THE  UMAfcY 

BRIC"*       ""'w  U    I  VARSITY 
ri\uvu,  UTAH 


/ 


THE   PREACHER'S   COMMENTARY 


ON 


ST.  JOHN 


THE 


reader's  Complete  Pumiletical 

COMMENTARY 


ON    THE 


NEW    TESTAMENT 

(ON  AN  ORIGINAL  PLAN) 

* 

ttfr  Critical  atrtr  <S*pIattat0rjj  |toies,  Jitbtas,  $z.,  #c. 


BY 


VARIOUS   AUTHORS 


i[5eto  fork 

FUNK   &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 

London  and  Toronto 

1896 


HOMILETICAL  COMMENTARY 


ON  THE 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO 

ST.  JOHN 


BY 

REV.    W.    FRANK    SCOTT 


Printed  in  the  U.S.A. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 

London  and  Tobonto 

1896 


THE    LIBRARY 

IGHAM  YOUNG  U  rV 

PROVO,  UTAH 


THE 

PREACHER'S  HOMILETICAL  COMMENTARY. 


ST.    JOHN. 


INTBODUCTION. 

I.  The  Disciple;  II.  The  Apostle;  III.  The  Evangelist  (1.  The  author- 
ship of  the  Gospel ;  2.  The  time  of  writing  and  place  of  publication  ;  3.  The 
purpose  for  which  it  was  written) ;  IV.  List  of  Writings  consulted  in 
the  Preparation  of  this  Volume. 

I.  THE  DISCIPLE. 

As  this  volume  is  mainly  homiletical,  the  controversies  in  New  Testament 
criticism  which  have  raged  round  the  questions  of  the  authorship  and  date  of 
St.  John's  Gospel  need  not  be  dwelt  on  here.  They  are  fully  dealt  with  in 
works  like  the  commentaries  named  at  the  end  of  this  Introduction,  and  will  be 
briefly  referred  to  here  under  the  heading  The  Evangelist.  It  will  be  sufficient 
to  state  now  that  the  critical  discussions  of  the  last  half-century  have  in  no  way 
undermined  the  credibility  of  the  Johannine  authorship  of  the  Fourth  Gospel, 
but,  on  the  contrary,  have  more  clearly  and  firmly  established  it  (see  Godet, 
Pref.  to  3rd  Ed.,  pp.  29-32). 

John,  the  son  of  Zebedee  and  Salome  (Mark  iii.  17  :  compare  Matt, 
xxvii.  56  and  Mark  xv.  40),  the  brother  of  James,  was  one  of  the  three 
disciples  admitted  to  closest  fellowship  with  our  Lord  during  His  public 
ministry.  At  the  time  when  the  public  ministry  of  our  Lord  began  John's  home 
was  in  Galilee.     With  his  elder  brother  James  he  was  engaged  in  his  father's 

B  X 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


calling  as  a  fisherman  on  the  Galilean  lake.  It  is  not  certain  that  he  was  bom 
in  Galilee,  however.  His  intimate  acquaintance  with  Jerusalem  and  its  topo- 
graphy would  almost  presuppose  a  prolonged  residence  in  the  holy  city.  He 
was  also  known  in  the  high-priestly  circle  in  the  capital  (xviii.  15).  His  con- 
nection with  the  family  of  Caiaphas  may  have  been  one  of  distant  relationship ; 
for  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  his  name  is  one  which  appears  among  the 
members  of  the  high  priest's  family  (Acts  iv.  6).  He  also  had  a  home  in  Jerusalem 
(xix.  27),  it  would  seem.  Indeed  Zebedee's  family  were  evidently  in  good  circum- 
stances, as  we  see  from  Mark  i.  20 ;  and  during  the  greater  part  of  Christ's 
public  ministry  Salome  is  found  among  the  band  of  pious  women  from  Galilee 
who  "  ministered  to  the  Saviour  of  their  substance "  (Matt,  xxvii.  55,  56  ; 
Luke  viii.  3).  Zebedee  must  have  died,  apparently,  soon  after  the  Saviour 
began  His  public  work  (see  Matt.  xx.  20 ;  whilst  Zebedee  is  not  spoken  of 
in  xxi.  1-14).  Thus  Salome  was  able  to  devote  herself  to  the  work  of  minister- 
ing to  Jesus.  In  connection  with  this  it  is  interesting  to  remember  that  it  is 
now  believed  that  Salome  was  the  sister  of  Mary,  the  mother  of  Jesus,  and  that 
she  it  was  who,  under  this  designation,  formed  one  of  the  group  of  women  who 
stood  near  the  cross  on  Calvary  (xix.  25  :  compare  Mark  xv.  40,  41).  Salome 
was  one  of  the  company  of  women  who  came  early  on  the  resurrection  morning 
to  the  tomb  in  the  garden,  bearing  sweet  spices  to  anoint  the  body  of  Christ, 
who,  though  they  yet  knew  it  not,  had  risen  from  the  dead  (Mark  xvi.  1,  etc.). 

Although  Zebedee  and  his  family  had  some  close  connection  with  Jerusalem 
(probably  a  "  commercial "  connection,  or  in  relation  to  property — xix.  27),  yet 
John  and  his  brother  had  evidently  been  brought  up  in  Galilee.  In  Jerusalem 
such  a  youth  as  John  would  have  sat  at  the  feet  of  some  great  Rabbi ;  and  the 
reproach  of  the  want  of  a  training  in  the  schools  would  not  have  been  brought 
against  him  later  (Acts  iv.  13).  But  at  the  opening  of  our  era  good  public  schools 
existed  in  all  the  towns  and  villages  of  any  importance  in  Galilee.  At  one  of 
these,  taught  no  doubt  by  some  one  trained  in  the  rabbinical  schools,  John  and 
his  brother  would  receive  an  education  adequate  to  their  position  in  life,  as  sons 
of  a  well-to-do  middle-class  citizen.  For  the  future  apostles  such  a  training 
would  be  less  narrowing  than  that  received  in  the  famous  schools  in  the  capital. 
Prolonged  visits  to  Jerusalem  at  the  great  feasts  and  at  other  times  would 
give  John  that  acquaintance  with  the  holy  city  which  the  Gospel  shows  he 
possessed. 

His  school-days  over,  with  his  elder  brother  James  he  followed  his  father's  occu- 
pation. He  would  probably  be  about  twenty-five  years  of  age  when  the  whole 
country  began  to  be  stirred  by  the  preaching  of  one  who  in  words  and  manner 
brought  to  mind  the  old  prophets  of  Israel.  John  the  Baptist  came  forth  into  the 
wilderness  of  Judsea,  clothed  in  shepherd  garb,  sternly  preaching  the  baptism  of 
repentance  for  the  remission  of  sins  (Luke  iii.  3).  So  earnest  and  convincing 
was  his  preaching  that  from  all  the  region  round  about  Judaea,  as  well  as  from 
the  capital,  men  flocked  to  his  baptism.  His  appearance  after  the  long  interval  of 
prophetic  silence  led  many  to  think  he  was  Elijah,  come  according  to  the  promise 
of  the  closing  prophetic  word  (Mai.  iv.  5) ;  whilst  others  "  mused  in  their  hearts 
whether  he  were  the  Christ"  (Luke  iii.  15).  The  two  young,  pious,  and  ardent 
sons  of  Zebedee  were  attracted  to  the  Baptist,  and  were  numbered  among  his 
2 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


disciples.  But  when  the  latter  pointed  his  followers  to  Jesus  as  the  Lamb  of 
God,  John  was  one  of  the  first  to  obey  the  Baptist's  prompting,  and  thence- 
forward with  his  brother  followed  the  Redeemer  (i.  35-42).  Their  direct  call  to 
discipleship  came  later,  when  at  the  word  of  Jesus  they  left  their  occupation 
and  home  to  become  His  constant  followers,  apparently  with  the  full  consent  of 
Zebedee  and  Salome  (Mark  i.  19,  20  ;  Matt.  iv.  22).  They  may  for  a  time  have 
still  occasionally  returned  to  their  calling,  and  may  have  received  a  second  call 
(Luke  v.  11) ;  but  at  all  events  they  were  soon  found  in  the  inner  circle  of  the 
twelve,  chosen  by  our  Lord  to  be  with  Him  (Matt.  x.  1-4;  Mark  iii.  14-19  ; 
Luke  vi.  13-16). 

Both  brothers  were  originally  of  an  ardent,  enthusiastic,  and  even  fiery 
temperament,  and  on  this  account  were  called  Boanerges  (Mark  iii.  17). 
The  fire  and  force  of  their  natural  temperament,  however,  were  to  be  turned 
into  new  channels  by  divine  grace.  They  possessed  the  old  prophetic  zeal 
and  wrath  against  unrighteousness  ;  and  sometimes  they  would  have  acted  with 
the  old  prophetic  severity  (Luke  ix.  54).  But  they  soon  learned  under  the 
benign  influence  and  teaching  of  the  Redeemer  that  He  came  to  save,  not  to 
destroy,  that  the  law  was  no  longer  to  rule,  but  grace,  and  that  the  Father 
desired  men's  salvation  (1  Tim.  ii.  3,  4).  They  had  their  ambitions  also 
(Matt.  xx.  20-24 ;  Mark  x.  35-41)  founded  on  false  Messianic  expectations, 
which  were  diificult  to  eradicate  (Acts  i.  6). 

John's  young  and  receptive  mind  and  heart  were  quickly  moulded,  however, 
by  the  Saviour ;  and  no  one  seems  to  have  understood  better  our  Lord's  higher 
spiritual  teaching  than  John,  who  combined  enthusiasm  with  contemplation. 
To  our  Lord  he  was  the  "  beloved  "  disciple,  and  his  gifts  of  mind  and  heart 
made  him  a  fit  instrument  to  be  used  by  the  Spirit  to  record  and  give  forth 
his  divine  Master's  deeper  teaching,  and  thus  show  forth  His  glory. 

John  was  one  of  the  disciples  who  accompanied  Jesus  during  His  Judsean 
ministry ;  and  he  was  chosen  to  record  the  events  of  this  part  of  our  Lord's  work, 
probably  because  he  was  more  fully  able  to  understand  the  discussions  of  the 
deeper  questions  which  characterised  it.  He  was  one  of  the  three  who  witnessed 
the  Transfiguration  and  the  agony  in  Gethsemane.  When  the  Supper  was  in- 
stituted he  reclined  nearest  to  our  Lord  at  the  table  (xiii.  23),  and  to  him  by  a 
sign  the  traitor  was  revealed.  He  (Peter  following  afar  off)  followed  the  crowd 
of  soldiers  and  others  who  bound  Jesus  in  the  garden  and  led  Him  away  to  the 
high  priest's  palace  (xviii.  15).  He  was  present  at  the  trial  of  our  Lord  before 
the  high  priest  and  before  Pilate,  and  stood  with  the  mother  of  Jesus  and  her 
friends  near  the  cross.  To  his  care  Jesus  entrusted  Mary  (xix.  25-27).  On 
the  Resurrection  morning,  when  Mary  Magdalene  announced  to  Peter  and  to 
him  that  the  sepulchre  was  empty,  he  was  the  first  to  reach  it,  having  outrun 
Peter,  and  was  the  first  to  rejoice  believingly  that  the  Lord  had  risen.  His 
eye  and  ear  also,  quickened  by  love,  made  Him  recognise  in  a  seeming  stranger 
his  divine  Master  on  the  shore  of  the  lake  of  Galilee  (xx.  8 ;  xxi.  7). 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


II.    THE    APOSTLE. 

After  the  Crucifixion  John  took  Mary,  the  mother  of  Jesus,  to  his  own  home 
in  Jerusalem,  where  he  remained  for  a  number  of  years — probably  till  the  death 
of  Mary.     At  the  beginning  of  the  book  of  Acts  he  is  found  closely  associate 
with  Peter,  as  in  the  closing  chapters  of  his  gospel.     They  were  present  at  the 
Ascension,  and  in  the  upper  room  when  Matthias  was  chosen  in  the  place  of 
Judas   Iscariot  (Acts  i.).      They   participated  in  the   Pentecostal   outpouring 
of  the  Spirit  (Acts  ii.),  when  the  promises  so  fully  recorded  in  John's  Gospel 
(xiv. — xvi)  were  marvellously  fulfilled.     He  was  associated  with  Peter  in  the 
miracle  wrought  at  the  gate  of  the  Temple  "called  Beautiful"  (Actsiii.).    When 
the  apostles  at  Jerusalem  heard  that  Samaria  had  received  the  Word  of  God 
they  sent  Peter,  and  along  with  him  John,  to  aid  in  reaping  those  fields,  at  the 
first  sowing  of  which  he  had  been  present  (iv.  35-38).     He  had  to  endure  the 
sorrow  of  his  brother's  martyrdom  (Acts  xii.  2),  but  still  remained  at  Jerusalem, 
and  was  present  at  the  apostolic  council,  the  proceedings  of  which  are  recorded 
in  Acts  xv.,  although  he  does  not  seem  to  have  spoken.      St.  Paul,  however, 
speaks  of  him  as  apparently  a  pillar  of  the  Church  (Gal.  ii.  9).     This  would  be 
about  twenty  years  after  the  Crucifixion.     No  doubt  during  that  time  he  was 
engaged  in  teaching  and  preaching,  and  in  such  missions  as  that  to  Samaria. 
Of  his  after-history  there  are  but  scanty  reliable  notices.     No  valid  objection 
has  been  urged  to  the  testimony  of  the  early  Church  Fathers  that  he  finally 
settled  in  the  province  of  Roman  Asia,  where  the  apostle  Paul  had  planted  a 
Church  at  Ephesus,  and  perhaps  in  other  centres,  from  which  the  truth  spread 
into  all  the  province.     St.  John  fixed  on  Ephesus  as  a  convenient  place  from 
which  to  oversee  the  Churches  of  the  district ;  and  considering  the  crowds  that 
resorted  to  that  city  from  all  quarters  of  the  then  known  world,  it  would  thus 
also  be  a  centre  from  which  the  truth  might  be  widely  spread  abroad.     He  was 
banished  to  Patmos  during  one  of  the  many  persecutions  that  were  directed 
by  the  Roman  power  against  the  nascent  Church;  and  in  that  rocky  isle  the 
Book  of  Revelation  was  written  (Rev.  i.  9).     Having  been  recalled  from  exile, 
he  returned  to  Ephesus,  and  died,  during  the  reign  of  Trajan,  in  extreme  old 
age,  sixty- eight  years  after   the  Crucifixion,  Jerome  says,  and   at   the   close, 
probably  in  the  last  year,  of  the  first  century  of  our  era. 

Of  the  many  traditionary  stories  of  incidents  in  the  apostle's  life  during  his 
residence  in  Ephesus,  the  following  may  be  noted.  That  of  his  refusing  to 
remain  under  the  same  roof  as  Cerinthus  is  related  by  Ireneeus,  who  heard  it 
from  Polycarp.  The  apostle  one  day,  entering  a  public  bath,  saw,  or  learned, 
that  Cerinthus  was  there.  Immediately  he  left  the  building,  saying :  "  Let  us 
flee  lest  the  house  fall  on  us,  since  Cerinthus,  the  enemy  of  the  truth,  is  within." 
He  is  still  a  "son  of  thunder"  this  story  would  show,  though  he  does  not  now 
call  for  fire  from  heaven  to  consume  the  adversary.  But  the  story  certainly 
reflects  the  spirit  of  2  John  10,  11.  The  following  reflects  the  more  gentle 
and  tender  side  of  his  nature.  A  young  convert  in  whom  he  was  interested 
had,  through  evil  companionship,  fallen  from  grace,  and,  descending  ever  lower, 
had  become  the  chief  of  a  robber  band.  Braving  all  danger,  the  aged  apostle 
penetrated  to  the  haunt  of  the  brigands,  and  led  the  young  man  back  to  repentance 

4 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


and  faith.  There  is  also  the  beautiful  story  of  a  huntsman  finding  the  venerable 
man  one  day  fondling  a  tame  partridge — still  a  common  pet  in  countries  bordering 
the  Levant.  Being  asked  why  he  should  occupy  himself  with  so  trivial  an 
occupation,  the  apostle  said,  "  What  is  in  thy  hand  ?  "  "  A  bow,"  was  the  answer. 
11  And  why  dost  thou  not  ever  carry  it  bent  ?  "  "  Because,"  said  the  huntsman, 
"  in  that  case  it  would  lose  its  strength,  and  would  be  useless  when  required  for 
shooting,  from  the  too  continuous  strain."  "  Then,"  said  the  apostle,  "  do  not  let 
this  simple  and  brief  relaxation  of  mine  perplex  thee,  since  without  it  the  spirit 
would  flag  from  the  unremitted  strain,  and  fail  when  the  call  of  duty  came." 
But  the  most  beautiful  and  characteristic  of  all  these  stories  is  that  which 
tells  how,  when  old  and  feeble,  with  all  his  senses  becoming  numbed,  the  apostle 
was  wont  to  be  borne,  at  his  own  request,  into  the  presence  of  the  assembled 
congregation,  and  spoke  but  these  words  :  "  Little  children,  love  one  another  ! " 
And  when  asked  why  he  always  said  this,  and  only  this,  his  answer  was :  "It 
is  the  command  of  the  Lord,  and  if  this  only  were  done,  enough  were  done" 


III.    THE    EVANGELIST. 

1.    The  Authorship  of  the  Gospel. 

From  the  end  of  the  second  century  until  the  close  of  the  eighteenth,  i.e.  for  about 
sixteen  hundred  years,  this  Gospel  was  universally  received  as  having  been  written 
by  John  the  apostle.  The  criticism  adverse  to  this  opinion,  which  culminated 
about  half  a  century  ago  in  the  conclusions  of  F.  0.  Baur  and  the  Tubingen 
school,  has  been  met  and  refuted.  Later  adherents  of  that  school  (e.g.  Keim) 
have  had  to  recede  from  the  opinion  of  the  great  Tubingen  critic,  and  to  acknow- 
ledge that  the  date  fixed  by  him  for  the  composition  of  the  Gospel  cannot  be 
defended,  and  indeed  must  be  placed  much  earlier. 

It  may  be  useful  from  the  homiletic  point  of  view  to  see  what  the  Gospel  itself 
tells  us  as  to  its  authorship.     To  what  conclusion  does  the  internal  evidence  lead  1 

1.  It  is  evident  that  the  Gospel  was  written  by  an  eye-witness  of  the  events 
recorded,  and  one  who  was  intimately  acquainted  with  the  life  of  Jesus  during 
His  public  ministry.  Many  of  the  instances  which  show  this  are  mentioned  in 
the  Explanatory  Notes.  In  many  of  the  narrative  passages  there  are  minute 
indications  that  the  writer  is  narrating  what  he  has  seen  and  heard,  e.g.  i.  35-51, 
ii.,  etc.,  iv.  52  (and  other  notes  of  time),  xi.,  xviii.  10,  etc. 

2.  The  author  was  also  a  Palestinian  Jew,  (a)  intimately  acquainted  with  the 
localities  of  which  he  speaks,  and  (b)  the  Jewish  customs  of  his  time  [(a)  ii.  1 , 
iii.  23,  v.  2,  ix.  7,  xviii.  1,  xix.  13,  etc. ;  (6)  vii.  and  viii.,  iii.  22,  iv.  9,  27,  xix.  40, 
etc.].  And  although  he  wrote  this  Gospel  in  Greek,  in  style  and  structure  his 
composition  is  frequently  Hebraic,  as  a  reference  to  critical  commentaries  will 
show.  But  although  a  Jew,  he  was  evidently  writing  with  a  view  to  a  foreign 
and  in  part  Gentile  community,  as  he  gives  frequent  interpretations  of  Hebrew 
place  names,  and  minute  topographical  notes,  which  would  be  unnecessary  for 
Palestinian  Jews.  Extended  lists  of  passages  bearing  out  these  statements  will 
be  found  in  various  commentaries,  e.g.  in  that  of  Archdeacon  H.  W.  Watkins. 

3.  A  careful  examination  of  the  Gospel  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  the  writer 

5 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


was  one  of  the  disciples  of  Christ,  most  intimately  acquainted  with  all  our  Lord's 
sayings  and  doings,  and  the  relations  of  the  disciples  to  Himself  and  to  one 
another.  The  discourse  and  prayer,  e.g.,  xiii. — xvii.,  could  have  been  reported  only 
by  one  who  reverently  and  eagerly  heard  them,  and  thus  retained  them  in  a 
memory  no  doubt  originally  good,  but  also  trained  to  perfection  as  memory  is 
trained  in  the  East.  And  who  but  one  intimately  acquainted  with  the  men 
could  have  given  such  a  vivid  conception  of  Thomas  and  Philip  as  this  writer 
gives  ? 

4.  Who  was  this  disciple  then  ?  "  Assuming  that  he  was  an  eye-witness  and 
an  apostle,  we  are  sure  he  was  not  Andrew,  who  is  named  in  the  Gospel  four 
times,  nor  Peter  (thirty-three  times),  nor  Philip  (twice),  nor  Nathanael  (five 
times),  nor  Thomas  (five  times),  nor  Judas  Iscariot  (eight  times),  nor  Judas,  not 
Iscariot  (once).  Of  the  five  other  apostles,  Matthew  is  necessarily  excluded,  and 
James  the  son  of  Alphseus  and  Simon  the  Canaanite  occupy  too  unimportant 
a  position  in  the  Synoptic  narrative  to  bring  them  within  the  limits  of  our 
hypothesis"  (Watkins).  The  sons  of  Zebedee  are  not  named,  they  are  relegated 
to  an  inferior  place  in  the  order  of  the  disciples  (xxi.  2),  (their  mother  even  is 
not  mentioned  (xix.  25)  by  name),  although  in  the  Synoptists  these  two  brothers 
occupy  a  prominent  position,  being,  with  Peter,  of  the  number  of  the  three  who 
were  favoured  to  accompany  the  Master  when  the  others  were  not  permitted  to 
do  so — e.g.  to  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration.  Of  these  two  James  could  not 
have  written  the  Gospel,  for  he  was  martyred  not  long  after  the  Ascension. 
Thus  John  alone  remains. 

5.  And  whilst  the  internal  evidence  all  points  in  this  direction,  the  external 
historical  evidence  confirms  it,  as  the  following  succinct  statement  by  a  recent 
writer  will  show  : — 

11  In  some  respects  the  external  evidence  for  this  Gospel  is  stronger  than  for  any 
of  the  others.  It  is  specially  quoted  by  such  early  Gnostic  writers  as  Basilides 
(125  a.d.),  Yalentinus  (145  a.d.,  whose  favourite  phrases  were  borrowed  from 
its  opening  verses),  and  Heracleon  (a  disciple  of  Valentinus),  who  wrote  a 
commentary  on  it — being  the  first  known  commentary  on  any  part  of  the  New 
Testament.  Moreover,  as  John  himself  survived  till  near  the  close  of  the  first 
century,  a  comparatively  short  interval  was  left  between  his  death  and  the  time 
when  the  four  Gospels  are  known  to  have  been  universally  accepted  by  the 
Church  (185  a.d.);  and  for  this  interval  it  so  happens  that  we  have  a  direct 
chain  of  testimony  consisting  of  a  very  few  strong  and  well-connected  links.  At 
the  lower  end  of  the  chain  we  have  Irenseus,  one  of  the  most  important  witnesses 
to  the  general  reception  of  the  four  Gospels  towards  the  close  of  the  second 
century.  Born  in  Asia  Minor,  where  John  spent  the  last  twenty  or  thirty 
years  of  his  life,  he  became  Bishop  of  Lyons  in  Gaul,  which  had  a  close 
ecclesiastical  connection  with  his  native  land.  Early  in  life  he  was  brought 
into  familiar  contact  with  Polycarp  (born  70  a.d.),  a  disciple  of  the  apostle  John, 
who  was  for  more  than  forty  years  Bishop  of  Smyrna  and  was  martyred  155  a.d. 
Among  other  allusions  which  he  makes  to  Polycarp,  he  says,  in  a  letter  to  his 
friend  Florinus  (177  a.d.)  :  'I  can  describe  the  very  place  in  which  the  blessed 
Polycarp  used  to  sit  when  he  discoursed,  and  his  goings  out  and  his  comings  in, 
and  his  manner  of  life,  and  his  personal  appearance,  and  the  discourses  which  he 

6 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


held  before  the  people,  and  how  he  would  describe  his  intercourse  with  John  and 
with  the  rest  who  had  seen  the  Lord,  and  how  he  would  relate  their  words.  And 
whatsoever  things  he  had  heard  from  them  about  the  Lord  and  about  His 
miracles,  Polycarp,  as  having  received  them  from  eye-witnesses  of  the  life  of  the 
Word,  would  relate  altogether  in  accordance  with  the  Scriptures.' 

"It  is  beyond  dispute  that  this  Irenseus  accepted  the  Fourth  Gospel  as  a 
genuine  work  of  the  apostle  John.  Is  it  credible  that  he  would  have  done  so, 
if  it  had  not  been  acknowledged  by  his  teacher,  Polycarp,  who  had  been  a 
disciple  of  John?  and  if  it  was  accepted  by  Polycarp  as  a  genuine  writing, 
notwithstanding  its  marked  dissimilarity  to  the  other  Gospels,  what  better 
evidence  could  we  have  that  John  was  really  its  author,  and  that  it  was 
accepted  as  his,  from  the  very  first,  by  the  leaders  of  the  Church  in  Asia 
Minor  V'—J.  A.  McClymont,  D.D. 

2.  The  Time  of  Writing  the  Gospel  and  the  Place  where  it  was  Published. 

As  we  have  seen  (vide  under  §  III.  1),  it  has  been  and  is  generally  held 
that  this  Gospel  was  written  toward  the  close  of  John's  life.  Later  tradition  is 
explicit,  but  cannot  be  entirely  relied  on.  Looking,  however,  at  earlier  testimonies, 
both  direct  and  indirect,  we  are  justified  in  placing  the  date  within  the  two 
last  decades  of  the  first  Christian  century.  Alford  places  the  limits  between 
70  a.d.,  i.e.  some  years  after  St.  Paul's  martyrdom,  and  85  a.d.  But  there 
seems  to  be  no  special  reason  for  fixing  85  a.d.  as  the  later  limit. 

Recently  the  Rev.  J.  J.  Halcombe,  M.A.,  in  an  able  work,  has  advanced  and 
defended  the  opinion  that  St.  John's  Gospel  was  the  first  of  the  four  to  be  written 
and  published ;  that  St.  Matthew  wrote  his  Gospel  after  St.  John's,  and  in  view 
of  the  latter ;  and  that  these  two  records,  as  may  be  seen  by  an  analysis  of 
their  contents,  give  a  complete  account  of  our  Lord's  earthly  life,  whilst  the  two 
Gospels  by  non-apostolic  writers  do  not  add  materially  to  the  historical  contents 
of  the  other  two.  St.  Mark's  Gospel,  he  considers,  constitutes  an  explanatory 
appendix  to  St.  Matthew's  history,  while  St.  Luke's  Gospel  gives  an  ordered 
chronological  account  of  the  events  of  our  Lord's  life,  with  supplementary 
information  tending  to  make  clear  to  his  Gentile  readers  the  records  of  the  other 
three  evangelists.  This  is  the  gist  of  Mr.  Halcombe's  theory,  which  is  set  forth 
with  great  ability  and  learning.  Whatever  the  final  opinion  may  be  regarding 
that  theory,  it  must  be  taken  into  account,  and  the  discussion  of  it  will  be 
certain  to  lead  to  fruitful  results. 

At  all  events  this  must  be  conceded — that  as  John  the  apostle  evidently  did 
his  part  in  the  work  of  the  Church  after  Pentecost  (Acts  viii.  14),  as  a  missionary 
and  teacher  he  would  naturally  present  that  phase  of  our  Lord's  doctrine  and 
those  "  signs  "  which  made  most  impression  on  himself,  and  which  were  therefore 
fitted  to  lead  others  also  to  faith  (xx.  30,  31).  Here  then  we  have  a  Gospel 
in  germ  at  all  events.  Nor  are  we  to  suppose  that  the  apostle  had  not  committed 
to  writing  (probably  in  his  native  tongue)  those  precious  sayings  of  our  Lord 
which  had  sunk  so  deeply  into  his  mind  and  heart.  It  seems  to  me  we  are  bound 
to  think  that  he  wrote  down  a  record  of  the  events  in  our  Lord's  life  in  which  the 
Saviour  manifested  forth  His  glory,  and  did  not  leave  entirely  to  memory  those 

7 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


discourses  which  he  alone  has  preserved.  These  he  would  dwell  on  chiefly  in  his 
preaching  and  teaching;  and  his  fellow-apostles  would  be  well  aware  that  he 
had  been  moved  to  preserve  the  record  of  that  phase  of  our  Lord's  ministry,  and 
that  no  one  else  was  better  fitted  to  make  it  known. 

But  that  this  record  was  then  published,  given  forth  to  the  world,  cannot  be 
proved.  For  the  infant  Church  the  simple  oral  teaching  of  apostles  and  apostolic 
men  would  be  deemed  sufficient.  When,  however,  the  Church  began  to  expand 
and  to  overflow  its  original  boundaries ;  when  the  apostolic  company  in  the 
parent  Church  became  smaller  through  the  death  of  some  members  and  the 
removal  of  others  to  new  centres  of  activity,  the  need  of  some  permanent  record 
of  the  things  most  surely  believed  would  be  felt.  For  the  parent  Church  this 
would  be  supplied  by  Matthew's  Gospel,  which  sets  forth  the  Messiahship  of  our 
Lord.  John  by  this  time  was  probably  away  from  Jerusalem  (§  II.),  and  if 
not  actually  settled  in  Ephesus,  was  being  led  towards  that  sphere  of  labour. 
When  he  came  to  Ephesus,  after  the  death  of  the  apostle  Paul,  probably  some 
time  before  the  year  70  a.d.,  Matthew's  Gospel  would  then  be  in  circulation ; 
and  it  may  be  that  the  Gospel  of  St.  Luke,  the  friend  and  companion  of 
the  apostle  to  the  Gentiles,  was  also  known  among  the  Churches  in  Roman 
Asia,  as  St.  Paul  first  founded  the  Church  in  that  province.  The  facts  of 
Christ's  life  and  His  simpler  ethical  teaching  would  thus  be  known.  But  when 
St.  John  began  his  ministry  among  the  Seven  Churches,  none  could  fail  to 
notice  that  in  his  teaching,  and  in  what  he  reported  of  the  Redeemer's  actual 
words,  there  were  elements  which  appeared  but  infrequently  in  the  other 
Gospels.  At  all  events  this  is  extremely  probable,  if  his  Gospel  and  first  Epistle 
in  any  way  reflect  the  ordinary  material  and  style  of  his  teaching. 

And  in  the  Churches  of  Roman  Asia  especially,  at  the  time  when  St.  John 
settled  among  them,  there  had  arisen  a  necessity  for  giving  permanent  form  to 
that  phase  of  the  truth  revealed  in  the  life  and  teaching  of  our  Lord  which  the 
apostle,  guided  by  the  Spirit,  had  been  led  to  grasp  most  firmly.* 


*  The  natural  conclusion  from  this  rapid  review  is  that  we  have  as  early,  if  not  as  numerous, 
proofs  of  the  existence  of  John's  Gospel  as  of  the  existence  of  the  Synoptists ;  and  that  in 
the  whole  stream  of  Christian  thought  during  the  second  century,  we  have  more  indubitable 
proofs  of  its  influence  than  of  the  influence  of  any  other  single  book  of  the  New  Testament' 
This  is  the  testimony  of  the  Church  and  of  the  heretics—  given  with  a  unanimity  which  is 
impressive.  And  what  is  there  on  the  other  side  ?  There  are  said  to  have  been  some 
individuals  in  the  end  of  the  second  century  who  refused  to  accept  this  book  because  of  the 
unpalatable  nature  of  its  teaching  regarding  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  Epiphanius  tells  us  of  a 
sect  or  party  in  Libya  excited  to  opposition.  They  were  not  numerous,  nor  were  they 
powerful ;  they  did  not  rely  on  any  external  evidence  ;  they  are  chiefly  memorable  because 
of  the  happy  nickname  ("AXoyoi,  or  Alogi)  by  which  Epiphanius  (who  is  very  proud  of  it)  hit 
them  off  as  "  irrational,"  as  well  as  rejecters  of  the  Gospel  of  the  Logos  or  Word  of  God. 
From  the  second  century  until  quite  a  recent  date  scarcely  a  voice  was  ever  lifted  against 
the  Johannine  authorship.  Luther  was  content  to  give  up  the  rest  of  the  New  Testament  if 
he  had  John,  Romans,  and  1  Peter.  Schleiermacher,  and  all  whom  he  influenced,  held  by 
this  Gospel  as  the  most  precious  spiritual  teaching  in  Scripture.  But  a  change  came  about 
sixty  years  ago.  The  solitary'scholar  (Bretschneider)  who  (1820)  advanced  among  critical 
"  probabilities  "  the  idea  that  the  book  was  not  written  by  John,  but  by  some  other  writer  in 
the  beginning  or  middle  of  the  second  century,  was  met  with  such  firm  opposition  that  he 
8 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


3.  The  Purpose  of  St.  John's  Gospel. 

When  the  apostle  settled  at  Ephesus,  the  Church  in  that  region  had  been 
established  for  a  number  of  years.  Church  life,  like  that  of  the  individual, 
must  grow  if  it  is  to  be  healthy.  The  simpler  faith  of  the  nascent  Church 
would  be  sufficiently  maintained  by  the  more  simple  ethical  Gospel  of  St. 
Matthew,  and  the  chronologically  arranged  and  ordered  treatise  of  St.  Luke. 
But  when  spiritual  life  advances  it  demands  higher  views  of  truth.  Failing 
the  presentment  of  these  higher  views,  not  a  few  in  seeking  for  them  will  be 
apt  to  fall  under  the  spell  of  error.  In  the  Churches  of  Roman  Asia  a  species 
of  Judaistic  Gnosticism  had  found  a  footing  even  in  the  time  of  St.  Paul's 
activity.  Cerinthus,*  who  propagated  this  error  in  Ephesus  during  the  time 
of  St.  John's  ministry  there,  was  no  doubt  only  one  sign  of  the  deep  movement 
of  thought  which  culminated  in  later  Gnosticism.  St.  Paul  wrote  an  epistle  to 
the  Church  at  Colossse,  which  was  also  to  be  read  to  the  Church  at  Laodicea, 
confirming  the  truth  he  had  preached,  and  that  in  such  a  manner  as  to  meet  and 


published  his  recantation  of  his  suggested  doubts.  But  his  views  were,  nevertheless,  soon 
after  maintained  by  Strauss,  and  since  his  Life  of  Jesus  was  published  (1834-35)  the 
Fourth  Gospel  has  been  the  battle-ground  of  criticism.  A  much  greater  Wiirtemberger  than 
Strauss — F.  C.  Baur — maintained  that  the  Gospel  was  written  and  started  into  great 
popularity  about  A.D.  160.  He  ascribed  the  popularity  to  the  fact  that  the  author  had  some- 
thing to  say  that  suited  everybody — one  party  of  heretics  finding  their  views  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  another  their  cosmogony,  another  their  opinions  on  the  paschal  controversy,  while 
Paul's  followers  found  their  Master's  principles  carried  out  further  and  more  fully  than  by 
themselves,  and  the  whole  Catholic  Church  rejoiced  in  the  exposition  of  Christianity  as  the 
one  absolute  religion.  In  all  this  Baur  did  not  take  into  account  that  every  party  would 
have  been  sure  to  denounce  the  new  book  for  what  it  contained  contrary  to  their  special 
tenets.  But,  moreover,  the  sufficient  answer  is  the  proof  that  the  Gospel  was  actually  in  use 
long  before  the  time  at  which  he  supposes  it  to  have  been  written.  Keim  pushed  it  back  to 
the  days  of  Trajan,  and  all  Christian  tradition  vouches  for  John's  surviving  till  that  reign. 
There  is  no  possibility  of  a  book  claiming  to  be  John's  being  written  by  some  one  else,  and 
palmed  off  upon  the  Church  as  his.  There  would  have  risen  up  a  host  of  eager  disciples  to 
deny  that  their  revered  master  ever  wrote  the  book.  Thus  much  may  be  said  on  the  external 
evidence  and  the  history  of  the  controversy. — Br.  A.  H.  Chart ei'is'  "  Canonicity." 

*  As  a  Judaiser  Cerinthus  held  with  the  Ebionites  that  Jesus  was  only  the  son  of  Joseph 
and  Mary,  born  in  the  natural  way.  As  a  Gnostic  he  maintained  that  the  Christ  first 
descended  in  the  form  of  a  dove  on  the  carpenter's  son  at  his  baptism  ;  that  He  revealed  to 
him  the  unknown  Father,  and  worked  miracles  through  him ;  and  that  at  length  He  took 
His  flight  and  left  him,  so  that  Jesus  alone  suffered  and  rose,  while  the  Christ  remained 
impassible.  It  would  appear  also,  though  this  is  not  certain,  that  he  described  this  reascen- 
sion  of  the  Christ  as  a  return  " to  His  own  pleroma"  Now  it  is  not  clear  from  St.  Paul's 
language  what  opinions  the  Colossian  heretics  held  respecting  the  person  of  our  Lord  ;  but 
we  may  safely  assume  that  he  regarded  them  as  inadequate  and  derogatory.  The  emphasis 
with  which  he  asserts  the  eternal  being  and  absolute  sovereignty  of  Christ  can  hardly  be 
explained  in  any  other  way.  But  individual  expressions  tempt  us  to  conjecture  that  the 
same  ideas  were  already  floating  in  the  air  which  ultimately  took  form  and  consistency  in 
the  tenets  of  Cerinthus.  Thus,  when  he  reiterates  the  statement  that  the  whole  pleroma 
abides  permanently  in  Christ,  he  would  appear  to  be  tacitly  refuting  some  opinion  which 
maintained  only  mutable  and  imperfect  relations  between  the  two.  When  again  he  speaks 
of  the  true  gospel  first  taught  to  the  Colossians  as  the  doctrine  of  "  the  Christ,  even  Jesus 

a 


HOMILETIC  C0MMEN1ARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


confute  at  the  same  time  this  growing  error.  But  the  error  continued,  and 
would  be  found  there  when  St.  John  went  to  Ephesus.  In  this  city  the  thought 
of  East  and  West  met  as  in  Alexandria.  It  could  not  fail  to  be  influenced  by 
the  questions  debated  in  the  Egyptian  intellectual  capital.  And  among  the 
Jewish  community  the  teaching  of  Philo  could  not  fail  to  be  in  some  degree 
influential.  Nor  would  the  Christian  Church  be  exempted  from  the  effect  of  such 
movements ;  and  attempts  would  be  made  then,  as  they  have  been  made  since 
and  to  the  present  time,  to  amalgamate  those  errors  with  the  truth.  The  second 
and  third  chapters  of  the  Apocalypse  show  how  far  this  danger  threatened  the 
Church,  and  how  much  need  there  was  to  purge  away  those  errors  by  the  com- 
pletion of  the  gospel  history  in  the  record  preserved  by  St.  John.  The  primary 
purpose  of  his  Gospel  was  to  build  up  the  members  of  the  Christian  Church  in 
that  faith  which  leads  to  life  through  Christ's  name  (xx.  30,  31).  At  the  same 
time,  by  the  exhibition  of  the  full  glory  of  Christ  as  the  Son  of  God  incarnate, 
St.  John's  record  struck  at  the  roots  of  those  errors  which  were  leading  men 
away  from  eternal  life. 

Thus  in  the  prologue  Jesus  Christ  is  declared  to  be  the  eternal  Logos,  the 
Word  of  God,  who  was  made  flesh.  All  through  the  Gospel  the  report  of  Christ's 
teaching,  and  the  narration  of  the  signs  which  Jesus  did,  contribute  to  show  this 
forth.  They  all  declare  how  He  manifested  forth  His  glory  "  as  of  the  only 
begotten  of  the  Father,  full  of  grace  and  truth  "  (i.  14).  The  record  shows  that 
in  Christ  "  dwells  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily  "  (Col.  ii.  9).  The  divine 
'Spirit  did  not  merely  come  into  the  man  Jesus  when  He  was  baptised  and 
tabernacle  inJJiia^a^Cerinthus  taught ;  nor  was  the  Logos  merely  the  highest 
of  angels,  the  primaeval  angel  or  second  God  (SevTepos  ©cos),  etc.,  as  Philo  afiirmed  ^ 
the  man  Christ  Jesus  was  the  Word,  and  the  Word  was  God  (i.  1,  14).  It  can 
therefore  be  well  understood  how  St.  John's  fellow- presbyters  and  disciples  might 
urge  upon  him  the  importance  of  giving  to  the  world  those  truths  which  he 
taught,  and  which  they  saw  would  be  so  effectual  in  building  up  believers  in  the 
faith,  and,  at  the  same  time,  confuting  insidious  and  growing  error. 

the  Lord,"  his  language  might  seem  to  be  directed  against  the  tendency  to  separate 
the  heavenly  Christ  from  the  earthly  Jesus,  as  though  the  connection  were  only  transient. 
When  lastly  he  dwells  on  the  work  of  reconciliation,  as  wrought  "  through  the  blood  of 
Christ's  cross,"  "in  the  body  by  His  flesh  through  death,"  we  may  perhaps  infer  that  he 
already  discerned  a  disposition  to  put  aside  Christ's  passion  as  a  stumbling-block  in  the  way 
of  philosophical  religion.  Thus  regarded  the  apostle's  language  gains  force  and  point, 
though  no  stress  can  be  laid  on  explanations  which  are  so  largely  conjectural.  But  if  so,  the 
very  generality  of  his  language  shows  that  these  speculations  were  still  vague  and  fluctuating. 
The  difference  which  separates  these  heretics  from  Cerinthus  may  be  measured  by  the 
greater  precision  and  directness  in  the  apostolic  counter-statement,  as  we  turn  from  the 
Epistle  to  the  Colossians  to  the  Gospel  of  St.  John.  In  this  interval,  extending  over  nearly 
a  quarter  of  a  century,  speculation  had  taken  a  definite  shape.  The  elements  of  Gnostic 
theory,  which  were  before  held  in  solution,  had  meanwhile  crystallised  around  the  facts  of 
the  gospel.  Yet  still  we  seem  justified,  even  at  the  earlier  date,  in  speaking  of  these  general 
ideas  as  Gnostic,  guarding  ourselves  at  the  same  time  against  misunderstanding  with  the 
twofold  caution,  that  we  here  employ  the  term  to  express  the  simplest  and  most  elementary 
conceptions  of  this  tendency  of  thought,  and  that  we  do  not  postulate  its  use  as  a  distinct 
designation  of  any  sect  or  sects  at  this  early  date.— J.  B.  IAghtfoot,  D.D.,  in  "  IJphesians" 

10 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


John  has  been  compared,  since  the  early  Christian  centuries,  to  the  flying 
eagle  (Rev.  iv.  7)  who  soars  upward  gazing  on  the  Sun.  His  Gospel  may 
be  likened  to  the  highest  step  on  a  heavenly  stairway.  The  others  proclaim 
Jesus  as  the  Messiah,  as  the  divine  Son  of  man,  as  the  Redeemer  of  the  whole 
human  race ;  the  Fourth  Gospel  raises  us  highest  when  it  declares  that  Christ  was 
the  Word,  and  the  Word  was  God.  And  perhaps  an  idea  held  by  some  may  be 
more  than  a  mere  fancy — that  the  last  age  of  the  Church  will  be  the  Johannine 
age,  a  period  of  deeper  spiritual  knowledge,  of  closer  unity  with  God  through 
Christ,  and  of  a  higher  spiritual  life  informed  and  moulded  by  love. 

IV.  WRITINGS   CHIEFLY   CONSULTED  AND   REFERRED   TO. 

In  the  preparation  of  the  explanatory,  etc.,  notes,  the  commentaries  of  these 
well-known  scholars  were  frequently  consulted  and  referred  to :  F.  Godet,  D.D. 
(Clark,  Edinburgh);  C.  E.  Luthardt  (Clark);  F.  B.  Westcott,  D.D.,  D.C.L. 
(John  Murray,  London)  ;  H.  R.  Reynolds,  D.D.  (in  Kegan  Paul,  Trench,  &  Co.'s 
Pulpit  Commentary) ;  Archdeacon  Watkins  (Cassell) ;  J.  P.  Lange  (Bielefeld, 
3rd  Ed.) ;  Brown  and  Fausset  (Collins) ;  Jacobus  (Oliphant  &  Co.) ;  Alford,  Greek 
Testament',  Wordsworth,  Greek  Testament)  Lange,  Life  of  Christ ;  Farrar,  Life 
of  Christ.  The  explanatory,  etc.,  notes,  whilst  somewhat  full  at  times,  have 
been  always  written  with  the  homiletic  purpose  of  the  work  in  view. 

In  preparing  the  homiletic  section  of  the  work  the  commentaries  of  the  above- 
mentioned  and  other  writers  have  been  most  helpful.  The  illustrations  and  notes 
from  English  writers  have  the  names  of  the  authors  appended.  All  students  of 
this  Gospel  would  benefit  by  the  perusal  of  Dr.  Parker's  brilliant  volume  in  the 
People's  Bible  Series,  of  the  succinct  but  scholarly  volume  of  Dr.  Alexander 
Maclaren  in  his  Bible-Class  Expositions,  and  of  Dr.  Dods'  work  in  The 
Expositor's  Bible ;  whilst  Rev.  J.  S.  Exell's  Biblical  Illustrator  is  a  veritable  mine 
of  homiletic  wealth  for  preachers  and  teachers. 

The  writer  has  to  acknowledge  his  special  indebtedness  to  noted  German 
preachers,  such  as  Gerok,  Ahlfeld,  Kogel,  Arndt,  Besser,  Schleiermacher,  and  others, 
as  the  frequent  occurrence  of  their  names  will  show ;  and  from  J.  L.  Sommer's 
(Erlangen)  Die  Evangelischen  Perikopen  he  has  drawn  a  number  of  outlines 
which  are  acknowledged  in  the  body  of  the  work.  A  few  extracts  from 
Bersier,  Viguie,  etc.,  are  also  included  as  illustrations  to  the  homilies ;  whilst 
the  outlines  from  Bourdaloue  are  given  as  specimens  of  the  work  of  one  who 
was  a  master  in  the  homiletic  arrangement  of  his  sermons,  and  who  trod  with 
firm  step  when  engaged  in  the  exposition  of  pure  Scripture  truth.  The  writer 
is  responsible  for  the  homiletic  sections,  etc.,  without  names  appended,  for  the 
explanatory  notes,  and  the  translations  (except  a  few  from  F.  W.  Krummacher), 
which  are  free,  not  literal,  renderings.  The  design  of  the  work  does  not  permit 
of  literary  finish.  Brevity,  with  fulness  of  homiletic  suggestion,  has  been  the 
end  aimed  at — the  writer  trusts  successfully. 

W.   F.   S. 


n 


PAKT  I. 

THE  PROLOGUE. 

Chapter  i.  1-18. 

The  Eternal  Nature  and  Incarnation  of  the  Word. 

1.  The  Logos  is  divine,  pre-existent,  eternal,  and  appears  in  His  relation  to 
God  (ver.  2) ;  to  creation  and  providence  (ver.  3) ;  and  as  the  life  and  light  of 
humanity,  which  has  become  darkened  by  sin. 

2.  The  Logos  was  made  flesh,  as  all  prophecy  foretold  (vers.  6-8) ;  and  He 
Himself  as  the  inspirer  of  the  prophetic  word  prepared  the  way  for  His  appear- 
ing (vers.  9-14). 

3.  The  Logos  is  the  revelation  of  the  Father  (vers.  14-18). 

CHAPTER  I. 

EXPLANATORY  AND  CRITICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  In  the  beginning,  etc. — iv  dpxd'  The  rvrc*ns.  etc.,  of  Genesis  i.  denotes  the  beginning 
of  that  movement  of  the  divine  creative  energy  from  which  sprang  the  visible  universe.  The 
Evangelist's  words  take  us  beyond  this  definite  point  into  the  immeasurable  eternity.  In  the 
beginning  the  Word  was.  The  Logos  was  not  then  called  into  being.  He  existed  "  before  all 
worlds  "  (xvii.  5,  24),  i.e.  before  time,  which  measures  the  visible  universe,  had  begun.  As 
eternity  has  neither  beginning  nor  end  the  Word  is  eternally  existent  (for  the  meaning  of 
the  term  Logos  see  Introduction,  p.  10,  and  notes  below). 

Ver.  2.  The  same. — oSros.  This  [Word],  etc.  The  distinct  personal  existence  of  the  Word 
is  more  definitely  asserted  and  emphasised  to  show  that  He  was  "  anterior  to  the  fact  of 
creation  of  which  He  is  the  agent "  (ver.  3). 

Ver.  3.  All  things,  etc. — For  the  contents  of  iravra  see  Col.  i.  16.  Made.—  I.e.  became. 
"  Creation  is  a  *  becoming '  in  contrast  with  the  '  being '  emphasised  before  "  (Westcott). 
Without  Him. — The  entire  community  between  God  and  the  Word  is  here  declared  (Godet)  ; 
and  see  xv.  5. 

Ver.  4.  In  Him  was  life. — For  the  universe.  The  "  fulness  "  of  life  dwells  in  Him,  and  He  is 
the  source  of  all  life  physical  and  spiritual.  He  is  light  through  life.  Life  comes  to  men 
through  Christ ;  and  the  result  of  that  life  in  renewed  hearts  is  light — the  light  of  goodness, 
truth,  holiness. 

Ver.  5.  The  light  shineth,  etc. — The  Word  was,  ere  the  fall,  the  light  of  man,  not  only 
potentially,  but  actually.  After  the  fall  darkness  covered  the  moral  world.  And  now  again 
at  the  Incarnation  the  light  anew  rises  in  power.  The  conflict  evident  in  all  history  between 
light  and  darkness  was  now  to  end  in  the  victor}'-  of  light.  Comprehended. — I.e.  seized  or  laid 
hold  of  in  a  hostile  sense  ;  but  perhaps  what  is  here  meant  is  a  passive  hostility — did  not 
appropriate,  i.e.  comprehend  or  receive ;  did  not  permit  the  light  to  penetrate  its  massive 
bulwarks. 

Ver.  6.  There  was  a  man,  etc. — iyfrero,  there  "  became,"  appeared.  Notice  the  contrast 
between  a  man  and  the  Word=  The  Word  was ;  that  is  essential  being.  The  man  "  became  "  ; 
his  being  is  derived.     John. — I.e.  the  grace  of  God  (Luke  i.  13,  14).     He  was  well  known,  and 

13 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


therefore  his  testimony  was  of  great  force.    The  Evangelist  called  him  by  this  name  before 
the  title  of  Baptist  had  become  general  (Halcombe,  see  Introduction). 

Ver.  7.  Through  him.— I.e.  through  his  preaching.  The  Evangelist  does  not  tell  the  subiect 
of  John's  preaching  in  the  same  terms  as  the  Synoptists;  but  repentance  is  implied  in 
believing,  i.  e.  in  saving  faith. 

Ver.  8.  He  was  not  that  light,  etc.— Many  were  disposed  to  believe  that  John  was  the 
Messiah  (vers.  19,  20;  Luke  iii.  15).  It  is  supposed  by  some  that  there  may  have  been  those 
in  Ephesus  and  its  vicinity  who  still  believed  in  John's  baptism  only  (Acts  xix.  3),  and  that 
it  was  with  those  in  view  that  the  evangelist  penned  these  words  ;  but  they  seem  rather 
simply  to  emphasise  further  the  distinction  between  the  Logos  and  the  man.  "  John  was  a 
light  which  was  enlightened,  but  had  not  the  light  in  itself"  (Aug.  in  Wordsworth's  Greek 
Testament). 

Ver.  10.  He  was  in  the  world,  etc. — The  Logos  had  ever  been  in  the  world  (vers.  3,  4),  for 
by  Him  all  things  consist  (Col.  i.  17).  But  He  was  now  especially  in  it  when  the  Baptist 
testified  of  Him,  and  when  "the  world  knew  Him  not."  The  world  means  the  inhabited 
world,  the  material  earth  with  its  inhabitants  blinded  by  sin. 

Ver.  11.  His  own  (t<x  i'Sia)  things. — The  world  was  His  own,  for  it  was  created  by  and  for 
Him  (Col.  i.  16)  ;  but  perhaps  better  His  own  home  (Ps.  cxxxii.  14,  etc.),  i.e.  the  land  of 
Israel ;  and  "  His  own  (ol  idiot,  i.e.  the  chosen  people  who  inherited  the  land  of  promise) 
received  Him  not,"  though  they  should  have  done  so  gladly,  and  as  His  Church  will  do  in  the 
end  (Kev.  xxi.  2). 

Ver.  12.  The  term  name  must  here  be  taken  in  the  sense  in  which  it  is  frequently  used  in 
Scripture.     The  name  expressed  the  power  of  the  divine  nature  of  Christ. 

Ver.  13.  Not  of  blood  (see  viii.  33,  39,  41,  42). — Pride  of  descent  from  Abraham  gave  no 
claim  to  entrance  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  will  of  the  flesh. — I.e.  of  the  lower  animal 
nature  and  its  desires.  Nor  of  the  will  of  man  (man  =  &p5p6s). — Perhaps  the  meaning  here  i 
the  divinely  implanted  desire  for  offspring  (Ps.  cxxvii.  3),  which  is  a  higher  motive  than 
the  former.  But  in  every  view  of  it  "  that  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh."  The  new  life 
comes  from  God.     True  children  of  God  are  born  "  from  above  "  (iii.  3). 

Ver.  14.  The  Word  became  flesh,  etc. — He  did  not  assume  a  mere  appearance  of  man,  as 
the  Docetce  urged ;  nor  did  the  Logos  take  to  Himself  only  a  body  and  not  also  a  human  soul, 
as  Apollinarius  and  others  held ;  nor  was  the  Word  simply  united  with  the  perfect  man 
Jesus,  as  Nestorius  maintained.  He  became  flesh  ;  He  did  not  cease  to  be  the  Word,  but  He 
made  the  human  nature  which  He  assumed  ("  a  true  body  and  a  reasonable  soul  ")  one  with 
Himself,  in  one  person.  So  that  thenceforward  He  was  the  God-man,  Emmanuel.  The  Word 
and  humanity  were  one  (Rev.  xix.  11-16).  And  thus  He  dwelt  (tabernacled)  among  us. — 
"Christ  pitched  not  His  tent  in  any  particular  person  already  existing,  but  in  us,  i.e.  in  our 
nature  "  (Bishop  Wordsworth's  Greek  Testament).  We  beheld  His  glory.  — As  the  glory  of  God 
was  manifested  in  the  tabernacle  in  the  wilderness,  so  it  was  exhibited  in  all  its  brightness 
in  that  tent  in  which  the  Word  tabernacled  here.  "  The  o-ktivt)  (tabernacle)  of  our  humanity 
became  the  Shechinah  of  Deity  "  (1  John  i.  1,  2).  As  of  an  only  begotten  (born)  son.  — /xovoyevrjs, 
only  son  or  child  (Col.  i.  15),  eternally  standing  in  this  relation  to  the  Father.  His  relation 
to  the  Father  is  unique  and  unparalleled  (Westcott),  of  the  Father,  or  from  with  the  Father, 
pointing  to  the  manifestation  of  the  divine  glory  of  that  sonship  as  beheld  by  men  here. 
Grace  and  truth. —  The  same  character  which  is  ascribed  to  Jehovah  in  the  Old  Testament  is 
here  applied  to  Christ  (Exod.  xxxiv.  6).  He  expressed  the  fulness  of  the  Father's  love,  and 
as  the  Truth  He  revealed  the  Father's  will  and  way  most  fully  to  men. 

Ver.  15.  John  beareth  witness  of  Him  and  hath  cried. — The  first  verb  is  present,  the  last 
is  perfect.  His  preaching  was  past  when  this  prologue  was  written  ;  but  it  was  still  power- 
ful as  a  witness  to  Christ.     The  Baptist  being  dead  yet  spake. 

Ver.  16.  Fulness. — irXripwfia  (see  Col.  ii.  9).  "  The  plenitude,  the  full  measure  of  all  the  divine 
powers  and  graces  whicti  were  concentrated  in  Christ,  the  incarnate  Word  "  (Westcott). 

Ver.  17.  The  law,  etc. — "The  law  was  given  (Heb.  iii.  5)  by  the  servant,  and  made  men 
guilty.  The  grace  which  came  by  the  King  freed  them  from  guilt  "  (Aug.  in  Wordsworth's 
Greek  Testament). 

Ver.  18.  No  man  hath  ever  yet  seen,  etc. — But  there  will  in  the  end  to  the  "  pure  in  heart " 
be  granted  a  divine  vision  (Matt.  v.  8).  The  only  begotten  Son,  etc. — Or,  as  the  best  MSS. 
(N ,  B,  L,  etc.),  God.  But  this  does  not  change  the  meaning  of  the  passage.  The  Logos  alone 
has  declared  and  interpreted  God  to  men  (Matt.  xi.  27).  In  the  bosom. — He  alone  has  that 
filial  intercourse  with  God  which  marks  Him  out  as  the  only  begotten.  Thus  He  alone  fully 
knows  the  divine  mind  and  will,  and  can  declare  them  to  men. 

The  Witness  of  John  the  Baptist  (vers.  19-37). 

Ver.  19.  Here  the  historical  narrative  of  the  gospel  begins.  The  point  of  time  may  be 
considered  as  soon  after  the  baptism  of  Jesus  by  John,  which  was  to  the  latter  the  testimony 
of  Jesus'  Messiahship  (vers.  33,  34).     This  is  the  record,  etc.— As  we  learn  from  Matt.  iii.  7, 

14 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  i. 


many  of  the  Jewish  leaders  had  been  attracted  by  the  Baptist's  teaching ;  and  the  people  as 
a  whole  were  so  moved  by  it  that  "  all  men  mused  in  their  hearts  of  John  whether  he  were 
the  Christ "  (Luke  iii.  15).  Indeed  so  much  attention  did  John's  teaching  attract  that  the 
Jews  "  sent  priests  and  Levites  ...  to  ask  him,  Who  art  thou  ?  "  St.  John  was  writing  his 
Gospel  as  a  universal  treatise,  and  it  was  necessary  for  him  to  use  the  term  the  Jews,  as  he 
constantly  does.  It  frequently  refers  to  the  ecclesiastical  leaders  of  the  people.  The  term 
is  used  historically.  The  Levites  are  seldom  mentioned  in  the  New  Testament,  and  the 
general  idea  of  expositors  is  that  they  were  identical  with  the  Scribes.  At  all  events  it  seems 
reasonable  to  conclude  from  such  a  passage  as  Nehemiah  viii.  7,  8,  that  the  remnant  of 
this  tribe  in  our  Lord's  day  still  continued  to  be  students  and  scribes  of  the  law.  Who  art 
thou  1 — Bishop  Wordsworth  remarks  that  there  is  here  "  an  indirect  testimony  "  to  the 
miraculous  occurrences  of  which  the  birth  of  John  the  Baptist  was  the  centre.  There  is  no 
doubt  that  these  occurrences  would  be  known  and  remembered  in  priestly  and  ecclesiastical 
circles.     Hence  the  willingness  of  the  Jewish  leaders  to  accept  John  as  the  Messiah. 

Ver.  20.  John's  answer  shows  that  he  as  well  as  his  interrogators  understood  the  bearing  of 
this  question.  "He  confessed"  indicates  in  effect  the  spontaneity  and  eagerness  with  which 
the  declaration  was  made.  The  same  thought  follows  in  a  negative  form,  "  he  denied  not," 
to  show  that  he  did  not  for  an  instant  yield  to  the  temptation  to  deny.  Finally  the  second 
"he  confessed"  is  added  to  the  first  in  order  to  attach  it  to  the  profession  which  follows. 
4y&  ovk  €ifd  6  Xpioros,  i.e.  Jam  not,  etc.,  but  there  is  One  who  is. 

Ver.  21.  Elias. — Mai.  iv.  5,  6.  John  came  in  the  spirit  and  power  of  Elijah,  it  is  true 
(Luke  i.  17)  ;  but  according  to  the  Jewish  expectation  of  a  literal  return  of  the  old  prophet, 
the  Baptist  could  return  only  a  negative  answer.  That  (the)  prophet. — Deut.  xviii.  15.  The 
interpretation  of  this  old  prophecy  given  in  Acts  iii.  19-24  was  evidently  that  held  by  John. 
Thus  again  he  answered  no. 

Vers.  22,  23. — In  his  positive  answer  the  Baptist  appropriated  to  himself  the  grand 
prophecy  of  Isa.  xl.  3.  Notice  the  agreement  with  the  Synoptists,  who  all  refer  this  prophecy 
to  John*(Matt.  iii.  3  ;  Mark  i.  3  ;  Luke  iii.  3-6). 

Ver.  24.  And  they  had  heen  sent  from  the  Pharisees. — The  best  MSS.  omit  the  ol,  but  this 
does  not  alter  the  sense,  as  the  messengers  would  no  doubt  be  themselves  Pharisees.  The 
clause  is  inserted  to  explain  the  sequel. 

Ver.  25. — The  Pharisees,  versed  in  the  law  and  tradition,  were  well  acquainted  with  the 
meaning  of  the  baptismal  rite — as,  e.g.,  applied  to  proselytes.  But  why  did  John  enforce  it 
in  the  case  of  all,  Jews  as  well  as  others,  if  he  were  not  the  Messiah,  or  Elias,  whom  they 
expected  to  enact  "  a  great  national  lustration  to  inaugurate  the  kingdom  of  Messiah " 
(Godet)  ?     Ezek.  xxxvi.  25-27  ;  Zech.  xiii.  1. 

Vers.  26,  27.  I  baptise,  etc. — This  is  the  continuation  of  his  call  to  repentance 
(ver.  23,  "  Make  straight"  etc.),  as  well  as  the  answer  to  the  question  of  the  Pharisees.  In 
the  very  fact  that  he  announces  to  them  the  presence  of  the  Messiah  in  the  midst  of  them, 
their  question  is  resolved.  "  If  the  Christ  is  there  He  is  known  by  him  and  him  alone, — the 
Messianic  time  has  come  ;  he  is  its  initiator,  and  his  baptism  is  thereby  justified  "  (Godet). 
Latchet,  etc. — The  coming  Messiah  should  be  so  glorious  that  John  felt  himself  unworthy  of 
serving  Him  in  the  most  menial  office.  The  phrase  6s  Zfx-wpocrdtv  fiov  yeyovev  is  wanting  in 
the  best  MSS. 

Ver.  28.  In  Bethabara  should  be  read  iv  Br)6avig,—i?i  Bethania,  or  Bethany  beyond  Jordan. 
The  change  of  name  from  the  Bethany  of  the  oldest  MSS.  seems  to  have  been  effected  by 
Origen.  In  his  day  the  name  had  been  obliterated  from  the  region  of  the  Jordan  ;  but  finding 
that  tradition  pointed  to  a  place  called  Bethabara  as  that  where  John  baptised,  he  inserted 
that  name.  But,  according  to  Godet,  "As  to  the  Bethany  near  the  Jordan,  it  is  more 
probable  that  its  name  is  derived  from  Beth-Onijah  (rroa-navis),  place  of  the  ferry-boat. 
This  last  sense  would  almost  coincide  with  that  of  Bethabara, place  of  the  ford"  (Judges 
vii.  24).  Caspari  identifies  it  with  Tell  (i.e.  Beth  sometimes  is  so  translated  in  Arabic) 
Anihje,  a  village  some  miles  north  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee  on  the  east  side  of  Jordan.  The 
conclusion  of  Godet  and  others  (given  above)  is  perhaps  the  most  reasonable  in  view  of  all 
the  facts  of  the  case.     There  were  two  Bethanys,  just  as  there  were  two  Caesareas,  etc. 

Vers.  31-33.  I  knew  Him  not  also. — John,  though  knowing  that  Jesus  had  some  important 
work  to  do,  and  a  lofty  destiny  far  higher  than  his  own,  had  not  yet  arrived  at  the  know- 
ledge of  Him  as  the  hope  of  Israel.  The  divine  lineage  and  lofty  mission  of  Jesus  as  the 
Messiah  were  not  fully  known  to  John  until  after  that  scene  at  Jordan,  when  the  Spirit 
descended  on  the  Saviour  "  from  heaven  like  a  dove  and  abode  upon  Him."  Then  the 
Baptist  knew  by  an  express  divine  revelation  that  this  was  He  who  should  baptise  with  the 
Spirit,  that  this  was  indeed  The  Son  of  God. 

Ver.  34.  And  I  saw  and  bare  record  (have  seen,  etc.). — The  perfects  denote'  a  completed 
fact.  The  meaning  is  not  that  Jesus  became  (was  constituted)  at  His  baptism  the  Son  of  God, 
but  simply  that  this  momentous  truth  was  then  revealed  to  John  and  testified  to  by  him. 

Vers.  35-37.  Again  (vide  ver.  29).   Two  of  His  disciples,  etc. — The  minute  details  are 

15 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


interesting  as  showing  how  deep  an  impression  this  day's  events  had  made  on  the  writer  of 
this  Gospel,  who  was  one  of  the  two  mentioned.  (36)  Looking  on  Jesus  as  He  walked.— Re- 
garding Him  with  earnest  gaze.  Christ  and  the  Baptist  henceforward  were  each  indepen- 
dently to  carry  on  their  individual  work  ;  but  John  was  now  to  be  guided  by  the  action  of 
Jesus.  Like  all  men,  John  also  must  "behold  the  Lamb  of  God."  (37)  "  The  disciples 
understand  the  words  as  the  teacher  meant  them.  .  .  .  There  is  no  word  bidding  them 
follow  Jesus ;  that  cannot  be  needed  "  (Watkins). 

Vers.  38-43.  Jesus  turned,  etc. — Jesus  saw  these  two  young  men  modestly  following  Him, 
too  diffident  to  accost  Him.  He,  therefore,  with  friendly  invitation  encouraged  them. 
"What  seek  ye?"  The  apparently  irrelevant  answer  of  the  disciples,  "  Eabbi,  where 
dwellest  Thou  ?  "  may  be  understood  as  simply  expressing  a  desire  for  further  acquaintance 
and  conversation  with  the  Saviour.  The  use  of  the  word  Rabbi  with  the  interpretation  shows 
that  this  Gospel  was  intended  in  part  for  Gentiles. 

Ver.  39.  Come  and  see  are  His  friendly  words ;  and  in  response  to  His  invitation  they 
went  with  Him  for  the  remainder  of  that  day,  i.e.  from  the  tenth  hour  (between  three 
and  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon)  until  sunset.  Of  the  place  of  Jesus'  abode  no  record 
is  given. 

Ver.  40.  Andrew. — The  apostle  better  known  as  Peter's  brother  (vide  also  vi.  8).  The 
other  disciple,  modestly  unnamed,  is  the  Evangelist  himself. 

Ver.  41. — On  the  impulse  of  simple,  glowing  faith  Andrew  first  sought  his  own  brother, 
Simon,  as  dearest  to  him,  so  that  he  might  impart  to  him  this  new-found  treasure.  It  is  to 
be  inferred  that  John  also  sought  his  own  brother,  James,  with  a  like  intention.  We  have 
found  Messias  (rrirra). — The  use  of  this  Hebrew  word,  with  its  Greek  interpretation,  again 
shows  that  the  Gospel  was  intended  for  a  mixed  community,  a  community  where  a  Greek 
element  existed. 

Ver.  42.  Cephas. — "He  is  called  Petrus,  'a  stone,'  from  Petra,  'the  rock'"  (Aug.). 
"  Petrus  (or  Peter)  has  the  same  meaning  in  Greek  as  Cephas  (nb>3)  in  Syriac  (Aram.) ;  and 
the  apostle  was  called  Peter  from  the  firmness  of  his  faith,  by  which  he  clave  to  that  Petra, 
or  Rock,  of  whom  the  apostle  Paul  speaks :  '  That  Rock  was  Christ ' "  (Chr.  Wordsworth). 
See  also  Matt.  xvi.  18.  The  latter  passage  denotes  an  advance.  Here  Simon's  name  is 
changed  to  Peter;  in  St.  Matthew,  "Thou  art  Peter?  says  Christ,  "and  this  name  hence- 
forth describes  thy  character."  The  passages  are  independent,  and  throw  light  on  each 
other.     Thus  if  Petrus  =  a  stone,  then  the  explanation  is  found  in  1  Pet.  ii.  5. 

Ver.  43.  On  the  morrow,  etc. — I.e.  the  fourth  day  from  the  incident  recorded  in  ver.  29. 
He  would  (r)d£\7i<jev)  go  forth,  and  as  He  did  so  He  found  Philip.  The  words  Jesus 
addressed  to  Philip,  "  Follow  Me,"  are  more  than  a  mere  invitation  to  accompany  Him.  No 
doubt  other  words  of  teaching  were  spoken  which  are  not  here  recorded,  but  the  result  is 
seen  in  this  word  of  command  and  its  upshot. 

Ver.  44.  Bethsaida. — Jesus  met  Philip  on  the  way  from  Bethania  to  Cana.  This  Bethsaida 
was  on  the  west  side  of  the  Lake  of  Galilee,  and  is  called  Bethsaida  of  Galilee,  ch.  xii. 
(probably  on  a  site  north  of  Khan  Minyeli),  to  distinguish  it  from  Bethsaida  Julias  on  the 
east  side. 

Vers.  45-51.  Nathanael  =  Theodorus.  The  gift  of  God  (bfewna).  Probably  this  is  the 
disciple  mentioned  afterward  as  Bartholomew  (Matt.  x.  3).  How  quickly  did  those  early 
followers  of  Jesus  discover  the  marks  of  true  discipleship  !  Philip  was  no  sooner  convinced 
than  he  sought  Nathanael.  Jesus  from  Nazareth. — It  is  not  implied  that  the  Evangelist  was 
ignorant  of  the  fact  that  Jesus  was  born  in  Bethlehem  :  he  is  only  reporting  Philip's 
words. 

Ver.  46.  Nazareth  was  not  apparently  a  place  particularly  distinguished,  whilst  the 
religious  character  of  the  inhabitants  seems  to  have  been  a  sort  of  unreasoning,  not  to  say 
bigoted,  Jewish  orthodoxy  (Luke  iv.  29).  But  probably  a  little  of  the  scorn  of  an  inhabitant 
of  a  neighbouring  village,  which  plumed  itself  on  being  as  good  or  better  than  Nazareth, 
may  account  for  this  language  of  Nathanael.     But  see  also  vii.  52. 

Ver.  47.  No  guile. — Not  a  Jacob,  a  supplanter,  a  man  of  guile  ;  but  an  Israel,  one  who 
recognises  his  condition,  and  through  prayer  prevails  with  God  (Hos.  xii.  4,  5).  As  Jacob's 
character  was  changed,  so  his  true  descendants  have  no  affinity  with  that  side  of  his  character 
by  which  he  was  known  as  the  "  Supplanter." 

Ver.  48.  Whence  knowest  Thou  me  ?— The  reply  shows  that  Nathanael  was  not  prepared 
to  receive  Jesus  without  some  further  testimony  than  that  of  Philip.  The  fig  tree 
(I  Kings  iv.  25  ;  Zech.  iii.  10).— Equivalent  to  home.  Under  the  fig  tree  in  garden  or  vine- 
yard was  probably  a  place  sacred  to  meditation  (Luke  xiii.  6).  I  saw  thee,  etc.  (ver. 
49). — Nathanael  realised  that  his  most  secret  and  sacred  thoughts  were  known  by  this 
Person  in  whose  presence  he  stood.  Who  could  He  be  but  the  very  Searcher  of  hearts 
Himself  ?  "  Thou  art  the  Son  of  God  "—therefore  the  Xing  of  Israel,  the  promised 
Messiah-King  (Ps.  ii.  2,  6,  7,  12). 

16 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  i. 


Ver.  50.  Jesus  answered,  etc. — This  is  not  a  question ;  it  is  rather  a  recognition  by  our 
Lord  of  the  fact  of  Nathanael's  faith,  leading  Him  to  give  the  assurance  to  Nathanael 
and  the  other  disciples  present  that  their  faith  would  be  still  more  fully  and  gloriously 
confirmed. 

Ver.  51.  Verily,  verily  ('Afiw  ajxrjv). — This  formula  is  found  twenty-five  times  in  this 
Gospel.  "  Thence  is  derived  the  title  of  Jesus,  the  Amen  (Rev.  iii.  14).  This  word  (from 
p**>  Jirmum  fuit)  is,  properly  speaking,  a  verbal  adjective,  firm,  worthy  of  faith  .  .  .  the 
repetition  implies  a  doubt  to  be  overcome  in  the  mind  of  the  hearer  "  (Godet).    Angels,  etc. 

"Angels  are  instruments  of  divine  power  in  the  domain  of  nature  (see  the  angel  of  the 

waters,  Rev.  xvi.  5  ;  of  the  fire,  xiv.  18).  This  saying  refers  therefore  to  phenomena  which, 
while  passing  in  the  domain  of  nature,  are  due  to  a  causality  superior  to  the  laws  of  nature. 
Can  Jesus  characterise  His  miracles  more  clearly  without  naming  them  ? "  (Godet).  The 
reference  is  evidently  to  Jacob's  dream  (Gen.  xxviii.  12,  13).  But  we  must  not  exclude  the 
appearance  of  angelic  visitants  in  Gethsemane,  at  the  Resurrection,  and  the  Ascension. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—18. 

The  revelation  of  the  eternal  Word,  its  influence  and  its  end. 

[The  prologue  to  the  Fourth  Gospel  treats  of  the  eternity  and  divinity  of 
Christ,  the  Word,  as  the  end  of  divine  revelation,  and  of  His  reception  by 
men.  This  opening  or  introductory  section  sets  forth  the  aim  and  intention 
of  the  Fourth  Gospel,  viz.  to  proclaim  and  testify  to  Christ  as  the  Son  of 
God  (xx.  30,  31).  It  may  be  questioned  whether  this  Gospel  as  it  stands  is  the 
product  of  an  earlier  or  later  apostolic  age  (vide  Introduction).  It  may, 
however,  be  reasonably  considered  as  the  setting  forth  by  the  apostle  John, 
toward  the  end  of  his  life,  in  systematic  form,  of  what  had  been  constantly 
taught  by  him,  with  this  prologue  prefixed  to  meet  and  disarm  Gnostic  opinions 
that  were  pressing  in  on  the  Church.  The  prologue  declares  that  though 
not  understood  by  the  world  and  rejected  by  "  His  own,"  yet  Christ  was  the 
divine  Son,  the  long-promised  Messiah.] 

As  Christ  came  to  Israel  He  comes  to  us.  The  end  of  His  coming  is  "  life 
through  faith  in  His  name."  We  as  the  men  of  John's  day  have  to  answer 
the  question,  "  What  think  ye  of  Christ  ? " 

I.  Who  is  He  that  comes  to  us  for  acceptance  with  such  lofty  claims? — 

1.  He  is  the  eternal  Word — thus  called  because  He  reveals  God  and  the  hidden 
things  of  God  (Eph.  iii.  9  ;  Rev.  vi.  1),  and  in  Himself  declares  the  beauty 
of  the  divine  nature,  since  He  is  "  the  brightness  of  His  glory,"  etc.  (Heb.  i.  3). 

2.  He  is  eternal,  for  He  was  in  the  beginning  the  only  begotten  Son,  "the  first- 
born before  all  creation  "  (Col.  i.  15).  He  did  not  become  the  Son  of  God.  He 
was  not  created.  He  was.  He  existed  with  God,  not  in  God,  but  with  Him, 
the  Man  who  is  God's  "  fellow  "  (Zech.  xiii.  7).  He  was  not  merely  an  attribute 
or  a  power  of  God,  but  a  divine  person  co-equal  with  God  from  all  eternity ; 
for  "  the  same  was  in  the  beginning  with  God "  (ver.  2).  And  as  a  divine 
Person  His  position  is  the  highest,  cannot  be  higher,  for  He  was  God',  so 
exalted  is  the  Being  here  revealed.  And  when  this  truth  has  been  grasped  we 
are  prepared  for  the  further  declaration  that  this  exalted  Being  is — 3.  The 
Creator  of  the  universe,  of  all  created  things  (ver.  3).  He  revealed  God  in 
creation.  With  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Spirit  He  is  the  creator  and  upholder 
of  all  existences — not  only  of  the  vX-q  (hyle),  i.e.  material  existences,  but  of  all 
things,  "the  things  in  the  heavens  and  the  things  on  the  earth,"  etc.  (Col.  i.  16). 
In  Him  are  the  sources  of  all  beauty  and  order,  all  power  and  wisdom,  all  riches 
and  fulness.  He  is  the  source  of  all ;  and  thus  when  His  people  rest  on  Him 
they  know  no  want,  for  His  fulness  is  infinite.  And  as  the  upholder  of  all 
things,  in  whom  all  things  subsist,  He  is — 4.  The  source  and  spring  of  life  for 
men,  for  He  is  the  life  absolutely  (xi.  25),  life  essentially,  which  He  communi- 
cates to  men,  which  takes  its  rise  in  the  divine  fulness  of  life,  and  which  has 

c  17 


{ 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


its  continuance  in  communion  with  God.  By  Christ  men  escape  from  spiritual 
corruption.  He  gives  life  in  reconciliation,  sanctification,  glorification — eternal 
life.  Whoso  abides  not  in  Him  abides  in  death.  5.  And  this  life  brings  light. 
"  The  human  soul  on  whose  consciousness  God  arises,  and  into  which  the  divine 
life  enters,  becomes  thus  enlightened.  This  enlightened  soul  then  sees  itself 
and  the  world  in  light,  i.e.  in  God  "  (Petri).  Christ  is  essentially  the  light  for 
men.  From  the  hour  when  the  first  promise  of  restoration  fell  on  the  ears  of 
fallen  men,  down  through  patriarch  and  prophet  until  His  manifestation  in 
time ;  and  since  His  ascension,  through  His  truth  He  has  proved  Himself  to  be 
the  light  of  men.  And  despite  the  darkness  which  cannot  comprehend  it  (ver.  5), 
His  light  is  shining  toward  the  perfect  day.  Then  the  last  and  most  wonderful 
step  in  the  manifestation  of  Himself  is — 6.  "The  Word  was  made  flesh"  (ver.  14), 
and  men  beheld  His  glory.  It  was  no  merely  supernatural  or  superhuman 
manifestation  that  He  made  to  men.  "  God  was  manifest  in  the  flesh  "  (1  Tim. 
iii.  16).  Christ  the  eternal  Son  took  on  Himself  the  nature  of  man.  The 
manifestation  was  not  confined  to  a  mode  in  which  men  could  not  comprehend 
it.  In  love  to  men  He  came  in  human  form  to  dwell  among  them,  and  to  make 
clear  to  them  the  truth  of  truths.  And  in  His  coming  He  brought  blessing.  He 
was  full  of  grace  and  truth ;  in  Him  there  was  fulness  of  divine  blessing  for 
men.  Such  was  He  who  was  thus  gloriously  revealed,  and  to  whom  the  heaven- 
sent forerunner  bare  witness  as  the  true  light,  etc.  (ver.  9). 

II.  How  did  men  receive  Him? — 1.  "He  was  in  the  world,"  etc.  (ver.  10). 
The  darkened  world  did  not  comprehend  Him.  The  world  here  means  the 
lost  race  of  men,  for  the  material  world  did  recognise  its  Creator  and  obeyed 
Him.  But  men  have  strayed  from  the  light.  The  love  of  God,  by  which 
we  chiefly  know  God,  does  not  exist  in  the  heart  of  the  natural  man.  Though 
most  sad,  yet  this  is  not  exceeding  wonderful.  But  it  is  more  than  sad  to 
consider  that — 2.  "  He  came  unto  His  own,"  etc.  (ver.  11).  He  came  to  those 
who  were  descendants  of  Abraham,  who  looked  for  the  Star  of  Jacob,  the 
Son  of  David  (Num.  xxiv.  17;  Isa.  xi.  1).  Yet  though  He  was  the  seed  of 
David  according  to  the  flesh  (Acts  ii.  30),  "  sent  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of 
Israel"  (Matt.  xv.  24),  His  own,  shut  up  in  the  darkness  of  formalism  and 
traditionalism,  did  not  receive  Him,  as  this  Gospel  specially  shows,  although 
they  should  have  been  attracted  to  Him  and  bound  by  double  ties  of  loyalty  and 
love  (Isa.  i.  2,  3).  Though  prepared  by  prophecy  and  promise,  and  especially 
warned  and  called  to  repentance,  in  view  of  His  manifestation  among  men,  by 
the  forerunner,  they  turned  away.  This  means  more  than  the  world's  want 
of  knowledge.  That  was,  indeed,  the  manifestation  of  the  pitiable  blindness 
of  man's  fallen  nature.  Here  we  have  the  deeper  blindness  of  unbelief  and 
spiritual  pride — the  rejection  of  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit,  who  through  the 
Word  would  have  enlightened  them.  What  a  depth  of  judgment  lies  in  the 
words,  "  His  own  received  Him  not "  !  3.  All  did  not  reject.  "  To  as  many  as 
received  Him,"  etc.  (ver.  12).  Thus  there  were  some  who  believed  in  His  name 
— in  Him  as  the  only  begotten  Son.  They  were  not  bound  by  the  material 
Messianic  conceptions  of  the  unbelieving  Jews.  And  to  all  such  He  gave  "  power 
to  become  children  of  God."  Christ  is  God's  Son  by  nature.  Men  by  nature  are 
"  the  children  of  wrath  "  (Eph.  ii.  3).  But  united  to  Christ  by  faith  they 
become  His  brethren,  and  in  living  union  with  Him  are  one  with  the  Father. 
The  Spirit  of  the  Son  is  imparted  to  them,  dwells  in  them,  so  that  they  cry, 
u  Abba,  Father"  (Bom.  viii.  11,  15).  4.  Christendom  has  been  highly  favoured 
— far  more  so  than  was  Judaism.  What  shall  be  the  result  of  not  receiving 
Him  now  after  all  the  proofs  of  His  divine  power  and  glory?  (Heb.  x.  28,  29). 
Let  us  receive  Him  with  reverence,  in  view  of  what  He  is — with  faith  in  His 
revealed  word  and  finished  work — with  longing,  feeling  our  need  of  all  grace. 

18 


HOMILETIC&COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  i. 


Let  us  increase  in  union  with  Him,  participating  in  His  life,  radiant  with  His 
light,  growing  through  the  fulness  of  His  grace. 

III.  Christ  is  manifested  as  the  end  of  divine  revelation. — 1.  The  law  was 

a  partial  and  dim  revelation  of  God's  mind  and  will.  The  law  was  given  by- 
Moses.  It  was  an  external  economy  given  through  a  human  lawgiver,  who 
passed  away.  "The  law  was  sent  by  a  servant;  grace  and  truth  came  by  the 
Son."  The  connection  of  Moses  with  the  law  was  temporary;  and  the  law, 
as  a  preparatory  economy,  was  "  a  shadow  of  good  things  to  come  "  (Heb.  x.  1). 
Grace  and  truth,  like  the  Son,  are  for  ever.  These  gifts  come  with  Him,  as  part 
of  Himself ;  they  are  received  with  Him,  bestowed  by  Him  in  their  fulness  on 
those  who  receive  Him.  And  in  this  coming  among  men — 2.  He  revealed  the 
Father.  "  No  man  hath  seen  God,"  etc.  (ver.  18).  Even  Moses  was  vouchsafed 
only  a  partial  revelation  of  the  divine  glory  (Exod.  xxxhi.  18-23).  No  man  can 
see  God  in  His  own  essential  glory  (1  Tim.  vi.  16).  The  partial  revelation  given 
to  the  holy  men  of  old  was  given  through  the  grace  of  Christ,  and  they  rejoiced 
to  think  of  the  fuller  revelation  that  was  to  be  made  (viii.  56).  Christ  alone  fully 
declares  the  Father  to  those  who  believe  in  Him  (Matt.  xi.  27).  And  the 
centre,  the  crown  of  this  revelation  is  that  of  the  Father,  i.e.  of  eternal  love 
(1  John  iv.  8).  "  That  they  may  know  that  Thou  hast  loved  them,  as  Thou  hast 
loved  Me  "  (xvii.  23) — this  is  the  end  of  revelation. 

Vers.  1-4  and  14.  "  The  Word  was  God." — None  of  the  gospel  writers  touch 
deeper  chords  of  the  eternal  mysteries  than  the  Evangelist  John.  He  was 
doubtless,  in  the  divine  order,  best  fitted  for  conveying  to  men  those  deeper 
truths.  "  The  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved,"  he  perhaps  understood  better  and 
sympathised  more  deeply  with  his  Master  than  the  other  disciples.  Hence  he 
was  likened  to  the  eagle  by  ancient  Church  writers,  as  best  able  of  all  the 
Evangelists  to  look  fixedly  on  the  glory  of  the  Sun  of  righteousness.  His  flight 
indeed  is  so  lofty  and  prolonged  that  sometimes  men  can  hardly  follow  him,  even 
those  gifted  with  keen  spiritual  vision.  In  this  introductory  portion  of  the 
prologue  to  his  Gospel  the  Evangelist  emphasises  the  Godhead  of  the  Redeemer. 
The  theme  in  all  its  fulness  is  far  beyond  finite,  human  comprehension.  Men 
can  advance  only  to  the  threshold  of  the  divine  mystery  here  revealed.  There 
are  two  great  facts  meet  us. 

I.  The  eternity  and  divinity  of  the  Word. — "In  the  beginning  was  the 
Word,"  etc.  1.  The  imperfection  of  human  language  and  the  limitations  of 
human  thought  make  it  impossible  for  even  this  most  highly  gifted  and  inspired 
writer  to  unfold  fully  the  divine  mysteries.  But  so  far  as  careful  and  exact 
expression  of  thought  can  compass  it,  the  divinity  and  eternity  of  Christ  are 
here  set  forth.  In  these  words  the  Evangelist  passes  beyond  the  limits  of  time 
and  space  into  the  eternities — into  the  presence  of  "the  high  and  lofty  One 
that  inhabiteth  eternity,  whose  name  is  Holy"  (Isa.  lvii.  15).  And  there  is 
revealed  the  existence  in  the  Godhead  of  certain  relations.  In  the  beginning, 
and  therefore  in  eternity,  before  all  created  existences  were  called  into  being, 
there  existed,  with  God  [or  "  in  relation  with  God  "  (Godet)],  One  here  called  the 
Word.  This  divine  Person,  or  hypostasis,  though  distinct,  was  yet  in  perfect 
unity  with  the  divine  Father,  and  "  was  God  "  [where  Oeos  without  the  article, 
"  used  as  an  attribute,  simply  expresses  the  notion  of  kind.  It  is  an  adjective 
which,  while  maintaining  the  personal  distinction  between  God  and  the  Logos, 
ascribes  to  the  latter  all  the  attributes  of  the  divine  Essence  "  (Godet)].  There 
was  perfect  unity  between  them,  not  only  in  Being,  but  in  the  revelation  of  the 
divine  in  the  world.  2.  The  term  "  word "  may  be  taken  to  mean  generally 
"  the  expression  of  hidden  thought,"  etc.  But  it  is  more.  It  is  the  expression 
of  our  being,  our  true  selves,  when  it  is  genuine  and  not  feigned.     So  the 

19 


chap.  i.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN. 


c 


eternal  Word  is  the  expression  not  only  of  the  thoughts,  etc.,  hut  also  of  the 
Being  of  God.  He  is  distinguished  from  God  the  Father,  yet  they  are  one. 
He  is  eternal,  like  the  Father,  and  thus  is  before  all  things  (Prov.  viii.  22-28). 
And  as  words  when  sincere  reveal  men's  thought  and  their  true  being,  so  Christ, 
the  Word,  reveals  the  true  nature  of  the  Father,  and  His  thoughts  toward  men ; 
for  "  He  is  the  brightness  of  God's  glory,"  etc.  (Heb.  i.  3).  Thus  He  is  the  way 
to  the  Father,  whilst  still  one  with  Him,  as  He  claimed  to  be  (Matt.  xi.  27). 
3.  This  divine  relationship  is  of  such  a  nature  that  it  may  be  described  as  like 
the  relationship  between  father  and  son.  The  thought  in  us  is  what  is  hidden. 
The  expression  in  speech  or  action  or  character  of  our  tL ought  is  the  revelation 
of  ourselves.  So  the  Father,  "dwelling  in  light  that  no  man  can  approach  unto," 
etc.  (1  Tim.  vi.  16),  is  revealed  by  the  Son  to  men  in  His  incarnation,  of  which 
many  think  there  were  premonitory  tokens  in  His  appearing  as  the  Jehovah- Angel 
(Gen.  xxii.  11);  the  Prince  of  the  host  of  the  Lord  (Josh.  v.  13-15);  the  Angel  of 
the  covenant  (Mai.  iii.  1).  He  was  predicted  as  the  Son  (Isa.  ix.  6) ;  as  Jehovah 
Himself  (Jer.  xxiii.  6 ;  Zech.  ii.  8) ;  as  He  whose  outgoings  are  from  eternity 
(Mic.  v.  2).  And  as  the  Revealer  of  God  He  has  been  the  light  of  men  in  all 
ages, — in  the  law  written  in  men's  consciences,  and  given  with  ordinances  to  Israel; 
in  the  prophetic  word ;  in  His  special  dealings  with  Israel,  and  His  general  deal- 
ings with  men ;  in  the  dim  starlight  of  heathendom,  as  in  the  glimmering  dawn  in 
Israel.  4.  He  is  also  the  life  of  men  as  the  creative  Word  (1  Cor.  viii.  6) ;  and 
because  this  power  continues  "  in  Him  all  things  consist."  £A  word  .implies  a 
corresponding  thought.  ?  That  which  is  revealed  in  Jesus  is  God.  He  is  not  the 
Father;  but  as  the  Son  He  is  eternally  what  He  is  with  and  through  the  Father. 
II.  In  the  eternal  Godhead  of  Jesus  the  Word  there  is  proclaimed  to  us  :  1.  The 
eternity  of  divine  love.  "  Thou  lovedst  Me,"  etc.  (xvii.  24).  And  therefore  as 
"  the  lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world  "  He  was  the  centre  and 
channel  to  man  of  that  heavenly  love  that  never  failed.  Thus  His  redeeming 
power  was  not  restricted  to  the  ages  following  His  atoning  work  on  earth,  but 
looked  backward  to  the  ages  past.  His  coming  in  time  and  all  it  implied  was 
a  necessary  part  of  that  work  which  has  not  ceased  since  Eden's  fall,  etc.  2.  This 
great  truth  also  is  a  cause  of  rejoicing  to  us  in  the  present.  This  rejoicing  comes 
in  the  individual  Christian's  happy  experience,  in  the  general  spread  of  righteous- 
ness, in  the  evidence  of  the  power  of  His  gospel  to  raise  men  higher  and  nearer 
to  God.  It  is  the  foundation  of  the  Christian's  confident  hope  of  the  ultimate 
victory  of  Christ  over  sin  and  death,  of  the  high  honour  and  lofty  destiny  of 
humanity  through  Christ's  "  not  taking  on  Him  the  nature  of  angels,  but  the 
seed  of  Abraham  "  (Heb.  ii.  16).  3.  And  there  is  hope  for  the  eternal  future 
for  humanity  in  this  great  fact.  He  who  is  the  eternal  Word,  "  the  same 
yesterday,"  etc.  (Heb.  xiii.  8),  who  so  cared  for  sinful  men  that  He  died  for  them, 
who  by  His  gospel  has  advanced  and  continues  to  elevate  the  whole  race,  will  not 
in  the  eternal  future  fail  those  who  trust  in  Him.  "  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass 
away,"  but  His  promises  will  not  fail.  No  power  can  prevail  against  Him,  and  He 
can  and  will  give  freely  all  things  to  those  who  are  His  (1  Cor.  iii.  22).    Therefore 

11  All  hail  the  power  of  Jesu's  name,"  etc. 

Ver.  3.  Christ  the  creator. — These  verses  may  be  compared  to  the  massive 
foundation  courses  of  the  structure  of  gospel  history.  They  are  laid  deep  and 
broad  in  eternity  ;  they  proclaim  in  truth  that  divine  Rock  on  which  our  faith  may 
rest  secure,  whatever  storms  may  blow,  whatever  foes  assail.  Apart  from  this 
eternal  foundation,  humanity  can  rear  no  firm  and  abiding,  spiritual  and  moral 
structures  for  the  soul's  refuge  amid  the  tempests  that  will  arise.  The  structures 
reared  on  the  shifting  sands  of  merely  human  opinion  have  fallen  and  will  fall. 
The  building  reared  on  this  foundation  will  stand  the  test  of  the  day  of  trial. 

20 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  I. 


In  these  simple  phrases  two  grand  truths  present  themselves  for  consideration, 
i.e.  that  Jesus  Christ,  the  eternal  Word  of  God,  is  the  active  agent  in  creation, 
and  that  by  Him  all  things  consist.  Thus  the  sustaining  and  upholding  of  the 
created  universe  are  part  of  His  work — on  Him  it  depends  for  its  continuance. 
All  things  were  created  by  Him  (the  original  creative  act  was  His),  and  without 
or  apart  from  Him  was  not  anything  made  that  hath  been  made,  i.e.  the  continued 
existence  of  created  things  depends  on  Him  (see  Dr.  A.  Maclaren,  in  loc.).  We 
consider  Christ  as  the  agent  in  creation. 

I.  Christ  was  before  creation. — 1.  We  are  wont  to  think  of  the  Redeemer 
more  especially  in  reference  to  His  redemptive  work,  and  to  leave  out  of  sight 
His  divine,  eternal  existence,  which  gives  to  His  redemptive  work  its  unique  and 
incomparable  value.  2.  This  foundation  truth  is  revealed  to  us  in  Scripture — 
that  Jesus  Christ  existed  before  all  worlds.  As  the  Son  of  the  eternal  Father, 
eternally  derived  from  the  Father,  He  is  of  the  same  substance,  "  equal  in  power 
and  glory."  3.  Christ  is  expressly  regarded  as  pre-existent  by  the  New  Testa- 
ment writers.  "  He  is  the  image  of  the  invisible  God,"  wrote  the  apostle  ;  and 
the  Evangelist-apostle,  in  words  in  which  he  seems  to  struggle  to  give  utterance 
to  the  grand  truth,  declares  that  the  Word  was  God.  Our  Lord  Himself  claimed 
this  eternal  existence  in  the  memorable  words,  "  Before  Abraham  was,  /  am." 
4.  In  such  declarations  we  are  led  beyond  the  bounds  of  time  and  space,  before 
those  shining  orbs  were  swung  in  the  abyss  by  the  word  of  creative  power.  In 
the  fathomless  depths  of  eternity,  in  seeking  to  penetrate  which  thought  and 
even  imagination  are  powerless,  Christ  existed,  i.e.  with  the  Father,  as  the  eternal 
Word.  5.  There  is  community  of  nature  between  these  divine  Persons.  The 
Son  is  not  merely  to  be  regarded  as  some  attribute  or  power  of  the  divine 
nature — not  merely  possessing  some  scintilla  of  the  divine  nature,  as  angels,  or 
even  man ;  but  He  is  the  complete  reflection  or  image  of  the  divine  Father ; 
He  is  the  complete  expression  of  the  divine  thought  toward  what  is  without ; 
and  also  of  the  divine  love,  not  alone  toward  what  is  without,  but  as  that  object 
in  which  God's  love  found  not  only  its  expression  but  its  satisfaction.  "  For 
only  God  is  sufficient  for  God — the  eternal  Son  for  the  eternal  Father." 

II.  Christ  is  the  eternal  manifestation  of  God. — 1.  He  is  not  merely  the 
outward  revelation  of  the  Father,  but  He  is  so  because  He  is  eternally  in  and 
with  the  Father.  All  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  exists  in  Him.  "  It  pleased 
the  Father  that  in  Him  all  fulness  should  dwell."  All  the  power,  all  the  wisdom, 
and  all  the  glory  of  the  divine  Father  are  communicated  to  the  Son,  residing  in 
and  issuing  forth  from  Him  with  the  same  fulness.  2.  The  divine  Word  stands 
in  this  relation  of  unity  with  the  Father,  not  beside  Him  as  if  He  were  another, 
equal  to  the  first  simply,  but  with  Him  in  His  eternal  glory,  so  that  all  that  the 
Father  has  the  Son  has,  not  from  Himself,  but  eternally  in  and  from  the 
Father.  "  The  Lord  possessed  me  in  the  beginning  of  His  way,"  etc.  (Prov. 
viii.  22).  3.  The  Word,  however,  has  this  further  relationship  toward  what  is 
without,  if  we  may  so  speak,  as  the  manifestation  of  God.  "  He  is  the  Son  as 
the  brightness  of  the  divine  glory,"  etc.  (Heb.  i.),  as  "the  image  of  the  invisible 
God"  (Col.  i.  15).  He  manifests  the  divine  wisdom  in  creation,  the  divine  love 
in  providence  and  redemption.  4.  And  it  is  to  this  expression  of  the  divine 
love  going  forth  through  the  divine  Son  and  Word  that  all  things  owe  their 
being.  As  thought  becomes  visible,  so  to  speak,  through  the  spoken  word,  so 
that  thought  of  the  divine  love  and  wisdom  was  expressed  by  the  Son  in  works 
of  love  and  wisdom. 

"  Love  is  the  root  of  creation  ;  God's  essence  worlds  without  number 
Lie  in  His  bosom  like  children  ;  He  made  them  for  this  purpose  only — 
Only  to  love  and  to  be  loved  again.     He  breathed  forth  His  Spirit 
Into  the  slumbering  dust ;  and  upright  standing,  it  laid  its 
Hand  on  its  heart,  and  felt  it  was  warm  with  a  flame  out  of  heaven." — Longfellow, 

21 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


5.  Christ  the  Lord  is  one  with  the  Father ;  but  He  is  also  to  be  distinguished 
from  the  Father  as  receiving  His  fulness  from  Him  and  revealing  and  manifesting 
it  within  the  bounds  of  space  and  time. 

III.  Christ  manifests  the  divine  glory  in  creation. — 1.  We  are  wont  to 
think  and  speak  of  Christ's  first  advent,  meaning  thereby  His  appearing  as 
the  incarnate  Son,  and  of  His  second  advent  in  reference  to  His  coming  again  to 
"  make  all  things  new."  But  it  must  never  be  forgotten  that  there  was  what 
might  be  called  the  original  and  prior  advent  of  the  divine  Word  in  creation. 
2.  "All  things  were  made  by  Him";  "By  Him  God  made  the  worlds"  (Heb. 
i.  2);  "In  Him  were  all  things  created"  (Col.  i.  16).  £He  is  the  centre  into  > 
which  the  creative  energy  is  poured  in  all  its  fulness  by  the  eternal  Father.! 
"There  is  but  one  God,  the  Father,  in  whom  are  all  things."  But  Christ  is  the 
expression  of  the  divine  thought,  and  thus  of  the  divine  wisdom.  He  is  the  Son 
in  full  accord  with  the  divine  will;  and  as  the  manifestation  of  that  will,  working 
by  love,  "He  made  the  worlds."  Thus  "there  is  to  us  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by 
whom  are  all  things,  and  we  by  Him"  (1  Cor.  viii.  6).  3.  All  created  things 
therefore  exist  in  and  through  Him.  "  But  He  Himself  draws  everything  from 
the  Father,  and  refers  everything  to  the  Father."  Thus  has  been  manifested  to 
created  intelligences  the  glory  of  God.  We  see  and  know  and  adore  His  power 
and  wisdom  and  love,  His  essential  glory,  in  those  works  which  are  His  works 
done  by  and  through  the  eternal  Son,  in  whom  His  divine  fulness  dwells. 

We  may  learn  here  :  1.  The  essential  and  eternal  glory  of  the  Saviour.  We 
are  not  to  regard  Him  merely  from  the  side  of  His  incarnation,  although  that 
is  His  crowning  glory.  We  should  remember  also  who  and  what  He  is  by 
nature,  so  that  our  adoration  and  service  may  be  reverent  as  well  as  loving. 
2.  To  rejoice  that  this  world  was  made  by  Him  whose  nature  and  name  is 
Love,  and  who  pronounced  all  things  "  very  good." 

Ver.  3,  last  clause,  and  4,  first  clause.  Christ  the  source  of  the  world's  life  and 
the  world's  upholder. — Christ  reveals  God  in  creation  not  only  by  the  original 
creative  act,  so  that  all  existences  in  the  created  universe  bear  the  impress  of 
His  wisdom  and  power  as  the  manifestation  of  the  Father ;  He  also  communi- 
cates to  the  world  those  vital  forces  in  virtue  of  which  it  continues  to  exist. 
The  continued  existence  and  order  of  all  created  things  depend  on  Him. 

I.  Christ  is  the  source  of  continued  life  for  the  world. — 1.  "  In  Him  was 
life,"  etc.  "  In  Him  all  things  consist  '  (hold  and  stand  together).  It  is 
not  only  spiritual  life  we  owe  to  Him,  but  life  in  all  its  grades.  In  the 
created  universe  physical  as  well  as  spiritual  life  depends  on  Him.  2.  This 
also  was  included  in  that  infinite  fulness  which  it  pleased  the  Father  should 
dwell  in  Him.  The  continuance  of  all  created  things  depends  on  Him.  Without 
Him  we  can  do  nothing,  and  we  are  nothing  (xv.  5).  3.  Thus  we  can  in  some 
measure  realise  how  much  in  accord  with  His  nature  it  was  that  He  (even  when 
incarnate  and  with  His  glory  veiled)  should  be  able  to  make  the  material  universe 
supply  Him  with  the  means  of  physical  life  (vi.  1-13),  and  that  He  should  be 
able  to  bid  back  the  power  of  death  and  restore  to  life  those  who  were  in  the 
power  of  the  last  enemy  (xi.  43,  44).  For  when  He  appeared  in  the  world  as 
the  visible  manifestation  of  the  invisible  God  He  came  unto  His  own  (things) 
(i.  11),  to.  i'Sia,  which  He  created  and  sustains. 

II.  Christ  orders  and  controls  the  universe  created  by  Him. — 1.  He  is  not 
a  demiurge,  who,  having  created  an  imperfect  world,  also  controls  it  imperfectly, 
or  leaves  it  uncontrolled  (Heb.  i.  3).  He  has  all  power  and  might,  and  is  able 
to  order  and  direct  the  universe  He  has  framed.  And  even  though  for  a  time 
He  laid  aside  the  heavenly  glory  and  tabernacled  among  men,  He  showed  His 
power  over  the  forces  of  nature,  etc.     2.   "  And  now  the  Father  hath  highly 

22 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  I. 


exalted  Him,"  etc.  "  He  hath  put  all  things  under  His  feet "  (1  Cor.  xv.  27). 
All  rule,  all  authority  and  power,  shall  be  subject  unto  Him.  "  All  power  is 
committed  to  Him  in  heaven  and  in  earth."  "  All  things  are  delivered  to  Me 
of  My  Father."  3.  And  this  is  true  not  only  of  physical  nature,  but  of  the 
spiritual  and  moral  worlds.  He  reigns  and  rules  in  them  also  as  King  of  kings ; 
and  He  is  guiding  and  controlling  all  things  for  an  appointed  end,  for 

"  that  great  divine  event 
Toward  which  the  whole  creation  moves. " 

III.  Christ's  rule  in  the  universe  brings  joy  and  hope  to  men. — 1.  He  is  the 

manifestation  of  God's  love  and  care  for  man  ;  and  whilst  eternal  Love,  "  the 
same  yesterday,  to-day,"  etc.,  is  on  the  throne  of  universal  power,  then  all  things 
shall  be,  must  be  well.  Righteousness  shall  in  the  end  prevail.  2.  This  hope 
we  need  in  the  midst  of  so  much  that  is  dark  and  terrible  in  the  world  and  the 
history  of  the  race.  When  the  wicked  seem  to  prosper  and  go  unpunished,  etc., 
still  even  the  wrath  of  man  shall  praise  Him ;  and  He  can  make  even  the 
sorrows  and  trials  of  life  redound  to  the  good  of  His  people.  All  things  shall 
work  together  for  their  good,  etc.  3.  It  brings,  therefore,  joy  and  hope  to 
God's  people — to  them  only — to  know  that,  however  untoward  the  course  of 
history  may  seem,  however  full  of  tribulation  to  themselves  the  experiences  of 
life,  Christ,  who  loved  men  and  gave  Himself  for  them  in  accordance  with  the 
Father's  will  and  desire,  reigns  in  love  on  the  throne  of  the  universe.  So  they 
may  cry  exultingly  with  the  poet, — 

"  God's  in  His  heaven.     All's  right  with  the  world  "  {Browning'),  and 
"His  purposes  will  ripen  fast,  unfolding  every  hour"  (Cowjjer),  etc. 

Vers.  4,  5.  Christ  the  life  as  the  light  of  men. — In  Scripture  God  and  His 
working  in  the  world  are  often  symbolised  by  light  and  its  effects.  Indeed,  from 
the  first  word  of  power  (Gen.  i.  2)  to  the  final  description  of  the  new  heavens 
and  earth  (Rev.  xxi.),  the  working  of  the  divine  energy  in  the  universe  is  j 
very  frequently  symbolised  by  light.  The  divine  life  and  light  are  constantly  / 
linked  together.  Wherever  the  divine  life  is  in  reality,  there  also  is  the  divine 
light ;  and  wherever  that  light  shines,  there  we  know  is  life,  spiritual  and 
eternal.  Thus  it  could  not  have  been  otherwise  that,  when  the  eternal  Son 
came  to  the  world,  He  came  as  the  life  and  light  of  men.  As  the  sent  of  God, 
bearing  His  image  (Heb.  i.  3),  He  could  not  have  given  a  clearer  revelation  of 
the  divine  nature. 

I.  This  was  the  revelation  for  which  humanity  longed. — For  this  they 
prayed  all  down  the  ages.  They  needed  a  quickening  life  which  would  help 
them  to  throw  off  the  mortal  and  moral  malady  which  had  brought  their  whole 
being  under  the  dominion  of  death.  They  needed  light,  not  only  that  they 
might  know  themselves  and  the  meaning  of  the  present,  but  that  they  might  have 
some  assurance  for  the  future.  For  this  the  race  longed — light  to  illumine  the 
way  in  which  they  should  go,  life  to  quicken  them  to  walk  therein  (Ps.  xliii.  3, 
cxix.  37). 

II.  But  are  not  man's  deepest  needs  forgiveness  and  freedom  from  sin  ? — 
Did  not  Jesus  come  "  to  save  His  people  from  their  sins  "  ?  (Matt.  i.  21).  Yes. 
But  this  is  only  another  aspect  of  the  same  great  truth.  Sin  is  the  cause  of  the 
darkness  ;  nay,  is  that  darkness  that  "  covers  the  earth,"  and  the  gross  darkness 
that  covers  the  people  (Isa.  lx.  2).  Sin  is  the  moral  and  mortal  malady  that  is 
destroying  the  race.  Therefore  Christ,  the  true  and  only  light,  comes  to  disperse 
the  darkness.  Christ  the  life  comes  to  save  the  perishing.  This  He  does  by 
imparting  His  life  and  light  to  men.     Thus  they  become  centres  of  the  same  • 

23 


CHAP.  i.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


and  thus  ever  more  surely  the  darkness  passes  and  the  true  light  shines,  the 
dominion  of  death  is  restricted  and  driven  back. 

III.  Spiritual  life  and  light  are  correlative. — 1.  We  cannot  imagine  the  world 
of  animated  being  existing  without  the  great  centre  of  the  material  world's  light,  the 
sun. — In  creation  the  first  movement  which  led  to  the  birth  of  order  and  beauty 
was  the  creation  of  light  :  "  The  ethereal  first  of  things,  quintessence  pure " 
(Milton).  When  it  vibrated  in  the  chaotic  elements,  as  the  effect  and  accom- 
paniment of  the  living,  creative  Spirit,  it  contained  the  promise  and  potency  of 
the  order  and  beauty  which  vanquished  chaos  and  darkness.  And  in  reference  to 
this,  Christ  the  Word  is  the  light  of  the  world  (ver.  3 ;  Prov.  ii.  10-22,  etc.). 

2.  >So  too  is  He  the  light  of  the  moral  world. — Humanity,  by  fatal  choice,  had 
become  morally  and  spiritually  dark — like  a  dark,  sunless  land.  No  perfectly 
healthy  spiritual  life  could  exist  naturally  in  those  fields  of  time  in  human 
nature — no  bloom  and  fragrance  of  the  higher  virtues  and  graces  of  character 
could  be  expected — no  fruit  of  higher  service  could  be  looked  for.  Not  that  all 
men  at  all  times,  during  the  long  course  of  history  until  Christ  came,  were 
entirely  in  this  dark  state  spiritually.  Here  and  there  among  all  tribes  and 
families,  in  every  period  of  earth's  history,  some  there  were  who  saw  the  light, 
even  though  dimly  and  imperfectly.  But  those  often  solitary  examples  only 
served  to  emphasise  more  the  intensity  of  the  surrounding  darkness.  From  the 
dawn  of  history  we  may  trace  the  process  of  unfolding  of  the  divine  life  in  the 
intellectual  and  moral  life  of  humanity.  Although  this  life  was  never  utterly 
destroyed  by  sin,  it  was  yet  enfeebled  and  darkened.  Men  lived  in  a  dim 
moral  and  intellectual  twilight,  in  which  they  erred  from  the  heavenward  path, 
as  in  the  gloomy  reaches  of  some  vast,  primeval  forest,  through  which  they 
vainly  struggled  often  toward  the  light.  Often  they  wandered  further  from 
the  path  to  perish  in  the  gloom.  What  a  confused  tangle,  as  of  a  gigantic, 
impenetrable  undergrowth,  has  been  the  moral  history  of  men !  How  few 
clearings  were  there  where  a  glimpse  of  sun  or  star  could  be  obtained  !  Through 
what  thickets  of  ignorance,  error,  and  moral  obliquity  have  they  had  to  press  ere 
they  could  gain  the  light  of  freedom,  truth,  righteousness  !  But  wherever  the 
light  of  God,  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  came,  the  darkness  fled. 

3.  In  One  race  this  was  conspicuous. — They  gained  a  vantage-ground,  through 
divine  grace,  from  which  the  paths  of  truth  and  righteousness  could  in  part  be 
traced.  But  it  is  since  Jesus,  the  light  of  the  world,  came  to  earth,  that  men 
have  been  guided  more  readily  from  the  tangled  mazes  of  ignorance  and  sin 
into  the  paths  of  truth  and  rectitude.  This  is  not  the  statement  of  a  theological 
dogma  merely.  It  is  the  testimony  of  the  annals  of  our  race.  It  is  an  indisput- 
able fact  that  wherever  Christ's  Spirit  comes  with  power,  there  in  a  marked 
degree  intellectual  life  quickens  and  expands  and  a  higher  moral  order  reigns. 

IV.  But  these  effects  arise  ultimately  from  a  change  in  the  spiritual  nature  of 
men. — 1.  It  is  there  that  the  deepest  darkness  has  reigned,  and  there  emphatically 
that  Christ  is  the  light  of  every  man.  Through  the  working  of  His  Spirit  alone, 
quickening  to  a  new  and  higher  life,  can  man  attain  to  true  life  and  light. 
Hear  one  of  the  ancients :  "  By  the  conclusions  of  reason  we  cannot  learn  the 
will  of  the  gods."  Thus  spoke  Socrates ;  and  his  great  disciple  also  said :  "  If 
the  gods  themselves  do  not  reveal  the  heavenly,  you  will  search  the  universe  in 
vain  for  it."  Thus  the  wisest  among  the  heathen  spoke  words  that  amply 
confirmed  the  apostle's  saying  :  "  The  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God." 

2.  As  a  consequence  of  this  darkness  all  spiritual  life  was  paralysed. — In  Israel 
the  moon  of  revelation  of  type  and  ceremony  gave  a  pale,  prophetic  light.  But 
among  the  heathen  darkness  as  to  God's  will  and  way  reigned  supreme.  Now 
here  certainly  Christ  is  the  light  of  men.  Not  only  by  His  teaching  but  by 
His  life  he  manifested  the  divine  will  and  made  known  the  Father  to  men. 

24 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  cSA£.  I. 

And  with  this  revelation  a  new  love  comes  into  men's  hearts.  Heat  rays 
accompany  the  light  rays.  The  nature  that  lay  frozen  in  the  spiritual  darkness 
thaws  beneath  this  combined  influence.  The  heart  that  was  hard  and  selfish  is 
softened  and  transformed.  The  light  brings  a  quickening  power.  During  the 
long  winter  of  the  arctic  circle,  when  only  a  fleeting  aurora  lights  up  the  gloom, 
nature  lies  frozen  "and  lifeless.  But  in  summer,  when  the  sun  rises  not  to 
set  for  many  days,  the  frost  unlooses  its  hold,  and  under  the  combined 
influence  of  light  and  heat  rays  vegetation  advances  rapidly,  quickened  into 
"sudden  vigorous  life — emblem  of  the  nature  of  man  when  it  is  turned  toward 
Christ,  the  life  and  light  of  men  !  The  records  of  history  and  the  continual 
testimony  of  experience  declare  that  Christ  is  "  the  true  light,  which  lighteth 
every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world." 

Yers.  6,  7.  The  forerunner . — Here  we  have  delineated  the  true  character  of 
John  the  Baptist,  and  his  chief  function  as  the  forerunner  of  our  Lord.  He  was 
a  witness  for  Christ,  and  came  for  that  end. 

Consider  the  witness  of  John  the  Baptist  to  Christ,  and  the  testimony  of 
Christ  to  His  forerunner. 

I.  The  witness  of  John  the  Baptist  to  Jesus  Christ. — This  forerunner  sent 
from  God  had  all  the  characteristics  of  a  perfect  witness.  1.  He  was  a  faith- 
ful and  disinterested  witness ;  2.  A  witness  fully  instructed  and  enlightened ; 
3.  A  faithful  and  irreproachable  witness ;  4.  A  zealous  and  ardent  witness  ; 
5.  A  constant  and  steadfast  witness. 

II.  The  testimony  of  Christ  regarding  John. — The  Saviour  of  the  world 
honoured  His  forerunner,  and  bore  witness  concerning  :  1.  The  greatness  of 
his  personality  :  "  Among  those  born  of  woman,"  etc.  2.  The  dignity  of  his 
ministry  :  "  What  went  ye  out  to  see  ?  a  prophet  ?  Yea,  I  say  unto  you,  and 
more  than  a  prophet,"  etc.  3.  The  excellency  of  his  preaching :  he  was  "  a 
burning  and  a  shining  light."  4.  The  efficacy  of  his  baptism  :  Jesus  cometh 
unto  John  to  be  baptised  of  him.  5.  The  holiness  of  his  life  :  "  What  went  ye 
out  to  see  1  a  reed  shaken  with  the  wind  1  a  man  clothed  in  soft  raiment  1  " 

Lesson. — Let  us  seek  to  live  a  holy  life,  so  that  Jesus  Christ  may  confess  us 
one  day  before  His  Father ;  and  let  us  fear  lest  He  may  have  to  witness  against 
us  in  view  of  the  contradiction  He  may  find  between  our  life  and  conduct  and 
that  of  John  the  Baptist. — Bourdaloue. 

Yers.  12,  13.  The  divine  sonship  of  believers. — The  great  races  of  heathen 
antiquity  loved  to  trace  their  descent  from  the  gods,  and  the  father  of  gods  and 
men,  through  a  long  line  of  demigods  and  heroes.  This  was  no  doubt  a  reminis- 
cence dimmed  and  blurred  of  the  great  truth  that  man  is  made  in  the  divine 
image.  Far  otherwise  is  it  with  a  large  section  of  scientific  and  literary  thinkers 
of  this  age.  They  are  seeking  strenuously  to  prove  that  man  is  of  the  earth 
earthy.  But  materialism  means  death  to  human  progress,  and  gives  the  lie  to 
the  feelings  and  aspirations  of  men.  Therefore  even  leading  materialists  are 
fain  to  take  refuge  in  agnostic  theories  or  even  spiritualistic  puerilities.  These 
theories  of  materialistic  evolution  are  exercising  a  widespread  influence.  Even 
in  the  Church  are  found  men  who  seek  to  reduce  religion  also  into  a  product  of 
the  dust.  But  there  have  not  been  wanting  others  who  have  taken  up  arms 
against  such  attacks,  even  many  who  have  given  no  special  allegiance  to  the 
Church.  Many  of  our  greatest  modern  thinkers  uphold  the  truth  that  men  are 
offspring  of  the  Eternal. 

I.  Men  by  nature  are  the  offspring  of  God. — 1.  God  is  "  the  Father  of  our 
spirits." — Objections  have  been  urged  against  this  truth.  It  is  said  the  only 
relationship  of  men  to  God  is  that  of  subjects  to  their  sovereign  ruler,  creatures 
to  their  creator.     But  can  they  not  bear  the  other  relation  also  ?     Can  it  not 

25 


chap.  i.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


be  so  among  men,  and  shall  the  Creator  be  less  free  than  the  creature  ?  True,  it 
is  not  specifically  in  the  material  part  of  our  being  that  we  are  God's  offspring. 
His  image  is  reflected  in  the  conscious,  reasoning  intelligence — in  the  heart 
or  moral  nature — in  that  conscience  by  which  His  law  is  authoritatively  revealed 
for  our  guidance  ;  whilst  the  signs  of  His  fatherly  love  and  care  are  all  around 
us,  and  a  bountiful  provision  is  accorded  to  us  far  above  what  is  bestowed  on 
all  other  living  creatures  in  the  world.  Divine  revelation  upholds  this  truth 
also  (Mai.  ii.  10  ;  Isa.  lxiii.  16 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  6). 

2.  This  truth  is  not  negatived  by  the  fact  that  God  deals  retributively  with  those 
who  despise  His  government  and  break  His  laws. — Many  a  ruler  has  had  so  to  deal 
with  a  law-breaking  child.  God's  spiritual  children  by  creation  have  rebelled 
against  His  righteous  government,  and  have  banished  themselves,  as  it  were, 
from  the  divine  presence — have  alienated  themselves  from  God,  and  laid  them- 
selves open  to  the  penalty  which  inevitably  follows  as  a  consequence  of  the 
breaking  of  divine  law. 

3.  But  even  though  they  are  fallen  and  alienated,  no  longer  able  to  call  God 
Father,  yet  He  shows  a  paternal  interest  in  them,  proves  that  He  cares  for  them 
with  a  father's  love. — For  has  He  not  devised  a  way  by  which  His  law  may  be 
vindicated  and  His  rebellious  children  reconciled  ?  Surely  the  fact  of  His  doing 
this  is  an  indisputable  proof  of  fatherly  love — above  all,  when  it  is  considered 
in  what  manner  that  tender  love  and  compassion  were  manifested,  etc.  When 
this  is  considered,  the  prophet's  words  will  become  luminous — "  Thou  art  our 
Father,  O  Lord,  our  Redeemer,"  etc. 

II.  But  the  text  speaks  evidently  of  another  sonship  than  the  relationship 
all  men  bear  to  God  by  nature.  The  true  Light  of  men  is  represented  as  giving 
power  to  those  who  believe  on  Him  to  become  sons  of  God. 

1.  Why  was  this  needful?  i.e.  if  men  were  already  sons  of  God.  They 
have  become  estranged  from  God  through  sin,  from  their  heavenly  Father's 
fellowship — have  lost  the  privileges  and  repudiated  the  obligations  of  sonship. 
They  do  not  regard  God  with  filial  reverence  and  affection  and  confidence.  The 
gifts  of  His  providence  are  still  bestowed  on  them ;  but  they  have  no  claim  to,  and 
naturally  no  desire  for,  the  inheritance  of  the  saints.  But  God's  love  is  not 
turned  from  them.  He  is  ready  to  receive  them  if  they  will  return.  This  is 
impossible  in  their  state  of  alienation ;  they  could  have  no  taste  for  the  life  of 
God's  children,  could  not  keep  the  laws  and  rules  of  the  Father's  house,  or  be 
fitted  for  the  communion  of  saints.  Of  themselves  they  cannot  return.  Sin  has 
choked  the  springs  of  wise  and  higher  affection. 

"  Sin  only  is  it  that  enslaveth  him, 
And  maketh  him  unlike  the  Good  Supreme." 

Dante,  "  Par.,"  vii.  79. 

2.  But  what  is  impossible  with  men  is  not  so  with  God. — In  no  other  action 
was  God's  fatherly  love  to  men  more  manifest  than  in  His  method  of  redeeming 
men  (iii.  16  ;  1  John  iv.  9). 

"  Therefore  it  God  behoved  in  His  own  way 
To  bring  man  back  into  the  perfect  path." 

Dante,  "  Par.,"  vii.  31-34. 

"To  as  many  as  recognised  Him  "  (as  the  true  light),  etc.  Men  must  recog- 
nise Christ  as  their  Saviour,  must  awaken  to  a  sense  of  their  lost  and  ruined 
state,  and  look  to  Him  as  the  way  of  return  to  God.  To  such  He  gives  power,  etc., 
i.e.  not  only  pardon,  freedom  from  guilt  of  sin,  peace  (to  many  these  alone  seem 
necessary),  but  also  a  new  spiritual  life,  in  which  they  break  the  fetters  of  evil 
and  step  once  more  into  that  spiritual  liberty  and  communion  with  God  for  which 
they  were  created.  This  is  the  way  of  return  to  this  high  dignity — not  by 
descent  as  children  of  Abraham,   or  as  born  in  the    Christian   Church,  or  by 

26  , 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN.  chap.  t. 


any  man-made  plans  or  means  (ver.  13)  ;  but  by  recognising  Christ  as  the  only 
begotten  Son,  and  by  the  power  of  His  love,  through  the  grace  and  truth  of  His 
Spirit,  being  transformed  into  His  likeness,  do  men  attain  the  end  of  their 
creation  and  become  again  children  of  God  (Eph.  ii.  13  ;  Gal.  iv.  6). 

III.  This  is  the  grand  purpose  and  aim  of  the  gospel. — This  restoration  of 
men  reveals  in  higher  measure  than  could  otherwise  have  been  done  God's 
unspeakable  love  to  fallen  men.  "  Behold  what  manner  of  love,"  etc. 
(1  John  iii.  1).  What,  in  comparison  of  this,  is  the  state  of  princes  or  the 
pomp  of  kings  ?  And  of  what  shall  they  be  thought  worthy — what  shall  be  the 
end  of  those  who,  by  continuing  in  a  state  of  sin  and  alienation,  not  only  rebel 
against  God's  rightful  authority  as  Creator,  etc.,  but  despise  and  think  lightly 
of  His  wondrous  love  1  Oh  think,  impenitent  ones,  what  it  is  ye  are  rejecting 
to  your  own  eternal  loss  !  Children  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  remember  your  high 
privileges  and  duties  !  To  you  infinite  Goodness  promises  every  good  and 
perfect  gift :  help  in  time  of  need ;  chastening  when  discipline  is  necessary ; 
ever-growing  communion  through  the  Spirit  indwelling,  and  in  the  end  the 
assured  hope  of  the  blessed  inheritance.  Such  are  your  privileges ;  and  your 
duty  may  here  be  summed  up  in  one  word  :  "  Walk  as  children  of  God,  as 
children  of  the  light  and  of  the  day." 

"  Like  as  a  wheel  is  equally  revolved, 
So  let  your  will  and  your  desire  be  moved 
By  the  love  which  moves  the  sun  and  other  stars." 

Dante,  "  Par.,"  xxxiii.  143. 

Vers.  12,  13.  Children  of  God. — It  would  be  impossible  to  analyse  all  that  is 
contained  in  this  astonishing  and  grand  statement.  It  will  suffice  for  edification, 
and  prove  a  stimulus  in  the  way  of  duty,  to  consider  a  few  of  the  conceptions 
called  up  by  such  words.    Eternity  will  not  exhaust  their  meaning.    Consider : — 

I.  The  greatness  of  the  thought  brought  before  us. — 1.  In  pondering  it  we 
seem  to  be  like  explorers  standing  on  the  borders  of  a  vast  undiscovered 
territory  :  mighty  rivers,  great  mountains,  vast  plains  rise  to  their  wondering 
gaze.  2.  But  what  are  all  such  wonders  compared  with  the  marvellous  vista 
opened  up  in  these  words  in  time  and  eternity?  "  Children  of  God" — who  can 
comprehend  its  fulness,  who  can  tell  its  greatness  and  glory  ?  The  astronomer 
gazes  with  awe  and  wonder  on  the  sublime  spectacle  of  the  starry  heavens, 
and  gets  glimpses  of  the  glory  of  the  universe. 

"  Then  felt  I  like  some  watcher  of  the  skies 

When  a  new  planet  swims  into  his  ken ; 
Or  like  stout  Cortez  when  with  eagle  eyes 

He  stared  at  the  Pacific — and  all  his  men 
Look'd  at  each  other  with  a  wild  surmise — 

Silent,  upon  a  peak  in  Darien." — John  Keats. 

But  here  there  are  glimpses  given  of  truths  more  astonishing  and  glorious 
than  those  of  astronomy.  3.  The  Psalmist  had  some  conception  of  these  truths 
when  he  wrote  :  "  What  is  man  that  Thou  art  mindful  of  him  1 "  etc.  (Ps.  viii.  4). 
But  the  Evangelist  sees  more  deeply  through  Christ  into  the  mystery  of  divine 
goodness  and  love  when  he  writes :  "  As  many  as  received  Him,"  etc. 

II.  May  men  become  children  of  God? — 1.  At  the  present  time  the 
tendency  seems  to  be  to  show  that  man  is  nothing  more  than  the  offspring  of 
the  dust— a  higher  kind  of  beast,  but  all  the  same  simply  a  lineal  descendant 
of  the  beasts  that  perish.  It  is  not  man's  future  which  concerns  so  many  now- 
adays, but  his  past.  2.  Whatever  truth  may  lie  at  the  basis  of  modern 
development-theories  it  has  not  yet  been  definitely  a^id  indubitably  stated.  It 
does  not  really  matter  much  whether  man  physically  was  made  by  a  direct  act 
of  the  Almighty,  or  evolved  from  lower  forms.  All  that  can  be  said  is  that 
the  theory  is  still  a  theory  merely.     3.  The  main  question  is,  What  is  man's 

27 


chap.  i.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


present  and  future  ?  Is  he  a  "  magnetic  mockery,  wholly  brain,"  or  is  there  within 
him  that  which  tells  of  his  relation  to  a  higher  sphere  1  Is  there  not  within  him 
a  spirit  which  is  his  true  self,  and  which  may  be  brought  into  close  relation  with 
Him  who  is  the  source  of  all  true  life,  moral  and  spiritual  ?  4.  Men  know  their 
weakness  and  sinfulness  so  well  that  many  stand  abashed  before  this  lofty  height 
to  which  they  are  called  to  attain —  to  be  children  of  God,  or,  as  the  apostle  says, 
"  partakers  of  the  divine  nature."  Many  seem  to  think  it  might  be  possible  for 
an  Enoch,  etc.,  who  look  down  so  serenely  from  the  lofty  height  of  their  character, 
to  achieve  this ;  but  not  ordinary  men.  But  they  were  "  men  of  like  passions  with 
ourselves  " — with  the  same  temptations,  etc.  And  to  us  as  to  them  the  command 
is  issued,  "Be  ye  perfect,  as  your  Father  in  heaven  is  perfect." 

III.  How  can  men  attain  to  this  height? — 1.  What  is  the  nature  of  the 
divine  Being  1  He  is  "  wisdom,  power,  holiness,  justice,  goodness,  and  truth." 
Because  He  is  so  He  is  the  eternal  and  unchangeable  Jehovah.  And  it  is  by 
becoming  like  Him,  by  being  made  partakers  of  the  divine  nature  (2  Pet.  i.  4), 
that  men  become  His  children.  2.  But  how  shall  we  who  cleave  to  the  dust 
be  able  to  build  up  within  us  this  lofty  character  1  Without  some  inner  spring 
it  would  be  impossible.  The  text  tells  us  "  as  many  as  received  Him,  to  them 
gave  He  power."  The  receiving  of  Christ  brings  men  into  permanent  union  with 
the  source  of  divine  spiritual  life.  They  are  then  born  not  of  merely  earthly 
elements.  The  reception  of  Christ  is  followed  by  the  communication  of  a  new 
principle,  divine  and  heavenly,  from  which  the  heavenly  character  grows. 
3.  And  the  constraining  force  from  within,  which  flows  from  this  new  life 
and  which  contains  all  its  characteristics,  is  the  power  of  love.  It  is  the  founda- 
tion principle  of  the  divine  nature.  God  is  love.  "  Every  one  that  loveth  is 
born  of  God."  It  is  the  love  of  God  reconciling  sinners  to  Himself  that  made 
it  possible  for  men  through  redemption  to  become  His  children ;  and  it  is  the 
mighty  constraining  power  of  this  love  within  that  gives  them  the  power  to  live 
and  walk  as  His  children.  4.  The  power  of  a  pure  affection  among  men  to 
constrain  and  bless  cannot  be  estimated.  And  thus  love  to  God  working  within, 
quickened  by  the  Spirit  of  all  grace,  helps  men  to  remove  those  obstructions 
that  hinder  their  divine  fellowship.  When  loving  Him  they  realise  His  mercy, 
love,  goodness,  etc.,  in  some  measure ;  they  will  not  continue  to  harbour  what 
God  abhors — sin,  to  remove  which  the  Redeemer  suffered  and  died.  The  love  of 
Christ  leads  men  to  imitate  Him,  to  empty  their  hearts  of  self,  to  take  up  the 
cross  and  follow  Him.  And  as  all  the  attributes  of  the  divine  nature  inhere, 
so  to  speak,  in  this  principle  of  love,  so  when  the  love  of  Christ  constrains  men 
it  is  that  they  should  become  holy,  etc.,  as  He  is — i.e.  children  of  God  in  Him. 

IV.  The  condition  of  attaining. — 1.  It  is  not  in  ourselves,  but  in  Christ. 
We  must  know  Him  and  receive  Him  in  faith.  The  Jews  as  a  people  did  not 
receive  Him.  To  those  who  did  He  gave  the  right — which  comes  from  God 
through  union  with  His  Son.  They  are  adopted  as  spiritual  children,  babes  in 
Christ,  and  thenceforward  grow  in  the  divine  likeness  (2  Pet.  i.  3,  4).  They  are 
even  here  members  of  God's  great  spiritual  family — "  of  the  household  of  God  " 
(Eph.  ii.  19).  2.  They  seek  through  His  grace  to  escape  the  corruption  that  is 
in  the  world  through  lust — to  advance  daily  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  3. 
There  is  an  easy  gospel  preached  by  too  many.  The  New  Testament  reveals 
only  two  courses  of  life.  In  the  one  men  rise  by  grace  through  victory  over  self 
to  become  children  of  God.  The  end  of  this  course  is  eternal  blessedness  and 
joy.  In  the  other  men  fall  ever  further  away  from  God,  the  source  of  all  true 
life  and  light.  The  end  of  this  course  is  darkness  and  death.  Those  who  receive 
and  follow  the  Saviour  s*hall  be  like  Him.  Those  who  live  for  this  passing, 
perishing  world,  and  are  filled  with  the  world's  spirit  and  life,  cannot  be  called 
"  children  of  God  "  (1  John  ii.  15-17). 

28 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  i. 


Ver.  14.  The  Word  made  flesh. — No  one  can  for  one  moment  doubt  that  this 
refers  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     Observe : — 

1.  His  peculiar  denomination ,  "  The  Word." — John  is  the  only  one  of  the 
sacred  writers  who  speaks  of  Him  under  this  name ;  but  this  does  not  render  it 
less  worthy  of  regard,  for  "  he  wrote  as  he  was  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost." 
Three  things  seem  to  be  derived  from  John's  use  of  the  title.  (1)  It  is  intended 
to  mark  a  person.  Nothing  can  be  more  forced  than  the  meaning  that  it  here 
means  the  wisdom  of  God.  How  could  the  wisdom  of  God  be  made  flesh,  etc., 
and  be  called  the  Only  Begotten,  etc.  ?  (2)  The  term  marks  previous  existence. 
This  is  evident  from  the  phrase  The  Word  was  made  flesh,  etc.  (3)  The  term  is 
designed  to  mark  a  divine  person.  The  name  given  to  God  is  expressly  given  to 
the  "  Word."  Creation  is  ascribed  to  Him.  This  could  not  have  been  affirmed 
of  a  mere  creature,  or  even  of  a  super-angelic  being.  John  here  declares  that 
He  was  God  ;  and  that  He  was  the  source  of  all  life  and  existence. 

2.  Christ's  incarnation. — The  Word  was  made  flesh — i.e.  He  became  man, 
although  not  ceasing  to  be  God.  As  He  was  God  before,  so  He  could  not  cease 
to  be  God  after  He  took  on  Him  our  nature ;  for  He  took  not  on  Him,  etc. 
(Heb.  ii.  16).  Hence  the  Scriptures  ascribe  many  things  to  Him  which  will  not 
apply  to  His  divine  nature  or  agree  with  His  human  nature  separately.  "  Unto 
us  a  Child  is  given  "  does  not  refer  to  Him  as  God.  "  And  His  name  shall  be 
called  Wonderful  "  does  not  refer  to  Him  as  man.  There  is  neither  contradiction 
nor  impossibility  in  the  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God ;  but  it  is  a  mystery,  and 
will  perhaps  ever  remain  so.  It  is  thus  that  the  Deity  is  brought  down  to  our 
apprehension — that  He  becomes  our  example,  is  able  to  sympathise — thus  to 
suffer,  bleed,  die  for  us,  etc. — W.  Jay. 

Ver.  14.  The  end  of  Christ's  humiliation. — The  apostles  preached  "  Christ." 
The  only  object  that  can  give  peace  to  the  soul  is  "  Christ  and  Him  crucified." 
To  know  Him  is  life.  The  first  truth  taught  here  is  the  humiliation  of  the  Son. 
It  is  laid  down  in  two  parts. 

I.  The  humiliation  of  the  Son  of  God  consisted  in  His  being  made  flesh. — 

1.  What  is  not  meant.  (1)  It  is  not  meant  that  He  really  took  a  body  without  a 
soul.  As  He  dwelt  among  us  He  had  also  a  loving  human  soul  (xii.  27).  (2)  It 
was  not  a  sinful  body.  "  He  offered  Himself  without  spot  to  God."  The  one  thing 
in  which  He  differed  from  men  was  sin  (Heb.  iv.  15).     His  humanity  was  holy. 

2.  What  is  meant.  He,  the  Word,  became  one  with  a  holy  human  soul,  and  with 
a  body  with  our  infirmities,  such  as  thirst,  pain,  etc.  Why  was  He  made  flesh  ? 
(a)  That  He  might  obey  the  law  of  God  in  the  same  nature  that  had  broken  the  law. 
He  was  made  under  the  law  that  He  might  obey  it,  and  under  the  curse  of  the 
law  that  He  might  endure  it.  It  is  the  first  of  these  that  is  brought  forward 
here.  He  came  that  He  might  obey  the  law  and  do  more  honour  to  it  than  if 
it  had  never  been  broken.  This  is  one  reason  why  He  remained  so  long  on  the 
earth — to  show  that  the  law  is  good.  (6)  He  was  made  flesh  that  He  might  die, 
and  bear  the  law's  curse  (Heb.  ii.  3,  14).  If  He  had  remained  in  the  bosom 
of  the  Father  He  could  not  have  suffered.  Therefore,  in  order  to  die  He  became 
flesh,  (c)  He  became  flesh  that  He  might  have  sympathy  with  men  (Heb.  ii.  17). 
None  but  those  who  have  felt  as  we  have  can  have  compassion  and  sympathy 
(Exod.  xxiii.  9).  So  God  says  to  Christ,  You  know  the  heart  of  a  man.  3.  The 
second  part  of  His  humiliation.  He  dwelt  among  us.  "  Tabernacled  among  us  as 
in  a  tent."    His  life  was  one  of  poverty — He  had  not  where  to  lay  His  head,  etc. 

II.  The  glory  that  burst  through  His  humiliation. — We  beheld  His  glory,  etc. 
Angels  saw  it.  The  doctors  in  the  temple  were  astonished  at  His  words.  At 
the  marriage  of  Cana  of  Galilee,  etc.,  it  was  seen.  What  is  it  ?  The  glory  of 
the  divine  perfections,  divine  wisdom,  divine  love,  etc. 

29 


chap.  i.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN. 


1.  The  glory  of  the  divine  wisdom  was  shining  through  Him. — This  was  seen  not 
so  much  in  His  miracles,  etc.,  as  in  the  plan  of  redemption — the  scheme  He 
accomplished  when  He  said,  "  It  is  finished." 

2.  The  glory  of  the  divine  love. — His  very  appearance  in  the  manger  at 
Bethlehem  was  a  display  of  this  love.  When  the  sinner  is  brought  to  peace, 
when  the  soul  says  of  Christ,  "  Here  will  I  rest  " — here  is  the  glory  of  the 
divine  love.     Have  we  seen  it  ? 

3.  The  glory  of  the  provision  laid  up  in  Christ. — "  Full  of  grace  and  truth." 
Some  may  say,  If  Christ  be  so  glorious  I  cannot  come  to  Him  ;  I  can  only  say 
with  Peter,  "  Depart  from  me,"  etc.  How  can  I  come  1  There  is  but  one 
answer :  He  is  full  of  grace  and  truth.  He  is  full  of  grace  for  them  who  deserve 
wrath.  How  could  the  publicans  and  sinners  sit  beside  Him  in  Levi's  house  ? 
"  He  was  full  of  grace."  How  suitable  a  Saviour !  He  is  full  of  truth.  "  The 
law  given  by  Moses,"  etc.  The  law  was  a  shadow;  Christ  is  the  substance. 
All  that  is  in  Christ  is  truth.  The  pardon  He  gives  is  a  true  pardon.  The 
peace  He  gives  is  true  peace.  Come  to  Him.  There  are  these  two  reasons  why 
all  should  come  :  (1)  He  is  full  of  grace;  (2)  He  is  full  of  truth.  You  need  a 
divine  Saviour,  and  yet  you  need  one  full  of  grace.  There  is  none  but  Christ 
answers  to  this  description.  He  is  full  of  grace,  though  full  of  glory.  Will  you 
not  let  Him  save  you  1 — McCheyne. 

Ver.  16.  Christ's  fulness  of  grace  and  truth. — The  fulness  of  Christ  here 
spoken  of  is  the  fulness  of  the  divine  attributes  dwelling  in  Him,  manifesting 
itself  in  that  glory,  full  of  grace  and  truth,  which  men  beheld.  And  it  pleased 
the  Father  that  this  "  fulness  "  should  be  in  Him  as  the  Redeemer,  so  that  men 
united  to  Him  might  freely  receive  of  it ;  and  that  the  Church  of  His  redeemed 
might  become  "  the  fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in  all." 

I.  In  Christ's  divine  fulness  there  is  provision  for  man's  need. — 1.  God  saw 
our  need  of  all  things — our  "  emptiness  and  woe" — our  need  of  light  on  the  path 
of  life,  of  guidance  and  direction  in  the  way  of  duty,  of  comfort  in  view  of 
death,  of  peace  in  view  of  sin.  2.  And  Christ  has  filled  up  all  these  needs  of 
ours.  He  is  the  Way,  the  Truth,  the  Life.  He  is  the  Light  of  the  world. 
When  He  speaks  Heavenly  Wisdom  speaks.  Dwelling  in  the  bosom  of  the 
Father,  He  has  perfectly  revealed  the  divine  will.  He  brings  peace  through 
His  atonement,  and  thus  meets  our  utter  need  of  salvation  and  grace.  And  He 
was  able  to  effect  this  because  in  Him  dwells  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead 
bodily. 

II.  This  provision  is  unfailing  and  inexhaustible. — 1.  Christ  is  the  same 
yesterday,  etc.  (Heb.  xiii.  8).  Th  streams  of  grace  and  truth  are  ever  full  and 
overflowing  from  that  perennial  fountain.  2.  "  All  we  have  received,"  etc. 
To  the  Church  during  all  these  centuries  grace  has  followed  in  the  train  of  grace. 
3.  Have  any  ever  found  this  fountain  to  fail  when  they  have  come  in  faith  and 
longing?  Has  not  each  blessing  received  prepared  the  way  for  another  (Matt, 
xiii.  12)  %  Every  measure  of  grace  gained  by  the  faithful  disciple  fits  him  for 
receiving  a  fuller  measure  (2  Pet.  iii.  18).  4.  From  the  eternal  fulness  of 
the  river  of  grace  all  may  drink  without  diminishing  one  drop  of  its  full  tide. 
And  then  for  millions  now  and  in  eternity  it  shall  flow. 

Yer.  17.  The  law  and  grace — Sinai  and  Calvary. — In  these  words  there  is 
brought  before  us  the  preparatory  and  the  final,  the  incomplete  and  the  perfect 
revelation  of  God's  will — the  temporary,  typical,  and  the  eternally  abiding 
manifestation  of  His  righteousness,  mercy,  and  love.  "  The  law  was  given  by 
Moses."  It  was  a  truly  grand  manifestation  of  the  righteousness  and  holiness 
of  God.       It   pointed   out  clearly  the  way  to  Himself.     "  Without  holiness," 

30 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  i. 


without  conformity  to  that  moral  order  revealed  on  Sinai.  "  no  man  shall  see  the 
Lord."  And  if  this  revelation  had  stood  alone  it  would  have  been,  so  far  as  men 
are  concerned,  a  revelation  of  despair.  "  By  the  deeds  of  the  law  shall  no  flesh 
be  justified  "  (Rom.  iii.  20).  To  those  who  sought  by  this  way  alone  access  to 
God  there  was  opposed  an  impassable  barrier — the  barrier  of  moral  inability. 
"  If  there  had  been  a  law  given  which  could  have  given  life,  verily  righteousness 
should  have  been  by  the  law  "  (Gal.  iii.  21).  But  even  the  law  itself,  on  its 
ceremonial  side,  showed  its  inability  to  give  life,  and  pointed  the  faithful  to  the 
promise  both  concealed  and  revealed  in  it.  The  law  led  men,  by  showing  them 
their  inability  to  attain  to  its  standard,  directly  to  the  promise,  whilst  the 
promise  pointed  and  led  them  to  Christ.  And  in  Him  that  ability  to  attain  is 
found.  He  does  not  give  a  mediate  and  partial  revelation  of  God's  mind  and 
will,  as  did  Moses.  He  Himself  is  the  embodiment  and  manifestation  of  the 
Father's  nature,  of  His  love  toward  men ;  and  thus  also  He  is  the  revealer  of 
that  blessed  truth,  in  part  revealed,  in  part  hidden,  in  law  and  promise.  To-day 
then  we  stand  in  view  of  the  two  mountain  peaks  of  divine  revelation.  On  the 
one  hand  rises  Sinai,  stern  and  forbidding,  filling  the  sinner  with  awe.  Yet  to 
the  faithful,  relying  on  the  promise,  even  at  Sinai  hope  shines  amid  the  dark- 
ness, telling  that  the  God  who  thus  has  revealed  Himself  has  done  so  for  men's 
weal,  and  points  them  to  that  higher  mountain — morally  higher — rising  beyond, 
where  in  Christ  grace  and  truth  meet,  where  righteousness  and  peace  are  reconciled 
(Ps.  lxxxv.  10). 

Let  us  gaze  to-day  fixedly  at  those  two  peaks  of  divine  revelation,  Sinai  and 
Calvary,  so  that  we  may  be  led  to  rest  more  trustingly  under  the  cross  of  Him 
who  suffered  on  Calvary — "Jesus,  the  mediator  of  the  New  Testament." 

I.*  On  Sinai  we  behold  the  forceful  lawgiver  publishing  an  inexorable  law ; 
on  Calvary  the  suffering  Redeemer  manifesting  the  fulness  of  divine  grace. — 
1.  How  vast  is  the  difference  between  the  two  scenes  presented  to  our  view  ! 
The  law  was  given  on  Sinai  under  conditions  of  awful  solemnity  befitting  its 
nature  :  the  thick  cloud  covering  the  mount,  with  lightning  flash  and 
thunder  roll ;  the  trumpet  sounding  louder  and  louder  as  the  stern  proclamation 
was  given  that  the  people  should  not  draw  near  (Exod.  xix.  16-20).  It  was 
a  fitting  accompaniment  to  the  delivery  of  a  law  that  revealed  the  divine 
holiness  and  truth,  the  divine  justice  and  judgment,  awful  in  their  unswerving 
onward  march  to  those  who  stand  unprotected  and  unreconciled  opposing  them. 
For  to  sinful  men  the  law  was  no  proclamation  of  peace  and  life.  As  a  revela- 
tion of  the  righteous  character  and  will  of  God,  as  a  formulation  of  those  statutes 
written  on  men's  hearts  by  the  Holy  One,  and  by  men  violated  all  along  the 
course  of  their  history,  it  showed  forth  the  divine  glory,  and  pointed  to  the 
summit  toward  which  men  must  strive  if  they  would  escape  the  penalty  of 
the  broken  law.  But  although  it  was  given  to  Moses  to  proclaim  this  divinely 
revealed  law,  he  could  not  implant  in  the  hearts  of  his  people  the  spirit  of 
obedience ;  he  could  not  impart,  or  only  dimly  and  imperfectly,  the  secret  of  that 
motive  power  which  leads  men  to  obey.  The  divine  Sovereignty  loomed  con- 
spicuous behind  the  thou  shalts  and  thou  shalt  nots  of  the  positive  commands. 
The  work  of  Moses,  the  stern  lawgiver  and  leader,  endowed  with  power  to 
proclaim  the  divine  will,  to  threaten  and  punish  the  disobedient,  was  a  necessary 
work.  In  order  to  do  God's  will  men  must  first  know  it,  have  it  proclaimed  to 
them  in  its  purity  and  fulness.  God  cannot  be  truly  known,  and  men's  relation 
to  Him,  until  the  awfulness  of  His  purity,  and  the  horror  and  condemnation  of 
sin,  are  seen  in  the  light  of  His  law.      And  men  still  need  this  revelation. 

*  Divisions  after  Gerok. 

3l 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


It  is  still  a  light  thing  with  many  to  "  commit  these  abominations"  that  "  fill 
the  land  with  violence"  (Ezek.  viii.  17)  and  bring  the  divine  judgments  upon 
men.  Thus  to  the  end  Moses  and  the  law  will  bring  to  men  "  the  knowledge 
of  sin." 

2.  But  should  we  wish  this  to  be  all  ?  Could  we  bear  that  yoke  which  even  the 
chosen  people  were  unable  to  bear  ?  Could  it  bring  us  peace  to  listen  to  Moses 
alone,  as  many  would  actually  have  us  do  ?  No.  "  For  as  many  as  are  of  the 
works  of  the  law  are  under  the  curse  "  (Gal.  iii.  10).  And  therefore  we  must 
turn  to  that  fuller  revelation  of  the  mind  of  God  given  on  Calvary.  It  is 
another  voice  that  speaks  to  us  from  that  holy  mount,  another  and  yet  the 
same.  For  whilst  there  we  still  hear  echoes  of  the  voice  that  of  old  brought 
dread  to  Israel ;  and  see  in  that  crucified  and  thorn-crowned  form,  as  in  a 
mirror,  the  awful  penalty  of  sin — 

"  Sins  not  His  own  His  spotless  soul 
With  bitter  anguish  tore. " 

Yet  we  hear  still  more  clearly  in  that  same  voice  the  accents  of  love  and  mercy, 
and  see  in  the  suffering  Redeemer  "  the  mediator  of  a  new  covenant,"  etc. 
(Heb.  viii.  6). 

II.  Sinai  speaks  of  judgment  and  death  ;  Calvary  of  righteousness  and  life. 
1.  There  is  something  congruous  and  harmonious  between  the  natural  aspect  of 
"  the  mount  of  the  Lord"  where  the  law  was  proclaimed  to  Israel,  and  the  meaning 
of  the  law  itself  in  its  reference  to  man. — The  mountain  top  is  a  scene  of  desolate 
and  solitary  grandeur — giant  cliffs  of  granite  rising  in  sublime  loneliness  into 
the  blue  of  heaven.  But  at  the  mountain  foot  stretches  a  small,  but  com- 
paratively fertile  plain,  whilst  here  and  there  among  the  wadies,  where  springs 
gush  forth,  are  patches  of  verdure  and  fertile  spaces.  So  on  the  summit  of  the 
moral  Sinai  sits  the  divine  Lawgiver,  in  awTful  solitude.  None  of  human  kind 
by  himself  may  venture  to  approach — can  approach — that  solitary  height. 
And  yet  to  those  who,  in  times  long  gone,  heard  in  the  intervals  behind  the 
thunder  tones  of  the  divine  Majesty  the  "  still,  small  voice "  of  divine  pity, 
compassion,  and  mercy,  there  were  even  at  the  base  of  Sinai  fertile  reaches, 
where  they  might  dwell  in  safety,  discerning  in  faith  that  the  promise  was  above 
the  law,  which  cannot  annul  the  promise  (Gal.  iii.  17). 

Sinai  still  speaks  to  men  as  to  Israel  of  old  of  condemnation  and  death.  The 
Mosaic  economy  is  expressly  called  by  St.  Paul  "  the  ministration  of  condemna- 
tion." Thus  condemnation,  judgment,  is  the  end  of  the  law.  And  is  it  not  so 
still  1  It  was  emblematic  of  what  the  law  wTould  be  and  is  to  men  of  all  time 
that  at  its  delivery  the  summit  of  the  mountain  "  was  altogether  on  a  smoke," 
that  a  thunderstorm  enwrapped  it,  and  that  the  earth  trembled  and  quaked. 
Well  might  earth  tremble  with  her  sons  when  it  is  remembered  what  the  issues 
were  that  depended  on  that  day's  revelation — blessing  or  curse,  life  or  death 
(Deut.  si.  26-28 ;  xxvii.  14-26 ;  xxx.  15). 

And  so  to  men  now  the  mountain  smokes,  the  thunders  roll,  the  earth 
trembles  when  they  seek  anew  a  way  to  God  by  the  law  of  Sinai ;  and  they  are 
compelled  to  add  their  Amen  to  the  apostle's  word  :  "  Cursed  is  every  one  that 
continueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do 
them  "  (Gal.  iii.  10).  Which  of  us  will  dare  to  say  with  the  young  ruler,  as  the 
ten  words  are  laid  before  us  :  "  All  these  things  have  I  kept  from  my  youth 
up  "  in  thought,  word,  and  deed  ?  (Matt.  xix.  20 ;  Job  ix.  3).  There  is  none — 
no,  not  one — can  stand  before  the  Holy  One  when  He  reckons  with  us  for  His 
broken  law.  By  way  of  the  mount  of  the  law  there  is  no  peace  or  safety  for 
men — rather  condemnation  and  death. 

"  Christian  turned  out  of  his  way  to  go  to  Mr.  Legality's  house  for  help ;  but, 
behold,  when  he  was  got  now  hard  by  the  hill  (Mount  Sinai),  it  seemed  so  high, 

32 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  I. 


and  also  that  the  side  of  it  that  was  next  the  wayside  did  hang  so  much  over, 
that  Christian  was  afraid  to  venture  further,  lest  the  hill  should  fall  on  hio 
head  :  wherefore,  there  he  stood  still,  and  wotted  not  what  to  do.  Also  his 
burden  now  seemed  heavier  to  him  than  while  he  was  in  his  way.  There  came 
also  flashes  of  fire  out  of  the  hill  that  made  Christian  afraid  that  he  should  be 
burnt ;  here,  therefore,  he  did  sweat  and  quake  for  fear." — Pilgrim's  Progress. 

By  this  way  there  is  no  attainment,  no  bringing  to  perfection — sometimes 
lofty  purposes  ruined,  attempts  at  the  higher  life  frustrated — until  the  soul 
despairing  cries  out  like  the  apostle :  "  Oh  wretched  man  that  I  am,  who  shall 
deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ? "  (Rom.  vii.  24). 

2.  And  it  is  here  that  those  who  desire  deliverance  will  be  led  to  look  past 
and  beyond  Sinai,  and  in  view  of  Calvary  to  exclaim :  "I  thank  God,  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord "  (ver.  25). — How  different  is  the  aspect  of  Calvary 
when  compared  with  that  of  Sinai !  In  place  of  the  towering,  frowning, 
forbidding  cliffs  of  the  latter,  the  little  hill  of  Calvary  is  insignificant.  But 
in  moral  grandeur  it  far  overtops  Sinai's  most  majestic  peak.  There  are  no 
elements  of  fear  and  terror  there.  It  is  true,  that  uplifted  Victim  bleeding 
and  dying  on  the  cross  of  shame  speaks  of  judgment  and  righteousness — so 
also  do  the  darkened  heavens  and  trembling  earth.  But  it  is  for  Him  who 
hangs  there  that  these  portents  appear.  It  is  He,  bearing  Himself  the  sin 
of  the  world,  whom  those  ministers  of  divine  wrath  against  sin,  suffering  and 
death,  compel  to  drink  the  bitter  cup  to  the  dregs.  But,  beyond  that,  Calvary 
tells  us  of  eternal  love  and  eternal  spiritual  life.  For  He  who  hangs  there 
is  sent  in  love  by  Him  who  uttered  His  voice  on  Sinai ;  and  He  came  will- 
ingly to  do  that  to  which  Sinai  pointed,  but  in  which  the  law  failed,  and 
must  fail.  "  What  the  law  could  not  do,"  etc.  (Bom.  viii.  3).  Therefore 
the  voice  that  speaks  from  Calvary  is  the  voice  of  love.  It  does  not  bid  men 
stand  back,  but  rather  calls  them  near.  "  Look  unto  Me,"  etc.  (Isa.  xlv.  22). 
"  Ye  are  come  to  Jesus,  the  mediator  of  the  new  covenant,"  etc.  (Heb.  xii.  24). 
Here  on  Calvary's  mount  true  righteousness  blooms  and  fructifies  for  men.  On 
Sinai's  granite  top  men  cannot  plant  trees  of  righteousness  ;  for  them  no  flower 
and  fruit  of  holiness  can  bloom  there.  But  on  Calvary  a  perennial  fountain 
springs ;  there  all  the  plants  of  righteousness  may  grow,  and  there  fertility  and 
beauty  abound.  "  Blessed  are  they  that  hunger,"  etc.  (Matt.  v.  6).  "  Satisfied 
not  through  their  own  efforts,  but  by  grace  divine."  "O  blessed  office  of  the 
New  Testament,  which  preaches  righteousness,  and  yet  proclaims  redemption 
and  life  in  the  name  of  Jesus  to  all  who  seek  salvation  !  Though  1  could  bring 
water  from  the  smitten  rock  like  Moses,  and  though  I  could  call  fire  from 
heaven  like  Elias,  yet  would  I  rather  proclaim  to  a  sinful,  penitent  heart,  '  Be 
of  good  cheer,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee ' ;  I  would  rather  open  heaven  to  a 
troubled  human  soul  by  preaching  the  eternal  love  of  God,  and  the  heavenly 
home  of  His  children  "  (Gerok). 

III.  On  Sinai  there  was  ordained  a  temporary  economy ;  on  Calvary 
Christ  is  the  mediator  of  a  covenant  which  is  enduring. — 1.  At  Sinai  there 
is  no  abiding. — The  Israelites  paused  near  it  for  a  time;  and  having 
received  the  law  passed  on  to  realise  it  in  the  concrete  form  of  a  separated 
and  consecrated  people  and  nation.  For  many  a  century  they  strove  to 
realise  what  the  law  pointed  to  and  required.  "  But  the  law  made  nothing 
perfect."  The  rites  and  sacrifices  of  the  old  covenant,  when  observed  and 
offered  according  to  the  letter  only  as  means  of  salvation,  and  without  reference  to 
their  hidden  typical,  spiritual  meaning,  were  worse  than  useless  (Isa.  i.  13-15). 
And  even  the  moral  law,  when  regarded  merely  as  an  objective  standard  to 
which  the  outward  life  and  conversation  were  to  be  conformed,  became  a  galling 
yoke,  an  unspeakable  burden.      The  law,  in  its  outward,  objective  form,  was 

d  33 


CHAP.   I. 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN. 


passing  and  temporary.  It  is  "  our  schoolmaster — to  bring  us  to  Christ " 
(Gal.  iii.  24).  Its  rites  and  ordinances  passed  away  when  Christ  appeared  and 
completed  His  atoning  work.  They  were  but  shadows,  that  was  the  reality.  Its 
moral  precepts  could  not  pass  away,  for  they  are  the  eternal  reflection  of  the 
all-perfect  character  of  God.  To  the  believer,  however,  they  are  no  longer  an 
objective  law,  but  a  subjective  standard,  whereby  aided  by  divine  grace  we  may 
test  and  regulate  our  lives. 

2.  Thus  the  temporary  economy  passed  away  to  give  place  to  the  abiding  Covenant 
of  Calvary. — "  Jesus  was  worthy  of  more  honour  than  Moses,  inasmuch  as  He 
who  hath  builded  the  house  hath  more  honour  than  the  house."  Moses  was 
faithful  as  a  servant  over  the  House  of  God ;  but  Christ  as  a  Son  over  His  own 
House  abideth  ever  (Heb.  iii.  3,  5,  6).  "  Christ  alone  brings  to  men  the  grace 
of  life  in  communion  with  God  ;  and  truth,  which  is  the  beautiful  reflection  of 
the  divine  holiness.  For  Christ  alone  is  eternally  full  of  grace  and  truth  as  the 
only  begotten  Son  "  (Besser).  Thus  the  new  covenant  which  He  makes  is 
unchanging  as  His  own  eternal  nature.  He,  as  God,  is  "  the  same  yesterday, 
to-day,  and  for  ever."  The  preparatory  testament  passes;  but  the  gospel 
remains.  The  offerings  and  sacrifices  of  the  legal  covenant  are  rendered  nugatory 
by  that  "  blood  of  sprinkling  which  speaketh  better  things  than  that  of  Abel." 
But  the  moral  precepts  of  the  old  law  remain  as  our  criterion  of  life  and 
attainment.  And  it  is  thus  by  Sinai  that  most  earnest  souls  are  startled  at  the 
view  of  their  own  weakness  and  sinfulness,  and  led  to  Calvary  for  redeeming 
grace  and  spiritual  strength. 


HOMILETIC  NOTES. 


Vers.  3,  4.  The  only  begotten  Son  of 
God  is  called  u  the  Word"  because:  1. 
He  reveals  what  is  hidden  ;  2.  Mani- 
fests what  is  unseen  ;  3.  Actively  and 
creatively  expresses  the  divine  thought. 
He  speaks  and  it  is  done,  commands 
and  it  stands  fast.  "  All  things  were 
made  by  Him,  and  without  Him  was 
not  anything  made  that  was  made." 
With  what  the  heart  is  filled  the  mouth 
runs  over.  That  with  which  the  heart 
of  God  is  filled  is  locked  up  in  the 
Word,  who  is  with  God  and  was  God. 

The  Word  was  with  God  and  was  God. 
— The  Evangelist  here  warns  us  against 
and  keeps  us  from  :  1.  A  Judaistic 
numbing  idea  of  the  solitariness  of  the 
divine  nature  in  the  phrase  the  Word  was 
with  God  i  and  2.  From  a  heathenish 
polytheistic  idea  when  we  further  read 
and  realise  that  the  Word  was  God. 
3.  Without  blasphemy,  therefore,  or 
the  deification  of  man,  do  we  in  Chris- 
tian baptism  baptise  in  the  name  of 
Christ,  as  the  name  of  the  Son  equal 
with  the  Father,  as  we  baptise  in  the 
name  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Holy 
Ghost. — From  Kogel. 

34 


The  starting-point  of  St.  John. — 
Instead  of  opening  his  narrative  at 
the  human  birth  of  our  Lord,  or  at  the 
commencement  of  His  ministry,  St. 
John  places  himself  in  thought  at  the 
starting-point  (as  we  should  conceive 
it)  of  all  time.  Nay  rather,  it  would 
seem  that  if  JWtf"Q  at  the  beginning  of 
Genesis  signifies  the  initial  moment  of 
time  itself,  kv  apxy  rises  to  the  absolute 
conception  of  that  which  is  anterior  to, 
or  rather  independent  of,  time.  Then, 
when  time  was  not,  or  at  a  point  to 
which  man  cannot  apply  his  finite  con- 
ception of  time,  there  was — the  Logos 
or  Word.  When  as  yet  nothing  had 
been  made,  He  was.  What  was  the 
Logos  1  Such  a  term,  in  a  position  of 
such  moment,  when  so  much  depends 
on  our  rightly  understanding  it,  has 
a  moral  no  less  than  an  intellectual 
claim  upon  us,  of  the  highest  order. 
We  are  bound  to  try  to  understand  it, 
just  as  certainly  as  we  are  bound  to 
obey  the  command  to  love  our  enemies. 
No  man  who  carries  his  morality  into 
the  sphere  of  religious  thought  can 
affect  or  afford  to  maintain  that   the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  i. 


fundamental  idea  in   the  writings  of  merely  a  divine   Being,  but  He  is  in 

St.  John  is  a  scholastic  conceit,   with  the  absolute  sense   God.      Thus  from 

which    practical    Christians   need    not  His  eternal  existence  we  ascend  first 

concern  themselves.     And,  indeed,  St.  to  His  distinct  Personality,  and  then 

John's  doctrine  of  the  Logos  denotes  at  to   the   full    truth  of  His   substantial 

the   very   least    something   intimately  Godhead.     Yet  the  Logos  necessarily 

and    everlastingly   present   with   God,  suggests  to  our  minds  the  further  idea 

something  as  internal  to  the  Being  of  of   communicativeness ;    the   Logos   is 

God  as  thought  is  to  the  soul  of  man.  speech   as  well   as   thought.      And  of 

In    truth,    the    divine    Logos   is   God  His  actual  self-communication  St.  John 

reflected  in  His  own  eternal  thought ;  mentions   two   phases  or   stages :    the 

in  the  Logos,  God  is  His  own  object,  first    creation,    the    second    revelation. 

This   infinite   Thought,    the    reflection  The  Word  unveils  Himself  to  the  soul 

and  counterpart  of  God,  subsisting  in  through    the  mediation    of   objects   of 

God  as  a   Being   or    Hypostasis,    and  sense  in  the  physical  world,  and  He 

having  a  tendency  to  self-communica-  also     unveils     Himself     immediately, 

tion — such  is  the  Logos.     The  Logos  is  Accordingly    St.  John  says  that  "  all 

the  Thought  of  God,  not  intermittent  things  were  made  "  by  the  Word,  and 

and   precarious    like   human   thought,  that  the  Word  who  creates  is  also  the 

but  subsisting  with  the  intensity  of  a  revealer :  "  The  Word  was  made  flesh, 

personal    form.      The  very  expression  and  dwelt  among  us,   and  we  beheld 

seems  to  court  the  argument  of  Athena-  His  glory."     He  possesses  So£a,  that  is 

goras,  that  since  God  could  never  have  in  St.  John  the  totality  of  the  divine 

been  a\oyo<s,  the  Logos  must  have  been  attributes.    This  "  glory  "  is  not  merely 

not  created  but  eternal.     It  suggests  something  belonging  to  His  essential 

the  further  inference  that  since  reason  nature,  since    He  allows  us  to  behold 

is  man's  noblest  faculty,  the  uncreated  it  through   His  veil  of  flesh.  — Canon 

Logos  must  be  at  least  equal  with  God.  Liddon. 
In  any  case  it  might  have  been  asked 

why  the  term  was  used  at  all,  if  these  Ver.  5.  The  world  a  dark  place. — In 
obvious  inferences  were  not  to  be  de-  paradise,  before  sin  entered  the  world, 
duced  from  it ;  but,  as  a  matter  of  spiritual  darkness  was  unknown.  But 
fact,  they  are  not  mere  inferences,  since  when  sin  entered  it  was  like  a  cloud 
they  are  warranted  by  the  express  shutting  out  the  light  of  God's  love,  of 
language  of  St.  John.  St.  John  says  His  law,  His  will,  His  way.  The 
that  the  Word  was  "  in  the  beginning."  world — the  world  of  men — became 
The  question  then  arises  :  What  was  truly  a  dark  place. 
His  relation  to  the  self -existent  Being  ?  I.  But  the  light  shone  in  the  dark- 
He  was  not  merely  Trapa  tw  ©€<5,  along  ness. — 1.  In  the  promises;  2.  In  the 
with  God,  but  7rpos  rov  ®coi/.  This  last  law  ;  3.  In  prophecy.  Christ  is  the 
preposition  expresses,  beyond  the  fact  radiant  centre  of  the  Old  Testament 
of  co-existence  or  immanence,  the  more  revelation.  4.  And  even  among  the 
significant  fact  of  perpetuated  inter-  heathen  there  were  witnesses  of  the 
communion.  The  face  of  the  ever-  divine  presence,  glimmerings  of  divine 
lasting  Word,  if  we  may  dare  so  to  light  (Acts  xiv.  17,  xviii.  27). 
express  ourselves,  was  ever  directed  II.  The  darkness  comprehended  it 
towards  the  face  of  the  everlasting  not. — The  world  of  men  apart  from 
Father.  But  was  the  Logos  then  an  God  is  darkness  (Isa.  lx.  2).  1.  One 
independent  being,  existing  externally  chief  reason  why  the  darkness  can- 
to the  one  God  1  To  conceive  of  an  not  comprehend  the  light  is  that  un- 
independent  being,  anterior  to  creation,  righteousness  reigns  in  men's  hearts, 
would  be  an  error  at  issue  with  the  "  He  that  doeth  truth  cometh  to  the 
first  truth  of  monotheism  ;  and  there-  light "  ;  whilst  those  who  do  evil  "  hate 
fore  ©eos  rjv  6  Aoyos.     The  Word  is  not  the  light "  (iii.  20).     2.  The  entrance 

35 


CHAP.   I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


of  light  disturbs — shows  what  is 
noisome  and  unlovely  in  the  moral 
world,  causes  pain  and  dissatisfaction. 
Men,  therefore,  do  not  desire  naturally 
that  light  should  penetrate  the  dark- 
ness. It  is  the  love  of  darkness  that 
prevents  the  light  shining  in  on  men. 

Vers.  6,  8.  "  There  was  a  man  sent 
from  God,1'  etc. — 1.  "  John  was  not  that 
light."  He  was  but  the  aurora — the 
dawn,  the  herald  of  the  sun-rising. 
2.  He  was  not  the  Word,  but  was  a 
voice  proclaiming  the  Word.  3.  He 
was  not  the  Way  through  the  wilder- 
ness, but  a  guide  to  lead  men  to  faith. 
Is  it  not  the  glory  of  the  office  of 
preacher,  that  the  servant  of  the 
Word  should  speak  all  given  to  him  by 
God,  in  order  to  lead  men  to  Christ, 
and  not  to  put  himself  for  ward  ? — After 
Kogel. 

The  true  light. — to  <£tos,  to  aXrjOwov  I 
the  true  light.  The  epithet  akyOivbv  is 
not  true  in  conti-ast  to  false,  but  true 
in  contrast  to  that  which  is  derived  or 
subordinate.  The  Greek  has  two 
words  to  express  these  ideas,  aX.r)0rjs 
and  aXrjOwos,  corresponding  to  verax 
and  verus  in  Latin  ;  but  the  English 
language  has  only  one  word,  and  we 
are  obliged  to  express  both  ideas  by 
the  word  true.  In  the  preceding  verse 
it  is  said  of  the  Baptist :  "  He  was  not 
the  light,  but  came  that  he  might  bear 
witness  of  the  light  " ;  and  then 
follow  the  words :  "  the  true  light 
was  He  who  came  into  the  world." 
The  Baptist,  in  one  sense,  was  the  true 
light.  He  was,  as  our  Lord  Himself 
says,  "  a  bright  and  shining  light " 
(v.  35)  :  a\r]6rj<;,  true,  as  opposed  to 
false.  But,  in  another  sense,  he  was 
not  the  true  light :  a\r)0tv6<;,  true,  as 
opposed  to  that  which  is  subordinate 
and  derived.  Christ  was  as  the  sun, 
the  original  source  of  light ;  the 
Baptist  was  as  the  moon,  deriving  all 
its  light  from  the  sun.  'AX^tvos  is 
a  favourite  term  with  St.  John.  It 
occurs  twenty-eight  times  in  the  New 
Testament,  and  twenty-three  of  these 
occur  in  the  writings  of  St.  John — 
nine  in  the  Gospel,  four  in  his  First 

36 


Epistle,  and  ten  in  the  Apocalypse. 
Thus  our  Lord  declares  Himself  to  be 
the  true  bread  (6  apros  6  aXrjOivos), 
which  came  down  from  heaven  (vi.  32), 
not  implying  that  the  manna  was  not 
also  the  bread  which  came  down  from 
heaven ;  but  that  He  was  the  original, 
of  which  the  manna  was  only  the  type 
and  emblem.  So  here  Christ  is  the 
true  Light,  the  archetype,  the  origin 
of  all  lights ;  all  other  lights  are 
derived  from  Him  as  their  source.  As 
Archbishop  Trench  observes :  "  The 
eternal  Word  is  declared  to  be  to  </>ws 
to  aX-nOtvov,  not  denying  thereby  that 
the  Baptist  was  also  a  burning  and  a 
shining  light,  or  that  the  faithful  are 
lights  in  the  world,  but  only  claiming 
for  a  Greater  than  all,  to  be  '  the 
light  which  lighteth  every  man  that 
cometh  into  the  world.'  In  the  words 
of  our  own  great  poet : — 

"  '  Our  little  systems  have  their  day, 
They  have  their  day  and  cease  to  be ; 
They  are  but  broken  lights  of  Thee, 
And  Thou,  O  Lord,  art  more  than  they. ' " 

cp^o/xevoi/  ets  tov  koo-jjlov  :  coming  into 
the  world. — Here  consists  the  difficulty 
in  the  exegesis  of  the  passage.  In  the 
original  the  language  is  ambiguous, 
and  grammatically  admits  of  two 
different  translations ;  and  hence  the 
true  meaning  is  to  be  determined  by 
other  than  grammatical  considerations. 
There  are  two  distinct  series  of  inter- 
pretations :  1.  'EpxofjLevov  may  be 
taken  in  the  accusative,  agreeing  with 
navTa  av0po)7rov,  its  nearest  antecedent. 
2.  It  may  be  taken  in  the  nominative 
neuter,  agreeing  with  to  <f>w<s.  Adopt- 
ing the  first  interpretation,  we  have 
the  translation,  "  The  true  Light  was, 
or  was  existing,  which  lighteth  every 
man  that  cometh  into  the  world." 
This  is  the  meaning  preferred  by 
Meyer,  one  of  the  greatest  of  modern 
exegetes,  and  was  generally  adopted 
by  the  early  expositors.  It  is  the 
meaning  given  in  the  Authorised 
Version.  The  great  objection  to  it  is 
that  the  words  "  that  cometh  into  the 
world"  are  superfluous,  as  they  are 
already   implied   in   every   man.      To 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   I. 


this  Meyer  replies,  "  There  is  such  a 
thing  as  a  solemn  redundance,  and  we 
have  here  an  epic  fulness  of  words." 
But  such  as  "  that  cometh  into  the 
world  "  is  never  used  in  Scripture  of 
ordinary  birth,  whereas  it  is  frequently 
employed  of  the  Incarnation — Christ's 
coming  into  the  world.  In  St.  John's 
Gospel  it  occurs  seven  times.  .  .   . 

Christ  is  the  light  of  men  :  He  is  the 
source  of  all  spiritual  light  to  the  saints 
both  under  the  Old  and  under  the 
New  Testament  dispensation  ;  He  is 
the  source  of  all  devout  thoughts  and 
all  holy  aspirations  among  the  heathen  ; 
He  is  the  voice  of  God  speaking  in  the 
conscience  of  men.  He  is  the  Sun  of 
righteousness  shining  in  the  midst  of 
the  darkness.  All  truth,  all  righteous- 
ness, all  holiness,  proceed  from  Him. 
He  is  not  merely  the  Head  of  His 
body,  the  Church,  but  the  King  of  the 
souls  of  men.  He  is  the  Spirit  of  all 
history.  He  regulates  the  events  of 
the  world.  He  rules  and  disposes  all 
the  affairs  of  men.  Everything  that 
happens  is  predetermined  by  Christ. 
He  holds  in  His  hands  the  destinies  of 
the  nations,  and  renders  all  things  con- 
ducive to  the  accomplishment  of  His 
purposes.  He  is  made  Head  of  all 
things  for  the  good  of  His  Church.  It 
is  this  living  Christ  in  the  world  and  in 
the  soul  that  explains  Christianity,  and 
is  the  reason  of  its  success  and  diffusion. 
If  it  were  not  for  Christ,  the  world 
and  the  Church  would  both  perish. 
In  Christ  all  things  consist.  There  is 
a  sense  in  which  it  is  true  that  Christ 
is  in  every  man.  In  Him  is  life,  and 
the  life  is  the  light  of  men — the  true 
Light  that  lighteth  every  man. — 
Dr.  J.  Paton  Gloag  in  "  The  Thinker" 
December  1893. 

Ver.  13.  "Not  of  blood,"  etc.— And 
we,  with  all  our  literary  fame  and 
technical  activity,  with  our  pride  in 
our  religious  reformation,  cannot  say 
we  deserve  to  be  called  sons  of  God. 
To  whom  much  is  given,  of  them  much 
will  be  required.  .  .  .  God's  children,  as 
the  name  implies,  must  be  born  of  God. 
As  James  writes  (i.  18),  "  Of  His  own 


will  begat  He  us,"  etc.  Pride  drives 
men  to  better  their  position.  Jesus 
must  give  them  the  power,  however, 
to  change  their  condition.  Who  among 
us  desire  to  be  God's  children,  and  pray 
that  they  may  be  so  ?  Who  among  us 
solemnly  resolve,  "  I  will  arise  and 
go  to  my  Father  "  ?  Who  among  us 
are  yielding  themselves  to  be  encou- 
raged and  strengthened  by  Him  who 
has  said,  "  No  man  cometh  unto  the 
Father  but  by  Me"1—Kogel. 

Vers.  1-14.  Three  advent  questions 
arising  from  this  subject :  1.  Do  we 
diligently  read  the  Scriptures  ? — One 
ought  to  read  on  one's  knees  the  Gospel 
of  John,  which,  as  it  has  been  well  said, 
has  the  simplicity  not  of  a  child,  but  of  a 
seraph.  When,  many  years  ago,  there 
was  published  in  France  a  so-called 
Life  of  Christ — a  sceptical,  superficial 
work,  which  was  much  read  in  our 
own  city — one  of  the  greatest  of 
German  historians  said,  "A  single  line 
of  the  Gospel  of  John  will  prostrate 
that  image  of  clay  in  the  dust."  And 
it  cannot  be  forgotten  by  me  how  the 
two  Dutchmen — the  physician  Dr. 
Abraham  Capadose,  and  the  poet  Isaac 
da  Costa,  both  Jews  originally,  and 
both  baptised  in  one  day  in  Leyden — 
told  me  what  an  influential  part  in 
their  conversion  was  due  to  reading 
the  introduction  of  St.  John's  Gospel, 
with  its  attractive  power  in  the  union 
of  simplicity  and  majesty.  Untouched 
by  the  novelties  of  the  day,  etc.,  the 
Gospel  of  John  will  continue  to  be  read. 
"  For  God's  ways  are  not  our  ways," 
etc. ;  and  the  natural  man  understands 
not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 
The  heart  will  harden,  the  people  be- 
come shallow,  when  they  will  not  study 
the  thoughts  of  God.  Rather  follow 
the  Psalmist  (Ps.  cxix.  17,  18). 

2.  Do  ive  rest  on  God's  eternal 
counsel  of  love  ? — Jesus  saw  the  wrath 
of  foes  enkindling,  and  He  said, 
looking  toward  the  gates  of  eternity, 
"  Before  Abraham  was,  1  am."  He 
saw  the  cup,  the  cross,  and  stood  fast 
as  He  prayed,  "  Father,  glorify  Me," 
etc.  (xvii.  5).     The  more  restlessly  and 

37 


CHAP.   I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


inconstantly  the  waves  of  the  world 
roll,  so  much  the  more  blessedly  will 
the  child  of  God  be  sensible  of  the 
anchor  which  "  reaches  unto  that 
within  the  veil."  .  .  .  See  what  St.  Paul 
wrote  in  Eom.  viii.  29.  These  pro- 
mises rest,  as  he  shows,  on  the  pre- 
existence  of  the  Son  of  God — His 
divinity.  On  this  rests  His  prophetic 
office;  the  atonement,  in  His  office  as 
great  high  priest ;  the  right  to  His 
kingly  title  ;  the  effect  of  His  resurrec- 
tion; His  right  of  possession  of  the 
souls  of  men  ;  His  power  for  final  judg- 
ment. 

3.    Have    we   received   Jesus  ? — Not 


as  a  burdensome  lodger,  not  as  an 
occasional  guest,  coming  and  going  on 
Sundays  and  feast-days,  but  as  our 
legitimate  Lord,  our  best  friend,  truest 
counsellor,  most  gracious  advocate,  and 
almighty  intercessor  1  Or,  alas  !  shall 
the  complaint  of  Him  who  was  home- 
less on  earth  rise  against  us,  "  The 
foxes  have  holes,"  etc.  ?  He  who  is 
the  Alpha  and  Omega  .  .  .  does  He 
not  still  come  unto  His  own  1  Do  we 
bring  Him  our  children,  give  Him  our 
hearts,  defend  Him  against  a  faithless 
world  ?  Will  we  be  saved  through 
Him,  and  through  Him  alone  ? — 
Abridged  from  Dr.  R.  Kbgel. 


ILLUSTRATION'S. 


Ver.  1,  The  "  Word."— Without  noticing 
even  in  outline  any  of  the  learned  inquiries 
and  discussions  as  to  where  the  evangelist 
found  this  name,  and  in  what  sense  he  meant 
it,  it  is  enough  to  say  that  it  was  already  in 
use  at  the  time  he  wrote,  and  probably  long 
before.  In  particular  it  had  been  woven 
into  elaborate  religious  speculations  by  the 
Jews  living  in  Alexandria.  Just  as  our 
modern  scientific  culture,  or  the  scientific 
spirit,  as  it  is  called,  is  exerting  a  wide  in- 
fluence in  the  domain  of  religious  thought 
to-day,  so  did  Greek  philosophy,  particularly 
that  of  Plato,  among  these  Jews.  Taking 
the  writings  of  the  Old  Testament  as  the 
divine  source  of  spiritual  knowledge,  and 
rejecting  mere  verbal  literalism  of  inter- 
pretation, they  endeavoured  to  give  philo- 
sophic expres  ion  to  the  truths  they 
apprehended,  and  to  build  them  into  a 
philosophic  system.  Under  such  conditions 
the  doctrines  of  the  Word  (the  Logos)  took 
shape  in  the  school  represented  by  Philo, 
and  no  doubt  soon  became  widely  known. 
There  is  no  ground,  however,  for  supposing 
that  the  evangelist  borrowed  the  name  from 
Philo ;  it  was  in  far  wider  and  older  use, 
having  its  origin  as  far  back  as  the  first 
chapter  of  Genesis,  which  I  have  no  doubt 
was  vividly  present  in  his  mind  as  he  wrote, 
"And  God  said"  "and  God  made":  so  it 
runs  throughout  that  chapter,  preparing  for 
the  utterance  of  the  Psalmist,  "  By  the  Word 
of  the  Lord  were  the  heavens  made,  and  all 
the  host  of  them  by  the  breath  of  His 
mouth."  A  word  is  a  thought  or  emotion 
or  volition  expressed  in  sound,  and  abiding 
where  it  is  lodged  after  the  sound  has  passed 
away.  You  put  yourself  into  your  word,  if 
it  is  a  true  word — your  own  mind,  your  own 
heart,  your  own  will.  In  telling  us  that  the 
Word  was  in  the  beginning,  does  the  Evan- 

38 


gelist  then  simply  mean  that  God  spake  and 
called  things  into  being  by  the  word  of  His 
power  1  and  that  it  was  not  "  holy  light " 
(as  Milton  sings),  but  voice  or  sound,  that 
was  the  "offspring  of  heaven  firstborn"? 
And  is  the  voice  of  God  here  personified,  as 
His  "  wisdom"  is  personified  in  the  Book  of 
Proverbs  ?  Shall  we  say  that  God's  word  in 
the  beginning  called  the  heavens  and  the 
earth  into  existence — that  it  afterwards  came 
forth,  generation  after  generation,  to  the 
children  of  men  through  the  prophets — that 
in  the  fulness  of  time  it  cauie  forth  as  a 
living  and  holy  humanity — that  God's  final 
word  to  men  is  a  Man,  even  the  Man  Christ 
Jesus,  who  is  the  truth  of  God,  the  wisdom  of 
God,  and  the  power  of  God  ?  We  might  be 
inclined  to  answer,  Yes,  it  is  but  a  strongly 
figurative  way  of  telling  vs  this,  were  it  not 
that  the  marks  of  personality  are  so  nume- 
rous and  decisive,  not  merely  in  separate 
expressions,  but  in  the  whole  scope  of  the 
paragraph.  The  English  Version  is  right  in 
naming  the  Word  He,  and  not  It ;  He,  the 
person — not  It,  the  voice. — Dr.  John  Culross. 

Vers.  3,  4.  Not  only  is  Jesus  Christ  the 
creator  of  nature,  but  He  holds  it  together. — 
By  Him  all  things  consist,  and  so  of  all 
the  unconscious  forces  of  the  world  He 
is  Lord ;  and  those  who  wrote  over  the  grave 
of  one  killed  on  the  Riffelhorn  the  words, 
"  It  is  I ;  be  not  afraid,"  understood  in  whose 
hands  are  all  the  powers  of  the  universe  that 
seem  so  blind  and  unreined.  But  putting 
it  more  generally,  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Lord 
of  providence — the  true  King  with  plenary 
power.  It  is  He  who  rules  over  the  evolu- 
tion of  events  and  the  disclosing  of  the 
epochs  in  the  world's  history.  "There  is 
much  to  confirm  the  thought  which  has 
visited  all  in  hours  of  gloom — that  history 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY;    ST.   JOHN. 


CHAP.  I. 


is  nothing  more  than  a  shifting  phantas- 
magoria of  passions  and  desires.  Sometimes 
men  seem  to  be  flung  together,  a  rude  and 
chaotic  mass  of  creatures,  who  fight  and 
howl  over  each  other,  and  die,  and  are  laid  in 
the  hopelessness  of  a  beast's  grave.  Some- 
times history  seems  no  more  than  a  series 
of  petty  stage-plays,  without  connection  and 
leading  to  no  issue.  But  even  sceptical 
thinkers  admit  the  organic  unity  of  all 
history.  Only  to  many  each  event  is  but  a 
link  in  the  long  chain  of  the  harmony  of  the 
universe  ;  to  such  the  organic  development 
of  history  will  mean  the  unbroken  sweep  of 
natural  law,  without  one  breath  of  the  crea- 
tive spirit  from  on  high  ;  while  to  a  higher 
school  of  thought  the  one  purpose  of  history 
is  the  purpose  of  everlastiug  love  worked  out 
in  and  through  human  personality  by  a  per- 
sonal redeeming  God  "(Dr.  Robertson  Smith). 
We  see  above  it  all  the  throne  where  the 
King  sits,  who  holds  all  things  in  His  hand, 
and  guides  them  according  to  the  purposes 
of  changeless  love.  The  true  exposition  and 
idea  of  history  are  to  be  found  in  the  king- 
dom of  redemption. — Dr.  W.  Robertson 
Nicoll. 

Ver.  5.  The  joy  of  light. — The  pleasant, 
welcome,  benignant,  and  gladdening  natural 
light  of  the  world  is  almost  universally  con- 
sidered an  image  of  similar  spiritual  condi- 
tions, and  signifies  therefore  happiness, 
prosperity,  peace,  joy,  health,  and  blessed- 
ness. The  opposites  of  light — night,  dark- 
ness, obscurity,  which  are  to  us  unpleasant, 
unwelcome,  frightful,  and  terrible — are  in- 
dications of  an  entirely  contrary  and  highly 
repulsive  condition.  Hence  they  include  the 
ideas  of  unhappiness,  injury,  dispeace,  sin, 
wickedness,  pain,  sorrow,  and  misery.  With 
especial  frequency  do  we  meet  with  this 
great  opposition  between  light  and  darkness 
in  the  Johannine  writings. — Lisco. 

Ver.  12.  The  grandeur  of  man's  being. — 
Many  of  the  leaders  of  men  have  most 
strenuously  opposed  the  degrading  material- 
ism of  the  age,  and  the  degradation  of  man 
to  a  level  with  perishing  things.  Such  men 
as  Richter,  Lotze,  Ulrici,  Tennyson,  Carlyle, 
have  done  so.  No  one  more  convincingly  than 
the  last,  in  this  century,  has  preached  the 
truths  of  the  grandeur  of  man's  being  and 
destiny.  "  The  essence  of  our  being,  the 
mystery  in  us  that  calls  itself  '  I ' — ah  !  what 
words  have  we  for  such  things  ? — is  a  breath 
of  heaven  :  the  highest  Being  reveals  Him- 
self in  man.  .  .  .  We  are  the  miracle  of 
miracles — the  great  inscrutable  mystery  of 
God.  We  cannot  understand  it,  we  know 
not  how  to  speak  of  it ;  but  we  may  feel 
and  know,  if  we  like,  that  it  is  verily  so  " 
(Carlyle). 

Ver.  12.  Man  differentiated  from  other  exist- 
ences.— Unprejudiced  science  also,  cultivated 


by  men  who  have  not  been  dazzled  by  the 
glamour  of  empirical,  scientific,  "  explain-all " 
nostrums,  does  not  deny  that  there  has  been 
in  man  from  the  beginning  that  which 
differentiates  and  separates  him  from  all 
other  living  and  material  existences  within 
our  ken.  Geology  finds  no  indubitable  trace 
of  man  before  the  current  epoch  of  the 
world's  material  history,  when  seas  and 
lands  received  their  present  conformation, 
and  were  peopled  by  those  genera  and 
species  which,  with  few  exceptions,  now 
exist.  And  when  man  does  appear  it  is  with 
a  new  power — the  power  of  intellect  (un- 
derived  from  merely  material  existences  and 
forces),  bringing  in  its  train  changes  and 
innovations,  of  anything  like  which  the  long 
preceding  ages  knew  nothing  (vide  A.  R. 
Wallace,  etc. ).  In  short,  in  opposition  to  all 
ghastly  materialistic  fancies,  however  famous 
the  names  of  those  who  uphold  them,  unpre- 
judiced science  and  philosophy  alike  confirm 
Scripture  in  holding  that  "  there  is  a  spirit 
in  man:  and  the  breath  of  the  Almighty 
giveth  them  understanding"  (Job  xxxii.  8). 

Ver.  12.  Better  born. — A  human  analogy 
may  help  toward  an  understanding  of  this 
truth.  In  the  slums  of  a  great  city  there 
may  sometimes  be  met,  floating  about  on  the 
malodorous  tide  which  sweeps  through  those 
melancholy  straits,  one  who,  amid  his  rags 
and  wretchedness,  gives  tokens  that  he  is 
not  a  native  of  those  dreary  coasts.  His 
speech,  even  when  interlarded  with  the 
blasphemy  and  brutality  of  slumdom,  betrays 
him.  Something  indefinite  in  manner  and 
appearance  —  under  all  his  swagger  and 
bravado,  under  the  rags  and  grime  of  the 
city's  purlieus — proclaims  him  as  having 
been  socially  at  one  time  of  another  sphere. 
As  inquiries  are  made  those  suspicions  are 
confirmed.  The  wretched  waif  was  at  one 
time  in  a  high  social  sphere.  He  has  per- 
haps noble  blood  in  his  veins.  He  was  well 
educated.  In  his  drunken  fits  he  may  quote 
Greek  and  Latin  to  enjoy  the  wonderment 
of  a  lodging-house  crowd.  Dissipation  in 
various  forms  has  brought  him  to  the  low 
level  where  he  now  lies.  Is  he  fit  for  his 
former  position  ?  Could  he  in  his  rags  and 
wretchedness  live  in  his  former  noble  home 
with  parents  and  friends  1  Were  he  ad- 
mitted even,  would  it  bring  any  true  pleasure 
to  him  any  more  than  to  them  ?  Suppose  a 
father's  love  did  descend  to  those  depths, 
and  bore  away  the  prodigal  to  his  home, 
clothed  him,  and  gave  him  as  far  as  possible 
the  outward  appearance  of  a  gentleman, 
could  there  be  any  happiness  to  either  whilst 
the  old  passions  and  habits  still  ruled  the 
heart  of  the  son,  leading  to  many  an  out- 
break and  shameful  scene  ?  No.  The  man 
must  first  reform — break  away  from  his 
debasing  habits  and  associates — become  a 
new  man.  Then  he  might,  would,  be  received 
again  into  the  old  home  as  a  son,  doubly 

39 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


dear  because  rescued  from  a  living  death, 
and  reinstated  in  the  inheritance  from  which 
for  the  time  he  had  been  reluctantly  cut  off. 
Now,  so  far  as  a  human  analogy  will  serve, 
this  shows  us  how  men  have  lost  that  divine 
sonship,  which  was  theirs  originally,  and 
how  they  can  return  by  the  way  opened  up 
by  Christ.  Surely  a  terrible  thought  for 
human  kind  it  would  be  were  there  no  hope 
for  men  beyond.  Awful  indeed  it  would  be 
were  all  our  strivings,  all  our  advances  in 
thought  and  knowledge  to  end  for  us  at  the 
cold  grave's  brink  !  that  men  of  one  genera- 
tion should  leave  for  those  who  follow  them 
wider  ideas  of  the  grandeur  and  possibilities 
of  life,  making  the  cup  of  existence  more 
sweet,  only  that  it  may  be  dashed  from 
their  lips  for  ever  at  the  gates  of  death  ! 

Vers.  12,  13.  Spiritual  relationships. — 
Fellowship  in  the  Spirit  brings  compensation 
for  what  is  sweetest  on  earth — for  the  bonds 
of  human  love  and  friendship.  It  is  truly 
a  bitter  loss  and  deprivation,  which  lasts 
through  life,  when  a  child  is  deprived  of 
a  mother's  love  and  a  father's  care.  But, 
nevertheless,  faith  gives  superabounding 
compensations  ;  and  there  is  no  orphan  child, 
however  poor  and  forsaken,  whom  we  can- 
not point  heavenwards  and  say :  There  thou 
bast  a  Father,  the  true  Father  of  all  who 
are  called  children  in  heaven  and  earth ; 
there  watches  over  thee  more  than  a 
mother's  love,  the  love  of  Him  who  says, 
Though  a  mother  should  forget  her  child, 
yet  will  I  not  forget  thee.  It  is  truly  a 
sorrowful  position  in  which  a  bereaved  wife 
weeps  for  the  husband  of  her  youth,  the 
friend  of  her  heart,  the  stay  of  her  weakness. 
But  blessed  is  she  when  she  can  stay  herself 
on  the  best  and  heavenly  Friend,  the  most 
faithful  Counsellor,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Many  a  lonely  heart  may  with  sadness 
regard  a  neighbour  around  whom  joyful 
children  are  blooming,  who  gladden  the 
evening  of  life.  But  knowest  thou  not  that 
thou  mayest  beget  spiritual  children  when 
thou  dost  edify  immortal  souls  by  word  and 
walk,  dost  win  hearts  for  God  and  His 
kingdom,  just  as  a  Paul  or  a  John  in  their 
letters  called  those  won  by  them  their  dear 
children  ?  It  is  truly  a  bitter  experience  to 
stand  alone  in  the  world  without  friend  or 
intimate.  But  it  is  sweet  when  a  man  realises 
that  he  is  a  member  of  the  great  fellowship 
of  saints,  bound  up  in  the  Spirit  with  all 
those  who  love  the  Lord,  and  can  say  :  Who- 
ever in  the  wide  world  does  the  will  of  God 
and  believes  in  Christ,  the  same  is  my 
brother  and  sister  and  mother.  It  is  truly 
sad  when  friend  after  friend  is  carried  away 
from  us  by  death  ;  but  there  is  also  a  most 
blessed  comfort  to  be  able  to  rejoice  in  hope 
of  the  shining  company  of  blessed  spirits  in 
the  heavenly  Jerusalem  above,  of  the  in- 
numerable company  of  angels,  the  Church  of 
the  firstborn  and  of  the  spirits  of  just  men 

40 


made  perfect,  of  the  vision  of  God  and  of 
Jesus  the  mediator  of  the  New  Testament. 
Yes ;    these   are    friendships    which   weigh 
thousandfold  more  than  any  earthly  friend- 
ship.    There  fails  not  also  of  joy  by  which 
in  the  kingdom  of  God  the  joy  of  human 
fellowship  is  made  up  for.     In  place  of  the 
voice  of  father  and  mother  there  is  the  Word 
of  God ;  in  place  of  converse  with  a  human 
friend,  the  converse  of  the  heart  with  God, 
prayer  ;  in  place  of  an  earthly  dwelling  of 
one's  own,  the  House  of  God,  where  one  is 
best  at  home  ;  in  place  of  earthly  pleasure 
this  meat,  to  do  the  will  of  the  Father  in 
heaven  ;  in  place  of  human  friendship  this 
blessedness,  to  belong  wholly  to  the  Lord  ; 
in  place  of  worldly  cares  for  one's  self  and 
one's  own,  the  peace  of  a  soul  satisfied  with 
God.       For    earthly    deprivation    is    given 
heavenly  hope ;    and  in  the  evening  of  life 
this  comfort — I  have  fought  a  good  fight ; 
and  beyond,  the  hope  of  the  white  robe  of 
those  who  have  come  out  of  great  tribulation, 
and  the  crown  of  the  victor,  and  the  fellow- 
ship of  all  the  children  of  God.    O  Lord,  take 
from  us  all,  if  it  must  be  so,  on  earth ;  but 
only  send  us  Thyself,  and  the  blessed  fellow- 
ship of  Thy  Spirit,  and  thine  eternal,  heavenly 
kingdom. — Translated  from  Karl  Qeroh. 

Ver.  14.  God  manifest  in  the  flesh. — The 
eternal  Son  of  God  divested  Himself  of  His 
glory,  took  upon  Him  the  form  of  a  ser- 
vant, was  found  in  the  likeness  of  man, 
was  found  in  fashion  as  a  man — the  Word 
became  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us.  This  is 
manifestly  the  great  mystery  which  this 
Christmas  season  has  anew  proclaimed  to  us. 
And  when  we  besides  behold  our  Saviour 
on  His  earthly  pilgrimage  from  the  manger 
to  the  sepulchre,  growing  up  in  the  cottage 
at  Nazareth,  teaching  in  the  company  of  His 
disciples,  eating  at  the  table  of  the  publican, 
sleeping  in  the  ship  on  the  lake,  weeping  at 
the  grave  of  Lazarus,  shuddering  on  the 
ground  in  Gethsemane,  bleeding  on  the 
cross  on  Golgotha,  ever  and  always  we  may 
realise  for  the  comfort  of  our  weak  flesh  and 
blood,  "  God  is  made  manifest  in  the  flesh." 
In  our  poor  flesh  and  blood  the  eternal 
goodness  has  clothed  itself.  How  gently 
and  confidingly  does  the  eternal  divine 
Majesty  look  on  us  out  of  those  human 
eyes !  how  simply  and  graciously  does 
eternal  Wisdom  speak  to  us  from  those 
human  lips  !  how  tenderly  and  sweetly  are 
the  divine  love  and  pity  stretched  forth  to 
thee  in  the  human  hand  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ !  We  rejoice  and  are  touched  when 
we  read  in  the  lives  of  great  men  how  they 
were  men  like  ourselves,  had  human  feelings, 
had  laboured  and  suffered, — when  we  read 
how  Alexander  the  Great,  once  on  a  difficult 
march  in  a  waterless  desert,  poured  out  the 
water  brought  to  him  by  a  soldier  in  his 
helmet,  the  only  drops  that  could  be  obtained 
in  a  wide  circle,  because  the  king  would  not 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   I. 


taste  it  before  the  most  ordinary  soldier 
in  the  army ;  or  how  Charlemagne  went  on 
all  his  life  wearing  simple  linen  garments, 
while  his  courtiers  paraded  their  silks  and 
sables  ;  how  the  good  King  Henry  IV.  was 
once  surprised  by  a  foreign  ambassador 
sitting  on  the  floor  of  his  room  playing  with 
his  children;  or  how  the  warlike  Luther, 
when  during  the  day  he  had  boldly  joined 
issue  with  king  and  pope,  world  and  devil, 
in  preaching  and  writing,  sat  together  with 
wife  and  child  in  the  evening  like  a  good 
father  of  the  household,  and  sang  to  the 
accompaniment  of  his  lute.  But  all  such 
human  traits  of  great  men,  what  are  they  in 
comparison  with  the  condescension  of  the 
King  of  kings,  who  went  about  on  earth  in  the 
form  of  a  servant— in  comparison  with  the 
gentleness  with  which  the  holy  Son  of  God 
encountered  sinners — in  comparison  with  the 
deprivations  He  endured  from  the  cradle  to 
the  cross — in  comparison  with  the  humble  * 
coverings  in  which  He  concealed  His  glory, 
from  the  swaddling-bands  in  which  they  en- 
swathed  the  infant,  to  the  grave-clothes  which 
they  wound  round  His  body  !  God  is  mani- 
fested in  the  flesh.  Therefore  let  all  flesh 
rejoice.  Yes,  through  this  great  Brother  how 
is  our  flesh  and  blood  ennobled,  through  this 
dear  Guest  how  has  this  poor  earth  been 
honoured  !  The  garment  which  a  famous  man 
has  worn,  were  it  ever  so  poor  and  threadbare, 
men  will  regard  after  the  lapse  of  centuries 
as  a  precious  heritage.  Behold,  0  man,  Christ 
has  also  worn  that  dress  thou  wearest — 
that  dress  of  flesh  and  blood  :  must  not  then 
this  body  become  holy  to  you,  even  to  the 
fingers  on  your  hand,  at  the  thought,  My 
Kedeemer  has  worn  this  garment  also  ? 
The  house  in  which  a  great  man  has  first 
seen  the  light  of  this  world  or  has  dwelt 
long  years,  or  has  drawn  his  last  breath,  is 
regarded  after  centuries  as  a  holy  place. 
A  golden  inscription  above  the  door  makes 
it  known  to  the  traveller,  and  from  far-off 
lands  men  make  pilgrimages  to  visit  it. 
Behold,  0  man,  this  world  which  was  for 
three-and-thirty  years  the  dwelling-house 
of  the  holy  Son  of  God.  Here  on  the 
ground  on  which  thou  dost  walk,  here  under 
the  heavens  that  shine  down  on  you,  He  was 
born,  He  walked,  He  suffered,  He  died. 
Must  not  then  this  world  be  dear  to  thee 
and  worthy  of  honour,  in  spite  of  its  penury, 
with  all  its  sins  and  sorrows,  at  the  thought : 
My  Saviour  was  also  pleased  to  be  here, 
saw  also  all  this,  went  through  it  all? — 
Translated  from  Karl  Gerok. 


Ver.  14.  "  Full  of  grace  and  truth:'— To  be 
full  of  grace  and  truth  was  indeed  a  glory. 
It  was  the  meeting  of  two  things  which  in 
the   souls  of  men   are   antagonistic  to  one 
another.      There     are    souls     which   easily 
bestow  grace,  which  find  it  not  hard  to  for- 
give, but  they  have  often  a  dim  perception 
of  the  majesty  of  that  truth  which  has  been 
violated.       There  are   souls  which   have  a 
clear  perception  of  the  majesty  of  truth  and 
a  deep  sense  of  the  sin  that  swerves  from 
it,  but  they  are  often   inexorable   in  their 
justice  and  unable  to   pardon  ;    they  have 
more   truth   than   grace.     Here   there   is    a 
perfect     blending  of    extremes — fulness   of 
grace  united  to  fulness  of  truth.     There  is 
a   forgiveness    which    is   valueless,   because 
there  is  no  sense  of  wrong  ;  there  is  a  sense 
of  wrong  which  is  forbidding,  because  there 
is  no  power  of  forgiveness.      Here   perfect 
forgiveness  is  joined  with  perfect  perception. 
The  glory  of  Christ's  love  is  that  it  comes 
not  from  darkness,  but  from  light ;  He  for- 
gave  the   sinner  because   He  bore  the  sin. 
Never  was  His   forgiveness  so  complete  as 
when   He   bore   His  fullest   witness  to  the 
awful   truth.     When  did  He   cry,  "Father, 
forgive  them  :    they  know   not   what   they 
do "  ?      Was   it  when   He   began   to   think 
lightly   of  a  violated   law  ?      Nay,   it   was 
when  the   violated    law  was  pressing  upon 
His     soul,  and   the     reproach   of    sin   was 
breaking   His  heart.     His  love  was  born  of 
His   pity,   and   His  pity   was   born  of  His 
purity.     He  felt   that   we  had  already  lost 
what  He  called  our  souls.      He  saw  us  blind 
in   a  world   of  light,   deaf  in   a   world   of 
music,  cold  in  a  world  of  warmth,  heartless 
in  a  world  of  love,  dead  in  a  world  of  life, 
and    He  lifted    up   His  eyes    and    cried : 
Father,    I  am  clouded    in    their    darkness, 
give   them   light ;    I   am   wounded  in  their 
sorrow,  give  them  joy  ;  I  am  pierced  in  their 
coldness,  give  them  warmth ;  I  am  crucified 
in  their  death,  give  them  life  eternal.     O 
Son  of  man,  that  was  Thine  hour  of  glory. 
There,  as  in  tints  of  blended  rainbow,  met 
colours   that   before   had    been   disjoined — 
righteousness  and  peace,  justice  and  forgive- 
ness,  penalty   and  pardon,  the  sentence  of 
death  and  the  message  of  life.     Heaven  and 
earth   met  together,   judgment  and   mercy 
embraced  each  other,  in  the  fulness  of  Thy 
glory.     The  hour  of  sin's  condemnation  was 
the   hour  of  a  world's  redemption.      Grace 
and  truth  stood  side  by  side. — Dr.  George 
Matheson. 


41 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


PART    II.    (a.) 

Chapters  i.   19— iv.  54. 

I.  The  Manifestation  of  the  Word  as  Light  among  those  prepared 

to  receive  Him  (vers.  19-51). 

1.  The  testimony  of  John  the  Baptist :  (1)  he  is  not  the  Christ,  etc.  (vers. 
19-21) ;  (2)  he  is  the  voice  of  the  promised  herald  (ver.  23). 

2.  He  proclaims  to  the  messengers  of  the  Sanhedrin  the  dignity  of  Christ 
(vers.  24-28). 

3.  He  testifies,  to  his  disciples,  of  Christ  as  the  antitype  of  divine  ordinance 
and  the  fulfilment  of  prophetic  promise  (vers.  29-31),  his  faith  having  been  con- 
firmed by  the  incidents  which  transpired  at  the  baptism  of  Jesus  (vers.  32-34). 

4.  John's  disciples  are  pointed  to  Jesus  (vers.  35-40). 

5.  Jesus  reveals  Himself  to  individual  disciples  :  (1)  to  Simon  (vers.  41,  42); 

(2)  to  Philip  (vers.  43,  44) ;  and  (3)  to  Nathanael  the  Israelite  without  guile 
(vers.  45-51). 

6.  To  these  He  reveals  Himself  as  (1)  the  Messiah  (ver.  41);  (2)  the  Son 
of  God,  in  whom  Old  Testament  predictions  find  their  fulfilment  (vers.  45-49) ; 

(3)  the  Son  of  man,  by  whom  the  heavenly  stairway  which  Jacob  saw  in  a 
vision  is  realised  and  completed  (vers.  50,  51). 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  19—37. 

The  witness  of  John  the  Baptist. — John  the  Baptist  was  aware  that  his 
preparatory  ministry  was  nearing  its  close,  that  his  prophetic  ray  would  grow 
dim  and  fade  away  as  the  Sun  of  righteousness,  now  risen  visibly  on  the  world, 
shed  abroad  its  heavenly  light.  The  Baptist  is  a  noble  figure  as  he  meets  us  in 
this  Gospel,  as  he  bears  unfaltering  witness  to  the  Messiah,  and  directs  his  loved 
disciples  to  Jesus.  His  uprightness,  candour,  humility,  boldness,  and  power  form 
traits  of  a  character  that  wins  the  esteem  and  admiration  of  all  noble  minds. 
"Among  them  that  are  born  of  women  there  hath  not  risen  a  greater  than 
John  the  Baptist"  (Matt.  xi.  11).  But  now  his  work  was  nearly  done — and 
well  done.  Therefore  like  a  modest  herald  he  steps  aside  at  the  coming  of  the 
Prince  whose  way  he  had  prepared.  The  witness  of  John  is  given  in  threefold 
form  : — 

I.  His  testimony  as  to  his  own  person  and  work. — "  The  Word  was  made 
flesh  "  is  the  theme  of  the  prologue  to  this  Gospel.  The  witness  of  John  that 
Jesus  is  the  incarnate  Word  is  the  subject  of  this  section.  1.  The  Evangelist 
had  already  referred  to  the  witness  of  the  Baptist  (vers.  6-8  and  15),  as  the 
herald  of  the  Messiah  about  to  be  revealed,  when  he  preached  "  repentance  "  to 
those  who  flocked  to  his  ministry  and  declared  that  "  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens 
was  at  hand  "  (ver.  15  :  compare  Matt.  iii.  1-3,  11).  His  preaching,  which  was 
with  power,  and  his  employment  of  the  rite  of  baptism,  which  was  to  be  a 
significant  sign  of  the  times  of  the  Messiah  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  25-27  ;  Isa.  Iii.  15  ; 
Zech.  xiii.  1),  made  so  deep  an  impression  on  all  classes  of  the  community,  that 
"  all  men  mused  in  their  hearts  of  John,  whether  he  were  the  Christ,  or  not " 
(Luke  iii.  15).  It  was  this  circumstance  which  led  to  his  first  historical, 
testimony  to  Christ  recorded  here.  The  religious  rulers  could  not  allow  such 
events  to  transpire  and  such  thoughts  to  spread  without  making  strict  inquiry 

42 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  I. 


as  to  John's  person  and  the  meaning  of  his  work.     Therefore  the  Jews  (under 
which  designation  we  are  to  understand  most  probably  the  Sanhedrin,  on  which 
devolved  the  oversight  of  the  religious  teaching  and  worship  of  the  people)  "  sent 
priests  and  Levites  from  Jerusalem  to  ask  him,    Who  art  thou?"  (ver.   19). 
By  the  Levites  probably  the  scribes  are  meant  (Neh.  viii.  7,  8).     As  men  versed 
in  the  law,  they  were  sent  to  discover  and  define  John's  position.     All  of  them 
were  members  of  the  party  of  the  Pharisees,  the  sect  which  laid  the  greatest 
stress  on  the  outward  observances  of  the  law,  and  the  greatest  store  by  the 
"traditions"  of  the  fatheis.     Thus  we  may  expect  that  (as  afterward  in  the 
case  of  Christ)  they  approached  John  the  Baptist,  if  not  as  enemies,  yet  with 
no  very  friendly  disposition.     2.  Their  question  was  a  sign  of  the  times.      As 
in  the  human  soul,  when  seeking  after  salvation,  there  may  be,  and  usually  is, 
a  period  of  uncertainty,  when  the  soul  can  find  no  rest,  and  looks  hither  and 
thither  in  order  to  find  it,  so  at  the   time  when  Christ  appeared  men   were 
anxiously  looking  for  a  Redeemer.     Not  only  among  the  Jews,  but  even  among 
the  heathen,  there  was  an  expectation  that  a  deliverer  of  the  race  was  nigh 
at  hand.     But  more  especially  was  this  the  case  among  the  Jews,  groaning  as 
they  were  under  the  yoke  of  subjection  to  Rome.     3.  Pious  Israelites,  and  even 
the  formalists,  were  anxiously  hoping  that  the  promised  hour  was  near  (Luke  ii. 
25,  38).     And  as  they  heard  of  John's  preaching,  of  the  crowds  that  were  drawn 
to  his  baptism,  and  of  the  revival  of  religion  that  was  proceeding  under  his 
startling  calls  to  repentance,  it  was  little  wonder  that  "  the  people  were   in 
expectation"  (Luke  iii.  15).    It  was  certainly  time  to  ask  John  publicly,  "  Who 
art  thou  ?  "     4.  There  was  no  delay  or  hesitation  in  the  Baptist's  answer.     That 
is  the  meaning  of  the  words,  "  He  confessed,  and  denied  not."     His  confession 
was  open  and  prompt,  without  dubiety.     Without  arriere  pensee,  without  any 
thought  of  his  own  honour  or  self -ad  vantage,  he  unhesitatingly  repudiated  any 
claim  to  be  the  Messiah,  as  he   doubtless  realised  that  this  definite  question 
lingered  behind  the  general  one.     5.  Satisfied  on  this  point,  the  deputation  then 
endeavoured  to  discover  something  concerning  John  himself.    "Art  thou  Elias?" 
is  the  next  question.     And  the  Baptist's  answer  is,  "  I  am  not,"  i.e.  not  Elias 
in  person,  according  to  your  expectation.     "  Art  thou  that  prophet?"  i.e.  that 
prophet  foretold  by  Moses  (Deut.  xviii.  15,   18).     And  John  answered,  "No," 
as  if  by  this  brevity  he  would  signify  that  he  did  not  desire  them  to  linger  on 
the  subject  of  own  personality.     Then  in  response  to  their  further  demand  that 
he  would  positively  declare  who  he  was,  he  answered,  "  I  am  the  voice,"  etc. 
Of  himself  he  would  not  speak  further  :  his  office,  and  not  himself,  to  him  was 
most  important.     He  desired  to  draw  attention  away  from  himself,  so  as  to 
concentrate  it  on  the  Messiah.     Therefore  he  described  himself  as  "  the  voice 
crying  in  the  wilderness  "  spoken  of  by  Isaiah  (Isa.  xl.  3),  to  prepare  the  way 
of  the  Messiah.     "  A  man  becomes  a  voice  when  he  desires  nothing  for  himself, 
when   he  does  not   consider   himself,   but   when   his   message   is   everything " 
(Luther).     The  wilderness  was  a  fitting  image  of  the  moral  condition  of  his 
people,  whose  hearts  needed  to  be  "  prepared  for  the  Lord  "  (Luke  i.  16-18,  76) 
by  true  repentance.    6.  In  the  next  question  the  true  character  of  the  messengers 
of  the  Jewish  religious  leaders  shows  itself.     They  were  zealous  in  a  way  for  the 
law,  but  they  were  even  more  so  for  their  traditions.     "Why  baptisest  thou 
with  water  ?  "  etc.    They  knew  that  before  the  days  of  the  Messiah  there  should 
be  a  cleansing  of  the  people  (vide  above,  Ezek.  xxxvi.  25,  etc.) ;   but  if  John  were 
not  the  Messiah,  nor  one  of  the  prophets  who  should  precede  Him,  what  right 
had  he  to  presume  to  use  that  symbolic  rite  ?     This  question  led  to  the  testimony 
the  Baptist  was  so  desirous  to  make  :  "  I  baptise  with  water,"  etc.  (vers.  26,  27). 
You  ask  me  for  my  authority  to  baptise  :  it  is  my  right  and  duty  in  the  office 
committed  to  me.     I  must  prepare  the  way  of  the  Lord ;  and  to  this  end  I 

43 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


preach  repentance  and  baptise,  i.e.  prepare  those  who  shall  receive  the  Messiah. 
And  this  is  so  much  more  needful,  as  the  Messiah  no  longer  delays  His  coming, 
but  even  now  stands  among  you,  i.e.  has  already  begun  His  public  ministry 
in  Israel.  Thus  in  the  lofty  position  of  Him  whose  forerunner  John  was,  in 
the  necessity  of  the  forsaking  of  sin  as  a  preparation  for  His  coming,  lay  John's 
authority  for  his  baptism. 

II.  John's  testimony  in  the  presence  of  Jesus. — 1.  John  confessed  that  he 
had  not  recognised  the  high  destiny  of  Jesus,  but  only  the  fact  that  He  should 
be  made  manifest  to  Israel.  This  does  not  mean  that  John  was  unacquainted 
with  Jesus  personally.  Probably  he  had  heard  something  of  the  marvellous 
circumstances  attending  the  birth  of  Jesus,  and  the  expectations  raised  by  these 
circumstances  in  pious  hearts.  But  that  He  who  at  Nazareth  appeared  in  such 
humble  guise  in  the  form  of  a  servant  should  be  the  promised  Messiah  was  far 
from  John's  thought.  2.  A  fuller  revelation  dawned  on  him  at  the  baptism  of  the 
Redeemer.  He  who  was  formerly  known  only  as  the  son  of  Joseph  was  now  re- 
vealed as  the  Son  of  God.  He  whom  the  Baptist  saw  as  One  so  pure  and  true  as  to 
need  no  cleansing,  nor  therefore  the  symbolic  sign  of  cleansing,  was  now  revealed 
as  He  who  should  baptise  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  John's  baptism,  like  the  Old 
Testament  offerings,  was  intimately  related  to  the  forgiveness  of  sin.  And  as 
the  offerer  was  purged  from  sin  by  looking  in  faith  toward  what  those  offerings 
symbolised,  so  those  who  received  John's  baptism  in  faith  as  a  preparation  for  the 
coming  of  God's  kingdom  participated  in  that  forgiveness  which  membership  in 
that  kingdom  implies.  But,  like  the  Old  Testament  offerings,  this  baptism  was 
typical  and  temporary.  It  could  not  confer  that  spiritual  life  by  which  renewed 
men  are  enabled  "to  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body"  (Rom.  viii.  13).  And  it 
was  revealed  to  John  at  Christ's  baptism  that  He  it  was  who  "  should  baptise 
with  the  Holy  Ghost."  And  therefore  John  was  now  prepared  to  testify,  as  he 
did,  that — 3.  Christ  is  the  Lamb  of  God,  etc. — the  Son  of  God — the  Messiah  of 
Israel.  But  why  was  it  necessary  that  the  Spirit  should  descend  on  the  Redeemer 
at  His  baptism  1  Was  He  not  the  eternal  Son  ?  Did  not  the  fulness  of  the 
Godhead  bodily  dwell  in  Him  ?  Was  He  not  "  conceived  of  the  Holy  Ghost  "  ? 
Yet  it  is  said,  u  God  giveth  not  the  Spirit  by  measure  unto  Him."  The  meaning 
seems  to  be  that  our  Lord's  humanity  needed  this  preparation,  this  bestowal  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  for  its  high  office.  God  "  was  manifested  in  the  flesh,  justified  in 
the  spirit "  (1  Tim.  iii.  16). 

III.  John's  testimony  to  Jesus  among  his  disciples. — 1.  When  John  saw 
Jesus  coming  as  conqueror  from  the  wilderness  conflict  he  had  pointed  Him  out 
as  the  "  Lamb  of  God  "  to  all  who  heard  him  speak.  On  the  following  day  he 
directed  his  disciples  especially  to  this  heavenly  Teacher  and  Redeemer,  to  bear 
witness  to  whom  was  now  his  high  office  and  his  deepest  joy.  2.  Apparently 
John  prompted  his  disciples  to  follow  the  Saviour.  His  words,  "  Behold  the 
Lamb  of  God,"  would  be  to  them  equivalent  to  a  command  to  go  after  Him. 

Learn,  preachers  and  teachers :  1.  To  lose  sight  of  self  in  witnessing  for 
Christ ;  2.  To  be  open  and  bold  in  confessing  Christ ;  3.  To  rejoice  in  being  able 
to  direct  others  to  the  Saviour. 

Ver.  22.  "  Who  art  thou  1 "  (A  Christmas  Homily.) — We  consider  this  question — 
I.  As  a  question  put  to  ourselves. — The  Saviour  has  been  born.     God  became 
man.     Then  comes  the  question,  0  God,  what  am  I  that  Thou  shouldst  give  Thy 
Son  for  me  1     Some  give  to  this  question — 

1.  No  reply. — John  gave  a  reply  •  we  seek  to  back  out  of  it.  Who  art  thou? 
This  is  no  police  inquiry  what  you  are  in  the  world,  and  how  much  you  are 
worth.  It  is  a  question  of  conscience  to  our  hearts.  Conscience  seeks  to  know 
how  we  stand   toward  God.     Your  possessions,  the  duties  of  your  office,  the 

44 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN.  chap.  I. 


newest  form  of  entertainment,  political  news,  etc.,  you  know  ;  but  to  your  own 
heart  you  are  a  stranger.  You  do  not  venture  to  look  into  it,  it  is  so  unpleasant 
to  do  so.  So  you  seek  to  hear  not,  or  to  ignore  this  question,  Who  art  thou  ?  and 
are  silent.     But  your  silence  is  also  an  answer. 

2.  A  vain-glorious  answer. — John  gave  a  humble  answer ;  you  an  answer  of 
self -commendation.  You  can  look  the  question  boldly  in  the  face.  You  fulfil 
what  is  incumbent  on  you  ;  you  envelop  yourself  in  the  cloak  of  your  good  name 
as  a  citizen.  You  measure  yourself  complacently  with  others.  You  know 
nothing  of  a  troubled  conscience,  and  you  have  nothing  to  seek  for  at  the  manger- 
cradle  of  the  Son  of  God. 

3.  An  embarrassed  and  undetermined  answer: — John  gave  a  definite  and  clear 
answer ;  you  give  a  doubtful  one.  You  hear  the  question  plainly,  Who  art 
thou  1  Are  you  already  converted  ?  Are  you  a  child  of  God,  a  member  of 
Christ  ?  Can  you  die  assured  1  But  you  seek  to  shun  the  question  ;  you  give  an 
embarrassed  and  undetermined  answer. 

4.  An  honest  answer. — There  are  those  who  answer  faithfully.  Their  answer 
is  a  troubled  one,  and  runs,  1  am  a  sinner.  And  it  brings  the  troubled  soul  to 
the  Saviour.  Or  their  answer  is  a  plaintive  one,  for  they  sigh  for  the  comfort 
of  grace,  and  have  it  not  yet.  Therefore  they  cry  out,  "  It  is  for  Thee  I  sigh  ; 
comfort  Thou  my  heart."  Or  their  answer  is  a  joyful  one,  and  runs,  "  I  am  a 
sinner,  but  I  have  found  grace.     Christ  is  bornybr  me." 

II.  As  a  question  put  concerning  the  Lord. — Men  turn  aside  from  the 
question,  Who  art  thou  ?  They  do  not  know  themselves,  and  therefore  they 
do  not  know  the  Lord.  They  know  not  the  meaning  of  Christian  joy.  But 
those  who  seek  to  answer  the  question  go  to  the  manger-bed  and  ask,  Who 
is  this  Child  ?      Of  Him  our  gospel  says  : — 

1 .  He  is  so  near,  and  is  yet  so  far  above  us. — He  has  come  into  your  midst, 
Him  whom  ye  knew  not.     This  is  true  now  as  then. 

2.  He  is  so  high,  and  yet  so  loivly. — He  who  comes  after  me  is  preferred  before 
me.  He  is  God  from  eternity,  and  yet  has  appeared  in  time,  and  lies  as  an 
infant  of  days  in  His  manger-bed. 

3.  He  is  so  holy,  and  yet  so  full  of  grace. — He  it  is  the  latchet  of  whose  shoes  I 
am  not  worthy  to  stoop  down  and  unloose.  We  are  not  worthy  tremblingly  to 
offer  Him  the  lowliest  service ;  and  yet  He  appears  as  the  Lamb  of  God  who 
beareth  away  the  sins  of  the  world. — Appuhn,  in  J.  L.  Sommer. 

Ver.  27.  Christ's  disciples  follow  Him. — I.  Christ's  disciples  follow  Him  as 
their  Redeemer.  This  is  the  first  and  chiefest  reason  why  we  should  go  after 
Him.  1.  It  is  good  to  be  attracted  to  Him  for  any  reason  ;  but  all  will  be  useless 
unless  we  recognise  and  act  upon  the  great  need  of  our  nature,  and  the  promise 
that  it  will  be  granted,  which  is  discovered  in  the  very  name  of  the  Saviour : 
"  He  shall  be  called  Jesus,  for  He  shall  save  His  people  from  their  sins."  And 
men  must  come  to  Him  for  this  eternally  important  and  all-inclusive  blessing  of 
redemption.  Otherwise  they  cannot  truly  follow  Him  in  any  fashion.  The 
prisoner  manacled  and  fettered  in  his  cell  cannot  walk  on  the  highway,  however 
eagerly  he  may  desire  to  do  so.  His  chains  and  fetters  must  be  taken  off,  and 
he  must  come  forth  from  his  cell  a  free  man  first.  Now  by  nature  we  are 
bound  by  sin,  enslaved  by  sin  ;  and  ere  we  can  follow  Jesus  to  any  good  purpose 
we  must  be  delivered.  2.  But  how  can  we  attain  deliverance  and  follow  Christ 
if  we  are  bound  and  fettered  ?  Here  is  the  grace  and  simplicity  of  the  gospel. 
When  men  feel  their  need,  and  desire  deliverance  truly  and  sincerely,  in  that 
very  moment  the  fetters  are  broken,  and  they  are  enabled  to  go  to  the  Redeemer 
for  pardon,  peace,  and  every  heavenly  gift.  "  Whosoever  will,  let  him  take  of 
the  water  of  life  freely"  (Rev.  xxii.  17).     "  He  hath  lifted  up  and  borne  away 

45 


— , 


chap.  I.  H0MILE1IC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN. 


the  sin  of  the  world  "  (ver.  29) ;  "  He  hath  borne  our  sins  in  His  own  body 
on  the  tree"  (1  Pet.  ii.  24);  "He  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions  and 
bruised  for  our  iniquities  "  (Isa.  liii.  5).  He  hath  taken  away  the  guilt  of  our 
sin.  3.  But  more  than  that — if  we  follow  Him  as  our  redeemer  He  enables  us 
"  to  die  unto  sin."  We  are  delivered  from  the  power  of  that  baleful  disorder 
which  has  laid  hold  of  our  humanity,  from  the  grip  of  that  subtle  foe  that  seeks 
our  undoing.  How  miserable  has  this  foe  made  earnest  men  who  have  tried  to 
free  themselves  from  his  power  !  Again  and  again  they  have  wrestled  and 
striven,  only  to  fall  yet  once  more  before  his  onslaught.  And,  on  the  other  hand, 
how  blessed  is  the  experience  of  those  who  have  felt  their  own  impotence,  have 
looked  to  Christ  for  deliverance,  and  of  whom  it  can  be  said  :  "  Sin  shall  have  no 
more  dominion  over  you  ;  for  ye  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace  "  (Rom. 
vi.  14).  4.  And  thus  do  Christ's  disciples  attain  to  peace.  The  old  terror  of  God 
passes  away,  as  they  see  sin's  guilt  removed  at  the  cross ;  the  old  misery  and 
wretchedness  in  the  ineffectual  strife  with  the  power  of  sin  is  banished  when 
Christ  frees  them  from  their  bondage.  Then  peace  and  joy  and  unfading  hope 
fill  their  souls.  Old-fashioned  and  simple  teaching?  Yes;  but  ever  fresh  and 
welcome  to  those  who  receive  and  act  upon  it.  Consequently  it  is  of  supreme 
importance  as  a  test  for  ourselves  to  ask :  Have  all  we  obeyed  the  earnest 
exhortations  of  faithful  preachers  of  the  cross  ?  Have  we,  like  John's  disciples, 
followed  Jesus,  and  is  the  full  blessedness  of  redemption  ours  ? 

II.  Christ's  disciples  follow  Him  as  their  pattern. — To  do  this  aright  is 
impossible  until  we  have  learned  to  follow  Him  as  the  Redeemer.  Hence  there 
are  many  who  profess  to  follow  Him,  by  taking  Him  as  their  example,  who  in 
reality  go  astray  at  the  very  first  step.  They  overlook  the  essential  purpose  for 
which  God's  Son  became  incarnate,  and  for  which  He  calls  men  to  Him  : 
"  Look  unto  Me  and  be  ye  saved,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth."  But  when  this 
first  step  has  been  made,  then  we  are  to  follow  Christ  as  our  heavenly  pattern. 

1.  Men  need  such  a  pattern — one  who  in  human  form  would  reveal  and 
exemplify  the  life  and  walk  of  the  "  perfect  man,"  according  to  the  heavenly 
ideal.  Such  was  never  seen  in  human  life — at  least  after  the  fall.  Men  could 
not  know  or  understand  the  perfect  human  life,  which  is  summed  up  in  the 
phrase  "  walking  with  God,"  until  it  was  revealed  in  Christ.  Nothing  remained 
but  the  mystic  and  brief  record  of  that  primaeval  period  of  Edenic  blessedness, 
ere  sin  entered  the  world.  And  afterward,  although  in  some  hearts  still  the 
desire  for  heavenly  communion  so  prevailed  that  of  an  Enoch  and  a  Noah  it  was 
said  that  they  "  walked  with  God,"  yet  this  brief  record  also  implies  and  records 
the  presence  of  imperfection.    There  were  flaws — "  In  much  the  best  life  faileth." 

2.  But  all  men,  as  we  have  seen,  conform  their  lives  to  one  pattern  or  another. 
The  child  imitates  the  parent ;  the  friend  is  influenced  by  the  more  powerful 
personality,  the  genius,  the  amiability,  the  intelligence  of  some  dearly  loved 
friend.  We  are  influenced,  often  insensibly,  by  one  conspicuous  in  the  religious, 
the  social,  the  political  sphere.  Hence  the  need  of  choosing  as  our  patterns 
those  influenced  by  principles  of  righteousness.  Hence,  also,  the  need  of  all 
those  who  are  professedly  Christ's  followers,  and  who  have  their  influence 
in  greater  or  less  degree  as  parents,  friends,  public  men,  to  see  that  their 
influence  is  for  good — that  in  this  they  are  imitators  of  Christ.  3.  But  it  is 
well,  above  all,  that  we  should  daily  look  to  that  "  perfect  pattern "  in 
whose  steps  we  are  commanded  to  follow,  to  that  sacred  height  of  holiness 
toward  which  we  are  to  climb.  (1)  We  are  to  follow  Him  in  His  willing 
obedience  to  the  Father.  "  He  was  obedient  unto  death"  even.  No  murmur 
escaped  His  lips,  however  bitter  the  cup,  however  painful  and  shameful  the 
cross.  A  cheerful  compliance  with  all  that  must  needs  be  done  was  the  con- 
spicuous feature  of  His  life.    In  His  prophetic  word,  ages  before  His  incarnation, 

46 


0 

^\  t< 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN.  chap.  i. 

He  declared :  "  Lo,  I  come ;  in  the  volume  of  the  book  it  is  written  of  Me,  I 
delight  to  do  Thy  will,  0  My  God;  yea,  Thy  law  is  within  My  heart  "  (Ps.  ad. 
7,  8).  And  when  He  did  assume  the  lowly  guise  of  a  servant  on  earth,  it  was 
to  reaffirm  that  word :  "  My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  Me,  and 
to  finish  His  work  "  (iv.  34).  And  this  is  the  spirit  in  which  all  true  sons  of 
God  will  seek  to  serve  the  heavenly  lather.  (2)  He  is  our  pattern  also  in  His 
patient  endurance  in  love  and  activity  for  men.  Who,  of  all  who  have  lived,  has 
kept  perfectly  the  second  great  commandment  of  the  law  but  Christ  1  (3)  And 
we  are  to  follow  Him  also  in  His  victorious  conquest  of  evil.  From  the  hour 
when  the  vanquished  adversary  retired  foiled  from  the  mountain  top,  until  on 
the  cross  the  Saviour  cried  "  It  is  finished,"  the  powers  of  evil  sought  to  conquer 
Him  in  vain.  In  vain  !  for  the  resurrection  morning  proclaimed  them  vanquished 
for  ever.  (4)  In  this  way  must  we  follow  Christ — on  the  path  of  obedience,  in 
the  way  of  the  service  of  humanity,  in  the  conquest  of  evil — and  we  shall  be 
"  more  than  conquerors  through  Him  who  loved  us  "  (Bom.  viii.  37). 

III.  "  Through  Him  who  loved  us."  This  leads  to  the  further  thought  that 
we  are  to  follow  Christ  as  our  guide  and  shepherd.  Christ  our  pattern  of 
attainment  !  Is  it  not  to  us  an  impossible  one  ?  Yes,  but  for  His  promise, 
"  Lo,  I  am  with  you  always."     Therein  lies  our  hope. 

1.  He  is  our  guide. — Without  an  experienced  guide  even  skilled  mountaineers 
will  not  attempt  to  scale  giddy  Alpine  peaks  ;  and  even  such  skilled  guides  may 
err,  so  that  guide  and  traveller  may  rush  to  death.  But  our  heavenly  Guide 
never  errs — He  is  unfailing.  His  hold  is  never  relinquished — no  blinding  storm, 
nor  slippery  path,  nor  yawning  crevasse  can  daunt  or  stay  Him.  And  those 
who  trust  Him  He  will  safely  guide  on  the  perilous  path  of  life,  until  they  rest 
on  the  summit  in  the  serene  sunshine  of  heaven,  far  above  the  storms  and  clouds 
of  earth. 

2.  But  more  comforting  still  is  the  assurance  that  He  is  the  shepherd  of 
His  people.  We  need  not  only  a  guide  for  the  upward  path — we  need  to  be 
strengthened  and  refreshed  for  the  way.  And  His  people  find  all  needed 
nourishment  in  the  green  pastures  of  His  word  and  gospel,  whereby  their  souls 
are  strengthened  for  the  journey  ;  whilst  there  is  continual  refreshing  for  them 
in  the  waterbrooks  of  grace.  He  strengthens  them  to  resist  their  spiritual  foes  : 
"  in  temptation's  dangerous  hour  "  He  stands  near  to  help  them  ;  when  the  wolf 
— the  enemy  of  God  and  man — draws  near  to  steal,  kill,  destroy,  and  His  flock 
look  to  Him  for  aid,  He  will  not  be  afar ;  when  they  must  pass  through  the 
darkness  of  death  He  shines  as  their  example,  comforts  with  His  rod  and  staff, 
and  at  eventide  brings  them  safely  folded  into  "  the  greener  pastures  of  paradise, 
and  the  waterbrooks  of  everlasting  life." 

Ver.  29.  The  Lamb  of  God. — John's  action  here  shows  (vers.  19-27)  how 
faithful  he  was  in  his  office  as  forerunner  of  the  Messiah.  It  was  not  his  own 
influence,  honour,  glory,  he  thought  upon.  Having  recognised  in  Jesus  his  Lord 
and  the  promised  Deliverer,  he  pointed  his  disciples  to  Him,  contented  that  his 
preparatory  work  should  come  to  an  end,  that  his  influence  should  wane  whilst 
that  of  Jesus  waxed,  that  as  the  herald  of  the  dawn  he  should  fade  from  view 
at  the  rising  of  the  Sun  of  righteousness. 

I.  What  is  the  meaning  of  this  title,  "  the  Lamb  of  God  "  ?— What  would 
John's  hearers  understand  by  those  words  ?  One  common  idea  is  that  they  refer 
to  the  passover  lamb.  No  doubt  this  in  a  sense  is  true.  The  sprinkling  of  His 
"  lood  is""a~sign  of  safety  to  the  redeemed.  But  this  is  not  the  only  meaning. 
The  reference  is  in  greater  measure ,  to  the  lamb  ofjthe.  trespass  offering 
(Lev.  iv.  32-35,  xiv.  12-14,  etc.).  The  image  brought  before  a  Jewish  mind  I 
by  this  descriptive  title  would  be  the  sacrifices  offered  in  a  special  sense  for   / 

47 


/ 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 

sin — more  particularly,  perhaps,  the  lamb  of  the  daily  morning  and  evening 
sacrifice.  It  would  call  to  mind  the  ascending  altar  smoke,  rising  like  a 
)  prayer  for  forgiveness,  and  the  typical  sacrifices  ever  pointing  forward  to  One 
1  who  was  to  complete  and  end  them  all.  Especially  would  they  be  reminded 
of  that  prophetic  picture  of  the  Messiah  in  which  He  is  represented  thus  : 
"  He  is  brought  as  a  lambjbojthe  slaughter,"  etc.  (Isa.  liii.  7).  Now  it  is  in  this 
sense  chiefly  that  men  are  called  upon  to  "  behold  the  Lamb  of  God."  He 
is  the  great  atonement  for  sin,  .for  His  atoning  work  is  potent  to  take  away 
V  the  guilt  of  sin  and  free  men  from  its  curse.  It  is  sufficient  here  to  point 
out  that  this  word  is  in  agreement  with  the  leading  idea  of  the  New  Testa- 
V  ment  when  it  speaks  of  Christ  "  bearing  away_^_  the  world's  sin.  The  full 
force  of  the  word  (atpeiv)  is  to  "lift  up"  as  a  burden  and  "carry  away" — 
the  meaning  being  that  Jesus  lifted  up  the  burden  and  penalty  of  sin  from 
believers,  Himself  bearing  the  penalty  for  them.  This  was  done  by  expiation — 
by  rendering  satisfaction  for  the  breaking  and  outraging  of  God's  law  through 
sin.  Nothing  less  could  bring  peace ;  and  Christ  brings  peace  by  removing 
the  guilt  of  sin.  "  Surely  He  hath  borne,"  etc.  (Isa.  liii.  4,  5).  Thus  the  Old 
Testament  seer  spoke  of  the  coming  Messiah.  And  when  He  had  completed  His 
work  on  earth,  the  New  Testament  writers  speak  of  that  work  thus  :  "  It 
behoved  Christ  to  suffer,"  etc.  (Luke  xxiv.  26) ;  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  \ 
cleanseth  from  all  sin  "  (1  John  i.  7) ;  "  Christ  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the  \ 
sacrifice  of  Himself"  (Heb.  ix.  26).  Such  words  testify  plainly  as  to  the  nature 
of  Christ's  redemptive  work.  His  sacrificial  death  accomplished  what  the 
typical  sacrifice  of  the  old  covenant  pointed  to.  He  shed  His  blood  "for  the 
remission  of  sin  "  (Matt.  xxvi.  28).  Make  of  it  what  men  may,  this  is  a  cardinal 
doctrine  of  Scripture.  "  God  hath  set  Him  forth,"  etc.  (Rom  hi.  25).  There  is 
an  experimental  proof  of  the  truth  of  this  doctrine  which  to  believers  is  irrefrag- 
able. It  is  the  fact  that  those  who  truly  have  faith  in  Christ  know  the 
blessedness  that  springs  from  forgiven  sin.  Does  it  form  a  firm  foundation 
for  our  Christian  hope  ?  They  who  have  this  proof  need  no  other  that  Christ  is 
"  the  Lamb  of  God." 

II.  Whilst  the  foregoing  is  the  primary  sense  of  the  text,  and  that  which 
would  first  occur  to  John's  Jewish  hearers,  there  is. another  sense  in  which  it 
appeals  to  the  Christian.  Christ  is  here  held  up  as  the  example  we  must  follow 
if  we  would  be  free  from  sin  and  grow  in  holiness.  His  disposition  and  life  are 
held  up  for  our  imitation.  The  redeeming  work  and  power  of  Christ  are  many- 
sided — a  truth  often  forgotten  in  disputes  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  Atonement. 
1.  In  this  descriptive  title  there  is  an  intimation  of  the  gentleness  of  Christ's 
character.  He  never  did  nor  will  "  quench  the  smoking  flax,"  etc.  He  never 
did  nor  will  spurn  true  penitents,  how  great  soever  their  sin  and  guilt.  He 
wore  no  forbidding  aspect,  did  not  display  the  fulness  of  His  power  in  wrath. 
The  mild  rays  of  love  and  mercy  shone  in  all  His  life.  Tender  acts,  gentle 
words,  showed  what  forces  moved  His  matchless  life.  He  was  ever  willing  to 
sheathe  the  sword  of  justice  and  stretch  out  a  helping  hand  to  erring  men  if  they 
would  cease  their  rebellion.  He  felt  for  weak  humanity,  sorrowed  with  men 
and  women  in  their  trials,  rejoiced  with  them  in  their  innocent  joys,  tenderly 
loved  little  children,  bore  compassionately  with  the  waywardness  of  children  of  a 
larger  growth.  He  was  meek  and  lowly — the  Lamb  of  God.  True,  there  were 
not  wanting  elements  of  divine  strength  from  His  character — anger  at  sin,  scorn 
of  evil  (Matt,  xxiii.,  etc.).  But  He  showed  this  only  when  gentleness,  even 
divine,  would  not  reclaim,  and  divine  indignation  must  needs  show  itself.  Still, 
this  was  exceptional.  And  so,  too,  exalted  in  the  heavens,  the  same  tender 
compassion  characterises  Him.  He  will  yet,  no  doubt,  speak  in  judgment, 
and  terrible  will  be  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb.     But  "  His  nature  and  His  name 

48 


} 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  t. 


is  love,"  and  with  tender  entreaty  He  invites  men  to  look  to  Him  and  live. 

2.  The  purity  and  sinlessness  of  Jesus  are  suggested  by  the  title  of  the  text. 
He  was  as  "a  lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spot"  (1  Pet.  i.  19),  the  true 
sacrificial  antitype.  His  life  all  through  was  beautiful,  pure,  true.  There  was 
about  it  that  which  made  wicked  men  shrink  from  it  as  darkness  from  light. 
As  the  pellucid  flood  reflects  the  blue  heaven,  so  the  pure  human  life  of  Jesus 
reflected  as  in  a  mirror  the  purity  and  holiness  of  heaven.  His  lynx-eyed 
enemies  could  not  disprove  His  innocence ;  at  His  trial  hired  witnesses  had  to  be 
set  up  to  accuse  Him,  as  no  honest  man  could  be  found  to  speak  an  accusing 
word.  Pilate  had  to  confess,  "  This  man  hath  done  nothing  amiss."  So  He 
stands  before  the  world  gentle  and  tender,  pure  and  innocent — the  Lamb  of  God.     , 

3.  And  by  this  display  of  character  and  life  Jesus  Christ  is  in  a  true  and  genuine 
sense  taking  away  the  sin  of  the  world.  Not  only  does  His  sacrifice  free  men  / 
from  the  guilt  of  sin — through  faith  in  Him  the  heart  is  endowed  with  a  new 
spiritual  power  by  which  the  believer  overcomes  the  world.  Yet  this  would  not 
be  sufficient  were  there  no  example  for  the  Christian  to  follow,  and  some  goal 
pointed  out  toward  which  he  may  strive.  But  there  is  such  an  example  and 
such  a  goal.  Christ  is  our  example,  and  calls  us  to  follow  Him,  the  perfect  man, 
bending  down  to  us  from  the  height  of  holiness  toward  which  we  are  to  strive  to 
attain.  His  example  and  His  invitations  are  like  an  immense  magnet  force 
drawing  men,  when  they  submit  to  its  power,  nearer  to  itself.  The  more  men 
become  familiar  with  Christ's  character,  the  more  will  they  be  dissatisfied  with 
themselves  and  with  sin,  the  more  attracted  to  holiness  and  the  divine  service. 

III.  Attend  therefore  to  the  exhortation  of  the  Baptist. — "Bejiold,"  etc. 
Men  must  do  so  whether  they  will  or  no.  Toward  Him  all  eyes  in  the  civilised '/ 
world  are  directed.  Even  His  enemies  cannot  help  themselves.  To  ignore  Him  I 
would  be  to  ignore  the  luminous  centre  of  a  dark  world.  Behold  Him  !  ye  who/ 
have  not  yet  trusted  in  Him.  You  have  tasted  of  sin's  bitterness,  felt  its  misery,  j 
have  trembled  at  the  thought  of  death  and  eternity.  You  feel  it  is  a  curse  in/ 
the  happiness  of  "  being."  But  there  is  one  power  can  burst  asunder  the  fetters 
of  evil,  can  purify  and  bless.  It  is  Christ's  gospel.  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  !  in 
simple  faith  accept  Him,  and  the  blessedness  of  pardon  will  visit  your  sin-sick 
nature  like  a  healing  balm,  and  peace  like  restful  eventide  will  descend  upon 
your  souls.  In  vain  will  the  like  result  be  sought  in  other  ways.  Try  this  way  ! 
Behold  Him,  Christians !  and  let  the  view  animate  your  souls  and  stir  you  to 
greater  efforts  to  attain.  The  conflict  between  good  and  evil  is  fierce  and 
protracted.  Take  your  stand  beside  the  cross.  Let  not  men  say  your  example 
was  such  that,  if  you  were  representative  Christians,  they  could  see  no  great 
hope  of  a  higher  life  or  any  great  profit  in  passing  to  the  position  in  which  you 
profess  to  stand.  Follow  the  Lord's  example  :  "  Let  your  profiting  appear  unto 
all  men."  Remember  how  unweariedly  He  toiled  and  endured  for  you  amidst 
danger  and  in  temptation.  Therefore  be  not  weary  in  well-doing,  and  let  your 
hands  be  quick  to  good.  See  Him  and  become  Christlike ;  let  His  loving 
character  be  reproduced  in  your  lives.  For  if  men  do  not  behold  Him  earnestly 
and  lovingly  in  the  day  of  life,  a  time  will  come  when  they  shall  not  be  able  to 
choose.  "  Behold,  He  cometh  with  clouds,  and  every  eye  shall  see  Him  "  (Rev.  i.  7) 
— comes  no  more  with  messages  of  peace,  but  awful  as  the  Judge  of  quick  and  dead. 
May  it  be  ours  to  labour  diligently  now  as  His  disciples  and  servants,  so  that  we 
may  joyfully  look  for  His  appearing,  and  join  the  mighty  host  of  the  redeemed 
whom  John  in  vision  heard  saying,  "  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain,"  etc. 
(Bev.  v.  12).  And  till  then  may  we  raise  that  prayer  which  has  ascended  since 
the  Church  was  founded  in  many  a  stormy  time,  and  which  still  ascends :  "  Agnus 
Dei,  qui  tollis  peccata  mundi,  miserere  nobis  :  Agnus  Dei,  qui  tollis  peccata 
mundi,  dona  nobis  pacem."     Amen. 

e  49 


chap.  i.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


Vers.  29-34.  The  result  of  beholding  Christ  in  faith  as  the  Lamb  of  God. — In  view 
of  all  that  Christ  is,  of  all  His  greatness  and  glory,  of  all  His  love  and  con- 
descension, what  position  should  we  assume  toward  Him  ?  When  we  remember 
that  not  only  does  He  bring  us  salvation,  but  that  He  is  governing  and  con- 
trolling all  things,  coming  in  His  judgments  among  the  nations  and  individuals, 
until  He  shall  come  at  last  in  His  glory,  it  well  becomes  us  to  ask  :  How  are  we 
receiving  Him  ?  Is  He  coming  to  us  in  love  and  mercy,  and  are  we  rejoicing  in 
Him  ?  There  can  be  joy  to  those  alone  to  whom  the  coming  of  Christ  signifies 
grace  and  not  judgment.  Do  we  believe  Him  to  be  what  the  Scriptures  declare 
He  is  1  Then  it  will  be  the  part  of  true  wisdom  to  ask  how  we  stand  related  to 
Him.  All  things,  all  created  beings,  "  were  created  by  Him  and  for  Him  " 
(Col.  i.  16).     What  then  is  our  duty  1 

I.  We  should  submit  ourselves  willingly  to  His  rule. — 1.  When  the  King  of 
kings  makes  His  presence  felt,  we  should  receive  Him  with  honour  and  reverence, 
and  prepare  ourselves  for  His  service.  At  His  advent  as  the  incarnate  Son  it 
was  foretold  that  His  forerunner  should  "  go  before  Him  in  the  spirit  and  power 
of  Elias  ...  to  make  ready  a  people  prepared  for  the  Lord  "  (Luke  i.  17).  And 
the  forerunner  declared  that  he  himself  was  the  voice  of  one  crying,  etc.  (ver.  23). 

2.  Therefore  we  should  prepare  our  hearts  to  receive  Christ,  by  repentance  of 
sin  and  turning  away  from  it — "  Prepare  the  way  of  the  Lord  and  make  His 
paths  straight "  (Matt.  iii.  2,  3).  So  we  must  humble  ourselves  before  Him, 
remembering  our  sins,  through  His  grace  turn  from  sin  and  submit  ourselves  to 
Him,  to  be  freed  from  spiritual  bondage,  and  made  free  citizens  of  His  spiritual 
kingdom — "  fellow-citizens  of  the  saints  and  of  the  household  of  God."  3.  And 
receiving  Christ  thus,  we  shall  reach  true  joy  and  peace  in  life ;  for  then  we 
shall  be  occupying  our  true  position  as  subjects  of  our  King  and  as  creatures  of 
our  Creator.  Duty  and  destiny  are  both  then  clear  and  plain.  Doubfc  as  to  the 
one  and  darkness  as  regards  the  other  vanish  away.  4.  Let  us  submit  ourselves 
to  our  Maker  and  King  then,  for  in  this  way  alone  do  we  attain  our  true 
position  in  time  and  our  true  hope  for  eternity.  But  we  must  also  do  so  in 
adoring  gratitude  when  we  remember  His  love  and  mercy — that  He  the  Son  and 
Word  of  God  became  man,  emptied  Himself  of  His  glory,  suffered  and  died  that 
we  might  live.     When  we  have  thus  submitted  ourselves,  then — 

II.  We  should  labour  for  Him. —  1.  The  true  and  loyal  citizen  of  a  country 
delights  to  spend  and  be  spent  in  the  service  of  country  and  ruler.  The  states- 
man spends  laborious  days  and  nights,  often  for  a  lifetime,  without  fee  or  reward, 
in  the  service  of  his  fatherland.  The  philanthropist,  in  his  enthusiasm  for 
humanity,  gives  himself  up  to  his  benevolent  labours,  not  only  without  a  grudge, 
but  with  positive  pleasure,  finding  in  well-doing  and  in  blessing  others  the 
highest  reward.  2.  Do  not  such  examples  put  many  of  those  called  Christians 
to  confusion  1  Are  not  those  who  profess  that  they  believe  in  Christ  citizens  of 
a  kingdom  far  more  grand  and  glorious  than  the  most  glorious  dominion  that 
the  world  has  ever  seen  ?  Are  they  not  subjects  of  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord 
of  lords,  the  Creator  and  Governor  of  all,  who  also  when  His  subjects  rebelled 
''was  made  flesh,"  in  order  that  He  might  bring  them  back  from  their  alienation? 

3.  And  yet  how  feebly  and  haltingly  do  they  serve  Him  and  labour  for  Him, 
and  the  building  up  and  extension  of  His  kingdom  !  But  His  true  subjects  make 
this  their  continual  aim.  Even  in  what  is  erroneously  called  their  secular 
labour,  they  will  be  ever  seeking  to  do  His  will  and  work.  The  glory  of  Christ 
and  His  kingdom  will  be  the  one  aim  of  life  to  them.  It  is  the  true  aim  of  men, 
and  leads  to  the  best  and  most  blessed  end,  if  men  would  but  see  this.  When 
we  have  attained  to  being  workers  together  with  Christ,  then — 

III.  We  should  bear  witness  to  Him. — 1.  This  Christ's  forerunner  did 
(ver.  15).     This  is  a  distinctive  mark  of  true  subjects  of  Christ.     "  Ye  shall  be 

50 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  I. 


witnesses  unto  Me  both  in  Jerusalem,"  etc.  (Acts  i.  8).  2.  They  should  bear 
■witness  by  their  righteous,  joyful  lives,  showing  in  this  way,  unto  all  men,  whose 
they  are  and  whom  they  serve,  attracting  men  to  the  kingdom  by  their  radiant 
Christian  character  (Matt.  v.  16  ;  1  Thess.  i.  8).  3.  They  should  witness  for 
Him  in  word,  rebuking  what  is  evil  in  His  name  (Luke  iii.  7-9),  and  pointing  to 
Him  as  the  way  of  salvation  (Luke  iii.  16-18),  testifying  from  experience  what 
He  has  done  for  their  souls.  4.  Nor  must  their  testimony  end  with  their  im- 
mediate surroundings.  To  every  true  Christian  man  and  woman  is  given  the 
promise,  "  Ye  shall  be  My  witnesses  unto  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth." 
Each  cannot  do  this  personally.  But  when  the  Church  at  Philippi  is  filled  with 
the  Spirit  of  Christ,  then  it  will  be  eager  to  uphold  and  aid  the  missionary 
apostle  to  bear  the  truth,  that  has  blessed  them,  to  those  wandering  in  error 
(Phil.  iv.  14) — to  bring  the  light  of  salvation,  which  has  arisen  on  them,  making 
their  hearts  glad,  to  those  who  are  still  in  spiritual  darkness.  True  citizens  of 
the  spiritual  kingdom  should  need  no  persuasion  to  invite  them  to  missionary 
effort. 

HOMILETIC  NOTES. 

Vers.  19-38.  Who  art  thou,  journalist  or  the  other  to  scoff  you?  Are  you 
with  far-heard  speaking-trumpet  of  thy  as  wholesomely  distrustful  of  yourself 
newspaper  ?  thou  poet  or  literary  as  was  Paul,  who  not  only  thought 
man  ?  thou  preacher  in  the  pulpit  or  lightly  of  man's  judgment,  but  in  view 
speaker  on  the  political  platform  ?  Will  of  the  possibility  of  being  self- deceived 
you  allow  yourself  to  be  addressed  declared  :  "  Yea,  I  judge  not  mine  own 
generally  in  regard  to  your  prophetic  self :  it  is  God  who  judgeth  me " 
calling,  as  the  Baptist  was  spoken  to,  (1  Cor.  iv.  3).  Do  you  confess  and 
as  to  whether  you  use  your  calling  on  deny  not :  I  am  not  my  own  Christ ; 
the  basis  of  self-knowledge  and  self-  as  the  hart  panteth  after  the  water- 
denial?  Do  you  know  what  your  brooks,  so  crieth  and  thir^eth  my 
dangers  are,  and  the  weak  points  in  soul  for  Him  who  is  full  of  grace  and 
your  armour  ?  Are  you  venal  like  truth — full  of  forgiveness  and  salva- 
the  prophet  Balaam,  or  incorruptible  tion?  Do  you  confess  and  deny  not: 
like  Simon  Peter  in  presence  of  the  I  am  of  unclean  lips,  and  need  the 
sorcerer  ?  Are  you  fearful  like  Jonah,  expiating  call  from  above  ?  This  is 
or  undismayed  like  Nathan  ?  Do  indeed  the  distinction,  frequently  over- 
you,  like  Saul,  even  when  he  was  by  looked,  between  simple  modesty  and 
chance  found  among  the  prophets,  hold  Christian  humility, — that  modesty  is 
fast  to  the  old  evil  Ego,  or  are  you  a  gracious  adornment,  humility  a  re- 
personally  consecrated  to  God  as  was  ligious  virtue;  that  modesty  has  learned 
that  other  Saul  when  he  became  Paul  ?  the  limits  of  individual  knowledge  and 
A  consecrated  voice  of  to-day  speaks  ability,  humility,  on  the  contrary,  the 
in  wrath  against  all  the  egoistic  and  feeling  of  sinfulness  and  misery ;  that 
selfish  doings  of  blatant  popular  orators :  modesty  thinks  it  sufficient  not  to 
"  They  frequently  rave  about  freedom  intrude  one's  self  and  strut  vainly 
whilst  all  the  time  the  slaves  of  their  before  men,  whilst  humility  bends  the 
own  lusts ;  they  speak  about  the  eternal  knee  before  the  all-holy  God.  Thinking 
rights  of  man,  and  mean  only  their  of  one's  self  too  highly — this  is  the 
own  little  ego  !  "  What  do  you  say  of  mildew  on  the  sowing  of  the  preacher, 
yourself?  no  matter  whether  you  are  the  poison  on  the  pen  of  the  author, 
surrounded  by  the  madding  crowd,  or  the  rust  upon  the  harp  of  the  poet. 
by  silent  loneliness;  whether  men  Wherefore  sings  a  noble  singer :  "And 
weave  thorns  or  laurels  for  your  crown  ;  were  my  song,  waiting  for  the  world's 
whether  the  one  side  seek  to  pamper,  favour,  to  court  the  reward  of  vanity, 

51 


CHAP.   I. 


H0M1LET1C  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


then  should  I  dash  my  harp  to  pieces, 
and  shuddering  be  silent  eternally 
before  Thee."  In  the  kingdom  of  God 
the  prophet  discovers  his  true  relation 
to  Christ,  to  his  fellow-labourers,  to 
his  people,  as  well  as  a  true  activity, 
only  when  he  lets  the  night  of  his  Ego 
become  ever  shorter,  and  the  day  of 
the  great  spiritual  Sun  ever  longer,  in 
his  life :  "  He  must  increase,  but  I 
must  decrease." — Dr.  R.  Kbgel. 

Vers.  19-37.  The  world  is  weary 
with  its  cumbrous  and  futile  methods 
of  obtaining  deliverance  from  sin. — 
Consciousness  of  moral  law,  and  the 
ever-growing  conviction  of  the  com- 
prehensiveness and  inflexibility  of  the 
physical  and  mental  consequences  of 
actions,  deepen  the  harrowing  sense  of 
moral  evil,  fasten  on  the  transgressor 
the  Nessus-shirt  of  fire,  from  which  in 
this  nineteenth  century,  as  well  as  in 
the  first,  he  struggles  hard  to  be  free. 
"  The  sin  of  the  world "  is  even  now 
revealed  with  awful  distinctness  to 
some  minds.  It  is  not  necessary  to  go 
to  the  cell  of  the  anchorite,  where 
some  child  of  superstition  is  combating 
those  phantoms  of  despair  which  are 
conjured  up  by  excited  brain  and 
morbid  tradition.  Nor  is  it  requisite 
to  follow  the  explorer  or  the  missionary 
into  haunts  of  vice  and  homes  of 
cruelty,  where  bold  badness  deliberately 
crushes  broken  hearts  and  blasphemes 
Heaven.  It  is  scarcely  needful  to  lift 
the  thin  veil  of  poor  excuse  and  pre- 
posterous flattery  with  which  a  flimsy 
philosophy  conceals  the  evil.  The 
grim,  gaunt  forms  of  sin  loom  through 
the  veil,  and  the  fear  of  men  is  not 
hushed  by  being  told  that  they  should 
be  virtuous  and  calm,  that  evil  is  an 
accident    and  responsibility  a   dream. 


Nature — the  word  being  used  as 
another  name  for  God — may  be  very 
beautiful  in  her  glowing  sunrise,  and 
fascinating  when  the  light  and  the 
mist  conceal  very  much  from  view ; 
but  Nature,  bearing  man  in  her  bosom, 
and  evolving  him,  sin  and  all,  out  of 
her  eternal  depths,  "without  any 
interference "  of  God  or  devil,  is  very 
ghastly  and  terrible.  Under  this 
awful  vision,  the  hearts  of  thousands 
have  been  hurried,  crushed  and 
blaspheming,  into  the  darkness.  The 
sin  of  the  world,  in  its  individual  forms 
and  its  terrible  aggregate,  presses  upon 
conscience  as  a  fault  and  a  removable 
evil.  Hence  its  awful  burden.  From 
this  springs  the  whole  history  of 
sacrifices  and  atonements.  If  sin  is  to 
be  taken  away  from  the  world,  the 
twofold  process  of  redemption  and 
renewal  must  be  involved  in  the  act. 
1.  The  conscience  must  be  assured  that 
the  law  has  not  been  trifled  with ; 
that  it  is  safe  and  right  to  believe  in 
God  as  able  to  save,  ready  to  forgive, 
waiting  to  bless  ;  that  the  universal 
voice  of  nature  has  failed  to  speak  all 
the  truth ;  that  a  Father's  heart 
pulsates  behind  the  eternal  laws ;  that 
He  has  revealed  Himself,  in  a  higher 
form  than  nature  can  ever  approach, 
through  a  human  life  which  still 
towers  above  the  loftiest  evolution  of 
humanity ;  that  Holy  Love  is  at  the 
heart  of  the  universe;  that  Grace  will 
reign  through  righteousness  unto  eternal 
life  !  But,  2.  More  than  this,  the  sin 
itself,  as  well  as  all  its  natural  con- 
sequences, must  be  expelled  from  the 
individual  and  the  aggregate.  There 
must  be  the  new  life,  as  well  as  the 
new  relationship  with  God. — Dr.  H. 
R.  Reynolds. 


ILLUSTRATION. 


Ver.  29.  Permanent  convictions.  —  John 
found  no  greater  word  to  describe  the  glory 
of  the  noon  than  that  through  which  he  had 
seen  the  dawn.  It  was  the  same  light  in  its 
zenith  as  when  it  first  greeted  him  through  the 
mist.  Surely  it  is  worth  while  to  investigate 
a  revelation  like  this,  which  was  as  much  to 

52 


the  aged  seer  as  it  was  to  the  young  fisher- 
man. How  beautiful  is  a  life  of  which  the 
early  days,  the  middle,  and  the  latest  hold 
the  same  convictions,  only  growing  with  the 
man's  growth,  and  widening  with  his  ex- 
perience. How  beautiful  when  the  life  is 
based  on  truths  which  no  experience  can 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  i. 


overthrow,  which  experience  only  renders  from  those  who  came  to  be  baptised  of  him ; 
more  precious ;  and  how  different  from  the  and  would  he  not  think  of  One  into  whose 
lives  of  men  who  flit  restlessly  from  one  ear  sorrow  would  never  be  sobbed  in  vain — 
faith  to  another,  and  rind  no  abiding  home.  One  who  was  to  deal  with  sin  adequately 
It  is  beautiful  when  we  see  the  father  and  and  finally  by  taking  it  away  1  "  He  was 
the  young  man  and  the  child  bound  together  wounded  for  our  transgressions,  He  was 
by  the  faith  which  goes  through  all  the  bruised  for  our  iniquities,  the  chastisement 
stages  of  life,  the  end  circling  round  the  of  our  peace  was  upon  Him,  and  with  His 
beginning,  only  with  a  deeper  conviction  stripes  we  are  healed."  But  along  with  this 
and  a  stronger  love  at  last.  To  understand  we  must  include  a  reference  to  the  Paschal 
the  meaning  of  this  profound  phrase  we  Lamb.  Few  thoughts  in  John's  Gospel  are 
must  go  back  to  the  Old  Testament,  in  which  more  distinct  than  that  of  the  relation  of 
the  mind  of  him  who  first  uttered  it  was  Jesus  Christ  to  the  Paschal  sacrifice  and 
steeped.  Perhaps  the  passage  which  was  feast.  The  Passover,  which  was  the  most 
most  clearly  before  him  as  he  spoke  was  that  conspicuous  symbol  of  the  Messianic  de- 
in  the  climax  of  evangelical  prophecy  *  where  liverance,  was  not  far  off;  flocks  of  lambs 
Jesus  is  described  as  a  Lamb  led  to  the  were  passing  by  to  Jerusalem  to  be  offered 
slaughter,  and  where  it  is  said  that  as  a  at  the  coming  feast,  and  the  sight  may  have 
sheep  before  his  shearers  is  dumb,  so  He  brought  home  the  thought.  Further,  there 
opened  not  His  mouth.  Forty  days  before  is  no  difficulty  in  believing  that  the  fore- 
Christ  had  been  baptised,  and  in  the  interval  runner,  who  had  deeply  meditated  the 
John  had  no  doubt  been  meditating  deeply  Messianic  prophecies  and  the  meaning  of 
on  the  prophecies  that  announced  the  the  sacrifices,  saw,  with  prophetic  insight, 
Messiah ;  and  this  would  stand  more  clearly  that  Christ  was  to  suffer,  thus  standing  for 
before  his  mind  than  any.  Besides,  through  a  time  on  a  higher  level  than  any  of  the 
those  days  and  before  them,  he  had  been  disciples. — Dr.  W.  M.  Nicoll. 
hearing  countless  stories  of  grief  and  sin 


MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  38—44. 

Jesus  manifests  Himself  to  His  first  disciples. — The  choice  of  His  disciples 
was  a  matter  of  great  moment  to  Jesus.  It  was  necessary  that  some  of 
them  should  be  witnesses  of  His  life  and  work  from  the  beginning  of  His 
public  ministry  (xv.  27),  that  they  might  learn  to  know  and  understand 
Himself  and  His  mission,  so  as  to  be  fitted  to  carry  out  the  work  of  His 
kingdom.  He  did  not  choose  those  "  hide-bound "  by  the  traditions  of  the 
rabbinic  schools,  with  fixed  and  earthly  notions  of  His  state  and  kingdom,  nor 
those  who  rejected  the  divine  word  (Sadducees),  to  be  His  witnesses.  He  chose 
men  of  simple,  unsophisticated,  yet  strong  and  earnest  mind,  already  led  to 
repentance  by  the  Baptist's  teaching,  and  waiting  in  their  own  honest  fashion 
(not  idly  dreaming,  but  actively  working)  for  "  the  consolation  of  Israel." 

I.  Such  were  the  first  two  disciples  led  to  the  Saviour.  Acting  on  John's 
indication,  they  "followed  Jesus,"  not  at  first  apparently  presuming  to 
accost  and  speak  to  Him.  But  He  ever  knows  His  own.  He  saw  them  coming 
after  Him,  and  with  a  simple  question  led  them  to  that  great,  that  important 
decision,  which  changed  the  whole  current  of  their  lives,  and  made  their  names 
shine  amongst  the  most  honoured  and  revered  in  history.  1.  How  simple 
and  natural  the  story  of  it  all  is  !  "  Rabbi,"  they  say,  "  where  dviellest 
Thou  ?  "  in  answer  to  His  question,  "  What  seek  ye  ?  "  This  simple  and  almost 
irrelevant  question  of  theirs  "breaks  the  ice"  for  them,  so  to  speak.  It 
was  their  wish,  probably,  to  converse  with  Him  at  some  other  time,  as  the  day 
was  declining  apace,  and  they  might  not  wish  to  disturb  Him  when  evening  was 
approaching.  But,  2.  His  answer  at  once  decided  them — "  Come  and  see  "  :  words 
of  simple  invitation,  but  implying  so  much  on  the  lips  of  Him  who  spoke  them. 
We  know  not  where  it  was  that  Jesus  was  dwelling.  It  is  Himself  and  not  the 
place  that  is  important.  Where  He  is  as  our  friend  and  host,  there  is  all  heaven. 
The  writer  of  this  account  (one  of  the  two)  was  so  impressed  by  the  events  of 
that  afternoon  interview  with  Jesus,  never  to  be  forgotten,  that  he  recollects 

53 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


the  hour  when  first  he  heard  the  voice  of  that  Jesus  whose  teaching  he  was  to 
assimilate  and  understand  so  deeply — whose  latest  word  he  was  to  hear  from 
the  cross  (xix.  30),  whom  he  was  to  recognise  first  of  all  the  disciples  after  the 
resurrection  (xxi.  7),  and  whom  again  he  was  to  hear  in  apocalyptic  vision 
speaking  in  words  of  power  (Rev.  i.  17-20).  3.  And  is  not  the  first  meeting  of 
the  Saviour  with  all  His  true  disciples,  when  they  first  recognise  Him  as  the 
Sent  of  God  and  their  Redeemer,  a  time  to  be  cherished  in  memory  1 

II.  The  second  incident  has  a  special  interest. — It  tells  us :  1.  That  those 
who  truly  come  to  Christ  do  not  go  back  from  Him.  They  come  to  know  Him  in 
all  His  loveliness  and  tenderness,  His  grace  and  truth.  But,  more  than  that, 
they  become — 2.  Active  ivorkers  for  Jesus.  John  modestly  records  Andrew's 
action  only ;  but  no  doubt  at  the  same  time  he  led  his  own  brother  James  to 
Jesus.  It  is  interesting  and  instructive  to  notice  that  no  sooner  did  these  two 
come  to  Christ  than  they  became  witnesses  to  Him.  They  are  the  first 
distinctively  gospel  preachers.  3.  A  notable  member  of  the  apostolic  band 
came  in  response  to  Andrew's  call.  Jesus  recognised  the  great  qualities  of  this 
man,  Simon,  son  of  Jona  (best  MSS.  John),  and  to  signalise  his  entrance  in  the 
service  of  the  kingdom  gave  him  a  new  name,  distinctive  of  the  prominent  and 
important  work  he  was  to  do.  But  there  is  nothing  in  this,  or  in  any  of  the 
gospel  narratives,  or  the  New  Testament  generally,  to  lead  us  to  suppose  that 
he  ever  occupied  a  position  analogous  to  that  given  him  in  mediaeval  Church 
history.  "  In  Church  history  St.  Peter  is  everything  and  St.  Andrew  nothing ; 
but  would  there  have  been  an  apostle  Peter  but  for  Andrew?"  (Plummer). 

III.  The  third  incident  is  also  noteworthy  in  an  especial  manner  from  this 
fact,  that  in  bringing  Philip  into  the  circle  of  the  disciples  Jesus  for  the  first 
time  issued  that  oft-repeated  direct  call,  "  Follow  Me."  1.  This  command  is  in 
the  Gospels  issued  only  by  our  Lord  Himself.  It  is  "  addressed  to  but  one 
outside  the  circle  of  the  apostles,  the  rich  young  man,  whom  Jesus  loved 
(Matt.  xix.  21,  etc.).  In  other  parts  of  the  New  Testament  it  is  used  but  once 
(Acts  xii.  8),  in  the  words  of  the  angel  to  Peter  "  (Watkins).  2.  This  word 
implies  that  now  there  is  a  new  centre  for  humanity — not  Moses,  not 
Jerusalem,  but  Christ  (i.  17;  iv.  23-26).  3.  Obedience  to  this  command  is  a 
test  of  genuine  Christianity  :  (1)  In  the  preacher  of  the  cross.  His  chief  duty 
is  to  direct,  like  John,  his  hearers  to  Christ,  and  to  be  able  to  say  like  St.  Paul, 
"  Be  ye  followers  of  me,  even  as  I  also  am  of  Christ  "  (1  Cor.  xi.  1).  (2)  Those 
who  hear  this  call  should,  like  Philip,  promptly  and  unhesitatingly  obey  it. 

HOMILET1C  NOTES. 

Leadership. — 1.  As    men    are    con-  selves  a  following  of  disciples,  more  or 

stituted  they  must  follow  some  leader  less  numerous,  and  exert  an  influence 

— are  drawn  by  some  power  to  choose  that  not  only  tells  on  human  history 

a   certain    direction   in   life.       2.  The  here,  but  extends  into  eternity.     We 

leaders  of  men  also  are  led.     They  too  cannot  compute  or  measure  the  results 

are   dominated   by   some    power,    not  for  good  and  for  evil  that  have  flowed 

themselves,    which   makes   either    for  from  the  activity  of  great  leaders  of 

righteousness  or  unrighteousness  ;  they  men    past  and  present.     3.  Therefore 

are    moved    either    by    principle     or  the    necessity    of     choosing    men    of 

caprice ;    they   are   swayed  either   by  principle,    unswerving    in    their    love 

the  desires  and  passions  of  their  lower  of    righteousness,    as    leaders    in    the 

nature,  or  by  reason    and  conscience.  social,  political,  and  ecclesiastic  spheres. 

And    so    much     power     have     those  For  if  they  be  not  men  of  principle, 

prominent   and    noteworthy   men    we  however     plausible     and    good     their 

call  leaders,  that  they  attract  to  them-  schemes  or  measures  may  seem,  some- 

54 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN. 


CHAP.   I. 


thing  will  lie  behind  that  will  vitiate 
all.  It  is  true  men  here  are  imperfect, 
and  much  of  evil  may  often  mingle 
with  what  is  good  ;  but  are  righteous- 
ness, truth,  benevolence,  principle,  the 
prominent  and  ruling  traits  in  the 
character  of  one  who  offers  himself  as 
a  leader  of  men,  then  let  them  rejoice, 
for  undoubtedly  such  a  one  is  heaven- 
sent. And  if  men  in  choosing  their 
leaders  fixed  on  such,  the  world  would 
speedily  be  happier  and  better.  4.  We 
believers  in  Christ  have  a  fixed  stan- 
dard by  which  men  may  be  tried  who 
offer  themselves  as  our  guides,  es- 
pecially in  things  religious.  Again 
and  again  St.  Paul  calls  on  his  converts 
to  follow  him  and  his  fellow- workers  ; 
but  he  shows  that  his  words  and 
actions  must  be  tested  by  the  ultimate 
standard,  "  Be  ye  followers  of  me, 
even  as  I  also  am  of  Christ  "  (1  Cor. 
xi.  1).  Here  is  the  standard 
to  which  our  leaders  should  be 
conformed,  especially  our  religious 
leaders.  And  as  the  mass  of  men 
in  the  present  state  of  the  world  still 
depend,  to  a  great  extent,  on  teachers 
and  guides,  prominent  human  leaders, 


it  is  greatly  to  be  desired  that  they 
should  be  led  in  choosing  them  to 
ascertain  in  how  far  they  conform 
to  the  perfect  pattern  given  us  in 
Christ.  "  He  is  our  example  that 
we  should  follow  in  His  steps" 
(1  Pet.  ii.  21).  He  called  His 
disciples  to  "  follow "  Him.  5.  And 
the  test  by  which  teachers  and  leaders 
in  the  religious  sphere  should  be  tried 
is  this  :  do  they  lead  those  who  come 
under  their  influence  to  follow  Christ 
Himself  ?  When  to  John  the  Baptist 
it  was  revealed  at  the  baptism  of  Jesus 
that  the  Son  of  Mary  was  indeed  no 
other  than  the  Son  of  God,  the 
promised  Messiah,  he  did  not  delay  to 
point  his  own  disciples  to  the  Lamb 
of  God,  so  that  "  they  followed  Jesus." 
This  is  the  spirit  of  all  faithful  teachers 
and  guides  in  the  Church.  "  Not  in 
the  words  which  man's  wisdom 
teacheth,"  but,  guided  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  therefore  "  in  demon- 
stration of  the  Spirit  and  of  power  " 
(1  Cor.  ii.  4),  they  point  men  to  Christ. 
They  forget  and  lose  themselves  in 
Him  whom  they  proclaim.  0,  si  sic 
omnes  ! 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


The  Peter  name.—' "  Thou  art  Simon,  son 
of  Jona ;  thou  shalt  be  called  Peter."  The 
apostle  received  this  grand  and  astonishing 
word  deep  in  his  heart.  It  revealed  to  him  a 
great  and  mysterious  destiny.  It  would  rise 
before  him  as  a  warning,  and  often  in 
reproach.  Always,  whatsoever  he  might  do, 
it  would  start  into  remembrance.  Ah !  what 
did  it  say  in  that  hour  of  his  fall  and  triple 
denial  ?  With  what  remorse  would  it  trans- 
pierce his  soul.  And  if  at  times  pride  laid 
hold  of  the  thought  of  this  great  vocation 
which  his  name  presaged,  how  would  he  then 
learn  in  his  weakness  that  God  alone  who 
called  him  to  this  destiny  could  give  him 
power  to  realise  it.  Brethren,  all  called  by 
Jesus  Christ  to  serve  and  follow  Him  as  Peter 
was,  what  name  would  your  Saviour  give  you 
were  He  present  now  in  our  midst  ?  Ah,  with- 
out doubt,  as  to  Simon,  a  name  which  would 
express  the  end  you  ought  to  press  toward, 
and.  the  new  character  you  ought  to  assume : 
to  you  who  are  yet  fearful  and  weak  in  your 
faith  a  name  which  would  express  firmness  ; 
to  you  who  are  besieged  by  temptations  that 
humiliate  you  a  name  expressive  of  the 
liberty  of  a  purified  soul ;  to  you  dominated 
by  obstinate  pride  and  ambition  a  name 


which  would  recall  you  to  humility,  to  the 
discipline  which  you  require.  Well  then, 
you  must  accept  and  lay  hold  of  this  glorious 
destiny ;  you  must  attain  to  this  end  ;  you 
must  respond  to  the  divine  will,  for  fear  lest, 
following  the  stern  words  of  Scripture,  you 
"  frustrate  the  grace  of  God  concerning 
you."  Simon,  remember  that  thou  art 
called  Peter.  Oh,  you  who  hear  me,  remember 
you  have  been  redeemed  by  the  Saviour! 
No,  you  were  not  made  for  this  life  only, 
to  be  entirely  absorbed  by  the  preoccupa- 
tions of  the  world,  by  those  dreams  of 
fortune,  of  glory,  and  of  egoistic  happiness. 
No,  you  are  not  made  for  that  inward 
servitude,  that  shameless  slavery  of  hidden 
passion  which  weakens  you,  paralyses  you, 
and  eats  away  the  substance  of  your  life  and 
your  moral  strength.  No,  my  sister,  you 
were  not  made  for  this  insensate  dissipation 
by  which  your  days  are  wasted,  for  those 
vain  dreams  of  vanity,  for  that  lying  homage, 
for  that  idolatry  which  is  so  pleasing  to  you. 
It  is  to  another  way,  to  another  aim,  which 
those  prayers  by  which  you  have  been  en- 
compassed have  called  you,  those  pure  and 
sweet  remembrances  of  a  Christian  child- 
hood, those  deep  emotions,  those  tears  at 

55 


CHAP.    I. 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


former  times  shed  at  the  Saviour's  feet,  those 
multiplied  warnings  sent  by  the  love  of  a 
faithful  God.  Christian  soul,  soul  redeemed 
by  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  called  to  eternal 
life,  awake,  throw  off  your  slave  chains,  and 
return  to  God,  who  is  willing  to  save  you. 
And  Thou,  Saviour  whose  love  is  so  faithful ; 
Thou  whose  gifts,  according  to  Thy  word, 
are  without  repentance  ;  Thou  who  dost  call 
and  who  dost  save,  who  dost  convert  and 
sanctify,  who  dost  commence  and  finish; 
Thou  who  dost  place  before  us  so  great  a 
destiny,  who  desirest  that  we  should  be  con- 
querors of  the  world  and  of  ourselves,  and 
inheritors  of  eternity,  citizens  of  heaven, 
kings  and  priests,  fulfil  in  us  Thy  will,  make 
us  submissive  to  Thy  holy  law,  and  in  place 
of  these  fleshly  hearts,  subject  to  vanity, 
give  us  new  hearts,  freed  from  evil  and 
consecrated  to  Thee  for  evermore. — Trans- 
lated from  Eug.  Bersier. 

"  To  live  unto  righteousness " — thus  alone 
to  the  honour  of  my  Saviour  and  Redeemer 
ought  I  to  live,  to  suffer,  to  die.  Such  a  life — 
a  new  life  in  righteousness — does  the  Saviour 
implant  in  all  His  own.  Has  it  begun  in  you 
to  germinate,  to  put  forth  buds,  to  flourish, 


this  new  spiritual  life  ?  Are  there  souls 
among  you  in  which  the  Holy  Ghost  has 
begun  His  work;  plants  of  righteousness 
who  to-day,  in  the  springtide  glow  of  their 
first  love  to  the  Saviour,  in  the  vernal  dress 
of  a  pure  youthhood  stand  before  the  Lord 
like  a  tree  covered  with  white,  fragrant 
blossom  ?  .  .  .  Oh  that  those  blossoms  of 
"  first  love "  may  not  fall  off  as  blighted 
blossoms,  but  may  ripen  into  fruit,  into 
"the  fruits  of  righteousness."  Oh  that  all 
who  hitherto  have  been  like  dry  wood  might 
yet  flourish  in  very  righteousness  and  holi- 
ness !  There  is  nothing  more  beautiful  on 
earth  than  a  son  or  daughter,  blooming  not 
alone  in  body,  but  also  in  soul,  flourishing 
before  God  in  innocency,  and  growing  up  by 
their  Saviour,  as  a  rose  which  has  climbed 
up  around  the  cross.  Oh  that  in  us  all,  even 
in  aged  hearts,  the  new  divine  life  once 
more  would  stir,  the  blossoms  of  godly  love 
would  finally  open,  the  fruits  of  righteous- 
ness would  yet  ripen,  by  which  the  Lord 
knows  His  own  !  That  would  indeed  be  a 
lovely  May  blossom,  a  most  blessed  spring- 
tide of  the  soul. — From  an  Easter  Address 
to  Catechumens,  Dr.  Karl  Geroh. 


MAIN  HOMILETIOS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses   45—51. 

Nathanael,  the  guileless  disciple. — Philip  of  Bethsaida,  on  receiving  the  divine 
call,  at  once  obeyed.  And  like  all  true  disciples  of  Jesus,  the  longer  he  com- 
panied  with  Him,  the  more  blessed  did  His  intercourse  become,  until  he  found 
Jesus  clearly  revealed  to  him  as  "  He  of  whom  Moses  in  the  law  and  the 
prophets  did  write."  And  like  all  other  true  disciples,  he  found  that  it  was 
impossible  to  keep  this  "  good  news  "  to  himself  alone.  He  must  make  it  known 
to  others.  Meeting  with  a  friend,  one  Nathanael,  an  inhabitant  of  the  village 
to  which  Jesus  was  going — Cana — he  told  him  the  joyful  news.  In  this 
Nathanael  a  type  of  man  meets  us  different  from  any  of  the  other  disciples  yet 
mentioned.  He  was  a  man  of  pious  disposition  and  devotional  feeling,  perhaps 
with  a  considerable  leaning  toward  Eabbinic  and  Pharisaic  ideas  concerning 
Messiah  and  His  kingdom  (ver.  46).  Above  all,  he  seems  to  have  been  a  man 
transparently  honest  and  open,  "  an  Israelite  indeed  without  guile."  Probably 
he  is  the  same  as  Bartholomew  (see  Explanatory  Notes).  It  is  easy  to  under- 
stand that  his  surname  might  be  son  of  Ptolemceus.  Under  the  name  Nathanael 
he  is  mentioned  only  once  again  (xxi.  2).  From  the  narrative  we  learn  that 
Nathanael  was  : — 

I.  A  true  Israelite  waiting  and  praying  for  "  the  consolation  of  Israel " 
(Luke  ii.  25). — 1.  Before  Philip  called  him  (ver.  48)  he  was  engaged,  apparently 
in  prayerful  meditation,  under  the  fig  tree.  This  fig  tree  was  most  likely  in  a 
retired  spot  in  his  garden  or  vineyard  (Luke  xiii.  6),  under  whose  shade  he 
retired  in  the  hot  March  day  for  uninterrupted  communion.  2.  What  his 
thoughts  were  precisely,  what  turn  they  took  on  that  particular  day,  is  not 
directly  revealed  ;  but  if  it  may  be  surmised  from  Philip's  words,  then  it  must 
have  been  on  that  supreme  subject  which  the  Mosaic  economy  with  its  sacrifices, 
and  the  prophets  in  their  predictions,  all  pointed  to.  In  spite  of  training  and 
prepossessions,  he  may  have  been  coming  to  realise  that  the  Messianic  hopes  of 
his  time  were  little  in  accord  with  what  was  revealed  in  the  law  and  prophets 

56 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:*  ST.   JOHN.  chap.  I. 


concerning  the  Messiah.  It  may  have  cost  him  a  pang  to  break  even  in  thought 
with  traditional  opinion ;  but  he  was  a  man  too  honest  and  sincere  not  to  follow 
the  guidance  of  truth,  when  it  was  clearly  revealed.  3.  There  may  have  been 
other  and  personal  thoughts  and  feelings,  personal  dealings  with  God,  secret  and 
solemn ;  but  this  question  of  questions  to  the  pious  Jew  would  not,  it  may  be 
safely  assumed,  be  far  away. 

II.  Nathanael  was  further  careful  in  discriminating  the  claims  of  one 
described  to  him  as  the  Messiah. — 1.  While  revolving  these  thoughts  in  his 
mind  his  friend  Philip,  evidently  brimful  of  intelligence  of  some  sort,  met  him. 
After  exchange  of  greetings,  and  inquiry  as  to  each  other's  doings,  Philip,  no 
doubt  without  delay,  spoke  on  the  subject  of  which  his  mind  and  heart  were 
full.  2.  Strange,  was  this  a  reply  to  his  prayers,  a  clearing  up  of  his  difficulties, 
the  realisation  of  his  hopes  1  What  did  Philip  say  1  "  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the 
son  of  Joseph  !  "  Oh,  impossible  !  Where  was  there  any  promise  regarding 
Messiah  connected  with  Nazareth  1 — above  all  places  Nazareth,  unnoted  in  the 
sacred  writings,  not  even  equal  to  his  own  Cana  !  Hence  his  in  part  dis- 
appointed and  melancholy,  in  part  pitying,  reply  to  his  more  simple  friend  : 
"  Can  any  good  thing  come  out  of  Nazareth  ? "  3.  But  his  simply  believing 
friend  is  not  to  be  daunted.  He  is  aware  of  his  own  inability  to  reason  this 
Nathanael  into  belief.  But  there  is  a  better  way,  a  way  sure  of  success.  So  he 
says  to  his  friend,  "  Come  and  see  ! "  The  best  counsel  that  could  have  been 
given.  The  weightiest  proof  of  Christianity  is  personal  experience  of  the 
blessedness  of  personal  knowledge  of  Christ,  and  of  participation  in  His  life.  In 
knowing  Him  in  reality  we  know  all.  Nathanael,  being  an  earnest  man  really 
seeking  for  truth,  did  not  answer :  "  What  need  !  He,  whatever  He  is,  cannot 
be  Messiah  if  He  is  from  Nazareth.  Is  not  Christ  to  be  born  at  Bethlehem  ?  " 
Like  the  honest  man  he  was,  he  would  not  take  information  on  so  momentous 
a  subject  on  second  hand,  he  would  see  for  himself.  There  might  be  a  mistake 
somewhere  ;  his  friend's  information  might  prove  to  be  defective.  He  would  see 
this  new  claimant  of  the  Messiahship.  The  wonderful  things  related  by  Philip 
as  having  been  said  by  John  the  Baptist  (an  upright,  incorruptible  man,  a  true 
prophet  !)  might  be  the  prelude  to  some  extraordinary  revelation.  If  however 
this  Jesus  were  not  what  He  apparently  claimed  to  be,  it  would  be  a  friend's 
duty  to  seek  to  rescue  Philip  from  his  delusion. 

III.  Nathanael's  earnest  confession. — 1.  As  the  two  friends  came  into  the 
presence  of  Jesus,  Nathanael  was  astonished  at  the  greeting  which  fell  on  his 
ears :  "  Behold  an  Israelite  indeed,"  etc.  He  saw  his  character  laid  bare  in  a 
sentence.  We  are  not  to  think  that  there  was  anything  like  a  want  of  modesty 
in  Nathanael  accepting  without  disclaimer  this  description  of  himself.  It  was 
the  goal  of  character  he  had  set  before  him,  to  be  an  earnest,  candid  seeker  after 
truth.  There  was  no  false  modesty  about  the  man,  any  more  than  there  was 
about  the  apostle  Paul  when  he  said,  "  I  have  lived  in  all  good  conscience,"  etc. 
(Acts  xxiii.  1).  "  Whence  knowest  Thou  me?"  is  his  astonished  inquiry.  2. 
The  answer  fills  him  with  still  deeper  surprise,  even  with  awe,  finally  deepening 
to  conviction.  Who  was  this  whose  eye  marked  him  in  his  most  secret  moments, 
who  penetrated  into  the  recesses  of  his  thought,  and  read  at  a  glance  character 
and  life  (ver.  47)  1  This  must  be  none  other  than  the  Searcher  of  hearts 
(1  Sam.  xvi.  7  ;  1  Chron.  xxviii.  9 ;  Jer.  xvii.  10).  Philip's  words,  this  strange 
greeting  and  stranger  reading  of  his  life,  and  the  personal  authority  Jesus  exerted 
on  all  good  and  earnest  men  who  came  under  His  influence,  combined  with 
overwhelming  force  to  carry  home  conviction  to  the  mind  and  heart  of  Nathanael, 
so  that  in  assurance  and  reverence  he  cried,  "  Babbi,  Thou  art  the  Son  of  God," 
etc.  (ver.  49).  3.  The  answer  of  Jesus  is  a  gracious  promise  of  a  higher  revelation 
still  of  His  Messiahship   to  all   His  disciples — a  promise  first   made  in   type 

57 


chap.  i.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN. 


at  Bethel.     Through  Christ's  incarr.ation  the  stairway  uniting  earth  and  heaven, 

humanity  and  God,  was  completed,  and  through  "  the  new  and  living  way "  all 
blessings,  angelic  and  others,  would  come  to  man  (ver.  51). 

HOMILETIC  NOTES. 

Ver.    48.    Spiritual    conflict.  —  The  there  lay  the  rosy  beams  of  a  new  day, 

Jews,    like   other    Easterns,   loved   to  the  light  of  eternity.     2.  It  must  have 

meditate  and  study  the  sacred   word  been  a  great  hour  that  then  struck  for 

under   the  shadow  of   some  spreading  him,  when  the    Lord,  reminding  him 

tree ;  to  engage  in  prayer  and  spiritual  of  an  inward  condition,  and  not  of  an 

conflict    (as   our    great   Example   did,  external  circumstance  merely,  unveiled 

Luke  xxii.  39),  or  in  intercourse  with  to  himself  the  astonished  and  agitated 

friends  in  some  quiet   retreat,   under  man  :    "  I  saw  thee"  etc.     No,  it  was 

the  open  heaven,  and  surrounded  by  no  hour  occupied  by  vain  dreaming,  by 

the  sights  and  sounds  of   nature.     1.  impure  imaginings  or  burning  desires 

There  must    have   been    some   special  for   honour,    that    had    passed    there, 

conflict,  or  the  debating  of  some  special  "  under    the    fig  tree,"    beneath    the 

question,  in  the  mind  of  Nathanael  on  watchful  gaze  of  the  Lord.     The  greet- 

this  particular  occasion,  as  the  sequel  ing,  "  Behold  an  Israelite,"  etc.,  points 

shows — something   known   to    himself  to  a  sacred,  decisive  occurrence  in  the 

and  to  God  alone.     2.  Every  earnest  breast  of   Nathanael.      3,    The   name 

honest  man  will,  like  Nathanael,  have  Israelite,  when  all  called  Israel  were 

his   fig   tree,  or   its   equivalent,  some  not    really    of    Israel,    speaks    of    a 

haven  of    quiet  retreat  in  which  the  spiritual  affinity  with  Jacob.     4.  The 

momentous  questions  of  life,   of  time  phrase  In  whom  is  no  guile  refers  to 

and  eternity,  may  occupy  the  mind  in  such  as  follow  the  footsteps  of  David, 

meditation  and  prayer.     And  it  is  well  as  the  latter   from  individual  experi- 

for    men    to   be    honest,    thoroughly  ence     cried,     "  Blessed    is    the    man 

guileless  and  honest,  with  themselves  whose  transgression  is  forgiven,"  etc. 

at   such  times ;  for  there   is  Another  (Ps.  xxxii.     1-5),    because   the    secret 

present,   though    unseen,    who   marks  curse  is  removed — all  guile  freely  and 

each   secret  thought,    etc.  fully     confessed     and     repented     of. 

"He  sees  my  wants,  allavs  my  fears,  Nathanael    was     an     Israelite    indeed 

And  counts  and  treasures  up  my  tears."  because  in  solitariness  he  had  striven 

^     .,                ,,.    ._  .,          .         .    _  like  Israel,  confessed  and  repented  like 

So  it  was  with  Nathanael,  and   how  David       And   behoM  the          ti       of 

blessed  was  the  result !  3.  But  whether  the  Lord  is  the  assurance  0f  forgive- 
men  follow  Nathanael  s  example  or  ness,  is  the  proclamation  of  a  new  con- 
not,  the  Searcher  of  hearts  can  read  dition  in  tndh  freedom  and  activity. 
their  secret  thoughts.  What  would  He  Brethren,  the  Israelite  indeed  finds, 
say  to  us  were,  we  to  come  before  Him  acknowledges,  and  prays  to  the  true 
now  what  will  He  say  when  we  do  Ki  of  Israel>  «  Rabbi>  Thou  art  the 
stand  before  Him?  In  view  of  this,  Son  of  God?  Thou  arfc  the  Ki  of 
"what  manner  of  persons  ought  ye  to  Israel ,  »_Dr,  Rm  Kdaei 
be,"  etc.  (2  Pet.  iii.  10-14).  ¥ 

Vers.  50,  51.  Ancient  visions  realised. 

Vers.  45-49.  Natural  and  spiritual  — Jesus  said  to  Nathanael,  "  Because  I 

growth. — 1.  The  law  of  nature  is  said  said  unto  thee,  I  saw  thee  under  the 

to   be  development ;    in   the  spiritual  fig  tree,"  etc.     Jacob's  dream   of  the 

world  it  is  called  the  new  birth.     In  heavenly  ladder  has  become  a  reality, 

the  stillness,  but  not  without  pain,  does  The  Son  of  man  unites  and  reconciles 

the  New  Man  behold  the  light  of  a  new  heaven  and  earth  ;  His  angels  carry  the 

day.     On  Nathanael's  forehead,  as  he  needs  and  prayers  of  believers  up,  and 

tarried  in  loneliness  under  the  fig  tree,  bring  answers  and  aid  down,  this  ladder. 

58 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.  I. 


How  the  water  becomes  wine  ?  No, 
thou  wilt  see  greater  things  than 
these !  Thou  wilt  see  how  Jesus 
comes  with  "water  and  blood";  how 
He  who  dies  on  the  cross  rises  from 
the  grave  and  ascends  into  heaven  ! 
And  greater  still  than  this,  thou  wilt 
at  last  be  like  Him,  changed  into  His 


image  from  one  degree  of  glory  to 
another.  With  such  sacred  prospects 
Nathanael  begins  his  public  career. 
And  Nathanael's  outward  activity  as 
an  apostle  would  have  been  neither  so 
hidden  nor  so  fruitful,  had  not  his  life 
as  a  disciple  been  so  retiring  and  re- 
ceptive . — Idem. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Phases  of  discipleship.  —  The  closing 
verses  of  this  chapter  carry  us  back  to  the 
early  dawn  of  Christianity,  and  it  is  there 
we  shall  learn  much  concerning  the  true 
method  of  regarding  it  and  the  law  of  its 
progress.  And  one  of  the  first  things  that 
strikes  us  is  that  while  each  disciple  was 
led  to  Jesus  in  a  different  way,  while  each 
had  different  peculiarities  of  temperament 
and  forms  of  belief,  yet  they  each  found  in 
Christ  Him  for  whom  their  souls  had  been 
longing.  John  and  Andrew,  the  two 
disciples  of  the  Baptist,  heard  their  master 
speak  of  Christ  as  the  "  Lamb  of  God," 
and  at  once  followed  Him.  The  words  of 
the  stern  prophet  of  the  wilderness  having 
roused  in  them  the  sense  of  sin,  they  sought 
the  Sin-bearer,  and  believed  in  Jesus  as  the 
One  who  should  fulfil  that  deep  necessity. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  impetuous  Peter, 
expecting  the  Messiah,  and  eager  for  His 
advent,  was  led  by  his  brother  to  Christ, 
and  with  characteristic  ardour  followed 
Him.  Philip,  called  by  Christ  Himself, 
feeling  His  mighty  and  mysterious  influence, 
advanced  in  faith  beyond  them  all,  and 
proclaimed  that  that  was  He  of  whom 
prophecy  for  ages  had  been  telling.  And 
Nathanael,  with  his  reflective,  devout,  guile- 
less nature,  found  One  who  had  read  his 
devotional  thoughts,  and  confessed  Him  to 
be  the  Son  of  God.  Led  by  such  different 
experiences,  their  faith  was  simply  this : 
He  whom  their  own  spirits  bad  been  looking 
for  bad  come,  and  because  He  fulfilled  their 
necessities  they  believed  He  was  the  Christ. 
Marked  by  these  strong  differences  of 
temperament,  which  always  give  rise  to 
different  forms  of  belief,  they  had  yet  one 
faith  in  common — faith  in  the  living  Christ. 
It  was  in  that  quiet  simplicity,  with  that 
simple  belief  in  a  personal  Saviour,  that  the 
great  Christian  age  began. — E.  L.  Hull,  B.A. 

"  Thou  shalt  see  greater  things  than  these." 
— "  And  He  said  unto  him,  Verily,  verily,  I 
say  unto  you,  Hereafter  ye  shall  see  heaven 
open,"  etc.  The  reference  here  seems  to  be 
to  the  vision  of  Jacob,  and  that  vision  helps 
us  to  understand  Christ's  meaning.  Christ 
declares  the  ancient  dream  to  be  fulfilled 
by  faith  in  Him.  The  patriarch  at  Bethel 
found  God  near  to  him  as  his  friend  and 
guide,  found  the  earth  where  he  lay  '*  a  dread- 


ful place,"  and  found  the  spiritual  world 
close  to  him.  These  three  things  are  actually 
realised  by  Christian  faith — these  are  the 
"greater  things  "  that  follow  its  dawning  : — 

1.  The  felt  presence  of  God. — As  to  Jacob 
heaven  was  opened  and  the  Eternal  near, 
so  to  the  Christian  heaven  is  unveiled 
and  God  revealed.  To  the  eye  of  faith  the 
Son  of  man  becomes  the  ladder  between 
earth  and  heaven  on  which  the  angels  of 
God  ascend  and  descend.  This  is  the  con- 
summation of  faith.  It  does  not  come 
suddenly,  but  as  the  soul  advances  in  the 
divine  life,  sin's  harsh  discords  die,  the 
clouds  which  once  veiled  the  heaven  roll 
away,  disclosing  the  smile  of  love  and  pity 
in  the  eternal  countenance,  and  the  believer 
walks  with  God  as  with  a  friend. 

2.  The  sacredness  of  life. — "  And  Jacob  was 
afraid  and  said,"  etc.  The  dream  vision 
made  him  feel  the  sacredness  of  life. 
Again,  this  suggests  a  result  of  faith.  Man 
naturally  feels  his  nature  defiled ;  faith  in 
Christ,  who  wore  it,  transforms  it  into  a 
sacred  thing.  In  the  light  of  that  faith  all 
life  becomes  glorified. 

3.  Union  with  the  angelic  world. — "The 
angels  of  God  ascending,"  etc.  To  the 
unbeliever  that  world  is  a  myth — he  sees 
nothing  beyond  the  material  sphere ;  but 
were  he  convinced  of  its  existence  the  belief 
would  be  terrible.  We  feel  instinctively 
that  sin  has  excluded  us  from  that  "  glorious 
brotherhood."  But  Christ  brings  us  into  it 
once  more.  Faith  sees  in  Him  the  Son  of 
man  as  our  brother  and  representative  there, 
uniting  us  with  "  the  principalities  and 
powers  in  the  heavenly  places." 

We  have  greater  things  yet  to  see. 
Another  world  is  dawning,  its  sights  and 
sounds  are  near.  Nothing  but  the  veil  of 
the  body  hides  us  from  its  scenes.  We  long 
sometimes  for  the  land  of  constant  spring, 
of  mountain  grandeur,  and  southern  beauty. 
My  friends,  great  lands  are  coming.  We 
long  for  the  glorious  companionships  of  the 
past,  of  the  great  dead,  of  our  own  friends  ; 
we  shall  know  them  if  we  are  "  counted 
worthy  to  obtain  that  world."  Therefore 
fight  on.  There  are  many  weary  conflicts 
before  you  yet,  but  "add  to  your  faith 
patience,"  and  you  shall  see  the  "  greater 
things  "  when  the  lamps  of  faith  and  hope 
expire  in  the  eternal  light  of  heaven. — Idem. 

59 


chap.  ii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


PAET    II.    (b.) 

II.  The  Manifestation  of  the  Glory  of  the  Word  in  Signs  among  His 
own  People  in  the  Region  of  His  Home,  and  among  many  of  His 
Countrymen  in  Jerusalem. 

1.  At  Cana  of  Galilee. — The  water  made  wine.  Jesus  manifests  His  power 
in  the  realm  of  nature  (vers.  1-11). 

2.  In  His  public  ministry  at  Jerusalem. — (1)  In  the  temple  He  shows  His 
supremacy  as  the  Son  in  the  Father's  house  (vers.  12-17) ;  (2)  in  a  prophetic 
sign  (vers.  18-22)  ;  (3)  in  miracles  of  beneficence  (vers.  23-25). 

First  Year  of  Public  Ministry 

Chaps,  ii. — iv.  54. — Place  in  Synoptic  history  :  follows  Matt.  iv.  11 ;  Mark  i. 
13-15;  Lukeiv.  13-30. 

Chap.  ii. — To  14th  Nisan — i.e.  end  of  March,  A.u.c.  781,  a.d.  28. 


CHAPTER    II. 

EXPLANATORY  AND   CRITICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  rr}  ijfxipq.  rrj  Tplrrj. — This  note  of  time  refers  to  i.  43,  44.  He  was  evidently  in 
Galilee  when  He  found  Philip  ;  thus  the  third  day  will  mean  the  third  after  His  arrival  in 
Galilee.  K  a  v  a. — There  are  two  modern  sites  which  dispute  the  title  to  be  the  Cana  of  St.  John. 
Robinson,  rejecting  the  traditionally  accepted  Kefr  Kenna  (about  an  hour  and  a  half  from 
Nazareth),  fixed  on  a  village  lying  to  the  north-east  of  Nazareth,  and  about  two  hours  distant, 
called  Cana  El  Jelil,  i.e.  Cana  of  Galilee.  But  recent  exploration  is  tending  to  vindicate  the 
claims  of  Kefr  Kenna.  Probably  further  careful  investigation  will  be  needed  before  a  final 
decision  can  be  arrived  at.  It  was  called  of  Galilee  to  distinguish  it  from  other  Canas — 
notably  one  in  Asher's  territory  (Josh.  xix.  28).  The  mother  of  Jesus  was  there. — There  was 
evidently  close  friendship,  if  not  relationship,  between  Mary  and  the  family  in  which  the 
marriage  was  to  take  place.  Mary  was  evidently  more  than  a  guest  merely  (ver.  3).  She 
may  have  been  resident  in  the  village  at  this  juncture,  as  she  seems  to  have  left  Nazareth  at 
the  time  of  the  incident  recorded  in  Mark  vi.  1-6,  see  ver.  3  especially. 

Ver.  2.  And  both  Jesus  was  called,  etc. — Probably  they  were  invited  after  all  the  other 
invitations  had  been  made.  Their  arrival  was  therefore  likely  unanticipated.  But  as 
Nathanael  was  of  Cana,  and  Mary  was  either  resident  there  or  intimately  acquainted  with 
some  of  the  people,  it  is  easy  to  understand  how  the  little  company  were  asked  to  be  present, 
though  late.  The  disciples  were  the  five  mentioned  in  chapter  i. — John,  Andrew,  Peter, 
Philip,  and  Nathanael. 

Ver.  4.  rl  i/nol  /cat  <rol. — What  is  there  to  Me  and  to  thee  ?  What  is  common  to  us  in  this 
matter  1  (yty\  lab  rra — 2  Sam.  xvi.  10,  Judges  xi.  12,  etc. :  Wordsworth,  Greek  Testament.) 
yvvai. — Woman.  The  word  indicates  no  want  of  esteem,  nor  does  it  even  imply  reproach 
(see  xix.  26,  xx.  13,  15 ;  Luke  xiii.  12)  ;  but,  taken  in  connection  with  the  preceding  words 
and  with  what  follows,  it  means  less  than  p^rnp,  mother.  Here  our  Lord  implied  that  He 
stood  now  in  a  different  relationship  to  Mary  than  the  old  one  (Luke  ii.  51).  He  had  assumed 
His  Messianic  office,  and  must  now  be  thought  of  first  and  foremost  as  the  Lord  of  Mary. 
She,  as  all  others  of  humankind,  must  now  honour  and  obey  Him.  Thus  He  says,  oxi-trw 
^k€l  i]  ibpa  fiov. — Mine  hour,  etc.  Even  Mary  will  not  be  permitted  to  direct  His  activity. 
"  The  times  and  seasons  "  are  for  Him  to  determine  in  accordance  with  His  Father's  will. 
otiirci)  is  more  than  no.  It  implied  the  possibility,  and  more,  of  Jesus  doing  something  in 
His  own  time.  Mary  seized  on  this ;  and  whilst  realising  that  her  request  would  be  granted 
otherwise  than  as  she  wished,  yet  this  word  announced  that  help  would  be  forthcoming. 
Therefore  she  confidently  said  to  the  servants  (ver.  5),  "  Whatsoever  He  saith,"  etc. 

Vers.  6,  7.  Six  waterpots,  etc. — Large  stone  jars,  containing  two  or  three  firkins  (fierpnT^). 
The  metrites  is  used  for  the  Hebrew  "bath"  (2  Chron.  iv.  5),  equal  to  nearly  nine  gallons. 
Thus  each  waterpot  would  contain  somewhere  between  18  and  25  gallons,  and  the  whole 

60 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  ii. 


six  about  130  gallons.  Purifying. — The  ceremonial  injunctions  as  to  which  were  strictly 
attended  to  by  pious  Israelites  (Mark  vii.  3,  4 ;  Matt.  xv.  2 ;  Luke  xi.  38).  The  jars  were 
apparently  wholly  or  partly  empty.  The  Servants,  not  the  disciples,  were  employed.  Thus 
there  could  be  no  suspicion  of  collusion. 

Ver.  8.  The  Governor  (or  Master)  of  the  feast. — He  was  probably  one  of  the  friends  of  the 
bridegroom,  appointed  to  see  that  the  guests  were  served,  etc.  This  is  evident  from  his 
familiarity  with  the  bridegroom  (ver.  10). 

Ver.  9.  r6  tidwp  olvov  yeyevytitvov. — "The  water  which  had  become  wine."  Luther: 
"  The  wine  which  had  been  water."  This  is  evidently  intended  as  a  definite  statement  of  a 
fact. 

Ver.  10.  When  men  have  well  drunk. — The  phrase  does  not  refer  to  the  company  at  the 
marriage  feast.  We  cannot  imagine  Jesus  remaining  among  drunken  people,  and  even 
ministering  to  their  folly.  The  remark  seems  to  have  been  a  kind  of  "  saw,"  referring  to 
a  mean  custom  practised  by  stingy  people.  It  serves  to  call  attention  to  the  fact,  and  for 
that  purpose  is  introduced  here. 

Ver.  11.  This  beginning  of  signs  did  Jesus  in  Cana,  etc. — A  clear  definite  sentence  marking 
out  this  as  the  first  of  His  miracles — not  the  first  wrought  in  Cana  merely. 

Ver.  12.  Capernaum. — Cod.  K,  B,  read  Ka<pap  vaot/x,  i.e.  the  kaphar  or  village  of  Nahum. 
Two  sites  especially  have  been  fixed  upon  as  the  best  representatives  of  the  ancient 
Capernaum.  The  ruins  at  Tell  Hum  are  now  considered  to  have  the  best  claim  to  represent 
the  Saviour's  city.  His  brethren. — The  controversies  which  have  raged  round  this  subject 
have  centred  on  the  question  of  the  perpetual  virginity  of  Mary.  Setting  aside  the  conjecture 
of  Jerome,  that  these  brethren  were  in  reality  first  cousins,  children  of  Mary  (the  wife  of 
Cleophas,  xix.  25),  sister  of  our  Lord's  mother,  as  incapable  of  being  sufficiently  proved,  there 
are  two  positions  which  should  be  noted :  (1)  that  of  Helvidius,  that  the  brethren  are 
actual  brothers,  the  sons  of  Joseph  and  Mary ;  and  (2)  that  of  Epiphanius,  that  these 
brethren  were  children  of  Joseph  by  a  former  marriage.  But  as  the  latter  position  rests 
for  its  proof  only  on  the  statement  of  an  apocryphal  gospel,  those  who  do  not  feel  it 
necessary  to  maintain  the  somewhat  sentimental  notion  of  Mary's  perpetual  virginity  will  be 
shut  up  to  accept  the  position  of  Helvidius.  Indeed  in  this  casual  mention  of  our  Lord's 
brethren  may  be  found  an  indirect  confirmation  of  His  recognition  of  the  sanctity  of  lawful 
marriage.  Dr.  Reynolds  well  says  :  "  Christ,  who  honoured  marriage  by  His  first  display  of 
miraculous  power,  and  this  at  the  suggestion  of  His  own  mother,  and  in  the  society  of  those 
who  passed  undoubtedly  as  His  brothers,  would  not  feel  that  the  faintest  shadow  of  a  shade 
fell  on  the  lofty  purity  of  His  mother  by  this  hypothesis."     (But  see  Horn.  Note  on  vii.  3.) 

Vers.  12,  13.  These  verses  furnish  us,  in  connection  with  vers.  20,  21,  an  important  time- 
note  {vide  in  loc).  It  was  the  first  year  of  our  Lord's  public  ministry,  i.e.,  according  to  the 
best  authorities,  A.D.  28,  and  in  that  year  the  15th  Nisan  fell  on  March  30th.  Caspari  gives 
the  following  dates  :  Baptism  by  John,  February  1st  (about)  ;  return  to  Bethania,  forty 
days  later  (about  March  12th)  ;  Cana,  March  15th ;  Capernaum,  March  17th  ;  Jerusalem, 
March  29th  (14th  Nisan). 

Vers.  14-16.  "  The  same  or  a  similar  fact  is  narrated  by  the  Synoptists  on  the  occasion  of 
the  last  passover  (Matt.  xxi.  12-16,  etc.).  Here,  then,  there  are  three  cases  possible:  either 
the  Lord  performed  the  cleansing  of  the  sanctuary  twice,  or  He  did  so  only  once  at  the 
beginning  of  His  ministry ;  or,  finally,  only  once,  but  at  the  end  of  His  ministry.  No  slight 
grounds  may  be  adduced  in  favour  of  the  repetition.  The  cleansing  of  the  sanctuary  was  a 
symbolical  act,  by  which  our  Lord  represented  that  which  He  desired,  and  at  which  He 
aimed  ;  it  was  thus  entirely  in  place  at  the  very  outset  of  His  public  ministry,  and  equally  so 
at  the  close  of  His  labours."  Probably  John  and  Andrew  alone  accompanied  our  Lord  to 
Jerusalem  on  this  occasion,  the  other  disciples  remaining  in  Galilee  until  their  final  call 
(Luke  vi.  13).  Thus  we  can  understand  why  John  alone  narrates  this  first  cleansing,  and  the 
Synoptists  only  the  second.  A  reason  why  John  especially  accompanied  Him  on  this  occasion 
may  be  found  in  xviii.  15  (vide  Introduction).  At  these  great  feasts  a  stock-market  was 
held  in  the  court  of  the  Gentiles  ;  and  it  may  be  that  the  moneychangers  were  driven  even 
into  the  court  of  the  people  of  Israel,  which  was  held  to  be  almost  as  sacred  as  the  sanctuary. 
Changers  of  money,  who  exchanged  current  and  foreign  moneys  for  the  sacred  half-shekel, 
in  which  alone  the  customary  annual  temple  tax  required  from  every  adult  Israelite  could 
be  paid.  A  scourge  of  small  cords. — crxoiviov  =  a  cord  made  of  bulrushes — from  the  litter 
scattered  about  the  court.  And  He  said  to  those  who  sold  doves,  etc. — Our  Lord  did  not  wish 
to  cause  the  traders  any  loss.  This  traffic  was  necessary ;  but  it  was  not  to  be  carried  on  in 
His  Father's  house.  The  reason  why  our  Lord  was  not  interfered  with  in  this  striking  and 
bold  action  was  the  fact  that  all  the  pious,  and  even  the  ceremonial  Israelites,  secretly  acknow- 
ledged that  He  was  right.  Temple  here  =  lepSv ,  i.e.  especially  the  outer  courts,  not  vaos, 
the  sanctuary. 

Ver.  17.  "The  zeal  of  Thine  house  shall  eat  Me  up"  (Ps.  lxix.  9). — Westcott  points  out 
here,  "on the  occasion  of  the  first  public  act  of  Christ,  as  throughout  St.  John,  the  double 
effect  of  the  act  on  those  who  already  believed,  and  on  those  who  were  resolutely  unbeliev- 

Gl 


chap.  ii.  HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


ing."  It  is  written. — yeypa/x/j.4uov  k<niv—  instead  of  the  simpler  y£y pairTcu.  KarcupdyeTaL  /xe 
— not  in  reference  to  Christ's  passion,  but  to  His  present  burning,  consuming  desire  for  His 
Father's  honour,  and  the  honour  of  His  Father's  house. 

Ver.  18.  The  disciples  saw  in  Christ's  action  the  fulfilment  of  the  old  Scripture,  the  Jews 
an  excuse  for  a  further  demand  for  a  sign. 

Ver.  19.  Destroy  this  temple,  etc. — The  reference  is  at  first  sight  mysterious,  especially 
when  taken  in  connection  with  the  Evangelist's  explanation  in  ver.  21.  But  the  difficulty 
is,  in  part  at  least,  cleared  up  when  we  remember  that  the  actual  temple  which  Jesus  had 
just  cleansed  was  the  visible  expression  of  the  consecration  of  God's  ancient  people  to  His 
service  and  worship,  and  of  His  dwelling  with  and  in  His  people  (Ezek.  xliii.  7).  That 
ancient  spiritual  temple  the  Jews  would  destroy  ;  but  by  His  death  and  resurrection  Jesus 
would  found  and  raise,  to  be  eternally  enduring,  His  Church,  which  is  indeed  His  mystical 
body.  And  it  is  this  temple  of  which  He  speaks — His  Church  including  that  of  patriarch  and 
prophet — built  now  upon  a  foundation  which  cannot  be  moved  (1  Pet.  ii.  1-10 ;  Matt.  xxii. 
2-14,  xxiii.  38).  I  will,  etc.  (x.  17,  18,  etc.). — The  Jews  twisted  this  saying  of  our  Lord,  and 
accused  Him  of  declaring  that  He  would  destroy  the  material  temple.  The  utterance  seems 
to  have  made  a  deep  impression.  It  formed  the  basis  of  Christ's  accusation  before  Caiaphas 
(Matt.  xxvi.  61)  ;  and  Stephen's  enemies  accused  him  of  repeating  this  saying  (Acts  vi.  13, 14). 
Thus  the  historical  accuracy  of  the  saying  is  established. 

Ver.  20.  The  temple  was  not  then  completed ;  but  it  had  taken  forty-six  years  to  bring  it 
to  the  point  of  completion  at  which  it  then  stood.  "  Herod  the  Great  began  to  restore  the 
temple  in  B.C.  20  [Jos.,  B.  J.,  i.  21  (16),  i.:  comp.  Antiq.,  xv.  11  (14),  i.],  and  the  design  was 
completed  by  Herod  Agrippa  a.d.  64"  (Westcott). 

Ver.  21.  He  spake,  etc. — Not  understood  at  first,  the  saying  afterward  became  clear  to  the 
disciples  (comp.  xii.  16).  He — e/cetros  —is  emphatic.  The  temple  of  His  body. — I.e.  "  the  temple 
defined  to  be  His  body  "  (Westcott)  (1  Cor.  vi.  19,  etc.). 

Ver.  22.  When  therefore  He  was  raised  from  the  dead,  etc. — Raised  by  the  power  of  God 
(Gal.  i.  1,  etc.).  Remembered  in  accordance  with  the  promise  afterward  given  (xiv.  26). 
They  believed  the  scripture,  etc. — Usually  this  phrase  refers  to  some  particular  passage. 
Doubtless  here  the  reference  is  to  those  passages  in  the  writings  of  psalmists  and  prophets 
which  foretold  Christ's  sufferings  and  death,  the  glory  of  the  Church  of  the  latter  days, 
etc.,  which  the  disciples  were  "  slow  of  heart  to  believe  "  before  the  Resurrection  and  Pente- 
cost (Luke  xxiv.  25-27). 

Ver.  23.  Now  when  He  was  in  Jerusalem  at  the  passover,  etc. — The  date  of  this  passoveris 
probably  A.u.C.  781,  i.e.  a.d.  28.  At  the  feast  (ev  ry  ird<rxa)- — T.e.  during  the  whole  period  of 
the  feast  of  unleavened  bread.  Many  believed  on  His  name,  etc. — Belief  in  His  Messiahship 
is  evidently  intended  ;  but  the  reference  to  "  the  signs  which  He  did  "  shows  that  their 
"  belief  "  was  probably  not  of  a  deep  abiding  nature.  It  was  a  Jewish  faith,  and  was  founded 
on  that  which  will  strengthen  true  faith,  but  will  not  beget  it.  Their  faith  rested  ou  the  outer 
acts  merely,  and  was  thus  imperfect,  and  perhaps  in  many  cases  evanescent.  "  The  incidental 
notice  of  these  signs  (vii.  31,  xi.  47,  etc.)  is  an  unquestionable  proof  that  St.  John  does  not  aim 
at  giving  an  exhaustive  record  of  all  he  knew  "  (Westcott).     See  also  Mark  iii.  10,  etc. 

Ver.  24.  He  knew. — He  is  emphatic.  He  Himself  knew,  etc.  He  did  not  commit  (iirLffrevev, 
believe).  "As  they  did  not  give  themselves  morally  to  Him,  He  did  not  give  Himself 
morally  to  them  "  (Luthardt).  He  knew  all,  etc.  As  He  read  the  heart  of  Nicodemus,  so  He 
read  the  hearts  of  these  people. 

Ver.  25.  And  because  He  needed  not,  etc. — He  did  not  require  that  men  should  bring  Him 
testimonials  of  character,  as  it  were,  from  their  fellows  before  He  would  commit  Himself  to 
them.  He  Himself  knew  what  was  in  man.  He  is,  indeed,  the  searcher  of  hearts,  etc. 
(Jer.  xvii.  10,  etc.). 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—11. 

Three  stoops  of  faith. — Shortly  before  our  Redeemer  had  gathered  round  Him 
a  small  company  of  disciples.  To  them  it  was  truly  advantageous  that  they 
were  witnesses  of  this  first  miracle.  They  had  believed  Christ's  word,  but 
now  that  they  saw  His  glory  manifested  in  miracle  it  was  like  oil  on  the  fire  of 
their  faith,  so  that  they  began  more  earnestly  to  trust  Him.  Their  reverence 
for  Him  was  strengthened,  and  they  were  more  fully  convinced  that  He  was  the 
Redeemer  sent  of  God.  It  is  truly  a  blessed  result  which  the  Holy  Ghost 
records  as  the  outcome  of  this  history.  It  is  an  indication  to  us  how  we  may 
thereby  permit  the  same  blessed  fruit  to  be  produced  in  us.  The  great  end  of 
this  miracle  is  that  we  should  be  led  to  faith  in  the  Saviour,  who  in  it  showed 

62 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN.  chap.  ii. 


forth  His  glory.  Jesus  shows  forth  His  glory  by  many  signs  and  wonders — 
does  that  which  far  surpasses  the  power  of  mortals.  He  calls  into  being  what  is 
not ;  changes  water  into  wine ;  changes  the  stony  heart  of  the  sinner.  He 
shows  that  His  counsel  in  many  ways  is  wonderful,  and  carries  it  through 
gloriously.  He  gives  us  more  than  we  ask  for — blesses  us  in  time  of  need.  This 
He  does  not  generally  and  universally  only.  He  does  it  in  the  case  of  the 
individual.     To  what  should  this  prompt  us  ?     To  faith,  etc. 

In  our  consideration  of  this  gospel  history  we  shall  find  three  immovable 
stays  of  faith  in  Christ,  as  we  see  in  it  proofs  of  the — 1.  Absolute  omnipotence ; 
2.  Divine  wisdom  ;  3.  Unspeakable  goodness  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Faith  in  Christ 
stands  on  no  sandy,  insecure  foundation :  it  rests  on  many  great  and  irrefragable 
proofs,  which  remain  unshaken.  If  we  attend  to  those  in  our  gospel  to-day, 
therefore,  we  find — 

I.  The  absolute  omnipotence  of  Jesus. — This  He  proved  in  the  miracle. 
There  is  a  considerable  period  of  time  elapses  in  the  order  of  nature  ere  the 
fruitful  moisture  of  the  earth  circulates  through  the  vine-stem  and  the  branches, 
is  distilled  in  the  grapes  by  the  sun,  and  thus  by  degrees  is  transformed  into 
wine.  Days,  weeks,  months  go  by  often  whilst  the  husbandman  waits.  But 
the  Loid  who  works  as  He  pleases  (Ps.  cxv.  3)  "speaks  and  it  is  done" 
(Ps.  xxxiii.  9),  etc.  Through  sin  we  are  among  the  number  of  those  creatures 
who  are  most  feeble.  Want,  trial,  misery  touch  us.  Now  wine  fails ;  now  even 
water.  Now  we  fail  within ;  again  without.  Now  we  are  in  want  ourselves ; 
anon  those  who  are  ours.  Now  grace  is  needed;  then  forgiveness,  humility, 
peace  of  conscience,  heavenly  power  in  the  struggle  against  temptation.  Some- 
times a  Christian  father  regards  his  children  sadly,  and  sighs  that  they  have  no 
bread — not  to  speak  of  luxuries — perhaps  not  even  needful  clothing  for  the  body, 
etc.  In  view  of  such  trials  the  faithful  cast  themselves  on  the  care  of  Him  who 
created  the  heavens  and  earth,  of  Christ  the  almighty  Saviour — a  faith  like  that 
of  the  centurion  (Matt.  viii.  5-10).  This  is  trust  in  Jesus  as  a  Redeemer  who 
has  power  over  all  things,  and  who  needs  but  to  speak  the  word  in  order  to 
relieve  the  spiritual  or  temporal  misery  of  any  of  humankind.  The  believer 
flees  to  Him  and  says,  Speak  but  the  word,  and  my  spiritual  and  material  cares 
and  troubles  will  pass  away,  etc.  The  omnipotence  of  Jesus  is  a  prop  and 
support  on  which  faith  rests.  But,  again,  faith  rests  also  on  the  firm 
ground  of — 

II.  The  divine  wisdom  of  Jesus. — Mary  sought  to  forestall  the  Saviour,  and 
thought  He  should  either  give  help  at  once,  or  quickly  take  His  departure  with 
the  disciples,  so  that  the  lack  of  wine  might  not  be  made  known,  to  the  shame  of 
the  hosts.  But  Jesus  traversed  her  plan,  and  answered  :  "  Woman,  what  have 
I  to  do  with  thee  1 "  etc.  Mary,  however,  was  contented  to  wait  in  faith  for  that 
hour  which  the  Lord  in  His  wisdom  had  appointed.  This,  then,  is  a  great  help 
to  faith  when  men  look  at  the  Lord  Jesus,  not  only  as  the  almighty  Saviour  who 
has  power  and  means  to  do  what  they  need,  but  as  the  all-wise  Redeemer  who  well 
knows  how  and  where  and  when  He  should  help  them.  The  wilful  heart  of 
man,  however,  is  often  inclined  to  seek  to  control  the  divine  wisdom,  and 
considers  that  whatever  help  is  needed  for  the  supply  of  men's  wants  must  be 
rendered  without  delay.  It  will  often  demand  from  the  Saviour  that  He 
should  immediately  bring  all  His  power  to  bear  for  the  relief  of  necessity.  Even 
men  of  sincere  soul  are  swayed  sometimes  by  this  wilfulness ;  in  their  spiritual 
experiences  they  think  there  must  be  a  set  time  when  peace  and  assurance  will 
fill  their  souls,  doubt  and  fear  vanish,  the  liability  to  temptation  pass  away,  etc. 
Not  so  will  it  be  with  the  experienced  Christian.  He  hears  in  faith  this  word 
of  Jesus  :  "  Mine  hour  is  not  yet  come."  My  thoughts  are  not  yours,  etc. 
Let  Me  act.     I  know  what  is  needful  for  you.     "  In  quietness  and  confidence 

63 


chap.  ii.  HOMILEJIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN. 


shall  be  your  strength"  (Isa.  xxx.  15).  "Fear  not,  only  believe,  and  ye  shall 
see  the  glory  of  the  Lord."  He  says,  Let  Me  watch,  care  for,  rule,  plan,  and  all 
will  be  well.  Thus  faith  rests  and  confides  in  the  wise  guidance  of  the  blessed 
Saviour.  As  St.  Paul  says,  "  God  is  faithful,"  etc.  (1  Cor.  x.  13  ;  Rom.  viii.  28) ; 
and  as  God  Himself  says  in  the  Psalms,  "Why  art  thou  cast  down?"  etc. 
(Ps.  xlii.  5,  11).     Yet  another  stay  of  faith  is  found  in — 

III.  The  boundless  goodness  of  the  Lord  Jesus. — This  shows  itself  here 
partly  in  that  the  Saviour  was  willing  to  supply  the  needs  of  these  people,  even 
though  they  had  not  yet  asked  Him  to  do  so ;  and  partly  in  that  He  provided  so 
rich  a  store,  a  blessing  so  overflowing,  not  only  for  the  present,  but  for  the  future. 
Such  a  Saviour,  full  of  goodness,  does  faith  find  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  says  to 
His  people  :  "  Yea,  I  will  rejoice  over  them  to  do  them  good"  (Jer.  xxxii.  41)  ; 
who  will  do  exceeding  abundantly  to  them  above  all  they  can  ask  or  think 
(Eph.  iii.  20) ;  who  is  not  only  willing  to  hear,  even  before  men  call,  etc. 
(Isa.  Ixv.  24),  but  who  is  not  niggardly  of  His  blessings,  and  gives  them 
abundant  and  overflowing  (Ps.  xxiii.  5).  Realise  this  glorious  characteristic  of 
the  Lord  Jesus,  and  learn  to  trust  His  might,  to  honour  His  wisdom,  to  rest  on 
His  goodness  ! 

Ye  wilful,  unbelieving,  impatient,  and  despairing  ones,  be  ashamed  that  ye  are 
so  rebellious  when  a  Saviour  is  near  whose  might  is  unfettered,  whose  wisdom 
is  inconceivable,  whose  goodness  is  unsearchable.  Ye  faithful  ones,  rejoice  that 
ye  have  such  a  Redeemer :  ye  have  already  realised  that  those  who  trust  in  Him 
are  not  put  to  shame  !  How  often  has  His  power  helped  you  in  need  ?  His 
wisdom  found  ways  and  means  of  relief  1  How  much  of  blessing  for  body  and 
soul  have  you  not  received  from  His  goodness  ?  Lacked  ye  anything  ?  No 
(Luke  xxii.  35).  Surely  such  a  Saviour  is  worthy  of  all  confidence  !  Continue 
in  this  faith. — Abridged  from  Luther. 

Vers.  1,  2.  Jesus  sanctifies  Christian  marriage  at  Cana. — Jesus  by  His  pre- 
sence at  the  marriage  feast  at  Cana,  and  by  working  there  His  first  miracle, 
thus  manifesting  His  glory,  honoured  the  estate  of  marriage.  It  would  seem  as 
if  He  foresaw  what  would  happen  under  a  corrupted  and  perverted  state  of 
Christianity,  when  marriage  should  be  counted  less  honourable  than  celibacy — 
when  "  men  should  give  heed  to  seducing  spirits  and  doctrines  of  devils,  .  .  . 
forbidding  to  marry"  (1  Tim.  iv.  1,  3).  We  know  from  history  the  fatal  con- 
sequences of  the  endeavour  to  force  on  the  Church  this  unscriptural  and 
unchristian  doctrine.  At  Cana,  however,  our  Lord  declared  the  sanctity  of  this 
estate,  recognised  the  dignity  of  womanhood,  and  the  right  of  woman  to  her 
honourable  place  as  the  helpmeet  of  man  in  the  social  organism  of  the  family, 
which  is  a  chief  foundation  for  the  unity  and  order  of  the  race.  So  holy, 
indeed,  did  our  Lord  account  this  state  of  marriage,  that  in  His  word  He  has 
taken  it  as  a  type  of  the  union  of  Himself  with  the  Church  (Eph.  v.  32). 

Think  of  the  meaning  of  marriage,  and  of  the  manner  in  which  this  condition 
should  be  entered  upon. 

I.  Marriage  is  the  divinely  ordered  means  for  the  foundation  of  the  family, 
as  the  chief  bond  of  society,  and  thus  for  the  conservation  and  advancement  of 
the  race. — 1.  Looking  at  the  last-mentioned  thought  first,  we  need  only  point  out 
that  this  was  evidently  a  chief  divine  purpose  in  its  institution,  viz.  to  conserve 
and  extend  the  human  race.  But  had  this  been  the  only  purpose  in  view,  it  is 
evident  that  such  a  solemn  institution  was  in  a  measure  needless,  and  man  might 
have  been  left  to  be  guided  by  his  animal  instincts  merely.  Thus,  too, 
irregularities  such  as  polygamy  could  not  have  been  morally  condemned.  Hence 
we  find  materialistic  thinkers,  and  men  who  are  guided  by  merely  material  and 
secular  ideas,  do  make  light  of  the  marriage  tie. 

64 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN.  chap.  ii. 


2.  But  the  institution  was  designed  also  for  a  greater  purpose,  viz.  to  lead 
through  the  foundation  of  the  family  to  a  confederate  social  bond  of  union,  resulting 
in  the  settled  government  and  security  of  persons  and  property,  and  thus  in  the 
advancement  of  the  race.  Without  this  institution,  and  the  family  bond  as  its 
result,  what  cohesion  would  there,  could  there,  have  been  among  the  individuals 
of  the  race  ?  Without  this  true  centre  and  bond  human  society  would  disinteg- 
rate and  fall  to  pieces.  The  family  is  indeed,  as  Aristotle  maintained,  the  true 
unit  of  the  race.  In  this  he  proved  his  practical  wisdom  to  be  greater,  at  least 
in  this  important  direction,  than  that  of  Plato,  who  considered  the  State  as  the 
central  idea  of  a  community,  that  children  should  be  accounted  as  belonging  to 
the  State,  and  should  be  trained  by  it. 

3.  But  not  only  is  the  institution  of  marriage  the  chief  bond  of  social  order ; 
it  is  just  because  of  this  of  vital  importance  to  the  Church.  It  is  from  the  bosom 
of  pious  families,  united  with  the  Church,  that  its  membership  is  chiefly  recruited, 
and  earnest  labourers  arise  to  carry  on  the  work  of  God.  Thus  we  can  under- 
stand why  our  Lord,  at  the  very  beginning  of  His  ministry,  honoured  this 
estate ;  and  why  His  apostles  so  strenuously  opposed  erring  teachers  who 
contemned  and  depreciated  it. 

II.  Again,  marriage  is  the  foundation  of  the  family  as  a  school  for  the 
training  and  development  of  the  individual. — 1.  It  is  in  this  school  that, 
cared  for  and  surrounded  by  the  ministries  of  love,  the  individuals  of  the  race 
have  their  powers  and  gifts  brought  into  fullest  and  healthiest  exercise,  and 
where  they  are  best  fitted  to  face  the  battle  of  life.  It  is  a  truism  that  a 
careful  training  in  the  bosom  of  a  good  family  is  really  the  best  equipment  for  life. 

2.  There,  also,  woman  finds  her  true  sphere. — She  is  not  fitted  for  buffeting 
with  adverse  forces  without.  Her  true  sphere  is  the  care  of  the  household  and 
family,  in  the  exercise  of  those  domestic  virtues,  graces,  and  gifts  in  which  true 
womanhood  finds  its  glory.  Where  marriage  is  despised,  or  where  polygamy 
or  other  aberrations  prevail,  woman  is  degraded  from  her  true  position  as  a 
helpmeet  to  man  to  that  of  a  mere  chattel  or  toy  •  and  with  her  society  as  a  whole 
becomes  morally  degraded  also.  Witness  the  condition  of  Mohammedan  and 
heathen  countries.  But  here  Christ,  as  we  should  expect,  honours  and  makes 
part  of  His  gospel  this  divine  institution  in  which,  at  the  first,  woman  was 
recognised  as  the  divinely  appointed  helpmeet  and  companion  of  man.  And  it  is 
under  His  dominion,  where  His  gospel  is  purely  preached,  that  woman  has  been 
raised  to  a  lofty  and  noble  position,  because  the  divine  rule,  which  after  the  fall 
sin  had  desecrated,  was  by  Him  reinstated  and  confirmed. 

3.  In  the  married  state  and  in  the  family  the  highest  qualities  in  human  nature 
are  evoked  and  educated. — Selfishness  dies.  Men  are  here  pledged  to  labour  and 
care  not  for  themselves  alone,  but  for  others  bound  to  them  by  ties  of  deepest 
affection.  In  this  sphere  is  learned  the  nobility  of  self-sacrifice  in  the  service  of 
others,  the  beauty  of  self-denial,  the  generous  sympathy  that  leads  to  mutual 
burden-bearing,  to  sorrowing  with  and  soothing  the  sorrows  of  others,  to  rejoicing 
with  them  in  their  joy. 

4.  And  in  all  this  a  noble  example  is  set  before  the  children  of  the  family,  who, 
trained  under  such  guidance,  and  constrained  by  such  example,  grow  up  in 
Christlikeness,  and  become  blessings  to  the  world. 

III.  How  alone  marriage  may  become  truly  a  blessing. — It  is  true  there 
are  trials  and  difficulties  incident  to  this  estate,  as  there  are  to  every 
condition  of  our  imperfect  human  life.  There  may  be  differences  of  cha- 
racter, leading  to  want  of  mutual  forbearance,  to  impatience,  and  so  forth. 
There  are  cases  where  habits  develop  in  one  or  both  partners  which  lead  to 
unhappiness,  if  not  worse.  And  there  are  those  trials,  hard  to  bear,  where 
affairs  are  unprosperous,  and  the  children  of  the  home  are  ill  provided  for  ;  and 

f  65 


chap.  ii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


yet  again,  when  children  become  ungrateful  or  prodigal.  These  and  many 
another  trial  may  embitter  and  destroy  family  life.  But  many  trials  may  be 
mitigated — nay,  many  may  be  averted — if  those  entering  on  the  married  state 
would  imitate  the  village  folk  of  Cana,  and  invite  Jesus  to  their  marriage.  Let 
such  not  only  consult  Him  as  to  the  choice  of  a  partner  in  life,  but  ask  Him  to 
be  with  them  in  the  home,  and  1.  Through  His  grace  to  keep  alive  in  their 
hearts  not  only  mutual  affection,  but  also  that  mutual  respect  and  regard  which 
ought  to  dominate  family  life,  and  without  which  it  will  be  degraded.  2.  Let 
them  take  Him  into  counsel  in  the  ordering  of  their  home — daily  at  the  family 
altar,  in  the  reading  of  His  word,  in  the  training  of  the  children,  in  the 
occupations  and  recreations  of  life.  And  3.  Let  them  ask  ever  His  blessing 
and  wait  on  Him  for  the  providing  of  such  gifts  as  He  sees  they  need,  both 
temporal  and  spiritual.  In  short,  let  them  ask  Jesus  to  be  the  chief  and 
honoured  guest  at  their  marriage  feast,  the  chief  friend  and  counsellor  in  the 
home,  and  then  no  difficulties  or  trials  will  mar  its  happiness,  and  He  will  provide 
for  them  richly,  fully,  freely,  as  He  did  for  those  at  Cana  of  Galilee,  where  He 
first  manifested  forth  His  glory. 

Yer.  2.  Jesus  the  guest  most  to  be  desired. — Life  may  be  likened  to  a  banquet — 
a  rich  and  varied  feast.  Even  to  those  who  are  virtuously  and  honestly  poor 
this  will  be  so.  The  whole  universe  brings  to  them,  as  to  others,  a  feast  of  good 
things.  To  eye  and  ear  it  offers  its  rich  stores  of  beauty.  For  taste  and  feeling 
it  provides  unnumbered  dainties.  To  some  men  these  may  be  given  in  greater 
profusion  and  variety  ;  yet  his  plain  fare  may  be  more  sweet  to  the  toil-worn 
labourer,  than  the  richest  banquet  to  the  man  of  wealth — and  indolence  !  The 
simple  joys  and  tender  affections  of  the  humble  home  shall  be  sweeter  and  truer 
foretastes  of  the  better  home,  than  all  the  pleasures  wealth  can  bring  to  the 
jaded  roue.  The  feast  of  life  is  spread  for  all  men,  and  the  way  in  which  it  can 
be  made  a  feast  of  happiness  from  beginning  to  end  is  to  invite  Jesus  to  be  our 
chief  guest  (Rev.  iii.  20). 

I.  His  presence  will  consecrate  all  life's  joy. — Pleasures  in  life  can  never  be 
real  and  lasting — true  joy  will  never  bless — unless  we  seek  them  according  to 
God's  will  and  in  His  way.  [This  idea  may  be  specially  applied  here  with 
reference  to  domestic  bliss.]  It  is  the  presence  of  sin  that  mars  and  vitiates  the 
enjoyment  of  the  bounteous  provision  God  has  made  for  men.  Only  let  men 
receive  and  use  the  divine  gifts  as  the  Giver  intended,  and  how  pleasant  does 
life  become — a  true  foretaste  of  the  higher  and  better  life  yet  to  be  revealed. 
And  how  shall  men  learn  to  do  this?  By  taking  Christ  into  their  lives — by 
making  Him  the  chief  and  honoured  guest — especially  on  setting  up  the  home. 
Let  His  Spirit  guide  and  direct  us,  and  life  will  become  a  perpetual  feast,  filled 
with  the  richest  and  purest  happiness. 

II.  When  He  is  present  He  will  bring  back  joy  that  has  fled. — To  mortal 
man  much  of  sorrow  comes  into  the  happiest  life.  The  sun  of  joy  is  overclouded. 
The  wine  of  life  gives  out.  Possessions  pass  away — affection  weeps  at  countless 
graves — health  and  energy  fail.  The  feast  of  life  seems  to  be  at  an  end. 
But  just  as  the  Redeemer  turned  the  water  into  wine  at  Cana,  and  astonished 
the  ruler  of  the  feast  with  a  richer,  fuller  provision  than  he  had  before  been  able 
to  present  to  the  guests,  so  does  Jesus  still  come  to  His  people,  giving  them 
something  nobler  and  better  than  that  which  they  have  lost.  To  this  truth  the 
experience  of  all  the  Christian  ages  testifies.  He  can  turn  the  night  of  weeping 
into  the  morning  of  joy.  And  when  earth's  pleasures  depart,  when  His  people 
are  reduced  to  the  simplest  and  humblest  condition,  He  can  glorify  it  by  His 
presence — can  still  turn  the  water  of  life  into  wine,  its  simplest  elements  into 
sources  of  truest  joy. 

66 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  ii. 


III.  When  we  invite  Him  to  be  our  guest  at  life's  banquet,  He  will  provide 
for  the  future  also,  as  well  as  for  the  present.  This  He  did  at  Oana.  Not  only 
was  "  the  large  surplus  beyond  the  present  need  intended  to  be  a  visible  and 
abiding  proof  and  record  of  this  mighty  work  of  Christ  "  (Chr.  Wordsworth)  ; 
it  was  also  intended  to  be  a  provision  for  the  future  needs  of  the  household  of 
the  married  pair.  It  would  continually  remind  them  of  His  kindness,  His 
bounty,  as  well  as  of  His  wondrous  power.  This  was  in  the  days  of  His  humilia- 
tion. But  now  every  blessing  we  receive  should  remind  us  that  He  has  been 
exalted  to  give  gifts  to  men,  and  that  every  blessing  He  bestows  is  a  pledge 
of  His  continued  lovingkindness,  for  He  is  "the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and 
for  ever."  When  we  take  Him  to  be  our  guest,  He  "  crowneth  us  with  loving- 
kindness  and  tender  mercies  "  (Ps.  ciii.),  "  so  that  we  may  rejoice  and  be  glad  all 
our  days  "  (Ps.  xc.  14,  15). 

Ver.  11.  The  Lord  manifests  His  glory. — Only  in  part  could  Jesus  show  forth 
His  glory  to  His  people  on  earth.  The  fuller  revelation  is  not  here  and  now,  as 
Jesus  shows  in  His  prayer  before  Gethsemane  (xvii.  24).  So  there  were  but  partial 
glimpses  given  on  earth  of  that  glory  which  He  had  with  the  Father  before 
the  world  was.  But  wherever  it  appears  it  shines  conspicuous,  and  all  else 
passes  from  view,  so  that  we  behold  "  Jesus  only  "  (Matt.  xvii.  8).  So  in  this 
scene  at  Cana,  interesting  and  noteworthy  as  the  other  persons  are,  they  and 
their  actions  all  contribute  to  direct  attention  to  the  central  figure,  and  cause  to 
shine  out  more  clearly  and  vividly  the  inner  glory  of  the  Saviour.  This  was 
manifested — 

I.  In  His  divine  condescension. — 1.  He  and  His  disciples  were  invited  to 
a  marriage  and  marriage  feast,  in  a  humble  village  near  Nazareth,  by  people 
who,  although  in  comfortable  circumstances,  were  not  by  any  means  possessed  of 
overflowing  wealth  apparently.  And  He  did  not  refuse.  We  must  remember, 
however,  that  this  was  He  of  whom  the  great  truths  in  the  preceding  chapter 
were  written — the  eternal  Word,  the  Life  and  Light  of  men,  to  whom  the 
Baptist  had  borne  witness,  saying,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,"  etc.  Upon 
Him  the  eternal  Spirit  had  descended  in  visible  form;  and  He  Himself  had  said 
to  Nathanael,  one  of  the  disciples  accompanying  Him,  and  that  only  three  days 
gone,  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  Hereafter  ye  shall  see  heaven  open,"  etc. 
(i.  51).  This  was  the  exalted  Being  who  condescended  to  sit  down  at  the  humble 
marriage  feast  at  Cana.  2.  And  though  now  exalted  in  the  heavens  He  is  still 
the  same.  He  comes  to  humble  hearts,  opened  to  receive  Him.  There  is  no 
home,  however  mean  and  lowly,  where  He  will  not  dwell.  There  is  no  relation- 
ship of  life  that  He  will  not  aid  us  to  sanctify.  There  is  no  lawful  condition 
in  our  earthly  lot  into  which  He  will  refuse  to  come.  And  when  He  does  come — 
when  we  do  open  our  hearts  to  Him — He  will  come  bles^ng-laden.    For  notice — 

II.  His  providing  love  and  care. — 1.  Jesus  and  His  disciples  were  perhaps 
invited  to  the  wedding  after  the  master  of  the  feast  had  made  provision  for  the 
expected  guests.  By-and-by  the  wine  gave  out ;  and  there  seems  to  have  been 
no  means  of  quickly  procuring  more.  Cana  was  probably  a  small  hamlet,  hours 
distant  from  the  towns  and  larger  villages  where  supplies  of  wine  could  be  had. 
Mary,  who  seems  to  have  been  on  intimate  terms  with  the  hosts,  desii  ing  to  save 
them  the  shame  of  confessing  that  the  wine  provided  had  run  short,  turned  in  her 
perplexity  to  her  Son,  feeling  certain  that  He  would  find  a  way  out  of  the 
difficulty.  And  this  He  did,  although  it  was  not  precisely  her  way.  Yet  He 
did  not  turn  aside  from  her  desire,  but  provided  richly  that  which  was  lacking 
at  the  feast.  2.  So  does  He  come  with  blessing  into  our  needy  lives.  But  not 
always  does  He  give  as  we  would  desire.  Oftentimes  we  ask  amiss  (James  iv.  3). 
Yet  if  we  are  His,  and  earnestly  desire  good  from  Him — have  truly  some  need 

67 


chap.  ii.  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN. 


that  requires  to  be  supplied — He  will  not  deny  us,  but  in  His  own  time  and 
way  will  fill  up  our  wants  out  of  His  divine,  overflowing  fulness. 

III.  So  too  in  the  exercise  of  His  divine  power  He  shows  forth  His  glory. 
1.  It  was  the  same  creative  might  which  manifested  itself  at  Cana  as  that  of 
which  chap.  i.  3  tells :  "  All  things  were  made  by  Him ;  and  without  Him  was 
not  anything  made  that  was  made."  "All  things  by  Him  consist"  (Col.  i.  17). 
It  was  by  an  act  of  almighty  power  that  Jesus  turned  the  water  into  wine  at 
Cana.  He  who  called  forth  order  and  beauty  from  chaos  at  the  beginning, 
shows  here  the  same  almighty  power  in  His  ability  to  use  those  elements  and 
combine  them  for  His  own  purposes.  2.  In  this  miracle  He  also  showed  forth 
His  power  of  providing  for  His  people.  In  a  country  where  the  vine  was  a 
staple  product,  and  where  the  natural  wine  of  the  country  was  in  daily 
(moderate)  use,  Jesus  exercised  His  divine  creative  power  in  supplying  for  the 
wedded  pair,  to  whose  marriage  feast  He  had  been  invited,  provision  for  their 
daily  wants  for  a  long  time  to  come.  3.  This  miracle  is  a  parable  of  Christ's 
continual  activity  in  His  Church.  When  His  people  are  in  straits  He  is  ever 
able  and  ready  to  help  them.  When  they  have  brought  Him  into  their  lives, 
then  they  need  not  fear.  Difficulties  will  yield,  stumbling-blocks  will  be 
removed,  necessities  will  be  met,  often  richly  and  far  beyond  men's  deserving. 
And  this  is  all  natural  when  it  is  remembered  who  it  was  that  in  Cana  thus 
manifested  His  glory.  "  He  is  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords."  And  shall 
the  children,  the  subjects  of  such  a  King,  be  ever  left  irrevocably  in  straits  and 
difficulties  ?  "  The  young  lions  do  lack,"  etc.  (Ps.  xxxiv.  10).  And  thus  day  by 
day  in  His  Church  and  to  His  people  "He  shows  forth  His  glory." 

IV.  Yet  again  our  Lord  manifested  forth  His  glory  at  Cana  in  the  manner 
in  which  He  leads  His  own  to  purer,  higher  faith. — 1.  This  is  seen  in  the  case 
of  Mary.  Probably  some  desire  for  personal  honour  mingled  with  the  wish  that 
Jesus  would  show  forth  the  power  that  was  in  Him.  Probably,  too,  she  thought 
of  some  striking  public  manifestation  of  His  power,  in  view  of  all  the  assembled 
guests,  etc.  Her  faith  in  Jesus  was  genuine  but  faulty.  Perhaps  we  here  find 
an  echo,  though  faint,  of  that  desire  for  "  a  sign"  so  often  expressed  by  the 
people  (vii.  3,  4,  etc.).  But  Jesus  shows  Mary  that  we  must  implicitly  trust 
Him  in  His  works  and  ways.  And  it  was  to  the  now  unqualified  faith  expressed 
in  the  words,  "  Whatsoever  He  saith  unto  you,  do  it,"  that  the  answer  was 
returned.  2.  Christ's  working,  as  well  as  His  teaching,  was  wisely  ordered  to 
lead  men  to  faith.  His  miracles  were  not  merely  stupendous  works  of  divine 
power,  which  would  simply  overawe  men,  and  lead  for  the  most  part  to  the 
submission  of  fear,  not  to  the  trust  of  love  :  His  miracles  wtre  all  works  of 
love  and  mercy ;  so  that,  whilst  they  certainly  led  open  and  prepared  hearts  to 
recognise  Him  for  what  He  was,  they  did  not  awe  men  into  submission  and  con- 
fession (x.  25,  26).  It  was  in  the  hearts  attracted  to  Him  by  love  that  these 
"  signs  "  had  their  due  effect  in  leading  to  stronger  faith.  And  so  He  still  works 
among  men.  He  could  by  manifestations  of  His  power  awe  men  into  at  least 
outward  submission.  But  such  glory  and  such  submission  He  does  not  desire. 
He  desires  that  men  should  freely  believe  and  love.  Therefore  He  spiritually 
enlightens  them,  purifies  their  faith  through  the  knowledge  of  Himself,  His 
love,  mercy,  etc.,  and  thus  manifests  forth  His  glory  evermore. 


HOMILETIC  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  The  true  foundation  of  foundation  on  which  it  can  be  securely 
marriage.— -1.  It  is  not  beauty,  nor  is  built.  3.  It  stands  firm  alone  on 
it  high  station.     2.  Biches  is  not  the      virtue  and  the  fear  of  God. 

68 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   II. 


Ver.  2.  The  secret  of  uninterrupted 
union  in  marriage. — When  married 
people  who  had  disagreed  came  to 
Philip  Melanchthon  and  accused  each 
other,  he  asked  whether  they  had  begun 
their  married  life  with  prayer.  If  the 
answer  given  was,  as  in  most  cases, 
"  No,"  then  he  said :  "  Do  you  then 
wonder  that  this  has  occurred  ?  You 
have  not  asked  God  to  bless  your  married 
life  ;  and  so  happiness  is  far  from  you. 
Repent  then  of  your  wrong-doing,  and 
it  may  be  that  the  Lord  will  be  gracious 
unto  you,-  and  bind  your  hearts  to- 
gether in  unity." 

Yer.  2.  A  rule  of  social  fellowship. — 
1.  As  Christ  came  to  the  feast,  so 
must  His  servants  come — not  only  in 
order  that  they  may  have  material 
food,  but  chiefly  that  they  may  feed 
the  guests  spiritually  with  godly  con- 
versation. 2.  Nor  is  it  seemly  that 
they  should  remain  late  into  the  night, 
and  bring  on  themselves  the  con- 
demnation of  those  who  "continue 
until  night,  till  wine  inflame  them " 
(Isa.  v.  11).  Go  late;  leave  early — 
that  is  the  best  rule. 

Yer.  2.  We  invite  Christ  to  the 
wedding,  when  we  hallow  it  with 
prayer  and  godly  conversation. 

Yer.  3.  Earthly  need  and  heavenly 
blessing. — 1.  Those  who  imagine  that 
where  Christ  is  there  must  always  be 
a  superabundance  of  earthly  blessings 
are  mistaken.  Want  is  oftentimes 
good  fare  for  God's  people,  and  leads 
them  closer  to  Him.  2.  The  heavenly. 
Father  sometimes  withdraws  temporal 
gifts  from  His  children  so  that  they 
may  thirst  more  for  the  eternal.  3. 
Those  who  would  avoid  the  cross  will 
not  invite  Christ  to  dwell  with  them ; 
for  where  He  comes  the  cross  closely 
follows  Him. 

Yer.  4.  God's  hour  strikes  when  man's 
hour  ends. — 1.  Christ  speaks  here  not 
so  much  as  the  Son  of  Mary  as  the 
Son  of  God,  who  was  about  to  perform 
a   good   work.     2.   He   spoke    to   His 


mother  thus,  not  slighting  her,  but  in 
order  to  show  that  her  maternal 
authority  did  not  extend  to  matters 
pertaining  to  His  office.  His  own 
authority  was  in  this  supreme.  3. 
God  permits  no  limit  to  be  prescribed 
as  to  what,  when,  and  how  He  should 
work ;  for  He  knows  best  Himself. 
4.  If  you  would  receive  blessing,  learn 
to  pray  and  wait.  5.  If  the  Saviour 
determines  that  His  hour  shall  not 
come  sooner  than  at  death,  then  be 
content  if  all  shall  be  eternally  well 
with  you.  6.  God  has  His  horas  et 
moras  (days  [hours]  and  delays).  When 
His  hour  strikes  in  heaven  help  is  at 
hand. 

Yer.  5.  The  bitter  of  life  made  sweet. 
— As  the  bees  extract  honey  from  the 
bitterest  flowers,  so  we  may  also  draw 
consolation  from  an  answer  from  God 
which  seems  to  us  austere. 

Yer.  7.  "Fill  the  waterpots,"  etc. — 1. 
He  who  would  enjoy  the  rose  must 
hazard  the  thorns,  and  he  who  would 
receive  the  divine  blessing  must  labour. 
2.  If  we  do  what  we  ought  to  do  God 
will  grant  us  what  we  desire.  3. 
Without  labour  we  cannot  expect  to 
receive  God's  gifts.  The  divine  blessing, 
it  is  true,  may  come  in  sleep,  but  not 
through  sleep. 

Yer.  10.  God  gives  not  as  the  world 
gives. — 1.  The  world  gives  its  best  to 
be  enjoyed  at  the  beginning,  and  at 
the  last  its  dregs.  The  sweet  is  set 
forth  at  the  beginning,  the  bitter  at 
the  end.  Worldly  pleasure  ends  in 
pain.  2.  In  the  kingdom  of  Christ  it 
is  otherwise.  He  gives  the  bitter  first, 
the  sweet  last ;  He  makes  sorrowful 
ere  He  causes  joy  ;  He  kills  ere  He 
makes  alive.  3.  Many  people  are  like 
the  master  of  the  feast.  They  taste 
somewhat  of  the  working  of  Christ  in 
the  lives  of  His  people;  but  Jesus 
remains  unknown  to  them — they  know 
it  not  as  His  work.  But  those  who 
have  drawn  the  water,  those  who 
labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  will  know 
whence  has  come  the  quickening  wine. 

69 


CHAP.   II. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


Do  not  refuse  then  to  fill  your  six 
waterpots  with  water.  The  hour  will 
come  when  the  word  of  power  shall 
be  uttered — "  Now  !  " — and  you  shall 
draw  out  wine. —  Weigel,  etc. 

Yer.  11.  Christ's  first  sign. — 1.  St. 
John  points  out  the  fact  that  Jesus 
began  His  sig?is  in  Cana  in  order  to  as- 
sert emphatically  that  this  "  sign  "  was 
a  real  moment  in  the  revelation  of  the 
Lord  and  in  the  faith  of  His  disciples. 
"  The  first  miracle  of  the  Lord,"  says 
Theremin,  "is  the  type  of  the  continuous 
miracle  which  Christ  has  accomplished, 
and  which  He  will  continue  to  perform 
until  the  end  of  time,  whilst  He 
glorifies  men,  and  transforms  their 
nature  and  conditions,  elevates  them, 
and  raises  them  to  a  higher  existence. 
The  first  miracle  of  the  Lord  will  also 
be  His  last.  It  is  done  as  He  speaks  : 
1  Old  things  pass  away,  behold  they 
are  become  new.'  Like  the  heavens  and 
the  earth,  so  will  the  soul  be  renewed, 
henceforth  to  sin  no  more,  then  prepared 
to  taste  in  endless  measure  the  bliss  so 
long  desired.  Then  will  the  Lord  sit 
among  His  people  in  the  kingdom  of 
His  Father,  and  pour  forth  for  them 
the  wine  of  a  pure  supernal  joy,  which 
no  interruption  shall  disturb,  and  no 
regret  shall  embitter.  They  will  be 
satisfied  with  the  fatness  of  His  house, 
and  filled  with  joy  as  from  an  overflow- 
ing stream."  2.  Jesus  revealed  His 
glory  (ty/v  So£av  avrov)  in  this  miracle, 
for  it  displayed  to  the  finite  human 
mind  that  absolute  power  with  which 
the  Father's  love  had  clothed  the  Son 
(iii.  35).  Whilst  in  the  miraculous  aid 
He  gave  at  Cana,  meeting  the  wants 
of  His  own  people,  and  showing  them 
the  riches  of  His  love,  He  was  re- 
vealed as  the  only  begotten  of  the 
Father  (full  of  grace  and  truth,  full  of 
divine  love),  in  whom  the  righteous  and 
holy  nature  of  God  is  perfectly  dis- 
played. Jesus  manifested  forth  His 
glory  in  Cana,  for  as  the  Father 
wrought  in  Him,  so  He  Himself 
wrought  (v.  17,  26).  That  distin- 
guished Jesus  from  His  messengers 
who  did  wonderful  works  before   He 

70 


came.  In  their  works  men  saw  the 
glory  of  Jehovah,  not  their  own  glory. 
The  works  of  Jesus,  however,  show 
forth  His  own  glory,  since  they 
are  witnesses  of  His  dignity  as  the 
Son.  The  consequence  of  this  miracle 
was  that  His  disciples  believed  on 
Him.  They  were  already  disciples  of 
the  Lord ;  the  words  of  Jesus  had  led 
them  to  faith,  but  the  miracles  of 
Jesus  confirmed  and  strengthened  them 
in  their  belief.  Their  faith  hitherto 
was  but  the  first  link  of  the  chain 
binding  them  to  Christ ;  through  the 
manifestation  of  His  glory  they 
were  more  confirmed  in  their  union 
with  and  devotion  to  the  Lord.  3. 
The  end  of  Christ's  miracles  is  to 
strengthen  faith.  We  do  not  learn 
that  the  other  wedding  guests  were 
brought  to  faith  by  this  miracle.  The 
first  condition  of  faith  is  just  that 
testimony  in  word  that  will  be  received 
by  men.  God  reveals  Himself,  not  on 
His  own  account,  but  for  our  sakes; 
therefore  the  miraculous  asks,  if  it 
would  effect  anything,  the  moral  con- 
dition in  men  of  an  already  existing 
faith,  by  which  they  may  become  re- 
ceptive of  the  testimony  of  divine 
Omnipotence.  This  receptivity  was 
wanting  in  the  case  of  the  other 
wedding  guests,  and  therefore  the 
miracle  would  effect  only  an  outward 
astonishment  from  which  their  souls 
would  derive  no  fruit.  We  close  with 
a  sentence  from  Petri  :  "  There  is  but 
One  who  is  glorious,  and  this  One 
manifests  forth  His  glory  so  that  we 
may  be  partakers  of  it,  whilst  through 
faith  we  make  it  our  own.  Of  all  of 
us  it  ought  to  be  said,  His  disciples 
believed  on  Him." — J.  L.  Sommer. 

Ver.  11.  The  nature  of  miracles. — It 
may  be  well  here  to  say  something 
regarding  the  miraculous  as  it  comes 
before  us  in  the  gospel  history.  There 
is  a  tendency  in  the  present  time  to 
assume  that  the  external  evidences  of 
Christianity,  miracles  and  prophecy, 
have  had  their  day;  and  that  now 
the  weight  of  proof  of  our  faith  must 
be  put  on  the  internal  evidences,  i.e. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   II. 


the  heavenly  morality  of  the  gospel, 
the  beauty .  of  Christ's  moral  charac- 
ter, etc.  The  miracles  of  Holy  Writ 
are  by  some  indeed  considered  to  be 
stumbling  blocks  rather  than  aids  to 
faith.  Yet,  the  question  comes  to  be, 
where  do  we  find  this  internal  evidence 
which  is  so  strongly  relied  upon  ?  Is 
it  not  in  the  gospel  history,  and  indeed, 
to  a  large  extent,  in  connection  with 
the  miraculous  and  supernatural — to  so 
great  an  extent  indeed  that  if  these 
were  eliminated  from  the  narrative 
little  would  remain?  Many  of  the 
finest  traits  of  Christ's  character,  and 
much  of  the  divineness  of  His  teaching, 
are  mixed  up  and  interwoven  with  the 
miraculous.  It  is  an  integrant  part  of 
the  gospel  narratives,  and  with  it  they 
stand  or  fall.  In  the  light  of  our 
Lord's  own  declarations  also,  and  the 
testimony  of  His  disciples,  we  are 
bound  if  we  accept  these  to  admit  His 
claim  to  more  than  human  power. 
Indeed  to  deny  these  claims  is  tanta- 
mount to  denying  His  unique  divine 
Sonship,  which  is  so  strongly  and  clearly 
affirmed,  especially  in  the  first  chapter 
of  this  Gospel.  But  in  saying  this 
it  is  not  assumed  that  the  miracles  of 
Christ  are  the  only  proofs  of  His 
divine  authority ;  but  that  in  connec- 
tion with  the  other  proofs  of  it  they 
combine  to  demonstrate  it.  The  evi- 
dences of  gospel  truth  are  cumulative. 
They  gather  strength  and  force  from 
their  combination ;  and  taken  to- 
gether seem  to  many  to  be  irresistible. 
Suppose  no  miracles  had  been  wrought 
by  Christ — no  sign  given  that  He  was 
the  eternal  Word  who  was  "  in 
the  beginning  with  God,  by  whom 
also  He  made  the  worlds " — then  it 
would  have  been  said,  WThy  claim  a 
divine  origin  for  a  system  that  can 
easily  be  explained  historically  ?  But 
those  inherent  accompaniments  of  the 
introduction  of  Christianity  stand 
historically  on  the  same  ground  as  the 
whole  gospel  history  ;  and  the  proofs  of 
its  authenticity  have  never  been  over- 
thrown. That  miracles  are  not  known 
in  our  own  experience  is,  therefore,  no 
reason  why  we  should  not  believe  that 


they  were  wrought,  for  we  believe 
many  things  on  the  testimony  of 
history  which  do  not  come  within  the 
range  of  our  experience.  The  material- 
ist objection  is  also  weak.  There  can 
be  no  miracles,  we  are  told,  for  they 
imply  an  infringement  of  the  laws  of 
nature,  of  the  universal  order  God  has 
established.  These  laws  are  fixed  and 
regular,  unvarying  and  undeviating. 
The  objection  assumes  too  much  :  it 
assumes  that  the  objectors  are  omni- 
scient— not  only  conversant  with  all 
the  laws  of  the  material  universe,  but 
also  with  the  relation  of  the  universe 
to  the  Power  which  is  behind  and 
above  all.  Then  it  must  not  be 
assumed  that  believers  in  revelation 
consider  that  miracles  are  violations 
of  the  laws  of  nature.  That  is  not  an 
assumption  they,  nor  any  one,  can 
be  entitled  to  make.  In  Scripture 
miracles  are  never  so  described.  No 
passage  asserts  that  any  law  of  the 
universe  is  broken  by  the  miraculous. 
Miracles  are  described  by  terms  which 
do  not  imply  any  such  idea.  They  are 
wonders  (repaTa)  in  view  of  common 
experience ;  they  are  signs  (cr^/xcta) 
as  evidences  of  divine  working  and 
purpose ;  and  they  are  powers  (§vv- 
a/xcis).  That  is  how  they  appeared 
to  men  who  witnessed  them  and  were 
inspired  to  write  about  them.  No  hint 
is  given  that  these  writers  supposed 
them  to  be  violations  of  God's  laws  of 
creation.  Objectors  forget  that  the 
creation  is  itself  the  all-including 
miracle.  Therefore,  as  Augustine 
says,  "  How  can  that  which  is  done 
by  the  will  of  God  be  against  nature  ?  " 
The  laws  of  nature,  even  as  we  know 
them,  act  and  interact  on  each  other. 
But  whilst  the  laws  of  inorganic 
nature  seem  to  act  undeviatingly  in 
given  directions,  organic  living  nature, 
whilst  in  part  influenced  by  them, 
brings  into  connection  with  them  a 
power  that  is  above  them,  which  can 
use  them  for  its  own  purposes  and 
ends.  Man,  with  reason  as  his  guiding 
light,  can  bend  many  of  these  forces 
to  his  purposes.  He  can  use,  e.gr.,  the 
electric    and   magnetic    forces — make 

71 


CHAP.    II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


the  form  of  motion  we  call  heat  ex- 
pand water  into  steam,  etc. — can  use 
the  forces  of  gravitation  to  forward 
his  ends.  Nothing,  also,  is  more 
wonderful  in  this  age  than  the  advance 
of  medical  science,  its  beneficent  dis- 
coveries, etc.  If,  then,  man  has  such 
power  over  the  forces  of  nature,  may 
not  the  Author  of  Nature  use  them  for 
His  benign  purposes — quickening  if  He 
will  the  processes  of  nature — touch- 
ing if  He  will  the  spring  of  disease, 
and  bidding  health  return — yes,  even 
with  directing  power  and  wisdom 
bringing  the  laws  of  life  to  bear  on 
the  destructive  forces  of  death,  and 
bidding  the  vital  spark  He  gave  at 
first  return  again  to  its  tenement  of 
clay  1  In  the  light  of  His  creative 
energy  who  shall  say,  "  Impossible  !  " 
We  see  His  ordinary  working,  but, 
as  Job  says,  "  The  thunder  of  His 
power,"  etc.  (Job  xxvi.  14).  Now  it 
was  necessary  for  the  Word  made  flesh 
not  only  to  show  His  divine  Sonship 
by  His  heavenly  teaching,  but  by  His 
power  over  the  works  of  His  own 
hands  (chap.  i.  3)  Miracles  were  one 
of  the  channels  by  which  His  spiritual 
power  and  divine  life  touched  savingly 
our  perishing  race.  He  was  to  be  the 
centre  of  a  new  creation,  in  which  the 
creature  subject  to  vanity  should  be 
redeemed,  and  in  which  the  whole 
creation  which  groans  and  travails  in 
pain  (Rom.  viii.  19)  should  have  rest. 
Christ's  miracles  testify  to  His  power 
to  accomplish  this.  So  we  find  that 
not  only  was  this  power  seen  in  His 
ability  to  quicken  the  processes  of 
nature,  but  to  rebuke  disease  and 
give  life  to  the  dead.  And  all  these 
mighty  acts  were  done  in  implicit  one- 
ness of  will  and  purpose  with  the 
Father.  Thus  we  feel  that  in  view  of 
what  He  is  proclaimed  to  be  in  the 
prologue  of  this  Gospel,  and  in  the 
fact  that  He  was  "  proclaimed  with 
power  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  according 
to  the  spirit  of  holiness,  by  the  resur- 
rection of  the  dead  "  (Rom.  i.  4),  it  must 
be  seen  that  in  His  life  miracles  are 
not  only  not  contradictory,  but  are 
really  the  equivalent  of  His  person  and 

72 


work.  Still  it  must  be  remembered 
that,  as  evidences  of  the  gospel,  miracles 
do  not  occupy  the  first  place.  Cole- 
ridge well  says:  "1.  The  consist- 
ency of  Christianity  with  right  reason 
I  consider  as  the  outer  court  of  the 
temple.  ...  2.  The  miracles,  with 
and  through  which  the  religion  was 
first  revealed  and  attested,  I  regard  as 
the  steps,  the  vestibule,  and  the  portal 
of  the  temple.  3.  The  sense,  the  inward 
feeling,  in  the  soul  of  each  believer,  of 
its  exceeding  durableness,  the  experi- 
ence that  he  needs  something,  joined 
with  the  strong  foretokening  that  the 
redemption  and  the  grace  propounded 
to  us  in  Christ  are  what  he  needs — this 
I  hold  to  be  the  true  foundation  of 
the  spiritual  edifice"  {Biographia 
Liter  aria). 

Ver.  11.  The  source  of  miracle. — 
Christ  is  the  miraculous  in  the  centre 
of  nature :  out  of  its  relation  to  Him, 
even  nature  is  miraculous ;  but  in 
relation  to  Him,  even  miracle  is 
natural.  The  Christian  gospel  miracle 
must  always  find  its  "  natural "  ex- 
planation in  the  miracle  of  the  life  of 
Christ.  Christ  Himself  exhibits  the 
completed  mediation  between  the  un- 
conditioned omnipotence  of  God  and 
finite  conditioned  nature  —  therefore 
the  mediation  of  miracles.  The  possi- 
bility of  miracles  is  correctly  proved 
in  a  twofold  way  :  either  by  an  appeal 
to  the  divine  omnipotence,  or  to  the 
idea  of  an  accelerated  natural  process. 
On  the  one  hand,  it  is  argued,  with 
God  nothing  is  impossible ;  on  the 
other,  God  changes  every  year  water 
into  wine,  only  by  a  slower  process 
than  at  Cana.  When,  therefore, 
miracle  is  described  as  an  act  of  God's 
omnipotence,  we  have  named  its  deepest 
ground,  its  possibility;  but  its  actual 
occurrence  is  not  thereby  explained. 
It  is  not  even  explained  by  represent- 
ing that  the  will  of  the  performer  of 
the  miracle  has  become  one  with  the 
will  of  God.  For  our  will  may 
become  one  with  the  will  of  God 
even  in  the  most  profound  resigna- 
tion.     But  in    the  performance  of   a 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   II. 


miracle,  not  only  does  man  become 
one  with  God  in  the  depths  of  the 
divine  will  in  general,  but  God  also 
becomes  one  with  man  in  the  special 
act  in  which  man  performs  the 
miraculous,  with  supernatural  power 
derived  from  God.  When,  therefore, 
we  are  confronted  by  omnipotence,  by 
the  will  of  the  Almighty,  and  conse- 
quently are  deeply  moved  by  the 
infinite  great  probability  of  the  miracle, 
the  question  still  returns,  Will  God 
perform  a  miracle  which  positively 
encroaches  on  miraculous  nature  ?  On 
the  other  hand,  a  miracle  can  as  little 
be  regarded  as  a  mere  extraordinary 
operation  of  the  performer  upon 
nature,  when  we  speak  of  an  accelera- 
tion of  nature.  There  can  be  no 
question,  indeed,  that  as,  on  the  one 
hand,  a  miracle  is  rooted  in  the  omni- 
potence of  God,  so,  on  the  other  hand, 
it  celebrates  its  appearance  in  the 
accelerated  process  of  nature.  If, 
therefore,  we  turn  to  this  conception 
of  the  accelerated  process  of  nature, 
we  certainly  find  that  nature  in  its 
processes  performs  pure  miracles — 
that  it  changes  water  into  wine,  wine 
into  blood,  blood  into  milk ;  and  this 
fact  shows  us  how  plainly  the  miracles 
of  the  kingdom  of  God  are  reflected 


in  similar  natural  phenomena.  These 
thousandfold  similarities  give  us, 
therefore,  again  a  lively  impression  of 
the  near  possibility  of  miracles.  We 
think  that  such  a  process  of  nature 
needs  only  to  be  in  some  degree 
accelerated,  and  a  miracle  will  be  the 
result.  But  if  it  should  come  to  this 
phenomenon  of  an  accelerated  process 
of  nature,  we  must  have  at  any  rate 
the  principle  of  the  process,  its  germ. 
All  processes  of  nature  arise  from 
principles,  which  in  their  ultimate 
grounds  must  be  regarded  as  the 
thoughts  and  operations  of  God.  If 
now  every  common  process  of  nature 
presupposes  a  principle,  much  more 
must  such  a  one  exist  for  an  accelerated 
process :  for  a  miracle  of  healing,  a 
decisive  healing  power  ;  for  the  change 
of  water  into  wine,  the  factor  of  the 
formation  of  wine,  "  the  vine  with  its 
branches."  Accordingly  the  idea  of 
an  accelerated  process  of  nature,  strictly 
considered,  exhibits  only  the  course  of 
a  miracle  when  it  is  already  decided  in 
principle,  just  as  the  appeal  to  the 
omnipotence  of  God  exhibits  only  the 
general  power  of  the  miracle,  without 
deciding  that  the  miracle  shall  actually 
take  place. — J.  P.  Lange,  "Life  of 
Christ." 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Vers.  1,  2.  Marriage  honoured  in  Christ's 
kingdom  on  earth. — The  heavens  had  now 
been  opened  over  the  Son  of  man  and  His 
brethren.  The  heavenly  stairway  on  which 
the  angels  of  God  ascended  and  descended 
remains  eternally  fixed  for  all  who  have  a 
Nathanael's  vision.  To-day,  three  days  after 
Nathanael's  spiritual  marriage  day,  the 
heavenly  ladder  was  set  up  at  the  wedding 
in  Cana.  In  paradise  truly  it  stood  at  the 
beginning  when  the  eternal  Word  instituted 
the  holy  estate  of  marriage.  Afterwards, 
however,  sin  manifoldly  desecrated  this 
divine  law,  grieved  the  blessed  angels, 
who  are  the  guests  of  pious  married  people, 
and  overturned  the  heavenly  ladder.  There- 
fore the  Saviour  comes  now  to  a  marriage 
accompanied  by  the  blessed  angels,  in  order 
to  irradiate  and  adore  the  estate  of  marriage 
by  the  revelation  of  His  glory.  Our 
fathers  delighted  especially  to  make  use 
of  this  incident  to  the  advantage  and  honour 


of  the  married  state.  Thus  Spangenberg,  in 
his  Mirror  of  Marriage,  says  that  the 
Lord  Jesus  at  the  beginning  of  His  ministry 
wished  to  proclaim  Himself  to  be  the 
Saviour  of  the  estate  of  matrimony,  ' '  which 
is  the  first  and  most  ancient  estate,  and 
which  His  Father  had  ordained  in  paradise, 
but  which  afterward  was  so  sorrowfully 
marred  by  the  devil's  lies  that  He  requiied 
again  to  restore  it.  Thus  He  accepted  and 
honoured  it,  especially  since  this  estate  is  of 
universalimportance,  and  that  theseothertwo 
orders,  the  ministry  and  magistracy,  depend 
upon  it.  Because,  therefore,  the  estate  of 
matrimony  thus  stands  first,  our  Lord  Christ 
wrought  His  first  miracle  to  honour  it.  .  .  . 
Who  then  will  not  look  with  favour  on  the 
married  state,  since  the  Son  of  God  has 
hououred  it  so  greatly,  and  set  such  a  beauti- 
ful golden  crown  on  its  head  in  working  His 
first  miracle  on  its  behalf?" — Translated 
from  Besser. 

73 


CHAP.   II. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


Vers.  1,  2.  A  marriage  on  which  Christ's 
blessing  rests  is  an  eternal  union. — "  0  happy 
house  where  Thou  art  received,  Thou  blessed 
friend  of  men,  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  where 
among  all  the  guests  present  Thou  art  the 
most  honoured  and  beloved !  "  How  many 
are  joined  together,  the  "  matchmaker  "being 
monetary  considerations,  sense  intoxication, 
vanity,  or  levity  !  The  counsel  of  parents 
is  often  never  desired  even.  A  mistake  in 
the  choice  of  a  calling  is  a  most  serious 
misfortune  ;  not  less  great  a  misfortune  is  it 
to  make  a  mistake  in  the  choice  of  a  partner 
for  life.  To  some,  indeed,  marriage  is  merely 
a  bargain :  the  entry  of  their  names  in  the 
legal  register  is  considered  sufficient ;  they 
think  nothing  about  the  religious  order.  To 
others  marriage  is  a  solemn,  preconcerted, 
reciprocal  lie.  To  others  it  seems  a  prison- 
house  from  which  there  is  no  escape.  In 
the  case  of  those  who  regard  it  in  such 
lights,  the  first  pages  of  the  family  chronicle 
do  not  mention  that  "  Jesus  was  bidden  to 
the  wedding."  Even  the  sense  of  the 
beautiful,  the  aesthetic,  will  not  suffice  as 
a  true  wedding  bond.  A  fine  taste  is  not  a 
pure  heart.  The  wedded  pair  may  anxiously 
concern  themselves  as  to  whether  the 
pictures  in  their  rooms  are  properly  hung 
or  not,  and  so  forth ;  but  do  they  also  ask 
themselves  whether  their  wills  are  in  accord- 
ance with  God's  will  ?  Do  they  not  consider 
that  Jesus  would  willingly  come  to-day  also, 
if  in  betrothals  and  weddings  His  counsel 
were  asked,  and  He  were  invited  to  be 
present  ?  Would  He  not  cause  marriage, 
from  being  merely  a  being  beside  each  other, 
to  become  a  union  with  each  other  for  time 
and  for  eternity  ?  Would  He  not  build  up 
the  homes  of  our  native  land  in  simplicity, 
faithfulness,  chastity,  and  patriotism  ?  0 
King  of  glory,  Head  of  Thy  Church,  Giver  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  build  up  what  threatens  to 
fall  in  ruins,  fill  the  hearts  of  the  people 
with  an  invincible  reverence  for  the  sanctity 
of  marriage,  inscribe  even  on  the  wedding 
ring  the  truth  that  love  "believeth  all 
things,  hopeth  all  things,  endureth  all 
things,"  and  "  manifest  forth  Thy  glory." — 
Translated  from  Dr.  R.  Kogel. 

Ver.  2.  The  hallowing  of  common  life. — It 
is  not  without  meaning  that  Jesns  began 
His  work  by  sanctioning  and  hallowing 
common,  and  especially  family,  life.  What 
a  contrast  there  is  between  the  simple  glad- 
ness of  the  rustic  wedding  and  the  tempta- 
tion in  the  wilderness,  from  which  Jesus  had 
just  come  1  What  a  contrast  between  the 
sublime  heights  of  the  prologue  and  this 
opening  scene  of  the  ministry  !  What  a  con- 
trast between  the  rigid,  ascetic  forerunner  and 
this  Son  of  man  !  How  unlike  the  anticipa- 
tions of  the  disciples,  who  would  be  all  ting- 
ling with  expectation  of  the  first  exhibition 
of  His  Messiahship  !  Surely  the  fact  that  His 

74 


first  act  was  to  hallow  marriage  and  family 
life  has  opened  a  fountain  of  sacred  blessing. 
So  He  breaks  down  that  wicked  division  of 
life  into  sacred  and  secular  which  has 
damaged  both  parts  so  much.  So  He 
teaches  that  the  sphere  of  religion  is  this 
world,  not  only  another.  So  He  claims  as 
the  subjects  of  His  sanctifying  power  every 
relation  of  manhood.  So  He  says  at  the 
beginning  of  His  career  :  I  am  a  man,  and 
nothing  that  belongs  to  manhood  do  I 
reckon  foreign  to  Myself.  Where  He  has 
trod  is  hallowed  ground.  The  participation 
of  the  prince  in  the  festivities  of  his  people 
dignifies  these.  Our  King  has  sat  at  a 
wedding  feast,  and  the  memory  of  His  pre- 
sence there, adds  a  new  sacredness  to  the 
sacredest  and  a  new  sweetness  to  the 
sweetest  of  human  ties.  The  consecration 
of  His  presence,  like  some  pungent  and 
perennial  perfume,  lingers  yet  in  the  else 
scentless  air  of  daily  life.  "  Sanctity "  is 
not  "singularity."  We  need  not  withdraw 
from  any  region  of  activity  or  interest  for 
affection  or  intellect,  in  order  to  develop  the 
whitest  saintliness.  Christ's  saints  are  to 
be  "in  the  world,  not  of  it,"  like  their 
Master,  who  went  from  the  wilderness  and 
its  fearful  conflicts  to  begin  His  work  amid 
the  homely  rejoicings  of  a  village  wedding. 
— Dr.  A.  Maclaren. 

Ver.  5.  A  word  enough. — Speak  but  a  word, 
mighty  Saviour,  and  I  shall  be  helped.  My 
soul  is  cast  down  ;  yet  speak  but  a  word,  and 
I  shall  be  relieved.  Care  and  unrest  disturb 
my  heart ;  yet  speak  but  a  word,  and  my 
heart  shall  be  at  peace.  The  wine  of  joy,  of 
trust  in  Thee,  is  lacking  in  me,  and  1  can 
only  shed  streams  of  water  in  tears ;  yet 
speak  but  a  word,  and  pitchers  full  of  com- 
fort and  refreshment  will  be  given  to  me. 
My  heart  is  still  hard  as  a  stone  ;  yet  speak 
but  a  word,  and  it  shall  become  tender  and 
shall  melt.  I  have  now  none  of  the  grace  of 
prayerfulness,  and  feel  myself  like  a  dumb 
man  who  cannot  utter  a  word ;  yet  speak 
but  a  word,  and  the  bonds  of  my  tongue  will 
be  unloosed,  so  that  I  shall  be  able  to  cry 
"  Abba,  Father."  So  too  in  regard  to  temporal 
wants.  I  and  my  wife  and  children  have 
not  bread,  have  not  the  things  needful  for 
this  life  ;  yet  speak  but  a  word,  and  the 
windows  of  heaven  shall  open,  and  Thy 
blessings  descend.  For  Thou  art  able  to  do 
this:  Thou  hast  the  power.  It  will  cost 
Thee  nothing  but  a  word,  a  sign,  a  move- 
ment of  Thine  almighty  will.  Thus  is  the 
omnipotence  of  Jesus  a  stoop  on  which  faith 
may  lean. — Luther. 

Vers.  9,  10.  The  best  at  last— The  ruler's 
half-jesting  speech  compliments  the  bride- 
groom's cellar  at  the  expense  of  his  prudence, 
and  in  its  intention  is  simply  a  suggestion 
that  he  is  wasting  his  best  wine  in  producing 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.    II. 


it  when  palates  are  less  sensitive  than  at  the 
beginning  of  the  entertainment.  But  it  sug- 
gests a  higher  thought.  Christ  keeps  His  best 
till  last,  whereas  the  world  gives  its  best  first ; 
and  when  palates  are  dulled  and  appetite 
diminished,  "then  that  which  is  worse." 
How  tragically  true  that  is  1  In  many  lives 
the  early  days  of  hope  and  vigour,  when  all 
was  fresh  and  wondrous,  contrast  miserably 
with  the  dreary  close,  when  habit  and  failing 
strength  have  taken  the  edge  off  all  delights 
of  sense,  and  memory  like  a  lengthening 
chain  is  dragged  along,  and  with  memory 
regrets  and  remorse.  In  the  weariness  and 
monotony  of  toilsome  middle  life,  and  in 
the  deepening  shadows  of  advanced  and 
solitary  old  age,  worldly  men  have  to  drink 
the  dregs  of  the  once  foaming  cup,  which 
"  at  the  last  biteth  like  a  serpent."  But 
Jesus  keeps  the  best  for  the  end.  No  time 
can  cloy  His  gifts,  but  advancing  years  make 
them  more  precious  and  necessary.  Inv 
His  service  "better  is  the  end  of  a  thing 
than  the  beginning  thereof  "  ;  and  when  life 
is  over  here,  and  we  pass  into  the  heavens, 
this  word  of  the  ruler  at  the  humble  feast 
will  serve  to  express  our  thankful  surprise 
at  finding  all  so  much  better  than  our  highest 
hopes  and  sweetest  experiences  :  "  Thou  hast 
kept  the  good  wine  until  now." 

"  The  best  is  yet  to  be, 
The   last   of  life,   for  which   the   first  was 
planned." — Dr.  A.  Maclaren. 

Ver.  10.  The  marriage  feast. — One  circum- 
stance in  connection  with  this  marriage  feast 
is  worthy  of  special  attention.  Such  fes- 
tivities in  the  East  lasted  from  a  day  or  two 
to  a  whole  week.  Perhaps  the  feast  had 
lasted  a  day  or  more  when  Jesus  and  His 
disciples  arrived  ;  and  as  they  were  probably 
unexpected  guests,  and  the  entertainers  in 
humble  circumstances,  if  not  poor,  the  supply 
of  wine  ran  short.  Jesus,  by  a  miracle  of 
power  and  benevolence,  supplied  this  lack. 
Now  in  reference  to  this  it  may  be  remarked, 

(1)  as  Luther  says,  that  we  are  not  to  allow 
that  "  carnally  minded  men  can  find  in  this 
passage  an  excuse  for  revelry,  drunkenness, 
and  luxuriousness  at  wedding  feasts."  We 
cannot  imagine  the  Lord  Jesus  being  present 
at  a  feast  characterised  by  drunken  revelry. 

(2)  On  the  other  hand,  we  must  also  re- 
member that  Jesus  Christ  whilst  on  earth 
was  no  ascetic.  He  did  nothing  to  encourage 
a  common  idea  that  religious  people  must  be 
ascetics — indeed,  by  His  example  He  showed 
the  error  of  such  an  idea.  And  there  was 
nothing  inconsistent  in  His  supplying  wine 
miraculously  for  the  guests  at  the  feast.  It 
is  doubtful  whether  the  argument  can  be 
sustained,  that  the  wine  produced  by  the 
miracle  was  unfermented,  although  it  is 
impossible  to  dogmatise  on  the  point.  This 
must  be  said,  however,  that  in  a  wine-pro- 
ducing   country   like   Palestine    there    was, 


and  is,  little  or  no  drunkenness  among  the 
natives.  And  the  true  basis  of  temperance 
or  abstinence  from  intoxicants  is  that  laid 
down  by  the  apostle  in  his  Epistle  to  the 
Corinthians  :  "  Wherefore  if  meat  make  my 
brother  to  offend  [or  stumble],  I  will  eat  no 
flesh  while  the  world  standeth,  lest  I  make 
my  brother  to  stumble "  (1  Cor.  viii.  13 ; 
Rom.  xiv.  21).  Such  is  the  Christian  rule  to 
which  we  in  this  country  should  take  heed. 

Ver.  11.  All  miracles  are  included  in  the 
Incarnation. — Should  not  the  tree  of  life  of 
the  new  aeon  be  able  to  bear  this  crown  with- 
out breaking  down,  and  put  forth  the  flowers 
which  adorn  it  from  its  own  internal  vital 
power  ?  Let  it  not  be  forgotten  bow  high 
the  tree  rises  toward  heaven,  how  deep  and 
wide  its  roots  spread  through  the  life  of 
all  humanity.  When  a  young  alpine  stream, 
under  the  impulse  of  its  great  destiny,  hastens 
down  into  the  wide  world,  it  shows  signs  of 
the  region  of  its  origin  ;  waterfalls  and 
passages  forced  through  rocks  testify  of  the 
original  freshness  of  its  power.  But  when 
Christianity  rushes  down  from  the  heavenly 
heights  of  the  God-man  into  the  low-lying 
tracts  of  a  human  world  (nature-enthralled 
and  sunk  in  misery),  and  in  its  first  irruption 
carries  away  with  it  the  great  stone  of  the 
sepulchre,  here,  as  in  the  alpine  scenery,  the 
second  miracle  is  not  greater  than  the  first  ; 
rather  is  it  purely  natural  in  relation  to  the 
first. — J.  P.  Lange. 

Ver.  11.  The  motive  of  Christ's  miracles. — 
What  then  was  the  motive  of  Christ's 
miracles  ?  He  was,  as  these  first  disciples 
owned  Him,  the  King  of  God's  kingdom 
among  men.  He  was  the  ideal  Man,  the  new 
Adam,  the  true  Source  of  human  goodness, 
health,  and  power.  He  came  to  do  us  good, 
and  the  Spirit  of  God  filled  His  human  nature 
to  its  utmost  capacity,  that  it  might  do  all 
that  man  can  do.  Having  these  powers,  He 
could  not  but  use  them  for  men.  Having 
power  to  heal,  He  could  not  but  heal,  irre- 
spective of  the  result  which  the  miracle 
might  have  on  the  faith  of  those  who  saw 
it ;  nay,  He  could  not  but  heal,  though  He 
straightly  charged  the  healed  person  to  let  no 
man  know  what  had  been  done.  His  miracles 
were  His  kingly  acts,  by  which  He  suggested 
what  man's  true  life  in  God's  kingdom 
should  be  and  will  be.  They  were  the 
utterance  of  what  was  in  Him,  the  manifes- 
tation of  His  glory,  the  glory  of  One  who 
came  to  utter  the  Father's  heart  to  His 
strayed  children.  They  expressed  good-will 
to  men  ;  and  to  the  spiritual  eye  of  St.  John 
they  became  "  signs "  of  spiritual  wonders, 
symbols  and  pledges  of  those  greater  works 
and  eternal  blessings  which  Jesus  came  to 
bestow.  The  miracles  revealed  the  divine 
compassion,  the  grace  and  helpfulness  that 
were  in  Christ,  and  led  men  to  trust  Him  for 

75 


CHAP.   II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


all  their  needs.  We  must,  therefore,  beware 
of  falling  into  the  error  that  lies  at  the  other 
extreme.  We  must  neither,  on  the  one 
hand,  suppose  that  Christ's  miracles  were 
wrought  solely  for  the  purpose  of  establishing 
His  claim  to  be  God's  viceroy  on  earth  ;  nor, 
on  the  other  hand,  are  we  to  suppose  that 
the  marvels  of  beneficence  by  which  He  was 
known  did  nothing  to  prove  His  claim  or  pro- 
mote His  kingdom.  The  poet  writes  because 
he  is  a  poet,  and  not  to  convince  the  world 
that  he  is  a  poet;  yet  by  writing  he  does 
convince  the  world.  The  benevolent  man 
acts  just  as  Christ  did  when  He  seemed  to 


lay  His  finger  on  His  lips  and  warned  the 
healed  person  to  make  no  mention  of  this 
kind  act  to  any  one ;  and  therefore  all  who 
do  discover  His  actions  know  that  He  is 
really  charitable.  The  act  that  a  man  does 
in  order  that  he  may  be  recognised  as  a  good 
and  benevolent  person  exhibits  his  love  of 
recognition  much  more  strikingly  than  his 
benevolence  ;  and  it  is  because  the  miracles 
of  Christ  were  wrought  from  the  purest 
and  most  self-denying  compassion  that  ever 
explored  and  bound  up  the  wounds  of  men 
that  we  acknowledge  Him  as  incontestably 
our  King. — Br.  Marcus  Bods. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13—17. 

The  cleansing  of  the  temple. — The  incident  recorded  in  these  verses  occurred 
on  the  first  visit  of  the  Redeemer  (during  His  public  ministry)  to  Jerusalem 
at  the  passover  feast.  Hitherto  His  teaching  had  been  confined  to  the  rural 
district  of  Galilee.  Among  the  quiet  Galilean  villages,  or  at  most  in  some 
of  the  towns  situated  on  the  margin  of  the  inland  lake,  He  had  preached 
the  word  of  the  kingdom  gently  and  lovingly  to  those  who  had  "  ears  to  hear," 
and  had  "  manifested  His  glory  "  in  miracle,  so  that  the  faith  of  His  disciples 
was  strengthened  and  confirmed.  But  the  passover  was  nigh,  and,  in  accordance 
with  the  customs  of  the  law,  Jesus  went  up  to  Jerusalem.  And  there  in  this 
incident  He  began  to  unfold  the  spiritual  nature  of  His  office  and  work, 
experiencing  in  consequence  the  first  open  symptoms  of  antagonism  from  the 
rulers  of  the  Jewish  people. 

Consider,  first,  the  incident  itself,  and  then  its  general  and  individual  lessons. 

I.  The  incident. — On  reaching  the  holy  city  the  Saviour's  steps  were  soon 
directed  to  the  temple ;  and  there  He  found  a  state  of  things  utterly  intolerable. 
The  temple  area  appears  to  have  been  divided  into  three  enclosures  or  courts. 
In  the  inner  enclosure  lay  the  temple  building  itself,  with  the  court  of  the 
priests  surrounding  it ;  beyond  that  was  the  court  of  the  people ;  and  then, 
divided  off  from  that  by  what  was  known  as  the  middle  wall  of  partition,  lay  the 
court  of  the  Gentiles.  It  was  in  the  last  of  these  enclosures  that  the  traffic 
which  led  to  this  incident  was  carried  on.  It  was  no  doubt  meant  for  the 
convenience  of  the  people.  At  the  passovertide  ten's  of  thousands  of  Jews  from 
every  country  almost  in  the  then  known  world  thronged  the  holy  city.  It  was 
necessary  for  them  to  exchange  their  foreign  moneys  for  current  coin,  etc. ;  hence 
the  tables  of  the  money-changers.  Then,  considering  the  immense  number  of  sacri- 
fices offered  at  the  feast,  in  addition  to  those  required  for  the  daily  and  ordinary 
sacrifices,  the  necessity  for  a  kind  of  stock  market  was  undoubted.  But  it 
certainly  showed  how  little  real  reverence  the  Jewish  leaders  had  for  the 
worship  of  God  when  they  permitted  all  this  to  go  on  within  the  enclosures  of 
the  temple  area.  And  it  needs  only  a  slight  acquaintance  with  exchanges  and 
cattle  markets  to  conceive  how  every  sight  and  sound,  how  the  turmoil  within  the 
sacred  precincts,  must  have  hindered  the  worship  of  God's  house.  Then  nil  this 
was  done  in  the  court  of  the  Gentiles — the  nearest  point  to  the  temple  the  Gentiles 
could  reach.  Thus  not  only  was  their  space  curtailed,  but  what  must  have 
been  the  feeling  of  earnest  men  among  them  when  they  observed  this  buying  and 
selling,  chaffering  and  trading,  in  the  courts  of  that  house  which  was  to  be  an 
house  of  prayer  for  all  nations  ?  The  Gentiles  were  admitted  to  the  court  named 
after  them  so  that  they  might  become  attracted  to  the  religion  and  worship  of 
Jehovah.     But  what  was  there  in  that  clamouring,  chaffering  crowd,  bleating 

76 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  ii. 


of  sheep,  etc.,  to  lift  their  thoughts  heavenward?  What  likelihood  was  there 
that  in  that  scene  of  traffic  the  prayer  of  Ps.  Ixvii.  would  be  answered  ?  We  do 
not  wonder,  then,  that  Jesus,  consumed  with  the  zeal  of  His  Father's  house, 
should  have  acted  as  He  did.  Making  a  scourge — probably  of  materials  lying 
scattered  about — He  drove  the  animals  out  of  the  court,  overturned  the  tables  of 
the  money-changers,  producing  silence  and  order  where  formerly  noise  and  confusion 
had  prevailed.  Notice  should  be  taken  of  the  language  used  by  the  Saviour  in 
doing  this  action.  When  a  boy  in  that  same  temple,  while  sitting  among  the 
doctors,  hearing,  etc.  (Luke  ii.  46),  He  had  declared  that  He  was  about  His  Father's 
business.  In  this  incident  He  showed  the  source  of  His  authority  in  asserting 
that  the  temple  was  His  Father's  house.  Here  we  have  His  distinct  and  clear 
claim  from  the  beginning  of  His  ministry  to  be  the  divine  Son  and  the  Messiah. 
The  Jewish  leaders  well  knew  He  meant  to  assert  this  claim.  Hence  their 
demand  for  a  sign,  some  miraculous  or  extraordinary  manifestation  of  the 
power  He  professed  to  wield.  In  this  question  we  seem  anew  to  detect  Satan, 
the  adversary,  attacking  Christ  as  he  did  before  on  the  pinnacle  of  the  temple  : 
"  If  Thou  be  the  Son  of  God,"  etc.  (Matt.  iv.  6),  give  an  evident  sign  of  your 
divine  Sonship,  and  the  people  will  believe  and  follow.  But  in  this  very 
incident,  had  they  not  been  blinded,  those  Jews  might  have  found  the  sign  they 
desired.  The  Messiah  had  suddenly  appeared  in  His  temple  to  be  "  as  a  refiner 
and  purifier,"  etc.  (Mai.  iii.  3).  And  the  rejection  by  those  men  of  such  comings 
in  mercy,  etc.,  ushered  in  the  day  when  His  judgments  were  made  manifest  in 
the  withdrawal  of  their  privileges  as  a  race.  • 

II.  The  spiritual  meaning  of  the  incident. — The  ministry  of  our  Lord  was 
not  ended  at  His  ascension.  His  work  on  earth  was  in  a  great  measure  the 
opening  and  typical  prelude  of  His  work  as  mediator  in  heaven.     He  still 

'  Pursues  in  heaven  His  mighty  plan, 
The  Saviour  and  the  Friend  of  man." 

He  still  sits  as  a  refiner  and  purifier  of  silver ;  still  the  prophetic  promise  holds 
good  that  He  shall  come  suddenly  to  His  temple  to  purge  and  purify.  He  has 
done  so,  and  will  do  so  until  the  end.  See  how  true  this  is  in  the  history  of  the 
Church.  It  was  not  long  after  His  ascension  that  the  warning  voice  again  was 
heard.  In  the  case  of  the  Church  at  Laodicea,  and  others  of  the  Churches  in 
Roman  Asia,  we  hear  Him  saying,  "  Take  these  things  hence."  Then  those  who 
disregarded  the  warning  voice  had  their  light  as  Christian  Churches  quenched, 
just  as  the  Jewish  temple  and  worship  were  destroyed  and  the  disobedient  people 
scattered.  Later  in  the  Church's  history,  when  new  empires  had  risen  on  fallen 
Rome's  broad  foundations,  there  followed  for  the  Church  a  long  period  of  outward 
prosperity.  But  along  with  this  much  of  evil  was  mingled.  The  world  and  the 
world's  traffic  and  pleasure  penetrated  even  to  the  inner  sanctuary,  whilst  the 
noise  and  clamour  of  it  all  drowned  the  voice  of  praise  and  prayer,  crushed  down 
the  aspirations  of  devotion  and  worship.  Therefore  the  great  Purifier  again 
appeared,  and  in  the  turmoil  and  overturning  of  the  Reformation  period  He 
swept  away  much  of  the  worldliness  and  materialism  which  was  hindering  the 
Church's  spiritual  life,  awakening  men  to  a  higher  spiritual  life  and  purer 
worship.  He  is  ever  watchful.  He  has  the  same  zeal  now  for  the  purity  of 
His  Father's  spiritual  temple.  "  His  fan  is  in  His  hand,"  etc.  (Matt.  iii.  12). 
When  Churches  become  selfish,  material,  worldly,  forgetting  their  true  mission, 
let  them  beware  !  To-day  outward  success  is  greatly  sought — increasing  numbers, 
overflowing  coffers.  The  world  is  stealing  in  on  the  Church  in  many  ways. 
There  is  much  danger  of  the  spiritual  life  being  neglected  through  men  being 
engrossed  in  this  material  progress.  Then  the  Lord  may  have  to  come  in 
judgment  to  purify  before  He  can  come  to  bless. 

77 


CHAP.   II. 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


III.  Lessons  of  the  incident. — This  incident  brings  personal  and  individual 
lessons.  "  There  is  but  one  temple  in  the  universe,"  says  Novalis,  "  and  that  is 
the  body  of  man."  "Ye  are  the  temple  of  God"  (2  Cor.  vi.  16),  said  St.  Paul. 
In  these  bodies  of  ours,  when  our  life  has  been  yielded  to  Christ,  God's  Holy 
Spirit  dwells.  Let  Christian  people  beware  lest  they  fall  into  the  careless  and 
irreverent  conduct  of  the  Jewish  priests,  and  permit  the  sacred  precincts  to 
become  a  mart  of  business,  a  den  of  thieves,  of  sinful  thoughts,  feelings,  etc.,  so 
that  the  noise  of  the  world's  voices  overpowers  the  accents  of  devotion.  Into  our 
churches — those  places  sacred  to  worship — no  sounds  of  the  world's  business, 
etc.,  should  be  permitted  to  come.  So  should  it  be  with  Christian  people  as  with 
reverent  hearts  they  bow  in  God's  holy  house  of  prayer.  Their  public  and 
private  worship  should  be  as  far  as  possible  free  from  the  inroads  of  the  business 
of  life.  Our  Redeemer  in  this  also  gave  us  an  example  that  we  should  follow 
in  His  steps  (vi.  15;  Matt.  xiv.  23,  etc.).  But  how  often  is  the  worship  of 
God's  house  profaned  with  worldly  thoughts,  vain  imaginations,  etc.,  and 
prayer  stifled  in  its  very  inception  !  And  is  not  the  heart — the  temple  of  God 
for  the  individual — often  so  crowded  with  other  things  that  the  sounds  of 
the  world  predominate,  and  the  voice  of  God  is  unheard  and  unheeded  in 
the  multitudinous  roar  ?  There  is  no  true  holy  of  holies  in  such  hearts.  To 
those  in  such  case  spiritual  worship  is  unknown.  They  are  immersed  in  the 
traffic  of  the  market-place,  warehouse,  etc.  The  sights  and  sounds  of  places 
of  amusement  are  oftener  before  them  than  the  sanctities  of  worship.  Let 
Christian  people  be  jealous  for  the  honour  of  God's  spiritual  house,  the  Church ; 
and  let  that  temple  be  not  profaned  which  He  hath  chosen  to  dwell  in — the 
temple  of  "  a  broken  and  contrite  heart"  etc. 


HOMILETIC  NOTES. 


Ver.  15.  On  the  peace-breakers  lies  the 
burden  of  war. — 1.  Shall  we  consider 
the  superficial  objection  as  to  whether 
it  was  right  or  not  to  disturb  the 
honest  trade  of  those  people,  since 
animals  for  the  temple  sacrifices  were 
indispensable,  and  to  "  pour  out "  the 
exchangers'  money  without  concern  as 
to  whether  any  of  the  pieces  should  be 
lost  ?  Or  shall  we  reply  to  the  opinion 
that  the  indignation  seen  in  Christ's 
eye  and  the  scourge  in  His  hand  seem 
to  indicate  the  presence  of  passionate- 
ness?  2.  If  a  breach  of  the  peace 
took  place,  the  blame  lay  on  the 
shoulders  of  the  temple  authorities.  If 
the  order  of  the  house  was  to  be  main- 
tained, who  could  better  carry  out  the 
doing  of  it  than  the  Son  in  the  Father's 
name?  Here  certainly  there  is  no 
passionateness,  but  on  the  contrary 
holiness,  and  a  merciful,  sympathetic 
heart  for  souls  in  danger.  Here  we 
find  reformative  action  in  the  footsteps 
of  Jeremiah  the  prophet  (Jer.  vii.  2-11). 

78 


Here  is  the  angel  of  the  covenant  fore- 
told by  Malachi  (Mai.  iii.  1-5).  Here 
is  the  obedience  that  eighteen  years 
previously  had  asked,  "  Must  I  not 
be  about  My  Father's  business  ? " 
(Luke  ii.  49).—  Dr.  R.  Kogel. 

Ver.  17.  "  The  zeal  of  Thine  house."— 
The  disciples  who  heard  Jesus  had  also 
heard  Him  speak  of  the  heavenly 
ladder — Himself — on  which  the  angels 
of  God  should  ascend  and  descend. 
They  had  been  witnesses  of  the  won- 
drous change  of  water  into  wine  at  His 
command.  Thus  so  little  were  they 
perplexed  at  the  action  of  our  Lord, 
that  they  saw  in  it  the  fulfilment  of 
the  Psalmist's  words,  "  The  zeal  of 
Thine  house,"  etc.  (Ps.  lxix.  9). 

Vers.  15-17.  The  distinction  of  this 
incident  from  the  similar  incident  re- 
corded in  the  Synoptists.  —  I.  The 
Synoptists  narrate  a  cleansing  of  the 
temple  as  having  taken  place  on  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.    II. 


day  of  the  triumphal  entry  into  Jeru- 
salem before  the  last  passover  (Matt. 
xxi.  12  ;  Mark  xi.  15  ff. ;  Luke  xix.  45). 
Of  such  an  incident  there  is  no  trace  in 
St.  John  (xii.  12  ff.),  and  curiously  the 
Synoptists  have  no  trace  of  an  earlier 
cleansing.  It  has  been  supposed  that 
the  event  has  been  transposed  in  the 
synoptic  narratives  owing  to  the  fact 
that  they  give  no  account  of  the  Lord's 
ministry  at  Jerusalem  before  the  last 
journey  ;  but  a  comparison  of  the  two 
narratives  is  against  the  identification. 
1 .  The  exact  connection  of  the  event  is 
in  each  case  given  in  detail.  2.  There 
is  a  significant  difference  "in  the  words 
used  to  justify  the  acts  (ii.  16  ;  Mark 
xi.  17).  3.  In  the  record  of  the  later 
incident  there  is  no  reference  to  the 
remarkable  words  (ii.  19)  which  give 
its  colour  to  the  narrative  of  St.  John, 
though  the  Synoptists  show  that  they 
were  not  unacquainted  with  thosa  words 
(Matt.  xxvi.  61  ;  Mark  xiv.  58). 

II.  1.  There  is  no  improbability  in  the 
repetition  of  such  an  incident.     Both 


were  connected  with  the  revelation 
of  Jesus  as  Messiah — first  when  He 
claimed  His  royal  power  at  the  entrance 
of  His  work,  and  again  at  the  close. 
2.  In  the  interval  He  had  fulfilled  the 
office  of  a  simple  prophet.  In  the  first 
case,  so  to  speak,  the  incident  was 
doubtful ;  in  the  second  it  was  decided. 
Hence  the  difference  in  details,  e.g. 
the  force  of  the  addition  "  a  house  of 
prayer  for  allnations  "  in  prospect  of  the 
Passion  and  His  rejection  by  the  Jews, 
which  has  noplace  in  the  first  incident, 
when  He  enters  as  a  son  His  Father's 
house.  Again,  the  words  a  house  of 
merchandise  are  in  the  second  incident 
represented  by  its  last  issue  :  "  a  den 
of  thieves."  John  records  the  incident 
which  occurs  at  the  beginning  of  Christ's 
ministry,  because  it  was  the  first  crisis 
in  the  separation  of  faith  and  unbelief. 
The  Synoptists,  from  the  construction  of 
their  narratives,  included  the  later  inci- 
dent ;  and  as  the  latter  was  virtually 
included  in  the  former,  St.  John  does  not 
give  it. — Abridged  from  Westcott. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Vers.  14,  15.  Christ  cleansing  His  Church. 
— For  us  this  cleansing  of  the  temple  is  a 
.  sign.  It  is  a  sign  that  Christ  really  means 
to  do  thoroughly  the  great  work  He  has 
taken  in  hand.  Long  ago  had  it  been  said, 
"Behold,  the  Lord,  whom"  ye  seek,  shall 
suddenly  come  to  His  temple  ;  and  He  shall 
sit  as  a  refiner  and  purifier  of  silver." 
He  was  to  come  to  sift  the  true  from 
the  false,  the  worldly  and  greedy  from 
the  devoted  and  spiritual.  He  was  not 
to  make  pretence  of  doing  so,  but  actually 
to  accomplish  the  separation.  To  reform 
abuses  such  as  this  marketing  in  the 
temple  was  no  pleasant  task.  He  had  to 
meet  the  gaze  and  defy  the  vindictiveness 
of  an  exasperated  mob  ;  He  had  "to  make 
enemies  of  a  powerful  class  in  the  community. 
But  He  does  what  is  called  for  by  the  cir- 
cumstances :  and  this  is  but  a  part  and  a 
sample  of  the  work  He  does  always.  Always 
He  makes  thorough,  real  work.  He  does  not 
blink  the  requirements  of  the  case.  We 
shrug  our  shoulders  and  pass  by  where 
matters  are  difficult  to  mend ;  we  let  the 
flood  take  its  course  rather  than  risk  being 
carried  away  in  attempting  to  stem  it.  Not 
so  Christ.  The  temple  was  shortly  to  be  de- 
stroyed, and  it  might  seem  to  matter  little 
what  practices  were  allowed  in  it ;  but  the 


sounds  of  bargaining  and  the  greedy  eye  of 
trade  could  not  be  suffered  by  Him  in  His 
Father's  house  :  how  much  more  shall  He 
burn  as  a  consuming  fire  when  He  cleanses 
that  Church  for  which  he  gave  Himself  that 
it  might  be  without  spot  or  blemish  1  He  will 
cleanse  it.  We  may  yield  ourselves  with 
gladness  to  His  sanctifying  power,  or  we 
may  rebelliously  question  His  authority  ; 
but  cleansed  the  house  of  God  must  be. — 
Dr.  Marcus  Dods. 

Ver.  17.  True  zeal. — Let  us  take  heed  we 
do  not  sometimes  call  that  zeal  for  God  and 
His  gospel  which  is  nothing  else  but  our  own 
tempestuous  and  stormy  passion.  True  zeal 
is  a  sweet,  heavenly,  and  gentle  flame,  which 
maketh  us  active  for  God,  but  always  within 
the  sphere  of  love.  It  never  calls  for  fire  from 
heaven  to  consume  those  that  differ  a  little 
from  us  in  their  apprehensions.  It  is  like 
that  kind  of  lightning  (which  the  philo- 
sophers speak  of)  that  melts  the  sword 
within,  but  singeth  not  the  scabbard ;  it 
strives  to  save  the  soul,  but  hurteth  not  the 
body.  True  zeal  is  a  loving  thing,  and  makes 
us  always  active  to  edification,  and  not  to 
destruction.  If  we  keep  the  fire  of  zeal 
within  the  chimney,  in  its  own  proper  place, 
it   never  doth  any  hurt — it   only   warmeth, 

79 


chap.  ii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN. 


quickeneth,  and  enliveneth  us  ;  but  if  once  up  all  that  stands  before  it.  True  zeal  is 
we  let  it  break  out,  and  catch  hold  of  the  like  the  vital  heat  in  us  that  we  live  upon, 
thatch  of  our  flesh,  and  kindle  our  corrupt  which  we  never  feel  to  be  angry  or  trouble- 
nature,  and  set  the  house  of  our  body  on  fire,  some  ;  but  though  it  gently  feeds  upon  the 
it  is  no  longer  zeal,  it  is  no  heavenly  fire — it  radial  oil  within  us,  that  sweet  balsam  of  our 
is  a  most  destructive  and  devouring  thing.  natural  moisture,  yet  it  lives  lovingly  with 
True  zeal  is  an  ignis  lan/ibens,  a  soft  and  it,  and  maintains  that  by  which  it  is  fed ; 
gentle  flame,  that  will  not  scorch  one's  hand ;  but  that  other  furious  and  distempered  zeal 
it  is  no  predatory  or  voracious  thing  :  but  is  nothing  else  but  a  fever  in  the  soul. — 
carnal  or  fleshly  zeal  is  like  the  spirit  of  R.  Cudworth. 
gunpowder  set  on  fire,  that  tears  and  blows 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  18—25. 

The  sign  Christ  gave  of  His  authority  in  cleansing  the  temple. — The  Jewish 
leaders  could  not  bring  any  accusation  against  Christ  for  His  zeal  in  vindicating 
the  honour  of  His  Father's  house.  In  their  secret  hearts  they  recognised  the 
necessity  for  such  an  action,  and  they  were  no  doubt  well  aware  that  the  great 
body  of  the  people  would  be  in  sympathy  with  Christ's  action.  But  unmoved 
themselves  by  the  clear  expression  of  divine  power  and  activity  manifested  in 
the  action  of  Jesus,  they  fell  back  on  the  device,  so  often  resorted  to  by  them,  to 
demand  outward  signs  and  miracles  in  proof  of  Christ's  divine  authority — signs 
which,  when  given,  only  made  their  unbelief  and  hatred  more  conspicuous. 
Christ  gave  them  an  answer,  although  not  that  which  they  asked  for.  He  well 
knew  that  no  mere  outward  signs  could  remove  unbelief,  that  miracle  would  be 
demanded  to  establish  miracle,  and  that  even  the  signs  He  wrought  would  be 
twisted,  as  they  were  afterward,  to  His  prejudice  by  His  enemies.  But  He 
gave  a  sign  which  would  not  only,  when  it  occurred,  vindicate  His  action  in  the 
eyes  of  all  unprejudiced  men,  but  would  tend  to  strengthen  the  faith  of  His 
disciples.  "  Destroy  this  temple,"  He  said,  "  and  in  three  days  I  will  raise  it 
again."     Consider : — 

I.  The  preparation  for  the  sign. — "  Destroy  this  temple."  The  Evangelist 
adds  the  explanation,  "  He  spake  of  the  temple  of  His  body."  As  we  read  these 
words  there  rises  before  us  the  view  of  the  Redeemer  with  thorny  crown  on  His 
head,  tottering  beneath  the  weight  of  His  cross.  We  see  Him  hanging  on  that 
cross — the  nails  lacerating  His  hands  and  feet,  the  thorny  crown  pressed  on  His 
lacerated  brow.  And  as  we  look  at  the  fainting,  bleeding  form  we  seem  to  hear 
Him  saying,  "  Behold,  and  see  if  there  be  any  sorrow  like  unto  My  sorrow." 
And  yet  again,  as  we  hear  the  last  voice,  "  It  is  finished,"  and  see  the  Roman 
soldier  thrust  his  spear  into  the  side  of  the  Redeemer,  we  realise  that  the  words 
"  Destroy  this  temple  "  were  a  prophecy  of  what  was  to  come  to  pass. 

II.  The  sign  itself  is  the  Resurrection. — "  In  three  days  I  will  raise  it  up." 
This  was  the  sign  above  all  signs  that  testified  to  Christ's  divine  Sonship,  and 
His  right  to  cleanse  His  Father's  house  from  defilement.  And  doubtless  the 
Saviour  signified  by  some  gesture  that  He  intended  to  refer  this  statement 
primarily  to  Himself.  And  it  is  noteworthy  that  He  here  claims  power  Himself 
to  rise  from  the  dead  ;  whilst  in  various  passages  of  the  New  Testament  His 
rising  is  ascribed  to  the  Father  (Rom.  iv.  24,  vi.  4  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  15  ;  1  Pet.  i.  21, 
etc.,  etc.).  But  it  must  be  remembered  that  "  the  receptivity  of  Jesus  in  the 
act  of  His  resurrection  is  not  mere  passivity  "  (Godet).  Jesus  was  "  one  with 
the  Father  "  ;  and  as  it  was  by  an  act  of  His  will  that  He  submitted  to  the 
temple  of  His  body  being  left  in  a  measure  to  the  power  of  the  destroyer,  so  it 
was  in  accordance  with  His  will  and  His  Father's  will  that  His  body  was  raised 
again  on  the  third  clay.  This  is  plainly  shown  in  His  own  words,  "  I  lay  down 
My  life,  that  I  might  take  it  again.  ...  I  have  power  to  lay  it  down,  and  I 

80 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  ii. 


have  power  to  take  it  again "  (x.  17,  18).  This  sign  was  the  seal  of  His 
authority,  and  would  carry  conviction  to  all  believing  hearts.  It  is  the  centre 
of  our  Christian  faith.  And  from  the  beginning,  and  in  all  ages  since,  the  Church 
has  proclaimed  "  Jesus  and  the  Resurrection  "  (Acts  xvii.  18). 

III.  The  reception  of  the  proffered  sign  by  those  who  heard  it. — 1.  The 
Jews  replied  in  wonder  and  scorn,  "  Forty  and  six  years,"  etc.  Utterly 
unspiritual,  they  applied  our  Lord's  words  to  the  material  temple  alone,  which 
Jesus  had  just  cleansed.  More  than  that,  they  wilfully  misunderstood  His 
words  to  mean  that  He  Himself  would  destroy  the  temple.  The  saying  seems 
to  have  made  a  deep  impression  on  all  who  heard  it ;  and  it  was  made  use  of  in 
its  perverted  form  by  the  false  witnesses,  who  brought  lying  accusations  against 
our  Lord  and  the  protomartyr  of  His  Church  (Matt.  xxvi.  61  ;  Acts  vi.  14). 
2.  The  disciples  could  not  understand  the  full  import  of  Christ's  words  at  the 
first.  But  they  also  treasured  them  up  in  their  hearts,  not  like  the  Jewish 
rulers,  but  believingly.  And  then  after  the  Resurrection  the  saying  became 
more  clear. 

IV.  The  deeper  meaning  of  the  sign. — 1 .  Not  only  is  the  body  of  the  individual 
Christian  likened  to  a  temple,  but  the  whole  Church  of  Christ  is  His  spiritual 
body  (Eph.  i.  23).  In  Him  "  all  the  building  fitly  framed  together  groweth 
unto  an  holy  temple  in  the  Lord"  (Eph.  ii.  19-22).  2.  And  in  this  view  our 
Lord  might  well  include  even  the  material  temple  in  this  "  dark  "  saying.  For 
was  it  not  simply  the  symbol  and  representative  of  the  whole  nation,  which  was 
to  be  holiness  to  the  Lord  ?  3.  This  old  order  the  Jews  did  destroy  when  they 
rejected  Jesus.  "  Behold,  your  house  is  left  unto  you  desolate  "  (Matt,  xxiii.  38). 
4.  But  the  ancient  Church  of  God  was  not  utterly  destroyed  (Rom.  xi.  26).  It 
was  merged  in  a  new  and  better  building,  founded  on  the  man  Christ  Jesus 
(Eph.  ii.  22),  a  spiritual  temple  in  which  men  should  worship  the  Father  in  spirit 
and  in  truth  (iv.  20-24). 

Ver.  19.  "  Destroy  this  temple." — Amid  the  intellectual  strife  of  this  age  we 
often  hear  voices  crying  out,  lt  Destroy  this  temple."  These  voices  sadden  us, 
make  us  indignant,  wound  us.  But  it  is  in  presence  of  such  attacks — light, 
frivolous,  learned,  passionate,  or  scornful — that  we  must  hear  the  voice  of  Jesus 
saying,  "  I  will  raise  up  this  temple  in  three  days." 

I.  Consider  first  that  voice  which  is  the  most  coarse  and  clamorous — that  of 
popular  materialism. — 1.  The  dominating  passion  of  the  hour  may  be  called 
enjoyment.  This  feverish  passion  menaces  both  social  and  moral  order.  The 
thirst  for  riches,  luxury,  honour,  devours  this  generation.  Enjoy  quickly, 
without  dignity,  without  labour,  without  a  care  of  honour  or  duty,  in  a  merely 
individual  and  egoistic  fashion — this  seems  to  many  the  unique  reality.  And 
if  there  is  no  longer  any  moral  sphere,  no  heaven,  no  God,  why  speak  of  duty,  of 
adoration,  of  sacrifice,  etc.  1  These  things  are  chimerical — a  faded  superstition. 
Therefore  what  need  of  that  temple  which  is  the  embodiment  of  such  ideas  ? 
"  Destroy  it,"  etc.  2.  Unhappy  men,  take  heed  !  Lay  not  your  sacrilegious 
hands  upon  this  temple.  Who  are  you  ?  Have  you  never  loved,  suffered,  wept  ? 
Have  you  not  had  fathers,  mothers,  children  ?  Does  no  voice  speak  to  you  when 
you  consider  your  misery  and  the  infinite  greatness  of  the  Highest  1  Have  you 
never  felt  the  holy  tremblings  of  duty,  sacrifice,  etc.,  within  you?  If  in  some 
fatal  day  through  the  violence  of  passion  this  temple  of  Christ's  gospel  should 
be  for  the  moment  overturned,  it  will  be  found  of  necessity  that  it  should  be 
raised  up.  For  humanity,  enlightened  and  sanctified  by  Jesus,  cannot  forsake 
this  temple.  Humanity  must  love,  believe,  pray,  hope.  This  temple,  for  a 
moment  overturned,  will  rise  again  and  issue  from  the  needs  of  the  spirit  of 
religion. 

g  81 


chap.  ii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


II.  The  second  voice  is  that  of  positivism. — I.  It  loathes  and  is  ashamed  of 
the  gross  materialism  just  described.  It  desires  that  humanity  should  seek  after 
truth,  disinterestedly  and  nobly.  But  away  with  illusions  !  Let  men  seek  for 
what  is  real  and  positive.  And  what  is  this  ?  That  which  is  in  accordance  with 
our  immediate  experience,  and  of  which  we  can  have  direct  experimental  proof. 
Beyond  this  is  the  region  of  dreams  ;  the  pretended  higher  realities  are  inaccessible. 
Thus  humanity  in  its  infancy  has  passed  through  the  religious  period ;  in  its 
adolescence  through  the  philosophic ;  in  its  virile  age  it  has  accepted  positivist 
science.  What  need  now  then  of  earlier  dreams — a  higher  world,  prayer,  etc.  ? 
"  Destroy  this  temple."  2.  In  the  name  of  positive  science  itself  we  protest 
against  such  desolating  conclusions.  Those  higher  instincts  prove  their  existence 
within  us,  and  obtrude  themselves  with  authority  on  our  consciousness.  They 
are  inherent  in  our  nature,  etc.  I  must  love,  believe,  pray,  raise  myself  nearer 
God,  as  much  as  I  need  to  breathe,  etc.  By  all  means  marshal  your  facts.  Show 
us  scientifically  how  the  sap  flows  in  the  tree  to  nourish  it,  how  the  earth  obeys 
the  law  of  gravitation  in  its  course  round  the  sun,  etc.  These  facts  are  real, 
positive.  But  that  there  is  a  sap  which  nourishes  my  spiritual  life,  that  my 
heart  gravitates  toward  God,  that  my  whole  being,  drawn  by  some  superior  force, 
rises,  is  attracted  (like  the  tides),  toward  heaven,  are  also  facts  that  are  positive 
and  indisputable,  as  much  as  the  realities  of  the  material  cosmos.  To  deny  these 
moral  facts  is  to  mutilate  and  violate  our  humanity.  And  when  you  cry,  '•  Leave 
those  chimeras,"  humanity  will  not  listen.  Its  greatness,  its  true  joy,  its  power, 
lies  just  in  this  spiritual,  ideal  world  which  you  would  deny.  Humanity  demands 
that  the  supreme  needs  of  the  soul  should  be  satisfied — men  will  pray,  etc. — and 
in  spite  of  your  attempts  will  raise  again  the  temple  you  think  you  have 
destroyed. 

III.  The  third  voice  is  that  of  religious  idealism  and  sestheticism. — 1.  Those 
who  uphold  it  agree  in  condemning  this  science  misnamed  positive,  which  mis- 
apprehends the  ideal  side  of  humanity.  The  world  of  the  ideal  is  the  true  world, 
in  which  to  live  and  dream  with  the  divine  Plato.  And  among  those  who 
exercise  the  highest  influence  here  must  be  placed  first  of  all  the  tender,  divine 
dreamer  Jesus,  who  has  seized  the  imaginations  of  men  in  all  ages  and  led  them 
into  the  joy  of  the  infinite.  But  we  must  stop  here.  No  need  to  speak  of 
conscience,  duty,  sin,  redemption,  etc.  Religion  is  a  grand  dream — the  supreme 
charm.  Poesy  and  art  will  suffice  to  express  it.  Therefore  this  old  sanctuary, 
with  its  questions  of  sin,  sacrifice,  redemption,  etc.,  what  need  for  it  ?  "  Destroy  it." 
2.  Beware  of  this  religious  aestheticisin,  which  flatters  the  imagination  and  kills 
the  conscience.  All  the  tragic  side  of  human  existence  in  it  is  denied  and 
scorned.  But  those  great  external  realities,  sin,  repentance,  sacrifice,  redemp- 
tion, correspond  with  realities  within.  History  confirms  this.  What  is  the 
central  fact  of  all  ages  and  religions  ?  Sacrifice.  This  is  so  because  man  feels 
himself  miserable,  guilty  before  God,  and  that  he  needs  reconciliation.  From 
all  ages  rises  the  cry,  "O  wretched  man,"  etc.  (Bom.  vii.  24).  Humanity  needs  a 
religion  of  mercy  and  grace ;  and  however  often  that  may  seem  destroyed,  it  will 
rise  again. — From  Ariste  Viguie. 

•Vers.  23-25.  Jesus  the  searcher  of  hearts. — Our  Lord's  cold  reception  by  the 
Jewish  rulers  led  Him  to  confine  His  labours  more  to  the  city,  among  the  general 
population  and  the  many  strangers  gathered  together  during  the  passovertide. 
He  did  not  compel  men  to  accept  him.  He  sought  to  win  them  to  His  kingdom 
through  faith  and  love.  Therefore,  when  rejected  of  the  rulers,  He  taught  those 
who  listened  to  Him,  and  wrought  miracles  of  beneficence. 

I.  The  consequence  of  His  activity. — 1.  "  Many  believed  in  His  name,  when 
they  saw  the  miracles  which  He  did."     Not  only  had  His  significant  action  in 

82 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  ii. 


the  temple  drawn  upon  Him  the  gaze  of  many,  but  also  the  miracles,  here 
unrecorded,  which  He  did  among  the  people.  2.  And  it  must  be  noticed  that 
Jesus  here  did  not  shun  publicity.  He  must  be  known  for  men's  salvation  ;  and 
when  He  is  made  known  it  must  be  as  He  who  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost, 
because  the  Sent  of  God.  And  in  consequence  of  His  activity  many  believed 
on  Him. 

II.  His  attitude  toward  those  who  thus  believed  on  Him. — 1 .  "  He  did  not 
commit  Himself  unto  them,"  or  He  did  not  believe  in  their  belief,  had  no  faith 
(e7uo-T€U€v)  in  their  faith.  Their  faith,  such  as  it  was,  was  evoked  by  the 
outward  signs,  the  miracles  Jesus  did.  2.  But  a  faith  founded  on  such  external 
foundation  is  apt  to  be  unstable  and  fleeting.  The  sign  would  require  to  be 
constantly  repeated  if  the  faith  were  to  continue.  But  constantly  repeated 
miracles  would  cease  to  be  wonderful.  They  might  be  explained  away  or  mis- 
interpreted. Such  a  faith  cannot  claim  affinity  with  that  trust  and  confidence 
which  Jesus  requires  of  His  true  disciples. 

III.  The  reason  why  our  Lord  adopted  this  attitude. — 1.  "  He  knew  all  men, 
and  needed  not  that  any  should  testify  of  man,"  etc.  This  power  had  already 
been  shown  in  the  case  of  Nathan ael,  and  startling  instances  of  it  are  given  in 
John's  Gospel.  Christ  knows  and  reads  the  human  heart.  2.  How  little  we 
know  of  our  own  hearts — how  difficult  even  for  the  most  skilled  observer  of  the 
phenomena  of  the  intellectual  and  moral  being  to  disentangle  the  various  twisted 
threads  of  motive,  emotion,  feeling,  etc.  3.  But  Jesus  knows  all — every  stream 
of  influence,  every  inception  of  thought  or  action,  every  spring  of  feeling  and 
emotion,  even  when  these  are  unperceived  by  men  themselves.  It  could  not  be 
otherwise  with  Him  of  whom  it  is  said,  "All  things  were  made  by  Him  "  (i.  3). 
He  therefore  can  detect  thought  and  motive  in  their  most  secret  recesses.  Thus 
He  saw  through  the  shallowness  of  those  men's  faith. 

IV.  Let  us  rejoice  that  Jesus  thus  knows  men. — 1.  Because  he  is  the  loving, 
sympathising  Saviour,  and  is  therefore  able  and  willing  to  winnow  the  false  from 
the  true  in  us — a  nominal  from  a  real  faith.  Our  only  security,  indeed,  is  that 
He  does  know  us.  2.  He  knows  full  well  each  one  of  us — our  capacities  as  well  as 
our  weaknesses — and  how  we  can  be  best  fitted  for  His  kingdom.  3.  Therefore 
our  highest  wisdom,  remembering  that  He  knows  us  altogether,  is  touched  with 
the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  and  can  send  us  help  in  time  of  need,  is  to  yield 
ourselves  to  Him  submissively,  saying,  "  Lord,  thou  knowest  all  things  "  ;  there- 
fore work  in  us  such  faith  that  of  us  Thou  may  est  say,  They  are  Mine :  for 
"  I  know  My  sheep,  and  am  known  of  Mine  "  (x.  14). 

HOMILETIC  NOTES. 

Ver.  18.  The  folly  of  unbelief . — The  (Luke  iii.  17).     Dost  Thou  claim  them 

same  psalm  which  declared  the  moving  as  Thy  Father's  possession  ?     2.  How 

cause  of  Christ's  action  in  the  temple  childish  is  this  play  of  these  opponents  ! 

contains  also  these   words :    "  Because  how  deceitful  their  actions  !     Their  ap- 

for  thy  sake  I  have  borne  reproach,"  pea  ranee  of  piety  was  simply  piety  in 

etc.   (Ps.   lxix.    7-10).     1.   That  which  appearance!    Were  not  they  the  sinners 

was   to    the    disciples    for    edification  against  the  sanctuary  1     3.  Did  not  an 

became   a  stumbling-block  to  the  de-  action  like  that  of  the  cleansing  of  the 

generate   Jews.      They   assailed   Jesus  temple  carry  its  authorisation   within 

with  the  question,  "  What  sign  % "  etc.  itself  ?    Does  the  unfruitful  fig-tree  ask 

Where  is  Thy  authority  1      Thou  art  of  the  lightning-flash  that  lays  it  low, 

not   a   priest,    temple   guard,  member  What  doest  thou  ?    Does  the  thief  who 

of    the    Sanhedrin  ;    and    wilt    Thou  has  been  caught  ask  the  officer,  What 

cleanse    God's    holy    threshing-floors  ?  right  have  you  to  seize  me  1     Did  the 

83 


CHAP.   II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   JOHN. 


Gadarenes,  as  they  saw  their  swine 
(possessed  by  them  in  opposition  to  the 
law)  precipitated  into  the  lake,  ask  for 
damages?  Was  not  the  cleansing  of  the 
temple  a  witness  to  the  spirit  and  power 
of  our  Lord,  a  proof  of  His  dignity,  that 
He  was  the  Son  of  God,  the  inheritor  of 
Israel  ?  4.  The  more  powerfully  Jesus 
preached,  and  not  as  the  scribes,  the 
more  angrily  did  those  very  scribes  ask, 
"  By  what  authority  ?  "  etc.  The  more 
their  hearts  were  filled  with  envy  and 
ambition,  sins  from  which  sprang  the 
desecration  of  the  temple,  the  careless- 
ness of  the  people,  the  corruption  of 
public  affairs,  the  more  jealously  and 
with  more  pettiness  did  they  lay  stress 
on  outward  consideration — their  autho- 
rity according  to  the  letter. — Abridged 
from  Kogel. 

Ver.  19.  The  foundation  of  the  spirit- 
ual temple  of  God. — 1.  The  temple  was 
a  house  built  of  stone ;  but  in  the  Lord 
was  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead.  The 
Jewish  temple  was  a  shadow ;  the  Lord, 
the  Spirit,  substance,  fulfilment.  The 
temple  was  the  place  for  typical  offer- 
ings only;  the  Lord  was  sanctuary, 
offering,  and  high  priest  in  one.  On 
another  occasion  He  could  say  of 
Himself :  Here  is  One  who  is  greater 
than  the  temple — here  is  One  who  is 
Lord  also  of  the  Sabbath  day.  2.  Jesus 
saw  from  the  hate  in  their  eyes,  etc., 
that  His  enemies  would  proceed  from 
the  profanation,  at  present  stayed,  of 
the  outward  sanctuary  to  an  open  act 
of  violence  against  the  Lord  and  heir 
— the  Messiah.  3.  But  the  more  they 
prided  themselves  on  the  beauty  and 
glory  of  the  sanctuary  which  required 
forty-six  years  to  build,  the  more  they 
would  harden  themselves  against  the 
preaching  of  repentance.  For  sin  is 
blind ;  therefore  they  did  not  see  the 
judgment  drawing  near.  Sin  is  deaf ; 
therefore  they  did  not  hear  the 
warning  voice  of  God's  Son.  The 
weight  of  guilt  hastens  the  fall  which 
precipitates  into  the  abyss.  Those  who 
scorn  the  reformer  must  face  the  judge. 
"Fill  up  the  measure  of  your  fathers  " j 


"  destroy  this  temple  "  :  just  as  at  the 
last  that  terrible  order  was  given  to 
Judas,  "  What  thou  doest,  do  quickly." 
— Idem. 

Yer.  22.  The  resurrection  is  the  sign 
which  includes  all  verification  and 
authorisation.  —  Jesus  answered  this 
question  as  to  His  authority  for  cleans- 
ing the  temple,  as  once  when  the 
Pharisees  asked  Him,  in  spite  of  all 
His  miracles,  for  a  sign  from  heaven. 
He  would  point  them  to  none  but  that 
of  the  prophet  Jonah — to  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  Son  of  man  from  the  grave. 
— Idem. 

Ver.  23.  Superficial  faith.  —  The 
original  words  imply  that  their  faith 
was  dependent  upon  the  signs  which 
they  gazed  upon,  without  entering  into 
their  deeper  meaning.  It  was  the 
impulsive  response  of  the  moment,  not 
based  upon  a  previous  preparation,  nor 
resulting  in  a  present  deep  conviction. 
It  came  far  short  of  the  faith  of  the 
disciples,  who  passed  from  a  true  know- 
ledge of  Moses  and  the  prophets  to  a 
true  knowledge  of  Christ  without  a 
sign ;  but  it  came  far  above  the  dis- 
belief of  scribes  and  Pharisees,  who 
after  a  sign  rejected  Him.  It  was  not 
the  prepared  good  ground  bringing 
forth  abundantly ;  but  neither  was  it 
the  hardened  wayside,  which  did  not 
receive  seed  at  all. 

Ver.  24.  The  deeper  faith,  the  fuller 
blessing.  —  But  beneath  this  shallow 
surface  there  is  the  unbroken  ledge  of 
rock.  They  are  easily  moved  just  be- 
cause they  are  not  deeply  moved.  The 
eye  which  looked  at,  looked  into,  others 
(i.  47,  etc.),  saw  to  the  very  depth 
of  their  hearts  too,  and  knew  all. 
It  saw  in  that  depth  that  the  true 
inner  man  did  not  believe,  did  not 
commit  itself  to  Him  ;  it  found  not 
the  spiritual  receptivity,  and  there 
could  not  therefore  be  the  spiritual 
revelation.  He  on  His  part  did  not 
commit  Himself  unto  them  (viii.  31). 
— Archdeacon  H.  W.  Watkins,  M.A. 


84 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  ill. 


PAET    II.    (c.) 

III.  The  Manifestation  of  the  Glory  of  the  Word  in  His  Public 

Ministry  (continued). 

1.  To  Nicodemus. — The  revelation  of  the  divine,  heavenly,  and  true  nature  of 
the  kingdom  of  God,  and  the  conditions  of  admission  into  it  (vers.  1-12) ;  of  the 
foundations  of  that  kingdom  (vers.  13-17);  the  danger  of  lack  of  faith  in  the 
One  Foundation  (vers.  18-21). 

2.  In  rural  Judcea. — (1)  All  men  flock  to  the  ministry  and  baptism  of  Jesus,  a 
circumstance  which  leads  the  disciples  of  John,  who  was  baptising  in  iEnon, 
to  ask  him  the  meaning  and  bearing  of  this  fact  (vers.  22-26) ;  (2)  the  closing 
testimony  of  John  the  Baptist  to  Jesus  in  this  Gospel  (vers.  27-36). 

First  Year  of  our  Lord's  Ministry. 

1.  Chap.  hi.  1-21. — See  Chap.  ii. 

2.  Chap.  iii.  22-36.— Summer  of  A.u.c.  781,  a.d.  28. 


CHAPTER  III. 
EXPLANATORY  AND   CRITICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  In  ii.  23,  24,  we  read  of  many  who  believed  in  Jesus  because  of  the  miracles  He 
wrought.  But  their  belief  was  so  imperfect  that  Jesus  had  "  no  faith  "  in  it.  Here,  however, 
we  have  a  man  of  a  different  stamp.  He  was,  it  is  true,  influenced  to  some  extent  by  Jesus' 
miracles,  but  he  came  to  the  Lord  as  a  genuine  inquirer  and  seeker  after  truth.  Nicodemus. 
— A  Greek  name,  but  known  among  the  Jews.  "  The  Talmud  mentions  again  and  again  a 
person  of  this  name  (Nakedimon),  called  also  Bounai,  reckoned  to  the  number  of  Jesus' 
disciples  "  (Godet).  The  word  a  man  (dudpwrros)  connects  this  with  ii.  25.  He  was  one  of 
those  whom  Jesus  knew  ;  but  he  was  an  exception  to  the  general  crowd.  The  Pharisees. — 
That  sect  which,  although  losing  themselves  in  the  quicksands  of  minute  legal  observance, 
yet  perhaps  included  many  men  possessing  a  high  moral  standard.  But  they  did  not 
fully  realise  the  nature  of  sin  and  the  holiness  of  God.  Therefore,  as  Hengstenberg  remarks, 
"  they  knew  of  no  new  birth,  but  of  a  holiness  attained  to  piece  by  piece,  in  which  man 
has  the  prima*  partes ;  God,  however,  principally  the  part  of  spectator  and  rewarder." 
Nicodemus  was  a  ruler  of  the  Jews  (JLpxuv),  i.e.  probably  a  member  of  the  Sanhedrin 
(vii.  50). 

Ver.  2.  He  came  to  Jesus. — This  suggests  a  division  in  the  Pharisaic  camp.  Some  were 
chafing  in  their  bonds  and  desired  spiritual  freedom.  Nicodemus  recognised  in  Jesus  a  more 
than  ordinary  appearance.  The  report  of  the  deputation  sent  to  John  the  Baptist  no  doubt 
also  raised  his  interest  in  Jesus  higher ;  and  all  this  probably  coincided  with  the  longing 
after  Messiah  and  His  kingdom  which  filled  the  hearts  of  the  best  of  the  race  at  that  time. 
By  night. — Not  because  he  feared,  but  rather  because  both  Jesus  and  himself  were 
occupied  during  the  daytime  (but  see  p.  89).  He  called  Jesus  Master  (pa(3(itt),  although  it 
seems  as  if  Jesus  had  not  gone  through  the  educational  course  required  ere  a  Jew  could 
assume  this  title  (vii.  15).  But  Nicodemus  recognised  Jesus  as  a  teacher  sent  from  God. 
The  miracles  of  Christ  led  him  dimly  to  realise  this.  We  know,  etc.,  shows  that  a  number 
of  the  Jewish  rulers  shared  the  opinion  of  Nicodemus. 

Ver.  3.  Verily,  verily,  etc.,  expresses  the  truth  and  unchanging  validity  of  what  was 
about  to  be  spoken:  "Except  a  man  be  born  again"  etc.  (&vu>dev  means  "from  above," 
"  from  the  beginning "  :  born  again,  anew,  or  reborn  is  evidently  the  sense  in  which 
Nicodemus  understood  the  phrase).  Nicodemus  came  with  a  dim  perception  that  these 
miracles,  etc.,  of  Jesus  might  be  evidences  of  Messiah's  presence.    But  Jesus  showed  him  that 

85 


chap.  in.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


Messiah's  kingdom  is  inward  and  spiritual.  Cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God. — I.e.  cannot 
arrive  at  an  individual  participation  in  God's  kingdom,  nor  at  the  attainment  of  its 
blessedness.  The  kingdom  of  God  is  that  kingdom  which  the  Messiah  was  expected  to 
establish ;  and  its  nature  is  clearly  set  forth,  e.g.,  in  Luke  xvii.  20,  21. 

Ver.  4.  Nicodemus  did  not  misunderstand  our  Lord.  He  knew  that  Christ  referred  to  a 
spiritual,  inward  change.  But  he  did  not  see  that  such  a  change  was  needed  in  his  own 
case.  He  was  already  in  the  kingdom  ;  and  to  ask  that  he  should  begin  anew  his  moral  and 
religious  life,  like  proselytes  who  must  become  as  children  ere  they  could  become  subjects 
in  God's  kingdom — as  well  expect  one  who  had  grown  old  to  be  reborn  naturally. 

Ver.  5.   Vide  separate  note,  p.  08. 

Ver.  6.  That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh.— Flesh  (<rdp%),  means  our  human  nature 
considered  in  itself  and  apart  from  controlling  spiritual  power.  It  is  our  fallen  humanity 
as  it  exists  with  its  passions,  feelings,  etc.,  not  governed  by  the  divine  law,  and  uncontrolled 
even  by  our  own  higher  reason  and  conscience.  It  lies  in  sin  ;  and  it  is  thus  transmitted 
from  generation  to  generation.  Our  Lord  when  He  became  incarnate,  therefore,  was  not 
born  by  "  ordinary  generation."  The  substantive  flesh  as  a  predicate  (is  flesh)  has  a  much 
more  forcible  meaning  than  the  adjective  carnal.  ''The  state  has  in  a  manner  become 
a  nature "  (Godet).  Hence  the  need  of  a  new  nature.  That  which  is  born  of  the 
Spirit,  etc. — This  answers  the  question,  "  How  can  a  man  be  born  ?  "  etc.,  of  ver.  4.  Spirit 
contains  some  reference  to  that  higher  spiritual  part  of  us  by  which  we  are  related  to  God, 
and  which  in  our  fallen  nature  is  stifled  and  repressed.  Through  the  quickening  power  of 
God's  Spirit  that  which  is  dead  through  sin  is  quickened  and  raised  up  again,  and  reinstalled 
in  its  true  position  (Eph.  ii.  1).  And  it  is  the  whole  man  that  is  thus  born  of  the  Spirit. 
All  his  nature  is  affected  by  this  radical  change.  And  only  on  this  condition  can  he  become 
a  subject  in  the  spiritual  kingdom. 

Vers.  7,  8.  Marvel  not,  etc. — No  doubt  Nicodemus  did  marvel  as  this  wonderful  discourse 
proceeded.  Who  does  not  marvel  at  this  exhibition  of  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God  ? 
(Rom.  xi.  33-36.)  Nicodemus  rested  on  his  privileges  (birth,  etc.)  as  fitting  him  for  entrance 
into  Messiah's  kingdom,  and  is  naturally  confounded  at  the  new  ideas  presented  to  him, 
especially  when  they  are  pressed  home  personally  :   Ye  must  be  born  again,  etc. 

Ver.  8.  Wind,  etc. — The  Greek  irvedfia  and  the  Hebrew  rm  mean  both  wind  and 
spirit;  and  some  translators  and  expositors  have  urged  that  here  the  true  rendering 
is  "  spirit "  in  both  cases.  "The  Spirit  breathes  where  it  listeth."  But  the  evident  sense 
of  the  passage  is  that  of  the  Authorised  Version  ;  and  it  is  that  accepted  by  the  majority  of 
scholars.  Indeed  the  use  of  the  word  (pwvr),  the  "  sound  "  of  the  wind,  etc.,  shows  tuat  here 
our  Lord  was  using  one  of  His  parabolic  figures,  otirws  (so)  also  suggests  that  we  have  here 
an  analogy.  So  is  every  one,  etc. — The  origin  and  rise  of  the  new  birth  are  unseen,  and 
known  only  to  those  who  experience  it ;  and  even  they  cannot  trace  the  movements  and 
activity  of  the  Spirit.     By  the  way  of  experience  alone  can  men  realise  it. 

Ver.  9,  10.  How  can,  etc. — Nicodemus  confesses  his  ignorance  of  all  this  ;  and  no  wonder, 
for  Pharisaism  in  its  devotion  to  petty  ritual-details  had  become  spiritually  short-sighted 
and  oblivious  of  those  higher  spiritual  realities.  There  is  on  the  part  of  Nicodemus, 
however,  a  hopeful  trait— he  is  willing  to  be  taught.  Art  thou  the  teacher  of  Israel  ? — 
The  article  is  not  to  be  taken  in  an  emphatic  sense,  as  specifying  Nicodemus  as  the  most 
widely  noted  teacher  of  the  time.  It  rather  gives  the  noun  an  abstract  meaning,  as 
representing  a  class  like  6  aireipajv  (the  sower)  :  Matt.  xiii. ;  2  Cor.  xii.  12.  See  Wordsworth's 
Greek  Testament. 

Ver.  11.  We  speak  what  we  do  know,  etc. — Is  the  "u>e  "  merely  an  example  of  the  pluralis 
majestaticvs  1  It  appears  hardly  likely  when  we  remember  that  "  I  "  is  used  in  the  fore- 
going verses.  The  clearest  explanation  is  that  given  by  Hengstenberg  and  others,  viz.  that 
our  Lord  here  refers  to  some  who  already  represented  the  new  doctrine  (John  the  Baptist 
and  the  disciples  already  called),  and  sets  them  over  against  the  rabbinical  school  represented 
by  Nicodemus  (1  John  i.  1-4).     Ye  receive  not,  etc.  (i.  5,  19 ;  ii.  19-25). 

Ver.  12.  Earthly  things  (ra  eTriyeia).—  These  earthly  things  refer  indeed  to  the  spiritual 
life,  but  to  those  facts  in  it  which  take  place  on  earth,  e.g.  what  Jesus  had  said  to 
Nicodemus  regarding  the  condition  of  men,  the  necessity  of  the  new  birth,  etc.,  and  "  His 
general  teaching  up  to  the  present  time"  (Godet).  Heavenly  things  (ra  eirovpdvia)  have 
reference  to  the  higher  mysteries  of  redemption,  such  as  the  relation  of  Christ  to  the 
Godhead,  the  counsel  of  God  in  reference  to  the  salvation  of  man,  the  manner  in  which  the 
world's  redemption  was  to  be  effected,  etc.  Such  great  facts  are  not  arrived  at  by  human 
experience  and  investigation  ;  they  must  be  divinely  revealed. 

Ver.  13.  And  no  man  hath  ascended,  etc. — ko\  =and  yet,  and  may  be  connected  with  ver.  12, 
i.e.  "  My  testimony  is  not  received,  and  yet  I  alone  can  testify  of  those  heavenly  things  so 
indispensable  to  humanity."  No  one  from  among  men  has  ascended  into  heaven,  and  thus 
is  in  a  position  to  declare  to  men  those  heavenly  truths  :  He  alone  can  do  so  who,  living 
in  unity  with  the  Father,  has  seen  and  known  them — the  Son  of  man  who  came  down,  etc.t 

86 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  in. 


who  now  stood  before  Nicodemus  "  in  the  form  of  a  servant."  Son  of  man. — "  He  that  came 
down  from  heaven,  even  He  who  being  incarnate  is  the  Son  of  man  without  ceasing  to  be 
what  He  was  before"  (Westcott).  Which  is  in  heaven.— Omitted  by  $,  B,  L,  etc.  The 
evidence  of  A,  in  which  the  words  occur,  is  doubtful,  as  they  are  written  over  an  erasure.  But 
it  is  contended  that  the  surface  difficulty  of  the  words  may  have  led  copyists  to  omit  them. 
How  could  Christ  while  on  earth  be  yet  in  heaven  ?  But  if  it  be  remembered  that  heaven  is 
a  state  more  than  a  place,  such  difficulties  vanish  and  the  words  are  seen  to  describe  fitly 
Christ's  close  and  intimate  fellowship  with  the  Father  (vide  Watkins,  etc.). 

Vers.  14,  15.  And,  etc.  (ko.1). — Jesus  not  only  revealed  the  way  of  salvation,  He  made  it. 
Such  is  the  force  of  the  copula.  Lifted  up  (viii.  28,  xii.  32-34). — In  reference  to  the 
Passion,  but  also  (Acts  ii.  33)  in  reference  to  the  Ascension.  It  was  necessary  for  man's 
salvation  (del)  that  Christ  should  rise  through  the  cross  to  the  "  right  hand  of  power." 
That  whosoever  believeih  in  Him  might  have  eternal  life.— The  words  should  not  perish  but 
are  omitted  in  several  of  the  most  important  MSS.  — X,  B,  L — although  found  in  A. 

Vers.  16-21.  These  verses  are  confidently  held  by  many  to  contain  the  reflections  of  the 
Evangelist,  and  not  to  be  a  continuation  of  our  Lord's  discourse.  But  (1)  there  is  not  the 
slightest  indication  of  a  transition  from  Christ's  words  to  a  disciple's  comments  on  them ; 
and  (2)  we  cannot  think  that  our  Lord  would  have  let  Nicodemus  depart  without  a  distinct 
assertion  that  the  Son  of  man  was  none  other  than  the  Son  of  God,  as  the  Baptist  declared 
Him  to  be  ;  and  without  further  instruction  in  the  mystery  of  redemption.  Nicodemus  was, 
we  may  believe,  now  a  humble  learner,  and  that  now  our  Lord's  discourse  flowed  on  uninter- 
ruptedly. The  discourse  is  not,  we  may  affirm,  reported  in  full.  The  Evangelist,  directed 
by  the  Spirit,  recorded  what  was  of  universal  interest  and  importance  ;  and  perhaps  also 
we  have  at  the  close  a  condensation  of  our  Lord's  utterance.  St.  John  did  not  profess  to 
have  recorded  every  word  spoken  by  the  Saviour,  any  more  than  all  His  actions  (xx.  30,  xxi.  25 ; 
Acts  xx.  35).  God  so  loved,  etc. — The  love,  and  not  the  wrath  of  God,  is  the  source  of 
redemption  for  mankind.  Gave  His  only  begotten  Son  (2  Cor.  ix.  15).  -It  was  during  this 
conversation  most  likely  that  John  first  heard  this  striking  title  (1  John  iv.  9).  Believeth 
upon  (els). — Implying  the  idea  of  assured  trust  in  the  Son  as  the  all-merciful  and  almighty. 

Ver.  17.  Condemn. — Better  judge  (icpLveiv).  "  It  means  originally  to  separate,  and  in  the 
moral  sense  to  separate  good,  from  evil.  Passing  from  the  act  to  the  effect,  it  may  mean 
to  absolve ;  but  as  the  usual  effect  of  separation  is  to  exclude  the  evil,  the  word  has  attached 
to  itself  frequently  the  idea  of  condemnation"  (Watkins).  Judgment  is  not  the  end  of 
Christ's  coming,  but  salvation.  That  the  world,  etc. — How  condemnatory  of  sectarian 
limitations  of  the  power  of  Christ's  saving  work ! 

Vers.  18,  19.  But  though  Christ  did  not  come  to  judge,  the  effect  of  His  coming  is  judg- 
ment. And  this  judgment  is  not  an  arbitrary  act.  It  is  the  result  of  men's  own  choice. 
Those  who  remain  in  the  bondage  of  sin  shall  taste  the  penalty  of  sin  (Rom.  vi.  23).  This 
is  their  judgment.  This  judgment  is  made  imperative  by  the  entrance  of  light  into  the 
world.  It  was  then  evident  that  men  loved  darkness  rather  than  light — darkness  absolutely 
(<tk6to{)  in  contradistinction  to  light. 

Vers.  20,  21.  Here  the  explanation  of  this  awful  choice  made  by  unrenewed  humanity 
is  given.  He  that  doeth  evil,  etc. — Doeth  (Trpavvwv),  or  practiseth,  evil  (<pav\a),  or  bad 
actions.  To  see  such  actions  for  a  moment  in  the  light  of  eternal  truth  is  to  condemn  them. 
Those  who  find  pleasure  in  them  therefore  avoid  the  light.  But  he  that  doeth  (iroiuv)  truth, 
etc. — itoiQp  "implies  effective  realisation — in  good- doing  the  product  remains"  (Godet). 
u  Bight  action  is  true  thought  realised"  (Westcott).  "  Among  mankind  before  Christ  there 
mingle  two  kinds  of  men.  With  the  appearance  of  Jesus  their  separation  begins  "  (Lucke). 
And  with  this  word  of  hope  to  Nicodemus —hope  that  he  was  of  the  number  of  those  doing 
truth — the  interview  with  him  ends. 

Ver.  22.  After,  etc. — I.e.  after  the  occurrences  related  from  ver.  13  in  the  previous  chapter. 
The  land  of  Jndcea  means  the  country  districts  of  Judsea.  No  further  record  of  this  work, 
in  which  our  Lord  must  have  increased  the  number  of  His  followers,  is  given,  as  Jesus  did 
not  baptise  personally,  but  through  His  disciples  (iv.  2). 

Ver.  23.  JEnon  near  to  Salim  (Alvdv,  from  w,  Arab,  c*^,  a  spring). — Salim  was  long  supposed 
to  have  been  situated  about  eight  miles  from  Beth-Shean,  i.e.  in  the  north  of  Samaria.  But 
this  would  discord  with  ver.  22.  Recent  research  has,  however,  discovered  a  site  more  in 
consonance  with  the  narrative.  "  Dr.  Barclay  ( City  of  the  Great  King)  found  both  names 
in  a  place  answering  the  description  ...  at  Wady  Farah,  about  five  miles  from  Jerusalem" 
(Watkins). 

Ver.  24.  For  John  had  not  yet  been,  etc.— I.e.  the  events  here  related  are  prior  to  those  of 
Matt.  iv.  12  ;  Mark  i.  14.  Thus  the  Synoptists  Matthew  and  Mark  omit  all  mention  of  the 
Galilean  ministry  recorded  in  John  i.  43 — ii.  13. 

Vers.  25,  26.  There  arose  therefore  a  questioning  on  the  part  of  John's  disciples  with  a 
Jew,  etc. — The  reading  Iov8aiov,  =  a  Jew,  rests  on  all  the  best  MSS.  (N  excepted).  The 
proximity  of  Jesus,  whose  disciples  also  baptised,  to  John,  gave  an  appearance  of  rivalry. 

87 


chap.  ill.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


The  question  about  purification  apparently  bad  reference  to  that  needed  for  entrance  into 
the  Messianic  kingdom.  John's  disciples  evidently  claimed  pre-eminence  for  their  master's 
baptism ;  but  this  Jew  would  probably  point  to  the  fact  that  John  himself  had  pointed  out 
the  higher  position  of  Jesus,  to  whom  now  crowds  of  disciples  were  flocking.  John's 
disciples  therefore  came  to  him  for  enlightenment  on  the  subject. 

Vers.  27-36.  John  answered,  etc. — The  Baptist  in  his  reply  to  his  disciples  points  out 
Christ's  relation  to  Himself,  and  then  (vers.  31-36)  the  true  position  of  Christ  as  "  above  all." 

Vers.  27,  28. — He  gives  the  statement  of  a  general  principle  which  applies  both  to  himself 
and  to  Christ  in  His  mediatorial  capacity.  He  then  proceeds  to  apply  this  principle  first 
to  his  own  relation  to  Christ,  showing  that  it  is  one  of  subordination.  I  am  not  the  Christ, 
etc. — The  disciples  themselves  remembered  that  this  was  so  (ver.  26  :  comp.  i.  7,  26,  34). 

Ver.  29.  He  that  hath  the  bride,  etc. — This  comparison  of  the  Church  to  a  bride,  and  the 
typical  use  of  the  marriage  tie  as  emblematic  of  the  relation  of  Jehovah  to  His  people,  is 
taken  over  from  the  Old  Testament  (comp.  Isa.  liv.  5  ;  Hos.  ii.  19).  The  imagery  continued  to 
be  used  by  the  writers  of  the  New  Testament  as  peculiarly  suitable  to  describe  the  relation 
between  Christ  and  His  Church  (Eph.  v.  32 ;  Rev.  xix.  7,  xxi.  2,  9  ;  Matt.  ix.  15,  xxi.  1, 
xxv.  1,  etc.).  Friend  of  the  bridegroom,  etc. — The  Trapauv/xcpLos  of  the  Greeks,  the  nvpTO  of 
the  Jews,  who  arranged  for  all  the  preliminaries  of  the  marriage,  and  presided  at  the 
betrothal  and  the  wedding  feast;  in  fact,  whose  special  duties  as  "  friend  of  the  bridegroom  " 
did  not  cease  until  bridegroom  and  bride  were  brought  together.  And  this,  the  culmination 
of  his  special  duty,  was  the  cause  of  his  greatest  joy.  The  representatives  and  the  firstfruits 
of  the  New  Testament  Church  were  now  flocking  to  Christ. 

Ver.  30.  He  must  increase,  etc. — "  The  office  of  the  Paranymph  ceases  to  exist  when  the 
marriage  is  accomplished  "  (Watkins). 

Vers.  31-36. — Here  the  Baptist  sets  forth  the  true  position  of  Christ  as  "  above  all,"  and 
His  relation  to  the  world.  This  paragraph  is  held  by  many  to  represent  the  reflections  of 
the  Evangelist  (Bengel,  De  Wette,  Westcott,  etc.).  The  chief  argument  is  that  the  style  is  more 
Johannine  than  that  of  the  preceding  verses  (27-30).  But  as  Godet  points  out  (vol.  ii.,  90),  our 
Lord  and  the  Baptist  spoke  the  same  Aramaic  tongue.  This  of  itself  would  produce  a  general 
likeness  in  the  translation.  But  more  than  that,  these  concluding  verses  contain  part  of  the 
answer  of  the  Baptist  to  his  disciples,  which  would  otherwise  be  incomplete.  It  therefore 
seems  better  to  hold  with  Hengstenberg,  Godet,  Alford,  etc.,  that  these  are  the  Baptist's  words. 

Vers.  31,  32.  From  above,  etc.  (comp.  ver.  13,  i.  15-18,  34). — He  that  is  of  the  e arth  is  of  the 
earth,  etc.  (eK  ttjs  yrjs).  u  The  earthly  teacher,  and  such  were  all  who  came  before  Christ, 
is  contrasted  with  the  One  Teacher  from  heaven :  (1)  in  origin  (of  the  earth,  from  above,  of 
heaven)  ;  (2)  in  being  (of  the  earth,  ahove  all) ;  (3)  in  teaching  (of  the  earth,  what  He  hath 
seen  and  heard  in  the  kingdom  of  truth)  "  (Westcott).  No  man  receiveth,  etc. — "  Over  against 
the  exaggeration  of  envy  he  sets  that  of  zeal :  '  Where  ye  say  all,  I  for  my  part  say  no  man.' 
He  would  not  be  satisfied  unless  he  saw  the  Sanhedrin  as  a  body,  followed  by  the  whole 
people,  coming  to  pay  homage  to  the  bridegroom  of  the  Messianic  community  "  (Godet). 
But  perhaps  John's  meaning  is  :  "  None  of  those  people  now  crowding  to  Him  receive  Him 
as  the  Son  of  God,  the  Messiah,  come  from  heaven  to  save  men  from  their  sins  "  (i.  29,  36). 

Vers.  33,  34.  Set  to  his  seal  (i<r<ppay«rei>). — Attested  by  this  very  fact  his  belief  in  the 
words  of  Christ  as  the  truth  of  God.  For  God  giveth  not  the  Spirit  by  measure,  etc. — Even 
if  Geds  is  omitted,  with  X,  B,  etc.,  God  will  still  be  understood  and  supplied  (i.  32,  33).  If, 
however,  (Messiah)  giveth  not  the  Spirit  by  measure  be  maintained  as  the  reading,  then 
the  meaning  will  be,  "  He  shows  His  origin  bv  giving  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit  to  His  people  " 
(i.  33). 

Ver.  36.  The  wrath  of  God  abideth. — It  is  not  specially  meted  out ;  it  is  there  already,  and 
simply  remains  for  all  who  remain  in  their  sins  (Eph.  ii.  3). 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses   1—15. 

Our  Lord's  interview  with  Nicodemus. — This  conversation  is  undoubtedly  one 
of  the  most  important  ever  recorded.  It  is  one  of  the  most  detailed  expositions 
that  we  have  of  our  Lord's  teaching  on  one  of  the  most  indispensable  concerns 
of  the  kingdom  of  God.  As  we  learn  from  ii.  23,  Jesus  was  at  the  passover 
at  Jerusalem,  and  "  many  believed  on  His  name,  beholding  the  miracles 
which  He  did."  One  of  the  number  evidently  was  Nicodemus.  He  had  seen 
the  miracles,  had  witnessed  the  cleansing  of  the  temple,  when  without  official 
power,  etc.,  but  simply  by  the  calmness  and  earnestness  of  His  demeanour 
and   the   righteousness  of  His  cause,  Jesus  had  for  the  time  remedied  what 

88 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  Hi. 


was  to  all  pious  Israelites  a  crying  abuse.  Nicodemus  was  a  "  man  of  the 
Pharisees,"  therefore  one  of  those  who  thought  themselves  the  elite  of  Israel, 
who  being  as  they  imagined  perfect  in  legal  righteousness,  were  quite  prepared 
to  be  members  of  Messiah's  kingdom  when  He  appeared.  He  was  also  a 
member  of  the  Sanhedrin,  and  thus  occupied  a  conspicuous  position  among 
his  countrymen.  Probably,  however,  like  many  good  and  honest  men  of 
his  party,  he  was  not  only  longing  for  the  advent  of  Messiah's  kingdom,  but 
unsatisfied  with  his  own  position  spiritually.  Therefore  the  advent  of  this 
new,  wonderful  teacher  excited  within  him  those  feelings  of  dissatisfaction  and 
hope ;  hence — 

I.  He  became  an  inquirer. — 1.  That  he  was  a  personal  inquirer  seems  to  be 
evident.  In  no  sense  was  he  like  the  members  of  the  deputation  sent  to  the 
Baptist.  They  were  sent  officially,  in  order  to  furnish  an  official  report. 
Nicodemus  came  to  Jesus  for  his  own  personal  satisfaction — to  seek  for  light  on 
some  of  the  questions  clamouring  for  solution  in  his  own  mind.  2.  Too  much, 
perhaps,  is  made  of  the  fact  that  Nicodemus  came  to  Jesus  by  night  as  a  proof 
of  his  timidity  and  fear  of  compromising  himself  with  his  fellows.  No  doubt 
there  might  be  a  feeling  in  his  mind  that  he  must  not  too  rashly  compromise  his 
position  by  openly  seeking  an  interview  with  this  Galilean  teacher.  But  the 
reason  for  his  choosing  the  evening  hours  for  his  visit  may  be  found  also,  in  part, 
in  the  fact  that  both  he  and  our  Lord  were  occupied  during  the  day.  No  doubt 
a  man  in  the  position  of  Nicodemus  was  busily  occupied  at  this  busy  time  in 
Jerusalem.  What  hope  would  there  be  therefore  of  uninterrupted  converse  on 
the  most  momentous  of  all  themes  in  the  press  and  hurry  of  the  day  ?  And 
indeed,  with  the  full  moon  of  the  passover  week  shining  in  all  its  brightness  on 
the  crowded  streets,  the  night  would  be  almost  as  public  as  the  day. 

II.  The  spirit  in  which  Nicodemus  began  his  inquiry. — 1.  Jesus  did  not 
refuse  to  receive  this  man  in  those  hours  devoted  to  rest  and  refreshment.  It 
was  ever  His  meat  to  do  His  Father's  will.  And  the  Saviour  received  him 
willingly.  Besides,  as  we  are  told  at  the  end  of  chap.  ii.  (vers.  24,  25),  Jesus 
11  knew  all  men,  and  needed  not  that  any  should  testify  of  man,"  etc.  He  saw 
behind  the  wrappings  of  Pharisaic  formalism  and  prejudice  of  birth  and  training 
into  the  inner  being  of  Nicodemus  (as  of  Nathanael),  and  recognised  there  good 
soil  where  the  good  seed  might  bring  forth  manifold  increase.  2.  The  opening 
words  of  Nicodemus,  however,  showed  that  the  prejudices  of  class  and  training 
were  still  strong.  He  came  confident^in  his  own  position.  He  was  a  leader  in 
the  Church  of  God,  and  from  that  very  fact,  he  and  all  his  compeers  inferred, 
a  subject  of  God's  spiritual  kingdom.  He  came  to  find  out  indeed  the  standing 
of  Jesus.  Jesus,  he  felt  assured,  was  "  a  teacher  come  from  God."  But  on  what 
special  mission,  for  what  divine  purpose,  was  He  sent  1  It  never  occurred  to 
Nicodemus  that  there  could  be  any  inquiry  or  doubt  as  to  his  own  position. 

III.  The  unexpected  answer  of  Jesus  to  his  inquiry. — In  His  answer  our 
Lord  shook  to  its  foundations  the  self-confidence  of  Nicodemus  :  "  Except  a  man 
be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God  "  (ver.  3).  1.  Our  Lord  at  once 
reverses  the  current  Jewish  ideas  concerning  Messiah  and  His  kingdom  ;  He  here 
•lays  the  foundation  of  His  teaching  as  to  His  kingdom  — its  spiritual  nature  and 
heavenly  origin  are  plainly  asserted.  Not  of  human  origin,  no  merely  external 
rule  or  law,  no  earthly  pomp,  were  to  characterise  it  and  its  advent  among 
men.  Men  do  not  become  subjects  of  it  by  right  of  birth,  office,  position.  They 
must  be  new  born  into  it,  with  a  new  spirit  not  subject  to  evil,  but  inspired  to 
overcome  it.  2.  Those  who  are  "born  again"  (or  from  above)  are  those  who 
become  what  they  were  not  before,  in  whom  an  entirely  new  spiritual  life  has 
been  implanted,  and  in  whom  this  change  has  been  brought  about,  not  by  the 
fulfilment  of  certain  ritual  or  devotional  duties,  not  even  by  repentance  alone, 

89 


chap.  in.  HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


but  by  the  impartation  of  spiritual  power  from  above.  They  alone  shall  "  see 
the  kingdom  of  God  " ;  they  alone  can  know  this  kingdom  and  understand  it 
truly.  As  the  eye  is  fitted  for  seeing  the  natural  world,  so  must  the  inner  eye 
of  the  soul,  the  moral  being,  be  fitted  by  regeneration  to  see  spiritual  things. 
Nicodemus  might  have  found  teaching  in  this  direction  in  the  Old  Testament 
revelation  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  26,  xviii.  31,  xi.  19;  Deut.  xxx.  6;  Jer.  xxxii.  39, 
iv.  4).  3.  Thus  the  ideas  expressed  in  our  Lord's  words  would  not  be  altogether 
strange  to  Nicodemus.  Indeed,  he  felt  their  truth  ;  but  he  could  not  imagine 
they  could  be  applicable  to  himself.  Was  he  not  already  in  the  kingdom  of  God  1 
A  descendant  of  Abraham,  and  from  that  very  circumstance,  as  a  faithful 
Israelite,  the  inheritor  of  the  promises,  what  need  for  him  to  go  through  any 
new  process  to  fit  himself  for  that  kingdom  ?  Would  it  not  be  as  possible  for  one 
grown  to  manhood  to  be  born  again  as  a  little  child  ?  Any  spiritual  renewing 
for  one  like  him  would  require  to  be  preceded  by  a  rebirth  of  the  physical  being 
as  well.  4.  Our  Lord  in  His  reply  to  this  question,  which  reveals  the  astonish- 
ment and  perplexity  of  the  inquirer,  explains  more  nearly  the  meaning  of  His 
answer,  which  Nicodemus  had  rightly  appropriated  personally.  "  Verily,  verily, 
.  .  .  except  a  man  be  born  of  water,"  etc.  There  cannot  here  be  any  reference  to 
Christian  baptism,  which  was  not  then  instituted.  The  reference  was  to  John's 
baptism,  which  at  that  time  was  creating  much  stir  among  the  people,  and 
which  the  Pharisees  had  rejected.  Now  our  Lord  here  insists  on  that  prepara- 
tion of  the  heart  of  which  baptism  is  the  symbol,  and  which  John  preached,  as 
an  indispensable  necessity  for  entrance  into  His  kingdom  (Luke  i.  16,  17). 
Repentance  and  pardon,  of  which  baptism  is  the  sign  and  seal,  must  go  before, 
are  the  first  steps  in  that  new  birth,  which  is  effected  by  the  Spirit  of  all  grace. 
"  The  pardon  which  is  symbolised  by  water-baptism  is  only  the  negative  condi- 
tion, the  sine  qua  non  of  the  new  birth.  The  positive  principle  of  this  inner  fact 
is  the  Spirit,  whom  God  gives  to  the  soul  which  has  been  washed  from  its  sin. 
As  really  then  as  salvation  comprehends  the  two  facts,  pardon  and  regenera- 
tion, so  really  did  Jesus  sum  up  in  the  two  words  water  and  Spirit  the  whole  of 
salvation,  and  consequently  man's  entrance  into  the  kingdom  of  God  "  (Godet). 
The  baptism  of  the  Spirit  is  what  is  essential  (Matt.  iii.  11);  but  it  must  be 
preceded  by  that  repentance  and  that  faith  which  looks  to  Christ  as  the  source 
of  pardon,  of  which  baptism  is  the  sign  and  seal.  This  last  will  not  be  omitted 
by  those  who  are  loyal  to  Christ's  commands  (Matt,  xxviii.  19,  20)  and  apostolic 
usage.  5.  "  That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh,"  etc.  (ver.  6).  In  this  truth  is  seen 
the  possibility  of  the  new  birth.  Where  the  Spirit  comes  with  regenerating 
power,  "  old  things  pass  away ;  behold,  they  are  become  new."  It  is  the  true 
answer  to  "  Can  a  man"  etc.,  of  Nicodemus. 

IV.  The  new  birth  is  mysterious,  yet  comprehensible. — 1.  Perhaps  there  was 
here  a  pause  in  the  conversation,  during  which  the  evening  breeze  of  the  Syrian 
spring  made  its  presence  felt,  as  it  gently  whispered  at  the  chamber  window,  and 
entered  with  refreshing  coolness.  And  then  on  the  ear  of  Nicodemus  fell  the 
words,  "  Marvel  not  that  I  said  unto  thee,  Ye  must  be  born  again.  The  wind," 
etc.  (vers.  7,  8).  The  presence  and  power  of  the  wind  are  evident.  Even  in  these 
days,  when  meteorologists  predict  the  direction,  etc.,  of  storm  winds,  still  it  is 
true  we  cannot  tell  at  what  spot  it  actually  rises,  etc.  Especially  is  this  so  with 
the  gentle  spring  and  summer  breezes.  2.  So  is  it  with  the  Spirit  in  the  new 
birth.  "  Who  can  trace  the  weaving  of  the  new  life  from  its  first  threads  which 
have  been  woven  together  by  grace  divine  ?  "  Who  can  tell  when  the  earliest 
promptings  of  divine  love  began,  trace  the  earliest  workings  of  the  Spirit,  unfold 
in  all  its  grandeur  the  process  of  the  new  birth  in  the  soul  ?  But  the  broad 
results  and  facts  we  can  see  and  know.  Just  as  the  ordinary  results  of  the  work- 
ing of  the  wind  are  evident,  so  is  it  with  the  working  of  the  Spirit.     3.  The  time 

90 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  in. 


is  coming  when  its  full  effects  will  be  revealed  (Col.  iii.  3,  4 ;  1  John  iii.  2).  "  It 
doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be."  Yet  even  here  and  now  proofs  of  the 
Spirit's  presence  and  activity  abound.  The  fruits  of  the  Spirit  are  manifest  in 
the  lives  of  God's  people  (Gal.  v.  22-26).  There  is  a  visible  growth  in  grace — a 
visible  change.     The  spiritually  lame  walk,  dumb  speak,  etc. 

V.  The  possibility  and  necessity  of  the  new  birth. — 1.  "How  can  such 
things  be  ?  "  (ver.  9).  It  was  difficult  for  the  Jew,  who  relied  on  his  relation  to 
Abraham,  his  being  one  of  the  chosen  people  of  God,  and  his  conformity  to  the 
law,  to  realise  the  necessity  for  spiritual  regeneration.  It  was  easier  for  the 
Gentile  to  understand  this.  Yet  even  among  the  Jews  the  necessity  for  some 
such  change  was  seen  (Ps.  li.  12  ;  Isa.  xliv.  3,  etc.).  But  the  scribes  and 
Pharisees  darkened  the  light  of  such  truth  by  tradition.  Thus  even  the  "  masters 
of  Israel "  (ver.  10)  were  often  ignorant  of  those  truths.  2.  "  Yerily,  verily,  I 
say  unto  thee,  We  speak  what  we  do  know,"  etc.  (ver.  11).  The  Saviour  in  regard 
to  such  great  truths  placed  Himself  high  above  all  earthly  teachers,  who  often 
Lave  to  guess  at  truth.  He  spake  what  He  knew,  etc.  It  is  fashionable  in 
some  quarters  to  speak  of  the  nescience  of  Christ,  of  His  having  limited  the 
sphere  of  His  knowledge  at  His  incarnation.  Here  Christ  claims  full  knowledge 
of  the  highest  truth.  "  If  I  have  told  you  earthly  things,"  etc.  (ver.  12),  i.e. 
things  already  revealed  to  the  Church  on  earth,  such  as  this  very  truth  of  the 
new  birth,  "  how  shall  ye  believe  if  I  tell  you  of  heavenly  things?  "  i.e.  of  the 
deeper  truths  of  the  Spirit's  working — the  whence  and  whither  of  spiritual  life 
in  the  soul — the  mysteries  of  Redemption,  the  Atonement,  and  the  Incarnation  ? 
3.  Christ  is  the  revealer,  through  His  Spirit,  of  these  det  p  truths.  He  alone  is 
competent  to  reveal  them.  "No  man  hath  ascended,"  etc.  (ver.  13).  This  is  no 
mere  rhetorical  expression,  but  the  expression  of  a  deep  truth.  "  He  came  down 
from  heaven  " — as  the  angel  of  the  covenant — to  prepare  the  way  by  His  Spirit 
in  Revelation,  and  last  in  His  incarnation.  And  He  is  "in  heaven" — in 
His  spiritual  intimate  communion  with  the  Father,  and  in  the  sinlessness  of  His 
humanity.  "  I  and  My  Father  are  one."  Heaven  is  a  state,  not  a  place.  4.  The 
new  birth  cannot  be  brought  about  by  our  own  power.  Those  dead  in  trespasses 
and  sins  must  be  quickened ;  their  guilt  must  be  cancelled,  they  must  be  recon- 
ciled. The  atoning  work  of  Christ  is  the  only  foundation  for  the  new  life.  Faith 
within  and  His  finished  work  are  the  means  of  union  with  Him  ;  and  in  that  union 
the  new  life  is  assured. 

Vers.  1-15.  The  new  birth  of  men. — We  assert: — 

I.  Its  necessity  on  account  of  the  divine  Father's  righteousness. — 1.  Man 

by  nature  is  unregenerate.  That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh.  2.  The 
righteousness  of  the  Father  cannot,  however,  receive  the  unregenerate  and 
unholy  into  its  fellowship,  because  it  requires  men  to  be  holy,  and  holiness  is  not 
characteristic  of  the  natural  man.  If  men  desire,  therefore,  to  enter  into  the 
heavenly  kingdom,  they  must  be  born  anew. 

II.  It  is  possible  through  the  "  lifting  up"  of  the  Son. — 1.  Men  have  sinned, 
and  therefore  must  some  representative  of  humanity  make  satisfaction  to  the 
divine  righteousness,  and  bear  the  punishment  of  sin.  This  Christ  did  in  that 
He  permitted  Himself  to  be  "lifted  up"  on  the  cross;  in  that  He,  being 
without  sin,  died  upon  the  cross.  2.  Those  who  look  to  the  Crucified  in  faith  are 
made  partakers  of  the  fruits  of  Christ's  death,  are  reconciled  to  the  Father,  and 
received  by  Him  as  children  and  heirs.  For  Christ  is  not  lifted  up  on  the  cross 
only,  but  is  also  raised  to  the  right  hand  of  the  Father,  where  He  intercedes  for 
His  own  with  blessed  results,  and  whence  He  works  among  His  people  through 
11  water  and  the  Spirit." 

91 


chap.  in.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


III.  It  is  efficacious  through  the  working  of  the  Holy  Spirit. — 1.  The  Holy 

Ghost  fills  us  with  the  power  of  a  new  life  (of  which  baptism  is  the  symbol),  so 
that  we  can  thereby  attain  to  the  renewal  of  our  whole  existence.  2.  And 
whilst  sin  still  retains  some  hold  over  us,  and  we  may  often  fall  into  sin,  the 
Holy  Spirit  ever  aids  us  to  rise  again  ;  and  when  we  repent  and  turn  to  Christ  in 
faith  He  imputes  to  us  the  work  of  Christ,  assures  us  of  forgiveness  and  son- 
ship,  maintains  us  in  the  faith,  strengthens  us  to  walk  in  righteousness  and 
holiness,  and  finally  intercedes  for  us  "  with  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered." 
— From  J.  L.  Sommer. 

Vers.  3-5.  Spiritual  regeneration,  or  the  new  birth. — The  manifestations  and 
operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit  are  manifold,  from  the  time  when  He  "brooded  over  " 
the  chaotic  elements  and  creation  issued  in  harmony  and  order.  So  He  works 
in  the  disordered  moral  nature  of  man.  All  along  the  course  of  history  He  has 
been  striving  "  with  men."  Through  prophets  and  holy  men  He  inspired  God's 
people  with  the  hope  of  deliverance.  But  especially  since,  in  accordance  with 
Christ's  promise,  He  descended  on  the  Church  at  Pentecost,  has  His  working 
been  manifest.  We  live  in  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit — the  teacher, 
counsellor,  and  Paraclete  of  Christ's  true  followers.  He  dissipates  their  dark- 
ness, strengthens  them  in  weakness,  sanctifies  their  nature.  No  aspect  of 
His  work  is  more  important  than  that  set  forth  here — the  mighty  work  of 
regeneration.  Day  by  day  is  this  miracle  wrought.  He  comes  into  the 
human  spirit  in  gentle  visitings,  so  that  what  was  before  spiritual  darkness  and 
disorder  becomes  filled  with  light  and  attuned  to  order.  We  do  not  now 
intend  to  state  minutely  the  great  doctrine  here  implied ;  rather  we  shall  see 
how  the  fact  appeals  to  all,  the  fact  of  regeneration  or  conversion — regeneration 
from  the  divine,  and  conversion  from  the  human,  point  of  view. 

I.  The  necessity  for  the  new  birth. — "  Except  ye  be  born  again,"  etc.  No 
more  important  or  momentous  words  could  sound  in  men's  ears  or  tremble  on 
their  lips.  If  the  Bible  is  God-given,  if  Jesus  is  the  eternal  Word,  then  there 
can  be  nothing  passing  this  in  importance.  It  is  the  point  of  junction  of  two  roads, 
— one  leading  through  many  a  lowly  vale  of  humiliation,  over  many  a  hill  of 
difficulty,  but  ending  in  everlasting  glory  ;  the  other  beginning  in  self-will  and 
ending  in  despair.  Without  this  vital  change  there  can  be  for  men  no  true 
spiritual  heavenly  life,  or  constraining  love,  etc.  But  what  is  the  attitude  of 
many,  even  subjects  of  the  outward  and  visible  divine  kingdom,  here  ?  Do  not 
many  look  on  the  subject  with  ill-disguised  contempt?  Do  not  many,  when  the 
change  passes  on  others,  consider  them  deluded — almost  mad  ?  Are  not  those 
under  the  influence  of  this  change  sometimes  recommended  to  throw  themselves 
into  the  gaieties  of  the  world  to  drive  away  the  cloud  of  spiritual  care  1  Fatal 
folly  !  How  terrible,  how  irrevocable  sometimes  are  the  results  !  Such  men 
are  blind  leaders  of  the  blind  who  regard  the  workings  of  the  Spirit  as  signs  of 
fanaticism,  requiring  to  be  corrected  by  their  worldly  wisdom.  But  this  is  the 
result  of  either  unbelief  or  ignorance.  Nothing  is  more  plainly  taught  in  God's 
word  than  the  necessity  for  this  change.  And  it  is  not  necessary  in  the  case  of 
the  grossly  wicked  merely.  They,  of  course,  must  be  changed,  regenerated,  ere 
they  can  see  the  kingdom  of  God.  But  even  men  of  good  repute  among  their 
fellows  may  at  heart  be  destitute  of  true  love  to  God  and  man.  This  they  must 
have  if  they  would  be  God's  children.  And  no  man  can  effect  it  of  himself. 
The  Spirit  alone  can  do  so,  with  His  quickening  and  sanctifying  power.  And  it 
is  not  a  mere  outward  reformation  that  He  effects.  The  inner  alienation  of  the 
heart  from  God  must  be  removed,  and  replaced  by  a  totally  different  feeling. 
And  that  no  man  can  do  this  of  himself  is  simply  a  fact.     The  holiest  will 

92 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN.  chap,  hi, 


confess  that  it  is  so.  True,  much  latent  criminality  may  be  kept  in  check  by 
what  might  be  called  "  artificial "  means — the  laws  of  social  order,  etc.  But 
such  restraint  from  sin  has  no  affinity  with  regeneration.  Even  the  most  rigid 
restraints  and  the  most  strenuous  self -endeavour  cannot  attain  to  it.  A  man 
may  be  benevolent,  may  give  of  his  goods  to  feed  the  poor,  may  give  his  body  to 
be  burned,  yet  regeneration  might  still  be  afar.  And  men  feel  they  need  this 
vital  change,  and  that  no  effort  of  theirs  can  effect  it  (Mic.  vi.  6,  7).  This 
true  and  right  state  of  heart  can  be  attained  to  only  by  regeneration,  not  by  any 
study  of  the  divine  character  or  the  example  of  Jesus.  The  natural  man  cannot 
understand  the  things  of  God.  It  would  be  as  easy  to  produce  a  flower  by 
willing  it.  An  artificial  flower  may  be  made  by  laborious  work  to  look  very 
beautiful,  and  almost  to  vie  with  a  real  flower.  But  a  closer  inspection  and  a 
test  under  the  microscope  will  show  how  wide  asunder  the  two  are.  God  reads 
our  hearts  and  knows  our  needs.  And  the  Spirit  of  God  alone  can  make  us 
new  creatures,  filling  our  hearts  with  love  divine.  "  Every  one  that  loveth  is 
born  of  God,  and  knoweth  God"  (1  John  iv.  7). 

II.  The  manner  in  which  the  Spirit  accomplishes  this  great  work. — It  is  a 

mysterious  process,  as  might  have  been  expected.  We  cannot  say  when  and 
how  the  Spirit  may  work.  We  can  see  the  effects,  as  with  the  wind.  The 
reason  is  that  the  spiritual  working  is  conjoined  with  our  human  activity 
(Phil.  ii.  12),  and  we  cannot  always  know  where  the  one  begins  and  the  other 
ends  in  any  particular  case.  [Is  there  not  a  tendency  to  take  perhaps  too 
"mechanical"  views  of  the  Spirit's  working  sometimes  in  evangelistic  work?] 
The  change  is  not  first  external,  but  internal.  It  dots  not  alter  the  nature  or 
banish  the  natural  feelings,  emotions,  etc.,  of  the  heart.  It  does  consist,  how- 
ever, of  a  change  in  the  dispositions  that  regulate  these.  In  regeneration  by  the 
Spirit  the  will  is  regulated  ;  the  attitude  of  rebellion  is  changed ;  it  becomes  a 
will  to  do  good.  This  change  is  not  altogether  disconnected  from  human  agency 
and  the  use  of  means,  e.g.  the  presentation  of  the  Word,  etc.  But  these  are 
not  sufficient  of  themselves  ;  either  men  will  not  listen  to  them,  or  will  not  see 
their  force  when  they  do.  He  who  is  not  born  again  cannot  see  the  kingdom,  etc. 
As  well  discourse  to  the  blind  of  beauty,  or  to  the  deaf  of  harmony,  etc.  But 
open  the  eyes,  unstop  the  ears,  and  then  both  will  share  in  the  same  joy.  So  is 
it  in  the  spiritual  life  ;  those  from  whose  spiritual  vision,  etc.,  the  film,  etc.,  has 
been  removed  see  and  hear  wondrous  things  in  God's  law.  And  notice  also  how 
human  activity  is  conjoined  with  the  divine  working.  When  the  man's  eyes  are 
opened  he  is  to  look,  etc. 

III.  The  manifestations  of  this  change. — They  vary  as  men  vary.  Some- 
times it  is  almost  imperceptible,  when,  e.g.,  the  subject  of  it  has  been  reared  in 
a  Christian  home,  and  is  of  amiable,  gentle  character,  like  a  Timothy.  Yet  an 
imperceptible  something  will  show  to  those  nearest  that  there  is  a  difference — 
greater  earnestness,  more  prayerfulness,  etc.  And  it  will  certainly  be  known  to 
the  man  himself,  and  that  most  surely  by  one  supreme  test — the  love  of  the 
brethren  (1  John  iii.  14).  Yet  again,  as  the  wind  not  only  comes  in  gentle 
breezes,  rippling  the  lake,  sighing  through  the  forest,  whispering  at  the  chamber 
window,  but  sometimes  rushes  with  hurricane  fury,  lashing  the  waters  into  storm, 
etc.,  so  with  some  of  strong  nature  or  former  great  wickedness  when  they  are 
born  of  the  Spirit.  But  in  every  case  the  change  will  be  evident — as  the  waving 
grain  on  harvest  field  is  evidence  that  the  seed  sown  germinated,  etc.  Has  this 
change  taken  place  in  us  ?  Nothing  can  be  more  important  to  us.  Eternal 
issues  depend  upon  it.  Give  no  sleep  to  your  eyes,  nor  slumber  to  your  eyelids, 
Until,  if  you  have  not  yet  experienced  it,  you  pray  with  earnest  desire  that  you 
may  be  "  born  again." 

93 


CHAP.  in.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


A  holy  hour  with  Jesus  in  the  silent  night. — Let  us  seek  to  realise  for 
ourselves  this  hour — 

I.  With  its  great  inquiry  (vers.  1-4) ; 
II.  With  its  wonderful  instruction  (vers.  5-12) ; 
III.  With  its  special  reference  to  the  Son  of  man,  our  Saviour  (vers.  13-15). 
— M.  Herold, 

Ver.  8.  Spiritual  life  a  divine  inspiration. — Christian  men  have  lost  the  belief 
of  the  apostles  that  God  is  speaking  in  us,  witnessing  in  us ;  that  we  have  an 
anointing  of  the  Holy  One.  They  speak  instead  of  impressions  and  motives 
and  influences,  as  if  God  were  not  to  come  into  close  contact  with  us,  but  were 
acting  through  these.  Religious  life  has  become  a  matter  of  self-searching  into 
experiences,  as  things  to  be  produced  by  exciting  impressions.  We  no  longer  act 
as  from  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  we  no  longer  live  as  looking  into  the 
spiritual  world.  The  Christian  life  has  therefore  lost  much  of  its  ancient  might. 
But  God's  Spirit  is  equally  close,  His  voice  equally  near,  though  in  a  different 
way.  Regeneration  is  impossible,  apart  from  the  direct  touch  and  actual 
inspiration  of  God. 

I.  Spiritual  life  is  a  direct  inspiration  from  God. — It  is  difficult  to  realise  the 
fact.  It  is  a  truth  out  of  the  common  range  of  everyday  thought.  This  is  so 
because  we  occupy  ourselves  so  much  with  the  outward  aspects  of  life,  and 
seldom  enter  the  secret  chambers  of  the  Spirit.  We  feel  ourselves  so  cold,  etc., 
that  we  scarcely  dare  say,  "  I  am  actually  touched,  moved,  inspired  by  the 
Almighty."  We  think,  too,  of  God  as  in  the  heavens.  We  forget  that  His 
presence  in  the  heart  alone  begets  that  faith  through  which  He  reveals  His 
glory.     These  words  suggest  two  thoughts  : — 

1.  Spiritual  life  is  impossible  apart  from  this  inspiration. — To  be  born  of  the 
Spirit  is  to  have  a  divine  love  created  within,  overthrowing  the  tyranny  of  the 
present,  the  sensual,  the  sinful,  filling  with  heavenly  hopes  and  aspirations, 
raising  life  above  the  downward,  natural  tendency  to  a  life  whose  whole  wrorld 
is  God  and  God's  heaven.  Spiritual  life  is  an  elevation  above  the  natural  will, 
the  natural  inclination  and  tendency.  And  this  can  be  produced  only  by  the 
direct  inspiration  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  For  man  cannot,  by  mere  effort  of  his 
own,  raise  himself  above  the  natural  life.  Look  at  Jacob,  Saul  of  Tarsus,  John 
the  son  of  thunder. 

2.  That  inspiration  enters  man  in  mystery. — We  may  trace  the  early  signs  of 
the  Spirit's  power  in  the  heart.  We  cannot  penetrate  the  mystery  which  shrouds 
its  origin.  Man  knows  not  when  it  begins,  though  he  may  know  when  its 
energy  came  forth  in  actual  development.  What  commenced  the  change  ?  Not 
man  himself ;  for  he  knew  it  not  till  its  power  was  felt  within.  So,  too,  sudden 
flashings  of  new  meaning  into  old  truths.  What  brought  this  about  1  Not  man 
himself.  Not  of  himself  did  he  set  out  on  the  pilgrim  path.  A  hand  touched 
him,  a  voice  called  him. 

II.  Some  of  the  results  of  realising  this  truth.— It  would  ever  work  a 
mighty  change.  God  is  brought  near,  prayer  becomes  inspired,  we  are 
freed  from  the  spell  of  the  material.  Did  we  feel  that  this  communion  were 
ours,  this  inspiration,  it  would  strengthen  spiritual  manhood. — Some  think 
this  doctrine  enervates.  They  try  to  rouse  themselves.  But  it  rather  inspires 
self -reverence,  self-control,  resistance  of  temptations.  There  is  reverence  for  the 
soul  in  which  God  abides — we  must  watch  its  altar  flame  to  keep  it  pure.  It 
inspires  us  to  work  out  our  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling ;  for  it  is 
God  who  works  in  us.  It  imparts  nobility  to  character. — The  man  who  feels  the 
divine  Spirit  working  within  him  will  not  waste  power  in  multiplied  professions, 
or  in  doing  things  to  be  seen  of  men.     It  gives  power  to  our  Christian  hope. — All 

H 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  hi. 


angelic  possibilities  lie  in  the  fact  that  we  have  within  us  the  Spirit  of  God ;  for 
to  be  inspired  by  Him,  to  be  thus  open  to  communion  with  His  love,  is  to  have 
the  "  power  of  an  endless  life." — E.  L.  Hull,  B.A. 

Ver.  9.  The  manner  of  the  new  birth. — "  How  can  these  things  be]" 

I.  Divine  grace  gives  the  new  life  from  above. — 1.  Except  a  man  be  born 
from  above.  This  indicates  the  source  of  the  new  life.  2.  Water  and  the 
Spirit,  etc. — In  this  our  Lord  reveals  the  nature  and  manner  of  the  new  birth. 
The  symbolism  points  back  to  creation  (Gen.  i.  2).  The  new  creation  follows  an 
order  as  well  as  the  old.  The  water  is  the  symbol  of  spiritual  cleansing ;  the 
Spirit  is  the  element  of  a  new  spiritual  life,  not  the  spirit  of  human  wisdom,  etc., 
but  the  Spirit  of  God.  3.  And  it  is  only  through  the  Son  of  man  that  this  new 
Spirit  of  life  comes  to  us  (ver.  13),  freeing  us  from  servitude  to  sin,  healing  us, 
through  His  cross,  from  the  poison  of  sin  (ver,  14).  4.  And  the  original  height 
from  which  all  this  blesbing  flows  down  to  men  is  the  high  summit  of  eternal 
love  (ver.  16). 

II.  Faith  lays  hold  of  this  divine  gift. — 1.  Scripture  tells  us  that  Christ  has 
been  lifted  up,  etc.  But  this  does  not  make  salvation  my  possession,  etc.  2. 
But,  brethren,  how  have  you  sought  to  make  this  gift  yours  1  By  your  own 
head,  heart,  exertions?  There  is  but  one  way:  "We  have  believed  and  have 
known  that  Thou  art  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God."  "  If  any  man  will  do  His 
will,"  etc.  (vii.  17) ;  "  Whosoever  believeth,"  etc.  (ver.  15).  Faith  in  the  Son  of 
God  opens  the  door  of  eternal  life.  3.  This  laying  hold  by  faith  is  most  natural. 
Suppose  you  seek  to  enter  the  service  of  some  one  on  earth,  how  will  you  find 
out  whether  it  will  be  a  pleasant  service  ?  You  can  ask  those  who  are  already 
in  it,  and  you  can  try  it  yourself.  Ask  those  who  have  entered  Christ's  service, 
and  what  is  their  testimony  1  Our  Lord  asked  the  disciples  :  "  When  I  sent 
you  without  purse,  etc.,  lacked  ye  any  thing  1  "  (Luke  xxii.  35).  Think  of  the 
history  of  the  faithful — of  even  those  who  suffered  for  Christ's  sake,  e.g.  a 
Polycarp,  etc.  These  old  servants  of  Christ,  grown  grey  in  His  service,  testified 
to  the  blessedness  of  His  service.  And  there  are  millions  of  witnesses  to  the 
same  effect.  4.  All  have  not  a  desire  to  believe.  Humble  yourself  under  the 
law,  and  you  will  see  your  need  of  faith,  and  be  led  to  cry  for  it.  And  the  cry, 
"  Help  Thou  mine  unbelief,"  will  speedily  be  answered. 

III.  The  walk  and  conversation  will  bear  witness  to  the  new  life. — 1.  A 
web  has  two  sets  of  threads — the  warp  and  woof.  A  life  has  two  sides : 
what  God  does  for  you,  and  what  you  do  toward  Him.  2.  How  does  God 
deal  with  His  believing  ones  ?  "  God  sent  not  His  Son  into  the  world  to 
condemn,"  etc.  (vers.  17,  18).  As  life  begins  here,  so  also  does  eternal  death. 
God's  judgments  are  ever  set.  The  stream  roars  loudest  when  it  enters  the  sea 
and  meets  the  billows  ;  but  it  roars  also  along  its  course.  And  thus  the  stream 
of  God's  judgments  is  ever  flowing.  For  the  unrepentant  and  unbelieving  every 
calamity  is  a  judgment,  every  whisper  of  conscience,  and  even  the  grace  of  God 
itself.  It  is  dark  in  the  heart  when  the  will-o'-the-wisps  of  the  world's  joy  go 
out,  and  this  darkness  closes  in  the  night  of  the  grave,  and  darker  night  still. 
3.  But  they  who  believe  are  not  condemned.  Grace  and  life  meet  them  every- 
where— become  all  their  joy.  They  shall  learn  to  love  the  Saviour  more  deeply 
— to  cut  away  more  earnestly  the  wild  branches  of  the  natural  man.  Grace  is 
to  them  a  cross — God's  pruning-knife.  But  the  heart  is  light — it  rejoices  in  the 
blessed  light  which  streams  from  the  throne  of  God  ;  for  those  who  believe  are 
not  condemned.  This  is  how  God  deals  with  His  redeemed  children.  4.  The 
attitude  of  the  life  toward  God  will  also  be  manifest.  The  new-born  spirit  lives 
in  Christ,  and  the  walk  and  conversation  are  in  Him,  because  Christ  lives  in 
them.     Then  there  must  be  love  to  God.      And  their  works  "  come  to  the  light 

95 


chap.  ill.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


because  they  are  done  in  God."  No  cloak  is  thrown  over  the  heart.  The  Lord 
is  openly  confessed.  "  He  that  doeth  truth  cometh  to  the  light."  They  must 
not  seek  to  hide  themselves.  Thus  we  see  how  the  new  life  is  effected,  how  it  is 
laid  hold  of,  and  how  it  manifests  itself. — Br.  Fried.  Ahlfeld. 

Vers.  14,  15.  The  cross  of  Christ  the  source  of  life  eternal. — These  verses  refer 
to  a  most  interesting  passage  in  the  history  of  God's  ancient  people.  The 
narrative  in  which  it  occurs  is  not  as  Dean  Stanley  says,  "the  obscure  record  of 
a  dark,  confused  time,"  but  rather  the  definite  record  of  a  definite  event  which 
left  a  deep  impression  on  the  minds  of  the  people.  Nothing  could  be  more  absurd 
than  the  conclusions  stated  by  modern  "  higher  critics  "  in  reference  to  this 
incident.  It  is  trifling  with  our  intelligence  to  say  that  it  proves  that  the 
Israelites  were  idolaters  at  the  time  of  its  occurrence,  and  worshipped  the 
serpent — a  cult  that  continued  to  Hezekiah's  time  !  (2  Kings  xviii.  4).  Did 
the  critics  never  hear  of  the  holy  coat  at  Treves,  and  the  relic's  adoration  in  the 
Romish  Church?  At  the  time  of  the  incident,  Israel,  after  being  refused  a 
way  through  the  territory  of  Edom,  had  to  struggle  through  the  barren  and 
rock-strewn  valley  of  the  Arabah.  It  was  a  terrible  march — water  was  scant 
and  bad,  and  the  people  contemned  the  daily  provided  manna.  They  became 
discouraged  "  because  of  the  way "  (Numb.  xxi.  4).  And  forgetting  former 
deliverances,  they  murmured  and  rebelled.  In  order  to  teach  these  rebellious 
Israelites  their  dependence  on  God,  the  poisonous  spotted  snakes  common  to  the 
region  were  permitted  to  inflict  on  many  the  burning  fiery  bite  which  gave  them 
their  name  (D>2")^  ^^ty),  so  that  a  number  of  the  people  died.  The  punishment 
had  the  intended  effect.  It  led  to  reflection  and  repentance.  Moses  was  ordered 
to  erect  on  a  pole,  in  full  sight  of  the  people,  an  image  of  a  serpent  in  brass  or 
copper ;  and  the  promise  was  given  that  when  those  who  were  bitten  looked  on 
the  brazen  serpent  they  should  live.  Those  who  did  look,  believing  the  divine 
promise,  were  made  whole. 

I.  Our  Lord  in  His  conversation  with  Nicodemus  took  this  historical  incident 
in  Israel's  history  as  a  type  of  His  own  atoning  work.  The  serpent  has  usually 
been  taken  as  a  symbol  of  sin,  or  the  power  of  evil.  Even  in  this  view  the  type 
will  stand  ;  for  God  made  Christ  "  to  be  sin  for  us  who  knew  no  sin  "  (2  Cor.  v.  21). 
But  here  rather  the  effect  of  the  serpent's  bite  signifies  the  results  of  sin.  The 
sin  of  the  Israelites  was  their  unbelief  and  base  ingratitude — this  dread  visitation 
their  punishment.  They  were  to  learn  that  just  as  the  reptile's  bite  was  deadly, 
so  moral  evil  leads  to  spiritual  death.  Sin  has  introduced  an  element  of  con- 
fusion into  human  nature,  which  has  turned  it  away  from  its  true  centre  and 
life.  In  essence  it  is  the  setting  up  of  ourselves  and  our  own  wills  in  opposition 
to  the  law  and  will  of  God  ;  it  leads  to  contemning  the  provision  God  has 
made  for  our  spiritual  life,  and  to  seeking  happiness  in  ways  not  His.  The 
poison  enters  our  veins.  In  place  of  the  healthy  flow  of  spiritual  life,  the 
elements  of  corruption  begin  their  deadly  work.  It  is  a  poison  so  subtle  that 
it  penetrates  into  all  the  powers  of  the  soul,  infects  all  the  actions,  etc.  It 
strengthens  as  time  passes.  "  Nothing  grows  weak  with  age  but  what  will  at 
length  die  with  age  "  (South).  Not  so  sin.  Unless  conquered  and  overcome,  it 
daily  grows  and  increases — a  warning  to  those  who  linger  on  the  brink  of  for- 
saking it.  And  if  men  are  to  be  saved  from  spiritual  death,  this  corrupting 
influence  must  be  expelled,  and  a  new  life  transfused  in  the  nature.  Men  are 
unable  of  themselves  to  effect  a  cure,  as  Scripture  and  human  experience  tell  us. 
Laws,  education,  moral  teaching — all  have  failed — not  to  speak'of  crude  attempts 
through  sacrifice  or  asceticism.  "  None  can  by  any  means  redeem  his  brother, 
nor  give  to  God  a  ransom  for  him  "  (Ps.  xlix.  7). 

II.  There  is  a  divine  way  of  escape  from  sin. — "  As  Moses  lifted  up,"  etc. 

96 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY;    ST.   JOHN.  chap.  hi. 


In  ver.  13  Jesus  had  said  :  "  No  man  hath  ascended,"  etc.  And  in  vers.  14,  15, 
the  reason  of  the  descent  of  the  Son  of  man  is  given.  1.  Notice  the  divine 
necessity  of  the  incarnation  and  offering  up  of  Christ  :  "So  must  the  Son  of  man 
be  lifted  up."  If  men  are  to  be  saved  from  the  power  and  effects  of  sin  God  must 
interpose.  As  at  the  command  of  God  Moses  set  up  the  serpent  of  brass  on  the 
pole — symbol  of  the  people's  salvation — like,  yet  so  unlike,  the  source  of  their 
danger,  the  channel  by  which  through  faith  came  healing — so  "  God  sending 
His  Son,"  etc.  (Rom.  viii.  3).  He  took  on  Him  the  form  of  our  humanity,  which 
had  become  corrupt  and  moribund ;  and  in  it  as  the  representative  of  all  men 
He  triumphed  over  the  powers  of  evil,  bearing  the  penalty  of  sin,  though 
Himself  holy,  harmless,  etc.  2.  The  immediate  means,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
Israelites,  is  faith.  Faith  forms  the  link  between  us  and  the  source  of  all  our 
hopes  as  we  look  on  this  representative  of  humanity  lifted  up  upon  the  cross. 
The  divine  life  and  spirit  in  Him,  source  of  His  triumph,  flow  to  us  through 
faith  as  through  an  appointed  channel,  touching  our  sin-stricken  souls.  A  new 
life,  a  new  spirit  from  above,  then  interfuses  and  possesses  us — the  poison  is 
neutralised.  We  become  as  new-born,  with  a  nature  freed  from  the  deadly  plague 
and  quickened  unto  life  eternal.  This  is  God's  way  of  life.  In  view  of  it  we  may 
well  cry  with  the  apostle,  "  Oh  the  depth  of  the  riches,"  etc.  (Rom.  xi.  33). 

III.  The  consideration  of  this  truth  should  impress  upon  us  two  great  out- 
standing facts. — 1.  The  terrible  nature  of  sin. — The  positions  men  occupy  toward 
sin  are  very  varied.  Some  are  revelling  in  its  pleasures,  but  have  not  yet  felt 
its  sting  severely.  Others  have  become  enslaved  by  its  power,  and  are  filled  with 
its  misery.  Others  again  are  beginning  to  loathe  the  terrible  bondage,  and  long 
for  freedom.  But  no  living  man  can  realise  all  its  awfulness  and  horror  until 
he  has  viewed  it  in  the  light  of  the  cross.  When  we  come  to  understand  who 
it  was  that  was  "  lifted  up  "  on  Calvary,  and  for  what  end,  then  we  see  how 
eternally  hateful  and  abhorrent  sin  must  be  to  God.  The  Holy  One  was  per- 
mitted, nay,  was  sent,  to  expiate  it.  And  thus  when  temptation  comes  the 
redeemed  man  will  say  :  "  Can  I  do  this  great  wickedness,"  etc.  Can  I  indulge 
in  that  to  save  me  from  the  power  of  which  the  Saviour  died  ? 

2.  And  then  there  is  the  fact  that  we  owe  this  great  Redemption  to  the  abounding 
love  and  mercy  of  God. — God  did  not  forsake  entirely  His  ancient  people  when 
they  sinned.  He  led  them  to  repentance.  He  did  not  forsake  the  whole 
human  race,  though  they  had  wandered  far  from  Him.  Viewing  their  misery 
in  the  infinite  depth  of  His  pitying  love,  He  was,  in  all  the  ages,  preparing  the 
way  for  the  manifestation  of  His  love  in  sending  His  Son.  How  could  many, 
in  view  of  such  glorious  declarations,  speak  in  terms  which  implied  that  it  was  the 
Son's  interposition  that  turned  aside  divine  wrath  from  sinful  men  !  True  there 
is  divine  wrath  against  sin,  for  sin  cannot  dwell  with  God ;  but  there  is  also 
infinite  love  toward  the  sinner  (ver.  16).  "God  commendeth  His  love  toward 
us,"  etc.  (Rom.  v.  8). 

3.  Who  that  have  thought  on  this  mighty  exhibition  of  divine  love  for  their 
salvation  can  resist  the  power  of  that  love,  and  still  continue  in  their  rebellion 
and  alienation  ?  With  the  story  of  that  great  love  sounding  in  our  ears — love 
mighty  to  save — let  us  turn  away  through  God's  grace  resolutely  from  sin, 
looking  in  living  faith  to  Him  who  can  save  us  from  its  guilt  and  power. 

HOMILETIC  NOTES. 

Ver.  3.  Born  again. — The  new  life  2.  It  is  called  being  born  from  above, 
is  called :  1.  Being  born  again,  in  con-  or,  born  of  God,  because  God  and  not 
tradistinction    to   the   natural    birth ;      man  effects  it ;   3.  It  is  called    being 

H  97 


CHAP.   III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.   JOHN. 


born  of  water  and  the  Spirit,  in  refer- 
ence to  the  means  through  which  it  is 
brought  about.  The  Romans  observed 
a  festival  called  Foniinalia — feast  of 
fountains.  They  decorated  the  foun- 
tains with  flowers  and  wreaths  to 
express  their  thankfulness  for  the  gift 
of  water.  By  the  light  of  nature  they 
recognised  the  greatness  of  the  blessing 
— that  God  sendeth  the  springs  into 
the  valleys,  etc.  (Ps.  civ.  10-14).  The 
Romans,  therefore,  held  their  springs 
and  fountains  as  sacred,  and  believed 
that  each  was  guarded  by  a  goddess. 
So  many  Christians  hold  a  sacred  fes- 
tival around  the  holy  spiritual  springs 
opened  up  in  the  gospel. — J.  J.  Weigel. 

Ver.  3.  The  gifts  of  God  to  the  spirit- 
ually new  bom. — Men  are  not  born 
again  in  order  that  they  may  sin  with 
greater  impunity,  but  in  order  to  live 
by  the  power  of  God,  and  to  let  the 
spirit  of  His  grace  work  within  them 
for  their  renewing.  The  Trinity  brings 
those  gifts. 

I.  God  the  Father  gives  His  grace 
and  the  blessedness  of  sonship,  the 
assurance  of  His  fatherly  care. 

II.  God  the  Son  gives  His  love,  the 
fellowship  of  His  sufferings,  the  merits 
of  His  work,  the  assurance  of  His  true 
and  loving  brotherhood,  and  the 
participation  in  His  heavenly  in- 
heritance. 

III.  God  the  Holy  Ghost  gives  His 
blessed  comfort,  and  the  assurance  of 
His  gracious  indwelling,  and  mighty 
controlling  power  all  through  life  until 
the  end. — Idem. 

Vers.  4,  5.  How  may  we  know  that 
we  are  "fit  for  the  kingdom  of 
God"? — 1.  By  our  confession  of  the 
Person  of  Jesus  Christ ;  2.  By  our 
longing  for  the  regeneration  of  our 
inner  nature ;  3.  By  our  experience  of 
the  working  within  us  of  the  Holy 
Spirit ;  4.  By  our  faith  in  regard  to 
the  testimony  of  Jesus;  5.  By  the 
peace  and  consolation  we  experience 
beneath  the  cross  of  Jesus. — J.  L. 
Sommer. 

98 


^  Ver.  5.  Water  and  the  Spirit. — 
"  Born  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit,"  etc. 
Men  must  be  born  of  water  and  of  the 
Spirit.  This  is  the  weighty  and  un- 
changeable condition  of  entrance  into 
the  kingdom  of  God,  as  our  Lord  shows 
by  the  repeated  verily  (afx^v).  A 
number  of  expositors  think  the 
Z£  vSaros  has  a  reference  to  Christian 
baptism ;  and  seek  to  set  aside  the 
objection  that  Nicodemus  could  have 
then  no  knowledge  of  Christian  bap- 
tism, with  the  remark  that  this  was 
designed  to  prepare  him  for  the  clearer 
knowledge  of  it  in  the  near  future, 
when  the  actual  disclosure  could  not 
be  postponed.  We  take  our  place, 
however,  on  the  side  of  those  who 
refer  the  expression  i£  vBaros  imme- 
diately to  John's  baptism.  This  alone 
was  known  to  Nicodemus ;  to  it  the 
Saviour  could  turn  the  discourse  in  His 
teaching.  The  baptism  of  John  was  a 
baptism  with  water  (i.  26,  31)  ;  and  it 
was  a  baptism  of  repentance  for  the 
remission  of  sins  (Luke  iii.  3  ;  Mark  i.  4 ; 
Matt.  iii.  6).  This  baptism  had  made 
a  deep  excitement  among  the  people, 
which  the  Pharisees  rather  resented 
(i.  24).  It  was  completed  also  by  im- 
mersion ;  hence  the  expression  i£  vSaros 
was  most  appropriate  for  this  action. 
It  was  at  this  baptism  also  that  John 
bore  witness  to  Christ  (i.  33),  as  He 
who  should  baptise  with  the  Holy 
Ghost.  By  the  expression  TLvev/jiaTos 
we  are  to  think  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
To  those  who  in  baptism  have  their 
sins  taken  away  and  forgiven,  which 
also  occurred  to  those  who  repented  in 
the  case  of  John's  baptism  (although 
there  is  a  special  promise  for  Christian 
baptism),  God  gives  the  Holy  Spirit, 
which  exercises  a  creative  energy  on 
men,  because  He  fills  them  with  the 
divine  powers  of  life.  So  Hofmann 
understands  the  passage  when  he  says : 
11  Water  and  Spirit  attest  the  begin- 
ning of  the  new  life  :  water,  as  the 
Baptist  administered  it,  and  Spirit,  as 
he  himself  promised  it  shouldbe given  by 
Him  who  came  after  him.  He  who  was 
obedient  to  the  word  of  God  as  it  came 
through  John,  submitted  to  the  water 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   III. 


of  his  baptism,  and  held  himself  ready- 
to  receive  the  baptism  with  the  Spirit 
from  that  Jesus  to  whom  John  bare 
witness."       Water    and   the    Spirit — 
these  are  the  means  of  the  new  birth. 
Through   the   pardon   of   sin  and  the 
communication   of    divine    powers    of 
spiritual  life  the  new  birth  comes  to 
pass.    In  the  following  verse  the  water 
is  no  more  spoken  of,  but  the  Spirit, 
because  the  water  in  the  transaction 
of  being  born  again  (or  the  new  birth) 
only   removes    the   hindrances.      The 
creative  power  comes  from  the  Spirit. 
Spiritual  regeneration  is  indispensably 
necessary  for  entrance  into  the  king- 
dom of  God.      For  the  nature  of  that 
kingdom   is    spiritual,    and    man    by 
nature  is  of  the  flesh. — J.  L.  Sommer. 
He    connects    the   water    and    the 
Spirit,    because     under     that     visible 
symbol  He  attests  and  seals  that  new- 
ness of  life  which  God  alone  produces 
in  us  by  His  Spirit. — John  Calvin. 

Yer.    6.  Flesh   and   Spirit. — 1.  The 
rose  bush  has  thorns,  and  so,  too,  has 
the  thorn  hedge.     The   former,  how- 
ever,   bears   lovely   roses,    whilst    the 
latter  only  pricks  and  tears  with  its 
thorns.     How  may  man  be  likened  to 
these  plants?     (1)  Repentant  children 
of  God  have  their  faults,  and  falter  in 
their  holy  purpose  sometimes  ;  yet  they 
will   always  be  found   to  have  heart- 
felt sorrow,  true   repentance,   prayer, 
faith    and    amendment   of   life.       (2) 
Hardened   and   godless   men,    on   the 
other  hand,  have  only  the  appearance 
of   godliness   in  their   lives,  and  then 
only  for  a  time.     But  their  lives  are 
always  filled  with  sins  and  transgres- 
sions.    (3)  Men  are  not  renewed,  like  a 
piece  of  old  worm-eaten  wood,  by  being 
painted  over,  and  made  to  assume  as 
fair  an  appearance  as  possible.     They 
nre  renewed  through  grace;  the  blood 
of  Christ  penetrates  with  its  power  to 
the   innermost   recesses   of   the    soul ; 
and  each  man,  thus   born  again,  re- 
ceives a  new  name,  a  new  life,  a  new 
power,  a  new  mind  and  heart.     (4)  As 
from  a  bitter  fountain  we  cannot  draw 
one  drop  that  is  not  bitter,  and  as  in 


leavened  dough  no  part  is  left  un- 
leaventd,  thus  from  sinful  men  no 
thing  can  come  that  is  not  influenced 
by  their  sinful  nature. — J.  J.  Weigel. 

Vers.  6,  7.  Three  questions  answered 
in  our  Gospel. — 1.  What  are  we? 
2.  What  ought  we  to  become  ?  3.  How 
can  we  attain  to  what  we  should  be  ? — 
V.  Stahlin. 

Ver.  8.   The  Wind  and  the  Spirit. — 
Whatever  be   the  difficulties  that  lie 
in  the  way  of  interpreting  7rv€vfxa  as 
"  Spirit,"  they  are  not  to  be  named  or 
numbered   with    the   thicket   of    diffi- 
culties and  absurdities  which  beset  its 
translation      and      interpretation      as 
"  wind."  Even  supposing  we  discard  the 
context,  and  treat  John  iii.  8  as  a  say- 
ing unrelated  to  aught  that  goes  before 
it,  can  we  for  a  moment  imagine  that  so 
wise  a  teacher  as  our  Lord  would  ever 
confuse  the  mind   of  an  enquirer  by 
using   an  important  word  like   Trvev^xa 
in  two  widely  different  senses  within 
the   compass    of    a    single    sentence  ? 
If  that  is  inconceivable,  I  ask  those 
who   say    we   are    to  read   "  the  vjind 
blow>s"  what  did  our  Lord  mean  by  the 
words,  "  So  is  every  one  that  hath  been 
born  of  the  wind  "  ?    This  is  a  specimen 
of  the  difficulties  which  the  old  transla- 
tion presents.  .  .  .    The  interpretation 
of  John  iii.  8  must  be  read  in  the  light 
of  John  iii.  6  :   "  That  which  has  been 
born  of  the  Spirit  is  Spirit."     It  con- 
tains an  amplification  and  illustration 
of  that  statement  of  the  ruling  prin- 
ciple of  spiritual  life.     The  particle  of 
comparison,    ovt(d<s,     "  so,"    limits    the 
likeness   to    manner    of   action.      The 
action   of  spiritual   life   in  the  spirit- 
born  resembles  the   action  of  the  life 
of   the  Holy    Spirit.       It  is    free ;    it 
manifests  itself  in  ways  that  appeal  to 
the  mind  and  conscience ;  it  is  hidden  or 
mysterious.     There  is  no  hint  here,  or 
in  any  other  part  of  the  record,  of  an 
intention  to  show  that  the  subject  was 
beyond  the   comprehension    or  appre- 
hension  of   Nicodemus.     A    rabbi,    in 
his  distinctive  position,  .  .  .  should  have 
had   sufficient  acquaintance  with    the 

99 


CHAP.   III. 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


revelation  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  the 
record  of  spiritual  life  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, to  enable  him,  in  some  measure, 
to  apprehend  such  teaching.  .  .  .  The 
dictum  of  Meyer,  that  the  Spirit  never 
"  blows,"  is  not  so  destructive  as  it 
looks  to  the  proposal  to  translate  irvtoi 
by  "  breathe."  It  suggests  what  is, 
after  all,  only  a  minor  difficulty  of 
the  interpretation  which  I  advocate. 
In  Wilke  and  Grimm's  Clavis  Novi 
Testamenti,  we  find  under  irveoi, 
"  from  Homer  downwards  to  breathe, 
to  blovj."  In  classical  authors  (see 
Liddell  and  Scott)  Trvioi  is  sometimes 
used  of  flowers  giving  forth  their 
fragrance.  .  .  .  This  suggests  a  wider 
meaning  and  application  of  the  word 
than  is  suggested  by  the  few  instances 
in  which  it  is  found  in  the  New 
Testament.  It  occurs,  I  believe,  six 
times,  ttvoy),  " breath"  (Acts  xvii.  25), 
"  wind  "  (Acts  ii.  2).  See  also  Mark 
xv.  37;  Luke  xxiii.  46;  Acts  v.  5-10. 
If  the  absence  of  any  other  instances 
of  such  a  modification  of  irveui  in 
the  New  Testament  is  still  put  forth 
as  an  objection  to  the  translation 
"  the  Spirit  breathes,"  I  would  then 
say  the  objectors  take  a  more  un- 
warrantable liberty  with  irvtvyua.  in 
translating  it  as  "  wind."  More 
reasonable  is  it,  on  one  occasion,  to 
slightly  and  legitimately  modify  the 
New  Testament  use  of  7n/ea>,  which 
only  occurs  six  times,  than  to  change 
entirely  the  meaning  of  7n/€v/xa,  which 
occurs  as  "  spirit  "  or  "  breath  "  three 
hundred  and  seventy  times.  Apart  from 
John  iii.  8,  there  is  only  one  instance 
where  irvevixa  may  mean  "  wind " 
(Heb.  i.  7),  and  the  interpretation  of 


the  quotation  from  the  Old  Testa- 
ment in  which  it  occurs  is  still  in 
dispute.  In  this  passage  7n/€v/xa,  not 
7rv€0),  is  the  dominant  word. — Rev. 
John  Reid  in  "Expository  Times."  [But 
may  not  our  Lord,  led  by  the  circum- 
stances, have  made  a  play  on  the  word, 
especially  when  we  remember  that  it 
was  an  Aramaic  word  He  would  use  ? 
Such  use  of  a  word  in  a  double  mean- 
ing was  not  unknown  in  the  Schools.] 

Yer.  8. — " The  wind  bloweth"  etc. — 
If  we  do  not  understand  what  comes 
under  the  cognisance  of  our  senses,  how 
can  we  understand  fully  and  excogitate 
what  is  far  beyond  all  human  under- 
standing? A  modest  acknowledgment 
of  our  ignorance  is  better  here  than  a 
presumptuous  inquisitiveness.  1.  The 
wind  blows  in  the  air  ;  the  Holy  Spirit 
breathes  in  the  hearts  of  those  who 
have  been  born  again.  2.  The  wind 
awakes  those  who  are  slumbering  ;  the 
Holy  Spirit  awakens  the  slumbering 
soul.  3.  The  wind  drives  before  it  the 
refreshing  rains ;  the  Holy  Spirit  brings 
the  rain  of  penitent  tears.  4.  The 
wind  blows  the  fire  into  a  flame ;  the 
Holy  Spirit  quickens  the  spark  of 
faith.  5.  The  wind  purifies  the  air  ; 
the  Holy  Spirit  sanctifies  the  hearts  of 
believers. — From  J.  J.  Weigel. 

Ver.  13. — Ascending  with  Christ. — 
1.  "No  one  hath  ascended  into  heaven 
but  the  Son  of  Man  "— "  and,"  said 
Maximilianus,  when  this  was  repeated 
to  him  when  he  was  dying,  "  all  who 
believe  on  Him."  2.  "If  thou  wilt 
ascend  into  heaven,  become  a  member 
of  Christ "  (Augustine). 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Nicodernus. — As  the  noblest  mystics  pro- 
ceeded from  the  monks  of  the  Roman  Catholic 
Church,  from  the  Dominicans  especially,  and 
the  great  Reformer  Luther  from  the  Augus- 
tinians,  so  two  great  witnesses  of  the  most 
living  Christian  faith,  Paul  and  Nicodernus, 
were  supplied  to  the  kingdom  of  God  by  the 
Pharisees,  a  party  noted  for  their  sancti- 
moniousness and  bondage  to  the  letter.  In 
the  person  of  Nicodernus,  Christ  at  the  very 

100 


outset  of  His  ministry  conquered  not  only  a 
Pharisee,  but  a  ruler  of  the  Jews,  a  member 
of  the  Sanhedrin.  It  has  been  a  common 
hypothesis  in  schools  of  theology,  but  with- 
out any  foundation,  to  regard  him  as  a  spy, 
who  at  first  came  to  Jesus  with  a  sinister 
design.  The  sincerity  of  his  inclinations 
toward  Jesus  is,  from  the  first,  decided ;  a 
genuine  germ  of  faith  already  begins  to 
combat  his  own  pretensions  and  prejudices  ; 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   III. 


otherwise  he,  an  old  man,  could  not  resort 
to  a  young  man,  and,  though  a  distinguished 
member  of  the  Council,  ask  questions  of  the 
Galilean  Rabbi  as  a  scholar,  thus  putting  his 
whole  reputation  in  peril.  We  also  see  how 
this  germ  gradually  increased  in  power,  till 
perfected  in  the  ripe  fruit  of  faith,  after 
passing  in  its  development  through  distinct 
stages.  But  that  the  germ  in  its  first  form 
was  feeble,  Nicodemus  plainly  indicates, 
not  only  by  his  coming  to  Jesus  by  night,  to 
which,  no  doubt,  considerations  of  fear  deter- 
mined him,  but  also  by  the  tenor  of  his 
language. — Lange,  "  Life  of  Christ." 

Ver.  3.  The  childlike  nature  is  of  the 
kingdom  of  God.  —  You  have  the  child's  i 
character  in  these  four  things — humility, 
faith,  charity,  and  cheerfulness.  That's 
what  you've  got  to  be  converted  to.  "Ex- 
cept ye  be  converted  and  become  as  little 
children."  You  hear  much  of  conversion 
nowadays ;  but  people  always  seem  to 
think  they  have  got  to  be  made  wretched 
by  conversion— to  be  converted  to  long  faces. 
No,  you  have  got  to  be  converted  to  short 
ones ;  you  have  to  repent  fnto  childhood,  to 
repent  into  delight  and  delightsomeness. 
You  can't  go  into  a  conventicle  but  you'll 
hear  plenty  of  talk  of  backsliding.  Back- 
sliding, indeed  !  I  can  tell  you,  on  the  ways 
most  of  us  go  the  faster  we  slide  back  the 
better,  slide  back  into  the  cradle,  if  going 
forward  is  into  the  grave — back,  I  tell  you 
— back,  out  of  your  long  faces,  and  into 
your  long  clothes.  It  is  among  children, 
and  as  children  only,  that  you  wTill  find 
medicine  for  your  heaJing,  and  true  wisdom 
for  your  teaching.  There  is  poison  in  the 
counsels  of  the  men  of  this  world  ;  the  words 
they  speak  are  all  bitterness,  "  the  poison 
of  asps  is  under  their  lips,"  but  the  "  sucking 
child  shall  play  by  the  hole  of  the  asp." 
There  is  death  in  the  looks  of  men,  "  their 
eyes  are  privily  set  against  the  poor ;  "  they 
are  as  the  uncharmable  serpent,  the  cocka- 
trice which  slew  by  seeing.  But  "  the 
weaned  child  shall  lay  his  hand  on  the 
cockatrice'  den."  There  is  death  in  the  steps 
of  men;  their  feet  are  swift  to  shed  blood  ; 
they  have  compassed  us  in  our  steps  like 
the  lion  that  is  greedy  of  his  prey,  and  the 
young  lion  lurking  in  secret  places,  "  but  in 
that  kingdom,  the  wolf  shall  lie  down  with 
the  lamb,  and  the  fatling  with  the  lion,  and 
a  little  child  shall  lead  them."  There  is 
death  in  the  thoughts  of  men  ;  the  world  is 
one  wide  riddle  to  them,  darker  and  darker 
as  it  draws  to  a  close  ;  but  the  secret  of  it  is 
known  to  the  child,  and  the  Lord  of  heaven 
and  earth  is  most  to  be  thanked  in  that  "  He 
has  hidden  these  things  from  the  wise  and 
prudent,  and  has  revealed  them  unto  babes." 
Yes,  and  there  is  death — infinitude  of  death 
— in  the  principalities  and  powers  of  men. 
"  As  far  as  the  east  is  from  the  west,"  so  far 


our  sins  are — not  set  from  us,  but  multiplied 
around  us  :  the  sun  himself,  think  you  how 
he  "  rejoices "  to  run  his  course,  when  he 
plunges  westward  to  the  horizon,  so  widely 
red,  not  with  clouds,  but  blood  ?  And  it 
will  be  red  more  widely  yet.  Whatever 
drought  of  the  early  and  latter  rain  may  be, 
there  will  be  none  of  that  red  rain ;  you 
fortify  yourselves,  you  arm  yourselves  against 
it,  in  vain  ;  the  enemy  and  avenger  will  be 
upon  you  also,  unless  you  learn  that  it  is  not 
out  of  the  mouths  of  the  knitted  gun,  or  the 
smoothed  rifle,  but  "  out  of  the  mouths  of 
babes  and  sucklings"  that  the  strength  is 
ordained  which  shall  "  still  the  enemy  and 
avenger." — Buskin. 

Ver.  5.  Our  twofold  nature  and  baptism  by 
water  and  the  Spirit. — We  have  a  twofold 
nature — the  nature  of  the  animal  and  the 
nature  of  God  ;  and  in  the  order  of  God's 
providence  we  begin  with  the  animal.  "  How- 
beit,"  says  St.  Paul,  "  that  is  not  first  which 
is  spiritual,  but  that  which  is  natural." 
Now  the  moment  when  these  natures  are 
exchanged  is  the  moment  of  spiritual  regene- 
ration. A  man  is  to  be  born  of  water,  but 
far  rather  of  the  Spirit.  Of  this  expression 
there  are  several  interpretations  :  first,  the 
fanatical  one.  Men  of  enthusiastic  tempera- 
ments, chiefly  men  whose  lives  have  been 
irregular,  whose  religion  has  come  to  them 
suddenly,  interpreting  all  cases  by  their 
own  experiences,  have  said  that  the  exercise 
of  God's  Spirit  is  ever  sudden  and  super- 
natural, and  it  has  seemed  to  them  that  to 
try  and  bring  up  a  child  for  God  in  the  way 
of  education  is  to  bid  defiance  to  that  Spirit 
which  is  like  the  wind,  blowing  "  where  it 
listeth  " ;  and  if  a  man  cannot  tell  the  day 
or  hour  when  he  was  converted,  to  those 
persons  he  does  not  seem  to  be  a  Christian 
at  all.  He  may  be  holy,  humble,  loving ; 
but  unless  there  is  that  visible  manifestation 
of  how  and  when  he  was  changed,  he  must 
be  still  ranked  as  unregenerate.  Another 
class  of  persons,  of  cold,  calm  temperament, 
to  whom  fanaticism  is  a  crime  and  enthu- 
siasm a  thing  to  be  avoided,  are  perpetually 
rationalising  with  Scripture,  and  explaining 
away  in  some  low  and  commonplace  way  the 
highest  manifestation  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 
Thus,  Paley  tells  us  that  this  passage 
belongs  to  the  Jews,  who  had  forgotten  the 
Messiah's  kingdom  ;  but  to  speak  of  a  spi- 
ritual, regenerative  change  as  necessary  for 
a  man  brought  up  in  the  Church  of  England 
is  to  open  the  door  to  all  fanaticism.  There 
is  a  third  class,  who  confound  the  regenera- 
tion of  baptism  with  that  of  the  Spirit,  who 
identify,  in  point  of  time,  the  being  born  of 
water  and  of  the  Spirit.  And  it  seems  to 
them  that  regeneration  after  that  is  a  word 
without  meaning.  Of  this  class  there  are 
two  divisions :  those  who  hold  it  openly  in 
the  Church  of  Rome,  and  those  who  do  not 

101 


chap.  ML  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


go  to  the  full  extent  of  the  Romish  doctrine  upon  the  cross  is  the  declaration  that  upon 

on  this  subject.     These  will  not  say  that  a  God's  part   all  hindrance  is  removed,   and 

miracle  Las  taken  place,  but  they  say  that  that   His  will — yea,  His   yearning   desire — 

a    seed    of   grace   has  thus   been    planted.  is  that  men  should   be  reconciled  to  Him. 

Whichever  of  these  views  be  taken,  for  all  It  is  by  the  sunshine  of  His  love  that  He 

practical   purposes  the    result  must   be  the  melts  our  hard  hearts.     Force  is  no  remedy, 

same.     If  this  inward  spiritual  change  has  Force  may  break  in  pieces  the  ice,  and  yet  ■ 

taken   place    at    baptism,   then   to   talk   of  every    fragment   remains   hard :    "  sunshine 

regeneration  after  that  must  be  an  imper-  makes   it  flow  down   in    sweet  water   that 

tinence.      But,    brethren,    looking    at    this  mirrors  the   light  that  loosed  its  bonds   of 

passage,   we   cannot   be  persuaded    that    it  cold."      The    thunder    of   threatening    may 

belongs  to  the  Jew  alone,  nor  can  we  believe  appal  us,  the  power  of  God  may  humble  us 

that  the  strength  of  that  expression  is  mere  and  crush  us,  but  it  is  the  love  of  God  that 

baptism   by  water.     Here   is  recorded  that  brings  back  the  lost,  and  wins  the  wayward 

which  is   true  not  for  the  Jew  or  heathen  heart,  and   quenches   the   fire   of  lust,   and 

only,  but  for  all  the  human  race,  without  makes  us  His  true  children.     The  cross  tells 

exception.     "  Except  a  man  be  born  of  water  us  that  the   crowning   attribute  of  God  is 

and  of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  the  king-  love.      Love,    as    it   were,   is   throned    and 

dom  of  God." — F.  W.  Robertson.  sceptred,  and  uses  all  the  other  attributes 

of  God  as  her  tools  and  instruments.     They 

Vers.    14,    15.    The  crowning  attribute  of  all  are  but  the  "  ministers  of  love,  and  feed 

God. — The  cross  tells  us  that  the  attribute  her  sacred  flame."     God  is  love.     This  is  the 

by  which  God  fights  against  sin  is  His  love.  message,  above  all  others,  that  has  gone  to 

The  very  fact  that  Jesus  Christ  appeared  in  the  heart  of  the  world. — Dr.  W.  Robertson 

the  flesh  showed  that  God  had  made  common  Nicoll. 
cause  with  us  :  and  the  fact  that  Jesus  died 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  16—21. 

The  blessedness  to  which  the  Spirit  leads  us  through  regeneration. — Faith  in 
Christ,  as  St.  John  points  out,  is  the  means  through  which  men  attain 
to  the  new  life  (ver.  15).  We  must  surrender  ourselves  and  trust  in  Him 
for  all.  But  faith  also  is  "the  gift  of  God."  Of  ourselves  alone  we  cannot 
attain  it ;  for  sin  has  darkened  our  spiritual  vision  and  weakened  our  spiritual 
power.  But  faith  is  given  by  the  Spirit  (1  Cor.  xii.  9).  He  transforms  our 
nature — through  Him  it  is  born  anew.  The  darkness  is  cleared  away  from  our 
spiritual  vision,  and  spiritual  strength  is  given  to  those  who  have  no  might.  And 
thus  the  spiritually  renewed  are  led  to  rejoice  in — 

I.  The  unchanging  divine  love,  which  is  revealed  as  the  eternal  spring  of 
redemption. — 1.  It  was  not  from  an  unwilling  God  that  mercy  was  won  for 
perishing  men.  God  Himself  is  fons  et  origo  of  all  the  mercy  and  goodness  and  love 
which  have  been  showered  on  men,  sinful  as  they  were,  through  the  long  course 
of  history.  2.  Nay,  more  :  when  no  man  could  "  redeem  his  brother,  or  bring  to 
God  a  ransom  for  him,"  God  sent  His  only-begotten  Son,  gave  Him  up  to  live  and 
die  for  man's  salvation.  3.  And  the  reception  of  and  participation  in  this 
heavenly  gift  is  assured  to  those  who  believe.  And  those  who  thus  receive 
Christ  and  His  salvation  are  led  ever  more  joyfully  to  understand  the  mystery 
of  the  divine  love — to  realise  ' '  that  God  sent  not  His  Son  into  the  world  to 
condemn  the  world,  but   that  the  world  through  Him  might  be  saved  "  (ver.  17). 

II.  Those  who  are  spiritually  renewed  rejoice  in  having  escaped  from  the 
terrible  judgment  of  unbelievers.— "He  that  believeth  not  is  condemned 
already,"  etc.  (vers.  18-20).  1.  Those  who  turn  away  in  unbelief  from  God's 
dear  Son  bring  judgment  upon  themselves,  and  shut  themselves  out  from  the 
divine  mercy  in  Christ.  They  reject  Christ's  expiation  of  the  offended  divine 
law,  and  the  means  by  which  the  new  spiritual  life  is  alone  begotten  in  men ; 
thus  the  final  judgment  will  simply  be  a  declaration  of  their  self-condemnation. 
They  will  stand  self -condemned  before  the  Judge  (Bev.  vi.  16).  2.  And,  as  a 
result  of  this  rejection  of  Christ,  the  light  of  men,  the  unbelieving  sink  into  ever 

102 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  hi. 


deeper  darkness,  the  heart  becomes  hardened,  the  dominion  of  evil  is  ever  more 
firmly  established.  Evil  becomes  their  good — they  devour  iniquity  (Prov.  xix.  28), 
wickedness  is  sweet  in  their  mouths  (Job  xx.  12).  And  because  of  this  they  hate 
the  light,  for  it  intrudes  on  their  peace,  and  threatens  to  snatch  their  pleasure 
from  them.  But  the  end  is  certain ;  it  is  condemnation — eternal  loss.  Thus 
the  Spirit  brings  before  believers  this  terrible  result  of  unbelief  as  a  warning ; 
and  they  are  led  thereby  more  fully  and  even  tremblingly  to  rejoice  in  their 
salvation. 

III.  And,  last,  the  blessedness  of  the  new  life  is  a  cause  of  rejoicing. — 1.  It 
is  free  from  the  fear  of  judgment ;  for  over  the  believer  the  Eternal  Judge 
Himself  has  cast  the  shield  of  His  grace.  "  There  is  no  condemnation  to  them 
who  are  in  Christ  Jesus,"  etc.  (Rom.  viii.  1).  The  eternal  judgment  will  be  but 
the  open  manifestation  of  God's  love  to  His  people;  and  in  the  judgments  and 
trials  that  overtake  them  here  they  realise  "  not  tokens  of  wrath,  but  of  gracious 
chastisement."  2.  And  in  the  life  of  faith  men  ever  seek  the  light — desire  ever 
more  fully  to  know  themselves,  their  weaknesses,  their  follies,  their  sinfulness ; 
and  to  know  Christ  and  the  gospel  of  His  grace,  that  those  evils  may,  through 
the  grace  of  His  indwelling  Spirit,  be  ever  more  eliminated.  By  the  truth 
enlightened,  they  order  their  way  and  work  to  the  honour  of  God,  in  all  things 
seeking  to  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  their  Saviour,  and  to  demonstrate  that  the 
life  they  now  live  in  the  flesh  they  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God,  who 
loved  them  and  gave  Himself  for  them  ;  they  work  out  their  own  salvation  with 
fear  and  trembling,  knowing  and  acknowledging  that  it  is  God  who  works  in 
them,  etc.  (Phil.  ii.  13),  so  that  their  "deeds  may  be  made  manifest  that  they 
are  wrought  in  God." 

Vers.  16-21.  The  office  of  the  Holy  Ghost. — This  office  has  two  sides  :  the  Holy 
Ghost  gathers  together  and  separates — unites  and  divides. 

I.  He  reveals  the  love  of  God.— 1.  The  object  of  this  love:  God  loved  the 
world.  2.  The  manner  and  kind  of  this  love :  God  so  loved  the  world  that  He 
gave  His  only  begotten  Son.  3.  The  condition  of  this  love  :  whosoever  believeth 
in  Him.  4.  The  purpose  of  this  love  :  God  gives  His  Son  that  we  may  not 
perish,  but  that  we  may  have  eternal  life.  Not  that  He  might  judge  the  world ; 
but  that  the  world  through  Him  might  be  saved. 

II.  He  executes  judgment. — 1.  Through  His  continued  pentecostal  activity, 
in  that  He  reveals  the  love  of  God  in  Christ  to  us  poor  sinful  men,  and  to  a  lost- 
world,  and  in  that  He  shows  the  mighty  so  (ovroi)  of  this  love.  He  not  only 
gathers  the  Church,  but  in  so  doing  carries  out  a  solemn  judgment.  It  is  a 
momentous  fact  that  those  who  believe  are  not  judged,  whilst  the  unbelieving 
are  judged  already.  2.  How  is  this  judgment,  this  separation,  effected  ?  Attend 
first  to  the  effect  which  the  heart  experiences  in  which  the  Holy  Spirit  witnesses 
to  the  love  of  God.  Christ  is  the  light  which  penetrates  into  the  heart  of  man, 
and  reveals  the  existing  darkness.  The  man  is  dismayed,  but  he  fears  the 
struggle.  He  resolves  to  remain  as  he  is.  Thus  arises  the  opposition  to  this 
apprehension  by  the  Spirit.  But  because  the  Holy  Spirit  does  not  leave  hold  of 
the  man  who  has  been  convicted,  the  opposition  may  gradually  become  hatred 
of  the  light  that  shines  in  on  his  darkness.  The  man  then  enters  on  the  way 
of  darkness,  in  which  his  deeds  are  evil,  and  does  not  come  to  the  light,  so 
that  his  works  may  not  be  detected,  and  lose  their  delight,  etc. — Appuhn  in 
J.  L.  Sommer's  "  Evang.  Per." 

Vers.  16-21.  The  double  office  of  the  Holy  Spirit. — He  is : 
I.  A  guide  to  the  way  of  salvation,  vers.  16,  17,  18,  21.— 1.  He  holds  up  to 
our  view  the  love  of  God  in  Christ.     2.  He  leads  us  to  regard  the  Saviour  as 

103 


chap.  in.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


dear  and  beloved.  3.  He  enkindles  faith  in  us.  4.  He  gives  us  assurance  of  life 
eternal.     5.  He  sanctifies  and  renews  us. 

He  is  further — 

II.  A  judge  of  those  who  contemn  the  great  salvation. — 1.  He  condemns  the 
darkness  of  unbelief  and  those  who  love  it.  2.  He  separates  the  unbelieving 
and  carnally  minded  from  the  community  of  the  faithful.  3.  He  represents  to 
them  their  unbelief  as  the  sole  cause  of  their  condemnation. — Dr.  v.  Biarowsky. 

Yer.  16.  The  love  of  God. — John  is  veritably  the  apostle  of  love.  He  alone  of 
all  the  apostolic  band  seems  to  have  been  chosen  to  understand  somewhat  the 
deeps  of  this  divine  love,  so  that  he  might  tell  it  to  men.  The  spirit  of  inspira- 
tion chooses  fitting  instruments  ;  and  we  must  assume  that  by  nature  and 
grace  St.  John  was  best  fitted  to  make  known  the  gospel  of  eternal  love.  Here, 
for  the  first  time,  he  opens  for  us  in  his  Gospel  this  eternal  spring.  Its  presence 
had  been  implied  before,  when  the  revelation  of  Christ  was  spoken  of ;  but  now 
it  is  clearly  made  known.     Notice  : — 

I.  The  eternal  spring  of  love. — 1 .  It  is  God  Himself.  He  is  the  fountain  of 
love.  Many  glorious  things  are  spoken  of  God.  His  eternity,  "the  same 
yesterday,"  etc.  ;  His  almighty  power,  so  that  He  speaks  and  it  is  done,  etc. ;  His 
omniscience,  His  wisdom,  are  all  brought  before  us,  and  evoke  our  adoration  and 
praise.  2.  But  this  feature  of  His  nature  is  pre-eminent.  It  is  said  God  is  the 
righteous  One,  holy  One,  etc.  But  it  is  not  said,  He  is  righteousness,  etc.  It  is 
said  He  is  love.  This  is  the  attribute  that  runs  through  and  dominates  all  the 
others.  3.  How  comforting  is  this  revelation  of  the  divine  love.  How  it  has 
altered  men's  ideas  of  God,  and  changed  to  them  the  face  of  the  universe  !  How 
dark  and  terrible  were  men's  thoughts  of  the  heavenly  Father  in  times  of  old, 
when  they  offered  children  in  sacrifice,  etc.  4.  Now  how  changed  is  the  face  of 
the  universe  !  Jesus  has  told  us  of  the  Father's  care  and  love  for  the  fowls  of 
the  air,  the  lilies  of  the  field.  And  nature  now  is  to  the  Christian  everywhere 
vocal  of  love  divine.  History  we  read  with  new  light  in  view  of  this  glorious 
revelation.  And  especially  in  the  history  of  His  dealings  with  men  it  shines 
conspicuous,  throwing  its  golden  light  over  all.     But  further — 

II.  God  first  loved  the  world. — 1.  It  would  have  been  long  ere  the  world 
would  have  come  to  love  Him.  But  "  He  first  loved  us,"  and  our  love  would 
never  have  blossomed  in  response  to  His  had  He  not  loved  us.  2.  And  first, 
what  does  this  imply  in  its  fulness  ?  It  implies  an  eternity  of  love.  In  the 
Son  whom  He  loved  from  eternity  He  loved  His  people.  Thus  all  through  the 
course  of  the  world's  history,  even  when  He  seemed  to  be  coming  only  in  wrath, 
God  has  been  coming  in  love  to  men.  3.  And  we  live  in  times  when  the  most 
amazing  proof  of  that  love  has  been  bestowed.  "  He  gave  His  only  begotten 
Son,"  etc.  And  in  all  the  Church  and  history  of  the  Church  that  divine  love 
speaks  in  convincing  tones — in  that  word  of  salvation  preached,  in  those  ordin- 
ances, the  observance  of  which  tends  to  the  soul's  spiritual  health,  in  those  gifts 
of  the  Spirit  given  freely  to  them  who  believe,  in  those  promises  that  draw  us 
near  to  the  throne  of  grace, — in  all  these  the  love  of  God  is  proclaimed  to  our 
wondering  eyes.  4.  How  has  that  love  cared  for  us  and  watched  over  us  from 
infancy  until  now — not  turned  aside  through  waywardness,  etc.  !  God  first 
loved  us ! 

III.  Walk  in  the  belief  of  His  love  and  thus  taste  its  joy. — 1.  Believe  on  Him 
who  is  the  gift  and  revealer  of  God's  love.  Then  love  will  cast  out  fear.  2.  Love 
will  also  strengthen  to  labour.  When  the  sun  rises  man  goes  forth  to  his  work, 
and  when  the  sun  of  love  in  Christ  shines  on  a  man  he  becomes  diligent  for 
God.  Fear  for  eternity  has  vanished,  and  he  labours  joyously  in  time.  3.  He 
who  believes  in  God's  love  fears  not  the  storms  of  temptation  or  trial.     Are  they 

104 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   JOHN.  CHAP.  III. 


not  in  God's  hands  ?  Shall  they  not  work  together  for  good  ?  4.  Those  who 
abide  in  love  abide  in  God  and  God  in  them.  Thus  they  can  "  never  perish." 
Abiding  in  God's  love  through  Christ  they  are  eternally  safe — safe  amid  all  the 
turmoil  of  time  until  the  rest  of  the  Father's  house  is  reached.  This  is  heaven 
on  earth,  and  therefore  no  condemnation. 

Ver.  17.  No  condemnation. — How  great  the  truth  revealed  in  those  simple 
words — God  sent  His  Son.  Jesus  Christ  His  Son  came  to  earth  sent  by  the 
Father  in  love  to  men.  The  end  of  His  mission  was  salvation  to  our  perishing 
race.     This  great  truth  is  brought  before  us  in  two  aspects. 

I.  No  condemnation. — 1.  His  Son  was  sent  not  to  condemn.  Nay,  His  very 
name  was  a  sign  and  symbol  of  safety,  He  was  called  Jesus — a  Saviour.  2.  The 
viorld  lay  justly  under  condemnation.  It  would  have  sufficiently  vindicated  the 
divine  justice  to  have  carried  out  a  sentence  of  condemnation.  And  the  history 
of  all  races  and  religions  shows  how  conscious  men  were  of  being  under  con- 
demnation,— how  they  feared  that  it  would  be  carried  into  effect.  3.  But 
God's  ways  are  not  man's  ways.  His  love  and  pity  for  men  found  a  way  by 
which  this  condemnation  might  be  averted.  4.  "  His  tender  mercies  are  over  all 
His  works."  This  has  been  shown  all  down  the  history  of  the  past.  It  is  seen 
in  His  providential  dealings  with  man.  He  has  so  ordered  the  course  of  nature 
that  "seedtime  and  harvest,  summer  and  winter,"  etc.  (Gen.  viii.  22),  have 
visited  the  earth,  made  it  fruitful.  He  has  sent  men  rain  from  heaven  and 
fruitful  seasons,  etc.  (Acts  xiv.  17).  All  this  showed  His  loving  care,  and 
might  have  led  men  to  expect  that  some  further  loving  purpose  lay  behind. 
5.  This  gracious  purpose  is  seen  in  redemption,  in  His  sending  the  Son — not  to 
condemn  the  world.  But  there  is  a  further  side  of  this  purpose  of  God,  and 
that  is — 

II.  Salvation. — 1.  No  condemnation  might  still  have  left  us  far  from  God. 
There  was  an  actual  purpose  of  blessing  beyond  and  above  this,  in  God  sending 
His  Son.  It  was,  "that  the  world  through  Him  might  be  saved."  God  could 
have  destroyed,  condemned  the  world  without  sending  the  Son.  But  it  was 
necessary  in  order  to  the  world's  salvation  that  He  should  come.  2.  He  came  to 
save  His  people  from  their  sins.  It  was  sin  that  lay  at  the  basis  of  alienation 
and  condemnation  ;  and  Jesus  came  not  in  wrath  but  in  love,  to  save  men  from 
it,  by  taking  away,  in  His  own  sufferings  and  death,  the  sins  of  the  world. 

3.  How  great  was  this  salvation  which  He  brought.  Moses  was  privileged  to 
lead  Israel  out  of  Egyptian  bondage,  and  Joshua  to  lead  the  ransomed  people 
into  the  Land  of  Promise.  But  the  Son  was  sent  to  deliver  the  world  from  the 
bondage  of  sin,  and  bring  unto  all  believers  the  promise  of  a  heavenly  inheritance. 

4.  God  sent  the  Son  for  this  great  end.  "  He  is  the  Author  of  eternal  salvation 
unto  all  them  that  obey  Him  "  (Heb.  v.  9).  5.  And  He  alone  could  undertake 
this  office ;  for  He  is  Emmanuel,  "  God  with  us."  He  is  God  with  men — in  all 
the  fulness  of  the  divine  power.  The  Creator,  the  Preserver,  etc.,  who  took 
upon  Him  the  form  of  a  servant,  but  whose  glory  was  manifest  in  the  flesh. 
He  is  God /or  men.  He  was  sent  and  came  to  stand  in  man's  room.  He  has 
authority  and  power  to  do  so.  Men  died  in  Him  unto  sin.  Through  faith  in 
Him  they  live.  And  He  is  God  in  men — in  those  who  believe.  "  Christ' in  us 
the  hope  of  glory."  Here  is  salvation.  With  Him  in  us  and  we  in  Him,  how  can 
we  perish  1  Nay,  a  world  shall  be  saved  !  The  lost  shall  not  outnumber  the 
saved.     The  purpose  of  God  towards  the  world  shall  not  fail  (Acts  iii.  20,  21). 

Lessons. — 1.  Consider  the  greatness  of  God's  love  in  Christ  !  He  might  have 
destroyed  the  world,  as  at  the  flood,  etc.  But  He  chose  the  way  of  love,  which 
meant  the  way  of  self-sacrifice  and  humiliation  for  the  Son.  2.  How  shall  they 
escape  who  neglect  so  great  salvation  1  (Heb.  ii.  3).      3.   Let  the  divine  love 

105 


CHAP.  in.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


constrain  us  to  faith  and  willing  submission.     Thus  shall  we  best  glorify  His 
name  by  believing  in  Jesus. 

Ver.  20.  Love  not  the  darkness. — Sin  is  darkness.  It  leads  to  men  turning 
away  from  the  light,  i.e.  from  God,  as  Adam  and  Eve  hid  themselves  from  God 
when  they  had  fallen. 

I.  Sin  in  its  nature  is  darkness. — 1.  It  is  a  denial  of  man's  dependence  on 
God,  and  an  attempt  to  cut  the  life  loose  from  Him — "  to  be  as  gods."  2.  This 
ends  in  disobedience  to  the  divine  law,  which  is  man's  light;  and  in  turning  away 
from  the  source  of  that  light.  3.  All  ways  that  lead  from  God  lead  to  darkness 
and  death. 

II.  The  results  of  sin  lead  to  ever-increasing  alienation  and  darkness. — 1. 
How  terribly  this  has  been  brought  out  in  the  world's  history  !  "  Darkness 
covered  the  earth,  and  gross  darkness  the  people."  And  men  became  so  accus- 
tomed to  this  state  that  they  loved  darkness  rather  than  light.  2.  Indeed  the 
entrance  of  light  became  a  pain.  There  were  still  ways  in  which  it  could  make 
itself  felt,  through  conscience,  through  the  shame  which  men  often  felt  at  sin ; 
for  God's  image,  though  broken,  was  not  entirely  destroyed.  But  this  entrance 
of  the  light  brought  pain.  It  brought  restriction  to  the  lower  nature,  which 
had  now  gained  the  ascendency,  and  it  showed  how  far  men  had  fallen,  to  what 
height  they  must  attain.  3.  Thus  they  came  to  love  darkness  rather  than  light, 
and  this  was  their  condemnation.  Not  that  they  were  sinful  and  in  darkness, 
but  because  they  clung  to  it  even  after  the  light  had  come.  And  thus  Christ, 
who  came  to  save,  becomes  in  the  nature  of  things  their  Judge  (xv.  22-24). 

III.  The  way  of  escape  from  the  darkness  of  sin. — 1.  "Awake,  thou  that 
sleepest,"  etc.  (Eph.  v.  14).  The  light  has  come.  2.  Christ  brings  the  true 
knowledge  of  God,  of  ourselves,  and  of  the  way  of  salvation.  3.  The  sun  of 
righteousness  has  arisen,  and  with  that  rising  the  hope  and  promise  of  escape 
from  the  darkness  of  self  and  sin,  to  those  who  believe. 

Vers.  22-24.  Our  Lord's  ministry  in  rural  Judea. — In  Jerusalem  our  Lord  came 
unto  His  own — the  very  centre  of  the  Theocracy — and  His  own  received  Him 
not.  He  therefore  turned  His  face  again  toward  Galilee.  But  on  the  way  He 
lingered  in  the  rural  parts  of  Judea  with  His  disciples,  attracting  men  to  Him, 
and  baptising,  not  personally,  but  through  His  disciples,  those  who  believed  on 
Him  (iv.  1).  Who  those  disciples  were  we  cannot  well  determine.  Peter  was 
not  there,  it  would  seem  ;  for  although  a  disciple,  he  had  in  the  meantime 
returned  to  his  avocation  (Mark  i.  16-18).  John  the  Evangelist  was  with  Him, 
and  perhaps  one  or  two  of  the  others  already  called.  Probably,  also,  some  who 
attached  themselves  to  Him  on  this  ministry.     We  notice  : 

I.  The  initiation  of  Christian  baptism. — 1.  By  the  command,  in  Matt,  xxviii. 
19,  baptism  was  ordained  as  an  universal  possession  for  all  people — a  means  of 
grace  designed  for  all  ages.  2.  In  reply  to  the  question  why  Christ  Himself  did 
not  baptise  but  through  His  disciples,  the  answer  which  seems  most  conclusive 
is  that  He  desired  that  all  His  people  should  have  the  assurance  that  baptism 
by  the  hands  of  His  disciples  is  to  be  accounted  as  His  baptism. 

II.  The  earnest  activity  of  the  Saviour. — 1 .  "  Work  while  it  is  called  to-day  " 
was  a  prominent  characteristic  of  His  activity ;  2.  And  in  every  place,  at  all 
times,  He  must  needs  be  about  His  Father's  business — a  happy  example  for  all 
His  true  disciples  never  to  neglect  opportunities  of  proclaiming  the  truth  of  God. 

III.  The  result  of  this  activity. — 1.  It  seems  to  have  been  phenomenal — "  the 
same  baptiseth,  and  all  men  come  to  Him  "  (iii.  26).  Disciples  were  gathered. 
2.  Here  again  to  the  babes — simple  countryfolk — were  revealed  the  things 
which  were  hid  from  the  wise  and  prudent  in  Jerusalem. 

106 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN. 


CHAP.    III. 


HOMILETIC  NOTES. 


Ver.  16.  The  greatness  of  the  divine 
love. — A  well-known  proverb  is,  Like 
draws  to  like.  But  here  there  is  an 
immense  dissimilarity.  1.  Who  is 
Godl  The  Being  of  beings,  the 
Almighty,  the  Light  of  lights.  2. 
What  are  you  ? — a  shadow,  a  vapour. 
The  greatness  of  faith. — 1.  In  faith 
God  has  chosen  His  people  to  blessed- 
ness fro\n  the  beginning  (2  Thess.  ii.  13); 
2.  Through  faith  they  can  come  by 
Christ's  blood  to  a  throne  of  grace 
(Rom.  iii.  25) ;  3.  Through  faith  they 
come  to  God  (Heb.  xi.  7)  ;  4.  Through 
faith  they  have  peace  with  God  (Rom. 
v.  1);  5.  Through  faith  they  receive 
forgiveness  of  sin  (Acts  x.  43) ;  6. 
Through  faith  they  are  accounted 
righteous  (Rom.  iv.  5) ;  7.  Through 
faith  they  overcome  the  world  (1  John 
v.  4) ;  8.  The  end  of  faith  is  the 
salvation  of  the  soul  (1  Peter  i.  9). 
Happy  and  blest  are  they  who  have 
believed.  The  greatness  of  this  word. — 
Frederick  of  Denmark  chose  this  verse 
as  his  "  sleeping  cup."  Receiving  this 
great  saying  in  faith  he  fell  asleep  in 
the  Lord  gently  and  blessedly.  Monica, 
the  mother  of  Augustine,  used  it  as 
a  heavenly  pinion.  Hearing  it  in 
the  course  of  a  sermon,  she  was  so 
entranced  that  she  began  to  cry  out, 
"  Avolemus,  Avolemus  I"  (Let  us  soar 
upward).  Abraham  Buchholzer,  a  noted 
chronologist,   held  it  before  him  as  a 


shield  against  the  temptations  of  the 
enemy.  When,  on  a  bed  of  sickness, 
he  was  oppressed  with  temptation  he 
cried  out  without  ceasing,  Not  lost,  not 
lost !  referring  to  this  verse,  "  Whoso- 
ever believeth  shall  not  perish." 
Luther  called  this  verse  parva  biblia 
(little  Bible),  because  it  contained  in  it 
the  kernel  of  the  whole  of  Scripture. 
And  when  it  was  repeated  to  him  on 
his  death -bed  he  said  :  "It  is  my 
favourite  cordial."  Luther  also  wrote 
of  this  verse  as  follows  :  "  This  is  one 
of  the  best  and  most  glorious  of 
evangels,  and  were  well  worth  being 
written  in  golden  letters,  not  on  paper, 
but  where  it  may  be,  on  the  heart; 
and  well  would  it  be  if  it  were  the 
subject  of  daily  meditation  in  every 
Christian's  prayer,  to  strengthen  faith, 
to  awake  the  heart  to  supplication ;  for 
these  are  words  that  can  turn  sorrow 
into  joy,  and  make  tbe  (spiritually) 
dead  alive,  if  only  the  heart  would 
steadfastly  believe  them."  We  behold 
here  the  contents  of  evangelical  doctrine 
and  the  paragon  of  consolation.  If 
this  saying  alone  is  laid  hold  of  truly 
by  faith,  it  will  enable  a  man  in  utmost 
peril  to  withstand  all  fiery  darts,  to 
be  victorious  in  all  temptations,  and 
lay  hold  of  life  eternal.  Do  not  shut 
yourself  out ;  God  does  not  desire  that 
you  should  be  shut  out. — From  J.  J. 
Weigel. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  16.  The  eternal  love  of  God.— God 
has  not  waited  for  us  to  love  Him;  before 
all  time,  before  we  were  endowed  with  life, 
He  thought  of  us,  and  thought  of  doing  us 
good.  What  He  meditated  in  eternity  He 
has  performed  in  time.  His  beneficent  hand 
has  bestowed  every  variety  of  blessings  upon 
us  ;  neither  our  unfaithfulness  nor  our  in- 
gratitude has  dried  up  the  fountain  of  His 
goodness  to  us,  or  arrested  the  stream  of 
His  bounty.  O  thou  eternal  Love,  that  hast 
loved  me  when  I  could  neither  know  nor 
acknowledge  Thee !  immeasurable  love ! 
that  has    made   me  what  I  am,  that   has 


given  me  all  I  possess,  and  that  has  yet 
promised  me  infinitely  more !  O  love 
without  interruption,  without  change,  that 
all  the  bitter  waters  of  my  iniquities  could 
not  extinguish  !  Have  I  any  heart,  O  my 
God,  if  I  am  not  penetrated  with  gratitude 
and  love  for  Thee  1—Fenelon. 

Ver.  16.  Shall  not  the  lore  of  God  constrain 
us  to  love  Him  ? — Are  there  yet  amongst  us 
those  who  have  never  felt  the  love  of  God 
as  shown  in  the  gift  of  His  Son  ?  Are  there 
hearts  which  can  warm  to  every  benefactor 
but  the  greatest,  throb  kindly  towards  every 

107 


CHAP.   III. 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


friend  but  that  One  who  died  in  man's  stead, 
and  give  their  quick  sensibilities  to  every 
tale  of  heroism  and  philanthropy  but  that 
which  describes  how  "  the  Son  of  man  came 
to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost "  ? 
Indeed  we  must  fear  that  there  are  yet 
many  whose  affections  are  in  full  play 
towards  all  but  God ;  many  who,  in  the 
domestic  circle  and  the  intercourse  of  life, 
show  themselves  possessed  of  fervent  affec- 
tions and  acute  sensibilities,  but  who  are 
yet  utterly  indifferent  in  regard  to  the  things 
done  "for  us  men  and  for  our  salvation." 
What  shall  we  say  to  such  ?  You  have  not, 
but  surely  you  must  wish  to  have,  a  lively 
sense  of  the  love  shown  towards  you  in 
redemption.  Then,  when  you  go  hence,  read, 
in  one  of  the  Gospels,  the  account  of  Jesus 
Christ's  sufferings  and  death  ;  read  it  with 
prayer  that  God  would  take  away  the  heart 
of  stone  and  give  the  heart  of  flesh  ;  and  we 
shall  still  hope  for  you  that  you  will  know 
the  gushings  of  a  thankful  spirit,  and  feel 
a  thrill  of  gratitude  at  the  announcement 
that  God  so  loved  you  as  to  give  His  own 
Son  to  die  in  your  stead. — Henry  Melvill. 

Ver.  17.  The  victory  of  eternal  love. — The 
result  of  all  this  is,  that  the  suffering  is 
efficacious — "  He  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the 
world."  The  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats 
could  never  take  away  sin,  but  this  Man  has 
offered  up  one  sacrifice  for  sins  for  ever. 
"  He  taketh  away ; "  it  is  not  merely, 
"He  bears  the  sin  of  the  world."  He 
takes  it  away  by  taking  it  upon  Him. 
Many  an  unconscious  victim  had  shed 
its  blood  for  the  sin  of  the  world,  and 
yet  the  sin  remained.  Many  a  gre  t 
heart  had  borne  the  sin  of  the  worl  d, 
and  had  broken  under  the  weight,  and  stil7 
the   sin  remained.      There  had  been  many 


that  palliated  the  sin  of  the  world,  and  yet 
it  remained.  It  is  possible  to  disguise  the 
sin  of  the  world,  to  drive  it  under  the 
surface,  to  cover  it  with  a  fair  exterior,  to 
make  excuse  for  it,  but  that  is  not  to  take 
it  away.  It  is  possible  to  fight  with  separate 
sins  of  the  world,  and  in  some  measure  to 
master  them,  but  as  long  as  any  sin  remains 
the  sin  of  the  world  has  not  been  taken 
away.  But  Jesus  came  not  to  deal  with  the 
sins  of  the  world,  but  with  the  sin  of  the 
world.  In  human  nature  strictness  in  one 
direction  often  compensates  itself  by  laxity 
in  another,  and  men  dream  that  they  have 
overcome  sin  when  they  have  gained  a 
victory  in  some  isolated  fragment  of  the 
world  of  moral  duty.  But  to  exchange  one 
sin  for  another,  as  Samson  the  Najarite 
did,  is  not  redemption.  Nor  is  the  mere 
escaping  from  the  penalty  of  sin  redemption. 
Redemption  means  the  removal  of  sin,  not 
merely  of  the  punishment  of  sin  ;  and  He 
who  dealt  with  sin  effectually  by  taking 
it  away  was  Jesus  Christ,  and  Jesus  Christ 
alone.  The  sin  of  the  world,  not  the  sins. 
The  victory  of  Christ  was  over  sin  as  a 
unity,  the  whole  corruption  of  human  nature 
which  finds  expression  in  separate  sins. 
The  sin  of  the  world  is  regarded  as  heaped 
up  in  one  tremendous  pile,  and  that  pile 
laid  upon  the  head  of  Christ.  That  was  the 
load  which  He  staggered  under.  Think  of 
the  sin  of  one  life — the  sin  with  which  it  is 
born,  the  sins  of  childhood,  youth,  manhood, 
age  ;  the  sins  of  broken  vows,  broken  oaths, 
unfulfilled  duties ;  and  then  multiply  that 
one  life  by  the  numbers  of  all  the  world, 
and  consider  what  a  foe  it  was  Christ  came 
to  reckon  with,  what  a  foe  it  was  that  He 
overcame  in  the  body  of  His  flesh  through 
death. — Dr.  W.  Robertson  Nieoll. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  23—36. 

The  Prince  appears,  the  herald  withdraws. — When  the  Lord  comes,  the  servant 
withdraws ;  when  the  sun  arises  the  twilight  vanishes,  and  the  stars  fade  and 
disappear.  So  necessarily  must  John  the  Baptist  lay  down  his  office  when  Jesus 
began  His  ministry.  The  baptism  of  repentance  must  give  place  to  the  baptism 
with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire.  John  could  not  now  be  the  leader ;  he  must 
be  content  to  be  led;  in  place  of  now  drawing  disciples  to  himself,  he  must 
direct  his  own  disciples  and  all  others  to  Jesus.  Recognising,  therefore,  the 
limits  of  his  mission  and  work,  John  stepped  aside,  so  that  there  might  be  but 
one  centre — Christ.     Therefore  : — 

I.  The  herald  withdraws. — 1.  The  circumstance  which  led  to  this  final 
testimony  of  the  Baptist  to  the  greatness  of  Jesus  and  His  work  was  a  "  dispute 
between  some  of  his  own  disciples  and  the  Jews  (or  a  Jew)  about  purifying  " 
(ver.  25).  John  was  baptising  at  iEnon,  near  to  Salim,  not  having  been  cast  in 
prison  as  yet  by  Herod.  The  dispute  was  concerning  some  ritual  observance,  a 
subject  fruitful  of  dissensions  in  every  age  of  the  Church ;  and  it  was  evolved  in 
some  manner  from  the  fact  that  Jesus  and  His  disciples  were  also  baptising  near 

108 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  in. 


the    same   place — with    the    result   that   many  were   drawn   to   the    Saviour. 
2.  What    the    actual  point   in   dispute  was   is   not    mentioned.      Indeed,   the 
incident  is  recorded  only  for  the  purpose  of  introducing  the  conversation  between 
the  Baptist  and  his  disciples,  during  which  John  declared  to  them  the  relationship 
in  which  he  stood  to  Jesus.     His  disciples  were  naturally  jealous  of  their  master's 
honour.     Was  the  work  of  Jesus  antagonistic  to  that  of  John  1     What  was  the 
meaning  of   this   seeming   rivalry  ?      3.     The  reply  of  John  reveals  the  true 
greatness  of  his  character.     There  was  nothing  small  or  petty  about  this  man, 
than  whom  greater  hath  not  been  born  of  woman.     He  realised  and  rejoiced  in 
the  greatness  of  his  work  and  the  nobility  of  his  office  as  forerunner  of  the 
Messiah.     But  was  there  not  a  lofty  place  for  him  in  the  kingdom  now  to  be 
established  ?     Was  he  not  to  shine  in  the  reflected  glory  of  that  kingdom  in  the 
presence  and  service  of  its  King  ?     We  may  believe,  indeed,  that  John  was  to  no 
little  extent  influenced  by  the  popular  ideas  regarding  the  Messiah,  as  the  Lord's 
disciples  were  until  the  descent  of  the  Spirit.     And  it  was  probably  in  part  dis- 
appointed hope  in  the  non- realisation  of  his  idea  that  led  to  the  question  he  sent 
his  disciples  from  the  prison  to  put  to  Jesus  :  "  Art  thou  He  that  should  come  % " 
etc.     He  understood  fully,  however,  that  his  work  must  now  cease.     He  had 
prepared  the  way ;  he  had  preached  righteousness,  but  he  could  not  give  man 
power  to  become  righteous.     The  Prince  whose  way  he  had  prepared,  the  Lord 
Our  Righteousness,  alone  could  do  this ;  and  therefore  John  humbly  recognises 
that  now  he  must  step  aside  and  let  the  Prince  be  all  in  all.    "  He  must  increase, 
but  I  must   decrease."     John   had,  moreover,    laid  hold  of   a  principle  which 
banishes  all  jealousy  and  self-seeking  from  the  human  heart,  and  leads  men  in 
humility  to  accept  God's  gifts  with  thankfulness  in  whatever  station  in  life  they 
may  be  placed.    "  A  man  can  receive  nothing  except  it  be  given  him  from  heaven." 
This  is  the  fixed  rule  and  order  of  the  heavenly  kingdom.     And  all  that  had 
been  seen  of  Jesus — His  beautiful,  holy  character,   His  wonderful  works,  the 
direct  testimony  of  heaven,  and  the  divine  wisdom  of  His  teaching — pointed  to 
this,  that  He  was  thus  bountifully  endowed  from  heaven  (ver.  34).     Therefore 
did  the  Baptist  realise  that  his  star  must  fade  before  the  rising  Sun ;  and, 
faithful  to  his  trust,  pointed  the  thronging  disciples  to  the  supreme  Master  as 
he  said,  "  He  must  increase,"  etc.     The  herald  withdraws,  because — 

II.  The  Prince  appears. — 1.  John  recognised  that  now  the  activity  of  Jesus 
in  His  kingdom  had  begun.  The  heavenly  Bridegroom  had  appeared  to  claim 
His  bride,  the  Church  of  the  Messiah  ;  and  the  "  friend  of  the  bridegroom,"  who 
had  made  all  the  preparations  for  the  union,  now  saw  his  work  accomplished. 
He  lays  down  his  office  with  joy,  as  he  hears  the  Bridegroom's  voice.  Messiah 
has  come,  and  His  kingdom  which  cannot  be-  moved ;  and  therefore  "  He  must 
increase."  2.  In  what  follows  the  Baptist  gives  his  reasons  for  the  supremacy 
of  Christ  in  a  full  and  pregnant  testimony  as  to  our  Lord's  divine  origin.  "  He 
that  is  of  the  earth  is  earthly."  The  Baptist  had  his  origin  on  earth,  and  his 
activity  had  reference  to  what  might  be  called  the  lower  ranges  of  the  spiritual 
life — the  call  to  repentance  and  amendment,  to  the  preparation  of  heart  and  life 
for  the  reception  of  the  coming  spiritual  King.  But  of  the  higher  realities  of 
the  kingdom  he  knew  but  dimly  and  imperfectly  ;  he  saw  them  from  below,  not 
from  above.  His  origin,  activity,  and  teaching  were  bounded  and  limited  by  the 
earth.  Indeed  in  reference  to  higher  knowledge,  etc.,  "  the  least  in  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  is  greater  than  he"  (Matt.  xi.  11).  On  the  other  hand,  "He  that 
cometh  from  heaven  is  above  all."  In  His  divine  origin  "  He  is  the  Son  of 
the  Eternal,"  and  is  therefore  "above  all";  not  alone  above  me,  but  above 
all  teachers  that  have  gone  before.  Heaven  is  his  seat,  and  He  has  but  for 
a  time  come  to  earth  to  make  known  God's  will.  "What  He  has  seen  and 
heard,  that  He  testifies  "  from  immediate  knowledge.     And  therefore  when  He 

109 


chap.  in.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


speaks  it  is  God's  words  that  are  spoken,  "  for  God  giveth  not  the  Spirit  by 
measure  unto  Him."  3.  And  all  this  flows  from  the  eternal  love  of  the 
Father  towards  the  Son,  into  whose  hand  all  things  have  been  given.  All 
things  !  Yes  (Heb.  ii.  8).  And  does  not  His  wonderful  life  declare  this  to  be 
true  ?  His  teaching,  the  words  of  heavenly  wisdom,  His  miracles,  evidences  of 
His  creative  power ;  His  spotless,  flawless  life,  image  of  divine  perfection ;  the 
working  of  His  Spirit  and  the  power  of  His  grace  as  evidenced  in  the  history  of 
His  Church — all  this  testifies  to  the  Father's  love  to  Him,  etc.  4.  And  the 
Baptist's  testimony  to  Jesus  as  the  Messiah  fitly  closes  with  words  of  mingled 
promise  and  warning.  "  No  man  receives  His  testimony."  You,  my  disciples, 
say,  "  All  men  come  to  Him."  Yes  :  but  do  they  receive  Him,  obey  Him  ?  Do 
not  the  rulers  and  people  as  a  whole  refuse  to  receive  Him  ?  (ver.  11).  But 
some  have  received  Him,  and  thus  have  become  witnesses  to  the  truth  of  God 
as  revealed  in  His  Son.  And  this  rejection  and  reception  carry  with  them 
momentous  consequences.  Those  who  receive  the  testimony  of  Jesus  become 
witnesses  to  the  truth  of  God  and  possessors  of  eternal  life,  whilst  those  who 
withstand  and  reject  it  inherit  the  wrath  of  God,  the  reverse  of  the  divine  love. 
"  If  any  man  serve  Me,  him  will  My  Father  honour  "  (xii.  26 ;  Matt.  x.  32,  33, 
etc.).     "  He  must  increase." 

Vers.  22-36.  The  setting  star  and  rising  Sun. — The  old  and  the  new  are 
frequently  in  conflict.  Many  hold  by  the  old,  as  if  it  should  remain  eternally. 
Others  range  themselves  with  the  new,  as  if  never  before  had  there  been  anything 
good  in  the  world.  Our  Saviour  did  not  despise  what  was  before  Him.  He 
came  not  to  destroy  but  to  fulfil  the  law  and  the  prophets.  He  at  all  times 
referred  His  disciples  to  the  Word,  and  this  Word  was  the  Old  Testament.  But 
when  the  Master  comes  the  servant  must  stand  aside.  Only  One  can  enlighten 
the  heart.  In  One  name  only  are  the  promises  realised.  This  was  Christ,  whom 
John  proclaimed  to  be  the  "  Lamb  of  God,"  etc. 

Consider  then  prayerfully — 

I.  The  setting  star  and  the  rising  Sun. — 1.  In  our  Gospel  we  behold  a  star 
that  is  nigh  its  setting.  It  had  for  a  time  shone  with  a  great,  beautiful  radiance. 
But  its  time  was  come  to  pale  and  vanish.  "  For  he  was  nob  that  light,"  etc. 
(i.  8).  He  was  not  the  Christ,  but  the  bridegroom's  friend  (ver.  29).  He 
knew  his  duty  and  his  power.  He  had  awakened  Israel  and  prepared  men  for 
Christ.  In  this  preparation  work  he  shone  as  a  star  in  the  eternal  morning. 
2.  The  law  was  a  heavenly  light  in  the  midst  of  the  darkness  of  a  fallen  and 
sinful  world.  None  can  destroy  it.  It  is  not  only  written  on  tables  of  stone, 
but  in  the  hearts  of  men.  It  shows  us  God's  will  and  way  (Ps.  xix.  7).  And  as 
the  law  is  a  light  from  heaven,  so  is  a  preacher  of  repentance  like  a  bright  star — 
a  man  of  God.  The  more  earnestly  He  deals  with  us,  the  more  we  recognise  our 
own  littleness.  And  we  should  be  thankful  to  such  as  awaken  in  us  the  sense 
of  sin  and  lead  us  to  repentance.  3.  But  John  is  nevertheless  a  setting 
star.  When  in  your  heart  this  light  shines,  when  you  realise  }7our  sinfulness, 
the  light  of  this  star  will  not  suffice.  It  does  not  bring  full  day.  At  one  time 
you  were  in  darkness— seeing  neither  heaven,  the  world,  nor  your  own  self. 
Then  God  permitted  this  light  to  shine  in  the  darkness — revealed  His  law,  called 
to  remembrance  His  commands,  His  word,  etc.  Then  you  found  all  was  other 
than  it  ought  to  be.  God's  commands  you  had  not  fully  obeyed,  nor  believed 
His  promises,  etc.  You  had  prayed,  but  were  cold  and  languid.  When  you  made 
inquisition  you  found  your  life  failed  to  attain  to  God's  righteousness.  Still  it 
was  well  to  have  been  brought  to  this  hour  of  self-realisation,  when  your  heart 
was  laid  bare  before  the  Omniscient.  4.  But  can  you  remain  in  this  state  ?  Is 
the  sick  man  contented  when  he  knows  merely  what  ails  him?     This  is  like 

110 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  hi. 


John's  light.  We  cannot  be  satisfied  with  "possessing  nothing"  merely;  but 
only  when,  though  we  have  nothing,  yet  we  possess  all  things  (2  Cor.  vi.  10). 
To  cast  away  our  own  righteousness  is  a  great  step  ;  but  we  must  also  have 
another  righteousness  in  place  of  it.  Therefore  is  the  star  of  John  a  setting  star. 
After  it  is  said,  "I  count  all  things  but  loss,"  there  must  follow  "to  win 
Christ,"  etc.  (Phil.  iii.  8).  With  John  there  is  no  abiding — with  Christ  an 
eternal  abiding. 

II.  Christ  is  the  rising  Sun. — 1.  This  truth  John  expresses  with  the  most 
beautiful  of  figures — that  of  the  bridegroom  and  the  bride.  Christ  is  the 
bridegroom  ;  His  people,  His  Church — the  bride.  John  did  not  desire  that  Israel 
should  follow  him.  He  desirtd  them  to  lean  on  Christ.  He  desired  simply  that 
they  should  follow  Jesus.  "There  John  must  decrease,"  etc.  The  Christian 
world  moves  around  Christ,  not  round  John  or  any  servant.  The  question  is 
not  one  of  honour,  piety,  virtue,  so  much  as  of  love  to  Christ.  That  is  chief.  We 
cannot  sufficiently  proclaim  His  name.  In  Him  is  peace  and  rest — in  Him  we 
attain  to  righteousness  and  the  heavenly  walk — to  forsaking  of  sin,  renunciation 
of  the  world,  and  victory  over  the  flesh.  2.  In  the  Gospel  Christ  is  the  rising  Sun. 
— Now  He  has  arisen.  Then  He  was  at  the  dawning — now  He  shines  in 
meridian  splendour.  He  it  is,  without  doubt,  who  brings  the  light  of  heavenly 
day  into  the  souls  of  men,  and  all  who  are  not  enlightened  by  Him  are  still  in 
darkness.  For  the  Father  has  given  all  things  into  His  1  and ;  so  that  they  who 
do  not  believe  on  Him  do  not  believe  in  God ;  and  they  that  do  not  believe  in 
God  and  Christ  are  children  of  death.  3.  The  world  will  not  acquiesce  in  the 
testimony  of  the  Baptist.  One  section  has  cast  away  all  belief ;  another  desires 
to  have  a  Christianity  without  Christ — without  a  Saviour.  But  there  is  no 
choice  in  the  matter.  Just  as  day  cannot  exist  without  the  sun,  so  Christianity 
cannot  be,  or  life,  or  righteousness,  or  peace,  without  Jesus.  He  is  "  the  light  of 
the  world,"  of  those  who  trust  Him.  4.  Let  Him  enlighten  you — let  Him  be 
your  heart's  true  sun,  and  rise  upon  you  every  day.  Every  day,  with  its  failures 
and  falls,  threatens  night  for  the  soul,  and  the  sun  of  your  life  must  disperse  the 
darkness.  Let  Jesus  go  forth  to  you  as  a  bridegroom  who  comes  out  of  his 
chamber,  and  let  Him  rejoice  as  a  strong  man  to  run  a  race — through  your 
heart  from  one  end  to  the  other,  and  to  enlighten  you  entirely.  Then  the 
wrath  of  God  passes  away  afar,  and  you  need  not  wait  for  life  eternal,  for  it  is 
yours  already  in  Christ  the  Saviour  (1  John  v.  13). — After  Karl  Lecher. 

Vers.  32,  33.  The  import  oj  the  testimony  of  Jesus. — It  ever  was  so,  and  will 
ever  remain  so.  The  gospel  and  the  world  do  not  agree  together.  So  long  as 
the  world  is  in  the  height  of  its  pride  the  gospel  will  be  despised.  When  the 
world  comes  to  be  despised  then  the  gospel  appears  in  honour,  and  Jesus  is  borne 
witness  to.  This  has  been  only  fulfilled  in  part.  The  time  will  come  when 
that  which  is  in  part  shall  be  done  away,  when  that  which  is  perfect  is  come. 

The  import  of  the  testimony  of  Jesus  in  the  world. 

I.  The  rejection  of  His  testimony. — 1.  How  small  was  the  following  of  Jesus! 
"  No  man  receiveth  His  testimony."  But  this  does  not  detract  from  Jesus.  It 
was  the  blind  who  did  not  regard  Him.  If  the  world  did  not  love  Him  the  Father 
did,  and  gave  all  things  into  His  hand ;  so  that  according  to  the  faith  or 
unbelief  of  men  in  regard  to  Jesus  will  they  be  judged.  2.  But  the  sad  thing  is 
that  it  should  have  been  the  case  that  so  few  received  His  testimony.  The  world 
will  believe  readily  enough  if  what  you  ask  it  to  believe  is  clad  in  a  suitable  garb. 
If  someone  comes  and  tells  of  new  gold  reefs,  of  new  methods  by  which  great 
interest  on  capital  may  be  gained,  then  men  believe  and  rush  eagerly  to  take 
advantage  of  the  boon.  When  a  master  in  science  rises  and  declares  that 
he  can  tell  how  the  world  was  evolved,  etc.,  what  a  string  of  followers  he  draws 

111 


chap.  in.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   JOHN. 


after  him.  If  one  preaches  there  will  be  no  more  war,  or  famine,  etc.,  how 
many  will  hang  eagerly  on  his  words  !  How  will  they  crowd  to  a  discerner  of 
times,  a  fortune-teller,  quacks,  and  the  like !  3.  But  the  witness  of  the  Son 
of  God  many  will  not  receive — that  He  is  over  all ;  that  through  Him  we  have 
eternal  life ;  and  on  those  not  in  Him  the  wrath  of  God  abides.  Many  think 
not  to  thank  Him  for  this  life,  and  have  given  up  all  thought,  as  their  lives  seem 
to  show,  of  an  eternal  life.  That  He  is  the  Bridegroom  of  humanity — has 
purchased  us  with  His  blood ;  that  He  gives  costly  and  precious  raiment  to  those 
who  come  to  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb — all  this  the  world  mocks  at. 
Oh  the  blindness  of  men  !  with  many  nothing  is  of  less  import  to-day  than  the 
Word  of  the  Lord. 

II.  Therefore  be  not  as  the  world, — "  be  transformed  by  the  renewing  of  your 
mind  "  (Rom.  xii.  2).  Receive  the  testimony  of  Jesus. — 1.  Set  to  your  seal  that 
God's  Word  is  true.  The  wrath  of  God  is  not  all  at  once  felt,  for  men's  hearts  are 
hard,  they  do  not  at  once  realise  the  sentence  which  has  gone  forth  in  heaven. 
The  careless  sinner  is  like  one  who  lies  down  to  sleep  in  a  thick  wood,  unmindful 
of  the  nearing  thunderstorm,  until  he  awakes  with  the  crash  and  sees  death 
streaming  around  as  he  flies  in  terror.  Happy  those  who  have  been  awakened 
from  this  numbing  sleep,  by  the  Spirit,  in  time  to  realise  their  danger.  Happy 
he  who  believes  that  Jesus  is  the  world's  Saviour — that  He  has  come  to  earth  to 
seek  and  save.  2.  He  who  has  never  tasted  the  power  of  the  gospel  knows 
nothing  of  it.  He  can  speak  of  it  only  as  a  blind  man  can  speak  of  colour.  But 
he  who  has  tasted  it,  i.e.  has  felt  the  power  of  conscience,  and  has  been  led  to  turn 
to  Christ,  he  can  say  that  Jesus  alone  can  heal  a  wounded  conscience.  3.  Or  has  he 
felt  the  power  of  temptation  and  been  driven  into  the  arms  of  the  Good  Shepherd? 
Then  he  can  say,  In  Christ  is  my  refuge.  Or  has  one  lain  in  fear  of  death  for 
himself,  or  those  dear  to  him,  and  has  sought  and  found  comfort  at  Jesus'  cross 
and  grave  ?  Then  he  can  testify  that  men  may  be  more  than  conquerors  in  Jesus. 
4.  Let  the  world  laugh,  mock,  criticise,  doubt,  chide,  curse,  or  rage  in  regard 
to  what  a  Christian  believes  and  confesses — still  the  believer  will  remain  firm 
and  say  :  I  know  whom  I  have  believed.  What  I  have  seen  and  known  cannot 
be  contradicted.  What  I  daily  experience  admits  of  no  doubt ;  and  from  Him 
in  whom  I  live  I  will  not  be  separated. — Karl  Lecher. 


112 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  iv. 


PAET  II.  (d.) 

IV.  Christ  Manifesting  Himself  in  His  Public  Ministry,  etc.  {continued). 

1.  In  Samaria. — (1)  To  the  woman  of  Samaria  as  the  "living  water  "  (vers. 
1-16);  (2)  as  a  discerner  of  the  thoughts  of  the  heart  (vers.  17-26),  the  result 
being  faith  in  Him  as  Messiah  ;  (3)  to  the  disciples,  giving  glimpses  of  the  far- 
reaching  effects  of  His  and  their  work  (vers.  27-38) ;  (4)  to  the  Samaritans  as  the 
Messiah  and  the  Saviour  of  the  world  (vers.  39-42). 

2.  In  Galilee. — (1)  His  reception  by  the  people  (vers.  42-45),  His  fame  in 
Jerusalem  having  preceded  Him  ;  (2)  His  glory  manifested  again  in  the  region 
of  nature,  by  healing  the  nobleman's  son ;  and  the  power  of  His  mighty  works 
to  awaken  faith  in  true  hearts  (vers.  46-54). 

First  Year  of  our  Lord's  Ministry. 

1.  Chap.  iv.  1-42. — End  of  A.u.c.  781  or  beginning  of  782  (December — 
January,  Tebeth). 

2.  Chap.  iv.  43-54. — Beginning  of  A.u.c.  782.  Probable  place  of  vers.  43-54  in 
Synoptic  narrative  :  Matt.  iv.  13  et  seq. ;  Mark  i.  14  et  seq. ;  Luke  iv.  14  et  seq. 

CHAPTER  IV. 
EXPLANATORY  AND  CRITICAL  NOTES. 

Vers.  1-3.  These  verses  form  an  historical  introductory  note  prefixed  to  and  explaining 
our  Lord's  ministry  in  Samaria.     He  left  Judsea  to  avoid  conflict  with  the  Pharisaic  party. 

Ver.  2.  Though  (Kalroiye  =  howbeit,  and  yet). — This  word  is  intended  to  indicate  a 
partial  correction  of  the  report  recorded  in  ver.  1  (vide  also  iii.  22,  26).  "  Why  did  not  Jesus 
Himself  baptise  ?  Just  because  He  was  the  Lord,  and  as  such  reserved  to  Himself  the 
baptism  of  the  Spirit.  By  leaving  the  baptism  of  water  to  the  apostles,  He  rendered  this 
rite  independent  of  His  personal  presence,  and  so  provided  for  the  maintenance  of  it  in  His 
Church  after  His  departure  "  (Godet). 

Ver.  3.  He  left  (dtprjKe). — This  is  not  the  verb  usually  employed.  d<pirjfu  means  "  to  leave 
a  thing  to  itself,"  "  to  leave  it  alone,"  etc.  (vide  Westcott,  Reynolds,  etc.).  Here  is  fore- 
shadowed the  awful  word  of  doom  of  Matt,  xxiii.  38. 

Ver.  4.  He  must  needs,  etc. — If  He  wished  to  go  directly  and  speedily  to  Galilee  the  way 
through  Samaria  was  the  most  direct ;  and  Jesus,  we  may  be  assured,  did  not  share  Jewish 
prejudice  as  to  this  route  (Luke  x.  30-37).  We,  however,  may  conclude  that  this  was  a 
necessity  of  redeeming  love.  Samaria  was  a  district  of  Central  Palestine  which  took  its 
name  from  the  city  built  by  Omri  (1  Kings  xvi.  24).  It  was  colonised  by  Assyrians  in  the 
reign  of  Esar-haddon,  the  Assyrian  king,  after  the  conquest  of  Israel  (2  Kings  xvii.  24). 
The  colonists  were  a  mixed  race,  including  five  tribes  or  nations,  each  of  which  brought  with 
them  their  own  divinity,  the  worship  of  which  they  conjoined  with  the  worship  of  Jehovah. 
Their  only  sacred  books  were  the  five  books  of  Moses.  The  later  Jewish  prophetical  and 
historical  books  they  did  not  receive  or  acknowledge. 

Ver.  5.  Sychar  (Suxap). — This  name  has  given  rise  to  no  little  controversy.  It  was  long 
supposed  that  either  Sux^p  was  simply  an  erroneous  reading  for  Sux^A1  (Acts  vii.  16),  and 
that  Sychar  was  therefore  Shechem,  the  modern  Nablous ;  or  that  "  the  change  of  the  name 
to  Sychar  is  due  to  the  contempt  shown  for  the  Samaritans  by  the  Jews,  who  charged  the 
Samaritans  with  the  worshipping  of  an  Idol  (ipyd),  Syehar,  or  falsehood,  from  ij?tf  (fefellit) 
(Hab.  ii.  18).  IAghtfoot  derives  it  from  *d\zj  (inebriavit)"  (Wordsworth's  Greek  Testament). 
But  Shechem  and  Sychar  were  distinguished  in  ancient  times  (e.g.  by  Eusebius) ;  and  a 
Samaritan  chronicle  of  the  middle  ages  contains  the  name  of  a  town  called  Iskar.  In  the 
Talmud  also  (see  Westcott)  a  place  called  "mD  TO,  i.e.  the  fountain  of  Soukar,  is  mentioned ; 

i  113 


chap.  iv.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


whilst  in  recent  years  a  spot  has  been  discovered  within  half  a  mile  or  so  of  Jacob's  well 
called  El-Askar.  If  Nablous  anciently  extended  nearer  to  Jacob's  well  than  it  does  now,  this 
place  might  have  been  in  reality  a  suburb  of  Sheckem. 

Ver.  6.  Jacob's  well  O77777,  p?,  a  spring). — The  well  is  still  called  Ain  Yacub.  Maun- 
drell  over  two  hundred  years  ago  described  it  as  105  feet  deep  ;  but  in  1886  it  was  found  to 
be  only  75  feet,  and  contained  no  water.  It  lies  just  under  the  side  of  Mount  Gerizim.  The 
sixth  hour. — It  has  been  much  debated  whether  the  Evangelist  in  his  notes  of  time  reckons 
according  to  the  Jewish  or  Roman  mode.  According  to  the  latter  mode  of  reckoning,  it  must 
either  have  been  six  o'clock  in  the  evening  or  morning.  But  as  the  time  of  year  was  December 
— January  (Tebeth),  it  would  thus,  had  it  been  evening,  have  been  dark  when  the  incident 
occurred,  and  there  is  nothing  in  the  narrative  to  indicate  that  night  had  fallen.  And  it  could 
hardly  have  been  six  in  the  morning,  as  there  is  no  indication  that  the  Lord  and  His  disciples 
had  been  travelling  over-night  or  very  early  in  the  morning.  All  the  circumstances  seem  to 
point  to  the  noontide  hour,  and  to  show  that  John  used  the  Jewish  time-reckoning. 

Ver.  8.  To  buy  meat. — I.e.  food. 

Ver.  9.  The  woman  knew  He  was  a  Jew  probably  by  His  dress,  but  it  may  be  also  by  His 
accent.  It  has  been  pointed  out  that  the  words  of  the  question  asked  by  Jesus  in  Aramaic 
would  be  nnMJb  ^  >3n  (Teni  li  lish'hoth),  whereas  the  woman  would  have  said  nrrob  (lis'hoth) 
(vide  Judg.  xii.  5,  6). 

Ver.  10.  If  thou  knewest  (or  hadst  known)  the  gift  of  God. — I.e.  the  gift  of  His  Son  (iii.  16). 
Had  she  known  this  in  place  of  waiting  for  Him  to  ask,  she  would  have  been  first  with  her 
petitions.  Living  water. — No  doubt  the  woman  had  some  faint  conception  of  the  spiritual 
meaning  of  our  Lord's  language.  Such  imagery  would  be  quite  clear  to  Jews  (vii.  37,  38 ; 
comp.  Zech.  xiv.  8;  Jer.  ii.  13,  etc.). 

Ver.  11.  The  well  is  deep. —  Vide  note  on  ver.  6. 

Ver.  12.  Our  father  Jacob. — The  Samaritans  considered  themselves  to  be  descendants  of 
Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  i.e.  Joseph.  The  woman  is  conscious  of  a  hidden  meaning  in  our 
Lord's  words,  but  she  does  not  fully  comprehend  them.  Whence  can  He  obtain  this  living 
water  ?  Not  from  Jacob's  well ;  it  is  deep,  and  He  has  nothing  to  draw  it  with.  And  besides, 
could  He  give  her  water  more  sacred,  more  blessed,  than  this  ancient  well  afforded  ? 

Ver.  15.  Come  hither  to  draw. — ditpxwpoLi,  come  all  the  way  hither,  seems  the  idea 
expressed  (see   Westcott). 

Ver.  16.  Go,  call  thy  husband,  etc. — Jesus  knew  by  His  divine  insight  the  character  and 
life  of  this  woman  ;  and  His  question,  though  at  first  sight  a  strange  one,  was  put  with  the 
intention  of  revealing  her  to  herself  and  leading  her  to  repentance. 

Vers.  17,  18.  The  woman  answered,  etc. — The  mystical  interpretation  of  this  passage  must 
be  noticed.  Hengstsnberg  and  others  contend  that  this  must  be  interpreted  nationally  and 
spiritually  of  the  Samaritans.  The  Jive  husbands  mean  the  five  idols  of  the  original  idolatrous 
settlers,  the  gods  of  Cuthah,  Babylon,  Ava,  Hamath,  and  Sepharvaim  ;  and  that  He  whom  thou 
hast  is  not  thy  husband  is  to  be  held  to  refer  to  Jehovah,  whom  the  Samaritans  claimed  now 
to  be  their  God,  but  on  whom  in  reality  they  had  no  covenant  claim.  And  there  certainly  seems 
to  be  some  foundation  for  the  interpretation  in  the  fact  that  the  conversation  almost  im- 
mediately turned  on  the  validity  of  the  Samaritan  faith  and  worship.  It  has  been  pointed 
out  that  the  idols  mentioned  in  2  Kings  xvii.  30,  31,  are  seven.  It  might,  however,  be  main- 
tained that  the  double  idols  of  Ava  and  Sepharvaim  might  each  be  considered  one.  There 
may  therefore  be  a  double  meaning  in  our  Lord's  words,  understood  by  His  Samaritan 
auditor.  But  a  calm  survey  of  the  passage  seems  to  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the  narrative 
must  be  taken,  primarily  at  least,  in  its  obvious  and  literal  signification. 

Vers.  19,  20.  Thou  art  a  prophet. — The  emphasis  is  on  Thou  (o-i/).  "  The  first  thought  in  the 
Samaritan's  mind  is  that  the  connexion  of  man  with  God  has  been  authoritatively  restored  " 
(Westcott).  Hence  the  woman's  question  in  ver.  20.  Nothing  could  be  more  important  than 
a  decision  on  that  point.  Our  fathers. — Probably  refers  to  Deut.  xxvii.  4,  5,  where  in  the 
Samaritan  Pentateuch  Gerizim  is  substituted  for  Ebal.  But  the  reference  might  also  be  to 
the  patriarchs  in  their  connection  with  Shechem.  No  temple  existed  on  Gerizim,  however,  it 
would  seem,  till  the  times  of  Nehemiah. 

Vers.  21,  22.  Woman,  believe  Me,  etc. — Although  our  Lord  directly  answers  the  woman's 
question,  pointing  rather  to  a  higher  universal  worship  which  should  supersede  all  local 
cults,  He  yet  makes  it  plain  that  Jerusalem  has  hitherto  been  the  centre  of  true  worship.  Ye 
worship  that  which  ye  know  not. — They  rejected  the  continuous  revelation  God  gave  of 
Himself  in  the  prophetic  word  and  the  history  of  His  people.  It  was  only  a  partial  idea  of 
God  as  revealed  which  they  had,  and  therefore  their  worship  was  necessarily  imperfect. 
But  to  the  Jews  the  progress  of  revelation  tended  to  the  recognition  of  God  as  the  Father 
(Ps.  ciii.  13 ;  Jer.  xxxi.  9 ;  Mai.  i.  6,  ii.  10),  the  great  truth  finally  established  and  made 
luminous  by  the  Incarnation. 

Ver.  23.  In  spirit  and  in  truth. — "Worship  involves  an  expression  of  feeling  and  a  con- 
ception of  the  object  towards  whom  the  feeling  is  entertained.     The  expression  is  here 

114 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  iv. 


described  as  made  in  spirit,  the  conception  as  formed  in  truth.  ...  By  the  Incarnation  men 
are  enabled  to  have  immediate  communion  with  God,  and  thus  a  worship  in  spirit  has 
become  possible.      At  the  same  time  the  Son  is  a  complete  manifestation  of  God  for  men, 
and  thus  a  worship  in  truth  has  been  placed  within  their  reach  "  (Westcott). 
Ver.  24.  God  is  Spirit. — irvevfia  6  Qe6s. 

Ver.  25.  Which  is  called  Christ  (6  Xeyoficvos  Xpurrds). — This  is  evidently  one  of  the 
Evangelist's  interpretations  of  Hebrew  terms  for  his  Gentile  readers.  Messias. — The 
Samaritans  seem  to  have  had  an  expectation  of  a  coming  prophet  and  deliverer  founded 
on  the  promises  in  the  Pentateuch  (Gen.  iii.  15 ;  Numb.  xxiv.  7 ;  Deut.  xviii.  15)  ;  and 
probably  to  some  extent  influenced  by  Jewish  belief.  The  modern  Samaritans  expect 
one  to  come  whom  they  call  nrrcjn,  HaTshahev  (from  ynxb,  to  return),  which  signifies  the 
one  who  brings  back,  or  the  one  who  returns  or  restores.  Taken  in  connection  with  ver.  42, 
this  statement  of  the  woman  would  seem  to  imply  an  imperfect  but  so  far  true  conception 
of  the  functions  of  the  coming  Messiah. 

Ver.  26.  I  that  speak,  etc. — "This  is  the  great  iyd  et>t  ('I  am')  that  recurs  throughout 
John's  Gospel "  (Luthardt). 

Ver.  27.  Marvelled. — The  disciples  evidently  thought  that  Jesus  would  conduct  Himself 
outwardly  as  did  the  Jewish  rabbis.  Those  teachers  said :  "  Do  not  prolong  conversation 
with  a  woman  ;  let  no  one  converse  with  a  woman  in  the  street,  not  even  his  own  wife  " 
(Lightfoot). 

Ver.  29.  Is  not,  etc.— Better,  Can  this  be  the  Christ  ?  or,  as  others,  He  is  not  however  the 
Christ,  is  He  ?  The  fi-qn,  not  however  ?  suggests  a  negative  reply.  But  the  question  was 
put  to  elicit,  not  a  speculative,  but  a  practical  answer — to  bring  the  people  of  Sychar  to 
see  Jesus. 

Ver.  30.  The  people  "  came  on  their  way  toward  Him." — She  proved  herself,  at  the  first 
certainly,  to  be  a  greater  evangelist  than  Nicodemus. 

Vers.  31-38.  The  disciples  on  their  return,  solicitous  for  His  comfort,  pressed  Him  to 
partake  of  the  food  they  had  brought.  In  reply  He  pointed  them  to  what  is  far  more 
important  than  material  food,  in  view  of  which  the  want  of  food  for  the  body  is  for  the  time 
forgotten. 

Ver.  34.  Finish. — reXeicicw,  to  complete  and  perfect  (comp.  xvii.  4). 

Vers.  39-42.  The  firstfruits  of  the  spiritual  harvest  in  Samaria  were  reaped  at  Sychar. 
Whilst  the  Jews  rejected  Christ,  the  men  of  Sychar  received  Him  in  simple  faith  as  truly  the 
Saviour  of  the  world. 

Vers.  41,  42.  His  word  .  .  .  thy  speech  (top  \6yov  olvtov  .  .  .  rr\v  <tt)v  XaXtdi').— The  \6yos, 
teaching,  of  Jesus  was  more  weighty  than  the  saying,  the  report,  of  the  woman. 

Vers.  43-54.  Our  Lord's  Galilean  ministry. — Detailed  accounts  of  His  work  in  Galilee  are 
found  in  the  Synoptics  (Matt.  iv.  12;  Luke  iv.  14;  Mark  i.  14 — ii.  14). 

Ver.  44.  For  Jesus  Himself  testified,  etc. — The  crux  in  this  passage  is  the  meaning  of  the 
words  His  own  country.  There  are  three  significations :  (1)  Judaea,  as  the  country  of  His 
nativity,  and  that  in  which  prophecy  declared  Messiah  would  arise  (Mic.  v.  2).  (2)  Lower 
Galilee,  including  Nazareth,  as  distinct  from  Upper  Galilee,  including  Capernaum,  etc.  (3) 
Galilee  as  a  whole.  There  is  much  to  be  said  for  each  of  these  interpretations ;  but,  as 
Luthardt  points  out  in  regard  to  (1),  it  does  not  suit  the  connection  ;  for  Jesus  was  not 
leaving  Judaea,  but  Samaria.  Then,  as  regards  (2),  He  went  to  Cana,  which  was  near 
Nazareth.  It  seems,  on  the  whole,  best  to  hold  (3)  as  the  correct  interpretation  (Mark  vi.  4 ; 
Luke  iv.  24).  What,  then,  is  the  connection  of  the  adage,  a  prophet,  etc.,  with  His  going  into 
Galilee  ?  The  explanation  of  Luthardt,  that  He  went  to  seek  rest,  and  in  Galilee  would 
have  more  probability  of  obtaining  it  than  elsewhere,  because  He  would  be  more  unob- 
served, does  not  commend  itself  as  satisfactory.  Godet's  view  seems  on  the  whole  the  most 
consistent  with  all  the  facts,  viz.  that  our  Lord  did  not  begin  an  extended  work  in  Galilee 
at  first,  quite  aware  of  the  fact  that  a  prophet  has  no  honour,  etc. ;  but  after  nearly  a 
year's  ministry  in  Jerusalem  and  Judaea,  where  many  Galileans  had  heard  and  seen  Him, 
He  returned  with  more  hope  of  securing  recognition.  And  this  hope  was  justified,  as 
ver.  45  testifies.  It  might  be  pointed  out  also  that  there  was  special  force  in  the  application 
of  this  adage  to  Galilee,  when  we  remember  the  words  of  Nathanael  (i.  46),  and  what  was 
said  to  Nicodemus  by  the  Pharisees  (vii.  52). 

Ver.  46.  The  miracle  here  recorded  is  distinct  from  that  of  the  healing  of  the  centurion's 
servant  (Matt.  viii.  5  ;  Luke  vii.  2). 

Ver.  52.  He  began  to  amend  (Koiixf/drepov  &rxe). — The  phrase  "appears  to  have  been  used  in 
familiar  conversation,  as  we  might  say,  'He  begins  to  do  nicely,'  or  'bravely  '"  (Westcott). 
Seventh  hour. — If  the  reckoning  be  in  Jewish  time,  then  this  hour  will  mean  about  1  pjn. 
And  as  it  would  be  late  at  night  before  the  father  reached  Capernaum,  the  servants  could 
easily  say  that  it  was  yesterday  when  the  amendment  in  his  son  began,  as  the  Jewish  day 
closed  at  sunset.     The  Jewish  sabbath,  e.g.,  begins  when  the  first  star  appears. 

115 


chap.  rv.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1-26. 

The  woman  of  Samaria. — The  dispute  between  John's  disciples  and  a  Jew  was 
apparently  only  an  outstanding  incident,  significant  of  deeper  under-currents  of 
feeling.  It  tended,  perhaps,  to  produce  an  outbreak  of  the  latent  hostility 
toward  Jesus  in  certain  quarters.  Even  in  Galilee  itself  there  seemed  to  be 
indications  of  a  feeling  of  opposition  to  the  popular  enthusiasm  for  Christ 
(Mark  ii.  5,  6,  etc.).  The  Baptist  had  now  been  cast  into  prison  ;  and  on  Jesus 
the  full  stream  of  Pharisaic  hatred,  which  had  formerly  been  divided,  was  now 
turned.  And  the  hatred  was  all  the  greater  because  Jesus  made  and  baptised 
more  disciples  than  John  (ver.  1).  Therefore,  in  the  circumstances,  Jesus  for 
the  time  withdrew  from  Judaea,  practising  a  precept  He  afterward  laid  down  for 
the  disciples  (Matt.  x.  23). 

I.  The  necessity  for  His  going  through  Samaria, — 1.  It  was  not  an  absolute 
material  necessity.  Strict  Jews  would  have  avoided  it  by  going  through  Persea. 
Those  who  wished  to  make  a  speedy  journey,  however,  required  to  take  this 
direct  route.  This  did  not  seem  to  be  the  sole  reason  why  Jesus  chose  it ;  for 
He  remained  two  days  at  Sychar.  2.  The  "  must  needs  "  be  is  no  doubt  to  be 
found  in  the  incidents  that  follow.  It  is  a  divine  necessity  for  Christ  to  save 
thirsting  souls.  3.  How  does  this  mission  to  Samaria  agree  with  the  command  to 
the  disciples  in  Matt.  x.  5,  6  ?  It  was  a  command  applying  only  to  that  special 
mission  (Acts  i.  8).  And  although  the  Saviour  was  sent  specially  to  the  lost  sheep 
of  the  house  of  Israel  (Matt.  xv.  24),  yet  He  never  withheld  His  saving  power 
from  those  ready  and  willing  to  receive  it. 

II.  Christ's  meeting  with  the  woman  of  Sychar. — 1.  In  the  heat  of  the  day  (for 
even  in  winter,  the  best  time  for  travelling  in  Syria,  the  midday  sun  is  often  very 
hot,  and  walking  fatiguing),  Jesus  came,  wearied,  to  Jacob's  well  (Gen.  xxxiii. 
18-20,  xlix.  21,  22  ;  Dent,  xxxiii.  28,  29),  near  a  village  or  suburb  of  Shechsm 
called  /Sychar,  now  called  El  Askar,   about  a  mile  from  Nablous  (Shechem). 

2.  Jesus  had  journeyed  on  foot.  The  common  fund  evidently  did  not  admit  of 
hiring  animals  for  all  His  company,  and  He  therefore  went  with  them  afoot. 
He  shared  with  His  disciples  the  common  fatigues  and  hardships  of  the  way. 

3.  He  sat  thus,  wearied  and  footsore,  by  the  well,  whilst  the  disciples  went  for 
provisions  to  the  neighbouring  village  or  town.  He  was  truly  human — the  Son 
of  man  as  well  as  the  Son  of  God.  He  knows  our  toils,  trials,  wearinesses,  and 
can  sympathise  with  us  in  our  troubles  (Heb.  iv.  15).  4.  While  He  thus  sat 
"  a  woman  of  Samaria  "  came  to  draw  water.  It  was  not  the  usual  hour  when 
women  came  to  draw  water,  and  this  particular  woman  must  have  come  there 
at  that  time  for  some  especial  need,  perhaps  also  to  avoid  publicity,  which  she 
had  reason  to  do.  Our  Lord  entered  into  conversation  with  her,  showing  that 
He  was  free  from  rabbinic  prejudice  and  Jewish  exclusiveness.  He  asked  from 
her  a  draught  of  water,  as  the  disciples  had  probably  taken  with  them  the  vessel 
for  drawing  water  (ver.  11).  The  Saviour's  request  was  a  real  request.  The 
sinless  needs  of  His  human  nature  were  as  ours  (xix.  28 ;  Matt.  viii.  24). 

III.  Christ  leads  the  woman  to  desire  the  living  water  which  He  can  give. — 
1.  Whilst  the  Saviour's  request  was  a  genuine  one,  it  also  afforded  Him  an 
opening  for  offering  this  poor  woman  a  richer  gift.  2.  The  mere  fact  of  doing 
a  kindness  to  another  leads  us  to  take  a  more  than  ordinary  interest  in  that 
person.  A  way  is  often  found  into  the  soul  of  a  man  by  giving  him  the  sense 
of  an  ability  to  be  helpful  to  others.  It  awakens  a  kindly  feeling  toward  the 
person  helped.  Here  we  have  an  example  of  but  one  of  the  many  ways  in  which 
Christ  brings  sinners  to  Himself.  Something  connected  with  our  daily  duty 
may  be  made  a  turning-point  in  our  life.     As  the  man  at  his  daily  work  founcl 

116 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  iv. 


the  treasure  in  the  field  (Matt.  xiii.  44),  so  often  in  the  pursuit  of  our  daily  duty 
the  Lord  may  give  us  the  privilege  of  bringing  to  light  heavenly  riches.  3.  The 
woman  was  astonished  at  our  Lord's  request.  His  costume  (most  probably  His 
accent)  proclaimed  him  a  Jew ;  and,  considering  the  relation  between  Jews  and 
Samaritans,  the  request  was  a  strange  one  (vide  Note,  p.  124),  although  we  may  be 
sure  it  was  granted  (Luke  x.  33).  4.  Jesus  soon  showed  that  He  was  no  ordinary 
traveller,  not  simply  a  liberal-minded  Jew,  as  He  said  to  her,  "  If  thou  knewest 
the  gift,"  etc.  (ver.  10).  The  water  of  Jacob's  well  was  truly  a  divine  gift 
flowing  for  all ;  but  there  is  a  richer,  fuller  spring,  giving  enduring  satisfaction, 
"  living  water  "  drawn  from  the  ever-fresh,  never-failing  springs  of  eternal  love 
and  grace  (Ps.  xxxvi.  9,  lxxxvii.  7  ;  Isa.  xii.  3,  xli.  17,  18,  lv.  1).  5.  The 
woman  now  realises  that  here  is  some  one  far  above  her,  and  she  addresses  Him 
courteously,  Sw.  But  she  does  not  yet  quite  comprehend  His  meaning.  Moreover, 
her  pride  of  race  and  religion  is  up  in  arms  ;  and  perhaps  some  idea  of  a  special 
sanctity  in  this  well  is  in  her  mind  as  she  replies,  "  Art  Thou  greater  1  "  etc. 
(ver.  12).  6.  The  answer  of  Jesus  reveals  to  the  woman  a  well  of  deeper  depth 
than  that  of  Jacob.  He  opens  up  to  her  gaze  the  deep  spring  of  eternal  love 
and  grace.  He  who  drinks  from  Jacob's  well,  or  any  earthly  spring  of  material 
joy,  shall  thirst  again.  "  But  the  water  that  I  shall  give,"  etc.  (ver.  14),  shall  be 
an  inner  source,  never  failing,  of  satisfaction  (Isa.  lv.  1).  And  thus,  too,  that  other 
prophetic  word  is  fulfilled  :  "  The  Lord  shall  .  .  .  satisfy  tby  soul  in  drought," 
etc.  (Isa.  lviii.  11).  All  fountains  of  earthly  satisfaction  cannot  satisfy  the  soul, 
which  needs  a  supply  not  from  external  sources  only,  but  deep  in  itself,  ever 
flowing  through  faith,  and  which  is  checked  only  by  unbelief.  It  is  living  water, 
flowing  from  the  source  of  all  grace  (Ezek.  xlvii.),  full  and  abounding  for 
spiritual  satisfaction,  springing  up  unto  life  eternal.  It  is  Christ,  and  His  Spirit 
and  gospel  (vii.  37-40). 

IV.  From  the  well  to  the  mount  of  service. — 1.  The  woman  of  Sychar, 
although  perplexed  by  the  words  of  Jesus  as  to  the  gift  of  living  water  which  He 
could  bestow,  realised  evidently  that  there  was  some  deep  meaning  under  these 
words.  At  all  events,  she  realised  that  such  a  gift  would  be  a  valuable  one,  and 
in  her  heart  a  great  desire  for  this  gift  was  awakened  (ver.  15).  2.  And  Jesus 
would  fain  give  her  this  boon ;  but  there  was  needed  first  a  preparation  of  heart 
and  life  for  its  reception.  Hence  our  Lord's  answer,  although  fitted  to  lead 
toward  this  end,  would  be  unexpected,  and,  we  may  believe,  at  first  unwelcome 
to  the  woman.  It  revealed  the  poor  sinful  woman  to  herself,  and  gave  her  a 
glimpse  of  the  nature  of  Him  with  whom  she  was  speaking.  She  had  apparently 
lived  a  loose  and  evil  life,  and  now  Jesus  brought  it  up  before  her  suddenly — not 
simply  to  shame  her,  but  with  a  view  to  lead  her,  and  her  partner  in  sin,  to 
repentance.  Probably  her  former  husbands  had  discarded  her  for  her  wicked 
life.  She  made  no  attempt  to  cover  or  conceal  her  sin.  3.  We  are  not,  there- 
fore, to  consider  the  apparently  strange  turn  given  to  the  conversation  as  merely 
"  a  woman's  ruse  "  to  escape  an  unpleasant  and  unwelcome  turn  in  the  con- 
versation. In  all  probability  this  woman  (who  possessed  evidently  some  force 
of  character)  had  grown  dissatisfied  with  her  past  life,  but  found  no  help  and 
guidance  toward  higher  things  in  the  religion  and  worship  of  Samaria.  She  was 
evidently  of  the  number  of  those  who  were  vaguely  longing  for  the  bright  new 
era  of  Messiah  (ver.  25).  And  the  thought  might  well  come  to  her,  "  Here  was 
one  who  was  evidently  a  prophet — might  He  not  decide  this  question,  and  give 
her  some  definite  clue  as  to  what  was  the  truth  i "  There  must  have  been  some 
such  feeling  in  her  mind,  else  Jesus  would  not  have  followed  the  turn  in  the  con- 
versation, which  indeed  led  up  to  the  end  He  desired  to  reach.  "  Our  fathers 
worshipped  on  this  mountain ''  (Gerizim),  etc.,  said  the  woman.  4.  The  answer 
of  Jesus  was  truly  prophetic.     He  had  to  convince  the  woman  that  the  Samaritan 

117 


chap.  IV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


religion  and  worship  were  erroneous,  and  that  in  the  Jewish  Church  alone  at 
that  period  the  true  Object  of  worship  was  adored  and  the  way  of  salvation 
known.  But,  at  the  same  time,  He  had  to  show  that  all  merely  local  cults  were 
soon  to  pass  away,  giving  place  to  a  universal,  rightly  directed,  and  true  worship, 
when  men  should  everywhere  worship  the  Father  (see  homily  on  vers.  20-24). 
5.  In  her  answer  to  our  Lord  the  woman  of  Samaria  showed  a  deeper  and  truer 
conception  of  part  of  Messiah's  work  than  did  the  Jews.  She  realised  that  He 
was  to  come  as  the  Revealer  (ver.  25).  And  Jesus,  recognising  in  this  poor 
woman's  heart  a  receptivity  not  common  in  Israel,  revealed  Himself  unto  her 
(ver.  26)  Not  prejudiced  like  the  Jewish  rulers  and  the  mass  of  the  Jewish 
people,  she  willingly  received  His  word.  In  haste,  excited  and  rejoiced  above 
measure  at  this  great  discovery,  leaving  her  waterpot  behind  in  her  excitement, 
thus  forgetting  the  object  of  her  visit  to  the  well,  or  having  otherwise  realised  it 
(above,  II.  4),  she  hurried  to  Sychar  to  communicate  her  important  news,  and 
thus  became  the  first  preacher  of  Christ  in  that  place. 

Vers.  7-26.  A  soul  awakened  and  enlightened. — In  this  conversation  of  our 
Lord  with  the  Samaritan  woman,  we  find  the  Saviour  employing  quite  another 
method  than  that  followed  in  the  case  of  Nicodemus.  Jesus  did  not  use  any 
stereotyped  plan  in  dealing  with  men  and  women  regarding  spiritual  things. 
Each  individual  case  was  treated  with  reference  to  its  own  special  circumstances 
and  needs.  There  seems  to  be  a  danger  of  forgetting  this  in  certain  quarters 
nowadays — of  forgetting  that  men  cannot  be  treated  spiritually  in  the  mass, 
and  run,  as  it  were,  into  moulds  like  molten  metal.  There  is  a  danger  lest  those 
whose  feelings  have  been  stirred  by  emotional  excitement  may  in  this  state  be 
led  to  grasp  a  shadow  for  the  reality.  It  is  better,  certainly,  that  men  and 
women  should  be  stirred  up,  than  that  they  should  remain  wholly  indifferent. 
But  there  is  room  for  much  wise  and  calm  spiritual  guidance  in  their  treatment. 
It  is  needful,  e.g.,  that  men  should  have  true  views  of  sin,  else  they  will  never 
have  true  views  of  God  and  salvation.  In  this  conversation  our  Lord  gives  an 
example  of  faithful  and  wise  dealing  with  a  sinful  soul.  Most  marked  is  the 
skill  with  which  the  Good  Physician  of  souls  led  this  woman  to  a  desire  for  some- 
thing higher — to  tacit  confession  of  her  sinfulness — to  a  glimpse  of  the  meaning 
of  the  true  spiritual  life. 

I.  In  this  conversation  Jesus  awoke  in  her  heart  a  desire  for  something 
higher. — The  woman  of  Samaria  came  to  Jacob's  well,  with  her  waterpot,  intent 
only,  it  would  seem,  on  satisfying  material  needs.  Her  life  had  not  been  a  good 
one ;  and  possibly,  like  many  slaves  of  sin,  she  felt  the  bondage  to  be  bitter. 
Even  amid  her  sinful  life  also  she  turned  her  thoughts  sometimes  toward  higher 
things  (ver.  25).  The  Saviour  read  her  heart,  and  His  very  presence  helped  (as 
it  ever  did)  to  awaken  the  germ  of  spiritual  life  slumbering  there,  and  well-nigh 
extinct.  He  effected  His  purpose  of  mercy  toward  her  and  her  fellow-citizens, 
by  leading  His  hearer  through  the  material  occupation  of  the  moment  to  the 
thought  of  the  higher  spiritual  reality.  The  empty  waterpot  led  Him  to  speak 
of  the  spiritual  thirst  of  men,  and  to  show  the  divine  way  in  which  alone  it  can 
be  satisfied.  The  woman  knew,  as  her  words  show,  that  Jesus  spoke  of  some 
other  water  than  Jacob's  well  or  any  material  spring.  Perhaps  it  was  some 
vague  religious  feeling  that  led  her  to  come  to  Jacob's  well — some  semi-superstitious 
thought  that  a  blessing  might  come  through  drinking  from  this  hallowed  spring. 
But  the  toil  remained — the  blessing  had  not  come.  Hence  she  says  (ver.  15), 
"  Sir,  give  me,"  etc. 

II.  Jesus  led  her  by  personal  revelation  to  conviction  of  sin  and  to  feel  her 
need. — The  inner  look  of  the  Saviour  revealed  this  woman  to  herself,  and  at  the 
same  time  showed  her  that  she  stood  in  the  presence  of  One  who  knew  her 

118 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  IV. 


altogether  (vers.  17-19).  She  made  no  attempt  to  deny  her  sinfulness.  Her 
tacit  acknowledgment  was  confession.  But  she  showed  her  sense  of  her  need, 
and  her  faith  that  He  could  supply  it,  by  at  once  asking  Him  for  light  regarding 
religion  and  the  spiritual  life. 

III.  Our  Lord  revealed  to  her  the  true  spiritual  life,  and  Himself  as  the  way 
to  it. — The  woman  now  in  a  measure  understood  what  Jesus  meant,  and  desired 
to  know  more.  He  therefore  showed  her  the  inadequacy  of  her  present  faith, 
and  pointed  out  the  fact  that  the  way  of  salvation  was  revealed  to  Israel.  But 
at  the  same  time  He  opened  to  her  the  vista  of  true  spiritual  service,  now  first 
fully  revealed,  of  which  the  Father  is  the  centre,  and  Himself  the  revealer  of  the 
Father. 

Vers.  4-26.  Our  Lord's  dealing  with  the  Samaritan  woman. — In  order  to 
assimilate  all  that  is  beautiful,  instructive,  and  touching  in  this  story,  to 
explain  and  consider  worthily  all  the  precious  words  spoken  by  Jesus  on  this 
occasion,  would  go  far  beyond  the  limits  of  our  meditation.  We  shall  not,  there- 
fore, consider  the  particulars,  but  rather  the  Redeemer's  mode  of  dealing  with 
souls,  as  shown  in  this  conversation ;  and  notice  the  special  application  the 
whole  may  have  in  our  ordinary  life.     We  see — 

I.  How  the  Redeemer,  starting  from  a  very  ordinary  occurrence,  one  of  the 
smallest  in  human  life,  knew  how  to  turn  the  conversation  with  the  Samaritan 
to  the  highest  truths  of  His  teaching,  and  the  end  and  aim  of  His  appearance 
in  the  world.  Thus,  not  only  in  the  narrower  circle  of  those  immediately  around 
us  and  connected  with  us,  but  in  that  wider  circle  in  which  we  all  more  or  less 
move,  in  which  men  are  not  so  open  with  each  other  as  in  the  narrower  sphere 
of  friendship  and  companionship,  even  although  they  are  not  entirely  strangers 
to  each  other,  we  often  in  conversation  linger  on  trifles,  on  the  petty  occurrences 
of  life  !  And  when  the  talk  turns  on  personal  circumstances,  how  seldom  is  it 
conducted  in  such  a  way  that  profitable  considerations  arise  from  it,  and  the 
heart  is  moved  to  turn  from  those  lesser  things  to  things  of  higher  import,  etc. 

II.  Notice  how  the  Redeemer  declared  Himself  to  this  Samaritan  woman 
in  regard  to  the  relations  between  the  Jews  and  the  Samaritans.  He  left  her 
in  no  doubt  regarding  His  opinion  as  to  these  contending  claims.  Similar 
circumstances  meet  us.  There  are  many  divisions  of  the  Church  of  God.  But 
when  through  these  divisions  men  become  embittered  and  inimical ;  when  the 
higher  consciousness  of  the  unity  of  the  faith,  and  the  oneness  of  the  Church 
resting  thereon,  vanishes ;  when  in  place  of  helping  each  other  toward  the 
knowledge  and  practice  of  the  true  and  good  they  deny  to  each  other  insight, 
right  feeling,  and  love  of  the  divine, — then  how  unblessed  are  such  divisions ! 
How  disastrous  also  !  for  thus  the  Church  becomes  like  a  congeries  of  small 
states,  divided  and  inimical — an  easy  prey  to  the  foe.  If  the  Redeemer  were 
asked  as  to  His  opinion  concerning  these  divisions,  He  would  point  to  a  time 
when  neither  one  nor  another  would  exist  .  .  .  and  reply  that  such  division  can 
become  beneficial  only  in  so  far  as  there  is  a  recognition  of  the  higher  unity. 
But  we  must  also,  in  imitation  of  our  Redeemer,  not  suppress  our  views  of  the 
subjects  on  which  we  are  divided.  Yet,  fellowship,  love,  and  the  power  of  truth 
are  to  be  invoked  to  bring  about  an  agreement  founded  on  better  opinions. 
Men  must  be  brought  to  an  earnest  conviction  that  the  blessing  of  God  does  not 
rest  on  our  divisions,  but  on  the  unity  which  lies  at  the  basis  of  each. 

III.  Lastly,  notice  the  open  avowal  of  Christ :  "  I  that  speak  unto  thee 
am  He."  We  live  in  an  age  when  many  a  one  is  unwilling  to  say  who  and  what 
he  is,  and  what  his  deepest  thoughts,  etc.,  are.  But  when  the  hearts  of  men  are 
truly  turned  to  God,  when  faith  and  love  increase  and  are  strengthened,  when 
men  deny  themselves  to  what  is  of  the  earth  earthy,  renounce  dissimulation, 

J19 


Chap.  IV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


and  desire  first  of  all  God's  eternal  kingdom  which  Christ  has  opened  even  on 
earth — then  when  we  meet  others  like-minded  with  ourselves,  let  us  openly  avow 
ourselves  to  them,  and  thus  strengthen  and  comfort  each  other  whilst  pressing 
forward  in  our  course. — Abridged  from  F.  Schleiermacher. 

Ver.  10.  Divine  grace. — This  gift  of  God  which  the  Samaritan  woman  did  not 
yet  know  is  divine  grace.  It  is  a  precious  gift  which  we  do  not  ourselves  com- 
prehend sufficiently,  and  which  we  do  not  always  take  pains  to  seek  to  compre- 
hend. Hence  it  comes  about  that  it  is  frequently  received  in  vain.  It  is 
important,  therefore,  to  seek  to  have  right  ideas  regarding  it.  Of  divine  wisdom 
it  is  said  that  she  works  gently  and  yet  attains  her  ends  with  power.  So  it 
may  be  said  of  grace,  for  grace  works  within  us  as  the  instrument  of  sovereign 
wisdom.     Consider  then,  first,  the  gentleness,  and,  second,  the  power  of  grace. 

I.  The  gentleness  of  divine  grace. — By  this  attribute  grace  touches  the  sinner 
and  becomes  victorious.  This  gentleness  is  seen — 1 .  In  this,  that  grace  waits  for  us. 
Jesus,  wearied,  etc.,  as  He  was,  waited  to  be  gracious  to  this  sinful  Samaritan. 

2.  Grace  avails  itself  of  the  times  and  occasions  best  suited  for  gaining  its  ends. 

3.  Grace  is  the  first  to  meet  us.  So  our  Lord  opened  the  conversation  with  this 
woman,  etc.  4.  What  grace  wishes  to  obtain  it  asks  from  us — it  solicits  and 
invites.  The  Lord  entreated  the  Samaritan  woman  to  believe  Him  :  "  Woman, 
believe  Me,"  etc.  More,  grace  asks  little  from  us  that  it  may  give  much.  The 
Saviour  asked  a  draught  of  water,  that  He  might  offer  to  this  woman  a  draught 
from  the  fountain  of  living  water.  5.  Grace  accommodates  itself  to  our  nature 
and  temperament.  This  woman  showed  an  inquiring  disposition,  and  the  Saviour 
deigned  to  converse  with  her  on  the  themes  she  introduced.  6.  Grace  does  not 
involve  us  in  positions  of  difficulty  where  it  cannot  comfort  and  help  us.  It  is 
true  God  by  His  grace  influences  us  to  renounce  the  world  ;  but  only  after  by 
grace  we  have  made  known  to  us  its  vanity  and  danger. 

II.  The  power  of  divine  grace. — It  has  always  appeared  to  me,  and  I  am 
still  of  the  same  opinion,  that  one  of  the  most  convincing  proofs  of  the  truth 
of  our  faith  is  to  see  what  grace  does  in  certain  souls.  And  if  I  consider  only 
the  conversion  of  this  Samaritan,  I  should  conclude  without  hesitation  that 
there  is  a  superhuman  power  that  works  within  us.  There  is  seen  a  double 
miracle  of  the  almighty  power  of  divine  grace  in  this  conversion — the  one  in 
regard  to  the  mind,  the  other  in  regard  to  the  heart.  1.  There  was  a  miracle 
of  grace  and  power  effected  in  the  mind  of  the  Samaritan.  She  was  an 
unbeliever  and  was  brought  to  faith — always  a  difficult  process.  2.  There  was  a 
miracle  of  grace  in  the  power  that  changed  her  heart.  She  had  lived  an  evil 
life,  and  grace  convinced  her  of  its  sinfulness.  3.  These  miracles  were  evidently 
works  of  superhuman  power,  yet  the  Saviour  of  the  world  wrought  them 
speedily.     Her  conversion  was  sudden,  and  its  reality  evident. 

What  lessons  shall  we  learn  from  this  ? — 1.  Hope  all  things  from  divine  grace  ; 
and  however  great  seems  to  be  the  effort  needed  to  bring  one  back  to  God,  have 
confidence.  2.  If  God  in  His  mercy  has  brought  you  out  of  the  estate  of  sin, 
imitate  the  zeal  of  the  Samaritan,  and  labour  like  her  to  bring  in  as  many 
sinners  as  you  are  capable  of  affecting,  above  all  those  who  have  been  accom- 
plices in  your  sins.  Say  with  penitent  David :  "  Come  and  hear,  and  I  will 
declare  what  God  hath  done  for  my  soul"  (Ps.  lxvi.  16),  and  therefore  what 
He  will  do  for  you  also.  Inspire  us  with  such  zeal,  O  God,  and  with  Thy 
Holy  Spirit. — Abridged  from  Bourdaloue. 

Ver.  21.  The  true  sacredness  of  places  of  worship. — The  natural  tendency  of 
men  to  localise  worship  and  consecrate  certain  spots  as  sacred  is  checked  by  the 
true  knowledge  of  the  spirituality  and  omnipresence  of  God.     His  manifestation 

120 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   Sf.  JOHN.  chap.  iV. 


of  Himself  specially  in  Israel  was  suited  to  the  childhood  of  the  race,  and  to  the 
fact  that  Israel  alone  was  then  consecrated  to  His  service.  But  by  the 
Incarnation  the  barriers  of  exclusiveness  have  been  thrown  down,  and  from 
every  race  and  nation  the  spiritual  Israel  is  being  gathered  in.  So  that  every- 
where in  the"  Church — the  congregation  of  the  faithful — which  is  Christ's 
mystical  body,  an  acceptable  worship  ascends  to  God  (1  Pet.  ii.  5).  Are  we  to 
say  then  that  our  churches — places  of  worship — are  to  have  no  special  sanctity 
in  our  eyes;  that  they  may  be  used  for  other  and  secular  purposes,  like 
ordinary  buildings ;  indeed  that  churches  may  be  dispensed  with  altogether,  and 
men  worship  the  Father  in  solitary  stillness  ? 

I.  The  place  of  worship  is  consecrated  by  the  communion  of  true  worship- 
pers with  each  other. — The  mere  stone  and  lime  of  a  religious  edifice  may  not 
be  more  sacred  than  other  stone  and  lime.  Yet  from  the  fact  that  the 
worshippers  meet  there  in  praise  and  prayer,  united  in  their  acts  of  devotion  to 
God,  the  place  acquires  a  sacredness  in  their  sight  which  belongs  to  no  other 
place.  There  the  divine  word  has  been  faithfully  preached  for  many  genera- 
tions ;  there  many  a  one  has  been  led  to  conviction  of  sin  and  settled  peace ; 
within  those  walls  have  come  the  weary  and  have  found  rest,  the  troubled  and 
perplexed  and  have  found  comfort.  There  our  fathers  have  worshipped,  and 
have  said,  "  It  was  good  for  us  to  be  there."  All  these  memories  awaken  our 
gratitude  and  thankfulness,  and  should  make  our  united  supplications  rise  with 
more  fervour  and  power  to  the  throne  of  grace.  And  all  this  will  make  the 
place  of  communion  sacred  and  dear. 

II.  The  place  of  worship  is  also,  for  the  most  part,  the  place  of  closest 
fellowship  and  communion  with  our  Saviour  and  our  God. — It  is  so,  indeed, 
only  because  the  congregation  statedly  meet  there.  Hence  many  a  church 
building  is  called — and  well  called — a  Bethel,  a  place  where  God  has  manifested 
Himself  to  His  waiting  people.  Wherever  God's  people  assemble,  in  the  lowly 
hut  amid  savage  wilds,  in  the  woods,  beneath  the  open  sky,  or  in  dens  or  caves 
of  the  earth,  they  may,  and  do,  enjoy  this  communion.  But  in  settled  com- 
munities there  is  ever  a  stated  place ;  and  that  place  must  and  will  be  hallowed 
by  the  memories  of  heavenly  consecration  and  fellowship ;  and  it  would  be  felt 
to  be  a  profanation  to  use  such  a  place  for  all  ordinary  purposes.  We  do 
not  make  vegetable  gardens  or  sow  corn  on  the  spots  where  our  loved  ones  lie 
buried.  These  spots  are  kept  sacred  to  their  memory.  And  shall  we  not  also 
consider  that  place  as  hallowed  where  first  the  name  of  Christ  was  named 
upon  us — where  often  in  the  sacred  rite  of  His  own  ordinance  we  have  entered 
into  communion  with  our  risen  Lord  ?  This  is  not  mere  sentimentality.  It 
is  a  sense  of  the  fitness  of  things  which  dictates  this  feeling. 

III.  Our  places  of  worship  are  specially  prepared  for  the  purpose  of  social 
public  prayer  and  praise. — They  are  set  apart  from  the  distractions  of  the 
world.  "  The  loud  vociferations  of  the  street "  do  not  enter  them  ;  and  all  the 
accessories  should  tend  to  distract  the  mind  and  heart  from  earth,  so  that  they 
may  be  fixed  on  heavenly  things.  The  art — both  in  the  furnishing  and  the 
music — should  be  fitted  to  aid  the  soul  in  its  heavenward  flight.  Whilst  here 
on  earth  the  senses  and  feelings  and  emotions  are  part  of  our  being ;  and  all 
must  be  made  to  contribute  to  and  not  hinder  spiritual  worship.  It  is  difficult 
to  prevent  men  going  to  extremes  here — of  "baldness"  on  the  one  hand,  of 
sensuousness  on  the  other.  The  remedy  is  to  pray  for  and  to  exercise  the  spirit 
of  true  worshippers,  who  worship  the  Father  "  in  spirit  and  in  truth." 

Vers.  20-24.  Worship  in  spirit  and  in  truth. — The  subject  brought  before 
us  in  these  verses  is  true  worship — its  Object,  its  universality  and  spirituality. 
Whether  the  whole  of  the  conversation  between  our  Lord  and  this  Samaritan 

121 


chap.  iv.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


woman  is  here  reported  cannot,  perhaps,  be  clearly  determined.  It  may  be  that 
as  in  the  conversation  with  Nicodemus,  only  the  salient  points  are  recorded.  At 
all  events,  we  see  this  auditor  of  our  Lord  led  upward  from  her  merely  material 
cares  to  the  loftiest  of  themes.  A  revelation  is  made  to  her  of  a  higher  and 
more  heavenly  truth  than  had  ever  before  been  made  known  to  man.  Not  in 
the  groves  of  the  Academy,  not  in  the  School  of  the  Peripatetics,  not  in  the 
"  Painted  Porch,"  was  this  revelation  made — not  in  imperial  Rome,  learned 
Athens,  or  cosmopolitan  Alexandria ;  but  in  an  obscure  district  of  Palestine, 
to  a  poor  Samaritan  woman,  and  therefore  to  a  member  of  a  race  despised  by  the 
Jews  and  not  much  regarded  by  the  Gentiles,  was  this  great  truth  first  spoken, 
by  One  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  a  weary  traveller  seated  for  rest  and 
refreshment  by  the  rand  of  Jacob's  well.  And  yet  although  the  truth  then 
proclaimed  in  all  its  fulness  for  the  first  time  among  men  appeared  so  lofty 
and  heavenly,  yet  now  it  has  been  made  known  it  is  at  once  seen  to  be  in 
accordance  with  reason  and  with  the  higher  aspirations  of  the  race.  And 
withal  it  is  so  simple  that  even  Christ's  humble,  uninstructed  listener  by  Jacob's 
well  seems  to  have  partly  caught  and  assimilated  it — a  striking  example  of 
how  great  spiritual  truths,  hidden  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  are  revealed  unto 
babes  (Matt.  xi.  25). 

I.  The  object  of  true  worship. — 1.  The  true  worshippers  shall  worship  the 
Father.  By  this  endearing  word  the  woman  of  Sychar,  and  since  then  all  men, 
had  revealed  to  them  a  thought  which  would  set  them  free  for  ever  from  all 
debasing  forms  and  modes  of  worship.  In  His  personal  relation  to  men  God  is 
the  Father.  On  the  throne  of  universal  dominion  there  is  seated  not  merely 
almighty  Power  inscrutable,  before  whom  men  must  needs  bend  in  dread  and 
awe — not  certainly  divine  wrath  merely,  frowning  down  on  trembling  men,  and 
requiring  to  be  appeased  by  ever  richer  offerings,  costlier  sacrifices,  and  bloodier 
rites :  on  that  throne  sits  the  God  of  love,  the  Father  of  Him  whom  He 
sent  to  save  the  race  of  men,  and  in  whom,  new-born,  they  can  come  with  holy 
boldness  to  that  divine  throne,  and  say,  "  Abba,  Father."  This  great  thought, 
revealed  faintly  and  dimly  to  Israel,  our  Lord  made  fully  known,  thus  elevating 
and  enlarging  the  thoughts  of  men  regarding  God.  2.  God  is  Spirit.  In  this 
word  the  nature,  the  eternal  personal  essence,  of  the  Deity  is  described.  There  is 
no  limitation  in  His  being.  He  is  not  limited  by  the  bounds  of  time  and  space,  as 
we  are — not  to  this  moment  of  the  world's  history,  in  this  set  place  in  the 
universe.  Even  as  thought  can  live  in  eternities  past  or  eternities  future,  so 
the  divine  Spirit  exists  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever,  unbounded  by  any  limit 
of  space  or  time.  And  in  this  description  we  are  also  to  realise  the  idea  of 
absolute  freedom.  It  is  just  this  freedom  of  will  that  distinguishes  man  as  a  free 
spiritual  being  :  all  else  in  his  nature  is  under  the  dominion  of  the  forces  of 
the  universe.  And  thus  man  is  in  his  nature  a  complex  being — strange  and 
perplexing ;  on  this  side  swayed  by  the  forces  around  him,  on  that  choosing 
freely  to  act,  and  conscious  of  the  responsibility  resting  on  him  in  view  of  his 
activity.  But  God  has  no  limitations  on  the  side  of  nature,  for  He  is  the 
creator  of  nature,  which  lies  plastic  in  His  hand.  Therefore  He  is  "free 
personality — the  supreme  conscience."  He  knows,  He  wills  absolutely.  "  He  is 
distinguished  from  all  His  creatures,  because  by  an  act  of  His  love  He  has 
formed  them."  And  in  His  activity  "  none  can  stay  His  hand  from  working,  or 
say  unto  Him,  What  doest  Thou?"  He  is  therefore  absolute  freedom,  the 
absolute  One.  -And  thus  in  this  conception  men  escape  the  idolatry  of 
heathenism,  with  its  gods  each  limiting  the  other — from  the  pantheistic  dreams 
of  the  one  substance,  from  fatalistic  materialism.  Yet  again,  the  spiritual 
being  is  founded  on  righteousness  and  truth.  It  is  even  by  these  qualities  of 
their  moral  being  that  men  rise  to  be  what  they  are.     Without  them,  as  the 

122 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  IV. 


guiding  principles  of  life  and  action,  men  may  become  worse  than  the  beasts 
that  perish.  And  these  are  the  eternal  and  immutable  attributes  of  the  God- 
head. "  Righteousness  and  judgment  are  the  habitation  of  His  throne." 
Indeed,  without  these  qualities  there  can  be  no  true  spirituality,  no  true 
freedom.  Where  righteousness  is  wanting  slavery  reigns.  "This  is  the  God 
whom  Jesus  reveals — infinite  and  eternal,  everywhere  present  and  conscious, 
Lord  and  Father,  merciful  and  holy  "  (Viguie). 

II.  The  true  manner  of  worship  :  it  is  to  be  in  "spirit  and  in  truth." — 1.  As 
are  men's  gods  so  is  their  worship.  According  to  men's  ideas  of  the  supreme 
Being  the  form  of  their  worship  will  shape  itself.  The  pages  of  the  world's  annals 
have  but  to  be  glanced  through  to  reveal  how  true  this  statement  is  to  fact. 
The  cruel  Moloch  will  demand  a  ritual  of  cruel,  even  human  sacrifice.  And  on 
the  other  hand  a  cold  monotheistic  and  rational  conception  of  the  Deity  (such 
as  that  of  the  Sadducees  and  Samaritans)  will  lead  to  a  cold,  formal,  lifeless 
worship.  And  the  agnostic,  who  philosophically,  and  even  with  a  sense  of 
superiority,  postulates  an  "  unknown  God,"  has  either  no  worship  at  all,  or  one 
so  ethereal  that  it  remains  unseen.  2.  But  in  this  highest  act  of  the  spiritual 
life  men  can  only  find  true  satisfaction  when  they  come  to  Him  whom  Christ 
has  revealed  as  the  Father.  He  is  no  mere  abstraction  of  the  intellect — no  mere 
negation — no  mere  chimera  of  the  human  imagination.  He  has  come  near — 
He  has  revealed  Himself  in  Christ.  "  He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the 
Father  "  (xiv.  9).  And  therefore  those  who  become  His  children  approach  in 
holy  reverence  and  boldness,  with  gratitude  and  love,  "as  children  to  a  Father." 
Their  hearts  are  drawn  toward  Him ;  and  the  spirits  He  has  created  rise  into 
loving  and  joyful  fellowship  with  the  divine  Spirit.  3.  We  are  thus  to  adore 
Him  in  spirit.  Not  now  by  material  sacrifices — not  by  ritualistic  posturings,  by 
ascetic  penances,  nor  by  any  outward  or  material  means  merely,  is  God  truly 
worshipped ;  but  by  the  rising  of  the  human  spirit  toward  the  divine  in  prayer 
and  praise  and  spiritual  communing.  Nor  do  the  true  worshippers  come  in  the 
spirit  of  servile  fear,  or  for  mere  show  and  pretence,  to  gain  favour  in  the 
eyes  of  men,  or  ignorant ly  hoping  thereby  to  purchase  favour  from  God.  They 
rather  "offer  up  to  God  a  sacrifice  of  praise  continually,"  etc.  (Heb.  xiii.  15). 
And  yet  again,  the  true  worshippers  are  to  worship  God  in  holiness  and  truth. 
Indeed,  the  nearer  we  approach  in  spirit  and  in  life  to  the  divine  likeness,  the 
more  true  and  spiritual  will  our  worship  become.  The  more  we  learn  and 
know  of  God,  the  more  will  our  worship  be  in  truth.  Because  worship  is  not  an 
act  we  can  dissociate  altogether  from  our  life  in  general.  We  cannot  in  reality 
say,  as  some  imagine  we  can,  here  lies  our  secular  and  there  our  spiritual  sphere. 
They  mingle  and  unite  :  we  cannot  separate  them.  Men  cannot  lead  unholy 
lives  and  still  truly  worship  God.  Such  acts  of  worship  He  counts  as  "  vain 
oblations  "  (Isa.  i.  10-18).  And  thus  we  see  how  the  new  spiritual  worship  may 
still  be  expressed  in  the  old  symbolic  language.  There  are  sacrifices  still;  but 
it  is  our  bodies  we  are  to  present  "living  sacrifices"  (Rom.  xii.  1).  There  are 
lustrations  and  separations  still.  "  Cleanse  your  hands,  ye  sinners,  and  purify 
your  hearts,  ye  double-minded  "  (James  iv.  8).  "  Come  out  from  among  them,  and 
be  ye  separate,  saith  the  Lord"  (2  Cor.  vi.  17).  And  thus  serving  Him  here  we 
shall  rise  ever  nearer  to  that  perfect  scene  when  in  the  company  of  the  redeemed 
we  shall  "serve  Him  day  and  night  in  His  temple"  (Rev.  vii.  15). 

III.  The  place  of  worship. — 1.  Great  would  be  the  astonishment  of  the 
Samaritan  woman  and  of  all  who  heard  for  the  first  time  this  wonderful  saying: 
"  An  hour  cometh  when  neither  in  this  mountain  nor  in  Jerusalem  shall  ye 
worship  the  Father."  Until  that  hour — unless  where  faintly  adumbrated  by 
psalmist  and  prophet — no  universal  worship  of  the  omnipresent  God  had  been 
thought  of.     Even  in  the  case  of  Jehovah,  although  the  inspired  teachers  of 

123 


chap.  iv.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


Israel  had  risen  to  some  true  conceptions,  to  the  mass  He  was  the  God  of  Israel 
whose  habitation  was  in  Zion.  All  the  gods  of  the  heathen  were  more  or 
less  localised,  and  their  shrines  were  the  holy  places  of  the  peoples.  2.  But 
here  in  a  word  Jesus  swept  away  for  ever  all  such  childish  and  idolatrous  ideas. 
By  revealing  the  true  nature  of  God,  He  at  once  made  plain  the  true  spirit  of 
worship,  and  the  fact  that  the  Most  High  "  dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with 
hands,  neither  is  worshipped  with  men's  hands  "  (Acts  xvii.  24,  25).  "  The  only 
temple  in  the  universe  is  the  body  of  man "  (Novalis).  "  Your  body  is  the 
temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost"  (1  Cor.  vi.  19).  "Thus  saith  the  high  and  lofty 
One,"  etc.  (Isa.  lvii.  1-15).  This  is  the  true  temple  of  God,  and  thus  worship  is 
universal  as  humanity — nay,  is  found  wherever  there  are  minds  to  know  and 
hearts  to  love.  At  all  times  then,  and  in  all  places;  the  spiritually  enlightened 
may  offer  up  an  acceptable  service  to  God.  No  longer  in  Jerusalem  or  in 
Gerizim  is  God  to  be  worshipped  exclusively,  but  in  all  places  where  true 
worshippers  meet  sincerely  and  spiritually  to  call  on  God  and  to  praise  and 
glorify  His  name. 

"  Where'er  they  seek  Thee  Them  art  found, 
And  every  place  is  hallowed  ground." 


HOMILETIC    NOTES. 

Ver.  9.  Jews  and  Samaritans. — The  Jewish  people.  They  built  a  temple 
last  words  (ov  vap  (Tvy^puivraC)  are  a  re-  on  Mount  Gerizim.  Their  first  priest 
mark  made  by  the  Evangelist,  for  the  was  Manasseh,  a  Jew  who  had  married 
sake  of  his  Gentile  readers  who  might  a  Persian.  They  were  more  abhorred 
not  know  the  origin  of  the  Samaritan  by  the  Jews  than  the  Gentiles  were, 
people  (2  Kings  xvii.  24  et  seq.).  It  No  Samaritans  were  received  as  pro- 
was  a  mixture  of  five  nations  trans-  selytes  (Godet).  Indeed,  strict  Jews 
ported  from  the  East  by  Esar-haddon  were  forbidden  to  have  any  intercourse 
to  repeople  the  kingdom  of  Samaria,  with  their  despised  and  hated  neigh- 
whose  inhabitants  had  been  removed  hours ;  and  they  were  even  forbidden 
by  Shalmaneser.  To  the  worship  of  to  eat  bread  prepared  by  Samaritans : 
their  national  gods  they  joined  that  of  "  He  who  eats  a  Samaritan's  bread  is  as 
the  divinity  of  the  country — Jehovah.  he  who  eats  swine's  flesh."  Generally 
After  the  return  of  the  Babylonish  perhaps  the  prohibition  was  directed 
captivity,  they  offered  their  services  to  against  all  prepared  foods,  as  thus 
the  Jews  in  the  rebuilding  of  the  defiled.  Fruits  and  vegetables,  un- 
t  em  pie.  Being  rejected,  they  used  all  cooked  eggs,  etc.,  were  not  included  in 
their  influence  with  the  kings  of  Persia  the  prohibition, 
to  hinder  the  re-establishment  of  the 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

V er.  6.  Memories  of Jacob 'swell. — Let  us  set  memories  clustering  about  this  place,  take 

ourselves  clown  on  the  edge  of  Jacob's  well.  refuge  from   the   harassed   present  in   the 

The  Lord  had  seated  Himself  there,  weary  peaceful  past  ?      In   those   pleasant  shades 

with  His  journey.     The  way  had  been  long,  did  not  the  figures  of  ancient  times  live  and 

and  the  midday  sun  hot.     He  was  athirst.  move  ?     Jacob  digging  this  well,  where  so 

Who  would  grudge  this  rest  to  the  Son  of  oft  the  patriarch  himself,  his  household  and 

man  ?     Shall  He  not  be  permitted  to  breathe  flocks,  refreshed  themselves.     How  he  gave 

restfully  in  this  place,  whilst  behind  Him  the  village  of  Sychar  to  his  beloved  Joseph ; 

lies  Jerusalem  inimical  to  Him,  and  before  how  Joseph  here,  earnest  and  chaste,  went 

Him  Galilee  rich  in  labours,  and  around  Him  in  and  out,  solicitous  for  his  brethren  ;  and 

strangers  who  still   had  no  part  in   Him  ?  how  at  last  the  bones  of  this  Israelite,  royally 

Might  He  not,  drawn  thereto  by  the  many  exalted   and   dying  highly  honoured  in  a 

124 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   IV. 


foreign  land,  were  brought  hither  and  en- 
tombed. But  Jesus  did  not  come  to  revel  in 
such  remembrances,  although  they  were  so 
poetically  beautiful,  but  to  advance  the 
kingdom  of  God.  He  did  not  come  again 
to  bury  the  dead,  but  to  awake  the  dead. 
He  did  not  come  to  be  ministered  unto,  but 
to  minister ;  and  that  where  He  asked  a  gift 
He  might  bestow  one  infinitely  richer  in 
return. — Dr.  Rudolph  Kogel,  "  Predigt." 

Ver.  24.  Worship  in  truth. — Behold  worship 
in  truth,  perfect  worship  and  eternal, 
beyond  which  we  can  neither,  imagine  nor 
conceive  anything  further.  It  is  in  truth, 
as  the  Saviour  said,  because  it  is  sincerity 
itself.  There  cannot,  indeed,  be  either 
division  or  discord  between  the  act  and  the 
inner  disposition.  The  disposition  is  here 
the  act.  It  is  the  heart  which  worships,  and 
has  always  its  part  therein.  There  is  no 
place  for  hypocrisy.  This  worship  is  in 
truth  because  it  is  the  perfection,  the  sublime 
flight,  the  culminating  point,  to  which 
the  whole  being  tends,  toward  which  it 
pants,  and  where  is  seen  the  vision  of  God. 
Such  a  worship  defies  time  and  space ;  it  is 
independent  of  everything  that  is  contingent 
and  perishing.  It  is  "  worship  in  truth  " 
to-day,  to-morrow,  for  evermore.  It  is 
"  worship  in  truth  "  on  our  poor  earth ;  but 
wherever  you  can  conceive  of  spiritual  beings 
existing  can  you  imagine  for  them  a  worship 
superior  to  the  worship  in  spirit  ?  .  .  . 
Luminous  spheres  which  dazzle  our  gaze, 
worlds  innumerable  which  sweep  through 
the  celestial  spaces  and  overwhelm  us  by 
your  majesty,  say,  who  are  those  spirits  that 
people  and  animate  your  immensities  ?  In 
our  weakness  here  below  we  shall  doubtless 
never  know  in  perfect  fashion  concerning 
their  nature  and  the  mode  of  their  activity. 
But  we  know  one  thing.  They  are  of  God, 
they  have  come  from  the  creative  hand  of  the 
Father  all  merciful  and  all  holy — they  are 
made  in  His  image.  And  without  doubt,  if 
we  judge  from  a  comparison  of  their  glorious 
habitations  with  our  poor  world,  this  divine 
image  will  be  less  obscured  and  effaced 
than  among  us.  Therefore  will  they  love 
more  perfectly  than  we  do,  hope  more  per- 
fectly, and  do  good.  More  perfect  also  will 
be  their  adoration,  with  more  devotional 
ardour,  more  prayer,  more  fervour,  more 
holiness.  They  mount  up  ever  toward  the 
Father,  and  in  this  come  before  us.  Yet  be- 
tween them  and  us,  unworthy  though  we  be, 
there  is  a  glorious  bond  of  union,  a  spiritual 
resemblance,  the  sign  and  image  of  the 
Father;  and  that  is  our  worship.  Thus  from 
sphere  to  sphere,  from  eternity  to  eternity, 
the  same  aspirations  of  the  soul  have  risen 
and  will  rise  toward  God.  It  is  the  universal 
thrill,  the  immensity  of  joy,  the  universal 
attraction  of    spiritual   beings   toward   the 


supreme  Spirit — the  radiant  centre  of  every- 
thing that  lives.  It  is  the  eternal  hosanna, 
the  sublime  harmony,  that  ascends  to  the 
Lord  from  all  worlds  and  from  all  ages.  Let 
us  join  our  strains  to  these — it  is  our  glory 
to  do  so,  owr  patent  of  nobility,  the  mark 
of  our  exaltation. — Translated  from  ViguiL 

The  heart  must  be  made  a  temple  to  God, 
wherein  sacrifices  do  ascend  ;  but  that  they 
may  be  accepted,  it  must  be  purged  of  idols, 
nothing  left  in  any  corner,  though  never  so 
secret,  to  stir  the  jealousy  of  our  God,  who 
sees  through  all.  Oh  happy  that  heart  that 
is,  as  Jacob's  house,  purged,  in  which  no 
more  idols  are  to  be  found,  but  the  holy  God 
dwelling  there  alone,  as  in  His  holy  temple  1 
— Leigliton. 

Ver.  26.  The  joy  and  fruit  of  sincere 
Christian  profession. — What  good  fruit  did 
this  conversation  bear  to  the  Redeemer,  as 
subsequently  men  and  women  came  to  Him, 
saw  Him  and  heard  Him,  prayed  Him  to 
remain  with  them,  and  then  testified  that 
they  believed  no  more  simply  because  of  the 
speech  of  the  woman,  but  because  they  had 
heard  Himself  !  How  was  His  spirit  rejoiced 
by  the  hope  that  the  fields  were  white  to 
harvest !  how  gladly  He  welcomed  His 
disciples  with  the  prospect  that  He  would 
send  them  to  reap  where  they  had  not  sowed  I 
how  joyously  He  beheld  the  accomplishment 
of  His  work,  and  the  whole  of  the  way  He 
had  yet  to  tread  1  Well,  my  friends,  we  too 
can  find  in  similar  fashion  the  strength  and 
comfort  which  the  Redeemer  here  found — 
yes,  we  also,  who  need  it  much  more  than 
did  the  Redeemer — if  we  wi^l  not  set  it  aside 
through  over-anxious*  forebodings.  To  us 
also  will  joyful  hope  be  given  when  we 
openly  avow  ourselves  to  like-minded  fellow- 
men.  Although  truly  we  cannot  cast  such 
a  widely  extensive  glance  over  all  that  lies 
before  us,  but  only  on  a  special  portion  .  .  . 
yet  what  we  thus  see  partially  is  also  a  field 
white  to  the  harvest.  And  the  hope  must 
arise  in  us  that  God  will  come,  that  His 
throne  is  already  set  for  judgment,  and  that 
the  time  draws  nigh  when  the  Sun  of  the 
righteous  will  shine  again  with  noonday 
splendour.  All  that  is  grand  and  beautiful 
after  which  we  sigh  can  issue  only  from  a 
union  of  forces,  to  which  each  individual 
truly  can  only  make  a  small  contribution, 
but  must  do  this  from  the  heart :  and  the 
basis  of  this  union  of  all  the  good  is  love 
and  confidence  alone.  Therefore  in  all  our 
intercourse  with  men  let  this  endeavour  lie 
at  the  foundation  of  it — to  investigate  and 
put  to  the  test  wisely  and  sincerely  where 
even  one  seems  to  be  like-minded,  whose 
heart  we  might  influence  and  strengthen  in 
faith  and  zeal  for  the  day  of  the  Lord. — 
Translated  from  F.  Schleiermacher. 


125 


chap.  iv.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


MAIN   HOMILETICS  OF    THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  27—42. 

Vers.  27-34.  Jesus'  spiritual  meat. — The  disciples  found  their  Master,  to  their 
astonishment,  talking  with  the  Samaritan  woman.  It  was  a  strange  thing  for  a 
rabbi  to  engage  publicly  in  conversation  with  a  woman  at  all,  but  more  especially 
with  a  Samaritan.  They  did  not,  however,  express  their  astonishment  openly, 
none  saying,  "  What  seekest  Thou  ?  " — i.e.  What  service  dost  Thou  require  from 
her  1  or,  Art  Thou  indeed  conversing  with  her  as  a  teacher  ?  Meanwhile,  the 
woman,  in  the  excitement  of  new  thoughts  and  feelings,  leaving  her  water-pot, 
hurried  away  to  the  city,  and  the  disciples  came  forward  with  the  food  they  had 
purchased,  pressing  their  Master  to  eat,  astonished  that  He  had  required  to  be 
asked  to  do  so  and  at  the  apparent  absence  of  weariness,  and  more  astonished 
still  at  His  answer ;  so  that  they  said  one  to  another,  u  Hath  any  man  ? "  etc. 
(ver.  33).  They  then  learned  of  that  higher  spiritual  food  which  had  cheered  the 
Redeemer's  soul.     We  learn  here  : — 

I.  The  true  place  of  physical  food  in  our  life. — 1.  It  is  essential,  but  is 
not  the  first  essential,  although  too  many  make  it  so — living  to  eat,  making  their 
chief  end  the  meat  that  perisheth  in  some  of  its  varied  forms.  "  What  shall  we 
eat?  what  shall  we  drink?"  etc.  Here  is  their  chief  anxiety.  2.  Our  Lord 
taught  men  that  this  lower  must  be  subordinated  to  a  higher,  e.g.  when  He 
fasted  in  the  wilderness  (Matt.  iv.  4).  3.  Yet  the  Saviour  did  not  neglect  the 
claims  of  the  body.  He  worked  marvels  to  supply  the  people  with  bread.  The 
various  provisions  of  nature  for  man's  satisfaction  are  part  of  the  divine  plan 
of  creation  (Col.  i.  16,  17).  4.  Jesus  also,  as  the  incarnate  Son,  came  under 
human  conditions  in  regard  to  physical  food.  As  He  hungered  and  thirsted,  so 
He  satisfied  hunger  and  thirst  as  we  do,  and  did  not  despise  the  means  of 
refreshing  and  strengthening  the  body  (Matt.  xi.  19). 

II.  There  is  a  higher  food  for  our  life  than  that  which  is  physical. — 
1.  Even  the  sustenance  of  intellectual  life  is,  we  are  told,  conducive  to  a 
vigorous  existence  more  than  is  generally  imagined.  2.  But  there  is  a  higher 
interest  than  merely  physical  comfort  and  pleasure.  The  highest  duty  of  man  is 
not  to  attend  to  the  body,  it  is  to  do  the  will  of  God  ;  whilst  the  body  is  to  be 
used,  and  therefore  duly  nourished,  as  the  instrument  of  the  soul  in  doing  the 
divine  will,  and  in  finishing,  perfecting,  the  Father's  work.  3.  Jesus  had,  by 
Jacob's  well,  been  experiencing  this  satisfaction,  which  his  soul  hungered  for 
more  than  for  meat  or  drink  (Luke  xii.  49,  50,  xxii.  15).  Whilst  His  disciples 
were  in  the  city  He  had  been  enjoying  a  refreshment  of  spirit,  which  showed 
itself  even  in  His  physical  frame — before  wearied  and  fatigued,  now  glowing 
with  inward  spiritual  energy. 

III.  In  this  also  we  are  to  follow  our  divine  Example. — 1.  This  was  not 
a  trait  of  Christ's  divine  nature  merely,  but  of  His  nature  as  the  representative 
man  to  whose  image  we  are  to  conform.  2.  The  highest  happiness  and  satis- 
faction of  man's  nature  is  found  in  doing  the  divine  will,  etc.  For  this  he  was 
created  (Ps.  lxxxiv.  3).  The  traces  of  it  still  remain  in  our  nature,  though 
blurred  by  the  Fall,  e.g.  intellectual  work  and  enthusiasm  lead  to  forgetfulness 
of  the  body's  wants  (instance  Kepler,  Spinoza,  etc.).  Many  an  earnest  student 
has  been  nurtured  on  scanty  fare.  3.  The  same  experience  may  be  seen  in 
devotion  to  spiritual  things.  See,  e.g.,  the  lives  of  great  missionaries — St. 
Paul,  Columba,  Cuthbert,  Xavier,  Martyn,  Judson,  Livingstone,  etc.  The  meat 
that  perisheth  is  almost  forgotten  in  the  absorption  of  spiritual  work,  in  doing 
the  will  of  God.  And  this  to  spiritual  men  is  the  greatest  joy.  They  eat  even 
here  of  the  hidden  manna  (Rev.  ii.  17). 

IV.  Conclusion. — This  should  be  the  chief  desire  'of  all  Christians,  especially 

126 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOB  A.  chap.  iv. 


of  all  ministers  of  the  word.  Their  greatest  joy  should  be  to  do  God's  will,  and 
to  see  His  work  prospering.  There  is  always  a  danger  that  when  the  Church 
becomes  too  absorbed  in  the  outward  and  material,  the  spiritual  life  should 
languish. 

Vers.  35-38.  The  joy  of  the  spiritual  harvest.  —  There  is  nothing  more 
interesting  and  delightful  to  contemplate  at  the  beginning  of  our  Lord's  public 
ministry  than  the  maimer  in  which  those  who  received  Him  and  passed  from 
darkness  to  light  became  in  turn  centres  of  light  and  life  for  others.  Andrew 
and  John  influenced  their  brothers.  Philip  brought  Nathanael  to  the  Redeemer. 
And  no  sooner  had  the  poor  erring  Samaritan  woman  received  enlightenment  and 
quickening  by  Jacob's  well  than  she  became  an  evangelist,  a  sower  of  heavenly 
truth.  And  this  is  the  peculiarity  in  the  harvest  of  humanity,  which  the 
natural  figure  fails  to  represent  entirely.  Not  only  does  every  good  seed 
harvested  and  garnered  contain  the  promise  and  potency  of  future  fruitfulness ; 
it  may  become  in  turn  sower  and  reaper — as  an  instrument  in  the  divine 
Sower's  hand.     We  consider  now  : — 

I.  The  joy  at  the  extent  and  ripeness  of  the  harvest. — "  Behold,  the  fields 
that  they  are  white  to  the  harvest  already."  1.  Then  the  husbandman  rejoices 
as  he  looks  forth  on  the  waving  fields  of  grain,  some  of  them  "  dead  ripe,''  as  it 
might  be  said,  waiting  for  the  reaper's  toil.  Many  an  anxious  hour  has  passed 
since  months  agone  the  seed  was  committed  to  the  soil.  Would  it  come  to 
maturity  1  Would  the  frost  blight,  a  rainless  sky  wither,  or  some  other 
unforeseen  contingency  blast  the  hopes  of  the  fruitful  year  ?  But  under  the 
kindly  influences  of  nature,  ever  guided  by  Providence,  the  fields  of  earth  year  by 
year,  and  with  but  few  exceptions,  offer  the  ripe  grain  to  the  reaper's  toil ;  and 
again  and  again  to  man  is  accorded  the  joy  of  harvest.  2.  It  was  this  general  truth 
which  led  to  these  pregnant  words  of  the  Redeemer  to  His  disciples  at  Jacob's 
well.  All  around,  under  the  genial  midday  sunshine,  the  fruitful  fields  of 
Samaria  (Obad.  19)  lay  decked  with  living  green,  promising  in  the  course  of 
the  season  an  abundant  harvest.  Yet  four  months,  and  then  those  fields  would 
ring  with  the  joy  of  the  reapers,  and  men's  hearts  be  glad  in  the  bountiful  gift 
of  heaven.  3.  This  joy  the  Saviour  was  experiencing  in  marked  measure.  It 
lifted  Him  above  the  necessities  of  the  body,  and  gave  Him  "  meat  to  eat  "  that 
His  disciples  knew  not  of.  In  the  Samaritans  drawing  near  He  saw  the  first 
ripe  field  of  that  spiritual  harvest  which  His  disciples  would  yet  gather  from  out 
of  every  nation  under  heaven  (Acts  ii.  5  ;  Isa.  Ix.  3).  He  saw  before  His 
vision  all  those  kingdoms  of  the  world  which  He  had  seen  on  the  mount  of 
temptation  (Lukeiv.  6-8) — those  various  fields,  which,  being  slowly  brought  into 
cultivation,  shall  yet  yield  a  glorious  harvest.  In  some  the  good  seed  will  grow 
slowly ;  in  some,  as  in  Samaria,  ripen  as  in  an  hour.  4.  And  all  were  "  white 
unto  the  harvest."  The  fulness  of  time,  the  hour  of  realisation,  had  come,  and 
the  reapers  were  called  to  go  forth  to  their  labour.  And  this  brought  joy  to  the 
Saviour's  heart.  5.  Since  those  memorable  words  were  spoken  nearly  nineteen 
centuries  have  passed  away.  Many  a  spiritual  harvest  has  been  reaped ;  and 
anew  the  seed  has  been  sown,  and  has  sprung  up  and  brought  forth  fruit. 
But  much  has  been  wasted  by  the  folly  of  man.  In  many  a  field  the  enemy 
has  sown  tares.  And  in  many  more  the  harvest  has  remained  ungathered 
because  the  reapers  have  been  few  or  careless.  And  all  the  while  the  field  has 
become  wider,  the  numbers  of  the  human  race  have  increased,  until  to-day  the 
same  voice  speaks  to  us  in  tones  of  mingled  reproach  and  entreaty,  "  Lift  up 
your  eyes,  and  behold  the  fields,  that  they  are  white  to  the  harvest  already." 
Those  eight  hundred  and  fifty  millions  of  heathen,  "  aliens  from  the  common- 
wealth of  Israel,"  etc.  (Eph.  ii.),  are  waiting  for  the  reaper's  toil ;  whilst  around 

127 


chap.  iv.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN, 


and  in  our  very  midst  are  many  waiting  to  be  gathered  in.  Vast  and  ready 
is  the  harvest.  Are  we  doing  our  part  in  reaping  it  for  "  the  Lord  of  the 
harvest "  ? 

II.  The  joy  in  our  fellow-labourers. — 1.  To  have  been  sharers  and  helpers 
in  any  great  work  carried  out  by  men  of  eminence  is  a  cause  of  joy  to  every 
noble  worker.  To  have  stood  side  by  side  with  some  great  explorer  or  discoverer 
on  a  lofty  mountain  peak,  from  which  eminence  new  countries  were  seen — lofty 
mountains,  great  lakes  and  rivers,  and  vast  forest  reaches ;  to  have  helped  some 
great  scientific  explorer  to  unfold  the  wonders  of  the  material  universe,  and  to 
have  one's  name  handed  down  with  his  in  however  humble  a  place  ;  to  have 
participated  in  the  labours  of  a  world- renowned  social  reformer  and  benefactor  of 
his  kind, — these,  e.g.,  are  privileges  that  bring  a  joy  of  the  highest  sort  to  all 
noble  minds.  2.  Such  is  the  joy  given  in  the  highest  degree  to  the  Christian 
labourers.  "  One  is  the  sower,  and  another  the  reaper.  I  sent  you  to  reap  that 
whereon  ye  have  bestowed  no  labour ;  others  have  laboured,  and  ye  are  entered 
into  their  labours."  They  enter  into  and  follow  up  the  activity  of  a  long  and 
illustrious  roll  of  predecessors  and  witnesses  to  the  truth — prophets  and  righteous 
men,  who  were  the  salt  of  the  earth,  and  whose  living  influence  is  felt  among  us 
in  these  later  days ;  for  they  "  being  dead,  yet  speak."  They  sowed  the  golden 
seed  of  righteousness  and  truth,  which  we  in  Christian  lands  are  reaping  in  a 
harvest  of  precious  privileges  to-day.  It  is  surely  an  unspeakable  privilege  and 
joy  to  be  successors  to  the  long  line  of  apostles  and  prophets  and  holy  men  in 
gathering  in  the  harvest  of  humanity.     3.  But  more  than  this  : 

"  Behold  a  Witness  nobler  still,  who  trod  affliction's  path — 
Jesus,  at  once  the  Finisher  and  Author  of  our  faith." 

Christ,  though  Himself  the  great  Sower  and  Lord  of  the  harvest,  laboured  while 
on  earth  as  all  His  servants  labour.  And  therefore  we  have  also  His  example 
to  cheer  and  encourage  us  as  we  go  forth  to  do  His  work,  and  the  joy  of  being 
"  workers  together  with  Him  "  (2  Cor.  vi.  1).  4.  And  as  we  look  abroad  on  the 
world  now,  and  on  those  fields  of  the  nations,  "  white  to  harvest  already,"  do  we 
not  discern  a  noble  band  of  fellow-labourers,  of  various  climes  and  races,  united 
with  us  for  this  great  work  ?  And  although  it  is  strange  that  there  is  not  that 
perfect  union  and  fellowship  which  should  attain  among  those  working  in  the 
spiritual  harvest,  yet  we  can  rejoice  in  each  other's  success  in  the  work,  and 
recognise  and  realise  that  each  is  fulfilling  in  some  fashion  the  divine  purpose — 
that  from  this  diversity  God  will  in  the  end  bring  forth  a  higher  unity.  5.  And 
when  our  labours  are  ended,  when  we  have  lt  served  our  generation  by  the  will 
of  God  "  (Acts  xiii.  36),  others  will  rise  and  enter  into  our  labours,  carrying  on 
the  line  of  succession  of  faithful  workers — the  truly  universal  apostolic  succes- 
sion— until  sowers  and  reapers  rejoice  together  eternally. 

III.  The  joy  in  the  reward  of  the  harvest. — "  He  that  reapeth  receiveth 
wages,  and  gathereth  fruit  unto  life  eternal."  1.  The  Lord  Himself  participated 
in  this  joy  when  He  saw  the  crowds  of  Samaritans  coming  to  Him  and  confessing 
their  faith  in  Him.  It  is  the  joy  of  the  soul-gatherer  expressed  by  the  apostle 
of  the  Gentiles.  "  What  then  is  my  reward  ?  That,  in  preaching  the  gospel,  I 
may  make  the  gospel  without  charge.  .  .  .  Yea,  being  free  from  all  men,  yet  made 
I  myself  servant  of  all,  that  I  might  gain  the  greater  number"  (1  Cor.  ix.  18,  19). 
It  is  ever  a  joy  to  men  to  see  the  fruit  of  their  labours ;  and  that  which  we  shall 
view  with  most  satisfaction  when  the  end  is  reached  will  not  be  our  gains 
material  or  even  mental — not  our  possessions,  not  the  pleasures  life  has  yielded 
us,  but  the  good  we  have  been  able  to  accomplish — the  influence  we  have  exerted 
in  bringing  men  to  God.  This  is  indeed  to  "  gather  fruit  unto  life  eternal."  2. 
To  save  the  life  of  another  is  a  praiseworthy  and  honourable  action.     It  brings 

128 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ;    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  iv. 


with  it,  to  well-constituted  minds,  a  feeling  of  intense  pleasure.  How  the 
physician  rejoices  to  see  the  glow  of  health  coming  back  to  the  cheeks  of  one 
whom  he  has  guided,  under  Providence,  back  from  the  very  gates  of  death  !  That 
is  emphatically  the  true  physician's  reward  more  than  any  material  gain.  The 
scientific  discoverer  (like  Kepler,  who  lived  on  a  miserable  pittance  whilst  unveiling 
the  laws  of  planetary  motion)  finds  his  joy  in  the  demonstrated  fact.  And 
to  the  true  follower  of  Christ  there  is  no  higher  reward,  nor  greater  joy,  than  to 
be  the  means  of  converting  a  sinner  from  the  error  of  his  ways,  and  thus  saving 
a  soul  from  death  (James  v.  20).  3.  And  this  joy  will  be  intensified  eternally. 
When  rescued  and  rescuer  meet  on  earth  their  mutual  joy  expands.  But  it  will 
do  so  perfectly  and  uninterruptedly  in  the  eternal  sphere.  The  Chief  Sower  and 
the  reapers — those  who  are  saved  and  those  who  were  the  instruments  of  their 
salvation — shall  rejoice  together. 

Is  this  harvest  joy  ours?  1.  Do  we  realise  the  honour  and  privilege  accorded 
to  us  of  being  fellow-workers  with  Christ  in  His  harvest  ?  or  is  it  a  matter  of 
indifference  to  us  whether  we  do  His  work  or  not  1  Are  we  rejoicing  in  being 
called  to  enter  on  the  labours  of  all  the  great  and  good  who  have  gone  before  us  % 
or  are  we  content  to  pass  through  life  leaving  the  harvest  of  the  fields  of 
humanity  to  whiten  in  vain  so  far  as  we  are  concerned  1  Apparent  indifference 
and  want  of  interest  in  this  work  may  often  be  set  down  to  unreflecting  modesty, 
which  shrinks  from  supposing  itself  called  to  or  worthy  of  such  an  honour,  and 
imagines  such  a  work  far  above  it.  It  is  a  fatal  error.  The  humblest  labourer 
is  called  and  welcomed,  and  for  such  also  the  reward  is  sure ;  and  if  all 
Christians,  inspired  with  Christlike  earnestness  and  zeal,  were  to  bring  but 
one  other  as  the  result  of  their  reaping,  speedily  and  grandly  would  the 
kingdom  of  God  advance. 

2.  Do  we  realise  and  seek  to  grasp  the  promised  reward  ? — To  have  been  able  to 
place  but  one  stone  in  the  eternal  spiritual  building,  founded  on  the  sure 
foundation,  to  have  brought  but  one  sheaf  from  the  spiritual  harvest  fields, 
will  give  more  joy  to  a  true  man  than  the  highest  of  earthly  honours  and 
rewards.  And  by  divine  grace  to  each  of  us  this  joy  may  be  given.  If  the 
desire  exists,  then  even  to  the  humblest  will  the  way  be  opened ;  and  to  them 
will  be  given  here  the  joy  of  being  workers  together  with  God,  and  hereafter 
that  eternal  gladness  when  sower  and  reaper  rejoice  together. 

Vers.  28-30,  39-42.  A  spiritual  harvest  at  Sychar. — It  must  have  been  a 
joyful  experience  to  our  Saviour  to  meet  with  one  so  docile  and  teachable  as  this 
woman  by  Jacob's  well.  The  evil  in  her  life,  encouraged  most  likely  by  training 
and  surroundings,  had  not  wholly  quenched  the  good.  There  had  been  in  her 
heart  thoughts  of,  perhaps  longings  for,  a  better  life,  a  better  guidance.  And  it 
was,  it  may  be,  with  a  sigh  that  the  woman  said,  "  I  know  that  Messias  cometh 
.  .  .  when  He  shall  come,  He  will  tell  us  all  things  "  (v.  25).  Here  was  a 
belief  more  simple  and  less  material  than  the  Jewish  expectation.  It  was 
imperfect,  very  imperfect,  but  in  the  right  direction.  And  therefore  our 
Lord  gave  to  this  Samaritan  a  full  revelation  of  His  Messiaship,  knowing  that 
the  "  good  seed  "  would  not  fall  on  barren  soil.  The  first  step,  then,  toward  this 
spiritual  harvest  was — 

I.  Christ's  revelation  of  Himself. — 1.  Jesus  saw  that  this  woman's  heart  was 
ready  for  the  reception  of  this  great  truth,  the  most  blessed  of  all  truths  that 
had  yet  been  proclaimed.  He  perceived  that  in  her  soul  the  grey  dawn  had 
risen.  Dim  and  uncertain  as  yet  were  her  conceptions  of  higher  truth  ;  but  the 
moment  need  not  be  delayed  when  the  full  light  of  truth  should  flash  in  on  her 
soul,  dispelling  the  darkness  for  ever.  2.  Therefore  He  spoke  those  words  so 
full  of  divine  consciousness   and  dignity:  "I  that  speak  unto  thee  am  He." 

k  129 


chap.  iv.  H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


What  a  moment  that  must  have  been  to  this  Samaritan  ! — a  moment  like  that 
which  the  man  born  blind  experienced  when  Jesus  stood  before  him,  speaking  of 
the  Son  of  God,  and  then  added,  "  Thou  hast  both  seen  Him,  and  He  that 
talketh  with  thee  is  He  " ;  or  that  which  Saul  of  Tarsus  experienced  as  a  voice 
spoke  to  him  and  said,  "  I  am  Jesus,  whom  thou  persecutest,"  etc.  So  with  this 
woman.  Her  highest  hopes  were  fulfilled — the  long-promised  Messiah  stood 
before  her.  The  voice  of  awakened  faith  in  her  heart  told  her  that  it  was  He 
in  reality. 

II.  The  woman's  witness  to  Christ  in  Sychar. — 1.  Like  all  who  truly  have 
come  to  know  Christ,  this  woman  must  needs  make  Him  known.  In  her  joy 
and  excitement  she  quite  forgot  her  errand  to  the  well,  and  leaving  her  water-pot 
hurried  to  the  town,  not  bearing  water  from  the  well,  but  intelligence  of  the 
wonderful  fountain  of  living  water,  etc.  (ver.  14).  2.  No  doubt  a  very  abbreviated 
version  of  her  message  is  given.  She  would  most  likely  give  the  chief  points  of 
her  interview  with  Jesus;  but  it  was  His  power  to  read  heart  and  life  that 
appealed  to  her,  and  which  she  was  convinced  would  impress  others  with  the 
truth  of  Christ's  claims.  3.  Her  confession  showed  humility  and  earnestness. 
It  was  no  light  thing  to  recall  to  the  memory  of  her  fellow -townsmen  her  past 
smirched  and  unlovely  life.  But  it  showed  the  Saviour's  power,  and  therefore 
must  be  done,  4.  Her  testimony  was  effectual.  From  occupation  and  rest  the 
dwellers  of  Sychar  hastened  to  Jesus,  who  saw  them  approaching,  and  pointed 
His  disciples  to  them  as  indications  of  the  coming  spiritual  harvest  of  humanity. 

III.  The  harvest  at  Sychar  reaped. — 1.  The  woman's  testimony  awakened 
faith  in  the  hearts  of  many  (ver.  39),  so  that  they  entreated  Jesus  to  remain  with 
them.  2.  This  He  did  to  the  strengthening  of  their  faith  (ver.  42).  Sychar  was 
won,  and  the  way  was  prepared  for  the  entrance  of  the  messengers  of  the  cross 
a  few  years  later,  etc.  (Acts  viii.  5-25). 


HOMILETIC  NOTES. 

Ver.  35.  Four  months  to  the  harvest,  immature  stage,  and  that  the  disciples 

— In  this  conversation  a  note  of  time  had   been   remarking  to   one  another 

is  given  us  in  ver.  35,  which  has  given  that  four   months   would   still   elapse 

rise  to  a  considerable  amount  of  con-  ere   the    harvest   would   begin.     This 

troversy.       Some     eminent      scholars  fixes  the  date  of  the  incident  at  about 

(Tholuck,    etc.)    have    considered    the  the  end  of  December  or  beginning  of 

words,  "  Say   ye  not,  There  are   four  January  in  the  first  year  of  our  Lord's 

months,  and  then  cometh  harvest  1 "  as  ministry,   as   harvest  began   in   those 

a   proverbial   expression   meaning  the  regions  some  time  about  the  end  of  April 

time    which   elapses    between   sowing  or  beginning  of  May.     Thus  we  gather 

and  reaping.     They  would  make  our  that  our  Lord  seems  to  have  spent  a 

Lord's  reference  to  the  spiritual  harvest  considerable   time   in  Jerusalem  after 

to  coincide  with  the  state  of  the  fields  the  first  passover  of  His  public  ministry, 

.around   Sychar.     But  there  seems   to  probably  five  or  six  months,  before  He 

be  no  need  for  this  interpretation  of  left  for  the  country  regions  of  Judaea 

the   words,    especially  when   it   is   re-  (iii.  22),  whence  He  came  to  Samaria, 

membered  that  more  than  four  months  And  it  is  of  pathetic  interest  to  notice 

elapse  between  sowing  and  reaping  in  that    whilst   the   Jewish   leaders   and 

Palestine.     The  plain  meaning  of  the  rulers   did  not   receive   Christ's   testi- 

phrase  is,  that  the  grain  in  the  smiling  mony  (iii.  32),  in  semi-heathen  Samaria 

fields  of  Samaria  was  still  in  a  green,  hearts  were  open  to  receive  His  word, 

130 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  iv. 


Yer.  36.    Sower    and     reaper. — To  spirer  of  those  Old  Testament  labourers, 

whom  does  our  Lord  refer  when  He  Touched  by  His  Spirit  it  was  His  word 

speaks  of  sower  and  reaper,  of  others  they  sowed.     But  few  of  them  saw  the 

who  have  laboured,  on  whose  labours  fruits   of   their   labours   to  any  great 

the  disciples  had  entered  ?     It  is  clear,  extent.      Slowly   and   imperfectly    did 

from  ver.  38,  "  I  sent  you  to  reap  that  the    fruit    advance    toward    maturity 

whereon  ye  have  bestowed  no  labour,"  under    the     oftentimes    unfavourable 

etc.,  that  our  Lord  in  the  first  instance  conditions,  the  dimmer  light  and  chillier 

intended  to  designate  the  disciples  as  atmosphere  of  pre-advent  times.     But 

the  reapers ;  and  from  this  it  follows,  now   that   the    "Light   of   men"   had 

as  Godet  and  others  point  out,  that  arisen  on  the  world,  and  the  quickening 

our  Lord  intended  to  refer  primarily  and  vivifying  influences  of  His  baptism 

to  the  circumstances  of  the  moment.  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire  were 

Whilst  the  disciples  were  absent  He  beginning  to  shoot  from  heart  to  heart, 

had  been  sowing  the  good  seed,  which  then  the  seed,  which  had  been  germi- 

had  taken  such  speedy  root  and  sprung  nating  and  springing  up,  though  slowly 

up  so  quickly  that  the  harvest  was  at  in  past  ages,  would  come  more  speedily 

hand,  a  fact  testified  to  by  the  multi-  to   maturity,  and  the  disciples   would 

tudes    coming   to   Him    from    Sychar  begin   to  reap   largely   in   joy.     Here 

with   hearts  prepared   to  receive    the  our  Lord  foresaw  not  only  the  harvest 

good  seed,  with  promise  of  speedy  fruit-  reaped    in    Samaria    soon    after    His 

fulness.       And    here    on    earth    the  ascension    (Acts    viii.    1-17),    but    the 

Saviour  tasted,  as  He  did  not  always  universal  harvest  to  be  reaped  in  all 

do  during  His  ministry,  the  joy  of  the  succeeding  ages  until  the  end  of  time, 
reaper — "  saw   of   the   travail   of  His 

soul,  and  was  satisfied."  Thus  He  was  Ver.  37.  The  success  of  the  gospel 
able  on  earth  to  participate  in  the  joys  husbandmen. — And  these  words  might 
of  His  servants  in  pentecostal  days.  be  taken  as  not  only  conveying  promises 
But  surely  it  is  not  necessary  to  restrict  of  success  to  the  disciples  in  their 
the  application  of  our  Lord's  words  labours ;  they  were  also  fitted  to  give 
to  this  single  incident  1  The  spiritual  consolation  in  times  of  apparent  failure, 
fields  of  Samaria,  we  may  be  certain,  The  disciples  in  pentecostal  times  would 
did  not  limit  His  vision,  which  ex-  be  both  sowers  and  reapers.  They 
tended  over  the  field  of  humanity.  would  see  and  rejoice  in  the  fruits  of 
He  was  sent  to  the  "  lost  sheep  of  the  their  labours.  But  not  always.  Some- 
house  of  Israel  " ;  but  in  the  midst  times  it  would  seem  as  if  they  had 
of  that  semi-heathen  community  He  laboured  in  vain.  Yet  it  would  not  be 
looked  forward  with  joy  to  the  time  so.  As  they  had  entered  into  the 
when  His  disciples,  entering  into  the  labours  of  others,  so  others  would  enter 
labours  of  those  who  had  gone  before  into  their  labours.  And  as  the  reaping 
them,  would  rejoice,  "  bringing  in  the  progresses  age  after  age,  so  will  the 
sheaves."  Thus  also  we  must  not  joy  increase  in  the  heart  of  the  supreme 
limit  the'  contents  of  the  phrase  "  others  Sower,  and  among  the  bright  inhabi- 
have  laboured  "  to  our  Lord  Himself  tants  of  heaven,  until,  when  at  last  the 
and  John  the  Baptist.  It  is  to  be  harvest  fields  of  time  have  been  fully 
taken  as  referring  (Westcott,  etc.)  to  reaped,  sowers  and  reapers  shall  rejoice 
all  God's  true  labourers  in  Old  Testa-  together  when  the  sheaves  have  been 
ment  times.  Our  Lord  is  the  supreme  all  brought  in. 
Sower,  no  doubt ;  but  He  was  the  in- 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Vers.  31,  32. — Brain  work  and  vitality. —  work,   especially  if  he   retains   the   power, 

You    may    kill    a   man   with   anxiety   very  which  most  men  of  intellectual  occupations 

quickly ;  but  it  is  difficult  to  kill  him  with  more  or  less  possess,  of  sleeping  nearly  at 

131 


CHAP.   IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


will  and  without  torpor.  The  man  who  has 
used  his  brain  all  his  life,  say  for  six  hours 
a  day,  has,  in  fact,  trained  his  nerve-power 
and  placed  it  beyond  the  reach  of  early 
decay,  or  that  kind  of  feebleness  which 
makes  so  many  apparently  healthy  men 
succumb  so  readily  to  attacks  of  disease. 
Doctors  know  the  differences  among  men  in 
this  respect  quite  well,  and  many  of  them 
acknowledge  that  the  "  habit  of  surviving  " 
which  they  find  in  their  best  patients  arises 
from  two  causes — one,  which  used  to  be 
always  pleaded,  being  that  soundness  of 
physical  constitution  which  some  men  enjoy 
by  hereditary  right,  and  the  other,  some 
recondite  form  of  brain-power,  seldom  ex- 
hibited, except  under  strong  excitement,  by 
any  but  those  who  throughout  life  have  been 
compelled  to  tbink  and,  so  to  speak,  use 
their  thoughts  as  other  men  use  their  liga- 
ments and  muscles.  If  such  a  man  is  tired 
of  life,  medicine  will  not  save  him  ;  but 
as  a  rule  his  will,  consciously  or  uncon- 
sciously, compels  the  trained  nerve-power  to 
struggle  on.  Whether  the  brain  can  actually 
give  power  to  the  muscles  is  not  certain, 
though  the  enormous  strength  sometimes 
developed  in  a  last  rally  looks  very  like  it ; 
but  that  it  can  materially  affect  vitality  is 
quite  certain,  and  has  been  acknowledged  by 
the  experienced  in  all  ages. — **  The  Speaker." 

Ver.  35.  Glorious  harvest  fields. — 0  glorious 
field  of  labour  which  presents  itself  to  the 
Church  of  Christ  to-day  !  "  Behold,  I  say 
unto  you,  Lift  up  your  eyes,"  etc.  Behold, 
Christendom,  all  that  extent  of  the  vast 
heathen  world  which  sighs  for  redemption 
from  its  miserable  servitude !  This  is  thy 
harvest  field.  Many  a  beautiful  stretch  of 
the  field  is  already  reaped  ;  many  weary 
reapers  have  already  succumbed  at  their 
labour  under  sultry  skies ;  many  sheaves  of 
ripened  grain  have  been  stored,  amid  songs 
of  rejoicing  throughout  Christendom,  in  the 
barns  of  the  Lord  :  but  still  the  field  stretches 
before  us  immeasurable  :  still  millionfold  the 
stalks  bend  to  meet  the  reaper  ;  still  is 
prayer  needed,  and  gifts,  and  labourers  from 
the  heart  of  Christendom  for  the  wide  harvest 
field.  The  harvest  is  great,  and  few  are  the 
labourers.  But  not  alone  without,  over  land 
and  sea,  but  here  in  our  own  neighbourhood, 
is  a  harvest  field  for  the  Lord's  labourers. 
When  we  ministers  of  the  gospel  look  from 
your  fields  and  from  your  hills  upon  your 
cities,  beneath  whose  roofs  lurk  so  much 
sorrow  and  sin,  yet  also  where  dwell  so  many 
pious  hearts,  so  many  souls  thirsting  for 
salvation ;  or  when  here  in  the  holy  place 
we  see  gathered  around  us  a  believing  con- 
gregation, then  also  it  is  as  if  we  heard  the 
Lord  saying,  "  Behold  your  field,  for  it  is 
white  already  to  the  harvest."  When  among 
us  a  father  and  mother  look  on  their  children, 
then  we  say,  "  O  parents,  behold  your  harvest 


field ! "  And  even  although  your  circle  of 
influence  is  limited,  though  it  should  be  a 
narrow  andalonely  cham ber,  though  a  widow's 
small  room  should  be  your  kingdom  and 
your  world,  yet  even  there  a  rich  harvest  field 
may  open  before  you,  daily  rich  in  resigna- 
tion, in  duty,  and  daily  rich  in  blessing,  if  so 
be  that  you  have  but  an  open  eye  and  a 
willing  heart  for  the  Lord's  work.  "  Behold, 
1  say  unto  you,  Lift  up  your  eyes,  and  look  !  " 
It  is  necessary  only  to  lift  up  the  eyes  and 
look,  and  each  one  among  you  will  find  in 
his  or  her  circle  opportunity,  calls,  powers, 
and  gifts  sufficient  for  the  work  of  the  Lord, 
for  labour  in  truth  and  love.  "  Say  not  ye, 
There  are  yet  four  months,"  etc.  It  is  need- 
ful only  to  perceive  the  opportunity,  to 
redeem  the  time,  and  every  day  will  be  for 
you  a  harvest  day,  every  hour  you  can  do 
some  good,  every  evening  you  can  bring 
home  a  sheaf  of  labour  done  in  God,  or  at 
least  an  ear  or  two  gathered  for  the  heavenly 
garners.  Let  no  one  say,  beloved  :  I  would 
willingly  endeavour  to  be  useful,  but  I  can- 
not do  anything.  I  would  willingly  engage 
in  good  work,  but  I  have  no  means,  no 
opportunity,  no  field  for  effort.  See,  a  true 
worker's  heart,  a  heart  rich  in  love  to  the 
brethren,  and  burning  with  zeal  for  the  Lord, 
will  find  ever  for  itself  a  field  of  labour,  and 
will  like  a  sunbeam  find  everywhere  a  door 
of  entrance,  an  opening,  a  chink,  through 
which  to  press  in  with  its  gracious  light. 
The  pious  pastor  Hiller,  when  he  had  for 
ever  lost,  through  heavy  sickness,  his  voice, 
formerly  so  beautiful  and  powerful,  by 
which  he  had  called  so  many  souls  to  the 
Lord,  and  when  he  could  no  more  occupy 
his  beloved  pulpit,  and  when  it  might  have 
seemed  that  the  voiceless  pastor  was  now 
useless  for  the  work  of  the  Lord,  sat  day 
after  day  in  his  little  room,  or  in  his  arbour, 
and  composed  to  the  harp,  with  a  heart  like 
David's,  bruised  and  anguished,  and  wrote 
the  many  hundreds  of  sacred  songs  which 
he  gathered  together  in  his  "  Jewel  Box,"  and 
through  which  he  still  preaches  to-day  to 
many  thousands  of  hearts.  Thus  a  true 
servant  of  God  will  at  all  times  find  a  field 
of  labour,  and  when  one  door  is  closed  to 
him  another  will  be  opened.  And  what  need 
we  of  further  witness  ?  Behold  the  Great 
Servant  of  God  in  our  Gospel.  Who  prompted 
Him  to  preach  a  sermon  at  Jacob's  well  ? 
Who  appointed  Him  to  be  a  minister  of 
truth  to  the  Samaritans  ?  Who  had  assigned 
to  Him  the  field  of  Samaria,  that  strange  and 
hostile  land,  to  be  His  harvest  field?  Who 
had  opened  the  gates  of  Sychar  to  Him.  a 
Jew  according  to  the  flesh  ?  His  own  heart 
alone — His  heart  burning  with  zeal  for  the 
Father's  honour,  and  glowing  lovingly  with 
desire  for  the  salvation  of  His  brethren.  To 
you  Christians  I  will  not  say,  "  Go  and  do  like- 
wise," for  who  could  do  like  as  He,  the  Only 
Begotten,  did  ?    But  from  Jacob's  well  the 


132 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   IV. 


Lord  calls  to  us  also  :  "  Lift  up  your  eyes, 
and  look  on  the  field,  your  field  of  labour, 
which  is  ripe  unto  the  harvest."  And  Hiller 
also  calls  to  us,  and  says,  "  Brethren,  let  us 
still  do  good,  and  in  well-doing  not  be  weary." 
None  need  want  a  field  of  labour.    Therefore 

"  Rise — to  worldwide  harvests  speed  ! 

The  whitening  fields  stretch  on  and  on. 
Few  the  labourers  are  indeed, 
But  great  the  work  that  must  be  done." 
Translated  from  Karl  Geroik. 

Ver.  36.  Reaping  after  many  days  in  joy. 
— On  the  eastern  shore  of  Virginia  there 
stands  to-day  one  of  the  few  beautiful  old 
homesteads  of  the  past.  Its  fences  are  in 
repair.  Its  beautiful  lawn,  shaded  by  mag- 
nificent trees,  is  in  perfect  order.  It  bears 
still  the  name  given  by  its  founder.  Its 
broad  acres  remain  intact  in  the  hands  of  the 
same  family  to-day  that  held  it  in  the  past 
century.  The  neighbours  are  proud  of  its 
name  and  beauty,  and  they  love  to  tell  the 
story  of  its  founder.  They  say  he  was  a  man 
of  noted  character  in  his  day.  In  a  certain 
year  there  was  a  great  famine  in  the  whole 
country.  Corn  sold  at  three  and  four  dollars 
a  bushel,  and  was  difficult  to  get  at  that 
price.  The  great  barns  of  this  farm  groaned 
beneath  the  burden  of  an  unusually  large 
crop  from  the  previous  year.  What  did  the 
owner  of  these  great  barns  and  broad  acres 
do  in  this  crisis  of  the  people  ?  Did  he  put 
his  men  to  work,  dig  vaults,  hide  his  grain, 
and  then  stand  at  the  gate  with  a  sad  smile, 
and  swear  by  heaven  and  earth  that  he 
didn't  have  a  nubbin  ?  No  !  He  placed  his 
men  at  the  doors  of  his  barns  with  this 
instruction  :  "  If  a  rich  man  comes  to  buy 
my  corn  with  money,  do  not  sell  him  a  grain, 
no  matter  what  price  he  may  offer.  When 
a  poor  man  comes  who  has  no  money,  let 
him  have  as  much  as  he  needs  at  last  year's 
price,  and  take  promise  to  pay  !  "  Merchants 
offered  him  fabulous  prices  for  his  store 
that  they  might  speculate  in  the  necessities 
of  their  fellows.  He  would  not  sell  them  a 
peck.  He  sold  to  the  poor  for  their  promise  to 
pay,  and  his  children's  children  are  not  done 
reaping  the  golden  harvest.  As  the  old  in- 
habitant passes  the  gate  that  leads  to  the 
great  clump  of  trees  that  marks  this  garden 
spot  of  humanity,  it  is  no  wonder  that  he 
tells  you  the  story  with  moist  eyes,  and  adds 
with  evident  satisfaction,  "  It's  still  the  hand- 
somest place  in  the  county."  Such  places 
will  always  be  garden  spots.  Such  men  have 
always  been  and  ever  will  be  the  salt  of  the 
earth. — Rev.  T.  Dixon  in  the  u  Christian." 

Ver.  38.  Self-denying  labour  for  Christ's 
harvest. — About  a  year  ago  an  old  resident 
in  a  hospital,  who  had,  about  ten  years 
previously,  bought  for  himself,  for  a  fixed 
sum,  an  asylum  in  a  poor-house,  came  to  a 
Saxon  clergyman  and  told  him  that,  feeling 


his  end  was  near,  he  now  wished  to  carry 
out  to  completion  what  he  had  for  long 
contemplated,  and  of  which  no  one  knew 
anything.  He  had  no  near  relatives,  and 
it  had  long  been  his  desire  to  contribute 
something  toward  the  upbuilding  of  God's 
kingdom.  He  had  therefore  lived  as  sparingly 
as  possible,  had  curtailed  his  wants  as  much 
as  he  could,  and  by  laying  aside  even  the 
smallest  coins,  had  gradually  gathered  a 
little  sum,  which  he  had  intended  to  devote 
to  the  East  India  Mission.  Finally  he 
desired  the  minister  to  draw  out  his  de- 
claration formally  in  writing,  and  enter  it 
on  the  last  page  of  his  savings-bank  book 
which  the  minister  did,  the  pensioner  sub- 
scribing to  it  in  his  own  hand.  This  man 
had  been  in  former  years  a  simple  workman, 
and  was  known  to  the  pastor  as  a  pious 
Christian  and  a  regular  attender  at  divine 
worship.  Shortly  before  his  death  he  once 
more  sent  for  the  clergyman  to  visit  1  im, 
and  handed  over  to  him  his  savings-bank 
book,  requesting  that  it  should  be  forwarded 
to  the  proper  address,  which  was  done.  At 
the  same  time  the  pastor  wrote :  "  It  is 
touching  to  think  how  this  one  thought  oc- 
cupied and  moved  him  during  long  years,  and 
how  he  had  laboured  with  this  one  aim  in 
view  until  his  end,  as  is  evidently  the  case 
from  an  inspection  of  his  savings-bank 
book."  The  donation  amounts  to  1,760  marks. 
In  the  last  will  and  testament  of  the  man, 
who  soon  thereafter  peacefully  "  fell  on 
sleep,"  which  was  written  on  the  last  page 
of  the  bank  book,  the  following  sentences 
occur :  "  It  is  a  heartfelt  joy  to  me  to  be 
able  to  do  something  for  my  Saviour,  since 
He  has  done  all  things  for  me — redeemed 
me,  made  me  a  child  of  God,  brought  me  to 
a  lively  hope  in  life  and  in  death.  I  hold 
that  the  highest  duty  of  a  Christian  man  is 
to  spread  abroad  His  kingdom  ;  for  Chris- 
tianity alone  can  bring  salvation  to  the 
world. 
1  Peace  ne'er  shall  reign  o'er  all  the  world 

Till  Jesus'  love  gain  victory  meet, 
And,  'neath  the  gospel  flag  unfurled, 

All  men  shall  bow  down  at  His  feet.' 

In  my  estimation  far  too  little  is  done  for 
the  noblest  of  all  works  of  love — for  mission 
work.  I  would  earnestly  seek  to  prove  that 
even  a  plain  man  without  personal  means 
can  certainly  contribute  something  toward 
the  upbuilding  of  God's  kingdom,  if  only  the 
will  to  do  so  exists.  For  this  purpose  1  have 
laboured,  laid  up,  saved  for  many  years. 
My  name  is  not  to  be  made  known.  I  seek 
not  my  own  honour,  but  that  of  Christ. 
May  He  graciously  accept  the  thankoffering 
which  I  bring  to  Him,  and  in  the  end  deliver 
me  from  all  evil,  and  bring  me  safe  into  His 
heavenly  kingdom."  So  far  the  simple  but 
heart-touching  testament  of  this  departed 
brother.  It  is  like  the  odour  of  the  precious 
Indian  nard  which  was  poured  out  on  Jesus' 

133 


CHAP.  IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


feet  and  filled  all  the  house.  Who  does  not, 
on  reading  it,  feel  deeply  ashamed  ?  What 
say  you  to  yourself,  dear  reader  ? — From  the 
"  Evangel.  Luther.  Missionsolatt" 

Vers.  47-49.  Men  should  make  their  re- 
quests known  directly  to  God. — It  is  related 
that  a  Scottish  Koman  Catholic  nobleman 
had  on  his  estate  a  Protestant  tenant,  who, 
in  a  season  of  depression,  was  in  arrears  for 
a  considerable  sum.  He  felt  himself  obliged 
to  turn  for  help  first  to  one  of  the  under- 
officials  of  the  nobleman,  asking  him  to 
plead  with  the  latter  for  some  alleviation. 
The  official  promised,  but  did  not  perform. 
Thereupon  he  went  to  a  higher  official  with 
the  same  request,  who  also  promised,  but 
did  as  little  as  the  other.  Finally,  the 
twice-deceived  peasant  summoned  courage 
to  approach  the  proprietor  personally.  The 
latter  remitted  the  whole  amount  of  the 
debt,  and  accompanied  his  tenant,  as  he  was 
departing,  through  the  great  hall  of  the 
castle,  on  the  side  walls  of  which  were  hung 
the  pictures  of  martyrs  and  saints.  "  Do 
you  know,"  said  the  nobleman,  "what  those 
paintings  represent  1 "  "  No,"  said  the 
peasant.  "  They  are  pictures  of  the  saints 
whom  I  pray  to,  so  that  they  may  make 
request  for  me  before  the  Lord  for  the 
forgiveness  of  my  sins,"  was  the  answer. 
"  But  why  do  you  not  go  to  the  Lord  of  all 
Himself  with  your  requests  ? "  said  the 
peasant  simply.  "  Oh,"  replied  the  noble- 
man, "  that  would  be  to  take  too  much  on 
myself  !  It  is  far  better  to  have  mediators 
like  the  saints  between  God  and  men."  "  I 
don't  think  so,"  replied  the  other;  "and  I'll 
show  you  why.     In   my  distress  I   turned 


first  to  your  under-official.  It  was  of  no 
avail.  Next  I  went  to  the  higher  official, 
who  promised  to  do  something,  and  did 
nothing.  In  the  end  I  came  to  you  per- 
sonally, and  you  have  remitted  all  my  debt." 

Ver.  49.  Earnest  prayer  answered. — We 
read  of  Princess  Louisa  Augusta  Magdalene 
of  Darmstadt,  that  in  the  year  1741,  falling 
into  a  grievous  illness,  she  herself,  like  all 
about  her,  was  entirely  doubtful  as  to  her 
recovery.  As  she  was  told  that  she  could 
hardly  survive  over  the  night,  she  called 
the  pious  minister  Fresenius  to  her  bedside, 
spoke  with  him  concerning  the  condition  of 
her  soul,  and  declared  she  would  willingly 
depart  hence,  but  that  she  had  not  yet  made 
her  peace  with  God,  and  felt  in  her  heart  no 
assurance  of  His  grace  and  the  forgiveness 
of  her  sins.  Therefore,  and  on  this  account 
only,  she  desired  to  live  a  little  longer.  And 
since  the  Lord  heard  Hezekiah,  such  a 
prayer  must  not  be  displeasing  to  Him. 
Fresenius  was  convinced  of  this  also,  and 
prayed  with  her  to  the  Lord  that  her  life 
might  be  spared  until  she  had  received  the 
witness  of  the  Spirit  in  her  heart,  of  grace 
and  pardon.  In  these  petitions  the  members 
of  Fresenius'  household  and  other  pious 
friends  joined  together.  Their  prayers  were 
graciously  answered.  In  a  few  hours  the 
physician  was  able  to  give  assurance  that 
the  crisis  was  past ;  the  next  day  the  im- 
provement was  much  more  marked,  and  the 
patient  was  full  of  praise  to  God  for  His 
grace  and  help.  Her  life  was  spared  until 
the  following  year,  when  she  passed  into 
the  presence  of  the  Lord,  saved  and  assured 
of  her  reconciliation. — J.  J.  Weigel. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  46—54. 

The  healing  of  the  nobleman's  son. — This  miracle  is  quite  distinct  from  that 
recorded  in  Matt.  viii.  5-13  and  Luke  vii.  1-10.  The  meaning  of  the  term 
"  nobleman  "  in  this  narrative  is  not  clearly  understood.  The  general  idea  is 
that  this  man  was  a  public  functionary  under  the  government  of  the  district, 
and  in  all  probability  an  official  of  the  court.  It  has  been  conjectured  that  he 
may  have  been  either  Herod's  (Antipas)  Steward  "  Chuza "  (Luke  viii.  3)  or 
Manaen,  that  tetrarch's  foster-brother  (Acts  xiii.  1).  He  had  no  doubt  heard 
of  Jesus ;  the  fame  of  the  miracle  at  Cana  had  invaded  Capernaum  ;  and  the 
Galileans  who  had  been  at  Jerusalem  during  our  Lord's  sojourn  there  would 
bring  back  reports  of  His  teaching  and  work.  But  this  man  hitherto  seems  to 
have  given  himself  little  concern  regarding  this  new  Teacher  and  His  doings. 
But  a  crisis  in  his  life  drove  him  to  seek  Jesus.  His  paternal  love,  well-nigh 
desperate  at  the  sight  of  his  dying  boy,  led  him  as  a  last  resort  to  see  if  there 
might  be  hope  through  this  Worker  of  miracles.  The  incident  is  not  only 
another  proof  of  the  power  of  Jesus,  but  a  history  of  the  nobleman's  growth 
in  faith. 

I.  Notice  the  weakness  of  his  faith. — 1.  He  had  some  small  glimmering  of 
faith,  that  hope  might  arise  in  that  quarter.     And  we  may  well  conceive  how 

134 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  iv. 


in  that  sorrowful  journey  to  Cana  hope  and  fear  alternated  in  his  heart. 
2.  Although,  therefore,  his  faith,  such  as  it  was — a  kind  of  faith  founded  on 
report  (like  that  of  the  Samaritans,  vers.  41,  42) — led  him  to  Christ,  it  was  very- 
imperfect.  He  regarded  Christ  apparently  as  simply  a  wonder-worker,  a  physician 
with  almost  more  than  human  skill,  who  would  come  and  see  the  sick  boy,  touch 
him,  perhaps  administer  some  medicament  of  unknown  virtue,  in  order  to  a  cure. 
That  this  was  his  state  of  mind  seems  clear  from  our  Lord's  reply  to  his  first 
request  (ver.  48).  3.  This  weakness  of  his  faith  is  further  shown  in  his 
trembling  eagerness  to  prevail  on  our  Lord  to  go  to  Capernaum  with  him 
(ver.  49).  It  is  very  pathetic  to  notice  this  eagerness :  only  parental  love  can 
fully  understand  it. 

II.  The  manner  in  which  his  faith  was  strengthened. — 1.  Through  Christ's 
word  of  promise.  His  eager  importunity  after  our  Lord's  rebuff  (ver.  48)  showed 
that  the  smoking  flax  was  not  quenched;  so  our  Lord  nursed  it  into  flame. 
The  presence  and  dignity  of  our  Lord  doubtless  made  an  impression  on  him,  but 
it  was  the  word  of  promise  (ver.  50)  which  increased  his  faith  and  hope.  He 
remembered  that  Christ's  word  had  made  the  water  wine.  So,  too,  His  word 
still  has  power  to  quicken  and  strengthen  the  weak  in  faith.  Searching  the 
Scripture  is  a  means  to  this  end,  and  the  preached  word  especially  has 
been  to  many  the  power  of  God,  etc.  (1  Cor.  i.  18).  2.  His  faith  was  still 
further  confirmed,  when  on  the  way  home  his  servants  met  him  with  the 
joyful  news  of  his  son's  recovery  ;  and  it  was  finally  and  irrevocably  assured 
when  on  careful  inquiry  he  learned  that  his  boy  completely,  and  in  no  ordinary 
way,  recovered  at  the  moment  when  Christ's  word  of  power  was  spoken 
(vers.  51-52).  Thus  "  the  more  carefully  the  divine  works  and  benefits  are 
considered,  the  more  nourishment  faith  acquires  "  (Bengel). 

III.  The  proof  that  his  faith  was  now  assured. — 1.  In  his  outward  con- 
fession. He  would  joyfully  recount  all  that  had  occurred  at  Cana,  and  his  firm 
conviction  that  Jesus  was  what  He  Himself  claimed  and  His  disciples  declared 
Him  to  be.     2.  In  the  power  of  his  faith  to  convince  others  (ver.  53). 

Vers.  47-54.  The  nobleman  led  by  Jesus  from  faith  to  faith. — The  faith  of 
the  Samaritans  had  refreshed  the  Redeemer  as  cool  water  refreshes  a  weary 
wayfarer ;  in  Galilee,  where  He  had  laboured  more  extensively,  none  had 
believed  on  Him  for  His  word's  sake.  He  needed  to  "  educate "  men  unto 
faith.  We  also  fail  in  this  faith  in  Christ  for  His  word's  sake,  although 
we  have  often  experienced  the  Saviour's  love.  Let  us,  like  the  nobleman  of 
Capernaum,  allow  ourselves  to  be  instructed  by  Jesus  and  brought  to  true 
faith.     We  consider  : — 

I.  The  nobleman's  coming  to  Jesus. — 1.  He  had  heard  of  Jesus,  and  trusted 
in  His  power  to  work  miracles  and  in  His  goodness.  2.  He  went  to  Jesus  and 
humbly  prayed  Him  to  give  help. 

II.  His  tarrying  with  Jesus. — 1.  Jesus'  rebuke  of  his  reliance  on  miraculous 
signs.  2.  The  patient  reception  of  the  rebuke  of  Jesus  by  the  nobleman,  and 
the  repetition  of  his  request.  3.  Jesus'  words  of  promise ;  the  reliance  of  the 
nobleman  thereon,  and  his  attraction  to  our  Lord's  person. 

III.  His  return  homeward  from  our  Lord's  presence. — 1.  The  nobleman's 
joyful  obedience  to  the  command  of  Jesus.  2.  The  confirmation  of  his  faith 
even  on  the  way  homeward,  and  his  meeting  with  his  son  now  healed.  3.  His 
testimony  to  Christ  among  the  members  of  his  household,  and  the  result  in  their 
belief  in  the  Saviour. — J.  L.  Sommer. 

135 


chap.  IV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN. 


Vers.  47-54.  The  blessing  of  the  cross. — There  is  a  blessing  in  the  cross  laid 
upon  us  winch  we  have  to  bear.  We  call  Christ's  cross  His  dear  cross,  because 
He  bore  it.  And  we  reckon  ours  to  be  so  also  when  He  la}^s  it  upon  us  to  draw 
us  to  Himself.  This  thought  seems  to  lie  at  the  base  of  this  gospel  narrative. 
It  teaches  us  the  blessing  of  the  cross  of  affliction  ;  because  : — 

I.  It  awakens  from  sinful  security. — 1.  This  nobleman  was  an  official  of 
Herod  Antipas,  whom  John  the  Baptist  warned,  and  whose  criminal  and  slavish 
attachment  to  his  brother's  wife  led  to  his  becoming  John's  murderer.  And  as 
was  the  king,  so  for  the  most  part  would  be  his  friends  and  the  officials  of  his 
court.  We  hear  of  no  penitence  on  his  part.  Memory  alone  would  not  let  the 
past  die.  Her  accusing  voice  even  the  king  could  not  silence  (Matt.  xiv.  2). 
2.  But  even  amid  such  surroundings  may  be  found  traces  of  a  better  life.  And 
the  Sun  of  divine  grace,  looking  down  even  on  this  moral  swamp,  quickened  into 
life  plants  of  righteousness  on  spots  not  wholly  submerged.  3.  How  far  God  had 
already  dealt  with  this  man  does  not  appear.  But  now  He  touches  him  with 
affliction,  and  his  loved  little  boy  (TraiStoi/)  lay  nigh  to  death.  Then  he  would  be 
led  to  ask  :  Whence  comes  this  sorrow  ?  where  can  help  be  found  ? 

II.  It  drives  the  troubled  one  to  the  Saviour. — 1.  This  official  resided  in 
Capernaum,  which  Jesus  had  already  visited  (ii.  12).  But  the  nobleman  had  not 
known  Him,  or  had  not  been  drawn  to  Him  during  that  visit,  even  though  he 
may  have  heard  of  the  miracle  at  Cana.  2.  But  this  trouble  had  awakened 
him  from  his  sleep  of  indifference.  In  this  condition  he  was  like  one  newly 
awakened,  not  quite  clearly  conscious  of  his  surroundings.  So  this  man  did  not 
know  which  way  to  turn.  Some  in  this  condition  frequently  consider  that  it  is 
too  late  to  do  anything.  But  God  gave  the  nobleman  an  indication.  He  heard 
that  Jesus,  who  had  wrought  the  miracle  at  Cana,  had  returned.  Here  was 
hope  !  Where  was  He  1  At  Cana,  six  to  eight  hours  away.  So  he  went  away, 
leaving  his  son  for  the  time,  to  seek  Jesus.  3.  It  was  the  cross  led  him  to  Jesus 
— led  him  at  first  with  erroneous  notions  as  to  the  Saviour's  work,  etc.  He 
came  to  Jesus  as  to  a  mere  healer  of  the  sick ;  and  the  consequent  rebuke  of  Jesus 
might  have  led  to  opposition  and  doubt  in  his  heart  had  not  the  thought  of  his 
dear  boy  led  him  to  persevere.  "  Lord,  come  down  "  (ver.  49)  shows  that  he  was 
learning  true  faith  and  supplication.  Affliction  was  teaching  him.  And  in 
these  words  we  discern  faith  "asa  grain  of  mustard  seed."  If  Jesus  would 
come  down  all  would  be  well.  The  dignity  of  our  Lord's  person,  His  word  of 
promise,  all  contributed  to  the  growth  of  faith.  But  it  was  the  cross  that 
opened  his  eyes  and  led  him  to  Jesus. 

III.  The  incident  teaches  us  like  precious  faith. — 1.  That  when  affliction 
presses  it  may  drive  us  to  hear  of  Christ  and  to  go  to  Him,  and  come  praying. 
Then  you  will  learn  to  call  Him  Lord,  and  not  to  despair  if  the  answer  is  not  at 
once  accorded.  2.  If  your  own  cross  is  not  sufficient  to  impel  you,  look  at  His 
which  He  bore  for  you.  3.  Thus  you  will  be  given  faith  and  assurance  that  He 
has  heard,  for  heaven  is  certainly  no  farther  from  you  than  Capernaum  from 
Cana.  4.  So  does  affliction  lead  to  Christ.  It  is  the  under-shepherd — the 
shepherd's  dog — to  bring  the  wanderers  back ;  the  morning  bell  calling  to  the 
Church  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  sounding  often  harshly  and  discordantly  to  the 
ear,  but  when  men  are  in  the  Church  leading  to  hallelujahs.  5.  Then  when  faith 
is  born  Christ  sustains  it ;  it  would  be  weak  without  its  seal.  Therefore  the  glad 
father  learned,  Thy  child  liveth :  at  the  same  hour  as  Jesus  spoke  his  child  was 
healed.  Thus  his  faith  received  its  seal,  "and  he  believed,  and  his  whole 
house." — Adapted  from  Dr.  Fried.  Ahlfeld. 

136 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.    IV. 


HOMILETIC  NOTES. 


Yers.  47-50.  How  does  the  Lord  deal 
with  those  weak  in  faith  ? 

Introduction.  —  Ezek.  xxxiv.  16  ; 
Gen.  xxxiii.  13. 

I.  He  does  not  turn  them  away  from 
Him,  but  rebukes  them  as  they  require 
(vers.  47,  48). 

II.  He  calls  them  to  believe  in  His 
word,  on  which  all  depends  (vers.  49, 
50). 

III.  He  gives  them  to  experience  the 
blessed  result  of  this  faith  in  order  to 
strengthen  them  (vers.  51-53). 

IV.  He  converts  them  into  instru- 
ments fitted  to  lead  others  to  faith 
(ver.  53). — Dr.  v.  Biarowsky. 

Vers.  47-54.  The  ladder  of  faith. — 
The  ladder  of  faith,  on  which  we  see 
the  man  in  our  Gospel  ascending  with 
firm,  unfaltering  steps,  has  three  divi- 
sions, and  each  division  its  rounds. 

I.  On  the  first  division  we  see  the 
man  driven  by  his  needs  standing 
before  the  Lord. 

II.  On  the  second  division  we  see 
faith  and  temptation  striving  with 
each  other. 

III.  On  the  third  division  we  see 
how  the  soul  becomes  through  grace 
certain  and  joyful. 

And  we  further  notice  :  1.  The  word 
of  promise  there  laid  hold  of.  2.  The 
experience    there    realised.       3.    The 


confirmation  of   the  promise  given. — 
AppuhninJ.L.  Sommer's  "Evang.  Per." 

Ver.  53.  The  importance  of  faith. — 
Faith,  like  a  divine  light,  enkindles 
others  also.  It  is  with  faith  as  it  is 
with  a  ship  which  struggles  on  in  a 
storm.  As  soon  as  the  rudder  is  left 
such  a  ship  will  make  no  progress,  but 
will  drift  before  the  gale.  He  believed. 
What  did  he  now  believe  ?  Not  that 
his  son  had  been  restored  to  health. 
Belief  in  this  fact  was  left  behind ;  he 
saw  with  his  own  eyes  that  his  son 
lived.  What,  then  ?  He  believed  that 
Jesus  was  Christ  and  was  able  to  help 
him  in  every  time  of  need.  The  end  of 
the  miracles  of  Christ  is  to  bring  about 
belief  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son 
of  the  living  God.  Ye  fathers  and 
mothers,  implant  faith  and  the  fear  of 
God  in  the  hearts  of  your  children  and 
the  members  of  your  household.  This 
will  come  to  pass  when  you  have  a 
"  Church  in  your  house,"  and  the  word 
of  Christ  dwells  richly  among  you; 
when  you  show  a  good  example,  main- 
tain proper  discipline,  and  reprove  such 
as  are  evil. — J.  J.  Weigel. 

Ver.  54.  "  This  is  the  second  miracle" 
etc. — The  bell  had  now  been  sounded  a 
second  time,  in  order  that  the  Galileans 
might  come  in  greater  crowds  to  the 
preaching  of  the  word. — Idem. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  46.  God  wounding  in  order  to  heal. — 
There  is  an  old  German  parable  somewhat  as 
follows :  "  A  boy  lay  down  on  the  shore  of  a 
lake  and  fell  asleep.  His  father,  however, 
was  on  the  heights  engaged  in  his  work. 
But  the  wind  rose  and  began  to  drive  great 
waves  along  the  shore.  They  mounted 
higher  and  higher,  and  each  new  wTave 
advanced  farther,  till  speedily  they  had 
readied  the  slumbering  child.  The  father 
saw  this  from  the  height  where  he  was ;  he 
raised  his  voice  and  shouted.  But  the  boy 
slept  on.  Thereupon  he  came  down  from 
the  hill,  laid  hold  of  and  shook  the  sleeper. 
But  the  latter  still  slept  peacefully  on. 
Therefore,  as   the   waves    swelled    around, 


the  father  struck  him  smartly  on  the  ear, 
so  that  he  might  awake."  The  meaning 
lies  beneath  the  surface.  The  child  who 
sleeps  on  the  shore  is  thyself,  O  man,  in  thy 
sinful  security.  The  lake  is  that  of  destruc- 
tion, that  every  hour  threatens  to  overwhelm 
thee.  Thy  father  is  thy  God,  who  sees  thy 
hardheartedness  with  sorrow.  He  calls  upon 
thee,  by  His  holy  word,  which  should  pene- 
trate thine  ear  and  thy  heart.  He  startles 
thee  in  that  He  punishes  sinners  on  the  right 
hand  and  the  left,  and  passes  judgment  on 
them.  He  smites  thee  finally  with  affliction, 
so  that  thou  mayest  awake,  and  the  flood 
and  curse  of  sin  may  not  engulf  thee.  Be- 
loved brother,  sister,  do  not  shrink  from  thy 

137 


CHAP.   V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


cross.  Hear,  go,  pray,  only  believe.  If  the 
Lord  has  begun  by  visiting  you  with  the  rod 
Woe,  believe  it,  He  will  lay  it  aside  anon 
and  take  the  staff  Gentleness,  when  He  has 
awakened  you  and  drawn  you  to  Himself. 
Only  on  those  who  harden  themselves  come 
stroke  on  stroke,  each  harder  than  the  other. 
— Dr.  Fried.  Aldfeld. 

Ver.  53.  The  power  of  a  living  faith  testify- 
ing to  God's  goodness. — That  this  nobleman 
believed  with  all  his  heart  is  a  beautiful 
example  of  the  power  of  a  living  faith. 
He  could  not  conceal  within  himself  what 
he  had  experienced — he  must  needs  bear 
witness  of  it  and  make  it  known  to  those 
whom  God  had  laid  on  his  heart  and  bound 
to  him,  so  that  they  also  might  attain  to  a 
faith  and  blessedness  like  that  he  him- 
self tasted.  Faith  is  not  self-seeking — it  is 
indeed  a  divine  work  of  grace  in  us,  and 
therefore  it  streams  out  in  works  of  love, 
and  brings  also  others  to  like  precious  faith 
in  Christ.     Each  genuine  conversion  is  the 


seed-corn  for  the  future  conversion  of  others ; 
and  more  especially  is  the  conversion  of  the 
member  of  a  family,  according  to  God's  will, 
a  circumstance  which  ought  to  have  the  very 
highest  and  most  blessed  result  for  that 
family  (Acts  xvi.  31).  From  the  effect  on 
the  other  members  of  the  family  the  word 
then  passes  through  the  zeal  of  the  converted 
still  further  to  the  whole  people  and  to  all 
mankind.  Hence  experience  teaches  us  that 
always  in  the  Church  of  the  Lord,  when 
genuine  faith  in  the  Redeemer  is  awakened 
afresh,  a  new  and  warmer  zeal  for  missions 
is  awakened ;  and  thus  from  one  centre  new 
light  and  life  are  spread  abroad  to  many. 
That  which  the  family  history  of  the  noble- 
man of  Capernaum  and  the  jailer  at  Ph.lippi 
shows  in  a  narrow  circle  we  see  expanded 
in  the  history  of  missions.  And  so  we  ought 
to  desire  that  everywhere  genuine  conversions 
of  individuals  may  take  place,  for  then  from 
them  the  knowledge  of  Christ  would  speedily 
and  powerfully  be  extended.  —  Translated 
from  F.  G.  Lisco. 


PART  III.  (a.) 

Chapters  v.,  vi. 

I.  Christ  Manifests   Himself  as  Light  and  Life  in  the  Conflict  between 

Light  and  Darkness. 

1.  Jesus  Christ  the  Word  as  the  source  of  life. — (1)  He  heals  the  man  physically 
impotent,  and  thus  again  shows  Himself  to  be  Master  in  the  region  of  natural 
life  (vers.  1-9) ;  (2)  He  has  also  power,  however,  to  give  a  higher,  spiritual  life 
(ver.  14) ;  (3)  He  is  life  because  He  is  one  with  the  Father  (vers.  17-19)  ;  (4)  He 
therefore  does  the  Father's  works,  quickening  to  life  whom  He  will  (vers.  20,  21) ; 
(5)  the  Father  has  committed  all  judgment,  and  the  raising  up  of  men  from 
death  to  judgment,  into  the  hands  of  the  Son  (vers.  22-30). 

2.  The  witness  to  these  claims. — (1)  The  witness  of  the  Father  (vers.  30-32,  37, 
38) ;  (2)  the  witness  of  the  Baptist  (vers.  33-35) ;  (3)  the  witness  of  Christ's 
works  (ver.  36) ;  (4)  the  witness  of  the  Scriptures  (vers.  39,  45-47). 

Second  Year  of  our  Lord's  Ministry. 

Chap.  v. — Probable  position  in  Synoptic  narrative  :  follows  Matt.  ix.  14-17  ; 
Mark  ii.  18-22  ;  Luke  v.  33-39. 

Time. — Circa  Ve-Adar  (February — March),  A.u.c.  782,  a.d.  29. 


CHAPTER  V. 
EXPLANATORY  AND   CRITICAL  NOTES. 

"  Up  to  the  present  time  our  Lord  has  offered  Himself  to  typical  representatives  of  the 
whole  Jewish  race  at  Jerusalem,  in  Judaea,  in  Samaria,  and  in  Galilee,  in  such  a  way  as  to 
satisfy  the  elements  of  true  faith.  Now  the  conflict  begins  which  issues  in  the  Passion.  Step 
by  step  faith  and  unbelief  are  called  out  in  a  parallel  development.     The  works  and  words  of 

138 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN.  chaI*.  V. 


Christ  become  a  power  for  the  revelation  of  men's  thoughts.  The  main  scene  of  this  saddest 
of  all  conceivable  tragedies  is  Jerusalem.  The  crises  of  its  development  are  the  national 
festivals.    And  the  whole  controversy  is  gathered  round  three  miracles  "  ( Westcott). 

The  Healing  of  the  Impotent  Man  at  Bethesda. 

Ver.  1.  After  these  things. — /xera  ravra  indicates  perhaps  a  less  immediate  succession  of 
events  tl«an  /xera  tovto,  after  this  (vide  ii.  12,  etc.).  A  feast. — This  has  been  identified  with 
all  the  feasts  of  the  Jewish  year  in  turn.  Many  of  the  Fathers  held  that  it  was  Pentecost ; 
others,  e.g.  Irenceus,  Evsebius,  etc.,  considered  that  the  passover  is  meant ;  —  Chrysostom, 
Calrm,  Bengel,  etc.,  Pentecost.  But  in  view  of  the  notes  of  time  indicated  in  iv.  35,  etc. 
(December — January  =  Tebeth),  and  vi.  4  (April— Nisan),  the  feast  of  Purim,  which  was 
observed  in  the  month  of  March  (Adar),  would  seem  to  be  the  feast  referred  to.  Our  Lord's 
absence  from  Jerusalem  at  the  succeeding  passover  would  be  accounted  for  by  the  hostility 
of  the  Jews  (v.  16-18  ;  vii.  1). 

Ver.  2.  There  is,  etc. — This  phrase  would  seem  to  imply  that  this  narrative  was  written 
bef  «re  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  (see  Introduction).  At  the  sheep  (gate)  (Art  tt?  irpoj3ariKrj). 
— The  word  "  gate  "  seems  to  be  the  only  suitable  name  to  place  after  this  adjective  (see 
Neh.  iii.  1,  32,  xii.  39).  Bethesda  (*npn  rva). — The  house  of  mercy.  This  was  probably  the 
designation  of  the  building  under  which  the  sick  and  diseased  folk  sheltered  themselves 
whilst  waiting  at  the  healing  spring.  The  Birket-Israil,  near  St.  Stephen's  Gate  in  modern 
Jerusalem — the  gate  leading  from  the  Haram  Area  to  the  Kidron — is  the  traditional  site. 
But  great  weight  is  to  be  placed  on  the  evidence  that  identifies  the  Pool  of  Siloam  with  this 
healing  spring.  It  is  a  mineral  spring,  with  an  intermittent  flow  of  water  at  irregular 
periods  (see  Alford's  Greek  Testament,  in  loco,  and  note  on  chap.  v.  2).  "  Dr.  Guthe's  excava- 
tions have  laid  bare  the  remains  of  four  such  pools  in  the  neighbourhood  of  that  of  Siloam  " 
(Sayce,  Fresh  Light  from  Ancient  Monuments,  p.  105). 

Ver.  3.  In  these  lay  a  great  multitude,  etc. — This  pool  was  in  fact  an  ancient  spa.  A  modern 
instance  is  to  be  found  in  the  hot  springs  near  Tiberias,  on  the  shores  of  the  lake  of 
Galilee.  "Waiting  for,  etc. — This  clause  and  ver.  4  are  omitted  in  all  the  great  MSS.  but  A. 
They  seem  to  have  been  a  gloss,  finally  incorporated  in  later  MSS.  But  on  ver.  4  see 
Rev.  xvi.  4,  5. 

Ver.  5.  Thirty  and  eight  years. — This  man  has  been  regarded  as  a  type  of  Israel  in  the 
wilderness  compelled  to  wander  nearly  forty  years  on  account  of  their  unbelief,  and  thus  of 
the  unbelieving  Jews  of  Christ's  time. 

Ver.  6.  Jesus  saw  him  lying  there,  etc.,  and  reading  with  His  searching  glance  this  man's 
history  (ii.  25),  the  long  years  of  helplessness,  and  the  sinful  cause  of  it  all,  was  moved  with 
compassion  as  He  saw  this  victim  of  sin  lying  before  Him  helpless  and  desponding.  His  com- 
passion led  Him  to  the  spontaneous  offer  of  help.  "Wilt  thou  be  made  whole?"  were  the 
words  which  fell  on  this  lonely  and  helpless  sufferer's  ear. 

Ver.  7.  Our  Lord's  words  seem  hardly  to  have  quickened  hope.  But  he  explained  why  it 
was  that  he  had  no  hope  of  cure.  When  the  water  has  been  troubled. — Some  special  advan- 
tage was  apparently  popularly  connected  with  this  phenomenon. 

"Ver.  8.  Jesus  said,  etc. — It  was  a  word  of  power.  Kpapfiarbv  aov. — Mattress,  or  probably 
something  like  the  kind  of  thick  quilt,  v-iU  (Lihaf),  used  now  by  many  of  the  poorer  natives 
of  Palestine  as  a  "  bed." 

Ver.  9.  The  effect  of  Christ's  words  was  immediate.  It  was  the  Sabbath. — This  statement 
introduces  and  explains  what  follows. 

Ver.  10.  It  is  not  lawful,  etc. — The  objectors  would  found  on  such  a  passage  as  Jer.  xvii.  21. 

Ver.  11.  He  that  made  me  whole,  etc. — The  restored  man  felt  that  this  was  a  sufficient 
vindication  of  his  action.  He  who  had  shown  His  divine  power  in  this  miracle  was  not  one 
who  would  contravene  the  divine  law. 

Ver.  12.  Thy  bed  (rbv  Kp&ppardv  (rou). —Omitted  by  X,  B,  C,  L. 

Ver.  13.  A  multitude,  etc. — No  doubt  our  Lord  did  not  desire  to  attract  attention  ;  and  the 
presence  of  the  multitude  is  mentioned  to  show  how  our  Lord  was  able  to  withdraw  quietly 
and  at  once,  so  that  "  he  that  was  healed  "  even  lost  sight  of  Him. 

Ver.  15.  The  man  departed,  etc. — There  is  no  indication  in  the  narrative  that  there  was 
any  malice  in  the  man's  heart  in  making  this  communication  to  the  Jews.  What  reason  had 
he  to  hide  the  truth  ?  A  great  and  miraculous  cure  had  been  effected  in  his  case  :  why 
should  he  not  make  known  his  benefactor,  who  would  be  able  to  clear  up  all  difficulties  ? 

Ver.  17.  My  Father  worketh  hitherto  (ews  dpn,  until  now). — The  working  of  God  knows 
no  cessation  (Ps.  cxxi.). 

Ver.  18.  Because  He  not  only  had  broken,  etc. — Or,  more  accurately,  He  was  destroying 
or  dissolving  the  Sabbath.  He  was,  however,  only  freeing  it  from  the  human  restrictions 
which  changed  in  part  its  purpose  and  effect. 

139 


chap.  v.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


Ver.  19.  The  Son  can  do  nothing  of  Himself. — This  statement  refers  back  to  and  justifies 
that  of  ver.  17.  He  is  still  speakiug  of  the  eternal  relation  in  which  He  stands  to  the  Father, 
but  also  of  that  relationship  as  manifested  in  His  activity  as  the  Son  Incarnate.  Even  when 
in  the  form  of  a  servant  He  sees  and  knows  the  Father's  working  as  men  cannot  see  and  know 
it,  and  His  actions  are  the  works  of  the  Father. 

Ver.  20.  Loveth. — 0i\«  expresses  a  feeling  of  tenderness  and  personal  affection.  Greater 
works. — These  works  lay  already,  as  it  were,  within  the  ken  of  the  Son.  The  wonderful  works 
already  done  are  but  the  prelude  of  the  greater  that  will  follow — not  only  the  greater  miracles 
which  would  cause  the  Jews  to  marvel  (xi.  47),  though  not  to  believe,  but  the  quickening  of 
the  dead  and  the  strange  work  of  judgment  (Isa.  xxviii.  16-22). 

Ver.  22.  Judgment. — "  Literally,  the  judgment  which  comes  and  will  come,  wholly,  in  all  its 
parts,  now  in  its  first  beginning  and  hereafter  in  its  complete  accomplishment  "  (Westcott). 

Vers.  24-29.  In  this  section  the  relation  of  the  divine  Son  to  humanity  is  dealt  with  as  the 
quickener  of  the  dead  and  the  judge  of  men. 

Ver.  24.  Believeth  Him. — Tno-Tetiuv  t£  vifirf/avTi,  not  els.  Believing  God  is  simply 
accepting  His  word  and  message  as  true. 

Ver.  25.  Now  is. — The  quickening  of  the  spiritually  dead  is  what  is  chiefly  in  view  in  this 
verse. 

Ver.  26.  Life  in  Himself. — kv  eaur£  is  emphatic.  As  the  Father  is  the  self-existent  One 
and  the  source  of  life,  so  is  it  with  the  Son.  He  also  with  the  Father  is  a  spring  of  self- 
sufficient  life.  "  He  generated  such  a  Son  who  should  have  life  in  Himself,  not  as  a  partici- 
pator in  life,  but  one  who  should  be  as  He  Himself  is— Life  itself  "  (Augustine  in  Eeynolds). 

Ver.  30.  The  Father  and  the  Son  do  not  act,  so  to  speak,  independently.  Their  action  is 
ever  in  unison.  So  the  judgments  of  the  Son  are  in  perfect  accord  with  the  Father's  will  and 
thought. 

Ver.  33.  Ye  sent.— See  i.  19. 

Ver.  38.  They  had  an  idolatrous  regard  for  the  letter  of  the  law ;  but  the  spiritual  power 
of  the  word  they  did  not  know.  Its  searching  and  quickening  power  they  had  not  experi- 
enced (Heb.  iv.  12). 

Ver.  39.  ipevvcLre. — Either  indicative  or  imperative — "ye  search"  or  "search." 

Ver.  40.  The  freedom  of  man's  will  and  his  consequent  responsibility  are  here  clearly 
asserted. 

Ver.  43.  Should  another  come  in  his  own  name. — There  were  many  who  did  so  ;  and  who, 
by  flattering  national  vanity,  and  homologating  the  Jewish  carnal  expectations  of  a  Messiah 
who  should  reign  as  a  temporal  king,  led  many  after  them.  In  all  sixty-four  false  Christs 
have  been  enumerated,  the  most  famous  being  Bar  Cocheha.  "  The  teacher  who  can  utilise 
to  the  widest  extent  the  fashionable  worldliness,  and  can  mingle  the  pungent  human- condi- 
ment with  the  princely  food  of  the  king's  banqueting-house,  is  he  who  at  the  present  hour 
meets  with  the  loudest  response  and  the  readiest  reception  "  (Dr.  Reynolds). 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—1.8. 

Vers.  1-9.  Bethesda,  a  witness  of  divine  compassion,  grace,  and  power. — In  this 
narrative  Jesus  is  again  in  Jerusalem  when  a  great  feast  of  the  Jews,  probably 
Purim,  is  m  progress.  The  feast  of  Purim  was  one  during  which  great  festivity- 
was  kept  up,  gifts  were  distributed  to  the  poor,  etc.  This  fact  might  account  for 
the  number  of  sick,  blind,  halt,  etc.,  then  congregated  at  Bethesda — just  as  during 
the  Easter  festival  at  the  present  day  Jerusalem  is  crowded  with  lame,  etc.,  beggars 
from  all  quarters  of  the  country.  The  spring  by  which  these  people  lay  was 
noted  for  the  curative  power  of  its  waters,  arid  pious  hands  had  erected  a  covered 
portico  to  protect  those  who  waited  for  a  periodical  disturbance  of  the  waters, 
which  indicated  the  presence  of  some  healing  element.  The  Saviour,  ever 
compassionate  and  gracious,  seeking  to  save  men  and  give  them  His  best  gifts, 
sought  out  this  sorrowful  crowd.  And  seeing  one  of  that  crowd  most  miserable 
physically,  but  perhaps  more  truly  penitent  and  receptive  than  all  the  rest,  He 
showed  toward  him — 

I.  His  divine  compassion. — 1.  There  was  one  who  was  a  sad  epitome  of 
the  race — sick  and  impotent  in  body,  the  result  of  soul-sickness,  of  moral 
disease  (ver.  14).  2.  This  poor  man  was  utterly  helpless,  unable  to  do  more 
than  crawl  to  this  place  of  hope.  For  thirty-eight  years  he  had  been  in  this 
miserable  condition.     How  long  he  had  lain  at  Bethesda  does  not  appear ;  but 

140 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  v. 


it  had  been  long  enough  to  depress  him  on  account  of  that  "  hope  deferred  which 
makes  the  heart  sick."  Hope  was  well-nigh  extinguished  when  the  Redeemer 
appeared  to  him.  3.  Jesus,  the  Son  of  the  All-merciful,  could  not  but  be 
moved  in  view  of  this  epitome  of  human  wretchedness,  of  helpless,  despairing, 
miserable  humanity.     Thus  we  are  prepared  for  the  display  of — 

II.  His  divine  grace  and  goodness. — 1.  As  Jesus  looked  on  this  poor, 
forsaken,  despairing  being,  He  sought  first  to  awaken  in  that  hopeless  breast  a 
desire  for  healing  and  an  impulse  to  seek  to  attain  it.  Therefore  he  said, 
"  Wilt  thou  be  made  whole  1  "  2.  The  answer  serves  to  reveal  the  poor  man's 
state  of  mind.  He  had  fallen  into  a  dumb  and  numbed  state  of  resignation. 
One  fancies  that  in  his  heart  was  heard  in  a  whisper  the  modern  Oriental's 
Kismet :  "  It  is  fate."  3.  It  was  doubly  sad  that  during  this  joyous  festival, 
when  gifts  were  lavished  abroad,  he  sat  there,  friendless  and  alone,  none  offering 
him  a  helping  hand.  4.  But  a  better  Friend  was  near  him  now  than  all  earthly 
friends  ;  and  as  the  Saviour's  question  fell  on  his  ear,  it  must  have  been  like  a 
ray  of  heaven's  own  light  coming  in  on  the  dull  and  sombre  sky  of  the  man's 
existence,  and  bidding  hope  spring  up  in  his  heart.  5.  But  our  Saviour's 
gracious  compassion  did  not  end — it  never  does  end — with  the  mere  awakening 
of  hope.  It  is  active  and  beneficent,  and  therefore  His  gracious  question  is 
followed  by — 

III.  His  gracious  word  of  power. — 1.  "  Wilt  thou  be  made  whole?  "  Jesus 
had  said.  And  ere  the  sick  man's  almost  querulous  statement  of  his  sad 
position  had  well  ended  the  word  of  power  went  forth  :  "  Rise,  take  up  thy  bed, 
and  walk."  2.  It  was  a  divine  voice  that  spoke,  and  its  speech  was  with 
divine  authority.  For  thirty-eight  years  human  skill,  and  latterly  what  at 
Bethesda  seemed  (popularly)  to  possess  supernatural  efficacy,  had  failed  to  help 
this  miserable  being.  But  here  in  a  moment  "  the  man  was  made  whole."  All 
who  reflected  might  see  that  this  was  the  power  of  God,  and  that  Jesus  only 
more  fully  explained  this  when  He  said,  "  My  Father  worketh,"  etc.  (ver.  17). 
And  thus  to  all  who  were  not  spiritually  blinded  the  divine  mercy  and  power 
were  unmistakably  displayed. 

Vers.  5-14.  Help  to  the  wretched. — A  sentimental  humanitarianism  is  one  of 
the  features  of  our  day.  External  cures  are  applied  to  inward  ills.  As  it  has 
been  well  said,  "  men  try  to  dam  up  the  brook,  but  still  leave  the  fountain-head 
untouched."  They  seek  to  heal  the  wound  superficially,  whilst  the  deep-seated 
cause  of  all  the  pain  and  trouble  is  left  unhealed.  The  outward  causes  of  misery 
and  wretchedness  are  pointed  to,  and  endeavours  are  made  to  remove  and 
alleviate  them.  But  our  age  seems  to  have  lost  sight  of  the  great  fact  of 
indwelling  sin — that  it  is  this  that  is  at  the  base  of  all  those  evils,  and  that 
the  removal  of  this  is  the  true  summum  bonum  for  the  race.  Free  men  from 
the  power  of  sin,  and  bring  them  into  conformity  to  the  mind  and  will  of  God, 
and  the  result  will  be  a  new  world.  Could  this  be  effected  universally,  the 
earth  would  become  a  province  of  heaven.  Where  this  result  does  take  place, 
the  individual  life  is  new-created,  and  the  individual  heart  becomes  a  temple 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  thus  that  Christ  goes  to  the  roots  of  our  misery 
and  wretchedness.  He  alone  can  redeem  humanity.  His  name  proclaims 
Him  a  true  Redeemer ;  for  "  He  shall  save  His  people  from  their  sins " 
(Matt.  i.  21). 

I.  The  misery  that  oppresses  men. — 1 .  This  impotent  man  was  a  most  miserable 
object — a  poor,  wretched  human  being.  2.  But  his  greatest  misery  was  not  his 
physical  but  his  spiritual  deadness.  There  was  little  aspiration  after  what  was 
higher.  His  wretched  state,  perhaps  caused  by  his  sin,  was  more  wretched  from 
its  apparent  hopelessness  and  his  want  of  spiritual  comfort.     3.  His  state  repre- 

141 


chap.  v.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


sents  men  spiritually  by  nature.  They  are  impotent — they  cannot  of  themselves 
attain  to  a  new  life.  What  they  desire  is  the  material,  not  the  spiritual.  And 
they  have  experienced  the  vanity  of  their  own  efforts,  even  when  some  vague 
desire  after  the  higher  life  has  come  into  their  souls. '  4.  Like  this  man,  they  need 
to  have  the  word  of  power  spoken  to  them,  ere  they  can  arise  and  walk  in  spiritual 
freedom. 

II.  The  awakening  of  hope. — 1.  Pitying  the  man's  wretchedness,  the  Saviour 
sought  to  awaken  faith  and  hope  in  the  heart  of  the  poor  sufferer.  And 
although  hopelessness  seems  to  have  numbed  the  man's  spiritual  sense,  so  that 
even  his  aspirations  were  dulled,  yet  we  may  believe  that  some  ray  of  hope 
and  inarticulate  longing  of  faith  came  to  him  when  the  Saviour  spoke.  His 
respectful  address  shows  that  he  considered  the  Saviour's  word  to  be  more  than 
an  idle  inquiry.  2.  This  incident  is  a  parable  of  man's  spiritual  state.  It  is  a 
matter  of  eternal  rejoicing  that  the  Redeemer  pitied  our  wretchedness,  and 
came  to  earth  in  order  that  He  might  put  to  us  the  all-important  question, 
"  Wilt  thou  be  made  whole  1  "  and  that  He  puts  this  question  with  full  power 
to  answer  with  His  omnipotent  affirmative,  however  feeble  and  faltering  our 
reply  may  be.  He  sees  our  wretchedness,  and  comes  with  divine  messages  of  love 
and  peace  to  awaken  hope  and  lead  to  salvation. 

III.  The  word  of  power  and  the  renewed  life. — 1.  The  word  of  Jesus  laid  hold 
of  even  by  this  man  weak  in  faith  as  in  body  brought  about  a  marvellous  cure. 
Thirty-and-eight  years  of  waiting,  latterly  of  despairing,  and  in  a  moment  the 
man  was  renewed,  though  still  the  same.  The  "  impotent  "  frame  received  new 
strength  for  labour  in  what  remained  of  life.  2.  And  how  closely  parallel  is  this 
to  the  spiritual  experience  of  many  !  During  a  long  life,  it  may  be,  they  have  been 
"  impotent "  in  the  divine  service.  At  one  time  there  may  have  been  a  desire  for 
spiritual  strength ;  but  because  help  was  not  sought  in  the  right  direction,  or  for 
some  other  cause,  the  blessing  has  never  been  attained.  And  at  last  perhaps  a 
kind  of  despair  has  settled  down  on  the  soul  as  one  after  another  passes  away 
healed — a  kind  of  hopeless  apathy,  and  acquiescence  in  enduring  what  seems 
inevitable.  But  to  such  the  word  of  power  can  bring  renewal  and  spiritual 
strength,  just  as  healing  came  at  last  to  the  poor  helpless  one  at  Bethesda. 
And  then  life  becomes  changed,  and  for  its  remaining  years  there  is  a  joy  and 
freedom  in  service,  the  only  regret  being  that  their  healing  did  not  come  sooner, 
and  for  the  wasted  years.  3.  Many  have  thought  the  man  healed  at  Bethesda 
a  kind  of  churl — thankless  and  ungrateful  (ver.  15).  But  there  does  not  seem  any 
trace  of  this  in  the  narrative.  Despite  Jewish  prejudice,  he  obeyed  the  command 
of  Christ  (ver.  9).  And  although  his  faith  may  have  been  feeble  and  imperfect, 
yet  it  seems  to  have  been  real,  for  he  was  found  by  Jesus  just  where  he  should 
have  been,  worshipping  and  thanking  God  in  the  temple  (ver.  14).  4.  A 
true  sign  of  the  reality  of  spiritual  healing,  of  genuine  though  feeble  faith, 
is  the  giving  of  praise  and  thanks  to  God  with  heart  and  life,  not  only  in  the 
courts  of  His  house,  but  in  all  the  activities  of  life. 

Ver.  6.  Jesus  the  life-giving  Saviour. — The  miracle  wrought  by  Jesus  at 
Bethesda  is  typical  of  His  spiritual  working,  in  saving  men.  By  nature  the 
sinful  are  like  the  impotent  man  :  they  are  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins " 
(Eph.  ii.  1).  Their  life  is  a  moral  death.  And  it  is  only  when  Christ,  the  life 
of  men,  speaks  the  word  of  power  that  there  comes  spiritual  activity  where 
before  there  was  impotence,  spiritual  health  where  before  lurked  spiritual 
disorder,  spiritual  life  where  before  reigned  spiritual  death.  But  though  men 
cannot  of  themselves  rise  from  their  low  and  lost  spiritual  state  by  nature,  yet 
it  does  not  seem  that  they  are  raised  against  their  will.  The  willingness  and 
desire  for  healing  are  apparently  conditions  of  the  gift.     This  is  shown  in  our 

142 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  v. 


Lord's  question  to  the  impotent  man  :   Dost  thou  desire,  hast  thou  the  will,  to 
be  made  whole  ? 

I.  Men  are  spiritually  impotent  by  nature. — 1.  It  needs  but  a  glance  at 
history  and  experience  to  prove  that  it  is  so.  2.  Have  not  men  through  the 
millennia  since  the  Fall  sat  beside  the  pools  of  human  systems  of  religion  and 
philosophy,  vainly  awaiting  spiritual  healing  ?  And  did  not  each  new  system, 
usurping  or  superseding  what  had  gone  before,  prove  that  these  were  vain  for  the 
purpose  ?  3.  And  does  not  individual  experience  confirm  this  ?  Do  not  most 
men  sit  down  patiently  by  the  fountain  of  the  law  at  one  time  or  other  of  their 
life -history,  expecting  to  find  spiritual  health  through  obedience  to  its  precepts, 
and  in  the  end  have  to  confess  themselves  spiritually  powerless,  unable  to 
attain  salvation,  spiritual  healing,  in  this  way  1  4.  And  do  not  many  fall  into 
the  hopeless  acquiescence  in  their  condition  into  which  the  impotent  man  fell  1 
Indeed,  do  not  many  become  strangely  unconscious  of  their  inability  to  gain 
salvation,  and,  worse  still,  of  their  need  of  it  ?    "  They  are  dead,"  etc.  (Eph.  ii.  1). 

II.  Jesus  quickens  the  desire  for  spiritual  life. — 1.  The  human  will  must  be 
brought  into  harmony  with  the  divine  will  in  order  to  spiritual  healing.  There 
must  be  human  receptivity  ere  the  divine  gift  is  accorded.  2.  It  was  so  with 
this  poor  man.  The  desire  after  healing,  deadened  and  almost  extinguished 
during  those  long  years  of  waiting,  must  be  quickened  anew.  Therefore  Jesus 
said,  "  Wilt  thou  be  made  whole  ?  "  He  will  not  force  His  gifts  on  unwilling 
men.     He  will   not  violate  the  conditions  of  the  freedom   of  human   nature. 

3.  So,  too,  He  does  not  force  salvation  on  unwilling  men  (ver.  40) ;  and  thus 
want  of  willingness  to  be  saved  rests  at  the  basis  of  the  doom  of  the  unsaved. 

4.  Hence  Jesus  seeks  to  bring  men  to  willing  obedience ;  to  see  their  need  and 
to  desire  to  have  it  satisfied.  Then  He  directs  them  to  Himself  as  the  giver  of 
spiritual  healing  and  life.  5.  Thus  one  of  the  chief  duties  of  the  ambassador 
of  Christ  is  to  seek,  divinely  aided,  to  awaken  this  desire  for  spiritual  healing  in 
men's  hearts ;  for  this  is  what  the  Spirit  is  ever  seeking  to  do  (xvi.  7-10 ; 
Gen.  vi.  3).  A  New  Testament  ministry  should  be  an  enlightening  and  quicken- 
ing ministry  through  the  grace  of  the  Spirit. 

III.  Jesus  gives  spiritual  life. — 1.  He  and  He  alone  can  give  it.  No  human 
help  can  avail  here.  No  profound  and  even  spiritual  philosophy ;  no  system  of 
education  and  training,  however  perfect ;  no  laws,  however  good,  can  accomplish 
this.  No  sacrifices,  however  costly ;  no  devotion,  however  unremitting ;  no 
asceticisms,  however  strict.  But  let  those  who  desire  spiritual  life  turn  to 
Christ,  and  it  is  theirs.  To  the  truth  of  this  let  the  Christian  ages  testify  :  "  We 
believe,  and  therefore  speak"  (2  Cor.  iv.  12,  13).  2.  This,  indeed,  is  the  chief 
end  of  Christ's  appearing.  "  Christ's  chief  purpose  was  not  so  much  to  inaugurate 
new  moral  precepts  or  simply  anew  to  enforce  the  old,  which,  indeed,  He  certainly 
did,  as  to  bring  into  humanity  a  new  divine  and  mighty  element  of  life.  For 
just  as  while  on  earth,  in  this  and  similar  wondrous  works,  He  gave  new  power 
to  the  body,  so  He  grants  new  spiritual  power  to  our  souls,  that  we  may  walk  in 
that  new  obedience  which  is  well  pleasing  unto  Him.  So  is  the  kingdom  of 
nature  in  which  the  Lord  works  visibly  ever  the  symbol  of  the  kingdom  of  grace, 
in  which  the  unseen  (spiritual)  powers  which  proceed  from  Him  alone  are 
bestowed  "  (Lisco).  3.  It  is  therefore  to  Christ  that  His  true  servants  must 
ever  point  sin-sick,  weary,  despairing  souls.  This  duty  must  ever  lie  to  the 
hand  of  ministers  of  the  word ;  and,  when  it  is  neglected,  what  wonder  is  it  to 
find  many  lying  spiritually  impotent  by  many  a  far-famed  "pool"  vainly  waiting 
for  spiritual  healing ! 

Vers.  10-16.  Traditionalism  versus  truth. — The  conflict  between  our  Lord 
and  the  dominant  Jewish  party,  which  was  inevitable,  became  from  this  point 

143 


chap.  v.     V      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


more  acute.  The  hatred  of  the  Jewish  traditionalists  began  to  wax  more  fierce 
and  deadly  ;  for  our  Lord's  action  and  teaching  would,  they  saw,  if  permitted  to 
continue  and  to  influence  the  people,  lead  to  the  overturning  of  their  authority. 
And  they  were  well  aware  that  in  regard  to  no  other  part  of  the  law  would  our 
Lord's  action  be  more  prominent  than  in  regard  to  the  observance  of  the  Sabbath. 
Its  observance  was  so  universal,  so  frequent,  so  hedged  about  with  traditional 
enactments,  that  deviation  from  it  would  be  more  marked  than  in  any  other 
direction.  Hence  the  prominence  of  this  question  in  the  conflict  between  our 
Lord  and  the  Jews. 

I.  The  blindness  of  traditionalism. — 1.  Here  a  great  miracle  had  been 
wrought.  A  man  whose  case  had  been  apparently  hopeless  for  thirty-eight  long 
years  was  cured  in  a  moment ;  and  yet  those  Jews,  because  a  seeming  infringe- 
ment of  the  traditional  Sabbath  law  had  been  made,  ignored  the  miracle,  and 
cavilled  at  the  supposed  infringement.  2.  But  their  strictures  were  founded  on 
human  misinterpretations  of  the  law.  There  seemed  some  ground  for  their 
complaint  in  a  passage  like  Jer.  xvii.  21.  But  in  ISTeh.  xiii.  19  it  is  evident  that 
such  restrictions  as  to  burden-bearing  were  not  intended  to  apply  to  a  case  like 
this.  The  central  idea  of  the  Sabbath  was  rest  from  ordinary  toil  (Isa.  lviii.  13). 
Only  the  priests  in  their  temple  duties  continued  their  work  as  on  ordinary  days, 
showing  that  the  life  of  devotion  and  worship  should  be  daily  and  unceasing. 
But  rabbinic  subtilising  had  built  up  round  this  ordinance  a  superstructure  of 
minute  observances  that  altogether  neutralised  the  design  of  the  law.  3.  The 
Jews  themselves  permitted  works  of  mercy  and  necessity  to  be  performed  on  the 
Sabbath  ;  and  here  they  found  fault  with  such  a  work.  Had  the  man  who  was 
healed  remained  where  he  was  not  only  would  he  have  occupied  the  space  where 
some  now  more  needy  sufferer  could  find  accommodation,  but  he  would  not  have 
been  able  to  do  what  thankfulness  and  gratitude  impelled  him  to  do — to  "  pay 
his  vows  "  to  God  in  the  temple.  4.  Thus  traditionalism,  in  seeking  rigidly  to 
maintain  the  letter,  frequently  transgresses  the  spirit  of  the  law. 

II.  The  command  and  example  of  Christ  the  true  corrective  to  traditionalism. 
— 1.  The  man  who  was  healed,  against  whom  the  Jews  brought  this  serious 
charge,  which  rendered  him  liable  to  excommunication  at  least  (ix.  34),  had  a 
convincing  answer  :  "  He  that  made  me  whole,  the  same  said,"  etc.  (ver.  11).  It 
was  surely  a  divine  power  that  was  exerted  to  work  that  miracle,  and  therefore 
He  who  wrought  it  would  not  require  aught  to  be  done  inconsistent  with  the 
divine  law.  2.  The  power  of  tradition  to  warp  men's  minds  and  shut  them 
against  the  truth  is  seen  in  the  question  asked  by  the  Jews.  They  say  nothing 
about  the  miracle ;  the  evidence  it  gave  of  the  presence  of  heavenly  power  in 
Him  who  wrought  it  is  thrust  aside,  and  they  ask,  u  What  man  is  that  which  said 
unto  thee,  Take  up  thy  bed  and  walk  ?  "  3.  The  true  corrective  to  traditionalism 
and  formalism  is  still  the  same.  We  must  ever  get  back  from  the  tradition  of 
men  and  the  rudiments  of  the  world  to  Christ  and  His  inspired  word. 

III.  The  result  of  unenlightened  traditionalism. — 1.  Our  Lord  sought  to 
complete  the  good  work  He  had  begun  in  this  poor  man  ;  and  finding  him  in  the 
temple,  thanking  God  for  his  recovery,  thus  evidencing  his  gratitude  and  faith, 
our  Lord  gently  counselled  him  to  sin  no  more,  lest  a  worse  evil  than  that  which 
had  afflicted  him  should  come  upon  him.  And  when  the  man  knew'  that  it  was 
Jesus  who  had  healed  him  he  went,  as  in  duty  bound,  and  told  the  Jews.  Here 
was  their  opportunity  of  being  enlightened.  2.  But  in  place  of  endeavouring  to 
come  to  a  right  decision  on  the  matter — without  adopting  even  the  calm  and  in 
part  temporising  position  afterwards  counselled  by  Gamaliel  (Acts  v.  34-40) — these 
formalists  wilfully  shut  their  eyes  against  the  light  and  set  themselves  in  opposi- 
tion to  eternal  truth.  Ignorance  and  prejudice  combined  led  them  to  persecute 
Jesus  because  He  was  wont  to  do  such  things  on  the  Sabbath,  i.e.  to  teach  the 

144 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  v. 


true  nature  of  the  Sabbath  and  to  vindicate  for  His  disciples  that  it  is  "  lawful 
to  do  well  on  the  Sabbath  day."  3.  The  spirit  of  unenlightened  traditionalism 
is  ever  the  same.  The  wrong  it  has  wrought  in  the  Christian  Church  is  matter 
of  history.  Especially  evident  was  its  baleful  influence  before  Beformation  times. 
And  it  still  appears  in  various  forms  among  the  Churches,  forming  the  chief 
barrier  to  Christian  unity  and  a  powerful  drag  on  Christian  activity.  4.  The 
only  cure  for  it  is  to  open  our  minds  to  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit,  to  the  word 
and  example  of  Christ;  and  thus  living  in  His  Spirit  we  shall  "discern  the 
things  that  are  more  excellent,  being  filled  with  the  fruit  of  righteousness  "  etc 
(Phil.  i.  10-11). 

Ver.  16.  True  Sabbath- keeping. — Here,  as  elsewhere  in  the  Gospel  history, 
Jesus  gives  us  an  example  that  we  should  follow  in  His  steps.  He  did  not 
abrogate  the  Sabbath  law;  He  simply  freed  it  from  traditional  incrustations 
and  showed  it  in  its  true  light,  as  intended  for  the  good  of  man,  and  not  to  be  a 
burdensome  yoke  (Mark  ii.  27),  as  Jewish  rabbinical  enactments  made  it.  But 
in  order  that  it  may  bring  to  men  the  blessing  intended,  a  certain  method  of 
observance  must  be  complied  with. 

I.  We  must  desire  to  honour  God  in  its  observance.— 1.  This  must  be  done 
by  first  observing  the  primary  meaning  and  purpose  of  the  Sabbath.  It  is  for  rest 
—rest  from  ordinary  and  daily  occupations.  The  necessity  for  such  a  stated 
period  of  rest  from  labour  is  arrived  at  by  reason  and  experience,  as  well  as 
revealed.  2.  It  is  for  worship.  Our  Lord  gave  us  a  clear  and  unmistakable 
example  in  reference  to  this  (ver.  14  and  Luke  iv.  16,  etc.).  Men  have  a 
spiritual  being  as  well  as  a  material  frame,  and  it  too  must  be  appropriately 
nourished.  And  on  this  day  in  God's  worship  this  end  is  achieved  in  an  especial 
fashion. 

II.  We  must  not  neglect  works  of  mercy  and  kindness  to  others.— 1.  Works 
of  mercy  are  not  to  be  neglected  on  that  day.  Our  Lord  has  here  also  shown  us 
the  way.  But  in  reference  to  works  of  necessity  we  must  ever  enquire  whether 
we  seek  to  do  them  from  merely  self-interested  motives,  or  from  love  to  God 
and  for  His  honour.  2.  Hence  Sabbath  desecration  would  be  avoided  were 
Christians  everywhere  to  obey  the  law  of  love  in  reference  to  Sabbath-keeping 
— love  to  God,  who  ordained  this  day  for  man's  higher  good ;  and  love  to  our 
neighbour,  which  will  not  only  urge  us  to  come  to  his  aid  with  works  of  mercy 
and  kindness  on  the  Sabbath,  but  will  prevent  us  from  unnecessarily  disturbing 
his  Sabbath  rest. 

Vers.  16-18.  Evil  designs  against  Jesus. — Here  for  the  first  time  in  this  Gospel 
history  "  the  shadow  of  the  cross  "  falls  athwart  our  path.  Hitherto  our  Lord 
had  appeared  to  the  Jews  more  in  the  light  of  a  prophet  with  revolutionary 
ideas.  _  But  as  in  His  activity  He  came  into  clearer  opposition  to  many  of  their 
traditional  customs  and  ideas,  and  especially  now  when  He  made  a  claim  which, 
were  it  admitted,  would  entitle  Him  to  make  such  changes  as  He  had  given  an 
mdication  of  in  His  activity,  in  their  blind  hatred  they  resolved  to  kill  Him. 
This  was,  as  we  may  say,  "  the  beginning  of  the  end."  The  evil  seed,  sown  by 
the  wicked  one,  and  permitted  to  lodge  in  the  hearts  of  those  Jews,  began  then 
to  germinate  and  grow  up,  until  at  last  those  miserable  men  were  filled  with  its 
bitter  fruit. 

I.  The  answer  of  Jesus  to  the  Jews  who  accused  Him.— 1.  It  was  an  answer 
that  fully  vindicated  His  claim  to  pronounce  on  the  interpretation  of  the  Sabbath 
law  and  all  the  other  laws  of  Israel.     And  it  especially  vindicated  His  activity 

l  145 


CHAP.  v.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


on  this  occasion,  for  doubtless  the  attack  on  the  man  who  was  healed  was  simply 
a  cover  for  an  attack  on  his  Healer  (Luke  xiii.  14).  2.  By  His  words,  "  My 
Father,"  etc.,  He  defines  His  position  to  the  Sabbath  law.  He  points  out  that 
in  accusing  Him  they  accuse  the  Father.  God's  works  of  beneficence  never 
cease ;  His  care  and  love  of  man  never  intermit.  If  they  did,  where  were  the  race 
of  men  ?  And  thus  Jesus,  whose  work  on  earth  is  to  carry  out  the  high  purpose 
of  divine  love  in  the  salvation  of  man,  must  continue  His  saving  work  uninter- 
ruptedly. 3.  But  in  doing  this  He  was  violating  no  divine  law.  He  was  rather 
emphasising  the  merciful  purpose  of  that  law.  Just  as  the  Father  does  not 
break  that  Sabbath  which  followed  His  creative  work  by  His  loving  and  provi- 
dential care  of  His  people,  so  the  Son  does  not  break  His  Sabbath  law  for  men 
in  working  works  of  beneficence  and  love  and  mercy.  4.  From  this  we  infer  that 
Christ's  disciples  and  ministers  best  serve  Him  by  following  in  this  His  blessed 
example.  On  His  day  we  are  to  cease  from  ordinary  occupations,  but  only  that 
we  may  more  fully  realise  and  engage  in  His  work,  in  seeking  the  redemption  of 
our  fellow -men. 

II.  Their  interpretation  of  the  claim  of  Jesus. — 1.  They  understood  clearly 
what  Jesus  meant  by  the  words  He  had  spoken.  Not  only  had  He,  according  to 
their  ideas,  broken  the  Sabbath,  but  (which  in  their  eyes  was  even  worse)  He 
had  claimed  equality  with  God  as  entitling  Him  to  interpret  and  determine  what 
was  the  law  of  the  Sabbath.  Not  only  by  His  teaching  and  example  was  He 
leading  men  to  neglect  the  traditional  observance  of  that  law,  but  He  had  said  in 
effect  that  God  was  His  Father,  which  was  blasphemy  in  their  view.  2.  This 
is  one  of  the  many  and  clear  declarations,  from  which  there  is  no  escape,  of 
our  Lord's  divine  Sonship  set  forth  in  this  Gospel,  which  indeed  makes  it  to 
many  "  a  savour  of  death."  Many  are  offended  at  this  claim  just  as  those 
Jews  were,  and  in  their  dogmatic  enmity  they  seek  to  "slay"  this  witness  to 
that  great  truth,  and  thus  in  reality  to  crucify  to  themselves  the  Son  of  God 
afresh,  etc.  (Heb.  vi.  6). 

III.  The  inception  of  their  evil  designs. — 1.  Therefore  the  Jews  sought  the 
more  to  kill  Him,  etc.  In  place  of  enquiring  earnestly  whether  His  zeal  for 
God's  honour  (ii.  14-18),  and  the  divine  authority  He  evidently  possessed  in  the 
realm  of  nature,  did  not  bear  out  His  claim,  and  whether  the  witness  of  John  to 
Him  as  the  Messiah  was  not,  therefore,  heaven -inspired,  their  hostility  became 
only  more  bitter  and  determined.  What  a  sequel  to  a  work  of  divine  mercy  and 
grace  !  2.  How  can  it  be  accounted  for  save  on  the  supposition  that  most  of 
those  men  had  lost  all  true  spirituality  of  mind  and  heart,  whilst  their  religion 
had  become  a  cold,  dead  formalism  1  Indeed  it  was  so.  Their  idea  of  God  and 
His  law  was  utterly  defective ;  they  conceived  of  them  as  shorn  of  their  highest 
attributes — judgment,  mercy,  truth,  and  love  (Matt,  xxiii.  23  ;  Luke  xi.  42) ;  and 
Jesus  had  afterward  to  point  them  sorrowfully  to  the  source  of  their  evil 
thoughts  of  Him  and  their  wicked  designs  against  Him  (viii.  41).  3.  Much  of 
enmity  to  the  gospel  as  a  divine  revelation  is  excused  on  the  plea  so  finely 
expressed  by  the  poet :  "  There  lives  more  faith  in  honest  doubt,  believe  me,  than 
in  half  the  creeds."  And  more  than  a  half  truth  is  here  expressed.  Had  these 
Jews  simply  come  to  Jesus  "  perplexed  in  faith,"  seeking  for  more  light,  like 
Nicodemus  or  Thomas,  they  had  gone  away  believing.  But  they  confronted 
Christ  with  bitter  enmity,  because  they  elevated  their  ideas  to  the  position  of 
infallible  truths.  So  many  of  the  bitterest  attacks  on  the  gospel  and  divine 
revelation  are  the  result,  not  of  "  perplexed  faith,"  but  because  men  come  to 
them  not  seeking  light,  rather  indeed  to  judge  them  according  to  some  standard 
already  set  up  and  fixed  by  their  own  reason  or  prejudice. 

146 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN.  chap.  v. 


HOMILETIG  NOTES. 

Vers.  1-18.     The    immediateness   oj  years  of  suffering;    and  so  the  truth 

divine  help.  we  gather  from  this  is,  there  is  a  con- 

I.  The  divine  aid  is  often  delayed,  nection  between  physical  and  moral 
— 1.  Whilst  we  see  that  His  power  evil,  more  deep  than  we  have  been 
and  grace  help  others  (vers.  1-4).  2.  accustomed  to  believe  in.  Often 
Thus  we  ourselves  often  remain  in  our  when  we  have  been  disposed  to  refer 
misery  (ver.  5).  the  whole  to  external  causes,  there  has 

II.  But  although  it  is  delayed  yet  been  something  of  moral  disorder  in 
it  will  be  given  at  the  proper  time. —  the  character  which  makes  that  con- 
And  this  help  comes  :  1.  From  Jesus,  stitution  exquisitely  susceptible  of 
the  true  helper  in  time  of  need,  who  suffering,  and  incapable  of  enjoyment, 
graciously  draws  near  to  us  (ver.  6).  Thus  we  see  that  external  suffering  is 
2.  And  who  comes  when  no  man  has  often  connected  with  moral  evil ;  but 
pity  upon  us  (ver.  7).  3.  And  who  we  must  carefully  guard  and  modify 
comes  unexpectedly  and  gloriously  this  statement,  for  this  is  not  uni- 
(vers.  8,  9).  versally     the      case.        2.  We      must 

III.  The  help  experienced,  so  full  remember  this  when  we  see  cases  of 
of  power  and  grace,  should  animate  bodily  suffering ;  we  must  consider 
US. — 1.  To  do  what  our  Helper  com-  that  there  is  a  great  difference  between 
mands  us  regardless  of  the  judgment  the  two  senses  in  which  the  word 
of  the  world  (vers.  10-13).  2.  To  "  punishment"  is  used.  It  may  be 
bring  our  thankoffering  to  God  (ver.  14).  a  penalty,  it  may  be  a  chastisement ; 
Jesus  found  him  in  the  temple.  3.  To  one  meaning  of  punishment  is,  that 
begin  a  new  consecrated  life  in  the  the  law  exacts  a  penalty  if  it  is 
Lord  (ver.  14)  :  sin  no  more.  4.  Not  broken — notice  having  been  given  that 
to  bring  down  new  punishment  on  our-  a  certain  amount  of  suffering  would 
selves  through  thoughtless  conduct  follow  a  certain  course  of  action.  All 
(ver.  14) :  "  lest  some  worse  thing  befall  the  laws  of  God,  in  the  physical  world, 
thee."  5.  To  magnify  Jesus  as  our  in  the  moral  world,  or  in  the  political 
Helper,  and  to  make  Him  known  to  world,  if  broken,  commonly  entail  a 
others  (ver.  15). — Translation  from  F.  penalty.  But  there  is  another  kind 
G.  Lisco.  of  law,  written  in  the  hearts  of  men, 

and  given  to  the  conscience,  when  the 

Vers.   14,  15.  Causes  of  evil. — Con-  penalty   is   awarded   as  the  result  of 

cerning   the   cause  of  his  disease,  we  moral  transgression,   and    then   it  be- 

are     not     left     in    any    doubt ;    the  comes  a  chastisement,  and  the  language 

Redeemer's  own  lips  have  told  us  what  of  Scripture  then  becomes  the  language 

it  was :  "  Sin  no   more,  lest   a  worse  of  our  hearts.     It  is  the  rod  of  God 

thing  come  unto   thee."      So   we   see  that  hath  done  all  this.     3.  There  is 

there  was  a  strange  connection  between  another  thing  that  we  must  bear  in 

this  bodily  malady  and  moral  evil,  a  mind,  that  there  are  certain  evils  which 

connection  that   would   have   startled  fall  upon  man,  over  which  he  can  have 

all  around  if  it  had  been  seen.     1.  No  no  control.     They  come  as  the  result 

doubt  the  men  of  science,  versed  in  the  of  circumstances  over  which  he  has  no 

healing  art,   would   have   found    some  power  whatever.     4.  The  punishments 

cause  for  his   malady  connected  with  of  God   are  generally   not   arbitrary ; 

the  constitution  of  his  bodily  frame  ;  each   law,  as  it  were,  inflicts  its  own 

but   the   Redeemer    went    beyond    all  penalty.      It  does  not  execute  one  that 

this.     Thirty-eight  years  before,  there  belongs  to  another.    So,  if  the  drunkard 

had  been  some  sin  committed,  possibly  lead  a  life  of  intoxication,  the  conse- 

a   small  sin,  in  our   eyes  at  least,  of  quence  will  be  a  trembling  hand  and 

which  the  result  had  been  thirty-eight  a    nerveless     frame ;    but    if    he   be 

147 


CHAP.   V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


drowned  in  the  seas  when  sailing  in  gressions  against  the  natural  laws  of 

the  storm,  he  is  punished  for  having  God  may,  in  the  end.  become  trespasses 

broken  a  natural  law,  not  a  moral  law  against   His  moral  law,  and  then  the 

of  God.     5.  There  is  one  thing  more,  penalty   becomes  chastisement. — From 

It   is    perfectly    possible   that    trans-  F.  W.  Robertson,  Brighton. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Wilt  thou  be  made  nhole  ?  —  To  judge 
from  appearances  merely,  was  there  ever 
a  question  less  necessary  than  that  which 
the  Son  of  God  asked  this  impotent 
man  1  Here  was  one  who  had  suffered 
for  thirty-eight  years,  lying  among  other 
sick  people  beside  the  wonderful  pool.  He 
was  waiting  impatiently  for  the  time  when 
some  one  would  assist  him  to  go  down 
into  the  pool  at  the  moment  when  its  waters 
were  moved  by  the  angel  of  the  Lord. 
He  yearned  for  the  advent  of  some  kind 
fellow-mortal  to  perform  this  good  office  for 
him.  He  was  miserable,  and  complained 
that  he  had  not  yet  been  able  to  find  such 
an  one.  In  short,  he  desired  nothing  more 
ardently  than  to  be  healed.  No  other 
thought,  no  other  care,  so  occupied  him. 
Why  then  ask  him,  "  Wilt  thou  be  made 
whole  ? "  "  But,"  says  St.  Augustine,  "  this 
was  not  without  reason.  This  impotent 
man  was  a  type  of  all  sinners.  And  he 
himself  as  a  sinner  could  not  be  healed  ere 
he  was  converted,  according  to  the  method 
of  the  Saviour  of  men,  who  did  not  heal 
men's  bodies  without  at  the  same  time 
sanctifying  their  souls."  Now,  however 
desirous  this  man  might  be  of  healing, 
perhaps  he  was  not  equally  desirous  of  his 
conversion.  And  it  was  for  this  reason  that 
Jesus  Christ,  who  knew  that  the  one 
depended  upon  the  other,  and  who  would 
not  accord  the  one  without  the  other,  asked 
him  before  everything  else :  "  Wilt  thou  be 
made  whole  ?  " — Bourdaloae. 

The  value  of  the  Sabbath.  —  On  the 
Sabbath  this  act  of  healing  had  taken 
place.  On  being  expostulated  with  regard- 
ing  His  acts  of  healing  on   the    Sabbath 


our  Lord  had  defended  His  works  of  love 
with  many  counter-arguments  —  e.g.,  that 
a  man  is  better  than  a  beast  which  is  led  out 
to  be  watered  on  the  Sabbath ;  and  that 
surely  on  a  day  of  blessing  it  is  lawful  to  do 
and  to  receive  good,  because  the  Sabbath 
was  made  for  man  ;  and  whether  what  David 
was  permitted  to  do  when  he  had  need, 
what  the  priests  alone  could  do  on  the 
Sabbath,  might  not  be  permitted  to  the 
Lord  of  the  Sabbath.  His  kingly  authority, 
however,  He  demonstrated  by  this  very 
miracle,  and  the  self-consciousness  with 
which  He  declared  Himself  equal  with  the 
Father  :  "  My  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and 
I  work "  —  unconditionally,  continually, 
whether  on  the  Sabbath — and  where  were 
our  rest  without  God's  work  ? — or  in  the 
night,  for  "  the  Keeper  of  Israel  neither 
slumbers  nor  sleeps."  Among  our  people  * 
dominates  the  opposite  error  to  that  of  the 
Jerusalem  Jews.  Not  an  over,  but  an  under, 
estimation  of  the  value  of  the  Sabbath  rest. 
Not  an  observance  according  to  the  letter 
of  Sabbath  sanctification,  but  a  negligence 
of  the  heavenly  gift ;  not  an  idolatrous 
reverence  of  church  buildings,  but  a  prevail- 
ing neglect  and  contempt  of  churches, 
especially  in  our  large  cities.  And  yet 
(a  fact  worthy  of  notice)  it  was  just  in  the 
temple  that  Jesus  found  the  man  who  had 
been  healed,  and  thus  had  further  dealing 
with  him.  And  so  it  is  still.  It  is  in  the 
house  of  God  where  the  man  who  has 
recovered  from  sickness,  after  long  absence 
pays  his  vows  in  the  presence  of  God's 
people — where  he  who  has  been  preserved 
through  God's  grace  learns  to  prepare  him- 
self to  meet  evil  days. — Dr.  R.  Kogel 


MAIN  HOMILETICS    OF    THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  19—47. 

Vers.  19-23.  The  activity  of  the  divine  Son. — In  these  verses  we  again  enter 
the  region  of  unfathomable  divine  truth,  already  opened  to  us  in  the  prologue, 
and  into  which  we  can  enter  but  a  little  way.  These  verses  give  us  a  glimpse 
of  the  intimate  union  of  God  the  Father  and  the  Son,  as  it  is  revealed  in  the 
activity  of  the  Son.  "  The  action  and  honour  of  the  Son  are  coincident  with 
the  action  and  honour  of  the  Father"  (Westcott).  The  impulse  which  moves 
them  is  the  same.  But  as  the  Incarnate  Son,  who  became  obedient  unto  death 
for  our  sake,  He  does  what  He  seefch  the  Father  do  ;  and  the  works  which  the 
Father  gives  Him  these  He  finishes  (ver.  36). 

*  This  refers  especially  to  Germany,  but  is  not  without  application  to  us. 
148 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  V. 


I.  There  is  identity  of  activity  on  the  part  of  the  Father  and  the  Son. — 

1.  This  is  seen  to  be  the  case  from  the  beginning  of  things.  He  is  identified 
with  the  Father  in  creation  (i.  3) ;  and  also  in  upholding  the  visible  universe 
(Col.  i.  17).  2.  Therefore  in  all  the  Father's  works  of  love  and  mercy  He  has 
been  the  constant  participator.  All  through  those  ages  darkened  by  sin  and 
sorrow  He  has  shared  in  all  those  exhibitions  of  divine  goodness  toward  fallen 
humanity  :  so  that  His  sun  has  shone  and  His  rain  has  descended  on  the  evil  and 
the  good — the  just  and  the  unjust.  3.  Above  all  He  has  shared  in  that  com- 
passionate love  which  yearned  over  the  ruined  race ;  and  in  reply  to  the  impulse 
of  that  love  He  said  :  "  Lo,  I  come  to  do  Thy  will.  My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of 
Him  that  sent  me,  and  to  finish  His  work  "  (iv.  34). 

II.  The  Son's  work  during  His  life  on  earth  was  therefore  the  Father's 
work. — 1.  The  Jews  had  accused  Him  of  contravening  the  Father's  will  and  law 
in  healing  the  impotent  man  at  Bethesda  on  the  Sabbath,  and  bidding  him  take 
up  his  "  bed  "  and  walk.  2.  Our  Lord,  in  His  vindication  of  His  action,  points 
out  that  He  could  not  have  acted  otherwise.  The  Father  is  ever  performing  acts 
of  beneficence — every  morning  His  mercies  are  new ;  and  the  day  of  rest  forms 
no  exception.  In  healing  the  sick  and  relieving  the  wretched,  therefore,  the 
Son  is  but  doing  what  the  Father  does.  3.  The  greatness  of  this  miracle  also 
proved  that  the  Father  must  have  been  in  purpose  and  action  one  with  the  Son. 
And  this  unity  in  work  was  further  shown  in  the  end  for  which  the  miracle  was 
wrought.  It  was  to  quicken  and  strengthen  faith,  and  thus  deliver  from  sin's 
guilt  and  power. 

III.  The  future  will  testify  to  this  unity  in  action  as  the  past  has 
done. — 1.  As  His  word  was  powerful  in  times  past  to  heal  men,  and  above  all  to 
give  them  spiritual  healing,  so  He  is  still  powerful  "to  save  unto  the  uttermost," 
etc.  (Heb.  vii.  25).  In  His  name  still  moral  miracles  are  wrought  among 
men,  and  will  continue  to  be  wrought  till  time  shall  end.  2.  And  then  will  be 
given  yet  more  universal  and  striking  proofs  of  that  unanimity  in  thought  and 
action  which  subsists  between  the  Father  and  the  Son.  3.  To  the  Son  is 
given  the  power  of  resurrection  life  for  those  who  hear  His  word  and  believe 
on  His  name.  4.  And  to  Him  also  is  delegated  the  throne  of  judgment 
(Matt.  xxv.  31  et  seq.)  by  the  Father,  that  He  may  appear  as  the  visible 
representative  of  the  divine  majesty  and  righteousness.  And  this  is  to  the  end 
that  all  men  should  honour  the  Son,  etc. 

Vers.  19-29.  Jesus  is  our  Life. — In  this  Gospel  Jesus  declares  that  He  is  the 
Lord  and  that  we  are  His  creatures.  He  has  given  us  life,  and  will  grant  it  in  all 
fulness.  He  is  the  express  image  of  God  in  His  being  and  working.  We  reflect 
His  light.  He  is  set  over  us  as  judge.  Those  who  appeal  to  Him  are  acquitted  ; 
those  who  do  not  recognise  His  jurisdiction  lose  the  process  of  eternity  in  all 
particulars.  Those  who  do  not  desire  that  death,  the  king  of  terrors,  should 
rule  over  them  eternally  must  turn  to  Jesus.  He  has  the  keys  of  Hades  and 
death  (Rev.  i.  18).  Those  who  make  their  reckoning  for  the  judgment-day  on 
any  other  rule  have  no  deliverance.  There  are  no  side  or  back  doors  by  which 
men  can  steal  out  of  their  graves  and  slink  into  heaven.  The  wide  door  of 
righteousness — on  that  day  most  wide — is  called  Jesus  ;  and  the  broad  way  of 
eternal  blessedness — on  that  day  most  wide  and  shining — is  also  called  Jesus, 
and  yet  again  Jesus.  Therefore  will  we  confess  Jesus  since  Jesus  is  our  life, 
because —  • 

I.  He  awakes  us  from  spiritual  death. — He  says  in  the  Gospel  that  He 
quickens  whom  He  will ;  and  that  the  hour  is  coming  in  which  the  dead  shall 
hear  His  voice  and  that  those  who  hear  shall  live — nay,  is  already  come.  The 
spiritual  awakening,  however,  is  the  condition  of  the  resurrection  unto  life  of 

149 


CHAP.  V.  HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


the  body.  When  the  Word  of  God  pierces  the  heart  it  also  penetrates  the 
mind.  When  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ  (2  Cor.  iv.  6)  lights 
up  the  soul  the  glorification  of  the  body  has  already  begun.  And  this  will  be 
apparent  in  victorious  might  when  the  change  comes,  for  which  we  shall  be 
sown  in  the  field  of  death  (1  Cor.  xv.).  When  men  who  have  lived  in  the 
world  without  true  faith  in  God,  without  love  to  Christ  or  hope  of  eternal 
life,  or  any  true  delight  in  his  Word,  in  prayer,  etc.,  are  awakened,  and,  looking 
around,  ask  how  they  stand,  they  see  how  far  they  were  from  the  divine  promises, 
how  ignorant  of  their  own  hearts  and  of  eternity.  Now  they  see  Christ,  and 
in  Christ  the  Father,  and  know  that  they  have  passed  fron  death  to  life.  This 
is  a  spiritual  resurrection.  It  is  that  condition  of  heart  in  which  men  no  more 
go  about  seeking  God's  mercy  because  of  their  sin,  crying  out  and  hoping  merely ; 
but  in  which  they  joyfully  appropriate  it — in  which  they  lay  hands  on  the 
treasures  of  eternity  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  say,  These  are  mine  through 
grace  ;  in  which  they  have  within  themselves  the  trustful  assurance  that  it  is 
not  necessary  any  more  to  seek  because  they  have  already  found.  This  experience 
is  the  same  to  all  believers,  and  it  is  always  connected  with  the  name  of  Jesus. 
This  name  is  life  to  the  dead  in  sin,  strength  and  refreshment  to  those  who  are 
quickened.  And  this  heavenly  life-essence  has,  God  be  thanked,  power  also  in  our 
day.  The  Father  loves  the  Son  and  gives  Him  ever  new  and  greater  work  to  do  in 
the  world.  And  the  porches  of  the  Church  remain,  and  are,  a  true  Bethesda.  God 
give  the  name  of  Jesus  power  with  us,  and  enable  us  to  walk  in  newness  of  life, 
enduring  to  the  end,  so  that  we  may  attain  to — 

II.  The  resurrection  from  the  dead  through  the  power  of  that  same  great 
name.     Every  one  who  has  anything  to  hope  for  in  life  shuns  the  ways  of  death. 
None  die  willingly,  else  it  had  not  been  written',  "All  men  must  die,"  but,  "  All  men 
may  die."     When  therefore  the  Lord  Jesus  here  promises  that  He  will  quicken 
men,  and  summon  the  dead,  who  have  done  good,  to  the  resurrection  of  life,  He 
evidently  meant  that  He  had  gained  for  the  miserable  race,  to  which  death 
brings  so  much  anguish  and  sorrow,  an  unspeaka,ble  blessing.     And  surely  He 
should  have  been  received  with  open  arms  by  all,  more  than  a  general  who  has 
victoriously  snatched  from  the  enemy  a  strong  fortress  which  they  had  taken. 
And  such  a  reception  surely  were  well  deserved  !     What  were  life  to  us  were  it 
to  end  in  death  ?     Our  greatest  desire  is  to  live,  not,  indeed,  in  this  life  only  : 
there  must  be  another  and  better  if  it  is  to  be  truly  life.     He  who  merely  brings 
us  in  one  hand  this  uncertain  life,  and  in  the  other  certain  death,  from  him 
I  turn  away.     He  cannot  be  my  benefactor  and  friend.     He  who  brings  me  life 
is  He  on  whom  I  shall  rely.     It  is  incomprehensible  how  many  people  can  live 
without  a  Saviour  from  death — especially  in  view  of  those  dear  to  them.     One 
has  a  wife  whom  he  cherishes  with  a  love  that  is  akin  to  devotion  ;  another  has 
children  whom  he  treasures  as  life's  jewels,  on  whom  he  sets  his  hopes,  for  whom 
he  will  do  his  utmost.     But  when  they  come  to  die,  does  he  leave  them  to  fare 
forth  without  asking  whether  it  be  true  that  he  shall  never  see  them  again,  or 
what  is  essential  in  order  to  re-union  with  them  1      There  must  surely  be  a 
great  chilling  of  love  when  men  can  endure  the  death  of  loved  ones  without 
having  any  certain  hope  of   life  eternal  for  them  and  for  themselves ;    and 
to  whom  the  only  mitigation  of  their  grief  is  that  the  image  of  the  departed 
may  be  retained  among  the  treasures  of  memory.     If  this  is  what  is  meant  by 
living,  then  it  were  better  never  to  have  lived.     But  this  truly  is  life,  when  we 
learn  and  are  assured  that  Jesus  will  bring  again  those  who  sleep  in  Him,  that 
there  will  not  only  be  a  glorification  of  the  souls,  but  of  the  dust  of  His  saints, 
and  that  our  highest  happiness  will  be  found  when  the  little  joys  of  earth  have 
come  to  an  end.     For  this,  Jesus,  and  He  alone,  has  become  our  surety.     And  in 
view  of  this  all  pure  souls  will  echo  the  confession  of  Peter :  Lord,  to  whom 

150 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  v. 


shall  we  go  ?     Thou  hast  the  words  of  eternal  life,  etc.  (vi.  68-9). — Abridged 
from  Lecher. 

Vers.  25,  26,  28,  29.  The  Son  as  Quickener  of  the  dead. — The  Son  is  the  giver 
of  life  because  He  has  life  in  Himself.  It  is  the  essence  of  the  Father  who  is  the 
living  God,  the  /  am ;  and  therefore  it  is  also  essentially  an  attribute  of  the  Son. 
And  as  the  Father  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead  but  of  the  living,  so  they  who 
hear  the  Son  shall  live.  And  as  death  is  but  a  type  of  spiritual  corruption — 
indeed  is  in  its  present  form  a  result  of  that  corruption — so  Jesus  quickens  the 
spiritually  dead  who  listen  to  His  voice ;  and  thus  through  His  life  imparted  to 
them  gives  the  promise  and  potency  of  the  resurrection  life.  That  hour  had 
already  struck  when  Jesus  spoke.  An  example  of  His  quickening  power  had 
just  been  given ;  but  they  were  not  to  wonder  at  what  had  been  done  and 
spoken  :  the  time  was  coming  when  greater  wonders  would  amaze  them  (Luke 
vii.  11  ;  John  xi.  43)  ;  and  these  would  be  but  prophecies  of  His  own  rising, 
which  is  the  prelude  and  prophecy  of  the  end,  when  death  shall  be  swallowed  up 
in  victory,  etc. 

I.  Christ  the  living  One  has  the  keys  of  Hades  and  death. — 1.  The  hour  is 
coming  (it  is  not  here  said  now  is,  as  this  refers  to  the  future)  when  all  who  are 
in  their  graves,  etc.  The  emphasis  is  here  upon  all,  and  the  reference  is  to  the 
bodies  of  men.  2.  The  souls  of  the  redeemed  had  already  been  quickened 
(ver.  25).  The  meaning  here  evidently  is  that  the  bodies  of  the  departed  shall 
be  raised,  and  united  with  the  spirits  awaiting  the  full  consummation  of  their 
bliss  or  woe.  3.  All  shall  go  forth  ;  "  whether  they  died  before  Christ's  birth,  to 
answer  according  to  the  measure  of  their  less  enlightened  conscience,  or  whether 
they  lived  in  the  full  noonday  of  Revelation, — all ;  those  who  have  sunk  into  the 
grave  honoured,  loved,  lamented,  or  who  died  with  none  to  receive  their  latest 
breath,  wherever  be  their  places  of  rest,  in  desert  or  ocean ;  all,  whether  they 
treasured  the  Word  of  the  Son  of  God  like  our  evangelist,  or  despised  it  like 
Pilate, — this  last  voice  louder  than  trumpet  tone  they  shall  hear  without 
exception,  and  attend  to  the  summons."  But  not  only  shall  all  hear  that 
dread  voice ;  it  shall  bring  about  a  manifestation  of  character  and  a  determina- 
tion of  destiny.     There  is  therefore — 

II.  The  resurrection  of  life. — 1.  They  that  have  done  good  shall  come  forth 
to  it.  And  in  the  order  in  which  the  two  resurrections  are  placed  we  see  the 
confirmation  of  the  apostolic  words,  so  pregnant  yet  mysterious :  "  The  dead  in 
Christ  shall  rise  first."  "This  is  the  first  resurrection"  (1  Thess.  iv.  16  ;  Rev. 
xx.  5).  2.  And  it  is  those  who  have  done  good  who  shall  participate  ix\  the 
resurrection  of  life,  i.e.  those  who  by  their  life  and  actions  declare  that  their 
spiritual  life  has  been  quickened  by  the  Redeemer  (ver.  25  ;  Matt.  xxv.  34-40). 
3.  They  shall  not  come  into  condemnation,  having  already  passed  from  death 
unto  life  (ver.  24).  Over  them  the  second  death  has  no  power ;  for  it  cannot 
touch  that  spiritual  life  which  is  in  them,  and  which  makes  them  one  with  the 
Redeemer.  Therefore  is  theirs  a  resurrection  o/*life  and  to  life,  to  be  "kings  and 
priests  unto  God  and  His  Christ."  It  is  a  resurrection  of  life  because  then  they 
shall  have  escaped  from  all  that  fettered  their  spiritual  life  in  its  exercise ;  and 
shall  have  arrived  at  the  full  consummation  of  their  salvation  and  the  happiness 
of  their  complex  nature,  when  the  glorified  spirit  has  been  reunited  to  the 
purified  and  glorified  body,  and  they  shall  be  like  Christ,  seeing  Him  as  He  is. 
But  there  is  also — 

III.  The  resurrection  of  judgment. — 1.  They  that  have  done  evil  shall  come 
forth  to  it.  Their  evil  doing  was  evidence  of  their  unrenewed  nature,  the 
proof  that  the  "  tree  was  corrupt "  (Matt.  vii.  17-19).  2.  Therefore  their 
resurrection,  because  they  had  no  life  in  them,  is  one  from  death  to  death 

151 


chap.  V.  HOMtLETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN. 


(Rev.  xx.  12-15  ;  Matt.  xxv.  41-46),  whatever  maybe  the  actual  meaning  of  the 
awful  imagery  used  in  Scripture  to  depict  this  terrible  state.  3.  But  in  any 
view  it  must  be  death ;  for  those  who  awake  to  the  resurrection  of  judgment 
have  severed  themselves  from  the  only  source  of  life — life  spiritual  and  eternal 
— Jesus  Christ.  "  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life ;  and  he  that  hath  not  the 
Son  of  God  hath  not  life  "  (1  John  v.  12).  "  Who  shall  abide  the  day  of  His 
coming,  who  shall  stand  when  He  appeareth  ?  "  Those  who  listen  to  that  voice, 
now  speaking  in  mercy,  of  the  Son  who  can  quicken  us  to  newness  of  life. 

u  O  God  of  truth  and  grace, 

Teach  us  that  death  to  shun, 
Lest  we  be  banished  from  Thy  face, 
And  evermore  undone." 

Montgomery. 

Vers.  22,  27,  30.  The  Son  as  Judge. — Christ  occupies  an  altogether  unique 
position  as  the  Redeemer  of  men.  He  is  our  Advocate ;  for  this  end  He  took 
on  Him  the  seed  of  Abraham,  and  passed  into  the  heavens  as  our  great  High 
Priest,  who  is  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities.  And  this  it  is  that 
peculiarly  fits  Him  to  be  our  Judge.  He  is  not  only  the  Omniscient,  looking  with 
piercing  glance  at  our  inmost  being,  and  laying  bare  our  most  secret  thoughts 
and  feelings ;  but  He  is  also  the  Son  of  man,  having  points  of  contact  and 
sympathy  with  humanity.  And  the  Father  hath  given  Him  authority  to  execute 
judgment  because  of  this — to  execute  judgment ;  but  in  the  fact  of  judgment  the 
Son  and  the  Father  are  one.  There  are  two  facts  that  seem  to  emerge  clearly 
in  this  and  other  Scripture  presentments  of  the  future  judgment,  the  first  in 
regard  to  the  materials,  and  the  second  in  regard  to  the  form  of  judgment.  But 
notice — 

I.  The  intuitions  and  even  the  reasoned  convictions  of  the  race  have  ever 
pointed  to  a  coming  judgment. — 1.  It  may  be  difficult  to  find  the  existence  of 
this  idea  clearly  defined  among  tribes  wholly  savage ;  although  it  is  generally 
found  in  some  form.  2.  But  when  men  rise  higher  in  the  scale  of  civilisation 
this  idea  emerges  more  strikingly,  forming  often  a  salutary  check  on  men's  evil 
passions  and  inclinations.  3.  Often,  however,  it  has  become  an  instrument  of 
terror  in  the  hands  of  a  corrupt  order  to  keep  men  under  their  power.  4.  The 
student  of  history  will  find  much  that  is  interesting  and  curious  regarding  this 
belief  in  the  annals  of  the  past.  From  the  intuition  of  and  belief  in  a  judgment 
sprang  the  Egyptian  Osiris  myth,  the  Greek  Minos  and  Rhadamanthus,  the 
Roman  Orcus.  5.  The  temples  and  shrines  of  antiquity  are  eloquent  indeed  in 
their  testimony  to  this  belief.  6.  Human  reason  also  on  a  view  of  our  present 
state,  with  its  inequalities,  etc.,  led  many  earnest  thinking  men  in  the  past 
to  entertain  the  belief  that  there  would  be  a  day  of  reckoning.  All  this  is 
confirmed  by  Scripture.     Turning  then  to  the  two  facts  spoken  of  we  notice — 

II.  The  materials  on  which  the  Judge  shall  base  His  decisions. — 1.  Men  are 
justified  hy  faith;  thus  it  may  be  truly  said  that  "  according  to  our  faith  will  it 
be  unto  us  in  that  day  "  (iii.  36).  2.  But  it  is  no  less  strongly  asserted  that 
men's  works  shall  form  the  ground  of  condemnation  or  acquittal.  3.  Faith  and 
works  indeed  are  in  a  sense  correlatives ;  and  both  are  simply  manifestations  of 
the  state  of  the  heart.  They  are  related  to  each  other  as  the  ray  to  the  flame, 
the  stream  to  the  fountain,  fragrance  to  the  flower.  They  are  both  the  produce 
of  an  inner  spiritual  life  which  comes  from  Christ.  4.  A  man's  works,  therefore, 
are,  as  the  fruit  of  his  inner  being,  the  witness  of  the  spirit  which  is  in  him,  the 
materials  on  which  he  will  be  judged  on  the  day  of  judgment.  Nothing  is  more 
clear  and  definite  in  Scripture  than  the  statement  of  the  truth,  that  in  that  day 
we  shall  "  receive  the  things  done  in  the  body  according  to  that  we  have  done, 

152 


ftOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  V. 


whether  it  be  good  or  bad  "  (2  Cor.  v.  10  ;  Rev.  xx.  13,  etc.).  5.  And  this 
truth  is  conformable  to  reason  as  well.  " Faith  without  works"  must  evidently 
be  dead,  and  therefore  worthless ;  and  the  proof  of  the  possession  of  spiritual 
life  in  Christ  is  a  life  of  new  obedience  to  the  glory  of  God.  This  brings  us  to 
the  next  fact. 

III.  The  form  of  the  judgment. — 1.  From  what  has  been  advanced  it  is 
evident  that  it  will  be  simply  a  manifestation  and  a  separation.  The  imagery 
used  in  Scripture  to  depict  the  reality  is  merely  employed  as  a  vehicle  to  bring 
home  the  truth  to  our  comprehension.  2.  Judgment  may  even  sometimes  be 
said  to  begin  here.  "  Some  men's  sins  are  open  beforehand,  going  before  to 
judgment,"  etc.  (1  Tim.  v.  24,  25).  Christ's  judgments  are  even  now  on  the 
earth.  3.  But  it  is  at  the  last  great  day  that  the  full  manifestation  will  take 
place,  when  the  Lord,  the  light  of  the  world,  shall  come  and  "  bring  to  light  the 
hidden  things  of  darkness,"  etc.  (1  Cor.  iv.  5).  The  good  shall  then  be  attracted 
to  the  source  of  all  goodness ;  and  the  wicked  shall  then  find  every  subterfuge 
vain,  and  seek  to  hide  themselves  from  Him  who  sits  upon  the  throne  (Rev.  vi. 
15,  16).  4.  The  sentence  indeed  will  be  that  already  pronounced  by  men  on 
themselves — it  will  be  the  declaration  of  what  they  are.  Sin — separation  from 
God,  spiritual  death.     Righteousness — union  with  Christ,  eternal  life. 

Therefore  the  books  which  will  on  that  day  be  opened  are  being  written  now. 
The  deeds  done  in  the  body  will  manifest  our  state.  "  The  night  is  far  spent, 
the  day  is  at  hand  :  let  us  therefore  cast  off  the  works  of  darkness,  and  let  us  put 
on  the  armour  of  light"  (Rom.  xiii.  12). 

Vers.  31-47.  Witnesses  to  Christ. — To  the  unbelieving  Jews  our  Lord  graciously 
pointed  out  these  witnesses  to  Himself,  and  to  the  divine  origin  and  purpose  of 
His  mission  which  they  had  despised  or  neglected.  Thus  another  opportunity 
was  given  to  them  to  reconsider  their  position.  In  the  first  place  He  speaks 
of— 

I.  His  witness  concerning  Himself. — 1.  It  was  matter  of  accusation  on  the 
part  of  the  Jews  afterward  (this  shows  how  falsely)  that  He  bore  witness  of 
Himself  (viii.  13).  But  in  view  of  the  ordinary  and,  in  our  present  state, 
necessary  custom  among  men  not  to  receive  personal  witness  alone,  as  the 
Incarnate  Son  He  forbore  to  do  so.  2.  Taking  His  word  in  connection  with 
His  life  and  works,  the  purity  of  His  life,  the  beauty  of  His  character,  the 
heavenliness  of  His  teaching,  the  majesty  of  His  miracles,  there  should  have 
been  no  difficulty  in  receiving  that  word  as  yea  and  amen.  And  it  is  so  to  all 
believing  hearts.  3.  But  in  condescension  to  men's  weakness,  and  to  take  out  of 
the  way  every  excuse  and  occasion  for  offence,  He  waived  His  own  inalienable 
right  as  the  Truth  to  bear  testimony  concerning  Himself.  How  great  His 
grace  and  condescension  !  (Phil.  ii.  6,  7).     He  appealed  first  to — 

II.  The  witness  of  John. — 1.  /  receive  not  witness  from  a  man,  said  our  Lord. 
The  testimony  of  His  Father  is  that  which  He  chiefly  relied  on  (ver.  37).  But 
graciously  remembering  the  human  weakness  of  His  hearers,  He  called  in  the 
testimony  of  the  Baptist.  2.  John  the  Baptist  indeed  bore  witness  loyally  to  Christ. 
He  was  as  a  Lamp  that  burneth  and  shineth,  although  it  was  a  light  that  must  wane; 
and  in  reference  to  him  men  for  a  time  realised  that  here  was  a  man  sent  from 
God  to  bear  witness  to  the  truth.  3.  And  what  was  the  witness  He  bore?  It 
was  that  Jesus  was  before  him ;  that  He  was  the  Lamb  of  God,  who  should  take 
up  and  be  ar  away  the  sin  of  the  world  ;  that  He  was  the  Son  of  God,  the 
heavenly  Bridegroom,  whose  voice  His  bride,  the  Church,  would  hear.  And 
what  other  claim  did  Jesus  advance  but  this  ?  This  witness,  therefore,  according 
to  their  own  first  estimate  of  him,  should  have  had  weight  with  the  Jews. 
But,  alas !  they  had  not  received  his  witness,  and  now  his  voice  had  gone  silent. 
But  however  great  the  Baptist  was  in  character  and  office,  and  however  powerful 

153 


chap.  v.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ;    ST.   JOHN. 


his  testimony  was  to  convince  unprejudiced  minds,  Christ  cannot  rest  on  his 
witness  alone.     There  is — 

III.  A  greater  witness  than  John. — 1.  The  works  which  the  Father  gave  Me  to 
finish,  etc.     Under  those  works  may  be  comprehended  our  Lord's  whole  activity. 

From  the  divine  side  His  works  are  contemplated  as  a  "  complete  whole."  But 
in  this  world,  during  His  incarnation  and  among  men,  they  were  done  by  Him 
at  the  time  and  in  the  place  where  they  were  best  calculated  to  carry  out  His 
purpose.  2.  But  more  especially  to  His  miracles  does  this  reference  point. 
These  are  all  to  be  regarded,  so  to  say,  as  one  witness.  They  form  a  cumulative 
testimony  of  the  redeeming  love  of  God  to  men  in  Christ.  In  them  the  old 
prophecies  of  the  wonders  and  blessedness  of  Messiah's  reign  were  fulfilled  and 
symbolised — they  were  types  of  the  spiritual  wonders  which  should  be  done  in 
His  name  (Isa.  xxxv.,  xli.).  In  the  spiritual  sphere  the  sick  in  soul  as  in 
body  were  healed,  and  to  the  poor  was  the  gospel  preached.  In  the  realm  of 
nature  the  winds  and  waves  obeyed  His  voice,  so  that  the  storm  was  stilled  ; 
the  water  was  turned  into  wine;  disease  and  death  yielded  to  His  word  of 
power.  All  these  miracles  witnessed  in  unison  to  the  divine  origin  and  mission 
of  the  incarnate  Son,  so  that  He  could  afterward  say,  "  If  I  do  not  the  works 
of  My  Father,"  etc.  (x.  37).  3.  If  one  like  Jesus  rose  among  men  to-day, 
would  calm,  right-thinking  men  doubt  for  a  moment  whence  He  derived  His 
beneficent  power  and  supermundane  wisdom  1  But  not  alone  do  the  works,  given 
to  Him  by  the  Father  to  finish,  testify  of  Christ. 

IV.  The  Father  Himself  bears  witness  to  the  Son. — 1.  The  Father's  witness 
here  seems  to  refer  to  all  the  testimony  borne  to  Jesus  as  the  Messiah,  outside 
of  His  personal  activity  as  the  Redeemer.  2.  This  was  given  especially  in  the 
testimony  of  the  Father  through  prophets  and  holy  men  of  old.  "  They  believed ; 
they  saw  My  day  and  were  glad ;  but  the  Word  that  came  to  them  finds  no 
response  in  your  hearts,  is  not  living  and  abiding  in  you.  Thus  you  are  unable 
to  rise  to  the  true  knowledge  of  the  Father,  and  have  neither  heard  His  voice  at 
any  time,  nor  seen  His  shape."  3.  But  the  Father's  testimony  was  given  also  in 
the  miraculous  occurrences  which  took  place  at  Christ's  birth  and  baptism  ;  and 
also  in  the  evident  concurrence  of  the  Father  in  Christ's  works  of  power.  And 
this  leads  naturally  up  to  the  last  witness  called  in. 

Y.  The  witness  of  Scripture. — 1.  "If  it  be  true,"  Jesus  seems  to  say,  "  that 
the  Father  hath  witnessed  of  Me  in  those  Scriptures  by  attending  to  the  outward 
letter  of  which  you  think  you  will  find  salvation,  then  know  that  they  indeed 
testify  of  Me."  2.  Christ  is  the  centre  of  Scripture — its  beginning,  middle,  and 
end.  And  He  came  to  fulfil  the  law  and  prophets ;  for  law  and  prophets  bear 
witness  to  Him. 

Yer.  39.  The  clearness  and  sufficiency  of  the  witness  of  Scripture. — We  notice 
these  objections :  Is  Scripture  intelligible  ?  Has  not  our  age  gone  far  beyond  it  ? 
Is  the  reading  of  Scripture  in  any  way  fruitful  ?  Does  it  merit  unconditional 
confidence  ?  In  opposition  to  this,  four  characteristic  traits  of  Holy  Scripture 
may  be  mentioned  in  its  honour.  It  is  pellucid  and  clear ;  it  is  sufficient  and 
adequate ;  it  is  fraught  with  authority  and  power.  And  each  of  these  charac- 
teristic traits  is  founded  on  the  fact  that  the  Scripture  bears  witness  to  Christ. 
Because  Scripture  witnesses  to  Christ  it  is — 

I.  Clear  and  pellucid. — But  how  ?  1.  Is  there  not  a  science  of  theology  which 
seeks  to  open  up  the  meaning  of  Scripture  by  means  of  languages,  etc.  1  Yes. 
Would  that  the  origin  and  aim  of  theology  were  less  forgotten  !  Luther's  most 
cherished  title  was  that  of  Doctor  of  Theology.  But  a  theologian  must  pray 
also,  "  What  shall  I  do  to  be  saved  ? "  or  Scripture  remains  to  him  a  book  with 
seven  seals.     2.  Truly,  even  to  the  prayerful  believer  many  things  in  Scripture 

154 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  \. 


remain  enigmatical.  We  see  here  in  a  glass  darkly ;  and  only  on  yonder  side, 
when  tongues  and  prophets  cease,  etc.,  shall  we  "  know  as  we  are  known " 
(1  Cor.  xiii.).  3.  But  is  it  not  clear  when,  as  the  gates  of  paradise  are  shut,  etc., 
in  the  wilderness  the  tender  promise  of  One  who  should  bruise  the  serpent's 
head  is  given,  etc.  1  A  unity  of  advance  from  book  to  book,  one  spirit  of  prophecy, 
one  cry  of  longing,  "  Come,  Lord  Jesus  "  :  "  He  it  is,"  said  John,  with  outstretched 
finger.  "To  Him  bare  all  the  prophets  witness,"  said  Peter.  "  In  Him  all  the 
promises  are  yea  and  amen,"  said  Paul.  "  Search  the  Scriptures,"  etc.,  said  Jesus 
Himself.     Here  is  clearness,  perspicuity,  to  those  who  are  pure  in  heart. 

II.  Search  the  Scripture;  it  is  sufficient  and  adequate. — 1.  It  contains  all 
which  suffices  for  the  movements  and  necessities  of  the  spiritual  life.  It  will  not 
satisfy  the  Athenian  desire  for  novelty.  It  would  then  be  no  book  from  eternity 
and  for  eternity.  2.  All  the  news-sheets  and  journals  of  last  night  are  this 
morning  withered  leaves.  And  all  the  journals  for  entertainment  and  amuse- 
ment may  help  to  drive  away  ennui,  but  not  the  fear  of  death,  the  terrors  of 
conscience,  or  the  horror  of  judgment.  3.  Scripture,  it  is  true,  will  not  minister 
to  that  importunate  curiosity  which  would  seek  to  tear  the  veil  from  the  spiritual 
world  ;  but  neither  does  it  anticipate  science,  nor  oppose  it.  What  men  can  gain 
by  culture  and  research  Scripture  does  not  reveal,  etc.  It  is  enough  that  the 
Originator  of  heaven  and  earth  is  the  same  as  the  Author  of  Scripture — that  He 
who  spake  the  first  word  will  speak  the  last — that  all  men  may  drink  from  this 
fountain  and  be  satisfied,  because  Holy  Scripture  gives  full  satisfaction,  since  it 
witnesses  of  Christ. 

III.  Search  the  Scripture;  it  is  fraught  with  power. — 1.  True,  a  number  of 
men  have  not  been  affected  by  it.  Philosophers  sit  in  their  chairs  and  despise 
the  Nazarene  and  His  eternal  word.  Leaders  of  thought  mock  at  the  deposed 
majesty  of  the  Bible.  Carnal  men,  etc.,  plume  themselves  on  the  idea  that  the 
doctrines  of  Scripture  are  coins  now  out  of  circulation.  Even  many  preachers — 
they  lead  a  dusty  existence,  for  their  Bibles  are  dust-covered.  2.  But  it  is 
comforting  that  so  long  as  there  are  men  weary  and  heavy  laden,  thirsting  after 
the  beatitudes  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  etc.,  so  long  as  there  are  pain  and 
sorrow  in  the  world,  where  a  Jairus  has  lost  a  child,  etc.,  etc.,  so  long  will  Holy 
Scripture  retain  its  power  and  prove  itself  effective  because  it  witnesses  of  Christ. 
But  the  Lord  had  to  complain  of  the  self-righteous  and  self-satisfied  :  "  Ye  will 
not  come  to  Me,"  etc. 

IV.  Does  Scripture  thereby  lose  its  credit  ?  Far  from  it ;  it  is  self-authenti- 
cating ;  it  witnesses  of  Christ — that  is  its  authority. — 1.  We  Protestants  have 
no  pope.  We  have  Christ.  He  is  the  Head  of  the  Church  yesterday,  to-day, 
and  for  ever.  We  do  not  rest  upon  tradition.  2.  Do  we  truly  receive  the 
Scripture?  There  is  a  dead  scriptural  knowledge  which  has  no  real  effect  on 
men's  hearts.  Some  read  not  at  all.  Others  hear  and  listen  occasionally,  but 
their  hearts  burn  not  either  with  misgiving  or  thankfulness.  And  what  shall  be 
said  of  those  who  forbid  the  free  circulation  of  Scripture  1  3.  It  is  the  Holy  Spirit 
who  delineates  Christ  in  Scripture,  the  same  Spirit  who  writes  His  name  on  our 
hearts,  makes  us  living  epistles.  4.  The  Scripture  concludes  all  under  sin  :  "  There 
is  none  that  doeth  good ;  no,  not  one."  It  includes  all  in  the  invitation  to  recon- 
ciliation. It  opens  to  all  the  way  of  redemption.  It  witnesses  to  Christ  as  God's 
Son.  The  revelation  it  includes  is  holy,  merciful,  simple,  deep.  All  in  it  is  so 
divine,  yet  so  human.  Come  under  this  authority.  Take  and  read.  Hold  fast 
that  which  thou  hast,  that  no  man  take  thy  crown. — Abridged  from  Dr.  R.  Kogel. 

Ver.  39.  Tolle,  lege. — How  shall  the  word  come  to  us  with  power  if  it  has 
not  already  done  so  ?  The  first  and  most  obvious  duty,  if  we  desire  the  word  to 
come  to  us  with  power,  is  to — 

155 


chap.  v.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


I.  Search  it. — Knowledge  of  the  contents  of  Scripture  comes  to  us  like  all 
other  knowledge.  Then  we  must  search  it  with  open,  teachable  hearts,  seeking 
the  truth,  and  prepared  to  follow  its  guidance  when  revealed  to  us.  You 
remember  the  incident  in  Augustine's  life  when  at  Milan,  tormented  between 
his  sinful  life  and  desires  and  the  desire  to  serve  God,  he  heard  in  the  garden  the 
words  tolle,  lege.  Hastening  to  the  house,  he  took  up  the  Pauline  epistles,  and  un- 
rolling the  MS.  at  Rom.  xiii.,  he  read :  "  Let  us  walk  honestly,  as  in  the  day ; 
not  in  revelling  and  drunkenness,  not  in  chambering  and  wantonness,  not  in 
strife  and  envying.  But  put  ye  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  It  was  a  voice  from 
God,  and  proved  the  turning-point  in  the  great  Church  father's  career.  We 
must,  then,  search  for  truth  in  it  as  for  hidden  treasure ;  and  we  must  search 
diligently  and  prayerfully,  not  forgetting  that  He  who  is  its  author  can  best 
make  plain  to  us  His  own  word.  Guizot,  in  the  following  sentences,  describes 
this  power  of  the  word  :  "  Where  has  the  Christian  faith  been  best  defended  ? 
There  where  the  reading  of  the  sacred  books  has  been  a  general  and  assiduous 
part  of  public  worship — there  where  it  takes  place  in  the  interior  of  families  and 
in  solitary  meditation.  It  is  the  Bible,  the  Bible  itself,  which  combats  and 
triumphs  most  efficaciously  in  the  war  between  incredulity  and  belief." 

II.  But  all  this  will  be  insufficient  unless  we  use  the  Bible  experimentally, 
i.e.  not  only  to  search  it  and  learn  it,  but  to  act  according  to  its  precepts  and 
commands.  This  is  the  highest  and  best  proof  of  the  Bible's  power.  "  If  any 
man  will  to  do  His  will,  He  shall  know  of  the  doctrine  whether  it  be  of  God." 

III.  There  are  many  who  come  to  the  Bible,  not  to  find  what  it  says,  but  to 
find  in  it  support  for  their  own  ideas.  What  wonder  if  it  fail  to  profit  them  ? 
But  the  chief  hindrance  to  the  receiving  of  the  word  with  power  is  indifference 
to  the  truth  which  it  contains,  and,  worse  still,  a  positive  disinclination  to  have 
its  light  brought  to  bear  on  the  dark  corners  of  the  nature.  Many  do  not 
wish  to  be  disturbed  in  the  enjoyment  of  their  favourite  vice  or  sin ;  and,  like 
Felix,  though  they  may  tremble  when  in  some  way  the  word  reaches  conscience, 
yet  they  put  it  away  from  them  to  "  a  more  convenient  season."  But  that  is 
folly  in  the  last  degree,  ruinous  for  time,  fatal  for  eternity  !  Let  ours  be  the 
wise  course  ever  to  search,  learn,  and  inwardly  digest  that  divine  wisdom  which 
makes  wise  unto  salvation. 

"  The  sacred  page 
With  calm  attention  scan  1     If  on  thy  soul, 
As  thou  dost  read,  a  ray  of  purer  light 
Break  in,  oh,  check  it  not ;  give  it  full  scope  ! 
Admitted,  it  will  break  the  clouds  which  long 
Have  dimmed  thy  sight,  and  lead  thee  till  at  last 
Conviction,  like  the  sun's  meridian  beams, 
Illuminate  thy  mind." 

Hayes. 

"  Within  this  awful  volume  lies 
The  mystery  of  mysteries  : 
Happiest  they  of  human  race 
To  whom  their  God  has  given  grace 
To  read,  to  fear,  to  hope,  to  pray, 
To  lift  the  latch,  to  force  the  way  ; 
But  better  had  they  ne'er  been  born 
Who  read  to  doubt,  or  read  to  scorn." 

Walter  Scott. 

Yer.  39.  Why  are  we  to  search  the  Scriptures  ? — The  Scriptures  here  spoken  of 
are  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  ;  and  as  it  is  known  how  highly  the  Jews  prized 
those  writings  as  the  oracles  of  God,  the  force  of  Christ's  appeal  may  be 
estimated.      And  if  these  sacred  Scriptures  really  did  testify  of   Him,  these 

156 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  v. 


unbelieving  Jews  were  treasuring  up  wrath  for  themselves.  How  earnestly 
then  should  they  have  searched  !  But  they  were  wilfully  blind,  and  failed 
therefore  to  lay  hold  on  that  eternal  life  which  their  Scriptures  revealed 
(Matt.  xiii.  15).     Consider  the  importance  of  the  Scriptures. 

I.  They  are  the  oracles  of  God. — 1.  The  oracles  were  the  responses  by  supposed 
divinities,  heathen  gods,  to  the  inquiries  of  their  worshippers.  Some  divine 
afflatus  was  supposed  to  be  communicated  to  the  priests  or  priestesses  who  served 
at  the  heathen  shrine ;  or  the  image  of  the  god  was  itself  by  sign  or  speech 
supposed  to  communicate  the  divine  message ;  or  the  message  was  communicated 
by  certain  natural  phenomena,  etc.  2.  The  oracles  of  the  Jews  came  to  them 
by  revelations  through  prophetic  men  during  many  centuries.  They  are  con- 
tained in  the  books  we  now  call  the  Old  Testament;  and  the  nature  of  their 
contents,  and  the  striking  unity  shown  in  the  progressive  unfolding  of  the 
revelation,  lift  them  high  as  heaven  above  the  ambiguous  and  often  foolish 
oracles  of  heathendom.  3.  They  contain  what  men  never  could  have  discovered 
for  themselves  concerning  the  nature  of  God,  the  way  of  access  to  Him,  and  the 
hope  and  promise  of  eternal  life. 

II.  They  bear  especial  witness  to  Christ. — 1.  The  whole  ritual  of  sacrifice 
and  many  of  the  enactments  of  the  law  typified  His  atoning  work,  and  thus 
pointed  forward  to  Him.  2.  The  prophets  plainly  foretold  Him — His  person  \ 
His  work  and  the  glory  of  His  kingdom  ;  His  sufferings  and  death.  3.  The 
details  they  give  are  minute  and  circumstantial,  e.g.  the  period  and  place  of  His 
birth ;  His  betrayal ;  His  meek  endurance  under  trial  and  scourging ;  His  cry 
on  the  cross  as  of  One  forsaken ;  His  sepulture  in  a  stranger's  tomb,  etc.,  etc. 
4.  Moses  and  the  prophets,  indeed,  testify  of  Him  ;  blot  Him  out  of  their  writings, 
and  these  will  become  confused  and  enigmatic. 

III.  They  are  an  authoritative  rule  of  life. — 1.  None  of  the  teachers  of 
heathen  antiquity,  however  great  intellectually  and  morally,  could  give  definite 
and  authoritative  rules  of  life  and  action.  What  they  did  give  was  founded  on 
partial  knowledge,  and  was  therefore  often  misleading.  Take,  e.g.,  even  such  a 
great  philosophical  work  as  "  The  Republic  of  Plato."  2.  Those  who  take  the 
Bible  as  their  rule  of  life  are  led  into  the  ways  of  righteousness,  which  are  in 
the  end  ways  of  pleasantness  and  peace.  These  things  being  so,  we  ought 
therefore  to — 

IV.  Search  the  Scriptures  (remembering  that  to  us  is  given  a  most  glorious 
and  clear  revelation) — 

1.  Sincerely,  desiring  to  know  the  truth  and  conform  to  it.  If  we  believe 
them  to  be  God's  Word  we  must  search,  and  we  must  obey,  even  when  it  is  not 
agreeable  to  flesh  and  blood  to  do  what  is  commanded. 

2.  Diligently. — How  much  more  earnestly  and  diligently  do  men  attend  often 
to  other  matters  !  The  Scriptures  are  worthy  of  our  most  earnest  attention. 
Dr.  Johnson,  when  dying,  said  to  a  young  friend,  "  Head  the  Bible  every  day  of 
your  life." 

3.  Prayerfully. — There  can  be  no  true  success  in  any  good  undertaking  unless 
we  seek  it  in  prayer.  Much  lies  in  this,  for  we  need  the  Spirit's  aid  in  order 
that  our  carnal  minds  may  understand  spiritual  things. 

4.  With  a  view  to  spread  the  knowledge  of  the  word. — Has  it  blessed  our  souls  1 
Then  we  must  and  will  seek  to  bring  the  same  blessing  to  others. 

Vers.  40-47.  Hindrances  to  faith. — The  Jewish  religion  had  become  largely 
a  racial  and  national  question  with  the  Jews.  It  was  their  nation,  their  religion, 
which  they  were  concerned  about ;  not  God's  honour  and  glory  and  the  advance 
of  divine  truth.  They  were  no  longer  emulous  of  the  blessing  of  Jehovah  to  the 
end  that  His  saving  health  might  be  known  among  all  nations  (Ps.  lxvii.). 

157 


chap.  V.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


They  had  fallen  far  below  the  spiritual  conceptions  of  the  prophets  (Isa,.  lx.),  and 
even  of  the  law  (Deut.  vi.  5).  The  glory  of  their  nation,  of  themselves,  was  their 
paramount  aim  and  end.  They  would  receive  any  one  who  came  in  his  own  name 
(false  Christs  and  prophets,  Matt.  xxiv.  24)  if  only  such  would  promise  to  carry 
out  their  aims  for  the  national  glory.  This  being  their  state  of  mind,  it  was  not 
wonderful  that  there  was  antagonism  on  their  part  toward  Jesus,  and  enmity  in 
their  hearts  to  Him.  "  Ye  will  not  come  to  Me,"  etc.  (ver.  40).  The  reasons 
given  for  this  are — 

I.  The  want  of  love  to  God. — 1.  It  was  not  the  love  of  God  the  Jews  sought 
supremely ;  it  was  their  own  glory,  their  proud  supremacy  as  the  favoured  race 
of  heaven.  2.  And  yet  they  professed  to  have  the  love  of  God  in  their  hearts. 
At  least,  they  bound  on  forehead,  neck,  and  arm,  in  writing  on  scrolls,  those 
precepts  of  the  law  which  gave  love  the  first  place  (Deut.  vi.  4-9,  13-22,  etc.) ; 
and  the  Pharisees  especially  made  conspicuous  the  frontlet  case  containing  those 
scrolls  (Matt,  xxiii.  5).  3.  But  our  Lord  saw  that  those  outward  declarations  did  not 
express  any  inward  truth.  Their  hearts  were  destitute  of  the  love  they  outwardly 
professed.  4.  And  as  the  love  of  God  was  not  in  them,  how  could  they  recognise 
it  when  it  came  to  them  in  Christ  %  Those  among  them  who  truly  had  that  love 
did  not  fail  to  recognise  the  witness  of  God  to  Christ  (Nathanael,  Nicodemus, 
etc.).  But  in  those  in  whom  the  love  of  the  world  reigned  the  love  of  God  was 
shut  out.  So  is  it,  so  must  it  ever  be.  The  consequence  of  this  want  of  love  to 
God  leads  to  the  second  reason — 

II.  The  mistaking  the  chief  end  of  man. — 1.  The  chief  purpose  of  man's 
creation,  the  end  of  his  being,  is  the  divine  glory.  There  can  be  no  higher 
aim.  All  our  life  and  all  its  actions  should  be  directed  to  this  end  (1  Cor.  x.  31). 
2.  But  they  who  have  no  love  to  God  in  their  hearts  do  not  and  cannot,  so  long 
as  they  remain  in  this  state,  glorify  God  in  their  lives,  although  God,  who  makes 
the  wrath  of  men  to  praise  Him,  can  make  even  those  loveless  lives  redound  to 
His  honour.  3.  How  different  was  it  with  Christ !  He,  being  in  the  form  of 
God,  deemed  not  His  equality  with  God  a  thing  to  be  grasped  at,  but  emptied 
Himself,  taking  upon  Him  the  form  of  a  servant,  etc.  (Phil.  ii.  6-11).  And 
He  sought  not  glory  from  men,  but  from  His  Father  (xvii.  5,  etc.).  4,  No 
wonder,  then,  that  the  Jews  did  not  perceive  the  glory  of  that  life  to  which  Jesus 
sought  to  win  them,  since  their  desire  was  for  an  outward,  visible,  personal  glory, 
and  the  divine  glory  only  as  it  could  come  to  pass  that  way.  The  glory  of  Christ 
lay  in  what  seemed  the  reverse  of  glory— in  His  humility  (xiii.  3,  4),  in  His 
cross  (xvii.  4),  in  His  self -sacrificing  love,  in  His  obedience  unto  death  (Phil.  ii.  8,  9). 
5.  And  in  His  life  of  obedience  Christ  was  men's  example  (1  Pet.  ii.  11-25). 

III.  This  want  of  love  to  God  and  mistaking  of  the  end  of  life  led  finally  to 
their  rejection  of  the  elder  revelation  and  of  Him  who  was  its  fulfilment. — 
1.  Jesus  came  not  to  judge  the  world,  but  to  save  it,  in  His  life  on  earth. 
Therefore  He  said,  "  Do  not  think  that  I  will  accuse  you,"  etc.  (ver.  45).  It  was 
enough  to  point  out  that,  however  vehemently  they  claimed  Moses  as  their  guide 
and  professed  to  follow  him,  they  entirely  missed  or  rejected  the  very  aim  and 
end  of  the  Mosaic  economy.  2.  The  divine  righteousness  and  glory  are  the 
purpose  for  which  the  law  was  established  (Bom.  ii.).  But  the  Jews  failed 
miserably  in  their  interpretation  and  observance  of  the  law  (Rom.  ii.  23),  and  thus 
failed  to  grasp  its  purpose  (Bom.  ii.  29).  3.  Above  all,  they  failed  to  see  that  the 
end  of  the  law  could  be  reached  only  through  that  substance  which  its  shadowy 
types  and  its  predictions  foretold  (ver.  46).  Moses  wrote  of  Christ.  The  Thorah 
is  here  ascribed  to  Moses  personally,  and  the  reference  is  to  that  special  promise 
(Deut.  xviii.  18)  for  whose  fulfilment  the  Jews  professed  to  be  waiting,  and  as  a 
preparation  for  which  the  types  and  ceremonies  of  the  law  were  instituted 
(Col.  ii.  17).     Thus,  not  seeing  the  end  or  purpose  of  the  law,  how  could  they 

158 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  v. 


understand  Him  who  came  to  fulfil  the  law  ?  These  men  had  reproached  Jesus 
with  breaking  the  law  \  He  showed  them  that  they  did  not  even  understand 
the  law. 

IV.  Application. — 1.  A  mere  unenlightened  reception  of  Scripture,  without 
spiritually  guided  searching  of  it,  is  not  sufficient  (1  Cor.  ii.  14).  2.  The  elder 
Revelation  agrees  with  the  new  Revelation  of  Christ.  Novum  Testamentum 
in  Vetere  latet,  vetus  Testamentum  in  Novo  patet.  3.  The  rejection  of  the  elder 
Revelation  must  inevitably  lead  to  the  rejection  of  the  new.  4.  The  word  of  God 
in  Old  Testament  and  New  will  remain  a  sealed  book  to  those  who  have  no  true 
love  of  God  in  their  hearts,  and  who  seek  merely  their  own  honour  and  glory. 
The  true  end  of  human  existence  is  hidden  from  them ;  hence  they  reject  that 
word  which  reveals  it,  and  that  Saviour  who  came  to  exemplify  it  and  make  it 
possible  for  men. 


HOMILETIC  NOTES. 

Vers.  22,  27,  29.   The  Son  of  Man  Ver.  39.  The  true  meaning  of  Scrip  - 

as  Judge. — The  thought  of  judgment  ture  not  hidden. — Search  the  Scriptures. 

is  wholesome  in  that  it  wrarns  us  to  Better,  Ye  search  the  Scriptures.     The 

work  out  our  salvation  with  fear  and  question  whether  the  mood  is  imperative 

trembling.     We  readily  think  of  Christ  or  indicative,  whether  we  have  here  a 

as  the  King  who  cometh  to  Zion  meek  commandment  to  examine  the  writings 

and  lowly,  who  calls  to  men :  "  Come  of    the    Old    Testament    canon,    or   a 

unto    Me,    all    ye   that    labour,"    etc.  reference  to  their  habit  of  doing  so,  is 

(Matt.  xi.  28).      But  we  should  also  one  which  has  been  discussed  through 

represent  Him  to  ourselves  as  He  to  the  whole  history  of  New  Testament 

whom  the  Father  hath  committed  the  exposition,  and  one  on  which  the  opinion 

right  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead.  of  those  best  qualified  to  judge  has  been, 

Consider  : —  and  is,  almost  equally  divided.    Observe 

I.  Those  whom  He  shall  judge. —  that  all  the  parallel  verbs  in  the  con- 
All  people  who  have  lived  shall  stand  text  are  in  the  indicative.  Why 
before  Him  (vv.  28,  29).  2.  He  shall  should  there  be  a  sudden  change  of 
separate  the  good  from  the  evil  (v.  29).  construction    in    this    instance    only  % 

II.  The  law  according  to  which  He  We  find,  then,  this  order  of  thought. 
shall  judge. — 1.  It  is  ultimately  the  1.  God  has  in  the  Old  Testament 
rule  of  love  to  Himself  and  His  brethren  witnessed  of  Me,  but  ye,  with  unrecep- 
by  which  faith  shows  itself  sincere,  tive  hearts,  have  never  heard  a  voice  nor 
and  which  manifests  itself  in  a  holy  seen  a  shape  of  God  (ver.  37).  2.  Ye  have 
and  loving  activity  (1  John  iii.  18,  iv.  7,  not  His  Word  dwelling  in  you,  or  it 
11,  etc.).  2.  Want  of  love  is  ulti-  would  have  witnessed  of  Me  (ver.  38). 
mately  the  cause  of  condemnation ;  3.  Instead  of  receiving  the  Scriptures 
for  love  to  God  will  lead  to  service  for  as  a  living  power  within  you,  ye  search 
Him  ;  and  also  to  fruitful  activity  and  explain  the  letter  of  them  from 
in  the  world  toward  our  brethren  without  (ver.  39).  4.  Ye  think  they 
(1  John  iv.  20,  21). —  From  J.  L.  contain  eternal  life,  and  hence  your 
Sommer.  reverence  for  them  (ver.  39).     5.  They 

really  are  witnesses  of    Me,   and  yet 

The  great  day  of  judgment. — I.  It  is  you,  seeking  in  them  eternal  life,  are 

drawing  near  for  all  mankind(ver.  28).  not  willing  to  come  to  Me  that  ye  may 

II.  It  will  bring  the  good  and  the  have  this  life.  It  is  believed  that  this 
evil  to  light  (ver.  29).  is  the  most  natural  interpretation.  .  .  . 

III.  It  will  determine  the  lot  of  each  The  only  objection  to  it  of  weight  is 
individual  (Dan.  xii.  13). — Idem.  that   the    Greek   word   for   "  search" 

159 


CHAP.   V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


(cpeware)  is  one  which  would  not 
have  implied  blame.  It  means  to 
search  after,  track,  inquire  after 
(cp.  vii.  52) ;  but,  surely,  this  is  just 
the  expression  for  the  literal  spirit  in 
which  the  rabbis  treated  their  scrip- 
tures. Moreover,  it  is  not  the  searching 
which  is  matter  for  blame,  but  the 
fact. of  the  searching  and  not  finding, 
which  is  matter  for  wonder.  Here, 
too,  as  elsewhere,  the  argument  from 
the  meaning  of  a  Greek  word  must  be 
pressed  only  within  strict  limits  when 
we  remember  that  it  represents  in 
translation  a  then  current  Hebrew 
word.  The  Hebrew  language  had  a 
word   which    just   at   that   time   was 


frequent  on  every  rabbi's  lips,  and 
which  exactly  corresponds  to  it.  As 
early  as  the  Book  of  Chronicles  we 
find  mention  of  the  Midrashim  or  Com- 
mentaries. .  .  .  May  it  not  be,  then, 
that  the  true  meaning  of  these  words 
is  to  be  found  in  their  bearing  upon 
these  rabbinic  lives  and  works  1 — "  Ye 
make  your  Midrashim  on  the  Scrip- 
tures ;  ye  explain  and  comment,  and 
seek  for  hidden  mystic  meaning  ;  ye  do 
all  this  because  ye  think  they  contain 
eternal  life ;  their  true  meaning  is  not 
hidden  ;  they  tell  of  life,  and  ye  who 
seek  it  do  not  hear  them,  and  will  not 
come  unto  Me  that  ye  might  have 
life." — Watkins. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  25.  The  resurrection  the  hope  of 
humanity. — We  are  told  that  the  most  savage 
nations  live  in  a  constant  horror  of  death  ; 
their  life  is  one  long  flight  from  it ;  it 
poisons  their  happiness ;  it  bursts  like  a 
ghastly  phantom  upon  their  moments  of 
peace.  It  is  not  death  the  agony  that  they 
shudder  at,  though  there  may  be  something 
terrible  in  that,  but  death  the  mystery,  and 
"next  to  God  the  most  infinite  of  mysteries;" 
death  that  slips  the  last  cable  of  the  soul, 
and  sets  it  afloat  on  the  shoreless  sea  of  an 
eternal  world  ;  there  it  is  that  lies  for  them 
"  the  mute,  ineffable,  voiceless  horror  before 
which  all  human  courage  is  abashed."  Can 
you  wonder  at  this  continuous  dread  1  They 
know  of  no  world  beyond  the  grave,  and 
what  would  life  be  without  the  trust  in  that  ? 
How  purposeless  and  mean,  how  weary  and 
hopeless ;  a  journey  leading  nowhither ;  a 
gate  opening  upon  nothing ;  a  ship  sent 
forth  only  that  she  may  founder  in  the  bare, 
unknown  deeps.  Look  steadily  at  life,  and 
consider  what  it  is ;  how  changeful,  how 
short,  how  sorrowful.  A  light  and  thought, 
less  youth,  of  which  the  beauty  and  bright- 
ness pass  rapidly  away ;  and  after  that, 
chance  and  change  and  bereavement;  cravings 
that  meet  with  no  fulfilment ;  the  dying 
away  of  hopes,  the  disappointment  of  ambi- 
tion,—a  disappointment,  perhaps,  more 
bitter  when  it  is  gratified  than  when  it  fails; 
the  struggle  for  a  livelihood,  the  cares  of  a 
family,  the  deceitfulness  of  friendship,  the 
decay  and  weakness  of  health  and  faculties, 
as  inevitable  old  age  comes  on  :  and  all  the 
while  heard  at  every  silent  interval  with  a 
plainness  that  creeps  along  the  nerves,  as 
though  our  ears  caught  the  pacing  of  some 
ghostly  tread  in  the  far-off  corridors  of  some 
lonely   haunted    house— all    the  while  the 

J60 


monotonous  echoing  of  death's  mysterious 
footfall,  heard  louder  and  louder,  as  day  by 
day  he  approaches  nearer  and  yet  more  near. 
And  all  this  for  so  short  a  time  that  our 
petty  schemes  are  broken  off  perpetually 
like  a  weaver's  thread,  and  the  meanest 
works  of  our  hand  survive  us  and  last  on  for 
other  generations,  to  which  our  very  names 
shall  be  covered  with  darkness.  "And  is 
this  all  ?  Is  this,  then,  the  period  of  our 
being  ?  Must  we  end  here  ?  Did  we  come  into 
the  world  only  to  make  our  way  through  the 
press,  amid  many  jostlingsand  hard  struggles, 
with  at  best  only  a  few  brief  deceitful 
pleasures  interspersed,  and  so  go  out  of  it 
again  ?  "  Alas  for  man  if  this  were  all,  and 
nought  beyond,  O  earth !  And  then  again, 
if  there  be  no  resurrection  of  the  dead,  how 
infinitely  pathetic,  how  quite  unspeakably 
heartrending  would  be  the  phenomena  of 
death  itself.  "  If  Christ  be  not  risen,  then 
is  our  preaching  vain  ;  and  your  faith  is  also 
vain;  and  we  are  found  false  witnesses  of 
God  ;  and  ye  are  yet  in  your  sins  ;  and " — 
all  this  is  terrible  enough,  but  mark  the 
pathos  of  the  climax,  a  pathos  too  deep  for 
tears — "and  then  they  also  that  are  fallen 
asleep  in  Christ  are  perished."  Perished  ! 
what  a  world  of  desolate  anguish,  what  sighs 
of  unutterable  despair,  lie  hid  in  that  strange 
word.  Most  of  you  are  too  young  to  have 
ever  stood,  as  all  the  eldest  of  us  have,  by 
the  bedside  of  death  ;  but  none  of  you  are 
too  young  to  feel  how  awful  such  a  scene 
would  be  if  we  did  not  believe  and  know 
that  Christ  has  risen  from  the  dead.  There 
on  that  low  bed  lies  one  we  loved,  for  whom 
our  whole  hearts  yearned,  to  whom  our  whole 
affections  clung  ;  he  was  noble  and  good,  he 
was  one  of  the  very  few  who  loved  us,  and  he 
would  have  undergone  for  us  any  sacrifice. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.    V. 


and  he  had  borne  bravely  and  meekly  the 
buffets  of  the  world.  It  was  a  short  life, 
hardly  checkered  (good  and  beautiful  and 
upright  as  it  was),  hardly  checkered  with 
any  sunshine  amid  its  shade ;  and  now  it  is 
over ;  it  ends  here  :  the  bright  eye  is  dull 
and  glazed ;  the  gentle  face  is  white  and  cold ; 
the  good  brave  heart  has  ceased  to  beat. 
He  has  no  more  a  part  in  anything  that  is 
done  under  the  sun.  The  day  was  when  he 
would  have  sprung  to  meet  us,  his  whole 
,face  brightened  at  our  approach  ;  and  now 
he  lies  there,  cold  to  the  voice  of  our 
affection,  unmoved  by  our  hot  tears,  with  all 
the  light  of  the  soul  quenched  within  him ; 
gone,  if  there  be  no  resurrection,  to  a  dreary 
land  where  all  things  are  forgotten ;  all  that 
was  good  in  him,  all  that  was  great  in  him, 
perished  for  ever,  as  we  and  ours  must  perish 
soon.  Oh,  if  there  were  no  resurrection, 
how  could  we  bear  it  ?  Would  not  the 
thought  crush  us  down  for  very  grief  into 
the  same  open  grave  ?  Many  of  you  will 
have  read  the  famous  vision  of  him  who  saw 
a  bridge  of  threescore  and  ten  arches,  which 
spanned  the  rolling  waters  of  a  prodigious 
tide,  and  how  the  Genius  said  to  him,  "  The 
bridge  thou  seest  is  Human  Life ;  consider 
it  attentively."  "And  as  I  looked  more 
attentively  I  saw  several  of  the  passengers 
dropping  through  the  bridge  into  the  great 
tide  that  flowed  underneath  it;  and  upon 
examination  perceived  that  there  were  in- 
numerable trap-doors  concealed  in  the  bridge, 
which  the  passengers  no  sooner  trod  upon, 
but  they  fell  through  them  into  the  tide  and 
immediately  disappeared.  My  heart  was 
filled  with  a  deep  melancholy  to  see  several 
dropping  unexpectedly  in  the  midst  of  mirth 
and  jollity,  and  catching  at  everything  that 
stood  by  them  to  save  themselves.  Multi- 
tudes were  very  busy  in  the  pursuit  of  bubbles 
that  glittered  in  their  eyes  and  danced  before 
them  ;  but  often,  when  they  thought  them- 
selves within  reach  of  them,  their  footing 
failed  and  down  they  sank.  *  Alas ! '  said  I, 
*  man  was  made  in  vain  !  How  is  he  given 
away  to  misery  and  mortality  !  tortured  in 
life  and  swallowed  up  in  death  ! ' " — F.  W. 
Farrar. 

Vers.  27,  29.  The  Judge  is  at  the  gate — 
prepare  to  meet  Him. — Beloved!  in  this 
passage  are  not  still  greater  things  promised 
to  the  faithful  ?  Verily,  verily,  etc.  (ver.  24). 
Already  here  below  is  the  believer  possessor 
of  life  eternal,  already  here  below  is  he  a 
victor  over  death,  and  is  freed  from  judg- 
ment. Behold,  whosoever  cometh  to  the 
long-suffering  Judge,  repentant,  and  judges 
himself  in  the  penitent  publican's  spirit 
(Luke  xviii.  13),  shall  not  come  into  judg- 
ment. Now  sickness,  poverty,  loss,  isolation, 
misjudgment,  separation,  affliction,  and  every 
sorrow  will  tend  to  bring  you  to  the  goal — 
in  that  you  will  be  more  than  conquerors 


in  all  these  things.  In  the  Lord  you  have 
righteousness  and  strength.  Consider  your 
activity  !  That  which  impels  you,  that  is 
yourself.  And  whither  you  are  impelled 
there  will  you  remain.  In  the  direction  in 
which  the  tree  inclines  it  falls  and  there  lies. 
Turned  away  from  or  turned  toward  Jesus 
— which  is  your  position,  your  inner,  your 
eternal  sentence  on  yourself  ?  .  .  .  There  is 
a  judgment,  the  earth  is  rolling  onward  and 
mankind  are  pressing  swiftly  toward  it,  and 
the  Son  of  mau  will  destroy  the  house  built 
on  sand,  and  cast  the  guest  without  the 
wedding  garment  into  outer  darkness,  and 
will  say  to  the  unmerciful  with  all  their  sins 
of  omission  :  "  Inasmuch,"  etc.  (Matt.  xxv. 
45).  Two  great  divine  works  of  Jesus  are 
referred  to  in  this  passage — the  work  of 
resurrection  and  the  work  of  judgment.  In 
view  of  them  should  all  men  honour  the 
Son  as  they  honour  the  Father.  Kiss  the 
Son  !  Pay  homage  to  Him  while  it  is  called 
to-day  !  Pray  to  Him  in  the  holy  adornment 
of  a  renewed  mind,  of  a  living  obedience,  of 
a  thorough  purification  through  His  blood, 
so  that  He  may  not  be  angry  with  you — 
when  His  anger  is  kindled  but  a  little  ! 
Woe  to  all  who  oppose  Him  !  Blessed  are 
all  they  who  put  their  trust  in  Him  I — Dr. 
R.  Kogel. 

Ver.  35.  The  "  burning  and  shining  light. 
— John  the  Baptist  was  a  burning  and  shin- 
ing light.  He  was  burning  with  zeal  for  the 
honour  of  God,  and  with  love  for  the  welfare 
of  His  people  ;  he  shone  with  clear  ray  on 
the  sins  of  all  classes  and  conditions  of  his 
contemporaries,  but  also  with  mild,  gentle, 
and  comforting  beams  on  the  work  and 
person  of  the  coming  Saviour.  Israel,  how- 
ever, did  not  take  John's  earnestness  in 
earnest.  Now  they  childishly  greeted  him 
with  faultfinding  and  calumny,  anon  and 
also  childishly  with  wonder  and  astonish- 
ment, but  remained  at  all  times  debtors  to 
that  repentance  which  was  the  chief  con- 
cern. They  boasted  and  made  a  show  of  the 
famed  preacher  of  righteousness,  of  their 
great  countryman,  yes,  even  of  the  powerful 
preacher  of  repentance.  They  toyed  with 
the  impressions  he  made  ;  and  even  basked 
in  them.  For  a  little  while  they  were  con- 
tented to  rejoice  in  his  light,  if  they  could 
only  be  spared  the  trouble  of  effecting  in 
themselves  a  moral  reformation.  It  is  even 
related  of  a  Herod  that  he  willingly  heard  the 
imprisoned  prophet,  and  did  many  things  in 
obedience  to  his  word  (Mark  vi.  20).  That 
John  was  worthy  of  being  believed,  the 
rulers  of  the  people  themselves  showed  when 
they  sent  a  deputation  of  priests  and  Levites 
to  him.  But  if  the  herald  were  great,  how 
much  greater  and  more  worthy  of  belief 
was  the  King ! — Dr.  R.  Kogel. 

Ver.  39.   We  honour  God  by  receiving  His 


M 


161 


CHAP.   V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


Word. — The  Word  is  the  true  manna ;  it  is 
the  bread  which  came  down  from  heaven; 
it  is  the  key  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  it 
is  the  savour  of  life  unto  life  ;  it  is  the 
power  of  God  unto  salvation.  In  it  God 
showeth  unto  us  His  might,  His  wisdom,  and 
His  glory.  By  it  He  will  be  known  of  us ; 
by  it  He  will  be  honoured  by  His  creatures. 
Whatsoever  truth  is  brought  unto  us  contrary 
to  the  Word  of  God,  it  is  not  truth,  but 
falsehood  and  error ;  whatsoever  honour  done 
unto  God  disagreeth  from  the  honour  re- 
quired by  His  Word,  it  is  not  honour  unto 
God,  but  blasphemy  ;  as  Christ  saith,  "  In 
vain  they  worship  Me,  teaching  for  doctrines 
men's  precepts."  By  Esay  God  saith,  "  Who  re- 
quireth  this  at  your  hands  ? "  (Isa.  i.  12).  And 
by  Jeremy,  "  I  spake  not  unto  your  fathers, 
nor  commanded  them,  when  I  brought  them 
out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  concerning  burnt 
offerings  and  sacrifices.  But  this  thing  com- 
manded I  them,  saying,  Obey  My  voice ;  and 
I  will  be  your  God,  and  ye  shall  be  My 
people ;  and  walk  ye  in  all  the  ways  which 
I  have  commanded  you,  that  it  may  be  well 
unto  you."  Again,  "  What  is  chaff  to  the 
wheat,  saith  the  Lord  1 "  What  are  your 
dreams  to  be  weighed  with  the  truth  of 
God  ?  "  Search  the  Scriptures  ;  in  them  ye 
shall  learn  to  know  Me,  and  how  ye  should 
worship  Me  ;  in  them  ye  shall  find  everlast- 
ing life."  "  The  words  of  the  Lord  are  pure 
words,  as  the  silver  tried  in  the  furnace." 
There  is  no  filth  or  dross  remaining  in  them. 
They  are  the  storehouse  of  wisdom,  and  of 
the  knowledge  of  God  ;  in  respect  whereof 
all  the  wisdom  of  this  world  is  but  vain  and 
foolish. — Bishop  Jewell. 

Ver.  39.  Apparent  difficulties  do  not  in- 
validate the  witness  of  Scripture. — All  those 
apparent  discrepancies  and  contradictions  in 
matters  of  fact,  all  those  apparent  departures 
from  morality  in  matters  of  principle,  which 
the  unbeliever  is  subtle  to  detect  and  proud 
to  parade,  in  the  holy  and  blessed  Scriptures, 
are  a  trial  which  costs  the  true-hearted 
Christian  many  an  anxious  moment  of  dis- 
tress and  perplexity,  in  proportion  to  his 
value  for  his  Bible,  his  earnestness  after 
truth,  and  his  jealousy  for  the  honour  of  his 
God  and  Saviour.  It  is  no  easy  thing  to 
say — but  the  man  of  Abraham's  mould  will 
say  it,  as  one  after  another  of  these  difficulties 
is  forced  upon  his  notice — I  may  not  be  able 
to  explain  it,  I  may  not  be  able  to  harmonise 
these  seeming  discords,  I  may  not  be  able  to 
separate  accurately  the  precious  from  the 
vile,  in  this  heap  of  positive  statements,  bold 
affirmations,  and  cruel  inferences,  to  which 
you  point  me  as  the  latest  results  of  modern 
science,  of  so-called  discovery,  in  its  bearing 
upon  the  records  of  revelation  ;  but  of  this 
I  am  sure,  that  anything  which  would  shake 
my  confidence  in  the  absolute  truth  of  that 


which  is  indeed  God's  Word  must  be  false, 
however  plausible ;  that,  whatever  error  may 
be  intermingled  with  my  idea  of  Scripture, 
or  with  my  theory  of  inspiration,  there  can 
be  no  error  in  the  very  thing  itself,  which 
God  communicated  in  His  Son  Jesus  Christ ; 
and  therefore  I  shall  not  lose  heart  nor 
abandon  hope  by  reason  of  any  novelty 
which  may  offer  itself  for  the  acceptance  of 
this  generation  :  that  which  is  true  in  it 
must  be  consistent  with  the  truth,  and  with 
the  Word  of  the  True  One  ;  I  may  not  see 
the  meeting-point  or  the  reconciliation,  but 
there  is  a  mind  which  beholds  all  thiugs  as 
one — His  time  I  will  wait,  yea,  even  if  it 
comes  not  to  me  living ;  for  with  Him  is  the 
fountain  of  light,  and  in  His  light,  hereafter 
if  not  here,  I  shall  myself  one  day  see  light. 
—  C.  J.  Vaughan,  D.D. 

Vers.  45,  46.  "  Tlie  letter  killeth,  the  spirit 
giveth  life." — "  There  is  one  who  accuseth  you, 
even  Moses  in  ivhom  ye  trust.  If  ye  believe 
Moses  ye  would  also  believe  Me,  for  he  ivroteof 
Me."  Those  who  reject  Moses  thus  also  reject 
Christ.  Take  heed  then,  ye  who  tamper  with 
the  integrity  of  Scripture,  of  your  critical 
estimates  of  the  Old  Testament !  Again, 
whoever  rejects  Christ  also  rejects  Moses. 
Hear  this,  ye  who  cherish  the  Judaistic 
spirit,  and  do  not  boast  of  your  Mosaicism ! 
Long  ago  should  the  true — not  the  imaginary 
— Moses  have  been  to  you  a  schoolmaster  to 
bring  you  to  Christ  !  And  finally,  ye  would — 
be  free-thinkers,  despisers  alike  of  the  Old 
and  New  Covenants  :  Moses  with  threatening, 
uplifted  tables  of  the  law,  and  Christ  with 
silent  but  victoriously  uplifted  cross,  will 
judge  you.  The  contemporaries  of  Jesus 
supposed  that  in  their  merely  external  recep- 
tion and  use  of  the  Scripture  they  had  found 
the  pledge  and  spring  of  eternal  life.  They 
had  in  their  hands  God's  Word  written  on 
parchment  rolls.  They  carried  it  also  stored 
up  in  memory.  They  had  it  on  their  tongues 
in  common  speech,  as  a  subject  of  conversa- 
tion ;  but  they  had  not  this  Word  in  their 
hearts  as  living  and  quickening.  It  did  not 
try  their  minds  and  hearts ;  it  brought  no 
reproof  to  their  conscience,  it  was  to  them 
no  sure  support,  no  comforting  hope,  no 
message  from  the  Father's  house  to  assure 
those  going  homeward.  Ye  have  never, 
Jesus  said  in  accusing  tones,  heard  the 
Father's  voice.  He  who  is  of  the  truth  hears 
the  voice  of  the  Father  in  that  of  the  Son. 
He  who  sees  the  Son  sees  the  Father.  .  .  . 
Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for  they  will  see 
God  in  Christ.  But  when  the  Son  of  God 
came  out  of  the  coverings  and  veil  of  the 
old  Covenant  like  a  bridegroom  out  of  his 
chamber,  like  the  sun  out  of  his  tent,  they 
passed  Him  by,  and  when  He  stood  in  their 
way  they  slew  Him. — Translated  from  Dr* 
JR.  Kbgel. 


162 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  vi. 


PAET  III.   (b.) 

II.  Jesus  Manifests  Himself  as  the  Sustainer  of  Life,  but  is  Rejected 
of  the  Jews,  of  Nominal  Disciples. 

1.  In  Galilee. — (1)  By  feeding  the  five  thousand  He  shows  Himself  to  be  the 
source  and  upholder  of  all  things  (vers.  1-13);  (2)  the  meaning  of  this  sign 
is  misunderstood  (vers.  14,  15) ;  (3)  He  shows  again  His  power  in  the  realm  of 
nature  by  His  control  over  wind  and  wave,  and  also  in  walking  on  the  sea  that 
He  can  use  natural  laws  according  to  His  will  (vers.  16-21). 

2.  (1)  In  His  teaching  He  offers  Himself  as  the  true  bread  of  life,  the  bread 
of  God,  the  bread  which  is  from  heaven,  of  which  the  manna  was  but  a  type ; 
(2)  as  the  Son  of  man  who  will  give  His  flesh  for  the  life  of  the  world 
(vers.  22-51). 

3.  (1)  The  Jews  murmur,  and  strive  among  themselves,  on  hearing  this 
doctrine  (vers.  52-59) ;  (2)  many  of  His  nominal  disciples  are  offended  at  His 
saying,  and  "  went  back "  (vers.  60-66) ;  (3)  the  disciples  are  led  into  firmer 
faith,  which  will  lead  ever  more  surely  to  conflict  with  the  power  of  darkness, 
which  manifests  itself  even  in  the  ranks  of  the  twelve. 

Second  Year  of  our  Lord's  Ministry. 

Chap.  vi. — Synoptic  parallels:  Matt.  xiv.  13-21;  Mark  vi.  30-44;  Luke 
ix.   10-17. 

Time. — Nisan  (March— April),  a.u.c.  782,  a.d.  29. 


CHAPTER   VI. 
EXPLANATORY  AND   CRITICAL  NOTES. 

The  miracle  of  the  feeding  of  the  five  thousand  is  recorded  by  all  the  Evangelists  (see 
Matt.  xiv.  13-21  ;  Mark  vi.  30-44  ;  Luke  ix.  10-17).  It  is  an  entirely  different  miracle  from 
that  of  feeding  the  four  thousand  (Matt.  xv.  32-39 ;  Mark  viii.  1-9). 

Ver.  1.  After  these  things  does  not  express  immediate  sequence  (see  v.  1).  Jesus  went,  went 
away  (airi)\dev),  or  withdrew,  went  out,  over  (Trepan).  The  Sea  of  Galilee,  of  Tiberias. — Only 
once  again  is  this  lake  called  the  Sea  of  Tiberias  in  the  New  Testament  (see  xxi.  1).  So  the 
Sea  of  Galilee  was  afterwards  principally  called  from  the  town  of  Tiberias,  built  by  Herod 
the  tetrarch,  and  named  after  the  Emperor  Tiberias.  Probably  the  building  of  the  town 
was  not  completed  at  the  time  of  the  ministry  of  our  Lord  ;  and  besides,  the  new  name 
would  require  some  time  before  it  superseded  the  old  name.  This  name  is  that  borne  to-day 
by  the  small  but  growing  modern  town  with  its  earthquake-shattered  walls  :  Tuhariyeh. 

Ver.  2.  The  miracles. — Rather  the  signs  (ra  arjixeia). 

Ver.  3.  Into  the  mountain. — The  hilly,  sloping  side  of  the  eastern  tableland  as  it  falls 
toward  the  lake.  The  place  was  near  to  Bethsaida  Julias,  which  lay  near  the  north-east 
corner  of  the  lake,  where  the  Jordan  enters  it  (Luke  ix.  10). 

Ver.  4.  The  passover  was  near. — I.e.  the  time  was  drawing  on  when  it  would  be  observed, 
and  doubtless  many  of  those  who  were  in  the  crowds  following  the  Saviour  at  this  time 
were  leisurely  making  their  way  to  Jerusalem  "  to  keep  the  feast."  The  mention  of  "much 
grass  "  (ver.  10),  and  that  the  grass  was  "  green"  (Mark  vi.  39),  gives  a  vivid  picture  of  Galilee 
in  March  and  April,  when  the  whole  land  is  carpeted  with  grass,  amid  which  the  wild  flowers 
spring  in  rich  profusion. 

Ver.  5.  A  great  company  came  (irefof,  afoot,  Matt.  xiv.  13). — I.e.  round  the  north  end  of  the 
lake.  There  is  a  ford  near  Bethsaida ;  and  probably  there  was  then  a  bridge  where  now 
stands  the  Jisr  Benat  Yacub  (Bridge  of  the  Daughters*  of  Jacob). 

163 


chap.  vi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


Ver.  6.  Prove  him,  i.e.  to  test  or  try  Mm.     Philip  (i.  44,  xiv.  8). 

Ver.  7.  Two  hundred  pennyworth. — I.e.  two  hundred  denarii,  which,  calculating  their 
value  at  about  S^d.,  would  amount  to  about  £7  in  our  money.  The  bread  was  probably 
somewhat  like  the  ordinary  flat  barley  cakes,  of  which  five  or  six  may  now  be  bought  in 
Syria  for  a  piastre  (about  2\d.}. 

Ver.  8.  Andrew  and  Philip  (i.  44,  xii.  22). 

Ver.  9.  Two  small  fishes. — Or  simply  two  fislies  (6\pdpia).  As  the  word  is  used  also  in 
xxi.  9,  10,  13,  it  may  simply  be  a  local  Galilean  word  for  a  fish.  But  it  may  mean  fish 
specially  prepared  to  eat  with  bread  as  a  relish  (see  Westcott  and  Watkins). 

Ver.  10.  Make  the  men  (cb#pw7rous). — Including  women  and  children  (Matt.  xiv.  21),  as 
distinguished  from  &u$pes,  wen  only,  at  the  end  of  the  verse.    Grass  (Ps.  xxiii.  2). — !See  ver.  4. 

Ver.  11.  To  the  disciples,  and  the  disciples. — These  words  are  omitted  in  the  great 
MSS.  X,  B,  L.  They  are  considered  by  Tregelles,  Tischendorf,  etc.,  to  be  a  gloss  from 
Matt.  xiv.  19. 

Ver.  12.  Gather,  etc. — It  is  from  John  we  learn  that  this  was  done  at  the  command  of  Jesus. 

Ver.  13.  Twelve  baskets  (i<o<plvovs). — As  there  were  twelve,  they  most  likely  belonged  to  the 
disciples ;  probably  they  were  used  as  we  use  our  modern  travelling  bags.  These  baskets 
are  to  be  distinguished  from  the  (nnjpides  used  in  the  miracle  of  feeding  the  four  thousand. 
The  latter  were  much  larger. 

Ver.  14.  That  prophet. — I.e.  Messiah. 

Ver.  17.  Jesus  was  not  yet  come. — They  had  probably  understood  that  He  was  to  meet 
them  at  some  point  on  the  shore. 

Ver.  19.  As  the  stretch  from  the  point  where  they  set  sail  to  Tiberias  was  perhaps 
seven  to  eight  miles,  the  disciples  had  probably  made  only  about  half  the  distance  (Mark 
vi.  47).  Jesus  walking  on  the  sea  (iirl  t?}s  SaXdaarjs'). — Not  along  the  shore,  as  some 
rationalistic  critics  suggest.  The  whole  narrative  is  against  such  an  interpretation  (see  also 
Matt.  xiv.  28-33),  which  is  quite  conclusive  against  this  conjecture. 

Ver.  21.  They  willingly. — They  were  willing  to  receive  Him,  etc. 

Vers.  22-24.  None  other  boat,  rather  little  ship  (-n-Xoiapiov). — The  meaning  of  this  long  and 
complicated  sentence  is  plain.  A  number  of  the  crowd  who  had  been  present  when  the 
bread  was  miraculously  supplied  had  remained  at  or  near  the  spot  where  the  miracle  was 
wrought.  They  wished  to  see  more  of  Jesus,  to  get  hold  of  Him  for  the  carrying  out  of  their 
purpose  (ver.  15).  They  had  seen  the  disciples  depart,  but  not  the  Saviour.  In  the  morning, 
however,  when  Jesus  did  not  appear  nor  His  disciples,  surmising  that  somehow  He  had  got 
to  the  western  shore,  the  people  took  advantage  of  a  number  of  boats  that  had  come  over 
from  Tiberias.  The  owners  of  those  boats  heard,  it  may  be,  that  the  crowd  on  the  opposite 
shore  desired  to  be  conveyed  across  the  lake  to  Tiberias. 

Ver.  27.  The  meat,  etc.,  i.e.  food  (/3pu><ns). — Material  food  which,  even  though  given  in  a  very 
direct  way  from  the  hand  of  God,  is  still  perishable  (Exod.  xvi.  20).  The  term  may  be 
widened  so  as  to  apply  to  all  material  treasures  and  possessions.  For  Him  hath  the  Father 
sealed,  even  God. 

Ver.  33.  The  bread  of  God  is  that  which  cometh  down  from  heaven. — Christ  led  His  bearers 
first  to  think  of  the  new  spiritual  manna;  and  then  when  they  expressed  the  desire,  "ever- 
more give  us  this  bread,"  He  said  (ver.  35),  "  I  am  the  bread  of  life"  etc. 

Ver.  34.  Lord. — This  title  shows  that  the  sense  of  Jesus'  greatness  had  begun  to  dawn 
upon  the  minds  of  some  of  His  hearers  (comp.  ver.  25). 

Ver.  35.  He  that  cometh  to  (rpds),  etc.  ;  he  that  believeth  in  (eis),  etc. — "  The  first  word 
presents  faith  in  deed  as  active  and  outward  ;  the  second  word  presents  faith  in  thought  as 
resting  and  inward  "  (Westcott). 

Ver.  36.  But  I  said  unto  you,  etc. — They  had  already  seen  His  signs,  and  yet  here  they 
were  asking  for  another  sign  (see  ver.  26). 

Ver.  37.  "All  that  the  Father  giveth  Me  shall  reach  Me  (attain  unto  Me);  and  him 
who  is  coming  to  Me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  —  These  whom  (1)  the  Father  gives 
shall  (2)  attain  to  the  Son,  and  (3)  shall  be  welcomed  lovingly  by  Him. 

Ver.  40.  The  last  day  is  a  phrase  peculiar  to  John's  writings  (xi.  24  ;  1  John  ii.  18). 

Ver.  41.  The  Jews. — It  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  an  influx  of  new  listeners.  These 
discourses  were  uttered  in  the  synagogue  at  Capernaum,  and  no  doubt  the  rulers  of  the 
people  in  that  locality  were  present.  The  Sanhedrin,  and  the  authorities  at  Jerusalem,  no 
doubt  had  their  e  missaries  at  Capernaum  as  elsewhere  (Acts  viii.  3,  4,  ix.  1,  2). 

Ver.  42.  Is  not  this,  etc. — The  reception  which  the  announcement  of  the  birth  of  Christ 
met  with  at  Jerusalem  (Matt.  ii.  16-18)  would  certainly  lead  those  who  knew  of  it  "  to  keep 
these  things  and  ponder  them  in  their  hearts."  The  widespread  knowledge  of  it  before  the 
Resurrection  would  have  led,  on  the  one  hand,  to  more  strenuous  efforts  on  the  part  of  some 
"  to  make  Him  a  king  " ;  and,  on  the  other,  would  have,  through  the  increased  enmity  of  the 
rulers  and  suspicions  of  such  men  as  Herod,  prevented  our  Lord  from  prosecuting  His  mission. 
It  cannot  be  inferred  from  this  verse  that  Joseph  was  still  alive.    Whose  father  and  mother 

164 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  VI. 


we  know  may  simply  mean  :  Whose  names  we  know,  whom  we  know  about,  etc.  Christ's 
works,  His  signs,  should  have  convinced  them  that  He  was  more  than  a  mere  man. 

Ver.  44.  No  man  can  come,  etc. — The  word  "  draw  "  (eX/ctfw)  is  used  here  in  the  same  sense 
as  in  xii.  32.     It  is  not  a  drawing  against  but  with  man's  will  (comp.  v.  40). 

Ver.  45.  Taught. — See  Isa.  liv.  13.  "Where  hearing  is  there  is  obedience  ;  for  faith  is  not 
of  necessity,  but  by  persuasion.  The  truth  of  Christian  doctrine  teaches  that  the  avre^oixnov 
/cat  avrb  Trpoaiperov  {independence  and  self-choice)  of  the  human  soul  is  preserved  entire  " 
(Cyril  in  Wordsworth's  Greek  Testament). 

Ver.  46.  He  hath  seen,  etc. — The  incarnate  Son  is  the  eternal  Logos  (i.  1,  2). 

Ver.  51.  If  any  man,  etc. — Tischendorf  reads  (with  K)  of  My  oread  (e/c  tov  i/xov  dprov).  But 
the  majority  of  MSS.  and  versions  seem  to  confirm  the  received  reading. 

Ver.  53.  There  is  in  this  passage  (vers.  51-59)  no  doubt  a  distinct  reference  to  Christ's  sacri- 
ficial death  as  the  true  passover  lamb.  The  distinct  reference  to  "  flesh  "  and  "  blood  "points 
to  the  separation  of  them  by  death.  First  the  whole  life  is  spoken  of  as  given  for  men,  and 
then  the  body  broken  and  the  blood  poured  forth.  "  The  Son  of  man  lived  for  us,  and  died 
for  us,  and  communicates  to  us  the  effects  of  His  life  and  death  as  perfect  man  "  (Westcott). 

Ver.  57.  The  chain  of  spiritual  life  is  complete.  The  believer  lives  through  and  in  Christ ; 
whilst  Christ  lives  in  the  living  Father,  the  source  of  all  life,  who  has  given  the  Son  to  have 
life  in  Himself  (v.  26). 

Ver.  59.  Capernaum. — On  the  western  shore  of  the  lake.  About  two  hours  from  the  point 
where  the  Jordan  enters  the  Lake  of  Galilee  the  ruins  of  Tell  Hum  are  situated.  These  are 
most  generally  considered  to  occupy  the  site  of  Capernaum.  And  it  is  certainly  most  interest- 
ing to  notice  that  Colonel  Wilson,  R.E.,  when  exploring  there  the  ruins  of  what  must  have 
been  a  well-built  synagogue,  discovered  a  stone  on  which  was  sculptured  a  pot  of  manna. 
"  Captain  Conder  and  Lieutenant  Kitchener,  however,  agree,  with  Robinson,  Kenan,  and  many 
others,  in  placing  this  city  at  the  ruin  Minyeh — 'the  town  of  Minim,'  or  Christian  heretics, 
who  are  called  in  the  Talmud  'sons  of  Capernaum  '  "  {Twenty -one  Years'  Work  in  the  Holy 
Land).  This  site  lies  about  an  hour  and  a  half  farther  south.  Thus  uncertainty  still  prevails 
as  to  the  site  of  this  city  (Matt.  xi.  23). 

Ver.  69.  And  we  believe  and  are  sure  that  Thou  art  the  Holy  One  of  God. — This  is  the 
reading  of  all  the  great  MSS.  K,  B,  C,  D,  L,  and  is  adopted  by  Tischendorf,  Tregelles,  etc.  If 
this  reading  is  to  be  received,  we  are  probably  to  understand  Peter's  confession  as  referring 
to  Jesus  as  sent  into  the  world  to  do  the  Father's  will,  and  as  having  His  authority  sealed 
by  His  mighty  works  and  holy  life. 

Ver.  70.  Hath  a  devil.— 5cd/3oA6s  i<mv,  i.e.  one  having  the  qualities  of  him  who  is  called 
6  5td/3o\os. 

Ver.  71.  Judas  Iscariot,  etc.,  rather  Judas  the  son  of  Simon  Iscariotes. — Iscariot  is  no  doubt 
imp  ur»N  (Ish-Kerioth),  a  man  of  Kerioth,  a  town  or  village  belonging  to  Judah  (Josh.  xv.  25). 
But  Westcott  suggests  that,  as  the  true  reading  in  Joshua  is  Kerioth-Hezron,  this  Kerioth 
might  be  identified  with  the  Kerioth  (Kepic£0)  of  Moab  (Jer.  xlviii.  24). 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—15. 

The  miracle  of  the  feeding  of  the  five  thousand. — The  miracle  which  we  are  now 
to  consider  briefly  is  one  of  those  that  show  Christ's  power  in  the  realm  of  nature. 
Like  His  miracles  generally,  it  is  beneficent  and  not  destructive.*  This,  and 
the  miracle  of  walking  on  the  sea,  are  recorded  by  all  the  Evangelists.  This 
miracle  is  distinguished  sharply  by  several  special  circumstances  from  that  of  the 
feeding  of  four  thousand  (Matt.  xv.  29-39;  Mark  viii.  1-10).  The  Evangelists 
vary  slightly — although  they  do  not  contradict  each  other — in  their  accounts  of 
the  circumstances  which  preceded  it.  They  supplement  each  other.  St.  John 
places  it  between  the  feast  mentioned  at  the  beginning  of  chap.  v.  (probably 
Purim)  and  the  succeeding  passover.  St.  Mark  gives  the  fullest  account  of  the 
causes  which  led  the  Saviour  to  cross  to  the  east  side  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee.  The 
forerunner  had  just  been  beheaded  by  Herod ;  and  his  disciples  had  gone  and 
told  Jesus  (Matt.  xiv.  12).  About  the  same  time  the  twelve  had  returned  from 
their  mission  of  preaching  and  healing,  on  which  Jesus  had  sent  them  out  "  by 

*  Even  the  two  which  seem  of  an  opposite  tendency — the  destruction  of  the  herd  of 
swine  and  the  withering  away  of  the  barren  fig  tree — have  their  beneficent  side,  i.e.  the 
removal  of  what  was  evil  and  useless. 

165 


chap.  vi.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ST.  JOHN. 


two  and  two."  The  disciples  doubtless  needed  rest  after  their  labours,  and  time 
for  converse,  which  they  could  not  find  in  Christ's  "  own  country  "  j  "  for  there 
were  many  coming  and  going,"  etc.  (Mark  vi.  31).  John's  disciples  also  perhaps 
needed  to  be  withdrawn  for  a  time  from  these  scenes  of  busy  life.  So  our  Lord 
and  His  more  immediate  followers — including,  it  may  be,  John's  disciples — sailed 
from  the  then  busy  western  side  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee  to  the  comparatively  lonely 
eastern  shore,  hoping  for  a  time  to  be  free  from  the  thronging  crowds.  In  vain. 
The  multitudes,  learning  His  destination,  followed  by  land — by  the  road  (7re£>J). 
There  were  many  sick  and  infirm  among  them,  for  they  knew  of  His  wondrous 
power  (Matt.  xiv.  14).  So  that  the  "  desert  place"  was  soon  crowded  where 
Jesus  was.  Nor  did  He  turn  those  poor  people  away.  He  received  them,  spoke 
to  them  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  healed  many  (Luke  ix.  11).  As  the  day 
w^ore  on  toward  evening,  and  the  westering  sun  began  to  descend  behind  the 
Galilean  hills,  tinting  Hermon  with  rosy  light,  and  the  evening  calm  settled 
softly  on  the  peaceful  inland  lake,  the  multitude  lingered  on,  captivated  by  the 
winning  accents  of  eternal  love — witnessing  with  wondering- gratitude  the  proofs 
of  Christ's  healing  power.  The  claims  of  physical  nature  were  well-nigh  for- 
gotten ;  and  when  the  day  was  far  spent,  the  multitudes  had  not  only  no  food 
with  them  sufficient  to  meet  their  wants,  but  they  were  far  from  any  place  where 
it  could  be  procured.  According  to  our  Gospel  it  was  Jesus  Himself  who  first 
mooted  the  idea  of  feeding  them.  Probably  He  spoke  to  Philip  early  in  the 
afternoon,  and  let  the  question  simmer  in  the  disciple's  mind,  to  prove,  try  his 
faith.  It  was  also  a  trial  of  the  faith  of  the  rest  of  the  twelve,  for  no  doubt 
Philip  consulted  with  them  ;  and  the  conclusion  they  came  to  was  shown  by  their 
coming  as  day  was  closing  to  request  Him  to  send  the  multitude  away.  Did 
Philip's  weak  faith  tend  to  infect  the  others,  and  was  he  specially  singled  out 
for  trial  that  his  faith  might  be  strengthened1?  (xiv.  8-14).  It  seems  strange 
that  the  disciples,  who  had  witnessed  already  so  many  of  the  Redeemer's  mighty 
works,  should  begin  to  compute  the  sum  of  money  (about  £7  in  our  money)  needed 
to  procure  even  the  simplest  provision  for  so  great  a  crowd.  At  His  word,  how- 
ever, the  disciples  found  out  what  provision  there  was  among  the  company.  "  A 
lad  was  present  who  had  five  barley  loaves,"  etc.  (ver.  9),  but  what,  truly,  were 
they  "  among  so  many"  1  At  the  command  of  the  Saviour,  however,  the  people 
were  seated  in  order  on  the  green  grass — green  and  luscious  at  that  season ;  and 
after  giving  thanks  He  distributed  through  the  disciples  this  small  provision, 
which  multiplied  miraculously  in  His  hands.  In  the  end  all  were  satisfied — 
shown  by  the  fact  that  at  Christ's  command  the  fragments  remaining  were 
gathered  into  the  disciples'  travelling  hand-baskets  (ko^lvol).  And  the  people 
departed,  firm  in  the  conviction  that  He  was  "  that  prophet,"  etc.  (ver.  14). 

I.  This  miracle  we  may  call  an  act  of  creative  might. — The  time  when  it  was 
wrought  was  near  the  passover  ;  and  at  that  period  the  valleys  and  hillsides 
would  be  clad  with  sprouting  corn.  In  parts  of  the  Jordan  valley  itself  the 
fields  might  even  be  assuming  harvest  tints.  The  corn,  however,  was  not  yet 
ready  to  be  used  as  food.  And  Jesus,  by  His  Creative  might  (i.  3,  4),  out  of  the 
small  provision  from  the  hands  of  the  lad,  made  such  increase  that  the  multitude 
did  eat  and  were  satisfied.  It  was  a  rapid  and  instantaneous  way  of  producing 
that  which  is  prepared  by  gradual  processes  for  man's  use,  by  Him  with  whom 
"  one  day  is  as  a  thousand  years."  The  same  wonder  in  different  form  transpires 
periodically  before  our  eyes :  only  we  have  become  so  familiar  with  it  that  we 
fail  to  recognise  it  as  a  perpetual  proof  of  God's  creative  power.  Crnsider  the 
amount  of  food  required  daily  for  a  whole  nation,  or  even  for  a  large  city. 
Thousands  on  thousands  are  employed  daily  in  catering  for  this  food  supply. 
The  food  stuffs  are  gathered  from  every  region  of  the  globe  almost.  Whence  do 
these  stores  come?      Who  ultimately  provides  them?      Who  feeds  the  teeming 

166 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ;    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  vi. 


millions  of  men  and  other  living  creatures  in  the  world  1  It  is  the  providence  of 
Him  on  whom  we  all  depend — who  opens  His  liberal  hand  and  supplies  the  wants 
of  "  every  living  thing."  We  are  surrounded  on  every  side  by  proofs  and  evidences 
of  His  creative  might.  If  we  would  but  open  the  eyes  of  our  understandings, 
and  look  deeply  enough  into  the  nature  of  things,  we  should  see  at  each  seed- 
time and  harvest  a  perpetual  wonder,  and  realise  that  we  are  surrounded  on 
every  side  by  what  has  well  been  called  "  the  natural  supernatural."  When  we 
consider  these  things  sufficiently,  such  a  wonderful  work  as  this  we  are  con- 
sidering is  just  what  we  might  expect  from  Him  who  is  revealed  at  the  beginning 
of  this  Gospel  as  the  creative  Word. 

II.  The  miracle  further  teaches  us  a  lesson  of  trust  in  the  divine  care — and 
in  our  Redeemer,  that  He  will,  as  He  can,  supply  every  necessary  gift  to  us. 
Human  life  is  a  hard  training-school  for  some.  But  "  sweet  are  the  uses  "  of 
such  a  severe  training  if  borne  aright.  Men  born  to  affluence  may  be  and  often 
are  tempted  to  forget  to  whom  they  owe  the  daily  provided  gifts  scattered  in  pro- 
fusion around  them ;  whilst  those  who  pray  with  the  sense  of  need  to  a  divine 
Father,  "  Give  us  each  day  our  daily  bread,"  are  kept  in  a  wholesome  sense  of 
their  dependenco  on  Him  "  who  is  above  all,  and  through  all,  and  in  all,"  and 
with  a  confident  feeling  that  their  trust  is  not  misplaced  or  vain.  The  crowds 
of  passover  pilgrims  who  turned  aside  to  listen  to  Christ's  words  of  heavenly 
wisdom  in  the  desert  place  by  the  Galilean  lake  realised,  for  the  time  at 
least,  in  their  experience  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  :  "  Seek  ye  first  the 
kingdom  of  God,  and  all  these  things  shall  be  added  unto  you."  And  so  all 
Christ's  disciples  may  in  the  same  trusting  spirit  go  about  their  Father's 
business,  assured  that  every  needed  gift  will  be  given  them ;  that  the  creative 
might  (and  providential  love  and  care)  which  supplies  the  wants  of  every  living 
thing — which  fed  the  "  five  thousand  men,  beside  women  and  children " 
(Matt.  xiv.  14),  at  Bethsaida  Julias — is  unresting  and  unfailing  still.  The 
poorest  and  most  tried  if  faithful  will  find  it  ever  the  same. 

III.  The  lesson  of  this  miracle  of  Jesus — the  spiritual  lesson — was  not 
learned  by  all  who  witnessed  it. — Many  of  the  people  continued  to  follow  the 
Saviour  in  expectation  of  repetitions  of  this  wonderful  work.  They  sought  for 
the  meat  which  perisheth, — not  for  the  spiritual  bread  which  endure th,  for  the 
heavenly  manna  of  which  if  a  man  eat  he  shall  never  hunger.  So  let  this 
miracle  be  to  Christ's  people  not  merely  a  fact  in  the  story  of  our  Lord's  life  on 
earth — not  merely  another  link  in  the  chain  of  evidence  of  His  divinity.  Let 
it  become  a  parable  of  divine  truth,  leading  men  to  see  Christ  as  the  source 
of  all  true  spiritual  nourishment,  the  Heavenly  Manna  and  the  Bread  of  Life. 
Then,  when  He  has  been  sought  and  found  thus  spiritually,  it  should  teach  a 
lesson  of  restful  dependence  on  God,  the  source  of  all  life,  and  on  Christ,  who, 
out  of  His  infinite  fulness,  will  freely  give  His  people  all  things. 

Harvest  Festival  Homily. — The  passage  read,  which  shows  Jesus  with  wonder- 
working power  feeding  the  starving  multitudes,  proving  His  disciples,  and 
strengthening  their  faith,  will  furnish  us  useful  lessons,  and  thus  raise  the 
harvest  festival,  beyond  its  relation  to  creation  merely,  to  the  higher  region  o! 
a  spiritual  Christian  festival.  The  harvest  festival  becomes  then  a  Christian 
festival  when  Christ  leads  us  therein — 1.  To  stronger  faith;  2.  To  ministering 
love  ;  3.  To  the  confession  of  thankfulness ;  4.  To  faithfulness  in  little  things. 
Teach  us,  0  God,  giver  of  every  good  and  perfect  gift,  to  sow  in  childlike  trust, 
so  that  we  may  reap  with  praise  and  thanksgiving.     Amen. 

I.  The  harvest  festival  becomes  a  Christian  festival  when  it  leads  to  stronger 
faith. — Many  people  followed  Jesus  because  they  saw  the  signs  He  wrought  on 
the  sick.     The  thought  that  He  was  Emmanuel  flashed  through  their  minds. 

167 


chap.  vi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


It  remained  doubtful,  however,  whether  the  miracles  wrought  for  the  sick  were 
realised  as  signs  for  the  strengthening  of  faith,  or  whether  these  would  lead  to 
material  misconceptions.  It  was  enough  for  Jesus,  who  lifted  up  His  eyes  and  saw 
many  people  coming  to  Him,  that,  touched  with  sincere  compassion,  He  should 
permit  the  sun  of  His  benevolence  to  arise  upon  good  and  evil,  as  He  said, 
"  Whence  shall  we  buy  bread?"  etc.  (ver.  5).  And  John,  our  narrator,  shows 
himself  not  merely  to  have  been  an  eye  and  ear  witness,  describing  the  scene 
minutely,  the  grass,  etc.,  but  also  bosom  friend  and  beloved  disciple  of  Him  who 
came  from  the  bosom  of  the  Father.  This  he  shows  in  that  he  was  entrusted 
with  the  design  of  the  testing  question,  as  he  writes,  "  And  this  He  said,"  etc. 
(ver.  6).  Whoever  comes  into  Jesus'  presence,  on  him  Jesus  lifts  His  eyes  in 
blessing.  Whoever  begins  to  believe  must  be  content  to  submit  to  testing 
questions  which  put  weak  faith  to  shame  and  banish  unbelief.  The  premedi- 
tated divine  work  appears  so  much  more  glorious  in  view  of  Philip's  estimate 
that  two  hundred  pennyworth  of  bread  would  not  suffice,  and  after  Andrew  had 
brought  the  information  about  the  five  loaves,  etc.  These  statements  only  con- 
firmed the  difficulty — did  not  remove  it.  Whence  shall  we  buy  bread,  ?  Is  not 
this  question  repeated  year  by  year,  with  every  spring  which  may  find  the 
winter  sowing  safe,  but  may  also  find  it  ruined  by  frost ;  with  every  summer, 
which  may  see  the  fields  ripening,  but  perhaps  also  desolated  by  thunderstorms 
or  hail ;  with  every  autumn,  wThich  may  see  the  grain  harvested,  but  which 
at  the  last  moment  may  bring  disappointment?  Each  season  furnishes  us 
new  examples  of  our  dependence  on  the  almighty,  living  God  who  balances 
the  clouds,  etc.  (Job  xxxvii.,  xxxviii.,  etc.) ;  who  put  the  fourth  petition 
(Matt.  vi.  11)  into  man's  mouth  and  promises  to  grant  it.  Nature  does  it,  so 
the  modern  heathens  tell  us,  who  imagine  they  have  deposed  the  eternal  Law- 
giver and  replaced  Him  by  the  laws  of  nature.  If  the  curtain  is  drawn  up  the 
stage  is  seen  to  be  empty.  Fools  say  in  their  hearts,  "  No  God."  But  God's 
children  say  every  seedtime  and  harvest,  "  Abba,  Father."  Here  in  the  gospel 
narrative  stands  He  who  said,  "  My  Father  worketh  hitherto  and  I  work," 
who  knew  what  He  would  do,  to  whom  no  supplicating  family  (chap,  xi.),  no 
surrounding  multitude  ever  came  in  vain ;  whom  no  need  ever  nonplussed, 
but  who  also  maintained  as  the  fundamental  law  of  His  religion,  "  Seek  ye 
first,"  etc.  (Matt.  vi.  33) ;  who  gives  not  alone  daily  bread,  but  also  has  made 
ready  His  eternal  word,  and  seeks  through  the  gifts  to  lead  men  back  and  up  to 
the  eternal  Giver.  A  large  number  of  the  five  thousand  however  .  .  .  thought 
of  the  Lord  merely  as  a  Master  or  Steward,  and  would  have  taken  Him  and  made 
Him  a  king.  "  O  Lord,  do  not  Thine  eyes  look  upon  faithfulness?  "  (Jer.  v.  3). 
Thy  giving  and  Thy  withholding  .  .  .  Thy  anticipating  and  delaying — in  oppres- 
sion and  deliverance,  in  all  things,  He  seeks  to  prove,  to  purify,  to  strengthen 
faith.  Yonder,  by  Tiberias,  Jesus  knew  what  He  would  do.  He  has  ever 
thoughts  of  peace  toward  men.  He  slumbers  not,  etc.  Believest  thou  this  ?  .  .  . 
Is  your  faith  strengthened  in  times  of  trial  ?     Then 

"  Thou  stand'st  not  alone,  over  thee  is  thy  Lord,  who  will  keep  and  uphold  thee : 
Thou  stand'st  not  alone,  for  around  thee  are  ministering  angels." 

II.  The  harvest  festival  becomes  a  Christian  feast  when  Christ  prompts  us 
thereby  to  render  losing  help  to  others.  The  Lord  took  His  disciples  as  fellow- 
labourers  and  helpers  in  His  benevolent  purpose.  .  .  .  The  Lord  gives  His  help 
mediately.  As  He  wrought  this  wonder  by  increasing  the  food  at  hand,  by 
multiplying  the  offered  provision,  so  He  employs  men  to  aid  their  fellows- — the 
disciples  to  help  the  brethren.  He  makes  them  ready  to  help,  breaks  and 
shames  the  natural  selfishness  and  slothfulness  of  the  flesh.  In  His  farewell 
discourse  He  said,  "  The  poor  ye  have  always  with  you " ;  and  again,  "  What 

168 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap,  vl. 


ye  have  done  unto  the  least,"  etc.  (see  also  James  ii.  15,  16  ;  2  Thess.  iii.  10; 
1  Tim.  v.  8).  In  the  case  of  those  lost  in  vain  traditions,  in  whom  benevolent 
action  sickens,  withers,  and  dies,  He  turns  the  evasive  question,  "  Who  then  is 
my  neighbour  1 "  into  the  question  of  conscience,  "  Who  was  neighbour  to  him 
who  fell  among  thieves  ?  "  It  is  true  the  Lord  makes  a  distinction  between  the 
gifts  of  ability  and  opportunity  for  well-doing  (parable  of  ten  pounds).  And  no 
state-monger,  or  people's  tribune,  will  ever  charm  away  that  distinction.  But 
the  love  inspired  by  God,  the  consciousness  of  responsibility  for  our  own  know- 
ledge and  action,  the  true  feeling  for  a  brother's  well-being,  can  make  low  the 
mountains  and  exalt  the  valleys,  bind  up  the  wounded  and  support  the  weak. 
.  .  .  We  must  be  like  stewards  waiting  the  coming  of  our  Lord.  .  .  .  Com- 
pare modern  communism  with  the  early  apostolic  Church.  In  the  one  there  is 
levelling  down  by  force  ;  in  the  other  equal  participation  and  communication  in 
the  ministry  of  love.  In  the  one  case  the  robber  command,  Give  what  is 
thine ;  in  the  other  the  fraternal  word,  Take  what  is  mine.  .  .  .  When,  there- 
fore, will  the  harvest  festival  become  truly  Christian  ?  When  it  calls  to  a 
Zaccheus,  Bender  back  your  desecrated  Sunday,  the  wages  detained  and 
curtailed,  etc.  When  it  summons  an  Andrew  and  Philip  to  give  of  what  they 
receive  to  the  needy,  for  the  upbringing  of  the  orphan,  the  care  of  the  aged,  the 
sheltering  of  the  sick,  institutions  for  rescue,  the  education  of  future  servants 
of  the  Word,  etc. 

III.  We  read  that  Christ  took  the  loaves  and  gave  thanks.  A  profession  of 
thankfulness  should  not  be  wanting  in  a  Christian  harvest  thanksgiving  festival. 
Christ,  the  only  begotten,  etc.,  in  whom  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead 
bodily,  on  whom  the  Spirit  descended  (i.  32),  who  at  Cana  changed  the  water 
into  wine,  here  broke  the  bread  with  giving  of  thanks.  .  .  .  Notice  (ver.  23)  the 
feeding  of  the  five  thousand  is  connected  with  this  giving  of  thanks.  The  day 
was  coming  when  He  would  hold  another  and  a  greater  feast.  On  that  night  in 
which  He  was  betrayed  He  would  say,  "  Take,  eat,"  etc.  But  before  He  took 
bread,  the  communion  of  His  body,  and  raised  the  cup,  the  communion  of  His 
blood,  He  would  give  thanks,  so  that  His  sacrament  could  be  called  a 
Eucharist.     And  is  the  hymn 

"  Now  thank  we  all  our  God  1 " 

to  be  sung  only  once  a  year  at  harvest  thanksgivings  1  The  Fathers  were  not 
ashamed  of  a  grace  before  meat ;  rather  would  they  have  been  ashamed  at  the 
omission  of  it  !  ...  If  any  seek  to  insinuate,  as  is  often  done,  that  faith  and 
science  stand  irreconcilably  opposed  to  each  other,  and  that  the  telegraph,  the 
electric  light,  and  the  locomotive  have  gained  the  day,  it  may  be  freely  conceded 
that  science  and  invention  show  the  conquest  of  the  material  by  the  spiritual,  and 
only  the  unthinking  would  inveigh  against  or  overlook  those  proofs  of  the 
nobility  of  the  mind  of  man.  But  the  religio-moral  problems  still  remain — the 
themes  of  the  regeneration  of  the  sinful  human  heart,  and  the  glory  of  redemp- 
tion. Or  can  any  one  escape  from  an  evil  conscience  by  rushing  away  on  iron 
tires  ?  Or  will  the  religio-moral  misery  of  the  time  be  alleviated  because  the 
electric  light  shines  on  it  ?  Or  is  comfort  at  the  loss  of  some  loved  one  brought  by 
the  fact  that  the  news  of  it  was  spread  by  the  telegraph  ?  .  .  .  Thrice  fools  are 
they  who  do  not  acknowledge  and  praise  God  as  a  God  from  whom  all  we  possess 
comes :  body  and  soul,  knowledge  and  power,  law  and  gospel,  grace  here  and  hope 
for  hereafter  !  From  the  thankless  hand  the  good  gift  passes  away  ;  to  an  un- 
thankful eye  the  world  is  gloomy.  He  is  men's  light.  With  the  upright  God 
will  show  Himself  upright,  etc.  (2  Sam.  xxii.  26,  27).  He  who  possesses  with 
thankfulness,  to  him  will  be  given,  etc.  (Ps.  ciii.). 

IV.  Faithfulness  in  little  things  is  a  lesson  of  a  true  harvest-thanksgiving. 

169 


chap.  vi.  HOMILETlC  COMMENTARY :  ST.  JOHN. 


Love,  thanksgiving,  faithfulness  in  little.  He  commanded  the  disciples  to  gather 
the  fragments,  and  they  gathered,  etc.  ...  It  is  faithfulness  in  little  things 
which,  when  the  multitude  are  satisfied,  commands,  Gather  the  fragments. 
To  Him,  to  whom  the  feeding  of  the  five  thousand  was  not  too  much,  the 
gathering  of  the  fragments  was  not  too  little.  To  despise  what  is  little,  to  neglect 
what  is  small,  not  to  care  for  the  pence,  is  often  the  beginning  of  ruin  to  many 
a  household.  .  .  .  Paul,  who  could  aver,  I  know  both  how  to  be  abased, 
etc.  (Phil.  iv.  12),  was  so  true  to  his  principle  that  he  wove  the  command  of  love 
and  duty  into  one  when  he  wrote,  "  Owe  no  man  anything,  but  to  love  one 
another,"  etc.  (Rom.  xiii.  8).  To  possess  little  and  yet  to  boast  great  things,  to 
borrow  and  squander,  to  promise  and  not  perform  ;  at  one  time  not  to  permit 
children  to  acquire  learning,  at  another  sinfully  to  overtask  youthful  powers 
untimeously, — by  a  few  such  strokes  may  be  described  the  miserable  domestic 
life  of  many  a  family.  Franklin  thus  sums  up  his  household  and  people's 
domestic  economy :  The  fear  of  God,  Industry,  Thrift !  There  only  remains  to 
be  added  the  fourfold  exhortation  to  self-examination.  Whence  is  faithfulness 
in  little  things  to  be  learned  if  not  through  a  conscience  quickened  by  Christ  ? 
Whence  a  tender  conscience  if  not  through  the  communion  of  a  thankful  heart 
with  the  thrice-holy  God  ?  Whence  an  enlarged  heart  if  not  through  a  daily 
struggle  with  selfishness  ?  and  whence  faith  if  not  through  the  word  of  God  and 
prayer  1  (Ps.  cxix.  32,  36). — Abridged  from  Dr.  Rudolf  Kogel, 

Vers.  11-13.  Christian  temperance. — The  Saviour  of  the  world,  in  nourishing 
the  multitudes,  teaches  us  that  Christian  temperance  which  we  should  observe  in 
eating. 

1.  Jesus  Christ  teaches  us  in  the  nourishment  of  the  body  to  avoid  what  is 
faulty  and  harmful. — 1.  Avoid  a  too  great  attention  to  the  solace  and  maintenance 
of  the  body.  Jesus  led  the  people  into  a  desert  place  where  there  was  little  that 
promised  material  satisfaction,  where  the  main  attraction  was  spiritual.  Very 
different  it  is  with  too  many,  who,  as  St.  Paul  says,  make  their  belly  their  god 
(Phil.  iii.  19). 

2.  Avoid  excess. — Nature  is  content  with  what  is  necessary.  Jesus  Christ 
never  thought  of  the  bodily  wants  of  those  people  until  it  was  absolutely  necessary 
to  do  so.  Men  go  far  beyond  this  often.  Indeed,  as  it  is  said  in  Scripture,  men 
make  themselves  like  the  beasts  that  perish.  The  beasts,  however,  have  this 
advantage,  that  they  are  satisfied  with  what  is  sufficient  for  them. 

3.  Avoid  luxury. — Jesus  Christ  nourished  the  people  with  bread  only. 
"  God,"  says  Abbe  Rupert,  "  gave  the  Israelites  in  the  desert  most  exquisite 
food.  The  people  asked,  and  He  brought  quails,  etc.  (Ps.  cv.  40).  But  it  was  not 
so  much  a  gift  of  His  liberality  as  a  chastisement  to  punish  them  for  murmur- 
ing." There  is  nothing  more  dangerous  and  pernicious  than  luxury.  It  gives 
power  to  the  forces  of  our  carnal  nature  to  revolt  and  cast  off  the  yoke  of 
Christ. 

II.  Jesus  Christ  teaches  us  how  the  nourishment  of  the  body  may  be 
sanctified,  and  shows  us  how  we  may  attain  to  this.  How?  By  asking  a 
blessing  on  the  food,  and  by  giving  thanks ;  by  His  adorable  presence,  and  by 
works  of  love.  1.  He  gave  thanks  to  His  Father.  We  should  follow  His 
example.  It  is  from  God  we  receive  what  is  for  our  nourishment.  This,  among 
other  practices,  distinguished  the  early  Christians  from  the  heathen.  And 
surely  it  is  a  strange  thing  that  we  should  receive  and  enjoy  the  gifts  of  God 
without  thinking  on  Him  or  giving  Him  thanks  !  2.  It  was  in  the  presence  of 
Jesus  Christ  that  the  people  received  the  nourishment  w^hich  He  provided  and 
distributed.  God  is  everywhere  present,  seeing  all  things  ;  but  it  might  be  said 
that  He  is  often  more  especially  present  in  places  and  at  junctures  where  we  might 
170 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  VI. 


be  in  danger  of  forgetting  ourselves,  as  in  our  entertainments.  But  it  is  just 
here  that  we  should  not  lose  sight  of  Him.  The  heathen  even  were  accustomed 
sometimes  to  bring  their  idols  to  their  feasts,  etc.,  under  the  idea  that  those  false 
gods  would  teach  them  moderation.  But  because  we  too  often  forget  our  God, 
omnipresent  though  He  is,  what  happens  often  ?  Judge  from  the  example  of 
Belshazzar.  If  God  does  not  visit  us  so  openly  His  secret  judgments  are  not 
less  awful  and  terrible.  3.  Jesus  Christ  commanded  that  what  remained  over 
should  be  gathered  up  to  serve  for  any  who  might  afterward  come.  Thus  the 
rich  should  aid  the  poor  from  their  abundance.  St.  Louis  fed  a  number  daily 
from  his  table.  There  is  much  wasted  in  the  mansions  of  the  rich  that  might 
succour  the  poor.  Yet  many  are  allowed  to  perish,  whilst  the  forgetful  expose 
themselves  to  the  fate  of  the  rich  man  of  the  parable.  Let  us  learn  to  free 
ourselves  from  the  slavery  of  the  body. — Bourdaloue. 

The  true  bread  of  life. — Jesus  went  forward  to  die  •  the  Lamb  of  God  beareth 
away  the  sins  of  the  world.  But  the  redemption  of  Christ  can  avail  for  thee, 
and  thy  heart  rejoice  (Isa.  lxvi.  10),  only  in  the  reception  of  the  true  Bread 
of  Life,  i.e.  when  the  Lord  and  Saviour  Himself  has  been  received  by  thee 
through  faith,  and  in  the  Word  and  ordinances  wherein  He  is  offered  to  thee. 
We  consider  in  regard  to  this  Bread  of  Life — 

I.  The  need  thereof. — 1.  The  people  followed  Jesus;  but  for  the  most  part 
because  of  the  signs  and  wonders  He  performed.  Even  as  they  needed  bread,  so 
their  heart  was  empty  of  real  trust  in  the  gospel.  2.  Our  natural  man  is  carnally 
minded  and  seeks  "good  times";  this  may  perhaps  be  agreeable  to  the  fleshly 
nature,  but  even  thus  only  in  appearance ;  at  all  events,  the  spiritual  man 
languishes,  faith  becomes  ever  weaker,  the  life  ever  more  alienated  from  God ; 
and  in  all  the  superfluity  which  the  outward  man  enjoys  the  inner  man  starves, 
and  forfeits  temporal  and  eternal  salvation,  or  runs  the  risk  of  doing  so. 
Man  "  cannot  live  by  bread  alone,"  but  needs  the  Word  which  proceeds  out  of 
the  mouth  of  God  for  the  nourishment  of  his  soul. 

II.  The  preparation  thereto. — 1.  Jesus  saw  the  need  of  the  people;  He  let 
it  be  seen  that  without  His  setting  to  work  there  was  no  help  possible  (vers.  5-9). 
He  brought  home  to  Philip  the  littleness  of  his  faith ;  He  made  use  of  the 
slender  provision — had  the  people  arranged  in  orderly  fashion,  took  the  bread, 
and  gave  thanks.  2.  Jesus  brings  home  to  our  consciousness  our  inability,  and 
the  weakness  of  our  faith,  so  that  we  may  turn  to  Him  for  help.  He  holds  out 
to  us  the  ordinary  means  of  grace,  the  Word  and  ordinances,  because  He  will 
even  link  to  these  the  powers  of  grace,  which  are  necessary  to  us  in  every 
contingency.  He  directs  us  to  prayer,  through  which  the  means  at  hand  are 
blessed  and  their  employment  assured. 

III.  The  reception  thereof. — 1.  Every  individual  in  the  multitude  received,  none 
was  omitted.  Every  one  who  had  eaten  was  satisfied,  and  there  remained  much 
over.  2.  Old  and  young,  rich  and  poor,  whoever  comes  to  Jesus  hungering 
for  grace,  receives  through  the  Word  and  ordinances  nourishing  and  healthful 
food,  and  that  in  richest  measure.  There  remains  from  the  blessing  of  the 
Sabbath,  e.g.,  something  over  for  the  work-day.  From  this  Bread  all  gain 
comfort  and  strength,  which  will  serve  us  not  alone  in  special  contingencies,  but 
will  hold  out  through  life. 

IV.  The  blessing  therein. — 1.  The  multitudes,  in  consequence  of  this  miracu- 
lous feeding  of  the  five  thousand,  acknowledged  Jesus  to  be  the  promised 
Prophet  (Deut.  xviii.  15) ;  they  desired  to  make  Jesus  a  king — in  earthly  fashion 
to  be  sure.  2.  The  Word  and  ordinances  reveal  Jesus  to  us  as  our  all- 
sufficient  Saviour ;  for  thereby  are  we  filled  with  comfort  and  strength,  estab- 
lished in  the  knowledge  that  Jesus  is  the  promised  Prophet,  High  Priest,  and 

171 


chap,  vi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ST.  JOHN. 


King,  and  thus  mighty  enough  to  free  us  from  the  awful  misery  of  sin  and  death. 
We  are  then  mightily  drawn  to  choose  Christ  as  King  to  reign  in  our  hearts,  to 
let  Him  rule  there,  and  so  to  walk  in  newness  of  life. — J.  L.  Sommer. 

How  the  Lord  Jesus  proves  Himself  to  be  our  true  helper. — He  shows  Himself 
to  be  our  true  helper  : — 

I.  In  His  desire  to  help. — 1.  He  sees  not  alone  the  material,  but  also  the 
spiritual  wants  of  the  people.  2.  He  has  compassion  on  the  multitudes  ere  they 
complain  to  Him  of  their  needs.  3.  He  comes  to  the  resolution  to  feed  the 
people,  not  only  materially  but  spiritually  (ver.  6). 

II.  In  His  power  to  help. — 1.  He  finds  means  to  which  He  can  link  the 
miracle.  2.  What  He  takes  in  His  hand  is  multiplied,  and  attains  His  purpose. 
3.  When  He  gives  not  only  have  all  who  receive  enough,  but  there  remains 
much  over. 

III.  In  His  wisdom  in  giving  help. — 1.  He  caused  the  people  to  arrange 
themselves  in  order  so  that  none  might  be  passed  over.  2.  He  points  in  the  course 
of  His  succouring  them  to  prayer,  whereby  the  spiritual  blessing  is  added  to  the 
material.  3.  He  thwarts  carnal  ideas,  which  are  connected  with  material 
blessing  merely,  and  directs  men  to  His  spiritual  kingdom. — Idem. 

HOMILETIC  NOTES. 

Vers.  1-3.   This  incident,  while  show-  unbelieving    multitude;     and   3.    His 

ing  forth  Christ's  glory,  marks  the  crisis  spirit  must  needs  be  refreshed  by  unin- 

of  His  ministry  in  Galilee. — These  in-  terrupted  communion  with  His  Father, 
cidents   in   the  Galilean   ministry  are 

recorded  for  two  principal  reasons:  1.  Yer.  5.  Jesus  saw  a  great  company 

As  manifesting  forth  the  glory  of  the  come  unto  Him,  etc. — The  reason  why 

Saviour;  and  2.  As  marking  the  culmi-  so   many  followed   our   Lord  was,   no 

nating  point — the  crisis  of  the  ministry  doubt,  for  the  most  part  because  of  the 

of  our  Lord  in  Galilee.     Three  causes  fame  of  His  miracles ;  but  in  part  also 

contributed  to   that  extension  of  our  because  those  who  had  hitherto  followed 

Lord's  ministry  in  Galilee,  of  which  this  John  were  now  most  likely  attracted 

forms  a  part :  the  twelve  who  had  been  to  Jesus. — J.  J.  Weigel. 
sent  out   two   and  two   had   returned 

(Luke  ix.  10) ;  Jesus  had  heard  of  the  Ver.  5.  Grace  needed  for  hard  times, 

death  of  John,  and  also  that  Herod  the  material    and    spiritual. — Want    and 

tetrarch  was  declaring,  on  hearing  of  poverty    are    grievous,    and     a     rich 

the  works  of  the  Lord,  that  Jesus  was  measure  of  spiritual  power  is  needed  to 

John  come  again  ;  and  furthermore  our  sustain  both,  and  that  men  may  not 

Lord  needed  rest  from  labour  (Hab.  iv.  fall  into  temptation  and  sin  in  conse- 

15 ;  Mark  vi.  31).  quence  of  them. — Idem. 

Ver.  3.  Jesus  went  up  into  a  moun-  Ver.  5.  Hard  times. — Yes,  truly,  but 

tain,    etc. — The   Lord   of   glory   incar-  thy  sins  are  also  burdensome.     Lay  thy 

nate  suffered  the  sinless  infirmities  of  poverty  and  thy  sin  in  the  balance,  and 

humanity.  1.  His  body  needed  rest  see  which  weighs  most  heavily. — Idem. 
and  refreshing  as  ours  do;  and  when 

labours  had  been  excessive  He  felt  the  Ver.  7.  Gold   and    courage. — If   we 

need   of  rest  and  retirement.     2.  His  have  gold  then  we  have  courage  enough; 

heart   needed    cheering    and    comfort  but  if  we  lack  gold  our  faith  is  apt  to 

through  communion  with  His  faithful  fail.      Thus  Philip's  reckoning  is  not 

disciples,   and   away   from    the  feeble,  founded  on  faith.    "  With  gold,  men  are 

172 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   VI. 


bold "  j  for  gold  men  can  purchase  all 
things.  "  Gold  sped,  courage  fled,"  for 
men  do  not  expect  to  get  something  for 
nothing. — Idem. 

Ver.  9.  God's  store  is  never  empty. — 
It  is  easy  enough  to  utter  the  prayer, 
"  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread," 
when  it  lies  before  us — when  we  have 
enough  and  to  spare.  The  test  of  faith 
is  to  continue  the  prayer  when  the 
cruse  of  oil  runs  low,  and  the  barrel  of 
meal  has  been  emptied.  But  even  then 
the  true  disciple  will  remember  the 
promise  :  "  Seek  first  the  kingdom  of 
God,  and  all  these  things  shall  be  added  " 
(Matt.  vi.  33). 

Ver.  11.  The  spiritual  reception  of 
material  gifts. — 1.  A  Christian  should 
first   show    his   care   for   the   soul   in 


prayer,  and  then  for  the  body  by 
taking  fit  nourishment.  2.  A  table 
sanctified  by  prayer  and  thanks  is  never 
void  ;  like  a  spring  it  is  ever  full.  3. 
The  Lord  gives  nourishment  to  His 
people  according  to  His  own  will,  not 
according  to  theirs. — Weigel. 

Ver.  15.  Earthly  crowns  are  unstable. 
— The  world  gives  its  crowns  as  rewards. 
To-day  it  sets  them  on  men's  heads, 
to-morrow  it  removes  them.  Enduring 
crowns  are  only  to  be  found  in  heaven 
(2  Tim.  iv.  8). 

The  blessing  of  solitude. — Solitude  is 
beautiful  and  grand  only  when  it  is 
chosen  as  a  quiet  resting-place,  in  which 
we  can  hold  converse  with  God. — St. 
Gregory. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  11.  Christ's  care  for  all  forms  of 
human  want. — What  are  the  lessons  of  the 
"sign"?  It  teaches  Christ's  care  for  all 
forms  of  human  want.  It  reveals  His  con- 
tinuous working  as  sustainer  of  physical 
life.  In  the  miracle,  some  of  the  links 
ordinarily  present  in  the  chain  which  binds 
physical  results  to  the  divine  will  were 
absent ;  but  their  absence  or  presence  does 
not  affect  the  reality  of  the  connection 
between  the  staple  from  which  it  hangs  and 
the  last  visible  effect.  The  cause  of  all 
physical  phenomena  is  the  will  of  God,  and 
that  will  works  in  and  through  Jesus  Christ, 
iu  whom  is  life,  and  without  whom  nothing 
created  subsists.  He  is  Sustainer  as  well  as 
Creator.  He  holds  the  stars  in  His  hand,  and 
He  opens  His  hand,  with  the  print  of  the 
nail  in  it,  and  satisfies  the  desires  of  every 
living  thing.  But  the  great  lesson  of  the 
miracle  is  that  which  our  Lord  Himself  drew 
from  it,  in  the  following  discourse  on  the 
bread  of  life.  .  .  .  The  result  of  the  miracle  is 
next  presented  in  two  ways — the  abundance 
left  over,  and  the  people's  excitement.  As  to 
the  former,  note  that  the  "  broken  pieces " 
are  not  the  crumbs  that  littered  the  grass 
after  the  feast  was  over,  but  the  pieces 
broken  for  distribution.  John  alone  records 
that  Christ  commanded  the  gathering.  He 
thereby  taught  economy  in  the  use  and  stor- 
ing of  His  gifts,  and  bade  the  disciples 
recognise  that  dependence  on  His  miraculous 
power  does  not  absolve  from  the  exercise  of 
ordinary  prudence.  But  if  we  regard  the 
whole  incident  in  that  symbolic  aspect  in 


which  He  Himself  presents  it  in  the  subse- 
quent discourse,  this  abundant  overplus  and 
the  care  taken  of  it  are  fruitful  of  instruction. 
Men,  women,  and  children  all  found  enough 
in  the  bread  from  His  hands.  The  world 
scoffs  at  the  barley-bread  which  Jesus  gives, 
which  seems  coarse  to  palates  spoiled  by  the 
world's  confectionery  ;  but  it  gives  life  to  the 
eaters.  If  any  man  wants  dainties  that  will 
tickle  his  diseased  or  fastidious  appetite,  he 
will  have  to  go  elsewhere  for  them  ;  but  if  he 
wants  bread  to  stay  his  hunger,  let  him  go 
to  Jesus,  who  is  "  human  nature's  daily  food." 
But  not  only  was  there  enough  for  each,  but 
the  twelve  baskets  were  filled — one  carried 
by  each  apostle  probably — with  the  food 
that  had  been  prepared  and  was  not  needed. 
"  The  gift  doth  stretch  itself  as  'tis  received." 
Other  goods  and  possessions  perish  with 
using,  but  this  increases  with  use.  The  more 
one  eats  the  more  there  is  for  him  to  eat. 
All  the  world  may  live  on  it  for  ever,  and  there 
will  be  more  at  the  end  than  at  the  beginning. 
In  Christ's  gift  of  the  bread  of  life  there  is 
always  a  certain  unappropriated  overplus,  a 
quality  of  infinity  of  resource,  which  sur- 
passes our  present  power  of  reception,  and 
encourages  us  to  hope  for  larger  possession 
when  our  faith  is  enlarged.  That  unrealised 
possible  attainment  is  not  to  be  left  unheeded, 
but  to  be  gathered  up  in  the  baskets  of  our 
growing  faith,  our  more  ardent  desire  and 
more  lowly  obedience,  that  it  may  be  food 
for  to-morrow,  when  we  are  able  to  make  it 
our  own.  The  unwon  treasures  of  His  grace 
should  stimulate  endless  hope,  aspiration,  and 

173 


chap.  vi.  HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


effort.     To-morrow  shall  be  as  this  day,  and  regard  to  the  Christian  life  is  to  fall  beneath 

much  more  abundant.     That  hope  is  folly,  our  privileges,  and  to  lose  the  unused  abun- 

and  worse,  if  cherished  in  regard  to  any  life  dance  prepared  for  us  by  the  Master  of  the 

but  a  Christian  life.     Not  to  cherish  it  in  feast.— Dr.  A.  Maclaren. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF   THE    PARAGRAPH.— Verses  16—21. 

Christ  the  hope  of  the  faithful  and  of  His  Church  in  peril. — This  narrative  of 
St.  John  must  be  taken  in  connection  with  the  parallel  passages  in  the  Synop- 
tists  (Matt.  xiv.  22-33 ;  Mark  vi.  45-52,  which  see),  which  give  a  more  full  and 
circumstantial  account  of  this  incident.  St.  John's  purpose,  it  may  be,  in  his 
manner  of  narrating  the  incident,  was  to  emphasise  our  Lord's  true  kingship. 
He  would  not  consent  to  be  made  a  king  after  the  desire  of  the  Jews  \  but  He 
showed  in  this  miracle  His  true  royal  dignity.  It  was  for  this  reason  in  part 
that  He  constrained  His  disciples  to  depart  to  the  other  side,  whilst  He  remained 
behind.  He  did  not  wish  them  to  be  infected  with  the  carnal  enthusiasm  of 
the  people,  and  it  was  perhaps  the  rising  desire  in  their  hearts  that  He  would 
comply  with  the  wishes  of  the  people  that  made  it  necessary  for  Him  to  constrain 
them  (Matt.  xiv.  22)  to  depart.  And  besides,  He  would  turn  the  occasion  into  a 
means  of  strengthening  and  confirming  their  faith. 

I.  Peace  on  the  mountain  side. — 1.  After  the  miracle  of  feeding  the  five 
thousand,  which  had  been  wrought  on  some  plain  near  the  lake  most  likely,  our 
Lord  retired  alone  to  the  mountain  (whither  He  had  gone  before  the  miracle, 
ver.  3),  in  order  to  escape  the  throng  of  people  who  wished  to  proclaim  Him  a 
king.  But  as  His  kingdom  was  not  of  this  world,  His  crown  no  tinsel  or  even 
golden  crown  of  earth,  to  be  placed  on  His  head  with  acclamation  by  men,  but, 
so  far  as  this  world  was  concerned,  a  crown  of  thorns,  He  went  in  the  gathering 
darkness  to  the  solitary  mountain  side.  2.  Yet  another  purpose  also  impelled 
Him  thither.  It  is  true  the  divine  Son  was  ever  conscious  of  His  Father's 
presence ;  but  as  the  Son  incarnate  He  needed  these  periods  of  restful,  undis- 
turbed communion  with  the  Father,  whence  He  came  forth  strengthened  for  His 
work.  3.  And  especially  at  such  a  time  would  He  need  this  strengthening. 
The  people  altogether  misunderstood  His  mission ;  even  His  disciples  were  prone 
to  be  led  away  by  the  prevailing  Messianic  conceptions,  whilst  one  of  them  "  had 
a  devil  "  (ver.  70).  Therefore  the  incarnate  Son*  needed  to  be  strengthened 
now  by  close  and  uninterrupted  communion  with  the  Father,  as  in  Gethsemane 
and  in  other  crises  of  His  ministry. 

II.  Trouble  on  the  sea. — 1.  Meantime  the  disciples  had  embarked  for 
Capernaum.  It  would  almost  seem  as  if  they  had  tarried  for  Him  at  some 
point  along  the  eastern  shore ;  but,  as  He  had  not  come,  in  obedience  to  His 
order,  previously  given  no  doubt,  they  launched  forth  (ver.  17).  2.  One  of  those 
sudden  storms  which  sweep  down  on  the  deep  trough  in  which  this  land-locked 
lake  lies  arose  soon  after  the  disciples  set  sail,  and  drove  them,  in  spite  of 
laborious  rowing,  toward  the  middle  of  the  lake,  so  that  when  the  fourth  watch  of 
the  night  began  the  toiling  vessel  was  still  far  from  its  destination.  3.  When 
suddenly,  in  the  "  struggling  moonbeams'  misty  light,"  shining  intermittently 
through  the  storm -rack,  they  saw  that  which  confounded  and  terrified  them — a 
human  form  treading  securely  over  the  heaving  waters. 

III.  Peace  on  the  troubled  waters. — 1.  On  the  solitary  mountain  side  Jesus 
did  not  forget  His  followers.  As  before  said,  His  intention  was  doubtless  to 
strengthen  their  faith  by  that  night's  experience.  He  saw  them  as  they  toiled 
in  rowing.  But  they  must  be  prepared  for  the  hour  when  He  should  have  to 
go  hence,  and  they  should  be  left  alone  to  buffet  with  the  winds  and  waves  of 
the  world's  opposition.     2.  But  when  the  moment  He  saw  fittest  had  come  He 

174 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ST.  JOHN.  chap.  vi. 


appeared  near  them  walking  on  the  storm- tossed  waters.  The  first  effect  on 
them  of  His  appearance  was  a  sensation  of  terror.  They  forgot  their  Master's 
power — that  once  before  He  had  risen  from  sleep  and  stilled  the  storm,  with 
words  of  rebuke  to  them  for  the  weakness  of  their  faith  (comp.  Matt.  viii.  26). 
They  forgot  that  His  power  had,  but  a  few  hours  before,  been  manifested  in  the 
feeding  of  the  multitude.  They  had  now  to  learn  that  that  power  availed 
though  space  and  storm  should  for  the  moment  sunder  them  from  Him.  And 
in  His  cheering  hail  over  the  stormy  waters,  "It  is  I,  be  not  afraid,"  we  hear 
the  prelude  of  the  comforting  words,  "  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,"  and  the 
resurrection  greeting,  "  Peace  be  unto  you"  (xiv.  1,  xx.  19,  26).  3.  Now  they 
joyfully  recognised  their  Lord,  and  were  willing — heartfeltly  willing — to  receive 
Him  into  the  ship.  And  after  the  incident  in  which  Peter  figures  conspicuously, 
and  which  is  recorded  by  the  other  Evangelists,  Jesus  entered  the  ship,  the 
storm  subsided  (Matt.  xiv.  32),  and  the  vessel,  obeying  Him  who  rules  in  all  the 
realms  of  being,  was  "  immediately  at  the  land  whither  they  went." 

IV.  Christ  comes  still  to  His  people  in  storm  and  trouble. — 1.  This 
miracle,  like  most  of  those  wrought  by  our  Lord,  has  a  spiritual  purpose,  as 
well  as  that  it  was  immediately  intended  to  effect.     His  words  of  cheer,  "  It  is 

1,  be  not  afraid,"  still  ring  out  in  the  night  and  storm  and  tempest  to  comfort 
His  people,  and  have  done  so  in  all  the  centuries  since  that  night  on  Galilee. 

2.  Christ  has  passed  from  our  view  into  the  heavenly  mount  of  God,  and  we 
have  perforce  to  launch  out  here  on  the  stormy  sea  of  life.  But  shall  we  not, 
even  in  the  darkest  and  most  troubled  hour,  remember  all  He  has  done  for  us, 
His  miracles  of  mercy  and  power  in  the  past — all  His  goodness?  and  can  we 
forget  that  the  Shepherd  of  Israel,  of  His  own  people,  neither  slumbers  nor 
sleeps,  and  that  in  the  hour  of  need  He  will  appear  to  our  aid  ?  3.  And  when 
He  does  come  it  may  be  in  unwonted  fashion,  it  may  seem  as  "  purposing  to 
pass  by  "  (Mark  vi.  48),  or  as  to  the  disciples  at  Emmaus  "  as  though  He  would 
go  further."  Yet  it  is  but  to  quicken  our  faith  and  lead  us  to  put  confidence 
in  Him,  and  trust  in  the  fulfilment  of  His  promise  that  He  is  with  us  always 
(Matt,  xxviii.  20),  even  when  we  cannot  recognise  Him  in  the  events  and 
circumstances  that  surround  us.  And  thus,  even  in  the  solemn  hour  when  we 
must  fare  forth  across  the  waters  of  death,  we  shall,  if  faithful,  know  that  He 
is  near,  and  hear  His  cheering  word,  "  It  is  I,  be  not  afraid."  4.  The  Church 
has  fitly  appropriated  this  incident  as  a  type  of  her  experience  at  earnest  periods 
of  her  history.  So,  in  these  latter  days,  when  fiercer  storms  than  she  has  before 
experienced  beat  upon  her,  and  her  company  strain  wearily,  it  may  often  seem 
vainly,  at  the  labouring  oar,  let  them  take  courage,  remember  the  past,  and 
believe  that  He  is  near. 

u  And  all  is  well,  tho'  faith  and  form 
Be  sunder'd  in  the  night  of  fear; 
Well  roars  the  storm  to  those  that  hear 
A  deeper  voice  across  the  storm." 

Tennyson. 

HOMILETIC  NOTES. 

Ver.    17.  The   Christian  life  under  I.  The  ship  has  to  contend  with  the 

the  figure  of  a  voyage. — We  see  : —  winds  and  waves  ; 

I.  The  peaceful  commencement ;  II.  The  ship's  company  are  faint- 

II.  The  stormy  progress ;  hearted  and  fearful  often  ; 

III.  The  happy  termination.  IIL  But  the  Lord  leads  {t  by  His 

powerful  hand  to  the  quiet  haven. — 

Ver.    18.  The    progress    of   Christ's     J-  L-  Sommer. 
Church  on  earth  like  that  o^  a  ship.  Ver.    18.  .Storms    on    the    Galilean 

175 


CHAP.   VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


lake. — The  traveller  on  first  viewing  the 
Lake  of  Galilee,  approaching  it  either 
from  the  heights  above  or  the  Jordan 
valley,  generally  looks  on  a  calm  and 
tranquil  scene.  Lying  far  below  the 
level  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea  (600 
feet),  shut  in  by  sloping  hillsides,  which 
are  in  reality  depressions  of  great 
tablelands,  it  seems  always  the  same 
peaceful,  beautiful  sheet  of  water.  Its 
rippling  wavelets  glitter  in  the  sunshine 
and  murmur  gently  along  the  shore  ; 
and  over  the  sunlit  reaches  the  wild 
aquatic  birds  wing  their  flight.  It 
would  almost  seem  as  if  no  wild 
commotion  could  break  in  on  and 
disturb  the  restful  scene.  But  in 
Syria  and  Palestine  during  winter  and 
spring  sudden  storms  arise  at  pretty 
regular  intervals,  lasting  usually  two 
or  three  or  more  days.  Then  the 
turmoil  of  the  elements  is  often  awe- 
inspiring  and  grand.  The  rains  fall 
with  tropical  violence,  lightning  flashes 
all  around,  whilst  the  thunder  crashes 
overhead  and  reverberates  among  the 
valleys  and  ravines  of  the  hillsides. 
From  those  heights  the  storm-winds 
rush  in  fury  and  roar  over  the  level 
country,  lashing  the  waters  of  those 
inland  lakes  into  stormy  commotion, 
and  sending  foam-capped  waves 
dashing  on  the  shore.  It  was  pro- 
bably such  a  storm  as  this — one  of  the 
last  of  the  season — that  met  the 
disciples.  We  have  several  hints  of 
this  well-known  phenomenon  of  the 
regularly  recurring  winter  and  spring 
storms  in  Syria  in  the  gospel  narrative, 
not  the  least  interesting  being  the 
graphic  description  in  the  concluding 
parable  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount. 

Ver.  19.  The  will  of  Christ  potential 
in  the  miracle  of  walking  on  the  sea. — 
It  is  a  docetic  view  of  the  person  of 
Christ  which  conceives  of  His  body 
as  permanently  exempt  from  the 
law  of  gravitation,  and  in  this  way 
explains  the  miracle ;  a  hard  and 
mechanical  view,  which  places  the 
seat  of  the  miracle  in  the  waters, 
rendered  solid  under  His  feet.  Rather 
was  it  the  will  of  Christ  which  bore 
Him  triumphantly  above  those  waters; 
176 


even  as  it  was  the  will  of  Peter,  that ' 
will,  indeed,  made  in  the  highest  degree 
active  and  potential  by  faith  in  the 
Son  of  God,  which  should  in  like 
manner  have  enabled  him  to  walk  on 
the  great  deep,  and,  though  with  partial 
and  transient  failure,  did  so  enable 
him.  It  has  been  already  urged  that 
the  miracle,  according  to  its  true  idea, 
is  not  the  suspension,  still  less  the 
violation  of  law ;  but  the  incoming  of 
a  higher  law,  as  of  a  spiritual  in  the 
midst  of  natural  laws ;  and  so  far  as 
its  range  and  reach  extend,  the  assertion 
for  that  higher  law  of  the  predomi- 
nance which  it  was  intended  to  have, 
and  but  for  man's  fall  it  would  always 
have  had,  over  the  lower  ;  and  with  this 
a  prophetic  anticipation  of  the  abiding 
predominance  which  it  shall  one  day 
recover.  Exactly  thus  was  there  here 
a  sign  of  the  lordship  of  man's  will, 
when  that  will  is  in  absolute  harmony 
with  God's  will,  over  external  nature. 
In  regard  of  this  very  law  of  gravita- 
tion, a  feeble  remnant  of  his  power, 
and  one  for  the  most  part  unconsciously 
possessed,  survives  to  man  in  the 
unquestionable  fact  that  his  body  is 
lighter  when  he  is  awake  than  sleeping ; 
a  fact  which  every  nurse  who  has 
carried  a  child  can  attest.  From  this 
we  conclude  that  the  human  conscious- 
ness, as  an  inner  centre,  works  as  an 
opposing  force  to  the  attraction  of  the 
earth  and  the  centripetal  force  of 
gravity,  however  unable  in  this  present 
time  to  overbear  it. — Archbishop  Trench. 

Yers.  19-21.  The  threefold  word  of 
comfort  from  our  Gospel  unto  all 
troubled  souls. 

I.  Be  not  afraid  !  for  we  have  near 
us  One  who  is  our  Lord  and  who  will 
be  with  us  even  to  the  end  of  the 
world  (vers.  19,  20). 

II.  Be  not  afraid!  for  however 
strange  and  unwonted  the  manner  in 
which  He  may  come  to  us,  His  presence 
will  ever  bring  us  joy  (ver.  21,  1st  el.) ; 

III.  Be  not  afraid !  for  when  He  is 
with  us  we  shall  speedily  arrive  at 
the  desired  haven ;  His  presence  will 
bring  us  success  in  our  labours  for 
Him  (ver.  21,  2nd  cl.). 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   VI. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  18.   Who  is  Christ  ? — Are  our  oppo- 
nents right,  and  has  Jesus  gone  never  to 
return  ?      The  ground   seems  to   be   giving 
way  beneath  our  feet  !     Now,  indeed,  is  the 
time   when  faith  must   "  be  silent "  before 
the  Lord.     Yet,  what  is  it  comes  toward  us 
through  the  darkness  of  the  night  ?     What 
kind  of  appearance  is  it  for  whose  feet  the 
rolling  waters  form  themselves  into  a  bridge  ? 
"  It  is  a  spirit " — so  imagined  the  troubled 
ship's  company  on  Galilee.  . . .  [Equally  astray 
are]    those    shortsighted    interpreters    who 
seek  to  lead  men  to  trace  back  the  greatness 
of  Christ  to  a  delusion,  a  seeming  greatness, 
projected   on    the  uncertain   and   wavering 
mists  of  tradition,  on  the  concave  mirror  of 
a  lively  imagination.    "  He  cannot  have  been 
really  and  truly  the  Son  of   God ;  but  the 
superstitious    and    easily   misled   multitude 
proclaimed  Him  to  be  so.     He  did  not  speak 
the  word  of  life,  nor  was  He  Himself  the 
Word  of   life,  but  simply  a  pious  fraud,  a 
spontaneous  poetical   creation  invented  by 
various  accomplices.     Thus  the  forgery  was 
executed.     He   will  not  quicken   us  either 
now    or    hereafter ;     but    in    our    common 
speech  and    in   our   thought  we  may  keep 
Him  continually  in  existence  from  generation 
to  generation.     In  all  the  history  there  is 
only  a  small  kernel  of  fact  worthy  of  belief  : 
the  envelope  is   a  floating  cometic  mantle 
composed   of    sheer   imaginations,   legends, 
exaggerations,       and      misunderstandings." 
Church  of  the  Lord,  can  this  be  the  founda- 
tion of  your  confidence  ! — Translated  from 
Br.  R.  Kogel. 

Ver.  19.  "  It  is  I,  he  not  afraid." — But  a 
familiar  voice  says,  "  Be  of  good  cheer,"  etc. 
It  is  I.  Thus  spake  this  same  voice  to  thee, 
my  friend,  as  thy  house  became  lonely  and 
a  bier  was  carried  out,  as  thy  heart  felt 
unspeakably  wretched.  Then  that  star  in 
heaven — the  faith  in  thy  heart—  grew  dim. 
But,  trouble  which  appeared  like  blind 
chance — a  malignant  fate,  a  spectre — death, 
that  grinning  skeleton  and  king  of  terrors, 
laid  aside  the  mask,  and  behold  !  it  was  the 
Lord.  Then  in  quietness  and  assurance 
thou  wert  helped  by  Him.  "It  is  7."  So 
the  Lord  ever  makes  Himself  known  to  His 
Church,  when,  e.g.,  the  State  removes  the 
accustomed  supports,  when  Rome  furbishes 
her  weapons  and  increases  her  fastnesses, 
when  materialism  scornfully  seeks  the 
outward  and  visible ;  and  the  multitude  with 
their  voice  ever-changing,  now  for,  now 
against,  like  ebb  and  flow ;  and  parties  with 


their  cry  of  "  Here  is  Christ,  or  there,"  seek 
reciprocally  to  excommunicate  each  other, 
and  finally  are  in  danger  of  banishing  Christ 
altogether, — then  the  ground  trembles.  But 
everything  will  turn  out  otherwise  from 
what  men  suppose.  Only  in  Jesus  has  no 
one  ever  been  deceived.  Do  the  people  of 
Capernaum  ask  Him,  as  it  is  in  our  text, 
Rabbi,  when  (rather  how)  earnest  Thou 
hither  1  No  philosopher  can  explain  this, 
that  Jesus  walks  on  the  waters,  making 
what  seems  firm  to  be  unstable,  and  what 
is  fluctuating,  stable.  The  conflict  of 
opinions,  the  loudness  of  calumny,  the 
raging  of  passion,  the  power  and  roar  of 
the  billows,  the  thunder-roll  of  events,  will 
at  the  decisive  moment  be  overpowered  at 
the  word  of  the  Church's  Lord.  "  Ye,  My 
disciples,  be  of  good  cheer.  It  is  I,  be  not 
afraid."  "  The  Lord  is  in  His  holy  temple  ; 
be  still  before  Him,  all  the  earth." — Trans- 
lated from  Br.  R.  Kogel. 

Ver.  19.  Faith  amid  the  storm. — To  the 
confidence  and  peace  reached  by  the  disciples 
on  this  occasion  Christian  people  may  and 
do  attain,  have  trusted  and  not  been  afraid 
in  storm  and  trouble  (Ps.  xlvi.).  A  missionary 
thus  described  an  incident  on  a  great  steam- 
ship during  a  terrible  storm  on  the  Atlantic. 
A  fearful  hurricane  swept  over  the  ocean, 
raising  a  tremendous  sea,  in  the  trough  of 
which  the  great  vessel  tossed,  helpless  and 
unmanageable.  It  did  not  seem  that  if  the 
storm  lasted  during  the  night  the  ship  could 
weather  it.  The  seamen  could  not  cross  the 
wave-swept  decks  ;  and  the  passengers  were 
shut  up  in  the  great  saloon.  A  crowd  of 
anxious  men  and  terror-stricken  women,  they 
clustered  together,  holding  tightly  to  any 
fixed  object.  Only  the  children  did  not  seem 
to  realise  all  the  terror  of  the  situation. 
The  minister-missionary  was  asked  to  engage 
in  prayer.  He  did  so,  kneeling  and  grasping 
with  his  hands  the  edge  of  one  of  the  fixed 
tables.  He  did  not,  however,  utter  any  set 
ordinary  form  of  prayer.  It  was  just  a 
simple  talk  with  his  God  and  Redeemer,  just 
such  a  talk,  as  he  expressed  it,  as  a  child 
would  have  with  a  loving  parent.  All  were 
calmed  and  comforted  by  the  simple  prayer 
of  faith,  and  took  courage.  Toward  morning 
the  storm  abated,  the  ship  was  got  under 
control,  and  they  were  safe. 

"  Thou  Framer  of  the  light  and  dark, 
Guide  through  the  tempest  Thine  own  ark ; 
Amid  the  howling  wintry  sea 
We  are  in  port  if  we  have  Thee." 


N 


177 


chap.  vi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ST.  JOHN. 


MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  22—65. 

Yer.  27.  "  Man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone." — This  is  a  subject  frequently  and 
urgently  referred  to  by  our  Lord  (Matt.  vi.  25-34,  etc.).  And  the  reason  why 
this  is  so  is  not  far  to  seek.  The  spirit  and  tendency  which  He  seeks  to  combat 
is  that  practical  materialism  which  springs  up  especially  where  men  are  con- 
gregated in  masses,  and  the  struggle  for  existence  is  more  keenly  felt ;  and 
which  also  exerts  its  baleful  influence  wherever  undue  attention  to  earthly 
concerns  is  indulged  in. 

I.  The  material  fails  to  satisfy  men. —  1.  What  is  material  can  satisfy  only 
for  the  time.  The  material  food  that  Jesus  had  miraculously  provided  for  the 
hungry  multitudes  satisfied  them  for  the  moment.  But  on  the  following 
morning  those  same  people  were  again  surrounding  Him  seeking  further  material 
manifestations.  2.  God  alone,  spiritual  things  alone,  can  fill  up  the  needs  of 
our  higher  nature.  Our  souls  cry  out  for  "  God,  the  living  God."  Scripture, 
and  human  history — the  aggregate  of  human  experience,  testify  to  this.  3. 
What  are  the  religions  and  rites  of  heathenism  ;  what  are  those  ruined  shrines 
and  temples  of  religions  and  peoples  of  the  past — even  of  races  forgotten  and 
unknown — but  an  eloquent  commentary  on  and  testimony  to  the  truth  that  man 
cannot  in  his  complex  nature  be  satisfied  with  material  things  alone  1 

II.  Material  things  should  therefore  not  exclusively  engross  us. — 1.  "Work 
not,"  etc. — seek  not  to  obtain  by  your  labour  merely  the  food  that  perisheth ;  do 
not  apply  all  your  energies  to  this  end.  That  seems  to  be  the  meaning  of  the 
Saviour's  words.  He  does  not  and  cannot  mean  that  men  are  not  honestly  to 
labour  for  daily  bread,  but  that  they  are  not  to  make  this  the  first  and  supreme 
concern.  2.  For  by  doing  so  they  will  stunt  their  nature,  and  by  supreme 
attention  to  the  things  of  earth  they  will  become  "of  the  earth  earthy."  Are 
not  socialism  and  secularism  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  growth  of  colossal  fortunes 
on  the  other,  results  of  this  undue  attention  to  material  things  condemned  by 

.our  Lord  ?     And  is  not  the  widespread  discontent  of  the  world  due  to  this  cause  1 

"  My  heart  is  pained,  nor  can  it  be 
At  rest  till  it  finds  rest  in  Thee." 

3.  The  same  truth  meets  us  on  a  higher  plane.  Undue  attention  to  scientific 
and  intellectual  pursuits,  leading  to  neglect  of  our  spiritual  being,  tends  to 
poverty  of  the  higher  life.  Witness  the  sad  confession  by  Darwin,  that  he  had 
lost  in  later  life  his  taste  for  poetry,  etc.  That  part  of  his  mind  had  become,  as 
it  were,  "  atrophied  "  by  disease.  So  our  spiritual  being  becomes  atrophied,  dead, 
when  the  energies  of  life  are  wholly  given  to  the  material. 

III.  If  we  seek  the  spiritual,  the  material  will  in  due  measure  be  given. — 

1.  The  spiritual  life  must  come  first.  And  if  it  is  within  our  power,  then  there 
will  be  none  of  that  over-anxious  striving  for  material  things  that  takes  the  true 
spring  out  of  life,  and  often  embitters  it ;  and  the  angel  of  sweet  content  will 
smile  upon  our  way. 

"  Content  can  soothe,  where'er  by  fortune  placed, 
Can  rear  a  garden  in  a  desert  waste." — Kirke  White. 

2.  God  is  the  true  summum  bonum ;  and  possessing  Him,  His  children  possess 
all  things.  This  we  can  attain  to  through  Christ  alone.  And  for  the  true  and 
heavenly  food  men  must  labour.  Not  as  though  they  could  gain  it  by  their  own 
exertions ;  for  Christ  gives  it.  But  they  must  strive  after  it — seek  for  it 
earnestly.  3.  And  doing  so  it  will  be  given,  and  with  it  every  other  gift.  For 
Christ  has  been  solemnly  set  apart  and  sent  for  this  very  purpose  of  bringing  to 
men  the  bread  of  life ;  and  the  proof  of  His  authority,  the  seal  of  it,  is  evident  in 
His  mighty  works,  etc.     To  those  who  enter  His  kingdom,  to  whom  the  Father 

178 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.  chap,  vl 


has  given  the  kingdom,  all  things  needful  will  be  added  (Luke  xii.  32).     "A 
kingdom — brave  word  !     Then  why  not  bread?  "  (Bengel.) 

Vers.  28,  29.  The  work  of  God. — The  Jews  on  this  occasion,  as  on  many 
others,  missed  the  central  idea  in  the  words  which  Jesus  had  just  spoken  to  them. 
The  old  legal  concept,  Do  this  and  live,  was  evidently  in  their  minds  in  this 
inquiry.  They  did  not  observe,  or  observing  did  not  understand,  the  words, 
"  Work  for  the  meat  that  endureth,  .  .  .  which  the  Son  of  man  shall  give"  etc. 
(ver.  27).  Hence  their  question,  "What  must  we  do?"  etc.  Had  they  duly 
weighed  His  words,  and  had  they  not  been  blinded  to  the  truth,  their  question 
would  have  been,  "  How  can  we  obtain  from  Thee  this  food  that  endureth  ? " 

I.  How  shall  men  work  the  works  of  God  ? — 1.  It  is  an  inquiry  of  the  utmost 
importance.  For  what  are  men  sent  into  the  world  to  do  but  just  those  very 
works?  2.  And  this  inquiry  on  the  part  of  those  Jews  who  were  sincere  and 
earnest  (not  hypocrites  like  the  Pharisee  who  thanked  God  he  was  not  like 
other  men)  was  a  pathetic  confession  that  they  knew  not  how  aright  to  do  the 
work  given  them  to  do  here.  Every  sincere  man  feels  how  imperfect,  even  when 
he  is  in  earnest  and  struggling  manfully,  is  the  service  he  can  render.  3.  And 
when  life  has  reached  its  middle  course,  or  is  hastening  to  its  close,  and  we  look 
back  on  the  way  that  has  been  traversed,  how  little  do  we  find  to  cause  com- 
placency? how  much  that  is  blameworthy?  how  much  that  remains  undone? 
It  is  a  question  we  should  be  ever  asking,  and  it  will  be  well  for  us  if  we  are  led 
to  realise  (and  act  accordingly)  ever  more  clearly  that — 

II.  There  is  a  foundation  work,  which  must  precede  and  underlie  all  other 
works  in  the  service  of  God. — 1.  "  This  is  the  work  of  God,  that  ye  should 
believe,"  etc.  For  by  nature  we  have  no  true  desire  to  do  God's  works.  And  it 
is  only  when  we  believe  in  Christ,  become  His,  and  are  filled  with  His  Spirit  and 
our  hearts  with  His  love,  that  like  Him  we  shall  delight  to  do  our  Father's  will. 
2.  Faith  is  the  spring  of  all  true  Christian  activity.  Without  a  living  faith  and 
the  assured  hope  and  peace  that  faith  brings,  all  work  would  be  but  vanity,  and 
every  seeming  gain  only  an  adornment  of  the  sepulchre  of  our  hopes.  This  is 
the  foundation  work.  3.  And  believing  will  lead  to  our  acting  on  our  belief, 
and  seeking  in  all  our  work  to  serve  God  after  the  example  of  Jesus — especially 
in  those  works  of  mercy,  kindness,  and  love  which  were  so  conspicuous  in  His 
life.  4.  And  then,  even  though  we  come  far  short,  and  often  err  through  the 
weakness  of  our  nature,  still  the  whole  spirit  of  service  will  be  Christlike ;  and 
there  will  be  a  constant  endeavour  after  what  is  higher,  "  a  pressing  toward  the 
mark."  The  progress  of  Christendom  shows  that  faith  is  the  spring  of  a  higher 
life  and  service. 

III.  Believe  now! — 1.  The  human  and  the  divine  co-operate  here.  Men 
must  agonise  to  enter  in,  etc.  The  higher  life  is  one  of  progress,  and  the  more 
assured  and  clear  our  faith,  the  more  ardently  will  we  labour.  2.  But  how 
many  err  as  to  the  meaning  of  faith,  forgetting  that  faith  must  work  by  love 
(Gal.  v.  6) ;  and  that  the  genuineness  of  faith  must  be  shown  by  works 
(James  ii.  18).  What  shall  be  said  of  the  "  faith  "  of  those  who  live  in  and  for 
themselves  and  the  things  of  time  ?  3.  To  all  it  is  a  call  to  purer  faith  and 
higher  endeavour.  "  The  night  is  far  spent,  the  day  is  at  hand,"  etc.  (Rom. 
xiii.  12-14).  What  lies  behind  of  wasted  efforts,  neglected  opportunities,  etc., 
patches  of  tares  where  good  seed  should  have  rTeen  sown,  barren  spots  where 
should  have  waved  harvest  blessings?  Redeem  the  time  which  remains. 
Believe,  live,  labour  ! 

Yers.  30-35.  The  manna  and  the  true  Bread  from  heaven. — In  this  incident  the 
Jews  showed  themselves  to  be  true  descendants  of  their  fathers  who  "  tempted 
God  in  the  desert,"  and  murmured  at  the  provision  given  to  them  by  Him.     In 

179 


chap.  vi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


order  to  a  clear  comprehension  of  this  passage  it  will  be  necessary  to  recall 
the  Old  Testament  type  on  which  this  conversation  on  Christ  as  the  Bread  of 
Life  is  founded. 

I.  The  nature  of  the  manna. — It  was  a  divine  gift  to  the  Israelites  during 
their  desert  wanderings,  and  is  minutely  described  in  the  historical  passages 
(Exod.  xvi. ;  Num.  xi.  7-9)  which  refer  to  it.  Much  minute  research  has  been 
expended  to  trace  the  resemblance  between  the  manna  given  to  the  Israelites 
and  a  mucilaginous  exudation  from  a  species  of  tamarisk  shrub,  and  other 
plants  of  the  Sinaitic  peninsula.  It  was  described  by  the  Arab  physician 
Avicenna  as  "  a  dew  which  falls  on  stones  or  bushes,  becomes  thick  like  honey, 
and  can  be  hardened  so  as  to  be  like  grains  of  corn."  Similar  testimony  is 
borne  by  modern  travellers  (Burckhardt,  Niebuhr,  etc.).  This  production 
is  used  to-day  by  the  Arabs  of  the  peninsula  and  by  the  monks  of  Mount  Sinai 
in  the  form  of  a  syrup  to  be  eaten  with  bread.  Now,  although  it  is  quite 
possible  that  divine  power  may  have  made  use  of  a  natural  product  of  the 
desert,  miraculously  multiplying  it  as  Christ  multiplied  the  loaves  and  fishes, 
still  the  constant  supply  of  the  manna  for  forty  years,  its  cessation  when  the 
Israelites  crossed  the  Jordan,  its  quality  of  keeping  fresh  on  the  Sabbath,  whilst 
it  would  not  keep  overnight  on  other  days — all  point  to  a  divinely  and 
miraculously  provided  gift  (hence  the  derivation  H3D,  Manah,  Arab.  ,^,  =  a 
part  or  portion ;  it  is  a  portion,  a  gift,  from  niJD,  to  divide  a  portion),  unknown 
before  to  the  people  (hence  the  other  and  it  seems  proper  derivation  Mil  |E>, 
Man-hu,  "What  is  this?  " — Exod.  xvi.  15),  and  taking  the  place  of  bread — the 
staff  of  life.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  the  Israelites  are  not  said  to  have 
lived  on  manna  alone.  They  had  their  flocks  and  herds.  Like  the  Arab  tribes, 
during  their  forty  years  of  wandering  they  might  camp  at  certain  places  for 
more  than  a  year  at  a  time,  and  during  that  period  cultivate  the  ground.  But 
generally  the  manna  was  their  staple  food.  Their  desert  fare  lacked  the  variety 
and  stimulus  of  the  food  they  enjoyed  in  Egypt.  Hence  their  murmuring  at  this 
divinely  provided  daily  gift,  although  it  was  healthful,  pleasant,  and  abundant. 

II.  The  Jewish  traditional  ideas  concerning  the  manna. — Although  some  of 
the  people  murmured  in  the  wilderness,  this  miraculous  provision  made  a  great 
impression  on  all  succeeding  ages.  It  is  one  of  the  wonders  recounted  in  the 
historical  Psalms  (lxxviii.  24,  cv.  40)  ;  and  frequent  reference  was  made  to  it  in 
the  rabbinical  traditions  of  the  Jews.  There  was  one  traditional  saying  that 
seems  to  have  made  a  special  and  enduring  impression :  "  The  first  .Redeemer 
caused  manna  to  descend  for  them ;  and  so  too  will  the  second  Redeemer  cause 
manna  to  descend."  This  idea  is  at  the  bottom  of  the  question  put  to  our  Lord  : 
"  What  sign  are  we  to  have  that  we  may  believe  ?  Our  fathers  had  the  wonder- 
ful gift  of  manna  :  if  Thou  art  indeed  the  promised  Redeemer,  where  then  is  this 
promised  meat  that  endureth  unto  eternal  life?"  (ver.  27).  "A  wonderful 
miracle  was  wrought  but  yesterday ;  when,  however,  shall  we  see  that  better 
and  more  enduring  provision  which  will  mark  the  inception  and  progress  of 
Messiah's  reign  ?  "  This  is  but  another  instance  of  the  people's  earthly  con- 
ceptions— their  desire  for  a  material  kingdom  of  God,  in  which  material  blessings 
then  unheard  of  should  descend  upon  them.  Thus  they  misinterpreted  the 
words  of  Jesus  in  reference  to  "  the  meat  that  endureth." 

III.  Our  Lord's  interpretation  of  the  type. — He  first  pointed  out  that  the 
popular  idea  that  it  was  Moses  who  gave  the  manna  was  erroneous.  It  was 
God  who  did  so.  And  then,  that  the  manna  after  all  was  not  veritably  "  bread 
out  of  heaven  " — at  least  not  in  a  primary  sense — although,  as  provided  by  God, 
it  was  a  heavenly  gift.  It  was  not  the  true  bread,  but  only  a  fading  type  and 
shadow  of  the  true,  unfailing,  heavenly  bread.  "  For  although  it  was  not 
prepared  by  earthly  hands,  the  manna  did  not  descend  from  heaven  itself,  whicli 

180 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   JOHN.  chap.  v*. 


is  the  throne  of  God.  Therefore  there  is  not  given  to  you  in  the  manna,  which 
your  fathers  ate  in  the  wilderness,  what  could  nourish  you  to  life  eternal " 
(Besser).  "  But  now  My  Father  gives  you  the  true  bread  out  of  heaven — for 
you  and  for  the  life  of  the  world."  Not  with  the  dews  of  night  from  the 
firmamental  heavens  alone  does  this  true  "  bread  of  God"  descend;  but  from 
God  Himself.  Not  only  does  it  nourish  for  a  time  a  single  people ;  but  it  gives 
life  to  the  world,  eternal  life  for  all  mankind,  of  every  tribe  and  nation,  of  every 
age  and  period.  Our  Lord's  hearers  were  evidently  impressed  by  His  words ;  for 
they  addressed  Him  as  Lord,  and  uttered  the  request,  "  Evermore  give  us  this 
bread  "  (ver.  34).  But  it  was  evident,  too,  that  they  were  still  immeshed  in  merely 
material  ideas — conceptions  of  some  heavenly  and  splendid  provision  for  their 
earthly  needs.  Therefore  our  Lord  pointed  to  Himself  as  the  interpretation  of 
this  type,  and  the  teaching  they  had  just  listened  to :  "I  am  the  bread  of  life," 
etc. 

Vers.  30-35,  48-59.  Jesus  the  bread  of  life. — After  the  miracle  of  feeding 
the  five  thousand  at  Bethsaida,  many  of  the  people  were  convinced  that  Jesus 
was  the  prophet  promised  of  old.  They  even  determined  "  to  take  Him  by  force 
and  make  Him  a  king,"  and  thus  to  lead  Him  to  declare  Himself  openly  as  a 
Messiah  after  their  own  heart.  And  even  when  He  withdrew  Himself,  and 
again  came  to  Capernaum,  they  followed  Him,  seeking  a  further  "  sign  "  to 
assure  themselves,  after  their  material  conceptions,  of  His  Messiahship.  Here  is 
the  sign  which  He  gave  them  ;  and  had  they  not  been  blinded  by  prejudice  and 
tradition,  they  must  have  been  convinced.  None  but  One  sent  from  God  could 
with  sincerity  have  uttered  such  words  as  these.  Their  import  has  simply  to  be 
considered  to  show  that  none  but  the  eternal  Son  could  make  such  a  declaration 
as  this.  In  the  mouth  of  any  other  but  God  Himself  such  words  would  be 
blasphemous,  if  not  meaningless.  Consider  the  meaning  of  this  wonderful 
figure — Jesus,  the  true  bread  from  heaven,  the  bread  of  God,  the  bread  of  life. 
Christ  is  the  bread  of  life  because — 

I.  He  is  the  ordinary  and  universal  provision  for  the  spiritual  life. — 1.  On 
a  journey  the  travellers  require  food  and  drink  to  sustain  and  refresh  them  on 
their  way.  So,  too,  on  their  pilgrimage  through  time  to  eternity  men  need 
spiritual  food  for  the  soul.  "  What  food  and  drink  are  to  the  body,  so,"  Christ 
says,  "  am  I  to  the  soul."  And  by  this  He  does  not  mean  simply  His  teaching, 
His  gospel.  It  is  Himself  "  The  bread  which  I  will  give  is  My  flesh,  for  the  life 
of  the  world  "  (ver.  51).  2.  He  used  this  metaphor  therefore  to  signify  that  just 
as  bread  is  the  most  simple  and  universal  means  of  subsistence,  so  is  He  to  the 
soul.  There  are  few  places  on  earth  where  bread  is  not  a  staple  of  existence. 
Those  places  where  it  is  practically  unknown  are  low  in  the  scale  of  civilisation, 
e.g.  Greenland,  etc.  And  so  too  where  this  spiritual  bread  is  not  found,  spiritual 
life  is  stunted  and  low.  There  are  many  things  men  could  well  spare.  Not  so 
bread.  So  there  are  many  things  we  could  spare  from  our  moral  and  in- 
tellectual, and  even  our  spiritual  life  ;  but  not  Christ.  3.  Bread  is  prepared  in 
many  forms  ;  and  Christ  also  comes  to  us  in  spiritual  blessing  manifoldly — in 
His  word,  His  Church,  His  ordinances.  In  all  these  ways  and  forms  we  may 
receive  spiritual  nourishment.  There  are  those  who,  like  the  Israelites, 
murmur  against  this  spiritual  food.  It  is  too  common,  too  insipid  for  them. 
The  Israelites  longed  for  the  more  stimulating  food  of  Egypt.  "  This  is  the 
perverted  nature  of  man,  which  cannot  continue  in  the  quiet  enjoyment  of  what 
is  clean  and  unmixed,  but  from  its  own  inward  discord  desires  a  stimulating 
admixture  of  what  is  sharp  and  sour  "  (Baumgarten).  Such  are  those  who  find 
their  enjoyment  in  the  draff  of  the  world's  pleasures,  the  intoxicating  cup  of 
sinful  enjoyment,  and  the  specious  banquets  of  earthly  wisdom.     To  such  the 

181 


ctiAP.  VI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


word  of  God,  the  day  of  God,  and  spiritual  goods  generally  bring  no  delight. 
4.  But  bread  is  not  only  a  common  and  simple,  it  is  a  universal  food.  From 
childhood  to  age  it  is  enjoyed  by  all.  It  is  found  and  is  welcomed  in  the  palace 
as  well  as  in  the  humblest  cot.  Follow  the  course  of  the  sun  round  the  world, 
and  almost  everywhere  you  will  find  bread  in  some  form  or  other ;  thus  it  is 
well  named  a  staff  of  life.  So  Christ  is  the  universal  spiritual  food  for 
humanity.  From  His  fulness  alone  can  we  all  receive  "  grace  for  grace." 
Prince  and  peasant,  man  and  child,  whoever  would  live  spiritually,  must  eat 
of  this  universal  spiritual  bread — Jesus  Christ,  "  the  same  yesterday,  to-day, 
and  for  ever." 

II.  He  is  the  most  indispensable  food  of  the  soul. — 1.  The  want  of  bread 
cannot  be  properly  compensated  for  by  the  supply  of  anything  else.  Nothing 
else  can  really  take  its  place.  With  regard  to  other  foods  our  taste  changes 
during  the  course  of  the  years.  We  never  lose  our  taste  for  bread  when  in  our 
normal  condition.  2.  Now  so  is  it  with  the  "  bread  of  life."  Earthly  pleasures 
and  enjoyments  lose  their  power  after  a  time ;  they  pall  upon  the  taste.  Men 
change  from  the  pursuit  of  one  to  the  pursuit  of  another,  in  order  to  find  satis- 
faction. Earthly  things  change  their  aspect  with  time  and  fashion.  What 
delighted  yesterday  is  counted  of  little  worth  to-day ;  what  fascinates  to-day  will 
have  lost  its  glamour  to-morrow.  Youth  goes  forth  to  seek  pleasure  ;  manhood, 
honours  and  rewards.  And  if  the  things  of  earth  are  pursued  in  and  for  them- 
selves alone,  when  the  last  page  is  turned  the  man  is  compelled  to  write  as  &  finis 
to  the  book,  "  Vanity  of  vanities,  all  is  vanity."  3.  Not  so  is  it  with  Christ  and 
the  treasures  He  brings  into  the  life.  In  Him  are  unfailing  sources  of  satis- 
faction— joys  that  never  fade,  but  become  ever  more  satisfying  to  the  end.  It  is 
related  of  Gellert,  Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy  at  Leipzig,  Christian  poet  and 
fabulist,  that  when  at  the  point  of  death,  and  when,  according  to  the  custom  of 
the  Lutheran  Church,  the  sacrament  of  communion  had  been  administered,  he 
said,  "  I  cannot  now  remember  much ;  but  continue  to  utter  the  name  of  my 
Redeemer,  for  when  I  hear  it  I  feel  in  me  new  strength  and  joyfulness."  This 
is  but  one  uttered  testimony  of  the  myriads  unuttered  of  the  indispensableness  of 
Christ  to  the  spiritual  life.  As  bread  cannot  be  replaced  by  the  richest  and 
rarest  of  viands,  so  were  man  to  gain  the  whole  world — its  riches,  honours, 
rewards — without  this  indispensable  gift,  these  would  be  but  dust  and  ashes  in 
the  end. — After  Fried.  Arndt. 

"  Rather  poor — than  without  Jesus  rich  in  glory  and  in  power ; 
Rather  sick — than  without  Jesus  fresh  and  full  life's  every  hour ; 
Yes,  far  better  ne'er  to  have  been  born  than  from  this  Friend  apart ; 
Though  a  world  be  lost  for  Him,  who  know  Him  have  the  better  part." 

Translated  from  Lavater. 

III.  He  sustains  and  builds  up  our  spiritual  life. — 1.  As  the  body  craves  for 
nourishment,  and  must  be  sustained  by  food  in  due  measure,  that  it  may  be 
maintained  and  grow,  so  does  the  spiritual  being.  Christ  alone  can  truly 
sustain,  is  the  true  bread  of  the  soul.  2.  Manifold  are  the  attempts  that  have 
been  made  by  men  themselves  to  invent  some  satisfying  food  for  their  moral  and 
spiritual  being.  The  religions  and  philosophies  of  the  past  are  the  monuments 
of  their  ineffective  toil.  And  at  the  present  day,  among  those  who  rejpct  the 
gospel,  how  many  futile  attempts  do  we  find  in  the  same  direction  1  Whilst 
others,  who  see  how  vain  all  this  effort  has  been  and  is,  and  who  cannot  in  their 
pride  of  intellect  and  heart  stoop  t  ~>  accept  the  divine  substitute,  simply  ignore  the 
spiritual  being  in  man  or  deny  its  existence,  declaring  that  intellect  and  soul  are — 

"  Magnetic  mockeries,  wholly  brain." — Tennyson. 

Thus  they  oppose  themselves  to  the  continuous  and  universal  consciousness 
of  the  race ;   to   the  myriads  who  by  life  or   word  have  confessed  Christ  as 

182 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  vi. 


the  sustainer  of  their  spiritual  life,  the  giver  of  spiritual  health,  peace,  joy ; 
and  also  to  the  crowd  of  great  men  of  intellect,  learning,  heart,  who  have  borne 
the  same  testimony.  3.  And  Christ  not  only  sustains,  He  builds  up  our 
spiritual  life.  The  child  becomes  a  youth,  the  youth  grows  to  manhood,  when 
fitly  nourished.  So  is  it  in  the  spiritual  life.  But  here,  as  in  many  particulars, 
the  earthly  analogy,  even  the  heavenly  provided  manna,  fails  to  show  forth  the 
antitype  in  all  its  fulness.  The  food  of  earth  (even  the  manna)  cannot  prevent 
age  stealing  on  us  with  stealthy  step,  so  that  in  spite  of  daily  bread  the  body 
grows  weaker  and  finally  decays.  But  there  is  a  marked  difference  in  the  effect 
of  the  bread  of  God  on  the  soul.  With  increasing  age  comes  increasing  spiritual 
strength  and  pr(  gress ;  so  that  not  only  is  "  the  inward  man  renewed  day  by  day  " 
whilst  the  "  outward  man  perishes,"  but  when  the  latter  dies  the  germ  of  the 
former  unfolds  and  blossoms  eternally.  4.  Those  who  spiritually  feed  on  this 
living  bread  must  and  will  display  a  continual  growth  in  grace  and  knowledge 
and  every  spiritual  gift.  If  this  does  not  show  itself,  then,  depend  upon  it,  there 
must  be  either  want  of  faith  in  appropriating  the  heavenly  nourishment,  or  some 
spiritual  obstruction  preventing  its  assimilation.  It  is  a  false  humility  which 
would  lead  men  to  conceal  or  deny  growth  in  the  Christian  life.  And  there  are 
too  many  who  fail  to  appropriate  to  themselves  fully  this  true  bread  of  life,  so 
that  they  are  stunted  and  dwarfed  in  their  spiritual  growth. 

Vers.  35-47.  A  willing  people  in  the  way  of  Christ's  power. — Christ's  kingdom 
was  not  to  be  a  kingdom  according  to  this  world  (ver.  15).  He  had  already 
repulsed  at  the  very  beginning  of  His  ministry  those  temptations,  which  were  the 
germ  of  future  importunities,  to  proclaim  Himself  a  temporal  Messiah  in  accord- 
ance with  Jewish  ideas  and  expectations  (Matt.  iv.  5-10).  He  was  to  unsheath 
no  glittering  material  sword ;  no  pomp  or  pride  was  to  herald  the  advent  of  His 
conquering  might,  and  of  that  kingdom  which  was  to  be  universal. 

I.  The  rule  which  Christ  has  established. — 1.  It  is  not  to  be  compared  with 
or  likened  to  the  empires  or  kingdoms  of  earth,  which  are  but  for  a  brief  space. 
It  was  to  be  set  high  above  them  all,  though  at  the  beginning  apparently  feeble. 
It  was  to  come  without  ostentation,  but  yet  from  its  beginning  it  would  be 
dependent  on  His  appearing  (Dan.  ii.  34-36,  44,  45,  vii.  13,  14;  Luke  xvii. 
20,  21).  2.  This  is  so  because  His  rule  is  a  spiritual  one  (Matt.  xx.  25-28).  It 
is  set  up  in  the  hearts  of  men.  It  exerts  its  dominion  over  moral  wastes  of 
humanity,  and  where  it  is  established  the  desert  rejoices  and  blossoms  as  the 
rose.  3.  Mere  external  union  with  it  is  not  possible ;  for  the  citizens  of  it 
become  members  in  virtue  of  a  great  spiritual  change  which  has  taken  place 
within  them  (iii.  3),  which  unites  them  in  oneness  of  spirit  and  aim  with  the 
King  and  with  their  fellow- subjects.  4.  And  whilst  it  is  a  present  it  is  also  an 
eternal  rule.  The  blessings  of  that  rule  are  present  (vers.  35,  37),  but  in  their 
fulness  they  will  be  realised  hereafter  (vers.  39,  40,  44).  This  is  the  rule  set  up 
by  Jesus.  His  kingdom  is  one  of  life  and  light.  He  is  its  centre.  It  is  by 
union  with  Him,  by  eating  of  Him,  the  living  bread  (ver.  35),  that  men  become 
spiritually  alive  and  fitted  for  this  kingdom  of  life  and  light. 

II.  The  way  in  which  subjects  of  the  kingdom  are  led  to  subject  themselves 
to  Christ's  rule. — 1.  It  is  through  the  drawing  of  the  Father.  The  willing 
Son  receives  those  whom  the  Father  gives  Him  (ver.  37).  But  the  Father's 
giving  is  not  restricted  ;  in  this  also  He  works  in  unison  with  the  Son  :  "Ask 
of  Me,  and  I  will  give  thee  the  nations  for  thine  inheritance,"  etc.  (Ps.  ii.  8). 
And  the  Son  said,  "As  Thou  hast  given  Him  power,"  etc.  (xvii.  2).  Christ  has 
set  up  this  kingdom  of  grace  and  salvation,  but  He  is  at  one  with  the  Father  as 
to  the  chosen  ones — the  elect — who  shall  inherit  it,  and  who  alone  come  to  Him. 
2.  And  they  come  because  the  Father  draws  them.     He  must  do  so,  else  men 

183 


chap.  vi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


of  themselves  would  never  come ;  for  men  naturally  have  no  desire  to  subject 
themselves  to  Christ's  rule.  3.  But  they  are  drawn  not  by  force,  although 
powerfully.  They  are  not  treated  as  mere  machines.  The  Father  seeks  to 
influence  them  as  rational,  accountable  beings.  He  (ver.  45)  presents  the  truth 
of  His  word  to  their  understandings ;  makes  it  sharp  to  pierce  their  consciences  ; 
touches  their  hearts  with  the  power  of  His  love.  He  does  not,  as  Luther  says, 
drag  them  to  Him  "  as  a  thief  is  dragged  to  the  gallows  "  ;  but  draws  and  entices 
them  lovingly  as  a  Father  seeks  to  bring  back  a  disobedient  son  to  his  allegiance 
(Jer.  xxxi.  3 ;  Hos.  xi.  3,  4).  For  God  "  wills  not  the  death  of  a  sinner,"  etc.  But 
there  are  those  who  do  and  can  resist  (vers.  40,  60,  66),  who  can  grieve  the  Spirit 
(Eph.  iv.  30),  resist  the  Holy  Ghost  (Acts  vii.  51),  and  the  power  of  the  truth 
(2  Tim.  iii.  8).  Their  hearts  are  estranged  quite  from  God,  and  they  desire  not 
to  serve  Him.  Here  the  mystery  of  human  free-will  and  divine  sovereignty 
meets  us.  The  two  ends  of  the  chain  are  seen  here.  The  joining  curve  is 
beyond  our  present  ken.  4.  But  let  no  man  entertain  the  materialist  or 
heathenish  idea  (which  is  simply  an  echo  of  a  voice  in  the  heart,  seeking  to 
justify  him  for  a  godless  life)  that  he  is  not  drawn,  and  therefore  cannot  be  of 
those  given  by  Christ  to  the  Father.  Let  him  desire  to  come,  and  lo !  the  way 
is  open.     5.  In  many  ways  does  the  Father  draw  men — in  joy  and  sorrow,  etc. 

III.  Those  drawn  by  the  Father  and  given  to  Jesus  come  to  Him. — 1.  Here 
the  action  of  the  human  agent  in  working  out  personal  salvation  (Phil.  ii.  12,  13) 
is  shown.  There  is  a  willing  coming  to  the  Saviour  of  those  given  and  drawn  by 
the  Father.  Here  will  men  find  the  proof  of  their  being  of  the  number  of  the 
elect.  Let  them  come  to  Christ.  2.  This  coming  does  not  mean  any  mere 
external  approach,  as  many  came  to  Jesus  in  the  days  of  His  flesh.  It  does  not 
mean  mere  outward  fellowship  in  the  Church.  It  is  a  coming  into  spiritual 
unity  and  fellowship.  3.  The  soul  is  attracted  to  Christ  by  the  beauty  of 
His  character,  the  divinity  of  His  message,  the  conviction  that  He  is  the 
truth,  and  that  He  is  able  to  satisfy  the  needs  of  man's  nature,  to  become  all 
his  salvation  and  all  his  desire.  4.  And  in  order  to  come  to  Him  men  need  not 
descend  into  the  deeps  of  a  dead  past  to  bring  Christ  thence ;  for  He  is  now 
present,  ever  present  by  His  word  and  Spirit,  in  His  Church  and  kingdom. 
Nor  need  they  ascend  into  heaven  to  bring  Him  down  ;  for  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  is  here  and  now,  is  in  every  believing  heart ;  and  its  great  King  is  not 
afar ;  for  He  is  with  His  people,  who  even  here  are  fellow-citizens  of  the  saints, 
etc.  (Eph.  ii.  19),  even  to  the  end  of  the  world  (Matt,  xxviii.  20).  5.  And  those 
who  come  find  eternal  satisfaction  and  blessedness  (ver.  35).  For  they  come  not 
like  the  multitude  at  Capernaum,  seeking  the  meat  that  perisheth — that  must 
perish ;  but  the  meat  that  endureth.  True,  material  things  will  be  given  them 
according  to  the  measure  of  their  need ;  for  to  whom  the  bread  of  life  is  given 
what  is  needful  will  also  be  supplied  (Rom.  viii.  32).  Men  seek  many  things — 
wealth,  honour,  freedom,  etc.,  etc.  But  they  who  gain  salvation  have  everlasting 
wealth,  honour,  freedom. 

IV.  Those  who  come  to  Jesus  abide  eternally. — 1.  They  have  the  blessed 
promise,  "  Him  that  cometh  to  Me  /  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  Imperfect, 
feeble,  erring,  weak  in  faith,  and  feeling  their  unworthiness  because  they  do  not 
in  all  things  live  as  citizens  of  His  kingdom,  yet  His  people  know  that  they 
through  faith  do  participate  in  His  life.  And  this  is  shown  by  their  desire  after 
the  higher  life — the  new  obedience  through  faith.  They  seek  earnestly  to  rise 
to  the  Saviour's  example  of  perfect  obedience  (ver.  38).  They  seek  ever  to  be 
loyal  to  the  Head  and  government  of  the  kingdom,  to  honour  and  obey  the 
heavenly  laws.  2.  Nor  do  they  ever  desire  for  one  moment  to  leave  Him.  If 
He  will  graciously  not  cast  them  out,  in  spite  of  failure  and  fall,  the  longer  they 
taste  the  blessedness  of  His  rule  the  more  they  desire  closer  fellowship  with  their 

184 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  cfiAP.  vi. 


King,  the  more  fully  do  they  seek  to  honour  and  serve  Him.  For  in  His  ways 
and  in  doing  His  will  they  find  that  higher  harmony  and  balance  of  all  the 
powers  of  their  being  which  is  expressed  in  the  word  peace.  Just  as  Jesus 
Himself  in  the  midst  of  disappointment,  and  when  He  was  grieved  at  the 
rejection  of  His  gospel  by  those  to  whom  He  came,  found  peace  in  the  Father's 
will  (Matt.  xi.  25-27),  so  His  disciples  who  come  to  Him  learn  to  say  joyfully, 
"  In  His  will  is  our  peace "  (Dante).  3.  But  does  not  this  promise  of  Jesus 
contain  less  than  some  other  promises  :  e.g.  "  Come  unto  Me,"  etc.  (Matt.  xi.  28) ; 
"  Peace  I  leave  with  you "  (xiv.  27)  ?  No,  verily.  It  means  more  than  all 
others  and  contains  all  others.  For  if  He  does  not  cast  us  out  in  time  or  in 
eternity,  then  surely  all  things  are  ours  (1  Cor.  iii.  22).  Consider  what  the 
promise  includes.  It  implies  that  He  will  be  with  us  to  the  end  of  our  journey 
here — not  only  in  holy  service  specially  so  called,  the  worship  of  His  house,  the 
sacred  season  of  communion  at  His  table  or  in  the  hour  of  prayer,  but  in  all  our 
work  and  labour  when  we  seek  to  do  it  unto  Him.  It  implies  that  He  will  be 
near  us  in  that  hour  "  when  heart  and  flesh  faint  and  fail " — that  "  He  will 
not  leave  us  in  the  dust "  (vers.  39,  40) ;  and  when  the  hour  of  judgment 
strikes,  that  He  will  confess  us  before  the  Father,  etc.  (Matt.  x.  32).  It  implies, 
therefore,  also  all  the  blessedness  of  the  heavenly  state — the  day  that  knows  no 
night,  the  tree  of  life,  etc.,  etc.  Thus  is  consummated  the  blessedness  of  Christ's 
willing  people  :  they  go  no  more  out  from  His  presence  (Rev.  iii.  12),  and  rejoice 
eternally,  serving  Him  day  and  night  in  His  temple  (Eev.  vii.  14-17). 

Ver.  38.  He  took  upon  Him  the  form  of  a  servant.  —  No  words  more  fully 
and  beautifully  describe  the  perfect  obedience  of  the  Son  to  the  Father  in 
carrying  out  to  completion  the  work  of  man's  redemption  than  those  striking 
words  of  the  prophet,  "  The  Lord  hath  given  me  the  tongue  of  them  that  are 
taught,"  etc.  (Isa.  1.  4-10).  Christ  is  the  servant  of  Jehovah  in  an  especial 
sense,  of  whom  it  was  written  that  He  came  to  do  the  Father's  will.  What 
better  and  truer  description  of  the  Redeemer  could  be  given  than  that  which 
tells  how  the  Lord  gave  Him  the  tongue  of  them  that  are  taught,  so  that  He 
should  know  at  the  right  time  and  with  comforting  words  to  sustain  and  refresh 
the  weary  1  As  we  read  there  falls  on  the  ear  of  memory  those  blessed  words  of 
comfort  and  consolation  which  the  Redeemer  spoke  to  weary,  troubled  men, 
"  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour,"  etc.  (Matt.  xi.  28) ;  "  Let  not  your  heart 
be  troubled,"  etc.  (xiv.  1) ;  "  Be  of  good  cheer,"  etc.  (xvi.  33).  And  what  more 
striking  result  of  the  coming  of  the  Life  and  Light  of  men  to  earth  could  be 
given  than,  "  He  that  walketh  in  darkness  and  hath  no  light,  let  him  trust  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord  "  1  And  do  not  the  intermediate  verses  of  the  prophetic  word 
indicate  clearly  the  lowly  humiliation  and  suffering  affliction  which  the  Son 
endured,  becoming  obedient  unto  death,  that  He  might  do  the  Father's  will  and 
finish  His  work  %  Consider  then  the  willing  obedience  of  Christ  as  our  example. 
Christ's  obedience  to  His  Father's  will  as  the  incarnate  Son  and  Servant  of 
Jehovah  is  evidenced  in  His — 

I.  Hearing  the  Father's  word. — 1.  All  true  obedience  and  service  begins  in 
readiness  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  God.  Unwillingness  to  hear  that  voice 
naturally  results  in  turning  a  deaf  ear  to  Him  who  speaks  from  heaven,  and 
finally  to  disobedience.  2.  Our  Lord's  obedience  to  the  Father's  voice  was 
unmistakable.  Well  might  the  prophet's  words  be  applied  to  Him  :  "  He 
wakeneth  me  morning  by  morning.  He  wakeneth  mine  ear  to  hear  as  those 
that  are  taught.  The  Lord  God  hath  opened  mine  ear,  and  I  was  not  rebellious, 
neither  turned  away  backward  "  (Isa.  1.  4,  5).  "  As  I  hear  I  judge,"  said  Jesus. 
"All  that  I  have  heard  of  My  Father  I  have  made  known  unto  you"  (xv.  15).  His 
ear  was  ever  open  to  hear  the  Father's  voice ;  and  with  Him  to  hear  was  to  obey. 

185 


chap.  vi.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


II.  His  obedience  was  further  shown  in  speech  and  action. — 1.  The  obedient 
child  and  servant  will  not  oppose  his  wise  and  loving  Father  and  Master  either 
in  word  or  deed.  2.  Thus  we  find  the  perfect  Son  ever  speaking  those  words 
which  are  well  pleasing  to  the  Father,  and  doing  those  works  which  the  Father 
gave  Him  to  do.  "I  speak  that  which  I  have  seen  with  My  Father  "  (viii.  38)  j 
"  The  word  which  ye  hear  is  not  Mine,  but  the  Father's  which  sent  Me  "  (xiv.  24). 
For  all  His  teaching,  therefore,  our  Lord  claims  divine  authority.  His  word 
and  the  Father's  word  are  ever  the  same;  between  them  there  is  perfect 
assonance,  without  suspicion  of  discordance.  3.  And  it  was  equally  so  with  the 
Son's  activity.  "  My  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work"  (v.  17);  "The 
works  which  I  do  in  My  Father's  name,  these  bear  witness  of  Me  "  (x.  25) ; 
"  If  I  do  not  the  works  of  My  Father,  believe  Me  not  "  (x.  37) ;  "  The  works  which 
the  Father  hath  given  Me  to  finish,"  etc.  (ver.  36).  4.  Nothing  could  be  more 
plain  than  the  claim  Jesus  makes  to  be  in  accord  in  all  things  with  His  heavenly 
Father  in  word  and  work.  Even  in  His  state  of  humiliation,  when  He  appeared 
in  the  form  of  a  servant,  as  the  willing  and  obedient  Son,  there  was  complete 
unity  and  concord  with  the  eternal  Father.  And  this  is  still  more  strikingly 
displayed  in  His — 

III.  Trustfulness  in  enduring. — 1.  The  way  of  sorrow  and  the  cross  of  shame 
were  surely  a  wonderful  test  of  our  Lord's  obedience,  of  His  determination  not 
to  seek  His  own  will,  but  that  of  His  Father !  He  was  despised  and  rejected 
even  of  those  whom  He  came  to  redeem.  He  permitted  Himself  to  be  betrayed, 
by  one  who  had  companied  with  Him,  into  the  hands  of  wicked  men.  "  He 
gave  His  back  to  the  smiters  "  ;  "  hid  not  His  face  from  shame  and  spitting"  ; 
and  when  He  died  on  the  cross,  a  voluntary  sufferer,  He  endured  for  an  awful 
moment  the  sense  of  loneliness  as  the  bearer  of  the  world's  sin.  2.  Yet  not 
for  one  moment  did  He  "turn  backward."  " I  have  a  baptism  to  be  baptised 
with,"  etc.  (Luke  xii.  50) ;  "  The  cup  which  My  Father  hath  given  Me,"  etc. 
(xviii.  1-8).  3.  And  in  all  those  sufferings,  in  which  "He  was  obedient  unto 
death,"  did  His  trust  in  the  Father's  love  for  one  moment  waver ?  "I  know 
that  Thou  nearest  Me  always "  (xi.  42).  Often  all  night  in  prayer  He 
strengthened  Himself  by  communion  for  His  arduous  work,  and  came  forth  to 
conquer  and  declare  :  "I  know  that  I  shall  not  be  ashamed " ;  " He  is  near  that 
justifieth  Me  "  ;  "  Behold,  the  Lord  God  will  help  Me." 

Vers.  51-59,  and  63.  The  manner  in  vrfiich  we  must  receive  the  bread  of  life. — 
There  are  certain  conditions  which  must  be  observed  ere  this  bread  of  heaven 
can  become  to  us  a  means  of  nourishment  and  growth  in  the  spiritual  life. 

I.  We  must  eat  of  it  daily. — Of  what  avail  would  it  be  to  have  bread  placed 
on  our  table  daily,  did  we  not  partake  of  it  ?  The  mere  looking  at  or  considera- 
tion of  it  will  not  nourish  us.  We  must  eat  it  (ver.  54).  So,  too,  we  must  eat 
of  the  bread  of  life.  And  the  means  by  which  we  can  do  so  is  expressed  in  the 
words,  "  He  that  belie veth  in  Me  hath  eternal  life  "  (ver.  47).  We  must  receive 
Him  with  all  that  He  brings  of  grace  and  truth  and  spiritual  power ;  we  must 
open  heart  and  soul  to  take  Him  as  our  all  in  all. 

II.  We  must  assimilate  this  divine  nourishment. — The  food  we  take  must  be 
assimilated,  converted  into  the  substance  of  the  body,  or  it  will  be  useless  for  the 
purpose  intended.  Now  it  is  evident  that  our  Lord  means  that  there  should  be 
such  a  close  spiritual  union  between  Himself  and  His  people  that  they  may  be 
regarded  as  one  (see  vii.  37-40).  They  partake  of  His  life,  which  flows  into 
their  souls,  nourishing  and  building  up.  Christ  is  in  His  people.  They  are 
members  of  His  body,  partaking  of  His  Spirit,  branches  of  the  living  vine, 
nourished  and  made  fruitful  by  His  life  in  them. 

III.  We  must  avoid  all  extraneous  and  poisonous  admixtures. — What  is  good 

186 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  VI. 


food  may  be  rendered  injurious  to  health  by  mixing  up  with  it  what  is  corrupt 
or  poisonous.  Such  things  would  prevent  the  best  of  food  from  fulfilling  its 
functions.  Thus  too  the  gospel  may  be  so  mixed  up  with  human  additions  and 
errors  as  to  lose  in  great  measure  its  power  to  nourish  and  build  up.  Let  us 
then  prayerfully  obey  the  apostle's  exhortation  :  "  As  therefore  ye  have  received 
Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,  so  walk  in  Him.  Beware  lest  ye  be  led  captive  by 
philosophy  or  vain  deceit,  according  to  the  traditions  of  men  or  the  rudiments  of 
the  world,  and  not  according  to  Christ  "  (Col.  ii.  6  et  seq.). 

Ver.  58.  The  bread  which  we  break,  is  it  not  the  communion  of  the  body  of 
Christ  ? — Although  our  Lord  was  not,  in  the  synagogue  at  Capernaum,  in  this 
great  discourse  on  the  living  bread,  referring  to  the  Lord's  Supper,  which  was 
not  yet  instituted,  still  there  is  no  doubt  He  was  referring  to  the  great  truth 
which  that  ordinance  commemorates,  symbolises,  and  shows  forth.  He  spoke  of 
the  giving  of  Himself  for  the  salvation,  the  life  of  the  world.  It  was  nigh  to 
the  passover  season,  and  He  had  just  fed  the  multitude  with  the  miraculously 
multiplied  bread  on  the  eastern  shore  of  the  lake  of  Galilee ;  and  no  doubt,  in 
speaking  to  these  people,  He  had  in  view  the  hour  when  He,  our  passover,  should 
be  sacrificed  for  us,  and  when  the  heavenly  types  of  the  manna  and  the 
bleeding  lamb  should  be  seen  fulfilled  in  the  great  Antitype — when  the  rites 
commemorative  of  God's  goodness  and  favour  to  Israel  of  old  should  give  place 
to  rites  commemorative  of  a  more  glorious  redemption  for  the  whole  human 
race.     This  discourse  leads  to  a  fuller  understanding  of — 

I.  The  Lord's  Supper  as  a  memorial  of  eternal,  divine  love. — 1.  Jesus  was 
even  now  looking  forward  to  the  time  when  His  great  atoning  work  should  be 
completed.  The  cross  lay  plainly  in  view.  Was  it  not  even  then  casting  its 
shadow  across  His  path  in  His  recognition  of  the  traitor  among  the  twelve  1 
And  yet,  in  view  of  all  He  knew  was  to  come,  there  was  no  attempt  on  His  part 
to  recede  from  His  purpose.  Rather  we  have  here  a  full  and  wonderful  state- 
ment of  all  that  His  incarnation  with  its  humiliation,  His  vicarious  suffering, 
His  atoning  death,  were  to  bring  to  His  people.  2.  The  divine  love  in  the  Father 
and  the  Son  is  seen  working  for  this  great  purpose  of  redemption  for  the  whole 
human  race.  The  will  of  the  Father  and  the  will  of  the  incarnate  Son  are  seen 
to  be  in  perfect  unison.  It  is  the  Father  who  sends  down  the  true  bread  from 
heaven  ;  and  the  Son,  who  is  the  true  bread,  gives  His  flesh,  His  incarnate  life, 
for  the  life  of  the  world  (vers.  32-51).  3.  And  added  to  all  this  are  the  drawings 
of  eternal  love  (ver.  44),  the  divine  teaching  so  patient  through  centuries  of 
stubborn  resistance,  "  here  a  little  and  there  a  little,"  etc.  (Isa.  xxviii.  10),  and 
the  divine  promises  and  invitations,  "  Him  that  cometh  unto  Me  I  will  in  no 
wise  cast  out "  (ver.  37).  4.  It  is  this  unspeakable  love  that  the  supper 
commemorates, — that  love  of  the  Father  "  who  spared  not  His  own  Son,  but 
delivered  Him  up  for  us  all "  (Rom.  viii.  32) ;  that  love  of  the  Son  "  which  many 
waters  could  not  quench,  nor  floods  drown  "  (Cant.  viii.  7) — waters  and  floods 
of  contumely,  humiliation,  affliction,  and  death.  Think  of  what  it  ail  means, 
this  wonderful  love  of  God  to  fallen  man,  and  then  say  should  not  the  memorial 
feast,  that  tells  of  the  completion  at  such  a  cost  of  those  divine  purposes  of 
mercy  and  grace,  quicken  in  our  hearts  more  warmly  the  glow  of  answering 
love  and  resolves  after  a  more  consecrated  service  1 

II.  The  Lord's  Supper  is  a  symbol  of  salvation  through  participation  in 
Christ's  life  and  death. — 1.  It  is  this  great  truth  that  the  Supper  is  chiefly 
a  memorial  of,  we  may  say  :  "  Do  this  in  remembrance  of  Me  "  (Luke  xxii.  19). 
For  Christ,  we  may  truly  say,  is  the  centre  of  all  that  concerns  our  salvation. 
It  is  of  Him,  through  Him,  to  Him  (Rom.  xi.  36).  2.  And  here  we  are  reminded 
of  what  is  taught  symbolically  in  the  supper  :  that  Christ's  flesh  and  blood,  in 

187 


chap.  vi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


the  spiritual  sense  in  which  the  terms  are  here  used,  are  for  the  nourishment  of 
our  spiritual  life  and  our  complete  salvation.  3.  It  was  to  redeem  sinful  men 
that  He  became  incarnate,  that  He  might  "  magnify  the  law  and  make  it 
honourable  "  (Isa.  xlii.  21)  by  His  holy,  blameless  life,  and  that  He  might  bear 
for  man  the  penalty  of  the  world's  sin  on  the  "  tree  of  shame."  The  cross  of 
Christ  is  the  deepest  and  fullest  revelation  of  God's  love  to  His  fallen  creatures 
— that  "  He  sent  His  Son  into  the  world,  not  to  condemn  the  world,  but  that 
the  world  through  Him  might  be  saved."  Christ  gave  His  life  for  the  life  of 
the  world,  and  it  is  by  participation  in  that  life  that  salvation  is  brought  to 
it.  4.  There  are  two  worlds — a  world  that  is  lost  and  a  world  that  is  saved. 
And  we  are  not  to  suppose  that  God's  purpose  in  creation  will  be  so  marred 
that  the  lost  world  shall  be  greater  in  extent  than  the  saved.  His  gracious 
purpose  in  redemption  will  not  fail.  The  world  of  the  lost  will  continue  to  use 
the  gift  of  freedom  to  enslave  itself  to  sin  and  oppose  itself  to  God.  But 
Christ's  mighty  work  shall  not  be  in  vain.  "  He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  His 
soul,  and  shall  be  satisfied  "  (Isa.  liii.  11).  He  shall  yet  have  the  heathen 
(Gentiles)  for  His  inheritance,  etc.  (Ps.  ii.  8).  To  His  kingdom,  in  the  end,  the 
glory  and  honour  of  the  nations  shall  come  (Rev.  xxi.  26).  "  A  great  multitude, 
which  no  man  could  number,  out  of  all  nations,  and  kindreds,  and  peoples,  and 
tongues "  (Rev.  vii.  9),  shall  be  gathered  into  the  kingdom  of  His  glory. 
5.  And  all  this  is  achieved  through  that  completed  work  symbolically  showed 
forth  in  the  sacrament.  And  it  is  through  lively  faith  in  that  work,  and  in  Him 
who  is  its  author,  that  salvation  comes  to  the  individual. 

III.  This  sacrament  is  a  blessed  means  of  communion  with  the  divine  Source 
of  spiritual  life. — 1.  It  is  faith  that  unites  believers  to  the  Saviour;  and  thus 
there  is  secured  to  them  the  benefits  which  flow  from  His  death  as  showed  forth 
in  the  supper — pardon  and  peace.  2.  But  there  is  a  further  advance  beyond 
this  position.  One  might  be  pardoned  for  offence  given  and  yet  remain  unchanged. 
In  the  Christian  life  there  must  be  renewal  after  the  pattern  of  Christ,  and  this 
renewal  must  extend  to  all  our  being.  Not  only  is  the  soul  quickened,  but  the 
body  is  to  be  quickened  as  well — that  body  which  is  the  tenement  and  partner  of 
the  soul,  and  without  which  our  life  would  be  incomplete.  3.  But  said  Jesus  : 
"  Whoso  eateth  My  flesh,  and  drinketh  My  blood,  hath  eternal  life ;  and  I  will 
raise  him  up  at  the  last  day  "  (ver.  54).  All  this  implies  far  more  than  a  mere 
intellectual  conception — a  mere  participation  in  thought  and  idea  of  Christ  and 
His  life.  It  implies  an  actual  union  with  Him — a  real  and  positive  assimilation 
of  His  life  by  believers,  as  real  as  the  assimilation  by  the  living  branch  of  the  life 
of  the  living  vine.  Believers  become  truly  members  of  His  body.  This  is  the 
mystery  of  Christ  and  His  Church.  The  divine  life  of  the  incarnate  Son,  in  all 
its  aspects,  is  given  to  believers  for  the  cleansing,  the  quickening,  the  nourishing 
of  their  life  in  all  its  aspects  unto  life  eternal.  4.  All  this  is  brought  before  the 
eye  of  faith  in  the  ordinance  of  the  supper,  which  is  not  a  mere  commemorative 
act,  but  a  fruitful  means  of  grace.  When  observed  faithfully,  it  brings  us  into 
close  personal  communion  with  Christ,  and  becomes  a  channel  through  which  His 
divine  life  is  given  to  us  for  "  our  spiritual  nourishment  and  growth  in  grace." 

Vers.  54-57.  The  blessedness  of  spiritually  feeding  on  Christ. — Those  who  commu- 
nicate in  an  unworthy  manner,  says  the  apostle,  "eat  and  drink  judgment," 
etc.  (1  Cor.  xi.  29).  And  unworthily  communicating  was  the  reason  why, 
among  the  Corinthians,  "  many  were  weak  and  sickly,  and  many  slept."  On  the 
other  hand,  to  those  who  approach  the  Lord's  table  in  unfeigned  faith,  and  with 
earnest  desire  to  have  fellowship  with  the  Saviour,  there  are  given  the  com- 
munion blessings  of  comfort,  strength,  joy. 

I.  To  those  who  come  penitent  and  humble  for  past  transgression  there  is 

188 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  vi. 


given  divine  comfort. — 1.  There  are  many,  alas  !  who  never  seem  to  feel  the 
need  of  repentance.  Their  moral  sense  has  become  blunted,  their  moral  vision 
obscured,  so  that  iniquity  has  no  terror  for  them,  etc.  2.  Others  do  feel  that  sin 
is  terrible,  awful,  so  that  remorse  gnaws  at  their  hearts.  But  this  will  not  of 
itself  make  them  worthy  communicants,  and  lead  to  their  receiving  the  blessing 
of  comfort.     Remorse  must  lead  to  penitence. 

"  Eemorse  is  as  the  heart  in  which  it  grows : 
If  that  be  gentle,  it  drops  balmy  dews 
Of  true  repentance ;  but  if  proud  and  gloomy, 
It  is  a  poison-tree  that,  pierced  to  th'  inmost, 
Weeps  only  tears  of  blood." — S.  T.  Coleridge. 

3.  But  those  who  are  truly  repentant  find  divine  comfort  in  the  great  fact  this 
communion  brings  vividly  before  them  :  that  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth, 
etc.  And  in  the  observance  of  the  ordinance  they  are  led  with  quickened  faith 
to  seek  for  their  souls  "  that  blood  of  sprinkling  which  speaketh  better  things," 
etc.  (Heb.  xii.  24). 

II.  To  those  who  come  with  resolves  after  new  obedience  strength  is  given. 
— 1.  Many  are  the  spiritual  foes  with  whom  we  have  to  contend;  still  the  im- 
pulses of  the  old  sinful  nature  assert  themselves  and  must  be  kept  in  check ;  still 
the  spiritual  life,  so  long  as  we  are  here,  needs  to  be  maintained  and  builded  up. 
2.  And  where  shall  we  find  strength  and  grace,  enabling  us  to  overcome,  but 
through  closer  union  with  Christ — through  becoming  more  and  more  partakers 
of  His  nature,  so  that  as  He  overcame  we  also  may  overcome  1  3.  This  is  vividly 
realised  (by  faith)  in  His  holy  ordinance,  etc. 

III.  To  those  who  come  desiring  to  rise  to  a  higher  life  there  is  given 
spiritual  joy. — 1.  Nothing  is  more  sad  to  behold  than  the  case  of  one  who  began 
life  with  high  ideals,  but  who  has  sunk  down  and  become  sordid  and  material, 
etc.  2.  How  often  does  it  happen  that  Christians  have  begun  their  Christian 
life  with  resolves  after  better  things,  who  by  carelessness  and  conformity  to  the 
world  have  permitted  the  flame  of  heavenly  love  in  their  hearts  to  grow  feeble, 
till  it  flickers  almost  to  extinction  !  3.  In  the  sacred  ordinance  of  the  supper, 
approached  in  a  truly  humble  and  longing  spirit,  our  Lord  has  provided  a  means 
by  which  this  love  in  our  hearts  may  be  reawakened,  and  the  oil  of  grace 
renewed  to  feed  the  heavenly  flame.  4.  And  to  those  who  come  to  the  Lord's 
table  desiring  to  love  more  and  serve  more  there  will  be  given  communion  joy. 
Their  great  Example  will  be  there  revealed  in  all  His  beauty  as  the  goal  toward 
which  they  are  to  strive  ;  and  in  the  symbols  of  communion  they  will  see  vividly 
represented  those  spiritual  blessings  which  are  implied  in  spiritually  participating 
by  faith  in  Christ's  life  and  death — His  body  and  blood  ;  so  that  to  them  will  be 
given  the  joy  of  realisation,  of  assurance  as  they  remember  Christ's  promise  :  "As 
the  living  Father  hath  sent  Me,  and  I  live  by  the  Father ;  so  he  that  eateth  Me, 
even  he  shall  live  by  Me"  (ver.  57). 

Vers.  60-65.  A  hard  saying  justified. — There  were  apparently  a  number  of 
people  who  had  attached  themselves  to  Jesus  at  this  period  of  His  ministry  who 
ranked  themselves  as  His  disciples,  but  whose  faith  in  Him  was  weak,  and  their 
conception  of  His  mission  not  only  imperfect  but  erroneous.  The  stupendous 
claim  He  made,  not  only  that  He  was  the  promised  Messiah,  whose  gifts  would  be 
greater  than  the  heavenly  gift  of  the  manna  to  their  fathers,  but  that  He  Him- 
self was  the  bread  of  life  which  came  down  from  heaven  to  give  life  to  the 
world,  and  that  those  who  would  live  eternally  must  eat  of  His  flesh  and  drink 
of  His  blood,  staggered  those  half-attached  disciples,  so  that  they  murmured  at 
it.  In  answer  to  their  murmuring  Jesus  corrects  their  misunderstanding  of  His 
words  by  pointing — 

189 


chap.  vi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


I.  To  His  ascension. — 1.  He  had  claimed  to  be  the  Messiah  promised  to  the 
fathers  (vers.  30-32),  the  giver  of  bread  from  heaven — nay,  that  He  was  the 
bread  which  came  down  from  heaven  (ver.  58),  and  that  they  must  eat  His  flesh 
and  drink  His  blood  in  order  to  eternal  salvation.  2.  And  the  proof  that  His 
words  were  true  would  be  given  in  His  ascension  into  heaven.  That  would  show 
whence  He  had  come,  and  that  His  words  were  with  authority.  For  He  would 
not  ascend  like  a  servant,  caught  up  like  Elijah,  or  rapt  from  earth  like  Enoch. 
He  would  ascend  as  a  Son,  as  the  divine  Son,  by  His  own  power  into  heaven, 
whence  He  came  to  earth.  Moreover,  this  fact  would  remove  such  cause  of 
offence  as  they  had  found  in  His  words  when  those  words  were  interpreted  in  the 
light  of  it.  3.  And  though  in  appealing  to  this  event  He  appealed  to  their  faith 
in  Him  as  to  its  certainty,  yet  surely  that  faith  might  be  looked  for  after  the 
events  which  had  occurred  within  a  brief  period  (vers.  1-13,  16-21),  and  which 
had  led  to  this  discourse  at  which  they  were  offended.     Moreover — 

II.  The  ascension  wonld  explain  His  claim  to  be  the  bread  of  life. — 1.  It 
would  show  at  once  in  what  sense  He  intended  His  words  about  "  eating  His 
flesh  and  drinking  His  blood  "  to  be  taken.  "  The  words  that  I  speak  unto  yon, 
they  are  spirit,"  etc.  (ver.  63).  When  the  flesh  disappears,  when  at  the  resur- 
rection I  assume  My  spiritual  body  and  ascend  therewith  into  heaven,  then  you 
will  understand  that  My  words  have  a  spiritual  meaning.  2.  The  people  at 
Capernaum  thought  of  flesh  which  is  born  of  the  will  of  the  flesh  (i.  13).  If 
I  spoke  of  flesh  in  this  sense,  My  words  would  profit  nothing.  3.  Our  Lord  did 
not  mean  that  His  flesh  profits  nothing.  It  is  indeed  because  He  became  incar- 
nate that  we  have  hope  for  eternity ;  and  it  was  as  the  incarnate  Son  that  He 
offered  Himself  for  our  sin  (ver.  51).  But  His  humanity — His  flesh  itself — was 
spiritually  conceived.  Without  this  His  humanity  would  not  have  been  fitted 
for  His  high  emprise.  And  through  the  same  Spirit  we  must  partake  of  Him, 
be  united  with  Him,  have  His  life  in  us,  if  we  would  have  life  eternal.  Thus  to 
those  who  receive  Him  He  gives  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God — makes  them 
" partakers  of  the  divine  nature"  (i.  12  ;  2  Pet.  i.  4).  4.  It  is  the  Spirit  that 
quickeneth  ;  it  is  by  the  Spirit  we  are  new  born  into  the  higher  life ;  it  is  by  the 
Spirit  that  this  higher  life  is  nourished  and  sustained  within  us — by  our  union  with 
Jesus  and  through  all  the  means  and  channels  of  grace  ;  whereby  His  life  flows 
into  our  souls — His  life  as  the  risen,  ascended  Saviour,  divine-human — building 
up  our  spiritual  being  and  "  changing  the  body  of  our  humiliation,  that  it  may  be 
conformed  unto  the  body  of  His  glory"  (Phil.  iii.  21). 

III.  The  new  birth  is  necessary  in  order  to  spiritual  understanding  of  and 
trust  in  Christ. —  1.  Well  did  the  Lord  say  to  Nicodemus,  "  If  I  have  told  you 
earthly  things,"  etc.  (iii.  12);  and  the  apostle,  "The  natural  man  receiveth  not 
the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God"  (1  Cor.  ii.  11-14).  2.  The  moral  teaching  of  our 
Lord  those  disciples  understood  and  were  attracted  by ;  but  some  of  them  could 
go  no  further.  W^hen  faith  demanded  their  adhesion  to  such  deep  spiritual 
truths  as  the  giving  of  Christ  for  the  life  of  the  world,  the  necessity  of  feeding 
upon  Him  in  order  to  their  spiritual  life,  then  Jesus  became  to  them  "a  stone  of 
stumbling  and  a  rock  of  offence,"  etc.  (1  Pet.  ii.  8).  3.  From  the  moment  those 
followers  began  to  gather  round  Him,  He  recognised  who  among  them  would 
become  true  disciples  and  believers,  and  who  would  not.  And,  too,  in  connection 
with  this  reference  to  our  Lord's  passion  and  ascension  the  first  mention  is 
made  of  His  betrayal.  But  why  was  the  traitor  numbered  among  the  twelve  ? 
The  answer  is  that  "  His  Father  willed  it."  And  if  we  might  suggest  a  purpose 
it  may  have  been  this — that  one  who  had  companied  with  Him,  and  who  vilely 
betrayed  Him,  was  led  in  bitter  remorse  to  confess,  "  I  have  sinned  in  that  I 
have  betrayed  the  innocent  blood  " ;  and  thus  with  our  Lord's  enemies  Judas  was 
forced  to  declare  that  there  was  no  fault  in  Him.     4.  The  deep  reason  lying  at 

190 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN.  chap.  vi. 


the  basis  of  the  unbelief  of  those  who  did  not  really  come  to  Christ  in  living 
faith  is  their  inability  to  do  so,  because  not  drawn  to  Him  by  the  Father  (ver.  44). 
Some  of  those  following  Him  had  been  drawn  by  the  hope  of  having  their 
material  wants  supplied — others  as  to  a  heavenly  teacher,  others  as  to  One 
who  might  be  hoped  to  fulfil  the  national  expectations.  Few  came  because  they 
felt  the  need  of  a  higher  life,  and  were  convinced  that  Jesus  could  bring  them 
that  life.  These  alone  were  drawn  by  the  Father,  had  opened  their  minds  to 
receive  His  truth,  and  their  hearts  to  the  impulses  of  His  Spirit.  These  will  not 
be  offended  They  may  not  and  will  not  fully  understand  the  truth  of  God — 
not  all  at  once,  but  slowly,  will  spiritual  things  become  plain  to  them.  They, 
however,  will  not  stumble  at  what  they  do  not  understand  thoroughly,  but  will 
seek  ever  more  for  that  spiritual  revelation  which  God  gives  His  children 
(1  Cor.  ii.  10).  5.  Our  Lord  here  returns  again  to  the  mystery  whence  all 
spiritual  life  flows — the  originating  impulse  of  the  divine  will,  and  the  blending 
in  unison  with  it  of  the  human  will.  The  soil  must  be  prepared,  or  the  good  seed 
will  fall  on  it  in  vain ;  the  heart  must  be  made  good,  or  it  will  be  spiritually  barren. 
The  will  must  be  submissive  to  respond  to  the  drawing  of  the  Father.  But  who 
is  it  that  makes  the  heart  evil,  hardens  it,  opposes  the  will  to  the  divine  law  ? 
It  is  men  themselves,  of  their  own  free  choice.  They  are  driven  by  no  fate, 
impelled  by  no  necessity ;  they  feel  themselves  responsible  for  what  they  are. 
Therefore  the  giving  to  the  Son  by  the  Father  of  redeemed  men  is  no  arbitrary 
act  ignoring  human  freedom  and  responsibility,  but  the  exercise  of  the  divine 
will  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  man's  being. 

IV.  Men  should  learn  on  a  consideration  of  these  things  a  lesson  of  earnest 
purpose  in  seeking  salvation. — 1.  In  reference  to  the  action  of  the  divine  will 
in  relation  to  human  redemption,  we  stand  before  what  is  here  a  mystery. 
But  it  is  clear  that  men  are  not  merely  passive  participators  in  this.  They 
cannot  save  themselves ;  but  without  their  willing  co-working  they  are  not 
saved.  2.  Men  by  nature  are  on  one  level  as  sinners.  All  travel  with  more 
or  less  haste  in  the  way  of  sin.  But  in  every  man's  life  there  comes  a  period 
when  another  way  diverging  from  that  of  nature  is  reached — a  way  that  is 
narrow,  and  the  entrance  to  it  strait ;  and  each  must  choose  which  he  will 
henceforth  walk  in.  Many  with  scarce  a  thought  pursue  the  way  of  destruction. 
3.  But  others  pause  in  their  course,  listen  to  warning  voices  telling  them  of 
their  danger.  Can  they  then  enter  the  way  of  safety  1  No.  But  if  they  see 
their  danger  and  desire  to  escape  from  it  and  to  enter  in  the  way  of  life,  then  the 
barriers  which  seem  to  oppose  fall  away,  and  a  new  force  is  given  them  fitting 
them  for  the  arduous  journey.  They  cannot  transform  their  moral  being, 
change  their  hearts.  But  if  through  the  shining  of  the  divine  light  upon  them 
they  see  evil  in  its  true  light,  and  desire  to  have  their  moral  nature  new  created, 
then  God  gives  them  to  His  Son  to  be  made  new  creations.  But  all  is  of  God  ! 
Even  the  desire  itself  is  awakened  by  the  strivings  of  His  gracious  Spirit ;  and 
apart  from  Jesus  men  can  do  nothing  (xv.  4).  Therefore  to  Father,  Son,  and 
Spirit  we  ascribe  all  the  honour  and  praise  of  our  redemption.  God  is  all — we 
are  nothing  in  carrying  out  this  mighty  work. 

HOMILETIC  NOTES. 

Vers.  1-15.  I.  Our  fellowship  with  plied.     3.  Therefore   should  we  trust 

Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  bread  of  life,  in  Him  alone  (vers.  13-15). 
— 1.  Our  neediness  should  lead  us  to  II.  Jesus   Christ  is   the  bread    of 

Christ,  who   helps   those  who  are   in  life. — 1.  No  one  but  He  Himself  can 

need.     2.  By  Christ  the  wants  of  our  satisfy   all   our   needs.      2.  None   but 

hearts  are  in  wonderful  fashion  sup-  He  can  promise  and  accord  full  satis- 

191 


CHAP.    VI. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


faction.  3.  He  disposes  everything  for 
the  reception  of  the  true  heavenly  food. 
4.  He  satisfies  our  needs  through  the 
agency  of  His  disciples.  As  the  people 
received  the  bread  from  Jesus,  but  by 
the  hands  of  the  disciples,  so  even 
heavenly  gifts  come  to  us  through 
human  agency  oftentimes.  But  we 
must  not  forget  the  invisible  Giver  in 
regarding  the  visible  "  hand  " — parents, 
teachers,  etc.,  etc.  5.  He  enjoins  on 
us  a  proper  estimation  of  the  value 
of  the  heavenly  gift.  6.  We  should 
recognise  and  acknowledge  Him  as  the 
only  Friend  and  Helper  and  Lord  of 
our  souls. — F.  G.  Lisco. 

Vers.  25-65.  The  general  idea  run- 
ning through  the  paragraph. — "  Though 
the  idea  of  life  prevailing  in  this  series 
of  discourses  appears  to  be  identical 
with  that  of  chap,  v.,  there  is  a 
difference  between  the  teaching  of  the 
two  chapters,  corresponding  with  that 
which  exists  between  the  miracles  of 
which  they  respectively  furnish  the 
application  "  (Godet).  1.  In  the  cure 
of  the  impotent  man  Jesus  does  all ; 
hence  all  through  chap.  v.  He  dwells 
on  His  authority  and  prerogatives, 
His  relation  to  His  Father  in  nature 
and  purpose.  2.  In  the  miracle  of 
feeding  the  five  thousand  Jesus  works 
through  His  disciples,  makes  use  of 
them  as  agents,  and  offers  the  mira- 
culously provided  food  to  the  people 
for  their  acceptance.  Hence,  as  Godet 
rightly  says,  "  in  the  discourses  in  the 
sixth  chapter  the  ruling  idea  is  that  of 
faith,  by  which  the  heavenly  food  is  to 
be  appropriated."  Or  as  we  might 
say,  the  main  theme  is  the  communi- 
cation of  Christ's  life  and  work  to 
humanity,  and  the  manner  in  which 
this  spiritual,  heavenly  food  is  to  be 
received.  In  chap.  vi.  the  relation  of 
the  Father  and  Son  to  humanity  is 
prominent 

Vers.  48-63.  The  connection  of  this 
discourse  with  the  Lord's  Supper. — In 
reference  to  one  view  of  this  great 
discourse  there  has  been  much  contro- 
versy.    Many  of  the  early  fathers  have 

in 


understood  it  of  the  Lord's  Supper, — the 
view  entertained  by  the  Romish  in- 
terpreters generally.  And  it  was  no 
doubt  this  last  fact  that  influenced, 
to  some  extent  at  least,  some  of  the 
reformed  theologians  to  deny  any  re- 
ference to  the  Lord's  Supper  in  the 
passage,  a  contention  that  may  in  a 
measure  be  conceded,  as  the  supper 
had  not  then  been  instituted.  But  any 
dispute  on  this  point  is  unnecessary; 
for — 

1.  There  could  be  7io  actual  direct 
reference  to  the  Lords  Supper  so  far 
as  the  audience  who  listened  to  this 
discourse  was  concerned. — That  holy 
ordinance  was  not  yet;  but  we  must 
believe  that  the  truths  Jesus  uttered 
were  as  applicable  to  those  who  heard 
them,  and  the  promises  as  sure  to  them, 
as  to  those  who  should  afterward  be 
privileged  to  observe  the  ordinance  of 
the  supper.  We  cannot  suppose  that 
Jesus  would  have  invited  His  hearers 
to  participate  in  the  blessedness  to 
which  He  called  them,  had  they  re- 
quired to  wait  till  in  the  sacred  rite 
it  would  be  assured  to  them.  Some 
might  die  ere  then  !  We  may  be  sure 
our  Lord  intended  that  those  who 
believed  in  Him  there  and  then  might 
eat  of  Him  and  have  eternal  life. 

2.  But  whilst  this  is  so  neither  can  there 
be  any  doubt  that  the  ideas  and  truths 
which  are  brought  forward  in  this  dis- 
course are  those  which  underlie  the 
ordinance  of  the  supper. — For  what  are 
the  great  truths  which  meet  us  in  those 
words  ?  Are  they  not  those  of  the  incar- 
nation of  the  Son,  and  His  atoning  work 
as  thefoundation  of  redemptionfor  man? 
Jesus  is  "  the  living  bread  which  came 
down  from  heaven"  (ver.  51);  "And 
the  bread  which  I  shall  give  is  My 
flesh"  etc.  ;  "  Except  ye  eat  the  flesh 
of  the  Son  of  man  and  drink  His 
blood,"  etc. :  in  such  words  the  in- 
carnation of  Jesus  and  the  purpose 
for  which  He  became  incarnate  are 
shadowed  forth.  Christ  Himself 
showed  that  His  words  are  not  to  be 
interpreted  in  a  gross  material  sense, 
when  He  said  to  these  disciples  who 
erroneously   understood   them   in  thig 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  VI. 


sense  and  were  offended,  "The  words  "  We  are  members  of  His  body,"  etc. 

that    I   speak   unto    you/'   etc.    (ver.  (Eph.  v.  30).     This  same  Spirit,  then, 

63).     The  words  crede  et   manducasti,  working  in  believers  makes  them  truly 

"believe     and     thou     hast      eaten"  and  really  participators   in  "the  life 

(Augustine),     sum     up     the     central  and  death  of  Jesus "  (Liicke),  of  the 

thoughts   of   the    passage    (Westcott).  "flesh"  and  "blood  "of  their  incarnate, 

Coming  to  Christ  and  believing  in  Him  exalted  Lord. 

evidently    involves    the    idea    of    an  4.  This  great  mystery  of  our  depend- 

assimilation  into  the  nature  of  those  ence  on  and  union  with  Christ's  person 

who  believe  of  what  is  here  spoken  of  which  Jesus  "  expressed  in  this  address 

as  flesh   (crap£)    and   blood.     It  is  an  in  words  is  precisely  that  which  Jesus 

acceptance  of  Him  in   His  humanity  designed  to  express  by  an  action  when 

as    the    eternal    Son    incarnate — the  He     instituted     the     Lord's     Supper" 

Word  made  flesh  as  the  foundation  of  (Godet). — This  union   is  sustained  and 

our  hope  of  salvation,  the  example  we  nourished  by   the   Spirit  through  the 

are   to   follow,  the  pattern   to    which  means  of  grace,  which  are  channels  by 

we  are  to  be  conformed.     It  is,  further,  which  Christ's  spiritual  life  flows  unto 

participation    in    His    atoning    work,  us.     And  the  Lord's  Supper  is  one  of 

the  acceptance  of  it  as  done  for  us  in  these  means.    Thus  it  may  be  truly  said : 

order  to  pardon,  peace,  life.  "  Jesus  wittingly  so  shaped  His  words 

3.  But  in  meaning  this  believing,  etc.,  that  at  once  and  for  ever  they  should 

means  more  also.     Eating  and  drinking  properly  treat  of  the  spiritual  enjoy  - 

of  Christ  implies  a  close  personal  union  ment  of  Him,  but  after  this  that  the 

of  ourselves  with  Him  and  participation  same  should  naturally  fit  also  the  most 

in   His    life   and   death. — We   are   to  august   mystery  of   the  Holy  Supper 

become  partakers  of  the  divine  nature  when  it  should  be  instituted  "  (Bengel). 

through  Christ  in  the  whole  of  our  being.  "  Although  this  discourse  has  nothing 

The  life  of  the  body  as  well  as  of  the  to    do   with    the    Sacrament    of    the 

soul  is  to  be  quickened  through  Him,  Supper,  the  Sacrament  has  everything 

as   is    evident   by    the    numerous   re-  to  do  with  it  as  the  visible  embodiment 

ferences   to   the  Resurrection   in   this  of  these  figures,  and,  to  the  believing 

discourse,     When  believers  are  spirit-  partaker,    a   real,  yea,   and  the  most 

ually  united  to  the  Second  Adam  they  lively   and   affecting,  participation    cf 

become  spiritually  quickened  in  Him  His  flesh  and  blood,  and  nourishment 

to  a  new  eternal  life  (1  Cor.  xv.   45),  thereby  of   the   spiritual   and  eternal 

whilst      His     blood     received     brings  life  here  below  "  (David  Brown,  D.D.). 

cleansing  and  pardon.     Our  life  depends  "  We  must  not  say  that  in  this  dis- 

on   our   acceptance    of   Christ    as    the  course    Jesus    alludes    to    the    Lord's 

incarnate  suffering  Redeemer.    And  the  Supper,   but   that   the  Lord's   Supper 

terms  "  eating  "  and  "  drinking  "  which  and  this  discourse  refer  to  one  and  the 

describe  this  acceptance  are  not  mere  same  divine  fact,  expressed  here  by  a 

metaphors.     They  describe  a  real  as-  metaphor   and   there   by  an   emblem. 

similation,  otherwise  our  Lord  would  From  this  point  of  view  the  delicate 

not  have  used  them.     And  they  mean  question  why  Jesus  here  made  use  of 

that  believers  really  participate  in  the  the  word  flesh,  and  in  the  institution 

life  of  the  incarnate  Son ;  for  the  same  of  the  Lord's  Supper  of  the  word  body, 

Spirit  through  whom  He  became  in-  is  easily  solved.     When  He  instituted 

carnate  moves  in  the  life  of  believers,  the  emblem  He  took  bread  and  brake  it. 

transforming    them    more    and   more  Now  it  is   His  body,  as  an  organism 

into   His   image.      "  If   the  Spirit   of  (o-w/xa)    broken,   which   corresponds  to 

Him  that  raised  up  Jesus,"  etc.  (Rom.  this  broken  bread.     In  the  address  at 

viii.  11);  "Your  bodies  are  members  Capernaum,    where   only   nourishment 

of  Christ,"  "  He  that  is  joined  unto  the  was  in  question,   it  was   agreeable  to 

Lord  is  one  Spirit "  (1  Cor.  vi.  15,  17)  ;  the  analysis  of  the  multiplication  of  the 

o  193 


CHAP.   VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


loaves  that  Jesus  should  rather  present 
His  body  as  substance  (o-dp$)  than  as 
an  organism.  The  perfect  propriety 
of  terms  shows  the  genuineness  and 
authenticity  of  both  forms"  (Godet). 
uAs  Jesus  in  the  conversation  with 
Nicodemus  in  the  third  chapter  does 
not  speak  of  Christian  baptism,  but  of 
that  influence  of  the  Spirit  which  forms 
the  presupposition  of  the  institution 
of  baptism,  so  here  in  the  sixth 
chapter  He  does  not  speak  of  the 
Lord's  Supper,  but  of  that  personal 
communion  with  the  incarnate  One  in 
belief,  which  communion  forms  the 
presupposition  of  the  Lord's  Supper. 
Thus,  therefore,  the  evangelist  could 
dispense  with  an  account  of  the  insti- 
tution of  baptism  and  of  the  Lord's 
Supper,  just  as  He  dispenses  with 
telling  about  Gethsemane  by  giving 
the  scene  in  xii.  27  ff."  (Luthardt). 
See  also  xiii.  8,  14. 

Ver.  54. — 1.  The  use  of  o-w/xa  rather 


than  cra/o£,  in  every  account  of  the 
institution  of  the  supper,  is  not  with- 
out special  meaning :  <rap£  and  at/xa 
meaning  the  whole  of  His  humanity, 
and  the  entire  fulness  of  the  sacrifice  for 
the  world ;  while  o-w/xa  kcu  at/xa  suggest 
that  organised  personal  life  in  which 
the  Incarnation  culminated,  and  the 
blood  which  was  shed  for  the  remission 
of  sins.  The  o-w/xa  is  not  without 
reference  to  the  new  "body  "  in  which 
the  Spirit  would  be  ultimately  en- 
shrined. 2.  The  phrase  "  drinking  of 
the  blood  "  is  peculiar  to  these  verses. 
In  the  Eucharist  we  "  drink  of  the 
cup  which  is  the  new  covenant  in  the 
blood  of  Christ."  "The  hand  of 
history,"  says  Edersheim,  "  has  drawn 
out  the  telescope ;  and,  as  we  gaze 
through  it,  every  sentence  and  word 
sheds  light  upon  the  cross,  and  light 
from  the  cross  carrying  to  us  the 
twofold  meaning,  His  death  and  its 
celebration  in  the  great  Christian 
Sacrament." — Dr.  H.  R.  Reynolds. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  31.  Manna.— The  manna,  according  to 
the  Jewish  tradition  of  Josephus,  and  the 
belief  of  the  Arab  tribes,  and  of  the  Greek 
Church  of  the  present  day,  is  still  found  in 
the  droppings  from  the  tamarisk  bushes 
which  abound  in  this  part  of  the  desert 
(i.e.  of  Sinai).  The  more  critical  spirit 
of  modern  times  has  been  led  to  dwell 
on  the  distinction  between  the  existing 
manna  and  that  described  in  the  Book  of 
Numbers  ;  and  the  identification  is  further 
rendered  precarious  by  the  insufficiency 
of  the  present  supply  in  the  desert  of 
Sinai.  It  became  afterwards  a  favourite 
figure  in  Christian  writings,  to  express  the 
heavenly  sustenance  of  the  soul,  either  in  the 
Eucharist  or  in  our  spiritual  life  generally. 
Of  all  the  typical  scenes  represented  in  the 
celebrated  Ammergau  Mystery,  none  is  more 
natural  or  touching  than  that  in  which  the 
whole  multitude  of  the  Israelites,  in  every 
variety  of  age,  sex,  and  character,  appear 
looking  up  with  one  ardent  expectation  to 
the  downward  flight  of  the  celestial  food, 
fluttering  over  the  hundreds  of  upturned 
heads,  according  to  that  fanciful  and  child- 
like but  beautiful  conception  of  the  descent 
of  the  manna.  The  historical  origin  of  this 
sacred  figure  was  always  carried  back  beyond 

194 


Palestine  to  the  desert ;  a  portion  of  it  was 
laid  up  as  a  relic  by  the  ark  for  this  very 
purpose,  "that  they  might  see  the  bread 
wherewith  their  fathers  were  fed  in  the 
wilderness."  And  a  Christian  poet  has  well 
caught,  in  The  Song  of  the  Manna-gatherer*, 
the  freshness,  the  monotony,  and  the  transi- 
tional character  of  the  whole  passage  through 
the  desert,  and  at  the  same  time  has  blended 
together  the  natural  and  supernatural  in  that 
union  which  is  at  once  most  Biblical  and 
most  philosophical. — A.  P.  Stanley. 

Ver.  31.  Manna-gatherers. 

Comrades,  haste  !  the  tent's  tall  shading 

Lies  along  the  level  sand, 
Far  and  faint :  the  stars  are  fading 

O'er  the  gleaming  western  strand, 
Airs  of  morning 
Freshen  the  bleak  burning  land. 

Haste,  or  e'er  the  third  hour  glowing 

With  its  eager  thirst  prevail, 
O'er  the  moist  pearls,  now  bestrowing 

Thymy  slope  and  rushy  vale. 

Comrades — what  our  sires  have  told  us, 
Watch  and  wait,  for  it  will  come. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   VI. 


Not  by  manna  showers  at  morning 
Shall  our  board  be  then  supplied, 

But  a  strange  pale  gold,  adorning 
Many  a  tufted  mountain's  side, 
Yearly  feed  us, 

Year  by  year  our  murmurings  chide. 

There,  no  prophet's  touch  awaiting, 
From  each  cool  deep  cavern  start 
Rills,  that  since  their  first  creating 
Ne'er  have  ceased  to  sing  their  part ; 
Oft  we  hear  them 
In  our  dreams,  with  thirsty  heart. 

Keole. 

Ver.  35.  Spiritual  hunger  and  thirst 
satisfied  in  Christ. — These  words  should  be 
written  in  letters  of  gold,  nay,  with  living 
letters  (which  were  better)  in  the  heart,  so 
that  each  might  know  whereon  to  rest  his 
soul;  whither  he  may  go  when  he  departs 
from  this  world,  or  when  he  retires  to  rest,  or 
rises  at  morningtide,  or  whatever  he  does, 
that  he  may  know  this  golden  art :  here  with 
Christ  my  soul  abides,  so  that  I  shall  neither 
hunger  nor  thrist.  This  Man  will  not  deceive 
me.  These  are  excellent,  sacred,  and 
precious  words,  which  we  ought  not  simply  to 
know,  but  make  use  of  and  say :  Thereupon 
will  I  go  to  sleep  at  night  and  rise  again  in 
the  morning  ;  upon  these  words  will  I  con- 
fide, sleep,  awake,  labour,  and  cross  the 
bridge.  For  although  everything  should  go 
to  ruin,  and  father  and  mother,  emperor  and 
pope,  monk  and  priest,  prince  and  lord, 
should  forsake  me,  and  even  Moses  could  not 
help  me,  let  me  but  run  to  Christ  and  He 
will  help  me.  For  these  words  are  sure ; 
and  He  further  says  :  Rest  on  Me  ;  come  to 
Me,  and  ye  shall  live.  And  the  meaning  of 
these  words  is  this— that  all  that  believe  on 
this  Man,  who  is  called  Jesus  Christ,  are 
satisfied,  and  will  not  suffer  hunger  or  thirst. 
— Translated  from  Luther. 

Ver.  37.  True  coming  to  Jesus. — Those  who 
come  to  church  to  sanctify  the  Sabbath 
according  to  custom,  to  take  part  in  a  beau- 
tiful service,  to  observe  the  good  and 
honoured  custom  of  engaging  in  the  com- 
munion, will  reap  what  they  have  sown,  quiet 
Sundays  and  the  name  of  being  diligent 
frequenters  of  the  worship  of  God's  house. 
But  those  who  go  no  further,  who  do  not 
come  to  Jesus,  will  truly  find  here  the 
door  of  the  chuich,  and  beyond  it  the  door 
of  the  churchyard  open  to  a  quiet  place,  but 
they  will  not  find  the  door  of  eternal  life,  of 
the  place  of  John  on  the  .Saviour's  breast, 
open.  In  the  end  they  will  be  cast  out  in 
spite  of  their  churchliness  and  decorum,  for 
they  did  not  come  to  Jesus.  They  who  come 
to  Holy  Writ  and  delight  themselves  with 
the  noble  strains  of  the  psalms,  the  beauty 
of  the  parables,  the  correctness  of  the 
proverbs,    the    remarkable    nature     of  the 


narrations,  will  perhaps  arrive  at  the  honour 
of  being  considered  learned  in  the  Scrip- 
tures, and  in  this  will  attain  to  the  experi- 
ence of  pious  excitations.  But  when  they 
go  no  further,  even  though  they  receive  the 
whole  catechism  as  true,  they  have  not 
thereby  come  to  Jesus.  The  Scripture  wit- 
nesses of  Jesus  and  points  to  Him.  The 
Scripture  does  not  seek  to  attract  men  to 
itself,  but  to  Jesus.  Well  then  !  they  who 
come  to  Jesus  Himself,  drawn  like  iron  by  the 
magnet,  as  the  earth  is  towards  the  sun,  who 
come  to  Jesus  as  the  greatest,  although  He 
appeared  in  the  form  of  a  servant,  as  to  the 
fairest  among  the  sons,  although  His  bleed- 
ing head  was  crowned  with  thorns,  as  to  the 
most  merciful,  despite  His  yoke,  His  cross, 
and  self-renunciation,  as  to  the  wisest.in  spite 
of  the  "offence"  and  "foolishness"  of  the 
word  ;  they  who  come  to  Jesus  as  the  sick  to 
a  physician,  as  children  to  a  mother,  as  the 
erring  to  one  who  knows  the  way ;  they  who 
come  to  Him  not  to  put  idle  enigmatic 
questions,  not  to  speak  highly  of  Jesus  merely 
and  avow  their' admiration  for  Him,  not  to 
bow  incidentally  before  the  cross  and  then 
to  pass  by ;  they  who  come  as  sinners,  as 
guilty,  as  condemned,  in  order  to  be  made 
whole,  redeemed,  saved — such,  though  they 
came  groping  like  the  man  born  blind,  infirm 
as  the  man  at  Bethesda,  carried  by  others 
like  the  paralytic,  though  they  should  come 
creeping  in  place  of  walking,  and  even  at  the 
latest  hour — they  shall  find  Jesus,  and  not  be 
lost ! — Translated  from  Br.  R.  Koyel. 

Ver.  38.  The  mystery  of  the  Blaster-servant. 
— The  mystery  of  the  Master-servant,  un- 
approachable as  it  is,  has  yet  an  imitable 
side ;  and  in  that  most  pathetic  and  wonder- 
ful instance  Jesus  sets  forth  the  law  for  all 
His  followers.  That  law  is  that  dignity 
binds  to  service.  If  we  are  Christ's  we  must 
stoop  to  serve,  and  serve  to  cleanse.  The 
noblest  form  of  help  is  to  help  men  to  get 
rid  of  their  sins.  The  highest  glory  of 
powers  and  gifts  is  to  humble  oneself  for 
the  lowest,  and  to  be  ready  to  be  a  slave,  if 
we  may  wash  any  stained  soul  or  bind  any 
bleeding  feet.  The  example  of  Christ  includes 
what  He  has  done  for  us.  Some  of  us  are 
willing  to  look  to  the  cross  as  the  foundation 
of  our  hope  who  are  not  willing  to  take  it  for 
the  law  of  our  lives.  But  the  benefits  of  the 
gospel  are  meant  to  impel  us  to  correspond- 
ing action.  How  little  any  of  us  have  caught 
the  whole  sweep  of  the  meaning  of  that 
imperative  example,  that  "ye  should  do  as  I 
have  done  to  you" !  What  have  we  received 
from  Him  ?  What  have  we  given  to  men  ? 
Are  we  not  too  much  like  some  sullen,  land- 
locked lake,  which  receives  many  streams 
and  gives  forth  none  ?  If  our  acts  to  others 
are  not  widened  to  correspond  to  Christ's 
to  and  for  us,  the  reverse  process  will  set  in, 
and  Christ's  acts  and  gifts  to  us  will  shrink 

195 


CHAP.   VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


to  the  narrowness  of  ours  to  others.  We  all 
know  that  He  is  our  example,  and  that  even 
in  the  supreme  and  unapproachable  gift  of 
His  death  we  ought  to  find  the  model  for 
our  lives.  But  the  gulf  between  knowledge 
and  practice  is  all  too  wide,  and  so  our  Lord 
adds  one  more  to  the  beatitudes,  pronouncing 
those  blessed  who  add  doing  to  knowing. 
Only  they  really  know  who  translate  all 
their  knowledge  into  performance.  Only 
they  are  truly  blessed  who  have  no  principles 
which  do  not  regulate  conduct,  and  no  con- 
duct which  is  not  regulated  by  principle. 
The  one  principle  which  can  shape  all  life 
into  blessedness  is,  Do  as  Jesus  has  done  for 
you.  Stoop  that  you  may  serve,  and  let 
your  service  be  cleansing. — Dr.  Alex.  Mac- 
laren. 

Ver.  38.  Following  the  Master-servant. — 
Let  us  then  walk  with  Him  daily,  having 
our  "  ear  open  like  a  disciple  "  to  hear  His 
word,  and  our  hearts  obedient  to  His  com- 
mand, so  that  we  may  faithfully  serve  Him. 
Then  in  days  of  joy  and  prosperity  life  shall 
become  more  bright  and  happy  in  the  light 
of  His  love  and  favour.  Then  in  days  of 
darkness,  when  His  disciples  have  to  walk  in 
the  gloom  and  see  no  light  (Isa.  1.  10),  let 
them  still  "  trust  in  the  name  of  the  Lord, 
and  stay  upon  their  God,"  and  they  shall 
not  be  ashamed.  For  He  will  make  light  to 
rise  for  them  in  the  darkness  (Ps.  cxii.  4), 
and  their  life  shall  be  crowned  with  the 
glory  of  a  consecrated  service.  For  Christ 
hath  said  of  His  true  disciples  and  servants, 
"  The  glory  which  Thou  hast  given  Me  I 
have  given  them  "  (xvii.  22). 

Ver.  39.  The  present  blessedness  of  be- 
lievers in  ver.  39  is  regardedas  being  safe  keep- 
ing, in  ver.  40  as  being  everlasting  life.  But 
the  two  types  merge  in  the  final  issue,  though 
even  there  the  one  reads  "  it "  and  the  other 
^him."  The  resurrection  of  the  body  is  the 
necessary  crown  of  that  safe  keeping  and 
communicated  life  which  are  the  believer's 
privilege  here.  That  glorious  issue,  without 
which  the  present  experiences  of  the  believer 
would  be  futile,  and  the  whole  of  his  earthly 
life  a  confounding  riddle,  is  wrought  by 
Jesus  Himself,  as  is  emphatically  claimed  by 
the  majestic  "I"  which  the  original  under- 
scores, so  to  speak,  by  its  position  in  the 
fortieth  verse.  He  who  feeds  on  the  bread  of 
life  here  cannot  die.  The  resurrection  to 
life  must  come  as  the  cope-stone  of  redemp- 
tion. Without  it  the  building  stands, 
would  stand,  a  ruin,  and  the  taunt  would  be 
justified,  This  Jesus  began  to  build  and  was 
not  able  to  finish. — Dr.  A.  Maclaren. 

Vers.  47,  48.  Life  the  quest  of  humanity. — 
All  the  world  seeks  after  life,  whether  it  be 
the  day  labourer,  who  is  in  indigence  and 


cries  out  perplexed,  What  shall  we  eat?  what 
shall  we  drink?  or  the  rich  man,  who  wishes 
to  spend  his  days  sumptuously  and  in 
pleasure  ;  or  the  physician,  who  dissects  the 
corpse  in  order  to  make  plain  the  cause  why 
life  has  fled ;  or  the  philosopher,  who  struggles 
to  discover  the  universal  secret,  and  cries 
out,  Where  shall  I  be  able  to  grasp  thee, 
infinite  nature  ?  or  the  artist,  who  deludes 
himself  with  the  appearance  of  life,  because 
he  cannot  produce  the  essence  itself  ;  or  the 
Pharisee,  who  is  foolish  enough  to  attempt 
to  satisfy  his  life-hunger  with  artificial  food, 
in  his  self-chosen  way  of  sanctity.  Enough ! 
All  the  world  seeks  after  life,  and  our  age 
not  in  the  lowest  degree.  Here  we  find 
some  claiming,  like  spoilt  children,  to  have 
the  manna  gathered  for  them  without  toil ; 
there,  the  complaint  that  the  golden  spring  of 
life  is  spent  so  speedily,  that  so  soon  the  pitcher 
is  shattered  at  the  fountain  and  the  wheel 
broken.  Here  there  is  the  accumulation,  and 
raking  together  of  gold  and  silver,  as  if  men 
could  thereby  purchase  life:  there,  foolish 
dissipation,  as  if  men  could  best  keep  fast 
hold  of  life  by  dissipating  it.  Here  again 
we  find  a  strange  mixture  of  loathing  of  life 
and  horror  of  death  ;  there,  the  consecution 
of  licentious  enjoyment  and  cowardly  self- 
murder.  The  living  spring,  the  word  of  the 
living  God,  they  forsake,  and  make  for  them- 
selves after  their  desires  and  dreams  "  broken 
fountains,"  which  in  the  hour  of  need  contain 
no  water.  You  may  continue  to  seek  what 
you  long  for,  the  fountain  of  life,  strength 
and  enjoyment.  But  there  where  many  seek 
it — among  the  husks  of  the  world,  in  the 
puddle  of  sin,  in  the  intoxicating  cup  of  lust, 
in  shifting  opinions  and  conjectures  of 
human  wisdom — it  is  not  to  be  found.  Do 
not  say  in  scornful  tones :  The  word  of  Jesus  is 
a  hard,  saying,  the  manna  from  heaven  is  a 
spare  repast ;  the  Bible  has  so  many  difficult 
passages.  The  burden  of  Jesus  is  light ;  your 
poverty  is  great.  The  dark  portions  that 
you  complain  of  are  not  centred  in  the  Sun, 
but  in  your  own  eyes — not  in  the  word  of 
God,  but  in  your  hearts.  David  knew  better 
where  the  true  wealth  of  life  is  to  be  found, 
as  he  shows  in  his  evening  prayer :  "  Thou 
rejoicest  my  heart,  although  thexe  may  have 
much  corn  and  wine"  (Ps.  iv.  7).  And 
Asaph  knew  it  better  still,  as  he  shows  in 
Ps.  lxxiii.  23  :  "  Nevertheless  I  am  continually 
with  Thee  !  "  And  Jesus  Christ  knew  it  best 
of  all.  He  understands  your  desires  and 
needs,  and  declares,  "  I  am  the  bread  of 
life  :  he  that  cometh  to  Me  shall  not  hunger." 
Here  is  a  food  that  never  consumes  away, 
whilst  still  it  nourishes ;  here  is  a  food  that 
satisfies  our  desires  after  eternity,  which 
God  has  placed  in  the  hearts  of  men  ;  here 
is  the  power  of  God  which  overcomes  all 
prejudices,  resolves  all  doubts,  annihilates 
all  lies.  Blessed  are  they  who  eat  Christ, 
i.e.    who   receive    Him    with    set    purpose, 


196 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   VI. 


obey  Him  with  unswerving  faithfulness, 
serve  Him  with  all  their  powers.  Jesus, 
the  bread  of  life — they  who  receive  and  eat 
this  si] all  not  only  not  hunger,  they  shall 
not  die,  but  shall  live  eternally.  Israel's 
fathers  perished  in  the  wilderness,  notwith- 
standing the  manna ;  they  were  struck  down 
because  of  the  disobedience  of  unbelief. 
Christians,  on  the  contrary,  who  meet  the 
Lord's  communication  of  Himself  with  the 
answering  self-submission  of  faith — Chris- 
tians who  attach  themselves  to  the  Lord, 
and  so  become  one  in  spirit  with  Him — 
Christians  who  receive  the  flesh  and  blood 
of  the  Son  of  man,  not  frivolously  and 
thoughtlessly,  not  outwardly,  but  in  truth, 
they  shall  live,  live  as  long  as  their  living 
Head  lives.  The  earthly  vessel  will  be 
broken,  but  the  treasure  of  life  remains.  The 
outward  man  perishes,  but  the  inward  man 
is  renewed  day  by  day  by  the  power  of  this 
heavenly  food.  The  same  apostle  who  before 
his  martyr  death  said,  "I  die  daily,"  also 
said,  "Nevertheless  I  live;  yet  not  I,  but 
Christ  liveth  in  me."  Death  did  not  to  him 
portend  destruction  for  the  buds  of  the 
spiritual  life,  but  unfolding.  Death  was  not 
to  him  an  overturning  and  clearing  away  of 
the  table,  but  the  invitation  to  the  wedding 
supper  of  the  Lamb. 

"  No,  no,  it  is  not  dying, 
Thou  Saviour  of  us  all ; 
From  founts  of  joy  forthgoing 
Love's  endless  streams  are  flowing — 
Here  only  droplets  fall." 

Translated  from  Dr.  R.  K'ogel. 

Vers.  50,  51.  Christ  satisfies  the  human 
soul. — Christ  nourishes  the  soul  into  life 
eternal,  and  through  His  divine  power  sus- 
tains the  germ  of  life  that  lies  hidden  there. 
It  is  the  greatest  of  miseries  when  the  soul 
hungers  and  thirsts  after  righteousness,  and 
fails  to  find  what  can  satisfy  her  hunger ; 
when  a  cry  ascends  to  heaven,  and  heaven 
seems  to  be  deaf,  like  a  cold  wall ;  when  the 
soul  calls  out  in  the  wilderness  of  life,  and 
no  voice  is  heard  from  the  howling  waste 
except  the  echo  of  her  own  voice  ;  when  she 
sees  across  the  flood  all  that  she  needs,  and 
cannot  cross  over  to  obtain  it.  Yes,  such  is 
a  truly  miserable  existence  !  On  the  ether 
hand  there  is  gladness  indescribable  when 
the  soul  can  say,  "  I  know  whom  I  have 
believed,  and  am  persuaded."  There  truly 
is  satiation  where  Christ  comes  with  His 
word  and  Spirit !  Then  the  soul  feels  that 
this  is  life,  real  life,  such  as  she  has  never 
before  experienced,  which  comes  from  heaven, 
for  it  leads  heavenward.  The  thought  which 
He  awakens  in  the  soul,  the  feelings  He 
animates,  the  anticipations  of  a  greater 
future  which  He  enkindles,  the  endeavours 
and  activities  to  which  He  inspires,  the 
elevation  and  divine  dignity  which  He  in- 
breathes— no,   these  are  not  from  beneath, 


but  must  have  their  origin  beyond  the 
clouds,  for  they  bear  the  seal  of  eternal  life. 
The  clamouring  hunger  is  silenced,  and  a 
feeling  of  satisfaction  pervades  the  soul, 
such  as  men  experience  when  victorious 
after  a  hotly  contested  fight,  or  when,  after 
a  long  and  toilsome  journey,  the  wished-for 
end  is  reached.  The  soul  now  possesses 
what  she  needs,  and  in  the  possession  and 
enjoyment  thereof  is  blest  exceedingly. — 
Translated  from  F.  Arndt. 

Ver.  53.  The  meaning  of  eating  Christ's 
flesh,  etc. — Some  have  been  inclined,  to  lower 
the  meaning  of  such  expressions  as  those 
in  the  text,  because  they  think  that  they 
may  encourage  extravagance  and  fanaticism. 
But  we  should  all  bear  in  mind  that  man, 
it  is  true,  is  apt  to  abuse  even  the  best 
things  ;  but  there  are  two  ways  of  abusing 
them,  one  by  over-using  them,  and  the  other 
by  not  using  them  enough.  Many  persons,  it 
is  likely,  have  attached  some  fanciful  notion 
to  the  words  "  eating  the  flesh  of  Christ  and 
drinking  His  blood,"  and  have  let  their 
thoughts  and  their  tongues  run  wild,  without 
bringing  their  hearts  and  lives  to  a  sober 
and  faithful  obedience.  But  many,  and 
perhaps  more,  by  forgetting  the  force  and 
peculiar  meaning  of  the  command  to  make 
Christ  our  food,  and  by  putting  always  in 
the  place  of  such  lively  expressions  the 
mere  injunction  to  obey  Christ's  law,  have 
in  fact  grown  cold  in  their  feelings  toward 
Him,  have  lost  the  sense  of  their  close  re- 
lationship to  Him,  have  not  held  fast  to  Him 
as  their  head,  nor  have  sought  of  Him  daily 
their  spiritual  nourishment  and  strength. 
They  have  not  then  eaten  the  flesh  of  the  Son 
of  man,  nor  drunk  His  blood  ;  they  have  lived 
much  in  the  world  without  Him ;  and  their 
life,  therefore,  has  not  been  that  life  of  faith 
in  the  Son  of  God  which  it  ought  to  be.  It 
is  unwise  in  us  now  to  use  the  same  sort  of 
figurative  language  in  religious  subjects, 
unless  we  merely  borrow  and  quote  Christ's 
own  words  ;  because  it  is  not  natural  to  our 
national  character  or  habits,  and  therefore 
appears  to  be  affectation,  even  if  it  really  is 
not  so.  But  we  must  not  lose  our  relish  for 
it  when  we  meet  with  it  in  the  Scriptures  : 
there  it  is  in  its  place,  natural  and  proper ; 
and  more  powerful  and  edifying  than  any- 
thing we  can  put  in  its  room.  In  fact,  the 
more  fondly  we  love  the  words  of  Christ,  so 
much  the  better  hope  is  there  that  we  shall 
practise  them.  There  was  an  especial  pro- 
mise given,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  should  bring 
them  faithfully  to  the  remembrance  of  His 
apostles,  in  order  that  they  might  record 
them  without  the  possibility  of  corrupting 
them  ;  and  the  more  we  study  and  feed  upon 
them,  the  more  reason  shall  we  see  to  bless 
the  goodness  of  God  for  preserving  them  to 
us  so  surely,  and  it  is  a  further  blessing  that 
they  are  their  own  best  interpreter  ;  so  that 

197 


chap.  vi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


he  who  has  the  Scriptures  only,  and  reads  for  any  practical  improvement,  and  become 

them  humbly,  sincerely,  and  with  the  exercise  clearer  and  more  effective  for  that  purpose 

of  his  thoughts  and  understanding,  will  find  every  time  they  are  read   with  an   honest 

for  the  most  part  that  they  are  clear  enough  heart  and  an  humble  spirit. — Dr.  T.  Arnold. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  66—71. 

The  relation  of  different  classes  of  men  to  the  Saviour. — A  time  of  testing  had 
come  for  the  followers  of  the  Saviour.  In  His  discourse  in  the  synagogue  of 
Capernaum,  He  had  advanced  into  regions  of  thought  not  only  far  above,  but 
alien  to  the  desires  of  many  among  them.  And  they  were  not,  we  may  think, 
of  the  number  of  the  Jews  who  murmured  (vers.  41,  42),  nor  men  who  were 
inimical  to  the  Redeemer.  They  were  those  who  would  willingly  have  con- 
tinued to  be  His  disciples  ;  but  His  late  teaching  proved  a  stumbling-block,  the 
prospects  He  held  out  were  not  such  as  they  anticipated,  His  yoke  to  some  of 
them  was  not  easy,  it  may  be,  and  thus  we  read  that  many  went  back.  They 
were — 

I.  Those  who  separated  themselves  from  Jesus. — 1.  Many  of  those  who  had 
never  really  come  to  Christ,  and  remained  spiritually  unchanged,  were  more  and 
more  offended  at  His  teaching ;  indifference,  lukewarmness,  faintheartedness, 
doubtless  characterised  them.  His  demands  were  too  great  for  their  little  souls. 
The  spiritual  life  and  kingdom  to  which  He  pointed  had  no  charms  for  them. 
2.  Thus  they  go  without  one  word  more  from  Him.  Not  by  such  followers 
would  the  world  be  won  for  Him.  Bather  will  He  choose  a  small  handful  of  faith- 
ful, self-sacrificing  men  ;  for  only  such,  guided  by  His  Spirit,  would  turn  the  world 
upside  down  (Acts  xvii.  6).  3.  As  Gideon's  army  at  the  spring  of  Harod  was 
purged  from  all  the  fainthearted  and  unfit  (Judges  vii.  3-7),  so  that  by  the 
three  hundred  left  Cod  saved  Israel  from  the  Midianites,  thus  the  ranks  of 
Jesus'  disciples  were  freed  from  unfit  and  encumbering  elements.  They  had  put 
their  hands  to  the  plough  and  turned  back,  etc.  (Luke  ix.  62).  Such  Jesus  does 
not  retain  in  His  service — or  rather  they  go  back  willingly,  freely,  from  Him 
into  the  old  life  and  the  old  ways. 

II.  Those  who  willingly  and  joyfully  remained  with  Him. — 1.  It  is  to  the 
twelve  our  Lord  addresses  Himself  in  the  memorable  question,  "  Will  ye  also  go 
away  ?  "  Did  no  others  remain  1  That  is  an  idea  hardly  to  be  entertained. 
But  those  five  disciples  already  chosen,  and  the  others  who  had  associated  them- 
selves more  closely  with  Him,  stood  nearest.  And,  as  He  saw  the  departing  many, 
seeking  some  solace  for  His  grieved  human  heart,  He  asked  the  others  this  question. 
2.  And  the  answer  was,  without  doubt,  cheering  and  grateful  to  the  Son  of  man, 
"  despised  and  rejected,"  etc.  Simon  Peter,  here  as  ever  the  spokesman,  if  not  the 
representative  of  them  all,  confessed  their  loyal  adhesion  to  their  Master.  He 
and  they  did  not  probably  understand  much  that  had  been  spoken  in  the 
synagogue.  But  they  knew  what  Christ  was — what  peace  He  had  brought  to 
their  souls ;  they  had  seen  His  wondrous  works,  and  heard  His  heavenly 
teaching  which  those  works  explained  and  illumined.  To  whom  else  could  they 
go  ?  from  whom  else  hear  the  words  of  eternal  life  ?  Nay,  all  they  knew  and 
had  seen  led  them  to  believe  and  know  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ — as  He  claimed 
to  be — and  the  Son  of  the  living  God.  3.  Our  Lord  desires  a  willing  service.  He 
had  chosen  these  disciples  ;  but  those  who  were  really  His  consecrated  themselves 
freely  to  Him,  under  the  blessed  free  constraint  of  His  love  and  His  Father's 
drawing. 

III.  The  traitor  in  the  ranks  of  the  disciples. — 1.  The  gleam  of  joy  which 
fell  on  the  Saviour's  path  at  the  manifestation  of  His  disciples'  faith  and  love 

198 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY;   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  vi. 


was  again  clouded  by  the  thought  that  even  in  this  inner  circle  lurked  a  traitor. 
2.  "  One  of  you  is  a  devil,"  our  Lord  had  to  say  sadly.  Judas  remained, 
although  he  should  have  departed ;  for  his  adherence  to  Peter's  confession  was 
evidently  hypocritical.  He  remained,  cherishing  in  his  heart  those  carnal  and 
earthly  ideas  of  Messiah's  kingdom,  probably  resolving  that  he  would  watch  the 
Saviour's  movements,  and  force  Him  to  declare  Himself  Messiah  in  a  temporal 

sense  (all  Judas  would  have  cared  for),  or 3.  That  Judas  was  wholly  unmoved 

by  the  Saviour's  holy  life  and  loving  works  and  heavenly  teaching  can  hardly  be 
held  in  view  of  his  bitter  remorse  (Matt,  xxvii.  3-5).  4.  The  patience  with  which 
our  Lord  endured  the  presence  of  this  spying  traitor  (who  was,  moreover,  a 
thief — xii.  6)  was  wonderful.  But  His  Father  willed  that  it  should  be  so — for 
some  purpose  it  was  necessary  that  it  should  be  so  (see  on  ver.  64) — and  His  will 
rose,  even  in  this,  into  loving  acquiescence  with  His  Father's  will. 

IV.   1.  Consider  Him  who  endured    such   contradiction,   etc.    (Hob.   xii.   3). 

2.  Consider  the  necessity  for  earnestness  in  religion.  The  religion  of  Christ  will 
not  admit  of  half-hearted  adhesion,  of  lukewarmness,  etc.  Christ  does  not 
desire  such  disciples  (Rev.  iii.  16).  And  in  the  ears  of  many  in  all  the  Churches 
His  words  of  blame  to  Laodicea  still  apply,  "  I  would  thou  wert  cold  or  hotr 

3.  The  continuance  of  a  hypocritical  profession  may  lead  in  the  end  to  awful 
results.  Nothing  more  surely  hardens  the  heart,  and  freezes  the  springs  of  faith 
and  feeling,  than  a  false  and  hypocritical  profession  of  religion  (James  i.  22 ; 
2  Tim.  iii.  13  ;  Isa.  xxix.  13,  14,  etc.). 

(See  Illustrations,  Chap.  xiii.  18  seq.) 


199 


chap.  VII.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY .-   ST.  JOHN. 


PABT   IV.   (a.) 

Chaptees  vii. — xii. 

I.  The  Growing  Conflict  between  the  Forces  of  Light  and  Darkness 
Ranged  on  the  Side  of  and  Against  the  Word. 

1.  Christ's  manifesting  Himself  in  His  public  ministry  as  the  Truth,  leads  to 
opposition  from  the  rulers  of  the  people,  who  fear  the  usurpation  of  their 
authority.  (1)  The  unbelief  of  His  brethren,  showing  that  even  in  the  circle  of 
His  earthly  home  the  hatred  of  the  world  arises  from  opposition  to  the  works 
of  truth  (vers.  1-9) ;  (2)  at  the  feast  of  tabernacles  He  declares  that  His  doctrine 
is  from  the  Father,  as  He  Himself  is  from  the  Father  (vers.  10-29). 

2.  The  growing  enmity  of  the  rulers.  (1)  It  shows  itself  in  open  attempts  to 
lay  violent  hold  of  Him  ;  (2)  this  is  abandoned  for  the  time  because  of  controversy 
among  the  Jews  themselves  (vers.  30-53). 

3.  Jesus  proclaims  Himself  to  be  the  giver  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  (1)  The 
result  is  that  many  believe  on  Him  among  the  people  ;  (2)  whilst  the  Pharisees 
are  inflamed  with  more  undisguised  hatred  against  Him  (vers.  40-53). 

Second  Year  of  our  Lord's  Ministry. 

Chaps,  vii. — ix. — Probable  position  in  Synoptic  narrative :  follows  Matt, 
xviii.  21-35 ;  Markix.  49,  50  ;  Luke  x.  17  et  seq. 

Time.— Feast  of  tabernacles,  Tisri  (September — October),  a.u.c.  782,  a.d.  29. 

CHAPTER  VII. 
EXPLANATORY  AND  CELTIC AL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Jewry.—  I.e.  Judasa.     Kill  Him.— See  v.  18. 

Ver.  2.  Feast  of  tabernacles. — Fifteenth  day  of  seventh  month,  Tisri  (September — October). 
See  Homiletic  Notes  on  vers.  37-40  ;  and  viii.  12. 

Ver.  3.  His  brethren. — See  ii.  12.  But  see  also  Lightfoot  on  Galatians;  and  Homiletic 
Note  below.  "  Thy  disciples  "  seems  to  have  especial  reference  to  the  "  disciples  "  which  had 
gathered  round  the  Lord  in  Judasa  (iv.  1). 

Ver.  4.  Show  Thyself  to  the  world. — The  meaning  of  the  verse  is  that  the  Messianic  claims 
of  our  Lord  could  not  be  confirmed  and  established  in  rural  Galilee,  which  was,  as  it  might 
be  said,  "  out  of  the  world."  He  did  not  Himself  manifest  any  desire  to  remain  unknown  ; 
on  the  contrary,  He  in  a  very  special  sense  seemed  to  desire  to  make  Himself  known  publicly, 
and  to  communicate  His  teaching  openly  ("  iv  irapprjaig,  means  here  •  in  public,'  '  openly  ' "). 
And  yet  He  confined  His  activity  to  rural  Galilee,  and  in  so  doing  seemed  to  contradict 
Himself.  Jerusalem  was  the  centre,  the  world,  to  which  He  should  manifest  the  proofs  of 
His  Messiahship. 

Ver.  6.  My  time  (6  Kcupos  6  e>6s,  My  season)  is  not  yet  come. — The  time  for  His  revelation 
of  Himself  as  the  Messiah,  the  true  King  of  Israel.  That  time  would  come,  when  in  the  depth 
of  His  humiliation  He  would  reveal  His  glory  (xii.  12-16,  23-33,  xix.  14-19,  etc.) ;  it  was  present 
to  His  mind  even  then,  as  we  see  from  ver.  7,  "  Me  the  world  hateth."  Your  time,  etc. — As 
His  course  was  already  determined,  He  waited  for  that  appointed  time.  There  was,  however, 
no  such  set  time  for  His  brethren.  They  were  then  in  harmony  with  the  world,  and  at  any 
time  could  show  themselves  in  the  world  without  drawing  down  on  themselves  its  wrath  and 
resentment  (ver.  7,  "The  world  cannot  hate  you  ").  "  They  who  are  friends  of  the  world  are 
never  out  of  season.  Their  season  lasts  as  long  as  the  world  lasts.  But  when  the  fashion 
of  this  world  has  passed  away,  then  they  will  be  out  of  season,  and  then  will  be  the  season 
of  Christ  and  all  His  true  disciples.  Their  harvest  is  the  end  of  the  world  (Matt.  xiii.  39)  " 
(Wordsworth's  Greek  Testament). 

200 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.         chap,  vil 


Ver.  7.  He  made  known  to  the  world  its  true  nature,  unmasked  it  and  revealed  it  plainly 
(viii.  42-44;  Matt,  xxiii.  13-36). 

Ver.  8.  Go  ye  up  unto  this  feast. — With  your  present  thoughts  and  feelings,  you  may  indeed 
go  up  with  your  fellow-countrymen  who  are  like-minded.  I  go  not  yet  up,  etc. — The  read- 
ing here  is  doubtful :  X,  D,  K,  M,  etc.,  and  several  ancient  versions,  Tischenclorf  and  Tregelles 
read  ovk,  whilst  oOttoo  is  the  reading  of  B,  L,  T,  X,  etc.,  the  Syriac  version,  etc.  If  ovk  be 
the  reading  preferred,  the  meaning  will  be,  I  do  not  go  up  as  tne  pilgrim  bands  do  to  keep 
this  feast.  For  My  time,  etc. — "The  feast  of  tabernacles  was  a  festival  of  peculiar  joy  for 
work  accomplished.     At  such  a  feast  Christ  had  now  no  place  "  ( Westcott). 

Ver.  9.  He  abode  in  Galilee.— He  remained  in  Galilee  for  some  days  after  the  departure  of 
His  brethen.  They  probably  took  the  longer  route,  east  of  the  Jordan,  whilst  our  Lord 
Himself  might  take  the  shorter  route,  through  Samaria.  So  that  He  delayed  following 
them  during  the  greater  part  of  a  week. 

Ver.  10.  Not  openly. — He  did  not  evidently  go  up  to  keep  the  feast,  for  He  was  not  present 
on  the  day  of  Holy  Convocation  (15th  Tisri).  He  went  up  quietly.  He  did  not  wish  to  force 
on  the  inevitable  contest,  in  mercy  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  House  of  Israel  (Matt,  xxiii. 
37-39).  For  this  reason,  and  to  avoid  any  appearance  of  desiring  that  His  followers  should 
carry  out  their  intention  of  making  Him  an  earthly  King,  He  went  up  to  Jerusalem  as  a 
humble  wayfarer.  The  supposition  advanced  by  Wieseler  and  others  that  this  journey  is  to 
be  identified  with  that  recorded  in  Luke  ix.  51-62  cannot  be  entertained.  The  latter  journey 
could  in  no  way  be  described  as  going  up  "  in  secret."     See  also  Luke  x.  1-16,  etc. 

Ver.  11.  The  Jews,  etc. — His  enemies  were  apparently  looking  for  His  appearance.  Where 
is  He  %—  eKelvos  =  that  one,  fellow.  The  expression  half  displays  their  enmity.  No  doubt 
there  were  others  anxious,  others  curious,  to  see  the  renowned  teacher. 

Ver.  12.  The  people.— Multitudes  (6^X01) .  The  mass  of  the  people  as  distinguished  from  the 
ruling  classes.  Among  these  multitudes  were  included  the  crowds  of  Galilean  pilgrims. 
Murmuring  (yoyyvo~fi6s). — "  Speech  not  venturing  to  break  forth."  The  scene  called  up  is  that 
of  knots  of  the  people  speaking  to  each  other  in  low,  confidential  tones.  And  this  murmuring 
revealed  two  classes  :  the  one  friendly,  whose  candid  minds  were  impressed  by  the  evidences 
of  Christ's  truth  and  goodness  of  character ;  the  other  hostile,  probably  a  class  of  superior 
people  who  looked  down  on  the  multitude.  It.  was  perhaps  the  more  cultured  townsmen  who 
held  the  hostile  view.  And  in  any  case  (ver.  13)  all  parties  waited  to  see  what  the  Jewish 
authorities  would  do. 

Ver.  14.  Now  about  the  midst,  etc. — The  middle  of  the  feast,  or  "  the  lesser  feast."  It  was 
the  fourth  day  of  the  feast  most  likely.  Taught. — For  the  first  time  (of  which  mention  is 
made,  but  see  ii.  13-25)  openly  in  the  temple.  The  excitement  caused  by  His  non-appearance 
at  the  beginning  of  the  feast  had  died  away  ;  and  the  ruling  powers  seem  to  have  taken  no 
concerted  action  against  Him. 

Ver.  ]5.  Letters. — I.e.  He  showed  Himself  to  be  w^ell  acquainted  with  the  rabbinical 
learning  and  literary  methods,  and  yet  He  had  not  studied  in  any  of  their  schools.  This 
fact  might  surely  have  led  them  to  make  a  dispassionate  inquiry  regarding  Him. 

Ver.  16.  Doctrine. — Sfiaxn,  teaching. 

Ver.  17.  If  any  man,  etc.  (idv  ra  64\y  rb  deX-rj/xa  clvtov  noieiv). — If  any  man  willeth  to  do 
His  will— i  e.  not  only  desires,  but  makes  a  distinct  voluntary  effort — seriously  endeavours  to 
do  the  will  of  God. 

Ver.  18.  He  that  speaketh,  etc. — The  Jewish  teachers  had  always  in  view  for  the  most 
part  their  own  glory  and  aggrandisement.  This,  and  not  doing  the  divine  will,  was  their 
ruling  motive.  But  our  Lord  never  dissociated  Himself  from  His  Father.  He  never  swerved 
from  that  highest  aim  in  the  universe — the  divine  will  and  the  divine  glory.  His  works, 
His  teaching,  proved  that,  and  demonstrated  His  truth  and  righteousness.  Thus  all  their 
charges  against  Him  fell  to  the  ground  (ver.  12). 

Ver.  19.  They  professed  to  be  jealous  for  the  law,  and  yet  they  broke  one  of  its  cardinal 
statutes. 

Ver.  20.  The  people. — The  multitude  (6  6'xXos).  The  mass  of  the  people,  especially  those  from 
Galilee  and  the  provinces,  did  not  know  of  the  designs  of  the  rulers  against  Jesus.  The 
people  of  the  city,  however,  seem  to  have  been  cognisant  of  the  fact  (ver.  25). 

Ver.  21.  One  work  (eV  ipyoy). — Our  Lord  did  not  notice  the  unseemly  interruption  of  the 
"  people,"  as  He  knew  it  was  made  in  haste  and  ignorance.  But  He  continued  His  argument 
to  bring  home  to  them  the  inconsistency  of  their  conduct,  at  the  same  time  thus  indirectly 
replying  to  the  charge  in  ver.  20.  He  had  done  one  work  at  which  they  were  indignantly 
surprised,  at  which  they  marvelled — i.e.  the  healing  of  the  impotent  man  on  the  Sabbath 
day  (v.  1  seq.) — and  that  not  because  He  healed  the  man,  but  that  He  did  so  on  the  Sabbath. 
He  therefore  proceeded  to  point  out  (ver.  22)  that  they  on  the  Sabbath  "violated"  the 
Sabbath  law,  or  set  it  aside,  when  they  circumcised  children  on  that  day.  (Therefore  [on 
this  account],  5ta  tovto,  belongs  to  ver.  21,  Ye  all  marvel  on  this  account.)  Moses  gave 
the  Sabbath  law ;  but  it  was  he  also  who  was  commanded  to  ordain  that  circumcision, 

201 


chap.  vii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


which  was  a  patriarchal  rite,  should  be  performed  on  the  eighth  day  even  when  that  day  was 
a  Sabbath.  "  Moses  himself  acknowledged  even  a  ceremonial  (how  much  more  a  moral  1) 
commandment  (that  of  Circumcision)  to  be  superior  to  the  law  of  the  Sabbath  as  those  Jews 
understood  it,  .  .  .  and  I  have  done  something  superior  and  better  than  Circumcision,  i.e.  I 
have  made  a  man  every  whit  whole  "  (Wordsworth's  Greek  Testament). 

Ver.  23.  Circumcision. — "  Circumcision  makes  the  Sabbath  give  way,"  said  the  Rabbis. 
For  circumcision  is  the  sign  of  the  covenant  of  promise  which  precedes  the  law.  "  By  means 
of  circumcision  the  man  is  received  into  that  covenant  within  which  alone  the  blessing  of 
the  Sabbath  rest  can  be  imparted  to  him  "  (Besser).  The  law  of  Moses  might  not  be  broken. 
— The  rite  of  circumcision  (Gen.  xvii.  12)  was  incorporated  by  Moses,  or  rather  given  its  due 
place,  in  his  economy  (Lev.  xii.  3).  Are  ye  angry,  etc. — "I  healed  the  whole  man,  not  only 
a  part ;  whereas  circumcision  inflicts  a  wound.  And  that  is  to  be  performed  on  the  Sabbath. 
Which  work  is  the  more  sabbatical  of  the  two  ? "  (Wordsworth's  Greek  Testament).  The 
reference  is  evidently  to  the  idea  of  the  cleansing  and  consecration  symbolised  by  circum- 
cision, contrasted  with  the  complete  healing  of  the  impotent  man. 

Ver.  24.  Judge  .  .  .  judge  (/c/nVere  .  .  .  Kpivare). — The  habit  of  hastily  and  superficially  judging 
is  condemned  strongly  by  our  Lord  (Matt.  vii.  1).  Judge  the  righteous  judgment  means,  Give 
an  honest,  straightforward  judgment  founded  on  the  truth. 

Ver.  25.  Them  of  Jerusalem. — The  Jerusalemites.  They  were  acquainted  with  the  evil 
intentions  of  the  rulers  (see  ver.  20). 

Ver.  26.  But,  lo,  He  speaketh  boldly,  etc. — The  turn  events  had  taken  surprised  them. 
Now  that  Christ  had  appeared  in  Jerusalem  the  rulers  unaccountably  left  Him  undisturbed, 
in  spite  of  former  threatenings.    Was  this  to  be  taken  to  mean  that  the  rulers  know  indeed,  etc.  1 

Ver.  27.  They  knew  something  about  the  earthly  life  of  Jesus  (Matt.  xiii.  55,  56).  The 
most  of  the  people  thought  of  Him  as  from  Nazareth.  Probably  some  of  those  in  Jerusalem 
knew  of  His  lineal  descent  from  David,  and  of  His  being  born  in  Bethlehem.  This  would 
account  for  their  falling  back  on  the  rabbinical  interpretations  of  such  passages  as  Isa.  liii., 
"  who  shall  declare  His  generation  1  "  "  Justin,  about  the  middle  of  the  second  century,  puts 
these  words  in  the  mouth  of  the  Jew  Trypho  :  The  Christ  is,  even  after  His  birth,  to  remain 
unknown,  and  not  to  know  Himself,  and  to  be  without  power,  until  Elias  appears,  anoints 
Him,  and  reveals  Him  to  all "  (Godet).  Does  not  this  idea  strangely  coincide  with  Jesus' 
hidden  life  until  His  baptism  by  John  (Elias  who  was  to  come — i.  29-34 ;  Matt.  xi.  14, 
xvii.  12)  ? 

Ver.  28.  Then  cried  Jesus,  etc. — Jesus  concedes  to  them  a  certain  degree  of  knowledge 
concerning  Him.  But  no  one  judges  a  man  merely  from  the  knowledge  of  certain  facts  of 
his  life-history.  He  must  be  judged  by  His  character,  His  true  self,  the  manifestations  of 
the  Spirit  that  is  in  Him.  Had  they  looked  with  unprejudiced  eye  on  this  revelation,  they 
must  have  known  whence  He  came  in  reality.  But  by  their  blind  unbelief  they  exemplified 
their  own  tradition  ("  No  man  knoweth,"  etc. — ver.  27).  The  reason  for  this  unbelief  lay  in 
their  misconception  of  God.  Traditionalism  and  formalism  had  shut  out  from  them  the 
true  knowledge  and  love  of  God.     Not  knowing  the  Father,  how  could  they  know  the  Son  ? 

Ver.  29.  But  I  know,  etc.— In  contrast  to  their  ignorance  is  His  knowledge.  One  in 
essence  with  the  Father,  He  is  ever  in  closest  communion  with  Him,  as  sent  by  Him. 

Ver.  30.  They  sought  to  take  Him.— The  Jews  again,  on  the  putting  forth  of  this  claim, 
tried  to  silence  Him  (vers.  25,  26).  But  no  one  laid  hands,  etc. — Considerations  of  prudence 
(Mark  xi.  32),  and  perhaps  also  qualms  of  conscience,  withheld  them.  But  doubtless  also 
a  higher  Power  restrained  them.  His  hour,  etc. — "  It  was  not  His  will  to  be  then  taken. 
Our  hour  is  His  will :  what  is  His  hour  but  His  own  will  ?  He  means  the  time  when  He 
deigned  to  be  slain — not  any  time  when  He  was  compelled  to  die  "  (Aug.  in  Wordsworth). 

Ver.  31.  The  facts  mentioned  in  ver.  30,  and  our  Lord's  calm  assertion  of  His  origin, 
backed  by  His  miracles,  led  many  to  advance  from  the  position  they  took  up  earlier  to  an 
approximation  to  belief  in  Him  as  the  Messiah. 

Ver.  32.  Murmured. — Our  Lord's  appearance  at  the  feast  had  aroused  more  keenly  the 
undercurrent  of  excitement  among  the  multitudes  described  in  ver.  12.  The  Pharisees  and 
chief  priests,  etc. — The  Sanhedrin  is  meant  probably.  Here  those,  many  of  whom  were 
mutually  inimical — Sadducees  and  Pharisees — are  seen  uniting  against  a  supposed  common 
danger.  The  chief  priests  were  those  who  had  held  the  highest  office  in  the  priesthood, 
and  also,  it  may  be,  the  chief  members  of  priestly  families. 

Vers.  33,  34.  Yet  a  little  while,  etc. — A  time — although  short — was  to  be  granted  to  them 
for  repentance.  Ye  shall  seek  Me,  etc. — The  time  was  near  when  He  should  withdraw  to 
His  Father ;  and  then  their  time  of  grace  would  be  past  (Luke  xix.  42 ;  Matt,  xxiii.  39), 
and  their  long,  dreary  search  for  Him,  which  still  continues  to  this  hour,  would  begin. 

Vers.  35,  36.  Whither  will  He  (this  man,  oSros)  go,  etc.  The  dispersed  among  the  Gentiles 
(Greeks — ij  diaenropa  tuv  "EtW-qvuv)  were  those  Jews  who  were  scattered  among  Greek- 
speaking  peoples,  e.g.  in  Alexandria,  Antioch,  etc.  The  Palestinian  Jews  looked  down  to 
some  extent  on  those  brethren  "scattered  abroad"  (1  Pet.  i.  1).    But  the  chief  point  in 

202 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  viL 


their  contemptuous  exclamation  lies  in  the  phrase  "  and  teach  the  Greeks."  Rejected  of  the 
Jews,  the  chosen  people:  will  this  woulci-be  Messiah  make  the  dispersion  a  means  of 
gaining  the  Gentiles  as  His  disciples  ?  Their  incredulous  question,  however,  received  after- 
ward an  affirmative  answer  (Acts  xiii.  46,  xxvi.  18,  20).     (See  Westcott,  etc.) 

Ver.  38.  As  the  Scripture  hath  said,  etc. — The  general  sense  of  many  passages  is  here 
crystallised  in  this  expression  :  see  Joel  iii.  18 ;  Zech.  xiv.  8 ;  Ezek.  xlvii.  1-12.  The  latter 
passage  especially  is  parallel  to  this  thought.  As  the  spiritual  temple,  of  which  Christ  is 
the  chief  corner-stone,  is  composed  of  "  living  stones "  (1  Pet.  ii.  4-9),  so  from  each 
believer  flows  the  heavenly  stream.  Belly. — /coiXta  =  from  within  him  (^qd,  comp. 
Exod.  xvii.  6  and  Num.  xx.  11).     (See  Reynolds,  etc.) 

Ver.  39.  But  this  spake  He  of  the  Spirit,  etc. —This  is  the  inspired  Evangelist's  interpreta- 
tion of  our  Lord's  words  in  ver.  38  ;  and  they  are  by  him  referred  to  the  pentecostal 
outpouring  of  the  Spirit.  (Holy)  Spirit  not  yet  (given),  etc. — The  words  lioly  and  given  are 
omitted  by  many  of  the  best  authorities ;  but  the  sense  of  the  passage  is  not  thereby  altered. 

Ver.  40.  People. — Multitude,  the  general  body  of  the  people  (see  ver.  20).  When  they  heard 
this  saying,  or  these  words  (aKovo-avres  tQv  \6ycov). — The  phrase  indicates  all  the  utterances 
of  Jesus  at  the  festival.  The  Prophet  predicted  of  old  (Deut.  xviii.  15),  whom  God  had 
promised  to  raise  up  to  them  (Acts  iii.  22).     See  also  notes  on  i.  21  and  vi.  14. 

Vers.  41,  42.  The  Christ. — Hearts  open  to  the  truth  were  convinced  and  confessed  Him. 
But  some  said,  etc. — These  were  unlike  the  guileless  Nathanael  (i.  46-49).  He  asked  when 
first  told  of  Jesus,  "  Can  any  good  thing  (above  all  the  Messiah,  he  meant)  come  out  of 
Nazareth."  But  he  soon  learned  to  think  otherwise.  These  objectors  could  have  inquired 
into  the  truth  regarding  Christ's  earthly  lineage,  and  the  place  of  His  birth  (Mic.  v.  2) ; 
but,  unlike  Nathanael,  they  did  not  care  to  do  so.  The  prophetic  promise  concerning  Galilee 
(Isa.  ix.  1)  would  have  given  the  light  had  they  desired  to  have  it.  Baur,  De  Wette,  and 
others  seek  to  prove  that  John  was  ignorant  that  Jesus  was  born  at  Bethlehem.  But  had 
John  not  known  this  fact,  he  would  in  some  way  have  endeavoured  to  meet  the  objection. 
He  assumes  the  fact,  which  the  Synoptic  Gospels  had  already  made  known. 

Ver.  44. — The  opposing  party  were  divided  in  their  counsels.  Some  would  have  let 
matters  rest ;  others  were  for  immediate  hostile  action.  They  were  again,  however,  restrained 
(ver.  30). 

Vers.  45,  46.  The  officers,  etc.  (ver.  32). — They  had  been  sent  with  a  strict  injunction  to 
lay  hold  of  Jesus.  An  opportunity  did  not  at  once  present  itself,  and  while  they  waited 
they  came  under  the  spell  of  Christ's  teaching,  and  to  the  chagrin  of  their  superiors  had  to 
confess,  "  Never  man  spake  like  this  man." 

Vers.  47-49.  Then  answered,  etc. — In  those  short,  sharp  sentences  the  chagrin  and  anger 
of  the  rulers  come  vividly  before  us.  Have  any  of  the  rulers  ?  etc. — In  their  wrath  they 
made  too  sweeping  a  statement.  Rulers,  etc.,  had  believed,  as  they  would  soon  learn  (ver.  50 : 
see  also  xii.  42).  This  people  .  .  .  accursed. — Unlearned  and  simple  men  were  treated  with 
great  scorn  by  the  Rabbis.  The  unlearned  they  called  vermin,  or  am  haaretz  (people  of 
the  earth,  a-iarr  ds).  Notice  the  calm  assumption  of  their  own  superiority,  it  might  almost 
be  said  infallibility. 

Ver.  50.  Nicodemus,  ...  he  that  came  to  Him  formerly  (6  ekduv  irpbs  avrbv  irpSrepov,  with 
B,  L,  T,  etc.),  being  one  of  them. — Here  their  own  question  (ver.  48)  is  answeied. 

Ver.  51.  Doth  our  law  judge  ?  etc. — Nicodemus  turns  their  charge  in  ver.  49  against  them- 
selves. If  ever  they  knew  the  law,  they  were  forgetting  and  breaking  it  in  their  blind  anger 
(see  Deut.  i.  16,  17,  xix.  15;  Exod.  xxiii.  1,  etc.).  Hear  him. — "  Hear  the  causes  between 
your  brethren,"  etc.  (Deut.  i.  16). 

Ver.  52.  They  answered,  etc. — They  could  not  really  answer,  and  flung  a  taunt  at 
Nicodemus  instead.  Abuse,  they  hope,  will  serve  for  reasoning.  Search,  etc. — Did  they 
forget  Jonah,  Nahum,  Hosea,  Elisha  (2  Kings  xiv.  25  ;  1  Kings  xix.  16)  ?  And  was  it 
not  foretold  that  in  the  latter  times  God  would  make  glorious  the  land  of  Zebulun  and  the 
land  of  Naphtali,  etc.  (Isa.  ix.  1,  2)  ?  The  New  Testament  "  prophets "  indeed  were  all 
Galileans  (see  vi.  71). 

Ver.  53.  This  verse  is  the  beginning  of  the  section  viii.  1-12,  which  see. 


MAIN'  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—13. 

Jesus'  action  in  view  of  the  hatred  of  the  world. — About  six  months  had  passed 
since  the  discourse  at  Capernaum,  following  on  the  miracle  of  feeding  the  five 
thousand.  The  green  grass  on  Galilean  hillsides  was  withered,  and  the  flowers 
of  spring  and  early  summer  had  faded.  When  this  chapter  opens  the  fields  had 
been  reaped,  the  fruits  gathered  in,  and  the  people  were  preparing  for  the  joyous 

203 


chap.  vn.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


feast  of  tabernacles.  The  "  brethren  of  our  Lord,"  before  setting  out,  urged 
Him  to  go  up  and  manifest  Himself  by  mighty  works  to  His  disciples  at 
Jerusalem,  i.e.  to  those  in  Judsea  and  Jerusalem  who  believed  in  Him,  and  those 
who  had  gone  up  from  Galilee,  including  probably  some  of  the  twelve.  Our 
Lord,  however,  refused  to  go  up  publicly  to  the  feast,  remaining  after  His 
brethren  some  days,  and  then  going  up  privately,  reaching  Jerusalem  about 
three  days  from  the  close  of  the  festival.  In  declaring  His  intention  of  not 
going  up  publicly  He  gave  reasons  why  He  did  not  do  so — did  not,  at  that  special 
time,  reveal  Himself  and  show  forth  His  glory.     These  reasons  were — 

I.  The  hatred  and  unbelief  of  the  world. — 1.  As  the  grass  and  flowers  on 
the  Galilean  hillsides  had  withered,  so  the  faith  of  many  who  had  at  first 
followed  the  Redeemer  was  now  withered  and  dead  (vi.  66).  Even  in  Galilee, 
where  there  was  less  direct  opposition  to  Him,  unbelief  and  indifference  were 
reigning.  His  own  brethren,  also,  were  among  the  unfaithful  multitude. 
2.  But,  sad  as  was  the  outlook  in  Galilee,  it  was  worse  in  Jewry.  Malignant 
hatred  in  Judaea  was  on  the  watch  for  His  life ;  and  had  He  gone  up  publicly  at 
that  time,  raising  expectations  in  some  hearts  of  further  and  fuller  revelations, 
this  would  have  tended,  in  all  likelihood,  to  bring  the  hatred  of  the  rulers  to  a 
point,  and  thus  hinder  the  work  He  had  yet  to  do,  and  the  further  revelations 
of  His  glory  which  were  yet  to  take  place.  3.  It  was  the  hatred  of  the  world 
to  the  truth,  and  to  Christ  as  the  King  of  truth,  which  hindered  His  life  from 
shining  out  then  in  all  its  beauty  and  power  to  become  the  light  of  men  (i.  4,  5). 
Our  Lord  was  no  exception  ;  it  has  ever  been  so.  But  just  as  His  life  was  so 
heavenly  pure,  and,  by  contrast,  what  was  evil  so  plainly  revealed,  and  those 
who  were  evil  so  startled  by  the  opposition,  so  was  the  evil  world's  hatred  of 
Him  more  malignant.  4.  But  as  it  was  with  Him  who  was  the  Truth,  so  it  has 
been  at  all  times,  and  will  be  to  the  end.  In  Attica,  reputed  wise,  they  con- 
demned their  Socrates  and  honoured  their  Anytus.  And  thus,  in  greater 
or  less  degree,  is  it  still  (Matt.  v.  10-12).  5.  To  reveal  Himself  fully  to  that 
world  would  have  only  led  to  their  greater  condemnation.  All  too  soon  would  they 
reject  Him  and  desire  a  murderer  to  be  granted  unto  them  (Acts  iii.  14). 

II.  His  time  was  not  yet  come. — 1.  There  was  a  divine  plan  in  the  life  of 
Jesus   on   earth,   regulating,   it  would  appear,   all   His  movements  (see  ii.  4). 

2.  And  at  that  period  the  time  for  a  festive  entry  into  Jerusalem  (which 
probably  would  have  been  attempted,  by  over-zealous  and  mistaken  followers,  at 
the  joyous  festival  of  tabernacles)  had  not  arrived.  For  that  festive  entry 
would  be  but  the  prelude  to  the  suffering  of  the    Via  Dolorosa  (xii.  12  seq.). 

3.  On  the  other  hand,  the  time  of  His  brethren  was  always  ready.  They  had 
not  to  oppose  the  world, — neither  its  active  hostility  nor  the  perverted  loyalty  of 
worldly-minded  and  mistaken  followers.  4.  There  was  no  intention  on  the  part 
of  Jesus  to  draw  back  from  the  goal  which  lay  before  Him.  It  was  in  mercy  to 
the  world,  in  order  that  He  might  yet  plead  with  "  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house 
of  Israel,"  and  show  them  unmistakable  proofs  of  His  loving  patience  and  long- 
suffering  (Matt,  xxiii.  37-39),  and  further  proofs  of  His  glory  as  the  incarnate 
Son.  (ix.  1-7,  xi.  38-45). 

III.  His  manifestation  of  Himself  "  was  not  with  ostentation." — 1.  His 
brethren  did  not  then  believe  in  Him  (but  see  Acts  i.  14).  They  were,  in  all 
likelihood,  puzzled  to  account  for  His  action,  and,  it  may  be,  desired  that  things 
should  be  brought  to  a  head,  that  He  should  permit  Himself  to  be  declared  a 
King.  Thus  they  showed  their  unbelief,  their  inability  to  realise  His  Messianic 
mission.  Their  reproachful  invitation  was  a  repetition  of  the  tempter's  wiles 
(Luke  iv.  13).  2.  His  brethren  and  His  followers  had  to  learn  that  it  was  not 
with  outward  pomp  that  He  would  manifest  Himself.  Truth  does  not  need  to 
blow  trumpets  (or  engage  others  to  do  so)  in  the  synagogues  or  at  the  corners  of 

204 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN.  chap.  vii. 


the  streets  (Matt.  vi.  1-5).  And  the  King  of  truth  needed  not  ostentatiously  to 
display  Himself.  Time  and  eternity  are  on  the  side  of  His  kingdom,  which 
advances  by  a  silent,  often  unnoticed,  development  in  the  hearts  of  men. 
3.  And  just  as  the  King  of  truth,  when  He,  hanging  a  dying  victim  on  the 
cross  of  shame,  seemed  utterly  defeated,  was  then  on  the  eve  of  victory,  so 
when  His  kingdom  may  seem  well-nigh  broken  up  will  it  rise  in  its  grandeur 
and  overcome.  Magna  est  Veritas  et  prailavebit.  Have  men,  even  in  Christian 
lands,  still  to  learn  this  lesson  after  the  experience  of  centuries  ?  What,  at  all 
events,  does  political  and  other  chicanery  mean  1 

Vers.  3-5.  The  unbelief  of  Christ's  brethren. — Whatever  we  hold  to  have  been 
their  actual  relationship  to  Jesus  according  to  the  flesh  (see  Homiletic  Notes),  at 
all  events  these  brethren  were  near  kinsmen  of  the  Son  of  man.  But  like  their 
Galilean  compatriots — even  those  to  whom  Jesus  was  best  known — they  did  not 
understand  the  Saviour,  did  not  comprehend  the  scope  and  purpose  of  His 
teaching  and  working.  Thus  they  lacked  belief  in  the  truth  that  He  was  to 
set  up  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  mention  of  this  interesting  fact  by  St.  John 
only  shows  his  close  relationship  with  the  Saviour.  He  was  the  beloved  disciple 
(xiii.  23).  To  His  care  Jesus,  while  on  the  cross,  committed  His  mother 
(xix.  26,  27).  And  probably  we  owe  some  interesting  details  in  this  Gospel  to 
this  affecting  fact. 

I.  The  unbelief  of  our  Lord's  brethren  was  due  to  misconceptions. — 1.  It 

was  not  manifested  in  hatred,  like  the  unbelief  of  the  Jewish  rulers,  Pharisees, 
etc.  There  is  nothing  in  the  gospel  narrative  to  show  that  they  were  inimical 
to  Him  ;  rather  from  the  scattered  notices  we  may  think  they  were  solicitous  for 
His  safety  (Mark  iii.  20-35  and  parallels).  2.  Nor  would  it  appear  that  their 
unbelief  was  caused  by  sheer  indifference,  like  that  of  the  dwellers  m  Capernaum, 
etc.  3.  It  was  due  rather,  as  this  passage  seems  to  show,  to  their  discontent 
with  His  action  in  not  seeking  publicly  to  gain  that  position  and  authority  which 
His  powers  entitled  Him  to,  and  which  the  people  were  willing  to  accord  Him. 
Like  the  majority  of  the  disciples,  they  would  have  liked  to  share  in  the  glory  of 
His  kingdom,  to  shine  in  the  reflected  light  of  His  fame.  "  Show  Thyself  to  the 
world  "  is  their  cry,  but  in  that  cry  our  Lord  recognised  the  tempter's  wile, 
"  Cast  Thyself  down  from  hence  "  (Luke  iv.  9-12).  4.  Thus  their  unbelief  arose 
more  from  misconceptions  of  His  work  and  kingdom  than  from  any  other  cause. 
Like  the  majority  of  their  compatriots,  they  were  allured  by  the  dream  of  a 
material  kingdom  of  the  Messiah.  And  no  doubt  disappointed  hopes  and 
ambitions,  leading  to  irritable  vexation,  lurked  in  their  hearts,  making  them 
querulous  and  discontented. 

II.  Their  unbelief  passed  away  with  their  misconceptions. — 1.  The  best  of 
all  proof  that  it  did  so  is  found  in  the  fact  that  they  are  found  among  the 
members  of  the  infant  Church  after  our  Lord's  ascension,  waiting  for  "  the 
promise  of  the  Father"  (Acts  i.  4-14).  2.  Their  misconceptions  of  our  Lord's 
work  and  teaching  had  passed  away.  Christ's  wonderful  works,  and,  above  all, 
His  glorious  resurrection,  had  cleared  away  the  mists  that  obscured  their 
spiritual  vision.  And  across  the  stormy,  raging  waters  of  His  passion  had  come 
to  their  souls  also  the  cheering  message,  "  It  is  I,  be  not  afraid."  3.  Here  in 
this  narrative  they  are  like  Joseph's  brethren,  who  scoffed  at  his  dreams,  which 
they  afterward  in  act  fulfilled.  These  brethren  of  Jesus  apparently  slighted 
His  teaching  regarding  His  being  lifted  up  like  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness 
(iii.  14),  His  giving  His  flesh  for  the  life  of  the  world,  etc.  (vi.  51),  as  incom- 
prehensible, and  as  altogether  too  unworldly  and  impracticable.  And  by  their 
unbelief   they,  no   doubt,  influenced   others,    who  would    make  this  an  excuse 

205 


chap.  vii.         H0MILET1G  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


for  their  want  of  interest.     Yet  afterward  they,  on  their  part,  fulfilled  His 
prophetic  word,  "  If  I  be  lifted  up,"  etc.  (xii.  32). 

III.  Outward  union  with  Christ  is  not  always  real  and  fruitful. — 1.  The 
same  truth  meets  us  here  that  Jesus  set  forth  in  the  parable  of  the  vine,  etc. 
(xv.  1-7).  There  may  be  outward,  apparently  very  close,  relationship  with  Him, 
and  yet  the  want  of  fruit  shows  that  unbelief  is  in  some  way  interposing  to 
prevent  true  vital  union.  2.  So  there  are  many  in  full  membership  with 
Christ's  Church,  in  many  ways  friendly  to  Him  and  His  gospel,  but  who  by 
their  evident  misconceptions  of  His  kingdom  show  that  they  are  not  truly 
believing.  3.  How  many,  e.g.,  make  their  own  personal  enjoyment  of  religious 
ordinances,  etc.,  the  only  end  of  their  so-called  faith,  and  when  asked  to  aid 
in  the  extension  of  Christ's  kingdom  either  do  so  grudgingly  or  not  at  all  ! 
Missions  to  Jews  and  Gentiles — what  are  these  to  them  ?  4.  But  are  they  not 
thus  showing  themselves  like  the  brethren  of  Jesus  before  they  believed,  and 
who  evidently  thought  the  ideas  of  Jesus  regarding  the  kingdom  of  God  were 
visionary  ?  or  like  the  Jews  of  His  time,  who  instead  of  seeking  to  spread  that 
kingdom  (Ps.  lxvii.)  would  have  restricted  it  selfishly  to  themselves  ?  5.  Outward 
conformity  to  Christ  is  not  sufficient — resting  in  external  privileges  and  ordinances 
alone  is  to  want  true  faith.  Those  who  do  so  cannot  understand  Christ's  kingdom. 
Its  spiritual  laws  are  incomprehensible,  its  speech  a  shibboleth,  and  its  require- 
ments grievous  to  them.  But  they  are  not  necessarily  inimical  to  Christ.  And 
what  is  needed  is  that  the  true  members  of  His  Church,  and  especially  the 
Church's  ministers  and  office-bearers,  should  seek  to  instruct  them,  and  above  all 
should  pray  for  their  spiritual  enlightenment  through  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  the 
power  of  Christ's  risen  life  may  be  manifested  to  and  in  them  (Phil.  iii.  10). 

Vers.  10-24.  Seeking  Jesus. — The  opening  verses  of  this  section  (10-13)  show 
that  the  minds  of  men  were  much  exercised  as  to  the  person  and  work  of  Christ. 
He  had  made  a  deep  and  ineffaceable  impression.  The  absence  of  Jesus  from 
the  feast  was  speedily  remarked,  and  eager  inquiry  was  made  concerning  Him. 
The  thoughts  of  all  were  concentrated  on  Him.  The  hatred  of  the  official  class — 
though  disguised — leaks  out  in  the  expression,  u  Where  is  that  one  ? "  And 
murmurs  not  loud  but  deep  passed  from  lip  to  lip  among  the  body  of  the  people 
concerning  Him.  But  there  was  no  open  declaration  either  for  or  against  Him 
The  official  class  had  not  yet  spoken ;  and  until  they  had  decided  the  multitude 
kept  discreetly  silent.  The  power  of  the  Sanhedrin  was  great  (Acts  viii.  3), 
and  none  would  willingly  incur  the  hostility  of  those  who  possessed  so  much 
power.  Meantime  Jesus  had  gone  up  quietly,  probably  through  Samaria,  and 
appeared  in  Jerusalem  when  the  greater  festival  was  concluded.  There  He 
entered  the  temple  and  taught,  apparently  for  the  first  time,  to  the  wonder  and 
astonishment  of  the  learned  Jews  (see  note  ver.  14,  p.  201).  Such  a  teacher! 
and  yet  not  of  the  schools.     Notice  in  reference  to  this  interesting  incident — 

I.  How  the  Jews  sought  Jesus. — 1.  Here  we  have  a  variety  of  opinions 
regarding  Him.  It  was  impossible  to  be  unmoved  by  Christ's  teaching  and 
activity.  Even  His  enemies  were  astonished  at  it,  for  it  was  with  authority 
(ver.  15;  Matt.  vii.  28,  29).  He  could  not  be  ignored.  The  people  were  too 
deeply  moved  by  this  unique  and  wonderful  phenomenon.  2.  Some  expressed 
the  opinion  that  He  was  a  good,  a  true  man.  And  they  could  allege  as  confirm- 
ing their  opinions  His  holy  life  and  teaching,  and  His  mighty  works  of  beneficence. 
These  were  probably  people  who  had  nearer  knowledge  of  Him.  3.  Others, 
influenced  by  the  scarce  concealed  hostility  of  the  rulers  to  Jesus,  declared  that 
He,  instead  of  being  true,  was  indeed  an  impostor.  These  no  doubt  represent 
what  might  be  called  the  servile  element,  found  in  every  community,  who  cringe 
before  mere  authority,  and  make  it  their  law,  uninfluenced  by  the  question  of 

206 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  vii. 


right  or  wrong.  4.  Among  the  crowd  there  were  those  moved  by  bitter  hatred, 
and  others  who,  though  secretly,  were  yet  drawn  by  love  toward  the  Saviour — 
men  like  Nicodemus  and  Joseph  of  Arimathsea  (iii.  1,  xix.  36).  5.  And  all  of 
them  were  seeking  Jesus,  and  desired  to  have  Him  among  them, — those  to  carry 
out  the  evil  designs  already  formed  (ver.  16)  ;  these  to  see  if  He  might  not  be 
prevailed  on  to  yield  to  their  desire,  and  permit  Himself  to  be  declared  a  king. 
Few  there  were  who  sought  Him  as  the  Redeemer  of  men. 

II.  How  men  seek  Jesus  now. —  1.  As  we  look  abroad  on  the  world  to-day, 
we  find  the  same  divided  sentiments  regarding  the  Saviour  everywhere  expressed. 
There  is  no  question  more  profoundly  discussed  than  just  this  :  "  Where  is  He  ?  " 
What  is  His  place  in  history  ?  What  is  His  position  in  the  scale  of  being  ?  Is 
He  in  reality  what  He  claimed  to  be?  or  is  the  story  of  His  life  entirely 
mythical,  and  His  gospel  a  delusion  ?  But,  whatever  position  be  taken  up,  there 
is  no  escape  from  the  necessity  of  deciding  one  way  or  other  concerning  Him. 
2.  There  are  those  who  continue  the  bitter  enmity  and  hatred  of  the  Jews,  not  only 
among  bigoted  descendants  of  those  unhappy  men,  but  among  the  secularist  and 
atheistic  communities  who  would  fain  see  His  religion  abolished  and  forgotten — the 
darkness  inimical  to  the  light.  3.  There  are  these  who  would  write  imposture 
on  the  history  in  which  His  holy  life  and  atoning  death  are  recorded,  and  others 
who,  while  admitting  that  the  narratives  do  with  more  or  less  veracity  present 
us  with  the  record  of  a  true  and  noble  life,  affirm  that  it  is  the  life  of  a  good  man, 
and  nothing  more ;  whilst  there  are  also  a  large  number  practically  indifferent 
as  to  the  opinion  they  entertain,  and  who  are  swayed  by  what  seems  the  authority 
of  the  hour.  4.  But  whilst  there  are  still  many  of  all  these  classes,  they  are 
now  relatively  in  the  minority  wherever  the  gospel  of  Christ  is  widely  known. 
The  disciples  of  Jesus  have  marvellously  increased  in  numbers,  and  are  no  more 
secret  followers,  although  among  heathen  communities  this  class  is  still  largely 
represented.  5.  Now  the  erewhile  despised  Nazarene  is  chief  ruler  in  the 
world.  No  kingdom  is  so  powerful  as  His — no  other  power  is  so  extended — no 
other  influence  is  so  gracious  and  benignant.  And  millions  untold  have  since 
learned  the  truth  of  His  words  :  "  If  any  man  will  to  do  His  will,"  etc.  (ver.  17). 

III.  Seek  Him. — Let  us  seek  Him  in  earnest ;  and  as  the  feast  of  tabernacles 
may  be  said  to  have  been  typical  of  His  incarnation,  so  life  will  be  to  us  a  feast 
of  tabernacles,  when  He  will  be  manifested  in  us,  the  hope  of  glory  (Col.  i.  27), 
earnest  and  promise  of  the  time  for  which  His  Church  is  longing  and  praying 
(Rev.  xxii.  20),  "  when  God  will  dwell  with  men,"  etc.  (Rev.  xxi.  3;  John  xvii.  24). 


HOMILETIC  NOTES. 

Ver.  12.  The  multitudes  murmured.  be  prepared  to  bear  the  hatred  of  the 

— There  will  be  no  end  of  such  mur-  world. — Dietrich. 
muring  among  the  multitudes  of  those 

who  are  superficial,  who  conform  them-  Ver.   14.    Supposing  the  o-KrjvoTrrjyia, 

selves  to  this  world  only  and  fear  men.  or  feast  of  tabernacles,  to  be  typical 

Some   will    praise   Christianity   as    a  of  our  Lord's  incarnation  and  sojourn 

whole,    without    actually   having   any  in  this  world,  we  may  see  thence  some 

real  part  or  lot  in  it ;    whilst  others  fresh  light  reflected  on  the  incidents  of 

will  protest  against  it.      Both,    how-  this  chapter.      Our  Lord   went  up  to 

ever,  know  little  about  it.    Even  whilst  this  feast  (ver.  10),  not  openly,  but  as 

the   former   class   accord   praise,  it  is  it   were  in   secret.      His  nativity   was 

simply  in  ignorance  of  it.     But  those  private,  in  a  poor  inn.      He  spent  a 

who  have  really  experienced  what   it  great  part  of  His  life  in  obscurity  at 

is,  and  then  undertake  to  praise,  must  Nazareth.  ..."  He  abode  in  Galilee." 

207 


CHAP.   VII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


But  when  His  time  was  come,  He  went 
up  and  taught  publicly  at  Jerusalem, 
in  the  temple  (see  Luke  xix.  47,  xxi.  37, 
xxii.  53). —  Wordsworth's  "  Greek  Testa- 
ment." 

Ver.  15.  Our  Lord  spoke  with  power, 
so  that  even  His  adversaries  were  com- 
pelled to  admit  the  influence  of  His 
teaching.  But  as  they  did  not  desire 
to   do  the  divine   will    (ver.   17),  the 


voice  of  truth,  to  which  their  con- 
sciences bare  witness,  spoke  in  vain  to 
them.  So  did  they  reject  afterward 
the  testimony  of  our  Lord's  inspired 
apostles  (Acts  iv.  2,  13).  Class  pre- 
judice and  official  intolerance  and 
superciliousness  helped  to  cloud  their 
judgment,  as  they  often  do  among 
men,  especially  in  questions  regarding 
religion. 


ILLUSTRATION. 


Ver.  11.  Seeking  in  vain. — But  even  in  that; 
hour  of  peril  He  thinks  less  of  Himself  than 
of  men,  and  turns  to  these  listeners  with: 
almost  a  wail  of  sad  forecast,  through  which; 
the  tone  of  beseeching  is  heard.  The  incar- 
nate Wisdom  laments  even  while  He  foretells, 
as  did  the  personified  Wisdom  in  the  Book  of 
Proverbs  :  "  They  shall  seek  Me  diligently, 
but  they  shall  not  find  Me."  The  sad  pro- 
phecy (of  ver.  34)  does  not  refer  to  penitence, 
but  to  the  vain  longings  and  futile  seekings 
which  have  been  that  strange  nation's  bitter 
food  ever  since.  The  whole  tragedy  of  its  his- 
tory is  condensed  into  a  sentence.  Like  all 
prophetic  threatenings,  it  was  said  that  it 
might  not  have  to  be  experienced,  and  mercy 
shaped  His  lips  to  stern  speech.   Why  would 


their  seeking  be  vain  ?  Because  they  had 
onot  the  conditions  needful  for  that  place  and 
estate  of  communion  with  the  Father  whither 
He  was  goiDg  and  to  which  He  can  lead  any 
<of  us.  Earthly-mindedness  shuts  us  out 
ifrom  heaven  and  from  finding  Christ  here. 
If  we  are  to  be  with  Him  there,  we  must 
have  sought  Him  here,  with  that  true  desire 
and  seeking  which  ever  finds.  Mark  that 
He  "  is,"  even  when  on  earth,  where  He  goes 
when  He  leaves  earth.  Mark,  too,  the  tone 
of  invitation  to  make  the  best  use  of  the 
"  little  while."  Conscious  security  till  His 
work  is  done,  prophetic  warning  and  loving 
call  to  present  faith,  are  all  contained  in 
these  words. — Dr.  A.  Maclaren. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  14—40. 

Vers.  14-31.  The  divine  authority  of  Christ's  teaching  and  working. — Our  Lord's 
teaching  not  only  astonished  the  unlearned  multitudes  (Matt.  vii.  28,  29),  but  also 
filled  the  accredited  teachers  of  Israel  with  amazement.  He  had  not  appeared  in 
the  temple  before  as  a  teacher.  He  had,  it  is  true,  stood  once  as  a  lad  of  twelve  in 
those  sacred  precincts  among  the  doctors  of  the  law,  ''hearing  them,  and  asking 
them  questions  "  (Luke  ii.  46).  Did  any  of  them  remember  the  wonderful  child  ? 
and  had  any  hopes  been  then  awakened  that  He  might  come  forth  as  leader  of 
the  nation  ?  and  did  those  hopes  lead  to  all  those  endeavours,  from  the  Temptation 
onward,  to  entice  Him  to  become  a  prophet  after  their  own  hearts  ?  It  may 
have  been,  for  Jesus  was  not  unknown  to  many  (ver.  27,  vi.  42).  But  now  that 
He  came  into  the  temple  as  a  teacher  of  righteousness,  although  they  marvelled, 
they  would  not  listen  sincerely ;  and  tieir  emphasis  on  the  fact  that  Jesus  had 
not  been  trained  in  the  schools  as  a  te  icher  was  perhaps  partly  designed  with  a 
view  to  discredit  His  teaching.  But  even  in  their  rejection  and  opposition  to  it 
they  showed  that — 

I.  Our  Lord's  teaching  was  with  authority,  because  of  its  contents  and  the 
manner  in  which  He  taught. — 1.  It  was  so  in  its  manner,  not  being  marked  by  the 
subtilties  and  conceits  of  the  rabbinical  teaching.  It  was  simple,  straightfor- 
ward, direct  from  the  heart  and  to  the  heart.  2.  He  did  not  appeal  to  select 
coteries,  to  the  learned  few ;  it  was  one  of  the  wonders  of  His  gospel  that  to 
the  poor  it  was  preached.  And  men  listened  with  eager  intentness  to  the 
sublime  thoughts  enshrined  in  allegory,  metaphor,  simile,  etc.,  and  brought  home 

208 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  vii. 


in  simple  and  telling  fashion  to  mind  and  heart.  3.  But  the  matter  of  Christ's 
teaching  also  stamped  it  with  authority.  He  did  not  "  teach  for  doctrines  the 
commandments  of  men  "  (Matt.  xv.  9).  He  taught  the  law  in  its  spiritual  fulness 
(vers.  22-24).  He  led  men  back  and  up  to  the  first  principles  of  spiritual  and 
moral  life  and  activity^  4.  But  His  teaching  was,  above  all,  distinguished  by 
the  presence  of  eternal  truth  in  it  all.  It  is  this  that  has  led  to  the  great 
teachers  of  the  race  being  remembered.  The  truth  in  their  teaching  has  kept  it 
alive  among  men.  But  in  Christ  all  the  half-truths  and  fragments  of  truth  are 
gathered  up  and  concentrated  into  one  clear,  beautiful  beam.  Thus  He  could 
say  confidently,  appealing  to  all  He  had  spoken,  "  My  doctrine  is  not  Mine,  but 
His  that  sent  Me"  (ver.  16).     But  it  is  further  declared  that — 

II.  Our  Lord's  working  was  with  authority. — 1.  It  was  evident  that  the 
miracle  wrought  on  the  impotent  man  at  Bethesda,  on  the  Lord's  former  visit 
to  Jerusalem,  had  not  been  forgotten.  The  fact  that  Jesus,  in  His  beneficent 
activity,  had  brushed  aside  impatiently  the  dust  and  cobwebs  of  tradition 
from  the  Sabbath  law  had  thoroughly  enraged  the  rulers.  For  was  not  this 
a  distinct  setting  aside  of  their  authority,  since  it  set  aside  their  teaching 
as  to  the  law  of  the  Sabbath  1  2.  But  our  Lord  showed  them  that  they  in 
reality  misinterpreted  the  law  by  their  traditions,  and  showed  them  that  even 
by  their  own  action  they  justified  what  He  had  done.  The  law  was  intended  for 
man's  welfare.  The  Sabbath  law  was  a  special  instance  of  this.  But  here  was 
a  religious  rite  with  a  great  spiritual  signification  which  was  permitted  on  the 
Sabbath  ;  "  for  the  Sabbath  yields  to  circumcision,"  said  the  Rabbis.  And  if  it 
was  thus  permissible  to  set  aside  the  Sabbath  law  so  that  he  who  was  circumcised 
might  be  admitted  into  the  ancient  covenant  with  its  rights  and  privileges, 
much  more  may  that  law  be  set  aside  when  the  healing  of  the  whole  man  is 
concerned.  Nay,  to  act  otherwise  would  be  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  the  law  of 
the  Sabbath  ;  for  "  the  Sabbath  was  made  for  man"  (Mark  ii.  27).  3.  So  ran 
our  Lord's  arguments,  and  they  were  unanswerable  (ver.  26).  Had  not  those 
leaders  been  blinded  by  prejudice  and  hatred,  they  must  have  seen  that  Christ's 
working  was  with  authority,  and  must  have  confessed  with  Nicodemus,  "  No 
man  can  do  these  miracles,"  etc.  (iii.  2). 

III.  The  causes  and  danger  of  the  rejection  of  truth. — 1.  The  prejudices  of 
the  Jews  led  them  to  shut  their  eyes  to  the  truth  of  Christ's  teaching  and  the 
evidently  divine  authority  of  His  activity ;  and  thus  pride  and  passion  led  to 
their  rejection  of  Him  who  came  to  save  them — led  them  to  indulge  in  feelings 
of  hate,  which  terminated  in  awful  transgression  of  the  law  they  professed  to 
revere  (ver.  19),  and  a  weary  curse  upon  their  race.  2.  The  same  causes  still 
are  powerful  among  men,  leading  them  to  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  the  voice  of  truth. 
The  "  idols  "  of  the  tribe  and  the  cave  still  attract  many — still  keep  many  from 
doing  homage  to  truth.  Too  many  still  continue  to  judge  according  to  the 
appearance  (ver.  24),  and  passing  by  truth,  as  she  stands  with  modest  mien  by 
the  way,  are  lured  by  and  follow  the  meretriciousness  of  error. 

Vers.  19-24.  Keeping  the  law. — The  limits  of  obedience  to  the  divine  will  are 
too  often  marked  simply  by  individual  prejudices  and  predilections.  Too  many 
are  content  with  what  is  merely  an  outward  and  formal  adhesion  to  that  will 
as  revealed,  or  written  on  the  conscience.  Too  few  strive  after  that  perfect 
righteousness  and  perfect  keeping  of  the  divine  will  manifested  by  Jesus  in  all 
His  works  and  ways. 

I.  The  observance  of  the  letter  of  the  law  was— 1.  By  the  scribes,  etc.,  con- 
sidered the  chief  end  to  be  aimed  at — the  knowledge  of  that  law  and  of  the 
traditional  interpretations  of  it.  They  followed  the  letter  and  lost  the  spirit, 
making  the  law  a  heavy  yoke,  "  in  place  of  a  delight,"  a  burden  grievous  to 

p  209 


chap.  vii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


be  borne,  instead  of  a  cause  of  joy  (Ps.  i,  2,  3,  etc.).  2.  So  do  many  nominal 
Christians  pride  themselves  on  their  knowledge  of  the  truths  of  revelation.  But 
how  many  misinterpret  them  !  how  many  are  entirely  unaffected  by  them  in  life 
and  conduct  !  (Rom.  ii.  27). 

II.  Ritual  observance  was — 1.  The  Pharisaic  method  of  keeping  God's  law  and 
doing  His  will.  Their  prayers,  almsgivings,  fastings,  tithings,  etc.,  were  to 
them  the  be-all  and  end-all  of  religion  (Luke  xviii.  12) ;  but  they  forgot  the 
weightier  matters  of  the  law  in  their  zeal  for  ritual  and  formal  devotion 
(Matt,  xxiii.  23).  2.  They  are  emulated  by  many  who  bear  the  Christian  name. 
They  are  outwardly  devout.  The  forms  and  ceremonies  of  religion  have  their 
zealous  attention.  But  these  are  all  observed  in  so  formal  and  perfunctory  a 
fashion,  without  the  heart  being  engaged,  that  the  life  is  altogether  unaffected. 
Love  does  not  rule  in  their  hearts — they  serve,  actuated  by  some  other  motive, 
superstition  or  fear.  Hence  their  religion  is  a  form  ;  and  their  so-called  religious 
and  their  secular  life  may  be  (as  it  was  in  the  case  of  the  Pharisees  in  our 
Lord's  day)  far  apart  to  outward  view,  although  in  reality  they  are  not.  A 
merely  formal  religion  is  indeed,  as  Christ  called  it,  an  hypocrisy  (Matt, 
xxiii.  24-28). 

III.  The  true  method  of  observing  the  divine  law. — 1.  We  are  not  to  bind 
ourselves  to  the  letter  merely  (2  Cor.  iii.  6),  but  to  live  according  to  the  spirit  of 
the  law.  2.  And  this  men  do  when,  following  the  precept  and  example  of  Jesus 
(Matt.  xx.  27  ;  Bom.  xiii.  10),  they  serve  in  the  spirit  of  love.  Jesus  had  shown 
those  Jews,  in  the  miracle  wrought  on  the  impotent  man,  how  "  love  is  the  ful- 
filling of  the  law."  But  their  minds  were  warped  by  prejudice,  and  their  hearts 
filled  with  hatred.  Hence  they  did  not,  could  not,  in  that  state  keep  that 
very  law  which  they  accused  our  Lord  of  breaking  (ver.  19 ;  1  John  v.  1-3). 

Ver.  17.  The  human  will. — Our  Lord  taught  His  disciples  to  pray  that  the 
Father's  will  might  be  done  on  earth  perfectly,  as  it  is  in  heaven  (Matt, 
vi.  10) ;  for  that  will  is  the  peace  of  earth,  as  it  is  of  heaven. 

"  Thus  of  life's  '  essence '  'tis  in  this  blest  home 
To  be  conformed  to  the  will  divine, 
Whereby  our  wills  one  with  His  will  become. 
So  that  as  all  from  grade  to  grade  forth  shine 
Throughout  this  realm — thus  is  it  pleasing  to  all 
As  to  the  King,  to  whose  will  we  incline. 
In  His  will  is  our  peace.     Toward  it  all 
Things  haste.     It  is  the  sea  toward  which  flow 
What  it  creates  and  nature  makes." — Dante,  "  Par.?  iii.  77-87. 

There  can  be  no  nobler  effort  for  man  and  no  higher  service  than  to  know  and  do 
the  divine  will.  It  is  only  when  created  beings  live  in  harmony  with  that  will 
that  they  attain  to  highest  happiness  and  peace.  There  is  eternal  blessedness 
where  the  divine  will  expresses  itself  through  all  and  in  all,  in  love,  righteousness, 
goodness,  truth,  etc.  So  is  it  in  the  heavenly  seats ;  but  not  so  is  it  on  earth. 
From  our  Lord's  words,  therefore,  we  learn  that — 

I.  Man's  will  is  free. — 1.  Fatalism  and  necessitarianism  find  no  place  in  the 
gospel  of  Christ.  Man  is  not  there  regarded  as  a  machine,  very  wonderful 
indeed  and  moved  by  most  complex  mechanism,  but  still  a  machine  without  volition 
and  freedom  of  action.  Such  an  idea  is  opposed  to  all  human  experience,  and 
ignores  to  a  great  extent  the  facts  of  mental  experience,  of  psychology.  For  what 
does  it  virtually  amount  to  but  this— that  man  is  not  a  morally  responsible  being, 
but  a  waif  acted  upon  by  forces  external  to  himself,  without  power  of  resistance, 
like  a  leaf  hurried  helplessly  down  the  current  of  human  destiny  1  2.  But  this 
is  not  the  doctrine  of  Scripture.  It  recognises  man's  responsibility  even  without 
an  external  law  ;  for  the  law  is  (more  or  less  clearly  in  individuals)  written  on  men's 

210 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  vii. 


consciences.  And  according  to  Scripture,  u  to  him  that  knoweth  to  do  good,"  etc. 
(James  iv.  17).  Unless  this  were  so  indeed,  the  precepts  and  commands  of 
Scripture,  as  well  as  all  other  laws,  human  or  divine,  would  be  meaningless  and 
vain.  All  Scripture  precepts  and  promises  imply  man's  freedom  of  choice,  and  it 
is  plain  that  our  Lord  acted  on  this  view. 

II.  But  man's  will  is  perverted  by  sin. — 1.  This  truth  also  is  evidently 
recognised  by  our  Lord  (v.  40).  The  fact  that  men  do  not  always  choose 
what  is  right  and  good  is  not  the  result  of  their  being  necessitated  to  do  other- 
wise, but  from  the  nature  being  depraved  through  sin.  2.  This  leads  them  often 
(even  when  they  see  what  is  good,  and  are  convinced  that  it  is  for  their  best 
interests)  to  follow  what  is  evil.  "  Video  meliora  proboque  deteriora  sequor  " 
(Ovid).  The  moral  judgment  has  been  perverted,  and  the  will  so  far  weakened 
by  sin — weakened,  that  is,  on  the  side  of  good.  Hence  men  often  "  choose  the 
evil  and  reject  the  good."  3.  But  it  is  a  deliberate  choice.  They  yield  volun- 
tarily. The  voices  of  reason  and  conscience  are  frequently  deliberately  stifled  or 
disregarded.  And  although  the  right  and  good  are  recognised,  evil  is  followed. 
4.  In  doing  this  men  also  frequently  deceive  themselves  as  to  the  consequences 
of  their  action.  They  think  God  will  not  be  strict  to  reckon.  They  interpose 
good  actions,  which  they  imagine  will  wipe  out  or  balance  the  bad,  and  thus 
they  attempt  to  excuse  themselves  for  not  doing  the  divine  will.  5.  And  what 
are  the  consequences  ?  Happiness,  peace,  progress  in  good  in  any  measure  or 
fashion  ?  Let  the  history  of  those  Jewish  rulers,  among  countless  examples,  bear 
witness  ! 

III.  How  are  men  to  attain  to  the  knowledge  of  the  divine  will? — 1.  How 
are  they  to  know  what  His  will  is  amid  the  perplexities  of  life  and  the  conflict- 
ing opinions  of  men  of  "  leading,"  if  not  of  "  light  " — amid  the  strifes  of  sects  and 
apparently  irreconcilable  statements  of  doctrine  1  2.  There  is  a  talisman  which 
will  bear  us  safely  over  these  troubled  waters,  when  we  look  to  Christ's 
example  and  hear  His  word,  "  If  any  man  will  to  do  His  will,"  etc.  It  is  in 
the  yielding  up  of  our  wills  to  do  unreservedly  whatever  the  divine  will  requires, 
and  whenever  it  is  revealed,  that  our  voyage  amid  the  perplexities  of  our  time 
will  be  safe  and  certain.  3.  But  that  is  just  the  difficulty — to  yield  our  wills 
wholly  to  God — to  be  what  He  would  have  us  be,  do  what  He  would  have  vis  do, 
bear  unmurmuringly  all  He  sends  upon  us — and  to  say,  whether  in  health  or 
sickness,  in  success  or  adversity,  in  life  or  death,  as  Christ  did,  "  Not  My  will 
but  Thine  be  done."  Here  is  the  difficulty.  Self-will,  pride,  selfishness,  lead  to 
rebellion  and  murmuring,  in  place  of  loyal  obedience.  4.  But  this  is  just  what 
an  earnest  man  will  seek  most  earnestly  to  do.  Realising  that  there  can  be  no 
higher  service,  he  will  desire  with  all  his  heart  to  do  that  holy  will. 

"  Our  wills  are  ours,  we  know  not  why  ; 
Our  wills  are  ours  to  make  them  Thine." 

Tennyson. 

"  Oh,  be  my  will  so  swallowed  up  in  Thine 
That  I  may  do  Thy  will  in  doing  mine." 

Hannah  More. 

IV.  To  the  earnest  desire  to  do  His  will  God  will  give  the  power  to  know 
and  do  it. — 1.  For  what  is  that  will  toward  men1?  It  is,  e.g.,  our  sanctification. 
"  Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am  holy,"  says  the  Lord.  And  when  a  man  sincerely  desires 
to  escape  from  sin  and  attain  to  holiness,  then  the  revelation  of  Jesus  in  all  its 
brightness,  as  the  express  image  of  God's  person,  is  borne  in  upon  him.  He  sees 
in  Christ's  Gospel  his  need,  the  goal  to  be  attained  and  the  way  thither.  2.  And 
yet  again  the  will  of  God  toward  men  is  love  ;  and  all  who  would  perform  that 
will  must  obey  the  command  of  love  (Matt.  xxii.  37).  3.  But  this  love  is  here 
chiefly  evidenced  in  love  to  our  neighbour,     In  this  is  the  true  fulfilling  of  the 

211 


chap.  vii.         H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


law  (Rom.  xiii.  8  ;  1  John  ii.  10,  etc.).  And  it  was  their  sinful  transgression  of 
this  supreme  law  which  condemned  the  Jewish  rulers  (ver.  19),  who,  in  thought 
and  action,  were  opposed  to  the  divine  will.  It  was  this  that  lay  at  the  root  of 
their  unbelief  and  their  opposition  to  Jesus  (i.  5).  They  had  not  the  submissive, 
filial  spirit  so  conspicuous  in  the  life  of  Jesus.  4.  But  how  shall  the  earnest 
desire,  the  heart  prepared  to  do  God's  will,  be  attained  to  ?  Here  we  come  again 
on  the  mystery  of  the  interaction  of  the  divine  and  human  in  redemption.  But 
this  desire  and  preparedness  may  be  cultivated.  Whence  come  men  and  women 
of  most  earnest  Christian  life  ?  whence  the  majority  of  active  labourers  in  the 
vineyard  ?  Is  it  not  from  among  those  trained  in  pious  homes,  whose  young 
minds  and  hearts  have  been  filled  with  heavenly  knowledge  and  love  ?  (2  Tim.  i.  5, 
iii.  14,  15). 

Ver.  24.  "  Judge  not  according  to  the  appearance." — As  human  nature  is  now 
constituted,  this  is  one  of  the  most  difficult  commands  to  keep.  Men  continually 
express  judgment  on  their  fellows  and  their  actions;  and  those  judgments  are 
swayed  by  various  influences — prejudices,  prepossessions,  self-interest,  etc.  In 
this  age  of  criticism,  judging  of  others  seems  to  be  a  custom  of  many  from  youth 
up.  Accusation,  censure,  condemnation,  are  indulged  in  often  without  mercy ; 
faults  of  others  are  magnified  and  intensified  ;  good  characteristics  are  diminished 
in  proportional  degree.  Such  a  spirit  will  not  find  place  in  the  heavenly  world. 
But  the  gospel  does  not  leave  the  attainment  of  the  spirit  of  right  judgment  to 
the  eternal  future.  The  germs  of  that  perfect  state  are  implanted  here.  The 
more  we  progress  in  love  to  our  neighbour,  the  more  will  the  fault  of  judging 
others  pass  away.  Besides,  men's  attempts  at  judgment  of  others  are  often  an 
infringement  of  the  divine  prerogative.  It  is  an  endeavour  with  beclouded 
judgment,  imperfect  or  erroneous  information,  and  biassed  minds,  to  do  what  the 
great  Creator,  who  reads  men's  hearts  and  thoughts,  alone  can  do.     But — 

I.  Are  we  never  to  judge  of  actions  or  character? — 1.  Not  so  ;  for  our  Lord 
warns  men  that  they  must  discriminate  between  false  teaching  and  true,  false 
assumptions  and  true.  As  we  judge  a  tree  by  its  fruits,  so  we  must  judge  the 
"  prophets  "  who  claim  our  adherence.  2.  Nor,  of  course,  does  our  Lord  in  any 
way  reflect  on  the  province  of  human  justice,  although  it  must  be  inferred  that 
in  it  also  judgment  must  be  according  to  righteousness.  Human  right  sand 
equity  must  be  enforced.  The  laws  for  the  commonweal,  of  morality  and  social 
order,  must  be  maintained ;  and  men  chosen  for  their  character  and  learning  are 
appointed  to  carry  out  the  judgments  of  the  law.  Human  justice  has  its  source 
in  the  divine ;  and  all  codes  and  institutes  of  human  law  are  attempts  to  bring 
us  into  harmony  with  eternal  justice.  3.  But  the . crown  of  justice  is  love;  and 
here  often  human  judgments  fail  and  are  imperfect,  a  fact  shown  by  the  con- 
tinual shifting  and  changing  of  human  laws.  And  the  more  the  peoples  approxi- 
mate to  the  spirit  of  the  gospel,  the  more  humane,  etc.,  do  their  laws  become. 

II.  It  is  irresponsible  and  ill-founded  judgments  that  our  Lord  commands  us 
to  avoid. — 1.  We  are  to  avoid  rash  and  unthinking  judgments — judgments 
founded  plausibly  on  appearances,  such  as  those  passed  on  Christ  by  the  Jews 
(ver.  23).  We  cannot  enter  into  the  hidden  circle  of  motive  and  feeling  in  the 
life  of  another.  2.  Nor  are  we  to  judge  others  without  careful  consideration  of 
the  meaning  of  their  words  and  actions.  Careful  consideration  may  often  bring 
to  light  an  entirely  different  signification.  3.  How  often  and  mournfully  this 
sinful  habit  has  wrought  havoc  is  evident  in  the  history  of  the  Church  !  True, 
men  who  become  members  of  and  teachers  in  the  Church  are  not  to  be  permitted 
to  hold  and  promulgate  opinions  utterly  subversive  of  the  faith.  But  how 
frequently  are  subjects  of  dubious  import,  speculations  on  matters  not  directly 
bearing  on  the  great  fundamentals  of  the  faith,  made  the  occasion  of  harsh 

213 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  Vil. 


judgments  and  irretrievable  wrongdoing  !  How  terribly  was  this  exemplified  in 
the  relations  of  the  Jewish  rulers,  etc.,  to  our  Lord,  as,  hurried  on  by  mistaken 
zeal  for  the  law,  and  bitter  enmity,  they  misjudged  and  condemned  Him  !  And 
how  fatally  was  this  spirit  perpetuated  in  the  persecutions  of  the  early  Christians 
and  in  the  horrors  of  the  Inquisition  ! 

III.  "  Judge  righteous  judgment." — 1.  It  is  essential  to  our  higher  life  that  we 

should  be  able  to  distinguish  between  good  and  evil,  between  wicked  men  and 

just  men,  so  that  we  may  not  "  walk  in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly."     2.  But 

we  are  not  left  to  our  own  unaided  judgment  here.     There  is  a  rule  laid  down 

for  us  here.     We  are  to  judge  men  "  by  their  fruits."     There  is  an  unerring 

standard  given  us — the  revealed  will  of  God  ;  and  in  judging  by  this  standard  we 

are  not  following  the  fallible  opinions  of  men,  but  the  word  of  God.     3.  It  was 

just  here  that  the  Jewish  rulers  erred.     They  did  not  conform  to  the  law  God 

had  given  them  (vers.  22,  23).     Even  here  too,  then,  we  must  discriminate,  lest 

we  fall  into  their  error.     It  is  not  our  duty  to  judge  finally;  so  that  even  whilst 

we  testify  firmly  against  wrong  and  evil,  our  testimony  must  be  given  in  the 

spirit  of  love.     And  in  that  case  it  will  not  be  we  who  judge,  but  God  by  His 

word  and  law.     4.  How  often  do  men  judge  others  by  appearances,  which  are 

deceptive,  and  thus  lead  to  much  unhappiness  and  wrong  !     Men  are  not  always 

what  they  seem  to  be.     How  often  does  it  happen,  when  people  have  passed 

away,  a  chain  of  hidden  circumstances  may  have  come  to  light,  overturning 

entirely  the  good  or  evil  name  they  bore  !     How  frequently  the  rough  casket 

contains  a  precious  jewel  !     How  many  rashly  and  harshly  judged  of  men  are 

accepted  of  God  !     Therefore,  whilst  discriminating  between  the  evil  and  the 

good,  we  are  to  be  careful  to  act  in  the  spirit  of  love,  and  to  obey  the  injunction 

of  our  Master — "  Judge  not  according  to  the  appearance,"  etc. 

Vers.  37-40.  The  spiritual  fountain. — The  thirty-ninth  verse  gives  the  key  to 
the  deeper  meaning  of  this  passage.  For  the  meaning  of  ver.  37  see  pp.  216,  217. 
The  thirty-eighth  verse  is  an  advance  beyond  ver.  37.  In  the  latter  we  have  the 
source  of  the  spiritual  stream ;  in  the  former  that  spring  of  life,  accepted  and 
received,  becomes  in  turn,  in  those  who  drink,  also  a  living  fountain,  flowing  forth 
in  refreshing  streams  to  men.  That  spiritual  stream  is  the  Holy  Spirit.  But  it 
could  not  come  down  to  men  to  dwell  in  them  with  power  until  Christ  had  been 
glorified.  But  what  is  the  meaning  of  ver.  39  ?  Had  not  the  Holy  Spirit  come 
to  men  before  this,  to  a  Simeon,  a  Zacharias,  an  Anna,  and  many  another  godly 
man  and  woman  1  Yes ;  but  to  them  individually  and  specially,  and  not  in  the 
way  in  which  it  would  flow  from  heart  to  heart  after  Pentecost,  in  accordance 
with  the  old  prophetic  promise  (Acts  ii.  16-18  ;  Joel  ii.  28-32).  That  could  not  be 
then,  till  Christ  was  glorified,  till  He  had  ascended,  "  leading  captivity  captive," 
etc.,  His  atoning  work  all  completed  and  accepted  by  the  Father,  so  that  He 
was  ready  to  be  communicated  to  men  in  all  His  life-giving  fulness  by  the 
Spirit,  whom  He  was  to  send  down  to  His  waiting  Church.  Consider  the 
fountain-head,  the  reservoirs  and  cisterns,  the  vitalising  energy  of  this  spiritual 
stream. 

I.  The  fountain-head. — 1.  This  need  not  long  detain  us.  Its  rise,  its  mys- 
terious depths,  are  hidden  from  human  view.  Its  waters  issue  from  that  land 
which  human  eye  hath  not  seen,  of  which  the  Lord  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb 
are  the  temple.  The  prophet  saw  the  stream  issuing  from  under  the  right  side 
of  the  temple  ;  and  John,  in  the  apocalyptic  vision,  saw  it  proceeding  out  of  the 
throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  (Ezek.  xlvii.  1  ;  Kev.  xxii.  1).  2.  This  stream 
rises  indeed  from  the  unfathomable  and  eternal  deeps  of  the  divine  wisdom, 
power,  and  love.  We  cannot  go  further  ;  we  lose  ourselves  in  the  infinite.  3.  But 
when  this  stream  of  life,  in  all  its  fulness,  appears  among  men,  it  is  seen  to 

213 


chap.  vii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :   ST.  JOHJSt. 


flow  to  them  through  the  Saviour.  "  God  giveth  not  the  Spirit  by  measure  unto 
Him  "  (iii.  34).  "  It  pleased  the  Father  that  in  Him  should  all  fulness  dwell " 
(Col.  i.  19).     And  out  of  this  fulness  all  His  people  receive  grace,  etc.  (i.  16). 

II.  The  reservoir  and  cisterns  for  the  distribution  of  the  spiritual,  life-giving 
Stream. — 1.  The  great  reservoir  is  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  the  cisterns  the 
hearts  of  believers.  The  stream  must  be  spread  by  irrigation,  if  the  desert  is  to 
be  fertilised  and  the  fruits  of  righteousness  to  grow  on  what  was  erewhile  a 
barren  waste.  And  through  the  communities  and  lives  of  believers  the  Redeemer 
spreads  His  spiritual  blessings  among  men.  2.  And  here  we  are  privileged  to 
see  how  this  blessed  promise  could  be  given.  "  He  that  belie veth  on  Me,  from 
within  Him  [-13DD,  Exod.  xvii.  6]  shall  flow,"  etc.  (ver.  38).  Christ  and  His 
Church  are  one  body.  He  is  the  head,  and  they  are  the  members  of  His 
body.  The  same  spiritual  life  that  is  in  Him  flows  to  them,  now  full,  free, 
and  uninterruptedly,  since  He  has  been  glorified,  His  redeeming  work  com- 
pleted. It  needed  first  that  the  Rock  should  be  smitten  (1  Cor.  x.  4),  and 
then  the  streams  of  salvation  flowed  forth  for  all  the  children  of  men.  3.  But 
more  wonderful  than  the  ancient  miracle  is  the  miracle  of  grace  wrought  in 
Christ.  For  not  only  do  those  who  drink  have  their  thirst  quenched,  they  in 
turn — hearts  that  have  been  hard  and  stony  as  the  granitic  ribs  of  Horeb — 
melted  by  the  power  of  divine  love  and  grace,  become  fountains  of  blessing  to  all 
around.  See  how  gloriously  this  was  exemplified  at  Pentecost,  when  the  disciples 
were  all  "  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost"  (Acts  ii.  4).  With  what  joy  they  bore 
witness  of  Christ,  with  what  power  His  word  was  preached,  with  what  tokens  of 
success  were  their  hearts  gladdened  !  See  how  the  relentless  persecutor  was  met 
on  the  way  to  Damascus,  and  from  that  heart  stony-proud,  smitten  by  grace, 
there  flowed  to  Europe  and  the  West  the  life-giving  message  of  salvation. 
4.  These  times  are  gone  now  !  Truly  they  are.  There  was  need  in  those  early 
days  of  the  Church  for  such  special  and  wonderful  gifts  as  were  given  by  the 
Spirit  to  the  apostles  and  early  ministers  of  the  word.  But  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit 
in  His  wonted  manner  of  working  are  still  given  to  "  whomsoever  will."  And 
the  whole  of  Christendom  to-day  is  a  wonderful  proof  of  that  mighty  spiritual 
influence  that  is  working  among  men.  5.  The  special  promise  of  this  verse  also 
is  evidently  fulfilled  in  many  a  consecrated  life.  It  is  quite  true  the  majority  of 
those  called  by  the  name  of  Christ  are  not  distinguished  by  the  full  stream  of 
blessed  influence  here  promised  to  those  who  believe ;  and  the  reason  is  that  their 
faith  is  small :  there  is  some  obstruction,  some  sin — worldliness,  selfishness,  etc. — 
shutting  the  channels  which  unite  them  to  Christ,  and  hindering  the  inflow  of 
His  spiritual  power.  Hence  it  is  not  wonderful  that  only  droplets,  instead  of 
streams  of  heavenly  influences,  flow  from  their  lives  to  the  world  around.  For 
this  is  the  purpose  and  end  of  this  life-giving  stream  which  flows  from  the 
Father  and  the  Son  through  the  Church  and  its  members  into  the  world. 

III.  The  vitalising  energy  of  this  spiritual  stream. — 1.  It  is  a  stream  of 
living  water ;  and  not  alone  shall  it  be  in  those  who  receive  it  a  "  living  foun- 
tain springing  up  into  everlasting  life  "  (iv.  1 4) ;  its  vitalising  energy  does  not 
cease  there,  but  flows  on  from  heart  to  heart,  from  life  to  life.  2.  The  reservoir 
and  cistern  are  not  intended  to  absorb  the  stream,  but  to  be  the  channels  of  dis- 
tribution. Just  as  in  an  Eastern  garden  there  are  not  only  fresh  greenery,  flowers, 
and  fruit  by  the  banks  of  the  stream  which  passes  by  or  through  it,  but  where 
every  tiny  irrigating  stream  is  turned,  there  too  the  ground  becomes  fruitful,  so 
when  the  love  and  grace  of  God  are  shed  abroad  in  men's  hearts  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  how  great  becomes  their  power  to  comfort  and  strengthen  others  !  And 
how  does  the  Lord  give  to  those  who  seek  thus  to  spread  His  spiritual  blessings 
ability  to  receive  more  for  themselves  !  To  those  who  do  not  selfishly  conceal  and 
bury  their  spiritual  gift  out  of  sight,  where  it  can  benefit  no  man,  but  put  it 

214 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN.  chap,  m 


forth  and  circulate  it  among  men,  to  them  shall  be  the  reward.  To  those  who 
thus  have  shall  be  given,  and  they  shall  have  abundance  (Matt.  xxv.  29).  3.  But 
alas  !  how  often  among  men  are  those  streams  retarded  in  their  flow.  The 
days  of  sultry  heat,  of  burning  temptation,  love  of  the  world's  pleasures,  come, 
and  the  stream  dries  up ;  or  the  cold  frosts  of  worldliness  and  a  practical 
materialism  seal  up  the  fountain  of  the  heart,  so  that  the  soul-garden  yields  no 
fruit,  the  flowers  of  grace  and  beauty  of  the  Christian  character  wither  and  die, 
and  only  an  arid  enclosure  meets  the  gazer's  view.  4.  Ah  !  it  is  in  ourselves,  it 
is  by  our  unbelief,  that  the  flow  of  this  heavenly,  vitalising  stream  is  often  so 
meagre  and  its  influence  so  feeble.  Think  of  what  Christ  intended  this  gift  to 
be,  and  what  might  be  the  result  of  its  bestowal,  did  we  look  for  it  and  pray  for 
it  in  all  its  fulness.  Would  we  be  such  feeble  witnesses  for  Christ  as  we  are  ? 
would  we  do  so  little  for  the  advance  of  His  kingdom  ?  Were  the  love  of  God 
shed  abroad  in  men's  hearts  in  all  its  fulness  by  the  Holy  Ghost  (Rom.  v.  5), 
would  the  world  stand  where  it  does  to-day,  with  its  crimes,  its  wars  and  fightings, 
its  dishonesty,  its  hatreds  and  strifes  between  man  and  man,  even  among  those 
nations  who  nominally  accept  Christ  as  their  spiritual  king  %  Do  not  too  many 
plume  themselves  on  being  and  doing  all  that  Christ  requires?  (Rev.  iii.  17,  18). 
And  if  any  should  say,  We  know  that  we  are  spiritually  poor,  very  deficient  in 
spiritual  possession  and  power,  etc.,  even  here  is  their  condemnation.  For  to 
them,  as  to  all,  the  Saviour  cries,  as  He  cried  of  old  in  the  temple,  "  If  any  man," 
etc.  (ver.  37) ;  "  He  that  believeth  on  Me  .  .  .  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers 
of  living  water  "  (ver.  38). 

Yer.  37.  Satisfaction  for  the  soul. — In  the  East,  during  the  long  rainless  summer, 
the  wadies,  in  which  during  winter  there  is  usually  a  copious  supply  of  water, 
are  dried  up.  It  is  only  where  a  perennial  stream  or  fountain  exists  that  human 
habitations  are  reared.  Every  village  has  its  perennial  spring — every  habitation 
must  be  near  one.  Water  is  everywhere  precious.  Thus  we  find  it,  as  might  be 
expected,  frequently  referred  to  in  Scripture.  It  is  used  as  an  emblem  of  fresh- 
ness and  fertility,  of  comfort  and  blessing.  It  is  quite  in  keeping  with  the 
prominence  of  this  natural  element,  and  the  universal  recognition  of  its  indis- 
pensableness,  that  the  Saviour  calls  men  to  Himself,  as  the  source  of  the  living 
waters  of  salvation.     In  our  Saviour's  words  we  are  reminded  of — 

I.  The  passing  away  of  the  types  and  shadows  of  which  He  is  the  antitype 
and  substance. — 1.  "  Here  again  Jesus  lays  His  hand  on  the  great  thoughts  and 
facts  of  the  old  order,  and  claims  to  be  what  they  shadowed"  (Maclaren).  2.  All 
that  prophets  promised  is  fulfilled  in  Him  (Isa.  lv.  1  ;  Ps.  xxiii.  2,  etc.).  3.  He 
alone  can  satisfy  the  spiritual  needs  of  humanity.  The  longings  of  the  soul,  the 
soul-thirst  of  the  race,  manifested  in  their  eager  though  blind  search  after  God, 
their  greedy  resort  to  "  broken  cisterns,"  etc.  (Jer.  ii.  13),  in  the  vain  attempt  to 
attain  to  that  satisfaction,  He  alone  can  give  (Ps.  xlii.  1,  lxiii.  1,  etc.).  Those 
needs  of  the  race  and  that  consuming  soul-thirst  are  met  and  satiated  in  His 
gospel,  which  comes  to  them  with — 

II.  Refreshing  and  strengthening  power. — 1.  Water  is  absolutely  essential  to 
life ;  and  although  in  well-watered  lands  the  need  is  not  felt  so  much,  still  it  is 
universally  recognised.  In  the  East,  however,  for  reasons  just  stated,  its  precious- 
ness  is  realised.  2.  In  the  hot  noonday,  with  the  blazing  sun  looking  down 
from  the  cloudless  Syrian  summer  sky,  how  refreshing  it  is  to  sit  by  some  cool, 
refreshing  spring,  and  quaff  the  fresh,  sparkling  water  !  No  wonder  the  people 
call  some  of  those  fountains  by  beautiful  names  :  "  Fountain  of  milk,"  "  of  honey," 
etc.  How  thereby  is  the  labourer  refreshed  for  his  work  and  the  traveller  for 
his  onward  journey  !  3.  And  on  the  arid  and  dusty  desert,  where  often  there  is  a 
march  of  twelve  to  eighteen  hours  between  indifferent  springs,  how  precious  does 

215 


chap.  vii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


every  drop  of  even  inferior  water  become  !  And  when  all  the  sinews  are  unstrung, 
and  life  is  languishing  and  dying,  how  does  the  draught  of  fresh  water  strengthen 
and  infuse  new  life  !  In  the  East,  when  drought  comes,  all  nature  languishes,  etc. 
(1  Kings  xviii.  1-6;  Gen.  xxi.  12-21).  4.  There  is  nothing  which  causes  a 
man's  name  to  be  remembered  more  with  blessing  in  the  Orient  than  to  erect 
a  fountain  for  general  use.  5.  So  Christ  comes  to  quench  man's  spiritual  thirst. 
Men  seek  satisfaction  in  the  world's  pleasures,  ambitions,  pursuits,  prizes, 
intellectual  gains,  and  so  forth.  Many  of  these  things  may  be  good  in  themselves, 
but  are  insufficient  for  the  needs  of  the  soul.  In  so  far  as  that  is  concerned,  they 
are  like  the  mirage,  which  deceives  the  traveller  with  the  hope  that  soon  he  will 
stand  on  the  shores  of  the  pleasant  lake  and  quench  his  burning  thirst,  when  lo  ! 
the  vision  vanishes  and  he  despairs.  But  Christ  never  deceives  !  Who  come  to 
Him  drink  and  are  satisfied.     The  gospel  comes  to  men  also  with — 

III.  Cleansing,  health-giving  power. — 1.  Though  not  specially  referred  to 
here,  these  properties  of  the  living  water  should  not  be  overlooked.  The  "cleans- 
ings  "  of  the  Jews  were  all  symbolical  of  the  cleansing  power  of  Christ's  gospel ; 
they  were  a  testimony  to  man's  sinfulness  and  his  need  of  cleansing.  So  under 
the  gospel,  baptism  is  symbolical  of  the  same  need,  and  of  the  way  in  which 
it  may  be  met.  "  Ye  are  washed,"  etc.  (1  Cor.  vi.  11);  "Now  ye  are  clean" 
(xv.  3,  etc.).  2.  Good  water  is  essential  to  health.  In  the  East  in  some  quarters 
the  supply  of  water  is  not  only  indifferent  but  actually  bad,  and  its  use  in  such 
cases  leads  often  to  serious  and  lasting  disease.  Thus  the  joy  of  men  when  they 
have  a  pure,  good  water-supply.  3.  The  streams  of  the  world's  pleasures  are 
poisoned;  they  cause  spiritual  and  moral  disorder.  But  whoso  drinks  of  the 
life-giving  stream  of  Christ's  gospel,  that  water  shall  be  in  him  as  a  well  of 
water  springing  up  unto  eternal  life  (iv.  14).  Our  thoughts  are  further  directed 
in  ver.  38  to — 

IV.  Spiritual  hydrodynamics. — 1.  The  power  of  water  needs  no  demonstration. 
It  is  a  scientific  dream,  which  may  yet  become  a  reality,  that  the  ocean  and 
mighty  rivers  may  yet  be  "  harnessed  "  to  electric  engines,  and  drive  the  machinery 
of  the  world.  Give  water  a  sufficient  head,  and  see  how  great,  how  destructive  a 
force  it  often  becomes.  How  beneficial  also,  irrigating  and  fertilising,  like  the 
Nile,  a  mighty  empire  for  millennia.  2.  So,  too,  is  it  with  the  living  water. 
When  Church  machinery  is  driven  by  this  power,  the  Church  will  indeed  move 
and  revolutionise  the  whole  race  of  men.  3.  If  the  reservoir  and  cisterns  are 
freely  united  to  the  great  living  Fountain,  then  through  millions  of  channels  the 
streams  of  grace  will  How  to  thirsty,  sinful,  fainting  souls,  bringing  satisfaction, 
cleansing,  quickening  (see  also  vers.  37-40). 


HOMILETIC  NOTES. 


Vers.  37-40.  The  /east  of  tabernacles. 
— 1.  The  feast  of  tabernacles  (from  H3D; 
a  hut  or  booth)  was  held  in  autumn, 
and  was  indeed  called  the  feast  of  in- 
gathering (Exod.  xxiii.  16),  as  it  sig- 
nalised the  completion  of  the  labours 
of  the  husbandmen,  when  the  corn,  the 
vintage,  and  olive  harvest  were  past. 
"  In  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  seventh 
month,  when  ye  have  gathered  in  the 
fruits  of  the  land,  ye  shall  keep  the 
feast  of  the  Lord  seven  days"  (Lev. 

216 


xxiii.  39  ;  Deut.  xvi.  13,  etc.).  It  was 
followed  also  by  a  special  "holy  con- 
vocation "  on  the  eighth  day,  in  the 
morning  of  which  the  people  broke  up 
their  booths  and  returned  to  their 
houses.  By  some  this  eighth  day  was 
regarded  as  a  part  of  the  feast  (Lev. 
xxiii.  36  ;  Neh.  viii.  18).  2.  It  was  to 
the  Israelites  a  special  memorial  of  the 
wilderness  march  of  their  fathers  to- 
ward Canaan,  when  they  tabernacled 
in  the  wilderness,  and  when  the  altar 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


ciiAP.  VII. 


of  God  and  the  ark  of  the  covenant 
were  sheltered  by  a  tent,  under  whose 
roof   the   priests    fulfilled    their   holy 
service.     And  in  remembrance  of  this 
the  people  lived  for  seven  days  in  huts 
or  booths  constructed  of  branches   of 
olive,  pine,  and  other  trees,  covered  over 
with  boughs  and  reeds  or  reed  mats.    In 
the  East  these  "huts"  are  set  up  now, 
as  they  were  in  the  time  of  our  Lord, 
in  the  courts  of  the  houses,  on  the  flat 
roofs,  or  in   the   fields.       3.  When   a 
sabbatical  year  came  round,  during  this 
festival,  part  of  the  law  was  daily  read 
in  public.     And  as  the  year  on  which 
these  events  took  place  seems,  without 
doubt,  to  have  been  a  sabbatical  year, 
part  of  the  law  that  would  be  read  was 
that  written  in  Deut.  i. — vi.  3.     There 
is  no  doubt  reference  to  this  in  vers. 
19-23 — especially  to  Deut.  v.  20,  which 
command  the  Jews  were  deliberately 
setting  at  defiance  in  their  murderous 
intentions  against  Jesus.     4.  There  is 
one   ceremony  not   mentioned   in   the 
Old  Testament,  but  observed  in  later 
times,  which  seems  to  emerge  promi- 
nently here.     During  the  seven  days 
of   the  feast  proper — perhaps   on   the 
eighth    day   as    well — the    people   as- 
sembled in  the  temple  before  the  time 
of  the  morning  sacrifice,  each  bearing 
in  the  one  hand  a  bunch  of  twigs,  and 
in  the  other    a    citron  (in   attempted 
literal  conformity  with  Lev.  xxiii.  40). 
One  of  the  priests  meanwhile  went  to 
the  Pool  of  Siloam  with  a  golden  vessel, 
which  he  filled  with  water,  and,  return- 
ing to  the  temple,  poured  out  the  water 
into  a    silver    basin,    with    perforated 
bottom,  which  stood  on  one  side  of  the 
altar  of  sacrifice ;    and  wine    was   at 
the  same  time  poured  into  a  similar 
basin  on  the   other  side,   both    being 
connected  by  pipes  with  the  Kidron. 
Then  the  Hallel  (Ps.  cxiii. — cxviii.)  was 
sung  by  all  present,  and  the  sacrifices 
of   the    day   offered.    This   interesting 
ceremony  called  to  the  remembrance 
of   the   people  that  miracle    of  divine 
mercy  when  from  the  smitten  rock  in 
Horeb   refreshing    streams   flowed   to 
satisfy  the  thirst  of  emancipated  Israel 
(Exod.  xvii.  6,  7,  etc.).     But  the  Jewish 


rabbinical  teachers  gave  to  the  cere- 
mony a  spiritual  signification  as  well. 
"  Maimonides  (note  in  Succah)  applies 
it  to  the  very  passage  which  appears  to 
be  referred  to  by  our  Lord  (Isa.  xii. 
3).  .  .  .  The  two  meanings  are  of  course 
perfectly  harmonious,  as  is  shown  by 
the  use  St.  Paul  makes  of  the  historical 
fact  (1  Cor.  x.  4)  :  '  They  drank  of  that 
spiritual  Pock  which  followed  them,' 
etc."  (Smith's  Dictionary  of  the  Bible). 

5.  Another  interesting  feature  of  this 
festival — the  lighting  of  the  great 
lamps  at  nightfall  in  the  temple  area — 
may  be  more  appropriately  referred  to 
at  viii.  12.  This  festival  was  one  which 
was  celebrated  with  great  and  even 
abounding  rejoicing.  "  There  is  a 
proverb  in  Succah  (vi.),  *  He  who 
has  never  seen  the  rejoicing  at  the 
pouring  out  of  the  water  of  Siloam 
has  never  seen  rejoicing  in  his  life/ 
Maimonides  says  that  he  who  failed  at 
the  feast  of  tabernacles  in  contributing 
to  the  general  rejoicing  according  to  his 
means  incurred  especial  guilt  (Carpzov, 
p.  14)"  (Smith's  Dictionary  of  the  Bible). 

6.  One  cannot  wonder  at  all  this  re- 
joicing when  it  is  remembered  what  the 
festival  signified  to  that  people,  and 
what  it  called  up,  to  mind  and  heart,  of 
the  divine  mercy  and  goodness  in  the 
past  to  their  race.  It  reminded  them  of 
the  first  halt  they  made  after  leaving 
Egypt  at  "  *  Succoth  ' — the  place  of 
booths  or  leafy  huts — the  last  spot  where 
they  could  have  found  the  luxuriant 
foliage  of  tamarisk  and  sycamore  and 
palm,  '  branches  of  thick  trees  to  make 
booths,'  as  it  is  written"  (A.  P.  Stanley). 
It  reminded  them  also  of  the  smitten 
rock,  of  the  long  wilderness  sojourn,  of 
the  promises  that  had  been  all  fulfilled. 
And  in  the  hearts  of  all  true  Israelites 
these  remembrances  would  awake  the 
feeling  of  hope — as  they  do  among  that 
people  at  the  present  day.  7.  But  all 
that  this  great  and  joyful  feast  meant  to 
the  Jews  we  can  rejoice  in,  in  a  spiritual 
sense,  when  we  look  to  Christ.  In  Him 
we  are  delivered  from  a  greater  bond- 
age than  that  of  Egypt ;  in  Him  our  pil- 
grimage is  an  assured  and  certain  course 
to  the  heavenly  Canaan;  in  Him  we 

217 


chap.  vii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


drink  of  living  water  from  the  smitten 
rock  ;  in  Him  no  more  are  we  shut  out 
from  the  immediate  divine  presence 
"  dwelling  between  the  cherubim,"  nor 
need  priestly  mediators  to  supplicate 
for  us  ;  for  now  the  Tabernacle  of  God 
is  with  men  in  Christ  our  Emmanuel — 
God  is  with  us;  and  the  ancient  promises 
are  all  fulfilled  (Lev.  xxvi.  11  ;  Ezek. 
xxxvii.  27). 

Vers.  37,  38.  Christ  the  smitten  rock. 
— What  was  this  rite  1  A  simple 
emblem  intended  to  recall  one  of  the 
great  theocratic  favours,  the  springing 
of  water  from  the  rock  in  the  wilderness. 
Why,  then,  should  not  Jesus,  instead 
of  stopping  at  the  emblem,  go  back  to 
the  divine  fact  which  this  rite  com- 
memorated 1  And  if  this  is  the  case, 
it  is  to  the  rock  itself,  whence  God  made 
the  water  to  spring  for  the  people,  that 
He  compares  Himself.  He  had  in 
chap.  ii.  represented  Himself  as  the 
true  temple,  in  chap.  iii.  as  the  true 
brazen  serpent,  in  chap.  vi.  as  the 
bread  of  heaven;  in  chap.  vii.  He  is  the 
true  rock ;  in  chap.  viii.  He  will  be  the 
true  light-giving  cloud  ;  and  so  on  till 
chap,  xix.,  when  He  will  at  length 
realise  the  type  of  the  Paschal  Lamb. 
It  was  thus  that  Jesus,  according  to 
the  Fourth  Gospel,  made  use  of  each 
festival  to  show  the  old  covenant 
realised  in  His  person,  so  entirely  did 
He  know  and  feel  Himself  to  be  the 
essence  of  all  the  theocratic  types.  So 
much  for  the  opinion  of  those  who 
represent  this  book  as  a  writing  either 
foreign   or   even    opposed  to   the   old 


covenant — a  book  in  which,  on  the 
contrary,  every  root  of  Christian  truth 
is  planted  in  the  soil  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment.— Dr.  F.  Godet. 

Yer.  39.  All  earlier  manifestations  of 
the  Spirit  overshadowed  by  Pentecost. — 
Our  Lord  Himself  has  thrown  most 
light  upon  this  perplexing  saying  when, 
on  promising  the  Paraclete,  He  said, 
"  He  shall  not  speak  of  [or, '  from  '] 
Himself  :  He  will  take  of  Mine,  and 
show  unto  you"  (xvi.  13,  14);  and  when 
He  declared  (xvi.  7-10)  that  He  must 
Himself  go  to  the  Father,  resume  His 
antenatal  glory,  carry  our  nature,  dis- 
honoured by  man,  but  now  clothed  with 
an  infinite  majesty,  to  the  very  throne 
of  God,  as  the  condition  of  the  gift  of 
the  Paraclete.  There  was,  in  the  con- 
stitution of  nature,  in  the  order  of 
providence,  in  the  revelations  of  the 
prophets,  in  the  person  of  the  Son  of 
man,  that  wherewith  the  blessed  Spirit 
was  ever  and  ceaselessly  working  ;  but 
not  until  the  atonement  was  made,  till 
God  had  glorified  His  Son  Jesus,  not 
until  the  person  of  the  God-man  was 
constituted  in  its  infinity  of  power  and 
perfection  of  sympathy,  were  the  facts 
ready,  were  the  truths  liberated  for  the 
salvation  of  men,  were  the  streams  of 
living  water  ready  to  flow  from  every 
heart  that  received  the  divine  gift.  In 
comparison  with  all  previous  mani- 
festation of  the  Spirit,  this  was  so 
wonderful  that  John  could  say  of  all 
that  had  gone  before,  "  Not  yet,"  "  not 
yet." — Dr.  H.  R.  Reynolds. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  37.  Streams  from  the  smitten  rock. — 
In  the  case  of  each  of  th*e  main  supports  of 
the  Israelites,  there  have  been  memorials 
preserved  down  to  our  own  time  of  the  hold 
acquired  on  the  recollections  of  the  Jewish 
and  the  Christian  Church.  The  flowing  of 
the  water  from  the  rock  has  been  localised 
in  various  forms  by  Arab  traditions.  The 
isolated  rock  in  the  valley  of  the  Leja,  near 
Mount  St.  Catherine,  with  the  twelve  mouths, 
or  fissures,  for  the  twelve  tribes,  was  pointed 
out  as  the  monument  of  the  wonder  at  least 

218 


as  early  as  the  seventh  century.  The  living 
streams  of  Feiran,  of  Shuk  Musa,  of  Wady 
Musa,  have  each  been  connected  with  the 
event  by  the  names  bestowed  upon  them. 
The  Jewish  tradition,  to  which  the  apostle 
alludes,  amplified  the  simple  statement  in 
the  Pentateuch  to  the  prodigious  extent  of 
supposing  a  rock  or  ball  of  water  constantly 
accompanying  them.  The  Christian  image, 
based  upon  this,  passed  on  into  the  Cata- 
combs, when  Peter,  under  the  figure  of  Moses, 
strikes  the  rock,  from  which  he  takes  his 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   VII. 


name ;  and  it  has  found  its  final  and  most 
elevated  application  in  one  of  the  greatest  of 
English  hymns, — 

"  Rock  of  Ages,  cleft  for  me, 
Let  me  hide  myself  in  Thee." 

A.  P.  Stanley. 

Ver.  38.  Believers  Messed  in  order  to  become 
the  medium  of  blessing  to  others. — The  result 
of  real  communion  with  Jesus  Christ  is  not 
terminated  in  the  rest,  as  of  satisfied  desires, 
which  it  brings,  but  passes  on  further  to 
make  us  the  medium  of  bringing  blessings  to 
others.  The  end  of  personal  religion  is  not 
personal  reception,  but  communication,  for 
which  reception  is  the  indispensable  prior 
requisite.  If  a  professing  Christian  has  no 
impulse  to  impart,  he  had  better  examine 
himself  whether  he  has  drunk  of  the  water 
of  life.  The  paradox  is  true  that  we  slake 
our  own  thirst  by  giving  others  to  drink.  In 
England  we  have  in  some  places  what  we 
call  "swallow  holes,"  where  a  river  plunges 
into  the  ground  and  is  lost.  Too  many  pro- 
fessing Christians  are  like  these.  But  we 
are  meant  to  be  water-carriers,  not  water- 
drinkers  only. — Br.  A.  Maclaren. 

Ver.  38.  The  Church  is  too  much  a  silent 
Church. — There  was  never  so  much  public  and 
official  witness-bearing  as  there  is  at  the 
present  day,  but  it  needs  to  be  supplemented 
by  private  individual  testimony.  The  Church 
is  too  much  a  silent  Church.  She  ought  to  be 
a  witnessing  Church.  There  are  hundreds 
of  thousands  of  people  in  this  land,  with 
Christian  men  and  women  on  every  side  of 
them,  who  have  never  had  a  word  of  direct 
testimony  addressed  to  them.  There  is  a 
morbid,  unnatural  silence  amoDg  professed 
Christians  which  requires  to  be  broken.  They 
are  the  truest  patriots  and  the  most  effective 
social  reformers  who  most  truly  live  the 
Christian  life  ;  and  they  are  rendering  the 
best  service  to  the  community  to  which  they 
belong  who  are  seeking  to  set  up  the  king- 
dom of  God,  which  is  the  empire  of  Christ, 
over  the  hearts  and  consciences  of  men. — 
Morris. 

Vers.  38,  39.  Water  a  type  of  the  gospel. — 
Water  typifies  the  gospel  because  of  its  abun- 
dance. When  we  pour  the  water  from  the 
pitcher  into  the  glass  we  have  to  be  careful  or 
the  glass  will  overflow,  and  we  stop  when  the 
water  has  come  to  the  rim.  But  when  God, 
in  summer,  pours  out  His  showers,  He  keeps 
pouring  on,  and  pouring  on,  until  the  grass- 
blades  cry,  "  Enough  !  "  and  the  flowers, 
"  Enough  !  "  and  the  trees,  "  Enough  !  "  but 
God  keeps  pouring  on  and  pouring  on  until 
the  fields  are  soaked,  and  the  rivers  overflow, 
and  the  cisterns  are  all  filled,  and  the  great 
reservoirs  are  supplied,  and  there  is  water  to 
turn  the  wheel,  water  to  slake  the  thirst  of 
the  city,  water  to  cleanse  the  air,  water  to 


wash  the  hemisphere.  Abundance  !  and  so 
with  this  glorious  gospel.  Enough  for  one ; 
enough  for  all.  Thousands  have  come  to 
this  fountain,  and  have  drunk  to  the  satis- 
faction of  their  souls.  Other  thousands 
will  come  ;  and  yet  the  fountain  will  not 
be  exhausted. — Br.  T.  Be  Witt  Talmage. 

Vers.  38,  39.  Beligious  activity  should 
7iot  absorb  the  contemplative  life. — [An] 
earnest  address  in  English,  delivered  by 
Protap  Chunder  Mazoondar,  of  the  Brahmo- 
somaj  faith,  had  the  remarkable  sequel  of 
his  immense  audience  rising  to  their  feet  and 
singing  "  Nearer,  my  God,  to  Thee,"  as  he 
was  recalled  at  its  close  to  receive  the  hearers' 
thanks.  Yet  he  had  given  utterance  as  fear- 
lessly as  the  Buddhist  [who  had  formerly 
spoken]  to  the  feelings  shared  by  every 
thoughtful  member  of  the  religions  among 
whom  our  missions  work,  when  they  come  to 
Europe  or  America,  and  see  how  far  Western 
nations  are  from  Christianity.  "  Your  ac- 
tivities are  so  manifold  that  you  have 
little  time  to  consider  that  the  sanctification 
of  your  own  souls  is  the  question  of  all 
importance.  .  .  .  What  is  religion  without 
morality  ?  .  .  .  Moral  attainments  do  not 
mean  holiness :  living  and  moving  in  God  is 
the  secret  of  personal  holiness."  Could 
words  be  more  true  or  better  timed  than 
these  ?  Surely  the  very  stones  are  crying 
out  against  the  selfish  counterfeit  of  Chris- 
tianity in  which  so  many  of  us  live  to-day. 
These  words  were  from  a  speaker  who 
claimed,  like  so  many  others,  that  his  religion 
embodied  the  best  of  all  religions,  and  that 
in  its  services  the  best  was  culled  from  all  of 
the  so-called  sacred  writings.  He  has  indeed 
learned  much  truth  somewhere,  and  the  view 
he  presented  of  his  teachings  undoubtedly 
owes  great  things  to  Christianity,  and  leads 
one  to  suspect  it  to  be  an  attempted  com- 
promise between  a  tottering  heathendom  and 
conquering  Christ.  This  Indian  declaimed 
against  caste,  and  foretold  its  abolition, 
related  gleefully  the  crusade  against  widow- 
burning,  and  urged  an  increase  of  public 
sentiment  against  child  marriage,  and  in 
favour  of  other  moral  reforms.  Were  these 
ever  heard  of  before  the  Christian  missionary 
entered  India  ?  Oh  for  such  a  man  as  this  to 
be  India's  Paul !  Was  not  Luther  such  a  one, 
and  were  not  many  of  the  brightest  pioneers 
of  Christianity  ?  Should  not  all  Christendom 
join  in  prayer  that  men  like  this,  so  near 
the  light,  should  taste  of  it  fully  and  bear 
it  forth  ?— "  Council  of  Creeds  at  Chicago." 
From  The  Christian,  October  5th,  1893. 

Ver.  39.  Christian  influence. — No  one  is 
entirely  without  influence.  If  not  a  stone 
can  be  cast  into  the  sea  on  one  coast  with- 
out the  ripple  formed  touching  the  opposite 
coast,  though  unseen  by  human  eye,  so  no 
human  being  is  entirely  indifferent  to  his 

219 


Chap.  vii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


fellows.  We  are  either  useful  or  hurtful  to  the  nursery."  By  our  own  power  we  can  do 
each  other,  we  make  others  joyful  or  miser-  nothing.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  stream  of 
able,  we  forward  God's  kingdom  or  stay  its  living  water.  He  it  is  who  gives  to  drink, 
progress,  we  lead  or  mislead.  Either  rivers  who  impels,  who  streams  through  and  from 
of  living  waters  or  pestilential  streams  flow  us  without  constraint  or  subtlety,  without 
from  us,  from  the  moment  when  we  open  or  leaving  men  to  faint  after  His  sudden  inflow, 
shut  our  hearts  to  or  against  the  word  of  Around  all  is  dry :  who  can  turn  the  desert 
God,  the  cross  of  Jesus,  the  Holy  Spirit.  into  a  garden  ?  Around  are  drooping  souls : 
Even  from  the  last  and  least  of  those  who  who  can  raise  them  up  ?  Around  is  a  lying, 
are  Jesus'  disciples  shall  streams  of  living  deceitful,  mocking  world  :  whose  mouth  can 
water  flow.  Yonder  is  a  sick  and  weakly  duly  reprove  them  of  sin,  of  righteousness, 
member  of  the  family  who  fears  that  he  or  of  judgment,  so  that  whoever  will  permit 
she  is  a  burden  to  others.  But  it  is  a  believ-  themselves  to  be  saved  may  be  saved  ? 
ing  soul,  and  streams  of  heavenly  peace,  of  Against  us  are  Satan  and  his  emissaries :  who 
genuine  patience,  flow  in  blessing  through  will  overthrow  them  ?  After  us  comes  a 
that  home  and  surroundings.  Who  is  usually  waiting,  hoping  generation:  who  will  leave  it 
less  in  evidence  and  so  inconspicuous  as  a  a  rich  inheritance?  Before  us  is  a  Saviour 
mother,  who  teaches  her  children  to  pray  who  desires  that  men  should  pray  for 
and  labour  ?  No  history  of  the  world  or  of  labourers  for  His  harvest :  who  will  pray  for 
the  Church  seems  to  take  account  of  this.  this,  who  will  offer  themselves  ?  Give  Thy 
But  when  a  mother  brings  her  children  Church  men  of  prayer  and  confessors,  give 
quietly  and  gently  to  the  Saviour,  in  spite  her  soldiers  and  pastors,  heroes  and 
of  the  inconspicuous  position  she  occupies  physicians ;  let  us  seek  our  brethren  until 
she  is  influencing  the  community — is  in-  we  find  them  and  confirm  them.  O  Holy 
fluencing  the  centuries.  To  use  the  well-  Spirit,  come  and  visit  us  1  Amen. — Trans- 
known  proverb,  "  The   world  is  ruled  from  lated  from  Dr.  R.  Kogel. 

MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH. —Verses  40—53. 

Hath  any  of  the  rulers  believed  on  Jesus  ? — When  the  company  of  the  Pharisees 
asked  such  a  question,  they  saw,  in  triumph,  Christ  and  Christianity  abolished 
in  the  name  of  science  and  culture.  So,  like  the  Pharisees,  Celsus  in  a  later 
age  spoke  to  Origen,  and  sought  to  magnify  heathenism  as  a  rational  faith,  and  to 
stigmatise  Christianity  as  a  plebeian  religion.  So  spoke  the  Romish  Church  to 
Luther :  Monk,  miner's  son,  who  are  you  to  reform  what  princes  and  councils 
hold  to  be  good  ?  And  to-day  ?  It  is  a  common  observance  that  Christianity 
and  culture  are  irreconcilable,  that  the  cross  hinders  the  advance  of  light,  that 
for  advanced  science,  faith  and  hope,  prayer  and  miracle,  Jesus  and  eternity,  are 
left  far  behind.  In  villages,  hospitals  for  children,  and  for  women,  the  knowledge 
of  a  Redeemer  may  have  a  meaniug.  But  would  any  truly  cultured  man 
believe  in  the  Son  of  God  ? 

I.  Does  this  objection  prove  anything  against  Jesus? — With  God  there  is 
no  respect  of  persoDS.  Jesus  had  proved  Himself  to  be  the  King  of  truth, 
those  who  were  of  the  truth  heard  His  voice,  those  willing  to  do  the  divine  will 
would  know  of  His  doctrine.  Unbelief  bears  on  its  brow  the  death-sign  of  trust 
in  authority  merely — in  the  n ambers  of  its  adherents,  the  brilliancy  of  their 
attainments,  etc.,  in  brief,  on  a  series  of  outward,  accessory  circumstances. 
The  officers  refer  to  the  impression  made  by  the  words  of  Jesus,  the  Pharisees 
to  the  authority  of  the  unbelieving  rulers,  as  if  what  the  rulers  believed  must 
be  true,  and  false  what  they  rejected.  This  blind  faith  in  authority  was  long 
before  condemned.  With  God  there  is  no  respect  of  persons,  as  it  is  written 
in  the  Psalm,  "  It  is  better  to  trust  in  the  Lord,"  etc.  (cxviii.  8). 

II.  Does  this  objection  prove  anything  to  the  advantage  of  the  rulers? — 
Did  it  show  that  they  were  elevated  above  human  weaknesses  in  their  faith? 
How  near  are  the  limits  of  pride  and  uncharitableness  !  "  This  people  that 
knoweth  not  the  law,"  etc.  (ver.  49) ;  thus,  because  of  their  ignorance  they  followed 
Jesus  !  If  the  people  are  really  so  ignorant,  what  have  you  done  for  their 
elevation,  ye  leaders  and  shepherds  ?  This,  That  you  measure  yourself,  self- 
complacently,  with  this  ignorance?   that  you  use  their  ignorance  to  enforce  a 

220 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap,  vil 


blind  obedience  ?  that  you  represent  Jesus  as  a  deceiver,  His  servants  as  foes 
to  the  light,  the  gospel  as  a  barrier  to  progress  ?  It  is  sad  when  defenders  of 
the  law  must  be  reminded  that  the  law  judges  no  man  before  he  has  been  heard 
— when  educated  men  employ  abuse  in  place  of  proof  (saying,  "Art  thou  a 
Galilean,  a  devotee,  a  pietist  1 ") — when  those  proud  of  their  learning  condemn 
and  prejudicate  the  Scripture  merely  on  what  they  know  from  hearsay.  It  is 
shameful  when  men  who  are  slaves  of  their  own  lusts,  of  pride,  lust  of  power, 
fear  of  men,  etc.,  are  more  hardened  to  higher  impressions  than  the  lowest  of 
the  people.  The  rude  myrmidons  prove  themselves  to  be  more  finely  strung 
than  their  hypocritical  and  plotting  masters.  They  do  not  say,  "  Whose  bread 
I  eat  his  song  I  sing,"  and  do  not  utter  the  false  proverb,  "  Our  master's  service 
first,  God's  service  next,"  and  say,  "  Therefore  will  we  seize  Jesus."  Their 
message  becomes  a  witness  against  their  own  employers.  Sent  out  as  assassins, 
they  returned  as  preachers  of  righteousness :  "  We  have  heard  a  mightier  word 
than  yours ;  never  man  spake  like  this  man."  Wonderful  !  It  is  just  the 
disciples'  confession :  "  Lord,  to  whom  shall  we  go  but  unto  Thee  1  Thou  hast 
the  words  of  eternal  life."  Ye  teachers  of  Israel,  who  were  here  the  teachers  1 
Ye  men  of  education,  who  were  here  the  most  enlightened  ? 

III.  What  reply  does  the  knowledge  of  the  fact  make  to  such  objections? — 
The  audacious  assertion  contained  in  this  question  was  in  reality  proved  to 
be  false.  Did  any  of  the  rulers  believe  ?  Bad  enough  for  themselves  if 
they  did  not  !  But  the  gospel  brings  a  forcible  answer  to  their  boastful 
objection.  Many  of  the  rulers  did  believe  (xii.  42) ;  and  here  was  one, 
Nicodemus,  a  member  of  the  Sanhedrin,  a  Pharisee,  a  disciple  of  Jesus.  If  a 
Herod  will  not  listen,  a  Constantine  will.  If  a  Gamaliel  will  not  come,  a  Paul 
will  instead.  Do  those  naturalists,  who  fall  into  the  crudeness  of  mere  assertion, 
declare  that  man  has  no  undying  soul,  was  not  made  after  God's  image,  but  has 
developed  merely  as  a  higher  animal  ?  Still  here  a  Newton,  there  a  Gottfried 
Schubert,  bows  the  knee  before  God  and  His  Son.  And  do  some  astronomers 
speak  scornfully  of  having  searched  the  heavens  and  found  no  God  ?  Then  the 
star-gazers  of  the  East  come  forward  to  announce  that  they  have  found  the 
star  of  Jesus ;  a  Kepler  comes  forward,  and  thus  ends  an  astronomical  writing  : 
"  Thou  dost  nourish  in  me  through  the  light  of  nature  the  desire  for  the  light  of 
grace,  in  order  that  thereby  I  may  attain  to  the  light  of  glory " ;  Copernicus 
testifies,  by  the  epitaph  composed  by  himself,  "  Not  grace  as  Peter  and  Paul 
received  it  do  I  seek,  but  as  the  dying  thief  received  it."  Is  this  not  to  fall  into 
the  error  of  the  Jewish  rulers  ?  No  !  It  is  but  to  utter  the  divine  Yea  to  the 
question,  "  Has  any  one  of  the  rulers?  "  etc.  We  extol  simply  the  faithfulness 
of  God,  who  can  make  possible  what  is  impossible  to  men,  viz.  that  a  rich  man 
should  find  salvation,  rich  whether  in  gold  or  intellectual  gifts. — Abridged  from 
Dr.  R.  Kogel. 

Vers.  40-53.  The  prejudices  of  literalism  and  authority. — There  was  a  division 
of  the  people  because  of  Christ,  and  "  every  man  went  to  his  own  house  "  without 
having  turned  earnestly  to  Him  whose  divine  wisdom  and  love  should  have 
drawn  them  all  unto  Himself.  Shall  we  not  reckon  this  as  a  part  of  the 
Redeemer's  sufferings — that  the  people  to  whom  He  was  sent  for  salvation,  to 
whom  He  had  consecrated  Himself,  knew  Him  so  little — that  the  glorious 
words  just  spoken  influenced  but  a  few,  that  this  influence  would  soon  pass,  and 
that  His  presence  at  this  great  feast  was  again  to  be  without  effect  for  the  great 
end  of  His  mission1?  This  was  the  first  step  toward  His  passion.  In  this 
history  we  see  the  victory  of  prejudice  over  truth.  Many  were  moved  by  His 
words.  Some  said  He  was  a  true  prophet,  others  that  He  was  the  Christ. 
Even  those  sent  forth  to  take  Him  bore  witness  to  Him.     All  light  comes  from 

221 


chap.  vii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


above.  All  truth  which  can  elevate  our  souls  and  bless  our  hearts  comes  to  us 
either  mediately  or  immediately  through  Him  who  said,  "  If  any  man  thirst,"  etc. 
These  gifts  of  light  and  truth  are  richly  shed  abroad  ;  and  yet  we  have  on  earth 
still  the  same  conflict,  and  too  often  prejudice  still  triumphs  over  truth. 

I.  The  prejudice  of  literalism. — Prophecy  foretold  that  Christ  should  come 
from  Bethlehem  ;  but  men  knew  generally  that  Jesus  came  out  of  Galilee,  and 
that  He  usually  dwelt  there.  And  their  devotion  to  the  letter  was  so  great  that, 
even  though  the  divine  power  of  His  teaching  and  personal  presence  was  so 
great,  and  might  have  convinced  them,  they  thrust  its  testimony  ever  away  from 
them.  Christ  we  know  did  come  from  Bethlehem,  and  they  had  not  been 
diligent  to  inquire  into  the  earlier  circumstances  of  Jesus.  But  even  had  they 
searched,  would  they  have  believed  ?  There  was  another  prophetic  word  which 
was  interpreted  to  mean  that  no  man  would  know  whence  Christ  came.  So 
that  even  had  it  been  proved  to  them  that  Jesus  was  of  the  seed  of  David,  etc., 
it  would  not  have  availed.  But  should  these  things  have  had  power  to  hinder 
faith  in  Him  who  was  evidently  sent  of  God  ?  Should  not  those  Jews  have 
considered  how  manifold  the  interpretation  of  such  prophecies  might  be  ?  Might 
they  have  not  meant,  e.g.,  that  as  David  was  the  first  who  gloriously  founded  the 
kingdom  of  Israel,  so  in  regard  to  Christ,  the  founder  of  the  more  glorious 
spiritual  kingdom,  there  might  well  be  ground  for  an  inspired  prophet  to  say 
that  Christ  must  be  of  the  seed  of  David,  yes,  and  even  his  Son,  as  one  of 
later  times  is  often  similar  in  power  and  thought  to  one  of  a  former  age,  and 
thus  may  be  called  his  son  ?  How  true  is  the  apostle's  word,  The  letter  killeth. 
All  the  proofs  of  Christ's  authority  were  set  aside  in  the  case  of  many  through 
mistaken  faith  in  the  letter  of  prophecy,  which  they  did  not  even  honour  by  such 
a  faith.  For  should  they  not  have  examined  whether  the  manner  in  which  the 
prophecy  was  expressed  could  not  convey  another  meaning  than  what  seemed  at 
first  glance  the  only  meaning  ?  And  even  if  they  had  found  it  otherwise,  should 
they  not  then  have  searched  and  seen  whether  Christ  was  really  born  in  Galilee 
or  not  ? 

II.  The  prejudice  of  authority. — This  reveals  itself  under  two  forms.  1.  That 
faith  should  be  turned  away  from  Jesus  because  people  designated  Him 
by  a  name  implying  contempt,  as  they  said  to  Nicodemus,  Art  thou  also  a 
Galilean  1  2.  That  faith  should  be  accorded  to  that  side  on  which  stand  men  of 
authority  :  "  Have  any  of  the  rulers  or  of  the  Pharisees  believed  on  Him  ? " 
Oh,  let  us  think  that  those  alone  who  are  pure  in  heart  can  see  the  Lord  and 
the  light  of  His  truth  !  Let  us  think  what  it  means  to  crucify  Christ  anew,  and 
to  revive  the  spirit  of  those  who,  whilst  they  permitted  themselves  to  be  fooled 
by  earthly  considerations,  brought  on  Him  all  that  the  world  could  do  to  Him  of 
evil,  but  in  doing  so  themselves  forfeited  the  truth  already  known,  and  lost  all 
the  blessing  Christ  has  won  for  us.  "  Who  that  hath  ears  to  hear,"  etc.— 
Translated  and  abridged  from  Fried.  Schleiermacher. 

Vers.  40-42.  Various  opinions. — Religion  may  commend  itself  either  by 
prodigies,  or  by  showing  that  it  is  adapted  to  the  wants  of  human  nature,  of  the 
spiritual  being  of  man.  But  by  showing  that  it  is  adapted  to  meet  those  wants 
it  brings  forward  a  standing  perpetual  witness  of  its  truth.  When  men  feel 
their  spiritual  diseases,  and  are  conscious  of  the  healing  power  of  the  gospel,  then 
they  are  convinced  that  Jesus  is  the  Saviour.  It  was  the  hearing  of  our  Lord's 
invitation  (vers.  37,  38)  and  His  teaching  which  led  many  to  ask  whether  He 
were  the  Christ,  as  much  as  or  more  than  the  miracles  He  had  wrought.  There 
is  a  state  of  mind,  a  thirst  for  truth,  which  is  more  accessible  to  an  appropriate 
doctrine  than  to  any  outward  demonstration.  Thirsty  men  feel  the  suitableness 
of  the  promise  of  water.     And  there  were  many  in  those  crowds  who  were 

222 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  vii. 


thirsting  for  truth,  redemption,  etc.  But  there  were  many  also  to  whom  those 
words  brought  no  hope,  etc.  And  as  there  were  then  various  opinions  regarding 
Christ  and  His  message,  so  are  there  now. 

I.  Shall  Christ  come  out  of  Galilee? — 1.  That  was  the  stumbling-block  to 
many.  No  doubt  Scripture  said  He  should  be  born  in  Bethlehem.  But  the 
unbelief  of  those  Jews  arose  from  their  ignorance  and  inattention.  They  could 
surely  have  ascertained  the  truth  had  they  been  anxious  to  do  so.  The  secret 
wish  of  their  hearts,  however,  was  that  Jesus  should  not  prove  to  be  Christ,  He 
was  in  everything  so  opposed  to  their  traditional  conceptions  and  hopes.  2.  We 
have  among  us  the  successors  of  those  Jews.  To  what  cause  may  much  of 
present-day  scepticism  be  attributed?  Is  it  the  result  of  deep  reading,  of  careful 
thought  and  investigation  ?  No.  It  exists  in  too  many  cases  because  the  wish 
is  father  to  the  thought.  No  effort  is  made  to  clear  up  objections.  There  is 
rather  a  secret  desire  to  get  rid  of  the  gospel.  The  case  of  those  Jews  is  an 
example  of  what  often  occurs  now. 

II.  Men  shield  themselves  under  one  text  of  Scripture  from  the  whole  Bible. 
11  Who  has  not  heard  '  Be  not  righteous  overmuch '  quoted  as  though  it  excused 
a  man  from  being  righteous  at  all?  And  *  Charity  covers  a  multitude  of  sins  ' 
is  a  most  convenient  passage.  There  is  needed  only  a  little  misrepresentation 
and  a  careful  overlooking  of  all  other  Scripture,  and  a  man  may  satisfy  himself 
that  by  a  little  liberality  to  the  poor  he  shall  hide  his  misdoings  or  obtain  their 
forgiveness.  Every  such  fastening  on  any  single  text,  without  taking  pains  to 
examine  and  consider  whether  there  be  not  some  great  and  fundamental  mistake, 
is  but  the  repetition  of  what  was  done  by  the  Jews,"  etc.  And  thus  it  is  also 
that  doctrines  and  ordinances  of  the  Church  are  depreciated  and  neglected. 

III.  The  ordinance  of  baptism  is  sometimes  thus  depreciated. — If  a  man 
wishes  to  depreciate  baptism  or  the  fitness  that  he  who  administers  so  holy  an 
ordinance  should  have  a  commission  from  God,  he  has  his  text.  St.  Paul  said 
to  the  Corinthians,  "  I  thank  God  that  I  baptised  none  of  you  but  Crispus  and 
Gaius.  For  Christ  sent  me  not  to  baptise,  but  to  preach  the  gospel."  Then 
St.  Paul  made  but  little  of  baptism,  and  thought  that  the  administering  it  fell 
beneath  his  high  office  !  Did  he  indeed  ?  Why  this  is  worse  than  the  Jews  ; 
they  had  to  travel  perhaps  as  far  as  to  Bethlehem  to  ascertain  their  mistake, 
but  you  need  not  go  beyond  the  next  verse  to  that  which  you  quote — "  Lest  any 
should  say  that  I  had  baptised  in  mine  own  name."  Paul  was  thankful  that  he 
had  baptised  but  few ;  for  he  judged,  from  the  temper  of  the  Corinthian  Church, 
that  had  he  baptised  many  it  would  only  have  encouraged  that  party  spirit 
which  was  so  utterly  at  variance  with  vital  Christianity.  And  this  is  making 
light  of  baptism,  or  entitling  any  one  to  administer  it.  Alas  !  it  seems  of  very 
little  worth  that  Jesus  was  actually  born  at  Bethlehem,  since  His  ordinary  name 
is  "  Jesus  of  Nazareth." — From  Henry  Melvill. 

Ver.  43.  Causes  of  division  regarding  Christ. — How  often  during  the  course 
of  His  ministry  might  our  Lord  have  cried  out  in  the  words  of  the  prophet, 
"  Who  hath  believed  our  report?  "  etc.  (Isa.  liii.  1) !  How  frequently  was  He 
confronted,  after  having  wrought  some  mighty  miracle  or  issued  a  gracious 
divine  invitation,  with  the  apparently  hopeless  unbelief  of  those  whom  He  came 
to  seek  and  save  !  How  few  were  His  followers  among  the  official  teachers  of 
His  people  and  the  spiritual  rulers  of  the  nation  !  Indeed,  it  was  the  boast 
of  the  latter  class  that  none  of  their  number  had  believed  on  Him ;  for 
apparently  those  from  among  them  who  had  given  their  adhesion  to  Christ  as 
the  Messiah  had  not  obtruded  their  opinions  on  the  notice  of  their  fellows 
(xii.  42,  43).  As  for  the  body  of  the  people,  knowing  what  we  do  of  human 
nature,  it  is  not  surprising  to  find  that  like  so  many  sheep  they  followed  the 

223 


chap.  vii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


leaders  of  the  flock.  And  as  those  leaders  were  unbelieving  the  trend  of  their 
authority  was  ever  prejudicial  to  our  Lord.  No  matter  how  mighty  were  His 
miracles  or  how  evidently  divine  was  His  teaching,  it  was  enough  for  them  that 
He  did  not  conform  to  their  ideas  of  the  Messiah.  He  was  to  them  as  a 
"  tender  shoot,"  and  "  a  root  sprout  out  of  a  dry  ground,  with  no  form  and  no 
comeliness,"  from  despised  Galilee,  with  no  adornment  of  rabbinical  learning, 
and  like  the  feeble  shoot  ready  to  die  away,  never  likely  to  rise  to  the 
proportions  of  the  stately  cedar,  or  spread  abroad  with  the  luxurious  fruitfulness 
of  a  vine.  And  thus  scorning  Him  because  of  His  lowly  guise,  because  He 
required  inward,  spiritual  conquest  of  themselves,  and  not  an  outward,  temporal 
contest  redounding  to  their  own  glory,  they  rejected  the  Redeemer  of  men,  with 
all  the  true  blessedness  and  glory  of  His  spiritual  kingdom.  There  are  divisions 
to-day  in  the  world  on  account  of  Christ  and  His  religion  as  there  were  of  old ; 
there  are  those  who  reject  and  those  who  accept.  Causes  leading  to  division 
regarding  Christ : — 

I.  The  rationalistic  spirit. — 1.  The  ruling  class  in  the  world  to-day  is  becoming 
more  and  more  the  learned  class.  Men  of  learning  and  science  have  always  had 
an  influence  among  thinking  people.  But  in  this  present  age,  through  extended 
educational  advantages  and  the  diffusion  of  cheap  literature,  their  influence  now 
is  more  extensive  than  ever  it  has  been.  The  democracy  affects  to  despise 
wealth,  glitter,  show.  And  the  danger  is  now  that  men  of  learning  and  science 
will  inspire  a  kind  of  fetish  worship,  than  which  nothing  could  be  more  harmful. 
2.  Learning  and  science  are  not  to  be  despised,  but  welcomed.  Yet  surely  not 
blindly  and  unthinkingly,  and  the  opinions  of  men  of  learning  are  not  to  be 
received,  from  a  mere  yielding  to  authority.  To  do  this  would  be  to  imitate  the 
Jewish  people  of  old,  and  set  up  authority  in  the  place  of  truth.  But  this  is  just 
what  is  done  by  too  many.  Certain  leaders  in  the  literary,  philosophical,  and 
scientific  world,  though  professing  to  revere  the  gospel  and  the  person  or  idea 
of  its  Founder,  reject  it  as  a  heavenly  message  bringing  salvation  to  men.  In 
their  pride  of  intellect  they  refuse  to  submit  to  enter  the  strait  gate  and  narrow 
way.  They  stultify  themselves  by  their  declaration  that  the  gcspel  is  no  divine 
revelation ;  for  they  thus  arrogate  to  themselves  universal  knowledge  and 
infinite  comprehension.  But  there  are  in  Christianity  facts  which  cannot  be 
accounted  for  by  human  insight  or  knowledge.  3.  And  too  many  accept  the 
position  of  these  leaders  solely  on  account  of  their  vast  learning  or  high  position 
in  the  scientific  world.  And  so,  too,  in  the  Church  the  opinions  of  an  extreme 
Higher  Criticism,  hostile  in  reality  to  revelation,  are  accepted  by  not  a  few 
simply  on  account  of  the  learning,  the  apparent  candour  and  ability  of  those 
who  advance  them.  Many  with  a  patronising  air  profess  to  admire  the  moral 
teaching  of  Christianity.  But  its  supernatural  origin,  man's  need  of  salvation, 
and  the  message  of  the  cross  are  set  aside. 

II.  The  ecclesiastical  spirit. — 1.  As  long  as  the  Church  is  in  the  bounds  of 
time  there  will  be  probably  separate  sections  or  branches.  Each  land  will  have 
its  own  individual  branch  or  section.  There  may  also  be  more  than  one  in  a 
country.  There  will  be  predilections  as  to  forms  of  government  and  worship. 
2.  But  there  is  danger  lest  in  following  the  voice  of  what  seems  authority,  in  this 
region  also,  men  should  be  led  to  trust  in  some  system,  and  in  reality  miss  Christ 
and  the  blessedness  of  His  gospel.  The  spirit  of  sect  is  antichristian  (1  Cor.  i.  12). 
Adhesion  to  a  certain  branch  of  the  Church,  observance  of  certain  rites  and 
services,  a  merely  formal  religion,  is  often  made  to  do  duty  for  faith  and 
spiritual  worship.  The  special  tenets  or  forms  of  a  sect  are  made  more 
conspicuous  than  the  fundamental  truths  of  the  faith.  And  Scripture  is 
impressed,  is  forced,  to  yield  its  testimony  in  favour  of  those  special  tenets,  etc. 
(vers.  27,  42,  49).     3.  But  such  a  spirit  has  led  and  leads  to  endless  divisions,  to 

224 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  vii. 


a  misapprehension  of  the  true  spirit  of  Christ's  gospel,  to  a  cold  and  formal 
adhesion  on  the  part  of  not  a  few  to  the  gospel,  and  hence  to  a  retardation  of 
the  advance  of  truth.  What  is  needed  in  order  to  remove  many  of  the  causes 
of  division  regarding  Christ  and  His  gospel  is — 

III.  A  clear  apprehension  of  the  meaning  and  end  of  the  gospel. — 1.  The 
Jewish  rulers  and  the  mass  of  the  people  who  followed  them  failed  to  understand 
Christ  and  His  message.  Nor  did  they  make  any  effort  to  understand,  being 
blinded  with  prejudice.  They  thought  our  Lord  was  inimical  to  them  and  their 
position,  etc.  2.  Now  many  of  those  leaders  in  science,  etc.,  to-day  are  under  the 
same  misapprehension.  They  imagine  that  the  gospel,  and  the  facts  and  laws  of 
nature,  so  far  as  they  have  been  discovered,  are  inimical  and  mutually  destructive. 
Moreover,  they  perhaps  form  their  conceptions  of  the  gospel  from  those  who  by 
over-rigid  adherence  to  the  letter  fail  to  display  its  true  spirit ;  or  from  "  higher 
critics  "  who  eliminate  both  letter  and  spirit.  But  they  are  not  absolved  from 
their  error  thereby.  They  should  investigate  for  themselves  before  pronouncing 
so  authoritatively.  But  like  the  Jewish  rulers  they  refuse  to  do  this,  and  con- 
tinue in  their  error.  3.  And  it  is  a  wilful  ignorance  with  which  they  may  be 
charged.  The  leaders  of  the  Jewish  people  and  those  who  followed  them  had 
seen  the  wonderful  works  of  Jesus,  or  had  heard  of  them.  They  had  heard  His 
teaching,  so  wonderful  that  even  their  own  emissaries  and  spies  were  astonished 
at  it,  so  suited  did  it  seem  to  the  needs  of  fallen  sinful  man  ;  yet,  blinded  by 
prejudice  and  hate,  they  rejected  Him.  And  is  the  gospel  less  wonderful  to-day  ? 
Are  its  moral  miracles  less  mighty  than  the  physical  miracles  wrought  by  the 
Saviour  while  on  earth  1  Is  its  teaching  less  lofty  and  sublime  1  Is  it  less  suited 
now  to  meet  the  needs  of  men,  to  sate  that  soul-thirst  which  human  learning  or 
science  cannot  satisfy  any  more  than  the  world's  pleasures  ?  Are  they  not  living 
among,  and  themselves  rejoicing  in,  the  moral  and  social  triumphs  effected  by 
that  very  gospel  which  they  reject  ?  4.  And  is  it  after  all  inimical  to  or 
destructive  in  any  way  of  that  science  or  philosophy  they  adore  1  Has  it  not 
been  among  peoples  ruled  by  the  genius  and  spirit  of  the  pure  gospel  that  this 
modern  learning  has  risen  and  nourished  1  To  what  truth,  firmly  established,  is 
the  gospel  opposed  ?  To  none  !  It  is  the  rejecters  of  the  gospel  who  are  in 
reality  most  unscientific  ;  for  they  neglect  and  ignore  that  part  of  human  nature 
the  wants  of  which  the  gospel  was  intended  to  meet,  and  which  it  does  meet 
fully  and  gloriously.  The  feeling  of  responsibility  in  view  of  sin,  the  felt  need 
of  pardon  and  peace,  the  need  of  power  to  overcome  evil,  the  yearning  after 
immortality — these  it  meets  and  satisfies.  And  in  doing  so  it  builds  up  the 
whole  man  after  the  image  of  Christ,  leading  to  the  best  and  truest  development 
of  all  His  powers  in  the  service  of  God  and  of  humanity.  Beject  it — and  what 
is  there  to  put  in  its  place  as  a  spring  of  beneficent  activity  1  what  to  stay  the 
rise  and  progress  of  a  cold  materialism  and  secularism,  which  would  freeze  the 
current  of  human  progress,  and  transform  men  into  what  would  be  merely  a 
superior  species  of  the  beasts  that  perish  ?  5.  And  let  formal  religionists  take 
heed  lest  they  also  not  only  retard  the  progress  of  the  gospel,  but  help  in  the 
spread  of  unbelief.  Pharisaism  among  the  Jews  crushed  out  the  true  spirit  of 
religion  by  its  formalism.  The  Pharisees  and  those  who  adhered  to  them  helped 
to  bring  about  the  final  rejection  of  Christ  as  much  as  the  sceptical  Sadduceeism  of 
the  entourage  of  the  high  priests.  6.  Formal  religion  has  still  the  same  numbing, 
blighting  effect.  Spiritual  life  withers  under  it,  spiritual  progress  is  arrested  ; 
thus  many  who  are  outwardly  friends  to  religion  are  in  reality  its  enemies,  for 
their  lives  belie  their  profession  ;  and  those  who  are  only  too  glad  of  such  an 
excuse  will  say,  If  this  is  your  religion,  we  will  have  none  of  it. 

Ver.  44.  The  first  measures  against  Jesus. — It  was  at  this  feast  of  tabernacles 

Q  225 


chap.  vii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN. 


that  the  enmity  against  Christ  came  clearly  to  the  light  of  day,  and  the  first 
active  severe  measures  were  taken  against  Him.  After  the  murderous  thoughts 
and  slanderous  words,  the  train  of  hateful  deeds  began.  In  the  chapter  from 
which  the  text  is  taken  we  see  how  Jesus  (1)  knew,  (2)  judged,  (3)  frustrated 
those  measures,  and  thus  showed  forth  His  glory. 

I.  Jesus  knew  the  plans  of  His  enemies. — He  knew  their  thoughts — that  they 
hated  Him,  and  why  they  hated  Him  and  must  do  so.  He  would  not  shrink 
from  the  lot  agreed  on  in  the  divine  counsels,  but  He  would  not  bring  it 
upon  Himself  by  His  own  act — it  was  not  His  duty  to  do  so ;  and  the  hour 
of  His  death  would  be  the  hour  of  His  greatest  glory.  Whatever  happened 
could  not  surprise  Him.  Pie  was  prepared  for  all.  But  He  must  have  experi- 
enced as  much  sorrow  because  His  brethren  did  not  believe  and  permitted 
themselves  to  be  led  by  worldly  considerations  (vers.  3-8),  as  that  the  great  mass 
of  men,  men  of  the  world,  opposed  Him  even  to  the  death  because  He  unveiled 
their  sins  and  reproved  them.  This  deep  heart-pain  belongs  to  His  atoning 
sufferings  which  He  bore  on  our  account ;  so  the  prophetic  word  was  fulfilled 
(Isa.  xliii.  24). 

II.  He  brought  the  plans  of  His  enemies  to  judgment. — They  accused  Him  of 
being  destitute  of  a  rabbinical  training ;  and  He  answered  calmly  that  He  had 
a  right  to  teach,  etc.  (vers.  16-18),  and  then  He  turned  upon  them  with  the 
sword  of  judgment.  How  is  it  with  you  in  spite  of  all  your  theologic  lore  and 
rabbinical  honours  ?  Ye  call  yourselves  Moses'  disciples.  How  can  ye  be  so 
when  ye  do  not  keep  his  law  even,  and  seek  to  kill  Me  ?  Then  He  drew  out  of 
the  darkness  of  concealment  their  concerted  murderous  plans  (ver.  19).  In  reply 
they  at  once  launched  forth  a  second  accusation :  "  Thou  hast  a  devil,"  etc. 
(ver.  20).  If  those  from  the  provinces  might  be  excused  in  part  for  this  exclama- 
tion, as  they  did  not  know  the  designs  of  the  Pharisees,  those  of  Jerusalem  could 
not  be  excused  (see  ver.  25).  It  was  therefore  to  the  Pharisees,  and  those  privy 
to  thtir  designs,  that  He  brought  home  the  blame.  He  showed  that  He  was 
no  destroyer  of  true  festive  joy — did  not  bring  simply  imaginary  charges  against 
them.  He  charged  them  with  harbouring  murderous  thoughts  in  their  hearts 
against  Him  without  good  reason.  Then  He  brought  home  to  them  the  lawful- 
ness of  His  action  in  healing  the  impotent  man  on  the  Sabbath,  confuted  them 
by  referring  to  their  observance  of  circumcision  on  the  Sabbath,  and  finally 
called  on  them  "  not  to  judge  by  appearance,"  etc.  (ver.  24).  And  then, 
wonderful  to  relate  !  the  Pharisees  were  punished  by  the  lying  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem  (ver.  20),  as  the  truth  in  spite  of  their  lying  was  brought  to  light 
and  was  suddenly  blurted  out  (versi  25-27).  And  this  led  Jesus  to  the  further 
declaration  (vers.  28,  29).  It  was  too  much  for  these  men,  who  sent  messengers 
to  take  Him.  And  Jesus,  knowing  that  their  plan,  though  not  yet,  would  finally 
succeed,  and  in  His  desire  to  save  some,  uttered  the  words,  "  Yet  a  little  while," 
etc.  (vers.  33,  34). 

III.  He  frustrates  their  evil  designs. — Sometimes  the  judgment  of  the 
people  hits  the  truth,  and  vox  populi  vox  Dei.  So  was  it  with  some  of  those 
people  in  their  judgments  regarding  Jesus.  "  Many  believed,"  etc.  (ver.  31); 
many  also  went  further  still  (vers.  40,  41).  But  more  wonderful  was  the 
testimony  of  the  officers  sent  to  take  Him  (ver.  46).  Those  rough  simple  men, 
officers  of  justice,  came  under  the  power  of  Christ's  words,  and  all  the  evil 
designs  against  Jesus  were  in  their  case,  as  in  the  people's,  frustrated  by  His 
word.  Yes,  even  in  their  own  ranks  the  Pharisees  found  one  who  stood  up  for 
Christ  (ver.  50).  So  each  finally  went  to  his  own  home.  Christ's  hour  had 
"not  yet  come." — From  Friedr.  Arndt. 


226 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.    VITI. 


ILLUSTRATION. 


Ver.  46.  "Never  man  spake  like  this  man." — 
Marvellous  indeed  was  Christ's  insight  into 
human  nature.  With  divine  delicacy,  yet 
with  divine  certainty,  He  lays  His  hand  upon 
the  heart  of  the  moralist  who,  boastful  of  his 
prim  propriety,  asks,  "What  lack  I  yet?" 
and  touches  instantly  the  sensitive  spot, 
"  Go,  sell  that  thou  hast,"  etc.  The  penetra- 
tion of  Christ's  words  struck  His  most  gifted 
foes  dumb.  Pharisees  and  Herodians  forgot 
their  hostility  and  conspired  to  catch  Him 
in  His  talk  :  "  Is  it  lawful  to  give  tribute 
to  Caesar  or  not  ? "  "  Render  unto  Caesar," 
etc.  Then  the  Sadducces  sought  to  entangle 
Him  in  a  question  on  the  Resurrection  ;  but 
again  His  wisdom  put  them  to  silence.  Then 
the  Pharisees  returned  to  the  assault,  and 
cunningly  tried  to  entrap  Him  into  giving 
some  one  command  of  God  undue  promi- 
nence.     And    when    again   He    read    their 


hearts,  and  so  majestically  eluded  their 
snare,  from  that  day  they  "  dared  ask  Him 
no  more  questions."  Fouque  has  a  fable  of  a 
magic  mirror  so  wonderful,  that  he  who 
looked  in  it  might  read  his  own  character, 
history,  and  destiny.  Goth  and  Moor,  Frank 
and  Hun,  came  from  far  to  see  their  past 
and  future  unveiled.  Here  is  the  true  magic 
mirror.  This  keenest  sword  is  also  a  polished 
blade  ;  it  not  only  cuts  deep,  but  it  reflects 
character.  Nothing  is  more  plain,  in  Christ's 
words,  than  an  insight  and  a  foresight  far 
beyond  man.  Here,  as  in  the  brook,  is  the 
inverted  image,  which  shows  how  deep  is  our 
degradation  ;  but  it  tells  of  our  possible  eleva- 
tion and  salvation,  even  as  the  stars  are  no 
deeper  down  in  the  reflection  than  they  are 
high  in  the  heaven.  Go,  look  in  this  mirror, 
see  your  own  thoughts  revealed. — Dr.  Arthur 
T.  Pierson. 


PAET  IV.  (b.) 

II.  The  Growing  Conflict,  etc. 

1.  Christ  manifests  Himself  in  His  public  ministry  as  the  light  of  men. — (1) 
At  the  feast  of  tabernacles  ;  the  woman  taken  in  adultery  (vers.  1-11) ;  (2)  Je.sus 
is  the  light  of  the  world,  to  which  truth  the  Father  testifies  (vers.  12-19)  ;  (3) 
discourse  in  the  temple  concerning  His  person  and  mission,  and  controversies 
arising  therefrom  (vers.  20-29)  ;  (4)  many  believe  on  His  word  (ver.  30). 

2.  Controversy  with  the  Jews  regarding  true  freedom. — (1)  The  enlighten- 
ment of  truth  leads  to  freedom  for  Christ's  disciples,  spiritual  sonship,  and  eternal 
life  (vers.  31-51)  ;  (2)  His  angry  rejection  by  the  Jews  because  of  His  claim  to 
be  "  before  "  Abraham,  and  the  "  I  am  "  (vers.  52-59). 

Second  Year  of  our  Lord's  Ministry. 
Time  and  place  in  Synoptic  narrative. — See  Chap,  vii.,  p.  200. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


EXPLANATORY  AND  CRITICAL  NOTES. 

Vers.  1-12.  For  the  general  exposition  of  this  section  see  Homiletic  Notes,  pp.  233-235. 

Ver.  2.  Early  in  the  morning  (bpdpov). — St.  John's  usual  word  is  -rrpcoi  (xx.  1,  and  comp. 
Luke  xxi.  38). 

Ver.  3.  The  scribes  and  Pharisees. — St.  John  does  not  name  the  scribes  in  his  Gospel; 
they  are  included  under  the  general  name  the  Jews. 

Ver.  6.  As  though  He  heard  them  not.— Omitted  in  best  copies. 

Ver.  12.  Again. — See  vii.  37.  Our  Lord  here  perhaps  makes  use  of  the  other  great  symbolical 
feature  of  the  feast  of  tabernacles — the  lighting  of  the  candelabra  at  night  in  the  Court  of 

227 


chap.  viii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


the  Women.  There  were  divided  opinions  regarding  Him  among  the  people,  and  He  gave 
them  another  opportunity  of  arriving  at  the  truth. 

Ver.  13.  They  forgot  His  vindication  of  Himself  (v.  31-37). 

Ver.  14.  Even  if  I  bear  record,  etc. — Although  He  was  content  to  let  the  Father  witness  of 
Him,  still  His  witness  of  Himself  was  full  and  complete  for  those  who  cared  to  search  and 
see.  Like  the  light,  He  was  truly  His  own  witness.  It  might  be  necessary  in  human  law 
to  require  at  least  two  witnesses  (Matt,  xviii.  16) — memory  and  knowledge  are  alike  often 
defective — but  it  was  not  so  with  Christ.      "  I  know  whence  I  came,"  etc. 

Ver.  15.  After  the  flesh  (Kara  rr,v  adpKa).  —  See  vii.  24.  They  judged  superficially  and  from 
the  point  of  view  of  essentially  materialistic  minds.  Had  they  been  more  spiritually  minded, 
the  truth  as  to  Christ's  nature  must  have  been  apprehended  by  them.  I  judge  no  man. — 
Many  explain  with  Cyril,  etc.,  I  .  .  .  after  the  flesh,  etc.,  i.e.  with  the  underlying  meaning, 
"I  come  as  Saviour,  not  as  judge."  But  while  this  meaning  is  included,  perhaps  ver.  16 
shows  that  our  Lord  means,  I  alone,  etc.,  i.e.  not  apart  from  the  Father. 

Ver.  16.  And  yet,  even  if  I  judge,  etc. —His  judgment  and  the  Father's  are  identical.  He 
reveals  and  declares  the  Father's  judgments  (see  v.  30),  and  therefore  His  judgment  is  true, 
aXrjdiur] ;  the  common  reading  is  dXrjd-ns,  but  the  former  has  the  fuller,  deeper  meaning  of 
fundamentally,  ideally  true  (see  i.  9).  His  judgments  indeed  are  the  divine  judgments. 
"  Judge  not  alone  (hit),  for  none  may  judge  save  One  "  (from  "  Pirke  Aboth,"  quoted  by 
Westcott). 

Vers.  17,  18,  It  is  also  written  in  your  law,  etc.  (Deut.  xvii.  6,  xix.  15). — He  says  Your 
law,  for  it  was  not  applicable  to  Him.  As  the  incarnate  Son  He  came  to  fulfil  the  law,  not 
to  oppose  and  annul  it ;  but  He  could  not  properly  say  Our  law,  any  more  than  He  could 
say  Our  Father.  I  am  He  that  beareth  witness,  etc. — In  His  unique  position  as  the  incarnate 
Word  He  had  fulfilled  the  requirement  of  this  precept.  Jesus  who  bears  witness  is  one  ;  but 
through  all  His  witness-bearing  in  word  or  deed  shines  the  testimony  of  the  Father. 

Ver.  19.  The  Jews  understood  what  our  Lord  meant,  for  they  do  not  say  "  Who,"  but? 
"  Where  is  Thy  Father  ? "  They  scoffed  at  His  claim :  "  Any  one  might  make  such  a  claim  ; 
show  decisively  the  validity  of  it."  In  reply  Jesus  points  out  that  only  through  the  means 
they  were  rejecting  could  they  truly  know  the  Father.  For  another  example  of  the  same 
scornful  unbelief  see  Matt,  xxvii.  49. 

Ver.  20.  The  treasury. — It  was  in  the  Court  of  the  Women  where  the  chests  for  the  reception 
of  the  gifts  of  the  worshippers  were  placed.  Near  at  hand  was  the  hall  where  the  Sanhedrin 
held  its  meetings,  a  fact  that  tells  in  favour  of  the  retention  of  vii.  53 — viii.  11  in  its  present 
position. 

Vers.  21-30.  Again. — No  man  had  yet  laid  hands  on  Him  ;  therefore  after  an  interval  He 
continued  His  teachings,  on  the  reception  or  rejection  of  which  such  momentous  issues  hung. 

(1)  In  these  verses  our  Lord,  leaving  particular  types,  speaks  more  generally  of  His  mission, 
which  could  not  be  thoroughly  understood  at  that  time,  but  the  full  significance  of  which 
would  be  hereafter  revealed  (ver.  28).  (2)  The  Jews  especially  were  shut  out  from  compre- 
hending it,  owing  to  the  fact  that  their  nature  was  essentially  different  from  His — nay, 
opposed  to  His.  (3)  Otherwise  they  would  have  learned  from  the  testimony  of  His  works  His 
origin  and  His  standing. 

Ver.  24.  "I  am  (He)." — eyu  el/xi  (see  also  vers.  28,  58).  There  seems  to  be  a  direct 
reference  to  such  passages  as  Exocl.  iii.  14;  Isa.  xliii.  10,  xlviii.  8. 

Ver.  27.  They  perceived  not,  etc. — "  Might  not  the  crowd  composing  His  audience,  when 
they  heard  Him  speak  mysteriously  of  '  Him  who  had  sent  Him,'  think  of  some  other  being 
than  God  Himself,  e.g.  one  of  those  Messianic  prophets  of  whom  a  considerable  number  was 
expected,  and  with  whom  Jesus  might  be  secretly  in  relation,  as  the  Messiah  was  to  be  with 
Elijah  before  His  manifestation  ?  For  what  strange  misconceptions  are  attributed  by  the 
Synoptists  to  the  apostles  themselves  "  (Godet). 

Ver.  28.  Lifted  up,  etc. — When  they  imagined  they  had  cast  Him  down  and  destroyed  Him 
they  would  have  in  reality  raised  Him  to  the  throne.  The  Crucifixion  was  the  prelude  of  the 
Kesurrection  and  Ascension. 

Ver.  30.  Believed  on  Him. — Their  faith  was  imperfect  and  weak,  no  doubt ;  but  it  was 
sincere.  They  not  only  believed  His  words,  but  iiriaTevaav  els  avrov.  They  put  their  trust 
and  confidence  in  Him,  content  to  wait  for  the  full  manifestation  of  His  Messiahship,  and 
those  whose  faith  is  thus  genuine,  though  weak,  are  the  objects  of  His  especial  solicitude 
(Mark  ix.  42,  etc.). 

Vers.  31-59.  In  this  section  Jesus  sets  forth :  (1)  the  marks  of  true  discipleship  (vers.  31, 32)  ; 

(2)  that  impenitent  Israel  is  in  the  bondage  of  sin  (vers.  33-36) ;  (3)  that  though  they  are 
Abraham's  seed  by  natural  descent  their  spiritual  head  is  not  from  above  but  from  beneath 
(vers.  37-47) ;  (4)  then  there  is  recorded  the  testimony  of  Jesus  regarding  Himself — His 
sinlessness,  the  power  of  His  word,  and  the  eternity  of  His  existence  (vers.  46-58) ;  (5)  a 
climax  of  unbelief  and  hatred  (ver.  59). 

Ver.  31.  Some  interval  of  time  had  elapsed  between  the  fact  recorded  in  ver.  31  and  this 

228 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.         chap.  viii. 


new  address.     Jews  who  believed  Him. — Not  who  believed  in  Him  ;  they  had  not  the  simple 
trust  of  the  other  converts,  and  were  still  under  the  power  of  their  traditions. 

Ver.  33.  Never  in  bondage,  etc. — They  could  hardly  forget  the  Egyptian,  the  Babylonian, 
and  the  Syrian  bondage,  nor  the  fact  that  they  were  at  that  time  politically  in  subjection  to 
Rome.  Perhaps  they  meant  their  spiritual  freedom ;  but  did  they  forget  the  idolatrous 
lapses  of  the  times  of  the  later  kingdom,  and  the  hard  experiences  of  their  fathers  under 
Antiochus  Epiphanes  ? 

Ver.  34.  Sin. — I.e.  "  Sin  as  a  whole — complete  failure,  missing  of  the  mark  in  thought  and 
deed — is  set  over  against  Truth  and  Righteousness  "  (Westcott).  Servant. — 8ov\os,  slave 
(Rom.  vi.  16-20). 

Vers.  35,  36.  A  slave  could  not  be  adopted  as  a  son  unless  he  were  made  free  (Heb.  iii.  6). 
There  may  be  a  spirit  of  servitude  in  the  house  of  the  Father  (the  Church)  even  (Luke  xv. 
29),  as  there  was  in  the  case  of  those  Jews.  What  such  need  is  to  have  "  the  Spirit  of  the 
Son  in  their  hearts  "  (Gal.  iv.  6) ;  then  they  too  will  cry,  "  Abba,  Father."  Here  is  our  hope 
that  we  may  cease  to  be  slaves  and  be  freed  by  Him  who  is  free,  and  gave  not  silver  and 
gold,  but  His  own  blood  for  us  ;  and  who  is  our  Head  ;  and  if  He  makes  us  free,  etc. 
(Augustine  in  Wordsworth). 

Ver.  37.  Ye  seek  to  kill  Me,  etc. — I.e.  the  Jews  who  believed  Him,  but  who  were  in  reality 
at  one  with  His  bitterest  foes  fundamentally.     Because  My  word  does  not  advance  (<  r  make 
way)  in  you. — This  was  the  true  ground  of  their  enmity  to  Him.     They  did  not  continue  in 
His  word.      It  had  gained  an  entrance,  but  their  hearts  were  not  wholly  given  to  Him 
"  The  thorns  sprung  up  and  choked  it."     "  The  lusts  of  other  things,"  etc.  (Mark  iv.  19). 

Ver.  38.  I  speak,  etc. — The  foundation  of  Christ's  nature  was  the  divine  eternal  Righteous- 
ness ;  God  was  revealed  in  and  spoke  through  Him  ;  but  His  opponents  were  allied  to  the 
power  of  evil,  as  their  disposition  and  their  deeds  testified. 

Ver.  41.  Then  said  they,  .  .  .  We  be  not  born  of  fornication. — They  understood  that  "He 
was  speaking  spiritually ;  and  it  is  the  usage  of  Scripture  to  describe  as  fornication  the 
prostitution  of  the  soul  to  false  gods  "  (Augustine  in  Wordsworth)  :  Hos.  i.  2  ;  Isa.  i.  21,  etc. 
Godet  says  they  refer  to  the  facts  recorded  in  Nehemiah  and  Malachi  regarding  the 
marriages  of  Jews  with  heathen  women  (Neh.  xiii.  23,  etc  ).  and  boast  that  they  "  had  no 
idolatrous  blood  in  their  veins,  but  were  Hebrews  of  the  Hebrews'  (Phil.  iii.  5). 

Ver.  42.  If  God  were  your  Father,  etc. — The  fact  that  they  had  no  spiritual  affinity  with 
Jesus  showed  that  the  supposition  could  not  be  entertained.  Neither  have  I  come  of 
Myself,  etc. — Christ  is  not  only  divine  in  His  origin,  but  His  mission  and  action  are  also 
manifestations  of  His  Father's  will,  which  is  His  will.  All,  then,  who  truly  realised  His 
divine  origin  would  not  fail  to  see  the  stamp  of  divinity  on  His  whole  activity. 

Ver.  43.  Because  ye  cannot  hear,  etc. — They  were  spiritually  of  another  race  and  country  ; 
thus  the  language  of  God's  kingdom  was  to  them  a  foreign  tongue  (1  Cor.  ii.  13,  14). 

Ver.  44.  Ye  are,  etc.  ;  ye  will  to  do,  ye  desire  to  do. — Ye  in  the  first  clause  is  emphatic. 
0Aere  ttouIu,  —  ye  will  to  do,  expresses  their  set  determination.  A  murderer. — By  the  fall 
sin  entered  and  M  in  Adam  all  died  "  (Rom.  v.  12).  The  departure  from  truth  (righteousness) 
is  the  destruction  of  men.  Abode  not,  etc.,  or  rather  standeth  not  in  the  truth. — Although 
there  may  be  no  direct  reference  to  the  fall  of  Satan,  yet  the  fact  is  implied ;  and  the  un- 
righteous character  of  the  adversary  continues.  Lying  (deceit,  unrighteousness) — this  is  the 
element  in  which  he  lives.  He  and  Truth  stand  eternally  opposed,  and  thus  too  his  adherents 
and  those  of  truth  (Gen.  iii.  15).  Lying  comes  spontaneously  and  naturally  from  Satan  and 
his  children.  For  he  is  a  liar,  and  the  father,  etc. — Is  6  irar^p  avrov  to  be  translated  with 
R.V.  the  father  thereof,  i.e.  of  lying  (falsehood),  rb  \pevdos  1  or  the  father  of  a  liar, 
\peti(7Tr)s  ?  or  as  in  margin  of  R.V.,  "  Whensoever  one  speaketh  a  lie,  he  speaketh  of  his  own  ; 
for  his  father  also  is  a  liar  "  ?  The  first  seems  best  to  carry  out  the  antithesis  running 
through  this  section  between  God  the  Father  of  the  Truth  and  of  all  truth,  and  the  father  of 
falsehood,  of  all  that  is  opposed  to  truth. 

Ver.  45.  The  truth. — Affinity  to  the  truth  is  essential  to  belief  in  the  truth.  If  Christ  had 
spoken  the  lies  which  pretended  Messiahs  uttered,  how  greedily  would  these  people  have 
listened  (ver.  43)  ! 

Ver.  46.  Convinceth. — Convicteth.     None  could  find  a  flaw  in  His  spotless  life  (xix.  6). 

Ver.  47.  Not  of  God.— They  were  not  yet  born  from  above  ;  but  they  were  not  necessarily 
excluded  from  grace.     It  was  of  their  own  free  choice  that  they  were  so. 

Ver.  48.  A  Samaritan. — Christ  had  declared  their  spiritual  affinity,  and  they  replied  by 
invective.  They  had  no  doubt  heard  of  His  journey  through  Samaria,  and  perhaps  that  He 
came  to  the  feast  through  the  same  hated  country  ;  and  they  hurled  at  Him  the  hateful 
name  of  their  bitterest  foes,  implying  that  He  who  thus  judged  the  children  of  Abraham 
could  not  be  the  Messiah.  A  devil.— Demon  (Matt.  xi.  18  ;  Luke  vii.  33).  "  Such  language, 
they  thought,  could  only  be  explained  by  the  ravings  of  madness.  .  .  .  The  meaning  of  their 
retort  comes  to  this  :  Thou  art  as  wicked  as  Thou  art  foolish  "  (Godet). 

Ver.  49.  I  have  not,  etc.— 1  Pet.  ii.  23. 

229 


chap.  viii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


Ver.  50.  I  seek  not,  etc. — Therefore  their  taunts  affected  Him  not  ;  but  the  Father  will 
glorify  the  Son,  and  seeks  His  glory  ;  therefore  those  who  dishonour  the  Son  shall  be  judged 
by  the  Father  (ver.  54,  v.  23,  xii.  26). 

Vers.  51,  52.  Shall  never  see  death. — I.e.  shall  never  know  of  death  as  it  is  known  by  the 
impenitent,  with  its  horror,  etc.,  for  Christ  takes  away  its  sting.  But  the  Jews  wilfully 
changed  Christ's  words  and  made  Him  say  never  taste  of  death.  Christ  did  not  say  or  mean 
this.     Even  He  Himself  tasted  of  the  bitter  cup  (Heb.  ii.  9). 

Ver.  54.  If  I  honour,  etc. — 'Ecu>  eyu  <5o£d£w,  glorify  (K,  B,  C,  D,  etc.,  do^daco).  If  He  had 
striven  for  personal  glory,  apart  from  the  Father  and  the  Father's  will,  tnen  His  work  and 
purpose  had  come  to  nothing.    It  was  to  this  that  Satan  sought  to  bring  Him  (Matt.  iv.  8-10). 

Ver.  55.  A  liar. — "  For  to  hide  the  truth  is  no  less  falsehood  than  to  spread  error" 
(Westcott).     Comp.  1  John  ii.  4,  21,  iv.  20,  v.  10. 

Ver.  58.  I  am. — See  ver.  24. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Chap.  vii.  53— viii.  12. 

The  Light  of  the  World  as  Revealer. — Whatever  view  be  taken  of  the  position 
of  this  narrative  in  the  gospel,  its  authenticity  is  generally  held.  The  feast  of 
tabernacles,  with  all  its  joyousness,  was  past.  The  joyous  morning  assemblages 
were  over,  the  lights  at  eventide  blazed  no  more  in  the  temple  courts.  But  the 
Saviour  came  early  to  the  temple  intent  on  His  great  work ;  and  as  the  crowds 
of  festival  worshippers  still  remaining  in  Jerusalem  gathered  round  Him, 
"assuming  the  position  of  an  authoritative  teacher"  (Matt.  v.  1)  He  sat  down 
and  taught. 

I.  Jesus  is  the  light  of  the  world  in  revealing  the  evil  in  men's  hearts. — 
1.  Whilst  engaged  in  teaching  He  was  interrupted  by  His  ever- vigilant  foes. 
They  brought  before  Him  a  poor  creature,  who,  instead  of  having  her  heart 
brought  nearer  God  in  the  religious  and  joyous  feast  just  ended,  had  given  her- 
self over  to  sin  of  the  grossest  and  most  debasing  nature.  The  guilty  wretch 
had  evidently  been  brought  before  the  Sanhedrin  for  judgment ;  and  it  was  so 
clear  a  case  that  had  they  dared  they  would  have  carried  out  the  old  sentence 
of  capital  punishment.  Hearing  that  Jesus  was  teaching  in  the  temple,  they 
brought  the  guilty  woman  before  Him,  hoping  thereby  to  entrap  Him,  and  gain 
for  themselves  the  name  of  being  zealous  for  the  law.  2.  The  Pharisees  had 
formerly  tempted  Him  on  this  subject  (Mark  x.  2-12),  and  had  been  sharply 
reproved  for  the  laxity  of  their  conceptions  regarding  the  holiness  of  the  marriage 
tie.  On  this  occasion  they  probably  thought  they  might  "  turn  the  tables  "  on 
Christ,  by  entrapping  Him  either  into  giving  a  too  lenient  judgment,  or  by 
answering  their  question  in  the  affirmative,  thus  bringing  Himself  under  the 
penalties  of  the  Roman  law.  3.  And,  moreover,  they  either  misread  their  own 
law,  or  presumed  that  Jesus  was  ignorant  of  it.  The  punishment  for  adultery 
was  stoning  only  in  special  circumstances  (Deut.  xxii.  23,  24).  In  what  form 
the  punishment  was  to  be  carried  out  in  other  cases  was  not  specified  (Lev.  xx.  10). 
/  Here,  then,  "  Jesus  seemed  forced  to  occupy  a  position  opposed  either  to  the 
/  law  of  Moses  or  to  the  Roman  authority  "  (Luthardt).  It  was  the  same  kind 
'.  of  snare  into  which  they  endeavoured  to  draw  Him  on  the  question  of  the  tribute 
money  (Matt.  xxii.  17).  4.  But  Jesus  knew  the  hearts  of  these  men  (ii.  24,  25). 
Their  hypocrisy  could  not  hide  their  true  feelings  and  motives  from  Him. 
They  professed  to  revere  the  law ;  but  in  reality  this  law,  like  others,  had 
become  a  dead  letter  to  them.  The  whole  Jewish  community,  during  our  Lord's 
time  on  earth,  had  become  more  or  less  corrupted  by  Roman  licentiousness,  and 
the  sanctity  of  the  marriage  tie  was  disregarded.  The  more  enlightened  and 
spiritual  custom  of  the  time  was  to  deprive  the  guilty  woman  of  her  dowry  and 
divorce  her  ;  and  our  Lord  seems  to  have  stamped  this  method  with  His  ap- 
proval so  far  (Matt.  v.  31,  32).  But  He  sternly  disapproved  of  the  granting  cf 
divorce  for  trifling  causes,  and  with  so  much  facility  as  seems  to  have  obtained. 

230 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN.         chap.  viii. 


But  these  Jews  did  not  want  any  direction  or  guidance  as  to  their  procedure  ;  they 
-     simply  wished  to  entrap  the  Saviour,  and  to  render  Him  obnoxious  to  the  people 
as  a  subverter  of  the  law,  or  to  the  Roman  authorities,  as  recommending  the 
exercise  of  the  power  of  life  and  death  to  the  Jews. 

II.  Jesus  is  the  light  of  the  world  in  the  revelation  of  the  higher  and 
spiritual  law. — 1.  The  divine  wisdom  of  the  Saviour  defeated  the  evil  purpose 
of  His  enemies.  He  came  "  not  to  judge  the  world  " — not  to  usurp  the  functions 
of  human  justice,  but  to  reveal  the  higher  law  toward  which  human  law  and 
justice  should  ever  be  more  closely  conformed  as  men  come  under  the  influence 
of  the  gospel.  He  raised  the  case  above  a  merely  human  level ;  and  did  He  not 
perhaps  point  to  what  is  too  often  forgotten,  even  among  Christian  communities,  i 
that  the  framers  and  administrators  of  the  law  should  model  their  enactments 
and  actions  as  nearly  as  possible  to  the  revealed  and  eternal  law  of  ' 
righteousness  ? — 

"  And  earthly  power  doth  then  show  likest  God's 
When  mercy  seasons  justice.  .  .  .  Consider  this — 
That  in  the  course  of  justice  none  of  us 
Should  see  salvation  :  we  do  pray  for  mercy ; 
And  that  same  prayer  doth  teach  us  all  to  render 
The  deeds  of  mercy." 

Shakespeare. 

2.  These  men  had  no  true  sense  of  this   divine  attribute  of  justice  ;  in  brutal 
fashion  they  dragged  in  this  poor  criminal  before  the  assembled  people.     They 
were  therefore  not  the  men  to  administer  the  law,  since  they  had  no  true  sense  *. 
of  the  spirit  of  the  law.     Our  Lord  did  not_say  that  human  justice  in  this  and  \ 
other  cases  should  not  be  carried  into   effect ;  "but  the  men  who  carry  it  into  J 
effect  must  have  true  ideas  concerning  it.     3.  He,  therefore,  raised  the  case  to 
a  higher  tribunal.     He  brought  accusers  and  accused  alike  before  the  bar  of 
conscience.     Stooping  down,  He   wrote  on  the  ground  (ver.  6),  as  if  intimating      ' 

h    / 


that  a  judicial  sentence  such  as  they  desired  was  to  be  delivered ;  for  such 
sentences  were  not  only  spoken,  but  written.  And  when  the  sentence  came 
it  was  with  crushing  effect — not  first  on  the  accused,  but  on  the  accusers :  li  He 
that  is  without  sin,"  etc.  (ver.  7).  Here  the  claims  of  the  holy  law  were  vindi- 
cated perfectly ;  and  those  self -constituted  judges,  conscience-smitten,  stole  away 
one  by  one  in  utter  confusion. 

III.  Jesus  is  the  light  of  the  world  in  that  He  points  out  the  way  of  safety. 
— 1.  When  the  last  footfall  of  the  baffled  and  retreating  conspirators  had  died 
away  on  the  ear,  our  Lord  turned  to  the  poor  sinner  brought  thus  before  Him 
in  shame  and  disgrace.  2.  The  question,  "  Where  are1?  "  etc.  (ver.  10),  does  not 
mean,  Has  no  man  accused  and  convicted  thee  of  this  crime  1  That,  alas  !  was 
evidently  plain  enough.  The  meaning  is,  Hath  no  man  offered  to  carry  out 
the  death  sentence  they  threatened  I  Therefore  His  further  words,  "  Neither 
do  I,"  etc.,  simply  mean,  "  Neither  do  I  pronounce  that  sentence."  He  gave  her 
indeed  an  opportunity  for  repentance,  as  His  closing  words  show,  while  at  the 
same  time  He  intimated  the  enormity  of  her  guilt :  "  Go  and  sin  no  more." 
3.  He  condemned  the  sin ;  and  it  is  noteworthy  there  is  no  word  of  forgiveness 
and  peace,  such  as  we  find  at  Luke  vii.  48.  As  in  the  case  of  the  woman  of 
Samaria,  our  Lord's  manner  of  reference  to  the  sin  stamps  it  with  its  true 
nature.  4.  Thus  "  the  judges  were  made  to  feel  that  freedom  from  out- 
ward guilt  is  no  claim  to  sinlessness ;  and  the  offender,  in  her  turn,  was  led 
/to  see  that  flagrant  guilt  does  not  bar  hope  "  (Westcott).  5.  We  learn  that 
/human  justice  should  be  modelled  on  the  divine  righteousness  ;  that  those  who  \ 
scarry  into  effect  the  decrees  of  human  justice  should  be  men  of  a  righteous,  God-  J 
(..fearing  disposition ;  that  there  is  another  bar  before  which  men,  even  though  ' 

231 


chap.  viii.        H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


acquitted  or  condemned  by  human  law,  must  stand  ;  and  that  men  must  forsake 
sin  ere  they  can  have  forgiveness  and  peace. 

Ver.  12.  The  world's  need  of  Christ,  the  Sun  of  righteousness. — How  important 
is  the  material  sun  in  its  relation  to  our  world  !  Without  its  light  and  heat- 
rays  darkness  and  death  would  reign.  The  world's  existence,  humanly  speaking, 
depends  on  the  continuity  of  our  earth's  relation  to  that  star.  It  is  the  most 
important  to  us  of  -all  the  starry  hosts.  It  would,  therefore,  be  a  bold  assertion 
for  any  man  to  make  that  he  was  as  important  to  the  moral  and  spiritual  life  of 
men  as  the  sun  to  their  physical  life.  Yet  here  we  have  such  an  assertion  made. 
Jesus  came,  as  it  appears  from  the  narrative  as  it  stands,  over-night  from 
Bethany  to  the  temple  early  in  the  morning.  The  sun  had  lately  risen, 
clothing  in  light  "  the  mountains  round  Jerusalem,"  and  gladdening  all  nature 
by  its  rising.  Jesus,  in  view  of  the  glorious  scene,  seems  to  say,  Just  as  the  sun 
has  awakened  animated  nature  to  new  life  in  a  new  day,  so  am  I  come  to  give 
spiritual  awakening  to  those  slumbering  in  the  darkness  of  sin  and  error.  [Or 
if  the  narrative  is  to  be  continued  from  vii.  52  to  viii.  12,  then  His  reference 
may  have  been  to  the  candelabra  in  the  temple  court,  and  His  meaning  some- 
what similar.]  And  Jesus  had  given  good  reason  to  those  who  heard  Him  for 
this  claim  of  His.  His  works  of  power,  His  words  of  wisdom,  marked  Him  out 
as  more  than  human — to  be  what  He  claimed  to  be,  the  Messiah,  the  promised 
Sun  of  righteousness,  the  Light  of  the  world.     Notice  : — 

I.  The  world  needed  such  a  light. — 1.  There  are  some  questions  which  have 
in  all  ages  engrossed,  and  will  engross,  the  minds  of  men,  and  which  cannot  be 
answered  by  unaided  reason.  There  are  problems  that  puzzle  and  perplex  which 
no  merely  human  intellect  has  solved  or  can  solve.  These  subjects  lie  in  lofty 
regions,  on  heights  to  which  philosophy  and  science  vainly  attempt  to  climb. 
They  have  been  shrouded  in  darkness,  like  earth  at  midnight — have  been  dimly 
discerned,  as  through  a  mist,  distorted,  etc.  2.  This  has  been  so  with  the 
knowledge  of  God,  of  the  means  of  approach  to  Him,  of  a  future  life.  By 
reason  men  have  attained  to  only  dim  and  illusory  conceptions  of  these  great 
subjects,  and  it  has  been  long  felt  that  reason  alone  cannot  here  pronounce 
decisively.  3.  By  the  light  of  natural  religion  men  can  go  only  a  little 
toward  the  verification  of  such  great  truths ;  and  even  when  they  seem  to  have 
attained  to  a  clearer  view,  the  mists  of  doubt  roll  down,  and  it  vanishes  from 
their  ken. 

II.  Jesus  is  the  light  of  the  world  in  that  He  leads  men  to  a  true  knowledge 
of  the  nature  and  character  of  God. — 1.  Among  the  nations  at  large,  as  regards 
this,  darkness  prevailed.  The  most  cultured  nations  of  antiquity  had  not  risen 
above  idolatry.  Only  a  few  voices  called  men  to  a  better  knowledge,  and 
they  were  either  unheeded  or  stopped.  2.  Amongst  barbarous  tribes  the  dark- 
ness "was  such  as  might  be  felt."  3.  There  was  but  one  exception — Israel; 
and  in  their  case  tradition  had  encrusted  the  windows  of  the  soul  and  darkened 
their  spiritual  vision.  4.  The  further  men  had  gone  from  the  primitive 
revelation,  the  further  they  had  fallen  from  the  true  knowledge  and  love 
of  God.  They  bowed  down  to  all  the  hosts  of  heaven,  and  finally  came  to 
*'  worship  devils"  (1  Cor.  x.  20).  And  this  description  is  still  true  of  the 
great  heathen  world.  5.  But  in  the  gospel  of  Christ  there  is  given  such  a  view 
of  the  nature  and  character  of  God  as  satisfies  the  heart.  The  existence  of  such 
a  Being  clears  up  the  enigmas  of  life,  and  makes  what  at  first  sight  seems  "  a 
dubious  maze  without  a  plan  "  to  appear  full  of  meaning  and  order.  There  is 
revealed  to  us  One  immeasurably  removed  above  our  highest  uninspired  concep- 
tions.    His  government  is  seen  to  be  founded  on  laws  which  are  the  expression 

232 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN.        chap.  viii. 


of  His  own  perfect  character,  and  obedience  to  which  is  seen  to  be  for  tne  welfare 
of  the  race,  etc. 

III.  Jesus  is  the  light  of  the  world  in  that  He  made  known  the  way  by 
which  men  can  approach  to  God  acceptably. — 1.  It  is  not  enough  for  sinful 
men  to  know  that  there  is  a  God ;  they  must  know  how  they  stand  related 
to  Him.     All  the  religions  of  the  world  were  framed  with  a  view  to  this  end. 

2.  Even  the  chosen  people,  when  Jesus  came  to  earth,  needed  light  on  this 
subject  of  subjects.  They  had  retained  the  letter  of  their  law,  but  had  lost  the 
spirit  of  the  law  (vii.  23,  24).  They  misapprehended  the  prophets.  Tradition  and 
ritual  were  what  the  Pharisee  trusted  in  ;  whilst  the  Essene  leaned  to  asceticism 
and  the  Sadducee  to  rationalism.  But  in  none  of  these  ways  was  there  any  true 
approach  to  God  (Mic.  vi.  6).  3.  Jesus  has  shown  us  the  way  of  access  to  the 
Father.  He  revealed  God  as  holy,  abhorring  sin,  by  no  means  clearing  the  guilty ; 
and  as  the  sinner,  gazing  on  His  revelation  of  the  Holy  One,  cries  out,  "  Depart 
from  me,"  etc.,  Jesus  presents  Himself  as  the  Lamb  of  God,  etc.  (i.  29).  Sinners 
are  shown  that,  though  eternal  Justice  forbids  that  a  free,  unconditional  escape 
from  the  guilt  and  penalty  of  sin  should  be  granted,  yet  a  way  has  been  found 
whereby  justice  and  mercy  can  be  and  are  reconciled.  It  is  true  certain  conditions 
are  affixed  to  this  boon.  Men  are  required  to  repent  of  and  renounce  sin,  and 
accept  the  pardon  and  peace  offered  in  Christ.  4.  Thus  Christ  enlightened  the 
world  on  this  fact  of  such  importance.  The  Morning  Star  of  promise  gleamed 
in  sacrifice  and  rite  and  prophecy  in  the  early  Church.  But  it  was  when  He 
came  to  earth  that  the  full  light  shone  on  our  world  ;  and  in  view  of  His  redemp- 
tive work  He  could  say,  "I  am  the  light,"  etc. 

IV.  Jesus  is  the  light  of  the  world  in  revealing  to  men  the  existence  and 
eternity  of  life  beyond  the  grave. — 1.  For  the  assurance  of  the  existence  of  a 
future  life  men  have  ever  longed.  This  has  been  to  them  a  supreme  question. 
Reason  can  offer  no  final  solution  of  the  problem.  The  disproportion  in 
the  allotment  of  rewards  and  punishments  here,  and  the  longing  after  immor- 
tality, deep  seated  in  the  human  heart,  may  lead  to  a  presumption  that  there  is  a 
life  beyond.  But  reason  has  no  absolute  authority,  and  cannot  state  definitely 
whether  that  life  she  longs  and  hopes  for  will  be  eternal.  2.  Revelation  tells  us 
of  a  future  spiritual  life.  In  patriarchal  times  God's  people  lived  in  the  conscious- 
ness of  that  higher  life.  He  was  the  God  of  the  living,  and  not  of  the  dead  (Matt, 
xxii.  32).  But  it  was  reserved  for  Jesus  Christ,  not  only  by  His  teaching,  but 
by  His  actual  rising  from  the  dead,  to  bring  "  life  and  immortality  to  light." 

3.  In  view  of  all  this  Jesus  has  proved  Himself  to  be  "  the  light  of  the  world." 
But  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  will  not  avail  unless  He  is  to  each  individual  the 
Sun  of  righteousness.  He  who  enters  some  gloomy  cell,  shutting  himself  in  from 
the  brightness  of  noonday,  may  indirectly  benefit  from  the  sun,  for  its  heat-rays 
will  warm  even  the  air  of  his  prison ;  but  he  cannot  rejoice  in  its  light.  So  if 
men  shut  themselves  up  in  their  sin  and  self-righteousness,  the  radiancy  of  the 
Light  of  the  world  will  be  well-nigh  vain,  so  far  as  they  are  concerned.  They 
must  open  their  hearts  to  receive  Him,  if  they  would  be  blest  by  the  brightness 
of  His  rising.  And  those  on  whom  He  has  risen  will  shine  in  ever-increasing 
light  until  the  perfect  day  of  which  Christ  is  the  eternal  light. 


HOMILETIC  NOTES. 

Vers.    1-11.      Pericope     adulter w. —  conclusions  rest  not  only  on  external 

Most  Biblical  scholars  are  now  agreed  but    on     internal    grounds.       Several 

that  this  narrative  forms  no  part   of  great    scholars,     however,     admit    its 

the  original  text  of  this  Gospel.    Their  genuineness,  and  defend  it  as  part  of 

233 


chap.  viii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


the  sacred  text.  The  evidence  for  and 
against  its  retention  may  be  briefly 
stated.  1.  It  must  have  existed  as  a 
part  of  the  Gospel  narrative  in  the 
third  or  even  in  the  second  century ; 
for  it  is  quoted  in  the  Apostolic  Consti- 
tutions. 2.  The  Church  fathers  Jerome, 
Ambrose,  Augustine,  etc.,  admit  the 
genuineness  of  the  passage,  and  com- 
ment upon  it.  3.  It  is  contained  in 
MSS.  ranging  from  the  fifth  to  the 
eleventh  century  (D,  F,  G,  H,  etc.), 
and  in  about  three  hundred  cursives ; 
and,  of  course,  some  of  these  may  be 
copies  of  earlier  MSS.  than  any  now 
known.  Jerome,  e.g.,  mentions  that 
it  was  found  in  many  MSS.  of  his 
time.  And  his  evidence  here  is  unim- 
peachable. It  appears  also  in  early 
MSS.  of  the  Vulgate  and  Ethiopic 
versions,  among  others.  Such  are  the 
main  facts  of  the  evidence  for  its 
genuineness  as  part  of  this  Gospel.  On 
the  other  hand,  there  is  a  great  weight 
of  evidence  which  seems  to  exclude  it 
from  its  position  here.  1 .  It  is  not  found 
in  the  great  uncial  MSS.  N,  (A),  B,  (0), 
L,  X,  etc. ;  for  although  A  and  C  are 
defective  at  this  point,  it  is  considered 
from  an  estimate  of  the  extent  of  the 
portions  missing  that  it  was  not  in  the 
complete  copies.  It  is  omitted  also 
in  fifty  cursives.  2.  The  passage  is 
marked  with  asterisks,  etc.,  in  several 
of  the  MSS.  which  contain  it ;  whilst 
in  others  its  position  is  altered.  In 
one  document  it  is  placed  after  vii.  36 ; 
in  others  at  the  end  of  the  Gospel ;  and 
in  others  still  after  Luke  xxi.  3.  It 
is  not  commented  on  by  Origen,  Cyril, 
Chrysostom,  and  others. — Scrivener, 
"Intro."  etc. 

Internal  evidence. — 1.  There  is  great 
variation  in  the  texts  where  it  is  ad- 
mitted. Griesbach  distinguished  three 
distinct  texts  :  (a)  the  Textus  Receptus, 
(6)  that  of  Codex  D,  and  (c)  what  might 
be  called  a  composite  text  (see  Godet). 
2.  There  are  in  the  narrative  forms  of 
expression  which  seem  to  distinguish 
the  passage  from  the  Gospel  as  a  whole. 
But  this  part  of  the  internal  evidence 
must  not  be  pressed  too  strongly.  The 
occurrence  here  of  one  or  two  words 

234 


and  phrases  nowhere  else  found  in 
this  Gospel  is  not  conclusive  against 
the  authenticity  of  the  passage.  If 
to  opo<s  twv  iXaiwv,  e.g.,  occurs  here 
only,  so  does  Ke'Spos  in  xviii.  1.  Nor 
must  what  seems  a  "  want  of  harmony 
between  the  spirit  of  the  narrative  and 
the  context  of  St.  John  "  (Godet)  be  too 
much  insisted  on.  Many  scholars  have 
failed  to  see  this  want  of  harmony. 
A  consideration  of  the  evidence  for 
and  against  the  passage  seems  to  lead, 
at  all  events,  to  the  conclusion  that 
the  narrative  is  a  genuine  apostolic 
tradition ;  and  there  is  much  force  in 
the  suggestion  of  Augustine  that  it 
was  kept  out  of  the  text  by  those  of 
little  faith,  who  were  afraid  it  might 
lead  to  moral  laxity.  It  is  not  impos- 
sible that  it  was  first  "  bracketed  "  in 
some  MSS.,  as  not  to  be  read  in  the 
public  assemblies,  and  in  copies  of  the 
MSS.  omitted.  The  following  weighty 
words  of  Dr.  Reynolds  wisely  sum  up 
the  controversy  :  "  Though  the  spirit, 
atmosphere,  and  phrase  suggest  the 
Synoptic  tradition  rather  than  the 
Johannine,  yet  it  must  not  be  forgotten 
that  there  are  many  Synoptic  passages 
in  John's  Gospel,  and  Johannine 
phrases  in  the  Synoptists.  The  criticism 
proceeding  from  moral  timidity  has 
failed  to  recognise  the  grandeur  of  the 
entire  proceeding.  It  contains  no  pal- 
liation of  incontinence,  but  a  simple 
refusal  of  Jesus  to  assume  the  position 
of  a  civil  judge  or  executor  of  the  law,  in 
face  of  the  established  political  supre- 
macy of  Rome ;  while  the  Lord  made 
a  demand  for  personal  holiness,  and  an 
appeal  to  conscience  so  pungent  that, 
in  lieu  of  condemning  to  death  a  sinful 
woman,  He  judged  a  whole  crowd  of 
men,  convincing  them  of  sin,  while  He 
gave  the  overt  transgressor  time  for 
repentance  and  holier  living."  Bishop 
Wordsworth  (Greek  Testament  in  loc), 
whilst  concluding  that  the  passage 
contains  a  true  history,  in  all  proba- 
bility from  St.  John,  and  delivered  by 
him  orally,  considers  that  it  was  not  a 
part  of  his  written  Gospel,  and  was 
probably  added  first  on  the  margin  of 
MSS.,  and  thence  crept  into  the  text. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   VIII. 


And  he  draws  from  the  investigation 
of  the  whole  difficulty  these  moral 
inferences :  a.  Thankfulness  to  God 
for  the  solid  foundation  on  which 
the  proof  of  the  genuineness  and 
inspiration  of  the  canon  of  Scrip- 
ture rests.  This  passage  consists  of 
twelve  verses  only.  Few  doubt  its 
authenticity.  But  its  canonicity  is  the 
question  at  issue.  How  much  and 
minutely  has  this  been  discussed  !  How 
rigid  has  been  the  scrutiny  to  which 
the  canonical  Scripture  has  been  sub- 
jected before  being  received  as  the 
work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  by  the  universal 
Church  !  And,  in  proportion  to  the 
rigidness  of  the  scrutiny,  how  solid 
the  ground  of  our  belief  in  the  inspira- 
tion of  Scripture  !  b.  It  reminds  us 
of  our  privilege  in  possessing  so  many 
MSS.  belonging  to  an  early  age  of  the 
Church's  history — proofs  of  the  genuine- 
ness of  the  text.  c.  It  leads  to  a 
careful  examination  of  the  grounds  on 
which  our  belief  in  the  inspiration  of 
Scripture  is  based,  d.  It  excites  us  to 
thank  Him  who  not  only  gave  Scrip- 
ture, but  founded  the  Church  universal 
to  guard  Scripture  and  assure  us  of  its 
inspiration. 

Vers.  1-12.  Illumination  of  the  temple 
court  at  the  feast  of  tabernacles. — One 
of  the  features  of  the  joyful  feast  of 
tabernacles  was  the  illumination  of 
the  city  at  nightfall,  on  at  least  the 
first  evening  of  the  festival,  but  pro- 
bably on  the  other  evenings  as  well. 
Large  candelabra  were  lighted  in  the 
court  of  the  women,  and  threw  their 


radiance  afar.  Probably  a  partial 
illumination  of  the  city  took  place  ;  at 
all  events,  "  many  in  the  assembly 
carried  flambeaux."  The  wicks  of  the 
lamps  in  the  temple  court  are  said  to 
have  been  "  furnished  from  the  casf.-off 
garments  of  the  priests."  Festivities 
were  kept  up  for  some  time  after  the 
lighting  of  the  lamps,  the  light  of  which 
was  seen  far  and  wide.  Very  striking 
must  have  been  the  spectacle  on  such 
occasions.  And  the  ceremony  had  a 
meaning.  Just  as  the  pouring  out  of 
the  water  of  Siloam  in  the  morning  re- 
minded the  people  of  God's  goodness  to 
them  at  the  rock  in  Horeb,  so  the 
sudden  lighting  up  of  the  darkened 
temple  court,  and  adjacent  parts  of  the 
city,  reminded  the  festive  crowds  of  the 
"  pillar  of  fire  by  night  "  (Exod.  xiii. 
21)  which  guided  them  in  the  wilder- 
ness. If  the  passage  vii.  53 — viii.  1-11 
is  not  retained  as  part  of  this  Gospel, 
then  it  may  be  held  that  in  ver.  12 
our  Lord  was  referring  to  the  prepara- 
tions for  lighting  the  candelabra  or  the 
actual  lighting  of  them  He  would 
thus  call  attention  to  Himself  as  the 
true  guide  over  life's  pilgrim  ways  in 
the  darkness  of  our  present  state : 
"  He  that  followeth  Me  shall  not  walk 
in  darkness."  If,  however,  the  pericope 
be  retained  (from  vii.  53 — viii.  1-11), 
we  should  infer  that  our  Lord,  entering 
the  temple  in  the  early  morning  and 
pointing  to  the  rising  sun,  then  drew 
attention  to  Himself  as  the  true  and 
only  light  of  the  world  of  men.  Both 
images  may  be  legitimately  referred  to 
Him  (Isa.  iv.  5  ;  Mai.  iv.  2). 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  12.  The  manner  in  which  mankind 
had  wandered  from  the  light. — The  early- 
fathers  of  the  race  would  hand  down  to  their 
children  the  knowledge  of  God  they  pos- 
sessed as  the  framer  of  the  heavens  and 
earth,  which  continually  tell  of  His  glory. 
"  But,"  as  one  has  beautifully  said,  "  this 
precious  truth  was  vitiated  among  their 
hands.  By  dint  of  admiration  for  the  works 
of  God  they  took  them  in  the  end  for  God 
Himself ;  and  the  stars  which  appeared  to 
announce  His  glory  became  in  turn  their 
divinities  "  (Massillon). 


Ver.  12.  Men  by  nature  have  wandered  far 
from  the  light  and  knowledge  of  God. 
Chaldean  shepherds,  ranging  trackless  fields, 
Beneath  the  concave  of  unclouded  skies 
Spread  like  a  sea,  in  boundless  solitude, 
Look'd  on  the  polar  star,  as  on  a  guide 
And  guardian  of  their    course,    that  never 

closed 
His  steadfast  eye.    The  planetary  five 
With  a  submissive  reverence  they  beheld  ; 
Watch'd,  from  the  centre  of  their  sleeping 

flocks, 
Those  radiant  Mercuries,  that  seem'd  to  move, 

235 


chap.  viit.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN. 


Carrying  through  ether,  in  perpetual  round, 
Decrees  and  resolutions  of  the  gods  ; 
And,  by  their  aspects,  signifying  works 
Of  dim  futurity,  to  man  reveal'd. 
The  imaginative  faculty  was  lord 
Of  observations  natural ;  and,  thus 
Led  on,  those  shepherds  made  report  of  stars 
In  set  rotation  passing  to  and  fro, 
Between  the  orbs  of  our  apparent  sphere 
And  its  invisible  counterpart,  adorn'd 
With  answering  constellations,  under  Earth, 
Kemoved  from  all  approach  of  living  sight, 
But  present  to  the  dead,  who,  so  they  deem'd, 
Like  those  celestial  messengers,  beheld 
All  accidents,  and  judges  were  of  all. 

The  lively  Grecian,  in  a  land  of  hills, 
Rivers,   and    fertile    plains,    and    sounding 

shores, 
Under  a  cope  of  variegated  sky, 
Could  find  commodious  place  for  every  god, 
Promptly  received,  as  prodigally  brought, 
From  the  surrounding  countries,  at  the  choice 
Of  all  adventurers.     With  unrivall'd  skill, 
As  nicest  observation  f  urnish'd  hints 
For  studious  fancy,  did  his  hand  bestow 
On  fluent  operations  a  fix'd  shape  ; 
Metal  or  stone,  idolatrously  served. 
And  yet,  triumphant  o'er  this  pompous  show 
Of  ait,  this  palpable  array  of  sense, 
On  every  side  encounter'd  ;  in  despite 
Of  the  gross  fictions  chanted  in  the  streets 
By  wandering  rhapsodists ;  and  in  contempt 
Of  doubt  and  bold  denials  hourly  urged 
Amid   the    wrangling    schools — a    "spirit" 

hung, 
Beautiful  region  !  e'er  thy  towns  and  farms, 
Statues  and  temples,  and  memorial  tombs ; 
And  emanations  were  perceived,  and  acts 
Of  immortality,  in  nature's  course, 
Exemplified  by  mysteries  that  were  felt 
As  bonds,  on  grave  philosopher  imposed 
And  armed  warrior  ;  and  in  every  grove 
A  gay  or  pensive  tenderness  prevail'd 
When  piety  more  awful  had  relax'd. 

Wordsworth 


Ver.  12.  Reason  not  the  light  of  men. 
Dim  as   the  borrow'd    beams  of   moon 

stars 
To  lonely,  weary,  wandering  travellers, 
Is  reason  to  the  soul :  and  as,  on  high, 
Those  rolling  fires  discover  but  the  sky, 


and 


Not  light  as  here  ;  so  reason's  glimmering  ray 
Was  sent,  not  to  assure  our  doubtful  way, 
But  guide  us  upward  to  a  better  day. 
And  as  those  nightly  tapers  disappear 
When  day's  bright   lord  ascends  our  hemi- 
sphere ; 
So  pale  grows  reason  at  religion's  sight ;     • 
So  dies,  and    so   dissolves   in  supernatural 

light. 
Some  few,  whose  lamp  shone  brighter,  have 

been  led 
From  cause  to  cause,  to  nature's  secret  head, 
And  found  that  one  first  principle  must  be ; 
But  what  or  who,  that  Universal  He  ; 
Whether  some  soul  encompassing  this  ball, 
Unmade,  unmoved,  yet  making,  moving  all ; 
Not  even  the  Stagirite  himself  could  see, 
And  Epicurus  guess'd  as  well  as  he. 
As  blindly  groped  they  for  a  future  state, 
As  rashly  judged  of  Providence  and  fate, 
But  least  of  all  could  their  endeavours  find 
What  most  concern'd  the  good  of  human  kind. 

Thus  anxious  thoughts  in  endless  circles  roll, 
Without  a  centre  where  to  fix  the  soul  : 
In  this  wild  maze  their  vain  endeavours  end  : 
How  can  the  less  the  greater  comprehend  ? 
Or  finite  reason  reach  Infinity  ? 
For   what    could    fathom   God  were   more 
than  He. — John  Bryden. 

Ver.  12.  Christians  in  Christ  are  lights  in 
the  world. — Every  Christian  is  a  light  of  the 
world ;  for  he  should  know  and  be  assured 
what  manner  of  man  he  is,  and  what  is  his 
standing  with  God — that  he  comes  from  God, 
and  ...  in  Christ  has  a  holy  standing, 
having  become  a  new  man,  and  shall  eternally 
abide  with  God.  In  this  condition  I  live 
and  bear  the  cross  ;  therefore  I  know  whence 
I  have  come.  I  am  truly  no  more  the  old 
Hans  or  Claus,  who  was  descended  from 
Adam ;  but  I  am  a  Christian.  I  bear  a 
name  common  to  all,  with  all  those  who  are 
new  born.  .  .  .  And  at  the  end  of  this  life 
heaven  stands  open  for  me,  so  that  with  all 
the  saints  I  may  go  thither.  I  am  sure  of 
my  position  ;  my  glory  has  a  most  precious 
foundation.  But  the  "  evil  men  and  seducers" 
stand  in  great  peril ;  they  know  not  whence 
they  come  and  whither  they  go,  are  uncertain 
of  their  condition,  and  pass  on  as  in  a  dream. 
— Luther,  quoted  by  Besser. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13—59. 


Vers.  13-19.  Witnesses  to  the  Light  of  the  world. — The  great  claim  made  by- 
Jesus  was  not  permitted  to  pass  unnoticed.  They  brought  against  Him  a 
repeated  accusation.  "  Thou  bearest  witness  of  Thyself,"  etc.,  said  the  Pharisees. 
They  forgot  that  He  had  already  repudiated  this  claim  (v.  31,  etc.) ;  they  forgot 
or  did  not  choose  to  remember  that  Jesus  had  called  in  the  testimony  of  other 
witnesses.     But  the  Pharisees  shut  their  eyes  to  the  wonderful  testimony  that  had 

236 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.         chap,  viil 


been  given.     They  were  self-blinded  and  would  not  see.     When  Jesus  is  accepted 
as  the  light  of  the  world  by  men,  then — 

I.  The  witness  He  bears  of  Himself  is  self-evident. — 1.  "Even  if  I  bear 
record,"  etc.  (ver.  14).  As  light  He  could  not  be  otherwise  than  self -revealing. 
No  elaborate  proof,  no  concourse  of  witnesses,  is  needed  to  demonstrate  the 
presence  of  light,  unless  to  such  as  are  blind  or  have  been  born  in,  and  have  never 
left,  some  dark  and  dismal  cell.  2.  Of  course,  as  the  Jews  held  that  Jesus  was 
merely  a  man,  then  such  a  claim  was  most  astounding,  and  they  had  a  right  to 
question  it.  But  it  was  even  here  that  their  error  lay.  Had  they  not  been 
prejudiced,  they  must  have  been  convinced  that  the  teaching  of  Jesus  and  His 
works  (v.  36)  showed  Him  to  be  more  than  man,  and  could  not  be  compatible 
with  a  false  claim.  3.  The  most  fatal  consequences  follow  this  rejection  of  the 
Light.  "  Ye  shall  die  in  your  sins  "  (ver.  24).  The  effect  of  turning  away  from 
the  Light  of  the  world  is  darkness  and  death. 

II.  Christ  witnesses  truly  of  Himself,  for  He  is  conscious  of  His  origin  and 
the  end  of  His  course. — 1.  Our  Lord's  testimony  regarding  things  invisible,  and 
His  relation  to  the  invisible  world,  was  not  mediate  or  fanciful ;  nor  was  it  the 
product  of  a  course  of  reasoning  :  it  was  based  on  personal  knowledge.  There  is 
no  proof  in  Scripture  that  Jesus  arrived  at  such  knowledge  either  by  a  splendid 
intuition  or  the  exercise  of  a  purified  reason,  that  His  Messianic  consciousness 
might  be  described  as  having  come  to  Him  by  gradual  evolution,  as,  in  the  case 
of  men,  ideas  and  discoveries  are  arrived  at.  2.  He  knew  whence  He  had  come, 
as  the  eternal  Word  who  was  with  God,  and  who  had  ever  the  consciousness  of 
the  divine  presence  (iii.  13,  etc. ;  Luke  ii.  49).  This  the  Jews  would  not  admit; 
they  would  know  Him  only  as  the  carpenter,  the  son  of  Joseph,  etc.  3.  Christ 
knew  also  the  course  that  lay  before  Him  (Luke  ix.  31,  51,  etc.).  This  was  no 
immediate  proof ;  but  even  when,  after  His  ascension,  the  apostles  called  attention 
to  it  (Acts  ii.  22-37),  many  refused  to  be  convinced  (Acts  iv.  1,  etc.).  He  knew 
whither  He  was  going — to  the  cross  and  the  grave,  but  thence  to  the  Father  who 
had  sent  Him,  and  to  the  heavenly  seats  whence  He  had  come  to  earth. 

III.  The  manifestation  of  the  Light  in  judgment  is  borne  witness  to  by  the 
Father. — 1.  In  the  very  fact  of  Jesus  being  the  light  of  the  world  is  seen  the 
inevitable  imminence  of  judgment  on  those  who  are  in  darkness,  even  although 
He  had  not  come  to  judge  but  to  save.  Salvation  is  the  end  of  His  witness- 
bearing.  2.  Without  true  knowledge  it  is  impossible  to  arrive  at  true  judgment ; 
and  these  Pharisees  judged  according  to  the  appearance — from  the  external, 
superficial  aspect  of  things  (vii.  24).  But  even  though  Jesus  possessed  all  true 
knowledge,  yet  He  alone,  as  the  incarnate  Son,  judged  no  man.  His  office  was 
not  judgment.  3.  When,  however,  men  rejected  salvation,  rejected  all  the 
evident  testimony  that  He  was  the  Redeemer,  the  Star  of  Jacob,  the  Sun  of 
righteousness,  then  nothing  but  judgment  remained  possible.  It  cannot  be 
otherwise.  Those  who  reject  Him — the  light,  the  truth — are  shut  up  to  darkness 
and  death  ;  and  Jesus  must,  in  this  view,  pronounce  sentence  upon  them  (ix.  39  ; 
Matt.  x.  35,  41,  42,  etc.).  4.  But  although  in  thus  coming  to  save  He  also  must 
needs  judge  (Luke  ii.  34,  35),  yet  even  so  His  judgment  was  not  His  alone,  but 
also  that  of  the  Father  (vers.  16-18),  with  whom  the  Son  was  ever  in  unity.  But 
"the  light  shineth  in  darkness,"  etc.  (i.  5).  And  as  hatred  of  truth  prevents 
men  seeing  and  acknowledging  it,  because  they  do  not  desire  to  believe  it, 
so  hatred  of  Christ  prevented  those  Jews  accepting  Him  as  their  light.  Had 
they  done  so,  they  must  have  seen  that  in  the  witness  of  Christ  was  evident  also 
the  witness  of  the  invisible  Father  (xiv.  9  ;  Col.  i.  15  ;  Heb.  i.  3).  5.  Learn — 
(1)  Follow  the  Light.  Accept  Christ,  and  then  He  will  be  His  own  evidence  in 
the  soul,  bringing  with  Him  life,  peace,  joy.  (2)  Accept  His  witness  and  the 
knowledge  of  the  whence  and  whither  of  life  in  Him  will  be  made  plain.     Life 

237 


chap.  viii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


will  be  no  more  uncertain  and  vague,  but  a  fixed  course  to  an  assured  and 
blessed  end.  (3)  Remember  the  awful  results  of  turning  away  from  the  Light  of 
the  world  ;  it  involves  the  being  left  in  spiritual  darkness :  this  leads  to  sin,  and 
the  end  of  sin,  which  is  death. 

Ver.  21-24.  Dying  in  sin. — I.  A  sinful  life,  without  repentance,  leads  to 
a  death  criminally  impenitent  as  an  outcome  of  character. — 1.  A  wilful 
renunciation  of  penitence — and  this  not  only  by  a  positive  and  express  revolt  from 
God — a  refusal  to  recognise  the  Creator  who  has  given  men  life,  etc.  What 
is  meant  is  that  unrepentant  spirit  resulting  from  weakness  or  maliciousness  of 
heart,  or  which  is  the  effect  of  the  one  or  the  other.  Take,  e.g.,  the  case  of  one 
whose  heart  is  filled  with  gall  and  bitterness,  and  who  refuses  reconciliation  in 
view  of  death.  2.  The  omission  of  the  means  by  which  the  grace  of  God,  which 
leads  to  repentance,  may  be  found.  Thus  the  disposition  and  character  of  the 
life  tend  to  lead  to  final  impenitence.  Habits  contracted  during  life  do  not 
vanish  at  approach  of  death,  and  thus  men  often  die  as  they  have  lived.  So,  too, 
the  sinful  affections.  The  wise  man  says,  "  The  sins  of  the  life  form  a  chain 
which  binds  the  sinner,  almost  in  spite  of  himself,  in  bondage  even  till  death  " 
(Prov.  v.  22).  Last,  the  heart  habitually  sinful  may  remain  untouched  and 
impenitent,  unless  a  miracle  of  Divine  Grace  interpose.  And  this  impenitence 
is  itself  a  sin — the  last  sin  and  consummation  of  the  sinful  life. 

II.  A  death  unhappily  impenitent. — 1.  It  is  not  sufficient  in  order  that  a 
man  may  die  in  a  state  of  grace  that  he  should  resolve  to  repent  some  time. 
For  the  time  for  repentance  may  not  be  granted.  His  final  impenitence  may  not 
therefore  be  a  new  sin,  but  the  greatest  of  all  misfortunes.  2.  How  common 
are  sudden  and  unlooked-for  deaths,  when  the  sinner  falls  suddenly  and  without 
warning  !  And  how  often  do  men  die  in  ignorance  of  their  danger  !  And  how 
frequently,  when  spiritual  help  is  called,  are  they  incapable  of  availing  themselves 
of  it,  or  the  messenger  fails  to  unlock  the  heart  of  the  dying. 

III.  False  penitence. — 1.  When  death  comes  it  brings  sorrow  to  dying  sinners 
that  they  are  quitting  the  objects  which  ministered  to  their  concupiscence,  and 
repentance  is  thus  likely  to  be  thrown  into  the  background.  2.  And  then 
because  their  hearts  have  been  hardened  by  sin,  their  repentance  may  not  be  of 
a  genuine  sort — it  may  be  either  forced  or  a  merely  human  penitence.  (1)  A 
forced  penitence  ;    for  such  men  are  often  moved  to  express  repentance  urged 

by  servile  fear,  and  inevitable  necessity.  (2)  A  merely  human  penitence,  i.e. 
which  has  neither  God  nor  sin  as  its  object.  What  do  these  pretended  penitents 
fear  ?  Burning,  said  Augustine.  This  is  what  moves  them.  How  does  an 
impenitent  life  lead  to  false  repentance  at  death  ?  It  does  so  through  self- 
deception.  One  who  has  never  repented  during  his  lifetime  has  never  learned 
what  it  means,  and  thus  may  more  easily  be  deceived  regarding  it  at  death. — 
Bourdaloue. 

Yers.  21-30.  The  peace  of  Jesus  amid  conflict  in  His  consciousness  of  the 
Father's  presence  and  approval. — Probably  a  new  audience  had  gathered  around 
Jesus.  Many  of  the  festive  pilgrims  have  departed.  The  Jerusalem  Jews  and 
the  rulers  alone  remain,  and  the  greater  part  of  that  company  are  inimical  to 
Him.  But  divine  love  is  unwearied  in  its  efforts  for  man's  redemption.  Another 
opportunity  is  to  be  given  to  those  hearing  Him,  an  opportunity  of  which  some 
really  availed  themselves  (ver.  30).  But  the  majority  of  His  hearers  were  openly 
scornful  and  antagonistic ;  and  when  Jesus  came  face  to  face  with  those  men,  He 
experienced  what  was  worst  in  human  nature.  But  the  heart  that  is  in  unison 
with  the  divine  will,  and  is  filled  with  the  divine  love,  has  peace  even  in  this 
bitter  strife. 

238 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN.         chap.  viii. 


I.  Those  who  know  how  they  stand  toward  God  have  peace  in  conflict. — 
1.  It  was  so  with  Jesus  in  the  highest  degree.  He  did  not  attempt  to  conceal  from 
Himself  the  enmity  cherished  against  Him  by  those  whom  He  had  come  to  save. 
He  was  well  aware  that  He  would  finally  suffer  death  at  their  hands,  etc. 
(ver.  21).  2.  But  in  view  of  all  this  opposition,  etc.,  He  never  lost  His  inward 
serenity,  but  moved  among  His  foes  with  a  calm  steadfastness,  replying  to  their 
woids,  burning  with  suppressed  hatred  and  malice,  with  no  hot,  passionate 
rejoinder,  but  first  and  chiefest  with  a  trustful  look  heavenward.  "  I  go  away," 
etc.  (ver.  21).  3.  So  calm  and  confident  was  He  of  His  standing  with  God 
(ver.  25),  that  He  declared  His  right  to  speak  many  things  to  them,  to  utter  the 
truth,  and  also  to  judge  them  ;  and  that  the  time  would  come  when  they  would 
learn  whom  it  was  they  had  despised  and  rejected  (ver.  28).  4.  He  did  not 
descend  to  futile  wranglings  and  discussions  with  those  Jewish  rulers  and  people. 
He  stands  among  them  with  majesty,  claiming  to  be  the  equal  with  the  Father  ; 
He  requires  them  to  listen  to  Him,  lest  they  should  die  in  their  sins.  He  speaks 
as  one  conscious  of  His  standing  toward  God,  when  He  so  plainly  and  without 
periphrase  uncovered  to  their  vision  the  great  gulf  that  lay  between  Himself  and 
them.  In  their  scornful  and  wilful  misunderstanding  of  His  words,  outvying 
their  question  on  a  former  occasion  (vii.  35),  they  hinted  that  He  must  mean  to 
go  hence  by  the  only  way  by  which  they  would  not  follow  Him,  as  that  would 
eternally  separate  them  in  the  spiritual  world  ;  but  Jesus  calmly  showed  that  by 
continuance  in  their  opposition  they  would  occupy  the  lower  side  of  the  great 
gulf  fixed  between  life  and  death  beyond  (Luke  xvi.  26).  And  He  thus  spoke 
from  the  sense  of  assured  union  with  His  Father. 

II.  The  sense  of  the  divine  presence  and  favour  is  the  foundation  of  unbroken 
spiritual  serenity. — 1.  It  is  hard  to  live  among  evil-minded  men,  to  see  their 
unrighteousness,  to  hear  their  calumnious  words.  It  is  trying  to  experience  the 
evil  of  their  doings  in  our  own  lives,  or  to  see  it  working  woe  in  the  lives  of 
others.  2.  Nor  are  we  to  suppose  that  Jesus  was  altogether  unmoved  by  the 
persistent  unbelief  and  enmity  of  those  Jewish  rulers,  and  the  bitterness  of  their 
attacks  upon  Him,  etc.  No  true  man  can  stand  by  stoically  and  hear  others 
accuse  him  of  thoughts  or  actions  abhorrent  to  him  and  foreign  to  his  nature,  as 
those  men  did  in  Jesus'  case  (ver.  22).  The  pure  human  nature  of  Jesus  must  in 
some  measure  have  felt  these  attacks.  His  soul,  we  believe,  was  sorrowful  in 
view  of  all  this  (Ps.  xlii.  11).  3.  But  He  never  lost  His  tranquillity  of  soul 
(Matt.  xi.  20-30).  The  sense  of  His  Father's  presence,  and  the  knowledge  that 
every  step  was  bearing  Him  toward  the  full  glory  of  the  Father's  presence  again, 
kept  His  soul  in  peace  (ver.  21).  Therefore  how  wise  was  His  dealing  with  those 
men  !  how  simple  yet  how  skilful  and  incisive  were  His  replies  to  their  questions, 
as  He  sought  "  to  win  some,"  and  was  gladdened  when  "  many  believed  on  Him  "  ! 
(ver.  30).  4.  Here  Jesus  is  our  example.  Our  human  spirits  are  prone  to  rise 
and  fall  in  face  of  the  trials  and  contradictions  of  life  (2  Cor.  xi.  20-29).  But 
the  more  we  partake  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  the  more  we  seek  to  rise  toward 
His  attitude  of  constant  and  unswerving  obedience  ("I  do  always,"  etc.:  ver.  29), 
the  more  will  our  doubts,  perturbations,  etc.,  vanish  away,  and  peace  reign 
within,  even  amid  the  strifes  and  conflicts  of  life. 

Ver.  24.  The  doom  of  unbelief. — This  is  an  awful  word  from  the  voice  of  eternal 
Truth  !  Had  Christ  been  merely  a  man,  then  all  He  could  have  righteously 
asked  men  to  do  would  have  been  to  listen  to  His  teaching,  or  at  most  to  follow 
His  example.  But  He  could  not  have  given  men  life  and  power,  and  therefore 
could  not  have  called  them  to  that  higher  belief  and  trust  in  Him  that  He 
demanded.     But  His  life,  teaching,  power,  all  bore  out  His  assertion  that  He 

239 


chap.  viii.        H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


was  the  /  am,  and  that  through  Him  alone  men  could  be  reconciled  to  God. 
This  great  truth  is  confirmed  to  us — 

I.  By  history  and  experience.— 1.  The  power  of  Christ's  risen  life  has  been 
manifested  in  all  the  ages  of  the  Church's  history.  We  live  amid  irrefragable 
proofs  of  its  presence.  Christendom  is  the  proof  of  Christ's  affirmation,  /  am 
{He).  2.  And  personal  experience  of  the  spiritual  life  of  men  will  convince  us 
that  those  who  believe  and  trust  in  Jesus  as  the  incarnate  Son  of  the  Eternal 
are  truly  blessed.  Such  live  in  the  assurance  of  hope,  in  the  knowledge  and 
peace  of  forgiveness,  and  die  peacefully  looking  for  the  "  inheritance  incorrupt- 
ible," etc.  3.  What  else  can  bring  about  such  blessed  experiences  as  this  great 
truth  of  Christ's  oneness  with  the  Father,  and  the  power  of  His  redeeming  grace 
and  love  1  "  Can  any  night  be  so  dark  that  it  cannot  be  penetrated  by  this 
light,  and  any  burden  so  heavy  that  this  truth  will  not  make  lighter  ?  Where 
this  truth  takes  possession  of  a  soul,  there  spring  airs  blow  on  wintry  fields, 
balsam  streams  flow  for  smarting  wounds,  foretastes  of  paradise  are  given  on 
burning  deserts,  and  songs  of  thankfulness  and  praise  rise  from  hearts  over- 
flowing with  blessedness." 

II.  The  lack  of  this  faith  is  death.— 1.  "If  ye  believe  not  .  .  .  ye  shall  die 
in  your  sins."  Even  the  life  of  the  unbelievers  is  a  perpetual  death,  a  "  dying 
in  their  sins."     If  they  do  not  live  to  Christ,  they  live  to  themselves  and  the  world. 

2.  To  live  to  and  for  the  world  is  to  be  united  to  that  which  is  passing  and 
temporary,  and  the  things  of  the  world  as  consecrated  to  death.  3.  Self  and  its 
vanities  and  dreams,  its  self -righteousness,  etc.,  what  is  it  all  but  transitory, 
illusory,  dead  ?  4.  And  if  this  is  true  of  the  life  of  unbelievers,  how  much 
more  is  it  of  their  death  !  They  shall  die  in  their  sins.  Terrible  word  !  It  is  more 
terrible  than  if  Jesus  had  said,  Ye  shall  die  suddenly,  and  in  agony ;  for  such 
deaths  many  of  Christ's  saints  have  endured,  but  to  die  in  sin  is  to  die  unsaved. 
How  many  die  thus  !  Is  it  not  terrible,  fit  cause  for  bitter  tears  1  Will  this  not 
urge  us  to  do  what  in  us  lies  to  bring  salvation  to  perishing  men  ? 

Ill  How  shall  we  escape  despair  and  despondency  in  view  of  this? — 
1.  When  coldness  and  want  of  effort  in  the  Christian  Church  and  much  that 
betokens  worldliness  and  unconcern  on  the  part  of  many  called  by  Christ's  name 
are  widespread,  we  might  well  despair.  2.  But  whilst  our  heart  bleeds  for  a 
perishing  world,  we  must  remember  that  He  who  wept  over  Jerusalem,  etc., 
yearns  for  the  salvation  of  men,   and    that  He  still  seeks  and  saves  the  lost. 

3.  So  we  pray  for  us  and  our  brethren,  for  whom  Thy  blood  was  shed,  for  mercy  ! 
If  we  forget  Thee,  forget  us  not — if  we  forsake  Thee,  bear  us  on  Thy  heart.  If 
the  world  is  unworthy  of  Thy  grace,  it  all  the  more  needs  it.  If  the  world  denies 
and  hates  Thee,  Thou  dost  not  hate  it.  Follow  us  all  with  Thy  love,  especially 
those  who  are  blinded,  who  misjudge  and  revile  Thee,  and  let  no  one  go  far  from 
Thee,  so  long  as  there  is  a  possibility  of  return. — Abridged  from  F.  Arndt. 

Vers.  31-47.  The  servitude  of  sin  and  the  bondage  of  corruption. — Truly  did 
Jesus  say,  "  For  judgment  I  am  come  to  the  world."  Those  words  are  among 
the  most  terrible  and  the  sharpest  ever  spoken  to  men.  Coming  as  they  do  also 
from  the  lips  of  the  loving,  gentle  Saviour,  their  awfulnessis  infinitely  intensified. 
Are  they  not  premonitions  of  the  coming  judgment,  when  the  impenitent  shall 
cry,  "Hide  us  from  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb"?  (Rev.  vi.  16).  In  fiery  colours 
the  character  of  those  obdurate  unbelievers  is  limned ;  and  had  they  not  been 
utterly  dead  to  all  love  of  the  truth,  those  burning  words  must  have  led  them  to 
pause  and  reflect.  But  the  truth  must  needs  be  witnessed  to,  and  a  warning  left 
to  men  to  flee  from  the  awful  slavery  of  sin. 

I.  The  bondage  of  corruption  is  a  dark  reality. — 1.  On  looking  around  in  the 
world,  two  streams  of  tendency  become  apparent — good  and  evil.     Man  must 

240 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.        chap.  viii. 


follow  one  or  other  from  his  nature  and  position.  2.  But  as  we  read  the  history 
of  the  race  and  review  our  own  experience,  we  see  that  men  as  a  rule  follow  one 
of  these  streams — that  of  evil.  Yet  they  have  freedom  of  choice  in  that  the  good 
appeals  to  them  as  well  as  the  evil,  that  the  higher  nature  prompts  to  good,  the 
lower  to  evil.  3. '  Men  must  determine  which  course  they  will  follow.  A  man 
cannot  help  being  under  one  or  other  power  ;  it  is  a  necessity  of  his  being.  Yet 
he  can  choose  whether  he  will  be  a  servant  of  sin  unto  death,  or  of  obedience  to 
God  unto  righteousness.  But  on  account  of  the  disordered  state  of  his  being 
he  is  inclined  to  evil,  for  that  power  finds  auxiliaries  within  his  heart. 
4.  And  when  the  soul  delivers  itself  to  that  dark  power  its  slavery  is  unbounded. 
The  soul  is  bound  over  to  the  penalty  of  the  divine  law.  There  is  for  it  "  a 
fearful  looking  for  of  judgment."  All  the  powers  and  faculties  of  a  man's  being 
are  dragged  captive  behind  his  triumphal  car.  The  spiritual  vision  is  dimmed  ; 
the  spiritual  powers  and  faculties  are  bound  and  fettered ;  the  soul  is  kept  in 
degrading  spiritual  poverty ;  and  all  the  intellectual  and  natural  powers  are 
wearied  in  ministering  to  their  tyrant.  5.  And  this  is  no  mere  dogma  of 
Scripture.  It  is  a  truth  that  has  been  recognised  by  earnest,  thinking  men 
of  every  age. 

II.  The  slaves  of  sin  are  self-deceived  and  blind. — 1.  Sin  is  a  kind  of  madness, 
and  its  greatest  slaves  are  often  like  the  poor  madman  who  fancies  he  is  a  king, 
reigning  in  royal  state,  etc.  It  was  so  with  many  of  those  Jews  to  whom  our 
Lord  spoke.  We  are  free,  they  said,  were  never  in  bondage — as  if  their  whole 
history  from  the  exile  onward  did  not  give  their  brave  words  the  lie ;  and  as  if 
their  spiritual  history  did  not  tell  the  sad  tale  of  enslavement  either  to  idolatry 
or  spiritual  pride.  2.  The  picture  of  the  Pharisee  limned  by  our  Lord  revealed, 
in  a  stroke,  their  enslaved  condition,  etc.  (Luke  xviii.  11).  Thus  those  Jews  lived 
believing  Satan's  lie  ;  and  being  hearers  of  the  word  and  not  doers  thereof,  were 
like  a  man  contemplating  his  natural  face  in  a  glass  (James  i.  23-27),  and  not 
looking  into  the  perfect  law  of  liberty,  and  continuing  therein.  3.  So  those  men 
deceived  themselves  as  to  their  true  standing  and  position.  They  proudly 
claimed  to  be  Abraham's  seed — nay,  more,  they  claimed  a  higher  descent 
(ver.  41)  ;  but  our  Lord  pointed  them  to  the  fact  that  spiritually  they  had 
quite  another  "  head "  than  Abraham,  another  father  than  God.  Their  works 
betrayed  their  spiritual  affinity  j  and  had  they  not  been  utterly  blinded,  the 
truth  must  have  been  borne  in  upon  them.  But  their  proud  reliance  on  their 
outward  privileges,  their  unbounded  trust  in  their  outward  descent  from 
Abraham,  made  them  imagine  themselves  spotless.  All  must  be  right  with 
them.  4.  It  is  an  error  the  Church  even  may  fall  into,  and  the  conduct  of  those 
Jews  should  be  a  warning  example  (Rev.  iii.  17,  18). 

III.  The  end  of  this  servitude  is  destruction. — 1.  It  is  a  galling  yoke,  and  its 
end  is  death.  And  this  is  not  only  true  of  flagrant  sins — it  is  true  of  all  sin. 
All  its  effects  tend  to  the  same  end — spiritual  death — death  to  God  and  holiness 
and  eternal  life.  2.  As  it  is  with  our  physical  frame,  so  it  is  with  our  moral 
being.  Some  diseases  are  more  terrible  in  their  effects  than  others  ;  but  every 
disease  weakens  the  body  and  tends  to  shorten  and  destroy  life.  So  sin.  Not 
only  is  the  sensualist,  the  thief,  the  murderer,  a  bondslave  of  sin — every  sinful 
habit  enslaves.  3.  The  deceitful  man,  e.g.  the  liar,  the  slanderer,  the  gambler, 
the  man  who  makes  gold  his  god,  the  miser,  the  pleasure-seeker — all  are  wretched 
slaves  of  evil.  4.  And  as  God  will  not  permit  His  commandments  to  be  ever 
trampled  underfoot,  and  His  name  dishonoured,  as  surely  as  the  arch-liar  and 
murderer  shall  be  bound  in  chains  in  darkness  (Jude  6),  so  surely  will  those 
bound  to  sin  receive  its  wages  and  reward. 

IV.  The  way  of  deliverance  from  this  bondage  is  freedom  through  the  Son. — 
1.  But  this  implies  taking  His  yoke.     We  must  serve,  come  under  some  yoke. 

R  241 


chap.  viii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


And  when  we  enter  Christ's  kingly  service  we  are  on  the  way  of  safety.  And  in 
His  service  there  is  perfect  freedom  (ver.  36) — freedom  to  move  uninterruptedly  in 
the  way  of  our  being  and  of  the  purpose  of  our  creation — to  glorify  God  "  in  our 
bodies  and  spirits,  which  are  His"  (1  Cor.  vi.  20).  2.  This  is  the  truest  freedom ; 
in  this  way  would  we  walk  spontaneously  were  our  humanity  perfect,  as  was  that 
of  Jesus.  He  was  a  Son  in  the  Father's  house,  free  to  fulfil  that  which  is  the 
highest  freedom — the  divine  will.  3.  And  the  more  nearly  we  rise  to  Christ's 
likeness,  the  more  shall  we  be  delivered  from  that  degrading  bondage,  and 
rejoice  in  "  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God  "  (Rom.  viii.  21),  showing 
our  spiritual  affinity  by  our  love  to  the  Redeemer  (ver.  42),  and  by  doing  the 
works  of  our  Father  (ver.  39). 

Ver.  31.  True  disciples  of  Jesus. — There  are  false  and  true  disciples — disciples 
who  have  the  name  only  to  live,  but  are  dead ;  and  disciples  who  belong  in  heart 
and  life  to  Jesus.  There  are  those  whom  Jesus  does  not  recognise  as  His,  and 
others  whom  He  calls  with  joy  to  follow  Him.  The  marks  of  a  true  disciple  are 
given  in  these  words  :  "  If  ye  continue  in  My  word,"  etc. 

I.  The  mark  of  a  true  disciple  is  continuance  in  the  word  of  Christ.  And  this 
implies — 1.  The  hearing  of  Christ's  word.  Men  cannot  know  of  Christ  unless  they 
hear  of  Him  (Rom.  x.  17) ;  and  there  are  many  among  the  heathen  who  thus  cannot 
hear,  for  the  preacher  has  not  been  sent.  And  alas  !  there  are  many  in  Christian 
lands  who  will  not  hear.  2.  But  the  hearing  of  the  word  must  be  followed  by 
its  reception,  i.e.  by  faith  in  the  word,  if  the  hearing  is  to  be  efficacious.  Many 
of  those  Jews  heard  Christ's  word,  and  rejected  it  with  scorn.  So  many  now  have 
heard  from  childhood  this  word,  but  it  remains  a  dead  letter  to  them.  To  many 
still,  as  to  the  Jews,  His  word  is  "an  hard  saying,"  etc.  (vi.  60).  Many  may 
read  daily  His  word,  and  yet  not  truly  understand  or  receive  it.  So  was  it  with 
the  Jewish  teachers.  They  were  learned  in  the  writings  of  Moses  and  the 
prophets,  but  they  did  not  understand  them  and  truly  receive  them.  Men  must 
receive  it  by  faith.  3.  The  true  disciple  must  remain  in  Christ's  word — continue 
in  it.  This  implies  the  diligent  use  of  the  word.  Christ's  disciples  must  continu- 
ally exercise  themselves  in  the  word  they  have  heard,  seeking  prayerfully  to 
understand  it.  2.  They  are  not  to  be  content  with  the  mere  knowledge  of  its 
contents,  however.  There  are  those  who  may  have  much  Christian  knowledge, 
may  be  well  acquainted  with  the  facts  of  Christ's  word  and  the  doctrines  of  the 
gospel,  who  may  yet  at  heart  be  cold  and  dead  (1  Cor.  xv.  34).  3.  The  true 
disciple's  use  of  the  word  must  be  a  practical  one.  He  must  not  only  exercise 
himself  in  it,  know  it  well ;  he  must  obey  it,  must  do  what  the  word  commands. 
He  must  be  a  doer  of  the  word,  and  not  a  hearer  only  (James  i.  23,  25).  4.  And 
in  all  this  true  disciples  must  persevere  in  hearing  and  in  believing,  in  use  and 
practice  of  the  word.  Then  it  will  be  evident  to  the  world  whose  they  are,  etc. 
They  will  be  living  epistles,  etc.  (2  Cor.  iii.  2 ;  GaL  ii.  20). 

II.  The  company  of  true  disciples. — 1.  The  Lord  gave  the  word,  etc. 
(Ps.  lxviii.  11).  Oftentimes  the  believer  is  apt  to  despond,  and  to  think  the 
company  small,  because  all  followers  of  Christ  do  not  fully  obey  Him.  But  those 
words  were  spoken  to  Jews  whose  faith  was  of  a  very  elementary  kind.  They 
now  acknowledged  His  claims  to  Messiahship,  but  their  knowledge  was  clouded 
by  their  traditional  expectations  and  prepossessions.  Still,  they  testified  to 
Christ,  even  though  imperfectly.  2.  And  thus  there  are  many  who  confess  the 
power  of  His  word,  and  in  feeble  fashion  it  may  be,  yet  truly  follow  Him. 
3.  The  danger  is  that  they  do  not  persevere  and  continue  in  His  word.  Many 
doubtless  fell  away  during  our  Lord's  ministry  (vi.  66),  and  no  very  great 
company  remained  after  His  crucifixion  (Acts  i.  15  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  6).  Yet 
many  no  doubt  were  at  heart  disciples,  and  were  added  to  the  Church  after 

242 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.        chap.  viii. 


Pentecost  (Acts  ii.  41,  47).  And  the  same  is  doubtless  true  in  the  fields  of 
apostolic  preaching  now.  As  the  Church  looks  out  on  the  vast  fields  of 
heathenism,  let  her  take  courage  and  go  forward  to  convert  and  strengthen  the 
weak  in  faith  to  persevere.  4.  They  are  a  numerous  company  of  every  age,  of 
every  race,  of  every  condition  ;  all  are  called  to  hear,  to  know,  to  do  Christ's  word, 
and  show  forth  His  glory  (Gal.  iii.  28). 

III.  The  joy  of  true  discipleship. — 1.  His  true  followers  know  Him  and 
follow  Him.  And  when  once  they  truly  know  Him  they  will  desire  ever  to 
abide  in  Him  (vi.  68).  2.  And  in  knowing  Him  they  know  the  truth — the 
truth  regarding  God,  their  own  condition  and  their  relationship  to  Him,  and, 
above  all,  the  way  of  safety  here  and  of  blessedness  hereafter.  3.  And  this  know- 
ledge brings  freedom  from  the  dread  of  what  is  beyond,  when  the  divine  holiness 
and  righteousness  are  contrasted  with  the  imperfection  and  sinfulness  of  even  the 
best  of  lives,  and  freedom  from  the  numbing  and  paralysing  power  of  sin  in  the 
spiritual  life.  4.  And  in  this  new  life  of  spiritual  freedom  the  true  disciples  go 
forth  in  hope  to  witness  for  Christ,  and  spread  that  word  which  has  brought 
such  joy  to  themselves.  Thus  they  are  found  in  every  sphere  and  station, — 
busy  and  active  men  in  their  work  in  the  world ;  gentle  women  in  the  home,  or 
in  the  service  of  the  Church,  by  the  bedside  of  the  sick,  caring  for  the  poor, 
seeking  to  bring  back  the  wanderers  to  the  fold ;  and  even  the  weak  in  faith  and 
babes  in  Christ,  showing  by  their  joy  in  endurance  or  service,  in  life  and  work, 
their  continuance  in  Christ's  word,  and  their  faith  as  true  disciples. 

Vers.  32-36.  Freedom  and  truth  the  liberty  of  God's  children. — The  chief 
ideas  that  meet  us  here  are  freedom  and  truth — freedom  as  the  end  to  be 
reached  ;  truth,  the  eternal  truth,  as  the  way  in  which  to  attain  to  it.  Freedom 
is  a  much-abused  word  and  idea.  It  is  forgotten  that  there  cannot  for  any 
created  being  be  absolute  freedom  :  within  the  circle  of  created  things  freedom  is 
more  or  less  conditioned  in  the  material  and  other  spheres.  Even  in  social  and 
political  spheres  freedom  is  limited.  The  kind  of  liberty  or  licence  claimed  by 
socialists  or  anarchists  is  not  freedom.  There  is  but  One  who  is  absolutely  free 
— God ;  and  He  is  so  because  He  is  absolutely  perfect.  Even  when  it  is  said  He 
cannot  lie,  that  sin  cannot  dwell  with  Him,  He  is  most  free,  for  sin  is  slavery, 
etc.  The  will  and  action  of  the  Eternal  are  the  expression  of  His  perfect  being. 
For  all  created  beings  true  freedom  consists  in  their  living  spontaneously  accord- 
ing to  the  laws  of  their  being.  And  within  these  limitations  human  freedom  is 
glorious,  inspiring.  Political,  religious,  social,  and  individual  freedom  are  all,  in 
their  place  and  measure,  most  worthy.  But  true  freedom  in  all  these  spheres  can 
come  in  one  way  only — by  the  truth,  i.e.  through  Christ. 

I.  Spiritual  freedom  comes  through  the  truth. — 1.  It  is  freedom  in  this  sphere 
to  which  the  Saviour  specially  refers  here.  Freedom  here  means  universal 
freedom.  If  the  soul  is  enslaved,  the  man  is  enslaved.  2.  To  this  truth  the 
Redeemer  pointed  those  Jews  who  believed  on  Him.  What  was  the  cause  of  the 
degraded  condition  of  Israel  at  that  time  ?  Was  it  not  that  many  of  them 
had  rejected  the  revelation  of  God  in  its  spiritual  and  higher  aspects,  whilst 
others  who  still  received  it  made  it  void  through  their  traditions?  They  made 
their  law  a  system  of  checks  on  the  outward  life,  and  not  a  means  of  enlighten- 
ing and  converting  the  soul.  This  was  not  the  kind  of  freedom  the  Jews  longed 
for  ;  they  imagined  that,  as  Abraham's  seed,  they  already  possessed  it.  The 
Roman  power  left  their  ecclesiastical  freedom  practically  undisturbed,  and  in 
spiritual  things  they  flattered  themselves  they  were  never  in  bondage,  etc.  (ver.  33). 
Freedom  from  Rome  and  all  external  foes  was  what  they  sought.  3.  Our  Lord, 
however,  went  to  the  root  of  the  bondage  of  all  humanity  as  of  those  Jews  when 
He  said,  "  Whosoever  committeth  sin  is  the  servant  of  sin."     He  led  those  men 

243 


chap.  viii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


higher  than  Nicodemus.  They  were  not  only  to  become  His  disciples,  but  their 
belief  in  Him  must  lead  them  to  continue  in  His  word,  to  come  to  the  light  of 
truth,  so  that  by  its  radiancy  they  might  see  what  was  evil,  and  be  delivered 
from  it.  4.  And  what  lies  at  the  foundation  of  spiritual  freedom  rests  on  what 
seems  at  first  sight  a  laying  aside  of  freedom,  for  it  implies  the  yielding  up  of 
our  wills  to  God  to  do  His  will. 

"  Our  wills  are  ours  to  make  them  Thine." 

In  reality  this  is  our  truest  freedom  ;  only  thus  shall  heart  and  life  be  in 
harmony  with  the  purpose  of  our  creation — the  eternal  purpose  of  Him  whc 
formed  us  for  His  glory.  What  our  life  needs  is  freedom  to  move  in  the  direction 
of  its  being,  and  in  accordance  with  the  divine  laws  of  its  being.  5.  The  truth 
makes  men  free  spiritually.  This  implies  a  willing  rejection  of  sin,  a  willing 
turning  to  God.  By  the  truth  we  realise  that  only  those  who  seek  His  precepts 
truly  walk  at  liberty  (Ps.  cxix.  45). 

II.  Religious  freedom   comes   through  the  truth. — 1.  No  greater  bondage 
existed  than  Pharisaic  traditionalism.     The  exponents  of  the  Jewish  law  in  our 
Lord's  time  "  laded  men   with  burdens,"   etc.    (Matt,  xxiii.   4  ;    Luke  xi.  46). 
Pharisaic  formalism  enslaved  the  soul  and  crushed  out  true  religious  life.     And 
when  Christ  came  and  proclaimed  the  spirituality  of  the  law,  the  people  were 
astonished.     A  new  world  was  revealed  to  them.     2.   Here  again  He  pointed  out 
that  it  was  by  continuance  in  His  living,  revealing  word  that  they  should  be 
made  free.     By  His  teaching  the  fundamental  law  of  love  was  proclaimed,  and 
the  true  nature  of  religion  and  worship  made  known.     3.  Only  by  continuing  in 
Christ's  words  can  we  escape  from  the  bondage  of  error  in  our  religious  life.    The 
Reformation  was  a  conspicuous  example  of  this  :  it  was  a  return  to  the  genuine 
source  of  authority  in  religious  matters — the  word  of  God.     The  unreformed 
Church  was  to  many  a  prison-house  of  spiritual  and  intellectual  life.    It  was  Christ's 
word  that  brought  light  and  freedom.     The  spreading  abroad  of  that  word  by 
Wycliffe,  Luther,  Tyndale,  brought  the  dawning  of  the  day  of  religious  freedom. 
4.  The  papacy  seeks  to  suppress  the  truth  by  discouraging  the  circulation  of 
the  Bible.     But  is  not  the  influence  of  rationalistic  and  destructive  criticism 
even   more  dangerous,  because  it  seeks  to  break  down  our  standard  of  truth  ? 
Now,  as  of  old,  Christ  says  :  "If  ye  abide  in  My  word,  then  are  ye  truly  My 
disciples." 

III.  Political  freedom  rests  on  truth. — 1.  Many  popular  politicians  seem  to 
harbour  the  idea  that  political  freedom  will  be  built  up  on  chicane,  misrepresenta- 
tion, etc.  The  word  "  political  "  has  come  in  many  quarters  of  the  world  to  be 
synonymous  with  shiftiness.  A  political  lie  is  evidently  by  too  many  regarded  as 
venal.  2.  But  it  will  be  found  in  the  long-run  that  those  peoples  and  governments 
will  be  most  free  and  stable  which  are  founded  on  that  righteousness  which  is  the 
foundation  of  Christ's  spiritual  kingdom.  True  freedom  will  be  reached  when 
the  kingdoms  of  the  world  are  become  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord,  etc.  3.  But 
when  political  action  is  not  ruled  by  righteousness,  when  party,  and  not  the 
national,  welfare  is  aimed  at,  when  to  gain  party  ends  class  is  incited  against 
class,  and  bribes  are  sown  broadcast  to  gain  support,  then  political  freedom  dies. 
Are  there  not  peoples  misgoverned  in  the  name  of  liberty  ?  What  nations  need, 
like  individuals,  is  first  true  spiritual  and  religious  freedom. 

IV.  Social  and  individual  freedom  are  reared  on  the  same  foundation. — 
1.  Schemes  of  brotherhood  and  equality  will  ever  be  vain  and  visionary  unless 
based  on  eternal  truth.  How  would  trade  disputes  and  social  strifes  pass  away 
if  all  who  profess  to  be  Christians  followed  St.  Paul's  teaching  ! — "  For,  brethren, 
ye  have  been  called  unto  liberty,"  etc.  (Gal.  v.  13, 14).    2.  What  is  needed  to  cure 

244 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.        chap.  viii. 


our  social  ills  is  to  continue  in  Christ's  words,  and  as  His  disciples  to  become  free 
through  the  truth.  3.  The  cure  of  many  of  our  social  disorders  is  retarded  by 
the  want  of  true  unity  among  Christ's  professed  followers.  Church  disputings 
and  divisions,  sect  competitions  and  rivalries,  are  the  cause  of  the  continuance  of 
many  of  our  social  ills.  4.  What  is  needed  is  to  come  back  to  the  teaching  and  the 
example  of  our  Lord.  All  these  divisions  and  dissensions  show  that  we  are  to 
some  extent  in  the  "  bondage  of  error."  Every  true  disciple  of  Christ  should 
seek  to  attain  this  freedom  by  the  truth ;  and  then  His  people  would  be  saved 
from  moral  and  spiritual  darkness  and  error,  and  guided  in  their  religious,  their 
social,  and  political  life  to  walk  righteously  according  to  truth,  in  following  Him 
who  is  the  Truth. 

Vers.  34-36.  The  nature  of  the  servitude  of  sin. — We  consider  : — 

I.  The  range  of  this  servitude. — 1.  All  mankind  serve  this  tyrant.  No  con- 
dition is  exempted.  Culture  or  moral  training  cannot  altogether  protect  against 
it.  Age  is  no  exception.  2.  Every  part  of  the  nature  is  subjugated.  (1)  The 
members  of  our  bodies;  (2)  The  reason  is  made  to  minister  to  desire;  (3)  The 
heart  is  defiled ;  (4)  The  will  is  enslaved.  3.  This  servitude  increases  also  with 
the  lapse  of  time. 

II.  The  depth  of  this  servitude. — 1.  There  are  three  conditions  in  which  men 
may  be  found  here  on  earth.  In  one  of  these  conditions  each  man  stands,  viz.  the 
condition  of  nature,  of  the  law,  of  grace.  In  each  of  these  this  servitude  endures 
wholly  or  partially.  2.  In  the  condition  of  nature  men  are  slaves  to  sin  un- 
knowingly (Rom.  vii.  8,  9).  3.  In  the  condition  of  being  under  the  law  men 
are  wittingly  under  the  bondage  of  sin  (Rom.  vii.  15-24).  4.  In  the  condition 
of  grace.  A  new  life  in  this  condition  is  awakened  in  the  sinful  heart ;  a  new 
power,  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  works  within.  But  though  the  power  of  sin  is 
broken,  in  this  life  the  yoke  is  never  thoroughly  got  rid  of  (Rom.  viii.  20-22 ; 
1  John  iii.  6 ;  1  John  i.  8  ;  Phil.  iii.  13).  Yet  in  this  state  the  servitude  is  not 
endured  willingly,  and  the  fetters  are  loosened  and  shaken  off.  But  all  this 
shows  how  deep  the  servitude  is. 

III.  The  duration  of  this  servitude. — 1.  Since  the  Fall.  2.  And  in  the  case 
of  the  individual  does  any  one  remember  when  first  he  began  to  sin  ?  The  sigh 
of  the  centuries  has  been,  "  O  wretched  man  that  I  am  !  who  shall  deliver  me 
from  the  body  of  this  death  1 " 

IV.  The  end  of  this  servitude. — 1.  "  Whosoever  committeth  sin  is  the  slave  of 
sin ;  and  the  slave  abideth  not"  etc.  His  master  can  sell  him,  or  give  him  his 
dismissal ;  the  slave  has  no  part  or  inheritance  with  the  free  children.  The  Son 
abideth  ever.  He  is  the  Father's  heir,  and  can  dispose  of  the  Father's  possessions 
as  if  they  were  His  own.  He  can  set  the  slaves  free,  and  give  them  the  position 
of  children — make  them  "  heirs  together  "  with  Himself.  "  If  the  Son  shall  make 
you  free"  etc.  The  faithful  are  the  true  freemen,  and  the  full  tyranny  of  sin  ends 
when  redemption  begins.  2.  Not  that  the  faithful  are  ever  entirely  free  from 
sinning.  Still,  they  are  free  from  sin  :  from  its  blindness — they  know  it  for  what 
it  is ;  from  its  punishment — they  fear  that  no  more ;  from  the  love  of  sin ;  from 
the  dominion  of  sin.  They  have  come  under  a  better  dominion.  They  learn  to 
glory  through  and  in  Him  who  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness :  "  I 
delight  to  do  Thy  will,  O  my  God ;  yea,  Thy  law  is  within  my  heart "  (Ps.  xl.  8), 
3.  Let  us  thank  God  that  we  can  rejoice  and  say,  There  came  to  us  a  Saviour, 
a  Deliverer,  a  Son  of  man,  full  of  love  and  power,  who  hath  kindled  a 
quickening  fire  within  our  hearts.  Now  we  see  the  heaven  open  to  us  as  our  true 
Fatherland,  and  can  now  believe  and  hope  and  rejoice  that  we  are  of  the  household 
of  God.  "  If  ye  continue  in  My  word,  then  are  ye  My  disciples  indeed,"  etc. 
(vers.  31,  32). — Abridged  from  Friedr.  Arndt. 

245 


chap.  viii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


Vers.  39,  40.  The  spiritual  children  of  Abraham  do  the  works  of  Abraham. — 
True  spiritual  sonship  with  Abraham  and  participation  in  his  blessedness  are 
found  in  following  the  faith  of  Abraham.  His  true  descendants  are  those  who 
do  his  works.  All  through  the  New  Testament  this  evident  truth  is  insisted  on. 
Some  of  his  lineal  descendants  were  told  by  our  Lord  that  they  belonged 
spiritually  to  a  very  different  family  (ver.  44).  In  His  parable  of  the  rich  man 
and  Lazarus  our  Lord  puts  into  the  mouth  of  the  tormented  Dives  the  words, 
"  Father  Abraham."  But  a  great  gulf  spiritually  separated  Dives  from  the 
patriarch  who  was  afar  off  (Luke  xvi.  19-31).  And  Abraham's  lineal  de- 
scendants to-day,  whilst  fondly  still  looking  back  on  that  majestic  figure  who 
stands  at  the  distant  beginnings  of  history  and  sacred  promise,  have  lost  spiritual 
touch  with  their  great  ancestor  according  to  the  flesh,  and  must  wearily  wander 
until  they  too  are  glad  in  that  day  which  he  saw  (ver.  56),  and  taste  of  the 
blessedness  he  experienced.  What  is  needed  in  order  to  this  by  all  spiritual 
children  of  Abraham  is  to  do  the  works  of  A  braham.     By  this  is  meant : — 

I.  To  imitate  his  obedience. — 1.  When  God  spoke  Abraham  obeyed.  When 
the  call  came  to  him  to  forsake  his  father's  home,  his  kindred,  his  native  land, 
and  go  forth  to  a  strange  land  and  to  be  a  sojourner  there,  he  at  once  obeyed. 
We  hear  of  no  wish  to  return — no  backward  glance  (Heb.  xi.  15).  2.  When 
the  awful  command  was  received  to  offer  up  his  son,  it  too  was  at  once  obeyed. 
3.  And  not  only  was  his  obedience  to  the  command  prompt ;  his  reverence  and 
regard  for  the  messengers  of  truth  were  equally  conspicuous  (Gen.  xxii.,  etc., 
xiv.  19,  20,  xviii.).  4.  How  great  was  the  contrast  between  this  feature  of  his 
life  and  the  action  of  his  descendants  in  our  Lord's  time  on  earth.  (1)  Though 
God  was  evidently  speaking  to  them  in  the  Baptist's  message,  in  the  signs  and 
wonders  of  our  Lord's  ministry,  they  refused  to  leave  the  idolatry  of  their 
tradition,  and  follow  the  divine  guidance  into  the  free  country  of  truth.  (2)  God 
was  evidently  calling  on  them  to  give  up  putting  their  trust  in  any  arm  of  flesh, 
and  to  follow  a  far  higher  spiritual  destiny.  But  they  refused  to  sacrifice  their 
ideas,  and  became  participators  in  the  awful  crime  on  Calvary.  (3)  In  place  of 
receiving  the  messengers  of  truth  like  Abraham  with  reverence,  some  they  stoned, 
others  they  killed  (Matt.  xxi.  35).  And  when  the  Son  came  they  cried,  "  Let  us 
kill  Him "  (ver.  40 ;  Matt.  xxi.  38).  Thus  they  proved  themselves  to  be 
altogether  unlike  Abraham,  who  entreated  the  divine  mercy  for  guilty  Sodom,  etc. 
(Gen.  xviii.  16-33).  (4)  The  same  experiences  that  came  to  Abraham  come  in 
some  form  or  other  to  all.  How  many  awakened  to  a  new  spiritual  life  have 
spiritually  had  to  leave  home  and  friends,  to  bear  the  scorn  of  those  they  loved, 
to  become  isolated,  strangers  in  a  strange  land  !  How  frequently  have  those 
converted  from  Judaism,  Mohammedanism,  and  heathenism  literally  to  follow 
Abraham's  footsteps  as  a  stranger  and  sojourner  !  Are  there  not  still  sacrifices 
to  be  made  which  we  must  obediently  offer,  which  try  our  faith,  it  may  be,  but 
in  the  end,  through  grace,  contribute  to  the  higher  life  1  And  is  there  not 
required  from  us  the  same  unswerving  reverence  for  the  truth,  and  its  messengers, 
whatever  name  they  bear,  and  the  same  gentle  spirit  toward,  and  desire  for, 
the  salvation  of  the  sinful  ?  (5)  Indeed,  Abraham  is  the  Christian's  example 
just  because  by  faith  he  participated  in  the  spirit  of  Christ,  who  left  the  glories 
of  heaven,  offered  up  Himself  becoming  "  obedient  unto  death,"  so  that  He  might 
save  our  ruined  race. 

II.  To  have  the  faith  of  Abraham  (vi.  29). — 1.  His  faith  was  the  foundation 
of  His  obedience.  By  faith  he  left  TJr ;  by  faith  he  sojourned  in  Canaan  ;  by 
faith  he  offered  up  Isaac ;  by  faith  he  inherited  the  promise ;  by  faith  he  sur- 
mounted difficulties  and  seeming  impossibilities — "  he  was  strong  in  faith,  giving 
glory  to  God"  (Bom.  iv.  20).  By  his  unwavering  trust  in  the  word  and 
obedience  to  the  commands  of  God  he  "  became  heir  of  the  righteousness  which  is 

246 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.         chap.  viii. 


by  faith  "  (Heb.  xi.  7  ;  Rom.  iv.  13).  2.  This  is  the  great  truth  which  the  Jews 
had  fallen  away  from,  interpreting  the  law  in  a  literal  fashion,  making  it  a  yoke 
of  bondage  in  place  of  a  guide  in  the  way  of  spiritual  freedom  :  "  Being  ignorant 
of  God's  righteousness,  .  .  .  they  have  not  submitted  themselves"  (Rom.  x.  1-10 ; 
Gal.  iii.  5-19,  etc.).  Thus  they  missed  Christ  and  freedom,  and  fell  ever  more 
deeply  into  the  bondage  of  corruption,  the  slavery  of  sin  (ver.  34 ;  Rom.  viii.  21). 
3.  So  it  is  now :  "  they  which  are  of  faith,"  etc.  (Gal.  iii.  7) ;  "By  grace  are  ye 
saved,  through  faith,"  etc.  (Eph.  ii.  8).  There  is  ever  a  fear  lest  men  should 
fall  into  the  Judaistic  error  of  resting  on  their  own  efforts,  and  trusting  in  their 
own  righteousness — a  course  that  may  and  will  often  lead  to  deepest  declension 
and  direst  sin.  There  is  a  danger  ever  lest  men  should  lose  sight  of  the  central 
gospel  truth  of  justification  by  faith  in  these  days  of  bustling  activity  in  the 
Church  and  the  Christian  world.  Faith  stands  at  the  beginning  of  the  Christian 
life  (Rom.  v.  1) ;  but  faith  and  trust  accompany  the  believer  all  through — will 
be  the  medium  of  sanctifying  and  keeping  power  until  the  end.  4.  Faith,  not 
works,  but  faith  working  by  love — faith  blossoming  out  into  action  as  with 
Abraham — faith  especially  looking  forward  to  and  labouring  in  prospect  of  the 
fulfilment  of  the  promise  "  in  thee  and  in  thy  seed  shall  all  nations  be  blessed  " 
(Gal.  iii.  8) — rejoicing  in  the  prospect  of  the  full  light  of  the  day  that  has  now 
risen — until  faith  passes  into  sight,  when  the  nations  of  them  that  are  saved 
shall  walk  in  the  eternal  radiance  of  that  day  (Rev.  xxi.  24). 

Vers.  46-59.  That  which  distinguishes  between  the  children  of  God  and  the 
children  of  the  devil. — "  Who  art  Thou,"  said  the  Jews  to  Jesus  (ver.  25).  It 
was  only,  however,  to  find  greater  occasion  against  Him  ;  as  for  them  their  anger 
cnly  increased,  until  at  last  they  took  to  action,  became  murderers,  and  took  up 
stones,  etc.  Into  such  terrible  sins  they  fell  through  despising  Christ's  word. 
This  Jesus  told  them  was  a  proof  of  their  affinity  to  the  devil ;  for  had  they 
been  from  God  they  would  have  taken  up  a  different  position  toward  His  word. 
The  widespread  disobedience  of  men  arises  from  the  same  cause.  They  either 
do  not  hear  God's  word,  or  when  they  do,  do  not  keep  it.  Thus  it  comes  that 
many  are  liars,  blasphemers,  persecutors. 

I.  Those  who  do  not  hear  God's  word  are  not  of  God,  but  of  the  devil. — 
1.  One  who  lies  and  deceives  had  a  good  tongue  given  him  from  God,  but  his  use 
of  it  is  from  the  devil ;  he  abuses  his  tongue  by  using  it  in  the  devil's  service 
against  God.  God  may  also  give  men  sound  eyesight;  but  he  who  uses  his  eyes 
unchastely  does  so  of  the  devil.  Thus,  too,  when  the  heart  desires  what  is 
unchaste,  deceitful,  lying,  and  the  like,  then,  although  by  nature  it  is  from  God, 
the  use  of  it  is  evil  and  of  the  devil.  On  the  other  hand,  to  be  of  God  is  when  a 
man  uses  his  ears  to  hear  the  word,  and  permits  himself  to  be  corrected  when  he 
is  in  the  wrong.  So  when  one  prays,  preaches,  instructs,  and  comforts  with  the 
tongue,  such  ears  and  tongues  are  of  God  and  are  good,  for  they  are  put  to  a  godly 
use.  Thus,  too,  when  the  heart  strives  after  modesty,  to  be  of  use  to  our  neigh- 
bour, and  is  not  filled  with  wrath,  such  a  heart  is  a  creature  of  God,  like  the 
ear  and  the  tongue.  The  meaning  of  being  "  of  God  "  is  that  we  conform  to 
God's  word,  and  do  not  willingly  think  of,  read,  listen  to,  what  is  against  God.  If 
it  should  sometimes  happen  that  we  neglect  this  and  stumble,  are  angry  when 
we  should  be  gentle^  etc.,  this  is  certainly  wrong.  But  if  men  repent  and  confess 
that  they  have  done  wrong,  and  pray  for  grace,  then  this  error  may  be  called 
stumbling  or  even  falling,  but  it  is  not  being  of  the  devil,  because  the  men  turn 
again  to  God  through  repentance,  etc.  There  are,  however,  children  of  the 
devil  who  are  stubborn,  and  who,  when  they  are  corrected  for  their  good  and 
exhorted,  speak  like  ill-mannered  children.  Such  people  are  of  the  devil,  and 
will  become  more  evil — "  the  longer  the  worse,"  for  the  devil  will  not  let  them  rest. 

-      ,  247 


CHAP.  viii.        HOMILEflC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


They  first  despise  the  word,  then  blaspheme  it,  then  rage  and  curse  against  it. 
Inijthe  end  they  will  do  as  the  Jews  did  here — take  up  stones  and  become 
murderers  at  heart.  These  are  the  devil's  true  colours — inattention  to  God's  word, 
abusing  it,  doing  evil  to  one's  neighbours,  wishing  the  preacher  were  dead.  By 
such  colours  men  may  learn  to  know  the  devil  and  his  children,  for  "  he  is  a 
murderer  from  the  beginning,"  etc.  (ver.  44).  Therefore  learn  to  guard  yourself 
against  such  sins. 

II.  Those  are  of  God  who  willingly  hear  God's  word. — 1.  For  God  is  no 
murderer,  but  a  Creator  from  whom  alone  all  life  flows  forth.  The  devil  never  made 
a  man  or  quickened  one.  And  as  God  is  a  living  God,  so  also  those  who  are  of 
Him  and  hear  His  word  shall  have  that  life,  as  Christ  here  says,  "  Yerily, 
verily,"  etc.  (ver.  51).  2.  What  is  the  meaning  of  keeping  God's  word  ?  Nothing 
else  than  believing  what  Christ  has  revealed  to  us  in  the  gospel  concerning  the 
forgiveness  of  sins  and  eternal  life — believing  that  it  is  true,  and  keeping  fast 
hold  of  that  faith  and  hope.  3.  He  who  does  that,  says  Christ,  has  eternal  life — 
fears  not  sin,  hell,  judgment ;  for  in  Christ  is  all  grace  and  mercy.  Death  truly 
will  fall  upon  him  and  slay  him,  but  he  will  not  feel  its  power  as  those  who  die 
in  the  devil's  name  and  without  the  word  of  God.  These  latter  die  without 
resignation ;  they  struggle,  etc.  If  it  were  possible,  they  would  run  through  an 
iron  wall  to  escape  from  death.  Not  so  with  My  people,  says  Christ.  They 
shall  not  have  such  anguish  and  fear  on  their  last  bed.  In  their  hearts  they 
are  at  peace  with  God ;  they  have  an  assured  hope  of  a  better  life,  and  in  this 
hope  they  fall  asleep,  and  without  terror  depart  hence.  For  although  death  will 
slay  them  materially,  he  is  so  masked  and  enfeebled  that  they  do  not  feel  his 
power  ;  they  rather  look  for  a  quiet  bed  of  rest  on  which  they  shall  calmly  fall 
asleep. 

Lessons. — Therefore  think,  dear  children,  how  profitable  it  is  for  you  to 
hearken  willingly  and  diligently  to  the  word  of  God.  This  is  the  chief  thing — 
that  you  know  that  you  are  of  God  and  have  overcome  the  devil,  and  that 
neither  sin  nor  judgment  can  harm  you.  Whatever  dross  you  meet  side  by  side 
with  this  you  will  turn  away  from.  On  the  other  hand,  the  world  is  impatient 
and  discouraged  even  in  the  most  trivial  concerns.  Christians  truly  must  endure 
much,  as  the  devil  and  the  world  are  their  bitter  foes — must  often  be  in  danger 
of  life  and  limb,  etc.  How  can  they  endure  all  this  and  remain  patient  ? 
Through  nothing  else  than  by  continuing  in  the  word,  and  saying  :  Let  things 
go  how  they  will,  I  am  not  of  the  world,  but  of  God,  otherwise  the  world  would 
act  differently  toward  me.  I  had  liefer  that  it  hated  me  than  that  it  loved  me, 
and  I  were  not  of  God.  Where  the  heart  is  thus  fixed,  then  all  temptations, 
trials,  adversities,  pass  away,  as  clouds  in  the  heaven  pass  over  us,  or  as  the 
birds  in  the  air  who  soil  us  for  a  moment,  but  fly  off  and  leave  us  untroubled. — 
Translated  from  Luther's  "  Hauspostille." 

Vers.  46-59.  The  Christian's  crossbearing  and  triumph. — If  but  the  bloom 
of  faith,  etc.,  would  grow  like  plants  in  spring,  that  the  beautiful  fresh  growth 
might  be  protected  from  night  frosts.  There  are  such  in  the  fields  and  vineyards 
of  Jesus  Christ.  Often  what  grows  quickly  hangs  the  head,  and  a  poor  growth 
makes  slow  progress  even  when  the  frost  has  not  entirely  killed  it.  But  there 
is  another  kind  of  growth,  most  mighty.  What  1  Hatred  against  God's  Anointed, 
who  came  in  love  to  save.  This  hatred  grows  more  speedily  than  any  tree  in  the 
garden.  In  this  history  an  evident  example  meets  us.  A  short  time  before  Christ 
had  been  urged  to  become  a  king.  But  now  !  And  yet  amid  all  enmity  there 
shone  radiant  the  kingly  throne  which  He  possessed  from  the  beginning  with 
the  Father,  and  would  possess  in  all  eternity.     Thus  through  this  sad  gospel 

248 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.        chap,  viil 


history  there  accompanies  us  the  consciousness  of  victory,  which  will  not  fail,  to 
the  Lord  and  His  believing  people. 

I.  The  seal  of  the  new  life  is  impressed  on  the  Christian. — 1.  Everything  in 
the  world  has  its  mark  by  which  men  know  it.  Every  plant  is  known  by  its 
fruits  or  blooms.  A  coin  is  known  by  its  inscription,  etc.  The  Christian  has  a 
double  mark — that  by  which  God  knows  His  own,  and  that  by  which  men  know 
that  we  are  born  of  Him  (2  Tim.  ii.  19).  The  Christian's  seal  andma  rk  is 
confession  with  the  mouth  and  by  a  holy  life.  The  Lord  could  say,  "  Which  of 
you  convicteth  Me  of  sin  ?  "  (ver.  46) ;  and  we  are  members  of  His  body,  but  we 
are  sinful.  Is  Christ  then  the  minister  of  sin  ?  (Gal.  ii.  17).  God  forbid  !  None 
of  us  truly  can  say,  "  Which  of  you,"  etc.  But  at  all  times  our  holiest  endeavour 
will  be  not  to  come  under  the  power  of  sin,  to  confess  and  turn  from  it,  etc. 
Thus  "  by  their  fruits,"  etc.  2.  But  along  with  this  witness  of  the  life  must  be 
the  witness  of  the  word.  Christ  here  bears  witness  to  His  eternity  (ver.  58),  etc., 
and  then  says,  "  If  a  man  keep  My  word,"  etc.  (ver.  51).  He  must  reign  and 
rule  over  those  who  are  His  possession  through  faith  and  a  holy  life.  In  spite 
of  His  foes  He  witnessed  to  His  holy,  eternal  nature,  etc.  He  requires  the  same 
confession  from  His  disciples.  Thou,  too,  shalt  witness  that  He  is  the  eternal 
Son,  has  come  to  earth  to  seek  and  save,  and  that  this  word  has  become  thy 
highest  good,  and  that  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  thou  art  daily 
conquering  thy  sins ;  thou  shalt  witness  to  thy  hope  to  the  end ;  thy  confession 
shall  run  through  all  thy  life. 

II.  The  world  shows  enmity  to  the  Christian,  but  he  is  still  and  endures. — 
1.  "For  this  cause  ye  hear  not,"  etc.  (ver.  47).  But  did  not  God  make  them? 
Yes ;  but  they  have  fallen  from  His  service  and  entered  into  that  of  the  prince 
of  this  world.  I  belong  to  him,  am  of  him  with  whom  my  heart  agrees,  to  whom 
it  is  conformed,  whom  it  serves.  What  matters  it  though  I  glory  in  my  father- 
land, etc.,  if  love  to  my  fatherland  is  extinguished  in  my  breast  ?  I  have  really 
gone  awaj7  from  it.  So  the  children  of  the  world  are  God's  creatures,  but  not  of 
Him.  2.  Therefore,  too,  they  cannot  bear  His  children,  are  at  enmity  with 
them.  W7hen  they  acknowledge  the  life  of  holiness,  and  bring  sin  home  to  the 
world's  consciousness,  its  first  word  is  a  railing  accusation,  "  Say  we  not  well," 
etc.  (ver.  48).  You  know  this  method.  "  If  they  have  called  the  master  of  the 
house  Beelzebub,"  etc.  (Matt.  x.  25).  The  first  Christians  were  called  Nazarenes  ; 
the  reformers  were  called  heretics.  So  to-day.  But  do  not  ask  what  the  world 
calls  you,  if  God  calls  you  His  child  and  your  name  is  written  in  heaven. 
3.  Another  method  of  attack  against  the  Lord  is  to  misinterpret  His  words. 
The  promise  of  ver.  51  the  Jews  affected  to  take  literally  :  they  knew  well 
enough,  most  of  them,  that  He  meant  these  words  to  be  taken  spiritually.  They 
did  not  desire  to  understand,  for  Jesus  had  already  spoken  of  His  own  death  in 
the  body.  They  wanted  a  weapon  against  Him  (ver.  53).  Is  it  not  the  same 
now  ]  How  are  the  words  of  Scripture  twisted  often  to  furnish  an  attack  against 
the  gospel !  4.  Their  last  weapon  was  one  against  which  only  patience  and 
faith  could  avail  (ver.  59).  It  is  a  symbol  of  the  history  of  the  Church  in  all 
times — persecuted,  but  not  forsaken,  etc. 

III.  The  Christian  founds  on  God,  who  weighs  with  righteous  balances. — 
1.  In  human  law  there  are  usually  three  courts  of  instance.  So  it  may  be  said 
is  it  with  eternal  justice.  Men  are  first  judged  by  the  people  connected  with  the 
deed.  For  many  this  is  too  favourable ;  for  men  judge  by  appearance.  For 
others  it  is  too  severe;  for  men  often  judge  according  to  the  hate,  etc.,  in 
their  hearts.  So  was  it  here  with  the  enemies  of  Christ.  They  judged  after 
the  hatred  in  their  hearts.  2.  Then  there  comes  during  the  lapse  of  time  a 
second  judgment  by  men.  Now  many  formerly  praised  are  condemned  ;  others 
come  to  their  right.     So   was   it    with    Christ   after   He   had  been  scourged, 

249 


chap.  viii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


crucified,  etc.  But  afterward  the  people  magnified  His  apostles  (Acts  v.  12-14). 
Such  traits  are  of  frequent  occurrence  in  history.  3.  But  there  is  a  third  court 
to  which  the  thousands  of  God's  persecuted  ones,  persecuted  to  death  often,  have 
appealed.  It  is  God's  judgment  seat.  Jesus  said,  "  I  seek  not  Mine  own  glory," 
etc.  (vers.  50,  51).  God  has  established  the  honour  and  name  of  His  dear  Son  most 
gloriously.  He  who  was  called  Samaritan,  etc.,  is  called  now  Saviour  and  Redeemer, 
Lord  and  God.  To  Him  is  given  all  power  (Matt,  xxviii.  18-20),  and  His  honour 
and  glory  shall  increase,  etc.  If  you  rest  your  honour  on  Him,  it  may  seem  to 
fall,  but  it  will  rise.  "If  we  suffer  with  Him,"  etc.  (2  Tim.  ii.  12).  These 
enemies  took  up  stones,  etc.  Who  withheld  their  hand  1  The  same  God.  After- 
ward Christ's  hour  came.  He  tasted  for  a  moment  the  bitterness  of  death  as  the 
wages  of  our  sin ;  but  it  was  then  chiefly  that  His  word  was  most  true,  "  If  a 
man  keep,"  etc.  (ver.  51).  The  Christian,  too,  will  see  death  as  the  wages  of  sin, 
but  also,  through  Christ,  as  the  gate  of  eternal  life  :  then  is  ever  past  the  bitter 
invective,  the  foe's  uplifted  hand,  the  bitterness  of  death.  There  remain  the 
grace  of  God  and  the  eternal  inheritance,  of  which  none  can  dispossess  God's 
people. — Translated  and  abridged  from  Ahlfeld. 

Ver.  46-59.  Jesus  is  our  true  high  priest. — The  witness  of  Jesus  as  to  His 
person,  the  power  of  this  testimony,  and  the  inimical  position  taken  by  the  world 
in  reference  to  it,  are  the  chief  points  to  be  noticed  in  our  passage. 

Introduction. — Jesus  goes  to  suffering  and  death  in  order  to  make  an 
offering  for  the  world's  sins.  The  Old  Testament  high  priests  could  only  shadow 
forth  what  Jesus  had  done  in  reality,  in  that  He  offered  up  Himself.  He  is  our 
true  high  priest  because — 

I.  His  walk  and  conversation  were  without  sin. — 1.  "  Such  an  high  priest 
was  beseeming  for  us,  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,"  etc.  (Heb.  vii.  26).  Only  one 
who  is  sinless  can  redeem  sinners.  Only  one  who  has  come  from  God  can  free 
those  who  are  of  the  world.  Only  He  who  has  completely  overcome  Satan  can 
rescue  those  who  are  under  Satan's  dominion — One  who  never  conformed  to 
Satan,  but  who  honoured  the  Father  alone.  2.  Such  a  high  priest  is  Jesus. 
His  life  was  sinless.  He  had  come  from  God.  He  honoured  the  Father.  There- 
fore when  He  offered  Himself  His  sacrifice  availed  for  others  also. 

IT.  His  word  is  mighty. — 1.  Mighty  for  those  who  receive  it,  and  are  thereby 
delivered  from  temporal,  spiritual,  and  eternal  death.  2.  Such  salvation  is 
possible  because  the  word  of  Christ  prevails  also  with  God,  and  His  intercession 
has  power  with  the  Father.     He  is  honoured  by  the  Father  (xii.  28). 

III.  His  continuance  is  eternal. — 1.  Men  of  all  ages  need  a  Redeemer,  a 
Saviour ;  for  all  men  are  sinners.  2.  Jesus  lives  eternally.  "  He  ever  liveth," 
etc.  (Heb.  vii.  25).  Therefore  His  saving  work  avails  for  all  believers  before 
and  after  His  incarnation.  Thy  fathers,  thyself,  thy  children — all  believers  till 
the  end  of  the  world. — J.  L.  Sommer,  "  Evang.  Perik." 

Vers.  46-59.  The  testimony  of  Jesus. — I.  What  Jesus  testifies. — 1.  Regarding 
His  sinlessness.  2.  Regarding  the  living  power  of  His  word.  3.  Regarding  the 
eternity  of  His  existence. 

II.  The  manner  in  which  the  world  receives  this  testimony.— 1.  The  world 
understands  it  not,  because  the   heart  of  the   world  is   alienated   from   God. 

2.  The  world  insults  and  slanders  those  who   bear   this    testimony   to   Jesus. 

3.  The  world   seeks  to   exterminate   such   witnesses   in   following   them   with 
persecution. 

III.  What  it  secures  to  the  believer. — 1.  Power  for  the  spiritual  life,  because 
it  is  not  a  human  but  a  divine  testimony.     2.  Victory  over  the  unbelieving  and 

250 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.         chap.  vni. 

deliverance  from  their  hand,  because  it  is  the  testimony  of  Him  who  reigns  and 
rules  eternally,  and  will  never  forsake  His  own. — Idem. 

Ver.  47.  Hindrances  to  the  word. — Nothing  is  more  powerful  and  effective  than 
God's  word.  If  it  does  not  now  produce  the  same  fruit  as  formerly,  it  is  not 
because  of  anything  in  itself  or  in  those  who  preach  it,  for  it  does  not  depend  on 
their  talents.  The  causes,  therefore,  lie  with  those  who  hear  the  word.  There 
are  three  such  causes  : — 

I.  Distaste  for  the  word  of  God. — This  is  a  terrible  punishment.  It  arises 
from  a  secret  pride  or  attachment  to  the  pleasures  of  sense,  or  to  temporal  gains. 
As  a  figure,  remember  the  distaste  of  the  Jews  for  the  manna. 

II.  Abuse  of  the  word  of  God. — Doing  as  the  Corinthians  did  in  their 
observance  of  the  communion — using  it  as  the  word  of  man,  etc. 

III.  Resistance  to  the  word  of  God. — This  leads  to  hardening  of  the  heart, 
as  in  the  case  of  Pharaoh ;  and  condemnation  of  the  sinner ;  for  this  most 
precious  talent  has  not  been  made  use  of.  God  will  judge  two  classes  in  this 
relation — hearers  who  should  have  honoured  the  word,  and  preachers  who  should 
have  proclaimed  it. — Bourdaloue. 

Ver.  56.  Abraham's  faith  in  the  redemption  of  humanity. — When  the  New 
Testament  writers  desired  to  give  a  striking  instance  of  the  power  of  faith  in 
a  human  life,  and  an  example  to  incite  men  to  higher  attainment  in  that  grace, 
the  life  of  Abraham  was  singled  out  as  the  most  pre-eminent.  Once  and  again 
St.  Paul  founds  the  weightiest  precepts  on  that  life-history  of  the  patriarchal 
age  ;  and  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  gives  the  story  of  that  patriarch 
the  most  prominent  position  in  his  long  and  glorious  roll  of  the  heroes  of  faith. 
Hence  we  find  in  all  New  Testament  history  that  the  memory  of  Abraham  was 
held  in  high  honour  among  the  Jews.  Their  highest  ambition  was  to  be 
reckoned  as  Abraham's  children  here  below,  and  their  idea  of  the  blessedness 
of  hereafter  was  to  be  carried  into  Abraham's  bosom.  And  there  is  no  doubt 
they  justly  revered  the  memory  of  their  great  ancestor.  With  the  same  fervid 
admiration  and  gratitude  with  which  we  look  back  on  the  great  heroes  of  our 
country's  history,  on  the  pioneers  of  our  religious  and  political  freedom,  those  Jews 
looked  back  to  Abraham.  But  they  regarded  his  memory  with  a  deeper  feeling 
even.  He  was  not  alone  the  father  of  their  race — he  was  also,  so  to  speak,  the 
fountain-head  and  channel  through  which  flowed  to  their  race  the  glorious  stream 
of  promise.  Personally  Abraham  was  a  great  man  even  from  a  merely  material 
point  of  view.  But  it  is  when  we  view  him  from  the  moral  and  religious  point 
of  view  that  his  true  greatness  appears.  It  is  his  faith  that  lifts  him  above  even 
the  greatest  of  his  time,  and  leads  to  his  being  affectionately  remembered ;  whilst 
the  names  of  many  statesmen,  warriors,  kings,  are  scarce  remembered  or  are 
altogether  forgotten.  But  the  chief  object  of  Abraham's  faith  evokes  a  universal 
interest.  It  was  not  merely  faith  in  God's  guiding  hand  for  himself  and  those 
dear  to  him — a  faith  which  shone  most  brightly  in  the  darkest  hours  :  it  was 
faith  in  a  definite  promise  of  blessing,  not  only  to  himself  and  his  seed,  but  for  all 
the  world.     Consider  : — 

I.  Abraham's  faith  in  the  redemption  of  humanity. — 1.  And  when  we 
remember  where  Abraham  stood,  the  greatness  of  his  faith  in  this  blessed  con- 
summation will  appear,  and  will  prove  that  his  faith  was  inspired  from  heaven. 
2.  By  a  divine  command  he  was  withdrawn  from  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  to  save 
him  evidently  from  being  drawn  into  the  ever-increasing  current  of  idolatry 
setting  in  among  his  kindred,  and  which  afterward  developed  into  that  great 
system,  now  slowly  being  brought  to  light  by  sculptured  stone  and  engraved  clay — 
tablet  or  cylinder.     But  it  was  to  no  country  claiming  immunity  from  idolatry 

251 


chap.  viii.        HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


that  he  came — rather  to  one  in  which  it  had  reached  the  most  degrading  depth, 
so  that  he  might  see  to  what  the  worship  of  the  heavenly  hosts  leads,  and  be 
more  and  more  strengthened  to  refrain  from  idolatry,  and  keep  untainted 
his  purer  faith  and  worship.  3.  And  it  was  amid  scenes  of  prevailing  and 
apparently  growing  idolatry  that  this  patriarch,  piercing  through  the  cloud  and 
gloom,  the  mist  and  darkness,  of  his  surroundings,  with  the  enlightened  spiritual 
vision  strengthened  by  faith,  saw  this  spiritual  night  dispelled,  and  over  the 
nations  arise  the  light  of  an  eternal  Sun,  the  dawning  of  an  endless  day.  As 
Jesus  said,  "  Abraham  rejoiced  to  see  My  day."  4.  We  honour  the  statesman, 
etc.,  who  looks  forward  with  hopeful  anticipation,  even  in  trying  circumstances, 
to  a  good  issue  for  his  country  (Thiers,  etc.),  the  philanthropist  who  does  not 
despair  of  the  ultimate  effect  of  his  efforts  (Howard,  etc.)  \  but  no  optimist  ever 
rose  to  the  lofty  level  of  Abraham — his  was  the  optimism  of  faith  which  over- 
comes seeming  impossibilities,  removes  mountains,  and  attains  its  goal. 

II.  The  definiteness  and  firmness  of  Abraham's  faith  in  regard  to  the  means 
by  which  this  redemption  should  be  accomplished. — 1.  "  The  Scripture,  foreseeing 
that  God  would  justify  the  heathen  through  faith,  preached,"  etc.  (Gal.  iii.  8). 
The  promise  was  that  through  Abraham's  descendants,  nay,  through  One  in 
especial,  this  blessing  for  all  nations  was  to  come.  "  He  said  not,  And  to  seeds, 
as  of  many;  but  as  of  one,"  etc.  (Gal.  iii.  16).  2.  When  that  great  promise  was 
made  to  Abraham,  it  seemed  as  if  the  fulfilment  of  it  were  a  physical  impossibility. 
He  was  a  childless  old  man ;  and  when  he  was  led  out  of  his  tent  under  the 
starry  heavens  (Gen.  xv.  5),  and  told  that  as  is  the  number  of  these  stars  so  his 
seed  should  be,  and  when  the  promise  was  afterward  repeated,  and  in  definite  form, 
that  Sarah  should  bear  him  a  son  as  a  pledge  and  earnest  of  its  fulfilment,  it 
would  be  easy  to  understand  the  patriarch's  surprise,  amazement,  and  almost 
incredulity  as  that  definite  promise  was  given  him.  But  when  the  first  surprise 
was  passed,  faith  surmounted  the  seeming  difficulties.  He  remembered  what 
God  is,  and  " staggered  not  at  the  promise  of  God  through  unbelief" 
(Horn.  iv.  19,  20).  3.  But  Abraham  was  to  learn  even  more  fully  that  the 
promise  given  him  was  divine  and  spiritual,  and  not  according  to  the  flesh.  It 
did  not  depend  on  man,  but  on  the  grace  of  God.  Abraham  was  commanded  to 
take  his  son  Isaac — his  only  son — with  whom  the  promise  was  bound  up,  and  offer 
him  for  a  sacrifice  on  Mount  Moriah.  It  was  a  terrible  trial ;  yet  the  command 
was  unmistakably  given,  else,  had  there  been  any  ambiguity,  Abraham  would 
never  have  dreamed  of  carrying  such  a  project  into  effect.  But  the  command 
was  clear,  and  he  prepared  to  carry  it  into  effect,  accounting  that  God  was  able 
to  raise  Isaac  up,  even  from  the  dead  (Heb.  xi.  19).  Was  it  on  Moriah,  on  that 
morning  which  began  with  gloom  and  ended  in  sunshine  and  joy,  that  Abraham 
caught  the  first  true  glimpse  of  that  far-off  day  when  another  Son,  a  willing 
victim,  should  bleed  and  die  for  the  world's  sins  and  man's  salvation,  who  should 
be  received  again  not  as  in  a  figure  from  the  dead,  but  should  rise  triumphant 
from  the  darkness  of  death,  bringing  joy  and  hope  to  weary  humanity  1 

III.  The  reward  of  Abraham's  steadfast  faith. — 1.  This  reward,  which  was  the 
consummation  of  his  faith  and  hope  in  the  finished  work  of  Christ,  is  variously 
expressed.  He  was  "  blessed "  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  (Gal.  iii.  9). 
"  His  faith  was  imputed  to  him  for  righteousness  "  (Rom.  iv.  22).  And  here  : 
"  Abraham  rejoiced  to  see  My  day ;  and  he  saw  it,  and  was  glad."  2.  There  was 
given  him  a  present  and  a  future  blessing,  it  would  appear.  On  that  memorable 
morning,  by  the  altar  on  Moriah,  there  was  given  him  the  joy  of  the  righteous- 
ness by  faith  (Gen.  xxii.  15-19),  and  a  far-off  glimpse  of  the  coming  time  when, 
through  his  seed,  like  blessing  should  come  to  all  nations  as  it  had  come  to  him, 
through  trust  in  the  divine  promise.  He  was  persuaded  of  it,  embraced  it,  and 
saw  it  afar  off  (Heb.  xi.  13).     He  knew  and  felt  that  the  blessing  which  was  to 

252 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN.         chap.  viii. 


be  given  to  that  distant  race  came  to  him  through  the  same  channel,  the  divine 
promise,  and  he  rejoiced.  3.  But  are  we  not  to  deduce  more  from  the  words  of 
Jesus  that  Abraham  saw  His  day  1  "  According  to  Jewish  tradition  (Bereshith  R., 
44,  Wunsche),  Abraham  saw  the  whole  history  of  his  descendants  in  the 
mysterious  vision  recorded  in  Gen.  xv.  8  ff.  Thus  he  is  said  to  have  '  rejoiced 
with  the  joy  of  the  law '  "  (Westcott)  ;  or  is  it  enough  to  say  with  Chrysostom  : 
"  He  saw  the  cross  of  Christ  when  he  laid  the  wood  on  his  son,  and  in  will  offered 
up  Isaac  (Heb.  xi.  17)  ;  when  he  believed  the  promise,  that  of  His  seed  should 
come  the  Saviour,  in  whom  all  nations  should  be  blessed  "  1  (quoted  by  Words- 
worth). 4.  There  would  seem  to  be  a  deeper  meaning  in  these  promises,  as  many 
think.  Moses  and  Elias  appeared  in  glory  to  our  Lord  on  the  mount  of  Trans- 
figuration, and  spake  of  His  decease  which  He  should  accomplish  at  Jerusalem 
(Luke  ix.  31).  But  although  these  two  alone  appeared,  as  they  had  passed  not 
by  ordinary  paths  into  the  invisible,  are  we  to  think  that  the  spirits  of  the  saints 
are  in  nowise  touched  or  affected  by  the  progress  of  that  great  work,  for  which 
they  toiled  and  suffered  and  died  ?  Were  the  heavenly  strains  that  echoed  over 
Bethlehem's  pastoral  slopes,  and  which  are  sounding  ever  sweeter  and  clearer 
down  the  ages,  unheard  in  the  blessed  courts  of  paradise  1  did  they  find  no  echo 
in  the  hearts  of  the  glorified  1  Should  he,  the  father  of  the  faithful  and  the 
"  friend  of  God,"  remain  ignorant  of  the  glorious  fulfilment  of  that  promise  given 
to  him  in  the  earthly  Canaan,  that  he  should  not  be  glad  in  the  finished  redemp- 
tion 1  5.  No  !  nor  will  those  who  labour  in  hope  remain  in  ignorance  of  the 
progress  of  that  holy  cause  for  which  they  laboured  while  here.  "  A  great  cloud 
of  witnesses  "  encompasses  believers  on  their  course.  And  the  reception  of  each 
redeemed  soul,  each  spiritual  victory  won,  every  advance  of  the  hosts  of  light, 
each  successive  fulfilment  of  the  promises,  will  bring  joy  to  Abraham  and  all  the 
waiting  saints  of  God. 

Vers.  56-59.  The  first  stoning. — In  this  incident  the  rising  hatred  of  the 
formalist  Jews  and  the  ruling  religious  classes  in  Jerusalem  receives  a  striking 
demonstration.  All  their  measures  against  Jesus  had  been  vain  ;  nay,  had 
resulted  rather  in  the  manifestation  of  Christ's  glory,  in  the  testimony  of  their 
own  officers  (vii.  46)  and  the  intervention  of  Nicodemus  (vii.  50,  51),  and  finally 
in  the  fact  that  many  believed  (ver.  30).  This  rising  hatred  may  be  considered  : 
(1)  in  its  expression  ;  (2)  in  its  inner  nature. 

I.  The  outward  expression  of  this  hatred. — 1.  It  is  first  seen  in  the  expression 
of  doubt  as  to  His  claim,  and  as  such  was  natural,  as  many  may  think  (ver.  13). 
But  it  was  a  doubt  that  refused  to  be  enlightened  ;  it  rested  on  a  hatred  of  the 
truth.  Witnesses  to  Christ  were  all  around.  His  Father's  works  done  by  Him, 
etc.  But  with  the  Jews  it  was  as  with  Voltaire,  who  said  :  "  If  on  the  market- 
place of  Paris,  before  the  eyes  of  a  thousand  men — and  my  own  also — a  miracle 
were  to  occur,  I  should  much  rather  doubt  the  two  thousand  and  two  eyes 
than  believe  it."  2.  This  hatred  is  seen  in  the  mockery  of  unbelief  (ver.  22). 
"  He  is  right  there ;  in  that  case  we  cannot  be  His  followers,  neither  as  suicides, 
nor  to  the  lower  hell,  the  abode  of  such."  3.  Again  this  hatred  breaks  out  in 
invective.  Ver.  48  :  a  Samaritan — Rabbi  J.  Sirach  says  :  "  To  two  nations  is  there 
enmity  in  my  heart,  the  Samaritans  and  the  Philistines  "  ;  a  demon,  and  there- 
fore one  who  should  be  banned  from  the  temple.  So  was  it  with  the  apostles 
(1  Cor.  iv.  13),  reformers,  etc.  4.  Their  hatred  appears  further  as  malignant 
fury  (vers.  52,  53).  They  twist  His  words  and  hurl  against  Him  the  charge  of 
heresy,  or  worse.  5.  But  hatred  knows  no  bounds ;  doubt,  mockery,  invective, 
malignancy,  lead  step  by  step  to  a  murderous  outrage.  In  this  the  sin  against 
the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  hearts  of  the  Pharisees  became  more  pronounced.  Seizing 
the  stones   scattered  about,  as  the  work  of   completing  the  temple  was  then 

253 


chap.  viii.        EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


proceeding,  they  thought  by  an  act  of  violence  to  rid  themselves  of  accusing  Truth. 
How  soon  thereafter  would  nothing  but  a  heap  of  stones  remain  !  He  hid  Him- 
self. This  was  symbol  of  what  would  soon  happen  (ver.  21).  But  then  they 
would  seek  and  not  find  Him.  They  were  filling  up  the  measure  of  their 
iniquity. 

II.  The  inner  nature  of  this  hatred. — 1.  How  can  it  be  explained  ?  It  might 
have  been  thought  that  those  people  would  rather  have  loved  Him  who  was  most 
worthy  to  be  loved,  that  eternal  Truth  must  have  won  all  hearts.  But  human 
nature  unredeemed  is  mimical  to  the  truth,  and  is  vexed  by  it  because  of  its  power. 
Truth  has  a  faithful  ally  in  conscience,  which  demands  obedience  to  the  truth. 
The  Pharisees  felt  the  power  of  the  divine  words ;  their  own  consciences  testified 
to  the  purity  of  Christ's  character,  the  truth  of  His  sayings.  Had  they  remained 
silent,  they  would  thus  publicly  have  confessed  their  injustice  and  their  defeat. 
Come  what  will,  they  would  not  do  that.  So  that  they  sought  to  get  rid  of  the 
sting  of  truth  by  mockery  and  invective.  And  to-day  also,  where  Christ  and 
His  word  are  hated  and  attacked,  this  hatred  is  ever  connected  with  anger  and 
bitterness  on  account  of  the  power  and  triumph  of  His  cause.  Men  are  not 
enraged  and  set  into  bitter  defiance  against  what  is  known  to  be  merely  a 
chimera.  2.  And  the  true  spring  of  this  hate  is  described  in  the  words  of 
St.  Paul — "  The  carnal  mind,"  etc.  (Bom.  viii.  7) ;  its  foundation  is  the  love  of  self 
and  sin  :  these  are  the  sworn  foes  of  Christ  and  His  word.  And  just  as  the  pride 
and  self-love  and  love  of  sin  embittered  the  Pharisees  against  Christ  (Matt,  xxiii.),. 
so  endures  still  the  conflict  between  the  seed  of  the  woman  and  the  seed  of  the 
serpent  in  the  world. — Abridged  from  F.  Arndt. 


HOMILETIC  NOTES. 


Yer.  26.  The  seal  of  Christ's  teaching. 
— "  He  who  sent  Me  is  true."  That  is 
the  seal  which  Christ  affixes  to  His 
teaching,  and  wherewith  He  comforts 
Himself.  So,  too,  we  can  say  to  the 
world :  Well,  we  have  preached  to 
you  and  judged  you,  have  many  things 
to  say  concerning  you  ;  do  not  threaten 
us  without  cause.  But  what  matters  ? 
It  is  truth ;  it  shall  come  to  pass,  and 
none  shall  hinder  it.  For  "  He  who 
sent  Me,"  the  Father,  has  commanded 
us;  He  has  given  His  word.  ...  I 
am  confident  of  this,  and  in  this  do  I 
trust.  Be  angry  and  despise  our  teach- 
ing and  preaching  as  you  will,  mock 
and  threaten  us ;  it  shall  nevertheless 
come  to  pass,  though  it  may  be  to 
the  sorrow  of  you  all. — Luther,  "  Haus- 
post." 

Vers.  28,  29.  Knowledge  acquired  too 
late. — "  I  am  not  alone,"  etc.  These 
words  the  Lord  repeats  in  concluding, 
because  they  had  never  yet  understood 
and  would  not  understand  that  what 
He   spake   and  He  Himself  (ver.    25) 

254 


constituted  the  true  Word  of  the  Father. 
The  fellowship  of  the  Son  with  the 
Father  —  the  mystery  of  the  man 
Christ  Jesus,  who  is  the  Son  of  God, 
whose  words  and  deeds  are  a  perpetually 
undimmed  mirror  of  the  perfect  will  of 
God — this  sacred  mystery  the  Jews 
did  not  understand,  because  the  word 
of  God  did  not  dwell  in  them  (ver.  37). 
One  day  they  would  know  what  they 
now  did  not  understand.  They  would 
know  when  they  sought  the  Son  of 
man,  Christ  the  Lord  of  glory,  who 
was  crucified  in  weakness  (2  Cor.  xiii. 
4),  and  through  the  lifting  up  of  His 
cross  (xii.  32)  was  called  to  manifest 
His  life  in  the  power  of  God — when 
they  should  hear  the  proclamation  of 
God,  who  did  not  forsake  His  Son 
("For,  behold,  this  is  My  servant ;  I  will 
uphold  Him,"  Isa.  xlii.  1) — who  did 
not  leave  Him  alone  in  the  hour  of 
His  sorrow  (xvi.  32),  not  even  at  the 
rising  of  that  cry  "EH,  Eli,"  etc. 
(Matt,  xxvii.  46).  They  would  know 
when  the  sun  was  darkened,  the  veil 
of  the  temple  rent  in  twain,  the  rocks 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   VIII. 


shattered — when  Christ  came  forth  from 
the  grave,  and  ascended  into  heaven, 
there  reigning  till  His  enemies  be  made 
His  footstool.  They  would  know  when 
the  first  strokes  of  the  judgment,  for 
which  He  shall  come  at  last  in  the 
clouds  of  heaven,  fell  on  the  obdurate 
race  of  Israel — when  the  forsaken  holy 
city  was  overthrown  in  ruin,  and 
thousands  died  in  their  sins  :  then  they 
would  know,  with  trembling  hearts 
(Song  of  Songs  v.  4),  that  He  it  was, 
their  Saviour  and  King,  whom  they 
had  rejected — He,  the  obedient  servant 
to  whom  God  made  His  will  known, 
and  whom  they  had  crucified — He,  the 
true  light  of  the  world,  the  true  and 
faithful  witness,  whom  they  had  not 
believed — He,  the  beloved  Son  of  the 
Father,  in  whom  God  was  well  pleased, 
whom  they  had  despised.  Oh  !  from 
the  terrors  of  such  knowledge  let  grace, 
which  now  comes  into  our  souls,  pre- 
serve us,  so  that  it  may  much  more 
be  said  of  us  who  now  hear  His  word, 
as  it  was  said  of  some  in  Jerusalem, 
"  As  He  spake  these  words  many 
believed  on  Him."  —  Translated  from 
Br.  Besser,  "  Bibelst." 

Yers.  37,  38.  The  permanent  basis 
of  each  human  life. — It  is  a  fact  of  in- 
calculable moment  in  man's  moral  life 
which  is  here  in  question.  Behind  the 
particular  acts  of  each  man  there  lies 
concealed  a  permanent  basis,  and,  if 
I  may  be  allowed  the  expression,  a 
mysterious  anteriority.  The  human 
life  in  each  of  us  is  in  communication 
with  infinity — an  infinity  of  good  or  of 
evil,  of  light  or  of  darkness — which 
opens  up  within  us,  and  manifests 
itself  in  our  works  (whether  words  or 
acts).  This  is  the  fact  which  Jesus 
here  represents  under  the  figure  of  the 
paternal  home,  whence  we  come  forth, 
and  whence,  as  a  son  in  his  father's 
house,  we  derived  our  habits.  It  is 
easy  to  see  from  my  words  and  your 
deeds  from  what  home  you  and  I  re- 
spectively come.  But  this  is  not  all. 
At  the  foundation  of  both  this  infinite 
good  and  this  infinite  evil  with  which 
man  is  in  constant   relation,  and   of 


which  he  becomes  the  instrument,  Jesus 
discerned  a  personal  principle,  an  intel- 
ligent and  free  will,  the  father  of  the 
family,  who  governs  the  whole  house- 
hold :  My  Father,  your  father.  From 
this  father  the  initiative  arises,  from 
him  emanate  all  impulses.  But  it  is 
just  because  the  prime  mover  is,  by 
nature,  personal,  and  not  fatal,  that 
the  state  of  dependence  in  which  man 
finds  himself  with  respect  thereto  is 
also  free  and  voluntary.  Jesus  faith- 
fully cultivates  communion  with  the 
Father  :  hence  He  finds  in  this  rela- 
tion the  initiative  of  all  good  (what 
I  have  seen  and  what  /  am  seeing, 
perf.).  The  Jews  cultivate  their  in- 
ward relation  to  the  opposite  will,  to 
the  other  father :  hence  they  are  con- 
stantly receiving  from  him  impulses  to 
all  kinds  of  impious  works  (what  you 
have  heard — aorist :  a  series  of  par- 
ticular impulses  from  their  father). — 
Br.  F.  Godet. 

Yer.  46.  Conscience  :  what  is  it  ? — 
1.  A  mirror  before  which  no  sin  can  be 
concealed.  2.  An  accuser  who  cannot 
be  silenced.  3.  A  witness  whose  testi- 
mony cannot  be  gainsaid.  4.  A  judge 
before  whom  men  cannot  stand.  5.  A 
preacher  who  rests  neither  day  nor 
night.  6.  A  brand  which  cannot  be 
obliterated.  7.  A  gnawing  worm  which 
dies  not.  8.  A  fire  which  ever  burns. 
Endeavour,  therefore,  so  to  act  that 
neither  before  God  nor  your  own  con- 
science nor  any  man  sin  can  be  brought 
against  you.  Faith  gives  freedom  from 
sin  before  God.  Through  faith  all  our 
sins  are  cast  into  the  deep  ocean  of 
divine  mercy ;  for  then  they  are  for- 
given and  forgotten.  Before  conscience 
you  may  be  free  from  sin  if  you  make 
even  the  smallest  sin  a  matter  of 
conscience,  and  therefore  seek  to  shun 
even  the  smallest  sin.  Before  men  you 
may  be  blameless  when  you  seek  to 
"  give  none  offence,"  to  take  offence  at 
no  man,  so  that  no  one  may  take  offence 
at  you. 

Yer.  48.  Those  who  are  evil  speak 
evil. — Those  in  whose  hearts  the  devil 

255 


chap.  viii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


abides  speak  of  him  willingly.  When 
men  speak  evil  of  us  we  need  not  be 
ashamed,  but  only  when  we  do  evil. — 
From  German  Sources. 

It  is  related  of  Sir  Thomas  More  that 
he  had  the  good  custom  of  turning 
aside  to  some  other  topic  of  conversa- 
tion when  any  one  began  in  his  presence 
to  defame  or  rail  against  friends.  Fre- 
quently also  he  was  accustomed  to 
repeat  these  words  :  "  He  that  is  with- 
out sin  among  you,"  etc.  (ver.  7). 

Ver.  48.  "  Thou  art  a  Samaritan." — 
The  rendering  "  and  hast  a  devil "  is 
one  which  probably  cannot  now  be  im- 
proved. Wycliffe's  word  here  is  "  fiend," 
which,  in  this  sense,  is  obsolete.  But 
every  reader  of  the  Greek  must  feel 
how  little  our  English  word  can  repre- 
sent the  two  distinct  ideas,  represented 
by  two  distinct  words,  here  and  in 
ver.  44.  "  Demon,"  used  originally 
for  the  lower  divinities,  and  not  un- 
frequently  for  the  gods,  passed  in  the 
Scriptures,  which  taught  the  knowledge 
of  the  true  God,  into  the  sense  of  an 
evil  spirit.  Thus  the  word  which  cou]d 
represent  the  attendant  genius  of 
Socrates  came  to  express  what  we  speak 
of  as  demoniacal  possession,  and  the 
supposed  power  of  witchcraft  and 
sorcery.  Socrates  is  made  to  say, 
"  For  this  reason,  therefore,  rather 
than  for  any  other,  he  calls  them 
demons,  because  they  were  prudent  and 
knowing "  (dazmones,  Plato,  Cratylus, 
xxiii.).  The  history  of  Simon  Magus 
reminds  us  that  the  people  of  Samaria, 
from  the  least  to  the  greatest,  had  been 
for  a  long  time  under  the  influence  of 
his  sorceries  (Acts  viii.  9  et  seq.)  ;  and  it 
is  probable  that  there  is  a  special  con- 
nection in  the  words  here,  "  Thou 
art  a  Samaritan,  and  hast  a  demon." — 
//.  W.  Watkins. 


Yer.  50.  True  nobility. — It  is  far 
more  honourable  to  be  ennobled  because 
of  worth,  than  to  have  inherited  a  noble 
name  from  ancestors.  He  who  recog- 
nises the  honour  that  is  his  through 
being  in  Christ  and  thus  in  God,  will 
not  greatly  trouble  himself  about  self- 
honour  or  the  honours  of  the  world.— - 
J.  J.  Weigel. 

Chrysostom  says :  "To  bear  con- 
tempt with  patience  is  praiseworthy; 
but  to  be  indifferent  when  God  is 
blasphemed  is  impious." 

Ver.  51.  Keeping  Christ's  word. — > 
Christ  does  not  mean  here  keeping  in 
a  sense  that  men  are  said  to  keep  the 
law  by  doing  the  works ;  rather  the 
word  must  first  be  kept  in  the  heart  by 
faith,  and  not  by  outward  doing,  as  the 
Jews  thought.  And  it  is  not  called 
without  meaning  a  "  keeping  of  the 
word,"  for  the  idea  implies  strife  and 
conflict.  It  is  when  sin  afflicts,  when 
death  presses,  and  hell  threatens,  that 
we  are  to  "  hold  fast  the  faithful  word  " 
(Titus  i.  9),  nor  let  ourselves  be  parted 
from  it. 

Never  seeing  death. — The  death  of  a 
Christian  seems  outwardly  often  very 
much  like  the  death  of  the  godless. 
But  in  reality  there  is  a  difference  as 
great  as  that  betwixt  heaven  and 
earth.  For  the  Christian  sleeps  in 
death,  and  through  it  enters  into  life  ; 
but  the  ungodly  goes  forth  from  life, 
and  knows  death  eternally. 

Ver.  59.  Stoning  Christ. — 1.  If  men 
follow  the  evil  one  on  the  way  of  lying, 
they  may  soon  do  so  on  the  way  of 
murder.  2.  Jesus  hid  Himself  not 
from  fear,  but  from  forbearance  for 
His  foes.  3.  Despise  not  Christ's  words 
lest  He  withdraw  Himself  and  His 
grace. — From  German  Sources. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  14.  The  light  hears  witness  of  itself— 
A  light  reveals  itself  as  well  as  other  objects. 
So  the  light  bears  witness  of  itself ;  it 
lightens  eyes  that  are  healthy,  and  is  its  own 
witness,  so  that  men  recognise  it  as  light. — 
Augustine. 

211 


Ver.  19.  Belief  or  unbelief —light  or  dark- 
ness ? — Either  we  believe  in  the  crucified 
One,  who  has  washed  us  in  His  blood  from 
our  sin ;  on  the  risen  One,  who  raises  us 
from  the  dust  and  miry  clay ;  on  the  Friend 
of  Souls,  who  daily  visits  us ;  on  the  great 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.    VIII, 


High  Priest,  who  intercedes  for  us ;  on  the 
Lord  of  lords,  who  raises  us  from  death,  so 
that  old  things  are  passed  away,  and  all — all 
are  become  new.  Or  we  do  not  believe  in 
the  Son  of  man  and  of  God,  we  impugn  His 
heavenly  origin,  we  doubt  His  word,  we 
neglect  His  cross,  we  despise  His  grace,  we 
set  at  naught  His  kingdom  ;  and  we  shall 
die  without  offering  or  ransom,  shall  die 
in  our  sins.  And  although  all  the  princes  of 
earth  were  to  stand  around  thy  dying  bed 
with  comfort  and  compassion,  if  the  Prince 
of  peace  be  not  among  them  ;  and  although 
all  thy  kinsmen,  weeping  and  bewailing  thy 
departure,  should  surround  thee,  if  Jesus  be 
not  there :  terrible  loneliness,  awful  passing 
away  !  No  ;  better  were  it  to  be  surprised 
by  death  on  some  desert  waste,  or  in 
darkened  chamber,  with  face  turned  to  the 
wall.  Yes,  deep  in  the  keep  of  a  dungeon 
to  finish  your  course,  if  only  Jesus  be  present 
with  you — not  to  die  alone  without  the 
Redeemer,  unconverted,  unpardoned  ;  in  the 
depth  of  your  sin,  to  go  down  to  destruction  1 
—Kogel,  "Predigt." 

Ver.  21.  Too  late. — I  was  once  present  at 
a  railway-station  when  a  man  who  had  pur- 
chased emigration  tickets  for  himself  and  his 
children  for  a  journey  to  America,  and  who 
had  put  his  children  into  a  carriage,  as 
they  were  to  sail  on  the  following  day  from 
Amsterdam,  came  himself  too  late  on  the 
platform,  when  the  train  had  left  with  his 
family  and  effects.  In  uncontrollable  agony 
he  threw  himself  on  the  platform,  and  cried 
continually,  Too  late — too  late  !  What  was 
the  sin  of  many  of  those  Jews  ?  That  many 
first  persecuted  Jesus ;  and  then,  when  they 
afterward  would  have  sought  Him,  it  was 
too  late  I — Idem. 

Ver.  23.  The  chief  cause  of  contest  between 
Christ  and  the  Jews. — Men  often  strive 
bitterly  regarding  certain  questions  of  public 
life  ;  and  when  we  look  more  narrowly  at  the 
matter  it  is  frequently  to  be  lost  in  wonder 
that  the  strife  waxes  so  hot  and  furious. 
For  very  frequently  the  contest  is  concerned 
with  merely  two  different  ways  to  the  same 
end  :  there  may  be  one  mind,  only  two 
different  fashions  of  expressing  it ;  one 
melody,  with  two  notes  that  do  not  accord. 
Sometimes  only  a  foot  breadth  divides  the 
opponents  from  one  another.  They  could 
easily  join  hands,  and  before  one  knows 
their  positions  may  be  reversed.  So-  that 
one  may  reasonably  ask,  Why  all  this  ex- 
travagance, all  this  bitterness  and  strife  ? 
But  when  a  man  of  God  has  to  strive  with 
the  unrighteousness  of  the  world,  when  h§ 
has  to  do  with  the  things  of  God  and  not 
with  those  of  men  only,  then  he  occupies  a 
standpoint  that  must  not  be  altered.  He 
does  not  stand  on  the  same  plane  with  the 
adversary.  .  .  .  But  here  is  the  distinction, 
"  Ye  are  from  beneath  ;  T  am  from  aboye." 


Mark  you  what  the  aim  and  end  of  the  evil 
man  is.  It  is  with  him  no  question  regard- 
ing news  and  hypotheses,  regarding  the 
longer  or  shorter  path  to  a  worthy  goal,  or 
which  of  two  parties  will  have  the  advantage 
and  be  able  to  impress  its  principles  on 
the  world.  The  question  here  is  whether  the 
Spirit  of  God  shall  rule  over  men,  or  the 
spirit  of  the  world;  whether  truth  shall 
have  the  place  of  honour,  or  falsehood ; 
whether  mankind,  erring  and  puffed  up, 
intoxicated  by  worldly  pleasure  and  the 
giddy  spirit  of  the  age,  shall  return  and 
receive  Christ  as  a  guest  into  the  depth  of 
their  souls,  and  bow  their  necks  under  His 
easy  yoke ;  or  take  on  them  the  strange  yoke 
with  the  unbelievers,  and  repute  the  light  to 
be  like  the  darkness.  "  Ye  are  from  beneath," 
etc.  On  this  ground  victory  is  secure, 
and  if  we  do  fall  we  fall  with  the  Lord. 
He  who  falls  with  the  Lord,  however,  con- 
quers even  while  he  falls.  For  then  Christ's 
cause  is  at  its  greatest,  when,  in  the  view  of 
the  world,  it  has  reached  its  nadir. — Lecher, 
"  Predigtr 

Ver.  32.  Merely  human  effort  cannot  de- 
liver men  from,  sin's  bondage. — It  is  true  that 
the  slaves  of  evil  and  the  tempters  to  evil 
do  not  ply  their  trade  so  unrestrainedly  as 
once  they  did,  and  it  is  true  that  the  hearts 
and  consciences  of  Christian  people  have 
been  awakened,  as  perhaps  never  before,  to 
their  responsibilities  in  connection  with  the 
disfigurements  and  perils  of  national  life. 
But,  after  all,  is  there  much  to  congratulate 
ourselves  upon  ?  In  our  great  cities  the 
forces  of  the  law  seem  to  be  paralysed  in 
the  face  of  certain  iniquities,  which  lift 
themselves  unabashed,  and  press  themselves 
in  their  most  hideous  forms  upon  the  notice 
even  of  the  most  innocent.  The  best  and 
the  most  earnest  lovers  of  their  kind  have 
been  driven  into  the  deepest  perplexities  as 
to  how  legislation  is  to  cope  with  evils  that 
seem  almost  too  great  for  its  force.  Many 
of  the  purest  and  noblest  spirits  of  our  time 
have  been  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is 
hopeless  to  expect  the  destruction  of  certain 
evils  ;  that  nothing  more  is  possible  than  to 
regulate  and  control  them.  Nor  is  there  so 
much  to  congratulate  ourselves  upon  in  our 
literature.  The  taint  may  not  be  so  gross, 
but  it  is  there,  though  in  a  subtler  form,  and 
not  less  seductive  because  it  is  somewhat  dis- 
guised ;  and  though  much  is  suppressed,  we 
have  now  and  then  terrible  indications  of 
what  lies  behind  and  beneath  that  silence, 
and  finds  expression  in  its  own  place  and 
time.  The  development  of  intellect  and 
culture  has  done  nothing  to  destroy  the 
power  of  beasthood  ;  nay,  the  intellect  has 
often  been  used  to  devise  new  refinements 
of  sin,  and  from  under  the  decorous  exterior 
ever  and  anon  leap  out  startling  manifesta- 
tions of  the  animal.     Even  in  the  best  this 

\  257 


chap.  vni.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


power  is  often  agonisingly  felt.  Some  of 
the  holiest  lives  the  world  has  ever  known 
have  been  darkened  and  shortened  through 
straggles  with  the  animal  nature — the 
changed  soul  in  the  unchanged  body  fretting 
in  its  prison. — W.  Robertson  Nicoll. 

Ver.  34.  The  vision  of  sin. — Nothing  could 
more  powerfully  depict  the  ruinous  effect  of 
sin  and  the  slavery  and  bondage  into  which 
it  brings  the  soul  than  The  Vision  of  Sin  by 
Tennyson.  In  this  poem  we  see  the  youth 
born  to  great  things  going  forth  on  winged 
steed,  but  drawn  half -willingly,  half- reluc- 
tantly, into  the  maze  of  sensuous  delight, 
mingling  in  the  giddy  dance  of  the  dwellers 
in  the  palace  of  pleasure,  till,  intoxicated 
and  blinded  to  the  consequences,  he  loses 
all  lofty  aims,  and  sinks  to  the  level  of  a 
votary  of  the  "  sensual  sty."  When  he  emerges 
at  last  it  is  as  a  wasted,  cynical,  prematurely 
old  roue,  mounted  on  a  sorry  steed,  pursuing 
his  way  over  a  blasted  heath,  the  emblem  of 
a  wasted,  ruined  life.  And  at  the  last  the 
palace  of  delight  vanishes,  leaving  but  a 
noisome  marsh  where  formerly  it  stood — a 
graveyard  of  ruined  humanity. 
"  Below  were  men  and  horses  pierced  with 
worms, 

And  slowly  quickening  into  lower  forms ; 

By  shards  and  scurf  of  salt,  and  scum  of 
dross, 

Old  plash  of  ruins  and  refuse  patched  with 
moss. 

"  At  last  I  heard  a  voice  upon  the  slope 
Cry  to  the  summit,  '  Is  there  any  hope  ? ' 
To  which  an  answer  peal'd  from  that  high 

land, 
But  in  a  voice  no  man  could  understand  ; 
And   on  the   glimmering  limit  far  with- 
drawn 
God  made  Himself  an  awful  rose  of  dawn." 

Tennyson. 

Ver.  34.  The  miser  a  slave. — A  merchant 
died  some  years  ago  in  Moscow.  He  was 
not  supposed  to  be  a  wealthy  man.  But  he 
was  found  dead  in  a  miserable,  damp  room. 
His  hands  were  clutching  the  sides  of  his 
iron  money-safe,  and  had  to  be  wrenched 
away  violently.  He  had  half-starved  himself, 
was  clothed  as  meanly  as  a  beggar.  Yet  in 
that  safe  which  he  clutched  with  his  death- 
grip  were  piles  of  gold,  bundles  of  bank- 
notes, etc.,  soiled  and  rotting  from  damp; 
in  short,  a  large  fortune.  Poor  slave  of  sin  1 
Where  was  his  happiness  here  ?  and  after  ? 

Ver.  34.  The  way  in  which  sin  enslaves. — 
The  gospel  focussed  all  the  separate  rays  of 
truth  shining  in  the  world,  it  may  be  said — 
not  only  the  truths  revealed  under  the  old 
covenant,  but  those  reached  by  men  of  all 
races  and  times  before  its  advent.  It  is 
interesting  to  meet  with  a  beautiful  expres- 

258 


sion  of  the  great  truth  in  ver.  34  in  the 
YLivaZ  of  Cebes,  the  disciple  of  Socrates,  a 
work  which  has  been  called  aptly  the  Greek 
Pilgrim's  Progress.  Cebes  depicts  men 
entering  on  life,  which  is  represented  by  a 
garden  or  enclosure,  in  a  picture  hung  on 
a  wall  of  the  temple  of  Thebes.  Those  who 
are  seen  entering  the  enclosure  are  solicited 
by  good  and  evil  influences,  whom  he  repre- 
sents under  the  guise  of  women.  Pleasure 
and  the  lust  of  pleasure  meet  men  at  the 
entrance  of  life,  promising  them  an  existence 
of  joy.  If  they  listen  they  are  led  away  by 
Deceit,  and  wander  off  from  the  true  path  of 
life,  falling  into  the  hands  of  Chance,  and  are 
given  over  by  her  in  turn  to  Incontinence, 
Unbridled  Desire,  Profligacy,  and  Flattery. 
u  These,"  he  says,  "  spring  up  and  embrace 
them,  flatter  them,  desire  them  to  remain 
beside  them,  assuring  them  that  they  will 
lead  a  pleasant  life,  easy,  and  free  from 
trouble  and  distress.  If,  then,  any  one  is 
persuaded  by  them  to  enter  on  this  luxurious 
existence,  for  a.  time  that  way  of  life  seems 
pleasant  enough,  as  long  as  the  man  gets 
gratification  from  it.  But  by-and-by  it  is 
seen  to  be  not  all  pleasant ;  for  when  the 
man  comes  to  his  senses  again  he  perceives 
that  in  reality  he  does  not  taste  this  life, 
but  that,  on  the  contrary,  he  is  devoured 
and  outraged  by  it.  Therefore  when  he  has 
squandered  all,  he  is  compelled  to  serve  these 
women  (vices),  to  bear  whatever  they  put 
upon  him,  and  to  do  what  is  pernicious  and 
wrong."  Then  he  is  given  over  to  Fear  and 
Grief  and  Pain,  till  finally  he  is  delivered  up 
to  Torment,  "  bringing  his  life  to  a  close  in 
misery,  unless  Repentance  by  design  should 
meet  him  on  his  way." — From  Cebes 
("  Tabulce  "). 

Ver.  36.  True  freedom. — When  repentance 
is  preached  to  the  race  of  to-day,  they 
proudly  toss  the  head  and  say :  Do  we  not 
live  in  the  nineteenth  century  ?  Are  we  not 
a  people  of  thinkers  ?  Are  not  Schiller  and 
Goethe  and  all  the  great  spirits  of  the  new 
age  of  our  flesh  and  blood  ?  Did  not  Luther 
erect  among  us  the  banner  of  freedom  ? 
Has  not  every  yoke  of  the  spirit  been  thrown 
off  and  shattered  1  Ah,  they  would  be  free 
and  cultured,  would  be  Protestants  and 
spiritual  fellows  of  Luther,  and  yet  are  such 
poor  bound  and  miserable  slaves.  Gold  is 
their  tyrant  and  king,  the  drinking-cup  their 
despot"  They  are  subject  to  them,  will  they 
nill  they.  The  flesh  sits  on  the  throne,  and 
stretches  out  its  sceptre  over  them.  When 
the  flesh  cries,  Come  hither  !  immediately 
they  come ;  when  it  cries,  Go  !  then  they  go  ; 
when  it  commands,  Do  this,  then  they  do 
it  without  contradiction.  When  God  com- 
mands, then  there  is  neither  voice,  nor 
perception,  nor  answer.  They  do  not  obey ; 
they  are  not  at  all  habituated  to  obedience, 
and  know  not  how  to  set  about  it.    Where 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.        chap.  viii. 


the  world  allures  them,  thither  they  speed 
on  the  wings  of  the  wind,  although  the  way- 
should  lead  into  the  open  abyss.  .  .  .  There 
is  no  surer  way  to  freedom  than  to  hear  Him 
who  said,  "  Take  My  yoke  upon  you  and 
learn  of  Me."— Lecher,  "  Predigt." 

Vers.  39,  40.  Abraham  the  obedient  servant 
of  God. — Abraham,  the  father  of  the  faithful, 
rises  from  his  rocky  grave  in  the  grove  of 
Mamre,  and  raises  his  hand  in  exhortation, 
calling  to  us,  "  Only  believe,  for  then  thou 
wilt  have  a  pilgrim's  staff  through  life,  which 
will  neither  bend  nor  break,  as  I  have  had  it 
during  my  long,  wearv  pilgrimage."      "  By 
faith  Abraham,"  etc.  (Heb.  xi.  8-10).     What 
a  checkered  pilgrim  life  had  this  father  of 
the  faithful  !     How  many  painful  steps  did 
he  make  on  this  earth  from  day  to  day,  from 
the   day   God   said,   "Get  thee   out  of  thy 
country,  and  from  thy  kindred,"  etc.  (Gen. 
xii.),  until  the  day  when,  old  and  life-wearied, 
he  laid  his  head  to  rest  in  the  double  cave 
at  Mamre,  near  his  faithful  Sarah.     What 
was  his  pilgrim  staff  on  this  journey  1  the 
pilgrim  staff  with  which  he  journeyed  to  the 
land  of  strangers,  and  knew  not  whither  he 
went  ?   the  pilgrim  staff  leaning   on   which 
he  made  the  bitterest  journey   of   his  life, 
the  journey  to  Mount  Moriah  to  offer  up  his 
beloved   son  ?      His  faith  was   his   pilgrim 
staff.     Through  faith  he  became  an  obedient 
servant  of  God,  who  said  willingly,  "  Speak, 
Lord,  for  Thy  servant  heareth,"  although  he 
knew   not   to   what   the    Lord    called    him. 
Through  faith  he  was  the  blessed  of  the  Lord, 
who   as  a  sojourner  and  stranger  dwelt  in 
the  land  of  promise,  which  his  people  should 
afterward   inherit ;    who   was   permitted    to 
read   in   the   stars   of   heaven   the  glorious 
promises    of    coming    salvation,    which    all 
peoples  would  share  through  him.    Faith  was 
his  pilgrim   staff.      Blessed   are  those  who 
still  to-day  journey  through  life  leaning  on 
this  staff.    Our  life  also  is  a  pilgrimage.    We 
also  have  sometimes  to  march  through  barren 
deserts,   anon    through    green    and    fertile 
meads,  now  through  rain,  and   now   under 
bright  sunshine.      We  too  often  go  out   at 
morning-tide,  at   the   beginning   of  a   new 
year,  or  at  a  new  crisis  of  our  life,  and  know 
not  whither  we  go,  and  how  it   shall  fare 
with    us.      We   too    must    make    many    a 
dolorous    journey    here    (as    Abraham    to 
Moriah),  on  which  our  faith  will  be  sorely 
tried,  and  our  obedience  put  to  the  hardest 
proof,  when  God  demands  from  us  what  is 
dearest,  and  lays  the  heaviest  burdens  on  our 
shoulders.     We  too  live  in  perishable  taber- 
nacles here,  and  have  here   no   continuing 
city,  but  seek  one  that  is  to  come.      What 
shall  our  pilgrim  staff   be   throughout  this 
life,  over  rough  or  pleasant  ways,  in  good  and 
evil  days  ?    For  thee,  0  my  soul,  I  know  none 
which  will  endure  unto  the  end,  none  that 
will  help  thee  over  hill  and  vale,  except  the 


staff  of  Abraham,  faith.  But  blessed  are 
ail  they  who  seize  this  staff  and  walk  in  the 
patriarch's  footsteps.  Blessed  are  they  when 
in  the  obedience  of  faith,  as  faithful  servants, 
they  pursue  the  path  the  Lord  points  out  for 
them,  because  they  know  this  one  thing, 
it  is  God's  will ;  and  thus  in  the  severest 
trials  they  will  submit  themselves  to  Him 
for  His  direction — "  Behold,  Lord,  here  am  I." 
Then  will  they  rejoice  in  the  blessing  of 
faith,  and  can  tread  comforted  on  the  darkest 
ways  in  the  confidence  of  faith,  because  they 
know  that  the  "  Lord  is  their  shepherd,  and 
they  shall  not  want,"  etc.  (Ps.  xxiii.).  In  the 
dark  night  of  sorrow  they  can  look  upward 
to  the  eternal  star  of  the  divine  promise, 
and  learn  amid  the  troubles  of  the  earthly 
pilgrimage  to  rejoice  in  the  new  eternal 
city  whose  Builder,  etc. — K.  Gerok,  "  Predigt! 

Ver.  46.  The  challenge  of  Christ  un- 
answered.— So  blinded  were  the  Jews  by  the 
glamour  cast  by  Satan's  lies,  that  they  re- 
jected Jesus  just  because  He  spoke  the  truth. 
The  highest  truth  has  this  for  one  of  its 
credentials — that  sinful  men  do  not  accept 
it.  Tongues  accustomed  to  the  coarse  pun- 
gency of  leeks  and  garlic  do  not  like  manna. 
The  devil's  children  naturally  take  to  lies, 
and  turn  away  from  truth.  Ver.  46  in 
its  first  part  gives  as  proof  that  He  spoke 
the  truth  the  unanswerable  challenge  to 
convict  Him  of  sin.  That  glove  lies  in  the 
lists  still,  and  eighteen  hundred  years  have 
produced  no  champion  bold  enough  to  lift  it 
and  say,  "  I  will."  Jesus  asserts  His  sinless- 
ness,  and  the  world  admits  the  claim.  But 
does  it  accept  the  consequence,  that  sinless- 
ness  in  action  implies  truth  in  speech  ?  So 
He  takes  for  granted  here — and  surely,  if  it 
be  true  that  His  manhood  was  utterly  free 
from  sin,  the  only  explanation  is  to  be  found 
in  the  recognition  of  His  Sonship,  and  in- 
volved therein — the  validity  of  His  claim  to  be 
the  perfect  Revealer  of  the  truth.  On  the  basis 
of  His  flawless  purity  is  solidly  planted  the 
searching  question,  "  Why  do  ye  not  believe 
in  Me  ?"  and  no  less  solidly  the  final  crush- 
ing unveiling  of  the  ultimate  reason  for  all 
unbelief,  "  Ye  therefore  hear  them  not, 
because  ye  are  not  of  God." — Dr.  Alexander 
Maclaren. 

Ver.  58.  Jesus  the  eternal  Son. — The  reason 
why  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  so  strong  was 
shown  (at  the  end  of  our  Gospel)  by  Him, 
and  so  enraged  the  Jews  that  they  took  up 
stones,  etc.  (ver.  59).  For  when  Christ  said 
that  His  word  would  keep  them  from  eternal 
death  this  stood  in  the  way  of  the  Jews. 
They  saw  that  Abraham  and  other  holy  men 
were  dead  ;  only  let  it  be  supposed  that 
Christ  was  not  equal  to  them,  then  it  w£S 
a  vain  glory  that  led  Him  to  magnify  His 
word  so  greatly.  But  Christ  answered, 
"  Abraham  rejoiced,"  etc.  (ver.  56).     That  is, 

259 


chap.  ix.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


had  Abraham  not  held  fast  to  My  word  he  nally  Son  of  God.     Why  then  are  such  testi- 

too  would  have  remained  in  eternal  death.  monies  so  frequent  in  the  gospel  ?    In  order 

And  again,  "  I  am  before  Abraham."     Both  that  we  may  put  our  trust  in  Him,  and  not 

mean   as   much  as,   "I   am  the  eternal  al-  in  man ;  and  rely  upon  His  word  assuredly, 

mighty   God."     Whoever   is   burdened  with  for  it  is  God's  word  and  cannot  lie.     What 

sin,  therefore,  and  would  escape  from  death  He   says  is  yea,  and  shall  not  fail  through 

and  lay  hold  of  life,  must  be  helped  thereto  eternity  ;  just  as  little  as  it  failed  when  God 

by  Me.      Such   a   claim   neither  Moses  nor  through  the  Word  created  heaven  and  earth 

all   the  prophets    could  glory  in ;   for  they  out  of  nothing.     Learn  this  with  diligence, 

were  all  men.     Christ  is  both  God  and  man ;  and  thank  God  for  such  doctrine,  and  pray 

therefore  He  can  give  life  and  blessedness —  that  through  His  Holy  Spirit  He  will  keep 

He  and  no  other.     This  is  most  comforting,  you  in  the  Word,  and  thus  make  you  through 

and   a   certain   proof   of    our  faith,   as   we  Christ   eternally  blessed. — Translated  from 

confess  that  Christ  is  by  nature  and  eter-  Luther's  "  Hauspostille" 


PART  IV.  (c.) 

III.  The  Growing  Conflict,  etc. 

1.  Jesus  manifested  as  the  light  of  men. — (1)  Shown  by  the  typical  "  sign  "  of 
healing  the  man  born  blind  (vers.  1-12) ;  (2)  the  opposition  of  Christ's  enemies, 
shown  in  their  determined  and  unscrupulous  attempts  to  break  down  the  testi- 
mony of  the  man  who  had  been  healed  (vers.  13-34). 

2.  The  result  of  the  miracle. —  (1)  Jesus  manifested  as  the  giver  of  spiritual 
light  (vers.  35-38)  ;  (2)  but  for  blindness  to  those  who  say  they  see,  yet  are 
enemies  of  the  light  (vers.  39-41). 

Second  Year  of  our  Lords  Ministry. 
Time  and  place  in  Synoptic  narrative. — See  Chap,  vii.,  p.  200. 

CHAPTER   IX. 
EXPLANATORY  AND  CRITJOAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  The  connection  of  this  narrative  with  what  precedes  and  what  follows  is  variously 
stated.  Westcott,  e.g.,  supposes  that  the  occurrence  took  place  at  the  feast  of  Dedication 
(x.  22  :  "  Then  was  the  feast  of  dedication,"  etc.).  It  is  here  assumed  that  it  is  immediately 
connected  with  the  previous  chapter — that  the  miracle  was  wrought  in  the  evening  of  the 
festival  Sabbath,  in  the  morning  of  which  Jesus  declared  Himself  to  be  the  Light  of  the 
world.  The  blind  beggar  might  be  seated  not  far  from  one  of  the  temple  gates  (Acts  iii.  2). 
Blind  from  his  birth. — "The  miracles  recorded  in  John's  Gospel  stand  out  each  as  a  type 
of  its  class.     Hence  stress  is  laid  on  this  special  fact  "  (Westcott). 

Ver.  3.  Our  Lord  does  not  mean  in  the  words  "Neither  hath  this  man  sinned,"  etc.,  that 
the  man  and  his  parents  were  not  sinners  (Rom.  iii.  23)  ;  but  that  this  special  calamity  was 
not  the  result  of  special  criminality  or  transgression. 

Ver.  4.  I  must,  etc. — The  better  reading  is  ^uas  del  epy&fcvdcu,  We  must  work  ({<,  B,  D,  L), 
with  Tischendorf,  Tregelles,  Westcott  and  Hort,  etc. 

Ver.  5.  As  long  as  I  am  in  the  world,  etc.,  or  better  When  I  am,  etc.  (8to.p). — This  evidently 
refers  back  to  the  preceding  discourse  (viii.  12  ff.).  Whilst  it  is  true  that  Christ  is  ever  the 
light  in  the  spiritual  world  :  "  for  the  day  of  Christ's  presence  has  no  evening  :  His  sun  never 
sets  "  (Augustine  in  Wordsworth)  :  yet  His  immediate  visible  manifestation,  the  day  of  His 

260 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  IX. 


activity  in  which  He  gave  sight  to  the  blind  and  relief  to  the  wretched,  would  soon  pass 
away.  <p  Q  $  (not  to  <pus,  the  light). — I.e.  light  manifesting  itself  in  various  ways — here 
healing  the  blind  physically  and  spiritually. 

Ver.  6.  The  application  of  saliva  to  the  eyes  (which  was  considered  salutary),  and  the 
making  of  the  clay  especially,  were  in  Jewish  eyes,  and  according  to  rabbinical  tradition,  a 
.serious  breach  of  the  Sabbath  law. 

Ver.  7.  Siloam  (ribtfrr,  from  nbtij,  to  send  forth). — Now  Birket  Silwdn,  lying  south  from  the 
temple  area,  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Moriah,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Tyropceon  valley  (see  note, 
p.  268).  "  Sent." — The  waters  of  the  pool  were  intermittent,  and  were  popularly  supposed  to 
be  specially  sent  with  healing  power ;  and  doubtless  there  is  a  hidden  reference  in  the  name 
and  its  interpretation  to  Jesus — the  Sent  of  God. 

Ver.  8.  The  neighbours,  etc. — Those  in  whose  vicinity  the  blind  man  lived.  Probably  the 
scene  now  recorded  took  place  on  the  day  following  the  miracle.  "  Who  saw  him  before  that 
he  was  a  beggar"  (6Vt  v-poo-aiTr}?  fy)  is  the  reading  of  all  the  best  MSS. 

Ver.  9.  Others  said,  No,  he  is  like  him.— No,  oixi :    K,  B,  C,  L,  etc.     He. — eKtcuos. 

Ver.  11.  A  man,  etc.-  Better  The  man  called  Jesus.  The  blind  man  said  nothing  regarding 
our  Lord's  claim  to  be  Messiah  ;  but  the  words  imply  that  Jesus  was  well  known,  and  most 
likely  the  man  who  had  been  healed  knew  Him  who  had  been  so  much  talked  about  in 
Jerusalem. 

Ver.  13.  They  brought. — Better  They  bring. 

Ver.  14.  Now  it  was  a  Sabbath  on  the  day  that  Jesus  made  the  clay,  etc. — It  was  most 
likely  a  festival  Sabbath. 

Ver.  15.  The  Pharisees. — In  the  lesser  Sanhedrin,  or  Synagogue  Councils. 

Ver.  16.  This  man  is  not  of  God  ...  a  division  among  them. — The  prophecy  that  was 
uttered  at  His  presentation  in  the  temple  was  being  fulfilled  (Luke  ii.  34).  The  Light  was 
separating  the  righteous  from  the  unrighteous  (vii.  43,  x.  19). 

Ver.  22.  The  Jews  had  agreed,  etc. — The  Sanhedrin  had  not  likely  come  openly  to  this 
agreement.  They  would  have  found  opposition  in  their  own  ranks.  A  party  of  the  leading 
sect  had  clone  so,  however  (Acts  xxiii.  20).  Put  out  of  the  synagogue.— Publicly  excom- 
municated from  participation  in  all  religious  privileges  for  a  time,  or  for  life. 

Ver.  24.  Give  glory  to  God. — Many  think  that  these  words  are  simply  a  call  to  the  man  to 
abjure  his  supposed  former  error,  in  having  called  Christ  a  prophet,  although  He  had  broken 
the  rabbinical  Sabbath  law  (see  Josh.  vii.  19).  But  it  surely  means  also  (since  they  could 
not  deny  the  fact  of  the  miracle),  Give  glory  to  God  for  the  cure  of  thy  blindness. 

Ver.  27.  And  ye  did  not  hearken  .  .  .  would  ye  also  become  His  disciples  % — Indignant  irony 
at  the  crooked  method  of  these  Pharisees,  who  sought  to  turn  truth  to  error,  echoes  in  these 
words. 

Ver.  28.  Thou  art  the  disciple  of  that  man,  etc.— They  implicitly  accused  him  of  dis- 
loyalty to  the  law. 

Ver.  31.  Heareth  not  sinners,  etc. — I.e.  men  who  are  hardened  and  impenitent — wicked 
men,  such  as  you  accuse  this  prophet  of  being.  A  worshipper. — I.e.  a  devout,  pious  man 
(6eo<rel37)s). 

Ver.  33.  Of  God. — "  The  mighty  work  done  by  Him  proves  He  is  not  a  wicked  man  ;  it 
proves  more,  viz.  that  He  is  of  God." 

Ver.  34.  Cast  him  out. — There  were  three  degrees  of  excommunication.  The  first  excluded 
the  person  under  the  ban  for  a  short  period  from  religious  privileges.  The  second  extended 
for  a  longer  period,  and  was  much  more  severe  in  that  it  debarred  the  person  banned  even 
from  social  intercourse  for  the  time.  The  third  was  almost  a  virtual  cutting  off  from  Israel 
of  the  person  excommunicated.  Perhaps  the  meaning  here  is  simply  that  they  thrust  the 
man  violently  out  of  the  place  of  assembly.  Those  who  were  trying  him  might  not  have 
full  power  to  excommunicate.  Born  in  sins. — These  men  held  the  idea  repudiated  by  our 
Lord  (ver.  3). 

Ver.  35.  When  He  found  him. — Jesus  had  a  greater  work  to  perform  on  him  than  even  the 
cure  of  his  blindness,  and  therefore  He  sought  him.  Son  of  God. — Some  MSS.  read  Son  of 
man  (Tischendorf,  Ed.  viii.,  etc.);  and  this  to  a  devout  Jew  would  mean  the  Messiah,  the 
King  of  the  eternal  kingdom  (Dan.  vii.  13). 

Ver.  38.  Worshipped  (TrpoaeKtiu-qaev). — This  word  does  not  mean  reverence  merely,  but 
worship  due  to  God  (xii.  20,  etc.). 

Ver.  39.  For  judgment,  etc. — Not  to  execute  judgment  (/cptVis),  but  judgment  (Kpifxa),  a 
judicial  decision,  would  follow  from  His  very  presence  among  men.  The  Light  must  reveal 
(iii.  17-20).     This  world. — In  which  there  is  much  darkness,  much  evil  and  sin  (Gal.  i.  4). 

Ver.  40.  Some  of  the  Pharisees,  etc. — Probably  some  who  still  believed  on  Him  (viii.  30) ; 
but  no  doubt  also  others  who,  it  may  be,  kept  a  watch  on  Christ  and  His  actions.  They  were 
not  conscious  of  their  spiritual  blindness,  and  thus  were  not  driven  to  rely  on  Him  who  is  the 
light  of  men. 

261 


chap.  ix.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY i   ST.  JOHN. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—12. 

Jesus,  the  light  of  the  world,  heals  the  man  bom  blind. — It  was  at  the  close  of 
a  festival  Sabbath  clay  (ver.  14,  "Now  it  was  Sabbath  on  the  day,"  etc.)  that 
Jesus,  passing  through  some  place  of  public  resort  apparently,  "saw  a  man," 
etc.  The  late  afternoon  was  wearing  toward  evening,  and  sitting  by  the 
way,  conspicuous  among  the  moving  crowds,  was  this  blind  beggar,  known 
to  some  extent  by  the  populace  (ver.  8).  Jesus  "  saw  "  this  poor  man,  the 
narrative  tells  us.  And  in  the  case  of  the  Saviour,  to  see  human  misery  was  to 
be  moved  to  relieve  it.  We  are  to  think  of  Him  looking  compassionately  on  the 
blind  beggar.  Our  great  High  Priest  was  ever  "  touched  with  the  feeling  of 
our  infirmities."  The  difference  between  divine  and  human  pity  is  strikingly 
brought  out  in  the  manner  in  which  the  disciples  regarded  this  pitiful  case.  The 
Lord's  seeing  of  the  blind  man  led  Him  to  heal;  the  disciples'  seeing  led  them 
to  moot  a  subtle  question  regarding  the  origin  of  such  infirmities.  Jesus  proved 
that  He  was  the  light  of  the  world — 

I.  In  giving  sight  to  the  blind. — 1.  Jesus  had  been  rejected  in  the  temple, 
His  well-established  claim  to  be  the  light  of  the  world  set  aside  with  scorn,  and 
He  Himself  assailed  violently.  But  that  did  not  stay  His  beneficent  activity  as 
the  world's  light,  any  more  than  the  clouds  can  hinder  the  sun  from  shining, 
although  they  may  shut  out  his  beams  from  the  earth,  as  the  Jews  shut  out  the 
healing  rays  from  their  souls.  On  the  high  levels  of  faith  His  light  is 
undimmed.  2.  And  here  we  find  the  rays  of  Christ's  love  and  mercy  directed  to 
one  sorely  in  need  of  them.  This  man  whom  Christ  restored  was  one  whose  case 
was  evidently  past  all  human  power.  He  was  known  to  have  been  hopelessly 
blind  from  his  birth ;  and  evidently  people  were  convinced  that  in  some  way  his 
affliction  was  connected  with  special  sin  (ver.  2).  This  was  an  opinion  familiar 
to  the  Jewish  people.  So  that  not  only  was  the  man  a  special  sufferer ;  but 
according  to  this  belief  his  affliction  was  the  result,  so  to  speak,  of  a  divine 
decree  3.  Thus  his  restoration  would  manifestly  be  a  work,  not  only  of  mercy, 
but  of  divine  power  ;  and  in  this  case,  where  the  cure  was  so  extraordinary  and 
so  manifest,  it  could  not  fail  to  impress  all  who  witnessed  it,  that  here  was  One 
more  than  man,  and  that  this  work,  performed  by  Him,  was  indeed  a  work  of  God 
(vers.  4,  5),  and  must  have  been  wrought  by  One  sent  from  God.  Only  He  who 
11  formed  the  eye  "  (Ps.  xciv.  9)  could  thus  be  able,  or  could  give  power,  to  heal 
the  eyes  to  which  sight  had  been  denied  from  birth.  It  is  the  Creator  who 
forms  the  seeing  eye,  who  every  day  is  working  this  miracle  million-fold  among 
the  tribes  of  earth  and  air  by  slow  gradation.  He,  therefore,  who  is  able 
thus,  as  it  were,  to  carry  out  and  perfect  the  work  of  the  Creator,  must  have 
heavenly  power. 

II.  In  the  evident  fulfilment  of  the  ancient  prophecies. — Jesus  proved  Him- 
self to  be  the  promised  "  Sun  of  Righteousness,"  the  light  sent  to  lighten  the 
Gentiles,  etc.  1.  In  all  His  miracles  our  Lord  had  not  only  the  immediate  end 
in  view,  such  as  the  alleviation  of  human  suffering,  etc.,  but  the  general  and 
comprehensive  end  of  manifesting  forth  His  glory  as  the  Messiah,  and  thus  the 
glory  of  His  Father  (ii.  11,  xi.  40-42,  xii.  27-29).  2.  This  also  was  to  be  one 
of  the  glories  of  Messiah's  reign,  one  of  the  signs  of  His  working  :  "  The  eyes  of 
the  blind  shall  be  opened  "  (Isa.  xxxv.  5).  And  at  the  beginning  of  His  public 
ministry  our  Lord  proclaimed  this  as  part  of  His  mission  (Luke  iv.  18).  When 
John  sent  from  his  prison  cell  two  of  his  disciples  to  ask,  "Art  Thou  He  that 
should  come?  "  etc.,  Jesus  in  answer  pointed  to  His  teaching  and  works  in  proof 
of  His  mission.  And  at  the  head  of  these  He  places  the  fact,  "  The  blind  receive 
their  sight "  (Matt.  xi.  2-5).     3.  This  then  was  an  undoubted  sign  of  Messianic 

262 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  ix. 


times  and  of  the  working  of  Messiah,  and  prominence  is  given  to  it  on  account 
of  the  included  spiritual  meaning  to  which  the  miracle  points.     Messiah  was  to 
give  sight  to  the  spiritually  blind      Thus  was  there  placed  before  the  people  an 
evident  proof  of  the  truth  of  Christ's  claim  (viii.  12), 
III.  The  awakening  of  faith  in  the  heart  of  the  man  who  was  healed. — 

1.  This,  so  far  as  the  afflicted  man  was  concerned,  was  the  end  for  which  this 
miracle  was  wrought.  Not  only  would  Jesus  restore  him  to  sight,  but  rescue  him 
from  a  deeper  spiritual  blindness — let  a  more  glorious  light  shine  into  his  soul 
than  the  natural  light  which  he  now  saw  for  the  first  time  (2  Cor.  iv.  6). 

2.  And  it  was  doubtless  as  a  means  of  quickening  that  faith  that  Jesus  in  this 
instance  used  outward  means  toward  the  end  in  view.  This  poor  man  did  not 
see  Jesus,  and  the  anointing  of  his  eyes  with  the  clay  brought  him  into  contact 
with  the  Saviour,  showed  him  the  source  of  the  power  (as  Mark  vii.  32-37). 
From  ancient  histories  we  learn  that  saliva  jejuna  was  held  in  repute  as  a 
remedy  for  blindness,  and  clay  was  considered  to  have  sanative  properties. 
May  not  all  these  things  have  been  tried  in  this  man's  case  and  failed  ?  But  now 
they  were  to  become  aids  to  this  man's  faith,  to  show  whence  was  the  healing 
power.  3.  Further,  he  was  sent  to  wash  in  Siloam  as  a  test  of  the  trustful 
obedience  of  faith.  Is  there  not  bound  up  with  the  mention  of  this  fountain, 
and  the  interpretation  of  its  name,  a  spiritual  meaning  ?  Was  it  not  in  refer- 
ence to  the  pouring  out  the  water  of  that  spring  at  the  feast  of  tabernacles  that 
Jesus  had  pointed  to  Himself  as  the  true  Siloam,  sent  of  God  to  heal  men's 
diseases,  to  bring  them  spiritual  life  (vii.  37-39)  ?  4.  The  man  went  forth 
trusting  in  the  word  of  Christ ;  and  he  went  not  in  vain.  No  direct  promise 
had  been  made ;  but  he  believed  that  He  by  whom  He  was  sent  would  not  mock 
him.  "  He  came  seeing  " — in  a  double  sense ;  for  now  he  believed  that  the 
divine  Teacher,  of  whom  so  much  was  spoken,  was  indeed  u  the  sent  of  God  " 
(vers.  30-33).  It  was  a  notable  miracle  ;  many  were  cognisant  of  it ;  and  it  was  a 
convincing  answer  to  the  opposition  and  calumnies  of  the  Jews.  5.  All  believers 
spiritually  go  through  the  same  experience  as  this  blind  man.  Men  by  nature 
are  poor,  miserable,  blind,  etc.  Of  themselves  they  can  do  nothing  to  alleviate 
their  wretchedness.  "  Grace,  grace  alone,  availeth."  The  "  Sent  of  God  "  alone 
can  bring  them  from  darkness  to  light.  But  the  means  He  prescribes  must  be 
used :  they  may  seem  humble  enough ;  but  they  lead,  if  used  in  faith,  to  the 
same  blessed  result,  e.g.  "  It  pleased  God  by  the  foolishness  of  preaching,"  etc. 
(1  Cor.  i.  21).  Have  we  listened  to  Christ's  gracious  command,  obeyed  it, 
and  have  we  spiritually  received  sight?  If  not,  then  hear  His  invitation 
(Rev.  iii.  18). 

Vers.  2,  3.  The  problem  of  human  suffering. — No  thinking  man  can  look 
abroad  unmoved  on  the  spectacle  of  human  pain,  and  the  question  that  is  so 
fully  investigated  in  the  Book  of  Job  must  come  up  for  answer.  Especially  per- 
plexing is  the  apparently  indiscriminate  apportionment  of  suffering  and  calamity. 
The  good  have  to  bear  them  as  well  as  the  wicked.  Often,  indeed,  the  wicked 
nourish,  whilst  on  the  good  adversity  descends.  How  can  this  occur  under  the 
government  of  a  just  and  merciful  God?  Many,  trusting  to  reason  alone 
for  a  solution  of  the  problem,  have  reached  either  pantheistic  ideas  regarding 
evil,  considering  it  only  the  condition  of  a  higher  good,  or  have  embraced 
materialistic  conceptions  of  the  universe,  regarding  it  as  the  result  of  the  working 
of  laws  formed  and  directed  by  no  intelligent  lawgiver. 

I.  Our  Lord  did  not  deny  the  general  connection  between  sin  and  suffering. — 
1.  It  is  true  that  in  the  widest  sense  suffering  is  the  result  of  sin.  The  subtle 
poison,  the  dreadful  moral  disorder,  has  become  widespread  and  universal  in 
the  world.     And  further,  therefore,  when  suffering  overtakes  us,  it  is  because 

263 


CHAP.  ix.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST,  JOHN. 


we  are  parts  of  the  great  sinful  whole.  2.  But  it  must  be  remembered  that 
suffering  often  is  directly  and  unmistakably  connected  with  particular  sins. 
This  awful  conclusion  we  cannot  escape.  The  transgression  of  God's  natural 
laws  brings  speedy  punishment  on  the  transgressor.  So  too  does  the  transgression 
of  His  moral  laws,  especially  where  the  breaking  of  them  is  effected  through 
physical  channels.  3.  Then  there  is  the  vast  amount  of  suffering  brought  on 
those  who  are  innocent,  through  the  crimes,  sins,  and  follies  of  others.  Much  of 
the  misery  in  our  great  cities  especially  is  caused  in  this  way.  The  children  of 
the  intemperate  man,  e.g.,  ragged,  half  starved;  pinched,  and  wretched,  bear  in 
this  way  the  iniquity  of  their  father.  It  is  a  sad  and  even  overwhelming 
picture,  an  awful  commentary  on  the  apostolic  word,  "  The  wages  of  sin,"  etc. 

II.  But  whilst  this  is  so,  our  Lord  shows  us  that  it  is  not  our  part  to 
endeavour  to  establish  the  connection  between  special  suffering  and  special  sin. 
— 1.  For  in  reality  we  have  no  infallible  means  of  judging.  It  is  enough  if 
we  judge  ourselves,  and  we  cannot  always  do  even  that  perfectly — much  less 
can  we  investigate  fully  and  pronounce  sentence  upon  the  lives  of  our  fellows. 
2.  Then  there  are  undoubtedly  two  classes  of  sufferings,  i.e.  those  which  are  the 
direct  and  immediate  result  of  special  sins,  and  those  tribulations  which  God 
permits  to  come  even  upon  His  own  people  for  His  own  wise  purposes  and  their 
good.  3.  There  are  many  who  forget  this  fact,  and  neglect  the  warning  of  our 
Lord  not  to  judge  others  (Matt.  vii.  1).  When  they  hear  of  calamity  overtaking 
others,  they  are  too  ready  often  to  consider  it  as  a  divine  judgment  sent  on 
account  of  special  sin.  If  some  who  thus  judge  would  only  remember  how  great 
would  be  their  own  danger  in  that  case !  Our  Lord  rebuked  this  spirit  when 
some  came  to  tell  Him  of  the  eighteen  on  whom  the  tower  in  Siloam  fell 
(Luke  xiii.  1-5).  4.  Under  this  condemnation,  therefore,  would  come  those  who 
would  charge  the  sufferers  from  wars,  pestilences,  conflagrations,  storms  and 
floods,  etc.,  as  sinners  above  all  others ;  or  think  that  those  into  whose  family 
circle  come  misfortunes  of  various  kinds  must  always  be  guilty  of  secret  trans- 
gressions. Carefulness  and  charity  in  judging  others  should  ever  be  exercised. 
And  whilst  it  must  be  recognised  that  much  of  the  terrible  suffering  in  the 
world  is  the  direct  consequence  of  gross  sinfulness,  yet  it  is  also  clear  that  much 
of  the  world's  suffering  is  often  remedial,  or  is  intended  as  a  trial  of  the  faith 
and  patience  of  the  saints. 

III.  There  is  a  divine  purpose  of  love  in  much  of  human  suffering. — 1.  It 
was  so,  Jesus  told  His  disciples,  in  the  case  of  this  man.  His  "  light  affliction  " 
was  to  be  a  means  of  manifesting  God's  works.  A  sifting  inquiry  followed  this 
miracle.  The  enemies  of  our  Lord  tried  their  utmost  to  overturn  the  clear 
testimony  to  the  fact.  But  their  efforts  resulted  only  in  their  own  confusion. 
The  clear  proof  of  the  miracle  resulted  in  showing  forth  the  glory  of  Christ  as 
the  light  of  the  world,  and  gave  the  lie  to  their  calumnies.  2.  The  miracle 
also  testified  to  Christ's  power  as  the  spiritual  physician.  He  not  only  healed 
the  physical  vision  of  this  man,  but  the  spiritual.  May  not  this  blindness  have 
been  in  the  plan  of  God  for  this  man's  salvation  1  Might  it  not  have  been  a 
means  of  keeping  him  from  some  way  of  sin  into  which  he  might  otherwise  have 
gone  1  Various  conjectures  might  be  made  as  to  the  divine  purposes  fulfilled  in 
this  man's  affliction.  But  in  regard  to  the  chief  purpose  of  it,  it  is  safe  to  say 
that  God  will  never  permit  any  one  to  endure  in  vain  in  His  service.  3.  The 
divine  purpose  in  and  use  of  tribulation  are  recognised  by  all  believing  men 
(Ps.  cxix.  71). 

"  Sweet  are  the  uses  of  adversity." — Shakespeare. 

And  when  affliction  comes  on  Christian  men  because  of  their  sins  directly,  it  is 
intended  for  their  profit.     Just  as  pain  is  a  warning  to  keep  from  danger,  so 

264 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  ix. 


affliction  is  often  an  admonition  to  beware  of  sin.  4.  And  suffering  that  is  not 
directly  but  indirectly  caused  by  the  sin  of  others  shall  become  a  means  for 
showing  forth  the  works  of  God.  "  The  poor  ye  have  always  with  you,"  said 
Jesus  to  His  disciples,  thus  confiding  the  wretched  to  their  sympathetic  care. 
And  where  do  care  and  love  show  so  like  God's  as  in  the  care  and  love  of  a 
true  mother  for  the  weak  and  feeble  member  of  her  flock  ?  And  where  is  more 
of  the  Christ-spirit  shown  than  in  the  means  used  by  His  people  for  the  allevia- 
tion of  sorrow  and  suffering  1  And  where  are  greater  triumphs  seen  of  the 
grace  of  Christ  overcoming  than  in  the  case  of  many  on  whom  sore  affliction  has 
been  laid,  and  to  whom  it  has  become  even  here  a  crown  of  glory  ?  5.  Add  to 
all  this  that  whilst  suffering  is  the  general  result  of  moral  evil,  it  forms  in  a 
measure  a  check  to  the  supremacy  of  the  latter.  To  what  awful  lengths  might 
not  moral  evil  go,  further  than  what  we  see  even,  did  not  this  salutary  check 
bar  its  progress  !  In  every  way  there  is  a  divine  purpose  of  good  to  man  in 
affliction.     If  men  could  not  believe  this  they  might  well  despair. 

In  view  of  this  Christian  men,  whilst  ready  (1)  to  judge  themselves,  and  to 
inquire  earnestly  when  affliction  comes  for  what  purpose  it  has  been  sent,  what 
sin  has  been  gaining  dominion  over  them,  are  at  the  same  time  (2)  to  be  slow  in 
judging  others.  God  gives  us  no  right  to  judge  what  He  alone  can  know 
perfectly.  But  (3)  in  imitation  of  our  Master  we  have  a  divine  mission  to 
fulfil  toward  those  who  are  afflicted — a  mission  of  mercy  and  love  in  His  name 
and  spirit  to 

**  Eaise  the  fallen,  cheer  the  faint, 
Heal  the  sick,  and  lead  the  blind." 

Vers.  2,  3.  Healing  the  blind. — This  is  a  signal  miracle.  The  healing  of  the 
man  born  blind  was  what  could  not  be  effected  naturally.  The  circumstances 
of  this  blindness  were  the  occasion  of  these  words  in  vers.  2  and  3.  We  have 
first  :  1.  A  question  of  Christ's  disciples.  The  design  and  proposal  of  this 
question  might  be  twofold  :  (1)  that  it  was  simply  and  positively  their  opinion 
that  all  maladies  of  the  body  come  from  the  antecedent  demerit  of  sin,  according 
to  which  all  men's  sufferings  are  the  effects  of  their  personal  sins,  either  as  sin 
past  and  committed,  or  future  and  foreknown  to  God ;  or  (2)  that  the  opinion 
was  proposed  for  argument's  sake,  occasioned  by  a  former  passage  in  John  v. 
2.  Christ's  rejoinder.  The  words  do  not  contradict  Scripture.  They  mean  that 
sin  was  not  the  cause  of  his  blindness.  Having  removed  the  false  cause,  He 
subjoins  the  true  :  "  That  the  works  of  God,"  etc.  These  words  not  only  exhibit 
the  erroneous  curiosity  of  the  disciples,  but  show  the  charity  of  Christ  in  clearing 
the  man's  innocence  and  vindicating  God's  proceedings.  The  design  of  the 
words  in  this  view  is  prosecuted  in  three  propositions : — 

I.  Men  are  prone  to  charge  God's  judgments  upon  false  causes. — 1.  These 
false  causes  are:  (1)  sin  on  his  part  that  suffers;  (2)  hatred  on  God's  part. 
2.  The  principles  inducing  men  thus  to  charge  God's  judgments  upon  false  causes  : 
(1)  the  fallibility  of  the  rule,  and  the  falseness  of  the  opinion  by  which  they 
judge ;  (2)  their  inability  in  discerning,  joined  with  their  confidence  in  pro- 
nouncing ;  (3)   the  inbred  malice  of  our  nature. 

II.  Not  always  the  sin  or  merit  of  the  person  afflicted,  but  the  will  of  God 
that  afflicts,  is  sometimes  the  sole,  but  always  the  sufficient,  reason  of  the 
affliction. — This  is  apparent  from  several  scriptures.  To  produce  one.  See  the 
whole  series  of  Job's  sufferings  resolved  into  this  by  God  Himself.  The  necessary 
distinction  between  punishments  and  afflictions  must  be  observed.  The  divine 
proceeding  is  cleared  from  injustice  on  three  reasons  :  1.  His  absolute,  un- 
accountable dominion,  etc.,  over  the  creature ;  2.  The  essential  equity  of  the 
divine  nature  ;  3.  The  unerring,  all-disposing  wisdom  of  God. 

265 


chap.  ix.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHtf. 


III.  Though  God's  will  and  power  be  a  sufficient  reason  of  any  evil  inflicted 
upon  men,  yet  He  never  inflicts  it  but  for  the  great  end  of  advancing  His 
glory,  and  that  usually  in  the  way  of  their  good. — This  glorious  design  of 
bringing  these  calamities  on  men  is  expressed  in  these  words,  "  That  the  works 
of  God,"  etc.  And  the  works  that  God  intends  thus  to  glorify  are  usually  these  : 
1 .  The  miraculous  works  of  His  power ;  2.  The  works  ol  His  grace. 

Let  us  apply  this  resolve  of  Christ,  in  the  words  of  the  text,  to  all  the  rugged 
instances  of  Providence. — "The  peremptory  way  in  which  men  often  judge  is 
highly  odious  to  God,  more  especially  on  account  of  the  cause  of  it — curiosity. 
This  is  but  one  remove  from  rebellion,  as  breaking  through  all  the  bounds  God 
has  set  about  the  secrets  of  His  counsel." — South. 

Ver.  4.  The  works  of  God. — Genuine  spiritual  religion  does  not  end  in  acts  of 
worship.  It  will  spur  men  to  effort  for  the  good  of  others,  to  do  the  works  of 
God.  Such  was  Christ's  life  here.  He  not  only  prayed,  engaged  in  acts  of  devo- 
tion ;  He  preached  the  gospel  to  the  poor,  fed  the  hungry,  healed  the  sick,  relieved 
the  wretched,  and  went  about  continually  doing  good. 

I.  The  works  of  God  should  embrace  all  life's  activity. — 1.  If  men  desire 
special  work  after  the  example  of  Jesus,  it  is  easy  to  find  it.  The  Judge  of  all 
will  not  reward  those  who  merely  say,  "  Lord,  Lord  !  "  etc.  Those  who  feed  the 
hungry,  etc.  (Matt.  xxv.  40),  shall  inherit  the  kingdom.  2.  But  work  for  God 
cannot  be  confined  within  special  limits.  All  labour  should  be  made  religious, 
the  whole  life  should  be  consecrated  (1  Cor.  x.  31).  This  is  the  end  of  redemp- 
tion. Men  are  made  "  new  creations,"  and  fitted  for  the  divine  service.  There 
is  no  true  distinction — should  be  none — between  what  are  termed  the  sacred  and 
secular  spheres.  "  Ye  shall  be  to  Me  a  kingdom  of  priests  "  (Exod.  xix.  6).  Christ 
shall  make  His  people  kings  and  priests  unto  God,  etc.  (Rev.  v.  10),  and  they  shall 
in  the  heavenly,  perfect  state  "serve  Him  day  and  night  in  His  temple." 
3.  Those  who  become  citizens  in  His  kingdom  consecrate  the  whole  life  to  Him. 
What  cannot  be  consecrated  were  best  left  undone.  Religion  was  intended  to 
raise  our  ordinary  life  higher.  Christ's  gospel  is  not  a  system  that  requires  men 
to  remove  from  the  society  of  their  fellows  to  some  calmer  region,  where  there 
are  no  rude  interruptions  to  the  life  of  devotion.  It  is  a  religion  for  men  and 
women  who  are  striving  onward  and  upward.  4.  The  gospel  sets  the  seal  of  its 
approval  on  every  honest  occupation  (1  Cor.  vii.  20,  21).  In  doing  the  common 
duties  of  life,  "  not  with  eye-service,  as  men-pleasers,  but  as  servants  of  God,"  we 
are  doing  His  work.  5.  In  this,  too,  Jesus  is  our  great  example.  When  at 
the  close  of  His  ministry  He  said,  "  I  have  glorified,"  etc.  (xvii.  4),  did  He  not 
include  those  preparation  years  spent  in  labour  and  silence  at  Nazareth  1  Thus 
to  men  in  every  rank  and  station  He  fitly  says,  "  We  must  work  the  works,"  etc. 
It  is  forgetf ulness  of  this  truth  that  tends  to  stunt  the  Christian  growth  of  too 
many.  Their  practical  life-work  is  not  done  with  a  single  eye  to  God's  glory,  and 
becomes  a  clog  on  their  spiritual  progress. 

II.  Spheres  of  service. — 1.  The  general  principles  laid  down  should  be  a  guide 
in  every  sphere  of  service.  There  is  one  work,  however,  that  must  go  before  all 
others,  if  these  are  to  be  done  for  God.  It  is  the  work  of  believing  :  it  is  the 
spring  of  all  genuine  work  for  God  (vi.  29).  2.  Then  our  common  daily  work 
will  be  consecrated.  St.  John  mending  his  fishing-nets,  St.  Paul  labouring  at 
tent-making,  were  serving  God,  even  as  when  preaching  the  gospel.  The  true 
Christian  workman  will  prosecute  his  handiwork  "  as  ever  in  the  great  Task- 
master's eye  "  (Milton).  And  if  all  hand  labour  were  done  thus,  how  much 
better  would  it  often  be  done  !  3.  Then  there  is  the  work  of  providing  for  those 
depending  on  them  by  God's  people.  It  is  a  part  of  Christian  duty  especially 
commanded  (1  Tim.  v.  8).     4.  Young  people  have  a  most  important  work  given 

266 


BQMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  IX. 


them  to  do — the  work  of  training  and  preparing  themselves  for  life's  duties. 
Diligence  in  study,  care  of  health,  strengthening  of  the  moral  nature,  are  all 
incumbent  to  fit  them  for  the  higher  duties  that  will  by-and-by  engross  them. 

5.  Then  there  is  the  work  of  training  the  young.  Evil  increases  apace  in  the 
heart ;  good  grows  slowly.  Teachers,  parents,  have  thus  a  pressing,  important 
work  to  do.  This  is  truly  a  divine  work,  the  work  of  Him  who  sent  Jesus,  His 
only  Son,  to  save  men.  Soon  those  children  will  take  their  place  in  life,  to  work 
good  or  evil  in  their  day,  pretty  much  in  accordance  with  the  training  and 
example  they  have  received.  It  is  a  noble  yet  serious  wTork  to  train  the  young 
for  duty  here  and  their  eternal  destiny  ;  and  in  this  training,  first  and  all  through, 
believing  should  be  kept  in  the  foreground.     Need  here  for  faith  and  prayer  ! 

6.  Thus  all  through  life  devotion  and  action  will  be  blended.  They  are  the  warp 
and  woof  of  every  true  spiritual  life.  And  thus,  if  lived  in  the  spirit  of  devotion, 
— every  talent  used,  every  opportunity  seized,  every  duty  entered  upon  not  from 
selfish  motives,  but  from  a  desire  to  do  God's  will  and  finish  His  work — then  the 
whole  life  will  be  an  acceptable  service. 

III.  Limits  of  service. — 1.  Our  own  imperfection  and  sinfulness,  the  sin  and 
opposition  of  the  world,  may  circumscribe  and  mar  our  service  ;  but  those  barriers 
we  must  overcome.  2.  But  there  are  limits  of  time.  It  was  so  with  Christ  in 
His  earthly  ministry.  How  promptly  and  eagerly  therefore  did  He  make  use  of 
every  opportunity !  3.  So  we  have  but  a  day  given  to  us  in  which  to  do  our 
work,  nor  can  the  length  of  that  day  be  determined.  For  some  it  merely  dawns. 
With  others  it  is  eclipsed  at  noonday.  For  all  it  comes  to  an  end.  It  is  inevit- 
able, this  onward  march  of  life.  The  diurnal  sweep  of  the  heavens,  the  seasons 
in  their  changeful  round,  every  heart-beat — all  proclaim 

*  The  day  of  life  fleets  fast  away, 
And  none  its  rapid  course  can  stay." 

Eventide,  with  its  closing  shadows,  is  swiftly  approaching,  when  our  work  must 
be  laid  aside,  and  we  wait  in  silence  until  it  is  judged  on  that  great  day. 

Ver.  4.  "  The  night  cometh,  when  no  man  can  work." — The  sense  of  the  text  lies 
in  these  three  positions  : — 

I.  There  is  a  work  appointed  to  every  man  to  be  performed  by  him  while  he 
lives  in  the  world. — Man  as  he  is— 1.  A  part  or  member  of  the  body  politic — hath 
a  temporal  work,  whereby  he  is  to  approve  himself  a  good  citizen  in  filling  the 
place  of  a  divine,  a  lawyer,  etc.  2.  As  a  member  and  subject  of  a  higher  and 
spiritual  kingdom,  he  has  also  a  spiritual  calling  or  profession  as  a  Christian,  and 
the  work  that  this  calls  him  to  is  threefold  :  (1)  to  make  his  peace  with  God; 
(2)  to  mortify  the  flesh  and  sin;  (3)  to  have  his  heart  purified  through  the 
operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit  implanting  within  it  the  graces  and  virtues  of  the 
Christian  life. 

II.  The  time  of  this  life  being  once  expired,  there  remains  no  further  oppor- 
tunity or  possibility  of  performing  this  work. — The  word  "  day,"  as  the  expres- 
sion of  the  time  of  human  existence,  here  may  denote  three  things  :  1.  The 
shortness  of  it.  2.  But  also  the  sufficiency  of  our  time  :  short  as  it  is,  yet  it 
equals  the  business  of  the  day.  3.  Then  by  a  day  is  denoted  to  us  the  deter- 
minate stint  and  limitation  of  our  time. 

III.  The  consideration  of  this  ought  to  be  the  highest  and  most  pressing 
argument  to  every  man  to  use  his  utmost  diligence  in  the  discharge  of  this 
work. — 1.  Because  of  the  difficulty  of  the  performance  of  that  work;  and 
2.  Because  of  its  necessity  :  especially  is  this  so  with  regard  to  a  man's  salvation. 
— Abridged  from  South. 


267 


CHAP.   IX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


HOMILETIC   NOTES. 


Vers.  2,  3.  Sin  and  suffering. — 1.  The 
Master  looked  on  the  blind  beggar 
with  an  eve  of  pitying  love,  and  the 
resolve  to  work  a  gracious  work  in 
hiin.  The  disciples  seemed  to  regard 
him  simply  as  an  interesting  problem 
or  case.  2.  Among  the  Jews  suffering 
and  calamity  were  regarded  as  conse- 
quences of  sin ;  and  in  a  sense  all 
suffering  results  from  sin,  regarded 
either  as  failure  or  transgression.  The 
whole  creation  participates  in  this 
result  (Rom.  viii.  22).  Our  Lord  did 
not  deny  this  connection  between  sin 
and  suffering  (v.  14).  The  Decalogue 
contains  this  idea  in  a  striking  form 
(Exod.  xx.  5,  6  ;  Xum.  xiv.  18,  etc.). 
Modern  science  reaffirms  the  truth  in 
its  doctrine  of  heredity  ;  the  slums  of 
our  great  cities  give  a  terrible  affirma- 
tion of  it.  The  sins  of  the  fathers  are 
visited  upon  the  children,  i.e.  the 
suffering  at  least  descends.  Revelation 
brings  in  the  element  of  hope,  however. 
It  is  only  to  the  third  and  fourth 
generation  of  those  who  hate  God  that 
this  doom  applies.  To  those  who  love 
Him  He  shows  mercy;  and  even  where 
suffering  does  follow  sin  in  this  case,  it 
is  made  to  serve  merciful  ends.  3.  But 
though  this  is  true,  none  of  human 
kind  can  truly  and  infallibly  pronounce 
judgment  in  individual  cases.  Men 
suffer  individually  as  a  part  of  the 
whole  of  humanity.  But  they  cannot 
always  say  this  particular  calamity  is 
the  result  of  that  particular  sin.  It 
may  have  been — in  some  glaring  cases 
it  cannot  be  denied,  e.g.  the  physical 
results  following  drunkenness,  etc.  ; 
but,  generally  speaking,  where  the  con- 
nection cannot  be  directly  traced,  we 
have  no  right  to  suppose  that  such  a 
special  connection  exists.  The  Book  of 
Job  was  written  to  teach  this  among 
other  truths.  4.  The  disciples  seem  to 
have  entertained  the  Jewish  ideas  on 
this  subject — hence  their  question.  In 
regard  to  the  first  part  of  their  ques- 
tion, some  suppose  there  is  a  reference 
to  the  idea  of  the  transmigration  of 
souls.    But  that  doctrine  does  not  seem 

268 


to  have  been  held  by  the  Jews  gene- 
rally. A  few  of  such  sects  as  the 
Bssenes  may  have  held  ideas  approxi- 
mating to  it,  or  some  may  have 
expressed  the  truth  of  the  soul's 
pre-existenee  in  terms  which  seemed  to 
imply  this  doctrine.  (But  see  Words- 
worth's Ode  to  the  Intimations  of 
Immortality,  and  Henry  Vaughan's 
The  Retreat,  for  an  expression  of  ideas 
not  far  removed  from  metempsychosis.) 
Others  think  the  disciples  were  alluding 
to  a  rabbinical  fancy  that  a  child 
might  sin  before  birth  (Gen.  xxv.  22 ; 
Ps.  li.  5;  Luke  i.  41);  others,  again, 
that  this  man  had  been  punished  by 
anticipation  for  some  crime  he  was  to 
commit  during  his  lifetime  (Tholuck, 
etc.).  But  such  attempts  to  account 
for  the  disciples'  question  are  some- 
what far-fetched.  For  though  the 
disciples  did  hold  the  almost  universal 
ideas  as  to  the  nature  of  Messiah's 
kingdom,  etc.,  it  does  not  appear  that 
they  were  much  conversant  with  or 
affected  by  the  subtleties  of  rabbinic 
lore.  There  is  much  to  be  said  for 
Chrysostom's  idea  that  the  disciples 
wished  to  show  that  both  suppositions 
were  baseless — in  short,  that  they  were 
combating  the  popular  view.  u  The  man 
could  not  have  brought  it  on  himself  ; 
and  the  prophet  (Ezek.  xviii.  2  seq.) 
warns  not  to  impute  such  calamities  to 
the  sins  of  others."  But  this  explana- 
tion seems  hardly  to  agree  with  our 
Lord's  answer  to  the  disciples.  It  seems 
a  direct  answer  to  a  direct  inquiry. 
Two  other  explanations  of  the  first 
part  of  the  disciples'  question  seem  to 
afford  the  simplest  and  best  solution  of 
the  difficulty,  according  to  Trench  :  (1) 
"The  man  could  not  have  brought  the 
affliction  on  himself,  for  he  was  bom 
blind.  How  and  why  then  was  it  laid 
upon  him  ?  Or  (2)  they  failed  to  per- 
ceive at  the  moment  when  they  asked 
their  question  the  self-contradiction 
involved  in  the  first  alternative." 

Ver.  7.  The  pool  of  Siloam. — In  the 
summer   of   1880,  one   of   the   native 


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.    IX. 


pupils  of  Mr.  Schick,  a  German  archi- 
tect long  settled  in  Jerusalem,  was 
playing  with  some  other  lads  in  the 
so-called  pool  of  Siloam  ;  and  while 
wading  up  a  channel  cut  in  the  rock, 
which  leads  into  the  pool,  slipped  and 
fell  into  the  water.  On  rising  to  the 
surface,  he  noticed  what  looked  like 
letters  on  the  rock.  .  .  .  He  told  Mr. 
Schick  of  what  he  had  seen,  and  the 
latter,  on  visiting  the  spot,  found  an 
ancient  inscription,  concealed  for  the 
most  part  by  the  water.  The  pool  is 
of  comparatively  modern  construction, 
but  it  encloses  the  remains  of  a  much 
older  reservoir,  which,  like  the  modern 
one,  was  supplied  with  water  through 
a  tunnel  excavated  in  the  rock.  This 
tunnel  communicates  with  the  so-called 
spring  of  the  Virgin,  the  only  natural 
spring  of  water  in  or  near  Jerusalem. 
It  rises  below  the  walls  of  the  city,  on 
the  western  bank  of  the  valley  of  the 


Kidron,  and  the  tunnel  through  which 
its  waters  are  conveyed  is  consequently 
cut  through  the  ridge  that  forms  the 
southern  part  of  the  Temple  hill.  The 
pool  of  Siloam  lies  on  the  opposite  side 
of  this  ridge,  at  the  mouth  of  the 
valley  called  that  of  the  Cheesemakers 
(Tyropoeon)  in  the  time  of  Josephus, 
but  which  is  now  filled  up  with  rubbish 
and  in  large  part  built  over.  Accord- 
ing to  Lieutenant  Conder's  measure- 
ments, the  length  of  the  tunnel  is 
1,708  yards  ;  it  does  not,  however,  run 
in  a  straight  line,  and  toward  the  centre 
there  are  two  culs-de-sac,  of  which 
the  inscription  now  offers  an  explana- 
tion. At  the  entrance,  on  the  western, 
or  Siloam  side,  its  height  is  about  six- 
teen feet ;  but  the  roof  grows  gradually 
lower,  until  in  one  place  it  is  not  quite 
two  feet  above  the  floor  of  the  passage. 
— Sayce,  "Fresh  Light"  etc. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  2.  Causes  of  affliction. — Affliction  may 
come  upon  a  man  either  in  his  own  person 
or  in  that  of  some  one  of  his  family ;  but  it 
may  not  in  the  remotest  degree  have  been 
brought  on  him  by  any  sin  at  which  God 
would  thus  mark  His  displeasure,  or  for 
which  He  would  thus  exact  punishment. 
And  we  hardly  know  a  more  interesting  or 
consoling  truth  than  this,  if  you  come  to 
consider  how  it  may  be  made  to  work  among 
those  who  are  M  distressed  in  mind,  body,  or 
estate."  For  there  is  nothing  more  common 
with  a  Christian,  when  God  visits  him  with 
a  bereavement  or  trial,  than  that  he  anxiously 
inquires  what  particular  sin  he  has  committed, 
for  which  the  bereavement  or  trial  is  to  be 
taken  as  the  chastisement.  And  the  inquiry 
is  a  wholesome  one :  it  is  but  that  which  Job 
so  pathetically  urges,  "  1  will  speak  in  the 
bitterness  of  my  soul  ;  I  will  say  unto  God, 
Do  not  condemn  me  ;  show  me  wherefore 
Thou  contendest  with  me."  It  becomes  the 
Christian,  when  he  is  in  trouble,  to  "  search 
and  try  his  ways,"  that  he  may  see  whether 
some  particular  fault  be  not  pointed  out  by 
the  particular  affliction.  This  is  what  so 
often  aggravates  affliction,  and  gives  it  a 
character  which  renders  it  intensely  more 
difficult  to  endure.  Visit  a  Christian  mother, 
who  has  been  suddenly  deprived  of  a  rnuch- 
loved  child,  and  very  probably  she  is  exclaim- 
ing in  the  bitterness  of  her  anguish,  "  Alas  ! 
I  must  have  made  an  idol  of  that  child  :  God 
would  never  have  thus  removed  the  child 


except  to  punish  my  idolatry ;  and  thus, 
miserable  that  I  am,  the  child  has  died  for 
its  mother's  sin."  And  undoubtedly  it  is 
but  too  possible  that  the  mother  may  be  right: 
she  may  have  made  an  idol  of  her  child ; 
and  God,  who  is  "  a  jealous  God,"  has  often 
to  take  rough  ways  of  loosening  our  affections 
when  we  suffer  them  to  grow  entangled  with 
the  creature.  But  may  not  the  child  have 
died,  and  yet  not  have  been  made  an  idol  ? 
Yes,  indeed:  "Neither  hath  this  man  sinned, 
nor  his  parents."  It  does  not  at  all  follow, 
from  the  sudden  removal  of  the  child,  that 
it  has  been  made  the  object  of  an  undue, 
inordinate  affection.  There  may  have  been 
other  and  wholly  different  ends  proposed 
by  the  bereavement  than  the  correction  of  an 
idolatrous  regard.  If  there  have  been  this 
idolatrous  regard,  undoubtedly  its  correction 
is  one  of  the  proposed  ends ;  and  the  sorrow- 
ing parent  does  right  in  considering  whether 
or  not  she  have  deserved  such  correction. 
But  what  we  insist  upon  is,  that  the  bereave- 
ment is  not  necessarily  any  proof  of  the 
idolatry  ;  whereas  the  heart-broken  mother 
is  almost  sure  to  conclude  that  it  is,  and 
thus  to  write  bitter  things  against  herself, 
adding  a  new  pang  to  affliction,  a  si  arper  and 
severer  than  the  mere  loss  could  cause. — 
Henry  Melvill. 

Ver.  3.  The  divine  end  of  affliction. — We 
cannot  but  dwell  with  the  greatest  interest 
on  these   words  :  "  that  the   works  of  God 

269 


CHAP.    IX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


might,"  etc.  They  seem  like  a  shield  of 
protection  thrown  gracefully  by  our  blessed 
Kedeemer  round  the  most  helpless  of  our 
race.  They  give  a  kind  of  dignity  to  de- 
formity, not  only  securing  it  from  contempt, 
but  requiring  for  it  respect ;  denouncing  not 
merely  those  who  could  treat  it  with  ridicule 
or  neglect,  but  those  also  who  fail  to  discern 
in  it  a  means  for  advancing  God's  vast,  if  in- 
scrutable, purposes.  I  would  have  the  words 
graven  as  a  motto  over  every  asylum  for 
the  blind,  the  deaf,  the  crippled,  the  dumb. 
They  would  teach  the  supporters  of  such 
noble  institutions  that  they  were  doing 
something  more  than  mitigating  a  certain 
species  of  human  misery  :  that  they  had 
under  their  care  one  of  those  mighty  hosts 
by  which  God  wages  war  with  principalities 
and  powers.  Oh,  who  can  fail  to  look  here- 
after with  something  more  than  pity  on  the 
deformed,  on  those  wanting  in  the  common 
organs  or  faculties  ;  to  look  on  them  with  a 
measure  of  the  very  feelings  excited  by  the 
spectacle  of  instruments  employed  to  the 
highest  ends ;  if  he  remember  that  of  every 
blind,  and  of  every  dumb,  and  of  every 
maimed  person  there  may  be  good  ground 
for  saying,  "  Neither  hath  this  man  sinned, 
nor  his  parents :  but  that  the  works  of  God 
should  be  made  manifest  in  him  *  ? — Idem. 

Vers.  2,  3.  The  meaning  and  purpose  of 
pain  and  sorrow  for  God's  people. — "  It 
pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  Him  !  "  Strange 
pleasure  this,  surely,  to  dwell  in  the  heart  of 
the  All-beneficent.  Is  it  not  the  nature  of 
the  heavenly  Father  to  give  joy  ?  Does  He 
not  delight  rather  in  the  laughter  than  in  the 
tears  of  men  ?  Why,  then,  should  He  find 
pleasure  in  the  bruises  of  that  heart  in  which 
there  was  no  violence  and  no  guile  ?  Nay, 
but  look  deeper.  The  prophet  tells  us  that 
the  bruises  of  the  Servant  of  God  were  the 
source  of  His  prosperity  :  "  When  Thou  shalt 
make  His  soul  an  offering,  He  shall  prolong 
His  days."  Wherever  the  soul  is  offered, 
wherever  the  will  is  given,  there  is  a  fresh 
access  of  life.  Did  not  He  find  it  so  in  the 
garden  of  Gethsemane  ?  When  did  the  angels 
come  to  Him  with  that  strength  which  pro- 
longed His  days  ?  Was  it  not  when  He  took 
the  Blather's  cup  in  His  hand  and  said,  u  Not 
as  I  will,  but  as  Thou  wilt "  ?  No  wonder 
that  the  Father  was  pleased  to  bruise  Him  ; 
the  bruising  of  His  soul  was  the  surrender  of 
His  will,  and  the  surrender  of  His  will  was 
resurrection  begun.  The  pressure  of  the 
flower  brought  out  its  perfume  ;  the  break- 
ing of  the  alabaster  box  diffused  its  fragrance 
till  it  filled  all  the  house.  It  recompensed 
the  Father  for  the  unloveliness  of  the  past ; 
it  made  atonement  for  the  sins  of  the  world. 
Art  thou  chafing  under  the  hand  of  thy  God  ? 
Art  thou  murmuring  that  He  should  seem  to 
look  on  complacently  while  thy  desire  is 
being    thwarted,   while  thy   will    is    being 

270 


denied  ?  What  if  He  is  complacent  ?  What 
if  He  is  pleased  to  bruise  thee  1  Thinkest 
thou  that  there  cannot  be  a  divine  benevo- 
lence which  rejoices  in  thy  moment  of 
pain  ?  Knowest  thou  not  that  there  is  a 
pain  which  gives  cause  for  rejoicing  ?  There 
is  a  pain  which  is  the  proof  of  convalescence, 
the  sign  that  death  is  not  yet.  There 
is  a  pain  which  tells  that  the  wound  has 
not  mortified,  that  there  is  life  left  in  the 
mutilated  member.  There  is  a  pain  which 
is  symptomatic  of  purity,  which  cannot  be 
felt  by  the  impure.  No  conscience  can  feel 
the  wound  of  sin  but  the  tender  conscience ; 
no  spirit  can  perceive  its  own  unrest  but 
the  regenerated  spirit.  Ought  not  the  sight 
of  such  pain  to  be  dear  to  thy  Father's 
heart  ?  Must  not  thy  Father  strive  to  pro- 
duce such  pain  ?  What  pleasure  to  Him  can 
be  the  vision  of  thy  perfect  satisfaction 
with  the  earth  ?  what  is  that  but  the  vision 
that  thou  wert  not  made  for  Him  ?  But  if 
He  shall  see  thee  unsatisfied  with  the  earth, 
then  indeed  it  is  meet  that  He  should  be 
glad,  for  by  the  very  want  which  earth 
cannot  fill  He  knows  assuredly  that  thou  art 
made  for  Himself  alone.  It  is  pleasing  to 
thy  Father's  heart  to  see  the  travail  of  thy 
soul. — Dr.  Geo.  Matheson. 

Ver.  4.  True  labourers. — Two  men  I  honour, 
and  no  third.  First,  the  toil-worn  craftsman, 
that  with  earth-made  implement  laboriously 
conquers  the  earth,  and  makes  her  man's. 
Venerable  to  me  is  the  hard  hand, — crooked, 
coarse  — wherein,  notwithstanding,  lies  a 
cunning  virtue,  indefeasibly  royal,  as  of  the 
sceptre  of  this  planet.  Venerable,  too,  is  the 
rugged  face,  all  weather-tanned,  besoiled, 
with  its  rude  intelligence  ;  for  it  is  the  face 
of  a  man  living  manlike.  Oh  !  but  the  more 
venerable  for  thy  rudeness,  and  even  because 
we  must  pity  as  well  as  love  thee  !  Hardly 
entreated  brother  !  For  us  was  thy  back 
so  bent ;  for  us  were  thy  straight  limbs  and 
fingers  so  deformed  :  thou  wert  our  con- 
script, on  whom  the  lot  fell,  and,  fighting 
our  battles,  wert  so  marred.  For  in  thee, 
too,  lay  a  God-created  form,  but  it  was  not 
to  be  unfolded  ;  encrusted  must  it  stand  with 
the  thick  adhesions  and  defacements  of 
labour,  and  thy  body  was  not  to  know 
freedom.  Yet  toil  on,  toil  on  ;  thou  art  in 
thy  duty,  be  out  of  it  who  may ;  thou  toilest 
for  the  altogether  indispensable — for  daily 
bread.  A  second  man  I  honour,  and  still 
more  highly  :  him  who  is  seen  toiling  for  the 
spiritually  indispensable,  not  daily  bread, 
but  the  bread  of  life.  Is  not  he,  too,  in  his 
duty,  endeavouring  toward  inward  harmony, 
revealing  this,  by  act  or  by  word,  through  all 
his  outward  endeavours,  be  they  high  or 
low ; — highest  of  all,  when  his  outward  and 
his  inward  endeavour  are  one, — when  we 
can  name  him  artist ;  not  earthly  craftsman 
only,  but  inspired  thinker,  who,  with  heaven- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   IX. 


made  implements,  conquers  heaven  for  us ! 
If  the  poor  and  humble  toil  that  we  have 
food,  must  not  the  high  and  glorious  toil  for 
him  in  return,  that  he  have  light,  have 
guidance,  freedom,  immortality  1  These  two, 
in  all  their  degrees,  I  honour ;  all  else  is 
chaff  and  dust,  which  let  the  wind  blow 
whither  it  listeth.  Unspeakably  touching 
is  it,  however,  when  I  find  both  dignities 
united  ;  and  he  that  must  toil  outwardly  for 
the  lowest  of  man's  wants,  is  also  toiling 
inwardly  for  the  highest.  Sublimer  in  this 
world  know  I  nothing  than  a  peasant  saint, 
could  such  now  anywhere  be  met  with.  Such 
a  one  will  take  thee  back  to  Nazareth  itself  : 
thou  wilt  see  the  splendour  of  heaven  spring 
forth  from  the  humblest  depths  of  earth, 
like  a  light  shining  in  great  darkness. — 
Carlyle. 

Ver.  4.  Hie  sacredness  of  true  work. — All 
true  work  is  sacred  ;  in  all  true  work,  where  it 
but  true  hand-labour,  there  is  something  of 
divineness.  Labour,  wide  as  the  earth,  has 
its  summit  in  heaven.  Sweat  of  the  brow  ; 
and  up  from  that  to  sweat  of  the  heart ; 
which  includes  all  Kepler  calculations, 
Newton  meditations,  all  sciences,  all  spoken 
epics,  all  acted  heroisms,  martyrdoms, — up 
to  that  "  Agony  of  bloody  sweat  "  which  all 
men  have  called  divine  !  .  .  .  Who  art  thou 
that  complainest  of  thy  life  of  toil  ?  Com- 
plain not.  Look  up,  my  wearied  brother ; 
see  thy  fellow-workmen  there,  in  God's 
eternity  ;  surviving  there,  they  alone  sur- 
viving: sacred  band  of  the  immortals, 
celestial  body-guard  of  the  empire  of  man- 
kind.— Idem. 

Go  !  let  your  deeds  His  praises  prove  ; 

To  all  make  manifest  His  love ; 

Like  brethren  live  and  journey  on.  .  .  . 

Make  known  His  promise  to  the  earth, 
Bliss  unto  all  of  mortal  birth  ; 
To  you  the  Master  shall  be  nigh  ; 
For  you  He  has  been  raised  on  high. 

Ver  4.  Man's  highest  happiness  in  the  com- 
pletion of  the  work  given  him  to  do. — The  only 
happiness  a  brave  man  ever  troubled  him- 
self with  asking  much  about  was  happiness 
enough  to  get  his  work  done.  Not  "  I  can't 
eat !  "  but  "  I  can't  work  !  "—that  was  the 
burden  of  all  wise  complaining  among  men. 
It  is,  after  all,  the  one  unhappiness  of  a 
man— that  he  cannot  work  ;  that  he  cannot 
get  his  destiny  as  a  man  fulfilled.  Behold, 
the  day  is  passing  swiftly  over,  our  life  is 
passing  swiftly  away,  and  the  night  cometh, 
wherein  no  man  can  work.  The  night 
once  come,  our  happiness,  our  unhappi- 
ness,— it  is  all  abolished,  vanished,  clean 
gone ;  a  thing  that  has  been  :  "  not  of  the 
slightest  consequence "  whether  we  were 
happy  as  Eupeptic  Curtis,  as  the  fattest  pig  of 
Epicurus,  or  unhappy  as  Job  with  potsherds, 


as  musical  Byron  with  Giaours  and  sensi- 
bilities of  the  heart ;  as  the  unmusical  meat- 
jack  with  hard  labour  and  rust!  But  our 
work  I — behold,  that  is  not  abolished,  that  has 
not  vanished  :  our  work,  behold,  it  remains,  or 
the  want  of  it  remains — for  endless  times 
and  eternities,  remains  ;  and  that  is  now  the 
sole  question  with  us  for  evermore  !  Brief 
brawling  Day,  with  its  noisy  phantasms,  its 
poor  paper  crowns  tinsel-gilt,  is  gone,  and 
divine  everlasting  Night,  with  her  star- 
diadems,  with  her  silences  and  her  veracities, 
is  come  I — Idem. 

Ver.  5.  The  word  of  Christ  the  true  guide 
of  men. — The  world  truly,  which  knows  and 
criticises  everything,  God  not  excepted, 
demands  first  the  test  of  sight  ere  it  will 
submit  to  the  word  of  the  Lord.  But  the 
result  is  in  accordance  with  this  spirit. 
The  world  lies,  and  abides  in  wickedness 
(1  John  v.  19)  until  the  end  of  this  dispensa- 
tion. But  we  shall  call  in  our  own  experience 
to  counsel  us.  Oh,  how  often  have  we  been 
sensible  of  the  fact  that  our  reputed  seeing 
has  been  simple  deception  and  illusion, 
when  we  have  undertaken  anything,  and 
sought  to  carry  it  through  apart  from  God  1 
How  often  do  people  determine  on  a  course 
which  they  gain  nothing  by  !  How  often  are 
we  careful  in  vain  and  for  nothing  !  How 
often  do  we  hope  vainly  because  we  have 
not  been  careful  and  hoped  in  accordance 
with  the  divine  word  !  What  are  even  the 
greatest  spirits,  the  wisest  of  men,  otherwise 
but  little  children  who  know  not  how  to 
help  themselves  ?  They  are  "  blind  leaders 
of  the  blind  "  who  point  each  other  to  the 
way  where  God's  word  is  not.  Without 
this  word  of  the  living  God  all  the  most 
ingenious  and  splendid  lights  which  are 
kindled  in  the  world  avail  nothing.  With 
the  word  of  Jesus  men  can  implicitly  find 
their  way.  His  word  clears  the  eyes.  It 
is  certain,  beloved,  that  when  a  soul  does 
what  the  Gospel  commands,  turns  neither  to 
the  right  hand  nor  to  the  left,  considers 
neither  what  this  man  or  that  says,  even 
though  it  should  have  to  press  through 
nothing  but  difficulty  and  perpetual  mockery 
— so  truly  as  there  lives  a  God  in  heaven, 
who  has  given  His  only  begotten  Son  for  us 
all,  that  soul  will  attain  to  the  end  it  has 
in  view ;  for  God  is  true,  and  what  He 
has  promised  that  He  will  surely  perform. — 
Translated  from  Lecher,  "  Predigt." 

Ver.  7.  Spiritual  blindness  and  its  cure. — 
This  man  did  not  act  as  at  first  Naaman 
the  Syrian  did  when  he  came  to  Elisha  at 
Samaria.  Had  the  blind  man  thought  that 
this  going  to  wash  in  Siloam  was  a  very 
small  matter — had  he  thought,  What  can 
this  pool  in  especial  do  for  me?  — or  had  he 
thought  it  too  much  and  had  said,  Why 
send  me  such  a  distance,  I,  a  blind  man  1 

271 


chap.  ix.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ;    ST.  JOHN. 


how  shall  I  get  through  the  crowds  ?  why  obeys    his    father.    .    .    .   Blindly,   as    Noah 

should  I  make  myself  a  laughing-stock  with  entered  the  ark,  and  Abraham  left  father- 

these  clay-bedaubed  eyes  ? — then  he  would  land   and   kindred.     How  can   it  be  other- 

not  have  come  seeing.     But  he  went  as  Jesus  wise?     We  are  blind  by  nature. — Idem. 
commanded.     His  faith   resulted  in   obedi-  "All  our  knowledge  and  our  thought 

ence,  and  stood  its  first  test.  .  .  .  Thus,  too,  Are  with  darkness  veiled  round, 

obedience  is  a  part  of  every  Christian  life.  Where  God's  Spirit  hath  not  brought 

Faith   and    self-will    agree    like    chaff   and  Light  within  us  to  abound." 

wheat.     The  evangelist   himself    found  the  Translated  from  Clausnitzer. 

fact  worthy  of  note  that  Jesus  had  sent  the  How  shall  one  who  is  blind  see  if  he  will  not 

man  to  the  pool  of  Siloam,  and  calls  atten-  implicitly  obey  his  Physician  and  Saviour  ? 

tion   to   this — that  the  word   Siloavi  is  by  if  be  first  seeks  to  examine  the  instruments 

interpretation  Sent ;  for  people  do  not  send  by  which  he  will  be  operated  upon  ?  would 

a  blind  man  about.      This  was  truly  a  Mind  seek  to  test  the  salve  which  he  must  rub  in  ? 

obedience.     And  the  Christian  must  blindly  when   he  desires  to  study  the  prescription 

obey   God's   word,   as  a   child   well  trained  which  has  been  written  for  him  ? — Idem. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.—  Verses  13—41. 

The  progress  of  faith  and  the  descent  of  unbelief. — A  mighty  miracle  had 
been  wrought.  The  blind  man's  neighbours,  and  many  who  had  before  known 
him  as  blind,  were  astonished  at  the  event.  But  the  more  minute  their 
inquiries,  the  more  fully  was  the  greatness  of  the  miracle  established.  The 
man  gave  a  brief  but  complete  account  of  what  had  occurred  (notice  the 
circumstantiality  of  the  account ;  he  had  not  seen  how  the  clay  was  prepared — 
ver.  11).  But  here  also  the  hatred  of  Christ's  enemies  indirectly  made  itself 
felt,  even  in  their  absence.  They  had  agreed  on  a  line  of  action  which  would 
deter  men  from  openly  allying  themselves  with  Christ  (ver.  22).  Fear  of  this, 
and  perhaps  a  wish  to  ingratiate  themselves  with  the  powerful  class  of  the 
Pharisees,  made  the  man's  neighbours,  etc.,  bring  him  before  a  sort  of  religious 
judicial  court — a  lesser  Sanhedrin — composed  apparently  chiefly  of  Pharisees 
(ver.  18).  In  place  of  a  judicial  inquiry  those  unjust  counsellors  sought  only 
by  persuasion  and  threatening  to  set  aside  the  truth.  But  their  evil  design 
proved  abortive.  They  brought  only  confusion  on  themselves  and  greater  glory 
to  Christ.     In  this  narrative  we  see — 

I.  The  progress  of  faith. — 1.  The  blind  man  came  seeing,  after  having 
washed  in  Siloam.  What  a  wonderful  evening  that  was  for  him,  when  first  on 
that  long-sealed  vision  the  gentle  light  of  the  setting  sun  and  gathering 
twilight  revealed  the  world  in  its  visible  wonder  and  beauty,  the  human  face 
divine,  etc.,  and  when  as  night  descended  the  wonders  of  the  celestial  sphere, 
in  all  the  brilliance  of  an  Eastern  night,  first  met  his  gaze,  etc.  So  much  was 
there  indeed  to  attract  his  attention,  that  next  day  probably,  when  questioned 
as  to  the  manner  in  which  he  had  received  his  sight,  he  simply  gave  the  facts, 
telling  what  the  "  man  called  Jesus "  had  done  and  said.  Whilst  full  of 
gratitude  for  what  had  been  done,  he  had  not  yet  given  thought  as  to  the  source 
of  this  man's  power.  2.  But  the  question  was  soon  to  be  pressed  on  him  for  an 
answer.  Taken  before  the  council  of  the  Pharisees  and  questioned  by  them,  he 
answered  them  apparently  with  some  curtness,  perhaps  desiring  to  avoid  a  con- 
flict with  this  powerful  sect.  He  was  no  doubt  aware  of  their  threat  (ver.  22), 
and  also  of  the  fact  that  the  miracle,  having  been  wrought  on  the  Sabbath  day, 
would  further  excite  their  enmity.  This  incontestable  evidence  had  weight  with 
the  more  honest  and  open-minded  section  of  the  council.  The  others,  however, 
even  though  the  voice  of  truth  must  have  spoken  to  their  consciences,  clothed 
themselves  in  the  triple  brass  of  their  tradition.  But  this  division  among  them, 
and  the  further  question  asked,  led  the  man  another  step  upward  on  the  stairway 
of  faith.     He  is  a  prophet.     Could  He  be  less?  for  "were  not  wondrous  works 

272 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  ix. 


the  mark  of  a  prophet  ? "  was  that  not,  indeed,  what  Nicodemus,  one  of  the 
Sanhedrin,  had  openly  declared  Christ  to  be  (vii.  51,  52)  ?  3.  Thus  the  light 
which  they  imagined  had  been  suppressed  (viii.  59)  burst  out  on  them  with  even 
greater  brilliancy.  Baffled,  yet  unreconciled  to  the  truth,  they  sought  to  prove 
the  man  an  impostor  or  a  liar,  and  proceeded  to  cross -question  his  parents  con- 
cerning him.  His  parents  in  their  answer  left  no  doubt  as  to  his  identity,  or 
the  fact  that  their  son  had  been  born  blind ;  but  in  regard  to  the  manner  in 
which  their  son  was  healed,  they  referred  their  questioners  to  the  man  himself, 
probably  bearing  in  mind  the  threat  of  the  rulers.  With  the  man  who  had 
been  born  blind  they  tried  another  method  (ver.  24).  The  fact  of  the  miracle 
could  not  be  denied  :  let  the  glory  be  given  to  God,  and  Christ  denied  any  genuine 
participation  in  the  wonder,  on  the  supposition  that  He  was  a  sinner.  But 
their  wicked  attempt  only  led  to  the  man  ascending  another  step  toward 
complete  faith  in  Christ.  His  scornful  utterance  on  their  further  cross- 
examination,  "  Will  ye  also  be  His  disciples  1  "  his  trenchant  repudiation  of  their 
attempt  to  make  out  Jesus  to  be  a  sinner,  and  his  clear  affirmation,  "  If  this 
man  were  not  of  God,"  etc.  (ver.  33),  show  the  man  rising  rapidly  toward 
a  true  conception  of  Christ's  nature  and  office.  4.  And  now  the  rage  of 
Christ's  enemies  knew  no  bounds.  We  seem  to  hear  the  shriek  of  anger  in  their 
closing  words  as  they  carried  out  their  threat  in  this  case  and  excommunicated  the 
man  (ver.  34,  but  see  p.  261).  But  as  persecution  never  really  hinders,  but  ever 
helps  to  forward  truth,  so  the  rage  of  our  Lord's  enemies  against  him  led  this 
poor  man  nearer  to  that  spiritual  enlightenment  toward  which  he  had  been  pro- 
gressing. When  the  Lord  heard  what  had  happened  He  sought  out  His  persecuted 
disciple,  who  was  now  passing  through  an  experience  which  all  His  followers 
would  speedily  pass  through  (xvi.  2),  and  gladly  aided  him  up  the  last  step  to 
faith  and  spiritual  enlightenment.  In  reply  to  Jesus'  question,  "  Dost  thou 
believe  ? "  etc.  (ver.  35),  he  had  answered,  "  Who  is  He,  Lord  ? "  etc.  (ver.  36). 
He  had  already  implicit  faith  in  Jesus'  word.  And  when  Jesus  in  His  reply 
first  gently  reminded  him  of  the  miracle  that  had  been  wrought  on  him,  "  Thou 
hast  both  seen  Him,"  i.e.  with  eyes  enlightened  by  Him,  etc.,  the  spiritual  dark- 
ness passed  away  from  the  man's  soul,  and  from  the  summit  of  faith  he  saw 
salvation  (ver.  38).  Earth  with  all  its  beauty  was  now  lost  sight  of  comparatively 
in  the  light  of  that  new  spiritual  vision  which  the  soul  had  attained  to,  and  to 
which  a  new  world  of  spiritual  beauty  and  eternal  glory  had  been  opened.  The 
blind  had  indeed  been  made  to  see  (ver.  39).  In  this  history  there  is  further  seen — 
II.  The  downward  progress  of  unbelief. — 1.  The  spirit  of  unbelief  is  essen- 
tially dogmatic  and  persecuting.  The  enemies  of  Jesus  had  made  up  their 
minds,  and  no  amount  of  evidence  of  the  truth  would  convince  them.  This  is 
brought  out  in  their  determination  to  anathematise  whoever  should  be  openly 
favourable  to  the  claims  of  Jesus.  So  now  unbelief  is  dogmatic  still.  It  will 
accept  no  proof,  no  evidence,  for  the  truth  of  the  faith.  It  has  agreed  to  regard 
supernatural  religion  as  an  exploded  idea.  2.  The  next  step  the  Pharisees  took 
was  to  attempt  to  weaken  the  credibility  of  the  chief  witness  of  the  great  miracle 
here  recorded — to  endeavour  to  show  that  the  subject  of  the  miracle  was,  in 
short,  a  liar.  So  unbelief  still  seeks  to  discredit  the  witnesses  of  the  gospel,  to 
resolve  their  writings  into  mythical  histories,  and  to  class  their  writers  as 
romancers  or  forgers.  3.  The  next  step  of  the  Pharisees  was  virtually  to  admit 
the:  fact  of  the  miracle,  as  all  their  attempts  to  throw  discredit  on  it  only  made 
it  more  evident ;  but  to  call  upon  the  man  on  whom  it  was  wrought  to  deny  to 
its  immediate  Author  any  real  participation  in  it — indeed,  by  acknowledging  Him 
as  an  especial  sinner  and  transgressor  (vers.  14,  16,  24),  to  declare  that  He  could 
have  had  no  part  in  it.  So  to-day  there  are  many  who  cannot  help  acknow- 
ledging the  beauty,  the  moral  power,  and  the  wonderfully  elevating  force  in  the 

T  273 


CHAP.  IX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


gospel ;  but  they  would  have  men  think  that  this  is  so  not  because  the  author  of 
the  gospel  is  the  "power  of  God"  They  would  have  them  believe  that  it  is  all 
the  result  of  a  natural  evolution  of  the  human  mind.  The  insincerity  of  the 
Pharisees  is  typical  of  a  certain  insincerity  of  modern  unbelief.  4.  These  baffled 
Jews,  unable  to  overturn  the  truth,  used  the  weapon  of  excommunication.  So 
the  leaders  of  unbelief  have  their  own  engine  of  petty  persecution.  Refusing 
themselves  to  investigate  candidly  into  the  origin  and  progress  of  the  faith,  they 
shut  themselves  within  their  charmed  circle,  excluding  therefrom  all  pertaining 
to  the  Christian  faith,  and  stigmatising  those  who  still  adhere  to  it  as  unscientific. 
But  their  anathemas  will  no  more  prevail  finally  against  the  truth  than  those  of 
the  Jews  of  Jerusalem. 

Ver.  25.  "  One  thing  I  know" — Scepticism  affected  to  disbelieve  in  the  reality  of 
this  miracle,  jealousy  sought  to  argue  that  it  was  due  to  other  agencies,  persecu- 
tion set  itself  to  awe  the  man  into  contradictions.  But  through  all  he  persisted 
in  his  artless  and  eloquent  tale,  with  its  unanswerable  conclusion,  "  If  this  man 
were  not  of  God,  He  could  do  nothing."     Mark — 

I.  The  change. — 1.  It  was  a  radical  change.  It  is  impossible  to  conceive  of 
two  more  opposite  or  different  states  than  that  of  the  blind  and  the  seeing. 
And  there  is  an  analogy  between  this  and  spiritual  blindness.  There  is  the  same 
glorious  change  from  darkness  unto  light.  Do  we  know  it  1  2.  It  was  a  divinely 
effected  change.  No  power  but  a  divine  power  could  have  wrought  this  miracle 
in  the  man  born  blind.  So,  too,  with  our  spiritual  blindness.  Beason,  educa- 
tion, civilisation  may  all  seek  to  alleviate  man's  condition ;  they  cannot  effect 
this  change.  "  Not  by  might,  not  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord 
of  Hosts."  3.  The  change  was  wrought  by  means.  Christ  on  this  occasion  chose 
to  employ  them.  Thus  too,  in  giving  sight  to  those  spiritually  blind,  God  does 
not  supersede  the  use  of  means,  but  He  vitalises  those  means,  which  must  be 
used,  just  as  the  blind  man  had  to  go  and  wash  in  Siloam.  With  the  divine 
word  the  human  effort  must  be  conjoined. 

II.  In  this  miracle  there  was  a  testimony  given. — 1.  The  miracle  was  so 
noised  abroad  that  the  Pharisees  felt  constrained  to  inquire  into  the  circumstances 
of  it.  Every  effort  was  made  to  bring  the  man  who  was  healed  to  contradict 
himself,  but  in  vain.  He  fell  back  on  the  evidence  of  his  own  senses.  "  One 
thing  I  know,"  was  his  testimony.  So  is  it  in  the  spiritual  life.  Beligion  is  a 
real  change.  And  when  God  has  changed  a  man's  spiritual  life,  that  man  should 
be  able  to  say,  "  One  thing  I  know,"  etc.  Does  the  Spirit  of  God  testify  with 
our  spirit  ?  2.  This  testimony  is  consistent  and  clear.  The  man  who  had  been 
born  blind  was  bold  and  fearless,  telling  his  tale  with  outspoken  frankness. 
And  so,  too,  are  the  witnesses  of  God's  grace  equally  sincere.  There  are  differ- 
ences of  temperament.  Some  are  reserved  and  silent.  But  all  on  whom  this 
change  has  passed  will  in  some  way  testify  to  its  reality.  3.  This  testimony  is 
consistent  under  all  circumstances,  under  every  pressure.  "  When,  indeed,  have 
these  faithful  witnesses  not  spoken  ?  Not  only  in  the  fellowship  of  the  saints, 
but  amid  the  darkest  scenes  of  life.  Beproach  may  bow  down  the  spirit,  but  it 
does  not  silence  the  testimony.  Affliction  may  shrivel  up  the  strength,  but  the 
Spirit-life  waxes  into  comelier  and  more  heavenly  beauty."  Even  death  pauses 
till  the  dying  can  shout,  "  O  death,  where  is  thy  sting  ? "  Yes,  the  testimony  is 
consistent — all  circumstances  have  witnessed  it.  In  every  scene  alike,  whether 
of  human  gladness  or  of  human  woe,  the  cry  of  the  faithful  has  gone  upward  to 
the  skies  :  "  One  thing  I  know,  that,  whereas  I  was  blind,  now  I  see."  How  is  it 
with  us,  brethren? — Abridged  from  Rev.  Robert  Russell. 

Vers.  29  ff.  "  God  spake  unto  Moses." — I.  In  affirming,  as  they  did,  "  We  know 
274 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  ix. 


that  God  spake  to  Moses,"  etc.,  the  Pharisees  virtually  condemned  themselves, 
for — 1.  In  acknowledging  the  authority  of  Moses,  his  authority  as  a  lawgiver 
commissioned  by  God,  the  Pharisees  showed  themselves  capable  of  being  acted 
on  by  that  sort  of  proof  which  a  messenger  from  heaven  might  be  expected  to 
adduce.  Therefore — 2.  They  were  bound,  on  every  principle  of  justice,  to  admit 
the  authority  of  any  alleged  teacher  from  heaven  who  should  give  as  strong 
proof  and  of  the  same  kind  as  Moses.  On  what  ground  was  Moses  acknowledged 
to  have  spoken  in  the  name  of  Jehovah  ?  The  supernatural  powers  he  displayed, 
etc. — the  plagues,  etc.  3.  But  if  all  this  was  received  as  an  undoubted  proof  of 
Moses'  claim  as  a  prophet  heaven-sent,  much  more  the  beneficent  miracles  of 
Jtsus  should  have  been  held  to  prove  His  divine  mission.  So  we  can  offer  the 
Jew  precisely  the  same  reasons  for  believing  in  Christ  from  the  New  Testament 
as  those  on  which  he  founds  the  authority  of  Moses  in  the  Old  Testament. 

II.  And  if  the  Pharisees  were  self-condemned,  it  becomes  us  to  ask  ourselves 
whether  we  stand  in  the  same  case — whether  there  may  not  be  in  our  actions  and 
creeds  sufficient  to  convict  us,  at  the  judgment,  were  we  to  die  without  interest  in 
the  mercies  of  the  Gospel.  1.  There  may  be  many  who  are  furnishing  against 
themselves  such  a  testimony  as  that  which  was  furnished  by  the  Pharisees — a 
testimony  as  to  a  power  of  attending  to  what  they  neglect,  believing  what  they 
disbelieve,  or  doing  what  they  omit,  which  will  supersede  all  necessity  for  any 
other  evidence  when  they  shall  stand  to  receive  sentence  from  the  Judge  of 
quick  and  dead.  2.  An  illustration  of  this  is  the  forethought  men  apply  to 
earthly  things.  But  that  which  urges  us  to  provide  against  to-morrow  ought  to 
urge  us  to  provide  against  eternity.  Religion  requires  nothing  but  that  we  be,  in 
respect  of  another  world,  what  we  continually  show  ourselves  to  be  in  respect  of 
the  present  world.  3.  Again,  the  first  and  great  commandment  is,  "  Thou  shalt 
love,"  etc. ;  and  there  is  no  commandment  commonly  thought  more  impracticable. 
It  will  be  urged  by  some  that  God  is  too  highly  exalted  and  removed  by  the 
majesty  and  spirituality  of  His  nature  to  be  the  object  of  love  on  the  part  of  men. 
tl  We  will  love  our  earthly  benefactors  and  friends,  but,  as  for  God,  He  is  too 
great  and  too  glorious  for  such  an  affection."  Well,  if  men  are  so  constituted 
that  goodness  is  with  them  an  object  of  love,  then,  as  God  is  emphatically  good, 
He  ought  surely  to  excite  this  love.  Men  are  attached  to  others  by  kindness, 
love,  etc.  Surely,  then,  they  ought  to  be  attracted  to  God,  whose  lovingkindness, 
etc.,  is  over  all  His  works.  It  will  not  do  to  say  :  The  creature  is  seen,  the  Creator 
unseen.  It  is  not  needful  that  our  benefactor  should  be  visible  to  awaken  our 
gratitude  and  love.  "  Let  a  man,  in  affliction  and  poverty,  be  told  of  some 
exalted  and  admirable  person  who  seems  to  have  gathered  every  virtue  into  his 
character;  let  him  know  this  person  only  by  the  description  of  his  qualities,  and 
let  him  receive  from  him  continued  proofs  of  his  benevolence,  the  supply  of  every 
want,  the  solace  of  every  care,  the  shield  from  every  danger  :  will  it  be  impossible 
for  him  to  love  this  unknown  and  invisible  benefactor  ?  You  know  better."  No ; 
"  the  domestic  charities,  feelings  of  children  toward  parents,  etc.,  all  testify  that 
we  are  capable  of  loving  God." — Abridged  from  Henry  Melvill. 

Vers.  39-41.  The  corning  of  the  Light  of  the  world  results  in  a  discrimination  or 
judgment. — In  these  words  our  Lord  made  a  general  observation  on  the  whole 
course  of  the  events  that  had  just  occurred.  Jesus  came  not  to  judge  but  to 
save  the  world,  and  His  words  here  are  no  contradiction  of  that  truth ;  they 
are  simply  a  statement  of  what  did  actually  occur  on  Christ's  advent.  It  is  not 
an  act  of  judgment  which  He  performs,  but  a  declaration  of  the  consequences  of 
His  coming  to  various  classes  of  men.  But  even  when  considered  in  this  light 
the  passage  is  a  very  terrible  one.  It  means  that  He  who  came  to  bring  salva- 
tion and  blessing  to  men  must,  through  the  individual  sin  and  folly  of  many, 

275 


chap.  ix.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


become  to  them  a  stone  of  stumbling,  etc.  (1  Pet.  ii.  8).  Nor  could  the  result  be 
unexpected.  How  many  make  God's  gifts,  through  prodigal  and  sinful  misuse 
or  neglect  of  them,  to  become  a  curse  to  them  in  place  of  a  blessing  1  And  it 
was  foreseen  that  such  would  be  the  result  to  many,  of  the  sending  of  God's 
best  gift  (Luke  ii.  34,  35).  The  result  of  Christ's  coming  as  the  light  of  the 
world  is— 

I.  That  they  which  see  not  might  see. — 1.  These  are  those  who  are  longing 
for  the  light,  but  on  whom  it  has  not  yet  risen.  Those  whose  knowledge  of 
divine  things  is  limited  and  meagre,  who,  in  the  words  of  the  Jews,  know  not 
the  law  (vii.  49),  but  who  are  conscious  of  this  ignorance  and  desire  enlighten- 
ment— these  are  the  "  babes"  in  Christ  to  whom  the  Saviour  once  and  again  so 
lovingly  refers  (Matt.  xi.  25;  Luke  x.  21).  Their  hearts  and  minds  are  open  to 
the  truth,  and  when  it  comes  they  eagerly  embrace  it.  2.  No  doubt,  also,  our 
Lord  refers  to  those  who  were  in  the  profoundest  spiritual  darkness,  the  other 
sheep  not  of  that  fold  which  He  was  to  bring  in  (x.  16).  On  those  who  sat  in 
this  great  darkness  the  light  was  to  shine,  and  to  be  seen  by  them  with  joy 
(Isa.  ix.  2,  lx.  2,  etc.).  3.  Such  were  those  who  were  blind,  and  who  rejoiced 
when  Jesus  came  with  healing,  illuminating  power — men  like  the  subject  of  the 
great  miracle  which  had  been  wrought,  like  the  Samaritans  who  gladly  believed 
His  word  (iv.  41),  etc. 

II.  That  they  which  see  might  be  made  blind. — 1.  Those  who  see  are 
those  who  prided  themselves  on  their  knowledge  of  the  law  (ver.  29),  and  who 
thought  themselves  infallible  interpreters  of  and  guides  to  truth.  2.  But  their 
knowledge  was  no  true  knowledge.  It  was  founded  on  misconceptions  of  the 
revelation  committed  to  them.  They  did  not  seek  to  understand  its  divine, 
spiritual  meaning,  but  rather  sought  to  make  it  bear  testimony  to  their  own 
conceptions,  and  to  minister  to  their  own  vanity  and  national  pride.  3.  From 
having  been  long  immured  in  those  darkened  caverns  of  tradition,  their  sight 
had  become  defective  and  rudimentary  (like  that  of  the  fishes  in  the  waters  in 
great  caverns),  unable  to  bear  the  light,  or  quite  insensible  to  it.  So  were  those 
men  "  blind  leaders  of  the  blind"  (Rom.  ii.  17-20).  In  their  proud  self-sufficiency 
they  lacked  all  desire  for  knowledge  of  the  truth.  They  accounted  themselves 
so  wise  and  prudent,  so  infallible,  that  when  the  Truth  appeared,  because  He 
did  not  conform  to  their  preconceptions  of  what  He  should  be,  they  rejected  Him 
blindly  and  stubbornly.  4.  They  should  have  known.  A  true  spiritual  life  and 
a  spiritual  desire  to  know  the  divine  oracles  committed  to  them  would  have  led 
them,  like  a  Simeon,  an  Anna  (Luke  ii.  25-38),  a  Nathanael  (i.  49),  at  once  to 
rejoice  in  the  light  when  it  appeared.  But  they  did  not,  would  not.  It  was 
knowingly,  in  face  of  the  divine  revelation  committed  to  them,  that  they  rejected 
Jesus.  They  hardened  their  hearts,  and  thus  committed  that  sin  against  the 
Holy  Ghost  which  abideth.  The  former  class  were  blind  because  the  eye  of 
knowledge  yet  waited  for  the  revealing  light,  and  the  eye  of  faith  was  thus  dim. 
Their  sin  was  thus  not  the  result  of  wilful  rejection,  and  hope  remained  for 
them.  Thus  the  coming  of  Christ  was  a  revelation  of  men—"  the  thoughts  of 
many  hearts  were  revealed." 

III.  The  proclamation  of  the  gospel  leads  to  the  same  result  now. — 
1.  Now,  as  of  old,  Christ's  truth  is  "  hid  from  the  wise  and  prudent,"  those  who 
presumptuously  imagine  that  their  knowledge  and  wisdom  are  the  measure  of  the 
universe.  Are  they  not  around  us — the  men  of  scientific  and  philosophical 
learning,  who  (like  the  Sadducees  of  the  council)  rely  on  their  own  reason  and  the 
results  of  human  investigation  alone,  and  who  will  accept  no  revelation  imme- 
diately given  by  the  Eternal,  who  deny  that  such  a  revelation  is  possible? 
Founding  on  their  own  fancied  infallibility,  they  reject  the  truth  of  Christ, 
forgetting  that  they,  and  all  men,  can  see  but  a  little  way  into  the  secrets  of 

276 


tiOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  jx. 


universal  nature  even,  not  to  say  the  Infinite.  Even  their  own  boasted  knowledge, 
wonderful  as  it  really  is,  should  lead  them  to  pause  in  humility,  and  to  examine 
reverently  and  earnestly  what  professes  to  be  a  divine  revelation.  Surely  even 
more  truly  rational  is  the  position  of  those  who,  like  the  pious  Isaac  Newton, 
acknowledge  the  limits  of  their  knowledge,  and  confess  themselves  to  be  like 
children  sporting  on  the  shore  of  the  infinite  ocean  of  truth, — that  "  the  universe 
is  the  centre  of  a  circle  whose  circumference  is  infinity  "  (Pascal),  These  are  the 
men  whose  hearts  are  open  to  truth,  the  "  babes  "  to  whom  the  Father  will 
reveal  eternal  realities  (Matt.  xi.  25).  2.  There  are  those  also  who,  like  the 
Pharisees,  shut  themselves  up  in  the  ceils  of  traditional  systems,  claiming 
infallibility ;  so  that  when  the  truth  comes  to  them  it  must  judge ;  they  must 
choose  between  it  and  their  traditions.  And  how  many  resolutely  shut  their 
eyes  to  the  light,  whilst  at  the  same  time  refusing  to  permit  others  access  to  the 
word  of  truth,  by  which  they  might  be  led  to  the  light  !  They  take  away  the 
key  of  knowledge,  etc.,  and  thus  choose  the  darkness,  become  wilfully  blind. 
But  those  whose  hearts  are  open  to  the  word,  like  Luther  and  the  leaders  of 
the  Reformation,  burst  through  the  walk  of  the  traditional  system.  They  go, 
following  the  divine  command,  untrammelled  by  supposed  infallible  systems,  and 
search  in  the  divine  word  itself,  earnestly  desiring  the  truth,  and  they  come 
seeing.  3.  Again,  there  is  a  large  class  who,  like  many  of  the  Jewish  rulers, 
are  actuated  by  actual  enmity  to  and  hatred  of  the  gospel.  Had  the  people 
accepted  and  followed  Christ,  the  personal  pride  and  ambition  of  those  rulers 
would  have  been  thwarted — indeed,  were  being  thwarted.  So  with  many  now. 
Christ  and  His  gospel  stand  athwart  the  path  of  their  pleasure,  gain,  ambitions, 
etc.  "  Thou  art  an  hard  man,"  etc.  (Matt.  xxv.  24) ;  and  they  refuse  to  serve,  and 
the  end  is  darkness  (Matt.  xxv.  30).  "  This  is  the  Heir  ;  come,  let  us  kill  Him," 
etc.,  and  the  end  is  destruction  (Luke  xx.  14-16).  It  is  to  those  who  realise 
that  earth  and  the  things  of  earth  are  not  all,  who  wisely  resolve  to  subordinate 
and  make  subservient  the  things  of  time  to  those  of  eternity,  that  light  shall 
rise  in  obscurity,  and  their  darkness  be  as  the  noonday  (Isa.  lviii.  8-10). 

Vers.  39-41.  Spiritual  blindness. — In  this  miracle  this  judgment  here  spoken 
of  was  effected,  when  Christ  said :  "  For  judgment  am  I  come,"  etc.  For  just  as 
Moses  of  old  divided  Egypt  in  such  a  fashion  that  in  all  the  parts  of  it  inhabited 
by  the  Egyptians  there  was  darkness,  whilst  the  Israelites  rejoiced  in  day ;  thus 
at  the  same  time  when  Jesus  Christ  enlightened  the  man  born  blind  He  blinded 
the  Pharisees,  who  were  the  wise  and  the  prudent  of  the  Jewish  people.  This 
is  a  judgment  which  is  daily  renewed  among  us.  In  this  discourse  the  terrible 
aspect  will  be  dwelt  upon,  that  some  are  stricken  with  an  inner  blindness,  which 
keeps  the  soul  in  the  most  gross  and  fatal  errors.  There  is  nothing  on  which 
Scripture  pronounces  with  such  variety  of  terms  as  on  spiritual  blindness. 
Three  kinds  of  it  are  here  distinguished — a  blindness  which  is  itself  sin,  a  blind- 
ness which  is  the  cause  of  sin,  and  a  blindness  caused  by  sin. 

I.  A  blindness  which  is  sin,  i.e.  which  is  itself  criminal.  Why  ?  Because 
it  is  voluntary.  Such  is  the  blindness  of  libertines  and  so-called  atheists,  who  in 
themselves,  and  by  the  way  of  nature,  have  light  more  than  sufficient  for  some 
knowledge  of  God,  and  who  in  consequence  only  cease  to  believe  in  Him  because 
they  will  not  subject  themselves  to  Him.  By  continually  sinning  against  Him 
they  come  to  forget  Him  and  then  to  deny  Him.  Such  is  the  blindness  of  the 
unfaithful,  of  sensual  and  voluptuous  men,  who  in  order  to  be  able  to  enjoy 
their  infamous  pleasures,  without  having  their  minds  disturbed,  do  not  desire  to 
hear  eternal  truth  spoken  of.  Such  is  the  blindness  of  certain  minds  full  of 
vanity,  who  by  the  reason  of  their  pride  cannot  endure  the  truth,  as  it  humiliates 
them.     Not  only  will  they  not  see  their  faults,  however  gross,  but  desire  others 

277 


chap.  IX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


to  applaud  even  their  weaknesses.  Such  is  the  blindness  of  many  called 
Christians,  who  do  not  desire  to  be  enlightened  in  certain  directions,  regarding 
certain  doubts,  certain  troubles  of  conscience,  because  they  well  know  that  they 
are  not  disposed  to  accomplish  the  duties  which  this  enlightenment  would  press 
upon  them.  "Noluit  intelligere  ut  bene  ageret."  There  is  no  more  pernicious  sin 
than  this,  nor  one  more  inimical  to  salvation.  1.  Because  this  voluntary  blind- 
ness excludes  the  beginning  of  all  grace — the  light  divine — and  thus  arrests  the 
progress  of  every  grace.  2.  Because  it  not  only  excludes  the  light,  but  takes 
away  all  desire  for  the  light.  3.  Because  it  makes  our  will  opposed  to  the  divine 
will,  and  leads  us  to  flee  from  the  light.  God,  it  is  true,  can  enlighten  us ;  but 
when  we  flee  from  the  light,  when  we  hate  it,  we  put  serious  obstacles  in  the  way 
of  salvation.     Let  us  pray  like  David,  "  Open  mine  eyes."     Lord,  enlighten  me. 

II.  Blindness  as  a  cause  of  sin. — Thus  the  Jews  crucified  Christ,  because 
they  knew  Him  not.  This  species  of  blindness  is  still  common.  How  often  do 
men  offend  against  justice,  charity,  etc.,  without  knowing  it,  and  because  they 
did  not  know  that  these  acts  are  sinful  !  But  does  this  excuse  men  before  God  ? 
If  it  were  so,  why  did  David  pray,  "  Cleanse  Thou  me  from  secret  faults  "  ?  I 
assert  that  this  ignorance  is  not  always  a  legitimate  excuse — that  it  never  is  in 
the  case  of  the  majority  of  Christians ;  for  in  the  age  in  which  we  live  there  is 
more  than  sufficient  light  to  render  this  excuse  invalid.  "  If  I  had  not  come 
and  spoken  unto  them,"  etc.  (xv.  22),  said  Jesus  to  the  Jews.  Apply  this 
personally.  How  many  have  preached  to  you  and  instructed  you  ?  "  They  have 
Moses  and  the  prophets,"  said  Abraham  to  Dives.  So  God  says  to  men  now. 
When,  therefore,  men  who  are  Christians  sin  through  ignorance  their  sin  is 
inexcusable.  Then  you  have  servants,  children.  Their  ignorance  will  not  form 
an  excuse  for  them ;  but  still  less  will  you  be  excused.  It  is  your  duty  to 
endeavour  that  they  should  be  able  to  instruct  themselves,  etc. 

III.  Blindness  as  the  effect  of  sin. — When  the  making  of  men  blind  enters 
into  the  order  of  the  divine  decrees,  it  must  be  believed  that  it  is  an  effect  of  sin, 
because  it  is  one  of  the  penalties  God  attaches  to  sin  :  in  the  words  of  Isaiah 
He  said,  "  Shut  their  eyes  "  (lsa.  vi.  10).  If  we  take  the  Scripture  terms  in  all 
their  strictness  and  literality,  one  would  conclude  that  God  effected  this  blindness 
by  a  positive  action.  But  according  to  their  real  meaning  their  signification  is, 
as  St.  Augustine  says,  that  if  God  makes  us  blind  it  is  by  way  of  privation,  by 
withdrawing  the  light.  But,  as  Augustine  adds,  God  never  absolutely  deprives 
men  of  the  light  of  His  grace  and  the  power  of  choice.  He  leaves  men  grace 
sufficient  at  least  to  lead  them  to  seek  the  way  of  salvation — to  pray,  if  not  to 
act.  This  species  of  blindness  is  the  most  terrible  punishment  God  can  inflict. 
It  is  purely  evil,  without  any  leaven  of  good.  After  such  considerations 
St.  Augustine  concludes,  "  Do  you  say  that  God  does  not  even  in  this  life  punish 
sinful  men  and  libertines?  If  God  has  not  brought  this  severe  judgment  on 
some  of  you,  it  is  because  He  has  extended  His  mercy  toward  you.  But  who 
knoweth  whether  He  will  longer  delay  ?  Who  would  not  tremble  at  the 
thought  that  there  is  a  sin,  perhaps,  which  God  has  marked  as  the  limit  of  His 
forbearance,  of  His  efficacious  and  victorious  grace  ?  What  is  this  sin  ?  I 
know  not.  But  let  me  for  neglect  get  nothing,  0  God,  to  avert  this  great  evil." — 
Abridged  from  Bourdaloue. 

Vers.  13-41.  The  gospel  of  the  man  born  blind. — Jesus  Christ  healed  this  blind 
man  ;  but  the  Pharisees,  who  sought  to  depreciate  the  works  of  the  Son  of  God, 
disputed  the  reality  of  the  miracle.  The  man  who  was  born  blind  nevertheless 
maintained  the  fact  of  the  miracle,  and  boldly  bore  witness  to  it.  From  the 
history  we  understand  : — 

I.  Into  what  blindness  our  self-interest  is  capable  of  leading  us,  and  does 

218 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  ix. 


lead  us  daily,  as  it  led  the  Pharisees.     This  passion  of  self-interest  blinded  the 
Pharisees — 

1.  As  to  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ. — As  He  was  opposed  to  the  Pharisees,  and 
His  influence  gave  them  umbrage,  that  was  sufficient  to  lower  Him  in  their  estima- 
tion. They  declared  He  was  a  sinner,  and  in  spite  of  all  that  could  be  said  they 
believed  it  or  would  believe  it.  Such  is  the  malignity  of  the  spirit  of  this  world. 
What  is  it  that  ordinarily  blinds  men  in  their  opinions  of  others  and  makes  them 
prejudiced  ?  Their  selfish  interests.  If  a  man  is  on  our  side,  his  devotion  to  our 
interests  renders  him  so  far  as  we  are  concerned  a  man  of  worth.  But  let  him 
be  opposed  to  us ;  he  is  then,  according  to  us,  one  of  the  most  unworthy  of  men. 
Justice  withdraws  when  once  self-interest  prevails.  It  is  because  of  this  that 
we  have  a  right  to  challenge  a  judge  or  witness  in  law,  if  he  is  proved  to  be 
swayed  by  some  special  interest  in  the  case  to  be  adjudicated  on. 

2.  As  to  the  miracles  of  Christ. — However  glorious  was  the  miracle  wrought 
on  the  man  born  blind  the  Pharisees  would  not  acknowledge  it ;  and  when  finally 
obliged  to  admit  the  fact,  they  denied  the  working  of  it  to  Christ.  They  denied 
it  without  reason,  I  say,  and  in  opposition  to  reason,  because  they  thought  it 
was  their  interest  to  deny  it.  This  spirit  produces  the  same  effects  to-day,  or 
the  same  errors,  not  only  in  regard  to  the  miracles  of  the  Son  of  God,  but 
generally  (1)  in  regard  to  the  most  incontestable  facts  of  religion.  A  libertine 
will  not  believe  so  that  his  disordered  and  corrupt  life  may  not  be  self- condemned. 
(2)  In  regard  to  the  most  natural  and  best-established  duties.  A  man  may 
reason  very  justly  concerning  some  matter  proposed  to  him,  and  give  a  stringent 
decision,iSO  long  as  his  own  interests  are  not  concerned.  But  let  these  be  touched, 
and  he  will  soon  modify  the  stringency  of  his  judgment,  and  find  reasons  for 
doubting  what  seemed  before  incontestable.  (3)  In  regard  to  the  most  evident 
facts  relating  to  justice  and  charity  toward  our  neighbour.  Why  do  we  pre- 
possess ourselves  with  a  thousand  false  suppositions,  which  we  seek  to  prove 
true,  supported  by  judgments  that  are  rash  and  futile  often,  but  because  our 
self-interests  occupy  our  whole  heart,  and  leave  to  the  mind  no  room  for  the 
exercise  of  reflection  and  reason  1     Consider — 

II.  How  the  testimony  of  the  man  healed  of  his  blindness  teaches  us  to 
dissipate  the  darkness  of  error  by  the  light  of  faith,  and  to  confound  falsehood 
by  a  holy  confession  of  the  truth. — The  testimony  of  this  man  has  four 
qualities : — 

1.  It  was  a  sincere  testimony. — His  sincerity  touched  on  naivete,  and  it  was 
this  that  disconcerted  the  Pharisees.  They  questioned  Him  narrowly.  But 
because  the  truth  never  contradicts  itself,  and  is  ever  the  same,  they  could  not 
embarrass  the  man  or  cause  him  to  contradict  himself.  What  could  they  do  or 
say  to  elude  the  force  of  a  testimony  so  simple  and  faithful  ? 

2.  It  was  a  noble  testimony. — In  vain  did  the  Pharisees  threaten  this  poor 
man.  They  managed  to  intimidate  his  parents.  But  he  feared  nothing,  and 
maintained  his  position.  This  showed  a  generosity  and  nobleness  which  was 
humiliating  to  those  proud  men.  But  it  also  condemns  much  more  the  weakness 
of  many  Christians  who  are  persuaded  of  the  truth,  and  are  slack  and  timid  in 
their  defence  of  it. 

3.  It  was  a  convincing  testimony. — It  is  worthy  of  admiration,  this  stand  of 
a  poor  man,  who,  without  study  or  preparation,  so  reasoned  as  to  shut  the 
mouths  of  those  doctors  of  the  law.  The  wisest  theologians  could  not  have 
given  better  answers  than  those  he  gave  to  all  they  brought  up  against  him. 
Such  is  the  victory  of  faith,  and  so  has  she  triumphed,  and  will  triumph,  over 
the  wisdom  of  the  world. 

4.  It  was  a  steadfast  testimony. — He  constantly  persisted  in  glorifying  his 
Benefactor,  and  in  publishing  abroad  the  blessing  that  had  been  bestowed  on  him. 

279 


chap.  IX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


The  Pharisees  cast  him  out  of  the  synagogue  with  every  mark  of  ignominy ;  but 
he  became  only  the  more  attached  to  the  Saviour.  He  worshipped  Him  as  God, 
and  embraced  His  law.  If  he  had  been  perhaps  less  firm,  as  many  are,  he 
might  have  belied  by  a  shameful  inconstancy  what  he  had  just  affirmed  in  his 
noble  confession.  Many  of  us  yield  in  face  of  the  least  difficulty,  and  permit  our 
faith  to  become  disturbed.  Novelty  draws  us  away,  and  seduces  us  by  the  vain- 
glory with  which  she  decks  herself.  Let  us  hold  fast  the  faith  of  Christ  Jesus. 
— Abridged  from  Bourdaloue. 

HOMILETIC  NOTES. 

The  healing  of  the  man  born  blind ;  seeks    false     witnesses    against    Him 

or,   Jesus ,   the   light   of    the    world. —  (ver.  24).     2.  This  sinful  world  hates 

I.  Jesus  is  the  light  of  the  world. —  and  reviles  the  steadfast  and  constant 

1.  This  truth  is  perceived  in  the  dis-  friends  of  the  truth  (vers.  25-28). 
closure  He  makes  regarding  the  designs  3.  They  wantonly  refuse  to  recognise  the 
of  God  in  the  enigmatical  and  inexplic-  divine  mission  of  Jesus  (ver.  29).  4.  They 
able  concerns  of  this  life  (vers.   1-3).  scorn  the  most  powerful  and  irrefutable 

2.  As  the  light  of  the  world  He  has  witnesses  to  the  honour  of  Jesus  and 
(like  the  sun)  a  set  time  for  His  earthly  the  holiness  of  His  person  (vers.  30-33). 
activity  (ver.  4).  3.  He  declares  Him-  5.  They  persecute  with  passionate 
self  to  be  the  light  of  the  world  (ver.  5).  anger  the  witnesses  of  the  truth 
4.  And  shows  Himself  to  be  so  through  (ver.  34). 

the  healing  of  the  man   born  blind  IV.  The  merciful  Saviour  receives 

(vers.  6,  7).  to  Himself  those  who  suffer  for  His 

II.  The  evidence  adduced  in  proof  sake  (vers.  35-38). — 1.  He  seeks  those 
of  this  truth  (vers.  8-23). — 1.  Such  cast  out  by  the  world  (ver.  35). 
evidence  is  necessary,  for  many  are  2.  He  inquires  into  their  convictions 
doubtful  as  to  the  power  of  Christ  (ver.  36).  3.  He  reveals  Himself  in 
(vers.  8,  9).  2.  This  testimony  should  His  dignity  to  them  as  the  Son  of  God 
be  given  by  those  who  have  experi-  (ver.  37).  4.  He  thus  works  in  them 
enced  the  power  and  grace  of  Jesus  in  joyful  faith  in  His  divine  mission 
themselves  (ver.  9) :  "I  am  "  (ver.  33).  (ver.  38). 

3.  Such  must  be  prepared  to  give  such  V.  The  manner  in  which  fellowship 
testimony  before  every  one  (vers.  13-15).  with  Jesus,   the  light   of  the   world, 

4.  And  should  courageously  witness  is  attained  (vers.  39-41).  —  1.  Not 
to  the  truth,  not  caring  how  their  all  attain  to  this  fellowship  (ver.  39). 
testimony  is   received   (vers.    16,    17).  2.  Humble  confession  of  their  own  blind- 

5.  Many  allow  themselves  to  be  deterred  ness  in  regard  to  divine  things  prepares 
through  the  fear  of  man  from  giving  men  for  this  fellowship  (vers.  40,  41). 
an  open  testimony  (vers.  18-23).  3.  Vain -glorious  conceit  in  their  own 

III.  This  testimony  must  be  borne  wisdom  shuts  men  out  from  this  f  ellow- 
in  face  of  persecution  (vers.  24-34). —  ship  (ver.  41).  "  But  now  ye  say," 
1.  The  world,  which  is  inimical  to  Jesus,      etc. — E.  G.  Lisco. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Ver.   30.  The  careless    are  inexcusable. —  the  nature  of  your  constitution,  within  things 

This  indication  of  forethought  shall  suffice  that  were,  and  could  not  so  extricate  your- 

to  condemn  the  ungodly.     Why  did  you  live  selves  as  to  give  heed  to  things  to  come  ? 

in  carelessness   as  to   religion  ?     Why  did  Nay,  let  the  counting-house,  the  shop,  the 

death   come   upon    yon,   and  find  you  un-  academy,  the  study,  all  witness  upon  this, 

prepared  ?     Is   it  that  you  could  not  look  These  are  beings  who  were  always  on  the 

forward?   Is  it  that  you  were  shut  up,  through  wing.      They  sprang  toward  coming  days, 

2m 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  i    ST.  JOHN. 


CftAP.   IX. 


and  sought  to  make  them  their  own.  To-day 
was,  with  them,  but  a  seed-time  for  to- 
morrow. The  one  toiled  for  fame,  and  made 
his  appeal  to  posterity;  another  aimed  at 
high  station,  though  there  stood  many  be- 
tween himself  and  advancement.  This  man 
rose  early,  and  late  took  rest,  that  he  might 
add  to  wealth  which  he  could  not  exhaust ; 
and  that,  in  order  to  ennoble  his  children. 
In  one  way  or  another,  they  all  lived  for  the 
future ;  and,  therefore,  might  they  all  have 
lived  for  eternity.  Ay,  there  is  not  one  of 
us  whom  his  care  for  the  things  of  this  life 
will  not  suffice  to  condemn  for  his  careless- 
ness as  to  the  things  of  the  next  life.  There 
is  not  one  who  ever  enters  into  a  speculation, 
who  attempts  to  lay  up  anything  in  store, 
who  takes  the  least  pains  to  secure  himself 
against  a  possible  evil  or  procure  for  himself 
a  possible  good,  who  does  not  thereby  show 
that  he  might,  if  he  would,  give  attention  to 
the  concerns  of  the  soul,  and  that,  therefore, 
can  he  have  none  but  himself  to  blame  if  he 
enter  another  world  with  no  provision  made 
for  the  trial  to  be  undergone.  The  parallel 
is  most  accurate,  as  we  would  again  and 
again  show,  between  any  such  case  and  that 
of  the  Pharisees.  .  .  .  The  careless  man — 
careless,  we  mean,  as  to  his  soul — will  be 
condemned  by  his  own  carefulness ;  the 
improvident  man,  by  his  own  providence ; 
the  man  who  laid  up  no  treasures  in  heaven, 
by  the  treasures  which  he  laid  up  on  earth  ; 
the  man  who  sought  not  the  honour  which 
cometh  from  God,  by  his  having  sought  the 
honour  which  cometh  from  the  world.  .  .  . 
The  great  demand  of  Christianity  is,  that  we 
"  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  the 
world,"  mortifying  evil  affections,  denying 
ourselves  in  things  which  a  corrupt  nature 
solicits,  but  reconciled  to  present  sacrifices 
and  endurances  by  the  prospect  of  future  and 
everlasting  happiness.  Does  this  seem  hard  ? 
is  it  too  much  to  ask  of  us  to  crucify  the  flesh, 
in  hope  of  recompense  in  some  yet  distant 
state  ?  Nay,  do  not  men  continually  submit 
to  inconvenience,  to  toil,  to  pain,  for  the 
sake  of  some  advantage  which  they  hope 
hereafter  to  reap  ?  Will  not  a  man  abandon 
his  home  and  his  family,  and  go  forth  to 
face  all  varieties  of  peril  and  effort,  sustained 
by  the  hope  of  accumulating  wealth  which 
will  enable  him  to  return  and  spend  in 
quiet  ease  the  close  of  his  days  ? — Henry 
Melvill. 

Ver.  31.  A  clear  proof  of  owr  divine  son- 
ship. — Let  us  take  heed,  then,  how  we 
continue  to  treasure  up  witness  against  our- 
selves. Examine  carefully  what  you  are 
proved  capable  of  doing  as  to  God  and 
eternity,  by  what  you  are  in  the  habit  of 
doing  as  to  man  and  time.  This  is  the  gist 
of  our  discourse :  that  in  things  commonly 
believed  and  performed  there  is  conclusive 
testimony  that  men  might,  if  they  would, 


have  believed  the  Bible  and  performed  God's 
will.  God  may  go,  as  it  were,  into  our 
households ;  and  there,  not  by  the  blemishes 
which  He  finds,  but  by  the  beauties ;  not  by 
the  stormy  passions  which  often  agitate  the 
inmates,  but  by  those  lovely  affections  which 
give  a  sacredness  to  our  firesides-  by  the 
respect  which  parents  feel  and  expect  as 
their  due,  by  the  meek  submissiveness  of 
children,  by  their  devoted  attention  to  those 
who  gave  them  life,  by  their  obedience  to 
their  wishes,  by  their  regard  to  their  feelings 
— may  He  proceed  to  make  good  His  charges 
against  us,  if  it  shall  be  found,  that  having 
drawn  from  Him  our  being,  been  sustained 
by  His  bounty,  and  protected  by  His  power, 
we  have  yielded  Him  no  homage  and  given 
Him  no  love.  All  then  who  perish  must 
perish  self -condemned,  their  actions  attest- 
ing that  it  was  in  their  power  to  have 
obtained  salvation,  and  that,  therefore,  it 
was  their  guilt  to  have  missed  it. — Idem. 

Ver.  39.  Praise  to  Jesus  for  spiritual  sight. 
— Praise  be  to  Thee,  Lord  Jesus,  that  Thou 
hast  brought  us  to  the  knowledge  of  our 
spiritual  blindness.  We  are  born  blind,  and 
know  not  what  we  shall  do  for  our  salvation. 
But  we  would  fain  be  saved,  and  so  we 
plead  with  Thee  this  Thy  precious  word, 
that  Thou  hast  come  that  those  who  see  not 
might  see.  Oh,  let  Thy  face  be  turned 
toward  us  also.  .  .  .  But  what  do  we  ask  ? 
Hast  Thou  not  opened  the  eyes  of  us  Thy 
Christian  people  in  the  washing  of  regenera- 
tion ?  (Tit.  iii.  5).  Yes,  Lord,  but  Thou 
knowest  also  that  the  devil,  the  world,  the 
flesh,  have  again  obscured  our  eyes,  and  that 
daily  the  sand  of  sin  streams  in  on  them. 
Therefore  enable  us  through  faith  at  all  times 
to  turn  to  the  Siloam  prepared  for  us,  so  that 
the  imperishable  power  of  this  gracious 
spring  of  life  may  renew  us,  and  that  our 
whole  course  of  life  may  be  continued  within 
the  limits  of  this  sacred  experience  :  "I  went 
and  washed  and  came  seeing."  .  .  .  Let  Thy 
grace  indeed  be  known  by  us  from  ex- 
perience, and  may  we  hold  it  fast  whatever 
worldly  wisdom,  pride  of  reason,  and  human 
authority  may  say  against  it.  Let  us  not  be 
weary  in  acknowledging  what  Thou  hast 
done  for  us,  and  never  deny  Thee  before  a 
generation  at  enmity  with  Thee  and  Thine. 
If  men  cast  us  out,  take  Thou  us  up,  O  Lord. 
Make  those  seasons  in  which  we  suffer  for 
Thy  name's  sake  seasons  of  quickening  for 
our  inner  man,  so  that  we  may  grow  in  Thy 
grace  and  knowledge.  May  the  comfort  of 
Thy  seeking  love  be  precious  to  us;  and 
when  we  have  been  found  through  Thy 
shepherd  faithfulness,  let  us  ever  hear  and 
know  Thy  voice  as  the  voice  of  the  Son  of 
God  who  speaks  to  us :  u  It  is  He  that 
talketh  with  thee."  Yes,  in  Thy  word  would 
we  see  Thee;  strengthen  our  faith  in  Thy 
word,  so  that  we  may  keep  it  unto  the  end 

281 


CHAP.   IX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


.  .  .  and  let  us  then  see  Thy  face  eternally. — 
JBesser,  u  Bibelst." 

Ver.  40.  "  We  see  "  the  boast  of  present-day 
scepticism. — Just  as  the  Jews  felt  in  their 
relation  to  the  Gentiles,  and  as  among  the 
Jews  the  Pharisees  felt  and  comported  them- 
selves toward  those  among  their  people  who 
were   ignorant — self-satisfied,  self-sufficient, 
haughty — so  are  there  not  such  in  our  own 
generation  1     We  see,  so  speak  many  culti- 
vated people  nowadays ;  we  see  the  ark  of 
the  Church  pierced  by  our  scepticism,  riddled 
by  our  negations — the  Church  is  no  longer  a 
proud  ship,  she  is  now  only  a  sinking  wreck. 
We  see,  they  affirm   further  in  their  self- 
righteousness ;  there  is  in  reality  no  sin — 
weaknesses  and  imperfections,  but  no  guilt 
which    requires   forgiveness,   no   corruption 
that  needs  redemption.      We  see,  and  we 
behold   Christ    deposed    from    His  throne, 
brought  down  to  the  common  level,  divested 
of   the   miraculous,   as  a   Jewish  rabbi,  an 
enthusiast,  the  founder  of  a  religion,  and  at 
all  events  a  brave  martyr ;  the  days  are  gone 
past,   for  ever  gone,   in  which  as  the  Ke- 
deemer  He  shall  wash  men  clean  from  their 
guilty  stains,  as  the  Prince  of  life  shall  lead 
them  through  the  dark  valley  of  death,  and 
shall  plead  for  them  as  their  surety  at  the 
last  judgment.      We,   we   see — we  see    the 
coherence   of  nature   as   a  huge   machine : 
the  mechanism  of  this  machine  has  stifled 
the  breathing  of  prayer  ;   the  regular  suc- 
cession of  events  has  set  aside  the  miraculous; 
the  telescope  has  dissolved  the  other  world. 
Like  a  foundling  exposed  on  the  sandbank  of 
the  Present,  man  must  just  accommodate  him- 
self to  his  poverty  as  well  as  he  can,  must  put 
a  good  face  on  a  bad  business.      We  are  all 
the  more  proud  to  rest  on  our  own  resources 
— unaided  to  fight  the  battle  of  existence. 
How  then  ?    Would  not  the  Lord  be  justified 
in  replying  thus  to  those  people,culture-proud, 
cultivated,  and  arrogant :  Now  you  say,  We 
see,  therefore  your  sin  remaineth — it  abideth 
unknown,  unacknowledged,  unconfessed,  un- 
forgiven  1—Kogel,  "  Predigt." 

Ver.  41.  The  doom  of  indecision. — The  un- 
decided come  under  the  judgment  of  Him 
who  said,  "  He  who  is  not  with  Me  is  against 
Me."  He  is  called  the  Amen.  Yes,  and 
shall  He  love  a  theologian  to  whom  yea  and 
nay  are  alike  ?  He  is  called  the  "  Bread 
of  Life,"  who  for  our  sakes  came  down 
into  this  wilderness  ;  and  shall  He  leave 
unpunished  those  who  adopt  the  thankless 
tongue  of  the  fault-finder,  and  say,  "  That  is 
common  food."  His  kingdom  opposes  the 
kingdom  of  Satan  as  light  opposes  darkness, 
as  holiness  opposes  impurity,  as  life  opposes 
death.  How  then?  Shall  there  be  before 
His  sight  a  position  lying  midway  between 
right  and  wrong,  sweet  and  sour  ?  Freedom 
and  the  kingdom  of  heaven  will  have  no 

•282 


half -loyalty.  The  undecided  Pilate  crucified 
Christ.  King  Agrippa  remained  with  arms 
crossed,  an  idle  spectator,  over  against  Paul 
in  bonds.  The  vacillator  does  not  take  part 
in  the  scourging,  but  he  permits  it  ;  he  does 
not  mock,  but  permits  the  mockery.  The 
receiver  stands  on  the  same  level  as  the 
thief.  Participator  in  the  act  is  to  be 
participator  in  the  punishment.  First 
strabitic,  then  blind. — Idem. 

Ver.   41.   The  folly    of  indecision. — How 
foolish,  on  every   calculation,  is  indecisive 
behaviour !     Would  that   they  would  take 
one  side  or  the  other,  that  they  would  either 
be  servants  of  Christ  in  earnest,  or  renounce 
Him  openly,  and  say  that  they  have  nothing 
to  do  with  Jesus  of  Nazareth  and  His  salva- 
tion.    Happy,  indeed,  would  it  be  for  the 
Church  of  Christ  if  all  its  false  friends  were 
to  declare  themselves  its  enemies  :  the  gospel 
would  then  no  more  be  reproached  with  the 
scandal   of   their  evil   lives,   and    the    true 
believers  would  be  drawn  more  closely  to 
one  another,  and  would  feel  the  name  of 
Christian  to  be  a  real   tie  of  brotherhood. 
But  how  much  more  happy  if  any  of  those 
who   know  not  the   Son  of  God  might  be 
brought  to  learn  who  He  is,  and  to  believe 
and  to  worship  Him  in  spirit  and  in  truth  ? 
And,  under  God,  there  is  no  way  so  likely  to 
draw  them  home  as  for  those  who  do  know 
Christ,  and  believe  in  Him  and  love  Him,  to 
increase  their  knowledge  and  love  more  and 
more,  and  to   bring  their  lives  to  a  more 
perfect  conformity  with  His  gospel.     That 
in  many  things  we   offend    all  is  a  truth 
which  the  consciences  of  every  one  of  us  can 
abundantly  confirm ;  but  that  our  offences 
may  daily  become  fewer  and  less  flagrant 
should  be  at  once  our  labour  and  our  prayer. 
And  for  all  who  in  sincerity  of  heart  do  thus 
strive  to  increase  their  faith  and  knowledge 
of  their  Saviour,  His  words  to  the  blind  man 
are  a  most  comfortable  prophecy  of  what  He 
will  one  day  say  to  them,  "  that  they  have 
seen  Him,  and  He  has  talked  with  them," — on 
earth,  by  His  word  and  Spirit ;  in  heaven,  by 
His  presence  revealed  to  them,  when  they 
shall  see  Him  as  He  is. — Dr.  T.  Arnold. 

Ver.  41.  Men  must  choose  light  or  darkness. 
— Through  the  whole  of  the  New  Testament 
runs  an  either— or.  God's  word  is  a  two- 
edged  sword ;  Christ  is  a  Kock,  on  which 
men  either  raise  themselves,  or  on  which 
they  are  broken.  The  cross  is  either  the 
power  of  God  unto  salvation,  or  weakness 
and  foolishness  to  men.  The  gospel  is  either 
a  savour  of  death  unto  death  or  of  life  unto 
life.  .  .  .  The  Alexandrian  catechist  of  the 
fourth  century,  Didymus,  who  was  blind 
from  his  fifth  year,  and  who  attained  the  age 
of  ninety,  once  said  to  one  who  sought  to 
console  him,  that  he  could  not  sorrow  over  the 
want  of  that  eyesight  which  is  common  even 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  x. 


to  flies  and  mosquitoes — the  Lord  be  praised  my  understanding  be  opened  for  a  double 

he  had  been  given  such  an  eye  as  angels  see  purpose — that  I  may  realise  my  sinfulness, 

with,  with  which  God  can  be  seen  and  His  and  recognise  my  Saviour,  that  Saviour  who 

light  received.      How   had  that  master  of  said,  "  If  ye  were  blind,  ye  should  have  no 

harmony  Handel,  blind   in  his  later  years,  sin.    I  am  come,"  etc.  ...  In  the  grey  dawn 

sought  to  raise  his  hands  in  prayer  in  the  of  morning,  in  the  falling  night,  I  lift  up 

aria  composed  by  him  in  the   oratorio  of  mine  hands  and   pray :    Make   me  to   see, 

Samson  : —  make  me  blest,  O  Jesus  I     Away  over  the 

"Darkness  around-nor  sun  nor  moon  nor  roses  and  lilies  which  summer  brings  forth, 

£ars »  over  the   stubble,  across   which   blows  the 

cold  breath  of  autumn,  I  cry,  "  Make  me  to 

With   what  fervency  did    a    Milton,   when  see,"  etc.     Over  biers  that  go  under,  over 

singing  his  Paradise  Lost,  pray  for  inner  kingdoms  that  crash  in  ruin,  over  a  new 

light !     "  Send  forth    Thy   light    and    Thy  generation  growing  up,  high  over  all  I  pray 

truth;  let  them  lead  me,"  etc.  (Ps.  xliii.);  Him  who  was  and  is  and  is  to  come,  Ever 

"let  Thy  word  be  a  light  unto  my  feet ;  open  mafce  me  to  see,  ever  bless  me,  O  Jesus  !— 

-Thou  mine  eyes,  that  I  may  behold  wondrous  Translated  from  Kogel,  "  Predigt." 
things  out  of  Thy  law."     Let  the  eyes  of 


PAET  IV.   (d.) 

IV.  The  Growing  Conflict,  etc. 


1.  At  the  feast  of  dedication. — (1)  Jesus  manifests  Himself  as  eternal  love  in 
the  parabolic  allegory  of  the  good  shepherd — the  door,  the  fold,  the  flock,  the 
shepherd,  the  porter,  the  stranger  (vers.  1-6).  (2)  The  explanation  of  the  allegory : 
Christ  is  the  door.  (3)  He  is  also  the  true  shepherd  of  the  sheep,  and  the 
character  and  duty  of  the  good  shepherd  are  set  forth  (vers.  7-18).  (4)  Divisions 
among  the  people  because  of  this  claim  of  Jesus  (vers.  19-21). 

2.  Christ's  claim,  of  oneness  with  the  Father,  which  is  the  basis  of  His  claim 
to  be  the  good  shepherd. — (1)  He  and  the  Father  are  one  (vers.  22-30).  (2)  This 
claim  is  violently  opposed,  but  clearly  vindicated  (vers.  31-38).  (3)  Jesus,  taking 
refuge  in  Persea  from  the  threats  of  His  enemies,  is  accepted  by  many  who  had 
followed  John  the  Baptist,  and  had  heard  of  his  faithful  testimony  to  Jesus  as 
the  Messiah  (vers.  39-42). 

Second  Year  (to  beginning  of  Third)  of  our  Lord's  Ministry. 

Chaps,  x.,  xi. — Probable  position  in  Synoptic  narrative  :  following  Matt.  xx. 
17-28  ;  Mark  x.  28-45  ;  Luke  xviii.  31-34. 

Time. — From  feast  of  dedication,  Chisleu  (November — December),  a.u.c.  782, 
a.d.  29,  until  Adar  (February — March),  a.u.c.  783,  a.d.  30. 


CHAPTER  X. 
EXPLANATORY  AND   CRITICAL  NOTES. 

Vers.  1-21  contain  a  discourse  on  false  and  true  leaders  and  teachers  in  reference  to 
Christ,  under  the  allegoric  parable  of  the  fold  and  the  good  shepherd.  The  enmity  of  the 
Pharisees  displayed  toward  Jesus  after  the  miracle  of  healing  the  man  born  blind  led  to  the 
assertion  of  ix.  39.  "  Are  we  blind  also  ? "  wonderingly  asked  some  of  the  Pharisees.  u  You 
boast  that  you  are  not,"  is  the  reply.  "  You  have  the  light  of  the  divine  word,  etc.,  but  are 
wilfully  blind  to  it,  as  your  words  and  actions  show,  and  therefore  blind  leaders  of  the 

283 


chap.  x.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY i   ST.  JOHN. 


blind."  This  naturally  led  to  the  parabolic  allegory  of  this  chapter.  The  Jewish  leaders, 
blinded  by  their  traditional  expectations,  had  false  conceptions  of  God's  fold,  and  of  the  way 
of  entrance  into  it.  Thus  they  were  incompetent  to  lead  men  into  the  fold.  Only  those  who 
were  able  to  get  past  the  thickets  of  traditionalism  could  find  the  true  way  and  entrance 
(Luke  i.  39-56,  ii.  20-38,  etc.).  In  His  teaching  the  Redeemer  gradually  cleared  away  the 
obstructions,  and  closed  up  false  paths  ;  and  here  He  definitely  points  to  Himself  as  the  door 
and  the  good  shepherd  of  the  sheep.  The  figures  of  the  allegory  shift  and  change.  Whilst 
vers.  1-6  is  a  complete  parable  of  the  fold,  in  vers.  7-9  emphasis  is  laid  on  the  figure  of  the 
door  of  the  fold,  and  in  the  following  verses  the  principal  idea  is  that  of  the  good  shepherd. 
One  similitude  could  not  fully  express  and  illustrate  the  many-sidedness  of  Christ's  relations 
to  His  people. 

Ver.  1.  The  sheepfold  (ttjv  aiXty  r&v  irpofiaTiov). — It  was  customary  in  Palestine  to  bring 
the  flocks,  which  had  wandered  over  the  hills  by  day,  into  fold  at  eventide.  Bedawin 
robbers  and  beasts  of  pray  were  dangerous  then  as  now.  The  fold  means  here  the  Church 
of  God — in  the  case  of  Christ's  hearers  the  ancient  Jewish  Church.  There  is  but  one  entrance 
to  the  fold— the  door.  Implicitly  this  is  Christ  Himself.  Although  not  fully  revealed  before 
His  advent,  He  was  implied  in  all  the  Mosaic  observances  and  requirements  through  which 
priest  and  prophet  had  to  enter. 

Ver.  3.  The  doorkeeper  (dvpcopds). — Various  opinions  have  been  held  as  to  the  meaning  of 
this  figure.  Some  think  it  merely  an  adjunct  (De  Wette,  etc.)  intended  to  fill  out  the 
picture.  Westcott  thinks  it  signifies  the  Spirit  working  through  His  appointed  ministers  in 
each  case.  This  idea  seems  quite  reconcilable  with  that  of  Lange,  Alford,  etc.,  viz.  that 
the  Holy  Spirit  Himself  is  meant.  For  how  does  the  Spirit  work  in  the  Church  and  among 
men  if  not  by  the  use  of  means  and  human  instruments  1  (1  Cor.  xii.  1-11,  xvi.  9,  etc.).  His 
own  sheep. — The  reference  is  evidently  to  true  pastors,  and  to  the  various  flocks  in  the  one  fold. 

Ver.  6.  This  parable  they  understood  not,  etc. — No  wonder,  if  even  a  Nicodemus  did  not  at 
first  understand  the  divine  teaching  of  Jesus.  But  the  Pharisees  were  not  "  seekers  after 
truth "  like  Nicodemus ;  therefore  to  them  the  Saviour's  words  in  Matt.  xiii.  10-17  will 
apply. 

Ver.  8.  All  that  ever  came  before  Me  (irpb  i/xov). — Christ  distinctly  claims  to  be  the  only 
way  to  the  fold.  He  cannot  here  refer  to  the  Old  Testament  prophets  and  teachers  ;  for 
they  "  testified  of  Him."  The  irpb  seems,  therefore,  intended  to  be  taken  in  the  sense  of 
"  instead  of,"  or  "  in  place  of  Me  "  (Lange,  etc.),  which  seems  to  be  essentially  the  same 
meaning  as  that  of  Westcott  and  Godet,  who  lay  the  emphasis  on  came,  and  add  "  who  came 
making  themselves  'doors  '  of  approach  to  God,"  claiming  to  have  the  key  of  knowledge,  etc. 
These  false  teachers  did  not,  like  law  and  prophecy,  point  to  Him  ;  they  sought  to  construct 
a  door  of  theocratic  temporal  grandeur,  and  scorned  the  lowly  entrance  of  the  incarnate 
Christ,  "  despised  and  rejected  of  men." 

Ver.  9.  By  Me,  etc. — Meyer,  who  restricts  this  clause  to  shepherds  alone,  may  in  part  be 
right.  For  in  the  East  shepherds  have  often  actually  to  find  pasture  for  their  flock  in  the 
dry  season.     Go  in  and  out,  etc. — I.e.  by  means  of  the  door  pursue  their  duties,  etc. 

Ver.  10.  The  Saviour  comes  to  His  flock  bearing  blessing  with  Him,  "  even  life  for 
evermore"  (Ps.  cxxxiii.),  on  the  mountains  of  the  spiritual  Zion.  This  is  an  application  of 
the  truth  in  i.  4. 

Vers.  11-18.  Christ  as  the  good  shepherd. — 6kcl\6s,  i.e.  in  a  super-eminent  sense.  The  head 
and  chief  of  all  other  true  shepherds  (1  Pet.  v.  1-4),  whose  claim  to  be  so  designated  is  shown 
not  only  by  His  general  care  of  the  flock,  but  by  His  willingness  even  to  lay  down  His  life 
for  them  (1  John  iii.  16). 

Ver.  12.  The  hireling. — A  figure  which  brings  out  the  inner  spirit  of  some  of  those  false 
shepherds.  One  who  becomes  a  pastor  of  the  flock  merely  for  daily  bread  (1  Sam.  ii.  36) — a 
mere  mercenary.  The  wolf  is  that  power  ever  seeking  to  destroy  men's  souls — the  powers 
opposed  to  Christ  in  whatever  form — Matt.  x.  16  (Reynolds) — more  especially  that  "  wicked 
foe  "  who  inspires  and  uses  them  all  as  his  instruments. 

Ver.  16.  And  other  sheep  I  have,  which  are  not  of  this  fold,  etc. — Is  He  not  looking  forward 
to  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  of  Isa.  lx.,  which  points  to  the  consummation  foretold  by 
St.  Paul  (Rom.  xi.  25,  26)  ?  Them  also  I  must  bring.  — Even  though  they  are  My  sheep  they 
have  not  the  privileges  granted  to  Israel ;  but  they  also  shall  enjoy  the  greater  blessedness 
of  My  kingdom  (i.  17 ;  Acts  x.  35,  44-48).  He  is  the  door  of  the  sheep.  Jews  and  Gentiles 
in  Him  are  one  (Eph.  ii.  11-17  ;  Col.  iii.  11).  "  There  may  be  many  folds.  Different  nations, 
ages,  times,  and  seasons  may  cause  variations  in  these,  but  there  is  but  one  flock  under  the 
watchful  guardianship  of  one  shepherd  "  (Reynolds).  One  flock. — Not  atf\?7,  but  irolfiPT] — not 
one  rigid  fold  or  Church  system,  but  all  of  whatever  name  who  hold  to  the  "  one  Lord,  one 
faith,  one  baptism  "  (Eph.  iv.  5). 

Ver.  17.  For  this  cause  doth  the  Father  love  Me,  etc. — The  Father's  love  is  the  concomi- 
tant of  this  eternal  purpose,  and  it  is  manifested  toward  the  incarnate  Son  whilst  subjecting 
Himself  to  voluntary  humiliation  for  the  salvation  of   men.      The  Me  and  1  are  to  be 

284 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  x. 


referred  to  Christ  incarnate.  *Ipcl  indicates  the  purpose  of  His  laying  down  His  life.  Had 
He  laid  it  down  merely,  then  His  shepherd  activity  would  have  ceased.  But  He  takes  it 
again  that  He  may  still,  as  the  chief  shepherd,  care  for  His  flock. 

Ver.  18.  He  asserts  full  power  over  His  life.  His  laying  it  down  is  a  voluntary  surrender 
out  of  love  to  men.  Had  He  willed  it  otherwise,  who  could  have  withstood  His  will  (Matt, 
xxvi.  53)  ?  JBut  as  the  incarnate  Son,  in  accordance  with  the  eternal  direction  (evrdhri),  com- 
mand, of  the  Father,  He  exercised  this  power  or  right  (i£ovcria),  not  only  to  lay  His  life 
down,  but,  etc.  "  The  Father's  command  was,  Thou  shalt  die  or  not  die,  Thou  shalt  rise 
again  or  not  rise  again,  according  to  the  free  promptings  of  Thy  love  "  (Godet). 

Vers.  22-38.  Our  Lord's  utterances  at  the  feast  of  dedication  on  His  oneness  with  the  Father, 
etc. — This  feast  (rd  iyKalvia — the  Encaenia)  was  post-exilic  in  its  origin.  It  commemorated 
the  re-dedication  of  the  temple  and  the  renewing  of  the  altar  by  Judas  Maccabaeus  after  their 
profanation  by  Antiochus  Epiphanes.  It  was  also  called  ra  <pwra,  "  Lights,"  from  a  later 
custom  of  illuminating  the  city  and  temple  (vide  Jos.,  Ant. ;  Smith,  Dictionary  of  the  Bible, 
etc.).  It  lasted  eight  days,  and  was  accompanied  by  great  festivities  (2  Mace.  x.  6-8) — from 
the  25th  Chisleu  (December  20th),  i.e.  about  the  middle  of  the  Syrian  winter  or  rainy  season. 
It  is  somewhat  uncertain  whether  we  are  to  understand  that  our  Lord  was  absent  from 
Jerusalem  between  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  during  which  the  discourse  1-22  was  spoken, 
and  this  feast.  Godet  thinks  that  perhaps  during  that  period  we  may  include  the  events 
recorded  in  Luke  x.  1-37. 

Vers.  22, 23.  It  was  winter,  etc. —  Vide  above.  These  are  clearly  the  words  of  an  eye-witness. 
Solomon's  porch. — Or  the  portico  of  Solomon  (vide also  Acts  iii.  11,  v.  12).  "That  which  was 
really  Solomon's  work,  and  which  was  preserved  until  that  time,  and  remains  even  to  the 
present  day,  is  to  be  found  in  the  substructures  under  the  Aslta  ;  the  subterranean  passage, 
especially,  which  led  from  the  city  of  David  into  the  sanctuary ;  the  corridor  with  the 
double  gate.  This  we  regard  as  the  portico  of  Solomon  :  there  Jesus  walked  in  winter ; 
because  the  cold  did  not  penetrate  into  this  crypt,  which  must  naturally  have  been  a 
frequented  place  of  resort  during  the  winter  season  "  (Caspari). 

Ver.  24.  How  long  dost  Thou  keep  our  minds  in  a  state  of  suspense  (or  doubt)  ? — (atyeiv  rV 
ypvxfy,  to  excite  the  mind  with  expectation  of  hope  or  fear.)  This  question  shows  how  wide- 
spread was  the  interest  among  the  Jerusalem  Jews  as  to  our  Lord's  person  and  mission. 
The  leading  Jews  were  evidently  anxious  that  they  and  the  people  should  arrive  at  some 
definite  understanding  concerning  Christ.  "  Here  the  rulingpowers  of  the  Jews  in  Jerusalem 
seem  to  be  making  their  last  attempt  to  discover  whether  from  this  man,  marked  as  in  any 
case  He  seemed  to  be  by  characteristics  of  great  power,  there  might  not  be  gained  another 
phase  of  character  and  turn  of  mind  than  He  had  hitherto  presented.  The  meaning  of  the 
festival  might  have  perhaps  especially  disposed  their  minds  to  do  this.  For  hardly  could 
they  celebrate  an  Encaenia  without  sighing  in  their  secret  hearts,  and  murmuring  to  one 
another,  Would  that  a  new  Judas  Maccabaeus  (Hammerer)  would  arise  and  hammer  away 
the  Romans.  .  .  .  And  as  often  as  they  thought  on  the  possibility,  even  yet,  that  the  mighty 
Jesus  might  undertake  this  part,  their  bitter  distaste  to  the  trend  of  His  character  could  not 
fail  for  the  moment  to  recede  into  the  background.  .  .  .  This  was  the  frame  of  mind  that 
prompted  this  question.  ...  It  was  only  under  His  further  explanation  in  what  sense  He 
allowed  Himself  to  be  their  Christ,  that  their  old  exasperation  broke  out  afresh "  (Lange, 
Life  of  Christ). 

Ver.  25.  I  told  you,  etc. — He  had  done  so  frequently  (v.  19,  viii.  12,  36,  etc.),  and  had 
shown  by  His  works  and  symbolical  actions  what  He  was  (ii.  13  seq.).  A  direct  claim 
merely  might  be  made  by  any  impostor ;  but  Jesus  pointed  to  the  proofs  which  supported 
the  declarations  He  had  already  openly  made  of  His  divine  Sonship. 

Ver.  26.  As  I  said,  etc.  (icadus  elirov  vfjuv). — This  clause  is  omitted  in  the  Revised  Version. 
Alford  considers  "  the  difficulty  of  the  clause  a  considerable  warrant  for  its  genuineness," 
and  that  it  refers  "  more  to  the  whole  allegory  than  to  any  explicit  saying."  The  phrase 
might  also  include  a  reference  to  viii.  37-44. 

"Vers.  27-38.  Here  the  subject  of  discourse  of  two  months  previously  is  again  taken  up. 
The  Saviour's  utterances  have  had  time  to  sink  into  the  hearts  of  His  hearers,  and  now  He 
takes  up  the  theme  and  carries  it  to  its  lofty  conclusion  in  ver.  30.  The  Saviour  was  seeking 
to  win  men  ;  therefore  He  brings  the  truth  to  their  minds  gradually  (Isa.  xxviii.  10). 

Ver.  29.  My  Father  ...  is  greater  than  all. — I.e.  than  all  those  powers  of  evil  which  seek 
to  destroy  My  flock,  e/c  ttJs  x€ipte  T°v  Trarpds  fxov. — Winer  well  remarks  that  these  words 
are  "  not  pleonastic."  They  give,  as  they  were  intended  to  do,  the  most  unmistakable 
definiteness  to  the  statement. 

Ver.  31.  ipdo-Tourav. — Perhaps  the  meaning  is  "  lifted  up  and  poised  in  their  hands  ready  to 
cast  at  Him."    Again  (viii.  59). — This,  however,  was  a  more  bitter  and  determined  attack. 

Ver.  32.  These  words  would  cause  the  Jews  to  reflect  before  carrying  out  their  intentions. 

Notice  the  calmness  of  the  Saviour  in  the  face  of  this  outburst,  and  the  wisdom  of  His  reply. 

Ver.  33.  Blasphemy  was  punishable  with  stoning  (Lev.  xxiv.  11).     But,  unless  they  had 

285 


chap.  x.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


been  led  away  with  rage,  could  they  connect  blasphemy  with  One  who  did  so  many  good 
works  ?  Their  action,  and  the  reason  they  gave,  form  a  clear  proof  that  tLey  understood 
Jesus  to  claim  the  divine  Sonship  and  oneness  with  God. 

Ver.  34.  The  law  (po/jlos),  signifies  here  the  Old  Testament  generally — the  elder  revelation  as 
a  whole.  Our  Lord  did  not  wish  to  drive  these  men  into  open  antagonism ;  He  tried  to  lead 
them,  by  reasoning  from  the  less  to  the  greater,  to  recognise  how  far  His  claim  was  from 
blasphemy.  In  your  law — the  law  by  which  you  consider  yourselves  bound— those  are 
called  gods  to  whom  the  word  of  God  came  (Ps.  lxxxii.  6).  And  if  even  tyrannical  judges, 
etc.,  were  called  gods,  how  much  more  may  the  eternal  Son  whom  the  Father  hath  sanctified, 
etc.,  assume  the  title  Son  of  God  ?  "  The  word  which  gives  the  name  of  gods  to  the 
lowest  judges  and  prophets  in  Israel,  in  the  well-understood  sense  of  their  being  bearers  and 
executors  of  individual  utterances  of  God,  whether  judicial  or  prophetic — this,  as  a  word  of 
Scripture,  they  were  constrained  to  hold  inviolable  ;  while  in  His  case,  who  is  essentially 
God's  consecrated  One  and  God's  Messenger,  the  Mediator  of  His  perfected 'revelation,  to 
whom  the  Father  has  Himself  given  consecration  and  office  in  its  most  essential  form— in 
His  case  they  will  count  it  as  blasphemy  that  He  calls  Himself  the  Son  of  God  "  (Lange, 
Life  of  Christ).  "  To  stand  in  close  relation  with  the  theocracy  was  to  be  covered  with  its 
glory.  .  .  .  Judaism  and  rabbinism  had  widened  the  chasm  between  God  and  man.  Christ 
came  to  fill  up  the  chasm  ;  nay  more,  to  show  the  divine  and  human  in  living,  indissoluble 
union  "  (Reynolds). 

Ver.  39.  Again,  etc.,  points  to  vii.  30.  See  also  Luke  iv.  30.  There  was,  one  may  believe, 
a  kingly  dignity  and  power  about  the  Saviour  which  restrained  these  infuriated  men  not  only 
from  stoning  Him,  but  from  laying  hands  on  Him. 

Ver.  40.  Beyond  Jordan. — Persea.  To  the  place,  etc. — I.e.  to  Bethania  in  the  ancient 
Gaulonitis,  now  Jaulan  (vide  i.  28).  See  Mark  x.  1 :  "  He  cometh  into  the  borders  of  Judaea 
and  beyond  the  Jordan."  St.  Mark,  in  this  succinct  notice,  comprises  the  two  journeys — that 
to  Jerusalem  at  the  feast  of  dedication,  and  this  to  Persea.  Matthew  mentions  the  latter  of 
these  only  (xix.  1).  But  even  in  these  minute  references  we  see  that  the  two  Synoptists  and 
St.  John  are  practically  in  agreement. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses   1—21. 

Vers.  1  9.  Christ  the  door  of  the  sheep. — "  Apart  from  Me  ye  can  do  nothing  " 
{xv.  5),  said  our  Lord  to  the  disciples  on  the  eve  of  His  crucifixion.  In  this 
beautiful  parabolic  allegory  the  same  great  truth  appears.  Christ  is  to  the 
Christian  "wisdom,"  etc.  (1  Cor.  i.  30).  That  is  the  reason  why  there  is  a 
mingling  of  different  images  in  this  allegory.  It  must  be  kept  in  view  that  it 
would  be  impossible  to  express  under  one  figure  all  that  Christ  is  to  His  people. 
The  relationships  He  sustains  to  them  are  so  various  that  it  is  impossible  to  pre- 
sent them  in  one  view.  Thus,  as  the  work  and  character  of  the  Redeemer  are 
presented  here,  the  scene  must  shift,  the  similitudes  change.  Christ  is  not  only 
the  shepherd  of  His  people,  the  guardian  of  His  sheep — not  simply  the  teacher 
and  leader  of  His  disciples.  Had  a  further  revelation  of  divine  truth  alone  been 
needed,  it  might  have  been  given  otherwise  than  in  the  Incarnation.  But  the 
needs  that  conscience  discovered  to  men,  and  which  revelation  only  made  clearer, 
could  not  be  satisfied  by  any  further  revelation  like  that  made  to  Israel,  which 
was  but  a  shadow  of  good  things  to  come  (Heb.  x.  1-10).  Christ  performs  func- 
tions for  His  people  that  could  alone  be  done  on  the  high  level  of  His  divine  nature. 
It  is  only  as  the  incarnate  Son  that  He  can  say,  "  I  am  the  door,"  the  means  of 
access  to  the  Father  and  to  life  eternal.  It  is  only  through  Him  that  blessings 
can  flow  forth  to  His  spiritual  flock.  He  is  the  door  of  access  to  those  spiritual 
blessings  that  culminate  in  the  "pleasures  for  evermore  "of  the  heavenly  fold 
(Ps.  xvi.  11).  The  giver  of  spiritual  life,  the  channel  through  which  grace  and 
truth  come  to  believers,  their  teacher,  guide,  friend,  Jesus  Christ  is  to  them 
altogether  essential. 

I.  Consider  some  of  the  contending  claims,  in  relation  to  that  of  Christ,  which 
are  prominent  in  the  world. — 1.  There  are  systems  which  profess  to  explain 
man's  position  in  the  universe,  and  to  meet  his  needs.  Can  they  do  so  ?  Can 
they,  e.g.,  satisfy  that  longing  for  immortality  which  is  innate  in  man's  soul  ? 

286 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  x. 


meet  that  inborn  desire  for  happiness  which  can  only  be  attained  when  men  find 
"  rest,"  when  their  powers  work  in  harmony  with  conscience,  etc.  ?  Can  they 
meet  those  religions  instincts  which  seek  to  find  appropriate  expression  in 
harmony  with  man's  spiritual  nature  ?  Nor  will  it  do  to  explain  away  those 
desires,  etc.,  for  they  have  been,  and^are,  characteristic  of  the  nature  of  man. 
Those  who  undertake  to  furnish  men  with  a  system  of  thought  that  will  bring 
complete  satisfaction  to  them  undertake  a  herculean  task.  2.  There  were  those 
who  attempted  to  do  this  when  our  Lord  was  on  earth.  To  them,  in  part,  He 
refers  in  ver.  8  :  "  All  who  ever  came  before  Me," — the  Sadducees  with  their  semi- 
materialistic  scepticism  at  the  one  extreme,  and  the  Pharisees  at  the  other  making 
void  the  law  by  their  traditions  (Mark  vii.  13).  Who  could  live  spiritually  in  the 
icy  atmosphere  of  Sadducean  unbelief,  or  tolerate  the  burdensome  traditions  of  the 
Pharisees  ?  3.  These  men  have  their  modern  representatives.  Have  they  suc- 
ceeded any  better  1  Materialism  may  be  considered  as  a  perfected  system  in 
these  days.  Its  prophets  make  assumption  of  a  kind  of  universal  insight  into 
things.  They  speak  as  if  they  can  explain  the  universe,  as  an  engineer  can 
explain  the  genesis  and  working  of  the  machine  he  has  made.  Matter  has  been 
deified  by  their  declaring  it  to  be  eternal.  From  it  they  have,  if  they  are  to  be 
believed,  evolved  the  universe.  Life  and  thought  are  thus  but  finer  phases  of 
matter.  As  a  result  there  can  be  no  human  freedom  ;  necessity  governs  all,  and 
moral  order  vanishes.  What  is  the  outcome  of  such  a  system  1  Hear  it : 
"  Materialism  springs  from  a  conviction  based  on  experience,  that  every  effort  is 
a  failure  and  our  position  a  comfortless  one."  Is  this  a  system  that  can  satisfy 
man  as  he  is  ?  or  is  Huxley's  position  any  better  ?  "  The  theory  of  evolution 
encourages  no  millennial  expectations  " ;  yet  we  are  told  "  to  be  strong  in  will,  and 
with  stout  hearts  to  strive  toward  our  hopes,"  the  hope  being,  "  It  may  be  that 
the  gulf  will  wash  us  down ;  it  may  be  we  shall  touch  the  happy  isles."  Can 
such  a  "  gospel  "  ever  satisfy  men  1  Is  it  wonderful  in  view  of  such  teaching 
that  there  is  an  increasing  spread  of  materialistic  social  views,  an  insane  com- 
munism and  generally  relaxed  morality — that  men,  become  restless  and  unhappy, 
should  seek  vainly  in  social  overturnings  and  excitements  that  happiness  which 
can  be  found  only  within?  4.  Another  similar  system  need  only  be  referred  to, 
the  pantheistic.  Material  things,  or  what  are  called  such,  are  only  ripples  on 
the  surface  of  an  infinite  substance,  which  indeed  is  universal  nature,  are  but 
modes  of  the  substance.  Man  is  therefore,  as  a  part  of  this,  immortal;  as  a 
transient  phase  of  it  he  passes  away,  his  individual  existence  vanishes.  Like  the 
waves  of  the  sea,  men  rise  and  disappear.  To  men  crying  for  the  bread  of  life, 
these  systems  give — a  stone  !  (Matt.  vii.  9-11).  5.  Such  doors  to  spiritual  satis- 
faction are  knocked  at  by  the  few.  There  are  other  doors,  however,  to  which 
the  many  throng.  There  is  one  in  high  favour  in  especial — the  substitution  of 
the  results  for  the  way  of  redemption,  putting  works  in  the  place  of  faith.  It  is 
astonishing  to  find  how  hard  this  error  is  to  kill.  On  what  do  the  hopes  of 
eternal  life  rest  in  the  case  of  many  ?  I  have  lived  respectably,  not  fallen  into 
gross  sin,  have  defrauded  no  one,  have  lived  as  far  as  possible  in  accordance  with 
God's  law ;  therefore  I  trust  that,  as  God  is  merciful,  He  will  pardon  what  has 
been  amiss.  How  frequently  are  such  pleas  met  with  !  But  there  is  no  open 
door  here  into  life.  It  was  closed  long  ago,  and  guarded  by  cherubim  and  a  flam- 
ing sword  (Gen.  iii.  24).  Across  men's  path  in  this  direction  is  a  barrier  as  huge 
as  Sinai  and  as  stern  as  its  lightning-scathed  summit  (Pom.  iii.  20).  6.  Another 
fancied  door,  toward  which  many  press,  is  that  of  a  supposed  intermediate 
authority  between  the  soul  and  God.  But  Christ's  words  are  explicit :  "  By  Me 
if  any  man  enter  in,"  etc.  (ver.  9).  To  apostles  and  ministers  of  the  word,  to 
pastors  as  well  as  their  flocks,  there  was,  and  is,  but  one  door  into  life — Jesus 
Christ. 

287 


chap.  X.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


II.  We  turn  from  all  proposed  substitutes  to  Christ  Himself,  the  only  way  of 
salvation. — 1.  "  I  am  the  door  "  is  only  an  allegoric  statement  of  the  truth, 
"  There  is  none  other  name,"  etc.  (Acts  iv.  12).  We  need  not  dwell  on  this;  it  is 
so  fully  and  frequently  urged  in  Scripture.  And  it  is  truth  that  all  who  truly 
enter  through  Him  find  peace  and  joy.  2.  But  what  is  meant  by  entering  in 
through  the  door  ?  Yer.  3  shows  that  there  is  one  appointed  to  guard  it,  viz. 
the  porter  or  janitor.  This  is  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  quickens  faith  in  believers, 
and  thus  ushers  them  into  the  fold.  Here  several  of  the  elements  of  faith  are 
implied.  (1)  The  element  of  knowledge.  The  porter's  opening  of  the  door  signifies 
the  enlightenment  of  Christians  in  divine  things  (iii.  8,  12).  They  thus  recognise 
Christ  as  the  entrance  to  life.  Without  this  enlightenment  the  best  are  blind 
and  may  enter  some  pathway  of  error.  Heavenly  aid  must  be  given  ere  repentant 
and  believing  the  soul  enters  in.  A  mere  intellectual  knowledge  is  not  enough. 
True  faith  will  bring  along  with  it  assurance,  arising  from  experimental  know- 
ledge. What  is  needed  is,  "the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  revelation  for  the 
acknowledgment  of  Christ,"  etc.  (Eph.  i.  17,  18).  (2)  This  being  taught  of  the 
Spirit  leads,  again,  to  these  further  elements  of  faith,  submission  and  trust. 
Submission  implies  the  forsaking  of  our  own  ways  and  man's  wisdom,  and  learn- 
ing of  Him  (ver.  3),  listening  reverently  for  His  commands.  And  when  men 
truly  understand  Christ's  blessed  character  this  is  not  difficult.  3.  Trust  in 
Christ  also  is  evoked.  The  sheep  of  His  spiritual  fold  hear  His  voice,  and  do  not 
fear  to  follow  Him.  No  wonder !  The  conceptions  of  His  power,  love,  goodness, 
etc.,  which  come  through  the  enlightenment  of  the  Spirit  are  sufficient  to  awaken 
this  feeling.  Think  of  all  He  is  and  of  all  He  did  whilst  on  earth ;  and  that, 
although  so  far  above,  yet  He  is  near  to  men  as  a  tender  brother  drawing  to  Him- 
self all  except  the  evil  by  the  power  of  His  love.  Men  trust  those  who  love  them, 
because  confident  that  love  will  never  willingly  cause  a  single  pang.  And  who 
has  ever  given  such  proofs  of  love  to  men  as  Christ  has  ?  This  must  lead  to  trust. 
Christ  alone  is  the  door  of  the  eternal  fold ;  those  who  would  enter  must  do  so 
through  knowing  and  believing  in  Him.  Then  knowledge  leads  to  love,  and  love 
to  willing  submission  and  implicit  trust. 

III.  Those  who  enter  the  spiritual  fold  through  Christ  "  go  in  and  out  and 
find  pasture." — 1 .  All  other  systems  outside  the  gospel  fail  in  this.  The  f ramers 
of  them  did  not  fully  understand  man's  nature,  and  their  systems  could  not  meet 
his  desires,  longings,  etc.  They  lead  to  a  longing  cry  for  "  more  light,"  or  to 
despair.  How  many  leaning  on  these  broken  reeds  have  fallen  !  Nor  are 
those  who  seek  to  establish  a  righteousness  of  their  own  in  any  better  case. 
Conscience  will  torment,  peace  will  be  afar.  2.  In  Christ  the  needs  of  man's 
nature  are  all  met.  The  gospel  quickens  intellectual  life ;  but  its  adequacy  for 
human  need  is  seen,  especially  in  the  moral  and  spiritual  spheres  and  in 
the  social  life  of  men.  It  supplies  an  authoritative  rule  for  guidance  in  the 
moral  life,  and  at  the  same  time  a  motive  of  obedience  (xiii.  34).  3.  In  the 
spiritual  life  it  realises  the  cravings  of  the  human  spirit  after  communion 
with  the  source  of  its  being,  and  meets  these  cravings.  In  Christ  God  is 
revealed  as  coming  near  to  men  in  fatherly  love,  receiving  them  into  His 
spiritual  family,  and  thus  granting  what  men  are  in  the  deepest  sense  longing 
for,  the  renewal  of  that  communion  broken  by  sin.  4.  The  gospel  meets  the 
social  wants  of  men.  It  breaks  down  the  barriers  sin  has  raised,  and,  if 
permitted  to  prevail,  would  banish  discord  from  the  earth  and  bring  men  "to 
dwell  together  in  unity"  (Ps.  cxxxiii.).  And  to  all  this  add  peace,  joy,  strength, 
grace,  comfort  in  sorrow,  sougs  in  the  night,  the  heavenly  manna,  the  springs 
of  living  water,  and  hope  for  the  future  to  animate  the  heart.  5.  The  door 
stands  open  now  (Rev.  iii.  7).  To-morrow  to  some  even  this  gate  may  be  closed 
for  ever  !     What  issues  depend  on  this  step  !     Without — error,  darkness,  misery, 

288 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  x. 


death  ;  within — the  light  of  eternity,  spiritual  pasturage,  everlasting  joy.     Can 
any  still  halt  between  two  opinions  ? 

"  Yet  there  is  room  !  still  open  stands  the  gate, 
The  gate  of  love  ;  it  is  not  yet  too  late.  .  .  . 
Oh,  enter,  enter  now  ! " 

Ver.  1.  The  care  of  servants. — Masters  are,  so  to  speak,  pastors  of  their 
families,  and  especially  of  their  servants,  for  the  sanctification  of  whom  they 
should  labour.     Three  interests  are  involved  in  this  : — 

I.  The  interest  of  the  servants. — A  master  is  constituted  by  God  the  governor 
of  his  servants.  Every  governor,  even  a  secular  governor,  should  seek  to  lead 
men  to  their  chief  concern — salvation.  This  law  is  common  to  kings  and  to  all 
powers  ordained  of  God.  If  a  man  regards  his  servants  only  from  his  own 
personal  point  of  view,  and  for  the  rest  permits  them  to  do  as  they  choose,  he  is 
acting  criminally.  A  master  should  use  his  power  as  God  uses  His.  He  uses  it 
for  our  salvation  (Eph.  vi.  5-9).  For  the  sanctification  of  his  servants  a  master 
should  attend  to  three  things — instruction,  example,  and  a  kindly  correction. 

II.  The  interest  of  God. — All  power  comes  from  God,  and  should  be  employed 
only  for  Him — to  serve  and  glorify  Him.  But  how  many  masters  employ  the 
power  given  them  for  their  own  ends  simply  !  This  was  an  error  for  which 
Augustine  eloquently  reproached  the  Roman  magistrates.  They  permitted  the 
poets  publicly  to  mock  the  gods,  and  prohibited  them  under  severe  penalties  from 
attacking  the  reputation  of  a  Roman  citizen — an  error  which  St.  Bernard  also 
denounced  severely.  Zeal  for  God  is  the  character  of  true  Christians.  Take  as 
examples  the  early  saints.  Whence  came  that  zeal  which  prompted  them  to 
guide  by  Christian  rule  and  order  those  under  them  ?  The  spirit  of  religion — 
faith.  Hear  what  St.  Paul  says  (1  Tim.  v.  8).  It  will  not  do  to  say  that  in  a 
house  it  is  difficult  to  compel  minds  that  are  wilful,  and  with  a  bias  toward 
freedom  from  restraint.  When  you  speak  of  God  to  your  servants,  and  speak 
to  them  with  a  kindness  sustained  by  your  authority,  they  will  hear  you. 

III.  The  interest  of  the  masters. — In  the  obligation  laid  on  them  by  God  to 
care  for  their  servants  two  advantages  will  be  found — the  first  spiritual,  the 
second  temporal.  The  spiritual  advantage.  This  obligation  will  prove  a  counter- 
poise to  repress  that  pride  often  inspired  by  authority;  for  according  to  St. 
Augustine,  St.  Gregory,  and  St.  Bernard,  the  masters  will  thus  become  the 
servants  of  their  servants.  The  temporal  advantage.  Masters  in  regulating  the 
morals  of  their  servants  establish  a  true  subordination,  peace,  concord,  the  safety 
of  their  homes ;  and  is  not  all  this  a  cause  of  happiness  ?  But  where  does  one  see 
such  homes  1  and  why  are  they  so  few  1  It  is  because  there  are  so  few  masters 
who  endeavour  to  maintain  among  their  servants  the  worship  of  God  and  the 
spirit  of  piety.  The  example  of  the  virtuous  woman  (Prov.  xxxi.). — Abridged 
from  Bourdaloue. 

Vers.  1-3.  Jesus  the  door  for  flock  and  pastor. — The  Jews  at  Jerusalem 
"  understood  not "  what  things  they  were  which  He  spoke  unto  them  in  His 
allegory  of  the  fold  (vers.  1-6).  It  was  not  the  form  of  the  allegory ;  that  they 
understood  perfectly  from  the  usage  of  the  Old  Testament  prophets.  It  was  the 
truth  couched  in  the  allegory  that  they  did  not  wish  to  understand  (see  Explana- 
tory Notes,  ver.  24).  They  did  not  desire  a  spiritual  shepherd,  nor  any  other  door 
or  way  into  the  fold  than  the  places  where  they  clambered  over  to  destroy  the 
flock.  What  they  wanted  was  a  conquering  prince  to  drive  away  the  enemies 
clustering  round  the  fold  of  Judaism.  And  such  intimations  that  His  mission  was 
spiritual,  not  temporal,  and  His  implied  condemnation  of  them  as  not  true 
shepherds,  filled  their  hearts  with  rage.     But  we  know  and  see  what  they  saw 

u  289 


chap.  x.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


not.     And  as  we  read  these  words  we  comprehend  that  Jesus  means  that  by  Him 
alone  flocks  and  true  pastors  can  enter  into  His  fold. 

1.  The  door  of  the  fold  for  the  sheep. — 1.  It  was  customary  in  the  East  for 
shepherds  to  bring  their  flocks  at  night  into  a  stone  enclosure,  the  entrance  to 
which  was  under  the  care  of  a  guardian  or  door-keeper,  who  kept  watch,  fully 
armed,  to  repel  beasts  of  prey,  and  to  keep  out  thieves.  In  the  morning  each 
flock  was  delivered  to  its  shepherd.  He  called  the  leader  of  the  flock,  and  they 
all  followed  to  the  pastures.  The  fold  is  the  Church  and  kingdom  of  God  (vide 
Explanatory  Notes,  ver.  1). 

2.  A  door  of  entrance  to  the  Church  and  kingdom  of  God  is  necessary,  and 
there  is  but  one — Jesus  Christ.  Even  the  ceremonial  law  of  the  ancient 
economy  implied  this  (Heb.  ix.,  x.,  etc.).  It  is  only  when  men  enter  through 
Him  that  the  promise  of  salvation  (ver.  9)  is  assured.  Those  who  try  to  enter 
in  some  other  way  really  seek  to  rob  God  of  the  honour  of  redemption.  They 
seek  to  break  down  the  wall  of  the  fold  in  whole  or  in  part,  to  make  the  Church, 
in  other  words,  on  a  level  with  the  world,  with  no  restrictions  of  which  the  world 
would  disapprove.  Others  fail  to  see  the  need  of  door  or  porter,  or  any  need  of 
salvation  by  entering  into  the  fold  by  Christ.  The  mercy  of  God  they  think 
opens  many  doors,  or  indeed  dispenses  with  doors  altogether.  They  forget  that 
the  experience  of  the  ages  confirms  the  word  of  the  prophet  as  to  the  futility  of 
all  merely  human  effort  to  draw  near  to  God  (Mic.  vi.  6,  7). 

3.  Human  effort,  wisdom,  philosophy,  have  all  vainly  endeavoured  to  find 
a  door  of  access  to  the  knowledge,  love,  and  favour  of  God.  Christ  alone  is 
fitted  in  His  nature  and  by  His  work  to  be  the  way  of  entrance  for  men  into 
God's  fold,  for  He  alone  can  take  away  the  cause  and  result  of  the  alienation 
between  God  and  man.  He  is  the  heavenly  Mediator,  and  it  is  through  faith  in 
Him  as  the  divine  Son  and  in  His  atonement  that  we  enter.  This  gate  is  too 
strait  for  many ;  it  is  wide  enough  for  Christ's  flock. 

4.  The  keeper  of  the  door  is  the  Holy  Spirit  working  through  all  the  means 
and  instruments  of  grace  (see  Explanatory  Notes,  ver.  3).  It  is  He  who  guides 
believers  into  all  truth,  opens  the  heart  of  a  Lydia  (Acts  xvi.  14,  etc.). 

5.  The  fold  into  which  the  door  leads  is  not  a  dungeon. — The  flock  "go  in  and 
out  and  find  pasture."  The  fold  of  God  is  the  home  of  spiritual  freedom  :  in  it 
we  enter  into  "  the  glorious  liberty  of  God's  children."  It  is  the  sphere  of 
spiritual  activity  where  the  members  go  in  and  out  freely  "  about  their  Father's 
business." 

II.  Christ  is  also  the  door  of  entrance  for  faithful  shepherds. — 1.  Through 
Christ  and  for  His  service  all  such  enter  the  fold.  The  highest  title  of  a  minister 
of  Christ  is  that  of  pastor — shepherd — in  this  office  serving  under  the  chief 
Shepherd.  It  is  a  great  honour,  an  unspeakable  privilege,  to  be  entrusted  by  the 
chief  Shepherd  with  a  section  of  His  flock.  Every  true  pastor  must  enter  the 
fold  by  the  same  door  as  the  sheep.  To  Him  also  the  porter  must  open,  and  will 
do  so  if  the  pastor  comes  with  loving  heart,  desiring  to  feed  Christ's  flock.  And 
there  is  an  orderly  manner  of  entrance  (1  Tim.  iv.  14,  v.  22,  etc.).  Not,  then, 
every  one  who  assumes  of  himself  this  sacred  office  is  to  be  accounted  worthy  to 
exercise  it,  but  he  who  comes  by  Christ's  appointed  way.  "  Would  God  that  all 
the  Lord's  people  were  prophets  "  ;  but  no  true  prophet  will  disregard  the  Lord's 
method  and  order  in  the  exercise  of  His  gifts.  2.  Yet  no  outward  ordination  to 
the  office  of  pastor  can  avail  without  the  inner  spiritual  calling.  It  is  here  that 
there  is  the  danger  of  false  shepherds  (Ezek.  xxxiv.),  who  have  merely  the  out- 
ward sign  and  not  the  inward  Spirit,  coming  to  deceive  and  waste  God's  flock. 
Only  those  who  are  spiritually  fitted  for  this  lofty  office  can  enter  through  the 
door.  Those  who  aspire  to  exercise  this  function  merely  for  ambition,  gain, 
bread,  or  some  other  selfish  end  never  truly  enter  the  fold.     They  may  entice 

290 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  x. 


some  of  the  flock  to  follow  them;  but  they  are  no  protection  to  such  deceived 
ones,  who  are  left  to  the  attacks  of  their  spiritual  foes  and  scattered  hither 
and  thither.  3.  The  true  pastor  leads  the  flock  of  God.  He  is  through  the 
Spirit's  guidance  in  Christ  their  leader  and  director.  He  leads  them  to  the 
pasture  and  living  water  of  God's  word  in  preaching  the  gospel.  He  guides 
them  to  earnestness  in  prayer  and  fervour  in  the  life  of  devotion.  He  points 
them  to  spheres  of  Christian  activity  and  service.  And  in  all  this  preaching  and 
precept  his  own  example  must  ever  be  conspicuous.  He  must  go  in  the  right 
way  if  he  wishes  them  to  tread  in  it.  4.  And  his  diligence  and  activity  in 
pasturing  and  leading  the  flock  will  be  conditioned  and  regulated  by  his  personal 
knowledge  of  them,  by  his  diligence  in  pastoral  work.  As  the  good  Shepherd 
knows  every  sheep  and  lamb  of  the  many  flocks  in  His  fold,  so  the  good  under- 
pastor  will  seek  to  know  the  individuals  under  his  charge.  "  He  calleth  his  own 
sheep  by  name."  He  knows  their  special  circumstances  and  needs,  so  that  he 
can  adapt  his  teaching  and  ministry  to  these  needs.  Onerous  but  most  honourable 
is  this  calling.  Oh  for  grace  that  we  may  exercise  it  diligently,  so  that  "  when  the 
chief  Shepherd  shall  appear  we  may  receive  a  crown  of  glory  "  !  (II.  after  Kbgel). 

Vers.  10-15.  Christ  the  good  Shepherd. — Scripture  exhausts  the  imagery  which 
may  be  used  to  describe  the  tenderness,  love,  and  care  of  God  for  men.  He  is  a 
Father,  and  men  His  children  ;  a  king,  and  men  His  subjects,  ruled  by  Him  for 
their  eternal  good  ;  a  benefactor,  "  opening  His  liberal  hand  "  and  pouring  out 
His  bounty.  But  no  figure  perhaps  is  at  once  so  tender  and  true  as  that  in 
which  the  relation  between  Jehovah  and  His  people  is  likened  to  that  between 
a  shepherd  and  his  flock.  This  relationship  implies  on  the  one  hand  ability  to 
help,  and  the  exercise  of  a  watchful,  even  tender  care,  and  on  the  other  a  sense 
of  dependence  and  affection  which  are  characteristic  of  the  relationship  between 
God  and  His  people.  He  cares  for  them,  tends  them,  supplies  their  wants ; 
and  they  look  to  and  follow  Him  in  entire  dependence  and  submission. 

I.  The  good  Shepherd  gives  His  flock  every  spiritual  blessing. — 1.  This  is 
implied  in  the  words,  "  I  am  come  that  they  might  have  life,"  etc.  This 
is  the  fulfilment  of  the  old  promise  to  the  spiritual  Israel  (Ps.  cxxxiii.  3).  It  is 
this  that  men  need,  life,  spiritual  life ;  and  it  is  this  Christ  came  to  bestow.  He 
alone  can  give  it  (i.  4) — spiiitual  life  and  the  means  of  sustaining  life. 
Everv  true  member  of  Christ's  flock  remembers  a  time  when  he  was  restless  and 
unsatisfied.  Why?  Because  the  soul  was  separated  from  the  true  fountain 
and  source  of  its  life,  because  the  spirit  was  longing  for  communion  with  the 
source  of  its  true  life.  And  having  received  life,  they  receive  it  more  abundantly. 
Those  who  have  come  to  the  fold  from  the  dreary  desert  of  dissatisfaction  and 
unrest,  of  danger  and  death,  where  no  spiritual  manna  fell,  they  know  of  the 
gladness  that  filled  the  soul  when  He  who  is  the  bread  and  who  gives  the  water 
of  life  followed  them  across  the  waste,  and  led  them  to  the  living  springs  of 
life,  etc.  2.  And  with  this  life  He  gives  all  that  pertains  to  it,  all  that  is 
necessary  to  quicken  and  sustain  it.  "  All  things  are  yours."  "  The  young  lions 
do  lack  and  suffer  hunger ;  but  they  that  seek  the  Lord  [His  flock]  shall  not 
want  any  good  "  (Ps.  xxxiv.  10).  He  will  care  that  His  people  are  sustained  in 
their  material  life  as  they  need,  so  that  their  spiritual  life  may  radiate  forth  in 
living  influence  on  a  perishing  world.  And  this  spiritual  life  will  also  have  its 
due  nourishment  (ver.  9),  so  that  they  may  grow  "  to  the  measure  of  the  stature 
of  the  perfect  man  in  Christ." 

II.  The  good  Shepherd  cares  for  each  individual  of  the  flock. — 1.  "  I  know 
Mine  own,"  He  says.  It  is  not  merely  a  general  care.  In  this,  too,  He  is  "  One 
with  the  Father."  The  divine  providence  follows  the  righteous,  nay,  all  men, 
individually,  overlooking  none,  despising  none.     2.  So  the  good  Shepherd  cares 

291 


chap.  x.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN. 


for  the  individuals  of  His  flock.  Each  member  of  it  feels  this  special  care, 
which  does  not  overlook  the  one  among  the  many,  and  can  say,  "  The  Lord  is  my 
shepherd."  "  I  know,  .  .  .  and  am  known  of  Mine."  He  knows  His  sheep  even 
when  they  wander  far  from  the  fold  it  may  be,  and  in  love  and  pity  He  follows 
them  in  their  alienation  across  the  lonely  wilderness,  and  brings  them  back 
to  the  fold  with  rejoicing  (Luke  xv.  1-7).  3.  His  care  descends  to  the  young 
and  feeble  of  His  flock  ;  and  in  the  aspect  of  His  office  He  is  emphatically  the 
good  Shepherd.  The  lambs  of  the  flock  He  receives  with  benign  favour  and 
blesses  them  (Mark  x.  13-16).  His  care  and  sympathy  are  extended  towaid 
those  who  are  spiritually  immature  and  feeble ;  they  elicit  His  tender  regard. 
He  never  breaks  the  bruised  reed,  etc.  4.  The  struggling  and  doubting  believer 
is  not  unregarded  by  Him,  but  looking  to  Him  shall  receive  from  Him  grace  for 
grace.  He  had  indeed  shown  among  this  unbelieving  people  all  those  marks 
of  the  character  of  the  Shepherd-King,  the  Messiah,  which  they  must  have 
recognised  had  they  understood  the  prophetic  writings.  u  He  shall  feed  His  flock 
like  a  shepherd  ;  He  shall  gather  the  lambs  in  His  arms,"  etc.  5.  "And  am  known 
of  Mine"  Is  it  wonderful  that  they  do,  in  view  of  all  the  grace  and  goodness  they 
owe  to  Him,  their  spiritual  life,  and  all  that  sustains  it,  and  all  the  blessedness 
and  peace  it  brings  ?  Who  could  be  ignorant  of  his  best  friend  and  benefactor  ? 
And  more  especially  His  flock  know  Him  because — 

III.  The  good  Shepherd  lays  down  His  life  for  the  sheep. — 1.  It  was 
necessary  that  He  should  do  so,  to  meet  the  claims  of  the  divine  law,  to  overcome 
the  wolf  that  came  to  steal,  kill,  and  destroy — that  by  dying  He  should  conquer 
death  for  His  people,  etc.  2.  Are  we  of  His  flock  ?  do  we  know  Him  ?  Then  we 
must  make  Him  known  ! 

Vers.  12-16.  The  good  Shepherd  and  His  flock. — In  everything  that  is  bright, 
clear,  diaphanous,  the  sun  mirrors  itself  and  imprints  its  image,  in  the  dewdrop, 
river,  and  brook,  glass  and  crystal,  and  in  the  human  eye.  It  recoils  from  what 
is  by  nature  dark  and  black,  lighting  the  surface,  but  without  impressing  its 
image.  So  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  sun  of  grace,  mirrors  Himself  in  hearts  pure  and 
transparent  to  the  heavenly  light ;  the  hearts  closed  and  dark  are  for  a  time 
outwardly  illumined,  but  His  image  does  not  remain  in  them.  So,  too,  He 
mirrors  Himself  in  the  conditions  and  occupations  of  human  life,  laying  hold 
in  His  parables  of  those  especially  which  have  the  most  affinity  with  His 
redemptive  work.  He  speaks  of  the  fisher,  sower,  etc.,  etc.  But  we  might 
almost  say  that  He  loves  most  of  all  to  liken  Himself  to  a  shepherd.  He  was 
foreshown  in  the  old  covenant  by  pious  types  of  this  office.  Abraham,  etc.,  who 
received  the  clearest  prophecies  concerning  Him,  shepherded  their  flocks. 
"  According  to  the  flesh  "  He  is  descended  from  those  shepherds.  In  the  psalms 
and  prophets  the  Lord  is  so  frequently  likened  to  a  good  shepherd  that  we 
cannot  now  go  over  the  long  succession  of  those  blessed  prophetic  words,  etc. 
As  therefore  He  it  was  to  whom  the  prophets  especially  referred,  He  willingly 
assumes  the  type.  He  spoke  of  the  lost  sheep,  and  the  flock-master — Himself. 
Here  He  speaks  of  the  good  Shepherd,  i.e.  Himself.  He  speaks  of  His  flock. 
The  flock  is  His  Church,  etc.  "  O  Lord  Jesus,  Thou  good  Shepherd,  gather  us 
together  to-day  around  Thee  on  the  green  meadows  of  Thy  holy  word.  Give 
our  souls  healthful  nourishment.  Open  heart  and  ears  that  we  may  hear  Thy 
voice.  Banish  all  allurements  of  the  world,  so  that  we  may  at  this  time  truly 
be  near  Thee,  and  may  more  and  more  be  filled  with  the  desire  to  be  with  Thee 
for  ever.     Amen." 

1.  The  good  Shepherd  cares  for  and  dies  for  His  sheep. — "I  am  the 
good  Shepherd,"  said  Jesus.  There  is  but  one,  etc.,  and  that  is  He.  He  also 
said,  "  I  am  the  light,"  etc.,  not  a  light.     Beside  Him  no  other  light  is  of  any 

292 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  X. 


account.  "  I  am  the  way,"  etc.  Beside  Him  there  is  no  other  way,  truth,  life. 
No  man  comet h  to  the  Father  but  by  Him.  If  any  one  has  a  right  to  a  title 
and  name  of  honour,  He  has  to  that  of  the  good  Shepherd.  In  the  gospel  He 
does  not  discourse  of  the  times  of  repose  for  the  flock, — how  at  spring  of  day  He 
leads  them  forth ;  at  midday  guides  them  to  rest  by  fresh  streams ;  how  at 
eventide  He  leads  them  gently  homeward  from  the  fold  to  the  sound  of  song  or 
flute-note.  He  has  chosen  times  of  need  in  order  to  represent  Himself  as  the 
good  Shepherd,  and  prove  Himself  to  be  so.  He  speaks  of  the  times  when  the 
wolf  breaks  into  the  fold.  Whom  does  He  mean  ?  The  prince  of  this  world. 
He  breaks  into  the  fold  of  God  that  he  may  sow  unbelief  therein,  that  he  may 
persecute  the  members  of  the  fold,  etc.  If  we  take  this  image  in  a  historical 
sense,  there  is  now  no  more  any  wolf,  the  flock  can  feed  unharmed.  But  if  we 
consider  the  position  of  the  community  of  the  faithful,  who  hold  fast  by  the 
revealed  word,  by  Christ,  God's  only  begotten  Son,  and  His  ordinances,  then  many 
wolves  menace  them.  With  speech,  writing,  seducements  of  every  sort,  mockery, 
and  force  they  attack  the  flock.  Now  the  wolf  adopts  sheep's  clothing ;  anon  he 
appears  in  true  wolfish  guise.  He  would  disperse  and  scatter  the  sheep,  etc. 
But  to  God  be  praise  and  thanks  in  eternity  that  we  have  such  a  good  Shepherd. 
Behold,  He  is  no  hireling.  The  flock  is  His,  purchased  by  Him,  gathered  together 
and  drawn  from  the  hedgerows  and  wastes  of  the  world.  He  has  fully  purchased 
and  acquired  them,  not  with  gold  or  silver,  but  by  His  own  precious  blood.  He 
is  no  hireling  for  reward.  None  can  give  Him  aught,  for  all  that  we  possess  is 
a  gift  of  His  grace.  What  He  did  receive  from  men  is  not  the  reward  of  any 
hireling — scourging,  a  crown  of  thorns,  nails  for  His  cross.  He  did  not  seek 
ours,  but  us.  In  order  that  His  flock  might  liave  pasture,  He  Himself  was  fed 
on  the  place  of  skulls.  But  His  pasturage  was  vinegar  mingled  with  gall,  and 
anguish,  as  He  cried,  "  My  God,"  etc.  When  the  wolf  came  in  Gethsemane,  the 
Shepherd  protected  His  flock:  "If  ye  seek  Me,  let  these  (disciples)  go,"  etc.  (xviii.  8). 
That  they  and  we  might  live  He  died.  But  He  still  is  our  good  Shepherd  in 
eternity.  From  the  right  hand  of  His  father  He  shepherds  His  flock.  His 
pastoral  staff  reaches  every  quarter  of  the  earth.  He  leads  to  green  pastures, 
etc.,  stands  by  us  in  conflict,  fights  ever  for  His  flock,  and  will  carry  the  conflict 
to  victory.  Jacob  was  faithful  in  his  pastoral  office  (Gen.  xxxi.  40).  But  more 
faithful  is  He  who  died  on  the  cross,  who  knows  each  sheep,  their  needs,  what 
their  souls  require.  Bold  was  David  son  of  Jesse  as  shepherd  and  king  (1  Sam. 
xvii.  34).  But  bolder  still  was  our  good  Shepherd.  He  knew  that  only  in 
dying  could  He  conquer.  He  gave  His  life  for  the  sheep.  And  this  faithfulness, 
this  death-defiance,  is  fitly  crowned,  so  that  He  rules  and  shall  rule  over  all  His 
foes.     Are  we  of  His  flock  ?     Prove  yourselves ;  for  of  His  flock  He  says — 

II.  The  flock  hear  His  voice  and  follow  Him. — The  flock  is  Christendom. 
His  people  are  likened  to  sheep,  because  they  are  to  be  meek  and  lowly  of  heart, 
and  fight  not  with  carnal  weapons.  What  does  the  Lord  require  of  His  sheep  % 
"  /  am  known  of  Mine."  What  does  He  mean  by  this  knowledge  1  You  know  that 
He  was  born  in  Bethlehem,  brought  up  in  Nazareth,  that  He  went  seeking 
souls  for  three  years  through  the  Holy  Land,  that  He  was  crucified  on  Golgotha. 
Do  you  say,  That  is  enough,  He  is  known  by  me  ?  This  is  not  the  knowledge 
He  means.  You  have  seen  a  painting  of  Him,  as  it  were,  as  He  lies  in  the 
manger-crib  whilst  the  star  of  the  wise  men  shines  down  upon  Him,  as  He 
stands  crowned  with  thorns,  etc.  But  that  is  not  knowledge  of  Him.  His 
enemies  saw  more  than  this — they  saw  Himself.  True  knowledge  of  Him  is 
that  which  you  have  within — that  He  is  in  you  lovingly,  that  you  are  dead  to 
the  world,  alive  to  Him.  He  is  known  when  you  have  experienced  in  you  the 
power  of  His  life  and  death,  when  His  gospel  has  penetrated  your  soul — when  in 
you  there  is  a  Golgotha  of  the  old  man  to  be  found,  and  a  Bethlehem  of  the 

293 


chap.  X.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


new — when  you  know  Him  as  not  a  but  your  Redeemer,  and  feel  that  in  you 
His  atoning  work  is  completed,  when  through  faith  and  prayer  you  enter  daily 
into  intercourse  with  Him.  To  those  who  thus  know  Him  may  be  applied  the 
saying,  "  My  sheep  hear  My  voice."  Have  you  heard  ?  There  may  be  hearing 
and  hearing.  On  the  crosses  near  His  hung  two  thieves.  Both  heard  (the  one 
like  a  rock  from  which  rebounded  a  dead  mocking  echo,  the  other  as  one 
whose  ears  God  had  opened)  words  which  reached  the  heart  like  arrows,  whose 
barbs  remained  fixed.  Do  you  hear  thus  1  You  must  if  you  know  Him.  Ask 
yourself,  How  many  passages,  sermons,  from  God's  words  thus  remain  fixed  in 
your  heart  ?  Have  you  so  heard  the  saving  truths  of  the  gospel  that  they  become 
part  of  your  life,  nature,  etc.  ?  Then  in  you  will  be  found  the  third  mark  of 
Christ's  flock,  "  And  I  know  them."  There  is  a  distinction  in  His  knowing  as  in  our 
hearing.  He  knows  a  Judas ;  but  only  in  this  sense  those  to  whom  He  wears 
another  aspect.  Faith  and  love  are  the  soul's  eyes.  .  When  the  Lord  stands 
before  us  and  sees  Himself  reflected  in  those  eyes,  He  says,  I  know  you.  If  He 
sees  nothing  of  Himself  in  you,  you  are  spiritually  dead.  But  this  is  not  an 
indifferent  position ;  it  is  a  wrong  one.  He  sees  a  mockery  of  Himself  in  it, 
knows  you  not,  and  says,  "  I  have  never  known  you,"  etc.  (Matt.  vii.  23).  Is 
He  known  to  you  ?  do  you  hear  His  voice  ?  does  He  know  you  ?  Then  you  must 
follow  Him — with  joy,  for  the  Christ  within  you  has  no  more  loving  friend  and 
leader  than  the  Christ  without.  Have  you  followed  your  Lord  1  How  often 
have  mammon,  life's  pleasures,  agreeable  and  easy  tranquillity,  been  your  leaders  ! 
How  pleasing  it  was  when  their  leadership  and  Christ's  coincided  !  And  when 
it  was  not  so,  had  you  not  much  regret  ?  Ah  !  then  you  must  not  truly  know 
Him.  Pray,  therefore,  the  Holy  Spirit  that  He  would  make  Him  known  to 
you,  so  that  you  may  follow  in  joy  or  sorrow,  etc. 

III.  He  leads  His  flock  home  at  eventide. — When  the  sun  sinks  to  rest  and 
the  shadows  lengthen,  when  the  evening  bells  are  sounding,  and  the  winds  of 
evening  sigh,  then  the  shepherd  leads  His  flock  homeward,  that  the  terrors  of 
night  may  not  overtake  them.  So  is  it  with  our  good  Shepherd.  At  the 
close  of  His  discourse  on  the  good  Shepherd,  He  drops  parable,  and  says  plainly, 
"I  give  unto  them  eternal  life,"  etc.  (ver.  28).  Why  does  He  drop  the 
allegory  now?  Because  He  comes  now  to  your  holiest  hopes  and  dearest 
portion.  He  does  not  wish  to  leave  the  slightest  doubt,  or  give  room  for  any 
misinterpretation.  Therefore  He  says,  "I  give  unto  them  eternal  life,"  etc. 
He  speaks  of  the  time  when  we  shall  no  more  see  in  a  glass  darkly,  etc. 
From  the  love  at  the  close  of  this  allegory  you  may  recognise  the  love  with 
which  He  will  bring  you  to  rest  at  the  eventide  of  life.  There  are  foes  and 
soul  murderers  even  on  the  home-going  road.  But  He  is  with  His  flock,  giving 
wondrous  power  and  quickening  faith.  "  They  shall  never  perish,"  etc.  But 
when  they  have  passed  through  this,  then  the  wilderness  is  all  past.  When  you 
consider  all  these  things,  when  you  so  know  Him,  then  you  will  ever  pray, 
Lord,  take  me  wholly  into  Thy  fold.  I  am  content  to  go  as  Thou  dost  lead,  if 
Thou  be  my  good  Shepherd. — Abridged  from  Dr.  F.  Ahlfeld,  "  Predigt." 

Vers.  12-16.  The  good  Shepherd  and  His  characteristics. — The  sheep,  their 
confidence  and  safety,  their  obedience  and  love,  are  the  chief  points  of  the 
passage.  The  mediator  of  the  old  covenant  said,  Thou  shalt.  The  Mediator  of 
the  new  covenant  declares,  I  love  thee  ;  and  He  awaits  the  effects  of  the 
working  of  His  love  in  our  hearts.  This  love  comes  home  to  us  especially,  and 
works  prevailingly  in  our  hearts  when  He  calls  and  proves  Himself  to  be  the 
good  Shepherd.  May  this  thought  of  Christ  as  our  good  Shepherd  determine 
us  to  love  Him  more  unrestrainedly,  and  increase  love  to  Him  in  our  hearts. 
Christ  is  the  good  Shepherd  of  His  people.    This  He  makes  known  :— 

294 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  X. 


I.  In  His  love  toward  His  people. — 1.  He  knows  His  own,  their  wants  and 
needs.  He  knows  what  solacement  they  require,  and  what  satisfaction  their 
hearts  desire.  2.  As  is  the  intercourse  of  love  between  the  Father  and  the  Son, 
so  is  it  between  Christ  and  His  flock.  He  consecrates  His  life  for  their  salvation. 
He  leads  them  to  pasture  on  green  meadows,  and  beside  the  fresh  watersprings. 

II.  In  His  conflict  for  His  people. — 1.  He  does  not  act  as  the  hireling  who 
flees  when  the  foe  comes  near.  He  stands  by  His  people  in  their  conflict  with 
the  prince  of  darkness  and  his  temptations,  in  opposition  to  the  incitements  and 
threatenings  of  the  unbelieving  world,  and  the  temptations  that  arise  from  their 
own  carnal  nature.  2.  He  lays  down  His  life  for  His  people  in  order  to  redeem 
them  from  sin,  death,  and  Satan,  to  satisfy  divine  justice,  and  assure  them  of 
the  grace  of  God. 

III.  In  the  joy  which  He  has  in  His  people. — 1.  He  rejoices  when  His  people 
find  life  and  full  satisfaction  in  their  loyalty  to  Him.  2.  He  rejoices  when  all 
His  people,  without  distinction  of  race,  station,  or  age,  unite  together  in  one 
communion,  hearing  His  voice,  and  being  comforted  by  His  promise  of  eternal 
life. — J.  L.  Sommer. 

Christ  the  good  Shepherd. — I.  He  loves  His  sheep. — "  I  am  a  good  Shepherd  ; 
a  good  shepherd  gives  His  life  for  the  sheep."  His  love  is  wonderful ;  for  who  is 
the  shepherd  1  who  are  His  sheep  ?  His  love'  is  self-sacrificing  and  self-denying. 
He  could  have  spoken  of  His  love  under  various  other  types,  but  here  He  uses 
this  one.  He  gives  His  life  for  the  sheep.  The  Shepherd  here  is  at  the  same  time 
the  Lamb  of  God  who  is  led  to  the  slaughter.  His  love  is  comforting ;  for  it  is 
to  the  sheep  light,  pasture,  treasure,  all  things. 

II.  He  protects  His  sheep. — The  good  Shepherd  gives  His  life  for  the  sheep  ; 
the  hireling  flees  before  the  wolf,  and  the  good  Shepherd  defends  the  sheep. 
He  must  protect  them,  for  the  sheep  are  silly,  timorous,  helpless  creatures. 
Without  the  help  of  the  good  Shepherd,  they  would  fall  a  prey  to  the  wolf,  the 
world,  sin,  and  Satan.  He  will  protect  them.  He  is  no  hireling  ;  the  sheep  are 
His  own,  and  have  been  bought  with  a  price.  He  can  protect  them.  He  has 
drawn  out  the  teeth  of  the  wolf.  The  risen  Lord  is  with  us  alway,  even  to  the 
end  of  the  world.     All  power  is  given  to  Him  in  heaven  and  in  earth. 

III.  He  knows  His  sheep. — "  I  know  My  own,  and  am  known  of  Mine,  as 
the  Father  knows  Me,  and  I  know  the  Father."  We  consider,  with  regard  to 
this  :  A  solace.  The  Holy  One  knows  me  !  Is  this  a  comfort  ?  Yes !  There  was 
a  time  when  this  thought  filled  one  with  fear ;  now  it  is  otherwise.  The  good 
Shepherd  has  given  His  life  for  the  sheep,  and  for  thee.  He  knows  all  thy  sins, 
and  how  much  thou  needest  His  grace.  He  knows  all  thy  temptations,  thy 
necessities,  thy  inmost  troubles.  He  can  comfort  thee,  as  one  is  comforted  by 
his  mother.  He  knows  thee,  although  thy  best  friend  may  misunderstand  thee. 
He  knows  thee,  and  acknowledges  thee.  An  experience.  "  I  know  My  own,  and 
am  known  of  Mine," — the  process  in  which  we  become  known  to  ourselves. 
A  mystery.  As  My  Father  knows  Me,  and  I  know  the  Father ;  so  I  know  My 
own,  and  am  known  of  Mine.  We  stand  here  before  a  mystery  which  we  cannot 
understand,  but  whose  blessedness  we  experience  in  our  hearts. 

IV.  He  gathers  His  sheep. — "  I  have  other  sheep  which  are  not  of  this  fold ; 
.  .  .  they  shall  be  one  flock,"  etc.  In  these  words  there  is  revealed  to  us  : 
The  majesty  of  the  good  Shepherd.  In  the  circle  of  His  disciples  the  Lord  stands 
in  kingly  majesty.  He  looks  abroad  on  the  development  of  His  kingdom.  He 
sees  beyond  all  ages  to  eternity,  and  utters  the  great  missionary  proclamation, 
"  Other  sheep  I  have,"  etc.  The  power  of  His  love.  He  must  bring  in  those 
other  sheep;  the  power  of  His  love  impels  Him  to  do  this.  The  nature  of  His 
Church.    He  gathers  together  His  flock,  but  not  into  one  fold.     The  one  mother 

295 


chap.  X.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


has  many  daughters,  among  whom  one,  it  is  true,  is  dearest  to  the  Lord.  We 
are  not  to  pull  down  our  own  fold.  The  future  of  His  kingdom.  There  shall  be 
one  flock,  one  Shepherd.  This,  at  present,  we  have  only  in  part.  But  amid  all 
differences  there  is  still  unity.  Still,  this  unity  will  find  its  complete  realisation 
in  the  future. — Appuhn  in  J.  L.  Sommer's  "  Evang.  Per." 

Ver.  14.  What  impression  should  this  truth,  "Jesus  is  our  good  Shepherd" 
make  upon  us  ? 

I.  It  calls  for  our  eternal  gratitude  in  view  of  the  highest  and  greatest  act 
of  His  love. 

II.  It  should  awaken  within  us  heartfelt  confidence  in  His  unchanging 
faithfulness. 

III.  It  should  prompt  us  to  earnest  self-examination  in  reference  to  our 
relation  to  Him. 

IV.  It  should  warrant  us  in  having  a  glorious  hope  in  the  extension  and 
consummation  of  His  kingdom. — Dr.  v.  Biarowsky,  Idem. 

Ver.  16.  Christ's  prophetic  promise  of  the  ingathering  of  the  Gentiles. — As  we 
read  these  words  of  Jesus  the  mind  instinctively  reverts  to  the  old  prophetic 
promises  of  the  glory  of  the  Church,  and  the  ingathering  of  all  peoples  into  the 
one  flock,  especially  such  prophecies  as  that  of  Isa.  lx.  6-16;  Mic.  iv.  1,  etc. 
In  such  grand  prophecies  the  final  unity  of  the  flock  of  Christ  is  gloriously 
foretold.  Not  only  do  we  behold  the  Gentile  nations  far  and  near  bringing 
their  gifts  to  Zion,  their  ships  like  light  clouds  on  the  far  horizon,  or  like  doves 
winging  their  flight  homeward,  coming  even  from  the  far  islands  of  the  sea;  but 
we  also  see  the  nations  themselves  becoming  subject  to  Zion.  The  governments 
of  the  nations  in  their  activity  and  rule  are  bound  to  the  Church  and  kingdom 
of  Christ,  and  find  their  chief  glory  in  the  service  of  the  Holy  One.  The  result 
of  all  being  that  Zion — the  Church — shall  grow  in  beauty  and  strength  as  the 
nations  are  brought  into  unity  of  service,  until  it  shall  be  conspicuously  evident 
that  Jehovah  is  the  Lord  and  Redeemer  of  His  Church  and  people.  It  need 
only  be  pointed  out  how  close  the  connection  is  between  those  prophetic  promises 
and  this  utterance  of  our  Lord  to  the  Jews  in  Jerusalem.  The  Saviour's  words 
are  not  merely  an  affirmation  of  these  old  promises,  for  they  are  His  own  word  also 
and  must  stand,  but  mark  a  definite  stage  in  their  fulfilment.     We  may  look : — 

I.  At  the  manner  and  extent  in  which  the  unification  of  the  Saviour's  flock 
had  been  accomplished  before  His  advent. — 1.  Of  course  it  is  evident  our  Lord 
included  His  ancient  people  as  part  of  His  flock.  The  "  other  sheep  "  are  the 
Gentile  nations,  and  these  are  to  be  brought  into  union  with  "  the  sheep  of  this 
fold,"  i.e.  the  Jewish  Church,  which  for  long  ages  had  been  the  church  and  flock 
of  God  on  earth.  And  we  are  to  remember  that  the  Saviour  still  calls  them  His 
sheep,  though  they  have  for  a  time  strayed  into  the  desert  of  unbelief.  He  still 
yearns  over  them  in  love,  and  is  going  forth  through  missions  and  mission  work 
to  seek  them  and  bring  them  back  into  the  unity  of  His  flock.  In  the  future 
of  Christ's  Church  also  Israel  will  play  an  important  part,  is  being  kept 
separate  for  that  part.  2.  The  restoration  (fulness)  of  Israel  will  be  "the 
riches  of  the  Gentiles  "  (Horn.  xi.  12).  But  as  a  nation  at  that  time  they  had 
not  carried  out  the  divine  purposes.  In  Babylon  they  had  been  cured  for  ever 
of  the  old  wayward  lapsing  into  idolatry,  and  leaving  in  Babylon  large  numbers 
of  their  compatriots  unequivocal  and  uncompromising  believers  in  the  unity 
and  spirituality  of  God,  the  remnant  returned  to  set  up  a  pure  worship  in 
Jerusalem.  But  they  became  more  exclusive  than  ever ;  they  did  not  seem  to 
realise  the  truth  that  the  possession  of  the  holy  oracles  and  privileges  of 
the  chosen  people  were  designed  to  make  them  ministers  and  teachers  of  truth  to 

296 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHtf.  chap.  x\ 


all  nations,  as  the  Psalmist  sang,  "  God  be  merciful,  .  .  .  that  Thy  way"  etc. 
(Ps.  lxvii.).  3.  But  what  they  would  not  do  of  their  own  free  will  they  were  in 
a  measure  compelled  to  do  by  the  divine  hand.  Under  the  divided  Greek 
empire  numbers  of  them  were  forcibly  transported  to  Alexandria,  Antioch, 
and  other  parts  of  the  Greek  dominion  among  peoples  under  Greek  influence. 
Alexandria  was  the  greatest  mercantile  centre  of  the  age — then,  as  now,  a  cosmo- 
politan city  in  the  widest  sense — a  seat  of  ancient  learning,  a  centre  from  which 
opinions  and  ideas  spread  to  all  parts  of  the  known  world.  4.  There  was  thus 
more  than  mere  hazard  in  the  fact,  rather  divine  guidance,  that  from  this 
important  centre  the  first  translation  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  was  given  to 
the  world  in  the  Greek  language,  then  the  speech  of  philosophy,  etc.,  spoken 
more  or  less  everywhere  throughout  the  known  world.  Thus,  in  spite  of  them- 
selves, the  Jewish  people  were  making  known  God's  light  and  truth ;  and  at  the 
time  when  our  Lord  came — the  fulness  of  time — not  only  were  there  hundreds 
of  thousands  of  Jews  in  many  of  the  most  populous  centres  (1  Pet.  i.,  etc.),  but 
their  religion  was  commending  itself  to  the  Gentiles ;  numerous  proselytes  from 
among  these  had  become  attached  to  the  Jewish  faith.  So  that  in  many  ways 
the  soil  had  been  prepared  for  the  fulfilment  of  those  promises  which  prophets 
had  foretold  in  many  an  inspired  utterance,  and  which  even  shine  out  in  special 
enactments  of  the  Mosaic  economy.  5.  But,  as  a  race,  the  Jews  failed  to 
carry  out  the  divine  order.  Not  only  did  they  make  the  gate  of  entrance  into 
Judaism  itself  too  strait  and  difficult  by  their  traditions,  "  lading  men,"  etc. 
(Luke  xi.  46),  shutting  up  and  hiding  by  their  human  inventions  the  way  into 
God's  fold,  but  they  stood  aloof,  and  repelled  by  spiritual  pride  Samaritan 
and  Gentile  alike.  As  a  nation  at  that  time  they  had  failed  to  carry  out  their 
divine  mission. 

II.  The  divine  necessity  for  the  fulfilment,  etc.,  is  expressed  in  Christ's 
words,  "Other  sheep:  .  .  .  them  also  I  must  bring,"  etc. — 1.  In  this  chapter 
we  have  recorded  the  actual  final  rejection  of  our  Saviour's  claim  by  the 
Jerusalem  Jews.  Earnestly  had  our  Lord  sought  to  free  them  from  the  bondage 
of  their  traditions,  so  that  they  might  receive  Him  and  become  His  instruments 
in  bringing  the  Gentiles  into  the  flock  of  God.  And  from  many  indications  we 
gather  that  they  would  have  been  willing  to  do  so  on  their  own  conditions  and 
in  their  own  way.  If  Jesus  had  permitted  them  to  crown  Him  as  king,  had 
rallied  an  army  around  Him,  and  like  another  Judas  Maccabaeus,  only  greater, 
He  had  smitten  as  withy,  hammer  the  Boman  invaders  from  the  land,  and  made 
conquering  Israel  the  centre  of  the  nation's  homage  in  a  temporal  and  material 
sense,  then  they  would  have  hailed  Him  with  their  hosannas  and  followed 
Him  to  the  death.  They  misread  their  prophets,  however,  turned  spiritual 
promises  into  material,  in  place  of  interpreting  the  temporal  adjuncts  in  a 
spiritual  sense.  They  disregarded  even  the  Baptist's  proclamation  of  the  spiritual 
kingdom — would  have  nothing  to  do  with  calls  to  repentance,  humility,  righteous- 
ness. They  would  not  see  it  was  these  they  needed — that  these  only  are  the 
true  strength  of  nations — that  true  conquest  is  not  by  the  sword,  but  by  the 
Spirit.  Therefore  the  Jewish  pastoral  office  was  to  be  superseded  for  a  time  : 
the  Jewish  fold  had  been  made  too  narrow  to  receive  the  whole  flock  of  God. 
The  Jewish  shepherds  of  those  later  days  had  become  false  and  hireling  for  the 
most  part :  their  office  was  to  be  taken  from  them  (Jer.  xxiii. ;  Ezek.  xxxiv.,  etc.). 
2.  But  Jesus  must  needs  bring  these  other  sheep  into  His  fold.  This  Jewish 
exclusiveness  was  not  the  measure  of  God's  love  and  pity.  Outside  of  that  fold 
were  many  whom  Christ  claimed  as  His  own — already  His,  for  He  speaks  in  the 
eternal  now  of  His  divine  nature.  They  were  still  wanderers — "  aliens  from  the 
commonwealth  of  Israel,"  etc.  (Eph.  ii.  11,  12).  But  Christ  must  bring  them  in. 
The  necessity  of  redemption  for  the  race  at  large  flows  from  the  depths  of  and 

297 


chap.  x.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


follows  eternal  love,  the  love  of  God,  "  who  will  have  all  men  to  be  saved,"  etc. 
And  if  we  ask,  Who  are  those  whom  He  is  to  bring?  etc.,  the  answer  is,  Those 
who  are  still  outside,  although  His  flock,  attested  to  be  so  by  His  word  here, 
and  by  His  declaration,  "I  lay  down  My  life,"  etc.  (ver.  15).  But,  it  is  said, 
is  it  not  the  elect  only  that  are  of  His  flock  ?  The  reply  is,  Those  who  hear 
His  voice  are  the  elect.  3.  But  all  are  His  sheep  by  creation  and  providence 
(Ps.  c.  3),  though  some  wander  away  and  perish,  may  turn  from  Him  and 
reject  Him,  as  did  the  Jews.  He  is  the  governor,  the  shepherd,  among  the 
nations ;  and  from  among  them  He  will  bring  His  flock,  the  title  to  and 
possession  of  which  He  has  gained  by  His  redeeming  and  self-sacrificing  love. 
He  was  sent  to  "  the  lost  sheep,"  etc.  (Matt.  xv.  24) ;  and  though  they  as  a  body 
for  the  time  rejected  Him,  He  could  look  beyond  them  to  wider  and  more 
distant  fields,  in  which  He  should  "  see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul,"  etc.  4.  He 
viewed  the  restriction  of  His  activity  to  Israel  as  withdrawn  by  His  death.  As 
He  said,  "  The  kingdom  of  God  shall  be  taken  from  you,"  etc.  (Matt.  xxi.  43). 
And  as  the  exalted  Christ  He  is  the  shepherd  of  all  peoples :  in  this  office  He 
issues  to  His  followers  the  command,  "  Go,  make  disciples,"  etc.  (Matt,  xxviii.). 
III.  Look  at  Christ's  method  in  bringing  about  the  fulfilment  of  His 
promises. — 1.  It  was  essentially  different  from  that  of  the  Jews.  They  would 
have  brought  it  about  vi  et  armis ;  Christ,  by  spiritual  influence  and  moral  power. 
They  would  have  taken  the  sword — some  of  the  disciples  even — as  Moham- 
medanism did  at  a  later  day,  only  "to  perish  by  the  sword"  (Matt.  xxvi.  52). 
2.  Christ  wields  a  power  which  no  material  force  can  hem  in  or  subdue ;  and 
His  empire  is  in  the  hearts  of  men.  He  brings  them  to  Himself  by  the  power 
of  His  redeeming  love  and  grace,  so  that  they  willingly  hear  His  voice  and  obey 
Him.  They  shall  come,  are  coming,  from  north,  south,  east,  and  west,  "  and 
shall  sit  down  with  Abraham,"  etc.  (Matt.  viii.  11),  and  they  shall  become  "  one 
flock,"  etc.  Not  one  fold,  one  rigid,  ecclesiastical  system ;  but  unity  in  diversity, 
one  flock  consisting  of  Jewish  and  Gentile  Church,  companies  from  among 
"Barbarian,  Scythian"  etc.  (Col.  iii.  11),  men  of  different  nations,  different 
Church  orders,  following  different  forms  of  worship,  yet  all  joined  in  unity  of 
love  and  service.  3.  And  how  does  He  lead  them  into  this  unity  ?  He  brings  the 
flock,  it  is  true,  but  does  so  by  bringing  first  the  individuals  to  Himself.  With 
each  He  pursues  His  own  way,  leading  each  as  He  sees  best,  varying  His  methods 
with  each  member  of  the  separate  folds,  as  every  member  is  dissimilar  from 
every  other  member.  4.  There  is  no  mechanical  method  of  "  turning  out " 
Christians ;  each  individual  must  for  him  or  herself  hear  Christ's  voice.  And  so 
it  comes  about  that  He  leads  His  people  by  "  ways  they  know  not  "  often,  some- 
times rough  ways,  where  they  may  "  sow  in  tears."  But  not  for  ever  :  it  is  that 
they  may  "  reap,"  etc.  (Ps.  cxxvi.).  While  men  of  the  world  escape,  His  sheep 
are  often  severely  punished  for  transgression,  e.g.  "Moses"  (Deut.  iii.  26,  27). 
So  that  His  people  may  often  say,  "  If  in  this  life  only,"  etc.  "  But  to  whom 
He  gives  much,  of  them,"  etc.  (Luke  xii.  48)  :  the  branches  of  the  vine  are 
pruned  that  they  may  bring  forth  more  fruit  (xv.  2).  5.  See  in  the  history  of 
the  Church  how  variously  He  deals,  etc.  In  what  different  ways  are  a  John, 
Paul,  Luther,  Savonarola,  etc.,  brought  to  Him  and  kept  in  His  flock  !  He  often 
leads  us  otherwise  than  we  desire — to-day  to  "green  pastures,"  to-morrow  to 
the  valley  of  shadows  :  times  of  fervour  are  succeeded  by  seasons  of  frigidity, 
"  Where  is  the  blessedness,"  etc. — times  of  peace  by  trial  and  persecution — times 
of  answer  to  prayer  by  times  of  withholding  the  answer.  Something  we  clung 
to  as  a  chief  good  is  taken  from  us,  and  it  is  only  long  after,  perhaps,  that  we  see 
what  a  danger  we  were  then  snatched  from.  His  flock,  indeed,  learn  as  He 
gathers  them  that  "  His  ways  are  not  our  ways,"  but  better,  etc.  (Isa.  lv.  8). 
6.  And  thus   He  individually  gathers  them,   through  the   power  of   His  love, 

298 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  X. 


working  of  His  Spirit,  ministry  of  the  word,  and  all  means  of  grace,  until  they 
attain  the  unity  of  faith,  and  through  hearing  His  voice,  and  following  Him,  to 
membership  of  the  one  flock  of  which  He  is  "  the  chief  shepherd  and  bishop " 
(1  Pet.  v.  4).     In  this  is  fulfilled  His  personal  and  prophetic  word. 

IV.  Hindrances  to  the  fulfilment  of  this  promise  which  still  exist. — 1.  The 
age  in  which  we  live  has  seen  a  marvellous  extension  of  endeavour  to  fulfil  our 
Lord's  injunction  to  the  Church  to  "  make  disciples,"  etc.,  marvellous  when  we 
remember  that  even  at  the  beginning  of  this  century  Christian  people  were 
found  who  argued  that  it  was  not  our  part  to  send  the  gospel  to  Jew  and 
Gentile,  etc.  2.  This  was  just  how  the  Jews  of  our  Lord's  day  acted.  They 
did  not  see  that  they  were  called  to  make  known  God's  saving  health  to  all 
nations.  And  we  know  the  result.  In  the  history  of  Judaism  since  the  fall  of 
Jerusalem,  the  fate  of  subjects  of  God's  kingdom  neglecting  their  responsibilities, 
etc.,  is  seen.  (1)  One  great  hindrance  to  the  fulfilment  of  this  divine  promise  is 
the  supineness,  want  of  interest,  indifference,  of  those  who  call  themselves 
Christ's,  to  the  Redeemer's  command.  What  shall  we  say  of  a  Christian  people 
who  call  themselves  God's  flock,  and  spend  on  football  yearly  about  four  millions 
of  pounds,  on  drink  over  one  hundred  and  fifty  millions,  and  on  missions  a  paltry 
one  and  a  half  million  ?  The  Church  needs  waking  up,  etc. ;  then  perhaps  the 
ships  of  Tarshish  will  bear  fewer  kegs  of  rum  and  gunpowder  to  the  heathen,  and  a 
larger  number  of  "  messengers  proclaiming  the  gospel  of  peace,"  etc.  (2)  Another 
and  in  some  ways  greater  hindrance  is  the  strife  and  division  between  different 
sections  of  Christ's  flock.  This  arises  from  the  lack,  fundamentally,  of  pure 
Christian  charity — love.  There  is  less  now  than  in  former  times,  let  us  be 
thankful,  of  the  unchurching  of  one  another  by  Protestant  communities  of  the 
faithful,  although  there  is  still  more  than  enough  of  it.  And  until  the  light 
of  pure  truth  breaks  in  on  the  Roman  and  Greek  communities,  not  much 
is  to  be  hoped  from  those  quarters.  Although  many  faithful  people  are  in  those 
communities,  as  a  whole  their  errors  must  keep  them  from  the  close  unity  of  the 
flock.  But  better  things  might  be  expected  from  enlightened  communities  of 
the  Reformed  than  the  state  of  things  that  exists.  Pray  for  the  spirit  of 
Christian  love,  so  that  this  promise  may  speedily  be  fulfilled,  and  there  "  be 
one  fold,"  etc. 

Vers.  17,  18.  "  I  have  power  to  lay  down  My  life" — This  is  not  spoken  of  the 
power  men  have  to  lay  down  life  voluntarily,  as  distinguishing  them  from  the 
lower  animals ;  nor  of  the  somewhat  equivocal  courage  required  to  lay  down  life, 
so  as  not  to  have  to  drink  to  the  dregs  the  cup  of  suffering  or  shame.  It  refers 
rather  to  the  power,  which  we  as  Christians  ought  to  feel  that  we  have,  to  lay 
down  our  lives  as  Christ  did  for  the  sake  of  what  is  good.  The  consciousness 
of  power  to  do  this  is  a  high  privilege  : — 

I.  Because  nothing  else  raises  us  so  much  above  earthly  things. — The 
changes  of  life,  whilst  they  bring  what  is  pleasant,  etc.,  also  threaten  us  with 
loss.  The  latter  is  all  the  more  hard  to  bear  when  we  are  conscious  that  we 
would  never  willingly  have  submitted  to  it.  Some  are  satisfied  when  the  loss  is 
balanced  by  the  gain.  But  must  they  not  feel  that  the  preponderance  is  ever 
uncertain,  and  that  in  regard  to  it  they  are  altogether  dependent  ?  Others  seek 
in  various  ways  to  endeavour  to  secure  as  long  a  lease  of  life's  possessions  as 
possible.  But  must  they  not  feel  that  the  ordering  of  life  is  not  in  their  own 
hands  ?  One  safe  way  remains,  i.e.  when  a  man  has  laid  down  his  course  for 
life,  and  resolves  to  lose  life  itself,  the  sum-total  of  all  those  particular  possessions, 
rather  than  swerve  from  that  course.  In  view  of  this  all  he  does  not  lose 
is  gain,  and  every  loss  which  confirms  him  in  his  duty  will  be  a  voluntary 
surrender.     In  misfortune  he  feels  that  he  who  possesses  what  is  dearer  than 

299 


chap.  x.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


life  need  not  weakly  grieve  over  the  loss  of  a  single  possession.  Only  thus  can 
we  be  free — more  free  than  if  we  possessed  many  of  earth's  gifts,  and  were  secure 
in  the  possession  of  them.  This  we  see  exemplified  most  gloriously  in  the  case 
of  Christ.  If  He  had  surrounded  Himself  with  the  heavenly  hosts,  and  escaped 
from  the  hands  of  His  foes,  would  He  have  seemed  to  us  so  sublimely  elevated 
above  all  earthly  power,  as  He  is  now,  since  He  voluntarily  gave  Himself  to  die  ? 

II.  Because  nothing  so  greatly  consoles  us  in  view  of  the  insignificance  of 
our  efforts. — We  are  not  to  reckon  up  the  value  of  our  works,  but  believe  that 
actions  apparently  unequal  may  in  view  of  this  be  equal  in  God's  sight.  The 
measure  of  our  work  is  the  exercise  of  our  powers.  Even  when  sometimes  we 
are  inclined  to  be  contented  with  our  efforts,  we  feel  that  by  greater  exertion 
we  might  have  done  more.  Men  often  feel  also  that  they  are  not  in  positions 
in  which  all  their  powers  might  be  best  utilised.  In  respect  of  this,  on  what 
shall  we  stay  ourselves  if  not  on  our  readiness  to  use  all  our  powers  in  doing 
what  is  incumbent  on  us  1  And  how  shall  we  be  better  conscious  of  ability  to 
do  this,  than  when  we  feel  in  us  the  power  rather  to  lay  down  life  itself  than 
to  turn  away  from  the  end  set  before  us  ?  What  greater  proof  did  the  Redeemer 
give  us  of  His  unbounded  obedience,  or  what  greater  could  be  required,  than 
that  He  went  forward  to  death  to  fulfil  the  Father's  will  ?  When  we  can  do 
this,  the  Father  will  love  us  as  He  loved  Him. 

III.  Because  nothing  can  purify  us  so  thoroughly  from  the  suspicion  of  self- 
interestedness  in  our  activity. — Evil  mixes  in  everything  which  is  of  con- 
sequence in  our  lives.  Too  late  sometimes  we  discover  that  it  has  been  mixed 
up  with  what  was  begun  from  the  very  purest  motives — in  the  form,  e.g.,  of 
selfishness  or  vanity.  The  more  narrowly  we  observe  ourselves  we  shall  see 
occasion  in  this  respect  to  blame  ourselves  severely.  But  how,  in  such  case, 
can  we  have  a  clear  conscience  toward  God,  unless  through  this  power  of  laying 
down  our  life  ?  Whatever  is  impure  in  connection  with  our  possessions  must  be 
concerned  with  merely  earthly  possessions.  In  order  then  best  to  cut  ourselves 
loose  from  dependence  on  them,  and  to  be  pure  in  heart,  we  must  seek  to  feel 
ourselves  strong  enough  not  to  be  willing  to  give  up  these  particular  possessions 
alone,  but  that  which  is  the  sum-total  of  them  all.  So  we  judge  others  should 
act.  Nothing  washes  away  the  reproach  of  self-interestedness  more  thoroughly 
than  a  real  martyrdom.  The  bitterest  foes  of  the  Saviour,  when  He  went 
forward  to  death  in  reality,  could  not  impute  to  Him  any  self-interested  aim. 
We  see  then  how  true  it  is  that  the  Eedeemer  can  raise  us  toward  Himself  only 
in  so  far  as  we  take  up  our  cross  and  follow  Him  ;  and  that  the  most  precious 
blessings  of  our  fellowship  with  Him  come  to  us  in  our  readiness,  if  need  be,  to 
suffer  and  die  for  Him  and  the  concerns  of  His  kingdom.  But  who  will  assure 
us  that  this  consciousness  of  our  power  to  lay  down  our  life  will  not  prove  to  be 
spurious1?  Beneath  the  cross  of  Christ  our  hearts  cannot  deceive  us  in  this 
matter.  Here  each  one  will  find,  when  he  needs  it,  the  conviction  that  he  is, 
or  the  power  to  become,  such  a  one. — Abridged  from  Schleiermacher. 

Vers.  19-21.  "A  sign  which  shall  be  spoken  against." — "  The  thoughts  of  many 
hearts  "  were  again  being  revealed ;  and  the  divisions  which  followed  Christ's 
teaching  were  becoming  more  and  more  sharp,  as  that  teaching  became  more 
searching  and  personal,  and  as  the  cross  at  the  end  of  the  way  became  more 
distinct.  And  this  is  not  to  be  wondered  at.  Every  reformation  and  every 
reformer  are  causes  of  division.  When  truth  enters  the  lists,  error  and  falsehood 
are  compelled  to  take  up  arms,  after  their  kind.  When  goodness  draws  near, 
wickedness  gnashes  its  teeth.  And  those  who  by  nature  are  allied  to  either  will 
then  fall  into  their  true  places,  although  before  it  may  have  been  difficult  to 

300 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  X. 


distinguish  between  the  two  classes.  Ever  and  anon  there  are  crises  in  life 
which  tend  to  bring  these  two  classes  into  prominent  opposition.  It  was  so  in 
Jerusalem  at  the  period  of  our  narrative. 

I.  A  wicked  charge. — 1.  This  was  not  the  first  time  such  a  charge  had  been 
levelled  against  our  Lord  (vii.  20,  viii.  48).  Spiritual,  like  mental,  derangement 
considers  itself  alone  sane.  These  Jews  could  not  bear  the  presence  and  teaching  of 
Christ,  which  were  a  continual  reproach  to  them.  2.  Especially  were  they  enraged 
at  our  Lord's  claim  to  such  close  relationship  with  His  Father.  If  that  were  a 
fact,  then  indeed  they  were  condemned,  so  utterly  inimical  were  they  in  nature 
and  life  to  Christ.  3.  But  there  was  no  attempt  on  their  part  to  discover  whether 
in  any  sense  Christ's  words  were  true.  They  must  not  be  admitted  to  be  true, 
otherwise  there  would  be  an  end  of  all  authority  over  the  people  on  the  part  of  these 
Jews.  4.  Nor  must  the  people  be  permitted  to  be  influenced  any  longer  by  Jesus. 
Hence  the  resort  of  these  men  to  the  old,  coarse  method  of  abuse  :  "  He  hath 
a  demon,  and  is  mad." 

II.  A  convincing  rejoinder. — 1.  It  is  a  matter  of  every-day  experience  that 
contemptuous  and  contumelious  charges  and  names  flung  abroad  in  the  heat  of 
party  strife  do  tell  with  many  of  the  unthinking  multitude.  It  is  a  poor  and 
contemptible  proceeding,  looked  at  in  any  light.  But  although  it  may  succeed 
with  some,  it  will  just  have  the  opposite  effect  on  rational-minded,  thinking  men. 
It  will  lead  to  a  more  strict  examination  of  facts  ;  and  the  evil  name  or  imputa- 
tion will  generally  in  the  end  recoil  on  the  head  of  him  who  gave  it  currency. 
Such  an  action  is  somewhat  of  a  boomerang  nature.  2.  It  was  so  on  this 
occasion.  As  some  of  the  thinking  people  reflected  on  the  beautiful,  tender,  and 
loving  words  of  the  Saviour — as  they  remembered  His  miracles,  the  healing  of 
the  man  born  blind,  which  had  led  to  such  prolonged  discussion  and  to  such  a 
display  of  heated  feeling — these  people  answered  with  a  simple  directness  that 
silenced  the  slanderers :  "  These  are  not  the  words  of  Him  that  hath  a  demon. 
Can  a  demon  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind  1  "  3.  By  all  candid  minds  the  "  teach- 
ing "  of  Jesus  was  seen  to  be  with  authority  ;  it  was  so  lofty  and  spiritual,  yet 
ever  graded  so  as  to  be  comprehensible  to  his  hearers.  He  taught  men  "  as  they 
were  able  to  bear  it "  (1  Cor.  iii.  2).  Unlike  the  scribes,  He  did  not  restrict 
Himself  to  the  instruction  of  learned  coteries.  The  poor  and  degraded  shared 
His  instructions,  and  the  common  folk  heard  Him  gladly.  All  reasonable  men 
must  have  seen  that  such  teaching  was  truly  Godlike  and  bore  the  stamp  of 
heaven.  It  was  given  to  all  freely,  just  as  God's  providential  care  is  over  all 
His  works.  4.  And  then  Christ's  miracles  !  So  beneficent,  so  divine !  It  was 
impossible  that  minds  not  distorted  by  hate  and  bigotry  could  believe  that  powers 
such  as  these  could  come  from  beneath. 

III.  A  lesson  for  the  time. — 1.  There  are  still  divisions  because  of  Christ, 
and  Christ's  disciples  are  frequently  treated  as  was  their  Master.  When  men 
become  spiritually  in  earnest,  often  people  of  the  world,  worldly  friends,  think 
their  earnestness  a  symptom  of  mental  ill-health.  It  was  so  in  the  case  of 
Chalmers,  e.g.,  when  first  he  began  to  preach  with  power.  "  Mad  Tom 
Chalmers "  was  a  familiar  expression.  So  has  it  been  with  other  men  of 
spiritual  power.  The  words  of  Festus  to  Paul  (Acts  xxvi.  24)  are  memorable. 
"  The  disciple  shall  be  as  his  Master."  2.  And  are  there  not  those  to-day 
who  hint  that  Christ's  claims  are  a  delusion  or  a  myth,  that  the  records  of  His 
mighty  works  are  fables  ?  But  are  not  His  w7orks  still  among  us  to  confute 
these  modern  calumnies?  Look  around.  See  amid  all  the  imperfections  of 
Christendom  the  tokens  and  evidences  of  His  presence  in  works  of  love  and 
mercy,  etc.,  unknown  before  He  lived  and  moved  among  men.  Let  men  and 
women  testify  how  He  has  rescued  them  from  the  horrible  pit  and  miry 
clay,  etc.  (Ps.  xl.)  ;  how  He  has  brought  them  out  of  darkness  into  marvellous 

301 


chap.  x.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


light,  etc.  "  By  its  rays  we  recognise  the  sun ;  by  its  fruits  we  know  the  tree ; 
by  his  seal  and  signature  we  know  who  the  man  is;  and  by  His  works  we 
know  the  Master." 

HOMILETIC  NOTES. 

Ver.   12.    The  motto  of  the  hireling  with   this   he   raises   up   the  humble, 

is  Non  vos,  sed  vestra,  i.e.  Not  you,  but  His  shepherd's  dog  is  watchfulness ;  he 

yours — your  milk,  your  wool.      Soul-  slumbers  not,  but  cares  for  the  flock 

tenders    and    not     wallet-tenders — so  committed  to  his  charge.     His  pastoral 

should  it  be  with  Christ's  pastors.    The  flute    is    cheerfulness    and   kindliness, 

description  of  a  true  shepherd  was  thus  with  which  he  attracts  souls  to  him,  so 

made  by  one  who  painted  a  mirror,  and  that  they  may  follow  the  teaching  of 

wrote   under  it,   Cunctis   ceque  fidum,  the  Lord  which  he  sets  forth. — From 

i.e.  He  does  not  play  the  hypocrite,  but  J.  J.  Weigel. 
represents  people  as  they  really  are. 

We  must,  before  all  things,  see  to  the  Ver.    14.    Truly   knowing   Christ. — 

glory   of   God    and    the    salvation   of  Many  know   Christ    indeed  according 

men,  for  for  these  two  reasons  God  has  to  His  mercifulness,  but  do  not  wish 

constituted  the  ministry  of  preaching,  to  know  Him  according  to  His  right- 

The  hireling    has    always   Pax  vobis  eousness;   therefore   they   sin   without 

(Peace   be   with   you)  on   his  tongue,  fear.     Others  recognise  Him,  however, 

never    Vae   vobis  (Woe   be    to    you),  as  the  Righteous  One,  but  not  as  the 

Good     shepherds    and     hirelings    are  Merciful  One ;  therefore  they  despond 

never      more     easily     distinguishable  in  sin,  and  will  not  allow  themselves 

than  in  circumstances  of  persecution,  to  be  comforted.      If   thou  givest  up 

poverty,  sickness,  etc.      At   no   other  Christ,  He  will  in  turn  give  thee  up. 

time  does  the  shepherd  remain  more  God  punishes  slighting  with  depriva- 

closely  by  his  flock,  and  at  no  other  tion.      If   Christ    sometimes   pastures 

time  does  the  hireling  so  readily  for-  His  lambs  not  among  corn,  but  only 

sake   his   flock.      The    spiritual  office  beside  it,  it  is  simply  because  too  rich  a 

brings  with  it  not  pleasure,  but  a  load ;  pasturage  would  not  be  good  for  them, 

not  glory,  but  often  grief ;  not  laugh-  It  was  not  without  purpose  that  the 

ing,  but  watching.     People  might  say  high  priest   of   the  old   economy  was 

of  the  preacher's  hood   and   gown  as  required    to    bear    on    his    heart    the 

that  king  said  of  his  kingly  robe  :  "If  names  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel, 

any  one  knew  how  much  care,  trouble,  when  he   went    into    the   holy   place, 

and  responsibility  are  concealed  in  it,  Without  doubt    this   signified   that   a 

he   would   not    lift    it    up    from   the  true  guardian  of   souls  will  bear  his 

ground."     A  pastor  is  Christ's  under-  flock  in  his  heart,  and  also  in  his  mind, 

shepherd.    The  prayer  book  must  never  so  that  he  may  never  forget  to  pray, 

be  far  from  him,  so  that  he  may  at  all  watch,  fight  for  them. — Idem. 
times  cry  out  in  spirit  for  himself  and 

his  hearers.  His  shoes  are  patience,  Ver.  15.  Christ  knows  His  sheep. — 
with  which  he  passes  through  all  Penatus  Campanus,  a  French  gentle- 
adversity,  and  endures  as  a  good  man  of  rank,  ordered  those  of  the 
soldier  of  Christ.  His  shepherd's  wallet  reformed  faith  who  fell  into  his  hands 
is  the  Holy  Scripture.  He  brings  to  be  cast  into  a  deep  lake,  which  he 
thence  things  new  and  old — the  law  called  his  great  beaker.  On  one  occa- 
to  terrify  the  old  man  and  the  Gospel  sion,  when  asked  by  King  Charles  IX. 
to  entice  and  comfort  the  new  man.  how  many  Lutheran  heretics  he  had 
His  shepherd's  crook  is  the  staff  "  chas-  put  into  his  welcome-cup,  he  replied 
tisement  "  and  the  staff  "  gentleness  " ;  that  he  had  not  kept  a  register  of  such 
with  that  he  brings  down  proud  spirits,  worthless  and  small  matters.     So  much 

302 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   X. 


men's  souls  were  valued  by  him,  which, 
however,  are  of  great  worth  in  God's 
sight. — Idem. 


the  cross,  it  has  a  poor  appearance. 
Because  it  is  not  fixed  in  any  one 
place.  Because  within  it  are  sheep 
and  lambs,  strong  and  weak.  Because 
Yer.  16.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  a  it  is  surrounded  by  foes,  like  a  sheep- 
sheepfold. — Because  from  outside,  under      fold  by  the  wolves. — Idem. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  2.  The  true  Shepherd. — All  these  traits 
are  so  speaking  that  they  require  no  great 
explanation.  Christ  is  the  essential  good 
shepherd,  because  that  faithfulness  with 
which  the  heart  of  the  true  shepherd  beats 
for  the  sheep  reappears  in  His  heart  in  a 
higher  form — a  faithfulness  carried  to  its 
utmost  perfection  on  behalf  of  His  human 
flock,  viewed  in  their  need  of  pasture,  of 
protection,  and  of  a  shepherd  ;  yea,  because 
His  heart  is  the  centre  and  fountain-  head  of 
all  that  faithfulness  and  compassion  with 
which  true  shepherd-hearts  in  their  spheres 
of  labour,  whether  spiritual  or  secular,  beat 
for  all  living  beings  which  require  protection 
and  pasture — for  all  flocks  requiring  the 
shepherd ;  because  He  is  essentially  the 
ordained  shepherd  of  mankind,  and  mankind 
is  eternally  His  flock,  which  entirely  needs 
His  presiding  shepherd's  glance,  His  protec- 
tion, and  His  pasture ;  and  because  He  is 
ready  to  deposit  His  life  for  the  deliverance 
of  this  flock. — J.  P.  Lange. 

Ver.  8.  Robbers  of  the  fold. — The  home  mis- 
sions, institutions,  and  associations  of  the 
Romish  Church,  the  orders  of  monks  and 
nuns,  had  lapsed  for  the  most  part  into  a 
state  of  corruption  through  the  universally 
corrupt  condition  of  the  whole  Church. 
Their  powerlessness  to  effect  any  radical 
betterment  was  not  overlooked  by  the  en- 
lightened men  of  that  time.  As  the  Romish 
See,  and  the  priesthood  serving  under  it, 
were  fighting  in  especial  to  sustain  the  out- 
ward authority  of  the  Church,  and  in  con- 
sequence permitted  the  care  for  the  eternal 
salvation  of  those  souls  committed  to  their 
charge  to  recede  all  too  far  into  the  back- 
ground— as  those  shepherds  of  Christendom, 
to  use  Ezekiel's  words  (xxxiv.  3,  4),  ate  the 
fat,  clothed  them  with  the  wool,  etc. — the 
spiritual  societies,  whilst  they  acknowledged 
no  higher  authority  than  the  Romish  See, 
so  fell  away  into  a  carnal  activity,  a  sen- 
suality and  riotous  living,  avarice  and  pride, 
that  they  helped  to  draw  the  Church  more 
deeply  into  corruption  rather  than  to  save  it. 
"They  appeared  principally,"  as  an  old  his- 
torian said,  "  to  be  appointed  to  be  fishers  of 
money  rather  than  of  men  by  the  Papal  See." 
If  Christendom  were  not  to  be  destroyed, 
the  merciful  Saviour,  the  faithful  chief 
Shepherd,  must  needs  Himself  intervene 
and   rouse   up  soul-shepherds,   who  should, 


in  the  spirit  and  mission  of  their  Master, 
seek  the  lost,  bring  back  the  erring,  etc.,  with 
j oyf ul  consecration.  —  Bachring  -  Johannes 
Tauler. 

Yer.  10.  A  call  to  faithfulness. — And  you, 
father,  guardian,  shall  you  not  come  through 
Jesus,  as  through  the  door,  and  pray  that 
you  may  have  a  shepherd's  heart  for  your 
child's  sake,  so  that  you  may  be  able  to 
nurture  the  seed  sown  by  pastoral  instruc- 
tion ?  And  you,  mother,  do  you  not  hear 
the  commission,  "  Feed  My  lambs  "  1  Dare 
you  into  the  opening  lily-cup  of  a  child's 
spirit,  expanding  to  receive  God's  word,  pour 
the  glowing  ashes  of  worldliness  and  vanity  ? 
Teachers,  counsellors  of  the  people,  authors, 
journalists — not  alone  among  the  clergy  are 
there  hirelings,  thieves,  robbers ;  and  not 
alone  either  among  the  clergy  are  there  shep- 
herds after  God's  own  heart  !  In  the  abbey 
of  Alpirsbach,  and  over  the  porch  of  the 
convent  church  there,  is  represented  a  hus- 
band and  wife  of  the  Hohenzollern  family 
kneeling  and  praying.  They  belonged  to 
the  most  remote  of  the  ancestors  of  the 
noble  Hohenzollern  house.  Above  the  figures 
are  engraved  the  words :  "  I  am  the  door ; 
through  Me,  if  any  man  enter  in,  he  shall  be 
saved,  and  shall  go  in  and  out  and  find 
pasture."  Let  us  here  seek  the  true  pasture ; 
let  us  lead  others  to  it,  so  that  one  day  we  may, 
both  shepherd  and  flock,  be  led  by  the  chief 
Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  our  souls  to  living 
streams  above! — Br.  R.  Kbgel,  " Predigt." 

Ver.  11.  True  pastors.— Oh  that  we  (pastors) 
were  faithful  like  our  Lord,  and  no  hirelings  ! 
that  none  of  us  served  for  reward,  daily 
bread,  the  honour  and  applause  of  the  world, 
but  as  the  servants  of  Christ,  doing  the  will 
of  God  from  the  heart !  that  we,  we  too, 
were  contented,  even  though  the  reward  of 
our  pains  were  shame  and  persecution, 
thorny  crown  and  cross  !  that  we  did  not 
trouble  ourselves  so  much  about  an  easy  and 
pleasant  life,  but  more  especially  about  the 
flock  committed  to  us  !  that  we  followed 
even  individual  souls,  as  He  went  after  the 
individual  lost  sheep !  We  read  how  He 
sought  Thomas  in  the  desert  of  unbelief, 
how  He  followed  Peter  in  his  wandering 
with  the  thrice  repeated  question,  "  Simon, 
son  of  Jona,"  etc.  (xxi.).  The  ancient  Apos- 
tolic Church  had  such  pastors ;  so,  too,  has 

303 


CHAP.   X. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


the  Evangelical  Church  in  her  times  of 
gracious  visitation.  During  the  first  period 
of  the  pestilence  which  Luther  passed 
through  in  Wittenberg,  he  wrote  to  his 
friend  John  Lange,  prior  of  the  Augustinians 
in  Erfurt :  "  The  pestilence  has  come,  and 
began  here  suddenly  and  violently,  especially 
among  the  dear  children.  You  advise  me 
to  take  flight.  I  trust  the  world  will  not  be 
ruined,  even  though  Brother  Martin  should 
die.  I  am  set  here  ;  because  of  my  duty  I 
dare  not  flee  until  duty,  which  has  called  me 
hither,  recalls  me."  And  thus  he  persevered 
during  three  periods  of  pestilence  at  his 
post  in  the  community,  comforting  and 
pasturing  the  flock  like  a  good  shepherd. — 
Translated  from  Ahlfeld,  "  Predigt." 

Ver.  12.  The  hireling. — Under  the  image 
of  a  hireling  are  here  presented  all  sur- 
reptitious leaders  of  men  who  only  for 
reward,  or  gain  of  some  sort  or  other, 
have  undertaken  an  overseer's  office  with  a 
human  flock.  They  are  integrated  by  the 
wolf,  the  natural  enemy  of  sheep,  who  makes 
havoc  of  flocks  and  scatters  them.  The 
hireling  and  the  wolf  present  toward  one 
another  an  elective  affinity  and  an  historical 
oneness.  The  one  exhibits  the  heartless 
flock-leader,  who  has  no  concern  for  the 
flock,  but  who  seemingly  serves  them  rightly 
so  far  as  it  suits  him,  for  the  sake  of  the 
hire.  The  wolf  exhibits  the  principle  of 
hostility  to  the  flock,  as  it  openly  appears 
doing  its  work  of  destruction  in  the  person 
of  decided  spirits  of  error  and  popular 
seducers.  And  just  by  the  wolfs  appearing 
is  the  hireling  revealed  as  hireling.  This 
last  does  not  live  for  the  flock  ;  he  watches 
not  against  the  wolf.  The  enemy  may  be 
near,  and  he  has  yet  hardly  observed  it ;  as 
soon  as  he  does  observe  it,  he  takes  to  flight. 
He  is  very  far  from  contending  with  his  life 
against  the  destructive  principles  of  the 
wolf,  but  leaves  him  to  do  as  he  will.  Yes, 
so  soon  as  the  delusion  of  spirits  has  attained 
a  certain  recognition,  he  joins  it.  The  hire- 
ling in  the  third  part  of  the  parable  is,  we 
may  perceive,  to  be  conjoined  with  the  wolf 
among  the  thieves  and  murderers  in  the  first 
and  second  parts.  The  thief  and  murderer, 
when  unfolded  to  view,  is  half  hireling,  half 
wolf. — J.  P.  Lange. 

Ver.  12.  Faithful  shepherds  and  hirelings. 
— The  office  of  teacher  is  related  to  that  of 
preacher.  A  Christian  teacher  should  re- 
member above  all  things  this  :  that  his 
scholars  are  Christians,  baptised  in  Christ's 
name.  Baptism  is  the  bond  of  union  be- 
tween the  Church,  that  school  of  adult 
persons,  and  the  school,  that  Church  of  the 
little  ones.  Even  the  high  schools  should 
not  be  considered  to  occupy  too  lofty  a 
position  for  their  teachers  to  have  the 
calling  of  soul-winners.     So,  too,  a  professor 

304 


of  theology  should  not  only  rear  scholars, 
but  Christian  disciples.  Whoever  of  us  has 
had  a  Christian  teacher,  whether  in  early 
childhood  or  in  later  youthhood,  either  as 
tutor  or  religious  instructor,  who  did  not 
spare  labour  and  application  to  be  faithful 
in  little  things  and  to  the  little  ones,  on 
whose  brow  the  earnestness  of  eternity 
seemed  written,  who  therefore  understood 
how  to  make  a  Scripture  lesson  instructive, 
because  he  himself  believed  in  it ;  who  knew 
how  to  train  for  the  Saviour,  because  to  the 
Saviour  he  himself  belonged, — whoever  has 
had  such  a  teacher  will  daily  pray,  Hallowed 
be  Thy  name  among  teachers  and  scholars ; 
may  Thy  kingdom  come  into  the  schools  and 
through  the  schools. 

"  Zion's  desolate  paths  repair ; 
Whate'er  can  stay  Thine  own  dear  word's 

free  way, 
Remove,  ah  !  swift  remove  it,  Lord,  away  : 

Eradicate  vain  unbelief's  despair ; 
From  every  selfish  hireling  set  us  free, 
That   Church  and   school   may  both   God's 
garden  be." — Kbgel,  "  Predigt." 

Ver.  12.  All  public  teaching  partakes  of 
the  pastoral  office. — Literary  men  and  writers 
for  the  journalistic  press  should  look  into  the 
mirror  of  our  gospel  for  self-examination, 
and  arraign  themselves  before  conscience 
as  to  whether  they  have  sought  to  implant 
and  foster  ideal  opinions,  or  materialistic 
opinions  with  the  mark  of  the  beast  and  the 
sycophancy  of  the  serpent ;  whether  they  have 
spared  and  defended  the  sanctuary,  or  have 
laid  it  in  ashes  with  the  torch  of  a  Hero- 
stratus  ;  whether  they  are  incorruptible  or 
venal.  They  also — yes,  they  also — have  the 
office  of  public  teachers,  and  have  affinity 
with  the  pastoral  office  ! — Idem. 

Ver.  14.  Following  Christ. — If  from  the 
tree,  under  which  he  had  last  rested,  the 
shepherd  has  broken  off  a  green  branch  and 
holds  it  behind  him,  then  the  flock  follow. 
If  he  turns  round  and  invites  them  with 
gentle  voice,  then  they  follow  him.  Yet 
they  follow  also  even  when  he  does  not  look 
back  at  them,  but  silently  and  steadfastly  ad- 
vances. You  will  follow  if  Christ  breaks  off 
for  you  green  twigs  from  the  tree  of  grace. 
You  will  follow  when  He  invites  you  with 
the  sweet  voice  of  His  gentleness,  when  He 
gives  you  what  your  heart  desires.  But 
that  is  not  enough.  When  He  goes  forward 
as  if  He  had  forgotten  you,  when  for  days 
and  weeks  and  months  you  have  not  con- 
sciously received  any  glance  of  His  grace, 
then  must  you  still  follow.  There  have 
been  many  in  the  Church  ...  on  whom 
spiritual  peace  and  freedom  have  never 
smiled,  and  yet  they  have  followed  on. 
Although  (internally  and  externally)  they 
have  had  to  press  on  through  thorns  and 
thickets,  they  have  followed  His  footsteps. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY;   ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.  X. 


Such  only  are  of  His  true  flock.  So  must 
you  learn  to  follow  Him.  Oh,  this  follow- 
ing, unconditional  following,  let  Him  lead 
how  He  will — this  is  a  theme  suited  to 
our  times  I  When  darkness  falls,  incon- 
tinently must  you  hold  closely  to  the  good 
Shepherd.  For  in  times  of  tribulation  and 
anxiety  the  wolf  crouches  beside  every  path. 
Especially  at  such  times  the  Christian  will 
keep  close  to  the  Shepherd  and  the  flock, 
for  each  individual  may  readily  become  a 
prey.  Especially  at  such  times  must  the 
lambs,  the  young  in  Christ,  be  kept  near 
Him,  for  they  are  not  yet  firmly  established 
in  His  way.  They  are  easily  enticed  away, 
one  knows  not  how.  But  he  who  thus 
keeps  himself,  and  his,  close  to  Christ  can  be 
of  good  cheer,  even  when  night  falls  around. 
— Translated  from  Ahlfeld,  "  Predigt" 

Y  Ver.  16.  "  Other  sheep,  not  of  this  fold." — 
John  Wesley  once,  in  the  visions  of  the 
night,  found  himself,  as  he  thought,  at  the 
gates  of  hell.  He  knocked  and  asked  who 
were  within.  "Are  there  any  Koman 
Catholics  here  ?  "  he  asked.  "  Yes,"  was 
the  answer,  "  a  great  many."  "  Any  Church 
of  England  men  ?  "  "  Yes,  a  great  many." 
"  Any  Presbyterians  ?  "  "  Yes,  a  great 
many."  "Any  Independents?"  "Yes,  a 
great  many."  "  Any  Baptists  1 "  "  Yes,  a 
great  many."  "  Any  Wesleyans  here  1 " 
"  Yes,  a  great  many."  Disappointed  and  dis- 
mayed, especially  at  the  last  reply,  he  turned 
his  steps  upward  and  found  himself  at  the 
gates  of  paradise,  and  here  he  repeated  the 
same  questions.  "Any  Wesleyans  here?" 
"No."  "  Any  Presbyterians  ?  "  "No."  "Any 
Church  of  England  men  ? "  "  No."  "  Anv 
Roman  Catholics  ? "  "No."  "Any  Baptists?" 
"  No."  "  Any  Independents  ?  "  "  No." 
"  Whom  have  you  here,  then  ? "  he  asked 
in  astonishment.  "  We  know  nothing 
here,"  was  the  reply,  "  of  any  of  those 
names  you  have  mentioned.  The  only 
name  of  which  we  know  anything  here  is 
1  Christian.'  We  all  are  Christians  here ; 
and  of  these  we  have  a  great  multitude 
which  no  man  can  number,  of  all  nations, 
and  kindreds,  and  peoples,  and  tongues." — 
From  tJie  "Quiver." 

Vers.  17, 18.  The  meaning  of  the  self-sacri- 
fice of  Christ. — He  died  of  His  own  free  will. 
From  the  very  beginning  His  obedience  was 
voluntary.  His  incarnation  loses  its  whole 
meaning  and  value,  unless  we  understand  it 
as  the  willing  entrance  into  our  condition 
for  our  sakes  of  the  Son  of  God.  For  our 
sakes  He  deigned  and  consented  to  be  born, 
even  as  for  our  sakes  He  deigned  and  con- 
sented to  die.  He  had  before  Him  all  the 
way  what  He  was  to  pass  through.    In  the 


very  beginning  of  His  ministry  the  same 
thought  came  over  His  spirit  that  crossed  it 
at  the  end ;  and  He  said  that  He  had  to  be 
lifted  up  even  as  the  serpent  was  lifted 
up  in  the  wilderness.  This  gives  their 
whole  meaning  to  His  sufferings.  The  very 
essence  of  sacrifice  lies  in  the  spirit ;  and  if 
the  spirit  of  Jesus  Christ  had  rebelled,  or  if 
He  had  been  but  the  feeble  victim  of  an 
enormous  wrong,  His  sacrifice  would  have 
been  of  no  value.  So  if  the  shocks  and 
storms  of  life  had  taken  Him  unawares,  as 
they  take  us,  the  meaning  of  that  life  would 
not  have  been  what  it  is.  But  we  know  that 
He  counted  the  cost,  that  every  step  of  His 
restless,  wandering  life  brought  Him  nearer 
Jerusalem,  where  the  prophets  were  slain, 
and  that  He  freely  willed  to  die  for  us.  If 
I  had  known,  we  often  say,  what  I  had  to 
pass  through,  I  never  could  have  lived. 
He  knew  it  all,  and  loaded  with  the  weight 
of  this  foreknowledge,  He  went  through  it 
for  our  sakes. —  W.  Robertson  Nicoll. 

Ver.  21.  Misjudgments  of  the  world. — 
"  Your  studies  have  turned  your  head, 
Paul."  Such  was  the  judgment  of  the  cool 
worldling  on  the  inspired  witness  of  the 
truth.  And  we  cannot  much  wonder  at  the 
heathen  Roman,  since  he  had  no  concep- 
tion of  the  light  of  Gospel  truth,  or  the 
sacred  fire  of  the  apostolic  spirit  of  wit- 
ness-bearing. But  does  not  the  Christian 
world  sometimes  judge  very  similarly  to- 
day ?  Is  it  given  to  a  preacher  to  handle 
the  sword  of  the  Spirit  with  power,  then  the 
world  may  not  be  disinclined  to  allow  that 
he  has  a  certain  amount  of  talent,  but  they 
are  of  opinion  that  he  lets  his  light  shine 
simply  for  the  sake  of  glory.  That  it  is  a 
heartfelt  matter  with  him  they  will  hardly 
credit ;  or  they  then  say  about  him,  *'  Much 
learning  makes  him  mad."  If  a  Christian 
seek  to  be  earnest  in  his  Christianity,  in 
his  faith,  life,  and  walk,  then  if  the  cool 
worldlings  do  not  set  him  down  as  a 
hypocrite,  they  will  dub  him  an  extravagant 
fanatic,  whose  excessive  Bible-reading  and 
church-going  have  turned  his  head ;  and 
again  the  cry  is,  "  Paul,  thou  art  beside 
thyself."  This  is  a  very  usual  judgment  of 
the  man  of  the  world  on  the  man  of  God. 
His  childlike  faith  is  set  down  as  spiritual 
narrowness,  his  earnest  Christian  walk  as 
hypocrisy,  his  blessed  Christian  hope  as  a 
vain  dream  ;  whilst  the  man  of  the  world's 
own  lukewarmness  is  reckoned  as  sobriety  of 
judgment,  prudence,  illumination,  and  cul- 
ture. So  did  they  judge  of  the  witnesses  of 
truth  at  Pentecost :  "  They  are  full  of  new 
wine."  And  of  Christ  Himself,  the  light  of 
the  world,  they  said,  "He  is  mad,  and  hath 
a  demon." — Karl  Gerok,  "Predigt" 


305 


chap.  x.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ;    ST.  JOHN. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  22—41. 

Vers.  22-39.  The  power  of  prejudice  in  blinding  men  to  the  truth. — The  feast  of 
dedication  (vide  Notes)  was  not  of  divine  appointment.  Attendance  at  Jerusalem 
was  not  demanded ;  it  could  be  held  elsewhere.  Still,  it  was  a  festival  that 
appealed  to  patriotic  hearts.  A  feast  of  joy  it  was ;  marks  of  sorrow  were  to 
be  banished ;  the  city  was  illuminated,  etc.  Its  celebration  could  not  fail  to 
awaken  in  the  hearts  of  the  people  a  desire  for  freedom  from  the  Roman  yoke. 
Jesus  seized  the  opportunity  to  meet  the  leaders  of  His  people  and  again  assert 
His  claims.  They,  it  seemed,  were  equally  anxious  to  have  those  claims  decided. 
Notice,  1.  The  eager  inquiry  ;  2.  The  clear  answer;  3.  The  malignant  charge 
begotten  of  prejudice  and  disappointment ;  4.  The  calm  refutation. 

I.  The  eager  inquiry. — 1.  Among  the  crowds  at  the  feast  Jesus  walked  intent 
on  His  mission.  It  was  never  forgotten.  It  was  winter  not  only  in  the  outer 
world,  but  even  at  this  festival  time  in  the  hearts  of  the  Jews — a  winter  of 
despair  of  deliverance.  Would  a  springtide  of  freedom  ever  bloom  again  for  the 
nation  ?  2.  Would  this  claimant  to  the  Messiahship  bring  such  a  blessed  period  ? 
They  had  been  meditating  on  Christ's  words.  All  men  indeed  had  been 
"  musing  in  their  hearts "  concerning  Him.  Could  He  be  the  messenger  pre- 
dicted by  the  ancient  prophetic  words  in  passages  read  during  tKe  festival  ? 
(Zech.  ii.  10,  iii.  8,  etc.).  "  Tell  us  plainly,"  they  cried,  we  may  imagine,  in 
despairing  tone.  "  We  would  fully  understand  the  meaning  displayed,  yet 
hidden,  under  Thy  parables.     Art  Thou  the  Messiah  ? " 

II.  The  clear  answer. — 1.  In  His  reply  Jesus  pointed  them  to  the  fact  that 
He  had  often  told  them  (see  Notes).  And  again,  in  patient  love,  He  pointed  to 
His  teaching,  which  they  had  heard,  as  it  was  delivered  openly ;  and  to  His 
works,  mighty  and  beneficent,  in  proof  of  His  claim  to  be  the  good  Shepherd  of 
His  people,  the  divine  Son  sent  by  the  Father.  2.  And  then  He  showed  them  that 
it  was  because  their  inner  spirit  had  no  true  affinity  with  Him  and  with  the 
Father  that  they  lingered  still  outside  His  fold.  It  was  because  of  this  that 
they  could  not,  would  not,  enter  into  the  blessedness  of  His  flock — eternal  life 
and  eternal  safety.  3.  His  flock,  who  follow  Him,  know  and  rejoice  in  this 
blessedness  ;  for  their  ground  of  confidence  is  in  the  Eternal.  They  realise  that 
the  good  Shepherd  is  one  in  love  and  power  with  the  Father.  And  to  leave 
those  Jews  in  no  doubt  as  to  His  claim  and  position  He  added  the  sublime 
words,  "  I  and  My  Father  are  one." 

III.  The  malignant  charge  begotten  of  prejudice  and  disappointment. — 
1.  We  can  in  a  measure  understand  the  effect  such  words  would  have  on  those  Jews 
who  had  listened  to  them,  biassed  by  the  training  of  rabbinical  traditionalism 
and  blinded  by  prejudice.  This  the  Messiah  they  dreamed  of,  longed  for  !  Away 
the  thought  !  Their  law,  the  prophetic  word,  Christ's  own  heavenly  teaching  and 
mighty  works,  all  went  for  nothing,  the  memory  of  them  was  clean  blotted  out, 
as  prejudice  and  hate  rose  within  them.  These  blinded  their  eyes  to  the  truth. 
And  it  was  not  that  this  prejudice  and  hate  arose  from  ignorance.  In  such  a 
case  they  are  in  part  excusable.  Here  they  arose  from  spiritual  pride  and 
obstinate  self-will.  "  Ye  will  not  come  to  Me,"  etc.  (v.  40).  This  was  their 
condemnation.  2.  And  their  action  is  a  warning  for  all  time.  How  often  do 
intellectual  or  religious  prejudices  keep  men  from  truth,  and  lead  to  acts  of 
sinful  violence  ?  Thus  the  Jews,  led  away  by  their  prejudices  and  prepossessions 
into  rage  and  madness,  seized  the  stones  scattered  around — there  were  building 
operations  proceeding  on  the  yet  unfinished  temple — and  were  ready  to  stone  our 
Lord,  putting  forward  as  their  excuse  His  alleged  blasphemy.  They  clearly 
understood,  it  is  evident,  the  nature  and  extent  of  His  claim.     They  would  even 

306 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  x. 


have  been  inclined  to  so  far  admit  that  it  had  been  proved ;  but  its  loftiness, 
unworldliness,  and  spirituality  opposed  and  defeated  their  temporal  expectations, 
and  their  answer  to  Christ's  claims  were  hatred,  rage,  and  stones  uplifted  ready 
to  be  cast  at  Him.  This  has  always  been  the  reply  of  traditionalism  baffled  by 
the  clear  presentation  of  truth,  e.g.  the  Inquisition  and  the  Reformation,  the 
Vatican  and  Galileo,  Savonarola,  etc. 

IV.  The  calm  refutation. —  1.  Calmly  and  unmoved  the  Saviour  repelled  their 
charge,  and  convinced  them  for  the  moment  of  the  folly  of  their  action.  He 
referred  them  to  their  sacred  Scriptures,  which  they  believed  "  could  not  be  made 
void,"  in  which  even  unjust  and  tyrannical  judges  are  called  gods  (vide  Notes, 
vers.  34-36).  "  If  you  find  no  blasphemy  in  those  words  of  the  Scriptures  you 
revere,  how  can  you  charge  Me  with  such  a  crime,  when  by  word  and  work  I 
have  testified  to  you  the  justice  of  My  claim?"  2.  They  were  silent,  but  not 
convinced.  It  was  their  heart  that  needed  to  be  changed  and  converted.  They 
would  fain  have  seized  Him ;  but  conscience,  and  a  moral  power  emanating  from 
the  Saviour's  person,  making  itself  felt  (vide  Notes,  ver.  39),  paralysed  them,  and 
so  "  He  passed  out  of  their  hand." 

Vers.  28-30.  The  eternal  safety  of  Christ's  people. — Believers  stand  firmly  on 
the  promises  of  God  in  Christ.  When  men  believe  in  Him,  they  find  all  the 
promises,  so  far  as  they  refer  to  this  life,  to  be  yea  and  amen.  This  is  surely  an 
earnest  that  the  promises  for  the  future  will  also  be  fulfilled.  Believers  know 
how  the  power  of  the  risen  life  works  within  them ;  and  as  they  know  from 
experience  that  Jesus  is  the  same  yesterday  and  to-day,  so  they  are  assured  He 
will  be  for  ever.     His  promises  do  not  and  will  never  fail. 

I.  Christ  is  the  giver  of  eternal  life. — 1.  That  spiritual  and  undying  life 
begins  here.  It  is  felt  pulsating  thiough  all  the  avenues  of  being.  The  believer 
is  "  a  new  creation  :  old  things  are  passed  away ;  behold,  they  have  become  new." 
2.  But  it  is  an  earnest  of  the  eternal  life  to  come.  The  most  of  men  believe  in 
an  immortality  of  some  sort.  Even  the  longing  for  it  in  our  hearts  is  in  some 
sort  an  evidence ;  for  this  desire  was  not  implanted  in  vain,  surely.  The  incom- 
pleteness around  seems  to  demand  a  state  where  the  imperfect  will  be  fully 
rounded.  3.  The  world's  greatest  uninspired  thinkers  have  not,  however,  been 
able  to  rise  to  the  conception  of  eternal  life  given  us  in  the  gospel.  They  could 
not  pronounce  definitely  on  the  question  of  personality.  But  our  Lord  revealed 
this  truth.  It  is  no  mere  vague,  unconscious  existence  He  gives.  It  is  eternal 
life, — life  pulsating,  vigorous  as  that  of  the  little  child  raised  at  His  word, 
Talitha  cumi ;  or  that  of  Lazarus  sitting  with  his  Lord  at  the  supper  table  at 
Bethany  (xii.  2) ;  or  higher  still,  that  of  His  own  glorified  person,  as  He  appeared 
to  His  disciples  after  His  resurrection.  4.  And  this  personal,  individual,  eternal 
existence  comes  through  living  union  with  the  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  our  souls. 
Our  Shepherd's  hands  will  hold  us  with  invulnerable  might  when  we  are  thus 
united  with  Him. 

II.  The  ground  of  the  believer's  safety. — 1.  The  Father  gives  the  Son  His 
believing  people  (vi.  37,  39),  gives  Him  unlimited  power  "  over  all  flesh,"  so  that 
He  may  give  eternal  life,  etc.  (xvii.  2).  And  the  Father  does  not  give  the  Son 
an  inheritance  which  may  be  taken  from  Him.  The  wicked  imagine  it  is 
possible  (Ps.  ii.  2,  3  ;  Luke  xx.  14 ;  Acts  iv.  29).  But  He  that  sits  in  heaven, 
who  is  over  all,  will  paralyse  every  foe.  So  that  even  supposing  it  were  possible, 
a  mere  supposition,  that  any  could  pluck  Christ's  sheep  out  of  His  hand,  still 
they  would  have  to  reckon  with  Him  who  is  above  all.  2.  More  than  that; 
there  is  in  reality  no  distinction  between  the  power  of  Christ  and  the  power  of 
the  Father  here.  The  sublime  utterance,  "  I  and  My  Father  are  one,"  dispels 
every  fear.     Believers  are  equally  the  care  of  Christ  and  the  Father.     There  is 

307 


CHAP.   X. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


unity  of  will,  of  power,  of  property,  of  nature  between  them.  Therefore,  as 
Jesus  said,  "All  Mine  are  Thine,"  etc.  (xvii.  10).  The  Father  did  not  give 
them  from  His  hand,  as  He  gave  them  to  the  Son  as  chief  Shepherd.  In  the 
Son's  hand  they  are  also  in  the  Father's.  3.  "  Our  salvation,  therefore,  rests  on 
almighty  power"  (1  Pet.  i.  5).  "He  who  holds  in  His  right  hand  seven  stars," 
etc.  (Rev.  i.  16),  is  the  Lord,  the  eternal  Son.  "If  He  is  for  us,  who  can  be 
against  us  ? " 

III.  The  blessedness  of  this  promise  should  be  a  motive  to  joyful  enduring, 
— 1.  Believers  should  seek  to  rise  to  full  trust  in  this  promise.  This  will  give 
them  strength  for  duty  and  courage  in  temptation  or  trial.  2.  The  assured 
prospect  that  all  things  will  "  work  together  for  good,"  whether  life  or  death, 
will  give  them  joy  and  comfort  in  their  course.  3.  This  trust  also  will  give 
them  more  power  for  good  in  the  world.  The  doubting,  fearing,  backsliding — 
these  are  the  weakness  of  the  Church.  Those  who  go  manfully  forward, 
trusting  on  those  divine  promises,  are  the  "lights  in  the  world,"  "the  salt  of  the 
earth." 


HOMILETIC  NOTES. 


"Ver.  41.  Upon  what  kind  of  life  did 
Jesus  Christ  set  the  seal  of  His  blessing  ? 
— 1.  He  specially  blessed  the  spirit  and 
ministry  of  John  the  Baptist ;  and  yet 
John  did  no  miracle,  (a)  It  is  possible 
to  be  true,  (6)  courageous,  (c)  self- 
controlled,  (d)  illustrious,  and  yet  to 
do  no  miracle.  2.  That  this  approval 
was  in  no  sense  exceptional  is  made 
plain  by  other  parts  of  Jesus  Christ's 
recognition  of  man's  life  and  work. 
(a)  Seventy  returned,  (b)  cup  of  cold 
water,  (c)  employment  of  talents.  All 
this  is  made  the  clearer  by  a  case  on  the 
other  side,  "  In  Thy  name  done  many 
wonderful  works,"  etc.  When  did  Jesus 


Christ  ever  set  a  man  in  high  honour 
in  His  kingdom  simply  because  the 
man  was  a  worker  of  miracles  ?  What, 
then,  are  the  qualities  which  God  most 
esteems  in  us  ?  "A  meek  and  quiet 
spirit,  which  in  the  sight,"  etc.  "  The 
Lord  loveth  a  cheerful  giver,"  etc. 
Nowhere  is  the  brilliant  man  singled 
out,  etc.  "  Many  that  are  first,"  etc. 
1.  A  word  to  the  poor;  2.  women; 
3.  nobodies.  What  doth  the  Lord  thy 
God  require  of  thee  1  Miracles  ?  "  To 
do  justly,"  etc.  Covet  earnestly  the 
best  gifts,  and  yet  charity  above  all ! — 
Dr.  Joseph  Parker. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  28.  Certainty  of  salvation. — We  are 
certain  of  our  salvation,  since  we  know  it 
rests  in  the  hand  of  Christ.  Those,  however, 
who  seek  it  through  the  saints  or  by  their 
own  works,  let  them  take  heed  as  to  what 
sort  of  assurance  they  have.  The  most  part 
doubt,  some  despair. — Lyser  U.S. 

That  Church  which  erects  doubt  as  to  the 
believer's  state  of  grace  into  a  dogma  leads 
one  to  assume  that  she  wishes  her  faithful 
adherents  to  entertain  a  certain  reserve  or 
fear  in  reference  to  the  reception  of  the 
witness  of  the  Holy  Ghost  within  them,  lest 
that  by  the  complete  cessation  of  doubt  a 
too  great  inner  freedom  and  self-depend- 
ence should  spring  up  in  them.  The 
Christian — it  would  almost  seem  as  if  they 
meant  this — should  never  attain  to  full 
spiritual    freedom,  in    case    he  should  no 

308 


longer  feel  the  need  of — should,  indeed,  feel 
independent  of — the  manifold  and  often 
repeated  means  of  help  provided  by  the 
Church. — Thiersch,  in  Besser's  "  Bibelst." 

Ver.  29.  The  Creator  keeps  His  word  with 
us.  .  .  .  Will  you,  with  vast  cost  and  pains, 
educate  your  children  to  be  adepts  in  their 
several  arts,  and  as  soon  as  they  are  ready 
to  produce  a  masterpiece  call  out  a  file  of 
soldiers  to  shoot  them  down  ?  We  must 
infer  our  destiny  from  the  preparation. — 
Emerson. 

To  me  the  eternal  existence  of  my  soul 
is  proved  from  my  idea  of  activity.  If  I 
work  incessantly  till  my  death,  nature  is 
bound  to  give  me  another  state  of  existence 
when  the  present  can  no  longer  sustain  my 
spirit. — Goethe, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  xi. 


PAET  IV.   (b.) 

V.  Jesus  at  the  Grave  of  Lazarus  Manifests  Himself  as  Love  and  Power. 

1.  The  return  from  Persea  to  Bethany  after  the  death  of  Lazarus  (vers.  1-16). 

2.  The  fact  of  a  resurrection  asserted  to  Martha,  and  the  great  declaration 
made,  "  I  am  the  resurrection  and  the  life  "  (vers.  17-32). 

3.  The  love  and  sympathy  of  Jesus  shown  to  the  sorrow-stricken  sisters 
(vers.  17-36). 

4.  The  internal  spiritual  struggle  of  Christ  with  death  and  unbelief,  and  His 
manifestation  of  Himself  as  the  life  at  the  grave  of  Lazarus  (vers.  37-44). 

5.  The  antagonism  of  the  world  and  unbelief,  as  represented  by  the  Pharisees 
and  the  religious  rulers,  contrasted  with  the  faith  of  other  witnesses  of  the 
miracle  (vers.  45,  46). 

6.  The  final  decision  of  the  unbelieving  world  (vers.  47-53). 

7.  The  withdrawal  of  Jesus  to  the  wilderness,  and  the  thoughts  of  various 
classes  of  men  concerning  Him  during  His  absence  before  the  passover 
(vers.  54-57). 

Third  Year  of  our  Lord's  Ministry. 
Time,  and  place  in  Synoptic  narrative. — See  Chap,  x.,  p.  283. 

CHAPTER  XI. 

EXPLANATORY  AND   CRITICAL  NOTES. 

The  Raising  of  Lazarus. 

Vers.  1,  2.  The  various  theories  as  to  the  reason  why  this  great  miracle  is  not  recorded  by 
the  other  Evangelists  need  not  be  fully  discussed  in  .this  commentary,  nor  the  rationalistic 
theories  which  seek  to  explain  it  away.  But  see  note,  pp.  70-72.  Lazarus. — I.e.  -nx6,  a 
shortened  form  of  nwbw,  Eleazar.  Bethany. — See  note,  xii.  1.  Town  (kw/j,t)). — I.e.  village. 
Mary  and  her  sister  Martha. — They  are  thus  mentioned  as  people  whose  names  were  familiar 
to  those  for  whom  this  Gospel  was  first  written  (Luke  x.  38-42).  This  is  further  shown  in 
ver.  2.  The  attempts  made  to  connect  this  narrative  with  the  parable  in  Luke  xvi.  are 
not  convincing  ;  nor  are  those  which  seek  to  identify  Mary  with  Mary  Magdalene,  and  the 
latter  with  the  woman  who  was  a  sinner,  who  anointed  Jesus'  feet  at  the  house  of  a  Pharisee 
(Luke  vii.  36-50). 

Ver.  3.  Therefore  the  sisters,  etc. — They  felt  sure  of  Christ's  sympathy  and  help.  Thou 
lovest  ihv  <pi\e?s). — I.e.  lovest  with  a  personal  affection. 

Ver.  4.  For  the  glory  of  God. — This  crowning  miracle,  the  last  and  greatest  of  the  series  of 
seven  recorded  by  St.  John,  had  the  same  end  as  the  first  miracle  and  all  the  others  (ii.  11). 
For  {vir£p). — "  The  preposition  marks  the  notion  of  '  sacrifice  on  behalf  of.'  .  .  .  There  was 
some  mysterious  sense  in  which  the  sick  man  suffered  in  behalf  of  God's  glory,  and  was  not 
merely  a  passive  instrument "  ( Westcott). 

Ver.  5.  Jesus  loved  ('H7d7ra). — "  dyairda)  is  equivalent  to  diligo,  and  means  the  love  of  choice, 
of  sentiment,  of  confidence  and  esteem  "  (Reynolds).  This  verse  in  a  measure  explains  the 
one  that  follows.  It  shows  that  there  was  some  special  reason  which  prevented  Him 
immediately  setting  out  for  Bethany. 

Ver.  6.  He  abode  two  days,  etc. — Liicke,  Neander,  and  others  suppose  that  His  work 
detained  Him  in  Peraea  (x.  40).  Was  it  now  as  at  Cana :  "  His  hour  was  not  yet  come  " 
(ii.  4)  ? 

Vers.  7,  8.  Master  (Rabbi). — The  Aramaic  word  gives  perhaps  some,  idea  of  the 
reverential  spirit  the  disciples  displayed  toward  Jesus ;  but  it  may  be  said  also  to  hint  at 
that  imperfection  of  their  knowledge  of  His  character  and  mission  which  still  characterised 
them. 

309 


chap.  xi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


Vers.  9,  10.  Jesus  answered,  etc. — He  had  left  Jerusalem  because  the  time  of  His  de- 
parture had  not  come ;  and  also  that  a  further  opportunity  for  repentance  might  be  given  to 
His  enemies.     Now  the  time  is  at  hand,  and  He  will  not  draw  back  fiom  the  conflict. 

Ver.  11.  Lazarus,  our  friend,  hath  fallen  asleep. — Death  does  not  dissolve  friendships  to  the 
good.    Fallen  asleep. — Acts  vii.  60,  etc. 

Vers.  12,  13.  Lord,  if  he  sleep,  etc. — How  natural  is  this !  The  disciples  mistook  our  Lord's 
meaning,  and  were  ready  with  the  common  observation  that  sleep  at  the  crisis  of  a  sickness 
often  gives  hope  of  recovery.  The  disciples  thought  that  now  there  would  be  no  need  that 
Jesus  should  rush  into  danger. 

Ver.  14.  Lazarus  is  dead. — When  the  death  actually  took  place  does  not  appear.  It  would 
most  likely  take  at  least  two  days  to  go  from  where  Jesus  was  to  Bethany.  It  is  a  fair  day's 
journey  on  horseback  from  Bethany  to  the  Jordan,  i.e.  going  at  a  walking  pace  most  of  the 
way,  as  the  roads  do  not  admit  of  anything  else.  So  that  Lazarus  had  died  perhaps  the  day 
after  the  message  came  to  our  Lord. 

Ver.  15.  I  am  glad,  etc. — He  was  glad  He  was  not  there  (not  glad  that  Lazarus  was  dead), 
as  the  issue  of  His  going  now  would  be  the  strengthening  of  their  faith. 

Ver.  16.  Thomas. — Hebrew  Di«n,  from  t»8%  Greek  dldv/xos,  Didymus.  Probably  the  latter 
name  was  that  by  which  he  was  best  known  to  those  among  whom  this  Gospel  was  first 
circulated.  Thomas  represents,  among  the  disciples,  those  whose  minds  have  a  pessimistic 
cast  (xiv.  5,  xx.  25). 

Vers.  18,  19.  Now  Bethany,  etc. — The  circumstantiality  of  the  details  of  this  miracle 
shows  the  deep  impression  it  made  on  the  Evangelist.  The  nearness  of  Bethany  to  Jerusalem 
explains  why  so  many  of  the  Jews  were  able  to  be  present  to  comfort  the  sisters. 

Vers.  20-27.  Martha. — Evidently  she  was  first  informed  of  the  approach  of  Jesus,  as  she 
was  the  elder  of  the  sisters,  and  thus  mistress  in  the  house.  She  is  true  to  her  character  as 
portrayed  in  Luke  x.,  etc. 

Ver.  21.  If  Thou  hadst  been  here. — There  is  no  shadow  of  reproach  in  the  words ;  they  are 
not,  If  Thou  hadst  come  at  once,  not  tarried,  etc.  They  are  simply  the  regretful  utterance 
of  an  imperfect  faith. 

Ver.  22.  Ask. — alr-^a-g  is  not  the  word  Jesus  Himself  uses  when  He  speaks  of  supplicating 
His  Father  (xiv.  16,  etc.)  Martha's  ideas  concerning  our  Lord's  relation  to  the  Father  were 
not  yet  full-rounded.  But,  remembering  Christ's  wonderful  works  at  Nain  and  in  other 
places  (Luke  vii.  11,  etc.),  she  still  cherished  a  faint  hope. 

Vers.  23,  24. — Martha  may  have  expected  a  somewhat  different  reply.  Her  words  seem 
to  indicate  some  disappointment.  A  general  resurrection  she  believed  in — a,  friend  of  Christ 
could  hardly  have  done  otherwise — but  it  was  something  more  immediate  she  had  hoped  for. 

Vers.  25-27.  Jesus  said,  etc. — The  reply  of  Jesus,  He  is  the  resurrection  because  He  is  the 
life,  brings  back  to  Martha  the  feeling  of  hope.  Her  words  imply  her  faith,  that  because 
Christ  is  the  Son  of  God,  the  Messiah,  then  all  things  will  be  well. 

Vers.  28-32.  Evidently  the  conversation  with  Martha  is  not  fully  reported.  Here,  as 
elsewhere  in  this  Gospel  especially,  we  find  evidence  of  the  inspired  wisdom  with  which  the 
narrative  was  composed.     Only  what  is  of  universal  spiritual  import  is  related. 

Ver.  28.  Secretly. — So  that  Mary's  interview  with  Christ  might  be  uninterrupted  by  the 
crowds  of  sympathisers. 

Ver.  30.  Into  the  town,  or  village  (ver.  1). — Jesus  evidently  knew  there  was  a  crowd  of 
mourners,  and  wished  to  see  His  friends  alone  first. 

Ver.  31.  The  Jews,  etc. — After  the  manner  of  Orientals,  they  followed  the  usual  custom. 
Saying,  She  goeth,  etc. — The  best  MSS.  read  "  supposing,"  or  "  thinking  (ddfcpTes)  she  was 
going."  To  weep,  etc. — The  verb  is  /cXafw,  to  wail,  and  is  used  to  express  the  loud  and 
passionate  utterance  of  grief. 

Ver.  32.  Fell  at  His  feet,  etc. — Mary,  as  we  gather  from  all  the  narratives,  was  in  most 
things  unlike  her  practical  sister.  Mary's  nature  was  emotional  and  sensitive.  The  crowds 
gathering  round  interrupted  her  interview  with  the  Saviour,  and  she  could  only  sob  out  the 
words  Martha  had  already  spoken  (ver.  21).  We  seem  thus  to  learn  the  thought  that  had 
been  uppermost  in  the  minds  of  the  sisters,  and  which  they  had  often  expressed  to  each  other. 

Ver.  33.  He  groaned,  etc. — I.e.  He  was  indignant,  expressed  indignant  emotion  in  the 
spirit,  and  troubled  Himself,  i.e.  reflected  in  outward  physical  movement  the  inward 
emotion.  This  seems  to  be  the  clearest  and  best  interpretation  of  the  original.  Various 
explanations  of  the  passage  have  been  given,  according  as  r£  irvtu/naTi  is  taken  as  the 
datfive  of  the  object,  or  as  signifying  the  sphere  of  His  indignation  (see  Homiletic  Note,  p.  325). 

Ver.  34.  Where,  etc. — Equivalent  to  an  invitation  to  lead  the  way  to  the  tomb. 

Ver.  35.  Jesus  wept. — iddicpvaev, "  shed  tears."  Bengel :  laerymatus  est,  nonploravit.  He  shed 
tears,  He  did  not  cry  aloud.  This  is  the  shortest  verse  in  Scripture,  but  it  reveals  more  than 
many  the  tender  human  heart  of  our  great  High  Priest  (Heb.  ii.  17,  iv.  15).  He  wept  in 
sympathy  with  those  weeping  friends.  This  reveals  His  true  humanity,  as  the  miracle 
shows  His  divinity. 

310 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  CHAP.  XI. 


Ver.  36.  Loved  (i<pl\ei).— See  ver.  3. 

Ver.  37.  And  some  of  them,  etc. — Probably  these  were  of  the  number  of  the  unbelieving 
(ver.  46),  and  their  words  indicate  a  feeling  of  doubt  as  to  the  power  of  Jesus.  Being 
natives  of  Jerusalem,  and  siding,  it  may  be,  with  the  enemies  of  Jesus,  they  had  not  heard 
of  His  raising  the  dead.  The  greatest  work  of  His  they  were  acquainted  with  was  the 
miracle  wrought  in  the  man  born  blind  (ix.).  If  it  were  a  reality,  might  Christ  not  also 
have  prevented  the  death  of  Lazarus  ?  The  idea  of  raising  the  dead  was  evidently  beyond 
them. 

Ver.  38.  Jesus  therefore. — The  trouble  was  now  caused,  in  part,  by  the  suspicions  of  those 
Jews.  Cave. — The  sepulchres  were  excavated  in  the  rock  in  the  hillside.  Such  tombs  are 
seen  to-day  about  Bethany  and  Jerusalem,  and  witness  to  the  graphic  touch  of  the  eye-witness 
in  this  narrative.  The  slab  or  stone  covering  the  mouth  of  the  sepulchre  might  be  laid  flat 
if  the  grave  were  a  pit,  or  might  be  laid  against  the  opening  if  the  tomb  were  simply  a 
chamber  in  the  hillside.  That  the  latter  seems  to  have  been  the  form  of  the  cave  at 
Bethany  will  appear  from  a  comparison  of  ver.  44  and  xx.  6  with  the  "  rolled  back"  of  Matt, 
xxviii.  2,  etc. 

Ver.  39.  Martha,  etc. — The  "touch  of  nature"  is  here  most  graphically  brought  before  us. 
Martha  is  not  looking  for  a  present  raising  up  of  her  brother,  and  she  naturally  shrinks 
from  seeing  the  ravages  death  has  made  on  that  form,  and  from  others  seeing  it  with  the 
evident  stamp  of  death  upon  it.  Four  days. — Perhaps  there  is  here  an  allusion  to  the 
Jewish  tradition  that  after  three  days  the  spirit,  which  has  hovered  about  the  tomb,  finally 
leaves  the  changing  body. 

Ver.  40.  Jesus  saith. — A  gentle  rebuke  of  Martha's  "  slowness  of  heart"  to  believe. 

Ver.  41.  Jesus  lifted  up  His  eyes,  etc.  ...  I  thank  Thee  that  Thou  didst  hear  Me. — 
This  is  a  thanksgiving  for  a  prayer  or  request  which  Christ  knew  was  already  granted.  In 
what  was  to  be  done  both  Father  and  Son  should  be  glorified  (ver.  4).  But  to  show  His 
oneness  with  the  Father,  and  the  perfect  accord  of  His  will  with  the  Father's,  Jesus  uttered 
these  words,  so  that  men  might  see  that  He  was  the  "  Sent  of  God." 

Ver.  43.  Loud  voice. — Comp.  Rev.  i.  10 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  16 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  52.  Lazarus,  come 
forth. — devpo  g£«,  here,  out !  Death  does  not  destroy  individuality.  Death  does  not  change 
the  relationship  to  Christ  of  His  own,  or  their  relationship  to  each  other  (comp.  ver.  23 :  Thy 
brother  shall  rise,  etc.). 

Ver.  44.  And  he  that  was  dead  came  forth,  etc. — All  the  details  reveal  the  eye-witness. 
"  The  word  rendered  '  grave-clothes  '  .  .  .  means  properly  the  bands  or  straps  by  which  the 
linen  sheet  was  fastened  to  the  body,  and  which  kept  the  spice  from  falling  out  " — comp.  xix. 
40  (Watkins).  Loose  him,  etc. — The  bystanders  may  be  thought  of  as  standing  petrified  by 
astonishment,  so  that  this  command  was  needed  to  stir  them  into  action  to  do  what  was 
needful,  by  unloosing  the  "bands  or  straps"  (see  above)  that  impeded  free  motion  to 
Lazarus. 

Ver.  45.  Many  .  .  .  which  came  to  Mary. — Those  most  friendly  with  the  family  at  Bethany 
would  not  likely  be  evil-disposed  toward  Jesus,  who  would  be  a  frequent  topic  of  conversa- 
tion there. 

Ver.  46.  But  some  of  them,  etc. — It  is  possible  to  misjudge  their  motives  ;  but  in  view  of 
ix.  22  and  x.  31  their  action  can  hardly  be  viewed  as  friendly. 

Ver.  48.  The  Romans,  etc.— If  Christ  were  to  be  raised  to  the  position  of  leader  of  the 
people  the  jealous  Roman  government  might  take  away  the  last  vestige  of  their  power. 
"  They  feared  temporal  loss  and  incurred  eternal,  and  did  not  even  escape  the  temporal " 
(Augustine).  Place. — Their  position  probably  as  ecclesiastical  rulers  of  the  Jewish  people. 
Thus  both  such  political  and  religious  privileges  as  they  possessed  might  be  endangered, 
they  thought. 

Ver.  49.  Caiaphas. — Joseph  Caiapbas,  son-in-law  of  Annas,  who  had  been  deprived  of  the 
priesthood  by  Valerius  Gratus  (Josephus,  Ant.,  xviii.).  To  conciliate  him  the  members  of 
his  family  were  elected  in  turn  to  the  office.     That  same  year. — I.e.  that  memorable  year. 

Ver.  50.  Caiaphas  was  politically  an  opportunist,  and  an  unscrupulous  one  to  boot.  Justice, 
human  life,  he  little  regarded  where  his  interests  and  those  of  his  class  were  concerned. 
Expediency  must  rule. 

Ver.  51.  Prophesied. — Like  Balaam  (Num.  xxiv.). 

Ver.  53.  Then  from  that  day,  etc. — The  Pharisees  had  now  overcome  their  last  scruples, 
and  united  for  evil  with  the  sceptical  Sadducees. 

Ver.  54.  Jesus  therefore,  etc. — Ephraim  is  said  by  Robinson  to  be  near  Bethel;  and  he 
identifies  it  with  Ephron  (2  Chron.  xiii.  19),  and  this  Ephron  with  Ophrah  (Judges  xviii.  23). 

Ver.  55.  Purify.— 2  Chron.  xxx.  16-20;  Acts  xxi.  24. 

Vers.  56,  57.  Then  sought  they. — The  simple  country  folk  would  have  heard  Jesus  gladly ; 
and  the  commandment  of  the  chief  priests  and  Pharisees  was  no  doubt  given  with  the 
intention  of  making  our  Lord  appear  to  be  one  unworthy  of  their  regard. 

311 


chap.  XL  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—45. 

The  raising  of  Lazarus. — "Let  holy  awe  touch  us  at  the  threshold  of 
this  holy  place  which  We  are  now  to  enter !  All  things  are  possible  to  the 
Almighty,  are  equally  so  to  the  Creator  of  all ;  but  we  call  the  one  greater  than 
the  other.  We  call  that  the  greatest  which  is  the  most  impossible  to  us.  This 
work  of  Jesus,  the  raising  of  Lazarus,  is  the  greatest  when  we  compare  it  with 
what  is  possible  to  men  "  (Lavater).  Our  Lord,  when  this  history  opens,  was 
sojourning  beyond  Jordan.  The  enmity  of  the  Jewish  rulers  in  Jerusalem  led 
Him  to  withdraw  for  a  time  from  the  city,  and  it  was  to  Persea  that  He  turned 
His  steps.  Even  there  He  was  engaged  in  doing  good.  Great  multitudes 
followed  Him,  and  He  healed  them  there  (Matt.  xix.  1  ;  Mark  x.  1) — healed 
them  physically  and  spiritually.  But  He  was  soon  to  be  called  thence  to 
perform  the  greatest  of  His  signs,  and  thus  to  manifest  the  glory  of  God  and 
His  own  glory. 

I.  The  entreating  message  and  the  delay  of  Jesus. — 1.  This  wonderful  history 
introduces  us  to  a  house  where  Jesus  was  willingly  and  lovingly  received  while  on 
earth,  and  in  which  He  was  pleased  to  dwell.  It  was  a  small  household  that 
dwelt  there,  but  their  house  was  a  home  of  peace  and  piety,  and  therefore  full  of 
the  sunshine  of  love.  2.  But  now  the  day  in  the  house  was  darkened.  Trouble 
had  crossed  the  threshold ;  sore  sickness  had  laid  hold  on  a  loved  brother.  It 
was  no  mere  passing  or  temporary  ailment ;  and  as  the  two  loving  sisters  of 
Lazarus  saw  the  disease  rapidly  progressing,  and  threatening  to  lay  the  sufferer 
low  in  death,  with  one  accord  they  sent  an  entreating  message  to  Jesus : 
"Lord,  behold,  he  whom  Thou  lovest  is  sick."  3.  It  was  a  considerate  and 
gentle  message,  as  much  as  to  say,  Thou  wilt  know  what  to  do.  They  did  not 
call  Jesus  away  from  His  work ;  they  did  not  even  ask  that  a  message  of  healing 
should  flash  through  space,  as  between  Cana  and  Capernaum  when  the  nobleman's 
son  was  healed  (iv.  46-54).  They  left  the  matter  to  Jesus,  believing  that  He 
knew  what  was  best ;  but  the  note  of  entreaty  is  there  notwithstanding.  The 
sickness  of  Lazarus  was  evidently  severe ;  nay,  more,  was  dangerous.  4.  When 
Jesus  heard,  He  said,  "  This  sickness  is  not  unto  death,"  etc.  ;  and  He  remained 
still  two  days  in  Persea,  probably  completing  some  work  that  lay  to  hand.  Then, 
in  spite  of  the  remonstrances  of  His  disciples  (who  must  have  been  glad  to  hear 
His  declaration  that  the  sickness  of  Lazarus  was  not  unto  death,  for  they  would 
think  there  was  thus  no  need  for  Him  to  go  to  Bethany),  He  declared  His 
intention  of  going  into  Judaea.  5.  Then  on  the  way  He  told  the  disciples  plainly 
that  Lazarus  was  dead ;  and  although  words  of  hope  were  added  to  the 
announcement,  its  effect  on  the  disciples  was  to  cause  depression,  deepening  in 
the  case  of  one  of  them  into  a  melancholy  resignation.  Lazarus  is  dead ;  Jesus  is 
going  into  the  very  jaws  of  death  ;  "  let  us  also  go,  that  we  may  die  with  Him  " 
(ver.  16).  6.  The  disciples  were  "men  of  like  passions  as  we  are."  (1)  They 
would  have  shrunk,  and  had  their  Master  shrink  from  His  work,  because  danger 
lay  in  the  path.  The  path  of  duty  is  the  path  of  day,  and  even  when  it  leads 
through  what  seem  dark  and  dismal  regions,  light  shall  ever  arise  on  the  dark- 
ness. (2)  How  weak  was  their  faith,  even  after  the  wondrous  works  wrought 
in  their  presence  by  Him  !  How  slowly  the  consciousness  of  their  Master's  true 
nature  and  greatness  dawned  upon  them  ! 

II.  Christ's  coming  with  comfort  to  sorrowing  hearts. — 1.  As  Jesus  tarried, 
hope  died  out  in  the  house  at  Bethany.  The  weary  hours  of  waiting  were 
sorrowfully  ended.  Death  had  entered  and  claimed  its  victim,  and  the  mourners 
were  going  about  the  streets.  The  wistful  message  it  seemed,  had  been  in  vain ; 
and  when  the  news  came  to  the  desolated  home  that  Jesus  was  near,  the  joy  of 

312 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  XL 


seeing  Him  was  absorbed  in  the  heavy  grief  that  bowed  down  the  bereaved  sisters. 
2.  Jesus  had  come !  But  to  those  mourning  ones  He  seemed  to  have  come  too 
late.  "  Lord,  if  Thou  hadst  been  here,  my  brother  had  not  died."  But  the  sorrow 
is  not  hopeless  ;  a  ray  of  hope's  light  shines  through  the  darkness  of  sorrow.  "  I 
know  that  even  now,"  etc.  (ver.  22).  3.  The  reply  of  Jesus  to  Martha  does  not 
quench  her  hope,  but  it  seems  to  remove  it  from  the  present  to  the  future. 
But  still  there  is  comfort  in  the  thought  which,  if  it  does  not  at  once  dry 
up  all  tears,  yet  lightens  the  burden  of  sorrow,  and  points  to  the  hour  when 
the  tears  shall  be  wiped  "  from  every  weeping  eye."  4.  But  there  is  also  a 
foundation  for  the  blessed  assurance  of  this  faith  and  hope  in  the  words  of 
Jesus,  in  which  He  declared  Himself  the  Prince  of  life  (vers.  25,  26).  Martha 
could  not  yet  grasp  this  truth  fully,  as  the  great  personal  proof  had  not  yet  been 
given  by  the  Lord ;  but  she  knew  enough  of  Him  and  His  love  and  power  to 
believe,  though  she  could  not  fully  understand  that  He  was  the  Son  of  God,  the 
Life  of  men.  5.  "  Believest  thou  this  ?  "  Then  it  will  prove  a  source  of  true 
comfort  in  every  hour  of  trouble  and  sorrow.  The  Son  of  God,  the  Life  of  men, 
is  near ;  and  though  you  cannot  understand  His  delay  to  help,  although  your 
prayer  has  been  unanswered  apparently,  and  the  calamity  has  fallen,  the  loved 
ones  have  gone  hence,  still  they  are  not  lost,  they  shall  come  again ;  they  are 
safe  in  the  hands  of  God — and  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God. 

III.  Christ's  manifestation  of  the  divine  glory  at  the  grave  of  Lazarus. — 
1.  At  first  it  appeared  as  if  He  would  show  only  impotent  human  grief,  as  He 
wept  in  sympathetic  sorrow  with  His  sorrowing  friends,  and  evidenced  the  signs 
of  a  conflict  in  His  breast.  But  silence  fell  on  the  multitude  as  He  looked  up  in 
loving  confidence  to  His  Father,  and  amazement  and  awe  as,  in  response  to  His 
word  of  power,  "  Lazarus,  come  forth,"  the  loved  friend  came  forth,  rescued  from 
death  and  the  grave.  2.  Three  times  during  His  ministry  on  earth  the  Lord' 
raised  the  dead — the  child,  the  young  man  on  his  bier,  and  Lazarus  from  his 
tomb.  They  were  all  mighty  signs  of  His  power,  and  must  have  impressed 
unprejudiced  men  that  here  was  One  in  whose  presence  death  itself  must  die. 
And  thus  their  belief  in  a  life  beyond  death,  and  that  death  is  but  temporal,  not 
eternal,  must  have  been  immeasurably  strengthened.  3.  What  would  many  men 
not  give  to  see  before  their  eyes  such  a  proof  of  death  vanquished  !  Nay,  but 
there  is  given  them  a  greater  proof.  "  Jesus  is  the  resurrection  and  the  life." 
His  rising  is  the  sure  foundation  on  which  the  Church  rests,  on  which  our  hopes 
for  eternity  rest.  It  was  not  the  raising  of  Lazarus  that  the  apostles  preached, 
great  and  wonderful  as  was  that  sign ;  it  was  the  rising  again  of  Jesus.  4.  And 
He  comes  with  comfort  as  the  Prince  of  life  to  all  who  sorrow  not  without  hope 
in  Him,  and  says  to  each,  "  If  ye  believe,  ye  shall  see  the  glory  of  God.'*  Ye 
shall  experience  the  power  of  Christ  here  to  give  the  most  blessed  consolation,  to 
bring  joy  with  the  thought  that  the  departed  spirit  has  indeed  been  called  forth 
to  the  Father's  house,  called  to  larger  rooms  and  higher  service,  and  that  we  too 
shall  soon  rejoice  in  meeting  those  gone  before.  "  There  is  but  a  step  betwixt 
us  and  death  ;  nay,  there  is  a  bridge  between  us  and  life  !  To  the  irremissible 
prayer,  Teach  us  to  remember  that  we  must  die ;  add  this  other,  Teach  us  to 
remember  that  we  shall  live." 

Vers.  5  and  1 1 .  The  love  and  friendship  of  Christ  in  the  home. — It  is  the  Redeemer's 
public  ministry,  and  His  intercourse  as  the  Master  with  His  disciples,  that  the 
Evangelists  record.  They  give  only  incidental  glimpses  of  what  may  be  termed 
His  domestic  life.  There  is  in  this  a  divine  purpose  which  makes  the  gospel 
history  unique  as  the  record  of  a  life.  Still  those  incidental  glimpses  are  fruitful 
for  the  Church,  furnishing  example  and  precept  for  the  home  life  ;  and  Christ's 
people  should  come  to  the  consideration  of  them  with  feelings  of  lively  gratitude. 

313 


CHAP.  XL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


They  show  that  our  Lord  in  social  intercourse  acted  on  those  principles  afterward 
shown  by  His  apostles  to  be  necessarily  present  in  Christian  conduct  in  the 
domestic  sphere.  Especially  interesting  are  the  hints  we  gain  from  our  Lord's 
intercourse  with  the  family  at  Bethany,  where  He  was  a  frequent  and  welcome 
guest.     In  thinking  on  this  notice — 

I.  The  Saviour  was  practically  homeless  on  earth  during  His  public  ministry. 
— 1.  He  Himself  said,  "The  foxes  have  holes,"  etc.  (Matt.  viii.  20).  Until  His 
baptism  He  seems  to  have  resided  at  Nazareth  or  near  it.  From  that  time, 
however,  He  appears  rarely  to  have  resided  in  His  former  home.  2.  Nor  did  He 
make  any  special  place  His  home  on  earth  thenceforward.  His  mission  was  to 
found  a  spiritual  house,  to  raise  up  a  spiritual  family.  3.  And  yet  our  Lord 
had  human  feelings  and  affections,  and  His  relinquishment  of  the  comforts  and 
domesticities  of  home  must  be  regarded  as  an  example  of  His  self-sacrificing  love, 
of  His  willingness  to  forgo  and  to  endure  for  the  sake  of  men.  Out  of  pure 
love  to  men  He  laid  aside  for  a  time  the  blessedness  of  the  eternal  home,  took 
upon  Him  our  nature,  dwelt  on  earth  among  men,  was  weary,  hungry,  thirsty, 
etc.,  so  that  He  might  live  the  life  of  willing  obedience  to  the  Father,  as  our 
example,  and  might  die  as  our  propitiation.  And  His  example  emphasised  His 
teaching,  in  which  He  showed  that  there  are  higher  objects  than  earthly  joy,  and 
things  more  important  than  those  of  sense  and  time.     But — 

II.  The  Saviour  rejoiced  in  the  intercourse  of  social  life.— 1.  Human  nature 
calls  for  this.  Men,  as  a  whole,  do  not  delight  in  the  hermit's  solitary  life. 
And  as  our  Saviour  was  truly  human,  we  may  believe  that  it  was  a  delight  to 
Him  to  have  intercourse  with  men.  2.  Although,  in  prosecuting  His  work  on 
earth,  He  went  everywhere,  mixed  with  all  classes  of  society,  endeavouring  to 
"  save  the  lost,"  yet  we  may  believe  He  found  special  delight  in  homes  where 
piety  was  predominant.  3.  Such  a  home  was  that  of  Lazarus  at  Bethany  (also 
that  of  Simon).  Thither  after  His  labour  in  Jerusalem,  and  when  His  spirit  was 
grieved  by  rejection  and  unbelief,  He  resorted  for  rest  and  refreshment,  finding 
these  under  the  roof  of  those  humble,  devoted  disciples.  4.  It  was  a  typical 
home.  The  members  of  the  household  were  of  different  dispositions  and 
temperaments.  It  was,  like  all  the  homes  on  earth,  not  a  perfect  home ;  yet  it 
was  one  where  love  reigned  above  all  differences,  because  love  to  God  was  the 
rule  in  it.  Jesus  rejoiced  in  the  social  intercourse  with  Lazarus  and  his  sisters, 
and  counted  them  His  friends.  In  their  love  and  devotion  to  Him,  in  their  faith 
and  piety,  He  found  solace  and  joy. 

III.  He  brought  blessing  with  Him  to  those  who  received  Him  lovingly. 
— 1.  The  joy  of  having  Him  as  a  guest,  even,  would  be  great  beyond  measure. 
Think  on  the  conversations  concerning  heavenly  things  in  which  the  family  at 
Bethany  were  privileged  to  join.  We  have  brief  reports  given  us  of  such 
conversations  (e.g.  iii.  1-21,  iv.  9-26,  xiii.-xvi.,  etc.).  How  delightful  must 
it  all  have  been  !  2.  And  the  influence  of  the  Saviour  tended  to  bring  peace 
into  that  home.  Where  there  are  people  of  different  temperaments  and 
tastes  living  together  there  will  be  occasions  when  these  will  clash,  and  some- 
times even  good  people  may  have  "  sharp  contentions  "  (Acts  xv.  39).  So  was  it  at 
Bethany.  Martha  seems  to  have  looked  with  impatience,  if  not  with  some  little 
touch  of  scorn,  on  Mary's  quiet,  thoughtful  ways.  But  Jesus  showed  Martha 
that  there  was  a  devotion  which  was  higher  than  that  even  of  hospitable  enter- 
tainment. And  Martha  seems  to  have  recognised  the  justice  of  His  words. 
The  jars  were  silenced  and  peace  reigned.  3.  He  brought  blessed  comfort  to  the 
sisters  in  their  time  of  deepest  sorrow.  His  very  presence  brought  comfort, 
even  though  He  had  delayed  a  little  after  their  modest  message  reached  Him. 
His  tears  of  sympathy  must  have  been  most  blessed,  and  more  so  His  promise 
that  they  need  not  sorrow  as  having  no  hope.     4.  He  brought  to  the  home  at 

314 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  XI. 


Bethany  a  bright  morning  of  joy  after  a  night  of  bitter  weeping.  No  wonder 
that  thankful  adoration  and  love  joyfully  served  Him,  and  poured  on  His  sacred 
head  and  feet  their  costly  offering  (xii.  2,  3). 

Lessons. — 1.  Earth  would  borrow  more  from  heaven  were  the  Saviour 
welcomed  in  Christian  homes  as  He  was  at  Bethany.  2.  There  peace  will  abide, 
because  there  love  reigns.  3.  There  He  will  bring  comfort  and  richest  consolation 
in  time  of  trouble  or  sorrow,  even  though  our  prayer  may  for  the  moment  seem 
unanswered,  and  He  delays  to  come  to  our  aid.  At  the  last  He  will  come 
blessing-laden,  bringing  joy  out  of  sorrow,  making  light  arise  in  the  darkness. 

Vers.  9,  10.  Walk  in  the  day. — In  these  verses  Jesus  points  out  the  true  way 
in  which  we  are  to  view  life.  It  should  be  lived  in  the  light  of  duty.  When  it 
is  thus  lived  all  fear  passes  away ;  for  nothing  but  what  shall  ultimately  lead  to 
the  highest  good  can  befall  those  who  thus  pursue  their  course.  They  may  be 
confident  that  their  life  is  not  unnoticed  from  heaven,  that  their  course  is 
marked  out,  and  the  end  certain.     And  consider : — 

I.  The  period  in  which  our  work  must  be  accomplished. — "Are  there  not 
twelve  hours?"  etc.  1.  Of  course  this  language  is  figurative.  The  reference  is  to 
the  Jewish  day,  the  hours  of  light  from  sunrise  to  sunset.  This  day  was  divided 
into  twelve  hours,  and  again  into  four  divisions.  And  consequently  its  hours 
were  longer  or  shorter  according  to  the  period  of  the  year.  2.  It  is  an  apt 
emblem  of  human  life — childhood,  youth,  manhood,  and  age.  But  in  the  case  of 
many  the  day  is  short ;  it  is  eclipsed  at  morn  or  noon ;  the  winter  of  death  shortens 
its  hours  and  brings  it  quickly  to  a  close.  3.  But  it  is  a  full  day.  Its  full 
hours — all  that  are  needful — are  given  to  each,  be  they  shorter  or  longer.  Each 
has  time  to  do  his  work.  4.  But  it  consists  of  twelve  hours  only — no  more. 
Therefore  if  work  is  to  be  done  it  must  be  within  the  compass  of  that  day. 

II.  How  is  this  allotted  period  to  be  used  by  men  ? — 1.  They  are  to  walk  in 
the  day,  not  to  sleep.  The  period  of  rest  will  soon  come.  But  in  the  day  they 
must  be  up  and  doing.  The  day  is  for  labour  and  action.  Then  our  talents 
must  be  used,  our  powers  employed,  if  when  night  comes  there  is  to  be  any 
reward  for  our  labour.  2.  And  in  and  through  all,  our  heavenly  calling  should 
engage  our  thought,  and  to  it  we  should  give  our  energy.  All  the  rest  must  be 
subordinated  to  it,  and  must  contribute  to  it,  if  the  hours  of  light  and  labour  are 
to  be  used  to  the  full.  3.  Yes ;  and  even  when  the  evening  shadows  begin  to 
fall,  when  "  those  that  look  out  of  the  windows  are  darkened,"  when  "  the 
grasshopper  is  a  burden  "  (Eccl.  xii.),  by  patient  enduring,  by  wise  direction,  by 
giving  the  weighty  counsel  of  experience,  the  hours  of  light  may  be  used  "  till  the 
last  gleam  fadeth." 

III.  In  what  spirit  are  men  to  walk  in  the  day? — They  are  to  be  fearless 
and  confident.  1.  Only  those  who  walk  in  the  murk  of  sin,  who  turn  aside  into 
its  dark  and  deathful  ways,  need  fear.  They  assuredly  shall  stumble,  and  unless 
they  return  shall  utterly  fall.  2.  But  they  who  walk  in  the  right  way,  under 
the  light  of  duty,  cannot  fail.  Danger,  and  death  even,  cannot  conquer  them. 
Even  tribulation  will  prove  to  have  been  not  for  evil,  but  for  good.  They  fear 
not  the  judgments  or  condemnations  of  men,  nor  will  be  turned  from  their  path 
thereby.  Above  them  is  the  light  of  truth — before  them  the  strait  and 
narrow  way.  All  that  meets  them  on  that  path  will  in  the  end  prove  no 
hindrance.  "  Good  shall  be  the  final  goal  of  ill "  to  them.  On  the  way  of  duty 
they  are  rising  ever  nearer  to  God,  even  though  amid  the  press  and  hurry  of  life 
they  seem  to  be  making  little  progress.  3.  But  they  know  that  all  shall  be 
well.  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ? "  And  when  the  day  is 
ended  shall  come  the  time  of  rest.  This  Christ  has  taught  us  by  precept  and 
example. 

315 


chap.  XL  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


Yer.  11.  Death  a  sleep. — This  is  an  image  common  in  other  writings  than  the 
Scriptures,  and  is  used  by  our  Saviour  as  shadowing  forth  one  of  those  universal 
truths  already  in  a  measure  grasped  by  men,  but  which  He  came  to  make  clearly 
known.  He  showed  that  the  longing  for  another  life  beyond  this  scene  had  not 
been  implanted  in  vain  in  the  hearts  of  men.  "  Has  nature,  who  quenches  our 
bodily  thirst,  who  rests  our  weariness  and  perpetually  encourages  us  to  endeavour 
onward,  prepared  no  food  for  this  appetite  of  immortality  1 "  (L.  Hunt).  No ; 
our  Lord  has  declared  it  by  His  teaching  and  resurrection.  But  it  is  only  those 
who  are  in  Him,  His  friends,  who  can  look  on  death  as  a  sleep. 

I.  The  Christian  is  freed  from  the  fear  of  death. — 1.  The  fear  of  death  is 
caused  by  sin  (1  Cor.  xv.  56).  Sin  hides  from  us  the  love  of  God  and  the  sense 
of  His  continual  presence.  The  dread  of  meeting  the  eternal  Judge  haunts  the 
thoughts  of  the  impenitent  and  makes  death  to  them  terrible.  2.  But  Christ  has 
removed  for  all  His  own  this  fear.  Those  who  have  been  seeking  to  live  according 
to  the  Father's  will  do  not  fear  to  enter  into  the  presence  of  His  glory.  3.  The 
fear  of  the  anguish,  etc.,  of  dissolution  is  also  removed.  For  to  the  believer  Christ, 
who  bore  these  pangs  of  dissolution  in  an  extreme  form,  is  with  His  people  to 
comfort  them.  So  that  even  a  Stephen  (and  many  a  martyr  since),  going  hence 
by  such  a  stormy  path,  "  lying  on  so  stony  a  bed,"  could  be  said  to  fall  asleep. 
4.  As  Christ  Himself  has  slept  and  risen  from  this  sleep,  His  people  are 
strengthened  and  cheered  by  His  promise  through  the  apostle  that  those  who 
sleep  in  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  Him  (1  Thess.  iv.  14). 

II.  The  Christian  looks  on  death  as  rest  from  labour. — 1.  As  the  labourer, 
tired  in  the  fields,  lays  down  at  eventide  the  implements  of  his  toil,  so  the 
Christian  labourer,  wearied  in  these  fields  of  time,  lays  aside  his  toil  when  it 
becomes  a  burden.  2.  In  our  present  state  it  is  a  natural  ending  of  physical  life. 
Had  there  been  no  sin,  the  exit  from  life  might  have  been  different,  a  translation 
(like  that  of  Enoch),  or,  at  least,  a  euthanasia.  And  Christ  has  made  this  possible. 
3.  This  image  is  true  to  nature  in  the  case  of  the  good.  It  is  a  calm  and 
tranquil  passage.  Some  "  fall  on  sleep  "  more  slowly  than  others — in  some  cases 
there  is  protracted  disease  ;  but  one  and  all  at  last  sleep.  4.  Yet,  as  when  men 
sleep  they  have  not  abandoned  life,  so  believers  live  on,  life  and  thought  endure, 
unless  we  are  "  magnetic  mockeries,  wholly  brain."  And  would  Christ  have 
deceived  us  as  to  this  ? 

III.  The  Christian  regards  death  as  a  state  of  refreshment  and  renewal. — 

1.  It  is  a  time  of  refreshment  for  the  spirit,  freed  from  the  bondage  of  the 
present,  when  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord  (Luke  xxiii.  43)  it  shall  await  the 
final  regeneration.  2.  It  will  be  a  time  of  renewal  for  the  body,  preparatory  to 
the  hour  when  that  which  is  "  sown  in  corruption  shall  be  raised  in  incorruption," 
and  thus  fitted  to  be  reunited  to  the  waiting,  perfected  spirit  (Heb.  xii.  23). 
3.  It  will  Jbe  prepared  for  the  "  eternal  weight  of  glory  "  (2  Cor.  iv.  17) ;  for  it 
will  rest  to  rise  in  a  new  and  bright  day,  prepared  and  quickened  for  a  higher 
labour. 

IY.  The  Christian  remembers  that  death  has  an  appointed  end. — 1.  The 
night  is  for  sleep;  when  the  sun  rises  man  goes  forth  to  labour.  The  night 
of  death  will  also  have  an  end.     The  Lord  shall  come  and  awaken  all  His  own. 

2.  And  as  when  men  awake  at  morn,  refreshed  and  strengthened,  they  raise 
thankful  hearts  to  God,  so  on  that  resurrection  morn  shall  rise  songs  of 
gratitude  and  praise,  never  to  cease  eternally. 

Yer.  16.  Dark  forebodings. — This  word  of  Thomas  was  the  expression  of  his 
character.  He  was  ever  looking  on  the  dark  side  of  things.  He  was  hungering 
fully  to  believe,  but  was  yet  haunted  by  doubt.  He  is  a  type  of  many.  And  it 
is  comforting  to  remember  that  Jesus  included  such  a  one  among  His  apostles 

316 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  XI. 


— one  whose  faith  was  so  imperfect.  The  gospel  is  thus  seen  to  be  fitted  for  men 
of  all  temperaments.  Thomas  had  forecast  the  probable  issue  of  this  journey  to 
Judsea.  His  mind  was  filled  with  the  gloomiest  apprehensions.  Yet  he  would 
not  hold  back ;  he  felt  bound  to  Jesus,  and  resolved  to  follow  Him  to  the  death. 
His  words  show — 

I.  A  melancholy  and  pessimistic  temperament. — 1.  The  speech  is  characteristic 
of  Thomas.  The  same  dark  way  of  looking  at  things  was  brought  out  later, 
when  in  the  upper  chamber  he  said,  "  Lord,  we  know  not  whither  Thou  goest," 
etc.  (xiv.  5).  2.  A  spirit  of  dejection  seized  him  at  the  thought  of  what  lay 
before  them  in  Judaea.  They  had  hoped  so  much  from  Christ.  They  had  been 
convinced  that  He  was  the  Messiah,  that  He  had  only  to  show  Himself  for  men 
to  recognise  Him.  But  it  had  all  turned  out  so  different  from  what  they  expected. 
But  if  He  were  not  to  bring  deliverance,  who  would  or  could  1  And  now  that 
hope  had  vanished  it  would  be  better  that  their  shattered  hopes  should  be 
buried  in  oblivion  with  Him.  3.  Not  unlike  this  is  the  pessimistic  spirit  in  the 
case  of  some  even  in  the  Christian  Church.  The  gospel  does  not  seem  to  be 
making  progress.  Is  it  destined  to  pass  away  like  other  religions  ?  Where, 
however,  can  a  better  be  found  ?  Therefore  they  will  cling  to  it  in  a  manner, 
hoping  against  hope.     Thomas'  words  further  show — 

II.  Weakness  of  faith. — 1.  The  faith  of  Thomas  seems  to  us  miserably  weak 
when  we  reflect  on  all  that  he  had  seen  and  heard  with  Jesus.  2.  But  this 
disciple  was  like  those  whom  Jesus  met  on  the  way  to  Emmaus.  They  had 
heard  His  teaching  concerning  the  spirituality  of  His  kingdom — His  warnings 
as  to  what  would  befall  Him  and  them.  But  they  had  refused  thoroughly  to 
believe  what  they  had  heard.  They  put  their  own  interpretation  on  His 
words.  Consequently  when  the  hour  of  darkness  came  their  feeble  faith  and 
hope  for  the  time  failed  them.  3.  And  so  it  is  now.  In  view  of  the  troubles 
that  arise  within  and  the  storms  that  rage  around  the  Church  many  are  dis- 
couraged. The  seeming  loss  of  hold  of  the  Church  on  the  masses,  and  also  on 
many  of  the  cultured  class,  the  rise  and  spread  of  socialistic  and  secularistic 
opinions  and  systems,  the  spreading  abroad  of  sceptical  ideas  and  the  attacks  of 
rationalism,  have  all  alarmed  them.  The  doubts  of  the  age  have  found  congenial 
soil  in  their  pessimistic  temperament.  4.  Yet  they  cannot  think  of  losing  or 
forsaking  the  Church  entirely.  The  fall  of  the  Church  they  realise  will  mean 
the  fall  of  hope  for  the  world.  Therefore  they  remain  in  it :  yet  often  as  those 
troubles  accumulate  they  almost  wish  the  conflict  were  past  and  the  rest  begun. 
But  these  words  are  also — 

III.  An  expression  of  deep  affection. — 1.  Love  to  the  Saviour  was  very  real 
in  the  heart  of  this  melancholy  and  desponding  disciple.  "  To  whom  shall  we  go," 
whether  He  shall  lead  to  life  or  death?  is  the  feeling  of  his  heart.  2.  And  this 
is  the  hope  in  his  despairing  utterance,  this  is  the  bright  ray  that  lightens  up 
his  sombre  character — personal  love  to  the  Saviour.  3.  Those  who  have  this 
love — a  love  that  is  true  unto  death — shall  not  be  left  in  their  darkness.  The 
light  shall  arise  upon  them.  Thomas  was  led  to  the  light,  and  rejoiced  in  it. 
The  Evangelist  who  tells  of  his  darker  experiences  tells  also  of  his  noble  confession 
(xx.  28). 

IV.  There  is  a  spiritual  sense  in  which  these  words  may  be  echoed. — 1.  All 
Christ's  true  disciples  are  called  to  follow  Him,  to  die  with  Him.  2.  They  must 
accompany  Him  to  Gethsemane  and  Calvary.  Spiritually  they  are  to  die, 
spiritually  to  be  buried  with  Him,  in  order  that  they  may  rejoice  in  His  risen 
life.  They  die  with  Him,  but  it  is  unto  sin ;  they  rise  with  Him,  unto  newness 
of  life. 

Vers.  25,  26.  Jesus,  the  resurrection  and  the  life. — Turn  where  we  will  in  our 

317 


chap.  xi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


speculations,  let  our  thoughts  be  actively  concerned  with  many  things  in  heaven 
and  in  earth,  let  us  be  immersed  as  deeply  as  it  is  possible  to  be  in  the  many 
occupations  and  busied  with  the  thousand  distractions  of  every-day  life,  there  is 
one  subject  which  ever  and  anon  presents  itself  to  us  in  our  hours  of  quiet  con- 
templation, or  is  forced  upon  our  view  in  the  intercourse  of  common  life.  This 
is  the  thought  of  the  end  of  life  and  what  shall  come  after.  Now  one,  now 
another,  is  snatched  almost  from  our  side  and  passes  from  our  view.  Now  it  is 
one  on  whom  age  has  set  its  stamp,  and  to  whom  the  threescore  and  ten  years 
are  a  burden  ;  but  anon  it  is  one  who  is  young  and  vigorous,  who  might  have 
hoped  to  see  many  days,  that  is  called  to  pass  into  the  invisible  by  accident  or 
disease,  thus  warning  us  that  no  season,  no  period  of  life,  is  exempted  from  the 
assaults  of  disease  and  death.  And  mostly  all  of  those  departed  ones  leave  those 
behind  who  mourn  their  absence  and  their  loss,  who  cry  out  in  their  hours  of 
loneliness — 

"  Oh  for  the  touch  of  a  vanished  hand, 
For  the  sound  of  a  voice  that  is  still  1 " 

Tennyson. 

And  what  comfort  have  we  to  give  these  bereaved  ones,  to  whisper  to  ourselves, 
in  view  of  this  fact  so  universal  yet  so  awful  for  humanity  ?  We  could  have 
none,  or  but  a  mere  shadow  of  any,  were  it  not  for  Christ  and  His  gospel,  but 
for  the  revelation  God  has  given  us  of  Himself  and  His  love.  The  light  of 
nature  and  the  speculations  of  philosophy  might  from  analogy  have  given  men 
a  more  or  less  vivid  hope  of  a  life  beyond,  a  hope,  however,  subject  to  frequent 
fluctuations,  and  oftentimes  apt  to  be  altogether  shattered  and  dissipated.  Con- 
sider what  life  would  have  been  had  at  the  close  the  curtain  of  death  fallen  on  it 
for  ever,  never  to  rise  revealing  it  in  new  scenes  beyond,  if  over  the  tombs  of  the 
loved,  the  good,  the  true,  men  should  have  had  to  write,  Here  hope  ends — this  is 
the  kingdom  of  despair.  And  it  is  not  wonderful  that  men  who  believe  that  it  is 
so  should  be  found  asking,  "  Is  life  worth  living  1 "  But  we  are  not  so  shut  up 
in  despair.  Every  Sabbath  morning,  every  Easter  season,  speaks  of  resurrection, 
tells  us  that  the  dead  shall  come  again.     The  hope  is  founded  simply — 

I.  On  the  word  of  Jesus. — 1.  This  was  one  of  the  great  truths  our  Lord  came 
to  reveal  fully — a  truth  of  the  highest  importance  to  men — one  of  the  foundation 
truths  of  this  gospel,  to  reveal  and  confirm  which  He  became  incarnate  and 
endured.  2.  He  made  known  this  great  truth  by  direct  statement,  and  in  the 
whole  tenor  of  His  teaching.  These  direct  statements  need  not  all  be  recalled. 
They  are  all  summed  up  indeed  in  this  memorable  utterance,  "  I  am  the  resur- 
rection and  the  life  :  he  that  belie veth  in  Me,  though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he 
live."  The  whole  tenor  of  His  teaching  also  showed  how  close  He  held  the 
relation  between  the  visible  and  the  invisible  to  be — that  spiritual  and  intellec- 
tual life  here  and  hereafter  form  a  continuity,  and  that  to  the  eye  of  faith  the 
spiritual  world  is  as  real,  nay  more  real,  than  the  material  present.  3.  And  the 
teaching  of  Jesus  on  this  theme  came  with  authority,  because  He  evidently  lived 
so  closely  in  union  with  the  higher  spiritual  sphere,  so  that  it  could  be  said  of 
Him,  "No  man  hath  ascended  up  to  heaven,  but  He  that  came  down  from 
heaven,  even  the  Son  of  man,  which  is  in  heaven "  (iii.  3).  For  the  spiritual 
life  is  not  a  locality,  but  a  state  or  condition ;  and  it  is  possible  for  those  who 
have  grown  spiritually  to  live  in  continual  communion  with  the  invisible.  This 
Christ  was  able  to  do  perfectly  as  the  divine  Son.  4.  And  the  truth  of  this 
was  not  shown  by  His  miracles  only,  although  these  are  impressive  proofs  of  His 
union  and  communion  with  the  Father  ;  it  is  evident  as  well  in  the  whole  course 
of  His  life  and  teaching.  His  life  on  earth  imaged  the  divine  holiness ;  His  teach- 
ing bore  the  impress  of  heavenly  wisdom.  It  was  so  simple,  yet  so  authoritative, 
satisfying  the  yearnings  of  the  soul  after  God  and  eternal  things.     His  spotless 

318 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  XI. 


life  confirmed  His  teaching.  It  is  here  that  the  best  of  earth's  teachers  fail — 
their  lives  and  their  doctrine  often  disagree.  Not  so  with  Jesus.  That  divine 
life  was  realised  even  by  His  enemies  to  be  far  above  the  highest  of  earth. 
"Never  man  spake  like  this  man."  Therefore  His  words  had  all  the  authority 
of  a  demonstration.  And  when  He  says,  "  If  it  were  not  so,  I  would  have  told 
you,"  we  feel  that  these  are  the  words  of  eternal  truth. 

II.  But  His  teachings  on  this  great  truth  and  this  Christian  hope  are  confirmed 
by  His  power  over  death. — 1.  This  He  showed  by,  on  at  least  three  occasions    \ 
and  in  the  presence  of  many  witnesses,  raising  those  who  were  dead.     Each  of  / 
these  wonderful  works  seems  typical  of  His  power  over^death  in  its  every  aspect. 
The  first  was  the  case  of  the  child  just  passed  away,  the  little  maid  who  lay  as 

if  asleep,  whose  form  the  destroyer  had  scarce  touched  with  corroding  finger, 
when  the  word  of  power,  "  Talitha  cumi,"  brought  her  again  into  these  realms  of 
time.  Next  the  youth  in  the  flower  of  his  manhood  at  Nain.  Here  death  had 
more  fully  wrought  his  will.  They  bore  the  lifeless  body  to  the  tomb,  when  the 
word,  "  Young  man,  I  say  unto  thee,  Arise  "  (Luke  vii.  14),  anew  demonstrated 
Christ's  power  over  the  last  enemy,  and  brought  joy  to  the  heart  of  the  weeping 
mother.  And  in  the  case  of  Lazarus  death  seemed  to  have  wholly  gained  the 
mastery,  until  Christ  came  and  showed  that  He  had  power  to  "  bind  the  strong 
man  "  and  to  despoil  him  of  his  goods.  And  in  this  last  case,  as  if  more  com- 
pletely to  show  His  authority,  Jesus  had  permitted  the  event  to  occur,  as  if  He 
desired  to  show  Himself  stronger  than  this  dark  power,  even  when  the  victim 
had  lain  in  its  fetters  four  long  days.  At  Christ's  word  the  fetters  were  burst 
asunder  and  the  prisoner  set  free.  Those  spirits  were  recalled  from  their 
"golden  day  "  to  testify  to  Christ's  glory  as  ruler  in  all  the  realms  of  being, 
able  to  satisfy  the  deepest  needs  of  humanity.  2.  And  more  convincing  still 
was  His  own  resurrection.  This  great  event,  of  such  universal  importance,  was 
"  not  done  in  a  corner."  So  numerous  were  the  witnesses  thereof,  and  so 
convincing  is  the  chain  of  evidences  in  its  favour,  that  one  of  the  greatest 
rationalists,  when  near  the  close  of  his  life,  declared  that  "  the  historical  proof  of 
this  great  event  cannot  be  overturned  "  (De  Wette).  It  is  the  truth  on  which 
the  Church  is  founded ;  and  since  the  days  of  the  apostles  all  true  Christian 
teaching  and  preaching  have  been  concerned  with  "  Jesus  and  the  resurrection 
from  the  dead  "  (Acts  iv.  2). 

III.  Therefore  in  Christ  His  people  rise. — 1.  Nothing  need  be  said  here 
regarding  the  two  resurrections :  "  They  that  have  done  good  participating  in 
the  resurrection  of  life,  and  they  that  have  done  evil  in  the  resurrection 
of  judgment "  (v.  29).  Here  it  is  the  resurrection  of  life  that  is  being 
considered.  Union  with  Christ  is  the  believer's  hope.  2.  When  men  become 
Christ's  disciples,  they  have  in  themselves  a  strong  proof  of  His  ability  to 
save  to  the  uttermost.  He  hath  redeemed  them,  rescued  them  from  spiritual 
corruption,  put  a  new  song  into  their  mouth.  And  He  who  hath  done  this  is 
able  surely  to  do  more.  3.  Living  union  with  Christ  is  the  believer's  hope  amid 
conflicting  doubts  and  fears,  amid  the  conflicts  and  trials  of  the  present,  in  view 
of  death  and  eternity.  Christ  did  not  come  to  earth  to  mock  men,  to  entice 
them  to  follow  truth,  holiness,  and  every  heavenly  gift,  only  that  they  might  be 
engulfed  at  last  in  darkness  and  the  dust  of  death.  No  !  He  has  issued  the 
blessed  promise,  "He  that  believeth  in  Me,  though  he  die,  yet  shall  he  live." 
He  is  the  resurrection  because  He  is  the  life.  "  He  is  the  resurrection  of  those 
who  die,  and  the  life  of  those  who  live  "  (Bengel).  "  Death  is  no  more  death, 
but  life.  Moses  says  the  opposite.  For  if  you  will  listen  to  the  law,  it  will  say 
to  you,  as  the  old  spiritual  song  has  it,  '  In  the  midst  of  life  we  are  with  death 
encompassed.'  But  that  is  a  song  of  the  old  covenant — the  law.  The  gospel 
and  faith,  however,  reverse  this  song  and  say,  In  the  midst  of  death  even  we 

319 


chap.  XL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


are  in  life.  We  praise  Thee,  O  gracious  Lord  God,  that  Thou  art  our  Redeemer. 
Thou  hast  awaked  us  from  death  and  given  us  salvation  "  (Luther).  4.  This 
is  our  comfort  amid  the  uncertainties  of  the  present,  when  those  dearest  are 
taken  from  us,  when  we  think  of  lonely  graves  far  away  perhaps  in  distant 
lands  or  islands  of  the  sea,  and  in  the  great  deep  itself,  where  the  relics  of 
humanity  hurtle  on  its  lonely,  silent  plains.  The  graves  shall  give  up  their 
dead.  As  the  Redeemer  rose,  so  shall  His  people  arise.  "  Christ  has  risen " 
means  the  Sun  has  risen,  the  Light  of  life ;  and  the  flowers  of  hope  and  resurrec- 
tion are  seen  blooming  on  the  Christian's  grave. 

Vers.  32-45.  Sympathy  in  sorrow. — Jesus  is  ever  near  to  His  people  in  their 
sorrow ;  and  though  He  had  delayed  to  come  immediately  to  Bethany,  when 
told  of  the  sickness  of  Lazarus,  it  was  only  in  order  that  the  glory  of  God  might 
be  more  fully  manifested.  But  when  the  time  had  come  He  hastened  with 
sympathetic  feeling  to  comfort  His  sorrowing  friends,  "  to  give  the  oil  of  joy  for 
mourning,  the  garment  of  praise  for  the  spirit  of  heaviness."  Meeting  with 
Martha  beyond  the  village  confines  apparently,  He  strengthened  her  weak  faith, 
and  sent  her  to  call  her  sister  to  Him,  in  order  that  He  might  comfort  her  also. 
And  as  we  view  Mary  coming  weeping  to  Him,  followed  by  a  wailing  crowd  of 
friends,  and  Jesus  Himself  becoming  troubled  at  the  sight  of  this  grief,  and  the 
thought  that  death  should  have  such  hateful  power,  we  derive  lessons  of  comfort 
and  peace. 

I.  The  grief  of  the  mourners. — 1.  It  was  natural,  and  Jesus  did  not  rebuke 
it.  He  does  not  forbid  His  people  to  mourn  in  their  hours  of  bereavement  and 
sorrow.     He  bids  them  not  sorrow  as  those  who  have  no  hope  (1  Thess.  iv.  13). 

2.  Belief  to  the  burdened  comes  with  the  tears  of  sorrow.  "  As  the  gentle 
spring  breezes  and  warm  spring  sunshine  melt  the  ice  that  binds  up  the  earth, 
so  the  bonds  of  heaviness  that  bind  up  the  heart  are  dissolved  by  gentle  tears." 

3.  Sad  is  it  when  in  the  midst  of  heavy  sorrow  the  relief  of  tears  is  denied,  and 
the  burdened  heart  is  nigh  to  breaking.  Therefore  should  men  be  thankful  for 
this  gift  of  tears,  constituted  as  they  now  are.  "  Tears  enable  sorrow  to  vent 
itself  patiently.     Tears  hinder  sorrow  from  becoming  despair  "  (Leigh  Hunt). 

II.  The  sympathy  of  friends  in  time  of  sorrow. — 1.  After  the  manner  of  the 
East,  many  friends  and  acquaintances  had  come  from  Jerusalem  to  comfort 
the  sorrowing  sisters.  The  most  part  were,  doubtless,  sincere  in  their  sympathy. 
But  how  little  can  friends  do  in  such  an  hour,  although  often  their  presence 
soothes  the  feelings  of  the  mourners  and  distracts  their  thoughts  !  2.  But  some 
of  those  present  were  apparently  merely  formal  in  their  sympathy  (vers.  38-46). 
At  the  feigned  sorrow  of  these  the  Saviour's  spirit  was  troubled.  All  "  shams  " 
were  hateful  to  Him;  and  where  are  shams  more  hateful  than  in  the  presence  of 
death,  and  in  the  light  of  eternity  ]  3.  From  such  feigned  sympathy  sensitive 
natures  shrink  away  wounded.  Hypocritical  sympathy  wounds  in  place  of 
healing.  So  in  part  the  outward  expression  of  grief,  the  formal  wailing  and 
crying  peculiar  to  the  East,  is  often  merely  formal.  Such  was  the  grief  of  a 
section  of  the  mourners  in  the  house  at  Bethany.  4.  But  sympathetic  sorrow 
soothes  the  hearts  of  the  bereaved  ones.  The  silent  pressure  of  the  hand,  the 
tender,  consoling  word,  the  eye  moist  with  heart-felt  grief,  bring  comfort  to 
bereaved  hearts. 

III.  The  sympathy  of  Jesus. — 1.  Thetenderest  and  sincerest  human  sympathy, 
however,  cannot  bring  highest  or  lasting  comfort  to  bereaved  ones.  It  cannot 
remove  the  chief  cause  of  grief.  It  cannot  call  back  the  departed.  2.  But  the 
sympathy  of  the  Saviour  can  do  what  human  sympathy  is  unable  to  effect.  For 
when  we  can  go  to  Him  or  call  Him  to  us  when  bereavement  brings  deepest 
sorrow,  He  can  tell  us  with  authority  that  those  prison  doors  of  death  that  have, 

320 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  XL 


closed  on  our  loved  one  shall  one  day  be  broken  open  and  the  prisoners  set  free. 

3.  He  can  tell  with  authority  of  the  welcome  awaiting  those  who  have  known 
and  lived  in  the  Father's  love,  and  have  gone  to  a  place  in  the  house  of  many 
mansions.  He  can  assure  the  mourner  that  the  loved  ones  are  safe  now, 
and  that  even  their  dust  is  in  safe  keeping,  and  that  at  last  we  shall  meet 
again  those 

Whom  we  "  have  loved  long  since  and  lost  awhile." 

4.  And  even  although  He  does  not  yet  wipe  away  our  tears,  and  bring  back  at 
once  radiant  joy  as  He  did  at  Bethany,  yet  He  points  to  His  own  empty  tomb 
and  recalls  His  promises,  that  are  yea  and  amen,  of  that  coming  hour  when  the 
dead  "  shall  be  raised  incorruptible,"  when  at  His  word  of  power  from  the  field 
of  death  an  exceeding  great  army  shall  come  and  death  shall  be  no  more. 

"  0  Thou  that  dry'st  the  mourner's  tear ! 
How  dark  this  world  would  be, 
If,  when  deceived  and  wounded  here, 
We  could  not  fly  to  Thee  ! 

"  But  Thou  wilt  heal  the  broken  heart, 
Which,  like  the  plants  that  throw 
Their  fragrance  from  the  wounded  part, 
Breathes  sweetness  out  of  woe. 

"  Then  sorrow,  touch'd  by  Thee,  grows  bright 
With  more  than  rapture's  ray, 
As  darkness  shows  us  worlds  of  light 
We  could  not  see  by  day." 

Thomas  Moore. 

Ver.  32.  Christ's  delay  to  interpose  against  death. — With  this  faith  of  Martha 
(and  Mary)  there  is  wonder  at  the  absence  of  Christ  which  verges  almost  on 
reproach.  *  Surely  there  must  have  been  reason  for  my  Lord's  delay,  while  we 
wept  and  prayed  for  His  coming,  while  every  morning,  and  through  the  long 
day,  our  eyes  sought  the  hills  where  His  steps  might  be  first  descried.  Why  so 
late  when  this  dead  brother  of  mine,  and  friend  of  Thine,  was  sinking  to  his 
grave?  Oh,  the  Hope  of  Israel,  the  Saviour  thereof  in  time  of  trouble,  why 
shouldst  Thou  be  as  a  stranger  in  the  land  ? '  Such  thoughts  as  these  have 
since  passed  through  many  a  heart,  and  will  do  till  the  world's  close.  What  sore 
strokes  befall  us,  in  this  matter  of  death,  from  which  the  Son  of  God  could  easily 
save  us,  if  His  power  and  His  pity  be  as  we  are  told !  They  are  very  natural 
thoughts — natural,  above  all,  when  we  watch  by  the  deathbed  and  weep  over 
the  dead. 

I.  The  strangeness  of  Christ's  delay  to  interpose  against  death. — Let  us  turn 
our  thoughts  to  the  circumstances  around  us,  as  Mary  and  Martha  might  to  the 
state  of  their  home  in  the  absence  of  Christ.  1.  Consider  what  death  is  to  the 
sufferer  !  The  token  of  God's  displeasure  against  sin  is  on  it.  Man's  heart 
recoils  from  its  accompaniments — the  rending  asunder  of  the  dearest  ties  of 
affection,  and  of  those  closest  friends,  body  and  soul — the  dismissal  of  our  nature 
to  the  corruption  of  the  grave  and  to  a  mysterious  eternity.  2.  Consider  what  a 
bereavement  death  is  to  the  survivors  !  "  Lover  and  friend  hast  Thou  put  far  from 
me,  and  mine  acquaintance  into  darkness."  How  often  has  the  old  wailing  cry 
burst  from  human  hearts  !  how  often  the  death-scene  at  Bethany  been  renewed 
in  the  homes  of  men  !  The  childless  mother  and  the  orphan,  the  wife  and 
sister,  lover  and  friend,  have  wrestled  in  agony  over  the  dying  and  moaned  over 
the  dead,  and  none  seemed  to  listen.  3.  Consider  what  a  ground  of  reproach 
death  has  furnished  to  the  enemies  of  Christ  !  There  was  no  want  of  unbelieving 
Jews  in  Bethany  to  take  advantage  of  Christ's  absence  in  this  crisis.  4.  There 
is  still  another  way  in  which  the  strangeness  of  the  delay  may  strike  us — when 

y  321 


chap.  xi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


we  turn  our  thoughts  from  our  own  circumstances  to  Christ,  as  the  sisters  of 
Bethany  did,  and  when  we  consider  the  just  expectations  we  have  of  interposition 
from  Him.  We  believe  that  Christ  is  fully  aware  of  our  need.  When  a  friend 
fails  us  through  innocent  ignorance,  we  do  not  blame  him.  What  pains  us  is 
his  persistent  absence  when  he  knows  our  extremity.  We  believe,  further,  that 
Christ  has  full  povier  to  interpose.  That  He  should  be  so  slow  to  put  His 
authority  into  exercise,  when  such  tides  of  suffering  would  be  rolled  back,  and 
such  a  flood  of  overwhelming  joy  set  in,  must  occasion  to  many  Christians 
strange  thoughts.  5.  We  cannot  doubt  the  desire  of  Christ  to  interpose.  But  if 
He  felt  so  deeply  for  His  friends,  why  did  He  not  come  sooner  to  comfort  them 
and  interpose  in  their  behalf?  Our  very  confidence  in  Christ's  ability  and 
willingness  to  help  us  thus  becomes  the  occasion  of  bewildering  doubts,  and 
our  faith  passes  through  that  painful  struggle,  "  Lord,  I  believe  ;  help  Thou  mine 
unbelief." 

II.  Some  of  the  reasons  for  Christ's  delay  which  may  be  found  in  this 
history. — Other  reasons  may  be  found  in  the  whole  divine  plan,  as  it  is 
revealed  in  the  Bible.  1.  The  reasons  why  Christ  delays  to  interpose  against 
death  are,  that  His  friends,  when  dying,  may  learn  confidence  in  Him,  and 
have  an  opportunity  of  showing  it.  2.  Christ  permits  death  that  the  sorrow- 
ing friends  may  learn  entire  reliance  on  Him.  3.  In  the  midst  of  death 
the  union  of  sympathy  between  Christ  and  His  friends  is  perfected,  4.  By 
delaying  to  interpose  against  death  God  makes  this  a  world  of  spiritual  probation. 
5.  A  last  reason  for  Christ's  delay  to  interpose  against  death  is  that  He  brings 
in  thereby  a  grander  final  issue.  It  is  in  this  interval  of  delay  that  our  life  is 
cast.  The  world  is  represented  by  this  home  of  Bethany  before  Christ  reached 
the  grave,  and  all  the  phases  of  character  and  all  the  stages  of  Christ's 
progressive  advance  may  be  seen  in  the  hearts  of  men  around  us.  But  at 
whatever  step  of  his  journey  man's  faith  may  discern  Him,  He  is  surely  on  His 
way.  6.  One  thing  connected  with  all  these  reasons,  and  impressed  upon  us  by 
the  present  narrative,  cannot  be  omitted — that  there  is  a  fitness  in  Christ  being 
absent  from  the  world  while  death  reigns.  Mary  felt  this.  "  Lord,  if  Thou  hadst 
been  here,  my  brother  had  not  died."  Meantime  He  gathers  the  fold  of  His  cloud 
over  His  countenance,  that  we  may  not  think  He  looks  with  cold  indifference  on 
our  anguish,  until  He  shall  withdraw  the  veil  fully  and  for  ever.  Happy  those 
to  whose  eye  of  faith  the  cloud  is  already  pierced  and  who  feel  in  the  heart  that 
sunshine  of  His  face,  which  shall  give  life  and  light  at  last  to  all  the  dead  in 
Christ. — Dr.  John  Ker. 

Ver.  35.  The  tears  of  Jesus. — Everywhere  over  the  earth  there  is  weeping. 
Death,  and  a  sorrow  that  is  often  worse  than  death,  bring  tears  to  many  eyes. 
The  surface  of  the  river  of  life  smiles  and  sparkles ;  but  there  is  ever  a  deep 
undercurrent  of  sadness.  And  a  Saviour  who  could  not  draw  near  to  men  with 
a  fellow-feeling  for  their  sorrows  were  no  Saviour  to  whom  they  could  eagerly 
turn.  Thrice  in  the  gospel  history  we  read  that  Jesus  wept.  He  wept  bitter 
tears  over  doomed  Jerusalem.  In  Gethsemane  He  wrestled  with  "  strong  crying 
and  tears "  in  His  great  spiritual  conflict.  But  here  He  appears  as  the  divine- 
human  friend,  not  wailing  like  a  formal  mourner,  but  shedding  tears  of 
sympathy  with  His  bereaved  friends.     Those  tears  of  Jesus  at  Bethany  are  : — 

I.  An  expression  of  the  Redeemer's  oneness  with  humanity. — 1.  "It  behoved 
Him  in  all  things  to  be  made  like  unto  His  brethren."  As  the  perfect  Son  of 
man  He  felt  for  human  suffering  more  keenly  than  any  merely  human  friend 
could  do.  But  as  man  He  expressed  His  sympathy  in  truly  human  fashion. 
And  as  true-hearted  men  are  ever  touched  by  the  sorrows  of  their  fellows,  so 
Jesus  wept  with  those  who  weep,   sincerely,  compassionately,  etc.,  in  all  this 

322 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  XI. 


proving  Himself  a  "  brother  born  for  adversity."  2.  And  in  the  grief  of  His 
friends,  as  He  drew  near  the  grave  of  Lazarus,  He  saw  no  doubt  vividly  reflected 
the  world-wide  grief,  the  sorrow,  crying,  and  tears,  which  have  followed  sin  and 
death  in  their  hateful  course  on  earth.  Who  does  not  feel  his  heart  moved  at 
the  contemplation  of  this?  No  wonder  then  that  He  "  who  bare  our  griefs  and 
carried  our  sorrows "  was  troubled  in  spirit,  in  part  at  this  epitome  of  human 
misery.  3.  The  thought  of  all  the  sorrow  and  suffering  caused  by  sin  and  death 
to  humankind  affected  the  Saviour's  heart,  and  the  pressure  of  His  grief  found 
relief  in  tears. 

II.  An  expression  of  sympathy  with  those  friends  of  the  Redeemer. — 1.  The 
heart  of  Jesus  was  moved  by  the  grief  of  those  sorrowing  sisters  of  Lazarus, 
whom  He  viewed  with  such  regard.  2.  Martha  and  Mary  had  lost  a  kind  and 
loving  brother.  Heart-broken  they  waited  the  Master's  coming  until  all  hope 
had  fled,  while  Jesus  still  delayed.  Jesus  felt  for  all  this  sorrow,  even  though 
He  knew  it  was  soon  to  be  turned  into  joy.  The  grief  of  the  sisters  was  real ; 
they  had  been  prostrated  by  the  awful  blow.  To  loving  hearts  such  grief  is 
contagious ;  and  their  divine  Friend,  as  truly  man,  was  touched  at  the  view  of 
their  affliction.  3.  Nor  was  the  thought  of  Lazarus  absent  from  the  mind 
of  Jesus.  He  sorrowed  that  death  should  have  such  power,  to  break  up  homes, 
to  sunder  friends,  to  chill  the  heart,  and  make  the  life  dark.  All  the  pains  and 
pangs  of  dissolution  which  His  friends  must  endure,  His  martyrs  and  faithful 
followers,  to  the  end  of  time,  who  must  submit  to  this  awful  spoiler,  moved 
His  heart  as  He  went  to  the  grave  of  His  friend.  Further,  those  tears  of  the 
Redeemer  are — 

III.  An  expression  of  the  divine  love  bringing  heavenly  comfort  to  men. — 

1.  He  who  wept  with  the  sisters  of  Lazarus  was  the  Man  of  sorrows,  the 
incarnate  Son  of  God.  His  mind  and  will  were  at  one  with  the  mind  and  will 
of  His  Father.  So  that  we  are  here  assured  of  the  divine  sympathy  in  our 
sorrows.  The  Father  does  not  weep.  There  are  no  tears  in  heaven.  Only  by 
becoming  man,  and  tabernacling  here,  could  the  Son  taste  the  cup  of  human  woe. 

2.  But  there  are  sympathy  and  love  in  the  heart  of  the  divine  Father ;  and  the 
sympathy  of  Jesus  with  human  sorrow,  and  those  tears  at  Bethany,  are  the 
visible  expression  of  the  Father's  heart.  3.  And  the  divine  sympathy  is 
the  forerunner  of  the  divine  help.  Jesus  raised  Lazarus  and  restored  him  to  his 
sorrowing  sisters  and  friends.  But  this  was  only  a  pledge  and  prophecy  of  the 
coming  time  when  sin,  sorrow,  and  death  shall  pass  away,  "and  God  shall 
wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes  "  (Rev.  xxi.  4). 

Lessons. — 1.  Men  may,  and  if  true  and  loving  must,  sorrow  when  loved  ones 
are  taken  away.  At  such  times  genuine  human  sympathy  is  most  comforting  and 
valuable.  But  when  that  fails,  and  above  and  beyond  it  even  when  it  exists, 
there  is  the  assurance  that  in  Jesus  His  people  have  an  ever-present  friend  who 
will  comfort  them  in  hours  of  sorrow. 

"  Thou,  Saviour,  mark'st  the  tears  I  shed, 
For  Thou  didst  weep  o'er  Lazarus  dead." 

2.  Jesus  can  do  more  than  sympathise  and  comfort :  He  can  infuse  into 
bereaved  and  sorrowing  hearts  a  "  lively  hope,"  a  greater  hope,  than  could  be 
given  to  Martha  and  Mary  ere  their  brother  was  raised.  For  He  Himself  has 
risen  from  the  grave,  that  all  His  own  might  have  an  assured  hope.  3.  While 
the  thought  that  Jesus  sympathises  with  His  people  in  their  sorrow  brings 
heavenly  comfort,  not  so  the  thought  that  He  mourns  for  some  who  have  gone 
back  from  Him.  His  feeling  for  such,  so  far  as  it  can  find  expression  in  the 
heavenly  places,  is  like  that  which  moved  Him  to  weep  over  Jerusalem. 

323 


CHAP.   XI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


HOMILETIC  NOTES. 


Vers.  1-27.  Help  from  the  Lord. — 
I.  As  help  sought  (vers.  1-5).  —  1. 
The  inducement  to  seek  this  help  is 
an  external  one,  and  is  found  in  the 
sickness  of  a  brother  (ver.  1).  2.  The 
true  way  in  which  to  seek  Christ's  help 
is  this — to  be  prepared  to  acquiesce 
that  it  should  come  according  to  His 
will.  They  simply  sent  the  message 
that  Lazarus  was  sick.  3.  The  deeper 
reason  why  help  is  sought  from  Jesus 
is  faith,  by  which  we  are  united  to 
Him  (ver.  3).  He  whom  Thou  lovest. 
4.  The  issue  and  final  result  of  it  is 
(ver.  4),  that  all  should  redound  to  the 
glory  of  God  and  of  Jesus  Christ, 
because  Jesus  loves  us  (ver.  5). 

IT.  As  help  delayed  (vers.  6-16). — 
1.  Jesus  does  not  always  at  once  hurry 
to  our  help  (ver.  6).  2.  But  unknown 
to  us  He  prepares  to  help  us  (vers. 
7-10).  3.  The  consequence  of  the 
delay  is  that  the  necessity  for  help 
rises  to  extremity  (vers.  11-14).  4.  The 
design  of  Jesus  in  such  delay  is  the 
strengthening  of  the  faith  of  His 
people  (ver.  15),  however  despairing 
they  may  be  (ver.  16). 

III.  As  help  drawing  near  (vers. 
17-27). — 1.  Help  comes  when  it  seems 
almost  impossible  that  it  should  (vers. 
17-19).  2.  Still  there  remains  a 
glimmering  of  hope  in  the  hearts  of 
His  people  (vers.  20-22).  3.  And 
Jesus'  precious  word  of  promise  power- 
fully quickens  this  hope  anew  (vers. 
23-27).— IAsco. 

Vers.  28-46.  The  Lord  as  the  helper  of 
His  people. — I.  The  drawing  nigh  to 
Him  as  helper  (vers.  28-32). — 1.  It  was 
occasioned  by  the  notification  of  His 
arrival  (vers.  28-30).  2.  It  took  place 
concealed  from  the  eye  of  the  world 
(ver.  31).  3.  It  was  accompanied  by 
the  outpouring  of  the  heart  before 
Him  (ver.  32). 

II.  The  love  of  this  mighty  Helper 
(vers.  33-37). — 1.  It  revealed  itself  in 
the  form  of  tender  and  lively  sympathy 
(vers.    33-35).       2.  It  was  recognised 

324 


by  many  (ver.  36).  3.  By  others  it 
was  regarded  as  a  sign  of  impotent 
weakness  (ver.  37). 

III.  The  help  accorded  by  this 
loving  Helper  (vers.  38-46).— 1.  It 
went  far  beyond  every  human  con- 
ception (vers.  38,  39).  2.  It  revealed 
the  glorious  power  of  God  (ver.  40). 
3.  It  redounded  to  the  divine  glory 
(vers.  41,  42).  4.  It  could  not  be 
denied  or  doubted  (vers.  43,  44).  5.  It 
was  not  followed  in  the  ease  of  all 
who  witnessed  it  by  the  same  result 
(vers.  45,  46). — IAsco. 

Vers.  1-45.  What  can  bring  us  com- 
fort at  the  graves  of  our  loved  ones? 
— I.  The  sympathy  of  Christ  with  our 
sorrow. — 1.  Jesus  saw  the  grief  of  the 
sisters  of  Lazarus  and  their  friends. 
He  understood  their  sorrow  and  was 
Himself  moved  by  it.  2.  The  world 
sees  our  affliction,  but  remains  cold, 
and  even  friends  underestimate  our 
grief  sometimes,  because  it  may  be  that 
on  account  of  our  loss  our  outward 
condition  is  not  greatly  altered.  Jesus 
understands  our  sorrow  better,  He  sees 
what  our  soul  has  suffered,  when  a 
loved  one  is  taken  hence,  that  not 
alone  a  material  but  a  spiritual  portion 
is,  as  it  were,  broken  from  us.  He  is 
moved  with  compassion  thereat. 

II.  The  words  of  Jesus  bring  com- 
fort to  our  hearts. — 1.  The  words  of 
Jesus  to  Martha,  "  Thy  brother  shall 
rise  again  :  I  am  the  resurrection,"  etc., 
brought  comfort,  although  she  did  not 
fully  realise  what  Christ  was  to  do. 
2.  The  world  has  surface  comfort  to 
offer,  and  never  shows  its  emptiness 
more  than  at  the  grave,  where  all  its 
wisdom  cannot  rise  above  the  thought, 
We  must  submit,  we  cannot  do  any- 
thing here.  But  the  words  of  Christ 
open  to  us  a  glimpse  of  what  is  beyond, 
and  bring  to  all  who  believe  on  Him 
most  blessed  promises.  Sorrow  is 
turned  into  joy,  weakness  into  strength, 
the  transitory  life  becomes  unfading 
in    the    skies.       Such    considerations 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   XL 


teach  us  to  look  beyond  this  earthly- 
life,  and  make  earthly  sorrow  retreat 
behind  the  hopes  of  the  blessed 
eternity. 

III.  Christ's  authority  over  the 
power  of  death. — 1 .  Christ  commanded 
the  bystanders  to  take  away  the  stone 
from  the  grave.  He  spoke  the  word  of 
power,  and  Lazarus,  who  had  been 
dead  four  days,  heard  that  word  and 
came  forth.  2.  True,  our  Lord  does 
not  now  iu  this  present  time  awaken 
our  dead.  His  wisdom  has  reserved 
this  mighty  act  of  His  power  for  the 
future.  The  raising  up  of  the  dead  by 
Jesus  during  His  ministry  on  earth  is, 
however,  our  warrant  that  He  will 
assure dly  fulfil  all  His  promises,  and 
awake  all  the  dead  in  the  end  of  the 
days.  Then  shall  there  be  no  more 
death :  the  fashion  of  it  shall  be 
changed ;  the  faithful  dead  shall  inherit 
immortal  life. 

IV.  The  love  of  Christ  in  restoring 
to  us  our  own. — 1.  The  Lord  brought 
back  Lazarus  to  His  sorrowing  sisters 
and  friends,  renewed  in  body,  and  also 
spiritually  strengthened  to  show  forth 
Christ's  praise.  2.  The  Lord  will  give 
back  to  His  people  their  loved  ones 
(who  have  gone  hence  in  faith),  freed 
from  all  earthly  imperfections,  clothed 
with  glory,  and  made  fit  for  full, 
undefiled,  and  unfading  affection. — 
After  J.  L.  Sommer. 

Ver.  33.  Jesus  troubled.  —  Without 
enumerating  various  other  interpreta- 
tions of  the  passage,  we  think  Augus- 
tine,   Erasmus,    Luthardt,    Hengsten- 


berg,  and  Moulton  meet  our  difficulty 
by  the  suggestion  that  death  itself 
occasioned  this  indignation.  Though, 
like  the  good  Physician  in  the  house 
of  mourning,  He  knew  the  issue  of  His 
mighty  act,  yet  He  entered  with  vivid, 
intense  human  sympathy  into  all  the 
primary  and  secondary  sorrows  of 
death.  He  saw  the  long  procession  of 
mourners  from  the  first  to  the  last, 
all  the  reckless  agony,  all  the  hope- 
lessness of  it,  in  thousands  of  millions 
of  instances.  There  flashed  upon  His 
spirit  all  the  terrible  moral  conse- 
quences of  which  death  was  the  ghastly 
symbol.  He  knew  that  within  a  short 
time  He  too,  in  taking  upon  Himself 
the  sins  of  men,  would  have  taken 
upon  Himself  their  death.  And  there 
was  enough  to  rouse  in  His  spirit  a 
divine  indignation,  and  He  groaned 
and  shuddered.  He  roused  Himself  to 
a  conflict  which  would  be  a  prelibation 
of  the  cross  and  the  burial.  He  took 
the  diseases  of  men  upon  Himself 
when  He  took  them  away.  He  took 
the  death-agony  of  Lazarus  and  the 
humiliation  of  the  grave  and  the  tears 
of  the  sisters  upon  Himself  when  He 
resolved  to  cry,  "  Lazarus,  come  forth ! " 
and  to  snatch  from  the  grasp  of  the 
grim  conqueror  for  a  little  while  one 
of  his  victims.  Compare  the  toil  of 
Hercules  in  wrestling  with  death  for 
the  wife  of  Admettte.  Compare  also 
chap.  xiii.  21,  where  moral  proximity 
to  the  treacherous  heart  and  ghastly 
deed  and  approaching  doom  of  Judas 
made  Him  once  more  to  shudder. — 
Reynolds. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  1.  Lessons  from  Bethany. — Bethany, 
thou  home  of  peace,  thou  place  beloved  of 
the  Lord,  joyfully  didst  thou  see  Him  in  the 
midst  of  thee,  joyfully  went  He  in  and  out. 
Well  shall  it  be  for  us  when  in  our  house 
and  heart  He  finds  a  place  beloved  by  Him  ! 
M  Friend,  so  near  unto  Thine  own, 
Here  be  Thy  home,  Thy  Bethany." 
Is  thy  house  such  a  Bethany  ?  Does  true 
brotherly  love  dwell  there  ?  Is  the  common 
love  to  Jesus  the  uniting  bond  ?  When 
afflictions  come,  dost  thou,  in  union  with  all 


thine  own,  call  the  Lord  to  thee  as  the  Prince 
of  helpers  ?  Is  every  period  of  sickness  for 
thee  and  thine  a  time  for  the  testing  and 
strengthening  of  faith  ?  When  thou  comest 
to  the  bed  of  languishing,  what  of  inner 
willingness  and  receptivity  dost  thou  bring 
with  thee  ?  Dost  thou  receive  a  blessing 
therefrom  ?  Is  Christ's  mind  thy  mind,  that 
the  result  shall  be  for  the  glory  of  God  ? 
It  is  part  melancholy,  part  bravado,  that 
makes  a  Thomas  declare,  "  Let  us  also  go, 
that  we  may  die  with  Him."     But  even  this 

325 


CHAP.  XL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


is  governed  by  the  spirit  that  rules  in 
Bethany,  the  love  of  Jesus,  and  the  un- 
bearableness  of  life  without  Him.  And 
then,  is  the  trust  of  this  community  un- 
changed when  He  seems  to  withdraw  His 
help  and  to  delay  it  ?  .  .  .  But  was  the  Lord 
not  present  when  the  sickness  began,  and 
as  it  became  ever  more  and  more  severe  ? 
Was  He  not  present  when  He  ...  in  super- 
natural prescience  declared  that  the  sickness 
was  not  unto  death — present  when  He  said, 
"  Our  friend  Lazarus  sleepeth  "  ? — Translated 
from  Kbgel. 

Ver.  4.  God  can  bring  good  out  of  evil.  — 
The  fact  of  the  existence  of  evil  ...  is  the 
mystery  of  mysteries.  Here  is  the  thought 
which  baffles  thought ;  here  is,  above  all 
other  spheres  of  exercise,  "  the  patience  of 
God's  saints."  It  is  impossible  to  argue 
against  this  contradiction.  It  is  impossible 
to  explain,  even  to  the  satisfaction  of 
the  explainer,  why  evil  must  exist,  why 
evil  must  live  and  work,  why  evil  must 
be  mighty  and  victorious,  if  God  be  power 
and  if  God  be  love.  Impossible,  I  say, 
to  explain  these  things.  Not  impossible 
— blessed  be  His  holy  name — to  trust  Him 
through  the  darkness  and  silence,  to  say 
with  the  patriarch,  "  He  is  able  to  raise  up 
even  from  the  dead  " ;  to  say  with  Him  once 
again,  "  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth 
do  right  ?  "  Enough,  if  we  are  assured  that 
what  we  see  not  He  sees,  and  that  which  we 
know  but  in  part  He  knows  perfectly  and 
from  end  to  end.  The  man  who  takes  God 
Himself  into  his  heart  by  faith,  knows  Him 
as  his  God,  and  finds  in  Him,  as  revealed  in 
Christ,  present  comfort  and  present  strength, 
can  wait  for  Him  though  He  tarry.  "  Times 
of  refreshing,"  "times  of  restitution,"  are 
promised  in  His  word.  This  complicated, 
this  perplexed,  this  chaotic  world, — He  is 
able  to  raise  it  up  even  from  the  dead. 
"  What  I  do  thou  knowest  not  now,  but  thou 
shalt  know  hereafter." — C.  J.  Vaughan,  D.D. 

Ver.  5.  The  spirit  of  love. — The  spring  of 
truth  is  alone  the  spirit  of  truth,  the  spring 
of  love  is  alone  the  spirit  of  love  which 
Christ  has  shed  abroad  on  His  people.  That 
which  any  one  is,  through  and  for  this,  alone 
expresses  his  true  worth.  And  how  much 
soever  any  one  has  succeeded  by  deeds  of 
another  sort,  and  however  much  of  renown 
he  may  have  gained  here  among  men,  all 
this  will  fade  and  become  invisible  in  the 
light  of  truth,  when  we  contrast  it  with  that 
which  a  spirit  effects,  even  in  the  most 
modest  positions  in  this  our  human  life, 
when  it  is  pervaded  by  the  divine  spirit  of 
truth  and  love.  Only  the  gifts  which  flow 
from  that  can  effect  what  is  true  and  per- 
manent in  the  life  of  men,  and  what  in 
every  way  should  be  reckoned  as  a  common 
good.     We  know  nothing  more  of  Lazarus 

'326 


than  this,  that  as  he  was  a  friend  of  the 
Lord  he  walked  in  this  spirit  of  love  and 
truth ;  and  never  was  deeper  sorrow  ex- 
pressed than  at  his  death. — Translated  from 
F.  Schleiermacher. 

Vers.  5,  6.  Trials  of  faith. — There  is  a 
trial  in  these  days  not  absolutely  unworthy 
to  be  set  side  by  side  with  that  of  the  father 
of  the  faithful.  It  is  that  which  comes  to 
us  more  directly  in  the  form  of  an  apparent 
inconsistency  between  God  and  His  word, 
between  God  and  His  promise,  between  God 
and  His  self -manifestation  in  the  Gospel  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Of  this  kind  are 
all  those  delays  and  denials  of  the  thing 
earnestly  prayed  for,  which,  when  the 
spiritual  life  is  in  question — and  it  is  of  this 
that  we  speak  now — are  of  the  nature  (to 
our  own  limited  view)  of  contradiction  to 
the  great  promise,  "  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask 
in  prayer,  believing,  ye  shall  receive."  It 
is^  idle  to  dispute,  it  is  wrong  to  disparage, 
the  severity  of  this  trial,  where  the  desire  is 
after  God,  and  where  the  prayer  is  honest, 
humble,  and  importunate.  Is  faith  strong 
to  say  under  such  trial,  "  Oh,  tarry  thou  the 
Lord's  leisure.  .  .  .  Hath  He  said,  and  shall 
He  not  make  it  good  ?  .  .  .  Though  He 
slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  Him  "  ? — C.  J. 
Vaughan,  D.D. 

Vers.  9,  10.  Light  on  the  path  of  duty. 
Thou  who  art  victory  and  law, 
When  empty  terrors  overawe, 
From  vain  temptation  dost  set  free, 
And   calm'st  the  weary   strife  of  frail  hu- 
manity. 
There  are  who  ask  not  if  Thine  eye 
Be  on  them  .  .  . 

Glad  hearts,  without  reproach  or  blot, 
Who  do  Thy  work  and  know  it  not : 
May  joy  be  theirs  while  life  shall  last, 
And  Thou,  if  they  should  totter,  teach  them 

to  stand  fast. 
Serene  will  be  our  day,  and  bright 
And  happy  will  our  nature  be, 
When  love  is  an  unerring  light, 
And  joy  its  own  security. 
And  blest  are  they  who  in  the  main 
This  faith,  even  now,  do  entertain, 
Live  in  the  spirit  of  their  creed, 
Yet  find  that  other  strength  according  to 

their  need. 
Stern  Lawgiver !  yet  thou  dost  wear 
The  Godhead's  most  benignant  grace. 
Thou  dost  preserve  the  stars  from  wrong, 
And  the  most  ancient  heavens  through  Thee 
are  fresh  and  strong. 

Wm.  Wordsworth. 

Vers.  9,  10.  Activity  dispels  doubt. — Con- 
viction, were  it  never  so  excellent,  is  worth- 
less till  it  convert  itself  into  conduct.  Nay, 
properly,  conviction  is  not  possible  till  then, 
inasmuch  as  all  speculation  is,  by  nature, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   XI. 


endless,  formless,  a  vortex  amid  vortices : 
only  by  a  felt,  indubitable  certainty  of 
experience  does  it  find  any  centre  to  revolve 
around,  and  so  fashion  itself  into  a  system. 
Most  true  is  it,  as  a  wise  man  teaches  us, 
that  "  doubt  of  any  sort  cannot  be  removed 
except  by  action."  On  which  ground,  too, 
let  him  who  gropes  painfully  in  darkness  or 
uncertain  light,  and  prays  vehemently  that 
the  dawn  may  ripen  into  day,  lay  this  other 
precept  well  to  heart,  which  was  to  me  of 
invaluable  service  :  "  Do  the  duty  which  lies 
nearest  thee"  which  thou  knowest  to  be  a 
duty  !  Thy  second  duty  will  already  have 
become  clearer. —  Carlyle. 

Ver.  11.  Bereavement  mitigated  for  the 
believer. — Beloved  brothers  and  sisters,  our 
sorrow  should  be  after  a  godly  manner : 
"  that  ye  sorrow  not  even  as  others  which 
have  no  hope,"  i.e.  as  the  heathen.  In  great 
sorrow,  as  in  great  joy,  a  man's  inner  nature 
comes  forth  to  the  light.  And  thus,  in  the 
bitter  sorrow  of  death,  it  will  be  seen  on 
what  foundation  of  faith  we  stand,  whether 
our  sorrow  is  a  Christian  or  a  heathenish 
sorrow.  Immoderate  grief  is  heathenish 
when  we  idolise  our  departed  ones,  as  if 
with  them  all  had  gone,  as  if  no  God 
existed  in  heaven,  who  alone  is  absolutely 
necessary,  who  alone  is  the  holy  and 
incomparable  One.  A  hopeless  sorrow  is 
heathenish  when  we  grieve  as  if  death 
were  the  annihilation  of  our  loved  ones,  and 
that  from  the  day  of  their  burial  nothing 
more  remained  of  them  than  the  mouldering 
bones  in  the  sepulchre,  and  the  pain  in  our 
hearts.  A  faithless  sorrow  is  heathenish 
when  we  forget  in  our  affliction  that  a  God 
rules  in  heaven,  without  whose  will  no  leaf 
from  the  tree,  no  hair  of  our  head,  falls — 
when  in  our  woe  we  chide  with  God,  as  if 
He,  the  Holy  One,  had  done  us  a  wrong, 
in  place  of  numbly  bending  ourselves  be- 
neath His  mighty  hand,  which  is  yet  a 
Father's  hand,  and  remains  so  even  when 
it  most  afflicts  us.  An  inconsolable  grief  is 
heathenish  when  we  obstinately  put  aside 
consolation,  and  self-tormenting  nurse  our 
pain  and  suicidally  pine  away,  in  place  of 
taking  the  burden  on  our  shoulders  trust- 
fully in  God's  name,  in  order  to  live  on  for 
the  sake  of  our  dear  ones,  and  to  work  while 
it  is  day,  and  to  advance  personally  in  holi- 
ness and  preparation  for  a  peaceful  end. 
Thus  inordinately,  hopelessly,  without  faith, 
and  inconsolably  may  a  heathen  sorrow  by 
the  cinerary  urn  of  his  dead,  but  not  a 
Christian  at  the  green  grave-hillock  of  those 
who  sleep.  Such  a  heathenish  sorrow  the 
apostle  prohibits  by  the  beautiful  words  by 
which  he  designates  the  dead  :  "  Those  that 
sleep."  The  death  of  the  Christian  is  a  sleep. 
This  is  certainly  only  a  figure,  but  in  this 
figure  lies  a  beautiful  meaning  and  tender 
consolation. — Translated  from  Karl  Gerok. 


Ver.  11.  Similitudes  of  death. — There  are 
many  figures  by  which  men  have  represented 
death  in  order  to  rob  him  of  his  terrors  and 
accustom  the  mind  to  his  appearance.  He 
has  been  likened  to  an  extinguished  torch 
and  a  broken  thread ;  to  a  door  through 
which  the  dying  one  enters  into  the  glories 
of  heaven ;  to  a  messenger  whom  the  Lord 
sends  to  bear  His  bride,  the  soul,  out  of  the 
world,  to  lead  her  to  Him  and  give  her  into 
His  arms  ;  to  a  chariot  on  which  the  soul 
journeys  to  its  native  home ;  to  a  ferryman 
who  steers  from  Meshech  to  Jerusalem. 
But  the  most  beautiful  and  comprehensive 
of  all  those  similitudes  is  still  that  which 
Christ  chose  specially,  which  indeed  had 
already  been  used  before  Him  by  Jews  and 
Gentiles,  and  which  is  readily  used  at  all 
times  by  believers  and  unbelievers  alike — the 
figure,  death  is  a  sleep.  For  very  striking 
is  the  resemblance  between  them.  Sleep 
is  the  brother  of  death. — Translated  from 
F.  Arndt. 

Ver.  11.  The  figure  of  the  sleep  of  death 
points  to  a  sacred,  divine  order. — As  it  is 
according  to  the  appointment  of  God  that 
in  autumn  nature  prepares  for  her  winter 
rest — that  as  in  the  ordinary  daily  course  of 
nature  at  eventide  tired  men  should  lie  down 
to  sleep — so  to  the  Christian  the  sleep  of 
death  is  a  holy,  divine  law,  to  which  each 
should  reconcile  himself  in  pious  resignation 
with  the  acknowledgment,  "  I  am  not  better 
than  my  fathers."  This  figure  of  death  as  a 
sleep  points  further  to  a  sweet  rest.  How 
does  the  labourer  rejoice  when  at  night  he 
forgets  the  day's  burdens  and  cares  in  sweet 
slumber !  So  to  the  weary  pilgrim  on 
earth  death  is  a  rest,  a  sleeping  away  of  the 
fatigues  of  this  earth  ;  and  so  should  we 
rejoice  when  our  loved  ones  sleep  in  the 
Lord,  that  they  have  attained  to  peace, 
resting  in  their  silent  chambers,  and  that  no 
troubles  and  pains  of  earth  touch  them  more. 
This  image  of  death  as  a  sleep  points  finally 
to  a  joyful  awakening.  As  morning  follows 
on  the  night,  when,  as  if  new  born,  men 
arise  from  sleep,  so  do  we  hope  that  after 
the  night  of  death  a  more  glorious  morning 
and  a  blessed  resurrection  are  awaiting  all 
who  sleep  in  the  Lord.  So  shall  we  not 
sorrow  as  others  who  have  no  hope ;  so  shall 
our  woe  be  subdued  to  pious  sadness ;  and 
whoever  of  you  have,  during  this  past  year, 
wept  in  bitter  anguish  by  the  bed  of  death, 
refusing  to  be  comforted,  oh  1  look  to-day, 
since  the  Lord  hath  helped  you  hitherto, 
with  mitigated  grief  on  the  graves  of  those 
who  sleep,  and  for  your  comfort  remember — 

"  Christ's  people  pass  from  place  to  place, 
O'er  ways  of  toil  and  sorrow, 
And  reach  at  last  their  resting-place, 
Where  they  await  the  morrow. 
God,  when  their  journey's  o'er, 
Receives  them  evermore.  .  .  . 

327 


chap.  xi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


The  seed-corn  in  the  furrow  thrown 
Is  with  the  hope  of  harvest  sown." 

Translated  from  Karl  Gerok. 

Vers.  21-24.  Submission  to  the  divine  will. — 
There  is,  however,  .  .  .  something  else  to  be 
considered  in  regard  to  those  with  whom  God 
has  placed  us  in  immediate  relationship  in 
our  life.  For  these  are  not  given  to  us 
merely  that  they  should  help  and  succour 
us,  but  as  much  for  this  reason,  that  we 
should  influence  and  help  them.  And  when 
they  are  taken  from  us  and  depart  hence, 
and  the  consciousness  remains  to  us  that 
we  have  not  influenced  them  as  we  should 
or  could  have  done,  that  we  have  not  been 
for  them  instruments  of  the  divine  Spirit, 
and  have  not  succoured  and  supported  them 
with  all  our  power  in  the  work  of  the  Lord, 
which  they  were  carrying  on,  then  this  truly 
is  a  sorrow  of  a  very  different  kind.  May 
we  so  receive  that  true  wisdom  which  comes 
only  from  above,  that  we  may  prepare  for 
ourselves  this  sorrow  less  and  less  with 
every  year  of  our  life,  and  ever  more  per- 
fectly fill  the  station  in  which  God  hath 
placed  us.  But  may  we  do  this  in  such  a 
way  that  our  trust  shall  be  placed  ever  more 
unboundedly  on  Him  who  directs  all,  so 
that  we  shall  gladly  leave  to  Him  to  deter- 
mine when  and  how  He  shall  call  hence  this 
one  and  that  one  from  among  us.  And 
truly  if  we  only  listen  to  His  word,  attend 
to  the  voice  of  His  Spirit,  honour  and  love 
men  from  the  heart  according  to  the  measure 
in  which  His  Spirit  works  in  them,  oh  !  then 
we  shall  not  murmur  when,  in  conformity 
with  the  divine  order,  now  this  one,  now  that 
one,  is  called  away.  But  we  shall  firmly 
trust  that  the  loss  of  each  dear  leader  will 
be  made  good  for  the  common  cause  and  for 
us,  if  not,  indeed,  always  by  another  single 
individual,  yet  certainly  through  the  working 
together  of  those  powers  which  make  toward 
the  same  end,  through  the  common  works  of 
love  which  flow  from  the  same  spiritual  source. 
In  this  sense  also  let  us  think  of  death  so  that 
we  may  be  wise — wise  that  we  may  view  its 
effects  on  our  own  lives  with  complete  sub- 
mission to  the  will  of  God,  and  wise  that 
we  may  be  resigned  ourselves  to  go  hence  in 
accordance  with  that  will  when  the  hour 
strikes,  and  He  purposes  to  give  us  rest 
from  earthly  labour. — Translated  from  F. 
Schleiermacher. 

Vers.  25,  26.  The  winter  of  death  and  the 
spring  of  resurrection. — This  is  a  lofty  article 
of  our  faith.  Heathenish  philosophers  have 
at  all  times  stumbled  at  it  and  rejected  it. 
The  glory  of  Christianity  lies  in  this,  that  it 
universally  acknowledges  it.  St.  Augustine 
sought  to  bring  it  within  the  comprehension 
of  simple  believers  by  a  common  but  popular 
and  familiar  similitude.  When  the  cold  and 
dark  winter  commenoes,  he  rages  with  fury 

328 


in  the  fields  and  woods,  in  the  gardens  and 
in  the  meadows,  in  towns  and  villages,  just 
as  if  he  would  subdue  men  and  beasts  and 
overturn  in  ruins  universal  nature.    He  robs 
the  trees  of  their  leaves,  the  meads  of  their 
flowers,  the  birds  of  their  nests,  the  moun- 
tains of  their  verdure,  the  springs  of  their  flow. 
Does  it  not  appear  as  if  all  hope  for  these 
had  gone,  as  if  the  sap  were  dried  up,  the 
roots  dead  ?    But  so  soon  as  summer  appears 
the  trees  resume  their  leafage,  the   meads 
their  flowers,  the  mountains  their  verdant 
pasturage,  the  brooks  flow  again.     Even  thus 
will  it  be  with  the  bodies  of  the  dead.     The 
bones  are  robbed  of  their  flesh,  the  flesh  of 
its  veins,  the   veins   of  blood,  and   all  the 
members  of  sensation.     But  at  the  dawn  of 
the  great  day,  and  at  the  sounding  of  the 
last  trumpet,  all  will  be  retrieved  as  in  a 
glorious  summer.     We  shall  proceed  and  add 
another  similitude  for  the  comfort  of  pious 
believers  in  this  world — the  similitude   of 
the  corn  of  wheat,  which  the  apostle  Paul 
himself  made  use  of  (1  Cor.  xv.  36,  37).    A 
corn  of  wheat  is  cast  into  the  earth.     Soon 
it  changes  in  such  a  fashion  that  it  becomes 
a  white  viscid  substance.    Still,  the  particles 
gradually  coalesce,  and  throw  out  a  white  point 
as  a  germ.    This  bores  upward  through  the 
ground,  and  as  soon  as  it  peeps  forth  throws 
aside  its  white  colour  and  takes  on  a  green 
shade.     Now    it  grows  up   like  grass,  but 
before  this   sends   its   roots  branching  out 
into  the  soil  in  filaments,  and  extends  these 
filaments  on  every  side,  so  that  the  plant 
may  have  a  firm  hold.    And  as  carpenters 
know  how  to  secure  a  house  by  strong  bind- 
ing beams,  so  God  strengthens  the  growing 
haulm  that  it  may  be  able  to  support  the 
ascending  ear.     And  now  the   wonders  in- 
crease.    The  blooms  appear  in  the  form  of 
tender    filaments.     Fine   flower-dust  brings 
about  fructification.     In  beautiful  order  the 
grain  appears,  closely  packed  together  ;  and 
each  grain  is  set  in  a  husk,  protected  as  in  a 
cell ;  and  still  more,  as  soon  as  the  ear  is  set, 
prickly  beards,  like  a  stockade,  are  set  around 
it,  so  that  the  grain  may  be  protected  from 
birds  and  vermin.   Now  behold,  O  children  of 
men;  see  how  much  there  is  that  is  wonder- 
ful in  an  ear  of  corn  that  dies.    When  once 
it  falls  into  the  earth  it  rises  up,  bringing 
with  it  and  from   itself  a  hundred   others. 
Now,  if  God  can  bring  from  a  simple  grain 
of  corn  a  hundredfold,  how  much  more  easy 
will  it  be  for  Him  to  reawaken  the  body  of 
a  man  1    Therefore  let  us  go  with  the  prophet 
to  the   field,  and  see  how  at  the  voice  of 
Christ  there  is  a  rustle  of  movement,  how  all 
begins  to  stir,  the  bones  coming  together  to 
each  other,  "  each  to   his  bone," — how  the 
veins  are  figured  out,  and  the  flesh  "  comes 
up  "  and  is  covered  with  skin ;  how  the  winds 
from  the  four  quarters  rise  and  blow  upon 
the  dead,  so  that  these  may  live ;  and  how, 
finally,  the  breath  enters  these  new-formed 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   XI. 


bodies,  so  that  they  are  animated  and  stand 
up  on  their  feet.  Let  us  consider  them ! 
They  are  a  great  army  !  O  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  breathe  upon  me  with  the  spirit  of 
holiness  against  sin,  with  the  spirit  of 
wisdom,  to  deliver  me  from  folly  !  Breathe 
upon  me  with  the  breath  of  life,  so  that  I 
may  be  quickened  from  death  !  Breathe 
upon  me  with  the  breath  of  freedom,  so  that 
I  may  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  this 
evil  world  !  Breathe  upon  me  with  the  breath 
of  grace,  so  that  after  this  tribulation  I  may 
receive  and  taste  of  Thy  mercy  I  Amen. — 
From  Dr.  J.  M.  Mayfart's  "  himml.  Jerus." 

Vers.  25,  26.  The  dead  not  lost. 
They  are  not  lost  1  they  live,  they  live  for 
aye; 
To  those  rent  hearts  this  healing  hope  is 
given : 
When  from   our  sight  our  loved  ones  pass 
away, 
All  that  seems  lost  to  earth  is  found  in 
heaven. — Thomas  Hill. 

The  blest  are  like  the  stars  by  day, 
Withdrawn  from  mortal  eye, 

But  not  extinct ;  they  hold  their  way 
In  glory  through  the  sky. 

Montgomery. 

Vers.  25,  26.  Types  of  the  resurrection. — 
God  gave  a  type  of  the  resurrection  to 
Ezekiel  (Ezek.  xxxvii.).  In  those  words  God 
gives  us  a  perfect  parable  of  the  rising  again 
of  the  dead.  He  gave  thereby  to  the  Jews 
in  Babylonian  exile  a  promise  that  they 
would  unfailingly  be  brought  back  again. 
But  if  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  had  been 
a  doubtful  matter  to  them,  how  could  God 
have  given  to  the  Jews  therefrom  a  proof  of 
the  certainty  of  His  promise  being  fulfilled  ! 
Some  will  not  believe  this.  They  consider 
that  it  would  be  impossible  for  a  body  scat- 
tered abroad,  it  may  be  indifferent  countries, 
to  be  brought  together  so  speedily.  And 
even  if  all  the  members  were  present,  it 
would  be  impossible  for  them  to  be  united. 
The  old  Church  doctor,  Gregory  of  Nyssa, 
thus  spoke  to  the  unbelieving :  "  You  will 
admit  that  God  can  do  as  much,  surely,  as  a 
potter  learns  from  his  master  to  do.  Now, 
what  does  a  potter  do  ?  He  takes  a  piece  of 
vile  clay,  and  forms  out  of  it  a  beautiful 
vessel,  according  to  his  pleasure,  and  places 
it  in  the  sun.  But  when,  through  some  mis- 
chance, the  vessel  is  damaged,  has  fallen, 
has  been  broken  or  thrown  down,  and  has 
thus  lost  its  former  shape,  then  the  potter 
presses  it,  if  he  chooses,  again  into  a  lump, 
and  makes  out  of  it  a  new  vessel  as  beautiful 
as  the  former.  This  the  potter  can  do  ;  and 
you  believe  that  he  can,  although  he  is  but 
a  weak  creature  of  God.  Why,  then,  will 
you  not  believe  God,  when  He  has  promised 
that  He  will  awake  the  dead  ?  " — F.  Arndt. 


Vers.  25,  26.  Death  as  foe  and  death  as 
friend. — A  great  German  artist  (Rethel)  has 
graphically  depicted  in  two  companion  pic- 
tures this  foe,  overcoming  and  overcome  ;  and 
thus  indirectly  teaches  us  how  we  may  best 
conquer  all  our  enemies.  By  the  one  canvas 
the  beholder  is  conducted  in  thought  to  a 
scene  of  gaiety — a  masquerade.  The  fete 
has  been  proceeding  merrily  in  a  spacious 
apartment,  at  one  end  of  which  the  musicians 
occupy  a  gallery.  But  the  artist  has  depicted 
an  awful  pause  in  the  revelry.  The  plague  is 
raging  in  the  city,  and  has  reached  those 
halls  of  pleasure,  where  men  are  trying  to 
drown  the  thought  of  the  destroyer.  The 
musicians  are  fleeing  from  the  gallery  ;  and 
the  gay  company  shrink  with  horror  from  a 
young  gallant  who  stands  with  his  mask 
fallen  off  in  the  centre  of  the  scene.  By 
him  stands  a  dark  spectre,  whose  uplifted 
mask  tells  that  he  is  death.  The  terri- 
fied wretch  looks  round  with  beseeching 
expression,  as  if  he  would  fain  compro- 
mise with  the  unwelcome  intruder  who 
has  come  to  mar  his  pleasure — but  in  vain, 
for  the  spectre  seems  to  beckon  him  away. 
Death  has  come  to  him  like  a  thief,  like 
an  avenging  foe.  The  companion  picture 
shows  us  a  different  scene.  It  is  a  small 
chamber  in  the  belfry  tower  of  a  village 
church.  The  little  square  window  of  the  room 
is  open,  and  through  it  we  look  on  a  rural 
landscape.  The  time  is  eventide.  All  without 
is  marked  by  calm  and  peaceful  gladness,  as 
if  the  old  earth  smiled  ere  night  drew  her 
curtains  around.  Flocks  are  browsing  and 
herds  returning  homeward,  for  the  sun  is 
just  beginning  to  dip  the  horizon  ;  and  a  long 
stream  of  light,  like  a  pathway  to  heaven,  lies 
between  the  window  of  the  little  room  and 
the  setting  sun.  The  peace  without  reigns 
within.  On  a  rustic  armchair  sits  the 
sacristan.  The  bell-rope  hangs  by  his  hand, 
as  if  he  had  just  rung  or  were  about  to  ring 
the  evening  bell.  He  seems  as  if  peacefully 
sleeping.  But  his  sleep  is  of  the  deepest; 
for  near  him  stands  the  same  figure  that 
called  the  pleasure-seeker  away.  Into  the 
bony  face  of  the  spectre  the  artist  has 
managed  to  put  a  sad,  yet  pleasing  expression. 
On  the  sill  of  the  window  sits  a  little  bird, 
irradiated  by  the  glow  of  the  setting  sun  and 
trilling  his  evening  song,  as  if  he  rejoiced 
with  the  spirit  speeding  heavenward  on  the 
pathway  of  light. 

Ver.  28.  "  The  Master  is  come,  and  calleth 
for  thee." — Spinoza,  the  sceptical  philosopher, 
declared  that  so  soon  as  he  could  hold  this 
story  of  the  raising  up  of  Lazarus  to  be  true, 
he  would  break  his  philosophical  system  in 
pieces.  But  he  rather  left  his  theory  whole 
than  that  he  would  yield  his  heart  in  thank- 
fulness and  humility.  A  married  pair  in 
our  city  had  piously  made  an  agreement 
with  each  other  that  when  it  was  evident 

329 


CHAP.   XI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


that  one  of  them  was  dying  the  other  should 
not  conceal  the  nearness  of  the  danger,  but 
should  say,  "  The  Master  is  come,  and  calleth 
for  thee."  Oh  no,  it  is  not  dying  to  go  forth 
to  God !  As  Jesus  asked  for  the  grave  of 
Lazarus,  saying,  "  Where  have  ye  laid  him  1 " 
so  during  thy  whole  life  the  Saviour  in- 
quires concerning  all  conditions  and  places 
where  thou  art,  and  dost  comfort  thee  even 
though  thy  outward  man  should  perish. 
He  will  also  concern  Himself  with  thy  last 
resting-place,  and  will  write  thereon  :  "  It  is 
sown  in  corruption,  it  is  raised  in  incorrup- 
tion."  Let  each  of  us  pray  in  the  Spirit : — 
"  When  Thou  shalt  raise  the  dead 
On  the  great  judgment  day, 
Touch  with  Thine  outstretched  hand 

The  grave  where  rests  my  clay, 
And  let  Thy  voice  be  heard 
Even  in  my  silent  tomb  ; 
My  body  gloiified 
Bring  to  its  heavenly  home. ' 

Translated  from  Kogel. 

Ver.  32.  The  sympathy  of  Jesus  in  sorrow. 
— Jesus  had  given  many  convincing  proofs  of 
His  love  to  the  household  of  Bethany  while 
Lazarus  lived,  but  none  with  that  touching 
tenderness  in  it  which  came  forth  at  his 
grave.  The  fellowship  of  suffering  brings 
hearts  and  lives  together  more  than  all  the 
fellowship  of  joy.  There  must  have  been  a 
divine  compassion  in  the  Redeemer's  look 
which  melted  Mary's  soul  as  she  fell  at  His 
feet  and  felt  that  her  grief  was  also  His.  And 
when  His  grief  broke  out  into  that  trouble  of 
spirit  at  the  grave — when  His  heart  was 
overpowered  by  it  and  Jesus  wept — the 
mourners  knew  that  He  was  one  with  them. 
Gethsemane  shows  us  the  agony  of  Christ's 
soul  for  man's  sin — the  grave  at  Bethany  His 
agony  of  heart  at  man's  suffering.  All  that 
sad,  sorrowful  walk  to  the  sepulchre  where 
He  mingled  His  tears  with  theirs  was  as 
necessary  to  make  them  feel  the  sympathy 
of  His  soul,  as  was  the  great  deliverance 
when  He  said,  "  Lazarus,  come  forth."  Nor 
need  we  be  at  all  stumbled  by  the  objection 
that  He  could  not  feel  so  deeply  since  He 
knew  what  He  was  about  to  do.  A  man  may 
pity  the  breaking  heart  of  a  child  although 
he  can  see  away  beyond  its  short  sorrow, 
and  God  pities  us  in  the  midst  of  our  life's 
troubles  though  He  perceives  the  speedy  end 
of  them.  Be  very  sure  of  this,  that  Christ's 
grief  was  as  genuine  as  theirs,  and  that  the 
compassion  of  God  and  of  His  Son  is  as  true 
at  every  step  of  the  road  to  the  grave  as  it  is 
when  it  rises  up  at  last  into  full  redemption, 
and  the  gate  of  the  grave  is  thrown  wide 
open.  To  form  this  fellowship  of  suffering 
on  the  way  to  death  is  one  reason  why  Christ 
permits  it.  He  says,  "  When  thou  passest 
through  the  waters  I  will  be  with  thee,"  and 


we  are  brought  to  reply,  "  We  did  pass 
through  the  flood  on  foot,  there  did  we 
rejoice  in  Him." — Dr.  John  Ker. 

Ver.  33.  Two  classes  of  mourners. — There  be 
two  manner  of  mourners  for  the  dead.  The 
heathen  and  unbelievers  mourn  without  hope 
of  the  resurrection  ;  their  opinion  is  that, 
seeing  their  near  friends  are  dead,  there  is 
no  more  of  them,  but  that  they  have  utterly 
lost  them  for  ever.  This  heathenish  sorrow 
will  not  St.  Paul  have  of  Christians.  The 
Christians  mourn  also,  but  with  a  living  hope 
of  the  joyful  resurrection.  For  like  as  God 
the  Father  left  not  Christ  the  Lord  in  death, 
but  raised  Him  up  again,  and  placed  Him 
in  eternal  life ;  even  so  us  that  believe 
shall  not  He  leave  in  death,  but  bring  us 
out  into  everlasting  life.  For  this  cause 
doth  the  apostle  speak  of  the  dead  as  of 
those  that  sleep,  which  rest  but  from  all 
travail  and  labour,  that  they  may  rise  again 
in  better  case.  Like  as  the  flowers  with  all 
their  virtue,  smell,  and  beauty  lie  all  the 
winter  in  the  root,  sleeping  and  resting  till 
they  be  awaked  with  the  pleasant  time  of 
May,  when  they  come  forth  with  all  their 
beauty,  smell,  and  virtue ;  even  so  ought  not 
we  to  think  that  our  friends  which  be  departed 
are  in  any  cumbrance  or  sorrow,  but  their 
strength  and  virtue  being  drawn  in,  liveth  in 
God  and  with  God.  They  lie  and  rest  till  the 
last  day,  when  they  shall  awake  again,  fair, 
beautiful,  and  glorious,  in  soul  and  body. 
Who  will  not  now  rejoice  at  this  comfort .  . . 
and  set  aside  all  unprofitable  sorrow  for  this 
exceeding  joy's  sake  ? — Coverdale. 

Vers.  34,  35.  The  gift  of  tears. 

Be  not  thy  tears  too  harshly  chid, 

Repine  not  at  the  rising  sigh  : 
Who,  if  they  might,  would  always  bid 

The  breast  be  still,  the  cheek  be  dry  ? 

How  little  of  ourselves  we  know 
Before  a  grief  the  heart  has  felt ! 

The  lessons  that  we  learn  of  woe 
May  brace  the  mind  as  well  as  melfc. 

The  energies  too  stern  for  mirth, 

The  reach  of  thought,  the  strength  of  will, 
'Mid  cloud  and  tempest  have  their  birth, — 

Through  blight  and  blast  their  course  fulfil. 

Tears  at  each  pure  emotion  flow ; 

They  wait  on  Pity's  gentle  claim, 
On  Admiration's  fervid  glow, 

On  Piety's  seraphic  flame. 

'Tis  only  when  it  mourns  and  fears. 

The  loaded  spirit  feels  forgiven, 
And  through  the  mist  of  falling  tears 

We  catch  the  clearest  glimpse  of  heaven 

Lord  Morpeth. 


330 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  xi. 


MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  47—57. 

The  unconscious  prophecy  of  Caiaphas. — The  wonderful  miracle  at  Bethany 
could  not  remain  hid.  Many  of  those  who  had  seen  it  believed.  Some  of 
them,  however,  although  they  could  not  doubt  the  evidence  of  their  senses  in 
the  matter  of  the  miracle,  appear  not  to  have  been  drawn  more  closely  to 
Christ.  These  went  to  the  Pharisees  with  the  news  of  the  miracle  and  of  the 
fact  that  many  had  believed  on  the  Saviour.  It  does  not  seem  necessary  to  seek 
for  either  a  good  or  a  bad  motive  in  their  action.  They  went  with  that  eagerness 
to  bear  news,  especially  to  such  as  will  welcome  it,  which  seems  characteristic 
of  some  people.  The  tidings  those  men  brought  threw  the  dominant  party  into 
a  state  of  perturbation.  A  crisis  had  arrived ;  and  Pharisee  and  Sadducee  were 
joined  in  an  unholy  league  against  God's  holy  child,  Jesus. 

I.  The  perplexity  of  the  Jewish  leaders  in  council. — 1.  The  opening  scene  in 
the  council  of  Christ's  enemies  reveals  the  unholy  conspirators  in  a  state  of 
pitiful  perplexity.  They  cannot  deny  Christ's  miracles.  They  see  that  if  He 
continues  His  course  a  large  following  will  gather  around  Him,  which  by  ordinary 
methods  they  will  be  unable  to  control.  2.  And  then,  in  spite  of  all  their  proud 
boasts  about  their  freedom  (viii.  33),  they  have  to  acknowledge  the  dominant 
power  of  Rome.  They  fear  that  power — fear  that,  if  Jesus  attracts  a  large  band 
of  followers,  the  Roman  governor  may  step  in  to  disperse  it,  and  may  tell  them, 
the  present  religious  rulers  of  the  people,  that,  being  incapable,  apparently,  of 
exerting  any  proper  authority,  they  must  in  every  department  give  up  the 
reins  of  power.  3.  This,  no  doubt,  influenced  some.  But  many  of  them  must 
have  known  that  the  kingdom  Christ  spoke  of  setting  up  was  no  earthly  dominion. 
There  was  another  influence  at  the  bottom  of  all  this  bitter  enmity  against  Jesus. 
He  had  put  the  Sadducees  more  than  once  to  silence.  And  this  last  miracle 
struck  at  one  of  the  fundamental  tenets  of  their  sect,  "  that  the  spirit  of 
man  is  an  emanation  of  the  Deity,  and  after  death  returns  to  Him,  so  that  there 
can  be  no  resurrection  of  the  body."  Our  Lord's  rebuke  of  this  sect  made  them 
especially  bitter,  and  indeed  the  leaders  in  the  plot  against  Jesus.  4.  While 
the  council  was  in  perplexity,  and  the  more  law-abiding  no  doubt  shrinking  from 
extreme  measures,  a  man  unscrupulous  and  able  brought  all  to  a  speedy  decision. 
Caiaphas,  the  high  priest,  owed  his  position  to  the  intervention  of  the  Roman 
governor,  Valerius  Gratus,  and  thus  was  interested  in  preventing  anything 
which  would  arouse  the  jealousy  of  Rome.  He  evidently  had  sat  silent  in  the 
council  whilst  the  members  were  blindly  and  confusedly  dubitating,  with  cynical 
scorn  expressed  in  his  look.  At  last  he  intervened,  rating  the  council  for  their 
indecision  and  weakness,  and  impressing  on  them  his  idea  as  to  what  their  line 
of  action  should  be.    * 

II.  The  counsel  of  Caiaphas. — 1.  He  interpreted  the  desires  of  the  majority 
of  his  colleagues  which  they  themselves  were  afraid  to  give  expression  to,  far  less 
to  carry  into  execution.  His  counsel  was  one  of  expediency  pure  and  simple. 
Justice,  righteousness,  truth,  were  nothing  to  him.  2.  The  present  danger  must 
be  averted  by  some  means  or  other,  if  the  position  of  the  Jewish  rulers,  both 
toward  the  people  and  in  relation  to  the  Roman  power,  was  to  be  maintained. 
If  this  Jesus  continued  to  work  and  gain  adherents  as  He  had  been  doing,  then 
farewell  to  their  authority  over  the  people  as  teachers  and  administrators  of 
their  law — farewell  also,  perhaps,  to  the  limited  power  they  still  possessed 
under  Rome.  Therefore  said  this  bold  and  evil  man,  "  Ye  know  nothing  at  all, 
nor  consider  that  it  is  expedient  for  us,"  etc.  (ver.  50).  That  was  his  decision  : 
Remove  this  man  by  death,  and  your  difficulties  vanish.  3.  A  simple  cutting  of 
the  knot,  Caiaphas  !     No  question  as  to  the  antecedents  of  this  Jesus,  as  to  the 

331 


Chap.  XL  SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHtt. 


manner  and  substance  of  His  teaching,  as  to  the  truth  of  His  mighty  works,  as  to 
whether  He  has  encouraged  any  feeling  of  disloyalty  among  His  followers  toward 
the  reigning  powers.  No  !  simply:  This  man  stands  in  our  way;  remove  Him, 
and  we  shall  be  able  to  advance  :  He  seems  to  endanger  our  authority ;  let  Him 
die,  and  we  shall  stand  secure.  It  is  a  counsel  which  some  would  count  worldly- 
wise,  but  its  inspiration  is  from  beneath,  not  from  above.  "  What  is  necessary 
is  right";  "Necessity  knows  no  law";  "The  end  justifies  the  means":  such 
are  Caiaphas'  counsels.  4.  Swayed  by  this  dominant  mind,  even  those  who  had 
qualms  of  conscience  seem  to  have  yielded  to  this  evil  counsel  (ver.  53).  How 
far  had  these  formal  adherents  to  the  law  of  Moses  fallen  below  its  standard  of 
justice  between  man  and  man  !  how  far  below  those  Roman  conquerors  whom 
they  hated,  and  who  prided  themselves  justly  on  the  protection  which  their  laws 
afforded  to  the  citizens  of  the  Roman  State  in  all  quarters  of  the  world ! 
Caiaphas  must  bow  before  the  heathen  who  wrote,  "  Fiat  justitia,  ruat  ccelum." 
5.  And  let  thy  counsel,  Caiaphas,  appear  successful  for  the  time  :  will  it  prove 
so  in  the  end?  Has  ever  true  good  come  from  unrighteousness?  God,  it  is  true, 
may  and  does  bring  good  out  of  evil, — 

"  From  seeming  evil  still  educing  good, 
And  better  thence  again." 

Thomson. 

But  will  it  be  for  good  to  those  who  do  the  unrighteous  deed,  carry  out  the 
unrighteous  plan  ?     Never  ! 

III.  The  unconscious  prophecy  of  Caiaphas. — 1.  He  was  high  priest.  And  even 
though  one  who  was  unworthy  occupied  the  office,  the  office  itself  had  a  theocratic 
dignity,  and  served  a  divine  purpose.  And  here  God  made  use  of  the  office. 
The  high  priest,  who  year  by  year  entered  into  the  Holiest  of  all,  "  not  without 
blood,  which  he  offered  for  himself  and  the  errors  of  the  people  "  (Heb.  ix.  7), 
is  here  led  unwittingly  to  prophesy  concerning  the  one  offering  which  was  to  be 
made  not  only  for  the  Jewish  "  nation,"  but  for  all  the  children  of  God  scattered 
abroad,  who  were  thus  to  be  brought  into  unity  (x.  16).  2.  "  Man  proposes,  but 
God  disposes."  Caiaphas  and  his  fellow-councillors  thought  that  by  getting  rid 
of  Jesus  they  might  preserve  the  small  remnant  of  authority  they  possessed,  and 
through  it  might  yet  regain  their  national  power.  In  this  view  he  appealed  to 
the  better  part  of  the  council  and  the  national  party,  who  may  even  yet  have 
dreamed  that  Jesus  might  have  some  Messianic  message  for  them,  and  many 
of  whom  believed  Him  to  be  a  prophet.  But  the  appeal  of  Caiaphas  prevailed 
over  their  better  feelings.  3.  And  yet  by  the  divine  guidance  this  evil  counsel 
resulted  in  the  true  good  of  the  spiritual  Israel,  in  a  wider  blessing  than  any 
mere  restitution  of  the  Jewish  "  nation,"  in  the  state  in  which  it  then  was,  would 
have  been.  It  would  result  in  the  blessed  unity  of  all  peoples,  which  later 
Judaism  had  failed  to  pray  and  labour  for  (xii.  32 ;  Ps.  lxvii. ;  1  John  ii.  2). 
4.  But  although  God  could  and  did  bring  blessing  to  all  men  by  the  carrying  out 
of  the  evil  counsel  of  Caiaphas,  no  blessing,  rather  the  reverse,  would  come 
on  those  who  planned  and  carried  it  out.  These  men  ostensibly  based  their 
action  on  the  danger  of  the  Romans  interfering  or  taking  away  what  power 
remained  to  them,  etc.  (ver.  48).  They  thought  to  avert  this  danger  by  an 
unrighteous  action.  But  from  the  moment  they  carried  out  their  designs  that 
which  they  feared  began  to  come  upon  them.  5.  The  Sadducees  sought  to  crush 
One  who  had  brought  their  errors  home  to  them,  and  had  thus  given  opportunity 
for  triumph  to  their  opponents  (Matt.  xxii.  34).  But  lo !  when  He  had  been 
crucified,  in  place  of  One  who  taught  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  there  arose 
multitudes  who  proclaimed  the  resurrection  of  that  same  Jesus  whom  they  had 
crucified,  and  preached  the  Resurrection  with  amazing  power  and  results  (Acts 

332 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   XI. 


iv.  2,  xxiii.  9).  6.  And  in  the  end  the  power  of  the  Jewish  rulers,  their  temple, 
their  city,  and  the  "  nation  "  itself,  passed  away  amid  blood  and  fire.  tin- 
righteousness  may  triumph  for  a  time,  yet  in  the  end  it  shall  not  prevail. 

Lessons. — 1.  Righteousness  is  the  only  safe  principle  to  guide  the  activity 
both  of  governments  and  individuals.  Such  merely  worldly-wise,  unjust,  and 
tyrannical  modes  of  action  as  that  of  Caiaphas  and  all  his  kind  will  result  only 
in  disaster  to  those  who  adopt  them.  Unrighteousness  carries  within  it  the 
elements  of  its  own  punishment  and  final  ruin  here  and  hereafter.  The  Christian 
rule  of  action  is  : — 

"  Perish  policy  and  cunning  ! 

Perish  all  that  fears  the  light ! 

Whether  losing,  whether  winning, 

Trust  in  God  and  do  the  right." 

MacLeod. 

2.  What  has  been  planned  by  evil  men  can  in  God's  hand  be  turned  to  good. 
He  that  sits  in  heaven  laughs  at  their  designs  ;  and  whilst  they  go  on  and  often 
perish  in  their  wickedness,  He  bends  their  actions  to  subserve  His  own  eternal 
purposes. 


ILLUSTRATION. 


Ver.  50.  Hypocritical  excuses  for  crime. 
— The  real  ground  of  opposition  was  hatred 
of  the  light ;  the  ostensible  ground  was 
patriotism,  public  zeal,  loyalty,  far-sighted 
policy.  And  such  is  life.  The  motive  in 
which  a  deed  of  sin  is  done  is  not  the  motive 
which  a  man  allows  to  others  or  whispers 
to  himself.  Listen  to  the  criminal  receiving 
sentence,  and  the  cause  of  condemnation  is 
not  the  enormity  of  the  crime,  but  the  injus- 
tice of  the  country's  law.  Hear  the  man  of 
disorderly  life,  whom  society  has  expelled 
from  her  bosom,  and  the  cause  of  the  expul- 


sion is  not  his  profligacy,  but  the  false  slander 
which  has  misrepresented  him.  Take  his 
own  account  of  the  matter,  and  he  is  innocent, 
injured,  pure.  For  there  are  names  so  tender, 
and  so  full  of  fond  endearment,  with  which 
this  world  sugars  over  its  dark  guilt  towards 
God  with  a  crust  of  superficial  whiteness, 
that  the  sin,  on  which  eighteen  centuries 
have  looked  back  appalled,  was,  to  the  doers 
of  that  sin,  nothing  atrocious,  but  respectable, 
defensible,  nay  even,  under  the  circum- 
stances, necessary. — F.  W.  Robertson. 


,333 


chap.  xii.         H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


PAET    IV.    (p.) 

VI.    The  Pause  between  Christ's  Public  Ministry  and  His  Passion. 

The  Mustering  of  the  Opposing  Forces  of  Light  and  Darkness. 

1.  The  anointing  at  Bethany,  as  an  expression  of  love  and  gratitude  to 
Christ,  and  as  at  the  same  time  an  anticipation  of  His  death  (vers.  1-8). 

2.  As  a  contrast  to  this  the  hate  and  fury  of  the  Jewish  rulers,  extending 
even  to  the  friends  of  Jesus,  is  recorded  (vers.  9-11). 

3.  The  triumphal  entry  into  Jerusalem  of  Jesus,  as  the  promised  King  of 
Israel  (vers.  12-18) ;  and  the  effects  of  this  demonstration  on  His  enemies 
(ver.  19). 

4.  Representatives  of  the  Gentiles  (Greeks)  come  to  Jesus  (vers.  20-22). 

5.  Our  Lord's  declaration  that  it  is  through  His  death  that  the  Son  of  man 
will  be  glorified  (vers.  23-26). 

6.  The  beginning  of  Christ's  final  spiritual  conflict,  and  the  assurance  of 
victory  (vers.  27-36). 

7.  The  Evangelist's  reflections  on  Jewish  unbelief  (vers.  37-41). 

8.  The  judgment  of  those  who  reject  the  Light  and  Life  of  men  is  sure, 
although  He  came  to  save  the  world  (vers.  42-50). 

Third  Year  of  our  Lord's  Ministry. 

Probable  place  in  Synoptic  narrative :  following  Matt.  xx.  29 — xxv.  46 ; 
Mark  x.  46 — xiv.  2  ;  Luke  xviii.  35 — xxi.  38. 

Time. — Nisan  (March — April),  a.u.c.  783,  a.d.  30. 


CHAPTER    XII. 
EXPLANATORY   AND    CRITICAL    NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  See  Homiletic  Note,  p.  341. 

Ver.  2.  The  Synoptists  inform  us  that  it  was  in  the  house  of  Simon  the  leper  (Matt.  xxvi.  6  : 
Mark  xiv.  3).  It  has  been  suggested  that  Simon  was  a  relative  of  the  family  of  Lazarus, 
or  that  Martha  was  the  wife  of  Simon.  There  is  no  ground  for  such  conjectures.  It  seems 
more  in  accordance  with  verisimilitude  that  Simon  and  Lazarus,  being  both  subjects  of 
Jesus'  healing  power,  resolved  to  honour  their  Benefactor,  and  that  the  feast  was  held  in 
Simon's  house  as  being  the  most  commodious.  The  special  mention  of  the  part  taken  by 
Martha,  and  the  position  of  Lazarus  at  the  board,  favour  this  view. 

Ver.  3.  A  pound  (Xrrpa). — In  Matthew  and  Mark  "an  alabaster"  (cruse)  is  the  term  em- 
ployed, i.e.  a  box  or  flask  made  of  this  beautiful  spar,  in  which  the  ointment  was  hermetically 
sealed.  Ointment  of  spikenard  (ixtipov  vapSov  7^0-7-1*775). — I.e.  either  genuine  or  pure  nard  ;  or 
Pistie  Nard,  which  is  perhaps,  as  Westcott  suggests,  "  a  local  technical  term."  John  does 
not  mention,  with  Matthew  and  Mark,  that  Mary  first  anointed  the  head  of  Jesus,  which  was 
an  ordinary  mark  of  honour  (Ps.  xxiii.  5;  Luke  vii.  46).  It  is  the  extraordinary  feature  of  the 
occurrence  that  this  "Evangelist  records — Mary's  anointing  of  Jesus'  feet  and  wiping  them 
with  her  hair. 

Ver.  4.  Simon's  son. — These  words  are  omitted  in  all  the  best  MSS. 

Ver.  5.  Three  hundred  pence. — A  little  over  £10  in  our  money. 

Ver.  6.  Bag  (yXwaadicofiov). — Chest  or  box.  Bare  (ipAarafcp). — It  means  here,  perhaps, 
bare  or  took  away. 

334 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  xii. 


Ver.  7.  Let  her  alone,  etc. — The  best  MSS.  read  "  in  order  that  she  may  keep  this  against 
the  day,"  etc. 

Ver.  9.  Much  people,  etc. — Not  our  Lord's  enemies,  but  members  of  the  pilgrim  bands  and 
friendly  neighbours  from  the  city. 

Vers.  10,  11.  But  the  chief  priests,  etc. — They  saw  that  now  it  would  not  be  sufficient  to 
put  Jesus  only  to  death.  Witnesses  to  His  power  would  remain,  and  thus  Lazarus  was 
marked  out  as  a  victim  ;  for  many  beholding  this  visible  proof  of  Christ's  divine  power 
could  no  longer  withhold  their  allegiance. 

Ver.  12.  See  Homiletic  Note,  pp.  347,  348.  Next  day. — I.e.  the  day  after  the  Sabbath,  i.e. 
our  Sunday.     Much  people. — See  ver.  9. 

Ver.  13.  Branches  of  palm  trees. — rd  /fata  tG>v  (poiviKuu,  which  then  probably  grew  by  the 
way.  These  were  used  to  wave  in  triumph  before  Christ.  The  other  Evangelists  mention 
the  spreading  of  the  path  with  litter  cut  from  the  trees,  and  garments.  A  comparison 
of  the  accounts  of  this  incident  in  the  four  Gospels  will  show  how  each  supplements 
the  others.  Hosanna. — Ps.  cxviii.  25.  Blessed,  etc. — They  hail  Him  as  the  Messiah, 
the  Sent  of  God,  the  Head  of  the  eternal  kingdom  (Dan.  vii.  14),  and  the  Saviour  and 
ruler  of  Israel. 

Ver.  14.  Found  a  young  ass. — The  other  Evangelists  tell  how  it  was  found. 

Ver.  15.  Fear  not,  etc. — Zech.  ix.  9.  The  prophet  foretold  that  meekness  and  humility 
in  the  Messiah  which  were  verified  in  the  life  of  Jesus. 

Ver.  16.  Understood  not,  etc. — They  needed  direct  teaching  ere  they  could  truly  understand 
the  spiritual  nature  of  Christ's  kingdom  (xiv.  26 ;  Luke  xxiv.  13-32). 

Ver.  17.  The  people,  etc. — xi.  31.  Not  only  did  they  shout  Hosanna  apparently,  but  testified 
among  the  others  to  the  fact  of  the  raising  of  Lazarus. 

Ver.  18.  The  people  (6  SxXos).— -The  multitude  (ver.  12). 

Ver.  19.  The  Pharisees. — All  their  plans  against  Jesus  only  seemed  to  bring  greater  honour 
to  Him.  Probably  these  men  shrank  at  first  from  the  more  cold-blooded  and  murderous 
plan  of  the  chief  priests.  But  their  wilful  opposition  to  truth  was  leading  them  to  accept 
the  plan  of  the  latter.     Facilis  descensus  Averni. 

Vers.  20-36.  Certain  Greeks  coming  with  a  desire  to  see  Him  gave  our  Lord  an  opportunity 
of  pointing  to  His  atoning  work  as  the  hope  of  salvation  for  all  men,  i.e.  the  world. 

Ver.  20.  Greeks. —  EXX^es,  not  simply  Grecian  Jews  (Acts  vi.  1).  They  were  most  likely 
"  proselytes  of  the  Gate,"  as  they  had  come  to  Jerusalem  to  keep  the  feast. 

Ver.  21.  The  same  came  therefore  to  Philip,  etc. — Why  therefore?  There  were  many 
Greeks  in  the  region  of  Decapolis ;  and  as  Philip's  name  is  Greek,  his  family  may  have  been 
connected,  at  least  by  trade,  with  the  foreign  residents. 

Ver.  22.  Andrew. — His  is  also  a  Greek  name  ;  and  he  is  mentioned  before  in  conjunction 
with  Philip  (i.  44,  vi.  7,  8). 

Ver.  23.  Jesus  answered,  etc. — This  answer  is  apparently  the  substance  of  what  our  Lord 
said  to  the  Greeks  and  disciples  alike.  The  hour  is  come,  etc. — When  the  old  prophecy  should 
begin  to  be  fulfilled  (Isa.  Ix.  3)  which  told  of  the  ingathering  of  the  Gentiles  (x.  16). 

Vers.  24-26.  These  verses  show  how  the  glorification  of  the  Son  of  man  is  accomplished. 
It  is  through  death  in  the  case  of  Christ  that  the  fuller  life  is  reached.  And  as  the  disciple 
must  follow  his  Master,  the  same  great  result  in  their  case  is  attained  through  self-sacrifice 
and  self- surrender.  The  similarity  of  the  teaching  in  St.  John  and  the  Synoptists  on  this 
point  will  be  seen  by  a  comparison  of  Matt.  x.  37-39,  etc.,  with  this  passage. 

Ver.  27.  Now  is  my  soul  troubled,  etc. — Soul,  \J/vxVi  *•'*■  life  (ver«  25),  the  seat  of  the  natural 
feelings  and  emotions  (Matt.  xi.  20-25,  xxvi.  38,  etc.).  Can  it  be  wondered  at  that  the 
Prince  of  Life  should  feel  it  a  terrible  ordeal  to  submit  to  death,  even  for  a  time  ?  Even  His 
human  nature,  "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,"  must  have  shrunk  more  from  this  ordeal  than  we 
do  who  feel  "  we  were  not  made  to  die."  What  shall  I  say  ?  etc. — Are  the  words  "  Father,  save 
Me,"  etc.,  a  prayer  like  that  uttered  in  Gethsemane  ?  or  are  they  to  be  read  interrogatively,  like 
the  opening  clause  of  the  sentence  ?  The  following  sentence  seems  decidedly  to  favour  the 
latter  view.  As  Godet  says,  "  It  is  a  hypothetical  prayer."  It  was  the  cry  of  nature,  if 
nature  had  suffered  Jesus  to  speak.  In  the  words  which  follow  He  expresses  what  really 
hindered  Him  from  addressing  such  a  request  to  God  :  it  would  be  a  negation  of  all  that  He 
had  yet  done  and  suffered. 

Ver.  28.  Father,  glorify,  etc. — This  is  the  prayer  Christ  really  uttered,  and  to  it  a  speedy 
answer  was  given — a  voice  from  heaven,  etc. 

Ver.  29.  The  people  therefore,  etc. — This  is  the  record  of  a  veracious  witness.  One  who 
sought  to  deceive  would  not  have  recorded  these  doubts.  But  why  was  the  voice  not  distinct 
to  all  ?  Perhaps  just  because,  as  in  the  spiritual  sphere,  those  who  are  prepared  simply  to 
receive  the  truth,  joyfully  accept  it  when  it  is  presented  to  them  ;  whilst  others  who  have 
no  desire  for  it  will  find  reasons  for  rejecting  it.  An  angel. — See  Acts  xxiii.  8,  9.  Those 
who  thus  interpreted  the  sound  took  a  higher  view,  and  one  in  accordance  with  Hebrew 
tradition  as  well  as  with  Old  Testament  fact  (Gal.  iii.  19 ;  Heb.  ii.  2). 

335 


chap.  xii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


Ver.  30.  Jesus  answered,  etc. — Our  Lord  attests  the  fact  of  the  divine  utterance,  and  shows 
that  it  came  for  the  purpose  of  strengthening  the  faith  of  those  who  heard  it. 

Ver.  31 .  Now  is  a  judgment,  etc. — Not  tj  kpictls.  Now  is  the  time  coming,  is  at  hand,  when  "  the 
thoughts  of  many  hearts  shall  be  revealed  "  (Luke  ii.  34).  The  prince  of  this  world. — See 
xiv.  30,  xvi.  11 ;  Eph.  ii.  2,  vi.  12.  This  "  was  the  regular  rabbinic  title  for  Satan,  whom  they 
regarded  as  the  ruler  of  the  Gentiles,  the  Jews  not  being  included  in  his  kingdom  " 
(Watkins).  And  as  the  Greeks  were  listening  to  Jesus  all  would  understand  that  He  here 
meant  the  beginning  of  the  Messianic  reign  (Gen.  iii.  15,  etc.). 

Ver.  32.  See  i.  29. 

Ver.  34.  The  people  answered,  etc. — Christ  had  claimed  to  be  Messiah  (ver.  31)  ;  how  then 
did  He  speak  of  being  lifted  up  out  of  the  earth  (e/c  tt)s  777s)  ?  Did  not  the  law,  at  least  as 
interpreted  by  the  Jewish  teachers,  declare  that  Christ  would  abide  for  ever  (see  Dan.  vii.  14  ; 
Isa.  ii.  2-5,  ix.  7,  etc. ;  Ps.  ex.)  ?  Who  is  this  Son  of  man  who  is  to  be  lifted  up  out  of  the 
earth  ?    Surely  He  cannot  be  the  Son  of  man  of  whom  the  prophets  speak  ? 

Ver.  35.  Walk  while,  etc.— Better  "  Walk  as  (ws  with  the  majority  of  great  MSS.)  ye  have 
the  light."     Lest  darkness  overtake  you,  come  on  you,  seize  on  you  suddenly  (1  Thess.  v.  4). 

Ver.  36.  That  ye  may  become  sons  of  light. — Eph.  v.  8 ;  1  Thess.  v.  5.  These  things  spake 
.  .  .  and  was  hidden  from  them. — These  solemn  words  are  the  Saviour's  closing  words  in  His 
public  ministry.  He  departed,  because  He  was  rejected.  He  was  hidden  from  them.  They 
had  chosen  the  darkness  rather  than  the  light.  It  was  most  likely  to  Bethany  that  He 
went. 

Vers.  37-43.  The  Evangelist's  statement  of  the  causes  of  Jewish  unbelief,  and  of  the 
timidity  of  many  who  believed,  which  prevented  them  confessing  Christ. 

Ver.  37.  roa-avra,  "  so  many,"  to  be  distinguished  from  roiavra,  "  so  great "  (Reynolds,  etc.). 

Ver.  38.  Report  (i.e.  the  message  given  to  the  prophets  to  be  delivered  by  them)  .  .  .  arm  of 
the  Lord. — Both  the  teaching  and  the  signs  wrought  by  Christ  failed  to  lead  the  mass  of  the 
people  to  faith. 

Ver.  39.  Therefore  they  could  not,  etc. — It  seems  to  be  a  law  of  the  spiritual  and  moral 
life  that  a  wilful  disregard  of  truth,  e.g.,  leads  to  an  inability  to  be  influenced  by  the  truth. 
The  nature  remains  impervious  to  it.  Just  as  the  prophesying  of  Isaiah  (Isa.  vi.)  tended  only 
to  harden  the  hearts  of  the  unbelieving  in  his  day,  so  our  Lord's  teaching  and  miracles 
hardened  the  hearts  of  the  Jews  because  of  their  wilful  unbelief  (ver.  40). 

Ver.  40.  That  they  should  not,  etc.  (jva  ixrq  iduxri). — Describes  the  result,  and  not  the  cause. 

Ver.  41.  When,  etc. — Better  (with  the  best  MSS.)  6'rt,  because  he  saw,  etc.  The  prophecy 
was  given  in  consequence  of  the  prophetic  vision  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  "  Was  this  the 
glory  of  the  triune  God  ?"  (Cyril,  see  Wordsworth,  Greek  Testament)  (Rev.  iv.  8-11,  v.  12-14: 
comp.  Isa.  vi.). 

Ver.  42.  Put  out  of  the  synagogue. — See  ix.  22,  vii.  13. 

Ver.  43.  The  glory  of  men. — See  v.  44. 

Ver.  44.  Cried  (&cpa£e). — These  words  were  doubtless  uttered  in  the  hearing  of  His  more 
immediate  disciples,  and  contain  encouragement  and  warning  for  them.  It  was  a  cry  from 
His  heart,  grieved  at  His  rejection  by  His  own  people,  and  solicitous  for  the  stability  of  His 
followers'  faith. 

Ver.  45.  See  xiv.  9.    See. — I.e.  behold,  contemplate. 

Ver.  46.  See  viii.  12. 

Vers.  47,  48.  See  iii.  17,  viii.  15,  16.  Those  who  reject  Christ  shall  be  self-condemned. 
The  opportunity  and  means  were  given  them ;  but  they  would  not  (Luke  x.  16,  xix.  44 ; 
Matt,  xxiii.  37). 

Ver.  49.  Of  Myself. — All  through  this  Gospel  Christ  declares  His  unity  of  will  and  purpose 
with  the  Father  (v.  30,  vii.  16-18,  28,  29,  viii.  26-29,  38,  42,  etc.). 

Ver.  50.  His  commandment  is  life  eternal. —Prov.  xix.  16;  Rom.  vii.  10.  It  is  so  with  all 
God's  laws,  material  and  spiritual.  They  are  ordained  to  life.  And  eternal  Wisdom  speaks 
in  Christ's  words  (Prov.  viii.  1,  4,  32-36). 


MAIN  HOMILETIOS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—8. 

The  anointing  at  Bethany. — It  was  eventide  at  the  close  of  the  Jewish 
Sabbath,  the  last  Sabbath  before  the  final  passover  of  our  Lord's  ministry, 
the  passover  at  which  He  was  to  be  offered  up  as  the  lamb  slain  from  the 
foundation  of  the  world.  The  restful  close  of  a  restful  day,  bright  with  the 
sunshine  of  spring,  beautiful  and  fragrant  with  the  fresh  greenery  and  the  pro- 
fusion of  flowers  of  that  season  in  Palestine,  was  this  Sabbath  evening.  In  the 
rural  retreat  at  Bethany,  hidden  from  the  city  by  the  brow  of  Olivet,  Jesus  and 

336 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  xn. 


His  disciples  had  passed  the  peaceful  day.  And  now,  when  the  rosy  tints 
of  sunset  had  faded  from  earth  and  sky,  the  little  company  was  found  under  a 
hospitable  roof  for  social  cheer  and  intercourse.  It  was  at  the  house  of  Simon  the 
leper,  probably  one  of  those  who  had  been  healed  by  Jesus,  that  the  guests  had 
met  (Matt.  xxvi.  6).  Among  them  were  the  members  of  that  family  whose 
connection  with  it  has  made  Bethany  ever  memorable.  Martha,  true  to  her 
character  as  depicted  in  Luke's  Gospel  (Luke  x.  40),  was  present,  busied 
with  needful  and  congenial  household  duties.  Thus  at  the  board  were  seated 
Jesus  Himself  and  two  of  the  trophies  of  His  redeeming  might :  Simon,  the 
host,  who  had  been  delivered  from  a  double  death  in  life ;  and  Lazarus,  "  strange 
guest,"  who  but  a  short  space  before  had  been  laid  in  the  tomb  with  almost 
despairing  sorrow,  and  had  been  summoned  forth  by  the  Life  of  men  anew  to 
see  the  light  of  mortal  day,  and  to  witness  to  the  divine  glory  in  the  action  of 
the  Son  of  God.  But  this  feast  is  memorable  for  the  circumstance  here  related 
as  having  occurred  at  it. 

I.  The  offering  of  loving  devotion. — 1.  After  the  signal  miracle  of  the  raising 
of  Lazarus,  Jesus  had  left  the  neighbourhood  of  Jerusalem,  thus  giving  to  His 
enemies  a  last  opportunity  for  repentance  (xi.  53,  54).  Since  that  time  He  had 
not  been  in  Bethany,  and  Mary  had  had  no  opportunity  of  showing  her  affection 
and  gratitude  to  Him.  2.  But  now,  as  she  sees  Him  sitting  at  the  table  in 
Simon's  house,  there  rushes  in  upon  her  soul  a  sense  of  all  the  preciousness  of 
Christ.  What  had  He  not  been  to  her  and  hers  during  those  years  of  inter- 
course !  How  blessed  had  those  hours  been  when  she  had  listened  to  His 
heavenly  teaching,  sitting  like  a  disciple  at  the  Master's  feet  and  learning  of 
Him,  drinking  in  His  words  of  heavenly  wisdom,  with  all  their  comfort  and 
hope  and  promise  !  3.  Above  all,  there  was  Lazarus,  her  brother,  seated  there 
in  health  and  vigour,  whom  Christ  had  snatched  from  the  prison-house  of  the 
grave.  Whichever  way  she  turned,  indeed,  were  evidences  of  the  blessedness 
Jesus  had  brought  to  her  home  and  to  her  own  life.  How  shall  she  display  all 
the  gratitude  and  love  that  are  welling  up  in  her  heart  ?  Words !  how  poor 
they  are  to  express  love  !  Gifts  !  are  they  not  even  poorer  ?  4.  There  was  one 
way  in  which  she  could  in  a  measure  express  her  feeling  better  than  by  costly 
gift,  or  even  fervent  speech.  She  possessed  an  alabaster  box  of  an  esteemed  and 
precious  unguent  (Mark  xiv.  3) — spikenard,  or  pistic  nard  ;  and  approaching  the 
Saviour,  she  broke  the  flask,  and  then  poured  the  unguent  on  His  head.  This 
was  in  the  East  "  an  ordinary  mark  of  honour "  (Ps.  xxiii.  5).  But  passing 
beyond  that,  she  showed  a  further  token  of  her  love  and  esteem  in  anointing 
His  feet  and  wiping  them  with  her  hair.  5.  Further  than  that,  there  may  have 
been  in  Mary's  heart  the  idea,  gathered  not  alone  from  Jesus'  own  words,  but  from 
the  hate  and  fury  of  His  foes,  that  He  might  not  be  long  here  to  receive  such 
tokens  of  gratitude  and  affection.  Mingled  with  this  would  be  the  feeling  also 
that  our  Lord  would  be  cheered  in  the  midst  of  so  much  opposition  by  the 
consciousness  of  the  deep  love  and  devotion  of  those  who  knew  Him  best. 
6.  Thus  she  poured  forth  the  precious  oil,  unconsciously  as  it  were  anointing  the 
great  kingly  Priest  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec,  as  He  went  forward  on  His 
path  to  conquer  and  redeem. 

"  Her  eyes  are  homes  of  silent  prayer, 
Nor  other  thought  her  mind  admits 
But,  he  was  dead,  and  there  he  sits, 
And  He  that  brought  him  back  is  there. 

"  Then  one  deep  love  doth  supersede 
All  other,  when  her  ardent  gaze 
Roves  from  the  living  brother's  face, 
And  rests  upon  the  Life  indeed. 

z  337 


chap.  xii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


"  All  subtle  thought,  all  curious  fears, 
Borne  down  by  gladness  so  complete, 
She  bows,  she  bathes  the  Saviour's  feet 
With  costly  spikenard  and  with  tears. 

"  Thrice  blest  whose  lives  are  faithful  prayers, 
Whose  loves  in  higher  love  endure ; 
What  souls  possess  themselves  so  pure, 
Or  is  there  blessedness  like  theirs  ? " 

In  Memoriam,  xxxii. 

II.  The  worldly  judgment  of  this  offering. — 1.  Acts  of  spiritual  devotion  are 
not  to  the  world's  liking.  The  world  cannot  understand  them,  and  dubs  them  with 
the  epithet  "  enthusiastic,"  or  "  fanatical,"  or  "  foolish."  And  thus  it  was  here. 
From  the  Synoptic  narratives  we  learn  that  the  disciples  of  our  Lord  generally- 
murmured  at  what  they  called  the  waste  of  the  ointment.  2.  But  we  further 
learn  from  this  Gospel  who  it  was  that  instigated  this  feeling.  It  was  the  traitor 
— the  son  of  perdition.  The  sweet  and  penetrating  odour  of  the  nard  actually 
stank  in  his  nostrils.  It  awoke  into  active  and  hateful  activity  the  avarice,  the 
meanness,  the  duplicity,  of  his  poor,  degraded  nature.  A  pound  of  spikenard — so 
costly — worth  at  least  three  hundred  pence  (about  <£10),  which  might  have  done 
so  much  for  the  poor  by  going  into  the  bag,  which  was  lean  enough  !  Such 
whispers,  circulated  among  the  disciples,  made  them,  at  first  view  of  the  matter, 
indignant  at  the  apparently  wasteful  act.  And  this  feeling  was  readily  ex- 
pressed by  Judas  Iscariot.  3.  But  it  was  an  altogether  false  and  evil  judgment ; 
and  the  Evangelist,  looking  back  on  the  scene,  discovers  for  us  the  true  meaning. 
Even  at  that  very  moment,  Judas,  that  man  of  dark  soul,  was  meditating  the 
betrayal  of  Jesus.  His  plausible  sympathy  for  the  poor  was  altogether 
hypocritical.  Much  the  poor  would  have  got  from  him,  even  had  the  ointment 
been  transmuted  into  gold ;  for  "  he  bare  the  bag,  and  was  a  thief."  And  as 
the  time  of  betrayal  was  near,  which  would  leave  the  bag  entirely  in  his  hands, 
he  boiled  over  with  avaricious  rage  to  think  how  much  more  might  have  been  in  it 
had  he  had  the  disposal  of  this  ointment.  4.  It  is  very  significant  to  read  in 
Matthew's  Gospel  (xxvi.  14,  15)  that  immediately  after  this  incident  Judas  went 
to  the  chief  priests  and  said,  "  What  will  ye  give  me,  and  I  will  deliver  Him 
unto  you  1  And  they  covenanted  with  him  for  thirty  pieces  of  silver."  He  has 
lost  the  three  hundred  pence,  but  He  will  have  something  to  swell  the  small  sum 
in  that  common  purse,  which,  depend  upon  it,  he  will  cling  to  when  the  end 
comes.  What  a  contrast !  The  love  and  devotion  of  Mary  side  by  side  with  the 
avarice,  hatred,  and  hypocrisy  of  Judas.  Here  on  earth  they  may  be  seen 
together,  and  may  be  misjudged — the  avarice  counted  prudence,  and  the  free- 
handed devotion  waste.  And  yet  even  here  there  is  fixed  between  a  gulf  as  great 
— nay,  that  same  gulf — as  that  which  separates  heaven  from  hell. 

III.  Our  Lord's  appreciation  of  Mary's  act. — 1.  The  sensitive  nature  of  Mary 
must  have  been  deeply  wounded.  She  was  "  troubled."  Had  she  done  wrong  1 
Not  long  was  she  permitted  to  be  in  suspense.  The  Lord  spoke,  and  He  spoke 
not  directly  to  Judas,  but  generally  to  all  the  disciples :  "  Let  her  alone,  that 
she  may  keep  it  for  the  day  of  My  burial."  The  other  Gospels  tell  what  the  mean- 
ing of  the  deed  was  at  that  time.  But  it  was  preliminary  to  a  further  anointing, 
for  which  part  of  the  costly  unguent  was  preserved.  2.  It  was  the  beginning  of  a 
good  work  done  on  the  Saviour,  and  having  a  double  significance.  Not  only  was 
it  the  anointing  of  our  High  Priest  and  King,  who  was  to  be  hailed  with  hosannas 
on  the  coming  day — the  High  Priest  was  also  to  be  the  sacrifice ;  and  thus  it 
was  a  beginning  of  His  embalming,  a  preparation  for  the  supreme  act  of  His 
self-sacrificing  and  redeeming  love.  3.  The  house  was  filled  with  the  odour  of 
the  ointment ;  but  it  has  gone  forth  also  beyond  the  house  at  Bethany,  and  the 

338 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  xii. 


world  has  been  filled  with  the  fragrance  of  this  loving  deed.  It  clings  to  this 
woman's  memory  as  an  imperishable  perfume ;  and  as  the  gospel  spreads,  the 
sweet  odour  of  this  loving  act  spreads  with  its  advance,  teaching  men  the 
spirit  of  consecrated  service,  the  spirit  of  true  devotion  to  the  Saviour.  Mary 
had  anointed  Jesus;  but  His  words,  like  a  rich  anointing,  have  imperishably 
embalmed  the  memory  of  her  gentle,  loving  deed. 

In  this  beautiful  and  touching  episode,  standing  out  more  clear  and  beautiful 
against  the  dark  background  of  the  treachery  of  Judas,  there  are  lessons  of  life 
and  conduct. — 1.  We  cannot  now  imitate  Mary's  act  of  love  and  devotion  by 
doing  what  she  did,  but  we  may  manifest  the  same  love  and  do  homage  to  Him 
in  other  ways.  There  are  many  gifts  we  may  bring  directly  to  Christ,  many  an 
act  of  service  specially  designed  to  honour  Him.  Love  in  every  new  age,  and 
in  every  new  combination  of  circumstances,  will  find  and  grasp  the  opportunity. 
2.  And  such  service  done  specially  for  Christ  will  never  conflict  with  duty  to  the 
poor  and  indigent.  What  is  really  spent  in  honouring  Him  can  never  be 
"  waste."  It  is  only  the  grasping,  covetous  mind  that  will  ever  grudge  such 
manifestations  of  love.  For  in  reality  all  that  is  done  for  His  sake,  and  in 
advancing  His  kingdom,  is  in  a  broad  but  true  sense  done  for  the  poor.  For 
wherever  His  kingdom  comes  with  power,  there  comes  with  it  a  greater  care 
for  the  poor,  a  deeper  sympathy  for  the  wretched,  a  wider  humanity.  3.  A 
frequent  objection  to  the  cost  of  foreign  missions,  e.g.,  is  that  we  have  enough  to 
do  with  home  missions,  the  care  of  the  poor,  etc.,  as  if  the  doing  of  one  duty 
could  absolve  us  from  another  specially  commanded  by  Christ  !  If  the  believers 
of  the  apostolic  age,  and  of  the  early  Christian  centuries,  had  acted  thus,  how 
would  the  gospel  ever  have  been  made  known  ]  And  if  we  are  to  wait  till  every 
one  at  home  is  converted  before  going  abroad,  we  shall  have  to  wait  till 
doomsday.  4.  Beware  of  the  sin  of  Judas  !  Temptation  comes  often  to  us  in 
that  very  work  for  which  we  are  best  fitted.  Judas  was  the  accountant  of  the 
infant  Church,  perhaps  because  his  gifts  inclined  him  that  way.  His  temptation 
lay  in  this  very  direction,  that  love  of  money  which  is  a  root  of  all  evil. 
Hypocrisy  and  temptation  made  him  a  thief,  and  at  last  a  criminal,  who  basely 
betrayed  his  Lord.     "  Lust,  when  it  hath  conceived,"  etc.  (James  i.  15). 

Ver.  8.  The  Christian  care  of  the  poor. — The  meaning  of  our  Lord's  words  is 
evidently  this  :  "  The  poor,"  etc. — As  Moses  wrote,  "  The  poor  shall  never  cease 
out  of  the  land."  "  But  Me  ye  have  not  always."  But  My  person,  My  bodily 
presence,  will  be  soon  removed  beyond  immediate  communion.  The  poor  are 
always  around  you,  but  opportunities  of  personally  ministering  to  My  wants  will 
soon  be  at  an  end."  Him  they  would  have  always  in  a  spiritual  sense  (Matt, 
xxviii.  20)  ;  but  soon  as  the  despised  and  rejected  Emmanuel,  who  had  not  where 
to  lay  His  head,  He  would  no  longer  be  known  to  them.  And  opportunities  of 
thus  showing  their  faith,  homage,  devotion  to  Him  in  His  state  of  humiliation 
would  no  longer  be  afforded.  In  these  words  our  Lord  lays  down  the  duty  of 
Christians  toward  the  poor  in  conjunction  with  special  devotion  to  Christ. 

I.  The  poor  will  always  remain. — 1.  There  have  been,  and  are,  dreamers  who 
imagine  that  if  in  some  way  or  other  all  capital  and  property  were,  so  to  speak, 
commuted,  then  all  men  would  be  equally  wealthy,  that  poverty  would  cease,  and 
a  sort  of  lotus-eater's  heaven  begin  on  earth.  2.  It  is  a  vain  dream,  for  men 
cannot  commute  and  bring  into  one  common  fund  health,  intelligence,  industry, 
skill,  etc.  These  will  always  remain  unequal,  and  thus  some  men  will  always 
rise  higher  than  others.  3.  Opportunity  and  position  of  course  go  for  something, 
but  they  do  not  explain  all  social  differences.  I  may  be  poor  to-day,  but  my  son 
may  be  rich  to-morrow,  having  more  faculty  or  greater  skill  in  acquiring  means. 
Or  my  neighbour  may  be  rich  to-day  and  his  child  poor  to-morrow,  because  the 

339 


chap.  xii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


latter  had  neither  the  health,  nor  skill,  nor  ability  to  retain  and  add  to  what  has 
been  bequeathed  to  him.  There  is  a  perpetual  fluctuation,  a  rising  and  falling 
in  the  social  scale,  in  so  far  as  wealth  is  the  standard.  4.  And  it  is  good  that  it 
should  be  so,  otherwise  humanity  would  stagnate.  It  is  good  for  our  common 
weal  that  few  are  absolutely  idle,  that  all  have  to  labour  with  hand  or  brain. 
And  "  honest  poverty  "  that  does  not  fall  to  utter  destitution,  but  which  permits 
the  satisfaction  of  its  simple  wants,  need  make  no  man  "  hang  his  head."  It  is 
the  field  on  which  grow  many  of  the  flowers  of  national  virtue,  and  from  it  come 
forth  many  who  are  strong  to  endure  and  act  for  the  good  of  the  whole  com- 
munity. 5.  But  from  this  class,  and  from  all  classes,  there  come,  part  by  force 
of  circumstances,  part  through  weakness  of  nature,  and  part  through  their  own 
folly,  a  number  who  reach  the  lowest  deeps  of  poverty,  who  are  indigent  and  in 
want  of  things  needful.  It  is  to  these  our  Lord  specially  referred  when  He  said, 
"  The  poor,"  etc. 

II.  In  these  words  our  Lord  commits  the  care  of  the  poor  to  His  Church. — 

1.  He  had  made  it  His  care  while  here  to  relieve  the  indigent.  That  was  the 
reason  partly  of  the  existence  of  the  "  bag,"  the  common  purse  in  the  charge  of 

.  Judas.  And  now  our  Lord  made  over  this  charge  to  the  representatives  and 
original   members   of   the   New  Testament    Church    that    stood   around    Him. 

2.  And  certainly  from  what  is  recorded  of  the  example  of  the  early  Church,  and 
indications  in  the  Gospels  themselves  and  in  our  Lord's  teaching,  there  is  much 
which  would  lead  us  to  conclude  that  there  should  be  a  greater  general  distribu- 
tion of  the  world's  wealth  than  there  is.  There  is  nothing  in  the  New  Testament 
to  incite  men  to  the  interference  with  property  which  is  a  too  common  feature 
of  socialistic  panacese.  But  there  is  a  warning  against  the  accumulation  of  too 
great  wealth,  and  the  inculcation  of  a  wider  and  freer  spirit  of  benevolence. 

3.  "  With  Christianity  began  the  organised  and  individual  charity  of  modern 
Europe  "  (Loring-Brace).  And  it  is  a  question  whether  it  would  not  be  better  in 
a  professedly  Christian  land  to  continue  to  permit  the  Church — all  sections  in  this 
working  in  unity — to  undertake  the  care  of  the  poor.  It  is  admitted  by  most  that 
the  present  state-devised  and  worked  method  of  relieving  indigence  is  not  the 
best ;  for  it  is  neither  the  least  expensive  nor  the  most  effective,  in  that  it  tends 
to  break  down  the  spirit  of  independence,  whilst  many  of  the  most  deserving 
indigent  poor  receive  no  benefit.  4.  Hence  there  are  still  many  charities  in 
existence,  having  for  their  end  the  care  of  the  poor.  But  never  will  this  work 
be  rightly  done  and  this  duty  properly  discharged  until  the  Church  as  a  whole, 
filled  with  the  Spirit  of  her  Master,  realises  the  claims  of  the  poverty-stricken 
and  distressed,  and,  in  the  words  of  the  Redeemer,  "  The  poor,"  etc.,  recognises 
the  fact  that  these  are  committed  to  her  care. 

III.  The  cost  of  honour  and  devotion  to  Christ  will  never  lessen  care  for  and 
succour  of  the  indigent  and  poor. — 1.  Often  the  best  way  to  help  the  poor  is  to 
help  them  to  labour,  or  so  to  strengthen  and  support  them  that  they  may 
by-and-by  be  able  to  support  themselves.  So  that  even  the  pouring  out  of  this 
ointment  was  no  waste.  There  were  poor  men  and  women  employed  in  the 
making  of  it  and  its  costly  case,  and  also  in  the  various  avenues  of  trade  through 
which  it  came  to  the  last  buyer.  2.  Thus  many  poor  had  food  provided  for  them, 
and  every  new  supply  of  spikenard  meant  bread  and  to  spare  in  some  humble 
home.  3.  And  especially  if  what  is  spent  is  dedicated  with  loving  heart  to  the 
divine  honour  and  glory,  it  will  not  lead  to  less  being  spent  for  the  relief  of  the 
poor  and  indigent.  The  man  who  builds  a  church,  e.g.,  to  the  glory  of  Christ, 
and  who  has  it  fitted  up,  with  some  true  sense  of  the  "beauty  of  holiness,"  as  a 
fitting  place  in  which  men  may  worship  thankfully  their  God  and  Saviour,  is  not 
the  man  whose  heart  will  be  untouched  by  the  tale  of  human  misery,  or  whose 
hand  will  be  slack  in  doing  what  the  heart  prompts,  etc. 

340 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


CfiAP.  XII. 


HOMILETIC  NOTES. 


Vers.  1-8.  Jesus  came  from  Eph- 
raim,  whither  He  had  gone  after  the 
raising  of  Lazarus  (xi.  54),  on  His 
way  to  the  last  passover  at  Jerusalem. 
He  arrived  at  Jericho,  in  company, 
doubtless,  with  the  pilgrim  bands  going 
up  to  keep  the  feast  (Matt.  xx.  29). 
Resting  at  Jericho  in  the  house  of 
Zaccheus  for  a  time,  He  then  went  on 
to  Jerusalem  (Luke  xix.  5,  28),  and 
came,  as  St.  John  records,  to  Bethany. 
The  Synoptic  Gospels  place  the  incident 
of  the  anointing  after  the  triumphal 
entry  into  Jerusalem ;  but  that  is  for 
the  purpose  of  bringing  it  into  con- 
nection with  the  betrayal  by  Judas  and 
the  history  of  the  passion  generally. 
If  we  consider  that  the  crucifixion  took 
place  "  between  the  two  evenings  "  of  the 
14th  and  15th  Nisan  (see  note,  ch.  xiii.), 
then  the  anointing  took  place  in  the 
evening  at  the  close  of  the  Sabbath,  the 
day  of  rest  which  followed  the  journey 
to  Bethany.  On  the  following  day 
(our  Sunday)  Jesus  made  His  entry  into 


Jerusalem  amid  the  shouts  of  Hosanna. 
He  would  therefore  reach  Bethany  on 
the  eve  of  the  Sabbath  (the  8th  Nisan). 
Bethany  (now  called  El-'Azriyeh — 
El-'Azir,  i.e.  Lazarus)  is  at  present  a 
small,  poor  village  on  the  east  slope  of 
Olivet,  about  two  miles  from  Jerusalem 
The  name  signifies  "  house  of  dates.5 
The  traces  of  ancient  buildings,  and 
the  fact  that  even  the  houses  of  the 
present  day  are  built  out  of  old  and 
somewhat  heavier  stones  than  we 
should  expect  to  find  villagers'  houses 
built  of,  show  that  at  one  time  the 
place  was  of  more  importance  than  it 
is  now.  But  almost  no  place  in 
Palestine  fills  a  greener  spot  in  memory. 
It  was  apparently  a  place  of  rest  and 
refreshing  for  the  Bedeemer  (Matt, 
xxi.  17;  Luke  x.  38-42;  John  xi.  1, 
etc.).  And  the  recollection  of  the 
home  there  is  a  sunny  one,  with  one 
night  of  darkness  (xi.  17),  and  one 
passing  cloud  (xii.  4-6). 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  6.  The  love  of  money. — In  every  nation 
there  are,  and  must  always  be,  a  certain 
number  of  those  fiends'  servants  who  have  it 
principally  for  the  object  of  their  lives  to 
make  money.  They  are  always  more  or  less 
stupid,  and  cannot  conceive  of  anything  else 
so  nice  as  money.  Stupidity  is  always  the 
basis  of  the  Judas  bargain.  We  do  great 
injustice  to  Iscariot  in  thinking  him  wicked 
above  all  common  wickedness.  He  was  only 
a  common  money-lover,  and,  like  all  money- 
lovers,  didn't  understand  Christ ;  couldn't 
make  out  the  worth  of  Him,  or  meaning  of 
Him.  He  didn't  want  Him  to  be  killed.  He 
was  horror-struck  when  he  found  that  Christ 
would  be  killed ;  threw  his  money  away 
instantly,  and  hanged  himself.  How  many 
of  our  present  money- seekers,  think  you, 
would  have  the  grace  to  hang  themselves, 
whoever  was  killed  ?  But  Judas  was  a 
common,  selfish,  muddle-headed,  pilfering 
fellow ;  his  hand  always  in  the  bag  of  the 
poor,  not  caring  for  them.  He  didn't  under- 
stand. Christ ;  yet  believed  in  Him,  much 
more  than  most  of  us  do  ;  had  seen  Him 
do  miracles,  thought  He  was  quite  strong 
enough  to  shift  for  Himself,  and  he,  Judas, 
might  as  well    make    his   own   little  bye- 


perquisites  out  of  the  affair.  Christ  would 
come  out  of  it  well  enough,  and  he  have  his 
thirty  pieces.  Now,  that  is  the  money- 
seeker's  idea,  all  over  the  world.  He  doesn't 
hate  Christ,  but  can't  understand  Him — 
doesn't  care  for  Him — sees  no  good  in  that 
benevolent  business  ;  makes  his  own  little 
job  out  of  it  at  all  events,  come  what  will. 
And  thus,  out  of  every  mass  of  men,  you 
have  a  certain  number  of  bagmen — your 
"  fee-first "  men,  whose  main  object  is  to 
make  money.  And  they  do  make  it — make 
it  in  all  sorts  of  unfair  ways,  chiefly  by  the 
weight  and  force  of  money  itself,  or  what  is 
called  the  power  of  capital ;  that  is  to  say,  the 
power  which  money,  once  obtained,  has  over 
the  labour  of  the  poor,  so  that  the  capitalist 
can  take  all  its  produce  to  himself,  except 
the  labourer's  food.  That  is  the  modern 
Judas's  way  of  "carrying  the  bag,"  and 
"  bearing  what  is  put  therein." — Ruskin. 

Ver.  8.  The  rise  of  organised  Christian 
charity. — With  Christianity  began  the  organ- 
ised and  individual  charity  of  modern 
Europe,  which  for  these  eighteen  centuries 
has  wiped  away  so  many  tears,  softened  so 
much  suffering,  saved  so  many  young  lives 

341 


CHAP.  XII.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


from  misery  and  sin,  ministered  at  so  many 
deathbeds,  made  the  solitary  evening  of  life 
sweet  to  so  many  forsaken  ones,  and  the 
morning  glad  to  so  many  who  would  have 
been  born  to  sorrow  and  shame ;  which  in 
so  many  countries  has  cared  for  the  sick,  the 
blind,  the  deaf,  the  crippled,  the  outcast  and 
tempted  ;  the  young,  the  orphan,  the  found- 
ling, and  the  aged.  Surely,  if  anything  is  a 
fore-gleam  of  that  kingdom  of  heaven  which 
is  yet  to  shine  over  the  earth,  it  is  the 
brotherhood  of  spirit,  shown  in  the  charity 
of  the  modern  world.  This  is  most  distinctly 
the  fruit  of  Christ's  teachings.  And  yet  the 
Master  did  not  lay  any  extraordinary  weight 
on  alms-giving.  He  simply  taught  the  love 
of  man  through  love  to  Himself,  that  the 
poorest  and  lowest  of  the  human  race  repre- 
sented Himself,  and  what  was  done  to  them 
was  done  to  Him.  The  equal  brotherhood  of 
man  came  forth  from  His  teachings,  and  all 
human  beings,  of  whatever  rank,  or  under 
whatever  disabilities  of  misfortune,  became 
of  equal  value  in  the  eyes  of  His  followers, 
as  being  those  for  whom  He  lived,  and  in 
behalf  of  whom  He  felt  it  not  unworthy  to 
die.  The  unfortunate  had  henceforth  around 
them  the  halo  of  the  great  Sufferer,  and  a 
very  different  place  in  the  sympathies  of  the 
new  world  of  Europe. —  C.  Loring-Brace. 

Ver.  8.  The  effect  of  Christianity  on 
pauperism. — It  has  been  alleged,  with  some 
apparent  justice,  that  this  spirit  of  Christian 
charity,  which  has  made  modern  society  so 
different  from  ancient,  has  cultivated  depend- 
ence, and  increased  pauperism  or  that  kind 
of  poverty  which  is  without  hope  or  energy. 
But  it  should  be  remembered  that  there  is 
nothing  in  the  teachings  of  Christ  or  the 
apostles  which  favoured  indiscriminate 
alms-giving,  or  the  supporting  the  poor 
without  labour.  "  If  a  man  will  not  work, 
neither  shall  he  eat,"  is  evidently  a  favourite 
proverb  with  the  great  apostle.  He  himself 
laboured  with  his  own  hands.  The  disciples 
were  working  people;  and  Christ,  in  human 
relations,  belonged  to  the  working  classes.  The 
type  of  character  He  stamped  on  men  was  the 
very  opposite  of  the  idle  and  dependent  kind  ; 
it  was  earnest,  self-controlled,  under  a  deep 
sense  of  responsibility,  looking  continually 
to  Him  to  whom  men  should  give  an  account 
of  every  word  and  work,  with  the  conviction 
of  being  the  child  of  God,  and  therefore 
calling  no  man  master.  .  .  .  The  influence 
of  the  great  Master  is  directly  to  lessen  one 
of  the  greatest  of  human  ills — pauperism. 
The  self-control,  sobriety,  temperance,  and 
moderation  He  teaches  tend  to  a  certain 
control  over  circumstances.  The  good-will 
He  encourages  brings  sympathy  and  help 
from  others.  The  great  sources  of  poverty 
are  idleness,  intemperance,  and  vice.  The 
Christian,  other  things  being  equal,  is  less 
likely  to  be  very  poor  and  a  pauper  he  cannot 

342 


easily  be — that  is,  he  cannot  have  that  spirit 
of  dependence,  idleness,  and  dishonesty 
which  are  the  essentials  of  pauperism.  If 
by  misfortune  he  come  to  the  lowest  depths 
of  human  ills,  he  bears  as  a  greater  One  hath 
taught  him  to  bear,  and  does  not  become 
degraded  in  spirit.  Having  a  sense  of  his 
great  dignity  as  a  child  of  God,  and  one  for 
whom  Christ  hath  lived  and  died,  he  is  less 
likely  to  become  a  parasite  on  society.  And 
ever  being  in  the  mental  habit  of  looking 
forward  to  the  judgment  of  another  life,  he 
will  be  the  more  apt  to  provide  for  the  ills 
of  this ;  so  under  Christianity  society  tends, 
as  has  often  been  seen  on  the  rugged  soil  and 
under  the  harsh  climate  of  New  England, 
to  throw  off  pauperism  and  eliminate  poverty. 
Many  villages  are  known  in  that  region, 
apparently  so  little  favoured  otherwise  by 
Providence,  where  not  a  pauper  and  scarcely 
an  abjectly  poor  person  can  be  found  for 
miles  around — the  causes  of  this  good  fortune 
being  mainly  moral. — Idem. 

Ver.  8.  The  manner  in  which  Christianity 
may  mitigate  poverty  in  the  future. — It  is 
not  claimed  that  religion  alone  in  future  ages 
can  remove  pauperism  from  the  world,  but 
the  Christian  belief  will  tend  towards  a  more 
just  distribution  of  property;  it  will  promote 
temperance  and  good  morals;  it  will  stimulate 
co-operation  between  labourers  and  between 
labour  and  capital ;  it  will  encourage  many 
forms  of  insurance,  and  above  all  elevate 
and  train  the  character,  so  that  the  human 
being,  though  unfortunate,  cannot  be  de- 
graded ;  and  thus  under  the  influence  of 
Christ  on  the  world  the  labouring  classes 
will  be  less  likely  to  fall  into  extreme 
poverty,  and  if  they  do,  will  be  more  readily 
assisted,  or  will  not  sink  morally.  Cabet,  a 
socialistic  writer,  well  says  :  "  If  Christianity 
had  been  interpreted  and  applied  in  the 
spirit  of  Jesus  Christ,  if  it  had  been  well 
known  and  faithfully  practised  by  the 
numerous  portions  of  Christians  who  are 
animated  by  a  sincere  piety,  and  who  have 
only  need  to  know  truth  well  to  follow  it, 
this  Christianity,  its  morals,  its  philosophy, 
its  precepts,  would  have  sufficed,  and  would 
still  suffice,  to  establish  a  perfect  society  and 
political  organisation,  to  deliver  humanity 
from  the  evil  which  weighs  it  down,  and  to 
assure  the  happiness  of  the  human  race  on 
earth." — Idem. 

Ver.  8.  Sympathy  with  the  poor. — Nothing 
seems  much  clearer  than  the  natural  direction 
of  charity.  Would  we  all  but  relieve,  accord- 
ing to  the  measure  of  our  means,  those  objects 
immediately  within  the  range  of  our  personal 
knowledge,  how  much  of  the  worst  evil  of 
poverty  might  be  alleviated !  Very  poor 
people,  who  are  known  to  us  to  have  been 
honest,  decent,  and  industrious,  when  indus- 
try was  in  their  power,  have  a  claim  on  us, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  xii. 


founded  on  our  knowledge,  and  on  vicinity  with,  without  exciting  an  interest  in  us  for 

and  neighbourhood,   which   have  in  them-  their  silent    and  unobtrusive   sufferings   or 

selves  something  sacred  and  endearing  to  privations.    A  hovel,  here  and  there,  round 

every  good  heart.   One  cannot,  surely,  always  and  about   our  own  comfortable  dwelling, 

pass  by,  in  his  walks  for  health,  restoration,  attracts  our  eyes  by  some  peculiar  appear- 

or  delight,  the  lone,  wayside  beggar,  without  ance  of  penury,  and  we  look  in,  now  and 

occasionally  giving  him  an  alms.     Old,  care-  then,  upon  its  inmates,  cheering  their  cold 

worn,   pale,   drooping,  and  emaciated  crea-  gloom  with  some  small  benefaction.     These 

tures,  who  pass  us  by  without  looking  be-  are  duties  all  men  owe  to  distress ;  they  are 

seechingly  at  us,  or  even  lifting  up  their  easily  discharged ;   and  even    such    tender 

eyes  from  the  ground,  cannot  often  be  met  mercies  as  these  are  twice  blessed. — Chalmers. 


MAIN  HOMILETIOS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses   12—19. 

Christ's  triumphal  entry  into  Jerusalem. — This  triumphal  entry  of  our 
Lord  into  Jerusalem  is  emblematic  of  His  triumph  in  the  hearts  of  indi- 
viduals and  in  the  world  at  large.  "  Behold,  thy  King  cometh,"  is  the  cry 
that  resounds  in  every  heart,  and  among  the  nations,  when  Christ's  truth  is 
proclaimed.  But  His  is  not  a  kingdom  which  comes  with  ostentation.  It  is 
spiritual,  not  temporal.  Hence,  as  of  old,  its  progress  is  marked  by  meekness 
and  lowliness,  its  grandeur  is  of  an  inner  moral,  and  not  of  an  outward 
material  sort,  and  at  its  advent  all  true  hearts  are  joyful.  In  considering  the 
scene  before  us,  notice  : — 

I.  The  humble  simplicity  of  Christ's  regal  entry  into  Jerusalem. — 1.  It  was 
a  real  royal  progress,  but  from  all  the  circumstances  attending  it  evidently  so 
unworldly  and  spiritual  that  even  our  Lord's  enemies  made  no  effort  to  found  on 
it  in  their  accusation  of  Jesus  before  Pilate.  "  Meek  and  lowly  "  was  Jesus,  as 
He  ever  was  during  His  life  on  earth.  And  all  the  ordinary  insignia  and  pomp 
of  royalty  were  absent  from  that  festal  throng  on  the  brow  of  Olivet.  No  guard 
of  soldiery  on  prancing  steeds,  with  glittering  display  of  arms  and  flaunting  of 
banners,  with  blare  of  trumpet  and  clash  of  armour ;  no  civic  functionaries  in 
robes  of  office  grouped  themselves  around  the  King ;  no  carpet  of  state  of  rich 
texture  and  dye  was  spread  on  His  path ;  no  chariot  with  protecting  canopy 
conveyed  the  approaching  King.  All  the  outward  insignia  and  emblems  of 
royalty  were  lacking.  2.  We  see  on  the  contrary  a  meek  and  lowly  man,  "  His 
visage  so  marred  more  than  any  man,"  bearing  on  His  heart  the  sorrows 
of  humanity.  He  is  seated  in  lowly  state  on  an  ass's  colt,  on  which  some  of 
His  few  humble  followers  have  laid  their  outer  garments.  And  the  crowd  that 
accompanies  Him,  shouting  Hosanna,  possess  but  humble  means  of  affording 
Him  honour.  They  spread  their  outer  garments,  and  strew  branches  of  trees  on 
the  way,  in  lieu  of  richer  carpeting.  And  in  place  of  royal  banners  they  wave 
palm  branches  in  the  air.  3.  And  those  crowds  are  of  the  humblest.  No 
representatives  of  the  Sanhedrin — none  of  the  priests,  the  rabbis,  or  other  teachers 
of  the  people.  None  of  the  rulers  of  the  city,  nor  their  servants,  waited  to 
receive  Jerusalem's  rightful  King.  Those  who  surrounded  Him  were  probably 
for  the  most  part  people  from  provincial  Galilee,  where  His  word  had  been  most 
readily  received,  together  with  some  who  were  with  Him  "  when  He  called 
Lazarus  from  the  grave,  and  raised  him  from  the  dead,"  humble  folk  like  His 
own  followers,  far  removed  from  anything  approaching  courtly  pomp  and  pride. 
4.  And  is  not  all  this  strikingly  emblematic  of  the  coming  of  our  Lord  as  King  into 
men's  hearts  and  among  the  nations  ?  It  is  not  with  outward  pomp  men  meet 
and  welcome  their  King,  but  in  meekness  and  lowliness.  It  is  to  the  humble 
and  contrite  in  heart  that  He  is  revealed,  although  hidden  "  from  the  wise  and 
prudent."  And  He  wins  men  to  acknowledge  Him,  not  by  the  display  of 
material  glory,  but  by  the  power  and  gentleness  of  His  love.     He  comes,  not  as 

343 


chap.  xii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


a  tyrant,  but  as  a  Saviour — not  to  overawe  by  the  display  of  His  power  and 
glory,  but  to  bless  with  His  salvation.  And  so  too  is  He  manifested  among  the 
nations.  At  the  proclamation  of  His  coming  and  kingdom  by  humble  followers  we 
do  not  find  the  rulers,  or  men  of  power  and  wisdom,  flocking  to  join  in  His  royal 
progress.  His  coming  is  met  often  by  the  contempt  and  indifference  of  men  in 
high  station,  if  not  by  actual  hatred  and  hostility.  As  of  old,  when  He  comes 
among  the  nations  now,  heralded  by  His  servants  with  the  cry,  "  Behold,  thy 
King  cometh,"  "  not  many  wise  after  the  flesh,  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble  " 
(1  Cor.  i.  26),  receive  Him ;  only  the  humble  who  have  listened  to  His  word 
and  experienced  His  power.  5.  And  it  may  surely  well  be  asked  here,  whether 
the  outward  pomp  and  splendour,  the  hankering  after  temporal  power  and 
honour,  in  some  sections  of  the  visible  Church,  can  be  held  to  be  compatible  with 
this  lowly  royalty  of  the  Redeemer.  Does  not  this  tendency  to  lean  on  outward 
pomp  and  power  lead  to  unspirituality  and  weakness,  and  thus  to  obscure  the 
true  glory  of  the  Redeemer's  advent  and  kingdom  ? 

II.  Its  inherent  glory  to  the  eye  of  faith. — 1.  These  multitudes  that  went 
before  and  followed  the  Eedeemer  were  not  attracted  to  Him  by  any  external 
tokens  of  earthly  power  and  majesty.  The  Saviour  wore  no  regal  crown.  He  was 
on  earth  to  bear  one  of  thorns  alone.  He  wielded  no  earthly  sceptre,  emblem  of 
earthly  authority.  He  wore  no  purple  robe,  significant  of  kingly  dignity  and 
honour.  By  no  such  outward  symbols  were  those  rejoicing  crowds  attracted  to 
the  Saviour.  But  they  did  see  a  glory  greater  than  earth  could  show.  2.  They 
recognised,  in  that  meek  and  lowly  One,  Him  that  had  power  over  the  forces  of 
nature  and  in  the  spiritual  world  such  as  the  greatest  of  earth  never  can 
possess.  Those  from  rural  Galilee  and  Decapolis  remembered  His  mighty  acts 
of  power  and  beneficence — His  healing  of  men's  diseases,  His  satisfying  their 
bodily  needs,  as  He  fed  the  thousands  near  the  Galilean  lake,  His  power  over  the 
spirits  of  evil,  His  ability  even  to  snatch  from  Death  his  prisoners  and  set  them 
free.  His  heavenly  teaching  they  recalled  also  to  memory — teaching  "with 
authority,  and  not  as  that  of  the  scribes."  The  remembrance  of  these  things, 
and  of  the  beauty  of  His  character  and  life,  came  upon  them  like  beams  from 
the  Sun  of  truth,  so  that  they  realised  that  this  could  be  none  other  than  the 
Christ,  the  King  of  Israel,  the  promised  Son  of  David.  Hence  their  shout, 
"  Hosanna,  blessed  is  He  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord."  3.  Thus  they 
also  recognised  in  Him  the  promised  Messiah,  who  was  to  fulfil  all  the  old 
prophecies  and  promises.  All  that  happened  on  that  memorable  morning, 
St.  Matthew  tells  us  (xxi.  4),  was  done  "  that  it  might  be  fulfilled  which  was 
spoken  by  the  prophet."  In  Him  all  the  glory  of  Israel  was  to  centre,  all  the 
ancient  promises  were  to  be  fulfilled.  And  the  most  of  that  rejoicing  crowd,  on  that 
far-away  Sunday  morning,  recognised,  though  dimly  and  imperfectly  it  may  be, 
that  this  lowly  King  was  to  fulfil  and  perfect  all.  They  did  not  know,  they  were 
for  the  most  part  no  doubt  mistaken,  as  to  the  manner  and  extent  in  which  those 
old  prophecies  were  now  to  be  fulfilled.  Even  the  disciples  did  not  at  first  under- 
stand the  full  meaning  of  this  demonstration.  But  they  caught  a  glimpse  in 
faith  of  the  great  truths  which  were  made  visible  in  these  events;  and  by 
accepting  their  homage  and  reverence  Christ  strengthened  their  faith.  4.  To  us 
there  is  even  greater  glory  to  the  eye  of  faith  in  the  coming  of  Christ  through 
the  advance  of  His  kingdom,  even  although  in  its  progress  there  is  little 
of  earthly  glory  or  pride.  We  have  the  record  of  His  miracles  which  He 
wrought  whilst  on  earth,  and  they  indeed  tell  us  of  His  divine  power  and 
majesty.  But  we  know  of  yet  greater  works  than  these  (i.  50,  51).  We  see 
the  spiritually  diseased  made  whole,  the  spiritually  dead  made  alive,  the 
spiritual  bondslaves  of  Satan  brought  into  the  liberty  of  God's  children,  through 
the  power  of  this  same  Jesus  of  whom  it  was  foretold  in  the  prophetic  word, 

344 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN.  cflAP.  XII. 


"  Behold,  thy  King  cometh  to  thee,  meek,  and  sitting  upon  an  ass,  and  upon  a 
colt  the  foal  of  an  ass  "  (Matt.  xxi.  5).  We  see  Him  also  coming  among  the 
nations  gently  and  lovingly,  not  with  conquering  sword  or  earthly  power  and 
glory,  but  in  the  preaching  of  His  cross,  in  the  story  of  His  self-sacrificing  love 
and  pity  for  men.  And  as  we  gaze  we  see  the  idols  bend  before  Him,  the  horrid 
deeds  of  darkness  fleeing  from  the  light  of  His  truth,  and  the  moral  wildernesses 
of  earth  rejoicing  and  blossoming  as  the  rose  (Isa.  xxxv.  1).  Therefore  as  we 
view  all  this  we  too  raise  our  shout  of  Hosanna  !  and  cry,  "  Blessed  is  He  that 
cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord." 

III.  Its  effect  on  men  of  the  world. — 1.  There  was  joy  in  the  hearts  of  the 
disciples  (Luke  xix.  37-40),  but  rage  in  the  hearts  of  our  Lord's  enemies.  They 
called  en  Him  to  rebuke  His  disciples.  And  when  later  in  the  day  they  heard 
the  children  (those  over  twelve  years  of  age  who  were  present  at  the  feast)  also 
shouting  Hosanna,  "  they  were  sore  displeased,"  and  said,  "  Hearest  Thou  what 
these  say?  "  (Matt.  xxi.  15,  16).  And  finally,  seeing  that  they  could  not  check 
this  enthusiasm  of  the  people,  "  the  Pharisees  said  among  themselves,  Perceive  ye 
that  ye  prevail  nothing?  behold,  the  world  is  gone  away  after  Him  "  (ver.  19). 
Therefore,  in  place  of  permitting  this  incident  to  lead  them  to  reflection  on  the 
nature  and  work  of  Jesus,  in  blind  rage  they  took  counsel,  yet  more  earnestly, 
"  to  put  Him  to  death  "  (xi.  53).  2.  Then  even  as  we  look  on  the  rejoicing 
crowd  a  different  scene  rises  on  our  view.  The  shouts  of  jubilation  on  Olivet 
and  in  the  temple  die  away,  and  the  multitude  disperses.  But  were  there  not 
some  of  them  in  that  surging  crowd  round  Pilate's  judgment  seat  who  shouted, 
"  Away  with  Him,  crucify  Him  !"  and  who  "railed  on  Him  "  as  He  hung  on 
the  cross  on  Calvary  ?  3.  And  is  it  not  so  still  ?  There  is  still  joy  in  the 
hearts  of  the  disciples  as  Jesus  comes  in  His  kingdom  among  men  without 
ostentation  ;  but  now  as  of  old  in  the  days  of  His  flesh  there  are  those  who  are 
"  sore  displeased  "  at  the  manifested  joy  of  His  disciples,  who  cast  contempt  on 
His  gospel,  and  take  counsel  for  its  hindrance  and  overthrow,  who  "  take 
counsel  against  the  Lord  and  His  anointed,  saying,  "  Let  us  break  their  bands 
asunder,  and  cast  their  cords  away  from  us  "  (Ps.  ii.  2,  3).  Then,  too,  many  of  the 
multitude  have  proved  themselves  to  be  fickle  as  in  those  times  of  our  Lord — one 
day  shouting  Hosanna,  the  next  Crucify.  It  is  too  common  a  trait  of  men's 
unrenewed  nature,  and  manifests  itself  in  all  phases  of  the  world's  history. 
Those  sent  by  God  experience  the  fickleness  of  men.  But  amid  all  enmity 
and  fickleness  Christ  still  is  coming  as  rightful  King  of  humanity  to  those  who 
receive  Him ;  whilst  to  those  who  in  their  pride  of  intellect  and  self- righteous- 
ness reject  Him  He  says,  "Out  of  the  mouths  of  babes  and  sucklings  Thou 
hast  perfected  praise  "  (Matt.  xxi.  16). 

Vers.  12-19.  The  royal  entry  of  Christ  into  Jerusalem. — "  Lift  up  your  heads, 
O  ye  gates,"  etc.  (Ps.  xxiv.).  This  word  of  the  Psalmist  might  have  been  specially 
referred  to  Jerusalem  when  Jesus  revealed  Himself  so  plainly  and  lovingly  as  the 
promised  King  of  Zion,  and  thereby  set  aside  every  excuse  that  could  be  urged 
for  the  rejection  of  His  person.  This  word  comes  specially  home  also  to  every 
Christian  community,  to  every  individual  Christian,  inasmuch  as  the  Saviour 
comes  to  us  spiritually,  and  vouchsafes  to  us  a  new  period  of  grace  in  which  we 
may  "  seek  after  Him  and  find  Him."  We  also  shall  have  no  excuse  if  we  do 
not  receive  Christ  in  faith.  The  object  of  this  meditation  is  to  quicken  us  to  a 
humble  and  joyful  reception  of  our  heavenly  King.     We  look  : — 

I.  At  the  King  who  makes  His  entry. — 1.  He  is  the  Lord  of  lords.  His 
majesty  shines  even  through  the  form  of  His  humiliation,  the  form  of  a  servant. 
He  influenced  the  hearts  of  His  followers  with  invisible  might,  so  that  at  His 
command   they   gave   up  their   temporal   possessions.      2.  He  came  poor    and 

345 


chap.  xii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


lowly,  meek  and  submissive.  He  did  not  employ  a  proud  war-steed,  but  a  little  - 
valued,  peaceful  beast  of  burden.  He  came  to  His  Zion  not  in  terror  and 
with  threatening,  but  in  love  and  goodness,  drawing  and  enticing  men  to 
follow  Him. 

II.  At  the  people  who  greeted  Him  with  their  hosannas. — 1.  The  people 
rejoiced  in  their  King  who  came  unto  them.  They  anticipated  that  He  would 
bring  salvation,  and  were  therefore  ready  to  offer  themselves,  and  strenuous  to 
receive  Him  worthily,  i.e.  with  reverence  and  homage.  We  not  only  hope  and 
anticipate — we  know  that  in  Christ  is  our  salvation.  Do  we  therefore  rejoice,  do 
we  honour  and  do  homage  to  Him,  in  rightful  fashion  ?  2.  The  people  with  their 
hosannas  openly  acknowledged  Christ  as  the  promised  Messiah,  and  praised  God 
for  the  coming  of  this  King.  Let  us  also  confess  openly  our  Prince  of  peace,  and 
also  thank  God  for  His  advent.  Do  we  not  often  act  as  if  He  must  be  joyful 
that  we  desire  to  know  something  of  Him,  although  it  is  not  He  who  needs  us, 
but  we  who  need  Him?  Let  us  receive  Him  as  our  Lord  and  Saviour  in 
humble  obedience,  with  reverent  gladness  and  true  confession. — From  J.  L. 
Sommer. 

Vers.  12-19.  Into  what  hearts  does  the  Lord  Jesus  to-day  make  His  entry? — 
Introduction. — Jesus  came  in  the  fulness  of  time  to  His  people ;  .  .  .  and  He 
comes  also  spiritually   to-day  to   every  heart   desirous  of  receiving  Him  and 
prepared  for  His  reception.      He  comes: — 
I.  Into  obedient  hearts ; 

II.  Into  the  hearts  of  those  ready  to  sacrifice  themselves  for  Him ; 

III.  Into  the  hearts  of  the  humble  and  contrite ; 

IV.  Into  the  hearts  of  those  who  confess  Him. — Idem. 

Ver.  15.  The  Lord  still  comes  to-day. — Around  this  entry  of  our  Lord  into 
Jerusalem  seem  to  range  themselves,  in  order  unnumbered,  gracious  visitations 
in  men's  hearts  and  homes,  unnumbered  victorious  progresses  in  the  ages  and 
among  the  nations.  The  Lord  still  comes  to  us  and  to  Christendom  at  large. 
We  see  that  this  is  so  : — 

I.  In  the  offerings  brought  to  Him. — [As  we  learn  from  the  Synoptic  Gospels, 
the  beast  on  which  the  Lord  was  seated  was  freely  granted  to  Him ;  so,  too, 
were  the  simple,  improvised  emblems  of  regal  estate.]  The  Lord  of  heaven  and 
earth  appears  in  this  incident  as  one  who  requires  these  gifts.  The  coming  King 
desires  the  offerings  of  our  love  and  gratitude.  The  Lord  hath  need  of  these. 
This  word  opens  still  to-day  the  treasuries  of  the  rich  who  believe,  and  the 
hearts  of  the  widows  to  bring  each  her  mite  to  Him  who  is  ever  coming. 

II.  In  the  multitudes  that  honour  Him. — The  jubilation  and  homage  of  the 
people  who  accompanied  our  Lord  on  His  entry  into  Jerusalem  were  but  the 
beginning  of  a  universal  movement  which  took  its  rise  from  this  meek  yet 
victorious  King — of  a  homage  which  men  and  angels,  earth  and  heaven,  have 
rendered  Him  to  this  present  hour,  and  shall  even  to  the  end  of  the  world. 

III.  In  the  song  of  praise  with  which  they  greeted  Him. — This  song  has  not 
gone  silent.  It  arises  and  swells  through  all  times  and  among  all  peoples  from 
earth  to  heaven,  and  again  from  heaven  to  earth.  To-day  it  resounds  in  many 
communities  of  the  faithful,  from  many  an  altar,  from  so  many  sinful  hearts 
which  have  received  divine  comfort.  In  the  Church  on  earth  and  in  the  Church 
above  sounds  the  acclaim,  "  Hosanna  to  the  Son  of  David  !  Blessed  is  He  that) 
cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  !  Hosanna  in  the  highest  ! "  (Matt.  xxi.  9).— 
Appuhn  in  J.  L.  Sommer's  "  Evang.  Per." 

Vers.  15,  16.  A  precious  advent  message,  and  a  significant  advent  warning. — 
346 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   XII. 


I.  The  precious  advent  message  runs  thus :  "  Behold,  thy  King  cometh  to  thee !  " 

(Zech.  ix.  9). — 1.  He  comes,  the  King  long  promised,  desired,  waited  for.  2.  Thy 
King  is  He  who  comes.  3.  He  comes  "in  righteousness,  mighty  to  save,"  yet 
meek  and  lowly.     4.  He  comes  to  thee. 

II.  The  significant  advent  warning  runs  thus  :  "  Prepare  to  meet  thy  God  " 
(Amos  iv.  12). — 1.  With  childlike,  simple  faith,  willing  obedience,  unconditional 
surrender  of  the  heart.  2.  Without  being  offended  because  He  is  "in  the 
form  of  a  servant."  3.  With  genuine  consecration  and  earnestness.  4.  With 
gladsome  praises  of  His  name.  5.  With  believing  prayer.  Hosanna  !  O  Lord, 
help  !     Save,  O  Lord  ! — Dr.  v.  Biarowsky,  Idem. 

Vers.  18,  19.  How  are  we  to  receive  the  coming  King  ? — Christ  is  continually 
coming  to  individual  hearts  and  in  the  world  at  large.  Still  accents  of  welcome 
greet  Him.  Still  there  are  those  who  despise  and  reject  Him.  How  should  we 
receive  Him  ? 

I.  With  humble  reverence. — We  must  ever  remember  that  He  is  the  Lord  of 
glory ;  and  that  the  preaching  of  His  cross,  although  to  men  foolishness,  should 
be  to  us  "  Christ,  the  power  of  God,  and  the  wisdom  of  God."  The  lowly 
Saviour  is  now  exalted  in  the  heavens,  but  He  still  comes  in  lowly  guise, 
"  through  the  foolishness  of  preaching,  to  save  them  that  believe  "  (1  Cor.  i.  21-25). 
Let  us  therefore  receive  Him  and  His  word  with  reverence,  in  however  lowly 
guise  and  humble  fashion  He  appears  among  us. 

II.  With  joyful  acclamation. — As  the  disciples  and  the  multitude  rejoiced 
and  greeted  Him  with  acclamation  as  the  King  of  Israel,  when  they  remembered 
His  wondrous  words  and  deeds,  and  the  various  proofs  He  had  given  that  He 
was  the  promised  Messiah ;  so  let  us  hail  Him  as  our  great  spiritual  deliverer, 
remembering  the  wonders  of  His  grace  in  ourselves  and  others.  And  as  we 
see  Him  advancing,  "conquering  and  to  conquer,"  by  the  power  of  His  love  in 
the  hearts  of  men  and  among  the  nations,  let  us  join  in  rendering  Him  the 
tribute  of  praise  which  is  His  due. 

III.  With  unwavering  loyalty. — Let  us  not  imitate  the  fickle  multitude. 
Why  did  He,  the  brightness  of  the  divine  glory,  condescend  to  this  lowly  guise  ? 
Why  does  He  still  come  to  our  hearts,  entreating,  "  If  any  man  hear  My  voice, 
and  open  the  door,  I  will  come  in  to  him  "  1  It  was  because  thus  alone  by  His 
self-sacrificing  love  could  we  be  saved.  Surely,  then,  we  too  with  heart  and 
voice  will  join  the  thronging  multitudes  of  every  age  and  nation  in  the 
acclaim,  "  Hosanna  !  Blessed  is  the  King  of  Israel,  that  cometh  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord  ! " 


HOMILETIC  NOTES. 


Vers.  12-19. — 1.  It  was  probably  on  a 
Sunday  morning,  as  we  should  say,  that 
this  striking  and  beautiful  incident  of 
the  closing  days  of  our  Lord's  ministry 
occurred,  i.e.  if  we  consider  that  the 
14th  Nisan  is  to  be  reckoned  as  the 
first  day  of  the  feast.  This  entry  into 
Jerusalem  would  thus  take  place  on  the 
morning  of  the  9th  Nisan.  But  if  it  took 
place  on  the  following  day,  the  10th,  the 
day  on  which  the  passover  lamb  was  set 
apart,  then  here  we  may  see  much  that 


is  fitting  in  the  incident.  The  Saviour 
was,  so  to  speak,  set  joyfully  apart, 
proclaimed  and  acknowledged  to  be 
the  promised  Saviour  with  shouts  of 
hosanna.  In  the  Synoptic  Gospels 
this  incident  seems  to  occur  on  the 
journey  from  Jericho  after  the  healing 
of  the  blind  men.  Still,  even  in  these 
Gospels  there  is  evidently  a  break  in 
the  narrative  (Luke  xix.  29  ;  Mark 
xi.  11).  St.  John  supplies  the  facts 
omitted  by  the  others,  showing  that 

347 


crtAP.  XII.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY i   ST.  JOHN. 


Jesus  remained  overnight  at  Bethany, 
where  the  anointing  of  His  feet  with 
costly  spikenard  by  Mary  took  place, 
which  aroused  the  mercenary  spirit 
of  Judas,  and  led  to  his  being  rebuked. 
2.  In  the  morning,  starting  from 
Bethany  on  the  south-east  side  of  the 
Mount  of  Olives,  two  of  the  disciples 
were  sent  to  bring  an  ass  with  her 
colt  to  the  Saviour.  And  seated  on 
the  colt,  He  proceeded  on  His  way, 
being  met  by  a  crowd  from  the  city, 
many  of  whom  spread  their  outer 
garments  on  the  way  before  Him 
(Matt.  xxi.  8),  as  a  token  of  their 
reverence  and  devotion ;  whilst  others 
brought  with  them  palm  branches, 
torn  from  the  palm  trees  by  the 
wayside,  as  a  token  of  joy  and  triumph. 
Palm  branches  were  seen  by  John  in 
apocalyptic  vision  in  the  hands  of  the 
redeemed,  as  tokens  of  victory.  Here 
these  are  a  sign  of  joy  in  Jesus  as 
the  victorious  King,  the  Messiah  long 
promised  and  now  revealed.  3.  So 
also  the  shout  of  hosanna  is  most 
significant.  As  they  rounded  the 
brow  of  Olivet,  and  the  city  stood 
before  them  shining  beneath  the  rays 
of  the  morning  sun,  and  conspicuous 
in  front  the  temple  in  its  majestic 
beauty,  token  and  type  of  God's  fa- 
vour to  and  communion  with  the 
race     of     Israel,     the     joy    of     the 


multitude  broke  forth  in  the  shout  of 
Hosanna  (help  !  grant  salvation  !). 
They  beheld  before  them  Him  whom 
they  hailed  as  the  King  of  Israel,  the 
blessed  One  coming  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord.  The  exclamation  was  also  a  cry 
of  jubilation  and  blessing,  like  our 
"  God  save  the  King."  4.  And  all 
this  fulfilled  an  ancient  prophecy  con- 
cerning Messianic  times.  The  words 
of  Zechariah  (ix.  9)  were  literally 
fulfilled;  and  the  prophetic  call  of 
Isaiah  (lxii.  11)  had  been  in  part 
obeyed :  "  Say  ye  to  the  daughter  of 
Zion,  Behold,  thy  salvation  cometh ; 
behold,  His  reward  is  with  Him,  and 
His  work  before  Him."  Amid  the 
rush  and  hurry  of  events  of  that 
memorable  passover  week  the  disciples 
did  not  think  of  nor  see  the  connection 
between  these  events  and  the  prophetic 
word.  "  But  when  Jesus  was  glori- 
fied "  they  remembered.  5.  It  was  a 
striking  spectacle  which  the  bright 
spring  sunshine  of  the  Syrian  morning 
greeted — a  scene  impressed  on  the 
memories  of  all  who  witnessed  it.  It 
is  recorded  in  all  the  Gospels ;  and  is 
thus  accorded  an  importance  which  is 
special.  It  was  a  late  and  partial, 
though  in  its  measure  glorious,  recogni- 
tion of  Jesus  in  His  rightful  position 
and  dignity  as  the  promised  King  and 
Saviour  of  Israel. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  13.  Hosanna/ 
Awake  !  why  linger  in  the  gorgeous  town, 
Sworn  liegemen   of  the  cross  and    thorny 
crown  ? 
Up  from  your  beds  of  sloth  for  shame, 
Speed  to  the  Eastern  mount  like  flame, 
Nor  wonder,  should  ye  find  your  King  in  tears, 
E'en  with  the  loud  Hosanna  ringing  in  His 
ears. 

Alas  !  no  need  to  rouse  them  :  long  ago 

They  are  gone  forth  to  swell  Messiah's  show ; 

With  glittering  robes  and  garlands  sweet 

They  strew  the  ground  beneath  His  feet : 

All  but  your  hearts  are  there — 0  doomed  to 

prove 
The  arrows  winged  in  heaven  for  faith  that 
will  not  love. 

Meanwhile  He  paces   through    th'  adoring 

crowd, 
Calm  as  the  march  of  some  majestic  cloud, 

348 


That  o'er  wild  scenes  of  ocean-war 
Holds  its  still  course  in  heaven  afar : 
E'en  so,  heart- searching  Lord,  as  years  roll  on, 
Thoukeepest  silent  watch  from  Thy  triumphal 
throne. 

E'en  so  the  world  is  thronging  round  to  gaze 
On  the  dread  vision  of  the  latter  days, 
Constrained  to.  own  Thee,  but  in  heart 
Prepared  to  take  Barabbas'  part  : 
"  Hosanna  "  now,  to-morrow  "  Crucify," 
The  changeful  burden  still  of  their  rude  law- 
less cry. 

Yet  in  that  throng  of  selfish  hearts  untrue 

Thy  sad  eye  rests  upon  Thy  faithful  few: 
Children  and  childlike  souls  are  there, 
Blind  Bartimeus'  humble  prayer, 

And  Lazarus  wakened  from  his  four  days' 
sleep, 

Enduring  life  again,  that  Passover  to  keep. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   XII. 


Still  through  decaying  ages  as  they  glide, 
Thou  lov'st  Thy  chosen  remnant  to  divide ; 
Sprinkled  along  the  waste  of  years 
Full  many  a  soft  green  isle  appears  : 
Pause  where  we  may  upon  the  desert  road, 
Some  shelter  is  in  sight,  some  sacred  safe 
abode. 


(Both)  bad  and  good  their  several  warnings 

give 
Of  His  approach,  whom  none  may  see  and 
live : 
Faith's  ear,  with  awful  still  delight, 
Counts  them  like  minute  bells  at  night, 
Keeping  the  heart  awake  till  dawn  of  morn, 
While  to  her  funeral  pile  this  aged  world  is 
borne. 

But  what  are  heaven's  alarms  to  hearts  that 

cower 
In  wilful  slumber,  deepening  every  hour, 
That  draw  their  curtains  closer  round 
The  nearer  swells  the  trumpet's  sound  ? 
Lord,  ere  our  trembling  lamps  sink  down  and 

die, 
Touch  us  with  chastening  hand,  and  make  us 
feel  Thee  nigh. — Keble. 

Vers.  13,  14.  Transient  homage. 
It  was  roses,  roses,  all  the  way, 

With  myrtle  mixed  in  my  path  like  mad  : 
The  house-roofs  seemed  to  heave  and  sway, 


The  church-spires  flamed,  such  flags  they 
had, 
A  year  ago  on  this  very  day  1 

The  air  broke  into  a  mist  with  bells, 

The  old  walls  rocked  with  the  crowd  and 

cries. 

Had  I  said,  "  Good  folk,  mere  noise  repels — 

But  give  me  your  sun  from  yonder  skies  1 " 

They  had  answered,  "  And  afterward,  what 

else  ?  " 

Alack,  it  was  I  who  leaped  at  the  sun 
To  give  it  my  loving  friends  to  keep  ! 

Nought  man  could  do,  have  I  left  undone  : 
And  you  see  my  harvest,  what  I  reap 

This  very  day,  now  a  year  is  run. 

There's  nobody  on  the  house-tops  now — 
Just  a  palsied  few  at  the  windows  set  ; 

For  the  best  of  the  sight  is,  all  allow, 
At  the  Shambles'  Gate — or,  better  yet, 

By  the  very  scaffold's  foot,  I  trow. 

I  go  in  the  rain,  and,  more  than  needs, 
A  rope  cuts  both  my  wrists  behind ; 

And  I  think,  by  the  feel,  my  forehead  bleeds, 
For  they  fling,  whoever  has  a  mind, 

Stones  at  me  for  my  year's  misdeeds. 

Thus  I  entered,  and  thus  I  go  ! 

In  triumphs,  people  have  dropped  down 
dead. 
"  Paid  by  the  world, — what  dost  thou  owe 

Me  ? "  God  might  question  :  now  instead, 
'Tis  God  shall  repay !     I  am  safer  so. 

R.  Browning. 


MAIN  H0MILET1CS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  20—36. 

Vers.  20-23.  The  desire  to  see  Jesus. — But  a  few  days  before  the  incident  here 
recorded  Jesus  had  come  from  His  retirement  in  Ephraim  to  Bethany,  and  had 
been  just  welcomed  with  shouts  of  hosanna  as  the  spiritual  King  of  Israel.  The 
last  period  of  probation  had  been  given  to  the  Jewish  rulers  and  the  unbelieving 
section  of  the  people.  The  end  of  it  still  found  them  hardened  against  the 
Saviour,  and  prepared  to  take  more  violent  measures  against  Him  when  they 
saw  that,  in  spite  of  all  their  threatenings  (ix.  22,  xi.  57),  the  people  were  being 
more  and  more  attracted  to  Jesus  (vers.  17-19).  But  in  the  midst  of  so  much  to 
grieve  there  was  something  also  to  gladden  the  heart  of  Jesus. 

I.  Certain  Greeks  desire  to  see  Jesus. — 1.  There  were  many  pious  Gentiles 
who  had  become  "  proselytes  of  the  gate,"  men  like  Cornelius  and  the 
chamberlain  of  Queen  Candace  (Acts  viii.  26,  x.  1).  No  doubt  there  were  not 
a  few  such  men  at  this  time  scattered  up  and  down  Palestine,  and  they  might 
come  in  even  greater  numbers  from  the  region  of  Decapolis.  2.  These  men, 
doubtless,  came  from  that  region,  and  recognised  Philip  and  Andrew  as  fellow- 
countrymen,  i.e.  as  coming  from  the  neighbourhood  of  their  home.  They  came 
first  to  Philip.  He  then  consulted  with  his  brother  Andrew ;  for  had  not  Jesus 
said  He  was  sent  only  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel  (Matt.  xv.  24)  ^ 
and  bad  He  not  commanded  the  disciples  not  to  go  into  the  way  of  the  Gentiles 
(Matt.  x.  5)?  3.  But  our  Lord  was  already  looking  forward  to  the  moment 
when  the  restriction  laid  on  His  ministry  would  be  removed,  and  the  Gentiles 
should  be  welcomed  as  members  of  His  flock  (x.  16).  Therefore  this  coming 
of  these  Greeks  to  Jesus  was  to  Him  a  matter  of  joy,  as  in  the  case  of  the 

349 


chap.  xii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


Samaritans  (iv.  35-46).  He  was  beginning  to  see  the  wider  fruits  of  His 
mission — to  see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul,  etc.  The  prophetic  word  which  He 
fulfilled  at  the  beginning  of  His  ministry  (Matt.  iv.  12-17)  was  receiving  its 
wider  fulfilment.  The  Gentiles  were  "  coming  to  His  light."  The  first  braird 
of  the  coming  harvest  (iv.  35)  was  visible.  And  no  doubt  His  soul  rejoiced,  as 
seeing  these  Greeks  standing  with  His  disciples,  He  said,  "  The  hour  is  come,"  etc. 
4.  The  sequel  of  the  incident,  so  far  as  the  Greeks  are  concerned,  is  not  stated  ; 
for  John  is  bent  on  the  great  lessons  our  Lord  founded  on  the  incident.  But 
Jesus  does  not  "  send  empty  away "  those  who  come  desiring  to  see  and  know 
Him.  From  His  words  in  vers.  23,  31,  32,  we  may  gather  that  they  did  not  thus 
earnestly  seek  Him  in  vain. 

II.  What  awakened  this  desire? — 1.  Those  men  as  proselytes  of  the  gate  were 
no  doubt  pious,  "  devout  "  men  (Acts  x.  2),  men  more  truly  religious  than  many 
of  the  chosen  race.  They  had  heard  of  Jesus,  had  seen  perhaps  the  striking 
scene  in  the  temple  (Matt.  xxi.  12-17),  and  were  convinced  that  here  was  One 
who  could  fill  their  deepest  longings.  2.  The  beauty  of  the  Saviour's  character, 
the  earnestness  and  lofty  nature  of  His  teaching,  and  the  greatness  of  His  claim 
— to  be  the  Sent  of  God — all  this,  no  doubt,  impelled  them  to  seek  to  see  Jesus, 
and  to  know  more  of  Him. 

III.  The  desire  is  still  expressed  by  many. — 1.  The  Greeks  came  first  to  the 
disciples.  "It  is  through  the  mediation  ...  of  the  Church  of  Christ  that 
the  heathen  attain  the  personal,  saving  society  of  Christ."  2.  And  there  are 
many  to-day,  devout  men,  not  only  from  among  the  heathen,  but  from  among 
those  in  our  modern  world,  who  are  "  seeking  the  Lord,  if  haply  they  might 
feel  after  Him,  and  find  Him "  (Acts  xvii.  27),  but  around  whom  the  mists 
and  darkness  of  error  have  been  creeping.  3.  What  responsibility,  there- 
fore, rests  on  the  Church — on  the  disciples  of  Christ — to  show  Him  in  all  the 
beauty  of  His  character  and  the  saving  power  of  His  risen  life  to  all  men  !  And 
how  unapostolic,  therefore,  is  the  wrangling  over  trifles  that  prevails,  while  all 
over  the  world  millions  are  perishing  for  lack  of  knowledge  ! 

IV.  The  Church  must  herself  seek  to  see  Jesus  ever  more  clearly  if  she  is  to 
lead  others  to  see  Him. — 1.  Christ  should  ever  be  the  beginning,  middle,  and 
end  of  the  Church's  message— Christ  as  the  prophet  of  His  people,  who  has  "  the 
words  of  eternal  life  "  (vi.  68),  as  the  great  high  priest  of  His  people,  by  whose 
high -priestly,  sacrificial  action  (vers.  24,  32)  salvation  is  made  possible  for  men, 
and  as  the  King  and  Head  of  His  Church,  who  will  establish  in  triumph  His 
universal  and  eternal  dominion  (xviii.  36,  37).  2.  And  in  order  that  the 
Church  may  more  fully  and  clearly  deliver  this  message,  she  must  have  close 
communion  with  her  living  Head.  To  the  office-bearers  and  members  of  the 
Church  Christ  must  become  a  living  reality.  They  must  not  be  content  with 
the  mere  knowledge  of  doctrines  about  Christ,  though  this  is  needful  also.  Faith 
in  Him  as  a  living,  personal  Redeemer,  and  fellowship  with  Him  through  the 
Spirit,  are  the  essential  needs  of  the  Church.  Without  these  all  else  is  vain. 
Numbers,  sanctities  of  worship,  learning,  and  even  outward  activity  will  not 
serve  the  end  for  which  they  exist.  3.  But  the  presence  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ 
in  the  heart  of  His  people,  leading  to  burning  zeal,  tender  pity,  ardent  love  for 
those  for  whom  Christ  died — for  a  perishing  world — would  more  and  more  attract 
the  heathen — make  straight  the  way  for  the  erring,  dispel  doubts,  arouse  the 
indifferent,  till  men  everywhere  should  come  to  the  Church,  saying,  We  too 
woidd  see  Jesus. 

Vers.  24,  25.  Through  death  to  life. — Our  Lord  had  been  moved  deeply  by  the 
coming  of  "  certain  Greeks "  to  see  Him.  He  recognised  in  their  advent  the 
earliest  tokens  of  that  abundant  harvest  yet  to  be  reaped.     But  ere  this  could 

350 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  xii. 


be  He  must  depart.  His  rejection  by  Israel  must  be  completed.  He  must  die, 
and  in  His  death  become  the  world's  life.  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,"  etc. 
In  this  familiar  image  our  Lord  shows  forth  the  deep  meaning  of  His  death  and 
resurrection  as  the  hope  of  His  people,  also  as  their  encouragement  and  example 
in  enduring. 

I.  The  death  of  Christ  is  the  hope  of  His  people.— 1.  The  corn  of  wheat  is 
cast  into  the  ground  by  the  sower,  and  dies.  It  dies  as  a  grain  of  wheat,  but 
is  not  destroyed.  There  is  a  germ  of  life  in  the  grain  which  dissolution  cannot 
harm.  But  the  seed  must  die  if  that  germ  is  to  be  liberated  and  to  become 
fruitful.  2.  If  it  be  not  cast  into  the  ground  it  abideth  alone ;  it  cannot 
accomplish  its  destined  purpose.  It  must  fall  into  the  ground;  its  wrappings 
must  fall  off,  its  substance  be  transformed ;  in  short,  it  must  perish  as  a  grain  of 
wheat  in  order  that  it  may  spring  up  and  bring  forth  fruit.  3.  So  was  it  with 
the  Saviour.  Whilst  He  remained  on  earth,  despised  and  rejected  despite  His 
heavenly  teaching  and  wondrous  works,  He  abode  practically  alone.  Only  a  few 
faithful  ones  gathered  around  Him.  The  world  did  not  understand  Him.  Neither, 
indeed,  did  those  who  faithfully  clung  to  Him  understand  the  full  significance  of 
His  mission.  It  was  necessary  that  He  should  die,  ere  the  full  meaning  of  His 
redemptive  work  should  be  known  through  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit,  and  men 
should  learn  that  a  way  of  eternal  safety  through  time  to  eternity  had  been 
opened  up  through  the  cross.  4.  Had  Jesus  not  gone  on  to  Calvary  to  die  for 
men's  sins,  where  had  been  their  hope  of  pardon  and  reconciliation  with  God  1 
They  would  still  have  pursued  the  weary  quest  of  the  waiting  ages,  and  still 
the  cry  had  gone  up,  "  Wherewith  shall  I  come  before  the  Lord  ?  "  etc.,  and  the 
plaint,  "  Oh  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  Him  !  "  (Job  xxiii.  3).  But  on  the 
cross  the  cry  of  humanity  was  answered  when  Jesus  said,  "  It  is  finished,"  and 
died  for  men — "  the  Lamb  of  God,  that  beareth  away  the  sin  of  the  world." 

II.  The  result  of  Christ's  death  is  a  great  spiritual  harvest. — 1.  The  seed- 
corn  cast  into  the  earth  dies  as  a  seed-corn.  The  external  wrappings  and 
envelopes  are  thrown  aside.  But  the  unseen  germ,  hidden  safely  away,  remains 
not  only  unharmed,  but  is  helped  by  the  decay  of  those  coverings.  Then  the 
living  portion  of  the  plant  begins  to  swell  and  push  its  way  upward  through  the 
earth,  till  the  warmer  sunshine  and  refreshing  rains  of  spring  draw  it  from  its 
earthly  hiding-place,  and  it  peeps  above  ground,  an  earnest  of  harvests  yet  to  be 
reaped.  2.  So  was  it  with  our  Lord.  He  died,  and  was  laid  in  the  tomb  ;  and 
there,  in  some  fashion  we  understand  not,  the  body  of  His  humiliation  became 
the  body  of  His  glory,  and  He  arose  conqueror  of  death  and  the  grave  for  His 
people,  the  firstfruits  of  them  that  sleep  in  Him — a  glorious  harvest  of  humanity 
rescued  from  death  and  the  grave  unto  life  eternal.  3.  This  shall  be  the  final 
result  in  that  harvest  which  is  the  end  of  the  world  (Matt.  xiii.  39).  But  now 
through  the  power  of  His  risen  life — the  germ  of  life  eternal  in  the  hearts  of 
those  united  to  Him  by  faith — the  fields  of  earth  are  ripening  to  the  harvest. 
4.  When  He  died  there  were  but  few  who  followed  Him.  But  how  fruitful  was 
that  death  in  the  coming  days  !  See  how  the  green  blades  sprang  above  the 
ground  all  around — how  the  timid  who  had  hidden  themselves  came  into  the 
light  of  day,  as  if  some  spiritual  spring  had  called  them  forth  !  See  how  in 
response  to  Pentecostal  showers  the  hope  and  promise  of  the  universal  harvest 
germinated  in  every  quarter  !  And  see  how  in  spite  of  blight  and  storm  and 
heat  of  persecution  it  is  spreading  worldwide  !  The  idols  bow  the  head  and  fall 
never  to  rise  in  every  quarter  of  the  world,  and  millions  upon  millions  rise  to 
show  forth  Christ's  glory.  5.  At  some  far-distant  age  the  first  seed-corn  was 
sown  in  the  world,  when  as  yet  its  fields  lay  wild  and  waste.  But  now  every 
land  has  its  harvest.  And  thus  it  has  been  in  the  history  of  Christ's  Church. 
M  There  shall  be  an  handful  of  corn  in  the  earth  upon  the  tops  of  the  mountains  : 

351 


chap.  xii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


the  fruit  thereof  shall  be  like  Lebanon"  (Ps.  lxxii.  16).  It  was  this  Jesus 
foresaw  when  the  Greeks  were  led  to  Him  by  Andrew  and  Philip.  "  The  hour 
had  come  that  the  Son  of  man  should  be  glorified." 

III.  Christ's  spiritual  seed  grows  in  His  likeness.— 1.  His  people  die  with 
Him  unto  sin,  and  live  with  Him  unto  righteousness.  "  He  that  loveth  his 
life"  etc.,  who  keeps  and  hoards  the  external  wrappings  of  the  soul's  true  life, 
shall  remain  unfruitful.  "  And  he  that  hateth,"  etc. — he  that  subordinates  the 
lower  and  earthly  to  the  higher,  inner,  spiritual  life — "  shall  keep  it  unto  life 
eternal."  All  that  was  best  even  in  the  lower  shall  through  this  abnegation  of 
it  be  incorporated  and  intensified  in  the  growth  of  the  higher.  "  The  cross  must 
be  our  pattern  as  well  as  our  trust."  2.  And  when  believers  are  thus  united 
with  Christ  in  the  likeness  of  His  death  (Rom.  vi.  5),  they  grow  up  in  the 
likeness  of  His  spiritual  life.  In  every  faithful  heart  Christ  lives  anew.  "  I 
have  been  crucified  with  Christ :  and  it  is  no  longer  I  that  live,  but  Christ  that 
liveth  in  me  "  (Gal.  ii.  20).  3.  The  Christian  grows  up  in  spiritual  freedom. 
"  Christ  being  raised  from  the  dead  dieth  no  more ;  death  hath  dominion  over 
Him  no  more.  .  .  .  Even  so  reckon  ye  yourselves  to  be  dead  indeed  unto 
sin/'  etc.  (Rom.  vi.  9,  11).  The  believer  is  no  more  the  slave  of  sin  unto  death, 
but  is  now  the  happy  servant  of  Christ,  the  spiritual  son  of  the  heavenly 
Father,  whom  He  will  honour  (ver.  26).  4.  The  believer  grows  up  in  Christ's 
spiritual  beauty ;  each  advance  in  growth  sees  some  added  grace  of  character. 
"  He  shall  grow  as  the  lily,"  "  he  shall  be  changed  into  the  same  image " 
(2  Cor.  iii.  18),  until  finally  "  he  shall  be  like  Him,  seeing  Him  as  He  is." 
5.  And  like  the  Saviour's  self-sacrifice,  the  Christian's  life  of  self-denial  will  be 
fruitful  for  good  in  the  world.  "  The  blood  of  the  martyrs  has  been  the  seed  of 
the  Church."  And  the  self-sacrificing  lives  of  His  true  followers  best  lead  men 
to  living  faith  in  Him. 

Learn. — Trust  in  His  cross ;  imitation  of  His  example. 

Ver.  26.  Christ  our  example  in  spiritual  service. — Christ  is  our  example  in 
the  service  of  God ;  and  as  He  was  faithful  as  the  servant  of  Jehovah,  and  in  all 
things  did  His  Father's  will,  so  are  we  to  follow  Him.  "  If  any  man  serve  Me, 
let  him  follow  Me.  ...  If  any  man  serve  Me,  him  will  the  Father  honour." 
The  type  of  service  which  He  demands  from  us  is  of  the  same  sort  as  that  which 
He  Himself  rendered — a  willing,  trustful,  complete  obedience  in  the  whole  life, 
and  in  all  its  activity.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  many  of  His  professed  followers 
fail  to  rise  to  this  conception  of  the  Christian  life ;  and  sometimes  popular 
presentations  of  the  gospel  tend  to  perpetuate  this  fatal  error.  "  Get  your 
soul  saved  "  is  the  burden  of  much  of  modern  evangelical  preaching.  No  doubt 
this  is  the  chief  thing,  so  far  as  men  personally  are  concerned ;  for  "  except  a 
man  be  born  anew,"  etc.  (iii.  3).  But  men  are  not  to  be  left  ever  in  the  con- 
dition of  spiritual  children,  and  fed  on  milk  (Heb.  v.  12,  13):  they  are  to  be 
nourished  and  built  up  for  the  higher  life  of  service.  Much  of  the  "  spiritual 
awakening "  of  recent  years  has  simply  been  an  "  awakening "  of  infantile 
Christians  into  a  higher  life  of  service.  And  every  agency  with  such  a  tendency 
is  to  be  hailed  with  joy.  What  indeed  is  one  great  end  of  revelation — especially 
2STew  Testament  revelation — but  to  build  up  believers  and  fit  them  for  this  life 
of  service?  For  what  end  was  the  Spirit  sent  forth,  the  means  of  grace 
established,  the  stated  ministry  of  the  Church  set  apart  ?  And  our  Christianity 
is  weak  and  ineffective  in  so  far  as  it  does  not  rise  toward  this  goal.  And  as 
Christ  said  to  His  Father,  "  I  have  glorified  Thee  on  the  earth  by  finishing  the 
work,"  etc.  (xvii.  4),  so  His  disciples  are  to  press  toward  this  chief  end  of  their 
being,  in  His  service.  Those  who  would  serve  Christ  faithfully  must,  following 
His  example  as  the  servant  of  Jehovah — 

352 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  xii. 


I.  Hear  His  voice. — 1.  Beyond  question,  ere  they  can  begin  to  obey  Him  as 
His  servants,  they  must  hear  His  voice  spiritually  quickening  them.  That  is 
what  Christ  meant  when  He  said,  "  The  hour  is  coming,  and  now  is,"  etc. 
(v.  25).  2.  But  having  heard  that  voice  speaking  to  them  with  quickening 
power,  they  must  prove  that  they  have  done  so  by  obeying  His  commands, 
following  His  instruction.  They  must  have  their  "  ear  open  morning  by  morn- 
ing "  (Isa.  1.  4)  to  catch  the  accents  of  His  voice  in  that  divine  word  which  His 
Spirit  has  inspired,  and  in  those  spiritual  impulses  to  forsake  the  evil  and  follow 
the  good ;  and  by  entreating  Him  in  earnest  prayer  to  quicken  their  spiritual 
ear,  so  that  they  may  more  readily  hear  and  understand.  3.  And  may  it  not  be 
that  we  oftentimes  are  troubled  and  perplexed,  our  way  enwrapped  in  mist, 
because  we  are  not  in  this  following  the  example  and  command  of  Him  who 
is  the  light  of  the  world,  and  who  says  of  His  true  followers  that  they  hear 
and  know  His  voice  ?     Further — 

II.  In  the  activity  of  their  lives,  their  speech  and  action,  they  serve  Him. — 
1.  To  hear,  with  the  true  disciple  and  servant  of  Christ,  is  to  obey.  It  was 
evident  this  was  so  in  the  case  of  Christ ;  and  so  it  must  be  in  greater  or  less 
degree  with  His  servants.  They  must  not  act  like  the  son  in  the  parable, 
who  in  answer  to  his  father's  command,  "  Son,  go  work,"  etc.,  replied,  "  I  go,  sir : 
and  went  not "  (Matt.  xxi.  28,  30).  And  yet  are  there  not  too  many  of  this 
class  in  the  Christian  Church  ?  By  their  professed  unity  in  the  Church,  openly 
declared  at  the  table  of  communion,  not  a  few  say,  "  /  go"  in  answer  to  God's 
command,  "  Go  work  to-day,"  etc.  "  You  will  search  the  vineyard  in  vain  for  too 
many  of  them ;  some  get  no  nearer  than  a  peep  across  the  hedge,"  whilst  others 
deliberately  turn  their  backs  on  it,  and  spend  their  energies  in  the  fields  of  the 
world.  2.  But  Christ's  true  followers  "  do  not  so  learn  "  Him  (Eph.  iv.  20). 
When  they  give  heed  to  His  word  and  the  teaching  of  His  Spirit,  then  the 
"  Spirit  of  the  Father "  speaketh  in  them  (Matt.  x.  20),  and  they  use  the  gift 
of  speech  as  the  Son  did  for  the  divine  glory.  They  earnestly  endeavour  to  let 
"  no  corrupt  communication  proceed  out  of  their  mouths,"  but  "  that  which  is 
good  "  (Eph.  iv.  29),  and  to  let  their  speech  be  "  always  with  grace,  seasoned  with 
salt "  (Col.  iv.  6).  3.  In  the  work  of  life,  and  its  every  action,  Christ's  true 
servants  seek  to  imitate  Him  in  the  divine  service.  How  eagerly  did  Jesus 
declare  and  show  it  to  be  His  meat  to  do  the  will  of  the  Father,  and  to  finish 
His  work  !  And  was  not  His  word  to  His  followers  a  clear  call  to  imitate  Him 
in  this,  "  We  must  work  the  works,"  etc.  (ix.  4)  ?  And  is  not  this  one  of  His  most 
precious  promises  to  the  disciples  that  they  should  continue  His  work  (xiv.  12)? 
"If  ye  keep  My  commandments,  ye  shall  abide  in  My  love,  even  as  I  have  kept 
My  Father's  commandments,  and  abide  in  His  love"  (xv.  10).  "Ye  are  My 
friends,"  etc. ;  "  Henceforth  I  call  you  not  servants,"  etc.  (xv.  14,  15).  Just  as 
there  was  unity  of  purpose  between  the  Father  and  Christ  in  all  Christ's  activity 
on  earth,  so  Jesus  said  there  would  be  the  same  unity  between  Him  and  His 
disciples,  and  therefore  will  they  be  His  friends  and  brethren  in  the  Father ;  for 
"  He  shall  make  known  unto  them  all  things  which  He  heard  from  His  Father." 
Therefore  will  the  true  disciple  of  Christ  seek  in  all  things  ever  to  do  His  will 
and  finish  His  work. 

III.  Christ's  disciples  follow  Him  and  serve  Him  in  the  path  of  suffering. — 
1.  "  Behold,  and  see  if  there  be  any  sorrow  like  unto  My  sorrow,"  said  the 
prophet  in  Christ's  name,  as  He  foretold  His  life  of  suffering  here  below.  And 
how  did  His  apostles  rejoice  "  because  they  were  counted  worthy  to  suffer  for 
that  name"  (Acts  v.  41) !  In  Christian  lands  to-day  men  have  not  thus  to 
suffer,  although  they  still  have  to  do  so  among  the  heathen.  To-day  even  in 
many  quarters  of  the  world  men  have  to  endure  tribulations,  suffering  wrongfully, 
for  the  name  of  Christ  and  in  His  service.     2.  But  we  also  have  our  afflictions. 

AA  353 


chap.  XII.         EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


The  night  sometimes  darkens  around  us ;  the  stroke  sometimes  falls  heavily ; 
so  that  in  the  darkness,  weariness,  pain,  the  spirit  is  nigh  overwhelmed,  and 
from  the  lips  bursts  out  involuntarily  the  cry,  "Hath  God  forgotten  to  be 
gracious?  hath  He  in  anger  shut  up  His  tender  mercies?"  (Ps.  lxxvii.).  3.  It  is 
in  such  hours  that  the  example  of  our  Lord  and  Master  is  fitted  to  cheer  and 
encourage.  As  He  in  the  hour  of  deepest  darkness,  in  which  He  cried  "  Eli,  Eli," 
etc.  (Matt,  xxvii.  46),  lost  not  His  trust  in  His  Father ;  so  we  surely  in  our 
hours  of  sorrow,  pain,  and  perplexity  may  well  trust  and  fear  not,  if  we  are 
consciously  following  the  Saviour.  Did  He  not  in  love  endure  for  our  sakes  ?  and 
will  He  then  put  on  us  more  than  we  can  bear  ?  Does  not  "  the  light  affliction 
which  is  but  for  a  moment"?  etc.  (2  Cor.  iv.  17).  4.  For  just  as  the  cross  of 
Jesus,  the  acme  of  suffering  and  sorrow,  has  become  the  emblem  of  His  glory ; 
so  to  those  who  endure,  "  the  proof  of  their  faith,  being  much  more  precious  than 
of  gold  that  perisheth,  though  it  be  tried  with  fire,  [shall]  be  found  unto  praise," 
etc.  (1  Pet.  i.  7). 

Vers.  25,  26.  The  spirit  of  true  service. — It  is  a  spirit  of  joyful  willingness  and 
self -surrender.  Not  alone  at  the  beginning,  when  the  soul  has  just  been 
quickened  to  the  higher  life,  is  the  true  servant  to  say,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou 
have  me  to  do  ? "  But  all  along  the  course  of  life,  even  to  the  end.  And  during 
its  course  there  will  be  manifested  : — 

I.  A  growing  sense  of  trust  in  God  and  our  Redeemer. — 1.  The  remembrance 
of  the  divine  love  and  favour,  and  that  God  has  in  Christ  granted  the  new 
spiritual  life,  will  lead  to  the  assurance  that  with  Him  also  He  will  give  all 
things  (Rom.  viii.).  2.  This  confidence  will  increase  as  life  goes  on ;  each  day 
will  disclose  new  mercies,  and  the  divine  promises  will  grow  brighter  and  more 
assured. 

II.  A  continued  confidence  that  our  material  needs  will  be  met. — 1.  "  Who- 
ever serveth  as  a  soldier  at  his  own  charges?"  (1  Cor.  ix.  7),  asked  the  apostle 
when  writing  to  the  Corinthians  of  the  duty  of  upholding  the  ministry.  But 
at  the  same  time  he  showed  that  he  did  not  depend  on  men  for  such  help,  but 
on  God.  2.  So  every  true  disciple  learns  confidently  to  trust  God  for  all  needed 
help  to  fit  him  for  and  sustain  him  in  his  work.  God  will  not  send  us  on  a 
warfare  at  our  own  charges.  True  servants  of  Christ,  who  are  setting  their 
affections  on  things  above,  are  ever  sustained  and  strengthened  in  their  arduous 
endeavour. 

III.  A  constant  consecration  of  all  life's  duties  and  work. — 1.  Each  day  of 
our  life  has  its  special  work  and  duty,  its  own  perplexities  and  sorrows.  But 
these  are  not  unknown  or  indifferent  to  Christ.  2.  Nay,  it  is  just  in  these, 
as  in  all  things,  that  we  are  to  serve  Him.  We  are  not  to  wait  for  some  special 
position  here,  some  outstanding  work,  or  for  the  future  life,  in  order  to  render  to 
our  God  and  Saviour  our  willing  service.  The  future  belongs  to  God.  We  are 
to  serve  joyfully  and  trustfully  as  the  Saviour  did  here,  by  dedicating  to  Him  the 
duties  and  labours  of  the  present  days. 

Yers.  27-33.  Jesus1  prayer  and  the  answering  voice  from  heaven. — The  thrill  of 
joyful  exultation  in  the  mind  and  heart  of  Jesus,  as  He  sees  in  prospect  the 
travail  of  His  soul,  is  quickly  succeeded  by  the  thought  of  the  awful  pathway  He 
must  tread  ere  the  mighty  work  is  accomplished.  This  prayer  is  the  prelude  of 
Gethsemane.  It  is  a  definite  step  toward  that  mysterious  conflict,  with  its  "  strong 
crying  and  tears,"  its  "  sweat  as  of  great  drops  of  blood,"  and  its  utter  self- 
renunciation. 

I.  Jesus  troubled. — 1.  The  man  Christ  Jesus,  the  Prince  of  life,  recoiled  from 
the  awful  strife  before  Him.     We  can  in  some  measure  understand  how  He, 

354 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.         chap.  xii. 


the  perfect  One,  would  shrink  from  death  even  more  than  we  do.  2.  Then 
there  was  doubtless  the  thought  of  His  people,  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of 
Israel,  who  in  rejecting  Him  should  be  rejected  (ver.  48),  whose  rulers  were 
even  then  engaged  in  dark  plots  against  Him.  3.  And  there  was  also  pressing 
on  Him  that  load  of  the  world's  guilt  which  He  was  to  bear  away,  that  cup 
which  He  was  to  drain  to  the  bitter  dregs,  and  which  was  soon  to  be  given 
Him  to  drink — the  cup  of  sorrow,  pain,  and  horror,  which  culminated  in  that 
hour  of  darkness  and  terrible  sense  of  aloneness  on  Calvary.  Our  great  High 
Priest  was  not  untouched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities ;  and  it  was  He, 
who  was  "  in  all  points  tempted  like  we  are,"  who  was  thus  troubled  in  prospect 
of  the  cross  and  "all  its  shame  and  woe." 

II.  The  direction  in  which  Jesus  turned  for  relief  when  troubled. — 1.  As 
the  faithful  and  obedient  incarnate  Son  He  turned  toward  His  Father.  Jesus 
prayed;  for  in  trouble  and  sorrow  He  was  as  we  are  (Heb.  ii.  17).  He 
did  not  conceal  from  Himself  the  terrible  nature  of  the  coming  conflict, 
and  looked  to  the  Father  for  strength  and  comfort.  2.  The  first  cry  is  a 
perplexed  question,  showing  the  conflict  in  Jesus'  breast — a  question  as  to 
the  possibility  of  the  cross  being  lifted  from  Him,  of  the  hour  being  averted. 
"  Shall  I  say,  Save  Me,"  etc.  3.  But  in  a  moment  this  thought  is  put  aside.  It 
is  seen  to  be  incompatible  with  the  purpose  for  which  He  had  come  unhesitatingly 
to  face  this  hour.  The  passion  to  be  entered  upon  is  indeed  the  only  way  in 
which  the  divine,  eternal  purpose  He  had  undertaken  to  carry  out  could  be 
fulfilled.  Only  thus  can  the  world  be  redeemed  and  the  "  prince  of  this  world 
be  cast  out."  Therefore  Christ  casts  away  all  thought  of  the  possibility  of  being 
saved  from  the  hour  before  Him,  and  in  willing  submission  resolves  to  carry  out 
the  eternal,  divine  purpose  :  "  For  this  cause  came  I  to  this  hour."  4.  And  now 
the  loftiest  flight  of  prayer  is  reached  by  the  Saviour  :  "  Father,  glorify  Thy 
name."  To  this  height  of  filial  submission  only  the  divine  Son,  and  unfallen 
spirits,  and  those  who  in  Christ  become  children  of  God  can  truly  attain.  There 
could  be  no  diviner  prayer,  as  there  can  be  no  higher  purpose  than  the  divine 
glory.  "  What  Thou  wiliest,  what  Thou  desirest,  O  Father,  this  is  My  purpose, 
though  the  way  to  the  performance  of  that  will  leads  by  the  cross  and  through 
the  grave."  5.  The  conflict  is  now  over,  the  dark  cloud  withdraws  itself,  and 
the  Redeemer  is  further  strengthened  to  go  forward  to  victory. 

III.  The  audible  answer  to  Christ's  prayer. — 1.  "Then  came  a  voice  from 
heaven,"  etc.  This  voice  is  the  third  audible  utterance  from  heaven  during  the 
sojourn  of  Jesus  on  earth — the  first  at  His  baptism,  the  second  on  Tabor, 
the  third  here.  All  proclaim  the  glory  of  the  Son,  but  this  utterance  is  to 
a  wider  circle.  The  time  has  come  when  the  glory  of  the  divine  Name  will 
be  manifested  through  the  Son  in  strange  and  unexpected  manner.  Hitherto  it 
had  been  seen  in  mighty  works  and  divine  teaching ;  now  it  would  be  seen — 
strange  contrast — on  the  cross.  2.  And  the  answer  has  been  verified.  Men 
glory  in  the  cross  as  the  highest  exhibition  of  divine  mercy  and  love.  The 
essential  character  of  the  Eternal  shines  in  it  most  conspicuously.  In  it  the  way 
of  salvation  and  eternal  blessedness  for  humanity  is  opened  up ;  for  with  the 
cross  are  bound  up  the  resurrection  of  the  Saviour  and  His  ascension  to  the 
heavenly  places,  whence  He  rules  His  Church,  and  where  He  reigns  till  all  foes 
of  His  kingdom  shall  be  finally  vanquished.  3.  And  in  every  step  of  progress 
made  by  His  kingdom  here,  in  every  soul  quickened  from  death  to  life,  in  every 
citadel  of  the  kingdom  of  darkness  overthrown — in  short,  in  every  new  region 
of  earth  made  glad  with  the  fruit  of  righteousness — all  is  "  through  Jesus  Christ, 
unto  the  glory  and  praise  of  God  "  (Phil.  i.  11). 

IV.  The  double  purpose  of  this  audible  answer  to  Christ's  prayer. — 1.  It  was 
doubtless  intended  to  strengthen  the  Saviour  and  comfort  Him  in  view  of  what 

355 


chap.  xii.         H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


lay  before  Him,  as  afterward  for  the  same  purpose  an  angel  appeared  to  Him 
in  Gethsemane  (Luke  xxii.  43).  2.  And  that  it  did  cheer  and  comfort  the  Saviour 
we  may  gather  from  the  firm  declaration  of  His  assured  expectation  of  final 
victory.  That  assurance  was  attained  in  His  own  willing  submission  to  the 
Father's  will  and  desire  for  the  Father's  glory.  It  was  not  necessary  for  Him 
that  the  Father  should  audibly  give  the  answer  to  this  prayer  (xi.  42).  Yet  can 
we  doubt  that  this  voice  from  heaven  would  cheer  and  rejoice  the  Son  ?  3.  We 
seem  to  detect  an  echo  of  this  rejoicing  in  the  triumphant  word,  "  Now  is  a 
judgment  of  this  world,"  etc.  The  cross  would  discriminate.  Around  it  would 
be  gathered  the  children  of  light ;  against  it  would  be  marshalled  the  powers  of 
darkness  in  vain.  "  For  the  prince  of  this  world  "  would  be  vanquished  (Col.  ii. 
14,  15).  And  Christ  is  drawing  all  men  unto  Him  (2  Cor.  v.  20)  by  the  power 
of  His  love — not  compelling,  not  driving — men  of  every  tribe  and  nation.  He 
brings  a  salvation  free  and  full  for  all  who  will  not  resist  the  drawings  of  His 
mighty  love.  4.  But  the  voice  came  not  only,  not  chiefly,  because  of  Jesus, 
but  for  the  sake  of  those  who  heard  it,  especially  those  who  believed,  so  that  the 
remembrance  of  this  heavenly  testimony  might  strengthen  their  faith.  Indeed, 
was  it  not  they  alone  who  heard  the  voice  speaking,  who  heard  the  words, 
whilst  to  others  the  voice  was  simply  a  sound  like  that  of  thunder  ?  The  un- 
believing were  not  expecting  that  there  would  be  any  divine  answer  ;  and  when 
it  came  audibly,  it  passed  before  they  caught  its  import.  Others  whose  spiritual 
nature  was  in  unison  with  God  both  heard  and  understood,  and  were  confirmed 
in  their  faith,  as  the  voice  on  Tabor  confirmed  the  faith  of  the  disciples  (2  Pet. 
i.  17,  18). 

Lessons. — 1.  Jesus  is  our  example  in  prayer  :  in  time  of  trouble  the  same 
blessed  source  of  strength  and  comfort  is  open  to  us.  2.  He  is  our  example  in 
submission  to  the  divine  will :  acquiescence  in  the  Father's  will  is  the  true  source 
of  inward  peace  and  strength  to  endure.  3.  He  is  our  example,  as  the  divine 
Son,  in  desiring  the  highest  good — the  divine  glory. 

Vers.  34-36.  Believe  in  the  Light,  walk  in  the  Light. — In  ver.  23  Jesus  had 
spoken  of  Himself  as  the  Son  of  man  who  should  be  glorified.  The  Jews 
understood  clearly  enough  this  reference  to  the  Messiah.  But  when  He  spoke 
of  dying  and  being  lifted  up  out  of  the  earth,  the  people  were  perplexed ;  for 
was  it  not  a  commonplace  of  their  teachers  that  Christ  should  "  abide  for  ever  "  ? 
Did  not  the  prophet  foresee  the  Son  of  man  coming  to  take  His  kingdom,  which 
was  to  be  an  everlasting  kingdom  (Dan.  vii.  14)?  Who  is  this  Son  of  man? 
An  important  question  truly,  but  one  which  Jesus  had  often  answered.  All 
His  life,  His  teaching,  His  activity,  had  been  a  fulfilment  of  prophecy 
concerning  Him.  The  Light  had  been  shining,  but  their  eyes  were  blinded. 
Now  was  their  opportunity — the  last.  In  brief  space  it  would  pass  away,  and 
then  the  darkness  would  fall,  dense  and  terrible,  on  the  race  of  Israel. 

I.  The  traveller  to  eternity  needs  light  for  his  journey,  and  must  advance 
toward  his  goal  while  it  is  day. — 1.  The  need  of  spiritual  light  is  admitted  by 
men  as  a  whole ;  and  all  the  religious  and  moral  systems  which  men  have  built 
up  have  been  designed  to  light  the  darksome  way  through  time.  2.  And  God 
has  given  light  to  men  (viii.  12).  It  remains,  therefore,  that  they  should 
advance  by  that  light  whilst  they  have  it.  The  Jews  were  blinding  themselves 
to  the  light  by  seeking  to  reconcile  Christ's  teaching  with  their  preconceived 
interpretations  of  law  and  prophecy,  in  place  of  simply  looking  to  the  Saviour, 
and  opening  their  minds  to  receive  the  truth  as  plainly  revealed  in  Him. 
3.  So  also  many  now  concern  themselves  with  matters  of  secondary  importance 
in  religion,  its  mere  externals,  its  forms  and  modes,  whilst  they  miss  the  true 
meaning,  and  thus  the  comfort  and  guidance  which  the  gospel  is  designed  an4 

35S 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.         chap.  XII. 


fitted  to  bring  them.  4.  Others  still,  whilst  professing  to  know  the  "  Son  of 
man,"  altogether  fail  to  walk  in  His  light,  and  on  their  way  linger  entranced 
by  the  occupations  and  pleasures  of  time,  until  the  solemn  night  of  dissolution 
descends  in  awful  swiftness,  and  snatches  from  them  their  opportunities  for  ever. 
II.  The  way  of  escape  from  the  power  and  fear  of  darkness  is  to  become 
children  of  light. — 1.  This  men  attain  to  by  believing  in  the  Light.  They  thus 
become  transformed  into  the  likeness  of  Christ.  They  imitate  Him,  reflect  His 
character,  and  escape  evermore  from  the  darkness  of  sin,  ignorance,  error,  and 
above  all  from  that  spiritual  blindness  which  is  unconscious  of  the  presence  of 
light.  2.  This  is  a  call  to  receive  Christ  into  our  hearts  by  faith,  to  follow  Him 
in  the  activities  of  life,  and  in  the  display  of  acts  of  Christian  love ;  and  thus  we 
shall  abide  in  the  light,  and  there  will  be  none  occasion  of  stumbling  in  us  (1  John 
ii.  10).  3.  With  this  blessed  assurance  the  public  ministry  of  Jesus  closed. 
Truly  He  was  the  Light  of  men.  How  great  was  His  patience  with  the 
unbelieving  !  how  infinite  His  compassion  !  and  how  terrible  was  the  doom  of  those 
who  through  unbelief  had  blinded  their  eyes  !  And  how  loud  is  the  warning 
voice  which  speaks  from  these  words ;  and  how  glorious  the  prospect  of  being 
"  light  in  the  Lord  "  through  believing  ! 


HOMILETIC  NOTES. 


Ver.  21.  "  We  would  see  Jesus." — 
These  words  were  uttered,  probably,  in 
the  Court  of  the  Gentiles,  as  He  passed 
from  the  Court  of  the  Women,  which, 
as  the  most  public  place  for  Jewish 
assemblies,  was  the  frequent  scene  of 
His  teaching.  On  the  previous  day, 
the  Court  of  the  Gentiles  had  been 
cleansed  from  the  traffic  and  merchan- 
dise which  had  been  customary  in  it, 
and  the  temple  had  been  declared  to 
be  "  a  house  of  prayer  for  all  nations." 
The  Court  of  the  Gentiles  was  divided 
from  the  inner  square  of  the  temple 
by  a  stone  fence,  bearing  upon  pillars, 
placed  at  regular  distances,  the 
following  words  in  Greek  and  Latin  : 
"  No  alien  must  pass  within  the  fence 
round  the  temple  and  the  court.  If 
any  one  be  caught  doing  so,  he  must 
blame  himself  for  the  death  that  will 
follow."  This  prohibition  was  known 
before,  from  Josephus  {Ant,  xv.  11,5); 
but  in  our  own  day  one  of  the  very 
slabs,  bearing  the  exact  words,  has 
been  discovered  by  M.  Ganneau  dur- 
ing the  excavations  of  the  Palestine 
Exploration  Fund  (comp.  Acts  xxii. 
28,  29,  and  especially  Mark  xi.  17). 
The  events  and  the  words  of  these 
days  must  have  brought  strange 
thoughts  to  the  minds  of  proselytes,  men 
who  were  worshippers  of  the  one  God 


by  personal  conviction,  and  not  because 
of  the  faith  of  their  ancestors ;  and  with 
hearts  filled  with  wonder  as  to  what 
these  things  meant,  half  grasping,  it 
may  be,  the  truth  that  this  middle 
wall  of  partition  should  be  broken 
down,  they  ask  for  a  special  interview 
with  Jesus  (comp.  Eph.  ii.  12  et  seq.). 
— H.  W.  Waikins. 

Ver.  27.  "Now  is  My  soul  troubled." — 
Note  the  punctuation  of  this  verse,  for 
everything  depends  upon  that :  "  Now 
is  My  soul  troubled;  shall  I  say, 
Father,  save  Me  from  this  hour  1 " 
Put  the  mark  of  interrogation  after 
the  word  "  hour  "  ;  then  you  have  the 
whole  meaning, — "  Now  is  My  soul 
troubled ;  shall  I  say,  Father,  save  Me 
from  this  hour  ? "  Then  He  answers 
Himself  :  "  For  this  cause  came  I  into 
the  world ;  for  this  cause  came  I  unto 
this  hour " :  I  will  not  say,  Save  Me 
from  this  hour;  I  will  say,  Father, 
glorify  Thy  name.  Then  there  came 
a  voice  from  heaven,  saying,  "  I  have 
both  glorified  it,  and  will  glorify  it 
again.  The  people  therefore,  that 
stood  by  and  heard  it,  said  that  it 
thundered :  others  said,  An  angel 
spake  to  Him."  Thus  it  always  is : 
there  are  always  two  explanations  of 
events;  the   vulgar   will  call  the  ex- 

357 


chap.  xii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


planation  thunder,  and  the  spiritually 
refined  will  call  it  an  angel. — Dr.  Joseph 
Parker. 

Vers.  28,  29.  The  voice  from  heaven. 
— Every  man  hears  in  God's  voice  what 
he  is  fit  to  hear.  Obviously  there  was 
an  objective  something,  an  audible 
sound.  To  the  deafest  there  was  a 
vague  impression  of  some  majestic 
noise  from  heaven,  which  said  nothing, 
but  was  grand  and  meaningless  as  a 
thunder-clap.  Others,  a  little  more 
susceptible,  caught  something  like 
articulate  words,  but  discerned  no 
significance,  though  they  felt  their 
sweetness  and  dignity,  and  so  thought 
them  an  angel's  voice.  "  Ye  therefore 
hear  them  not,  because  ye  are  not  of 
God."  We  can  dull  our  ears  till  they 
will  not  even  recognise  God's  voice  as 
thunder,  and,  if  it  sounds  meaningless  to 
us,  it  is  our  own  fault. — Dr.  A  .Maclaren. 

Vers.  31-33.  Christ  victorious  through 
death. — If  He  thought  of  Himself  only 
as  a  martyr,  one  among  many,  it  was 
gross  exaggeration  to  say  that  His 
death  headed  the  black  roll  of  the 
world's  sins.  On  that  hypothesis  of 
His  person,  there  have  been  many 
other  deaths  quite  as  criminal.  Only 
the  full-toned  view  of  who  and  what 
the  victim  was  warrants  such  a  con- 
struction of  the  guilt  of  His  slaying  as 
is  here.  Still  more  extravagant,  on 
the  supposition  that  Jesus  is  simply 
the  best  of  men  and  teachers,  is  that 
other  triumphant  cry  of  victory  over 


the  defeated  and  cast-out  "  prince  of 
this  world."  Only  the  full-toned  view 
of  the  death  of  Christ  as  the  sacrifice 
for  the  world's  sins  can  warrant  such  a 
construction  of  its  power  to  redeem  the 
world  from  the  tyranny  of  that  usurper, 
and  to  dislodge  him  from  his  fortress. 
He  and  all  his  hosts  hold  their  own, 
undisturbed  by  teachers  and  martyrs, 
but  they  flee  before  the  power  of  the 
cross  of  the  Son  of  God,  "  who  taketh 
away  the  sin  of  the  world."  He  "  made 
a  show  of  them  openly,  triumphing 
over  them  in  it."  The  judgment  and 
defeat  are  immediate  results  of  the 
cross,  but  the  last  issue,  which  Jesus 
stays  Himself  by  beholding,  is  one 
that  begins,  indeed,  contemporane- 
ously with  these,  but  stretches  on 
through  all  time,  and  blesses  each 
coming  generation.  Of  course,  the 
"  lifting  up "  here  is  primarily  a  de- 
signation of  the  crucifixion  (iii.  14) ; 
but  that  is  contemplated  in  connection 
with  the  other  lifting  up  from  the 
earth,  in  His  ascension  and  session  at 
the  right  hand  of  God.  To  draw  men 
to  Himself  is  the  work  of  Christ  till 
the  end  of  the  world.  His  magnet  is 
the  cross.  That  drawing  does  not 
imply  universal  yielding  to  itself,  for 
there  may  be  resistance  to  it ;  but  for 
evermore  there  stream  out  from  the 
cross  powers  which  lay  hold  on  hearts, 
and  sweetly  and  mightily  grapple  them 
to  Jesus.  He  Himself,  and  nothing 
less,  is  the  centre  ;  and  what  conquers 
men  to  be  His,  is  His  death. — Idem. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  20.  The  promise  of  harvest. — What 
about  the  first  blade  that  pierces  the  dull 
earth  and  stands  up  in  green  beauty  : 
is  it  a  favourite  ?  No,  it  is  better ;  it 
is  a  harbinger  ;  it  says,  "  I  have  only 
come  first ;  they  are  all  coming."  It  is 
not  elected  in  the  sense  of  other  green 
blades  having  been  blighted  underground: 
it  is  elected  in  some  sense  of  precedence ;  it 
outran  the  others  ;  they  all  started  together, 
but  this  little  one  came  up  first,  elected  to 
preach  the  harvest,  called,  not  to  singu- 
larity, but  to  expressiveness,  to  algebraic 
suggestiveness,  saying,  This  is  the  indica- 
tion that  you  must  presently  get  your  sickles 
ready,  for  we  are  all  alive  and  all  unfolding 

358 


and  all  coming  ;  to-morrow  the  land  will  be 
green,  and  the  day  following  it  will  be 
yellow  with  corn.  The  blade  is  only  first, 
because  there  are  more  to  follow.  It  would 
be  neither  first  nor  last  if  there  were  no 
succession ;  it  would  stand  alone,  it  would 
be  without  an  arithmetical  indication  at  all, 
except  there  be  some  word  that  signifies 
loneliness,  some  figure  that  typifies  isola- 
tion ;  it  is  either  first  or  last,  because  there 
are  more. — Br.  Joseph  Parker. 

Ver.  25.  All  for  Christ. — The  glory  of  a 
Christian  is  Christ  in  heaven,  and  Christ's 
glory  is  His  Church  on  earth.  The  believer 
is  a  true  child  of  God,  who,  clothed  with 


B0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.  XII. 


Christ's  righteousness,  walks  in  holy  fear 
and  willing  obedience  before  his  Father.  Do 
not  wonder,  then,  that  there  meet  you  in  the 
Church  of  Christ  such  a  one  as  Polycarp,  who, 
when  threatened  with  the  stake  if  he  would 
not  curse  Christ  and  offer  to  the  gods, 
replied,  "  Eighty  and  six  years  have  I  served 
my  Saviour,  and  He  hath  done  me  nothing 
but  good ;  how  could  I  curse  my  Lord  and 
King,  who  hath  saved  me?"— as  an Ignatjus, 
who  thus  wrote  from  his  Roman  prison  to 
his  Church  :  "  Let  fire  and  conflict,  breaking 
of  the  bones  and  tearing  asunder  of  the 
members,  nay,  let  the  burning  of  the  whole 
body  and  all  the  malice  of  the  devil  come 
upon  me,  if  I  may  have  but  Christ  with  me. 
I  seek  Him  who  died  for  us ;  I  desire  Him 
who  rose  again  for  us.  My  earthly  desires  are 
crucified  ;  the  fire  of  God's  love  burns  within 
me  with  unquenchable  glow — it  calls,  Come 
to  the  Father  " ; — as  a  Chrysostom,  who,  after 
a  laborious  life  for  the  sake  of  the  confession 
of  the  truth,  and  when  dying  in  exile  breathed 
out  his  soul  with  the  words,  "  God  be  praised 
for  all "; — as  a  John  Huss,  who,  from  the  midst 
of  the  flames  oT~martyrdom  in  Constance, 
thus  prayed  :  "  Lord  Christ,  I  will  bear  this 
terrible  death  with  joy  for  the  Gospel's  sake, 
but  I  pray  Thee  forgive  my  foes " ; — as  a 
Theodore  Beza,  who,  standing  face  to  face 
with  the  ruler  of  France,  thus  spoke :  "  The 
Church  of  Christ  is  indeed  like  a  lamb 
dumb  before  her  shearers,  but  she  is  also 
like  an  anvil  on  which  the  strongest  hammer 
may  be  shattered  "  ; — finally,  as  a  Dr.  Martin 
Luther,  who,  at  the  imperial  diet  at  Worms 
before  Emperor  and  Court,  in  the  most  de- 
cisive moment  of  his  life,  finished  his  heroic 
confession  in  these  words :  "  Here  I  stand — 
I  cannot  do  otherwise ;  God  help  me.  Amen." 
It  is  indeed  Christ  who,  in  all  these  standard- 
bearers  of  His  holy  kingdom,  radiates  forth 
His  power  and  His  life,  so  that  they  have 
overcome  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  and 
through  the  word  of  their  testimony,  "  and 
they  loved  not  their  lives  unto  the  death" 
(Rev.  xii.  11). — Translated  from  F.  Arndt. 

Ver.  27.  Prayer,  a  way  of  deliverance 
from  trouble. — The  more  we  give  place  to 
our  own  thoughts  and  plans,  the  more  we  seek 
through  our  own  power  some  opening  on 
this  hand  or  on  that,  so  much  the  more  dark 
will  our  way  appear,  our  dispeace  become 
greater,  our  mind  more  perplexed,  and  the 


way  of  escape  more  doubtful.  Many  in 
this  way  have  fallen  into  such  tortures  of 
anxiety,  and  even  despair,  that  they  have 
been  stupefied,  deprived  of  thought,  and 
thus  led  to  take  some  foolish  step,  through 
their  own  folly  sinking  deeper  and  deeper 
into  misfortune.  Often  indeed  such  people 
have  thus  lost  their  reason.  It  is  impossible 
in  our  own  strength  to  overcome  soul  trouble. 
Take  up  the  task  as  you  will — flee  loneli- 
ness, amuse  yourselves,  seek  to  dull  feeling, 
fly  into  the  face  of  danger,  turn  your  atten- 
tion to  other  things,  resolve  firmly,  I  shall 
no  longer  give  way  to  these  thoughts,  I 
shall  resist  them,  put  them  aside,  root  them 
out,  let  it  cost  what  it  will — it  will  be  of 
no  avail.  The  heavy  thoughts  will  return 
again,  will  follow  you  into  society,  will 
rob  you  of  your  nightly  slumber.  They 
will  become  only  the  more  powerful  the 
more  you  seek  with  hatred  to  put  them 
down.  One  thing  only  can  help  you — prayer 
to  the  Lord.  Prayer  enables  us  to  recover 
ourselves,  brings  peace,  gives  assurance,  con- 
fidence, hope.  Prayer  opens  up  the  true  way 
of  escape  and  deliverance  from  all  trouble 
and  danger. — Idem. 

Ver.  35.  The  use  of  opportunity. — Have  we 
been  decided  and  active  in  using  our  oppor- 
tunities for  spiritual  improvement  and  doing 
good  ?  You  remember  perhaps  the  legend 
of  mediaeval  times,  of  the  young  maiden, 
who,  one  evening  as  twilight  was  falling, 
rowed  out  in  a  skiff  on  a  lake  which  lay 
before  her  father's  castle.  As  the  dreamy 
twilight  descended  she  fell  asleep  ;  and 
while  she  slept,  the  string  of  her  beautiful 
pearl  necklace  broke,  and  one  by  one  the 
precious  gems  dropped  into  the  still  waters  of 
the  lake,  till  when  she  woke  she  found  that 
her  gems  were  lost  for  ever.  This  legend  is 
symbolic  of  many  a  human  life.  How  many 
of  us  have  allowed  ourselves  to  slip  easily 
along  while  we  slumbered,  not  aware  or 
unheeding  that  golden  opportunities  were 
slipping  away  for  ever  as  the  moments  sped  ! 
or,  while  we  have  dreamily  hesitated,  they 
have  escaped  from  our  grasp  1  Let  us  then 
seek  for  greater  grace  and  strength,  that  we 
may  be  decided  in  our  Christian  calling, 
that  there  may  be  no  shirking  of  duty,  no 
shamefacedness,  no  wavering ;  but  that  we 
may  be  able  always  to  stand  "  strong  in  the 
Lord  and  in  the  power  of  His  might." 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  37—50. 

Vers.  37-41.  "  Who  hath  believed  our  report  ?  " — What  is  needed  in  order  that  we 
may  not  fall  into  the  error  of  those  who  do  not  believe  the  heavenly  report,  who, 
if  not  in  words,  yet  in  reality  reject  and  despise  the  Saviour  ?  This  is  a  question 
of  supreme  moment  for  all  who  profess  to  be  genuine  disciples  and  followers  of 
Christ,  children  of  the  heavenly  Father.  Yet  to  how  many,  confronted  with  the 
prophetic  word,  might  Philip's  question  be  repeated :  "  Understandest  thou  what 
thou  readest  ? "  (Acts.  viii.  30).     Can  anything  be  more  important  ?     Still  are 

,  359 


CHAP.  XII.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


there  not  many  whose  energies  and  thoughts  concentrated  on  other  matters  are 
most  fruitful,  but  who  in  regard  to  this  supreme  matter  are  but  as  "  babes  in 
Christ,"  subsisting  on  the  mere  elements  of  the  faith,  and  never  going  on  to 
perfection  ?  Is  this  right  1  and  is  it  wonderful,  when  we  consider  it,  that  the 
religious  life  of  the  Church  is  not  so  healthy  as  it  should  and  might  be,  and  that 
the  progress  of  Christ's  kingdom  is  retarded  ?  What  we  all  need  is  an  assured 
faith,  and  then  the  arm  of  the  Lord  will  be  revealed  to  us,  the  power  of  the 
gospel  will  be  manifested  in  us  and  to  the  world.  And  this  assured  faith  rests 
on  simple  elementary  truths  such  as  all  men,  the  simplest  and  most  unlearned, 
may  know  and  understand.     There  need  only  be  mentioned — 

I.  The  sense  of  sin  and  our  responsibility  to  God. — 1.  The  sense  of  sin  is 
universal  as  humanity.  Go  where  we  will,  the  ideas  of  right  and  wrong  will  be 
found  subsisting,  and  the  deep  sense  of  guilt  on  account  of  wrongdoing  is 
expressed  in  all  religions,  in  sacrificial  rites,  even  in  the  fetich  worship  of  the 
barbarian.  You  cannot  escape  from  this  universal  belief  in  the  sense  of  sinful- 
ness among  men.  2.  And  with  this  comes  the  sense  of  responsibility.  Conscience 
speaks  within  men's  hearts,  and  declares  that  they  are  responsible  to  that  Power 
which  rules  over  all,  and  that,  unless  in  some  way  it  can  be  averted,  the  punish- 
ment for  wrongdoing,  for  the  transgression  of  the  law  of  right  which  governs  the 
universe,  will  be  speedy  and  awful.  3.  The  realisation  of  this  fundamental 
truth  is  essential  for  the  true  religious  life.  All  professed  Christians  will  confess 
in  a  general  way  that  they  are  "miserable  sinners."  But  there  must  be  an 
individual  and  personal  realisation  of  the  fact.  Sin  must  be  recognised  in  all  its 
hideousness  and  horror  in  the  light  of  the  divine  holiness ;  the  awf  ulness  of  its 
indwelling  power  must  be  felt  by  the  individual,  until  he  turns  from  it  with 
loathing,  crying,  "  God  be  merciful,"  etc.     The  next  step  will  then  be  to  seek — 

II.  Away  of  escape  from  sin  and  its  guilt. — 1.  The  slave  bound  in  fetters 
sighs  for  liberty ;  the  shipwrecked  sailor,  adrift  on  a  spar,  with  the  lonely  ocean 
all  around,  looks  and  longs  for  a  passing  ship ;  the  sick  man  turns  to  the  skilful 
and  trusted  physician.  2.  So  do  those  who  awake  to  a  sense  of  their  spiritual 
bondage  sigh  for  a  Redeemer  and  deliverance  ;  those  adrift  on  the  ocean  of  life, 
knowing  not  whither  they  are  being  carried,  to  what  awful  mystery  beyond,  long 
for  some  ark  of  safety ;  the  man  who  feels  that  a  subtle  poison  is  corrupting  his 
soul-life  longs  for  a  skilful  spiritual  physician.  3.  And  does  not  the  history  of 
the  past  tell  how  fruitlessly  men  endeavoured  for  themselves  to  discover  a 
remedy,  construct  an  ark,  and  gain  a  spiritual  freedom  ?  They  still  groan  in 
their  chains,  many  of  them ;  the  wrecks  of  their  flimsy  arks  are  scattered  all 
along  the  shores  of  time,  and  the  physicians  they  sought  have  proved  spiritual 
charlatans.  4.  Still  the  feeling  which  prompted  to  this  was  true  and  right.  It 
showed  the  existence  of  the  sense  of  sinfulness.  Those  who  do  not  feel  that  they 
are  in  danger  will  make  no  effort  to  escape.  Those  who  do  will  make  earnest 
efforts  to  find  deliverance  and  safety.  Is  there,  however,  any  way  of  escape,  any 
means  of  deliverance  1  We  have  seen  how  vain  and  futile  all  merely  human 
attempts  have  been  to  bring  deliverance.  Are  we  shut  up  to  despair  ?  It  is 
here  Revelation  meets  us  with  the  announcement  that — 

III.  The  cross  of  Christ  is  the  means  of  redemption. — 1.  That  and  not  less  is 
the  claim  made  by  our  Lord  and  His  apostles.  "  He  was  wounded  for  our  trans- 
gressions," etc.  (Isa.  liii.  5 ;  1  John  i.  7  ;  Eph.  i.  7  ;  Rev.  i.  5).  This  is  the  central 
truth  of  redemption.  There  are  other  truths  most  grand  and  important,  other 
aspects  of  this  divine  work  necessary  in  their  proper  place.  This  is  fundamental 
so  far  as  sinful  men  are  concerned.  Take  away  this  and  there  remains  a 
beautiful  moral  system,  high  above  others  even  in  this  aspect,  but  nothing  more. 
2.  And  that  the  atoning  purpose  of  Christ's  cross  is  the  central  and  all-embracing 
purpose  so  far  as  man  is  concerned  is  shown  by  this  :  that  it  is  only  when  that 

36Q 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.      "  chap.  xit. 


purpose  is  realised  and  personally  appropriated  by  faith  that  the  full  blessedness 
of  the  gospel  comes  to  individuals.  It  has  always  been  where  faith  in  this  great 
central  truth  has  been  firm  and  clear  that  men  have  entered  into  truest  peace, 
have  become  most  Christlike,  have  reached  highest  heights  of  attainment. 
3.  But  there  must  be  the  personal  acceptance  of  and  trust  in  Christ  and  His  cross 
in  order  to  this  end.  A  mere  general  and  vague  belief  can  hardly  be  dignified 
with  the  name  of  faith.  True,  even  though  genuine  faith  be  "  as  a  grain  of 
mustard  seed,"  it  will  have  power.  But  it  must  be  genuine  and  it  must  be 
personal.  It  uplifts  the  burden  of  guilt ;  it  frees  from  the  bondage  of  sin,  of 
corruption.  "  The  mountain  is  removed,  and  is  cast  into  the  sea  "  (Mark  xi.  23). 
When  this  point  has  been  reached,  then  it  is  seen  that — 

IV.  The  saving  power  of  Christ's  gospel  is  the  true  proof  of  His  Messiahship. 
1.  Those  to  whom  these  things  are  realities  need  no  further  proof  that  Christ 
and  His  message  are  divine.  The  proof  is  within  them ;  and  however  fierce  may 
be  the  storms  around  them,  "  the  anchor  of  the  soul,  both  sure  and  steadfast, 
which  entereth  into  that  within  the  veil ;'  (Heb.  vi.  19)  will  hold.  And  the 
proof  will  not  only  be  a  personal  one ;  it  will  assuredly  affect  others,  it  will  be  a 
test  of  their  sincerity.  2.  True,  many  will  pass  by  or  slight  this  proof,  just  as 
the  Jews  slighted  our  Lord's  miracles.  But  in  doing  so  they  will  condemn  them- 
selves, for  examination  would  have  convinced  them  that  the  moral  miracles 
effected  by  the  gospel  during  the  eighteen  centuries  that  have  passed  away  since 
Christ's  passion  never  have  been  and  cannot  be  effected  by  any  other  power.  A 
dispassionate  historical  survey  would  convince  unbiassed  minds  that  "  the  gospel 
of  Christ  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation,"  etc.  (Rom.  i.  16).  3.  Those 
who  "  despise  and  reject,"  who  are  unbelieving,  are  in  a  greater  or  less  degree 
themselves  to  blame.  They  have  permitted  themselves  to  be  led  away  by 
authority  inimical  to  Christ,  without  making  earnest  search  themselves ;  or  they 
are  shackled  by  some  besetting  sin  and  do  not  desire  freedom ;  or  they  are  merely 
nominal  disciples  of  the  Redeemer  and  have  not  personally  known  the  saving 
power  of  His  gospel.  Such  considerations  should  lead  professing  Christians  to 
give  diligence  to  make  their  calling  and  election  sure  (2  Pet.  i.  10).  Is  it  not 
the  lack  of  this  that  leads  to  such  feeble,  listless  confession  of  Christ,  such  world- 
liness  in  the  Church  ?  "  The  wheat  and  tares  are  to  grow  together  till  the 
harvest  "  (Matt.  xiii.  30).  But  make  sure  that  your  life  is  a  wheat  and  not  a  tare 
life  !  For  that  is  the  end  of  Christ's  atonement.  "  When  thou  shalt  make  His 
soul  an  offering  for  sin,  He  shall  see  His  seed,"  etc.  (Isa.  liii.  10).  And  His  seed 
will  yield  fruit.  (1)  Here  is  the  test  of  a  sincere  faith  :  it  works  by  love,  it  leads  to 
consecration  and  self-sacrifice.  Those  whose  hearts  are  filled  with  divine  love 
give  a  holy  service.  The  mother  who  truly  loves  her  child  will  do  and  give  all 
that  is  possible,  apart  from  what  is  wrong  and  evil,  for  her  child.  And  so  in  all 
ranks  and  grades  of  pure  human  affection.  (2)  Love  to  the  Redeemer  must  mani- 
fest itself  in  the  same  way.  But  how  feeble  it  is  in  the  case  of  many  when  we 
consider  how  little  is  done  by  the  mass  of  Christians  to  make  known  the  love  of 
Christ  !  How  many  "  spend  and  are  spent "  in  the  service  of  the  world,  whilst 
the  service  of  Christ  hardly  costs  them  a  thought !  Is  it  not  because  they  have 
never  really  known  and  loved  Him,  never  truly  felt  the  guilt  of  sin,  the  need  of 
pardon,  the  peace  of  Christ  ?  And  are  they  not  thereby  cumbering  the  ground 
and  hindering  Christ's  kingdom  1  (3)  Were  all  who  profess  to  be  Christ's  disciples 
truly  consecrated  to  His  service,  this  would  prove  the  greatest  check  to 
unbelief,  and  not  afar,  but  near,  would  be  the  hour  when  He  should  "  see  of  the 
travail  of  His  soul  and  be  satisfied." 

Vers.  44-50.  The  declaration  of  Jesus  in  view  of  the  world's  unbelief. — Of  these 
words  Bengel  says  :  "  He  spoke  these  words  in  the  act  of  going  away,  when  He 

361 


chap.  xii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


had  already  gone  a  considerable  distance  from  the  men ;  wherefore  it  is  said  that 
He  cried,  so  that  those  to  whom  He  had  been  speaking  might  hear."  Rather  it 
would  seem  an  utterance  of  His  heart  in  the  presence  of  His  disciples,  in  view  of 
the  unbelief  of  Israel — a  cry  to  them  to  witness  that  He  had  testified  the  truth 
to  the  unbelieving,  since  He  had  not  spoken  of  Himself,  but  as  the  Father 
commanded  Him.  In  these  words  Jesus  declared  that  He  had  delivered  the 
appointed  message,  the  reception  of  which  is  life  to  men. 

I.  The  mission  of  Christ. — I.  Light  was  what  the  world  was  longing  for,  and 
life  was  what  it  above  all  needed.  And  Jesus  came  to  earth  to  be  the  light  and 
life  of  the  world.  2.  And  the  manner  in  which  He  brought  light  and  life  to  men 
was  by  revealing,  in  Himself,  the  Father.  It  was  this  He  was  sent  to  accomplish 
— to  speak  what  God  had  commanded,  to  do  the  Father's  will.  3.  And  this  He 
could  do  because  He  Himself  was  the  revelation  of  the  Father,  "  the  brightness 
of  His  glory,"  etc.  So  that  those  who  see  Jesus  in  reality  see  the  Father,  and 
those  who  believe  on  Him  believe  on  the  Father  who  sent  Him.  4.  And  thus 
He  is  the  light  of  those  who  follow  Him,  who  believe  on  Him.  His  revelation 
of  the  Father  was  not  in  vain  for  all.  He  became  obedient  unto  death.  Had 
He  not  turned  aside  from  Satan's  wiles,  then  the  world  had  remained  in 
darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death.  But  now  through  Him  the  light  of  the 
divine  love,  mercy,  and  wisdom  hath  for  those  who  believe  for  ever  dispelled  the 
darkness.  5.  In  this  revelation  of  the  Father's  will,  and  in  the  doing  of  it, 
Jesus  brought  life  to  men.  His  commandment  is  life.  He  wills  not  the  death 
of  sinners,  but  their  salvation.  "  The  gospel  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation 
to  every  one  that  believeth  "  (Rom.  i.  16). 

II.  The  result  of  rejecting  Christ. — 1.  Whilst  millions  rejoice  for  time  and 
eternity  in  this  divine  life  and  light,  there  are  those  who  will  not  listen  to  the 
Revealer,  and  who,  in  rejecting  Him,  treasure  up  for  themselves  wrath  in  the 
day  of  wrath  and  of  the  revelation  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God  (Rom.  ii.  5). 

2.  In  their  case  the  Word  designed  to  bring  life  rises  up  as  an  avenger.  Opportu- 
nities neglected,  entreaties  slighted,  commands  despised,  shall  rise  up  in  judgment 
against  those  who  will  not  hear  and  believe  "  in  the  last  day."  Jesus  came  to 
save ;  but  the  rejection  of  His  salvation  must  of  necessity  issue  in  judgment. 

3.  Men  who  reject  the  gospel  remain  in  their  sins,  and  thus  are  unlike  God. 
Clinging  to  sin,  they  must  be  shut  out  from  God,  for  with  Him  sin  cannot  dwell. 
Rejecting  Christ,  they  choose  darkness,  and  cannot  dwell  with  light.  Rejecting 
Christ,  they  reject  the  Father.  4.  This,  then,  is  no  matter  to  be  lightly  thought 
of  or  set  aside.  Christ  comes  with  lofty  claims  for  acceptance  before  men.  The 
witnesses  of  His  gospel  testify  to  Him  on  every  side.  Thus  a  terrible  responsi- 
bility rests  on  those  who  hear  the  gospel.  It  is  the  part  of  true  wisdom 
to  examine  it  earnestly  and  sincerely.  Woe  to  those  who  refuse  to  listen  or 
who  scornfully  reject ! 

III.  Christ  has  obediently  and  fully  performed  His  mission. — 1.  If  men  reject 
Christ,  it  is  not  because  He  has  failed  in  any  way  to  proclaim  the  Father's  will. 
With  that  will  the  Son  is  in  complete  agreement,  and  what  He  speaks  is  His 
Father's  word,  His  Father's  commandment,  which  is  life  everlasting  for  men. 
He  is  "  the  Word,"  the  divine  Logos,  the  very  expression  of  the  Father's  mind  and 
will.  2.  Thus  His  mission  had  been  fully  performed,  in  willing  submission  to 
the  Father.  Not  His  own  glory,  but  the  Father's ;  not  His  own  work,  but  the 
Father's,  given  Him  to  do  ;  not  His  own  words,  but  the  Father's.  "  Although 
He  was  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  He  will  not  seek  to  be  looked  on  as  the  builder 
of  that  temple  which  is  being  raised  in  the  world ;  but  the  Father  had  given 
Him,  as  it  were,  all  the  plans  and  designs ;  He  is  the  Master-builder  who 
carries  out  the  Father's  designs.  He  speaks  and  interprets  according  as  the 
Father  desires,  so  entirely  is  His  will  merged  in  the  will  of  His  Father  *  (Lecher). 

362 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  xii. 


3.  Christ,  then,  has  done  all  things  well.     He  can  look  back  on  that  ministry 

now  closing  with  the  consciousness  that  the  purpose  of  Him  who  sent  Him  has 

been  carried  out  and  His  will  obeyed.  4.  And  the  path  of  safety  for  men  is 
to  obey  His  word  as  He  obeyed  the  Father.  Openly  confess  Him,  undeterred  by 
the  fear  of  men  (ver.  43) ;  bend  the  will  to  the  obedience  of  faith  ;  overcome 
yourselves  j  consent  to  count  all  things  but  loss  for  Him  ;  and  lay  hold  of  the 
better  and  enduring  inheritance.     For  the  divine  commandment  is  to  life  ;  and 

"  He  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever." 

HOMILETIC  NOTES. 

Ver.  43.  The  fear  of  men. — The  ban  up  and  say,  "Man  is  mortal,"  he  would 
of  the  Pharisees  made  those  men  afraid,  be  said  to  have  uttered  a  platitude — so 
and  their  fear  was  more  powerful  than  have  we  fooled  ourselves  away  !  Yet 
the  attraction  toward  the  household  of  we  speak  of  spendthrifts  and  prodigals 
God.  .  .  .  They  loved  the  praise  of  and  persons  who  do  not  take  hold  of 
men.  Therefore  they  could  not  be  life  by  the  right  end,  but  prosper  at 
perfect  in  faith.  The  judgment  which  the  bank,  in  the  shambles,  in  the 
John  heard  from  our  Lord's  own  market-place.  Why,  we  are  spend- 
mouth  (v.  44,  etc.)  he  would  never  have  thrifts  who  have  got  through  these 
uttered  concerning  a  Nicodemus  or  a  elementary  truths  that  ought  to  con- 
Joseph  of  Arimathsea.  .  .  .  No,  not  stitute  the  very  capital  of  Christian 
such  weak  ones  are  here  meant,  who  meditation  and  practice.  We  must — 
slowly  grew  in  faith  and  became  I  repeat  it  at  the  risk  of  uttering  a 
strong  in  that  hour  in  which  the  commonplace — we  must  all  face  the 
strong  became  weak ;  but  those  darkness  of  death  one  by  one.  We 
wretched  souls  who  had  experienced  have  wronged  ourselves  by  living  much 
indeed  the  enlightening  activity  of  in  crowds.  It  is  well  for  us  now  and 
the  Light,  yet  had  choked  the  germ  then  to  know  that  each  for  himself 
of  faith  in  its  springing,  because  alone — alone — must  die.  What  pre- 
they  loved  darkness  more  than  light,  paration  have  we  made  for  death  1 
honour  with  men — their  carnal  Judaic  There  is  only  one  rational  and  sufficient 
honour — more  than  honour  with  God.  preparation,  and  that  is  walking  while 
Notice  earnestly  therefore  that  not  we  have  the  light.  Christ  is  the  light 
alone  those  who  have  been  inimical  .  of  the  world.  Walking  whilst  we  have 
to  the  Gospel  and  stiff-necked  in  Christ — an  opportunity  of  studying 
their  opposition,  but  also  some  who  Christ,  an  opportunity  of  receiving 
"  believed,"  may  be  hardened,  when  Christ  into  the  heart,  an  opportunity 
they  deny  the  power  of  faith,  and  do  of  serving  Christ  by  all  good  deeds, 
not  learn  to  "  hate  "  their  own  life  in  If  you  have  made  any  other  preparation 
this  world  (ver.  25).  Yes  !  the  harden-  for  death  you  are  foolish;  and  the  very 
ing  of  such  as  have  known  the  truth,  wisdom  you  have  shown  in  making 
and  yet  wilfully  turn  their  backs  on  other  preparation  aggravates  your  folly, 
it,  is  the  most  terrible  result  of  all  You  have  insured  your  life — you  have 
(2  Pet.  ii.  21  ;  Heb.  vi.  4). — Trans-  let  your  soul  go  without  defence.  You 
latedfrom  Besser.  have   barred   all   the   upper   windows 

■\t         a  a  ao    m-L        j           '    M-  against  the  thief — you  have   left  the 

Vers.  4b-48.  The  end  of  rejection  of  r&    ,     ,           c    ,,     %.              .  -, 

at    .,      mu        •         i    i           xi.  x      mi  front   door   oi    the  house   wide   open. 

Christ. — I  here  is  a  darkness  that  will  ^         .  ,,  .     -  ni             .-,           u     if 

„ n                           ^T  Sevenfold  in  folly  are  they  who  have 

come,  come  upon  all,  must  come.     Men  ,                       J.-, ,            J      ,  •        £ 

call  it  night;  men  call  it  death.    Death  "■*»  every  P088}"6   Pff^..  f£ 

I*  ^^uTr  j«  xi.  •    ,11              wt           4.  death   except   walking    in   that   light 

ismgnt;  death  is  darkness.     We  must  ,  .  ,          ,r      i     •<?  •       i.         *i,         u 

all  die      That  sentence  is  now  called  whlch  Sends  a  ^on^m^  beam  through 

™™™~     i          j.          u       i       'A    u  the  whole  valley  or  its  shadow.  —Hr. 

commonplace — to  such  vulgaritv  have  T       j   p     l 

we  grown.     If  a  preacher  should  stand  Josep/l  rar/cer- 

363 


CHAP.  Xin.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


PART    V.     (A.) 

Chaptees  xiii. — xvii. 
Christ  in  the  Circle  of  His  Friends,   the  Children  of  Light. 

Christ's  Fuller  Revelation  of  Himself  to  His  Disciples. 

1.  The  example  of  ministering   love  in  Christ's  washing  the  disciples'   feet 
(vers.  1-17). 

2.  The  unmasking  of  the  traitor  (vers.  18-30). 

3.  u  Now  is  the  Son  of  man  glorified  "  (vers.  31,  32). 

4.  The  new  commandment  (vers.  33-35). 

5.  Peter's  question — his  denial  foretold  (vers.  36-38). 

"  The  relation  of  the  Jewish  night-days  of  the  paschal  season  to  our  days, 
which  begin  with  midnight,  will  be  apparent  from  the  following  scheme  "  : — * 

Jewish  Night-Day. 

13th  Nisan  i  JU(^as  bargains  with  the  high   priests 
\      to  deliver  the  Lord  up. 

r  The  Last  Supper ;  beginning  of  Mazzoth ; 
Gethsemane ;  putting  away  of  leaven ; 
judgment. 

Crucifixion  and  ^  Offering  of  the 


Thursday, 
6th  April " 


Julian  Bay. 

Midnight  till  morning 

Forenoon 

Afternoon 


14th  Nisan 


burial 


} 


Paschal  Lamb. 


15th  Nisan  f  Eating  of  the  Paschal  Lamb. 


{ 


(Sabbath)   \  Jesus  in  the  grave — Passover. 


Evening  till  midnight 
C  Midnight  till  morning 
Friday,       J  Forenoon 
7th  April  J  Afternoon 

V.  Evening  till  midnight 

'  Midnight  till  morning 
Saturday,       Forenoon 
8th  April  ~|  Afternoon 

fc  Evening  till  midnight 
'  Midnight  till  morning 
Sunday,      J  Forenoon 
9th  April  j  Afternoon 

L  Evening  till  midnight 

From  Caspari's  Life  of  Christ. 

*  This  scheme  accords  with  the  theory  that  the  Supper  was  instituted  on  the  evening  of 
the  13th  and  14th  Nisan. 

Time  (xiii. — xx.). — Nisan,  A.u.c.  783,  a.d.  30. 


16th  Nisan 


Jesus  in  the  grave ;  ingathering  of  the 
firstfruits  ;  resurrection  of  Jesus. 


CHAPTER    XIII. 
EXPLANATORY  AND  CRITICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Before  the  feast,  etc. — Jesus  came  to  Jerusalem  steadfastly  resolved  to  finish  the 
work  given  Him  t®  do  (Luke  xii.  50,  etc.).  These  words  are  not  to  be  connected  with  either 
ci'Sws,  or  ayair-qvas.  They  "mark  the  date  of  the  manifold  exhibition  of  love,  of  the  acts  and 
discourses  which  follow  immediately  afterward  "  (Westcott).  (As  to  the  day,  see  note,  pp. 
371-373).)  Knowing. — It  was  an  hour  He  had  been  looking  forward  to  (ix.  4,  xi.  9).  That 
He  should  depart  (Iva  fi€raj3rj). — That  He  should  pass  hence  to  the  Father.  Thus  death  to  the 
Christian  should  be  a  going  hence  to  God.  Having  loved,  etc. — Not  simply  to  the  close  of 
His  earthly  ministry,  although  that  is  true,  but  He  loved  them  with  divine  fulness  to  the 
extreme  limit  of  love,  as  He  showed  in  becoming  the  servant  of  all,  etc.  It  is  "  the  love 
of  Christ  which  passeth  knowledge  "  (Eph.  iii.  19). 

Ver.  2.  Supper,  etc. — The  reading  probably  is  ddirvov  yivo/mivov,  "  taking  place  '  (with  K, 
B,  L,  Tischendorf,  Greek  Testament,  Ed.  VIIL,  etc.).  The  meaning  seems  to  be  that  they 
had  just  sat  down  to  supper.    Into  the  heart  of  that  Judas  the  sou  of  Simon,  Iscariot. — 

364 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.         chap.  xiii. 


Meyer  and  Reuss  take  the  words  into  the  heart  to  refer  to  the  devil's  heart ;  but,  as  Godet 
says,  "  where  in  Scripture  is  there  mention  of  the  devil's  heart  ?  " 

Ver.  3.  Jesus  knowing  that  the  Father  had  put,  etc. — The  Evangelist  states  this  to  show 
how  wonderful  the  following  act  of  humility  is.  All  things  (Matt,  xxviii.  18,  etc.). — Yet 
He  emptied  Himself,  made  Himself  of  no  reputation,  became  obedient  unto  death,  etc. 
Astonishing  humility !  wondrous  love  ! 

Ver.  4.  He  riseth,  etc. — The  disciples  had  been  striving  who  should  be  the  greatest,  and 
none  probably  offered  to  do  that  act  of  service,  the  customary  washing  of  the  feet  before 
beginning  the  supper  (Luke  vii.  44).  Garments. — The  upper  garment.  He  kept  on  only  the 
tunic,  the  servant's  or  slave's  robe. 

Ver.  5.  He  poureth  water  into  the  basin. — I.e.  the  basin  used  for  that  purpose.  And  began 
to  W'ash,  etc. — It  has  been  gravely  debated  whether  our  Lord  began  with  Simon  Peter  or  with 
Judas.  It  is  really  a  matter  of  no  moment.  The  natural  inference  from  the  words  as  they 
stand  would  be  that  He  had  already  begun  with  others  before  He  reached  Simon  Peter. 

Ver.  6.  Dost  Thou  wash  my  feet?  (<ri>  fiov  vlirTets  roi/s  ir68as;). — The  pronouns  are  emphatic, 
and  shovr  in  a  lively  fashion  Peter's  astonishment. 

Ver.  7.  IVhat  I  do  thou  knowest  not,  etc. — Peter  needed  to  rise  above  his  imperfect  know- 
ledge of  Jesus  and  His  work ;  he  needed  to  be  "  taught  of  the  Spirit,"  "  led  into  all  truth," 
ere  he  could  comprehend  this  and  much  else  in  the  Redeemer's  words  and  actions. 

Ver.  8.  Peter  said,  Thou  shalt  not  ever  wash  my  feet. — "  A  praiseworthy  modesty  :  were  it 
not  that  with  God  obedience  is  better  than  service  "  (Calvin).  Jesus  answered,  etc. — Jesus 
demands  implicit  obedience.  Notice  the  contrast  between  the  lowly  action  of  Jesus  and  His 
regal  authority.  And  yet  how  beautifully  are  they  blended  !  No  part,  etc.  (Deut.  xii.  12). — 
The  Lord  had  shown  that  His  action  had  a  spiritual  meaning  (ver.  7).  The  meaning  of  our 
Lord  is  evidently  to  be  connected  with  the  rite  then  being  instituted,  the  Lord's  Supper.  "  If 
thou  art  not  washed  spiritually  in  that  fountain  opened  for  sin,"  etc.  (Zech.  xiii.  1),  "  thou 
hast  no  part  with  Me,  oneness  with  Me,  in  that  glory  which  is  Mine  "  (xvii.  24).  This  is  the 
deeper  meaning  of  the  action  perhaps  (ver.  11).  And  included  in  this,  as  evidence  of  the 
sanctified  nature,  there  is  the  lesson  of  absolute  self -surrender  to  Christ  in  the  spirit  of  self- 
sacrificing  love  and  service  (vers.  12-15). 

Ver.  9.  Simon  Peter  saith,  etc. — No  part  with  Christ !  rather  anything  than  that.  And 
thus  the  impulsive  apostle,  still  misunderstanding  our  Lord's  action,  blunders  from  one  error 
into  another.  He  had  thought  this  washing  unnecessary  ;  nor/  that  the  Lord  declares  that 
it  is  needfui,  he  for  one  will  be  "throughly  cleansed"  (Ps.  li.  2). 

Ver.  10.  He  who  has  bathed  needeth  not  save  to  wash  his  feet. — "  Just  as  the  guest,  after 
the  bath,  needs  only  to  have  the  dust  washed  from  his  feet  when  he  reaches  the  house  of 
his  host  "  (Westcott).  For  sanctification  we  must  daily  look  to  Christ  for  grace.  The  saved 
man  is  clean  even  though  the  feet  are  superficially  defiled  by  contact  with  the  world,  etc. 
"  He  does  not  sin  wilfully  "  (Heb.  x.  26  ;  1  John  v.  18).  Christ  "  daily  makes  intercession  for 
us  "  (Heb.  vii.  25). 

Ver.  11.  [Ye  are  clean,  but  not  all.]  For  He  knew,  etc. — Judas  had  received  in  some 
measure  the  "  knowledge  of  the  truth  " ;  but  he  had  "  sinned  wilfully  "  (Heb.  x.  26,  27),  and 
was  ready  to  go  forth  into  the  darkness  (Heb.  vi.  4-6).  But  the  disciples  were  clean  not- 
withstanding the  presence  of  the  traitor ;  and  thus  the  Corinthian  Church,  and  all  true 
Churches  of  Christ,  are  communities  of  the  saints,  the  cleansed  ones,  though  traitors  and 
unworthy  ones  lurk  in  the  fold  (1  Cor.  i.  2,  v.  1,  etc.). 

Ver.  12.  Know  ye,  etc. — The  "  hereafter  "  of  ver.  7  is  not  exhausted  here — would  not  be 
indeed  until  Pentecost.     The  lesson  that  follows  is  the  lesson  they  could  then  understand. 

Ver.  13.  Master  and  Lord,  etc.  (6  5t5do7ca\os,  teacher). — "'Rabbi  and  Mara,'  the  names 
of  reverence  which  disciples  of  the  Hebrew  teachers  were  accustomed  to  offer  to  their 
masters  "  (Reynolds).  Again  the  mingling  of  humility  and  nobility.  He  who  had  just  washed 
the  disciples'  feet  told  them  they  did  well  to  name  or  call  Him  ((juaveiv)  by  those  titles  of 
respect  and  reverence. 

Ver.  14.  Ye  ought  also,  etc. — The  apostolic  Church  learned  this  lesson  thoroughly.  In  the 
Epistles  there  are  many  exhortations  to  mutual  and  self-denying  helpfulness  (Rom.  xv. 
1  ff. ;  Gal.  vi.  2  ;  Eph.  iv.  2  ;  Phil.  ii.  3-5  ;  1  John  iii.  16,  iv.  11).  The  impulsive  Peter 
learned  this  lesson  well,  and  was  able  afterwards  from  the  heart  to  urge  the  duty  of  mutual 
service,  etc.  (1  Pet.  v.  5). 

Ver.  18.  I  speak  not  of  you  all. — Christ  knew  the  heart  of  Judas  ;  and  He  still  gave  him 
space  for  repentance  (see  vi.  71).  I  know  whom,  etc. — See  xv.  16.  But  that  the  Scripture, 
etc. — The  choice  here  refers  to  the  choice  of  the  twelve  disciples  as  His  apostles.  In  the 
present  sinful  state  of  the  world  this  Scripture  will  continue  to  be  fulfilled ;  and  the  Son  of 
man,  who  "  experienced  every  human  pain,"  did  not  escape  the  pang  caused  by  the  treachery 
of  a  friend  (Matt.  xxvi.  50),  as  His  typical  representative  in  the  theocracy  did  not  (Ps.  xli.  9). 
"  There  is  an  ellipsis  after  '  but,'  which  is  most  simply  filled  up  by  some  such  phrase  as  '  all 
this  was  done  '  that  the  Scripture,  etc."  (Watkins). 


365 


chap.  xiii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


Ver.  19.  I  tell  you  from  henceforth,  etc. — The  disciples  must  be  shown  that  this  happened 
in  consonance  with  the  prevision  of  His  Father  and  of  Himself.  Thus  all  those  events 
about  to  happen,  the  betrayal  among  others,  which  seemed  at  first  to  be  the  frustration  of 
their  hopes,  would  only  prove  more  conclusively,  when  seen  from  the  point  of  view  of  the 
Kesurrection  and  Pentecost,  that  Jesus  was  what  He  claimed  to  be,  the  Son  of  God,  the 
Messiah,  the  King  of  Israel. 

Ver.  20.  Verily,  verily,  etc. — See  Matt.  x.  40.  But  it  is  interesting  to  notice  how  at  the 
moment  when  He  was  being  betrayed  into  the  hand  of  sinners,  to  drink  the  cup  of  humilia- 
tion to  the  dregs,  He  identifies  Plimself  with  the  Father. 

Ver.  21.  Troubled  in  spirit. — See  xi.  33,  xii.  27.  "The  regimen  rep  Trveij/xaTi,  in  spirit, shows 
that  this  trouble  had  its  dwelling  in  a  higher  region  than  that  of  even  the  noblest  natural 
sensibility.  Here,  as  at  xi.  33-38,  it  was  a  shock  of  a  religious  nature,  a  kind  of  horror  felt 
by  His  pure  heart  at  the  sight  of  this  Satanic  crime,  and  at  the  approach  of  its  invisible 
author"  (Godet). 

Ver.  23.  Leaning  on  Jesus'  bosom,  etc. — The  guest  reclined  on  the  left  arm,  leaving  the 
right  free;  the  back  of  the  head  of  the  guest  on  the  right  reached  the  bosom,  and  perhaps  lay 
in  the  fold  of  the  robe  of  the  guest  on  his  left.  This  was  John,  the  writer  of  the  Gospel. 
Peter's  position  is  not  clear:  some  think  he  reclined  to  the  left  of  the  Saviour,  others  that 
Judas  occupied  this  position.  Peter  must  clearly  have  been  farther  off,  perhaps  to  the  right 
of  John. 

Ver.  25.  Lying  on  Jesus'  bosom,  etc. — Rather  perhaps  leaning  bach,  as  he  would  naturally 
do  in  speaking  to  Jesus. 

Ver.  26.  He  it  is  to  whom  I  shall  give  a  sop,  etc. — I.e.  a  morsel,  a  piece  of  bread  broken 
off,  and  dipped  in  a  dish  common  to  all,  or  to  several,  of  the  guests.  The  custom  is  still 
common  in  the  East,  especially  among  the  Bedawin  tribes.  But  the  writer  has  met  with  it 
in  a  Syrian  city. 

Ver.  27.  And  after  the  sop,  etc. — It  was  the  moment  of  decision.  Instead  of  turning  to 
Christ  in  penitence  Judas  opened  every  avenue  for  the  entrance  of  the  evil  one.  That  thou 
doest,  etc. — There  was  no  longer  place  among  the  apostles  of  Christ  for  one  who  had  given 
himself  over  to  become  an  emissary  of  the  spirit  of  evil. 

Ver.  29.  Against  the  feast. — This  seems  to  indicate  that  the  meal  in  progress,  or  just 
ended,  was  not  the  passover  supper.  It  was  the  Mazzoth  meal,  and  was  partaken  of  on  the 
evening  at  the  beginning  of  the  14th  Nisan.     Poor. — xii.  5;  Gal.  ii.  10. 

Ver.  30.  It  was  night. — From  the  commemorative  and  sacramental  rite  that  ushered  in  a 
new  and  blessed  era  of  life  and  light  for  men,  Judas,  dark  in  soul,  went  forth  into  the  night, 
and  into  a  deeper  darkness  still. 

Ver.  31.  Therefore,  when  he  was  gone  out,  Jesus  saith,  etc. — "  Ye  are  not  all  clean,"  Jesus 
had  said ;  but  now  the  traitor  had  gone,  and  a  higher  spiritual  teaching  was  given  to  the 
eleven.  Now  the  hour  of  His  crowning  glory  as  the  Son  of  man,  the  glory  of  uttermost 
humiliation  for  the  sake  of  man,  has  come  ;  and  in  that  the  Father's  love  and  mercy  are 
also  displayed. 

Ver.  32.  If  God  be  glorified  in  Him.— Omitted  in  K,  B,  C,  D,  etc. 

Ver.  33.  Little  children. — reKvla,  a  word  peculiar  to  John's  writings.  It  "  emphasises  the 
idea  of  kinsmanship ;  and  the  diminutive  conveys  an  expression  at  once  of  deep  affection 
and  also  of  solicitude  for  those  who  are  yet  immature  "  (Westcott). 

Vers.  34,  35.  A  new  commandment,  etc. — The  disciples  could  not  follow  the  Saviour  then  ; 
but  they  would  do  so  afterward,  during  their  earthly  service,  on  the  ways  of  this  new  com- 
mandment of  self-sacrificing  love  in  imitation  of  Him.  In  the  Spirit  of  love  would  be  their 
eternal  union  with  the  Father  in  Christ  (xvii.  23). 

Vers.  36-38.  "  Thou  canst  not  now  be  a  Peter,  for  the  Petra  (or  Rock)  has  not  yet  consoli- 
dated thee  with  His  Spirit ;  but  thou  shalt  follow  Me  by  dying  on  the  cross  as  I  shall  die  for 
thee"  (Augustine  in  Wordsworth's  Greek  Testament)  (xxi.  18,  19)..  "Peter  imagined  that 
he  could  lay  down  his  life  for  Christ,  whereas  Christ  had  come  to  lay  down  His  life  for 
all,  among  whom  was  Peter.  Peter  imagined  he  could  precede  his  Guide.  Presumptuous 
supposition !  It  was  necessary  that  Christ  should  first  lay  down  His  life  for  the  salvation 
of  Peter,  before  Peter  could  be  able  to  lay  down  his  life  for  the  Gospel  of  Christ "  {Idem). 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—17. 

A  lesson  of  humility  and  ministering  love. — It  must  have  been  with 
mingled  feelings  that  Jesus  entered  Jerusalem  on  that  last  passovertide.  The 
streets  would  be  thronged  with  multitudes  who  had  come  to  keep  the  feast. 
Friends  joyfully  met  their  friends.  There  would  be  few  who  would  greet  gladly 
Jesus  and  His  disciples.     There  would  be  rather  scowls  of  enmity  on  the  part  of 

366 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xiii. 


some,  and  some  would  even  be  rejoicing  that  there  was  a  traitor  in  that  little 
band.  Yet  Jesus,  on  entering  the  upper  chamber,  must  have  felt  in  His  heart 
a  glow  of  exultation  that  here  was  to  be  instituted  an  ordinance  in  which  loving 
hearts  would  "  remember "  Him  to  the  end  of  the  age,  and  which  should  be  a 
medium  of  intimate  communion  between  Him  and  His  people  till  all  of  them 
shall  sit  down  with  Him  at  the  heavenly  feast.  The  institution  of  the  supper 
is  not  expressly  mentioned  by  St.  John,  but  it  is  implied  (vers.  2,  4).  The 
Evangelist  did  not  repeat  what  had  already  been  made  known  in  the  other 
Gospels,  and  which  was,  when  he  issued  his  own,  a  rite  firmly  established  and 
constantly  observed  in  the  Church.  It  is  the  incident  recorded  in  these  verses 
we  consider.     What  is  its  significance  to  us  ? 

I.  It  affords  a  striking  example  of  the  grace  of  humility. — 1.  Through  some 
neglect  the  feet  of  the  wayfarers  had  not  been  washed.  Possibly  the  house  was 
too  poor  to  maintain  servants.  Among  the  disciples,  too,  there  had  been  a 
dispute  which  of  them  should  be  the  greatest.  Hence  none  of  them  had  offered 
to  undertake  this  duty.  2.  Jesus  took  advantage  of  this  circumstance  to 
inculcate  a  much-needed  lesson.  It  was  one  of  the  chief  lessons  of  His  whole 
life.  He  took  upon  Him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  in  this  act  of  His  toward 
its  end  He  became  the  servant  of  all.  He  showed  this  spirit  of  humility  which 
should  animate  His  followers  in  every  age  at  the  very  moment  when  "  He  knew 
that  the  Father  had  given  all  things  into  His  hand."  3.  The  spirit  here  dis- 
played is  the  spirit  of  true  greatness,  which  does  not  depend  on  adventitious 
circumstances.  Pomp  and  pride  are  far  beneath  it.  The  great  man  is  ;  he  does 
not  need  to  blow  a  trumpet  and  flaunt  his  pretensions  before  men.  Being  and 
doing  are  the  warp  and  woof  of  his  nature.  4.  True  greatness,  as  Christ  taught 
His  disciples,  is  found  in  service,  in  doing  the  will  of  God.  If  we  do  the  divine 
will  from  the  heart,  that  must  be  because  we  love  Him.  And  if  we  love  Him,  then 
we  must  love  the  brethren ;  and  love  will  find  expression  in  even  the  humblest 
service  which  will  lead  to  men's  highest  good.  It  was  this  the  Saviour  showed 
forth  in  this  act  of  humility,  etc.,  etc. 

II.  Our  Lord's  action  was  the  means  of  bringing  home  to  the  disciples  a  sense 
of  their  spiritual  need. — 1.  The  impulsiveness  of  Peter  furnished  Jesus  with  an 
opportunity  of  teaching  the  symbolic  meaning  of  this  action.  It  was  a  necessary 
act  of  service  which  Jesus  thus  ennobled.  2.  Peter  observed  the  action  with 
wonder — wondered  that  no  one  interposed — resolved  that  he  would.  What  ! 
his  Master,  whom  multitudes  had  hailed  as  king,  who  was  yet  to  reign  over  the 
kingdom  of  God,  that  He  should  stoop  to  this  act !  He  forgot  that  the  humilia- 
tion lay  in  Christ  being  where  He  was.  When,  therefore,  Jesus  came  to  him, 
the  impulsive  apostle  cried  out,  "Lord,  dost  Thou,"  etc.  3.  The  answer  of 
Jesus  should  have  sufficed  (ver.  7).  Not,  however,  for  self-willed  Peter.  But 
when  Jesus  said,  "  If  I  wash  thee  not,"  etc.,  then  Peter  showed  that  his  resist- 
ance was  due  to  no  want  of  love,  but  to  his  impulsive  self-confidence.  Seeing 
now  the  spiritual  meaning  our  Lord  conveyed  in  His  action,  the  disciple  went  to 
the  other  extreme,  and  cried  out,  "  Not  my  feet  only,"  etc.  4.  The  Lord's  reply 
put  him  right.  "  He  that  is  bathed  needeth  not  save  to  wash  his  feet."  The 
traveller  over  the  dusty  ways  might  in  the  morning  have  bathed ;  but  in 
the  evening  the  dusty  feet  needed  washing,  which  was  grateful  and  refreshing. 
5.  So  Christ's  disciples  daily  need  sanctifying  grace.  They  who  are  cleansed, 
bathed,  in  the  fountain  opened  for  sin,  are  cleansed  once  for  all.  But  they  still 
come  in  contact  with  sin,  the  world's  evil,  and  need  daily  cleansing  of  the  feet, 
daily  approach  unto  Christ  through  His  Spirit  for  sanctifying  grace.  6.  "  Now 
ye  are  clean,  but  not  all."  Judas  was  there,  soon  to  depart  from  that  company 
for  ever — an  example  of  those  for  whom  the  wonderful  humiliation  of  Jesus  and 
His  love  plead  in  vain, 

367 


chap.  xiii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


III.  This  action  of  Jesus  teaches  us  a  lesson  of  self -sacrificing  love. — 1.  "  I 

have  given  you  an  example,"  etc.  Two  of  the  great  historic  Churches  consider 
this  to  mean  that  our  Lord  meant  those  who  represent  Him  to  do  what  He  did. 
No  interpretation  of  His  words  could  be  more  puerile.  If  the  scene  is  to  be 
transacted  literally,  then  a  Judas  should  always  be  among  the  twelve  !  2.  Christ 
said,  Do  as  I  have  done  unto  you,  standing  in  the  place  of  a  minister  among  you. 
3.  It  was  an  actual  service  which  had  been  omitted  that  Jesus  performed,  and 
from  which  He  drew  a  spiritual  lesson.  But  times  and  customs  change,  dress 
and  habits ;  also  what  in  that  land  and  in  those  days  might  be  essential  is  not  so 
now.  But  the  lesson  of  ministering  love  remains  for  all  men  and  all  times.  The 
Christian  life  is  to  be  a  life  of  service  in  imitation  of  our  Lord  and  Master, 
Christ. 

Learn — 1.  In  the  present  age  there  is  much  need  to  remember  the  Lord's 
saying,  "  What  I  do  thou  knowest  not  now,"  etc.  (ver.  7).  It  is  not  an  age  of 
humility,  but  of  boasted  knowledge.  In  every  department  men  need  to  learn 
the  lesson  of  humility,  of  dependence  on  God,  and  of  the  limited  and  relative 
nature  of  all  human  knowledge.  Neither  scientific  knowledge  nor  any  other 
department  can  claim  to  be  absolute.  2.  Humility  and  reverent  submission 
become  Christian  men  in  view  of  the  mysteries  of  Providence.  The  divine  ways 
sometimes  seem  dark.  The  righteous  are  afflicted,  whilst  the  wicked  prosper. 
But  we  have  not  entered  entirely  into  the  secret  divine  counsels,  nor  do  we  know 
the  end  of  these  things.  It  is  when,  like  Asaph,  we  go  with  such  troubled 
thoughts  in  humility  to  the  sanctuary  that  light  arises  for  us  (Ps.  lxxiii.  17). 

3.  But  we  must  beware  of  false  humility.  There  are  times  when  Christian  men 
vividly  feel  their  unworthiness,  and  are  prompted  to  cry  out,  "  What  am  I  that 
the  Lord  should  be  mindful  of  me  ? "  "I  am  not  worthy  that  Thou  shouldest  come 
under  my  roof "  (Matt.  viii.  8)  ;  "  Depart  from  me,  for  I  am  a  sinful  man, 
O  Lord."  Yet  true  disciples  will  humbly  and  thankfully  receive  the  blessing 
sent.  But  there  is  a  false  humility  that  would  obtrude  its  own  ideas  as  to  the 
fitness  of  things,  and,  misled  by  it,  men  would  seek  cleansing  in  their  own  way. 
They  will  not  submit  entirely  to  Christ's  way ;  they  must  themselves  do  what  He 
alone  can  do.  They  forget  that  sanctifying  grace,  as  well  as  saving  grace,  comes 
alone  through  Christ,  and  that  they  must  daily  look  to  Him  for  it  (vers.  8-10). 

4.  We  may  learn,  therefore,  to  avoid  that  pride  which  apes  humility,  and  that 
false  pride  also  which  often  leads  men  to  shrink  from  obvious  duty.  And  as  the 
Lord  in  this  action  of  His  stooped  even  to  entreat  a  Judas,  so  should  we  learn 
to  bend  a  pitying  eye  on  perishing  sinners,  and  hold  out  to  them  a  helping  hand. 

"Vers.  8,  14.  Ministering  love. — To  every  thoughtful  reader  of  this  portion  of 
Holy  Scripture  it  must  seem  strange  and  worthy  of  special  notice  that  St.  John 
records  this  incident  of  the  feet-washing,  not  narrated  by  the  other  Evangelists, 
in  place  of  the  holy  supper,  the  institution  of  which  is  given  in  the  other 
Gospels.  And  it  is  worth  noting  that,  although  here  this  incident  takes  the 
place  of  the  other,  there  are  yet  manifold  points  of  connection  between  them. 

I.  As  Christ  here  says  to  Peter,  "  If  I  wash  thee  not,  thou  hast  no  part  with 
Me,"  so  He  had  formerly  declared  in  a  rich  and  profound  discourse,  "  If  ye  eat 
not  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  man  and  drink  His  blood,  ye  have  no  life  in  you  "  (vi.). 
We  cannot,  indeed,  but  think  of  those  words  in  our  sacramental  communion. 
Yet  it  is  quite  evident  that  the  eating  of  the  bread,  which  the  Lord  calls  His 
body,  stands  in  relation  to  the  spiritual  enjoyment  of  His  flesh  and  blood,  as  the 
outward  washing  here  corresponds  with  the  spiritual  washing  of  the  soul.  It  is 
as  if  St.  John  would  have  us  especially  understand  that  neither  in  the  one  case 
nor  the  other  is  the  chief  reference  to  the  visible  and  outward.  For  here  the 
Lord  Himself  says,  after  He  had  done  alike  to  all,  "  Ye  are  clean,  but  not  all" 

368 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xm. 


because  in  this  action  one  had  had  part  who  was  to  betray  Him.  Even  so  should 
we  also  realise  that  mere  outward  eating  and  drinking  (in  the  sacrament)  can 
give  life  to  none,  nor  maintain  it.  As  it  was  in  the  feet-washing,  the  com- 
munication of  life  must  be  something  inward.  But  then,  as  Christ  exhibited  this 
action  of  washing  His  disciples'  feet  to  be  a  helpful  testimony  of  His  heartfelt, 
meek,  and  lowly  love  for  our  imitation,  as,  indeed,  He  had  manifested  that  love 
toward  His  disciples  all  along  the  course  of  His  public  life,  so  our  holy  feast  is 
a  remembrance  of  His  love.  He  constituted  the  ordinance  of  the  supper  in  part 
to  be  an  example  to  His  disciples,  so  that  they  should  love  each  other  with  the 
same  love  with  which  He  loved  them,  and  in  part  that  from  that  period 
Christians  should  be  called  to  show  forth  His  love  in  partaking  at  one  holy  table. 

II.  The  words  we  have  read  show  us  the  true  use  of  this  incident — viz. 
that  we  should  seek  to  purify  each  other  as  the  Redeemer  seeks  to  purify  us. 
And  in  order  that  this  may  not  appear  too  gigantic  a  task  for  any  of  us,  toward 
the  doing  of  which  we  can  only  faintly  strive,  we  must  not  overlook  the  difference 
which  Christ  Himself  here  emphasises.  He  says,  i.e.,  "  He  that  is  bathed  needs 
henceforward  only  a  partial  cleansing."  Of  the  first,  the  complete  cleansing,  He 
speaks  here  no  more.  He  presupposes  it  as  already  experienced  by  the  disciples. 
But  this  second  partial  cleansing  He  commands  and  commissions  us  to  practise 
toward  each  other.  He  brings  the  first  to  pass  when  He  is  received  as  the  only 
begotten  Son.  .  .  .  But  here  He  requires  His  own  people,  as  true  servants  and 
consecrated  instruments,  not  to  effect  what  He  alone  can  effect  certainly,  but 
(in  order  to  point  others  to  Him)  to  bear  witness  for  Him,  and  to  represent  Him 
to  men  in  all  His  purity  and  love,  which  must  tend  to  draw  all  hearts  to  Him. 

III.  Thus  it  is  with  the  partial  cleansing  which  those  who  are  already 
sanctified  still  require  that  we  have  to  do  here. — Life  ever  brings  elements  of 
defilement  with  it  to  our  individual  lives.  Even  this  partial  cleansing  also  can 
be  perfectly  effected  by  divine  power  alone.  As  John  has  elsewhere  said,  "  If 
we  confess  our  sins,  He  is  faithful,"  etc.  But  in  this  very  particular  we  may 
minister  to  each  other.  Even  before  the  need  of  cleansing  appears,  even  whilst 
we  are  seeking  to  guard  ourselves  as  far  as  possible  from  the  assaults  of  tempta- 
tion, and  afterward  when  we  have  encountered  temptation,  our  fellow -disciples 
should  seek  to  strengthen  us  by  a  living  example,  by  means  of  comforting 
admonition  and  earnest  prayer.  And  yet  more  should  they  seek  that  through 
the  word  of  God  we  may  be  edified,  and  should  unite  together  in  the 
acknowledgment  and  confession  of  sin.  This  is  one  of  the  positive  ends  of  those 
actions  of  worship  in  which  we  are  united  together.  This  community  of  con- 
fession has  a  quickening  influence  on  us  all,  and  strengthens  us  in  the  assurance 
of  our  cleansing.  And  it  is  also  exceedingly  beautiful  and  precious  when  in  the 
midst  of  our  ordinary  life  we  can  be  helpful  to  each  other,  in  counsel  and  deed 
supporting  each  other  in  this  effort  after  cleansing.  And  this  will  come  about 
only  in  the  measure  in  which  we  are  closely  related  to  each  other — whether  it 
be  by  firm  bonds  in  an  enduring  fashion,  or  whether  it  be  in  those  accidental 
reunions,  which  life  so  often  brings  us,  with  the  experience  of  blessed  communion 
of  souls.  This  should  bind  Christians  together.  To  this  we  should  bind  ourselves 
at  the  holy  table  of  the  Lord ;  we  should  minister  spiritually  to  one  another, 
that  each  may  seek  to  do  so  in  lowly  love  as  he  is  able  toward  all  who  bear  the 
name  of  Christ,  as  Christ  has  here  shown  us.  And  we  should  do  this  in  small 
things  as.  well  as  in  great,  so  that  we  may  in  all  things  advance  in  that  spiritual 
beauty  and  purity  in  which  the  Church  of  Christ  should  ever  represent  her 
Master  and  Lord. — Translated  from  Fr.  Schleiermacher. 

Ver.  15.  The  great  example. — Jesus  taught  not  only  by  word,  but  by  His  life 
and  walk.     Even  although  He  had  spoken  not  a  word.  His  life  would  have  been 

us  369 


CHAP,  xiih       HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


the  most  impressive  of  sermons.     He  was  indeed  the  ideal  and  prototype  of  all 
perfection. 

I.  How  can  we  describe  this  ideal  ? — It  is  impossible  to  do  so  fully.  We  can 
only  partially  describe  certain  features  that  we  can  catch.  The  complete  image 
who  can  describe  ?  If  we  look  first  at  the  example  Jesus  here  gave  His  disciples, 
we  see  Christ  as — 

1.  The  highest  example  of  ministering  love. — He  was  among  the  disciples  as 
"  One  that  serveth,"  etc. 

2.  Jesus  was  meek  and  lowly,  and  He  was  also  free  from  all  self-seeking, 
which  is  one  of  our  sinful  affections.  His  love  was  a  communicating  love.  We 
through  His  poverty  have  become  rich.  He  gave  and  gives  all  His  best  gifts  to 
His  people :  He  gave  Himself. 

3.  It  was  a  self-denying  love. — He  denied  Himself  all  earthly  comforts,  etc. 
"  Foxes  have  holes,"  etc.  His  life  was  a  constant  self -forgetting,  self -offering 
one  from  beginning  to  end.  It  was  an  example  of  the  purest,  most  disinterested, 
devoted,  and  self-surrendering,  the  most  active  and  all-embracing  love. 

4.  Most  conspicuous  also  was  His  love  to  the  Father. — This  was  the  spring  of 
His  love  to  men.  Because  of  His  love  to  the  Father  He  bore  witness  to  the 
truth — did  the  works  of  the  Father  while  it  was  day,  took  on  Him  the  form  of  a 
servant.  "  The  fulness  of  the  divine  life  was  the  breath  of  His  soul  "  ;  therefore 
every  thought  was  consecrated  into  prayer,  every  word  to  the  revelation  of  God, 
every  deed  to  the  glorifying  of  His  heavenly  Father.  Everything  in  His  case 
had  a  relation  to  the  highest  and  the  heavenly.  His  life  was  an  unbroken 
prayer,  a  glorifying  of  God. 

5.  He  was  free  from  all  sin. — Every  virtue  was  found  in  full  perfection  in 
Him.  He  "  fulfilled  all  righteousness."  All  the  virtues  were  exemplified  in 
Him — strength,  gentleness,  etc.  In  each  He  is  the  type  of  perfection.  With 
men  these  virtues  are  difficult  of  acquisition — hard  to  attain  to,  easy  to  fall  from. 
In  His  case  they  were  the  spontaneous  fruit  of  His  nature.  He  was  not  only 
the  best  of  men  ;  He  is  the  alone  good,  pure,  and  holy  One  as  God  is.  Because 
He  is  the  image  of  the  invisible  God,  He  is  the  prototype  of  a  perfected  humanity. 
Every  man  is  a  sinner.  But  as  every  nay  has  its  opposing  yea,  so  Christ  appears 
as  the  ideal  example  before  us,  and  we  thus  may  carry  within  us  the  image 
of  a  perfect  virtue  and  moral  perfection,  the  conception  and  possibility  of  perfect 
purity  and  disinterested  goodness,  undisturbed  peace,  and  immutable  truth. 

6.  But  can  He  then  be  an  example  for  all  ? — Yes.  For  what  is  virtue]  What 
are  all  the  virtues  ?  The  expression  of  the  principle  of  love  to  God.  He  who 
loves  God  has  reached  the  source  of  all  virtue ;  for  "  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the 
law,"  the  bond  of  all  perfection. 

II.  That  Christ  is  our  example  is  an  important  fact  for  our  Christian  life. — 
1.  It  should  prove  a  guide  and  direction  to  us,  as  to  how  we  ought  to  live  when 
bearing  the  name  of  Christ.  He  is  the  head  of  a  new  spiritual  race;  He  is  a  second, 
a  better  Adam.  The  image  of  Christ  is  held  up  before  us  by  the  apostles  in 
gospel  and  epistle  as  our  Ideal.  We  must  observe  it,  and  carry  it  with  us 
wherever  we  go,  in  our  thought  and  activity  discovering  ever  new  glories  in  it, 
and  dark  spots  in  our  own  lives.  And  as  unknown  to  ourselves  His  light  shines 
on  us,  we  are  transformed  into  the  same  likeness.  If  a  French  philosopher 
confessed  in  reference  to  the  devout  Fenelon :  "  I  dare  not  remain  in  the 
presence  of  this  saintly  man ;  if  I  were  to  do  so  I  should  be  compelled  to  discard 
my  infidelity :  such  purity  and  loveliness  of  character  as  he  displays  prove  the 
truth  of  his  religion,  and  that  religion  really  comes  from  heaven," — much  more 
must  we  subscribe  the  words  of  another  (Rousseau)  concerning  Christ :  "  If  the 
death  and  life  of  Socrates  are  those  of  a  sage,  so  are  the  life  and  death  of  Jesus 
those  of  a  God." 

370 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xiii. 


2.  The  example  of  Christ  should  be  an  inspiration. — It  is  pleasant  to  follow  a 
high  example.  It  is  easier  to  do  so  than  to  have  to  discover  the  way  for 
ourselves.  With  Christ's  example  before  us  the  way  becomes  more  easy.  No 
tpur  will  be  needed  for  duty.  It  will  be  done  without  thought  of  reward,  etc. 
Is  it  asked,  Is  it  possible  to  follow  the  example  and  obey  the  precepts  of  Christ 
and  live  as  He  did  in  the  world  ?  Truly  He  is  always  an  unattainable  ideal.  But 
He  is  also  "  the  author  and  finisher  of  our  faith,"  so  that  we  may  grow  up  into 
Him  in  spirit,  whence  flow  the  issues  of  the  eternal  life.  We  have  not  attained, 
etc. ;  but  if  we  cannot  run,  we  may  be  able  to  walk,  etc.  And  His  word  will  be, 
"  Thou  hast  done  what  thou  couldst." 

3.  A  true  example  saves  us  from,  all  false,  visionary,  etc.,  examples,  and  from 
deifying,  worshipping,  and  serving  the  creature. — Men  are  either  better  or  worse 
than  their  systems.  Only  in  the  case  of  Christ  word  and  deed,  doctrine  and  life, 
are  in  fullest  accord.  Thus  He  supersedes  all  merely  human  examples.  What 
religion  of  earth  has  ever  furnished  such  an  example?  What  prophet  can  be 
named  in  comparison  with  Him  ? 

It  follows  that  He  alone  is  worthy  of  the  consecration  of  our  time  and  strength. 
He  alone  is  worthy  that  we  should  copy  Him,  and  fix  our  regards  on  Him  as 
much  as  possible — that  we  should  call  Him  Master — that  we  should  glorify  Him 
in  word  and  work  our  whole  life  long.  We  truly  become  Christians  only  when 
Christ  is  formed  in  us  and  lives  and  rules  in  us  through  His  life  with  demonstra- 
tion of  the  Spirit  and  of  power. — Abridged  from  F.  Arndt. 

HOMILETIC  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  The  time  of  the  institution  of  produce  strong  arguments  for  their 
the  Lord's  Supper. — Although  it  is  not  position,  that  the  Lord's  Supper  was 
necessary  here  to  enter  on  a  full  survey  instituted  on  Thursday,  the  14th  Nisan, 
of  the  vexed  question  that  has  arisen  i.e.  at  the  beginning  of  the  new  day 
on  the  note  of  time  in  ver.  1,  yet  in  (reckoning  from  sunset  to  sunset),  which 
order  to  gain  a  clear  conception  of  the  followed  the  close  of  Wednesday,  the 
narrative  in  the  succeeding  chapters,  13th,  and  that  consequently  the  Cruci- 
the  chief  points  in  the  controversy  as  fixion  took  place  on  the  morning  of  the 
to  the  day  of  our  Lord's  crucifixion  14th  Nisan,  so  that  the  ninth  hour, 
should  be  noted.  The  idea  most  widely  when  Jesus  died  on  the  cross,  would 
entertained  is  that  the  three  Synoptic  be  about  three  o'clock  in  the  after- 
Evangelists  seem  clearly  to  affirm  that  noon  of  the  14th,  when  the  priests  in 
the  Lord's  Supper  was  instituted  at  the  the  temple  began,  "  between  the  two 
passover  feast  proper,  i.e.  at  the  supper  evenings  "  (Exod.  xii.  6),  to  slay  the 
during  which  the  paschal  lamb  was  passover  lambs  of  the  worshippers,  and 
eaten,  on  the  evening  beginning  the  to  sprinkle  the  blood  on  the  altar.  Now 
15th  Nisan.  But  St.  John  expressly  it  seems  to  be  unquestionable  that  the 
says  it  was  before  the  feast  of  the  narrative  of  St.  John  appears  to  favour 
passover  that  the  incidents  here  re-  this  solution  of  the  difficulty.  But  the 
corded  took  place ;  in  ver.  29  "  buying  question  then  is,  Is  this  Evangelist; 
the  things  needed  for  the  feast "  is  at  variance  with  the  other  three  1 
spoken  of ;  whilst  in  xviii.  28  the  Jews  This  by  no  means  follows.  It  cannot 
would  not  enter  Pilate's  palace,  we  are  be  asserted  that  there  is  any  real  con- 
told,  lest  they  should  be  defiled,  and  tradiction;  and  various  attempts  have 
thus  debarred  from  eating  the  passover.  been  made  on  the  one  side  and  the 
The  whole  question  has  been  sub  judice  other  to  reconcile  the  apparent  incon- 
since  the  middle  of  the  second  century,  sistencies.  Some  link  seems  still  to 
It  is  still  virtually  undecided.  A  con-  be  wanting  to  complete  the  chain  of 
siderable  number  still  maintain,  and  evidence  on  one    side    or  the   other. 

371 


chap.  XIII.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


And   as  within   the    present   century- 
links   have   been    found    to    complete 
other  chains  (e.g.  Zumpt's  solution  of 
Luke  ii.   2),   so  we  may  believe   this 
difficulty  also  will  be  resolved  in  pro- 
cess of  time  and  discovery.     But  there 
is  no  doubt  that  at  present  the  weight 
of  argument  seems  to  lie  on  the  side 
of  what  may  be  called  the  Johannine 
explanation.     (See,  e.g.,  Caspari's  ad- 
mirable treatment  of  the  question  in 
his  Chronological,  etc.,  Introduction  to 
the  Life  of  Christ.)    It  seems  clear  that 
our  Lord's  resurrection  took  place  on 
the  first  day  of  the  week,  a  fact  con- 
firmed by  this  other  fact  that  Pentecost 
fell  also  on  the  first  day  of  the  week 
(Lev.   xxiii.  15 ;  Deut.  xvi.  9).     It  is 
by  no  means  clear  that  the  Synoptists 
intended  to  indicate  that  it  was  at  the 
meal  when  the  paschal  lamb  was  eaten 
our  Lord  instituted  the  supper.     There 
is  no  mention  made  in  their  narratives 
of  the  special  observances  of  that  meal. 
The   lamb   is   not   spoken  of,  nor  the 
bitter   herbs,    the    numerous    cups   of 
wine  mingled  with  water,  etc.    Indeed, 
the  Lord's  Supper  is  regarded,  even  by 
those  who  think  it  was  instituted  on 
the  15th  Nisan,  as  an  appendix  to  the 
passover   meal,  and   no   part  of    that 
meal  (1  Cor.  xi.  25).     When  Matthew 
and  the  other  Synoptists  speak  of  the 
first  day  of  unleavened  bread,  etc.,  they 
may,  and  in  fact  must,  mean  the  14th 
Nisan,  the  day  on  which  all  leaven  was 
removed   from  the   houses,   and  when 
preparation    for  the    whole    passover 
week  was   made.      Then  on   the   be- 
ginning  of   the   evening  of  the  14th 
(i.e.  after  the  close  of  the  evening  at 
the  end  of  the  13th)  the  casting  out  of 
the  leaven  was  begun.     It  may  have 
begun  even  before  that ;  and  then  the 
people  went  to  draw  fresh  water  for 
the  making  of  the  unleavened   bread 
(Mark  xiv.   13).     The  enemies  of  our 
Lord  did  not  wish  to  take  Him  on  the 
first  day  of  the  feast,  which  was  a  day 
of  holy  convocation   (Matt.   xxvi.   5; 
Mark  xiv.   2) ;   and  well  might  they 
desire  to  avoid  such  a  contretemps ;  for 
all  the   proceedings  before   the    high 
priest  and  Pilate  would  have  been  a 


direct  violation  of  that  most  sacred  day 
(sacred   as   the  weekly  Sabbath),  the 
15th   Nisan.      The    "preparation"  of 
the    passover    (Matt.   xxvi.    17)    may 
reasonably  be  taken  to  mean  prepara- 
tion for  the  whole  course  of  the  feast, 
including  the  14th  Nisan,  the  day  in 
which   all    leaven  would   be  excluded 
from  the  houses.    If,  then,  the  meal  at 
which  the  ordinance  of  the  supper  was 
instituted  was  not  the  passover  meal, 
what  was  it  ?     Was  it  an  anticipation 
of   the   passover  ?     Even   though   un- 
precedented,  we   might   see   a   reason 
why   our   Lord   might   anticipate   this 
feast.      The  feast  was  "  a  shadow  of 
good  things  " ;  but  now  the  shadow  was 
to  give  place  to  the  substance  (Heb. 
x.  9).     It  has  been  asserted  also  that 
our  Lord  observed  the  passover  at  the 
same  time   as  a   certain  body  of  the 
Jewish  people  ;  or  that  He  observed  it 
at  the  proper  date,  whilst  the  bulk  of 
the  people  did  not.     There  is  no  actual 
proof  for  these   conjectures,  however. 
The   view  held   by  Neander  is  worth 
noting.     "  He  foresaw  that  He  would 
have  to  leave  His  disciples  before  the 
Jewish   passover,    and    determined   to 
give  a  peculiar   meaning  to  His  last 
meal  with  them,  and  to  place  it  in  a 
peculiar  relation  to  the  passover  of  the 
old  covenant,  the  place  of  which  was 
to  be  taken  by  the  meal  of  the  new 
covenant  "   (Neander,  Life  of  Christ). 
Another    supposition    is    thus    given, 
which,  if  it  were  undoubtedly  confirmed, 
would   at  once  dissolve  the  difficulty. 
"  The   simple    supposition,"   says    Dr. 
Reynolds,    "  that   a   custom   prevailed 
among    the    Jews    of    spreading    the 
allowable  opportunity  of  the  sacrifice 
of    the   paschal   lamb   over    a    larger 
portion  of  time,  in  consequence  of  the 
great  crowd  in  Jerusalem  at  the  time, 
would  really  cover  every  difficulty,  if 
we  add  to  it  that  our  Lord,  *  desiring 
to  eat  the  passover  with  His  disciples 
before   He   suffered,'    had    chosen    to 
select  such  portions  of  the  ritual,  and 
such  hour  of  the  day,  as  best  suited 
His   dread   foreknowledge  of  the  im- 
mediate future."     And,  we  may  add, 
could  not  the  Son  of  man  (Mark  ii,  26), 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.        chap,  tilt 


in  view  of  His  becoming  men's  true 
passover  (1  Cor.  v.  7,  8),  make  such 
change?  Those  who  hold  that  the 
Synoptic  narratives  refer  to  the  actual 
passover  feast  get  over  the  difficulties 
in  John's  Gospel  in  the  following 
manner  : — They  consider,  e.g.,  that 
xiii.  1  is  a  simple  introduction.  Before 
the  passover  the  Saviour's  love  was 
specially  manifested  to  His  disciples. 
They  explain  the  reference  in  ver.  29 
as  the  preparation  for  the  chayigah 
(peace-offering  and  festivals  2  Chron. 
xxx.  22)  ;  and  hold  that  xviii.  28  refers 
to  fear  of  defilement  preventing  the 
Jews  from  eating  the  chagigah ;  and 
that  the  "preparation  of  the  passover11 


(xix.  14)  means  simply  the  preparation 
for  the  Sabbath,  i.e.  the  Friday  before  a 
Sabbath,  which  had  a  special  import- 
ance when  it  fell  in  the  passover  week. 
The  difficulty  throws  no  doubt  on  the 
authenticity  or  truthfulness  of  any  of 
the  gospel  narratives,  and  it  is  indeed  a 
very  clear  testimony  to  the  independence 
of  these  documents.  The  solution  turns 
perhaps  on  the  ascertaining  of  some 
fact  or  facts  regarding  the  mode  of 
celebration  of  the  passover  at  the  time 
of  our  Lord's  sojourn  on  earth.  Is  it 
too  much  to  expect  that  in  these  days 
of  earnest  research  and  wonderful  dis- 
covery this  long-vexed  question  may  at 
length  be  settled  ? 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  1.  Christ  loving  His  own  to  the  end. — 
To  the  end  He  loved  His  own,  to  the  end  of 
His  earthly  course.    And  what  the  disciples 
experienced  from   that  -point  was    a    new 
history  of  His  love.     He  loved  them,  bore 
them  to  their  old  age.     When  they  came  at 
last  to  the  next  world,  His  love  again  was 
there.     This  is  the  same  Lord  who  is  also 
ours.    Great  comfort  for  hearts  that  feel  their 
need  of   love  !      Glorious   balm  for  bruised 
souls,  Jesus  loves  to  the  end  !    Even  this  may 
be  listened  to  with  cold  heart.     Thou  hast 
enough    of    earthly   love :    what    need    of 
Jesus'  love  ?    Or  thou  art  enough  for  thyself : 
why  speak  of  love  at  all  ?    We  may  also  say, 
Jesus  loving  to  the  end  is  matter  of  course : 
how   else   could   He    be    Saviour?      What 
would  His  love  be  to  me,  if  it  did  not  love 
to  the  end  ?     Very  good ;  if  any  one  deems 
himself  worthy  of  the  love  of  Jesus,  to  him 
this  is  matter  of  course.     And  in  the  case  of 
almost  all  men  there  is  a  time   when  the 
heart  thinks  itself  worthy  of  love — the  time 
of   natural  pride,   of  an  unsubdued  heart. 
But  a  time  may  also  come  to  thee,  when 
thou  canst  scarcely  believe  that  Jesus  will 
love   thee,  even  thee,   when  thou  wouldst 
fain  believe  and  wouldst  give  much  if  thou 
couldst  believe  it  and  canst  not.     For  it  is 
indeed  divinely  natural,  but  for  this  very 
reason  wondrous,  that  Jesus   should  love, 
love  us,  love  to  the  end.     God  is  the  wonder 
of  wonders.     Jesus'  love  is  matter  of  faith, 
for  Jesus  is  invisible,  and  His  working  also 
is   often    hidden.      What    thou   seest    and 
sufferest  often  looks  unlike  love.     But  again 
come  times  when  one  can  feel,  taste  love, 
and  times  when  the  heart  by  a  power  from 
above  is  sure  and  glad  of  this  :  Jesus  loves, 
and  He  loves  even  me.     Every  one  among 
us,  if  he  is  only  in  earnest,  may  have  such 


experiences.  Therefore  should  every  one 
among  us,  those  of  ripe  age  especially,  be 
able  to  say,  I  know  that  He  loves,  how 
much  He  loves,  and  I  know  in  what  the 
certainty  rests,  that  He  is 'an  exhaustless 
fount  of  love.  Nor  can  our  inner  life  be 
bright  or  one  of  joyous  progress  until  we  have 
the  certainty  that  Jesus  loves  us. — Dr.  W. 
F.  Gess,  in  "  The  Thinker,"  October  1893. 

Vers.  4,  5.  The  power  of  self -denying  love. — 
At  present  the  Lord  Jesus  gives  above  all 
this  command  to  His  disciples  :  "  If  I  then, 
your  Lord  and  Master,  have  washed  your 
feet,  ye  ought  also  to  wash  one  another's 
feet"  (ver.  14).     To  say  that  this  is  not  to 
be  taken  literally  is  to  say  too  little.     The 
precept  of  feet- washing  is  one  of  the  cases 
to  which  Paul's  saying  applies  :  "  The  letter 
killeth,  the  spirit  makes  alive  " — at  least  in 
one  of  its  aspects.    A  man  might  fulfil  it 
literally  and   yet  remain   spiritually  dead ; 
nay,  confirm  himself  in  death  by  the  practice. 
But   what  is   the   spirit  of   Jesus'  saying  1 
Has  none  of  us  to  do  with  contrary  people, 
when  it  requires  self-denial  to  use  friendly, 
gentle  language  to   them,  or  to  give  them 
practical  help,  and  that  more  than  once  ? 
Among  thy  acquaintance   are  there   weak- 
minded  people  who  need  thy  love  ?     In  this 
case  you   will  easily  understand  what  the 
words  mean,  "  Wash  one  another's  feet."     In 
such  circumstances  it  is   often   difficult  to 
show  kindly,  loving  patience,  and  that  for 
years,  even  to  near  kindred,  to  brothers  and 
sisters.    Even  parents,  when  age  comes  with 
its  infirmities  and  whims,  become  a  trouble 
to  children.    Then  it  behoves  to  remember 
the  precept  of  feet-washing.    And  what  as  to 
us  parents  with  our  children  ?     In  regard  to 
the  amiable  and  gifted,  who  are  our  joy  and 

373 


CHAP.  xiii.        MOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


glory,  a  parent's  heart  naturally  rejoices  in 
diligence  and  truthfulness  ;  then  the  greatest 
sacrifice  is  no  sacrifice.  But  the  feeble  and 
troublesome,  whom  one  cannot  speak  of  1 
Even  here  natural  love  sometimes  overcomes 
every  obstacle.  Yet  love  often  makes  so 
blind  that  parents  cannot  see  even  the 
defects  of  children.  Christians  should  not 
be  blind,  even  toward  children.  But  when 
children  become  an  irksome  tax  upon  them, 
what  should  they  do?  Perhaps  thou  hast 
too  a  bad,  misguided  child.  My  friends, 
Christians  are  not  then  to  be  like  old  Eli, 
not  to  shut  their  eyes  and  deceive  them- 
selves, not  to  be  faint-hearted  and  do 
nothing.  Then  is  the  time  to  be  earnest,  to 
show  anger — anger  like  God's— zeal  against 
sin,  and  therefore  against  the  sinner  who 
nurses  sin  in  himself,  and  with  it  death,  the 
unpitying  zeal  which  springs  from  true  love, 
from  real  mercy.  But  how  feel  love  toward 
a  bad  child  ?  How  soothe  trouble  of  heart 
for  a  child's  ingratitude  ?  Any  one  among 
us  who  knows  such  parental  grief  will 
understand  what  the  Lord  means  by  the 
feet-washing :  exercise  love,  be  bold  to 
love,  when  loving  grows  irksome. — Dr.  W. 
F.  Gess,  in  "  The  Thinker:' 

Vers.  9,  10.  The  need  of  continual  spiritual 
cleansing. — "  If  I  wash  thee  not,  thou  hast 
no  part  in  Me."  How  terrified  Peter  is 
when  he  hears  this  1  Then  he  tacks  about 
and  cries,  "  Lord,  not  my  feet  alone,  but 
my  hands  and  my  head  "  (ver.  9).  It  was  a 
fine  trait  in  him  that  his  greatest  pain  was 
to  hear  the  Lord  say,  "  Else  thou  hast  no 
part  in  Me."  When  we  see  that  a  certain 
thing  would  hinder  fellowship  with  the 
Lord,  or  others  tell  us  so,  are  we  as  resolved 
to  make  sure  of  having  part  with  Jesus  ? 
Do  we  then  say,  "  Lord,  not  my  feet  alone, 
but  my  hands  and  my  head  "  1  This  was 
Peter's  honest  heart,  in  virtue  of  which  he 
was  able  afterward  to  become  so  perfect  a 
disciple  of  the  Saviour.  But  now  he  has  to 
be  checked.  Jesus  says  to  him,  "He  that 
has  bathed  needs  not  save  to  wash  his  feet, 
but  is  clean  every  whit "  (ver.  10).  This 
third  saying  of  our  Lord  also  is  of  abiding 
significance.  It  distinguishes  bathing  from 
feet-washing.  The  whole  man  is  made 
clean  by  bathing ;  but  the  feet  are  the  first 
to  be  soiled  again,  and  so  ever  need  cleansing. 
What  does  the  Lord  mean  by  having  bathed  ? 
It  is  what  Holy  Scripture  means  by  the  new 
birth.  Washing  the  feet  is  daily  forgiveness 
and  sanctifying.  Jesus  bears  witness  to  His 
disciples,  "  Ye  are  clean "  (xv.  3).  This 
they  become  through  His  word  and  inter- 
course with  Him ;  their  heart  was  turned 
away  from  the  world,  from  the  service  of 
vanity,  and  belonged  in  reality  to  the  Lord. 
And,  accordingly,  when  He  departed,  the 
Spirit  came  from  on  high  and  dwelt  in  the 
centre  of  their  heart.    This  is  the  new  birth 

m 


which  we  all  need.  "  Unless  a  man  be  born 
again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God." 
Our  very  mind  and  heart  must  be  trans- 
formed. This  may  possibly  be  done  gradu- 
ally by  God,  from  the  time  of  baptism,  so 
that  the  Spirit  gains  power  in  us  imper- 
ceptibly, as  Tersteegen  says  : 

"  As  flowers  their  opening  leaves  display, 
And  glad  drink  in  the  solar  fire." 
But  if  it  has  not  taken  place  after  baptism, 
it  must  take  place  now.  It  is  scarcely 
credible,  before  one  has  experienced  it,  how 
much  our  heart  leans  on  itself,  how  closely 
our  own  nature  clings  to  us.  Most  men  do 
not  know  it.  We  only  perceive  it  when  we 
begin  to  try  to  go  out  of  ourselves.  But  we 
must  go  out  of  ourselves.  Instead  of  our 
own  ideas,  the  love  and  the  glory  of  God 
must  become  our  end,  a  new  life  of  God's 
Spirit  must  begin  in  us.  Such  a  trans- 
formation of  nature  took  place  in  the 
disciples ;  they  became  pure.  Now,  says 
Jesus,  ye  need  still  to  wash  the  feet.  Too 
many  new  stains  and  faults  occur.  The  old 
man  still  works  ;  we  fall  short  of  God's  will ; 
we  go  astray  in  our  own  ways.  But  do  not 
treat  it  lightly,  do  not  think,  "  My  heart  is 
all  right,  I  am  bathed ;  my  outward  circum- 
stances and  natural 'temperament  still  make 
me  stumble  now  and  then,  but  in  my  heart  I 
am  the  Lord's  disciple  ;  no  one  is  perfect  I " 
This  is  the  way  to  forget  the  daily  washing. 
We  know  that  this  and  that  is  not  right,  but 
we  would  fain  forget  it ;  we  feel  how  deep- 
rooted  inclination  is,  and  do  not  struggle 
against  it.  But  faults  of  the  soul  are  not  like 
faults  in  wood  and  stone,  or  even  some  bodily 
defects,  which  are  fixed  ;  but  it  is  here  as 
with  those  physical  ailments  which  must 
either  be  got  rid  of  or  they  consume  the  whole 
body.  Either — or.  There  is  no  true  peace 
of  heart,  unless  one  is  always  anew  coming  to 
an  understanding  with  Jesus.  What  takes 
place  between  us  and  Him  we  are  always  to 
discuss  with  Him  and  come  to  a  settlement 
about  with  Him.  We  may  go  on  with  a 
heart  which  has  but  a  half -peace,  in  which 
is  a  certain  unrest.  This  is  not  the  true 
Christian  state.  But  as  soon  as  we  have 
failed  in  anything  (and  the  failure  is  always 
toward  God),  in  doing  or  leaving  undone,  we 
should  humbly  confess  it  to  Him,  seek  His 
forgiveness,  and  begin  afresh.  By  thus  ever 
seeking  His  forgiveness,  and  not  resting  until 
we  have  it,  the  heart  is  set  free,  enjoys 
perfect  peace,  and  daily  receives  new 
strength  to  go  forward  in  the  narrow  way. — 
Idem. 

Ver.  14.  Mutual  aid  in  the  spiritual  life. — 
To  wash  one  another's  feet  is,  in  the  deeper 
meaning  of  the  thing,  to  help  one  another  out 
of  the  evil  that  is  in  the  world,  to  aid  one 
another  in  the  keeping  of  a  pure  conscience 
and  of  a  wholesome  and  holy  life.  This 
assuredly  must  be  our  first  concern  as  to 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xiii. 


those  whom  God  has  given  us.  Our  love 
will  show  itself  by  counting  nothing  too 
lowly,  and  nothing  too  hard,  by  which  we 
may  strengthen  against  sin — lead  into  the 
way  of  peace,  or  at  least  witness  for  the 
eternally  right  and  good.  For  example, 
supposing  one  has  wronged  you,  really 
wronged  you,  injured  you  at  the  innermost 
place  of  your  heart,  spoken  or  done  what 
you  feel  was  not  only  an  unkindness  and  a 
personal  pain,  but  an  untruth  between  him 
and  God :  to  carry  out  the  idea  symbolised 
by  Christ,  you  must  not  merely  forgive  that 
one,  you  must  try  to  get  him  out  of  that 
untruth  which  is  between  him  and  God,  to 
have  the  soul  cleansed  from  the  evil  that  it 
has  contracted.  And  a  man  is  great,  Christ- 
like, in  the  measure  in  which  he  can  lay 
aside  merely  personal  considerations,  and  in 
tender  yet  faithful  love  deal  with,  that  he 


may  win,  his  brother.  Did  not  Jesus  wash 
the  feet  of  Judas,  into  whom  Satan  had 
entered  1  Did  He  not  try,  even  to  the  last 
moment,  to  save  him  fromjhis  lie  ?  Brainerd, 
in  his  younger  days,  carried  away  by  an 
indiscreet  zeal,  provoked  the  censure  of  his 
seniors  at  college,  and  was  severely,  too 
severely,  punished.  Tn  later  years  he  saw 
his  error.  He  had  been  unkindly  treated ; 
but  he  could  say,  "  I  would  willingly  humble 
myself  before  those  whom  my  error  led  into 
sin,  and  ask  their  forgiveness,  although 
they  should  still  refuse  to  own  that  in 
which  they  wronged  me."  Was  not  that 
Christlike  indeed  ?  Is  it  not  truly  divine 
to  come  down  from  a  vantage-ground  and 
be  nowhere,  that  God's  love  may  be  mani- 
fested, and  men  may  indeed  know  it  in  its 
separation  from  evil  1 — Dr.  Marshall  Lang. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  18—30. 

The  traitor  discovered. — The  incidents  recorded  here  took  place  during  the 
progress  of  the  Lord's  Supper  at  its  first  institution.  Although  St.  John  does 
not  give  a  narrative  of  the  institution  of  the  ordinance  like  the  other  Evangelists 
(just  as  he  does  not  tell  of  the  institution  of  baptism,  although  he  implies  it 
[see  pp.  98,  99]),  because  it  was  well  known  in  the  Churches,  and  in  writing  his 
Gospel  he  had  a  special  object  in  view,  yet  he  undoubtedly  implies  it.  Jesus 
had  given  the  disciples  a  final  token  of  His  ministering  love  in  acting  the  part  of 
servant  and  washing  their  feet.  He  was  with  them  around  the  supper  table,  had 
indeed  begun  the  institution  of  the  ordinance  (which  was  to  be  done  in  remem- 
brance of  Him,  and  thus  to  show  forth  His  death  until  His  coming  again),  when 
He  spoke  these  solemn  words  :  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  that  one  of  you 
shall  betray  Me."  And  when  the  amazed  and  doubting  disciples  were  debating 
among  themselves  as  to  who  should  do  this  awful  deed,  Jesus,  by  a  sign  given 
at  the  request  of  Peter  and  John,  signalised  Judas  Iscariot  as  the  traitor. 

I.  The  divine  omniscience  of  Jesns. — 1.  "  He  knew  what  was  in  man  "  (ii.  25), 
and  He  had  long  known  that  among  His  disciples  lurked  this  dark  and  crafty 
spirit  (vi.  64),  suffered  for  some  inscrutable  reason  to  mingle  in  the  ranks  of  His 
followers.  2.  Christ  had  borne  long  and  patiently  with  Judas,  with  his  grasping 
covetousness,  his  petty  peculations  (xii.  6),  his  dark  plots,  giving  him  space  for 
repentance.  He  had  been  privileged  to  see  Christ's  mighty  works,  he  had 
listened  to  His  words  of  power,  even  at  this  moment  had  an  extraordinary  proof 
of  Christ's  self-sacrificing  love  been  shown  to  him  as  to  the  other  disciples,  and 
a  partial  participation  in  the  holy  feast,  which  the  Lord  was  instituting,  had 
been  accorded  to  him.  Would  he,  could  he,  remain  untouched,  unmoved  by  this 
wondrous  love  1  3.  In  vain.  As  David,  type  of  the  Messiah,  was  betrayed  by 
false  Ahithophel,  so  Judas,  who  had  eaten  with  Christ,  not  alone  during  the 
three  years'  ministry,  of  spiritual  as  well  as  temporal  food,  but  had  even  now 
eaten  of  the  "  broken  "  bread,  was  by  a  base  act  to  betray  his  Lord.  Now,  for 
the  disciples'  sake,  the  mask  must  be  torn  off,  and  the  traitor  must  appear. 
Why  1  Jesus  had  said  to  the  disciples,  "  Ye  are  clean,  but  not  all " ;  and  He  must 
reassure  them  by  casting  out  this  "leaven  of  wickedness"  (1  Cor.  v.  7).  Judas 
must  not  be  permitted  to  do  his  awful  deed  in  secret,  and  remain  as  spy  and 
thief  among  the  little  band  when  Jesus  had  gone.  Thus,  in  order  to  cheer  their 
hearts  with  the  knowledge  that  they  were  His  chosen  (ver.  18),  to  strengthen 

375 


chap.  xiii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST  JOHN. 


their  faith  in  His  divine  wisdom  and  prescience,  and  their  confidence  as  His 
ambassadors,  He  took  steps  to  unveil  His  betrayer  (vers.  21,  22).  The  disciples 
were  not  to  be  left  to  imagine  that  because  one  of  their  number  had  proved 
untrue  the  grand  office  formerly  conferred  on  them  and  the  work  entrusted  to 
them  were  to  be  withdrawn  (Matt.  x.  7-20).  4.  Therefore,  in  view  of  the 
impenitence  and  hardness  of  this  dark  soul,  the  revelation  of  his  treachery  must 
be  made,  though  it  brought  horror  to  and  troubled  even  Christ's  spirit.  The 
very  proximity  of  Judas,  hardened,  resolved  in  his  sin,  produced  that  antagonism 
in  the  heart  of  Jesus  which  arises  between  holiness  and  Satanic  wickedness — that 
conflict  which  arises  between  light  and  darkness.  5.  And  whether  we  consider 
or  not  that  the  thought  of  what  the  act  of  Judas  would  bring  in  its  train — those 
terrible  sufferings  from  which,  as  the  incarnate  Son,  Jesus  shrank — might  tend 
to  trouble  the  Saviour,  there  was  at  all  events  the  thought  of  the  traitor's  doom 
to  do  so.  To  see  a  soul  that  has  been  privileged  to  dwell  for  a  time  on  the 
heights  of  spiritual  communion  plunging  ever  more  deeply  downward  into  the 
pit  of  perdition  is  a  sight  to  make  men  and  angels  weep.  And  it  can  be  readily 
understood  how  it  would  trouble  Him,  who  came  to  save,  to  have  to  speak  those 
words  that  proclaimed  the  traitor's  presence  among  the  disciples. 

II.  The  revelation  of  the  traitor. — 1.  Not  only  was  the  Saviour  troubled,  so 
too  were  His  disciples.  They  doubted  of  whom  He  spake,  and  one  by  one  in 
sorrowful  tones  asked  Jesus,  "  Lord,  is  it  I  ?  "  (Mark  xiv.  19).  2.  They  doubted 
and  were  sorrowful,  because  they  knew,  as  all  true  men  know,  the  weakness  of 
their  own  hearts.  Then  it  was  a  terrible  thought  that  among  them  there 
was  one,  perhaps  one  whom  they  trusted  and  looked  up  to,  who  was  a  skulking 
traitor ;  and  the  shame  of  it  also  brought  sorrow  into  their  hearts.  3.  Amid  this 
doubting,  sorrowful  throng  sat  the  cause  of  all  this  trouble — cold,  watchful, 
calculating  apparently :  ready  to  brazen  the  matter  out  until  the  end,  and 
thinking,  perhaps,  that  although  the  Lord  saw  through  him  the  disciples  might 
not,  and  that  he  might  therefore  retain  his  treasurership  and  gain  his  thirty 
pieces  of  silver  as  well.  4.  But  that  could  not  be.  For  the  sake  of  the  disciples 
he  must  depart,  and  also  that  the  trouble  might  pass  from  the  spirit  of  the 
Master,  so  that  His  closing  counsels  to  His  followers  might  not  be  checked  in 
their  flow  by  the  dark  presence  of  Judas.  5.  The  revelation  was  made  quietly, 
however,  and  in  such  an  unobtrusive  manner  that  the  most  part  of  the  disciples 
perhaps  did  not  know  until  the  event  (Luke  xxii.  48).  The  guests  were  reclining 
in  the  Eastern  fashion  of  the  time  at  the  table.  The  writer  of  this  Gospel 
reclined  next  to  Jesus,  with  his  left  arm  on  "the  bosom  of  Jesus'  robe."  To  that 
disciple  Peter  signalled  that  he  should  inquire  who  it  was  of  whom  Jesus  spake. 
And  to  John  Jesus  whispered  that  it  was  he  to  whom  He  should  give  a  morsel  of 
bread  dipped  in  the  dish,  which  would  likely  contain  a  sauce  composed  of  fruit 
of  various  kinds.  In  the  East  it  is  a  mark  of  special  attention  on  the  part  of 
a  host  to  do  this.  6.  It  was  the  last  appeal  to  Judas,  a  special  act  of  kindness, 
a  mute  entreaty  that  he  would  permit  the  final  catastrophe  to  come  about  in 
some  other  way.  But  the  appeal  was  vain.  "  Master,  Rabbi,  is  it  I  ? "  said 
Judas.  No  word  of  anger  escaped  the  lips  of  Jesus.  His  words,  "  Thou  hast 
said,"  tremble  with  the  feelings  of  trouble  and  sorrow.  7.  And  after  the  sop  the 
final,  irrevocable  step  was  taken.  Jesus  did  not  upbraid,  did  not  threaten,  did 
not  call  down,  as  the  traitor  perhaps  feared,  the  divine  wrath.  "  Therefore  Judas 
would  carry  out  the  business.  '  Satan  entered  into  him.' "  He  gave  himself 
wholly  over  to  the  evil  influence.  He  had  chosen  the  evil,  and  must  abide  in 
his  choice.  He  is  therefore  dismissed  for  his  awful  work  by  the  Master.  Judas 
has  resolved ;  then  let  him  carry  out  his  resolve,  quickly  if  he  would,  for  Christ's 
time,  His  "  hour,"  is  at  hand. 

III.  A  benighted  soul. — 1.   There  is  something  terribly  significant  in  the 
/*■         376  - --  — 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xiii. 


remark  of  the  Evangelist,  "  He  then  having  .  .  .  and  it  was  night "  (ver.  30), 
compared  with  our  Lord's  words  in  St.  Matthew's  Gospel,  "  Woe  unto  that 
man,"  etc.  (Matt.  xxvi.  24),  and  those  of  Peter,  "  This  ministry  and  apostleship, 
from  which  Judas  by  transgression  fell,"  etc.  (Acts  i.  25).  "  It  was  night — 
night  around  him,  night  before  him,  night  behind  him,  night  within  him,  night 
above  him,  night  over  all ;  the  hour  of  darkness  had  come,  and  for  him  all  stars 
of  grace  divine  had  set"  (Arndt).  2.  Various  attempts  have  been  made  to 
determine  the  motive  of  Judas'  action,  and  even  to  rehabilitate  his  character,  y 
The  most  widely  entertained  idea  of  his  deeper  motive  is,  that  he  thought  by  his 
action  to  force  our  Lord  to  declare  Himself  King  and  Messiah,  and  that  he  had 
no  fear  of  evil  consequences,  knowing  as  he  did  the  power  of  Jesus.  Could  He 
not  call  the  legions  of  heaven  to  His  defence  1  3.  There  may  be  much  truth  in 
this  suggestion.  It  is  on  a  line  with  the  Satanic  argument,  that  it  is  permissible 
to  do  evil  that  good  may  come.  It  is  also  on  a  line  with  the  avarice  of  Judas — 
if  Christ  became  king,  it  would  mean  gold,  gold,  gold — and  with  that  terrible 
remorse  he  afterward  displayed  in  the  casting  away  of  his  dearly  acquired  thirty 
pieces  of  silver,  and  his  heart-rending  cry,  "  I  have  sinned  in  that  I  betrayed," 
etc.  (Matt,  xxvii.  4).  4.  As  it  is  not  for  men  to  attempt  to  fix  exactly  the 
traitor's  doom,  neither  is  it  the  part  of  any  to  seek  to  minimise  the  crime  of 
Judas,  or  to  endeavour  to  declare  his  late  remorse  true  repentance.  The  way  to 
the  suicide's  grave  does  not  run  through  the  hopeful  valley  of  genuine  contrition 
(2  Cor.  vii.  9,  10),  but  most  frequently  through  the  dark  and  barren  ravine  of 
hopeless  remorse.  5.  None  of  the  disciples  but  he  who  narrates  the  scene  most 
fully,  and  perhaps  Peter,  knew  the  purpose  for  which  Judas  went  forth.  Some 
thought  he  had  gone  to  make  purchases  for  the  feast;  others,  who  imagined 
that  there  was  time  enough  for  that  in  the  morning,  were  of  opinion  that  he 
had  been  ordered  to  give  alms  to  the  poor.    But  one  thing  is  certain — he  took  the 

bag  with  him.     Avarice  was  his  bane :  he  had  gained  his  world,  and  lost 1 

He  went  out,  and  sorrow  and  trouble  for  the  time  departed  with  him.  Then 
the  heavenly  light  shone  forth,  and  springs  of  divine  comfort  and  grace  were 
then  opened  which  still  flow  on  with  blessing  for  all  mankind. 

Vers.  22,  25.  Self-examination. — The  sin  of  Judas  is  regarded  as  something 
especially  heinous.  But  in  this  respect  it  is  like  every  sin  against  the  Holy 
Ghost.  And  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  true  way  in  which  to  regard  it 
is  to  do  as  the  disciples  did,  and  ask,  "  Lord,  is  it  I ! "  The  disciples  had  learned 
their  own  weakness.  They  did  not  say,  as  Hazael  to  the  prophet,  "  Is  thy 
servant  a  dog,  that  he  should  do  this  great  thing  ?  "  They  remembered  that 
Hazael  did  that  very  thing  which  he  so  indignantly  disclaimed  any  intention  of 
doing.     We  must  imitate  the  disciples. 

I.  We  must  remember  the  weakness  of  human  nature. — 1.  Even  the  impulsive 
and  self-confident  Peter  appears  for  the  moment  to  have  remembered  this,  and 
become  self-distrustful.  He,  too,  was  among  those  who  doubted  and  were 
inwardly  acting  on  the  maxim,  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed 
lest  he  fall"  (1  Cor.  x.  12).  2.  Do  not  say,  None  now  can  do  as  Judas  did. 
Let  it  be  remembered  that  those  who  strike  at  and  betray  the  disciple  of  Christ, 
in  the  disciple  strike  at  and  betray  the  Master.  3.  That  sin  which  seems  to  have 
been  a  root-sin  of  Judas'  character — avarice,  "  the  love  of  money,  which  is  a  root 
of  all  evil,"  or  an  intense  love  of  pleasure,  which  is  equally  bad — leads  to  crimes 
dark  and  terrible.  A  man,  e.g.,  is  in  a  position  of  trust :  in  his  integrity 
thousands  place  their  confidence  ;  into  his  hands  are  confided  the  interests  of 
widows  and  orphans ;  but  after  squandering  their  money  in  riotous  living,  sinking 
it  in  schemes  which  are  gigantic  swindles,  whilst  all  the  time  wearing  a  pretence 
of  honesty,  perhaps  even  of  piety,  he  at  last  basely  betrays  them,  and  makes  off 

377 


chap.  xiii.       BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


with  the  bag — the  treasury — or  what  is  left  of  it.  Is  not  his  crime  a  Judas-crime  1 
Given  circumstances,  opportunity,  temptations,  would  not  many,  unless  sustained 
by  grace,  readily  fall  into  similar  crimes  1  Is  it  not  the  part  of  wisdom  to  act 
like  the  disciples,  and  each  ask,  "  Is  it  I  ? "  (Mark  xiv.  19). 

II.  This  inquiry,  self-examination,  should  be  made  frequently  and  earnestly. 
— 1.  We  are  loud  in  our  indignation  at  the  recital  of  crimes  committed,  especially 
when  they  touch  ourselves.  And  it  is  right  to  be  indignant,  to  be  at  war,  with 
unrighteousness.  2.  Yet  let  men  beware  lest  when  condemning  others  they 
forget  the  dreadful  possibility  seen  in  Judas.  He  was  a  disciple  of  Christ,  had 
heard  Christ's  words,  had  been  entrusted  with  office  and  apostleship  with  the 
other  eleven,  went  out  with  them  doubtless  when  they  were  sent  to  preach,  etc. 
(Matt.  x.  1  et  seq.) ;  yet  from  all  this  "  Judas  by  transgression  fell."  3.  There- 
fore this  should  teach  professed  followers  of  Christ  the  duty  of  watchfulness  and 
prayer,  of  self-examination,  not  alone  at  communion  seasons,  or  special  periods 
of  feast  or  fast,  but  at  all  times  (Eph.  vi.  18). 

III.  We  must  take  our  case  to  the  Lord. — 1.  This  is  what  the  disciples  did — 
it  is  what  Peter  and  John  did  specially — and  the  doubting  of  one  of  them  at  least 
was  stilled.  The  Lord  will  not  withhold  the  truth  from  us.  And  then  we  have 
His  word  ever  as  the  mirror  by  which  the  features  of  our  Christian  character 
may  be  tested.  2.  It  was  this  Judas,  like  the  Jews,  contemned.  Of  him  Christ 
also  might  ask,  "  Who  hath  believed  our  report  ?  "  "  Contempt  of  the  divine 
word,"  said  Luther,  "  is  the  extremest  and  most  terrible  penalty  in  the  world ;  for 
on  the  contemning  of  God's  word  all  great  and  terrible  punishment  will  certainly 
follow.  ...  If  I  desired  to  curse  any  one  and  wish  him  much  evil,  I  should  wish 
that  he  would  contemn  God's  word.  For  upon  this  would  follow  inward  and 
outward  misfortune.  .  .  .  What  will  come  after  that  we  shall  readily  see  and 
know."  And  that  is  every  evil  way  and  work.  3.  Therefore  it  is  well  for  us  to 
try  ourselves  by  His  word  (Heb.  iv.  12),  and  to  come  before  Him  "whose 
eyes  are  as  a  flame  of  fire,"  who  knows  us  even  afar  off,  who  will  reveal  us  to 
ourselves,  who  will  lead  us  to  those  fountains  of  cleansing  and  healing  which 
He  hath  opened  for  all,  and  who  will  help  us  to  overcome  the  evil  and  be  His 
faithful  disciples. 


HOMILETIC  NOTES. 

Vers.  21-30.  Four  opinions  have  been  party.     4.  That  the  more  general  inti- 

held  as  to  the  exact  time  at  which  this  mations  preceded   the   breaking  of  the 

incideat    occurred. — 1.    That    the    an-  bread,  of  which  Judas  partook.     The 

nouncement  of  the  betrayer  and  his  more  special  and  private  preceded  the 

departure  were  before  both  the  breaking  drinking  of  the  cup  when  supper  was 

and  giving  of  the  bread  and  the  cup,  ended,  so  that  of  the  cup  Judas  did  not 

as  the  narratives  of  St.  Matthew  and  partake.     It  appears  to  me  that  the 

St.  Mark  suggest  (Matt.  xxvi.  21-26;  last-mentioned    opinion   is   untenable. 

Mark.  xiv.  18-22).     2.  That  they  were  The  account  of  St.  John  will  not  allow 

after  the  breaking  and  giving  of  the  us  to  suppose  such  a  dividing  of  the 

bread  and  the  cup,  as  the  narrative  of  words   of   Christ.      The   third   of   the 

St.  Luke  implies.     3.  That   the  more  views  is  possible.    Many,  indeed,  insert 

general  intimations  of  the  traitor  were  the  consecration  of  the  bread  and  wine 

made  at  an  early  stage  of  the  meal,  between  the  twenty-second  and  twenty- 

The  meal  then   proceeded;    after   the  third  verses  of  the  chapter  in  the  Fourth 

bread  and  the  cup  there  was  the  sign  Gospel — that  is,  after  Jesus  had  testified, 

which  Judas  understood,  and  in  con-  and  before  He  had  given  the  sop.    But 

sequence  of  which  he  left  the  supper  I  must  regard  this  order  as  intrinsically 

378 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.        chai>.  xiil. 


improbable.     Surely  when  the  shadow 
was  resting  on  the  soul,  when,  so  to 
say,  the  Lord  was  in  the  middle  of  His 
final  dealing  with  Judas,  this  was  not 
the  moment  at  which  we  can  suppose 
the  institution  of  a  new  mode  of  com- 
munion and   bond  of   love.     Between 
the  first  and  the  second  of  the  opinions 
referred  to,  on  the  whole — not  denying 
that    there    are   probabilities   on   the 
other  side  also — I  incline  to  the  first. 
There  is  not  much  force  in  the  argu- 
ment founded  on  the  charge  when  the 
cup  was  passed,  "  Drink  ye  all  of  it  " — 
an  expression,  it  is  urged,  which  "  leads 
us  to  suppose  that  the  same  persons, 
the  twelve,  were  present."     Not  neces- 
sarily so ;  the  all  in  the  charge  might 
have  been  equivalent  to  the  "  all  ye 
shall  be  offended,"  which  included  only 
the  eleven.     And  weighing  the  record 
of  St.  Luke  with  those  of  the  other 
two  Synoptists  and  of  St.  John,  there 
is  this  to  be  said  :  St.  Luke  is  content 
with  a  vague  and  general  summing  up 


of  the  Lord's  words  about  the  traitor ; 
the  other  Synoptists  are  more  definite 
and  particular ;  whilst  St.  John  gives 
at  considerable  length  the  speech   of 
Jesus  and  the  heart-searching  of  the 
apostles.      I   accept   the    guidance   of 
the  more  circumstantial  histories.    Two 
are  explicit  as  to  time.     In  the  Fourth 
Gospel  we  are  reminded  that  the  supper 
was   proceeding  when  Judas  was  de- 
clared, the  stage  of  dipping  the  morsels 
of  flesh  in  the  sauce  having  not  yet 
passed.     One  such  morsel  thus  dipped 
was  the  token,  immediately  followed 
by  departure.     But  the  cup  was  not 
blessed  until  a  later  stage,  until  the 
supper   was   ended.     If  this   view  be 
correct,   we   must    suppose    that    the 
departure   of   the   traitor    took   place 
after  Matt.  xxvi.  25,  and  that  ver.  26, 
"  as  they  were  eating  Jesus  took  bread 
and  blessed  it,"  refers  to  a  resumption 
of   the  supper  after  the  interruption 
caused  by  his  leaving  the  apartment. 
— Dr.  Marshall  Lang, 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  18  Judas  an  example  of  the  slighting 
of  opportunity.  —  The  heathen  world  is 
ignorant  of  a  Judas,  and  could  not  produce 
such  a  character.  Such  a  monster  matures 
only  in  the  radiant  sphere  of  Christianity. 
It  was  Judas'  misfortune  that  he  was  born 
under  the  most  propitious  star.     He  entered 

|  into  too  close  contact  with  the  Saviour  not 
to  become  either  entirely  His  or  wholly 
Satan's.  There  was  a  time  when,  with 
reference  to  Judas,  "  the  candle  of  God 
shone  upon  his  head,  and  when  the  secret  of 
God  was  upon  his  tabernacle."  Once  he  was 
not  wanting  in  susceptibility  for  impressions 

V  of  the  most  devotional  kind,  and  his  soul 
was  capable  of  every  noble  elevation  of 
feeling.  The  appearing  of  the  "fairest  of 
the  children  of  men"  in  the  glory  of  His 
marvellous  deeds  attracted  him,  though  less 
excited  by  Him  in  His  character  of  Saviour 
and  the  Friend  of  sinners.  He  swore  fealty 
to  the  banner  of  Jesus  with  youthful  enthu- 
siasm, though  with  an  unbroken  will;  and 
the  Searcher  of  hearts,  perceiving  the  pro- 
mising talents  of  the  young  man,  who  was 
really  zealous  for  the  cause  of  God  in  a 
certain  degree,  confidingly  admitted  him 
into  the  circle  of  His  nearest  and  most 
intimate  disciples.  This  favour  would  never 
have  been  granted  to  Judas  if  he  had 
attached  himself  to  the  Saviour  simply  from 


interested  motives.  At  the  moment  when 
he  offered  his  services  to  the  latter  he  was 
no  hypocrite,  at  least  not  consciously  so. 
And  when  he  afterwards  prayed,  studied  the 
word  of  God,  and  even  preached  it  with  the 
other  disciples,  it  was  doubtless  done  for  a 
time  with  a  degree  of  inward  truthfulness ; 
it  was  only  in  the  sequel  that  he  resorted 
to  intentional  deception  and  dissimulation. 
The  Lord  appointed  him  to  the  office  of 
receiver  and  almoner  in  His  little  circle,  and 
assuredly  did  so  for  no  other  reason  than 
that  He  perceived  he  was  fittest  for  that 
vocation.  Many  have  profanely  supposed 
that  the  Lord  committed  the  purse  to  him 
in  order  to  tempt  him,  but  such  a  thought 
is  wholly  to  be  rejected.  On  the  contrary, 
that  circumstance  affords  us  an  additional 
confirmation  of  the  fact  that  Judas,  at  the 
commencement  of  his  discipleship,  possessed 
the  full  confidence  of  His  Master,  although 
it  could  not  have  been  hidden  from  the  latter 
that  the  disciple  was  still  deficient  in  a 
thorough  knowledge  of  himself,  and  especially 
in  contrition  of  heart,  to  which  a  participa- 
tion in  salvation  is  inseparably  attached. 
Amidst  the  superabundance  of  pious  senti- 
ments an  evil  root  remained  within,  which 
was  the  love  of  the  world,  and  especially  of 
its  gold  and  empty  honour.  And,  in  fact, 
Judas  deceived  himself  when  he  ascribed 


chap.  Xiii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


his  admission  amongst  the  disciples  of  Jesus 
to  much  deeper  and  holier  motives  than  the 
longing  for  the  realisation  of  those  earthly 
and  enchanting  ideas  which  his  lively 
imagination  depicted  to  him  as  connected 
with  that  kingdom  which  the  Lord  had 
appeared  to  establish,  as,  on  attaching 
himself  to  the  cause  of  the  great  Nazarene, 
he  fully  supposed  he  was  following  the 
attraction  of  a  higher  and  nobler  excite- 
ment ;  so  his  fellow-disciples  believed  it  no 
less  of  him.  The  latent  wound  did  not 
escape  the  Saviour's  eye  ;  but  the  mischief 
was  not  incurable,  and  Christ  had  appeared 
in  order  that,  as  the  divine  Physician,  He 
might  heal  the  sick  and  bind  up  the  wounded. 
— F.  W.  Krummacher,  "  Suffering  Saviour  " 
(T.  &  T.  Clark,  Edinburgh). 

Ver.  22.  Sorrow  for  the  backsliding  leading 
to  self-examination. — With  great  frankness 
Peter  speaks  of  the  disgrace  which  Judas 
had  brought  on  himself  and  on  them  all. 
With  holy  earnestness  he  reminds  them  of 
the  divine  judgment  which  had  been  passed 
on  the  unhappy  one,  and  shows  how  even 
this  sorrowful  history,  which  had  brought 
deep  shame  to  Christ's  disciples,  must  in  the 
end  minister  to  the  glory  of  the  holy  and 
true  God.  For  His  justice  and  truth  are 
thereby  manifested,  and  the  fearful  end  of 
the  traitor,  already  announced  by  the  mouth 
of  David  in  the  Psalms,  is  here  remarkably 
and  literally  fulfilled.  Thus  Judas  stands 
as  a  warning  example  for  all  time  of  the 
deceitfulness  of  sin  and  the  righteous  judg- 
ment of  God.  So  terribly  can  a  faithless 
spirit  plunge  from  the  height  of  a  blessed 
calling,  scatter  all  its  gifts  and  powers,  and 
come  to  ruin.  Thus  sorrowfully  have  many 
trifled  with  their  high  destiny  in  this  world 
and  the  next  so  that  others  have  taken  their 
crowns.  Can  the  terrible  reward  of  sin  be 
more  clearly  seen  than  in  the  case  of  Judas  ? 
He  passed  as  Jesus'  disciple,  and  became  His 
betrayer.  He  should  have  held  the  office 
of  a  bishop,  and  he  inherited  the  Field  of 
Blood.  He  should  have  preached  the  risen 
Christ,  and  he  died  a  suicide.  He  should  have 
received  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  he  went  to  per- 
dition. "  The  wages  of  sin,"  etc.  And  yet 
with  all  the  earnestness  and  decision  with 
which  Peter  spoke  of  Judas'  sin  and  end, 
the  tone  of  tender  forbearance  and  gentle 
sorrow  for  this  unhappy  brother  is  discern- 
ible. There  are  none  of  those  harsh  judg- 
ments which  often  find  place  among  ourselves 
in  such  circumstances.  Peter  permits  God 
to  judge.  There  is  nothing  here  of  that 
proud  self-exemption  with  which  Christians 
sometimes  look  down  on  an  unhappy  self- 
murderer.  "  I  thank  God  I  am  not  like  this 
man."  But  a  holy  sadness  for  the  lost 
brother  breathes  through  the  apostle's  words. 
Gently  does  he  speak  of  his  treachery  :  "He 
was  guide  to  them  that  took  Jesus."  Gently 

33Q 


is  his  fate  spoken  of :  "  He  is  gone  to  his  own 
place,"  to  that  place  which  the  Lord,  the 
Searcher  of  hearts,  will  allot  him  beyond, 
according  to  his  righteousness.  So,  my 
brethren,  let  us  think  of  those  and  speak  of 
those  who  go  hence  over  dark  ways,  with, 
brotherly  love,  holy  sympathy,  and  pious 
humility,  and  in  every  such  case  remember 
the  word  of  Nathan  to  David :  "  Thou  art  the 
man  1 "  Also  in  thee  there  is  something  of 
this  depravity,  and  it  is  to  the  praise  of 
God's  grace  that  thou  hast  kept  thyself  from 
falling  into  the  abyss. — Translated  from 
Karl  Geroh  on  Acts  ii. 

Ver.  25.  Judas  a  warning  example. — O 
Judas,  Judas  !  happy  would  it  have  been 
wert  thou  the  only  one  of  thy  kind!  But 
the  name  of  thy  brethren,  even  in  the  present 
day,  is  "  Legion."  They  were  not,  indeed,  at 
any  time  thy  like-minded  apostles ;  but,  like 
thee,  they  once  inhaled  the  pure  air  of  the 
gospel,  and  were  shone  upon,  like  thee,  by 
the  rays  of  the  eternal  Morning  Star.  They 
were  baptised  like  thee  ;  they  grew  up, 
nourished  by  the  views  of  divine  truth  ;  and 
on  the  day  of  their  confirmation  devoted 
themselves,  more  or  less  sincerely,  in  the 
most  solemn  manner,  to  the  Lord  and  His 
cause.  But,  unfaithful  to  their  sacred  vows, 
they  revolted  with  the  inmost  tendency  of 
their  hearts  to  the  god  of  this  world ;  and 
instead  of  the  kingdom  of  divine  light  and 
peace,  the  idea  of  another  presented  itself 
to  their  minds,  in  which  the  flesh  should 
have  its  unrestrained  and  complete  gratifica- 
tion. This  object  they  pursued ;  but  the 
Holy  One  upon  the  throne  of  David,  in  the 
power  of  religion,  interposed  in  the  way  to 
its  attainment.  He  requires  the  crucifixion 
of  the  flesh  with  its  affections  and  lusts, 
unconditional  submission  to  the  divine  com- 
mands, and  unceasing  endeavours  after 
godliness.  He  protects  property,  sanctifies 
the  marriage  state,  introduces  order  into 
families,  condemns  revolt,  perjury,  deceit, 
uncleanness,  intemperance,  and  every  offence 
against  the  moral  government  of  the  world, 
as  the  supporter  and  advocate  of  which  He 
appears.  And  they  who  would  gladly  elevate 
their  lusts  to  be  the  world's  law,  feel  more  or 
less  in  their  consciences  the  weight  of  His 
requirements  as  the  sting  of  their  condem- 
nation, and,  without  confessing  it,  are  in- 
wardly constrained,  even  against  themselves, 
to  justify  the  warnings  and  teachings  of 
Christ's  religion  as  absolute  and  irrefutable 
truth.  But  this  fills  them  with  bitterness, 
and  enkindles  in  them  the  infernal  spark  of 
enmity  against  the  Gospel,  and  against  the 
Lord  as  its  author.  Thus  they  become 
enemies  of  God,  and  join  in  Satan's  colossal 
attempt  to  war  against  the  power  and  majesty 
of  God  in  the  Christian  religion,  and  to  bury 
the  whole  world  of  religious  and  moral  senti- 
ments in  the  gigantic  grave  of  an  atheistic 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xiii. 


materialism,  which  denies  the  existence 
of  a  future  state.  They  prepare  for  Jesus 
the  cross  of  an  enthusiast ;  for  His  Gospel 
the  sarcophagus  of  what  they  profanely  call 
antiquated  ideas  ;  for  His  whole  Church  the 
stairs  of  Pilate,  on  which,  in  their  view,  it 
descends  from  the  scene  of  reality  into  a 
kingdom  of  shadows;  and  thus  renew  the 
treachery  of  Judas  to  his  Lord  for  the 
wretched  reward  of  an  expected  state  of 
things,  in  which,  in  a  short  time,  every 
consciousness  of  a  superior  fate  for  mankind 
would  perish  by  the  poisonous  nutriment 
of  a  base  and  transitory  lust.  —  F.  W. 
Krummacher. 

Ver.  25.  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth 
take  heed  lest  he  fall. — Our  first  lesson  will 

(,    be  found  in  the  fact  that  when  our  Lord  said 

(  to  His  disciples,  "  One  of  you  shall  betray 

Me,"  every  one  of  them  began  to  say,  "  Is 

^vit  I?"  Instead  of  being  shocked  even  to 
indignation,  each  of  the  disciples  put  it  to 
himself  as  a  possibility :  "  It  may  be  I,  Lord ; 
is  it  I  ? "  This  is  the  right  spirit  in  which 
to  hold  all  our  privileges.  We  should  regard 
it  as  a  possibility  that  the  strongest  may 
fail,  and  even  the  oldest  may  betray  his 
trust.  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth 
take  heed  lest  he  fall."  Do  you  suppose  that 
there  was  but  one  betrayal  of  the  Lord  once 
for  all,  and  that  the  infamous  crime  can  never 
be  repeated  ?  "I  tell  you,  nay  !  "  There  are 
predictions  yet  to  be  realised  :  "  There  shall 
be  false  teachers  among  you,  who  privily 
shall  bring  in  damnable  heresies,  even  deny- 
ing the  Lord  that  bought  them."  "Lord,  is 
it  1 1 "  It  shall  surely  be  more  tolerable  for 
Judas  Iscariot  in  the  day  of  judgment  than 
for  that  man !    Living  in  the  light  of  Gospel 


day,  professing  to  have  received  the  Holy 
Ghost,  ordained  as  a  minister  of  the  cross, 
holding  office  in  the  Christian  Church,  is  it 
impossible  for  those  who  were  once  en- 
lightened, and  have  tasted  of  the  heavenly 
gift,  and  were  made  partakers  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  have  tasted  the  good  word  of 
God,  and  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come, 
if  they  shall  fall  away  to  renew  them  again 
unto  repentance,  seeing  that  they  crucify  to 
themselves  the  Son  of  God  afresh,  and  put 
Him  to  an  open  shame  ?  "  Lord,  is  it  I  ?  " 
"  In  the  last  days  perilous  times  shall  come  ; 
men  shall  be  traitors."  "Lord,  is  it  I?" 
Governing  our  life  by  this  self-misgiving 
spirit,  not  thinking  all  men  sinful  but  our- 
selves, we  shall  be  saved  from  the  boastful- 
ness  which  is  practical  blasphemy,  and  our 
energy  shall  be  kept  from  fanaticism  by  the 
chastening  influence  of  self-doubt.  —  Br. 
Joseph  Parker. 

Ver.  30.  The  sad  mystery  of  the  son  of 
perdition. — Imagination  reverts  to  the  period 
of  childhood  ;  think  of  him  as  the  fair  boy, 
whose  presence  gladdens  the  house  of  Simon 
of  Kerioth.  He  has  received  the  name  Judas, 
"  the  confessor,"  or  "  the  praise  of  God." 
Who  could  have  anticipated,  watching  the 
romp  of  the  bright-eyed  child,  that  over  him, 
long  years  afterwards,  the  incarnate  Truth 
would  say,  "  Better  that  he  had  never  been 
born  "  ?  Oh,  sad  mystery  and  pain  of  love  1 
How  often  repeated !  How  many  the  parents 
doomed  to  sob  over  the  misery  of  manhood 
or  womanhood  !  "  Would  God  our  child  had 
never  been  born,  or  that  we  had  laid  him 
long  since  in  the  narrow  grave  1 " — Dr. 
Marshall  Lang. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  31—35. 

The  glorified  Son  oj  man  and  the  new  commandment. — When  Judas  had 
departed  from  the  upper  chamber,  and  his  dark  presence,  with  something  of 
a  depressing  or  numbing  influence,  was  no  longer  felt,  then  the  Saviour  pre- 
pared His  true  disciples,  faithful  though  weak  and  imperfect,  for  what  lay 
before  them,  which  would  prove  to  them  so  full  of  horror,  so  subversive  of  hope. 
He  sought  to  strengthen  them  to  meet  the  events  about  to  follow,  showing  that 
all  had  been  foreseen  and  provided  for.  "  Now  I  tell  you  before  it  come,  that 
when  it  is  come  to  pass,  ye  may  believe  that  I  am  He  "  (ver.  19). 

I.  The  glorified  Son  of  man  must  depart. — 1.  After  the  traitor  had  gone 
forth  determined  on  his  awful  purpose,  events  would  move  with  startling  rapidity. 
Now  the  glorification  of  Jesus,  as  the  Son  of  man,  is  viewed  as  begun.  2.  For 
what  was  that  glory  ?  The  very  depth  of  His  voluntary  humiliation  was  being 
reached.  How  could  there  be  glory  in  that  ?  But  that  was  indeed  the  very 
period  of  His  greatest  glory  as  Emmanuel.  For  "  with  His  stripes  we  are 
healed."  His  sufferings  and  death  were  man's  redemption.  In  all,  His  love  to 
man  was  unmistakably  manifested — even  mercy  and  love  to  His  enemies. 
His  obedience  as  the  divine  Son  was  shown  before  all  worlds.  His  unswerving 
trust  in  the  love  of  the  Father,  and  His  deep,  unshaken  peace  shone  forth  in 

381 


chap.  xiii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


those  hours  of  trial  and  pain  with  transcendent  glory.  And  this  glory  of  self- 
sacrificing  love  had  just  been  seen  shining  conspicuously  in  that  humility  with 
which  He  had  washed  even  the  feet  of  Judas,  and  in  seeing  the  traitor  depart 
Unhindered  on  his  awful  errand.  3.  In  all  this  God  was  glorified  in  Jesus.  The 
glory  of  the  divine  character  is  conspicuous  in  this  wonderful  exhibition  of 
redeeming  love,  in  which  a  way  was  shown  by  which  "  He  might  be  just  and  the 
justifier  of  him  that  believeth  in  Jesus"  (Rom.  iii.  26).  It  was  God  who  "so 
loved  the  world,"  etc.  (iii.  16).  His  love  is  wonderful;  His  righteousness  and 
truth  are  manifest  to  all  in  this  amazing  work  of  redemption.  "  Behold  what 
manner  of  love,"  etc.  (1  John  iii.  1).  Thus  in  the  Son's  carrying  out  of  the 
divine  plan,  in  the  exercise  of  "a  love  which  many  waters  could  not  quench," 
the  Son  and  Father  were  together  glorified :  "  grace  and  truth  "  were  made 
manifest,  and  the  depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God 
conspicuously  declared  (Rom.  xi.  35).  4.  "  And  if  God  be  glorified  in  Him,  God 
shall  also,"  etc.  Not  only  does  Christ's  redeeming  work  redound  to  the  glory  of 
the  Father,  but  the  Father  also  would  glorify  Christ,  in  raising  Him  from  the 
dead,  and  setting  Him  on  His  throne  in  the  heavens,  in  the  outpouring  of  the 
Spirit  at  Pentecost  in  accordance  with  Christ's  promise,  and  in  putting  "  all 
things  under  His  feet."  Christ  must  go,  and  it  is  true  must  go  by  a  via  dolorosa 
whither  the  disciples  then  could  not  follow  Him — a  way  of  sorrow  and  suffering, 
which  is  yet  the  way  of  abounding  glory. 

II.  The  disciples  must  remain. — 1.  The  hour  was  approaching  when  the 
little  flock  must  be  scattered,  though  only  for  a  season.  But  they  must  needs 
be  prepared.  They  had  dreamed,  and  were  still  dreaming,  some  of  them,  of 
material  thrones  and  kingdoms.  The  rude  awakening  must  be  anticipated. 
2.  In  Christ's  absence  they  would  seek  Him.  Ah  !  how  earnestly,  as  we  see 
by  their  timid  gathering  together  (xx.  19) ;  by  the  return  homeward  of  at  least 
two  sad  at  heart  and  bankrupt  in  hope  (Luke  xxiv.  14,  17);  and  by  the  eager 
rush  to  the  sepulchre  on  the  resurrection  morning.  3.  "  Whither  I  go  ye  cannot 
come,"  etc.  (ver.  33).  They  could  not,  must  not,  follow  Him  then  by  the  way  of 
sorrow  to  glory ;  for  the  work's  sake  they  must  remain.  As  He  said  to  the  Jews : 
"  Ye  shall  seek  Me,"  etc.  But  He  did  not  say  what  He  further  said  to  the 
Jews  :  "  Ye  shall  not  find  Me."  For  not  only  is  it  ever  blessedly  true  that  those 
who  truly  seek  shall  surely  find  Him ;  ere  long  they  would  in  reality  see  Him 
again  (xiv.  19,  xvi.  16),  not  only  in  His  glorified  resurrection  body,  and  in  the 
fulfilment  of  His  promise  at  Pentecost,  but  when  they  should  be  called  into  His 
presence,  and  when  He  appeared  in  His  glory.  At  the  longest,  measured  in  the 
seons  of  eternity,  this  shall  be  "  but  a  little  while."  "  I  go,  but  ye  shall  remain 
to  carry  out  and  complete  My  work,  to  show  forth  My  truth,  to  walk  in  the 
light  of  My  example  as  obedient  children  of  the  heavenly  Father,  with  the  hope 
of  blessed  reunion  in  the  Father's  house."  To  unite  and  quicken  them  for 
their  work — 

III.  Jesus  gave  a  uniting  and  inspiring  principle  of  life  and  action  to  the 
disciples  in  the  new  commandment,  in  the  observance  of  which  they  might  follow 
Him.  1.  The  path  He  had  at  that  time  to  tread  He  must  truly  tread  alone 
(Isa.  lxiii.  3).  This  way  of  glory  should  yet  be  trodden  by  the  disciples ;  but  it 
would  be  on  the  path  of  obedience  to  this  new  commandment.  2.  Christ  was  to 
be  withdrawn  in  visible  presence ;  but  He  would  still  be  with  them  in  spirit,  and 
they  would  be  united  to  Him,  their  living  Head,  by  the  very  closest  bonds, 
through  the  spirit  of  mutual  love.  "  That  love  which  you  see  in  Me  to  youward, 
and  which  you  bear  to  Me,  let  it  be  expanded  toward  one  another,  so  that  it 
may  become  a  bond  of  union  and  communion,  uniting  you  to  one  another  as 
members  of  My  body"  (Eph.  i.  22,  23,  v.  25,  29,  30).  3.  Christ  calls  this  com- 
mandment a  new  commandment.     {Similar  command,  it  is  true,  had  been  given 

382 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  XIII. 


of  old  in  the  Mosaic  institutions.  But  it  had  not  the  same  vital  force,  because  it 
was  restricted  in  scope  and  motive.  Thus  we  are  prepared  to  find  that  it  had 
become  almost  a  dead  letter.  The  Rabbis  had  tortured  it  to  mean,  "  Thou  shalt 
love  thy  neighbour  and  hate  thine  enemy."  The  love  Christ  commands  has  a 
wider  sweep  ;  it  embraces  all  men.  He  pointed  the  Jew  to  the  hated  Samaritan 
even  as  his  neighbour  whom  he  should  love  (Luke  x.  36).  4.  But  here  it  is  the 
love  of  His  people  to  one  another  of  which  Christ  speaks,  not  so  much  the  love  of 
the  disciples  for  perishing  men  as  their  mutual  love.  The  natural  man  loves 
those  bound  to  him  by  ties  of  affection  and  kinship,  from  motives  of  esteem,  etc. 
Christians  love  the  brotherhood  for  Christ's  sake.  They  love  Him,  and  must  love 
those  whom  He  loves,  who  are  children  of  the  heavenly  Father,  temples  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  A  new  motive  for  this  mutual  love  has  been  given.  5.  The  object 
of  love  is  indeed  the  same.  It  is  men,  mortal  and  imperfect,  but  men  viewed 
in  a  different  relationship.  They  are  members  of  the  great  spiritual  family, 
"brethren  and  sisters  in  Christ."  Men  love  the  members  of  their  families 
naturally  more  than  strangers.  Much  more  should  members  of  the  great 
spiritual  family,  fellow-citizens  of  the  saints,  etc.,  show  to  each  other  a  deep, 
abiding  affection.  A  relationship  that  is  for  eternity  binds  them  together. 
Such  a  love  cannot  be  narrow  or  confined.  It  will  flow  beyond  the  bounds  of 
mutual  affection  and  pour  itself  forth  to  all  men,  like  Christ's  love  for  a  perishing 
world,  for  which  He  died.  6.  The  spirit  and  example  of  this  love  are  new.  "  Thou 
shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself  "  was  the  old  form.  But  no  such  wavering, 
imperfect  reflection  of  love  as  this  is  given  in  the  new  commandment.  "  As 
/  have  loved  you."  Here  is  the  new  and  glorious  prototype.  Think  of  His 
love  "  unspeakable,"  its  patience,  tenderness,  forbearance,  strength,  etc.  It  is 
an  example  which  will  suffice  for  eternity. 

IV.  The  observance  of  the  new  commandment  is  an  evidence  of  disciple - 
ship. — 1.  "  By  this  shall  men  know,"  etc.  It  is  a  test  by  which  disciples  may 
try  their  lives.  "  We  know,"  etc.  (1  John  ii.  3,  iii.  14).  2.  It  is  the  badge  of 
Christian  citizenship.  Men  are  proud  to  wear  the  badges  and  insignia  of  famous 
orders,  societies,  etc.,  to  which  they  may  belong.  The  loyal  soldier  is  not  ashamed 
of  his  uniform,  etc.  Religious  orders  have  their  special  garb,  etc.  But  the  true 
mark  of  Christian  discipleship  is  mutual  love.  The  world  soon  realised  that 
here  was  a  new  power.  3.  It  is  a  sign  of  Christian  brotherhood.  Just  as  the 
members  of  some  societies  recognise  each  other  by  a  sign  or  word,  etc.,  so 
members  of  the  society  of  believers  recognise  each  other,  or  should  do  so,  by  this 
mark  of  mutual  love.  4.  It  should  also  be  an  earnest  of  mutual  helpfulness. 
Genuine  Christian  affection  will  lead  to  prompt,  brotherly  helpfulness  ;  and  thus 
more  clearly  still  will  be  evidenced  true  discipleship  (1  John  iii.  17). 

Lessons. —  1.  Pure  love  on  earth  is  ever  new.  Its  songs  never  grow  old  or  cloy 
from  age  to  age.  It  is  a  living  fountain  from  which  streams,  ever  fresh,  flow 
out  to  bless  men.  It  is  so  because  it  manifests  the  same  unselfish,  self-sacrificing 
spirit  as  that  of  this  heavenly  commandment.  2.  So  this  mutual  love  of  Christ's 
disciples  should  be  a  never- failing  spring  of  blessing  for  men.  Yet  just  as  human 
love  is  marred  by  human  imperfection,  so  is  this.  3.  Still  what  infinite  possi- 
bilities lie  in  this  command,  nothing  less  than  making  earth  an  outer  court  of 
heaven,  and  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord,  etc.  4.  How 
far  are  Christians  from  its  perfect  observance  !  The  divisions,  jealousies,  sectarian 
rivalries,  of  Christendom  ought  to  humble  us.  How  can  Christian  men,  who  in 
everything  else  are  so  near  each  other,  stand  opposed  behind  some  trumpery 
ecclesiastical  or  other  barrier  ?  The  members  of  all  the  Churches  need  to  drink 
more  deeply  the  spirit  of  these  blessed  words,  to  pray  that  they  may  learn  to  love 
one  another  as  Christ  has  loved  them, 

383 


chap.  xiii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


Yer.  34.  The  new  commandment. — This  new  commandment  serves — 

I.  To  prove  our  love  to  God. — 1.  To  show  that  He  is  Lord  of  our  hearts 
(1  John  iv.  7,  8).  2.  If  we  discover  by  this  test  that  our  heart  is  loveless  toward 
our  brother,  then  we  learn  that  it  is  because  in  our  heart  there  is  no  real  love 
to  God,  and  that  we  have  not  understood  what  His  love  is. 

II.  It  also  leads  to  the  exercise  of  love  to  God. — 1.  God  is  invisible  to  us,  but 
has  given  a  visible  object  of  love  in  our  brother,  so  that  we  may  prove  through 
him  what  love  to  God  really  means  (1  John  iv.  20).  2.  Thus  we  are  able  through 
the  exercise  of  love  toward  the  brother  whom  we  see  to  advance  in  the  divine 
love  (1  John  iv.  12).  3.  This  seems  like  a  perversion  of  the  order  of  salvation, 
according  to  which  love  to  God  must  precede  love  of  the  brethren.  Yet  it  is  not. 
It  is  only  the  simple  way  of  education.  Men  who  are  religious  only  in  the 
natural  sense  recognise  the  force  of  the  command,  "  Thou  sbalt  love  thy 
neighbour,"  etc.  Let  them  exercise  this  love  genuinely ;  and  when  they  find 
how  unable  they  are  to  do  it  fully,  may  they  not  learn  to  begin,  as  all  love  to 
God  begins,  to  love  wistfully,  conscious  of  their  failure,  and  looking  in  longing 
to  Him  who  through  grace  brings  righteousness  to  the  transgressor  ?  And  if 
a  child  of  grace  desires  to  be  perfected  in  the  divine  love,  let  him  just  try 
whether  Christ's  promise  will  not  hold  good,  "If  ye  keep'  My  commandments, 
ye  shall  abide  in  My  love." 

III.  This  commandment  is  given  for  our  temporal  and  eternal  blessedness. — 
1.  This  is  not  merely  a  commandment  with  a  promise  of  reward  attached  thereto, 
but  it  is  in  itself  a  reward  of  highest  blessedness — to  love  and  be  loved,  loving 
fellowship  with  God,  and  loving  fellowship  in  God.  2.  When  we  learn  really 
to  love  as  brethren,  then  we  shall  find  our  happiness  and  prosperity  in  the 
happiness  and  prosperity  of  our  brethren.  In  loving  them  each  of  us  loves  a 
consecrated  ego.  3.  Then  this  true  wisdom  is  learned — to  consecrate  all  the 
powers  and  intelligence,  which  were  formerly  devoted  to  selfish  ends,  to  the  good 
of  our  fellows,  and  in  them  of  that  higher  and  divinely  consecrated  ego.  This 
is  what  our  Redeemer  taught ;  in  Him  we  see  how  men  should  love  one  another. 
We  should — this  is  His  new  commandment — "  love  one  another  as  He  has  loved 
us."  And  how  did  He  love  us  1  He  sought  His  glory  in  our  salvation.  So  has 
this  Friend  loved  us ;  His  blood  was  shed  forth  for  us  !  And  therefore  should 
we  learn  of  Him  to  love  our  brethren,  and  thus  love  and  seek  truly  our  own 
selves  and  our  highest  happiness.  4.  All  love  of  the  brethren  displays  itself  in 
this  :  it  does  not  wrong  them — it  ever  seeks  their  good.  And  this  it  does  in  the 
way  of  the  commandments  of  the  second  table  of  the  law.  u  Love  worketh  no  ill," 
etc.,  but  ever  shows  itself  in  acts  of  kindness  to  the  brethren  done  by  us,  and  in 
guarding  ourselves  from  doing  them  wrong — 

(1)  In  their  life — the  sixth  commandment; 

(2)  In  their  other  selves — the  seventh  commandment ; 

(3)  In  their  possessions — the  eighth  commandment ; 

(4)  In  their  good  name — the  ninth  commandment ;  and 

(5)  From  the  inner  depths  of  our  being — the  tenth  commandment. 

From  Th.  Wunderling  {Moravian). 

Yers.  34,  35.  The  ruling  spirit  of  Christian  citizenship. — Citizens  keep  the  laws 
of  their  country  from  various  motives.  The  majority,  and  the  best  part  of 
the  people,  keep  those  laws  because  they  see  that  they  are  conducive  to  the 
country's  social  and  material  welfare,  and  thus  to  their  own.  Others,  however, 
who  do  not  feel  bound  by  any  moral  or  social  restraint,  who  consider  first 
and  foremost  only  their  own  fancied  interests  and  pleasures,  would  often  trans- 
gress their  country's  laws,  were  it  not  that  the  fear  of  punishment  restrained 
them.      And  some,   disregarding  this,   with  hope  that  they  may  escape  the 

384 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xm. 


penalty,  break  those  laws  perpetually.  Self-interest,  it  may  be  said,  rules  in 
the  kingdoms  of  the  world.  It  is  far  otherwise  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ. 
In  it  there  is  a  constraining  and  ruling  spirit  which  inspires  its  government, 
and  is  the  motive  power  in  the  lives  of  its  citizens,  leading  them  to  honour 
and  obey  its  King. 

I.  Christ  rules  in  love. — 1.  Love  is  the  eternal  law  and  spirit  of  His  kingdom. 
All  its  manifestations  are  founded  on  love.  Love  to  the  world  underlies  the 
sending  of  the  Son ;  love  to  men  brought  the  Son,  who  "  loved  us  and  gave 
Himself  for  us,"  down  to  earth.  2.  God  indeed  loves  His  people  with  an  ever- 
lasting love  (Jer.  xxxi.  3).  So,  too,  His  people  are  in  Christ  under  the  reign  of 
love  :  nothing  can  separate  them  from  it.  Every  day  confirms  it,  every  blessing 
proclaims  it.  Our  whole  life  is  encompassed  by  it.  3.  See  how  His  love 
forbears  with  us  ;  how  patiently  He  deals  with  us  ;  how  faithfully  He  chastens ; 
how  constantly  He  helps  in  every  time  of  need ;  and  thus  how  gloriously  His 
high -priestly  prayer  hath  been  answered :  "  I  have  declared  unto  them  Thy 
name,  and  will  declare  it  j  that  the  love  wherewith  Thou  hast  loved  Me  may  be 
in,  them  ;  and  I  in  them  "  (xvii.  26). 

II.  Love  to  Christ  leads  to  loving  obedience  of  Him. — 1.  "  He  that  hath  My 
commandments,"  etc.  (xiv.  21),  said  our  Lord.  And  the  apostle  echoes  his 
Master's  words  when  he  writes,  "  This  is  the  love  of  God,"  etc.  (1  John  v.  3). 
"  Without  love  obedience  is  impossible  "  (xiv.  24) ;  "  for  love  is  the  outcome  of 
the  renewed  nature  which  comes  through  faith  in  Christ."  2.  Love  reigning 
within  shows  a  heart  and  will  in  unison  with  Christ.  The  same  mind  that  was 
in  Him  dwells  in  those  who  love  Him.  Thus  obedience  becomes  spontaneous 
and  joyful.  The  nearer  men  rise  toward  Christ's  likeness,  the  more  His  love  is 
shed  abroad  in  their  hearts,  the  more  will  they  be  led  to  pray,  and  seek  to  do  His 
will  in  all  things. 

"  Take  my  life,  and  let  it  be 
Consecrated,  Lord,  to  Thee." 

3.  Who  indeed  is  more  worthy  of  our  supreme  love  and  unwavering  obedience  ? 
The  more  we  know  of  Him — His  wisdom,  love,  power — the  more  we  experience 
His  gracious  dealings,  the  more  we  realise  the  sweetness  of  His  yoke  which  is 
so  easy  and  His  burden  which  is  so  light,  the  more  shall  we  be  grieved  when  we 
neglect  His  commands  and  fall  into  sin.  And  when  we  realise  all  the  misery 
and  slavery  of  sin,  and  the  freedom  and  peace  of  His  kingdom,  we  shall  be  led 
ever  to  cry,  more  and  more,  "  Give  me  Thy  easy  yoke  to  bear." 

III.  The  test  of  love  and  obedience  to  our  spiritual  King  is  love  to  the 
brethren  and  to  those  for  whom  Christ  died. — 1.  "  A  new  commandment  I  give 
unto  you,  that  ye  love  one  another,"  etc.  (xiii.  34),  was  one  of  the  parting 
exhortations  of  our  Lord  to  His  disciples.  And  is  it  not  neglect  of  this  com- 
mand that  has  hindered  and  is  hindering  the  advance  of  Christ's  kingdom? 
2.  To  what  grace  are  Christians  more  earnestly  urged  in  the  New  Testament 
than  this  ?  and  yet  what  grace  is  frequently  more  conspicuously  absent  ?  Would 
there  be  the  wranglings,  jealousies,  divisions,  that  now  exist  in  Christ's  Church, 
His  spiritual  kingdom  on  earth,  even  among  good  men,  over  "  trifles  light  as 
air,"  were  the  love  of  Christ  perfected  in  us  1  3.  Would  we  see  so  many 
Christians  grasping,  worldly,  bent  on  the  pleasures  and  pursuits  of  time,  almost 
to  the  exclusion  of  everything  else,  did  more  of  the  spirit  and  love  of  Christ 
animate  them  ?  To  how  many  does  the  love  of  Christ  mean  no  more  than  a 
languid  attendance  at  a  Sabbath  service,  followed  by  a  constant  devotion  all  the 
week  to  the  world,  the  flesh,  or  the  devil — or  all  three  ?  4.  Love  prompted  the 
Redeemer  to  leave  the  heavenly  glory,  to  live  among  men,  despised  and  rejected, 
to  die  upon  the  cross,  that  He  might  bring  salvation  within  reach  of  all.  And 
He  has  confided  to  His  people  the  glorious  work  of  making  that  salvation  known 

cc  385 


chap.  xiii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


to  perishing  men.  And,  lo  !  those  who  call  themselves  His  people  sit  at  ease  in 
Zion  for  the  most  part,  and  never  dream  of  sacrificing  a  farthing's  worth  of  com- 
fort for  that  great  cause  for  which  Christ  died.  He  shed  His  blood — gave  His  life. 
They  give,  often  with  grudging  hand,  what  can  well  be  spared,  and  cast  away  on 
trifles  or  doubtful  pleasures  what  might  go  to  swell  many  a  living  rill  for 
refreshing  the  spiritually  thirsty  and  weary  tribes  of  earth.  Is  this  love  ?  Is 
this  obeying  the  command,  "As  I  have  loved  you  .  .  .  love  one  another"? 
5.  Back  to  the  Christ  of  the  Gospels,  is  a  modern  cry.  But  the  Christ  of  the 
Gospels  is  the  Christ  of  the  New  Testament — of  Paul  and  John  as  well  as  of 
Matthew  and  Luke.  And  the  reigning  feature  of  His  kingdom  all  through  is 
this  of  love.  Yes,  back  to  Christ — back  from  ecclesiastical  wranglings,  from 
theological  strifes,  from  hazy  secularistic  and  socialistic  dreamings — back  to 
learn  of  Him,  to  be  inspired  by  His  Spirit,  to  be  filled  with  His  love ;  and  then 
a  willing  and  obedient  people  shall  show  forth  His  praise,  and  seek  to  extend  His 
blessed  kingdom  of  truth  and  love. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  34.  "  A  new  commandment"  etc. — This 
solemn  testament  our  Lord  left  in  His  part- 
ing words  for  all  who  should  be  His  disciples. 
But  is  this  commandment  of  love  in  reality 
a  new  commandment  ?  Is  it  not  a  very 
ancient  command,  as  old  as  the  world  ?  Had 
not  the  fratricide  Cain  to  bear  about  this 
commandment,  written  as  if  with  blazing 
letters  on  his  despairing  heart,  as  he  went 
about  restless  and  a  fugitive  on  the  earth 
after  his  bloody  crime  ?  Did  not  the 
patriarch  Abraham  already  understand  this 
commandment,  and  practise  it,  as  he  spoke 
to  his  cousin  Lot  with  such  noble  broth erli- 
ness,  "  If  thou  wilt  go  to  the  left,  I  will  go  to 
the  right ;  or  if  thou  wilt  go  to  the  right,  1  will 
go  to  the  left,"  and  as  he  prayed  to  the  Lord  in 
such  heartfelt  pity  for  lost  Sodom  ?  Do  not 
the  ten  commandments  which  Israel  received 
at  Sinai  come  to  this  sum  of  the  whole, 
"  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  above  all, 
and  thy  neighbour  as  thyself  "  1  Do  we  not 
see  in  a  David  an  example  of  love  to  friend 
and  foe,  when  we  view  his  friendship  with 
Jonathan  and  his  nobleness  toward  his 
deadly  foe  Saul  ?  Have  not  even  the  heathen 
understood  and  practised  this  command- 
ment ?  What  a  beautiful  example  of  the 
love  of  a  child  was  that  of  the  Athenian 
hero  Cimon  for  his  imprisoned  father  !  What 
a  touching  example  of  the  love  of  friends  do 
Damon  and  Pythias  give  us,  whose  faithful- 
ness endured  even  at  the  scaffold,  and  which 
Schiller  has  sung  in  his  poem  The  Surety- 
ship !  What  a  noble  pattern  of  human 
love  did  the  Koman  Emperor  Titus  give, 
who  held  that  every  day  in  his  life  was  lost 
in  which  he  had  done  good  to  no  one  I 
What  glorious  deeds  of  the  love  of  father- 
land are  related  to  us  of  a  Leonidas,  a 
Regulus,  and  so  many  other  Greek  and 
Eoman  heroes,  who  freely  gave  up  their  lives 
for  the  common  weal !    And  yet  the  Founder 

386 


of  our  faith  calls  it  a  new  commandment, 
that  His  disciples  should  love  one  another. 
And  truly  it  was  a  new  commandment  in 
His  mouth  ;  it  has  received  an  entirely  new 
signification  in  His  kingdom.     Now  for  the 
first  time  this  commandment  of  love  has  been 
placed   on  its  true  eternal  basis,  when  we 
learn   from   the   New    Testament   of    Jesus 
Christ  that  God  is  love.      Now  for  the  first 
time  has  it  reached  its  highest  degree,  since 
there  is  given  us  a  type  of  the  purest  and 
greatest   love   in   Him   who   loved  us  unto 
death,  and  who  says  to  us,  "  A  new  command- 
ment. .  .  .  As  I  have  loved  you."    Now  it  is 
referred  to  the  whole  wide  field  of  its  in- 
fluence, since  we  have  learned  that  all  men 
are  our  brethren,  and  none  need  now  ask, 
"  Who  is  my  neighbour  ? "     And  now  first 
could  this  command  be  received  in  its  real 
power  through  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  which  is 
a  Spirit  of  humility  and  meekness,  of  love 
and  peace.    Now  first   has  this  command- 
ment been  accorded  its  rightful  position  as 
the  sum  of  all  the  others — the  royal  com- 
mandment   of    love.       In    short,     beloved, 
through  Christ  this  command  of  love  has 
first  become  truly  difficult,  and  through  Him 
also  it  has  first  become  easy.     Therefore  did 
He  rightly  say.  "  A  new  commandment"  etc. 
And  say,  is  it  not  in  truth  to   us  also  ever 
new  ?     Ah,  how  many  who  call  themselves 
Christians  understand  this  commandment  so 
little  that  one  might  think  they  had  never 
heard  of  it,  as  if  it  were  entirely  new  to 
them  !    And  even  among  those  of  us  who 
understand  and  observe  it,  need  we  not  to 
have  it  ever  anew  held  up  before  us,  lest  our 
love  should  grow  cold  ?    Need  we  not  every 
day  again  to  learn,  again  to  practise  it,  and 
cannot  perfectly  fulfil?   but  we  dare  never 
neglect    it,   because  in  this  command    all 
Christian  duties  are  included,  because  love 
is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law.      Says  Luther : 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xiii. 


"  The  commandment  of  love  is  a  short  com- 
mand and  a  long  command  :  a  single  com- 
mandment, and  yet  many  commandments;  no 
commandment,  and  yet  all  commandments : 
it  annuls  all  the  commandments,  and  yet  it 
establishes  them  all." — Translated  from  Karl 
Gerok. 

Ver.  34.  Ministering  love  the  highest 
service. — Behold,  then,  from  the  first  be- 
ginning, from  the  first  turning  of  the 
heart  to  the  Redeemer,  until  the  joyful 
departure  from  this  world,  nothing  avails 
but  this  communicating  and  ministering  love 
in  its  winning  and  self-sacrificing  nature ! 
This  it  is  with  which  the  Redeemer  embraces 
the  world — this  in  which  we  should  love 
one  another.  If  any  man  should  say  aught 
else  concerning  the  Christian  Church,  believe 
it  not  1  Does  any  one  say  that  there  are 
human  laws  which  belong  to  it,  then  answer 
that  the  Son  of  God  is  come  to  free  us  from 


the  bondage  of  merely  human  ordinances,  so 
that  we  might  receive  the  gift  of  adoption. 
Does  any  one  say  a  confession  belongs  to  it, 
this  or  that  custom,  then  reply,  the  Re- 
deemer said,  "  I  give  you  a  commandment, 
that  ye  should  love  one  another  with  that 
love  wherewith  I  have  loved  you."  And  if  it 
is  answered  that  in  this  fashion  the  Christian 
Church  would  be  something  which  could  not 
be  laid  hold  of,  which  can  be  kept  to  nothing, 
so  that  one  would  not  know  where  she  is, 
where  she  began,  where  she  will  end — then 
say  :  Thus  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the 
Spirit ;  ye  know  not  whence  He  comes  and 
whither  He  goes  ;  ye  hear  His  breathing. 
Well  for  you  when  you  understand  this ; 
well  for  you  when  your  own  life  is  encom- 
passed by  this  breathing  of  the  Spirit ;  well 
for  you  when  also  through  you  the  words  of 
eternal  life  become  spirit  and  life  for  the 
race  of  men. — Translated  from  F.  Schleier- 
macher. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF   THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  36—38. 

The  self-confident  apostle :  "  Let  him  that  thinheth  he  standeth  take  heed." 
— The  man  who  spoke  here  so  confidently  was  Simon  son  of  Jona,  not 
Peter,  the  Rock.  He  was  still  the  impulsive  fisherman  of  Galilee,  still  slow 
of  heart  to  believe  all  that  was  written  in  the  prophets,  etc.,  concerning  Christ. 
He  was  to  learn  by  sad  experience  to  forego  for  ever  that  self-trust  and  to  put 
his  trust  in  the  Saviour.  To  strengthen  his  faith  the  Redeemer  foretold  him  of 
what  would  happen  ;  for  the  remembrance  of  this  and  of  the  kind  and  gracious 
words,  "  Thou  shalt  follow  Me  afterward,"  "  I  have  prayed  for  thee,  that  thy 
faith  fail  not  "  (Luke  xxii.  32),  would  keep  the  apostle  from  falling  into  Judas- 
like despair. 

I.  The  impatience  of  Peter. — 1.  The  apostle  was  not  content  to  receive  our 
Lord's  words  with  implicit  trust  in  His  wisdom  and  love.  Where  will  his  Master 
go  that  they  cannot  follow  Him  1  Had  they  not  the  promise  that  He  would 
appoint  the  disciples  a  kingdom,  that  they  should  sit  on  thrones  (Luke  xxii.  29)  1 
2.  Our  Lord's  gentle  reply  only  increased  the  apostle's  impatience.  Afterwards  ! 
Why  not  now  1  Why  wait  for  some  to-morrow  when  we  have  to-day  ?  The 
apostle  in  this  is  a  type  of  many.  They  would  be  men  before  they  are  prepared 
for  the  work  of  life.  They  would  clutch  at  joy  to-day,  would  seek  to  leap  to  the 
summit  in  place  of  slowly  toiling  upward,  or  waiting  till  the  means  of  transit  are 
ready.  3.  Peter  was  not  yet  ready  to  follow  Christ.  Christ  must  first  do  His 
work  for  him  on  the  bitter  cross,  and  in  him  by  the  Galilean  lake  and  at 
Pentecost,  ere  the  impatient  apostle  could  be  fitted  to  follow  Him.  So  may 
Christian  men  who  are  impatient  to  enter  on  such  and  such  work,  or  to  occupy 
some  other  position,  learn  not  to  fret  impatiently  that  their  prayers  are  not  at 
once  answered.  The  Lord  will  prepare  us  to  follow  Him,  if  we  are  His,  in  His 
own  time  and  way.  Peter  had  a  glorious  work  to  do,  far  other  than  he  thought. 
So  may  we  have.     Let  us  rest  trustingly  on  the  divine  wisdom  and  love. 

II.  Peter's  rash  self-confidence. — 1.  "  I  will  lay  down  my  life,"  etc.  Here 
he  showed  his  want  of  true  self-knowledge.  He  over-estimated  greatly  his  own 
strength.  The  others  may  fail — he  will  not.  However  dark  the  way  Christ  has 
to  tread  he  will  follow,  even  though  it  should  be  to  death.  Had  he  not  come 
with  the  Master  to  Judaea  in  face  of  danger  (xi.  16)  ?     No,  he  will  not  fail. 

387 


chap.  xiii.        H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


2.  What  must  have  been  his  thoughts  then  when  Jesus  spoke  solemnly,  "  Verily, 
verily,  /  say  unto  thee,"  etc. — /,  whom  you  believe  to  be  the  Son  of  God  ?  Did 
he  say  in  his  heart,  "  Is  thy  servant  a  dog,"  etc.  ?  At  all  events  his  voice  led  in 
the  asseveration  of  all  the  disciples.  "  Though  I  should  die  with  Thee,"  etc. 
(Matt.  xxvi.  35).     3.   "  What  the  song  says  with  fine  sentiment, 

'  If  all  should  be  unfaithful, 
Yet  I'll  to  Thee  be  true,' 

is  in  Simon's  style,  not  in  Peter's,  and  must  have  been  composed  before  the 
hour  of  trial "  (Besser).  Men  need  a  stronger  arm  than  their  own  to  lean  upon 
in  this  world  of  trial  and  temptation.  "Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth 
take  heed  "  ;   "  Watch  and  pray,"  etc. 

III.  Peter's  ardent  love  and  zealous  devotion. — 1.  The  apostle,  though  weakly 
over-confident,  was  really  devoted  to  the  Redeemer,  and  at  the  moment  meant 
what  he  said.  He  believed  Jesus  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  and  was  willing  to  bring 
Him  the  highest  offering  in  his  power — his  life.  2.  And  the  Lord  received  the 
imperfect  offering,  and  blessed  him  with  the  promise,  "Thou  shalt  follow  Me 
afterward  "  (xxi.  18,  19).  3.  Like  love  and  devotion  will  be  followed  by  like 
promises.  Let  but  our  love  and  zeal  in  Christ's  service  be  genuine,  and  we  too 
shall  be  strengthened  in  weakness  like  Peter,  and  be  enabled  also,  though  far  off, 
to  follow  Christ  through  life  and  in  death. 


ILLUSTRATION. 


Ver.  37.  The  folly  of  over-self-confidence. 
— Even  the  best  should  not  think  them selves 
absolved  from  the  duty  of  self-examina- 
tion, for  even  the  best  are  not  clean,  the 
best  cannot  be  certain  of  themselves.  Even 
a  John  dare  not  be  confident  overmuch, 
even  a  Peter  has  his  hours  of  weakness,  a 
Nathanael  his  spots,  a  Paul  glories  not  as  if 
he  had  attained,  and  a  Demas  can  again 
love  this  present  world.  Therefore  genuine 
disciples  of  the  Lord  must  ever  be  on  their 
guard,  must  ever  watch,  ever  prove  them- 
selves and  ask,  "  Lord,  is  it  I  "  whom  Thou 
dost  charge  ?  And  for  such  earnest  self- 
examination  the  Lord's  Supper  gives  a  special 
opportunity  ;  there  ought  to  be  true  friends 
of  Jesus  around  Him,  there  He  will  give  us 
of  the  best  that  He  has  for  us.  No  un- 
worthy one  should  be  there,  no  foe,  no 
traitor,  not  even  one  who  is  indifferent. 
And  even  the  best  should  there  look  within 
and  ask,  M  Lord,  is  it  I  ? "  hast  Thou  aught 


against  me  ?  .  .  .  When  you  ask  your  own 
hearts,  you  will  not  do  it  thoroughly.  The 
answer  will  be  quickly  forthcoming,  No,  it 
is  not  thee  ;  thou  art  no  Judas,  no  betrayer 
of  the  Master;  thou  art  a  good  Christian, 
better  perhaps  than  many  hundreds  of 
others,  an  honest  citizen,  a  skilful  workman, 
a  diligent  housewife  ;  thou  canst  hold  up  thy 
head  before  God  and  men.  And  when  you 
ask  men,  there  also  you  will  get  no  reliable 
judgment.  Your  names  may  stand  well  in 
the  world,  your  walk  may  be  blameless. 
The  world  will  speak  well  of  you  if  you  will 
of  it.  Its  balances  are  other  than  those  of 
the  high  and  holy  places.  So  many  are  self- 
deceived  their  whole  life  long,  are  their  own 
eulogists,  have  the  best  of  witnesses  as  to 
their  good  name  in  the  world  ;  and  behold  ! 
when  they  reach  eternity  those  witnesses 
are  of  no  avail,  and  their  calculations  are 
found  to  be  false. — Karl  Gerok,  "  Predigt." 


388 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  XIV. 


PAET   V.    (b.) 

1.  The  perplexity  of  the  disciples  in  view  of  our  Lord  going  away,  and  the 
consoling  promise  of  Jesus  (vers.  1-4). 

2.  The  question  of  Thomas  as  to  the  way,  and  the  affirmation  of  Jesus  that 
He  is  the  way  to  the  Father,  etc.  (vers.  5-7). 

3.  The  demand  of  Philip  for  a  divine  vision,  and  the  affirmation  of  Jesus  as  to 
His  essential  oneness  with  the  Father  manifested  by  His  works.  His  promise 
that  He  will  be  with  the  disciples,  answering  prayer  in  His  name,  and  enabling 
them  to  do  greater  works  that  the  Father  may  be  glorified  in  Him  (vers.  8-14). 

4.  The  gift  of  the  Faraclete  (vers.  15-17),  through  whom  the  Father  and  Son 
will  dwell  with  believers  (vers.  18-21). 

5.  The  question  of  Judas  (not  Iscariot)  as  to  the  manner  in  which  Christ  will 
manifest  Himself  to  the  disciples  and  not  to  the  world.  The  reply  of  our  Lord 
that  love  to  Him  is  necessary  ere  there  can  be  such  manifestation.  And  to 
those  who  love  Him  will  be  accorded  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  Christ's 
own  peace  to  cheer  them  in  time  of  trouble  (vers.  22-31). 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

EXPLANATORY  AND  CRITICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  The  discourse  begun  at  xiii.  31  is  here  continued.  Here  our  Lord  not  merely 
answers  fully  Peter's  question,  "  Whither  goest  Thou  ? "  (xiii.  36),  but  speaks  much  needed 
words  of  comfort.  Mr)  rapaaaiado),  k.t.\.,  "  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,"  etc.,  should  be 
compared  with  'Irjaovs  irapdx^v  T<?  vvefifULTi  of  xiii.  21.  He  was  troubled  that  they  might 
have  peace.  "  From  this  point  onwards,  the  form  of  instruction  properly  so  called  prevails  ; 
Jesus  transports  Himself  in  thought  to  the  period  when  the  promised  reunion  will  be 
realised,  and  glances  from  this  point  of  view  at  the  future  career  of  His  apostles  in  the  midst 
of  a  hostile  world  to  be  saved"  (xv.  1 — xvi.  15)  (Godet).  Tn.are<jere. — Believe,  imperative, 
like  the  second  71-10-7  etfere.  It  was  want  of  faith  that  caused  their  despondency.  Therefore 
Jesus  says,  Look  up  in  confidence  to  God ;  remember  all  that  He  is.  "  Believe  also  in  Me." 
You  know  Me  :  can  you  not  therefore  trust  Me  ? 

Ver.  2.  In  My  Father's  house,  etc. — This  is  a  reason  for  their  confidence  in  God.  He  is  a 
Father,  and  the  Father's  house  is  no  limited  dwelling,  but  a  house  of  "  many  mansions," 
fiovai  TroWai.  The  antitype  of  the  oIkos  rod  warpos  /ulov  (ii.  16).  Comp.  also  Ezek.  xliii., 
Rev.  xxi.,  Matt.  xxv.  34.  /xoval  =  abiding  dwelling-places,  or  resting-places.  Many. — iroXXal, 
does  not  denote  variety,  i.e.  conditions  of  differing  degrees  of  glory,  but  refers  to  the  number 
of  those  dwellings.  There  will  be  room  for  all  (x.  16),  and  therefore  for  those  troubled  ones. 
Does  not  our  Lord  refer,  perhaps,  to  the  multiplicity  of  worlds  in  His  universe,  throughout 
space  ?  We  might  well  suppose  that  He  pointed  them  to  the  starry  sky.  No  doubt,  when 
supper  was  ended,  they  passed  from  the  upper  chamber  on  to  the  flat  roof,  and  there  rested 
in  the  falling  twilight,  ready  to  go  forth  to  Gethsemane.  If  it  were  not  so,  etc. — If  they 
could  not  have  followed  Him  He  would  not  have  buoyed  them  up  with  false  hopes.  One 
reason  indeed  why  He  told  them  this  was  because  (6'rt  in  best  MSS.)  I  am  going  to  prepare 
a  place,  etc. — "Here  it  is  that  faith  in  Jesus  comes  in  as  the  complement  of  faith  in  the 
Father.  He  is  their  irpodpofios,  their  forerunner  in  heaven"  (Heb.  vi.  20)  (Godet).  The 
interrogative  "  Would  I  have  told  you  1  "  is  not  admissible,  for  there  is  no  previous 
reference  to  which  the  clause  would  point. 

Ver.  3.  And  if  I  shall  go,  etc. — This  does  not  express  uncertainty.  "The  fact  that  He 
goes  away  to  realise  for  them  the  kingdom  of  God,  i.e.  that  His  going  away  is  for  them  such 
a  realisation,  forms  the  presupposition  (idv,  if)  of  His  return  to  receive  His  own  '  into  His 
kingdom ' "  (Luthardt).    Whether  ko.1,  and,  be  omitted  or  not,  the  sense  is  the  same.    I  am 

389 


CHAP.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ;    ST.  JOHN. 


coming  again. — Even  if  this  clause  does  not  refer  primarily  to  our  Lord's  second  coming,  it 
includes  a  reference  to  that  event.  It  must  evidently  be  connected  with  Rev.  xxii.  7,  12,  20, 
and  i.  8.  He  is  ever  coming  until  the  end — in  His  resurrection  glory,  by  His  Spirit  at 
Pentecost,  in  judgment  on  the  nations.  All  these  lead  up  to  His  final  appearing.  And 
shall  receive  you  unto  Myself,  etc. — Whether  in  death,  as  He  received  His  martyred  servant 
(Acts  vii.  56) ;  or  those  who  are  alive  and  remain  when  He  comes  to  judgment 
(1  Thess.  iv.  17). 

Ver.  4.  And  whither  (or  where)  I  go  ye  know  the  way. — The  meaning  is  virtually  the 
same  as  that  of  the  T.  R.  The  K  whither  "  includes  the  end  of  the  way  and  the  Father's 
house. 

Vers.  5-7.  These  verses  include  the  question  of  Thomas  and  the  answer  of  our  Lord.  "  The 
first  conversation  occasioned  by  the  question  of  Peter  (xiii.  36,  37)  had  turned  upon  the  final 
reunion,  the  end.  The  second,  called  forth  by  the  question  of  Thomas,  turned  rather  on  the 
ability  of  Jesus  to  bring  them  to  the  end  upon  the  way  "  (Godet). 

Ver.  6.  In  His  answer,  by  substituting  the  Father  for  the  Father's  house,  Jesus  sought  to 
make  the  end  of  the  way  more  clear.  Heaven  is  the  divine  presence.  I  am  the  way,  the 
truth,  and  the  life. — The  end  of  their  hopes  and  aspirations  being  the  Father,  it  would  be  at 
once  evident  that  Jesus  must  be  the  way.  As  the  incarnate  Word  He  is  the  uniting  bond 
between  men  and  God.  Through  Him  and  in  His  mediatorial  office  we  have  access  to  the 
Father.  And  this  men  attain  by  accepting  His  truth  and  Him  as  the  truth — by  coming  to 
Him  for  spiritual  life,  and  participating  in  that  life  by  union  and  communion  with  Him.  No 
man  cometh,  etc. — "  He  brings  to  the  goal,  and  He  alone,  because  He  and  He  alone  is  and 
bears  in  Himself  the  essential  revelation  of  God,  and  the  blessing  of  the  essential  divine 
fellowship  "  (Luthardt). 

Ver.  7.  If  ye  had  known  Me,  etc. — By  most  expositors  the  emphasis  is  placed  on  known; 
but  there  seems  to  be  some  justification  for  the  reading  eyvuKare  e>^,  with  K,  D,  i.e.  "If  ye 
have  known  Me,  ye  shall  know  My  Father  also."  Comp.  with  ver.  9,  where  the  emphasis  is 
certainly  on  I  and  Me.  hit  apri,  from  henceforth. — Now  and  henceforth  they  would  more 
fully  know  and  understand  Him.  Their  true  knowledge  of  Him  would  now  begin,  and  never 
again  be  entirely  obliterated.  From  that  night's  communications  and  proceedings  they 
would  begin  to  understand  the  true  relation  in  which  He  stood  to  the  Father. 

Vers.  8-21.  The  request  of  Philip  and  the  response  of  Jesus.  —  Philip,  catching  at  the  word 
ewpd/care  (seen),  misapprehended  its  meaning,  and  thought  of  some  theophany,  some  mani- 
festation of  the  glory  of  God.     This  would  suffice  them,  would  remove  their  anxiety. 

Ver.  9.  The  Lord's  answer  is  that  He  is  the  revelation  of  the  Father,  in  Him  alone  is  the 
Father  revealed.  There  is  sadness  in  the  words  in  which  He  recalls  the  fact  that  Philip 
had  been  a  disciple  almost  from  the  beginning,  and  yet  the  disciple  did  not  understand 
Him  !  Compassionate,  pitying  love  speaks  in  these  words.  Seen  the  Father. — I.e%  as  the 
Father  can  be  seen  in  His  wisdom,  holiness,  goodness,  truth,  etc.  "  Not  that  I  am  both 
Father  and  Son  (the  error  of  the  Patripassians  and  Noetians  and  Sabellians),  but  because 
the  Son  is  coequal  wTith  the  Father  "  (Augustine  in  Wordsworth's  Greek  Testament). 

Ver.  10.  ov  Trto-reueis. — Believest  thou  not  from  all  thou  hast  heard  and  seen  (x.  38)  that 
there  must  be  an  intimate  indwelling  of  Me  in  the  Father  and  of  the  Father  in  Me  ?  This 
is,  as  Luthardt  says,  "  a  relation  of  unconditioned  communion."  "  The  first  sign  of 
community  of  life  and  action  between  Jesus  and  God,  to  prepared  hearts,  is  His  teaching ; 
to  those  who  are  not  so  well  disposed,  it  is  His  works"  (Godet).  ttoicT  to,  gpya  airov 
(5<,  B,  D). — Doeth  His  own  works.  This  is  proof  not  only  of  the  mutual  indwelling  of  Father 
and  Son,  but  of  the  loving  willingness  of  the  Son  in  our  redemption  to  carry  out  the  Father's 
will.  "  There  is  room  for  hesitation  between  the  readings  Xa\u)  and  X^yw  in  the  first  clause 
of  the  sentence.  In  the  second  the  term  XaXw  is  in  any  case  perfectly  suitable.  .  .  .  God 
says  ;  Jesus  declares  "  (Godet). 

Ver.  11.  Or  else,  etc. — So  x.  37,  38.  His  miracles  are  an  objective  proof  not  only  confirming, 
but,  in  the  case  of  those  whom  prejudice,  etc.,  had  blinded,  going  beyond  His  words.  But  they 
are  a  powerful  testimony  to  all,  especially  when  we  include  miracles  of  spiritual  healing,  etc. 

Ver.  12.  Whilst  still  answering  Philip's  request  Jesus  now  addresses  again  all  the  disciples, 
in  His  answer  leading  them  back  to  the  interrupted  discourse.  Verily,  etc. — The  expression 
used  when  He  calls  attention  to  some  deeper  aspect  of  truth.  He  that  believeth,  etc. — 
These  works  the  disciples  were  enabled  to  do  (Acts  iii.  1-10,  etc.)  "in  the  name  of 
Jesus."  The  greater  works  refer  to  the  marvellous  effects  of  their  activity  after  the  out- 
pouring of  the  Spirit.  Few  had  been  attracted  by  our  Lord's  ministry  ;  but  under  the 
ministry  of  the  Pentecostally  gifted  apostles  spiritual  and  moral  miracles  abounded.  "  Every 
revival  of  a  truly  religious  spirit  has  been  an  instance  of  (the  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy) ; 
every  mission  field  has  been  a  witness  to  it "  ( Watkins).  The  works  were  greater  because 
they  were  of  a  higher,  a  spiritual  order.  In  them  are  fulfilled  such  glorious  promises  as 
those  of  Isa.  lx.  Because  I  go  unto  the  Father.— His  exaltation  will  be  the  signal  of  an 
accession  of  power  to  the  disciples,  enabling  them  to  do  these  greater  works.    They  are 

390 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.        chap.  XIV. 


still  from  Him.  On  earth  He  began  to  do  and  teach  (Acts  i.  1);  in  heaven  He  continues 
to  do  so. 

Ver.  13,  14.  In  My  name,  etc. — "I  think  we  must  hold  by  the  explanation  of  Hengstenberg, 
Keil,  Westcott  (with  shades  of  difference)  :  asking  a  thing  from  God  as  Father  on  the 
foundation  of  the  revelation  which  Jesus  has  given  of  Himself  and  of  His  work  ;  or,  as  Keil 
says,  '  while  immersed  through  faith  in  the  knowledge  which  we  have  received  from  Him 
as  the  Son  of  God  humbled  and  glorified.'  This  meaning  corresponds  with  that  of  the  term 
name  in  Scripture,  for  the  name  sums  up  the  knowledge  we  have  of  a  being ;  it  is  the 
reflection  of  Him  in  our  thought  "  (Godet).  I  will  do  it. — A  proof  of  the  unity  of  mind  and 
action  between  Father  and  Son. 

Ver.  15.  Keep  My  commandment. — "  Ask  in  My  name.  Keep  My,"  etc.  These  go  together. 
We  can  only  truly  pray  in  His  name  when  we  keep,  etc. 

Ver.  16.  £y&  ipojTTjcu. — The  pronoun  is  emphatic.  The  verb  ipwrav  is  that  especially  used 
by  our  Lord  in  reference  to  His  prayers  to  the  Father  (xvi.  26,  xvii.  9,  xv.  20).  Tt  expresses 
perhaps  a  greater  degree  of  nearness  and  familiarity  of  approach  than  airita,  I  ask.  &X\ov 
UapaKXrjTov,  k.t.X.,  another  Comforter. — The  classical  meaning  of  the  word  is  certainly 
advocate.  It  is  used  of  our  Lord  Himself  in  this  sense  in  1  John  ii.  1.  "  Its  passive  form 
by  all  analogous  words  will  not  justify  here  an  active  or  transitive  sense,  but  means  '  one 
called  to  the  side  of  another,'  with  the  secondary  sense  of  helping,  consoling,  counselling, 
or  aiding  him  "  (Dr.  Keynolds).  In  this  sense  it  was  taken  over  in  its  legal,  technical  sense 
into  Talmudic  Hebrew  (Watkins).  But  surely  a  term  like  this  must  be  interpreted  here  in  a 
large  sense,  and  not  confined  to  its  strictly  technical  meaning.  When  He  who  is  called 
to  be  the  advocate  of  God's  people  is  Christ  Himself  or  the  Holy  Spirit,  His  advocacy  will 
have  far-reaching  consequences,  subjective  as  well  as  objective.  Therefore  Bishop  Wordsworth 
(Greek  Testament)  is  justified  in  his  contention  that  "  The  word  is  one  of  large  acceptation. 
And  it  was  probably  chosen  for  that  reason,  as  best  signifying  the  manifold  gifts  and  offices 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  (1  Cor.  xii.  3-10),  as  the  Sanctifier,  Teacher,  Comforter,  Exhorter, 
Remembrancer,  Inspirer,  Enlightener,  Counsellor,  Guide,  Helper, and  Advocate  of  the  Church." 

Ver.  17.  Shall  be  in  you. — Not  is  in  you  (eV  v/xiv  ecrri).  The  meaning  is,  He  abides  now,  and 
shall  continue  to  abide.  The  Spirit  of  Truth. — In  that  He  prepares  the  heart  to  receive  the 
truth  (iii.  6-8),  and  then  makes  known  first  of  all  that  most  important  truth,  Christ,  and  the 
things  of  Christ.  The  world  cannot  receive  Him  because  of  the  want  of  this  special  prepara- 
tion. "  Worldly  hearts  desire  what  is  visible,  and  the  world  does  not  rise  to  the  love  of 
what  is  invisible ;  therefore  the  world  cannot  receive  Him  "  (Augustine  in  Wordsworth's 
Greek  Testament).  Not  seen  Him,  etc. — Neither  recognise  the  external  nor  the  internal 
manifestations  of  His  power. 

Ver.  18.  6p<f>avov's. — Dins  fatherless,  orphans.  He  had  spoken  of  them  (xiii.  33)  as  little 
children  (jewta).  I  return  to  you  ...  ye  see  Me. — This  refers  not  only  to  His  appearance  in 
resurrection  glory,  but  to  His  coming  spiritually  in  sending  the  Paraclete,  and  the  whole 
chain  of  His  comings  until  the  parousia,  when  "  every  eye  shall  see  Him." 

Ver.  19.  For  I  live,  and  ye  shall  live  (6'rt  iyu  £w,  nal  vpeis  ^-qaeade). — The  future  here  simply 
points  oat  the  effect  of  Christ  conquering  death  (xi.  25,  26  ;  also  1  John  v.  11-13). 

Ver.  22.  Judas  (Lebbseus,  Thaddseus:  Matt.  x.  3;  Mark  iii.  18). — Luke  vi.  16;  Acts  i.  13. 
Thus  carefully  distinguished  from  Judas  Iscariot.  The  question  of  Judas  is  founded  on  the 
words  in  ver.  21,  ifjupapltrta,  k.t.X.,  "I  shall  manifest  Myself  unto  him."  Judas  is  surprised. 
Was  not  Messiah  to  manifest  His  glory  to  the  world  ? 

Ver.  23.  Jesus  shows  that  this  manifestation  is  spiritual ;  and  the  condition  on  which  it 
rests  is  the  prepared  heart  filled  with  love  to  Him.    We  will  come  unto  Him,  etc. — Rev.  iii.  20. 

Ver.  27.  Peace,  etc. — This  reminds  us  of  the  common  Eastern  greeting,  Tfb  Dibti— n^b  oVraJ, 
Peace  be  with  thee — you. 

Vet.  28.  My  Father  is  greater,  etc.  —In  what  sense  are  we  to  take  these  words  ?  Surely, 
after  the  claim  of  the  prologue  (i.  1-4),  only  in  the  sense  of  the  voluntary  humiliation  of 
the  Son — His  emptying  Himself,  taking  upon  Him  the  form  of  a  servant,  etc.  (Phil.  ii.  5-8). 
He  subordinated  Himself,  became  obedient  unto  death  for  the  purposes  of  redemption. 
The  words  would  be  meaningless  unless  Jesus  claimed  to  be  God.  "  This  has  for  its 
presupposition  the  essential  divinity  of  the  Son  ;  for  there  would  be  no  sense  in  speaking 
thus  of  a  mere  man"  (Luthardt).  Ye  would  rejoice  that  My  humiliation  is  now  well-nigh 
past,  and  that  I  am  again  to  take  My  full  glory,  and  to  carry  with  Me  the  body  of  My 
humiliation  into  that  glory,  the  pledge  of  your  final  glorification. 

Ver.  30.  I  will  not  continue  to  talk  much  with  you. — The  time  for  teaching  was  well-nigh 
past.  A  more  awful  duty  and  passion  lay  before  Him.  The  prince  of  this  world  "  was  the 
regular  rabbinic  title  for  Satan,  whom  they  regarded  as  the  ruler  of  the  Gentiles  "  (Watkins). 
See  Eph.  ii.  1-9  for  the  gospel  view.  But  he  is  now  to  be  conquered,  for  he  can  find 
nothing  in  Christ — no  sin,  no  flaw,  no  weakness,  etc. 

Ver.  31.  Why  then  did  our  Lord  submit  so  far  as  to  die  ?  "  Death  in  Him  was  not  the 
penalty  of  sin,  but  a  gift  of  mercy  to  us,  that  He  might  free  us  from  eternal  death  "  (Augustine 

391 


chap.   xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN. 


in  Wordsworth).  His  action  in  submitting  to  the  attack  of  the  power  of  darkness  for  a  time 
was  entirely  voluntary,  and  borne  for  the  sake  of  men.  But  this  voluntary  obedience  shows 
the  world  His  love  to  the  Father,  who  out  of  love  to  a  perishing  world  sent  Him  to  suffer 
and  die.  It  is  all  the  expression  of  eternal  love.  Arise,  etc. — They  prepared  to  take  their 
way  to  the  Mount  of  Olives. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—3. 

The  reality  and  assurance  of  the  heavenly  state. — These  words  of  Jesus  before 
He  went  forth  to  Gethsemane  and  the  cross  contained  those  promises  which  divine 
Wisdom  saw  to  be  suited  to  the  case  of  the  disciples.  They  were  soon  to  go  out 
into  the  world  to  proclaim  their  message.  Tribulation  awaited  them — trial, 
persecution,  unjust  treatment  from  Jew  and  Gentile.  A  believer's  foes  would 
sometimes  be  those  of  his  own  household.  And  even  though  this  were  not  so, 
they  had  to  wander  from  land  to  land  among  alien  peoples  and  unfamiliar 
scenes.  All  this  militated  against  the  majority  of  them  possessing  settled  homes 
on  earth,  or  any  permanent  dwelling-place.  Therefore  this  sweet  and  tender 
promise  was  given  to  them.  They  had  here  no  abiding  city ;  but  having  this 
promise,  they  confidently  looked  for  one  to  come.  This  promise  holds  good  for 
all  God's  people.  When  they  cast  off  the  shackles  of  mortality  and  pass  into 
new  and  higher  spheres  of  being,  it  is  not  to  wander  aimlessly  through  the 
vastnesses  of  eternity ;  it  is  to  pass  to  the  welcome  of  a  Father's  house,  where 
abiding  dwelling-places  are  provided  for  them. 

I.  Notice  the  ground  on  which  Jesus  rests  the  reality  and  assurance  of  the 
heavenly  state. — It  is  on  the  fact  of  His  own  personality  as  the  truth.  "  If  it 
were  not  so"  etc.  He  could  present  no  stronger  argument  to  the  mind  of  His 
disciples.  It  is  as  if  He  had  said :  You  know  Me ;  the  course  of  My  life  is 
before  you,  etc.  Surely  you  must  be  persuaded  I  would  never  have  spoken  thus, 
would  not  fill  your  minds  with  delusive  hopes,  if  these  things  were  not  so  ? 
This  argument  would  be  of  the  strongest  to  the  disciples.  For  nigh  three  years  they 
had  followed  Jesus,  had  seen  His  wonderful  life  as  He  went  about  doing  good, 
and  His  wonderful  works.  They  had  heard  His  words  of  wisdom,  had  seen  the 
stainless  beauty  of  His  character,  had  felt  the  strength  of  His  love.  Therefore 
His  "  If  it  were  not  so,"  etc.,  would  come  to  them  with  the  force  of  a  demonstra- 
tion. Should  such  considerations  have  less  weight  with  us  1  We  have  friends 
whose  characters  are  so  genuine  that  we  say,  Their  word  is  as  good  as  their 
bond.  They  would  not,  even  to  please  us,  utter  what  they  know  to  be  untrue,  etc. 
And  who  that  has  studied  the  character  of  Jesus  could  think  otherwise  of  Him  ? 
And  especially  will  this  be  the  case  with  those  who  know  the  power  of  Christ's 
gospel  in  their  hearts  and  lives,  and  have  the  joy  of  His  fellowship  in  their  souls. 
Such  rest  on  this  blessed  promise  in  implicit  confidence,  etc. 

II.  Think  what  this  promise  implies. — We  may  draw  from  a  consideration  of 
the  ideas  the  conception  calls  up  to  our  minds  those  lessons  of  comfort,  hope,  etc., 
the  Redeemer  intended  to  convey.  Of  course  human  language  and  imagery  can 
only  at  best  dimly  shadow  forth  heavenly  things ;  in  fact,  they  can  only  be 
understood  in  the  measure  in  which  we  are  prepared  to  understand  them.  So 
all  the  conceptions  of  the  heavenly  state  in  Scripture  only  faintly  adumbrate 
the  reality.  Scripture  itself  declares  this  to  be  so  (1  Cor.  ii.  9).  Thus  the 
heavenly  world  is  set  before  us  in  a  variety  of  aspects.  It  is  a  country,  state, 
city,  garden,  paradise,  etc.  Here  it  is  the  Father's  house.  But  the  reality 
will  be  far  beyond  our  highest  conceptions.  But  just  as  an  astronomer  may 
reason  analogously  from  what  he  knows  of  the  starry  orbs  as  to  the  infinite  glory 
of  the  universe,  so  we,  from  the  analogy  of  the  ideas  given  in  Scripture,  may  reason 
as  to  the  glory  of  the  heavenly  world.     Jesus,  as  we  have  said,  seems  to  have 

392 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.         chap.  XIV. 


chosen  this  conception  as  suited  to  the  circumstances  of  the  disciples.  But,  in 
speaking  of  heaven  as  the  Father's  house,  He  did  not  leave  them  under  the 
impression  that  it  is  a  limited,  etc.,  dwelling.  It  is  a  house  of  many  mansions. 
The  idea  is  that  the  family  will  be  numerous  and  always  resident  (/JLovrj,  mone 
=  abiding  or  tarrying ;  hence  mfjiovai,  monai  =  residences).  The  idea  of  a 
father's  house  is  one  of  the  most  pleasant  that  can  occur  to  the  mind.  In  after- 
life the  heart  turns  fondly  toward  it.  With  few  exceptions  it  is  the  happiest  spot 
on  earth.  It  is  generally  in  the  home-circle  that  we  find  humanity  at  its  best. 
None  are  to  be  pitied  so  much  as  those  who  are  alone  on  earth,  who  have  no 
centre  round  which  the  affections  may  turn,  no  spot  where,  under  the  influences 
of  love,  trust,  helpfulness,  their  whole  being  may  grow  healthily  and  joyfully. 
How  many  a  life  has  been  soured  through  isolation  and  loneliness !  But  the 
happy  denizens  of  the  Father's  house  above  are  blessed  in  the  sweetest  communion, 
the  noblest  employ,  etc. 

III.  Think,  then,  of  a  few  of  the  characteristic  features  of  the  homes  of 
earth,  and  see  how  they  typify  the  house  of  many  mansions. — 1.  A  true  father's 
house  on  earth  is  a  place  of  safety.  The  children  feel  and  are  safe,  so  far  as  can 
be  here,  under  the  roof-tree  of  home.  They  are  there  shielded  from  danger  as 
lambs  in  the  fold.  It  is  when  the  child  goes  forth  into  the  far  country  that 
health,  strength,  energy,  so  carefully  nurtured  before,  are  in  danger  of  being  lost, 
squandered,  etc.,  leaving  the  life  bare.  So  in  the  Father's  house  above,  the 
family  are  eternally  safe  (x.  28,  29).  The  father's  house  here  is  a  place  where 
everything  needful,  so  far  as  possible,  is  provided  for  the  children.  It  is  in  the 
far  country  that  they  meet  with  bitter  want,  etc.  And  in  the  heavenly  dwelling- 
place  "they  hunger  no  more,"  etc.  (Rev.  vii.  16,  17).  2.  The  true  home  on 
earth  is  a  place  of  rest  and  peace.  Thither  the  weary  labourer  directs  his  steps 
at  close  of  day  :  a  welcome  awaits  him — he  gains  fresh  strength  for  future  toil. 
So,  too,  the  toiler  wearied  with  labour  in  the  fields  of  time  finds  a  place  of 
welcome  rest.  It  is  no  wayside  inn,  no  temporary  abode  ;  but  a  house  of  many 
abiding  dwellings.  There  the  voyager  rests  from  struggle  with  adverse  gales ; 
the  Christian  soldier  rests  from  conflict  with  sin  and  every  spiritual  foe. 
3.  Again,  every  true  father's  house  on  earth  is  a  place  of  love  and  joy.  It  is  not 
the  place  merely  that  is  dear.  It  is  because  there  dwell  those  whom  we  love. 
Love  binds  the  members  of  the  family  in  one.  Selfishness  is  excluded.  The 
members  of  the  family  are  glad  in  each  other's  joy.  A  spirit  of  mutual  charity 
and  sympathy  binds  them  together  in  common  aims.  No  other  spot  on  earth  where 
love  gains  greater  triumphs,  where  it  shows  more  prominently  its  power.  There 
it  beareth  all  things,  etc.  (1  Cor.  xiii.).  And  where  love  reigns  there  is  purest 
joy.  Need  it  be  said  that  this  is  true,  only  in  infinitely  higher  degree,  of  the 
heavenly  house  of  many  mansions  ?  It  is  the  abode  of  love,  etc.  There  "  love 
never  faileth  "  ;  and  thus  there  is  endless  joy.  And  one  chief  element  of  this  joy 
will  be  the  union  of  the  saints  with  the  heavenly  Father  in  our  great  elder 
brother  Jesus  Christ.  "  I  will  come  again,  and  receive  you  unto  Myself,"  etc. 
(ver.  3).  These  are  some  of  the  characteristic  features  of  the  house  of  many 
mansions.  But,  after  all  has  been  said  and  can  be  said,  how  feeble  and  dim  are 
our  conceptions  of  its  eternal  glory  !  And  how  should  such  hopes  and  promises 
quicken  us  to  live  as  children  of  the  light  and  of  the  day  ! 

Ver.  3.  Reunion  of  saints  in  heaven.  In  the  Father's  house  the  Father's  children 
in  Christ  shall  know  as  they  are  knovm. — It  is  a  question  of  deep  interest  that 
confronts  us  when  it  is  asked,  "  How  are  the  dead  raised,  and  with  what  body 
do  they  come  1 "  And  the  apostle  has  answered  that  question  for  us  with  great 
fulness  (1  Cor.  xv.).  But  there  is  another  question  also  of  great  interest  con-' 
nected  with  this  subject,  the  answer  to  which  we  are  left  to  infer.     It  is,  Shall 

393 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


we  know  our  friends  and  brethren  in  Christ  on  that  happy  shore  on  which  they 
and  all  His  shall  dwell  in  eternal  peace,  when  the  resurrection  dawn  shall  bring 
the  consummation  of  their  redemption,  and.  body  and  soul  shall  be  reunited  in 
perfect  purity  ?  The  spirit  longs  to  know  this,  and  seeks  to  rise  to  hope,  and 
trust, 

"  With  faith  that  comes  of  self-control, 
The  truths  that  never  can  be  proved 
Until  we  close  with  all  we  loved, 
And  all  we  flow  from,  soul  in  soul." 

Tennyson. 

There  are  two  considerations  which  might  be  mentioned  as  warranting  Christians 
to  entertain  an  assured  hope  that  it  shall  be  so. 

I.  Christ  is  there,  and  we  shall  know  Him. — 1.  This  is,  indeed,  the  chief 
element  of  the  believer's  gladness  in  prospect  of  the  life  beyond.  Our  Lord 
Himself  held  out  this  prospect  to  the  disciples  as  calculated  to  inspire  their 
hearts  with  peace  and  joy :  "  In  My  Father's  house  are  many  mansions,"  etc. 
(xiv.  2,  3).  It  is  therefore  no  unknown  land,  no  land  of  strangers,  into  which 
believers  shall  enter  to  possess  their  inheritance,  but  a  Father's  house  of  many 
abiding  dwelling-places,  fitted  for  His  people.  2.  And  the  Elder  Brother,  in 
whom  all  are  united  in  one  family,  shall  be  there  to  receive  all  His  own.  Even 
now  He  knows  His  sheep  and  is  known  of  them.  Shall  it  be  less  so  ihen% 
Nay,  the  close  union  in  love  of  Christ  and  His  people  will  then  become  complete 
and  perfect.     This  is,  indeed,  one  of  the  chief  elements  of  eternal  blessedness. 

II.  Our  life  beyond  shall  not  be  less  but  more  perfect. — 1.  "  Now  we  see  in  a 
glass,  obscurely  ;  but  then  face  to  face,"  etc.  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12).  And  we  know  that 
when  the  manifestation  of  the  Invisible  takes  place  "  we  shall  be  like  Him,"  etc. 
(1  John  iii.  2).  Christ's  people  shall  be  made  perfect  in  Him  and  in  the  Father. 
2.  Now  perfection  cannot  mean  loss  of  personality.  If  our  individuality  were 
destroyed,  it  would  not  be  we  who  were  perfected ;  for  it  is  the  7,  the  personality, 
which  distinguishes  every  man  as  a  separate,  sentient,  intelligent  existence. 
Nay,  we  should  look  for  the  perfection  of  our  personality  rather  than  its 
extinction.  3.  Thus  clearer  knowledge  will  mark  the  perfected  man.  "  We  shall 
know  as  we  are  known."  The  dim  obscurity  of  our  present  state  will  merge  in 
perfect  day.  No  longer  will  reason  be  thwarted  by  passion,  or  judgment  warped 
by  prejudice.  Things  shall  be  seen  and  known  as  they  are,  and  not  simply  as 
what  they  appear  to  be.  Then  all  shams  shall  be  revealed,  all  hypocrisies 
unmasked.  4.  And  if  with  all  the  powers  and  faculties  of  mind  the  redeemed 
are  to  become  Christlike,  then  memory,  on  which  personality  so  much  depends, 
will  also  be  perfected.  Christ  remembers  His  own — His  people  remember  His 
atoning  work ;  and  one  chief  theme  of  their  praises  will  be  the  fact  that  He  hath 
"  redeemed  them  with  His  blood."  And  so  too  we  may  believe  they  will 
remember   their  fellow-pilgrims   in   time   and  "know  them  when  they  meet." 

5.  And  if  memory  be  perfected,  it  will  thus  be  purified.  When  we  stand  close  to 
some  great  structure  of  antiquity,  we  are  conscious  more  of  the  marks  that  time 
and  stress  have  left  upon  it  than  of  its  beauty  as  a  whole — its  fair  proportions, 
its  exquisite  symmetry.  But  when  we  remove  to  a  distance  these  appear,  and 
the  flaws  and  marks  of  time  and  the  destroyer's  hand  are  lost  and  forgotten.  So 
as  we  look  back  on  and  summon  up  in  memory  the  images  of  our  Christian 
friends  departed,  the  flaws  and  disfigurements  incident  to  our  imperfect  state 
are  for  the  most  part  forgotten,  and  only  the  fair  proportions  of  their  general 
Christian  character  remain.  All  the  rest  was  adventitious  ;  this  is  permanent. 
And  in  some  such  fashion  the  memory  of  the  redeemed  will  be  purged  in  their 
intercourse  in  the  heavenly  state  from  what  is  impermanent  and  perishable. 

6.  And  as  they  are  all  united  in  Christ  in  love  and  knowledge,  so  will  they  be 

394 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  XIV. 


united  one  with  another  ;  and  whilst  the  sphere  of  communion  will  be  infinitely 
extended,  still  those  who  loved  and  laboured  here  as  fellow-citizens  of  the  saints 
will  not,  we  may  believe,  love  and  labour  unknown  to  each  other  in  that  higher 
sphere  and  more  perfect  service.  7.  And  the  chief  end,  therefore,  is  to  seek  for 
that  abiding  unity  in  Christ  with  all  our  friends  and  loved  ones  that  shall  endure 
all  the  shocks  of  time  and  death  and  judgment,  that  shall  exist  and  persist 
through  all  the  ages  of  eternity.  It  has  been  truly  said  that  if  it  were  to  be 
thought  possible  that  we  should  not  know  and  consequently  never  love  our 
friends  in  Christ  after  this  life,  we  should  simply  "  number  them  with  temporal 
things,  and  love  them  as  such  "  (Baxter).  A  better  hope  remains.  The  re- 
deemed whose  names  are  written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life,  whose  names  He 
will  "  confess  before  His  Father  and  before  His  angels,"  shall,  knowing  Him, 
know  each  other,  and  in  unity  rejoice  eternally. 

III.  In  these  considerations  there  may  be  found  comfort  and  hope.  But  there 
is  also  warning.  This  is  our  probation -sphere.  It  is  here  we  become  fitted 
or  unfitted  for  the  future  life  of  glory.  The  spiritual  life  to  come  is  but  a 
continuation  and  consummation  of  the  spiritual  life  begun  here.  For  the 
foundation  on  which  the  spiritual  life  rests  here  and  hereafter  is  One — Jesus 
Christ.  Unity  with  Him  and  in  Him  is  its  condition ;  and  its  chief  manifesta- 
tion here  as  hereafter  is  charity,  i.e.  love :  not  only  love  of  Christ,  but  in  Him 
love  of  His  people.  "  God  is  love ;  and  he  that  abideth  in  love  abideth  in  God, 
and  God  in  Him."  And  the  opposite  of  love  is  hatred,  unrighteousness,  sin. 
Turn  and  flee  then  from  that  which  must  perish,  and  cling  to  that  which  alone 
is  enduring.  Enter  into  living  union  through  faith  with  Him  who  is  the  "resur- 
rection and  the  life,"  to  whom  the  Father  hath  given  to  have  life  in  Himself, 
and  then  rejoice  in  the  assured  hope  and  promise  of  life  eternal.* 

"ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Not  many  lives,  but  only  one,  have  we —  Think  of  "  living  "  !      Thy  life,  wert  thou 

Frail,  fleeting  man!  the   "pitifullest  of  all  the   sons  of   earth," 

How  sacred  should  that  one  life  ever  be —  is  no  idle  dream,  but  a  solemn  reality.     It 

That  narrow  span  !  is  thy  own  ;  it  is  all  thou  hast  to  front  eternity 

Day  after  day  filled  up  with  blessed  toil,  with. —  Carlyle. 

Hour  after  hour  still  bringing  in  new  spoil ! 

Dr.  H.  Bonar. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH. —Verse  6. 

Jesus,  the  way,  the  truth,  the  life. — Think  of  the  meaning  of  this  claim 
advanced  by  our  Lord.  It  is  a  unique,  a  divine  claim.  No  merely  human 
leader  or  teacher  ever  made  a  similar  claim — not  even  a  Buddha  or  a  Mohammed. 
They  said,  We  shall  instruct  you,  teach  what  we  think  truth,  etc.  Jesus  goes 
beyond  them  and  says,  "  I  am  the  way,"  etc.  Such  an  utterance  seems  quite 
natural  when  viewed  against  the  background  of  the  life  of  Christ,  so  full  of 
heavenly  teaching  and  mighty  works.  Then  think  of  the  joy  and  peace,  etc., 
He  has  brought  to  millions.  We  all  indeed  may  have  personal  experience  of  the 
truth  of  this  word.  The  reply  to  Thomas  was  not  in  the  order  of  His  question, 
*  Lord,  we  know  not,"  etc.  The  answer  means  :  Surely  if  ye  know  Me  that  is 
enough.  He  who  comes  through  Me  will  attain  the  true  end  of  the  way.  The 
end  of  spiritual  life,  the  true  end  of  its  way,  is  its  beginning — God  Himself. 
The  stream  returns  to  the  ocean  whence  it  was  drawn.  The  spirit  attains  to 
union  with  God,  from  whom  its  life  is  derived.  "  He  that  hath  seen  Me,"  etc. 
He  is  the  mediator,  the  junction  between  the  two  points,  the  commencement  and 
the  end,  the  Alpha  and  Omega.     Therefore  He  is  absolutely  the  way. 

395 


chap.  XIV.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


I.  Christ  is  the  way  through  His  incarnation. — There  is  a  general  tendency 
in  the  theology  of  the  present  time  to  lay  great  stress  on  the  humanity,  the 
human  nature,  of  our  Lord.  Now  that  He  was  truly  human  is  a  precious  truth 
never  to  be  lost  sight  of.  It  is  this  fact  that  enables  Him  to  say  to  us  men,  "  I 
am  the  way,"  for  the  way  must  necessarily  begin  with  us,  with  human  nature. 
But  there  is  along  with  this  tendency  also  a  tendency  to  neglect,  or  minimise  at 
least,  the  truth  of  the  Saviour's  divinity.  But  the  Saviour's  divinity  is  the 
corollary  of  His  perfect  humanity.  And  it  is  in  His  divine  nature  that  He 
becomes  the  end  of  the  way,  as  by  the  human  He  is  its  beginning.  He  leads 
from  sin  to  God,  from  earth  to  heaven,  because  He  is  Emmanuel — God  with  us. 

II.  Not  through  nature  and  moral  law  alone  can  men  come  to  God. — But 
say  many,  It  is  not  so.  Christ  may  be  one  of  many  ways  to  God,  but  He  is  not 
the  only  one.  By  the  way  of  nature,  of  moral  law,  of  moral  being,  we  can  come 
to  the  Father.  But  can  we,  e.g.,  come  to  the  Father  by  the  works  of  nature — 
"  rise  through  nature  up  to  nature's  God  "  ?  Truly  in  the  works  of  nature  there 
is  the  evidence  of  a  wisdom  and  power  which  point  to  an  Almighty  Framer. 
We  look  out  on  the  universe  with  its  mighty  forces,  its  unerring  laws,  all 
working  together  to  produce  harmony  and  order.  The  wonders  of  life  in  all  its 
aspects,  beauty  of  form,  radiancy  of  colour,  etc.,  speak  of  an  intelligent  mind 
informing  all,  and  attuned  to  order  and  harmony.  Then  the  workings  of  what 
we  call  providence  for  the  preservation  and  continuance  of  the  races  of  living 
things  speak  of  goodness  and  benevolence  in  the  presiding  power.  But  they  tell 
little  of  anything  more  to  men  unenlightened  by  revelation.  For  all  they  know 
from  nature  and  nature's  laws  man  may  be  no  more  to  the  Deity  than  the 
ephemerae  that  nutter  their  little  day  in  the  sunshine  and  then  pass.  When  we 
realise  our  own  littleness  and  insignificance  in  view  of  the  grandeur  surrounding 
us  on  earth,  etc.,  and  in  the  vast  and  apparently  limitless  void  of  space  strewn 
with  its  stars  and  star-systems,  then  say  we,  "  What  is  man,"  etc.  (Ps.  viii.). 
Besides,  there  is  in  nature  something  that  appears,  on  a  superficial  view,  even 
to  contradict  those  conceptions  of  benevolence,  etc.,  which  providence  seems  to 
establish.  There  is  disorder  in  nature — the  mystery  of  pain  and  evil — facts 
which,  if  viewed  apart,  lead  to  Buddha's  idea  of  life  as  a  curse  and  not  a  blessing. 
No,  not  through  nature  alone  is  there  any  true  way  to  God,  not  in  this  way  can 
we  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  the  divine,  loving  Father.  Nature's  stern  laws  tell 
of  Almighty  power.  Even  the  workings  of  providence,  and  the  benevolence 
inspiring  them,  are  hidden  sometimes  behind  what  seems  to  contradict  them. 
Hence  those  who  seek  to  come  in  this  way  to  God  approach  in  fear,  seeking  to 
propitiate — not  in  faith,  to  a  loving  Father.  Nature-religions,  as  history  shows, 
have  led  men  away  from  God.  For  they  have  come  to  "  worship  and  serve  the 
creature,"  etc.  (Rom.  i.  25). 

III.  Men  cannot  come  to  God  even  through  their  higher  nature. — Others 
will  say  all  this  is  true.  But  there  is  within  man  himself  a  witness  of  the  Deity. 
Not  by  nature  alone  can  we  come  to  God.  But  the  moral  nature — conscience — 
is  the  record  of  the  divine  presence  in  man.  When  it  speaks  God  speaks. 
Walking  according  to  its  dictates,  we  can  come  to  God.  The  divine  law  is 
written  on  our  moral  nature ;  in  listening  to  the  voice  of  conscience,  following 
the  way  of  duty,  the  way  to  God  lies  before  us.  True  in  a  measure.  There  is 
a  great  and  precious  truth  here ;  but  it  is  not  all  the  truth.  Were  there  no  sin 
in  the  world,  it  would  perhaps  be  the  whole  truth  regarding  man's  relation  to 
God.  But  do  men  always  obey  the  divine  law,  always  listen  to  the  voice  of 
conscience,  even  the  best  of  men  1  Are  not  traces  of  the  divine  law  often 
obliterated,  so  that  evil  may  become  a  man's  good,  lying  supplant  truth,  wrong 
usurp  the  place  of  right?  Does  not  conscience  oft  become  dulled,  benumbed?  Is 
not  its  voice  often  stifled  or  its  pronouncement  disregarded  ?     Nay,  does  not  the 

396 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xiv. 


law  only  reveal  our  distance  from  God  and  our  inability  to  commend  ourselves 
to  Him  and  come  to  Him  by  this  way?  "  By  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin." 
It  reveals  to  us  the  holy  and  righteous  God ;  but  across  its  face  is  written, 
"  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die."  It  tells  of  the  righteous  Judge,  of  the 
divine  Lawgiver,  who  is  jealous  for  His  broken  law,  who  will  vindicate  it  and 
"  make  it  honourable."  Men  are  not  led  by  this  way  to  the  refuge  of  a  heavenly 
Father's  love  and  care. 

IV.  Jesus  alone  is  the  way  to  God. — A  way  is  a  road  connecting  two  distant 
points.  Jesus  claims  to  be  the  bond  of  union  between  man  and  God,  the  high- 
way uniting  earth  and  heaven.  Men  were  alienated  from  God,  spiritually  dead. 
Christ  came  to  bring  love,  light,  life,  to  men.  Those  who  receive  in  Him  these 
blessings  have  attained  the  end  of  their  being.  They  become  Christlike,  one 
with  Him  in  the  Father.  Through  the  Way  they  have  attained  to  the  end. 
The  way  is  therefore  the  means  by  which  men  "  attain  to  the  truth  which  is 
light,  and  the  life  which  is  love."  Thus  Jesus  can  say  absolutely,  "  I  am  the  way." 
And  He  is  so  because  He  is  the  truth  and  the  life.  As  Augustine  says,  He  is 
via  vera  vitm.  When  we  have  laid  hold  of  the  truth,  when  we  have  Christ's  life 
in  us,  then  truly  we  have  come  to  the  Father.  Jesus  is  the  truth.  The  test  of 
a  true,  a  right  way  is  this,  that  it  leads  to  the  desired  end.  Now  what  men 
need  is  that  they  shall  attain  to  harmony  in  their  own  being,  and  with  that 
divine  Being  on  whom  they  depend.  In  Christ  Jesus,  and  in  no  other  way,  can 
and  do  they  attain  to  this.  In  Him  they  realise  and  are  saved  from  their 
sinfulness ;  they  become  possessed  of  a  new  spirit,  through  which  they  attain  the 
mastery  over  their  lower  nature,  so  that  the  higher  being  becomes  dominant. 
So,  too,  by  His  gospel  they  learn  that  the  broken  divine  law  has  been  vindicated, 
so  that  in  Him  God  is  seen  to  be  just  and  the  justifier,  etc.  (Rom.  iii.  26). 
Finally,  through  union  and  communion  with  Jesus  they  become  one  with 
the  Father  in  Him  (xvii.).  Thus  Christ  is  the  true  way  to  the  Father,  the  way 
of  reconciliation,  pardon,  peace  (Eph.  ii.  11-22). 

V.  But  how  is  Jesus  as  the  truth  to  be  received  and  appropriated  ? — Our 
Lord  does  not  leave  us  in  doubt.  "  I  am  the  life,"  He  says.  It  is  through  His 
power,  His  spiritual  life  implanted  and  working  within  us,  that  we  must  attain 
to  the  end  of  the  way.  We  must  become  actually  and  spiritually  united  to 
Him  (xv.),  and  drawing  from  that  source  of  all  life  we  shall  be  aided  to  endure, 
to  overcome  the  evil  within  and  without,  and  thus  to  advance  onward  and 
upward.  "  In  Him  was  life,"  etc.  (i.  4).  In  Him  alone  is  light,  i.e.  truth  ;  and 
in  Him  also  is  life,  i.e.  power.  Christ  then  alone  is  the  way,  because  He  is  the 
truth  and  the  life.  And  in  Him  those  means  of  grace,  which  could  not  in  them- 
selves aid  us  to  advance  one  step  in  the  heavenly  life,  become  channels  through 
which  that  heavenly  life  is  ever  renewed  and  strengthened  within  us.  In  Him 
also  the  law,  the  quickened  conscience,  and  even  the  tokens  of  God's  power  in 
nature,  etc.,  act  as  aids  and  incentives  to  progress  on  the  way  of  life.  For  there 
must  be  progress — a  way  implies  this  idea.  It  is  one  of  the  conditions  of 
ultimate  attainment.  True,  at  once  when  men  believe  they  come  through  Christ 
to  the  Father.  But  our  present  attainment  is  only  an  earnest  of  fuller  joy. 
As  spiritual  children  we  know  but  little  of  His  glory,  power,  wisdom,  etc.  But 
as  we  advance  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ  the  spiritual  vision  becomes  more  clear 
(2  Cor.  iv.  6),  until  at  last  "  we  shall  know  as  we  are  known."  The  way  begins 
in  the  darkness  of  our  state  by  nature.  Christ  rises  on  our  souls  (Mai.  iv.  2) ; 
our  spiritual  morning  dawns ;  and  even  here  in  seasons  of  spiritual  com- 
munion we  catch  glimpses  of  the  glory  that  shall  be  revealed  in  us,  w,hen, 
in  God's  eternal  presence,  the  way  shall  have  been  traversed  and  the  pilgrimage 
ended. 

397 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  1.  The  heavenly  home. — "Where  does 
God  live  ? "  asks  the  little  child  ;  "  Oh  that 
I  knew  where  I  might  find  Him !  "  cries  the 
earnest  man.  We  are  all  seeking  Thy  dwell- 
ing-place, Thou  King  of  kings.  We  have 
not  yet  found  a  palace  large  enough  to 
contain  Thee.  Some  have  sought  Thee  in 
the  water,  some  in  the  air,  some  in  the  fire, 
because  the  water  and  the  air  and  the  fire 
are  to  us  boundless  things.  Yet  it  is  not 
in  the  boundless  that  Thou  desirest  to  be 
found ;  it  is  in  the  limited,  the  broken,  the 
contrite.  The  heaven  of  heavens  cannot 
contain  Thee,  but  the  broken  and  contrite 
heart  can ;  it  is  there  Thou  delightest  most 
to  dwell.  Thy  brightest  glory  is  not  in  the 
stars,  but  in  the  struggles  of  a  conquering 
soul.  Thy  temple  is  the  heart  of  Him  whom 
men  have  called  the  Man  of  Sorrows.  Thy 
fulness  dwells  in  His  emptiness,  Thy  wealth 
in  His  poverty,  Thy  strength  in  His  weak- 
ness, Thy  joy  in  His  sorrow,  Thy  crown  in 
His  cross.  Within  that  temple  meet  har- 
moniously the  things  which  to  the  world  are 
discords — perfection  and  suffering,  peace 
and  warfare,  love  and  storm ;  the  lion  and 
the  lamb  lie  down  together.  There  would  I 
seek  Thee,  O  my  God.  Within  these  sacred 
precincts,  where  all  things  are  gathered  into 
one,  where  middle  walls  of  partition  are 
broken  down,  where  jarring  chords  are 
blended  in  one  symphony  of  praise,  there 
would  I  seek  and.  find  Thee.  Under  the 
shadow  of  that  cross,  where  death  meets  life 
and  earth  is  touched  by  heaven,  my  finite 
soul  would  lose  its  finitude  and  be  one  with 
Thee;  my  night  would  vanish  in  Thy  day, 
my  sorrow  would  melt  in  Thy  joy,  my  mean- 
ness would  merge  in  Thy  majesty,  my  sin 
would  be  lost  in  Thy  holiness.  The  veil 
which  hides  me  from  Thee  is  the  shadow  of 
my  own  will ;  when  the  veil  of  the  temple 
shall  be  rent  in  twain  I  shall  see  the 
place  where  Thy  glory  dwelleth — Dr.  Geo. 
Matheson. 

Ver.  2.  The  Father's  house. — Home — an 
endearing  name  for  the  heavenly  state. 

This  fond  attachment  to  the  well-known  place 
Whence  first  we  started  into  life's  long  race, 
Maintains  its  hold  with  such  unfailing  sway, 
We  feel  it  e'en  in  age,  and  at  our  latest  day. 

Cowper. 

There  is  a  land  of  every  land  the  pride, 
Beloved  by  heaven  o'er  all  the  world  beside  ; 

There  is  a  spot  of  earth  supremely  blest, 
A  dearer,  sweeter  spot  than  all  the  rest, 
Where  man,  creation's  tyrant,  casts  aside 
His  sword  and  sceptre,  pageantry  and  pride, 
While  in  his  softened  looks  benignly  blend 

398 


The   sire,    the   son,  the   husband,   brother, 

friend : 
Here  woman  reigns ;  the  mother,  daughter, 

wife, 
Strews  with  fresh  flowers  the  narrow  way  of 

life ; 
In  the  clear  heaven  of  her  delightful  eye  '■ 
An  angel-guard  of  loves  and  graces  lie ; 
Around  her  knees  domestic  duties  meet, 
And  fireside  pleasures  gambol  at  her  feet. 
"  Where  shall  that  land,  that  spot  of  earth 

be  found  ?  " 
Art  thou  a  man?  a  patriot  ?— look  around; 
Oh,  thou  shalt   find,  howe'er  thy  footsteps 

roam, 
That  land  thy  country,  and  that  spot  thy 

home. — Montgomery,  "  West  Indies." 

Ver.  2.  For  pilgrims  there  is  promise  of 
a  home  beyond. — It  has  often  been  so  ordered 
that  earth's  greatest  have  "  dwelt  apart." 
A  life  of  toil  and  danger  or  isolation  has 
been  mapped  out  for  them.  But  was  it  not, 
perhaps,  that  through  their  enduring  faith 
and  high  example  others  than  themselves 
might  be  lured  to  live  for  the  better  home  ? 
Take,  for  example,  one  of  our  greatest 
modern  heroes — Crusader  and  Bayard  in 
one — as  he  stood  alone,  surrounded  by 
strangers  and  traitors,  in  that  far-off 
city  on  the  Nile  whence  he  went  home. 
Think  of  exiled  Dante  in  mediaeval  times, 
a  lonely  wanderer,  learning  in  his  exile, 
desolation,  and  bitter  experience  to  sing 
more  sweetly  of  the  soul's  true  home. 
Or  think  of  Paul  the  apostle.  With  his 
warm  affections  and  deep  sympathetic 
nature  he  must  have  often  deeply  felt  his 
loneliness.  Does  not  a  glimpse  Of  this  feel- 
ing meet  us  in  the  words,  "  If  in  this  life  only 
we  have  hope  in  Christ,  we  are  of  all  men 
most  miserable"  ?  But  to  those,  and  to  all  who 
have  been  spiritually  "strangers  and  pilgrims" 
here,  this  higher  hope  has  been  given.  They 
were  not  in  reality  either  desolate  or  for- 
saken. They  claimed  affinity  and  kinship 
with  a  great  family,  and  to  them,  in  view  of 
the  unseen  and  eternal  realities,  the  passing 
vanities  and  troubles  of  time  shrank  into 
nothing.  They  knew  also  that  whatever  is 
most  precious  here,  and  most  worthy  of  our 
regard,  would  not  be  lost  hereafter.  Pure 
love  and  friendship,  wisdom  and  knowledge, 
holiness  and  truth,  all  that  bear  the  marks 
of  heaven,  are  like  it — eternal. 

Ver.  2.  Premonitions  of  the  heavenly  home. 
— Man,  even  here  in  the  midst  of  his  life 
obscure  and  dim,  sees  the  mountain  tops  of 
the  future  world  touched  with  the  golden 
rays  of  a  sun  that  never  rises  here.  So  the 
dweller  in  the  polar  circle,  in  the  long  night 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.         chap.  xiv. 


of  the  Arctic  winter,  when  no  sun  rises,  yet 
sees,  at  what  should  be  midday,  a  golden 
aurora  glimmering  on  the  highest  summits, 
and  dreams  of  the  long  summer  days  when 
the  sun  shines  and  does  not  set. — Jean  Paul 
Riehter. 

And  oft  I  wish  amidst  the  scene  to  find 
Some  spot  to  real  happiness  consigned, 
Where  my  worn  soul,  each  wandering  hope 

at  rest, 
May  gather  bliss  to  see  my  fellows  blest. 
Goldsmith,  "  The  Traveller:' 

Ver.  3.  Heaven  is  blessedness,  for  Christ  is 
there. 

How  know  I  that  it  looms  lovely  that  land 
I  have  never  seen, 

With  morning-glories  and  heartsease  and 
unexampled  green, 

With  neither  heat  nor  cold  in  the  balm- 
redolent  air  ? 

Some  of  this,  not  all,  I  know ;  but  this  is  so  : 
Christ  is  there. 

How  know  I  blessedness  befalls  who  dwell 
in  Paradise, 

The  outwearied  hearts  refreshing,  rekind- 
ling the  worn-out  eyes  ; 

All  souls  singing,  seeing,  rejoicing  every- 
where ? 

Nay,  much  more  than  this  I  know ;  for  this 
is  so: 

Christ  is  there. 

O  Lord  Christ  whom  having  not  seen  I  love 
and  desire  to  love, 

O  Lord  Christ  who  lookest  on  me  un- 
comely yet  still  Thy  dove, 


Take   me  to  Thee  in  Paradise,  Thine  own 

made  fair ; 
For  whatever  else  I  know,  this  thing  is  so  : 
Thou  art  there. 
British  Weekly,  Aug.  31,  1893. 

Ver.  3.  Shall  we  know  our  friends  in  heaven  1 
— One  after  another  they  fall  by  our  side, 
till  at  last  a  shadow  is  cast  over  every  good- 
night and  good-bye,  and  life  comes  to 
be  a  journey  into  the  wilderness,  there 
to  die  alone.  Yet  we  do  not  cease  to  love 
them  and  desire  them.  Long  lost,  they  are 
longer  dear;  and  the  question  we  put  is, 
"Is  the  love  of  the  Lamb  so  jealous 
and  so  strong  as  to  absorb  and  consume 
all  meaner  passions,  leaving  no  room  for 
any  but  the  one  affection  ?  "  The  answer 
is  to  be  discovered  by  putting  another 
question:  "Do  we  find  that  our  love  for 
Christ  weakens  our  love  for  those  who  share 
with  His  supreme  affection  ? "  Is  it  true  that 
all  who  love  one  another  before  they  were  in 
Christ,  love  one  another  less  when  they  pass 
from  darkness  into  light  ?  Is  it  not  em- 
phatically the  contrary  ?  Are  not  all  other 
loves  hallowed,  ennobled,  and  eternised  by 
this  other  affection  ?  The  love  of  Christ  in- 
cludes our  love  for  all  those  who  are  in  Christ. 
It  intensifies  and  perpetuates  the  earthly 
affection,  and  any  heavenly  love  that  does 
otherwise  is  diseased  and  perverted. 

"  He  who  being  bold 
For  life  to  come  is  false  to  the  past  sweet 
Of  mortal  life,  hath  killed  the  world  above. 
For  why  to  live  again,  if  not  to  meet  ? 
And  why  to  meet,  if  not  to  meet  in  love  ? 
And  why  in  love  if  not  in  that  dear  love  of 
old  ? " 

W.  Robertson  Nieoll. 


MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  8—14. 

The  revelation  of  the  Father. — The  disciples  of  our  Lord,  even  at  the  close 
of  His  ministry,  were  still  far  from  understanding  fully  either  Himself  or  the 
import  of  His  mission.  Their  faith  rose  and  fell  as  now  one  side,  now 
another,  of  His  purpose  and  work  became  known  to  them.  They  secretly 
cherished  in  their  hearts,  nay,  often  showed  openly  that  they  entertained  the 
idea,  that  Jesus  would  yet  manifest  Himself  in  temporal  Messianic  glory.  So 
that  when  He  spoke  of  death  and  departure,  the  barometer  of  faith  fell,  the  sky 
of  hope  was  overclouded.  Especially  now  that  He  spoke  of  immediate  departure, 
and  that  the  disciples  could  not  then  follow  Him,  "  sorrow  filled  their  hearts  " — 
token  of  their  personal  affection  for  Jesus,  but  also  of  the  imperfection  of  their 
faith.  Thus  Jesus  sought  to  comfort  them,  told  them  of  the  Father's  house,  etc., 
and,  in  reply  to  the  pessimistic  question  of  Thomas,  pointed  to  Himself  as  the 
way  to  the  Father,  and  thus  to  the  Father's  house,  closing  His  answer  with  the 
memorable  words  (ver.  7),  "  If  ye  had  known  Me,"  etc.  Catching  at  the  word 
" seen"  Philip  puts  forward  his  request :  "  Lord,  show  us"  etc. 

I.  Philip's  request  echoes  the  longing  of  humanity.  1.  To  know  God,  to  see 
Him,  some  manifestation  of  His  glory,  visible,  palpable,  unmistakable,  that  is 
what  even  the  noblest  of  the  race  have  longed  for  (Exod.  xxxiii.  18).    And  if  not 

399 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   JOHN. 


some  visual  manifestation,  then  at  least  some  audible  voice  speaking  from 
heaven.  Is  not  this  desire  and  craving  at  the  base  of  the  world-idolatry  ?  of  the 
ecstatic  dreams  of  mystic  contemplation  ?  And  it  has  been  well  said,  "  The  desire 
would  be  well  founded  if  the  essence  of  God  consisted  of  power;  the  true 
theophany  might  then  be  found  in  some  splendid  appearance."  2.  But  would  thia 
at  once,  even  were  it  granted,  disperse  the  mist  and  darkness  of  error  and 
unbelief  1  It  may  be  doubted.  There  are  glorious  manifestations  of  God  in 
nature  :  "  The  heavens  declare  His  glory,"  etc.  His  glory  was  manifested  in  an 
especial  fashion  to  Israel  (Ps.  lxviii.,  cvii.,  etc.).  But  even  these  manifestations 
did  not  suffice  to  banish  unbelief,  etc.  Men  in  such  a  way  alone  could  not  come 
to  the  true  vision  of  God.  But  this  longing  is  a  true  and  heavenly  longing  ;  it  is 
the  Godlike  in  man's  heart  seeking  to  find  its  source  and  end.  Therefore  such 
a  desire  is  not  to  be  repressed  as  wrong,  but  rightly  directed. 

II.  In  Jesus  is  the  full  revelation  of  the  Father.  1.  Our  Lord  did  not  chide 
Philip  for  his  request,  but  for  his  slowness  of  heart  in  not  realising  that  it  had 
already  been  granted.  It  showed  the  depth  of  Philip's  love  ;  for  it  was  in  view 
of  Jesus'  departure  that  he  desired  this  vision,  so  that  their  faith  in  Jesus  and 
the  divinity  of  His  mission  might  be  fully  established.  Such  a  manifestation 
as  he  asked  would  at  once  set  their  doubts  at  rest.  But  it  was  a  melancholy 
proof  also  of  the  weakness  and  uninstructedness  of  Philip's  faith.  2.  And  it  was 
in  view  of  this  that  Jesus  said  in  sadness,  "  Have  I  been  so  long  time  ?  "  etc.  So 
long  !  Since  the  beginning  of  My  ministry,  when  in  the  ardour  of  new-born 
faith  you  brought  Nathanael  to  Me  as  the  Messiah !  Thou,  who  hast 
accompanied  Me  throughout  these  years,  who  hast  seen  My  life  unfolded  in  the 
world,  and  hast  heard  My  repeated  declarations  of  My  heavenly  origin  (x.  30, 
viii.  19,  vi.  27-40,  etc.), — hast  thou  not  known  Me  sufficiently  to  know  that 
"  He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father  ?  How  sayest  thou  then  ?  "  etc. 
God  can  only  be  seen  aright  when  we  recognise  in  Him  the  loving  Father  of  the 
incarnate  Son.  "  Believest  thou  not  ?  "  etc.  Is  it  not  evident  from  all  you  have 
seen  and  heard  that  "  /  am  in  the  Father,"  etc.,  that  each  dwells  in  each,  that 
the  Son  is  the  expression  and  object  of  the  Father's  eternal  love  (xvii.  24),  and 
that  the  same  eternal  life  is  in  the  Son  that  is  in  the  Father  ?  Surely  none  but 
the  eternal  Son  would  use  such  language  as  this  ! 

III.  That  Jesus  is  the  revelation  of  the  Father  is  confirmed  by  His  teaching 
and  works,  and  the  works  which  those  who  believe  in  Him  shall  do.  1.  He 
reminds  Philip  and  his  fellows  of  His  teaching  in  confirmation  of  His  claim — not 
merely  His  teaching  on  this  special  subject,  but  the  whole  scope  and  tenor  of 
it,  as  showing  His  divine  origin  (vii.  16,  17,  xii.  49)  and  His  oneness  with  the 
Father.  2.  Yes,  more  than  that,  "  The  Father  which  dwelleth  in  Me  doeth  His 
own  works"  (ver.  10,  etc.).  These  works  confirm  My  teaching;  these  words  and 
works  are  surely  the  Father's,  such  as  God  alone  can  utter  and  perform.  They  are 
all  actions  of  divine  love,  pity,  mercy,  benevolence,  attributes  of  the  divine  charac- 
ter, and  thus  testify  to  their  origin.  3.  More  than  this  also,  I  solemnly  say  to  you 
that  a  further  proof  will  be  forthcoming  of  My  oneness  with  the  Father.  I  go 
to  the  Father,  but  it  will  be  as  "  the  Son  of  God  with  power,"  etc.  (Rom.  i.  4-6), 
a  power  that  will  be  manifested  in  My  communicating  to  you  power  to  do  these 
works  that  I  do — yes,  greater  works  than  these.  In  answer  to  believing  prayer 
in  My  name  shall  this  power  be  given  you  from  Me,  "  that  the  Father  may  be 
glorified,"  etc.  "  Those  works  which  after  My  ascension  I  shall  enable  others  to 
do,  thus  showing  My  divine  power  and  co-equality  with  the  Father  "  (Augustine). 
(l  Greater  works  " — those  moral  miracles  of  redeeming  grace,  wrought  through  the 
instrumentality  of  believing  men,  in  answer  to  the  prayer  of  faith',  in  which  the 
sinful  are  led  to  peace,  etc.  True,  they  were  also  wrought  by  Jesus :  "  Thy  faith 
hath  made  thee  whole,"  etc.  (Matt.  ix.  22,  etc.).    But  not  to  the  extent  in  which 

400 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xiv. 


they  would  be  manifested  when  Jesus  was  exalted,  and  under  the  dispensation 
of  the  Spirit.  For  then  the  old  prophecies,  so  glorious  and  far-reaching,  would 
be  fulfilled  (Isa.  lxvi.  8,  etc.). 

IV.  "  Believest  thou  not  ?  "  etc. — This  is  a  question  for  the  present  day.  The 
thoughts  of  the  whole  world  to-day,  as  well  as  of  the  followers  of  Jesus,  are 
directed  to  Him.  "  What  think  ye  of  Christ  1 "  is  daily  becoming  ever  more 
a  universal  inquiry.  And  as  Jesus  asked  Philip  in  sadness,  "Have  I  been  so 
long  ?  "  etc.,  so  might  He  say  to  many  in  the  Christian  Church,  in  whom  the  spirit 
of  rationalism  has  dimmed  their  vision  of  the  true  unity  and  equality  of  Christ 
and  the  Father.  Would  statements  such  as  these,  teaching  such  as  Christ's, 
come  from  one  who  was  not  one  with  the  Father  ?  Is  not  the  Father  manifestly 
revealed  in  Him  ?  And  are  not  those  greater  works  still  manifest  in  answer  to 
believing  prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus  ?  The  whole  course  of  the  Church's  history, 
the  power  of  the  gospel  to  convert  the  individual  and  elevate  the  race,  the 
triumphs  of  modern  missions — all  these  testify  to  the  living  power  of  the  living, 
loving  Christ,  and  His  oneness  with  the  Father. 

Ver.  12.  Greater  works. — The  works  Christ  did  on  earth  were  a  proof  and 
evidence  of  the  truth  of  His  claims.  They  were  works  worthy  of  the  Son  of 
God,  not  only  because  they  were  works  of  mercy  and  love,  but  also  of  super- 
human power.  They  did  contribute  to  manifest  forth  His  glory.  They  were, 
at  the  founding  of  His  Church,  a  necessary  link  in  the  chain  of  testimony  which 
pointed  to  Him  as  the  promised  Messiah  and  the  Son  of  God.  The  remembrance 
of  those  mighty  works,  therefore,  would  make  His  words  to  the  disciples,  "If  it 
were  not  so  I  would  have  told  you,"  more  convincing  and  comforting.  But  here 
our  Lord  says  that  not  only  shall  His  disciples  do  His  works,  but  greater  works. 
What  does  this  mean  ? 

I.  Christ's  disciples  were  to  do  the  same  works  that  He  did. — 1.  At  the 
founding  of  the  Christian  faith  the  ambassadors  for  Christ  needed  to  be  unmis- 
takably authenticated.  It  must  be  clearly  evident  that  they  came  with  the 
authority  of  the  King  of  kings.  2.  Hence  they  did  the  same  works  as  Christ 
did ;  they  healed  the  sick,  etc.,  and  raised  the  dead,  in  His  name.  And  without 
doubt  those  works  of  power  in  Christ's  name  drew  the  attention  of  those  who 
saw  them  wrought  to  the  gospel,  and  were  a  testimony  that  the  apostles  were 
armed  with  divine  authority.  3.  And  yet  another  wonderful  work  done  by 
Christ  was  carried  out  by  the  apostles.  The  gospel  was  preached  to  the  poor 
(Luke  xvii.  22). 

II.  But  the  disciples  were  also  to  do  greater  works  than  the  Master. — 
1.  Was  this  possible  ?  Could  any  works  possibly  be  greater  than  those  typical 
miracles  related  by  John,  culminating  in  the  raising  up  of  Lazarus  1  Yet  these 
were  not  the  Saviour's  greatest  works.  Christ  might  have  cured  humanity  at 
large  and  for  ever  from  physical  disease,  etc.,  and  yet  the  world  might  have  been 
brought  no  nearer  God  and  eternal  life.  2.  Christ  recognised  the  spiritual  works 
He  did  to  be  the  most  important.  It  was  higher  to  lead  men  to  spiritual  healing, 
and  for  this  end  He  came  to  earth  (Luke  iv.  18).  3.  But  His  sphere  on  earth,  so 
far  as  those  works  went,  was  limited.  He  was  sent  to  "  the  lost  sheep  of  the 
house  of  Israel."  Whereas  the  disciples,  after  being  enlightened  and  strengthened 
by  the  Spirit  at  Pentecost,  had  no  limit  set  to  their  working :  "  Jerusalem, 
Judaea,  Samaria,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth."  Indeed,  the  continued 
history  of  the  "  acts  "  of  these  apostles  and  other  ministers  and  teachers  of  the 
Church  shows  how  grandly  this  promise  was  fulfilled.  With  power  they 
preached  to  Jew  and  Gentile,  and  multitudes  through  their  instrumentality 
became  "  new  creatures." 

III.  This  promise  was  not  confined  to  the  early  Church. — 1.  The  Christian 

dd  401 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


civilisation  in  which  we  live  is  the  outcome  of  that  promise.  How  has  the  face 
of  the  moral  world  changed  since  those  words  were  spoken!  The  "sweeter 
manners,  purer  laws  "  of  Christian  countries  are  the  results  of  the  working  of 
Christ's  true  disciples  from  that  hour  to  this.  These  are  the  greater  works  given 
them  to  do.  2.  And  as  great  or  greater  works  remain  to  be  done  by  the  Church, 
the  disciples  of  to-day.  Higher  reaches  of  faith  and  attainment  lie  still  before 
us.  Vast  tracts  of  heathendom  still  await  the  gospel.  To  our  own  or  some 
future  age  will  be  given  a  crowning  and  glorious  work,  when  "  a  nation  shall  be 
born  in  a  day."  3.  But  to  this  end  we  need  the  same  spiritual  power.  Therefore 
should  faithful  prayer  ascend  for  Pentecostal  blessing. 

Vers.  13,  14.  Praying  in  order  to  working. — Or  a  et  Labora.  This  is  the  divine 
order.  Prayer  and  work  must  go  together,  or  our  work  in  the  end  will  be  in 
vain.  And  those  "  greater  works"  especially,  which  Christ's  disciples  are  to  do, 
must  be  begun  and  continued  in  believing  prayer.  And  it  has  been  the  experience 
of  the  Church  in  all  ages  that  where  faithful  prayer  has  abounded  there  the 
works  of  God  have  been  manifest.  In  regard  to  the  prayer  here  enjoined  there 
is  a  condition  attached. 

I.  It  is  prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus. — 1.  These  prayers  are  the  prayers  of 
workers  in  the  vineyard,  of  those  therefore  who  are  fellow-labourers  in  promoting 
Christ's  kingdom.  They  are  in  close  and  intimate  fellowship  with  Christ,  are 
indeed  members  of  His  body  ;  they  are  of  the  household  of  God.  2.  They  must 
therefore  come  in  the  name  of  their  living  Head.  For  not  only  has  He  opened 
up  a  new  and  living  way  of  access  to  the  throne  of  grace,  but  they  would  not 
desire  to  approach  that  throne  unless  they  could  take  Him  with  them  and  feel 
that  He  would  present  their  feeble  petitions  to  the  Father.  3.  And  this  implies 
asking  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  Jesus.  No  Christian  would  care  to  ask  the 
Father  for  anything  out  of  harmony  with  the  mind  and  will  of  the  Saviour. 
And  thus  our  Christian  prayers  are  in  this  view  conditioned.  But  within 
this  limit — 

II.  It  is  in  reality  unconditioned  prayer. — 1.  "  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask,"  etc. 
"If  ye  shall  ask  anything"  etc.  He  who  speaks  these  words  is  the  King  of 
kings  and  Lord  of  lords,  by  and  for  whom  all  things  in  heaven  and  earth  were 
created.  The  boundless  riches  and  resources  of  the  universe  are  His.  And  out 
of  this  fulness  whatever  is  for  our  good,  and  that  by  which  we  can  be  strengthened 
and  aided  for  His  work,  will  be  given.  For  "  prayer  is  a  key  which,  turned  by 
the  hand  of  faith,  unlocks  all  the  treasuries  of  God."  2.  But  at  the  basis  of  this 
asking  there  must  ever  he  faith.  "All  things  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  prayer, 
believing,  ye  shall  receive  "  (Matt.  xxi.  22).  3.  How  faithful  did  the  apostolic 
band  and  the  early  Church  find  this  promise  to  be  when,  after  the  Ascension, 
they  "  continued  with  one  accord  in  prayer  and  supplication"  (Acts  i.  14).  As 
they  waited  "  with  one  accord  "  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  how  gloriously  were  they 
answered  !  Christian  history  and  biography  can  bring  forward  manifold  proof 
that  this  promise  has  been  "  yea  and  amen." 

III.  This  promise  is  sure  for  every  time  and  for  the  humblest  of  Christ's 
saints. — 1.  Christ  Himself  fulfils  this  promise,  and  He  is  the  same  yesterday, 
etc.,  and  His  infinite  fulness  may  be  drawn  upon  by  the  poorest  and  feeblest  of 
His  disciples.  2.  And  He  encourages  us  to  ask,  and  to  ask  frequently,  for  it 
will  all  tend  to  one  great  purpose,  the  highest  in  the  universe,  "  that  the  Father 
may  be  glorified,"  for  He  will  thus  be  glorified  in  the  Son.  How  marvellously 
the  consciousness  of  His  divine  dignity  is  seen  with  Gethsemane  and  the  cross  in 
view  !  3.  Is  not  the  secret  of  much  of  the  Church's  weakness  want  of  waiting 
on  God  in  unity  of  supplication  in  the  name  of  Jesus  1  Why  are  her  spiritual 
gifts  often  so  low  and  so  few  1     Why  might  not  her  power  be  a  thousandfold 

402 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xiv. 


increased,  since  there  is  the  "  infinite  fulness  "  of  Jesus  to  draw  from  through 
believing  prayer  ?  Perhaps  we  labour  and  scheme  and  plan  too  much,  guided 
only  by  our  own  ideas,  illumined  by  our  own  wisdom.  Might  there  not  be  more 
of  believing,  earnest,  united  prayer,  and  thus  more  blessing  ? 

Vers.  13,  14.  A  gracious  promise. — What  a  marvellous  spectacle  it  is  when 
we  look  abroad  on  the  world  to  see,  amid  all  diversities  of  race  and  occupation, 
men,  whether  in  highly  civilised  nations  or  amid  savage  tribes,  all  acknowledging 
in  prayer  their  dependence  on  the  Unseen  !  Whether  it  be  in  Christian  temples 
and  at  Christian  family  altars,  or  in  mosque  or  home  at  the  call  of  the 
Muezzin,  or  at  the  prayer-mills  and  flags  of  the  Buddhist,  or  in  the  idolater's 
temple,  or  by  the  fetich  stone  of  the  dark  and  ignorant  savage,  there  is  this  sense 
of  dependence  and  the  going  forth  of  the  thoughts  and  desires  of  men  to  powers 
invisible,  which  seem  at  once  to  point  to  man's  high  origin  and  to  tell  of  his 
fall  from  his  original  high  position.  Very  superstitious  and  very  childish,  very 
routine  and  perfunctory,  are  the  prayers  of  men  oftentimes.  But  even  the  most 
superstitious  and  perfunctory  prayer  is  a  witness  to  the  universal  human  sense 
of  need,  and  the  equally  universal  conviction  that  there  is  a  Power  unseen  which 
controls  our  destinies,  and  which  alone  can  satisfy  our  deepest  needs.  Scepticism 
and  infidelity  may  for  a  time  turn  some  away  from  faith  in  the  Christian  creed ; 
they  have  never  been  able  to  obliterate  the  need  which  drives  men  to  prayer. 
In  hours  of  deep  distress  and  trial  even  the  sceptic  and  infidel  have  been  known 
to  bow  the  knee  and  utter  a  cry,  though  wild  and  despairing,  for  help.  The 
necessity  of  prayer  is  one  of  the  grandest  proofs  of  the  original  dignity  of  our 
nature ;  and  our  Lord,  recognising  the  fact,  lays  down  for  His  disciples  in  all  ages 
rule  and  direction  to  guide  them  in  prayer.  Those  who  cannot  command  anything 
or  claim  it  as  a  right  must  ask  for  it.  Those  who  will  not  comply  with  this 
requirement  must  not  complain  if  they  do  not  attain. 

I.  It  is  they  that  ask  that  shall  receive. — 1.  In  warning  His  disciples  against 
formal  prayers  with  vain  repetitions  our  Lord  said  to  them,  "  Your  Father 
knoweth  what  things  ye  have  need  of  before  ye  ask  Him  "  (Matt.  vi.  8).  What 
need  then  of  asking  ?  it  may  be  said,  as  it  often  has  been  said.  2.  It  is  true  that 
God  does  not  need  that  we  should  come  to  Him  with  our  petitions  "  as  if  He 
must  first  learn  through  us  what  we  lack."  But  we  need  to  pray.  "  It  is  only 
through  prayer  that  we  can  come  into  the  right  position  toward  God,  in  which 
we  can  alone  receive  the  fulness  of  His  goodness  to  our  true  blessedness " 
(Dr.  J.  Stockmeyer).  3.  When  a  man  does  not  ask  for  any  special  gift*'that 
others  are  anxiously  seeking,  it  means  that  he  does  not  see  his  need  of  thatjgift, 
that  there  is  no  place  in  his  nature  for  the  reception  of  it.  And  thus  it  is  in 
prayer.  God  knows  men's  needs  ;  but  for  the  heavenly  gifts  He  is  so  willing  to 
bestow  there  may  be  no  room  in  the  lives  of  many.  Their  hearts  and  lives  may 
be  so  filled  with  the  things  of  earth  that  they  are  conscious  of  no  desire  for  better 
things.  The  heart  may  be  so  filled  with  Mammon,  or  some  other  earthly  idol, 
that  there  may  be  no  room  in  it  for  God.  4.  Therefore  the  first  requisite  in 
prayer  is  the  sense  of  need — knowledge  of  the  lack  of  those  gifts  which  God  can 
bestow,  driving  us  to  Him  with  the  feeling  of  dependence  on  Him,  and  thus 
leading  us  to  ask  so  "  that  it  may  be  given  unto  us."  Then  this  asking  that  we 
may  receive  shows  further  that  we  have  attained  to  a  just  conception  of — 

II.  The  true  spirit  of  prayer. — 1.  The  true  suppliant  comes  to  the  throne  of 
grace  in  deep  humility.  And  why?  Because  those  who  come  to  ask  confess 
that  they  have  not  what  they  ask,  that  they  cannot  obtain  it  for  themselves, 
and  that  He  whom  they  ask  can  alone  bestow  the  blessing.  2.  And  not  only 
so :  the  true  suppliants  approach  also  conscious  of  unworthiness  in  themselves, 
and  that  they  must  rely  alone  on  the  grace  and  mercy  of  Him  to  whose  throne 

403 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


they  come  with  their  entreaties.  It  is  not  to  demand  reward  for  labour  done, 
or  gifts  to  be  conferred  because  of  merit,  that  servants  of  God  approach  His 
throne.  Not  even  as  beggars  do  they  come ;  for  the  indigent  man  who  seeks 
alms  at  my  door  may  never  have  done  me  harm.  They  come  rather  as  rebels  to 
the  throne  of  their  offended  Sovereign,  realising  that  every  gift  they  ask  and 
receive  is  of  the  grace  and  free  favour  of  their  offended,  but  now  reconciled, 
King.  3.  This  spirit  of  humility  will  also  be  shown  in  the  condition  observed  in 
all  true  supplication.  At  first  sight  it  would  appear  as  if  our  asking  were  un- 
conditioned. "  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask."  "Ye  shall  ask  what  ye  will,  and  it 
shall  be  done  unto  you  "  (xiv.  1 3,  xv.  7) ;  or  simply,  "  Ask,  and  it  shiJl  be 
given  you  "  (Matt.  vii.  7,  8).  But  there  is,  and  must  be,  this  condition  in  true 
prayer  by  God's  children,  "If  we  ask  anything  according  to  His  will  He 
heareth  us " ;  or,  as  Christ  said,  "  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  My  name " 
(Matt,  xviii.  20).  True  suppliants  will  have  the  humble  consciousness  of 
their  own  limitations,  of  their  unwisdom,  their  want  of  true  foresight,  the 
limitations  of  their  knowledge.  Therefore  they  will  come  to  God  convinced  of 
His  unerring  wisdom,  His  absolute  knowledge,  as  well  as  of  His  power  to  bestow 
the  gifts  they  seek.  And  they  will  realise  that  He  is  not  only  to  be  asked  for 
material  gifts,  as  being  the  Governor  of  the  material  universe,  holding  in  His 
almighty  hand  all  the  powers  and  forces  that  control  and  move  it ;  but  as  the 
bestower  also  of  spiritual  gifts,  that  men  cannot  acquire  these  for  themselves, 
any  more  than  they  can  command  the  sunshine  or  rain,  health  or  sickness. 
But  asking,  etc.,  implies  also — 

III.  Loving  and  trustful  confidence  in  prayer. — 1.  "Asking  that  we  may 
receive  "  is  the  child's  attitude  in  prayer.  It  is  the  son  who  looks  up  with  loving 
confidence  to  the  Father  that  alone  can  come  in  this  attitude  to  God.  2.  Here 
then  another  reason  meets  us  why  God  requires  His  children  to  come  to  Him  in 
prayer.  As  the  divine  Father,  it  is  well  pleasing  to  Him  that  His  children 
should  draw  near  to  ask  Him  for  such  things  as  they  need,  even  though  there  is 
not  a  word  still  un uttered  that  He  does  not  know  it  altogether  (Ps.  cxxxix.  4). 
It  is  true  He  bestows  many  things  which  we  do  not  ask  for  specially,  just  as  a 
father  on  earth  provides  many  things  for  his  children  for  which  they  simply 
rely  on  his  love.  But  even  an  earthly  father  does  not  like  that  those  gifts 
should  be  received  merely  as  a  matter  of  course  and  without  thankful  gratitude. 
And  more  especially  when  a  son  embarks  in  some  enterprise,  or  meditates  some 
course  of  action,  will  a  father  delight  to  be  asked  for  counsel  and  guidance. 
And  do  not  the  attributes  of  a  father's  heart  hide  behind,  or  rather  manifest 
themselves  in,  this  endearing  name  assumed  by  God  ?  3.  In  order  that  we  may 
so  ask  as  to  receive  we  must  come  to  God  in  the  spirit  of  loving  confidence,  with 
unwavering  trust. 


HOMILETIC  NOTES. 


Vers.  10-12.  The  miracles  acts  of  the 
humility  of  Christ. — The  miracles  of 
Jesus  appear,  indeed,  as  very  great 
events,  extraordinary,  unheard  of,  and 
almost  incredible  if  we  compare  them 
with  the  course  of  the  old  dispensation 
of  the  world  (Alten  Weltaon) ;  and 
this  is  the  common  view.  But  if  we 
measure  them  according  to  their 
number,  appearance,  and  importance, 

404 


by  the  infinite  fulness  of  the  power  of 
Christ's  life,  a  saving  power  which 
restores  the  whole  sinful  world  even  to 
the  resurrection,  we  must  regard  them 
as  indeed  small  beginnings  of  the  reve- 
lation of  this  living  power,  in  which 
it  comes  forth  as  secretly,  modestly, 
and  noiselessly  as  His  doctrine  in 
His  parables  ;  and  we  learn  the  mean- 
ing   of    Christ's    saying,    by     which 


SOMILETlC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   XIV. 


He  led  His  disciples  to  estimate  this 
misunderstood  phase  of  His  miracles, 
"  Ye  shall  do  greater  works  than 
these  "  (xiv.  12).  But  Christ's  miracles 
served  in  manifold  ways  to  reveal  His 
life-power  to  the  world  in  subdued 
forms  of  operation.  Often  has  it  been 
attempted  to  find  in  the  miracles  of 
Jesus  an  ostentatious  display  of 
Christianity.  But  a  time  must  come 
when  men  will  learn  to  regard  them 
as  acts  of  the  humility  of  Christ.  Still, 
much  of  the  wonderful  that  is  from 
beneath  must  be  set  aside,  before  the 
wonderful  from  above  is  entirely  ac- 


knowledged as  the  first  interposition 
of  Christ's  eternal  life- power  for  the 
world.  For  this  power  is  holy  even 
as  the  spiritual  light  of  Christ,  as  His 
title  of  Messiah,  and  as  His  blessedness 
in  the  vision  of  God ;  therefore,  it  veils 
itself  to  the  captious,  while  it  unveils 
itself  to  the  susceptible,  and  even  that 
measure  of  it  which  has  become  mani- 
fest in  miracle  appears  to  them  as  too 
much.  But  we  must  not  misappre- 
hend either  the  one  side  or  the  other  of 
the  miracles  in  which  this  power  finds 
its  medium  of  communication  to  men.  — 
J.  P.  Lange. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  13.  The  naturalness  of  prayer. — 
There  is  something  in  the  very  act  of 
prayer  that  for  a  time  stills  the  violence 
of  passion,  and  elevates  and  purifies  the 
affections.  When  affliction  presses  hard,  and 
the  weakness  of  human  nature  looks  around 
in  vain  for  support,  how  natural  is  the  im- 
pulse that  throws  us  on  our  knees  before 
Him  who  has  laid  His  chastening  hand  upon 
us !  and  how  encouraging  the  hope  that 
accompanies  our  supplications  for  His  pity  ! 
We  believe  that  He  who  made  us  cannot  be 
unmoved  by  the  sufferings  of  His  children  ; 
and  in  sincerely  asking  His  compassion,  we 
almost  feel  that  we  receive  it. — Jeremy 
Taylor. 


Ver.  13.  Continual  readiness  for  prayer. 
If  we  with  earnest  effort  could  succeed 
To  make  our  life  one  long  connected  prayer, 
As  lives  of  some  perhaps  have  been  and  are ; 
If  never  leaving  Thee,  we  had  no  need 
Our  wandering  spirits  back  again  to  lead 
Into  Thy  presence,  but  continued  there, 
Like  angels  standing  on  the  highest  stair 
Of  the  sapphire  throne, — this  were  to  pray 

indeed. 
But  if  distractions  manifold  prevail, 
And  if  in  this  we  must  confess  we  fail, 
Grant  us  to  keep  at  least  a  prompt  desire, 
Continual  readiness  for  prayer  and  praise, 
An  altar  heaped  and  waiting  to  take  fire 
With  the  least  spark,  and  leap  into  a  blaze. 

R.  Ch.  Trench 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  15—31. 

Vers.  15-17.  Love  and  obedience. — What  is  the  ruling  power  in  the  lives  of  too 
many  professed  disciples?  What  always  determines  the  will  and  quickens  the 
hand  in  the  way  of  life  ?  Is  it  love  to  Christ  ?  or  is  it  not  too  often  some  form 
of  self-love?  If  it  is  love  to  Christ,  then  it  will  prove  itself  to  be  so  by  the 
test  Christ  here  gives— those  who  love  Him  will  keep  His  commandments.   ' 

I.  How  reasonable  it  is  for  Christians  to  love  Christ.— 1.  We  love  our  friends 
because  of  some  excellency  or  beauty  of  character  or  disposition  which  they 
display,  or  for  some  reason  of  gratitude  because  of  what  they  have  done  for  us. 
Many  have  friends  whom  to  know  better  is  to  love  more,  as  the  character  opens 
out  and  displays  new  excellencies  and  traits— deep  springs  of  affection,  beautiful 
blossoms  of  simplicity  and  goodness— the  ripe  fruit  of  wisdom  and  experience, 
the  silent  ministries  of  love.  2.  So  too  the  disinterested  patriot,  the  pure,  brave, 
unselfish  deliverer  of  his  people,  the  self-sacrificing  pioneer  of  life,  light,  liberty', 
etc.,  to  oppressed  and  degraded  tribes,  win  the  esteem  and  affection  of  all  good  men| 
who  gladly  aid  them  in  their  noble  endeavours.  3.  Now  how  infinitely  more 
should  we  love  the  Eedeemer  when  we  remember  what  He  is  and  what  He  has 
done  !  Who  can  be  compared  to  Him,  the  "  chiefest  among  ten  thousand  and 
altogether  lovely"?     Where  else   shall  be  found  such  loftiness,  beauty,   and 

405 


chap.  xiv.        ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


sweetness  of  character  as  in  the  life  on  earth  of  Christ  Jesus  ?  4.  Then  think  of 
what  He  has  done  for  His  people.  Not  only  has  He  loaded  them  with  many 
good  and  precious  gifts,  even  when  they  had  strayed  from  Him,  but  He  Himself 
came  to  seek  and  save  them,  to  suffer  and  die  for  them.  Then  remember  all 
He  is  still  doing  for  them  from  His  heavenly  throne,  of  the  gifts  He  so  freely 
bestows,  etc.,  and  then  say,  Ought  not  He  to  be  loved  with  an  undying 
affection  ? 

II.  The  test  of  the  reality  of  love  to  Christ  is  keeping  His  commandments. — 
1.  It  may  be  said  that  loving  Christ  and  keeping  His  commandments  are  co- 
extensive in  their  meaning.  They  should  be,  and  will  be  perfectly  so  in  the  glorified 
Church.  As  Augustine  has  said  :  "  Whoever  loves  God  has  in  him  that  spirit 
which  will  lead  him  to  keep  God's  commandments ;  and  when  he  obeys  these 
commands  he  is  simply  carrying  out  into  action  the  principle  that  animates  his 
mind."  2.  Thus  also  when  we  consider  Christ's  regal  position — "  He  hath  made 
Him  to  be  head  over  all  things  to  the  Church  " ;  His  power — "  all  power  is  given 
Him  in  heaven  and  earth  "  ;  His  wisdom — "  In  Him  are  hid  all  the  fulness  of 
wisdom  and  knowledge," — it  is  seen  to  be  reasonable  and  wise  that  we  should 
keep  these  commands  of  His.  But  apart  from  this,  love  to  Him  will  and  must 
lead  to  a  spontaneous  observance  of  them.  For  it  will  at  once  be  recognised  that 
these  commands,  though  sometimes  apparently  hard  for  flesh  and  blood  to  bear, 
are  yet  for  the  soul's  health.  3.  Love  will  give  a  full  and  joyful  obedience  :  not 
like  the  obedience  of  a  slave  to  his  harsh  owner ;  nor  like  that  of  one  who 
serves  with  "  eye  service,"  and  will  escape  when  it  is  possible ;  nor  like  that  of 
one  who  will  be  glad  to  obey  in  great  things,  but  neglects  and  despises  lesser 
commands,  minor  duties.  The  love  of  Christ  will  dominate  all ;  and  His  rule 
— Himself — will  be  the  guide  of  all  our  life  and  all  its  activity.  "  Lord,  what 
wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  1  "     Thus  speaks  the  true  disciple. 

III.  How  shall  the  disciples  be  fitted  for  this  loving  obedience  ? — 1.  Human 
nature  at  its  best  is  weak ;  and  however  good  may  be  the  resolutions  which  even 
Christian  men  and  women  make,  yet  how  liable  are  they  to  fall  from  them  in 
some  onset  of  temptation  !  So  it  was,  e.g.,  with  Peter.  2.  They  need  therefore 
a  diviner  strength  than  their  own,  which  can  inspire  them  and  on  which  they  can 
fall  back  in  moments  of  weakness.  So  it  was  with  the  disciples.  Hitherto 
Jesus  had  been  with  His  disciples,  cheering,  strengthening,  etc.  But  now  He 
was  to  depart  to  go  to  the  Father.  True,  they  were  to  realise  that  He  would 
still  be  near  them  to  comfort  and  sustain,  but  they  needed  also  the  actual 
presence  of  One  who  would  guide  and  direct  them  directly  in  the  place  of  the 
ascended  Redeemer.  3.  Hence  this  promise  of  another  Comforter.  All  that  Jesus 
had  been  would  this  Paraclete  be.  And  He  would  lead  them  in  the  way  of 
obedience,  for  He  is  the  Spirit  of  truth.  And  the  way  of  Christ's  commandments 
is  simply  the  way  of  truth,  for  Christ  is  the  truth.  4.  Nor  were  they  even  then 
without  a  dim  knowledge  of  the  presence  of  this  Comforter,  for  He  was  with  and 
in  Christ.  The  world  cannot  know  Him  ;  its  spiritual  sense  is  too  much  dulled 
and  blunted,  so  that  higher  and  finer  influences  cannot  touch  it.  But  He  dwells 
in  blessed  influence  with  believers  in  the  Church,  and  in  each  faithful,  loving, 
obedient  disciple. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  necessity  of  ever  warmer  love  to  Christ  in  view  of  all  He  is 
and  has  done.  2.  The  evidence  of  love  to  Christ  should  be  unmistakable. 
3.  The  need  true  disciples  have  of  the  Comforter  to  show  them  more  of  Christ,  so 
that  they  may  love  Him  more  fervently  and  obey  Him  ever  more  spontaneously. 

Vers.  16,  17.  The  promise  of  the  Paraclete. — Why  did  not  our  Lord  remain  on 
earth  after  the  conflict  was  past  and  the  victory  won  ?  Why  not  after  His  resur- 
rection take  His  great  power  and  reign,  and  as  a  conqueror  over  sin  and  death  rule 

406 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xiv, 


with  benign  influence  over  our  fallen  race  until  all  the  earth  acknowledged  His 
sway  ?  At  first  glance  it  might  seem  as  if  this  had  been  best.  The  full  reason 
why  it  was  not  so  is  hid  in  the  mystery  of  the  divine  counsels.  But  one  reason 
which  seems  probable  from  man's  point  of  view  may  be  ventured  reverently.  God 
compels  no  man  to  believe  by  external  force.  Now  the  kingly  glory  of  Jesus  on 
earth  would  have  been  such  a  force.  No  room  would  apparently  have  been  left 
for  faith,  or  even  for  free  choice,  on  the  part  of  men.  But  salvation  is  not  a 
state  that  can  be  produced  by  external  force — human  nature  is  not  like  some 
plastic  substance  that  may  be  moulded  by  external  pressure.  Salvation  is 
brought  about  not  against  but  with  the  sinner's  will.  The  guilt  of  sin  is  removed 
by  Christ's  death  ;  but  the  power  of  sin  is  subdued  by  spiritual  and  moral 
influences  appealing  to  mind  and  heart.  It  is  in  this  way  that  the  Spirit  works 
within  man,  touches  the  inner  being  by  His  gracious  influences,  penetrating  it 
with  subtle  though  unseen  power,  quickening  the  new  spiritual  life,  strengthen- 
ing, comforting,  guiding,  aiding,  etc.  Jesus  had  hitherto  been  the  Paraclete  of 
the  disciples ;  but  now  that  He  must  depart  He  gives  this  blessed  promise  of 
another  Paraclete  who  would  dwell  with  them  for  ever. 

I.  The  promised  Paraclete  is  a  divine  person. — 1.  The  scriptural  testimony  to 
this  truth  is  abundant  and  clear.  From  the  period  when  we  read  of  Him  as 
brooding  over  the  waters  of  the  chaotic  universe,  till  the  time  when  in  apocalyptic 
vision  He  issues  with  the  Bride  the  invitation  to  men  to  take  of  the  water  of  life 
(Rev.  xxii.  17),  He  is  represented  as  an  intelligent  agent.  2.  He  works  in  and 
through  the  moral  and  intellectual  nature  of  man,  irradiating  the  darkness  of 
the  carnal  mind,  working  conviction  in  sinners,  inspiring  with  strength  to  lead 
a  heavenly  life.  All  through  the  New  Testament  actions  and  functions  are 
ascribed  to  Him  that  can  only  be  applied  to  a  person,  e.g.  in  this  very  passage. 
He  is  spoken  of  as  "  willing," — "  distributing  to  every  man  severally  as  He  wills  " 
(1  Cor.  xii.  11) ;  making  intercession  (Bom.  viii.  26);  selecting  agents  for  work 
(Acts  xiii.  2),  etc.,  etc.  3.  Divine  actions  and  attributes  which  can  be  ascribed  to 
God  only  are  applied  to  Him.  The  Spirit  descended  in  visible  form  on  Christ 
at  baptism,  and  the  Lord  offered  Himself  .  .  .  through  the  eternal  Spirit 
(Heb.  ix.  14).  These  and  other  references  point  to  the  personality  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  He  is  not  a  divine  influence  merely — a  vague,  indefinite,  impersonal 
something  whose  true  nature  escapes  observation.  4.  This  is  the  only  conception 
of  the  nature  of  the  Paraclete  that  will  agree  with  this  promise  of  Jesus.  A 
spiritual  influence  could  hardly  be  called  a  teacher,  e.g.  who  could  take  of  the 
things  of  Christ  and  show  them  to  the  disciples.  All  Scripture  and  Christ's 
words  show  that  the  Spirit  is  a  divine  person,  performing  acts  God  alone  can 
perform,  and  thus  able  to  speak  with  divine  authority  and  guide  with  unerring 
wisdom.  Otherwise  our  Lord  would  surely  not  have  said,  "  The  Father  shall  give 
you  another  Paraclete"  etc. 

II.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  Paraclete  of  God's  people. — 1.  This  term  {vide 
Notes,  ver.  16)  is  pregnant  with  meaning.  It  not  only  implies  the  meaning  of 
the  term  Comforter ;  it  also  includes  the  ideas  of  helper  and  advocate.  It  was, 
indeed,  just  an  advocate  and  helper  that  the  apostles  needed  in  going  forth  to 
their  arduous  work — an  advocate  to  be  to  them  "  a  mouth  and  wisdom  "  in 
presence  of  their  adversaries,  and  a  helper  in  times  of  danger  and  trial.  Thus  in 
every  way  He  would  be  a  comforter.  2.  To  whom  was  this  promise  given?  To 
a  body  of  humble  men,  not  infallible  in  any  sense  of  that  word.  They  were 
drawn  together  by  a  common  bond  of  love  to  Christ,  yet  they  were  so  weak  that 
in  their  Master's  hour  of  trial  they  forsook  Him,  etc.  Even  after  the  Resurrec- 
tion we  find  them  gathering  together  timorously  in  secret  "  for  fear  of  the  Jews  " 
(xx.  19).  How  differently  they  comported  themselves  after  the  descent  of  the 
Spirit  at  Pentecost !     They  preached  Christ  boldly  in  face  of  threatenings,  stripes, 

407 


chap.  xiv.       tiOMlLETlC  COMMENTARY:   8f.  JOHN. 


imprisonment,  death  (Acts  iii.,  iv.,  xii.,  etc.),  declaring,  when  commanded  to  desist, 
they  must  obey  God,  etc.  (Acts  v.  29).  See  them  as  they  stand  before  kings  and 
rulers,  speaking  "  not  in  the  words  which  man's  wisdom  teacheth,"  etc.  (1  Cor.  ii.  4). 
Scattered  by  the  sword  of  persecution,  and  impelled  by  the  gentle  impulses  of 
the  Spirit  (Acts  viii.  4,  x.  19,  etc.),  they  went  everywhere  preaching  the  gospel. 
Is  it  necessary  to  point  to  the  long  roll  of  martyrs  and  heroic  champions  of  the 
truth  who  have  endured  and  suffered  loss  since  that  time  in  the  Lord's  service — 
the  man  of  substance  losing  all,  and  with  the  slave  fleeing  into  exile,  or  suffering 
death  for  the  truth ;  women,  timorous  and  gentle  in  ordinary  life,  snapping 
asunder  ties  of  affection,  enduring  untold  hardships,  standing  firm  in  the  hour 
of  final  trial  to  witness  for  the  faith  ?  It  was  no  mere  spirit  of  enthusiasm  that 
inspired  them ;  their  hearts  were  touched  with  a  heavenly  affection,  their 
enlightened  spiritual  vision  looked  beyond  the  gloom  of  the  present,  their  minds 
and  hearts  were  sustained  by  the  Spirit's  comforting  power. 

III.  Only  Christ's  people  can  receive  the  Paraclete. — 1.  The  world  cannot 
receive  Him,  i.e.  men  of  the  world  cannot  receive  Him  to  dwell  intimately  with 
them.  Their  hearts  have  no  shrine  for  Him,  that  they  should  become  temples 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  (1  Cor.  vi.  10);  they  are  filled  with  idols,  their  affections  are 
set  on  things  on  the  earth.  The  heart  must  be  prepared  for  the  reception  of 
the  Spirit ;  the  unclean  spirit  must  go  forth  (Matt.  xii.  43)  ere  the  Spirit  of 
Christ  can  take  up  His  abode  there.  This  is  what  Christ  means  when  He 
prefaces  this  blessed  promise  with  the  words,  "  If  ye  love  Me,  keep  My  command- 
ments," and  follows  it  with  the  same  truth  amplified  (ver.  21).  The  Spirit  cannot 
dwell  in  the  heart  where  there  is  no  love  to  Christ.  2.  But  into  such  prepared 
hearts  the  Spirit  comes  and  finds  an  entrance  for  the  truth.  "  The  Spirit's 
teaching  .  .  .  makes  divine  truth  enter  the  soul,  gives  it  entire  reality  within 
us,  and  makes  it  the  truth  to  us.  This  is  undoubtedly  the  meaning  of  the 
expression  '  the  Spirit  of  truth ' "  (Godet).  He  thus  casts  out  all  error,  showing 
us  plainly  the  truth  in  Christ,  witnessing  with  our  spirits  that  we  are  the 
children  of  God  (Rom.  viii.  16).  3.  Thus  believers  see  Him  and  know  Him ;  they 
see  the  manifestations  of  His  working,  and  realise  His  presence  in  their  own  souls. 
The  world,  because  of  its  spiritual  blindness,  cannot  see  and  know  these  spiritual 
facts.  The  manifestations  of  His  working  are  to  them  mere  enthusiasm, 
madness,  as  men  said  when  Chalmers  began  to  preach  with  spiritual  power ; 
"  Come  and  hear  mad  Tom  Chalmers."  4.  "  He  dwelleth  with  you,  and  shall  be  in 
you."  He  had  been  striving  with  them,  as  He  does  with  all  men  ;  but  now 
He  was  to  assume  a  closer,  nearer  relationship.  He  was  to  be  in  them.  At 
Pentecost  a  deeper,  fuller,  richer  manifestation  of  Him  was  to  be  given,  which 
would  be  permanent.  He  abides  with  the  disciples  for  ever — a  perpetual 
Paraclete. 

IY.  The  blessedness  of  this  indwelling. — 1.  In  hours  of  trial  He  upholds  the 
fainting  heart.  As  with  our  Lord,  He  is  with  the  believer,  teaching  Him  to 
oppose  an  "  It  is  written  "  to  the  subtlest  temptation  of  the  adversary.  In  the 
hour  of  death  He  sustains  the  passing  soul,  recalls  the  divine  promises,  gives 
peace.  2.  It  is  by  making  men  "  partakers  of  the  divine  nature  "  (2  Pet.  i.  4) 
that  He  becomes  our  Paraclete,  not  by  temporary  accessions  of  power,  but  by 
making  men  new  creatures,  giving  power  to  the  faint,  etc.  So  that  as  believers 
go  forth  on  their  way  the  spiritual  eye'  sees  ever  more  clearly,  the  spiritual 
armour  sits  more  closely  the  more  it  is  "  proved,"  the  sword  of  the  Spirit  is 
wielded  with  greater  power.  Trials  and  cares  that  would  once  have  weighed  the 
Christian  down  he  is  now  able  to  bear  ;  doubts  and  difficulties  clear  away ;  and 
in  the  brunt  of  temptations,  before  which  he  would  have  fallen  once,  he  passes 
on  "  invulnerable."  God  grant  to  all  of  us  "  to  be  strengthened,"  etc.  (Eph.  iii. 
16,  17,  19). 

408 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.         chap.  XIV. 


Ver.  18.  "  /  will  not  leave  you  orphans." — The  experience  of  the  disciples 
as  Jesus  spoke  of  His  speedy  departure  was  like  that  which  children  feel  as 
they  stand  at  the  bedside  of  a  dying  parent.  What  had  Christ  not  been  to 
them  during  their  three  years'  intercourse  ?  How  they  had  learned  to  look  to 
Him,  to  lean  on  Him,  to  follow  Him  !  How  joyful  had  been  their  intercourse ! 
Each  new  day  some  further  revelation  of  Christ's  power,  wisdom,  or  love  had 
dawned  upon  them,  until  He  had  become  all  in  all  to  them.  The  months  and 
years  had  fled  on  swift  wings  by  His  side.  And  now  the  end  drew  near,  as  He 
told  them.  Yet  a  brief  space  and  they  would  be  left  alone,  orphaned  spiritual 
children  in  an  unsympathetic  and  hostile  world.  But  to  their  troubled  minds 
came  these  words  of  comfort  and  promise,  "  /  will  not  leave  you  orphans"  etc. 

I.  The  disciples  were  not  orphans,  for  they  could  rejoice  in  the  heavenly 
Father's  care. — 1.  All  that  the  Lord  had  spoken  should  have  filled  the  disciples 
with  the  assurance  of  the  Father's  love  and  care.  In  the  Father's  house  a  place 
was  to  be  prepared  for  them,  and  prayer  in  Jesus'  name  would  bring  down  gifts 
from  His  full  storehouse,  in  especial  one  highest  gift,  the  Comforter,  to  guide  and 
counsel,  etc.  2.  In  view  then  of  this  they  were  not  to  be  left  orphans.  But 
more  than  this,  they  had  in  Christ  the  assurance  of  the  heavenly  Father's  love. 
The  sorrow  in  the  lot  of  the  fatherless  is  the  deprivation  of  a  father's  love  and 
care.     But  the  disciples  were  to  lack  neither. 

II.  They  were  not  orphans,  because  Christ  Himself  would  come  to  them. — 

1.  The  disciples  thought  that  Jesus  was  henceforth  to  be  entirely  separated  from 
them,  that  they  would  not  again  see  Him  until  death  or  the  time  of  judgment. 

2.  But  said  our  Lord,  "  Ye  see  Me."  The  world  could  not  see  Him,  for  darkness 
had  overtaken  the  world.  The  disciples  would  see  Him  in  His  resurrection 
glory,  so  that  they  could  greet  one  another  with  the  words,  "  The  Lord  is  risen 
indeed,  and  hath  appeared,"  etc.  (Luke  xxiv.  34,  35).  3.  But  the  presence  and 
care  of  a  loving  father  and  friend  may  be  vividly  realised  though  they  are  not 
visibly  present.  The  boy  at  school  and  the  youth  going  out  into  life,  children 
of  Christian  parents,  experience  this  care.  They  see  it  in  the  gifts  provided,  in 
the  loving  letters  ;  they  know  it  follows  in  earnest  prayer.  So  was  it  with  the 
disciples.  Thus  Pentecost,  the  after-guidance  of  the  Spirit,  the  inspiration  and 
help  in  time  of  need,  the  power  of  doing  mighty  works  in  Christ's  name,  were  all 
tokens  of  His  presence.  4.  More  than  this,  they  would  be  conscious  of  the 
possession  of  that  same  life  which  was  in  Christ,  would  realise  that  they  were 
bound  up  with  Him  by  the  indissoluble  bond  of  a  common  spiritual  life.  "  Be- 
cause I  live,"  etc.  His  presence  then  was  no  imagination,  no  dream  of  fancy, 
but  a  great  spiritual  reality.  5.  And  this  in  turn  leads  to  a  clearer  realisation 
of  the  disciples'  unity  and  fellowship  with  the  Father  in  Christ  as  they  go 
forward  in  the  way  of  His  commandments.  And  thus  more  and  more  Christ  is 
manifested  to  them  in  the  experiences  of  the  Christian  life,  until  that  day  when 
"  they  shall  be  like  Him,  seeing  Him  as  He  is."  Those  who  could  appropriate 
such  promises  were  not  orphans. 

III.  The  same  promises  remain  to  us. — 1.  Only  those  who  by  faith  live 
because  Christ  lives  can  appropriate  these  promises.  They  who  cannot  are 
orphans,  with  no  promise  of  a  place  in  the  Father's  house,  no  hope  because  no 
capacity  for  receiving  the  Father's  spiritual  gifts,  no  assurance  because  no  desire 
for  the  Saviour's  blessed  presence.  2.  But  when  in  living  union  with  Christ 
they  receive  of  His  Spirit,  then  the  sense  of  orphanhood  passes  for  ever  away,  as 
they  attain  to  the  conception  of  their  divine  sonship  and  cry,  "  Abba,  Father  " 
(Gal.  iv.  6). 

Vers.  22-28.  The  promise  of  divine  manifestation  to  loving,  obedient  disciples, — 
These  blessed  words  of  promise  were  spoken  in  answer  to  an  inquiry  by  Judas, 

409 


chap.  xiv.        BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


not  Iscariot,  as  to  how  Christ  was  to  manifest  Himself  to  the  disciples,  and  yet 
not  to  the  world.  How  could  the  world  see  Him  no  more,  whilst  they  were  to 
see  Him  ?  The  simple-minded  disciple  was  still  wandering  among  materialities. 
He  was  thinking  of  visible  appearances,  which  indeed,  in  a  limited  sense,  did 
take  place  after  the  Resurrection.  But  Judas  had  no  true  conception  of  the 
spiritual  manifestation  which  Christ  more  especially  referred  to.  Our  Lord 
proceeded  to  enlighten  the  disciple.  Not  that  the  latter  would  even  then  clearly 
understand  ;  but  when  the  Spirit  was  given,  Christ's  words  would  become  plain. 
Jesus  pointed  out  that  the  prerequisite  for  this  manifestation  of  Himself  is  love 
in  the  believer's  heart,  that  love  which  evidences  itself  in  the  keeping  of  His 
commandments.  To  those  who  thus  obey  Him  He  manifests  Himself  in  glorious 
fashion. 

I.  In  the  consciousness  of  the  Father's  love. — 1.  What  men  have  desired  in 
all  ages  has  been  shelter  from  the  wrath  of  the  Deity,  and  for  the  manifestation 
of  His  mercy  and  favour.  For  these  ends  they  raised  their  shrines  and  multi- 
plied their  sacrifices,  etc.  2.  But  only  in  Christ  and  through  fellowship  with 
Him  in  His  atoning  work  has  this  even  been  possible.  Here  Christ  promises  a 
higher  blessedness.  Through  love  to  Him  and  being  loved  by  Him  disciples  are 
bound  by  a  close  tie  of  affection  to  the  Father,  who  loves  those  whom  Christ 
loves.  3.  And  in  this  love  all  fear  and  terror  of  God  and  the  future  pass 
away,  etc. 

II.  In  the  divine  indwelling. — 1.  With  the  manifestation  of  Christ  to  His 
disciples  will  be  conjoined  the  indwelling  of  the  Father  and  the  Son  ;  both  will 
come  and  make  their  abode  in  the  loving  heart.  2.  Think  of  what  this  means. 
How  highly  favoured  do  even  the  rich  and  noble  esteem  themselves  to  be  when 
a  great  monarch  or  prince  visits  them,  and  sojourns  with  them  perhaps  but  for 
a  night  in  passing  !  How  proudly,  even  in  after-centuries,  are  the  rooms  where 
those  great  ones  slept  pointed  out  by  the  descendants  as  the  king's,  the  queen's, 
the  prince's,  etc.,  room  !  But  here  God  the  Father,  says  our  Lord,  will 
come  with  Him,  and  they  will  make  their  abode  in  the  hearts  of  true  disciples. 
3.  And  this  indwelling  is  not  that  common  and  universal  presence  of  God,  as  He 
who  rules  over  all  and  is  everywhere  present ;  who  "  comes  near  in  judgment " 
to  those  who  outrage  His  laws,  and  in  the  stings  of  an  accusing  conscience  makes 
His  presence  felt ;  who  comes  to  obstinate  contemners  of  His  commands,  like 
Pharaoh  (Exod.  iv.  21,  viii.  15),  and  in  this  very  coming  hardens  or  leads  them 
to  harden  their  hearts.  4.  The  indwelling  of  Father  and  Son  here  promised  is 
the  indwelling  of  love.  To  those  who  listen  to  and  keep  Christ's  words,  His 
promise  to  the  Laodicean  Church  endures  (Rev.  iii.  20).  And  where  He  comes 
the  Father  will  come. 

III.  Christ  manifests  Himself  in  the  indwelling  Comforter. — 1.  All  the 
fulness  of  the  Godhead,  indeed,  is  represented  in  this  indwelling.  Christ  and  the 
Father  come  and  make  their  abode  with  the  true  disciple  in  the  uniting  /Spirit 
of  truth.  2.  When  the  Spirit  comes,  sent  from  the  Father  in  Christ's  name,  He 
will  teach  all  things,  etc.  The  Comforter  is  the  revelation  of  Christ  and  the 
Father.  And  by  His  indwelling  the  divine  presence  will  become  ever  more 
manifest.  He  will  bring  to  remembrance  the  words  of  Jesus,  so  that  the  heart 
will  be  led  to  love  Him  more  perfectly  the  more  He  is  known.  And  in  loving 
Him  and  keeping  His  word,  His  presence  will  become  a  blessed  reality.  3.  The 
proof  of  this  indwelling  will  be  evident  to  all  around.  Taught  and  guided  by 
the  Spirit  and  words  of  Jesus,  and  showing  an  obedient  walk  in  love  toward  the 
brethren,  the  true  disciple  will  be  conspicuous  as  one  who  has  been  with  Jesus, 
one  with  whom  God  abides. 

IV.  The  indwelling  Christ  gives  peace. — 1.  Not  as  on  Sinai,  with  sound 
of  trumpet  and  thunder-roll,  nor  in  the  earthquake  or  the  fire,  but  in  still  and 

410  -  — 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN.        chap.  XIV. 


gentle  breathings,  a  still  small  voice,  the  Spirit  comes  to  dwell  with  Christ's 
chosen.  2.  And  the  divine  abiding  leads  to  peace.  Where  Christ  comes  living 
and  loved,  He  brings  His  peace,  a  peace  resulting  from  restful,  undisturbed 
reliance  on  the  Father.  So  will  it  be  with  those  into  whose  hearts  the  Lord 
has  come.  They  rest  implicitly  on  the  Father's  will.  3.  He  gives  not  as  the 
world,  for  the  world  will  often  take  more  than  it  gives.  He  who  takes  the 
world  into  his  heart  takes  also  with  it  the  world's  unrest,  its  gnawing,  carking 
care,  its  strife  of  tongues,  its  angry  passions,  its  jars  and  bitter  enmities.  But 
those  who  have  opened  their  hearts  to  Christ,  whose  hearts  have  become 
temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  shall  be  at  rest,  even  though  the  storms  beat  around 
them.  4.  And  they  may  be  fearless ;  for  the  citadel  is  safe  with  Christ  within. 
Is  God  abiding  with  us? — 1.  In  order  to  fit  us  for  this  close  fellowship  Jesus 
came  to  earth,  died,  rose  again,  and  poured  forth  the  Pentecostal  gifts  on  the 
waiting  Church.  2.  The  Church  needs  to  send  up  earnest  prayer  for  the  con- 
tinued renewal  of  these  gifts.  "  Lift  up  your  heads,  O  ye  gates,"  etc.  (Ps.  xxiv.). 
Let  God  in  all  His  fulness  of  blessing  come  and  dwell  with  and  in  you,  that  He 
may  be  your  God,  that  you  may  be  His  people. 

Ver.  23.  Christ  and  His  words. — I.  The  connection  between  Christ  and  His 
words. —  1.  Christ  and  His  words  are  both  very  fully  made  known  to  us.  This  is  not 
always  the  case  with  those  whose  names  have  gone  far  and  wide  among  men  as 
teachers  of  the  race.  2.  We  may  have  great  and  noble  words  from  a  man,  but  we 
may  know  little  of  his  personality.  But  in  Christ  both  the  personality  and  the 
words  have  been  brought  out  into  the  clearest  and  fullest  illumination.  3.  And  with 
the  words  God  has  been  pleased  to  give  us  the  life,  as  never  a  life  was  given,  by 
these  four  [Gospels],  each  different,  yet  each  the  same,  a  separate  mirror  to  take  in 
the  side  presented  to  it,  but  all  disclosing  in  lifelike  harmony  the  one  grand 
person,  each  so  absorbed  in  his  theme  that  he  himself  is  forgotten,  his  personality 
lost  in  the  object — all  eye,  all  ear,  all  heart,  for  Christ  alone.  4.  As  they  are 
made  known  to  us  there  is  a  perfect  harmony  between  Christ  and  His  words.  A 
man  should  always  be  more  than  his  expression.  This  is  pre-eminently  true 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

II.  The  connection  between  loving  Christ  and  keeping  His  words. — 1.  The 
way  in  which  our  Lord  states  this  brings  before  us  the  central  truth  of  Christian 
doctrine,  viz.  that  in  some  way  there  must  be  a  change  of  heart  before  there  is 
a  change  of  life.  We  must  begin  to  love  Christ  before  we  can  keep  His  words. 
But  here  comes  in  a  view  which  admits  this,  which  dwells  upon  it  very  strongly 
and  beautifully,  and  which  has  done  much  to  bring  out  the  value  of  the  person- 
ality of  Christ  in  its  bearing  on  our  service.  It  shows  how  He  creates  a  new 
power  in  the  soul,  not  by  His  example  merely,  but  by  His  whole  being — not 
simply  by  teaching  us  and  moving  before  us,  but  by  in  a  manner  transfusing 
Himself  into  us.  2.  The  connection  between  loving  Christ  and  keeping  His 
words  brings  before  us  the  Christian  philosophy  of  morality.  As  Christians  we 
believe  that  the  morality  of  Christianity  is  superior  to  any  other,  in  the  kind  of 
duties  it  gives  prominence  to,  and  the  light  in  which  it  presents  them ;  and 
candid  men  who  profess  to  stand  outside  generally  admit  this.  There  would  be 
a  fatal  objection  to  this  if  Christ  were  either  less  than  He  is,  or  if  He  had  done 
less  for  man  than  He  has  done.  There  are  only  three  conceivable  ways  in  which 
morality  can  be  thought  of  as  springing  up  in  man.  (1)  The  first  is  by  some- 
thing like  an  instinct,  and  that  this  does  exist  in  man  we  are  far  from  denying. 
If  it  were  perfect  in  all  its  parts  on  any  such  principle,  morality  by  instinct  would 
be  morality  mechanical.  (2)  The  second  way  is  by  reason  ;  and  that  reason  can 
do  much  for  morality  must  also  be  admitted ;  but  it  can  never  furnish  it  with 
sufficient  motive  power.     (3)  The  third  and  last  way  is  an  appeal  to  love,  and  love 

411 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


going  forth  to  a  person.  It  is  this  way  that  Christianity  has  chosen.  It  sets 
before  men  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ,  noblest  and  most  beautiful  in  itself,  and 
infinitely  attractive  in  its  self-sacrifice  for  them.  To  love  Him  is  an  impulse  of 
the  heart,  and  this  impulse  is  the  spring  of  all  morality.  If,  then,  we  would  be 
partakers  of  this  noble  Christian  morality,  the  true  way,  the  only  way,  is  to  come 
closer  to  the  person  of  Christ  as  set  before  us  in  God's  word,  looking  on  Him  and 
learning  to  love  Him. — Dr.  John  Ker. 

Vers.  23-31.  To  what  does  the  Holy  Spirit  lead  believers? — The  indwelling  of 
the  triune  God  in  the  believing  and  loving  soul — the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in 
those  who  desire  to  be  Christ's  disciples,  Christ's  peace — the  conflict  of  Jesus 
with  the  prince  of  this  world,  and  the  certainty  of  victory  in  this  conflict  to 
which  Jesus  submitted  in  loving  obedience  to  the  Father, — -these  are  the  chief 
points  in  the  passage. 

Introduction. — "In  Christ  was  life"  (i.  4);  and  the  high  purpose  of  the 
whole  work  of  Christ  is  to  impart  His  life  to  sin-sick  humanity.  The  manner  in 
which  this  life  comes  from  God  and  becomes  incarnate  is  unfolded  in  the 
Christmas  story ;  the  manner  in  which  it  overcomes  death  is  shown  in  the 
resurrection  festival ;  and  the  manner  in  which,  through  the  Holy  Spirit,  it 
flows  into  our  hearts,  in  the  Christian  community,  and  among  the  nations, 
is  the  object  of  the  Pentecostal  commemorative  festival.  Nature  reawakened 
is  an  image  of  the  stream  of  life,  which  surges  in  every  branch  and  through 
every  twig.  The  Holy  Spirit  as  a  wind  of  divine  life  penetrates  the  hearts  of 
men,  rests  on  them  like  cloven  tongues  of  fire,  and  changes  the  unlearned 
apostles  into  eloquent  preachers.  He  divides  the  multitudes,  and  leads  a  great 
number  to  believe.  In  those  crowds  should  we  also  be  included ;  and  may  the 
Holy  Ghost  come  to-day  into  our  hearts  to  fill  them  with  faith  and  love.  The 
Holy  Spirit  leads  us  to : — 

I.  Union  with  God. — 1.  He  shows  forth  to  us  the  love  of  Jesus  in  God's 
word,  and  thereby  stirs  us  up  to  answering  love,  which  manifests  itself  in  our 
keeping  the  word  of  Jesus.  2.  Thereby  the  Spirit  brings  us  into  a  condition  with 
which  the  Father  is  well  pleased,  so  that  He  comes  with  the  Son  to  rejoice  and 
bless  our  hearts  with  the  presence  of  His  grace. 

II.  Comprehension  of  the  words  of  Jesus. — 1.  Although  we  search  and 
examine  the  Scriptures,  our  own  reflections  lead  us  to  no  true  understanding  of 
this  or  that  passage.  But  all  at  once,  in  answer  to  prayer,  the  Holy  Spirit  will 
bring  the  meaning  of  such  passages  home  to  our  souls  with  striking  clearness. 
We  may  read  over  many  sentences  of  deep  meaning  again  and  again ;  their 
connection  with  the  whole,  however,  is  not  clear  to  us,  until  the  Holy  Spirit 
makes  our  glance  more  keen,  so  that  it  penetrates  into  the  deeps  of  the  thought, 
and  is  able  also  to  survey  the  whole.  Thus  He  teaches.  2.  He  also  calls  to 
remembrance.  He  impresses  the  words  of  Jesus  not  only  on  the  understanding, 
but  on  the  heart.  At  the  proper  moment  He  brings  back  to  our  remembrance 
those  passages  which  are  just  fitted  for  the  special  conditions  in  which  we  find 
ourselves,  and  which  are  the  most  comforting  and  salutary  in  the  circumstances. 
He  brings  it  about  that  we  inwardly  experience  the  truth  of  the  word,  so  that 
we  may  be  satisfied  with  it. 

III.  The  peace  of  sonship. — 1.  Our  heart  finds  no  tranquillity  either  in  itself 
or  in  the  world ;  it  is  restless,  fearful,  despondent.  2.  The  Holy  Spirit  awakes 
in  the  soul  a  desire  after  the  peace  of  Jesus  ;  through  repentance,  to  which  He 
impels  our  hearts,  He  prepares  us  for  the  reception  of  this  peace.  He  assures 
us  of  forgiveness  of  sins  and  our  divine  sonship.  Thereby  He  stills  our  unrest 
and  satisfies  our  hearts,  so  that  we  want  •  for  no  gift,  and  experience  only 
blessedness. 

412 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xiv. 


IV.  Victory  in  tribulation. — 1.  We  do  not  see  Jesus  with  the  bodily  eye,  and 
hence  doubts  arise  in  the  heart  as  to  whether  He  is  near.  But  the  Holy  Spirit 
reveals  Jesus  as  the  exalted  one,  who  is  ever  near  those  who  love  Him  till  the 
end  of  the  world.  2.  Satan  brings  tribulation  to  us,  because  in  our  sins  he  finds 
a  vantage-ground.  But  the  Holy  Spirit  drives  us  to  Jesus,  beneath  whose  shield 
the  arrows  of  the  wicked  one  cannot  harm  us.  He  presses  into  our  hand  the 
word  of  God  as  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  with  which  we  can  rout  the  enemy. 
3.  Oftentimes  we  obey  God's  will  reluctantly  and  dejectedly ;  but  the  Holy  Spirit 
shows  us  God's  leadings  in  such  a  glorious  light  that  in  all  our  ways  we  realise 
God's  goodness.  He  then  awakes  us  to  a  joyful  obedience,  which  we  thence- 
forth show  forth  in  reference  to  God's  commands  and  gracious  leadings. — 
J.  L.  Sommer. 

Vers.  25,  26.  The  Holy  Ghost  the  teacher  and  Paraclete  of  believers. — Jesus  had 
to  depart,  but  He  promised  to  send  His  Spirit  in  place  of  His  own  immediate 
presence.  "  I  will  not  leave  you  orphans,"  He  had  said  (ver.  18).  You  shall 
not  be  left  without  a  comforter  to  encounter  what  lies  before  you.  Ye  who  have 
companied  with  Me  through  evil  and  good  report,  in  dangers,  toil,  and  weariness, 
who  have  brought  Me  the  burden  of  your  cares,  confided  to  Me  your  difficulties, 
turned  to  Me  in  all  your  sorrows  till  My  presence  has  become  indispensable  to 
you — ye  shall  not  want  a  counsellor,  a  guide,  an  advocate.  The  Paraclete, 
which  is  the  Holy  Ghost,  shall  come  and  lead  you  to  higher  attainments  than 
those  you  have  yet  reached,  etc.  He  shall  not  only  call  to  remembrance  all 
things  which  I  have  spoken  unto  you,  but  shall  teach  you  all  things,  lead  you 
to  understand  what  has  been  revealed.     Therefore  have  My  peace,  etc. 

I.  We  shall  think  especially  of  that  part  of  the  Spirit's  work  to  which  the 
text  refers.  He  is  the  teacher  of  the  faithful.  He  is  the  divine  teacher  of  the 
Church.  "He  shall  teach  you  all  things,  and  bring  all  things  to  your  remem- 
brance" etc.  Those  to  whom  the  words  were  first  spoken  needed  such  a  promise. 
For  nigh  three  years  they  had  been  in  the  company  of  Christ,  i.e.  they  had  been 
learning  of  Him  "  in  whom  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  " 
(Col.  ii.  3).  They  had  had  a  training  such  as  no  university  now  can  give  to 
ministers  of  the  word.  And  how  had  they  profited  by  this  training?  Alas  ! 
not  as  they  should  or  might  have  done.  Had  not  the  Lord  after  His  resurrection 
to  speak  of  some  of  them  as  fools  and  slow  of  heart  to  believe  all  that  the 
prophets  had  spoken,  etc.  (Luke  xxiv.  25)  ?  And  did  they  not  show  on  the  very 
eve  of  His  ascension  how  far  they  were  from  fully  apprehending  His  teaching 
(Acts  i.  6-8)  ?  But  see  the  same  men  after  the  Pentecostal  outpouring  of  the 
Spirit.  A  mighty  change  had  taken  place  in  them.  A  flood  of  light  seemed  to 
have  been  poured  on  the  sacred  page  and  the  sayings  of  Jesus.  What  was  dark 
and  mysterious  before  was  now  bright  as  noonday.  Before,  the  lowly  life, 
shameful  cross,  etc.,  had  been  stumbling-blocks  to  them.  But  after  Pentecost 
the  true  meaning  of  that  humiliation — humbled  that  men  might  be  exalted — 
was  clearly  seen.  The  cross,  instead  of  being  a  portent  of  shame,  was  seen  to 
be  a  symbol  of  Christ's  glory,  etc.  And  the  result  of  this  divine  teaching  was, 
as  Christ  foretold,  a  mouth  and  wisdom  in  the  day  of  trial,  which  all  their 
adversaries  could  not  gainsay,  etc.  (Luke  xxi.  15). 

II.  The  Spirit  still  exercises  the  same  enlightening  influence  in  the  hearts 
of  believers. — Those  not  taught  of  Him,  and  who  therefore  cannot  "discern" 
divine  truth,  see  no  beauty  in  the  gospel,  are  not  influenced  by  its  promises  or 
threatenings.  And  although  they  may  admire  the  Saviour  as  a  great  moral 
teacher,  etc.,  will  see  no  beauty  in  Him  as  the  Redeemer  of  men,  etc.  They  do 
not,  cannot  understand  spiritual  religion  ;  its  source  and  manifestations  seem  to 
them  too  vague  and  uncertain  to  merit  their  deepest  regard.     How  different  the 

413 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


aspect  those  things  wear  to  those  who  have  been  taught  of  the  Spirit,  etc.  ! 
Invisible  and  spiritual  things  become  to  them  the  highest  realities.  Their  lives 
are  thenceforth  not  governed  by  the  seen  and  temporal,  but  by  the  unseen  and 
eternal.  This  divine  Teacher  "  makes  even  the  simple  wise "  by  revealing  to 
them  the  will  of  Heaven.  The  simple  and  unlearned,  knowing  only  the  Scriptures, 
but  taught  in  them  by  this  heavenly  Teacher,  will  be  able  to  confute  and  con- 
found those  who,  although  wise  in  their  own  eyes,  are  fools  in  the  sight  of 
Heaven.  And  the  possession  of  this  heavenly  learning  brings  with  it  a  spirit  of 
contentment,  gladness,  peace,  such  as  those  wise  only  in  regard  to  earthly  things 
never  possess. 

III.  One  other  truth  must  be  simply  noted  in  regard  to  this  aspect  of  the 
Holy  Spirit's  work :  He  was  to  teach  and  bring  to  the  remembrance  of  the 
disciples  all  things  which  Jesus  had  spoken  to  them.  They  had  not  fully  under- 
stood all  Christ's  teaching.  Sometimes  it  seemed  to  them  He  spoke  in  enigmas. 
But  after  His  resurrection  and  the  descent  of  the  Spirit  sayings  that  had 
appeared  dark  and  obscure  became  luminous  (Luke  xxiv.  8;  John  ii.  22,  xii.  16 ; 
Acts  xi.  16).  The  heavenly  Sower  had  scattered  the  seeds  of  divine  truth  into 
hearts  prepared  to  receive  it ;  but  there  was  needed  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit, 
with  heavenly  influence,  the  dews  and  rains  of  grace,  to  awaken  it  to  life,  to 
cause  it  to  spring  forth  and  bloom  into  fuller  fruitfulness.  And  a  test  of  any 
teaching  professing  to  be  divine  will  be  its  accordance  or  non -accordance  with 
the  great  principles  of  truth  revealed  in  the  teaching  of  Christ  and  amplified 
in  the  apostolic  writings.  Any  Church  or  religious  body  that  claims  that  its 
symbols  (doctrinal)  and  decisions  (ecclesiastical)  have  the  same  authority  as  Holy 
Writ,  and  should  be  as  binding  on  the  faithful,  can  only  claim  such  authority  for 
them  by  showing  that  they  stand  the  test  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  teaching  in 
Scripture.  It  must  be  the  final  court  of  appeal  in  matters  of  faith  and  doctrine. 
We  are  not  told  that  the  Spirit  was  to  teach  the  apostles  any  new  truth.  He 
was  to  instruct  in  and  call  to  remembrance  what  the  Master  Himself  had  taught. 

IV.  This  experience  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  power  as  a  teacher  is  not  confined 
to  the  past. — It  is  a  present  reality.  It  is  known  in  some  measure  by  every 
one  progressing  in  the  narrow  way.  Not  all  at  once  does  the  full  day  of  the 
Spirit's  enlightening  power  illuminate  the  soul.  Here,  as  in  all  God's  works, 
there  is  a  wise  progression.  The  plants  of  grace  are  not  ephemeral  gourds,  but 
palms  and  cedars.  At  the  beginning  of  their  course  believers  feel  that  to 
know  God's  will  and  to  serve  Him  aright  is  a  task  beyond  their  own  powers. 
They  feel  the  need  of  the  Spirit's  help  and  teaching.  But  day  by  day  as  they 
look  more  earnestly  into  the  divine  oracles,  and  use  with  diligence  the  means 
of  grace,  what  was  dark  will  become  light,  "  the  crooked  straight,  and  the 
rough  places  plain." 

Yer.  27.  A  heavenly  legacy. — Peace  now  reigned  undisturbed  in  the  upper 
chamber.  Judas  had  gone  out  into  the  night  to  do  the  work  for  which  he  had 
received  the  wages  of  iniquity.  The  withdrawal  of  his  presence  removed  a 
feeling  of  restraint  perhaps.  The  Saviour's  discourse  now  flowed  along  a  stream 
of  blessing,  which  not  only  refreshed  and  cheered  the  disciples  on  that  memorable 
night,  but  which  has  brought  joy  and  comfort  to  many  in  every  age  since  then. 
These  are  words  of  farewell,  but  also  of  hope.  In  all  this  history  in  St.  John's 
Gospel  we  cannot  fail  to  notice  a  calmness  and  repose  which  are  marvellous,  when* 
we  think  of  the  circumstances  in  which  these  words  were  uttered.  The  unutter- 
able agony,  the  shameful  trial,  the  bitter  cross,  lay  before  Jesus.  Yet  it  was 
not  of  Himself  He  thought,  but  of  His  disciples.  His  mind  was  calm  and 
tranquil.  Here  the  Redeemer  showed  the  same  lofty  repose  of  spirit  that 
characterised  all  His  life  on  earth, 

m 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  xiv. 


I.  In  unfolding  the  central  thought  of  this  verse,  consider  first  that  this  gift 
of  peace  which  Jesus  bestows  is  what  all  men  need,  even  when  they  know  it 
not. — These  words  are  not  merely  words  of  farewell.  Luther  says  :  "  They  are 
the  parting  words  of  One  who  is  about  to  bid  farewell  to  His  friends,  and  gives 
them  His  good-night  and  His  blessing."  True,  the  words  might  also  bear  this 
interpretation.  The  common  Hebrew  salutation  has  some  resemblance  to  these 
words.  How  often  do  we  meet  such  words  as  DP6P?  fQ9  "  Go  in  peace  " ;  and  also 
in  the  closing  salutations  in  letters  (1  Pet.  v.  14),  and  as  a  greeting  to  reassure 
those  in  fear  (Gen.  xliii.  23) !  And  viewed  in  this  light,  they  are  not  like  the  world's 
farewell  greetings,  often  insincere,  mere  words  signifying  nothing.  Not  so  the 
words  of  Jesus;  they  are  heartfelt  and  real.  But  this  is  more  than  a  mere 
leave-taking.  The  words  themselves  show  that.  "  Peace  I  leave  with  you  ;  My  j 
peace  I  give  unto  you."  It  is  the  Lord's  legacy  to  His  disciples,  something 
real  which  He  bestows  on  them,  more  precious  than  gold  or  jewels.     It  is  what 

all  men  have  been  seeking  since  the  Fall,  and  have  never  of  themselves  found. 
In  their  restless  striving  after  satisfaction  in  pleasure,  etc.,  they  were  in  reality 
seeking  peace,  which  cannot  be  found  in  the  possessions  of  earth.  It  is  sought  for 
in  vain  apart  from  God.  It  may  be  described  as  a  state  of  the  spiritual  nature 
of  man  resulting  from  a  right  relation  between  man  and  God.  And  this  is  brought 
about  not  by  any  change  on  the  part  of  God — He  is  unchangeable — but  by  a 
renewing  of  man's  nature  after  the  divine  image. 

II.  How  is  this  change  brought  about  ? — By  God  Himself,  the  author  and 
giver  of  peace.  When  the  new-created  world  arose  at  His  command,  no  jarring 
element  marred  the  unison  of  all  things.  Peace  reigned  in  earth  as  in  heaven. 
Nor  was  it  God  who  banished  peace  from  earth.  It  was  sin.  Sin  came  like  a 
flood,  covering  all  things  with  its  noisome  waters ;  and  peace,  like  Noah's  dove, 
could  find  no  resting-place.  And  as  men  sinned  they  lost  peace  (James  iv.  1). 
But  God  yearned  over  men  in  pity  and  love.  He  Himself  sent  the  Son  of  His 
love  to  bring  peace  to  men.  "  He  is  our  peace."  And  He  was  peculiarly  fitted 
to  undertake  this  work  ;  for  He  is  the  "  Prince  of  peace  "  (lsa.  ix.  6).  One  of 
the  chief  blessings  of  His  advent  was  proclaimed  to  be  "  peace  on  earth."  And  it 
comes  to  men  through  His  cross  (Eph.  ii.  15,  16  ;  Bom.  v.  1).  Through  faith  in 
Him  men  become  "  new  creatures,"  made  anew  in  the  divine  image ;  and  thus 
harmony  between  the  Creator  and  the  creature  is  again  restored.  God  is  the 
author  of  peace. 

III.  The  characteristics  of  this  peace. — 1.  It  is  Christ's  own  peace. — "  My  \ 
peace."  Contemplate  the  story  of  the  Redeemer's  life  on  earth.  He  was  at 
peace  alike  when  He  was  praying  on  the  mountain  top;  or  when,  awakened 
from  sleep  in  the  sinking  fisher-boat,  He  arose  and  said,  "  Peace,  be  still,"  and  the 
storm  ceased  to  rage ;  when  He  taught  the  multitudes  by  the  seashore,  or  was 
dragged  to  the  brow  of  the  hill  above  Nazareth  ;  when  He  sat  with  the  disciples 
in  the  upper  chamber,  or  heard  the  crowds  shout,  "  Crucify  Him,"  or  prayed  for 
His  murderers  on  the  cross.  And  the  key  to  this  characteristic  of  our  Lord's 
life  on  earth  is  to  be  found  in  the  close  and  intimate  communion  He  had  with 
the  Father,  and  His  unreserved  submission  to  the  Father's  will.  Such  com- 
munion and  submission  could  exist  only  when  there  was  complete  harmony 
between  the  Father  and  the  Son.  But  He  was  "  one  with  the  Father."  The 
rule  of  His  life  of  humiliation  was,  "  not  My  will,  O  Father,  but  Thine  be  done." 
Here  again  we  come  in  sight  of  the  way  of  peace.  We  must,  through  Christ, 
enter  into  the  same  relation  of  submissive  trust  in  God.  The  more  we  can 
attain  to  this  spirit,  the  nearer  shall  we  be  to  perfect  peace. 

2.  This  peace  is  not  dependent  on  outward  circumstances,  whatever  these 
may  be. — The  man  of  the  world  is  most  miserable  when  circumstances  are 
adverse.     Who  so  miserable  when  the  props  that  upheld  his  happiness  have 

415 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


fallen  ?  It  is  not  so  with  the  man  who  has  entered  into  fellowship  with  God 
through  Jesus  Christ.  Trouble  and  sorrow  indeed  drive  him  nearer  to  God,  and 
lead  him,  like  the  prophet,  to  say,  "  Although  the  fig  tree  shall  not  blossom," 
etc.  (Hab.  iii.).  In  the  case  of  true  disciples  of  our  Master  and  Lord,  the  direst 
calamities  have  not  been  able  to  shake  the  firmness  of  their  trust  or  overturn 
the  foundations  of  their  peace.  It  is  an  inner  heritage;  and  no  external 
circumstances,  however  untoward  or  unhappy,  can  deprive  them  of  it  or  drive 
them  to  despair. 

3.  It  is  an  abiding  peace. — This  follows  from  what  has  been  said.  It  comes 
from  trust  in  God,  not  in  ourselves ;  and  it  is  this  that  makes  it  abiding  and 
eternal.  It  is  in  the  eternal  Jehovah  that  the  believer's  hope  lies.  What 
need  he  fear  who  is  one  with  Christ  and  thus  with  the  Father  ?  As  the  Rock  of 
Ages  stands  firm  and  sure,  so  believers  shall  never  be  moved.  In  view  of  this 
well  might  the  disciples  be  exhorted  to  be  trustful  and  courageous  !  And  to 
disciples  now  the  realisation  of  this  blessed  truth  should  lead  to  the  same  stead- 
fastness. "  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled  "  when  difficulties  and  trials  meet 
you.  Christ  knows  them  all,  and  the  way  out  of  them.  Be  not  over-anxious 
about  the  morrow.  "God  will  provide."  "  Neither  let  your  heart  be  afraid." 
All  that  is  really  opposed  to  you  who  are  in  Christ  is  opposed  to  Him  ;  and 
therefore  can  even  the  gates  of  Hades  prevail  ?  Your  life  in  Him  should  be  a 
joyful  service,  and  its  latter  end — peace. 

Vers.  29-31.  Comfort/or  trial. — Our  Lord  knew  the  weakness  of  the  disciples' 
hearts,  and  what  was  needed  to  strengthen  their  faith,  so  that  they  might  not 
utterly  fail  in  trials  just  before  them.  He  therefore  repeated  with  wider 
reference  what  He  had  already  said  (xiii.  19)  as  to  His  knowledge  of  what  lay 
before  Him.  They  were  to  learn  that  no  blind  fate,  but  a  directing  Providence, 
was  overruling  the  events  about  to  happen.     Our  Lord  here  showed — 

I.  His  divine  prescience. — 1.  All  through  His  public  ministry  He  had  shown 
His  omniscient  prevision  regarding  the  course  of  events  that  should  group 
themselves  round  His  person  and  work,  e.g.  the  action  of  the  traitor,  the 
manner  of  His  death,  etc.  2.  This  would  prepare  the  disciples,  in  part  at  least, 
for  what  was  to  happen,  and  would  tend  to  assure  them  of  the  certainty  of  His 
promise,  "  I  will  not  leave  you  orphans."     Further,  by  this  prediction — 

II.  Our  Lord  strengthened  the  disciples  to  endure. — 1.  He  called  attention 
to  the  fact  that  the  prince  of  this  world  was  beginning  his  final  onslaught.  But 
He  added,  "  and  hath  nothing  in  Me."  2.  The  conflict  was  in  reality  already  over. 
The  will  of  Christ  was  one  with  the  Father's  will  ;  and  thus  in  face  of  the 
coming  foe  He  arose  to  meet  and  vanquish  him  as  He  said,  "  Arise,  let  us 
go  hence."  3.  Therefore  might  the  disciples  realise  that  with  Christ  and  the 
Father  abiding  with  them  they  too  would  be  secure. 

III.  The  same  truth  remains  for  our  comfort  and  strength. — 1.  One  part  of 
what  our  Lord  foretold  has  come  to  pass.  Shall  this  not  lead  to  faith  that  what 
remains  shall  likewise  be  fulfilled  ?  The  Father  hath  put  all  things  under  His 
feet :  "  He  must  reign  till  He  hath  put  all  enemies  under  His  feet."  As  He 
conquered  before,  so  His  people  believe  He  will  conquer  in  the  end.  3.  In  later 
days  the  Church  will  again  enter  into  conflict  with  the  prince  and  forces  of  evil 
(2  Thess.  ii.,  etc.).  But  those  with  whom  the  Father  and  Son  abide,  to  whom 
the  Comforter  has  come  with  enlightening  and  guiding  power,  need  not  fear. 
As  in  the  past,  the  prince  of  this  world  shall  have  no  real  power  over  the  people 
of  God.  With  the  Captain  of  salvation  within,  and  the  walls  of  salvation  around, 
there  is  safety.  No  device  of  the  enemy,  no  engine  however  cunning  and  strong, 
no  weapon  however  vaunted,  no  fiery  darts,  can  avail  to  move  the  heart  in  which 
God  dwells. 

416 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.         chap.  xiv. 


HOMILETIG  NOTES. 


Ver.  23.  Keeping  Christ's  words. — 
His  words  mean  all  that  is  commanded 
and  promised  in  them.  Thus  one  who 
loves  Jesus  will  not  only  possess  or 
hear  but  will  keep  His  words,  in 
remembrance,  in  faith,  in  the  midst 
of  sorrow. 

No  fear  when  God  dwells  in  the 
heart. — If  the  emperor  could  say  to 
the  boatman,  Fear  not,  for  Caesar  is 
in  the  vessel,  why  should  I  not  say 
to  my  soul,  Fear  not,  God  is  with 
thee? 

The  manner  of  the  divine  indwelling. 
— God  will  not  dwell  with  us  merely 
as  a  guest  in  an  inn,  who  comes  to-day 
and  goes  to-morrow;  He  will  come 
as  the  Father  of  the  family  into  His 
house,  and  will  never  forsake  us. 

Yer.  24.  The  Christian's  love  to  God 
shown  in  his  deeds.  —  It  is  a  fatal 
self-deception  when  any  one  boasts  of 
having  love  to  God,  and  yet  proves 
the  contrary  by  his  deeds  (Tit.  i.  16  ; 
1  John  ii.  3,  4). 

In  the  offering  of  obedient  service  to 
God  three  things  must  be  observed. — 
Obey  God  willingly  (Ps.  ex.  3) ;  obey 
God  all  through  life  (Luke  i.  74,  75) ; 
obey  God  before  all  else  (Acts  v.  29). 

Figure  of  a  loveless  Christian. — A 
Christian  without  love  is  like  a  painted 
image  ;  or  a  corpse  wrapped  in  beauti- 
ful garments  and  covered  with  flowers ; 
or,  after  the  apostle's  similitude,  like 
sounding  brass  or  a  tinkling  cymbal 
(1  Cor.  xiii.  1). 

Ver.  26.  He  who  teaches  all  things 
must  know  all  things.  —  God  alone 
knows  all  things.  For  this  reason  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  appointed  to  be  Doctor 
Doctorum ;  so  that  those  who  are  set  to 
teach  others  should  first  learn  of  Him. 


Ver.  27.  What  Christ's  peace  com- 
prehends.— It  contains  this  assurance, 
that  God  is  well  pleased  with  us  in  Him. 

The  world's  peace. — The  world  often 
speaks  peace  with  the  lips,  and  cherishes 
discord  in  the  heart;  just  as  Joab 
spoke  quietly  with  Abner  (2  Sam. 
iii.  27),  and  immediately  stabbed  him 
with  the  sword.  Without  peace  with 
God  men  have  no  true  peace  on  earth. 

A  peace-loving  heart  is  a  dwelling  of 
the  triune  Jehovah,  for  the  Father 
is  the  God  of  peace;  the  Son  is  the 
Prince  of  peace;  the  Holy  Spirit  is 
the  Spirit  of  peace. 

Ver.  29.  Experience  is  a  powerful 
confirmation  and  assurance  of  our 
faith. 

Ver.  30.  The  prince  of  this  world. — 
The  devil  is  a  prince  of  this  world  in 
conformity  with — 1.  His  vain-glory. 
2.  His  tyrannical  rule.  3.  The  willing 
subjection  of  the  impious.  4.  The 
heathen  idolatries. 

Ver.  31.  The  Christian's  pilgrimage. 
— What  is  the  pilgrimage  of  a  true 
Christian?  A  continual  departing 
hence,  and  a  continual  going  to  the 
Father. 

Genuine  love  exceeds  vjords. — Love  to 
God  must  not  be  merely  an  expression 
of  the  lips.  To  love  in  word  only  is 
the  way  of  hypocrites.  If  we  would 
be  more  than  these,  then  we  must  love 
in  deed. 

Love  perfects  obedience.  —  Without 
love  obedience  is  slavish,  and  cannot 
endure;  but  a  loving  obedience  is  in 
no  way  contrary  to  our  freedom — on 
the  contrary,  it  makes  us  joyful  and 
blessed. — Translated  from  a  collection 
by  Weigel. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  15.  The  proof  of  our  love  to  Christ. — 
Christ  promiseth  His  disciples — that  is,  such 
as  believe  in  Him — that  He  will  give  them 
whatsoever  they  make  petition  for  or  desire ; 


yea,  if  they  love  Him.  For  faith  without 
love  is  dead,  and  hath  no  strength.  Where 
there  is  faith  in  man,  there  followeth  love. 
Many  of  us  say,  We  believe  in  Christ,  and 

EE  417 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


we  love  Him,  yet  we  keep  not  His  command- 
ments. Such  men  ought  well  to  note  the 
words  that  Christ  here  speaketh,  "  Whoso 
loveth  Me  keepeth  My  commandments " 
(xiv.  15-24).  The  disciples  thought  that 
they  loved  Christ  right  because  they  were 
sorry  for  His  departing  ;  but  Christ  teacheth 
us  that  love  consisteth  in  the  keeping  of 
His  commandments.  If  we  will  declare  our 
love  toward  God,  it  must  not  be  done  only 
with  word  and  tongue,  but  with  keeping 
of  His  precepts.  "  The  eyes  of  the  Lord 
behold  the  righteous,  and  His  ears  consider 
their  prayers."  God  will  not  that  we, 
whom  He  through  His  grace  hath  admitted 
for  His  own  children,  and  purified  through 
faith,  should  go  idle.  Faith  which  God 
giveth  us  in  our  hearts  standeth  not  idle ; 
we  have  for  this  purpose  received  it.  even  to 
keep  His  commandments.  Now  is  it  His 
commandment  that  we  deny  and  mortify 
ourselves,  hate  and  despise  the  world,  take 
up  our  cross  upon  us  and  follow  Him,  stoutly 
and  manfully  confessing  and  acknowledging 
Him  before  the  wicked  world,  loving  one 
another  as  He  hath  loved  us,  innocently  and 
godly  leading  our  lives,  whereby  we  may 
daily  receive  the  more  gifts  at  His  hand. 
For  i£  we  keep  not  His  grace  that  He  giveth 
us,  if  we  do  not  continually  and  daily  reform 
ourselves,  and  with  all  diligence  fashion  our 
lives  after  His  life,  it  is  but  right  that  we 
lose  again  what  we  have  received. — Bishop 
Coverdale. 

Ver.  27.  Christian  peace  and  unity. — 
"  How  good  and  pleasant  it  is,"  as  David 
saith,  "for  brethren  "  (and  so  we  are  all,  at 
least  by  nature)  "  to  live  together  in  unity." 
How  that,  as  Solomon  saith,  "  Better  is  a 
dry  morsel  and  quietness  therewith,  than 
a  house  full  of  sacrifices  and  strife."  How 
delicious  that  conversation  is  which  is 
accompanied  with  a  mutual  confidence, 
freedom,  courtesy,  and  complacence  :  how 
calm  the  mind,  how  composed  the  affections, 
how  serene  the  countenance,  how  melodious 
the  voice,  how  sweet  the  sleep,  how  con- 
tented the  whole  life  is  of  him  that  neither 
deviseth  mischief  against  others  nor 
suspects  any  to  be  contrived  against  him- 
self ;  and  contrariwise,  how  ingrateful  and 
loathsome  a  thing  it  is  to  abide  in  a  state 
of  enmity,  wrath,  dissension;  having  the 
thoughts  distracted  with  solicitous  care, 
anxious  suspicion,  envious  regret ;  the  heart 
boiling  with  choler,  the  face  overclouded 
with  discontent,  the  tongue  jarring  and  out 
of   tune,  the    ears  filled    with   discordant 


noises  of  contradiction,  clamour,  and  re- 
proach; the  whole  frame  of  body  and  soul 
distempered  and  disturbed  with  the  worst 
of  passions.  How  much  more  comfortable 
it  is  to  walk  in  smooth  and  even  paths  than 
to  wander  in  rugged  ways  overgrown  with 
briers,  obstructed  with  rubs,  and  beset 
with  snares ;  to  sail  steadily  in  a  quiet  than 
to  be  tossed  in  a  tempestuous  sea ;  to  behold 
the  lovely  face  of  heaven  smiling  with  a 
cheerful  serenity  than  to  see  it  frowning 
with  clouds  or  raging  with  storms  ;  to  hear 
harmonious  consents  than  dissonant  j ang- 
lings ;  to  see  objects  correspondent  in 
graceful  symmetry  than  lying  disorderly 
in  confused  heaps  ;  to  be  in  health,  and  have 
the  natural  humours  consent  in  moderate 
temper,  than  (as  it  happens  in  diseases) 
agitated  with  tumultuous  commotions  :  how 
all  senses  and  faculties  of  men  unanimously 
rejoice  in  these  emblems  of  peace,  order, 
harmony,  and  proportion;  yea,  how  nature 
universally  delights  in  a  quiet  stability  or 
undisturbed  progress  of  motion  ;  the  beauty, 
strength,  and  vigour  of  everything  requires 
a  concurrence  of  force,  co-operation,  and 
contribution  of  help;  all  things  thrive  and 
flourish  by  communicating  reciprocal  aid, 
and  the  world  consists  by  a  friendly  con- 
spiracy of  its  parts ;  and  especially  that 
political  society  of  men  chiefly  aims  at  peace 
as  its  end,  depends  on  it  as  its  cause,  relies 
on  it  as  its  support.  How  much  a  peaceful 
state  resembles  heaven,  into  which  neither 
11  complaint,  pain,  nor  clamour "  (as  it  is  in 
the  Apocalypse)  do  ever  enter,  but  blessed 
souls  converse  together  in  perfect  love  and 
in  perpetual  concord ;  and  how  a  condition 
of  enmity  represents  the  state  of  hell. .  .  . 
How  like  a  paradise  the  world  would  be, 
flourishing  in  joy  and  rest,  if  men  would 
cheerfully  conspire  in  affection  and  helpfully 
contribute  to  each  other's  content ;  and  how 
like  a  savage  wilderness  now  it  is,  when, 
like  wild  beasts,  they  vex  and  persecute, 
worry,  and  devour  each  other.  How  not 
only  philosophy  hath  placed  the  supreme 
pitch  of  happiness  in  a  calmness  of  mind  and 
tranquillity  of  life,  void  of  care  and  trouble, 
of  irregular  passions  and  perturbations,  but 
that  Holy  Scripture  itself  in  that  one  term  of 
11  peace  "  most  usually  comprehends  all  joy 
and  content,  all  felicity  and  prosperity  ;  so 
that  the  heavenly  consort  of  angels,  when 
they  agree  most  highly  to  bless  and  to  wish 
the  greatest  happiness  to  mankind,  could 
not  better  express  their  sense  than  by 
saying,  "  Be  peace  on  earth,"  etc. — Isaac 
Barrow. 


418 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ST.  JOHN.         chap.  xv. 


PAET  V.   (C.) 

The  Union  of  Christ  and  His  Disciples,  with  the  Results  of  this  Union. 

1.  The  relation  of  the  disciples  to  Christ  is  one  of  living  union  as  branches  in 
the  vine  (vers.  1-11). 

2.  The  result  of  this  union  in  the  lives  of  the  disciples  (vers.  12-17),  and  in  the 
unbelieving  world  (vers.  18-27). 

CHAPTER  XV. 
EXPLANATORY  AND  CRITICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  True  vine. — Christ  and  the  disciples  were  now  on  the  way  to  Gethsemane.  Their 
passing  through  the  vineyards,  etc.,  surrounding  the  city  may  have  suggested  this  image : 
others  think  it  may  have  been  called  up  by  a  vine  in  the  courtyard,  or  on  the  roof,  of  the 
house  where  the  supper  was  instituted  ;  others,  by  the  golden  vine  which  adorned  one  of  the 
temple  gates ;  and  others  still,  by  the  fires  of  the  vine-prunings  along  the  valley  of  the 
Kidron.  The  first  seems  the  most  likely  origin  of  the  figure,  combined  perhaps  with  the  last. 
I  am  the  true  (ideal,  veritable}  vine,  etc. — Israel  was  the  vine  of  Jehovah  ;  but  they  failed 
to  bring  about  that  living  unity  and  fellowship  between  God  and  men  that  has  been  effected 
in  Christ.  Christ  is  the  true  centre  of  unity,  the  source  of  true  vine-life,  uniting  the  branches 
to  Himself  as  one  complete  whole.  The  husbandman. — Christ  is  the  true  vine  as  the  incar- 
nate Son.  It  is  as  the  Son  of  man  that  He  enters  into  this  close  relationship  with  humanity. 
Christ  is  the  life  of  the  complex  organism,  and  over  this  living  whole  the  Father  watches 
with  providential  care.    The  husbandman  is  the  owner  and  cultivator. 

Ver.  2.  Every  branch  in  Me,  etc. — There  is  a  being  in  Christ  which  is  yet  not  a  living, 
vital  union  (Matt.  iii.  10,  xxi.  19,  etc.).  These  fruitless  branches  the  divine  husbandman 
"  takes  away."  The  mode  itself  is  not  stated.  "  Death  breaks  the  connection  between  the 
unfaithful  Christian  and  Christ"  ( Westcott).  Purgeth.— Cleanses  or  prunes.  The  word  Kadalpa 
has  here  a  spiritual  significance.  Everything  that  would  retard  fruit-bearing  is  removed. 
Bring  forth. — Bear.    This  is  the  end  of  disciplinary  training,  as  it  is  the  end  of  pruning. 

Ver.  3.  Now  ye  are  clean,  etc. — Pruned  or  cleansed.  The  Word  is  the  whole  revelation  of 
Himself— the  A6yos.  This  Word  has  a  cleansing  power  (Heb.  iv.  12).  When  it  is  believed  it 
exercises  this  power  in  the  soul  (see  v.  24,  viii.  31,  32,  xii.  48,  xvii.  6,  17). 

Ver.  4.  Abide  in  Me,  and  let  Me  abide  in  you. — Both  clauses  are  imperative.  The  indwell- 
ing is  mutual ;  but  the  let  Me  abide,  etc.,  signifies  the  source  of  the  gracious  spiritual  life 
for  the  dependent  branches. 

Ver.  5.  Without  Me. — Apart  from  or  severed  from  Me,  etc.  All  the  branch's  fruitfulness 
depends  on  its  living  union  with  Christ.  Let  any  seek  to  live  apart  from  Him,  without  His 
divine  strength,  and  the  result  will  be  speedily  apparent. 

Ver.  6.  He  is  cast  forth,  etc. — Whenever  the  vital  connection  ceases  then  separation  has 
in  reality  begun.  The  branch  is  already  "  cast  forth,"  though  it  may  remain  for  a  time  in 
outward  union  apparently  with  the  stem.  And  is  withered. — The  reality  of  the  separation  will 
show  itself.  And  men  gather,  etc. — And  their  ultimate  fate  is  to  be  destroyed.  This  image 
may  have  been  suggested  by  the  fires  of  vine-prunings  (see  ver.  1).  Judgment  now  and 
hereafter. 

Vers.  7,  8.  The  end  of  answered  prayer,  as  of  every  Christian  grace  and  blessing,  is  spiritual 
fruit-bearing. 

Ver.  9.  Even  as  the  Father  hath  loved  Me,  I  also  have  loved  you. — In  these  words  our 
Lord  recalls  the  disciples  to  that  which  is  the  source  and  foundation  of  this  union — the 
eternal  love  of  God.  As  the  Father  loves  Him  with  this  perfect  eternal  love,  so  He  loves  His 
disciples  (xvii.  24, 26).  My  love  (ij  dydirr)  77  e/nrj)  is  that  love  which  is  His  very  nature.  "  Thy 
nature  and  Thy  name  is  love."  Abiding  in  that  love  means  in  its  deepest  sense  to  abide  in 
the  Spirit  and  life  of  Christ. 

Ver.  10.  If  ye  keep,  etc.  (xiv.  15). — "  Let  no  one  deceive  himself  by  saying  that  he  loves 
Christ,  when  he  does  not  obey  Christ.  We  love  Christ  exactly  in  the  proportion  in  which 
we  keep  His  commandments  "  (Augustine  in  Wordsworth's  Greek  Testament}. 

419 


chap.  xv.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


Ver.  11.  My  joy. — The  joy  that  is  Mine.  Just  as  He  gives  them  His  peace  (xiv.  27),  He 
gives  them  His  joy,  the  joy  of  self-sacrificing  love. 

Ver.  13.  Greater  love,  etc. — This  shows  the  contents  of  the  conception,  "  As  I  have  loved 
you."  This  is  the  loftiest  ideal  of  love.  Here  He  is  speaking  to  His  disciples,  and  of  His 
self-sacrificing  love  in  reference  to  them  (x.  11).  In  Kom.  v.  6-8  St.  Paul  is  viewing  that 
love  from  the  point  of  view  of  perishing  humanity. 

Ver.  14.  Command  you,  etc. — This  friendship  is  not,  of  course,  on  a  footing  of  equality. 
Our  friends  do  not  command  us.     Our  heavenly  Friend  must  do  so  in  virtue  of  His  position. 

Ver.  15.  I  call  you  no  longer  servants,  etc. — Servants  =  dotXovs,  slaves.  But  the  apostles 
rejoiced  in  His  service  (Rom.  i.  1 ;  2  Pet.  i.  1,  etc.).  It  was,  however,  a  free  service,  not  that 
of  a  slave.  The  slave's  position  admits  but  of  one  mode  of  action,  unthinking  obedience. 
It  is  far  otherwise  with  Christ's  disciples  and  friends.  He  takes  them  into  confidence, 
reveals  Himself  and  His  work  to  them,  makes  them  fellow-labourers  in  His  vineyard.  There 
were  truths  still  to  be  revealed,  but  the  Comforter  would  make  these  known  unto  them  also. 

Ver.  16.  Ye  have  not  chosen  Me,  etc.  (vi.  70,  xiii.  18  ;  Luke  vi.  13). — High  was  the 
honour  to  which  those  fishermen  of  Galilee  had  been  called.  They  had  not  chosen  Him  as 
disciples  choose  a  teacher,  but  He  had  called  them  and  ordained  or  appointed  them  to  His 
work  (1  Cor.  xii.  28  ;  1  Tim.  i.  12,  etc.),  to  go  forth  (when  He  had  gone  to  the  Father),  still  in 
unity  with  Him,  to  bring  forth  fruit,  to  sow  and  reap  in  the  harvest  field  of  the  world 
(iv.  36-38),  to  labour  for  Him,  and  their  labour  would  endure  (1  Cor.  iii.  11-15).  To  such  the 
Father  will  give  all  needed  gifts  in  answer  to  prayer  in  Christ's  name.  The  true  disciple 
will  come  "boldly"  to  the  throne  of  grace,  as  Christ  did  whilst  He  was  on  earth  (see 
vers.  7,  8). 

Ver.  17.  These  things,  etc. — I.e.  all  contained  in  His  words  just  recorded  (vers.  12-16). 
The  outcome  of  obedience  to  Me  will  be  love  one  to  another. 

Ver.  18.  If  the  world  hate  you,  etc. — He  now  directs  the  attention  of  the  disciples  to  their 
relation  toward  the  world.  Christ  loves  His  disciples,  the  world  hates  them,  and  in  this  they 
are  one  with  their  Lord  (1  Pet.  iv.  12,  13). 

Ver.  19.  The  world  would  love,  etc. — icpiXei,  the  love  of  affection.  Notice  the  selfishness 
of  the  world's  love  (vii.  7  ;  Matt.  v.  46). 

Ver.  20.  Remember  the  word,  etc. — The  reference  is  probably  to  some  such  saying  as 
Matt.  x.  16-24  ;  but  see  also  xiii.  16.  He  prepares  them  to  encounter  the  persecution  they 
would  meet. 

Ver.  21.  But  all  these  things,  etc. — The  Lord  considers  the  hatred  as  already  manifested  ; 
it  was  inevitable  in  the  nature  of  things.  The  persecutions,  indeed,  that  arose  about  and 
against  the  apostles  were  instigated  by  hatred  of  the  name  of  Jesus  (Acts  iv.  30,  v.  41). 
They  know  not  Him  that  sent  Me. — Had  the  Jews  really  had  any  true  spiritual  knowledge  of 
God,  would  they  have  acted  toward  Jesus  and  His  disciples  as  they  did  ? 

Ver.  22.  If  I  had  not  come,  etc. — They  shut  their  eyes  against  the  light  and  closed  their 
ears  to  the  truth,  and  therefore  they  could  not  plead  ignorance  (Acts  xvii.  30,  31).  They 
sinned  wilfully  after  the  revelation  of  the  truth  (Heb.  x.  26) ;  they  are  therefore  without 
excuse. 

Ver.  23.  Hateth  My  Father,  etc. — The  nadir  of  the  heavenly,  for  God  is  love  (1  John  iv.  8). 

Ver.  24.  If  I  had  not  done,  etc. — Not  only  did  they  reject  Christ's  teaching,  but  His  mighty 
works  which  confirmed  it  (v.  36,  ix.  30,  x.  21,  37,  etc.).  Thus  they  were  doubly  without 
excuse  (Rom.  i.  20). 

Ver.  25.  They  hated  Me,  etc.  (Ps.  xxxv.  19,  lxix.  4). — Such  is  the  attitude  of  the  world  to 
God's  true  sons  and  servants  in  all  ages. 

Ver.  26.  The  Comforter  (xiv.  16).— The  Spirit  of  Truth,  i.e.  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  who  is 
the  Truth  and  whose  gospel  is  the  truth.  Proceedeth  from  (irapd). — From  beside.  The 
reference  is  to  the  mission  of  the  Spirit.     Testify. — Bear  witness  (xiv.  26). 

Ver.  27.  And  ye  also  shall  bear  witness,  etc. — They  testified  as  to  what  they  had  seen  and 
known,  and  what  the  Holy  Spirit  brought  to  their  remembrance.  But  there  was  also  a 
distinct  witness-bearing  of  the  Spirit  (Acts  v.  32). 


MAIN   HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  1—17. 

Vers.  1-3.  The  true  Vine  and  the  Husbandman. — What  guidance  for  the  spiritual 
life,  what  calm  in  the  midst  of  trial,  what  comfort  and  even  cheerfulness  in  the  hour 
of  dissolution,  have  these  words  of  our  Lord  given  to  the  saints  in  all  ages  since 
they  were  spoken  !  It  is  touchingly  related  of  the  'great  Scottish  reformer  that 
when  within  an  hour  or  two  of  his  death  he  said  to  his  wife,  "  Go,  read  where  I 
cast  my  first  anchor,"  upon  which  she  read  the  seventeenth  chapter  of  John's  Gospel 

420 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  XV. 


(McCrie's  Knox,  p.  276).  And  how  many  since  this  discourse  was  uttered 
(in  which  Christ  speaks  of  that  unity  of  Himself  and  His  people  in  God  which 
He  prays  for  in  chap,  xvii.)  have  cast  an  anchor  there  ! — "  an  anchor  of  the  soul, 
both  sure  and  steadfast,  and  entering  into  that  which  is  within  the  veil" 
(Heb.  vi.  19).  The  first  truth  that  meets  us  here  is  Christ's  declaration  that 
He  is — 

I.  The  true  Vine. — 1.  The  meaning  of  the  word  true  here  is  not  simply  true 
as  opposed  to  false,  but  true  in  an  absolute  sense — the  ideal,  the  veritable  Vine ; 
the  only  root  and  stem  to  which  the  branches  can  be  vitally  united,  and  from 
which  they  can  draw  their  life.  2.  The  vine  of  humanity  had,  through  sin, 
withered  and  died  away  spiritually,  severed  from  the  source  of  true  spiritual 
life.  Even  when  God  "  brought  a  vine  out  of  Egypt,"  etc.  (Ps.  lxxx.),  sin  was 
able  to  interpose.  It  was  necessary  that  there  should  be  a  closer  bond  of 
union  with  the  source  of  all  true  life,  ere  the  vine  of  humanity  could  bring  forth 
fruit  to  the  divine  glory.  3.  Thus  God  sent  the  Son,  and  the  Son  came  to  earth 
to  be  the  true  centre  of  union  between  the  human  and  divine.  The  true  Vine  is 
rooted  in  the  divine  and  eternal ;  but  its  stem  comes  forth  toward  men  in  the 
world — "  The  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us."  Humanity,  united  to 
Him  in  His  incarnation  through  faith,  becomes  fruitful  spiritually.  4.  Men, 
the  branches,  become  one  with  the  Stem.  "  One  life  fills  the  plant  from  root 
through  stem,  and  reddens  and  mellows  each  cluster.  So  His  life  pervades 
all  His  true  followers ;  and  that  one  life  results  in  oneness  of  relation  to  God, 
of  character,  and  of  destiny  "  (Maclaren). 

II.  The  Husbandman. — 1.  It  is  the  Husbandman  who  plants  the  Vine.  The 
term  includes  here  proprietorship.  The  Father  is  in  a  true  sense  the  owner  of 
the  Vine.  Christ's  disciples  are  His  as  branches  of  the  Vine.  But  Vine  and 
branches  are  both  the  Father's — "  Ye  are  Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's " 
(1  Cor.  hi.  23).  The  Father  sent  the  Son  into  the  world  to  assume  our 
nature,  so  that  He  might  become  the  medium  of  spiritual  life  for  men,  through 
their  union  with  Him.  2.  But  the  Vine  is  more  than  a  possession  of  the  Father, 
Christ  is  the  eternal  Son  of  the  Father,  and  is  the  same  in  nature  and  essence  as 
the  Father.  Jesus  is  the  true  Vine  because  of  the  double  relation  in  which  He 
stands  toward  God  and  toward  man  in  virtue  of  His  having  become  incarnate. 
3.  He  thus  "  took  upon  Him  the  form  of  a  servant" — in  infinite  love  and  con- 
descension willingly  came  to  earth  to  stand  between  God  and  men,  and  to 
become  the  means  of  spiritual  life  for  men,  and  of  union  between  them  and  the 
Father.     But  the  Father  is  not  only  the  owner — He  is  the  Cultivator,  he  is — 

III.  The  Vine-dresser. — 1.  The  vine  needs  special  attention  and  care.  A 
skilful  cultivator  is  necessary.  Left  to  itself,  a  vineyard  would  speedily 
degenerate  and  become  comparatively  fruitless.  2.  So  God  watches  over  and 
cares  for  the  spiritual  Vine.  He  tended  carefully  the  vine  brought  out  of  Egypt. 
Much  more  will  He  specially  care  for  this  true  Vine — the  centre  and  source  of 
life  and  fruitful ness  for  men.  3.  The  heavenly  Vine-dresser  is  active  in  His 
treatment  of  the  branches  in  the  true  Vine.  (1)  He  cuts  off  all  the  fruitless 
twigs  and  branches  which,  through  some  cause,  have  been  severed  already  from 
the  source  of  life  (see  on  ver.  6).  But  (2)  "  Every  branch  that  beareth  fruit," 
etc.  The  vine-branches  need  pruning  lest  the  sap  should  run  to  leaves  only. 
So  does  the  Lord  deal  with  His  "people."  He  cuts  away  what  would  hindep 
fruitfulness  in  the  life.  4.  This  is  a  process  that  goes  on  both  in  the  inner  and 
outer  life.  In  the  best  lives  there  remains  some  remnant  of  the  old  nature, 
which  rebels  against  the  "  new  man."  Hence  such  exhortations  as  this  :  "  Die 
unto  sin,  live  unto  righteousness,"  etc.  Even  a  St.  Paul  had  to  struggle  against 
the  law  in  his  members,  etc.,  and  cry,  "  O  wretched  man  that  I  am,"  etc. 
(Horn.  vii.  23).     But  he  could  also  thank  God  for  victory  through  Christ.     So 

421 


chap.  XV.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


Christ  says  to  the  disciples,  "  Now  ye  are  clean,"  etc.  The  light  of  His  truth 
penetrates  to  the  inner  recesses  of  our  being ;  the  Word  shows  us  to  ourselves, 
and  leads  us  through  grace  to  put  away  evil  and  "  cleave  to  that  which  is  good  " 
(xiii.  10).  5.  But  pruning  goes  on  in  the  outward  life  also.  There  are  things 
lying  around  us  and  connected  with  us  that  engross  us  too  much  and  chain  us 
to  the  world.  Men  set  up  as  gods  some  of  those  gifts  entrusted  to  them  often- 
times. This  tends  to  weaken  spiritual  communion,  and  to  check  fruitfulness. 
Therefore  God  in  mercy  and  love  removes  such  things  sometimes.  The  pruning- 
knife  of  trial,  affliction,  bereavement,  cuts  sharply  down.  It  is  hard  sometimes  to 
have  to  give  up  this  or  that  at  the  call  of  conscience  or  duty.  But  the  heavenly 
Vine-dresser  sees  it  to  be  good  for  those  who  thus  suffer.  "  Before  I  was  afflicted 
I  went  astray,"  etc.  (Ps.  cxix.  67,  71).     The  pruning  results  in  fruitfulness. 

Application. — See  to  it  that  this  is  the  result ;  for  if  not  the  knife  may  again 
require  to  descend,  cutting  even  more  closely  than  before.  And  there  may  come 
a  time  when,  after  repeated  trials,  all  is  found  to  be  vain,  and  the  branch  left 
until  it  becomes  profitless.    Of  this  what  shall  be  the  end  ? 

Vers.  4,  5.  The  living  union  of  Christ  and  His  people. — How  precious  are 
those  words,  spoken  under  the  soft  springtide  Syrian  sky,  among  the  vineyards 
and  gardens  clustering  around  Jerusalem  !  The  closing  words  of  the  preceding 
chapter  are  most  significant.  "  Arise,  let  us  go  hence,"  the  Saviour  had  said.  And 
this  going  hence  meant  more  than  simply  quitting  the  upper  room  (or  the  terrace) 
where,  since  the  traitor's  departure,  there  had  been  so  much  peaceful  fellowship,  and 
such  deep  heart-converse  regarding  highest  realities.  For  the  disciples  it  was  a 
going  hence  into  a  new  set  of  experiences,  the  continuance  of  their  life-journey 
without  the  blessed  presence  of  their  Master  and  Lord.  He  had  spoken  to  the 
disciples  of  His  own  relationship  to  the  Father,  and  of  all  the  grace  for  them  which 
that  relationship  afforded.  But  now,  in  view  of  what  was  coming,  and  to 
comfort  them  and  sustain  them  during  the  conflict,  He  spoke  of  their  close  union 
with  Himself  under  this  figure  of  the  vine  and  the  branches. 

I.  The  vine  is  a  fit  emblem  of  our  Lord. — 1.  The  prophet  wrote  of  Christ, 
"  He  hath  no  form  nor  comeliness,  and  when  we  shall  see  Him  there  is  no 
beauty,"  etc.  (Isa.  liii.  2).  And  the  vine  has  no  apparent  graceful  beauty  as,  from 
its  short,  knotted  stem,  it  sends  out  its  branches  on  the  terraced  hillside.  2.  And 
yet  it  has  a  beauty  and  nobility  all  its  own,  possessed  not  by  the  stately  cedar  or 
other  wonders  of  the  vegetable  kingdom.  Its  fertility,  its  vital  richness,  the 
excellency  of  its  products  and  their  wide  and  varied  usefulness,  cause  it  to  be 
prized  worldwide.  3.  Thus,  as  Jesus,  in  reference  to  the  spiritual  nourishment 
of  men,  called  Himself  the  bread  of  life,  so  here,  in  special  reference  to  Himself 
as  the  source  and  channel  of  spiritual  life,  He  called  Himself  the  true  vine. 
4.  In  this  emblematic  description  of  Himself  He  fulfills  the  ancient  prophecy 
which  foretold  that  God  would  raise  up  for  His  people  "  a  plant  for  renown  " 
(Ezek.  xxxiv.  29).  And  lo  !  there  is  none  in  excellency  and  preciousness  like  unto 
Him.  5.  Israel  had  been  called  by  God  a  fruitful  vine — it  took  deep  root,  it 
filled  the  land,  "  the  hills  were  covered  with  the  shadow  of  it,"  etc.  (Ps.  lxxx.). 
But  the  nation  of  Israel,  the  theocracy,  was  but  a  shadow  of  good  things  to 
come.  And  in  Christ  all  that  those  shadows  and  types  symbolised  was  found  in 
reality  and  divine  fulness.  But  there  is  a  further  truth  revealed  in  this  emblem. 
"  I  am  the  Vine,  ye  are  the  branches."     There  is  here  set  forth — 

II.  The  oneness  of  Christ  and  His  Church. — 1.  A  vine  is  not  only  a  stem. 
The  branches  are  part  of  the  vine  and  in  the  vine.  Through  them  the  vine 
sends  forth  its  fruit.  Both  are  mutually  dependent,  although  the  branches 
are  far  more  dependent  on  the  stem.  Still  the  one  needs  the  other.  2.  How 
grand  is  this  thought  as  applied  to  the  relationship  of  Christ  and  His  Church ! 

422 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  xv. 


What  a  clear  and  definite  idea  it  gives  of  the  oneness  of  believers  with  Him, 
their  organic  unity  with  Him,  the  centre  and  source  of  life.  And  how  should  it 
lead  us  to  lively  gratitude,  unbounded  love,  and  adoring  praise.  3.  In  Christ 
much  more  fully  and  vitally  the  Church  becomes  one  in  God  than  it  had  ever 
been  before  His  coming.  All  the  incomplete,  imperfect,  and  shadowy  types  of 
the  Jewish  economy  found  their  completion  in  Christ.  "  The  vineyard  of  the 
Lord  of  hosts  was  the  house  of  Israel,  and  the  men  of  Judah  His  pleasant  plant : 
and  He  looked  for  judgment,"  etc.  (Isa.  v.  7).  The  highest  natural  and  spiritual 
advantages  failed  to  keep  the  vine  of  the  ancient  Church  in  living  oneness  with 
God.  Something  from  the  world  or  the  power  of  evil  ever  interposed,  and  the 
branches  withered,  the  fruit  failed.  And  only  those  branches  which  drew 
through  the  channels  of  promise  a  true  though  sometimes  feeble  nourishment 
became  fruitful.  There  could  not  be  thus  for  humanity  abiding  oneness  with 
God.  4,  But  that  is  made  possible  through  Christ  in  His  divine-human 
personality.  His  essential  nature  is  rooted  in  the  divine.  He  is  one  with  God. 
"  The  Word  was  God."  But  through  His  incarnation  He  was  revealed  among 
men  in  the  world  as  the  centre  and  source  of  divine  life  for  them.  His  people 
become  one  with  Him,  as  the  branches  are  one  with  the  vine,  as  the  members 
are  one  with  the  body.  The  most  vital,  intimate,  and  necessary  relationship 
subsists  between  the  living  branches  and  the  stem.  The  vine  stock  is  essential 
to  the  vine  branch ;  so  is  Christ  to  the  believer — a  close  uninterrupted  union 
must  subsist  between  them. 

III.  How  is  this  union  effected  and  sustained? — 1.  It  is  effected  through 
faith.  "  He  that  believeth  on  Me,"  etc.  (vi.  47).  That  life  which  is  in  Christ 
through  faith  flows  into  the  souls  of  believers.  2.  This  faith  which  is  so  essential 
implies  a  living  trust  in  a  present,  living  Lord,  with  whom  we  can  hold  com- 
munion, who  is  not  far  from  us,  but  has  promised  to  be  with  us  "  even  unto  the 
end  of  the  world,"  and  whose  life  flows  into  and  through  us  by  faith.  "  I  am 
crucified  with  Christ ;  nevertheless  I  live,"  etc.  (Gal.  ii.  20).  He  has  entered 
the  believer's  heart  when  it  was  opened  to  Him  by  faith,  and  entering  has 
become  guest  and  provider.  How  close  and  real  is  this  union  between  Christ 
and  His  people,  the  Vine  and  the  branches  !  3.  And  this  union  is  maintained 
through  believers  abiding  in  Christ,  and  becoming  stronger  and  more  assured  in 
their  faith.  Christ  then  gives  Himself  in  all  His  fulness  unto  them,  for  this 
abiding  becomes  mutual.  "Abide  in  Me,  and  I  in  you."  "  Jesus  is  the  'true 
Vine '  ...  of  which  Israel  had  failed  to  be  the  spiritual  emblem  which  it  was 
meant  to  be  "  (Maclaren).  His  people  live  in  Him,  and  the  fulness  of  His  life 
is  communicated  to  them.  "  We  are  sons  of  God  in  Him,  lights  of  the  world  by 
Him,  clothed  with  His  righteousness,  sanctified  by  His  Spirit,  and  at  last  with 
Him  and  glorified  with  His  glory  "  (Maclaren).  4.  But  there  is  implied  in  this 
the  consciousness  of  dependence  of  the  branches  on  the  vine  stock.  If  the  branches 
are  severed,  new  branches  will  grow,  or  may  be  grafted  on  the  stem.  So  whilst 
the  Church  is  "  the  fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in  all "  (Eph.  i.  23),  yet 
it  must  never  be  forgotten  that  it  owes  its  life  to  Him,  and  apart  from  Him  can 
have  no  true  life.  So  individuals  may  fall  away,  but  others  will  take  their  place. 
5.  When  this  union  is  vital  and  real  it  is  also  enduring.  "  He  gives  His  own 
eternal  life,  and  they  shall  never  perish."  His  Church  will  endure ;  it  cannot 
perish.  Storms,  etc.,  may  come  and  tear  away  withered  branches;  but  the 
true  Vine,  as  an  organic  whole,  will  abide. 

Ver.  5.  Much  fruit. — These  words  were  spoken  when  the  ordinance  of  the 
supper  was  instituted.  Thus  they  come  specially  home  to  those  who  are  seated 
at  the  Lord's  table.  There  are  words  of  encouragement  and  warning.  This 
unity  between  Christ  and  His  disciples,  which  is  so  close,  is  effected,  through  faith, 

423 


chap.  XV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


by  the  "  drawing  "  of  the  Father  (vi.  65,  x.  29).  It  is  not  a  merely  external  union 
if  real ;  but  is  inward,  spiritual.  "  I  live  ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  Me." 
In  spite  of  our  weakness  and  un worthiness,  God  will  not  willingly  cut  us  off  from 
union  with  Christ.  Christians  are  in  Christ,  and  are  therefore  able  to  draw  from 
His  divine  fulness  all  they  need  to  enable  them  to  bring  forth  fruit. 

I.  Fruit. — That  is  what  is  expected  as  the  result  of  union  with  Christ.  What 
is  this  fruit  ?  The  fruit  of  faithfulness  in  the  work  given  us  to  do,  in  our  daily 
toil,  etc. ;  the  denial  of  ourselves  to  all  ungodliness,  etc.  ;  steadfastness  and 
endurance  in  trial  and  temptation,  etc.  ;  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  (Gal.  v.  22). 

II.  No  fruit  apart  from  Christ. — In  the  world  and  in  the  life  of  sin  men 
may  be  active  enough.  But  the  fruits  they  bear  are  ever  vanity,  i.e.  nothingness. 
The  fruits  and  results  of  sin  shall  all  perish.  Only  that  which  bears  the  stamp 
of  eternity  can  really  be  called  fruit.  Therefore  it  is  ever  true :  apart  from 
Christ,  nothing — nothing  for  our  own  higher  good,  nothing  for  the  advancement 
of  the  divine  kingdom,  nothing  for  the  higher  life  of  our  fellow-men. 

III.  In  Christ  infinite  possibilities  of  fruit-bearing. — 1.  "  I  can  do  all  things 
through  Christ  which  strengthened  me"  (Phil.  iv.  13).  Here  are  the  negative 
and  positive  descriptions  of  the  spiritual  life  :  without  Christ,  nothing  ;  in  Christ, 
all  things  possible.  There  is  given  in  Him  divine  strength,  because  there  is  given 
divine  life.  Thus  boasting  is  excluded.  /  can  through  Christ.  He  alone  is  the 
source  of  spiritual  life  and  strength  for  fruit-bearing.  All  true  disciples  need  this. 
Their  own  strength  is  but  weakness.  But  in  Christ  the  weak  and  feeble  have 
brought  forth  much  fruit — even  at  the  stake  or  on  the  scaffold.  2.  How  shall  this 
power  to  bear  fruit  be  attained  ?  Learn  of  Him,  of  His  word  (ver.  3) ;  come  into 
vital  union  with  Him  through  faith,  and  thus  be  strengthened  to  do  and  bear. 
3.  In  the  case  of  some  the  fruit  is  brought  forth  in  enduring.  Dr.  Norman 
MacLeod  relates  a  touching  incident  regarding  a  boy  of  eleven  who  for  years  had 
not  a  day's  rest  from  pain,  and  could  not  move.  The  night  before  he  died,  in 
response  to  some  words  of  sympathy  by  Dr.  MacLeod,  the  boy  said,  "  I  am  strong 
in  Him."  For  the  case  of  those  to  whom  strength  and  opportunity  are 
given,  the  fruit  comes  also  in  the  form  of  doing.  4.  And  in  every  case  the 
fruitf ulness  will  be  evidence  of  the  hidden  spiritual  power.  A  great  building  is 
filled  with  mighty  machinery,  driven  apparently  by  an  invisible  power.  There 
is  no  sound  of  hissing  steam,  etc.  ;  nothing  but  the  "  whir "  of  the  belted 
wheels.  There  is  no  visible  source  of  energy,  but  switch-handles  manipulated  by 
the  engineers.  Underground,  however,  and  hidden,  are  the  cables  of  wires  con- 
necting the  machinery  with  the  water  power,  perhaps  many  miles  away,  which 
is  the  source  of  the  electric  energy.  So  by  hidden  channels  of  communication 
and  means  of  grace  faith  draws  divine  energy  and  strength  for  fruit-bearing. 

Questions. — What  are  you  doing  1  Dare  you  glory  in  that  poor  sheaf  of 
blighted  ears,  or  are  you  bringing  only  tares  to  perfection  ?  Do  not  let  any  say, 
What  can  /  do  ?  I  am  poor,  weak,  etc.  If  Christ's,  you  can  draw  drafts  on  the 
bank  of  faith — faith  in  the  divine  promises.  And  it  is  because  Christians  do  not 
present  their  drafts,  do  not  make  the  promises  their  own,  that  there  is  such  poor 
fruit- bearing. 

Ver.  6.  The  end  of  separation  from  Christ. — Whilst  the  union  of  Christ  and 
His  Church  endures — is  close  and  abiding — there  may  be  and  are  Churches 
and  individuals  who  lose  touch  with  Christ,  and  finally  are  cut  off.  Some 
branches  are  here  spoken  of  as  having  been  in  the  Vine,  which  are  yet  finally 
cut  off  from  it  and  destroyed.  However  difficult  this  may  be  to  understand,  the 
history  of  the  Christian  Church  testifies  to  the  truth  of  it.  Christ  says  that  His 
sheep  will  not  perish,  and  yet  we  read  of  lost  sheep,  who  have  strayed  from  the 
fold. 

424 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN.  CHAP.  xv. 


I.  Apart  from  Christ  there  can  be  no  true  spiritual  life. — 1.  Although  it 
may  appear  outwardly  one  with  the  tree,  a  branch  which  is  not  naturally  and 
healthily  connected  with  the  stem  soon  becomes  withered  and  falls,  or  is  cut 
away.  Something  has  interposed  between  it  and  the  stem,  or  its  organs  of 
nutrition  have  become  weakened  and  unable  to  fulfil  their  functions,  and  no 
vivifying  sap  flows  through  it  to  twig  and  leaf.  2.  So  it  is  with  Churches. 
Instructive  examples  for  all  time  are  given  among  the  seven  Churches  in  Asia : 
Ephesus,  "  losing  its  first  love " ;  Sardis,  true  emblem  of  a  dying  branch, 
" having  a  name  to  live,  yet  dead";  Laodicea,  lukewarm  in  spiritual  things,  yet 
puffed  up  with  spiritual  pride  ;  Pergamos,  threatened  with  the  influx  of  erroneous 
doctrine  ;  and  Thyatira,  with  corruptness  of  life.  These  are  warning  examples. 
3.  And  to-day  the  old  errors  are  ever  ready  to  creep  in  and  destroy  the  Church's 
spiritual  life  ;  lukewarmness,  scepticism,  spiritual  pride,  were  not  confined  to  the 
early  Christian  centuries.  4.  So  is  it  with  individuals.  There  may  be  men  and 
women  who  were  baptized  into  the  name  of  Christ,  have  seemed  true  members  of 
the  Church,  have  been  touched  by  His  word,  influenced  by  His  Spirit,  and 
have  even  prophesied  in  His  name ;  and  yet  something  or  other  has  inter- 
posed to  prevent  a  living  union,  and  they  are  severed  from  the  Vine. 

II.  Apart  from  Christ  men  abide  in  death. — 1.  Here  we  seem  to  be  in  sight 
of  the  awful  possibility  spoken  of  by  the  apostle  :  "  For  as  touching  those  who 
were  once  enlightened,"  etc.  (Heb.  vi.  6).  2.  We  may  not  comprehend  this 
thoroughly.  What  is  called  "the  perseverance  of  the  saints"  is  not  known  to 
us  from  the  heavenly  point  of  view — cannot  yet,  at  least,  be  thus  known.  But 
from  what  is  revealed  we  know  that  God  in  saving  men  does  not  override  human 
freedom.  And  as  a  man  by  resistance  can  prevent  himself  from  coming  into 
saving  union  with  Christ  (v.  40),  so  is  abiding  in  Christ  not  against  but  with 
the  will  of  the  believer.  3.  "  Abide  in  Me."  Had  not  this  union  with  Him  been 
in  some  measure  dependent  on  the  mutual  action  of  the  believer,  such  words 
would  never  have  been  spoken,  nor  would  exhortations  and  warnings  "  to  watch," 
"to  take  heed  lest  we  fall,"  etc.,  have  beer  given.  But  this  is  a  region  of  divine 
mysteries  ;  and  in  view  of  this  possibility — 

III.  We  must  learn  to  rest  with  entire  dependence  on  Christ. — 1.  This  is  the 
true  secret  of  abiding  in  Him.  The  more  healthily  and  unimpededly  the  branch 
draws  its  nourishment  from  the  Vine,  the  stronger  will  it  become,  the  more 
firmly  and  naturally  united  to  the  stem.  2.  Thus  the  more  Churches  and 
individuals  rely  on  their  divine  Head,  the  more  healthy  and  vigorous  will  be 
their  life.  3.  Apart  from  Him  there  is  no  life.  "  Those  who  will  live  from 
themselves,  not  from  the  eternal  truth  and  love  of  God,  shall  be  cast  forth  and 
regarded  as  amongst  the  withered  things  whose  end  is  to  be  burned  "  (Marshall 
Lang). 

Vers.  7-11.  The  results  of  living  union  with  the  true  Vine. — Where  true  union 
with  Christ  exists — where  the  branch  abides  in  the  Vine — there  will  be  clear 
evidence  of  the  fact.  The  branches  are  united  to  the  Vine  for  a  purpose — to 
bear  fruit.  For  that  same  purpose  the  sap  circulates  through  the  whole  plant. 
One  life  is  present  in  it  all.  From  Christ  comes  the  spiritual  life  and  power 
and  stimulus  that  lead  to  the  spiritual  life  in  the  members  of  His  Church  being 
manifested  in  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit. 

I.  Living  union  with  Christ  leads  to  fruitfulness. — 1.  Just  as  the  branch 
which  is  living  and  draws  its  vigour  from  the  living  vine  stock  rejoices  in  the 
green  freshness  of  its  summer  dress,  and  in  the  vintage  season  in  its  luscious 
clusters,  so  should  it  be.  with  the  branches  of  the  true  Vine.  "He  that 
abideth,"  etc.  (ver.  5);  "Herein  is  My  Father  glorified,"  etc.  (ver.  8).  2. 
Christians  evidence  the  presence  of  the  spiritual  life  of  Christ  in  them  by  bearing 

425 


chap.  xv.         BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


appropriate  fruit.  Christ's  spiritual  life  flows  into  their  being,  and  bourgeons, 
blossoms,  ripens  in  the  daily  life.  Prayer  will  become  habitual,  love  will  fill  the 
heart,  deeds  of  mercy  and  kindness  will  be  done  spontaneously.  3.  All  the  gifts, 
talents,  powers  of  the  nature  will  be  employed  in  Christ  on  the  high  level  of  the 
divine  service.  The  believer  will  love  what  Christ  loves,  hate  what  He  hates,  do 
what  He  commands.  4.  And  for  this  end  (looking  now  from  the  point  of  view 
of  the  branches,  and  not  of  the  divine  Husbandman,  whose  action  also  is 
necessary — ver.  2),  the  channels  through  which  grace  and  power  flow  must  be 
kept  open.  Prayer  must  be  constant  and  fervent ;  the  word  and  all  other  means  of 
grace  must  be  diligently  and  reverently  used.  Above  all,  faith  and  trust  must 
lead  to  close  and  constant  communion. 

II.  Abiding  in  Christ,  and  having  His  words  abiding  in  us,  leads  to 
blessedness. — 1.  Every  needed  gift  is  supplied. — "  Ye  shall  ask  whafc  ye  will,"  etc. 
(ver.  7).  What  a  blessed  promise  this  is  to  those  who  can  fully  appropriate  it ! 
And  yet  it  is  only  what  might  be  expected  from  abiding  in  Christ.  "  It  pleased 
the  Father  that  in  Him  all  fulness  should  dwell."  "  In  Him  are  hid  all  the 
treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge."  And  to  living  branches  in  Him — to  living 
members  of  His  body — will  be  given  "every  good  and  perfect  gift."  But  notice 
the  condition  :  "  If  ye  abide,"  etc.  It  is  only  then  that  this  promise  holds 
good.  For  when  we  truly  abide  in  Him,  then  are  our  wills  in  accord  with 
His  will,  as  His  was  with  the  Father's.  If  we  ask  thus  "it  shall  be  done 
unto  us." 

2„  The  more  we  receive  from  His  fulness,  grace  after  grace,  the  more  shall  we 
bring  forth  much  fruit  and  approve  ourselves  to  be  His  disciples. — Only  those  who 
are  bringing  forth  much  fruit  to  God — living  for  the  divine  glory — have  reached 
the  true  end  of  life,  and  attained  its  highest  bliss.  None  else  indeed  can  truly 
understand  life,  none  else  do  so  much  for  men's  highest  interests.  It  is  a 
noble  life,  full  of  devout  aspiration  and  noble  endeavour  ;  it  implies  the  leaving 
behind  of  what  is  mean  and  petty  and  uncharitable,  the  growing  up  evermore 
toward  permanent  discipleship ;  sitting  at  Christ's  feet,  learning  daily  of  Him, 
rising  ever  nearer  to  that  blessed  height  when  "the  disciple  shall  be  as  his 
Master,"  when  "  we  shall  be  like  Him,  seeing  Him  as  He  is." 

3.  The  more  we  approve  ourselves  His  disciples,  the  more  shall  we  keep  His 
commandments  and  abide  in  His  love. — The  more  intimate  the  relation  of  believers 
with  Christ,  the  more  constant  will  be  their  obedience  and  fervent  their  love. 
To  know  Him  truly  is  to  obey  Him.  Is  He  not  highest  wisdom,  truth,  love  ? 
"  To  whom  shall  we  go  ?  Thou  hast  the  words  of  eternal  life  "  (vi.  68).  And 
when  through  obedience  and  following  we  become  more  closely  united  to  Him, 
then  we  shall  realise  ever  more  perfectly  that  "  His  nature  and  His  name  is 
love."  To  be  the  object  of  a  pure  affection  is  to  taste  of  the  highest  blessedness 
earth  can  give.  To  be  the  object  of  Christ's  love — not  only  His  love  of  compas- 
sion for  fallen  man,  but  His  love  of  satisfaction — is  the  earnest  of  that  blessedness 
which  awaits  His  disciples  in  the  Father's  house.  In  view  of  all  this,  then,  we 
understand  what  Jesus  means  when  He  says — 

4.  "  These  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you,  that  My  joy  might  remain  in  you,"  etc. 
(ver.  11). — Just  as  He  spoke  of  His  peace  even  when  in  view  of  Gethsemane  and 
Calvary,  so  the  Man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief  spoke  of  His  joy.  As 
the  patriot  has  joy  even  in  the  midst  of  trial  and  sorrow  endured  for  fatherland 
and  home,  just  as  the  artist  has  joy  in  the  toil  expended  on  his  masterpiece, 
etc.  (xvi.  21),  so  had  the  Saviour  joy  in  carrying  out  the  divine  purpose  in  man's 
redemption,  in  enduring  that  men  might  be  saved,  in  travailing  to  bring  to 
light  "  a  glorious  Church,  not  having  spot  or  wrinkle,"  etc.  (Eph.  v.  27).  And 
that  joy  will  be  ours  if  we  devote  ourselves  to  the  divine  service  in  Him.  The 
chief  end  of  life  is  to  glorify  God  (ver.  8),  that  we  may  enjoy  Him  for  ever. 

426 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  XV. 


Obedience  to  Christ  ever  leads  to  joy  here  and  hereafter.  Whatever  waters  of 
tribulation  the  soul  united  truly  to  Christ  may  have  to  pass  through,  whatever 
dark  valleys  of  trial  and  sorrow,  whatever  conflict  of  temptation  it  may  have  to 
endure,  yet  in  obedience  to  Christ,  as  to  Him  in  obedience  to  His  Father,  there 
will  be  given  amid  all  an  ever-increasing  joy,  which  even  though  imperfect  here 
shall  be  an  earnest  of  the  perfect  bliss  of  heaven. 

Ver.  11.  Spiritual  joy. — It  is  strange  that  our  Saviour  should  speak  of  joy — 
His  joy — when  the  way  of  sorrow  lay  before  Him.  But  that  which  was  accom- 
panied with  such  deep  sorrow  ("  Behold,  and  see  if  there  be  any  sorrow  like  unto 
His  sorrow  ! ")  yet  led  to  highest  joy — joy  to  the  Saviour  "  in  bringing  many 
sons  to  glory  " — joy  to  His  people  in  the  blessedness  of  redemption. 

I.  The  Saviour's  joy  was  that  of  harmony  with  the  will  of  the  Father. — 
1.  This  is  the  true  source  of  Christian  joy.  It  comes  through  self -surrender  to  God 
and  submission  to  His  will.  There  can  be  no  true  joy  in  a  man's  life  till  he  has 
learned  to  say,  "  Thy  will,  O  God,  be  done."  2.  For  this  reason  joy  and  grati- 
tude go  together  in  the  Christian  life.  Gratitude  leads  believers  to  surrender 
themselves  to  God  in  Christ.  But  to  do  this  is  to  become  sharers  in  Christ's 
peace  and  partakers  in  His  joy. 

II.  The  nature  of  Christian  joy. — 1.  The  term  "  Christian  joy  "  seems  to  many 
to  involve  a  paradox.  Many  believe  that  joy  and  religion  are  not  associates — 
that  where  the  one  is  the  other  is  not.  2.  Some  good  people  truly  contrive  to  make 
their  religion  somewhat  unattractive.  Even  good  men  have  been  fallible  here, 
and  extreme  austerity  has  hindered  their  power  for  good.  3.  Why  should 
religion — especially  the  religion  of  Jesus — be  thought  incompatible  with  joy? 
The  belief  or  unbelief  of  the  materialist,  etc.,  might  well  be  joyless,  but  not  belief 
in  the  gospel.  4.  Such  mistaken  ideas  arise  from  wrong  conceptions  of  the  true 
nature  of  joy.  What  is  joy?  Not  the  excitement  arising  from  material 
pleasures,  from  what  men  call  pleasure.  That  is  on  the  surface  merely.  Joy  is 
a  deep-seated  emotion,  arising  from  the  possession  of  some  good  or  the  contem- 
plation of  it.  Unmixed  joy  is  a  pure  emotion,  and  cannot  be  called  forth  by  what 
is  sinful.  Its  outward  manifestations  are  therefore  often  different  from  what 
might  be  expected.  The  eyes  may  be  filled  with  tears,  whilst  the  heart  may  be 
throbbing  with  joy.  ■'  The  noisy  laughter  of  the  fool  "  has  no  affinity  with  true 
joy,  nor  has  the  effervescing  excitement  caused  by  the  world's  pleasures.  It  is  not 
like  a  winter  torrent,  but  like  a  gentle,  perennial  spring.  "  Joy  comes  gently 
upon  us  as  the  evening  dew,  and  does  not  patter  down  like  a  hailstorm " 
(Bichter). 

III.  The  way  to  true  joy. — 1.  It  is  the  way  of  Christ.  To  attain  to  joy  men 
do  not  need  to  live  lives  of  inaction,  etc.  It  is  not  to  be  found  in  some  "  Castle 
of  Indolence  "  or  "  Lotos-eaters'  Island."  2.  Men  seek  in  the  life  of  action, 
adventure,  danger,  the  joy  they  could  not  find  in  luxurious  living.  The  great 
statesman,  e.g.,  does  not  spend  laborious  days  and  nights  merely  for  fortune  or 
fame.  The  first  most  of  our  legislators  have.  The  second  might  be  attained  in 
other  and  easier  fashion.  The  joy  of  the  true  statesman  is  the  joy  of  service  for 
people  and  country.  There  are  times  also  when  the  noble  mind  finds  that  suffer- 
ing and  enduring  bring  truest  joy.  3.  True  joy  is  from  within.  The  world's  joy 
is  adventitious,  dependent  on  changing  external  things,  which  alter  and  leave  only 
a  sad  memory  of  what  has  been.  It  is  the  life  of  selfishness  that  is  destitute  of 
true  joy.  When  the  heart  is  surrendered  to  God,  and  the  life  is  given  into  His 
care  for  guidance,  there  is  given  to  believers  that  peace  and  gladness  at  which 
the  world  wonders,  but  which  it  cannot  understand.     Such  was  the  joy  of  Jesus. 

Application. — Christians  have  many  causes  for  joy.     1.  God's  dealings,  His 

427 


chap.  xv.         HOMILETlC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


gifts,  deliverances,  etc.,  in  the  past.     2.  His  mercies  in  the  present.     3.  The 
assured  hope  He  gives  in  Jesus  for  the  future.     "  Therefore  rejoice  evermore." 

Yers.  12-14.  Not  servants,  but  friends. — Friendship  that  is  sincere  and  lasting 
is  much  esteemed  even  among  men.  Cicero  said  well  that  it  "  improves  happi- 
ness and  abates  misery  by  doubling  our  joy  and  dividing  our  grief."  It  is  a 
voluntary  and  reciprocal  relationship.  It  is  the  most  disinterested  of  all  human 
relationships.  It  is  our  pride  and  happiness  to  be  able  to  call  any  of  the  truly 
great  and  good  on  earth  our  friends ;  and  that  any  of  these  should  call  us  their 
friends  is  esteemed  by  us  as  a  great  honour. 

I.  Notice  the  greatness  of  the  friendship  spoken  of  here. — 1.  It  is  no  earthly 
potentate,  king  or  Caesar,  no  earthly  sage  however  honoured  or  great,  who  calls 
these  humble  men  His  friends.  It  is  He  who  is  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords 
who  says  to  these  humble  Galileans,  "  Ye  are  My  friends."  2.  This  is  indeed 
astonishing  when  we  think  of  the  vast  distance  that  separates  us  by  nature  from 
this  heavenly  Friend.  But  for  this  very  end  Christ  was  "  made  flesh"  so  that 
we  being  "  made  partakers  of  the  divine  nature"  in  Him  might  rise  to  this  high 
estate.  3.  It  is  wonderful,  marvellous.  Yet  He  delights  in  this  name.  He  was 
called  the  friend  of  sinners  (Matt.  xi.  19).  But  more  especially  is  He  the  friend 
of  His  chosen.     What  a  theme  for  praise  and  gratitude  ! 

II.  Notice  the  closeness  and  intimacy  of  this  friendship. — 1.  The  disciples  of 
Jesus  might  well  rejoice  in  being  called  to  His  service,  and  count  this  a  great 
honour.  But  Christ  here  raised  them  above  that  condition,  though  they  still 
remained  servants.  2.  It  often  happens  that  a  faithful  servant  of  a  great 
business  house  rises  from  the  foot  of  the  ladder  to  be  the  faithful  friend  and 
helper  of  the  principals  of  the  firm.  But  the  wonderful  thing  here  is  that  Christ 
raised  these  men  to  this  high  position.  3.  The  merely  subordinate  servant  simply 
obeys  without  always  knowing.  But  it  is  different  with  a  servant-friend.  He 
does  knowingly  and  willingly  what  falls  to  be  done.  The  mere  servant  is  not 
taken  into  counsel.  The  true  friend  is.  4.  Yet  this  friendship  between  Christ 
and  His  people  has  its  distinguishing  features.  "  Ye  are  My  friends,  if  ye  do," 
etc.  It  is  the  friendship  of  the  great  and  wise  elder  Brother,  who  is  all-wise,  and 
in  whose  love  and  friendship  we  can  trust.  And  we  are  Jesus'  disciples  and 
friends  without  ceasing  to  be  His  servants.  It  is  a  unique  relationship.  5.  Still 
it  is  a  close  friendship.  "  Henceforth  I  call  you  not  servants,"  etc.  He  is  one 
with  the  Father.  The  Father  makes  known  all  things  to  Him ;  and  He  reveals 
the  deep  things  of  God  to  His  true  disciples.  The  closer  our  fellowship  with  Him, 
the  more  are  the  divine  purposes  of  mercy  and  love  revealed.  His  word  becomes 
to  Christ's  friends  as  a  light  in  a  dark  place  until  the  day  dawn  (2  Pet.  i.  19). 
His  Spirit  leads  into  all  truth,  and  enlightens  us  so  that  we  can  understand  the 
heavenly  speech,  and  daily  communications  shall  flow  unto  us  from  the  divine 
presence.  He  gives  of  His  Spirit ;  and  the  Spirit  searches  all  things,  yea,  the 
deep  things  of  God.  6.  These  tender  words  of  the  Saviour  are  surely  the  words 
of  a  friend.  How  may  we  be  assured  that  these  words  may  be  appropriated 
by  us? 

III.  This  friendship  shows  itself  in  mutual  love  and  offices. — 1.  Christ 
showed  His  love  toward  us  in  unmistakable  fashion.  "  He  gave  His  life  for 
us  "  (Rom.  v.  8).  How  much  higher  this  than  any  of  the  commonly  recognised 
tokens  of  friendship,  the  sacrificing  of  time,  wealth,  etc.  !  The  greatness  of 
Christ's  friendship  is  evinced  in  that  while  we  were  enemies  He  died  for  us. 
2.  How  are  we  to  show  our  love  to  Him  ?  That  love  of  His  should  constrain  us 
no  longer  to  live  to  ourselves,  but  unto  Him  (2  Cor.  v.  14).  We  should  do  what 
this  heavenly  Friend  commands  us.  As  He  denied  Himself  for  us,  we  should 
deny  ourselves  for  His  sake.     Our  feeling  ought  to  be :   Lord,  Thy  love  and 

'428 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  xv. 


friendship  are  so  great  that  we  will  do  all  things,  give  all  things,  endure  all 
things,  for  Thy  sake.  Our  feet  shall  be  swift  for  Thee,  our  hands  quick  to 
labour  for  Thee,  our  lips  diligent  to  sing  thy  praise,  not  in  the  spirit  of  slaves, 
but  as  those  whom  Thou  callest  friends,  bound  to  Thee  by  the  cords  of  love. 

Yer.  14.  The  friendship  of  Jesus. — Christ  is  all  things  to  the  Christian :  a 
Saviour  mighty  to  save — a  human  friend  and  brother,  entering  in  sympathy 
into  all  life's  circumstances,  raising  all  His  own  nearer  to  Himself,  shedding  into 
the  atmosphere  of  earth  an  aroma  of  heaven.  He  might  have  chosen  to  come 
in  some  other  way,  in  greater  outward  pomp  and  glory.  But  He  came  a  man 
among  men.  Men  need  friendship ;  and  therefore  Christ  assumes  this  relation- 
ship toward  His  chosen.  It  is  the  most  disinterested  of  earthly  relationships. 
Note  some  of  the  characteristics  of  a  true  friend,  and  see  how  all  are  exemplified 
in  Jesus. 

I.  Willingness  to  sympathise. — 1.  All  men  are  more  or  less  dependent. 
None  except  those  with  a  twist  in  their  nature  can  be  hermits.  All  need  social 
intercourse — even  our  Lord  did.  This  desire  for  friendship  arises  in  part  from 
the  need  of  sympathy.  Even  joy  we  must  impart,  much  more  sorrow.  Nothing 
relieves  more  a  stricken  heart  than  true  sympathy.  2.  There  are  times  when 
human  sympathy  avails  not.  We  may  press  the  hand,  speak  the  kindly  word, 
but  cannot  reach  with  healing  touch  the  deep  wounds  of  human  sorrow. 
3.  Christ  can  do  so. 

"  In  every  pang  that  rends  the  heart 
The  Man  of  sorrows  had  a  part." 

Believers  need  no  laboured  argument  to  prove  to  them  the  sympathy  of  Jesus. 
It  is  no  figure  of  speech.     It  is  a  glorious  reality.     Have  we  experienced  it  ? 

II.  Readiness  to  counsel  and  aid. — 1.  A  true  friend  will  be  willing  to  help  in 
time  of  need.  Those  cannot  be  called  friends  who  are  always  ready  to  aid  us 
when  we  are  quite  able  to  help  ourselves,  but  who,  when  the  pinch  comes,  put 
us  off  with  a  little  cheap  sympathy.  Nor  are  they  true  friends  who  do  kind 
offices  that  they  may  receive  the  same.  2.  The  true  friend  is  he  who  loves  us 
ror  what  we  are,  who  is  willing  to  help  us  for  our  own  sakes.  This  is  not  the 
world's  way.  Many  who  have  fallen  through  misfortune  have  been  driven  to 
despair  by  the  coldness  of  false  friends.  How  many  also  have  been  sent  on 
their  way  rejoicing  by  wise  directions  and  aid  in  time  of  need !  3.  Yet,  after 
all,  however  willing  our  friends  may  be  to  aid,  they  may  not  be  able.  But  the 
Friend  who  speaks  here  is  not  only  willing  but  able  to  help  unto  the  uttermost. 
His  power  is  almighty.  He  who  sits  on  the  throne  of  the  universe  stoops  down 
to  help  His  chosen  in  their  time  of  need. 

III.  Constancy. — 1.  Adversity  is  a  great  test  of  friendship.  The  true  friend 
is  one  who  loves  me  whatever  misfortunes  befall  me  :  yes,  and,  even  when  my 
own  folly  has  brought  harm  and  loss,  who  will  help  me  when  repentant,  or  seek 
to  bring  me  to  repentance — who  will  inflict  those  wounds  of  a  friend  that  are 
" faithful " — who  turns  a  deaf  ear  to  those  "  whispering  tongues  that  poison 
truth."     2.  But  where  are  such  friends  to  be  found?     Is  it  not  well  written — 

"  Constancy  lives  in  realms  above  "  ? 

Yes.     But  even  among  men  there  are  bright  examples — Jonathan  and  David, 

Pelopidas  and  Epaminondas,  etc.     3.  But  such  examples  are  prominent  because 

of  their  rarity.     Many  can  recall  the  memory  of  some  friends  with  whom  they 

took  sweet  counsel  who  have   turned   against   them.     But   here   is   One  who 

"  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother  " — who  is  ever  the  same — in  whom  all  true 

friendships  and  relationships  endure. 

11  One  family  we  dwell  in  Him, 
One  Church  above,  beneath." 

429 


chap.  xv.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


IV.  This  relationship  between  believers  and  Christ  is  higher  than  earthly 
friendship. — 1.  There  is  not  an  entire  equality  in  the  relationship.  We  cannot 
render  help  or  guidance  to  Him  or  any  adequate  return  for  His  kindness  and 
love.  2.  Our  friends  do  not  command  us.  Christ  does,  and  has  a  right  to  do 
so.  3.  But  we  need  never  fear  to  trust  ourselves  into  His  hands.  For  He  is 
all-wise  and  all-loving.  4.  Keeping  His  commandments  does  not  procure  us  His 
friendship.  This  is  a  proof  of  our  love  to  Him,  in  which  His  friendship  has  its 
being.  Is  this  a  reality  to  us  ?  It  is  because  we  do  not  realise  it  sufficiently  that 
our  lives  fail  so  much. 

Ver.  15.  The  love  of  Christ  to  His  disciples. — The  superlative  love  of  Christ 
appears  in  the  several  degrees  of  His  kindness  to  man,  before  man  was  created, 
when  he  had  been  created,  and  when  he  had  fallen.  And  not  only  did  He  spare 
fallen  men,  but  from  the  number  of  subjects  took  some  into  the  retinue  of  His 
servants,  and  further  advanced  them  to  the  privilege  of  being  friends.  The 
difference  between  these  two  appellations  is  this : — 

I.  The  servants. — In  those  ages  servants  occupied  a  different  position  than 
they  now  do.  They  were  generally  slaves.  And  for  these  reasons  Christ  waived 
the  appellation :  1 .  Because  the  servant  is  utterly  unacquainted  with  the 
Master's  designs.  2.  The  name  of  servant  imports  a  slavish  and  degenerous  awe 
of  mind,  as  it  is  in  Rom.  viii.  5.  3.  The  appellation  of  servant  imports  a 
mercenary  temper  and  disposition,  and  denotes  such  an  one  as  makes  his  rewards 
both  the  sole  motive  and  measure  of  his  obedience. 

II.  The  friends. — That  great  character  and  privilege  which  Christ  was  pleased 
to  vouchsafe  to  the  disciples  includes  the  following  things :  1.  Freedom  of  access. 
Home  and  heart  and  all  are  open  for  the  reception  of  a  friend.  We  need  no 
mediator  to  bring  us  to  Christ ;  for  He  has  condescended  to  a  cognation  and 
consanguinity  with  us,  that  He  might  subdue  His  glories  to  a  possibility  of 
human  converse.  He  that  denies  himself  an  immediate  access  to  Christ  affronts 
Him  in  the  great  relation  of  a  friend.  2.  A  favourable  construction  of  all 
passages  between  friends,  3.  Sympathy  in  joy  and  grief.  4.  The  communication 
of  secrets.  God  maintained  intimacy  with  them  whom  He  loved  under  the  law 
(Gen.  xviii.  17,  etc.) ;  much  more  will  He  under  the  Gospel  (Matt.  xiii.  17,  etc.). 
5.  Counsel  and  advice.     6.  Constancy. 

Learn. — 1.  The  excellency  and  value  of  friendship — especially  of  the  friendship 
of  Christ.  2.  The  advantage  of  becoming  truly  pious  and  religious.  "  He  who 
will  give  up  his  name  to  Christ  in  faith  unfeigned,  and  a  sincere  obedience  to 
all  His  righteous  laws,  will  be  sure  to  find  love  for  love  and  friendship  for 
friendship." — Dr.  Robert  South. 

Ver.  16.  Chosen  and  appointed. — Jesus  chose  His  disciples  from  among  the 
multitudes  of  the  people  whom  He  came  to  save,  for  a  special  purpose  and  a  divine 
end.  And  no  doubt  the  words  of  our  Lord  referred  especially  to  these  disciples — 
to  His  choice  of  them  as  appointed  instruments  in  doing  His  work  in  the  world. 
But  the  words  were  not  recorded  for  an  historical  purpose  merely.  They  were 
spoken  to  the  disciples  as  representing  the  whole  Church  as  already  constituted 
and  yet  to  be  extended,  just  as  the  promise  of  the  Comforter  was  not  confined  to 
the  eleven,  but  was  meant  for  all  the  members  of  the  Church.  Thus  the  words 
apply  to  all  true  disciples,  to  all  living  branches  of  the  true  Vine. 

I.  The  divine  choice. — 1.  From  a  human  point  of  view  the  choice  of  His 
disciples  by  our  Lord  was  not  what  men  would  have  looked  for — at  least,  so  it 
seems  at  first  view.  He  passed  by  the  men  in  position,  the  learned,  the  rich,  the 
influential,  and  chose  those  fishermen  of  Galilee.  He  did  not  regard  their 
humble  position,  their  want  of  culture,  and  even  their  spiritual  obtuseness ;  but 

430 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  xv. 


called  them  graciously  and  freely  to  be  His  ministers  and  disciples,  nay,  to  be 
His  friends.  2.  This  choice  was  of  grace  ;  and  yet  when  we  consider  it,  it  will  be 
found  to  have  been  dictated  by  highest  wisdom.  The  divine  choice  does  not 
entirely  ignore  fitness  for  service.  God  chooses  the  instruments  best  fitted  for 
His  purpose,  even  when  He  takes  the  weak  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the 
mighty  (1  Cor.  i.  27).  And  certainly  some  of  those  men  were  weak  in  faith,  and 
in  the  hour  of  trial  "  all  forsook  Him  and  fled."  And  yet  through  grace  they 
were  made  foundation-stones  in  the  great  spiritual  building  (Eph.  ii.  20).  3.  And 
how  graciously  did  the  Saviour,  when  He  had  chosen,  prepare  those  men  for 
their  work  and  ministry.  How  patiently  He  bore  with  their  faults  and  follies, 
never  wearying  in  instructing  them,  comforting  them,  strengthening  their  faith. 
And  how  tenderly  in  this  parting  discourse  did  He  speak  to  them,  further 
fitting  them  for  their  work  by  showing  His  confidence  in  them,  in  that  He 
desired  that  they  should  no  longer  regard  Him  with  the  spirit  of  the  servant  or 
slave,  but  should  rise  into  fellowship  with  Him  as  His  friends  !  He  had  won 
them  to  Himself  and  His  service.  He  had  chosen  them  not  only  in  the  outward 
call,  but  had  won  their  hearts  to  Himself.  4.  To  all  true  disciples  Jesus  can  say, 
"  Ye  have  not  chosen  Me,  but  I  have  chosen  you."  The  beginning  of  true 
discipleship  and  friendship  is  with  Christ.  By  nature  men  are  not  attracted  to 
Him.  But  there  are  those  who,  when  His  grace  touches  them,  respond  to  the 
call  and  "  follow  Him."  It  is  first  from  Him ;  it  is  to  His  call  that  the  soul 
responds.  But  here  is  the  mystery  of  divine  grace,  that  the  call  and  the 
response  of  His  chosen  are,  so  to  speak,  simultaneous.  The  divine  choice  is  met 
by  the  human  response.  The  divine  inworking  is  met  by  the  human  effort.  His 
chosen  choose  Him. 

II.  The  divine  appointment  and  its  purpose. — 1.  The  divine  choice  and 
appointment  are  not  without  a  special  end.  It  may  be  said  of  all  men  indeed  that 
God  works  out  His  purposes  in  their  lives. 

"  There's  a  divinity  that  shapes  our  ends, 
Rough  hew  them  how  we  will." 

Shakespeare. 

But  in  the  special  appointment  by  Jesus  of  His  disciples  there  was  a  definite  and 
blessed  purpose  in  view.  2.  They  were  to  obey  and  serve.  It  is  here  that  the 
divine  wisdom  of  the  choice  of  Jesus  is  seen.  Those  disciples  had  consecrated 
themselves  to  Him,  to  do  His  will  and  finish  His  work.  They  were  resolved — 
although  they  did  not  Anow  how  weak  they  were  then — to  follow  Him.  In  this 
resolve  they  would  be  strengthened.  Such  is  the  character  of  true  ministers  of 
Christ :  they  "  go  forth "  gladly,  as  His  friends,  when  He  calls  and  where  He 
appoints.  3.  We  know  how  the  apostles  "  went  forth  "  :  the  missionary  labours  of 
the  apostolic  Church  have  here  their  spring.  And  so  too  all  true  disciples  who 
realise  that  Christ  has  laid  His  hand  on  them  and  appointed  them  to  membership 
in  His  Church  feel  the  call  in  some  way  to  "  go  forth  "  for  Him,  as  His  servants 
and  friends,  into  the  highways  and  byways  of  the  world.  4.  "  That  ye  should 
bring  forth  fruit,  and  that  your  fruit  should  remain."  It  is  not  to  be  a  fruitless 
activity  or  "  going  forth,"  but  a  fruitful.  Although  the  reference  is  to  fruit  of 
effort,  yet  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  personal  fruit- bearing,  the  growing  of 
the  character  and  life  spiritually  toward  Christ,  is  essential  to  the  fruit  of  effort. 
First  character,  then  fruitful  effort.  And  those  disciples  did  "  bring  forth  fruit," 
and  their  fruit  remains.  It  is  the  product  of  the  "  incorruptible  seed  "  sown  in 
their  own  hearts,  and  by  them  through  the  Spirit's  power  in  the  hearts  of  others. 
5.  So  too  now,  the  only  "  fruit "  that  remains,  the  only  work  that  bears  the 
stamp  of  eternity,  is  work  done  in  and  for  Christ. 

III.  The  promise  to  those  going  forth  as  Christ's  chosen  and  appointed 
ones. — 1.  Christ  does  not  send  His  disciples  on  a  warfare  "  at  their  own  charges." 

431 


chap.  xv.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


The  divine  grace  and  blessing  are  ever  needed,  and  therefore  our  Lord  repeats 
the  blessed  promise  already  given,  that  to  His  chosen  the  infinite,  divine  fulness 
is  opened  to  believing  prayer.  2.  His  friends  will  have  free  access  to  the  source 
of  all  grace ;  limitless  riches  are  open  to  them  (Rom  viii.  28  ;  1  Cor.  iii.  21). 
2.  There  is  but  one  condition  as  to  the  asking.  We  are  to  ask  in  Christ's  name, 
i.e.  we  are  to  ask  as  His  friends,  as  filled  with  His  Spirit.  Therefore  we  shall 
ask  in  accordance  with  His  will,  guided  by  His  Spirit.  And  surely  this  is 
reasonable.  Our  heavenly  Friend  is  infinitely  wise,  good,  gracious.  And  when 
we  learn  to  desire  what  is  in  accordance  with  His  will,  nothing  that  is  good  will 
be  withheld  from  us. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Vers.  1,  2.    The  union  of   believers  with 
Christ. — Look  but  into  thy  garden  or  orchard, 
and  see  the  vine,  or  any  other  fruit-bearing 
tree,    how    it    grows    and    fructifies.      The 
branches  are  loaden  with  increase :  whence 
is  this,  but  that  they  are  one  with  the  stock, 
and  the  stock  one  with  the   root  ?     Were 
either  of    these    severed  the  branch  were 
barren  and  dead.     The  branch  hath  not  sap 
enough  to  maintain  life  in  itself,  unless  it 
receive  it  from  the  body  of  the  tree ;    nor 
that  unless  it  derived  it  from  the  root ;  nor 
that  unless  it  were  cherished  by  the  earth. 
Lo,  "  I  am  the  vine,"  saith  our  Saviour,  "  ye 
are  the  branches  :   he  that  abideth  in  Me, 
and  I  in  him,  the  same  bringeth  forth  much 
fruit.  ...  If  a  man  abide  not  in  Me,  he  is 
cast  forth  as  a  branch,  and  is  withered " 
(xv.  5,  6).     Were  the  branch  and  the  body 
of  the  tree  of  different  substances,  and  only 
closed  together  in  some  artificial  contiguity, 
no  fruit  could  be  expected  from   it ;  it  is 
only  the  abiding  in  the  tree  as  a  living  limb 
of  that  plant  which  yields  it  the  benefit  and 
issue  of   vegetation.      No    otherwise    is    it 
betwixt  Christ  and  His  Church  ;   the  bough 
and  the  tree  are  not  more  of  one  piece  than 
we  are  of  one  substance  with  our  Saviour ; 
and  branching  out  from  Him,  and  receiving 
the  sap  of  heavenly  virtue  from  His  precious 
root,  we  cannot  but  be  acceptably  fruitful. 
But  if  the  analogy  seem  not  to  be  so  full, 
for  that  the  branch  issues   naturally  from 
the  tree  and  the  fruit  from    the    branch, 
whereas  we  by  nature  have  no  part  in  the 
Son  of  God, .  take  that  resemblance   which 
the  apostle  fetches  from  the  stock  and  the 
branch  or  scion.     The  branches  of  the  wild 
olive  (Rom.  xi.)  are  cut  off,  and  are  graffed 
with  choice  scions  of  the  good  olive.     These 
imps  grow,  and  are  now,  by  this  incision, 
no  less  embodied  in  that  stock  than  if  they 
had  sprouted  out  by  a  natural  propagation, 
neither  can  be  any  more  separated  from  it 
than  the  strongest  bough  that  nature  puts 
forth.    In  the  meantime  that  scion  alters  the 
nature  of  that  stock ;    and  while  the   root 
gives  fatness  to  the   stock,  and  the   stock 
yields  juice   to  the   scion,  the   scion   gives 
goodness  to  the  plant  and  a  specification  to 

432 


the  fruit:  so  as  while  the  imp  is  now  the 
same  thing  with  the  stock,  the  tree  is  dif- 
ferent from  what  it  was.  So  it  is  betwixt 
Christ  and  the  believing  soul.  Old  Adam  is 
our  wild  stock  :  what  could  that  have  yielded 
but  either  none  or  sour  fruit  ?  We  are 
imped  with  the  new  man,  Christ,  that  is 
now  incorporated  into  us.  We  are  become 
one  with  Him.  Our  nature  is  not  more  ours 
than  He  is  ours  by  grace.  Now  we  bear  His 
fruit  and  not  our  own ;  our  old  stock  is 
forgotten,  all  things  are  become  new.  Our 
natural  life  we  receive  from  Adam ;  our 
spiritual  life  and  growth  from  Christ,  from 
whom,  after  the  improvement  of  this  blessed 
incision,  we  can  no  more  be  severed  than  He 
can  be  severed  from  Himself.  ...  To  wind  up 
all :  if  ever  thou  look  for  sound  comfort  on 
earth  and  salvation  in  heaven,  unglue  thy- 
self from  the  world  and  the  vanities  of  it : 
put  thyself  upon  thy  Lord  and  Saviour, 
Jesus  Christ :  leave  not  till  thou  findest 
thyself  firmly  united  to  Him ;  so  as  thou  art 
become  a  limb  of  that  body  whereof  He  is 
head,  a  spouse  of  that  husband,  a  branch  of 
that  stem,  a  stone  laid  upon  that  foundation. 
Look  not,  therefore,  for  any  blessing  out  of 
Him  ;  and  in,  and  by,  and  from  Him,  look 
for  all  blessings.  Let  Him  be  thy  life  ;  and 
wish  not  to  live  longer  than  thou  art 
quickened  by  Him. — Bishop  Hall. 

Ver.  3.  Self -pruning . — Sometimes  there  is 
a  nearer  (though  still  distant)  approach 
toward  the  glorious  example  before  us — and 
the  loss  is  not  only  suffered,  not  only  endured 
and  acquiesced  in,  but  in  some  sense  self- 
inflicted,  at  the  bidding  of  duty,  of  religion, 
of  conscience,  and  of  the  soul.  The  very 
fact  that  a  particular  possession  is  in- 
estimably precious  has  been  felt  ere  now — 
and  felt  not  by  the  morbidly  scrupulous,  but 
by  the  honest  and  straightforward  Christian 
—  as  a  reason  why  it  should  be  sacrificed 
Again  and  again,  in  the  secret  histories  of 
human  life,  offerings  have  been  made,  on 
God's  altar,  of  affections  and  attachments 
not  sinful  but  perilous,  perilous  by  reason  of 
their  strength.  Connections  which  would 
bring  the  world  too  much  into  the  life,  or 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.  XV. 


which  would  too  probably  thwart  and  choke 
the  growth  of  grace  in  the  soul,  or  which 
would  too  often  present  the  embarrassment 
of  "  walking  together  without  being  agreed," 
or  would  involve  the  risk  of  perpetual  com- 
promise in  the  daily  arrangements  of  society 
or  of  worship,  have  again  and  again  been 
renounced,  on  the  eve  of  formation,  by  the 
one  party  or  by  the  other,  at  a  cost  of 
present,  sometimes  of  abiding  distress,  which 
can  have  no  compensation  in  the  world'  of 
time  and  of  the  living.  Faith  has  been 
found  equal  to  the  trial,  but  it  must  carry 
the  scar  of  it  to  the  grave. —  C.  J.  Vaughan, 
D.D. 

Vers.  4,  5.  The  indispensableness  of  Christ 
to  believers. — This  is  one  of  the  most  precious 
and    richest    similitudes    in    which    Christ 
represents  the  relationship  between  Himself 
and   His  disciples.      Whilst   He   calls    His 
Father  the  husbandman,  He  brings  back  the 
origin  of  the  union  between  Himself  and  the 
disciples  who  believe  on  Him  to  God  as  its 
author  and  founder  in  conformity  with  the 
utterances  in  vi.   37,   44,   45.      The   indis- 
pensableness of  the  vine-stock  to  the  branches, 
the  entire  dependence  of  the  latter  on  the 
vine,   and  the   depth   and  closeness  of   the 
union   between   both— these  are  the    chief 
points  of  resemblance  which  meet  us  here. 
If  we  consider  the  humble  appearance  of  the 
vine-stock   (when   it  is    not    covered    with 
leafage),  this   may  be  taken  by  us   as   an 
image   of   the  low  estate — the  form    of    a 
servant — of  the  Redeemer.     The  worth  and 
splendour  of  the  vine,  on  the  other  hand, 
may  stand  as  a  figure  of  the  glory  of  Christ 
and  His  faithful  people.     Still  these  refer- 
ences lie  outside  of  the  three  principal  and 
natural   points   of  resemblance   just   given, 
and  may  conveniently  be  left  out  of  view. 
The  Redeemer  calls  Himself  a  true  vine,  i.e. 
He  is  in  truth  the  all  in  the  spiritual  province 
in  relation  to  His  disciples  that  the  actual 
vine-stock   is  to  the   branches.      The  vine 
gives  and  the    branches    receive    from  it 
the  sap  which  contributes  to  their  growth, 
prosperity,   blossoming,   and    fruit-bearing ; 
so  those  who  believe  in  Christ   receive  the 
divine    vital    sap.      Through    inner  canals, 
hidden   from  the   bodily    eye,  the    life-sap 
flows  from  the  vine-stock  into  the  branches. 
Thus  unseen  do  the  influences  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  from  Christ  flow  in  and  upon  those 
who  are  united  with  Him  in  faith  as  branches 
adhere  in  the  vine.    Without  these  influences 
men  can  have  no  true,  divine,  and  blessed 
life  in   them ;    without   them   they   cannot 
truly  do  good,  cannot  bring  forth  fruit.    The 
branch  cut  off  from  the  vine-stock  withers 
away,  becomes   dry  and  ripe  for  the   fire. 
So  when  through  unbelief  fellowship  with 
Christ  is  relinquished,  then  the  stream  of  life 
gradually  dries  up,  and  the  man,  as  long  as 
this  continues,  fades  away  and  finally  dies 


spiritually.  The  fruit-bearing  branches  are 
"  cleansed "  by  the  husbandman  for  their 
own  good,  so  that  they  may  be  enabled  to 
bring  forth  fruit  ever  more  richly.  The 
faithful  need  thus  that  grace  which  cleanses 
and  purifies  them  inwardly.  It  is  the 
pruning-knife  of  affliction  by  means  of  which 
God  seeks  to  effect  our  correction,  our  sancti- 
fication,  and  our  glorification. — Translated 
from  F.  G.  Lisco. 

Ver.  5.  Without  Christ,  nothing  ;  in  Him, 
all  things. — These  gracious  words  of  our 
Lord,  "  I  am  the  vine,  ye  are  the  branches," 
afford  us  above  all  things  the  greatest 
comfort,  and  the  assurance  that  we  shall 
not  on  account  of  our  sins  be  cast  out  or 
severed  from  Him  as  we  well  deserve  to  be. 
The  faithful  Saviour  does  not  depart  from 
us  because  of  our  un worthiness,  but  acknow- 
ledges us,  and  speaks  with  us  out  of  the 
fulness  of  His  love,  as  a  head,  could  we 
think  of  it  speaking,  would  speak  with  the 
members  of  the  body.  We  are  called  into 
Christ's  kingdom,  and  not  merely  called,  but 
admitted  and  welcomed.  "Jesus  receiveth 
sinners :  He  hath  received  me."  We  are 
branches  of  the  Vine.  We  have  often  ex- 
perienced the  truth  of  this.  For  the  Holy 
Spirit  has  continually  shed  forth  on  us  His 
blessed  sunshine  and  showered  His  fructi- 
fying rain  on  our  souls.  We  can  ever  hear 
the  word  of  God,  may  ever  pray  to  the 
Father  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  in  times 
of  trial  have  tasted  of  heavenly  consolation. 
— Translated  from  Lecher. 

Ver.  5.  Seasons  of  the  spiritual  year. — 
There  are  four  seasons  in  thy  spiritual  year  : 
the  winter  of  desolation  ;  the  buds  of  spring, 
which  tell  of  hope  ;  the  warmth  of  summer, 
which  bespeaks  the  fulness  of  the  heart; 
and  the  ingathering  of  autumn,  which  is  the 
time  for  life's  practical  fruits.  Each  season 
has  its  fruit,  and  the  fruit  is  in  its  turn 
golden.  Do  not  seek  to  change  the  order  of 
God's  spiritual  year ;  do  not  seek  to  put  the 
fruits  of  one  season  into  the  lap  of  another. 
Thou  must  not  expect  the  buds  of  spring 
from  the  desolation  of  winter,  for  desolation 
is  the  fruit  of  winter ;  thou,  like  Nicodemus, 
must  begin  thy  journey  in  the  sense  of 
night — night  without  a  star.  Thou  must 
not  expect  the  warmth  of  summer  from  the 
buds  of  spring,  for  the  fruit  of  spring  is  not 
fruition,  but  hope ;  thou,  like  Peter,  must  be 
content  for  a  time  to  live  on  aspiration 
alone.  Thou  must  not  expect  the  practical 
ingathering  of  autumn  from  the  warmtu  of 
summer,  for  the  fruit  of  summer  is  not  action, 
but  emotion ;  thou,  like  John,  must  be  con- 
tent to  lie  on  the  Master's  bosom  until  thy 
time  to  work  for  Him  shall  come.  O  Thou 
that  hast  revealed  the  order  of  Thine  accept- 
able year,  reveal  in  my  experience  the  stages 
of  that  year  1     Help  me  to  gather  the  fruits 


FF 


433 


chap.  xv.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


of  each  season  as  good  and  perfect  gifts 
from  Thee  1  When  I  feel  the  sense  of  night, 
let  me  accept  it  as  the  token  that,  like 
Nicodemus,  I  am  coming  to  Thee.  When  I 
feel  the  sense  of  hope,  let  me  accept  it  as 
the  sign  that,  like  Peter,  I  am  called  by  Thee. 
When  I  feel  the  sense  of  warmth,  let  me 
accept  it  as  the  evidence  that,  like  John,  I 
rest  on  Thee.  When  I  feel  the  sense  of 
power  and  am  inspired  to  gather  in  the 
fruits,  let  me  accept  it  as  the  pledge  that  I 
am  bidden,  like  Paul,  to  work  for  Thee.  So 
shall  my  year  be  rounded,  hallowed,  per- 
fected. So  shall  my  life  be  girt  about  with 
Thee.  The  snows  of  its  winter  shall  be 
sanctified,  the  buds  of  its  spring  shall  be 
fostered,  the  foliage  of  its  summer  shall 
be  blest,  the  firstfruits  of  its  autumn  shall 
be  hailed  with  joy ;  they  shall  proclaim  that 
within  my  soul  the  year  of  the  Lord  has 
come. — Dr.  Geo.  Matheson. 

Vers.  5,  6.  Causes  of  separation  and  fruit- 
lessness. — When  we  walk  abroad  on  a  beautiful 
day  and  survey  a  landscape  lit  up  by  the 
beams  of  a  summer  sun,  our  eye  catches  a 
variety  of  colours  lying  on  the  surface  of  the 
landscape  :  there  is  the  yellow  of  the  golden 
grain,  the  green  of  the  pasture-land,  the 
dark  brown  of  those  thick-planted  copses, 
the  silver  gleam  of  the  stream  which  winds 
through  them,  the  faint  blue  of  distant  hills 
seen  in  perspective,  the  more  intense  blue  of 
the  sky,  the  purple  tinge  of  yonder  sheet 
of  water ;  but  none  of  these  colours  resides 
in  the  landscape,  they  are  not  the  properties 
of  the  material  objects  on  which  they  rest. 
All  colours  are  wrapped  up  in  the  sunlight, 
which,  as  is  well  known,  may  be  seen  resolved 
into  its  elementary  colours  in  the  prism  or 
the  rainbow.  Apart  from  the  sunlight  no 
object  has  any  colour — as  is  shown  by  the 
fact  that,  as  soon  as  light  is  withdrawn  from 
the  landscape,  the  colours  fade  from  the  robe 
of  nature.  The  difference  of  colour  in  dif- 
ferent objects,  while  the  sun  is  shining, 
is  produced  by  some  subtle  difference  of 
texture  or  superficies,  which  makes  each 
object  absorb  certain  rays,  and  reflect  certain 
other  rays,  in  different  proportions.  Now 
Christ  is  the  Sun  of  righteousness,  in  whom 
dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead 
bodily,  the  fair  colour  of  every  grace  and 
Christian  virtue.  When  Christ  is  shining 
upon  the  heart,  then  these  virtues  are  mani- 
fested there — by  one  Christian  graces  of  one 
description,  by  another  of  another,  according 
to  their  different  receptivity  and  natural 
temperament,  just  as  when  the  sun  is  shining 
colours  are  thrown  upon  a  landscape  and 
reflected  by  the  different  objects  in  different 
proportions.  But  as  no  part  of  the  landscape 
has  any  colour  in  the  absence  of  the  sun,  so 
Christians  have  no  grace  except  from  Christ, 
nor  hold  any  virtue  independently  of  Him. — 
Goulbum. 

434 


Vers.  7,  8.  Conditions  of  spiritual  fruit- 
fulness.  —  Our  blessed  Lord  said  not  only 
"  Abide  in  Me,"  but  also  "  Let  Me,  or  take 
heed  that  I,  abide  in  you."  He  thus  teaches 
us  that  ordinance,  as  well  as  faith,  forms 
part  of  the  system  of  His  religion,  and  es- 
pecially that  ordinance,  in  which  indeed  all 
others  are  included,  by  which  He  communi- 
cates Himself  to  the  faithful  soul.  In  order 
to  the  fruitfulness  of  the  vine -branch,  two 
conditions  have  to  be  fulfilled :  the  first  that 
the  branch  shall  adhere  closely  to  the  stem, 
and  offer  an  open  tube  for  the  passage  of  the 
sap — this  is  the  abiding  of  the  branch  in  the 
vine ;  the  second,  that  the  sap  shall  rise 
ever  and  anon  from  the  vine-stock,  and  pass 
into  the  branch — this  the  abiding  of  the  vine 
in  the  branch.  Similarly  in  the  case  of  the 
Christian.  The  first  condition  of  his  spiritual 
fruitfulness  is  that  he  shall  adhere  by  a  close 
trust  to  Christ,  and  keep  open  towards  Him 
the  avenues  of  faith,  hope,  and  expectation. 
This  is,  "  Abide  in  Me."  The  second  is,  that 
Christ  shall  continually  send  up  into  his 
heart  a  current  of  holy  inspirations,  new 
loves,  good  impulses,  devout  hopes.  Or, 
more  accurately,  that  He  shall  communicate 
Himself  to  the  soul  by  the  continual  influx 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  This  is,  "  And  I  in  you." 
And  this  communication  of  Himself  is  made 
specially  (where  that  sacrament  may  be  had) 
in  the  supper  of  the  Lord:  He  comes  at 
those  seasons  into  the  opened  avenue  of 
the  faithful  communicant's  soul — comes  to 
cement  by  His  own  passage  into  the  inner 
man  the  union  in  which  our  faith  cleaves  to 
Him  ;  and  the  result  is  "  the  strengthening 
and  refreshing  of  our  souls  by  the  body  and 
blood  of  Christ,  as  our  bodies  are  by  the 
bread  and  wine." — Idem. 

Vers.  8-11.  The  fruit  of  the  spiritual  vine 
branch. — Let  us  give  diligent  heed  to  the 
saying  of  our  Lord :  "  Herein  is  My  Father 
glorified,  that  ye  bear  much  fruit ;  so  shall 
ye  be  My  disciples."  We  may  notice  the 
honour  which  He  puts  on  discipleship.  The 
sentence  is  not,  "  So  shall  ye  be  My  apostles." 
Apostles  and  all  must,  before  and  above  every- 
thing else,  be  learners.  That  is  the  summit 
as  well  as  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  life. 
And  the  learning  advances  in  the  measure  in 
which  the  fruit-bearing  increases.  For,  in 
that  measure,  our  sympathy  with  the  Lord, 
the  union  of  our  wills  with  Him,  and  there- 
fore our  knowledge  of  Him,  is  deepened  and 
confirmed.  Herein  is  Jesus'  Father  glorified. 
He  desires  the  glory  of  His  Son — that  is  the 
Father's  glory.  He  is  regarding  this  in  all 
the  discipline  of  His  love.  "  Whoso  knows 
that  the  gardener's  arm  is  not  set  on  work 
by  anger,  but  by  skill,  will  not  conclude  that 
he  hates  the  tree  he  wounds,  but  that  he 
has  a  mind  to  have  it  fruitful,  and  judges 
these  harsh  means  the  fittest  to  produce  that 
effect."   Always  let  us  say  this  to  ourselves : 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   XV. 


The  mind  of  my  Father  in  all  His  dealings 
with  me  is  to  enlarge  the  capacity  of  disciple- 
ship,  of  learning  the  sonship  of  His  Son,  of 
bearing  much  fruit.  Fruit  is,  so  to  speak, 
the  concentrated  juice  or  blood  of  the  tree. 
It  is  the  result  and  sign  of  the  life  which  is 
in  that  blood.  The  fruit  to  which  Christ 
refers  is  the  character,  with  all  its  influence, 
which  expresses  the  cleansing  efficacy  of  His 
blood,  which  is  the  necessary  manifestation 
of  the  spirit  of  a  son.  "  Love,  joy,  peace, 
long-suffering,  kindness,  goodness,  faithful- 
ness, meekness,  temperance  " — thus  St.  Paul 
describes  "  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit."  How 
solemn  the  reminder,  "  Much  fruit,  so  shall 
ye  be  My  disciples."  Ah,  to  what  must  we 
trace  the  reason  of  our  spiritual  poverty  and 
powerlessness  but  to  this,  that  we  are  not 
abiding  in  Christ,  making  Him  truly  our 
home,  understanding  that  the  order  is,  first, 
in  Him,  the  inner  life  fed  out  of  Him,  and, 
second,  for  Him,  the  outer  life  His  witness 
to  men.  Some  of  us,  I  dare  say,  feel  that  we 
do  not  attend  sufficiently  to  the  springs  of 
action.  We  are  so  busy,  so  engaged  in  work 
of  one  kind  or  another,  that  the  private, 
personal  communion  with  the  Lord  suffers. 
Oh,  for  all  right  service  the  need  is,  Christ 
at  the  centre  of  the  being,  Christ  Himself 
the  being's  centre.  Mrs.  Stowe  has  beauti- 
fully interpreted  the  longing  of  the  true 
disciple  : — 

11  The  soul  alone,  like  a  neglected  harp, 

Grows  out  of  tune,  and  needs  that  hand 
divine ; 
Dwell  Thou  within  it,  tune  and  touch  the 
chords, 
Till  every  note  and  string  shall  answer 
Thine. 

*(  Abide  in  me,  there  have  been  moments  pure 
When  I  have  seen  Thy  face  and  felt  Thy 
power  ; 
Then    evil    lost  its  charm,    and    passion 
hushed, 
Owned  the  divine  enchantment  of  the 
hour. 

"  These  were  but  seasons  beautiful  and  rare  ; 
Abide  in  me  and  they  shall  ever  be. 
I  ask  Thee  now  fulfil  my  earnest  prayer — 
Come  and  abide  in  me  and  I  in  Thee." 
Br.  Marshall  Lang. 

•Ver.  11.  In  what  does  man's  happiness 
consist  ? — Man's  happiness  consists  not  in 
any  earthly  abundance,  taken  from  this 
consideration, — that  the  greatest  happiness 
which  this  life  is  capable  of,  may  be,  and 
actually  has  been,  enjoyed  without  this 
abundance ;  and  consequently  cannot  depend 
upon  it.  Now  that  undoubtedly  is  the  chief 
happiness  of  life,  for  the  attainment  of 
which  all  other  things  are  designed  but  as 
the  means  and  subservient  instruments. 
And  what  else  can  this  be,  but  the  content, 
quiet,  and  inward  satisfaction  of  a  man's 


mind  ?  For  why,  or  for  what  other  imagin- 
able reason,  are  riches,  power,  and  honour 
so  much  valued  by  men,  but  because  they 
promise  themselves  that  content  and  satis- 
faction of  mind  from  them,  which,  they  fully 
believe,  cannot  otherwise  be  had?  This, 
no  doubt,  is  the  inward  reasoning  of  men's 
minds  in  the  present  case.  But  the  experience 
of  thousands  (against  which  all  arguments 
signify  nothing)  irrefragably  evinces  the  con- 
trary. For  was  there  not  a  sort  of  men, 
whom  we  read  of  in  the  former  ages  of  the 
world,  called  the  ancient  philosophers,  who, 
even  while  they  lived  in  the  world,  lived 
above  it,  and  in  a  manner  without  it ;  and 
yet  all  the  while  accounted  themselves  the 
happiest  men  in  it  ?  And  from  these,  if  we 
pass  to  the  professors  and  practisers  of  an 
higher  philosophy,  the  apostles  and  primitive 
Christians,  who  ever  so  overflowed  with 
spiritual  joy  as  they  did? — "a  joy  unspeak- 
able and  full  of  glory,"  as  St.  Peter  terms  it; 
a  joy  not  to  be  forced  or  ravished  from  the 
heart  once  possessed  of  it,  as  our  Saviour 
Himself,  the  great  giver  of  it,  has  assured  us. 
Hear  St.  Paul  and  Silas  singing  out  this  joy 
aloud  in  the  dismal  prison,  where  they  sat 
expecting  death  every  moment.  And  from 
hence  to  proceed  to  the  next  ages  of  the 
Church :  who  could  be  fuller  of  and  more 
transported  with  a  joyous  sense  of  their  con- 
dition, than  the  martyrs  of  those  primitive 
times,  who  were  so  far  from  any  of  the 
accommodations  of  this  world,  that  their  only 
portion  in  it  was  to  live  in  hunger,  nakedness, 
and  want,  and  stripped  of  everything  but  the 
bodies,  in  and  through  which  they  suffered 
all  these  afflictions  ?  And  as  this  internal, 
spiritual  comfort  is  doubtless  the  highest 
that  human  nature  is  capable  of,  and  may 
serve  instead  of  all  others,  so  it  descends 
even  to  those  of  the  lowest  condition.— 
South. 

Ver.  11.  Earthly  joy  not  secured  to  men  so 
that  they  may  seek  heavenly  joy. — The  provi- 
dence of  God  has  not  thought  it  worth  while 
to  secure  and  protect  the  very  best  of  men 
in  their  rights  to  any  enjoyment  under 
heaven  ;  and  all  this  to  depress  and  vilify 
these  things  in  their  thoughts  ;  that  so  they 
may  every  day  find  a  necessity  of  placing 
them  above,  and  of  bestowing  their  pains 
upon  that  which,  if  they  pursue,  they  shall 
certainly  obtain ;  and  if  they  obtain,  they 
shall  impregnably  keep.  u  My  peace  I  leave 
with  you,  My  peace  I  give  unto  you,"  says 
our  Saviour ;  "  not  as  the  world  giveth, 
give  I  unto  you."  Why  ?  What  was  the 
difference  ?  He  tells  us  in  John  xvi.  22, 
"Your  joy  no  man  taketh  from  you."  It 
was  such  a  joy  or  peace  as  was  to  be  above 
the  reach  of  either  fraud  or  force,  artifice  or 
assault;  which  can  never  be  said  of  any 
earthly  enjoyment  whatsoever,  either  as  to 
the    acquisition   or  possession   of   it;    God 

43$ 


CHAP.  XV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


having  made  no  man  any  promise,  that  by  all 
his  virtue  and  innocence,  all  his  skill  and 
industry,  he  shall  be  able  to  continue  in 
health,  wealth,  or  honour ;  but  that,  after 
his  utmost  endeavour  to  preserve  those  de- 
sirable things,  he  may  in  the  issue  lose  them 
all.  But  God  has  promised  and  engaged  to 
mankind  that  whosoever  shall  faithfully  and 
constantly  persevere  in  the  duties  of  a  pious 
Christian  life,  shall  obtain  "  an  eternal  crown 
of  glory,"  and  an  "  inheritance  that  fadeth 
not  away."  A  man  cannot  indeed  by  all  his 
piety  secure  his  estate,  but  he  may  "  make 
his  calling  and  election  sure " ;  which  is 
infinitely  and  unspeakably  more  valuable 
than  all  the  estates,  pleasures,  and  greatness 
of  the  world.  For  all  these  are  without  him, 
and  consequently  may  be  taken  from  him, 
and,  which  is  yet  worse,  may  do  him  no 
good,  even  while  they  stay  with  him.  But 
the  conscience  is  a  sure  repository  for  a  man 
to  lodge  and  preserve  his  treasure  in,  and  the 
chest  of  his  own  heart  can  never  be  forced 
open. — South. 

Ver.  11.  Some  afraid  of  joy  in  religion. — 
Some  people  are  afraid  of  anything  like  joy 
in  religion,  They  have  none  themselves, 
and  they  do  not  love  to  see  it  in  others. 
Their  religion  is  something  like  the  stars, 
very  high  and  very  clear,  but  very  cold. 
When  they  see  tears  of  anxiety,  or  tears  of 
joy,  they  cry  out,  Enthusiasm,  enthusiasm  ! 
"  I  sat  down  under  His  shadow  with  great 
delight."  Is  this  enthusiasm  ?  *'  May  the 
God  of  hope  fill  you  with  all  joy  and  peace 
in  believing."  If  it  be  really  in  sitting 
under  the  shadow  of  Christ,  let  there  be  no 
bounds  to  our  joy.  Oh !  if  God  would  but 
open  our  eyes  and  give  us  simple  childlike 
faith  to  look  to  Jesus,  to  sit  under  His 
shadow,  then  would  songs  of  joy  arise  from 
all  our  dwellings.  "  Rejoice  in  the  Lord 
always, and  again  I  say,  Rejoice." — M'Cheyne. 

Ver.  11.  True  joy  not  on  the  surface. — The 
passion  of  joy  was  not  that  which  now  often 
usurps  this  name ;  that  trivial,  vanishing, 
superficial  thing,  that  only  gilds  the  appre- 
hension, and  plays  upon  the  surface  of  the 
soul.  It  was  not  the  mere  crackling  of 
thorns,  a  sudden  blaze  of  the  spirits,  the 
exultation  of  a  tickled  fancy  or  a  pleased 
appetite.  Joy  was  then  a  masculine  and  a 
severe  thing;  the  recreation  of  the  judgment, 
the  jubilee  of  reason.  It  was  the  result  of  a 
real  good,  suitably  applied.  It  commenced 
upon  the  solidities  of  truth,  and  the  sub- 
stance of  fruition.  It  did  not  run  out  in 
voice,  or  undecent  eruptions ;  but  filled  the 
soul,  as  God  does  the  universe,  silently  and 
without  noise.  It  was  refreshing,  but  com- 
posed ;  like  the  pleasantness  of  youth 
tempered  with  the  gravity  of  age  ;  or  the 
mirth  of  a  festival  managed  with  the  silence 
of  contemplation. — South. 

436 


Ver.  11.  Christians  are  commanded  to  re- 
joice in  the  Lord. — We  are  not  only  allowed 
indeed,  but  we  are  commanded  to  rejoice  in 
the  Lord.  No  joy  has  so  good  and  firm  a 
foundation  as  that  which  is  to  be  found  in 
the  Lord,  who  has  bought  us,  and  with 
whom  we  are  blessed  with  all  spiritual 
blessings.  But  whoever  wishes  to  rejoice  in 
the  blessings  purchased  for  us  by  Jesus 
Christ,  must  be  in  Him,  intimately  united 
to  Him  by  faith,  renouncing  sin,  and  all  the 
false  pleasures  of  the  world.  This  true 
union  and  communion  with  Christ  is  the 
source  of  joy,  the  only  source.  Hence  will 
follow  a  willingness  to  love,  obey,  and 
glorify  Him  as  long  as  we  live.  But  if, 
instead  of  trusting  in  Christ  and  in  His 
consummate  atonement,  we  rely  on  our  own 
virtue,  and  consequently  try  to  stand  upon 
our  own  foundation,  we  shall  never  enjoy 
one  moment's  peace  of  mind.  Our  virtue 
and  holiness  are,  and  ever  will  be,  im- 
perfect ;  we  shall,  therefore,  always  have 
reason  to  confess  before  God,  "  If  Thou  wilt 
mark  what  is  amiss,  Lord,  who  shall  stand 
before  Thee  ?  "  Let  us  therefore  seek  for 
pardon,  peace,  and  joy  in  Jesus  ;  and  having 
found,  then  let  us  be  grateful  and  obedient. 
But  though  we  should  be  as  holy  as  any  of 
the  apostles,  let  us  beware  lest  we  put  our 
confidence  in  anything  except  the  sufferings 
and  atoning  death  of  Jesus  Christ. — Swartz. 

Vers.  12-14.  The  friendship  of  the  Re- 
deemer.— It  was  certainly  a  circle  con- 
taining but  a  few  to  which  the  Redeemer 
spoke  these  words.  They  were  not  only  as 
regards  their  number  an  inconsiderable 
selection  from  the  whole  of  the  people, 
among  whom  and  for  whom  He  lived,  but 
from  the  whole  human  race,  to  whom  He 
had  been  sent.  And  on  those  few  He  set 
His  hopes.  Ah !  therefore  He  must  have 
felt  a  special,  inward  relation  to  them. 
Therefore  He  could  give  them  no  name 
which  could  more  sweetly  and  tenderly 
express  this  than  the  name  of  brethren  and 
friends,  in  contradistinction  to  the  whole  race 
of  men,  who  had  misunderstood  Him,  and 
would  in  no  wise  receive  Him.  But  now 
we  who  confess  Him  include  a  great  multi- 
tude of  the  peoples,  a  considerable  portion 
of  the  human  race.  Innumerable  are  those 
who  stand  toward  Him,  fundamentally  and 
in  deepest  truth,  in  the  same  relation  of  love 
and  confession.  Can  we  indeed  appropriate 
these  words  as  spoken  to  us  also,  that  each 
can  be  His  friend  and  He  ours  ?  Let  us  for 
the  moment,  my  friends,  give  space  to  our 
diffidence  which  excites  a  doubt  on  this 
point.  It  will,  of  itself,  lead  us  to  another 
point  of  view,  from  which  the  similarity 
between  ourselves  and  those  disciples  will 
come  more  clearly  into  view.  Is  this  mass 
of  Christian  people  from  so  many  lands 
and  zones,  among  whom  His  name  is  made 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.  XV. 


known  in  so  many  tongues,  entirely  one  ? 
No  !  It  is  divided  into  many  communities, 
•whose  members  hold  more  closely  to  one 
another  than  they  do  with  the  others.  In 
part  it  is  divided  by  the  same  circumstances 
which  in  other  relations  divide  and  separate 
men  from  each  other ;  in  part  it  is  divided 
in  a  peculiar  manner,  not  so  much  from 
difference  of  view  in  regard  to  Christ's 
person  and  His  aim,  as  rather  by  the 
different  manner  and  fashion  of  expressing 
and  explaining  what,  in  its  inner  spirit,  is  one 
and  the  same.  Well  then,  let  us  think  of 
these  different  bodies  of  Christians  instead 
of  the  innumerable  individuals  composing  the 
mass.  Each  such  group  may  be  regarded 
as  one  ;  and  thus  we  arrive  at  a  number 
which  is  less  diverse  from  the  small  body  of 
the  disciples  to  whom  the  Lord  spoke  this 
great  word.  Now  shall  not  each  of  those 
communities  occupy  a  similar  position  to 
the  disciples  ?  Is  not  each  such  community 
of  Christians,  in  so  far  as  they  are  one  in 
faithfulness  to  Him,  like  one  of  the  dis- 
ciples, and  in  a  measure  in  the  same  con- 
dition ?  Well  then,  let  us  first  so  state  our 
claim  to  the  Redeemer's  friendship,  as  that 
we  shall  regard  ourselves  as  His  friends, 
not  as  individuals,  but  as  members  of  a 
Christian  community  to  which  we  belong, 
when  these  love  each  other  as  the  Saviour 
commanded.  Each  one  of  these  communities, 
though  they  may  differ  from  us,  and  may 
deviate  from  our  practice,  yet  makes  Him 
known  and  directs  men  to  Him.  And  with 
each  of  them,  however  much  may  be  the 
differences  that  separate  us,  we  should  feel 
ourselves  bound  in  that  same  love  which  He 
commanded  to  His  disciples,  since  they  too 
are  the  instruments  of  His  glory.  If,  there- 
fore, those  communities  recognised  and 
cherished  in  each  other  the  same  hunger 
and  thirst  after  righteousness,  and  their 
susceptibility  for  the  same  fulness  of 
spiritual  gifts  which  proceed  from  Christ, 
then  Christendom  would  truly  deserve  to 
be  called  His  spiritual  body.  And  are  we 
as  individuals  so  engrafted  into  that  whole 
with  which  we  are  more  nearly  connected, 
and  do  we  seek  to  animate  it  with  this  love, 
and  extend  this  love  in  every  way  possible 
toward  the  various  communities  of  Christen- 
dom, oh  !  then  truly  may  we  have  a  right 
to  consider  that  we  may  appropriate  this 
claim  to  ourselves  personally,  that  the  Re- 
deemer will  call  such  disciples  His  friends ! 
For  then  truly  it  will  be  evident  that 
we  have  understood  His  Spirit,  that  we  are 
in  sympathy  with  His  love,  which  goes  forth 
to  all  the  race  of  men  without  being  turned 
aside  by  those  differences,  or  caring  more 
for  the  one  than  the  others.  Then  in  such 
a  case  we  also  are  received  into  His  confi- 
dence, and  He  makes  known  to  us  fully  that 
unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bonds  of  love  and 
peace  which  should  unite  together  all  those 


among  whom  His  name  is  known.  Then  we 
also  are  bound  together  with  Him  as  fellow- 
workers  in  freedom  and  power.  And  in 
such  community  we  again  truly  find  ourselves, 
and  are  not  lost  as  a  single  individual  in  the 
great  mass.  Each  of  us  can  contribute  to 
the  quickening  of  this  spirit  evermore  in  the 
community  to  which  he  belongs.  Each  can 
influence  the  others  mightily  in  this  spirit, 
and  receive  from  them  a  like  influence  in 
return.  And  thus  we  also  shall  be  entitled 
to  appropriate  this  to  ourselves— that  we 
are  friends  of  the  Lord  when  we  do  what 
He  commands  us. — Translated  from  Fr. 
Schleiermacher. 

Ver.  14.  The  inward  blessedness  of  the 
friends  of  Christ. — Now  if  God  maintained 
such  intimacies  with  those  whom  He  loved 
under  the  law  (which  was  a  dispensation  of 
greater  distance),  we  may  be  sure  that  under 
the  Gospel  (the  very  nature  of  which  imports 
condescension  and  compliance)  there  must 
needs  be  the  same,  with  much  greater  ad- 
vantage. And  therefore,  when  God  had 
manifested  Himself  in  the  flesh,  how  sacredly 
did  He  preserve  this  privilege  1  How  freely 
did  Christ  unbosom  Himself  to  His  disciples 
(Luke  viii.  10)  !  "  Unto  you,"  says  He,  "  it  is 
given  to  know  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom 
of  God :  but  unto  others  in  parables ;  that 
seeing  they  might  not  see " ;  such  shall  be 
permitted  to  cast  an  eye  into  the  ark,  and 
to  look  into  the  very  holy  of  holies.  And 
again  (Matt.  xiii.  17),  "  Many  prophets  and 
righteous  men  have  desired  to  see  those 
things  which  ye  see,  and  have  not  seen 
them ;  and  to  hear  those  things  which  ye 
hear,  and  have  not  heard  them."  Neither 
did  He  treat  them  with  these  peculiarities 
of  favour  in  the  extraordinary  discoveries  of 
the  Gospel  only,  but  also  of  those  incom- 
municable revelations  of  the  divine  love, 
in  reference  to  their  own  personal  interest 
in  it.  In  Rev.  ii.  17,  "  To  him  that  overcometh 
will  I  give  to  eat  of  the  hidden  manna,  and 
will  give  him  a  white  stone,  and  in  the 
stone  a  new  name  written,  which  no  man 
knoweth  saving  he  that  receiveth  it."  As- 
surance is  a  rarity  covered  from  the  inspection 
of  the  world — a  secret  that  none  can  know 
but  God,  and  the  person  that  is  blessed  with 
it.  It  is  writ  in  a  private  character,  not  to 
be  read  nor  understood  but  by  the  conscience, 
to  which  the  Spirit  of  God  has  vouchsafed 
to  decipher  it.  Every  believer  lives  upon  an 
inward  provision  of  comfort,  that  the  world 
is  a  stranger  to. — South. 

Ver.  14.  The  sympathy  of  our  divine 
Friend. — Friendship  is  one  of  the  greatest 
boons  God  can  bestow  on  man.  It  is  a  union 
of  our  finest  feelings ;  an  uninterested  binding 
of  hearts,  and  a  sympathy  between  two  souls. 
It  is  an  indefinable  trust  we  repose  in  one 
another,  a  constant  communication  between 

437 


chap.  xv.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


two  minds,  and  an  unremitting  anxiety  for 
each  other's  souls.  What,  then,  is  the  root, 
the  cause  of  friendship?  Sympathy.  Sym- 
pathy conceives  friendship  ;  friendship,  love. 
Love  is  friendship.  The  tree  that  bears  love, 
bears  also  friendship.  Where  friendship 
exists  between  two  persons,  there  is  also, 
always,  hope  ;  in  adversity  there  is  always  a 
support,  a  refuge,  a  knowledge  of  there  still 
remaining  some  succour ;  and  as  a  babe  cries 
for  its  mother  for  nourishment,  so  do  we  in 
adversity  run  to  friendship  for  advice,  fully 
relying  on  some  means  by  which  it  may 
release  us  from  the  troubles  of  the  world. 
And  in  true  friendship  there  is  cultivated 
such  a  love  of  God,  such  a  devotion  for  the 
Creator  of  the  world,  that  the  chains  become 
adamant.  Friendship  having  thus  a  righteous 
appreciation  of  the  Almighty's  goodness  and 
power,  and  a  knowledge  of  His  injunctions 
to  the  righteous,  and  the  reward  they  may 
expect  hereafter,  it  spreads  around,  every- 
where, joy  and  happiness,  causing  not  only 
fresh  unions,  but,  with  praiseworthy  Christian 
exertion  and  love,  rendering  them  inflexible. 
—J.  Hill. 

Ver.  14.  The  Friend  above  all  others. 

One  there  is,  above  all  others, 

Well  deserves  the  name  of  Friend : 

His  is  love  beyond  a  brother's, 
Costly,  free,  and  knows  no  end. 

They  who  once  His  kindness  prove 

Find  it  everlasting  love. 

Which  of  all  our  friends,  to  save  us, 
Could  or  would  have  shed  their  blood  ? 

But  our  Jesus  died  to  have  us 
Eeconciled  in  Him  to  God. 

This  was  boundless  love  indeed. 

Jesus  is  a  Friend  in  need. 

When  He  lived  on  earth  abased, 
Friend  of  sinners  was  His  name  ; 

Now,  above  all  glory  raised, 
He  rejoices  in  the  same  : 

Still  He  calls  them  brethren,  friends, 

And  to  all  their  wants  attends. 

Could  we  bear  from  one  another 
What  He  daily  bears  from  us  ! 

Yet  this  glorious  Friend  and  Brother 
Loves  us  though  we  treat  Him  thus. 

Though  for  good  we  render  ill, 

He  accounts  us  brethren  still. 


,  Oh  for  grace  our  hearts  to  soften  1 

Teach  us,  Lord,  at  length  to  love  : 
We,  alas  !  forget  too  often 

What  a  Friend  we  have  above : 
But  when  home  our  souls  are  brought, 
We  will  love  Thee  as  we  ought. 

John  Newton. 

Ver.  15.  The  grand  leading  affection  of  all 
is  love. — This  is  the  great  instrument  and 
engine  of  nature,  the  bond  and  cement  of 
society,  the  spring  and  spirit  of  the  universe. 
Love  is  such  an  affection,  as  cannot  so 
properly  be  said  to  be  in  the  soul,  as  the 
soul  to  be  in  that.  It  is  the  whole  man 
wrapt  up  into  one  desire  ;  all  the  powers, 
vigour,  and  faculties  of  the  soul  abridged 
into  one  inclination.  And  it  is  of  that  active, 
restless  nature,  that  it  must  of  necessity 
exert  itself ;  and  like  the  fire  to  which  it  is 
so  often  compared,  it  is  not  a  free  agent,  to 
choose  whether  it  will  heat  or  no,  but  it 
streams  forth  by  natural  results  and  un- 
avoidable emanations.  So  that  it  will  fasten 
upon  an  inferior,  unsuitable  object,  rather 
than  none  at  all.  The  soul  may  sooner  leave 
off  to  subsist,  than  to  love ;  and  like  the 
vine,  it  withers  and  dies  if  it  has  nothing  to 
embrace.  Now  this  affection,  in  the  state 
of  innocence,  was  happily  pitched  upon  its 
right  object ;  it  flamed  up  in  direct  fervours 
of  devotion  to  God,  and  in  collateral  emissions 
of  charity  to  its  neighbour.  It  was  not  then 
only  another  and  more  cleanly  name  for 
lust.  It  had  none  of  those  impure  heats, 
that  both  represent  and  deserve  hell.  It 
was  a  vestal,  and  a  virgin  fire,  and  differed 
as  much  from  that  which  usually  passes  by 
this  names  nowadays,  as  the  vital  heat  from 
the  burning  of  a  fever.  Then,  for  the  con- 
trary passion  of  hatred.  This  we  know  is 
the  passion  of  defiance,  and  there  is  a  kind 
of  aversation  and  hostility  included  in  its 
very  essence  and  being.  But  then  (if  there 
could  have  been  hatred  in  the  world,  when 
there  was  scarce  anything  odious),  it  would 
have  acted  within  the  compass  of  its  proper 
object.  Like  aloes,  bitter  indeed,  but 
wholesome.  There  would  have  been  no 
rancour,  no  hatred  of  our  brother :  an  inno- 
cent nature  could  hate  nothing  that  was 
innocent.  In  a  word,  so  great  is  the  com- 
mutation, that  the  soul  then  hated  only  that 
which  now  only  it  loves,  that  is,  sin. — 
South. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  18—27. 

Vers.  18-21.  The  hatred  of  Christ's  disciples  by  the  world. — In  the  upper  chamber 
our  Lord  taught  His  disciples  the  new  commandment  of  love.  This  was  to  be  the 
rule  and  law  of  His  Church.  But  the  Christian  spirit  would  lead  to  conflict  in  the 
world.  Just  as  the  world  hated  and  persecuted  the  Master,  because  the  truth 
which  He  was  and  taught  brought  condemnation  to  the  world,  so  would  it  be 

438 


E0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  xv. 


with  the  disciples.      Hatred  and  persecution,  He  foretold,  would  track  their 
course  through  the  world. 

I.  The  source  of  hatred  of  the  disciples :  the  world. — 1.  There  are  several 
meanings  attached  to  the  word  "  world  "  in  the  Scriptures.  The  term  means  (1)  the 
earth,  the  material  world  and  its  inhabitants.  "  The  world  and  they  that  dwell 
therein"  (Ps.  xcviii.  7),  viewed  as  the  works  of  the  Creator ;  (2)  the  inhabitants 
of  the  world,  without  any  reference  to  their  character  (xvi.  28) ;  (3)  the 
inhabitants  of  the  world,  viewed  from  the  moral  point  of  view.  In  this  view 
it  is  called  the  "present  evil  world"  (Gal.  i.  4).  It  lies  in  the  wicked  one 
(1  Johnv.  19),  and  those  who  are  in  this  world  are  not  conformed  to  God.  God 
is  light,  the  world  darkness ;  God  is  love,  the  world  hatred,  etc.  2.  What  causes 
this  is  sin.  It  may  be  urged  that  the  world  of  men  is  not  so  depraved.  Yet 
there  may  be  many  amiable  men  in  an  army  of  rebels.  Sin  causes  enmity  to 
God,  hatred  to  His  cause.  3.  It  was  the  enmity  and  hatred  of  this  sinful 
world  which  our  Lord's  disciples  had  to  encounter.  We  see  how  the  rebellious 
Jews — to  whom  Christ  came  as  to  His  own,  and  they  received  Him  not — were 
inimical  to  the  gospel  as  preached  by  the  apostles.  They  hated  Christ  "  without 
a  cause  "  (ver.  25),  for  the  real  antagonism  was  that  of  hypocrisy  and  truth,  sin 
and  holiness.  4.  Nor  did  this  hatred  end  with  Judsea  and  Judaism.  Wherever 
the  disciples  came  into  contact  with  the  spirit  of  the  world  the  same  hatred 
blazed  forth.  It  has  burned  in  all  the  martyrdoms  and  persecutions  of  true 
followers  of  Christ  from  the  apostolic  age  until  the  fires  of  the  Inquisition  were 
extinguished.  5.  But  even  now  it  has  not  ceased.  In  subtle  ways  the  world 
manifests  its  hatred  of  true  followers  of  Christ.  The  sneer  of  the  worldling  at 
true  piety,  his  covert  attacks,  innuendoes,  and  insinuations  regarding  followers 
of  Christ  and  labourers  for  Him,  show  the  old  spirit  still  at  work.  And  the 
absolute  hostility  which  converts  to  the  gospel  have  to  endure  in  the  ranks  of 
bigoted  Judaism,  and  in  the  midst  of  idolatrous  communities,  is  the  same  as  of 
old.  Christian  converts  from  Judaism,  Mohammedanism,  and  idolatry  need  this 
same  consoling  word  of  the  Master. 

II.  The  cause  of  the  world's  hatred  to  Christ  and  His  disciples. — 1.  This  has 
been  in  part  dwelt  on.  But  it  is  to  be  noticed  more  fully  that  the  disciple  must 
expect  the  world  to  wear  this  aspect  toward  him,  for  the  Master  was  also  hated 
by  it:  2.  As  Christ  was,  so  must  His  disciples  be  in  the  world.  If  they  desire 
to  have  His  glory,  they  must  have  fellowship  in  His  sufferings.  As  He  was 
made  perfect  through  suffering,  so  will  they  be  ;  for  the  servant  is  not  greater  than 
his  Lord.  If  Christ  is  in  us,  and  we  are  manifesting  His  life,  we  must  expect  to 
bear  His  reproach.  3.  Persecution  may  seem  to  have  ceased  against  the  Church. 
But  the  spirit  of  the  world  is  still  the  same.  The  world  is  ignorant  of  God,  and 
those  Christians  who  let  their  light  shine  before  men  bring  condemnation  to  the 
impenitent  and  hatred  to  themselves  oftentimes.  For  the  world  loves  its  own, 
and  there  must  be  want  of  harmony  between  it  and  the  Church.  Those  that  will 
live  godly  must  suffer  persecution.  "  Where  the  living  Christ  manifests  Himself, 
there  also  is  seen  the  old  serpent  that  bruised  His  heel."  A  Christianity  that 
can  endure  the  world,  and  with  which  the  world  is  pleased,  must  have  in  some 
measure  lost  its  true  power.  4.  Persecution  in  a  gross  sense  has  ceased  in 
civilised  lands.  But  there  seems  a  time  coming  when  it  may  be  renewed 
(2  Thess.  ii.,  etc.).  The  fanaticism  of  superstition  and  unbelief  wants  but  the 
power  to  show  the  old  spirit. 

III.  The  spirit  in  which  the  disciple  should  meet  the  world's  hatred— 1.  It 
is  not  to  be  met  with  hatred.  Christ  speaks  of  a  must  needs  be,  so  long  as  men 
are  what  they  are.     But  Christ  came  to  save  the  world. 

11  Then,  like  Thine  own,  be  all  our  aim 
To  conquer  them  by  love." 

439 


chap.  xv.         tiOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


2.  We  must  therefore  meet  the  world's  hatred  with  faith^  and  undismayed.  The 
Lord  knows  how  to  solace  His  own  and  deliver  the  godly  in  temptation  and  trial. 
The  apostles  joyfully  departed  from  the  council  because  they  were  accounted 
worthy  to  suffer  shame  for  the  name  of  Christ  (Acts  v.  41).  Paul  and  Silas  could 
pray  and  sing  praises  in  the  dungeon  at  Philippi  (Acts  xvi.  26).  Paul  could 
write  of  himself,  "I  take  pleasure,"  etc.  (2  Cor.  xii.  10).  Tertullian  thus  wit- 
nessed for  Christ :  "  We  say  it,  and  say  it  openly,  freely,  and  without  fear,  and 
even  under  your  tortures  we  shall  cry  from  our  torn  and  bleeding  frames,  We 
honour  God  in  Christ."  3.  We  should  meet  the  world's  hatred  with  gentleness 
and  pitying  love,  as  Christ  did.  Thus  shall  true  disciples  following  Christ  win 
men  from  a  hostile  world  to  the  love  and  service  of  Christ.  And  there  will  be 
joy  in  the  assured  presence  of  the  Master,  and  in  the  thought,  "  Even  as  He  is,. 
so  are  we  in  this  world"  (1  John  iv.  17). 

Vers.  22-25.  The  inexcusableness  of  the  sin  of  unbelief — The  earthly  ministry 
of  the  Saviour  had  come  to  a  close.  He  was  sent  to  His  own  possessions,  and  His 
own  people  received  Him  not  (i.  11).  He  had,  indeed,  come  for  the  fall  and  rising 
again  of  many  in  Israel,  and  for  a  sign  which  should  be  spoken  against  (Luke 
ii.  34).  And  unbelief  in  its  various  forms  in  all  ages  rests  on  much  the  same 
causes  as  in  Judaea  of  old. 

I.  The  culmination  of  unbelief. — I.  It  had  grown  rapidly  during  the  last 
few  months  of  Christ's  earthly  course.  At  the  beginning  of  Christ's  ministry 
there  was  a  time  when  the  rulers  were  not  so  inimical.  Perhaps  the  outward 
form  which  the  temptation  took  was  attempts  by  these  men  to  get  our  Lord  to 
proclaim  Himself  a  temporal  Messiah  (and  see  vi.  15).  2.  But  when  the  Jewish 
rulers  saw  His  determination  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  their  ideas  of  the 
Messianic  kingdom,  they  refused  to  listen  to  the  truth.  Their  spiritual  pride, 
their  hypocrisy,  their  low  moral  standard,  were  all  brought  home  to  them  by 
the  humility,  the  purity,  the  beauty,  of  Christ's  character.  All  this  produced 
antagonism,  and  led  them  to  shut  their  eyes  to  the  truth  so  plainly  evident  in 
all  Christ's  life.  3.  And  thus  they  arrived  at  deliberate  and  bold  unbelief,  and 
were  even  now  seeking  means  to  destroy  the  truth.  4.  Unbelief  is  still  the 
same.  It  results  now,  as  of  old,  either  from  spiritual  pride  or  moral  antagonism. 
The  gospel  is  humbling  to  human  pride.  Many  will  not  entertain  the  idea  that 
a  spiritual  and  fundamental  change  is  needed  ere  they  can  enter  the  kingdom. 
So  did  the  Jews  pride  themselves  on  being  Abraham's  seed  (viii.  39).  Many  will 
not  believe  in  Christ's  works  ;  others  reject  the  gospel  because  it  demands  holiness 
and  self-denial ;  and  thus  many  still  remain  in  alienation  and  enmity. 

II.  The  sin  of  unbelief. — 1.  How  terrible  are  its  consequences  as  here  stated 
by  Christ !  Of  the  Jews  He  said,  "  They  have  seen  and  hated  both  Me  and  My 
Father."  It  was  nothing  less  than  rejection  and  hatred  of  the  God  of  love  and 
His  eternal  Son.  It  was  the  rejection  and  hatred  of  Him  who  had  been  the 
God  of  their  fathers,  who  had  wrought  wonders  in  the  days  of  old  and  blessed 
them  beyond  any  nation.  It  was  the  rejection  and  hatred  of  the  divine  Son 
who  had  come  to  seek  and  to  save  the  lost.  2.  And  unbelief  and  rejection  of 
the  gospel  are  as  sinful  now.  For  if  men  would  but  examine  it,  they  would 
at  once  see  that  it  could  not  be  from  earth.  The  character  of  Christ  is  so 
heavenly  and  so  noble  that  a  careful  consideration  ought  to  show  that  all 
attempts  to  account  for  it  in  a  merely  natural  way  utterly  fail. 

III.  The  sin  of  unbelief  is  without  excuse. — 1.  It  was  so  in  the  case  of  the 
Jews  since  Christ  had  come  among  them.  (1)  He  taught  them  with  authority. 
He  spake  among  them  as  never  man  spake  (vii.  46).  (2)  He  wrought  mighty 
works  among  them  which  in  their  less  biassed  moments  bore  conviction  in  on  the 
minds  of  many  of  them  (x.  41,  42,  etc.).    All  these  should  have  appealed  to  them, 

440 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  i   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  xv, 


They  could  plead  no  excuse  to  the  effect  that  He  had  not  given  adequate  proofs 
of  His  claims.  Indeed,  they  were  altogether  without  excuse ;  for  they  hated 
Him  without  a  cause.  His  character  and  life,  His  works  and  teaching,  should 
have  been  sufficient  to  convince.  2.  Rejecters  of  Christ  now  have  the  same 
proofs.  Attack  after  attack  has  been  made  on  the  authenticity  of  gospel 
history — attacks  often  most  subtle  and  virulent.  But  it  still  stands ;  and  the 
attacking  theories  have  fallen.  A  system  not  founded  on  truth  could  not  have 
withstood  such  attacks.  3.  But  more  than  that.  "  Si  monumentum  requiris, 
circumspice."  The  proofs  of  the  divine  origin  of  the  gospel  are  all  around.  The 
changed  face  of  the  world  proclaims  its  truth.  The  whole  course  of  Christian 
history,  the  whole  realm  of  Christian  biography,  tell  of  its  heavenly  power.  The 
pure  and  noble  lives  of  true  Christians,  the  conquests  of  Christian  missions,  the 
ability  of  the  gospel  to  regenerate  and  raise  men  nearer  God — all  are  proofs,  that 
cannot  be  dismissed  with  a  word,  of  the  heavenly  origin  of  the  religion  of  Christ. 
And  those  who  reject  guiltily  reject  the  Father  and  the  Son,  reject  that  power 
which  evidently  makes  for  righteousness  and  meets  the  requirements  of  the  race. 

Yers.  26,  27.  Zeal  in  defence  of  the  divine  interests. — The  apostles  bore 
witness  to  Christ  in  preaching  His  gospel.  And  even  although  we  may  not  be 
called  to  the  same  ministry,  we  ought  to  bear  witness  to  God  in  defending  His 
cause  and  His  interests  when  they  are  assailed.  People  abandon  the  defence  of 
the  divine  cause  either  through  a  false  prudence  or  a  culpable  weakness.  Here 
in  the  one  case  this  false  prudence  is  reproved,  and  in  the  other  this  hurtful 
weakness. 

I.  False  prudence  reproved. — 1.  God  holds  Himself  to  be  dishonoured  by  such 
a  prudence.  It  is  His  glory  to  be  served  by  those  who  find  their  glory  in  His 
service,  and  who  do  not  balance  His  interests  with  their  own.  Thus  there  is  an 
indubitable  obligation  laid  on  Christian  men  to  confess  their  faith,  even  at  the 
expense  of  their  lives.  On  thousands  of  occasions  we  ought  to  declare  ourselves 
on  the  side  of  God — otherwise  we  sin  against  Him ;  for  as  Christ  has  said, 
"  He  that  is  not  for  Me  is  against  Me."  The  example  of  David — his  zeal 
(Ps.  lxviii.).  2.  This  is  a  sort  of  prudence  that  even  the  world  approves  not  of. 
A  man  would  be  regarded  as  a  craven  who  did  not  come  to  the  help  of  his  friend. 
A  subject  would  be  treated  as  a  rebel  if  in  war  he  did  not  come  to  the  aid  of  his 
prince.  The  rules  of  honour  of  the  world  even  condemn  our  indifference  in  regard 
to  the  divine  cause.  3.  This  is  a  kind  of  prudence  that  brings  scandal  on  religion. 
For  this  indifference  to  the  cause  of  God  is  considered  to  be  a  sign  of  secret 
alienation  from  Him.  The  world  scarcely  distinguishes  the  man  who  is  indifferent 
to  the  things  of  God  from  the  open  libertine  who  is  without  doubt  against  Him. 
The  reason  is  that  libertinage  does  not  dare  to  show  itself  fully,  but  comes 
forward  under  the  guise  of  indifference.  Whence  comes  occasion  of  offence  to  the 
weak.  It  was  this  that  awoke  of  old  the  zeal  of  Elijah  (1  Kings  xviii.  21). 
4.  Such  a  prudence  tends  to  encourage  impiety.  Libertinism  does  not  exactly 
ask  that  it  should  be  applauded — only  tolerated.  This  is  sufficient  to  give 
it  opportunity  to  take  root  and  flourish.  Is  it  said,  My  zeal  would  only 
irritate  the  evil  ?  What  although  it  did  !  You  would  have  done  your  duty. 
But  we  must  use  discretion.  True,  provided  it  is  a  discretion  which  leads  to  the 
end  to  which  zeal  directs.  But  this  zeal  would  lead  to  publicity  and  noise.  It 
is  not  always  prudent  to  avoid  that  when  it  is  necessary.  There  is  a  kind  of 
peace  which  is  more  dangerous  than  trouble.  But  must  not  one  be  careful  in 
regard  to  one's  neighbours  ?  Away  with  such  carefulness  where  the  service  of 
God  is  concerned  !     The  apostles  did  not  reason  thus. 

II.  To  abandon  the  divine  cause  is  a  most  injurious  weakness. — 1.  It  deprives 
us  of  the  greatest  honour  to  which  we  could  aspire — to  be  defenders  of  the  divine 

441 


chap.  xv.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


cause.  It  was  in  defence  of  this  cause  that  the  heroes  of  faith  in  the  Old 
Testament  and  the  New  were  distinguished.  Have  you  the  same  boldness  in  the 
cause  of  Christ  ?  Will  God  make  use  of  you  as  He  did  of  them  ?  2.  It  makes 
men  odious  and  despicable.  To  whom?  (1)  To  good  men,  who  behold  this 
faithlessness  with  just  indignation  ;  (2)  to  impious  and  sinful  men  even,  who 
interpret  the  weakness  of  this  conduct,  and  see  very  well  that  our  indulgence 
toward  them  results  from  fear  and  littleness  of  mind.  3.  The  acme  of  our 
misery  is  this  :  we  lack  firmness  only  where  the  interests  of  God  are  concerned  ; 
we  preach  firmness  strongly  enough  where  our  personal  interests  are  concerned. 
When  we  think  of  this,  can  we  listen  to  the  testimony  of  our  own  hearts  without 
blushing  from  shame  and  confusion  ?  4.  This  weakness  may  end  in  God  with- 
drawing His  grace  and  sending  on  us  the  most  severe  chastisements.  Rather 
let  us  second  His  designs  whilst  He  may  be  found,  etc.  ;  and  by  an  ardour  and 
zeal  altogether  new  so  prepare  ourselves  to  hear  from  His  mouth  this  glorious 
invitation,  "  Come,  good  and  faithful  servants,"  etc.  (Matt.  xxv.  23). — Bourdaloue. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  18.  The  hatred  of  Christ's  disciples 
by  the  world. — The  friends  and  disciples  of 
Jesus  Christ  have  two  marks  of  their  friend- 
ship and  discipleship :  the  first  is  that  they 
love  one  another ;  the  second,  that  they  are 
hated  by  the  world.  Concerning  the  first 
our  Lord  had  spoken  in  the  former  part  of 
this  chapter.  "  This  text  is  worth  hundreds 
of  thousands  of  gulden ;  yes,  no  gold  could 
buy  it.  For  Christ  Himself  tells  us  therein 
that  we  are  not  of  the  world,  and  that 
this  is  the  sign  thereof,  i.e.  that  the  world 
hates  us.  This  includes  lofty  contempt  and 
excellent  comfort ;  because  if  we  are  hated 
for  His  sake,  it  is  because  we  have  been 
chosen  by  Him  and  separated  from  the 
world,  judged  and  marked  by  it  "  (Luther). 
Just  as  the  love  of  Christ  is  the  ground  of 
love  of  the  brethren,  so  the  hatred  of  the 
world  rests  on  Christians  because  they 
abide  in  the  love  of  their  Lord.  For  just 
so  little  as  the  world  can  hate  those  who 
are  of  the  world  (vii.  7),  just  so  little  can 
it  love  those  chosen  out  of  the  world  as 
friends  of  Jesus.  The  disciples  would  from 
the  time  of  our  Lord's  departure  most  pain- 
fully experience  this.  But  let  not  your 
heart  be  troubled.  It  must  so  be  and 
happen  so  long  as  the  world  is  world  and 
Christians  are  Christians,  and  so  long  as 
Abel's  race  inhabits  the  earth  with  Cain's 
race.  That,  however,  which  the  blind  world 
does  as  a  curse  God  turns  into  pure  blessing 
for  His  children.  For  the  Vine-dresser 
cleanses  the  branches  of  the  vine  by  means 
often  of  this  hatred  of  the  world ;  but  He 
does  not  permit  the  world  to  tear  one  twig 
from  the  vine.  If  the  world  has  hated 
that  vine-stock,  yet  it  must  leave  it  scathless  ; 
yes,  must  even  help  its  glorious  growth  by 
this  bitter  hatred.  Thus,  too,  will  it  be  with 
the  beloved  branches  in  spite  of  the  cruel 
hatred  and  rage  of  the  world. — Translated 
from  Dr.  R.  Besser. 

442 


Ver.  22.  The  boldness  of  unbelief. — As  to 
the  manner  in  which  unbelief  takes  the  field 
against  faith,  I  read  recently  of  a  glaring 
instance  in  a  religious  journal.  An  intelli- 
gent Christian  farmer,  in  the  vicinity  of 
Cain,  brought  to  his  minister,  with  great 
indignation,  a  little  book  which  had  been 
sent  him  by  post,  and  which  bore  the  title, 
The  Return  Home  from  Heaven  to  Earth,  a 
Booh  for  Free  Christians,  printed  at  Stutt- 
gart 1851.  In  this  tractate,  in  the  form  of 
a  catechism  with  question  and  answer,  the 
most  naked  infidelity  was  taught — the  Bible 
laid  under  suspicion  of  being  a  book  of 
fables,  heaven  and  everything  heavenly 
denied,  and  the  earth  alone,  as  our  true 
home,  and  the  world  of  sense  as  the  only 
element  in  which  to  live,  held  up  to  honour. 
"  Return  home  from  heaven  to  earth  ! " 
Yes,  so  runs  the  watchword  of  the  sensualist. 
He  does  not  desire  to  look  beyond  the 
horizon  of  earth  ;  therefore  for  him  every- 
thing that  comes  from  an  unseen  world 
and  would  lead  men  thither  —  Bible  and 
church,  heaven  and  eternity,  God  and 
Saviour,  religion  and  Christianity — is  a  cause 
of  offence  and  foolishness.  Therefore  he 
desires  to  call  men  back  from  heaven  to 
earth.  The  watchword  of  faith,  however, 
runs  otherwise :  u  The  return  home  from 
earth  to  heaven."  Here  we  have  no  con- 
tinuing city,  but  we  seek  one  to  come ;  we 
look  not  on  the  things  which  are  seen,  but 
on  the  things  which  are  not  seen.  Thence 
did  our  undying  souls  come ;  thither  our 
heart  goes  forth  like  a  child's  heart  toward 
his  father's  house.  Thence  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  has  come  to  bring  heavenly  light, 
heavenly  power,  heavenly  comfort,  into  this 
poor  dark  world;  thither  He  has  prepared 
a  way  for  us  through  His  divine  teaching 
His  heavenly  example,  His  holy  death,  His 
glorious  ascension ;  and  thither  will  He  also 
lead  us,  so  that  where  He  is  we,  whom  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.  XV. 


Father  has  given  Him,  may  be  with  Him. 
Now,  which  of  these  is  the  true  way  1  Will 
we  agree  with  the  catechism  of  unbelief,"  Re- 
turn home  from  heaven  to  earth  "  ?  Shall  we 
leave  the  heavenly  air  and  light  of  faith,  in 
which  we  hitherto  have  been  so  well  and 
happy,  and  come  back  to  our  five  senses  like 
a  snail  into  its  shell,  or  creep  like  a  mole 
into  its  hole.  Shall  Christendom  retreat 
like  a  defeated  army  from  a  land  it  cannot 
possess,  a  city  that  it  cannot  take — retreat 
from  the  blessed  province  of  faith,  and 
abandon  the  heavenly  city  with  its  glittering 
walls,  and  renounce  the  heavenly  inheritance 
which  the  Captain  of  our  salvation  had 
gained  by  His  blood,  whither  for  eighteen 
hundred  years  so  many  thousand  believing 
souls  have  looked  amid  the  afflictions  of  time, 
where  we  also  hoped  to  find  our  eternal 
home  and  to  rest  from  toil  in  the  heavenly 
Sabbath  ?  Shall  we  let  all  this  go  as  a 
booty  that  pertains  not  to  us,  as  a  dream, 
behind  which  there  is  nothing  ?  Shall  we 
give  it  all  up  simply  because  it  lies  beyond 
our  earthly  horizon,  because  it  is  not 
strengthened  and  confirmed  by  the  evidence 
of  our  five  senses  ?  Never !  Our  faith  is 
the  victory  that  overcomes  the  world.  It 
overcame  the  world  and  the  world's  doubt 
eighteen  hundred  years  ago,  as  the  message 
"  Christ  is  risen  "  went  victoriously  through 
all  lands.  It  overcomes  the  world  and  its 
doubt  to-day  also ;  for  it  rests  on  a  divine 
testimony  (1  John  v.  9). — Translated  from 
Karl  Gerok. 

Ver.  27.  Boldness  in  witness-tearing  for 
Christ. — Yes,  Christians,  you  in  reality  put 
away  your  true  glory  when,  among  the  sub- 
jects that  come  before  you,  and  in  regard  to 
which  your  zeal  should  be  engaged,  you  do 
not  dare,  from  a  timidity  that  is  weak  and 
craven,  either  to  speak  or  to  act  for  the 
cause  of  God.  For  what  is  more  worthy  of 
a  great  spirit,  of  a  noble  and  dignified  soul, 
than  the  defence  of  such  a  cause  ?  and  what 
can  we  propose  to  ourselves  in  the  world  as 
a  more  honourable  aim  1  When  you  labour 
for  yourselves  alone,  how  little  do  you 
become  ;  whatever  you  may  do  all  is  small  and 
limited,  is  reduced  to  that  nothingness  and 
that  vanity  inseparable  both  from  your 
persons  and  your  position.  But  when  you 
interest  yourselves  for  the  cause  of  God, 
all  that  you  do,  even  according  to  men's 
ideas,  possesses  I  know  not  what  of  the 
divine,  which  they  are  forced  to  honour, 
and  which  awakes  in  them  for  you  a  secret 


respect.  "You  seek  for  glory,"  wrote 
Augustine  to  a  man  of  the  world,  "  and 
where  will  you  find  this  glory  that  you  seek 
better  than  in  the  exercise  of  an  ardent  zeal 
for  everything  connected  with  the  service  of 
your  God,  i.e.  to  protect  those  who  engage 
in  it,  to  reprove  those  who  dishonour  it,  to 
cause  abuses  in  connection  with  it  to  cease, 
to  maintain  discipline,  to  oppose  yourself 
like  a  wall  of  brass  and  like  a  pillar  of  bronze 
to  the  enterprises  of  error  and  of  impiety  ? 
If  you  wish  to  acquire  a  solid  merit,  in  order 
to  commend  yourself  to  men,  by  what  other 
way  can  you  hope  to  attain  to  that  end  1 
What  is  it  that  has  immortalised  the  names 
of  the  great  men  of  Old  Testament  history, 
and  those  of  the  New  Testament  story? 
Was  it  not  this  that  has  impressed  on  all 
minds  such  general  sentiments  of  esteem 
and  constant  admiration  for  these  illustrious 
Maccabees  ?  What  distinguished  Constantine 
and  Theodosius  among  the  Christian  em- 
perors ?  Was  it  not  that  zeal  for  the  honour 
of  God  and  His  law  by  which  they  were 
animated  ?  '  Traverse,'  said  the  brave 
Mattathias,  when  instructing  his  children 
from  his  deathbed — '  traverse  all  the  genera- 
tions, and  see  if  those  of  our  ancestors 
whose  memory  is  blessed  have  merited  the 
praise  and  respect  of  the  people  otherwise 
than  by  the  power  and  courage  which  they 
displayed  when  the  cause  of  the  Lord  called 
for  their  aid.  Do  not  imagine  you  will  ever 
arrive  at  such  a  degree  of  glory  as  tha*t 
to  which  they  attained,  unless  through  the 
same  resolution.  And  do  not  be  blind 
enough  to  suppose  that  any  purely  human 
success  only,  regarding  which  the  world  may 
compliment  you,  will  ever  enable  you  to 
equal  them.'"  Thus  spoke  this  saintly  and 
noble  church-father.  And  this  is  what  I 
would  say  after  him,  Christians.  No,  who- 
ever you  may  be,  do  not  expect  to  find  any 
true  glory  other  than  that  which  will  come 
to  you  through  the  holy  ardour  which  will 
make  it  plain  that  you  are  God's  and  for  God. 
By  the  so-called  successes  you  may  achieve 
otherwise,  and  for  which  men  applaud, 
you  may  make  some  noise  in  the  world. 
But  with  this  fleeting  flame,  as  Scripture 
teaches,  your  memory  will  perish.  This 
glory  which  you  have  sought  apart  from 
God,  and  in  which  God  has  no  part,  will 
vanish  like  smoke.  And  after  you  have 
shone  for  a  little  with  a  false  lustre,  it  will 
leave  you  in  eternal  darkness. — Translated 
from  Bourdaloue. 


443 


chap.  xvi.       BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ST.  JOHN. 


PAET  V.   (d.) 

1.  The  disciples  in  the  world,  and  the  world's  attitude  toward  them  (vers.  1-6). 

The  Promise  of  the  Comforter. 

2.  To  comfort  them  in  view  of  coming  trial  the  promise  of  the  Paraclete  is 
given  more  fully,  and  His  relation  to  the  world  is  set  forth  (vers.  7-11). 

3.  His  enlightening  influence  on  the  disciples  themselves  (vers.  12-15). 

4.  Christ  must  depart,  but  the  disciples'  sorrow  shall  be  turned  into  joy 
when  they  more  fully  realise  the  Father's  love  to  them  in  Him  (vers.  16-28). 

5.  The  disciples  profess  their  faith  in  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  God,  and  are  warned 
that  their  faith  would  have  to  stand  the  test  of  trial  ;  but  that,  although 
shaken,  it  should  not  be  overthrown,  for  Christ  has  "  overcome  the  world  " 
(vers.  29-33). 


CHAPTER  XVI. 
EXPLANATORY  AND   CRITICAL  NOTES. 

Chap.  xv.  27.  The  Spirit  does  not  teach  historical  facts,  but  reveals  their  true  meaning. 
Hence  the  apostolic  testimony  and  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit  form  but  a  single  act,  in 
which  each  contributes  a  different  element — the  one  the  historic  narrative,  the  other  the 
internal  evidence  and  the  victorious  power.  This  relation  is  reproduced  in  our  day  in  all 
living  preaching  derived  from  Holy  Scripture.  St.  Peter  equally  distinguishes  the  two  kinds 
of  testimony  (Acts  v.  32)  (see  Westcott,  etc.). 

Ver.  1.  These  things,  etc. — I.e.  regarding  the  hatred  of  the  world  (xv.  18-27),  lest  that 
should  become  a  cause  of  offence  to  them.  He  will  not  send  them  unwarned  into  the  field 
of  bitter  strife.  But  perhaps,  also,  the  reference  is  to  the  comforting  promises,  and  the 
views  of  their  union  with  Him  just  given,  which  would  comfort  and  strengthen  them  in  the 
midst  of  their  sufferings.     Offended. — Matt.  xi.  6,  xiii.  21,  etc. 

Ver.  2.  They  shall  put  you  out  of  their  synagogues,  etc. — I.e.  excommunicate  the  disciples, 
debar  them  from  religious  fellowship.  Toward  this  the  Sanhedrin  had  already  taken  steps 
(ix.  22,  xii.  42).  It  would  be  a  trial  to  the  disciples  to  be  shut  out  from  participation  in  the 
blessings  promised  to  Abraham's  seed.  But  more  than  that,  whosoever  killeth  you  will 
think  he  is  bringing  an  offering  to  God. — So  blinded  would  these  persecutors  be  by  their 
hatred  to  Christ  and  His  people  that  they  will  think  (56|r;)  that  they  are  serving  God  by  this 
bitter  hatred,  so  alien  to  the  God  of  love.  But  the  Rabbis  taught  that  "  every  one  that  sheds 
the  blood  of  the  wicked  is  as  he  that  offereth  an  offering  "  (see  Westcott,  in  loo.). 

Ver.  3.  These  things,  etc. — Such  action  would  proclaim  their  entire  ignorance  of  the  true 
nature  of  God  (xv.  21),  in  Himself  and  as  revealed  in  Christ.  They  rejected  the  light,  and 
thus  did  the  works  of  darkness. 

Ver.  4.  But  these  things,  etc.  (ver.  1).— The  dXXct,  but,  indicates  a  break.  The  Lord  now 
turns  aside  from  the  idea  of  future  sorrow.  And  these  things  I  said  not  at  the  beginning, 
etc.— He  had  spoken  of  future  trials  (Matt.  v.  10,  x.  17,  xvi.  24,  etc.),  but  not  with  the  same 
fulness  as  now.  Nor  had  He  before  told  them  of  the  manner  in  which  the  world's  hatred 
was  to  be  met  by  the  Spirit.  When  He  was  with  them  His  presence  protected  and  comforted 
the  disciples.  The  world's  hatred  fell  on  Him.  But  now,  with  His  promise,  they  would  be 
able  to  endure. 

Vers.  5,  6.  But  now  I  go  My  way,  etc. — His  work  was  nearing  its  close,  and  this  to  Him 
was  matter  of  rejoicing.  But  the  disciples  were  so  engrossed  with  the  thought  of  parting 
with  Him,  and  of  what  they  were  to  encounter,  that  they  had  no  thought  of  the  purpose  of 
His  departure,  and  whither  He  was  going,  the  glorious  state  into  which  He  was  to  enter. 
The  disciples  were  absorbed  in  themselves,  and  even  in  the  questions  of  Peter  (xiii.  36)  and 
Thomas  (xiv.  5)  the  whither  was  lost  sight  of.  They  did  not  think  of  the  Lord's  glory,  but 
of  themselves. 

Ver.  7.  Nevertheless  I  tell  you  the  truth ;  it  is  expedient,  etc.— He  appealed  again  to  their 

444 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  xvi. 


conviction  of  the  truth  of  His  words  (xiv.  2).  They  imagined  His  departure  to  be  an  unmiti- 
gated evil  for  them ;  but  He  showed  them  that  it  was  not  so.  His  going  away  was  the 
condition  of  His  ascension  and  glorious  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  from  whence  He 
should  send  the  Comforter  (vii.  39).  "  I  do  not  desire  that  you  should  love  Me  after  a  fleshly 
manner,  and  through  being  contented  with  this  milk  remain  ever  children  "  (Augustine ; 
2  Cor.  v.  16).  He  is  nearer  to  His  true  disciples  than  if  He  were  on  earth.  "  The  complete 
work  of  Christ  was  the  necessary  preliminary,  and,  in  some  sense,  the  procuring  cause  of  that 
gift ;  and  since  the  Word  is  the  Spirit's  instrument,  the  revelation  must  be  complete  before 
the  application  of  it  can  begin  in  its  full  energy.  Christ  must  be  at  the  right  hand  of  God 
before  He  can  bestow  the  Spirit,  ascending  on  high  that  He  may  receive  for,  and  give  the 
gift  to,  spirits  fitted  to  receive  it  by  faith  in  His  completed  work  "  (Maclaren).  The  redemp- 
tive work  of  Jesus  needed  to  be  completed  ere  the  Spirit  could  come  (Heb.  ix.  26). 

Ver.  8.  And  when  He  is  come,  He  will  reprove,  etc. — I.e.  He  will  convince  or  convict 
(e\e7£ei)  the  world  of  fault  or  error.  This  ability  to  be  convinced  shows  that  there  is  still 
possibility  of  salvation  for  the  world.  The  testimony  of  the  disciples,  filled  with  the  Spirit, 
would  surely  convince  the  world  of  its  sinfulness.  The  Spirit  would  use  the  testimony  of  the 
apostles  regarding  Christ  so  powerfully  that,  despite  itself,  the  world  would  be  convicted  of 
its  error,  and  their  cause  vindicated  (Acts  ii.  37).  Sin,  righteousness,  judgment. — The  world 
entertains  erroneous  conceptions  of  these  great  facts,  the  greatest  as  regards  the  position  of 
men  spiritually.  The  world  does  not  understand  what  sin  is  in  relation  to  God,  feels  no  need 
of  righteousness,  does  not  comprehend  fully  the  idea  of  retribution,  and  dreams  of  some  way 
of  escape.     From  such  fatal  dreams  the  world  must  be  awakened. 

Ver.  9  In  respect  of  sin,  etc. — Sin  in  its  deepest  essence  is  disobedience  to  the  divine  will, 
and  therefore  unbelief  (Gen.  iii.  17).  And  the  world's  sin  had  reached  its  highest  point  when 
it  rejected  Christ.  To  all  open  hearts  Jesus  is  the  manifestation  of  the  highest  good,  and 
those  who  reject  Him  turn  away  from  the  light  which  reveals.  Unbelief  in  Christ  is  the 
acme  of  sinfulness. 

Ver.  10.  In  respect  of  righteousness,  because,  etc. — The  world  being  blinded  as  to  the 
true  idea  of  sin  had  also  no  true  conception  of  righteousness.  But  when  the  full  redemptive 
work  of  the  Saviour  was  seen  and  understood,  when  men  were  made  aware  at  what  a  cost 
sin  needed  to  be  propitiated — how  it  required  the  sending,  the  humiliation,  the  death  of  the 
incarnate  Son — and  was  announced  as  completed  by  His  rising  and  ascension,  then  they 
would  understand  what  sin  really  was,  and  that  no  mere  outward  reformation  could  take  it 
away,  that  the  Lord  our  righteousness  alone  could  effect  it  (Rom.  i.  17,  x.  3,  etc.). 

Ver.  11.  In  respect  of  judgment,  etc. — This  judgment  began  when,  in  meek  obedience, 
the  Saviour  hung  upon  the  cross,  bowed  His  head,  and  gave  up  the  ghost,  crying,  "  It  is 
finished."  The  serpent's  head  was  bruised  (Gen.  iii.  15).  But  the  power  of  evil,  though 
vanquished  and  retreating,  is  not  yet  finally  overcome,  and  may  yet  make  desperate  efforts 
to  retrieve  the  lost  position  (2  Thess.  ii. ;  Rev.  xiii.,  etc.).  But  Christ's  judgments  are  in  the 
world ;  and  year  by  year  the  kingdom  by  God  is  advancing  to  triumph. 

Ver.  12.  I  have  yet,  etc. — The  disciples  were  like  spiritual  children.  They  required  "  line 
upon  line,  precept  upon  precept  "  (Isa.  xxviii.  10).  See  how  the  risen  Christ  had  to  reprove 
the  two  on  the  way  to  Emmaus  as  "  fools,  and  slow  of  heart,"  etc.  (Luke  xxiv.  25).  They 
required  the  inner  illumination  of  the  Spirit.  Nor  was  Christ's  work  all  accomplished.  The 
final  and  most  important  part  of  it  had  yet  to  come.  And  that  the  disciples  could  not  then 
understand ;  they  could  not  conceive  of  it  until  it  was  past,  and  its  purposes  revealed  to 
them. 

Ver.  13.  Howbeit  when  He,  the  Spirit  of  truth,  etc.—  irvev/xa,  neuter,  but  pronoun  4k€?vos 
(masc.)  shows  that  the  Spirit  is  a  person.  Guide. — Christ  is  the  way  of  truth ;  the  Spirit 
guides  men  to  and  in  Him  the  living  way.  He  shall  not  speak  of  Himself,  or  from  Himself. 
— He  shall  declare  the  will  of  the  Father  as  Christ  did  (viii.  38-40,  xiv.  24,  xv.  15).  This  is 
the  test  of  His  guidance.  His  divinity  is  clearly  shown  in  the  words,  "  He  shall  show  you 
things  to  come."  None  but  God  can  do  this.  The  things  that  are  coming  (see  Rev.  i.  1, 
xxii.  6). — The  course  of  the  Church's  progress  would  be  revealed  to  them  (see  especially 
Rev.  ii.,  iii.). 

Ver.  14.  He  shall  glorify,  etc. — The  Son  glorifies  the  Father.  And  the  Spirit,  teaching  the 
glorious  truths  of  Christ's  redemptive  work  to  men,  shall  glorify  the  Father  and  the  Son 
(ver.  15)  in  every  redeemed  soul.  "  The  Son  is  of  the  Father  alone  ;  but  the  Holy  Spirit  is 
of  the  Father  and  the  Son  "  (Augustine). 

Ver.  15.  All  things  that  the  Father  hath,  etc.  (Col.  i.  19). — Thus  He  is  the  complete 
revelation  of  the  Father.  It  is  a  stupendous  claim  ;  but  is  it  not  borne  out  by  the  person 
and  work  of  the  Redeemer  ?  The  three  divine  hypostases  are  united  in  man's  redemption. 
Ver.  16.  See  xiv.  19.  A  little  while. — The  last  clause  omitted  by  ,  B,  D,  L,  etc. 
Ver.  17.  Then  said  His  disciples,  etc. — They  did  not,  could  not,  comprehend  yet  what  He 
meant.  No  doubt  the  words,  "  Again  a  little  while,  and  ye  shall  see  Me,"  may  refer  to  His 
post-resurrection  appearances  here,  and  to  the  descent  of  the  Spirit.     But  it  has  a  wider 

445 


chap.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY;   ST.  JOHN. 


reference  to  all  God's  people.  As  "  one  day  is  with  the  Lord  as  a  thousand  years,"  it  will  be 
but  a  little  while  in  the  measure  of  eternity  until  He  comes  again :  "  He  is  coming  quickly  " 
(Eev.  xxii.  20).     He  was  going  to  the  Father — not  to  death  then,  but  to  the  heavenly  life. 

Ver.  20.  Verily,  verily,  etc. — A  most  cheering  promise.  First,  to  the  disciples.  How  soon 
would  their  despair  and  sorrow  be  turned  into  the  joyful  acclaim,  The  Lord  is  risen  indeed  I 
And  how  should  they  then,  filled  with  the  Spirit,  rejoice  even  to  surfer  with  Christ  (Col.  i. 
24)  !  Second,  to  the  Church.  Persecutions  have  fallen  on  the  Church  in  all  ages ;  and  in 
this  promise  the  people  of  God  have  joyfully  endured.  In  the  last  ages  it  would  seem  there 
will  be  a  recrudescence  of  persecution  (2  Tim.  iii. ;  Rev.  xii.),  and  then  this  promise  will 
bring  joy  in  the  midst  of  trouble  ;  for  those  days  of  darkness  will  show  that  the  Son  of  man 
is  at  hand  (Matt.  xxiv.  29-51).     See  Wordsworth's  Greek  Testament,  in  loc. 

Ver.  23.  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  the  Father,  He  will  give  it  you  in  My  name. — 
See  also  xiv.  13,  xv.  16.  The  name  of  Jesus  is  not  only  the  medium  through  which  we 
are  to  come,  so  that  coming  thus  we  ask  in  accordance  with  His  will,  but  the  answer  to 
our  prayers  is  also  in  virtue  of  His  name  (see  Watkins,  in  loc). 

Ver.  25.  Proverbs,  or  parables. — Such  as  the  vine,  the  woman  in  travail,  etc.  The  time 
cometh,  etc. — The  Spirit  after  Pentecost  would  guide  them  clearly  into  all  truth. 

Vers.  26,  27.  At  that  day. — How  different  were  the  preaching  and  the  prayers  of  the 
disciples  after  they  were  inspired  of  the  Spirit !  Then  they  did  not  ask  so  much  as  commit 
themselves  joyfully  to  God  (Acts  iv.  23-31). 

Ver.  28.  I  came  forth,  etc. — Here  the  whole  prologue  is  condensed  into  one  sentence, 
and  the  passion  into  another.  He  was  sent ;  He  became  incarnate  (i.  14)  ;  He  died  (xix.  30)  ; 
He  ascended  to  glory  (Luke  xxiv.  50,  51)  (see  Westcott,  in  loc). 

Ver.  30.  Now  we  are  sure,  etc. — The  faith  of  the  disciples  was  weak  and  grew  slowly 
(ii.  11).  They  believed  Jesus  to  be  the  Son  of  God  ;  but  they  had  not  yet  fully  apprehended 
all  that  this  implied.  Yet  His  reading  of  their  thoughts  (ver.  19)  was  a  further  cause  of 
strength  to  their  faith.  But  they  had  much  to  learn,  which  the  events  at  hand  and  the 
Spirit  alone  could  teach,  ere  they  understood  clearly. 

Ver.  31.  Do  ye  now?  etc. — As  if  He  had  said  to  them,  "  Search  your  hearts."  You  have 
faith  ;  but  is  it  strong  enough  and  clear  enough  to  endure  what  is  to  come  ?  "  Watch  and 
pray." 

Ver.  32.  Behold,  the  hour  cometh,  etc. — An  hour  of  testing  to  the  faith  oE  all — especially  of 
one.  Scattered  to  his  own  occupations  (xxi.  3). — Christ  must  tread  the  winepress  alone.  All 
fell  away  at  this  supreme  hour.  The  multitudes  who  shouted  Hosanna — those  who  believed 
at  the  tomb  of  Lazarus.  Judas  had  gone  forth  a  traitor  ;  Nicodemus,  Nathanael,  and  others 
are  unseen.  The  eleven  remain,  and  the  devout  women.  But  in  Gethsemane  all  forsake  and 
flee  ;  only  John  and  Peter  follow.  Peter  fell,  and  at  the  cross  John  and  Mary,  Mary 
the  wife  of  Cleophas,  and  Mary  Magdalene  alone  heard  His  last  words  as  the  lowly  "  Man 
of  Sorrows,"  "  It  is  finished." 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—15. 

Chap.  xv.  26 — xvi.  4.  True  witnesses  of  Christ. — The  Spirit  was  to  testify  of 
Christ  in  the  minds  and  hearts  of  the  disciples.  He  would  make  clear  the  word 
spoken  by  Christ  in  their  souls.  He  would  come  with  power  into  their  hearts, 
witnessing  to  their  spirits  that  they  were  God's  children.  They  realise  that 
their  treasure  is  in  heaven;  and  in  silent  hours  that  treasure  is  revealed  to 
them,  and  they  are  blessed  in  the  knowledge.  They  are  bound  in  one,  and 
the  Spirit  is  the  messenger  passing  between  them.  The  Spirit  witnesses  that 
they  have  found  their  Lord  and  Saviour,  and  the  Spirit  testifies  to  Christ  that 
they  are  children  of  God.  For  this  cause  the  Spirit  will  witness  through  God's 
children  (xv.  27). 

I.  The  source  of  this  witness-hearing. — 1.  "  When  the  sunbeams  have  borne 
witness  to  the  planets  and  the  moon  as  to  the  source  of  their  light,  they  in  turn 
shine  in  the  night  and  bear  witness  of  the  source  of  their  light.  When  the 
sunshine  bears  witness  in  the  flowers  of  the  source  of  their  life,  then  they  bear 
witness  to  it  in  their  varied  beauty  and  their  sweet  odours."  So  should  it  be 
with  Christians  and  Christ.  2.  They  bear  witness  to  His  power  in  their  lives. 
They  are  as  lights  in  the  world,  as  the  salt  of  the  earth.  And  whatever  is 
revealed  in  Scripture  by  the  Holy  Spirit  regarding  the  meaning  and  aim,  the 

446 


HO  MILE TIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xvi. 


contents  and  fruit,  of   the  work  of  Jesus,  remains   as  the  directory  for  this 
witness-bearing. 

II.  Its  steadfastness. — 1.  This  witnessing  for  Jesus  excites  the  hatred  of  the 
world,  which  seeks  to  isolate  believers  and  excommunicate  them  from  participa- 
tion in  the  divine  service.  The  disciples  speedily  came  under  the  ban  of  the 
Jewish  authorities.  It  had  been  threatened  before.  But  after  the  descent  of 
the  Spirit,  when  the  true  nature  of  the  religion  of  Christ  was  perceived,  then 
the  hatred  of  Jewish  bigotry  broke  out  in  bitter  persecution.  They  were 
not  allowed  to  witness  for  Christ  in  temple  or  synagogue ;  and  the  hatred  of 
their  persecutors  followed  them  into  strange  countries  (Acts  ix.  1,  2).  2.  Not 
only  so,  but  the  persecution  took  a  bitterer  form,  and  the  protomartyr  Stephen 
was  the  first  of  those  who  fell  under  the  hands  of  those  who  thought 
they  were  doing  God  service  in  slaying  him.  3.  As  the  years  sped  on  Roman 
persecutions  took  the  place  of  the  Jewish.  JYVhen  any  misfortune  came  upon 
a  country,  men  imagined  it  was  the  wrath  of  the  gods  because  the  "  new 
superstition "  was  permitted  to  extend.  And  the  cry  was,  "  To  the  lions  with 
these  Christians,  and  then  things  will  mend  !  "  This  they  did  because  they  knew 
not  the  Father  nor  Christ.  4.  And  it  descended  to  pre-Reformation  times,  when 
the  first  companies  of  the  faithful  separated  from  the  Romish  Church.  A 
crusade  against  heretics  was  preached.  As  Huss  was  bound  to  the  stake  to  be 
burnt,  and  the  fire  did  not  speedily  enough  burn  up,  a  monk  cried  out,  "  Who- 
ever brings  wood  for  the  burning  of  this  heretic  shall  have  full  absolution  and 
forgiveness  of  sins."  These  things  were  done  then  because  men  truly  knew  not  the 
Father  or  Christ.  5.  But  to  the  believer  the  fellowship  with  his  Lord  is  a  full 
compensation,  and  in  peace  his  soul  finds  a  rich  indemnity  for  temporal  loss. 
Thus  his  faithfulness  toward  Jesus  does  not  waver ;  he  is  drawn  indeed  into 
closer  union  with  his  Lord  the  more  earnestly  the  world  drives  him  away  from 
itself. 

III.  The  comfort  with  which  the  disciples  of  Jesus  are  consoled. — 1.  They 
remember  that  the  Lord  had  foretold  these  persecutions.  The  Lord  had  spoken 
the  truth,  but  that  truth  was  yet  like  an  unopened  book.  The  ages  have 
unsealed  and  opened  it.  2.  But  the  Lord  had  forewarned  the  disciples,  so  that 
when  the  trouble  came  they  might  not  think  that  some  strange  thing  had 
happened  unto  them  (1  Pet.  iv.  12).  They  were  not  to  dream  that  the  position 
of  disciples  would  be  one  of  happiness  in  the  world.  When  they  know  of  the 
enemy  then  they  are  able  to  stand  on  their  guard.  And  these  persecutions  they 
were  to  account  an  honour ;  yes,  they  were  to  remember  that  those  who  suffered 
with  Christ  would  also  be  partakers  of  His  glory.  3.  There  was  a  proverb  in 
the  ancient  Church  that  "  the  blood  of  the  martyrs  is  the  seed  of  the  Church." 
When  the  willows  by  the  brook  have  their  twigs  cut  off  they  do  not  wither, 
but  shoot  forth  more  sprays  than  there  were  before.  So  when  mockery  and 
persecution  break  forth  on  Christian  men  for  the  sake  of  the  name  of 
the  Lord  and  Saviour,  then  they  are  like  trees  planted  by  the  watercourses. 
What  the  world  thinks  shall  be  evil  He  will  turn  to  good.  Against  his  will 
must  the  enemy  build  up  the  Church  also  in  your  souls.  4.  Believers  remember 
also  amid  it  all  that  many  are  enraged  at  the  gospel  purely  from  want  of 
knowledge.  And  in  the  hope  that  finally  to  the  witnessing  of  Jesus  the  victory 
is  sure,  they  work  on  in  patience  and  prayerful  watching. 

Vers.  5-15.  The  blessed  coming  of  the  Spirit  (see  also  xiv.  16-18). — The  one' 
thought  filling  the  disciples'  hearts  at  the  moment  these  words  were  spoken  was 
a  thought  of  sorrow.  "  He  is  going  away,"  was  the  dominant  thought.  And  it 
had  filled  the  hearts  of  the  disciples  with  sadness.  Their  faces  were  clouded  as  is 
the  summer  noon  when  a  storm  draws  on  apace.     Sorrow  indeed  prevented  them 

447 


chap.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY .    ST.  JOHN. 


asking  the  simple  question  whither  He  was  going,  for  then  their  sorrow  had  been 
turned  to  joy.  But  in  mercy  and  kindness,  remembering  their  weakness,  the 
Redeemer  spoke  words  of  cheer,  telling  them  that  though  He  must  depart  this 
was  but  the  prelude  of  richer  blessing,  which  would  in  the  end  turn  their  sorrow 
into  joy. 

I.  The  glorified  Saviour  will  send  the  Comforter. — 1.  The  Spirit  is  called  the 
Comforter  for  this  reason  among  others — that  He  would  bring  comfort  to  the 
hearts  of  the  disciples  when  the  Saviour  had  ascended,  and  when  He  should  tell 
them  what  they  could  not  hear  then  from  Christ.  2.  It  was  better  for  the 
disciples  and  the  world  that  the  Saviour  should  depart.  Had  He  remained  it 
must  have  been  in  one  place,  in  which  His  reign  would  be  more  conspicuous  than 
elsewhere.  But  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  would  be  universal.  Nor  would  it  be 
an  outward  manifestation  so  much  as  an  inward  life.  The  Lord  comes  spiritually 
in  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  thus  the  life  of  sight,  of  the  actual  bodily  presence  of 
the  living  Saviour,  gave  place  to*  the  life  of  faith.  3.  The  Saviour  has  now 
ascended,  and  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  So  that  now  the  believer  knows 
there  is  One  awaiting  him  beyond.  It  is  no  unknown  country.  The  loving 
Redeemer  is  in  the  Father's  presence  and  has  prepared  a  place  for  His  followers. 
4.  But  had  not  the  Spirit  been  in  the  world  ere  Christ  came  ?  Did  He  not 
influence  the  hearts  of  God's  people  of  old  through  law  and  prophecy  ?  Yes, — 
but  to  a  desire  for  better  things,  to  a  faith  in  what  was  to  come,  and  from  which 
the  prophets  were  permitted  sometimes  for  a  moment  to  uplift  the  veil,  revealing 
the  coming  Redeemer  and  His  wondrous  work.  Thus  many  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment saints  rejoiced,  though  dimly,  in  Christ.  5.  But  now  the  time  of  type  and 
symbol  was  past,  and  the  Spirit  was  to  come  as  an  indwelling  guest,  revealing 
Christ  in  the  hearts  of  all  true  believers.  But  first  Christ  must  bring  the  work  of 
redemption  to  its  completion.  Only  in  hearts  cleansed  in  the  Fountain  opened 
for  sin  can  the  Spirit  joyfully  dwell  as  the  Paraclete.  And  His  resurrection  and 
ascension  must  show  that  work  completed,  as  "  all  power  is  given  to  Him  in 
heaven  and  earth,"  and  He  can  send  them  forth  in  spiritual  strength  to  witness 
to  His  saving  work,  the  Spirit  bringing  all  things  to  their  remembrance  of  His 
life  and  work,  so  that  they  could  proclaim  in  His  name  forgiveness  of  sin. 

II.  The  Comforter  comes  with  quickening  power. — 1.  But  He  comes  thus 
only  to  those  who  believe.  To  be  baptized  is  not  enough,  to  be  a  church  member 
not  enough.  It  is  only  to  believing  hearts  that  the  Spirit  will  come  as  a  com- 
forter. 2.  To  the  world  He  comes  otherwise.  He  "  convinces  the  world  of  sin." 
Ere  He  comes  into  our  hearts  there  is  the  silence  and  calm  of  death.  But  when  the 
Spirit  comes  through  the  word  or  some  providential  dealing,  this  fatal  calm  is 
broken  up,  and  the  storm  of  conviction  descends  on  the  soul  like  a  rushing  wind, 
or  the  door  is  shut  against  His  pleading.  3.  And  the  sin  of  which  He  convinces 
the  dead  world  is  the  sin  of  unbelief.  This  is  the  root  of  all  sin — the  believing 
of  the  devil's  lie,  "  Thou  shalt  not  surely  die "  (Gen.  iii.  4),  rather  than  the 
voice  of  God  which  is  truth.  It  is  turning  away  from  the  Light  of  truth — the 
rejection  of  that  Light  which  all  along  was  revealing  the  Father,  and  which 
finally  made  manifest  His  glory,  full  of  grace  and  truth  (i.  14).  4.  But  the  Spirit 
further  convinces  the  world  of  righteousness.  Men  of  the  world  have  in  vain 
striven  to  establish  a  righteousness  of  their  own.  But  the  Spirit  convinces  those 
who  open  their  hearts  of  the  futility  of  this  endeavour,  and  points  to  the  only 
way,  i.e.  that  they  should  humbly  confess  their  sinfulness  and  come  to  the 
Redeemer,  that  He  may  be  made  unto  them  righteousness.  And  His  going  to  the 
Father  meant  the  completion  of  that  work  which  made  it  possible  for  men  to 
attain  this  righteousness.  5.  The  Spirit  "  will  convict  the  world  of  judgment, 
because  the  prince  of  this  world  is  judged."  Satan's  kingdom  will  be  destroyed 
as  the  kingdom  of  grace  advances.     Christ  came  not  to  judge  the  world,  but  %q 

448 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  xvi. 


save  it ;  and  therefore  His  very  coming  was  a  judging  of  the  prince  of  the  evil 
world  of  men's  hearts.  At  the  cross  the  serpent's  head  was  bruised  ;  and  where- 
ever  the  Spirit  comes  with  power  there  the  dark  kingdom  of  evil  shrinks  and 
contracts.  And  through  the  ages  it  is  shrinking  and  contracting  at  every  new 
conquest  of  the  cross.  The  darkness  is  passing  and  the  true  Light  now  shines. 
Every  new  mission  station,  every  enlightened  heart,  is  a  new  conquest  of  a  part 
of  the  territory  of  the  awful  power  of  darkness.  As  Christ  cried  "  It  is 
finished  "  the  prince  of  this  world  was  judged.  And  as  the  risen  Christ  is 
preached  so  declines  the  power  of  evil.  6.  But  in  this  convincing  and  convicting 
power  of  the  Spirit  lies  the  purpose  of  eternal  love.  He  does  not  convince  and 
convict  in  vain,  or  merely  to  demonstrate  the  divine  judgments.  He  comes  in 
judgment  to  tear  up  the  fallow  ground  (Jer.  iv.  3),  to  uproot  the  noxious  weeds, 
the  thorns  and  thistles,  which  would  choke  the  good  seed  sown  by  the  servants  of 
the  Church,  so  that  when  He  descends  like  rain  upon  the  grass  to  be  mown,  and 
as  showers  that  water  the  earth,  the  good  seed  may  spring  up  and  bring  forth 
abundantly.  7.  This  conviction,  too,  is  an  awakening  from  the  darkness  and 
ignorance  of  sin  and  unrighteousness  under  which  men  were  exposed  to  judgment, 
and  a  bringing  of  them  into  the  light  of  truth.  He  shall  guide  you  into  all 
truth — fit  representative  of  the  good  Shepherd  who  leads  His  flock — telling  of 
the  gentle  dealing  of  God.  And  as  the  Saviour  ever  listened  for  the  Father's 
voice  (Isa.  1.  4),  so  the  Spirit  will  not  speak  of  Himself.  His  witnessing  is  one 
with  the  witness  of  the  word  of  Christ.  Nothing  revealed  by  Him  can  truly  be 
in  contradiction  to  the  teaching  of  Christ  and  His  inspired  word.  For  He  is 
to  receive  of  Christ  what  is  His,  to  show  it  unto  the  disciples — show  it  not  to  the 
head  alone,  but  to  the  heart.  For  it  is  here  especially  that  moral  truth  is  appre- 
hended ;  and  the  heart  must  be  specially  enlightened.  8.  How  has  the  Spirit 
glorified  Christ !  The  history  of  the  progress  and  power  of  Christ's  gospel  is  a 
testimony  to  the  power  of  His  witness -bearing  to  the  Redeemer.  And  every 
redeemed  heart  bears  the  same  witness ;  for  what  the  Spirit  gives  is  what  He 
received  of  Christ,  and  therefore  Christ  is  glorified.  9.  So  also  is  the  Father 
glorified  in  Christ.  For  the  things  of  Christ  are  the  Father's.  "  Christ  is  God's." 
Here  all  the  persons  of  the  Godhead  are  seen  conjoined  in  this  glorious  work. 
How  ought  this  wondrous  love  to  constrain  us  not  to  live  unto  ourselves — to  open 
our  hearts  joyfully  to  the  influence  of  the  blessed  Paraclete,  that  He  may  work 
His  sanctifying  work  within  us  !  "  Working  out  our  own  salvation  with  fear  and 
trembling,  seeing  that  it  is  God  who  is  working  in  us,"  etc.  (Phil.  ii.  12). 

Vers.  5-15.  How  the  Holy  Ghost  brings  to  completion  GoaVs  purpose  of  grace 
toward  men. — The  working  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  faithful  and  in  the  world ; 
the  comfort  of  believers  in  view  of  the  world's  enmity  and  their  own  wickedness ; 
the  true  spirit  of  obedience  in  reference  to  the  leading  of  the  Spirit,  are  the  chief 
points  in  the  passage. 

Introduction.  .  .  .  Rejoice  at  the  remembrance  that  God  has  sent  His 
Son  into  the  world  that  the  world  through  Him  might  be  saved,  that  the 
Son  died  on  the  cross  to  reconcile  the  world  to  God.  The  Holy  Spirit  has  come 
as  the  promised  Paraclete,  to  enable  all  who  seek  it  to  appropriate  Christ's  right- 
eousness, and  to  make  them  joyful  in  their  divine  sonship.  Our  passage  shows 
how  this  working  of  the  Holy  Spirit  completes  God's  purpose  of  grace  toward 
men. 

I.  He  comforts  the  sorrowing. — 1.  The  disciples  were  sorrowful  because  of  the 
departure  of  Jesus.  It  was  shown  to  them  how  needful  this  was,  and  how  good 
it  would  be  for  them.  2.  In  tribulation  we  by  nature  see  that  alone.  The 
Holy  Spirit  quickens  our  vision,  so  that  we  recognise  the  blessings  that  come  from 
tribulation, 

gg  449 


chap.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


II.  He  punishes  those  who  oppose. — 1.  The  world  is  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
convicted  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment.  2.  We  all  possess  in  our- 
selves a  bit  of  the  world,  which  must  be  discarded.  For  this  reason  the  Holy 
Ghost  also  discovers  our  sinfulness  to  us,  and  chastens  us,  so  that  we  may  be  led 
to  repentance,  to  lay  hold  of  Christ's  righteousness,  and  comfort  ourselves  in  the 
same,  in  view  of  the  judgment. 

III.  He  leads  the  "willing  people." — 1.  The  Holy  Ghost  was  to  lead  the 
disciples  into  all  truth,  so  that  through  their  testimony  Christ  might  be  glorified. 
2.  The  Holy  Ghost  leads  the  penitent  ever  deeper  into  the  knowledge  of  God's 
way  of  salvation ;  He  purifies  their  life  evermore  from  sin,  brings  them  into 
ever  closer  union  with  Christ,  and  thus  their  word  and  life  glorify  Jesus. — 
J.  L.  JSommer,  "  Evang.  Per." 

Ver.  8.  He  shall  convince  the  world  of  sin. — What  Scripture  lays  stress  on  is 
not  men's  circumstances,  but  their  moral  and  spiritual  condition.  According  to 
their  inner  life,  men  in  the  same  outward  circumstances  will  do  vastly  different 
deeds  and  arrive  at  issues  wide  asunder  as  heaven  and  hell.  In  the  same  circle, 
under  the  same  influences,  with  the  same  advantages,  we  find  a  John  who  leaned 
on  the  Saviour's  breast,  and  a  Judas  who  betrayed  Him.  It  may  be  well  to 
seek  social  reform,  higher  wages,  better  education,  better  circumstances.  But  if 
we  would  seek  to  raise  the  race  higher,  we  must  begin  first  and  strive  chiefly 
after  inward  and  spiritual  reform.  With  that  the  external  and  outward  will 
come  also. 

I.  The  presence  of  sin  and  its  power  in  the  life  of  men  show  the  need  of 
conviction  of  sin. — 1.  The  divine  teaching  is  therefore  directed  first  to  the 
conviction  of  sin.  This  is  one  of  the  chief  offices  of  the  Spirit.  It  is  a  weakness 
of  much  of  modern  evangelical  preaching  that  this  is  so  little  insisted  on. 
2.  The  apostolic  preaching  enforced  this  truth  on  Jew  and  Gentile,  showing  that 
the  culmination  of  sin  was  unbelief,  through  knowing  not  God  and  Him  whom 
God  hath  sent.  This  made  Wesleyanism  and  the  evangelical  revival  at  the  end 
of  last  century  so  powerful  3.  To  ignore  the  fact  of  sin  is  to  ignore  history. 
Apart  from  this  great  fact  Christ's  work  is  meaningless.  Hence  the  attempt 
to  discredit  the  divine  facts.  The  modern  craze  of  evolution  has  infected  the 
Church  ;  hence  men  are  seeking  to  square  Scripture  and  divine  eternal  truth 
with  this  narrow  and  dubious  theory.  4.  But  the  stern  truths  of  the  existence 
and  doom  of  sin  men  cannot  get  rid  of,  juggle  as  they  may.  This  is  not  only  a 
Bible  dogma.  It  lies  at  the  basis  of  the  religious  history  of  mankind  It  is  met 
in  all  its  sombreness  in  all  the  historic  religions,  in  the  cultured  literature  of 
Greece  and  Rome.     The  great  cycle  of  Greek  tragedies  reveals  it — 

"  Pollution,  like  a  cloud,  hangs  o'er  a  man, 
And  folly  hides  the  knowledge  of  his  fall." 

The  Greek  poets  not  only  saw  sin  working  out  its  dire  results  here.  They  were 
convinced  it  would  follow  man  beyond. 

"  For  Hades  is  a  stern  inquisitor 
Of  men  beneath  the  earth,  and  views  their  deeds, 
And  writes  them  in  the  tablets  of  his  mind.  .  .  . 
The  lewd  offender  shall  not  when  he  dies 
Escape  arraignment  in  the  shades  below." 

jEschylus,  "  Agam? 

No  fine-spun  theories  can  get  rid  of  the  momentous  fact.  Each  one  in  view  of 
sin  must  confess,  "I  did  this  ;  this  habit  of  sin  is  in  me  ;  whatever  the  motive,  I 
was  the  mover.  Man  at  first  knew  the  right  and  good,  i.e.  obedience  to  the 
divine  will.  It  was  not  necessary  that  he  should  know  personally  what  evil  was 
in  order  to  his  development.      But  when  he  disobeyed  the  divine  will  he  could 

450 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  xvi. 


not  help  knowing  it,  and  now  his  development  is  effected  in  another  way  than  it 
would  have  been  had  he  not  fallen"  (see  Maurice,  Theol.  Essays).  The  first 
step,  therefore,  that  God's  Spirit  takes  is  to  convince  men  of  sin.  This  He  had 
been  doing  all  along,  even  in  pagan  hearts,  as  we  see  from  Greek  and  Roman 
literature,  Egyptian  monuments,  etc.  But  now,  in  view  of  the  exhibition 
of  what  sin  is  on  Calvary,  His  convincing  and  convicting  power  is  infinitely 
increased. 

II,  The  blessedness  of  the  Spirit's  work  in  convincing  the  world  of  sin. — 
1.  The  real  principle  of  sin  is  disobedience  to  the  word  of  God  arising  from 
unbelief.  Hence  sin  in  this  view  is  called  a  deficiency,  a  want,  a  missing  of  the 
mark.  It  is  as  if  some  important  bolt  or  rivet  from  a  great,  complicated 
machine  had  been  broken  or  withdrawn.  The  machine  is  thrown  into  confusion 
and  much  of  it  destroyed.  So  with  man's  nature, — the  moral  bond  between  God 
and  man  being  snapped  asunder,  moral  and  physical  deterioration  inevitably 
followed.  2.  Sin  never  remains  alone.  It  is  followed  by  a  numerous  progeny. 
One  lie  leads  to  another,  one  crime  to  another.  This  perhaps  is  the  great  lesson 
taught  by  the  mediaeval  tragedy  of  Faust,  modernised  by  Goethe,  Lenau,  and  others. 
It  shows  how  sin  follows  on  the  heels  of  sin,  in  the  vain  effort  made  by  the  sinner 
to  escape  the  consequences  of  what  has  gone  before.  3.  Hence  evil  becomes 
"  crookedness"  perversion  of  the  divine  law.  Then  it  develops  into  open  rebellion, 
and,  last  and  lowest  stage,  becomes  habitual  wickedness,  and,  if  persisted  in,  moral 
death.  It  leaves  its  mark  on  the  nature.  4.  Another  reason  why  it  is  blessed 
to  have  this  conviction  thrust  upon  us  is  the  fact  that  sin  is  hereditary.  It  has 
led  to  physical  deterioration.  Children  inherit  this,  and  also  a  weakened  moral 
nature.  The  sins  of  the  fathers  are  visited  on  the  children.  "  The  evil  that 
men  do  lives  after  them."  Modern  science  "  is  laying  unexpected  emphasis  upon 
the  words  of  Robert  Browning  when  he  said  that  Christianity  is  the  faith  which 
launched  its  dart  at  the  head  of  a  lie,  taught  original  sin,  and  the  corruption  of 
man's  heart  "  {Expository  Times,  1892).  5.  Sin  haunts  men,  and  the  longer  they 
continue  impenitent  the  more  terrible  does  it  become.  Our  sins  are  "like 
our  shadows."  Not  only  so,  but  the  shadow  often  envelops  others  in  its  gloom, 
and  may  follow  beyond. 

Application. — We  should  therefore  hail  with  joy  the  fact  that  the  Spirit's 
work  is  to  convince  the  world  of  sin,  and  now  more  powerfully  than  ever  before, 
in  view  of  Gethsemane  and  Calvary.  Let  His  convincing  and  convicting  power 
have  free  play  in  our  hearts  and  consciences.  For  the  first  step  from  the 
bondage  of  sin  is  this  conviction  of  its  deadly  power  and  presence  in  the  world 
and  in  our  hearts. 

Ver.  10.  The  way  of  escape  from  sin. — Thank  God,  the  Spirit  not  only  convicts 
the  world  of  sin.  He  also  comes  to  convict  or  convince  it  of  righteousness,  and 
thus  of  the  way  of  escape  from  sin.  The  Comforter  will  not  only  quicken  the 
consciences  of  sinful  men,  but,  in  the  finished  work  of  Jesus,  will  point  the  way 
to  deliverance  from  sin. 

I.  How  men  of  old  longed  for  this. — "We  must  either  learn  to  discover 
the  truth  about  these  subjects ;  or,  if  this  be  impossible,  we  must  take  the  best 
and  most  irrefragable  of  human  words,  and  supported  on  this,  as  on  a  raft,  sail 
through  the  waters  of  life  in  perpetual  jeopardy,  unless  we  make  the  journey  on 
a  securer  stay — some  divine  word,  if  it  might  be — more  securely  and  with  less 
peril "  (Plato's  Phmdo,  in  Westcott's  Religious  Thought  in  the  West). 

II.  This  divine  word  which  those  seekers  after  truth  would  fain  have 
possessed  we  have. — 1.  This  word  gives  us  the  joyful  assurance  that  the  work 
of  sin  may  be  undone :  not  by  merely  changing  our  circumstances,  but  by 
having  ourselves  changed.     2.  There  is  a  way  of  escape  from  moral  evil,  its  toils 

451 


chap.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


here  and  its  terrors  hereafter.  The  divine  law  is  founded  on  the  possibility  of 
men  resisting  evil.  But  if  men  persist  in  sinning,  it  is  an  eternal  decree  that 
evil,  if  persisted  in,  hardens  the  heart  and  sears  the  conscience.  Some  aid  must 
therefore  be  given  if  sin  is  to  be  overcome.  3.  Christ  brings  this  aid.  His 
redemptive  work  is  often  presented  under  the  very  defective  view  of  providing 
merely  for  the  pardon  of  actual  transgressions — as  if  that  were  enough.  If  by 
an  act  of  royal  clemency  a  criminal  is  discharged,  is  he  less  a  criminal  1  No ; 
and  this  would  not  suffice  in  the  moral  sphere  either.  Thus  the  Redeemer  was 
called  Jesus ;  for  He  shall  save  His  people  from  their  sins.  He  delivers  men 
from  the  bondage  of  corruption.  He,  through  the  Spirit,  will  make  them  new 
creations.  Convincing  them  of  the  need  of  righteousness,  the  Spirit  will  point  to 
the  completed  work  of  Jesus,  and  its  acceptance  in  His  ascension  to  the  right  hand 
of  the  Father,  where  He  reigns,  "The  Lord  our  righteousness." 

III.  The  effect  in  the  moral  and  spiritual  life  of  the  Spirit's  convincing  men 
of  righteousness. — 1.  Let  men,  while  now  is  the  accepted  time,  yield  themselves 
to  the  influences  of  God's  Spirit,  and  He  will  convince  them  of  sin,  righteousness, 
judgment.  2.  But  He  will  not  leave  them  there.  He  will  guide  them  so  that 
they  may  rise  to  that  condition  from  which  man  fell — to  submissive  readiness  to 
do  God's  will,  and  to  renounce  their  own  will.  He  will  lead  them  to  righteous- 
ness— not  absolute,  but  through  faith  ever  becoming  more  marked  through 
union  with  Christ.  3.  And  He  will  also  lead  them  to  realise  that  judgment  is 
already  going  forward  in  the  world,  that  yet  a  little  while  and  the  final  time  of 
declaration  will  come,  "  when  we  shall  all  be  made  manifest  before  the  judgment 
seat  of  Christ,  that  each  one  may  receive  the  things  done  in  the  body,"  etc. 
(2  Cor.  v.  10). 

Ver.  11.  The  mission  of  the  Comforter. — This  passage  is  frequently  interpreted 
as  though  it  referred  to  the  final  judgment  of  the  world,  and  men  have  supposed 
that  Christ  meant  to  say  that  the  last  conviction  produced  by  the  Comforter  is 
the  assurance  of  a  day  when  He  (the  Lord)  shall  appear  as  the  Judge  of  man.  It 
is  evident  that  Christ  referred  to  a  judgment  that  had  then  and  there  commenced, 
for  the  words  have  a  present  meaning — "  The  prince  of  this  world  is  judged." 
We  shall  most  easily  illustrate  this  by  referring  to  a  precisely  similar  utterance 
in  chap.  xii.  31,  "  Now  is  the  judgment  of  this  world:  now  shall  the  prince  of 
this  world  be  cast  out."  The  Saviour  had  just  declared  that  by  His  death  He 
should  give  life  to  the  world.  He  had  just  received  from  heaven  the  assurance 
of  final  victory.  The  judgment,  therefore,  to  which  He  pointed  was  that  conquest 
which  He  had  already  commenced  of  the  dominion  of  evil,  and  the  final  victory 
over  it  which  He  should  gain  on  His  cross  ;  and  the  same  meaning  must  be  attached 
to  the  word  world  here,  so  that  the  verse  may  be  rendered  thus  :  "  He  shall  con- 
vince the  world  that  evil  is  conquered,  overthrown,  and  shall  finally  pass  away." 
Taking  it  in  that  sense,  we  perceive  at  once  why  the  belief  in  judgment  must 
follow  the  belief  in  righteousness.  For  when  we  have  been  freed  from  sin,  and 
made  righteous  in  Christ,  we  find  that  we  have  entered  on  a  life-long  struggle 
with  evil ;  and  as  the  one  thing  to  keep  us  true,  we  need  the  assurance  of  final 
victory.  These  words  present  two  thoughts — a  fact,  and  a  conviction  founded 
on  that  fact.  1.  Christ's  conquest  over  the  kingdom  of  evil.  2.  His  conquest 
revealed  by  the  Comforter  is  the«pledge  of  victory  for  man. 

I.  The  kingdom  of  evil  as  opposed  to  the  Saviour. — He  speaks  of  the 
"  prince  of  this  world  " ;  and  if  we  examine  that  phrase,  we  shall  find  it  full  of 
suggestions  that  throw  an  awful  light  on  the  majesty  of  the  power  that  He 
overcame  for  man.  In  speaking  of  a  prince  Christ  manifestedly  implies  that 
evil  forces  are  not  separated,  but  combined  and  connected  things,  that  they  form 
a  great  living  power,  a  kingdom  of  wrong.     The  phrase  also  points  to  a  personal 

452 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.         chap,  xvi. 


evil  spirit  as  lord  of  that  evil  kingdom.  Not  in  the  sense  that  he  is  the  cause  of 
it  all,  but  he  is  the  representative  of  it,  as  being  the  greatest  and  the  first. 
This  was  the  kingdom  that  opposed  itself  to  the  Son  of  man.  The  question  may- 
arise,  What  have  we  to  do  with  a  prince  of  evil  ?  Is  he  a  personal  power, 
"  working  in  the  children  of  disobedience  "  1  "  I  believe  there  are  indications  of 
a  personality  of  evil  acting  on  human  life  to-day.  Whence  come  the  thoughts, 
blasphemous  and  horrible,  about  God  and  man — temptations  to  awful  crimes — 
actual  outbursts  of  demoniacal  wrong,  rising  from  a  region  no  human  eye  has 
fathomed  or  science  explored?  Are  they  the  product  of  our  own  individual 
spirits,  or  the  result  of  any  abnormal  combination  of  circumstances  ?  May 
they  not  be  the  flashings  on  the  surface  of  the  mysterious  sea  of  human  con- 
sciousness, which  indicate  a  power  troubling  its  waters  1  At  least  God's  Bible 
tells  us  they  may  be,  and  no  philosophy  under  heaven  can  account  for  them. 
Now  look  at  the  kingdom  of  evil  which  opposed  Christ ;  it  all  arrayed  itself  in 
might  against  Him.  Evil  spirits  confronted  Him  constantly,  possessions  by 
devils  were  more  frequent.  All  the  evil  influences  that  touch  the  human  soul 
gathered  themselves  against  the  Perfect  Soul  to  turn  Him  aside  and  tear  Him 
from  His  self -chosen  path  of  dedication  for  the  world." 

II.  The  Saviour's  conquest. — We  are  regarding  it  as  a  conquest  won  for  man, 
and  for  this  two  things  were  requisite  :  Christ  must  overcome  the  essence  of  evil 
by  a  means  common  to  humanity,  and  He  must  show  in  His  conquest  that  the 
facts  which  seemed  to  prove  the  perpetuity  of  evil  were  the  signs  of  its  overthrow. 
Note  then,  first,  that  the  essence  of  evil  is  self-will.  Christ  must  conquer  sin 
through  the  might  of  a  divine  obedience,  and  yet  occupy  a  battle-ground  common 
to  humanity.  And  where  was  this  so  perfectly  accomplished  as  in  His  life  and 
death  ?  His  temptation  opened  with  the  challenge  in  the  wilderness,  "  If  Thou 
be  the  Son  of  God,  command  that  these  stones  be  made  bread";  "  If  Thou  be 
the  Son  of  God,  cast  Thyself  down  from  hence  "  ;  and  closed  with  the  last  taunt, 
"  If  Thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  come  down  from  the  cross."  But  the  cry,  "It  is 
finished,"  was  the  herald  of  conquest.  Then,  secondly,  Christ  must  show  by  His 
conquest  that  the  facts  which  seem  to  prove  the  perpetuity  of  evil  are  really 
signs  of  its  overthrow.  The  darkest  lie  of  the  evil  one  is  this — that  evil  is  an 
eternal  power.  Before  the  advent  of  the  gospel  the  world  was  beginning  to 
believe  in  the  omnipotence  of  wrong.  The  slavery  wrought  by  sin  was  so  com- 
plete that  men  were  losing  faith  in  anything  which  could  conquer  evil,  and  were 
sinking  into  a  dreary  and  hopeless  fatalism.  Just  note  the  two  great  facts 
which,  as  the  results  of  sin,  lay  at  the  root  of  this  state.  1.  Suffering. — Men 
felt  the  pressure  of  its  mystery.  It  seemed  to  belie  the  goodness  of  God,  to 
darken  the  heaven  of  His  love,  and  prove  sin  to  be  irresistible.  Its  shadow 
rested  on  the  ages  of  the  past,  and  projected  itself  with  a  grim  certainty  into 
the  future.  Now  suffering,  in  all  its  deepest  dreadfulness,  Christ  endured.  He 
became  the  high  priest  of  sorrow.  He  grew  glorious  through  it.  "  He  was 
perfected  through  sufferings,"  and  thus  revealed  it  to  man  as  the  education 
of  a  Father.  2.  Death. — The  great  mystery,  the  spoiler  of  human  hopes,  the 
divider  of  friend  from  friend,  the  sign-manual  of  sin's  dominion.  He  became 
subject  to  its  power.  It  seemed  to  conquer  Him.  It  seemed  to  divide  Him 
from  the  Father,  but  really  it  was  the  pledge  of  their  eternal  union. 

III.  Christ's  conquest  as  a  pledge  of  victory  for  man. — 1.  The  fact  itself 
is  a  power. — We  are  strengthened  by  the  belief  that  some  one  has  known  our 
difficulties  and  subdued  them.  This  lies  at  the  root  of  all  true  "  hero  worship." 
Like  us  Christ  fought.  By  a  strength  which  we  may  share  He  conquered. 
Look  at  the  early  Church  when  the  meaning  of  this  fact  was  revealed  by  the 
descending  Comforter. 

2.  Christ  is  GooVs  promise. — Through  His  life  God  speaks  to  us  now. 

453 


chap.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


3.  Christ  is  a  present  friend. — We  do  not  always  realise  His  presence,  but 
sometimes  amid  the  pauses  of  the  battle  we  feel  Him  near  in  that  "  peace  which 
passe th  all  understanding,"  and  hear  Him  saying,  "  Be  faithful  unto  death,"  etc. 
(Rev.  ii.).  This  then  is  the  sublime  position  of  the  Christian  warrior.  In  his 
life  the  war  of  worlds  is  gleaming.  He  is  fighting  in  a  battle  which  is  the 
heritage  of  the  ages.  He  is  wrestling  with  "  principalities  and  powers."  He 
is  following  in  the  track  of  the  great  Captain  who  has  passed  before  him  into  the 
heavens.  The  condition  of  victory  is,  "  To  him  that  overcometh  will  I  grant  to 
sit  with  Me  on  My  throne,"  etc.—  E.  L.  Hull,  B.A. 

Ver.  12.  Christ's  reticence  in  teaching  truth. — Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  had  been 
engaged  for  years  in  instructing  His  disciples.  There  never  was  so  constant  and 
skilful  a  teacher,  using  every  opportunity  and  every  incident.  The  record  of 
His  lessons  preserved  to  us  in  the  four  Gospels  is  a  very  small  part  of  what 
He  spoke,  and  yet  what  a  store  of  truth,  new  to  the  world,  and  divine  and 
everlasting  in  its  reach,  is  contained  in  it  !  But  after  all  these  revelations, 
and  now  at  the  close  of  His  ministry,  much  remains  untold.  The  Teacher  is 
all- wise,  but  the  learners  are  weak  and  full  of  prejudice.  The  Teacher  is  so  wise 
that  He  will  not  give  them  more  than  they  can  well  receive. 

1.  Some  illustrations  of  this  feature  of  Christ's  teaching. — 1.  Some  of  the 
truths  to  which  we  may  suppose  our  Lord  made  immediate  reference. — One  of  these 
was  the  long  separation  which  was  about  to  take  place  between  Him  and  His 
disciples.  He  did  not  reveal  to  them  plainly  the  fall  of  the  Mosaic  dispensation, 
accompanied  with  the  destruction  of  the  Jewish  State,  and  the  scattering  of  the 
nation  over  the  world  for  so  many  centuries.  Another  thing  of  the  future  not 
fully  revealed  was,  the  admission  of  men  of  all  nations  upon  equal  terms  to  the 
privileges  of  the  children  of  God.  Also  notice  the  gradual  way  in  which  He 
made  the  true  view  of  His  own  person  dawn  on  them.  All  those  things  of 
which  we  have  spoken  are  rooted  and  imbedded  in  the  Gospels  ;  we  can  see  them 
there  in  our  Lord's  words  and  actions  from  the  beginning.  It  was  from  these 
very  words  and  actions  that  His  disciples  came  to  learn  them  under  His  Spirit's 
teaching,  but  they  are  presented  in  such  a  way  as  to  meet  the  state  of  their 
minds  at  every  stage. 

2.  The  manner  of  His  revelation  of  truth  to  the  world  in  general. — His  methods 
are  of  a  kind  peculiarly  fitted  to  reveal  truth  as  men  are  able  to  bear  it.  The 
parable  is  His  favourite  method  in  speech,  and  the  miracle  in  action,  which,  as 
He  performs  it,  is  a  parable  put  into  a  living  shape.  Our  Lord  desired  that 
truth  should  not  be  thrust  upon  a  man  from  without,  but  grow  up  within,  as 
from  a  seed,  night  and  day,  he  knows  not  how.  If  we  go  back  to  the  Old 
Testament,  we  shall  find  that  the  teaching  was  conducted  in  the  same  way. 
When  we  come  down  to  the  ages  that  have  followed  His  appearance  upon  earth, 
there  is  the  same  gradual  unfolding  of  the  principles  of  His  kingdom. 

3.  Christ's  teaching  in  the  individual  life. — Take,  for  example,  the  way  in 
which  the  view  of  human  life  alters  as  men  advance  in  years.  Were  the  young 
to  discover  how  unsatisfactory  the  present  world  is  at  the  core,  how  little  of  real 
happiness,  as  they  expect  it,  it  can  bring,  what  blanks  and  what  bitters  there 
are  in  its  most  promised  sweetness,  they  could  not  bear  it. 

"  If  nature  put  not  forth  her  power, 
About  the  opening  of  the  flower, 
Who  is  it  that  could  live  an  hour  ? " 

The  young  need  this  bright  view  of  the  world  to  develop  their  energies,  to  nurse 
their  affections  and  imagination,  that  when  the  veterans  droop  they  may  come 
in,  like  a  fresh  reinforcement,  into  the  failing  battle  of  life.  There  is  a  similar 
experience  in  the  Christian  life.     Those  who  enter  on  it  have  the  confident 

454 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xvi. 


feeling  which  would  gain  triumphs  without  thinking  of  trials,  the  spirit  of  Peter, 
that  hopes  to  have  the  heavenly  vision  without  the  hard  world,  "  Master,  it  is 
good  for  us  to  be  here,"  or  the  fancied  strength  which  prompted  his  boast, 
"  Lord,  I  will  follow  Thee  whithersoever  Thou  goest."  They  have  the  "  love  of 
their  youth,  the  zeal  of  their  espousals,"  and  they  cannot  conceive  that  it  should 
ever  be  otherwise.  But  then  comes  "  the  check  and  change,"  dullness  of 
feeling,  temptation,  the  bitter  cross,  and  long  prospects  of  march  and  battle 
before  the  close.  Ere  this,  however,  they  have  learned  to  add  to  their  faith 
virtue  and  temperance  and  patience,  to  put  on  the  whole  armour  of  God,  and 
having  done  all  to  stand.  The  afflictive  events  of  God's  providence  are  measured 
in  the  same  way.  The  great  doctrines  of  the  Gospel  are  presented  to  the  mind 
in  a  like  manner. 

II.  Some  of  the  conclusions  taught  us  regarding  Christ  and  human  nature. 
— In  regard  to  Christ  we  admire  His  control  over  Himself  and  His  message. 
With  this  self-control  there  is  united  Christ's  tenderness  in  teaching.  There  are 
in  the  teaching  of  Christ,  both  in  the  Bible  and  in  providence,  reticences  and 
pauses,  which  temper  the  truth  to  feeble  minds,  as  clouds  chasten  light.  If  we 
so  read  them,  they  are  not  mere  blanks,  but  tokens  of  a  true  and  real  tenderness. 
"  His  doctrine  will  yet  drop  from  them  as  the  rain,  His  speech  distil  as  the  dew." 
"  He  will  not  break  the  bruised  reed,  nor  quench  the  smoking  flax,  till  He  bring 
forth  judgment  unto  truth."  We  see  in  this  method  of  teaching,  not  less,  the 
wisdom  of  Christ.  Last  of  all  in  regard  to  Christ,  we  learn  His  patience  as  a 
teacher.  This  subject  may  also  teach  us  some  conclusions  concerning  our 
common  human  nature.  We  may  learn  to  take  large  and  tolerant  views  of  it. 
When  we  see  how  slowly  the  best  of  men  have  apprehended  the  clearest  of  all 
truths,  we  must  not  be  provoked  at  what  we  call  the  stupidity  and  prejudice  of 
our  contemporaries,  nor  fret  unreasonably  because  antiquated  opinions,  as  they 
seem  to  us,  obstinately  hold  their  ground.  If  the  great  Teacher  had  to  wait,  we 
may  be  content  to  do  so.  We  may  cherish  very  hopeful  views  of  human  nature. 
There  are  many  grounds  for  this,  but  here  is  one,  that  there  must  be  noble 
things  in  store  for  that  race  with  which  the  Son  of  God  is  contented  to  have 
such  patience.  In  regard  to  things  which  Christ  does  not  tell  us,  let  us  be 
thankful  to  Him  for  His  silence.  The  cloud  that  veils  full  knowledge  "is  a 
cloud  of  love."  Finally,  let  us  be  chiefly  concerned  about  knowing  the  one  great 
thing  which  Christ  has  to  say  to  us.  There  is  a  message  which  stands  out  in 
His  word  distinct  from  the  beginning  to  the  close :  "  This  is  life  eternal,  that 
they  might  know  Thee,  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  Thou  hast 
sent." — Br.  John  Ker. 

Ver.  13.  Concerning  the  love  and  fear  of  truth. — There  is  nothing  of  which  a 
more  criminal  abuse  may  be  made  than  truth.  It  is  important  that  we  should 
consider  the  true  position  we  ought  to  take  in  relation  to  it.  There  is  a  truth 
which  reproves  and  a  truth  which  flatters  us. 

I.  Of  all  truths  there  is  none  we  ought  to  love  more  than  that  which  reproves 
US. — Why?  There  are  four  reasons.  1.  Because  it  lets  us  know  ourselves. 
However  enlightened  we  may  be,  and  however  much  care  we  may  take  to  know 
ourselves,  there  are  many  faults  that  escape  our  notice.  The  truth  that  brings 
them  to  our  notice  is  healthful.  As  Chrysostom  has  said,  "  When  a  sick  man 
finds  a  physician  who  makes  known  to  him  clearly  what  his  malady  is,  far  from 
being  offended  at  him,  he  esteems  him."  A  young  noble  of  the  court  of 
Augustus,  and  even  related  to  his  family,  by  name  Germanicus,  filled  with  a 
noble  curiosity  to  know  himself  (little  thought  of  by  the  great  of  this  world),  and 
being  at  the  head  of  the  Roman  troops,  disguised  himself  from  time  to  time,  and 

455 


chap.  xvi.        BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


went  to  the  camp  of  his  troops  in  the  evening,  approaching  the  tents  unknown  to 
the  occupants,  and  listening  to  the  talk  of  the  soldiers,  for  he  knew  that  then 
they  would  speak  with  most  freedom  what  they  thought  of  their  general.  This 
example  of  a  pagan  should  confound  this  nicety  so  foreign  to  Christianity,  which 
causes  men  to  revolt  against  truth  the  moment  it  begins  to  silence  and  wound 
them.  2.  Because  this  truth  is  the  most  efficacious  for  our  correction.  It  makes 
us  look  within  and  leads  to  repentance.  The  truth  spoken  a  propos  often  suffices 
to  save  men  from  vicious  habits.  All  else  may  have  been  tried  in  vain ;  but  the 
truth  spoken  with  prudence  has  at  last  prevailed.  The  man  may  be  troubled  at 
first  and  inclined  to  rebel;  but  grace  and  reason  overcome  sentiment.  And  truth, 
although  bitter  at  first,  even  by  its  very  bitterness  becomes  the  cause  and  prin- 
ciple of  healing.  3.  Because  such  truths  are  those  that  peoplr  will  hardly  say 
out  to  us,  which  they  will  rather  seek  to  hide  from  us.  It  is  very  rare  to  find  a 
friend  so  sincere  as  to  reprove  us.  Above  all  this  is  true  in  regard  to  people  of 
position.  Therefore  the  truth  that  reproves  should  be  the  most  precious.  4.  Be- 
cause such  truth  proceeds  from  a  pure,  generous,  and  disinterested  zeal.  For 
there  is  nothing  harder  than  to  tell  any  one  a  disagreeable  truth.  Therefore  such 
a  truth  should  be  heard  with  docility  and  thankfulness.  As  in  the  case  of 
Belshazzar  and  Daniel,  why  did  he  load  Daniel  with  favours  ?  Because,  says 
Chrysostom,  he  judged  that  a  man  who  had  courage  to  speak  such  truths  to  a 
prince,  and  who,  in  order  to  acquit  himself  for  this  heroic  act,  forgot  his  own 
self-interest,  was  a  man  who  merited  the  highest  honours  (Dan.  iii.).  But  when 
the  truth  reproves  most  men  they  hate  it.  As,  e.g.,  Ahab  and  the  prophet 
Micaiah  (1  Kings  xxii.  8  ft'.).  So  men  shut  their  ears  against  the  preacher's 
voice  when  he  becomes  personal. 

II.  The  truths  we  ought  to  fear  most  are  those  which  flatter  us. — Why? 
There  are  two  good  reasons.  1 .  Because,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  world,  as 
St.  Gregory  says,  as  we  know  by  experience  that  which  flatters  us  is  usually  that 
which  deceives  and  seduces  us.  That  which  flatters  us  tends  to  corrupt  us. 
What  does  God  say  by  the  mouth  of  Isaiah  ?  "O  My  people,"  etc.  (Isa.  iii.  12). 
Indeed,  what  are  the  better  part  of  the  praises  of  the  world,  in  the  manner  of 
the  world,  but  official  lies  !  Nevertheless  men  are  intoxicated  by  these  vain 
praises,  and  believe  themselves  to  be  far  better  than  they  really  are.  This  indeed 
was  the  source  of  heathen  idolatry.  And  another  sort  of  idolatry  has  replaced 
this  in  Christendom.  People  no  longer  call  the  rich  and  great  gods,  but  they  tell 
them  that  they  are  not  like  other  men ;  and  these  are  willing  to  let  themselves  be 
persuaded  that  they  are  of  another  mould.  So  a  woman  or  a  friend  is  idolised 
and  seduced.  They  are  so  surrounded  by  flatteries  that  they  forget  altogether 
their  faults,  and  make  no  effort  to  correct  them.  What  is  the  result  of  these 
public  praises,  epistles  recommending  a  book,  funeral  orations  in  the  holy  place  ? 
Is  there  not  often  a  mercenary  abuse  of  such  customs?  Nevertheless  people 
protest  that  there  is  nothing  they  have  a  greater  horror  of  than  to  be  deceived. 
They  do  not  wish  to  be,  and  yet  they  seek  what  leads  to  it.  What  then  can  we 
reply  to  God  when  we  are  reproached  by  Him  for  having  sought  flattering  truths 
which  we  have  often  found  to  be  deceitful  ?  2.  Because  that  which  flatters  us 
tends  to  corrupt,  and  that  in  two  ways.  (1)  In  inspiring  us  with  secret  pride; 
(2)  in  diminishing  and  weakening  within  us  a  zeal  for  perfectness,  which,  were  it 
earnestly  entertained,  would  be  more  to  our  profit  than  all  the  advantages  we 
possess.  Let  us  then  lay  hold  of  these  two  important  maxims.  Let  us  desire 
that  truth  which  corrects  us  and  makes  us  known  to  ourselves,  and  rather  avoid 
what  would  flatter  us  and  hinder  our  desire  for  improvement. — Bourdaloue. 


456 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  XVI. 


HOMILETIC  NOTES. 


Yers.  7-14.  The  working  of  the  Holy 
Spirit. — I.  In  relation  to  the  world. — 

1.  He  punishes  because  of  sin  ;  2.  Be- 
cause of  righteousness ;  3.  Because  of 
judgment. 

II.  In  relation  to  believers.— 1.  He 
proves  Himself  to  be  their  comforter ; 

2.  He  leads  them  into  all  truth  ;  3.  He 
glorifies  Jesus. — Dr.  v.  Biarowsky. 

Ver.  9.  The  sin  of  unbelief. — Un- 
belief is  the  root  of  other  sins,  which 
are  the  shoots.  It  is  useless  to  cut 
away  the  shoots  whilst  the  root  re- 
mains. These  will  always  grow  again. 
But  if  the  root  be  destroyed,  whence 
will  the  shoots  come  ?  It  is  not  meant 
here  that  the  Holy  Ghost  does  not  con- 
vict the  world  because  of  other  sins. 
Other  sins  are  of  such  a  nature  that 
reason  itself  perceives  their  sinful- 
ness. But  unbelief  is  a  sin  of  such  a 
nature  that  reason  does  not  recognise 
it  as  such.  The  Holy  Ghost  must 
convince  men  of  the  fact. 

Ver.  10.  Righteousness. — Men  have 
no  righteousness  of  their  own  before 
God,  and  can  have  it  only  through 
Jesus  Christ,  who  has  procured  it  for 
us.  This  is  a  truth  reason  cannot 
know.  It  can  be  known  alone  through 
the  enlightenment  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
— Weigel. 

Ver.  1 1 .  Judgment.  —  Chrysostom 
writes :  "  Tell  me,  O  man,  since  you 
know  that  you  must  stand  before  the 
judgment  seat  of  Christ,  how  it  comes 
about  that  you  would  rather  speak  of 
a  thousand  other  matters  than  of  this 
judgment  ?  When  you  have  a  case 
before  an  earthly  judge,  then  you  think 
day  and  night  about  it,  and  converse 
about  it  everywhere  as  to  how  you  may 
prosecute  your  cause.  Yet  you  must 
do  this  before  God  the  just  judge,  and 
give  an  account  to  Him  of  your  whole 
life  ;  but  you  never  speak  about  the 
matter,  and  cannot  indeed  bear  that 
any  one  should  begin  to  converse  with 
you  about  it. 


Vers.  12-15.  The  Spirit  guiding  the 
disciples  into  all  truth. — In  these  verses 
we  have  a  very  abundant  exhibition  of 
the  unity  of  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Spirit,  coupled  with  a  very  remark- 
able setting  forth  of  the  tripersonality. 
The  Father  «  hath  "  (2Xet)  that  which  is 
in  very  essence  the  Son's  (e/xa) ;  and 
the  Spirit  whose  purpose  is  to  glorify 
the  Son  by  making  Him  known  to  men 
(Aa//./3av€i)  takes  of  "  Mine  "  and  will 
declare  it  (see  Schaff,  Stier,  note  to 
Lange).  Luthardt  once  thought  with 
Stier,  but  now  he  limits  the  reference, 
without  giving  any  reason  for  it,  to 
what  he  calls  "the  deposit  of  divine 
truth  to  the  humanity  of  Jesus."  The 
sum  of  this  astonishing  assurance  is 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  of  truth  will  lead 
these  apostles  into  the  fulness  of  truth, 
and  of  knowledge  of  the  future,  by 
taking  up  the  essential  realities  of  the 
Christ  in  the  fulness  of  His  being  and 
work,  and  disclosing  them  by  spiritual 
insight  and  supernatural  quickening. 
These  realities  of  the  Christ  will  prove 
to  be  the  fulness  of  the  Father's  heart — 
all  that  the  Father  hath.  . .  .  Does  John 
even  here  travel  beyond  his  prologue  1 
— Dr.  H.  R.  Reynolds  in  "  Pulpit  Com- 
mentary.''1 

Ver.  14.  The  glory  of  Christ. — The 
glory  of  Christ  is  often  hidden  from 
men  like  a  jewel  in  a  humble  casket. 
The  Holy  Ghost  opens  the  casket.  He 
shows  us  how  much  of  comfort  and 
power  there  is  in  the  cross,  what 
honour  in  the  shame  of  the  cross,  what 
wealth  under  Christ's  earthly  poverty, 
what  majesty  under  His  lowliness. 
And  thus  Christ  is  made  dear  and 
precious  to  us,  so  that  we  esteem  Him 
more  than  all  the  treasures  of  earth, 
even  when  we  view  Him  as  crucified. 

Ver.  14.  How  the  Holy  Ghost  glorifies 
Christ  to  us. — He  shows  us  Christ  as 
He — 1.  Who  removes  our  sorrow; 
2.  Who  bears,  our  sins ;  3.  Who  frees 
us  from  the  judgment. — J.  L.  Sommer, 

457 


chap.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Vers.  1-4.  How  shall  we  hear  witness  to 
Christ  ? — In  this  way  :  by  confessing  Him 
by  the  mouth  (Rom.  x.  10).  It  is  therefore 
a  confession.  Whosoever  confesses  Him 
before  men  He  will  confess  before  His 
heavenly  Father  (Matt.  x.  32).  We  must 
not  be  ashamed  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ,  but 
confess  that  it  is  the  power  of  God  unto 
salvation  to  all  those  who  believe.  O 
dear  Christian  people,  that  we  were  more 
courageous  in  our  confession  !  You  display 
all  your  earthly  possessions  so  willingly. 
You  conduct  your  friends  over  your  houses, 
which  you  have  fitted  up  so  carefully.  You 
are  glad  to  display  your  fine  dresses.  You 
lay  on  your  adornments,  your  rings  on  your 
fingers.  You  willingly  let  your  artistic  tastes 
or  your  learning  be  seen  by  all.  You  bring 
forward  your  children  with  pride.  And  will 
you  permit  the  best  treasure  you  possess  to 
remain  hidden  ?  Do  you  not  venture  to 
mention  it,  almost  as  if  you  were  ashamed 
of  it?  Do  you  call  that  witnessing  for 
Christ  ?  There  must  be  something  lacking 
in  you,  else  were  you  more  joyful  in  this 
witness- bearing.  What  then  is  lacking  ? 
This  :  that  you  have  not  yet  in  yourselves 
the  full  witness  of  the  Spirit  that  you  are 
God's  children.  When  you  have  that,  then 
you  will  not  be  silent.  Those  who  are  led  by 
the  Spirit  of  God  are  the  children  of  God. 
And  those  whom  He  leads  must  confess  the 
first-born  Son  of  God.  But  so  long  as  He 
leads  you  not,  then  better  remain  silent. 
Otherwise  your  words  might  be  feigned. 
But  pray  diligently  that  the  Holy  Spirit 
may  speedily  write  that  blessed  testimony  in 
your  heart,  so  that  you  may  then  be  able  to 
bear  it  further  afield,  so  that  you  may  then 
be  able  to  celebrate  the  victories  of  the 
Lord  in  the  tabernacles  of  the  righteous 
(Ps.  cxviii.  15),  and  make  known  the  deeds 
of  Him  who  hath  called  you  out  of  darkness 
into  His  marvellous  light.  You  also  should 
hear  witness  of  Christ  with  the  life.  Yes, 
with  the  life.  This  is  and  remains  a  chief 
witness.  What  will  it  profit  if  I  confess 
Christ  with  my  tongue,  with  my  lips,  whilst 
my  heart  is  far  from  Him  ?  All  confession 
without  the  life  is  as  sounding  brass  or  a 
tinkling  cymbal,  which  has  no  heart  in  it. 
Thus  with  life  and  love,  with  love  and  life, 
should  you  bear  witness  to  Christ.  The 
Spirit  mirrors  His  image  in  your  hearts.  But 
His  image  should  then  be  reflected  out 
again  on  the  world  if  you  are  followers  of 
Christ.  Men  should  see  it  in  your  walk  and 
conversation  that  you  are  His  disciples. 
When  people  must  first  inquire  of  any  one 
whether  he  holds  fast  to  the  confession  of 
Christ,  his  Christianity  must  be  of  a  weak 
sort. 

458 


"  No  one  need  ask  the  vine  this  question : 
Art  thou  a  vine  ?    Tell,  yea  or  nay. 
The  ripe  and  luscious  hanging  clusters 
Confess  the  truth  in  clearest  day." 

Translated  from  Ahlfeld. 

Ver.  7.  Our  Lord's  ascension  the  Church's 
gain. — Zvfuptpei  v/mv.  He  Himself  says,  "It 
is  expedient."  He  might  have  said  "ex- 
pedient"  for  the  blessed  spirits  of  the  just 
made  perfect,  to  whom,  after  overcoming 
the  sharpness  of  death,  He  was  about  to 
open  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  He  might 
have  said  "  expedient "  for  the  blessed  angels 
who  had  for  thirty-three  years  been  "as- 
cending and  descending  upon  the  Son  of 
man,"  and  who  had  now  higher  ministries  in 
store  for  them.  He  might  have  said  "  ex- 
pedient "  for  Myself,  who,  after  finishing  the 
work  that  was  given  Me  to  do,  am  to  be 
glorified  by  the  Father  with  that  glory  which 
I  had  with  Him  before  the  world  was.  But 
He  does  say,  "for  you."  My  sorrowing, 
broken-hearted,  despairing  disciples,  it  is 
"  expedient  for  you  "  that  I,  your  teacher, 
and  friend,  and  guide,  and  strength,  should 
leave  you  in  your  weakness,  in  your  wander- 
ings, in  your  loneliness,  in  your  ignorance. 
You  have  hitherto  believed  Me ;  trust  Me 
now  when  I  tell  you,  "  It  is  expedient  for 
you  that  I  go  away." — Wherein  then,  it  may 
be  asked,  did  this  expediency  lie  ?  Why  was 
it  for  the  advantage  of  those  whom  our  Lord 
had  chosen  out  of  the  world,  and  whom  He 
sent  back  into  it  as  sheep  in  the  midst  of 
wolves,  that  He  should  leave  them  ?  How 
were  they  to  be  gainers  by  the  departure  of 
their  Lord  and  Master,  when  they  had 
hitherto  been  indebted  to  His  visible 
presence,  to  His  voice,  to  His  companion- 
ship, for  every  spiritual  blessing  that  they 
enjoyed  ?  Why  was  it  better  for  the  apostles 
and  for  us  that  the  incarnation  of  the 
blessed  Son  of  God  should  not  be  visibly 
perpetuated  into  Christian  history?  What 
then  is  this  transcendent  gift,  more  precious, 
as  it  seems,  than  the  hearing  and  seeing 
with  the  eyes  and  looking  upon  and  handling 
the  very  Word  of  life  ?  What  is  this  gift,  so 
great  that  it  can  more  than  compensate  for 
the  loss  of  that  intimate  companionship  with 
our  Lord  and  Saviour  which  was  enjoyed  by 
His  first  followers?  We  cannot  look  this 
question  too  steadily  in  the  face  ;  for  on 
the  answer  to  it  depends  nothing  less  than 
our  estimate  of  the  true  character  of  the 
Christian  dispensation. 

I.  It  may,  indeed,  be  said  with  much 
truth  that  there  was  a  kind  of  natural 
expediency  in  the  ascension,  grounded  on 
that  law  of  the  human  mind  which  makes 
the  appreciation  of  present  blessings  so  very 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.        chap.  XVI. 


difficult. — Had  Christ  our  Lord  continued 
to  live  visibly  upon  the  earth,  the  spiritual 
force  of  the  Church  might  have  been  ex- 
pended in  an  indefinitely  prolonged  observa- 
tion. It  was  natural  that  He,  the  Light  of 
the  world,  should  rivet  the  gaze,  of  those  who 
beheld  Him,  too  completely  to  allow  time 
and  leisure  for  analysis,  and  comparison,  and 
inference.  The  strength  even  of  saintly 
souls  might  have  been  fatally  overtaxed  if 
a  moral  miracle,  such  as  the  life  of  Jesus 
Christ,  had  been  perpetuated  here  below. 
In  the  Gospels,  after  all,  we  possess  only  a 
fragment  of  the  witnessed  deeds  and  of  the 
uttered  and  remembered  words  of  Christ. 
If  all  had  been  recorded,  the  world  itself, 
we  are  told,  could  not  have  contained  the 
books  that  should  be  written.  But  those 
recorded  words  and  acts  of  Christ  have 
engaged  the  reflective  powers  of  Christendom 
ever  since.  They  are  a  mine  which  may 
still  be  worked  without  risk  of  exhaustion. 
They  have  been  drawn  out  into  literatures. 
They  are  the  basis  of  institutions.  They  are 
the  spirit  of  codes  of  law.  They  may  have 
mingled  with  some  earthly  alloy,  but  they 
are  to  this  day  quick  with  heavenly  virtue. 
And  each  representative  teacher  that  has 
unfolded,  and  each  authoritative  assembly 
that  has  enforced,  their  true  essential  mean- 
ing, has  in  adding,  not  to  the  stock  of 
revealed  truths,  but  to  the  illuminated 
thought  of  Christendom  that  surrounds  them, 
attested  the  truth  of  our  Master's  words, 
*'  It  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go  away." 

II.  Startling  as  it  may  seem,  it  is  never- 
theless certain  that  the  life  of  the  separate 
souls  of  the  apostles  must  have  been  quick- 
ened by  the  departure  of  their  Lord.— Faith, 
hope,  and  charity  are  the  threefold  cord  that 
links  the  living  spirit  with  its  God.  These 
graces  were  dwarfed  or  merely  nascent  in  the 
apostles  before  the  ascension  of  our  Saviour. 

III.  If  the  apostles  had  been  altogether 
left  to  their  own  resources  by  their  ascending 
Lord,  could  they  have  formed  so  true,  so 
wonderful  an  estimate  of  the  bearings  and 
proportions  of  His  life  as  by  their  writings 
to  rule  the  thought  and  kindle  the  enthu- 
siasm of  all  the  ages  of  Christendom  ?— Were 
the  faith,  the  hope,  the  love,  which  gave  to 
their  lives  the  beauty  and  force  of  heroism, 
thrown  out,  as  plants  of  native  growth,  from 
the  rich  soil  of  their  natural  hearts  ?  Are 
the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  or  is  the  character  of 
St.  John,  to  be  explained  by  any  searching 
analysis  of  their  natural  gifts,  of  their  edu- 
cational antecedents,  of  their  external  con- 
tact with  the  manifested  Redeemer,  of  the 
successive  circumstances  and  directions  of 
their  lives?  Surely  not.  Even  though  the 
Pentecostal  miracle  had  not  been  recorded, 
some  supernatural  interference  must  have 
been  assumed,  in  order  seriously  to  account 
for  the  moral  transformation  of  the  apos- 
tolical character,  and  for  the  intellectual 


range  of  the  apostolical  writings.  Of  itself 
the  departure  of  our  risen  Lord  would  neither 
have  permanently  illuminated  the  reflections 
of  the  Church,  nor  yet  have  quickened  the 
graces  of  its  separate  members.  But  He 
left  this  earth  in  His  bodily  form,  to  return 
as  a  quickening  Spirit,  present  in  force  and 
virtue,  before  He  comes  to  be  present  in 
judgment.  He  ascended  up  on  high  to 
obtain  gifts  for  men ;  and  having  received 
of  the  Father,  as  the  bounteous  firstfruits 
of  His  opening  and  omnipotent  intercession, 
the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  He  shed  upon 
the  earth  those  wondrous  gifts  which  the 
first  Christians  saw  and  heard.  With  the 
apostles  we  must  wait  until  Pentecost,  if  we 
would  enter  into  the  full  expediency  of  the 
the  Ascension. — Liddon. 

Ver.  8.  The  manner  in  which  the  Spirit 
convinces  men  of  sin. — Do  you  desire  to 
understand  how  the  Spirit  convicts  because 
of  sin,  then  imagine  yourself  to  be  in  a 
house  where  people  have  lived  till  now 
entirely  at  peace  in  following  sin.  Now 
there  comes  with  you  a  friend  who  knows 
the  better  life,  the  fear  of  God  which  is 
the  beginning  of  wisdom,  the  love  of  Christ 
which  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law.  He  walks 
in  the  Spirit,  and  does  not  bring  forth  the 
works  of  the  flesh.  Then  the  Spirit  will 
convict  the  others.  Your  friend  needs  to 
speak  no  word.  The  evildoers  are  chastised 
by  his  walk.  They  learn  from  him  either  to 
serve  the  Lord  with  him,  or  they  will  begin 
to  hate  him  as  the  world  hated  the  disciples 
of  the  Lord.  He  will  become  to  them  either  a 
savour  of  life  unto  life  or  of  death  unto  death. 
.  .  .  That  the  enemy  is  wounded  unto  death  is 
evident  wherever  the  Spirit  comes  and  begins 
His  work.  Although  men  at  first  may  rage 
and  strive,  yet  let  the  work  go  forward  in 
gentle  humility  and  full  faith,  then  it  will 
go  unrestrainedly  to  victory.  Not  with 
rapid  march,  not  always  with  full  and 
flowing  sail,  not  with  great  noise,  but  all 
the  more  surely.  The  Lord  did  not  lift  up 
His  voice  in  the  streets — only  at  the  last 
He  cried,  "  It  is  finished."  So  will  it  be  also 
in  the  world.  The  world  feels  this  of  itself. 
A  tremor  passes  through  it.  That  is  the 
judgment  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  world's 
prince  has  fallen ;  the  world  strives  in  vain. 
Beloved  brothers  and  sisters,  give  to  the 
convictions  of  the  Spirit  a  place  in  your 
hearts.  Only  when  He  convinces  of  sin  will 
you  realise  that  sin  is  your  deadly  foe,  and 
then  you  will  give  place  to  grace.  Only 
when  He  shatters  the  trust  in  a  false  right- 
eousness in  you  will  you  find  the  way  to 
gospel  righteousness.  Only  when  in  you 
judgment  has  been  passed  on  the  prince  of 
this  world  will  the  Lord  become  your  prince 
and  leader  to  eternal  life.  But,  do  you 
say,  how  is  the  Spirit  then  called  a  Com- 
forter ?  for  this  is  simply  a  work  of  convic- 

459 


c&ap.  XVI.        tiOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


tion  and  judgment.  ...  It  is  a  conviction 
that  seeks  to  lead  to  godly  sorrow  which 
leads  to  repentance  not  to  be  repented  of. 
Thus  the  Spirit  is  even  here  a  Paraclete  ;  and 
if  at  first  you  could  not  rejoice  in  this  expe- 
rience, yet  in  the  end  you  will  rejoice.  Truly 
the  other  part  of  His  work  is  sweeter  which 
He  brings  to  pass  in  those  won  to  faith. 
He  will  lead  them  into  all  truth.  "The 
spirit  of  lies,"  wrote  an  old  faithful  witness 
of  Christ,  "  is  like  a  spider :  he  evolves  every- 
thing out  of  himself.  The  Spirit  of  truth  is 
like  a  bee,  which  brings  honey  from  the 
flowers."  The  flower  is  the  divine  word. 
"From  it  He  will  take  of  Mine  and  show  it 
unto  you."  This  is  the  test  of  every  spirit. 
We  are  not  to  believe  every  spirit,  but  to 
try  the  spirits  whether  they  be  of  God 
(1  John  iv.  1).  Though  a  man  may  speak 
with  words  of  power,  though  his  words  may 
be  ever  so  pleasing  to  the  flesh,  if  he  has  not 
received  them  of  Christ,  if  they  do  not 
accord  with  God's  word,  he  is  but  a  lying 
spirit.  "  The  Spirit  guides  into  all  truth." 
— Translated  from  Ahlfeld. 

Ver.  13.  The  disciples  guided  into  all  truth. 
— In  this  great  discourse,  which  was  not 
given  in  writing  to  the  Christian  world  upon 
the  authority  of  St.  John  until  a  lapse  of 
nearly  three-quarters  of  a  century  had 
realised  in  experience  its  every  promise,  we 
read  beforehand,  and  in  the  words  of  Jesus, 
why  it  was  expedient  that  He  should  go 
away.  It  was  not  merely  that  He  might 
prepare  a  place  for  His  disciples,  and  then 
come  again  and  receive  them  unto  Himself. 


It  was  because,  as  He  says,  "  If  I  go  not 
away,  the  Comforter  will  not  come  unto 
you ;  but  if  I  depart,  I  will  send  Him  unto 
you."  The  whole  action  of  the  Spirit  upon 
the  intellect  and  affections  and  inmost 
character  of  the  Christian,  as  well  as  His 
felt  presence  and  power  in  forming, 
enlightening,  guiding,  governing,  and  sancti- 
fying the  Church,  must  have  become  a 
lengthened  justification  of  their  Master's 
ascension  in  the  eyes  of  the  apostles.  If 
the  apostles  are  to  be  guided  into  all  truth, 
if  they  are  to  be  shown  things  to  come,  if 
they  are  to  be  taught  all  things,  and  if  all 
the  blessed  words  of  Christ,  whatsoever  He 
said  to  them,  are  to  be  brought  .home  with 
literal  accuracy  to  their  remembrance,  it  is 
expedient  that  their  Lord  should  go.  If  they 
are  to  do  greater  works  than  the  works  of 
Christ,  it  is  "because  I  go  to  My  Father." 
If  dauntless  missionaries  of  the  cross  are  to 
bear  witness  of  their  Lord  to  a  sinful  and 
perishing  world,  it  can  only  be  because  the 
Comforter,  sent  from  the  Father  by  the 
ascended  Saviour,  witnesses  through  their 
weakness  to  the  strength  and  glory  of 
their  Lord.  If  the  world  is  to  be  con- 
vinced of  the  sin  of  its  own  unbelief,  or 
of  the  righteousness  of  the  all-holy  Re- 
deemer, such  conviction  is  to  be  a  con- 
sequence of  Christ's  going  to  the  Father 
and  being  seen  no  more.  Pass  the  eye 
over  that  last  great  discourse,  and  mark 
how  it  bears  with  repeated  effort  and  signifi- 
cance upon  the  statement  of  the  text,  that 
the  Ascension  was  expedient  for  the  apostles, 
expedient  for  the  Christian  Church. — Liddon. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  16—23. 


Wlierefore  can  and  ought  Christians  to  be  confident  and  even  joyful  in  trouble  ? 
— I.  Because  it  is  for  their  good. — That  this  is  so  is  evident  when  it  is 
considered — 

1.  From  whom  trouble  comes. — All  the  sorrow  which  was  to  overtake  the 
disciples  in  the  near  future  came  upon  them  in  accordance  with  the  Lord's 
knowledge  and  His  will.     It  is  not  otherwise  with  us. 

2.  Who  knows  all  about  it. — The  Lord  told  the  disciples  that  they  would  "not 
see  Him  " — that  they  would  weep  and  lament. 

3.  Whereunto  it  serves. — The  Lord  said  to  the  disciples  that  their  sorrow 
would  be  turned  into  joy.  From  the  pain  of  the  cross  springs  the  joy  of  the 
Resurrection  ;  from  the  pains  of  travail,  the  joy  of  welcoming  a  newborn  life. 

II.  Because  it  passeth  away  so  speedily. — 1.  Consider  the  greatness  of  the 
consolation. — Seven  times  the  phrase  "  a  little  while  "  is  repeated  in  the  passage. 

2.  Lay  hold  of  this  comfort  in  your  hearts. — Guard  yourselves  against  mur- 
muring and  despondency ;  shelter  yourselves  against  all  disturbing  conceptions 
and  phantoms  of  fear  behind  the  word,  "  yet  a  little  while."  Give  heed  to  the 
smallest  beginnings  of  consolation  and  indications  of  help  at  hand.  The  first 
tears  on  account  of  sin  prelude  the  first  ray  of  the  rising  Sun  of  grace. 

3.  Do  not  embitter  and  cloud   this  joy. — This  men   do   when,  after   being 

460 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xvi. 


delivered  from  pain  and  sorrow,  they  begin  to  hanker  after  the  pleasures  and 
joys  of  the  world. 

III.  Because  its  end  is  so  blessed. — The  sorrows  of  believers  end- 

1.  In  an  assured  joy. — "  I  will  see  you  again." 

2.  In  a  blessed  rejoicing. — "  Your  heart  shall  rejoice." 

3.  In  an  eternal  joy. — "  Your  joy  shall  no  man  take  from  you." — Appuhn  in 
J.  L.  Sommer. 

Yers.  16-23.  The  Lord  is  the  helper  of  His  people  in  sorrow. — This  passage  directs 
our  thoughts  to  the  departure  of  Jesus  from  the  world  and  the  sorrow  of  the 
disciples,  the  seeing  of  the  Lord  again  by  the  disciples  and  their  joy  in  con- 
sequence, the  tribulation  and  sorrow  of  the  disciples  as  a  source  of  joy  which 
cannot  be  taken  away,  and  generally  the  prospects  of  true  disciples  of  Jesus. 
The  Lord  declared  that  the  disciples  would  have  sorrow,  when  He  was  led  as  a 
lamb  to  the  slaughter,  and  the  mortal  stroke  was  inflicted  on  Him.  But  it  must 
needs  be  so ;  sorrow  was  necessary  if  they  were  to  remain  and  grow  up  in  Him. 
The  noble  scion  by  which  the  wild  plant  is  to  be  ennobled  must  be  wounded  ;  for 
it  must  be  cut  off  from  the  noble  tree.  But  the  sharp  knife  must  also  wound 
the  wild  plant  and  make  an  incision  in  it,  if  the  noble  scion  is  to  be  grafted  into 
it,  so  that  they  may  grow  together.  Thus,  too,  must  the  subjects  of  God's 
kingdom  have  sorrow  if  they  are  to  ripen  and  bring  forth  good  fruit.  They 
need  not,  however,  be  afraid  that  sorrow  will  destroy  them ;  for  they  have  the 
Lord  for  their  comfort  and  strength.  We  learn  that  Jesus  helps  His  disciples 
in  sorrow  when  we  see  : — 

I.  How  the  Lord  prepares  them  for  sorrow. — 1.  Jesus  told  His  disciples  before- 
hand that  in  a  little  while  they  would  not  see  Him,  that  through  the  malignity 
of  the  world  they  would  have  increased  sorrow,  so  that  they  might  not  be  sur- 
prised at  this  malignity,  but  might  arm,  prepare,  themselves  in  view  of  it.  2.  He 
explained  the  meaning  of  His  words  in  such  fashion  that  He  brought  their  hearts 
into  the  true  condition  in  which  they  would  remain  ready  to  meet  affliction. 

II.  How  the  Lord  strengthens  them  in  sorrow. — 1.  In  the  figure  of  the 
woman  with  child  (ver.  21)  Jesus  showed  the  disciples  how  sorrow  may  be  the 
source  of  true  joy,  how  His  cross  is  the  condition  of  their  salvation,  and  their 
sorrow  in  fellowship  with  Him  the  basis  of  their  joy  together  with  Him. 
2.  Jesus  instructed  the  disciples  as  to  how  their  prospect  of  true  joy  would  be 
fulfilled,  not  alone  in  some  far  future  time,  but  speedily  ;  how  their  hope  is  not 
placed  on  what  is  unattainable,  but  will  experience  full  and  near  fulfilment. 

III.  How  the  Lord  rejoices  their  hearts  after  sorrow. — 1.  Jesus  sees  His 
disciples  again,  and  shows  Himself  alive  to  them.  He  dedicates  to  them  the 
fruits  of  His  victory,  and  thereby  makes  them  partakers  of  a  joy  which  remains 
firm  amid  all  conflicts  within  or  without.  2.  In  the  light  of  the  Resurrection 
Jesus'  disciples  clearly  discerned  their  way,  and  also  clearly  saw  how  their  way, 
as  pointed  out  by  Him,  led  to  their  salvation  and  eternal  joy. — J.  L.  Sommer. 

Yer.  16.  "A  little  while." — In  our  Lord's  last  conversation  with  His  disciples 
before  His  betrayal  and  crucifixion,  He  said  to  them,  "  A  little  while,  and  ye 
shall  not  see  Me ;  and  again  a  little  while,  and  ye  shall  see  Me,  because  I  go  unto 
the  Father."  Before  them  was  the  bloody  tragedy  on  Calvary,  and  forty  days 
after  that  His  ascension  through  the  vernal  air  to  heaven.  They  should  see 
Him  no  more  in  earthly  form.  But  in  another  little  while — in  fifty  days  there- 
after— He  should  come  again  by  His  Holy  Spirit  in  the  wondrous  baptism  of 
power  at  Pentecost.  He  was  then  to  be  glorified  by  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the 
hearts  of  His  disciples.  Jesus  Christ  is  with  His  people  now ;  for  did  He  not 
promise,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  always "  ?     Those  sweet,  tender  words,  "  a  little 

461 


chap.  xvi.        H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


while,"  have  deep  thoughts  in  them,  like  the  still  ocean  at  the  twilight — thoughts 
too  deep  for  our  fathoming.  They  breathe  some  precious  consolations  to  those 
whose  burdens  are  heavy,  either  of  care  or  poverty  or  sickness.  If  the 
prosperous  can  enjoy  their  prosperity  only  for  a  little  while,  neither  shall  the 
mourner  weep  much  longer,  nor  God's  poor  children  carry  much  longer  the  pains 
or  privations  of  poverty.  The  daily  toil  to  earn  the  daily  bread,  the  carking 
care  to  keep  the  barrel  from  running  low  and  the  scanty  "cruse"  from 
wasting,  will  soon  be  over.  Cheer  up,  my  brother  !  "  In  a  little  while,  and  ye 
shall  see  Me,"  says  your  blessed  Master ;  "  for  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you." 
Oh  the  infinite  sweep  of  the  glorious  transition  !  A  few  years  here  in  a  lowly 
dwelling,  whose  rent  it  was  hard  to  pay,  and  then  infinite  ages  in  the  palace  of 
the  King  of  kings.  Here  a  scanty  table  and  coarse  raiment  soon  outworn, 
yonder  a  robe  of  resplendent  light  at  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb.  Let 
this  blissful  thought  put  new  courage  into  thy  soul  and  fresh  sunshine  into  thy 
countenance.  I  sometimes  go  into  a  sick-chamber  where  the  "  prisoners  of  Jesus 
Christ "  are  suffering  with  no  prospect  of  recovery.  Perhaps  the  eyes  of  some 
of  those  chronic  invalids  may  fall  upon  [these  words].  My  dear  friends,  put  under 
your  pillows  these  sweet  words  of  Jesus,  "  A  little  while."  It  is  only  for  a  little 
while  that  you  are  to  serve  your  Master  by  patient  submission  to  His  holy  will. 
That  chronic  suffering  will  soon  be  over.  That  disease  which  no  earthly 
physician  can  cure  will  soon  be  cured  by  your  divine  Physician,  who  by  the 
touch  of  His  Messenger  will  cure  you  in  an  instant  into  the  perfect  health  of 
heaven  !  You  will  exchange  this  weary  bed  of  pain  for  that  crystal  air  in  which 
none  shall  say,  "  I  am  sick,"  neither  shall  there  be  any  more  pain.  Not  only  to 
the  sick  and  to  the  poverty-stricken  child  of  God  do  these  tender  words  of  our 
Redeemer  bring  solace.  Let  these  words,  "  A  little  while,"  bring  a  healing  balm 
to  hearts  that  are  smarting  under  unkindness,  or  wounded  by  neglect,  or  pining 
under  privations,  or  bleeding  under  sharp  bereavements.  I  offer  them  as  a 
sedative  to  sorrows  and  a  solace  under  sharp  afflictions.  "A  little  while,  and 
ye  shall  see  Me,"  and  the  sight  of  Him  shall  in  an  instant  wipe  out  all  the 
memories  of  the  darkest  hours  through  which   you  made  your  way  into  the 


everlasting  rest. 


"  A  few  more  struggles  here, 
A  few  more  conflicts  o'er  ; 
A  little  while  of  toils  and  tears, 
And  we  shall  weep  no  more." 


These  words  of  the  Master  are  also  a  trumpet-call  to  duty.  In  a  little  while  my 
post  in  the  pulpit  shall  be  empty :  what  manner  of  minister  ought  I  to  be  in 
fidelity  to  dying  souls  %  Sabbath -school  teacher,  in  a  little  while  you  shall  meet 
the  young  immortals  in  your  class  for  the  last  time  !  Are  you  winning  them  to 
Christ  ?  The  time  is  short.  Whatever  your  hands  find  to  do  for  the  Master,  do 
it.  Do  it,  Aquila  and  Priscilla,  in  the  Sunday  school !  Do  it,  Lydia,  in  the 
home  !  Do  it,  Dorcas,  with  thy  needle,  and  Mary  in  the  room  of  sickness  and 
sorrow !  Do  it,  Tertius,  with  thy  pen,  and  Apollos  with  thy  tongue !  Do  it, 
praying  Hannah,  with  thy  children,  and  make  for  them  the  "little  coat"  of 
Christian  character,  which  they  shall  wear  when  you  have  gone  home  to  a 
mother's  heavenly  reward.  Only  think,  too,  how  much  may  be  achieved  in  a 
little  while.  The  atonement  for  a  world  of  perishing  sinners  was  accomplished 
between  the  sixth  hour  and  the  ninth  hour  on  darkened  Calvary.  That  flash  of 
divine  electricity  from  the  Holy  Spirit  which  struck  Saul  of  Tarsus  to  the  ground 
was  the  work  of  an  instant ;  but  the  great  electric  burner  of  the  converted  Paul 
has  blazed  over  all  the  world  for  centuries.  A  half -hour's  faithful  preaching  of 
Jesus  by  a  poor  itinerant  Methodist  exhorter  at  Colchester  brought  the  boy 
Spurgeon  to  a  decision,  and  launched  the  mightiest  ministry  of  modern  times. 

462 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   XVI. 


Lady  Henry  Somerset  tells  us  that  a  few  minutes  of  solemn  reflection  in  her  garden 
decided  her  to  exchange  a  life  of  fashionable  frivolity  for  a  life  of  consecrated 
philanthropy.  Why  cite  any  more  cases  when  every  Christian  can  testify  that 
the  best  decisions  and  deeds  of  his  or  her  life  turned  on  the  pivot  of  a  few 
minutes  1  In  the  United  States  Mint  they  coin  eagles  out  of  the  sweepings  of 
gold  dust  from  the  floor.  Brethren,  we  ought  to  be  misers  of  our  minutes  !  If 
on  a  dying-bed  they  are  so  precious,  why  not  in  the  fuller  days  of  our  healthful 
energies?  Said  General  Mitchell,  the  great  astronomer,  to  an  officer  who 
apologised  for  being  only  a  few  minutes  behind  time,  "  Sir.  I  have  been  in  the 
habit  of  calculating  the  tenth  part  of  a  second  ! "  Our  whole  eternity  will  hinge 
on  the  "  little  while  "  of  probation  here.  Only  an  inch  of  time  to  choose  between 
an  eternity  of  glory  or  the  endless  woes  of  hell !  And  as  a  convert  exclaimed  in  a 
prayer  meeting,  "  It  was  only  a  moment's  work  with  me  when  I  was  in  earnest  I " 
May  God  help  us  all  to  be  faithful  only  for  a  little  while  ;  and  then  comes  the 
unfading  crown. 

"  A  little  while  for  patient  vigil  keeping 

To  face  the  stern,  to  wrestle  with  the  strong, 
A  little  while  to  sow  the  seed  with  weeping, 

Then  bind  the  sheaves  and  sing  the  harvest  song. 

"  A  little  while  to  keep  the  oil  from  failing, 

A  little  while  faith's  flickering  lamp  to  trim, 
And  then  the  Bridegroom's  coming  footsteps  hailing, 
We'll  haste  to  meet  Him  with  the  bridal  hymn." 

Br.  Theo.  L.  Cuyler,  in  "  The  Christian." 


HOMILETIC  NOTES. 


Ver.  16.  Would  Christians  know  how 
it  will  go  with  them  in  the  world  ? — 
Here  it  tells  them.  Joy  and  sorrow  will 
alternate.  For  a  little  time  they  shall 
have  sorrow,  and  again  for  a  little  time 
they  shall  have  joy. — From  J.  J.  Weigel. 

Vers.  16,  17.  Ends  served  by  Christ's 
departure  from  the  world. — Let  it  not 
seem  extraordinary  that  the  heavenly 
Bridegroom  should  hide  Himself  for 
a  little  from  His  bride.  He  does  so 
in  order — 1.  To  chasten  her.  2.  To 
humble  her.  3.  So  that  she  may  learn 
truly  to  prize  His  comforting  presence. 
4.  In  order  that  she  may  seek  Him 
more  earnestly. — Idem. 

Ver.  18.  It  is  well  to  realise  our 
ignorance  of  spiritual  things. — 1.  He 
who  is  aware  of  this,  and  purposes 
to  learn,  is  on  the  way  to  wisdom. 
2.  He  who  knows  not  what  he  ought 
to  know,  let  him  ask  of  the  Lord.  But 
the  Lord,  through  the  Spirit,  has  given 
His  servants  who  minister  in  holy 
things  a  mouth  and  wisdom. — Idem. 


Ver.  20.  Weeping  universal. — It  is 
related  of  Crassus  that  he  was  never 
known  to  have  laughed ;  but  it  could 
not  be  said  of  any  man  who  has  seen 
the  light  of  the  sun  that  he  never 
wept.  If  the  sun's  light  should  be 
withdrawn  but  a  single  day,  how 
miserable  would  all  living  creatures 
be  !  Thus  the  hearts  of  disciples  are 
sad  when  Jesus  does  not  let  the  light 
of  His  countenance  shine  on  them. 
In  trial  the  best  medicine  is  the  herb 
patientia  (patience). — Idem. 

Ver.  20.  The  prospect  of  Jesus1  dis- 
ciples.— I.  Sorrow  stood  before  them. 
— 1.  Those  they  loved  would  separate 
themselves  from  them.  2.  The  Lord 
would  not  be  seen  by  them. 

II.  They  would  have  comfort  in 
their  sorrow. — 1.  They  knew  that  the 
Lord  had  sent  it.  2.  After  a  little 
while  the  trouble  would  cease. 

III.  Joy  would  come  to  them  out 
of  their  sorrow. — 1.  It  would  come 
more  fully  than  before.  2.  Body  and 
soul   would   rejoice.      3.  This   coming 

463 


chap.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


joy  no  man  could  take  from  them. — 
J.  L.  Sommer. 

Ver.  21.  The  preciousness  of  the  cross. 
■ — Without  the  cross  (tribulation,  etc., 
etc.)  the  old  man  cannot  be  crucified 
nor  the  new  man  quickened.  The  cross 
is  the  seed  of  all  virtues.  It  is  the 
seed  of  devotion,  of  supplication,  of 
humility,  and  of  repentance. 

Ver.  21.  "A  woman"  etc. — f)  yvvrj, 
the  woman  in  her  womanhood  and  in 
its  peculiar  sorrow  (Gen.  iii.  1 6).  This 
verse,  like  the  two  preceding  ones,  has 
a  double  sense.  1.  As  applicable  to 
Christ.  His  resurrection  was  a  birth 
from  death  to  life  everlasting — a  birth 
which  is  the  source  of  all  other  births, 
from  the  death  of  sin  to  newness  of 
life,  from  the  death  of  the  grave  to 
immortality  (through  resurrection)  for 
body  and  soul  in  the  life  beyond.  The 
Apostolic  Church  (i.e.  the  Church  of 
the  apostles  personally)  went  through 
the  throes  of  parturition  until  the  day 
of  the  Resurrection,  when  the  Second 
Adam  came  forth  from  the  womb  of 
the  grave ;  and  then  they  no  longer 
remembered  their  sorrow  for  joy  that 
a  man,  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  the  first 
begotten  from  the  dead  (Col.  i.  18; 
Rev.  i.  18),  was  born.  And  all  humanity 
was  born  into  the  world  with  Him : 
"  for  as  in  Adam  all  die,  so  in  Christ 
all  are  made  alive "  (1  Cor.  xv.  22). 
2.  In  a  wider  sense  the  Church  in 
the  world  is  the  woman  in  travail 
(Rev.  xii.  2;  Gal.  iv.  19).  She  is  in 
travail  with  souls  for  the  new  birth  to 
grace  and  glory.  She  groans  in  the 
pangs  of  parturition  even  till  the  great 
day  of  regeneration,  the  day  of  the 
glorious  reappearing  of  Christ,  and  the 
general  resurrection  and  new  birth  to 


immortality  (Rom.  viii.  22).  Then, 
indeed,  "  a  Man  will  be  born  into  this 
world."  Humanity  will  cast  off  its 
grave-clothes,  and  be  glorified  for  ever 
in  Christ.  As  Augustine  says,  "The 
Church  may  be  compared  to  this 
woman,  because  she  brings  forth  chil- 
dren to  God.  Now  is  her  time  of 
travail ;  but  when  that  time  is  over 
and  her  hour  is  come,  then  she  will 
rejoice  in  the  birth  of  a  faithful  pro- 
geny to  life  eternal.  She  is  now  in 
travail  in  looking  for  Christ.  She  will 
then  be  delivered  when  she  sees  Him." 
—  Wordsworth's  "  Greek  Testament." 

Ver.  21,22.  Thejoy  of  God's  children. 

I.  Its  origin. — It  springs  from  holy 
sorrow. 

II.  Its  foundation. — It  rests  itself 
on  the  living  Saviour  alone. 

III.  Its  nature. — It  consists  in  fel- 
lowship of  life  and  love  with  the  Lord. 

IV.  Its  extent. — It  is  perfect  and 
complete. 

V.  Its  duration. — It  is  everlasting. 
— Dr.  v.  Biarowsky. 

Ver.  22.  The  demeanour  of  believers 
in  sorrow  which  "  fills  their  hearts." — 
We  ask : — 

I.  What  causes  them  sorrow? — 
Their  not  seeing  Jesus,  and  the  want 
of  His  gracious  presence. 

II.  How  do  they  look  on  this 
sorrow  ? — As  necessary  for  their  sanc- 
tifi cation  and  confirmation  as  the  spring 
of,  and  passage  to,  true  joy. 

III.  How  do  they  bear  their 
sorrow  ? — With  resignation  and  in 
hope,  unmoved  by  the  world. 

IV.  What  gain  do  they  derive 
from  their  sorrow  ? — Imperishable  joy, 
knowledge  of  God's  ways,  praise  of  God 
(1  Cor.  iv.  5). — J.  L.  Sommer. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  23—33. 

Vers.  23,  24  (see  also  xv.  11,  Christian  Joy).  "Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive." — A 
passage  like  this  should  rivet  the  attention  of  believers.  The  miner  who  has 
laboured  for  months  in  vain  at  his  claim  and  who  suddenly  lights  on  a  rich  vein 
of  the  precious  metal,  the  labouring  man  who  suddenly  falls  heir  to  a  fortune, 
think  they  have  occasion  to  rejoice.     Yet  it  may  turn  out  that  their  fortune 

464 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.         chap,  xvl 


brings  anything  but  a  blessing  to  them,  and  even  at  the  best  they  may  never 
afterward  enjoy  the  rude  health  and  freedom  they  had  before.  But  in  these 
words  of  our  Lord  there  is  a  promise  of  greater  wealth  than  Burma's  mines,  etc. 
"  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask,"  etc.  Here  is  the  promise  of  all  true  peace,  joy, 
"every  good  and  perfect  gift."  And  there  is  but  one  condition:  "If  ye  shall 
ask  anything  in  My  name"  etc.  In  order  to  understand  the  meaning  of  this 
promise,  see  what  it  meant  to  the  disciples. 

I.  The  disciples  had  not  yet  learned  the  true  spirit  of  believing  prayer. — 

1.  The  disciples  were  troubled.  In  spite  of  the  grand  promise  of  the  Comforter, 
"  sorrow  had  filled  their  heart."  They  could  not  understand  why  Jesus  must 
depart,  even  though  He  promised  that  they  should  see  Him  again.  They  had  to 
learn  that  the  time  was  coming  when  their  fellowship  with  Jesus,  though  no 
longer  material,  would  be  yet  more  close.  2.  The  disciples  had  known  Christ 
only  "  after  the  flesh  "  hitherto.  The  idea  of  His  spiritual  kingdom  had  not 
been  fully  grasped  by  them.  Their  thoughts  and  aspirations  were  still  for  the 
temporal  and  material  manifestation  of  His  kingdom.  It  was  only  when  the 
day  of  enlightenment  came,  and  the  Spirit  descended,  that  all  became  plain,  and 
they  went  forth  to  preach  Jesus  and  the  Resurrection  with  power,  and  to  labour 
to  extend  His  spiritual  kingdom.  3.  Just  because  of  all  this  they  could  not  yet 
pray  in  the  spirit  of  the  Redeemer,  i.e.  the  spirit  of  complete  submission  to  the 
divine  will.  But  when  they  went  forth  to  do  His  work  in  His  name  after  their 
spiritual  enlightenment,  then  it  was  evident  that  they  had  learned  to  pray  in 
His  spirit  as  well  as  in  His  name.  4.  Their  whole  after- history  reflects  this 
change  in  the  spirit  of  their  prayers.  They  had  asked  the  Saviour  to  teach  them 
to  pray,  but  had  not  learned  fully  the  meaning  of  the  petition,  "  Thy  kingdom 
come."  Hence  their  strife  about  priority,  their  anxiety  to  dissuade  the  Saviour 
from  the  way  to  the  cross,  etc.  But  read  their  recorded  prayer  after  Pentecost 
(Acts  iv.  23,  etc.),  and  see  how  they  had  now  learned  to  submit  to  the  divine 
will,  and  thus  to  pray  in  the  name  of  Jesus. 

II.  How  may  we  realise  this  promise? — 1.  The  mere  use  of  the  form  "for 
Jesus'  sake  "  is  not  sufficient.  This  may  become  a  mere  superstitious  formula. 
We  must  realise  that  it  is  possible  for  us  to  approach  God  acceptably  only 
through  Jesus.  God  is  the  hearer  of  prayer ;  but  before  Jesus  came  men  could 
come  only  in  fear  and  trembling  to  Him.  But  Jesus  has  made  the  way  open  to 
the  throne  of  grace,  and  men  can  come  through  Him  with  holy  boldness  and 
confidence  as  children  to  a  father.  Christ's  people  are  one  with  Him,  partakers 
of  the  divine  nature, — God  loves  them,  and  there  is  no  need  that  Jesus  should 
entreat  for  them  (ver.  26).  That  love,  in  all  its  wealth  and  fulness,  is  theirs  in 
Him.  2.  Prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus  is  prayer  in  His  spirit  of  trustful  confi- 
dence in  the  love  of  the  Father  and  His  almighty  power  and  providential  care. 
Material  and  temporal  blessings  are  to  be  asked  for.  It  is  said,  "  God  does  not 
stop  the  working  of  His  laws  to  answer  the  man  who  prays."  God  does  not 
violate  His  laws  in  carrying  out  His  purposes  ;  but  surely  He  can  control  those 
laws,  which  He  has  framed,  to  carry  out  His  great  and  good  designs.  We  must 
not  limit  the  meaning  of  our  Lord's  word  whatsoever.  The  material  as  well  as 
the  spiritual,  the  temporal  as  well  as  the  eternal,  are  included.  3.  Prayer  in  the 
name  of  Jesus  implies  the  spirit  of  submission  to  the  divine  will.  We  are  not  to 
seek  selfishly  for  things  and  gifts  merely  for  our  own  self-interest.  We  have  a 
mediator  with  the  Father ;  but  will  He  intercede  for  what  would  merely  increase 
our  vanity,  or  minister  to  earthly  ambition  ?  Better  that  such  prayers  remain 
unanswered.  "  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness."  We 
must  banish  from  our  desires  and  prayers  all  that  will  not  fit  in  with  our  endeavours 
to  advance  the  heavenly  kingdom.     The  Spirit  will  help  us  to  such  unselfish 

hh  465 


chap.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


prayer.     In  approaching  God  let  us  remember  the  weakness  of  our  humanity 
(James  iv.  3),  and  ask  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit  in  our  intercessions. 

III.  This  divine  promise  has  been  and  is  being  daily  fulfilled. — 1.  Would 
the  kingdom  of  God  have  advanced  so  far  had  believing  prayer  in  Christ's  name 
not  been  answered?  In  our  Christian  lands  to-day  we  are  rejoicing  in  the 
answers  to  believing  prayer.  And  it  is  because  we  do  not  ask  earnestly  enough 
that  our  joy  is  so  far  from  full.  We  lament  the  poverty  of  our  prayers.  Let 
them  be  unselfish  and  sincere  and  they  will  be  answered.  God  reads  our 
thoughts,  He  translates  our  poor  stammering  words  into  heavenly  speech,  and 
gives,  not  as  the  world,  but  freely,  bountifully  in  His  love.  2.  Those  who  thus 
come  in  faith  to  God,  in  the  spirit  of  submissive  confidence,  will  be  filled  with 
joy.  They  shall  realise  that  all  must  be  well,  that  even  out  of  trial  and  sorrow 
good  will  come,  and  heavenly  light  rise  on  darkness.  3.  Rejoice,  because  true 
prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus  will  in  every  way  be  answered.  The  vast  all,  the 
great  universe,  with  all  its  mysteries  of  law  and  being,  is  under  the  guidance  of 
the  eternal  Father,  working  out  His  purposes  of  love  and  mercy.  So  that  all 
who  are  in  Christ  are  in  the  line  of  His  purposes,  and  will,  must,  receive  every- 
thing needful  to  fit  them  for  their  place  and  action,  in  reference  to  the  divine 
plan.  In  Christ  dwells  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily,  and  they  are 
complete  in  Him  (Col.  ii.  9,  10). 

Vers.  23-30.  What  'prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus  leads  believers  to  hope  for. — 
The  principal  points  for  consideration  in  the  passage  are  :  prayer  in  Jesus'  name 
and  the  hearing  of  such  prayer ;  the  free  access  to  the  Father,  and  the  love  of  the 
Father  to  those  who  believe  in  the  Son ;  the  increase  of  the  knowledge  and  joy  of 
believers  through  the  clear  revelation  of  Jesus  and  their  experience  of  prayer 
heard. 

Introduction. — Prayer  is  the  vital  breath  of  the  soul ;  a  soul  which  does  not 
pray  is  dead.  In  prayer  communion  between  man  and  God  is  carried  into  effect, 
and  this  communion  is  further  deepened  through  prayer.  It  is  therefore  because 
men  do  not  pray  that  they  have  no  true  inner  spiritual  life.  The  generation  of 
to-day,  to  a  great  extent,  professes  to  be  ashamed  of  prayer,  as  foolishness.  But  is 
there  ever  a  true  child  who  in  his  father's  house  speaks  no  word  to  his  father, 
or  is  ashamed  to  speak  with  him  before  strangers  ?  Others,  again,  do  pray,  but 
they  pray  like  the  Pharisee  in  the  temple — rehearse  before  God  their  (supposed) 
goodness  and  benevolence ;  in  their  hearts  also  death  reigns.  They  who  would 
pray  aright  must  pray  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  must  not  appeal  to  their  own 
righteousness,  but  must  lay  hold  by  faith  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ.  They 
must  also  pray  only  for  what  is  for  their  weal,  submit  to  the  divine  will,  and  live 
in  confidence  that  God  will  grant  to  His  reconciled  children  according  to  their 
needs.  Such  prayer  opens  up  a  most  joyful  prospect.  It  leads  them  to  hope 
for — 

I.  Free  access  to  the  divine  Father's  heart. — 1.  Without  Jesus  we  stand  as 
unreconciled  sinners  before  God,  whose  holiness  turns  away  His  face  from  us. 
2.  Through  faith  in  Jesus  we  are  brought  into  the  unity  of  His  mystical  body 
and  are  clothed  with  His  righteousness,  so  that  the  Father,  in  beholding  His 
Son,  visits  us  also  with  His  good  pleasure  and  vouchsafes  us  a  way  of  access  to 
Himself — nay,  calls  and  allures  us  to  His  heart  of  love. 

II.  Assured  help  in  every  time  of  need. — 1.  Of  themselves  men  are  so  weak 
and  helpless,  inwardly  and  outwardly,  however  highly  they  may  be  tempted  to 
think  of  themselves,  that  without  the  divine  protection  they  are  not  secure,  and 
without  the  divine  help  they  cannot  be  delivered  from  material  or  spiritual 
trouble.  2.  But  to  those  who  pray  in  the  name  of  Jesus  the  Father  will  give 
what  is  needful.     Through  prayer  in  Jesus'  name  men  fly  under  cover  of  God's 

466 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  xvi. 


wings,  where  they  are  protected  from  all  danger ;  they  hasten  to  the  heart  of 
divine  love,  whence  there  flow  to  meet  them  streams  of  heavenly  consolation ; 
they  speed  to  the  refuge  of  divine  strength,  which  will  enable  them  to  overcome 
all  tribulation,  and  extricate  them  from  all  temporal  and  spiritual  trouble. 

III.  Unspeakable  joy  at  every  new  experience  of  prayer  heard. — 1.  God 
protects  and  saves  those  who  call  on  Him  in  the  name  of  His  Son — not  only 
giving  them  enough  to  satisfy  their  wants,  so  that  they  should  not  ever  live  in 
want  and  sorrow :  He  makes  the  life  of  His  people  pleasant ;  He  desires  also 
to  bring  joy  into  their  hearts.  2.  Every  renewed  experience  of  prayer  heard 
assures  Christians  of  their  divine  sonship,  and  shows  them  the  glory  of  their 
heavenly  King  and  the  final  victory  of  His  kingdom.  3.  Every  new  gift  received 
strengthens  them  in  the  assurance  that  He  will  make  all  their  enemies  His  foot- 
stool. This  fills  their  hearts  with  heavenly  joy,  and  makes  them  feel  secure  and 
contented  on  their  pilgrimage  through  life. — J.  L.  Sommer,  "  Evang.  Per." 

Vers.  31,  32.  The  loneliness  of  Christ. — There  is  no  thought  connected  with 
the  life  of  Christ  more  touching,  none  that  seems  so  peculiarly  to  characterise 
His  Spirit,  than  the  solitariness  in  which  He  lived.  Those  who  understood  Him 
best  only  half  understood  Him.  Those  who  knew  Him  best  scarcely  could  be  said 
to  know  Him.  On  this  occasion  the  disciples  thought,  Now  we  do  understand, 
now  we  believe.  The  lonely  Spirit  answered,  "  Do  ye  now  believe  1  Behold,  the 
hour  cometh  that  ye  shall  be  scattered,  every  man  to  his  own,  and  shall  leave 
Me  alone." 

I.  The  loneliness  of  Christ  was  caused  by  the  divine  elevation  of  His 
character. — His  infinite  superiority  severed  Him  from  sympathy ;  His  exquisite 
affectionateness  made  that  want  of  sympathy  a  keen  trial.  There  is  a  second- 
rate  greatness  which  the  world  can  comprehend.  If  we  take  two  who  are 
brought  into  direct  contrast  by  Christ  Himself,  the  one  the  type  of  human,  the 
other  that  of  divine  excellence,  the  Son  of  man  and  John  the  Baptist,  this 
becomes  clearly  manifest.  John's  life  had  a  certain  rude,  rugged  goodness,  on 
which  was  written,  in  characters  which  required  no  magnifying  glass  to  read, 
spiritual  excellence.  The  world  on  the  whole  accepted  him :  Pharisees  and 
Sadducees  went  to  his  baptism  ;  the  people  idolised  him  as  a  prophet ;  and  if  he 
had  not  chanced  to  cross  the  path  of  a  weak  prince  and  a  revengeful  woman, 
we  can  see  no  reason  why  John  might  not  havo  finished  his  course  with  joy, 
recognised  as  irreproachable.  If  we  inquire  why  it  was  that  the  world  accepted 
John  and  rejected  Christ,  one  reply  appears  to  be  that  the  life  of  the  one  was 
finitely  simple  and  one-sided,  that  of  the  Other  divinely  complex.  To  the 
superficial  observer  Christ's  life  was  a  mass  of  inconsistencies  and  contradictions. 
Hence  it  was  that  He  lived  to  see  all  that  acceptance  which  had  marked  the 
earlier  stage  of  His  career,  as,  for  instance,  at  Capernaum,  melt  away.  First 
the  Pharisees  took  the  alarm ;  then  the  Sadducees ;  then  the  political  party  of  the 
Herodians ;  then  the  people.  The  apostles  quailed ;  one  denied,  another  betrayed, 
all  deserted.  They  "  were  scattered,  each  to  his  own,"  and  the  Truth  Himself 
was  left  alone  in  Pilate's  judgment  hall.  Now  learn  from  this  a  very  important 
distinction.  To  feel  solitary  is  no  uncommon  thing ;  to  complain  of  being  alone, 
without  sympathy  and  misunderstood,  is  general  enough.  In  every  place,  in 
many  a  family,  these  victims  of  diseased  sensibility  are  to  be  found,  and  they 
might  find  a  weakening  satisfaction  in  observing  a  parallel  between  their  own 
feelings  and  those  of  Jesus.  But  before  that  parallel  is  assumed  be  very  sure 
that  it  is,  as  in  His  case,  the  elevation  of  your  character  which  severs  you  from 
your  species.  Let  us  look  at  one  or  two  of  the  occasions  on  which  this  loneliness 
was  felt.  The  first  time  was  when  He  was  but  twelve  years  old,  when  His 
parents  found  Him  in  the  temple  hearing  the  doctors  and  asking  them  questions. 

467 


CHAP.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


High  thoughts  were  in  the  Child's  soul,  expanding  views  of  life  :  larger  views  of 
duty  and  His  own  destiny.  That  is  a  lonely,  lonely  moment,  when  the  young  soul 
first  feels  God— when  this  earth  is  recognised  as  an  "  awful  place,  yea,  the  very 
gate  of  heaven  " — when  the  dream-ladder  is  seen  planted  against .  the  skies,  and 
we  wake,  and  the  dream  haunts  us  as  a  sublime  reality. 

II.  That  solitude  was  felt  by  Christ  in  trial. — In  the  desert,  in  Pilate's 
judgment  hall,  in  the  garden,  He  was  alone ;  and  alone  must  every  son  of  man 
meet  his  trial-hour.  The  individuality  of  the  soul  necessitates  that.  Once  more 
the  Redeemer's  soul  was  alone  in  dying.  The  hour  had  come ;  they  were  all  gone, 
and  He  was,  as  He  predicted,  left  alone. 

III.  The  spirit  or  temper  of  that  solitude. — The  solitude  of  Christ  was  the 
solitude  of  a  crowd.  In  that  single  human  bosom  dwelt  the  thought  which  was 
to  be  the  germ  of  the  world's  life — a  thought  unshared,  misunderstood,  or 
rejected.  Can  you  not  feel  the  grandeur  of  these  words,  when  the  Man,  reposing 
on  His  solitary  strength,  felt  the  last  shadow  of  perfect  isolation  pass  across  His 
soul  1 — "  My  God,  My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me  ?  "  Learn  from  these 
words  self-reliance.  "  Ye  shall  leave  Me  alone."  This  is  self-reliance  :  to  repose 
calmly  on  the  thought  which  is  deepest  in  our  bosoms,  and  be  unmoved  if  the 
world  will  not  accept  it  yet.  Remark  the  humility  of  this  loneliness.  Had  the 
Son  of  man  simply  said,  I  can  be  alone,  He  would  have  said  no  more  than  any 
proud,  self -relying  man  can  say.  But  when  He  added,  "  because  the  Father  is 
with  Me,"  that  independence  assumed  another  character,  and  self-reliance 
became  only  another  form  of  reliance  upon  God.  Be  sure  that  often  when  you 
say,  It  is  only  my  own  poor  thought,  and  I  am  alone,  the  real  correcting  thought  is 
this,  Alone,  but  the  Father  is  with  me ;  therefore  I  can  live  that  lonely  conviction. 
The  practical  result  and  inference  of  all  this  is  a  very  simple,  but  a  very  deep 
one,  the  deepest  of  existence.  Let  life  be  a  life  of  faith.  Do  not  go  timorously 
about,  inquiring  what  others  think,  what  others  believe,  and  what  others  say. 
It  seems  the  easiest,  it  is  the  most  difficult  thing  in  life  to  do  this  :  believe  in 
God.     God  is  near  you.    Throw  yourself  fearlessly  upon  Him. — F.  W.  Robertson. 

Ver.  33.  In  the  world  tribulation. — All  men  must  bear  this  yoke,  some  in 
greater  degree  than  others.  How  then  should  it  be  borne  so  that  it  may  become 
a  discipline  for  the  higher  life  in  the  case  of  God's  people  ? 

I.  As  a  means  of  strengthening  faith.  1.  This  may  seem  a  strange  statement, 
almost  a  paradox.  Does  not  affliction  on  the  contrary  often  lead  to  despair  ?  And 
do  not  many,  when  a  load  of  tribulation  weighs  them  down,  lay  violent  hands 
on  their  own  lives  even  ?  Not  if  they  are  genuine  Christians,  in  whom  the 
light  of  reason  has  not  been  extinguished.  Despair,  in  its  full  meaning,  is  a 
word  excluded  from  the  Christian's  vocabulary.  The  healthy  spiritual  nature, 
which  lives  in  conscious  union  with  the  Invisible,  is  all  unharmed  by  tribulation. 
As  the  tests  applied  to  bridges,  and  like  structures  in  mechanical  engineering, 
prove  the  strength  of  the  structure ;  so  tribulation  tests  the  believer's  faith. 
But  it  does  more  than  this.  Like  the  keen  mountain  air  amid  the  ice  and  snow 
of  alpine  regions,  or  the  sharp  medicine,  it  gives  tone  to  the  spiritual  being, 
strengthening  the  believer  for  future  trials  and  for  more  earnest  work.  There 
cannot  be  a  doubt  that  this  is  so.  An  appeal  to  universal  Christian  experience 
will  establish  the  truth  of  these  affirmations.  The  seeming  curse  is  turned  into 
a  blessing ;  the  bane  is  transformed  into  a  healthful  and  healing  balm.  But  the 
faith  that  so  transforms  affliction  must  be  a  real  unwavering  faith,  a  trustful 
resting  on  the  divine  Father's  love  and  care.  It  was  of  His  true  children 
that  Isaiah  spoke  when  he  said,  "  In  all  their  afflictions,"  etc.  ;  and  it  was  to 
those  who  had  become  members  of  the  heavenly  family  in  Himself  that  Christ 
said,  "  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation  :  but  be  of  good  cheer ;  I  have 

4Q8 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  XVI. 


overcome  the  world."  2.  Now,  as  of  old,  it  is  through  faith,  through  resting  on 
the  divine  strength,  that  we  can  endure ;  and  our  faith  should  be  deeper  in  view 
of  the  greater  manifestation  of  divine  love  granted  to  us.  The  angel  of  His 
presence -saved  God's  people  in  the  morning  of  the  Church's  history.  But  now 
the  Son,  become  incarnate,  suffered  and  died,  gave  the  ultimate  and  unspeakable 
proof  of  divine  love.  Shall  tribulation  harm  those  who  are  in  Him  1  Shall  it 
separate  them  from  the  love  of  Christ  1  No,  nor  death  with  all  its  sorrows, 
nor  life  with  all  its  troubles,  can  loosen  the  roots  and  fibres  of  faith  that  have 
sunk  down  to  and  twined  about  the  eternal  Rock.  For  "  the  world,  the  evil  one, 
and  death  are  vanquished  and  lie  prone;  heaven,  righteousness,  and  life 
have  the  victory."  .  .  .  Therefore  we  are  not  to  "  despise  the  chastening  of 
the  Lord,"  but  to  remember  that  "  whom  the  Lord  loveth  He  chasteneth " 
(Heb.  xii.  5) ;  and  that  from  it  all  He  will  bring  blessing  and  the  strengthening 
of  our  faith.  As  in  storms  the  oak  and  other  trees,  with  deep,  spreading  roots, 
only  strike  their  roots  more  deeply  down,  to  enable  them  to  withstand  the 
fiercest  blasts;  so  through  affliction,  tribulation,  trial,  will  He  who  sympathises 
with  His  own  in  all  their  sorrows  strengthen  their  spiritual  life,  transform  them 
into  His  image,  and  prepare  them  for  His  glory. 

II.  It  should  be  an  incentive  to  prayer.  1.  For  if  our  true  strength  and  hope 
in  tribulation  are  in  God,  then  every  trial  should  lead  us  into  closer  and  more 
earnest  fellowship  with  Him.  So  "  in  the  days  of  His  flesh,  having  offered  up 
prayers  and  supplications  with  strong  crying  and  tears  "  (Heb.  v.  7),  as  in  the 
garden  He  cried,  "  Father,  save  Me  from  this  hour  "  (xii.  27),  our  Redeemer 
pointed  us  the  way  in  which  to  obtain  "  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need."  And 
here  again  universal  spiritual  experience  comes  to  us  with  corroborative  evidence. 
There  come  to  many  seasons  of  tribulation,  when  no  philosophic  calmness  of 
temper  can  sustain  the  soul,  when  even  the  convictions  and  reasonings  of 
faith  would  be  of  no  avail,  unless  the  soul  had  this  way  of  access  to  the  holiest. 
And  it  has  frequently  been  in  an  hour  of  overwhelming  tribulation  and  sorrow 
that  some,  "  to  whom  the  cross  of  Christ  had  been  a  stumbling-block  and  foolish- 
ness, have  been  led  to  bring  their  sorrows  there."  Oh  what  comfort  is  there  here 
for  the  children  of  sorrow  !  When  the  pressure  of  affliction  comes,  when  courage 
fails,  when  succour  lingers,  and  the  weight  of  care  becomes  intolerable,  what 
solace  to  lean 

*  on  Him  who  not  in  vain 
Experienced  every  human  pain : 
He  sees  my  wants,  allays  my  fears, 
And  counts  and  treasures  up  my  tears !  " 

2.  For  we  know  that  the  approach  of  faith  to  Him  will  not  be  in  vain.  Is 
it  want  that  afflicts  ?  Then  the  faithful  have  only  to  remember  that  the  divine 
treasuries  are  full  and  overflowing,  and  that  God  is  the  benign  giver  of  all  good. 
Therefore  the  apostolic  promise  may  be  joyfully  appropriated,  "  My  God  shall 
fully  supply  all  your  need  according  to  His  riches  in  glory  in  Christ  Jesus  " 
(Phil.  iv.  19).  Is  it  tribulation  from  the  unrighteousness  and  enmity  of  men? 
Then  let  it  be  remembered  that  the  Lord  shall  deliver  His  people  from  every  evil 
work  (2  Tim.  iv.  18).  Is  it  physical  pain  and  trouble  ?  "  Your  light  affliction," 
etc.  (2  Cor.  iv.  17).  Is  it  spiritual  perplexity  and  darkness  ?  Even  the  psalmist 
could  triumph  in  this  :  "  The  Lord  my  God  shall  enlighten  my  darkness " 
(Ps.  xviii.  28).  Is  it  bereavement  and  loneliness  ?  He  who  is  able  to  save  us 
in  our  afflictions  was  touched  with  "the  feeling  of  our  infirmities"  (Heb.  iv.  15). 
He  cried  on  the  cross  "  Eloi,  Eloi,"  etc.  Thus  tribulation  leads  God's  children  to 
prayer.  "  Oh,  well  for  the  souls  who  permit  themselves  to  be  driven,  by  these 
storms  of  affliction,  to  the  haven  of  eternal  peace  in  their  God  and  Redeemer ! " 

III.  It  should  lead  to  deeper  love  to  God  and  more  earnest  service. — 

469 


chap.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


Why  so  ?  1.  Because  it  is  a  proof  and  evidence  to  us  of  our  Father's  love  and  care. 
"  Whom  the  Lord  loveth,"  etc.  (Heb.  xii.  6).  Were  He  to  leave  us  unreproved 
when  we  needed  correction,  to  go  on  without  hindrance  in  some  way  of  danger, 
then  we  might  be  led  to  ask,  Has  God  forgotten  us  ?  When  the  vine-branches  are 
left  unpruned  to  waste  their  strength  in  useless  leafage,  this  should  be  a  warning 
rather  than  a  cause  of  joy.  For  the  heavenly  Husbandman  prunes — purges — 
the  true  and  living  branches  of  His  vine,  so  that  they  may  bring  forth  fruit. 
The  tribulation,  therefore,  permitted  to  enter  the  lives  of  God's  children  is  a 
token  of  His  love,  for  "  God  doth  not  afflict  willingly  nor  grieve  the  children  of 
men  "  (Lam.  iii.  33).  2.  But  at  the  best  all  suffering,  all  affliction,  all  tribulation, 
are  the  result  of  sin.  Were  there  no  sin  there  would  be  no  tribulation,  no 
suffering ;  and  as  much  of  the  affliction  of  individuals  arises  from,  or  is  consequent 
on,  personal  sin  and  folly ;  so  the  best  way  in  which  to  get  rid  of  this  element  of 
personal  responsibility  for  tribulation  is  to  seek  to  rise  ever  higher  in  the  divine 
service,  ever  nearer  to  the  primal  object  of  man's  creation,  i.e.  that  he  might  glorify 
God  and  enjoy  Him  for  ever.  3.  But  even  though  this  element  were  eliminated, 
there  would  remain  the  tribulation  that  arises  to  Christ's  people  from  this  present 
evil  world.  It  was  this  that  Christ  endured;  and  His  people  in  enduring  also 
may  be  upborne  and  comforted  with  the  thought  that  He  has  overcome  the 
world  to  redeem  His  people — that  now  exalted  on  high,  in  all  their  afflictions  He 
is  afflicted,  and  sends  help  in  time  of  need.  Great  cause  then  for  warmer  love 
and  zeal,  for  more  heart-felt  service. 

Ver.  33.  The  purposes  of  tribulation. — Christ  in  His  incarnation  has  become 
only  more  blessedly  to  His  people,  what  He  has  been  from  the  beginning — "  the 
Saviour  and  the  friend  of  man."  Of  old,  as  the  "  angel  of  Jehovah's  presence," 
He  saved  God's  people  in  their  affliction  and  tribulation  ;  but  now  in  Him 
tribulation  becomes  no  more  a  punishment,  as  it  was  frequently  of  those  of  old, 
but  a  discipline  of  the  soul.  So  that  as  He  Himself  was  "  made  perfect  through 
suffering,"  He  gives  His  people  power  to  triumph  even  through  tribulation. 

I.  Affliction — tribulation — to  the  worldly  man  is  not  only  unwelcome,  but 
dreaded  and  execrated. — It  conflicts  with  his  ideas  of  happiness,  which  are 
bound  up  with  the  pleasures  of  this  passing  scene.  Therefore  the  watchword  of 
materialistic  ethics  is  "  The  greatest  happiness  of  the  greatest  number."  But 
this  is  a  fatal,  fundamental  error.  It  is  to  put  the  effect  in  the  place  of  the 
cause.  "  The  greatest  good  of  men  "  is  the  chief  end  to  be  aimed  at ;  and  this 
greatest  good  is  to  be  found  in  concord  with  God,  and  a  consequent  divine  service. 
When  this  is  attained  to,  then  the  greatest  happiness  will  be  the  result. 

II.  Toward  this  happy  end  of  our  greatest  good,  in  our  present  imperfect 
state,  affliction  is  often  an  important  means  (Ps.  cxix.  67). — The  enduring  of 
tribulation — of  the  " great  fight  of  afflictions" — when  borne  in  the  divine  strength, 
tends  to  brace  and  strengthen  our  spiritual  nature.  It  is  like  the  purifying 
flame  refining  the  true  and  pure  metal  of  our  being  from  the  dross  and  slag  of 
earthly  and  impure  elements.  It  is  part  of  the  Father's  discipline  of  His 
children,  in  training  them  for  a  better  and  higher  life.  Nor  will  He  permit 
them  to  be  overwhelmed  by  affliction.  Now  as  ever  it  is  true,  "  In  all  their 
afflictions  He  is  afflicted,"  and  their  Saviour  is  not  afar. 

III.  But  we  must  guard  against  misconception  by  pointing  out  that  not  to  all 
men,  and  not  in  view  of  all  afflictions,  is  this  comfort  sure. — There  is  express 
mention  made  of  circumstances  in  which  there  can  be  no  true  peace  in  view  of 
tribulation.  "  Let  none  of  you  suffer  as  a  murderer,  or  as  a  thief,  or  as  an  evil- 
doer, or  as  a  busybody  in  other  men's  matters/'  "  For  what  glory  is  it,  if,  when 
ye  be  buffeted  for  your  faults,  ye  take  it  patiently?"  (1  Pet.  iv.  15,  ii.  20).  Let 
us  remember  also  that,  although  men  might  be  horrified  at  the  idea  of  some 

470 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  xvi. 


of  those  sins  mentioned  by  the  apostle,  yet  dispositions  and  thoughts  may  be 
cherished  which  in  the  sight  of  Heaven  may  be  equally  guilty.  And  let  men  be 
thankful  when  the  restraining  hand  of  God,  even  through  affliction,  prevents 
the  growth  in  their  nature  of  such  hateful,  poisonous  plants,  "  roots  of 
bitterness,"  that  if  permitted  "  to  spring  up  "  would  assuredly  "  trouble  them." 

IV.  But  the  tribulation  and  affliction  which  the  children  of  God  have  to 
meet  for  the  most  part  are  those  which  arise,  either  from  the  nature  of  things, 
as  at  present  constituted,  such  as  bereavement,  sickness,  and  so  forth,  or  from 
the  present  evil  world,  the  world  of  sinful  men  inimical  to  Him  and  His  gospel, 
and  therefore  to  His  followers.  This  world  it  is  which  "  by  wicked  hands  has 
crucified  and  slain  "  the  Lord  Himself.  And  as  He  said  to  His  disciples,  "  If 
they  have  persecuted  Me,  they  will  also  persecute  you  "  (John  xv.  20).  But  He 
did  not  leave  them  to  imagine  that  tribulation  was  without  its  compensations ; 
for  among  His  closing  words  to  His  disciples  were  those  so  full  of  comfort,  "  In 
the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation  ;  but  be  of  good  cheer,  I  have  overcome  the 
world.' 

HOMILETIG  NOTES. 

Ver.  23.  Asking  and  receiving. — King  wilt  pray  so  that  thou  wilt  be  heard, 

William  III.  of  Prussia  was  once  un-  thy  heart  must  be  withdrawn  from  the 

able  to  sleep  in  consequence  of  the  pain  world  and  worldly  things, 
caused    by   a   broken    bone.       Whilst  Praying  in  Jesus'  name  guides  our 

lying   awake  he  thought,   "Who  has  prayers. — Jesus  means  "  Saviour  ":  how 

been  most  inimical  to  me  during  my  can  you  then  ask  in  the  name  of  your 

life  ?     I  desire  to  forgive   him,  to  do  Saviour   what   would   be   inimical    to 

him  a  kindness."     It  then  occurred  to  your  salvation  and  blessedness  ? 
him  that  perhaps  it  was  one  Colonel  Prayer  and  labour. — Prayer  is  thy 

Massenbach,  who,  on  account   of   his  heavenly   vehicle,    labour   thy  earthly 

caricatures  of  the  king,  had  been  im-  carriage — both  bring  many  good  gifts 

prisoned  long  years.     Immediately  he  when  they  prosper  on  their  journey, 
gave  the  order  for  Massenbach's  release.  Learn  to  understand  fully  what  you 

The  latter  had  now  been  for  ten  years  pray  for. — You  will  thus  be  able  more 

confined  in  the  fortress  of  Glatz,  and  easily  to  prevent  wandering  thoughts, 
during  that  time  had  left  no  stone  un-  If  you  cannot  find  words  for  your 

turned  to  procure  his  release,  but  all  in  prayer,    let  your  thoughts    speak,   the 

vain.    But  as  he  was  reading  the  story  anguish  of  your  heart  cry  out.    God  will 

of  a  wonderful  answer  to  prayer,  he  hear  you.    You  must  acknowledge  that 

suddenly    remembered    that    he    had  He  knows  your  heart,  and  will  give  you 

never  prayed  to  the  Lord  of  lords  for  not  only  what  you  ask  with  your  mouth, 

freedom.     He  did   so   without  delay  ;  but  what  your  heart  desires, 
and  next  day  an  order  came  to  the  Those    who    pray    best.  —  The   best 

governor  of  the  fortress  for  his  release,  payers  are  those  who  pay  their  debts  in 

The  power  of  Jesus'    name.  —  The  few  pieces  or  notes  of  great  value  ;  and 

name  of  Jesus  is  nothing  less  than  the  those   who  pray  best   are  those   who 

fulness  of  all  the  work  of  Jesus  ;  and  present  their  prayers  in  few  words,  but 

especially  of  that  work  wrought  for  us  in  great  earnestness  and   devotion. — 

in  Gethsemane  and  on  Golgotha,  and  J.  J.  Weigel. 
through  which  we  are  reconciled  to  God, 
not  figuratively,  but  really  and  truly.  Ver.  24.  Not   to  pray  aright   is   as 

The  spirit    of  prayer. — When    the  futile  as  not  to  pray  at  all. — If  you  desire 

ancient    Persians    prayed,    they    had  not  to  bring  down  upon  you  God's  dis- 

neither  gold  in  their  pockets  nor  gold  pleasure  in  your  prayers,  then  ask  from 

rings  on  their  fingers.     And  if  thou  Him  what  such  a  King  as  He  is  is 

471 


chap.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


willing  to  bestow.  Your  worthiness  will 
not  help  you,  your  un  worthiness  will  not 
hinder  you ;  and  whilst  mistrust  will 
condemn  you,  confidence  will  bring  you 
favour  and  success. 

Ver.  27.  No  prayer  without  true  faith 
in  Christ. — Faith  in  Jesus — 

I.  Awakens  the    true    impulse  to 
prayer ; 

II.  Points    out  the    true    way  in 
prayer ; 

III.  Reveals    the    true   spirit    of 
prayer ; 

IV .  Inspires  with  the  true  hope  and 
expectation  in  prayer. 

Prayer  in  the  name  of  Jesus — 

I.  All  powerful  with  God  ; 

II.  Possible  to  faith  alone  (vers.  25- 
30); 

III.  On  earth  strong  and  invincible. 
— M.  Herold. 

Ver.   28.  There  are  two   actions  of 
Christ    we    should  never  forget. — The 


coming  of  Christ  from  heaven  into  the 
world ;  for  by  this  He  prepared  a  way 
for  us  :  and  the  going  of  Christ  from 
the  earth  into  heaven  ;  for  by  this  He 
brings  us  on  that  way. 

Ver.  30.  Why  we  need  to  ash  of 
Christ. — Christ  does  not  need  that  you 
should  ask  Him ;  but  you  yourself  need 
to  do  so.  For  you  do  not  ask  Him  in 
order  that  He  should  learn  from  you, 
but  that  you  should  learn  from  Him. 

The  faith  of  the  holiest  weak  in  its 
beginning.  —  Even  among  the  saints 
faith  does  not  become  at  once  a  great 
tree,  but  is  like  a  grain  of  mustard 
seed.  Yet  a  sick  man  is  a  man,  a  weak 
faith  is  still  faith.  But  we  must  not 
be  contented  with  this  weakness ;  rather 
we  should  give  diligence  that  the  weak 
faith  should  be  strengthened.  And  it 
will  grow  on  the  word  of  God  as  a  child 
grows  on  the  breast  of  his  mother. — 
From  various  German  sources. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  24.  No  prayer  "  in  the  name  of  Jesus  " 
unanswered. — To  prayer  in  the  name  of 
Jesus  an  answer  will  be  accorded — an  answer 
consistent  with  the  divine  wisdom  and 
omniscience,  and  with  our  need.  There  is 
no  such  thing  in  the  long  history  of  God's 
kingdom  as  an  unanswered  prayer.  Every 
true  desire  from  a  child's  heart  finds  some 
true  answer  in  the  heart  of  God.  Most 
certain  it  is  that  the  prayer  of  the  Church 
of  God  since  creation  has  not  been  the  cry 
of  orphans  in  an  empty  home,  without  a 
father  to  hear  or  answer.  Jesus  Christ  did 
not  pray  in  vain,  or  to  an  unknown  God; 
nor  has  He  spoken  in  ignorance  of  God  or 
of  His  brethren  when  He  says,  "Ask  and 
receive,  that  your  joy  may  be  full." — Br. 
Norman  Macleod. 

Ver.  26.  Coming  to  the  throne  of  grace  "in 
the  name  of  Jesus  "  a  prerequisite  of  Christian 
prayer. — "  A  prayer  without  faith  is  like  the 
firing  of  a  gun  with  blank  cartridge,  or  like  a 
painting — without  life."  "  All  things  what- 
soever ye  shall  ask  in  prayer,  believing,  ye 
shall  receive  "  (Matt.  xxi.  22).  Whilst  tears 
fall  to  the  ground,  faith  must  mount  heaven- 
wards. It  is  written  of  Samuel  that  he 
offered  a  sucking  lamb  to  the  Lord  as  a 
burnt  offering,  and  cried  unto  the  Lord  for 
Israel,  and  the  Lord  heard  him  (1  Sam. 
vii.  9).  The  sucking  lamb  was  a  type  of 
Christ.    If  we  desire   to  come  to   God  in 

472 


prayer,  we  must  not  leave  behind  the  Lamb 
who  bears  away  the  sin  of  .the  world  (i.  29). 
Luther  says  somewhere,  "  If  our  prayer  is 
founded  on  our  own  worthiness  it  is  worth- 
less, although  we  should  sweat  our  hearts' 
blood."  As  Joseph's  brethren  were  to  bring 
with  them  their  brother  Benjamin,  as  other- 
wise they  would  not  see  Joseph's  face,  so 
when  we  in  prayer  would  behold  God's 
gracious  countenance  we  must  not  leave  our 
brother  Jesus  behind.  This  He  impresses 
upon  our  souls  when  He  says,  "  Verily,  verily, 
I  say  unto  you,  If  ye  shall  ask  anything  of 
the  Father  in  My  name,  He  will  give  it  you. 
Hitherto  ye  have  asked  nothing  in  My  name : 
ask,  and  ye  shall  receive,  that  your  joy  may 
be  full." — Translated  from  G.  Nitsch. 

Ver.  27.  The  heavenly  Father  loves  His 
children. — I  do  not  say  I  will  pray  for  you, 
says  Jesus.  There  is  no  need  for  Me  to 
act  as  Moses  did  on  Mount  Sinai.  He  had 
to  pray  lest  the  wrath  of  God  should  sweep 
away  these  people.  Why  ?  Because  God 
was  dealing  with  them  on  .the  ground  of 
their  own  disobedience.  But  now,  through 
the  perfect  work  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  saints 
are  in  such  a  position  of  blest  security  that 
there  is  no  need.  Jesus  says:  There  is  no 
need  for  Me  to  pray  the  Father  to  love  you — 
He  does ;  there  is  no  need  for  Me  to  stand 
between  you  and  an  avenging  Deity — 
that  avenging   Deity  is  now  become  your 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  xvi. 


Father.  Dear  brethren,  it  is  possible,  I 
believe,  for  God's  children  to  fall  into  an 
error  of  Roman  Catholicism  in  this  respect  : 
Rome  put  the  Son  in  the  place  of  the 
Father.  What  is  the  next  thing  ?  Rome 
has  put  the  Virgin  Mary  in  the  place  of  the 
Son,  and  appeals  to  the  awful  mother  to 
speak  to  the  awful  Son.  Yes,  and  now  they 
appeal  to  holy  Joseph  to  intercede  with  holy 
Mary  that  she  may  speak  to  her  holy  Son. 
We  have  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  that. 
We  are  free  from  that.  But  there  is  such  a 
thing  as  a  child  of  God  failing  to  realise  his 
position  in  Jesus,  that  he  may  appeal  unto 
Jesus  in  almost  as  meaningless  a  way  as  the 
Roman  Catholics  do.  There  is  no  need  for 
me  to  cry,  Jesus,  oh,  speak  for  me  to 
God  1  No,  Jesus  has  accomplished  the 
work.  He  has  gone  in  as  high  priest  there. 
He  is  Himself  the  intercessor.  His  presence 
there  is  the  intercession.  And  so  Jesus 
says :  You  may  come  with  boldness  ;  there 
is  no  need  for  Me  to  pray  the  Father  to  love 
you — He  Himself  does.  Now  take  the 
word,  "  The  Father  Himself  loves  you."  Do 
not  water  it  down.  Do  not  dilute  it.  1 
know  how  difficult  it  is  to  realise  it.  There 
are  times  when  I  can  only  know  it  because 
God  has  said  it ;  but  it  does  seem  so  wonder- 
ful of  God  to  love  me.  I  could  think  of  Him 
putting  up  with  me,  I  could  imagine  His 
forgiving  me,  I  could  imagine  His  forbearing 
with  me,  but  I  cannot  think  of  His  loving 
me.  Dare  to  take  it  because  Jesus  said  it  I 
If  you  believe  Jesus  because  of  His  testimony, 
if  you  are  one  of  the  saints,  the  Father 
Himself  loves  you ;  yes,  with  an  abiding 
love.  He  does  not  love  you  to-day  and 
dislike  you  to-morrow,  and  then  be  recon- 
ciled to  you  on  the  Wednesday,  and  then  drop 
His  love  on  the  Friday  ;  He  loves  you  day 
in,  day  out.  It  is  unalterable  love.  There 
is  such  a  thing  as  love  being  killed.  Perhaps 
you  may  have  loved,  and  you  may  have 
loved  intensely,  and  the  one  you  loved  killed 
the  love,  and  you  felt  a  cold  dagger  go  into 
your  heart  and  your  life,  and  then  the  love 
died  in  you.  What  a  mercy  it  is  that  God's 
love  cannot  be  killed  !  God's  love  does  not 
die,  although  sometimes  I  seem  to  have 
done  my  best  to  murder  it.  It  is  like 
Himself,  "the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day, 
and  for  ever."  I  believe  that  the  Father's  love 
to  His  children  is  as  perfect  as  His  love  to 
Christ  Himself.  It  is  Christ  who  says,  "  As 
the  Father  hath  loved  Me,"  so  dear  soul, 
very  dear  to  God,  the  love  wherewith  He 
loved  His  Son,  such  is  His  love  to  you.  The 
Father  Himself  loveth  you. — Rev.  Arch. 
G.  Brown,  in  "British  Weekly"  August  3\st, 
1893. 

Vers.  31,  32.  Believing  and  abiding. — To 
feel  the  burden  of  our  captivity  is  not  the 
same  thing  as  to  be  free  from  it ;  to  love 
God  in  our  better  mind,  or,  as  St.  Paul  calls 


it,  according  to  the  inward  man,  is  not  the 
same  thing  as  to  walk  according  to  that 
love,  and  to  show  it  forth  in  our  lives  and 
actions.  So  that  though  we  may  now 
believe,  yet  if  the  hour  cometh  when  we 
shall  be  scattered  every  man  to  his  own, 
assuredly  we  cannot  reckon  ourselves  as 
belonging  to  that  flock  of  the  good  Shepherd, 
who  hear  His  voice,  and  also  follow  Him 
whithersoever  He  goeth,  so  that  they  never 
go  astray  from  the  fold.  Then  how  shall 
we  be  made  free  ?  how  shall  we  be  able  to 
love  Christ  always,  to  walk  as  well  as  to 
feel  according  to  the  Spirit,  and  not  according 
to  the  flesh  ?  The  answer  is,  that  we  must 
attain  to  the  Spirit  of  life  which  is  in  Christ 
Jesus  ;  that  the  Spirit  of  God  must  abide  in 
us,  and  change  us  into  His  own  image,  that 
we  may  be  delivered  from  sin  and  the  flesh, 
and  serve  them  no  more  at  all.  And  yet 
this  great  truth,  on  which  our  whole  salva- 
tion depends,  and  without  which  Christ  has 
died  in  vain  for  each  of  us,  as  far  as  we 
ourselves  are  concerned — this  great  truth  is 
for  ever  forgotten ;  and  of  all  the  points 
which  the  gospel  teaches  us,  this  is,  perhaps, 
the  least  regarded.  So  true  are  our  Lord's 
words  of  that  blessed  Spirit  whom  we  thus 
continually  despise,  "  that  the  world  cannot 
receive  Him,  because  it  seeth  Him  not, 
neither  knoweth  Him."  We  pray  to  God ; 
few,  very  few,  none  of  us  there  are,  I  trust, 
who  do  not  pray  to  Him ;  but  I  greatly  doubt 
whether  the  prayer  for  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  the  prayer  for  the  real  enjoyment  of 
that  blessing  which  Christ  has  promised  to 
His  true  disciples,  that  the  Comforter  should 
abide  with  them  for  ever — whether  this  be  so 
often  the  part  of  our  addresses  to  God  as  it 
ought  to  be.  But  this  is  the  very  main 
thing  of  all.  We  are  living,  if  I  may  so 
speak,  under  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit : 
in  that  character  God  now  reveals  Himself 
to  His  people,  as  He  did  of  old,  by  conversing 
visibly  with  the  prophets  and  patriarchs  ;  or 
in  the  latter  times,  when  He  became  mani- 
fest in  the  flesh,  in  the  person  of  Jesus 
Christ.  He  who  does  not  know  God  the 
Holy  Ghost  cannot  know  God  at  all. 
Though  we  have  known  Christ  after  the 
flesh,  says  St.  Paul,  yet  henceforth  know  we 
Him  so  no  more :  the  divine  presence  is 
henceforth  to  be  of  a  different  kind,  not  less 
real,  but  only  revealing  itself  to  our  minds 
instead  of  our  bodily  senses.  We  must 
pray,  then,  for  the  Spirit — the  Spirit  of 
holiness,  the  Spirit  of  liberty,  the  Spirit  of 
peace  and  love  and  joy.  As  the  apostles 
were  changed  by  His  influence,  so  even  shall 
we  be.  When  He  had  once  entered  into 
their  hearts,  we  hear  no  more  of  their  being 
scattered  every  man  to  his  own,  and  leaving 
their  Saviour  alone.  The  words  of  Peter, 
which,  spoken  in  his  own  unaided  strength, 
were  but  an  idle  boast  soon  reproved  by  the 
event,  "Lord,  I  will  lay  down  my  life  for 

473 


chap.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


Thy  sake,"  were,  after  the  Spirit  had  once 
made  him  free  from  the  bondage  of  corrup- 
tion, the  words  of  truth  and  soberness ; 
and,  according  to  his  words,  so  did  it 
happen  to  him.  And  may  we  not  hope  the 
very  same  thing  in  our  own  case ;  that  we, 
who  now  make  vain  professions  of  faith  and 
love  to  our  Lord  in  the  Church — vain, 
because  they  are  so  soon  broken,  however 
sincerely  they  were  uttered  at  the  time ; 
that  we  who  are  scattered  every  man  to  his 
own,  each  after  his  several  idols,  which  he 
worships  with  the  service  of  his  daily  living ; 
that  we  may  no  more  go  astray  from  our 
Shepherd  ;  but  even  as  we  believe  in  Him 
jvhen  our  hearts  are  most  warmed  within  us, 
30  we  may  also  keep  the  assurance  of  our 
faith  steadfast  to  the  end  1 — Dr.  T.  Arnold. 

Ver.  33.  Classes  in  the  school  of  affliction. 
— It  has  been  well  said  that  there  are  four 
classes  in  the  Christian  school  of  affliction. 
In  the  first  class  men  learn  to  say,  I  must 
endure  tribulation.  Suffering  affliction  is 
there  regarded  as  a  bitter  necessity,  an 
oppressive  yoke,  which  men  must  be  con- 
tented to  bear,  although  murmuring  and 
complaining,  because  it  cannot  be  otherwise. 
In  the  second  class  the  scholars  learn  by 
degrees  to  say,  I  will  endure.  There,  bearing 
affliction  becomes  a  duty  which  is  willingly 
undertaken,  a  burden  which  truly  is  felt  to 
be  heavy,  but  which  is  taken  up  and  borne 
in  God's  name,  with  devout  patience,  and  in 
childlike  obedience.  In  the  third  class  the 
purport  of  the  lesson  is  better  still :  I  am 
able  to  bear  affliction.  The  enduring  of 
tribulation  has  here  become  a  discipline  in 
which  advance  can  be  made  from  day  to  day. 
Whilst  enduring  the  weight  of  the  cross,  the 
Christian  experiences  more  and  more  the 
power  of  God,  which  is  made  perfect  in 
our  weakness;  the  comfort  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  who  is  the  true  Comforter  in  every 
time  of  need ;  the  refreshment  of  the 
divine  word,  which  is  a  light  on  all  our 
ways,  even  on  the  darkest ;  and  the  peace  of 
Christ  Jesus,  which  the  world  cannot  give 
nor  take  away,  and  which  becomes  ever 
more  blessed.  The  Lord  lays  a  burden  on 
us,  but  He  helps  us  to  bear  it.  And  thus 
the  believer  is  advanced  into  the  fourth  and 
highest  class,  in  which  the  solution  of  all 
problems  is  reached,  when  he  learns  to  say, 
I  need  to  bear  affliction.    Here  tribulation 


is  seen  to  be  an  honour  and  even  a  cause  of 
joy.  The  burden  is  no  more  a  burden,  but 
an  honour,  a  mark  by  which  God's  children 
are  known  and  Christ's  disciples  recognised ; 
and  they  learn  with  St.  Paul  to  say,  "  We 
glory  in  tribulations"  (Kom.  v.  3),  and 
understand  the  exhortation  of  another 
apostle  (James  i.  2),  "Count  it  all  joy," 
etc. — After  Geroik. 

Ver.  33.  Mar  ah. — In  the  history  of  the 
Exodus  we  read  that  the  children  of  Israel 
on  their  desert  march  came  to  a  water-supply 
which  they  could  not  drink,  for  it  was  very 
bitter.  Because  of  this  the  place  was  called 
Marah,  "  bitterness."  The  people  murmured 
and  complained,  and  said  to  Moses,  "  What 
shall  we  drink  ?  And  he  cried  unto  the 
Lord  ;  and  the  Lord  showed  him  a  tree, 
which  when  he  had  cast  into  the  waters,  the 
waters  were  made  sweet  "  (Exod.  xv.  23-25). 
In  this  ancient  history  may  be  found  a 
beautiful  parable  for  us  all.  We,  too,  on 
our  pilgrimage  through  the  deserts  of  this 
life  come  to  many  a  place  "  Marah,"  and 
many  bitter  springs  of  tribulation,  where  we 
murmur  and  complain  and  cry,  How  can 
we  drink  this  ?  And  not  only  before  indi- 
viduals among  us  (to  you  or  me)  may  a  bitter 
cup  of  tribulation  be  set,  from  which  our 
inner  nature  shrinks  back — a  whole  people 
also  may  come  to  such  a  field  of  Marah, 
where  to  them  the  sweet  springs  of  well- 
being  and  enjoyment  are  made  salt  and 
bitter ;  when  what  seems  a  sea  of  troubles 
lies  before  them,  and  thousands,  young  and 
old,  cry  out,  How  can  we  come  through  it  ? 
For  such  bitter  floods  of  tribulation  and 
springs  of  tears,  my  brethren,  the  Lord  our 
God  has  given  us  also  a  tree,  by  means  of 
whose  wood  the  bitter  waters  may  become 
sweet.  This  tree  is  the  cross  of  Christ. 
Through  the  cross  of  the  Eedeemer  the  cross 
of  His  people  is  made  light,  and  even 
pleasant.  From  His  Gospel  flow  such  sweet 
and  powerful  rills  of  comfort,  that  whole 
seas  of  affliction  are  thereby  made  sweet, 
the  unbearable  is  made  bearable,  what  is 
insipid  agreeable,  and  His  people  experi- 
ence in  reality  what  the  hymn  expresses : 
"  With  sighs,  and  oft  with  weeping, 

Is  marked  My  journey  here ; 
Yet  Christ,  in  peace  me  keeping, 

Thus  sweetens  every  tear." 

Idem. 


474 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ST.  JOHN.       chap.  Xvif. 


PAET    V.   (e.) 

Our  Lord's  Intercessory  Prater. 
Jesus  prays 

1.  For  Himself — that  He  may  be  glorified,  and  thus  glorify  the  Father 
(vers.  1-5) ; 

2.  For  the  disciples — that  they  may  be  kept  from  the  evil  that  is  in  the 
world  and  united  with  the  Father  in  Him  (vers.  6-19) ; 

3.  For  the  universal  Church.  The  unity  of  all  believers  (vers.  20,  21),  in  their 
unity  with  the  Godhead  (vers.  22-24),  through  their  knowledge  of  the  Father 
(vers.  25,  26). 

CHAPTER  XVII. 
EXPLANATORY  AND  CRITICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  These  things  spake,  etc.  (ravra  iXdXyo-ev). — The  reference  is  to  the  discourse  just 
ended.  Lifted  up. — From  the  troubles  of  earth  and  time  the  mind  and  soul  are  raised  to  the 
thoughts  of  eternity.  It  is  the  attitude  of  the  victorious  incarnate  Son,  not  that  of  the 
Man  of  Sorrows  in  the  final  temptation  (Luke  xxii.  41).  He  spoke  aloud  that  the  disciples 
might  in  the  hour  of  tribulation  be  led  to  follow  His  example.  Glorify  (comp.  xii.  23 ; 
Phil.  ii.  9). 

Ver.  2.  Even  as  Thou  gavest  Him  authority,  etc. — As  God  manifest  in  the  flesh  for  the 
redemption  of  men  this  authority  was  given  Him  ;  but  it  was  only  after  His  ascension  and 
glorification  that  He  could  pour  forth  those  spiritual  gifts  which  are  to  life  eternal.  Eternal 
life  is  a  present  possession ;  for  it  is  a  state  or  condition  that  is  attained  to  through  the 
Spirit,  in  whom  we  become  one  with  Christ,  partakers  of  His  life,  partakers  of  the  divine 
nature  and  the  life  of  God.  All  flesh  (ntm  bl). — "  Mankind  in  their  weakness  and  transitori- 
ness  "  (Westcott).     It  is  to  this  imperfect  humanity  Christ  gives  eternal  life. 

Ver.  3.  Him  whom  Thou  didst  send,  [even]  Jesus  the  Christ  (Messiah). — Only  through  the 
true  knowledge  of  God  can  men  attain  to  life  eternal ;  but  this  knowledge  can  be  attained 
alone  through  Him  who  is  the  revelation  of  the  Father— the  visible  representative  of  the 
Father's  glory,  "  full  of  grace  and  truth." 

Ver.  4.  I  glorified  (i56£acra). — The  work  is  regarded  as  all  completed.  He  has  manifested 
the  glory  of  the  Father  in  all  His  works  and  ways  ;  and  His  redemptive  work — His  passion 
— is  also  viewed  as  accomplished ;  for  the  will  to  go  forward  is  in  His  heart,  and  with  Him 
to  will  is  to  perform. 

Ver.  5.  And  now,  etc. — The  Son  is  still  in  His  estate  of  humiliation,  but  is  looking  forward 
to  re-entering  on  that  glory  which  was  His  ere  He  was  manifested  as  the  Word  made  flesh. 
Here  we  have  a  more  definite  statement  of  our  Lord's  claim  to  be  the  pre-existent  eternal 
Son  than  even  in  viii.  58. 

Vers.  6-19.  Prayer  for  the  disciples. 

Ver.  6.  I  manifested  Thy  name,  etc. — The  contents,  so  to  speak,  of  the  divine  name  were 
not  fully  known  till  Christ  came  as  the  brightness  of  the  divine  glory,  etc.  Thine  they  were, 
etc. — i.  37,  vi.  44,  xv.  16.  Thy  word,  etc.  (\6yop). — The  whole  revelation  of  Christ  is  the 
Father's  word.    They  heard  His  word  and  obeyed  (vi.  45). 

Ver.  7.  Now  they  do  know  (see  xvi.  30). — Imperfect  as  was  their  faith  and  knowledge,  they 
had  arrived  at  this  fundamental  position,  that  as  the  result  of  their  training  they,  in  some 
measure,  knew  that  all  His  words  and  works  were  a  manifestation  of  the  Father's  wisdom, 
power,  love,  etc.  (v.  36,  xii.  49).    See  also  following  verse. 

Ver.  8.  The  words,  etc. — As  above,  xii.  49.  They  have  received,  etc. — And  therefore,  being 
themselves  now  sons  of  God,  they  could  not  fail  to  recognise  the  Only  Begotten  of  the  Father, 
"  full  of  grace  and  truth  "  (i.  12). 

Ver.  9.  I  pray  for  them,  etc. — He  is  praying  that  the  disciples  may  be  sanctified  and  fitted 
for  their  work.    This  prayer  He  could  not  offer  for  the  world.    But  this  very  prayer  for  the 

475 


chap.  xvii.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


disciples  includes  the  world ;  for  they  were  to  be  sent  forth  in  His  power  on  their  saving 
work.  There  is  therefore  no  limitation  here  of  His  redeeming  love.  But  He  prays  now 
specially  for  His  faithful  ones,  "  chosen  in  Him  before  the  foundation  of  the  world " 
(Eph.  i.  4). 

Ver.  11.  Holy  Father,  etc.  (see  ver.25 — "righteous  Father"). — The  world  is  evil;  the  disciples, 
as  sanctified,  are  opposed  by  the  world,  and  therefore  they  are  rightly  committed  to  the 
care  of  the  Holy  Father.  Keep  them  in  Thy  name  which  Thou  hast  given  Me  (Phil.  ii.  9 ; 
Eev.  ii.  17,  xix.  12,  xxii.  4). — "  The  '  giving  of  the  Father's  name '  to  Christ  expresses  the 
fulness  of  His  commission  as  the  incarnate  Word  to  reveal  God.  He  came  in  His  Fathers  name 
(v.  43),  and  to  make  that  name  known  (comp.  vers.  4  ff.).  He  spoke  what  He  had  heard 
(viii.  26,  40,  xv.  15).  And  all  spiritual  truth  is  gathered  up  in  '  the  name '  of  God,  the 
perfect  expression  (for  men)  of  what  God  is,  which  '  name  '  the  Father  gave  to  the  Son  to 
declare  when  He  took  man's  nature  upon  Him.  Comp.  Exod.  xxiii.  21  "  (Westcott).  "  This 
name — not  the  essential  Godhead,  but  the  covenant  name,  Jehovah  our  righteousness — 
the  Father  hath  given  to  Christ "  (Alford). 

Ver.  12.  None  of  them  is  lost,  but  the  son  of  perdition. — Even  he,  it  seems,  was  given  to 
Christ,  but  he  perished  by  his  own  act.  He  strayed  from  the  flock  into  ways  that 
led  to  death  in  spite  of  the  tender  entreaties  of  love  that  would  have  kept  him  safe 
(xiii.  2-5,  18,  21,  26,  27,  etc.).  Son  of  perdition.— A  Hebraism— nip-)?,  a  son  of  death ; 
DTTttJn-|]i,  a  son  of  corruption  or  destruction.  That  the  Scripture  might  be  fulfilled 
(Acts  i.  20) — His  perdition  was  foreknown ;  but  this  was  in  no  wise  the  cause  of  his  fall. 
This  is  one  of  the  proofs  of  the  inspiration  of  Scripture. 

Ver.  13.  My  joy  (see  xv.  11). 

Ver.  14.  Not  of  the  world. — But  "  fellow-citizens  of  the  saints  "  (viii.  23  ;  Eph.  ii.  19). 

Ver.  17.  Sanctify. — I.e.  consecrate,  separate.  In  Thy  truth,  etc. — I.e.  the  truth  wiiicLi  they 
had  kept  (vers.  6-8),  which  He  had  made  known  to  them  (ver.  14) ;  the  word  of  truth — 
the  revelation  of  the  divine  mind  and  will  spoken  to  the  prophets,  and  now  fully  manifested 
in  Christ  Himself.  This  led  to  their  divine  consecration,  and  it  was  in  order  to  make  this 
known  to  the  world  that  they  were  separated  and  set  apart  (Rom.  xii.  1). 

Ver.  18.  As  Thou  didst  send,  etc. — To  reveal  the  Father,  whom  to  know  is  life  eternal ; 
so  I  send  you  to  testify  of  Me ;  for  they  who  know  Me  know  Him  that  sent  Me,  and  thus 
partake  of  the  heavenly  gift. 

Ver.  19.  And  for  their  sakes  I  consecrate  Myself,  etc. — "  I  sanctify  or  hallow  Myself, 
My  body  as  an  offering  for  sin  (Heb.  x.  5),  and  I  sanctify  My  body  the  Church,  whose 
members  are  members  of  Christ,  and  sanctified  in  Him  "  (Augustine  in  Wordsworth's  Greek 
Testament).  By  His  sacrificial  offering  of  Himself  He  would  fulfil  the  Father's  will  and 
the  great  work  of  redemption.  Then  being  raised  on  high  He  would  receive  gifts  for  men, 
and  pour  forth  upon  the  disciples  the  gift  of  the  Spirit,  through  which  consecrated  and 
inspired  they  would  go  forth  with  the  message  of  life  to  men. 

Ver.  21.  That  they  all  may  be  one,  etc. — Inspired  and  vivified  in  life  and  activity  by  one 
Spirit.  One  in  the  unity  of  love,  for  such  is  the  unity  between  the  Father  and  the  Son. 
But  even  more.  As  the  Father  and  the  Son  are  one  in  nature,  so  in  Christ  through  the 
indwelling  Spirit  believers  become  "  partakers  of  the  divine  nature  "  (2  Pet.  i.  2,  3  ;  Rom. 
xii.  5 ;  Eph.  ii.,  iv.,  etc.).  It  is  a  blessed  fact  of  Christian  experience  ;  but  also  a  divine  mystery 
(Eph.  v.  30-32).  Here  too  we  meet  again  the  mystery  of  the  Trinity.  Believers  are  joined 
to  the  Father  and  the  Son,  but  their  bodies  are  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost  They  are  one 
in  the  triune  Jehovah. 

Ver.  22.  And  the  glory,  etc.  (xiv.  23 ;  Col.  i.  27). — Even  now  the  Church  shines  in  the 
beauty  of  holiness  (Isa.  lx.  1-3). 

Ver.  23.  That  the  world  may  know,  etc. — The  shining  of  the  heavenly  light  and  life  in  the 
lives  of  believers  will  lead  men  everywhere  to  render  homage  to  Christ,  till  every  knee  shall 
bow  in  His  name  and  every  tongue  confess,  etc.  (Phil.  ii.  10,  11).  The  beauty  and  glory  of 
the  Church,  even  in  its  present  state  of  imperfection,  will  be  an  irrefragable  proof  of  the  divine 
mission  of  Jesus. 

Ver.  24.  Father,  I  will,  etc. — He  has  gone  to  prepare  a  place  for  them  (xiv.  1-3).  Where 
He  is,  there  will  His  people  be.  The  members  of  His  mystical  body  are  one  with  their 
living  Head  (ver.  22). 

"  One  family  we  dwell  in  Him, 

One  Church  above,  beneath, 
Though  now  divided  by  the  stream, 
The  narrow  stream  of  death." 

C.  Wesley. 

But  a  more  glorious  communion  awaits  His  people  beyond,  in  the  undimmed  radiancy  of 
the  eternal  glory  (Rev.  iii.  21).  There  is  in  the  universe  no  higher  aim  than  the  glory 
of  God  in  Christ ;  and  to  participate  in  and  behold  that  glory  means  eternal  blessedness, 

476 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN.       chap.  xvii. 


Thou  lovedst  Me,  etc. — Here  the  eternal  pre-existence  of  Jesus  is  expressly  implied.  God 
is  eternal  love.  The  Son  is  the  eternal  object  of  the  Father's  love,  and  manifests  it  to  the 
world,  so  that  it  is  seen  in  glory  in  His  redeeming  work.  And  it  is  especially  manifested 
to  those  who  are  in  Christ  (xvi.  27),  and  become  obedient  as  He  was  to  the  Father's  will 
(ver.  26). 

Ver.  25.  Righteous  Father,  etc.  (jdrep  Skate). — The  world  which  does  not  know  Him 
shall  learn  of  His  righteous  judgments.  But  righteousness  and  peace  (Ps.  lxxxv.  10)  kiss 
each  other  at  the  cross  of  Christ.    And  God  is  there  glorified  in  believers. 


MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE   CHAPTER. 

The  scope  and  contents  of  our  Lord's  intercessory  prayer. — With  the  words,  "Be 
of  good  cheer ;  I  have  overcome  the  world,"  the  Lord  had  concluded  the  discourse 
which  He  had  spoken,  in  this  hour  of  parting,  to  His  disciples.  To  the  richness  of 
the  comfort  which  He  left  to  His  Church  in  those  words  His  love  would  yet 
add  a  richer  jewel,  and  He  spoke  in  this  hour  before  the  Father  of  what  moved 
His  high-priestly  heart,  whilst  He  prayed  that  the  blessings  of  His  victory 
should  descend  from  the  Father  upon  His  disciples.  Thus  He  manifested  forth 
His  glory,  and  the  disciples  saw  it.  Yonder  on  the  holy  mount  His  countenance 
shone  as  the  sun,  and  His  garments  were  white  as  the  light,  and  a  voice  fell 
from  heaven,  "  This  is  My  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased  "  (Matt.  xvii.). 
Here  His  Spirit  shone  like  the  sun,  and  His  words  beamed  like  a  mild,  majestic 
light ;  for  upward  to  heaven  ascended  the  voice  of  prayer  of  the  only  begotten 
Son,  who  in  the  flesh  of  His  brethren  had  overcome  the  world,  and  was  going  to 
the  Father,  to  give  them  the  glory  which  the  Father  had  given  Him.  This  is 
the  manner  of  prayer  of  that  man  who  is  God  the  Lord. 

The  Lord  Jesus  is  our  high  priest  and  advocate  (Rom.  viii.  34 ;  1  John 
ii.  1  ;  Heb.  vii.  25).  No  ear  has  ever  heard  how  He  entreats  for  us  at  the  right 
hand  of  God.  But  here  we  listen  to  something  that  must  resemble  it.  "  How 
He  as  our  advocate  with  the  Father  speaks  with  Him,"  says  Steinhofer,  "  cannot 
be  known  by  us  here,  and  indeed  cannot  be  comprehended  in  the  present  con- 
dition of  our  humanity.  Yet  He  had  once  on  earth  spoken  (so  that  all  might 
hear),  in  the  tongue  of  men,  a  prayer  laid  before  the  Father's  heart ;  so  that  we 
might  know  the  feeling  of  His  heart  toward  us,  and  what  He  now  accomplishes 
in  heavenly  fashion,  since  He  has  been  glorified  by  the  Father."  In  all  times 
the  Church  (for  which  her  Head  and  faithful  High  Priest  in  this  prayer 
petitioned  for  power  and  might  in  her  activity)  has  accepted  this  as  a  noble  jewel 
in  the  treasury  of  the  Holy  Scripture,  and  quickened  herself  thereat  as  at  a  full 
stream  of  living  water.  Melancthon,  who  shortly  before  his  end  had  delivered 
his  last  lectures  on  this  high-priestly  prayer,  praised  its  excellency  in  these 
words  :  "  No  more  noble,  no  more  holy,  no  more  salutary,  no  more  lofty  voice 
has  ever  been  heard  in  heaven  or  earth  than  this  very  prayer  of  the  Son  of  God." 
Spener  on  his  deathbed  desired  three  times  that  it  should  be  read  to  him  : 
"  Thereby  to  indicate  "  (says  his  biographer  Canst ein)  "  that  he  specially  loved 
this  chapter.  But  he  would  never  preach  on  it :  it  seemed  to  him  so  high  above 
human  understanding."  Luther  testifies  in  the  exposition  of  this  chapter  :  "  It 
is  indeed  above  measure  a  fervent,  heart-felt  prayer,  in  which  He  revealed  and 
poured  out  the  depth  of  His  heart  both  toward  us  and  toward  His  Father.  But 
the  power,  the  character,  and  the  virtue  this  prayer  has  in  itself  I  cannot  set 
down  sufficiently,  I  fear.  For  however  plainly  and  simply  it  is  expressed,  it  is 
so  deep,  so  wide,  so  rich,  that  no  one  can  sound  its  depths."  Thus  speaks  Bengel 
also :  "  This  chapter  is  in  all  the  Scriptures  the  most  easy  in  its  language,  but 
contains  the  deepest  meaning."  And  with  this  agrees  Hofacher,  in  the  intro- 
duction to  his  consecrated  sermon  on  the  high -priestly  prayer  :  "  To  preach  on 

477 


chap.  xvii.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


our  Gospel  for  to-day  is  no  light  task.  Not  that  its  words  are  difficult  to  under- 
stand. They  are,  on  the  contrary,  exceedingly  clear  and  simple.  But  that  which 
these  words  express,  the  meaning  they  contain,  is  so  deep  that  we  can  never 
thoroughly  penetrate  it  with  our  thoughts  and  words."  What  then  shall  we  do 
in  entering  on  the  study  of  this  chapter  ?  Let  us  be  in  the  Spirit,  so  that  He, 
as  in  St.  John,  may  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  the  love  of  Christ,  whence  sprang 
this  high-priestly  prayer.  Then  an  understanding  of  the  same  will  be  given  to 
us  according  to  our  need ;  and  there  will  be  fulfilled  in  our  experience  what 
Augustine  said  of  the  Scripture  as  a  whole  :  that  it  is  a  stream  "  wherein  the  lamb 
may  wade  and  the  elephant  swim."  .  .  .  Let  the  Spirit  which  searches  even  the 
deep  things  of  God  dwell  in  us — as  the  Spirit  of  prayer  let  Him  enable  us  to 
search  these  words  of  prayer  with  which  the  Saviour  sealed  all  His  words  and 
actions. 

The  hour  which  would  bring  to  the  disciples  pain  and  sorrow,  offence  and 
dispersion,  had  come.  But  He  who  had  overcome  the  world  bade  His  disciples 
be  of  good  cheer.  He  was  of  good  cheer,  and  had  peace  in  that  hour,  for  He 
was  not  alone,  for  the  Father  was  with  Him.  And  with  eyes  clear  as  the 
unclouded  sun  He  looked  to  the  open  heaven  above  Him,  and  prayed,  "  Father, 
glorify  Me"  (comp.  xii.  28,  xiii.  31).  This  prayer  for  Himself  and  for  His 
own  glory  did  the  divine  Son  of  man  proffer  in  the  first  part  of  His  prayer 
(vers.  1-5)  in  threefold  fashion.  He  made  reference  to  the  glory  of  the  Father, 
whom  through  His  own  glorification  He  desired  also  to  glorify ;  to  the  salvation 
of  sinners,  who  would  be  able  to  attain  to  eternal  life  in  the  glorifying  of  the 
Son  through  the  Father,  and  of  the  Father  through  the  Son ;  to  the  completion 
of  His  mediatorial  work,  through  which  He  gained  His  glorification  as  reward 
and  crown.  In  the  second  part  (vers.  6-19)  He  prayed  for  His  apostles, 
the  first  inheritors  of  eternal  life  to  whom  He  had  revealed  the  name  of  His 
Father,  through  the  word  He  had  given  them  ;  and  in  whom  He  was  glorified, 
because  they  believed  on  Him.  For  them  He  prayed,  that  they  in  a  world 
which  hated  them  might  be  kept  and  sanctified  in  order  to  their  perfect  Christian 
joy.  Then  this  petition  for  the  keeping  and  sanctifying  of  His  disciples  finally 
includes  all  the  faithful.  Most  explicity  does  He  pray  for  His  whole  Church  in 
the  third  part  (vers.  20-26),  that  they  may  all  be  one  in  the  truth,  a  consecrated 
missionary  Church  for  the  salvation  of  the  world,  and  may  be  partakers  of  His 
glory,  in  the  first  place  inwardly,  as  believing  members  of  His  body,  and  in  the 
next  outwardly,  as  visible  inheritors  of  the  kingdom  of  His  glory. 

J.  Gerhard  thus  brings  the  unity  of  the  whole  clearly  into  view :  "  In  the  first 
place,  Christ  prays  for  Himself  in  order  to  His  glorification,  because  He  is  the 
chief  corner-stone  of  the  Church  (Eph.  ii.  20),  and  because  on  His  merits  all 
heavenly  and  spiritual  blessings  rest.  Next  He  prays  for  the  apostles,  the 
teachers  appointed  to  the  world,  who  should,  in  the  words  of  the  Gospel,  present 
to  the  world  the  treasures  of  salvation  won  by  Christ.  For  this  reason  they 
are  called  the  foundation  of  the  Church,  on  which  other  believers  are  builded 
(Eph.  ii.  20).  Finally,  He  prays  for  the  whole  Church,  whose  members  should 
through  the  apostles'  preaching  believe  on  Him. 

Firstly,  He  speaks  of  this  gain, — i.e.  that  He  through  His  sufferings,  death, 
and  resurrection  should  restore  their  lost  salvation  to  men,  and  He  prays  that  His 
offering  may  be  acceptable  to  the  Father.  Secondly,  He  speaks  of  the  means, — 
i.e.  that  He,  through  the  preaching  of  the  apostles,  should  spread  abroad  the  gifts 
won  by  His  being  glorified,  and  He  prays  that  the  Father  would  sanctify  and  fit 
the  apostles  for  their  office.  Thirdly,  He  speaks  of  the  fruit, — i.e.  that  the  faithful 
should  be  made  partakers  of  His  gifts  through  the  apostolic  preaching,  and  He 
prays  that  the  Father  would  keep  them  in  the  unity  of  faith  and  love,  and  lead 
them  to  the  end  of  faith — the  heavenly  glory." — Translated  from  Dr.  R.  Besser. 

478 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.       chap.  xvii. 


Vers.  2,  3.  Life  eternal. — The  word  life,  as  used  here  by  our  Lord,  includes  all 
blessedness.  It  is  the  supreme  gift  He  has  obtained  for  men.  And  although 
it  must  not  be  limited  to  the  blessed  life  beyond  this  scene,  yet  there  it  will 
attain  to  its  full  perfection.  It  is  on  what  might  be  called  the  material  aspect 
of  this  life  that  men  have  been  wont  to  dwell.  The  new  Jerusalem,  with  its 
streets  of  gold,  its  angel-guarded  gates  of  pearl,  its  strong  bulwarks,  its  divine 
temple,  its  river  of  the  water  of  life,  with  trees  on  either  bank  for  the  healing  of 
the  nations,  etc. — such  figures  start  up  insensibly  in  the  mind  at  the  thought 
of  the  life  eternal.  And  no  doubt  they  prefigure  glorious  facts.  But  eternal  life 
is  not  something  outward,  but  inward.  We  have  not  to  wait  for  it  till  heaven  is 
revealed.     It  is  given  to  Christ's  people  now. 

I.  It  is  life  in  Christ,  and  therefore  eternal  life. — 1.  It  was  this  that  Jesus 
came  to  win  for  His  people.  "  I  am  come  that,"  etc.  (x.  10).  2.  This  life 
contains  the  idea  of  happiness,  and  is  opposed  to  punishment,  misery,  death.  It 
begins  here  in  germ,  although  it  is  perfected  hereafter.  "  God  hath  given  us 
eternal  life,  and  this  life  is  in  His  Son"  (1  John  v.  11).  Life  begun  here, 
progressive,  and  unending  beyond  is  the  result  of  abiding  in  Christ.  The 
possession  of  it  is  heaven — life  eternal.  3.  This  was  a  truth  known,  though 
dimly,  by  God's  people  from  the  beginning.  The  Old  Testament  saints  felt  that 
God's  true  people  never  die.  They  did  not  so  much  trouble  themselves  about  a 
future  state.  Their  divine  life  was  a  present  reality.  They  stood  firm  on  the 
rock  of  the  divine  presence  often  visibly  manifested,  and'could  from  that  vantage- 
ground  look  unmoved  on  quaking  earth,  trembling  mountains,  and  raging  seas. 
His  presence,  the  knowledge  of  Him — that  they  felt  sufficient  for  time  and 
eternity.  4.  But  how  their  hearts  would  have  rejoiced  had  they  attained  all 
the  fulness  of  knowledge  that  Jesus  came  to  impart  (viii.  56) !  Christ  hath  truly 
brought  life  and  immortality  to  light.  The  dim  dawn  hath  given  place  to 
glorious  morning. 

II.  This  eternal  life  comes  to  men  through  their  attaining  to  the  true  know- 
ledge of  God  in  Christ. — 1.  Christ  came  to  reveal  the  Father.  Men  had  some 
dim  and  illusory  conceptions  of  the  greatness,  power,  wisdom,  etc.,  of  God  in  the 
past.  Those  who  were  inspired  by  His  Spirit  especially  had  arrived  at  true 
ideas  of  His  fatherly  care  (Ps.  xxiii.,  ciii.,  etc.).  2.  But  with  few  exceptions 
how  erroneous  were  the  conceptions  of  men  regarding  the  Deity !  With  what 
fatal  facility  did  not  even  the  Israelites,  with  their  heaven-given  law  and 
ordinances,  fall  into  idolatry  ;  whilst  with  regard  to  the  rest  of  the  world  the 
apostle's  charge  was  terribly  true  (Bom.  i.  18-32).  3.  And  this  ignorance 
regarding  God  means  moral  and  spiritual  death.  It  is  so  with  many  of  the 
heathen  nations  and  tribes  at  the  present  day.  They  lie  under  the  shadow  of 
spiritual  ignorance,  darkness,  and  death.  Even  in  the  case  of  merely  nominal 
Christians,  who  "  have  a  name  to  live,"  we  see  how  through  ignorance  of  the 
true  character  and  the  ways  of  God  "they  are  dead"  (Bev.  iii.  1).  4.  But  Jesus 
revealed  the  Father :  in  Him  men  saw  the  divine  glory  "full  of  grace  and  truth." 
He  brings  to  view  the  divine  hatred  of  sin,  a  clear  view  of  the  demands  of  the 
divine  righteousness ;  so  that  men  are  led  to  repentance,  which  is  the  first  step 
to  true  spiritual  life. 

III.  The  source  and  stay  of  eternal  life  is  the  divine  love. — 1.  "  God  is  love ; 
and  he  that  abideth  in  love,"  etc.  (1  John  iv.  16).  It  was  this  love  that  looked 
in  saving  pity  on  the  world  (iii.  16).  It  was  this  love  which  shone  in  mild  rays  of 
mercy  in  Christ's  redemptive  work  (xv.  9 ;  Eph.  v.  2).  "  He  that  loveth  not 
knoweth  not  God;  for  God  is  love"  (1  John  iv.  8) ;  and  the  knowledge  of  God 
is  life  eternal  (ver.  3).  2.  The  lack  of  love  is  the  root  of  all  evil.  Selfish- 
ness lies  at  the  base  of  sin.  Sin  is  the  abominable  thing  which  God  hates 
(Jer.  xliv.  4) ;  therefore  the  impenitently  sinful,  those  whose  hearts  are  barren 

479 


CHAP.  xvii.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ;    ST.  JOHN. 


of  love,  cannot  dwell  in  the  divine  presence,  where  alone  is  life  eternal  (ver.  24) 
3.  The  grace  of  love  is  the  root,  essential  grace.  The  loveless  being  might  be 
placed  (if  that  were  possible)  near  the  throne  of  heaven's  eternal  King  •  but  he 
would  flee  in  terror  "  sheer  o'er  the  crystal  battlements,"  and  seek  his  appointed 
place.  4.  The  presence  of  love  is  the  absence  of  sin.  "  Love  worketh  no  ill  to 
his  neighbour"  (Rom.  xiii.  10).  If  on  one  spot  of  earth  love  reigned  supreme — 
pure,  unselfish  love — there,  even  in  spite  of  sorrow  and  trial,  would  be  a  true 
foretaste  of  heaven  and  eternal  life.  In  the  heavenly  state  love  will  be  supreme. 
Therefore  no  sin  shall  cloud  the  light  of  the  divine  love,  no  mists  of  misconception 
rise  between  friend  and  friend.  The  objects  of  love  shall  be  perfect,  and  it  shall 
11  never  fail."  5.  The  knowledge  of  God,  the  reign  of  love,  the  absence  of  sin — 
these  elements  constitute  eternal  life,  and  these  we  have  in  Jesus  Christ,  God's 
Son.  Men  need  not  wait  for  the  revelation  of  the  heavenly  state  ere  this 
promise  can  be  fulfilled  to  them.  Here  and  now  Christ  gives  His  people  eternal 
life.  It  is  in  and  through  Him.  Without  Him  we  can  do  nothing.  His 
incarnation,  His  life  and  death,  were  necessary  to  cancel  the  guilt  of  sin,  and 
vindicate  the  eternal  law  of  righteousness.  There  is  necessary  a  living  faith, 
uniting  men  to  Christ  in  order  that  spiritual  grace  and  power  may  flow  into 
their  souls,  producing  the  heavenly  character.  But  this  divine  love  of  Christ 
constrains  His  disciples  to  love  Him  in  return,  and  to  live  unto  Him  who  died 
for  them  and  rose  again  (2  Cor.  v.  1,  14-21).  And  this  is  life  eternal,  begun  even 
here  in  the  human  soul,  leading  to  the  living  hope  of  the  eternal  inheritance 
beyond  (1  Pet.  i.  4). 

Vers.  14,  15.  Christian  separation  from  the  world. — The  secret  of  the  higher 
life  is  separation  from  the  world.  The  believer  is  in  the  world,  but  not  of  it. 
Christ  does  not  wish  us  to  withdraw  from  the  world.  His  earnest  prayer  for  His 
disciples,  who  were  not  of  the  world  as  He  was  not  of  the  world,  was  that  they 
might  be  kept  from  the  evil.  That  is  what  we  are  to  keep  from  as  strangers 
and  pilgrims. 

I.  Christian  separation  from  the  world  does  not  mean  withdrawal  from  the 
society  of  our  fellow-men. — 1.  That  is  what  men  thought  in  the  earlier  ages  of 
the  Church's  history,  when  the  Church  began  to  come  into  contact  with  the 
sinful  and  unbelieving  world.  They  fled  to  hermitages  and  desert  places,  they 
avoided  the  society  of  their  kind,  and  lived  lives  of  solitary  retirement,  thus 
thinking  to  escape  the  pollutions  of  the  world,  but  forgetting  the  purpose  for 
which  they  had  been  sent  into  it.  2.  And  this  error  spread  so  that  in  mediaeval 
times  it  grew  into  a  system,  and  the  light  of  truth  was  hidden  often  within 
monastic  walls,  whilst  all  arouud  the  darkness  of  sin  and  superstition  was  gross 
among  men.  3.  And  did  this  seclusion  always  conduce  to  real  separation  from 
the  world  ?  In  nowise  !  True,  within  those  monastic  cells  were  many  true- 
hearted  men  and  women  who  earnestly  followed  Christ.  But  for  the  most  part, 
especially  in  pre-Reformation  times,  men  and  women  took  the  world  with  them 
into  monastery  and  convent,  till  these  often  became  centres  of  darkness  instead 
of  light.  And  without  those  walls  were  witnesses  to  the  truth,  who  lived 
consecrated  lives,  as  well  as  within.  4.  The  monastic  system  in  its  time  had 
a  purpose,  and  formed  a  protest  against  the  sin  and  wickedness  of  the  world. 
But  could  not  this  have  been  better  done  had  the  good  from  within  those  walls 
lived  more  in  fellowship  and  unity  with  the  good  without  1  5.  As  Christ  "  the 
light  of  the  world"  did  not  shun  the  society  of  men,  so  should  those  who  are 
His  true  followers,  and  therefore  in  Him  also  lights  in  the  world,  let  their 
"  light  shine,"  not  alone  at  the  family  altar,  or  in  the  public  services  of  the 
sanctuary,  but  in  the  field  or  on  the  market-place,  and  in  all  the  innocent 
^intercourse  of  society.     Christ  does  not  desire  that  His  people,  who  are  "  the  salt 

480 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xvn. 


of  the  earth,"  should  remove  themselves  or  be  removed  from  the  world,  else  the 
world's  destruction  would  be  near  at  hand.  And  Christ  desires  the  world's 
salvation — came  to  save  the  world. 

II.  Christian  separation  from  the  world  means  being  kept  from  the  world's 
evil. — 1.  As  Christ's  disciples,  as  members  of  God's  spiritual  family,  and  therefore 
"  strangers  and  pilgrims  "  on  earth,  although  we  are  forbidden  to  seclude  our- 
selves from  the  society  of  men  and  the  pursuits  of  life,  we  are  also  bidden  to 
keep  ourselves  free  from  that  sin  and  evil  which  make  the  world  inimical  to 
God  and  God's  people.  2.  Our  daily  prayer  should  be  this  petition  in  that 
prayer  which  Jesus  taught  His  disciples — "  Deliver  us  from  evil."  And  when 
it  is  remembered  that  evil  inheres  as  it  were  in  a  centre,  comes  from  one  dark 
source,  then  the  petition  should  also  run — "  Deliver  us  from  the  evil  one."  It 
was  for  this  that  Jesus  prayed  His  Father  just  before  the  cross,  that  He  would 
keep  the  disciples  from  the  evil  one.  3.  It  is  not  then  the  world  in  itself  that  is 
evil.  The  earth  indeed  is  full  of  the  divine  goodness.  "  The  heavens  declare  the 
divine  glory,"  etc.  "  Earth  with  her  thousand  voices  praises  God  "  (Coleridge). 
Reverent  intercourse  with  nature  to  the  spiritually  minded  leads  them  nearer 
to  God.  And  nature  in  itself  has  no  sympathy  with  evil  (Rev.  viii.  22).  It  is 
from  the  world  of  evil  men,  inspired  by  the  spirit  of  evil,  that  the  believer  is  to 
be  kept  free.  4.  And  this  is  the  difficulty.  Hie  labor,  hoc  opus.  How  can  men 
escape  that  which  touches  their  lives  at  every  point !  In  what  enticing  guises 
and  disguises  does  evil  solicit  even  in  a  Christian  land  !  Under  the  guise  of 
sociability  and  good  fellowship  it  offers  the  intoxicating  cup.  With  the  specious 
promise  of  pleasure  it  tempts  with  those  "  fleshly  lusts  that  war  against  the 
soul."  With  the  tempting  bait  of  easy  gain,  and  the  excitement  of  chance,  it 
entices  its  victims  into  worshipping  at  those  shrines  (of  gambling,  etc.)  dedicated 
to  Mammon.  Great  need  for  prayer  that  we  should  be  kept  from  the  world's 
evil — that  the  high-priestly  prayer  of  our  Lord  should  be  answered  in  our  case 
also. 

III.  How  then  shall  believers  be  kept  from  the  evil  in  the  world? — 1.  Not 
by  their  own  strength.  They  must  be  inspired  by  a  higher  power.  Another 
spirit  must  reign  within  them  than  that  which  dominates  this  evil  world.  As  in 
malarious  districts,  those  who  have  to  go  through  them  prepare  themselves  by 
prophylactics  to  resist  the  poisoned  air,  so  that  the  deadly  swamp  fever  may  not 
lay  its  burning  hand  upon  them — so  the  Christian  who  must  come  in  contact 
with  the  evil  world  must  have  a  spiritual  prophylactic.  "  Sanctify  them  through 
Thy  truth."  2.  The  men  who  are  spiritually  healthy,  holy,  will  be  best  fitted 
to  resist  spiritual  disease,  and  be  able  to  go  about  as  spiritual  healers  among 
men.  3.  And  this  we  may  attain  to  through  union  with  the  Saviour ;  for  then 
we  shall  be  kept  by  the  Father  from  evil  and  the  evil  one.  In  this  struggle  we 
do  not  stand  unaided  and  alone.  A  heavenly  panoply  is  provided  for  us  (Eph. 
vi.  11-18);  a  heavenly  weapon — the  divine  word — is  put  into  our  hands;  a 
divine  Spirit  inspires  the  Christian  pilgrim  and  soldier  with  strength  to  endure ; 
a  divine  Friend  is  ever  near  to  aid  and  help  in  time  of  need. 

IV.  The  purposes  for  which  the  Christian  disciple  is  to  remain  in  the  world. 
— 1.  There  is  a  personal,  spiritual  gain  in  wrestling  with  and  overcoming  evil. 
Our  faith  is  strengthened  by  the  conflict  with  unbelief.  Every  temptation  over- 
come is  a  step  upward  on  the  heavenly  stairway,  every  victorious  struggle  with 
evil  thoughts  from  within  and  incitements  from  without  is  a  gain  to  the  moral 
nature.  Every  firm  refusal  to  yield  to  the  blandishments  of  the  world,  the  flesh, 
the  devil,  every  time  the  indignant  word,  "  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan,"  is 
spoken,  the  struggle  will  be  less  painful,  and  the  victory  in  Christ's  strength 
more  sure.  2.  And  as  the  divine  Son  was  "  perfected  through  sufferings,"  so 
will  it  be  with  His  disciples.     In  our  present  condition  we  must  either  overcome 

ii  481 


chap.  xvii.       EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


the  world  or  be  overcome  by  it.  But  Jesus  has  shown  us  the  way  in  which  we 
may  be  more  than  conquerors,  through  His  grace.  And  the  promise  is  to  those 
who  overcome  (2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8 ;  Rev.  xxi.  7).  3.  There  was  also  a  purpose 
regarding  the  world  served  by  the  disciples  of  Christ  remaining  in  it.  They 
were  to  be  witnesses  for  Christ.  Inspired  by  the  Spirit,  they  were  to  make 
known  His  saving  power.  "  Having  their  conversation  honest  among  the 
Gentiles,"  "  shining  as  lights  in  the  world,"  they  would  lead  men  to  see  the 
sinfulness  of  sin,  the  need  of  Christ's  salvation,  and  thus  bring  glory  to  God 
(1  Pet.  ii.  12).  4.  And  as  they  were  so  are  we  in  the  world.  If  we  are  truly 
Christ's  disciples,  He  gives  us  a  work  to  do  for  Him  whilst  we  are  here  which  we 
alone  can  do.  He  calls  us  to  witness  for  Him  by  our  lives,  by  word  and  deed,  in 
the  world,  showing  by  our  walk  that  we  are  not  of  the  world,  but  seek  a  better 
country,  even  a  heavenly.  Thus  men  will  be  led  also  to  seek  for  and  rejoice  in 
this  salvation,  and  in  the  end  glorify  our  heavenly  Father  (Matt.  v.  16). 

Ver.  15.  "  I  pray  not  that  Thou  shouldest  take  them  out  of  the  world." — Some 
reasons  why  our  Lord  asks  for  His  friends  that  they  should  not  be  taken  out  of 
the  world. 

I.  He  asks  it  for  the  benefit  of  the  world. — If  Christ  were  to  remove  men  to 
His  immediate  presence  s6  soon  as  they  become  His  followers,  He  would  be 
taking  away  from  the  world  those  who  were  meant  to  be  its  greatest  blessings. 
True  Christians  are  the  salt  of  the  earth.  Distributed  over  its  surface,  they 
help  to  preserve  it  from  the  utter  corruption  to  which  it  would  otherwise  sink. 
They  are  more — they  are  its  light.  If  ever  the  world  is  brought  to  the  knowledge 
of  God,  it  must  be  through  their  instrumentality.  If  they  were  removed,  there 
would  be  no  Church  on  earth  to  witness  for  God.  It  would  be  the  darkness  of 
Egypt,  without  light  in  any  dwelling — the  corruption  of  Sodom,  without  a  Lot  to 
be  grieved  for  it ;  and  if  the  earth  were  still  preserved,  it  would  only  be  for  the 
sake  of  those  who,  in  time  coming,  might  be  drawn  from  it  to  God.  This  world 
would  then  be  a  quarry  from  which  stones  were  taken,  as  from  heathen  Tyre, 
and  transported,  so  soon  as  cut,  to  form  the  house  of  God  in  another  land.  But 
it  would  not  be  a  site  on  which  a  temple  shall  rise  to  God's  glory,  growing  from 
age  to  age,  until  it  fill  the  extent  of  the  wide  earth,  and  have  the  "  headstone 
brought  forth  with  shoutings,  Grace,  grace,  unto  it !  " 

II.  He  asks  it  for  the  honour  of  His  own  name. — There  is  glory  that  accrues 
to  the  name  of  Christ  and  there  is  joy  among  the  angels  when  a  sinner  drops 
the  weapons  of  rebellion,  and  becomes,  through  Him,  the  child  of  God.  There  is 
glory  also  that  comes  to  Him  when  His  redeemed  are  brought  home,  and  when, 
arrayed  in  the  beauties  of  holiness,  they  cast  their  crowns  before  the  throne  with 
the  ascription,  "  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain !  "  But  it  is  for  His  honour 
also  that  there  should  be  an  interval  between — a  pathway  of  struggle,  where 
the  power  of  His  grace  may  be  seen  in  preserving  His  friends  in  ©very  extremity. 
The  more  threatening  the  rocks  and  eddies,  the  fiercer  the  winds  and  waves,  so 
much  the  more  honour  to  Him,  who  sometimes  asleep  in  the  ship  (as  men  deem 
it),  sometimes  absent,  can  keep  it  from  wreck,  and  carry  it  in  safety  to  the 
desired  haven.  What  an  emphatic  challenge  there  is  to  every  enemy  in  His 
own  words,  "  I  give  unto  My  sheep  eternal  life,  and  they  shall  never  perish, 
neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  My  hand  "  ! 

III.  He  asks  it  for  the  good  of  Christians  themselves. — "  Master,  it  is  good 
for  us  to  be  here,"  Peter  said,  when  a  ray  of  heaven's  light  shone  upon  him  on 
the  holy  mount;  "let  us  build  here  three  tabernacles."  As  if  he  had  said, 
"  Why  go  down  again  into  the  dark  world  of  opposition  and  trial,  when  we  can 
enjoy  here  at  once  the  heavenly  vision  ? "     But  "  he  wist  not  what  he  said,"  and 

482 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.        chap,  xvii 


he  was  compelled  to  descend,  and  travel  many  a  weary  footstep,  before  he 
reached  that  higher  mount  where  he  now  stands  with  his  Lord  in  glory.  We, 
too,  may  sometimes  feel  that  it  would  be  better  for  us  to  be  carried  past  these 
temptations  and  struggles,  and  to  enter  at  once  into  rest.  There  are  times  when 
that  rest  seems  so  much  to  be  desired,  and  this  world  so  little,  that  our  soul,  like 
that  of  the  ancient  Israelites,  "  is  much  discouraged  because  of  the  way."  But 
He  who  undertakes  for  us  knows  what  is  best,  and  as  it  was  expedient  for  us 
that  He  should  depart,  so  must  it  also  be  that  we  should  for  a  season  remain 
behind.  There  are  lessons  which  we  have  to  learn  on  this  earth  which  can  be 
taught  us  in  no  other  part  of  our  history.  One  of  these  is  the  evil  of  sin. 
Another  part  of  God's  desire  may  be  that  we  should  enjoy  more  fully  the 
blessedness  of  heaven.  Our  bitter  bereavements  will  intensify  the  joy  of  its 
meetings  ;  its  rest  will  be  sweeter  for  the  hard  toil ;  and  its  perfect  light  and 
purity  fill  the  soul  with  a  far  more  exceeding  glory  for  the  doubts  and  tempta- 
tions which  oppress  us  here. — Dr.  John  Ker. 

Vers.  16,  17.  Christian  separation  from  the  world. — The  circumstances  under 
which  this  prayer  was  offered  render  it  pre-eminently  a  revelation  of  Christ's  last 
thoughts  concerning  the  Church  of  the  future.  In  this  prayer  we  enter  the 
solemn  temple  of  the  Saviour's  soul,  and,  gazing  on  the  mighty  thoughts  that 
were  throbbing  there,  we  read  those  spiritual  principles  on  whose  foundation  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  rises  into  might  and  majesty.  Christ  throughout  draws  a 
sharp  distinction  between  the  disciples  and  the  world.  At  the  outset  He  draws 
a  broad  line  of  demarcation,  "  I  pray  for  them  :  I  pray  not  for  the  world,  but  for 
them  whom  Thou  hast  given  Me  ;  for  they  are  Thine."  That  distinction  comes 
out  yet  more  sharply  as  He  passes  on.  He  implies  that  the  world  has  become 
conscious  of  it,  and  shows  its  detection  of  the  difference  by  hating  the  disciples. 
He  asks  not  that  they  may  be  taken  out  of  the  world,  but  kept  from  its  evil.  If, 
then,  this  prayer  be  a  revelation  of  Christ's  profoundest  thoughts  on  the  mission 
of  His  disciples,  we  are  compelled  to  infer  that,  if  this  separation  be  lost,  the 
Christian  Church  will  lose  its  power  and  leave  its  work  undone.  And  this  con- 
viction is  forced  upon  us,  inevitably,  as  in  approaching  the  close  of  the  prayer 
the  Saviour  carries  the  thought  to  its  conclusion  in  the  words,  "  They  are  not  of 
the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world.  Sanctify  them  through  Thy  truth : 
Thy  word  is  truth." 

The  Christian  separation  from  the  world :  its  nature,  attainment,  and  purpose. 

I.  Its  nature. — "  They  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world." 
Christ  does  not  so  much  mean  to  say  that  His  disciples  were  not  of  the  world 
because  He  was  not,  as  that  they  were  unworldly  precisely  in  the  same  way  that 
He  was.  1.  Looking  at  Christ's  life,  we  observe  that  His  separateness  was  not 
an  outward  separation  from  the  world,  but  an  inward  separation  from  its  spirit. 
2.  Christ  walked  the  earth  as  God's  world.  He  looked  into  the  beautiful  eyes  of 
lilies  and  saw  the  touch  of  the  eternal  finger,  and  beheld  the  Father's  care  in 
every  falling  sparrow.  Men  have  tried  to  be  separate  from  the  world  by  con- 
demning the  glad,  the  social,  the  free  ;  but  He  who  blessed  little  children  blessed 
the  mirth  and  joy  of  childhood.  So  little  of  an  ascetic  was  He  that  men  called 
Him  a  "  wine-bibber,"  and  by  His  very  first  miracle  He  hallowed  and  glorified 
the  gladness  of  human  love.  Whence  came  this  spiritual  atmosphere  of  separa- 
tion amid  His  close  contact  with  men  ?  We  may  trace  two  sources  of  it :  (1)  His 
life  of  holy  consecration ;  (2)  His  life  of  abiding  prayer. 

II.  Such,  then,  is  the  nature  of  Christian  separateness.  We  are  not  required 
to  retire  outwardly  from  the  world ;  we  are  not  called  upon  to  be  sad,  stern, 
severe ;  not  to  abjure  the  common,  the  familiar,  and  the  social  ;  but  in  the  midst 
of  all  to  manifest  a  separateness  of  spirit.     But  the  question  meets  us  here,  How 

483 


chap.  xvii.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY     ST.  JOHN. 


is  this  to  be  attained?  how  can  a  man  acquire  this  spiritual  separateness ? 

"  Sanctify  them  through  Thy  truth."  To  sanctify  means  to  set  apart,  to  separate 
for  God.  Set  them  apart  in  spirit  from  the  world  "  through  Thy  truth."  He 
whose  eye  gazes  on  the  eternal  pierces  the  shadows  of  the  apparent.  The  world 
lives  in  and  for  the  present,  the  visible,  the  temporal.  He  walks  with  God,  and 
His  life  and  conversation  are  in  the  heavenly.  Hence  arises  that  spiritual 
separation.  The  entanglements  of  the  world's  life  are  broken  and  overcome. 
Its  charms  are  snapped.  Its  practical  falsehoods  fade  before  the  light  of  an 
unveiled  eternity. 

III.  Its  purposes. — "  As  Thou  bast  sent,"  etc.  Our  mission  of  witnessing  to 
the  truth,  love,  will  of  God,  can  only  be  fulfilled  by  this  spiritual  separation  from 
the  world.  Apart  from  this  everything  else  fails ;  it  alone  gives  power  to  our 
direct  Christian  activity.  Our  influence  is  just  in  proportion  to  what  we  are. 
Men  will  read  the  reality  of  our  lives,  whatever  they  may  appear  to  be.  It  is 
vain  to  preach,  etc.,  unless  we  can  prove  by  this  spirit  of  Christlike  separation 
that,  like  Christ,  we  are  "  not  of  the  world."  This  forms  our  mightiest  power 
over  men,  because  its  action  is  silent,  constant,  irresistible. — E.  L.  Hull,  B.A . 

Vers.  16-19.  The  spirit  in  which  Christians  are  to  live  separated  from  the  world. 
— I.  As  God's  sanctified  ones. — 1.  "Your  bodies,"  wrote  the  apostle,  "are 
temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  "  Ye  are  the  temple  of  God."  This  is  to  be  kept 
in  view  in  all  the  relationships  of  life,  in  the  training  of  our  spiritual  being,  in 
seeking  to  influence  others  for  good.  It  is  for  this  end  our  Lord  prayed  for  His 
disciples  that  they  might  be  sanctified  by  the  truth.  2.  Nor  is  it  easy  to  live  in 
this  spirit.  It  is  hard  for  men  to  deny  themselves,  to  oppose  that  spirit  of  self 
which  naturally  inspires  them,  to  submit  themselves  to  discipline  that  may  some- 
times seem  like  the  cutting  off  of  a  right  hand  or  the  plucking  out  of  a  right 
eye.  So  hard  is  this  that  men  and  women,  in  their  present  imperfect  condition, 
could  not  of  themselves  accomplish  the  task.  They  need  to  surrender  themselves 
to  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit,  to  be  led  by  Him  into  all  truth,  to  be  sanctified 
through  the  truth.  3.  But  guided  thus  and  quickened  by  the  example  of  Jesus, 
who  for  their  sakes  sanctified  Himself,  His  disciples  will  be  able  through  His 
grace  to  maintain  their  freedom  from  the  evil  in  the  world.  They  will  remember 
that  these  bodies  of  theirs  are  sacred  places,  and  that  sin  committed  is  committed 
against  the  indwelling  God.  "  Shall  I  profane  the  temple  of  God?  "  They  will 
be  led  to  say,  "  Shall  I  do  this  great  wickedness  and  sin  against  God,  against  His 
Spirit  that  dwells  within  me  ?  "  And  thus  they  will  be  led  to  pray  ever  more 
earnestly,  "  Deliver  us  from  evil." 

II.  As  members  of  God's  spiritual  family. — 1.  Though  not  of  the  world,  and 
separated  by  a  gulf  deep  as  eternity  from  the  evil  that  is  in  it  and  the  evil  men, 
believers  do  not  stand  alone.  They  are  members  of  a  great  spiritual  family,  of 
which  God  is  the  Father  and  Jesus  the  great  elder  Brother.  And,  strengthened 
by  this  fellowship,  they  wiil  be  enabled  more  and  more  to  resist  the  world's  evil. 

2.  The  citizens  of  the  heavenly  state  strengthen  each  other  in  their  struggle 
against  the  forces  of  evil.  And  this  they  do  through  union  and  communion 
with  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  "  Through  Him  we  both  have  access  by  one  Spirit  to 
the  Father."  And  in  Him  we  have  fellowship  one  with  another.  The  traveller 
over  difficult  and  dreary  paths  is  upheld  and  cheered  by  the  presence  of  like- 
minded  fellow-travellers,  and  by  mutual  help  delivered  from  many  a  danger. 

3.  And  this  very  fellowship  acts  with  deterrent  power  in  keeping  men  from  the 
evil.  How  shall  we  sin  against  and  bring  dishonour  on  the  name  of  our 
brethren  ?  How,  above  all,  shall  we  through  sin  "  tread  under  foot  the  Son  of 
God,  and  count  the  blood  of  the  covenant,  wherewith  we  were  sanctified,  an 
unholy  thing,  and  do  despite  unto  the  Spirit  of  grace  ?  "  (Heb.  x.  29).     4.  Shall 

484 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xvil. 


we  not  rather  through  grace  seek  to  have  higher  conceptions  of  duty,  a  noble 
scorn  of  what  is  base  and  unrighteous,  and  resolve,  aided  by  grace  divine,  to 
attend  to  the  apostle's  exhortation,  "  I  .  .  .  beseech  you  to  walk  worthy  of  the 
high  calling  wherewith  ye  are  called"  (Eph.  iv.  1). 

III.  In  holy  activity  for  the  world's  salvation. — 1.  Why  were  the  disciples 
to  remain  in  the  world  but  in  order  to  carry  out,  after  Jesus  had  left  it,  the  work 
given  by  the  Father  to  Him  to  do?  And  was  not  their  activity  simply  a  con- 
tinuation of  the  work  of  Jesus  Himself,  now  working  for  the  world's  salvation 
from  His  heavenly  throne  1  As  the  Gospel  story  tells  of  all  that  Jesus  began  to 
do  and  teach,  so  the  Acts  of  His  Apostles,  and  the  history  of  the  Christian 
Church,  show  how  He  has  continued  His  work  (Acts  i.  1).  2.  Separation  from 
the  world  does  not  mean  hatred  of  the  world.  Jesus  met  the  hatred  of  the  world 
with  love;  He  died  for  it.  So  the  disciples  of  Jesus  must  meet  the  hatred  and 
persecution  of  the  world  with  love,  and  seek  to  win  the  world  for  Christ,  so  that 
it  may  no  longer  be  the  world,  but  that  its  kingdoms  may  become  the  kingdom 
of  our  Lord,  etc.  3.  For  this  end  Christ's  disciples  are  "  sent  into  the  world  " 
(ver.  18),  so  that  by  their  holy  example,  their  earnest  proclamation  of  redemption, 
the  spiritual  power  of  their  witness-bearing,  they  may  be  the  instruments  of 
bringing  many  to  believe  unto  salvation ;  and  that  thus  over  all  the  glory  of  God 
and  the  Redeemer  may  be  seen.  4.  Modern  disciples  should  "  walk  according  to 
the  same  rule,  should  mind  the  same  things."  Their  conversation  should  be  in 
heaven  (Phil.  iii.  16,  20),  as  they  walk  in  the  present  evil  world,  so  that  they  may 
win  men  by  their  holy  example  (Matt.  v.  14-16).  The  love  to  Christ  which 
inspires  them  will  lead  them  in  love  to  seek  to  win  a  perishing  world  for  Him. 
The  extension  of  His  kingdom  in  their  own  hearts  and  in  the  world  will  be  their 
first  and  dearest  desire.  They  will  give  themselves  and  their  gifts  freely  and 
ungrudgingly  for  Christ's  cause  and  kingdom.  5.  And  thus  living  in  the  unity 
of  the  faith  with  Christ  and  His  people  they  will  joyfully  realise  that  His  prayer 
for  His  disciples  has  in  their  case  been  blessedly  answered  ;  they  will  "  rejoice  in 
hope  of  the  glory  of  God  "  (Rom.  v.  2). 

Yer.  17.  Thy  word  is  truth. — Look  at  the  testimony  of  our  Lord  to  the  truth 
of  revelation.  When  He  prayed  for  His  disciples,  "  Sanctify  them  through  Thy 
truth  :  Thy  word  is  truth  "  : — 

I.  What  did  Christ  mean  by  these  words? — 1.  Did  He  mean,  as  modern 
critics  would  have  us  suppose,  a  revelation  that,  whilst  containing  the  truth,  was 
at  the  same  time  so  mixed  up  with  error  that  it  required  the  training  of  experts 
to  distinguish  the  one  from  the  other  ?  And  if  this  had  been  the  case,  would 
He  not  in  some  way  have  warned  His  disciples  of  the  fact,  if  fact  it  was] 
Surely  He  would.  2.  It  was  not  Christ's  method  to  keep  His  disciples  in 
darkness  regarding  matters  of  such  moment  to  them.  In  all  His  teaching,  and 
even  whilst  earnestly  warning  the  disciples  against  the  teaching  of  those  who 
had  made  "  the  word  of  God  of  none  effect  through  their  tradition  "  (Mark  vii.  13), 
we  have  no  hint  of  the  existence  of  human  error  in  the  divine  word,  or  any 
warning  to  avoid  in  it  the  elements  of  fabrication,  which  modern  critics  assert 
are  to  be  found  in  it.  3.  No  ;  on  the  contrary,  He  asserts  as  here,  "  Thy  word 
is  truth  " — not  merely,  notice,  that  it  contains  the  truth  mixed  up  with  other 
elements,  but  "  is  truth."  "  I  came  not  to  destroy,"  etc.  "  Not  one  jot  or 
tittle,"  etc.  (Matt.  v.  17,  18).  "The  law  and  the  prophets  prophesied,"  etc. 
(Luke  xvi.  16).  "  Blessed  are  they  that  hear,"  etc.  (Luke  xi.  28).  "  Search  the 
Scriptures,  .  .  .  for  they,"  etc.  (v.  39).  In  all  His  teaching  there  is  no  word  of 
errancy  in  the  Scripture.  Nay,  He  showed  that  error  arose  just  from  want  of 
knowledge  of  those  same  Scriptures.  "Ye  do  err,"  He  said  to  the  Sadducees, 
"  not  knowing  the  Scriptures,  nor  the  power  of  God."     4.  Apostolic  testimony  is  in 

485 


chap.  XVii.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


the  same  line  as  our  Lord's.  And  all  this  referred  to  the  Old  Testament  only. 
To  our  Lord  and  His  disciples  it  is  truth.  "  Thy  word  is  truth."  5.  And  in 
xvi.  13  our  Lord  shows  how  the  word  is  "truth,"  and  gives  the  basis  of  our 
belief  in  the  New  Testament  as  a  divine  revelation.  "  When  He,  the  Spirit  of 
truth,  is  come,  He  will  guide  you  into  all  truth  :  .  .  .  whatsoever  He  shall  Lear, 
that  shall  He  speak  :  and  He  will  show  you  things  to  come."  Scripture,  as 
to  its  substance,  is  God-given,  although  in  its  form  it  was  necessarily  human. 
Only, — the  human  promulgators  or  heralds  of  the  word  were  divinely  guided  into 
"  all  truth."  The  Old  Testament  stands  on  the  same  basis  as  the  New ;  "  for 
the  prophecy  (teaching)  came  not  in  old  time  by  the  will  of  man ;  but  holy  men 
of  God  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost." 

II.  God's  faithfulness  a  foundation  for  the  truth  of  His  word. — 1.  Would 
God  leave  us  with  an  ambiguous  and  perhaps  erring  presentment  of  His  mind 
and  will  1  When  we  look  for  bread,  will  He  give  us  a  stone,  or  the  wheat  of 
His  truth  so  mixed  up  with  the  poison  of  error  that  we  do  not  discover  it,  and  go 
on  eating  until  the  skilful  analysts  come  along  and  warn  us  of  our  danger — all 
disagreeing  among  themselves  meanwhile  as  to  the  nature  and  proportion  of  the 
poison  ?  2.  Our  brethren  for  many  a  century  have  been  fed  on  this  Avord  ;  and 
the  more  heartily  they  partook  of  it,  so  much  more  did  they  grow  in  spiritual 
strength.  Many  of  them  from  childhood  knew  "  the  Holy  Scriptures,  which  are 
able  to  make  men  wise  unto  salvation,  through  faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus." 
3.  We  believe  this  is  the  experience  of  many  still,  who  will  decline  to  accept 
this  critically  refined  and  desiccated  production  offered  by  modern  critics  as  the 
pure  wheat  of  the  word.  We  shall  be  inclined  rather  to  acquire  for  our 
spiritual  nourishment  that  commended  by  our  Lord  as  "  truth,"  and  by  the 
apostle  as  "  able  to  make  us  wise,"  etc.,  believing  that  the  concentrated  essence 
offered  by  the  critics  is  not  spiritually  nourishing,  and  will,  like  many  other 
patents,  have  its  day,  and  then  pass  away  into  merited  oblivion.  4.  The 
Admiralty,  and  those  in  the  department  responsible  for  the  direction  of  the 
navigation  of  our  great  navy  and  mercantile  marine,  issue  charts  of  all  the  oceans 
that  are  so  nearly  absolutely  correct  that  seamen,  steering  faithfully  by  them, 
will  pass  safely  over  seas  they  have  never  traversed  before.  It  may  sometimes 
nappen  that  a  reef,  hitherto  unnoticed,  causes  disaster ;  but  then  it  is  immediately 
noted,  and  of  .course  new  reefs  and  rocks  are  continually  rising  here  and  there 
through  the  labours  of  the  coral  insects,  or  the  upheavals  of  volcanic  forces. 
On  the  whole,  however,  those  navigation  charts  are  wonderfully  exact,  and  they 
are  founded  not  alone  on  actual  patient  investigation  of  seas  and  shores, 
but  on  the  movements  of  the  unerring  heavenly  bodies,  whereby  the  exact 
latitude  and  longitude  of  every  point  on  the  trackless  waste  of  waters  can  be 
determined.  5.  But  what  should  we  think  of  those  officials  who,  with  all  the 
astronomical  calculations  and  results  of  navigation  before  them  (and  our  nation 
depends  more  on  those  specialists  perhaps  than  even  on  its  greatest  statesmen), 
should  issue  charts  with  the  leading  routes  and  ports,  and  some  of  the  dangerous 
spots  marked,  it  may  be,  yet  at  the  same  time  with  so  much  omitted  that 
should  be  known,  and  so  many  errors  left  uncorrected,  that  the  navigator  would 
be  in  danger  night  and  day  ?  And  shall  we  think  it  possible  that  the  almighty 
and  omniscient  One  should,  when  giving  a  revelation  of  His  mind  and  will,  so 
permit  truth  and  error  to  be  mixed  up  that  the  wayfaring  man  should  need  a 
specialist  at  his  elbow  to  help  him  to  discriminate  between  them — nay,  that 
the  truth  and  error  should  be  so  mingled  that  even  the  specialists  (the  critics)  are 
not  agreed  among  themselves  where  the  one  begins  and  the  other  ends  1  6.  No ; 
some  of  us  are  still  old-fashioned  enough  to  believe  that  God  has  spoken  to  us  in 
His  word,  and  that  "  His  word  is  truth."  It  is  true  we  cannot  comprehend  it 
all ;  for  the  human  cannot  entirely  apprehend  the  divine.     But  what  is  necessary 

486 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.       chap.  xvii. 


for  the  practical  and  spiritual  life  we  can  know;  and  the  Spirit  has  been 
promised  to  guide  us  into  all  truth.  It  is  true,  also,  there  are  difficulties,  and 
seeming  discrepancies  in  its  pages ;  but  as  many  of  these  have  been  cleared  away 
in  the  past,  so  the  future  will  see  more  removed.*  And  if  there  are  statements 
and  facts  which  seem  to  clash  with  the  moral  government  and  love  of  the  divine 
Father ;  so  there  are  in  the  works  of  nature,  and  we  do  not  deny  that  nature  is 
the  workmanship  of  His  divine  hand.  We  see  things  with  our  purblind  human 
intelligence.  To  realise  the  divine  thought  we  must  rise  to  the  divine  standard  ■ 
and  we  believe  that  in  days  to  come  it  will  be  as  in  days  gone  by.  The  fashions 
and  modes  of  thought  among  men  will  change  and  fluctuate ;  but  the  word  of 
God,  as  it  has  done  through  centuries  of  trial  in  the  past,  will  in  the  future  shine 
only  with  clearer  lustre  as  the  truth,  when  the  clouds  of  conflict  clear  away, — "  a 
light  shining  in  a  dark  place  "  until  the  eternal  day  dawn,  and  the  Day-star,  the 
Sun  of  righteousness,  the  Truth,  the  Light  and  Life  of  men,  shall  be  revealed  to 
uc  in  all  His  glory : — 

"The  works  of  man  inherit,  as  is  just, 
Their  author's  frailty  and  return  to  dust ; 
But  truth  divine  for  ever  stands  secure, 
Its  head  is  guarded  and  its  base  is  sure : 

11  Fix'd  in  the  rolling  flood  of  endless  years, 
The  pillar  of  the  eternal  plan  appears ; 
The  raving  storm  and  dashing  wave  defies, 
Built  by  the  architect  that  built  the  skies." 

Qmp&r. 

Ver.*17.  "  The  Gospel  is  true,  true,  true." — Yes,  let  us  preach  doctrines,  Chris- 
tians !  But  do  you  know  what  paralyses  our  preaching  1  Alas  !  it  is  the  little 
effect  which  those  doctrines  produce  in  many  of  those  who  accept  and  profess 
them.  For  my  part  I  declare  that  it  is  in  regard  to  this  that  my  faith  is  often 
troubled.  When  I  consider  Christianity  itself  in  its  magnificent  unity ;  when  I 
view  the  sublime  truths  of  revelation,  like  to  lofty  mountains  whose  summits  are 
lost  in  the  depths  of  the  heavens ;  when  I  follow  along  the  centuries  the  marvellous 
history  which  begins  in  the  bower  of  Eden,  and  which  is  to  result  in  the  universal 
reign  of  righteousness  and  love  over  a  world  at  peace  ;  when  I  turn  my  gaze  on 
the  adorable  face  of  the  Christ,  on  His  unequalled  holiness,  on  His  love  as  it 
shone  on  Calvary ;  when  I  hear  the  word  that  comes  from  His  lips  with  the 
accent  of  an  authority  that  is  divine, — then  I  believe,  I  adore,  and  cry  like 
Felix  Neff,  when  dying,  "  The  Gospel  is  true,  true,  true ! "  But  what  often 
troubles  me  is  the  life  of  those  who  call  themselves  Christians.  How  shall  we 
believe  that  these  doctrines  are  efficacious,  when  those,  who  for.  twenty  or  thirty 
years  have  embraced  them  and  profess  them,  are  the  same  to-day  as  they  were 
then — when  a  bitter  or  narrow  spirit  animates  them — when  from  their  lips  there 
fall  unmerciful  judgments  of  their  brethren?  How  shall  we  believe  it,  when 
the  most  pressing  appeals  of  charity  hardly  succeed  in  moving  them,  and  only  win 
what  remains  over  from  what  self,  vanity,  and  the  desire  to  make  a  show  have 
sacrificed  to  the  world  ?  How  shall  we  believe  it,  when  we  see  those  who  demand 
faithful  preaching,  that  we  should  speak  of  a  Holy  God,  of  sin,  of  life  and  death 
eternal,  plunging  into  the  whirlpool  of  the  world,  and  astonishing  us  by  their 
levity ;  when  sudden  falls  or  secret  licentiousness  come  to  light  to  humiliate  the 
Church  and  cause  rejoicing  to  the  worldly-minded  1     How  shall  we  believe  it, 

*  These  may  be  trivial  blemishes  caused  by  want  of  care  on  the  part  of  scribe  or  copyist,  or 
printer  even.  But  all  these  petty  variations  alter  in  no  whit  the  general  meaning  of  any 
passage  or  portion,  or  make  the  divine  plan  of  salvation  less  clear. 

487 


chap.  xvii.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


when  in  business  matters  an  external  appearance  of  piety  covers  the  unhand- 
someness  of  the  behaviour,  the  want  of  scruple  and  honesty;  so  that  toward 
religious  talk  by  such  people  just  men  sometimes  exhibit  an  instinctive  mistrust  ? 
See,  my  brethren,  what  often  makes  men  sceptics ;  see  in  this  what  makes  our 
preaching  weak,  and  strikes  dead  our  endeavours  and  apologies ;  see  in  this 
that  which  destroys  souls,  which  would  destroy  the  Church,  if  the  Church  could 
be  destroyed.  Ah  !  may  such  thought  fill  our  minds  with  salutary  fear.  May  we 
all,  humbled  and  repentant,  beat  on  our  breasts,  and  remember  that,  if  the  truth 
which  we  believe  does  not  change  our  hearts  and  transform  our  lives,  it  will  at 
the  last  rise  up  to  condemn  us. — Translated  from  Eugene  Bersier. 

Vers.  19-21.  Sanctijication  through  the  truth  the  source  of  human  peace  and 
unity. — That  the  spirit  of  the  present  age  is  materialistic  is  shown  by  the  attitude 
many  have  assumed  toward  religion.  The  Truth  has  been  assumed  to  be  unneces- 
sary to  fit  the  individual  for  the  work  of  life.  The  cry  has  been  on  the  lips  of 
many  so-called  reformers  for  a  secular  education,  from  which  Christianity  should 
be  excluded.  Give  children  a  good  secular  training  in  the  schools  of  the  country, 
oust  religious  teaching  altogether,  or  thrust  it  into  a  corner.  The  latter  has  been 
the  course  adopted  in  many  places  in  our  own  country ;  and  the  result  of  more 
than  twenty  years'  experience  has  not  been  reassuring.  Thoughtful  men  of  all 
Churches  and  classes  are  beginning  to  see  the  necessity  of  putting  the  Bible  into 
its  former  position  in  our  public  schools,  and  of  teaching  the  young  the  broad 
catholic  truths  of  that  Christianity  which  the  nation  professes. 

I.  The  neglect  of  the  religious  training  of  the  young  is  a  sign  of  the 
practical  materialism  of  the  age,  and  a  national  danger. — 1.  When  that 
covetousness  of  material  things  "  which  is  idolatry  "  becomes  the  ruling  spirit  of 
a  community,  it  will  speedily  attempt  to  get  rid  of  whatever  conflicts  with  it. 
It  is  impossible  to  serve  God  and  Mammon ;  and  when  Mammon  is  worshipped 
God  is  contemned  and  for  the  time  forgotten.  2.  Mammon- worshippers  there- 
fore see  no  need  to  train  their  children  to  religious  service.  A  thorough  training 
for  this  life  seems  sufficient.  Therefore  religious  training  is  to  be  excluded  from 
the  public  schools.  And  does  the  end  answer  the  expectation  1  Do  the  children 
thus  trained  without  religion  succeed  even  in  this  life  ?  3.  An  instructive  example 
has  come  to  us  from  Victoria.  During  the  years  of  apparent  prosperity  and 
Mammon-worship,  when  people  "  took  their  ease,  ate,  drank,  and  were  merry  " 
(Luke  xii.  19) ;  men  not  only  seemed  to  forget  that  God  and  eternity  were  around 
them,  they  appeared  to  think  it  possible  to  live  and  thrive  without  much  regard 
for  man's  chief  good,  i.e.  God.  "  They  went  to  the  disgraceful  extreme  of 
removing  the  name  of  Christ  from  the  school-books,"  rendering  anything  like 
moral  training  impossible ;  for  all  reference  to  the  Christian  sanction  of  morals 
was  forbidden,  and  nothing  was  put  in  its  place.  4.  And  what  was  the  con- 
sequence 1  A  practical  scepticism  became  largely  prevalent.  During  this  period 
of  a  godless  education,  whilst  the  population  increased  32*24  per  cent.,  arrests  for 
serious  crime  increased  54  per  cent.  The  increase  of  native-born  Victorians  was 
(during  a  decade)  42*94  per  cent.,  but  the  increase  of  crime  among  them  reached 
the  appalling  figure  of  8865  per  cent.,  and  the  increase  of  arrests  for  drunkenness 
63*19  per  cent.  "And  the  great  increase  of  crime  comes  from  those  under 
twenty -one"  (Professor  Harper,  British  Weekly,  January  18,  1894).  Well  might 
those  Victorians  pray  to  be  delivered  from  the  worship  of  Mammon,  which  even 
in  this  life  leads  to  such  disastrous  results  ;  and  religious  people  are  regarding  the 
commercial  catastrophe  which  has  overtaken  the  colony  as  a  blessing  in  disguise. 
Well  might  the  more  earnest  people  among  these  colonists,  and  all  who  have  the 
welfare  of  humanity  at  heart,  breathe  for  their  brethren  the  Saviour's  prayer, 
"  Sanctify  them  through  Thy  truth :  Thy  word  is  truth."     The  bitter  experience 

488 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xvil. 


of  failure  has  led  the  legislature  to  resolve  to  replace  the  name  of  Christ,  etc., 
in  all  the  school-books  of  the  colony. 

II.  The  only  hope  for  the  elevation  and  peace  of  humanity  is  their  sanctifl- 
cation — their  consecration  to  God  through  His  truth. — 1.  When  men  acLpt 
practical  heathenism  as  their  creed  they  must  not  be  surprised  if  the  abomina- 
tions of  heathenism  appear  in  their  immediate  surroundings.  Divorce  Christianity 
and  education,  and  the  result  will  infallibly  be  evil.  When  education  has  no 
moral  and  religious  basis,  it  is  a  house  founded  on  sand.  Divorce  religion  and 
national  life,  and  the  way  is  opened  for  corruption  and  dishonesty,  not  only  in  the 
central  government,  but  in  every  phase  of  the  nation's  life.  A  religious  people, 
which  considers  religion  a  prime  necessity,  will  tolerate  no  rule  founded  on  un- 
righteousness or  mere  expediency.  And  such  a  people  will  be  truly  strong  and 
prosperous.  "  Happy  is  that  people  which  is  in  such  a  case ;  yea,  happy  is  that 
people  whose  God  is  the  Lord"  (Ps.  cxliv.  15).  2.  Let  those  then  who  are  bent 
on  secularising  the  state,  on  divorcing  religion  from  national  life,  consider 
whether  the  results  of  the  experiment,  as  given  in  history,  warrant  any  hope  of 
blessing  from  such  a  source.  Consecration  to  the  service  of  God  through  the 
truth,  and  thus  submission  to  the  rule  of  Christ,  is  the  true  panacea  for  the  world's 
evils.     3.  Is  it  unity  and  fellowship  between  man  and  man  that  is  desired — 

"  When  man  to  man  the  warld  o'er 
Shall  brithers  be  for  a'  that  "  ? 

Robert  Burns. 

Then  that  which  is  a  dream  of  the  socialist's  creed,  and  could  never  be  anything 
more  if  it  depended  only  on  that  system  of  covetousness  and  selfishness,  individual- 
istic or  collectivist,  can  be  realised  in  union  with  Christ.  And  the  more  men  are 
transformed  into  Christ's  likeness,  the  nearer  will  the  realisation  of  such  a  unity 
be.  Is  it  peace  on  earth  men  desire?  Then  they  may  rejoice ;  for  Christ's 
kingdom  is  the  kingdom  of  peace.  And  it  will  be  when  men  are  sanctified  by  His 
truth  that  they  shall  "  beat  their  swords  into  ploughshares,  and  their  spears 
into  pruning-hooks "  (Isa.  ii.  4).  Is  it  help  for  the  wretched,  food  for  the 
hungry,  labour  for  the  strong  and  skilful,  enough  and  to  spare  for  all  ?  Then 
men  may  legislate  as  they  will,  and  legislate  till  doomsday,  if  they  legislate  in 
the  spirit  of  covetousness ;  if  they  labour  for  the  sake  of  mere  class  interests, 
regardless  of  the  interests  of  their  fellow- workers,  and  the  interests  of  their 
fellows  as  a  whole,  they  will  in  the  end  fail.  "  Christ  in  the  employer  and 
Christ  in  the  employed  "  is  the  true  solution  of  all  these  evils.  "  Love  born  of 
the  love  of  the  indwelling  Christ  will  always  inspire  right  treatment  of  the 
neighbour"  (Homiletic  Review,  January  1894). 

Yers.  20,  21.  Christian  unity. — The  unity  for  which  Christ  prayed  by  its 
manifestation  leads  to  the  glory  of  God,  through  the  walk  and  conversation  of 
Christ's  true  disciples.  The  world  will  know  Christ  in  His  people,  will  be  con- 
vinced that  only  union  with  Him  can  make  them  lights  of  the  world.  And  even 
in  this  period  of  the  Church's  obscuration,  when  the  Church's  light  is  dimmed  by 
the  veil  of  sect  or  party,  "  the  glory  of  the  Lord  "  is  seen  shining  through  it. 

I.  The  Church  of  Christ  should  be  the  centre  of  Christian  unity. — 1.  The 
influence  of  this  spirit  of  unity  and  the  manner  of  its  working  are  beautifully 
expressed  in  Ps.  cxxxiii.  True  Christian  unity  is  like  the  precious  fragrant  oil 
used  for  anointing  Israel's  high  priest.  Flowing  down  from  the  head,  it  sanctifies 
the  whole  man.  It  is  like  the  dew  of  Hermon,  which  saturates  the  air  with 
refreshing  moisture,  which  is  wafted  by  genial  airs  even  to  the  lower  hills. 
2.  The  first  has  a  personal  reference — the  anointing  of  the  spirit  sanctifies  the 
whole  man.  The  second  refers  to  the  collective  and  universal  effects  of  the 
unity   of   believers.     As   the   dews   distilled   on  Hermon  bless  also   the  lower 

489 


chap.  xvii.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


heights  of  Zion,  so  this  spiritual  unity  exists  not  only  on  the  high  summits  of 
spiritual  and  religious  life,  but  descends  to  the  lower  ranges  of  men's  experience 
— their  governments,  their  political,  social,  commercial,  and  industrial  interests — 
to  every  member  of  the  common-weal,  refreshing  and  quickening  all.  This  is 
what  would  happen  if  everywhere  brethren  dwelt  together  in  unity  in  the  spirit 
of  Jesus.  3.  This  unity  of  Christians  should  not  remain  an  ideal.  It  is 
intended  to  be  translated  into  fact,  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  the  apostolic  Church 
(Acts  ii.  41-47).  So  it  should  be  now.  True,  the  small  company  has  increased 
and  is  scattered  abroad.  Men  cannot  now  have  "  all  things  in  common."  But 
that  was  not  the  essential  of  their  unity.  It  was  their  continuance  in  fellow- 
ship and  doctrine  and  prayer.  This  would  bring  to  us  now  more  unity — not 
uniformity.  How  few  were  the  articles  of  their  creed  compared  with  our  cum- 
brous symbols !  Where  such  union  and  fellowship  exist  they  bring  to  those 
influenced  by  them  priestly  beauty  of  character,  priestly  honour  as  called  to  be 
fellow-workers  with  Christ,  priestly  blessedness  in  the  sense  of  oneness  with  God 
in  Christ.  Thus  Christ's  disciples  show  forth  His  glory,  so  that  the  world  may 
believe  and  know  that  He  is  the  Sent  of  God. 

II.  The  blessed  effects  of  this  unity  are  widespread. — 1.  They  are  seen  in  all 
who  "  dwell  together  in  unity."  The  active  life  is  penetrated  and  quickened  by 
its  spirit.  It  binds  the  most  distant  units  of  the  spiritual  family  to  one  another 
and  to  their  head.  It  should  come  with  blessing  in  all  life's  activity — politics, 
business,  pleasure,  etc.,  for  these  affect  our  brethren's  weal.  Christ's  kingdom  is 
not  of  the  world,  but  in  it.  It  is  intended  to  bless  the  world.  2.  The  art  of 
government  and  the  business  of  life  should  not  be  ruled  by  expediency,  or  made 
the  sport  of  envy,  strife,  malice,  and  every  passion.  Christian  unity  should 
quicken  into  a  richer,  fuller  activity  every  occupation  and  work  of  men.  If  all 
these  were  engaged  in  in  the  spirit  of  Christian  unity  Christ  would  be  glorified. 
3.  Alas !  how  far  is  it  otherwise  :  party  jealousies,  labour  disputes,  Church 
divisions,  destroy  it.  Hence  men  are  looking  in  other  directions  for  unity — 
socialism,  communism,  etc.,  by  which  paths  only  greater  disunion  can  be 
reached. 

III.  What  can  be  done  to  realise  fully  this  oneness  for  which  Christ  prayed  ? 
— 1.  Christians  must  seek  to  realise,  and  act  on  the  realisation,  that  amid  much 
outward  diversity  the  true  fellowship  of  saints  may  exist,  that  unity  does  not 
mean  uniformity  (1  Cor.  xii.  4,  5).  Why  should  there  not  be  between  the 
various  communities,  of  reformed  Christians  at  least,  not  only  mutual  regard, 
but  mutual  helpfulness  in  consecrated  activity  ?  It  is  not  fundamental  principle 
that  separates  them,  but  opinions  which  are  not  of  the  essence  of  Christianity. 
Diversity  is  not  always  a  blemish.  It  is  a  feature  of  nature  :  why  not  of  God's 
spiritual  creation  ?  2.  The  Church  is  likened  in  Old  Testament  allegory  to  an 
Eastern  garden.  In  such  a  garden  there  is  the  widest  diversity;  but  that 
detracts  neither  from  its  beauty  nor  its  usefulness.  It  would  not  be  well  to  have 
nothing  in  the  garden  but  roses  or  lilies,  or  any  single  flower.  It  will  be  a 
greater  delight  to  the  owner  to  have  it  as  an  orchard  of  pomegranates,  with 
pleasant  fruits  ;  camphire,  with  spikenard  and  saffron  ;  calamus  and  cinnamon, 
with  all  trees  of  frankincense  ;  myrrh  and  aloes,  with  all  the  chief  spices  (Song 
of  Songs  iv.  13,  14).  Each  has  its  place,  and  the  garden  is  richer  and  more 
beautiful  for  the  diversity.  3.  Thus  the  Lord  may  see  it  good  to  have  variety 
in  His  spiritual  garden,  the  Church.  As  the  plants  and  trees  do  not  envy  or 
grieve  at  each  other  in  the  garden,  but  each  fulfils  its  own  place  and  function, 
watered  by  the  same  dews  and  rains,  and  blessed  with  the  same  light  and  heat 
rays,  so  should  it  be  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  to  the  glory  and  praise  of  God. 
Where  brethren  dwell  in  unity  of  love  and  service,  and  inspired  by  the  same 
blessed  Spirit,  working  together  for  Christ's  glory,  then  the  barren  and  thirsty 

490 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.       chap.  xvil. 


tracts  of  life  are  refreshed  by  copious  dews  of  spiritual  blessing.  4.  And  the 
glory  of  the  Church  will  be  manifested  to  the  world,  proving  a  centre  of 
attraction  for  all  men,  so  that  "  the  Gentiles  shall  come  to  her  light  and  kings 
to  the  brightness  of  her  rising." 

Vers.  20-23.  Christ's  prayer  for  the  unity  of  His  Church. — It  is  impossible  to 
read  these  words  and  yet  think  of  the  Speaker  as  merely  human.  He  speaks  of 
a  glory  which  was  His  before  all  worlds ;  but  His  utterances  are  marked  by  such 
conscious  dignity  that,  taken  in  connection  with  His  life  and  works,  they  come 
home  with  the  force  of  truth  to  the  mind.  It  is  vain  for  men  to  seek  to 
explain  away  such  utterances.  They  refuse  to  yield  to  such  treatment.  They 
are  as  clear  and  distinct  in  their  meaning  to-day  as  when  they  were  first 
spoken,  and  they  reveal  the  glory  of  Him  who  spoke. 

I.  How  this  prayer  has  been  answered. — 1.  It  did  not  seem  likely  when  these 
petitions  were  presented  that  an  answer  would  speedily  come.  How  widespread 
is  the  belief,  even  beyond  the  bounds  of  Christendom,  that  Christ  was  a 
heavenly  messenger !  That  name,  once  despised,  is  now  honoured  worldwide. 
The  cross  of  Christ,  the  symbol  of  shame,  has  become  the  centre  of  the  world's 
spiritual  life,  the  rallying-point  of  what  is  noble,  good,  and  true.  Men  of 
divers  nationalities,  various  ranks,  even  of  non- Christian  ideas,  have  conspired 
to  honour  it. 

"  In  the  cross  of  Christ  I  glory, 

Towering  o'er  the  wrecks  of  time  ; 
All  the  light  of  sacred  story 

Gathers  round  its  head  sublime." 

Bowring. 

2.  Not  by  force  of  arms,  fascination  of  ritual,  glamour  of  learning  and 
philosophy,  has  the  gospel,  whose  chief  expression  is  the  cross  of  shame,  entered 
into  human  life  and  transformed  it ;  but  by  its  own  inherent  power,  warring 
only  against  sin,  the  gospel  has  lifted  human  life  to  higher  levels,  working  moral 
miracles,  glorifying  everyday  existence.  3.  So  doing  it  has  crowned  Christ  Himself 
with  a  glory  that  is  growing  in  ever-increasing  brightness,  and  which  will  grow 
whilst  men  have  hearts  to  love  Him  and  tongues  to  sing  His  praise.  But  it  is 
not  yet  perfected ;  for  it  is  manifested  on  earth  among  men,  and  therefore  must  be 
imperfect  so  far.  For  the  chief,  or  one  of  the  chief,  elements  of  this  glory  is  the 
unity  of  Christ's  people  in  Him.  4.  It  should  then  be  one  of  the  chief  motives 
of  Christians  to  exhibit  that  glory  in  their  unity.  Yet  what  seems  most  striking 
in  view  of  the  Christian  Church  is  rather  diversity  than  unity.  It  is  the  want 
of  it  that  greatly  retards  the  progress  of  Christian  truth,  that  dwarfs  and 
minimises  the  output  of  Christian  energy  and  effort.  5.  It  does  exist  to 
some  extent — it  is  not  necessarily  co-extensive  with  outward  unity.  It  flows 
from  a  spiritual  affinity  which  may  exist  under  diverse  forms.  But  outward  dis- 
union is  too  frequently  indicative  of  inward  disunion,  for  unity  of  action  is  often 
entirely  lacking.  The  Christian  Churches  are  not  all  like  divisions  of  one  great 
army  under  one  head,  but  are  often  rather  like  contending  factions.  And  effort 
misdirected  by  sectarian  jealousy  makes  often  one  part  of  the  vast  field  of  the 
world  like  Gideon's  fleece  when  wet  with  dew,  whilst  all  around  stretches  a  dry 
and  barren  land.  How,  then,  shall  Christ's  prayer  for  His  Church  be  answered  1 
What  is  the  nature  of  Christian  unity  1  how  is  it  to  be  attained  ? 

II.  Christian  unity  is  the  result  of  a  peculiar  unity  of  relationship. — 1.  It 
does  not  arrive  by  external  force.  It  is  produced  by  an  affinity  of  spiritual  life 
in  the  persons  united.  Mere  human  relationship  or  proximity  does  not  of  it- 
self lead  to  unity  of  sentiment  or  action.  A  man's  foes  are  sometimes  those  of 
his  own  household.     But  those  united  spiritually  in  Christ,  however  diverse  in 

491 


chap.  xvii.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


outward  circumstances  or  tastes,  can  live  in  harmony.  They  are  partakers  of 
the  same  Spirit.  The  Spirit  given  without  measure  to  Jesus  works  in  their 
hearts.  A  unity  of  disposition  is  attained  to  in  Christ,  and  leads  to  unity  of 
action.  This  will  be  seen  in  the  hatred  of  sin  and  striving  against  it — zeal  for 
the  divine  glory,  etc.,  whether  they  eat  or  drink,  etc.  2.  Thus  they  are  brought 
into  a  peculiar  relationship  with  Christ  and  the  Father.  God  is  in  a  special 
sense  the  Father  of  all  who  believe.  They  are  the  children  of  God  through  Jesus 
Christ.  But  though  this  relationship  of  the  redeemed  to  the  Father  is  like  that 
of  Christ  to  the  Father,  it  is  also  widely  different  in  degree  at  least.  Christians 
who  are  united  to  Christ  become  childlike  in  their  love  and  obedience  to  the 
Father.  Yet  even  in  this  sense  of  sonship — not  to  speak  of  the  essential  oneness 
of  nature  of  the  divine  Son  with  the  Father — they  lag  far  behind  Him,  with 
whom  in  all  things  the  Father  was  well  pleased.  3.  Still,  there  exists,  as  will 
be  seen,  a  peculiar  unity  of  relationship,  between  God  and  His  redeemed  children, 
which  does  not  exist  between  Him  and  other  men,  and  which  lifts  the  life  of  the 
redeemed  into  closer  unity  with  Him.  4.  And  this  has  a  vital  effect  on  the 
relations  of  believers  to  each  other.  They  become  one  as  Christ  and  the  Father 
are  one.  With  one  aim  before  them,  the  glory  of  God  and  the  divine  vision,  and 
a  constant  striving  after  that  perfection  to  which  they  are  called,  there  is  pro- 
duced, above  all,  a  deeper  union  than  any  that  is  merely  human,  and  an  anticipation 
of  eternal  communion  hereafter. 

III.  How  do  believers  attain  to  this  union? — 1.  The  answer  is  brief  and 
simple— faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  uniting  them  to  Him  as  branches  of  the  living 
vine.  Thus  His  life  flows  into  their  souls,  and  that  renewal  of  the  nature  in  His 
likeness  is  produced  on  the  basis  of  this  union.  2.  True  faith  which  brings 
salvation  leads  to  a  change  in  the  life  of  men  which  cannot  be  mistaken,  and 
they  show  evidences  of  the  presence  in  them  of  that  germ  of  new  life  which  is  the 
earnest  of  life  eternal.  They  know  the  regenerating  power  of  Christ's  gospel, 
through  which  the  current  of  their  being  has  been  changed.  It  is  when  men 
enter  through  faith  into  union  with  Christ  and  become  members  of  His  mystical 
body  that  they  become  one  in  Him  with  the  Father  (ver.  21).  It  is  in  this 
heavenly  relationship  that  believers  are  bound  by  a  common  love  and  common 
interests.  This  will  show  that  they  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  Christ  is  not 
of  the  world.  They  will  rejoice  in  the  companionship  of  all  who  are  likeminded 
with  themselves.  And  one  chief  proof  of  their  having  passed  from  death  to  life, 
and  thus  entered  into  their  eternal  fellowship,  will  be  their  love  of  the  brethren 
(1  John  iii.  14). 

IV.  This  unity  can  only  be  attained  to  in  part  on  earth.— 1.  There  will 
always  be  something  to  mar  the  harmony  that  should  exist  even  among  those 
filled  with  the  same  spirit,  prompted  by  the  same  motives,  swayed  by  the  same 
impulses.  This  is  caused  by  the  presence  of  sin,  the  great  disturbing  element, 
producing  disunion  and  consequent  weakness.  The  "  old  man  "  is  not  entirely 
subjugated,  the  "  new  man  "  is  not  yet  perfected.  2.  But  the  Church  of  Christ 
should  ever  keep  this  goal  in  view.  It  should  ever  seek  to  be  more  catholic. 
The  motto  of  sincere  Christians  should  be  :  "  In  essentials  unity ;  in  non- 
essentials tolerance  j  in  all  things  charity."  It  is  a  hopeful  sign  that  men  do 
not  so  readily  assemble  now  at  the  beat  of  the  "  drum  ecclesiastic."  The  more 
Christians  realise  the  prophetic  vision  of  the  great  multitude  which  "  no  man 
can  number  "  (Rev.  vii  9),  who  with  united  voice  praise  God  and  the  Lamb,  the 
more  they  will  be  ashamed  of  strifes  and  divisions.  And  although  union  cannot 
be  perfected  here,  it  must  be  begun  here,  and  ought  to  grow  toward  perf ectness. 
3.  Unity  with  Christ  must  be  first  assured :  unless  we  are  one  in  Him,  we  are  not 
included  in  this  petition  for  His  Church.  But  the  closer  our  union  with  Him, 
the  more  sincere  our  hatred  of  sin,  the  more  ardent  our  imitation  of  Him,  the 

492 


HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.       chap.  xvii. 


closer  will  be  our  union  one  with  another.  4.  Then  shall  our  relations  to 
our  brethren  in  Christ  be  more  harmonious,  we  shall  learn  to  bear  one  another's 
burdens,  and  so  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ.  The  strong  will  bear  with  the  infirmities 
of  the  weak;  and  generally  the  relations  of  all  believers  to  their  Christian 
brethren,  and  to  those  without,  will  be  animated  by  the  spirit  of  Christian  love, 
which  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  3.   The  essence  of  life  eternal. 
Still,  still  with  Thee— when  purple  morning 
breaketh, 
When  the  bird  waketh,  and  the  shadows 
flee  ; 
Fairer  than  morning,  lovelier  than  the  dawn- 
ing 
Dawns  the  sweet  consciousness,  I  am  with 

Thee! 

Still,  still  with  Thee  !  as  to  each  new-born 
morning 
A  fresh  and  solemn  splendour  still  is  given, 
So  does  the  blessed  consciousness  awaking 
Breathe,  each  day,  nearness  unto  Thee  and 
heaven. 

When   sinks  the   soul,   subdued  by  toil,  to 
slumber, 
Its  closing  eye  looks  up  to  Thee  in  prayer ; 
Sweet  the  repose  beneath  Thy  wings  o'er- 
shading, 
But  sweeter  still  to  wake  and  find  Thee 
there. 

So  shall  it  be  at  last,  in  that  bright  morning, 
When  the  soul  waketh,  and  life's  shadows 
flee ; 
Oh  in  that  hour,  fairer  than  daylight  dawn- 
ing, 
Shall  rise  the  glorious  thought,  I  am  with 
Thee. 

Harriet  Beecher  Stowe,  1867. 

Ver.  15.  Patience  vnder  trial. — To  be  kept 
in  the  world  and  kept  from  its  evil  means, 
to  suffer  under  its  trials  and  to  be  preserved 
from  impatience.  If  a  man  would  escape 
trial,  he  must  needs  go  out  of  the  world, 
and  when  Christ  prayed  that  His  disciples 
should  be  kept  in  it,  He  knew  that  they  were 
to  suffer  affliction.  "  In  the  world  ye  shall 
have  tribulation."  Moral  distinctions  are 
not  observed  in  the  providential  allotment 
of  calamity.  Famine,  pestilence,  shipwreck, 
and  death  in  every  shape,  light  upon  those 
who  are  God's  servants,  when  they  are 
hastening  on  His  errands.  This  stumbles 
many.  But  only  consider.  If  God  were  to 
adopt  another  plan,  and  exempt  His  friends 
from  trial,  He  would  antedate  the  day  of 
judgment.       He    would    take    away    from 


Christians  one  of  the  most  effective  means 
of  their  training,  and  one  of  the  most 
striking  ways  in  which  they  can  prove  their 
likeness  to  Christ.  The  righteous  is  more 
excellent  than  his  neighbour,  but  it  is  not 
seen  in  his  being  saved  from  suffering  ;  it  is 
in  the  way  in  which  he  meets  it.  A  merely 
worldly  spirit  is  ready  in  severe  affliction  to 
fall  into  one  of  two  extremes, — either  to  cast 
the  trial  aside  in  levity,  and  to  dissipate 
thought  by  some  engrossing  preoccupation  ; 
or  to  sink  into  despondency,  and  consider  all 
as  lost.  The  spirit  of  the  Christian,  which 
is  also  that  of  the  true  man,  is  described  by 
the  apostle  :  "  Not  to  despise  the  chastening 
of  the  Lord,  nor  to  faint  when  we  are 
rebuked  of  Him." — Dr.  John  Ker. 

Ver.  15.  The  world  is  full  of  danger. — 
"  Behold,"  said  Christ,  "  I  send  you  forth  as 
sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves."  He  spoke 
then,  of  course,  of  the  persecutions  that 
were  lying  ready  to  His  people,  but  His 
words  are  as  true  of  the  moral  and  spiritual 
dangers  that  lurk  to-day  in  every  corner  of 
God's  universe  for  our  souls.  The  world  is 
a  very  cruel  place  for  character.  We  cannot 
live  in  it  long  without  finding  that  out,  how 
terribly  cruel  a  place  the  world  is.  Now  in 
this  respect  one  does  not  need  to  speak  only 
of  presumptuous  temptations  which  abound 
in  it.  It  is  enough  to  remind  ourselves  of 
how  morally  exhausting  our  ordinary  life 
is.  To  live  in  the  present  day  an  ordinary 
and  average  life  takes  it  out  of  a  man 
tremendously.  The  drain  upon  character 
is  constant  and  tremendous.  If  even  in  that 
simpler  age  in  which  He  came  our  Lord 
warned  His  disciples  of  the  cares  of  this  life, 
how  much  more  warning  do  we  need  whose 
lot  has  fallen  in  this  far  more  complex  time  ! 
The  cares  of  this  life,  innocent  and  legitimate 
as  they  may  be,  are  exhausting,  morally  and 
spiritually  exhausting ;  and  if  we  give  our- 
selves to  them,  taking  no  care  to  provide 
compensation  from  other  sources,  they  are 
bound,  however  gradually,  to  drain  the  life- 
blood  from  our  souls,  and  to  reduce  us 
to  spiritual  death.  That  is  the  case  even 
with  our  honest  work.  There  are  some  men 
who  imagine  that  to  give  up  one's  self  to 
one's  daily  duty,  to  the  profession  one 
has  adopted,  to  the  routine  work  of  every 

493 


chap.  xvii.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


day,  that  that  is  sufficient ;  and  if  a  man 
does  that  he  will  grow.  No,  he  does  not ;  he 
does  not  grow.  If  you  bind  yourselves  over 
hand  and  foot  to  your  work  like  that,  without 
taking  care  to  draw  in  from  other  sources 
compensation,  how  wasted  and  distorted  a 
life  do  you  become !  how  selfish  does  mere 
attention  to  work  and  labour  make  us  !  how 
selfish  do  our  studies  make  us  !  Oh,  how 
necessary  it  is,  in  the  midst  of  this  earthly 
life  that  sucks  in  upon  our  poor  hearts  from 
all  sides,  how  necessary  it  is  to  lay  hold  on 
eternal  life,  to  pull  it  toward  ourselves,  to 
make  our  spiritual  life,  not,  as  we  so  often 
do,  a  mere  pleasure  and  luxury,  but  a 
necessary  and  indispensable  agony.  What 
need  is  there  for  us  all  to  recognise  our 
dangers  in  even  the  purest  walks  of  life,  and 
to  call  in  to  counterbalance  their  effect  all 
the  ready  grace  and  influence  of  the  Holy 
Spirit ! — Prof.  G.  A.  Smith,  from  "  British 
Weekly.,y 

Ver.  15.  Danger  from  unlooked-for  sources. 
— Take  even  the  lovelier  aspects  of  this 
world  in  which  we  are  placed.  The  indul- 
gence of  friends  and  the  praise  of  friends  are 
at  times  the  sweetest  and  most  needed  cups 
of  blessing  that  God  can  lift  to  a  weary  and 
dispirited  man's  lips.  But  how  often  at 
other  times  do  they  inevitably  relax  his  moral 
strenuousness,  and  he  slumbers.  I  say  it  is 
part  of  a  sane  man's  sanity  and  a  vigilant 
man's  vigilance  to  be  on  his  guard  against 
these  daugers  in  the  world,  even  where  the 
world  is  most  innocent. — Idem. 

Ver.  18.  Filial  trust  in  and  submission  to 
God. — This  is  a  duty  incumbent  on  those 
whom  He  adopts  into  His  family ;  the  very 
name  Father  dispels  fear  and  inspires  con- 
fidence ;  and  yet  it  is  but  little  that  the  best 
of  men  who  bear  this  endearing  name  are 
able  to  do  for  us.  In  our  greatest  emer- 
gencies we  should  often  be  left  without 
relief  if  we  had  no  better  father  than  they 
on  whom  to  rely.  But  when  the  great  God 
ranks  us  among  His  children,  what  is  there 
that  we  majT  not  look  for  at  His  hands  ?  In 
whom  shall  we  confide,  if  not  in  such  a 
Father  ?  To  whom  can  we  so  cheerfully 
consign  our  cares  and  entrust  our  interest 
as  to  Him,  who  is  no  less  able  than  He  is 
willing  to  do  for  us  "  exceeding  abundantly 
above  all  that  we  ask  or  think "  ?  His 
promise  is  ever  sure,  that,  "If  men,  being 
evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  their 
children,  much  more  shall  our  Father  who 
is  in  hea\en  give  good  things  to  them  that 
ask  Him  " ;  and,  trusting  in  this  promise,  it 
becomes  us  to  "  be  careful  for  nothing,  but 
in  everything,  by  prayer  and  supplication 
with  thanksgiving,  to  make  our  requests 
known  unto  Him :  and  the  peace  of  God, 
which  passeth  all  understanding,  shall  keep 
our  hearts  and  minds  through  Christ  Jesus." 

494 


Filial  submission  to  the  chastening  of  God 
is  another  duty  incumbent  on  His  children. 
They  know  that  their  severest  afflictions 
come  from  a  Father's  hand,  and  are  sent  to 
them,  not  in  wrath,  but  in  mercy,  as  a 
salutary  discipline  tending  to  their  good. 
This  consideration  is  fitted,  if  anything  be, 
to  reconcile  them  to  the  endurance  of  the 
hardest  trials  ;  for  there  is  an  unanswerable 
force  in  the  apostle's  argument :  "  My  son, 
despise  not  thou  the  chastening  of  the  Lord, 
nor  faint  when  thou  art  rebuked  of  Him: 
for  whom  the  Lord  loveth  He  chasteneth, 
and  scourgeth  every  son  whom  He  receiveth. 
If  ye  endure  chastening,  God  dealeth  with 
you  as  with  sons ;  for  what  son  is  he  whom 
the  father  chasteneth  not  ?  Furthermore 
we  have  had  fathers  of  our  flesh  which 
corrected  us,  and  we  gave  them  reverence : 
shall  we  not  much  rather  be  in  subjection 
unto  the  Father  of  spirits,  and  live?  For 
they  verily  for  a  few  days  chastened  us 
after  their  own  pleasure ;  but  He  for  our 
profit,  that  we  might  be  partakers  of  His 
holiness  "  (Heb.  xii.  5-10).  Further,  we  may 
draw  from  the  thought  of  our  heavenly 
sons  hip  a  powerful  motive  to  abstinence 
from  base  pursuits,  sordid  pleasures,  and 
unworthy  companionships,  and  to  the  main- 
tenance of  a  dignity  of  character  and 
loftiness  of  sentiment  suited  to  our  high 
vocation.  Even  a  heathen  philosopher  could 
thus  argue  :  "  If  any  one  were  duly  affected 
with  the  opinion  that  we  are  all  originally 
descended  from  God  as  our  Father,  he  would 
not,  I  suppose,  conceive  anything  mean 
or  ignoble  concerning  himself.  If  Caesar 
should  adopt  thee,  thou  wouldst  be  greatly 
elated ;  and  if  then  thou  knowest  that  thou 
art  a  son  of  God,  much  more  ought  this  to 
elevate  thy  mind  "  (Epictetus).  To  the  same 
effect  another  learned  heathen  remarks  :  "  It 
is  useful  for  states  that  valiant  men  should 
believe  themselves  to  be  born  of  the  gods, 
although  it  be  false,  in  order  that  their 
minds,  thus  assured  of  their  divine  ex- 
traction, may  the  more  boldly  undertake 
great  enterprises,  pursue  them  the  more 
earnestly,  and  hence  accomplish  them  the 
more  successfully,  from  the  security  and 
confidence  which  this  belief  produces " 
(Varro).  If  heathens  thus  estimated  the 
dignity  of  a  divine  sonship,  it  ought  not 
surely  to  be  less  esteemed  by  those  who  are 
children  of  God  by  faith  in  His  beloved  Son, 
and  "  if  children,  then  heirs — heirs  of  God, 
and  joint  heirs  with  Christ."  It  becomes 
them  to  shrink  from  aught  that  would  be 
disparaging  to  the  character  they  sustain 
and  the  destiny  they  have  in  prospect. 
"  Beloved,"  we  may  say  to  them,  in  the  words 
of  an  apostle,  "beloved,  now  are  we  the 
sons  of  God,  and  it  doth  not  yet  appear 
what  we  shall  be :  but  we  know  that,  when 
He  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like  Him  ;  for 
we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is.    And  every  man 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xvii. 


that  hath  this  hope  in  him  purifieth  himself, 
even  as  He  is  pure "  (1  John  iii.  2,  3). 
Finally,  it  becomes  those  who  are  partakers 
of  the  heavenly  sonship  to  sbow  their  high 
estimation  of  its  preckmsness  by  the  habitual 
gladness  and  cheerfulness  of  disposition 
with  which  the  thought  of  it  is  fitted  to 
inspire  them.  To  "joy  in  God  through  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ"  is  the  duty,  no  less 
than  the  privilege,  of  believers.  And  if  a 
Christian  at  any  time  allows  himself  to  be 
harassed  with  cares,  or  overwhelmed  with 
griefs,  or  cast  down  by  gloomy  and  de- 
sponding imaginations,  he  may  justly  be 
considered  as  walking  unworthily  of  the 
high  vocation  wherewith  he  is  called.  The 
question  put  of  old  to  a  disconsolate  Jewish 
prince  may  with  much  greater  emphasis  be 
put  to  such  a  Christian,  "  Why  art  thou, 
being  the  king's  son,  growing  lean  from  day 
to  day  ? "  (2  Sam.  xiii.  4).  For,  certainly, 
of  all  men  he  has  the  least  excuse  for 
suffering  any  causes  of  disquietude  to  prey 
upon  him,  who  can  call  himself  a  son  of  the 
very  King  of  kings,  and  who  knows  that,  by 
the  gracious  providence  of  His  Father  in 
heaven,  all  things  work  together  for  his 
good.  Whatever  reasons  the  children  of 
God  may  have,  or  think  that  they  have,  at 
any  time  for  being  sorrowful,  they  have 
always  far  greater  reasons  for  being  joyful. 
No  outward  losses  can  rob  them  of  their 
blessed  portion  as  "  heirs  of  God  and  joint 
heirs  with  Christ."  Nor  can  any  of  "the 
sufferings  of  this  present  time  "  be  deemed 
"  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory  that 
shall  be  revealed."  Hence  it  is  a  just  de- 
scription that  is  given  of  them,  "  as  sorrowful, 
yet  always  rejoicing ;  as  poor,  yet  making 
many  rich ;  as  having  nothing,  and  yet 
possessing  all  things,"  and  it  is  a  reasonable 
injunction  that  is  laid  upon  them,  "  Rejoice 
in  the  Lord  alway ;  and  again  I  say,  rejoice." 
— Dr.  T.  J.  Crawford. 

Ver.  18.  Christ's  perfect  self -surrender  our 
example. — Christ's  prayer  for  us  should  be 
our  aim  and  deepest  desire  for  ourselves, 
and  His  declaration  of  the  condition  of  its 
fulfilment  should  prescribe  our  firm  adhesion 
to,  and  constant  abiding  in,  the  truth  as 
revealed  and  embodied  in  Him,  as  the  only 
means  by  which  we  can  attain  the  consecra- 
tion which  is  at  once,  as  the  closing  verses 
of  the  lesson  tell  us,  the  means  by  which  we 
may  fulfil  the  purpose  for  which  we  are 
sent  into  the  world,  and  the  path  on  which 
we  reach  complete  assimilation  to  His  perfect 
self-surrender.  All  Christians  are  sent  into 
the  world  by  Jesus,  as  Jesus  was  sent  by 
the  Father.  We  have  the  charge  to  "  glorify 
Him."  We  have  the  presence  of  the  Sender 
with  us,  the  sent.  We  are  inspired  with 
His  Spirit.  We  cannot  do  His  work  without 
that  entire  consecration  which  shall  copy 
His    devotion    to    the   Father,    and    eager 


swiftness  to  do  His  will.  How  can  such 
ennobling  and  exalted  consecration  be  ours  ? 
There  is  but  one  way.  He  has  "  consecrated 
Himself,"  and  by  union  with  Him,  through 
faith,  our  selfishness  may  be  subdued,  and 
the  Spirit  of  Christ  may  dwell  in  our  hearts, 
to  make  us  "living  sacrifices,  consecrated 
and  acceptable  to  God."  Then  shall  we  be 
"truly  consecrated,"  and  then  alone,  when 
we  can  say,  "  I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ 
liveth  in  me."  That  is  the  end  of  Christ's 
consecration  of  Himself — the  prayer  which 
He  prayed  for  His  disciples — and  should  be 
the  aim  which  every  disciple  earnestly 
pursues. — Dr.  A.  Maclaren. 

Vers.  19-21.  The  direful  results  of  the  neglect 
of  divine  truth. — In  small  communities  like 
ours  it  is  possible,  in  a  very  remarkable  way, 
to  gather  up  the  results  of  social  movements, 
ar.d  in  this  way  the  results  of  the  delirium  of 
the  past  ten  years  have  been  set  forth  for 
our  instruction  in  rather  an  interesting 
fashion.  Some  little  time  ago  the  Bishop  of 
Manchester,  making  use  of  his  experience  in 
Melbourne,  warned  the  English  people  of  the 
moral  dangers  which  secular  education  would 
bring  with  it.  As  a  proof  he  adduced 
statistics  to  show  that  crime,  especially 
juvenile  crime,  had  greatly  increased  in 
Victoria  since  primary  education  was  secu- 
larised. An  admirer  of  the  Birmingham 
system  wrote  to  a  leading  Congregational 
minister  in  Melbourne,  asking  for  a  correc- 
tion of  the  bishop's  figures.  The  checking 
was  done  by  the  Rev.  W.  Savage,  also  a 
Congregational  minister,  and  it  more  than 
verified  all  Dr.  Moorhouse  had  said.  The 
effect  of  the  statement  was  great.  It  killed 
any  remaining  Congregational  opposition  to 
Scripture-reading  in  State  schools,  and 
brought  its  author  into  the  committee  of 
the  National  Scripture  Education  League. 
The  Argus,  too,  took  it  up,  and,  after  careful 
revisal  of  the  figures,  endorsed  them,  at  the 
same  time  raising  a  note  of  alarm.  Nor  are 
any  of  these  results  to  be  w-ondered  at,  for, 
roughly,  the  figures  reveal  that  crime  and 
drunkenness  have  been  increasing,  during  the 
ten  years  from  1881  to  1891,  out  of  all  propor- 
tion to  the  increase  of  population .  [The  lead- 
ing figures  are  given  above,  p.  488.]  .  .  .  And 
the  great  increase  of  crime  comes  from  those 
under  twenty-one.  As  for  the  cause  of  this 
state  of  things  there  was  of  course  the  relax- 
ing influence  of  our  recent  speculative  period, 
one  terribly  destructive  aspect  of  which  was 
the  absence  of  family  religion  and  parental 
control.  Then  men  made  money  quickly 
and  the  drink  bill  went  up.  But  the  most 
potent  cause  has  undoubtedly  been  the  bitter 
secularism  of  the  State  system  of  primary 
education.  As  I  have  stated,  it  went  to  the 
disgraceful  extreme  of  removing  the  name  of 
Christ  from  the  school  books,  etc.  (see  above). 
It  may  perhaps  not  seem  patriotic  to  proclaim 

495 


chap.  xvii.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


the  disgrace  of  these  past  delirious  years,  but 
I  have  done  it  with  two  good  objects.  The  first 
is  to  declare  also  that  the  remedy  will  soon 
be  applied.  The  Scripture  Education  League 
has  taken  votes  of  the  householders  on  the 
question  whether  extracts  from  the  Bible 
should  be  read  in  the  schools,  and  in  almost 
every  locality  ten  have  been  for  it,  one 
against  it.  In  the  last  vote  taken,  a  month 
or  so  ago,  the  majority  was  forty-six  to  one. 
Most  probably  a  plebiscite  upon  the  subject 
will  soon  be  taken,  and  we  may  hope  then 
to  end  this  most  disastrous  experiment.  In 
our  folly  we  cut  up  the  roots  of  moral  life  in 
the  schools,  and  we  have  seen  it  wither 
away.  We  shall  live  to  plant  them  painfully 
again  ;  but  if  our  disasters  enable  us  to  do 
that,  they  will  prove  to  be  blessings,  hardly 
even  in  disguise.  The  second  is  to  warn  the 
religious  people  of  the  old  lands  never  to  let 
the  Bible  out  of  the  primary  schools.  Let  it 
be  read  there,  and  receive  such  a  modicum 
of  explanation  as  will  make  it  intelligible 
as  an  English  classic.  That  will  be  enough. 
In  the  London  School  Board  there  have  been 
very  perilous  discussions  as  to  whether  the 
duty  of  Christ  may  be  taught.  Let  the  Bible 
be  read,  and  teach  what  is  in  it  of  that  and 
other  things.  That  is  the  minimum  which 
should  be  irreducible,  and  more  in  the 
primary  schools  is  of  little  use.  We  have 
writhed  in  the  prison  of  secularism  for 
twenty  years  with  most  disastrous  results. 
Let  our  experience  be  a  word  to  the  wise. — 
Prof.  And.  Harper  of  Melbourne,  in  "  British 
Weekly,"  Jan.  18,  1894. 

Vers.  20,  21.  The  golden  rule  of  Christ  the 
bond  of  human  brotherhood. 

Not  without  envy  Wealth    at    times  must 

look 
On  their  brown  strength  who  wield  the  reap- 
ing-hook 
And  scythe,  or  at  the  forge-fire  shape  the 

plough, 
Or  the  steel  harness  of  the  steeds  of  steam ; 
All  who,  by  skill  and  patience,  anyhow 
Make  service  noble,  and  the  earth  redeem 
From  savageness.     By  kingly  accolade 
Than  theirs  was  never  worthier  knighthood 

made. 
Well  for  them  if,  while  demagogues  their 

vain 
And  evil  counsels  proffer,  they  maintain 
Their  honest  manhood  unseduced,  and  wage 
No   war  with   Labour's   rights  to  Labour's 

gain 
Of  sweet  home-comfort,  rest  of  hand  and 

brain, 
And  softer  pillow  for  the  head  of  Age. 
And  well  for  Gain  if  it  ungrudging  yields 
Labour  its  just  demand ;  and  well  for  Ease 
If,  in  the  uses  of  its  own,  it  sees 
No   wrong  to    him   who  tills  its   pleasant 

fields, 
And  spreads  the  table  of  its  luxuries. 

496 


The  interests  of  the  rich  man  and  the  poor 
Are  one  and  same,  inseparable  evermore  ; 
And  when  scant  wage  or  labour  fail  to  give 
Food,  shelter,  raiment,  wherewithal  to  live, 
Need  has  its  rights,  necessity  its  claim, 
Yea,  even  self-wrought  misery  and  shame 
Test   well   the   charity   suffering    long  and 

kind. 
The  home-pressed  question  of  the  age  can 

find 
No  answer  in  the  catch-words  of  the  blind 
Leaders  of  blind.     Solution  there  is  none 
Save  in  the  Golden  Rule  of  Christ  alone. 

J.  G.  Whittier. 

Vers.  20-23.  Phases  of  unity  among  be- 
lievers.— We  can  distinguish  a  sequence  of 
thought  in  the  references  to  the  unity  con- 
tained in  this  prayer.  There  is  first  the 
most  general  form,  "  one  as  We  are/'  having 
one  purpose,  one  mind,  one  dwelling-place — 
the  Father's  name — the  Holy  Spirit  thus 
making  them  one.  There  is  again  the  more 
special  form,  oneness  in  the  communion  of 
Father  and  Son,  proving  that  the  unity  of 
believers  is  more  than  a  merely  moral  consent, 
that  it  is  in  a  real  sense  a  vital  unity,  "  As 
Thou,  Father,  art  in  Me  and  I  in  Thee,  that 
they  also  may  be  one  in  Us."  And,  lastly, 
there  is  the  perfected  unity,  which  is  realised 
through  the  giving  of  the  glory  which  the 
Father  gives  the  Man  Jesus,  viz.  the  know- 
ledge of  Him  as  the  Father,  and  fellowship 
with  Him  as  the  Son  with  the  Father,  and 
which  is  consummated  in  the  everlasting 
participation  in  the  Father's  beatific  presence. 
Corresponding  to  the  two  latter,  there  are 
results  in  the  world.  The  unity  of  believers 
in  the  communion  of  the  Father  and  the 
Son  is  the  means  of  awakening  belief  in 
the  divine  mission  of  Christ.  The  unity  in 
glory — the  perfecting  into  it — is  the  means 
of  revealing  the  love  with  which  the  Father 
loves  Him,  so  that  men  may  recognise  not 
only  the  mission  of  Christ,  but  the  fellow- 
ship of  His  people  in  that  love.  As  the 
perfecting  proceeds,  the  knowledge  of  the 
love  of  God,  reflected  in  and  from  the 
Church,  will  increase.  Ah  !  when  we  speak 
of  failure,  of  the  powerlessness  of  the 
Church,  of  the  weakness  of  her  testimony, 
and  the  fruitlessness  of  her  toil,  let  us  ask 
whether  the  perfecting  into  unity  is  advanc- 
ing as  it  should.  Unity,  oneness,  is  the 
predominant  feature  of  the  last  part  of  the 
prayer.  To  the  hostile  world  it  is  the  sign 
of  the  Church  of  Jesus  ;  it  is  the  power  of 
the  Church  also.  Without  it  all  evidences 
fail.  With  it  there  is  a  force  which  the 
world  cannot  resist.  We  may  not  linger 
over  the  sublime  conception  ;  we  cannot 
analyse  the  wonderfully  suggestive  language. 
This  only, — it  is  unity  in  truth,  unity  in  love, 
unity  in  the  consciousness  of  the  "  one  Lord, 
one  faith,  one  baptism,  one  God  and  Father 
of  all."      Certainly  it  is  something  at  once 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   SI.  JOHN.        chap.  xvii. 


much  higher  and  more  elastic  than  any 
external  uniformity.  Yet  there  must  be  a 
visible  attestation  of  the  union.  Else  how 
could  the  world  believe  ?  How  could  the 
world  know  ?  There  can  be  no  doubt  that 
the  attestation  is  hindered  by  the  disunion 
of  Christians.  But,  through  all  the  times,  and 
notwithstanding  all  kinds  of  divisions,  there 
has  been,  is,  and  will  be,  the  working  of  the 
same  Spirit,  the  same  holy  and  eternal  life. 
Blurred  and  marred  as  the  writing  is,  men 
have  traced — the  human  heart  does  trace — 
the  characters  :  "I  in  them,  and  Thou  in 
Me,  one  in  Us." — Dr.  Marshall  Lang. 

Vers.  20-23.  Christian  unity  is  not  formal, 
but  spiritual. — If  we  are  looking  for  formal 
union,  we  are  looking  in  the  wrong  direction, 
and  we  are  looking  for  the  wrong  thing.  It 
is  as  if  we  should  ask  the  question,  Are  men 
alive  ?  and  should  then  determine  to  answer 
to  the  inquiry  by  stature,  complexion,  accent, 
or  by  any  other  accident  attaching  to  the 
individual.  Who  would  assent  to  the  doc- 
trine that  it  is  right  to  determine  living 
humanity  by  such  incidents  or  accidents? 
We  should  protest  against  the  judgment ;  we 
should  say,  We  are  looking  in  the  wrong 
direction,  we  are  in  quest  of  the  wrong  test 
and  standards  ;  life  is  wholly  different  from 
stature,  complexion,  or  local  position  and 
attitude.  Human  love  is  not  formal ;  it  is 
spiritual.  What  is  its  shape,  what  its  colour, 
what  its  bulk  in  plain  ounce  weight  ?  Where 
is  it  ?  Yet  we  all  know  it,  we  all  feel  it ;  life 
would  be  poor  without  it ;  yet  it  resists 
organisation  beyond  a  given  point,  it  believes 
in  organisation  also  up  to  that  point,  and 
most  fully  and  sacredly.  Love  claims  united 
love ;  love  is  the  genius  that  presides  over 
household  life  ;  love  will  unite  even  national 
life,  when  political  instinct  fails  to  touch  the 
necessity  of  the  hour.  Still,  love  is  more 
than  organisation.  Love  is  always  surprising 
us  with  new  revelations  of  its  beauty  and 
goodness  ;  love  is  always  revealing  to  us 
some  hitherto  unknown  or  unrealised  aspect 
of  God.  Human  life  is  not  formal ;  it  is 
spiritual.  Who  has  seen  life  ?  Where  does 
life  reside  in  the  body  ?  Put  a  finger  upon 
the  residence  of  life,  saying,  Here  you  will 
find  it,  and  nowlere  else.  No  man  has  seen 
life.  Yet  life  is  organised  ;  life  has  its  body, 
its  tabernacle,  its  system  of  nerves,  and  its 
wondrous  incarnation  ;  it  presses  itself 
against  these  forms  in  palpitation  that 
means  it  is  greater  than  can  be  confined 
within  physical  boundaries.  Life,  like  love, 
is  always  surprising  us  by  new  energy,  new 
passion,  new  capacities.  Who  can  throw  a 
line  upon  life  and  say,  We  will  keep  thee 
here,  and  bind  thee  like  a  beast  of  burden  ? 
The  very  life  that  could  purpose  to  deal  so 
with  other  life  gives  itself  the  lie  ;  its  own 
energy,  its  own  aspiration  after  primacy, 
declares  that  it  has  miscalculated  the  quality 


and  the  quantity  of  that  supreme  mystery 
which  we  call  life.  So  it  is  with  the  Church 
of  Christ.  It  has  organisation — without 
organisation  it  could  not  live  ;  but  it  has 
more  than  organisation.  Emerson  speaks  of 
some  men  who  are  blessed  with  "  over-soul," 
soul  enough  and  to  spare ;  soul  that  goes  out 
in  evangelistic  yearning  and  solicitude  after 
other  souls  less  favoured,  pining  away  in  the 
desert  or  in  the  darkness.  So  with  the 
Church  of  Christ.  Its  organisations  are 
valuable  ;  up  to  a  given  point  these  organi- 
sations are  sacred :  but  whose  house  has 
outbuilt  all  other  houses  and  made  them 
nothing  but  huts  not  worth  living  in  ?  The 
house  is  sacred,  yet  there  is  a  house  next 
door,  there  is  a  house  behind,  there  is  a 
house  opposite  ;  the  whole  place  is  covered 
with  joyous  habitations,  lighted  early  in  the 
winter-time,  rich  with  flowers  all  the  sum- 
mer-time, and  the  children  are  so  like  one 
another  in  their  laughter,  in  their  innocent 
glee,  that  only  their  mothers  can  tell  which 
is  which.  Is  there  not  some  analogy,  or  at 
least  dim  hint  of  meaning,  as  to  ecclesias- 
tical and  religious  life  to  be  gathered  from 
the  life  of  the  household  and  of  the  neigh- 
bourhood ?  When  we  lose  the  spiritual 
conception  of  unity,  then  the  mechanical 
conception  is  exaggerated  ;  it  is  set  in  false 
proportions  and  in  misleading  cross-lights  ; 
we  have  lost  the  meridian,  and  men  are 
keeping  their  time  by  their  own  guesses  and 
their  own  wild  conjectures  and  speculations. 
The  moment  we  lose  hold,  so  to  say,  of 
Christ's  hand,  we  are  the  prey  of  the  enemy, 
we  are  lost ;  we  are  like  planets  loosed  from 
their  centres  ;  we  plunge  where  we  ought  to 
revolve  in  silent  rhythm  around  the  govern- 
ing Flame.  Men  become  controversial  when 
they  become  unspiritual.  When  men  cease 
to  pray,  they  begin  to  argue  and  to  fight. 
How  wonderful  it  is  that  men  are  usually 
one  in  prayer,  but  the  moment  they  rise 
from  their  knees  and  begin  to  state  their 
opinions,  the  Church  becomes  a  battle  ; 
pray,  then,  without  ceasing.  —  Dr.  Joseph 
Parker. 

Vers.  21,  22.  The  blessedness  of  unity  of 
labour  among  different  sections  oj  the  Church. 
— The  Church  of  Christ,  no  longer  tt  e  scene  of 
intestine  warfare  among  the  several  denomi- 
nations into  which  it  is  cantoned  and  divided, 
presents  the  image  of  a  great  empire,  com- 
posed of  distant  but  not  hostile  provinces, 
prepared  to  send  forth  its  combatants,  at  ti  e 
command  of  its  invisible  Sovereign,  to  invade 
the  dominions  of  Satan  and  subdue  the 
nations  of  the  earth.  The  weapons  of  its 
warfare  have  already  made  themselves  felt 
in  the  east  and  in  the  west ;  and  wherever 
its  banner  is  unfurled,  it  gathers  around  it, 
without  distinction  of  name  or  sect,  "  the 
called,  the  chosen,  the  faithful "  who,  at  the 
heart-thrilling  voice  of  Him  whose  "  vesture 


K  K 


497 


chap.  xvn.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


is  dipped  in  blood,"  and  who  goes  forth 
"  conquering  and  to  conquer,"  rush  to  the 
field,  unmindful  of  every  distinction  but 
that  of  his  friends  and  foes,  and  too  eager 
for  the  combat  to  ask  any  other  question 
than,  "  Who  is  on  the  Lord's  side  1  Who  ? " 
— Robert  Hall. 

"  Come  out  from  among  them,  and  he  ye 
separate"  etc. — There  is  a  most  profound 
philosophy  in  this.  If  we  are  to  impress 
the  world,  we  must  be  separate  from  sinners, 
even  as  Christ,  our  master,  was,  or  at  least, 
according  to  our  human  degree,  as  being  in 
His  Spirit.  The  great  difficulty  is,  that  we 
think  to  impress  the  world,  standing  on  the 
world's  own  level  and  asking  its  approbation. 
We  conform  too  easily  and  with  too  much 
appetite.  We  are  all  the  while  touching 
the  unclean  thing — bowing  down  to  it, 
accepting  its  law,  eager  to  be  found 
approved  in  it.  God  therefore  calls  us 
away.  Oh  that  we  could  take  our  lesson 
here,  and  plan  our  life,  order  our  pursuits, 
choose  our  relaxations,  prepare  our  families, 
so  as  to  be  truly  with  Christ,  and  so,  in  fact, 
that  we  ourselves  can  say,  each  for  himself, 
"  The  Prince  of  this  world  cometh,  and  hath 
nothing  in  me  "  ! — H.  Bushnell. 

Ver.  23.  Unity  with  the  spiritual  children 
is  dear  to  God's  heart. — Does  He  not  know 
all  things  ?  Why  limit  thus  the  range  of 
His  omniscience  ?  Is  there  anything  that 
can  be  hid  from  the  search  of  His  piercing 
gaze  ?  Is  not  the  way  of  the  wicked  also 
known  to  Him  ?  known  so  well  that  He  has 
travelled  over  the  far  country  to  seek  and  to 
save  that  which  was  lost.     Yes  :  but  there  is 


a  sense  in  which  He  only  knows  the  good. 
His  eyes  behold,  His  eyelids  try  all  that 
belongs  to  the  eye  ;  but  there  is  a  knowledge 
which  belongs  not  to  the  eye,  but  to  the 
heart,  the  knowledge  which  men  call  sym- 
pathy. Hundreds  know  me  as  a  man,  but 
only  my  child  knows  me  as  a  father.  Even 
so  the  heavenly  Father  has  a  special  know- 
ledge of  His  child.  His  knowledge  is  His 
nearness;  it  is  the  attraction  of  a  kindred 
sympathy,  the  gravitation  of  love.  He  looks 
into  the  glass  of  our  humanity,  and  He 
beholds  there,  in  miniature,  the  brightness 
of  His  own  glory,  the  express  image  of  His 
own  person,  the  Christ  that  is  to  be,  and, 
when  He  sees  it,  He  rejoices  with  an  ex- 
ceeding great  joy.  My  soul,  wilt  thou  fulfil 
this  joy  of  thy  Father's  heart  ?  He  waits  to 
behold  in  thee  the  impress  of  His  own 
likeness.  He  sits  as  a  refiner  of  silver  till 
He  sees  in  thee  the  reflection  of  His  own 
image  ;  and  when  He  sees  His  image  reflected 
He  knows  that  the  refining  is  complete. 
Wilt  thou  grant  Him  the  joy  of  that  know- 
ledge ?  Wilt  thou  let  Him  behold  a  Christ 
in  thee,  Himself  in  thee  ?  Wilt  thou  let 
Him  feel  that  there  is  a  heart  in  sympathy 
with  His  heart,  a  life  in  unison  with  His 
life,  a  will  in  harmony  with  His  will  ?  Then 
thou  shalt  have  the  joy  of  all  joys,  the  joy 
of  making  glad  the  heart  of  God.  Com- 
munion is  dear  to  the  Spirit  of  the  heavenly 
Father,  for  the  Spirit  of  the  Father  is  love, 
and  love  seeketh  not  her  own.  It  cannot 
rest  in  aught  but  the  vision  of  its  object ; 
it  must  speak,  and  it  must  be  answered 
again  ;  it  must  know  even  as  it  is  known. — 
Br.  Geo.  Matheson. 


498 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.      chap,  xviii. 


PAET    VI.    (a.) 

Chapters  xviii.,  xix. 

I.  Christ  in  the  Hands  of  His  Enemies. 

1.  His  betrayal  and  apprehension  (vers.  1-12). 

2.  The  informal  examination  before  Annas  and  Caiaphas  (vers.  13-27). 

3.  Simon  Peter's  denial  of  the  Lord  (vers.  15-18,  25-27). 

4.  Christ  before  Pilate  (the  trial  before  the  Sanhedrin  is  presupposed) 
(ver.  28). 

5.  Pilate's  interview  with  the  Jews  outside  the  Prsetorium  (vers.  29-32). 

6.  Pilate  within  his  judgment  hall  with  Jesus:  Christ's  declaration  of  the 
spiritual  nature  of  His  kingdom  (vers.  33-37). 

7.  Pilate's  declaration  of  the  innocency  of  Jesus ;  he  gives  the  Jews  the 
choice  of  having  Jesus  or  Barabbas  released  to  them,  but  they  choose  Barabbas 
(veis.  38-40). 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 
EXPLANATORY  AND   CRITICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Went  forth. —From  the  part  of  the  suburbs  where  the  discourse  from  xiv.  31  had  been 
spoken,  and  the  intercessory  prayer  offered.  The  brook  Cedron  (rod  Kedpuv,  Kidron,  Heb. 
rnip,  the  dark  stream :  2  Sam.  xv.  23,  etc.). — It  was  a  winter  torrent,  xefaappos.  The  wady 
is  dry  after  the  winter  and  spring  rains.  It  separates  Jerusalem  on  the  East  from  the  Mount 
of  Olives  and  Scopus,  flows  South-East  by  Ma?*- Saba,  and  enters  the  Dead  Sea.  A  garden  (see 
Matt.  xxvi.  36,  etc.). — Josephus  mentions  that  such  gardens  were  numerous  in  his  time  near 
Jerusalem.  There  is  no  reason  for  doubting  that  the  site  now  pointed  out  as  corresponding 
with  Gethsemane  is  at  or  near  it.  The  present  enclosure  has  been  held  sacred  since 
Constantine's  time.  It  was  called  (Heb.)  "TOtirna  (Gath-Shiraanai)  =  an  oil-press.  It  was 
an  olive  garden.  In  the  garden  of  delights  (Eden)  the  first  Adam,  through  listening  to  the 
foe  of  God  and  man,  and  through  disobedience  to  the  divine  will,  brought  misery  on  himself 
and  all  men.  In  Gethsemane  the  Second  Adam,  by  His  willing  obedience  to  His  Father, 
became  perfected  through  sufferings,  and  conquered  the  subtle  foe. 

Ver.  3.  A  band  of  soldiers  and  officers. — The  band  (rip  (xireTpav) — i.e.  part  of  the  Roman 
garrison.  Probably  it  was  a  detachment,  but  under  one  of  the  chief  officers  of  the  legion. 
The  officers  (virripiTcu),  members  of  the  Jewish  temple  guard.  Jews  and  Gentiles  alike  were 
gathered  against  the  Lord  and  His  Christ.  But  how  impotent  their  endeavours  to  hinder 
the  eternal  purpose  (Matt.  xxvi.  53 ;  Acts  iv.  26-28)  ! 

Ver.  4.  Knowing,  etc. — Conscious  of  the  purpose  and  end  of  His  mission,  which  was  even  in 
these  untoward  events  being  accomplished.  Whom  seek  ye  ? — Probably  the  officers  did  not 
recognise  Jesus  in  the  uncertain  light ;  or  both  they  and  the  soldiers  were  not  sufficiently 
acquainted  with  His  appearance  to  be  certain.  It  was  now  most  likely  that  Judas  gave  the 
preconcerted  signal  and  betrayed  His  Master  with  a  kiss  (Mark  xiv.  45). 

Ver.  9.  That  the  saying,  etc.  (xvii.  12). — This  was  one  of  many  ways  in  which  the  prayer 
of  our  Lord  was  to  be  fulfilled  in  the  experience  of  the  disciples.  The  Lord  guards  His 
people  in  their  temporal  as  in  their  spiritual  life. 

Ver.  10.  Then  Simon  Peter,  etc. — Here  we  have  a  touch  of  the  eye-witness.  Not  only 
does  St.  John  know  that  it  was  Peter  who  thus  rashly  but  boldly  used  his  sword — one  against 
many — to  defend  his  Master,  but  also  who  was  the  temporary  victim  of  his  onslaught. 
The  Synoptists,  in  regard  to  this  part  of  the  narrative,  show  their  independence  as  historians. 
They  seem  to  place  the  binding  of  Jesus  before  Peter's  onslaught.  But  there  is  no  contra- 
diction.   It  would  be  the  laying  hold  of,  and  beginning  to  bind  Jesus  that  excited  Peter  to 

499 


CHAP,  xviii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


draw  his  sword.     This  onslaught  deterred  the  civilian  "  soldiers  "  ;  and  then  the  band  and 
the  high  officer,  who  accompanied  the  soldiers,  completed  the  operation. 

Ver.  13.  To  Annas  first. — Although  not  the  actual  high  priest,  he  had  great  power  with 
the  priestly  party  and  Sanhedrin.  He  probably  occupied  part  of  the  high  priest's  palace 
with  his  son-in-law  Caiaphas,  or  at  least  a  contiguous  dwelling.  John  here  mentions  a 
preliminary  investigation  which  took  place  apparently  before  both  Annas  and  Caiaphas  in 
the  palace  of  the  latter.  This  is  not  the  trial  before  the  Sanhedrin  recorded  by  the 
Synoptists.  The  preliminary  examination  could  effect  nothing  definite,  but  it  might  have 
led  Annas  and  Caiaphas  to  endeavour  to  formulate  some  definite  accusation  against  Jesus 
before  the  Sanhedrin ;  for  as  yet  they  had  nothing  to  lay  to  His  charge.  Moreover  it  seems 
from  the  high  priest's  question  in  ver.  19,  about  Christ's  disciples,  that  they  were  endeavour- 
ing to  find  out  how  many  of  the  chief  rulers,  etc.  (xii.  42),  believed  in  Jesus.  In  this  they 
were  disappointed  by  His  silence  on  that  point. 

Ver.  15.  Another  disciple. — St.  John  (see  xx.  2 ;  Matt.  xxvi.  58).  Known  unto  the  high 
priest,  etc, — What  this  connection  was  is  not  recorded.  This  is  one  of  those  incidental  notes 
which  show  how  John  was  perhaps  best  fitted  to  record  the  Judaean  ministry  of  our  Lord. 
The  name  John  occurs  among  the  names  of  the  kindred  of  Annas,  who  in  Acts  iv.  6  is  called 
high  priest.  But  this  proves  little.  It  is  thought  by  some  that  John's  brother  James  is 
referred  to.  John  calls  himself  "  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  "  (xiii.  23,  xix.  26).  But 
John's  proximity  to  the  Lord  all  through  the  scene  of  the  Crucifixion  seems  to  indicate 
him  as  the  disciple  spoken  of  here.  The  other  disciple  (i.e.  the  well-known  disciple) 
is  another  reading.  Palace. — Courtyard :  av\rj,  a  paved  enclosure,  open  to  the  sky.  This 
explains  why 

Ver.  18.  A  fire  of  coals  was  needed.  The  air  of  the  spring  nights  at  the  altitude  of 
Jerusalem  is  cold,  avdpaia&v,  a  charcoal  fire,  glowing  in  a  brazier,  such  as  is  in  use  in 
Palestine  at  the  present  day.  Peter  evidently  wished  to  pass  as  an  unconcerned  spectator 
among  the  soldiers  and  servants,  and  was  even  thus  also  denying  his  Lord. 

Ver.  20.  I  spake  openly  in  the  world,  etc. — He  was  the  Truth,  and  did  not  need  to  hide 
His  thoughts.  Nor  did  He  speak  to  a  select  few — a  school.  He  was  no  mere  Kabbi ;  He 
came  to  declare  those  spiritual  and  moral  truths  which  bring  blessedness  to  men.  Some- 
times He  had  to  speak  in  parables  (xiii.  10) ;  but  those  who  were  of  the  truth  would 
understand  them.     His  teaching  was  ever  before  men. 

Ver.  21.  Why  askest  %  etc. — The  Lord  claims  a  just  hearing  before  a  just  tribunal. 

Ver.  22.  One  of  the  officers,  etc.— Was  he  one  of  those  sent  to  entrap  Jesus  in  his  words 
(vii.  32,  46)  ?  And  was  he  thus  seeking  to  regain  favour  which  had  been  lost  (vii.  47)  1 
If  so,  the  greater  his  sin.  These  very  "  officers  "  should  have  testified  in  Christ's  favour.  It 
shows  that  a  remnant  of  conscience  was  left  them  when  they  would  not  testify  against  Him, 
so  that  the  judges  had  to  suborn  false  witnesses. 

Ver.  24.  Now  Annas  had  sent,  etc. — Kather  Therefore  Annas  sent.  This  semi-official 
interrogation  had  taken  place  before  both  Annas  and  Caiaphas.  But  they  evidently  now 
agreed  to  lay  the  case  before  the  council  (Sanhedrin) ;  therefore  Jesus  was  officially 
delivered  to  Caiaphas  to  be  brought  before  the  Sanhedrin,  the  trial  before  which  is  that 
narrated  by  the  Synoptists.  The  verb  airtixTeikev  is  an  aorist,  and  should  not  be  translated 
as  a  perfect. 

Ver.  28.  Then  led  they  Jesus,  etc. — The  Evangelist  presupposes  the  trial  before  the 
Sanhedrin,  and  its  issue.  Jesus  had  been  condemned  to  death.  But  the  Jews  had  no  power 
to  carry  out  a  death  sentence.  They  must  prevail  on  the  Eoman  governor,  by  fair  means  or 
foul,  to  do  this  for  them.  Hall  of  judgment. — Palace  (irpaiTibpiov,  prsetorium),  i.e.  the  Roman 
governor's  house,  supposed  to  have  been  a  palace  built  by  Herod.  They  themselves,  etc. — 
See  Homiletic  Note  to  xiii.  1.  How  true  this  is  to  our  Lord's  description  of  these  men  as 
"whited  sepulchres"  .(Matt,  xxiii.  27).  They  made  clean  the  outside  of  cup  and  platter. 
Here  they  were  afraid  of  an  outward  defilement  which  might  pervent  them  participating 
in  the  passover  feast.  They  recked  nothing  of  the  inward  defilement  of  heart  and 
conscience,  which  was  evident  in  all  these  scenes.  Justice,  truth,  righteousness,  merciful- 
ness, the  weightier  matters  of  the  law,  were  to  them  as  nothing. 

Ver.  29.  Pilate  then  went  out,  etc. — In  all  this  narrative  of  St.  John  the  Synoptic  account 
is  presupposed.  Pilate  went  out  of  his  own  palace  to  some  convenient  place  where  he 
might  hold  a  colloquy  with  the  Jews.  He  condescended  so  far  to  their  prejudices.  He 
demanded  what  accusation  they  brought  against  this  man  which  would  bring  Him  under 
the  penalty  of  Roman  law.  For  Pilate,  like  Gallio,  would  care  nothing  for  merely  religious 
questions  (Acts  xviii.  12-17). 

Ver.  30.  They  answered  .  .  .  malefactor. — And  this  after  His  deeds  of  beneficence  and 
His  holy  life  1     How  far  had  these  men  yielded  themselves  to  the  power  of  evil ! 

Ver.  31.  Then  said  Pilate,  etc. — I.e.  they  wished  to  judge,  and  merely  permit  Pilate  to  carry 
their  judgment  into  effect.  Not  so,  is  Pilate's  answer.  If  this  Man  is  judged  by  your 
tribunal,  you  can  sentence  Him  according  to  your  law  and  carry  out  the  sentence.    Very 

500 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.       chap,  xviil 


galling  must  it  have  been  to  those  proud  rulers  thus  to  be  reminded  of  the  limitations  of 
their  power.  But  Pilate's  reply  brought  out  their  malice  and  envy  in  all  its  hatefulness. 
They  had  to  shift  their  accusation  from  a  religious  to  a  political  ground,  and  hypocritically 
to  pretend  that  they  were  concerned  for  the  majesty  of  the  conquering  Roman  power 
(Luke  xxiii.  2). 

Ver.  32.  That  the  saying  of  Jesus,  etc. — He  had  prophesied  this  before  it  came  to  pass 
(Mark  x.  33 ;  Matt.  xxvi.  2).  Crucifixion  was  a  Roman  punishment.  These  wicked  rulers 
thought  that  Jesus  would  thus  be  made  a  reproach  both  to  Jews  and  Gentiles. 

Ver.  33.  Art  Thou  the  King  of  the  Jews  % — Pilate  saw  that  there  was  something  strange  in 
this  accusation.  These  rulers  of  the  Jews  would  never  have  delivered  up  a  popular  leader  who 
sought  to  free  them  from  the  Roman  yoke ;  and  the  governor  was  to  learn  more  of  this  King 
and  His  kingdom  ere  the  trial  was  over.  He  saw  that  this  charge  of  the  Jewish  Sanhedrin 
was  a  trumped-up  one. 

Ver.  38.  Pilate  .  .  .  went  out  again  to  the  Jews,  and  saith  unto  them,  I  find  in  Him  no 
fault. — This  is  a  striking  testimony.  It  shows  us  Pilate  at  his  best,  as  the  Roman  judge  and 
governor,  set  to  rule  and  administer  justice  impartially.  It  shows  also  the  character  of  our 
Lord's  enemies.  They  knew  well  that  there  was  no  actual  fault  in  Christ  (Matt.  xxvi.  60). 
It  was  their  hatred  of  the  truth,  and  the  fear  of  losing  position  and  influence,  that  made 
them  cast  aside  all  thought  of  righteousness,  etc.,  in  their  treatment  of  Jesus.  Jesus 
was  innocent ;  His  foes  and  judges  admitted  this.  His  death  was  not  an  expiation  of  any 
wrong  in  His  life — it  was  an  expiation  for  the  sins  of  the  world. 


MAIN  H0MILET1CS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  1—27. 

Vers.  1,  2.  Gethsemane. — When  Jesus  was  in  Jerusalem  there  was  a  spot 
retired  from  the  city  (yet  not  far  from  its  walls)  where  He  could  retire  for 
prayer  and  meditation,  undisturbed  by  the  city  crowd.  The  owner  of  the  place 
was  probably  friendly  to  our  Lord  and  the  disciples,  so  that  they  would  have 
entry  at  all  times.  The  spot  called  the  Garden  of  Gethsemane,  situated  on  the 
slope  of  Olivet,  not  far  from  the  Kidron  Wady,  is  a  sacred  place  now  to  all 
Christian  travellers.  Under  the  ancient  olive  trees  the  reverent  pilgrim  can 
think  over  the  sacred  memories  that  haunt  the  spot,  and  recall  the  events  which 
transpired  at,  or  near,  the  place  which  is  named  Gethsemane  to-day. 

I.  The  reasons  why  John  does  not  mention  the  conflict  of  Jesus  in 
Gethsemane. — It  seems  strange  that  John  should  not  mention  the  bitter  anguish 
of  our  Lord  as  He  prayed  that  the  cup  might  pass  from  Him.  Not  that  he 
knew  not  of  it,  for  in  ver.  1 1  the  words  of  Jesus  imply  it ;  not  that  he  did  not 
feel  in  his  heart  the  awfulness  of  that  struggle.  2.  He  may  have  shrunk  from 
writing  about  this  mysterious  agony,  but  yet  he  writes  of  the  humiliation  of  the 
cross.  3.  The  most  likely  cause  is  that  men  already  knew  from  the  other 
Evangelists  the  history  of  that  agony.  And  John's  purpose  in  his  Gospel, 
guided  by  the  Spirit,  was  to  show  how  the  eternal  divine  Logos  manifested  forth 
His  glory.  He  therefore  omitted  the  scenes  already  recorded  by  his  fellow- 
Evangelists,  and  put  down  that  which  they  had  omitted  (ver.  6),  showing  his 
Lord  calmly  triumphant  over  all  foes — ready  to  meet  the  "  prince  of  this 
world  "  and  wrestle  with  him,  even  to  the  death  of  the  cross,  for  the  redemption 
of  humanity. 

II.  Gethsemane  was  a  place  consecrated  to  prayer  and  holy  meditation. — 
1.  "  Jesus  oftentimes  resorted  thither  with  His  disciples."  Here,  after  the  heat 
and  turmoil  of  the  city  during  the  day,  in  the  quiet  eventide  a  restful  solitude 
might  be  found,  in  which  the  body  would  be  refreshed,  and  the  mind  strengthened 
and  tranquillised,  for  future  thought  and  labour.  2.  There  in  peaceful  intercourse 
with  the  Father  He  passed  the  moments,  and  in  training  His  disciples  for  their 
future  work.  And  many  a  similar  hour  did  the  disciples  remember.  But  on 
this  occasion  there  was  something  different.  As  they  entered  the  moonbeam- 
flecked  shade  the  presentiment  of  something  awful  impending,  coupled  with  the 
words  of  Jesus  about  His  going  away,  fell  on  their  minds  and  hearts.     And, 

501 


chap,  xviii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


as  is  the  case  with  sorrow  often,  they  fell  asleep.  Yet  not  so  unbrokenly  as 
not  to  hear  snatches  of  that  bitter  cry,  "If  it  be  possible — if  Thou  be  willing, 
let  this  cup  pass  from  Me."  3.  But  now  this  was  past.  The  Saviour  came  to 
them  calm  and  resolved,  arousing  them  with  the  announcement  that  "  the 
betrayer  was  at  hand." 

III.  The  place  of  prayer  becomes  a  place  of  conflict  with  evil. — I.  It  is  so 
even  with  the  house  of  God  on  earth.  Into  our  holiest  hours  come  our  heaviest 
temptations.  When  the  thoughts  are  nearest  God  the  efforts  of  the  adversary 
will  be  redoubled.  2.  So  it  was  with  Jesus  in  this  hour  in  Gethsemane.  It 
was  the  place  chosen  for  the  final  trial  of  strength  between  the  Second  Adam 
and  our  cruel  foe.  In  Eden  the  serpent  had  easily  prevailed  through  his  lies; 
but  in  Gethsemane  he  meets  the  Second  Adam — the  promised  seed  of  the  woman, 
who  "  strives  and  shall  prevail."  Fearful  was  the  contest,  as  the  sweat  like  great 
drops  of  blood  fell  to  the  ground.  But  in  the  Second  Adam  "  the  prince  of 
darkness  found  nothing,"  and  returned  baffled  from  the  fray,  to  send  his  evil 
tools  to  accomplish  his  work  on  the  body  of  Jesus — not  knowing  clearly  that  the 
end  would  be  the  bruising  of  his  head,  his  utter  overthrow.  3.  It  was  also 
a  place  of  conflict  for  the  disciples.  But,  unheeding  the  Saviour's  warning  to 
"  watch  and  pray,"  they  slept,  and  were  confused  and  amazed  when  the  traitor 
came  to  betray  the  Lord  "  with  a  kiss  "  to  the  band  he  had  brought  with  him. 
But  though  Satan  had  desired  to  have  one  of  them — nay,  all — to  sift  them  as 
wheat,  yet  Christ  had  prayed  for  them  and  Satan  would  not  prevail. 

IV.  The  place  of  prayer  is  near  to  heaven. — 1.  To  Jesus  in  His  agony '"  an 
angel  appeared  strengthening  Him"  (Luke  xxii.  43).  This  too  must  have 
reminded  the  disciples  of  the  nearness  of  God  to  His  people,  and  that  nothing 
could  happen  without  His  divine  and  loving  purpose  being  fulfilled.  2.  This 
strengthened  Jesus  in  His  conflict ;  and  this  is  reflected  in  His  calm  majestic 
mien  as,  in  the  history  of  St.  John,  we  see  Him  coming  forth  to  meet  the  traitor 
and  his  bands.  The  victory  was  won.  "Jesus  knowing  all  things,"  etc.  (ver.  4). 
3.  The  forces  of  light  and  darkness  are  here  once  again  arrayed.  The  prince 
of  this  world  has  retired  baffled ;  now  his  chief  instrument  in  this  business  of 
the  pit,  Judas,  stealthily  creeps  in  with  his  instruments,  and  Jesus  is  speedily 
led  off  to  conquer  for  men  through  His  deepest  humiliation. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  need  of  a  place  of  prayer  and  meditation  apart  from  the  bustle 
and  hurry  of  life.  Especially  is  this  needed  in  these  days  of  rush  and  hurry 
in  our  modern  world,  where  too  much  is  done  without  thought,  and  men  thus 
are  laid  open  to  and  rush  into  temptation.  2.  Remember  that  the  place  of  prayer 
will  most  likely  become  the  place  of  spiritual  conflict,  so  that  we  should  give  heed 
to  the  Lord's  words  to  watch  as  well  as  pray.  3.  But  the  place  of  prayer  is 
also  near  to  heaven.  Heaven  is  near  to  it.  It  is  the  house  of  God,  the  gate 
of  heaven  (Gen.  xxviii.  17).  And  there  God  will  strengthen  to  do  and  bear 
for  Him. 

Vers.  3-12.  Jesus  in  the  hands  of  His  enemies. — The  Saviour's  agony  in 
Gethsemane  was  past,  and  He  was  now  ready  to  drink  the  cup  which  the  Father 
had  given  into  His  hand.  The  traitor  and  the  bands  of  soldiers  and  others  who 
were  guided  by  him  drew  near.  His  care  even  in  this  hour  of  betrayal  was  for 
His  disciples ;  and  whilst  He  freely  delivered  up  Himself  to  His  enemies,  He 
mercifully  and  lovingly  said  to  His  captors,  of  His  disciples,  "  If  therefore  ye 
seek  Me,  let  these  go  their  way."  And  in  this  we  see  a  beautiful  example  of 
the  Redeemer's  self-sacrificing  love.     Notice  here — 

I.  The  power  of  Jesus  in  face  of  His  enemies. — 1.  The  angel  that  appeared 
to  strengthen  Jesus  (Luke  xxii.  43)  in  His  agony  had  scarce  gone  when  Satan 
diew  near  to  carry  out  his  final  assault  on  the  Saviour  (ver.  3).     Why  such 

502 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.      chap,  xviii. 


a  crowd  of  officials  was  supposed  to  be  necessary  does  not  appear.  They  may 
have  remembered  the  power  of  Jesus  in  healing,  stilling  the  storm,  etc.  ;  or  they 
might  think  that  the  eleven  apostles  would  make  a  desperate  resistance.  If 
Jesus  gave  Himself  up  willingly  one  messenger  would  have  sufficed.  If  He  did 
not  intend  to  do  so,  the  armies  of  the  world  would  not  have  been  enough  (Matt. 
xxvi.  53).  2.  An  evil  conscience,  the  sense  of  their  wrong-doing — for  as  officers 
of  the  chief  priests  and  Pharisees  they  should  have  been  protectors  of  the  defence- 
less and  innocent — led  to  the  necessity  of  such  a  band.  Judas  especially  would, 
in  his  dark  heart,  feel  that  he  had  need  of  all  the  protection  which  could  be 
afforded.  And  thus  the  forces  of  light  and  darkness  stood  opposed  to  each  other 
(i.  5).  3.  Jesus  was  aware  of  the  presence  of  these  myrmidons  of  the  prince  of 
this  world  ere  they  appeared  (Matt.  xxvi.  45,  46),  and  had  warned  the  disciples. 
And  now  He  stepped  in  front  and  asked,  "Whom  seek  ye?" — not  that  He  needed 
to  know,  but  that  He  might  bring  to  their  minds  a  clear  consciousness  of  what 
they  were  about  to  do,  and  draw  their  attention  mainly  to  Himself.  4.  "  Jesus 
of  Nazareth"  is  their  reply.  They  do  not  say  "  Thee."  Either  they  did  not  know 
Him,  or  saw  imperfectly  in  the  dim  light,  and  did  not  recognise  Him ;  and 
Judas  had  not  yet  given  his  preconcerted  sign.  Perhaps  now  the  traitor  did  so, 
and  this,  and  Jesus'  reply,  "  I  am  He,"  removed  all  doubt.  5.  The  result  was 
unexpected.  Some  sudden  flash  of  that  glory  which  the  disciples  witnessed 
"on  the  holy  mount"  (2  Pet.  i.  17,  18)  radiated  from  Christ's  person  ;  and  the 
band  of  men  and  officers  went  backward,  startled  as  if  by  an  apparition,  "  and 
fell  to  the  ground  "  (Acts  ix.  3-9).  There  was  a  divine  purpose  in  this.  It 
would  bring  home  to  those  conscience-stricken  men  the  fact  that  it  was  with 
Heaven  they  were  warring  ;  and  it  would  show  to  them,  to  the  disciples,  and  all 
men  that  the  Redeemer  voluntarily  surrendered  Himself  into  their  power. 
They  were  compelled  to  do  involuntarily  what  millions  of  believers  will  do 
voluntarily  (Phil.  ii.  10),  and  to  take  the  position  His  enemies  at  the  last  must 
assume  (Acts  ii.  33-36). 

II.  The  Lord's  care  for  His  disciples. — 1.  Our  Lord  showed  He  had  power  which 
His  enemies  must  acknowledge.  But  after  the  flashing  out  of  His  divine  majesty, 
He  showed  that  He  did  not  intend  to  resist  their  will.  Beside  Him,  however, 
stood  His  disciples,  and  them  He  would  protect.  2.  Since,  however,  Jesus  had 
declined  to  use  His  heavenly  power  to  protect  Himself,  He  would  not  use  it,  at 
least  through  physical  means,  to  save  the  disciples.  "  Let  these  go,"  He  said  to 
the  leaders  of  the  band.  He  knew  that  He  alone  was  their  quarry;  but  in 
order  to  secure  His  disciples  from  attacks,  which  might  be  caused  by  any  foolish 
movement  on  their  part,  He  issued  this  order.  And  it  was  needful  (ver.  10). 
And  doubtless,  too,  the  power  which  they  had  felt  resided  in  the  Saviour  would 
keep  these  men  in  mind  of  this  limitation  of  their  duty.  3.  There  were  reasons 
also  why  the  disciples  should  go  unharmed.  They  could  not,  were  not  prepared 
to,  follow  Him  through  suffering  to  death,  until  He  had  suffered  for  them  and 
redeemed  them.  They  were  not  strong  to  follow  Him,  nor  would  be,  until  the 
Spirit  quickened  them  to  a  higher  life.  Then  they  would  be  prepared  for  the 
divine  purpose  for  which  they  were  kept  in  the  world  (xvii.  15),  to  proclaim  His 
gospel  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father  and  His  own  glory.  But  now  He  alone 
must  drink  the  bitter  cup.  4.  Afterward  they  would  be  strengthened,  some  of 
them  to  follow  Him  in  yielding  up  their  lives  for  His  kingdom.  Now  His  word 
of  promise  in  His  intercessory  prayer  must  receive  in  part  its  fulfilment 
(xvii.  12)  ;  and  that  other  word  would  also  come  home  to  the  hearts  of  the 
disciples  in  these  hours  of  perplexity  and  sorrow,  "  I  lay  down  My  life  for  the 
sheep"  (x.  15).  5.  Thus  in  the  hour  when  "the  prince  of  this  world"  had 
come  to  the  Saviour,  and  the  powers  of  darkness  were  mustering  about  the  Son  of 
man,  "  He  stood  unmoved  by  all  their  machinations,  elevated  above  the  passions 

503 


CHAt*.  xvm.      H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


of  men,  caring  for  His  own,  and  giving  blessings  to  those  who  would  receive 
them." 
III.  Peter's  rash  act,  and  our  Lord's  disavowal  of  material  force. — 1.   It 

would  have  been  strange  had  Jesus'  disciples,  now  that  the  hour  so  long  foretold 
had  come,  stood  by  unmoved  during  this  scene.  Not  long  awakened  from 
slumber,  they  would  be  surprised  and  confused  for  the  moment.  But  as  the 
shock  passed  they  would  anxiously  ask  in  their  hearts  what  could  be  done.  2. 
In  the  upper  chamber  our  Lord  had  counselled  the  disciples  to  provide  themselves 
with  "swords,"  even  to  sell  their  garments  to  buy  them.  And  on  Peter  stating 
they  had  two,  Jesus  said,  "  It  is  enough  "  (Luke  xxii.  38).  Did  He  mean  the 
disciples  to  defend  Him  and  themselves  1  Yes ;  but  not  against  a  lawful  authority 
like  that  presented  by  the  captain  of  the  band.  Probably  the  swords  were  for 
the  purpose  of  defending  themselves  against  the  robbers  and  lawless  men  who 
swarmed  about  the  city  and  its  environs  at  the  passovertide.  3.  But  now  in  the 
garden  they  asked  Jesus  if  they  should  use  their  weapons  (Luke  xxii.  49).  And, 
without  waiting  for  a  reply  apparently,  head-strong  Peter  smote  wildly,  and  cut 
off  the  right  ear  of  the  high  priest's  servant.  4.  It  was  a  foolish  act,  contrary 
to  the  will  of  the  Redeemer,  to  which  Peter  had  not  yet  become  wholly  sub- 
missive. The  disciple  had  not  yet  fully  realised  that  Christ  must  suffer,  etc.  It 
was  an  action  also  that  might  have  led  to  reprisals  had  not  Jesus  displayed  His 
power  and  healed  the  stricken  man.  Thus  the  wrath  of  the  band  would  be 
arrested  (Luke  xxii.  51).  5.  Then  He  taught  the  apostle  by  a  word  that  not  by 
the  sword — by  physical  force — should  His  kingdom  be  extended,  that  all  that 
was  happening  was  in  the  line  of  a  divine  purpose  (Matt.  xxvi.  54),  and  that 
this  bitter  experience  was  also  a  draught  of  that  cup  the  Father  had  given  Him 
to  drink  (ver.  11).     Then  Jesus  was  delivered  to  His  enemies. 

Lessons. — 1.  "  Whom  seek  ye?"  said  Jesus  to  the  myrmidons  who  came  to 
take  Him.  The  question  is  repeated  in  every  age  to  every  individual.  Men 
are  seeking  many  things,  but  under  all  is  the  desire  for  satis/action  and  peace. 
And  to  all  such  seekers  Christ  answers,  "  /  am  He."  He  is  the  living  water,  the 
bread  of  life,  etc.  The  men  sent  to  take  Him  answered,  "Jesus  of  Nazareth? 
That  name  is  "  The  name  of  our  salvation."  Let  us  seek  Him,  not  as  they 
sought,  and  we  shall  find  Him  and  in  Him  our  all  and  in  all.  2.  "  Let  these  go 
their  way"  Christ's  care  of  His  disciples  is  ever  the  same.  If  they  seek  His 
kingdom  and  righteousness,  no  hair  of  their  head  shall  fall.  Christ  came  to 
deliver  men  from  the  hatred  of  the  prince  of  this  world  by  conquering  him  on 
the  cross.  And  now,  when  Satan  still  threatens  to  bring  them  into  bondage,  He 
can  say  with  power  for  those  who  are  His  own,  "  Let  these  men  go  "  ;  sin  shall 
have  no  more  dominion.  3.  Christ's  kingdom  is  not  advanced  by  the  sword. 
How  often  have  men  forgotten  this  !  How  has  the  Church  defaced  her  annals  by 
seeking  to  suppress  by  force,  as  the  Jews  in  our  Lord's  day,  what  seemed  contrary 
to  her  !  The  spiritual  kingdom  can  only  be  propagated  spiritually.  Nor  are 
men  in  the  name  of  Christ's  religion  to  resist  duly  constituted  authority  with  the 
sword  (1  Peter  ii.  12-14).  Only  against  lawlessness  and  cruel  injustice  may 
Christ's  people  defend  themselves. 

Vers.  10,  11.  "The  sword  in  the  garden." — I.  The  circumstances  which  led  to 
its  use. — It  is  interesting  to  group  together  from  the  different  Evangelists  all 
that  is  told  about  this  sword.  Before  they  left  the  supper-room  things  which  the 
Lord  was  saying  as  to  the  approaching  crisis  were  misunderstood  by  the  disciples, 
or  at  least  by  some  of  them.  Strange  to  say,  He  was  thinking  and  speaking 
more  of  what  awaited  them  than  of  His  own  fate.  He  was  telling  them  that  in 
future  they  would  have  to  face  a  hostile  world  in  their  apostolic  work.  It  would 
not  be  as  in  the  happy,  peaceful  disciple  days.      He  had  sent  them  forth  in 

504 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.      chap,  xviit 


those  days  unarmed,  peaceful  missionaries,  and  they  were  kindly  welcomed 
everywhere,  and  felt  not  the  need  of  sword  or  scrip.  But  now,  said  the  Master, 
speaking  to  them  metaphorically  and  proverbially,  "  He  that  hath  no  sword,  let 
him  sell  his  garment  and  bay  one."  It  was  very  natural  that  the  disciples — 
that  Peter,  of  all  men,  most — should  think  of  some  approaching  personal  struggle 
(nor  was  Peter  so  very  far  wrong),  in  which  his  beloved  Lord  would  be  in  peril 
and  need  defence.  And  the  strong  and  bold  Galilean  fisherman  looked  round 
him  instinctively  for  a  weapon.  In  a  corner  of  the  chamber  stood,  or  there 
were  hung  from  the  wall,  a  pair  of  swords,  just  as  might  have  been  seen  in  any 
house  in  our  country  two  hundred  years  ago  (just,  as  now,  might  be  seen  in  our 
houses  umbrellas  or  walking-sticks).  There  were  only  the  two  swords.  Peter 
girt  himself  with  one,  some  other  hand  seized  the  other  weapon  ;  and  when  there 
was  regret  expressed  by  some  of  the  disciples  that  there  were  but  the  two,  one 
can  imagine  the  smile  of  sad  gravity  with  which  the  Lord,  intimating  that  they 
had  mistaken  His  meaning,  said  that  the  two  swords  were  quite  "  enough." 

II.  The  sword  leaves  the  scabbard. — In  the  garden,  when  the  band  of  the 
traitor,  after  the  betrayal  kiss  was  given,  laid  hands  on  Jesus  and  began  to  bind 
Him  as  a  prisoner,  it  was  more  than  Simon  Peter  could  stand;  and  that  sword 
of  his  left  its  scabbard,  flashed  a  moment  in  the  moonlight,  and  descended  like 
lightning  on  the  foremost  assailant.  A  chance  movement  at  the  very  moment 
saved  the  man's  life;  but  his  ear  was  all  but  shorn  from  his  head.  In  the 
hurried  and  disturbing  confusion  of  a  night-fray  like  that,  where  men  were 
struggling,  lights  glancing,  swords  flashing,  voices  raised  excitedly,  a  man  struck 
down  and  bleeding  would  in  ordinary  circumstances  have  been  left  lying.  But 
think  !  In  this  case,  who  is  it  that  takes  the  matter  in  hand  ?  The  Man  around 
whom  the  whole  struggle  centred,  the  Man  who  might,  indeed,  be  thought  to  have 
had  enough  of  His  own  to  think  of.  It  is  the  bound  Prisoner  Himself  who  notices 
the  wounded  man  and  the  severed  bleeding  ear ;  and  in  these  simple  words  that 
are  well  worth  treasuring  in  all  our  hearts,  "  Suffer  ye  thus  far,"  He  requests  His 
stern,  ruthless  captors  to  let  Him  move  His  thong-bound  hands  so  far  as  that 
His  fingers  may  touch  the  wounded  ear.  The  men  heard  the  strange  request. 
They  "  suffered  Him  thus  far."  He  touched  the  ear  (of  Malchus),  and  it  was 
whole ! 

III.  Christ's  kingdom  comes  not  by  the  sword. — Then  there  were  two  little 
words  spoken — for  Peter,  with  his  sword,  and  of  course  also  for  the  other 
disciples.  And  we  may  be  very  sure  these  men — the  apostles — to  the  latest 
day  they  served  their  Lord  never  forgot  these  words.  The  first  was  about  the 
twelve  legions  of  angels,  which  one  word  of  His  to  His  Father  would  have 
brought  to  earth  to  rescue  Him.  He  needed  not  that  His  twelve  earthly  followers 
should  arm  themselves  with  earthly  swords  in  His  defence  !  The  second  word 
was  for  His  apostles  in  their  day,  for  His  Church  in  all  its  days,  for  us  all  now, 
in  all  our  Christian  work.  "  Put  up  thy  sword."  They  who  try  to  use  the 
sword  in  that  work  will  find  their  work  will  not  prosper,  but  perish  thereby. 
Rivalry  amongst  Churches,  bitterness  of  spirit,  narrow  sectarianism,  Pharisaic 
exclusiveness,  and  all  such  things,  are  swords,  daggers,  pistols,  and  will  harm  and 
hinder  true  Church  work.  "  The  fruits  of  righteousness  are  sown  in  peace  by 
those  who  make  peace." — Rev.  Thomas  Hardy. 

Ver.  11.  The  cup  given  to  the  Saviour  to  drink. — Although  St.  John  does  not 
record  the  mysterious  agony  of  the  Son  of  man  in  Gethsemane,  it  is  evident  he 
implies  it  in  his  narrative  by  this  mention  of  "  the  cup."  Headers  of  the  other 
Gospels  could  not  fail  to  see  the  connection.  But  the  beloved  disciple's  purpose 
is  to  show  the  incarnate  Son  triumphant,  "  manifesting  forth  His  glory." 
Therefore,  in  this  Gospel,   we  do  not  hear  Jesus  praying  that  the  cup  may 

505 


chap,  xviii.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


pass,  but  firmly  resolved   to  drink  it,  since  it  hath  been  given  Him  by  the 
Father. 

I.  The  cup  was  divinely  appointed. — 1.  Jesus  even  then  might  have  availed 
Himself  of  the  aid  of  the  heavenly  hosts,  but  He  turned  aside  from  all  thought 
of  self  to  carry  out  the  divine  plan.  2.  But  it  was  a  bitter  cup  He  had  to  drain. 
The  cup  had  its  appointed  measure ;  but  the  ingredients  of  which  it  was  composed 
were  most  bitter,  and  even  loathsome.  3.  For  what  were  those  ingredients  1 
To  understand  their  bitterness  it  will  be  necessary,  for  a  moment,  to  consider 
Him  who  had  to  drink  this  cup.  (1)  He  was  the  Son  of  man — none  more  truly 
human — with  human  feelings,  affections,  etc.,  yet  untainted  with  sin.  (2)  He 
was  also  Emmanuel — God  with  us — the  Prince  of  life,  the  Light  of  men,  etc. 
And  one  of  the  most  bitter  ingredients  of  that  cup  was  the  sense  of  the  burden 
of  the  world's  sin,  borne  by  Him  who  was  holy,  harmless,  undefiled.  He  was  to 
become  the  substitute  for  sinful  man,  and  the  shadow  and  burden  of  that 
mighty  load  were  already  felt  by  Him.  Another  ingredient  was  doubtless  the 
conflict  with  the  dark  power  of  evil,  abhorrent  to  the  pure  soul  of  the  Saviour. 
And  yet  another  was  the  near  presence  of  death.  Not  that  the  Saviour  feared, 
but  He  contemplated  the  dark  foe  with  aversion  and  horror.  He,  the  divine 
Son,  the  Prince  of  life,  the  Light  of  men,  must  submit  to  be  for  a  time  in  the 
power  of  this  enemy,  and  shut  up  in  the  darkness  of  the  tomb  !  4.  But  it  was 
all  divinely  appointed.  Although  the  ingredients  of  the  cup  were  mixed  by  His 
foes,  it  was  given  by  the  Father  for  the  redemption  of  men.  Each  bitter  drop 
men  should  have  drained ;  but  Jesus  drained  them  instead.  "  God  spared  not 
His  own  Son,"  "  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  "  (Bom.  viii.  32  ;  Gal.  iii.  13). 

II.  The  resolve  of  the  Saviour  to  drink  the  cup. — 1.  Our  Lord  would  not 
shrink  from  the  awful  experience  which  lay  before  Him.  "  He  became  obedient 
unto  death."  His  will  and  the  Father's  for  men's  redemption  were  in  complete 
concord.  2.  Therefore,  though  with  bruised  heel — for  even  in  the  garden  the 
conflict  had  begun — it  was  with  firm  resolve  He  went  forth.  "  Lo,  I  come ;  in  the 
volume  of  the  book,"  etc.  (Heb.  x.  7).  He  was  made  perfect  as  the  incarnate 
Son  through  suffering  (Heb.  ii.  10,  v.  9),  and  thus  became  "the  author  of 
eternal  salvation  to  all  them  who  obey  Him,"  and  an  example  that  we  should 
follow  in  His  steps. 

Lessons. — 1.  To  Christian  men  as  to  the  Saviour,  for  a  divine  purpose,  often- 
times a  bitter  cup  is  given  to  drink.  Let  them  not  doubt  the  divine  love,  but 
be  willingly  submissive  like  the  Saviour.  2.  How  shall  believers  praise  the 
Reedeemer  for  all  He  endured '?  Let  the  old  Adam  be  crucified  ;  let  them 
struggle  against  sin ;  consecrate  themselves,  body  and  soul,  to  the  Lord's  service ; 
and  rejoicing  in  hope  of  the  divine  glory,  let  them  walk  as  God's  redeemed 
children.  So  shall  the  Saviour  see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul,  and  shall  be 
satisfied. 

Vers.  13,  14,  19-24.  Jesus  before  Annas  and  Caiaphas. — Jesus  had  been  taken. 
What  the  rulers  of  the  Jews  had  long  wished  for  had  now  been  accomplished,  by 
the  help  of  the  traitorous  disciple.  We  can  imagine  the  grim  satisfaction  with 
which  the  news  was  received  in  the  palace  of  the  high  priest,  but  also  the  per- 
plexity. For  having  now  seized  their  victim,  they  had  to  consider  what  should 
be  done  with  Him,  and  that  speedily ;  for  they  had  still  a  salutary  fear  "  of  the 
people,"  not  knowing  how  many  adhered  to  the  Bedeemer  (Matt.  xxvi.  5  ;  Mark 
xiv.  2).  Hence  the  necessity  of  this  hurried  midnight  trial.  They  that  do  evil 
and  walk  in  darkness,  fear  to  come  to  the  light  (iii.  20).  Hence  Jesus  was 
hurried  away  to  the  palace  of  the  high  priest  and  the  head  of  the  Sanhedrin,  so 
that  they  might  see  whether  He  could  be  condemned  on  religious  grounds. 
There  are  two  chief  points  to  be  considered  here. 

506  _.,     . 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.      chap.  xvin. 


I.  The  first  declaration  of  Jesus  in  answer  to  the  accusations  brought  against 
Him. — 1.  The  narrative  tells  us  that  Jesus  was  led  away  to  Annas  (Hanas  or 
Ananias).  He  was  not  actually  the  high  priest  (xi.  49-52) ;  but  he  had  held  that 
office,  and  had  been  succeeded  in  it  by  his  sons  and  sons-in-law,  and  no  doubt 
exercised  a  prevailing  influence  in  their  counsels.  2.  He  himself  also  appears 
to  have  held  high  office  at  this  time — most  likely  the  presidency  of  the  Sanhedrin. 
He  was  a  most  unscrupulous  man,  a  great  intriguer,  and  managed  to  keep  much 
power  in  his  own  hands.  By  many  he  was  still  regarded  as  the  high  priest — at 
least  he  kept  hold  of  the  reins  of  power  (Luke  iii.  2  ;  Acts  iv.  6).  3.  The  houses 
of  Annas  and  Caiaphas  appear  to  have  been  contiguous.  John  only  mentions  the 
relationship  between  the  two  men,  and  thus  explains  why,  although  Caiaphas  was 
legally  high  priest,  Annas  exercised  so  much  influence.  4.  Before  Annas  Jesus 
was  first  led,  a  concession  to  the  position  of  the  aged  ex-high  priest ;  but  he 
preferred  to  act  in  concert  with  Caiaphas  in  the  matter.  Indeed  these  evil  men, 
though  they  knew  it  not,  would  require  all  their  skill  in  taking  up  arms  "  against 
the  Lord's  anointed "  (Ps.  ii.  2,  3).  And  the  character  of  these  judges  is  well 
sketched  in  one  word  regarding  the  principal  agent  in  this  unjust  trial,  though 
Annas  and  not  he  might  be  the  inspiring  spirit  (ver.  14:  comp.  xi.  49-52). 
Probably  keeping  the  fear  of  the  people  in  view,  and  thinking  it  would  be  better 
in  case  of  any  emeute  to  have  the  blame  lie  on  Caiaphas'  shoulders  rather  than 
his  own,  he  left  the  latter  to  conduct  the  trial.  But  behind  them  both  was  a 
greater  power  than  they  imagined.  5.  This  first  trial  turned  mainly  on  two 
points — the  disciples  of  Jesus  and  His  teaching.  This  was  according  to  Jewish 
law.  It  was  proper  for  the  religious  head  and  the  religious  council  of  the  nation 
to  make  inquiry  as  to  new  teachers — their  doctrines,  disciples,  and  so  forth.  Then 
it  was  matter  of  common  report  that  even  in  the  council — the  Sanhedrin — were 
His  secret  disciples.  Thus  this  question  would  serve  a  double  purpose.  They 
would  learn  about  Christ,  and  about  those  in  their  own  ranks  who  were  suspected 
of  having  a  leaning  toward  Christ,  and  would  know  how  to  deal  with  them  (ix.  22). 
6.  The  high  priest  was  seeking  to  extract  from  Jesus  such  information  as  would 
lead  the  council  to  condemn  Him  as  a  sectary,  and  implicate  those  who  held  with 
Him.  But  Jesus  did  not  answer  this  question  regarding  His  disciples.  The 
disciples  were  not  there  standing  as  accused.  The  question  was  beyond  the 
province  of  His  interrogators.  7.  As  to  His  doctrine  He  answered  freely.  They 
had  a  right  to  ask  that  question ;  and  He,  as  "  made  under  the  law,"  would 
answer  it.  But  the  answer  was  virtually  a  condemnation  of  His  accusers. 
Christ  had  not  taught  secretly,  but  openly.  If  they  did  not  know  what  His 
teaching  was,  it  argued  culpable  ignorance  on  their  part ;  they  should  have 
known.  The  people  who  heard  him,  even  their  own  messengers  (vii.  46),  could 
tell  them  what  He  had  said.  And  had  there  been  anything  that  could  have  clearly 
been  laid  hold  of,  no  doubt  they  would  have  made  use  of  it  to  His  harm  long 
ago.  It  was  an  insincere  question — one  that  needed  formally  to  be  put,  as  the 
Prisoner  was  nominally  before  a  court  of  justice.  8.  Jesus  spoke  not  of  His 
works.  These  His  accusers  did  not  speak  of  :  the  mere  mention  of  them  would 
have  condemned  their  proceedings,  and  compelled  them  to  ask  rather  whether 
He  who  wrought  such  mighty  works  was  not  in  reality  sent  of  God.  And  they 
could  not  deny  the  miracles  (xi.  47,  etc.).  But  there  was  no  use  in  Jesus  reminding 
them  of  His  works ;  they  were  determined  on  His  destruction,  and  any  mention 
of  those  wonderful  works  would  only  have  intensified  their  bitterness. 

II.  The  beginning  of  the  deeper  humiliation  of  our  Lord's  passion. — 1.  All 
the  accessories  of  this  trial,  or  examination,  showed  that  it  was  merely  a  form  to 
cover  a  foregone  conclusion  and  a  sentence  already  framed.  The  secret  appre- 
hension, the  midnight  meeting  of  the  high  functionaries,  the  insincere  questions, 
were  all  in  keeping  with  the  intriguing  character  of  those  unscrupulous  rulers, 

507 


chap.  xvm.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


acting  as  tools  of  the  "prince  of  this  world."  2.  If  further  proof  were  needed  of 
the  unjust  nature  of  the  whole  proceeding,  it  was  soon  forthcoming.  A  servant 
of  the  high  priest — one  of  his  creatures — struck  the  Saviour  with  the  palm  of 
his  hand  (still  used  in  the  East  in  striking,  in  place  of  the  fist,  as  with  us), 
and  said,  "  Answerest  Thou  the  high  priest  so  1  "  (Isa.  1.  6,  7).  3.  It  was 
a  most  unrighteous  act.  Here  stood  a  Prisoner,  uncondemned,  in  no  way 
opposing  Himself  to  the  action  of  the  religious  tribunal  before  which  He  stood — 
nay  rather,  recognising  its  validity.  And  on  His  answering  in  His  defence,  one 
of  the  creatures  of  the  judge  smote  Him,  simply  because  He  ventured  to  defend 
Himself.  4.  There  is  no  doubt  the  servants  had  heard,  or  knew  sufficiently  well, 
what  had  been  determined  on  in  the  hearts  of  these  unjust  men,  and  knew  that 
they  could  act  thus  with  impunity,  if  not  with  a  hope  of  actual  favour.  To  the 
just  men — Nicodemus,  Gamaliel,  and  others — how  must  such  actions,  when  they 
came  to  their  knowledge,  have  come  home  to  conscience,  making  them  ashamed 
rather  than  proud  of  their  high  position.  But  fear  seems  to  have  restrained 
them  (xii.  42,  43),  and  they  participated,  tacitly  at  least,  in  these  events,  which 
must  afterward  have  caused  them  many  a  bitter  thought  (1  Cor.  xv.  9  ;  Gal.  i.  13). 
By  St.  John  the  more  formal  trial  before  the  Sanhedrin  is  omitted.  It  was 
merely  the  registration  of  a  foregone  conclusion. 

Lessons. — 1.  Shall  men  be  able  to  stand  as  serenely  before  the  righteous  Judge 
as  Jesus  before  the  unrighteous  ?  No,  we  are  all  sinful.  And  it  needed  that  the 
Saviour  should  undergo  all  this  humiliation  ere  we  should  be  able  to  stand  before 
the  great  white  throne.  For  we  must  come  before  it  trusting  in  His  righteous- 
ness, which  He  wrought  out  for  us.  2.  By  our  unrighteous  deeds  we  may  lead 
men  to  "  blaspheme  that  worthy  name  by  the  which  we  are  called  "  (James  ii.  7), 
and  thus  wound  the  Saviour  more  than  the  insolent  servant  of  the  unjust  high 
priest.     Let  us  beware  lest  we  come  under  the  same  condemnation  (Heb.  vi.  6). 

Vers.  15-18,  25-27.  Peter's  fall. — The  disciples  forsook  Jesus  and  fled,  accord- 
ing to  His  word  (Matt.  xxvi.  31).  Two  of  them,  however,  would  not  forsake 
Him  even  in  that  hour.  John,  who  was  known  to  the  high  priest,  accompanied 
Jesus  into  the  palace ;  but  Peter,  all  his  boldness  gone,  followed  afar  off,  and 
stood  at  the  gate,  not  being  permitted  entrance  until  John  spoke  with  the  gate- 
keeper. The  disciple's  heart  was  full  of  affection  and  sorrow.  But  with  the 
rash  and  bold  stroke  of  the  sword  in  the  garden  all  his  boldness  had  fled.  He 
was  confused  and  dispirited.  His  hopes  and  aspirations  had  vanished  like  a 
beautiful  dream,  and  the  stern  reality  stared  him  in  the  face.     Notice — 

I.  His  forgetf ulness  of  the  warning  of  Jesus. — 1.  He  had  boldly  averred  in 
the  upper  chamber  his  readiness  to  go  with  Jesus  to*  death.  But  in  all  this 
turmoil  the  warning  voice  sounded  no  more  in  his  ears,  else  he  would  not  have 
ventured  heedlessly  into  the  place  of  danger.  2.  But  Satan  had  desired  to  have 
him  that  he  might  sift  him  as  wheat  (Luke  xxii.  31).  The  prince  of  this  world 
found  nothing  in  the  Master  he  could  lay  hold  of,  but  he  found  much  in  the 
disciple.  3.  Peter  entering  timorously,  striving  probably  to  keep  up  an  appear- 
ance of  unconcern,  was  warned  even  at  the  very  door  that  the  time  of  sifting 
was  near.  "  The  maid  that  kept  the  door,"  seeing  that  he  was  befriended  by 
John,  and  probably  knowing  that  John  was  a  disciple,  said,  "  Art  thou  not  also 
of  this  man's  disciples  ? "  What  would  he  answer  ?  he  who  had  declared  he 
was  willing  to  go  to  the  death  even  with  Jesus  ?  he  who  said,  "  Though  I  should 
die  with  Thee,"  etc.  (Matt.  xxvi.  35)  ? 

II.  Peter's  timorous  denials  and  shameful  fall. — 1.  All  his  asseverations  were 
forgotten,  and  to  the  "  damsel "  who  questioned  him  as  to  his  connexion  with 
the  Lord  he  denied  his  discipleship,  and  then  accusing  conscience  made  him 
stammer  out,  "  I  know  not  what  thou  sayest."     2.  But  in  place  of  being  warned 

508 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.      chap,  xviii. 


by  this  incident  and  fleeing  in  shame  from  the  place  of  his  denial,  tortured 
between  love  for  his  Master  and  fear  for  himself,  he  joined  the  company  of 
guards  and  servants  gathered  round  the  fire  in  the  courtyard  in  the  dullness 
of  the  night,  to  hear,  probably,  what  was  designed  against  his  Master.  He 
evidently  wished  to  pass  himself  off  as  one  of  the  company.  But  what  did  he 
among  that  rude  and  mocking  crew  ?  He  had  placed  himself  in  the  very  place 
where  temptation  was  likely  to  meet  him.  Another  of  the  bystanders,  and 
again  another,  charged  him  with  discipleship ;  and  again  he  weakly  denied. 
3.  John  does  not  tell  the  full  story  with  its  abrupt  termination,  as,  after  denying 
the  Lord  with  rude  oaths  (Mark  xiv.  71),  Peter  was  startled  at  hearing  the  divinely 
given  sign;  and,  at  the  reproachful,  pitying  look  of  Jesus,  went  out  to  weep 
bitterly,  overwhelmed  with  shame  and  sorrow.  4.  For  was  it  not  he  who  had 
been  loudest  in  his  asseverations  that  though  all  should  be  offended  yet  would  he 
not  be  (Mark  xiv.  29)  ?  Was  it  not  he  who  had  confessed,  as  spokesman  of  the 
rest,  that  Jesus  was  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of  God  ?  Had  he  not  seen  His  glory, 
experienced  His  love  ?  And  this  was  how  he  had  requited  his  dear  Lord  !  The 
sifting  was  accomplished — the  chaff  was  rudely  driven  away.  Peter  now  saw 
himself  in  a  true  light ;  henceforth  he  renounced  trust  in  self,  and  learned  to 
warn  others,  so  that  they  might  be  kept  from  falling  as  he  fell  (1  Pet.  v.  7-9). 

Lessons. — 1.  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall. 
Remember  the  Lord's  injunction :  "  Watch  and  pray,"  etc.  (Matt.  xxvi.  41). 
2.  Do  not  rush  needlessly  into  temptation ;  but  when  it  does  assail  meet  it  bravely 
in  the  divine  strength  (James  iv.  7).  The  evil  one  will  be  permitted  only  to  drive 
away  the  chaff. 

HOMILETIC  NOTES. 

Vers.    1-5.  Christ   and   His  foes  in  garden.     He  takes  the  readers'  know- 

Gethsemane. — On  the  one  hand  we  see  ledge  of  it  for  granted ;  but  he  fixes 

the  little  band  coming  from  the  city  in  our  attention  on  these  two  groups,  and 

deep    silence,    and    passing    into    the  wishes  us  to  feel  the  impressiveness  of 

olive    garden,    where    the    tremulous  the  contrast,  as  well  as  the  voluntary 

shadows  of   the   leaves  somewhat   ob-  surrender    of    Jesus    to    His   captors, 

scured  the  paschal  moon ;  and,  on  the  implied  in  His  choice  of  the  place. — 

other,  we  see  the  armed  soldiers  of  the  Dr.  A.  Maclaren. 
Roman  garrison  and  the  temple  police, 

headed  by  Judas,  and  carrying  useless  Yer.    6.  Lowliness     and     glory     in 

swords  which  had   no   power   against  Gethsemane. — We  need  not  ask  if  this 

Jesus,  and  superfluous   "  lanterns  and  was  a  miracle.     However  produced,  a 

torches"  which  were  absurd  in  that  clear  strange  awe  and  terror  smote  the  rude 

moonlight.     The  contrast  of  the  two  soldiers.     His  calm  dignity  impressed 

groups  is  striking  as  they  pass  through  them,  as  that  of  virgin  martyrs  and 

the  silent  midnight  to  meet  between  the  grey-headed  confessors  has  often  done, 

olives.     One   starts  from  heaven,   the  But  that   will   not   explain   the   fact, 

other  from  hell,  and  they  touch  there.  which  seems  most  worthily  attributed 

Infinite  love  and  the  mystery  of  divine  to  a  momentary  shining  forth  of  Christ's 

endurance   for   man  stream  from  the  indwelling  divinity,  somewhat  like  that 

one,  like   the   encircling   moonbeams ;  which    shone    through    His    corporeal 

diabolic  hate  and  treachery  flame  in  frame  at  the  transfiguration.     It  may 

the  other,  like  the  smoky  torches  with  not  have  been  the  work  of  His  will 

which  they  affronted  the  moon.     How  at    all ;    but    the    elevation    of    spirit 

many    opposing    paths    met    in    that  attendant    on    the     solemn    scene    in 

meeting  !     John  has  no  record  of  the  Gethsemane  may  have  transfigured  for 

solemn    scene    in    the    depths   of   the  a  moment  His  lowly  manhood,  and  let 

509 


chap.  xvm.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


some  beams  of  His  glory  through. 
But  however  that  may  be,  we  can 
scarcely  fail  to  see  here  a  revelation 
of  His  majesty,  which  is  all  the  more 
eloquent  as  coming  at  the  hour  of 
deepest  humiliation.  John  delights  to 
bring  into  juxtaposition  instances  of 
both,  as  indeed  do  all  the  Evangelists. 
The  interweaving  of  lowliness  and 
glory  makes  the  very  differentia  of  the 
character  pourtrayed  by  them  all.  He 
is  a  weak  infant,  but  angels  hover 
round  the  manger,  and  a  star  leads 
worshippers  to  it.  He  bows  His  head 
to  John's  baptism,  but  heaven  opens 
and  the  dove  descends.    He  falls  asleep 


in  the  boat,  but  wakes  to  still  the 
storm  with  a  word.  He  weeps  by  a 
grave,  but  He  raises  its  tenant.  He 
all  but  faints  in  His  agony  in  the 
garden,  but  angels  strengthen  Him. 
The  same  union  of  opposites  is  in  this 
incident.  He  is  to  be  led,  bound  by 
rude  hands,  before  an  unjust  judge. 
But  as  He  passes  into  their  power, 
one  flash  of  brightness  "  above  that 
of  the  noonday  sun  "  tells  of  the  hidden 
glory.  "  What  will  He  do  when  He 
shall  come  as  judge,  if  He  did  this 
when  giving  Himself  up  as  a  prisoner  ? " 
(Augustine). — Dr.  A.  Maclaren. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  6.  Christ's  enemies  must  acknowledge 
His  power. — I  here  call  to  mind  a  well- 
known  learned  man  of  Saxony,  who,  after 
having  all  his  life  long  attacked  Jesus  and 
His  gospel  with  all  the  weapons  of  sophistry, 
was  in  his  old  age  partially  deprived  of  his 
reason,  chiefly  through  the  fear  of  death, 
and  frequently  fell  into  religious  paroxysms 
of  a  peculiar  nature.  He  was  almost  daily 
observed  conversing  with  himself  whilst 
pacing  to  and  fro  in  his  chamber,  on  one 
of  the  walls  of  which,  between  other  pictures, 
hung  one  of  the  Saviour.  Repeatedly  he 
halted  before  the  latter  and  said  to  it,  in  a 
horrifying  tone  of  voice,  "  After  all,  Thou 
wast  only  a  man ! "  Then,  after  a  short  pause, 
he  would  continue,  "  What  wast  Thou  more 
than  a  man?  Ought  I  to  worship  Thee? 
No,  I  will  not  worship  Thee ;  for  Thou  art 
only  Rabbi  Jesus,  Joseph's  son  of  Nazareth." 
Uttering  these  words,  he  would  turn  his 
back  upon  the  picture ;  but  immediately 
afterwards  he  would  return  with  a  deeply 
affected  countenance,  and  exclaim,  "  What 
dost  Thou  say?  that  Thou  comest  from 
above  ?  How  terribly  Thou  eyest  me  !  Oh, 
Thou  art  dreadful !  But — Thou  art  only  a 
man  after  all."  Then  he  would  again  rush 
away,  but  soon  return  with  faltering  step, 
crying  out,  "  What,  art  Thou  in  reality  the 
Son  of  God  ?  "  In  this  way  the  same  scenes 
were  daily  renewed  till  the  unhappy  man, 
struck  by  paralysis,  dropped  down  dead,  and 
then  really  stood  before  his  Judge,  who, 
even  in  his  picture,  had  so  strikingly  and 
overpoweringly  judged  him.  —  F.  W. 
Krummacher,  "  Suffering  Saviour." 

Vers.  14,  15,  19-24.  Christ's  patience. — Do 
you  not  marvel  at  the  loftiness  of  character 
of  your  incomparable  Lord  ?  Have  you  ever 
heard  of  a  meekness  and  patience  like  His  ? 

510 


of  a  peace  so  tranquil  which  bore  with  one 
of  the  sorts  of  bodily  indignity  which  causes 
most  resentment,   an   open    insult ;    which 
mildly  punished  the  servant  and  his  chief 
who  permitted  the  insult ;  and  at  the  same 
time   so  earnestly  sought  to  awaken  their 
consciences  in  so  majestically  protesting  its 
innocence  ?    Behold,  so  does  He  act  toward 
you  ;  His  patience  toward  you  is  day  by  day 
unspeakably  great.      You   can   never  prove 
that  He  hath  spoken  evil,  for  all  His  words 
are  righteousness  and  truth,  words  of  eternal 
life.     And  yet  you  have  often  stricken  Him 
with  your  unbelief  and   insincerity.      Still 
less  can  you  prove  that  He  has  ever  done 
evil    toward    you,    for    all     His    acts    and 
dealings   toward  you  are  mercy  and  love ; 
and  yet  you  have  often  stricken  Him  with 
your  discontent   and  murmuring.     And  He 
ever  bears  with  you,  and   will   forgive   all 
when  in  faith  and  repentance  you  come  to 
His  feet  and  return  from  your  crooked  ways 
to  Him.     Come,   then,  and   seek  Him  and 
remain  with  Him,  and  then  follow  and  learn 
of  Him,  because  He  is  meek  and  lowly  of  heart. 
Not  as  though  you   should   seek  to  make 
yourself  well  pleasing  to  your  foes  and  the 
world.     No  ;  do   as   Jesus  did.     What  you 
can  say  and  do  for  your  justification  that 
say  and  do.     You  owe  that  not  only  to  the 
truth  and  to  love,  you  owe  it  also  to  your 
fellow-man.    For  many  vexations  and  insults 
in  the  world  arise  from  a  misunderstanding, 
and  may  frequently  through  quiet  and  simple 
explanations  be  removed  and  adjusted.     To 
remain  silent  in  all  circumstances,  to  agree 
to  everything,  not  to  consider  it  worth  one's 
while  to  open  one's  mouth  to  defend  one's 
self  before  the  world,  is  more  the  result  of 
pride*  and  arrogance,  which  are  an  abomi- 
nation to  the  Lord.    If,  however,  you  have 
justified  yourself  quietly  and  with  dignity, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN.      chap,  xviii. 


then  proceed  no  further ;  leave  the  rest  to  going  ;  but  the  lad  went  in  spite  of  this, 

the  Lord,  who  says,  "  Vengeance  is  Mine ;  I  He    came    back   and   received   three  times 

will  repay."     Say   not   an    eye   for  an  eye,  twenty-five    lashes,    which    the    barbarian 

a  tooth  for  a  tooth.     Do  not  repay  the  evil-  accompanied   with    the   mocking   question, 

doer  with  evil,  but  overcome  evil  with  good.  "  What  can  your  Jesus  do  for  you  now  ? " 

Learn  from  your  Lord,  as  good  learners  in  "  He    strengthens    me    to    bear    all    this," 

the  school  of  His  passion,  meekness,  placa-  answered  the  poor  lad  the  first  time  ;    "  He 

bility,  and  Christian  forgiveness.     Learn  of  helps  me  to  believe  in  a  future  reward,"  the 

Him  to  bear  bonds,  indignity,  smiting,  for  second  time.     And  when  he  was  beaten  the 

His  glory.     Thus  the  apostles  copied  their  third    time    and    was    nigh    expiring,   and 

Lord.      "  Being    reviled,   we    bless ;    being  the  mocking  question  must  yet  once  more 

persecuted,  we   suffer  it"   (I    Cor.   iv.    12).  be    heard   by   him,   he   said   with   his    last 

They  have  said  and  have  themselves  followed  breath,  "  Jesus  helps  me  to  pray  for  you." 

the  precepts  they  gave  to  others  for  similar  What  was  possible  to  a  negro  lad,  a  beginner 

circumstances:    "Be   always  ready  to   give  in  the  Christian  life,  were  possible,  should 

an  answer,"  etc.  (1  Pet.  iii.  15-18).     Do  as  be  more  possible,  to  you  grown-up  Christians  ! 

did  that  negro  lad  whose  master  would  not  You  can  attain  to  it  if,  like  David,  you  do  not 

permit  him  to  go  to  hear   the   missionary  look  to  the  man  who  injures  you,  but  to  the 

preach.     His   tyrannical  master  threatened  Lord  who  has  permitted  him  to  do  it  (2  Sam. 

to  whip  him  to  death  if  he  did  not  "give  up  xvi.  10). — Translated  from  F.  Amdt. 

MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  28—40. 

Chap,  xviii.  28 — xix.  22.  Pilate. — Of  all  the  strange  and  moving  incidents  in 
the  scenes  immediately  preceding  our  Lord's  crucifixion,  there  is  none  perhaps 
more  striking  than  that  during  which  Pontius  Pilate  uttered  these  memorable 
words  :  "  Behold  the  man  !  " 

I.  Pilate's  sincerity. — 1.  They  were  not  words  of  mockery  or  scorn;  rather 
they  were  spoken  with  a  sincere  desire  to  influence  men's  pity,  and  thus  bring 
about  the  release  of  Jesus.  2.  We  must  recognise  the  fact  that  all  through 
those  scenes  of  patient  suffering  of  our  Lord,  Pilate  was  endeavouring  to  appease 
the  blood-thirsty  crowds,  while  at  the  same  time  keeping  Jesus  out  of  their 
grasp.  3.  It  is  not  because  he  was  the  guiltiest  in  this  terrible  transaction  that 
his  name  has  been  handed  down  to  execration  in  the  creeds  of  Christendom. 
This  was  done  merely  as  a  record  of  the  time  of  our  Lord's  crucifixion. 

II.  His  unrighteous,  vacillating  action. — 1.  Yet  with  all  allowance  for 
human  frailty,  and  remembering  our  Lord's  words  to  Pilate,  "  He  that  hath 
delivered  Me  unto  thee  hath  the  greater  sin  "  (the  Sanhedrin  judged  Christ 
on  religious  grounds,  and  they  should  have  known  better),  still  Pilate  cannot  be 
exonerated  from  complicity  in  this  great  crime.  He  acted  the  part  of  an  unjust 
judge  ;  for  he  declared  Jesus  to  be  innocent  of  any  crime,  and  yet  ordered  His 
soldiers,  at  the  cry  of  a  furious  mob,  to  lead  the  innocent  to  the  basest  male- 
factor's death.  2.  Pilate  was  an  opportunist,  a  time-server  ;  he  was  chained  by 
the  bonds  of  his  own  evil  life  and  wicked  deeds ;  so  that  when  the  hour  of  trial 
came  he  was  not  free  to  act  on  the  side  of  right  and  truth.  He  had  been  an 
unjust  and  a  cruel  governor  of  Judsea,  had  made  many  enemies,  and  had  already 
been  accused  of  maladministration  at  the  Imperial  Court.  There  were  continued 
revolts  against  his  authority,  especially  as  he  had  seriously  offended  the  religious 
prejudices  of  the  people.  He  knew  many  enemies  were  watching  for  some  slip 
in  his  administration,  so  that  they  might  procure  his  recall  and  punishment. 
Hence  his  vacillating  conduct  all  through  this  trial.  3.  He  saw  through  the 
motives  of  Christ's  enemies,  and  rightly  treated  their  quibbling  accusation 
against  Christ,  about  His  claiming  to  be  a  king,  with  scorn.  He  eagerly  seized 
the  chance  which  the  mention  of  Galilee  in  the  Jews'  accusation  gave  him  of 
getting  rid  of  the  whole  matter  (Luke  xxiii.  7).  But  when  Herod  in  mockery 
sent  back  Jesus  to  him  clothed  in  the  white  robe  of  a  candidate  for  office,  he 
was  compelled  to  make  up  his  mind  one  way  or  another.     4.  His  conscience  was 

511 


chap,  xviii.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


up  in  arms ;  the  meek  and  patient  bearing  of  Jesus,  of  whom  he  had  no  doubt 
heard,  together  with  his  hatred  of  the  Jews,  and  distaste  of  being  compelled  to 
carry  out  their  wishes,  made  him  determined  to  release  Christ.  He  promised  to 
accede  to  the  people  so  far ;  he  would  scourge  Jesus,  so  as  to  disgrace  Him  and 
discredit  any  claims  He  might  make.  When  this  proposal  was  rejected,  another 
was  made — that  Jesus  should  be  delivered,  or  freed  from  custody,  according  to 
a  custom  prevailing  then  at  the  time  of  the  passover.  But  the  Jews,  as  if  to 
show  plainly  to  all  men  their  malice,  cried  out  for  the  release  of  one  Barabbas, 
who  had  been  condemned  for  that  very  crime  of  sedition  of  which  they  falsely 
accused  Jesus.  5.  The  Jews  saw  their  power;  they  knew  that  Pilate  feared 
them,  and  his  vacillating  conduct  at  the  beginning  made  them  confident  that 
they  would  prevail. 

III.  His  great  crime. — 1.  Pilate  therefore  took  his  place  on  the  judgment 
seat,  on  the  tesselated  pavement  raised  above  the  rest  of  the  courtyard  of  the 
palace,  or  praetorium,  and  gave  orders  to  the  soldiers  to  scourge  Jesus,  as  this 
was  also  a  preliminary  to  crucifixion.  2.  After  the  cruel  mocking  and  scourging, 
Jesus  was  led  forth  to  an  elevated  spot  where  all  might  see  Him,  and  Pilate 
said,  "  Behold  the  man  !  "  The  governor  hoped  to  save  Jesus  from  crucifixion 
even  yet.  As  he  sat  on  the  judgment  seat,  his  wife,  moved  by  a  dream,  sent  to 
him,  saying,  "Have  thou  nothing  to  do  with  that  just  man"  (Matt,  xxvii.  19). 
Still  more  did  he  fear  when  the  Jews  accused  Jesus  of  claiming  to  be  the  Son  of 
God,  and  when  Jesus  Himself  admitted  the  claim.  3.  But  the  Jews  had  one  more 
argument  that  proved  too  powerful  for  time-serving  Pilate:  "If  thou  let  this  man 
go,  thou  art  not  Caesar's  friend."  The  Roman  sense  of  justice,  hatred  of  the  Jews, 
the  clamourings  of  conscience,  were  swept  away  by  the  rising  tide  of  self-interest. 
Pilate  did  what  he  called  on  others  to  do  ;  he  "  beheld  the  man."  Pity,  justice, 
the  voice  of  God,  all  were  in  vain  to  keep  the  sin-shacklecl  time-server  from  this 
great  crime.     Self  in  the  other  scale  made  the  balance  kick  the  beam. 

IV.  His  miserable  end. — 1.  But  even  this  great  crime  did  not  save  him  from 
the  fate  he  dreaded.  He  was  shortly  after  this  accused  of  a  cruel  and  unpro- 
voked attack  on  the  peaceful  Samaritans,  summoned  to  Pome,  tried  and  exiled, 
and,  like  Judas,  was  finally  laid  in  a  suicide's  grave.  2.  Want  of  true  principle 
and  a  time-serving  spirit  will  lead  men  to  the  commission  of  the  greatest  crimes, 
in  the  name  and  for  the  sake  of  policy.  "  What  is  truth  ?  "  said  Pilate,  meaning 
perhaps,  What  has  that  to  do  with  acts  of  government  or  policy?  Much 
every  way,  O  unhappy  Pilate  !  For  righteousness  and  truth  are  eternal  ;  and 
though  the  time-server  may  seem  for  the  moment  to  prevail,  yet  it  shall  only 
serve  to  discover  more  fully  in  the  end  his  utter  confusion.  Thou  didst  imagine 
that  it  was  better,  in  order  to  prevent  a  riot,  to  offer  up  as  a  victim  to  popular 
hatred,  uncondemned,  nay,  pronounced  by  thyself  innocent,  that  poor,  bleeding, 
thorn-crowned  form.  But  thou  wert  in  reality  the  victim — victim  of  thine  own 
evil  deeds  and  of  abject  fear  of  the  people.  3.  The  seeming  victim  became  the 
conqueror — the  unjust  judge  became  a  despised  exile ;  and  the  people  who 
invoked  on  their  heads  the  awful  curse,  "  His  blood  be  on  us  and  on  our 
children,"  still  wander  homeless  on  earth,  until  they  behold  Christ  as  "  the 
Lamb  of  God  who  beareth  away  the  sin  of  the  world." 

Ver.  36.  The  true  nature  of  Christ's  kingdom. — As  the  King  of  the  kingdom 
of  truth  is  from  above,  so  is  His  kingdom.  Although  it  extends  to  this  world, 
and  men  here  on  earth  may  become  members  of  it,  yet  it  is  not  "  of  the  earth, 
earthy."  Christ  did  not  come  to  set  up  an  empire  which  would  extend  itself  by 
conquest,  and  usurp  the  government  of  secular  kingdoms,  although  He  sought 
to  influence  these  indirectly  by  the  establishment  of  His  kingdom.  His  dominion 
is  first  inward,  in  order  that  it  may  at  last  be  outward,  and  that  finally  "  the 

$12 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.      chap,  xviii. 


kingdoms  of  the  world "  may  become  "  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  of  His 
Christ."     That  Christ's  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world  is  seen — 

I.  In  the  means  used  for  its  extension. — 1.  As  the  Redeemer  said  to  the 
vacillating  Roman  judge,  "  If  My  kingdom  were  of  this  world,  then  would  My 
servants  fight."  Earthly  kingdoms  are  extended  mostly  by  conquest.  The  means 
used  for  their  advancement  are  material.  Armies  and  navies,  secular  and  social 
laws,  courts  of  justice,  officers  of  justice,  penalties  and  prisons,  are  among  the 
many  means  employed  for  the  external  and  internal  order  and  safety  of  the 
kingdoms  of  earth.  2.  And  these  in  their  place  are  not  to  be  contemned  or  set 
aside.  Righteous  political  and  social  government  is  to  be  hailed  with  joy.  But 
none  of  these  means  in  themselves  can  raise  men  nearer  God.  Rome  had  a 
wonderful  code  of  laws,  a  noble  political  system,  a  far-reaching  and  powerful 
dominion.  But  these  things  made  her  corruption  only  more  conspicuous  and  hei 
fall  more  terrible.  3.  Christ's  kingdom  rests  on  principles  of  eternal  truth. 
The  aim  and  end  of  His  dominion  is  not  earthly  glory,  conquest,  power ;  but  the 
advance  of  spiritual  and  moral  ends.  And  it  must  have  been  surprising  to  those 
among  whom  Jesus  moved,  and  whose  idea  of  kingdom  and  dominion  did  not  rise 
above  the  empires  and  governments  of  time,  to  hear  Christ's  claim,  and  then  to 
look  around  for  the  means  by  which  He  sought  to  support  it.  It  was  this  that 
alienated  the  Jews,  who  longed  for  conquest  and  earthly  glory.  It  was  this  that 
staggered  Pilate  when  the  Saviour  acknowledged  that  He  was  a  king.  Christ's 
kingdom  also  is  not  of  this  world — 

II.  In  the  scope  of  its  government. — 1.  It  is  not  restricted  to  earth  and  time, 
like  the  kingdoms  of  this  world.  Its  laws  do  not  fluctuate  or  change  with 
changing  times.  They  are  ever  the  same — unalterable — as  the  expressions  of 
truth  and  righteousness.  It  can  and  does  exist  alongside  of  various  forms  of 
earthly  government ;  its  spirit  and  principles  may,  indeed,  enter  into,  inspire, 
and  purify  them  all.  2.  And  that  is  so  because  it  is  the  kingdom  of  the  truth. 
It  is  set  up  in  the  hearts  of  men,  putting  an  end  to  the  reign  of  the  spirit  of  lies, 
triumphing  over  the  evil,  evoking  humility,  faith,  love,  hope,  purity,  and  every 
spiritual  grace ;  in  short,  making  men  new  creatures,  in  spirit  and  mind  like  to 
the  King.  3.  And  thus  the  subjects  of  this  kingdom  are  not  bound  to  it  by  any 
merely  external  tie,  which  might  at  any  time  be  broken,  as  in  the  case  of  subjects 
of  an  earthly  kingdom.  They  are  not  forced  against  their  will  to  serve  this 
King,  as  are  enslaved  subjects  of  an  earthly  tyrant  and  of  the  prince  of  the 
power  of  the  air.  No ;  for  in  this  kingdom  truth  prevails,  and  he  who  rebels 
against  truth  knows  that  he  rebels  against  his  higher  nature.  And  the  true 
subjects  of  this  unworldly  kingdom  are  willingly  and  joyfully  submissive  to  its 
laws  and  rules,  because  its  King  rules  in  their  hearts  and  lives.  His  love  is 
their  constraint,  His  service  their  joy.  That  Christ's  kingdom  is  not  of  this 
world  is  seen' in  the  fact  of — 

III.  Its  universality  and  perpetuity. — 1.  Less  and  less  as  the  years  pass  is 
any  earthly  monarch  likely  to  achieve  universal  dominion.  And  even  when 
great  empires  have  been  builded  up  by  mighty  conquerors  they  have  speedily  been 
broken  in  pieces  and  have  perished.  The  race  of  to-day  treads  on  the  ruins  of 
the  past.  Beneath  our  feet  are  the  ruined  homes,  shrines,  palaces,  of  great 
peoples  and  kingdoms.  It  seemed  in  their  day  as  if  they  were  founded  for  ever, 
and  now  only  their  sculptured  stones  remain  to  show  their  glory  and  power. 
Egypt,  Assyria,  Babylon,  Persia,  Greece,  Rome,  and  many  another  rise  up  in 
memory  to  tell  us  that  their  power  and  glory  are  in  the  dust.  2.  And  why  could 
they  not  remain?  They  were  not  founded  on  truth,  on  eternal  reality.  The 
nation  and  government  founded  on  righteousness  alone  can  stand.  And  when 
nations  and  governments  forget  God,  when  peoples  make  their  laws  and  conduct 
their  negotiations  without  Him,  when  they  decree  that  nations  and  governments 

LL  513 


chap,  xviii.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


have  nothing  to  do  with  the  maintenance  and  advancement  of  the  kingdom  of 
truth,  then  their  end  is  near  (Isa.  lx.  12).  3.  For  Christ's  kingdom  alone  and  those 
who  subject  themselves  to  Him  are  enduring.  His  kingdom  alone  will  advance 
through  all  generations,  and  shall  endure  throughout  eternity.  And  the  Churches 
and  kingdoms  who  submit  to  and  honour  its  King  shall  also  endure.  Individual 
governments  and  ecclesiastical  communities  may  rise  and  pass  away.  But  amid 
all  turmoil  and  change  this  all-embracing  kingdom  shall  advance,  gathering  to 
itself  faithful  peoples  and  communities  in  its  progress,  until  the  kingdoms  of  the 
world  shall  become  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  of  His  Christ. 

Ver.  37.  The  King  of  the  spiritual  kingdom. — When  Jesus  stood  before  Pilate, 
the  governor,  seeking  to  elicit  the  facts  as  to  the  charge  laid  against  our  Lord 
by  the  Jews,  sought  especially  to  arrive  at  the  truth  regarding  His  alleged 
claim  to  be  a  king.  This  especially  touched  the  honour  of  the  Roman,  and  the 
peace  of  his  government.  Was  this  one  of  those  numerous  pretenders  to  religious 
and  temporal  leadership  of  the  Jewish  people  who  were  ever  and  anon  rising  up 
and  leading  men  after  them  ?  Had  our  Lord  replied  directly  by  "  yes  "  or  "  no  " 
to  the  Roman  governor's  question,  He  would  have  left  a  false  impression.  Had 
He  said  simply,  "  Yes,  I  am  a  king,"  Pilate  would  have  considered  the  charge  of 
the  Jews  justified.  Had  he  said  "  No,"  He  would  have  left  Pilate  with  a  false 
idea  as  to  His  true  nature  and  position.  Therefore  He  replied  that  He  was  truly 
a  king,  but  that  His  kingdom  was  not  of  this  world. 

I.  Christ  is  truly  a  king  by  nature  and  descent. — 1.  "  Unto  this  end  have  I 
been  born,"  etc. ;  "  I  came  forth  from  the  Father,  and  am  come  into  the  world  " 
(xvi.  28;  also  x.  36).  His  birth  in  time  was  a  coming  forth  to  fulfil  an  eternal 
divine  purpose,  and  the  fulfilment  of  this  purpose  rested  on  His  essential  nature 
as  the  Son  of  God.  He  was  on  earth  in  lowly  guise  as  the  Son  of  man  ;  but  He 
came  into  the  world,  because  He  existed  before  all  worlds  with  the  Father.  2.  Nor 
did  He  come  to  the  world  to  assume  this  dominion  on  His  own  authority.  It 
was  in  complete  accordance  with  the  Father's  will  that  He  came,  so  that  it  is  also 
said  that  the  Father  sent  Him.  The  sending  and  the  coming  are  indeed,  viewed 
from  the  heavenly  standpoint,  one  divine  act.  But  for  this  end,  that  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  might  be  established,  Christ  became  obedient  to  the  Father.  By  this 
very  obedience  He  put  Himself  into  the  true  position  from  which  He  could 
conquer  and  reign  over  men,  bringing  them  back  to  loyalty  and  obedience  to  the 
Father.  3.  And  because  of  this  He  hath  been  highly  exalted  (Phil.  ii.  9,  10 ; 
Heb.  v.  8,  9 ;  Ps.  ii.  6-8) ;  and  to  Him  has  been  given  an  everlasting  dominion, 
a  kingdom  that  shall  know  no  end. 

II.  Christ  is  King  of  the  spiritual  kingdom  because  by  His  knowledge, 
wisdom,  and  power  He  is  fitted  to  govern. — 1.  Not  even  the  wisest  and  best  of 
men  have  been  able  to  save  the  human  race  from  evil  and  bring  them  back  to 
allegiance  to  eternal  Truth.  We  have  only  to  look  back  on  the  history  of  our 
race  to  see  how  true  this  is.  The  race  has  wandered  ever  further  from  the 
truth.  Wise  kings  have  reigned,  wise  leaders  have  risen,  even  divinely  inspired 
leaders.  The  divinely  given  law  of  Moses  itself  was  but  a  preparatory  and 
imperfect  system,  which  was  to  pass  away.  How  much  more  imperfect  then  the 
systems  of  a  Zarathushtra,  a  Kong-fu-tze,  a  Plato  !  None  had  the  knowledge, 
the  wisdom,  the  power,  to  bring  men  under  the  dominion  of  Truth.  2.  But 
Christ  had  all  these.  The  eternal  manifestation  of  eternal  Truth,  He  knew  what 
men  needed.  He  alone  could  fully  declare  the  mind  of  God,  and  reveal  to  men 
heavenly  realities ;  testify  to  truth  already  revealed  in  law  and  prophecy ;  and, 
above  all,  manifest  the  reality  of  the  Father's  love  in  His  own  person  and  work. 
3.  And  He  is  King  not  only  because  He  bore  witness  to  the  truth.  His 
authority  consisted  not  alone  in  the  teaching  of  certain  truths  concerning  man 

514 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.      chap,  xviii. 


and  God  and  eternal  things,  but  because  of  His  power  to  attract  men  to  Himself, 
to  transform  them  into  His  likeness,  and  thus  make  them  true  subjects  of  His 
eternal  kingdom. 

III.  Christ's  kingship  is  a  fact  of  history  and  experience. — 1.  To  Him  is 
given  universal  dominion  over  all  who  are  of  the  truth.  We  see  before  our  eyes 
the  ancient  prophecies  being  daily  fulfilled.  From  every  land  and  nation,  all 
peoples  and  tongues,  they  come  to  subject  themselves  to  His  kingly  sway.  All 
whose  hearts  are  moved  by  the  Spirit,  who  are  attracted  toward  the  truth,  who 
seek  truly  to  know  and  love  God — all  such  hear  Christ's  voice,  and  submit  them- 
selves to  His  mild  and  gracious  authority.  2.  And  how  rapid,  comparatively 
speaking,  has  been  the  spread  of  His  kingship  when  we  remember  that  He  is  the 
King  of  truth,  and  that  men  by  nature  are  opposed  to  Him.  So  all  along  the 
course  there  has  been  opposition  from  without  and  error  from  within  to  hinder 
His  government.  And  He  has  conquered  first,  not  the  dreamy  and  superstitious 
races  of  the  East,  but  the  highest  type  of  humanity  in  the  West.  And  now  His 
authority  as  the  King  of  truth  is  not  confined  to  a  little  band  of  disciples,  but  is 
more  or  less  faithfully  submitted  to  by  more  than  one  quarter  of  the  population 
of  the  globe.  And  every  day  more  and  more  men  are  bowing  the  knee  in  His 
name  and  confessing  that  He  is  Lord.  3.  And  individual  experience  confesses 
the  blessed  power  of  His  reign.  When  He  comes  the  darkness  passes  with  the 
works  of  darkness;  and  love,  peace,  joy  abound.  The  love  of  truth  leads  to 
freedom  from  error  and  sin.  "  He  draws  all  men  unto  Him."  An  invisible 
bond  of  fellowship  unites  to  Him  men  of  every  clime  and  time,  as  joyful  fellow- 
subjects  of  that  King  "  whose  kingdom  ruleth  over  all." 

Ver.  37.  The  King. — How  does  Jesus  forward  His  kingdom  ? 

I.  Not  by  material  force. — 1.  Look  at  the  history  of  those  who  have  ruled  in 
this  way :  the  Caesars,  a  Scylla,  a  Marius,  a  Tiberius,  whose  tenure  of  power 
was  distinguished  by  the  frightful  turmoil  of  human  passion,  the  flowing  of 
rivers  of  blood,  etc.  There  was  nothing  new  or  strange  in  all  this.  It  is  an 
epitome  of  the  history  of  mankind.  2.  It  was  not  thus  that  God  wished  to 
forward  His  kingdom  among  men.  He  gave  in  a  strange  and  unexpected  manner 
His  method  in  the  form  of  a  criminal  nailed  to  a  cross,  conquering  thus  for  Himself 
an  empire  of  which  no  Caesar  ever  dreamed.  3.  At  the  foot  of  that  cross  men 
learned  that  there  is  in  the  world  something  more  powerful  than  material  force 
— it  is  mind  ;  and  something  even  more  powerful  than  intellect — it  is  love.  "  I, 
if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto  Me  "  (xii.  32). 

II.  Not  by  force  of  cleverness. — 1.  The  kings  of  material  force  must  be  put  on 
one  side.  Christ  is  not  among  them.  We  look  higher.  Above  force  there  is 
skill.  You  have  seen  the  genius  of  cleverness  contriving  its  fabrications  in  the 
shade,  and  preparing  for  a  successful  issue.  With  what  patience  it  creates  its 
resources.  With  what  assurance  it  bids  audacity  supply  what  is  lacking, 
diverting  the  imaginations  of  men  until  the  hour  when  it  feels  itself  strong 
enough  to  unveil  its  pretensions.  2.  People  admire  this  success.  But  on  a 
nearer  view  some  disquieting  circumstances  are  brought  to  light.  How  many 
calculations,  how  many  ruses  and  deceits  are  involved  !  Ask  a  clever  man  of  the 
world  what  he  thinks  of  one  who  would  endeavour  to  succeed,  whilst  attending 
to  the  dictates  of  morality,  in  following  the  line  of  duty  to  the  end  without 
deviating,  and  you  will  see  with  what  scorn  he  will  dismiss  this  naive  innocence 
into  the  region  of  chimeras.  3.  And  yet  Christ  has  founded  a  greater  empire 
than  all  those  who  have  used  only  their  cleverness  and  skill;  and  when  we 
examine  His  life  no  trace  of  this  cleverness  is  found  in  it.  This  word  is  indeed 
incompatible  with  Christ's  character.  When  a  critic,  attempting  to  explain  the 
marvellous  dominion  which  Jesus  exercised  over  His  own,  attributed  to  Him 

515 


chap,  xviii.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


calculation,  dissimulation,  etc.,  the  public  conscience  arose  in  dissent  and  gave 
an  immense  protest.  4.  If  any  one  wanted  to  proclaim  a  new  doctrine,  and  gain 
the  adherence  of  the  intelligent  people  to  it,  he  would  not  shut  himself  up  in  an 
obscure  province  like  Galilee,  or  come  with  the  most  sublime  teaching  to  the 
most  ignorant,  who  did  not  comprehend  the  full  beauty  of  it.  At  the  beginning 
of  His  ministry  a  chief  ruler  of  the  sect  of  the  Pharisees  came  to  Jesus.  Had 
He  been  desirous  of  gaining  adherents,  He  would  have  endeavoured  to  treat  him 
with  caution,  so  that  He  might  gain  the  Pharisees  to  His  side.  But  we  know 
how  Jesus  received  Nicodemus.  And  to  the  people  who  came  to  Him  with  their 
Messianic  dreams  (vi.  15),  and  sought  to  make  Him  a  king,  He  spoke  in  such 
fashion  that  they  went  back  fr  om  Him,  leaving  only  the  twelve  (vi.  66).  Was 
this  cleverness  ?  But  those  disciples — did  He  not  promise  them  speedy 
victory,  thrones  and  kingdoms,  etc.  ?  Nay,  He  rather  announced  persecutions 
and  trials  awaiting  them,  etc.  Was  this  cleverness  ?  He  spoke  the  truth  to  the 
people  and  to  the  Pharisees,  denouncing  the  latter  for  their  sins,  etc.  Wasithis 
cleverness  ?  No  ;  from  the  point  of  view  of  policy,  all  this  was  folly.  It  was  not, 
then,  by  skill  and  cleverness  that  Christ  attained  to  His  dominion. 

III.  Not  by  intellectual  force. — 1.  This  realm  also  has  its  kings,  kings  in 
poetry,  philosophy,  art,  science — a  Homer  or  Plato,  a  Raphael  or  Newton. 
Shall  we  place  Christ  in  their  ranks  ?  2.  There  are  three  classes  of  rulers  in 
this  domain,  corresponding  to  the  beautiful,  the  good,  the  true.  To  the  desire  of 
the  beautiful  the  domain  of  art  corresponds  ;  to  the  desire  of  the  true  the  domain 
of  science  ;  to  the  desire  of  the  good  the  domain  of  morality.  Each  domain  has 
its  kings.  In  which  shall  we  seek  for  Jesus?  3.  Is  it  on  the  heights  of  Artl 
No,  although  Jesus  has  brought  a  new  ideal  to  the  imagination,  and  has 
revealed  new  beauty  which  had  till  then  been  unnoticed ;  and  certainly  art  owes 
to  Christianity  some  of  its  grandest  inspirations.  When  the  repentant  sinner 
beats  on  his  breast,  when  the  Saviour  of  the  world  dies  on  the  cross,  is  it 
the  imagination  only  that  is  moved,  or  are  you  taken  into  another  region — the 
region  of  holiness  and  love  ?  Yes.  4.  Is  it  in  the  field  of  science  and  its  brilliant 
discoveries  and  researches,  etc.,  that  we  shall  place  the  Redeemer?  Again,  no. 
His  teaching,  it  is  true,  is  in  accordance  with  the  highest  laws  of  the  mind. 
And  it  is  in  Christian  lands  that  science  has  advanced  most.  But  here  Christ 
did  not  seek  to  reign  (Matt.  xi.  25,  26).  His  Gospel  was  not  addressed  especially 
to  the  wise  men  of  this  world.  The  force  by  which  He  draws  men  is  not  con- 
nected with  human  logic.  He  did  not  sprak  in  syllogisms,  or  like  a  master  of  the 
schools.  This  has  been  made  a  reproach  against  Christianity  by  such  philosophers 
as  Lucian,  Celsus,  Porphyry.  And  supposing  Christ  had  reigned  in  the  realm 
of  intelligence  alone,  would  the  wise  have  come  around  Him  ?  And  then  what 
of  the  poor  and  unlearned?  To  the  poor  the  Gospel  was  preached  (Luke  iv.  18). 
5.  Above  the  intellectual  is  the  moral.  There  is  nothing  higher.  The  moral 
order  is  the  will  of  God.  It  is  in  this  supreme  order  that  Jesus  is  King — King 
by  holiness,  King  by  love,  for  these  are  the  two  poles  of  that  world.  Thus  He 
said  to  Pilate,  "  I  am  a  king  ;  for  this  end  was  I  born."  And  He  is  not  King 
here  simply  because  He  revealed  to  men  a  new  ideal.  Certainly  He  did  this  : 
all  will  accord  that  He  gave  new  ideas  concerning  love  to  God  and  man.  But 
this  is  not  all.  Nor  did  He  merely  enunciate  some  great  moral  verities.  He 
was  not  merely  the  prophet  of  truth,  but  He  was  the  Truth  Himself — the 
incarnation  of  moral  truth.  6.  What  Jesus  desires  is  the  dominion  in  men's 
souls — a  spiritual  dominion,  the  most  real  and  absolute.  And  it  is  He  who 
lives  and  reigns  from  age  to  age.  By  His  words  and  actions,  His  miracles,  He 
showed  His  right  to  this  authority  which  He  claimed,  and  the  love  which  He 
desired  should  be  accorded  to  Him  universally  by  His  followers.  And  the 
beauty  of  His  character,  the  power  of  His  love  displayed  in  His  saving  work, 

516 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.       chap.  XViii. 


has  drawn  men  to  Him  in  the  bonds  of  an  affection  which  is  more  and  more 
becoming  worldwide. — Abridged  from  Eug.  Bersier. 

Ver.  37,  38.  The  scepticism  of  Pilate. — The  lesson  which  we  are  to  draw  from 
this  verse  must  depend  upon  the  view  we  take  of  the  spirit  in  which  the  words 
were  spoken.  Some  of  the  best  commentators  conceive  them  to  have  been  words 
of  mockery,  and  such  is  the  great  Lord  Bacon's  view.  "'What  is  truth?'  said 
jesting  Pilate,  and  would  not  stay  for  an  answer."  In  all  deference  to  such 
authority,  we  cannot  believe  that  this  sentence  was  spoken  in  jest.  In  Pilate's 
whole  conduct  there  is  no  trace  of  such  a  tone.  It  betrays  throughout  much  of 
uncertainty,  nothing  of  lightness.  He  was  cruelly  tormented  with  the  perplexity 
of  efforts  to  save  his  prisoner.  He  risked  his  own  reputation.  He  pronounced 
Him,  almost  with  vehemence,  to  be  innocent.  He  even  felt  awe,  and  was  afraid 
of  Him.  In  such  a  frame  of  mind  mockery  was  impossible.  Let  us  try  to 
comprehend  the  character  of  the  man  who  asked  this  question.  His  character 
will  help  us  to  judge  the  tone  in  which  he  asked.  And  his  character,  the 
character  of  his  mind  and  life,  are  clear  enough  from  the  few  things  recorded 
of  him.  He  first  hears  what  the  people  have  to  say ;  then  asks  the  opinion  of 
the  priests — then  comes  back  to  Jesus — goes  again  to  the  priests  and  people — lends 
his  ear-— listens  to  the  ferocity  on  the  one  hand,  and  feels  the  beauty  on  the  other, 
balancing  between  them ;  and  then  he  becomes  bewildered,  as  a  man  of  the 
world  is  apt  to  do  who  has  had  no  groundwork  of  religious  education,  and  hears 
superficial  discussions  on  religious  matters,  and  superficial  charges,  and  superficial 
slanders,  till  he  knows  not  what  to  think.  What  could  come  out  of  such 
procedure  1  Nothing  but  that  cheerlessness  of  soul  to  which  certainty  respecting 
anything  and  everything  here  on  earth  seems  unattainable.  This  is  the  exact 
mental  state  which  we  call  scepticism.  Out  of  that  mood,  when  he  heard  the 
enthusiast  before  him  speak  of  a  kingdom  of  the  truth,  there  broke  a  sad,  bitter, 
sarcastic,  "  What  is  truth  ?  "  Who  knows  anything  about  it  ?  Another  dis- 
coverer of  the  undiscoverable  ?  Jesting  Pilate !  With  Pilate  the  matter  was 
beyond  a  jest. 

1.  The  causes  of  Pilate's  scepticism. — 1.  Indecision  of  character. — Here  is  a 
man  knowing  the  right  and  doing  the  wrong,  not  willing  to  do  an  act  of  manifest 
injustice  if  he  can  avoid  it,  but  hesitating  to  prevent  it,  for  fear  of  a  charge 
against  himself — pitiably  vacillating  because  his  hands  were  tied  by  the  con- 
sciousness of  past  guilt  and  personal  danger.  How  could  such  a  man  be  certain 
about  anything  ? 

2.  Falseness  to  his  own  convictions. — Pilate  had  a  conviction  that  Jesus  was 
innocent.  Instead  of  acting  at  once  on  that,  he  went  and  parleyed.  He  argued 
and  debated  till  the  practical  force  of  the  conviction  was  unsettled.  Pilate  was 
false  to  his  conscience. 

3.  The  taint  of  the  worldly  temper  of  his  day. — Pilate  had  been  a  public  man. 
He  knew  life,  had  mixed  much  with  the  world's  business  and  the  world's  politics, 
had  come  across  a  multiplicity  of  opinions,  and  gained  a  smattering  of  them  all. 
He  knew  how  many  philosophies  and  religions  pretended  to  an  exclusive  pos- 
session of  truth,  and  how  the  pretensions  of  each  were  overthrown  by  another. 
And  his  incredulity  was  but  a  specimen  of  the  scepticism  fashionable  in  his  day. 
To  such  a  character  Jesus  would  not  explain  His  truth.  He  gave  no  reply ;  He 
held  His  peace.  God's  truth  is  too  sacred  to  be  expounded  to  superficial  worldli- 
ness  in  its  transient  fit  of  earnestness. 

4.  That  priestly  bigotry  which  forbids  inquiry  and  makes  doubt  a  crime. — The 
priests  of  that  day  had  much  to  answer  for.  The  results  of  their  priestcraft 
were  twofold.  The  first  result  was  seen  in  the  fanaticism  of  the  people  who 
cried  for  blood ;  the  second  in  the  scepticism  of  Pilate. 

517 


chap.  Xviii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   JOHN. 


II.   The  way  appointed  for  discovering  "what  is  truth."— 1.  I  am  not 

about  to  be  guilty  of  the  presumption  of  answering  the  question  which  Jesus  did 
not  answer.  Some  persons  hearing  the  text  might  think  it  to  be  the  duty  of 
any  man  who  took  it  as  a  text  to  preach  upon  to  lay  down  what  truth  is.  2.  The 
truth  cannot  be  compressed  into  a  sermon.  The  reply  to  Pilate's  question 
cannot  be  contained  in  any  verbal  form.  3.  The  truth  is  infinite  as  the 
firmament  above  you.  In  childhood  both  seem  near  and  measurable ;  but 
with  years  they  grow  and  grow,  and  seem  further  off,  and  further  and 
grander,  and  deeper  and  vaster,  as  God  Himself,  till  you  smile  to  remember 
how  you  thought  you  could  touch  the  sky,  and  blush  to  recollect  the  proud  and 
self-sufficient  way  in  which  you  used  to  talk  of  knowing  or  preaching  "  the 
truth."  4.  The  truth  is  made  up  of  principles  :  an  inward  life,  not  any  mere 
formula  of  words.  God's  character :  spiritual  worship ;  the  divine  life  in  the 
soul.  How  shall  I  put  that  into  sentences  ten  or  ten  thousand  ?  "  The  words 
which  I  speak  unto  you,  they  are  truth,  and  they  are  life."  5.  The  appointed 
ways  to  teach  this  truth.  They  are  three:  (1)  Independence.  Let  no  man  start 
as  if  independence  savoured  of  presumption.  No  man  cares  for  your  health  as 
you  do ;  therefore  you  rely  blindly  upon  none.  No  man  has  the  keeping  of 
your  own  soul,  or  cares  for  it  as  you  do.  For  yourself,  therefore,  you  inquire 
and  think,  and  you  refuse  to  delegate  that  work  to  bishop,  priest,  or  Chuich. 
Call  they  that  presumption  ?  (2)  Humbleness.  There  are  two  kinds  of  temper 
contrary  to  this  spirit.  The  first  is  a  disputing,  captious  temper.  The  next  is 
a  hopeless  spirit.  (3)  Action.  This  was  Christ's  rule  :  "  If  any  man  will  do  His 
will,"  etc.  A  blessed  rule  ;  a  plain  and  simple  rule.  Here  we  are  in  a  world  of 
mystery,  where  all  is  difficult  and  very  much  dark — where  a  hundred  jarring 
creeds  declare  themselves  to  be  the  truth,  and  all  are  plausible.  How  shall  a  man 
decide  ?  Let  him  do  the  right  that  lies  before  him  :  much  is  uncertain — some 
things  at  least  are  clear.  Whatever  else  may  be  wrong,  it  must  be  right  to  be 
pure — to  be  just  and  tender,  and  merciful  and  honest.  It  must  be  right  to  love, 
and  to  deny  oneself.  Let  him  do  the  will  of  God,  and  he  shall  know. — 
F.   W.  Robertson. 

Yers.  39,  40.  Jesus  rejected  for  Barabbas. — The  sad  scenes  of  this  history 
follow  each  other  with  great  rapidity.  The  apostle  summarises  the  various 
incidents  in  these  scenes  with  masterly  force  in  his  bold  sermon  to  those  Jews, 
after  he  and  John  in  the  name  of  Jesus  had  healed  the  lame  man  in  the 
temple.  It  was  the  same,  yet  not  the  same  Peter  who  had  acted  such  an 
ignoble  part  in  those  very  scenes.  They  delivered  up  Jesus,  whom  God  had 
glorified ;  they  denied  the  holy  and  just  One  before  Pilate,  who  was  more  just 
than  they  (xix.  11),  for  he  declared  that  Jesus  was  innocent  and  should  be 
freed.  But  worse  than  all,  they  desired  that  a  murderer  should  be  granted 
unto  them  in  place  of  the  Holy  One  and  the  Just  (Acts  iii.).  Here  we  consider 
their  awful  choice. 

I.  Pilate's  plan  for  the  release  of  Jesus. — 1.  The  Roman  governor  was  sore 
perplexed.  Conscience,  superstition,  hatred  of  the  Jews,  a  strange  drawing 
toward  this  silent,  dignified  prisoner,  made  him  long  to  wash  his  hands  of  the 
whole  matter.  2.  He  had  sent  Jesus  to  Herod,  thus  thinking  to  get  rid  of 
the  trouble ;  but  now  Jesus  is  returned  for  his  judgment,  and  he  must  decide. 
He  had  almost  made  up  his  mind  to  brave  those  men  who  desired  the  death  of 
Jesus  for  no  fault,  but  to  gratify  their  own  envy  and  malignity.  3.  But  the 
governor  bethought  him  of  an  expedient  which  should  succeed.  At  this  passover 
feast  it  was  the  custom  to  deliver  up  to  the  multitude  one  of  the  offenders 
against  law  whom  they  desired  to  see  liberated.  It  was  a  symbolic  reminder  to 
the  people  of  their  own  deliverance  from  Egyptian  bondage.     Pilate  grasped  at 

518 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.      chap,  xviii. 


this  expedient.  He  would  offer  the  mob  the  choice  between  this  meek,  innocent, 
spotless  man,  and  the  greatest  criminal  who  deservedly  lay  in  a  dungeon,  one 
Jesus  Barabbas  (Mark  xv.  7).  Surely,  although  the  leaders  might  do  otherwise, 
the  body  of  the  crowd  would  choose  Jesus. 

II.  The  Jews'  choice  of  Barabbas. — 1.  Pilate  was  to  learn  that  opportunism 
is  neither  the  pleasantest  nor  safest  policy.  It  is  a  two-edged  weapon,  and 
often  wounds  the  hand  that  wields  it.  2.  He  had  made  sure  of  the  issue  of  his 
expedient,  which  would  save  him  the  trouble  and  unpopularity  of  having  to 
refuse  the  request  of  those  turbulent  leaders  of  the  people.  But  he  was  to  learn 
how  far  they  would  descend  in  their  hatred  to  this  innocent  sufferer,  who  had 
spoken  the  truth  which  so  enraged  those  rulers.  Thus  his  expedient  failed,  and 
the  case  was  still  laid  on  his  conscience  for  decision.  3.  But  his  attempt  brought 
out  the  true  feelings  of  those  godless  men.  The  chief  priests  moved  the  people 
that  they  should  rather  ask  Barabbas  (Mark  xv.  11).  It  may  thus  be  gathered 
that  had  the  people  been  left  to  themselves  they  would  never  have  made  this 
awful  choice.  But  they  were  more  subservient  to  their  leaders  than  anxious  for 
justice  and  truth.  The  worst  kind  of  slavery  this.  4.  Well  had  Jesus  told 
those  leaders  and  their  too  subservient  followers  their  origin  and  descent  (viii.  44). 
And  now  they  openly  proved  it  before  all  the  world  by  choosing  one  who  had 
hitherto  been  one  of  the  most  conspicuous  children  of  their  evil  father. 

Lesson. — Let  us  not,  however,  too  harshly  condemn  those  men  thus  hurried 
away  by  passion.  Peter  did  not  when  he  said,  "And  now,  brethren,  I  wot 
that  through  ignorance  ye  did  it,"  etc.  (Acts  hi.  17).  Do  not  men  sometimes 
choose  the  evil1?  Before  knowing  Christ,  did  not  even  Christians  perhaps 
company  with  those  who  were  His  enemies  and  children  of  the  wicked  one  ? 
Did  they  not  delight  more  in  them  than  in  His  service  and  the  company  of 
His  people  1  And  do  not  such  who  have  now  chosen  Christ  look  back,  with 
feelings  of  mingled  sorrow  and  shame,  to  think  that  they  so  long  rejected  the 
Holy  One  and  the  Just,  and  companied  so  long  with  those  who  were  children  and 
servants  of  the  prince  of  this  world  ? 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Ver.  36.  The  true  use  of  this  life  determined  ness  holds  out  her  greedy  hand  and  party 

by  its  connexion  with  that  to  come. — You  spirit  rends  the  air  with  the  clamorous  cry, 

will  never  make  a  proper  use  of  the  life  that  while  pride  looks  disdainfully  on  the  poor 

now  is   until    you  regard  it   in   connexion  and  rank   draws  its    invidious    boundaries, 

with  that  which  is  to  come.     Standing  at  the  while    capital    is    regardless    of    the    true 

Saviour's  cross   you  will  be  able  to  take  a  interests    of   labour   and    merit  must  give 

right  view  of  both  worlds.     You  will  see  place  to  patronage,  there  can  be  no  lasting 

earth  in   all  its  littleness  and  tumult,  and  reformation.      We  must  strike  the  upas  at 

heaven  in  all  its  magnitude   and  peaceful-  its  roots.     If  you,  as  political  reformers,  can 

ness ;   and  while  rendering  to   the  one  the  amputate  any  of  the  deadly  branches,  you 

attention    which   its    transient  importance  will    indeed    earn    the    gratitude    of    your 

demands,  you  will  reserve    the  fulness    of  race.    Far  be  it  from  me    to  question  the 

your  energy  for  the  momentous  claims  of  ^utility  of  your  labour ;  but  again  I  tell  you, 

the  other.      I  make  no  apology  for  asking  we  must  strike  the  upas  at  its  root  I    Churoh 

whether  you  are  making  a  kingdom  of  your  of  the  living    God,  this    is   your  business ! 

politics,  and  whether  you  have  begun  at  the  It  is  for  you  to  lift  the  axe  and  smite  the 

true  source  of  all  genuine  and  permanent  deadly  tree  !     You  have  a  tremendous  power 

reformation.      My     firm    conviction    being  which  you  can  bring  to  bear,  not  only  on  the 

that  Christianity  will  adjust  the  relationships  spiritual,  but  on  the  civil  interests  of  man  : 

of  individuals  and  consolidate  the  liberty  of  every  prayer  you  breathe  may  exert  influence 

empires,  my  life  is  consecrated  to   its  ex-  on  the  political  destiny  of  the  nation !     I 

planation  and  enforcement.     When  the  heart  call  upon  you,  therefore,  to  do  your  utmost 

is  right  with  God,  there  will  be  little  difficulty  in  the  propagation  of  the  Christian  faith  ; 

in  arranging  political  details ;  but  while  the  in  the  name  of  God,  I  forbid  you  to  relax 

heart  is  swollen  with  passion,  while  selfish-  any  spiritual  effort.    Toil  on,  and  in  due 

519 


chap,  xviii.     BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


time  there  shall  be  but  one  kingdom  and 
one  King ;  He  shall  come,  whose  right  is  to 
reign — on  His  head  shall  the  crown  flourish. 
Freedom  and  peace  shall  unfurl  their  banners ; 
brotherhood  and  charity  shall  wake  their 
sweetest  music ;  then  shall  a  cry  be  heard, 
loud  as  the  roar  of  the  thunder,  the  rush  of 
the  whirlwind,  and  the  anthem  of  the  sea, 
Alleluia  !  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  have 
become  the  kingdoms  of  our  God  and  of  His 
Christ. — Dr.  Joseph  Parker. 

Ver.  36.  The  majesty  and  sanctity  of  living 
for  the  invisible. — Oh  that  I  could  pour  in 
upon  the  young  the  majesty  and  sanctity 
of  living  for  the  invisible — that  is  to  say, 
for  honour,  and  truth,  and  fidelity !  Oh 
that  I  could  make  you  feel  how  essentially 
brittle,  how  friable,  how  perishable,  are  all 
material  sources  of  strength  !  God  is  the 
centre  of  life,  and  spiritual  realities  are  the 
only  things  that  will  endure.  Stone  and 
iron,  and  silver  and  gold,  and  timber,  and 
cities,  and  nations,  and  outward  things  are 
but  pictures,  painted  soon  to  fade  away  ; 
while  truth  and  love,  and  fidelity,  and 
purity  shall  last  for  ever  and  for  ever. — 
H.  W.  Beecher. 

Ver.  37.  Christ  the  promised  spiritual 
king. — In  the  sublime  vision  of  the  prophet 
Daniel  (chap,  vii.)  a  grand  and  striking 
prophetic  picture  is  given  of  the  conquering 
might  and  the  glorious  establishment  of 
Christ's  kingdom.  And  it  was  because  of 
their  misunderstanding  the  spiritual  drift 
and  meaning  of  such  prophecies,  because 
they  translated  with  gross  laterality  those 
grand  prophetic  promises,  that  the  Jewish 
people  as  a  whole  failed  to  realise  the  true 
greatness  of  the  Saviour  and  rejected  Him 
as  their  king.  But  with  kingly  dignity  our 
Lord  referred  all  those  majestic  prophetic 
visions  to  Himself  and  His  kingdom.  He 
claimed  to  be  the  king  of  a  great  spiritual 
dominion— a  gathering-place  for  all  the 
nations,  to  which  they  should  come  from 
north,  south,  east,  and  west.  It  was  to  be 
unlike  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  repre- 
sented as  those  are  in  the  vision  of  the 
prophet  by  fierce  beasts,  which  war  with 
and  destroy  each  other,  which  are  therefore 
passing  and  temporary.  His  great  and 
universal  dominion  has  its  origin  in  another 
sphere  than  that  of  earth.  When  the  need 
of  earth  was  greatest,  when  the  groaning  of 
enslaved  humanity  rose  loud  and  woeful, 
then  God  came  to  judgment  on  the  king- 
doms of  the  world.  And  then,  behold,  one 
like  the  Son  of  man  came  on  the  clouds  of 
heaven ;  and  to  Him  from  the  Ancient  of 
Days  was  given  dominion  and  glory,  and 
a  kingdom  that  all  peoples,  nations,  and 
languages  should  serve  Him,  etc.  (Dan. 
vii.  14.)  Such  is  the  dominion  Christ  claims 
as   His.      It  is  not  of  this   world.      It  is 

520 


advanced  by  no  material  force.  And  its 
king  comes  to  men  not  in  the  guise  of 
a  conqueror,  in  regal,  warlike  splendour,  but 
meek  and  lowly  as  the  Son  of  man. 

Ver.  37.  "  For  to  me  to  live  is  Christ "  the 
motto  of  Christ's  subjects. — You  have  seen 
a  young  man  whose  spirit  yearns  for  the 
salvation  of  his  race  ;  he  is  educated  and 
mentally  strong ;  his  home  is  a  scene  of 
happiness,  parents  and  relatives  hold  him 
in  highest  regard  ;  were  he  to  employ  his 
talents  in  his  fatherland,  they  might  ensure 
him  competence,  and  perhaps  renown ;  but 
he  is  determined  to  realise  his  convictions  of 
duty  ;  he  is  ready  to  sever  the  strong  attach- 
ments which  bind  him  to  the  land  of  his 
birth,  and  brave  the  innumerable  perils 
which  may  beset  his  enterprise — forasmuch 
as  his  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world.  You 
find  in  such  a  youth  an  illustration  of  a 
principle  already  enunciated;  he  is  not 
destitute  of  interest  in  the  political  progress 
of  his  nation,  far  less  is  he  wanting  in  affec- 
tion to  those  who  gave  him  life — but  he 
cannot  make  a  kingdom  of  such  considera- 
tions ;  he  renders  to  them  the  attention  due 
to  their  respective  merits,  but  in  his  estima- 
tion there  are  claims  whose  importance  is 
infinitely  greater.  His  life-cry  is,  "  For  to  me 
to  live  is  Christ ;  everything  must  subordinate 
itself  to  Christ.  Christ  is  the  fairest  among 
ten  thousand,  and  altogether  lovely ;  he 
redeemed  me  with  His  blood,  and  shall 
be  served  with  undivided  energy,  for  in 
serving  Him  I  am  most  effectually  promoting 
the  well-being  of  all  the  objects  of  my 
love." — Dr.  Joseph  Parker. 

Ver.  37.  The  future  is  Christ's.— Think, 
then.  Who  in  the  past  has  been  loved  more 
than  Jesus  Christ  ?  His  disciples  left  all  for 
Him — they  had  to  choose  ;  on  the  one  side 
His  love  and  the  most  terrible  sacrifices,  on 
the  other  earthly  happiness  and  the  most 
legitimate  affections.  Jesus  has  won  them  1 
Explain  by  what  miracle  this  love  has  been 
enkindled  after  them  among  millions  of  men 
who  have  never  seen  Jesus  Christ ;  for,  do  not 
deceive  yourselves,  this  is  the  feeling  which 
inspired  in  the  Church  of  the  first  centuries 
that  heroic  devotion,  that  love,  which  was 
not  extinguished  by  the  most  savage  and 
atrocious  persecution.  And  if  you  pass  over 
those  eighteen  centuries,  who  to-day  is  loved 
more  than  Jesus  Christ  ?  who  occupies  in 
the  affections  of  men  so  great  a  place  ?  And 
for  us  who  love  Him,  is  Jesus  simply  an  in- 
dividual of  the  past,  a  beautiful  and  touching 
figure,  of  which  history  has  preserved  the 
remembrance  for  us  ?  Is  H  e  not,  on  the 
contrary,  the  Being  whom  we  consider  the 
most  living  and  present?  Is  the  love  of 
which  He  is  the  object  an  abstraction?  and 
has  it  not,  like  the  most  loving  affections,  its 
sorrows  and  trials,  its  anguish  in  our  falls, 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.      chap,  xviii. 


its  joys  in  our  rising  again  ?  Are  we  the 
objects  of  a  fantastic  hallucination  when  we 
feel  His  invisible  presence,  when  the  view  of 
His  holiness  fills  us  with  trouble  in  the  midst 
of  our  wicked  pleasures,  when  repentant  and 
ashamed  we  go  to  weep  upon  His  breast, 
when  repulsed  by  the  world  we  experience 
His  consolations  filling  our  souls  ?  And  if 
we  were  alone  in  the  experience  of  this  love ! 
But  have  you  thought  on  the  matter  ?  This 
love  has  shined  to  all  parts  of  the  world.  We 
see  ourselves  in  the  presence  of  an  inexplic- 
able problem  if  He  is  not  divine.  We  see,  as 
I  have  said,  men  who  have  received  from 
their  likes  an  idolatrous  attachment.  Every 
people  has  its  heroes.  But  He  whom  we 
have  not  seen  is  a  man  who  in  every  country, 
at  all  times,  and  among  races  the  most 
diverse,  has  been  able  to  awaken  in  the 
depths  of  men's  hearts  the  same  emotions 
and  the  same  love.  Is  it  not  certain  that  the 
heroes  of  one  race  have  often  no  renown 
among  other  races,  because  each  of  them 
possesses  the  exclusive  type  of  his  nationality? 
and  gains  his  influence  just  from  that  cause 
that  limits  it  at  the  same  time  ?  Endeavour 
to  get  men  among  our  European  races  to 
admire  the  heroes,  the  demigods  which  the 
East  adores,  and  even  were  it  a  possibility 
that  their  religion  could  be  established, 
endeavour  to  make  men  love  them.  But 
Christ  alone  has  had  this  marvellous  power 
of  making  Himself  beloved  everywhere 
across  time  and  space  even.  Every  tongue 
raises  to  Him  a  song  of  love  and  adoration. 
Those  divine  emotions  that  fill  my  soul  in 
listening  to  Him  were  felt  by  Origen  and 
Augustine  fifteen  hundred  years  ago  under 
an  African  sky;  and  to-day  in  his  distant 
hut  an  Esquimaux  of  the  polar  regions,  or  a 
poor  negro,  shall  experience  them  as  I  do.  At 
this  moment,  on  this  Sabbath  day,  wherever 
the  Church  is  gathered  together,  millions  of 
hearts  are  moved  at  the  name  of  Christ  by 
the  same  feelings  as  you  have ;  and  if  all 
those  voices  could  make  themselves  heard, 
you  would  know  in  a  measure  the  extent  of 
His  kingdom.  .  .  .  Gather  together  in  thought 
all  those  whom  this  love  has  saved,  ignorant 
and  wise,  great  and  small,  of  the  world; 
children  in  whose  innocent  souls  has  been 
felt  a  mysterious  attraction  toward  Jesus, 
and  who  in  dying  have  gone  to  His  arms — 
sinners  who  have  fallen  to  the  depth  of  the 
abyss,  souls  sorrowful  and  groaning.  Behold 
athwart  the  centuries  this  cortege  of  wor- 
shippers who  are  increasing  day  by  day,  and, 
before  this  universal  testimony  of  hearts  who 
love  Him,  recognise  Him  for  whom  all 
hearts  have  been  made.  He  said,  "  I  am  a 
King "  ;  and  see  a  redeemed  humanity  who 
reply  to  Him  by  proclaiming  His  kingdom. 
What  royalty,  what  a  domination,  what  an 
empire!  To  be  loved  in  all  the  centuries, 
loved  everywhere,  loved  even  to  the  death, 
loved  ever  more  deeply:   behold  the  king- 


dom of  Christ.  And  people  ask  us  yet  why 
we  believe  in  His  divinity  !  Oh,  wise  men  of 
this  world,  who  believe  that  His  reign  is 
ended,  and  who  see  in  Him  nothing  but  a 
master  of  the  past  who  has  been  superseded — 
you  who  think  that  the  criticism  of  the 
schools  will  do  that  which  eighteen  centuries 
of  attack  have  not  been  able  to  do,  and 
reduce  the  Gospel  to  powder  1  you  know  not 
how  much  Christ  is  loved,  you  know  not 
what  place  He  occupies  in  the  heart  of  the 
world.  Yes  ;  in  the  Church  of  to-day,  so 
feeble,  so  faithless  and  worldly,  however,  you 
do  not  know  all  that  is  seen  to  shine  forth  of 
devotion  and  heroism  on  the  day  when  for 
confessing  Jesus  Christ  all  must  be  left 
behind,  even  life  itself.  I  do  not  know 
what  the  future  has  in  store  for  us.  I  do 
not  know  what  those  doctrines  which  this 
generation  tolerates  with  a  soft  complaisance 
will  bring  forth,  this  materialism  which 
denies  freedom  in  God  and  responsibility  in 
man,  this  insulting  disdain  of  the  unseen 
world,  this  proud  confidence  in  the  forces  of 
humanity,  this  fanatic  atheism  which  regards 
as  hypocrisy  or  imbecility  faith,  prayer,  the 
supernatural.  ...  I  know  not  if  the  Church 
will  be  called  to  go  through  a  new  baptism  of 
suffering  and  persecution.  At  all  events,  it  is 
not  on  the  simple  progress  of  toleration,  nor 
on  the  native  goodness  of  man,  that  I  count  to 
make  such  excesses  impossible.  I  remember 
that  no  epoch,  more  so  than  the  last  century, 
preached  the  goodness  of  man  and  tolera- 
tion ;  and  I  recall  the  fact  also  as  to  the  way 
in  which  the  century  ended.  But  if  the 
storm  must  come,  let  it  come,  let  it  come.  For 
if  it  will  remove  from  the  Church  all  the 
unreal  homage,  all  the  false  regard,  which  a 
generation  who  laughs  in  secret  at  the  faith 
lavishes  upon  it,  what  will  it  matter?  In 
this  inevitable  defection  the  world  will 
learn  at  least  how  much  Christ  is  loved ;  it 
will  see  all  this  that  draws  to  Him  faith, 
devotion,  and  hope ;  it  will  see  that  He  is  yet 
the  King  of  souls,  and  that,  to  snatch  Him 
from  the  love  of  the  Church,  it  would  be 
necessary  to  snatch  away  the  heart  of 
humanity.  Lord,  the  future  is  Thine.  The 
kingdom  has  been  given  to  Thee,  and  Thy 
kingdom  will  come.  But  how  shall  it  serve 
us  to  proclaim  Thy  kingdom  if  Thou  hast  not 
first  triumphed  in  our  hearts  ?  Ah  !  let  us 
submit  them — these  hearts  worldly  and  re- 
bellious— break  down  our  resistance,  our 
pride,  our  egoism ;  and  reign  at  least  over 
those  whom  Thou  hast  gained,  who  are 
waiting  for  those  days  in  which  we  believe 
Thou  wilt  reign  over  a  world  at  peace,  and 
when  all  men  shall  bow  the  knee  before 
Thee. — Translated  from  Eug.  Bersier. 

Ver.  38.  None  are  by  nature  "of  the 
truth." — The  expression  "  every  one  that  is 
of  the  truth  "  betokens  an  inward  prepara- 
tion for  conversion  which  no  one,  however, 

521 


chap,  xviii.      HOMILETIC  COMMEJS  TARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


experiences  without  the  operation  of  "  pre- 
venting grace. "  No  one  is  by  nature  of  the 
truth;  but  all  men,  as  the  Scriptures  say, 
are  liars,  since  they  love  darkness  rather 
than  light,  because  the  light  reproves  them 
for  their  sins  and  disturbs  their  repose  ;  and 
because  they  press  error  to  their  bosoms  and 
shut  themselves  up  against  the  entrance  of 
truth,  which  menaces  their  sensual  pleasures 
with  danger  and  urges  them  to  a  life  of 
self -denial.  Thus,  as  St.  Paul  once  expressed 
it,  they  "  hold  the  truth  in  unrighteousness." 
But  as  soon  as  the  Spirit,  which,  like  the 
wind,  bloweth  where  it  listeth,  gains  room, 
the  love  of  delusion  gives  way  to  the  ardent 
desire  to  be  freed  from  it,  and  studious  self- 
deception  to  the  willingness  to  "prove  all 
things,  and  to  hold  fast  that  which  is  good." 
Before  the  honest,  serious  inquiry  after 
truth  and  peace  the  visionary  forms  of  these 
false  ideas  vanish  to  which  the  poor  soul 
had  been  previously  attached.  But  when, 
by  the  operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  we 
have  attained  to  this  simplicity  of  heart,  we 
become  joined  to  those  who  are  of  the  truth. 
Then,  if  the  divine  Teacher  utters  His  voice, 
how  does  our  inmost  soul  echo  to  the  sound 
of  His  light  and  life-giving  words  !  If  He 
then  says,  "  Come  unto  Me,  ye  that  are 
weary  and  heavy  laden,"  how  gladly  do  we 
accept  the  gracious  invitation  1  If  He  then 
unveils  His  glory  and  beauty,  how  do  our 
longing  souls  rush  into  His  arms  rejoicing  ! 
If  He  then  displays  the  standard  of  His 
cross,  how  do  we  not  hasten  to  it,  to  build 
tabernacles  under  its  peaceful  shadow  ! — 
F.  W.  Krummacher,  "  Suffering  Saviour." 

Vers.  39,  40.  Satan's  children. — Whence 
sprang  the  weeds  in  the  history  of  our 
Lord's  passion  ?  Whence  the  thistles  even 
among  the  weeping  willows  and-  olive  trees 


of  Gethsemane  ?  Whence  the  thorns  on 
Golgotha?  That  the  enemy  had  done. 
When  the  members  of  the  Sanhedrin  set  up 
false  witnesses,  and  made  them  assert  that 
Jesus  had  arrogantly  said  He  would  destroy 
and  build  up  the  temple  again ;  when  on  the 
declaration  of  Jesus  that  He  was  the  Son 
of  God  and  the  judge  of  the  world,  they 
answered  in  hypocritical  anger,  "Now  we 
have  heard  His  blasphemy,"  etc.  (Matt, 
xxvi.  65) ;  when  they,  the  guardians  of  the 
law  and  the  protectors  of  religion,  were 
given  a  choice  between  Jesus  and  Barabbas, 
and  when  asked,  Which  of  these  two  will  ye 
have  ?  urged  the  people  to  demand  the  re- 
lease of  the  murderer  and  to  slay  the  Lamb ; 
when  out  of  the  poisoned  spring  of  envy  they 
drew  the  resolve  to  storm  the  vacillating 
governor  with  the  cry,  "  Crucify,  crucify  !  " 
and  determined  on  the  murder  of  the 
Righteous,  invoking  a  mad  curse  upon  their 
own  heads.  ..."  His  blood  be  on  us  and  on 
our  children,"  .  .  .  were  those  who  did  this 
of  the  viper's  brood,  Satan's  children, 
descendants  of  Cain  1 — their  lips  were  lying, 
their  hands  were  murderous. — Translated 
from  Dr.  R.  Kogel. 

The  old  saying  that  the  voice  of  the  people 
is  the  voice  of  God  receives  an  instructive 
commentary  in  the  vote  for  Barabbas  and 
against  Jesus.  That  was  what  a  plebiscite 
for  the  discovery  of  the  people's  favourite 
came  to.  What  a  reliable  method  of  finding 
the  best  man  universal  suffrage,  manipulated 
by  wire-pullers  like  these  priests,  is  1  and 
how  wise  the  people  are  who  let  it  guide 
their  judgments,  or,  still  wiser,  who  fret 
their  lives  out  in  angling  for  its  approval  1 
Better  be  condemned  with  Jesus  than 
adopted  with  Barabbas. — Dr.  A.  Maclaren. 


522 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.        chap   Xix. 


PAET  VI.  (b.) 

II,  The  Crucifixion  and  Burial  of  Jesus. 

1.  The   scourging   of   Jesus   and   the   mockery,   etc.,   by  the  soldiers  in  the 
Prsetorium  (vers.  1-3). 

2.  The  attempt  of  Pilate  to  deliver  Jesus,  the  bitter  outcry  of  the  Jews,  and 
their  charge  against  Jesus  as  having  "  made  Himself  the  Son  of  God  "  (vers.  4-7). 

3.  The   fear  of   Pilate  on   hearing   this.     He  again  questions  Jesus  in  the 
judgment  hall,  and  again  seeks  to  deliver  Him  (vers.  8-12). 

4.  Pilate  yields  to  popular  clamour  (vers.  12-16). 

5.  Jesus  is  led  to  crucifixion  (vers.  17,  18). 

6.  The  title  on  the  cross  (vers.  19-22). 

7.  Dividing  and  casting  lots  for  His  garments  (vers.  23,  24). 

8.  The  mother  of  Jesus  committed  to  the  care  of  the  beloved  disciple  (vers.  25-27). 

9.  The  cry  of  physical  agony  (ver.  28) ;  the  shout  of  spiritual  victory  (ver.  30). 

10.  The  pierced  side  (vers.  31-37). 

11.  The  burial  of  the  body  of  Jesus  (vers.  38-42). 

CHAPTER  XIX. 
EXPLANATORY  AND  CRITICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Therefore  (see  Luke  xxiii.  22-25). — He  was  under  the  erroneous  impression  that 
this  treatment  of  Jesus  might  soften  the  enmity  of  the  Jews  toward  the  Prisoner.  Scourged 
(ifxa<TTiya)<T€v). — There  is  no  evidence  that  Jesus  was  twice  scourged.  Scourging  was  usually 
a  preliminary  of  crucifixion  among  the  Romans.  St.  Matthew  and  St.  Mark  use  a  different 
word  (ppcryeXXuxras). 

Vers.  4,  5.  Pilate  therefore  went  forth  (see  ver.  1,  above). — He  imagined  that  the  sight  of 
the  poor  tortured  form  might  move  compassion.  I  find  no  crime,  etc. — Had  Pilate  been  able 
to  find  any  crime  in  Jesus,  he  would  not  have  hesitated  to  condemn  Him. 

Ver.  6.  Pilate  saith  unto  them,  Take  ye  Him,  etc. — There  is  a  ring  of  angry  sarcasm  in  the 
words  which  must  have  galled  those  proud  Jews.  Pilate  means,  "  I  shall  have  nothing  to 
do  with  crucifying  one  who  is  innocent.     Do  it  yourselves,  if  you  dare." 

Ver.  7.  According  to  the  law. — Our  law,  they  say,  must  be  respected,  whatever  you  do  about 
the  political  charge  (Lev.  xxiv.  16).  We  only  can  be  judges  in  this  matter,  and  according  to 
our  law  He  should  die. 

Ver.  9.  Whence  .  .  .  Jesus  gave  no  answer. — The  answer  had  already  been  given  (xviii.  36, 
37  :  see  also  viii.  25,  x.  24,  25).  Besides,  what  Pilate  had  to  settle  now  was  the  justice  of  the 
charge  for  which  Jesus  was  brought  before  him  (Isa.  liii.  7). 

Ver.  11.  He  that  delivered  Me  unto  thee,  etc. — The  Jewish  high  priest  claimed  to  represent 
a  divinely  ordered  religion  and  system,  and  to  be  directed  in  his  action  by  divine  revelation 
and  guidance.  Therefore,  as  one  who  should  have  been  in  possession  of  clearer  light,  he  was 
more  guilty  than  a  heathen  judge,  to  whom  the  light  and  truth  of  God  had  not  come. 

Ver.  12.  Caesar's  friend. — Amicus  Ccesaris  was  a  title  of  honour  sometimes  given  to  pro- 
vincial governors.  Those  men  well  knew  the  jealous  fears  of  Tiberius  for  his  authority. 
The  suspicion  of  treason  brought  almost  inevitable  ruin  during  his  reign,  and  many  were 
charged  with  that  crime. 

Ver.  13.  Therefore. — Pilate's  action  is  that  of  a  man  of  the  world,  not  of  a  just,  impartial 
judge — of  a  man  who  puts  self-interest  before  truth  and  righteousness. 

Ver.  14.  The  preparation  (jrapaaKtvij). — Of  the  pa&sover,  which  was  near  at  hand.  Soon  the 
passover  lamb  was  to  be  slain,  and  even  on  that  very  day  "  Christ  our  passo ver  was  sacrificed 
for  us."    The  sixth  hour.  — See  note,  pp.  536,  537. 

Ver.  15.  Shall  I  crucify  your  king  % — Since  those  men  would  persist  in  the  political  charge 
against   Christ,  Pilate  intends  that  the  condemnation  of  the  accused  shall  rest  on  that 

523 


chap.  xix.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


ground,  as  he  clearly  showed  in  the  "  title"  written  to  be  affixed  on  the  cross  (ver.  19).  No 
king  but  Caesar. — This  cry,  in  which  the  leaders  of  the  theocracy  reject  their  rightful  King, 
is  sadly  prophetic.  They  judged  themselves  "  unworthy  of  everlasting  life  "  ;  therefore  the 
kingdom  of  God  was  taken  from  them  (Acts  xiii.  46;  Matt.  xxi.  43).  And  the  world's  rule 
has  been  hard  and  bitter  for  them  and  their  children. 

Ver.  16.  Then  delivered  he  Him  unto  them,  etc.  —  I.e.  to  the  priests  and  rulers  of  the  Jews. 
Not  that  Jesus  was  actually  delivered  into  their  hands,  but  He  was  delivered  up,  in  order 
that  their  evil  designs  against  Him  might  be  carried  out.  The  quaternion  of  Roman 
soldiers  who  carried  out  the  actual  crucifixion  were  only  instruments  of  their  wicked  will 
(Acts  ii.  23,  iii.  15). 

Ver.  17.  Bearing  His  cross,  etc.— He  bore  it  until  He  appears  to  have  sunk  under 
it,  and  then  Simon  of  Cyrene  was  compelled  to  help  Jesus  to  bear  it  (Mark  xv.  21). 
Golgotha  (from  <£|). — Probably  so  called  from  the  rounded  form  of  the  mound,  or 
hillock,  on  which  crucifixion  was  usually  carried  out.  The  Vulgate  translated  the  word 
Calvaria — a  skull,  or  a  place  of  burial.  Hence  our  word  Calvary.  The  question  of  the  site 
of  Calvary  and  the  holy  sepulchre  need  not  be  discussed  here.  It  is  a  question  that  is  not 
yet  settled,  if  it  ever  can  be.  But  no  valid  reason  has  yet  been  given  to  lead  to  a  conclusive 
decision  against  the  spot  now  covered  by  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre. 

Ver.  18.  Two  others. — The  intention,  no  doubt,  in  crucifying  these  two  malefactors,  and 
Jesus  in  the  midst  as,  on  account  of  His  alleged  treason,  more. guilty  than  they,  was  to  offer 
to  the  world  an  ostensible  reason  for  His  condemnation. 

Vers.  19,  20.  This  was  also  one  reason  for  the  title  written  (r/rXos,  titulns,  the  technical 
name)  by  Pilate  for  the  cross  of  Jesus.  His  alone  would  need  it.  For  people  might  be 
inclined  to  ask  (those  who  were  not  mere  tools  of  the  Jewish  rulers),  "  Why  was  this  man, 
who  had  been  declared  innocent,  and  who  during  His  life  among  the  people  had  gone  about 
doing  good,  thus  treated  ? "  But  the  title  was  also  indicative  of  Pilate's  scorn  of  those 
Jews,  and  part  of  his  revenge  for  their  having  forced  him  against  his  better  judgment,  his 
will,  and  his  conscience  to  condemn  Christ.  The  reason  why  the  title  was  written  in  the 
three  languages  chiefly  in  use  in  Palestine  at  that  period  is  evident  ;  but  it  seems  also  to 
give  an  indication  of  Pilate's  eagerness  to  let  the  accusation  be  widely  known.  Hebrew. — No 
doubt  the  current  Aramaic  (Semitic)  dialect.  Greek. — The  language  of  culture.  Latin. — 
The  language  of  imperial  Rome. 

Vers.  23,  24.  Took  His  garments,  etc. — St.  John's  is  the  more  full  account  of  this  incident. 
Vers.  23,  24,  explain  why  the  soldiers  cast  lots.  This  is  merely  mentioned  generally  by  the 
Synoptists,  as  if  it  applied  to  the  garments  as  a  whole. 

Vers.  25-27.  Now  there  stood  by  the  cross,  etc. — Are  three  or  four  women  mentioned 
here  ?  The  evidence  on  the  whole  seems  to  show  that  there  were  four — that  the  sister  of 
Mary,  the  mother  of  Jesus,  is  not  "  Mary  of  Clopas  "  (Alphaeus,  Matt,  xxvii.  56,  x.  3),  but 
Salome  (Mark.  xv.  40),  "  the  mother  of  Zebedee's  children."  The  reason  why  her  name  is 
not  mentioned  is  that  John  in  his  Gospel  does  not  mention  his  own  name,  or  the  names  of 
his  kindred,  except  by  circumlocution.  If  this  explanation  be  correct  it  throws  a  clear  light 
on  the  incident  of  vers.  26,  27.  It  would  also  explain  in  a  measure  why  the  mother  of 
Zebedee's  children  ventured  to  make  so  hold  a  request  for  her  two  sons  on  one  occasion 
(Matt.  xx.  21). 

Vers.  28-30.  Jesus  knowing  that  all  things  were  now  accomplished  (for  accomplished  read 
finished,  TeTeXeo-rcu),  that  the  Scripture  might  be  (accomplished)  reXeicady. — These  words  are 
from  the  same  root.  By  His  life  and  death  He  had  fulfilled  the  purpose  for  which  divine 
revelation  was  given,  the  purpose  to  which  it  all  pointed,  i.e.  the  redemption  of  men.  There- 
fore, knowing  this,  He  called  out,  "  1  thirst "  (thus  fulfilling  the  prophetic  words  regarding 
the  suffering  Servant  of  Jehovah,  Ps.  lxix.  21);  and  when  His  parched  lips  and  tongue  were 
moistened  by  the  drops  of  sour  wine,  He  was  able  to  lift  the  cry  of  victory,  It  is  finished 
(again  TertXeaTcu).  Bowed  His  head. — All  the  narratives  show  clearly  that  our  Lord's  death 
was  a  voluntary  death. 

Ver.  31.  The  Jews  therefore,  etc.  ...  for  great  was  that  Sabbath  day. — There  was  a 
twofold  sanctity  about  the  coming  day,  for  it  was  not  only  the  day  at  the  beginning  of  which 
in  the  evening  the  passover  lamb  was  eaten — it  was  at  the  same  time  the  weekly  Sabbath,  and 
therefore  a  day  of  peculiar  sanctity,  a  high  day.  Hence  the  anxiety  of  the  Jews  to  hasten 
the  death  of  the  crucified,  and  have  the  bodies  removed  before  the  first  star  appeared 
announcing  the  beginning  of  the  evening  of  a  new  (Jewish)  day. 

Vers.  31-37.  The  Jews  .  .  .  that  their  legs  might  be  broken  (crurifragium). — Probably 
this  was  done  to  hasten  death,  as  ver.  33  seems  to  indicate  here.  Pierced. — To  satisfy  them- 
selves that  He  was  really  dead.  Blood  and  water. — There  have  been  various  explanations 
of  this  fact,  physiological  and  other.  None  of  them,  however,  are  entirely  satisfactory.  The 
chief  physiological  explanation  is  that  given  by  Dr.  Stroud  {Physical  Cause  of  the  Death 
of  Christ),  who  argues  with  much  learning  that  our  Lord's  death  was  caused  by  rupture 
of  the  heart  following  on  the  intense  agony  He  suffered,  physical  and  spiritual.    The  result 

524 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN.         chap.  xix. 


of  this  would  be  (he  continues)  to  fill  the  surrounding  tissues  with  blood,  which  would 
rapidly  separate  into  its  constituent  parts,  solid  and  fluid,  which  flowed  out  when  the  body 
was  pierced  by  the  soldier's  lance.  Such  explanations  may  be  taken  for  what  they  are  worth. 
Dr.  Reynolds  well  says  of  this  incident  that  we  see  in  it  "  a  token  of  the  twofold  power  of 
Christ's  redemptive  life  and  work:  (1)  renovation,  refreshment,  rivers  of  living  water  issuing 
from  the  KoiXia  of  Christ,  the  first  great  rush  of  spiritual  power  which  was  to  regenerate 
humanity  ;  and  (2)  the  expression  of  that  redemptive  process  which  was  effected  in  the 
positive  shedding  of  His  precious  blood."  In  all  these  events  divinely  ordered  facts  corre- 
sponded with  divinely  inspired  type  and  prophecy  (Exod.  xii.  46 ;  Zech.  xii.  10).  As  the 
promised  Messiah  He  fulfilled  law  and  prophecy  (Eev.  i.  7). 

Ver.  38.  Secretly. — This  is  a  fact  given  only  by  St.  John. 

Ver.  39.  Myrrh. — A  fragrant  gum.  Aloes. — A  scented  wood  which  was  much  esteemed 
for  embalming  purposes.  A  mixture. — Some  MSS.  read  a  roll,  but  the  authority  is  of  no  great 
weight.  An  hundred  pound. — I.e.  Roman  pounds  of  about  twelve  ounces  each  (see  Ps.  xlv. ; 
Matt.  ii.  11). 

Ver.  40.  In  linen  clothes  (dOovLots). — Probably  long  strips  used  for  enswathing  the  body. 
There  seems  also  to  have  been  a  larger  cloth  for  covering  the  body,  or  wrapping  it  round. 
It  is  this  that  is  mentioned  by  St.  Matthew  (xxvii.  59  :  it  was  called  o-tvddcv),  etc.  As  the  manner 
...  to  bury. — They  did  not  remove  the  viscera,  as  in  the  Egyptian  custom  of  embalming. 
Cremation  was  the  rule  among  the  Romans. 

Ver.  41.  A  garden  (see  xviii.  1). — As  in  a  garden  it  was  said  to  man,  "  In  the  day  that  thou 
eatest,"  etc.  (Gen.  ii.  17),  so  in  a  garden  Christ  was,  by  His  rising  from  the  dead,  to  say  to 
men,  "  In  Me  ye  have  eternal  life."  A  new  sepulchre.— Jesus  was  in  no  way  to  come  in 
contact  with  corruption  (Ps.  xvi.  10).     The  sepulchre  belonged  to  Joseph. 

Ver.  42.  They  laid. — But  it  was  virtually  the  Jews  delivering  Him  to  death  that  made  it 
necessary  that  He  should  also  be  laid  in  the  grave.  Consequently  St.  Paul  was  justified  in 
saying  (Acts  xiii.  29),  "  They  (the  Jews)  that  dwell  at  Jerusalem  and  their  rulers  .  .  .  laid 
Him  in  a  sepulchre."  The  Jews'  preparation. — I.e.  the  preparation  for  the  great  feast  of  the 
Jews  (xi.  55).  This  incidentally  confirms  the  idea  that  the  day  about  to  commence  was  that 
on  which  the  passover  was  eaten. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH— Verses   1—7. 

Vers.  1,  2.  The  scourging  of  Jesus  and  the  crown  of  thorns. — Pilate  plunged  ever 
deeper  and  deeper  into  the  toils.  Justice  and  injustice  cannot  be  reconciled.  It 
went  sore  against  this  proud  Roman's  conscience  to  offend  the  majesty  of  Roman 
law,  in  the  attempt  to  please  the  clamouring  mob  of  Jewish  priests,  rulers,  and 
populace.  Had  he  made  a  firm  stand  the  guilt  would  not  have  rested  on  him. 
It  is  not  easy  always  to  he  popular  as  well  as  just.  He  tried  various  expedients 
to  extricate  himself  from  the  difficult  position  in  which  he  was  placed.  He 
thought  that  by  releasing  Barabbas,  and  holding  up  Jesus  to  contempt,  the  latter 
might  be  delivered  and  the  Jews  propitiated. 

I.  The  scourging. — 1.  Our  Lord  had  already  predicted  this  part  of  His 
sufferings  (Matt.  xx.  19  ;  Luke  xviii.  33).  It  was  the  preliminary  to  crucifixion. 
Pilate  in  ordering  the  punishment  secretly  hoped  that  the  accusers  of  Jesus 
would  be  satisfied  with  the  infliction  of  this  cruel  punishment.  2.  We  follow  the 
meek  and  lowly,  the  divine  victim  into  the  courtyard  of  Pilate's  palace.  He 
was  handed  over  to  the  cruel  executioners  and  rough  soldiers  of  the  guard, 
bound  to  a  pillar,  so  that  the  back  was  bent  and  the  skin  tense.  The  blows 
were  inflicted  with  switches  or  thongs,  at  the  extremity  of  which  were  pieces  of 
bone  or  lead.  These  were  wielded  by  callous  men,  usually  slaves.  Even  at  the 
first  blow  blood  was  drawn,  and  ere  the  ten  or  fifteen  minutes  of  the  punishment 
were  ended  streams  of  blood  flowed  from  the  lacerated  and  wounded  frame. 
3.  But  this,  too,  was  part  of  the  divine  plan.  And  great  as  were  the  pangs  of  this 
terrible  torture  to  the  body,  yet  deeper  was  the  agony  of  soul  which  He  endured. 
How  great,  how  incomparable,  was  His  obedience  !  "  They  made  long  their 
furrows  upon  His  back  "  (Ps.  cxxix.  3).  But  it  was  all  done  in  order  that  with 
His  stripes  we  might  be  healed  (Isa.  liii.  5). 

II.  The  crown  of  thorns. — 1.  Herod  had  already  sent  Jesus  to  Pilate  clothed 

525 


chap.  xix.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


with  mock  emblems  of  royalty.  No  doubt  these  had  been  removed ;  but  the 
remembrance  of  them  led  the  soldiers  to  imitate  in  cruel  fashion  this  jest  of 
Herod.  2.  Jesus  was  evidently  entirely  given  into  their  hands — a  strange  thing, 
Pilate,  to  do  in  the  case  of  one  pronounced  by  thyself  innocent.  Breaking  off 
twigs  from  a  thorny  plant  abundant  about  Jerusalem,  they  wove  it  with  their 
mailed  hands  into  a  rude  wreath  or  crown,  and  thrust  it  down  over  the  Saviour's 
brow,  the  sharp  thorns  lacerating  the  flesh  and  causing  great  pain.  Over  His 
lacerated  frame  they  threw  a  cast-off  soldier's  robe  to  represent  a  royal  robe. 
They  bowed  in  mockery  before  Him,  crying,  "  Hail,  King  of  the  Jews,"  thus 
mocking  that  clamouring  mob  of  the  people  and  their  Messianic  hopes.  It  was 
not  Jesus  so  much  that  was  mocked  as  the  people  He  came  to  save,  and  who 
in  rejecting  Him  were  filling  up  the  measure  of  their  wrath.  3.  And  Jesus 
bore  it  all  in  patient,  meek  submission  for  our  sakes.  "  He  is  led  as  a  lamb  to 
the  slaughter,"  etc.  (Isa.  liii.  7).  Did  none  of  those  barbarous  men  ask,  "  What 
manner  of  man  is  this  1  "     One  perchance  did  so  (Luke  xxiii.  47). 

III.  The  crown  and  robe  were  symbolic  of  a  real  kingship. — 1.  He  who  wore 
the  thorny  crown  and  mock  royal  mantle  shall  yet  be  hailed  as  King  of  kings, 
etc.  (Rev.  xvii.  14),  as  the  apostle  was  privileged  to  see  Him  in  vision  in  His 
heavenly  glory.  2.  But  the  way  to  this  glory  was  through  suffering.  And  here, 
as  at  His  birth,  Jew  and  Gentile  unite  to  proclaim  Him  to  be  what  the  angels 
declared  He  was  to  the  Jewish  shepherds,  and  the  star  of  prophecy  to  the  Gentile 
magi.  Christ  is  a  king  ;  but  it  was  through  humiliation  that  He  rose  to  glory, 
for  the  sake  of  man.  3.  Man  was  made  for  dominion  (Ps.  viii.  4-6) ;  but 
through  sin  his  kingly  rule  has  been  in  part  destroyed — he  has  not  even  full 
dominion  over  himself.  So  we  see  not  yet  all  things  put  under  him  (Heb.  ii.  8). 
But  Jesus  identified  Himself  with  men,  offered  for  them  that  obedience  which 
they  had  failed  to  give — offered  it  in  the  only  form  in  which  here  and  now  it 
can  be  offered,  through  humiliation  for  sin,  and  free  self -surrender  in  all  things 
to  the  will  of  the  Father.  Thus  He  became  the  great  High  Priest  and  King  for 
humanity  ;  and  all  who  are  His,  who  believe  in  Him  as  the  only  way  of  escape 
from  moral  and  spiritual  slavery,  He  makes  "  kings  and  priests  unto  God " 
(Rev.  i.  6),  raising  them  to  a  more  glorious  throne  than  that  from  which 
humanity  had  fallen.  4.  And  the  way  to  this  dominion  is  the  way  of  suffering 
— the  scourgings  of  anguish  because  of  sin,  the  thorny  crown  of  repentance,  the 
crucifixion  of  the  old  nature,  etc. — all  a  painful  and  bitter  cross.  But  to  those 
who  thus  ever  come  and  are  faithful  unto  death  shall  be  granted  the  crown  of 
life  in  the  reign  of  heavenly  glory  (Rev.  ii.  10,  hi.  21).  5.  So,  too,  the  Church 
has  triumphed  and  will  triumph  through  suffering  for  the  truth.  It  is  thus  it 
is  freed  from  the  dross  of  earth  and  refined  for  glory.  It  is  the  glory  of  true 
members  of  the  Church  that  they  are  able  to  "  fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the 
sufferings  of  Christ."  As  He  the  Captain  of  salvation  was  perfected  through 
suffering  (Heb.  ii.  10),  thus  also  is  His  body  the  Church. 

Ver.  1.  "  And  scourged  Him."     (Outline  address  for  children.) 

I.  Why  do  we  read  this  so  unconcernedly?  1.  It  was  nearly  two  thousand 
years  ago.  An  old  story.  But  if  we  are  "  Christians,"  we  know  Jesus  now. 
We  speak  to  Him  and  hear  Him ;  He  is  no  stranger.  2.  The  awful  crucifixion 
following  makes  it  seem  less  noticeable.  But  this  He  bore  for  us ;  and  we  ought 
to  think  of  it.     The  scourging  added  terribly  to  the  agony  of  the  cross. 

II.  Do  we  know  what  "  scourging  "  means  ?  1.  Have  any  among  us  ever  seen 
a  criminal  sentenced  and  flogged  1  Have  any  among  us  ever  seen  a  boy  flogged  ? 
Most  painful  to  witness.  2.  Describe  Roman  ''scourging."  3.  Had  it  been 
a  cruel  murderer  of  women  and  infants,  a  brutal  criminal !  But  the  kind,  good, 
"  Jesus  "  (describe  His  life).     4.  Had  He  been  tried  and  sentenced !     But  this 

526 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xix. 


was  done  by  a  weak-minded  ruler,  afraid  of  the  priests  and  the  mob.     It  could 
not  take  place  under  our  good  laws  and  strong  government. 

III.  Jesus  bore  it  all — no  terror,  no  cry.     How  brave  He  was  ! 

IV.  It  was  part  of  what  Jesus  bore  for  you.  It  was  your  sins  caused  Him 
this  humiliation. 

V.  Will  you  think  of  Him  and  love  Him  for  it  ?  And  when  you  know  that 
He  is  asking  you,  by  the  voice  of  His  Spirit  within  you,  to  do  something,  or 
not  to  do  something,  for  His  love,  for  His  sake,  will  you  try  ?  He  will  help  you 
if  you  ask  Him. 

Lastly. — Take  away  with  you  this  little  text :  "  By  His  stripes  [I  am]  healed  " 
I  sa.  liii.  5). — Rev.  T.  Hardy. 

Ver.  3.  "Behold  the  man!" — I.  In  these  words  Pilate  unwittingly  gave  utter- 
ance to  a  great  truth. — Christ  Jesus  was  indeed  the  man,  the  great  representa- 
tive of  all  that  is  highest  and  grandest  in  humanity.  What  nobler  or  more 
beautiful  life  was  ever  lived  on  earth  than  the  life  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  through 
all  its  hours  (on  earth)  from  opening  to  close]  As  we  view  Him  standing  in 
silent  dignity  near  the  judgment  seat  of  the  vacillating  Pilate,  before  the  fiend- 
inspired  mob  calling  out  "  Crucify  Him  ! "  we  know  that  no  other  life  has  been 
lived,  no  other  ever  dreamed  of  or  imagined,  that  can  be  compared  even  to 
His.  From  that  hour  of  conscious  awakening  to  the  sense  of  His  great  mission 
in  the  temple,  amidst  the  doctors  and  teachers,  where  He  knew  and  felt  that  He 
was  about  His  Father's  business,  to  this  closing  scene  of  His  public  ministry,  He 
stands  before  us  "  the  perfect  man,"  holy,  harmless,  undefiled ;  for  His  enemies 
could  find  no  flaw  in  His  character;  and  the  Roman  judge  who  reluctantly  and 
in  unmanly  fashion  gave  Him  over  to  a  violent  and  shameful  death  declared 
again  and  again,  "  I  find  no  fault  in  Him."  As  we  behold  Him  we  must  think 
of  that  heavenly  teaching  and  doctrine  that  are  the  centre  and  crown  of  all  that 
is  noblest  and  best  in  the  world  to-day,  of  that  tender  humanity  that  showed 
itself  in  His  continually  doing  good,  of  that  meekness  and  lowliness  combined 
with  dignity  and  power  that  proclaimed  Him  the  very  King  of  men.  Well  may 
we,  looking  merely  at  His  humanity,  echo  the  words  of  a  great  modern  writer  on 
this  aspect  of  His  character.  "  He  walked  in  Judaea  eighteen  hundred  years 
ago  ;  His  sphere -melody  .  .  .  took  captive  the  ravished  souls  of  men,  and,  being 
of  a  truth  sphere-melody,  still  flows  and  sounds,  though  now  with  thousandfold 
accompaniments  and  rich  symphonies,  through  all  our  hearts,  and  modulates  and 
divinely  leads  them  "  (Carlyle). 

II.  The  man  Christ  Jesus  is  the  holy,  divine  Son. — If  we  see  this  we  must  see 
something  more.  This  perfect  man,  this  flower  of  humanity,  cannot  be  merely 
man.  No  such  flower  has  bloomed,  nor  ever  can  bloom,  on  the  field  of  human 
nature  as  it  now  is.  There  is  something  about  this  man  that  points  us  to 
another  sphere.  As  one  has  well  said :  "  I  find  the  life  of  Christ  made  up  of 
two  parts,  a  part  I  can  sympathise  with  as  a  man,  and  a  part  on  which  I  am  to 
gaze ;  a  beam  sent  down  from  heaven  which  I  can  see  and  love,  and  another 
beam  shot  into  the  infinite  that  I  cannot  comprehend."  Not  only  is  this 
suffering  man  the  holiest  and  best  that  earth  has  seen,  He  is  "  Emmanuel,  God 
with  us."  Some  glimmering  of  this  truth  seems  to  have  visited  Pilate,  and 
made  him  dread  yet  more  to  deliver  up  Jesus  to  the  impious  multitude.  But  no 
doubt  his  scepticism  and  worldly  unbelief  tended  to  dismiss  the  thought.  The 
priests,  rulers,  and  scribes,  as  well  as  many  in  the  vast  crowd  crying  out 
"  Crucify  Him  !  "  would  have  confessed  this,  had  they  not  been  blinded  by  hatred. 
Ah  !  He  came  to  give  light,  but  that  was  not  what  men  wanted.  They  did  not 
wish  to  see  themselves  in  the  penetrating  light  of  His  omniscient  purity.  The 
midnight  burglar  and  transgressor  flee  the  light,  and  will  endeavour  to  overpower 

527 


chap.  xix.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


him  who  persists  in  letting  in  a  clear  ray  upon  their  evil  deeds ;  and  the  old 
philosopher  said  well  that  if  truth  appeared  in  the  world  in  her  unadorned 
loveliness  men  would  persecute  her.  And  thus  it  happened  here.  Truth  did 
appear.  The  truth  came  to  men  with  heavenly  radiance  to  be  the  life  and  light 
of  the  race  ;  but  those  to  whom  He  came  "  hated  the  light  because  their  deeds 
were  evil."  "  They  denied  the  Holy  One  and  the  Just,  and  desired  a  murderer 
to  be  gi anted  unto  them"  (Acts  iii.  14).  But  to  all  who  look  to  Him,  this 
crown  of  humanity,  Emmanuel,  becomes  their  high  example,  their  guiding  star, 
the  strength  of  their  life,  the  comfort  of  their  death,  their  hope  for  eternity — 
"  Behold  the  man  !  " 

III.  We  behold  here  the  awfulness  of  sin. — In  beholding  Christ  at  Pilate's 
judgment  seat  a  sense  of  the  awfulness  of  sin  in  God's  sight  is  borne  in  upon  us. 
For  how  does  Jesus  appear  as  Pilate  points  to  Him?  The  awful  Koman 
punishment  of  scourging  was  just  ended.  As  Pilate  was  only  a  procurator  he 
had  no  lictors  in  his  train,  so  that  the  punishment  was  left  to  the  rude  and 
brutal  soldiery.  The  arms  of  the  victim  were  lashed  down  to  a  post  near  the 
ground,  and  on  the  bare  shoulders,  head,  and  face  the  lashes  were  inflicted  with 
a  whip  of  leather  thongs  loaded  at  the  extremity  with  lead  or  bone.  Thus  the 
prophetic  language  of  the  prophet  received  a  literal  fulfilment,  "  They  made  long 
the  furrows  upon  My  back."  Over  His  bleeding  form  the  rude  soldiers  threw  in 
mockery  a  purple-dyed  soldier's  cloak  to  represent  a  kingly  robe,  upon  His 
bleeding  head  and  bruised  face  they  pressed  a  torturing  crown  of  thorns,  and 
into  His  hands,  bound  and  helpless,  they  thrust  a  cane  to  represent  a  royal 
sceptre.  Then  they  made  a  further  mockery  of  His  royal  dignity,  by  each 
making  pretended  obeisance,  as  at  a  royal  levee ;  and  in  place  of  salute  each  spit 
in  the  bruised  face,  and  each  with  the  mock  sceptre  smote  the  thorny  crown  more 
firmly  on  the  bleeding,  bruised  head.  What  a  scene  !  A  carnival  of  fiends,  one 
would  feel  almost  inclined  to  say.  And  yet  not  an  impossible  scene  by  any 
means— only  a  result  that  may  be  expected  when  men  give  themselves  over  to 
the  power  of  the  spirit  of  evil.  Such  scenes  were  too  common  in  those  days ; 
and  in  these  times,  when  the  Gospel  is  denied,  as  in  the  great  French  Revolution 
— or  where  it  never  had  power,  as  in  the  scenes  of  torture  among  the  North 
American  Indians — the  same  diabolic  spirit  may  be  seen  in  its  awful  working. 
But  amid  it  all  Christ  stood  in  silent  dignity.  "  He  was  oppressed,  and  He  was 
afflicted ;  yet  He  opened  not  His  mouth."  For  He  was  a  voluntary  sufferer  for 
the  sins  of  men.  "The  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  Him;  and  with  His 
stripes  we  are  healed."  Some  would  say,  No  !  Not  for  this  end  did  He  suffer 
and  die,  but  that  He  might  overcome  sin  in  the  future  by  winning  men  from  its 
love  and  power  by  His  holy  example.  Therefore,  as  Christ  sealed  the  truth  of 
His  mission  by  His  sufferings  and  death,  it  might  be  said  He  died  for  sin,  and  to 
take  away  sin.  Now,  no  doubt  this  is  in  part  true,  as  Christ's  own  words  will 
show :  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men  unto  Me."  But  surely  it  is  not  all 
the  truth.  The  death  of  the  innocent  Jesus  would  scarcely  be  called  a  proof  of 
the  divine  origin  of  His  mission,  or  a  confirmation  of  the  truth  of  the  Gospel.* 
Indeed,  the  very  opposite  was  the  effect.  "  The  cross  of  Christ  was  to  the  Jews 
a  stumbling-block,  and  to  the  Greeks  foolishness."  And  if  it  is  further  said  that 
the  resurrection  was  a  confirmation  of  the  truth  of  Christ's  teaching  and  must 
needs  have  been  preceded  by  death,  then  we  may  ask,  What  need  was  there  that 
the  death  should  have  been  so  shameful  and  the  antecedent  sufferings  so  cruel  1 
No  !  None  of  those  attempts  to  escape  from  acknowledging  the  sacrificial  and 
atoning  purpose  of  Christ's  death  can  stand  examination.  When  will  men  learn 
that  one  aspect   only  of  the  Bedeemer's  atoning  work  can  never  exhaust  its 


*  To  those  without,  i.e.  to  those  to  whom  belief  in  it  is  of  vital  importance. 
528 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xix. 


meaning?  And  yet  Christian  men  have  striven,  have  excommunicated,  and 
have  been  excommunicated  because  of  their  devotion  to  one  view  of  the  death  of 
Christ,  as  if  it  included  all  the  truth.  We  must  learn  that  His  redeeming  work 
was  many-sided,  that  we  cannot  thoroughly  comprehend  that  infinite  depth  of 
divine  wisdom  displayed  in  it,  which  even  the  angels  desire  to  look  into. 
Certainly  one  of  the  most  prominent  views  Scripture  gives  us  of  these  sufferings 
of  Jesus  is  that  of  their  expiatory  nature.  "  He  appeared  once  in  the  end  of  the 
world  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself."  "  He  was  delivered  for  our 
offences."  "  This  cup  is  the  New  Testament  in  My  blood,  which  is  shed  for  many 
for  the  remission  of  sin."  This  truth  is  written  prominently  in  the  history  of 
Calvary.  And  is  it  not  this  view  of  the  Saviour's  sufferings  that  hath  brought 
deepest  peace  and  truest  joy  to  His  followers  and  to  repentant  sinners  in  all  the 
Christian  ages  ?  "  Behold  the  man  ! " — the  spiritual  Adam,  representative  of 
humanity ;  the  God-man  who,  in  oneness  with  men,  willingly  submitted  to 
endure  their  woes,  and  by  His  sacrifice  of  Himself  brought  in  for  them  eternal 
salvation,  having  magnified  the  eternal  law  and  borne  for  man  the  effects  of  sin, 
pain  and  sorrow,  shame  and  agony,  the  hiding  of  the  Father's  face,  death  and 
the  grave  that  they  might  have  life.  "  Behold,"  therefore,  in  this  suffering  man 
"  the  Lamb  of  God  who  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world." 

IV.  We  behold  here  the  Judge  of  quick  and  dead.— Behold  in  this  afflicted 
man  the  Judge  of  quick  and  dead.  "  Behold,  He  cometh  with  clouds,  and  every 
eye  shall  see  Him."  "  And,  behold,  I  am  coming  quickly ;  and  My  reward  is  with 
Me,  to  give  to  every  man  according  as  his  work  shall  be."  "  We  must  all  appear 
before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ."  Pilate  on  his  judgment  seat  and  the  chief 
priests  and  rulers  in  the  Sanhedrin  imagined  that  they  were  the  judges  on  that 
memorable  occasion.  But  how  blinded  men  are.  In  reality  they  were  being 
judged,  and  their  Judge  stood  before  them  in  the  form  of  that  meek,  afflicted 
man.  Latter-day  Pilates  and  rulers  might  well  take  this  truth  to  heart !  And 
what  is  our  attitude  in  view  of  His  promise,  "  I  am  coming  quickly  "  ?  Would  it 
be  that  of  Wesley,  who,  when  asked,  "  Suppose  you  were  summoned  to  meet  the 
eternal  Judge  at  twelve  o'clock  to-day,  what  would  you  do?  "  replied,  "  I  should 
do  what  I  am  doing  now" 

Lessons.—"  Behold  the  man,"  and  let  the  view  of  that  unspeakable  love  of  His 
move  your  hearts  to  lively  gratitude  and  self-denying  service.  Has  it  not  been  well 
said,  that  often  men  show  more  gratitude  toward  the  friend  from  whom  they  have 
received  one  benefit  than  to  the  God  from  whom  they  received  all  ?  "  God  spared 
not  His  own  Son."  "  Even  Christ  pleased  not  Himself."  And  how  do  His  pro- 
fessed f<  llowers  often  show  their  love  and  gratitude  ?  By  a  languid  attendance  at 
divine  ordinances,  by  the  giving  of  a  perhaps  grudging  dole  for  the  work  of  (  hrist's 
kingdom ;  there,  it  may  be,  their  tribute  of  gratitude  begins  and  ends.  Let  our 
conscience  speak  to  us  as  we  view  this  scene  on  Gabbatha  !  Some  of  you  may  have 
read  the  story  of  the  manner  in  which  Count  Zinzendorf  was  finally  led  to  found 
the  Moravian  Church.  He  was  one  day  walking  through  the  picture  gallery  at 
Dusseldorf  revolving  various  projects  in  his  thought.  He  was  a  good  man,  a  true 
disciple,  but  had  not  yet  risen  to  the  full  consecration  of  his  noble  work.  He  was 
that  day  suddenly  arrested  before  a  notable  Ecce  Homo — a  picture  of  the  Redeemer 
with  the  crown  of  thorns  on  His  bleeding  head.  The  artist's  legend  was,  "  All 
this  have  I  done  for  thee  :  what  hast  thou  done  for  Me  ? "  The  picture  sermon 
went  home.  Zinzendorf  there  and  then  entreated  the  Lord  to  grant  him  "the 
fellowship  of  His  sufferings,"  and  the  result  was  the  founding  of  Unitas  Fratrum, 
the  United  Brethren,  the  most  missionary  Church  in  the  world.  It  is  the  want 
of  faith  and  love  that  keeps  men  from  a  full  consecration.  May  we  have  faith  to 
realise  more  fully  the  wonder  of  that  love ;  and  may  that  love  constrain  us  to  do 
our  Father's  will  and  finish  His  work,  following  our  Redeemer  ! 

mm  529 


chap.  xix.        EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


EOMILETIO    NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  The  punishment  of  scourg- 
ing.— The  fact  that  among  the  Romans 
there  was  a  twofold  scourging — the 
one  which  served  for  torture  (qucestio 
per  tormenta)  or  for  punishment,  the 
other  as  preparatory  to  execution 
(comp.  Sepp,  509) — may  enlighten  us 
upon  the  difficulty  which  has  arisen 
between  the  narratives  of  the  first  two 
Evangelists  and  that  of  St.  John,  in 
reference  to  the  scourging  of  Jesus. 
We  may  beforehand,  for  instance, 
suppose  without  difficulty  that  Pilate 
allowed  the  same  scourging  which  was 
at  first  intended  as  torture  or  as 
punishment,  to  satisfy  the  thirst  for 
revenge  of  the  Jews,  to  pass  subse- 
quently, when  the  execution  was  de- 
cided on,  as  its  introduction.  Thus 
the  Evangelists  might  apprehend  this 
scourging  according  to  its  different 
aspects.  John  regarded  it  according 
to  the  original  motives  under  which 
Pilate  had  arranged  it,  and  Luke  also 
brings  out  this  reference  strongly 
(xxiii.  16).  Matthew  and  Mark,  on 
the  other  hand,  represent  the  scourg- 
ing, in  its  world-historical  importance, 
as  preparatory  to,  and  the  beginning 
of,  the  sufferings  of  the  cross  of  Christ. 
Thence  it  is  plain,  moreover,  that  they 
take  it  away  from  its  original  connec- 
tion, and  place  it  at  the  close  of  the 
sufferings  of  Christ  before  Pilate's 
tribunal.  Nay,  even  the  apparent 
differences  between  the  specifications 
of  time  of  John  and  of  Mark  respec- 
tively, become  set  aside  by  this  observa- 
tion. To  suppose  a  twofold  scourging, 
as  Ebrard  does  (433),  is  not  allowable, 
for  this  reason,  that  the  act  of  scourg- 
ing, of  which  the  first  Evangelist 
speaks,  perfectly  resembles  that  de- 
scribed by  John,  and  referred  to 
by  Luke  in  its  issue  in  the  history 
of  the  crowning  with  thorns. — J,  P. 
Lange. 

Yer.  7.  The  clearness  of  our  LoroVs 
claim  to  be  the  Son  of  God. — If  indeed, 
in  His  dealings  with  the  multitude,  our 
Lord  had  been   really  misunderstood, 

530 


He  had  a  last  opportunity  of  explaining 
Himself  when  He  was  arraigned  before 
the  Sanhedrin.  Nothing  is  more  cer- 
tain than  that,  whatever  was  the 
dominant  motive  that  prompted  our 
Lord's  apprehension,  the  Sanhedrin 
condemned  Him  because  He  claimed 
divinity.  The  members  of  the  court 
stated  this  before  Pilate.  "We  have 
a  law,  and  by  our  law  He  ought  to  die, 
because  He  made  Himself  the  Son  of 
God."  Their  language  would  have 
been  meaningless  if  they  had  under- 
stood by  the  "  Son  of  God "  nothing 
more  than  the  ethical  or  theocratic 
sonship  of  their  own  ancient  kings  and 
saints.  If  the  Jews  held  Christ  to  be 
a  false  Messiah,  a  false  prophet,  a 
blasphemer,  it  was  because  He  claimed 
literal  divinity.  True,  the  Messiah 
was  to  have  been  divine.  But  the 
Jews  had  secularised  the  Messianic 
promises ;  and  the  Sanhedrin  held 
Jesus  Christ  to  be  worthy  of  death 
under  the  terms  of  the  Mosaic  law, 
as  expressed  in  Leviticus  xxiv.  16  and 
Deuteronomy  xiii.  5.  After  the  wit- 
nesses had  delivered  their  various  and 
inconsistent  testimonies,  the  high  priest 
arose  and  said,  "  I  adjure  Thee  by  the 
living  God,  that  Thou  tell  us  whether 
Thou  be  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God. 
Jesus  saith  unto  him,  Thou  hast 
said  :  nevertheless  I  say  unto  you, 
Hereafter  shall  ye  see  the  Son  of  man 
sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  power, 
and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven. 
Then  the  high  priest  rent  his  clothes, 
saying,  He  hath  spoken  blasphemy " 
(Matt.  xxvi.  63-65).  The  blasphemy 
did  not  consist,  either  in  the  assump- 
tion of  the  title  Son  of  man,  or  in  the 
claim  to  be  Messiah,  or  even,  excepting 
indirectly,  in  that  which,  by  the  terms 
of  Daniel's  prophecy,  was  involved  in 
Messiahship,  namely,  the  commission 
to  judge  the  world.  It  was  the  further 
claim  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  not  in  any 
moral  or  theocratic,  but  in  the  natural 
sense,  at  which  the  high  priest  and  his 
coadjutors  professed  to  be  so  deeply 
shocked.     The  Jews  felt,  as  our  Lord 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  xix. 


intended,  that  the  Son  of  man  in 
Daniel's  prophecy  could  not  but  be 
divine ;  they  knew  what  He  meant  by 
appropriating  such  words  as  applicable 
to  Himself.  Just  as  one  body  of  Jews 
had  endeavoured  to  destroy  Jesus  when 
He  called  God  His  Father  in  such  sense 
as  to  claim  divinity  (v.  17,  18)  ;  and 
another  when  He  contrasted  His 
eternal  being  with  the  fleeting  life  of 
Abraham  in  a  distant  past  (viii.  58,  59); 
and  another  when  He  termed  Himself 
Son  of  God,  and  associated  Himself 
with  His  Father  as  being  dynamically 
and  so  substantially  one  (x.  30,  31,  39) ; 
just  as  they  murmured  at  His  preten- 
sion to  have  "  come  down  from  heaven  " 
(vi.  42),  and  detected  blasphemy  in  His 


authoritative  remission  of  sins  (Matt, 
ix.  3), — so  when,  before  His  judges,  He 
admitted  that  He  claimed  to  be  the 
Son  of  God,  all  further  discussion  was 
at  an  end.  The  high  priest  exclaimed, 
"  Ye  have  heard  His  blasphemy  "  ; 
and  they  all  condemned  Him  to  be 
guilty  of  death.  And  a  very  accom- 
plished Jew  of  our  own  day,  M.  Salva- 
dor, has  shown  that  this  question  of 
our  Lord's  divinity  was  the  real  point 
at  issue  at  that  momentous  trial.  He 
maintains  that  a  Jew  had  no  logical 
alternative  to  belief  in  the  Godhead  of 
Jesus  Christ  except  the  imperative 
duty  of  putting  Him  to  death. — H.  P. 
Liddon. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  5.  "Behold  the  man!"— From  the 
brief  and  very  pregnant  form  of  the  words, 
it  might  perhaps  be  concluded  that  a  better 
feeling  had  overcome  [Pilate's]  worldliness  in 
this  expression :  the  latter  feeling  would  have 
probably  been  uttered  in  a  more  declamatory 
manner.  The  exclamation  of  the  judge  has 
been  with  reason  regarded  by  the  Church  as 
an  involuntary  prophecy  of  this  moment  of 
suffering,  extorted  from  his  feeling  by  the 
power  of  Christ's  appearance.  His  first 
conscious  feeling  is  connected  with  the 
most  unconscious  by  a  series  of  links.  "Be- 
hold the  man !  "  It  is  as  if  Pilate  would 
exclaim,  There  He  is— the  poor  man — a 
spectacle  for  compassion ;  as  if  in  this 
deepest  misery  the  Man  first  of  all  appeared 
to  us  again  in  His  full  human  form,  and 
awakened  our  entire  human  feeling.  The 
Roman  knew  not  in  what  measure  he  pro- 
phesied. According  to  his  conscious  purpose, 
however,  he  wished,  doubtless,  by  his  words 
to  preach  sympathy  and  compassion  to  the 
high  priests  and  their  attendants,  by  the 
sensible  effects  of  Christ's  appearance.  But 
the  heathen  man  of  the  world  preached 
humanity  in  vain  to  the  Jewish  hierarchs. 
As  soon  as  they  saw  the  man  appear  in  the 
crown  of  thorns,  they  became  deeply  irritated, 
and  cried,  "  Crucify,  crucify  Him  1 "  The 
sorrowing  Messiah  is  to  the  Greeks  foolish- 
ness— to  the  Jews  an  offence  :  this  moment 
proves  this.  The  heathenish  mind,  in  its 
disposition  to  worship  fortune,  and  to  count 
misfortune  a  sin,  or  even  as  a  curse,  cannot 
at  all  perceive  the  power  in  the  idea  of 
triumphant  and  redeeming  sorrow  :  therefore 
it  is  laughable  to  it ;  and  the  representation 
of  this  idea  seems  to  be  involved  in  a  foolish 
fanaticism,    which    deserves     compassion. 


But  the  Jewish  mind  is  able  to  perceive  so 
much  of  the  truth  of  that  idea,  and  of  its 
confirmation  in  Christ,  that  the  momentary 
appearance  of  it  results  in  offending  and 
agitating  it  in  the  strongest  manner  in  its 
ardent  but  darkened  worldliness.  Therefore 
Jesus,  in  the  present  pomp  in  which  He 
appeared  as  the  jest  of  the  heathen  world, 
and  in  Him  the  idea  of  the  King  of  the 
Jews  served  for  a  mockery  to  the  heathen 
world — became  to  them  more  odious  than 
ever.  It  is  extremely  characteristic  that 
immediately  a  frightful  paroxysm  of  rage 
was  developed  in  them  at  this  view  of  Jesus 
— a  hurricane  which  carried  them  altogether 
into  the  position  of  the  heathens,  without 
their  being  conscious  of  it,  seeing  that  they 
now  themselves  dictated  for  the  Lord  the 
heathen  punishment  of  the  cross  in  the  cry 
and  roar,  "  Crucify,  crucify  Him  1 "  This  was 
the  second  degree  of  rejection  wherewith 
the  Jews  delivered  their  Messiah  to  Pilate. 
.  .  .  The  Jewish  hierarchy  is  the  most  deeply 
guilty ;  next  to  that,  the  people  of  the 
promise,  which  is  here  changed  by  its  own 
agency  into  a  people  of  the  curse.  It  cannot, 
indeed,  be  asserted  that  here  it  was,  in  the 
main,  the  same  voices  which  cried  out  the 
"Crucify  Him  !  crucify  Him  !  "  against  Jesus 
which  a  few  days  before  hailed  Him  with 
the  hosanna.  There  the  best  of  the  people 
appeared  in  the  foreground,  here  the  worst ; 
and  only  a  medley  of  slavish  and  wavering 
minds  would  find  themselves  here  again 
among  the  rabble  of  the  high  council,  who 
had  then  attached  themselves  to  the  royal 
priestly  people  of  the  Messiah.  But  where 
in  this  case  were  the  better  ones  who  had 
shouted  hosanna?  Thrice  resounded  the 
great  liturgy  of  death  spoken  by  the  Jews 

531 


chap.  xix.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


on  the  temple-mountain  against  the  Messiah,  seditious  man  and  the  murderer,  became 
"  Crucify,  crucify  Him ! "  There  was  heard  thenceforth  the  gloomy  genius  of  the 
no  contradiction.  Thus  had  the  elected  political  life  of  the  people.  This  is  proved 
people  fulfilled  against  itself  the  doom  of  by  the  history  of  the  Jewish  war.  But 
self-rejection.  Moreover,  even  the  heathen  whilst  he  was  set  free  in  triumph,  Jesus 
world  had  doomed  itself.  Greek  civilisation  was  once  more  stripped  of  the  soldier's  cloak 
and  Roman  justice  had  become,  in  the  and  dressed  in  His  own  clothes,  and  was 
person  of  Pilate,  the  servants  of  the  Jewish  hurried  away  to  the  place  of  execution, 
fanaticism  which  was  hostile  to  Christ.  Certainly  this  condemnation  and  leading 
The  mighty  worldly  pomp,  the  nursery  of  to  death  of  Jesus  resulted,  moreover,  in 
civic  right,  had  become  a  slavish  executioner  the  redemption  and  release  of  still  another 
of  a  degraded  priestly  caste,  and  of  an  Barabbas,  namely,  of  fallen  man  in  general, 
inquisition  hostile  to  humanity.  The  entire  as  having  committed  sedition  against  God 
old  world  accomplished  the  judgment  of  and  murder  against  its  brethren,  and  there- 
self -rejection  in  sealing  the  doom  of  the  upon  is  fallen  into  the  heavy  bondage  of 
Prince  of  the  new  world,  the  inheritor  of  its  sin.  Christ  goes  away  to  release  the 
blessing.  The  rejection  of  Jesus  was  actually  prisoners  who  long  for  freedom. — J.  P. 
declared  when  Pilate  released  to  the  Jews  Laiige 
their  Barabbas.     The  spirit  of  Barabbas,  the 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  7—18. 

"Vers.  7-16.  Jesus  innocent,  yet  condemned. — Pilate  had  done  his  utmost  to  deliver 
Jesus  from  those  implacable  foes,  i.e.  he  had  done  his  utmost  to  effect  his  purpose  by 
policy.  He  hesitated  to  take  a  firm  stand  on  the  platform  of  even-handed  justice. 
His  unjust  government  of  his  province  made  him  fear  to  do  this.  "  Conscience 
makes  cowards  of  us  all " ;  and  here  it  made  Pilate  weak  and  vacillating.  The 
Jewish  leaders  were  quick  to  see  this,  and  pressed  their  advantage  remorselessly 
until  the  divinely  appointed  end  had  been  reached.     Notice — 

I.  Pilate's  final  examination  of  Jesus. — 1.  The  last  word  of  Jewish  malice 
made  Pilate  again  hesitate  and  bethink  himself  before  finally  yielding  (ver.  7). 

2.  The  Son  of  God!  This  saying  of  the  infuriated  Jews,  coupled  with  the  remem- 
brance of  his  wife's  message  regarding  her  mysterious  dream,  made  Pilate  more 
than  ever  conscious  that  in  Christ's  presence  the  eternal  world  was  near.  Little 
wonder  that  he  feared,  lest  haply  he  might  be  found  " fighting  against  God" 
(Acts  v.  34-40).  But  he  had  neither  the  clear  conscience  nor  the  moral  courage 
of  a  Gamaliel  to  make  such  a  stand  for  truth  and  right  as  he  should  have  made. 

3.  Perturbed  in  mind,  this  unbeliever  (in  whose  mind  the  usual  association  of 
unbelief  and  superstition  was  found)  returned  to  the  judgment  hall,  and  again 
stood  before  the  silent,  suffering  Christ.  Abruptly  and  with  troubled  countenance 
he  asks  the  question,  "  Whence  art  Thou  ? "  but  he  received  no  answer  from 
our  Lord.  4.  It  is  plain  why  Jesus  did  not  answer  the  Roman  judge.  All  the 
materials  for  forming  a  judgment  were  before  him,  and  on  reviewing  these 
Pilate  had  already  pronounced  Jesus  innocent.  Thus  the  Roman  judge  himself 
was  indirectly  condemned.  But  it  was  also  in  mercy  for  Pilate's  moral  weakness 
which  his  heathen  education  could  not  change  into  strength.  Therefore  He 
spares  him  further  sin.  5.  But  in  answer  to  Pilate's  foolish  boast  about  his 
power  Jesus  did  reply  in  a  fashion  that  made  Pilate  yet  more  uneasy  (ver.  11). 
Jesus  pointed  out  to  him  that  his  power  and  authority  as  judge  and  governor  lay 
above  and  behind  imperial  Rome  (Rom.  xiii.  1):  that  this  power  was  given 
to  be  exercised  justly,  and  that  therefore  he  would  be  called  to  account  for  the 
use  of  it ;  but  that  those  who  knew  better — the  theocratic  judge  Caiaphas  and 
the  other  Jewish  leaders,  who  should  have  had  more  enlightenment,  and  who 
unjustly  pressed  Pilate  to  condemn  Jesus — were  the  most  guilty. 

II.  Pilate's  final  declaration  of  the  innocency  of  Jesus. — 1.  This  last  con- 
versation with  the  Saviour  made  Pilate  more"  feverishly  anxious  than  ever  to 
release  Jesus.     The  more  he  saw  of  the  kingly  Sufferer,  the  more  unfathomable 

532 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  xix. 


abysses  of  mystery  and  being  seemed  to  open  around  Him.  2.  In  doing 
this  he  bore  testimony  again  to  his  own  word,  "I  find  in  Him  no  fault 
at  all"  (xviii.  38).  And  well  might  Pilate  do  so;  for  Jesus  here  distinctly 
acknowledges  Pilate's  right  to  judge  derived  from  above,  and  thus  proves  that 
He  is  no  stirrer-up  of  the  people  against  properly  constituted  authority.  He 
declares  also  the  right  of  Heaven  to  order  human  affairs,  and  thus  shows  Himself 
to  be  no  blasphemer.  3.  Well  then  might  Pilate  seek  to  release  Him.  And  we 
should  rejoice  to  be  able  to  accept  this  evidence  of  the  blamelessness  of  our  great 
High  Priest.  It  was  testimony  dragged  from  an  unwilling  witness;  and  it 
shows  us  that  Jesus  in  this  was  fitted  for  His  great  mediatorial  work  as  the 
Redeemer  of  men. 

III.  Jesus,  though  innocent,  is  condemned.— 1.  Pilate's  well-meant  efforts  to 
save  Jesus  from  the  uttermost  penalty  proved  vain.  A  cry  of  wrath  from  the 
excited  mob  rent  the  air:  "  If  thou  let  this  man  go,"  etc.  (ver.  12).  The 
struggle  between  righteousness  and  apparent  self-interest  going  on  in  Pilate's 
breast,  and  which  a  moment  ago  seemed  being  decided  on  the  side  of  righteous- 
ness, was  suddenly  ended  in  favour  of  self-interest.  2.  If  this  accusation, 
however  baseless,  came  to  the  ears  of  Tiberius,  and  it  was  proved  that  Christ 
had  been  released,  then  Pilate  knew,  or  thought,  there  would  be  "  short  shrift  " 
for  him.  "  What  was  this  Jew  in  comparison  with  his  position  and  safety. 
Better  the  satisfaction  of  this  unjust  demand  of  the  Jewish  rulers  than  disgrace 
or  worse  at  Rome."  Is  it  so  certain,  Pilate  ?  and  does  a  God  of  righteousness 
not  reign  ?  Had  you  remained  firm  that  day  your  house  might  have  been 
established  in  righteousness  (Ps.  cxii.).  Unrighteousness  will  not  serve  you  ;  the 
unrighteous  shall  perish.  3.  Pilate  therefore,  with  a  heavy  load  upon  his 
conscience,  sat  down  in  his  judgment  seat  to  stain  his  office  by  a  crime.  He  was 
not  a  judge,  but  a  slave  in  the  high  light  of  noon.  4.  Strange  were  his  words 
in  pronouncing  judgment :  "  Behold  your  King " ;  and  as  the  people  cried, 
"  Away  with  Him,  crucify  Him,"  again  the  scornful  voice  was  heard :  "  Shall  I 
crucify  your  King  ?  "  This  was  the  plea  on  which  they  finally  pressed  Pilate 
to  condemn  Jesus,  and  they  will  not  be  spared  the  humiliation  of  the  charge. 
5.  But  if  Pilate  was  a  slave,  what  shall  be  said  of  those  hypocritical  men  who 
boasted  of  their  freedom  as  they  cried  out,  "  We  have  no  king  but  Caesar " 
(viii.  32,  33)  1  Jesus  is  "  delivered  to  be  crucified,"  and  is  led  away  to  the  cross. 
But  as  these  men  go  we  see  gathering  over  them  the  storms  of  justice,  sum- 
moned by  their  imprecation,  "  His  blood  be  on  us  and  on  our  children."  We 
see  a  subjugated  people — a  ruined  city,  the  abode  of  hideous  iniquity,  round 
which  the  eagles  gather  for  their  prey — a  blazing  temple — "  a  people  scattered 
and  peeled  " — until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  are  fulfilled  (Luke  xxi.  24),  and  the 
descendants  of  those  murderers  shall  say,  "  Blessed  is  He,"  etc.  (Matt,  xxiii.  39), 

Vers.  17,  18.  Golgotha. — A  guard  of  Roman  soldiers  issue  from  one  of  the 
gates  of  Jerusalem  escorting  three  prisoners,  and  accompanied  by  a  varied  crowd, 
many  execrating  or  jeering,  some,  mostly  of  the  gentler  sex,  weeping.  The  guard 
hold  their  way  toward  an  open  space  near  the  highway,  where,  on  a  low  mound, 
malefactors  are  wont  to  be  executed.  Two  of  the  prisoners  are  known  criminals ; 
the  third,  who  has  aid  in  bearing  the  cross  to  which  He  is  soon  to  be  nailed,  is 
Jesus,  who  was  pronounced  innocent  by  the  Roman  judge.  As  they  come  to 
the  place  of  execution,  the  flower-scented  airs  of  spring  breathe  around,  and 
the  bright  spring  sunshine,  as  yet  undimmed,  gleams  down  on  this  scene.  The 
preliminaries  of  crucifixion  are  soon  arranged.  Jesus  and  the  malefactors  are 
nailed  to  the  crosses  they  have  been  bearing,  which  are  then  set  upright  and 
fixed.     Jesus  occupies  the  central  position ;  on  either  hand  the  malefactors  are 

533 


chap.  XIX.        BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


placed,  and  the  weary  hours  begin  to  pass.  We  place  ourselves  in  thought  before 
the  central  cross  on  Golgotha,  and  ask  the  meaning  of  this  scene. 

I.  The  cross  of  Jesus  is  the  symbol  of  the  punishment  of  sin. — 1.  Around  it 
are  marshalled  the  hosts  of  light  and  darkness.  The  crucial  hour  of  conflict  has 
come,  when  humanity  shall  be  freed  from  the  guilt  of  sin — when  the  darkness 
that  covered  the  earth,  and  the  gross  darkness  brooding  over  the  peoples,  shall 
begin  to  pass,  and  the  true  light  to  shine  (1  John  ii.  8).  2.  Jew  and  Gentile  felt 
the  burden  of  sin,  and  perceived  that  they  were  responsible  for  its  committal  and 
obnoxious  to  its  punishment.  The  Hebrew  with  the  divine  revelation  given 
to  him  apprehended  this  truth  most  deeply.  He  realised  that  sin  springs  "  out 
of  the  depths  of  human  personality  in  opposition  to  the  divine,"  that  it  is  "in  its 
nature  destructive  and  leads  to  death,"  and  that  by  it  misery  comes  upon  men. 

3.  But  the  Gentile  also  had  his  idea  of  sin.  It  gave  rise  to  the  dualism  of 
Persia,  it  meets  us  in  the  thought  of  the  most  cultured  Gentile  peoples ;  it  is 
one  of  the  foundations  on  which  the  loftiest  heathen  literature,  Greek  tragedy, 
has  been  built.  "  Behind  all  the  activities  of  life,  and  all  the  play  of  dramatic 
passion,  .  .  .  there  is  a  stern  background  of  righteousness  which  will  by  no 
means  clear  the  guilty.  A  shadowy  terror  overhangs  all  wrong-doing,  and  a 
curse  which  cannot  be  turned  away  pursues  the  offenders  "  (Dr.  John  Tulloch). 

4.  Sin  and  its  punishment,  then,  were  amongst  the  most  engrossing  thoughts  of 
all  men.     How  to  escape  its  guilt  and  penalty — that  was  the  cry  of  the  ages. 

5.  And  here  on  the  cross  of  Jesus  the  prayers  of  the  ages  uttered,  or  unexpressed, 
have  found  an  answer.  "  He  was  made  sin  for  us  who  knew  no  sin."  On  the 
cross  He  suffered  the  extreme  penalty,  even  to  the  hiding  for  a  moment  of  the 
Father's  face.  6.  There,  too,  the  dominion  of  evil  is  broken.  The  evil  power  in 
which  sin  inheres  is  vanquished.  The  head  of  Satan  is  bruised  ;  and  the  kingdom 
of  darkness  begins  to  shrink  as  the  kingdom  of  light  expands. 

II.  The  cross  of  Jesus  is  the  symbol  of  divine  love. — 1.  When  sinful  men 
remember  that  they  must  stand  before  God  they  begin  with  fear  to  ask,  "  How 
shall  I  come  before  Him  1 "  etc.  And  if  they  are  honest  their  answer  will  be, 
"  I  cannot  answer  for  one  of  a  thousand  transgressions."  I  cannot  pay  the  ten 
thousand  talents  which  I  owe.  I  have  no  way  by  which  the  debt  might  be 
cancelled.  My  own  righteousness  falls  in  ruins.  The  heaven  that  I  would 
purchase  with  my  good  works  becomes  like  an  empty  dream.  2.  "  What  man 
could  not  do  God  did,"  etc.  (Bom.  viii.  3).  His  love  planned  the  way  of  escape 
for  man.  In  the  Son  He  lays  a  foundation  on  which  men  may  build  safely  for 
eternity,  "  not  having  their  own  righteousness  which  is  of  the  law,"  etc.  (Phil.  iii.  9). 
3.  And  in  the  cross  is  seen  the  love  of  the  Bedeemer  in  His  vicarious  suffering 
and  self-sacrifice  for  mankind,  in  obedience  to  the  Father's  will,  "  who  desires  not 
the  death  of  a  sinner,"  etc.  (Ezek.  xviii.  32).  The  cross  of  shame  thus  becomes  a 
visible  manifestation  and  symbol  of  heavenly  love  toward  fallen  men. 

III.  The  cross  of  Jesus  on  Golgotha  is  the  meeting-point  of  the  ages. — 1. 
(1)  It  was  foreseen  from  eternity.  Jesus  is  "  the  Lamb  slain  from  the 
foundation  of  the  world."  (2)  It  was  concealed  in  the  first  promise  of  redemption 
after  Eden's  fall.  (3)  Abraham  saw  it  afar  off,  "  and  was  glad,"  when  Isaac  was 
spared  on  Moriah  (Gen.  xxii.  12-14).  (4)  Jacob  waited  for  the  salvation  of  God 
(Gen.  xlix.  18).  (5)  Isaiah  and  all  the  Old  Testament  saints  and  prophets  sighed 
for  and  looked  forward  to  that  happy  hour  wrhen  Christ's  divine  sorrow  and 
suffering  should  bring  joy  to  men.  "  Oh  that  Thou  wouldst  rend  the  heavens, 
and  come  down,"  etc.  (Isa.  lxiv.  1).  "  Yea,  many  kings  and  prophets  would  fain 
have  seen  the  things  which  Christ's  disciples  saw,"  etc.  (Luke  x.  24).  (6)  The 
Gentile  world  also  felt  vague  longings  after  peace  and  a  higher  life  which  no 
wisest  philosophy,  no  effort,  could  help  men  to  attain  to, — when  the  love  of  God 
wrought  redemption  for  humanity  on  the  cross  of  shame. 

534 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.        chap.  XIX. 


2.  (1)  And  ^toward  this  cross  all  succeeding  ages  have  looked.  (2)  Men  still 
have  tried  in  various  ways  to  effect  for  themselves  what  the  redeeming  grace  of 
our  great  High  Priest  alone  can  effect.  They  have  sought  through  ritual, 
pilgrimages,  etc.,  to  escape  the  necessity  of  that  full  surrender  to  Christ  which 
has  made  the  cross  of  Christ  "  to  the  Jews  a  stumbling-block,"  etc.  (1  Cor.  i.  23). 
But  however  far  men  wander  into  the  ways  of  unbelief  or  superstition,  seeking 
thus  to  gain  peace  and  promise  of  heaven,  they  have  had  to  come  back  to  the 
cross  of  Jesus.  (3)  And  now  in  ever-widening  circles  its  influence  is  spreading. 
Men  of  all  races,  as  the  years  pass  on,  are  turning  toward  it,  as  the  true  centre 
of  life — the  true  blessedness  for  time,  the  only  hope  for  eternity. 

Application. — Do  we  see  in  this  scene  on  Golgotha  divine  love  exhibited 
toward  us?  Do  we  see  in  it  the  wisdom  and  mercy  of  God  working  out 
through  Christ  our  redemption  ?  Then  what  joy  and  comfort  should  the  view 
bring  to  our  souls  !  On  that  cross  the  dominion  of  evil  is  broken,  the  guilt  of 
sin  removed,  the  sting  of  death  taken  away.  Do  our  sins  appal  us  with  the 
thought  of  judgment  ?  "  Christ  was  delivered  for  our  offences,"  etc.  (Rom.  iv.  25 ; 
Col.  i.  14).  Does  death  affright?  The  power  has  been  taken  from  him 
(Rom.  xiv.  8).     Does  the  law  thunder  condemnation  ? 

"  Free  from  the  law,  0  happy  condition, 
Jesus  hath  bled,  and  there  is  remission. 
Cursed  by  the  law  and  bruised  by  the  fall, 
Christ  hath  redeemed  us,  '  once  for  all.' " 

What  reason,  then,  to  rejoice  in  the  cross  of  Jesus !  Thence  flow  eternal 
peace,  heavenly  joy,  divine  sonship  and  citizenship ;  there  the  darkness  passes 
from  our  souls  for  time  and  eternity,  and  through  the  mists  of  sorrow  and  pain 
the  morning  of  joy  dawns,  and  the  Sun  of  righteousness  arises,  bringing  an 
endless  day  of  truth  and  grace. 

Vers.  17,  18.  The  cross  of  Christ. — It  is  in  the  mystery  of  the  cross  that  God 
has  made  the  glory  of  His  wisdom  most  evident.  The  thoughts  of  men  and  those 
of  God  have  been  in  opposition  since  men  sinned.  It  is  therefore  no  cause  of 
astonishment  that  men  should  have  dared  sometimes  to  find  fault  with  the  works 
of  God.  That  which  should  surprise  us  most  is  that  men  have  been  offended  even 
at  the  grace  of  God.  The  mystery  of  a  crucified  God  is  foolishness  to  the  worldling. 
Yet  with  the  apostle  we  maintain  that  it  is  in  a  special  degree  the  manifestation 
of  divine  wisdom.  Two  things  were  essential:  1.  To  satisfy  an  offended  God;  and 
2.  To  elevate  men,  who  had  become  perverted  and  corrupted.  But  these  ends 
could  not  be  attained  to  in  any  way  more  effectually  than  by  the  cross  of  the 
Saviour. 

I.  There  is  no  other  means  by  which  an  offended  God  can  be  satisfied  than 
the  cross  of  Jesus  Christ. — 1.  God  could  be  satisfied  only  by  the  God-man. 
And  what  has  this  God-man  done,  or  rather  what  was  there  that  He  did  not  do  ? 
Why  was  God  alienated  from  man  ?  Because  man  had  sought  to  be  as  God. 
"  Ye  shall  be  as  gods,"  etc.  (Gen.  iii.  1-5).  And  I,  said  the  God-man,  in  order  to 
satisfy  My  Father,  I  shall  humiliate  Myself  more  than  any  man:  "  I  am  a  worm 
and  no  man,"  etc.  (Ps.  xxii.  6).  Men  had  rebelled  against  God.  Therefore,  said 
the  God-man,  shall  I  become  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross 
(Phil.  ii.  8).  Man  in  sinful  concupiscence  eats  of  the  forbidden  fruit ;  therefore 
I  (said  the  God-man)  will  become  a  man  of  sorrow  and  acquainted  with  grief 
(Isa.  liii.  3).  Can  we  conceive  a  more  complete  reparation?  2.  But  this  is 
not  all.  The  Saviour  has  revealed  three  great  truths  with  which  men  should  be 
chiefly  concerned  :  (1)  What  God  is ;  (2)  what  sin  is  ;  and  (3)  what  salvation  is. 
The  knowledge  of  these  truths  is  essentially  connected  with  the  mystery  of  the 
cross.     What  is  God  %    An  exalted  Being,  for  whose  glory  Emmanuel  had  to  be 

i  535 


chap.  xix.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


humiliated,  even  to  the  death  of  the  cross.  The  idea  of  the  greatness  of  God 
which  this  gives  surpasses  all  that  can  otherwise  be  conceived.  And  what  is 
sin  ?  An  evil,  for  the  expiation  of  which  it  was  necessary  that  the  God- man 
should  become  "  a  curse"  (Gal.  iii.  13)  and  full  of  reproach.  This  is  the  mystery 
of  the  cross  which  we  preach.  And  what  is  the  salvation  of  man?  It  is  a 
blessing  to  secure  which  for  man  the  Son  of  God  laid  down  His  life.  These  are 
the  great  truths  which  this  divine  Master,  dying  on  the  cross,  teaches  us.  Now, 
a  truth  which  gives  us  such  lofty  ideas  of  God,  which  inspires  us  with  a  perfect 
horror  and  hatred  of  sin,  which  leads  us  to  prize  salvation  above  everything  else, 
must  be  a  mystery  of  divine  wisdom. 

II.  There  is  no  means  more  effectual  than  the  cross  of  Christ  for  converting 
men  perverted  and  corrupted  by  sin. — 1.  There  are  three  sources  of  sin 
according  to  St.  John  :  "  The  lust  of  the  eye,  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  the  pride 
of  life"  (1  John  ii.  16).  The  remedy  for  these  our  Lord  brought  when  He  came 
from  heaven,  and  He  shows  us  in  His  passion  what  they  are.  The  despoilment 
of  His  garments  teaches  us  not  to  love  riches,  the  lust  of  the  eye.  The 
humiliations  He  underwent  testify  against  ambition,  the  pride  of  life.  His 
sufferings  witness  against  sensuality,  which  is  the  lust  of  the  flesh.  "  What 
would  be  the  result,"  said  the  learned  Pic  de  la  Mirande,  "  if  men  should  agree 
universally  to  live  according  to  the  example  of  Jesus  Christ,  so  that  this  crucified 
God  should  become  practically  the  law  according  to  which  the  world  would  be 
governed  ?  To  what  a  degree  of  perfection  would  the  world  speedily  be  raised 
which  to-day  is  so  corrupt  ! "  2.  In  the  divine  plan  how  beautifully  is  the 
excess  of  malice  corrected  by  the  excess  of  perfection  in  Christ,  the  excess  of 
sinfulness  by  His  superabounding  holiness,  the  excess  of  base  ingratitude  by 
the  abounding  of  His  unspeakable  love  !  3.  Behold,  here  is  surely  what  is 
sufficient  to  confound  our  reason  in  view  of  the  judgment  of  God  ;  and  may  it 
please  Him  that  this  judgment,  at  which  our  reason  must  be  convinced  of  its 
errors  and  put  to  confusion,  may  not  already  be  begun  for  us.  For  from  this 
time  forth  the  dying  Saviour  has  committed  to  Him  the  judgment  of  the  world. 
"  Now  is  the  judgment  of  this  world"  (xii.  31).  His  cross  will  rise  against  us. 
It  is  the  cross  of  Christ  by  which  we  shall  be  judged — this  cross  (so  inimical  to  our 
passions),  which  we  have  honoured  in  our  speculations,  and  which  we  have  shrunk 
from  in  our  practice,  with  it  we  shall  be  confronted.  All  that  is  not  found  to 
be  conformable  to  it  shall  then  bear  the  character  and  seal  of  reprobation.  What 
resemblance  is  there  between  it  and  our  fleshly  lives?  Let  not  that  which 
should  reconcile  us  to  God  only  make  us  more  worthy  of  condemnation ;  but  let 
it  be  that  in  which  we  place  all  our  confidence. — Abridged  from  Bourdaloue. 


HOMILETIC  NOTES. 


Ver.  14.  The  time  of  the  crucifixion. 
— Does  John  here  use  the  Jewish  mode 
of  reckoning  time?  and  if  so,  how  is 
this  statement  to  be  reconciled  with 
Mark  xv.  25,  "  And  it  was  the  third 
hour,"  etc.,  and  with  the  assertion  of 
all  the  Synoptists  that  the  darkness — 
not  mentioned  by  St.  John — lasted 
from  the  sixth  to  the  ninth  hour,  i.e. 
twelve  to  three  o'clock?  1.  It  must 
be  remembered  that  the  ancients  had 
not  the  convenient  means  we  have  of 

536 


determining  the  exact  time.  They  had 
to  go  a  good  deal  by  guess-work,  by 
noticing  the  position  of  the  sun,  etc. 
We  are  not  therefore  to  think  that  the 
hour  as  given  either  by  the  Synoptists 
or  by  St.  John  was  what  we  might 
call  the  exact  moment  in  astronomical 
time.  Then  St.  John  expressly  uses 
the  word  about.  It  is  just  as  if  he 
had  said  toward  noon.  2.  All  the 
Synoptists  give  the  hours  when  dark- 
ness fell  on  the  scene  of  the  crucifixion 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY.    ST.  JOHN.        cttAP.  xix. 


as  the  sixth  to  the  ninth.  This  probably 
denoted  the  actual  time  of  our  Lord's 
crucifixion ;  and  in  this  way  St.  John's 
general  reference  would  not  be  at 
variance  with  St.  Mark's  statement  as 
above.  3.  Probably  the  scourging  was 
regarded  by  St.  Mark  as  the  beginning 
of  the  crucifixion.  It  was  preliminary 
tj  it.  Then  would  come  the  march 
to  Golgotha,  and  the  preparation  for 
the  crucifixion  itself.  Both  would  take 
time.  And  as  Jesus  would  almost 
appear  to  have  been  the  last  of  the 
three  to  be  nailed  on  the  cross,  it  might 
be  well  on  toward  noon  when  His  cross 
was  finally  lifted  up.  4.  There  are 
strong  arguments,  however,  in  favour 
of  the  idea  that  John  used  the  Western 
mode  of  reckoning  time  (a  day  of 
twelve  hours  from  midnight  to  noon 
and  from  noon  to  midnight)  as  best 
known  in  Roman  Asia  where  he 
laboured.  But  this  surely  would  only 
shift  the  difficulty,  and  not  solve  it ; 
for  6  a.m.  is  not  9  a.m.  The  likelihood 
is  that  amid  the  events  of  that  day, 
so  awful  to  the  disciples,  neither 
St.  John  nor  St.  Peter  (if  he  it  was 
who  dictated  St.  Mark's  Gospel)  would 
have  time  or  thought  to  inquire  what 
the  exact  hour  by  sun-dial  or  clepsydra 
was,  whilst  both  might  think  of  some- 
what different  stages  of  the  proceedings 
when  they  made  their  notes  of  time. 

Vers.  16-18.  The  presence  of  evil  in 
human  life. — When  we  turn  to  the 
highest  form  of  life  in  man  himself, 
the  presence  of  evil  haunts  it  every- 
where in  endless  forms  of  general 
and  individual  experience  in  all  re- 
lations of  human  society,  all  func- 
tions of  human  industry,  and  in  the 
noblest  energies  of  human  progress. 
We  cannot  conceal  its  working  when 
we  look  within  our  own  hearts.  Nay ; 
here  more  than  anywhere  it  shows  its 
deepest  power,  and  touches  human 
experience  with  acutest  misery.  Diffe- 
rent natures  will  apprehend  differently 
the  depth  and  power  of  evil  in  human 
life ;  but  there  are  none,  not  even  the 
more  sentimental  enthusiasts,  can  dis- 
pute its  existence  ;  and  it  requires  only 


a  slight  degree  of  moral  earnestness 
to  be  solemnly  arrested  by  it.  The 
highest  natures  have  been  most  moved 
by  its  mystery;  and  those  who  have 
most  realised  the  greatness  of  man, 
and  done  most  for  his  good,  have  at 
the  same  time  felt  most  pathetically 
the  shadows  of  evil  that  rest  upon 
his  lot.  So  far  there  can  hardly  be 
any  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  fact 
which  we  call  evil.  Whatever  men 
may  make  of  the  fact,  its  presence 
around  them  and  in  their  own  life 
admits  of  no  denial.  A  fact  so  uni- 
versal and  so  painful,  touching  human 
life  at  all  points  with  such  a  sore 
pressure,  has  been  necessarily  a  subject 
of  much  inquiry  and  reflection.  Men 
have  never  ceased  interrogating  the 
mystery  which  lies  around  them  and 
within  them.  The  history  of  religion 
is  in  great  part  a  history  of  the  expla- 
nations which  men  have  tried  to  give 
of  it. — Dr.  John  Tulloch. 

Vers.  17,  18.  The  law  is  no  remedy 
for  sin. — The  moral  law  powerfully  con- 
tributed to  awaken  the  inner  sense  of  the 
Hebrew  people  and  deepen  their  con- 
sciousness of  sin.  The  divine  is  presented 
in  it  not  merely  as  Sovereign  and  Lord 
— although  this  is  the  opening  keynote 
(Exod.  xx.  2,  3) — but  as  identified  with 
every  aspect  of  order,  truth,  righteous- 
ness, and  purity  in  human  life.  A 
moral  idea  not  only  invests  all  life,  but 
is  carried  up  to  Jahveh-Elohim,  as  the 
Source  of  this  life  and  its  highest  Ex- 
emplar. It  was  impossible  to  dwell  in 
the  light  of  such  an  ideal  and  not  to 
have  had  the  spiritual  sense  quickened 
and  made  sensitive  and  the  feeling  of 
offence  toward  the  divine  called  forth 
in  many  ways  hitherto  little  under- 
stood or  owned.  This  is  what  St.  Paul 
means  when  he  says  that  "  the  law 
entered  that  the  offence  might  abound" 
(Rom.  v.  20),  and  again,  that  "  without 
the  law  sin  was  dead"  (Rom.  vii.  8). 
He  is  speaking  of  his  own  experience, 
or  of  the  experience  of  a  devout  Jew 
in  his  own  time ;  but  the  experience  of 
the  religious  nature  is  always  so  far 
the  same — nay,  the  experience  of  the 

537 


chap.  xix.        MOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


individual  is  typical  of  the  race.  When 
the  law  entered  into  the  consciousness 
of  humanity,  and  was  added  to  the 
progressive  force  of  divine  revelation, 
the  sense  of  sin  was  deepened  along- 
side of  it.  Conscience  became  alive  in 
front  of  the  divine  commandment,  and 
spiritual  life  was  touched  to  its  depths 
by  that  sad  undertone  of  sin  which  has 
never  died  out  of  it.  Through  ages  the 
moral  law  has  been  the  most  powerful 
moral  factor  of  humanity,  restraining 
its  chaotic  tendencies,  and  binding  it 
into  harmonies  of  domestic,  social,  and 
religious  well-being.     It  has  lain   not 


merely  upon  the  human  conscience,  but 
entered  into  the  human  heart  as  one  of 
its  most  living  inward  springs — bracing 
its  weakness,  rebuking  its  laxity,  hold- 
ing before  it  an  inflexible  rule  of  moral 
good.  Words  cannot  measure  the 
strength  which  it  has  been  to  all  the 
higher  qualities  of  the  race,  and  the 
widespread  moral  education  which  it 
has  diffused,  discriminating  and  purify- 
ing the  ideas  alike  of  good  and  evil 
wherever  it  has  prevailed,  and  clothing 
life  with  a  reality  and  depth  of  mean- 
ing which  it  would  never  otherwise 
have  possessed. — Dr.  John  Tulloch. 


ILLUSTRATION. 


"Vers.  17,  18.  The  preaching  of  the  cross 
the  power  of  God  unto  salvation. — Let  me  try 
then  to  point  out  to  you  what  some  of  the 
effects  will  be  in  a  man's  preaching  from  a 
true  sense  of  the  value  of  the  human  soul, 
by  which  I  mean  a  high  estimate  of  the 
capacity  of  the  spiritual  nature,  a  keen  and 
constant  appreciation  of  the  attainments  to 
which  it  may  be  brought.  And  first  of  all  it 
helps  to  rescue  the  gospel  which  we  preach 
from  a  sort  of  unnaturalness  and  incongruity 
which  is  very  apt  to  cling  to  it ;  this  is,  I 
think,  very  important.  Consider  what  it  is 
that  you  are  to  declare  week  after  week  to 
the  men  and  women  who  come  to  hear  you. 
The  mighty  truths  of  Incarnation  and  Atone- 
ment are  your  themes.  You  tell  them  of  the 
birth  and  life  and  death  of  Jesus  Christ. 
You  picture  the  adorable  love  and  the 
mysterious  sacrifice  of  the  Saviour,  and  you 
bind  all  this  to  their  lives.  You  tell  them 
that  in  a  true  sense  all  this  was  certainly  for 
them.  I  do  not  know  what  you  are  made  of, 
if  sometimes,  as  you  preach,  there  does  not 
come  into  your  mind  a  thought  of  incon- 
gruity. What  are  you,  you  and  these  people 
to  whom  you  preach,  that  for  you  the  central 
affection  of  the  universe  should  have  been 
stirred  1  You  know  your  own  life.  You 
know  something  of  the  lives  they  live.  You 
look  into  their  faces  as  you  preach  to  them. 


Where  is  the  end  worthy  of  all  this  ministry 
of  almighty  grace  which  you  have  been 
describing  ?  Is  it  possible  that  all  this  once 
took  place,  and  by  the  operation  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  a  perpetual  power  in  the  world, 
merely  that  these  machine-lives  might  run 
a  little  truer,  or  that  a  series  of  rules  might 
be  established  by  which  the  current  workings 
of  society  might  move  more  smoothly? 
That,  which  men  sometimes  make  the  pur- 
pose of  it  all,  is  too  unworthy.  The  engine 
is  too  coarse  to  have  so  fine  a  fire  under  it. 
You  must  see  something  deeper.  You  must 
discern  in  all  these  men  and  women  some 
inherent  preciousness,  for  which  even  the 
marvel  of  the  Incarnation  and  the  agony  of 
Calvary  were  not  too  great,  or  it  is  impossible 
that  you  should  keep  your  faith  in  those 
stupendous  truths  which  Bethlehem  and 
Calvary  offer  to  us.  Some  source  of  fire 
from  which  these  dimmed  sparks  come,  some 
possible  renewal  of  the  fire  which  is  in  them 
still,  some  sight  of  the  education  through 
which  each  soul  is  passing,  and  some  sugges- 
tion of  the  special  personal  perfectness  to 
which  each  may  attain,  all  this  must  brighten 
before  you,  as  you  look  at  them ;  and  then 
the  truths  of  your  theology  shall  not  be 
thrown  into  confusion  nor  faded  into  un- 
reality by  your  ministry  to  men.— Dr.  Phillips 
Brooks. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  19—30. 

Ver.  19.  The  "  title  on  the  cross." — I.  We  should  have  an  interest  in  the  details 
of  the  crucifixion. — 1.  If  we  believe  that  the  death  on  this  cross  was  borne  for 
our  sakes,  we  cannot  but  take  an  interest  in  every  detail  connected  with  it.  2. 
A  wonderful  and  well-known  picture,  at  which  many  have  loved  to  look,  presents 
to  us  the  mother  of  the  Crucified  being  gently  led  away  from  the  awesome  scene 
by  him  who  was  now  her  "  son"  broken-hearted,  crushed  by  what  she  had  gone 
through.     The  face  is  something  to  look  at — so  grief -stricken,  so  heart-pierced 

S3S 


S0M2LETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST  JOHN.        chap.  xix. 


and  yet  with  some  strange,  quaint  ray  of  faith  lighting  it  up  !  And  the  painter 
has  given  this  "  touch."  In  the  poor,  feeble,  quivering  fingers  is  clasped — what  1 
The  "  crown  of  thorns."  Unconsciously,  instinctively,  Mary  had  unfastened  the 
cruel  thorns  from  her  holy  child's  head.  They  were  no  more  hurting  then  ;  but  it 
was  nature  in  a  mother's  hand  to  tear  it  off.  And  now  she  clasps  it,  keeps  it, 
dear,  precious.  It  was  with  Him,  part  of  Him,  and  it  is  sacred,  not  to  be  parted 
with  now  !  But  it  will  be  said — and  truly  in  a  measure — that  is  merely  natural 
sentiment.  3.  Well,  again  there  are  those  who  think  that  could  they  but  hold 
in  their  hand,  while  kneeling  in  prayer,  or  engaged  in  holy,  devotional  thought, 
a  piece  of  the  real,  true  wooden  cross  of  Golgotha,  how  good,  how  happy  that 
would  make  them.  And  now  it  will  be  said — in  a  measure  truly — this  is 
superstition.  4.  But  is  there  not  solid  ground  on  which  Christians  who  are 
given  neither  to  sentiment  nor  superstition  may  stand?  We  love  Him  who 
died  for  us  (would  we  loved  Him  better  !).  We  love  to  think  of  the  death  He 
endured.  All  our  blessings,  all  our  hopes,  spring  from  it.  The  Bible  has  given 
the  story  of  the  cross  in  full  detail.  We  wish  to  look  at,  think  about,  and 
understand  everything,  even  the  incidental  details  and  circumstances,  connected 
with  the  cross  of  Calvary. 

II.  Here,  then,  is  what  is  called  the  title  on  the  cross. — 1.  We  should  neither 
in  mere  sentiment  nor  in  superstition,  but  as  common-sense  and  honest  readers  of 
the  Bible,  look  at  and  think  of  this  incident  in  the  story  of  the  cross.  2.  There 
it  hangs  (nailed  no  doubt  to  the  cross)  in  large,  legible,  official  characters,  telling 
in  the  three  languages  there  in  common  use  the  name  of  Him  who  was  put  to 
death,  where  He  came  from,  and  His  crime.  3.  We  know  the  name — a  name 
dear  to  many  a  heart — to  many  who  love  it  better  still  to-day  beyond.  And 
"  Nazareth."  Ay  !  bless  God,  He  lived,  for  our  sakes,  the  common  village  life 
of  poor  Nazareth  !  And  what  about  His  crime  ?  "  King  of  the  Jews."  A 
bitter  taunt  which  the  Roman  governor,  in  writing  it,  flung  at  the  priests  and 
rulers  and  the  Jewish  mob  they  led.  We  know  how  this  came  about.  They 
forged  a  story  which  Pilate  no  more  believed  than  they — that  this  man  had 
harboured  claims  of  kingly  dignity,  dangerous  to  the  Roman  rule.  So  in  one  of 
the  feeble  efforts  Pilate  made  to  save  the  life  of  Jesus,  he  said,  "  This  is  your 
king :  shall  I  crucify  your  king  ? "  So  anxious  were  priests  and  mob  to  have 
this  man  crucified  that  they  were  willing  to  renounce  their  very  national  history, 
as  it  were,  and  lay  their  necks  under  the  foot  of  Borne  :  "  We  have  no  king  but 
Caesar."  And  when  Pilate  still  hesitated,  the  last  touch  that  spurred  him  to  the 
leap  was  the  threat,  "  Let  this  man  off,  and  it  will  be  told  at  Borne,  '  thou  art 
no  true  friend  to  Caesar.'  "  And  so,  later  in  the  day,  Pilate  sat  down  to  write 
the  official  "  title  "  ;  and  one  can  fancy  the  bitter  smile  that  crossed  the  Roman's 
face  as  he  said,  "  They  shall  have  no  king  but  Caesar  !  And  it  shall  be  told  at 
Rome  that  Pilate  was  so  true  to  Caesar  and  ruled  the  Jewish  people  with  so  stern 
a  hand  that  he  crucified  before  their  very  faces  the  man  whom  they  dared  to 
call  their  king."  The  title  was  nailed  up,  in  Hebrew,  Greek,  and  Latin,  that 
all  men  of  all  nations  might  read :  "  The  King  of  the  Jews."  4.  The  priests 
and  rulers  read  it,  and  gnashed  their  teeth  when  they  saw  themselves  entrapped 
by  the  wily  Roman.  They  would  have  him  to  soften  or  explain  his  phrase. 
But  the  haughty  ruler  said,  "  What  I  have  written,"  etc.  Thus  this  title  was 
just  one  more  of  the  many  words  and  tones  of  bitterness  and  hate  and  mockery 
with  which  men  surrounded  that  day  the  cross  of  the  Saviour.  5.  They  were 
all  of  a  piece,  these  surroundings  of  His  cross  !  The  mocking  of  Herod's  men, 
Pilate's  soldiers,  the  robe  and  crown  and  sceptre,  all  in  ribald  scorn ;  the  brutal 
scourging,  and  hellish  hate  of  priests  and  Pharisees,  and  the  yells  of  the  fiendish 
mob  !  The  mocking  title  with  its  bitter  gibe  between  Rome  and  the  Jews  was 
quite  in  tone  with  all  the  rest.     6.  Only  from  Him  (the  central  figure  of  the 

539 


chap.  xix.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


throng)  throughout  the  fearful  scene  came  that  day  what  was  calm  and  true  in 
tone,  and  tender.  From  Him  comes  the  gentle  prayer,  "  Father,  forgive  them," 
etc.,  and  the  brief  message,  and  the  last  look — the  one  word  to  His  dearest  earthly 
friend,  and  the  one  word  to  her  and  the  last  look  to  her  !  Even  the  weary  sigh, 
as  all  was  over,  was  of  heaven  and  peace  !  All  around  was  hate  and  mockery 
and  hell.  7.  It  mattered  little  what  they  wrote  above  the  drooping  head,  or 
what  bitter  scorn  might  pass  between  the  Jews  and  Rome,  or  that  it  baffled 
them  to  say  why  He  was  put  to  death.  Why  He  died  was  known  in  heaven, 
amidst  the  angels'  joy  and  wonder. 

III.  Application. — 1.  We  can  take  the  Roman's  words  of  mockery  and  read 
them  calmly,  truly  for  ourselves.  Little  did  Pilate  dream  how  true  wei  e  those 
words  of  his  !  He  is  King,  Sovereign,  Ruler  in  a  higher,  wider,  greater  realm 
than  ever  Rome  or  Israel  dreamed  of  !  2.  Let  it  be  our  prayer  that  He  would 
make  us  true  and  loving  subjects  in  His  realm,  to  be  owned  in  the  new  heavens 
and  the  new  earth,  as  having  followed  His  banner  and  upheld  His  kingdom. 
2.  And  scattered  Israel  shall  yet  be  gathered,  and  the  land  of  His  birth  and 
lineage,  whose  tongue  He  spoke,  whose  homes  He  blessed,  whose  prophecies  He 
fulfilled,  will  yet  know  Him  as  its  "  King."  3.  The  mocking  title  may  well 
remind  us  of  many  things  concerning  Him — the  love  He  bears  us  still,  His 
kingdom  here,  His  kingdom  coming.  4.  To  think  of  it  may  also  help  us,  when 
we  have  to  bear  from  others  things  hard  to  be  borne,  to  remember  the  patient, 
silent  Sufferer  amidst  all  the  insults  that  were  around  His  cross,  to  breathe  of 
His  spirit  and  to  be  His  followers. — Rev.  Thomas  Hardy. 

Vers.  23,  24.  The  soldiers  divide  the  garments  of  Jesus. — It  was  the  custom 
among  the  Romans  that  the  executioners  at  a  crucifixion  should  divide  among 
themselves  the  raiment  of  the  criminals.  The  raiment  was  taken  off  before  the 
sufferer  was  nailed  to  the  cross.  Jesus  endured  even  this  humiliation.  There  was 
not  one  drop  of  the  bitter  cup  He  did  not  drain.  But  this  indignity  too  was 
foreseen.  The  action  was  retrospectively  a  fulfilment  of  the  prophetic  word  :  it 
told  of  the  Saviour's  present  condition  ;  it  pointed  symbolically  forward  to  one 
chief  end  of  His  redemptive  work. 

I.  It  fulfilled  prophecy. — 1.  It  was  done  that  an  ancient  scripture  might  be 
fulfilled  (Ps.  xxii.  18).  How  wonderfully  wras  this  ancient  psalm  fulfilled  on 
Calvary  !  The  very  words,  "  My  God,  My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me  ?  " 
etc.,  are  those  recorded.  How  graphically  do  such  verses  as  6  and  17  of  the 
psalm  describe  the  utter  humiliation  of  the  sufferings  of  the  Saviour  !  2.  And 
in  this  incident  the  rude  Romans  were  God's  agents  in  fulfilling  His  prophetic 
word.  They  knew  nothing  of  it ;  the  Jews  would  not  urge  them  to  do  anything 
to  connect  Jesus  with  prophetic  Scripture ;  and  therefore  all  were  used  as 
unconscious  instruments  in  carrying  out  the  divine  purpose.  3.  As  the  whole 
of  prophetic  Scripture  points  to  the  Messiah  and  in  Him  finds  its  fulfilment,  we 
should  be  careful  of  wresting  its  meaning  lest  we  lose  the  divine  instruction  it 
is  intended  to  convey. 

II.  It  testified  to  the  poverty  of  Jesus  and  His  utter  humiliation. — 
1.  "  Though  He  was  rich,  for  our  sakes  He  became  poor,"  etc.  We  read  of  no 
money.  (Judas  kept  the  "  bag."  He  had  made  sure  of  securing  it ;  and  what  was 
it  to  him  now?)  No  gems  or  jewels  bedecked  His  person.  His  garments  were 
of  a  simple  fashion.  The  headdress,  sandals,  outer  robe,  and  sash  were  all 
probably  of  the  simplest,  and  the  large  outer  robe  could  readily  be  divided.  But 
the  tunic,  fitting  closely  to  the  body,  and  probably  finer  than  the  rest,  as  it  was 
seamless,  etc.  (ver.  23),  the  soldiers  (there  was  a  "quaternion"  engaged  at  the 
actual  crucifixion)  did  not  divide.  2.  All  this  shows  how  poor  He  was  in  earth's 
possessions,  and  how  great  was  His  humiliation.    The  rude  soldiers  were  unmoved 

540 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xix. 


by  the  silent  majesty  with  which  He  suffered.     They  thought  only  of  the  spoils, 

and  left  Him  naked  and  exposed  to  the  burning  sunshine  of  the  late  Syrian 

spring.     He  drank  the  cup  of  sorrow  and  shame  to  the  bitter  dregs. 

III.  It  may  be  viewed  symbolically. — 1.  "  For  our  sakes  He  became  poor."   He 

was  made  naked  that  we  might  be  clothed  (Rev.  iii.  18).     The  seamless  garment 

— like  the  high-priestly  robe  (Rev.  i.  13) — He  allowed  to  be  taken  off,  that  we 

might  be  clothed  in  garments  made  white  in  His  precious  blood  (Rev.  vii.  14). 

It  was  symbolical  of  His  perfect  obedience  (Rom.  v.  18,  etc.).     2.  And  on  His 

cross,  through  His  sufferings  and  death,  another  garment  has  been  woven  for 

His  believing  people.     His   suffering   unto  death  satisfied  and  vindicated  the 

broken  law.     Hence — 

"  Jesus,  Thy  blood  and  righteousness 
My  beauty  are,  my  glorious  dress  "  (Isa.  lxi.  10). 

3.  The  simple  garments  which  He  wore  on  earth  the  callous  Roman  legionaries 
divided  and  cast  lots  for.  But  the  heavenly  dress,  glorious  in  everlasting 
beauty,  which  Jesus  provides,  is  given  to  all  who,  feeling  their  nakedness,  the 
insufficiency  of  their  own  poor  moral  rags  to  clothe  the  soul,  come  in  faith  to 
Him.  Then  He  endues  them  with  that  which  will  protect  them  from  the  fiery 
heat  of  divine  wrath  against  sin,  and  insure  them  a  welcome  entrance  to  the 
heavenly  feast  (Matt.  xxii.  12). 

Vers.  26,  27.  Mary  at  the  cross. — It  was  eternal  Love  incarnate  that  hung  on 
the  cross  on  Calvary.  And  it  is  in  accordance  with  the  nature  of  that  love 
unspeakable,  which  embraced  all  ages  and  races,  that  it  should  care  especially  for 
those  most  moulded  to  its  likeness.  And  as  at  the  death-bed  of  those  dearest  we 
treasure  up  the  words  spoken,  so  the  loving  friends  of  Jesus  would  treasure  up 
the  words  they  heard  fall  from  His  lips  during  those  hours  of  suffering  on  the 
cross.  To  the  writer  of  this  Gospel  especially  none  of  those  words  would  appeal 
more  tban  those  in  which  Jesus  honoured  him  with  the  care  of  Mary.    Notice  : — 

I.  The  bitter  grief  of  Mary. — 1.  Simeon's  words  in  the  temple  to  Mary  now 
received  their  utmost  fulfilment.  A  sword  truly  pierced  through  her  soul  that  day. 
Was  this  to  be  the  end  of  all  those  hopes  which  she  had  treasured  up  in  regard 
to  her  wonderful  Son  ?  Did  the  strange  events  which  accompanied  His  birth, 
and  which  she  kept  and  pondered  in  her  heart,  lead  to  this  and  nothing  more  % 

2.  None  can  estimate  the  suffering  of  Mary  as  she  stood  with  her  weeping  friends 
and  John  at  the  foot  of  the  cross.  She  and  they  had  been  prepared  for  struggle, 
for  conflict,  in  His  progress  toward  His  Messianic  throne.  But  what  a  throne 
was  this  blood-stained  cross,  what  a  crown  was  that  which  lacerated  His  brow  ! 

3.  Not  only  would  the  bitter  grief  of  shattered  hopes  fill  her  breast ;  the  pangs 
of  maternal  love  would  be  more  bitter  still.  "What  true  mother  could  stand 
unmoved  whilst  see  ing  her  son  suffer  untold  agonies  1  And  the  maternal 
affection  of  the  heart  of  her  who  was  called  "  blessed  among  women  "  would  not 
be  less  but  more  keen.  How  then  must  that  heart  have  been  rent  during 
those  awful  hours  ! 

II.  The  loving  sympathy  of  Jesus.— 1.  Even  in  that  hour  of  unutterable 
agony,  when  dread  portents  were  showing  nature's  sympathy  in  the  sufferings 
of  the  Son  of  God,  Jesus  showed  that  He  was  truly  human — Emmanuel,  God 
with  us.  In  the  midst  of  His  terrible  sufferings,  in  the  conflict  He  was  waging 
to  bring  redemption  to  our  race,  we  could  not  have  wondered  if  Jesus  for  the 
time  had  forgot  all  of  earth.  2.  Yet  even  in  that  awful  hour  He  did  not  forget 
those  nearest  to  Him  as  the  Son  of  man.  He  saw  the  group  of  weeping 
followers,  but  His  glance  rested  especially  on  two — on  His  mother  and  the 
beloved  disciple.  He  remembered  her  widowc  d  condition.  He  saw  the  traces 
of  her  bitter  grief.     He  knew  the  desolation  caused  in  her  heart  through  the 

541 


chap.  xix.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


fading  of  hope  in  consequence  of  imperfect  faith.  And  even  in  that  hour  when 
the  awful  sense  of  desolation  was  stealing  in  upon  His  own  soul,  which  issued  in 
the  mysterious  cry,  "  Eli,  Eli,"  etc.,  His  filial  heart  flowed  forth  in  sympathising 
love  to  her  who  bore  Him.  3.  Even  in  that  hour  of  suffering  He  remembered 
her  deep  affection,  her  tender  care  and  solicitude,  the  strong  yet  gentle  bonds  of 
a  mother's  love.  This  we  may  believe  was  dear  to  the  human  heart  of  Jesus ; 
and  as  He  gazed  on  Mary,  now  standing  with  tear-bedewed  countenance  near 
the  cross,  waiting  heart-broken  for  the  inevitable  end,  His  filial  sympathy  and 
love  welled  up  and  overflowed  in  thoughts  and  words  of  tenderness. 

III.  The  filial  care  of  Jesus  for  Mary.— 1.  Whilst  Mary  and  her  friends  stood 
weeping,  wondering,  the  Saviour  spoke  to  His  mother,  commending  her  to  the 
care  of  the  disciple  whom  He  loved.  2.  Why  was  this  1  Had  faith  in  Jesus 
brought  with  it  the  inevitable  division  even  into  His  mother's  home,  so  that 
harmony  between  her  and  His  unbelieving  brethren  no  longer  existed,  though  it 
was  afterward  no  doubt  restored  (Matt.  x.  36 ;  Acts  i.  14)?  But  in  any  case 
nothing  could  be  more  appropriate  than  that  those  two,  who  loved  the  Saviour 
with  the  deepest,  purest  affection,  should  thenceforward  occupy  one  home. 
3.  We  are  not  to  think  that  the  term  Jesus  used  in  addressing  Mary — 
"  Woman,"  i.e.  "  Lady  " — implied  any  diminution  of  His  filial  affection.  But  it 
certainly  does  imply  (as  it  did  to  a  less  extent  "in  ii.  4)  that  the  relationship 
cannot  thenceforward  rest  on  the  same  basis.  Mary,  too,  must  look  to  her  Son 
as  the  Redeemer.  And  as  the  Saviour  must  now  depart,  His  filial  duty,  so  far 
as  earth  is  concerned,  must  devolve  on  another ;  although  we  must  believe  that 
He  had  still  .a  special  interest  in  and  care  for  her  whom  He  called  mother  on 
earth.  4.  The  disciple  to  whose  care  Mary  was  confided  proved  himself  worthy 
of  so  honourable  a  trust.  "  From  that  hour  "  Mary  was  tended  with  filial  care 
and  reverence,  until  she  was  called  to  see  in  His  glory  Him  beside  whose  cross 
she  had  wept  in  the  hour  of  His  deepest  humiliation. 

Lessons. — 1.  Our  Redeemer  is  our  example  in  the  doing  of  relative  duty. 
This  is  one  of  the  laws  of  the  Christian  life  (1  Tim.  v.  8).  Even  the  awful  position 
in  which  He  was  placed  did  not  make  Jesus  as  the  perfect  man  forget  the 
duty  of  care  and  consolation  toward  His  mother,  even  though  that  relationship 
was  now  to  be  merged  in  a  higher.  2.  The  honour  and  dignity  of  being  trusted 
by  the  Saviour  with  the  care  of  His  loved  ones — His  disciples  (Matt.  xii.  49). 
John  entered  most  deeply  into  the  Saviour's  thoughts,  etc.,  and  was  rewarded 
with  a  special  love,  showing  itself  in  this  special  trust  committed  to  him.  It  is 
an  honour  to  be  thus  trusted  by  kings  and  potentates ;  how  infinitely  greater  is 
the  honour  when  we  are  thus  trusted  by  the  King  of  kings,  and  His  "  needy 
brethren  "  committed  for  temporal  or  spiritual  things  to  our  care  ! 

Vers.  28-30.  "/  thirst." — The  hot  Syrian  spring  day  was  waning  toward 
afternoon.  True,  from  the  sixth  to  the  ninth  hour  darkness  had  fallen  over  the 
face  of  nature.  The  sun  had  been  eclipsed ;  but  as  an  earthquake  was  near 
most  likely  the  air  would  be  still  and  heavy,  oppressive  and  hot  like  the  sirocco's 
breath,  as  it  frequently  is  before  an  earthquake.  Jesus  had  stood  on  Calvary 
weak  and  faint,  and  hung  on  the  cross  through  the  hot  morning  hours  from 
between  the  third  and  sixth.  No  refreshing  draught  had  passed  His  lips  since  the 
last  cup  in  the  upper  chamber.  And  now  His  exhausted  physical  frame,  though 
of  most  perfect  mould,  craved  for  refreshment,  and  He  cried  out,  "  I  thirst." 

I.  In  this  word  from  the  cross  we  have  an  expression  of  the  true  humanity 
of  Jesus. — 1.  It  was  a  word  uttered  in  order  to  gain  an  assuagement  of  the 
awful  suffering  of  thirst.  Dwellers  in  the  East  know  well,  either  from 
personal  experience,  or  the  experience  of  those  who  have  felt  it,  how  awful  it  is 
under  the  burning  sun  to  endure  the  agony  of  thirst,  when  there  is  no  water 

542 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  xix. 


near  to  slake  it,  whilst  the  mocking  mirage,  with  vision  of  lakes  and  streams, 
maddens  the  tortured  traveller.  2.  And  was  it  to  be  wondered  at  that  He, 
who  was  "  treading  the  wine-press  alone,"  etc.,  "  travailing  in  the  greatness  of 
His  strength  "  for  humanity,  should,  in  that  hour  of  awful  suffering,  feel  the 
pangs  of  thirst?  How  terrible  were  those  sufferings  on  the  cross,  to  which 
heart  and  soul  anguish  were  added  in  incalculable  degree !  How  racked  with 
fever  was  that  sacred  body,  whilst  His  tongue  clave  to  the  roof  of  His  mouth, 
and  all  the  dreadful  pain  of  thirst  added  to  the  strain  and  torture !  3.  Who 
will  relieve  Him  ?  Not  the  Jew.  He  is  ready  with  his  taunts  to  the  end.  But 
now  even  the  rude  soldiers  are  being  touched  with  the  patient  yet  majestic 
bearing  of  the  kingly  Sufferer ;  for  it  was  evidently  from  the  supply  of  sour 
wine  provided  for  them  (Luke  xxiii.  36)  that  a  sponge  was  filled  and  held  to 
Jesus'  lips  on  the  end  of  a  stem  of  "  hyssop  " — it  may  be  at  the  instigation  of  the 
centurion  in  command,  on  whom  the  whole  scene  had  made  a  deep  impression 
(Luke  xxiii.  47).  4.  It  was  the  last  service  rendered  to  Jesus  in  the  period  of 
His  humiliation.  It  strengthened  and  revived  Him  for  the  final  declaration, 
"  It  is  finished,"  which  is  the  charter  of  our  redemption.  May  not  the  hope  be 
permitted  that  this  last  kindly  act — if  it  were  kindly  meant,  as  it  seems  to 
have  been — did  not  go  without  its  reward  1 

II.  This  utterance  of  Jesus  proclaims  Him  as  the  divinely  predicted 
Messiah,  to  whom  all  prophecy  bears  witness—  1.  Though  this  word  was  the 
expression  of  a  natural  desire,  yet  in  its  utterance,  and  in  the  answer  accorded, 
prophetic  Scripture  was  fulfilled.  This  was  foretold  as  part  of  the  suffering  of 
the  Messiah  (Ps.  lxix.  21).  2.  The  darkness  and  trouble  that  had  encompassed 
His  soul,  resulting  in  the  cry  "  Eli,  Eli,"  etc.,  had  now  passed  away,  as  the  shadow 
of  eclipse  from  the  face  of  nature,  and  Jesus  knew  that  He  had  now  endured 
to  the  uttermost  all  that  had  to  be  endured  for  humanity — even  to  this  mysterious 
hiding  of  the  Father's  face.  But  now  when  that  face  was  again  seen  by  Him 
radiant  with  love,  He  knew  that  His  great  work  was  ended,  that  He  had  done 
for  men  what  men  could  not  have  done  for  themselves,  and  that  the  Father  was 
well  pleased  (Rom.  viii.  3).  Then  physical  nature,  which  had  been  forgotten 
during  the  dreadful  conflict — as  men  forget  their  wounds  in  the  press  of  battle — 
reasserted  itself,  and  the  cry  arose,  "  I  thirst."  But  in  this  very  cry  the  last 
unfulfilled  word  of  prophecy  regarding  the  Saviour  in  His  humiliation  received 
its  fulfilment.  It  had  been  predicted  of  the  suffering  Servant  of  Jehovah  that  in 
His  thirst  they  should  "  give  Him  vinegar  to  drink."  Thus  the  whole  prophetic 
picture  of  Messiah  in  His  sufferings — through  which  He  was  made  perfect 
(Heb.  ii.  10,  v.  7) — was  filled  in ;  and  all  men  might  see  that  He  was  the 
fulfilment  of  law  and  prophecy — the  divinely  given,   God-appointed  Messiah. 

III.  This  thirst  of  the  Redeemer  was  endured  for  us. — 1.  What  He  endured 
might  be  held  to  be  symbolical  of  that  despairing  search  after  God  and  peace  of 
humanity,  that  longing  and  thirst  after  God,  which  was  now  to  be  satisfied.  To 
the  Redeemer  the  travail  of  His  soul  was  now  finished,  and  He  desired  to  see  the 
end  of  it  and  its  blessed  fruits.  And  as  the  wine-filled  sponge  was  held  to  His 
lips  He  was  physically  refreshed  and  strengthened  to  proclaim  that  His  soul- 
travail  was  past,  His  soul  satisfied  (xvii.  4,  5).  2.  Now,  too,  that  the  work  was 
accomplished  that  had  been  given  Him  to  do,  He  longed  for  the  presence  of  the 
Father,  and  for  that  blessed  home  where  the  sin  and  evil  of  earth  could  no  more 
pain  and  torture  His  pure  spirit  (xi.  33,  xii.  27).  3.  He  thirsted,  He  endured, 
that  an  ever-flowing  fountain  of  the  water  of  life  might  be  opened  for  all  who 
desire  to  have  their  soul-thirst  quenched  (Isa.  lv.  1  ;  Rev.  xxii.  17).  And  He 
shall  be  most  satisfied,  and  the  courts  of  heaven  shall  ring  (Luke  xv.  10)  with 
songs  of  joy,  when  men  and  women  who  have  themselves  drunk  and  been  satisfied 
from  those  rivers  of  Life  which  He  thirsted  and  died  to  send  forth,  shall  lead 

543 


chap.  xix.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


others  who  are  thirsting  for  the  higher  life — the  life  of  Christ's  redeemed  ones — 
to  drink  and  thirst  no  more. 

Ver.  30.  "  It  is  finished." — The  life  heralded  by  promises  of  peace  is  slowly 
ebbing  in  pain.  He  who  was  announced  as  king  dies  as  a  malefactor.  His 
kingly  crown  is  one  of  thorns,  His  high-priestly  altar  a  cross,  His  sacrifice 
Himself.  The  world  looked  on  coldly  or  mockingly.  If  His  entrance  into  life 
was  humble,  what  of  His  exit  ?  Yet  at  His  birth  angels  rejoiced,  at  His  death 
nature  trembled.  What  a  life  of  holiness  and  heavenly  beneficence  was  it  which 
was  thus  closing  !  But  this  death  was  the  most  momentous  event  in  the  world's 
history.  The  completion  of  a  great  work  is  matter  of  rejoicing.  Yet  never 
was  a  great  undertaking  ended  in  apparently  less  auspicious  circumstances. 
These,  however,  were  the  concomitants  of  His  victory.  What  is  the  meaning  of 
this  word  ? 

I.  In  this  word  Jesus  proclaimed  the  close  of  His  state  of  humiliation. — 

1.  His  earthly  life,  begun  in  lowliness,  etc.,  misunderstood,  etc.,  was  ended. 
The  suffering  His  soul  endured  in  contact  with  sin,  unbelief,  etc. ;  His  rejection 
by  the  Jews,  the  weakness  of  the  disciples'  faith,  the  dark  deed  of  Judas, 
Gethsemane  and  the  cross,  were  now  past.  2.  His  body  for  a  time  must  lie  in 
the  grave,  but  it  will  see  no  corruption.  His  humiliation  was  past,  and  what 
we  should  remember  is  that  it  was  endured  for  us. 

II.  This  word  shows  that  God's  preparatory  discipline  of  the  race  had  ended. 

— 1.  Moses  and  the  prophets  take  the  position  of  witnesses  to  Christ.  The 
educational  regime  of  the  law  was  no  longer  necessary ;  it  had  served  its  purpose 
of  bringing  home  to  men's  hearts  the  consciousness  of  sin,  etc.  Sacrifice  was 
shown  to  be  typical  of  this  supreme  sacrifice,  and  prophetic  utterances  ceased 
which  pointed  to  a  coming  deliverance  by  a  heaven-sent  Redeemer.  2.  The 
heathen  world's  dreaming  of  a  coming  age  fairer  than  the  golden  age  of  fable 
here  became  a  reality ;  and  even  their  false  religions  served  an  educational 
purpose,  emphasising  ever  the  need  of  cleansing.  And  what  a  training  had  theirs 
been — a  wandering  ever  further  from  the  true  source  of  light !  To  what  depths 
of  iniquity  had  they  sunk — all  going  in  the  same  dreary  track,  with  no  true  light 
to  cheer  them  on  the  way  !  3.  But  this  voice  from  the  cross  proclaimed  the  end 
of  this  preparatory  training.  Every  type  and  symbol  of  redemption  must  give 
place,  for  the  antitype  had  come.  Jew  and  Gentile  were  under  tutelage  till 
they  had  learned  that  no  rites  or  ceremonies  could  bring  reconciliation.  "  The 
times  of  this  ignorance  God  winked  at,"  etc.,  but  is  now  calling  men  to  be  saved 
without  the  deeds  of  the  law,  etc. 

III.  This  utterance  implies  the  final  triumph  of  the  people  of  God  through 
Christ's  finished  work. — 1.  By  His  will  we  are  sanctified  by  the  offering  of  the 
body  of  Jesus,  etc.  (Rom.  viii.  30) ;  and  wThen  thus  sanctified  believers  shall  also 
be  glorified  (1  Cor.  i.  30).  But  notice  :  If  we  are  His  we  must  be  justified  and 
sanctified.  There  should  be  no  mistake  here.  2.  The  final  triumph  of  the 
kingdom  of  God  is  here  proclaimed.  Christ  died,  but  in  this  very  fact  is  the 
potentiality  of  the  world's  redemption.  Even  at  that  very  moment  Christ  began 
to  see  the  travail  of  His  soul,  the  discomfiture  of  the  enemies  of  His  kingdom, 
and  its  final  triumph.  This  cry  is  one  of  victory.  It  was  the  signal  of  the 
triumphant  conclusion  of  His  enduring  for  men.  3.  "  It  is  finished."  It  is  the 
voice  of  Emmanuel,  the  Captain  of  our  salvation,  who  on  the  red  battle-field  lays 
aside  the  weapons  of  His  warfare,  and  raises  the  shout  of  victory — a  conqueror 
over  sin  and  death  and  Satan,  though  seeming  to  be  vanquished  by  His  foes. 


544 


) 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.        chap.  XIX. 


HOMILETIC   NOTES. 

Vers.    23-30.     Christ's    battle    and  God's  righteousness  and  God's  love  are 

victory  on  the  cross. — "  Let  us  also  go,  firmly  established.      The  work  of  re- 

that  we  may  die  with  Him,"  Thomas  demption    is   completed !  —  Translated 

had  said  to  his  fellow-disciples  (xi.  16),  from  J.  L.  Sommer. 
when  Jesus  prepared  to  go  the  grave 

of   Lazarus  to  awake  him  from   the  Vers.  23-30.  The  death  of  Jesus. — It  is 

dead.      In   the   case   of   Thomas  this  no  ordinary  death  which  we  are  called  to 

was  more  a  kind  of  resignation  which  witness.     The  sun's  light  is  veiled,  the 

despaired  of  escape  than  faith  which  earth  quakes,  and  the  veil  of  the  temple 

follows  Jesus  to  death  and  yet  fills  the  is  rent.  Adam  was  pointed  to  Him  who 

heart  with  hope  of  victory.     On  Good  dies  upon  the  cross,  in  that  it  was  said 

Friday  it  is  well  for  us  to  accompany  to  him  that  the  woman's  seed  should 

Jesus  on  the  way  of  His  sufferings  and  bruise  the  serpent's  head.     Noah  was 

death,  to  pass  through  it  all  with  Him  occupied   with   Him    when   he   recog- 

in  faith,  so  that  going  with  Him  we  nised  that  the  life  was  in  the  blood, 

may  be  led  to  the  cross,  but  also  from  Abraham  saw  Him  in  Isaac  bound  on 

the  cross  to  the  throne.     It  is  well  also  the   altar,  and  in  the  bleeding  ram. 

to  comprehend  how  the  sufferings  and  Moses  preached  Him  when  he  raised 

death  of  Jesus  effect  our  reconciliation  up  the  brazen  serpent.     Isaiah  pointed 

with  the  Father,  and  how  thereby  are  Him  out  as  He  who  was  "  wounded  for 

given  to  us  comfort  in  life  and  in  death,  our  transgressions,"  etc.     And  as  men 

We  consider  the  theme —  from  afar  had  looked  forward  to  the 

How  Christ  suffered   and  died  on  cross,  so  we  look  back  from  afar  to  the 

the  cross. — We  picture  to  ourselves  in  cross.       They    are    eternal    obsequies 

connection  with  His  four  last  words :  which  are  celebrated  for  Him  who  dies 

1 .  His  anguish  of  soul ;  2.  His  physical  on  Golgotha.  It  is  with  us  as  if  to-day 
anguish  ;  3.  His  cry  of  victory ;  4.  His  we  stood  beneath  His  cross,  heard  His 
closing  prayer.  latest  voice,  saw  His  blood -besprinkled 

face.     Then   we   say,  "  0  sorrow  and 

Vers.  23-30.  Christ's  conflict  and  vie-  mourning  ! "     Yet  also,  "  In  Him  we 

tory   on   the  cross. — We    represent   to  have  redemption  through  His  blood," 

ourselves: —  etc.     No  ordinary  death  is  this  which 

I.  Christ's  bitter  conflict. — 1.  The  we  are  called  to  behold.  We  seek  to 
earth  was  darkened,  for  even  nature  find  expression  for : — 

suffers  through  the  sinfulness  of  men.  I.  The  astonishment  which  fills  us. — 

2.  The  cup  of  divine  wrath  was  emptied  The  true  God,  the  Creator,  the  King, 
out  on  the  Son  of  man,  so  that  He  felt  the  Life,  eternal  Love,  the  holy  God, 
as  if  God  had  forsaken  Him,  and  burn-  the  Judge  of  the  world,  in  deepest 
ing  thirst  increased  the  torture  of  His  suffering  and  misery. 

physical  frame.      3.  The   unbelieving  II.  The  grief  to  which  this  moves 

world   requited   the   unspeakable  love  us. — 1.   Over   the  unbelieving   world, 

of    the    Crucified   to   humanity    with  which  mocks  Him.     2.  Over  our  own 

mockery.  hearts,  which  so  often  forget  Him. 

II.  Christ's  glorious  victory. — 1 .  The  III.  The  penitence  which  it  preaches 
crucified  One  remained  in  communion  to  us. — 1.  We  should  remember  God's 
with  His  Father ;  He  committed  His  wrath  against  our  sins.  2.  Take  care 
spirit  into  the  hands  of  the  Father ;  that  we  dishonour  God  no  more  by 
consciously  and  freely  He  yielded  up  sinfulness. 

His  life.      2.  The  ransom  for  man's  IV.  The  comfort  which  it  confirms 

debt  of  guilt  was  paid ;  the  Father  who  to   us. — 1.   In  the  struggle  with  sin. 

was  angry  with  men's  sins  is  reconciled ;  2.  In  the  pains  of  death. — Appuhn,idem. 

NN  545 


chap.  xix.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


Ver.  30.  The  sixth  word  of  Jesus  from 
the  cross. — I.  Its  meaning. — 1.  The 
Messianic  prophecies  and  types  are 
fulfilled.  2.  The  Lord's  sufferings  had 
come  to  an  end.  3.  Reconciliation 
between  God  and  man  is  established, 
and  peace  reinstated. 

II.  The  blessings  for  which  we  have 
to  thank  it. — 1.  It  calls  us  to  repent- 
ance.    2.    It   assures  us  of  salvation. 

3.  It  serves  to  strengthen  our   faith. 

4.  It  enlivens  our  hope  in  relation  to 
enduring  unto  the  end.  —  Dr.  von 
Biarowsky. 

Ver.  30.  The  dominion  of  sin  and 
death  ended  on  the  cross  (Rom.  v.  12-14, 
19;  1  Cor.  xv.  22).— The  thought  of 
the  apostle  in  these  and  other  passages 
circulates  around  Adam  on  the  one  hand 
and  Christ  on  the  other,  as  centres  of 
spiritual  influence.  The  state  of  man 
before  Christ,  and  the  state  of  man 
after — or  of  all  who  belong  to  Christ 
and  share  in  His  redeeming  work — is 
strongly  contrasted.  Adam,  as  sinner, 
gives  its  character  to  the  one  ;  Christ, 
as  Saviour  and  the  righteous  One,  gives 
its  character  to  the  other.  In  the 
passage  from  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans 
sin  and  death  are  represented  as  the 
ruling  powers  in  the  world.  Adam  is 
the  source  through  which   they  have 


entered  into  the  world.  Through  his 
one  act  of  sin  Adam  not  only  fell  him- 
self, but  the  line  of  spiritual  integrity 
was  broken  in  him.  The  flaw  extended 
to  the  race.  "  Sin  entered  the  world,  and 
death  by  sin  ;  and  so  death  passed  upon 
all,  for  that  all  have  sinned."  In  other 
words,  sin  passed  to  us  from  Adam,  and 
death  from  sin.  This  is  the  simple 
meaning  of  the  words  as  they  stand  in 
our  version.  They  might  seem  at  first 
to  add  little  to  the  doctrine  of  heredi- 
tary corruption  as  generalised  from  the 
facts  of  experience.  But  on  a  closer 
view  they  will  be  found  to  add  various 
features  to  this  doctrine.  They  em- 
phasise the  position  of  Adam  as  not 
merely  the  first  in  a  line  of  sinners,  but 
as  the  type  or  representative  of  the 
whole  line — one  whose  act  was  fatal 
not  only  for  himself,  but  for  all  who 
followed  him.  All  mankind  fell  with 
him  into  the  death  which  he  had  in- 
curred. 1.  This  typical  character  of 
Adam  ;  2.  The  descent  of  spiritual 
depravity  from  him ;  and  3.  The  fatal 
character  of  the  results  which  followed, 
not  only  for  himself,  but  for  his  pos- 
terity— in  other  words,  the  judicial 
character  of  these  results  in  their  down- 
ward passage — are  all  ideas  more  or 
less  involved  in  the  passage. — Dr.  John 
Tulloch. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  26.  u  Woman,  behold  thy  son." — It  has 
been  considered  strange  that  the  Saviour,  in 
speaking  to  Mary,  should  have  made  use  of 
the  distant  word  "  Woman,"  instead  of  the 
tender  name  of  "  Mother."  In  reply  to  this, 
it  is  certainly  true  that  He  did  so,  partly 
because  He  would  not  still  more  deeply 
wound  her  bleeding  heart  by  the  sweet  title 
of  mother,  as  well  as  that  He  might  not 
excite  within  Himself  a  storm  of  human 
emotions  ;  and  likewise  lest  He  should  expose 
His  mother  to  the  rudeness  of  the  surround- 
ing crowd.  But  the  chief  reason  why,  instead 
of  the  maternal  title,  He  used  the  more  general 
term  "Woman,"  or  lady,  lies  much  deeper, 
both  in  this  and  the  well-known  scene  at  the 
marriage  in  Cana.  He  certainly  meant  His 
mother  to  understand  that  henceforward  His 
earthly  connection  with  her  must  give  way 
to  a  superior  one.  As  though  He  had  said, 
"  Thou,  my  mother,  wilt  from  this  time  be  as 

'  546 


one  of  my  daughters,  and  I  thy  Lord.  Thou 
believest  in  Me,  and  shalt  be  blessed.  Thou 
layest  hold  of  the  hem  of  My  garment,  and  I 
appear  in  thy  stead.  Thou  adorest  Me,  and 
I  am  thy  High  Priest  and  King.  Mother, 
brother,  and  sister,  henceforward  are  all  who 
swear  allegiance  to  My  banner.  The  relation- 
ships according  to  the  flesh  and  the  manner 
of  the  world  have  an  end  ;  other  and  more 
spiritual  and  heavenly  take  their  place."  It 
was  this  that  the  Lord  intended  to  suggest 
to  Mary's  mind ;  and  hence  the  word 
"  Woman,"  which  at  first  sounds  strange, 
instead  of  the  more  tender  and  affectionate 
term  "  Mother."  Nay,  it  the  less  became 
Him  to  call  her  mother  now,  since  this  term 
in  the  Hebrew  includes  in  it  the  idea  of 
"  Mistress,"  whilst  He  was  just  preparing,  as 
the  Lord  of  lords,  to  ascend  the  throne  of 
eternal  Majesty.  But  whilst  endeavouring 
to  elevate  Mary's  mind  above  the  sphere  of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.         chap.  xix. 


merely  human  conceptions,  He  does  not  for- 
get either  that  He  is  her  son,  or  that  she  is 
His  dear  and  sorely-tried  mother;  and 
reflects  at  the  same  time  that  man  in  his 
weakness  has  need  of  man,  and  must,  besides 
the  heart  of  God,  possess  at  least  one  heart 
upon  earth  into  which  he  can  confidingly 
pour  out  his  own,  and  upon  whose  love  and 
faithfulness  he  may  firmly  reckon  under  all 
circumstances.  For  these  reasons,  the  Lord 
is  desirous  in  His  filial  forethought,  and  as 
far  as  is  practicable,  to  fill  up  for  Mary,  even 
in  a  human  respect,  the  void  which  His 
decease  would  leave  in  her  life,  and  give  her, 
instead  of  Himself,  a  son  to  assist  her,  even 
in  an  earthly  manner,  in  whom  she  might 
place  entire  confidence,  and  on  whose 
shoulder  she  could  lean  in  all  her  distresses, 
cares,  and  sorrows,  and  this  new  son  He 
bequeaths  to  her  is  His  favourite  disciple,  the 
faithful  and  feeling  John.  Is  it  not  as  if  He 
intended  to  say  ? — "  I  well  know,  My  mother, 
how  solitary  and  dreary  must  be  a  widow's 
path  upon  earth  when  the  crown  is  re- 
moved from  her  head.  But  lo  !  here  is  the 
disciple  that  lay -in  My  bosom,  and  is  thus 
peculiarly  prepared  to  become  thy  support 
and  stay.  He  is  ready  to  do  all  I  desire  of 
him ;  and  since  1  have  neither  silver  nor 
gold,  I  bequeath  thee  all  My  claim  on  this 
disciple's  love,  gratitude,  and  faithfulness. 
Let  him  be  thy  son  ! "  It  was  thus  He  loved 
to  the  end  ;  thus  delicately  does  He  provide 
for  all  the  necessities  of  those  He  loves.  And 
as  He  formerly  did,  so  He  does  still.  He  is 
to  this  hour  the  compassionate  High  Priest. 
He  enters  most  feelingly  into  the  wants  of 
those  who  confide  in  Him,  so  that  every  one 
in  his  station,  whether  they  be  widows, 
orphans,  poor  and  infirm,  or  to  whatever 
class  of  the  weary  and  heavy-laden  they 
belong,  may  rely  most  peculiarly  on  His 
providential  care.  After  saying  to  Mary, 
"  Woman,  behold,"  etc.,  He  says  to  John, 
"  Behold  thy  mother."  Oh,  what  a  proof 
does  the  Saviour  here  give  His  disciple  of  the 
affection  and  confidence  which  He  reposes  in 
him !  He  imposes  a  burden  upon  him,  but 
He  knows  that  John  will  regard  it  as  the 
highest  honour  and  felicity  which  could  be 
bestowed  upon  him  on  earth.  Nor  is  the 
Saviour  mistaken  in  His  disciple.  John 
understands  His  Master's  wish,  looks  at  Mary, 
and  his  whole  soul  says  to  her,  "  My  mother  !  " 
— F.  W.  Krummacher,  '■'■Suffering  Saviour.1" 

Vers.  26,  27.  Self-renunciation  at  the  Ci'oss. 
— Thus  the  Redeemer  endured.  Although 
terror  seized  hold  of  His  disciple's  heart  and 
a  sword  went  through  His  mother's  soul  as 
He  bled  on  the  cross,  yet  no  bands  of  blood, 
nor  human  friendship,  could  turn  Him  aside 
from  His  high  emprise.  And  thus,  too,  His 
disciples  endured.  No  Peter  would  have  left 
all,  no  Paul  would  have  borne  the  reproach 
of  Christ,  no   missionary  would  have  gone 


among  the  heathen,  no  Luther  would  have 
journeyed  to  Worms,  had  they  conferred  with 
flesh  and  blood  merely — if  women's  tears  and 
friends'  entreaties  had  availed  more  than  the 
call  of  the  Lord.  No,  where  the  Lord's 
work  is  in  question  the  most  beloved  on 
earth  must  stand  aside ;  when  God  com- 
mands, then  we  must  be  prepared  to  leave  and 
part  with  what  is  dearest.  Especially  at 
critical  moments  it  is  needful  to  be  armed 
with  this  spirit  of  self-denial.  Then  no 
sweetest  heart-ties,  no  soft  feeling,  should 
hinder  us  from  setting  our  face  steadfastly 
to  go  to  Jerusalem.  Men  must  renounce 
many  a  peaceful  hour,  many  a  lawful  joy, 
many  a  pleasant  custom,  in  the  service  of  the 
Lord.  Sometimes  the  husband  must  drag 
himself  away  from  wife  and  child  when 
duty  calls  him ;  and  then  the  wife  must 
become  a  heroine,  and  able  to  give  up  hus- 
band and  child  to  the  divine  service,  like  that 
heroic  mother  of  the  times  of  the  Maccabees 
who  saw  her  seven  sons  die  before  her  eyes, 
whilst  she  herself  had  exhorted  them  to  die 
the  martyr's  death. — Translated  from  Karl 
Gerok. 

Ver.  27.  "Behold  thy  mother."— He  who 
was  dying  on  the  cross,  whose  name  was 
Love,  was  the  great  philanthropist,  whose 
charity  embraced  the  whole  human  race. 
His  last  dying  act  was  an  act  of  individual 
attachment,  tenderness  toward  a  mother, 
fidelity  toward  a  friend.  Now,  some  well- 
meaning  persons  seem  to  think  that  the 
larger  charities  are  incompatible  with  the 
indulgence  of  particular  affections ;  and 
therefore,  all  that  they  do  and  aim  at  is  on 
a  large  scale ;  they  occupy  themselves  with 
the  desire  to  emancipate  the  whole  mass  of 
mankind.  But  it  not  unfrequently  happens 
that  those  who  act  in  this  manner  are  but 
selfish  after  all,  and  are  quite  inattentive 
to  all  the  fidelities  of  friendship  and  the 
amenities  of  social  life.  It  was  not  so,  if  we 
may  venture  to  say  it,  that  the  spirit  of  the 
Redeemer  grew,  for  as  He  progressed  in 
wisdom  and  knowledge,  He  progressed  also 
in  love.  First,  we  read  of  His  tenderness 
and  obedience  to  His  parents,  then  the 
selection  of  twelve  to  be  near  Him  from  the 
rest  of  His  disciples,  and  then  the  selection 
of  one  more  especially  as  a  friend.  It  was 
through  this  that,  apparently,  His  human 
soul  grew  in  grace  and  in  love.  And  if  it  were 
not  so  with  Him,  at  all  events  it  must  not  be 
so  with  us.  It  is  in  vain  for  a  man  in  his 
dying  hour,  who  has  loved  no  man  in- 
dividually, to  attempt  to  love  the  human 
race ;  everything  here  must  be  done  by 
degrees.  Love  is  a  habit.  God  has  given  to 
us  the  love  of  relations  and  friends,  the  love 
of  father  and  mother,  brother,  sister,  friend, 
to  prepare  us  gradually  for  the  love  of  God  ; 
if  there  be  one  stone  of  the  foundation  not 
securely  laid,    the    superstructure    will    be 

547 


chap.  XIX.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


imperfect.  The  domestic  affections  are  the 
alphabet  of  love. — F.  W.  Krummacher,  "Suf- 
fering Saviour." 

Ver.  28.  The  Redeemer  drank  the  full  cup 
of  agony  on  the  cross. — "  I  thirst " ;  in  answer 
to  this  they,  gave  Jesus  vinegar  to  drink. 
Now  upon  first  reading  this  we  are  often 
tempted  to  suppose,  from  the  unnatural 
character  of  the  draught,  that  an  insult  was 
intended,  and  therefore  we  rank  this  among 
the  taunts  and  fearful  sufferings  which  He 
endured  at  His  crucifixion.  But  as  we 
become  acquainted  with  Oriental  history, 
we  discover  that  this  vinegar  was  the  com- 
mon drink  of  the  Roman  army,  their  wine, 
and  therefore  was  the  most  likely  to  be  at 
hand  when  in  the  company  of  soldiers,  as 
He  then  was.  Let  it  be  borne  in  mind  that 
a  draught  was  twice  offered  to  Him  ;  once  it 
was  accepted,  once  it  was  refused.  That 
which  was  refused  was  the  medicated  po- 
tion, wine  mingled  with  myrrh,  the  intention 
of  which  was  to  deaden  pain,  and  therefore 
when  it  was  presented  to  the  Saviour  it  was 
rejected.  And  the  reason  commonly  assigned 
for  that  seems  to  be  the  true  one :  the  Son 
of  man  would  not  meet  death  in  a  state  of 
stupefaction ;  He  chose  to  meet  His  God 
awake.  There  are  two  modes  in  which  pain 
may  be  struggled  with — through  the  flesh, 
and  through  the  spirit ;  the  one  is  the  office 
of  the  physician,  the  other  that  of  the 
Christian.  The  physician's  care  is  at  once 
to  deaden  pain,  either  by  insensibility  or 
specifics  ;  the  Christian's  object  is  to  deaden 
pain  by  patience.  We  dispute  not  the  value 
of  the  physician's  remedies — in  their  way 
they  are  permissible  and  valuable ;  but  yet 
let  it  be  observed  that  in  these  there  is 
nothing  moral  ;  they  may  take  away  the 
venom  of  the  serpent's  sting,  but  they  do 
not  give  the  courage  to  plant  the  foot  upon 
the  serpent's  head,  and  to  bear  the  pain 
without  flinching.  Therefore  the  Redeemer 
refused,  because  it  was  not  through  the 
flesh,  but  through  the  Spirit,  that  He  would 
conquer.  To  have  accepted  the  anodyne 
would  have  been  to  escape  from  suffering, 
but  not  to  conquer  it.  But  the  vinegar  or 
sour  wine  was  accepted  as  a  refreshing 
draught,  for  it  would  seem  that  He  did  not 
look  upon  the  value  of  the  suffering  as 
consisting  in  this,  that  He  should  make  it  as 
exquisite  as  possible,  but  rather  that  He 
should  not  suffer  one  drop  of  the  cup  of 
agony  which  His  Father  had  put  into  His 
hand  to  trickle  down  the  side  untasted. 
Neither  would  He  make  to  Himself  one  drop 
more  of  suffering  than  His  Father  had  given. 
— F.  W.  Robertson. 

Ver.  28.  Christ's  thirst  on  Calvary. — 
Indeed  He  did  thirst :  "  The  zeal  of  Thine 
house  hath  consumed  Me."  He  was  parched 
with  longing  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the 

548 


safety  of  man.  "  I  thirst "  :  I  thirst  to  see 
of  the  travail  of  My  soul ;  I  thirst  for  the 
effects  of  My  anguish,  the  discomfiture  of 
Satan,  the  vindication  of  My  Father,  the 
opening  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all 
believers.  Shall  our  last  end  be,  in  any 
measure,  like  this  ?  Would  that  it  might ! 
Would  that,  when  we  come  to  die,  we  may 
thirst  with  the  thirst  of  the  Redeemer's 
soul !  "  Blessed  are  they  that  hunger  and 
thirst  after  righteousness,  for  they  shall  be 
filled."  "  My  soul  thirsteth  for  Thee,"  is  an 
exclamation  of  the  psalmist,  when  declaring 
the  ardency  of  his  longings  after  God.  And 
our  Saviour  endured  thirst  that  our  thirst 
might  be  quenched.  His  tongue  clave  to  the 
roof  of  His  mouth — "My  heart,"  saith  He, 
in  the  midst  of  My  body,  is  even  like  melting 
wax  " — that  we,  inhabitants  naturally  of  u  a 
dry  and  barren  land,"  might  have  access  to 
the  river  of  life,  which,  clear  as  crystal, 
pours  itself  through  the  paradise  of  God. 
Who  does  not  thirst  for  these  waters  1  Ah  ! 
there  is  nothing  required  but  that  every  one 
of  us  should  be  able,  with  perfect  truth,  to 
declare  "I  thirst,"  and  the  Scripture  shall 
be  fulfilled  in  that  man's  drawing  water  out 
of  the  wells  of  salvation.  For  the  invita- 
tions of  the  Bible  presuppose  nothing  but  a 
sense  of  want  and  a  wish  for  relief.  "Ho ! 
every  one  that  thirsteth  " — there  is  the  sum- 
mons, there  the  description.  Oh  that  we 
may  now  thirst  with  a  thirst  for  pardon,  a 
thirst  for  reconciliation,  a  thirst  for  holiness  ! 
Then,  when  we  come  to  die,  we  shall  thirst 
for  the  joys  of  immortality,  for  the  pleasures 
which  are  at  God's  right  hand ;  we  shall 
thirst,  even  as  Christ  did,  that  the  Scripture 
may  be  fulfilled.  And  the  Scripture  shall  be 
fulfilled ;  for,  bowing  the  head  and  giving  up 
the  ghost,  we  shall  be  in  His  presence  with 
whom  is  "  the  fountain  of  life,"  and  every 
promise  that  has  cheered  us  here  shall  be 
turned  into  performance  to  delight  us  for 
ever. — Henry  Melvill. 

Ver.  30.  Christ s  dying  love  embraces  the 
race. — That  satisfaction  was  not  the  mere 
payment  of  an  obligation  which  man  had 
incurred ;  it  was  not  the  rendering  of  a  bare 
equivalent  for  human  sin  to  the  outraged 
justice  of  God.  It  was  more  than  plenary  ; 
it  was  superabundant,  since  it  was  offered 
in  a  finite  nature,  but  by  an  infinite  Being. 
We  may  shrink,  indeed,  from  saying  that 
such  a  satisfaction  must  have  exerted  a 
peremptory  claim  on  the  justice  of  God. 
Needed  it  not,  after  all,  to  be  accepted  by 
infinite  Mercy?  Might  it  not  have  been 
dispensed  with  ?  Might  not  the  almighty 
Father,  infinite  in  His  resources,  have  saved 
the  world  without  exacting  the  death  of  His 
Son  as  the  price  of  its  salvation?  Here 
revelation  does  not  encourage  conjecture. 
Enough  that  the  satisfaction  actually  offered 
has  been  as  really  accepted.    We  may  pre- 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  XiX. 


sume,  without  hardihood,  that,  if  God  might 
have  saved  us  in  other  ways,  He  has  chosen 
the  way  which  was  in  itself  the  best.  And 
the  freedom  of  the  Father's  gift  of  His 
blessed  Son,  the  freedom  of  the  Son's  self- 
oblation,  are  insisted  on  in  Scripture,  as  if 
with  the  object  of  condemning  by  anticipa- 
tion any  mercantile  estimate  of  infinite  Love. 
There  is  a  profusion  of  self-sacrifice  which 
meets  us  everywhere  in  the  history  of  the 
Passion.  Throughout  it  is  the  history  of  a 
"plenteous  redemption."  The  bearing  of 
the  divine  Victim  is  not  that  of  one  who  is 
tendering  an  equivalent  for  a  debt  which  had 
been  incurred.  He  does  not  seek  to  undergo 
only  the  precise  amount  of  ignominy  and 
pain  which  was  needed  for  the  redemption. 
He  has  offered  His  human  will  without  re- 
serve ;  and  His  offering  has  been  accepted. 
True,  one  blow  from  the  soldier's  sword  or 
hand,  one  lash  from  the  scourge,  one  pang  of 
Christ's  sacred  soul,  one  drop  of  His  precious 
blood,  might  have  redeemed  our  world,  or  a 
thousand  such  worlds  as  ours.  For  each  act 
of  submission,  each  throb  of  pain,  had  in- 
finite value  in  the  sight  of  Heaven — not  only 
as  representing  the  perfect  offering  of  our 
Lord's  will,  but  as  being  penetrated  by  the 
informing  presence  and  boundless  merits  of 
His  divinity.  Yet  Jesus,  who  might  have 
saved  us  thus,  was  in  truth  enamoured  of 
profuse  self-sacrifice.  "  In  His  love  and  in 
His  pity  He  redeemed  us "  (Isa.  lxiii.  9), 
and  His  pity  and  His  love  knew  no  bounds. 
He  had  surrendered  His  throne  on  high,  His 
angel-ministers,  His  earthly  home ;  He  had 
left  His  mother  and  His  friends ;  and  when 
His  doctrine  and  His  miracles  had  brought 
Him  fair  fame  and  popular  ascendency,  He 
chose  to  become  "  a  worm,  and  no  man ;  the 
very  scorn  of  men,  and  the  outcast  of  the 
people  "  (Ps.  xxii.  6).  And  so  He  gave  His 
face  to  the  smiters,  and  His  cheeks  to  them 


that  pulled  off  the  hair.  He  gave  His  body 
to  physical  torture  ;  He  gave  His  soul  to  an 
unspeakable  spiritual  agony.  He  offered 
the  long  history  of  His  suffering  life,  and  of 
His  death  of  shame  and  pain,  to  atone  for 
the  sins  of  us  guilty  men.  He  gave  all  to 
that  will,  in  which  we  are  sanctified,  by  the 
offering  of  His  body  (Heb.  x.  10).  Less 
might  have  merited  the  Father's  grace  ;  less 
might  have  satisfied  His  justice.  But  Jesus 
would  display  the  range,  the  power,  the 
prodigal  generosity,  of  divine  charity.  The 
cross  was  to  be  not  merely  the  instrument  of 
His  punishment,  but  the  symbol  of  the  throne 
of  His  conquering  love.  "  I,  when  I  am  lifted 
up,"  etc.  (xii.  32).  "  He  loved  me,  and  gave 
Himself  for  me."  Each  sinner,  each  saint, 
around  His  cross  might  have  used  the  words 
of  the  apostle.  For  His  blessed  mother  and 
St.  John,  for  the  Roman  judge  and  for  the 
Roman  soldiers,  for  the  chief  priest  and  for 
the  Pharisee,  for  the  vilest  and  hardest  of 
His  executioners,  and  for  the  thieves  who 
hung  dying  beside  Him,  our  Lord  gave 
Himself  to  death.  For  all  who  have  been 
first  and  greatest,  for  all  who  have  been  least 
and  last  in  human  history,  for  all  whom  we 
have  loved  or  seen,  for  our  separate  souls, 
He  gave  Himself.  True,  His  creatures  indeed 
are  still  free  to  accept  and  appropriate  or 
to  refuse  His  gift.  But  no  lost  soul  shall 
murmur  hereafter  that  the  tender  loving- 
kindness  of  God  has  not  willed  to  save  it. 
No  saint  in  glory  shall  pretend  that  aught  in 
him  has  been  accepted  and  crowned,  save 
the  infinite  merit,  the  priceless  gifts,  of  his 
Redeemer.  The  dying  love  of  Jesus  embraces 
the  race ;  and  yet  it  concentrates  itself  with 
direct,  as  it  seems  to  us,  with  exclusive 
intensity,  upon  each  separate  soul.  He  dies 
for  all,  and  yet  He  dies  for  each,  as  if  each 
soul  were  the  solitary  object  of  His  incarna- 
tion and  of  His  death. — H.  P.  Ziddon. 


MAIN  H0MILET1CS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  31—42. 

The  rest  of  the  Redeemer  in  the  grave. — After  the  storm  comes  the  calm  ;  after 
sore  labour,  rest.  And  as  at  the  beginning  of  material  things  the  divine 
activity  was  followed  by  a  period  of  rest,  so  the  travail  of  the  Saviour  in  working 
out  man's  redemption  was  followed  by  the  rest  in  Joseph's  tomb.  When  Jesus 
uttered  the  cry  "  It  is  finished,"  His  pain  and  travail  ceased.  And  although 
His  descent  into  the  state  of  the  dead  may  be  regarded  as  the  deepest  depth  of 
His  humiliation,  yet  it  may  be  also  regarded  as  the  beginning  of  His  glory.  It 
is  not  mentioned  by  the  apostle  as  a  part  of  that  obedience  for  which  Christ  was 
highly  exalted.  For  in  that  period  when  His  physical  frame  was  at  rest  it  was 
in  the  Father's  care,  who  would  not  suffer  His  Holy  One  to  see  corruption.  It  was 
therefore  for  the  Son  of  man's  material  frame  a  calm  repose,  with  the  certainty 
of  a  glorious  reawakening.  Nature  is  practically  inactive  in  the  winter  season, 
when  the  icing  winds  blow,  when  bitter  sleet  falls  and  feathery  snow  enwraps 
the  landscape  ;  but  in  all  this  there  is  the  hope  and  even  the  promise  of  spring 
with  its  glad  new  life  and  opening  verdure.  So  in  Christ's  rest  in  the  tomb 
there  was  the  promise  of  a  new  glad  season  of  hope  for  humanity.      Just  as 

549 


chap.  xix.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ;    ST.  JOHN. 


spring  breaks  the  bonds  of  winter,  so  Christ  broke  asunder  the  icy  fetters  of 
death's  prison-house,  and  brings  to  those  who  are  spiritually  crucified  with  Him 
the  hope  and  promise  of  heaven's  eternal  spring. 

I.  The  preparation  for  the  interment  of  the  body  of  Jesus. — 1.  The  afternoon 
of  the  crucifixion  began  to  wane  toward  evening,  the  lengthening  shadows  told 
that  the  Sabbath  would  soon  begin.  The  executioners  prepared  to  take  the  body 
of  Jesus  from  the  cross,  to  bury  it  most  likely  in  a  common  grave  with  the  two 
malefactors.  2.  But  that  sacred  body,  which  was  not  to  see  corruption,  was  to 
be  otherwise  cared  for.  The  disciples  had  fled  ;  not  even  John  seems  to  have 
thought  of  the  next  step.  But  God  had  His  instruments  for  this  holy  duty. 
Two  secret  disciples  of  the  Saviour  now  step  forth,  men  whom  we  should  not 
have  expected  to  do  so,  for  they  were  members  of  the  Sanhedrin.  3.  The  one 
was  Joseph,  who  had  come  originally  from  Arimathsea  in  the  mountains  of 
Ephraim,  and  had  risen  to  honour  and  consideration  in  Jerusalem.  Like 
Simeon,  he  "  waited  for  the  kingdom  of  God,"  and  had  thought  that  Jesus  was 
its  king.  He  had  not  consented  to  the  counsel  and  deed  of  the  hypocritical 
leaders  of  his  people.  And  now,  when  the  great  crime  was  past,  he  came  to  pay 
that  homage  which  he  had  denied  to  Jesus  whilst  He  was  alive.  Proceeding  to 
the  governor's  palace,  he  demanded  the  body  of  Jesus.  From  the  Synoptic 
narrative  we  learn  that  Pilate  was  apparently  still  exercised  in  mind  regarding 
the  innocent  One,  whom  he  had  so  unjustly  permitted  to  be  led  to  death 
(Mark  xv.  44,  45).  Evidently  Joseph's  request  accorded  with  Pilate's  own 
feelings,  and  the  wish  that  He  who  had  been  so  unjustly  condemned  should  be 
honoured  in  His  death.  4.  As  Joseph  drew  near  the  garden  he  was  aware  of  the 
presence  of  another  Jewish  ruler — his  friend  and  fellow-counsellor,  Nieodemus. 
He  too  had  cast  aside  all  servile  fear,  and  had  come  laden  with  spices  for 
embalming  the  sacred  body  of  Him  from  whom  he  had  learned  so  much  of  the 
deeper  truth  concerning  the  kingdom  of  God. 

II.  The  place  of  interment  and  the  manner  of  the  burial. — 1.  Near  the 
place  where  the  Lord  was  crucified  was  a  garden  enclosure  belonging  to  Joseph, 
in  which,  in  accordance  with  a  prevalent  custom  of  those  times,  he  had  prepared 
a  sepulchre.  In  it  no  man  had  yet  been  laid.  Toward  this  garden,  after  they 
had  taken  down  Christ's  body  from  the  cross,  and  wound  it  reverently  in  linen 
cloths  with  the  aromatic  spices,  they  conveyed  it.  2.  It  was  then  borne 
reverently  to  the  empty  tomb,  and  laid  there  in  the  stillness  of  the  gathering 
evening  shadows.  No  execrating  shouts  now  rend  the  air ;  no  body  of  weeping 
disciples  follow  the  Saviour's  body  to  the  grave.  Only  those  two  honourable 
men  perform  their  sacred  duty  in  reverent  silence,  not  unmoved,  it  may  be,  by 
hope  in  mysterious  words  of  promise  spoken  by  their  now  silent  Master  ;  whilst 
afar  off  a  little  knot  of  women  beheld  where  the  body  was  laid.  3.  And  now,  as 
the  first  star  on  the  brow  of  night  announced  that  the  Sabbath  had  come,  the 
two  friends  departed  from  the  tomb ;  whilst  the  women  had  already  gone  to 
prepare  spices  for  embalming  and  to  wait  till  the  Sabbath  was  past  ere  they 
visited  the  grave.  4.  How  calm  and  peaceful  and  majestic  it  all  is  !  No 
mournful  dirges  sound,  no  funeral  torches  flare.  Yet  it  was  a  glorious  burial. 
The  tender  love  and  sympathy  of  succeeding  ages  are  represented  in  those 
disciples,  till  now  not  openly  and  constantly  attached  to  Jesus.  How  far 
otherwise  was  all  this  from  what  those  who  hated  Him  anticipated.  They 
imagined  perhaps  that  even  now  His  body  had  been  flung  into  a  common  grave 
with  the  bodies  of  the  two  malefactors ;  whilst  what  occurred  was  really  the 
prelude  of  His  glory. 

III.  The  resting  of  Jesus  in  Joseph's  tomb  was  a  sweet  repose. — 1.  It  was  rest 
after  conflict ;  and  what  a  conflict  in  both  body  and  soul !  David  the  shepherd- 
king  once  in  his  shepherd  days  had  vanquished  the  savage  beasts  that  threatened 

550 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  xix. 


his  flock.  But  this  King  of  David's  line  had  vanquished  a  more  cruel  foe,  though 
in  the  conflict  His  sweat  had  been  like  great  drops  of  blood,  and  on  the  cross 
nameless  fears  had  tortured  His  soul— His  body  was  rent,  His  heart  broken. 
2.  But  now  the  agony  and  conflict  were  all  past.  The  revenge  of  His  foes  and 
the  blood-thirstiness  of  the  unbelieving  throng  were  stilled.  The  waves  of  the 
storm-tossed  sea  of  human  passion  had  ceased  to  rage.  It  is  as  when  the  last 
storms  of  "winter  begin  to  die  away,  and  earth  and  air  are  filled  with  undefined 
yet  real  promises  of  the  coming  spring.  3.  It  is  he  who  has  laboured  most 
faithfully  and  diligently  during  the  day  whose  sleep  at  eventide  is  soundest, 
sweetest,  and  most  refreshing.  And  it  is  he  who  has  done  his  duty  most 
unselfishly  and  in  conformity  with  the  divine  will,  during  life's  working  day, 
who  sees  with  no  dread  the  day  of  labour  ending  and  the  time  of  rest  approach- 
ing. 4.  And  as  our  Redeemer  was  truly  human  as  well  as  divine,  we  may 
think  a  somewhat  analogous  feeling  occupied  His  breast.  He  had  laboured. 
He  had  toiled  in  the  midst  of  unbelief  and  contumely,  and  at  last  active  and 
deadly  opposition  from  those  He  had  come  to  save.  But  now  He  had  finished 
the  work  given  Him  to  do  on  earth  (xvii.  4),  and  there  was  a  pause  of  rest 
between  the  close  of  His  work  in  His  state  of  humiliation  and  the  beginning  of 
His  work  and  reign  in  glory. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Ver.  34.  The  pierced  side. — It  has  been 
supposed  that  John  laid  so  much  stress  upon 
this  circumstance  because  he  believed  it 
might  serve  to  refute  certain  erroneous 
spirits  of  his  day  who  assigned  to  Christ 
an  imaginary  and  not  a  real  body.  It  is 
certainly  possible  that,  in  giving  his  account 
of  the  matter,  he  was  partly  induced  by  such 
a  motive.  But  it  is  the  miraculous  nature  of 
the  event  that  chiefly  excited  his  interest 
in  it.  In  dead  bodies  the  blood  always 
coagulates,  whilst  from  the  wound  above 
mentioned,  on  the  contrary,  it  flowed  clearly 
and  abundantly,  unmixed  with  the  water 
which  burst  forth  from  the  pierced  peri- 
cardium of  His  heart,  and  ran  down  from 
the  cross.  It  was  as  if  the  great  High  Priest 
intended  to  say,  even  in  His  death,  "  Behold, 
I  shed  My  blood  voluntarily,  and  offer  it  up 
in  entire  fulness  for  your  sins."  But  that 
which  most  deeply  affected  the  soul  of  the 
beloved  disciple  was  the  divine  symbol 
he  perceived  beneath  the  wondrous  event. 
In  the  water  and  the  blood  he  sees  repre- 
sented the  most  essential  blessings  of 
salvation  for  which  the  world  is  indebted  to 
Christ.  We  know  that  in  his  first  Epistle 
he  points  out  the  fact  of  His  coming  with 
water  and  blood,  as  well  as  with  the  Holy 
Spirit,  as  the  most  peculiar  characteristic  of 
the  Redeemer  of  the  world ;  and  who  does 
not  perceive  in  these  words  that  the  won- 
drous event  on  Calvary  must  have  been 
present  to  his  mind  1 — F.  W.  Krummacher, 
"  Suffering  Saviour." 

Ver.  39.  Nicodemus  at  the  cross  and  tomb 
of  Jesus. — We  come  to  a  still  later  time. 


The  fatal  hour  is  passed ;  Jesus  Christ  has 
been  crucified.  The  sorrowing  disciples  are 
scattered  and  discomfited.  The  women  and 
the  few  faithful  ones  come  with  their  last 
offering  of  love  to  the  tomb  ;  and  among  the 
faithful  comes  Nicodemus,  bringing  a  mixture 
of  myrrh  and  aloes  a  hundred  pounds  weight. 
It  is  an  act  of  homage  and  devotion. 
It  is  the  time  when  the  ear  has  sprung  up. 
We  can  easily  believe  that  the  full  corn 
came  up  at  the  last ;  and  we  can  accept  the 
tradition  that  afterwards  he  avowed  himself 
as  a  believer  in  Christ,  and  received  baptism 
from  Peter  and  John.  The  further  tradition 
that  his  acknowledgment  of  our  Lord  led 
to  his  persecution  and  exile  from  office  and 
reputation  would  almost  naturally  follow 
the  former.  But  it  is  enough  that  we  have 
seen  again  Christ's  power  and  influence  over 
men.  We  have  seen  Him  in  patient  converse 
with  Nicodemus ;  and  we  have  seen  also 
that  slowly  the  spirit  of  devotion  grew, 
prompting  Nicodemus  to  courageous  remon- 
strance, and  at  last  to  an  act  of  devotion  at 
the  tomb  of  the  crucified  Christ.  It  cost 
Nicodemus  much  to  do  those  things.  With 
his  temperament,  timid  and  cultivated,  the 
effort  to  stand  alone  needed  no  small  resolu- 
tion, and  evinced  a  courageous  victory  over 
self.  To  this  the  influence  of  Christ  nerved 
him.  Christ  gave  manhood  to  the  courage 
of  a  nervous  and  timid  man.  Under  His 
influence  he  is  able  to  take  his  place  with 
growing  force  and  dignity.  The  man  who 
sought  Him  by  night  is  at  last  enabled  to 
rebuke  unrighteousness,  and  to  join  himself 
with  the  despised  and  lonely  followers  of 
Christ.    Christ  can  give  courage  to  the  weak 

551 


chap.  xix.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


and  fearful.  This  may  seem  a  small  thing ; 
but  nothing  is  small  which  enables  a  man  to 
enter  into  the  full  possession  of  his  man- 
hood. In  one  way  or  another  this  defect  of 
life  clings  to  us — we  do  not  possess  our  own 
lives.  Passion,  greed,  ambition,  may  rob  us 
of  this  heritage  ;  but  we  are  none  the  less 
deprived  of  it  when  we  are  the  slaves  of 
weakness  and  fear.  To  tame  passion  and 
to  curb  desire  is  a  victory ;  but  that  also  is 
a  victorious  power  which  can  banish  fear, 
and  transform  weakness  into  resolution  and 
timidity  into  courage.  For  the  fears  which 
haunt  timid  souls  are  real  and  mighty 
powers.  In  their  way  they  are  not  less 
powerful  than  covetousness  and  lust.  They 
touch  and  wither  up  the  lives  of  a  vast 
number  of  men.  Christ,  if  He  is  to  be  the 
Saviour  of  all  men,  must  have  a  message  of 
hope  and  redemption  for  the  fearful.  The 
story  of  Nicodemus  assures  us  that  He  is  the 
Saviour  of  the  doubtful.  To  those  that  have 
no  might  He  increaseth  strength.  His  hand, 
His  pierced  hand,  can  grasp  ours  and 
encourage  us  against  our  weakness.  Over 
natural  timidity  and  social  fears  we  can  be 
made  more  than  conquerors  through  Him 
who  loved  us. — Br.  W.  Boyd  Carpenter,  in 
"  Good  Words,"  Becember  1893. 

Ver.  42.  The  quiet  sepulchre  the  abode  of 
hope. — We  leave  them  (Joseph  and  Nico- 
demus), and  linger  a  few  moments  longer  at 
the  sepulchre,  from  whence  a  vital  atmo- 
sphere proceeds,  and  the  peace  of  God  is 
breathed  upon  us.  There  He  rests,  the  Lion 
of  the  tribe  of  Judah.  How  grateful  is  the 
feeling  to  us,  after  all  the  ignominy  and 
suffering  He  has  endured,  to  see  Him  at  least 
once  again  honourably  reposing,  and  that 
too  upon  a  couch  which  love,  fidelity,  and 
tenderness  have  prepared  for  Him  1  Who 
does  not  perceive  that,  even  in  the  circum- 
stances of  His  interment,  the  overruling 
hand  of  God  has  interwoven  for  our  con- 
solation a  gentle  testimony  that  His  only- 
begotten  Son  had  well  accomplished  the 
great  task  which  He  was  commissioned  to 
perform  ?  How  clearly  the  taking  down 
from  the  cross  and  the  interment  of  the 


Kedeemer  before  the  setting  in  of  night  and 
the  Sabbath  shows  the  fulfilment  of  the 
ancient  ordinance  of  Israel  respecting  those 
who  were  hanged  on  a  tree !  and  how  dis- 
tinctly are  we  convinced  to  a  demonstration 
that  the  curse  is  now  removed  from  a  sinful 
world,  and  that  the  eye  of  God  again  looks 
graciously  and  well-pleased  down  upon  the 
earth!  There  He  slumbers.  Well  for  us 
that  He  was  willing  to  pass  through  even 
this  dark  passage  on  our  behalf  1  Nothing 
hindered  Him  from  taking  up  His  life  again 
on  the  cross,  and  returning  from  thence 
immediately  to  His  Father.  But  had  He 
done  so  our  bodies  would  have  been  left  in 
the  grave ;  and  you  know  how  much  more 
we  are  wont  to  fear  the  grave  than  even 
death  itself.  There,  where  corruption  reigns, 
it  seems  as  if  the  curse  of  sin  still  hung  over 
us,  and  as  if  no  redemption  had  been  accom- 
plished. In  order  to  dispel  this  terror,  and 
to  convince  us,  by  means  of  His  own  pre- 
cedent, that  even  with  the  interment  of  our 
bodies  in  the  gloomy  cell  there  is  no  longer 
anything  to  fear,  but  that  a  passage  into  life 
is  opened  for  us  out  of  this  dark  dungeon, 
He  paternally  took  into  consideration  all  our 
necessities,  and  suffered  Himself  to  be  laid 
in  the  grave  before  our  eyes.  He  did  not, 
indeed,  see  corruption,  because  He  was  only 
imputatively  and  not  substantially  a  sinner. 
"  Thou  wilt  not  suffer  Thine  holy  One  to  see 
corruption,"  said  David  in  Ps.  xvi.  10,  im- 
pelled by  the  spirit  of  prophecy.  Our  flesh, 
on  the  contrary,  which  is  poisoned  by  sin, 
must  necessarily  pass  through  the  process 
of  the  germinating  seed-corn,  and  be  dis- 
solved into  its  original  element  before  its 
glorification.  But  the  difference  between 
our  lot  and  that  of  our  divine  Head  is  not 
an  essential  one.  The  chief  thing  continues 
to  be  this,  that  we  know  that  even  our  bodies 
are  not  lost  in  the  grave,  but  that  they  rest 
in  hope.  This  is  confirmed  and  guaranteed 
to  us  by  Christ.  The  way  we  have  seen 
Him  go  we  shall  also  take.  That  which  His 
obedience  merited  for  Him  as  the  Son  of 
man  it  merited  and  acquired  for  us  be- 
cause Christ  yielded  it  in  our  stead. — . 
F.  W.  Xrummacher,  "  Suffering  Saviour." 


552 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  XX. 


PART  VII  (a). 

Chapter  xx. 
The  Triumph  of  Jesus  in  His  Resurrection. 

1.  At  the  empty  sepulchre  (vers.  1-10).. 

2.  Mary  of  Magdala  and  the  Saviour  (vers.  11-18). 

3.  The  risen  Lord's  first  appearance  to  the  ten  disciples.  (1)  The  greeting  of 
peace ;  (2)  their  apostolic  mission;  (3)  an  effusion  of  the  Spirit  as  an  earnest  of 
the  fuller  outpouring;  (4)  the  power  to  bind  and  loose  (vers.  19-23). 

4.  The  unbelief  of  Thomas  (vers.  24,  25). 

5.  Christ's  appearance  to  the  ten  and  Thomas,  whose  doubts  are  vanquished, 
and  who  acknowledges  the  Godhead  of  Jesus  (vers.  26-28). 

6.  The  blessedness  of  faith  (ver.  29). 

7.  The  purpose  of  this  Gospel  clearly  stated — life  through  believing  (vers.  30,  31). 

Synoptic  parallels. — Chap.  xx.  1-18:  Matt,  xxviii.  1-15;  Mark  xvi.  1-11; 
Luke  xxiv.  1-12.     Vers.  19-23  :  Mark  xvi.  12-14;  Luke  xxiv.  36-44. 


CHAPTER  XX, 
EXPLANATORY  AND  CRITICAL  NOTES. 

St.  John's  narrative  of  the  Resurrection  is  not  general.  He  describes  how  faith  in  the 
risen  Lord  was  established  in  his  own  case  and  in  the  case  of  the  other  disciples.  But 
although  he  does  not  record  all  the  facts  noted  in  the  Synoptic  narratives,  he  incidentally 
shows  that  he  was  aware  of  them.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  these  historical  pictures  by 
St.  John  of  the  Passion  and  Resurrection  were  written  for  Christians,  who  were  already 
acquainted  with  the  facts  of  the  Redeemer's  life. 

Vers.  1,  2.  The  first  day  of  the  week,  eta.— Of  the  week  (tQv  ffappdrw)  :  ff6.pfia.Tov  seems  to 
have  signified  the  whole  week,  the  interval  between  two  Sabbaths  (Luke  xviii.  12).  Mary 
Magdalene,  etc. — There  were  others  with  her,  as  the  Synoptists  record  (Luke  xxiii.  55,  56, 
xxiv.  1,  etc.).  St.  John  implies  this  in  ver.  2,  We  know  not,  etc.  The  stone. — St.  John  does 
not  mention  the  fact  of  its  having  been  placed  in  the  opening  of  the  tomb,  but  here  again 
he  implies  his  knowledge  of  the  fact.  Mary  thought  that  the  body  of  Jesus  had  been  removed 
when  she  saw  that  the  stone  had  been  rolled  away,  and  ran  with  troubled  heart  to  tell  the 
disciples,  especially  Peter  and  John.  This  is  in  agreement  with  the  record  of  the  angelic 
message  in  Mark  xvi.  7. 

Vers.  5,  6.  Stooping  down  (irapaK^yf/as). — The  word  describes,  perhaps,  both  the  bending 
position  (bending  beside),  with  the  head  on  a  level  with  the  somewhat  low  opening,  and 
the  eager,  penetrating  gaze  into  the  semi-darkness  of  the  sepulchre.  Simon  Peter  was  not 
content  with  this,  but  went  in,  and,  as  the  word  (deupei)  expresses,  looked  carefully  and 
observantly  at  the  various  details  presented  to  his  view. 

Ver.  7.  Napkin. — A  sudarium  (crovdapiov),  tied  probably  under  the  chin. 

Ver.  9.  They  knew  not  the  Scripture,  etc. — Even  though  Jesus  had  impressed  upon  them 
the  truth  that  He  must  die  and  would  rise  again,  apparently  the  disciples  were  altogether 
unprepared,  even  to  the  last,  for  what  had  occurred  on  Calvary.  Thus  the  first  announcement 
of  the  Resurrection  seemed  to  some  of  them  to  be  "an  idle  tale  "  (Luke  xxiv.  11). 

Ver.  11.  Mary,  etc. — She  had  returned  after  telling  the  disciples  about  the  empty  tomb. 

Ver.  12.  Two  angels,  etc. — Seated  as  if  they  had  been  guarding  the  body  while  it  rested 
in  the  tomb,  and  had  remained  to  testify  that  God  had  given  His  angels  charge  concerning 
His  Son's  sacred  body,  which  was  not  to  see  corruption  (Ps.  xvi.  10,  xci.  11).  This  was 
a  special  appearance  of  the  angels  to  Mary  (see  Luke  xxiv.  4). 

553 


chap.  xx.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


Ver.  13.  She  saith  unto  them,  etc. — The  one  thought  occupied  her  (ver.  2).  Now  evidently 
she  is  alone,  as  her  language  shows  :  I  know  not,  etc. 

Vers.  14,  15.  And  when  she  had  thus  said,  etc. — Turning  away  sorrowfully  from  contem- 
plating the  tomb,  her  eye  rested  on  another  presence.  Why  did  she  not  recognise  who  it 
was  ?  It  may  be  that  "  her  eyes  were  holden,"  as  in  the  case  of  the  two  on  the  way  to 
Emmaus  (Luke  xxiv.  16 ;  Mark  xvi.  12).  Jesus  saith,  etc. — These  are  evidently  the  first 
words  of  the  risen  Lord  (Mark  xvi.  9).  Whom  seekest  thou  % — A  person,  not  a  dead, 
inanimate  form.  The  gardener. — And  therefore  a  servant  of  Joseph  of  Arimathsea,  and 
friendly.  She  supposes  he  can  throw  some  light  on  the  mystery ;  that  perhaps,  for  some 
good  purpose,  the  body  had  been  removed. 

Ver.  16.  Jesus  saith,  etc. — Mary  seems  to  have  turned  again  to  the  sepulchre,  for  when 
Jesus  spoke  she  turned  herself,  and  saith  unto  Him  [in  Hebrew],  Rabbuni  Q$En). — The 
phrase  in  brackets  is  included  in  the  Greek  MSS.  The  familiar  voice  addressing  her  in  her 
own  name  at  once  revealed  to  Mary  who  it  was  who  spoke.  Rabbuni. — My  teacher,  a  term 
of  reverence  and  respect. 

Ver.  17.  Touch  Me  not  (/xrj  /nov  airrov,  cling  to  Me  not). — Mary  had  to  unlearn  much  in  her 
conceptions  of  Christ,  and  He  begins  now  to  lead  her  to  higher  knowledge.  He  did  not 
mean  to  repel  the  mere  touch  (for  see  ver.  27),  but  to  teach  Mary  that  she  must  have 
different  conceptions  now  of  her  divine  Master  and  Lord.  She  must  not  cling  to  His  mere 
outward  presence  (2  Cor.  v.  16,  17).  She  must  seek  to  rise  to  that  communion  of  the  new 
creature  with  the  risen  Lord  which  would  be  enjoyed  in  highest  measure  when  He  had 
ascended  to  the  Father,  according  to  His  promise  (xiv.  23).  But  even  now  she  must  seek 
chiefly  for  this  blessed  communion.  Then  Christ  gives  her  to  do  something  that  is  far 
more  glorious  than  any  mere  external  clinging  to  Him.  He  gave  her  a  commission  to  perform 
for  Him — Go  to  My  brethren  (Mark  xvi.  7  ;  Matt,  xxviii.  10).  Through  His  redeeming  work  His 
true  disciples  have  become  joint  heirs  with  Him  in  the  heavenly  inheritance.  They  are  no 
longer  slaves,  or  even  friends— they  are  brethren  in  the  Lord  (Acts  i.  15,  16  ;  Heb.  ii.  10-17). 
I  am  ascending. — The  process  of  ascension,  so  to  speak,  had  begun  ;  the  delay  of  its  final 
step  was  for  the  disciples'  sake.  My  Father,  whose  Son  I  am  by  essential  nature  ;  your  Father 
through  redeeming  grace  (see  Westcott,  in  loc.}.     My  God  He  says  as  the  incarnate  Son. 

Ver.  19.  Evening  of  that  day. — I.e.  the  day  on  which  our  Lord  rose  from  the  dead. — When 
the  doors  were  shut. — St.  John  notices  this  fact,  not  only  to  show  how  terror-stricken  and 
despairing  the  disciples  had  become,  but  in  order  to  indicate  that  Jesus  entered  the  room  in 
a  miraculous  manner.  This  fact  gives  us  a  glimpse  of  the  power  of  the  spiritual  body, 
showing  that  it  is  not  confined  by  material  limits  such  as  we  know  them  ;  but  it  tells  us 
nothing  regarding  its  nature.  Peace,  etc. — The  disciples'  hearts  were  still  troubled,  therefore 
the  first  word  of  Jesus  reminds  them  of  one  of  His  most  blessed  parting  promises  (xiv.  1,  27). 

Ver.  20.  He  showed  them,  etc. — The  marks  of  the  wounds  received  in  winning  redemption 
for  them,  to  convince  them  that  it  was  He  whom  they  saw  in  very  truth. 

Ver.  21.  As  My  Father,  etc. — Christ's  work  on  earth  done  by  Him  in  actual  bodily 
presence  was  completed  ;  but  the  disciples  were  now  to  go  forth  in  His  strength  to  continue 
His  work. 

Ver.  22.  Breathed  on  them,  etc.  (see  iii.  8;  Gen.  ii.  7). — "The  natural  meaning  of  the 
words  of  Jesus  is,  "  Receive  an  effusion  of  the  Spirit."  What  Jesus  gives  them  is  not  a 
simple  promise,  but  neither  is  it  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit ;  it  is  an  earnest.  Raised  Himself 
to  a  degree  of  higher  life,  He  hastes  to  make  them  sharers  in  it  as  far  as  that  is  possible. 
This  communication  is  to  the  Resurrection  what  Pentecost  will  be  to  the  Ascension.  As 
by  Pentecost  He  will  initiate  them  into  His  ascension,  so  by  breathing  on  them  now  He 
associates  them  with  His  life  as  the  Risen  One  "  (Godet). 

Ver.  23.  Whose  soever  sins  ye  remit,  etc. — "  The  words,  closely  considered,  amount  to  this  : 
that  with  the  gift  and  real  participation  of  the  Holy  Spirit  comes  the  conviction,  and  there- 
fore the  knowledge,  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  judgment;  and  this  knowledge  becomes  more 
perfect,  the  more  men  are  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  Since  this  is  so,  they  who  are 
pre-eminently  filled  with  His  presence  are  pre-eminently  gifted  with  the  discernment  of  sin 
and  repentance  in  others,  and  hence  by  the  Lord's  appointment  authorised  to  pronounce 
pardon  of  sin,  and  the  contrary.  The  apostles  had  this  in  an  especial  manner,  and  by  the  full 
indwelling  of  the  Spirit  were  enabled  to  discern  the  hearts  of  men,  and  to  give  sentence  on 
that  discernment  (see  Acts  v.  i-11,  viii.  21,  xiii.  9).  And  this  gift  belongs  to  the  Church  in 
all  ages,  and  especially  to  those  who  by  legitimate  appointment  are  set  to  minister  in  the 
Churches  of  Christ :  not  by  successive  delegation  from  the  apostles — of  which  fiction  I  find  no 
trace  in  the  New  Testament — but  by  their  mission  from  Christ,  the  Bestower  of  the  Spirit  for 
their  office,  when  orderly  and  legitimately  conferred  upon  them  by  the  various  Churches.  Not 
however  to  them  exclusively, — though  for  decency  and  order  it  is  expedient  that  the  outward 
and  formal  declaration  should  be  so  : — but  in  proportion  as  any  disciple  shall  have  been 
filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit  of  Wisdom,  is  the  inner  discernment,  the  Kplais,  his."  (Henry 
Alford,  D.D.)     See  also  Matt.  xvi.  19,  xviii.  18. 

5U 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  XX. 


Vers.  30,  31.  "It  cannot  be  doubted  that  St.  John,  ...  at  the  close  of  this  Ghapter,  before 
recording  the  special  bearing  of  the  resurrection  life  and  spiritual  power  of  Christ  on  the 
subsequent  condition  of  the  Church,  .  .  .  gathers  up  the  general  significance  of  his  Gospel 
and  its  relation  to  other  books  "  (H.  R.  Reynolds,  D.D.).  But  these  are  written,  etc. — The 
Evangelist  here  states  the  object  of  his  Gospel.  It  was  not  his  purpose  to  write  a  complete 
account  of  Christ's  life,  but  to  record  a  selected  series — typical  of  the  whole — of  those 
"  signs  "  in  word  and  work  given  by  Christ  which  manifested  His  glory  and  proved  His  divine 
Sonship,  which  led  to  faith  and  salvation  in  the  case  of  the  disciples,  and  which  thus  would 
lead  others  also  to  believe  and  live. 


•MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—18. 

Vers.  1-10.  The  resurrection  of  the  Redeemer. — How  long  and  cold  soever  the 
winter  may  be  it  cannot  prevent  the  advent  of  spring.  Its  storms  may  be  fierce  and 
terrible.  It  might  seem  sometimes  as  if  nature  could  not  live  under  their  fury. 
But  they  pass  at  last ;  and  then  even  under  the  calm  of  the  last  chilling  frosts  men 
are  sensible  of  the  coming  change,  when  the  ice-bound  waters  and  the  hardened 
ground  will  be  freed  from  the  power  of  winter,  when  the  hidden  plants  will  begin 
to  come  to  light,  and  the  life  of  nature  awaking  from  wintry  sleep  will  pulsate 
in  all  her  animated  realms.  In  this  part  of  Gospel  history  we  see  the  beginning 
of  a  new  and  better  period  for  humanity.  The  winter  of  humanity  had  passed 
away,  the  dark  time  of  alienation  between  God  and  men,  when  storms  of  wrath  were 
dreaded.  But  now  there  was  "  peace  on  earth."  The  storm  had  expended  its 
worst  fury  on  Him  who  lay  in  Joseph's  tomb.  The  wintry  time  that  had  begun 
in  Eden  was  about  to  break  in  joy-giving  spring  in  that  garden  near  Calvary. 

I.  The  place  and  time  of  the  Resurrection. — 1.  The  Sabbath  dawned  peace- 
fully on  the  garden  where  was  Joseph's  tomb,  and  the  place  was  still  and 
peaceful  during  the  Sabbath  hours,  save  that  a  Roman  guard  appeared  to  set 
a  seal  on  the  stone  which  had  been  rolled  to  the  opening  of  the  sepulchre 
(Matt,  xxvii.  62-66).  2.  In  the  evening  perhaps  their  vigilance  was  redoubled; 
and  the  silent  night  passed  on,  until  when  the  morning  watch  drew  near  a  portent 
occurred.  The  firm  earth  quaked,  the  sealed  stone  was  rolled  away  by  invisible 
power  from  the  opening  of  the  tomb,  and  a  heavenly  watcher  appeared  before 
whom  the  Roman  guard  quailed  and  fled  to  the  city  (Matt,  xxviii.  2-4). 
3.  It  was  in  the  night  when  the  Saviour  rose,  before  the  dawn  of  morning  ;  and 
with  His  rising  dawned  a  new  and  brighter  day  for  the  human  race,  the 
beginning  of  a  glad  new  year  of  salvation  and  grace  to  men.  In  this  history 
of  the  Resurrection  it  does  appear  as  if  there  were  a  harmony  between  the 
natural  and  spiritual  worlds.  When  Jesus  died  the  sun  was  darkened,  nature 
put  on  a  funeral  pall.  But  when  Jesus  rose  the  dawn  was  near  to  breaking, 
and  soon  the  sun  would  herald  the  advent  of  a  new  day.  It  was  fitting  that 
the  light  of  humanity  should  thus  usher  in  the  new  spiritual  day.  4.  The  place 
of  resurrection  then  was  Joseph's  tomb,  the  time  the  last  watch  just  before  the 
dawn.  "  There  where  the  noble  seed  had  been  laid  with  reverent  sorrow 
(Ps.  cxxvi.)  it  sprang  up  to  sudden  verdure  and  fruitfulness."  In  that  place 
round  which  tears  of  sorrow  had  been  wept  in  the  night  joy  came  with  the 
resurrection  morning.  There  where  the  hopes  of  ardent  disciples  had  been 
buried  they  were  awakened  to  perpetual  bloom.  5.  He  who  rested  in  that 
tomb  saw  no  corruption.  The  tomb  itself  had  hitherto  been  untenanted ;  and 
He  who  now  rested  in  it  for  a  season  could  not  be  hoi  den  by  the  bands  of  death. 
The  heavy  stone  could  not  impede  His  passage.  He  who  voluntarily  laid  down 
His  life  had  power  to  take  it  again  (x.  18).  He  died  freely,  willingly;  but 
because  He  the  innocent  died  for  the  guilty  vicariously  death  had  no  power 
over  Him.  Therefore  His  spirit  returned  from  its  sojourn  in  paradise. 
Unmarked  by  human  eye  did  the  divine  Father's  power  awake  the  Son  from 

555 


chap.  xx.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


His  sleep,  and  the  Son  resumed  His  life  again  (Rom.  viii,  1 1  ;  Eph.  i.  20 ; 
Acts  ii.  24 ;  Rom.  i.  4,  vi.  4)  in  order  to  appear  in  His  glorified  body,  freed 
from  the  bounds  of  space  and  time,  to  testify  to  His  disciples  that  He  had  really 
risen  again,  ere  He  entered  on  His  full  glory  in  the  presence  of  the  Father. 

II.  The  Resurrection  revived  the  dead  hopes  of  the  disciples. — 1.  How 
graphic  are  the  Gospel  narratives  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  !  Ere  the  dawn 
of  the  morning  of  the  first  day  of  the  week,  ere  the  light  of  the  stars  had  faded, 
the  little  company  of  women  who  had  lingered  by  the  cross,  and  had  seen  where 
the  Lord's  body  had  been  laid,  might  have  been  seen  approaching  the  sepulchre. 
They  had  perplexedly  asked  each  other  who  should  remove  the  heavy  stone  from 
the  tomb's  mouth.  But  as  they  drew  near  even  in  the  dim  twilight  they  saw 
that  the  stone  had  been  rolled  away.  2.  In  haste  one  of  the  company,  Mary 
Magdalene,  ran  to  tell  the  disciples  who  were  evidently  closest  to  Jesus — Peter 
and  John.  The  Gospel  graphically  depicts  the  excitement  and  amazement  with 
which  the  news  filled  the  disciples,  and  thus  indirectly  their  failure  in  faith 
and  hope.  But  now  with  hope  reviving  in  their  beating  hearts,  as  the 
sayings  and  promises  of  Jesus  began  to  crowd  in  again  on  the  memory,  they 
both  ran  in  haste  toward  the  garden  sepulchre.  3.  John  being  younger, 
ran  in  advance,  more  quickly  than  Peter,  and  reached  the  sepulchre  first :  in  his 
agitation,  and  with  feelings  of  awe  and  perhaps  fear,  he  did  not  enter  the  tomb, 
yet  looking  in  saw  the  linen  cloths,  which  had  wrapped  the  body,  lying  apart. 
But  when  Peter  came,  with  characteristic  impulse  he  entered  the  tomb,  followed 
by  John.  And  what  they  saw  showed  that  the  body  had  not  been  taken  away 
to  be  interred  elsewhere — that  whatever  had  been  done,  had  been  done  in  orderly 
fashion.  And  when  John  saw  he  believed.  A  light  clearer  than  that  of 
morning  was  shed  on  Scripture  and  the  sayings  of  Jesus  which  hitherto  had 
been  dark  to  them.     But  what  they  now  saw  revived  their  faith  and  hope. 

III.  The  Resurrection  has  brought  hope  to  humanity. — 1.  It  has  brought 
the  hope  of  reconciliation  and  peace  with  God.  That  for  which  men  longed  in 
all  the  ages  is  given  at  the  empty  tomb  of  Jesus  to  them  that  believe.  Acceptance 
with  God  and  peace  and  joy  in  His  service  were  the  ends  aimed  at  in  all  the 
religions,  the  rites  and  sacrifices,  of  the  past.  And  these  ends  were  fully  attained 
only  when  the  cry  "  It  is  finished  "  rang  from  the  cross  on  Calvary.  But  it 
could  only  be  known  that  this  was  so,  and  that  the  great  expiatory  sacrifice  of 
Jesus  was  accepted,  when  He  was  "declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power, 
according  to  the  spirit  of  holiness,  by  the  resurrection  from  the  dead  "  (Bom.  i.  4). 
2.  And  from  this  follows  the  foundation  of  a  second  great  hope — the  hope  of 
immortality — not  only  a  pale,  shadowy  existence  for  the  spirit  beyond  the 
sphere  of  this  life,  but  for  all  those  united  to  Christ  in  His  death,  so  that  they 
die  unto  sin — the  hope  of  a  blessed  life  for  the  whole  man.  They  look  for  the 
appearing  of  the  Saviour,  who  at  His  coming  shall  speak,  and  the  dead  shall 
hear  (v.  25),  and  shall  change  the  body  of  their  humiliation,  that  it  may  be 
conformed  unto  the  body  of  His  glory,  etc.  (Phil.  iii.  21).  3.  These  blessed  hopes 
form  a  spring  of  Christian  endeavour  which  has  brought  blessing  to  all  men. 
Animated  by  it,  men  and  women  have  laboured  for  the  unseen  and  eternal,  and 
have  raised  life  higher,  made  it  more  unworldly  and  self-sacrificing,  because  they 
have  "  set  their  affections  on  things  above,"  etc.  (Col.  iii.  1,  etc.).  And  it  has 
become  a  source  of  living  spiritual  energy,  inspiring  men  to  nobler  effort  in  the 
service  of  God  and  man. 

Lesson. — The  first  day  of  the  week  was  the  day  of  Christ's  resurrection,  i.e.  on 
the  same  day  on  which  Creation  was  begun  was  the  restitution  of  the  fallen 
world  begun,  and  hope  given  to  men  of  a  new  and  higher  life.  "  He  died  for  all, 
that  they  which  live,"  etc.  "  Therefore,  if  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new 
creation,"  etc.  (2  Cor.  v.  15,  17).     "We  are  buried  with  Him  by  baptism  unto 

556 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  xx. 


His  death,  that  like  as  Christ  was  raised  up  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the 
Father,  so  we  also  might  walk  in  newness  of  life  "  (Rom.  vi.  4).  Has  the  winter 
of  the  old  life  passed  away,  with  its  storms  of  passion,  its  coldness  of  alienation, 
its  fruitlessness  in  good  ?  And  has  the  new  eternal  year  begun  to  move  in  all 
the  nature,  to  bourgeon  and  shoot  forth  with  promise  of  fruit  to  God  ?  This  can 
come  only  through  Christ.  "  God  hath  not  appointed  us  to  wrath,  but  to  obtain 
salvation  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  died  for  us,  that,  whether  we  wake  or 
sleep,  we  should  live  together  with  Him  "  (1  Thess.  v.  9,  10). 

"  Can  all  the  wiles  of  art,  the  grasp  of  power, 
Snatch  the  rich  relics  of  a  well-spent  hour  ? 
These,  when  the  trembling  spirit  wings  his  flight, 
Pour  round  his  path  a  stream  of  living  light, 
And  gild  those  pure  and  perfect  realms  of  rest, 
Where  virtue  triumphs,  and  her  sons  are  blest." — Rogers. 

Ver.  1-8.  Easter. — It  is  the  festival  of  Easter  we  celebrate.  Our  Christian 
festivals  are  more  than  simple  festivals  of  remembrance.  The  facts  and  marvels 
of  redemption  on  which  they  are  founded  have  an  eternal  significance,  a  perpetual 
influence.  Those  facts  and  wonders  we  live  over  with  each  other ;  they  pass 
before  our  eyes ;  they  impress  their  influence  upon  us.  To-day  we  gather 
together  at  the  grave  in  Joseph's  garden,  and  keep  Easter  with  each  other. 
We  consider : — 

I.  The  sympathy  which  it  awakens. — 1.  Its  impression  was  felt  in  tne 
dominion  of  death,  whose  gates  were  burst  asunder,  and  whose  prince  was  bound 
and  led  captive.  2.  Participation  in  it  extends  to  heaven.  All  good  spirits  praise 
God  the  Lord,  offer  to  the  victor  their  reverence,  and  receive  their  commission 
for  the  Easter  proclamation  which  went  forth  from  the  grave  of  the  risen  One,  by 
the  mouth  of  the  angel,  and  has  re-echoed  down  the  centuries.  3.  The  participa- 
tion in  it  extends  to  earth.  Earth  and  sun  take  part  in  the  victory  of  Easter. 
Men  and  women  come  together  to  the  open  grave.  Wounded  consciences  and 
sick  souls  are  healed.  Easter  songs  of  triumph  are  sung  of  the  riven  bonds  of 
the  tomb  and  of  the  opened  heaven. 

II.  The  special  facts  which  it  emphasises. — 1.  An  Easter  Church  is  there,  the 
empty  tomb,  this  place  of  a  mighty  victory,  this  birthplace  of  all  light,  which 
lights  up  the  darkness  of  life,  this  place  of  refuge  of  those  forsaken,  this  field  of 
victory  of  those  who  strive,  this  workroom  of  eternal  life,  this  lofty  choir  of  the 
worshipping  Church,  where  all  Christian  worship  took  its  beginning — this  Easter 
Church,  which  has  been  the  foundation  of  all  other  Easter  Churches.  2.  An  Easter 
preacher  is  there — the  Easter  sermon  is  entrusted  to  one  of  the  blessed  spirits 
who  ever  stand  before  God's  face.  3.  The  Easter  sermon  has  as  its  purport,  "  Fear 
not,"  etc.  It  brings  comfort ;  it  awakens  repentance ;  for  it  commands  not  to  seek 
the  living  among  the  dead.  It  tells  of  victory  ;  sin,  death,  the  grave,  are  con- 
quered. It  demands  faith  :  He  is  not  here.  The  women  must  first  believe,  then 
they  will  behold.     Thus  too  with  us. 

III.  The  impression  which  it  leaves. — "The  disciples  again  departed,"  etc. 
Our  hearts  also  sometimes  fluctuate  between  fear  and  joy,  between  doubt  and 
faith,  until  they  become  joyful  Easter  hearts. — Appuhn,  in  J.  L.  Sommer's 
"  Evang.  Per." 

Ver.  9.  Grounds  of  belief  in  the  resurrection  of  the  Lord. — The  lines  of  proof  of 
this  great  fact  may  be  briefly  pointed  out  as  follows  : — 

I.  The  confident  declaration  of  the  apostles  that  Jesus  had  risen  from  the 
dead  shortly  after  His  crucifixion. — They  were  not  expecting  that  this  would 
occur.  The  disciples  seemed  to  be  about  to  disperse,  thinking  their  beautiful 
dream  was  over.     When  the  women  related  the  vision  of  their  risen  Lord,  their 

557 


chap.  xx.         H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


words  seemed  to  the  disciples  to  be  "  idle  tales,"  vain  imaginations.  Two  of  the 
company  even,  disbelieving  the  vision,  and  with  hope  extinguished,  were  travel- 
ling sadly  toward  their  distant  home.  But  if  this  were  their  attitude  on  the 
third  day  after  the  Crucifixion,  how  quickly  was  it  changed.  In  little  more  than 
a  month's  time  we  find  those  desponding,  doubting  disciples  proclaiming  boldly, 
in  the  midst  of  adversaries,  all  too  willing  to  overthrow  them,  that  Jesus  had 
risen  from  the  dead.  The  enemies  of  the  apostles,  not  being  able  to  confute 
their  assertions,  tried  to  put  them  to  silence  by  persecution  and  imprisonment. 
But  the  disciples  only  persisted  more  earnestly  in  their  proclamation.  Strangely 
enough,  one  of  the  most  bigoted  of  their  persecutors  (one  called  Saul  of  Tarsus) 
himself  became  convinced,  and  preached  fervently  that  doctrine,  for  holding 
which  he  had  persecuted  the  apostles.  And  it  is  in  the  history  of  his  life,  and 
in  his  Epistles,  that  this  fact  is  most  prominently  dwelt  upon.  Even  the  most 
rationalistic  and  sceptical  of  modern  critics  allow  that  the  great  Epistles  of  St. 
Paul  and  the  Book  of  Acts  were  products  of  the  apostolic  age,  and  authentic ;  so 
that  these  facts  are  admitted  beyond  doubt.  How  then  can  this  fact  be  accounted 
for,  unless  by  admitting  that  it  occurred  as  narrated  in  the  Book  of  Acts  and 
Paul's  Epistles  1  The  adversaries  of  the  apostle  Paul — even  the  Judaisers — never 
called  this  fact  in  question.  On  the  contrary  St.  Paul  uses  it — uses  the  fact  that 
the  risen  Christ  had  appeared  to  him — as  a  proof  of  his  apostleship,  to  show  that 
he  was  really  the  called  of  God.  Had  the  resurrection  of  Jesus,  then,  not  been 
a  fact,  nothing  would  have  been  easier  than  to  disprove  Jit.  But  the  Jews  at 
Jerusalem  could  not  do  so.  And  such  men  as  Gamaliel,  who  would  not  stoop  to 
subterfuge  and  lying,  saw  that  it  was  the  part  of  wisdom  to  let  these  men  alone, 
at  all  events. 

II.  The  very  day  on  which  we  meet  for  worship  is  an  ever-standing  proof  of 
this  great  truth. — What  except  the  occurrence  of  some  such  outstanding  event 
would  have  led  men,  trained  as  strict  Jews,  and  who  at  first  did  not  believe  that 
Jesus  had  risen,  to  have  changed  a  custom  and  tradition  bound  up  with  the  very 
existence  of  their  religion  ?  And  yet  practically  they  changed  the  day  of  rest, 
meeting  together  (excepting  when  in  Jewish  communities,  and  then  on  both 
days)  on  the  first  day  of  the  week  instead  of  the  seventh.  Why,  unless  in 
memory  of  this  event,  and  because  on  that  day  Jesus  first  appeared  to  them 
when  He  had  risen  from  the  dead  1  In  the  same  way  the  Church  festival  of 
Easter — the  only  one  that  can  claim  a  high  antiquity,  leading  up  to  apostolic 
times  (although  the  name  Easter  in  the  north  indicates  that  the  Church  united 
it  with  the  ancient  Teutonic  springtide  festival) — shows  from  collateral  history 
that  the  fact  of  Christ's  resurrection  was  universally  believed  in  the  Church 
during  the  apostolic  age. 

III.  The  promises  that  Jesus  in  His  own  words,  as  recorded  in  the  Gospels, 
made  dependent  on  His  resurrection  have  all  been  fulfilled. — He  promised  that 
after  His  death  His  disciples  should  see  Him  for  a  little  while,  and  that  then 
He  should  go  to  the  Father ;  that  He  would  send  them  the  Holy  Spirit  to  be 
their  comforter  and  guide.  The  books  granted  by  all  to  be  contemporary  with 
the  apostles  tell  how  these  promises  were  fulfilled.  The  divine  Spirit  did  descend 
on  them — at  all  events  after  the  crucifixion  and  ascension  we  find  the  apostles 
animated  with  a  new  spiritual  life.  They  were  invested  with  spiritual  power, 
and  gifted  with  various  tongues.  All  this  was  in  accordance  with  Christ's 
promise  that  He  would  send  them  power  from  on  high.  In  a  few  years  His 
words  were  literally  fulfilled.  The  apostles  and  their  followers  became  His 
witnesses  in  Jerusalem,  Judaea,  etc.  Conquests  of  the  gospel  in  the  present 
day  also,  in  accordance  with  Christ's  promises  and  predictions,  lend  additional 
force  to  the  argument.  They  are  proofs  before  our  own  eyes  of  the  working  of 
the   Spirit  of  our  risen  Lord.     When  we  see  men  of  idolatrous  and  barbarous 

558 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.         chap.  xx. 


nations  rising  through  the  gospel  to  a  higher  life,  when  we  see  individuals  who 
had  been  living  for  self  and  in  sin  become  changed  in  character  and  life 
by  this  gospel,  we  see  there  an  evidence  that  "  Christ  hath  risen  from  the  dead  " 
and  is  "  alive  for  evermore." 

IV.  The  number  and  character  of  the  witnesses  to  the  resurrection. — St. 
Paul  truly  said  to  King  Agrippa  that  "  these  things  were  not  done  in  a  corner." 
First,  the  pious  women  and  the  disciples  saw  Him ;  then  the  "  five  hundred 
brethren  at  once,"  and  the  whole  Church  at  Jerusalem  to  the  number  of  one 
hundred. and  twenty,  many  of  whom  also  would  be  witnesses  of  His  ascension. 
It  would  be  a  circumstance  almost,  if  not  wholly  miraculous,  if  it  could  be 
proved  that  such  numbers  of  people  could  be  self-deceived — especially  as  the 
number  contained  many  of  known  probity  and  intelligence.  No  doubt  the 
number  included  more  than  one  man  of  the  stamp  of  Thomas.  The  whole  mental 
and  moral  position  also  of  a  man  like  St.  Paul  forbids  the  supposition  of  self- 
deception.  Were  the  disciples  and  their  followers  deceivers  then?  If  so,  to 
what  end  %  See  in  2  Cor.  xi.  a  sketch  of  the  manner  of  life  of  those  early 
preachers  of  the  cross — a  life  of  hardship,  etc.  Truly  St.  Paul  might  say,  "  If  in 
this  life  only,"  etc.  (1  Cor.  xv.  19).  Their  character  also,  and  the  lofty  morality 
and  spirituality  of  the  doctrines  they  proclaimed,  exclude  all  idea  of  wilful  decep- 
tion so  far  as  they  are  concerned.  One  of  the  leading  rationalistic  theological 
thinkers  of  Germany  (De  Wette),  after  a  long  life  spejit  in  the  investigation  of 
the  New  Testament  in  a  keen,  critical  spirit,  came  at  last  to  the  conclusion  that, 
although  the  manner  of  the  resurrection  may  be  a  mystery,  yet  the  fact  is  one  that 
cannot  be  overturned  any  more  than  any  other  firmly  established  historical  fact. 

Vers.  11-18.  Mary  Magdalene  at  the  tomb  of  Jesus. — Mary  Magdalene  !  Hers 
becomes  a  deeply  interesting  figure  in  these  closing  scenes.  She  is  the  last  at  the 
cross,  the  first  at  the  tomb.  And  there  are  few  passages  in  the  gospel  narrative 
more  really  beautiful  than  that  which  is  before  us.  There  are  those,  of  course, 
who  feel  conscientiously  and  solemnly  bound  to  accept  tradition.  And  tradition 
mixes  up  Mary  of  Magdala  with  "  the  woman  which  was  a  sinner,"  who  anointed 
the  Saviour's  feet  in  the  house  of  Simon  the  Pharisee  (Luke  vii.  36-50).  But  if 
we  take  simply  what  Scripture  says  to  us,  and  let  tradition  shift  for  itself — as 
probably  some  of  us  are  quite  prepared  to  do — then  we  are  bound  to  hold  that 
these  two  women  are  perfectly  distinct  and  different  persons. 

I.  Mary's  love  to  the  Redeemer. — Mary  of  Magdala  was  healed  by  our  Lord 
of  a  terrible  mental  or  spiritual  malady,  but  Scripture  nowhere  tells  us  she  had 
been — in  the  sense  in  which  the  word  is  evidently  applied  to  the  other  woman — 
"  a  sinner,"  Surely  there  is  a  wide  difference  !  Some  of  us  may  have  dear 
friends  who  were  for  a  time  Asylum  patients,  or  who  once  wildly  raved  and 
struggled  in  fever- delirium,  but  we  don't  think  or  speak  of  them  as  having  been 
(in  that  particular  sense  of  the  word)  sinners  !  Tradition  is  not  infallible.  It 
may  have  erred  in  this,  as  in  other  things.  And  it  is  certainly  far  more 
pleasant  to  look  at  the  picture  which  Scripture  holds  up  to  us — that  of  a  woman 
(there  is  at  least  some  shadow  of  reason  for  believing,  a  lady,  of  good  worldly 
position)  to  whom,  in  God's  providence,  life  for  long  years  had  been  very  burden- 
some and  bitter.  Happy  they  who  have  never  chanced  to  know  how  sore  such 
an  affliction  is.  No  wonder,  when  that  woman  came  back — "  herself  "  again — 
to  happy  life,  that  she  bore  deep  reverence  and  solemn  tender  love  within  her 
heart  to  Him  whose  word  and  touch  had  dispelled  the  dark  cloud,  and  brought 
gladsome  light  once  more  into  the  Magdala  home.  And  who  can  doubt  that  He 
whose  word  restored  and  blessed  that  woman's  mind,  did  even  likewise  for  that 
woman's  soul  !  that  the  richer,  higher  blessings  of  spiritual  life  and  health  were 
bestowed  by  the  Saviour's  hand.     Thus  rescued,  and  thus  blessed,  the  remainder 

559 


chap.  xx.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


of  that  woman's  life  was  nobly,  solemnly,  tenderly,  anxiously  devoted  to  the 
Saviour's  cause.  That  was  the  ship  that  held  her  heart  within  it.  No  love  was 
ever  given  to  the  cause  of  Christ  more  pure  and  true  than  that  of  Mary's  heart. 
And  (excepting  that  of  the  virgin  mother's,  and,  it  may  be,  that  of  Mary  of 
Bethany)  no  heart  was  more  sorely  pierced  at  Calvary  than  the  heart  of  Mary 
of  Magdala. 

II.  Mary  at  the  empty  tomb. — How  beautifully  lifelike  is  the  story  of  her 
coming  thus  to  the  empty  tomb  !  It  is  the  very  picture  (in  little  homely  touches 
that  tell)  of  a  bewildered,  distracted  woman.  She  has  come  in  the  early  morning, 
and  found  the  door  stone  removed.  She  has  rushed  to  summon  Peter  and  John. 
They  have  come,  and  gone  in,  and  found  that  the  body  was  away ;  and  the  poor 
helpless  men  turn  homeward  broken-hearted.  She  cannot  leave  the  place.  She 
is  in  a  state  in  which  she  knows  not  what  she  does,  and,  in  some  interval  in  her 
bursts  of  grief,  she  bends  down  and  abstractedly  gazes  into  the  tomb.  The 
angels  speak  to  her,  and  her  mind  is  so  distraite,  so  bewildered  with  grief,  she 
answers  them  quite  simply  as  though  she  spoke  to  two  mortals  like  herself. 
Oh  !  the  tone  of  distracted  grief  that  rings  in  that  cry,  "  They  have  taken  away 
my  Lord,  and  I  know  not  where  they  have  laid  Him  ! "  She  turns  wildly  round 
while  she  says  it,  as  though  looking  everywhere  for  that  which  she  had  lost. 
The  Lord  Himself — within  a  few  feet  of  her — speaks,  echoes  the  angels'  ques- 
tion, "  Why  weepest  thou  ?  "  and  adds  the  still  more  home  question,  "  Whom 
seekest  thou  ?  "  And  still  Mary,  too  completely  grief -stricken  and  grief- bewildered 
to  recognise  the  supernatural,  answers  as  though  to  a  common  man — the  man 
in  charge  of  the  ground — surely  he  may  know  something.  "  Sir !  if  thou  hast 
borne  Him  hence  !  "  etc. 

III.  Habboni. — Who  has  not  often  tried  to  think  of  the  tone  in  which  that 
one  word  "  Mary  "  was  spoken  ?  True,  her  own  name  was  uttered,  but  there 
was  more  than  that.  We  all  know  how  tones  live  in  memory,  and  that  "  Mary  " 
probably  called  back  to  her  the  time  when  its  utterance  brought  her  spirit  out 
from  demon -darkness  into  light  and  peace.  "  Mary  " — its  utterance  brought  back 
later  days  of  holy  teaching.  It  brought  back  the  Teacher,  the  Saviour,  the 
Lord  Himself  !  and  then  Mary  flung  herself  at  the  Saviour's  feet  with  that  first 
glad  resurrection  cry  that  issued  from  the  Church  on  earth — "  Rabboni !  " 
Who  can  think  of  the  tone  in  which  that  was  uttered  ! — Rev.  Thomas  Hardy. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Ver.  1.  The  Lord's  day  a  memorial  of  the  why  the  Jews  should  observe  a  seventh  day ; 

Resurrection. — Well  might  that  day,  which  first,  because  in  reference  to  their  redemption 

carried  with  it  a  remembrance  of  that  great  the  number  of  seven  had  no  more  relation 

deliverance  from  the  Egyptian  servitude,  re-  than  any  other  number ;  secondly,  because 

sign  all  the  sanctity  and  solemnity  due  unto  the  reason   of  a    seventh    day  was  before 

it,  when  the  morning  once  appeared  upon  rendered  in  the  body  of  the  commandment 

which  a  far  greater  redemption  was  confirmed.  itself.    There  was,  therefore,  a  double  reason 

One  day  of  seven  was  set  apart  by  God  in  rendered  by  God  why  the  Jews  should  keep 

imitation  of  His  rest  upon  the  creation  of  that  Sabbath  which  they  did :  one  special  as 

the  world,  and  that  seventh  day,  which  was  to  a  seventh  day,  to  show  they  worshipped 

sanctified  to  the  Jews,  was  reckoned  in  rela-  that  God  who  was  the  creator  of  the  world  ; 

tion  to  their  deliverance  from  Egypt.    At  the  the  other  individual  as  to  that  seventh  day, 

second  delivery  of  the  law  we  find  this  par-  to  signify  their  deliverance  from  the  Egyptian 

ticular  cause  assigned,  "  Kemember  that  thou  bondage,  from  which  that  seventh  day  was 

wast  a  servant  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  that  dated.     Seeing,  then,  upon  the  resurrection 

the  Lord  thy  God  brought  thee  out  thence  of  our  Saviour  a  greater  deliverance  and  far 

through  a  mighty  hand  and  by  a  stretched-  more  plenteous    redemption    was    wrought 

out  arm  ;  therefore  the  Lord  thy  God  com-  than  that  of  Egypt,  and  therefore  a  greater 

mandeth  thee  to  keep  the   Sabbath  day."  observance  was  due  unto  it  than  to  that,  the 

Now  this  could  not  be  any  special  reason  individual  determination  of  the  day  did  pass 

560 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.  XX. 


upon  a  stronger  reason  to  another  day, 
always  to  be  repeated  by  a  seventhly  return 
upon  the  reference  to  the  creation.  As  there 
was  a  change  in  the  year  at  the  coming  out 
of  Egypt,  by  the  command  of  God, — "  This 
month,"  the  month  Abib,  shall  be  "  unto  you 
the  beginning  of  months,  it  shall  be  the  first 
month  of  the  year  to  you," — so  at  this  time 
of  a*  more  eminent  deliverance  a  change  was 
wrought  in  the  hebdomadal  or  weekly 
account,  and  the  first  day  is  made  the 
seventh,  or  the  seventh  after  that  first  is 
sanctified.  The  first  day,  because  on  that 
Christ  rose  from  the  dead ;  and  the  seventh 
day  from  that  first  for  ever,  because  He  who 
rose  upon  that  day  was  the  same  God  who 
created  the  world,  and  rested  on  the  seventh 
day :  "  For  by  Him  were  all  things  created, "  etc. 
(Col.  i.  16).  This  day  did  the  apostles  from  the 
beginning  most  religiously  observe  by  their 
meeting  together  for  holy  purposes  and  to  per- 
form religious  duties.  The  first  observation 
was  performed  providentially,  rather  by  the 
design  of  God  than  by  any  such  inclination  or 
intention  of  their  own  ;  for  "  the  same  day," 
saith  the  Evangelist,  that  is,  the  day  on  which 
Christ  rose  from  the  dead,  "at  evening, 
being  the  first  day  of  the  week,  the  disciples 
were  assembled  for  fear  of  the  Jews."  The 
second  observation  was  performed  voluntarily, 
for  "  after  eight  days  again  His  disciples  were 
within,  and  Thomas  with  them  " :  the  first 
day  of  the  week,  when  Christ  rose,  by  the 
Providence  of  God  the  disciples  were  to- 
gether, but  Thomas  was  absent ;  upon  the 
first  day  of  the  next  week  they  were  all  met 
together  again  in  expectation  of  our  Saviour, 
and  Thomas  with  them.  .  .  .  From  this 
resurrection  of  our  Saviour,  and  the  constant 
practice  of  the  apostles,  this  first  day  of  the 
week  came  to  have  the  name  of  the  M  Lord's 
day,"  and  is  so  called  by  St.  John,  who  says 
of  himself  in  the  Revelation,  "I  was  in  the 
spirit  on  the  Lord's  day."  And  thus  the 
observation  of  that  day  which  the  Jews  did 
sanctify  ceased,  and  was  buried  with  our 
Saviour ;  and  in  the  stead  of  it  the  religious 
observation  of  that  day  on  which  the  Son  of 
God  rose  from  the  dead,  by  the  constant 
practice  of  the  blessed  apostles,  was  trans- 
mitted to  the  Church  of  God,  and  so  con- 
tinued in  all  ages. — Bishop  Pearson. 

Vers.  1-8.  The  meaning  of  the  Resurrection 
for  Christ's  people. — The  risen  life  had  its 
clearly  defined  obligations  no  less  than  its 


glorious  privileges.    Those  who  had  in  very 
deed    shared    in    Christ's    resurrection-life 
should  seek  things  above  the  level  of  that 
tomb  which,  with  Him,  and  through  Him, 
they  had  left  behind.     A  consideration  this, 
sufficiently  practical,  and  peculiarly  suited 
to  the  Paschal  season.    Brighter  far  than  any 
other  days   in  the   Christian  year  for  the 
living  members  of  God's  redeemed  family 
are  the  forty  days  through  which  we  now 
are  passing.    At  the  thought  of  the  divine 
Saviour's  triumph  over  death,  the  Christian 
heart  swells  with  a  joy,  nay,  almost  with  a 
chastened  pride.    In  the  realm  of  spiritual 
life,  Easter  feelings  seem  to  correspond  to 
that  union    of    deep    thankfulness  and  of 
triumphant  exultation  with  which  an  Eng; 
lishman,  at  any  rate  of  the  last  generation, 
was  wont  to  hail  the  anniversary  of  Waterloo. 
"The   Lord  hath  risen  indeed,   and    hath 
appeared  unto  Simon  "  (Luke  xxiv.  34).    He 
has  risen,  and  we  Christians  have  a  share  in 
His  resurrection.     "  This  is  the  day,"  etc. 
(Ps.  cxviii.  24).  .  .  .  But  high  spirits  are  not 
without  their  attendant  dangers;   and  it  is 
never  so  necessary  to  insist  upon  the  practical 
aspects  of  a  truth,  as  when  we  are  being 
carried  along  by  the  full  tide  of  buoyant 
feeling  which  has  been  stimulated  by  dwell 
ing  on  it.     "Risen  with   Christ."    Observe 
the    relation  in  which  the   miraculous,  ex- 
ternal, historical  fact,  that  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord  rose  from  the  dead,  is  made  to  stand  to 
the  practical  spiritual  Christian  life.     In  the 
earliest  teaching  of  the  apostles  the  Resur- 
rection prominently  dominates  over  all  other 
Christian    doctrines.      That    which    chiefly 
gives  it  tbis  early  prominence  is  manifestly 
its   evidential    value.      With    the    apostles, 
especially  in  the  Pentecostal  period,  Christ's 
resurrection  is  the  palmary  proof,  the  invin- 
cible assertion  of  the  truth  of  Christianity. 
The  story  how  Jesus,  after  being  crucified 
and  buried,  rose  in  triumphant  life  from  His 
grave,  provokes,  as  Jewish  multitudes  listen 
to  it,  a  sense  of  wondering  awe.    It  rouses 
the  attention  even  of  the  most  indifferent; 
and  the  interest  thus  created  is  deepened  by 
reflection ;  in  the  event,  it  is  deepened  and 
consolidated  into  a  defined  conviction  of  the 
truth  of  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ.    The 
Resurrection  is  thus  the  usual,  the  effective 
weapon,  by  which  the  apostles  force  their 
way  through  the  dense  obstructive  blocks  of 
Jewish  or  heathen  thought  around  them. — 
H.  P.  Liddon. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  19—31. 

The  peace  of  the  Resurrection. — The  three  portions  (vers.  19-23;  24-29; 
30,  31)  into  which  this  passage  may  be  divided  are  not  easily  brought  into  unity 
in  treatment.  Hence  many  homilists  treat  only  of  one  or  other  of  the  divisions. 
The  joy  of  Christ's  resurrection,  the  path  from  doubt  to  faith,  the  office  of  the 

po  5G1 


chap.  xx.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


ministry,  its  source,  its  equipment,  its  mission,  are  the  chief  points  in  the 
passage.  When  catechumens  are  to  be  admitted  (or  confirmed)  the  reference 
to  young  believers,  their  profession,  their  solemn  vows,  their  work,  and  their 
hopes,  ought  to  be  especially  kept  in  view. 

Introduction. — (By  His  resurrection)  Jesus  proved  Himself  to  be  victor  over 
sin,  death,  and  the  evil  one.  The  Risen  One  has  gained  this  victory  for  us  ; 
therefore  those  who  are  His  should  be  sharers  in  the  peace  won  by  Him, 'and 
joyful  in  their  faith.  Thus  the  Risen  One,  even  on  the  day  of  His  resurrection, 
appeared  to  His  followers  in  order  to  make  them  partakers  of  this  peace.  There 
is  something  especially  blessed  in  this  resurrection  peace ;  and  to-day  we  speak 
concerning  it  in  order  to  quicken  and  increase  our  desires  after  it.  In  regard  to 
this  peace  as  the  fruit  of  Christ's  resurrection  we  see — 

I.  That  it  cannot  be  found  by  our  own  reason. — 1.  Thomas  did  not  believe 
the  tidings  of  the  Resurrection.  He  desired  to  see  first  in  order  to  believe,  and 
therefore  he  missed  the  Easter  message  of  peace.  2.  Our  natural  reason  seeks 
after  proof  from  the  senses  before  it  is  convinced.  It  shuts  itself  out  from 
the  fellowship  of  the  faithful;  the  heart  remains  empty  in  its  unrest  and 
dejection. 

II.  How  it  is  accorded  by  the  Lord  Jesus. — 1.  He  conveyed  it  to  the 
assembled  disciples  with  His  greeting.  He  ordained  them  to  His  ministry,  by 
which  His  peace  would  be  spread  abroad.  He  pursued  Thomas  with  com- 
passionate love,  and  aided  him  to  arrive  at  the  acknowledgment  of  His  divinity. 
2.  The  ministry  of  the  gospel  proclaims  in  Christ's  stead  the  peace  of  the  Risen 
One,  imparts  it  to  us  in  proclaiming  forgiveness,  follows  our  erring  souls,  seeks 
to  persuade  them  and  to  lead  them  to  that  faith  which  will  lay  hold  of  Jesus' 
peace. 

III.  It  is  accompanied  by  a  true  (spiritual)  life. — 1.  Thomas  confessed  Jesus 
as  Lord  and  God,  indeed  as  his  Lord  and  God,  whose  possession  he  would 
forthwith  be,  and  to  whom  he  looked  for  his  true  life.  2.  The  heart  which  has 
found  true  peace  prevails  over  reason.  Faith  grows  by  means  of  the  Word. 
In  believing  the  life  of  Christ  overflows  within  us,  which  blesses  us  for  time  and 
for  eternity. — J.  L.  Sommer. 

Vers.  19-21.  The  joy  of  the  Resurrection. — It  was  the  close  of  the  Resurrection 
day,  a  day  of  gladness  for  humanity.  But  that  gladness  had  as  yet  found 
entrance  into  few  hearts  only — Mary  Magdalene  and  her  sisters  in  sorrow,  John 
the  beloved  disciple,  and  Simon  (1  Cor.  xv.  5),  and  the  two  now  hastening  from 
Emmaus  through  the  gathering  gloom  to  tell  their  joyful  news  to  those  whom 
they  had  left  sorrowing  (Luke  xxiv.  33).  These  two  have  just  reached  Jerusalem, 
and  entered  the  house  where  the  disciples  had  assembled  within  locked  doors, 
for  fear  of  the  Jews ;  and  ere  they  told  their  news  were  met  with  the  words, 
"  The  Lord  is  risen  indeed,"  etc.  (Luke  xxiv.  24).  As  they  sit  pondering  on  these 
things — some  doubting,  some  half -persuaded,  some  believing,  but  all  sorrowful 
and  depressed,  remembering  how  they  had  denied  the  Lord,  and  all  thinking  with 
troubled  hearts  of  what  might  soon  befall  them — the  Lord  Himself  suddenly 
stands  in  their  midst.  The  bolted  doors  could  not  bar  His  entrance,  and  at  first 
the  disciples  are  afraid  (Luke  xxiv.  37  :  see  Matt.  xiv.  26).  This  Gospel  gives 
the  fullest  account  of  what  Jesus'  appearance  brought  to  the  disciples. 

I.  It  brought  them  peace. — 1.  This  peace  they  needed.  Without  were  trouble 
and  tribulation,  within  were  fears.  The  Lord's  foes  were  the  foes  of  His 
disciples.  2.  There  was  little  peace  in  their  souls.  The  cross  and  shame  had 
shattered  their  hopes,  and  were  not  yet  become  the  symbol  of  victory  and  glory 
to  them.  3.  Then,  even  though  strange  rumours  were  abroad  as  to  Christ's 
having  risen,  and  some  of  those  present  asserted  the  truth  of  this  from  their 

562 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.  chap.  xx. 


own  personal  knowledge,  the  truth  does  not  seem  to  have  met  with  anything 
like  full  credence,  whilst  in  the  hearts  of  all  remained  the  bitter  thought  of 
having  left  their  Lord  in  His  hour  of  need.  4.  Therefore  the  Lord  came  to 
them  from  the  well-won  fight  to  confer  on  them  the  firstfruits  of  His  conquest, 
and  laise  them  from  their  despondency  and  fear.  Thus  His  first  greeting  recalls 
to  their  minds  one  of  His  last  blessed  promises  (xiv.  27).  5.  And  it  is  thus  the 
Redeemer  brings  peace  to  all  waiting  hearts.  Those  to  whom  the  risen  Christ 
has  not  been  revealed  have  "  fightings  without  and  fears  within."  The  fear  of 
death  and  eternity,  the  unrest  of  conscience,  the  feeling  of  degradation  caused 
by  sin,  all  cease  when  through  the  barriers  and  bolts  that  close  up  our  hearts 
Christ  comes  to  reveal  Himself  in  His  risen  life,  and  brings  with  Him  His  peace. 
II.  It  brought  them  joy. — 1.  When  Jesus  appeared  among  the  disciples  in 
order  to  allay  their  fears  "  He  showed  them  His  hands  and  His  side"  (ver.  20  : 
comp.  Luke  xxiv.  39),  as  if  He  had  said  to  them,  "  See  in  these  wounds  what  I  have 
endured  for  you:  why,  then,  should  you  fear?"  2.  Then  we  read  that  "the 
disciples  were  glad,"  etc.  Well  might  they  be  glad  !  The  disappointed  hopes, 
gloomy  doubts  and  forebodings  darkened  their  spiritual  life.  Spiritually,  and  so 
far  as  hope  was  concerned,  they  were  like  the  dead  host  that  Ezekiel  saw  in 
vision  on  the  battle-plain,  when  bone  had  come  to  bone,  etc.,  but  the  men  lay 
prone  without  the  breath  of  life  and  until  the  word  of  life  was  spoken.  But 
among  those  spiritually  torpid  disciples  the  Life  Himself  now  appeared,  and  as 
they  felt  the  quickening  influence  of  His  presence,  the  darkness,  the  clouds  and 
mists  of  doubt  and  fear  began  to  disperse,  and  as  the  new  day  of  hope  arose  upon 
them,  no  wonder  they  were  glad.  3.  They  were  glad  to  see  their  Lord  again,  to 
hear  His  voice,  to  rejoice  in  His  presence.  They  rejoiced,  for  now  the  mystery 
of  the  cross  and  the  grave  would  be  becoming  clear  to  them ;  the  promise  of  His 
resurrection  and  all  it  involved  would  now  be  recalled  vividly.  The  conviction 
that  He  was  indeed  the  Messiah,  and  that  the  things  which  He  suffered,  and 
which  had  almost  bereft  them  of  faith  and  hope,  "  He  ought  to  have  suffered 
and  to  enter  into  His  glory  "  (Luke  xxiv.  26),  would  come  home  to  them  with 
power,  dispelling  and  scattering  doubt  and  fear.  4.  And  they  would  be  glad 
also  that,  in  spite  of  their  faithlessness  in  forsaking  Him  in  the  garden,  and  their 
want  of  trust  in  His  teaching,  their  forgetfulness  of  His  mighty  works,  He  had 
not  forsaken  them — that  He  appeared  to  them  so  graciously,  that  His  first 
greeting  was  one  of  peace.  5.  And  that  gladness  which  Jesus  brought  to  His 
disciples  was  not  confined  to  them  nor  to  the  day  of  His  resurrection.  He  brings 
not  only  peace  but  gladness  into  the  hearts  into  which  He  enters.  Because  His 
entrance  means  forgiveness  of  the  sinful,  unbelieving  past,  it  brings  comfort 
to  troubled  souls;  it  gives  assurance  that  the  promises  of  Christ  are  yea  and 
amen ;  it  dispels  the  darkness  that  hitherto,  through  sin,  has  shut  out  the  light 
of  God's  countenance ;  and  in  the  risen  Christ,  bearing  the  marks  of  His  soul- 
travail,  it  makes  men  rejoice  in  the  revelation  of  infinite,  eternal  love. 

Vers.  19-23.  The  Risen  One  for  the  first  time  among  His  disciples. — The 
whole  life  of  the  Christian  should  be  one  of  joy  in  the  Resurrection.  (This  idea 
seems  to  meet  us  in  our  Gospel,  in  that  it  shows  us  the  Risen  One  among  His 
followers.)     Our  gaze  is  directed  to — 

I.  The  closed  doors  through  which  He  entered. — All  the  witnesses,  whose 
words  agreed  with  so  many  clear  predictions,  could  not  confirm  and  make  joyful 
the  hearts  of  the  disciples.  The  timorous  little  company  sat  anxiously  behind 
closed  doors.  Our  hearts  also  are  often  foolish  and  dejected,  for  which  cause  the 
Lord  must  often  come  unto  us  too  through  closed  doors.  Evil  warders  refuse 
Him  entrance  to  us  :  the  fear,  that  He  may  blame  in  place  of  comforting  us ;  the 
doubt,  that  He  cannot  heal  our  sorrows ;  shamefacedness,  lest  He  may  find  us  all 

563 


chap.  xx.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


too  unclean  ;  anxiety,  lest  He  should  demand  that  which  our  heart  will  not  let 
go ;  hesitancy,  in  view  of  what  the  world  would  say  were  He  to  come  in  unto  us. 
Through  closed  doors  the  Lord  must  come  to  us,  and  only  then  will  it  be 
Eastertide  in  our  souls. 

II.  The  greeting  He  gave  to  the  disciples. — When  the  Risen  One  stepped 
into  the  circle  of  the  disciples  He  did  not  at  first  reprove  them,  but  absolved 
them  and  greeted  them  with  unspeakable  graciousness,  "  Peace  be  with  you  !  " 
Thereby  He  called  to  their  minds  the  fulfilment  of  His  promises  (xiv.  27, 
xvi.  33),  and  represented  Himself  as  the  Prince  of  Peace  who  had  effected 
complete  reconciliation.  Thereby  also  He  offers  to  each  one  who  will  have  it 
the  complete  salvation  won  on  the  cross,  the  fulness  of  His  grace. 

III.  The  marks  of  the  wounds  which  He  showed  them. — The  Lord  showed 
them  His  hands  and  His  side,  and  in  these  they  beheld  marks  of  love,  marks  of 
victory,  marks  of  peace. 

IV.  The  ordination  that  He  imparted  to  them. — The  Lord  imparted  that 
ordination  to  His  apostles,  upon  which  afterward  at  the  Ascension  followed  their 
introduction  to  the  office  of  the  ministry  (comp.  Matt,  xxviii.  18-20).  The  act 
of  ordination  has  three  steps  :  their  sending  forth  ("  As  the  Father  hath  sent  Me, 
even  so  send  I  you  ") ;  their  equipment  for  the  office  ("  He  breathed  on  them,  and 
said,  Receive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost ") ;  their  authority  ("  Whose  soever  sins  ye  remit," 
etc.,  ver.  23).  This  is  an  authority  and  prerogative,  but  also  a  responsibility, 
such  as  no  monarch  possesses,  yet  which  is  imparted,  and  will  continue  to  be, 
to  all  servants  of  the  divine  Word. — Appuhn,  in  J.  L.  Sommer. 

Ver.  20.  Faith's  view  of  Christ. — When  the  Lord  of  glory  left  His  Father's 
bosom  and  came  into  this  world  we  are  sure  it  was  for  a  purpose  suited  to 
His  divine  nature.  Christ  came  to  make  men  glad.  It  was  said  of  Him,  "  The 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  God  is  upon  Me,  because  the  Lord  hath  appointed  Me  to  preach 
good  tidings  unto  the  meek,"  etc.  (Isa.  lxi.  1). 

I.  What  it  was  not  that  made  the  disciples  glad. — 1.  It  was  not  riches. 
They  were  all  poor  fishers  :  none  of  them  had  nets  of  their  own.  Like  their 
Lord,  they  were  poor.  One  of  them  once  said,  "  Lord,  I  will  follow  Thee, 
whithersoever  Thou  goest."  Jesus  said,  "  The  foxes  have  holes,  and  the  birds  of 
the  air  have  nests  ;  but  the  Son  of  man  hath  nowhere  to  lay  His  head."  When 
Jesus  rose  again  He  did  not  give  His  disciples  riches.  2.  It  was  not  friends  that 
made  the  disciples  glad.  3.  Their  joy  did  not  proceed  from  their  own  righteousness. 
Some  have  all  their  joy  from  looking  at  themselves.  The  disciples  did  not  do 
this.  Ah,  no  !  What  would  they  have  seen  had  they  done  so  ?  They  had  once 
known  the  Lord ;  but  they  had  all  forsaken  Him  in  His  sufferings ;  one  of  them 
had  denied  Him  :  they  were  cast  down ;  they  did  not  know  what  to  do  \  but  they 
were  glad  when  they  saw  the  Lord.  4.  The  disciples'  joy  did  not  flow  from  a 
sight  of  Christ  with  the  bodily  eyes.  Ah  !  some  of  you  may  think,  "  Oh,  if  I 
had  been  there,  I  would  have  been  glad  " ;  but  it  was  not  seeing  Him  with  the 
bodily  eye  that  made  them  glad,  for  two  reasons.  First  of  all,  because  many 
saw  Him,  and  only  wagged  the  head  and  spat  upon  Him.  Second  reason  :  It  was 
not  by  seeing  Christ  with  the  bodily  eye,  for  many  have  felt  the  same  joy  that 
the  disciples  did  who  never  saw  Christ  with  the  bodily  eye.  5.  The  disciples1  joy 
did  not  proceed  from  seeing  their  Master  again.  The  joy  they  had  flowed  from 
looking  at  His  hands  and  side. 

II.  What  it  was  that  made  the  disciples  glad. — 1.  It  was  the  sense  they  had 
got  that  His  work  was  finished.  When  they  saw  His  hands  and  His  side,  they 
saw  His  work  was  all  completed.  2.  The  disciples  were  glad,  for  they  saw  Jesus 
was  their  living  Head.  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also."  "  In  the  world  ye 
shall  have  tribulation  ;  but,  be  of  good  cheer,  I  have  overcome  the  world,"     The 

564 


M0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.  chap.  XX. 


disciples  were  no  doubt  sad — they  felt  a  load  of  guilt;  but  now  they  would 
rejoice,  for  they  had  got  a  sight  of  Him  as  an  ever-living  Saviour. 

III.  You  may  learn  from  this  if  you  are  disciples. — 1.  What  does  your  joy 
flow  from  ?  Does  it  flow  from  riches,  from  friends  ?  The  disciples'  joy  pro- 
ceeded from  a  spiritual  sight  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  2.  Seek  a  sight  of  Jesus.  Oh  ! 
seek  this  joy — a  joy  that  will  not  pass  away.  3.  To  you  that  are  seeking  Christ 
night  and  day.  Oh  !  how  glad  you  will  be  when  you  find  the  Lord  !  Look 
away  from  all  to  Jesus.  Oh  !  look  to  Him  as  a  crucified,  risen  Saviour.  4.  To 
you  that  once  had  this  joy,  but  have  backslidden  and  lost  it.  Ah  !  you  must 
look  again  to  Jesus.  Learn,  all  of  you,  the  folly  of  self -righteousness.  Suppose 
the  disciples  had  looked  to  themselves,  what  would  they  have  seen  ?  One  had 
denied,  all  of  them  had  forsaken  Him  in  His  sufferings ;  but  the  disciples  looked 
only  to  Jesus,  "  Then  were  the  disciples  glad  when  they  saw  the  Lord."  Look, 
then,  to  Jesus,  and  you  will  have  true  peace,  true  joy,  fulness  of  joy — joy  that 
the  world  cannot  give  nor  take  away.  You  that  are  Christ's  "  Rejoice  in  the  Lord 
always,  and  again  I  say,  Rejoice." — McCheyne. 

Vers.  21-23.  A  divine  mission  and  a  divine  power. — Not  only  did  Christ 
reassure  His  disciples,  and  make  them  glad  by  His  greeting  and  presence  at  the 
close  of  the  Day  of  Resurrection  ;  He  gave  them  a  mission  which  would  further 
increase  their  joy,  and  fill  their  hearts  with  grateful  love.  For  it  would  show 
them  that  they  were  still  to  be  privileged  to  remain  in  His  service  after  all  that 
had  come  and  gone  during  the  past  few  days. 

I.  The  mission  on  which  the  disciples  were  to  be  sent. — 1.  This  commission 
Christ  gave  them  was  in  reality  a  proof  of  their  reinstatement  into  the  apostolic 
office — the  assurance  that  it  was  still  theirs,  though  they  had  brought  grievous 
shame  on  it  by  their  want  of  faith  and  fortitude.  2.  It  was  a  mission  analogous  to 
that  on  which  He  Himself  had  come  to  the  world  (xvii.  18).  He  had  been  sent  into 
the  world  to  redeem  it  through  His  life  and  works,  His  truth  and  His  atoning 
death.  But  now,  though  He  was  ascending  to  His  Father,  that  work  was  not 
to  cease  ;  and  its  instruments  for  the  beginning  of  it  were  before  Him.  Already 
with  awakening  faith  and  hope,  with  hearts  beating  with  a  new  gladsome  energy, 
they  were  being  made  fit  for  that  work,  and  to  be  the  precursors  of  a  mighty 
army  of  labourers  in  the  world's  harvest  fields,  who  should  reap  and  gather  fruit 
unto  life  eternal  (iv.  36,  37).  3.  But  this  work  was  all  dependent  on  Christ's 
work.  Had  He  not  laboured  and  travailed  the  reaping  would  have  been  one  of 
wrath  only,  and  not  of  joy.  And  although  Christ's  work  is  far  above  that  of 
the  apostles,  and  members  of  the  Christian  Church  to-day,  yet  it  had,  it  has,  the 
same  end,  the  glory  of  God  in  the  redemption  of  men.  This  is  the  mission 
confided  to  the  whole  Christian  Church.  But  how  remiss  many  of  its  members 
are  !  They  pray,  "  Thy  kingdom  come,"  yet  stand  coldly  looking  on  whilst 
others  labour  in  the  harvest  field,  and  others  still  bring  help  and  sustenance  to 
the  actual  labourers.  When  will  all  Christians  rise  to  a  sense  of  their  lofty 
duty  and  heavenly  calling  ? 

II.  Power  for  the  exercise  of  their  high  office  was  then  given  by  the  Lord  to 
His  apostles  (ver.  22). — 1.  It  was  as  when  the  word  of  power  in  prophetic  vision 
was  spoken  (Ezek.  xxxvii.  9).  Those  who  were  spiritually  meet,  etc.,  were 
quickened  for  service.  2.  And  it  was  not  a  promise  merely  of  what  should 
follow  at  Pentecost ;  it  was  a  real  gift,  though  not  the  full  outpouring  of  the 
Spirit.  It  was,  as  it  were,  a  seal  of  their  new  call  to  the  apostolic  office,  and  an 
earnest  of  the  fuller,  richer  outpouring  yet  to  follow,  when  Jesus  had  ascended 
to  the  Father's  right  hand.  But  ere  that  it  was  needful  that  a  special  gift 
should  be  imparted,  so  that  in  the  interval  the  feeble  Church  might  be 
strengthened  to  cohere  and  endure.     And  by  breathing  on  them   now,  and 

565 


chap.  xx.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


giving  them  an  effusion  of  the  Spirit,  Christ  associated  them  with  Himself  in 
His  life  as  the  Risen  One.  3.  And  it  must  be  remembered  that  this  divine 
"  breathing  "  of  the  Spirit  was  not  conferred  on  apostles  alone  ;  others  were 
present.  It  is  therefore  typical  and  prophetic  of  the  fuller  outpouring  on 
Pentecost  "proceeding  from  the  Father  and  the  Son."  And  this  incident 
teaches  that  it  is  not  intellect,  or  knowledge  of  tongues,  or  eloquence  that 
makes  a  man  an  apostle,  a  missionary,  one  sent.  It  is  now,  as  then,  the  gift  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  not  baptism  or  Church  membership  or  knowledge  of 
Scripture  that  makes  men  and  women  true  disciples  of  Christ.  Now,  as  of  old, 
it  is  a  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Is  it  the  lack  of  this  gift  that  makes  the  Church 
so  weak,  and  hinders  the  love  for  and  the  advance  of  the  kingdom  of  God  ? 

III.  The  power  to  remit  and  retain  sins  was  given  to  the  apostles  with  the 
divine  office  and  gift. — 1.  This  power,  promised  before  (Matt.  xvi.  19,  xviii.  18), 
was  now  conferred  not  on  the  apostles  individually,  or  as  apostles  only  (for  others 
were  present — Luke  xxiv.  33),  but  on  those  there  assembled  as  representing  the 
whole  Church.  2.  "  Only  he  who  believes  in  the  Risen  One,  who  seeks  and  finds 
forgiveness  on  the  way  of  true  repentance  and  genuine  faith,  is  in  a  position  to 
pass  a  just  sentence,  and  to  use  aright  the  keys  of  the  divine  kingdom.  Such  a 
one  will  testify  with  unwavering  freedom  against  sin  wherever  and  whenever  he 
may  find  it,  and  shut  it  out  with  God's  word  and  in  His  name.  But  yet  with 
tireless  patience  will  he  seek  to  erect  the  broken  reed  and  to  warn  the  erring,  and 
entreat,  invite,  entice,  so  that  they,  coming  in  repentance  and  faith,  may  have 
the  kingdom  opened  to  them.  Both  are  necessary — the  retaining  as  well  as  the 
remission.  Where  there  is  no  power  to  retain,  neither  is  there  power  to  declare 
remission.  It  is  indeed  an  act  of  divine  love  to  keep  back  the  impenitent  and 
openly  sinful  from  holy  things.  .  .  .  And  there  need  be  no  fear  of  a  misuse  of 
this  power  when  the  Holy  Spirit  dwells  in  the  Church  and  its  ministers" 
(F.  Arndt).  3.  This  power  is  given  to  the  whole  Church ;  but  as  all  the  members 
cannot  exercise  it,  it  is  committed  to  the  regularly  appointed  servants  of  the 
Church.  They  exercise  it  for  the  community.  But  if  the  spiritual  life  of  the 
community  be  low  and  the  servants'  hands  be  not  upheld  by  prayer,  then  this 
power  may  fall  into  disuse,  and  the  Church  be  corrupted  and  weakened.  But 
in  that  case,  though  not  openly,  yet  really,  the  "  binding  and  loosing  w  are  still 
exercised  from  the  heavenly  throne. 

Vers.  24-30.  Thomas. — I.  The  character  of  Thomas. — In  the  very  few  words 
the  gospel  narrative  has  given  us  concerning  this  man,  how  clearly  it  has  set  his 
character  before  us !  A  plain-sailing,  common-sense,  practical,  matter-of-fact 
man,  with  no  idea  of  grasping  anything  supernatural ;  but  loving — devotedly 
and  bravely — Jesns  as  a  Teacher,  a  Master,  a  Man.  A  few  weeks  before  this, 
when  he  thought  his  Master  was  madly  rushing  to  His  death  at  the  hands  of  the 
priests  and  Jewish  mob,  "Let  us  go  with  Him  and  defend  Him,"  cried  this 
true-hearted  follower,  "  and  if  we  cannot  save  Him,  let  us  die  with  Him  ! " 
And  when  what  he  had  feared  at  length  happened,  and  his  Master  died  in  the 
hands  of  His  enemies,  no  heart  more  truly  than  that  of  Thomas  mourned  his 
murdered  Lord.  And  no  heart  more  sorely  mourned  for  the  Master's  cause, 
which  he  looked  on  as  lost  and  gone  for  ever. 

II.  The  unbelief  of  the  disciple. — The  disciples  told  him  of  the  Master 
risen — the  Master  appearing  to  them,  speaking  to  them.  Thomas  sadly  shook 
his  head.  No,  no  !  that  was  something  he  could  not  believe  !  That  a  man, 
crucified  and  buried,  should  come  alive  and  rise  !  It  was  some  wild  delusion  of 
theirs  !  He  did  not  care  to  join  them  in  their  meetings.  He  went  about  alone, 
cheerless,  hopeless,  in  melancholy  musings,  thinking  of  Him  whom  he  had 
loved  so  dearly,  gone  from  his  sight  for  ever.     And  the  kingdom  he  had  hoped 

566 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  xx. 


his  Lord  was  to  establish  !  that  had  perished  with  Him  !  Thomas  was  no 
infidel,  no  traitor-,  no  turncoat,  no  faithless  forsaking  disciple.  His  faith  in  his 
Lord  was  strong  as  ever.  His  love  to  the  memory  of  his  Lord  was  true  as  ever. 
But  Thomas  could  not,  would  not,  believe  anything  except  it  was  attested  to 
him  on  the  evidence  of  his  senses.  And  such  was  his  answer  when  they  told 
him  they  had  seen  their  Lord.  Only  if  that  testimony  were  given  him  which 
his  mind  demanded  as  necessary  would  he  believe  that  his  Lord  had  risen. 

III.  The  Redeemer's  dealing  with  Thomas,  and  the  disciple's  confession. — 
How  well  the  Saviour  knew  all  His  followers  in  all  their  varying  shades  of 
character — in  all  their  strength  and  all  their  weakness,  in  all  their  individual 
peculiarities  !  And  how  considerately  and  tenderly  He  dealt  with  each  !  How 
gently  condescending  was  He  with  the  special  weakness  of  this  one  man  !  Had 
they  told  Jesus,  think  you,  those  words,  that  bold  demand  of  Thomas  1  Nay  ! 
we  may  be  very  sure  Jesus  needed  not  to  be  told.  Another  "  first  day  of  the 
week  "  came  round ;  and  they  met  again,  "  Thomas  with  them."  No  door  was 
opened.  No  one  saw  His  entrance.  But  suddenly  the  risen  Lord  was  there  ! 
To  all  in  the  room  there  His  "  peace  "  was  spoken ;  and  then  He  turned  to 
Thomas.  The  test  the  disciple  had  demanded  was  before  him  now,  was  within 
his  reach.  But  the  Bible  does  not  tell  us  that  Thomas  applied  the  test.  There 
is  a  marked  silence  as  to  that,  which  one  would  imagine  leads  most  readers  to 
understand  that  the  spear-wound  in  the  side  and  the  nail-prints  on  feet  and 
hands  were  not  needed  now,  when  Thomas  looked  on  the  face  he  knew  so  well, 
and  heard  the  voice-tones  that  thrilled  his  very  heart.  He  was  practical  and 
common-sense,  and  what  not ;  and  he  needed,  poor  man,  the  very  plainest  proof. 
But  he  had  it.  His  living  Lord  was  before  him  in  that  room,  looking  on  him, 
speaking  to  him.  And  Thomas  made  the  confession  of  his  faith  in  two  words — 
of  wondrous  meaning.  "  My  Lord  S  "  Yes ;  all  doubt  had  vanished,  and  he 
knew  that  Jesus,  the  Lord,  the  Master  he  had  loved  and  followed,  was  before 
him.  And  <;  my  God  "  he  added — for  his  faith,  once  set  in  motion,  bounded 
high  into  the  world  unseen ;  and  he  owned  his  earthly  Lord  as  more,  far  more — 
almighty,  the  Son  of  God. 

IV.  The  blessedness  of  faith. — The  Saviour  said  that  day  to  Thomas  some- 
thing which  concerns  us.  We  "  have  not  seen."  But  oh,  let  us  seek  by  His 
grace  to  be  of  those  who  "  yet  have  believed."  And  if  so,  then  we  are — for  the 
Lord  said  it  that  day — "  blessed." 

"  We  stood  not  by  the  empty  tomb 
Where  late  Thy  sacred  body  lay, 
Nor  sat  within  that  upper  room, 

Nor  met  Thee  in  the  open  way ; 
But  we  believe  that  angels  said, 
*  Why  seek  the  living  with  the  dead  ? ' " 

— Rev.  Thomas  Hardy. 

Ver.  29.  The  blessedness  of  those  who  have  not  seen,  yet  believe. — The  presence 
of  Thomas  among  the  disciples  and  the  record  of  his  experience  should  teach  the 
Church  to  be  patient  in  dealing  with  doubt  and  unbelief.  Here  was  one  who 
was  evidently  an  attached  follower  of  the  Saviour,  who  had  been  drawn  to  Jesus 
by  the  magnetism  of  love,  but  whose  materialistic  and  pessimistic  cast  of  mind, 
which  had  already  more  tnan  once  shown  itself  (xi.  16,  xiv.  5),  led  at  last  after 
the  Crucifixion  to  sullen  and  even  bitter  despair  and  unbelief.  Yet,  in  the  end, 
of  all  the  disciples  it  was  he  who  gave  utterance  to  the  highest  expression  of 
faith  in  our  Lord's  divinity. 

I.  The  proximate  cause  of  the  unbelief  of  Thomas. — 1.  The  remark  in  ver.  24 
appears  to  intimate  that  there  was  a  certain  amount  of  blame  in  the  absence 

567 


CttAK  Xx.         EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOH& 


of  Thomas.  This  was  a  result  of  that  weak  side  of  his  character  which  he  had 
not  yet  learned  to  distrust :  that  trust  in  his  own  judgment,  the  refusal  to  see  or 
believe  nothing  but  what  came  within  his  limited  ken.  He  could  see  nothing 
but  the  outward  aspect  of  the  cross — the  awful  tragedy  which  had  shattered 
his  hopes,  and  filled  him  with  gloomy  despair.  2.  All  the  words  of  Jesus  as  to 
what  was  to  come  after  the  death  which  He  foretold  were  either  forgotten  by 
Thomas  or  relegated  to  the  region  of  idle  dreams.  The  scene  at  the  grave  of 
Lazarus  was  forgotten.  If  he  did  remember  it,  it  might  only  be  to  put  aside 
the  thought.  A  living  Christ  might  do  such  mighty  works ;  but  One  who  was 
crucified,  dead,  buried — the  dream  for  Thomas  was  over.  It  had  been  pleasant 
whilst  it  lasted ;  but  now  had  come  the  awful  awakening,  and  with  it  bitter 
grief,  unbelief,  despair.  3.  Thus  he  had  refrained  from  meeting  with  his  fellow- 
disciples.  Of  what  use  were  it  to  dwell  on  past  hopes,  and  thus  increase  the 
burden  of  present  sorrow  %  What  comfort  could  they  bring  each  other  %  Better 
with  set  face  and  resolved  heart  to  forget  the  past,  and  front  what  they  had  to 
meet  in  the  hopeless  future.  And  when  the  disciples  met  him  and  told  of  the 
risen  Eedeemer,  not  only  did  the  story  seem  to  him,  as  at  first  it  appeared  to 
the  others,  "an  idle  tale"  (Luke  xxiv.  11),  but  there  appears  to  be  a  ring  of 
hardness  in  his  voice  as  he  lays  down  the  only  conditions  on  which  he  will  believe. 
There  is  a  touch  of  impatience  in  his  words,  as  if  he  had  said,  You  say  you  saw 
the  wound  in  His  side,  etc. ;  you  will  not  find  me  so  easily  convinced.  "  Except 
I  shall  .  .  .  put  my  finger,"  etc.  And  thus  for  the  time  at  least  he  remained, 
proud  perhaps  of  his  superior  insight  and  rationality. 

II.  The  blessedness  of  faith. — 1.  It  is  possible  that  before  Thomas  became  a 
disciple  he  had  been  influenced  to  some  extent  by  that  philosophical  rationalism 
prevalent  at  the  time,  which  found  its  chief  expression  among  the  Jews  in  the 
sect  of  the  Sadducees.  A  mind  of  his  caste  could  hardly  fail  to  have  been  troubled 
by  the  new  thought  of  the  time.  2.  The  words  of  the  disciples  would  seem, 
however,  to  have  awakened  a  glimmer  of  hope  in  his  darkened  soul.  And  when 
after  eight  days  had  passed  Jesus  again  appeared  among  the  disciples,  Thomas 
was  one  of  the  company.  The  Lord  offered  him  the  proof  he  demanded.  But  to 
see  was  enough  for  him.  At  once  his  despair  and  unbelief  were  swept  away,  and 
in  a  transport  of  joy  and  adoration  he  testified  to  the  foolishness  of  his  unbelief, 
and  made  full  confession  of  the  Godhead  of  the  risen  Lord.  3.  Whilst  in  the 
words  of  Jesus  in  ver.  29  there  is  certainly  a  gentle  reproof  of  His  disciple's  faith- 
lessness, and  consequently  of  all  similar  unbelief  at  all  times,  there  is  yet  more 
of  comfort  and  joy  for  faithful  disciples  who  have  not  seen  and  yet  believe. 
4.  Our  Lord  does  not  mean  here  to  inculcate  a  blind  unthinking  faith,  or  require 
that  men  should  not  seek  to  be  able  to  give  a  reason  for  the  faith  that  is  in 
them.  But  Thomas,  confident  in  his  own  rationalistic  way  of  thinking,  refused 
to  accept  the  testimony  of  the  others,  because  it  did  not  coincide  with  what 
seemed  to  him  must  be  the  truth.  His  mind,  like  that  of  many,  was 
keenly  alive  to  the  things  of  sense  and  time,  but  contracted  in  its  outlook  on 
spiritual  realities.  In  the  words  of  Christ,  in  the  testimony  of  others,  he  had 
sufficient  proof  of  the  Lord's  resurrection,  and  yet  he  refused  to  look  at  the 
evidence.  5.  Mere  sight,  sure  evidence,  may  not  lead  to  faith.  Many  of  our 
Lord's  contemporaries  saw  Christ,  heard  His  teaching,  beheld  His  mighty  works, 
and  yet  believed  not.  Their  lot  was  not  blessedness,  but  woe  (Matt.  xi.  20-24, 
xxiii.  13).  6.  The  blessedness  of  those  who  believe,  although  they  do  not  see, 
consists  in  the  possession  of  the  spiritual  mind  which  discerns  spiritual  things 
(iii.  5,  6,  12;  Rom.  viii.  6).  This  lifts  them  above  the  tyranny  of  the 
seen  and  temporal,  which  by  their  continual  fluctuation  cause  unrest  in  the 
spiritual  life,  and  often  deprive  the  soul  of  comfort  and  peace.  Those  who  through 
faith  have  learned  to  rest  on  Him  who  is  the  same  yesterday,  etc.  (Heb.  xiii,  8), 

568 


MOMltETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  XX. 


have  an  immovable  foundation  on  which  to  build  life's  activity  (1  Cor.  iii.  12). 
In  all  this  there  is  blessedness.  7.  And  all  may  have  this  blessedness.  All 
could  not  see  Christ,  although  certainly  it  was  a  source  of  joy  to  the  disciples  to 
have  done  so.  But  even  for  them  it  was  expedient  that  He  should  go  away 
(xvi.  7).  The  disciples  saw  Him,  and  their  testimony,  confirmed  by  arduous 
labour,  and  in  most  cases  by  martyrdom,  should  be  sufficient  to  convince.  And 
all  may  have  the  spiritual  gifts  Christ  bestows  from  His  throne ;  being  born 
from  above,  and  receiving  that  influence  of  the  Spirit  which  began  at  Pentecost, 
they  may  have  the  witness  in  themselves  and  the  blessedness  of  those  who  have 
not  seen,  etc. 

Vers.  19-29.  What  we  may  learn  from  the  intercourse  of  Jesus  with  His  disciples 
after  the  Resurrection. — I.  How  gentle  was  Jesus  with  His  disciples. — True  He 
"  upbraided  them  with  their  unbelief,"  etc.  (Mark  xvi.  14).  But  whilst  He  re- 
proves, it  is  for  their  profit.  This  Gospel  tells  of  His  tenderness  and  love — His 
reassuring  greeting,  His  blessed  gift,  etc.  It  specially  records  His  gentle  deal- 
ing with  Thomas,  and  thus  gives  a  pattern  to  the  Church  in  all  time  as  to  the 
manner  in  which  troubled,  doubting  disciples  should  be  dealt  with. 

II.  The  materialistic  spirit  which  refuses  credence  to  what  cannot  be  tested, 
etc.,  by  the  senses,  is  to  be  avoided  and  repressed. — Are  the  senses  themselves 
infallible  ?  Do  they  never  err  ?  Is  there  no  truth  above  and  beyond  material 
fact  ?  Far  otherwise,  say  the  great  thinkers  of  all  ages.  They  realise  that 
knowledge  is  limited,  that  there  are  spheres  beyond  men's  reach  both  in  the 
world  of  matter  and  mind,  that  the  wisest  is  a  very  infant  in  knowledge,  with 
infinitude  around  him.  Happy  he  to  whom  spiritual  discernment  is  given  to 
receive  the  great  truths  revealed  by  God  concerning  the  higher  life.  Then  his 
life's  path  will  stretch  before  him,  cleared  from  uncertainty  and  brightened  with 
hope  and  promises  as  he  presses  toward  the  mark. 

III.  It  is  not  well  to  forsake  the  assemblies  of  Christ's  people,  lest  a  blessing 
be  lost. — Had  Thomas  been  among  the  disciples  on  the  morning  of  resurrection 
he  might  not  have  fallen  so  deeply  into  unbelief.  It  is  not  wise  for  any  simply 
because  they  cannot  understand  some  of  God's  ways  or  part  of  His  word  to  for- 
sake the  worship  of  His  house — to  imagine  that  because  one  point  cannot  be 
understood  the  whole  must  be  obscure,  and  that  ministers  as  fallible  men,  like 
their  hearers,  will  not  be  able  to  clear  up  what  seems  mysterious,  etc.  Spiritual 
truth  is  not  grasped  by  the  intellect.  One  of  moderate  intellectual  ability  may 
make  spiritual  truth  clear.  And,  however  that  may  be,  where  Christ's  people 
wait  on  Him,  He  will  be  present ;  and  to  those  souls  who  long  to  know  Him  He 
will  reveal  Himself,  however  simple  or  humble  the  worship  and  thought. 

Vers.  30,  31.  The  purpose  of  John's  Gospel. — The  declaration  of  these  great 
truths  was  fitted  to  lead  those  who  received  them  to  faith,  and  those  who  already 
believed  to  deeper  trust,  more  close  and  abiding  union  with  the  living  Vine, 
and  therefore  to  life.  And  thus  John  fitly  states  here  the  purpose  of  his  Gospel, 
when  he  has  shown  how  it  has  led  even  the  doubting  disciple  to  adoring  faith. 
And  there  was  no  need  for  the  apostle  to  narrate  the  ascension  of  our  Lord.  To 
the  disciples  that  was  implied  in  His  resurrection  (xx.  17).  It  did  not  need  that 
event  to  confirm  their  faith. 

I.  The  limitations  laid  down  in  carrying  out  his  purpose. — 1.  The  Evan- 
gelist simply  drew  what  was  sufficient  for  his  purpose  from  a  full  store, 
reverently  gathered  by  him  (see  Introduction,  pp.  7-10).  2.  He  did  not  think  it 
necessary  in  this  book  to  go  over  ground  already  occupied  by  other  books,  i.e.  the* 
other  Gospels.  It  was  sufficient  for  him  to  record  from  his  own  personal 
experience  such  signs  as  Jesus  did,  both  in  word  and  deed,  in  the  presence  of  His 

569 


chap.  xx.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


disciples,  as  chosen  witnesses  of  the  truth ;  which  signs  having  led  him  and  his 
fellow-disciples  to  faith  and  higher  life,  would  be  fitted  to  lead  others  also  to  the 
same  blessed  haven.  3.  Doubtless  there  were  many  other  details  of  the  life  of 
Jesus  which  might  have  been  recorded.  But  it  is  not  necessary  to  record  every 
word  and  every  action  of  a  life  in  order  that  we  may  know  what  manner  of  life 
it  was.  The  multiplication  of  incidents,  etc.,  might  only  tend  to  burden  the 
mind  and  lead  to  a  confused  rather  than  to  a  clear  image.  4.  The  Gospel  writers, 
guided  by  the  Spirit,  were  true  artists  in  divine  biography.  They  display  what  is 
characteristic  of  all  the  books  of  Scripture — a  wise  reticence.  The  result  is  not 
only  clearness  in  details,  but  a  succinctness  which  brings  the  whole  history 
within  a  moderate  compass. 

II.  The  record  is  that  of  an  eye-witness  confirmed  by  others. — 1.  The  signs 
which  Jesus  did  were  not  done  in  a  corner.  They  were  done  in  the  presence  of 
faithful  men,  some  of  whom  suffered  martyrdom,  and  all  of  them  persecution 
for  their  faith,  thus  witnessing  to  the  sincerity  of  their  testimony.  2.  Thus  the 
writer  did  not  set  down  "  cunningly  devised  fables  "  ;  he  recorded  facts  which  he 
could  personally  vouch  for,  and  words  which  no  one  but  the  eternal  Logos  could 
have  spoken.  Those  facts  thus  attested,  and  those  words  of  heavenly  wisdom, 
bring  their  own  evidence  with  them.  John's  book  is  therefore  no  fiction,  but  a 
record  of  divine  truth,  testifying  to  the  divine  Sonship  of  Christ. 

III.  The  chief  purpose  of  the  record.— 1.  It  is  that  which  Christ  Himself 
brought  to  John — life  through  believing  in  Christ's  name,  i.e.  through  trust  in 
His  divine  power.  2.  It  was  for  this  purpose  that  the  wonderful  life  was 
manifested  (i.  4,  12).  This  Gospel  shows  how  through  faith,  leading  to  trustful 
abiding  in  Christ,  unity  with  Him  results,  and  the  participation  in  His  life  which 
is  life  eternal.  "  I  am  come  that  they  might  have  life,"  etc.  (x.  18).  3.  This  life 
begins  on  earth,  but  is  neither  of  the  world  nor  influenced  by  it  (Gal.  ii.  20).  It 
is  above  the  world — hid  with  Christ  in  God — leading  men  to  set  their  affections 
on  things  above,  to  have  their  conversation  in  heaven.  4.  The  Church  to-day 
witnesses  to  the  truth  of  this  record.  Believing  in  Christ's  name  still  brings  life 
into  the  soul,  makes  men  new  creations.  Men  may  have  the  witness  in  them- 
selves. Happy  are  those  who  have.  Then  it  will  be  their  joy  to  spread  this 
faithful  record,  so  that  others  may  be  moved  to  believe,  and  may  attain  to  life, 
and  that  thus  over  the  whole  earth  the  true  Life  and  Light  of  men  may  bring  sal- 
vation (Isa.  lx.  1-3). 

HOMILETIC  NOTES. 

Vers.  19,  20.  The  risen  Redeemer's  IV.  For  the  result,  His  promises. — 
greeting  of  peace.  J.  L.  Sommer. 

I.  It  is  to  the  disciples  a  most  joyful 

word  (vers.  19,  20).  Ver.  23.  The  power  of  forgiving  sins. 

II.  It  is  to  the  world  an  acclaim  — The  result  of  a  careful  examination 
full  of  blessing.  of  Biblical  teaching  upon  this  subject 

III.  It  is  to  the  wavering  a  great,     is  the  acceptance  of  the  following  pro- 
divine  power. — M.  Herold.  positions  :    1.  That  the  power  of  for- 
giving sins  is  divinely  bestowed  upon 

Vers.    21-23.   How   the  Lord  equips  the  disciples  of  Jesus  Christ  in  their 

His  servants  for  their  office. — He  gives  corporate  capacity,  and  that  such  power 

them —  is  in  harmony  with  the  purpose  of  Jesus 

I.  For  their  hearts,  His  peace.  Christ's  mediation  and  the  genius  of 

II.  For  their  preaching,  His  Spirit,  the  religious  epoch  in  which  we  live. 

III.  For   their    activity,    His     au-  2.  That  Jesus  Christ  taught  the  doc- 

thority.  trine  of  individual  confession  to  the 

570 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  XX. 


offended   individual,   and   called   upon  Saviour  was  an  act  of  acknowledgment 

the  offended  individual  to  forgive  the  or  of  thanksgiving  for  mercies  received, 

offender  upon  receiving  such  confession.  .  .  .  Thus  the  holy  women  when  the 

3.  That  nowhere  in  the  sacred  Scrip-  risen  "  Jesus  met  them,  saying,  All  hail, 

tures  is  forgiveness  promised  apart  from  came  .  .  .  and  held  Him  by  the  feet, 

confession  and  restitution,  whether  the  and  worshipped  Him  "  (Matt,  xxviii.  9). 

sin  lies  between  man  and  man,  or  be-  Thus  apparently  Mary  of  Magdala,  in 

tween  man  and  God.     4.  That  nowhere  her   deep   devotion,   had   motioned   to 

in  the  sacred  Scriptures  is  there   any  embrace  His  feet  in  the  garden,  when 

authority  given  to  any  official  person,  Jesus  bade  her  "Touch  Me  not"  (xx.  17). 

bishop,  priest,  minister,  or  deacon,  to  Thus  the  eleven  disciples  met  our  Lord 

receive    secretly   and   confidentially   a  by   appointment    on    a   mountain    in 

confession  of  sins.      5.  That  the  con-  Galilee,  and  "when   they  saw  Him," 

fession   of   sins   is  too  sacred  a  duty,  as   it   would   seem,   in   their   joy  and 

involving  consequences  too  many  and  fear,  "  they  worshipped  Him "  (Matt, 

important,  to  be  reduced  to  a  system  xxviii.    17).     Thus,  pre-eminently,   St. 

and  presided  over  by  any  single  human  Thomas  uses  the  language  of  adoration, 

being.      6.    That   all   overt  sin  has  a  although  it  is  not  said  to  have  been 

human  as  well  as  a  divine  aspect,  and  accompanied  by  any  corresponding  out- 

that  the  Church,  inspired  and  sanctified  ward  act.     When,  in  reproof  for  his 

by  the  Holy  Ghost,  has  power  to  deal  scepticism,  he  had  been  bidden  to  probe 

with  the  human  aspect,   according  to  the  wounds  of  Jesus,  he   burst   forth 

the  nature  of  the  confession  which  the  into  the  adoring  confession,  "  My  Lord 

sinner  may  make.     7.  That  to  shrink  and  my  God."*    Thus  when  the  ascend  - 

from  receiving  confession  of  sin,   and  ing   Jesus   was   being   borne  upwards 

dealing  with  it  according  to  its  merits,  into  heaven,  the  disciples,  as  if  thanking 

may   have    the   appearance    of   great  Him  for  His  great  glory,  worshipped 

reverence   and   humility,  without  the  Him,  and  then  returned  to  Jerusalem 

reality — may  show  that  the  Church  has  with  great  joy. — H.  P.  Liddon  (Bamp- 

part  in  the  first  baptism  only,  and  not  ton  Lectures). 
in   the   baptism   of  fire.      8.  That   to 

avoid    all     priestly    pretension,     and  Ver.  29.  The  certainty  of  our  Saviour's 

destroy  the  confessional,  that  infinitely  resurrection.  —  The    resurrection   of   a 

hateful  institution  which  has  degraded  body,    before   its   total    dissolution,   is 

and  oppressed  every  nation  in  which  it  easier  to  be  believed,   than   after   it ; 

has  found  an  existence,  and  further  to  and  it  was  this  last   sort  of  resurrec- 

show  that  all  who  have  the  Holy  Ghost  tion   which   puzzled  Thomas's   reason, 

are  kings  and  priests  unto   God,   the  Various     objections     being     removed, 

sinner  should  openly  confess  his  overt  Christ's  resurrection  is  proposed  to  our 

sins  in  the   presence    of    the   Church  belief     upon     certain     and    sufficient 

(which  could  be  done  by  writing,  or  grounds : — 

before  such  a  number  of  witnesses  as  I.  The  constant,  uniform  affirmation 

the  Church  itself  might  appoint),  and  of  such  persons  as  had  sufficient  means 

receive  from  the  Church  such  comfort  to  be  informed  of  the  truth,  and  were 

as  can  never  be  refused  to  those  who  of  an  unquestionable  sincerity, 
truly  confess  and  heartily  repent  their         II.  The  miracles  which   confirmed 

sins. — Dr.  Joseph  Parker.  the  apostle's  words. 

III.  That  such  tradition  has  greater 

Ver.  28.  The  worship  of  Jesus. — At  reason  for  its  belief,  than  can  be  sug- 

other  times  such  visible  worship  of  our  gested  for  its  disbelief. 


*  Against  the  attempt  of  Theodore  of  Mopsuestia  and  others  to  resolve  this  into  an 
ejaculation  addressed  to  the  Father,  see  Alford,  in  loc. 

571 


chap.  xx.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


We  ought  to  admire  the  command- 
ing excellency  of  faith,  which  can  force 
its  way  through  the  opposition  of 
carnal  reason,  with  an  entire  sub- 
mission to  divine  revelation. — South, 

Vers.  30,  31.  The  object  which  the 
Evangelist  had  in  view  in  writing  this 
Gospel  we  are  not  left  to  find  out  for 
ourselves.  He  explicitly  says  that  his 
purpose  in  writing  was  to  promote  the 
belief  that  "Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the 
Son  of  God"  (xx.  31).  This  purpose, 
he  judges,  he  will  best  accomplish,  not 
by  writing  an  essay,  nor  by  framing  an 
abstract  argument  in  advocacy  of  the 
claims  of  Jesus,  but  by  reproducing  in 
his  Gospel  those  manifestations  of  His 
glory  which  elicited  faith  in  the  first 
disciples  and  in  others.  That  which 
had  produced  faith  in  his  own  case  and 
in  that  of  his  fellow-disciples,  will,  he 
thinks,  if  fairly  set  before  men,  produce 
faith  in  them  also.  He  relates,  there- 
fore, with  the  utmost  simplicity  of 
language,  the  scenes  in  which  Jesus 
seemed  to  him  most  significantly  to 
have  revealed  His  power  and  His  good- 
ness, and  most  forcibly  to  have  demon- 
strated that  the  Father  was  in  Him. 
At  the  same  time  he  keeps  steadily  in 
view  the  circumstance  that  these  mani- 
festations had  not  always  produced 
faith,  but  that  alongside  of  a  growing 
faith  there  ran  an  increasing  unbelief 
which  at  length  assumed  the  form  of 
hostility  and  outrage.  This  unbelief  he 
feels  called  upon  to  account  for.  He 
feels  called  upon  to  demonstrate  that 
its  true  reason  lay,  not  in  the  inade- 
quacy of  Christ's  manifestations,  but  in 
the  unreasonable  and  unspiritual  re- 
quirements of  the  unbelieving,  and  in 
their  alienation  from  God.  The  Gospel 
thus  forms  the  primary  apologetic, 
which  by  its  very  simplicity  and  close- 
ness to  reality  touches  at  every  point 
the  underlying  causes  and  principles  of 
faith  and  unbelief. — Marcus  Dods. 

Vers.  30,  31.  St.  John's  method 
as  an  Evangelist. — As  a  polemical 
writer,  St.  John  selects  and  marshals 
his    materials    with    a    view  to   con- 

572 


f uting,  from  historical  data,  the  humani- 
tarian or  docetic  errors  of  the  time. 
St.  John  is  anxious  to  bring  a  parti- 
cular section  of  the  life  of  Jesus  to 
bear  upon  the  intellectual  world  of 
Ephesus.  He  puts  forward  an  aspect 
of  the  original  truth  which  was  certain 
to  command  present  and  local  atten- 
tion; he  is  sufficiently  in  correspond- 
ence with  the  age  to  which  he  ministers, 
and  with  the  speculative  temper  of  the 
men  around  him.  He  had  been  led  to 
note  and  to  treasure  up  in  his  thought 
certain  phases  of  the  teaching  and 
character  of  Jesus  with  especial  care. 
He  had  remembered  more  accurately 
those  particular  discourses,  in  which 
Jesus  speaks  of  His  eternal  relation  to 
the  Father,  and  of  the  profound  mystic 
communion  of  life  into  which  He  would 
enter  with  His  followers  through  the 
Holy  Spirit  and  the  Sacraments.  These 
cherished  memories  of  St.  John's  earlier 
years,  unshared  in  their  completeness 
by  less  privileged  apostles,  were  well 
fitted  to  meet  the  hard  necessities  of 
the  Church  during  the  closing  years 
of  the  beloved  disciple.  To  St.  John 
the  gnosis  of  Cerinthus  must  have 
appeared  to  be  in  direct  contradiction 
to  the  sacred  certainties  which  he  had 
heard  from  the  lips  of  Jesus,  and  which 
he  treasured  in  his  heart  and  memory. 
In  order  to  confute  the  heresy  which 
separated  the  man  Jesus  from  the 
"  ^Eon "  Christ,  he  had  merely  to 
publish  what  he  remembered  of  the 
actual  words  and  works  of  Jesus.  His 
translation  of  those  divine  words  may 
be  coloured,  by  a  phraseology  current 
in  the  school  which  he  is  addressing, 
sufficiently  to  make  them  popularly 
intelligible.  But  the  peculiarities  of 
his  language  have  been  greatly  ex- 
aggerated by  criticism,  while  they  are 
naturally  explained  by  the  polemical 
and  positively  doctrinal  objects  he  had 
in  view.  To  these  objects,  the  lan- 
guage, the  historical  arrangement,  the 
selection  from  conversations  and  dis- 
courses before  unpublished,  the  few 
deeply  significant  miracles,  the  descrip- 
tion of  opponents  by  a  generic  name 
— the    "Jews" — which    ignores    the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


CHAP.  XX. 


differences  of  character,  class,  and  sect 
among  them,  and  notices  them  only  so 
far  as  they  are  in  conflict  with  the 
central  truth  manifested  in  Jesus, — all 
contribute.  But  these  very  peculiari- 
ties of  the  Fourth  Gospel  subserve  its 
positive  devotional   and   didactic   aim 


even  more  directly  than  its  controversial 
one.  The  false  gnosis  is  refuted  by  an 
exhibition  of  the  true.  The  true  is  set 
forth  for  the  sake  of  Christian  souls. 
These  things  "  are  written  that  ye 
might,"  etc. — H.  P.  Liddon  (Bampton 
Lectures). 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Vers.  19-29.  The  manner  in  which  Christ 
manifested  His  resurrection. — Christ,  the 
great  Sun  of  righteousness  and  Saviour  of 
the  world,  having  by  a  glorious  rising,  after 
a  red  and  bloody  setting,  proclaimed  His 
deity  to  men  and  angels,  and  by  a  complete 
triumph  over  the  two  grand  enemies  of 
mankind,  sin  and  death,  set  up  the  ever- 
lasting gospel  in  the  room  of  all  false 
religions,  has  now,  as  it  were,  changed  the 
Persian  superstition  into  the  Christian 
devotion ;  and,  without  the  least  approach 
to  the  idolatry  of  the  former,  made  it  hence- 
forth the  duty  of  all  nations,  Jews  and 
Gentiles,  to  worship  the  rising  Sun.  But 
as  the  sun  does  not  display  his  rising  to  all 
parts  of  the  world  together,  nor  to  the  same 
region  shows  his  whole  light  at  the  same 
instant,  but  by  weaker  glimmerings  at  the 
first  gradually  ascends  to  clearer  and  clearer 
discoveries,  and  at  length  beams  it  forth 
with  full  diffusion  ;  so  Christ  here  discovered 
Himself  after  His  rising,  not  to  all  His 
apostles  at  once,  nor  to  any  of  them 
with  the  same  evidence  at  first,  but  by 
several  ascending  instances  and  arguments, 
till  in  the  end  He  shone  out  in  His  full 
meridian,  and  made  the  proof  of  His 
resurrection  complete  in  His  ascension. 
Thomas  we  have  one  of  the  last  in  this 
chorus,  resolving  to  tie  his  understanding 
close  to  his  senses;  to  believe  no  further 
than  he  could  see,  nor  to  venture  himself  out 
but  where  he  could  feel  his  way.  He  would 
not,  it  seems,  take  a  miracle  upon  hearsay, 
nor  resolve  his  creed  into  report,  nor,  in  a 
word,  see  with  any  eyes  but  his  own.  No ; 
he  must  trace  the  print  of  the  nails,  follow 
the  spear  into  our  Saviour's  side,  till  he  even 
touched  the  miracle,  and  felt  the  article  of 
the  resurrection.  But  as  in  the  too  inquisi- 
tive beholder,  who  is  not  content  to  behold 
the  Sun  by  reflection,  but  by  a  direct  in- 
tuition of  His  glorious  body,  there  comes 
such  a  light,  as  at  the  same  time  both 
informs  and  chastises  the  over-curious  eye ; 
so  Christ  here,  in  His  discovering  Himself 
to  this  doubting  apostle,  condescends  indeed 
to  convince  him  in  his  own  way  ;  but  so, 
that  while  He  complies  with  his  infirmity, 
He  also  upbraids  his  infidelity ;  humouring 
His  patient,  but  not  sparing  his  distemper ; 
and  yet  all  this  with  so  gentle  a  hand,  and 


such  an  allay  of  sweetness,  that  the  reproof 
is  only  collateral  or  consequential,  not 
directly  reproaching  him  for  his  unbelief, 
but  implicitly  reflecting  upon  it,  by  com- 
mending the  belief  of  others  ;  nothing  in 
the  meantime  sharp  or  corrosive  dropping 
from  His  healing  lips,  even  in  passing  such 
a  reprehension  upon  His  disciple.  He  only 
shows  him  his  blind  side  in  an  opposite 
instance,  and  so  leaves  him  to  read  his  own 
case  in  an  antithesis,  and  to  shame  himself 
by  a  comparison.—  South. 

Christ,  in  manifesting  His  resurrection 
to  the  world,  proceeded,  after  a  very  different 
way  from  what  mere  human  sense  or  reason 
would  probably  have  suggested,  or  looked 
for  in  such  a  case. —  Calvin. 

Ver.  19.  "  Peace  be  unto  you" — Nature 
prescribes  reprisals  ;  for  nature  is  only  flesh 
and  blood,  and  vehement  desires  and  hot 
passions,  ordinarily  controlled  only  by  con- 
siderations of  social  prudence.  Leaning 
upon  nature,  we  may  as  well  despair  of 
getting  beyond  her  as  of  forcing  water  to 
rise  permanently  above  its  natural  level. 
But  if  we  will  we  may  reach  a  higher 
standard,  since  we  are  not  really  left  to 
our  own  resources.  It  is  the  Spirit  that 
quickeneth.  He  does  not  merely  prescribe, 
He  transforms.  He  is  perpetually  asserting 
His  presence  by  His  spiritual  transforma- 
tions ;  He  makes  the  feeble  strong,  and  the 
melancholy  bright,  and  the  cold-blooded 
fervent,  and  the  irascible  gentle,  and  the  un- 
instructed  wise,  and  the  conceited  humble, 
and  the  timid  unflinching.  And  now,  as  of 
old,  He  filleth  the  hungry  with  good  things, 
but  the  rich  He  hath  sent  empty  away.  He 
has  but  a  scant  measure  of  endowments  to 
bestow  on  those  who  find  in  the  things  of 
sense,  in  the  pursuit  or  worship  of  wealth  and 
rank  and  reputation,  their  deepest  and  most 
solid  satisfaction.  He  gives  Himself  most 
fully  to  those  who  ask  for  Him  secretly  and 
often.  0  blessed  gift,  so  bounteously  given 
in  baptism,  and  then  again  and  again  repeated, 
of  the  Spirit  of  Christ !  We  seek  Him 
without,  and  we  find  Him  within  us ;  we 
seek  Him  in  great  assemblies,  and  find  Him 
in  solitude ;  we  seek  Him  in  the  under- 
standing, we  find  Him  in  the  heart.    He 

573 


CHAP.  XX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN. 


enters  the  soul  when  all  the  doors  of  sense 
are  shut ;  He  gives  His  benediction  to  each 
and  all  of  its  faculties :  "  Peace  be  unto 
you  "  (ver.  21).  The  soul  hears  him,  it  sees 
Him  not ;  the  soul  feels  Him,  yet  as  if 
insensibly ;  and  His  presence  is  itself  that 
peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  understanding. 
Henceforth  enriched  by  His  indwelling,  the 
soul's  desire  is  to  desire  nothing,  its  will  to 
will  for  nothing,  its  care  to  care  for  nothing, 
its  wealth  to  possess  nothing,  out  of  God, 
its  one,  its  everlasting  treasure.  This  is  not 
mysticism  ;  it  is  the  experience  of  those 
who  have  heard  within  themselves  that 
there  is  a  Holy  Ghost.  This  is  the  subjective 
side  of  lives  which  have  been  spent  in  the 
purest  and  most  unselfish  benevolence,  but 
the  secret  of  whose  strength  has  escaped 
the  notice  of  ordinary  lookers-on.  Depend 
upon  it,  the  kingdom  of  the  Spirit  is  as  near 
to  us  as  it  was  to  our  fathers,  and  that 
no  changes  of  human  opinion  can  affect  the 
irrevocable  gifts  of  God.  One  day,  each  and 
all,  we  shall  look  back  upon  its  blessed 
opportunities,  upon  its  high  responsibilities, 
with  what  feelings  of  self-reproach  or  of 
gratitude,  who  shall  say  1  Let  us  be  wise 
while  we  may.  Let  us  "  lay  not  up  for 
ourselves  treasures  upon  the  earth,  where 
moth  and  rust  doth  corrupt,  and  where 
thieves  break  through  and  steal ;  but  let  us 
lay  up,"  etc.  (Matt.  vi.  19).— H.  P.  Liddon. 

Ver.  19.  The  blessedness  of  those  who  have 
Christ 's  peace. — If  we  would  live  peaceably 
ourselves,  we  should  endeavour  to  preserve 
peace  and  prevent  differences,  and  reconcile 
dissensions  among  others,  by  doing  good 
offices  and  making  fair  representations  of 
intercurrent  passages  between  them ;  by 
concealing  causes  of  future  disgust,  and 
removing  present  misunderstandings,  and 
excusing  past  mistakes  ;  by  allaying  their 
passions  and  rightly  informing  their  minds  ; 
by  friendly  intercessions  and  pacific  advices. 
For  the  fire  that  devoureth  our  neighbour's 
house  threateneth  and  endangereth  ours ; 
and  it  is  hard  to  approach  contention  with- 
out being  engaged  therein.  'Tis  not  easy 
to  keep  ourselves  indifferent  or  neutral, 
and  doing  so  we  shall  in  likelihood  be 
maligned  and  persecuted  by  both  the  con- 
tending parties.  "  Blessed  are  the  peace- 
makers," saith  our  Saviour  ;  "  for  they  shall 
be  called  the  sons  of  God  " :  that  is,  they 
shall  be  highly  esteemed  and  reverenced  for 
this  divine  quality,  wherein  they  so  nearly 
resemble  the  God  of  peace  and  His  blessed 
Son,  the  great  Mediator.  But,  further, 
without  respect  to  other  recompense,  and 
from  the  nature  of  their  employment,  such 
are  immediately  happy;  and  in  this  their 
virtuous  practice  rewards  itself,  that  by  ap- 
peasing others'  quarrels  they  save  themselves 
from  trouble,  and  enjoy  themselves  that 
tranquillity  which   they  procure  to  others. 

574 


But  those  informing  sycophants,  those  inter- 
nuncios of  pestilent  tales,  and  incendiaries 
of  discord,  that  (from  bad  nature  or  upon 
base  design)  by  the  still  breath  of  clan- 
destine whispers,  or  by  the  more  violent 
blasts  of  impudent  calumnies,  kindle  the 
flames  of  dissension,  or  foment  them  among 
others,  ..."  separating  between  chief 
friends,"  and  widening  the  distance  between 
others,  .  .  .  reap  in  the  end  mischief  and 
disturbance  to  themselves,  nor  can  expect  to 
enjoy  the  benefit  of  that  quiet  which  they 
labour  to  deprive  others  of. — Isaac  Barrow. 

Ver.  21.  Living  as  children  of  the  Resur- 
rection.— Why  wonder  that  all  around  us 
Christians  in  the  Church  is  supernatural,  if 
it  be  thus  a  continuous  exercise  of  the  power 
which  raised  Jesus  from  the  dead  ?  Or  that 
our  Bible  is  essentially  unlike  all  merely 
human  books  ?  Or  that  the  Church,  our 
mother  and  our  home,  is  distinct  in  essence 
from  the  perishing  politics  and  societies 
around  it  ?  Or  that  in  the  holy  sacraments 
we  have  the  sources  and  supports  of  a  life 
that  nature  could  neither  create  nor  sustain  ? 
Or  that  in  Christian  souls  we  behold  graces 
of  which  nature  is  incapable ;  faith,  hope, 
charity — charity  of  the  deepest,  tenderest 
kind  toward  God,  and  for  God's  sake  to- 
ward man ;  humility,  purity,  patience  ;  a 
joy  which  no  earthly  pleasure  could  minister ; 
a  peace  which  passeth  all  understanding  ? 
For  all  that  really  quickens  and  strengthens 
the  Christian  soul  is  His  work  who  raised 
Jesus  from  the  grave.  The  resurrection  of 
our  Lord  is  the  measure  of  the  risen  life. 
The  risen  life  is,  in  the  mental  and  moral 
order  of  things,  what  the  Resurrection  is 
among  the  phenomena  which  are  discerned 
by  the  senses.  The  reality  of  the  moral  fact 
before  our  eyes  is  bound  up  with  the  reality 
of  its  historical  counterpart.  If  Christ's 
resurrection  is  not  a  fact,  then  is  Christianity 
false  from  the  first  and  altogether,  and  its 
spiritual  no  less  than  its  intellectual  life  is 
a  delusion.  If  Christ's  resurrection  be  a 
fact— so  certain  that  Christians  would  die 
to  attest  it — then  the  supernatural  character 
of  the  Christian  life  around  us  corresponds 
with  the  strictly  supernatural  fact  from 
which  it  dates  its  origin.  And  as  we  take 
the  measure  of  the  beauty  and  power  and 
glory  of  this  new  and  higher  life  which  has 
been  thus  bountifully  bestowed  on  men, 
what  remains  but  to  lift  up  heart  and  voice 
to  God,  and  cry,  "  It  is  meet,  right,  and  our 
bounden  duty,  that  we  should  at  all  times, 
and  in  all  places,  give  thanks  unto  Thee, 
O  Lord,  holy  Father,  almighty,  everlasting 
God"?  Yesl  one  thing  else  remains:  to 
see  that  we  are  living  as  those  who  are 
"  risen  with  Christ."  This  glorious  life  has 
manners,  a  temper,  a  bearing,  a  line  of  con- 
duct, a  code  of  honour,  peculiarly  its  own. 
The  grace  of  God  does  not  put  force  upon 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  xx. 


our  wills :  we  are  free  to  obey  or  to  resist  it. 
Therefore  the  apostle  adds,  "Seek  those 
things  that  are  above."  Surely,  brethren, 
there  is  need  for  this  warning ;  even  when, 
as  we  trust,  the  light  of  heaven  is  already 
beaming  on  our  understandings,  and  the  love 
of  God  is  already  warming  our  hearts. — 
H.  P.  Liddon. 

Ver.  25.  Faith  and  evidence. — There  is  not 
a  little  of  unbelief  in  these  words.  Thomas 
impugned  the  truth  of  all  the  testimony  he 
had  listened  to.  He  wounded  his  fellow- 
disciples  most  deeply,  while  he  apparently 
considered  them  all  visionaries  or  liars,  and 
himself  alone  wise ;  and  trusted  more  to  the 
evidence  of  his  fingers  than  the  testimony 
of  his  ten  fellow-disciples.  He  boldly  and 
pertly  prescribed  to  the  Lord  the  only  kind 
of  evidence  he  (Thomas)  would  be  willing 
to  receive ;  he  laid  down  the  most  definite 
conditions  as  to  the  only  manner  in  which 
he  would  be  willing  to  acknowledge  Christ 
as  the  risen  One,  .  .  .  and  brought  his  incre- 
dulity to  wear  an  aspect  of  sheer  obstinacy. 
But  is  this  not  the  manner  of  unbelievers  in 
all  times  ?  Is  it  not  so  to-day  ?  Is  it  not 
the  characteristic  mark  of  unbelief  that  it 
demands  that  everything  should  be  proved, 
vouched  for,  immediately  and  palpably  to 
the  senses  ?  And  are  not  the  head  shaken 
and  the  shoulders  shrugged  by  many,  when 
belief  is  asked  for  on  what  cannot  be  seen 
by  the  eyes  or  grasped  by  the  hand  ?  And 
is  it  not  frequently  said  in  the  way  of 
excuse  that  the  Lord  Himself  demands  no 
blind  faith,  and  that  St.  Paul  exhorts  men 
to  "  prove  all  things,  and  hold  fast  what  is 
good "  1  that  it  is  impossible,  even  unjusti- 
fiable, for  one  to  believe  everything — that, 
above  all,  a  man  must  be  thoroughly  con- 
vinced of  the  grounds  of  belief  ?  that  it  is 
natural  for  sober  and  reasonable  men  not  to 
credit  all  at  once  and  without  proof,  on  the 
word  of  the  narrator,  extraordinary  facts  as 
being  absolutely  true  ?  that  to  err  is  human, 
and  that  the  wisest  of  men  have  been 
deceived,  not  to  speak  of  enthusiastic, 
imaginative  Eastern  women,  or  of  a  Peter 
who  was  always  precipitate  in  his  assertions, 
or  a  John  who  was  the  youngest  of  the 
apostles,  with  the  most  mobility  of  mind  ? 
A  faith  which  knows  not  why  it  believes  is 
not  a  true,  firm  faith,  but  a  reed  shaken  with 
the  wind,  exposed  to  be  influenced  by  every 
storm,  by  new  teachers  and  novel  opinions. 
In  these  assertions  there  is  almost  as  much 
of  what  is  false  as  of  what  is  true.  It  is 
true  we  must  not  believe  without  solid 
ground  for  doing  so,  and  must  avoid  cre- 
dulity. But  the  truths  of  Holy  Writ  are 
truths  which  stand  on  a  most  firm  founda- 
tion, and  can  point  to  an  authority  for  them- 
selves which  is  as  eternal  as  God  Himself. 
Are  some  of  these  truths  beyond  our  reason  ? 
They  are  yet  not  contrary  to  it  ;  and  the 


reason  why  men  do  not  believe  them  lies  not 
so  much  in  the  doctrine  and  facts  of  Scrip- 
ture, as  in  the  hearts  of  men  themselves. — 
Translated  from  F.  Arndt. 

Ver.  28.  The  faith  of  Thomas  an  argument 
to  convince  and  a  lesson  to  instruct  us. — 
When  St.  Paul,  after  his  conversion,  preached 
the  name  of  Jesus  in  the  synagogues  of  the 
Jews,  the  Scripture  says  that  he  "  con- 
founded the  Jews."  And  why  ?  Because 
he  had  been  a  well-known  persecutor  of  the 
name  of  Jesus,  and  therefore  the  Jews  could 
neither  challenge  nor  reject  the  testimony 
which  he  gave  in  favour  of  the  God-man. 
For  you  know  (he  said),  my  brethren,  in 
what  manner  I  lived  in  the  Jews'  religion,  and 
with  what  excess  of  rage  I  waged  war  on  the 
new  Church  which  I  acknowledge  to-day  to 
be  the  Church  of  God.  It  is  true  I  was  an 
unbeliever  as  you  were,  and  more  opposed 
to  the  light  of  grace  than  you.  But  it  was 
for  this  reason  that  God  looked  on  me  and 
Jesus  Christ  exercised  His  mercy  toward  me, 
that  I  might  become  an  example  which 
would  lead  you  to  believe  in  Him.  Yes, 
He  Himself  spoke  to  me ;  and  what  is  the 
most  wonderful  of  all  wonders,  has  bestowed 
on  me  the  disposition  which  you  see  to  be  in 
me,  who  laid  me  low  that  He  might  raise 
me,  who  blinded  me  that  He  might  enlighten 
me,  who  made  me,  once  a  blasphemer,  an 
apostle,  and  who,  that  I  may  now  undo  the 
evil  I  have  done,  desires  that  I  should  serve 
Him  as  a  witness  among  you.  These  words 
in  the  mouth  of  St.  Paul,  I  say,  would  come 
home  with  a  divine  power.  And  St.  Luke 
adds  that  it  was  sufficient  for  the  apostle 
to  prove  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ  to  close 
the  mouths  of  all  the  enemies  of  the  Christian 
name.  Now,  I  say,  it  would  be  the  same 
in  the  case  of  St.  Thomas.  In  order  to 
confound  unbelief  in  the  Resurrection,  and 
therefore  in  the  divinity  of  Jesus  Christ, 
St.  Thomas  had  only  to  show  himself  and 
to  say  aloud  :  I  impugned  His  resurrection  ; 
I  was  greatly  opposed  to  believing  in  it ;  but 
I  am  now  forced  to  acknowledge  its  truth, 
and  do  not  desire  to  live  except  to  publish 
it  abroad.  To  do  so  may  cost  me  my  life, 
but  it  shall  be  to  me  the  greatest  joy,  if  by 
the  shedding  of  my  blood  I  can  witness  for 
such  a  sacred  truth  as  I  ought  to  do.  This 
witness-bearing  may  draw  on  me  the  hatred 
of  my  people ;  but  I  shall  count  it  as  nothing 
to  be  exposed  to  all  their  hatred,  if  I  can 
proclaim  the  glory  of  my  God.  Yet  once 
more.  What  could  inspire  this  apostle 
with  such  noble  feelings?  Was  there  pre- 
possession in  his  case  1  Was  it  self-interest  ? 
Was  it  aberration  of  mind  ?  Or  rather  is  it 
not  evident  that  it  was  nothing  of  the  sort  ? 
And  whilst  the  conversion  of  this  apostle 
cannot  be  explained  otherwise  than  by 
affirming  that  it  was  the  effect,  incontest- 
able and  palpable,  of  the  truth  revealed  to 

575 


CHAP.  XX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


him,  what  more  should  we  desire  for  the 
confirmation  of  our  faith?  And  not  only 
is  the  faith  of  St.  Thomas  an  argument 
which  should  convince  us,  but  a  lesson 
which  may  instruct  us.  After  it  has  shown 
us  the  reasonableness  of  faith,  it  teaches 
what  we  should  believe,  i.e. '  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  God. — Translated  from  Bourdaloue. 

Ver.  29.  The  necessity  for  Christ's  resur- 
rection.—Christ  rose  from  the  dead,  not  to 
startle  godless  and  truth-hating  men  into 
faith,  but  to  furnish  all  mankind  with  a 
new  and  better  temple,  with  the  means  of 
spiritual  worship  and  constant  fellowship 
with  God.  There  was  a  necessity  for  the 
Resurrection.  Those  who  became  intimately 
acquainted  with  Christ  slowly  but  surely 
became  aware  that  they  found  more  of  God 
in  Him  than  ever  they  had  found  in  the 
temple.  Gradually  they  acquired  new 
thoughts  about  God ;  and  instead  of  think- 
ing of  Him  as  a  sovereign  veiled  from  the 
popular  gaze  in  the  hidden  Holy  of  holies, 
and  receiving  through  consecrated  hands 
the  gifts  and  offerings  of  the  .people,  they 
learned  to  think  of  Him  as  a  father,  to 
whom  no  condescension  was  too  deep,  no 
familiarity     with     men     too     close.      Un- 


consciously to  themselves,  apparently,  they 
began  to  think  of  Christ  as  the  true 
revealer  of  God,  as  the  living  temple  who 
at  all  hours  gave  them  access  to  the  living 
God.  But  not  till  the  Resurrection  was  this 
transference  complete.  Nay,  so  fixed  had 
their  hearts  been,  in  common  with  all  Jewish 
hearts,  upon  the  temple,  that  not  until  the 
temple  was  destroyed  did  they  wholly  grasp 
what  was  given  them  in  the  resurrection  of 
Jesus.  It  was  the  Resurrection  which  con- 
firmed their  wavering  belief  in  Him  as  the 
Son  of  God.  As  Paul  says,  it  was  the 
Resurrection  which  "declared  Him  to  be 
the  Son  of  God  with  power."  Being  the 
Son  of  God,  it  was  impossible  He  should  be 
held  by  death.  He  had  come  to  the  temple 
calling  it  by  an  unheard-of  name :  "  My 
Father's  house."  Not  Moses,  not  Solomon, 
not  Ezra,  not  the  holiest  of  high  priests, 
would  have  dreamt  of  so  identifying  himself 
with  God  as  to  speak  of  the  temple,  not 
even  as  "our  Father's  house"  or  "your 
Father's  house,"  but  "my  Father's  house." 
And  it  was  the  Resurrection  which  finally 
justified  His  doing  so,  declaring  Him  to  be, 
in  a  sense  no  other  was,  the  Son  of  God. — 
Br.  Marcus  Bods. 


576 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xxi. 


PAET    VII.    (b.) 

THE  EPILOGUE. 

Chapter  xxi. 

The  Risen  Christ  at  the  Lake  of  Galilee. 

1.  The  unsuccessful  toil  and  the  miraculous  draught  of  fishes  (vers.  1-11). 

2.  The  morning  meal  on  the  shore — the  third  appearance  of  Jesus  to  His 
disciples  (vers.  12-14). 

3.  The  public  restoration  of  Peter  to  his  apostolic  office,  the  commission  given 
to  him,  the  prediction  of  his  martyr  end  (vers.  15-19). 

4.  The  meaning  of  Christ's  saying  regarding  the  Evangelist :  "  If  I  will  that 
he  tarry  till  I  come,"  etc.  (vers.  20-23). 

5.  The  closing  testimony  to  the  truth  of  the  Gospel  (vers.  24,  25). 

Synoptic  parallels. — Matt,  xxviii.  16-20  ;  Mark  xvi.  20;  Luke  xxiv.  49. 

CHAPTER  XXI. 
EXPLANATORY  AND   CRITICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  After  these  things  (see  v.  1,  etc.). — I.e.  after  the  events  recorded  in  chap.  xx.  The 
Sea  of  Tiberias. — See  vi.  1.  Showed  Himself. — Rather  manifested  (tyavtpwcrev)  Himself. 
Again. — Pointing  back  to  xx.  14,  19,  26.  In  each  case  it  was  a  manifestation  of  Himself 
to  His  disciples.  This  word  is  quite  Johannine,  and  is  one  of  the  marks  of  genuineness 
of  this  chapter  (see  ii.  11,  etc.). 

Ver.  2.  There  were  together,  etc. — The  names  are  those  of  the  disciples  who  specially 
belonged  to  the  region  of  the  lake,  most  of  whom  had  been  engaged  in  the  fishing 
industry.  Nathanael. — The  connection  of  his  name  with  Cana  explains  more  clearly 
i.  45, 46.  Tbey  had  obeyed  the  injunction  of  the  Lord,  and  were  now  waiting  His  appearance 
in  Galilee  (Matt,  xxviii.  7  ;  Mark  xvi.  7  :  comp.  1  Oor.  xv.  4-6). 

Vers.  3,  4.  Simon  Peter  saith,  etc. — Peter  was  still  the  most  energetic  and  leading  spirit  in 
the  apostolic  band.  Though  he  had  fallen  so  far,  yet  the  Lord  had  not  disowned  Him,  but 
had  spoken  to  him  as  to  the  other  ten,  had  granted  to  him  the  effusion  of  the  Spirit  as  to  his 
brethren.  That  night. — They  no  doubt  fished  with  a  light  burning  in  tbeir  boat.  Night  was 
considered  the  best  time  for  fishing.  But  when  the  morning,  etc. — During  those  hours  of 
unsuccessful  toil  the  disciples  must  have  been  reminded  of  a  similar  incident  at  the 
beginning  of  their  discipleship.  The  disciples  knew  not,  etc. — No  doubt  "  their  eyes  were 
holden"  (Luke  v.  5,  xxiv.  16).  In  His  glorified  resurrection  body  our  Lord  seems  to  have 
manifested  Himself  in  such  fashion  as  He  willed,  so  that  He  might  be  known  when  He 
pleased  (Mark  xvi.  12). 

Ver.  5.  Children  {iraiMa,  boys,  lads). — The  usual  term  in  Syria  now  for  addressing  workmen, 
etc. :  walad  (boy).  The  word  used  in  xiii.  33,  Teicvia,  indicates  relationship.  The  disciples 
probably  thought  that  He  who  addressed  them  was  some  passing  stranger.  Meat  (irpoaQd-yiov). 
— Something  (in  this  case  fish)  to  be  eaten  with  bread. 

Ver.  6.  Cast  the  net  on  the  right  side,  etc. — The  disciples  seem  to  think  that  here  is  one 
who  knows  about  fishing,  and  sees  from  the  shore,  by  some  indication,  where  they  would 
most  likely  get  a  good  haul.  The  whole  incident  was  doubtless  intended  to  have  a  symbolic 
meaning,  and  would  lead  the  disciples  afterward  to  remember  that,  if  they  were  to  be 
successful  in  their  apostolic  labours,  they  must  take  their  directions  from  the  Lord  Himself. 
To  draw  it. — I.e.  to  haul  it  into  the  boat. 

Ver.  7.  Therefore  that  disciple,  etc. — The  superior  spiritual  insight  of  the  beloved  disciple 
leads  him  at  once  to   divine   who  it  is  who  stands  on  the  shore;  whilst  his  impulsive 

p  p  577 


chap.  xxi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


fellow-disciple  at  once  acts  in  characteristic  fashion.  None  but  an  eye-witness  could  have 
described  this  scene.  Girt  his  fisher's  coat  (i-rrepdiJTrjs). — A  kind  of  smock  or  blouse  worn  above 
the  xLTwv,  or  under-tunic.  Peter  had  his  tunic  or  shirt  on ;  but  to  have  only  this  on  was 
regarded  as  practically  being  naked.  He  "  girded  on  to  him  "  the  blouse  in  order  that  it 
might  not  impede  him  in  swimming.  He  had  no  patience  to  await  the  slow  progress  of  the 
boat  shoreward  with  the  overflowing  net  behind  it. 

Ver.  8.  Two  hundred  cubits. — About  one  hundred  yards. 

Ver.  9.  A  fire  of  coals  (dvdpatad). — See  xviii.  18.  Fish  .  .  .  and  bread.—"  If  this  draught 
is  to  the  disciples  the  symbol  and  pledge  of  the  success  of  their  preaching,  the  repast  is 
undoubtedly  the  emblem  of  the  spiritual,  and  even  temporal,  assistance  on  which  they  may 
reckon  from  their  glorified  Lord  so  long  as  the  work  shall  last.  Grotius,  Olshausen,  and 
others  .  .  .  have  thought  that,  in  contrast  with  the  sea,  which  represents  the  field  of  labour, 
the  land  and  the  repast  represent  heaven,  from  which  Jesus  gives  aid,  and  to  which  He 
receives  the  faithful  after  their  labour  "  (Godet). 

Ver.  10.  Bring  of  the  fish. — Probably  to  add  to  the  meal  already  prepared,  it  would  seem 
miraculously. 

Ver.  11.  Peter  went  up  therefore.— Now  with  glad  alacrity  he  is  the  first  to  obey  the 
Lord's  command.  Great  fishes. — This  is  probably  mentioned  because  in  so  large  a  take  there 
would  ordinarily  be  a  great  number  of  worthless  fishes  (Matt.  xiii.  48).  Various  attempts 
have  been  made  to  fix  a  symbolical  meaning  on  the  number  an  hundred  and  fifty  and  three. 
Probably  no  such  meaning  was  intended  to  be  attached  to  it.  The  supposition  that  there 
is  here  a  reference  to  the  153,600  proselytes  mentioned  in  2  Chron.  ii.  17  is  too  far-fetched 
to  be  received  seriously.  Augustine's  interpretation  is  elaborate,  but  is,~perhaps,  also  too 
fanciful :  10  is  the  number  of  the  law  and  7  that  of  the  Spirit,  which  being  added  equals  17, 
and  all  the  numbers  from  1  to  17  when  added  equal  153,  and  thus  the  number  practically 
represents  all  the  elect.  There  may  be  some  such  meaning  latent  in  this  number,  if  the 
whole  incident  is  to  be  viewed  symbolically.  And  all  exegetes  have  remarked  on  the 
difference  between  this  miracle  and  that  recorded  in  Luke  v.  1-11.  There  evidently  the 
draught  of  fishes  is  intended  to  represent  the  visible  Church,  containing  both  real  and 
7iominal  Christians  (comp.  Matt.  xiii.  47-49) ;  here  it  is  the  Church  invisible — the  glorious 
Church  of  the  redeemed  (Eph.  v.  27).  Net  not  broken. — Contrast  Luke  v.  6.  Christ's  grace 
shall  avail  to  bring  all  His  people  safely  home. 

Ver.  12.  Dine. — Breakfast  (d/no-T^o-are),  take  the  morning,  or  forenoon,  meal.  See  Matt, 
xxii.  4,  where  the  noun  is  used.  None  of  the  disciples,  etc. — They  knew  in  whose  presence 
they  stood  ;  awe  and  reverence  made  them  keep  silence.  It  was  their  Lord,  but  now  the 
manner  of  their  intercourse  with  Him  was  different,  preparing  them  for  the  moment  when, 
though  seeing  Him  not,  they  should  believe  and  rejoice  in  the  sense  of  His  near  and  glorious 
presence  (xx.  29  ;  1  Pet.  i.  8). 

Ver.  13.  Jesus  then  cometh,  etc. — Whilst  they  still  held  back,  Jesus  Himself  encouraged 
them  to  approach  and  to  eat.  This  narrative  does  not  state  whether  the  Saviour  Himself 
participated  in  the  meal.     There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  He  did  not  (Luke  xxiv.  43). 

Ver.  14.  The  third  time,  etc. — I.e.  the  third  time  He  appeared  to  His  disciples  in  a  body. 
The  two  former  appearances  are  narrated  in  xx.  19-22,  26-29. 

Vers.  15-17.  Simon,  son  of  Jonas  (or  John,  with  several  of  the  best  MSS.). — He  is  addressed 
thus  to  remind  him  that  by  his  fall  he  had  shown  that  he  had  not  yet  attained  to  be  Peter — 
the  rock  (or  stone,  see  I.  42,  p.  16).  It  is  interesting  to  remark  that  his  call  to  active  disciple- 
ship  followed  on  the  miraculous  draught  of  fishes  at  the  beginning  of  the  Lord's  ministry, 
and  his  reinstatement  into  the  apostolic  office  here.  Lovest. — Love  is  the  foundation  of  all 
Christian  service ;  love  to  Christ  alone  will  inspire  men  truly  to  do  His  work  (xiv.  15,  etc.). 
In  Christ's  kingdom  a  correct  creed,  however  necessary,  can  be  no  substitute  for  a  loving  heart. 
Jesus  had  used  the  word  dyarr^s  (see  xiii.  34,  xiv.  15) ;  Peter  in  reply  uses  the  verb  <f>i\eiv, 
meaning  to  love  in  the  more  ordinary  sense  of  the  term,  and  not  that  constant,  deep  affection, 
including  something  of  reverence,  denoted  by  the  other  word.  Nor  does  he  dare  to  say  that  he 
even  cherishes  the  lesser  affection  more  than  his  fellow-disciples.  Nor  is  his  yea  full  of  the 
bold  assurance  of  his  former  protestations  of  fidelity.  Thou  knowest,  he  says  to  Jesus.  Again 
the  question  is  asked,  but  on  the  second  occasion  the  more  than  these  is  omitted  by  our  Lord. 
He  knows  Peter's  trust  in  self  alone  is  broken.  Again  the  same  answer  is  returned  by  Peter. 
A  third  time  the  question  rings  out,  and  now  the  Lord  uses  Peter's  own  word,  0iXe?5  fie ; 
Peter  is  grieved  at  this— doubly  grieved,  we  may  say— first  that  Jesus  seems  to  admit  that 
Peter  is  not  yet  able  to  accord  to  Him  the  higher  love,  and  next  because  the  thrice-repeated 
question  brings  pitifully  to  mind  his  threefold  denial.  Thoroughly  humbled,  the  apostle 
even  omits  the  yea,  Lord,  and  casts  himself  in  utter  self-renunciation  on  the  omniscience 
of  Jesus:  "Lord,  Thou  knowest  all  things,"  etc.  The  thrice-repeated  commission  to  the 
restored  apostle  shows  an  interesting  gradation.  Feed  My  little  lambs  (apvla  fiov).— -Care 
for  and  feed  with  word  and  doctrine  the  young  of  the  flock,  the  children  and  young  converts. 
The  more  simple  duty  of  the  pastor  is  here  committed  to  Peter.    Next  comes  the  more 

578 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  JOHN.        chap,  xxi 


difficult  and  onerous  task,  "  Lead  (rule,  shepherd,  irot/natve)  My  sheep,"  direct  and  guide  the 
Church  as  a  whole  ;  and,  last,  if  the  reading  wpbpaTa  be  accepted,  "Feed  My  sheep"  will  mean 
to  give  them  the  spiritual  nourishment  fitted  for  them,  or,  if  the  reading  irpofiarid  /xou  (with 
A,  B,  C,  etc.)  be  accepted,  the  reference  is  perhaps  to  providing  the  little  children  of  Christ 
(t€kvL<x,  xiii.  33),  advanced  and  matured  Christians,  with  the  finest  of  the  wheat.  No  special 
primacy  seems  to  have  been  conferred  on  Peter  here  ;  but  Meyer  justly  observes  that,  when 
Peter  was  restored  to  his  former  position,  this  restoration  embraced  his  former  pre-eminence 
(see  1  Pet.  v.  2-4). 

Vers.  18,  19.  Verily,  verily. — Notice  the  familiar  phrase.  When  thou  wast  younger 
(Wwrepos),  etc. — Peter  must  have  been  at  that  time  about  middle  life.  The  contrast  is 
perhaps  intended  to  refer  to  Peter's  boast  that  he  would  follow  Christ  to  death.  Yes,  the 
time  would  come  when  he  should  be  constrained  to  follow  his  Master  on  the  way  of  suffering 
— always  a  way  repugnant  to  flesh  and  blood. 

Ver.  19.  The  martyrdom  of  St.  Peter  at  Rome,  probably  circa  A.D.  64,  is  attested  by 
Clement  of  Rome.  It  took  place  apparently  in  the  time  of  Nero.  Tertullian  asserts  that  he 
was  crucified,  and  Origen  says  he  was  fixed  on  the  cross  with  his  head  downward.  His 
martyrdom  must  have  been  well  known  in  the  Church  when  this  chapter  was  written.  (See 
Smith's  Bible  Dictionary,  etc.) 

Vers.  21-23.  Lord,  and  what  shall  this  man  do,  etc.  % — This  question,  although  it  might  be 
dictated  by  love,  was  one  which  should  not  have  been  asked.  To  Peter  it  was  given  to 
know  what  manner  of  death  he  was  to  die,  but  it  would  not  be  good  that  this  should  be 
known  in  the  case  of  every  disciple  or  apostle.  God  keeps  the  future  wisely  in  His  own 
power.  The  answer  of  Jesus  is  hypothetical.  "Ews  fyxopai  would  be  understood  by  many  of 
the  Parousia,  the  second  appearing  of  our  Lord ;  and  it  was  to  correct  this  erroneous  idea, 
entertained  apparently  by  many,  that  this  incident  was  recorded  by  the  Evangelist.  The 
reference  might  quite  legitimately  be  to  Christ's  coming  to  John  in  death  (xiv.  3);  but 
probably  (Westcott)  the  coming  referred  to  may  be  that  coming  of  Christ  in  judgment 
which  began  at  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and  will  issue  in  the  final  judgment.  John 
overlived  this  coming,  which  indeed  he  may  refer  to  in  Rev.  xxii.  12. 

For  vers.  24,  25,  see  homilies  and  Homiletic  notes. 

MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  1—14. 

On  the  lake-shore  .-fruitless  toil. — The  poor  disciples.  An  anxious  and  uncertain 
time,  this,  for  them  !  What,  exactly,  were  they  ?  What  were  they  to  do  1  It 
was  worst  of  all  for  poor  Simon  Peter.  He  might  well  ask  himself  what  was 
he  ?  He  was  "  Peter,"  "  Cephas  " — firm,  true,  rock — once.  But  ah  !  yon  hall 
of  the  high  priest's  house  !  Was  he  a  disciple  now,  or  a  discarded  traitor  ? 
Restlessly,  Peter  said — as  the  lake  seemed  to  wear  its  old  smile  for  him,  as  it 
glittered  in  the  setting  sun — "  Let  us  go  a  fishing."     And  all  seven  set  off. 

I.  The  night  of  fruitless  toil. — A  long  cold  night  of  weary,  fruitless  toil. 
They  "  caught  nothing."  Courage,  brother  !  courage,  sister  !  when  it  falls  to 
you  to  toil  long  and  meet  with  no  success  !  The  Lord's  eyes  were  all  night 
on  that  unsuccessful  boat's  crew,  and  His  heart  was  with  them.  And  a  blithe 
morning  for  them  all  broke  on  that  seemingly  luckless  night. 

II.  The  morning  of  joy. — Pulling  shoreward,  as  the  day  was  breaking,  they 
saw  a  figure  in  dim  haze  standing  on  the  beach.  A  voice  of  cheery  hail  reached 
the  boat.  It  might  be  freely  but  truly  translated,  for  it  was  in  common  fisher 
phrase,  Well,  lads!  or,  Well,  comrades!  any  success?  any  fish?  He  who  so 
spoke  knows  to-day  our  homely  tongue,  and  our  little  troubles  and  disap- 
pointments, and  all  the  homely  things  of  our  daily  lives.  When  the  weary 
fishermen  cried  back  in  answer  "  Nothing"  it  was  in  a  deeper  tone,  and  with 
more  of  pointed  meaning  in  it,  that  the  voice  came  again  from  the  beach 
telling  them  what  to  do.  And  the  faith  that  prompted  that  one  more  cast 
of  the  net  after  all  the  failures  was  rewarded  by  a  "  haul "  which  needed  all 
hands  and  all  strength.  Simon,  thinking  only  of  the  work  in  hand,  pulling 
his  very  hardest,  is  startled  by  a  whisper  in  his  ear  from  John.  The  tones  of 
that  voice  had  just  reached,  half  touched,  the  memory  of  the  loved  disciple. 
He  knew  that  voice  so  well  !  But  it  was  the  "  draught  of  fishes,"  the  miracle, 
that   made   him   sure.      Yes,    "  It   is    the    Lord."      Never  man  in  the   desert 

579 


chap.  xxi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


thirsted  for  the  water-spring  as  the  heart  of  Simon  had  longed,  since  "that 
night  in  which  He  was  betrayed,"  to  see  his  Lord's  face  and  tell  Him  all — all 
that  was  in  that  fisherman's  tossed,  troubled,  shame-stricken,  loving  heart.  It 
was  that  made  him  so  eagerly  spring  overboard  and  swim,  wade,  struggle,  shore- 
ward. And  did  not  Jesus  know  ?  We  may  almost  say  this  morning's  interview 
was  mainly  made  for  Simon  Peter — that  beach,  with  its  morning  meal  all  ready 
spread,  and  its  cheering  fire  blazing.  The  Lord  knew  then  what  drenched, 
benumbed,  weary  fishers  needed.     He  knows  all  such  things  still. 

III.  Christ's  tender  dealing  with  His  erring  disciple. — The  morning  meal 
was  over,  and  we  know  of  one  heart  that  throbbed  with  many  mingled 
feelings  as  the  Lord  said,  "  looking  on  him  "  once  more,  "  Simon,  son  of  Jonas  !  " 
Not  the  dear  old  disciple  name,  the  given  name,  Peter,  but  the  bare  name  of 
his  early  fisher  life,  by  which  he  was  known  in  the  fisher  town.  "  Simon,  son  of 
Jonas ! "  It  is  so  like  a  modern  fisher  town  form  of  name  !  Once  the  Lord 
called  him  by  a  better,  higher  name  than  this.  Yes,  Simon  !  but  from  that  you 
fell — fell  thrice — thrice  swore  you  were  no  disciple  of  His.  Ay  !  but  your  kind 
Lord  is  about,  as  once  He  did  when  you  were  sinking,  to  grasp  your  hand  and 
lift  you  up  to  where  you  were  again  ;  and  you  will  be  once  more  Peter,  the  firm, 
steady  servant  of  your  Lord.  And  because  he  had  known  what  it  was  to  fall, 
and  to  be  forgiven  and  restored,  Peter,  the  apostle  of  the  young  Christian 
Church,  did  the  work  of  Christ,  to  his  dying  day,  all  the  more  earnestly  and  the 
more  tenderly. — Rev.  Thomas  Hardy. 

Vers.  6-8.  Ventures  of  faith. — At  the  word  and  following  the  direction  of 
Christ,  the  nets  were  let  down  into  the  waters.  We  are,  perhaps,  to  suppose 
that  the  disciples  thought,  e.g.,  that  the  Stranger  saw  what  they  did  not  perceive 
indications  of,  i.e.  the  presence  of  a  shoal  of  fishes.  But  beyond  that  they  were 
constrained  by  a  power  which  they  felt,  but  could  not  determine,  to  do  as  He 
commanded.  Their  obedience  did  not  go  unrewarded.  The  large,  apparently 
unprecedented,  "  take  "  filled  them  first  with  wonder,  and  then  with  adoration, 
as  they  recognised  in  the  stranger  their  Lord.  With  regard  to  this,  as  to  all 
the  other  signs  done  by  Christ,  it  is  sufficient  to  notice  now  that  they  are  really 
all  included — even  that  of  the  Resurrection  itself — in  the  Incarnation.  Let 
that  great  truth  be  accepted  (although  it  is  certainly  strengthened  and  confirmed 
by  the  Resurrection),  then  the  wonderful  life  and  signs  wrought  by  Christ 
become  luminous.  They  are  then  rightly  seen  as  parts  of  a  great  whole. 
Without  them  that  life  would  be  incomplete  and  inexplicable.  Look  now  at 
the  spiritual  lessons  of  this  sign  in  regard  to — 

I.  The  ventures  of  faith. — 1.  This  miracle  was  to  Peter  and  the  other 
disciples  an  acted  parable — a  symbolic  representation  of  what  would  follow 
when  they,  resting  implicitly  in  faith  on  the  Saviour,  should  afterward  go 
forth  on  their  great  work  of  winning  souls  for  Him — of  becoming  fishers 
of  men,  as  our  Lord  had  shown  them  at  the  beginning  of  their  discipleship. 
2.  Guided  by  the  Spirit,  they  were  to  follow  the  directions  in  which  He  prompted 
— casting  the  gospel  net  in  places  apparently  the  most  unlikely,  where  before, 
it  may  be,  they  had  toiled  long  in  vain,  assured  that  He  would  follow  their 
action  by  His  blessing.  And  we  read  in  the  succeeding  history  how  they 
prospered  in  so  doing.  After  the  descent  of  the  Spirit  at  once  they  began  to 
speak  to  the  mixed  multitude  of  men  from  every  nation  under  heaven  (Acts  ii.). 
Undeterred  by  the  fact  that  those  men  spoke  in  various  tongues,  in  strong 
faith  they  cast  their  net,  "  and  the  same  day  there  were  added  unto  them  about 
three  thousand  souls"  (Acts  ii.  41).  Again,  in  a  vision  of  the  night  the  apostle 
Paul  sees  a  man  of  Macedonia  beckoning  him  to  cross  the  ^Egean  Sea,  and  cast 
the  net  in  Grecian  waters.     Once  more  it  might  have  seemed  a  hopeless  task. 

580 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY ;   ST.  JOHN.        chap.  XXI. 


That  Greeks,  proud  of  their  culture  and  literature,  would  receive  a  new  and 
self-denying  religion  from  men  belonging  to  the  despised  Jewish  people  would 
in  those  times  have  seemed  a  wonder  even  more  strange  than  that  of  the 
miraculous  draught  of  fishes.  But  the  apostle  obeyed — the  net  was  cast,  and 
it  has  enclosed  Europe  and  all  the  civilised  nations.  3.  And  so  ought  the 
Christian  Church  to  act  now.  It  has  been  the  habit  of  many  to  speak  slightingly 
of  the  Jewish  missions  of  the  Church,  e.g.  it  has  been  an  annual  joke  with 
some  journals  to  calculate  how  much  it  cost  in  money  for  each  Jewish  convert. 
That  is  a  sarcasm  that  will  not  bear  repetition  now,  when  everywhere  Jewish 
converts  are  entering  the  Church,  and  the  whole  mind  of  Judaism  seems 
turning  Christward.  The  original  founders  of  Jewish  missions  cast  the  gospel 
net  in  faith,  although  from  past  experience  failure  seemed  to  threaten.  But 
now,  after  long  waiting,  the  nets  are  beginning  to  be  filled.  4.  One  of  the 
grandest  instances  of  modern  pioneer  mission  work — the  casting  of  the  gospel 
net  in  one  of  the  most  unpromising  regions  of  earth — is  what  might  be  called 
the  forlorn-hope  mission  to  Thibet,  under  the  leadership  of  a  fragile  woman,* 
who  has  proved  one  of  the  most  intrepid  pioneer  missionaries  of  modern  times. 
What  more  indeed  need  be  said !  Time  would  fail  to  tell  of  Moffat,  Living- 
stone, Williams,  Patteson,  French,  J.  G.  Paton,  Heber,  Henry  Martyn,  etc.  In 
faith  they  cast  the  nets  at  the  prompting  of  Christ's  Spirit,  and  lo  !  over  all  the 
world  to-day  the  harvest  of  the  sea  of  the  nations  is  being  gathered  in.  5.  In 
every  epoch  in  the  Church's  history  the  ventures  of  faith  have  had  their  reward. 
On  the  venture  of  faith  followed  the  Reformation.  On  the  missionary  ventures 
of  faith  in  our  modern  world,  if  they  are  sustained  as  they  should  be,  there 
will  assuredly  follow  the  rescue  of  multitudes  from  the  depths  of  alienation  and 
degradation.  There  are  many  signs  of  the  coming  blessing.  If  the  Church 
were  entirely  faithful  the  limits  would  widen,  the  multitudes  increase. 

II.  Individual  ventures  of  faith. — 1.  See  how  this  applies  to  the  individual. 
The  ventures  made  by  the  rash  speculator  and  the  gambler  do  not  come  under 
this  category.  These  might  rather  be  called  ventures  of  unbelief.  They  are 
made  in  the  name  of  "  chance "  or  "  luck,"  gods  unknown  to  the  Christian. 
2.  To  the  Christian  the  whole  of  life  is  a  venture  of  faith,  not  only  for  the 
future  world,  but  for  the  present.  At  the  direction  of  Christ,  Christian  men 
should  go  forth  into  the  world  to  whatever  duty  they  are  called,  fearing  nothing, 
believing  that  if  they  persevere  in  the  path  of  duty  then  daily  bread  and  every 
needed  blessing  will  be  supplied ;  for  "  the  river  of  God  is  full  of  water " 
(Ps.  lxv.  9).  Not  that  we  are  to  neglect  the  use  of  means.  It  is  true  God  can 
work  without  means;  and  the  means  without  His  help  will  be  useless.  But 
with  His  help  they  will  be  the  channels  through  which  blessing  will  come,  as 
the  disciples'  fisher-nets  enclosed  the  miraculous  draught  of  fishes.  3.  And  if 
this  be  so  in  regard  to  things  material,  much  more  is  it  so  in  regard  to  things 
spiritual.  Men  must  cast  their  nets,  the  net  of  faith,  deep  in  the  divine 
promises,  if  they  would  taste  to  the  full  the  spiritual  blessedness  of  the  gospel. 
How  many  a  life  is  empty  of  the  joy  and  fruits  of  faith  because  this  has  not 
been  done  !  How  many  can  show  only  few  and  limited  "  catches,"  simply 
because  they  have  not  boldly  ventured  out  to  the  deeps  of  divine  promise, 
undeterred  by  the  sneers  and  scoffs  of  men  of  the  world,  and  cast  their  nets 
in  faith  of  blessing !  4.  And  above  all,  when  special  work  has  been  given  to 
any — the  training  or  teaching  of  children,  e.g.,  or  the  care  of  souls  in  the 
pastorate — then  they  must  especially  cast  their  nets  in  faith  in  the  deeps  of  divine 
promise,  relying  on  the  Omnipotent  for  the  blessing  which  will  come  in  the  end. 
They  may  toil  long,  but  if  they  toil  in  faith  they  shall  not  labour  in  vain. 

*  Miss  Annie  Taylor,  Pioneer  Mission  to  Thibet,  February  1893. 

581 


chap.  xxi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


5.  And  this  thought  should  influence  men  also  in  their  individual  support  of  the 
missionary  effort  of  the  Church — its  really  great  and  important  work.  What 
would  be  thought  of  a  man  whose  whole  interests  centred  in  himself,  who  cared 
neither  for  kith  nor  kin,  not  to  speak  of  country  and  humanity  at  large — whose 
life  was  so  selfish  that  he  never  did  aught  to  mitigate  another's  sorrow  or  cheer 
another's  life?  There  are  such  men.  And  alas  !  there  are  many  so-called  Christians 
who  might  come  under  the  same  description.  Give  them  enough  of  religion  for 
themselves,  and  the  rest  of  humanity,  as  far  as  they  are  concerned,  may  go  down 
to  darkness  and  death.  Strange  Christians  these  !  The  apostles  and  the  early 
apostolic  Church  were  of  another  stamp,  else  the  world  had  been  darker  to-day  than 
it  is.     From  this  incident  therefore  comes  the  exhortation,  "  Cast  your  net,"  etc. 

Ver.  7.  "  It  is  the  Lord." — In  all  that  the  beloved  disciple  wrote  there  is  a 
profound  depth.  A  spiritual  aspiration  breathes  through  it,  and  leads  us  to 
realise  that  even  the  history  has  a  spiritual  meaning.  In  this  incident  by  the 
sea  of  Galilee  we  see  a  picture  of  inward  experiences  in  the  souls  of  believers ; 
and  in  this  passing  incident  in  the  communion  of  the  risen  One  with  His 
disciples  we  see  a  type  of  His  continual  coming  into  the  hearts  of  His  people. 
On  the  last  as  on  the  first  page  of  this  Gospel,  there  is  a  joyful  message  full  of 
life  and  spiritual  power.  There  is  but  One  who  can  fill  men's  hearts  with  joy 
and  bring  blessing  where  He  comes,  whether  as  the  infant  laid  in  a  manger  or 
as  the  risen  One  to  His  disciples. 

I.  Where  He  is  not  there  are  want  and  pain. — 1.  To  the  noblest  and  best 
company  the  Head  is  wanting  when  He  is  not  there.  2.  To  the  firmest  will  the 
rule  of  conduct  is  lacking.     3.  To  the  hardest  labour  the  blessing  is  absent. 

II.  Where  He  comes  counsel  and  comfort  come. — 1.  He  inquires  about  our 
necessities.  2.  He  gives  wise  and  gracious  counsel.  3.  He  brings  a  blessing 
with  Him. 

III.  Where  He  is  present  His  disciples'  hearts  burn  within  them. — 1.  The 
disciples  were  weary  and  dispirited  whilst  He  was  absent.  2.  Now  they  have 
become  like  other  men ;  their  hearts  burn,  etc.  (Luke  xxi  v.  32).  3.  John, 
contemplative  and  thoughtful,  recognises  the  Lord.  4.  Peter,  ardent  and 
impulsive,  cannot  wait  till  the  boat  is  brought  to  land.     Love  impels  them. 

IV.  Where  He  comes  Ee  gives  heavenly  food. — 1.  He  gathers  His  own 
together  lovingly.  2.  He  satisfies  their  hearts  with  heavenly  peace.  3.  He  thus 
prepares  them  to  look  forward  to  eternal  joy. — From  Karl  Gerok. 

Ver.  7.  "  That  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved." — Friendship,  founded  on  the  principles 
of  worldly  morality,  recognised  by  virtuous  heathens,  such  as  that  which  sub- 
sisted between  Atticus  and  Cicero,  which  the  last  of  these  illustrious  men  has 
rendered  immortal,  is  fitted  to  survive  through  all  the  vicissitudes  of  life ;  but  it 
belongs  only  to  a  union  founded  on  religion,  to  continue  through  an  endless 
duration.  The  former  of  these  stood  the  shock  of  conflicting  opinions  and  of  a 
revolution  that  shook  the  world;  the  latter  is  destined  to  survive  when  the 
heavens  are  no  more,  and  to  spring  fresh  from  the  ashes  of  the  universe.  The 
former  possessed  all  the  stability  which  is  possible  to  sublunary  things;  the 
latter  partakes  of  the  eternity  of  God.  Friendship  founded  on  worldly  principles 
is  natural,  and  though  composed  of  the  best  elements  of  nature,  is  not  exempt 
from  its  mutability  and  frailty ;  the  latter  is  spiritual,  and  therefore  unchanging 
and  imperishable.  The  friendship  which  is  founded  on  kindred  tastes  and 
congenial  habits,  apart  from  piety,  is  permitted  by  the  benignity  of  Providence 
to  embellish  a  world  which,  with  all  its  magnificence  and  beauty,  will  shortly 
pass  away ;  that  which  has  religion  for  its  basis  will  ere  long  be  transplanted,  in 
order  to  adorn  the  paradise  of  God.  *•  »- 

582 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xxi. 


I. — 1.  There  was  something  in  the  taste  and  disposition  of  our  Lord, 

considered  as  a  man,  more  in  unison  with  those  of  John  than  with  any  of  the 
other  apostles.  2.  The  distinguishing  features  of  our  Lord's  character,  viewed 
as  a  perfect  human  being,  were,  unquestionably,  humility  and  love ;  nor  is  it  less 
certain,  or  less  obvious,  that  these  were  the  qualities  most  conspicuous  in  the 
character  of  the  beloved  disciple.  3.  In  the  short  Epistles  inscribed  with  his 
name,  the  topic  on  which  he  chiefly  insists  is  love,  which,  in  its  sublime  form, 
constitutes  the  moral  essence  of  the  Deity,  as  well  as  the  very  sum  and  substance 
of  true  religion.     His  heart  was  in  perfect  unison  with  his  subject. 

II.  Indications  of  the  preference  with  which  John  was  honoured. — 1.  On 
perusing  the  Evangelists,  it  appears  that  he  was  invariably  selected  by  our  Lord 
as  one  of  the  three  who  were  present  in  the  most  retired  scenes  of  His  life — on 
the  mount  of  Transfiguration,  in  the  house  of  Jairus,  and  in  the  garden  of 
Gethsemane  (see  also  xiii.,  xix.,  etc.).  2.  After  the  Resurrection  and  Ascension, 
he  continued  to  receive  from  his  Saviour  similar  proofs  of  his  preference. 
Preserved  amidst  a  violent  and  bloody  persecution,  he  was  permitted  (such  is  the 
universal  tradition  of  the  Church)  to  survive  the  rest  of  the  apostles,  to  witness, 
in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  the  dispersion  of  its  inhabitants,  the 
fulfilments  of  his  own  predictions,  and  finally  to  close  a  life  extended  to  an 
extreme  old  age  in  peace  and  in  the  bosom  of  his  friends.  3.  To  him  it  was 
given  to  convey  to  the  Churches  of  Asia,  among  whom  he  dwelt,  repeated 
messages  from  his  ascended  Lord,  to  behold  His  glory,  and  to  catch  the  last 
accents  of  inspiration.  4.  The  place  which  he  occupies  in  the  order  and 
succession  of  inspired  men  must  at  the  same  time  ensure  to  him  a  high 
distinction ;  for  while  Moses  leads  the  way,  John  brings  up  the  rear  of  that 
illustrious  company. — Robert  Hall. 


HOMILETIC    NOTES. 


Vers.  1-8.  The  life  of  the  messengers 
of  the  gospel. — I.  Their  work. — 1.  It  is 
a  work  common  to  all  (ver.  2).  2.  Some 
come  before  others  in  it,  according  to 
their  special  gifts  (ver.  3).  3.  Some- 
times they  labour  long  in  vain  (ver.  3). 
4.  There  sometimes  come  on  them 
seasons  of  gloom,  so  that  they  do  not 
always  recognise  the  Lord  with  the 
same  clearness  (ver.  4).  5.  But  they 
endure  patiently. 

II.  The  blessing  of  the  Lord.— 1.  It 
is  overflowing  (ver.  6).  2.  The  dis- 
ciples thereby  realised  the  presence  of 
their  Lord  (ver.  7).  3.  Grateful  love 
impelled  them  anew  toward  Him 
(ver.  8).  4.  But  this  gladness  did  not 
come  in  similar  fashion  to  all  (ver.  8). 

III.  Their  reward. — They  were  re- 
freshed (vers.  9,  10,  13).  2.  The 
blessing  was  a  perpetual  one  (ver.  11 — 
"  brake  not ").  3.  They  attained  the 
blessed  certainty  of  their  fellowship 
with  the  Lord  (ver.  12). 


Ver.  6.  "  The  river  of  God  is  full  of 
water" — A  pious  citizen  who  had  many 
children,  and  but  straitened  means, 
when  dying  spoke  comfortingly  to  his 
children.  He  told  them  not  to  distress 
themselves  about  his  death  and  his 
modest  means.  He  would  leave  behind 
him  a  treasure  ;  and  when  he  was  dead 
they  would  find  written,  behind  the 
chamber  door,  the  place  where  it  was 
to  be  got  at.  When  their  father  died, 
therefore,  they  examined  the  door  care- 
fully, but  found  written  there  only  these 
words  of  Ps.  lxv.,  "  The  river  of  God 
is  full  of  water."  Well,  those  children 
lived  in  dependence  on  God  ;  they  were 
pious  and  diligent.  Thus  they  ex- 
perienced in  after-years  the  truth  of 
those  words,  and  the  richness  of  their 
father's  treasure.  For  God  never  per- 
mitted them  to  want  the  means  of 
subsistence. — From  J.  J.  Weigel. 

Ver.  9.  The  fire  of  coals,  etc. — Let  us 

583 


chap.  xxi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   Sf.  JOHN. 


see  whether  [a]  great  truth  may  not  been  previously  secured,  was  it  not 
have  been  figuratively  taught  by  the  shown  that  the  visible  Church  before 
facts  of  which  we  are  endeavouring  and  after  the  coming  of  Christ  was 
to  find  an  explanation.  There  was  virtually  but  one  and  the  same  ?  that 
already  a  fire  kindled,  when  the  its  members,  at  whatever  time  they 
apostles  dragged  to  shore  the  net  which  lived,  had  to  be  brought  to  the  same 
specially  represented  the  Christian  altar,  and  to  be  purified  by  the  same 
Church,  the  Church,  that  is,  as  it  was      flame  ?      I  know  not  why  we  should 

to  subsist  in  its  expanded  form,  subse-  not     think    that    that     strange    fire, 

quently  to  the  coming  of  Christ,  and  on  mysteriously    kindled    on    the    lonely 

the  fire  which  was  thus  burning  there  shore,  was  typical  of  the  propitiatory 

were  fish  already  laid ;    yea,  and  the  work  of  the  Redeemer,  through  whom 

first  direction  to  the  apostles  was,  that  alone  the  men  of  any  age  can  be  pre- 

they  should  bring  of  the  fish  which  had  sented  as  a   sacrifice  acceptable   unto 

just   been   caught,    and   add  them   to  God.     We  have  all  to  be  laid  upon  an 

those  which  were  already  on  the  coals.  altar ;  we  have  all,  as  it  were,  to  be 

Now,    since   by  the  fish   of   all  kinds  subjected   to   the   action  of  fire ;    but 

which   the   net   enclosed,  we   are  un-  there  is  no  altar  but  the  one  Mediator, 

doubtedly  to  understand  the  members  and  no  fire  but  that  of  His  one  great 

of  the  Church  under  the  gospel  dispen-  oblation,  which  will  answer  for  those 

sation,  ought  we  not  to  understand  by  who  seek   to   consecrate   themselves  a 

the  fish  already  on  the  coals  the  mem-  whole  burnt -offering  to  their  Creator 

bers  of  the  Church  under  the  Jewish  in  heaven.     And  what  could  be  a  more 

dispensation  ?      This    is    nothing   but  lively  parable  of  this  fact,  than  that, 

preserving  or  keeping  up  the  metaphor.  just  before  His  departure  from  earth, 

If  the  fish  just  caught  represented  the  when  standing  on  the  margin  of  the 

converts  that  would  be  made  by  the  sea,  the  separating  line,  so  to  speak, 

preaching  of  the  gospel,  the  fish  which  between    time    and    eternity,    Christ 

had  been  caught  before,   and  not  by  caused  an  altar  to  rise,  mysterious  as 

those  who  now  draw  the  net  to  land,  Himself,  for  no  human  hands  reared  it, 

may — we  should   rather  say,    must —  and   crowned  it    with   burning  coals, 

represent  those  of  whom  the  Church  which   had  not  been  kindled  by   any 

had  been  composed  during  the  minis-  earthly  flame ;  and  then  brought  about 

trations   of    the    law.       So    that   the  that   there   should   be   placed  on  this 

visible     Church     before     Christ     was  sacred  and  significant  fire  representa- 

figured  by  the  fish  already  on  the  coals,  tives  of  the  one  visible  Church,  as  it 

the  visible  Church  after  Christ  by  the  had  subsisted  before  His  incarnation, 

fish  j  ust  enclosed  in  the  net ;  and  when  and  as  it  was  to  subsist  till  He  should 

the  newly  caught  fish  were  placed  on  come  the  second  time  to  judgment  1 — 

the  same  five  with  those  which  had  Henry  Melvill. 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Ver.  6.  Casting  the  net  at  Christ's  com-  seizes  us  as  we  gather  the  handful  of  fruit ; 
mand. — We  look  back  over  the  eighteen  one  here  and  another  there  made  better,  made 
centuries  during  which  the  Church  has  been  happier  ;  a  few  lives  changed  :  but  what  are 
toiling  as  in  the  night ;  and  as  we  spread  these  as  a  return  ?  Coming  still  closer  home, 
out  the  nets,  the  gains  seem  small  and  insig-  and  looking  within  our  own  hearts,  a  sober 
nificant.  We  turn  over  the  reports  of  the  survey  brings  to  many  of  us  a  feeling  of 
missionary  societies,  representing  the  life-  despair.  We  began  so  hopefully,  too  hope- 
work  of  hundreds,  and  the  prayer  and  fully  perhaps,  forgetting  the  power  of  habit 
devotion  of  thousands  of  Christians  ;  and  and  the  slow  growth  of  the  kingdom.  A  few 
we  note  with  dismay  the  scanty  returns  of  weeks  only  had  passed,  and  our  hopeful 
converts,  here  a  hundred,  there  a  score,  in  resolves  lay  around  us  in  ruins ;  and  here 
many  places  none.  We  reckon  the  result  of  we  are  like  Sisyphus  with  our  stone  once 
our  own  work  for  Christ,  and  again  dismay  more  at  the  bottom  of  the  hill  and  the  steep 

584 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xxi. 


slope  before  us.  Our  nets  are  drawn  in  at 
our  feet,  and  of  progress,  of  character,  of 
sanctification,  we  have  "taken  nothing." 
Once  more  the  Master  takes  His  stand 
be>ide  His  disciples  at  their  work.  Once 
more  He  bids  us  again  let  down  our  nets, 
carry  on  the  old  work  as  before.  And  once 
more,  strong  in  our  faith  in  Him  and  in  His 
victory  over  evil  and  death,  we  say  "  Never- 
theless." Humbly  recognising  past  failure 
and  feeling  the  full  weight  of  the  disappoint- 
ment, not  ignoring  the  pressure  of  difficulty 
and  the  sting  of  pain,  yet  trusting  in  His 
grace,  we  set  against  the  stream  of  worldli- 
ness  and  indifference  the  whole  force  of  our 
will  consecrated  to  Him,  and  say,  "  Never- 
theless at  Thy  bidding  we  will  let  down 
our  nets." — From  "  The  British  Weekly" 
January  Wth,  1894. 

Ver.  6.  The  true  missionary  spirit. — Many 
wise  people  say  to-day,  "  What  need  is  there 
for  missionaries  troubling  themselves  about 
the  conversion  of  the  heathen  ;  let  them  first 
go  to  the  heathen  at  homel"  Those  who 
thus  judge  ought  speedily  to  request  a 
missionary  for  themselves.  .  .  .  They  seek 
to  prescribe  to  Christ  the  manner  in  which 
He  must  carry  on  the  extension  of  His  king- 
dom. They  will  make  void  the  command, 
"  Go  and  teach  all  nations,"  etc.,  until  there 
is  not  a  sinful  unsaved  man  more  in  their 
own  country.  Have  you  the  determination 
of  the  order  of  Christ's  kingdom,  or  has  He  ? 
There  were  still  millions  of  Jews  who  did  not 
believe  on  Christ,  and  yet  He  gave  the  com- 
mand to  Peter  to  go  to  Cassarea  and  to  baptise 
the  heathen  centurion  Cornelius.  Why,  the 
testimony  of  those  heathen  who  had  become 
converted  through  the  work  of  the  first 
missionaries,  and  the  pious  life  and  death 
of  many  of  them,  did  more  in  the  primitive 
Church  to  extend  the  gospel  than  had  those 
who  preached  to  them  still  remained.  And 
if  we  were  more  zealous  in  regard  to  our 
mission  work  among  the  heathen,  the  blessing 
to  the  many  slumbering  members  of  the 
old  Churches  would  be  more  abundant.  We 
have  only  in  faith  and  zeal  to  seek  to 
save  souls.  The  blessing  rests  with  the 
Lord.— Dr.  F.  Ahlfeld. 

Ver.  6.  Labour  for  Christ  not  in  vain. — 
What  befell  them  at  sea.  The  long  night 
of  fruitless  toil  perhaps  may  have  reminded 
some  of  the  ji  of  the  other  similar  experience  ; 
but,  more  probably,  they  were  too  busy  and 
weary  to  think  of  anything  but  their  empty 
nets.  Whether  they  remembered  that  first 
miraculous  draught  of  fishes  or  no,  we  must 
keep  it  constantly  in  view  if  we  would 
understand  this  incident,  and  must  remem- 
ber that  our  Lord  Himself  gave  it  a  sym- 
bolical meaning.  The  whole  of  the  events 
in  this  lesson  point  to  that  symbolism  as  a 
chief  part  of  the  intention  ;  and,  while  it  is 


easy  to  be  over-ingenious  in  translating  the 
facts  into  parables,  it  is  unwise  to  shut  our 
eyes  to  the  broad  features  which  receive 
their  full  meaning  only  when  so  translated. 
As  the  day  was  breaking  over  the  Eastern 
girdling  hills,  and  the  cold  air  at  sunrise 
telling  of  a  change  in  the  dark  world,  Jesus 
stood  on  the  shore.  The  place  is  significant 
— the  disciples  tossing  on  the  water,  the  Lord 
standing  on  the  firm  beach,  with  the  light 
playing  round  Him.  Can  we  fail  to  see 
in  that  the  picture  of  the  condition  of  His 
servants  in  contrast  with  the  rest  and  stable 
glory  where  He  dwells  ?  And  may  we  not 
see  in  His  attitude  the  same  inspiring  truth 
which  upheld  Stephen  dying,  when  he  saw 
the  Son  of  man  in  the  opened  heaven,  stand- 
ing as  ready  to  help?  Ihe  disciples  did  not 
recognise  Him.  Throughout  the  forty  days 
His  will  determined  when  He  should  be 
known.  The  Unknown  speaks  as  a  superior, 
using  the  address  "  Children,"  and  His 
question  in  the  original  implies  the  expecta- 
tion of  a  "No."  Then  you  have  not  any- 
thing to  eat  ?  He  knew  the  state  of  things 
before  asking,  but  He  wished  the  acknow- 
ledgment. Is  not  that  ever  His  procedure 
with  His  servants,  drawing  them  to  confess 
their  failure,  and  so  preparing  them  for  the 
blessing,  which  He  cannot  send  except  to 
the  consciously  weak  and  powerless?  An 
honest  and  humble  "  No "  is  generally 
followed  by  correction  of  methods  or  fields, 
and  that  by  full  nets.  If  we  said  it  more 
readily  to  Him  who  is  ever  interested  in  our 
work,  we  should  not  have  to  say  it  so  often 
to  ourselves.  The  prompt  obedience  to  the 
Stranger's  directions  was  probably  due  to 
the  disciples'  belief  that  He  had  seen  from 
the  shore  some  sign  of  a  shoal  which  they  in 
the  twilight  had  not  noticed.  None  of  them 
had  any  thought  of  His  being  anything  more 
than  a  passing  traveller,  stopping  to  look  on. 
The  swift  result  is,  alas  1  not  always  the  ex* 
perience  of  even  the  humblest  and  most  docile 
of  Christ's  servants  ;  but  we  may  be  sure  that, 
though  in  regard  to  immediate  issues  the 
parable  of  this  incident  may  fail,  it  does  not 
fail  in  regard  to  their  certainty.  Jesus  did 
not  promise  them  that  they  should  find  at 
once,  nor  does  He  promise  us  ;  but  He  does 
promise  that,  sooner  or  later,  our  labour  will 
not  be  "  in  vain,"  if  it  be  "  in  the  Lord." 
And  that  may  content  us.  The  beautiful 
episode  of  Peter  and  John  is  full  of 
meaning.  Love  has  quick  eyes,  and  is 
first  to  discern  the  Christ.  Its  prerogative 
is  to  trace  His  working  where  others  do  not 
see  Him  ;  and  for  love  it  is  enough  to  know 
that  it  "  is  the  Lord,"  and  to  sit  quietly 
blessed  in  contemplation.  But  there  is 
another  kind  of  faithful  devotion,  not  so 
quick  to  discern,  but  eager  to  act.  John  could 
sit  still,  satisfied  to  gaze,  but  Peter  flung 
his  upper  garment  about  him,  and  was  over 
the  side  and  splashing  in  the  water  before 

585 


CHAP.  XXI.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  JOHN. 


he  knew  what  he  was  doing.      He  was  only  Lord.    He  had  said,  v  Depart  from  Me,  for 

a  hundred  yards  off,  and  would  have  been  I  am  a  sinful  man,  O  Lord,"  on  that  first 

by  Jesus  almost  as  soon  if  he  had  sat  still ;  similar  occasion  ;  but  the  sense  of  sin  which 

but  that  was  not  his  way,  and  "there  are  drives  to  Jesus  is  deeper  and  wholesomer  than 

diversities  of  operations."   Besides,  penitence  that  which  drives  from  Him.    The  safest 

and  the  blended  shame  and  joy  of  restora-  place  for  the  forgiven  penitent  is  close  to  the 

tion  made  him  flounder  thus  quickly  to  his  Lord. — Dr.  A.  Maclaren. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  15—25. 

Vers.  15-17.  On  the  lake-shore.  "Simon,  son  of  Jonas."  (A  communion 
address.) — What  passed  in  converse  at  that  lakeside  table,  what  the  Lord  said  to 
His  disciples,  what  they  said  to  Him,  the  disciple  who  has  described  the  scene  has 
not  told  us.  It  may  be  He  had  special  things  to  say  to  this  one  and  to  that,  to 
dispel  their  doubts  and  fears,  to  strengthen  faith,  to  rekindle  hope.  Some  word, 
perhaps,  to  say  to  him  to  whom  had  been  said,  "  Son,  behold  thy  mother."  Of 
these  we  know  not.  But  this  the  Evangelist  has  told  us,  that,  turning  to  Peter, 
the  Lord  said  to  him,  "  Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  lovest  thou  Me  1 "  "  Simon,  son  of 
Jonas,"  not  the  honoured  name  the  Lord  had  given,  to  be  worn  by  the  disciple 
who  was  to  be  Cephas,  Peter,  firm  as  rock  in  his  Master's  cause  ;  but  the  common 
name  he  bore  in  his  common  fisher  days,  ere  the  Lord  had  called  him  ! 

I.  Peter  had  fallen. — Fallen  thrice ;  and  by  three  steps,'  the  thrice-put  question, 
thrice  answered,  and  the  thrice-given  commission  to  resume  the  work  of  the 
Saviour  (feeding  the  lambs — feeding,  folding,  caring  for,  being  a  shepherd  to  the 
sheep),  by  these  three  steps  the  fallen  disciple  is  reinstated,  restored ;  and  is 
once  more,  not  "  Simon,  son  of  Jonas,"  the  fisherman,  but  Peter,  the  firm,  faith- 
ful disciple,  the  commissioned  servant !  There  are  beautiful  touches  in  the 
words,  marked,  in  the  telling  of  the  interview,  by  the  beloved  historian.  "  More 
than  these  ? "  (these  other  disciples)  was,  perhaps,  as  a  gentle  reminding  to 
Peter  that  the  time  had  been  when  he  used  to  think  himself  foremost  in  zeal, 
boldest  in  faith,  truest  in  love,  of  them  all.  And  Peter  would  seem  to  have  felt 
the  touch.  He  has  had  experience.  He  knows  his  own  frailty  now.  He  will 
say  nothing  of  what  He  is,  compared  with  others  now !  And  when  he  invites 
the  Lord  to  read  his  heart,  and  see  its  love,  Peter,  with  sterling  modesty, 
hesitates  to  use  the  same  word  which  the  Lord  had  used  in  putting  the 
question ;  for  Jesus]  had  used  a  word  which  signifies  a  very  strong  and  tender 
love,  and  the  disciple  used  a  word  which  implies  a  love  of  a  kind  more  common, 
and  not  so  exalted  and  refined.  "  Feed  My  lambs."  And  oh  !  Peter's  heart 
was  glad  that  he  was  to  be  blessed  and  honoured  in  putting  hand  to  the 
simplest,  lowliest  work  the  Lord  might  give  Him.  He  did  not  scorn  the  feed- 
ing of  the  lambs!  The  little  ones,  the  weak,  the  ignorant,  the  erring!  He 
read  his  Master's  meaning  better.  He  who  had  his  experience  could  not  but 
know  something  of  how  to  lead  the  weak  and  ignorant  and  erring  to  a 
Saviour  whom  his  own  experience  had  taught  him  to  know  as  tender-hearted 
and  forgiving,  and  Himself  the  source,  the  giver,  of  all  true  strength  and 
guidance.  Again,  "  Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  lovest  thou  Me  1 "  and  again  the  self- 
same answer,  and  the  same  modest,  humble  word,  "  Thou  knowest."  Yes  !  the 
Saviour  knew  ;  and  Peter,  with  this  love  in  his  heart,  was  to  tell  others  of,  to 
lead  others  to,  to  keep  others  in,  the  love  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  third  time  it 
pained  him.  Did  his  Lord  doubt  him  ?  No  !  but  the  Lord  knew  Peter's  heart ; 
and  this  third  question  brought  from  that  heart  a  fervent  gush  of  the  love  that 
dwelt  there,  deeper,  stronger,  and  more  tender  than  Peter  himself  had  known 
till  that  moment.  "  Thou  knowest  all  things !  Thou  knowest  that  I  love  Thee." 
And  with  love  in  his  heart,  strong  and  tender  love,  the  restored  disciple  is  sent 
to  "  shepherd  "  (the  word  is)  the  sheep,  not  merely  feed,  but  be  all  to  them  (in 

586 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.        chap.  XXI. 


loving  care,  in  wise  and  patient  guidance  and  watchfulness)  that  a  shepherd  is 
to  his  flock. 

II.  And  now  it  needs  but  a  word  or  two  to  take  home  this  Gospel  story  to 
ourselves. — We  come,  in  the  communion  feast,  to  tell  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  a 
solemn  act  of  His  own  appointment,  that  we  love  Him  as  our  Saviour.  It  will 
be  well  that  we  consider  that  our  Lord  is  speaking  to  us  in  some  such  words  as 
those  in  which  He  spoke  to  Peter.  And  if  we  think  of  that  "  Simon,  son  of 
Jonas,"  it  will  perhaps  enable  us  to  feel  as  though  the  Saviour  were  addressing 
us,  each  one  of  us,  by  the  very  individual,  homely  name  which  we  have  borne 
all  our  days,  the  name  associated  in  our  minds  with  all  our  by-past  life — the 
sins  and  errors  of  our  youth,  the  sins,  the  worldliness,  and  selfishness,  and 
unworthiness  of  our  riper  years.  The  name  will  recall  all  the  longsuffering 
mercy  of  the  Saviour,  all  the  unmerited  blessings,  all  the  watchful  care  of  His 
providence,  and  all  the  light,  and  peace,  and  strength,  and  hope  that  have  come 
to  us  from  the  Saviour's  grace.  And  as,  on  a  quiet,  solemn  day  in  God's  house, 
we  thus  look  back  on  life,  and  into  our  own  hearts  and  our  own  ways,  may  the 
grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  from  whom  all  good  thoughts  and  desires  come,  help 
each  one  of  us  to  see  ourselves  truly. — Rev.  Thomas  Hardy. 

Ver.  15.  "  Lovest  thou  Me  ?  " — It  was  after  the  strange  morning  meal,  eaten  on 
the  shore  of  the  Galilean  lake,  had  been  finished,  and  when  the  company  were 
moving  about  in  little  groups  of  two  and  three,  that  the  conversation  took  place 
between  Peter  and  the  Redeemer.  Peter  had  fallen  from  His  apostolic  office  ;  it 
was  necessary  that  he  should  be  restored  to  it,  in  order  that  he  might  do  his 
special  work  in  spreading  the  gospel  and  founding  the  Church. 

I.  Our  Lord's  method  of  dealing  with  His  repentant  follower. — 1.  The  severe 
trial  and  sifting  to  which  Peter  had  been  subjected  tended  to  rectify  much  that 
was  faulty  in  his  nature,  to  disperse  much  of  the  chaff  that  was  mingled  with 
the  genuine  grain  of  his  disposition.  It  had  quite  broken  down  his  self-sufficiency ; 
it  had  convinced  him  that  he  could  not  depend  on  himself  alone.  His  answers 
to  our  Lord's  question  showed  that  the  forward,  boastful  Simon,  son  of  Jonas, 
was  a  memory  of  the  past,  and  that  he  had  again  become  the  rock,  strong  through 
faith  in  the  Lord.  After  this  incident  his  former  self-assertiveness  seldom 
appeared.  Once  only  it  seems  to  have  led  him  into  a  false  position,  when  it 
brought  him  into  conflict  with  St.  Paul.  But  he  seems  to  have  yielded  in  a  true 
spirit  of  humility,  and  to  have  entertained  nothing  but  a  brotherly  feeling  for 
St.  Paul,  as  his  words  concerning  that  apostle  in  his  second  Epistle  testify.  In 
his  two  Epistles  we  may  trace  all  through  evidences  of  the  change  that  had  taken 
place  in  him.  His  exhortations  to  humility,  trust  in  the  Lord's  strength,  and 
steadfast  resistance  of  evil,  through  faith  in  Christ,  show  that  he  had  attained  at 
last  to  the  true  spirit  of  a  disciple.  2.  At  the  repetition  of  our  Lord's  first 
question,  "  Lovest  thou  Me  more  than  these? "  in  a  somewhat  different  form,  we 
can  believe  that  a  feeling  of  sorrow  and  disappointment  sprang  up  in  the  disciple's 
heart.  The  inquiry  now  was,  not  whether  he  esteemed  Jesus  more  than  others 
did,  but  whether  he  really  esteemed  Him  at  all.  3.  The  question  was  put  a 
third  time,  and  this  time  our  Lord  used  the  apostle's  own  word,  "  Lovest  thou 
Me  ? " — not,  Dost  thou  entertain  for  Me  a  lofty  affection  and  regard  ?  but,  Have 
you  even,  as  you  assert,  a  genuine  personal  love  for  Me  ?  4.  At  this  question 
the  rising  grief  in  Peter's  heart  welled  up  and  overflowed.  To  be  looked  at 
askance  by  one  we  love,  to  have  to  face  one  whom  we  esteem  highly,  but  whom 
we  have  grievously  wronged,  must  be  a  hard  thing  to  bear,  and  must  make  the 
sorrow  for  what  has  been  done  more  poignant  and  severe.  And  that  was  the 
case  with  this  disciple.  The  question  three  times  repeated  brought  home  the 
memory  of  his  denial,  and  showed  him  his  sin  in  all  its  enormity.     5.  Yet  the 

587 


CHAP,  xxl        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY;    ST.  JOHN. 


question  ministered  hope,  for  he  could  answer  it  affirmatively.  Still,  he  felt  that 
it  would  be  no  longer  safe  to  trust  in  himself  alone.  He  would  throw  hirrself 
on  the  divine  Omniscience ;  so  his  whole  heart  gushed  out  in  the  utterance,  "  Lord, 
Thou  knowest  all  things ;  Thou  knowest  that  I  love  Thee."  It  was,  indeed,  the 
best  answer  he  could  have  given.  He  who  was  so  fatally  self-deceived  before, 
might  be  so  again.  But  by  coming  to  Christ,  and  bringing  an  open  heart  to 
Him,  asking  Him  in  His  omniscience  to  judge  whether  there  was  love  in  it  to 
Him  or  no,  was  the  best  course  the  repentant  disciple  could  have  adopted.  He 
was  thus  brought  to  regard  his  own  strength  as  weakness,  his  feelings  with  self- 
distrust,  and  to  a  frame  of  mind  that  would  lead  to  simpler  confidence  in  the 
strength  of  the  Redeemer.  Thus  at  the  end  of  the  Gospel  narrative  a  very 
different  man  meets  us  from  that  forward,  boastful,  self-sufficient  Simon  Barjona, 
who  meets  us  at  its  beginning.  A  vital  change  had  taken  place  in  his  life  and 
character ;  he  had  learned  the  secret  of  the  true  Christian  life — to  be  humble,  to 
conquer  self  by  relying  on  Christ  alone.  As  it  was  with  Peter,  so  will  it  be  in  a 
greater  or  less  degree  with  all  true  disciples.  They  will  learn,  sometimes  through 
bitter  failure,  profoundly  to  distrust  themselves,  and  to  trust  alone  in  Christ. 

II.  The  disciple's  protestations  of  affection  to  his  Lord. — 1.  These  words  were 
not  merely  from  the  lip.  The  Lord,  who  knows  all  things,  saw  in  them  the 
expression  of  a  great  reality.  Peter  had  a  genuine  love  for  his  Master,  and  he 
was  therefore  restored  to  his  apostolic  office.  2.  Our  Lord  in  restoring  the 
apostle  seems  to  have  committed  three  distinct  charges  to  him — "  Feed  My 
lambs,"  "  Shepherd  My  sheep,"  "  Shepherd  My  tender  sheep  "  (see  "  Explanatory 
Notes  ").  3.  We  know  how  faithful  St.  Peter  was  to  his  charge  in  after-days. 
We  can  distinguish  an  echo  of  his  Master's  words  in  one  of  his  Epistles  when  he 
writes  to  his  fellow- presbyters :  "  Feed  the  flock  of  God,"  etc.  (1  Pet.  v.  2-4). 
4.  With  this  threefold  charge  came  the  command  to  follow  Christ,  even  if  to 
danger  and  death,  to  avoid  the  apparent  imminence  of  which  but  lately  he  had 
denied  his  Lord.  " Follow  Me  " :  "I  renew  the  first  call  to  discipleship  and 
apostleship  given  amid  those  same  scenes,  but  which  thou  didst  forfeit  through 
thy  sin.  Let  the  love  thou  hast  professed  prompt  thee  to  obey  My  voice." 
"  Follow  Me  "  in  submitting  to  what  is  hard  to  bear  for  My  sake,  as  I  submitted 
to  My  Father's  will  for  thy  sake.  "  Follow  Me  "  in  imitating  My  spirit — in 
feeding  the  flock  of  God,  in  caring  for  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel ;  and 
show  the  constancy  of  thy  love  by  standing  steadfast  and  being  faithful — "  even 
unto  death." 

Applications. — 1.  The  question  put  by  our  Lord  to  St.  Peter  we  may  profitably 
put  to  ourselves.  If  the  Redeemer  were  to  appear  to  us,  and  come  to  us  here 
with  the  inquiry,  "  Lovest  thou  Me  ? "  what  answer  would  He  receive  ?  2.  He  is 
among  us ;  His  spiritual  presence  is  near  us ;  He  can  read  every  heart.  Can 
each  of  us  say,  "  Lord,  Thou  knowest  all  things ;  Thou  knowest  that  I  love  Thee"  ? 
3.  The  test  of  the  genuineness  of  Peter's  love  was  the  course  of  his  after-life,  his 
devotion  to  the  charge  given  him  by  Christ.  So  the  test  of  our  love  will  be  our 
devotion  to  the  duty  Christ  has  laid  upon  us.  Religion  can  be  no  matter  of 
secondary  importance;  it  claims  our  first  attention.  It  is  the  atmosphere  in 
which  our  life  should  be  lived.  Its  spirit  should  interpenetrate  our  every 
thought  and  word  and  deed.  Love  to  Christ — and  if  ye  love  Me  keep  My 
commandments — that  is  the  touchstone  of  genuine  religion. 

Ver.  15.  "  Feed  My  lambs."  (Address  to  children.) — Children  are  among  the 
lambs  of  the  Saviour's  flock  which  He  here  so  lovingly  confides  to  the  care  of  His 
Church.  He  loves  little  children  (Mark  x.  16) — died  for  them  also.  He  feeds 
them  through  His  under-shepherds  in  the  Church.  What  then  ought  children  to 
do  in  view  of  His  tender  care  ? 

588 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xxi. 


I.  Love  Him. — Love  is  the  true  adoration  of  the  heart,  and  is  specially  pleasing 
to  the  Saviour.  Children  love  those  who  are  kind,  gentle,  etc.,  to  them.  And  if 
it  is  true  that  Christ  has  done  all  for  men  that  the  gospel  declares  He  has  done> 
then  love  to  Him  should  be  the  most  natural  feeling.  "  His  is  love  beyond  a 
brother's."  And  in  Him  they  will  love  His  true  pastors — the  under-shepherds — 
whom  He  has  appointed  over  His  flock,  etc. 

II.  Obey  Him. — Be  loyal  to  Him,  true  and  faithful.  This  will  follow  naturally 
on  love  to  Him.  "  If  ye  love  Me,  keep  My  commandments  "  (xiv.  15).  And  how 
reasonable  it  is  to  do  so.  His  commands  are  not  grievous,  but  are  for  the  health 
of  the  soul.  "  I  would  rather  obey  than  work  miracles " ;  "do  not  found 
obedience  on  fear,"  said  a  great  man.  And  obedience  to  Him  will  mean  also 
obedience  to  those  whom  He  has  appointed  in  the  Church  to  be  pastors  and 
teachers  (Heb.  xiii.  7,  17).  Christ  has  appointed  them  to  feed  His  lambs,  to  lead 
them  by  green  pastures,  etc.     Let  them  be  honoured  for  their  work's  sake. 

III.  Serve  Him. — Work  His  works  as  He  did  His  Father's  work.  One  of  the 
first  desires  of  those  who  give  themselves  to  Him  is,  What  shall  I  do  for  Him  ? 
Follow  Him,  is  the  answer,  who  as  child,  as  man,  in  everything  did  the 
heavenly  Father's  will.  But  St.  Paul's  words  to  the  Corinthians  should  be 
remembered,  "  Be  ye  followers  of  me,"  etc.  (1  Cor.  xi.  1).  The  instructions  and 
example  of  those  appointed  His  shepherds  by  the  Chief  Shepherd,  when  they  are 
sincere,  should  be  followed.  The  ancients  erected  statues  of  great  and  good  men 
in  the  Forum  or  other  chief  place  in  a  city,  so  that  the  children  might  see  and 
emulate  their  greatness.  So  should  the  pastors  appointed  by  Christ  ever  point 
the  lambs  of  the  flock  to  Him  as  their  example,  and  themselves  seek  ever  to 
be  more  Christlike. 

Vers.  18,  19.  On  the  lake  shore — "Follow  Me." — I.  Peter's  future. — Peter  was 
right  when  he  said  to  his  Lord,  "  Thou  knowest  all  things,  Thou  knowest  that  I 
1  love  '  Thee  !  "  The  Lord  read  Peter's  heart,  and  He  knew  the  "  love  "  that 
was,  at  that  moment,  in  the  disciple's  heart.  But  more,  the  Lord  read  Peter's 
life  in  the  unseen  future — ay  !  to  its  very  close.  And  He  knew  how  His  poor 
faithful  follower  would  be  true  to  Him — to  the  death.  The  love  in  Peter's  heart 
would  lead  him  to  the  cross.  And  how  touchingly  and  tenderly  He  tells  it ! 
"  When  thou  wast  young,  thou  girdedst  thyself,  and  walkedst  whither  thou 
wouldest.  But  when  thou  shalt  be  old,  another  shall  gird  thee,  and  carry  thee 
— whither  thou  wouldest  not." 

II.  Peter's  question  as  to  his  fellow-disciple's  future. — "  Follow  Me,"  the 
Master  said,  as  He  called  Peter  to  listen  to  some  words  that  were  for  his  ear  and 
his  heart  only.  What  these  words  were,  we  may  not  seek  to  know.  But  there 
was  one  a  little  way  behind  them  on  the  shore  path — one  whose  love  to  the 
Master,  Peter  probably  acknowledged  to  be  perhaps  deeper  than  his  own.  John 
had  not  deserted  or  denied  his  Lord  on  that  sad  morning  !  And  John  was  known 
to  Peter,  and  to  the  rest,  as  the  disciple  whom  Jesus — we  may  say — specially 
loved.  To  what  trials — to  what  fate  in  the  after-years — would  "  this  man's  " 
love  to  Jesus  lead  him  1  And  the  Lord's  answer  was  one  which  gently,  but 
clearly,  taught  Peter  that  the  question  was  one  which  should  not  have  been 
asked.     And  so  ended  this  memorable  scene  on  the  shore  of  the  lake. 

III.  The  lessons  of  the  scene  on  the  lake  shore. — Its  lessons  are  well  worth 
the  gathering.  1.  With  our  love  for  the  Saviour,  how  many  opportunities  are 
within  reach  of  all  of  us — for  "  feeding  His  lambs,"  for  "  shepherding  His  sheep"! 
We  don't  need  any  special  ordination,  or  any  special  field  of  work.  We  shal] 
find  these  opportunities — all  of  us — in 

"  The  trivial  round,  the  common  task." 

589 


chap.  xxi.        H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


Lovest  thou  Jesus  ?  help  some  poor  weakling  lamb,  guide  some  straying  sheep  of 
His.  2.  Poor  Simon  Peter !  His  very  errings  and  failings  make  him  dear  to 
us.  To  the  very  last,  he  seemed  to  need  the  kindly  restraining  hand  of  Jesus 
to  keep  him  right.  How  apt  are  all  of  us,  like  him,  to  wish  for  a  peep  into  that 
which  is  wisely  hidden  from  us.  Let  us  remember  the  voice  that  said — so  gently, 
but  with  such  force  of  meaning — "  What  is  that  to  thee  ?  follow  Me."  3.  What 
a  noble  apostle  Peter  becomes,  after  Pentecost  has  put  the  cope-stone  on  the  work 
of  the  Saviour's  life- training  of  him  !  It  is  but  little  fragments  of  his  apostle- 
work  we  have.  But  we  cannot  fail  to  see  what  a  power  he  was  in  the  infant 
Christian  Church.  And  through  all  his  life  of  work,  that  scene  on  the  lake  shore 
would  often  be  present  to  his  mind.  Ay  !  and  when  the  time  came,  and  the  old 
disciple  was  being  girded  for  the  cross,  the  memory  of  the  Lord's  words  would 
help  him  to  die  the  martyr  death  for  the  love  he  bore  to  Jesus. — Rev.  T.  Hardy. 

Vers.  18,  19.  The  high  prerogative  of  suffering. — In  these  words  our  Lord 
predicts  the  death  of  St.  Peter.  In  his  old  age  the  apostle  was  to  be  crucified, 
made  to  stretch  forth  his  hands  upon  the  transverse  beam  of  the  cross,  and 
girded  (or  lashed  round  the  waist)  to  the  instrument  of  torture  by  a  cord. 
Tradition  says  that  he  was  crucified,  at  his  own  request,  with  his  head  down- 
wards ;  in  that  case,  the  girding,  or  tying  tightly,  to  the  cross  would  probably 
be  necessary,  by  way  of  keeping  the  body  of  the  sufferer  in  its  right  position. 
Putting  aside  the  original  and  literal  meaning  of  the  words,  and  attending 
only  to  their  secondary  application,  notice  : — 

I.  Suffering,  in  all  its  forms,  is,  and  should  be  looked  upon  as  being, 
a  vocation. — 1.  There  are  many,  and  these  real  Christians,  persons  interested 
in  God's  service,  who  regard  suffering  in  a  shallow,  superficial  point  of  view, 
as  an  interference  with  their  vocations,  and  consequently  miss  all  the  golden 
opportunities  of  growth  in  grace  and  knowledge  which  it  holds  out.  2.  The 
truth  is,  that  God,  in  sending  them  the  sickness  or  the  accident,  has  been 
pleased  in  His  wisdom  and  love  to  change  their  vocation,  and,  if  minded  to 
be  really  loyal  to  His  will,  they  must  accommodate  and  familiarise  them- 
selves to  the  idea,  not  that  their  occupation  is  gone,  but  simply  that  it  is 
altered.  3.  When  our  heavenly  Father  changes  our  whole  plan  of  life  by 
His  providential  despatches,  and  virtually  sends  us  the  order,  "  Lie  still, 
and  let  another  gird  thee  and  carry  thee,  instead  of  thy  girding  thyself, 
and  walking  on  Mine  errands  ■  whither  thou  wouldest,' "  shall  we  venture 
even  to  remonstrate,  when  we  are  assured  by  the  testimony  of  His  word 
that  both  His  wisdom  and  His  care  for  us  are  unbounded,  and  when  our 
own  experience  of  life,  brief  as  it  has  been,  re-echoes  this  testimony  ? 
4.  Regard  suffering,  even  in  its  slighter  forms,  as  a  vocation,  having  its 
special  duties,  and  offering  its  special  grace.  Say  secretly  of  it,  "  Here  for 
the  present  lies  thy  allotted  task,  O  my  soul ;  consider  how  much  may  be 
made  of  this  period — how  largely  it  may  be  improved  to  God's  service  and 
thy  salvation." 

II.  May  we  not  say  of  suffering,  that  it  is  the  highest  of  all  vocations  ? 
— 1.  Peter  was  God's  prime  agent  in  the  spread  of  the  gospel  among  the 
people  of  the  circumcision.  Yet  not  one  word  is  here  said  of  the  glorifica- 
tion of  God,  in  connection  with  St.  Peter's  active  days.  The  Evangelist 
speaks  of  his  crucifixion — when  those  limbs,  once  so  full  of  vigour,  so  prompt 
to  move  in  the  Master's  service,  were  fettered,  and  when  his  body  was 
bound  fast  to  the  accursed  tree — as  the  period  when  God  reaped  from 
the  apostle  a  great  harvest  of  glory :  "  Thus  spake  He,  signifying  by  what 
death  he  should  glorify  God."  2.  So  in  a  holy  death  there  is  something 
specially  acceptable,  over  and  above  that  which  there  is  in  a  holy  life;  and 

590 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xxi. 


therefore  with  a  marked  emphasis  it  is  written,  "  Right  dear  in  the  sight  of 
the  Lord  is  the  death  of  His  saints."  2.  The  same  law  is  observable  in 
spiritual  character,  which  rules  the  formation  of  the  natural.  How  often  in  a 
smooth  and  easy  life  do  men,  who  have  something  far  better  beneath, 
appear  selfish,  effeminate,  and  trifling  !  Suddenly  they  are  thrown  into  some 
position  of  high  trust,  great  responsibility,  or  serious  danger ;  are  called  upon 
to  face  an  enemy,  or  submit  to  the  hardships  of  a  campaign ;  and  lo  !  the 
character  shows  a  stuff  and  a  fibre,  ay,  and  a  tenderness  for  others,  which 
no  one  ever  gave  it  credit  for.  4.  But  the  chief  reason  why  suffering  is 
the  highest  of  all  vocations,  is,  that  in  suffering,  so  close  a  conformity  may 
be  attained  to  Him  who  is  the  highest  exemplification  of  human  virtue.  It  was 
to  conformity  with  Him  in  this  high  acquiescence  that  He  called  His  disciple, 
St.  Peter,  when  He  said  to  him,  "Follow  Me."  5.  If  the  words  " Follow 
Me  "  were  addressed  specifically  to  St.  Peter,  are  there  not  words  of  precisely 
similar  import  addressed  to  all  disciples  to  the  end  of  time  ?  Do  we  not  read, 
"  If  any  man  will  come  after  Me,  let  him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his  cross 
daily,  and  follow  Me  "  ?  Ah  !  there  is  the  word  of  which  we  are  in  search,  to 
express  the  agency  of  the  sufferer  in  this  matter — "  take  up  his  cross." — Goulburn. 

"  0  Lord,  my  God,  do  Thou  Thy  holy  will ! 

1  will  lie  still : 
I  will  not  stir,  lest  I  forsake  Thine  arm, 

And  break  the  charm, 
Which  lulls  me,  clinging  to  my  Father's  breast, 

In  perfect  rest." 

Vers.  19,  22.  Following  Christ. — The  way  of  Jesus  in  this  world  was  one 
of  sorrow.  Only  now  and  again  was  His  path  brightened  as  He  saw  of  the 
travail  of  His  soul  in  the  faith  of  some.  But  from  the  beginning  of  His 
public  ministry  He  was  grieved  at  His  rejection  by  those  whom  He  came  to 
redeem.  At  the  close  of  His  public  ministry  one  of  His  disciples  betrayed  Him ; 
the  others  "  forsook  Him,"  etc.  (Mark  xiv.  50).  But  all  this  was  to  be  expected. 
Christ  the  light  must  needs  oppose,  and  be  opposed  by,  the  darkness ;  and  all 
through  His  manifestation  of  Himself  this  conflict  marked  His  path  with  sorrow, 
although  the  hour  of  seeming  defeat  was  virtually  the  hour  of  His  triumph. 

I.  Christ's  disciples  must  follow  Him  in  this  conflict. — 1.  It  is  not  wonderful 
that  the  disciple  should  be  as  the  Lord.  The  same  conflict  between  good  and 
evil  is  still  raging.  As  the  dominant  spirit  of  the  world  is  in  antagonism  to 
the  gospel,  the  disciples  of  Christ  must  expect  to  be  opposed  in  following 
Him,  as  He  Himself  was.  2.  But  they  are  not  to  be  troubled  at  these  things, 
as  though  some  strange  thing  has  happened  to  them.  Christ  suffered  contra- 
diction of  sinners,  and  His  followers  must  meet  it  as  He  did,  and  as  the  apostle 
Peter  learned  to  do  in  following  his  Master  in  after-years  (1  Pet.  ii.  21-23). 
3.  And  so  it  will  be  to  the  end  of  this  dispensation.  In  all  times  earnest 
men  who  strive  to  work  righteousness,  and  refuse  to  deflect  from  the  straight 
path  of  duty,  have  to  struggle  in  following  Christ ;  whilst  often  the  hypocrite, 
the  time-server,  the  conventionalist,  the  sycophant,  glide  along  through  life  easily. 
Recall  in  thought  the  bead-roll  of  men  conspicuous  for  righteousness,  fidelity 
to  truth  and  duty.  The  time  would  fail  to  tell  how  many  have  had  to 
endure  hardness  in  following  their  heavenly  Leader.  4.  Nor  are  the  foes  who 
hinder  all  from  without.  The  greatest  hindrances  to  the  Christian  race  are 
from  within.  The  weights  that  impede,  etc.,  are  pride,  self-will,  desires 
chained  to  the  dust,  etc.  But  those  who  resolve  to  follow  on  in  the  Redeemer's 
strength,  even  when  apparently  vanquished,  will  be  in  reality  more  than 
conquerors. 

591 


chap.  xxi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   JOHN. 


II.  Christ's  disciples  must  follow  Him  without  delay. — 1.  There  is  danger 
lest  in  delaying  they  should  be  turned  aside  from  the  way  of  Christ.  The 
influences  prevalent  in  the  present  evil  world  leave  their  impress  on  the 
spiritual  nature,  if  men  dally  within  their  sphere.  They  mould  the  soul  into 
conformity  with  them  if  permitted  to  prevail,  unite  it  to  the  perishable, 
and  lead  it  away  from  the  Life.  2.  What  would  many  a  one  give  when  nearing 
the  end  of  life's  journey — a  life  spent  in  following  evil — to  gain  a  few  years 
or  even  days  to  retrace  their  steps,  and,  if  it  might  be,  but  enter  on  the 
way  over  which  Christ  trod  and  to  which  He  calls !  But  it  is  not  always 
easy  to  turn  back.  To  the  willing,  longing  heart  it  is  possible  by  grace 
divine.  But  would  there  be  any  desire  often  ?  It  is  hard  for  one  whose  nature 
has  been  dwarfed  and  stunted  in  the  ways  of  sin,  and  in  following  evil, 
even  when  awakened  to  a  sense  of  danger,  and  with  remorse  dogging  his  steps, 
to  turn  and  retrace  his  path,  and  the  end  of  such  a  one  is  often  the  despair 
of  a  Judas  (Matt,  xxvii.  3),  even  though  it  does  not  result  in  his  desperate 
act.  3.  There  is  nothing  more  awful  than  to  see  a  human  soul  turning 
away  from  Christ  !  To  follow  Christ  as  did  the  penitent  and  restored  apostle 
is  to  be  in  the  path  of  safety,  and  leads  to  joy — even  though,  as  in  St.  Peter's 
case,  it  be  through  sorrow  and  suffering  (1  Peter  passim),  in  the  end  it  will 
be  well. 

Vers.  20-23.  The  Lord's  saying  regarding  the  beloved  disciple. — Probably  one 
of  the  reasons  why  this  concluding  chapter,  or  epilogue,  of  the  Gospel  was 
written  was  that  the  erroneous  opinions,  which  were  held  as  to  our  Lord's 
words  concerning  John  on  this  occasion,  might  be  corrected. 

I.  Peter's  question. — 1.  The  memorable  interview  with  Peter  had  ended. 
The  apostle  at  Jesus'  command  was  going  after  him,  and  turning,  saw  the 
disciple  whom  Jesus  loved  also  following.  2.  The  question  Peter  put  was 
prompted  no  doubt  by  love  to  John  in  the  first  place — probably  a  desire  to  know 
whether  his  fellow-disciple,  who  had  not  forsaken  or  denied  the  Lord,  was  to 
have  the  same  bitter  experience  at  the  end  of  life,  or  whether  a  milder  lot  would 
be  his.  Peter  had  not  yet  learned,  as  he  afterward  did,  the  nobility  of  suffering 
for  righteousness'  sake  (1  Pet.  iv.  13-16).  3.  But  there  was  also  a  culpable 
spirit  of  curiosity,  a  breaking  through  for  the  moment  of  the  old  forward  spirit 
so  often  manifested.  His  Lord  had  just  graciously  readmitted  him  into  his 
office  and  apostleship.  He  should  therefore  have  been  humbly  receptive,  and  not 
forward  to  ask  what  Jesus  did  not  offer  to  communicate. 

II.  The  Lord's  reply  (ver.  22). — 1.  There  is  conveyed  in  it  a  certain  degree 
of  reproof,  as  if  the  Lord  had  said,  "  Would  it  not  be  well  for  you  to  attend  to 
what  I  have  said — working  on  till  you  are  called  to  '  follow  Me '  on  the  way  of 
martyrdom — content  to  aid  your  brethren  in  their  work,  and  not  occupy  your 
mind  in  speculating  on  their  future?"  God  has  reserved  the  future  in  His  own 
power  ;  it  is  not  our  part  to  pry  into  those  "  times  and  seasons  "  (Acts  i.  7).  It 
is  ours,  having  received  power,  to  go  forth  to  labour,  leaving  the  future  of 
ourselves  and  others  dear  to  us  in  His  hands,  knowing  that  whatever  it  may  be 
it  can  only  bring  good  (Bom.  viii.  28).  2.  There  is,  it  is  true,  a  natural  desire  in 
our  hearts  to  know  that  the  future  of  those  dear  to  us  shall  be  prosperous, 
happy,  etc.  And  frequently  one  of  the  bitterest  pangs  in  the  case  of  those 
dying,  and  leaving  behind  them  helpless  ones  who  have  been  depending  on  them, 
is  the  uncertainty  which  surrounds  the  future  of  those  left.  But  the  safe  plan 
is  so  to  follow  Christ,  and  influence  those  dear  to  us  to  follow  Him  also,  that 
everything  can  be  restfully  entrusted  to  Him.  3.  The  incident  may  teach  also 
that  there  is  a  species  of  curiosity  that  cannot  be  praised,  which  may  lead 
to  ideas  and  opinions  which,  if  cherished,  may  result  in  laxity  and  remissness 

592 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ST.  JOHN.       chap.  XXI. 


even  in  the  Christian  life,  and  thus  to  turning  away  from,  in  place  of  following, 
the  Redeemer. 

III.  The  meaning  of  our  Lord's  answer  explained. — 1.  The  Lord  had  said 
"if  I  will  that  he  tarry,"  etc.,  thus  bidding  Peter  remember  that  He  is  supreme ; 
that  He  acts  "  according  to  His  will,"  etc.  (Dan.  iv.  35) ;  that  the  lives  of  men 
are  controlled  and  determined  according  to  His  wisdom  and  power.  And  thus 
those  who  are  His,  who  are  in  unison  with  His  divine  purposes,  know  that 
eternal  wisdom,  love,  and  power  are  watching  over  them  all  through  life  to  its 
end.  His  purposes,  so  far  as  His  people  are  concerned,  will  issue  in  good. 
2.  No  need  then  curiously  to  inquire  or  take  thought  for  the  morrow  in  regard 
to  ourselves  or  our  brethren  in  Him.  As  He  wills  we  live,  when  He  wills 
we  depart;  and  whether  that  time  be  long  or  short,  whether  the  issue  be 
through  cloud  or  through  sunshine,  it  must  be  well.  If,  then,  John  should  tarry 
till  Christ  came,  should  not  go  hence  by  a  martyr's  death  like  Peter,  of  what 
consequence  was  it  ?  In  this  he  could  follow  Christ  as  well  as  Peter,  who  was 
to  go  hence  by  a  rougher  way.  3.  But  this  saying  of  our  Lord  resulted  in  a 
misunderstanding  among  the  brethren  in  the  apostolic  Church.  It  was  commonly 
reported  that  John  "  should  not  die"  This  misunderstanding  arose  from  an 
erroneous  interpretation  of  the  words,  "  till  I  come"  (1)  Christ  comes  to  His  own 
at  death  (xiv.  3) ;  (2)  He  came  to  His  disciples  spiritually,  according  to  His  promise 
(xiv.  22,  23,  etc. ;  Matt.  xvi.  28) ;  (3)  He  was  to  come  in  judgment  on  Jerusalem 
(Matt.  xxiv.  30 ;  Luke  xxi.  25-28) ;  (4)  and,  finally,  He  is  coming  to  judge  the  quick 
and  the  dead.  4.  Now,  those  who  erroneously  interpreted  our  Lord's  words 
thought  these  referred  to  the  coming  of  Christ  in  final  judgment,  and  therefore 
they  conceived  that  the  apostle  would  not  die  (1  Thess.  iv.  17).  Here  lay  their 
error.  They  forgot  that  the  last  two  comings  mentioned  are  so  connected 
that  they  are  practically  one.  These  two  events  are  the  first  and  last  link  of  a 
chain  of  Christ's  comings  in  judgment.  They  are  closely  connected  by  St.  Matthew 
(xxiv.  29,  30,  36,  42);  and  St.  John  in  Revelation  iterates  and  reiterates  the 
Lord's  message  to  His  Church:  "/  am  coming  quickly"  (Rev.  xxii.  7,  etc.). 
5.  John  thus  did  remain  till  Christ  came  to  him  in  these  ways  :  Jerusalem  fell ; 
he  still  lived  whilst  many — most  of  his  fellow-apostles  had  passed  away.  "  On 
Patmos'  lonely  isle  "  he  saw  in  vision  the  Lord  in  glory ;  and  still  he  tarried, 
commissioned  to  go  and  proclaim  the  Lord's  purposes  with  His  Church.  He 
saw  the  kingdom  of  God  coming  with  power,  spreading  like  the  tree  growing 
from  the  tiny  mustard  seed ;  and  then  His  Lord  came  to  take  him  to  Himself 
(xiv.  3),  to  await  that  hour  when,  in  the  body,  His  saints  shall  be  like  Him,  for 
they  shall  see  Him  as  He  is  (1  John  iii.  2). 

Yer.  22.  li  Follow  thou  Me." — To  those  who  follow  the  Redeemer  there  is 
given  a  fourfold  joy. 

I.  The  joy  of  forgiveness. — The  prisoner  condemned  to  suffer,  set  at  liberty; 
the  sick  man  whose  life  was  despaired  of,  restored  to  health ;  the  debtor  who  felt 
the  load  intolerable,  set  free  by  another's  bounty — these  are  but  inadequate 
types  of  the  joy  of  deliverance  from  the  load  and  burden,  the  misery  and  fear,  of 
unforgiven  sin,  and  a  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment.  Joy  fills  the  heart  and 
irradiates  the  life.  "  Then  was  our  mouth  filled  with  laughter,  and  our  tongue 
with  singing"  (Ps.  cxxvi.  2). 

II.  The  joy  of  free,  unfettered  obedience  and  service. — Sin  has  no  more 
dominion  over  those  who  are  Christ's.  Its  bondage  has  been  broken,  and  there 
is  no  longer  the  galling  and  vain  attempt  in  their  lives  to  keep  the  command- 
ments as  a  means  to  gain  the  divine  favour,  but  the  willing  obedience  of  sons  of 
the  heavenly  Father,  who,  following  their  divine  pattern,  find  it  indeed  to  be 
their  meat  to  do  that  Father's  will  and  finish  His  work ;  so  that  neither  trial  nor 

QQ  593 


chap.  xxi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY;   ST.  JOHN. 

difficulty  in  the  doing  of  it  will  detract  from  their  joy.  Like  St.  Paul,  they  can 
each  say,  "  Yea,  if  I  be  offered  (poured  out)  upon  the  sacrifice  and  service  of  your 
faith,  I  joy  and  rejoice  with  you  all  "  (Phil.  ii.  17). 

III.  The  joy  of  assured  hope. — What  are  the  hopes  of  men  to  whom  no 
revelation  of  divine  love  and  grace  hath  come  ?  Even  to  the  best  and  noblest  of 
the  past,  who  amid  the  darkness  have  struggled  toward  the  light,  hope  was  but 
a  dim  and  feeble  ray,  uncertain  oft  and  oft  extinguished ;  whilst  the  logical 
result  of  modern  materialistic  systems  is  the  entire  obliteration  of  hope  for  man 
beyond  the  brief  and  limited  spheres  of  earth  and  time.  All  the  comfort  materialism 
can  give  us  is  "  to  meet  with  brave  hearts "  (Huxley)  the  awful  unknown. 
But  in  following  the  Redeemer  we  are  "  begotten  again  to  a  living  hope  through 
the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead,  to  an  inheritance  .  .  .  that 
fadeth  not  away  "  (1  Pet.  i.  3,  4).  The  present  and  future  here  blessed  by 
His  presence  are  radiant  with  hope,  and  from  the  eternal  glory  it  scintillates 
and  glows  on  the  path  of  the  believer  here.  A  life  without  hope  is  a  life  of  per- 
petual captivity.  A  life  with  hope  is  like  the  life  of  noble,  generous  youth, 
pressing  eagerly  forward  into  the  future.  And  in  following  the  Redeemer  we 
lay  hold  of  this  element  of  perennial  strength  and  vigour,  a  mark  and  charac- 
teristic of  true  pilgrims  Zionward  : — 

"  The  beacon  of  life's  dreary  sea, 
The  star  of  immortality." 

Swain. 

IV.  The  joy  of  victory. — In  following  Christ  we  gain  the  victory  over  self. 
Man's  will  and  desire  were  formed  not  to  be  centred  in  himself,  but  in  God. 
And  so  long  as  our  will  is  opposed  to  God's  there  can  be  no  true  joy  in  life.  But 
as  Christ,  the  perfect  example  in  all  things,  acquiesced  in  the  Father's  will,  so 
Christ's  disciples  say,  Not  my  will,  but  Thine,  be  done.  "  In  His  will  is  our 
peace  "  (Dante).  Victory  over  sin.  There  is  no  happiness  in  the  slavery  of  sin, 
and  therefore  going  after  Christ  brings  freedom  and  joy.  Last,  victory  over 
the  fear  of  death  and  the  hereafter.  Christ's  followers  behold  the  light  of 
eternity  shining  through  the  Saviour's  empty  tomb ;  and  as  their  Redeemer- 
Shepherd  is  their  judge,  they  look  to  meet  Him  with  joy  and  not  with  grief. 
Theirs  is  the  joy  of  final  victory,  even  though  the  passage  to  it  be  through 
suffering,  as  Christ's  was. 

"  Sure  the  last  end 
Of  the  good  man  is  peace  1    How  calm  his  exit  1 
Night  dews  fall  not  more  gently  on  the  ground, 
Nor  weary,  worn-out  winds  expire  so  soft." 

Blair. 

Ver.  25.  The  truth  of  the  record. — I.  The  impossibility  of  fully  pourtraying 
Christ's  life. — This  verse  refers  evidently  to  the  entire  life  of  the  Saviour  from 
His  coming  into  the  world  to  His  leaving  it.  St.  John  is  closing  his  narrative  of 
that  life ;  and  the  historian,  as  if  with  a  sigh,  tells  us  that  he  has  only  given  a 
faint  sketch  or  outline  of  that  wonderful  life,  so  filled,  in  all  its  days  and  nights, 
with  acts  of  wondrous  power  and  gracious  mercy,  and  words  of  wisdom  and  of 
kindness.  Is  it  strange  that  the  historian  should  say  this  ?  Without  for  one 
moment  doubting  that  he  was  heaven-prompted  to  give  the  world  that  plain, 
honest  narrative  of  facts  and  words  (words  in  his  case  especially)  which  presents 
to  us  our  Saviour  so  beautifully,  as  described  by  the  disciple  whom  He  loved, 
cannot  we  imagine  that  disciple  saying  thus,  as  though  to  himself,  that,  Oh  ! 
there  were  thousands  of  things  done  and  said  by  his  Lord  beyond  those  which  he 
had  been  writing  down  ?  And  as  these  things  and  sayings  came  crowding  in  on 
the  loving  memory  of  John,  is  it  strange  that  he  should  thus  exclaim  that  all  the 

594 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.         chap.  xxi. 


books  in  the  world  would  not  suffice  to  describe,  in  its  full  beauty  and  power  and 
holiness,  that  wondrous  life  ? 

II.  The  writer's  hyperbole  prophetic. — One  would  almost  think  the  Evan- 
gelist's words  were  prophetic.  Think  what  a  proportion  of  the  literature,  which 
for  ages  past  has  been  pouring  from  the  press  for  the  world's  reading,  grows  out 
of,  bears  upon,  that  life  and  that  teaching  of  which  John  (when  he  said  this)  had 
given  the  world  a  bare  sketch  or  outline  !  And  how  such  literature  keeps  pouring 
into  the  world  still !  It  does  look,  indeed,  in  the  present  day,  as  if  the  world 
could  not  contain  the  books. 

Application. — 1.  St.  John  had  so  been  with  Jesus  (perhaps  also  had  of  late 
held  such  communion  with  his  risen  Lord)  that  when  he  thought  of  Him  he  saw 
something  far  more  distinct  and  definite  and  real  than  even  the  beautifully 
graphic  picture  he  had  been  enabled  to  set  before  the  world.  2.  Let  us  know 
the  living  Saviour,  our  elder  brother,  the  friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a 
brother — know  Him  in  prayer,  in  holy  thought,  in  daily  life — and  we  shall  be 
like  John.  We  shall  have  a  more  vivid  conception  of  what  our  Saviour  is — how 
wise,  how  kind,  how  powerful  to  take  care  of  us  here  and  anywhere,  now  and 
for  ever — a  more  real  conception  of  Him  than  that  which  we  can  draw  from 
even  that  grand,  striking,  wondrously  impressive  fourfold  picture  which  the  word 
of  God  holds  out  to  us.  Though  bless  God  for  that  "  four-ply  "  sketch  !  And 
may  the  Holy  Spirit  engrave  it  deeper  and  clearer,  and  in  more  loving  lines  and 
tones,  on  all  our  hearts,  as  we  live  !     Amen. — Rev.  Thomas  Hardy. 

HOMILETIC   NOTES. 

Ver.  17.  Our  LordJs  omniscience. —  result  of  His  taking   careful   note  of 

Indeed,  our  Lord's  knowledge  embraced  peculiarities  of   action    and   character 

two  districts,  each  of  which  really  lies  manifested  to  the  eye  by  those  around 

open  only  to  the  eye  of  the  Most  High.  Him,  but  of  His  "  perceiving  in  His 

We  will  not  dwell  on  His  knowledge  of  Spirit  "  and  "  knowing  in  Himself  "  the 

the  unsuspected  future,  a   knowledge  unuttered    reasonings     and     volitions 

inherent  in  Him,  as  it  was  imparted  to  which  were  taking  shape,  moment  by 

those  prophets  in  whom  His  Spirit  had  moment,    within   the    secret    souls   of 

dwelt.      We   will   not    insist   on   His  men,  just  as  clearly  as  He  saw  physical 

knowledge    of    a    strictly   contingent  facts  not  ordinarily  appreciated  except 

futurity,   such   as   is  involved  in  His  by  sensuous  perception.     This  was  the 

positive  assertion  that  Tyre  and  Sidon  conviction  of  His  apostles.     "  We  are 

would  have  repented  of  their  sins,  if  sure,"  they  said,  "  that  Thou  knowest 

they  had  enjoyed  the  opportunities  of  all  things  "   (xvi.   30).      "  Lord,   Thou 

Chorazin    and    Bethsaida  ;     although  knowest,"  etc.,  cries  St.  Peter  (xxi.  17). 

such  knowledge  as  this,  considering  the  Yet  more,  in  the  eternal  Father  Jesus 

vast   survey   of   motives   and   circum-  encounters  no  impenetrable  mysteries ; 

stances  which  it  implies,  must  be  strictly  for  Jesus  no  clouds  and  darkness  are 

proper  to  God  alone.     But  He  knew  round  about  Him,  nor  is  His  way  in 

the  secret  heart  of  man,  and  He  knew  the   sea,   nor   His   path   in   the   deep 

the  hidden  thought  and  purpose  of  the  waters,  nor  His  footsteps  unknown.  On 

most   high  God.     Such  a  "  discerner  "  the  contrary,  our  Lord  reciprocates  the 

was  He  "  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  "  Father's  knowledge  of  Himself  by  an 

of   human   hearts,   so    truly    did   His  equivalent   knowledge   of  the  Father. 

Apocalyptic  title,  the  "  Searcher  of  the  "As  the  Father,"   etc.   (x.   15);  "No 

reins  and  hearts,"  belong  to  Him  in  the  man    knoweth,"    etc.    (Luke    x.    22). 

days  of  His    historical  manifestation,  Even  if  our  Lord  should  be  speaking, 

that  "  He  needed  not  that  any  should  in  this  passage,  primarily  at  least,  of 

testify,"  etc.  (ii.  25).     This  was  not  a  His  divine  omniscience,   He    is    also 

595 


chap.  xxi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN. 


plainly  speaking  of  a  knowledge  infused  although  we  may  presume   generally 

into  and  possessed  by  His  human  soul,  that  it  was  a  part  of  that  condescend- 

and  thus  His  words   supply   the  true  ing  love  which  led  Him  to  become  "  in 

foil  to  His  statement  respecting   the  all  things   like    unto   His    brethren.' 

day  of  judgment.     If  that  statement  That  He  was  ever  completely  ignorant 

be   construed   literally,   it    manifestly  of  aught  else,  or  that  He  was  ignorant 

describes,  not  the  normal  condition  of  on   this  point  at  any  other  time,  are 

His  human  intelligence,  but  an  excep-  inferences  for  which  we  have  no  warrant, 

tional    restriction.      For    the    gospel  and  which  we  make  at  our  peril. — H. 

history  implies  that  the  knowledge  in-  P.  Liddon. 
fused  into  the  human  soul  of  Jesus  was 

ordinarily  and  practically  equivalent  to  Vers.  24,  25.  The  meaning  of  the 
omniscience.  "  We  may  conjecture,"  epilogue. — Much  ingenuity  has  been 
says  Hooker,  "how  the  powers  of  that  expended  in  the  efforts  to  explain  this 
soul  are  illuminated,  which,  being  so  appendix  or  epilogue  to  the  Gospel, 
inward  unto  God,  cannot  choose  but  The  opinion  held  generally  at  present 
be  privy  unto  all  things  which  God  among  scholars  is  that  the  chapter  as 
worketh,  and  must  therefore  of  necessity  a  whole  is  an  appendix  added  by  the 
be  endued  with  knowledge  so  far  forth  apostle  some  time  after  the  Gospel  was 
universal,  though  not  with  infinite  published,  and  that  vers.  24,  25  form 
knowledge  peculiar  to  Deity  itself."  an  addition  by  a  later  hand,  or  that 
St.  Paul's  assertion  that  "  in  Christ  are  ver.  25  at  least  was  thus  added.  The 
hidden,"  etc.  (Col.  ii.  3),  may  practically  style  in  which  the  chapter  is  written  is 
be  understood  of  Christ's  earthly  life,  John's  style.  Any  seeming  peculiari- 
no  less  than  of  His  life  of  glory.  If  ties  may  be  accounted  for  on  the  rational 
then  His  human  intellect,  flooded  as  it  supposition  that  much  of  John's  Gospel 
was  by  the  infusion  of  boundless  light,  was  written  long  before  it  was  given 
streaming  from  His  Deity,  was  denied,  forth  to  the  world  (see  Introd.).  It 
at  a  particular  time,  knowledge  of  the  seems  better  on  the  whole  to  conclude 
date  of  a  particular  future  event,  this  with  Lange  (and  others)  that  chap.  xxi. 
may  well  be  compared  with  that  de-  is  designed  as  an  epilogue,  and  forms 
privation  of  the  consolations  of  Deity,  at  the  close  of  the  Gospel  the  counter- 
to  which  His  human  affections  and  will  part  of  the  prologue  at  the  beginning ; 
were  exposed  when  He  hung  dying  on  that  it  represents  "  the  post-historical 
the  cross.  If  "  the  divine  wisdom,"  as  operations  of  Christ  in  the  world,  in 
Bishop  Bull  has  said,  "  impressed  its  general,  as  an  administration  exercised 
effects  upon  the  human  soul  of  Christ  by  the  Lord  in  heaven  over  the 
pro  temporum  ratione,  in  the  degree  Church  on  earth,  with  a  view  to 
required  by  particular  occasions  or  conduct  her  forward  to  the  kingdom 
emergencies,"  this  would  be  only  one  of  glory  in  the  world  above  "  (Lange, 
application  of  the  principle  recognised  Life  of  Christ).  The  incidents  in 
by  St.  Irenseus  and  Theodoret,  and  the  chapter  become  therefore  sym- 
rendered  familiar  to  many  of  us  in  the  bolical  of  the  course  of  the  Church's 
language  of  Hooker.  "  As  the  parts,  history,  and  of  our  Lord's  rule  and 
degrees,  and  offices  of  that  mystical  dealings  with  His  people  during  the 
administration  did  require,  which  He  course  of  that  history.  No  doubt  also 
voluntarily  undertook,  the  beams  of  the  apostle,  in  writing  the  chapter,  had 
Deity  did  in  operation  always  accord-  in  view  the  correction  of  the  erroneous 
ingly  restrain  or  enlarge  themselves."  impression  as  to  the  meaning  of  our 
We  may  not  attempt  rashly  to  specify  Lord's  words  concerning  him.  There 
the  exact  motive  which  may  have  de-  is  no  cogent  reason  also  why  vers.  24,  25 
termined  our  Lord  to  deny  to  His  should  be  ascribed  to  other  hands  than 
human  soul  at  one  particular  date  the  the  writer  of  the  Gospel.  Surely  ver.  23 
point  of  knowledge  here  in  question ;  would  have  been  a  most  abrupt  and 

596 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.        chap.  xxi. 


unsuitable  close  of  such  a  momentous 
record  ;  and  most  unlike  John,  for  the 
reference  in  that  verse  is  mostly  to 
himself.  And  whilst  in  xx.  30,  31  the 
purpose  of  the  Gospel  is  fully  stated, 
here  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  natur- 
ally comes.  Nor  is  Chrysostom's  ex- 
planation of  olSa/jLcv,  We  know,  of 
ver.  24  to  be  summarily  rejected.  It 
might  well  be  written  oTSa  fxlv,  I 
indeed  know,  in  the  sense  of  /  testify, 
I  asseverate  or  affirm.  Chrysostom  and 
Theophylact  were  not  such  bunglers  or 
imperfect  Greek  scholars  as  to  suggest 
an  impossibility  (but  see  Godet  in  loc). 
The  words  of  ver.  24  distinctly  connect 
it  with  ver.  23,  and  are  indeed  most 
explicit.  "  This  is  the  disciple  who 
testifies n  (present,  6  fiapTvpuiv),  "  and 
who  wrote "  (past,  ypdi[/a<s) ;  and  in 
the  "  I  know  "  (or,  if  oiSafAtv  be  read, 
"I  and  those  associated  with  me  in 
the  Church  ")  he  solemnly  affirms  the 
truth  of  his  testimony.  The  hyperbolic 
expression  in  ver.  25,  which  seems  to 
many  incompatible  with  the  idea  of  the 
Johannine  authorship  of  the  verse,  may 
not  seem  so  much  out  of  place  when 
the  life  of  Jesus  is  viewed  in  the  light 
of  the  Prologue.  The  meaning  of 
these  verses  may  therefore  be  unfolded 
as  follows : — 


Vers.  24,  25.  John's  final  testimony 
to  the  truth  of  what  he  had  written. — 
I.  The  apostle  affirms  the  truth  of 
his  Gospel. — 1.  When  he  wrote  he  was 
still  in  the  flesh,  prepared  to  witness 
by  his  life  or  death  to  the  truth  of 
what  he  had  seen  and  heard,  which  he 
thus  gave  to  the  world.  2.  His  Gospel 
is  therefore  to  be  included  in  that 
word  of  truth  which  is  able  to  make 
men  wise  unto  salvation,  etc.  (2  Tim. 
iii.  15). 

II.  What  is  recorded  is  not  a 
complete  life  of  the  Saviour,  but  is 
sufficient  for  the  purpose  described 
(xx.  30,  31). — 1.  The  Gospel  is  but  a 
fragmentary  exhibition  of  the  truth 
concerning  Christ,  but  it  is  sufficient 
for  its  purpose.  2.  Had  every  word 
of  Jesus  and  every  fact  of  His  public 
ministry  been  recorded,  the  record  would 
not  have  come  within  limits  which 
would  make  it  useful' for  all  men,  and 
easily  disseminated  throughout  the 
world.  3.  Nor  would  it  have  been 
possible  to  set  forth  in  a  limited  space 
the  fulness  of  Christ,  which  is  infinite. 
What  book,  what  world  of  books,  could 
contain  it  %  4.  Even  on  what  has 
been  recorded  the  mass  of  literature  is 
enormous.  This  limitation  is  therefore 
a  proof  of  divine  wisdom. 


Ver.  15.  Feeding  the  lambs  of  the  flock. — 
"  Lovest  thou  Me  more  than  these  love  Me  ? " 
It  is  an  appeal  to  the  oldest  instinct  of 
Peter's  nature,  his  desire  to  be  first.  The 
root  of  his  whole  being  had  been  ambition. 
Even  in  his  approach  to  his  Lord  there  had 
been  a  consciousness  of  self,  a  thirst  for 
superiority,  a  desire  that  his  coming  should 
be  singled  out  from  the  approaches  of  all 
other  men.  "  Bid  me  that  I  come  to  Thee 
on  the  waters  " — that  had  been  the  motto  of 
his  life.  What  was  he  that  he  should  be 
bidden  more  than  John  or  James  or 
Nathanael  ?  But  the  instinct  for  superiority 
was  in  the  man,  and  he  could  not  help  it. 
And  now  it  is  to  this  instinct  that  our  Lord 
appeals,  "  Lovest  thou  Me  more  than  these 
love  Me  ?  "  Is  there  the  old  wish  to  be  first  ? 
But  observe  the  new  revelation  which  the 
Lord  makes  to  the  old  instinct,  M  Feed  My 
lambs."  It  is  as  if  He  said :  Peter,  thou  hast 
been  pursuing  a  wrong  road  to  greatness  \ 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


he  that  is  least  shall  be  greatest  of  all. 
Wouldst  thou  be  spiritually  the  most  con- 
spicuous of  the  band  ?  Then  must  thou  be 
the  least  proud,  the  most  self-forgetting. 
Thou  must  come  down  to  feed  the  very 
lambs  of  the  flock.  Thou  must  descend  into 
the  lowliest  valleys  of  the  world.  Thou 
must  lose  through  the  very  power  of  thy 
love  all  sense  of  thine  own  power.  Thou 
must  forget  thine  interest  in  the  interest  of 
the  lives  beneath  thee,  thou  must  be  ob- 
livious of  thy  wants  in  feeling  the  hunger 
and  the  thirst  of  other  souls,  thou  must  take 
no  thought  for  thyself  through  the  pressure 
of  one  great  thought — the  burden  of 
humanity,  the  bearing  of  My  cross.  O  Thou 
that  hast  emptied  Thyself  of  Thy  glory,  and 
by  Thy  humiliation  hast  conquered  the  world, 
help  me  to  be  great  like  Thee  in  Thee. 
Give  me  Thine  own  spirit  of  self-forgetfulness, 
that  I  may  be  inspired  with  the  power  of 
love.    Teach  me  to  lose  self-will,  that  I  may 

597 


chap.  xxi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  JOHN. 


be  strengthened  by  a  higher  will.  Let  my 
life  be  buried  in  the  love  of  Thee,  hid  in  the 
sense  of  Thy  presence,  absorbed  and  lost 
and  overshadowed  in  Thine  all-excelling 
glory.  Then  in  Thy  cross  shall  I  reach  Thy 
crown,  and  Calvary  shall  become  my  Olivet. 
My  enthusiasm  of  self-forgetfulness  shall 
be  the  greatness  of  my  power,  my  loss  shall 
be  my  gain,  my  death  shall  be  the  strength 
of  my  life.  When  I  feel  that  I  have 
nothing  I  shall  indeed  possess  all  things ; 
when  I  am  least  conscious  of  myself  I  shall 
be  strongest  of  all.  Teach  me  to  feed  Thy 
lambs. — Dr.  Geo.  Matheson. 

Vers.  22,  23.  Every  man  shall  bear  his  own 
burden. — It  is  worth  observing  that  the 
Evangelist  says,  "  Then  Peter,  turning  about, 
seeth,"  etc.  (ver.  20).  Peter  had  to  turn  about 
in  order  to  see  John — had  he  simply  followed 
Christ  as  he  had  been  bidden,  he  would 
have  seen  nothing  of  John ;  and  thus  it  is 
with  us — we  turn  about  when  we  look  after 
our  neighbours,  we  go  straight  forward  when 
we  look  only  to  Christ.  Remember,  then, 
that  "  Every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden." 
Remember,  that  every  man  standeth  or 
falleth  to  his  own  master.  Exercise  charity 
rather  than  curiosity — the  charity  which 
hopeth  all  things,  rather  than  the  curiosity 
which  would  pry  into  all  things.  Say  not 
with  Peter,  "Lord,  what  shall  this  man 
do  ?  "  but  with  Paul,  "  Lord,  what  wouldst 
thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  You  are  quite  safe 
in  waiting  till  you  are  in  heaven  to  know 
whether  others  shall  be  there  too ;  but  you 
may  lose  the  path  yourselves  by  "  turning 
about "  to  see  whether  others  are  following 
or  not.  "  If  I  will  that  he  tarry,"  etc. 
(ver.  23).  If  I  will  that  he  have  fewer,  or 
that  he  have  heavier  trials,  what  is  that  to 
thee  ?  If  I  will  that  he  linger  long  upon 
earth,  or  that  he  be  speedily  removed,  what 
is  that  to  thee  ?  If  I  assign  him  extra- 
ordinary duties,  or  confer  upon  him 
extraordinary  privileges,  what  is  that  to 
thee?  "Follow  thou  Me."  I  have  given 
thee  enough  to  do,  and  enough  to  bear :  it 
diminishes  not  thy  mercies  that  another  has 
greater;  it  adds  not  to  thy  trouble  that 
another  has  less ;  it  would  not  make  thy 
calling  and  election  more  sure  to  read 
another's  name  in  the  Lamb's  Book  of  Life  ; 
neither  would  it  invalidate  thine  own  hope 
of  glory  to  be  told  that  another  came  short. 
"Follow  thou  Me."  O  blessed  Lord,  give 
us  Thy  grace  to  enable  us  to  obey  Thy 
command  1  Teach  us  to  look  within,  to 
busy  ourselves  with  ourselves,  to  be  severe 
on  ourselves,  gentle  and  charitable  to  others, 
to  follow  Thee  too  steadfastly  and  too 
intently  to  have  time  to  turn  about,  or 
inclination  for  unprofitable  questions  as  to 
our  brethren.  u  Follow  thou  Me  " — and 
whither  now  goeth  our  Lord  1  Indeed  when 
He  spoke  to  Peter  He  was  about  to  pass  to 

598 


the  right  hand  of  God ;  but  He  had  just 
before  told  this  disciple  that  he  must  have 
fellowship  with  Him  in  His  sufferings.  Oh  1 
let  this  truth  be  remembered  by  all:  we 
must  follow  Thee,  O  Lord,  to  Thy  cross,  if 
ever  we  would  follow  Thee,  O  Lord,  to  Thy 
crown.  — Henry  Melvill. 

Vers.  23,  24.  St.  John's  fitness  as  a  witness 
to  Christ. — After  eating  together,  and  after 
the  gracious  dealing  with  Peter  that  ensued, 
Jesus  rises,  and  begins  to  walk  away  from 
the  spot,  saying  to  Peter,  "Follow  Me" 
who  does  so.  John  also  follows,  unbidden 
and  silently,  as  he  had  done  once  before 
when  the  Baptist  said,  "Behold  the  Lamb 
of  God  I "  Peter,  turning  round  and  seeing 
him,  asks,  "  Lord,  and  what  shall  this  man 
do  ?  "  To  whom  the  Lord  replies,  "  If  I  will 
that  he  tarry  till  I  come,  what  is  that  to 
thee?  follow  thou  Me?  His  future  lies 
wholly  in  My  will.  The  saying  went  abroad 
among  the  disciples  that  John  was  not  to 
die  ;  and  a  legend  arose  afterwards  that  he 
only  slumbered,  breathing  in  his  grave,  and 
that  the  turf  was  tremulous  above  him. 
"  Yet  Jesus  said  not  He  shall  not  die,  but  If  I 
will  that  he  tarry  till  I  come?  This  is  the 
last  glimpse  we  have  of  John's  companion- 
ship with  Jesus  on  to  the  ascension  into 
heaven,  when  He  sat  on  the  right  hand  of 
God.  On  the  banks  of  the  Jordan,  in  the 
beginning,  he  followed  Jesus  unbidden,  and 
abode  with  Him  that  day ;  on  the  shore 
of  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  after  the  resurrection, 
he  begins  to  follow,  again  unbidden,  in  a 
course  that  runs  down  through  eternity, 
neither  death  nor  life  able  to  separate  him 
from  his  Lord  and  Saviour.  It  is  .  .  .  ap- 
parent that  not  only  had  John  special 
qualifications  both  by  nature  and  by  grace 
for  being  a  witness  of  the  Lord's  life,  but 
special  opportunities  of  observation  and 
intimate  knowledge  were  afforded  him ; 
special  disclosures  of  the  Lord's  glory  were 
opened  up  to  him ;  and  none  of  the  twelve 
penetrated  more  deeply  into  the  revelation, 
or  treasured  it  up  more  faithfully  and  lovingly 
in  his  heart.  "  We  beheld  His  glory,"  he 
says  in  the  beginning  of  his  Gospel ;  and 
in  his  first  Epistle  he  reports  how  he  had 
heard,  and  seen  with  his  eyes,  and  looked 
upon,  and  his  hands  handled,  the  manifested 
Word  of  Life.  In  view  of  what  had  been 
disclosed  to  him,  he  is  overwhelmed  by  the 
impossibility  of  duly  and  worthily  setting  it 
forth,  and  thinks  of  all  he  has  told  in  his 
Gospel  as  the  merest  nothing  compared  with 
what  there  was  to  tell.  Looking  upon  his 
little  slender  manuscript,  which  is  to  us  so 
profound  and  wonderful,  he  exclaims,  I 
have  shown  you  a  part  of  His  way  ;  but  the 
world  itself  could  not  contain  the  books  that 
might  be  written,  rehearsing  the  superb  story. 
It  is  testimony  to  the  fulness  of  knowledge, 
of  insight,  of  understanding,  of  memory,  of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  JOHN.       chap.  xxi. 


sacred  joy,  which  he  possessed ;  and  to  the 
impossibility  of  telling  all  he  knew. — Br. 
J.  Culross,  "John  whom  Jesus  Loved." 

Ver.  25.  The  Bible  suited  to  men  of  all 
classes  and  circumstances. — The  great  practi- 
cal lesson  which  we  desire  to  draw  from 
this  subject  is  one  which  is  applicable  to 
every  class  of  hearers.  Whatever  your 
position  in  life,  whatever  your  occupation, 
we  have  to  say  to  you  all,  we  have  to  ask 
you  all  to  bear  away  with  you  the  truth 
that  there  is  enough  in  the  Bible  for  those 
who  have  most  time  at  their  command,  and 
not  too  much  for  those  who  have  least  time 
at  their  command.  There  may  be  those  of 
you  whom  God  has  so  placed  that  they  are 
not  compelled  to  wear  away  their  days  and 
nights  in  providing  means  of  subsistence  for 
themselves  and  their  families,  but  who  are 
blessed  with  such  a  measure  of  sufficiency 
that  they  have  leisure  at  their  disposal  for 
study  and  inquiry.  And  what  is  the  lesson 
which  our  subject  reads  to  such  as  these  1 
Why,  we  press  on  these  men,  who  are  com- 
paratively men  of  leisure,  the  duty  of 
searching  the  Scriptures ;  Of  giving  them- 
selves, assiduously  and  prayerfully,  to  the 
searching  of  Scripture,  assuring  them  that 
the  more  they  explore,  the  more  will 
the  mine  deepen ;  and  thus  will  study 
be  recompensed,  not  only  by  present  dis- 
coveries, but  by  the  certainty  that  there  are 
yet  greater  to  be  made.  But  there  are 
others  amongst  you  who  are  quite  differently 
circumstanced,  who  have  hardly  any  time 
they  can  call  their  own;  who  must  "rise 
early,  and  late  take  rest,  and  eat  the  bread 
of  carefulness."  And  what  do  we  say  to 
these  ?  What  lesson  do  we  draw  for  these 
from  our  subject  ?  Exactly  what  we  said — 
exactly  what  we  drew  in  the  case  of  men 
who  had  much  leisure  at  their  disposal.  We 
press  alike  upon  those  who  are  deeply 
engaged  in  business  the  duty  of  searching 
the  Scriptures.  We  will  take  no  apology 
from  the  extent  of  your  occupations.  Com- 
mentators may  swell  the  Bible,  but  the  Bible 
itself  is  but  a  small  book;  and  if  only  a 


single  chapter  were  read  morning  and 
evening,  read  with  hearty,  humble  prayer, 
there  would  be  rapidly  acquired  a  great 
knowledge  of  Scripture ;  and  men  of  business, 
if  not  profound  theologians,  would  be  well 
versed  in  the  revelation  made  by  God  of 
Himself.  It  is  a  mercy  for  you  that  the 
Bible  is  not  larger.  You  are  thus  deprived 
of  a  most  specious  excuse  by  which  you 
might  have  striven  to  justify  ignorance.  If 
the  divine  writings,  like  the  writing  of 
divines,  filled  shelf  upon  shelf,  and  room 
upon  room,  we  should  have  you  asking  the 
use  of  recommending  the  records  of  salva- 
tion to  men  who  had  but  a  few  minutes 
every  day  which  they  could  employ  upon 
reading.  But  the  minutes  will  suffice. 
Kevelation  has  been  gathered  within  so 
manageable  a  compass  that  no  press  of 
necessary  occupation  can  incapacitate  for 
gaining  acquaintance  with  its  statements. 
Revelation  might  have  been  so  enlarged  that 
its  extent  might  perhaps  have  been  pleaded 
at  the  judgment  in  extenuation  of  neglect, 
and  if  not  at  the  judgment,  it  might 
certainly  have  been  used  during  life  for 
quieting  conscience  when  it  pleaded  the 
great  duty  of  searching  the  Scriptures.  But 
as  it  is,  the  Bible  being  after  all  but  a  small 
book — small,  as  we  have  endeavoured  to 
show  you,  not  from  lack  of  material  for 
making  it  larger,  but  because  the  divine 
Author  saw  that,  if  larger,  it  would  be  too 
large  for  human  comprehension, — this,  we 
say,  being  the  size  of  the  Bible,  why,  if  you 
refuse  to  acquaint  yourselves  with  its  con- 
tents, which  are  able  to  "make  you  wise 
unto  salvation,"  it  will  rise  hereafter,  like 
a  cloud  from  the  sea  before  the  prophet's 
servant,  no  larger  in  size  than  a  man's  hand, 
the  very  diminutiveness  ominous  of  ruin  ; 
and  presently  the  whole  firmament  of  the 
future  shall  be  overcast  with  blackness ; 
the  rain  shall  descend,  the  floods  shall 
come,  and  yourselves  be  borne  away  by  the 
torrent  of  indignation.  Once  more,  then, 
we  say,  "  Search  the  Scriptures."  Search 
them  with  prayer,  and  you  shall  certainly 
search  them  with  profit. — Henry  Melvill. 


599 


INDEX. 


[Note  :  H.  =  Homily ;  I.  =  Illustration ;  N.  =  Homiletic  Notes. 


Abiding,  believing  and,  I.  473 
Abode  of  hope,  quiet  sepulchre,  I.  552 
Abraham,  obedient  servant  of  God,  I.  259 

spiritual  children  of,  do  his  works,  H.  246 
Abraham's  faith  in  redemption  of  humanity, 

H.  251 
Action,  Jesus',  in  view  of  hatred  of  world, 

H.  203 
Actions,  two,  of  Christ,  there  are,  we  should 

never  forget,  N.  472 
Activity  dispels  doubt,  I.  326 
of  Divine  Son,  H.  148 
religious,  should  not  absorb  contemplative 
life,  1.  219 
Acts  of  humility  of  Christ,  miracles,  N.  404 
Ad  ul terse,  pericope,  N.  233 
Advent  message,  precious,  H.  346 
questions,  three,  H.  37 
warning,  significant,  H.  346 
Affection,  grand  leading,  of  all  is  love,  I.  438 
Affliction,  causes  of,  I.  269 
classes  in  school  of,  I.  474 
Divine  end  of,  I.  269 
Afraid,  it  is  I,  be  not,  I.  177 

of  joy  in  religion,  some,  I.  436 
Again,  born,  H.  97 
Agony,  full  cup  of,   Kedeemer    drank,    on 

cross,  I.  548 
Aicl,  mutual,  in  spiritual  life,  I.  374 
Af/xa,  adfxa  ical,  N.  194 

All  classes  and  circumstances,  men  of,  Bible 
suited  to,  I.  599 
for  Christ,  I.  358 

things,  he  who  teaches,  must  know  all 
things,  N.  417 
in    Him;    without    Christ,     nothing, 
I.  433 
Ancient  visions  realised,  N.  58 
Angelic  world,  union  with,  I.  59 
Annas  and  Caiaphas,  Jesus  before,  H.  506 
Anointing  at  Bethany,  H.  336 
Apostle,  self-confident,  I.  387 
Apparent  difficulties  do  not  invalidate  wit- 
ness of  Scripture,  I.  162 
Appearance,  judge  not  according  to,  H.  212 
Appointed,  chosen  and,  H.  430 
Approval  and  presence,  Father's,  Jesus'  con- 
sciousness of  His,  H.  238 


Argument  to  convince  and  lesson  to  instruct, 

faith  of  Thomas,  I.  575 
Aright,  not  to  pray,  is  as  futile  as  not  to  pray 

at  all,  N.  471 
Ascending  with  Christ,  H.  100 
Ascension,  our  Lord's,  Church's  gain,  H.  458 
Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive,  H.  464 

of  Christ,  why  we  need  to,  N.  472 
Asking  and  receiving,  N.  471 
Assurance    and  reality  of   heavenly  state, 

H.  392 
Attribute  of  God,  crowning,  I.  102 
Authorisation  and  verification,  all,  the  re- 
surrection   is    sign    which    includes. 

N.  84 
Authority   and    literalism,     prejudices    of, 

H.  221 
Divine,  of  Christ's  teaching  and  working, 

H.  208 

Backsliding,  sorrow  for,  leading  to  self- 
examination,  I.  380 
Baptism,  our  twofold  nature  and,  by  water 

and  Spirit,  I.  101 
Baptist,  H.  25 
Baptist's  testimony,  H.  42 

witness  to  Jesus,  H.  153 
Barabbas,  Jesus  rejected  for,  H.  518 
Basis,    permanent,    of    each    human    life, 

N.  255 
Battle  and  victory,  Christ's,  on  cross,  H.  545 
Behold  the  Man  !  H.  527 ;  I.  531 
thy  mother !  I.  547 
thy  son,  woman  !  I.  546 
Being,  man's,  grandeur  of,  I.  39 
Belief  in  resurrection  of  Lord,  grounds  of, 
H.  557 
or  unbelief,  I.  256 
Believe,  blessedness  of  those  who  have  not 
seen,  yet,  H.  567 
in  Light,  walk  in  Light,  H.  356 
Believer,  bereavement  mitigated  for,  I.  327 
Believers  blessed  in  order  to  become  medium 
of  blessing  to  others,  I.  219 
blessedness  of,  I.  196 
Divine  sonship  of,  H.  25 
Holy  Ghost  Teacher  and  Paraclete  of, 
H.  413 

601 


INDEX. 


Believers  in  sorrow,  demeanour  of,  H.  464 
indispensableness  of  Christ  to,  I.  433 
phases  of  unity  among,  I.  496 
to  hope  for,  what  prayer  in  name  of  Jesus 

leads,  H.  466 
to  what  does  Holy  Spirit  lead  ?  H.  412 
union  of,  with  Christ,  I.  432 
Believing  and  abiding,  I.  473 
Beloved  disciple,   Lord's   saying  regarding, 

H.  592 
Bereavement  mitigated  for  believer,  I.  327 
Best  at  last,  I.  74 

those  who  pray,  N.  471 
Bethany,  N.  341 

anointing  at,  H.  336 
lessons  from,  I.  325 
Bethesda,  witness    of    Divine    compassion, 

grace,  and  power,  H.  140 
Better  born,  I.  39 

Bible  suited  to  men  of  all  classes  and  cir- 
cumstances, I.  599 
Birth,  new,  manner  of,  II.  95 
of  men,  H.  91 

spiritual  regeneration,  or,  H.  92 
Bitter  of  life  made  sweet,  N.  69 
Blessed  coming  of  Spirit,  H.  447 
Blessedness,  heaven  is,  for  Christ  is  there, 
1.399 
inward,  of  friends  of  Christ,  I.  437 
of  believers,  I.  196 

of  spiritually  feeding  on  Christ,  H.  188 
of  those  who  have  Christ's  peace,  I.  574 

who  have  not  seen,  yet  believe,  H.  567 
of  unity  of  labour  among  different  sec- 
tions of  Church,  I.  497 
to  which  Spirit  leads  us  through  regene- 
ration, H.  102 
Blessing,  fuller,  deeper  faith,  N.  84 
heavenly,  earthly  need  and,  H.  69 
of  cross,  H.  136 
of  solitude,  N.  173 
seal  of  His,  upon  what  kind  of  life  did 

Jesus  Christ  set  ?  N.  308 
to  others,  believers  blessed  in   order  to 
become  medium  of,  I.  219 
Blind,  man  born,  gospel  of,  H.  278 

Jesus,  Light  of  world,  heals,  H.  262, 
265,  280 
Blinding  men  to  truth,  power  of  prejudice  in, 

H.  306 
Blindness,  spiritual,  H.  277 

and  its  cure,  I.  271 
Blood,  not  of,  N.  37 
Boast  of    present-day  scepticism — We  see, 

1.282 
Body  of  Christ,  communion  of,  H.  187 
Boldness  in  witness-bearing  for  Christ,  I.  443 

of  unbelief,  I.  442 
Bond  of  human  brotherhood,  golden  rule  of 

Christ,  I.  496 
Bondage  of  corruption,  servitude  of  sin  and, 
H.  240 
sin's,  merely  human  effort  cannot  deliver 
men  from,  I.  257 
Born  again,  H.  97 
better,  I.  39 

602 


Brain-work  and  vitality,  I.  131 
Bread  alone,  man  shall  not  live  by,  H.  178 
of  life,  Jesus,  H.  181 

manner  in  which  we  must  receive, 

H.  186 
our  fellowship  with,  H.  191 
true,  H.  171 
true,  from  heaven,  manna  and,  H.  179 
which  we  break,  H.  187 
Break,  bread  which  we,  H.  187 
Brethren,  Christ's,  unbelief  of,  H.  205 
Brotherhood,  bond  of  human,  golden  rule  of 

Christ,  I.  496 
Burden,  every  man  shall  bear  his  own,  I.  598 

of  war,  on  peace-breakers  lies,  H.  78 
Burning  and  shining  light,  I.  161 

Caiaphas  and  Annas,  Jesus  before,  H.  506 

unconscious  prophecy  of,  H.  331 
Call  to  faithfulness,  I.  303 
Calleth  for  thee,  Master  is  come,  and,  I.  329 
Calvary,  Christ's  thirst  on,  I.  548 

Sinai  and,  H.  30 
Cana,  Jesus  sanctifies  Christian  marriage  at, 

H.  64 
Care,  Christ's,  for  all  forms  of  human  want, 
I.  173 
of  poor,  Christian,  H.  339 
of  servants,  H.  289 
Careless  are  inexcusable,  I.  280 
Casting  net  at  Christ's  command,  I.  584 
Causes  of  affliction,  I.  269 

of  division  regarding  Christ,  H.  223 
of  evil,  H.  147 

of  separation  and  fruitlessness,  I.  434 
Certainty    of    our    Saviour's    resurrection, 
H.  571 
of  salvation,  I.  308 
Challenge  of  Christ  unanswered,  I.  259 
Characteristics  of  good  Shepherd,  H.  294 
Charity,  organised  Christian,  rise  of,  I.  341 
Childlike  nature    is    of    kingdom   of   God, 

I.  101 
Children,  God's,  joy  of,  H.  464 

heavenly  Father  loves  His,  I.  472 
of  God,  H.  27 

and    children    of    devil,   that  which 

distinguishes  between,  H.  247 
liberty  of,  freedom  and  truth,  H.  243 
of  the  Resurrection,  living  as,  I.  574 
Satan's,  I.  522 
spiritual,    of    Abraham    do    his    works, 

H.  246 
unity  with  spiritual,  is  dear    to  God's 
heart,  I.  498 
Chosen  and  appointed,  H.  430 
Christ,  acts  of  humility  of,  miracles,  N.  404 
all  for,  I.  358 

and  His  foes  in  Gethsemane,  N.  509 
and  His  people,  living  union  of,  H.  422 
and  His  words,  H.  411 
and  Jews,  chief  cause  of  contest  between, 

1.257 
as  Creator,  H.  20 
ascending  with,  H.  100 
before  creation,  H.  21 


INDEX. 


Christ,  blessedness  of  spiritually  feeding  on, 
H.  183 

body  of,  communion  of,  H.  187 

boldness  in  witness-bearing  for,  I.  443 

causes  of  division  regarding,  H.  223 

challenge  of,  unanswered,  I.  259 

Christians  in,  are  lights  in  world,  I.  236 

Church  of,  is  sheepfold,  N.  303 

cleansing  His  Church,  I.  79 

cross  of,  H.  535 

source  of  life  eternal,  H.  96 

faith's  view  of,  H.  564 

following,  H.  591,  593 ;  I.  304 

friends  of,  inward  blessedness  of,  I.  437 

gave,  sign,  of  His  authority  in  cleansing 
temple,  H.  80 

glory  of,  N.  457 

golden  rule  of,  bond  of  human  brother- 
hood, I.  496 

Hope  of  faithful  and  of  His  Church  in 
peril,  H.  174 

how  Holy  Ghost  glorifies,  to  us,  N.  457 

how  shall  we  bear  witness  to  ?  I.  458 

in  home,  love  and  friendship  of,  H.  313 

indispensableness  of,  to  believers,  I.  433 

inviting,  to  wedding,  N.  69 

is  there,  heaven  is  blessedness,  for,  I.  399 

knows  His  sheep,  N.  302 

labour  for,  not  in  vain,  I.  585 

Life  and  Light  of  men,  H.  23 

loneliness  of,  H.  467 

love  of,  to  His  disciples,  H.  430 

loving  His  own  to  end,  I.  373 

manner  in  which,  manifested  His  resur- 
rection, I.  573 

meaning  of  self-sacrifice  of,  I.  305 

our  example  in  spiritual  service,  H.  352 

proof  of  our  love  to,  I.  417 

rejection  of,  end  of,  N.  363 

result  of  beholding,  in  faith  as  Lamb  of 
God,  H.  50 

satisfies  human  soul,  I.  197 

separation  from,  end  of,  H.  424 

Source  of  world's  light,  and  world's  Up- 
holder, H.  22 

spiritual  hunger  and  thirst  satisfied  in, 
I.  195 

stoning,  H.  256 

the  Door  of  sheep,  H.  286 

the  good  Shepherd,  H.  291,  295,  296 

the  promised  spiritual  King,  I.  520 

the  smitten  Kock,  N.  218 

there  are  two  actions  of,  we  should  never 
forget,  N.  472 

true  faith  in,  no  prayer  without,  H.  472 
witnesses  of,  H.  446 

truly  knowing,  N.  302 

union  of  believers  with,  I.  432 

victorious  through  death,  N.  358 

who  is  ?  I.  177 

why  we  need  to  ask  of,  N.  472 

will  of,  potential  in  miracle  of  walking 
on  sea,  N.  176 

without,   nothing;  in  Him,   all  things, 
1.433 

witness  to,  John's  fitness  as,  I.  598 


Christ,  witnesses  to,  H.  153 

word  of,  true  guide  of  men,  I.  271 
world's  need  of,   Sun  of  righteousness, 

H.  232 
Christ's  battle  and  victory  on  cross,  H.  545 
blessing,    marriage    on    which,    rests    is 

eternal  union,  I.  74 
brethren,  unbelief  of,  H.  205 
care  for  all  forms  of  human  want,  I.  173 
Church,  progress  of,  on  earth  like  that  of 

ship,  H.  175 
command,  casting  net  at,  I.  584 
delay  to  interpose  against  death,  H.  321 
departure   from   world,  ends  served  by, 

N.  463 
disciples  follow  Him,  H.  45 

hatred  of,  by  world,  H.  438  ;  I.  442 
dying  love  embraces  race,  I.  548 
enemies   must   acknowledge   His  power, 

1.510 
first  sign,  H.  70 

flesh,  eating,  meaning  of,  I.  197 
fulness  of  grace  and  truth,  H.  30 
future  is,  I.  520 

harvest,  self-denying  labour  for,  I.  133 
humiliation,  end  of,  H.  29 
kingdom  on  earth,  marriage  honoured  in, 

1.73 
true  nature  of,  H.  512 
miracles,  motive  of,  I.  75 
patience,  I.  510 
peace,  blessedness  of  those   who   have, 

I.  574 
comprehends,  what,  N.  417 
people,  eternal  safety  of,  H.  307 

meaning  of  the  Resurrection  for,  I.  561 
perfect  self -surrender  our  example,  I.  495 
power,  willing  people  in  day  of,  H.  183 
prayer  for  unity  of  His  Church,  H.  491 
prophetic  promise  of  ingathering  of  Gen- 
tiles, H.  296 
resurrection,  necessity  for,  I.  576 
reticence  in  teaching  truth,  H.  454 
subjects,  motto  of,  I.  520 
teaching  and  working,  Divine  authority 

of,  H.  208 
seal  of,  N.  254 
thirst  on  Calvary,  I.  548 
triumphal  entry  into  Jerusalem,  H.  343, 

345 
word,  keeping,  N.  256 
words,  keeping,  N.  417 
Christian  care  of  poor,  H.  339 
charity,  rise  of  organised,  I.  341 
influence,  I.  219 

life  under  figure  of  voyage,  H.  175 
loveless,  figure  of,  N.  417 
marriage,  Jesus  sanctifies,  at  Cana,  H.  64 
peace  and  unity,  I.  418 
prayer,  prerequisite  of,  I.  472 
profession,  sincere,  joy  and  fruit  of,  1. 125 
separation  from  world,  H.  480,  483 
temperance,  H.  170 
unity,  H.  489 

is  not  formal,  but  spiritual,  I.  497 
Christian's  cross-bearing  and  triumph,  H.  248 

603 


INDEX. 


Christian's  love  to  God  shown  in  his  deeds, 
N.  417 
pilgrimage,  N.  417 
Christians   are    commanded    to    rejoice  in 
Lord,  I.  436 
in  Christ  are  lights  in  world,  I.  236 
spirit  in  which,  are  to  live  separated  from 

world,  H.  484 
wherefore   can    and   ought,   to  be   con- 
fident and  even  joyful  in  tribulation  ? 
H.  460 
would,  know  how  it  will  go  with  them  in 
this  world  1  N.  463 
Christianity,  effect  of,  on  pauperism,  I.  342 
may  mitigate  poverty  in  future,  manner 
in  which,  I.  342 
Church,  blessedness  of  unity  of  labour  among 
different  sections  of,  I.  497 
Christ  cleansing  His,  I.  79 
Christ's  prayer  for  unity  of  His,  H.  491 
in  peril,  Christ's  hope  of  His,  and  of  faith- 
ful, H.  174 
is  too  much  a  silent  Church,  I.  219 
of  Christ  is  sheepfold,  N.  303 
progress  of  Christ's,  on  earth  like  that  of 
ship,  H.  175 
Church's  gain,  our  Lord's  ascension,  H.  458 
Claim,  our  Lord's,  to  be  Son  of  God,  clearness 

of,  N.  530 
Classes  and  circumstances,  men  of  all,  Bible 
suited  to,  I.  599 
in  school  of  affliction,  I.  474 
of  men,  relation  of  different,  to  Saviour, 

g..  198 
two,  of  mourners,  I.  330 
Cleansing,  continual  spiritual,  need  of,  I.  374 
His  Church,  Christ,  I.  79 
of  temple,  H.  76,  78 

temple,  sign  Christ  gave  of  His  authority 
in,  H.  80 
Clear  proof  of  our  Divine  sonship,  I.  281 
Clearness  and  sufficiency  of  witness  of  Scrip- 
ture, H.  154 
of  our  Lord's  claim  to  be  Son  of  God, 
N.  530 
Coals,  fire  of,  N.  583 
Come  out  from   among  them,  and  be  ye 

separate,  I.  498 
Comfort  at  graves  of  our  loved  ones,  what 
can  bring  us  ?  H.  324 
for  trial,  H.  416 

threefold  word  of,  unto  all  troubled  souls, 
H.  176 
Comforter,  mission  of,  H.  452 
Coming  into  world,  N.  36 

King,  how  are  we  to  receive  ?  H.  347 

of  Light  of  world  results  in  discrimination 

or  judgment,  H.  275 
of  Spirit,  blessed,  H.  447 
true,  to  Jesus,  I.  195 
Command,  Christ's,  casting  net  at,  I.  584 
Commandment,  new,  H.  384 ;  I.  386 

glorified  Son  of  man  and,  H.  381 
Common  life,  hallowing  of,  I.  74 
Communion  of  body  of  Christ,  H.  187 
Company,  great,  coming  unto  Jesus,  N.  172 

604 


Compassion,     grace,     and     power,    Divine, 

Bethesda  witness  of,  H.  140 
Completion  of  work  given  him  to  do,  man's 

highest  happiness  in,  I.  271 
Condemnation,  no,  H.  105 
Condemned,  yet  innocent,  Jesus,  H.  532 
Conditions  of  spiritual  fruitfulness,  I.  434 
Confident  and  even  joyful  in  trouble,  where- 
fore can  and  ought  Christians  to  be  ? 
H.  460 
Conflict  and  victory,  Christ's,  on  cross,  H.  545 
peace  of  Jesus  amid,  H.  238 
spiritual,  H.  58 
Conscience  :  what  is  it  ?  H.  255 
Consciousness,  Jesus',  of  His  Father's  pre- 
sence and  approval,  H.  238 
Contemplative  life,  religious  activity  should 

not  absorb,  I.  219 
Contents  and  scope  of  our  Lord's  intercessory 

prayer,  H.  477 
Contest  between  Christ  and  Jews,  chief  cause 

of,  I.  257 
Continual  readiness  for  prayer,  I.  405 
spiritual  cleansing,  need  of,  I.  374 
Convictions,  personal,  I.  52 
Convince  world  of  sin,  He  shall,  H.  450 
Corruption,  bondage  of,  servitude  of  sin  and* 

H.  240 
Counsel  of  love,  God's  eternal,  resting  on, 

N.  37 
Courage,  gold  and,  N.  172 
Creation,  Christ  before,  H.  21 
Creator,  Christ  as,  H.  20 

keeps  His  word  with  us,  I.  308 
of  nature,  Jesus  Christ,  I.  38 
Crime,  hypocritical  excuses  for,  I.  333 
Crisis  in  Jesus'  ministry  in  Galilee,  N.  172 
Cross  and  tomb    of    Jesus,   Nicodemus   at, 
I.  551 
blessing  of,  H.  136 
Christ's  battle  and  victory  on,  H.  545 
dominion  of   sin  and   death  ended  on, 

N.546 
Mary  at,  H.  541 
of  Christ,  H.  535 

source  of  life  eternal,  H.  96 
preaching  of,  power  of  God  unto  salvation, 

1.538 
preciousness  of,  N.  464 
Kedeemer  drank  full   cup  of  agony  on, 

I.  548 
self-renunciation  at,  I.  547 
title  on,  H.  538 
Cross-bearing     and     triumph,     Christian's, 

H.  248 
Crown  of  thorns,  scourging  of  Jesus  and, 

H.  525 
Crowns,  earthly,  are  unstable,  N.  173 
Crowning  attribute  of  God,  I.  102 
Crucifixion,  time  of,  N.  536 
Cup  given  to  Saviour  to  drink,  H.  505 

of  agony,  full,  Kedeemer  drank,  on  cross, 
I,   548 
Cure,  spiritual  blindness  and  its,  I.  271 

Danger  from  unlooked-for  sources,  I.  494 


INDEX. 


Danger,  world  is  full  of,  I.  493 
Dark  forebodings,  H.  316 

place,  world,  H.  35 
Darkness,  light  or,  I.  256 
shining  in,  H.  35 
love  not,  H.  106 
not  comprehending  light,  H.  35 
or  light,  men  must  choose,  I.  282 
Day,  Lord's,  memorial  of  the  Kesurrection, 
1.560 
of  judgment,  great,  H.  159 
walk  in,  H.  315 
Days,  reaping  after  many,  in  joy,  I.  133 
Dead,  not  lost,  I.  329 

Son  as  Quickener  of,  H.  151 
Death  a  sleep,  H.  316 

as  foe  and  as  friend,  I.  329 
Christ  victorious  through,  N.  358 
Christ's     delay    to    interpose     against, 

H.  321 
dominion  of    sin  and,   ended  on   cross, 

N.  546 
figure  of  sleep  of,  points  to  sacred  Divine 

order,  I.  327 
never  seeing,  N.  256 
of  Jesus,  H.  545 
similitudes  of,  I.  327 
to  life,  through,  H.  350 
winter  of,  and  spring    of  resurrection, 
1.328 
Declaration  of    Jesus  in  view  of    world's 

unbelief,  H.  361 
Deeds,  Christian's  love  to  God  shown  in  his, 

N.  417 
Deeper  faith,  fuller  blessing,  N.  84 
Defence  of  Divine  interests,  zeal  in,  H.  441 
Dei,  vox  populi  vox,  I.  522 
Delay,  Cbrist's,  to  interpose  against  death, 

H.  321 
Deliverance  from  sin,  world  is  weary  with 
cumbrous  and  futile  methods  of  ob- 
taining, N.  52 
from  trouble,  prayer  way  of,  I.  359 
Demeanour  of  believers  in  sorrow,  H.  464 
Departure,  Christ's,  from  world,  ends  served 

by,  N.  463 
Descent  of  unbelief,  progress  of  faith  and, 

H.  272 
Designs,  evil,  against  Jesus,  H.  145 
Desire  to  see  Jesus,  H.  349 
Destroy  this  temple,  H.  81 
Devil,  children  of,  and  children  of  God,  that 

which  distinguishes  between,  H.  247 
Different  classes    of    men,   relation    of,  to 

Saviour,  H.  198 
Difficulties,    apparent,    do    not    invalidate 

witness  of  Scripture,  I.  162 
Diligently  reading  Scriptures,  N.  37 
Direful  results  of  neglect  of  Divine  truth, 

I.  495 
Disciple,  beloved,  Lord's  saying  regarding, 
H.  592 
guileless,  Nathanael,  H.  56 
whom  Jesus  loved,  H.  582 
Disciples,  Christ's,  follow  Him,  H.  45 

hatred  of,  by  world,  H.  438  ;  I.  442 


Disciples,  first,  Jesus  manifests  Himself  to 
His,  H.  53 
intercourse  of  Jesus  with  His,  after  His 

resurrection,  lessons  from,  H.  569 
Jesus',  prospect  of,  H.  463 
love  of  Christ  to  His,  H.  430 
loving  and  obedient,  promise  of  Divine 

manifestation  to,  H.  409 
of  Jesus,  true,  H.  242 
Kisen   One    for    first   time   among  His, 

H.  563 
Spirit  guiding,   into  all  truth,   N.   457; 
1.460 
Discipleship,  phases  of,  I.  59 
Discovered,  traitor,  H.  375,  378 
Discrimination  or  judgment,  coming  of  Light 

of  world  results  in,  H.  275 
Divine  authority  of  Christ's   teaching   and 
working,  H.  208 
compassion,  grace,  and  power,  Bethesda 

witness  of,  H.  140 
end  of  affliction,  I.  269 
Friend,  sympathy  of  our,  I.  437 
grace,  H.  120 

help,  immediateness  of,  H.  147 
indwelling,  manner  of,  N.  417 
"     inspiration,  spiritual  life  a,  H.  94 
interests,  zeal  in  defence  of,  H.  441 
love,  greatness  of,  H.  107 
manifestation,    promise    of,    to    loving, 

obedient  disciples,  H.  409 
mission  and  Divine  power,  H.  565 
order,  sacred,  figure   of  sleep  of  death 

points  to,  I.  327 
Son,  activity  of,  H.  148 
sonship,  clear  proof  of  our,  I.  281 

of  believers,  H.  25 
truth,    neglect    of,    direful    results    of, 

I.  495 
will,  submission  to,  I.  328 
Division,     causes     of,      regarding     Christ, 

H.223 
Dominion  of  sin  and  death  ended  on  cross, 

N.  546 
Doom  of  indecision,  I.  282 

of  unbelief,  H.  239 
Door  for  flock  and  pastor,  Jesus,  H.  289 

of  sheep,  Christ  the,  H.  286 
Double  office  of  Holy  Spirit,  H.  103 
Doubt,  activity  dispels,  I.  326 
Drink,  to,  cup  given  to  Saviour,  H.  505 
Duty,  light  on  path  of,  I.  326 
Dwelling  of  Triune  Jehovah,  peace-loving 

heart  is,  N.  417 
Dying  in  sin,  H.  238 

love,  Christ's,  embraces  race,  I.  548 

Eaenest  prayer  answered,  I.  134 
Earth,     Christ's     kingdom     on,     marriage 
honoured  in,  I.  73 
progress  of  Christ's  Church  on,  like  that 
of  ship,  H.  175 
Earthly  crowns  are  unstable,  N.  173 

joy  not  secured  to  men,  so  that  they  may 
seek  heavenly  joy,  I.  435 
Earthly  need  and  heavenly  blessing,  H.  69 

605 


INDEX. 


Easter,  H.  557 

Eating  Christ's  flesh,  meaning  of,  I.  197 
Effect  of  Christianity  on  pauperism,  I.  342 
Effort,  merely  human,  cannot  deliver  men 

from  sin's  bondage,  I.  257 
Empty,  God's  store  never,  N.  173 
End,  Christ  loving  His  own  to  end,  I.  373 
Christ's  humiliation,  H.  29 
Divine,  of  affliction,  I.  269 
of  rejection  of  Christ,  N.  363 
of  separation  from  Christ,  H.  424 
Ends    served    by    Christ's    departure    from 

world,  N.  463 
Enemies,  Christ's,   must  acknowledge    His 
power,  I.  510 
Jesus  in  hands  of  His,  H.  502 
Enough,  a  word,  I.  74 
Enslaves,  way  in  which  sin,  I.  258 
Entry  into  Jerusalem,   Christ's    triumphal, 
H.  343,  345 
into  what  hearts  does  Lord  Jesus  to-day 
make  ?  H.  346 
Escape,  way  of,  from  sin,  H.  451 
Essence  of  life  eternal,  I.  493 
Eternal  life,  H.  479 

cross  of  Christ  source  of,  H.  96 
essence  of,  I.  493 
love  of  God,  I.  107 

victory  of,  I.  108 
safety  of  Christ's  people,  H.  307 
Son,  Jesus,  I.  259 
union,  marriage  on  which  Christ's  blessing 

rests  is,  I.  74 
Word,  revelation  of — influence  and  end, 
H.  17 
Evangelist,  John's  method  as,  N.  672 
Every   man    shall    bear    his    own    burden, 

1.598 
Evidence,  faith  and,  I.  575 
Evil,  causes  of,  H.  147 

designs  against  Jesus,  H.  145 
good  out  of,  God  can  bring,  I.  326 
presence  of,  in  human  life,  N.  537 
those  who  are,  speak  evil,  N.  255 
Example,   Christ   our,   in    spiritual    service, 
H.  352 
great,  H.  369 
our,     Christ's     perfect      self -surrender, 

I.  495 
warning,  Judas  a,  I.  380 
Excuses  for  crime,  hypocritical,  I.  333 
Existences,  man  differentiated   from  other, 

I.  39 
Experience,  N.  417 

Faith,    Abraham's,      in      redemption     of 

humanity,  H.  251 
amid  storm,  I.  177 
and  evidence,  I.  575 
deeper,  fuller  blessing,  N.  84 
hindrances  to,  H.  157 
how  does  Lord  deal  with  those  weak  in  ? 

H.  137 
importance  of,  N.  137 
in  Christ,  true,  no  prayer  without,  H.  472 
ladder  of,  H.  137 

606 


Faith,  living,  power  of,  testifying  to  God's 
goodness,  I.  138 
nobleman  led  by  Jesus    from  faith   to, 

H.  135 
of  holiest  weak  in  its  beginning,  N.  472 
of  Thomas,  argument    to  convince  and 

lesson  to  instruct,  I.  575 
progress   of,    and    descent  of   unbelief, 

H.  272 
result  of  beholding  Christ  in,  as  Lamb  of 

God,  H.  50 
superficial,  N.  84 
three  stoops  of,  H.  62 
trials  of,  I.  326 
ventures  of,  H.  580 
Faith's  view  of  Christ,  H.  564 
Faithful,  Christ  Hope  of,  and  of  His  Church 
in  peril,  H.  174 
shepherds  and  hirelings,  I.  304 
Faithfulness,  call  to,  I.  303 
Fall,  let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take 
heed  lest  he,  H.  387  ;  I.  381 
Peter's,  H.  508 
Father  bears  witness  to  Son,  H.  154 
heavenly,  loves  His  children,  I.  472 
revelation  of,  H.  399 
Father's  home,  I.  398 

presence  and  approval,  Jesus'  conscious- 
ness of  His,  H.  238 
Fear  and  love  of  truth,  concerning,  H.  455 
no,  when  God  dwells  in  heart,  N.  417 
of  men,  N.  363 
Feast,  first  day  of,  N.  347 
marriage,  I.  75 
of  Tabernacles,  N.  216 

illumination    of    temple    court     at, 
N.  235 
Feed  My  lambs,  H.  588 
Feeding  five  thousand,  miracle  of,  H.  165 
lambs  of  flock,  I.  597 
on    Christ,    spiritually,    blessedness     of, 
H.  188 
Fellowship,  social,  rule  of,  H.  69 

with  Bread  of  life,  our,  H.  191 
Felt  presence  of  God,  I.  59 
Festival,  harvest,  H.  167 
Figure  of  loveless  Christian,  N.  417 

of  sleep  of  death  points  to  sacred  Divine 

order,  I.  327 
of  voyage,  Christian  life  under,  H.  175 
Filial  trust  in  and  submission  to  God,  I.  494 
Fill  the  water-pots,  H.  69 
Final  testimony,  John's,  to  truth  of  what  he 

had  written,  H.  597 
Finished,  it  is  !  H.  544 
Fire  of  coals,  N.  583 
First  day  of  feast,  N.  347 

disciples,  Jesus  manifests  Himself  to  His, 

H.  53 
measures  against  Jesus,  H.  225 
sign,  Christ's,  H.  70 
stoning,  H.  253 

time,  Risen  One  for,  among  His  disciples, 
H.563 
Fit  for  kingdom  of  God,  how  we  may  know 
we  are,  H.  98 


INDEX. 


Fitness,  John's,  as  witness  to  Christ,  I.  598 
Five  thousand,  miracle  of  feeding,  H.  165 
Flesh  and  spirit,  H.  99 

eating  Christ's,  meaning  of,  I.  197 

God  manifest  in,  I.  40 

Word  made,  H.  29 
Flock  and  pastor,  Jesus  the  Door  for,  H.  289 

feeding  lambs  of,  I.  597 

good  Shepherd  and  His,  H.  292 
Foe,  death  as,  and  as  friend,  I.  329 
Foes,  Christ  and  His,  in  Gethsemane,  N.  509 
Fold,  other  sheep,  not  of  this,  I.  305 

robbers  of,  I.  303 
Follow  Me  :  on  lake-shore,  H.  589,  593 
Following  Christ,  H.  591,  593  ;  I.  304 

Master-servant,  I.  196 
Folly  of  indecision,  I.  282 

of  over  self-confidence,  I.  388 
.    of  unbelief,  H.  83 
Forebodings,  dark,  H.  316 
Forerunner,  John,  H.  25 
Forgiving  sins,  power  of,  H.  570 
Form  of  servant,  He  took  on  Him,  H.  185 
Formal,  Christian  unity  is  not,  but  spiritual, 

1.497 
Foundation  of  marriage,  true,  H.  68 

of  spiritual  temple  of  God,  H.  84 
Fountain,  spiritual,  H.  213 
Four  months  to  harvest,  N.  130 

opinions  as  to  time  when  traitor   dis- 
covered, N.  378 
Freedom  and  truth,  the  liberty  of    God's 
children,  H.  243 

true,  I.  258 
Friend  above  all  others,  I.  438 

death  as,  and  as  foe,  I.  329 

Divine,  sympathy  of  our,  I.  437 
Friends  in  heaven,  shall  we  know  our  ?  I.  399 

not  servants,  but,  H.  428 

of  Christ,  inward  blessedness  of,  I.  437 
Friendship    and   love   of   Christ   in    home, 
H.  313 

of  Jesus,  H.  429 

of  Redeemer,  I.  436 
Fruit  and  joy  of  sincere  Christian  profession, 
1.125 

much,  H.  423 

of  spiritual  vine-branch,  I.  434 
Fruitfulness,  spiritual,  conditions  of,  I.  434 
Fruitless  toil :  on  lake-shore,  H.  579 
Fruitlessness    and    separation,    causes    of, 

1.434 
Full  cup  of  agony,  Redeemer  drank,  on  cross, 
I.  548 

of  grace  and  truth,  I.  41 
Fuller  blessing,  deeper  faith,  N.  84 
Fulness  of  grace  and  truth,  Christ's,  H.  30 
Futile  as  not  to  pray  at  all,  not  to  pray  aright 

is  as,  N.  471 
Future  is  Christ's,  I.  520 

Gain,  Church's,  our  Lord's  ascension,  H.  458 

Galilean  lake,  storms  on,  N.  175 

Galilee,  crisis  in  Jesus'  ministry  in,  N.  172 

Garden,  sword  in,  H.  504 

Garments  of  Jesus,  soldiers  divide,  H.  540 


Gate,  Judge  is    at — prepare  to  meet  Him, 

1.  161 
Gentiles,  ingathering  of,  Christ's  prophetic 

promise  of,  H.  296 
Genuine  love  exceeds  words,  N.  417 
Gethsemane,  H.  501 

Christ  and  His  foes  in,  N.  509 
lowliness  and  glory  in,  N.  509 
Gift  of  tears,  I.  330 
Gifts,  material,  spiritual  reception  of,  N.  173 

of  God  to  spiritually  new  born,  H.  98 
Glorified  Son  of  man  and  new  commandment, 

H.  381 
Glorifies    Christ    to    us,    how   Holy    Ghost, 

N.  457 
Glorious  harvest-fields,  I.  132 
Glory  and  lowliness  in  Gethsemane,  N.  509 
Lord  manifests  His,  H.  67 
of  Christ,  N.  457 
God,  Abraham,  obedient  servant  of,  I.  259 
can  bring  good  out  of  evil,  I.  326 
children  of,  H.  27 

and  children    of    devil,    that   which 
distinguishes  between,  H.  247 
Christian's  love  to,  shown  in  his  deeds, 

N.  417 
crowning  attribute  of,  I.  102 
dwells  in  heart,  no  fear  when,  N.  417 
eternal  love  of,  I.  107 
felt  presence  of,  I.  59 
filial  trust  in  and  submission  to,  I.  494 
gifts  of,  to  spiritually  new  born,  H.  98 
gives  not  as  world  gives,  H.  69 
kingdom  of,  childlike  nature  is  of,  I.  101 
fit  for,  how  we  may  know  we  are, 
H.  98 
Lamb  of,  H.  47 
love  of,  H.  104 
man  sent  from,  H.  36 
men  should  make  their  requests  known 

directly  to,  I.  134 
manifest  in  flesh,  I.  40 
offering  obedient  service  to,  N.  417 
power  of,   unto  salvation,  preaching  of 

cross,  I.  538 
river  of,  is  full  of  water,  N.  583 
shall  not  love  of,  constrain  us  to  love 

Him  ?  I.  107 
Son  of,  clearness  of  our  Lord's  claim  to 

be,  N.  530 
spake  unto  Moses,  H.  274 
spiritual  temple  of,  foundation  of,  H.  84 
we  honour,  by  receiving  His  Word,  I.  161 
Word  was,  H.  19,  34 
work  of,  H.  179 
works  of,  H.  266 

wounding  in  order  to  heal,  I.  137 
God's  children,  joy  of,  H.  464 

liberty  of,  freedom  and  truth,  H.  243 
eternal  counsel  of  love,  resting  on,  N.  37 
goodness,  power  of  living  faith  testifying 

to,  I.  138 
heart,    unity  with   spiritual  children  is 

dear  to,  I.  498 
hour    strikes    when    man's    hour    ends, 
H.  69 

607 


INDEX. 


God's  people,  meaning  and  purpose  of  pain 
and  sorrow  for,  I.  270 
purpose  of  grace  toward  men,  how  Holy 

Ghost  brings  to  completion,  H.  449 
store  never  empty,  N.  173 
Gold  and  courage,  N.  172 
Golden  rule  of  Christ,  bond  of  human  brother- 
hood, I.  496 
Golgotha,  H.  533 

Good  out  of  evil,  God  can  bring,  I.  326 
Shepherd  and  His  flock,  H.  292 
Christ,  H.  291,  295,  296 
Goodness,  God's  power  of  living  faith  testi- 
fying to,  I.  138 
Gospel  husbandmen,  success  of,  N.  131 
is  true,  true,  true,  H.  487 
life  of  messengers  of,  H.  583 
object  of  John  in  writing  his,  N.  572 
of  man  born  blind,  H.  278 
water  type  of,  I.  219 
Grace  and  truth,  Christ's  fulness  of,  H.  30 
full  of,  I.  41 
Divine,  H.  120 
law  and,  H.  30 
needed   for   hard    times,    material  and 

spiritual,  N.  172 
power,  and  compassion,  Divine,  Bethesda 

witness  of,  H.  140 
toward  men,  God's  purpose  of,  how  Holy 
Ghost  brings  to  completion,  H.  449 
Gracious  promise,  H.  403 
Grand  leading  affection  of  all  is  love,  I.  438 
Grandeur  of  man's  being,  I.  39 
Grave,  rest  of  Eedeemer  in,  H.  549 
Graves  of  our  loved  ones,  what  can  bring  us 

comfort  at  ?  H.  324 
Great  company  coming  unto  Jesus,  N.  172 
day  of  ju  igment,  H.  159 
Example,  H.  369 
Greater  things,  seeing,  I.  59 

works,  H.  401 
Greatness  of  Divine  love,  H.  107 
Greeting  of  peace,  risen  Redeemer's,  H.  570 
Grounds  of  belief  in  resurrection  of  Lord, 

H.  557 
Growth,  natural  and  spiritual,  H.  58 
Guest  most  to  be  desired,  Jesus,  H.  66 
Guide  of  men,  true,  word  of  Christ,  I.  271 
Guileless  disciple,  Nathanael,  H.  56 

Hallowing  of  common  life,  I.  74 
Happiness,  man's  highest,  in  completion  of 
work  given  him  to  do,  I.  271 
man's,  in  what  does,  consist  ?  I.  435 
Hard  saying  justified,  H.  189 
times,  N.  172 

material  and  spiritual,  grace  needed 
for,  N.  172 
Harvest,   Christ's,   self-denying    labour  for, 
I.  133 
festival,  H.  167 
four  months  to,  N.  130 
promise  of,  I.  358 
spiritual,  at  Sychar,  H.  129 
joy  of,  H.  127 
ii.irvest-fields,  glorious,  I.  132 

608 


Hatred  of  Christ's  disciples  by  world,  H.  438 ; 
1.442 
of  world,  Jesus'  action  in  view  of,  H.  203 
Heal,  God  wounding  in  order  to,  I.  137 
Healing  blind,  H.  265 

of  nobleman's  son,  H.  134 
Heart,  God's,  unity  with  spiritual  children 
is  dear  to,  I.  498 
no  fear  when  God  dwells  in,  N.  417 
peace-loving,     is     dwelling     of     Triune 
Jehovah,  N.  417 
Hearts,  into  what,  does  Lord   Jesus  to-day 
make  entry  ?  H.  346 
Jesus  Searcher  of,  H.  82 
Heaven,  answering  voice  from,  Jesus'  prayer 
and,  H.  354 
is  blessedness,  for  Christ  is  there,  I.  399 
reunion  of  saints  in,  H.  393 
shall  we  know  our  friends  in  ?  I.  399 
true  Bread  from,  manna  and,  H.  179 
voice  from,  N.  358 
Heavenly  blessing,  earthly  need  and,  H.  69 
Father  loves  His  children,  I.  472 
home,  I.  398 

premonitions  of,  I.  398 
joy,  earthly  not  secured  to  men  so  that 

they  may  seek,  I.  435 
legacy,  H.  414 

state,  reality  and  assurance  of,  H.  392 
Help,  Divine,  immediateness  of,  H.  147 
from  Lord,  H.  324 
to  wretched,  H.  141 
Helper  of   His   people  in  sorrow,  Lord  is, 
H.  461 
Lord  as,  H.  324 
true,  how  Lord  Jesus  proves  Himself  to 
be  our,  H.  172 
Herald  withdraws,  Prince  appears,  H.  108 
Hidden,    true   meaning    of    Scripture    not, 

H.  159 
High  prerogative  of  suffering,  H.  590 

Priest,  true,  Jesus  our,  H.  250 
Highest  service,  ministering  service,  1.  387 
Hindrances  to  faith,  H.  157 

to  Word,  H.  251 
Hireling,  I.  304 

motto  of,  N.  302 
Hirelings,  faithful  shepherds  and,  I.  304 
Holiest,   faith   of,  weak  in  its   beginning, 

N.  472 
Holy    Ghost   glorifies    Christ   to   us,    how, 
N.  457 
how,  brings  to  completion  God's  pur- 
pose of  grace  toward  men,  H.  449 
office  of,  H.  103 

Teacher  and  Paraclete  of  believers, 
H.  413 
hour  with  Jesus  in  silent  night,  H.  94 
Spirit,  double  office  of,  H.  103 

to  what  does,  lead  believers  ?  H.  412 
working  of,  H.  457 
Homage,  transient,  I.  349 
Home  beyond,  for  pilgrims  there  is  promise 
of,  I.  398 
Father's,  I.  398 
heavenly,  I.  398 


INDEX, 


Home,  heavenly,  premonitions  of,  I.  398 

love  and  friendship  of  Christ  in,  H.  313 
Honour  God,  we,  by  receiving  His  Word, 

I.  161 
Hope,  abode  of,  quiet  sepulchre,  I.  552 
of  faithful,  Christ,  and  of  His  Church  in 

peril,  H.  174 
of  humanity,  resurrection,  1. 160 
Hosanna  1  I.  348 

Hour,  God's,  strikes  when  man's  hour  ends, 
H.  69 
with  Jesus,  holy,  in  silent  night,  H.  94 
House,  zeal  of  Thine,  N.  78 
Human  brotherhood,  bond  of,  golden  rule  of 
Christ,  I.  496 
effort,  merely,  cannot  deliver  men  from 

sin's  bondage,  I.  257 
life,  permanent  basis  of  each,  N.  255 

presence  of  evil  in,  N.  537 
peace  and  unity,  source  of,  sanctification 

through  truth,  H.  488 
soul,  Christ  satisfies,  I.  197 
suffering,  problem  of,  H.  263 
want,  Christ's  care  for  all  forms  of,  I.  173 
will,  H.  210 
Humanity,  hope  of,  resurrection,  I.  160 
life  the  quest  of,  I.  196 
redemption  of,  Abraham's  faith  in,  H.  251 
Humiliation,  Christ's,  end  of,  H.  29 
Humility  and  ministering  love,  lesson  of, 
H.  366,  368 
of  Christ,  acts  of,  miracles,  N.  404 
Hunger  and    thirst,   spiritual,   satisfied    in 

Christ,  I.  195 
Husbandman,  true  Vine  and  the,  H.  420 
Husbandmen,  gospel,  success  of,  N.  131 
Hypocritical  excuses  for  crime,  I.  333 

I  THIRST  !  H.  542 

I  will  not  leave  you  orphans,  H.  409 

Ignorance  of  spiritual  things,  it  is  well  to 

realise  our,  N.  463 
Illumination  of  temple  court  at  Feast  of 

Tabernacles,  N.  235 
Immediateness  of  Divine  help,  H.  147 
Import  of  testimony  of  Jesus,  H.  Ill 
Importance  of  faith,  N.  137 
Incarnation,  all  miracles  are  included  in, 

1.75 
Indecision,  doom  of,  I.  282 

folly  of,  I.  282 
Indispensableness   of   Christ    to    believers, 

1.433 
Indwelling,  Divine,  manner  of,  N.  417 
Inexcusable,  careless  are,  I.  280 
Inexcusableness  of  sin  of  unbelief,  H.  440 
Influence,  Christian,  I.  219 
Ingathering  of  Gentiles,  Christ's  prophetic 

promise  of,  H.  296 
Innocent,  yet  condemned,  Jesus,  H.  532 
Inspiration,  Divine,  spiritual  life  a,  H.  94 
Institution  of  Lord's  Supper,  time  of,  N.  371 
Intercessory  prayer,  our  Lord's,  scope  and 

contents  of,  H.  477 
Intercourse  of  Jesus  with  His  disciples  after 

His  resurrection,  lessons  from,  H.  569 


Interests,  Divine,  zeal  in  defence  of,  H.  441 
Interview  with  Nicodemus,  our  Lord's,  H.  88 
Invisible,  living  for,  majesty  and  sanctity  of, 

1.520 
Inviting  Christ  to  wedding,  N.  69 
Inward    blessedness   of   friends   of   Christ, 

I.  437 
It  is  finished !  H.  544 
It  is  I,  be  not  afraid,  I.  177 

Jacob's  well,  memories  of,  I.  124 
Jehovah,  Triune,  peace-loving  heart  is  dwell- 
ing of,  N.  417 
Jerusalem,  Christ's    triumphal  entry   into, 

H.  343,  345 
Jesus  before  Annas  and  Caiaphas,  H.  506 
Bread  of  life,  H.  181 
Christ  as  Source  of  life,  H.  138 
Creator  of  nature,  I.  38 
upon  what  kind  of  life  did,  set  seal  of 

His  blessing  ?  N.  308 
cross  and  tomb  of,  Nicodemus  at,  I.  551 
death  of,  H.  545 
declaration  of,  in  view  of  world's  unbelief, 

H.  361 
desire  to  see,  H.  349 
Door  for  flock  and  pastor,  H.  289 
eternal  Son,  I.  259 
evil  designs  against,  H.  145 
first  measures  against,  H.  225 
friendship  of,  H.  429 
garments  of,  soldiers  divide,  H.  540 
great  company  coming  unto,  N.  172 
Guest  most  to  be  desired,  H.  66 
hath  any  of  rulers  believed  on  ?  H.  220 
holy  hour  with,  in  silent  night,  H.  94 
import  of  testimony  of,  H.  Ill 
in  hand  of  His  enemies,  H.  502 
innocent,  yet  condemned,  H.  632 
intercourse  of,  with  His  disciples  after 

His    resurrection,    lessons    from, 

H.  569 
is  our  Life,  H.  149 
life-giving  Saviour,  H.  142 
Light  of  world  heals  man  born  blind, 

H.  262,  265,  280 
loved,  disciple  whom,  H.  582 
manifests  Himself  to  His  first  disciples, 

H.  53 
name  of,  no  prayer  in,  unanswered,  1. 472 
what  prayer  in,  leads  believers  to  hope 

for,  H.  466 
nobleman  led  by,  from  faith  to  faith, 

H.  135 
our  true  High  Priest,  H.  250 
peace  of,  amid  conflict,  H.  238 
praise  to,  for  spiritual  light,  I.  281 
receiving,  N.  38 
rejected  for  Barabbas,  H.  518 
Kesurrection  and  Life,  H.  317 
sanctifies  Christian    marriage  at   Cana, 

H.  64 
scourging    of,    and    crown    of    thorns, 

H.  525,  626 
Searcher  of  hearts,  H.  82 
seeking,  H.  206 


R  R 


609 


INDEX. 


Jesus,  tears  of,  H.  322 
testimony  of,  H.  250 
tomb  of,  Mary  Magdalene  at,  H.  559 
troubled,  N.  325 
true  coming  to,  I.  195 
disciples  of,  H.  242 
Way,  Truth,  Life,  H.  395 
we  would  see,  N.  357 
went  up  into  mountain,  N.  172 
worship,  of,  N.  571 
Jesus'  action  in  view  of  hatred  of  world, 
H.  203 
consciousness  of  His  Father's  presence 

and  approval,  H.  238 
disciples,  prospect  of,  H.  463 
ministry  in  Galilee,  crisis  in,  N.  172 
name,  power  of,  N.  471 

praying  in,  guides  our  prayers,  N.  471 
prayer,  and  answering  voice  from  heaven, 

H.  354 
second  miracle,  N.  137 
soul  troubled,  N.  357 
spiritual  meat,  H.  126 
sympathy  in  sorrow,  H.  320 ;  I.  330 
witness  concerning  Himself,  H.  153 
Jews  and  Christ,  chief  cause  of  contest  be- 
tween, I.  257 
and  Samaritans,  N.  124 
John,  apostle,  N.  4 

Baptist,  witness  of,  H.  42 

forerunner,  H.  25 
disciple,  N.  1 
evangelist,  N.  5 

object  of,  in  writing  his  Gospel,  N.  572 
starting-point  of,  N.  34 
John's  final  testimony  to  truth  of  what  he 
had  written,  H.  597 
fitness  as  witness  to  Christ,  I.  598 
Gospel,  authorship  of,  5 

-epilogue,  meaning  of,  N.  596 
purpose  of,  9  ;  H.  569 
when  and  where  written,  7 
method  as  evangelist,  N.  572 
record,  truth  of,  H.  594 
Jonas,     Simon     son     of :      on     lake-shore, 

H.  586 
Joy  and  fruit  of  sincere  Christian  profession, 
,-.,   I.  125  -**■"" 

earthly,  not  secured  to  men,'SO  that  they 
*      may  seek  heavenly  joy,  I.  435 
in  religion,  some  afraid  of,  I.  436 
of  God's  children,  H.  464 
of  light,  I.  39 

of  spiritual  harvest,  H.  127 
of  the  Kesurrection,  H.  562 
reaping  after  many  days  in,  I.  133 
spiritual,  H.  427 
true,  not  on  surface,  I.  436 
Joyful  in  trouble,  confident  and  even,  where- 
fore can  and  ought  Christians  to  be  ? 
H.  460 
Judsea,     rural,     our     Lord's     ministry    in, 

H.  106 
Judas  example  of  slighting  of  opportunity, 
I.  379 
warning  example,  I.  380 

610 


Judge  is  at  gate — prepare  to  meet  Him, 
1.  161 
not  according  to  appearance,  H.  212 
Son  as,  H.  152,  159 
Judgment,  N.  457 

great  day  of,  H.  159 

or    discrimination,  coming  of  Light   of 

world  results  in,  H.  275 
resurrection  of,  H.  151 

Keeping  Christ's  words,  N.  256 
words,  N.  417 
Law,  H.  209 
King,  coming,  how  are  we  to  receive  ?  H.  347 
of  spiritual  kingdom,  H.  514,  515 
promised  spiritual,  Christ  the,  I.  520 
Kingdom,  Christ's,  true  nature  of,  H.  512 
King  of  spiritual,  H.  514,  515 
of  God,  childlike  nature  is  of,  I.  101 
fit  for,   how  we  may  know  we  are, 
H.  98 
on  earth,  Christ's,  marriage  honoured  in, 
L  73 
Know  all  things,  he  who  teaches  all  things 
must,  N.  417 
one  thing  I,  H.  274 

our  friends  in  heaven,  shall  we  ?  I.  399 
Knowing  Christ,  truly,  N.  302 
Knowledge  acquired  too  late,  N.  254 

LABORA,  ora  et,  H.  402 

Labour  for  Christ  not  in  vain,  I.  585 

prayer  and,  N.  471 

self-denying,  for  Christ's  harvest,  I.  133 

unity  of,  blessedness  of,  among  different 
sections  of  Church,  I.  497 
Labourers,  true,  I.  270 
Ladder  of  faith,  H.  137 
Lake,  Galilean,  storms  on,  N.  175 
Lake-shore,  on :  Follow  Me,  H.  589 

fruitless  toil,  H.  579 

Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  H.  586 
Lamb  of  God,  H.  47 

result  of  beholding  Christ  in  faith  as, 
H.  50 
Lambs,  feed  My,.H.  588 

of  flock,  feeding,  I.  597 
Last,  best  at,  I.  74    , 
Late,  too,  I.  257 
Law  and  grace,  H.  30 

is  no  remedy  for  sin,  N.  537 

keeping,  H.  209 
Lazarus,  raising  of,  H.  312 
Leadership,  H.  54 

Leading  grand  affection  of  all  is  love,  I.  438 
Learn  to  understand?  fully  what  you  pray  for, 

N.  471 
Legacy,  heavenly,  H.  414 
Lege,  tolle,  H.  155 

Lesson  of   humility  and   ministering  love, 
H.  366,  368 

to  instruct  and  argument  to  convince, 
faith  of  Thomas,.-I.  575 
Lessons  from  Bethany,  I.  325 
Letter  killeth,  Spirit,  giveth  life,  I.  162 


INDEX. 


Liberty  of  God's  children,  freedom  and  truth, 

H.  243 
Life  and  Light  of  men,  Christ,  H.  23 
bitter  of,  made  sweet,  N.  69 
Bread    of,   manner    in  which  we    must 
receive,  H.  186 
our  fellowship  with,  H.  191 
Christian,  under  figure  of  voyage,  H.  175 
common,  hallowing  of,  I.  74 
contemplative,  religious  activity  should 

not  absorb,  I.  219 
eternal,  H.  479 

cross  of  Christ  source  of,  H.  96 
essence  of,  I.  493 
human,  permanent  basis  of  each,  N.  255 

presence  of  evil  in,  N.  537 
I  have  power  to  lay  down  My,  H.  299 
Jesus  Bread  of,  H.  181 

is  our,  H.  149 
of  messengers  of  gospel,  H.  583 
one,  I.  395 

quest  of  humanity,  I.  196 
Resurrection  and,  Jesus,  H.  317 

of,  H.  151 
sacredness  of,  I.  59 
spiritual,  a  Divine  inspiration,  H.  94 

mutual  aid  in,  I.  374 
through  death  to,  H.  350 
true  Bread  of,  H.  171 

use  of  this,  determined  by  its  connec- 
tion with  that  to  come,  I.  519 
upon  what  kind  of,  did  Jesus  Christ  set 

seal  of  His  blessing  ?  N.  308 
Way,  Truth,  Jesus,  H.  395 
Life-giving  Saviour,  Jesus,  H.  142 
Light  and  Life  of  men,  Christ,  H.  23 
bears  witness  of  itself,  I.  256 
believe  in,  walk  in  Light,  H.  356 
burning  and  shining,  I.  161 
darkness  not  comprehending,  H.  35 
joy  of,  I.  39 
manner  in  which  mankind  had  wandered 

from,  I.  235 
of  men,  reason  not,  I.  236 
of  world  as  Revealer,  H.  230 

coming  of,  results  in   discrimination 

or  judgment,  H.  275 
Jesus,  heals  man  born  blind,  H.  262, 

265,  280 
witnesses  to,  H.  236 
on  path  of  duty,  I.  326 
or  darkness,  I.  256 

men  must  choose,  I.  282 
shining  in  darkness,  H.  35 
spiritual,  praise  to  Jesus  for,  I.  281 
true,  N.  35 
Lights   in  world,  Christians  in  Christ  are, 

1.236 
Literalism    and    authority,    prejudices    of, 

H.  221 
Little  while,  a,  H.  461 
Living,  I.  395 

as  children  of  the  Resurrection,  I.  574 
faith,  power  of,  testifying  to  God's  good- 
ness, I.  138 
for  invisible,  majesty  and  sanctity  of,  1. 520 


Living  union  of  Christ  and  His  people,  H.  422 
with  true  Vine,  results  of,  H.  425 
unto  righteousness,  I.  56 
Loneliness  of  Christ,  H.  467 
Lord  equips   His  servants  for  their  office, 
how,  H.  570 
help  from,  H.  324 
how  does,  deal  with  those  weak  in  faith  ? 

H.  137 
is  Helper  of  His  people  in  sorrow,  H.  461 
it  is  the,  H.  582 

Jesus,  how,  proves  Himself  to  be  our  true 
Helper,  H.  172 
into  what  hearts   does,  to-day  make 
entry  ?  H.  346 
manifests  His  glory,  H.  67 
rejoice  in,  Christians  are  commanded  to, 
I.  436 
.  resurrection   of,   grounds    of    belief    in, 
H.  557 
still  comes  to-day,  H.  346 
Lord's  ascension,    our,  the    Church's   gain, 
H.  458 
claim  to  be  Son  of  God,  clearness  of  our, 

N.  530 
day  memorial  of  the  Resurrection,  I.  560 
dealing    with     Samaritan    woman,    our, 

H.  119 
intercessory  prayer,  our,  scope  and  con- 
tents of,  H.  477 
interview  with  Nicodemus,  our,  H.  88 
ministry  in  rural  Judaea,  our,  H.  106 
omniscience,  our,  N.  595 
saying  regarding  beloved  disciple,  H.  592 
Supper,  H.  192 

time  of  institution  of,  N.  371 
Lost,  dead  not,  I.  329 
Love  and  fear  of  truth,  concerning,  H.  455 
and  friendship  of  Christ  in  home,  H.  313 
and  obedience,  H.  405 
Christ's  dying,  embraces  race,  I.  548 
Divine,  greatness  of,  H.  107 
eternal,  victory  of,  I.  108 
genuine,  exceeds  words,  N.  417 
God's    eternal    counsel    of,   resting   on, 

N.  37 
grand  leading  affection  of  all  is,  I.  438 
ministering,  highest  service,  I.  387 

lesson    of    humility    and,     H.     366, 
368 
not  darkness,  H.  106 
of  Christ  to  His  disciples,  H.  430 
of  God,  H.  104 
eternal,  I.  107 

shall  not,  constrain  us  to  love  Him? 
I.  107 
of  money,  I.  341 
perfects  obedience,  N.  417 
self-denying,  power  of,  I.  373 
spirit  of,  I.  326 

to  Christ,  our,  proof  of,  I.  417 
to  God,  Christian's,  shown  in  his  deeds, 
N.  417 
Loved  ones,  what  can  bring  us  comfort  at 

graves  of  our  ?  H.  324 
Loveless  Christian,  figure  of,  N.  417 

611 


INDEX. 


Lovest  thou  Me?  H.  587 

Lowliness  and  glory  in  Gethsemane,  N.  509 

Majesty  and  sanctity  of  living  for  invisible, 

I.  520 
Man,  behold  the  !  H.  527  ;  I.  531 
born  blind,  gospel  of,  H.  278 

Jesus,  Light  of  world,  heals,  H.  262, 
265,  280 
can  work,  night  cometh,  when  no,  H.  267 
differentiated  from  other  existences,  I.  39 
every,  shall  bear  his  own  burden,  I.  598 
glorified  Son  of,  and  new  commandment, 

H.  381 
never  man  spake  like  this,  I.  227 
sent  from  God,  H.  36 
shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  H.  178 
Son  of,  as  Judge,  H.  159 
Man's  being,  grandeur  of,  I.  39 

happiness,  in  what  does,  consist  ?  I.  435 
highest  happiness  in  completion  of  work 

given  him  to  do,  I.  271 
hour  ends,  God's  hour  strikes  when,  H.  69 
Manifestation,  Divine,  promise  of,  to  loving, 

obedient  disciples,  H.  409 
Manifestations  of   Spirit,   all  earlier,   over- 
shadowed by  Pentecost,  N.  218 
Mankind,  manner  in  which,  had  wandered 

from  light,  I.  235 
Manna,  I.  194 

and  true  Bread  from  heaven,  H.  179 
Manna-gatherers,  I.  194 
Manner  in  which    Christ    manifested    His 
resurrection,  I.  573 
Christianity  may  mitigate  poverty  in 

future,  I.  342 
mankind  had  wandered  from  light, 

1.235 
Spirit  convinces  men  of  sin,  I.  459 
we    must    receive    Bread     of     life, 
H.  186 
of  Divine  indwelling,  N.  417 
of  new  birth,  H.  95 
Marah,  I.  474 

Marriage,    Christian,    Jesus    sanctifies,    at 
Cana,  H.  64 
feast,  I.  75 
honoured  in  Christ's  kingdom  on  earth, 

1.73 
on  which  Christ's  blessing  rests  is  eternal 

union,  I.  74 
secret  of  uninterrupted  union  in,  N.  69 
true  foundation  of,  H.  68 
Mary  at  cross,  H.  541 

Magdalene  at  tomb  of  Jesus,  H.  559 
Master  is  come,  and  calleth  for  thee,  I.  329 
Master-servant,  following,  I.  196 

mystery  of,  I.  195 
Material  and  spiritual,   hard  times,  grace 
needed  for,  N.  172 
gifts,  spiritual  reception  of,  N.  173 
Meaning  and  purpose  of  pain  and  sorrow  for 
God's  people,  I.  270 
of  eating  Christ's  flesh,  I.  197 
of  John's  epilogue,  N.  596 
of  self-sacrifice  of  Christ,  I.  305 

612 


Meaning  of  the  Resurrection  for   Christ's 
people,  I.  561 
true,  of  Scripture  not  hidden,  H.  159 
Measures,  first,  against  Jesus,  H.  225 
Meat,  Jesus'  spiritual,  H.  126 
Medium    of    blessing    to    others,    believers 

blessed  in  order  to  become,  I.  219 
Memorial  of  the  Eesurrection,  Lord's  day, 

1.560 
Memories  of  Jacob's  well,  I.  124 
Men,  earthly  joy  not  secured  to,  so  that  they 
may  seek  heavenly  joy,  I.  435 
fear  of,  N.  363 
God's  purpose  of  grace  toward,  how  Holy 

Ghost  brings  to  completion,  H.  449 
Life  and  Light  of,  Christ,  H.  23 
light  of,  reason  not,  I.  236 
manner  in  which  Spirit  convinces,  of  sin, 

I.  459 
merely  human  effort  cannot  deliver,  from 

sin's  bondage,  I.  257 
must  choose  light  or  darkness,  I.  282 
new  birth  of,  H.  91 
of  all  classes  and  circumstances,  Bible 

suited  to,  I.  599 
relation  of  different  classes  of,  to  Saviour, 

H.  198 
should  make  their  requests  known  directly 

to  God,  I.  134 
true  guide  of,  word  of  Christ,  I.  271 
Message,  precious  advent,  H.  346 
Messengers  of  gospel,  life  of,  H.  583 
Method,  John's,  as  evangelist,  N.  572 
Methods  of  obtaining  deliverance  from  sin, 
world  is  weary  with  cumbrous  and 
futile,  N.  52 
Ministering   love,  lesson   of  humility  and, 
H.  366,  368 
the  highest  service,  I.  387 
Ministry,  Jesus',  in  Galilee,  crisis  in,  N.  172 

our  Lord's,  in  rural  Judsea,  H.  106 
Miracle  of  feeding  five  thousand,  H.  165 
of  walking  on  sea,  will  of  Christ  potential 

in,  N.  176 
second,  this  is,  N.  137 
source  of,  N.  72 
Miracles,  acts  of  humility  of  Christ,  N.  404 
all,  are  included  in  Incarnation,  I.  75 
Christ's,  motive  of,  I.  75 
nature  of,  N.  70 
Miser  a  slave,  I.  258 
Misjudgments  of  world,  I.  305 
Mission,  Divine,  and  Divine  power,  H.  565 

of  Comforter,  H.  452 
Missionary  spirit,  true,  I.  585 
Money,  love  of,  I.  341 
Months,  four,  to  harvest,  N.  130 
Moses,  God  spake  unto,  H.  274 
Mother,  behold  thy  1  I.  547 
Motive  of  Christ's  miracles,  I.  75 
Motto  of  Christ's  subjects,  I.  520 

of  hireling,  N.  302 
Mountain,  Jesus  went  up  into,  N.  172 
Mourners,  two  classes  of,  I.  330 
Much  fruit,  H.  423 
Multitudes  murmured,  N.  207 


INDEX. 


Mutual  aid  in  spiritual  life,  I.  374 
Mystery  of  Master-servant,  I.  195 
sad,  of  son  of  perdition,  I.  361 

Name,  Jesus',  power  of,  N.  471 

of  Jesus,  no  prayer  in,  unanswered,  1. 472 
what  prayer  in,    leads   believers  to 
hope  for,  H.  466 
Nathanael,  guileless  disciple,  H.  56 
Natural  and  spiritual  growth,  H.  58 
Naturalness  of  prayer,  I.  405 
Nature  and  baptism,  our  twofold,  by  water 
and  Spirit,  I.  101 
childlike,  is  of  kingdom  of  God,  I.  101 
Jesus  Christ  Creator  of,  I.  38 
none  are  by,  "  of  the  truth,"  I.  521 
of  miracles,  N.  70 
of  servitude  of  sin,  H.  245 
true,  of  Christ's  kingdom,  H.  512 
Necessity  for  Christ's  resurrection,  I.  576 
Need,  earthly,  and  heavenly  blessing,  H.  69 
of  continual  spiritual  cleansing,  I.  374 
world's,  of  Christ,  Sun  of  righteousness 
H.  232 
Neglect  of  Divine  truth,  direful   results  of, 

1.495 
Net,  casting,  at  Christ's  command,  I.  584 
Never  man  spake  like  this  Man,  I.  227 

seeing  death,  N.  256 
New  birth,  manner  of,  H.  95 
of  men,  H.  91 

spiritual  regeneration,  or,  H.  92 
born,  gifts  of  God  to  spiritually,  H.  98 
commandment,  H.  384 ;  I.  386 

glorified  Son  of  man  and,  H.  381 
Nicodemus,  I.  100 

at  cross  and  tomb  of  Jesus,  I.  551 
our  Lord's  interview  with,  H.  88 
Night  cometh,  when  no  man  can  work,  H.  267 

silent,  holy  hour  with  Jesus  in,  H.  94 
No  condemnation,  H.  105 
Nobility,  true,  N.  256 
Nobleman  led  by  Jesus  from  faith  to  faith, 

H.  135 
Nobleman's  son,  healing  of,  H.  134 
None  are  by  nature  "  of  the  truth,"  I.  521 
Not  of  blood,  N.  37 

Nothing,  without  Christ ;  in  Him,  all  things, 
1.433 

Obedience,  love  and,  H.  405 

perfects,  N.  417 
Obedient  servant  of  God,  Abraham,  I.  259 

service  to  God,  offering,  N.  417 
Object  of  John  in  writing  his  Gospel,  N.  572 
Offering  obedient  service  to  God,  N.  417 
Office,   how   Lord  equips  His  servants  for 
their,  H.  570 

of  Holy  Ghost,  H.  103 
Omniscience,  our  Lord's,  N.  595 
One  life,  I.  395 

thing  I  know,  H.  274 
Opinions,  various,  H.  222 
Opportunity,  slighting  of,  Judas  example  of, 
1.379 

use  of,  I.  359 


Ora  et  labora,  H.  402 

Order,  sacred  Divine,  figure  of  sleep  of  death 

points  to,  I.  327 
Orphans,  I  will  not  leave  you,  H.  409 
Other  sheep,  not  of  this  fold,  I.  305 

Pain  and  sorrow,  meaning  and  purpose  of, 

for  God's  people,  I.  270 
Paraclete  and  Teacher    of   believers,   Holy 
Ghost,  H.  413 
promise  of,  H.  406 
Pastor  and  flock,  Jesus  the  Door  for,  H.  289 
Pastors,  true,  I.  303 
Pastoral  office,  all  public  teaching  partakes 

of,  I.  304 
Path  of  duty,  light  on,  I.  326 
Patience,  Christ's,  I.  510 

under  trial,  I.  493 
Pauperism,  effect  of  Christianity  on,  I.  342 
Peace  and  unity,  Christian,  I.  418 

source      of      human,      sanctification 
through  truth,  H.  488 
be  unto  you  !  I.  573 

Christ's,  blessedness  of  those  who  have, 
I.  574 
comprehends,  what,  N.  417 
greeting  of,  risen  Redeemer's,  H.  570 
of  Jesus  amid  conflict,  H.  238 
of  the  Resurrection,  H.  561 
world's,  N.  417 
Peace-breakers,  on,  lies  burden  of  war,  H.  78 
Peace-loving  heart  is   dwelling    of   Triune 

Jehovah,  417 
P.entecost,  all  earlier  manifestations  of  Spirit 

overshadowed  by,  N.  218 
People,  Christ's,  eternal  safety  of,  H.  307 

meaning    of    the     Resurrection    for, 
1.561 
God's,  meaning  and  purpose  of  pain  and 

sorrow  for,  I.  270 
in  sorrow,  Lord  is  Helper  of  His,  H.  461 
living  union  of  Christ  and  His,  H.  422 
Lord  as  Helper  of  His,  H.  324 
willing,  in  day  of  Christ's  power,  H.  183 
Perdition,  son  of,  sad  mystery  of,  I.  381 
Pericope  adulterae,  N.  233 
Peril,  Christ's  Hope  of  His  Church  in,  and  of 

faithful,  H.  174 
Permanent  basis  of  each  human  life,  N.  255 
Personal  convictions,  I.  52 
Peter-name,  I.  55 
Peter's  fall,  H.  508 
Phases  of  discipleship,  I.  59 

of  unity  among  believers,  I.  496 
Pierced  side,  I.  551 
Pilate,  H.  511 

scepticism  of,  H.  517 
Pilgrimage,  Christian's,  N.  417 
Pilgrims,    for,   there   is   promise    of   home 

beyond,  I.  398 
Place,  dark,  world,  H.  35 
Places  of  worship,  true  sacredness  of,  H.  120 
Pool  of  Siloam,  N.  268 
Poor,  Christian  care  of,  H.  339 

sympathy  with,  I.  342 
Populi,  vox,  vox  Dei,  I.  522 

613 


INDEX. 


Poverty,  manner  in  which  Christianity  may 

mitigate,  in  future,  I.  342 
Power,  Christ's  enemies  must  acknowledge 
His,  I.  510 
willing  people  in  day  of,  H.  183 
compassion,  and  grace,  Divine,  Bethesda 

witness  of,  H.  140 
Divine  mission  and  Divine,  H.  565 
of  forgiving  sins,  H.  570 
of  God    unto    salvation,    preaching    of 

cross,  I.  538 
of  Jesus'  name,  N.  471 
of  living  faith  testifying  to  God's  good- 
ness, I.  138 
of  prejudice  in  blinding  men  to  truth, 

H.  306 
of  self-denying  love,  T.  373 
speaking  with,  N.  208 
to  lay  down  My  life,  I  have,  H.  299 
Praise  to  Jesus  for  spiritual  light,  I.  281 
Pray  aright,  not  to,  is  as  futile  as  not  to 
pray  at  all,  N.  471 
best,  those  who,  N.  471 
for,  learn  to  understand  fully  what  you, 
N.  471 
Prayer  and  labour,  N.  471 

Christ's,  for  unity  of  His  Church,  H.  491 
Christian,  prerequisite  of,  I.  472 
continual  readiness  for,  I.  405 
earnest,  answered,  I.  134 
if  you  cannot  find  words  for  your,  let 

thoughts  speak,  N.  471 
in  name  of  Jesus,  what,  leads  believers 

to  hope  for,  H.  466 
Jesus',  and  answering  voice  from  heaven, 

H.  354 
naturalness  of,  I.  405 
no,  in  name  of  Jesus  unanswered,  I.  472 
without  true  faith  in  Christ,  H.  472 
our  Lord's  intercessory,  scope  and  con- 
tents of,  H.  477 
spirit  of,  N.  471 

way  of  deliverance  from  trouble,  I.  359 
Praying  in  Jesus'  name  guides  our  prayers, 
N.  471 
in  order  to  working,  H.  402 
Preaching    of    cross,     power  of    God   unto 

salvation,  I.  538 
Precious  advent  message,  H.  346 
Preciousness  of  cross,  N.  464 
Prejudice,  power  of,  in  blinding  men  to  truth, 

H.  306 
Prejudices    of     literalism    and    authority, 

H.  221 
Premonitions  of  heavenly  home,  I.  398 
Prerequisite  of  Christian  prayer,  I.  472 
Prerogative  of  suffering,  high,  H.  590 
Presence  and  approval,  Father's,  Jesus'  con- 
sciousness of  His,  H.  238 
of  evil  in  human  life,  N.  537 
of  God  felt,  I.  59 
Present-day  scepticism,  boast  of — We  see, 

1.282 
Prince  appears,  herald  withdraws,  H.  108 

of  this  world,  N.  417 
Problem  of  human  suffering,  H.  263 

614 


Profession,  sincere  Christian,  joy  and  fruit 

of,  I.  125 
Progress  of   Christ's  Church  on  earth  like 
that  of  ship,  H.  175 
of  faith  and  descent  of  unbelief,  H.  272 
Promise,  Christ's  prophetic,  of  ingathering 
of  Gentiles,  H.  296 
gracious,  H.  403 

of  Divine   manifestation  to  loving  obe- 
dient disciples,  H.  409 
of  harvest,  I.  358 
of  home  beyond,  for  pilgrims  there  is, 

1.398 
of  Paraclete,  H.  406 
Promised  spiritual  King,  Christ  the,  I.  520 
Proof,  clear,  of  our  Divine  sonship,  1.  281 

of  our  love  to  Christ,  I.  417 
Prophecy  of  Caiaphas,  unconscious,  H.  331 
Prospect  of  Jesus'  disciples,  H.  463 
Public  teaching,   all,  partakes    of  pastoral 

office,  I.  304 
Punishment  of  scourging,  N.  530 
Purpose  and  meaning  of  pain  and  sorrow  for 
God's  people,  I.  270 
of  John's  Gospel,  H.  569 
Purposes  of  tribulation,  H.  470 

Quest  of  humanity,  life  the,  I.  196 
Questions,  three,  answered,  H.  99 
Quickener  of  dead,  Son  as,  H.  151 
Quiet  sepulchre,  abode  of  hope,  I.  552 

KACE,  Christ's  dying  love  embraces,  I.  548 
Raising  of  Lazarus,  H.  312 
Readiness  for  prayer,  continual,  I.  405 
Reality   and   assurance   of   heavenly   state, 

H.  392 
Reaper,  sower  and,  N.  131 
Reaping  after  many  days  in  joy,  I.  133 
Reason  not  light  of  men,  I.  236 
Receive,  ask,  and  ye  shall,  H.  464 
Receiving,  asking  and,  N.  471 

Jesus,  N.  38 
Reception,  spiritual,  of  material  gifts,  N.  173 
Record,  John's,  truth  of,  H.  594 
Redeemer  drank  full  cup  of  agony  on  cross, 

I.  548 
friendship  of,  I.  436 
rest  of,  in  grave,  H.  549 
resurrection  of,  H.  555 
Redeemer's,  risen,  greeting  of  peace,  H.  570 
Redemption  of  humanity,  Abraham's  faith  in, 

H.  251 
Regeneration,  blessedness   to  which   Spirit 

leads  us  through,  H.  102 
spiritual,  or  new  birth,  H.  92 
Rejection  of  Christ,  end  of,  N.  363 
Rejoice  in  Lord,  Christians  are  commanded 

to,  I.  436 
Relation    of    different    classes    of    men    to 

Saviour,  H.  198 
Relationships,  spiritual,  I.  40 
Religion,  joy  in,  some  afraid  of,  I.  436 
Religious  activity  should  not  absorb  contem- 
plative life,  I.  219 
Remedy  for  sin,  Law  is  no,  N.  537 


INDEX. 


Report,  who  hath  believed  our  ?  H.  359 
Requests,   men  should  make   their,   known 

directly  to  God,  I.  134 
Rest  of  Redeemer  in  grave,  H.  549 
Resting  on   God's  eternal   counsel  of   love, 

N.  37 
Result  of  beholding  Christ  in  faith  as  Lamb 

of  God,  H.  50 
Results    of    living  union    with    true   Vine, 

H.  425 
Resurrection  and  Life,  Jesus,  H.  317 
children  of  the,  living  as,  I.  574 
Christ's,  necessity  for,  I,  576 
hope  of  humanity,  I.  160 
intercourse  of  Jesus  with  His    disciples 

after  His,  lessons  from,  H.  569 
is  sign  which  includes  all  verification  and 

authorisation,  N.  84 
joy  of  the,  H.  562 
manner  in  which  Christ  manifested  His, 

1.573 
meaning  of  the,  for  Christ's  people,  I.  561 
memorial  of  the,  Lord's  day,  I.  560 
of  judgment,  H.  151 
of  life,  H.  151 

of  Lord,  grounds  of  belief  in,  H.  557 
of  Redeemer,  H.  555 
our  Saviour's,  certainty  of,  H.  571 
peace  of  the,  H.  561 
spring  of,  winter  of  death  and,  I.  328 
types  of,  I.  329 
Reticence,  Christ's,  in  teaching  truth,  H.  454 
Reunion  of  saints  in  heaven,  H.  393 
Revealer,  Light  of  world  as,  H.  230 
Revelation  of  eternal  Word — influence  and 
end,  H.  17 
of  Father,  H.  399 
Righteousness,  N.  457 
living  unto,  I.  56 

Sun  of,  world's  need  of  Christ,  H.  232 
Rise  of  organised  Christian  charity,  I.  341 
Risen  One  for  first  time  among  His  disciples, 
H.  563 
Redeemer's  greeting  of  peace,  H.  570 
Rising  Sun,  setting  star  and,  H.  110 
River  of  God  is  full  of  water,  N.  583 
Robbers  of  fold,  I.  303 
Rock,  smitten,  Christ  the,  N.  218 

streams  from,  I.  218 
Royal  entry  of  Christ  into  Jerusalem,  H.  345 
Rule  of   Christ,    golden,    bond    of    human 
brotherhood,  I.  496 
of  social  fellowship,  H.  69 
Rulers,  hath   any  of,  believed   on    Jesus  ? 

H.  220 
Rural  Judaea,  our  Lord's  ministry  in,  H.  106 

Sabbath,  value  of,  I.  148 
Sabbath-keeping,  true,  H.  135 
Sacredness  of  life,  I.  59 

of  places  of  worship,  true,  H.  120 

of  true  work,  I.  271 
Sad  mystery  of  son  of  perdition,  I.  381 
Safety,  eternal,  of  Christ's  people,  H.  307 
Saints,  reunion  of,  in  heaven,  H.  393 
Salvation,  certainty  of,  I.  308 


Salvation,  power  of  God  unto,  preaching  of 

cross,  I.  538 
Samaria,  woman  of,  H.  116,  119 
Samaritan,  thou  art  a,  N.  256 
Samaritans  and  Jews,  N.  124 
Sanctification  through  truth,  source  of  human 

peace  and  unity,  H.  488 
Sanctity  and  majesty  of  living  for  invisible, 

1.520 
Satan's  children,  I.  522 
Satisfaction  for  soul,  H.  215 
Saviour,  cup  given  to,  to  drink,  H.  505 
Jesus  life-giving,  H.  142 
relation  of  different  classes  of  men  to, 
H.  198 
Saviour's    resurrection,    our,    certainty    of, 

H.  571 
Saying,  hard,  justified,  H.  189 

Lord's,  regarding  beloved  disciple,  H.  592 
Scepticism,  boast  of  present  day — We   see. 
I.  282 
of  Pilate,  H.  517 
School  of  affliction,  classes  in,  I.  474 
Scope  and  contents  of  our  Lord's  intercessory 

prayer,  H.  477 
Scourging   of  Jesus  and  crown  of    thorns, 
H.  525,  526 
punishment  of,  N.  530 
Scripture  bears  witness  to  Jesus,  H.  154 
true  meaning  of,  not  hidden,  H.  159 
witness  of,  apparent  difficulties  do  not  in- 
validate, I.  162 
clearness  and  sufficiency  of,  H.  154 
Scriptures,  diligently  reading,  N.  37 

why  are  we  to  search?  H.  156 
Sea,  miracle  of  walking  on,  will  of  Christ 

potential  in,  N.  176 
Seal  of  Christ's  teaching,  N.  254 

of  His  blessing,  upon  what  kind  of  life 
did  Jesus  Christ  set  ?  NT  308 
Search  Scriptures,  why  are  we  to  ?  H.  156 
Searcher  of  hearts,  Jesus,  H.  82 
Seasons  of  spiritual  year,  I.  433 
Second  miracle,  this  is,  N.  137 
Secret,  in,  N.  207 

of  uninterrupted  union  in  marriage,  N.  69 
Seeing  greater  things,  I.  59 
Seeking  in  vain,  I.  208 

Jesus,  H.  206 
Seen,  blessedness  of  those  who  have  not,  yet 

believe,  H.  567 
Self-confidence,  over,  folly  of,  I.  388 
Self-confident  apostle,  H.  387 
Self-denying    labour    for    Christ's    harvest, 
T.  133 
love,  power  of,  I.  373 
Self-examination,  H.  377 

sorrow     for     backsliding     leading     to, 
I.  380 
Self -pruning,  I.  432 
Self-renunciation  at  cross,  I.  547 
Self-sacrifice  of  Christ,  meaning  of,  I.  305 
Self-surrender,  Christ's  perfect,  our  example, 

1.495 
Separate,  come  out  from  among  them,  and  be 
ye,  I.  498 

615 


INDEX. 


Separation  and  fruitlessness,  causes  of,  I.  434 
from  Christ,  end  of,  H.  424 
from  world,  Christian,  H.  480,  483 
Sepulchre,  quiet,  abode  of  hope,  I.  552 
Servant,  He  took  on  Him  form  of,  H.  185 

of  God,  Abraham  obedient,  I.  259 
Servants,  care  of,  H.  289 

how  Lord  equips  His,   for   their   office, 

H.  570 
not,  but  friends,  H.  428 
Service,  highest,  ministering  service,  I.  387 
obedient,  to  God,  offering,  N.  417 
spiritual,  Christ  our  Example  in,  H.  352 
true,  spirit  of,  H.  354 
Servitude  of  sin  and  bondage  of  corruption, 
H.  240 
nature  of,  H.  245 
Setting  star  and  rising  Sun,  H.  110 
Sheep,  Christ  knows  His,  N.  302 
the  Door  of,  H.  286 
other,  not  of  this  fold,  I.  305 
Sheepfold,  Church  of  Christ  is,  N.  303 
Shepherd,  good,  and  His  flock,  H.  292 
Christ,  H.  291,  295,  296 
true,  I.  303 
Shepherds,  faithful,  and  hirelings,  I.  304 
Shining  light,  burning  and,  I.  161 
Ship,  progress  of  Christ's  Church  on  earth 

like  that  of,  H.  175 
Side,  pierced,  I.  551 

Sign  Christ  gave  of  His  authority  in  cleans- 
ing temple,  H.  80 
Christ's  first,  H.  70 
which     includes     all     verification     and 

authorisation,  Eesurrection  is,  N.  84 
which  shall  be  spoken  against,  H.  300 
Significant  advent  warning,  H.  346 
Silent,  Church  too  much,  I.  219 

night,  holy  hour  with  Jesus  in,  H.  94 
Siloam,  Pool  of,  N.  268 
Similitudes  of  death,  I.  327 
Simon,     son     of     Jonas  :     on     lake-shore, 

H.  586 
Sin  and  death,  dominion  of,  ended  on  cross, 
N.  546 
and  suffering,  H.  268 
deliverance  from,  world  is  weary  with 
cumbrous  and  futile  methods   of 
obtaining,  N.  52 
dying  in,  H.  238 
enslaves,  way  in  which,  I.  258 
He  shall  convince  world  of,  H.  450 
Law  is  no  remedy  for,  N.  537 
manner  in  which  Spirit  convinces  men  of, 

1.459 
of  unbelief,  N.  457 

inexcusableness  of,  H.  440 
servitude  of,  and  bondage  of  corruption, 
H.  240 
nature  of,  H.  245 
vision  of,  I.  258 
way  of  escape  from,  H.  451 
Sin's  bondage,  merely  human  effort  cannot 

deliver  men  from,  I.  257 
Sins,  forgiving,  power  of,  H.  570 
Sinai  and  Calvary,  H.  30 

616 


Sincere    Christian  profession,  joy  and  fruit 

of,  I.  125 
Slave,  miser  a,  I.  258 
Sleep,  death  a,  H.  316 

of  death,  figure  of,  points  to  sacred  Divine 
order,  I.  327 
Slighting  of  opportunity,  Judas  example  of, 

I.  379 
Smitten  rock,  Christ  the,  N.  218 

streams  from,  I.  218 
Social  fellowship,  rule  of,  H.  69 
Soldiers  divide  garments  of  Jesus,  H.  540 
Solitude,  blessing  of,  N.  173 
ScSyCta  Kal  afyia,  N.  194 
Son  as  Judge,  H.  152,  159 

as  Quickener  of  dead,  H.  151 
Divine,  activity  of,  H.  148 
Jesus  eternal,  I.  259 
nobleman's,  healing  of,  H.  134 
of  God  called  Word,  why,  H.  34 

clearness  of  our  Lord's  claim  to  be, 
N.  530 
of  man,  glorified,  and  new  commandment, 

H.  381 
of  perdition,  sad  mystery  of,  I.  381 
woman,  behold  thy  !  I.  546 
Sonship,  Divine,  clear  proof  of  our,  I.  281 

of  believers,  Divine,  H.  25 
Sorrow  and  pain,  meaning  and  purpose  of, 
for  God's  people,  I.  270 
believers  in,  demeanour  of,  H.  464 
for  backsliding  leading  to  self-examina- 
tion, I.  380 
Lord  is  Helper  of  His  people  in,  H.  461 
sympathy  in,  H.  320;  I.  330 
Soul  awakened  and  enlightened,  H.  118 
human,  Christ  satisfies,  I.  197 
satisfaction  for,  H.  215 
troubled,  now  is  My,  N.  357 
Souls,  troubled,  threefold  word  of  comfort 

unto  all,  H.  176 
Source  of  human  peace  and  unity,  sancti- 
fication  through  truth,  H.  488 
of  life  eternal,  cross  of  Christ,  H.  96 
of  miracle,  N.  72 

of  world's  light,  and  world's  Upholder, 
Christ,  H.  22 
Sources,  unlooked-for,  danger  from,  I.  494 
Sower  and  reaper,  N.  131 
Speaking  with  power,  N.  208 
Spirit,  all  earlier   manifestations   of,  over- 
shadowed by  Pentecost,  N.  218 
and  truth,  worship  in,  H.  121 
blessed  coming  of,  H.  447 
blessedness  to  which,  leads   us  through 

regeneration,  H.  102 
convinces  men  of  sin,  manner  in  which, 

1.459 
flesh  and,  H.  99 
giveth  life,  letter  killeth,  I.  162 
guiding  disciples  into  all  truth,  N.  457 ; 

1.460 
in  which  Christians  are  to  live  separated 

from  world,  H.  484 
of  love,  I.  326 
of  prayer,  N.  471 


INDEX. 


Spirit  of  true  service,  H.  354 
true  missionary,  I.  585 
water  and,  N.  98 

our  twofold  nature  and  baptism  by, 
1.101 
wind  and,  N.  99 
Spiritual  and  material,  hard    times,  grace 
needed  for,  N.  172 
blindness,  H.  277 

and  its  cure,  I.  271 
children    of    Abraham    do    his    works, 
H.  246 
unity  with,  is  dear  to   God's  heart, 
1.498 
Christian    unity    is    not    formal,    but, 

I.  497 
cleansing,  need  of  continual,  I.  374 
conflict,  H.  58 
fountain,  H.  213 

fruitfulness,  conditions  of,  I.  434 
growth,  natural  and,  H.  58 
harvest  at  Sychar,  H.  129 

joy  of,  H.  127 
hunger  and    thirst   satisfied  in  Christ, 

I.  195 
joy,  H.  427 

King,  promised,  Christ  the,  I.  520 
kingdom,  king  of,  H.  514,  515 
life,  a  Divine  inspiration,  H.  94 

mutual  aid  in,  I.  374 
light,  praise  to  Jesus  for,  I.  281 
meat,  Jesus',  H.  126 
reception  of  material  gifts,  N.  173 
regeneration,  or  new  birth,  H.  92 
relationships,  I.  40 

service,  Christ  our  Example  in,  H.  352 
temple  of  God,  foundation  of,  H.  84 
things,  it  is  well  to  realise  our  ignorance 

of,  N.  463 
vine-branch,  fruit  of,  I.  434 
year,  seasons  of,  I.  433 
Spiritually  feeding  on  Christ,  blessedness  of, 
H.  188 
new  born,  gifts  of  God  to,  H.  98 
Spring  of  resurrection,  winter  of  death  and, 

I.  328 
Standeth,  let   him  that  thinketh  he,  take 

heed  lest  he  fall,  H.  387  ;  I.  381 
Star,  setting,  and  rising  Sun,  H.  110 
Starting-point  of  John,  N.  34 
State,  heavenly,  reality  and  assurance  of, 

H.  392 
Stoning  Christ,  H.  256 

first,  H.  253 
Stoops  of  faith,  three,  H.  62 
Store,  God's  never  empty,  N.  173 
Storm,  faith  amid,  I.  177 
Storms  on  Galilean  lake,  N.  175 
Streams  from  smitten  rock,  I.  218 
Subjects,  Christ's,  motto  of,  I.  520 
Submission  to  Divine  will,  I.  328 

to  God,  filial  trust  in  and,  I.  494 
Success  of  gospel  husbandmen,  N.  131 
Suffering,  high  prerogative  of,  H.  590 
human,  problem  of,  H.  263 
sin  and,  H.  268 


Sufficiency    and    clearness    of    witness    of 

Scripture,  H.  154 
Sun  of  righteousness,  world's  need  of  Christ, 
H.  232 

rising,  setting  star  and,  H.  110 
Superficial  faith,  N.  84 
Supper,  Lord's,  H.  192 

time  of  institution  of,  N.  371 
Surface,  true  joy  not  on,  I.  436 
Sweet,  bitter  of  life  made,  N.  69 
Sword  in  garden,  H.  504 
Sychar,  spiritual  harvest  at,  H.  129 
Sympathy  in  sorrow,  H.  320  ;  I.  330 

of  our  Divine  Friend,  I.  437 

with  poor,  I.  342 

Tabernacles,  Feast  of,  N.  216 

illumination  of  temple  court  at,  N.  235 
Teacher  and    Paraclete  of  believers,   Holy 

Ghost,  H.  413 
Teaches  all  things,  he  who,  must  know  all 

things,  N.  417 
Teaching,   all  public,   partakes   of  pastoral 
office,  I.  304 
and  working,  Christ's  Divine  authority  of, 

H.  208 
Christ's,  seal  of,  N.  254 
Tears,  gift  of,  I.  330 
of  Jesus,  H.  322 
Temperance,  Christian,  H.  170 
Temple,  cleansing  of,  H.  76,  78 

sign  Christ  gave  of  His  authority  in, 
H.  80 
court,  illumination  of,  at  Feast  of  Taber- 
nacles, N.  235 
destroy  this,  H.  81 

spiritual,  of  God,  foundation  of,  H.  84 
Testimony,  Baptist's,  H.  42 

John's   final,  to  truth  of  what   he   1  a  i 

written,  H.  597 
of  Jesus,  H.  250 
import  of,  H.  Ill 
Thirst  and    hunger,  spiritual,   satisfied    in 
Christ,  1.  195 
Christ's,  on  Calvary,  I.  548 
1 1  H.  542 
Thomas,  H.  566 

faith  of,  argument  to  convince  and  lesson 
to  instruct,  I.  575 
Thorns,  crown  of,  scourging  of  Jesus  and, 

H.  525 
Thoughts    speak,  let,   if   you    cannot    find 

words  for  your  prayer,  N.  471 
Thousand,  five,  miracle  of  feeding,  H.  165 
Three  Advent  questions,  H.  37 
questions  answered,  H.  99 
stoops  of  faith,  H.  62 
Threefold  word  of  comfort  unto  all  troubled. 

souls,  H.  176 
Through  death  to  life,  H.  350 
Time  of  Crucifixion,  N.  536 

of  institution  of  Lord's  Supper,  N.  371 
when  traitor  discovered,  four  opinions  as 
to,  N.  378 
Times,  hard,  N.  172 
Title  on  cross,  H.  538 

617 


INDEX. 


To-day,  into  what  hearts  does  Lord  Jesus, 
make  entry  ?  H.  346 
Lord  still  comes,  H.  346 
Toil,  fruitless :  on  lake-shore,  H.  579 
Tolle,  lege,  H.  155 

Tomb   of   Jesus,  cross  and,  Nicodemus  at, 
1.551 
Mary  Magdalene  at,  H.  559 
Too  late,  I.  257 

Traditionalism  versus  truth,  H.  143 
Traitor  discovered,  H.  375,  378 
Transient  homage,  I.  349 
Trial,  comfort  for,  H.  416 
patience  under,  I.  493 
Trials  of  faith,  I.  326 
Tribulation,  in  world,  H.  468 

purposes  of,  H.  470 
Triumph,    Christian's     cross-bearing     and, 

H.  248 
Triumphal    entry  into   Jerusalem,    Christ's, 

H.  343,  345 
Triune  Jehovah,  peace-loving  heart  is  dwell- 
ing of,  N.  417 
Trouble,  confident  and  even  joyful  in,  where- 
fore can  and  ought  Christians  to  be  ? 
H.  460 
prayer  way  of  deliverance  from,  I.  359 
Troubled  souls,  threefold  word  of  comfort 

unto  all,  H.  176 
^rue  bread  from  heaven,  manna  and,  H.  179 
of  life,  H.  171 
coming  to  Jesus,  I.  195 
disciples  of  Jesus,  H.  242 
foundation  of  marriage,  H.  68 
freedom,  I.  258 

guide  of  men,  word  of  Christ,  I.  271 
Helper,  how  Lord  Jesus  proves  Himself 

to  be  our,  H.  172 
High  Priest,  Jesus  our,  H.  250 
joy  not  on  surface,  I.  436 
labourers,  I.  270 
light,  N.  35 

meaning  of  Scripture  not  hidden,  H.  159 
missionary  spirit,  I.  584 
nature  of  Christ's  kingdom,  H.  512 
nobility,  N.  256 
pastors,  I.  303 
sabbath-keeping,  H.  145 
sacredness  of  places  of  worship,  H.  120 
service,  spirit  of,  H.  354 
Shepherd,  I.  303 
true,  true,  gospel  is,  H.  487 
use  of  this  life  determined  by  its  connec- 
tion with  that  to  come,  I.  519 
Vine  and  the  Husbandman,  H.  420 

results  of  living  union  with,  H.  425 
witnesses  of  Christ,  H.  446 
work,  sacredness  of,  I.  271 
zeal,  I.  79 
Trust,  filial,  in  and  submission  to  God,  I.  494 
Truth,   all,    Spirit    guiding    disciples    into, 
I.  460  ;  N.  457 
and  freedom  the  liberty  of  God's  chil- 
dren, H.  243 
and  grace,  Christ's  fulness  of,  H.  30 
full  of,  I.  41 

618 


Truth,  Christ's  reticence  in  teaching,  H.  454 
concerning  love  and  fear  of,  H.  455 
Divine,    direful    results    of    neglect    of, 

1.495 
Life,  Way,  Jesus  the,  H.  395 
of  John's  record,  H.  594 
of,  none  are  by  nature,  I.  521 
power  of  prejudice  in  blinding  men  to, 

H.  306 
sanctification  through,  source  of  human 

peace  and  unity,  H.  488 
Thy  word  is,  H.  485 
versus  traditionalism,  H.  143 
worship  in,  I.  125 

in  spirit  and  in,  H.  121 
Two  actions  of  Christ,  there  are,  we  should 
never  forget,  N.  472 
classes  of  mourners,  I.  330 
Twofold  nature  and  baptism  by  water  and 

Spirit,  our,  I.  101 
Type  of  gospel,  water,  I.  219 
Types  of  resurrection,  I.  329 

Unanswered,  no  prayer  in  name  of  Jesus, 

I.  472 
Unbelief,  belief  or,  I.  256 
boldness  of,  I.  442 

descent  of,  progress  of  faith  and,  H.  272 
doom  of,  H.  239 
folly  of,  H.  83 
of  Christ's  brethren,  H.  205 
sin  of,  N.  457 

inexcusableness  of,  H.  440 
world's,  declaration  of  Jesus  in  view  of, 
H.  361 
Unconscious  prophecy  of  Caiaphas,  H.  331 
Understand  fully  what  you  pray  for,  learn 

to,  N.  471 
Uninterrupted    union    in    marriage,    secret 

of,  N.  69 
Union,  eternal,  marriage  on  which  Christ's 
blessing  rests  is,  I.  74 
in    marriage,    secret    of    uninterrupted, 

N.  69 
living,   with  true    Vine,   results    of,   H. 

425 
of  believers  with  Christ,  T.  432 
of  Christ  and  His  people,  living,  H.  422 
with  angelic  world,  I.  59 
Unity  among  believers,  phases  of,  I.  496 
and  peace,  Christian,  I.  418 

source      of      human,      sanctification 
through  truth,  H.  488 
Christian,  H.  489 

is  not  formal,  but  spiritual,  I.  497 
of  His  Church,  Christ's  prayer  for,  H.  491 
of  labour,  blessedness  of,  among  different 

sections  of  Church,  I.  497 
with  spiritual  children  is  dear  to  God's 
heart,  I.  498 
Universal,  weeping,  N.  463 
Unlooked-for  sources,  danger  from,  I.  494 
Unstable,  earthly  crowns  are,  N.  173 
Upholder  of  world  and  Source   of  world's 

light,  Christ,  H.  22 
Use  of  opportunity,  I.  359 


INDEX. 


Use,  true,  of  this  life  determined  by  its  con- 

Will of  Christ  potential  in  miracle  of  walking 

nection  with  that  to  come,  I.  519 

on  sea,  N.  176 

Willing  people  in  day   of    Christ's  power, 

H.  183 

Vain,  labour  for  Christ  not  in,  I.  585 

Wilt  thou  be  made  whole  ?  I.  148 

seeking  in,  I.  208 

Wind  and  Spirit,  N.  99 

Value  of  sabbath,  I.  148 

bloweth,  etc.,  H.  100 

Various  opinions,  H.  222 

Winter  of  death  and  spring  of  resurrection, 

Ventures  of  faith,  H.  580 

1.328 

Verification    and    authorisation,     all,     the 

Without  Christ,  nothing  ;  in  Him,  all  things, 

Eesurrection  is  sign  which  includes, 

1.433 

N.  84 

Witness,  light  bears,  of  itself,  I.  256 

Victorious  through  death,  Christ,  N.  358 

of  Father  to  Jesus,  H.  154 

Victory,  Christ's  battle  and,  on  cross,  H.  545 

of  Jesus  concerning  Himself,  H.  153 

of  eternal  love,  I.  108 

of  John  Baptist,  H.  42 

View  of  Christ,  faith's,  H.  564 

of  Scripture,  apparent  difficulties  do  not 

Vine,  true,  and  the  Husbandman,  H.  420 

invalidate,  I.  162 

results  of  living  union  with,  H.  425 

clearness  and  sufficiency  of,  H.  154 

Vine-branch,  spiritual,  fruit  of,  I.  434 

to  Son,  H.  154 

Vision  of  sin,  I.  258 

to  Christ,  how  shall  we  bear  ?  I.  458 

Visions,  ancient,  realised,  N.  58 

Witnesses  of  Christ,  true,  H.  446 

Vitality,  brain-work  and,  I.  131 

to  Christ,  H.  153 

Voice  from  heaven,  N.  358 

John's  fitness  as,  I.  598 

answering,  Jesus'  prayer,  and,  H.  354 

to  Light  of  World,  H.  236 

Voyage,  Christian  life  under  figure  of,  H.  175 

.  Witness-bearing    for    Christ,    boldness    in, 

Vox  populi  vox  Dei,  I.  522 

I.  443 

Woman,  a,  etc.,  N.  464 

Walk  in  day,  H.  315 

behold  thy  son  !  I.  546 

in  Light,  believe  in  Light,  H.  356 

of  Samaria,  H.  116,  119 

Walking  on  sea,  miracle  of,  will  of  Christ 

Word,  I.  38 

potential  in,  N.  176 

Creator  keeps  His,  with  us,  I.  308 

Want,  human,  Christ's  care  for  all  forms  of, 

Christ's,  keeping,  N.  256 

I.  173 

enough,  a,  I.  74 

War,   burden    of,    on    peace-breakers    lies, 

eternal,  revelation  of — influence  and  end, 

H.  78 

H.  17 

Warning  example,  Judas  a,  I.  380 

hindrances  to,  H.  251 

significant  Advent,  H.  346 

is  truth,  thy,  H.  485 

Water  and  spirit,  N.  98 

made  flesh,'  H.  29 

our  twofold  nature  and  baptism  by, 

of  Christ  true  guide  of  men,  I.  271 

I.  101 

of  comfort,  threefold,  unto  all  troubled 

river  of  God  is  full  of,  N.  583 

souls,  H.  176 

type  of  gospel,  I.  219 

was  God,  H.  19,  34 

Water-pots,  fill  the,  H.  69 

we  honour  God  by  receiving  His,  I.  161 

Way  in  which  sin  enslaves,  I.  258 

why  Son  of  God  called,  H.  34 

of  escape  from  sin,  H.  451 

Words,  Christ  and  His,  H.  411 

Truth,  Life,  Jesus  the,  H.  395 

Christ's,  keeping,  N.  417 

We    see — boast  of   present-day  scepticism, 

genuine  love  exceeds,  N.  417 

1.282 

if  you  cannot  find,  for  your  prayer,  let 

We  would  see  Jesus,  N.  357 

thoughts  speak,  N.  471 

Weak  in  faith,  how   does   Lord  deal  with 

Work  given  him  to  do,  man's  highest  happi- 

those ?  H.  137 

ness  in  completion  of,  I.  271 

Wedding,  inviting  Christ  to,  N.  69 

night  cometh  when  no  man  can,  H.  267 

Weeping  universal,  N.  463 

of  God,  H.  179 

Well,  Jacob's,  memories  of,  I.  124 

true,  sacredness  of,  I.  271 

Wherefore  can  and  ought  Christians  to  be 

Works,  greater,  H.  401 

confident  and  even  joyful  in  trouble  ? 

of  God,  H.  266 

H.  460 

spiritual  children    of   Abraham   do   his, 

While,  a  little,  H.  461 

H.  246 

Who  art  thou  ?  H.  44,  51 

Working    and    teaching,    Christ's,     Divine 

hath  believed  our  report  ?  H.  359 

authority  of,  H.  208 

is  Christ  ?  I.  177 

of  Holy  Spirit,  H.  457 

Whole,  wilt  thou  be  made  ?  I.  148 

praying  in  order  to,  H.  402 

Why  are  we  to  search  Scriptures  ?  H.  156 

World,  angelic,  union  with,  I.  59 

we  need  to  ask  of  Christ,  N.  472 

Christ's  departure  from,  ends  served  by, 

Will,  Divine,  submission  to,  I.  328 

N.  463 

human,  H.  210 

Christian  separation  from,  H.  480,  483 

619 


INDEX. 


World,  coming  into,  N.  36 
dark  place,  H.  35 
gives,  God  gives  not  as,  H.  69 
hatred  of  Christ's  disciples  by,  H.  438; 

1.442 
Jesus'  action  in  view  of,  H.  203 
I  pray  not  that  Thou  shouldest  take  them 

out  of,  H.  482 
in,  tribulation,  H.  468 
is  full  of  danger,  I.  493 
is   weary    with     cumbrous    and    futile 

methods  of  obtaining  deliverance 

from  sin,  N.  62 
Jesus,  Light  of,  heals  man  born  blind, 

H.  262,  265,  280 
Light  of,  as  Revealer,  H.  230 

witnesses  to,  H.  236 
lights  in,  Christians  in  Christ  are,  I.  236 
mis  judgments  of,  I.  305 
of  sin,  He  shall  convince,  H.  450 
prince  of  this,  N.  417 
spirit  in  which   Christians   are    to  live 

separated  from,  H.  484 


World,  this,  would  Christians  know  how  it 

will  go  with  them  in  ?  N.  463 
World's  light,   Source  of,   and  world's  Up- 
holder, Christ,  H.  22 
need  of    Christ,  Sun  of  righteousness, 

H.  232 
peace,  N.  417 
unbelief,  declaration  of  Jesus  in  view  of, 

H.  361 
Upholder,  and  Source  of  world's  light, 
Christ,  H.  22 
Worship  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  H.  121 
in  truth,  I.  125 
of  Jesus,  N.  571 

places  of,  true  sacredness  of,  H.  120 
Wounding  in  order  to  heal,  God,  I.  137 
Wretched,  help  to,  H.  141 

Year,  spiritual,  seasons  of,  I.  433 

Zeal  in  defence  of  Divine  interests,  H.  441 
of  Thine  house,  N.  78 
true,  I.  79 


HOMILIES  FOR  SPECIAL  OCCASIONS. 


Church  Seasons:  Christmas,  ch.  i.  14;  22.  Palm  Sunday,  ch.  xii.  12-19.  Good  Friday, 
ch.  i.  29 ;  xix.  1 ;  3  ;  17,  18 ;  19 ;  23-30 ;  26,  27 ;  30.  Easter,  ch.  xx.  1-10 ;  1-8 ;  9.  Whitsun 
Day,  ch.  xiv.  16, 17 ;  18 ;  xv.  5-15.  John  Baptist,  ch.  i.  6,  7 ;  iii.  23-36.  St.  Bartholomew, 
ch.  i.  45-51.     Sabbath,  ch.  v.  16. 

Holy  Communion :  ch.  vi.  30-35 ;  58 ;  x.  14,  15 ;  xii.  15. 

Foreign  Missions :  To  Heathen,  ch.  iv.  35-38 ;  xxi.  6-8.    Bible  Society,  ch.  v.  39 ;  xvii.  17. 

Evangelistic  Services :  ch.  iii.  14,  15 ;  16 ;  17 ;  iv.  7-26  ;  v.  6 ;  vi.  37 ;  ix.  25 ;  xiv.  6 ;  xix.  16,  17. 

Special :  Ordination,  ch.  xx.  21-23.  Opening  of  Church,  ch.  iv.  20-24 ;  21.  Workers,  ch.  vi.  17 ; 
ix.  4;  x.  1;  xii.  26;  xiii.  8,  14;  xiv.  13,  14;  xvi.  16;  xxi.  1-14.  Hospital  Sunday, 
ch.  v.  5-14 ;  ix.  2,  3.  Harvest  Festival,  ch.  iv.  35-38 ;  vi.  1-15 ;  27.  Christian  Temperance, 
ch.  vi.  11-13.  Marriage,  ch.  i.  1,  2.  Death,  ch.  xi.  11;  25,  26;  xiv.  1-3.  Children, 
ch.  xxi.  15.     Servants,  ch.  x.  1.    Almsgiving,  ch.  xii.  8. 


620 


BRIGHAM  YOUNG  UNIVERSITY 


3  1197  21020  8218 


Date  Due 


