1 


k 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2011  with  funding  from 
Brigham  Young  University 


http://www.archive.org/details/preacherscomplet30newy 


THE   PREACHER'S   COMMENTARY 


ON 


TIMOTHY,  TITUS,  PHILEMON, 
HEBREWS,  ST.  JAMES 


THE 


'^xmtfyxB  Complete  Jomilctical 

COMMENTAKY 


ON    THE 


NEW    TESTAMENT 

fOir  Air  ORIGINAL  PLAN) 

Mtt^  Critical  ani  explanatory  |toles,  |nirtaH,  ^t.,  i^c. 


BY 


VARIOUS  AUTHORS 


FUNK   &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
London  and  Toeonto 
1896 


? 

^30 


HOMILETICAL  COMMENTARY 


ON    THE 


EPISTLES  OF  ST.  PAUL  THE  APOSTLE  TO 

TIMOTHY,    TITUS,    PHILEMON 

BY 

REV.   GEORGE    BARLOW 

ON    THE    EPISTLE    TO    THE 

HEBREWS 

AND 

THE    GENERAL    EPISTLE    OF 
ST.    JAMES 

BY 

REV.  ROBERT  TUCK,  B.A.  (Lond.) 


Printed  in  the  U.S.A, 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 

London  and  Toronto 

1896 


THE 

PEEACHER'S    HOIILETIOAL    COMMENTARY. 


THE    FIRST    EPISTLE    TO 

TIMOTHY. 

INTRODUCTION. 

Timothy  was  the  son  of  a  Christian  Jewess  named  Eunice  and  a  Greek  whose 
name  is  unknown.  Though  nothing  can  be  said  definitely  as  to  the  place  of 
his  birth,  Acts  xvi.  1  would  seem  to  indicate  that  it  was  Lystra  or  some  place 
in  the  immediate  neighbourhood.  There  St.  Paul  first  made  his  acquaintance, 
when  he  was  already  a  disciple.  Paul,  after  circumcising  him  by  way  of 
expedient,  adopted  him  as  his  fellow- worker.  They  journeyed  together  through 
Asia  Minor  to  Philippi.  At  Beroea  we  find  them  together  again.  Thence  he 
followed  St.  Paul  to  Athens,  and  was  sent  on  to  Thessalonica ;  and  having 
fulfilled  his  mission  there,  returned  to  St.  Paul  at  Corinth.  He  was  with  the 
apostle  during  his  residence  in  Ephesus,  and  also  when  the  epistles  to  the 
Corinthians  and  Romans  were  wiitten.  When  St.  Paul  was  a  prisoner  at 
Rome,  Timothy  was  still  with  him.  The  apostle's  high  regard  for  his  junior 
is  evident  in  many  ways.  Though  of  frail  health,  he  was  the  true  child  of  an 
indomitable  father  in  the  gospel  who  had  "  no  other  like-minded." 

Date  and  circumstances  of  writing  the  epistle. — Considering  (a)  the  close 
resemblances  of  the  Pastorals,  it  seems  incredible  that  they  are  separated  by 
any  long  intervals  of  time,  (b)  The  almost  insuperable  difficulties  of  fitting 
them  into  the  period  covered  by  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  (c)  The  even  greater 
difficulty  of  harmonising  their  notes  of  time  and  place  mth  those  mentioned 
by  St.   Luke.     Add  to  these  (d)  the  pecuUar  and  developed  character  of  the 

B  1 


INTRODUCTION.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  I.  TIMOTHY. 


false  teachers  and  teaching  aUuded  to  in  these  epistles,  and  (e)  the  advanced 
Church  organisation  which  they  specify — and  from  all  this  it  would  seem 
impossible  to  refuse  the  ancient  tradition  that  St.  Paul  was  twice  imprisoned 
at  Rome,  or  to  refuse  the  simple  reasonable  and  highly  natural  opinion  that 
the  Pastorals  are  to  be  assigned  to  the  period  between  these  two  imprisonments, 
about  A.D.  66  or  67  (EUicott). 

Contents  of  the  first  epistle. — The  epistle  passes  from  subject  to  subject  with 
all  the  ease  and  famiKarity  of  a  private  communication  written  by  an  old  man 
to  a  favourite  disciple  (Farrar). 
Ch.    i.     1—2.     Greeting. 

3 — 7.     Warning  against  theosophic  Judaism. 
8 — 14.     Sphere  of  the  law,  and  thanksgiving  for  grace. 
15 — 20.     Personal  relations  to  that  grace  of   Paul,  Timothy,  and 
men  like  Hymenseus. 
Ch.  ii.     1 — 3.     Prayers  enjoined  for  authorities. 

4 — 7.     Universality  of  God's  gracious  purpose. 
8 — 15.     PubHc  prayers  of  men  and  women. 
Oh.  iii.     1 — 7.     The  ideal  overseer  of  the  Church. 

8 — 13.     Qualifications  of  deacons  and  deaconesses. 
14 — 16.     Personal  message  to  Timothy  and  a  rhythmic  confession. 
Ch.  iv.    1 — 16.     Timothy's  attitude  to  the  current  speculations. 
Ch.  V.     1 — 16.     His   attitude    to    his    elders,   to   widows,   especially   the 

younger  ones. 
17 — 19.     Treatment  of  the  presbyters. 
20 — 22.     Treatment  of  offenders. 

23 — 25.     Personal  directions — the  different  kinds  of  sin. 
Ch.   vi.    1 — 2.     Relationship  of  slaves  to  believing  masters. 

3 — 10.     Insolence  and  avarice  of  the  heterodox  teachers. 
11 — 16.     Solemn  command  to  Timothy  (a)  concerning  himself. 
17 — 19.     (b)  Concerning  the  well-to-do. 
20 — 21.     Final  cautions  against  pernicious  error. 


HAM  You- 
PROVo 


CHAPTER  I. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  By  the  commandment. — The  usual  expression  has  been  "  by  the  will  of  God." 
There  is  a  perceptible  ring  of  austerity  about  the  word  for  "  commandment."  Paul  is  an 
apostle  in  accordance  with  the  behest  of  God.  God  our  Saviour. — A  designation  not  often 
found  outside  the  Pastoral  epistles  in  the  New  Testament,  but  frequent  in  the  Old  Testa 
raent.  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  is  our  hope. — R.V.  "Christ  Jesus  our  hope."  Not  only  the 
object  of  it,  nor  the  author  of  it,  but  its  very  substance  and  foundation ;  "  in  eo  solo  residet 
tota  salutis  nostrae  materia  "  {Ellicott). 

Ver.  2.  Unto  Timothy,  my  own  son  in  the  faith. — R.V.  "  my  true  child  in  faith."  Every 
part  of  the  appositional  member  has  its  complete  significance.  "  Son  "  denotes  the  affectionate 
as  well  as  spiritual  nature  of  the  connection.  *'  Own  "  specifies  the  genuineness  and  reality 
of  it.  •'  In  faith  "  marks  the  sphere  in  which  such  a  connection  is  alone  felt  and  realised 
{Ellicotf). 

Ver.  3.  Charge  some  that  they  teach  no  other  doctrine. — R.V.  "  charge  certain  men  not  to 
teach  a  different  doctrine."  It  is  doctrine  that  differs  in  quality  that  was  not  to  be  taught. 
In  his  impassioned  address  to  the  Galatians  St.  Paul  would  anathematise  "  even  an  angel 
from  heaven"  who  should  dare  to  proclaim  another  gospel,  "  'different,'  from  its  commixture 
with  an  unedifying,  vain,  and  morbid  theosophy." 

Ver.  4.  Fables  and  endless  genealogies. — Rabbinical  fables  and  fabrications,  whether  in 
history  or  doctrine— these,  according  to  Ellicott,  are,  the  fables,  and  the  genealogies  are  to 
be  taken  in  the  proper  sense  with  which,  however,  these  wilder  speculations  were  very 
probably  combined.  Most  modern  commentators  refer  the  terms  to  the  spiritual  myths  and 
emanations  of  Gnosticism.  The  which  minister  questions. — The  wordy  wars  in  which  the 
Christian  community  would  be  involved  by  these  genealogies  would  be  as  long  as  they 
themselves,  and  as  vacuous.  Godly  edifying. — R.V.  "  a  dispensation  of  God."  The  A.V.  is 
an  impossible  rendering  of  the  word  from  which  our  "  economy  "  comes.  The  translators 
followed  another  reading,  and  the  Vulgate  *'  aedificationem." 

Ver.  5,  The  end  of  the  commandment. — The  end  is  not  the  same  thing  as  the  fulfilment  of 
the  law.  It  is  the  goal  towards  which,  with  strenuous  endeavour,  each  Christian  must  press 
on.  "  Commandment "  (R.V.  "  charge  ")  is  the  monitory  teaching — a  touch  of  severity  clings 
to  the  word  from  the  old  "  economy."  Unfeigned. — So  of  "  love  "  (Rom.  xii.  9)  ;  of  *'  wisdom 
from  above  "  (Jas.  iii.  17)  (without  hypocrisy). 

Ver.  6.  Some  having  swerved. — Margin,  "  not  aiming  at."  R.V.  margin,  "  Gr.  missed  the 
mark."  This  metaphor  was  suggested,  probably,  by  the  word  for  "  end  "  in  ver.  5.  Compare 
St,  Paul's  grapliic  word  to  the  Galatians,  "  You  were  running  gallantly  :  what  sudden  spell 
has  been  laid  upon  you  ? "  Have  turned  aside. — The  figure  is  that  of  the  racer  who  breaks 
away  from  the  prescribed  course.  Unto  vain  jangling.  —R.V.  "  vain  talking."  The  Pastoral 
epistles  more  than  once  warn  against  this  fault  (Tit.  i.  10,  iii.  9). 

Ver.  7.  Desiring  to  be  teachers  of  the  law. — The  R.V.  also  gives  the  same  rendering. 
Perhaps  we  might  note  that  it  is  not  so  much  a  wish  as  a  determination.  They  would  be 
legalists.  Understanding  neither  what  they  say,  nor  whereof  they  affirm. — They  neither 
see  the  significance  of  the  words  they  use,  nor  do  they  know  anything  of  the  subjects  they 
profess  to  teach.  St.  Paul  knew  too  much  of  Judaism  to  be  imposed  on  by  a  parade  of 
phrases.  Here,  as  so  often,  loud  and  positive  assertion  makes  up  for  the  lack  of  profounder 
knowledge. 

Ver.  8.  We  know  that  the  law  is  good. — The  "  grace  and  truth "  which  '*  came  by  Jesus 
Christ "  did  not  abrogate  the  law.  That  law  had  a  moral  excellence,  was  indeed  an  admirable 
thing,  provided  that  it  was  used  legitimately. 

Ver.  9.  The  law  is  not  made  for.— As  we  say  "  is  not  laid  down."  The  vices  which  follow 
are  enumerated  first  under  terms  more  general,  and  then  more  specific.    Lawless  and 


CHAP.    I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    TIMOTHY, 


passive  disregard  of  it.  the  latter  a  more  active     i  ^  .^^^  ^^ 

Lrnitr^^^^^^^^^^  «  p-^^- — ^-  ^^^^^' 

n^r^^lrther^bfry^S^^^^^^^  doctrine.-St.  Paul  has 

wa   XSd  as  a  brother ;  Ananias  at  Damascus^  thought  ^^- f  ^^^^^J^^^^^^^^^ 
himself  does  not  complain  of  the  mistrust  (Acts  xxii.  19)  ;  but  the  grace  of  God  that  treats 
him  as  trustworthy  fills  him  with  thankfulness. 

Vf.r  n  A  blasphemer.  -In  the  general  acceptation  of  the  word.  He  was  one  wno  woma 
say  vehementir^  J^^us  anathema  1 "  (1  Cor.  xii.  3).  To  revile  the  name  of  Chnst-as  the 
mLvrs  were  asked  to  do-was  to  blaspheme.  A  persecntor.-Lit.  one  who  pursues  another. 
S^^riSurTou8.--One  who  does  not  content  himself  with  an  anathema,  but  Proceeds  to 
personXiolence.  I  did  it  ignorantly  in  unbelief.-The  S^-our  had  intimate^d  th^^^^^^ 
rage  would  confuse  the  murder  of  men  whose  only  crime  was  belief  in  ^hnst  with  a 
safrifice  to  God  Our  Lord  does  not  regard  ignorance  as  sufficient  excuse,  but  asks  that 
theTgnorant  be  forgiven  (Luke  xxiii.  34>     So  St.  Paul  says  he  obtained  mercy-was  dealt 

"^Ve/ Tl' And  the  grace  ...  and  love.-The  full  sense  is :  "  [And  not  only  was  I  pardoned  ] 
but  the  gm(.e  of  our^Lord  so  superabounded  [beyond  my  deserts]  that  I  was  also  brought  to 
believe  in  and  love  Jesus  Christ  whom  I  had  blasphemed    {Blomfield). 

Ver  15.  This  is  a  faithful  saying.-R.V.  "Faithful  is  the  word."  This  expression,  with 
variations,  occurs  five  times  in  the  Pastoral  epistles,  and  probably  was  used  m  a  liturgical 
manner  Compare  1  Kings  x.  6;  Rev.  xxi.  5,  xxii.  6.  Of  all.  acceptation.-An  excellent 
Sanation  (£7Zi6-.^0.  Came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners.-Not  to  be  limited  to  the 
sense-His  mission  in  life  was  to  rescue  sinners.  Many  scriptures  remmd  us  that  the 
purpose  was  not  formed  when  Christ  found  Himself  surrounded  by  sinners,  but  before. 
Of  whom  I  am  chief.-To  explain  away  the  force  of  this  expression  is  seriously  to  iniss  the 
strong  current  of  feeling  with  which  even  in  terms  of  seeming  hyperbole  the  apostle  ever 
alludes  to  his  conversion  and  his  state  preceding  it  (Mhcott). 

Ver  16  Howbeit  for  this  cause  I  obtained  mercy.-The  "howbeit"  is  the  same  word  as 
"  but "  in  "ver  13  which  the  R.V.  gives  as  here.  It  marks  the  contrast  between  the  apostle  s 
own  iudgment  on  himself  and  the  mercy  which  God  was  pleased  to  show  him. 

Ver  17  Immortal.— R.V.  "  incorruptible  "  :  an  epithet  only  found  m  union  with  God  m 
Rom.'i.  23,  besides  this  place.  The  only  wise  God.-R.V.  drops  "wise,'  on  the  over- 
whelming authority  of  the  MSS.  ,  -,        •. 

Ver  18  Prophecies  which  went  before  on  thee.— The  prophecies  went  forward,  as  it  were 
the  heralds  and  avant-couriers  of  the  actions  which  they  foretold  (Mhcott).  See  iv.  14 ; 
2  Tim.  i.  16.  Thou  by  them  mightest  war  a  good  warfare.— A  frequent  metaphor  ot 
St.  Paul's.     He  would  have  his  young  friend  to  be  as  loyal 

"unto  his  Captain  Christ, 
Under  whose  colours  he  had  fought  so  long," 

as  he  had  been  himself.  ,  .  ,  -,     or..,    •    j. 

Ver.  19.  Holding  faith,  and  a  good  conscience.— The  shield  of  faith  is  to  cover  a  pure 

heart. 

"He  is  but  naked,  though  locked  up  in  steel, 
Whose  conscience  with  injustice  is  corrupted." 
Which  some  having  put  away.— The  apostle  means  that  they  have  found  the  protests  of 
conscience  so  irritating  that  they  have,  so  to  say,  taken  it  up  with  violence  and  flung  it  far 

out  of  doors.  .  -,     1     • 

Ver.  20.  I  have  delivered  unto  Satan.— A  form  of  Christian  excommunication  declarmg 
the  person  to  be  reduced  to  the  state  of  a  heathen,  accompanied  with  the  authoritative 
infliction  of  bodily  disease  or  death  {EUicott,  after  Waterland).  That  they  may  learn.— 
11. V.  "  may  be  taught,"  i.e.  by  punishment. 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I,   TIMOTHY.  chap.  i. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  1,  2, 

Apostolic  Greeting. 

I.  Asserts  the  Divine  source  and  authority  of  the  apostleship  of  the  writer. — 

"  Paul,  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  by  the  commandment  of  God  our  Saviour,  and 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  is  our  hope  "  (ver.  1 ).  It  was  not  necessary  to  assure 
Timothy  of  his  apostleship ;  but  Paul  had  others  in  view  to  whom  this  epistle 
might  be  read,  and  for  his  own  sake  and  Timothy's  he  set  forth  His  Divine  call. 
No  man  can  make  himself  an  apostle  or  a  minister  of  the  gospel.  This  is  God's 
w^ork,  and  whom  He  calls  He  charges  with  full  authority  to  proclaim  the  truth. 
The  responsibilities  of  the  preacher  are  so  great,  and  the  difficulties  of  his  work 
so  perplexing  and  oppressive,  that  nothing  short  of  a  profound  consciousness  of 
his  Divine  commission  can  sustain  him.  The  apostle  recognises  the  united  action 
of  God  the  Saviour  and  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  his  appointment ;  and  without  any 
argument — for  the  fact  to  him  was  beyond  the  necessity  of  argument — he  states 
the  Divinity  of  Christ  and  His  equality  of  nature  with  the  Father.  Both  were 
as  one  in  the  work  of  salvation,  and  in  a  beautiful  and  suggestive  expression 
he  designates  Christ  as  "  our  hope."  The  hope  of  salvation  which  dawned  upon 
men  by  the  manifestation  of  Christ  becomes  a  blessed  reality  to  all  who  believe 
in  Him. 

II.  Addressed  to  one  standing  in  a  special  relation  to  the  writer. — "  Unto 
Timothy,  my  own  son  in  the  faith  "  (ver.  2).  It  was  through  the  instrumentality 
of  Paul  that  Timothy  was  brought  to  accept  the  gospel,  and  a  friendship 
between  the  two  then  began  which  deepened  in  affection  as  the  years  rolled  on, 
notwithstanding  their  disparity  in  age.  It  was  a  friendship  as  intimate  and 
as  dear  as  that  which  mutually  exists  between  father  and  son.  In  this  case, 
so  different  in  other  friendships,  it  was  the  aged  one  who  had  the  enthusiasm 
and  enterprise,  and  the  younger  one  the  timidity  and  reflective  reserve  :  yet  the 
one  was  the  complement  and  true  helpmeet  of  the  other.  It  is  not  easy  to  say 
which  gained  most  from  the  affection  and  devotion  of  the  other.  Timothy's 
indebtedness  to  Paul  was  great ;  but  few  men  could  have  supplied  the  apostle's 
needs  as  Timothy  did.  The  craving  for  sympathy  so  often  disclosed  in  the 
writings  of  Paul  found  a  loving  response  in  the  sensitive  and  thoughtful  nature 
of  Timothy.  The  young  and  capable  evangelist  entered  appreciatively  into  the 
ideas  and  plans  of  the  apostle,  and  with  willing  obedience  and  heroic  fortitude 
helped  to  carry  them  out. 

III.  Supplicates  the  bestowment  of  Divine  blessings. — "Grace,  mercy,  and 
peace,  from  God  our  Father  and  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  "  (ver.  2).  From  the 
same  source  as  salvation  come  the  blessings  of  grace,  mercy,  and  peace — the 
results  and  evidences  of  salvation.  To  the  accustomed  formula  of  the  apostle, 
"grace  and  peace,"  he  now  adds  "mercy" — an  internal  evidence  of  the  genuineness 
of  the  epistle.  "  Grace,  mercy,  and  peace  illustrate  the  character  of  the  gospel 
as  essentially  different  not  only  from  the  law,  but  from  every  merely  human 
and  philosophic  system  of  religion.  All  grace,  mercy,  and  peace  which  God  can 
bestow  come  to  us  only  through  and  in  communion  with  His  Son.  We  may 
call  grace  the  highest  good  for  the  godly,  mercy  for  the  suffering,  and  peace  for 
the  struggling  disciple.  In  its  harmony  this  ravishing  threefold  chord  expresses 
all  the  spiritual  gifts  which  the  Christian  should  ask  for  himself  and  his 
brethren  "  [Lange). 

Lessons. — 1.  Ministerial  qualification  and  authority  are  from  God.  2.  The 
minister  has  a  tender  regard  for  those  he  brought  to  Christ.  3.  The  work  of  the 
ministry  is  beset  with  difficulties. 

5 


CHAP.   I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   TIMOTHY. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  3,  4. 

A  DifHcuU  Pastoral  Charge.  .  ,  .    i?  1 1 

1  A  sphere  of  active  and  distracting  heresies.—"  Neither  give  heed  to  fables 
and  endless  -enealogies,  which  minister  questions,  rather  than  godly  editing 
which  is  in  faith  "  (ver  4).     The  Gnostic  problem  was  now  beginning  to  manitest 
itself  and  to  mingle  with  the  development  of  the  gospel.     The  heresy  spread 
'^th  marvellous  rapidity  between  a.d.  70  and  220;  and  Eusebius  tel  s  us  that 
"as  soon  as  the  apostles  and  those  who  had  listened  to  them  with  their  own 
ears  had  passed  away,  the  conspiracy  of  godless  error  took  its  rise  through  the 
deceit  of    false  teachers,  who  endeavoured  with   brazen   face  to    preach    their 
knowledge  falsely  so  called  in  opposition  to  the  preaching  of  the  truth.       Ihe 
Gnostic  theory  was  that  matter  is  eternal  and  that  evil  resides  inherently  m 
matter    so  that  there  were  two  coeternal  existences— God  and  matter.     Ihis 
theory' afterwards    developed    the    creed    that    there   are   two   coeternal   and 
coequal  powers— good  and  evil;  and  the  doctrine  of  emanations  from  the  supreme 
God  of  a  series  of  inferior  deities,  the  last  being  regarded  as  the  creator  of  the 
world      Here  was  scope  for  the  "fables  and  endless  genealogies     which  the 
apostle  condemns  and  against  which  he  warns  Timothy.     The  existence  of  these 
confusincr  errors,  which  were  rife  in  Ephesus,  rendered  the  position  ot  the  young 
pastor  both  dehcate  and  difficult.     Not   less  difficult  aud  anxious  is  the  relation 
of   the   minister   to   modern   speculations    and   doubts.      The   activity   oi    the 
propacrators  of  false  ethics,  of  scepticism,   theosophy,  agnosticism,  materialism, 
and  a'^crude  unformed  socialism  in  the  present  day,  creates  concern  in  the  breast 
of  the  earnest  preacher  of  the  gospel.  ,,  a     t 

II  Requiring  caution  and  fidelity  in  enforcing  the  true  doctrine.—"  As  i 
besouc-ht  thee  to  abide  still  at  Ephesus  .  .  .  that  thou  mightest  charge  some  that 
they  teach  no  other  doctrine  ...  so  do  "  (vers.   3,  4).     The  apostle's  specific  for 
the   errors  of  that  day  was  not  to  advertise  and  spread  them  by  injudicious 
controversy,    but   to   teach    with    the   more    care   and    faithfulness   "no  other 
doctrine"  than  the  gospel  of   Christ.      Error  must  be  slain  by  a  clearer  and 
more  emphatic  statement  of  the  truth,  of  which  it  is  a  distortion  and  caricature. 
The  same  method  is  applicable  to  the  times  in  which  we  hve.     The  modern 
preacher  must  know  and  therefore  study  the  theories  of  unbelief,  however  wild 
and   extravagant   they   may   seem,    and    much    as    he   may   recoil   from    the 
disagreeable  and  dangerous  task.     He  must  fight  his  own  way  through  the 
wicked  antagonisms  of  the  truth  to  faith  and   certainty;    but   he  must    not 
introduce  into  his  pulpit  ministrations  the  details  of   the  errors  he  seeks   to 
refute.     He  need  not  expose  the  progressive   steps   by   which  he   reaches  his 
conclusions,  but  should  use  those  conclusions  in  the  most  condensed  and  concrete 
form.     Error  is  most  effectually  quenched  by  a  faithful  preaching  of  the  truth 
as  it  is  in  Jesus,  and  insisting  upon  a  holy  and  consistent  hfe.     Unbelief  is  more 
an  obliquity  of  the  heart  than  the  head  ;  and  if  the  heart  is  to  be  reached  and 
changed,  we  must  "  teach  no  other  doctrine "  than  that  which  Timothy  was 
exhorted  to  expound  and  enforce. 

III.  Retained  with  evident  reluctance.— " As  I  besought  thee"  (ver.  3). 
Timothy  shrank  from  the  formidable  task  proposed  to  him.  He  saw  its  vital 
importance  and  its  difficulties  too,  and  perhaps  his  natural  timidity  tempted 
him  to  exaggerate  these.     He  was  subject  to  moods  of  discouragement  (compare 

2  Tim.  i.  7,  8,  ii.  1-13,  iv.  5).  It  was  only  after  earnest  and  affectionate 
persuasion  on  the  part  of  Paul  that  he  at  length  consented  to  undertake  the 
(hfficult  work.  It  was  impossible  for  him  to  resist  the  pleading  of  his  father 
in  the  gospel ;  and,  fearful  and  hesitating,  his  instinctive  obedience  led  him  to 

6 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L   TIMOTHY.  chap.  i. 


comply.  When  he  parted  from  Paul — probably  at  Miletus,  where  he  first 
received  this  charge — Timothy  was  in  tears  (Acts  xx.  36-38).  Duty  is  not 
always  easy :  the  more  difficult  it  is,  the  greater  the  honour  and  the  more 
distinguished  the  reward.  St.  Ambrose  relates  a  legend  that,  when  persecution 
arose  in  Rome,  the  Christians,  anxious  to  preserve  the  life  of  Peter,  advised 
him  to  flee.  He  was  in  the  act  of  leaving  the  city  when  he  met  our  Lord. 
"  Lord,  whither  goest  Thou  ?  "  asked  the  apostle.  *'  I  go  to  Eome,"  was  the 
answer,  "  there  once  more  to  be  crucified."  Peter  understood  the  rebuke, 
returned  at  once,  and  was  crucified.  Duty  must  be  done  whatever  the  result. 
We  may  safely  leave  that  with  God. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  minister  should  he  awake  to  the  tendency  of  modern  error, 
2.  Faithful  'preaching  of  the  truth  is  the  best  antidote  to  error.  3.  The  work  of 
the  ministry  is  beset  with  difficulties. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Ver.  4.  ^'' Godly  edifying  which  is  II.  The  materials  for  moral-build- 
in  faith."    Moral-building.  ing  are  supplied  by  the  gospel. 

I.  The  soul  is  edified  only  as  it  III.  Moral-building  is  hindered  by 
advances  in  godliness.  the  discussion  of  frivolous  questions. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  5—7. 

The  Grand  Moral  Aim  of  the  Gospel — 

I.  Is  to  elicit  the  exercise  of  Christian  love. — **Now  the  end  of  the  com- 
mandment is  charity" — love  (ver.  5).  1.  This  love  emanates  froTn  a  purified 
heart.  "  Charity  out  of  a  pure  heart "  (ver.  5).  The  word  "  commandment " 
may  here  be  taken  in  the  larger  sense  as  comprehending  the  gospel — the  latest 
expression  of  the  will  and  commandment  of  God.  The  great  burden  of  the 
gospel  theme  is  love,  which  is  the  sum  and  end  of  the  law  and  of  the  gospel 
alike.  The  gospel  is  a  development  and  fulfilment  of  the  law  in  all  its  essential 
demands,  and  expresses  its  spirit  in  gentler  and  more  winning  terms.  Love 
springs  from  the  heart  as  from  a  fountain,  but  it  is  a  fountain  cleansed  and 
purified  by  faith.  There  is  little  taste  for  jangling  and  the  strife  of  words  when 
the  heart  is  sanctified.  When  Archbishop  Ussher  was  urged  by  a  friend  to  write 
on  sanctification,  and  had  begun  to  do  so,  he  confessed  he  could  not  proceed,  as 
he  found  so  httle  of  that  grace  in  himself ;  and  when  his  friend  expressed 
amazement  to  hear  such  an  admission  from  so  grave  and  holy  a  person,  the 
prelate  added  :  "I  must  tell  you  we  do  not  well  understand  what  sanctification 
and  the  new  creature  are.  It  is  no  less  than  for  a  man  to  be  brought  to  an 
entire  resignation  of  his  own  will  to  the  will  of  God,  and  to  live  in  the  offering 
up  of  his  soul  continually  in  the  flames  of  love,  as  a  whole  burnt  offering  to 
Christ.  And  oh  !  how  many  who  profess  Christianity  are  unacquainted  experi- 
mentally with  this  work  upon  their  souls  !  "  Love  is  rare,  but  a  truly  sanctified 
nature  is  rarer.  2.  This  love  is  regulated  by  a  good  conscience.  "  And  of  a  good 
conscience"  (ver.  5).  A  pure  heart  and  good  conscience  go  together.  Bengel 
says  :  "  In  Paul  the  understanding  is  the  seat  of  conscience,  the  heart  the  seat 
of  love."  In  the  work  of  sanctification  the  conscience  benefits  with  every  other 
faculty  of  our  nature.  A  Christianised  and  sanctified  conscience  governs  the 
exercise  of  love,  and  saves  it  from  degenei'ating  into  a  mere  sensual  passion 
or  weak  sentimentality.     3.  The  exercise  of  a  love  like  this  is  made  possible  by 

7 


CHAP.  I.  UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY. 


a  genuhie faith.  "And  of  faith  unfeigned"  (ver.  5).  Not  a  hypocritical,  dead, 
and  unfruitful  faith,  but  faith  working  by  love.  The  false  teachers  drew  men 
off  from  such  a  loving,  working,  real  faith,  to  profitless  speculative  questions  and 
jangling.  A  good  conscience  is  joined  with  sound  faith,  a  bad  conscience  with 
unsoundness  in  the  faith  (Fausset).  To  be  a  power  in  the  Christian  hfe, 
stimulating  the  growth  of  every  Christian  grace,  faith  must  be  active  and 
sincere.  Conscience  is  warped  and  love  is  feeble  when  faith  is  feigned  and 
a  mere  make-beheve. 

II.  Is  utterly  missed  by  pretentious  teachers. — "  From  which  some  having 
swerved  .  .  .  desirmg  to  be  teachers  of  the  law  "  (vers.  6,  7).  They  would  fain  be 
teachers  of  the  law,  but  were  utterly  incompetent  for  the  task.  They  swerved 
from  or  missed  the  mark  at  which  even  an  honest  teacher  of  the  law  aimed — 
to  produce  uprightness  of  conduct  and  life.  1.  They  are  foolish  talkers.  "Have 
turned  aside  to  vain  jangUng  "  (ver.  6) — silly,  empty  talk.  Their  utterances 
were  waste  words,  containing  no  rational  sense,  no  unity  of  reasoning,  no  depth 
and  reality  of  conviction.  A  friend  admiring  the  eloquence  of  a  certain  preacher 
said  to  Archbishop  Whately,  "  What  a  fine  command  of  language  !  "  "  Nay," 
said  the  prelate,  "  the  language  has  the  command  of  him."  2.  They  are  grossly 
ignorant.  "  Understanding  neither  what  they  say,  nor  whereof  they  affirm  " 
(ver.  7).  Says  the  old  proverb,  "  Ignorance  is  rash."  Some  men  speak  with 
the  greater  confidence  of  that  which  they  know  least  about.  Ignorance  is  both 
coarse  and  dogmatic.  The  more  a  man  knows  he  is  not  the  less  certain  about 
truth,  but  he  is  the  more  circumspect  in  dogmatising  about  it.  "  The  Judaisers 
here  meant  seem  to  be  distinct  from  those  impugned  in  the  epistles  to  the 
Galatians  and  Komans,  who  made  the  works  of  the  law  necessary  to  justification 
in  opposition  to  gospel  grace.  The  Judaisers  here  referred  to  corrupted  the  law 
with  fables  which  they  pretended  to  found  on  it,  subversive  of  morals  as  well 
as  of  truth.  Their  error  was  not  in  maintaining  the  obligation  of  the  law,  but 
in  abusing  it  by  fabulous  and  immoral  interpretations  of  and  additions  to  it. 
They  neither  understood  their  own  assertions  nor  the  object  itself  about  which 
they  made  them.  They  understood  as  little  about  the  one  as  the  other " 
(Fausset,  Alford). 

Lessons. — 1.  The  gospel  is  a  message  of  love.  2.  Christian  love  is  based  on  the 
righteousness  of  faith.     3.  False  teachers  are  unloving  and  unlovable. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

^er.    5.    The    Genuine    Sources    of  this  :  "  Charity,  or  love,  out  of  a  pure 

Christian  Charity.  heart." 

I.  The  apostle's  declaration  of  the         II.  The  principles  from  which  true 

excellence  of  charity  as  the  end  of  charity  must  spring  and   by  which 

the  commandment. — 1.  The  command-  it  must  be  upheld. — 1.  From,  a  pure 

ment  may  signify  the  moral  law.    2.  May  heart.     A  heart  purified  by  the  power 

also  signify  the  gospel  of  ChHst,  or  in  of   Divine  truth  from  the  love  of  sin 

general  the  ivhole  of  God's  revealed  will,  and  the  dominion  of  evil  passions.     In 

3.  May  mean  the  charge  th^  apostle  gave  proportion  as  the  heart  is  purified  it 

to    Timothy   as    a    Christian    minister  is  filled  with  charity;  and  charity  is 

(ver.   18).     That  the  great  design  of  genuine  in  proportion  only  as  it  springs 

the  gospel  Timothy  was  to  preach  as  from  the  heart  thus  made  pure  by  the 

worthy   of   men's  acceptation   and   of  Spirit  and  truth  of  God      2.  From  a 

the  law  he  was  to  inculcate  as  the  rule  good    conscience.      A    conscience   well 

of  their  duty  was  simply  and  supremely  informed  as  to  the  will  of  God,  purged 
8 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY.  chap.  I. 


from  guilty  fears  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  of  God  and  man  proceeds.      Look   to 

and  preserved  tender  by  the  influence  the  state  of  your  heart — consult  your 

of  Divine  grace.      3.  From  faith  un-  conscience  —  examine     your     faith. — 

feigned.     A  sincere  belief  of  the  truths  J.  Brewster. 
revealed  in  sacred  Scripture ;  a  reliance 

on  the  Son  of  God  and  the  promises  of  Vers.  6,  7.   A  Corrupt  Conscience — 

God  through  Him  for  salvation.  I.  Is  a  prey  to  useless  controversy. 

Lessons. — 1.    Search    earnestly   how         II.  Is  ambitious  to  pose  as  a  teacher 

far  you  have  this  Divine  principle  of  and  guardian  of  consciences. 
charity  dwelling  in  your  hearts.    2.  Ex-  III.    Is    misled    and    confused    by 

amine   and  prove   the   nature   of  those  utter  ignorance. 
inward  principles  from  which  your  love 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  8—11. 

The  Function  of  the  Law. 

I.  The  law  is  good  in  itself. — "  We  know  that  the  law  is  good,  if  a  man  use 
it  lawfully  "  (ver.  8).  The  law  is  blameless  :  the  blame  is  in  the  improper  use 
of  the  law.  The  law  is  the  standard  and  guardian  of  right,  and  has  no  quarrel 
with  the  man  who  obeys  its  enactments.  We  spoil  the  law  when  we  try  to 
improve  it.  In  the  Jewish  Talmud  we  read  that  there  was  a  flute  in  the 
Temple  preserved  from  the  days  of  Moses :  it  was  smooth,  thin,  and  formed  of 
a  reed.  At  the  command  of  the  king  it  was  overlaid  with  gold,  which  ruined 
its  sweetness  of  tone  until  the  gold  was  taken  away.  There  were  also  a  cymbal 
and  a  mortar,  which  had  become  injured  in  course  of  time,  and  were  mended  by 
men  of  Alexandria  summoned  by  the  wise  men ;  but  their  usefulness  was  so 
completely  destroyed  by  this  process  that  it  was  necessary  to  restore  them  to 
their  former  condition.  So  when  we  try  to  improve  the  law  by  overlaying  it 
with  what  we  call  the  gold  of  rationalism,  but  which  in  truth  is  the  dross  and 
tinsel  of  human  conceits,  we  injure  and  divert  both  its  beauty  and  its  usefulness. 

II.  The  law  does  not  avail  in  producing  personal  righteousness. — "  Knowing 
this,  that  the  law  is  not  made  for  a  righteous  man "  (ver.  9).  The  law 
regulates  the  outward  life,  but  it  does  not  touch  the  heart,  until  it  is  planted 
there  as  the  law  of  love.  But  it  has  in  itself  no  power  thus  to  transform  itself  : 
this  is  done  only  by  the  soul  being  made  righteous  by  faith  in  Christ.  Then 
the  law  is  not  destroyed,  but  it  is  rendered  powerless  by  being  obeyed.  The 
righteous  man  is  "  not  forensically  amenable  to  the  law,"  though  he  still  needs 
it  to  show  him  his  lapses  and  shortcomings,  and  the  requirements  of  a  holy  God. 

III.  The  function  of  the  law  is  to  convict  the  sinner  of  his  manifold  trans- 
gressions.— "  But  for  the  lawless  and  disobedient  .  .  .  and  any  other  thing 
contrary  to  sound  doctrine  "  (vers.  9,  10).  The  catalogue  of  sins  contained  in  these 
verses  includes  every  kind  of  transgression.  They  differ  in  baseness  and  violence  ; 
but  they  are  all  violations  of  the  law ;  and  the  root  of  these  evils  is  in  the 
obstinacy  and  rebellion  of  the  human  heart.  The  law  not  only  reveals  the 
enormity  of  these  transgressions,  but  inflicts  pains  and  penalties  upon  their 
perpetrators.  The  gospel  is  not  placed  so  high  above  the  law  as  to  favour  sin  : 
it  denounces  all  sin  as  "  contrary  to  sound  doctrine."  The  doctrine  that  deals 
with  meaningless  questions  and  false  interpretations  of  the  law  is  diseased. 

IV.  The  function  of  the  law  is  in  harmony  with  the  teaching  of  the  gospel. 
— "  According  to  the  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God,  which  was  committed 
to  my  trust  "  (ver.  11).  *'  The  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God  "  is  a  striking 
and  suggestive  phrase,  as  though  the  arrival  of  the  time  when  the  glorious 
news  of  salvation  was  announced  to  man  was  an  occasion  of  Divine  joy.     We 

9 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    TIMOTHY. 


say  it  with  profound  reverence— the  gospel  was  proclaimed  with  Divine  hilarity. 
God  was  happy  that  man  should  be  at  length  told  of  the  reality  of  the  Divine 
blessedness.  The  law  represented  God  as  a  rigid,  unbending  Magistrate— the 
gospel  as  a  loving,  forgiving,  joyous  Father.  In  the  presence  of  this  glorious 
evangel,  how  paltry  the  distorted,  emasculated  gospel  of  the  false  teachers 
would  appear  !  There  is  no  real  antagonism  between  the  law  and  the  gospel : 
the  law  is  a  preparation  for  and  introduction  to  the  gospel.  Both  are  included 
in  God's  method  for  saving  men.  An  old  divine  writes  :  *'  It  is  ordinary  with  the 
prophets  first  to  discover  the  sins  of  the  people  and  to  denounce  judgments; 
and  then  to  promise  Christ  upon  their  coming  in  to  enlighten  and  make  them 
hghtsome  with  raising  their  thoughts  to  a  fruitful  contemplation  of  the  glory, 
excellency,  and  sweetness  of  His  blessed  kingdom.  Isaiah  in  his  first  chapter, 
from  the  mouth  of  God,  doth  in  the  first  place  behave  himself  like  a  son  of 
thunder,  pressing  upon  the  conscience  of  those  to  whom  he  was  sent  many 
heinous  sins,  horrible  ingratitude,  fearful  falHng  away,  formality  in  God's 
worship,  cruelty,  and  the  like.  Afterwards  he  invites  to  repentance,  and 
assures  them  of  God's  wiUingness  to  forgive  and  cleanse—*  Come  now,  and  let 
us  reason  together.'  Nathan,  to  recover  even  a  regenerate  man,  first  convinces 
him  soundly  of  his  sin,  with  much  aggravation  and  terror,  and  then  upon 
remorse  assures  him  of  pardon  (2  Sam.  xii.  13)." 

Lessons. — 1.  The  law  is  terrible  to  the  disohedient  2.  The  law  convinces  of  sin, 
hut  cannot  remove  it.  3.  The  gospel  as  a  remedy  for  sin  is  a  glorious  revelation 
of  God. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE   VERSES. 

Ver.  8.  The  Lawful  Use  of  the  Law.  II.  In  the  sublime   themes   it   de- 

I.  It  is  lawful  to  employ  it  as  a     clares. 

schoolmaster   to  lead  the  sinner  to         III.  In  the  grandeur  of  the  moral 

Christ.  benefits  it  confers  on  man. 

II.  It  is  lawful  to  use  the  law  as  a         IV.  In  the  dignity  and  power  with 
rule  of  life. — 1.  The  gospel  dissolves  no  which  it  invests  its  messengers. 
relation   to   God.      2.  Obedience   is  the 

object  of  the  gospel.    3.  The  law  shall  be  The   Glorious   Gospel   of  the  Blessed 

eternally  obeyed.  God. 

III.  It  is  lawful  to  use  the  law  as  I.  It  contains  a  bright  display  of 
a  test  of  our  spiritual  state. — 1.  God  the  perfections  of  God. — His  wisdom, 
uses  the  lavj  for  this  end,  in  judging.  His  power.   His  justice,  His  holiness, 

2.  We  may   anticipate    the  judgment.      and  His  love  are  all  exhibited,  and  the 

3.  The   law    the    standard   by    which      exhibition  is  striking  and  harmonious. 
th^  believer's  progress  is  ascertained. —  II.  It  is  admirably  adapted  to  the 
Stewart.                                                    moral  and  spiritual  necessities  of  man. 

— Man  is  ignorant,  guilty,  polluted, 
Ver.  11.^  Noble  Eulogy  of  the  Gospel.  miserable,  immoral,  impotent, 
I.  The  gospel  of  the  glory  of  God.  III.  It  exerts,  wherever  it  is  be- 
ll. This  God  the  blessed  God.  lieved,  a  mighty  influence. — It  civil- 
Ill.  Through  this  blessed  God  the  ises,  reforms,  exalts,  strengthens. 
ministry  of  the  gospel  is  entrusted  to  IV.  It  has  already  won  signal 
a  man  like  Paul. — /.  P.  Lange^  D.D.        triumphs. — Contrast  the  infant  Church 

in  Jerusalem  with  Christendom  as  it  is. 
The  Gospel  Glorious.  V.  It  secures  eternal  happiness. 

I.  As  it  is  a  splendid  revelation  of  VI.  It  combines  with  the  utmost 
the  Divine  felicity.  grandeur  of  result  the  utmost  sim- 

10 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY.  chap.  i. 


plicity  of  requirement. — It  is  of  faith  tical  lessons  which  the  contemplation 

that  it  might  be  by  grace. — G.  Brooks,  of  the  happiness  of  God  suggests. — 

1.  It  teaches  us  how  great  God  is.     He 

The  Blessed  God.  is  all-sufficient.     2.  It  teaches  us  how 

I.  Let  us  contemplate  the  happiness  great  man  is.  He  is  capable  of  friendly 
of  God. — 1.  Its  nature  is  beyond  our  relations  with  Him  who  is  blessed  for 
compi'ehension,  because  it  is  beyond  our  ever.  3.  It  teaches  us  the  evil  of  sin. 
experience.  2.  It  consists  of  many  It  has  alienated  man  from  the  source  of 
elements.  Infinite  power,  wisdom,  and  all  bliss.  4.  It  teaches  us  the  grandeur 
goodness.  3.  It  is  communicated  to  of  the  gospel y  whose  aim  is  to  make 
sentient  creatures.  4.  It  furnishes  a  believers  partakers  of  God's  happiness. 
lofty  and  delightful  subject  of  thought.  — Ibid. 

II.  Let  us  collect  some  of  the  prac- 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  12—17. 

The  Distinguished  Honour  of  the  Service  of  God — 

I.  Supplies  a  ground  for  devout  thankfulness. — ''  I  thank  Christ  Jesus  our 
Lord,  who  hath  enabled  me,  for  that  He  counted  me  faithful,  putting  me  into 
the  ministry"  (ver.  12).  So  far  from  boasting  of  the  honour  conferred  upon 
him  in  being  a  minister  of  the  gospel,  the  apostle  attributes  it  all  to  the  goodness 
of  God,  and  is  full  of  devout  gratitude.  He  would  have  been  in  the  same 
position  as  the  false  teachers  he  exposes  but  for  the  grace  of  God.  His  fidelity 
in  his  apostleship  he  does  not  regard  as  of  himself,  but  as  the  result  of  the 
imparted  strength  of  God :  if  he  was  faithful  in  his  stewardship,  it  was  God 
who  made  him  so,  and  for  this  he  gives  thanks.  1.  Remembering  the  mercy 
shown  to  the  most  notorious  of  sinners.  "Who  was  before  a  blasphemer,  a 
persecutor,  and  injurious:  but  I  obtained  mercy"  (ver.  13).  Paul  not  only 
himself  blasphemed  the  sacred  name  of  Jesus,  but  persecuted  others,  compelling 
them  to  do  the  same,  and  took  a  wanton  and  insolent  delight  in  violence  and 
in  outraging  the  feelings  of  others.  He  does  not  refer  to  his  past  sins  by  way 
of  boast — this  is  the  most  besotted  form  of  self -glorying  ;  nor  to  excuse  himself 
for  his  ignorance  and  unbelief  ;  but  to  exalt  the  mercy  of  God,  which,  notwith- 
standing his  outrageous  wickedness,  found  him  out  and  pardoned  him.  "  In 
John  Bunyan,"  writes  Guthrie,  "  God  calls  the  bold  leader  of  village  reprobates 
to  preach  the  gospel — a  blaspheming  tinker  to  be  one  of  England's  famous 
confessors.  From  the  deck  of  a  slave  ship  he  summons  John  Newton  to  the 
pulpit,  and  by  hands  defiled  with  mammon's  foulest  and  most  nefarious  traffic 
brings  them  that  were  bound  out  of  darkness,  and  smites  adamantine  fetters  from 
the  slaves  of  sin.  In  Paul,  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  He  converts  Christ's 
bitterest  enemy  into  His  warmest  friend  :  to  the  man  whom  a  trembling  Church 
held  most  in  dread  she  comes  to  owe,  under  God,  the  weightiest  obligations. 
How  much  better  for  these  three  stars  to  be  shining  in  heaven  than  quenched 
in  the  blackness  of  darkness — better  for  the  good  of  mankind,  better  for  the 
glory  of  God  !  "  2.  Recognising  the  abundant  outflow  of  Divine  grace.  "  And 
the  grace  of  our  Lord  was  exceeding  abundant  with  faith  and  love  which  is 
in  Christ  Jesus"  (ver.  14).  The  grace  of  God  was  so  abundant  that  the 
remembrance  of  his  past  sins  was  effaced  and  their  guilt  forgiven  :  the  unbelief 
which  had  blinded  his  mind  was  replaced  with  the  bright  vision  of  faith  in 
Christ  Jesus,  and  the  hatred  which  prompted  his  cruelty  towards  the  Church, 
with  love.  "  Grace  will  not  be  confined,  for  God's  goodness  cannot  be  exhausted. 
He  is  rich  enough  for  all.  God's  mercy  is  both  free  and  rich,  both  bountiful 
and  plentiful,  bursting  forth  round  about,  round  about  all  ages,  round  about 

11 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY. 


all  nations,  round  about  all  sorts,  surrounding  all  those  rounds,  and  with 
surplus  and  advantage  overflowing  all.  Not  only  an  abounding  grace,  abounding 
unto  all,  to  the  whole  world,  but  a  grace  superabounding,  that,  if  there  were 
more  worlds,  grace  would  bring  salvation  unto  them  all "  {R.  Clerhe). 
3.  Declaring  the  universal  blessedness  of  Christ's  advent.  "This  is  a  faithful 
saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to 
save  sinners"  (ver.  15).  The  advent  of  Christ  into  the  world  means  blessing  to 
all  in  it ;  and  the  purpose  of  His  advent  to  save  sinners  is  so  well  authenticated 
by  experience  as  to  merit  the  unreserved  acceptance  of  all.  It  is  impossible  to 
exaggerate  the  importance  of  either  the  advent  or  its  purpose.  "  It  is  not 
without  good  reason,"  says  Bengel,  "that  the  name  Christ  is  sometimes  put 
before  Jesus.  From  the  Old  Testament  point  of  view  progress  is  made  from  the 
knowledge  of  Christ  to  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  :  from  the  New  Testament  point 
of  view  the  progress  is  from  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  to  the  knowledge  of  Christ." 
As  the  condemned  man  believes  first  the  king's  favour  to  all  humble  suppliants 
before  he  believes  it  to  himself,  so  the  order  is,  not  to  look  to  God's  intention 
in  a  personal  way,  but  to  His  complacency  and  tenderness  to  all  repentant 
sinners.  This  was  St.  Paul's  method,  embracing  by  all  means  that  great  and 
faithful  saying  "  Jesus  came  to  save  sinners  "  before  he  ranked  himself  in  front 
of  those  sinners. 

II.  Bestowed  upon  a  notorious  sinner  as  typical  of  the  compassion  extended 
to  all. — "  Of  whom  I  am  chief.  Howbeit  for  this  cause  I  obtained  mercy  .  .  . 
for  a  pattern  to  them  who  should  hereafter  believe  on  Him  to  life  everlasting  " 
(ver.  16).  If  Paul,  the  chief  of  sinners,  obtained  mercy,  so  may  all  others — 
from  the  same  source  and  on  the  same  terms.  The  worst  need  not  despair  : 
the  most  abandoned  may  be  recovered.  "You  have  heard  of  stereotype- 
printing.  When  the  types  are  set  up,  they  are  cast,  made  a  fixed  thing,  so  that 
from  one  plate  you  can  strike  off  hundreds  of  thousands  of  pages  in  succession, 
without  the  trouble  of  setting  up  the  types  again.  Paul  says,  *That  I  may 
be  a  plate  never  worn  out,  never  destroyed,  from  which  proof -impressions  may 
be  taken  to  the  very  end  of  time.'  What  a  splendid  thought  that  the  apostle 
Paul,  having  portrayed  himself  as  the  chief  of  sinners,  then  portrays  himself  as 
having  received  forgiveness  for  a  grand  and  specific  end — that  he  might  be  a 
standing -plate  from  which  impressions  might  be  taken  for  ever,  that  no  man 
might  despair  who  had  read  his  biography  !  "  (Dr.  Cumming). 

III.  Calls  forth  a  fervent  ascription  of  praise  and  adoration  to  the  bountiful 
Giver  of  all  good. — "  Now  unto  the  King  eternal,  immortal,  invisible,  the  only 
wise  God,  be  honour  and  glory  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen"  (ver.  17).  A 
vehement  exclamation  of  gratitude,  of  lofty  admiration,  of  adoring  awe.  God 
is  the  King  of  all  the  ages,  and  in  the  process  of  time  the  typical  significance  of 
the  conversion  of  a  man  like  Paul  can  be  fully  realised.  How  different  his 
conceptions  of  the  duration  of  God  from  the  fanciful  and  misleading  seons  of 
the  Gnostic  heresy,  and  of  the  character  of  God,  who  alone  has  immortality  in 
and  of  Himself,  underived  from  any,  and  in  His  very  nature  is  invisible,  in 
opposition  to  the  intermediate  deities  of  the  Gnostic  dreamer  !  The  Divine 
wisdom  renders  foolish  and  condemns  as  vanity  all  the  wisdom  of  men.  The 
thought  of  eternity,  terrible  as  it  is  to  unbelievers,  is  delightful  to  those  assured 
of  grace.  Calvin  well  says  :  "  God  alone  is  worthy  of  all  glory ;  for  while  He 
scatters  on  His  creatures  in  every  direction  the  sparks  of  His  glory,  still  all 
glory  belongs  truly  and  perfectly  to  Him  alone.  There  is  no  glory  but  that 
which  belongs  to  God." 

Lessons. —  1.  It  is  an  unspeakable  honour  to  be  a  servant  of  God.  2.  It  is 
impossible  to  estimate  the  results  of  the  conversion  of  one  sinner.  3.  Praise  should 
he  offered  to  God  continually, 

12 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY. 


CHAP.    I. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  12-14.  Ministerial  Responsi- 
bility— 

I.  Should  be  thankfully  acknow- 
ledged as  a  proof  of  the  Divine 
favour  (ver.  12). 

II.  Should  be  contrasted  with  a 
former  life  of  disobedience  and  unbelief 
(ver.  13). 

III.  Should  be  used  to  magnify  the 
abundant  grace  of  God  (ver.  14). 

Ver.  15.  The  Grand  Purpose  of  the 
Redeemers  Advent. 

I.  A  most  stupendous  fact. — '*  Christ 
Jesus  came  into  the  world." 

II.  A  most  gracious  design. — "To 
save  sinners." 

III.  A  most  appropriate  estimation. 
— "  A  faithful  saying  .  .  .  vi^orthy  of  all 
acceptation." — W.  T. 

The  Essential  Truth. 

I.  The  saying. — Christ  came  not  to 
teach,  not  as  an  example  merely,  but 
to  die. 


II.  What  is  said  of  it. — 1.  A  faithful 
saying.  2.  Wm^thy  of  all  acceptation. — 
HomAletic  Monthly. 

The  Chief  of  Sinners. — "  Of  whom 
I  am  chief."  Every  true  Christian 
should  feel  that  he  is  the  chief  of 
sinners — 

I.  Because  he  knows  himself  better 
than  he  knows  any  other  man. 

II.  Because  he  judges  himself  by 
a  different  standard  than  other  men. 

III.  Because  conscience  is  more 
enlightened  and  more  tender. 

IV.  Because  he  labours  more 
earnestly  to  subdue  his  native  de- 
pravity. 

V.  Because  he  lives  in  closer  fellow- 
with  God. — G.  Brooks. 

Ver.  16.  St.  Paul  a  Pattern  of  the 
Long-suffering  of  God. 

I.  The  mercy  Paul  obtained. 

II.  The  cause  for  which  he  obtained 
it. — E.  Cooper. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  18—20. 

Moral  Fitness  for  Special  Work — 

I.  Recognised  by  previous  indications  of  character.-  - "  This  charge  I  commit 
unto  thee,  son  Timothy,  according  to  the  prophecies  which  went  before  on 
thee"  (ver.  18).  There  were  features  and  tendencies  of  character  in  the 
youthful  Timoth}'",  evident  from  the  time  of  his  conversion,  that  indicated  his 
suitability  for  the  ministerial  office.  Paul  and  those  who  knew  Timothy  best 
detected  these ;  and  the  apostle  saw  that  God  had  called  him  to  the  sacred 
work.  "  The  prophecies  which  went  before "  were  no  doubt  certain  sacred 
utterances  that  Paul  and  others  were  inspired  to  make  on  the  ordination  of 
Timothy,  and  which  indicated  a  Di\ine  commission  and  Divine  approbation 
publicly  expressed  respecting  his  choice  of  the  ministry.  These  prophecies  were 
a  means  of  blessing  to  the  young  minister,  and  would  often  animate  and 
sustain  him  in  the  difficulties  and  discouragements  of  his  mission.  "  The 
gradual  cessation  or  discredit  of  the  function  of  the  Christian  prophet  is 
thoroughly  intelligible.  Possibly  the  spiritual  gift  which  rendered  it  possible 
was  withdrawn  from  the  Church.  In  any  case  the  extravagances  of  enthusiasts 
who  deluded  themselves  into  the  belief  that  they  possessed  the  gift,  or  of 
impostors  who  deliberately  assumed  it,  would  bring  the  office  into  suspicion 
and  disrepute.  Such  things  were  possible  even  in  apostohc  times,  for  St.  Paul 
and  St.  John  give  cautions  about  it,  and  directions  for  dealing  with  the  abuse 
and  the  false  assumption  of  prophecy.  There  will  always  be  those  who  crave 
for  something  more  definite  and  personal  than  the  Scriptures,  who  long  for  and 

13 


CHAP.    I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I    TIMOTHY, 


perhaps  create  for  themselves  and  believe  in   some  Imng  authority  to  whom 
^ey  can  perpetually  appeal.     If  a  man  will  not  hear  Christ  and  His  apostles 
neither  ^v411   he   be  persuaded  though  a  prophet  was  granted  to  him.     If  we 
believe  not  their  writings,  how  shall  we  believe  his  words  ?     (^?^^^^f )'    „.  . 

II  Shown  by  the  fortitude  and  fideUty  maintained  m  the  midst  of  conflict.— 
"That  thou  by  them  shouldest  war  a  good  warfare;  holding  faith,  and  a  good 
conscience"  (vers.  18,  19).  The  Christian  life  is  a  conflict  and  ministers  are 
standard-bearers  and  leaders,  and  must  not  only  believe  and  preach  the  truth 
but  defend  it.  Armed  with  faith  and  a  good  conscience,  the  gospel  champion 
must  maintain  the  fight  with  bravery  and  fidelity  to  the  end  of  the  campaign 
Whoever  falls  or  withdraws,  he  must  press  forward,  though  he  should  stand 
alone  The  true  spirit  of  the  pioneers  of  the  gospel  should  be  hke  that  ot 
Edward  III.,  amid  the  fiery  sands  of  Syria,  where  his  small  force  of  soldiers 
fainted,  died,  deserted,  and  seemed  to  melt  away.  But  his  prowess  made  light 
of  it,  and  he  said,  *' I  will  go  on,  if  I  go  on  with  no  other  follower  than  my 


grroom. 


Ill    Conspicuous  by  the  failure  and  fate  of  the  unworthy.—"  Which  some 
having  put  away  concerning  faith  have  made  shipwreck  :  of  whom  is  Hymenseus 
and  Alexander ;  whom  I  have  delivered  unto  Satan,  that  they  may  learn  not 
to  blaspheme"  (vers.  19,  20).     "If  one's  religion  better  not  his  morals,"  s^ys 
Archbishop  Whately,   "his  moral  deficiencies  will   corrupt    his  religion.     The 
rain  which  falls  pure  from  heaven  will  not  continue  pure  if  it  be  received  m 
an  unclean  vessel."     Hymenseus  and  Alexander  had  lost  both  their  faith  and 
their  good  conscience,  and  had  so  far  retrograded  as  to  blaspheme  the  name 
of  God  and  Christ  by  doings  and  teachings  unworthy  of  their  Christian  profession. 
The  personality  of  Satan  was  not  a  question  of  hesitation  and  doubt  with  the 
apostle.     Satan  was  to  him,  as  he  is  in  the  emphatic  teaching  of  the  Bible, 
a  real,  active,  and  Hving  embodiment  of  evil;  and  for  their  punishment  and 
reformation  he  hands  over  the  two  delinquents  to  the  great  power  of  darkness. 
*'In  the  apostolic  sentence  upon  the  two  blasphemers  we  have  to  notice  four 
points.     1.  It  is  almost  certainly  not  identical  with  excommunication  by  the 
congregation,  although  it  very  probably  was  accompanied  by  this  other  penalty. 
2.  It  is  of  a  very  extraordinary  character,  being  a  handing  over  into  the  power 
of  the  evil  one.     3.  Its  object  is  the  reformation  of  the  offenders,  while  at  the 
same  time— 4.  It  serves  as  a  warning  to  others,  lest  they  by  similar  offences 
should  suffer  so  awful  a  punishment.     To  all  alike  it  brought  home  the  serious 
nature  of  such  sins.     Even  at  the  cost  of  cutting  off  the  right  hand,  or  plucking 
out  the  right  eye,  the  Christian  community  must  be  kept  pure  in  doctrine  as 
in  life.     Satan  inflicts  suffering  from   love  of  inflicting  it,  and  leads  into  sin 
from  love  of  sin  ;  but  God  knows  how  to  bring  good  out  of  evil  by  making  the 
e\dl  one  frustrate  his  own  wiles.     It  is  for  us  to  take  care  that  in  our  case  the 
chastisements  which  inevitably  follow  upon  sin  do  not  drive  us  further  and 
further  into  it,  but  teach  us  to  sin  no  more  "  {Plummer,  passim).     When  we 
lose  our  faith  in  God  and  truth,  we  lose  our  better  selves  and  rush  upon  defeat 
and   disgrace.     What   power  had   the  last   Brutus  at   the  moment   when   he 
abandoned  his  faith  ?     From  the  time  of  his  melancholy  vision,  produced  by 
a  diminution  of  that  faith,  it  might  have  been  predicted  that  his  own  destiny 
and  that  of  the  repubUc  were  finished.     He  felt  it  himself  :  it  was  with  a 
presentiment  of  defeat  that  he  fought  at  PhiUppi ;  and  such  a  presentiment 
always  realises  itself. 

IV.  Commands  the  confidence  of  the  good. — "This  charge  I  commit  unto 
thee"  (ver.  18).  Paul  had  many  proofs  of  the  eagerness  and  fideUty  of  Timothy 
in  prosecuting  the  work  of  the  ministry;  and  it  is  with  ingenuous  confidence 
that  he  commits  to  him  the  charge  of  the  truth,  as  a  sacred  deposit,  to  keep  and 

14 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   TIMOTHY.         chap.  ii. 


to  defend,  and  to  keep  and  defend  it  by  diligently  spreading  it.  **  The  remem- 
brance of  the  hopes  of  a  former  teacher  is  a  great  stimulus,  an  earnest  call 
to  be  and  do  what  others  have  expected  of  us  "  (Heubner). 

Lessons. —  1.  The  good  in  us  is  found  by  others.  2.  Difficulties  test  and  develop 
our  virtues.     3.  The  defection  of  others  should  stimulate  our  zeal  and  fidelity. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES, 

Ver.  18.^  Good  Warfare.  power  of  his  General.     4.  Must  do  battle 

I.  The  Christian  warfare. — 1.  Is  a  with  His  foes  whenever  they  oppose  him 
struggle  of  Christ  against  Satan,  holiness      — (Helps). 

against   sin.      2.    The    Christian   is   a 

soldier  in  Chrisfs  army.     3.  The  war-  Ver.    19.   Faith   and  a   Good    Con- 
fare  implies  numerous  foes.  science. 

II.  The  excellency  of  this  warfare.  I.  Some  try  to  hold  faith  without 
— 1.  It  is  good  because  its  object  is  to  the  good  conscience. —That  soon  be- 
destroy  that  which  is  evil  aiul  promote  comes  a  hollow  and  hypocritical  thing. 
that  which  is  good.  2.  It  is  under  a  II.  Some  try  the  good  conscience 
good  Commjander.  3.  It  will  issue  in  without  faith. — That  becomes  a  super- 
coTuplete  triumph.  ficial,  unspiritual,  and  barren  thing. 

III.  Claims  of  this  warfare  upon  III.  The  union  of  the  two. — Faith 
the  Christian. — 1.  He  must  be  sensible  is  the  spring  and  quickener  of  con- 
of  his  own  incompetence.  2.  Must  science — conscience  gives  truthfulness 
understand  the  character  of  his  enemies.  and  reahty  to  faith. — Dr.  J.  Ker, 

3.    Have   confidence    in   the   skill    and 


CHAPTER  II. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES, 

Ver.  1.  Supplications,  prayers,  intercessions. — The  first  is  a  special  form  of  the  second. 
Intercession  is  prayer  in  its  most  individual  and  urgent  form — prayer  in  which  God  is  sought 
in  audience  and  personally  approached  {Ellicott).  Thanksgivings  are  always  to  accompany 
prayers. 

Ver.  2.  For  kings,  and  all  that  are  in  authority. — It  is  very  noticeable  that  the 
neglect  o£  this  duty  on  the  part  of  the  Jews  led  to  the  commencement  of  their  war  with 
the  Romans.  That  we  may  lead  a  quiet  and  peaceable  life. — A  life  that  is  free  from  the 
rude  shocks  consequent  on  political  f^trife,  and  equally  free  from  participation  in  intrigue  or 
sedition.  In  all  godliness  and  honesty. — R.V.  "  in  all  godliness  and  gravity."  The  former 
word  describes  the  direction  of  our  reverence  to  whatever  is  truly  worthy  of  it.  *'  Honesty 
denotes  the  decency  and  propriety  of  deportment  which  befits  the  chaste,  the  young,  and 
the  earnest,  and  is  as  it  were  the  appropriate  setting  of  higher  graces  and  virtues " 
(EllieflU). 

Ver.  4.  Who  will  have  all  men  to  be  saved. — The  emphatic  word  here  is  "all  men." 
The  good  purpose  of  God  is  as  universal  as  it  is  good.  It  is  not  the  will  of  the  Father  that 
any  should  perish  ;  and  if  some  will  be  punished  with  eternal  destruction,  they  reach  a 
doom  that  was  never  meant  to  be  theirs.  To  come  to  the  knowledge. — As  we  have  seen 
elsewhere,  it  is  the  full  or  complete  knowledge  of  which  St.  Paul  thinks. 

Ver,  5.  For  there  is  one  God. — In  his  wide  travels  the  apostle  had  met  the  beliefs  in 
"gods  many  and  lords  many."  In  contrast  to  these,  of  whatever  name,  he  opposes  the 
one  God.  And  one  Mediator  between  God  and  men,  the  Man  Christ  Jesus. — R.V.  "  Between 
God  and  men,  Himself  man,  Christ  Jesus."  "The  human  nature  of  Christ  is  specially  mentioned 
as  being  the  state  in  which  His  mediatorial  office  was  visibly  performed  "  (EUicott). 

15 


CHAP.  II.         IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L    TIMOTHY. 


Ver  6  Who  gave  Himself  a  ransom  for  all.— There  is  no  possibility  of  evading  the 
>  icariousness  of  the  work  of  Christ  as  here  stated.  As  the  idea  of  Christ's  substitution 
comes  out  in  the  compound  word  for  "  ransom, '  so  the  benefit  accruing  therefrom  is  clear 
in  ♦'  for  all."  To  be  testified  in  due  time.— R.V.  "  the  testimony  to  be  borne  in  its  own 
times  "     *'  The  import  of  the  testimony  to  be  set  forth  in  its  proper  seasons  "  {Ellicott). 

Ver.  8.  I  will  therefore.— B.V.  "  I  desire  therefore."  An  active  wish  is  implied.  That 
men  pray.— R.V.  the  men  in  contrast  to  women  to  whom  St.  Paul  gives  all  honour  in  that 
which  is  purely  womanly.  Lifting  up  holy  hands.— Compare  Ps.  cxxxiv.  2  (R.V.  margin), 
"  Lift  up  your  hands  in  holiness  " ;  and  Isa.  i.  15,  "  When  ye  spread  forth  your  hands." 
The  folding  of  the  hands  in  prayer  may  be  illustrated  from  the  monuments,  where  captives 
approach  the  conqueror,  or  vassals  draw  near  with  tribute. 

Ver.  9.  That  women  adorn  themselves  in  modest  apparel.—"  In  seemly  guise."  The  word 
for  "  apparel  "  includes  more  than  dress— taking  in  the  whole  deportment,  whether  manifest 
in  manners  or  dress.  "  Do  not  people  speak  of  '  loud  dress '  ?  I  suppose  that  by  this  is 
meant  a  discord  in  shape,  a  shock  in  colours,  a  flashy  advertisement,  to  say  the  wearer 
is  very  foolish,  but  with  a  kind  of  folly  that  is  not  very  innocent"  (^i5^^^  Alexander). 
With  'shamefastness.— The  innate  shrinking  from  anything  unbecoming.  And  sobriety.— 
The  well-bahmced  state  of  mind  resulting  from  habitual  self-restraint.  Not  with  broided 
hair,  or  gold,  or  pearls,  or  costly  array. — "  The  saints  in  all  ages  have  allowed  themselves  to 
be  sarcastic  about  dress.  Isaiah  was  so  (iii.  16),  and  Paul  and  Peter.  Jerome  is  angrier 
and  fiercer.  To  Loeta  he  writes,  '  Load  not  your  child's  hair  with  gemS,  nor  sprinkle  on  her 
young  head  some  of  the  red  fire  of  hell '"  {Alexander).  Let  those  who  do  not  fear  the  red 
fire  smile  at  the  narrowness, 

Ver.  11.  Let  the  woman  learn. — The  apostle  speaks  with  the  assurance  of  one  who  has 
the  fitness  of  things  on  his  side.  It  would  be  interesting  to  have  St.  Paul's  judgment  on 
certain  developments  of  our  own  times. 

Ver.  12.  Nor  to  usurp  authority  over  the  man. — It  is  very  certain  the  translators  of  1611 
held  the  supremacy  of  the  man,  as  this  phrase  shows.  The  R.V.  says,  "  to  have  dominion 
over." 

Ver.  13.  For  Adam  was  first  formed,  then  Eve.— An  important  reason  St.  Paul  thinks 
why  man  should  take  the  headship.  Its  force  would  be  more  evident  to  Jews  than  to  our 
own  day.     The  same  reasoning,  it  might  be  said,  would  show  Adam  inferior  to  the  brutes. 

Ver.  14.  And  Adam  was  not  deceived. — But  the  woman  was  not  only  later  than  man  in 
point  of  creation— she  was  earlier  in  sin  than  he. 

Ver.  15.  But  she  shall  be  saved  in  child-bearing. — There  are  two  most  reasonable  explana- 
tions of  this  difficult  expression,  (a)  "  She  shall  be  saved  by  fulfilling  her  proper  destiny 
and  acquiescing  in  all  the  conditions  of  woman's  life  "  ;  and  (&)  "  by  the  child-bearing, 
i.e.  by  the  relation  in  which  woman  stood  to  the  Messiah."  Bishop  Ellicott  argues  strenuously 
for  the  latter. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPK—Verses  1-3. 

Prayer  a  Universal  Duty. 

I.  Should  be  offered  for  all  classes.—-"  I  exhort  therefore,  that,  first  of  all, 
supplications,  prayers,  intercessions,  and  giving  of  thanks,  be  made  for  all  men ; 
for  kings,  and  all  that  are  in  authority  "  (vers.  I,  2).  There  is  very  little  difference 
of  meaning  in  the  terms  here  used  for  prayer.  "  And  yet  this  heaping  up  of 
words,"  says  Calvin,  "  is  not  superfluous ;  but  Paul  appears  purposely  to  join 
together  three  terms  for  the  same  purpose  in  order  to  recommend  more  warmly 
and  urge  more  strongly  earnest  and  constant  prayer.  We  know  how  sluggish 
we  are  in  this  religious  duty,  and  therefore  we  need  not  wonder  if  for  the  purpose 
of  rousing  us  to  it  the  Holy  Spirit  employs  various  excitements."  While  we 
are  to  pray  for  all  men,  "  kings  and  all  that  are  in  authority  "  are  mentioned 
as  especially  needing  our  prayers  :  their  exalted  position  and  great  responsi- 
bilities needing  help  from  heaven  that  their  duties  may  be  discharged  with 
impartiality  and  justice.  Though  public  authorities  may  be  opposed  to  the 
gospel,  as  was  the  case  in  the  apostle's  days,  they  are  not  to  be  neglected  in  our 
prayers.  "  The  scope  of  a  Christian's  desires  and  gratitude,  when  he  appears 
before  the  Lord,  must  have  no  narrower  limit  than  that  which  embraces  the 
whole  human  race.  The  solidarity  of  the  whole  body  of  Christians,  however 
16 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY,         chap.  ii. 


distant  from  one  another  in  space  and  time,  however  different  from  one  another 
in  nationality,  in  discipUne,  and  even  in  creed,  is  a  magnificent  fact  of  which  we 
all  of  us  need  from  time  to  time  to  be  reminded,  and  which,  when  we  are  reminded 
of  it,  it  is  difficult  to  grasp.  Members  of  sects  that  we  never  heard  of,  dwelling 
in  remote  regions  of  which  we  do  not  even  know  the  names,  are  nevertheless 
united  to  us  by  the  eternal  ties  of  a  common  baptism  and  a  common  belief  in 
God  and  in  Jesus  Christ.  The  Eastern  sectarian  in  the  wilds  of  Asia,  and  the 
Western  sectarian  in  the  backwoods  of  North  America,  are  members  of  Christ 
and  our  brethren,  and  as  such  have  spiritual  interests  identical  with  our  own, 
for  which  it  is  not  only  our  duty  but  our  advantage  to  pray.  What  shall  we 
say,  then,  about  the  difficulty  of  realising  the  solidarity  of  the  whole  human 
race  ?  The  population  of  the  globe,  those  who  are  not  even  in  name  Christian, 
outnumber  us  by  at  least  three  to  one  "  (Plummer).  For  these  we  should  not 
fail  to  pray,  and  give  all  the  assistance  we  can  to  missionary  enterprise  and 
humanising  efforts. 

II.  Should  be  accompanied  with  thanksgiving. — "And  giving  of  thanks" 
(ver.  1).  Prayer  is  cold  and  meaningless  unless  it  is  interfused  with  a  thankful 
spirit.  Gratitude  prompts  prayer,  and  in  the  answers  God  is  continually  giving, 
finds  new  themes  for  supplication.  A  Maryland  planter  was  riding  to  one  of 
his  plantations  under  a  state  of  religious  awakening.  He  heard  the  voice  of 
prayer  and  praise  in  a  cabin,  and,  hstening,  discovered  that  a  negro  from  a 
neighbouring  estate  was  leading  the  devotion  of  his  own  slaves,  and  offering 
fervent  thanksgiving  for  the  blessing  of  their  depressed  lot.  His  heart  was 
touched,  and  with  emotion  he  exclaimed,  ''  Alas !  O  Lord,  I  have  my  thousands 
and  tens  of  thousands,  and  yet,  ungrateful  wretch  that  I  am,  I  never  thank  Thee 
as  this  poor  slave  does,  who  has  scarcely  clothes  to  put  on,  or  food  to  satisfy  his 
hunger  ! 

III.  Should  be  offered  in  order  to  secure  real  progress  in  the  Christian  life. 
— **  That  we  may  lead  a  quiet  and  peaceable  life  in  all  godliness  and  honesty  " 
(ver.  2).  Here  is  a  reason  for  praying  for  kings  and  magistrates — that  they  may 
use  their  power  in  the  maintenance  of  peace  and  good  order  and  in  defending 
the  interests  of  true  religion,  that  while  restraining  the  violence  of  wicked  man 
they  may  not  recklessly  plunge  the  nation  into  war.  The  Christian  has  a 
reverence  for  law,  and  the  maintenance  of  law  and  order  is  helpful  to  growth 
and  progress  in  religion,  "  I  have  been  benefited  by  riding  alone  a  long 
journey  in  giving  that  time  to  prayer.  Making  an  errand  to  God  for  others, 
I  have  gotten  something  for  myself.  I  have  been  really  confirmed  in  many 
particulars  that  God  heareth  prayers,  and  therefore  I  pray  for  anything,  of  how 
little  importance  soever.  He  enables  me  to  make  no  question  that  this  way, 
which  is  mocked  and  nicknamed,  is  the  only  way  to  heaven  "  (S.  Rutherford). 

IV.  Prayer  for  all  classes  has  the  Divine  approval. — *'  For  this  is  good  and 
acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God  our  Saviour  "  (ver.  3).  God  is  willing  that  all 
should  be  saved  ;  therefore  we  should  meet  the  will  of  God  in  behalf  of  others  by 
praying  for  the  salvation  of  all  men.  More  would  be  saved  if  we  prayed  more. 
"  Since  God  mshes  that  all  should  be  saved,  do  you  also  wish  it,  and  if  you 
wish  it  pray  for  it.  For  prayer  is  the  instrument  of  effecting  such  things  " 
(Chrysostom). 

Lessons. — 1.  Trite  prayer  is  ever  unselfish.  2.  Prayer  is  the  vital  element  of 
religious  progress,     3.  Acceptable  prayer  is  answered  prayer. 


17 


CHAP.  II.         HOMILEriC  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.    1-3.  Forms    of    Prayer    in     doctrine  and  faith  of  the  Church. — 

Public  Worship.  Bishop  Bull, 

I.  Are    useful    and    necessary    to  ^      r-             -, 

obviate  and  prevent  aU  extravagant  ^ers.  1,    2.  Prayer  for  kings  and 

levities  or  worse  impieties  in  public  Governors.                        ,     ,,    ,. 

_^-^_v,-                        ^  I.  Common  charity  should  dispose 

i,,         .  .  ,       ,       1  J  us  to  prav  for  kinfifs. 

XL  That  ministers  less  learned  may         jj  ^^l  ^^^  ^^^^  ^^  ^^^  ^ 

have  provision  of  devotions  made  for     ^^^  ^^  ^^^^^^^  ^^^  ^^^  p^^^^ 

*^®"^-  III.  Subjects  are  bound  in  gratitude, 

III.  That  all  the  members  of  the  equity,  and  justice  to  pray  for  their 

Church  may  know  the   condition  of  princes. 

public    communion    and    understand  jy.  Princes  need  our  prayers. 

beforehand  what  prayers  they  are  to  y.  Prayer    is  the   only  allowable 

join  in.  method  for  redressing  our  case  if  we 

lY.  To     secure     the     established  suffer  by  ^xincQS,— Barrow. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  4—8. 

The  Universality  of  Redemption — 

I.  Is  in  harmony  with  the  Divine  will. — "  Who  will  have  all  men  to  be  saved, 
and  to  come  unto  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  "  (ver.  4).  The  provisions  for  the 
salvation  of  the  race  are  the  outcome  of  the  Divine  will ;  but  while  He  wills 
the  salvation  of  all,  He  also  wills  that  that  salvation  should  be  obtained  by 
coming  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth.  Hence  our  prayers  for  others,  in  order 
to  their  salvation,  should  be  that  their  eyes  may  be  opened  to  see  the  truth, 
and  that  they  may  be  induced  to  embrace  it.  Because  God  wills  salvation  we 
should  pray  for  it :  had  He  willed  the  contrary,  prayer  for  salvation  would  be 
useless.  Our  prayers  should  include  all,  as  God's  grace  includes  all.  Men 
cannot  be  forced  into  the  truth ;  but  they  may  be  prayed  into  it.  When 
Augustine  was  on  the  eve  of  his  departure  for  Rome,  where  she  knew  he  would 
have  to  encounter  so  many  temptations,  his  mother  Monica  prayed  for  the 
prevention  of  his  going.  But  he  went,  and  was  there  converted.  1.  T'he  unity 
of  God  implies  the  comprehension  of  all  His  human  offspring  in  thz  provision  of 
redemption.  "  For  there  is  one  God  "  (ver.  5).  2.  Redemption  was  effected  hy 
the  one  Mediator  who  represented  in  His  humanity  the  whole  human  race.  "  And 
one  Mediator  between  God  and  men,  the  Man  Christ  Jesus ;  who  gave  Himself  a 
ransom  for  all,  to  be  testified  in  due  time  "  (vers.  5,  6).  The  word  "  for  "  links  the 
unity  of  God  and  Christ  with  the  universality  of  the  redemption  of  the  race  : 
prayer  should  therefore  be  offered  to  the  one  God  on  behalf  of  all  men.  The 
unity  of  God  is  here  placed  distinctly  in  the  foreground  to  show  how  arbitrary 
is  any  limit  of  Christian  intercession ;  the  unity  of  the  Mediator  to  prove  that 
the  Jew  has  not  the  least  advantage  over  the  heathen,  since  both  must  be 
saved  in  one  and  the  same  way.  God's  unity  in  essence  and  purpose  is  a  proof 
of  His  comprehending  all  His  human  children,  created  in  His  image,  in  His  offer 
of  grace.  All  mankind  constitute,  as  it  were,  one  man  before  God.  They  who 
have  not  this  one  God  by  one  Mediator  have  no  mediator  at  all.  Christ's 
mediation  affects  the  whole  race,  since  there  is  but  the  one  Mediator,  designed 
as  the  representative  Man  for  all  men  alike.  His  being  man  was  necessary 
to  His  being  a  mediator,  sympathising  with  us  through  experimental  knowledge 
of  our  nature.     Even  in  nature  almost  all  blessings  are  conveyed  to  us  from 

J8 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY,         chap.  ii. 


God,  not  immediately,  but  through  the  mediation  of  various  agents.  The 
effectual  intercession  of  Moses  for  Israel  (Num.  xiv.  ;  Deut.  ix.),  of  Abraham 
for  Abimelech  (Gen.  xx.  7),  of  Job  for  his  friends  (Job  xlii.  10) — the  mediation 
being  prescribed  by  God  whilst  declaring  His  purpose  of  forgiveness — all 
prefigure  the  grand  mediation  for  all  by  the  one  Mediator.  Man  was  the 
captive  of  sin.  He  was  unable  to  ransom  himself,  because  absolute  obedience 
is  due  to  God,  and  therefore  no  act  of  ours  can  satisfy  for  the  least  offence. 
The  Son  of  God  therefore  became  man  in  order  that,  being  made  like  unto  us 
in  all  things,  sin  only  excepted,  as  our  elder  brother  He  should  redeem  us  by 
offering  Himself  as  a  ransom,  a  substituted  or  equivalent  ransom.  The  oneness 
of  the  Mediator,  involving  the  universality  of  redemption,  which  faith  alone 
appropriates,  was  therefore  the  great  subject  of  Christian  testimony  (1  Cor.  i.  6, 
ii.  1  ;  2  Thess.  i.  10)  (Faussef,  Bengel^  Alford). 

II.  Is  authoritatively  declared  by  a  specially  commissioned  messenger. — 
*'  Whereof  I  am  ordained  a  preacher  and  an  apostle  ...  a  teacher  of  the  Gentiles 
in  faith  and  verity"  (ver.  7).  None  of  the  apostles  obtained  so  clear  an  insight 
into  the  wide,  far-reaching  sweep  of  the  doctrine  of  redemption  as  Paul,  and 
no  one  has  argued  its  universal  application  more  ably  than  he.  The  breadth 
of  the  gospel  as  it  expanded  before  his  studious  gaze  effectually  cured  him  of 
his  Jewish  prejudices  and  narrowness,  and  fitted  him  as  the  fearless  champion 
of  Gentile  rights  and  privileges.  The  mixed  and  restricted'  gospel  of  the 
Judaisers  was  shrivelled  up  before  the  fire  of  his  intensified  zeal  and  the 
irresistible  power  of  his  logic.  He  refers  to  the  universality  of  his  calling  as 
an  evidence  of  the  universality  of  Divine  grace,  and  as  a  motive  to  pray  for  all 
men.  The  solemn  protestation,  "  I  speak  the  truth  in  Christ,  I  lie  not," 
indicates  the  importance  he  attached  to  his  mission  as  a  teacher  of  the  Gentiles, 
notwithstanding  the  misrepresentations  of  others. 

III.  Is  a  reason  for  prayer  everywhere. — 1.  Prayer  should  he  reverential, 
"  I  will  therefore  that  men  pray  everywhere,  lifting  up  holy  hands  "  (ver.  8). 
The  early  Christians  turned  up  their  palms  towards  heaven  as  those  craving 
help  do.  "  Holy  hands "  are  hands  which  have  committed  no  impiety  and 
observed  every  sacred  duty.  This,  or  at  least  the  contrite  desire  to  be  so, 
is  a  needful  qualification  for  effectual  prayer.  It  is  a  feeling  which  nature  has 
implanted  within  us,  when  we  ask  God,  to  look  upwards.  Even  idolaters  retain 
the  custom  of  lifting  up  their  hands  to  heaven.  The  attitude  is  in  accordance 
with  true  godliness,  provided  it  be  attended  by  the  corresponding  truth 
represented  by  it  (Fausseiy  Calvin).  2.  Prayer  should  be  offered  in  a  suitable 
spirit.  *'  Without  wrath  and  doubting  "  (ver.  8).  In  peace  and  trust — putting 
away  the  spirit  of  anger  and  disputing,  which  is  unfriendly  to  and  destructive 
of  the  true  spirit  of  prayer.  Prayer  does  not  consist  in  gifted  expressions  and 
volubility  of  speech,  but  in  brokenness  of  heart.  A  hard  heart  cannot  pray  : 
a  broken  heart  is  made  up  of  prayers.  Prayer  does  not  consist  in  elegance  of 
phrase,  but  in  the  strength  of  the  affection.     Pray  that  you  may  pray. 

Lessons. — 1.  Pedemption  is  provided  for  all.  2.  It  is  a  great  honour  to  proclaim 
a  gospel  of  universal  blessing.  3.  Prayer  would  be  suppi^essed  if  all  might  not  be 
saved. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES, 

Ver.  4.  Salvation  for  All.  III.  By  the  Holy  Spirit. 

I.   God  shows  His  desire  for  the         IV.  In  the  gift  of  Christ. — Preacher\ 


salvation  of  men  in  providence.  Magazine. 

II.  In  conscience. 


19 


CHAP.  II.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   TIMOTHY. 

God  icould  have  All  Men  to  he  saved.  ence  neither  more  nor  less  nor  other 

I.  The    appellation   given   to   the  than  man. 

gospel—"  the  truth."  III.  He  is  the  one  man— the  only 

II.  The  knowledge  of  this  truth  is  man  in  whom  the  manhood  is  unbroken 
connected  with  salvation,  as  a  means  and  entire — the  man  unfaUen,  and 
to  an  end,  by  no  less  an  authority  therefore  unfragmentary, 

than  the  will  of  God.  IV.  He   is    the    man   to    mediate 

III.  The  connection  of  the  Divine  between  God  and  man. 

will    with    the  salvation  of  men.—  V.  He  is  the  man  to  give  Himself 

1.  The  object  of  this  will  is  the  salvation  a  ransom  for  all. 

of  man.      2.   In   the  same  sense  God  VI.  He  is  the  man  to  be  testified 

willeth   all  men    to   he  saved.      3.  ZTe  in  due  time. — R.  S.  Candlish. 

wills    to    save    men    accordi^ig    to    the 

nature     He      has      given      them. — R.  Ver.    8.    Conditions  of  Success    in 

Watson.  Prayer. 

I.  A  holy  life. — "  Lifting  up  holy 

Ver.  5.  The  Man  Christ  Jesus.  hands." 

I.  He  is  the  true  man— really  and  II.  A  charitable,  forgiving  spirit.— 
thoroughly    man— the  common  man.  "  Without  wrath." 

II.  He  is  very  man— simply  man —  III.  Faith. — Without  "  doubting."-^ 
as  to  His  human  nature  and  experi-  Olin. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PAMAGRAPH,— Verses  9—15. 

The  Place  of  Woman  in  Church  Life. 

I.  To  be  modest  in  dress  and  moral  deportment. — "  In  hke  manner  also,  that 
women  adorn  themselves  in  modest  apparel,  with  shamefacedness  and  sobriety  .  .  . 
with  good  works  "  (vers.  9,  10).  The  allusion  is  primarily  to  the  behaviour  of 
women  in  public  worship,  though  generally  applicable  to  the  dress  and  conduct 
of  "  women  professing  godliness."  A  lady  once  asked  the  Rev.  John  Newton 
what  was  the  best  rule  for  female  dress  and  behaviour.  "  Madam,"  said  he, 
*'  so  dress  and  so  conduct  yourself  that  persons  who  have  been  in  your  company 
shall  not  recollect  what  you  had  on."  Modesty  and  simplicity  are  the  adornment 
of  Christian  women.  The  caution  against  display  in  dress  and  ornaments  was 
no  doubt  necessary  in  writing  to  Ephesus,  where  wealthy  ladies  dressed  extrava- 
gantly. St.  Paul  might  say  :  "  You  are  Christian  women,  and  the  profession 
you  have  adopted  is  reverence  towards  God.  This  profession  you  have  made 
known  to  the  world.  It  is  necessary  therefore  that  those  externals  of  which  the 
world  takes  cognisance  should  not  give  the  lie  to  your  profession.  And  how  is 
unseemly  attire,  paraded  at  the  very  time  of  pubhc  worship,  compatible  with 
the  reverence  which  you  have  professed  ?  Reverence  God  by  reverencing  your- 
selves, by  guarding  with  jealous  care  the  dignities  of  those  bodies  with  which  He 
has  endowed  you.  Reverence  God  by  coming  before  Him  clothed  both  in  body 
and  soul  in  fitting  attire.  Let  your  bodies  be  free  from  meretricious  decoration. 
Let  your  souls  be  adorned  with  abundance  of  good  works  "  (Plummer). 

II.  Not  to  be  a  public  teacher,  but  a  submissive  learner. — "  Let  the  woman 
learn  in  silence  with  all  subjection.  But  I  suffer  not  a  woman  to  teach,  nor  to 
usurp  authority  over  the  man  "  (vers.  11,12).  The  prohibition  refers  to  taking  the 
lead  in  the  public  teaching  of  the  sanctuary.  There  was  a  tendency  among  the 
women  at  Ephesus  to  put  themselves  forward  more  than  was  seemly.  **  Woman's 
sphere  in  the  law  of  God,  without  doubt,  is  hornet  her  noblest  attraction, 
devotedness  to  those  with  whom  she  is  thrown  in  daily  intercourse.  Some 
women  there  are  who  find  not  only  duty,  but  pleasure  there — not  only  love,  but 

20 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    TIMOTHY.         chap.  ii. 


safety.  Others  again,  restless  and  discontented,  fancy  that  they  should  be 
happier  and  better  and  more  useful  anywhere  but  where  they  are,  and  gladly 
seize  the  first  pretence  to  turn  aside.  Woman's  guide  in  general  is  feeling  ;  she 
is  a  creature  of  impulse,  ever  likely,  unless  strongly  yet  tenderly  restrained,  to 
turn  aside  from  the  safer  and  less  excitable  path  of  daily  duty,  wherever  the 
affections  or  the  enthusiasm  of  the  moment  may  lead.  More  especially  is  she 
likely  to  fall  into  this  temptation  when  first  awakened  to  the  claims  and  beauty 
and  comfort  of  religion.  The  simple  duties  of  home  then  seem  little  worth 
compared  to  the  service  of  heaven.  She  cannot  realise  that  the  unfatiguing, 
unexciting  duties  of  domestic  usefulness,  infused  with  thoughts  of  God  and  of 
His  word,  is  the  path  most  acceptable  to  Him  "  (Grace  Aguilar,  on  '*  Women  of 
Israel "). 

III.  Not  to  assume  imperious  authority  over  man. — "  ISTor  to  usurp  authority 
over  the  man,  but  to  be  in  silence"  (ver.  12).  1.  Because  man  was  first  in  the 
order  of  creation.  "For  Adam  was  first  formed,  then  Eve"  (ver.  13).  It  was 
God's  law  from  the  beginning  that  woman  should  be  subject  to  the  man,  and  it 
may  be  supposed  that  this  authority  suffered  by  the  Fall,  yet  in  the  ruin  that 
followed  there  remained  so  much  of  the  Divine  blessing  as  would  make  it  seem 
improper  that  woman,  by  her  own  fault,  should  make  her  condition  better  than 
before.  2.  Because  woman  was  first  in  the  tra7isgression.  *'  And  Adam  was  not 
deceived,  but  the  woman  1  eing  deceived  was  in  the  transgression"  (ver.  14). 
Being  more  easily  deceived,  she  more  easily  deceives.  Last  in  being,  she  was 
first  in  sin — indeed,  she  alone  was  deceived.  The  subtle  serpent  knew  she  was 
the  weaker  vessel.  He  therefore  tempted  her,  not  him.  She  yielded  to  the 
temptations  of  sense  and  the  deceits  of  Satan ;  he  to  conjugal  love.  Hence  in 
the  order  of  God's  judicial  sentence  the  serpent,  the  prime  offender,  stands  first ; 
the  woman  who  was  deceived  next ;  and  the  man,  persuaded  by  his  wife,  last. 
Hence  the  woman's  subjection  is  represented  as  the  consequence  of  her  being 
deceived  (Faitsset).  3.  Though  the  first  in  the  transgression  and  suffering  her 
part  in  its  punishment,  she  shall  he  saved  on  the  same  term^s  as  others.  "Notwith- 
standing she  shall  be  saved  in  child-bearing,  if  they  [the  women]  continue  in 
faith  and  charity  and  holiness  with  sobriety "  (ver.  1 5).  The  curse  will  be 
turned  into  a  condition  favourable  to  her  salvation  by  her  faithfully  performing 
her  part  in  doing  and  suffering  what  God  has  assigned  her — child-bearing, 
rearing  of  children,  and  home  duties — her  sphere,  as  distinguished  from  public 
teaching,  which  is  not  hers,  but  man's.  In  this  home  sphere,  not  ordinarily  in 
one  of  active  duty  for  advancing  the  kingdom  of  God,  which  contradicts  the 
position  assigned  to  her  by  God,  she  will  be  saved  on  the  same  terms  as  all  others 
— by  faith,  and  bringing  forth  the  fruits  of  faith  in  a  holy  and  consistent  life,  in 
which  godly  women  should  excel,  that  they  may  differ  from  irreligious  women. 
Many  who  have  children  are  lost  :  many  who  are  childless  are  saved.  The 
woman  is  blessed  as  a  mother  when  she  cares  for  the  good  Christian  nurture  of 
her  children. 

Lessons. — 1.  Woman  should  he  a  pattern  of  neatness  and  modesty.  2.  The 
subjection  of  woman  is  not  that  of  a  servant,  hut  of  an  equal.  3.  The  place  of 
woman  in  the  Church  is  one  of  great  power  and  usefulness. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE    VERSES. 

Vers.  9,  10.  ^  Woman's  True  Adorn-  III.  In  works  of  charity. 

ment — 

I.  Is  not  in  dress  or  costly  trinkets.  Vers.  11-15.  Womanly  Modesty — 

II.  But  in  modesty  and  self-re-  I.  Shrinks  from  the  display  of  im- 
strained  behaviour.  perious  authority  (ver.  12). 

21 


CHAP.  III.        IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.   TIMOTHY. 

II.  Does  not  aspire  to  be  a  public         IV.  Kemembers  her  part  in  the  first 
Church  teacher  (ver.  12).  transgression  (vers.  13,  14). 

III.  Is  often  most  eloquent  in  silent         Y.  Is  becoming  in  one  who  suffers 
submission  (vers.  11,  12).  (ver.  15). 


CHAPTER  III. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Yer.  1.  This  is  a  true  saying. — See  note  on  i.  15.  If  any  man  desire  the  office  of  a 
bishop.— It  is  generally  admitted  that  to  the  latest  New  Testament  times  the  terms  "  bishop  " 
and  "  presbyter  "  were  applied  to  the  same  persons.  Whether  .subsequent  developments  have 
any  binding  force  for  us  may  be  left  an  open  question.  The  R.V.  indicates  that  there  are 
two  words  in  the  original  for  "seeketh"  and  "  desireth  "— not  one,  as  the  A.V.  might  lead 
us  to  suppose.     The  former  means  "  to  stretch  oneself  out  in  order  to  grasp." 

Ver.  2.  Blameless.  —R.V.  "  without  reproach."  Some  think  the  term  an  agnostic  one,  signi- 
fying one  who  gives  his  adversary  no  hold  upon  him,  applied  here  metaphorically  to  one 
who  gives  others  no  just  cause  to  accuse  him.  Ellicott  denies  any  but  an  ethical  sense. 
The  husband  of  one  wife.— Full  play  is  given  to  subjective  interpretation  on  this  passage. 
A  bishop  must  have  a  wife,  only  one  at  a  time,  must  not  have  a  concubine,  only  a  wife,  and 
on  the  loss,  even  by  death,  of  his  wife  must  never  have  a  second.  Such  are  some  of  the 
interpretations.  Vigilant. — R.V.  better  "  temperate,"  in  its  usual  and  literal  meaning. 
Sober.— R.V.  ••  sober-minded."    Of  good  behaviour.— R.V.  "  orderly." 

Ver.  3.  Not  given  to  wine. — R.V.  "  no  brawler."  The  A.V.  margin  indicates  that  it  is  not 
simply  a  liking  for  wine,  but  the  quarrelsomeness  of  a  man  so  addicted.  Not  greedy  of 
filthy' lucre.— Omitted  in  R.V.    The  idea  comes  in  with  the  last  word  of  the  verse. 

Ver.  4.  One  that  ruleth  well. — The  management  of  his  own  household  with  dignity  would 
be  a  recommendation  to  the  oversight  of  a  larger  family. 

Ver.  6.  Not  a  novice. — Lit.  "a  neophyte" — one  just  born.  Lest  being  lifted  up. — "A 
beclouded  and  stupid  state  of  mind  must  be  associated  with  that  of  pride  "  {Ellicott).  The 
condemnation  of  the  devil. — Whose  great  sin  was  pride. 

Ver.  7.  A  good  report  of  them  which  are  without. — How  different  this  sounds  from  the 
Master's  "  Blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall  revile  you  ! "  And  yet  how  often  has  the  world 
borne  witness  to  a  life  of  spotless  humility  ! 

Ver.  8.  Deacons. — Originally  dispensers  of  the  Church's  bounty,  they  came  to  be  regarded 
as  the  subordinates  of  the  presbyters.    Not  greedy. — Like  the  first  purser  of  the  Church. 

Ver.  10.  First  be  proved. — In  allusion  to  what  is  said  of  the  bishop  in  ver.  6.  Their 
qualifications  for  the  office  must  be  self-evident. 

Ver.  11.  Even  so  must  their  wives. — As  "their"  is  entirely  imported  and  the  original  does 
not  distinguish  them  as  wives,  the  R.V.  gives  "  Women  in  like  manner."  More  probably 
they  were  deaconesses. 

Ver.  13.  Used  the  office  of  a  deacon  well. — R.V.  "  served  well  as  deacons."  Purchase  to 
themselves  a  good  degree — R.V.  "  gain  to  themselves  a  good  standing  " — not  simply  prefer- 
ment ;  the  gain  is  spiritual,  as  is  intimated  by  the  next  phrase. 

Ver.  15.  How  thou  oughtest  to  behave  thyself. — The  language  seems  open  to  a  double 
interpretation,  as  the  R.V.  shows — "  how  men  ought  to  behave."  Perhaps  St.  Paul  meant 
that  his  letter  should  teach  Timothy  what  men  should  be  in  office,  as  well  as  the  officials 
themselves  what  manner  of  men  they  must  be.  The  Church  of  the  living  God,  the  pillar  and 
ground  of  the  truth. — "  If  the  Church  is  here  called  '  the  pillar  and  stay  of  the  truth,'  the 
expression  is  one  of  the  least  Pauline,  the  most  difficult  and  the  most  modern  in  these 
epistles.  On  the  other  hand,  all  difficulties  vanish  if  we  refer  the  words  to  Timothy,  who  is 
here  bidden  to  bear  himself  as  an  upholder  and  supporter  of  the  truth"  {Farrar). 

Ver.  16.  And  without  controversy. — Lit.  "  confessedly."  God  was  manifest. — R.V.  "  He 
who  was  manifested."  Ellicott  thinks  it  not  at  all  improbable  that  we  have  a  quotation 
from  some  well-known  hymn,  or  possibly  from  some  familiar  confession  of  faith.  Justified 
in  the  Spirit. — As  in  1  Pet.  iii.  17,  the  Spirit  seems  to  be  contrasted  with  the  flesh.  Preached 
unto  the  Gentiles.—  R.V.  "  among  the  nations."  How  inseparably  St.  Paul  considered  his 
own  mission  to  be  united  to  the  purposes  of  God  in  giving  His  Son,  this  phrase  makes 
evident.  Beceived  up  into  glory. — The  reference  is  to  the  event  recorded  in  Acts  i.  9,  the 
assumption  of  our  Lord. 

22 


ffOMiLETiC  COMMENTARY :   I   TtMOTHt.        chap.  iii. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH,— Verses  1—7. 

Qualifications  of  a  New  Testament  Bishop. 

I.  He  must  be  a  man  of  upright  and  irreproachable  life  (vers.  1-3). — The  office 
of  bishop  or  presbyter  is  a  good  work  in  itself,  has  to  do  specially  with  good 
things,  and  gives  a  signal  opportunity  of  doing  good  to  others.  Speaking  to 
Bishop  Crowther,  the  first  coloured  bishop  in  connection  with  the  Church  of 
England,  a  clergyman  said  :  "  If  a  man  desire  the  office  of  a  bishop,  what  saith 
the  word  of  God  that  he  desireth  ? — a  large  income  ? — a  palace  ? — to  be  called 
my  lord  ?  No —  he  desireth  a  good  work.  Work  for  Christ  is  the  true  honour 
of  the  bishop."  Such  a  man  should  possess  both  gifts  and  grace,  and  both  in  a 
high  degree.  The  qualifications  of  a  bishop  are  here  given  by  the  apostle  in 
detail.  "A  bishop  then  must  be  blameless" — unexceptionable,  giving  no  just 
handle  for  blame.  "  The  husband  of  one  wife."  The  feeling  which  prevailed 
among  the  Gentiles,  as  well  as  the  Jews,  of  that  age  against  a  second  marriage 
would,  on  the  ground  of  expediency  and  conciliation  in  matters  indifferent  and 
not  involving  compromise  of  principle,  account  for  Paul's  prohibition  here  in  the 
case  of  one  in  so  prominent  a  sphere  as  a  bishop  or  a  deacon.  "Vigilant, 
sober" — ever  on  the  watch,  as  sober  men  alone  can  be — keenly  alive,  so  as  to 
foresee  what  ought  to  be  done.  *'  Of  good  behaviour  " — orderly.  "  Sober  "  refers 
to  the  inward  mind ;  orderly  to  the  outward  behaviour,  tone,  look,  gait,  dress. 
"Given  to  hospitality" — both  to  Christian  brethren  and  to  strangers.  "Apt 
to  teach."  They  who  labour  in  word  and  doctrine  are  counted  worthy  of  double 
honour.  "  Not  given  to  wine  " — not  merely  drunkenness,  but  any  intemperance 
in  wine-drinking.  The  word  also  includes  not  indulging  in  the  brawling,  violent 
conduct  towards  others  which  proceeds  from  being  given  to  wine.  "  Not 
covetous  " — not  a  lover  of  money,  whether  we  have  much  or  little. 

II.  He  must  be  a  man  showing  the  faculty  of  government  in  his  own  family. 
— "  One  that  ruleth  well  his  own  house  .  .  .  for  how  shall  he  take  care  of  the 
Church  of  God  ?  "  (vers.  4,  5).  Presiding  over  his  own  children  and  servants,  as 
contrasted  with  the  house  of  God,  which  he  may  be  called  on  to  preside  over. 
The  fact  that  he  has  children,  who  are  in  subjection  to  him  in  all  gravity  and 
modesty,  is  the  recommendation  in  his  favour  as  one  likely  to  rule  well  the 
Church.  If  he  cannot  perform  the  lesser  function,  how  can  he  perform  the 
greater  and  more  difficult  one  ? 

III.  He  must  be  a  man  not  raw  and  inexperienced  in  spiritual  things. — 
"  Not  a  novice,  lest  being  lifted  up  with  pride  he  fall  into  the  condemnation 
of  the  devil "  (ver.  6).  Not  one  just  converted — a  neophyte,  a  young  plant, 
luxuriantly  verdant — lest  being  lifted  up  with  pride,  being  beclouded,  darkened, 
befooled,  inflated  with  self-conceit  and  exaggerated  ideas  of  his  own  importance, 
he  falls  into  the  eame  condemnation  as  that  in  which  Satan  fell,  who  was 
condemned  for  his  pride.  The  minister  is  emphatically  the  spiritual  man,  and 
should  be  deeply  and  experimentally  acquainted  with  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  and 
with  spiritual  things. 

lY.  He  must  be  a  man  of  unquestionable  reputation. — "  He  must  have  a 
good  report  of  them  which  are  without ;  lest  he  fall  into  reproach  and  the  snare 
of  the  devil "  (ver.  7).  He  should  be  blameless,  not  only  in  the  eyes  of  the 
Church,  but  be  esteemed  for  his  moral  worth  and  uprightness  by  the  world. 
Not  even  the  former  life  of  a  bishop  should  be  open  to  reproach.  The  reproach 
continually  surrounding  him  for  former  sins  might  lead  him  into  the  snare  of 
becoming  as  bad  as  his  reputation.  Despair  of  recovering  reputation  might,  in 
a  weak  moment,  lead  some  into  recklessness  of  living. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  officers  of  the  Church  should  he  above  reproach.     2.  A  bishop 

23 


CHAP.  III.        nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   TIMOTHY, 


should  he  a  competent  leader  of  the  Church.     3.  Only  the  grace  of  God  can  make  a^ 
true  bishop. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Ver.  2.  "  Apt  to  teach.''  The  Pulpit  VI.  Apt  to  teach  has  the  element  of 
a  Light  and  Power.  fB.ii}l.—Homiletic  Monthly. 

I.  To  meet  the  claims  of  a  good 

teacher  one  must  be  willing  to  learn.  Vers.  4,  5.  Family  Government — 

II.  We  must  have  a  lesson  to  impart.         I.  Must  be  carried  on  in  a  religious 

III.  One  must  be  master  of  the     spirit. 

lesson  he  would  impart.  II.  Is  necessary  in  the  proper  train- 

IV.  A  sacred  enthusiasm  is  indis-     ing  of  children. 

pensable.  III.  Is  a  preparation   for   higher 

V.  We  must  gather  strength  and     ministerial  duties, 
success  by  prayer. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  8—13. 

Qualifications  of  New  Testament  Deacons. 

I.  They  must  be  men  of  good  character  and  behaviour  (ver.  8).:— The  deacons 
answer  to  the  chazzan  of  the  synagogue — the  attendant  ministers  or  subordinate 
coadjutors  of  the  presbyter.  Their  duty  was  to  read  the  Scriptures  in  the 
Church,  to  instruct  the  catechumens  in  Christian  truths,  to  assist  the  presbyters 
at  the  sacraments,  to  receive  oblations,  and  to  preach  and  instruct.  To  the 
other  quaUfications  belonging  to  the  bishops,  the  deacons  were  required  to  be 
circumspect  in  speech.  "  Not  double-tongued  " — not  saying  one  thing  to  this 
person  and  another  to  that  person.  The  extensive  personal  intercourse  that 
deacons  would  have  with  members  of  the  Church  might  prove  a  temptation  to 
such  a  fault.  "Not  given  to  much  wine."  He  who  would  not  merely  aid 
poverty,  but  as  far  as  possible  heal  it,  must  be  himself  a  pattern  of  temperance. 
*'  Not  greedy  of  filthy  lucre."  Any  who  was  capable  of  this  would  soon 
appropriate  dishonestly  the  gifts  entrusted  to  him  for  the  poor.  All  gain  is 
base  which  is  set  before  a  man  as  a  by-end  in  his  work  for  God.  The  deacon's 
office  of  collecting  and  distributing  alms  would  render  this  uncovetous  spirit  a 
necessary  qualification. 

II.  They  must  be  men  holding  clear  and  conscientious  views  of  Divine  truth. 
— *'  Holding  the  mystery  of  the  faith  in  a  good  conscience "  (ver.  9).  The 
mystery  of  the  faith  is  like  a  treasure  in  the  actual  possession  of  the  deacons, 
and  the  coffer  in  which  it  is  best  preserved  is  a  good  conscience.  Having  a  firm 
hold  of  the  truth  themselves  and  realising  its  power  in  their  hearts,  they  must 
illustrate  it  in  their  lives  and  actions. 

III.  They  must  be  men  whose  fidelity  has  been  tested. — *'  And  let  these  also 
first  be  proved  "  (ver.  10).  Their  character  is  to  be  carefully  inquired  into,  and 
the  investigation  being  favourable,  they  are  then  to  be  appointed  deacons.  In 
this  way  the  unworthy  were  kept  from  ofiice.  The  office  required  one  of  tried 
and  well-ascertained  fidelity. 

IV.  They  must  be  men  whose  married  and  family  life  is  without  reproach 
(vers.  11,  12). — The  character  not  only  of  the  wives  of  the  deacons,  but  also  of 
deaconesses,  is  referred  to  here.  The  same  qualifications  are  required  in  female 
deacons  as  in  deacons,  only  with  such  modifications  as  the  difference  of  sex 
suggested.  "  Not  slanderers " — not  devils,  as  they  undoubtedly  would  be  if 
guilty  of  lying  and  slander.     "  Sober  " — answering   to   **  not   given   to   much 

24 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY.        chap.  hi. 


wine."  "  Faithful  in  all  things  " — in  little  as  well  as  great.  The  deacons  must 
be  husbands  of  one  wife — not  marrying  a  second  time ;  and  must  show  com- 
petency for  their  duty  in  the  Church  by  ruling  their  own  households  well.  The 
domestic  virtues  of  deacons  must  not  be  inferior  to  that  of  presbyters.  Care  of 
their  own  children  was  doubtless  the  best  preparatory  school  for  care  of  the  poor 
and  sick. 

V.  Fidelity  in  their  office  will  ensure  their  advancement  and  stability  in  the 
truth. — ''  For  they  that  have  used  the  office  of  a  deacon  well  purchase  to  them- 
selves a  good  degree,  and  great  boldness  in  the  faith  which  is  in  Christ  "  (ver.  1 3), 
Those  who  faithfully  discharge  the  duties  of  the  diaconate  acquire  for  themselves 
a  good  standing-place,  a  well-founded  hope  of  salvation  against  the  day  of 
judgment.  A  faithful  fulfilment  of  our  calling  in  the  Church  of  Christ  is  the 
means  blessed  by  Him  to  win  here  as  in  eternity  a  good  degree  of  growth  and 
of  salvation  {Lange,  Fausset).  It  seems  most  agreeable  to  our  conceptions  of 
justice,  and  is  consonant  enough  to  the  language  of  Scripture,  to  suppose  that 
there  are  prepared  for  us  rewards  and  punishments  of  all  possible  degrees,  from 
the  most  exalted  happiness  to  the  extremest  misery,  so  that  our  labour  is  never 
in  vain :  whatever  our  advancement  in  virtue,  we  procure  a  proportionable 
accession  of  future  happiness  (Paley). 

Lessons. — 1.  Church  work  affords  spheres  of  special  usefulness.  2.  Work  for  God 
demands  the  highest  moral  qualifications .  3.  Work  doTie  for  the  Church  helps  the 
growth  of  personal  godliness. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Yers.  8-13.  Church  Officers —  IV.  Should  be  submitted  to  prepara- 

I.  Should  be   sedate  in  behaviour     tory  tests  (ver.  10). 

(vers.  8,  11).  V.  Exemplary  in  home  life  (ver.  12). 

II.  Irreproachable  in  life  (vers.  8, 1 1 ).         VI.  Are  rewarded  for  their  fidelity 

III.  Conscientious  in  maintaining     (ver.  13). 
the  faith  (ver.  9). 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH,— Verses  14,  15. 

The  Dignity  and  Stability  of  the  Church. 

I.  The  Church  is  the  habitation  of  the  liviner  f^od. — "The  house  of  God, 
which  is  the  Church  of  the  living  God"  (v  ;.  j.o).  The  Church  of  God  does 
not  consist  of  massive  buildings,  however  grandly  designed  or  richly  decorated, 
but  is  a  congregation  of  immortal  souls  and  of  bodies,  which  are  temples  of  the 
living  God.  How  different  from  the  lifeless  idol  Diana,  in  whose  honour  the 
Ephesians  built  a  temple  that  was  regarded  as  one  of  the  seven  wonders  of 
the  world,  and  how  different  the  worship  and  service !  God's  house  must  have 
rules  and  regulations  to  preserve  it  from  unseemly  disorder  and  irreverence. 
The  congregation  worshipping  the  living  God  must  have  a  constitution  and 
laws  to  preserve  it  from  faction  and  anarchy.  Officers  of  such  a  Church  must 
have  the  highest  qualifications,  and  their  behaviour  be  above  suspicion.  To 
them  is  largely  entrusted  the  moral  culture  and  destiny  of  living  souls.  "  As  I 
was  walking  in  the  fields,"  writes  M'Cheyne,  "  the  thought  came  over  me,  with 
almost  overwhelming  power,  that  every  one  of  my  flock  must  soon  be  in  heaven 
or  hell.  Oh,  how  I  wished  that  I  had  a  tongue  like  thunder,  that  I  might 
make  all  hear ;  or  that  I  had  a  frame  like  iron,  that  I  might  visit  every  one 
and  say,  *  Escape  for  thy  life  ! '  Ah  !  sinners,  you  little  know  how  I  fear  that 
you  will  lay  the  blame  of  your  damnation  at  my  door !  " 

25 


CHAP.  III.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY. 


II.  Jhe  Church  is  the  stay  and  defence  of  the  truth. — "The  pillar  and 
ground  of  the  truth"  (ver.  15).  "To  the  Church  has  been  assigned  a  post  of 
great  responsibility.  Truth  in  itself  is  self-evident  and  self- sustained ;  it  needs 
no  external  support  or  foundation.  But  truth  as  it  is  manifested  to  the  world 
needs  the  best  support  and  the  firmest  basis  that  can  be  found  for  it.  And  it 
is  the  duty  and  privilege  of  the  Church  to  supply  these.  God's  household  is 
not  only  a  community  which  in  a  solemn  and  special  way  belongs  to  the  living 
God — it  is  also  the  pillar  and  ground  of  the  truth."  The  Church  is  stable  and 
enduring  because  it  rests  upon  and  is  made  up  of  unchanging  truth  :  the  truth 
it  declares  defends  and  preserves  it.  One  of  the  red  republicans  of  1793  was 
telling  a  good  peasant  of  La  Vendee,  "We  are  going  to  pull  down  your 
churches  and  your  steeples — all  that  recalls  the  superstitions  of  past  ages,  and 
all  that  brings  to  your  mind  the  idea  of  God."  "Citizen,"  replied  the  good 
Vendeean,  "  pull  down  the  stars  then." 

III.  The  greatness  of  the  Church  needs  special  qualifications  in  its  officers. — 
"  These  things  write  I  unto  thee,  hoping  to  come  unto  thee  shortly  :  but  if  I 
tarry  long,  that  thou  mayest  know  how  thou  oughtest  to  behave  thyself  in  the 
house  of  God  "  (vers.  14,  15).  As  his  hope  of  visiting  Ephesus  soon  was  not  very 
confident,  the  apostle  regards  the  work  of  governing  the  Church  as  of  such  vital 
importance  that  he  provides  for  Timothy's  lengthened  superintendence  by  giving 
him  the  preceding  rules  to  guide  him.  Thus  he  commends  the  weight  and 
dignity  of  the  pastoral  office,  because  pastors  are  stewards  to  whom  God  has 
committed  the  charge  of  governing  His  house.  If  any  person  has  the  super- 
intendence of  a  large  house,  he  labours  night  and  day  with  earnest  solicitude 
that  nothing  may  go  wrong  through  his  neglect  or  ignorance  or  carelessness. 
If  only  for  men  this  is  done,  how  much  more  should  it  be  done  for  God ! 
St.  Francis,  reflecting  on  a  story  he  heard  of  a  mountaineer  in  the  Alps  who 
had  risked  his  life  to  save  a  sheep,  says,  "  O  God,  if  such  was  the  earnestness 
of  this  shepherd  in  seeking  for  a  mean  animal  which  had  probably  been  frozen 
on  the  glacier,  how  is  it  that  I  am  so  indifferent  in  seeking  my  sheep  ?  " 

Lessons. — 1.  God  is  the  life  of  His  own  Church.     2.  The  Church  lives  by  being 
faithful  to  the  truth.     3.   No  pains  should  be  spared  in  acquiring  efficiency  in 
Church  work. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Ver.  1 5.  The  Christian  in  the  Church.  The  Church  the  House  of  God. 

I.  The  condition  our  subject  sup-  I.  The  Church  of  God — 1.  Is  any 
poses. — 1.  The  Church  comprises  all  the  number  of  Christians  meeting  together, 
redeemed  and  sanctified  people  of  God.  2.  All  the  Churches  in  existence  on  earth 
2.  Frequently  means  a  particular  com-  at  the  same  time.  3.  All  the  people  of 
munity  or  company  of  believers  associated  God  of  all  ages. 

together  for  religious  purposes.  II.  The  Church  of  God  is  a  house. 

II.  The  obligations  we  are  under  — 1.  It  has  a  foundation.  2.  The 
to   enter    this    state. — 1.    Suitability.      materials  of  the  house  are  men.     The 

2.  Consolation.      3.    Safety.      4.    Use-  materials  differ  from  each  other,  and 
fulness.  are  prepared  for  the  heavenly  building 

III.  The  duties  arising  from  the  before  they  go  to  it.     3.   The  putting 
state. — 1.    Worship,    in  the  use  of  the  of  the  materials  together  is  done  by  union 
means  of  grace.     2.   These  duties  in  the  and  mutual  dependence  on  each  other, 
use  of  the  means  regard  the  minister.  III.    The    Church    of    God    is    the 

3.  Your  fellow-members.  4.  The  welfare  house  of  God. — 1.  He  is  the  builder, 
and  prosperity  of  tJie  whole  interest. —  2.  The  owner.  3.  The  inhabitant. — 
W,  Jay.  C.  Bradley. 

26 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L   TIMOTHY.        chap.  111. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF   VERSE   16. 

An  Epitome  of  the  Gospel. 

I.  The  incarnate  God  a  mystery,  but  a  fact. — "And  without  controversy 
great  is  the  mystery  of  godHness :  God  was  manifest  in  the  flesh."  The  oldest 
manuscripts  and  versions  read,  "  He  who  was  manifest  in  the  flesh."  Paul  speaks 
of  the  truth  as  the  mystery  of  godliness,  in  order  to  express  both  the  Divine 
and  the  human  aspects  of  the  Christian  faith.  On  the  Divine  side  the  gospel 
is  a  mystery,  a  disclosed  secret.  It  is  a  body  of  truth  originally  hidden  from 
man's  knowledge,  to  which  man  by  his  own  unaided  reason  and  abilities  would 
never  be  able  to  find  the  way.  The  mystery  of  godliness  has  for  its  centre  and 
basis  the  life  of  a  Divine  Person ;  and  the  great  crisis  in  the  long  process  by 
which  the  mystery  was  revealed  was  reached  when  this  Divine  Person  was 
manifested  in  the  flesh,  *'  Mystery "  in  Christian  theology  implies  something 
which  once  was  concealed  but  has  now  been  made  known  :  "  manifest "  implies 
making  known  what  had  once  been  concealed.  An  historical  appearance  of 
One  who  had  previously  existed,  but  had  been  kept  from  the  knowledge  of  the 
world,  is  what  is  meant  by  "who  was  manifest  in  the  flesh."  The  famous 
statue  of  Christ  in  the  gallery  at  Stuttgart,  by  Dannecker,  was  produced  after 
reading  the  words  "God  manifest  in  the  flesh,"  which  led  to  the  conversion 
of  the  sculptor.  The  subject  he  proposed  to  himself  seemed  too  great ;  but  as 
he  reflected  that  others  could  preach  and  write  on  Christianity,  which  he  could 
not  do,  he  wrought  out  the  statue  as  the  expression  of  his  faith. 

II.  The  incarnate  God  was  vindicated  as  Divine  in  His  own  spirit. — 
"  Justified  in  the  Spirit."  His  flesh  was  the  sphere  of  His  manifestation ;  His 
spirit  was  the  sphere  of  His  justification.  It  was  in  His  spirit  that  Christ 
was  affected  when  the  presence  of  moral  evil  distressed  Him.  This  spiritual 
part  of  His  nature  which  was  the  sphere  of  His  most  intense  suffering,  was 
also  the  sphere  of  His  most  intense  joy  and  satisfaction.  As  moral  evil  distressed 
His  spirit,  so  moral  innocence  delighted  it.  In  a  way  that  none  of  us  can 
measure,  Jesus  Christ  knew  the  joy  of  a  good  conscience.  His  justification  or 
vindication  in  respect  to  His  spirit  or  higher  being  was  effected  by  all  that 
manifested  that  higher  being — His  words,  works.  His  Father's  testimony  at 
His  baptism  and  at  the  Transfiguration,  and  by  His  resurrection. 

III.  The  incarnate  God  is  a  suggestive  revelation  to  the  angelic  intelli- 
gences.— "  Seen  of  angels."  This  manifestation  of  a  perfectly  righteous  man 
was  not  confined  to  the  human  race.  The  angels  also  witnessed  it,  as  well  as 
His  triumphant  return  to  glory,  and  can  bear  testimony  to  the  reality  of  both 
facts.  Angels  saw  the  Son  of  God  with  us,  not  having  seen  Him  before.  Not 
even  they  had  seen  His  Divine  nature,  which  is  not  visible  to  any  creature,  but 
they  saw  Him  incarnate. 

IV.  The  incarnate  God  is  the  theme  of  the  gospel  and  the  object  of  faith. 
— 1.  As  such  He  was  declared  to  the  nations.  "Preached  unto  the  Gentiles." 
What  angels  came  to  know  by  seeing,  the  nations  learned  by  preaching.  He 
is  a  new  message  to  the  one  class  as  well  as  to  the  other — to  the  angels  so  near 
to  Him,  and  the  Gentiles  so  far  off.  2.  As  such  He  was  and  is  accepted  by 
perishing  men.  "  Believed  on  in  the  world."  Though  many  reject  Him,  many 
believe  on  Him.     To  reject  Him  is  to  perish ;  to  believe  on  Him  is  to  be  saved. 

V.  The  incarnate  God  is  now  reigning  in  heavenly  glory. — "  Received  up 
into  glory."  At  His  ascension  He  was  received  up  so  as  now  to  be  in  glory, 
carrying  on  His  mediatorial  work  and  ruling  the  universe,  until  all  things  shall 
be  finally  subdued  unto  Him.  The  revelation  of  the  eternal  Son,  which  imposes 
on  those  who  accept  it  a  holiness  of  which  His  sinlessness  must  be  the  model, 

27 


CHAP.  IV.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   /.    TIMOTHY. 


is  something  awful  and  profound.  But  He  does  not  impose  a  pattern  for 
imitation  without  at  the  same  time  granting  the  grace  necessary  for  struggling 
towards  it.  The  sinlessness  of  Christ  is  immeasurably  beyond  us  here ;  and  it 
may  be  that  in  eternity  the  loss  caused  by  our  sins  in  this  life  will  never  be 
entirely  cancelled.  But  having  followed  Christ  on  earth,  we  shall  follow  Him 
still  more  in  heaven  {Flummer,  Faubsset). 

Lessons. — 1.  The  gospel  is  the  revelation  of  the  incarnate  God.  2.  The 
fundamental  facts  of  the  gospel  are  well  authenticated.  3.  If  we  reject  the  gospel 
we  shall  he  condemned  hy  both  earth  and  heaven. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSE. 


Ver.  16.  My steriousness  of  Godliness. 

I.  Godliness  as  it  exists  in  the  soul 
and  character  of  man  is  a  mystery. — 

1.  It  is  mysterious  in  its  commence- 
ment. 2.  Mysterious  in  its  own  proper 
nature  or  in  that  in  which  it  consists. 
3.  Mystei'ious  to  those  who  are  them- 
selves possessed  of  it.  4.  A  mystery  to 
the  world. 

II.  Godliness  as  it  exists  in  the 
form  of  Christian  doctrine  is  a  mystery. 
— 1.  Because  of  its  own  intrinsic  nature. 

2.  Because  of  the  remoteness  and  in- 
visibility of  the  things  of  which  it  treats. 

3.  Because  of  the  untriedness  of  the  state 
it  describes.  4.  Because  of  the  inscrutable 
nature  of  many  of  the  subjects  of  which 
it  treats.  5.  Because  of  the  Tnanner  in 
which  it  is  revealed.  6.  Because  of  the 
character  and  capacities  of  man. — 
Stewart. 


The  Mystery  of  Godliness. 

I.  The  gospel  a  great  mystery. — 
1.  Because  it  could  not  have  been  known 
had  it  not  been  revealed.  2.  Being 
revealed^  it  cannot  be  perfectly  compre- 
hended. (1)  Reason  not  to  be  the 
measure  of  faith.  (2)  Disquisition  of 
truth  to  be  within  the  bounds  of 
sobriety.  (3)  Offence  not  to  be  taken 
at  the  difference  of  opinions  among 
Christians. 

II.  Christianity  a  mystery  of  god- 
liness.— 1.  In  regard  of  its  general 
scope.  2.  Of  the  special  parts  of  it. 
3.  In  the  means  of  conserving  it.  The 
best  and  surest  means  to  preserve 
Christianity  in  its  proper  integrity  and 
power  is  to  season  it  well  with  grace, 
and  be  sure  to  keep  the  conscience 
upright.^ — R.  Sanderson. 


CHAPTER  lY. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  Doctrines  of  devils. — The  term  "  devils  "  seems  to  give  the  spirit  of  the  apostle's 
meaning  more  accurately  than  the  more  literal  *'  demons  "  would. 

Ver.  2.  Having  their  conscience  seared  with  a  hot  iron. — R.V.  "  branded  in  their  own 
conscience."  As  a  runaway  or  offending  slave  was  sometimes  punished  by  having  the 
brai.d  of  his  infamy  stamped  on  his  brow,  so  these  men  carry  about  with  them  their  own 
condemnation. 

Ver.  3.  Forbidding  to  marry. — It  does  not  appear  whether  they  forbade  all  to  marry  or 
only  the  aspirants  to  peculiar  sanctity.  To  abstain  from  meats,  which  God  created  to  be 
received. — The  strongest  condemnation  of  ascetic  practices,  St.  Paul  seems  to  think,  is  that 
they  contravene  the  good  purpose  of  God.  With  thanksgiving. — The  true  attitude  towards 
the  gifts  of  God.  '*  It  was  a  maxim  even  of  the  heathen  that  the  good  gifts  of  the  gods 
were  not  to  be  refused  "  (Ellicott). 

Ver.  6.  For  it  is  sanctified.— Not  merely  declared  holy,  but  made  holy. 

28 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY.        chap.  iv. 


Ver.  7.  But  refuse  profane  and  old  wives'  fables. — Have  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  those 
irreligious  and  pitiable  myths.  What  some  reputed  as  wisdom  8t.  Paul  calls  grandmotherly- 
mumblings.  Exercise  thyself  rather  unto  godliness. — He  who  had  Himself  fought  the  good 
fight  would  not  have  his  well-beloved  Timothy  a  credulous  weakling,  but  strong  through 
the  gymnastic  exercise  of  faith. 

Ver.  8.  For  bodily  exercise  profiteth  little. — The  meaning  which  seems  simplest  may  here 
be  the  correct  one,  as  many  able  scholars  think — bodily  exercise,  development  of  the  body's 
powers,  is  profitable  in  some  small  way,  and  for  a  short  time.  Godliness  is  profitable  unto 
all  things. — "Thrift  is  blessing,  if  men  steal  it  not";  but  when  the  only  godliness  is  the 
spirit  of  Shylock's  thrift  (as  in  chap.  vi.  5),  it  is  unblest  enough. 

Ver.  10.  We  both  labour  and  suffer  reproach. — R.V.  "we  labour  and  strive."  Though  the 
changed  reading  of  the  R.V.  is  highly  attested,  Ellicott  thinks  it  suspicious  and  prefers  the 
A.V.  Specially  of  those  that  believe. — He  is  the  8aviour  of  all  in  that  He  would  have  all 
men  to  be  saved — the  Saviour  showed  the  consequence  of  opposing  that  universal  and 
gracious  purpose  (Matt,  xxiii.  38) ;  but  where  the  human  will  is  one  with  the  Divine,  there 
is  a  specially  effective  salvation  unto  the  uttermost. 

Ver.  12.  Let  no  man  despise  thy  youth. — It  is  not  upon  any  official  position  that  St.  Paul 
would  demand  respect,  but  on  the  worth  of  personal  character.  It  is  a  poor  thing  when  a 
distinction  has  to  be  made  between  the  man  as  man  and  as  official. 

Ver.  13.  Give  attendance  to  reading. — Probably  the  apostle  means  to  the  public  reading 
of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures,  though  it  would  not  be  surprising  if  portions  of  our  New 
Testament  were  so  read  at  the  late  date  when  this  epistle  was  written. 

Ver.  14.  Neglect  not  the  gift. — In  the  second  epistle  this  gift  is  repiesented  as  a  living 
fire  which  must  be  cared  for.  With  the  laying  on  of  the  hands  of  the  presbytery. — In 
2  Tim.  i.  6  the  imposition  of  hands  is  regarded  as  instrumental  to  the  reception  of  the 
charisma  :  here  it  is  a  concomitant  merely. 

Ver.  15.  Meditate  upon  these  things. — R.V.  *'  Be  diligent  in."  The  word  for  '*  neglect "  in 
ver.  14  is  the  direct  opposite  of  "  meditate."  That  thy  profiting. — R.V.  "  thy  progress,"  like 
that  of  a  boat  whose  oars  beat  the  water  and  urge  it  forward. 

Ver.  16.  Take  heed  to  thyself. — In  ver.  13  the  apostle  had  bidden  Timothy  give  heed  to 
the  teaching  :  the  "  take  heed  "  of  this  verse  is  perhaps  slightly  more  emphatic.  Thou  shalt 
save  both  thyself,  and  them  that  hear  thee. — It  is  possible  that  a  man  who  plays  an  actor's 
part  may  utter  a  word  that  shall  rouse  the  conscience  or  touch  the  heart,  but  the  messenger 
of  the  gospel  must  himself  know  the  truths  he  proclaims  to  others. 


MAIN'  HOMILETICS  OF  TEE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—5. 

False  Doctrine — 

I.  Leads  to  apostasy. — "  Now  the  Spirit  speaketh  expressly,  that  in  the  latter 
times  some  shall  depart  from  the  faith  "  (ver.  1 ).  Signs  of  apostasy  were  already 
discernible  in  the  operation  of  the  Gnostic  heresy.  Apollonius  Tyanaeus,  a 
notorious  heretic,  came  to  Ephesns  in  the  lifetime  of  Timothy.  The  defection 
was  within  the  Church  ;  and  the  active  cause  of  the  apostasy  was  the  false 
teaching  of  the  heresiarchs.  It  is  perilous  for  members  of  the  Church  to  give 
heed  to  the  seductive  voice  of  error. 

II.  Is  the  suggestion  of  evil  spirits. — "  Giving  heed  to  seducing  spirits,  and 
doctrines  of  devils  "  (ver.  1).  The  spawn  of  devilish  malice — the  reckless  sport 
or  cunning  designs  of  inveterate  wickedness.  The  throne  of  Satan  was  shaken 
by  the  introduction  of  the  gospel,  and  the  opposition  of  evil  spirits  was  the  more 
fierce  and  malignant.  In  warning  the  Thessalonians  the  apostle  connects  the 
mystery  of  iniquity  which  was  working  such  mischief  with  the  activity  of  some 
wicked  demon  acting  under  the  instigation  of  Satan. 

III.  Is  discoverable  by  uninistakable  marks. — 1.  By  the  character  of  its 
teachers.  "  Speaking  lies  in  hypocrisy  ;  having  their  conscience  seared  with  a 
hot  iron  "  (ver.  2).  They  are  hypocritical  liars,  self-branded  with  crime  :  not  only 
speaking  lies  to  others,  but  having  their  own  consciences  seared.  Professing 
to  lead  others  to  holiness,  their  own  consciences  all  the  while  defiled.  •  A  bad 
conscience  always  has  recourse  to  deception.  They  are  branded  with  the  con- 
sciousness of  sins  committed  against  their  better  knowledge  and  conscience,  like 

29 


CHAP.  IV.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L    TIMOTHY. 


so  many  sc<ars  burnt  in  by  a  branding-iron — an  image  taken  from  the  branding 
of  criminals.  They  are  conscious  of  the  brand  within,  yet  with  a  hypocritical 
show  of  sanctity  they  strive  to  deceive  others.  Pollok  called  the  hypocrite  *'  the 
man  that  stole  the  livery  of  heaven  to  serve  the  devil  in."  2.  By  its  enforcing  a 
spurioics  outward  sanctity.  "  Forbidding  to  marry,  and  commanding  to  abstain 
from  meats  "  (ver.  3).  Sensuality  leads  to  false  spiritualism.  Their  own  inward 
impurity  is  reflected  in  their  eyes  in  the  world  around  them,  and  hence  their 
asceticism.  By  a  spurious  spiritualism  which  made  moral  perfection  consist  in 
abstinence  from  outward  things  they  pretended  to  attain  to  a  higher  perfection. 
Those  who  do  not  keep  frorfi  ambition,  covetousness,  hatred,  and  cruelty  endeavour 
to  obtain  righteousness  by  abstaining  from  those  things  which  God  has  left  at 
large.  Not  long  after  the  death  of  the  apostle  arose  Encratites,  Tatianists, 
Catharists,  Montanus  with  his  sect,  and  at  length  Manichseans,  who  had 
extreme  aversion  to  marriage  and  the  eating  of  flesh,  and  condemned  them  as 
profane  things.  Such  is  the  disposition  of  the  world,  always  dreaming  that  God 
ought  to  be  worshipped  in  a  carnal  manner,  as  if  God  were  carnal. 

IV.  Degrades  the  true  use  of  the  Divine  gift  of  food. — 1.  All  God's  gifts  are 
good.  "  For  every  creature  of  God  is  good  "  (ver.  4).  A  refutation  by  anticipation 
of  the  Gnostic  opposition  to  creation,  the  seeds  of  which  were  now  lurking  latently 
in  the  Church.  Judaism  was  the  starting-point  of  the  error  as  to  meats  :  Oriental 
gnosis  added  new  elements.  The  old  Gnostic  heresy  is  now  almost,  extinct,  but 
it  remains  in  the  celibacy  of  the  priesthood,  and  in  Church  fasts  from  animal 
meat,  enjoined  under  the  penalty  of  mortal  sin.  In  and  for  itself  no  food  is 
objectionable,  yet  on  condition  that  it  be  used  with  thanksgiving  to  God. 
Creatures  are  not  called  good  merely  because  they  are  the  works  of  God,  but 
because  through  His  goodness  they  have  been  given  to  us.  2.  God's  gifts  are 
good  to  us  only  as  we  receive  them  in  a  devout  and  thankful  spi^'it.  "  And  nothing 
to  be  refused,  if  it  be  received  with  thanksgiving  :  for  it  is  sanctified  by  the  word 
of  God  and  prayer  "  (vers.  4,  5).  Just  as  in  the  Lord's  Supper  the  thanksgiving 
prayer  sanctifies  the  elements,  separating  them  from  their  natural  alien  position 
in  relation  to  the  spiritual  world,  and  transferring  them  to  their  true  relation  to 
the  new  life,  so,  in  every  use  of  the  creature,  thanksgiving  prayer  has  the  same 
effect,  and  ought  always  to  be  used.  One  of  the  most  beautiful  models  of  the 
primitive  *'  Grace  before  meat,"  consisting  almost  wholly  of  Scripture,  was  this  : 
"  Blessed  be  Thou,  O  Lord,  who  hast  fed  me  from  my  youth,  who  givest  food  to  all 
flesh.  Fill  our  hearts  with  joy  and  gladness,  that,  having  always  what  sufficeth, 
we  may  abound  unto  all  good  works  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  through  whom 
be  unto  Thee  honour,  glory,  and  power,  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen"  {Calvin^ 
Fausset). 

Lessons. — 1.  False  teacher Sy  deceived  themselves^  deceive  others.  2.  Error  in 
doctrine  leads  to  sins  in  practice.  3.  Prayer  and  thanksgiving  are  safeguards 
against  false  doctrine. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  2.  A  Seared  Conscienxie. — Note  II.  Uneasy  conscience. — Multiplied 

the  successive  stages  which  lead  to  a  sins,  small  and  trifling   as   each   may 

seared  conscience.  appear,  will  lead  to  this,  just  as  accu- 

I.  Dull  conscience, — Not  quick  and  mulated  snow-flakes  bend  the  strongest 

active,  but  slothful ;  like  a  storm-bell  bough. 

ringing  in  the  storm,  when  it  should  be  III.    Guilty    conscience. — Accusing 

as  a  storm -signal  run  up  in  a  blue  sky.  the  sinner  of  his  sin  and  folly.     This 

30 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY.        chap.  iv. 


may   be    either    an    awakened    or    a 
remoi'seful  conscience. 

IV.  Hardened  conscience.  —  The 
hardened  need  not  be  invulnerable ; 
there  may  be  a  joint  somewhere  where 
the  arrow  of  conviction  may  enter. 

V.  A  seared  conscience. — Cauterised. 
A  nerve  diseased  or  almost  paralysed 
may  possibly  be  healed  ;  but  when  it 
has  been  subjected  to  the  cauterising 


iron  it  is  perished.  What  hope  for  a 
man  whose  conscience  is  cauterised  ? — 
E.  Conder,  D.D. 

Vers.  4,  5.  The  Gifts  of  God— 

I.  Though  good,  may  be  abused. 

II.  Should  be  enjoyed  in  a  thankful 
spirit. 

III.  Should  be  hallowed  by  prayer 
in  harmony  with  the  word  of  God. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  6,  7. 

The  True  Minister  of  Christ — 

I.  Is  faithful  in  instructing  others. — "  If  thou  put  the  brethren  in  remem- 
brance of  these  things,  thou  shalt  be  a  good  minister  of  Jesus  Christ "  (ver.  6). 
Light  is  given  to  the  minister  that  he  may  shed  it  upon  others.  All  his  studies 
are  not  simply  for  his  own  mental  enjoyment — to  the  minister  often  a  most 
seductive  pleasure — but  should  be  used  in  storing  up  a  magazine  of  truth  to  be 
imparted  to  his  people.  Everything  he  reads  should  be  turned  into  sermon.  It 
is  a  poor  book  that  does  not  yield  something  useful  for  the  pulpit,  and  it  is  a 
waste  of  time  to  read  anything  that  does  not  add  to  his  homiletic  store.  All  true 
preaching  is  a  setting  forth  of  Christ,  and  the  deepest  learning  and  most  varied 
knowledge  should  be  coveted  for  that  end.  A  minister  being  one  week-day 
evening  in  London,  asked  a  friend  where  he  could  hear  a  good  sermon.  Two 
places   were   mentioned.     *'  Well,"   said   he,    *'  tell   me   the   characters   of   the 

preachers,  that  I  may  choose."     "  Mr.  D ,"  said  his  friend,  "  exhibits  the 

orator,  and   is  much  admired  for  his  pulpit  eloquence."     "And  what  is   the 

other  ?  "     "  Why,  I  hardly  know  what  to  say  of  Mr.  C ;  he  always  throws 

himself  into  the  background,  and  you  see  his  Master  only."     "  That's  the  man 
for  me  then  ;  let  us  go  and  hear  him." 

II.  Finds  his  own  spiritual  nourishment  in  the  truth  he  is  commissioned  to 
preach. — "  Nourished  up  in  the  words  of  faith  and  of  good  doctrine,  whereunto 
thou  hast  attained  "  (ver.  6).  The  minister  not  only  needs  themes  for  the  pulpit, 
but  also  food  for  his  own  soul.  His  Bible  studies  are  therefore  not  simply  critical 
and  homiletical,  but  devotional.  To  teach  others  he  must  be  instructed  himself ; 
to  influence  others  he  must  himself  be  powerfully  moved  by  the  truth.  Success 
in  preaching  will  largely  depend  upon  his  own  personal  growth  in  piety. 
Spurgeon  one  day  sitting  at  a  window  in  Cologne  noticed  a  man  with  a  yoke 
and  two  buckets  coming  and  going  to  a  pump  in  the  square  for  water,  and  at 
once  thought  to  himself  :  "  Ah,  you  do  not  fetch  water  to  your  own  house,  I  am 
persuaded  :  you  are  a  water-carrier ;  you  fetch  water  for  lots  of  people,  and  that 
is  why  you  come  oftener  than  anybody  else.  Now  there  was  a  meaning  in  that 
to  my  soul — that  inasmuch  as  I  had  not  only  to  go  to  Christ  for  myself,  but 
had  been  made  a  water-carrier  to  carry  the  water  of  everlasting  life  to  others, 
I  must  come  a  great  deal  oftener  than  anybody  else." 

III.  Ignores  the  profitless  theories  of  the  enemies  of  the  truth. — "  But  refuse 
profane  and  old  wives'  fables  "  (ver.  7).  It  would  have  been  a  waste  of  time  to 
occupy  the  mind  on  the  fables  and  foolish  traditions  of  the  Jewish  deceivers ; 
their  folly  and  emptiness  were  apparent  on  the  surface.  The  minister  must 
be  rigidly  discriminative  in  his  studies,  and  soon  detects  what  is  profitless  and 
profane,  leading  away  from  piety  and  from  the  great  vital  themes  of  his  ministry. 
Passing  through  the  china  works  at  Sevres,  we  observed  an  artist  drawing  a 

31 


CHAP.  IV.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    TIMOTHY. 


picture  on  a  vase.  We  watched  him  for  some  minutes  :  other  visitors  came  and 
went,  glancing  at  the  work  and  passing  remarks  ;  but  the  man  took  not  the 
shghtest  heed  of  any,  but  was  wholly  absorbed  in  his  work.  A  suggestive  lesson. 
After  this  fashion  should  we  devote  our  heart  and  soul  to  the  ministry  we  have 
received.  This  one  thing  I  do.  To  imprint  the  image  of  Jesus  on  a  human  soul 
demands  whole-hearted  devotion  on  the  part  of  the  most  gifted  minister. 

IV.  Is  ever  striving  after  practical  piety.— "And  exercise  thyself  rather 
unto  godliness  "  (ver.  7).  The  fable- mongers  enforced  certain  ascetic  rules  as  to 
eating  and  drinking  and  the  treatment  of  the  body— practices  both  unnecessary 
and  injurious.  The  apostle  teaches  a  nobler  discipline.  As  the  gymnast  trains 
his  body  to  develop  physical  strength  and  alertness,  so  the  minister  should 
exercise  all  his  mental  and  spiritual  powers  with  a  view  of  invigorating  his  own 
personal  piety.  Godliness  is  a  moral  state,  and  demands  the  most  strenuous 
em-ployment  of  moral  energies  and  the  constant  use  of  moral  agencies.  Daily 
study  and  meditation  must  be  directed  to  increase  in  personal  godliness. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  minister  of  the  gospel  should  be  apt  to  teach.  2.  Should  avoid 
profitless  controversies.     3.  Should  diligently  cultivate  personal  religion. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  6.  A  Good  Minister  of  Jesus  pendence  on  the  grace  of  Christ. — 
Christ.  Dr.  Brock. 

I.  His  goodness  as  a  minister  of 

Christ  is  disclosed  in  the  faithfulness         Ver.  7.  Spiritual  Growth. 

of  his  subordination  to  the  authority         I.  Seasons  of  devout  solitude  are 

of  Christ.  necessary  to  higher  culture. 

II.  In  the  persistency  of  his  adher-  II.  Spiritual  communion  with  good 
ence  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ.  men. 

III.  In   the    steadfastness  of   his         III.  Close  communion  with  Christ, 
imitation  of  the  example  of  Christ.  IV.   Communion  with  and  prayer 

IV.  In  the  devoutness  of  his  de-     to  God. — Homiletic  Monthly. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  8—11. 

Athletics  and  Religion. 

I.  Athletic  exercise  has  some  advantage. — "  For  bodily  exercise  profiteth 
little  "  (ver.  8).  The  apostle  is  using  terms  employed  in  describing  the  gymnastic 
contests  in  the  public  games,  and  the  training  necessary  for  the  athletes.  Bodily 
exercise  taken  in  moderation  profiteth  a  little.  It  improves  health,  develops 
physique,  strengthens  us  to  labour  for  God  and  man.  But  athletics  may  be 
overdone.  An  abnormal  development  of  muscle  deteriorates  the  quality  of  the 
brain  and  impairs  the  general  health.  Plato  says  of  the  wrestlers  of  his  day 
that  they  were  a  sluggish  set  and  of  dubious  health,  that  they  slept  out  their 
lives,  and  if  they  varied  their  regular  diet  in  the  least  degree  they  became 
extensively  and  deeply  diseased.  The  disciphning  of  the  body  by  abstmence 
may  also  be  some  advantage  in  the  suppression  and  control  of  the  passions  ;  but 
the  advantage  is  limited.  It  is  an  attempt  to  reach  the  inward  life  by  outward 
means,  which  is  a  reversal  of  the  Christian  method,  which  seeks  to  regulate  the 
outward  life  from  within. 

II.  Keligion  has  every  advantage. — 1.  It  is  best  for  the  present  life.  "But 
godhness  is  profitable  unto  all  things,  having  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is  " 
(ver.  8).     It  tends  to  health  and  longevity  by  teaching  us  the  proper  use  of  the  \ 

32 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY.        chap.  iv. 


body,  and  shows  that  true  happiness  and  prosperity  are  secured  by  promoting 
the  welfare  of  both  body  and  soul.  2.  It  is  best  for  the  future  life.  "  And  of 
that  which  is  to  come"  (ver.  8).  It  ensures  an  eternity  of  blessedness.  The 
condition  of  our  bodily  and  mental  powers  attained  by  judicious  exercise  must 
have  an  important  influence  upon  our  spiritual  state.  The  degree  of  moral 
excellence  attained  in  this  life  will  be  the  basis  of  development  and  enjoyment  in 
the  life  to  come. 

III.  Religion  involves  fatigue  and  shame,  but  it  means  salvation  to  the 
believing. — "For  therefore  we  both  labour  and  suffer  reproach,  because  we 
trust  in  the  living  God  "  (ver.  10).  Religion  is  not  obtained  without  effort :  we 
must  "  strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate,"  and  we  must  labour  to  maintain 
our  integrity,  notwithstanding  the  opposition  and  reproach  of  the  world ;  but 
trusting  in  the  living  God,  we  shall  be  able  to  endure  and  finally  conquer.  1.  This 
is  an  undoubted  and  universal  fact.  "This  is  a  faithful  saying  and  worthy  of 
all  acceptation"  (ver.  9).  It  may  seem  to  some  that  godly  men  suffer  loss  as  to 
this  life  ;  but  it  is  not  so.  The  labour  and  reproach  of  the  good  man  do  not 
deprive  him  of  the  best  blessings  of  the  present  life,  which  he  enjoys  in  rich 
abundance,  though  with  persecutions  (Mark  x.  30) ;  and  he  has  the  assurance 
of  yet  greater  blessings  in  the  future  life.  '2.  As  the  living  God  is  willing  to  save  all, 
He  will  certainly  save  those  who  believe  in  Him.  "  The  living  God,  who  is  the 
Saviour  of  all  men,  specially  of  those  that  believe  "  (ver.  10).  If  God  is  the 
Saviour  of  all  men,  even  of  those  who  do  not  believe  in  Him,  and  is  their  bene- 
factor and  preserver,  much  more,  and  in  a  most  blessed  sense,  is  He  the  Saviour  of 
those  who  fully  trust  in  Him.  He  is  the  Saviour  of  all  men  potentially,  as  He 
has  provided  and  offers  salvation  to  all ;  but  to  those  who  believe  in  Him  He  is 
their  Saviour  experimentally  and  really — they  become  conscious  of  their  salvation 
by  their  faith  in  Him. 

lY.  The  distinction  between  athletics  and  religion  should  be  authoritatively 
insisted  on. — "These  things  command  and  teach"  (ver.  11).  In  opposition  to 
the  false  views  of  the  Judaisers,  Timothy  must  reiterate  the  truth  concerning 
true  godliness.  "  You  can  always  show  what  a  life  of  godliness  really  is, — that 
it  is  full  of  joyousness,  and  that  its  joys  are  neither  fitful  nor  uncertain ;  that  it 
is  no  foe  to  what  is  bright  and  beautiful,  and  is  neither  morose  in  itself  nor  apt 
to  frown  at  light- hear tedness  in  others ;  that  it  does  not  interfere  with  the  most 
strenuous  attention  to  business  and  the  most  capable  despatch  of  it.  Men  refuse 
to  listen  to  or  to  be  moved  by  words  ;  but  they  cannot  help  noticing  and  being 
influenced  by  facts  which  are  all  round  them  in  their  daily  lives.  So  far  as 
man  can  judge,  the  number  of  vicious,  mean,  and  unworthy  lives  is  far  in  excess 
of  those  which  are  pure  and  lofty.  Each  one  of  us  can  do  something  towards 
throwing  the  balance  the  other  way.  We  can  prove  to  all  the  world  that 
godliness  is  not  an  unreality,  that  it  enhances  the  brightness  of  all  that  is 
really  beautiful  in  life,  while  it  raises  to  a  higher  power  all  natural  gifts  and 
abilities"  (Flummer). 

Lessons. — 1.  Bodily  athletics  may  be  cari'ied  to  injurious  excess.  2.  The  noblest 
athletics  are  spiritual,  and  seek  to  promote  genuine  godliness.  3.  Religion  is  best 
for  both  worlds. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES, 

Yer.  8.  The  Life  that  now  is,  lY.  Important. — It  has  a  relation 

I.  It  is  short.  to  that  which  is  to  come. — G.  Brooks 


II.  Uncertain. 


The  Life  which  is  to  come. 


III.  Chequered.  I.  Mention  some  of  the  proofs  that 

D  '  33 


CHAP.    IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY. 


there  is  a  life  to  come. — Proofs  from 
reason — analogy,  common  consent,  tlie 
desire  of  immortality,  conscience. 
Proofs  from   revelation. 

II.  Mention  some  of  the  character- 
istics of  the  life  to  come. — 1.  It  will 
coinpi'ehend  man's  whole  nature.  2.  It 
will  he  purely  and  entirely  retributive. 
3.  It  will  he  uncha7igeahle  and  eternal. 

III.  Mention  some  of  our  duties  in 
reference  to  the  life  to  come. — 1.  We 
should  habitually  contemplate  it. 
2.  We  should  diligently  prepare  for  it. 
• — G.  Brooks. 

The  Profitableness  of  Godliness. 

I.  The  nature  of  godliness. — 1.  It 
comprehends  the  fear  of  God.  2.  The 
saving  knowledge  of  God.  3.  Supreme 
love  to  God.  4.  Intercourse  loith  God. 
5.  The  practice  of  righteousness.  ^.Im- 
plies a  humble  and  supreme  regard  to 
the  honour  and  glory  of  God  in  all 
things. 

li.  The  advantages  of  godliness. — 
1.  It  is  profitable  for  the  prresent  life. 
(1)  Consider  its  influence  on  a  man's 
external  circumstances.  (2)  Is  calcu- 
lated to  promote  a  man's  worldly 
prosperity.  (3)  It  elevates  and  ex- 
pands the  mind.  (4)  Gives  real  excel- 
lence and   sterling  worth  to  a  man's 


character.  (5)  Has  a  tendency  to  pro- 
long life.  (6)  Profitable  to  individual 
happiness.  (7)  To  mankind  in  their 
social  capacity  and  in  all  the  diversified 
relations  of  life.  (8)  Is  profitable  dur- 
ing every  stage  of  life — in  the  morning, 
noon,  and  eventide  of  life.  2.  Profit- 
able for  the  life  to  come.  (1)  If  there 
were  no  positive  certainty  of  a  future 
life,  godliness  is  profitable.  (2)  It  is 
certain  there  is  another  life. 

Lessons. — 1.  We  see  the  fallacy  and 
impiety  of  those  who  say^  "  What  is  the 
Almighty  that  we  should  serve  Him  ? 
and  what  profit  shall  we  have  if  we  pray 
unto  Him. .? "  2.  The  inconsistency  and 
folly  of  those  who^  while  admitting  the 
profit  of  godliness,  make  no  practical 
efforts  to  realise  its  advantages.  3.  We 
commend  godliness  on  the  principle  of 
enlightened  self-interest. — Dr,  Robert 
Newton. 

Yer.   \^.\Christ   the  Saviour  of  AU 
Men. 

I.  As  He  IS  the  emhodiment  of  the 
truest  and  noblest  manhood.  v 

II.  Therefore  all  men  may  be  saved. 

III.  Therefore  the  gospel  should  be 
proclaimed  to  all. 

IV.  Men  are  truly  saved  only  as 
they  believe  in  Christ  as  the  Saviour. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF   VERSE   12. 

The  Power  of  a  Good  Example-— 

I.  Commands  respect  in  spite  of  youthfulness. — "  Let  no  man  despise  thy 
youth."  Timothy  was  a  mere  youth — probably  between  twenty  and  twenty-five 
years  of  age — when  Paul  selected  him  as  a  missionary  companion  (Acts  xvi.  1-3). 
Eleven  years  had  elapsed  since  then  to  the  time  subsequent  to  Paul's  first 
imprisonment.  He  was  therefore  still  comparatively  young,  especially  considered 
in  relation  to  the  elderly  presbyters  he  was  authorised  to  appoint  and  ordain, 
a  work  that  seemed  more  fitting  to  the^  sedateness  and  gravity  of  age,  and 
especially  in  relation  to  the  aged  Paul,  who  was  evidently  anxious  to  prepare 
Timothy  to  be  in  some  sort  his  successor.  Youthfulness  is  no  disability  in  doing 
good.  It  is  possible  so  to  act  as  to  win  the  esteem  of  all  classes.  Youth  has 
great  influence,  and  therefore  great  responsibility.  "  Tell  me  what  is  the 
character  of  the  young,"  said  an  old  statesman,  "  and  I'll  tell  you  the  character 
of  the  next  generation." 

II.  Is  based  on  consistency  of  religious  life. — 1.  In  speech.  "  But  be  thou  an 
example  of  the  believers  in  word."  The  tendency  of  youth  is  to  exaggerate  in 
speech,  and  the  danger  is  that  what  begins  in  mere  playfulness  may  degenerate 
into  wanton  misrepresentation.     Speech  is  an  index  of  character.     During  the 

34 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY.        chap.  iv. 


war  between  Alexander  the  Great  and  Darius,  king  of  Persia,  a  soldier  in  the 
army  of  the  latter  thought  to  ingratiate  himself  with  Memnon,  the  Persian 
general,  by  uttering  the  fiercest  invectives  against  Alexander.  Memnon  gently 
touched  the  fellow  with  his  spear  and  said,  "  Friend,  I  pay  you  to  fight  against 
Alexander,  not  to  revile  him."  2.  In  conduct.  "In  conversation."  The  young 
minister  should  so  behave  in  the  Church,  the  family,  and  in  intercourse  with  the 
world  as  to  gain  respect  both  for  his  ofiice  and  his  work.  3.  In  spirit.  "  In 
charity,  in  spirit,  in  faith."  Faith  and  love  are  the  spring  and  sustenance  of 
a  becoming  Christian  spirit.  The  spirit  that  animates  us  will  make  itself 
evident  in  word  and  action.  4.  In  holiness.  "  In  purity."  The  minister  should 
cultivate  the  deepest  experiences  of  the  spiritual  life,  and  be  holy  in  thought,  in 
word,  and  in  intention.  Simplicity  of  holy  motive  should  be  followed  out  in 
consistency  of  holy  action.  The  same  Greek  word  signifies  a  fool  and  a  child ; 
and  the  Hebrew  word  for  youth  signifies  blackness  or  darkness.  Few  Macarinses 
are  to  be  found,  who,  for  his  gravity  in  youth,  was  surnamed  "  the  old  young  man." 

III.  Is  a  guide  and  inspiration  to  others. — "  Be  thou  an  example  to  the 
believers."  The  young  as  well  as  the  old  may  be  an  example  for  good,  and  so 
be  an  encouragement  to  young  and  old.  It  is  a  noble  ambition  to  be  not  the 
first  but  the  best  among  the  good.  A  single  example  of  valour  and  devotion  is 
a  stimulus  to  others.  Whilst  stationed  in  Scotland,  Colonel  Durnford  happened 
to  be  between  Berwick  and  Holy  Island,  where  a  small  craft  had  stuck  on  the 
coast  during  a  storm.  Seeing  the  hesitation  of  the  fishermen  to  go  to  the 
rescue,  he  jumped  into  a  boat,  calling  out,  "  Will  none  of  you  come  with  me  ? 
If  not,  I  shall  go  alone."  A  volunteer  crew  at  once  joined  him  and  succeeded 
in  rescuing  those  in  peril. 

Lessons. — 1.  A  good  example  is  the  product  of  genuine  religion.  2.  An  exmnple 
of  youthful  fidelity  is  an  inspiration  to  many.  3.  We  should  study  not  so  much 
to  he  an  example  to  others  as  to  he  good  ourselves. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13—16. 

Ministerial  Responsihilities — 

I.  Involve  the  constant  public  reading  and  enforcement  of  the  Holy  Scriptures. 

— "  Till  I  come  give  attendance  to  reading,  to  exhortation,  to  doctrine  "  (ver.  13). 
The  practice  of  reading  the  Scriptures  in  the  Jewish  synagogues  was  transferred 
to  the  Christian  Church.  The  New  Testament  gospels  and  epistles,  recognised  as 
inspired  productions  by  those  who  in  the  early  Christian  age  had  the  gift  of 
discerning  spirits,  were  read  in  the  churches  along  with  the  Old  Testament 
books.  This  constant  public  reading  of  the  Bible  in  the  sanctuary  has  had  a 
powerful  influence  in  forming  national  character  throughout  Christendom.  To 
read  the  word  of  God  in  public  with  due  emphasis  and  efficiency  is  worthy  of 
the  most  careful  study.  It  should  ever  be  regarded  as  an  important  part  of 
public  worship :  it  has  often  been  *  made  a  blessing  to  the  congregation.  The 
Bible  must  also  be  diligently  pondered  by  the  minister  for  his  own  personal 
edification,  and  as  the  fountain  of  wisdom  from  which  he  must  continually  draw 
in  instructing  and  exhorting  his  people.  It  is  said  of  some  of  the  mines  of 
Cornwall  that  the  deeper  they  are  sunk  the  richer  they  prove ;  and  though  some 
lodes  have  been  followed  a  thousand  and  even  fifteen  hundred  feet,  they  have 
not  come  to  an  end.  Such  is  the  book  of  God.  It  is  a  mine  of  wealth  which 
can  never  be  exhausted.     The  deeper  we  sink  into  it  the  richer  it  becomes. 

II.  Require  the  frequent  stirring  up  of  any  special  spiritual  endowment. 
— "Neglect  not  the  gift  that  is  in  thee"  (ver.  14).  The  gift  referred  to  was, 
in  general,  his  spiritual  qualification  for  the  ministry.     It  is  represented  as  a 

35 


CHAP.    IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    L    TIMOTHY. 


^  f  +1.0  «4T.,Vif  liVfilv  to  smoulder  if  neglected,  and  needing  to  be  blown 
S  flamet  ^^o^s  e^^c^  The  bestowmLt  of  the  Spirit  at  his  ordination 
wis  nZhetL  of  the  power  that  would  be  ever  communicated  to  him  in  carrying 
was  propneiic  oi  ine  p  j  ;  ^      j^  also  a  qualification  to  discharge  its  duties. 

^'^'rTemanl  e^  iUrXrogrLive  stuly  of  Divine  things  "Medita^ 
unon  these  thin-s"  (ver.  1 5).  Spiritual  endowment  is  no  plea  for  mental  azmess. 
The  study  of  the  word  of  God  requires  and  involves  constant  reading,  elaborate 
research;  and  intense  thought.     AH  our  intellectual  abilities  and  resources  are 

'"iV  *lmj:se*contouous  vigUance  over  both  Ufe  and  teaching  in  order  to 
snccess  -"  Take  heed  unto  thyself,  and  unto  the  doctrine  '  (ver.  16).  Personal 
^ety  must  be  sedulously  cultivated.  The  people  are  quick  to  detec  religious 
decadence  and  loss  of  spiitual  power  in  the  minister.  The  power  of  teaching 
depends  upon  a  constantly  vivid  sense  of  the  reality  and  solemnity  of  eternal 
veSs.  It  is  a  fruitless  moan  of  the  husbandman,  "Thou  hast  made  me  the 
keeper  of  the  vineyards,  but  mine  own  vineyard  I  have  not  kept. 

Lessons.-l.  tL  minister  is  respomible  to  God.  2.  RespomiMity  xnml-ce^ 
waUhfulness  a^xd  comtant  effwt.  3.  Smcess,  whsther  evident  to  m  or  not,  u 
proportioned  to  fidelity. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  13,  14.  Ministerial  Duties — 

I.  Necessitate  much  reading  and 

study. 

II.  Include  frequent  appeals  to  the 
feelings  and  wiU  of  the  people  in 
order  to  regulate  the  life. 

III.  Involve  furnishing  the  under- 
standing with  substantial  knowledge. 

lY.  Demand  the  exercise  of  the 
choicest  spiritual  gifts. 

Ver.  15.  Meditation. 

I.  Hindrances  in  forming  the  habit. 
— 1.  The  tendency  to  relapse  into  indiffer- 
ence concerning  spiritual  things.  2.  The 
absorbing  demands  of  business.  3.  Ex- 
cessive attention  and  labours  in  the 
external  pi^osperity  of  the  Church. 

II.  The  duty  of  meditation.— 1.  The 
subject-matter  of  meditation.  "  Those 
things"  (ver.  15:  compare  ver.  13; 
2  Tim.  iii.  15).  The  Holy  Scriptures,  in 
their  direct  bearing  on  religious  life 
and  experience.  2.  The  exercise  of  the 
duty — (1)  Includes  reading.  (2)  Re- 
flection. (3)  Prayer.  (4)  Earnest 
exercise  of  all  our  powers. 

III.  Advantages    of    the     duty. 


\.  Personal.    "  Thy  profiting."    "l.  Re- 
lative.    "  May  appear  in  all  things." 

Ver.  16.  Ordination  Sermon. 

I.  Ministers  ought  to  take  heed  to 
their  personal  religion. 

II.  To  their  study. 

III.  To  their  preaching. 

IV.  To  their   parochial   duties. — 
E.  D.  Griffin. 

The  Comparative  Influence  of  Char- 
acter and  Doctrine. 

I.  Life  tends  very  greatly  to  modify 
a  man's  own  views  of  doctrine. 

II.  Affects  his  power  of  expressing 
or  communicating  truth  to  others. 

III.  Has  in  many  respects  an  in- 
fluence which  direct  teaching  or 
doctrine  cannot  exert. — 1.  Actions  are 
more  intelligible  than  words.  2.  The 
language  of  the  life  is  more  convincing 
than  the  language  of  the  lip.  3.  The 
teaching  of  the  life  is  available  in  many 
cases  in  which  the  teaching  of  the  lip 
cannot  or  ought  not  to  be  attempted. — 
/.  Caird. 


36 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY,  chap.  v. 

CHAPTER   V. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Rebuke  not  an  elder. — I.e.  do  not  sharply  reprimand  one  advanced  in  years. 
The  authority  of  St,  Paul  was  never  that  of  those  who  "  lord  it  over  God's  heritage." 

Ver.  2.  As  sisters,  with  all  purity. — With  severe  chastity  of  thought  and  expression. 

Ver.  4.  Children  or  nephews.— K.V.  "children  or  grandchildren."  "Descendants,  or 
more  specially,  as  the  context  implies,  grandchildren — nephews  in  the  original  but  now 
antiquated  sense  of  the  word "  (Ellicott).  Shew  piety  at  home. — Another  example  of 
St.  Paul's  natural  religion.     Filial  piety  is  what  he  here  enjoins. 

Ver.  5.  She  that  is  a  widow  indeed. — Like  old  Anna  who  "  departed  not  from  the  Temple  " 
— left  desolate  for  a  long  lifetime. 

Ver.  6.  She  that  liveth  in  pleasure. — R.V.  "  giveth  herself  to  pleasure."  The  only  other 
use  of  the  word  in  the  Kew  Testament  is  Jas.  v.  5. — an  instructive  parallel.  Dead  while 
she  liveth. — As  in  the  vivid  thought  of  the  East  that  which  was  certain  was  spoken  of  as 
actual,  so  St.  Paul  regards  a  wanton  life  as  an  actual  death. 

Ver.  8.  If  any  provide  not. — If  he  does  not  use  his  judgment  to  anticipate  the  needs. 
For  his  own,  and  specially  for  those  of  his  own  house. — This  cuts  at  the  root  of  the  improvi- 
dence which  might  originate  in  the  care  of  the  Church,  through  the  deacons,  for  those  who 
were  destitute.  A  man's  household  must  be  his  concern  rather  than  that  of  the  Church  or 
the  board  of  guardians. 

Ver.  9.  Let  not  a  widow  be  taken  into  the  number. — R.V.  "  Let  none  be  enrolled  as  a 
widow."  It  has  been  suggested  that  they  were  an  order  of  widows  who  took  the  oversight 
of  the  younger  women.     Perhaps  they  acted  as  chaperons. 

Ver.  10.  Brought  up  children. — Whether  her  own  children,  or  others  left  as  orphans,  it  is 
not  easy  to  decide.  Lodged  strangers. — R.V.  "used  hospitality  to."  Not  only  with  the 
possibility  of  finding  angels  (Heb.  xiii.  2)  amongst  them,  but  with  the  direct  assurance  that 
the  Lord  Himself,  in  His  lowliest  servant,  was  honoured. 

Ver.  11.  The  younger  widows  refuse. — "They  were  not  necessarily  to  be  excluded  from 
the  alms  of  the  Church,  but  were  only  to  be  held  ineligible  for  the  collegium  viduarum  " 
{Ellicott). 

Ver.  13.  Tattlers  also,  and  busy-bodies. — Like  Diotrephes — going  about  prating  against 
St.  John — these  babblers  give  unrestrained  licence  to  their  tongues,  and  permit  others  no 
peace  from  their  meddlesomeness. 

Ver.  16.  If  any  man  or  woman  that  believeth  have  widows. — How  were  the  younger 
widows  to  be  supported  then  ?  Let  their  relatives  care  for  them  rather  than  place  them  in 
a  position  to  bring  reproach  on  the  community. 

Ver.  17.  Counted  worthy  of  double  honour. — If  the  honour  is  remuneration,  this  double 
honour,  denoting  competent  reward  as  well  as  respect,  is  like  Costard's  "  gardon,  better 
than  remuneration." 

Ver.  19.  Receive  not  an  accusation. — Their  position  would  render  them  liable  to  be 
accused,  and  they  must  be  guarded  from  slander. 

Ver.  21.  The  elect  angels. — Who  kept  their  own  estate  (Jude  6). 

Ver.  22.  Lays  hands  suddenly  on  no  man. — The  usual  explanation,  of  the  imposition  of 
hands  in  ordination,  is  rejected  by  Ellicott  in  favour  of  the  assumption  that  it  was  in 
absolution  of  penitents.  It  would  seem  better  to  leave  the  admonition  more  general,  as  a 
warning  against  precipitancy. 

Ver.  23.  Drink  no  longer  water. — Timothy  had  evidently  carried  his  abstemiousness 
beyond  the  limits  of  prudence. 

Ver.  24.  Going  before  .  .  .  follow  after. — In  either  case  they  come  to  judgment,  as 
heralds  and  apparitors,  or  as  an  inevitable  testimony  crying  after  them. 

Ver.  25.  The  good  works  of  some  are  manifest  beforehand. — R.V.  "  there  are  good  works 
that  are  evident."  As  in  the  case  of  sins,  so  in  the  case  of  good  works — they  must  eventually 
be  manifest,  perhaps  to  the  astonishment  of  those  by  whom  they  were  wrought. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH,— Verses  1,  2. 

The  Pastor^ s  Treatment  of  Old  and  Young  of  Both  Sexes. 

I.  Old  and  young  are  liable  to  err. — There  are  temptations  and  sins  peculiar 
to  all  periods  of  life.  The  effervescence  of  youth  is  liable  to  degenerate  into 
frivolity.  _Tbe  sedateness  of  age  may  breed  moroseness  or  a  dangerous  self- 

37 


CHAP.  V.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   TIMOTHY. 


confidence.  Young  and  old  should  learn  to  respect  one  another.  The  old  should 
regard  the  young  with  hope,  with  sympathy,  with  affection,  with  thankfulness, 
and  not  with  jealousy.  And  the  young  should  treat  the  aged  with  respect,  with 
reverence,  and  with  cheerful  submission  to  their  wise  and  anxious  counsel. 

II.  Reproof  should  be  administered  with  due  regard  to  the  age  and  relation- 
ship of  the  persons  committing  wrong  (vers.  1,  2). — Timothy's  youthfulness  and 
natural  timidity  might  be  a  barrier  to  his  undertaking  the  office  of  reprover, 
especially  in  dealing  with  those  older  than  himself.  Hence  the  apostle  exhorts 
him  to  fideUty  in  this  duty.  Even  in  rebuking,  the  aged  are  to  be  treated  as 
fathers  and  mothers,  the  young  as  brothers  and  sisters.  We  must  not  forget  the 
reverence  due  to  age,  nor  must  we  lose  our  sympathy  with  the  tastes  and  hopes 
of  the  young;  but  we  must  not  allow  our  personal  predilections  to  interfere  with 
dealing  faithfully  with  the  manifest  errors  and  sins  of  all  classes. 

III.  Reproof  is  a  necessary  but  difficult  part  of  a  pastor's  duty. — There  is  an 
unspeakable  pleasure  in  study,  in  preaching,  and  in  social  and  spiritual  fellow- 
ship with  Christian  people ;  but  to  rebuke  is  a  hard  task,  and  requires  both  tact 
and  courage.  Everything  depends  on  the  method  and  spirit  in  which  reproof 
is  administered,  and  we  must  seek  to  be  fair  and  just  as  well  as  faithful.  To 
rebuke  in  a  sharp  and  arrogant  temper  will  do  more  harm  than  good,  and  to 
shirk  the  duty  is  a  loss  to  ourselves  and  a  wrong  to  the  offender.  There  is  no 
part  of  a  minister's  work  that  requires  more  caution  and  tenderness,  and  about 
which  he  needs  to  pray  more  earnestly,  than  in  reproving  evident  sin  with 
candour  and  fidelity. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  minister's  teaching  must  he  adapted  to  both  old  and  young. 
2.  Ue  shoidd  cultivate  a  generous  sympathy  with  you'iig  life.  3.  He  must  know 
how  to  reprove  as  well  as  encourage. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  3—16. 

Widows  and  the  Early  Christian  Church. 

I.  There  was  a  distinction  recognised  between  the  different  grades  of  widow- 
hood.— In  this  paragraph  four  classes  of  widows  are  mentioned.  1.  The  widow 
indeed  (vers.  3,  5).  She  is  desolate,  quite  alone  in  the  world.  She  has  not  only 
lost  her  husband,  but  is  without  children  or  any  other  near  relative  to  provide 
for  her  needs.  The  Church  must  be  to  her  in  place  of  husband  and  family, 
and  seek  to  mitigate  as  much  as  possible  the  oppressive  loneliness  of  her  life. 
2.  The  widow  with  a  family.  "  Children  and  grandchildren "  (ver.  4).  It  is 
the  Christian  duty  of  the  members  of  the  family  to  provide  for  the  wants  of  the 
home  (vers.  4,  8,  16).  The  Church  must  not  burden  itself  with  responsibilities 
that  belong  to  others,  and  which  they  must  be  taught  to  discharge.  3.  The 
widow  living  in  pleasure.  Gay,  frivolous,  and  even  worse  (vers.  6,  11-15).  Her 
young,  passionate  nature  must  be  restrained,  and  be  warned  not  to  bring  dis- 
credit and  disgrace  upon  herself  and  the  Church.  4.  The  enrolled  widow 
(vers.  9,  10).  She  must  be  sixty  years  of  age,  have  had  only  one  husband,  have 
had  experience  in  the  bringing  up  of  children,  and  be  well  known  as  devoted  to 
good  works.  She  is  a  widow  indeed,  and  something  more.  She  has  an  office  in 
the  Church  with  definite  functions  to  discharge,  and  the  Church  is  responsible  for 
her  support. 

II.  Discretion  and  tact  were  necessary  in  dealing  with  the  different  classes 
of  widows. — Timothy  was  young,  and  was  exhorted  so  to  behave  himself  that  his 
moral  integrity  should  command  respect  in  spite  of  his  youth.  Respect  must  be 
shown  towards  age  and  moral  worth  (ver.  3),  and  discretion  exercised  in  dealing 
with  the  young  and  wanton  (vers.  6,  7).     There  is  a  shrewd  insight  into  human 

38 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   TIMOTHY.         chap.  v. 


nature  in  one  of  the  rules  imposed  by  Wesley  on  his  early  preachers  :  "  Con- 
verse sparingly  with  women,  especially  with  young  women."  "  Care  must  be 
taken  not  to  encourage  either  a  rigour  not  likely  to  be  maintained,  or  oppor- 
tunities of  idleness  certain  to  lead  to  mischief.  Help  is  to  be  generously  afforded 
to  the  destitute,  but  the  resources  of  the  Church  must  be  jealously  guarded. 
They  must  not  be  wasted  on  the  unworthy,  or  on  those  who  have  other  means 
of  help.  And,  so  far  as  possible,  the  independence  of  those  who  are  relieved 
must  be  protected  by  employing  them  in  the  service  of  the  Church  "  (vers.  3-16) 
i^FluniTner). 

III.  The  principle  of  self-help  and  independence  in  the  Christian  family  is 
recognised  and  strongly  enforced  (vers.  4,  8,  16). — The  Church  is  not  to  be 
regarded  as  a  permanent  board  of  relief  constituted  for  the  administration  of 
indiscriminate  charity.  It  does  not  and  should  not  free  any  of  its  members 
fiom  responsibilities  by  undertaking  for  them  in  mistaken  charity  the  duties 
they  ought  to  discharge  and  are  capable  of  discharging  themselves.  Chris- 
tianity teaches  the  gospel  of  work,  not  as  an  end  in  itself,  but  as  a  means 
of  securing  support  and  independence,  and  of  freely  ministering  to  the  good  of 
others.  No  one  should  be  encouraged  to  attach  himself  or  herself  to  the 
Church  for  the  sake  of  personal  maintenance.  The  Church  must  keep  her  needy 
members,  but  all  who  can  work  should  be  stimulated  to  honest  and  diligent 
industry. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  young  minister  must  be  circumspect  in  his  behaviour  towards 
women.  2.  The  Church  should  shelter  and  help  its  deserving  widows.  3,  The 
Church  should  encourage  work  and  a  spirit  of  independence. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  4,  8, 16.  Family  ResponsiUlities.  II.  Make  it  attractive. 

I.  Parents    and    children    should  III.  Make  it  instructive, 
mutually    contribute    to   the   family  IV.  Make  the  home  a  preparation 
support.  for  life. 

II.  The  help  of  children  afforded  to  V.  Make  the  home  a  preparation  for 
their  parents  is  a  just  requital   of  heaven. 

parental  toil  and  affection.  VI.  Keep  the  home  near  heaven. — 

III.  The    neglect    of   self-evident     J.  Hamilton. 
family  duties  is  utterly  alien  to  the 

spirit  and  teaching    of    Christianity  Ver.    8.    Consistency  of  Benevolence 

(ver.  8).  with  providing  for  our  own. 

I.  Whenever  the  conduct  proposed 
Ver.  4.  The  Christian  Home —  is  physically  impossible,  it  cannot  be 

I.  Is    the   sphere    for    exercising     our  duty. 

practical   religion. — "Learn    first   to         II.   Wherever  this  conduct  would 

show  piety  at  home."  frustrate  the  great  end  of  benevolence 

II.  Recognises  the  righteous  claims  by  lessening  human  happiness,  it  can- 
of  the  widowed  mother  to  affection  not  be  our  duty. — I.  If  the  interests  and 
and  support. — "If  any  widow  have  duties  of  mankind  were  all  thi'ovjn  into  a 
children  or  grandchildren,  let  them  common  stock,  there  would  be  little  or  no 
.  .  .  requite  their  parents."  good  done  to  any.     2.  The  division  of 

III.  Enjoys   the   Divine    approval,      human  industry   should    be  voluntary. 
— "For  that  is   good  and  acceptable      ?>.  By  the  institution  of  families  prepara- 
before  God."  tion  is  effectually  made  for  the  preserva- 
tion, support,  and  education  of  children. 

Piety  at  Home.  4.   All  the  duties  of  man  respect  espe- 

I.  The  home  must  be  safe.  dally  the  objects  Iw  best  knows,  those  to 

39 


CHAP.  V.         IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    1.   IIMOTHY. 


which  he  can  most  freqmntly  and  effect-      (vers.  11,  12).     2.  In  degenerating  into 
ually  extend  his  beneficence.— D wight.  habits  of  idleness  and  mischievous  gossip 

(ver.  13). 
Vers.  11-15.   Young  Widowhood—  II.  Has  its  safeguards  in  the  duties 

I.    Has  its  special  perils.— 1.    In     and  responsibilities  of  domestic  life. 
rebelling   against   the  claims  of  Christ 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  17—25. 

Uules  for  Church  Government 

I.  The  diligent  and  faithful  minister  should  be  highly  esteemed  and  gene- 
rously maintained  (vers.  17,  18). — It  is  in  vain  to  expect  spiritual  profit  from  a 
minister  we  do  not  respect.  As  a  public  man  he  is  exposed  to  much  criticism — 
criticism  that  is  often  thoughtless,  shallow,  and  unfair ;  and  all  such  criticism 
tends  to  lower  his  influence  with  the  indifferent  and  unspiritual.  To  get  the 
highest  good  from  the  pastor  the  people  must  love  and  esteem  him  ;  and  where 
this  spirit  obtains  his  maintenance  will  be  just  and  generous,  and  cheerfully 
rendered.  He  devotes  his  life,  his  powers,  his  all,  to  his  work,  first  for  the  love 
of  his  Master,  and  then  for  the  spiritual  salvation  of  his  people.  If  he  ministers 
faithfully  in  holy  things,  he  is  entitled  to  honour  and  becoming  support  in 
temporal  things. 

II.  The  character  and  reputation  of  a  minister  should  be  jealously  guarded 
(ver.  19). — There  are  some  people  who  gloat  with  undisgiiised  satisfaction  as 
they  eagerly  hsten  to  the  most  flippant  scurrilities  disparaging  a  minister  of  the 
gospel.  His  very  office  is  an  offence  to  them,  and  his  fidelity  a  constant  rebuke 
to  their  inconsistencies  and  follies.  A  Church  that  runs  down  its  minister 
degrades  itself.  If  there  is  real  cause  for  com"plaint,  the  accusation  should  be 
cautiously  and  tenderly  made,  and  should  be  treated  and  sifted  with  the  utmost 
gravity  and  justice.  A  minister's  character  is  his  shield  :  if  that  is  lost,  he  is 
undone. 

III.  Care  should  be  scrupulously  exercised  in  selecting  men  for  the  Christian 
ministry. — "  Lay  hands  suddenly  [hastily]  on  no  man  "  (ver.  22).  A  man  is  not 
fit  for  the  Christian  ministry  because  he  thinks  he  is.  He  must  possess  not 
only  grace — every  Christian  must  do  that — but  also  gifts  that  demonstrate  his 
suitability  for  the  office.  Even  then  it  should  be  evident  by  the  fruits  of  his 
labours  that  he  is  Divinely  called  to  the  work.  He  must  also  have  the  opportunity 
of  scholastic  and  spiritual  training,  and  be  severely  tested  by  inquiry  and 
repeated  examinations.  Few  young  men  realise  the  difficulties  and  trials  of  the 
ministerial  vocation.  Dr.  Raleigh,  at  the  height  of  his  popularity,  spealdng  to 
one  of  his  deacons  on  this  subject,  said  :  "  They  come  here  and  see  the  place 
crowded  ;  they  hear  me  preach,  and  it  all  seems  easy  and  natural ;  and  straight- 
way they  get  a  desire  to  do  the  same.  Ah  !  they  little  know  what  it  has  cost 
me  to  attain  to  this  !  " 

IV.  Sin  everywhere  should  be  faithfully  and  fearlessly  denounced. — 1.  As 
a  warning  to  others.  "  Them  that  sin  rebuke  before  all,  that  others  also  may 
fear"  (ver.  20).  2.  To  avoid  the  suspicions  of  personal  connivance.  "Neither 
be  partaker  of  other  men's  sins  :  keep  thyself 'pure"  (ver  22).  3.  Sin  and  virtue 
vnll  sooner  or  later  be  made  evident  (vers.  24,  25). 

V.  Zeal  to  serve  the  Church  does  not  justify  indifference  to  bodily  health 
(ver.  23). — Many  practise  this  advice  to  Timothy  who  do  not  suffer  from 
Timothy's  complaint.  The  tendency  of  the  young  pastor  was  to  asceticism,  and 
his  excessive  abstinence,  adopted  from  conscientious  motives,  was  undermining 
his  already  delicate  constitution.     There  were  few  by  whom  the  advice  to  take 

40 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY.         chap.  v. 


a  little  wine  for  medicinal  purposes  could  be  so  safely  followed  as  by  Timothy. 
His  high-toned  temperance  was  his  safeguard.  There  is  no  encouragement  to 
the  wine-bibber  in  this  cautious  advice.  The  health  of  the  minister  is  an 
important  factor  in  the  effective  discharge  of  his  physically  exacting  duties. 
There  was  common  sense  in  the  reply  of  Kobert  Hall  to  the  question  as  to  what 
is  the  best  preparation  for  preaching  when  he  said,  "  A  good  night's  rest." 
The  success  of  the  sermon  depends  upon  the  preacher's  state  of  health.  It  is  a 
sacred  duty  to  cherish  and  strengthen  the  body,  that  it  may  be  a  more  vigorous 
servant  and  instrument  of  the  mind. 

VI.  Rules  for  Church  government  should  be  applied  with  strict  impartiality, 
(ver.  21). — There  should  not  be  less  care  in  maintaining  Church  order  and 
discipline  than  in  the  methodical  management  of  a  large  business,  or  in  civic 
government,  or  in  the  administration  of  justice  in  courts  of  law.  Church  courts 
should  be  patterns  of  justice  and  equity.  It  is  easier  to  observe  than  to  enforce 
discipline. 

Lessons. — 1.  Church  organisation  is  the  outgrowth  of  Church  life.  2.  To 
govern  vjell  the  minister  must  himself  respect  and  obey  the  law.  3.  Discipline  and 
doctrine  are  essential  in  promoting  vigorous  Church  life  and  progress. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  17-22.  Ministerial  Life —  in  their  true  colours  before  the  judg- 

I.  Should  be  relieved  from   pecu-  ment-seat. 

niary  burdens  (vers.  17,  18).  II-  Crood  men  and  their  actions.— 

II.  Should  be  guarded  from  vexa-  ^-/^^  unmistakably  good.      They  are 
tious  charges,  but  its  sins  fearlessly  ^f  ^^^l^^f/i    ^«    Christians    by    all 

1-  1    J  /           1  r^  ^"^  know  them.      Comparatively  rare, 

rebuked  (vers.  19,  20).  High  style  of  excellence.     A  boon  to 

III.  Should    be     distinguished    by  have  been  intimately  acquainted  with 
impartiality  (ver.  21).  a  single  specimen.     2.  The  questionably 

IV.  Should   not  be    entered    upon  good.      Their   excellence  is    concealed 

without  careful  preparation  (ver.  22).  ^^   ^^^^^    humble  position,    or    their 

meagre    attainments,     or    their    con- 

Vers.  24,  25.  Bad  and  Good  Men.  stitutional      diffidence     and     reserve. 

I.  Bad    men    and    their    actions. —  Gradually    it    becomes    known    in    a 

1.  The  openly  wicked.     Their  character  larger   or    more    limited    circle    here, 

is  patent  to  all  observers.     Their  sins  They   shall    "  shine   forth   as  the  sun 

are  gross  and  flagrant.     2.  The  secretly  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father." 

wicked.     They  have  a  false  character.  Lessons. — 1.  Let   us   be  cautious  in 

different  at  home  and  abroad,  in  their  our     judgments    of     our    fellow-men. 

family   and   among   their   boon    com-  2.  Let   us   act  with   habitual  reference 

panions,    in   the   Church    and   in   the  to   the  judgment-seat.      3.  Let    us    be 

world.     They  are  sometimes  unmasked  resolved  not  to  leave  behind  u^  a  doubt- 

during  their  lives.     They  shall  appear  ful  reputation. — G.  Brooks. 


41 


CHAP.  VI.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  That  the  name  of  God  and  His  doctrine  be  not  blasphemed. — Masters  who  had 
slaves  professing  to  be  Christians  and  yet  supercilious  would  curse  them  and  their  new 
faitb. 

Ver.  2.  Let  them  not  despise  them. — Two  uses  of  this  word  by  our  Lord  will  be  its  best 
interpretation.  In  Matt.  vi.  24  He  too  speaks  of  the  servant  who  has  two  different 
masters,  for  one  of  whom  he  has  dropped  all  estimation.  In  Matt,  xviii.  10  Christ  warns 
against  thinking  the  little  ones  as  unworthy  of  attention. 

Ver.  3.  Teach  otherwise. — R.V.  "  teacbeth  a  different  doctrine."  Wholesome  words.— 
R.V.  *'  sound  [margin,  Gr.  healthful]  words." 

Ver.  4.  Doting  about  questions. — K.V.  margin,  "  sick  " — in  contrast  to  the  healthful  words 
of  the  Lord  Jesus. 

Ver.  5.  Perverse  disputings.— A. V.  margin,  "  gallings  one  of  another."  R.V.  "  wranglings." 
Supposing  that  gain  is  godliness. — Men  may  choose  mammon  rather  than  God,  but  we  can 
hardly  suppose  they  mistake  one  for  the  other,  as  this  translation  says.  R.V.  corrects  this — 
*'  supposing  that  godliness  is  a  way  of  gain." 

Ver.  7.  We  brought  nothing  into  this  world. — Compare  Job  i.  21.  It  is  not  safe  to  say 
St.  Paul  is  quoting  here.     All  times  and  peoples  have  such  sayings. 

Ver.  8.  Let  us  be  therewith  content. — R.V.  margin,  "  in  these  we  shall  have  enough." 

Ver.  9.  They  that  will  be  rich. — The  cry  of  the  day  is  against  those  who  are  rich  ;  the 
danger  is  equally  great  for  those  who  would  be  if  they  could, — a  somewhat  comprehensive 
saying.  Which  drown  men.  —The  word  is  found  again  in  Luke  v.  7  only,  to  describe  the 
swamping  of  the  fishing-boats  on  Galilee. 

Ver.  10.  While  some  coveted  after. — The  word  is  the  same  as  in  chap.  iii.  1  is  rendered 
"desire"  or  "seeketh."  The  R.V.  "reaching  after"  is  more  accurate.  Many  sorrows. — 
Sharp  griefs  ;  lit.  "  gnawing  pains  of  remorse  "  (JBlomfield').  Ellicott  denies  that  the  word 
is  derived  from  the  Greek  for  a  tooth.     Grimm  thinks  they  may  have  a  common  root. 

Ver.  11.  Flee  these  things;  and  follow  after. — We  have  a  vivid  view  of  the  fear  on  the 
one  side,  and  the  eagerness  of  desire  on  the  other. 

Ver.  13.  God,  who  quickeneth  all  things. — R.V.  margin,  "  preserveth  all  things  alive."  It 
would  almost  seem  as  if  St.  Paul  meant  to  say  that,  whatever  perils  gathered  round  the 
warrior  for  truth,  an  unseen  shield  should  cover  his  head  in  the  day  of  battle. 

Ver.  15.  The  blessed  and  only  Potentate. — All  else  derive  their  power  from  Him  and  hold 
it  Dei  gratia. 

Ver.  16.  Who  only  hath  immortality. — "  He  in  whom  immortality  essentially  exists  and 
who  enjoys  it  neither  derivatively  nor  by  participation"  {ElUcotf).  Dwelling  in  light 
which  no  man  can  approach  unto. — All  the  fulsome  eulogies  of  kings  who  "  live  for  ever," 
and  whose  faces  shine  on  their  favourites,  are  but  poor,  broken  lights  as  compared  with  the 
God  who  is  light. 

Ver.  17.  Nor  trust  in  uncertain  riches. — R.V.  "  nor  have  their  hope  set  on  the  uncertainty 
of  riches."  Perhaps  they  would  say  riches  were  not  uncertain.  But  the  moralists  do  not 
agree  with  the  "  Northern  Farmer."  Who  giveth  us  richly  all  things  to  enjoy. — On  God's 
giving  see  St.  James's  words  (i.  5.)     But  this  marks  the  end  of  that  giving  for  enjoyment. 

Ver.  19.  Laying  up  in  store  for  themselves. — Lit.  "Treasuring  away  for  themselves."  The 
similarity  of  this  verse  to  Tobit  iv.  9  is  too  close  to  allow  us  to  say  it  was  not  in  St.  Paul's 
thoughts.  A  good  foundation  against  the  time  to  come. — Not  simply  against  the  decrepitude 
of  old  age,  for  which  in  some  respects  "  money  is  a  defence,"  but  against  that  day  when 
money  and  its  owners  shall  fail  (Luke  xvi.  9). 

Ver.  20.  Keep  that  which  is  committed  to  thy  trust. — Lit.  "guard  the  deposit."  As 
St.  Paul  was  entrusted  with  "  the  care  of  all  the  Churches,"  so  is  Timothy  with  this 
particular  one.  Avoiding  profane  and  vain  babblings. — "Full  of  sound  .  .  .  signifying 
nothing."  Science  falsely  so  called. — Knowledge  that  deserved  the  name  was  no  object  of 
the  apostle's  contempt  or  indifference,  but  this  pseudonymous  gnosis  excites  his  scorn. 

Ver.  21.  Have  erred. — The  same  word  as  in  chap.  i.  6.  There  it  is  translated  "  swerved." 
Grace  be  with  thee. — The  most  contracted  form  of  the  apostolic  formula  of  benediction. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH,— Verses  1,  2. 

Christianity  and  Servitude. 

I.  Respect  must  be  shown  to  unbelieving  masters. — 1.  Though  the  service  is 
humiliating  and  unjust.     "  As  many  servants  as  are  under  the  yoke  count  their 
42 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY.        chap.  VI. 


masters  worthy  of  all  honour  "  (ver.  1 ).  The  servant  of  those  days  was  a  slave. 
The  Eoman  Empire  was  about  equally  divided  by  freemen  and  slaves.  Slavery 
was  an  ancient  and  widely  spread  institution,  and  was  closely  bound  up  with  the 
social  life  of  the  times.  All  this  was  to  be  changed,  and  has  been  changed. 
Christianity  has  effected  the  revolution,  not  by  appealing  to  and  stirring  up 
political  passions,  but  by  implanting  principles  in  the  expansion  of  which  it  is 
impossil  le  for  slavery  to  live.  The  Christian,  though  a  slave,  was  taught  to 
show  respect  to  his  master ;  and  the  injunction  was  perhaps  necessary,  as  the 
servant  in  his  newly  found  moral  freedom  might  be  tempted  to  regard  himself 
as  superior  to  his  unbelieving  master,  and  to  develop  an  arrogant  and  rebellious 
spirit.  2.  Respectful  servitude  will  guard  religion  from  reproach.  "  That  the 
name  of  God  and  His  doctrine  be  not  blasphemed"  (ver.  1).  The  heathen 
master  would  be  compelled  to  respect  a  religion  that  made  his  servant  honest, 
industrious,  obedient,  respectful,  and  morally  consistent.  Many  masters  were 
won  over  to  Christianity  by  the  holy  examples  of  their  slaves. 

II.  Nor  should  less  respect  be  shown  towards  believing  masters. — 1.  Because 
of  the  equality  of  servant  and  master  in  Christian  brotherhood.  "  Let  them  not 
despise  them  because  they  are  brethren  "  (ver.  2).  The  servant  might  presume 
upon  this  equality  and  take  unwarrantable  liberties,  and  seek  to  justify  even 
positive  neglect  and  disobedience.  Before  God  master  and  man  are  alike  ;  before 
the  world,  and  according  to  the  contract  existing  between  them,  they  are  master 
and  servant.  In  doing  his  duty  conscientiously  the  servant  is  not  only  serving 
his  earthly  master,  but  also  pleasing  God.  2.  Equality  in  Christian  brotherhood 
is  rather  a  stronger  reason  for  fidelity  in  servitude.  "  But  rather  do  them  service, 
because  they  are  faithful  and  beloved,  partakers  of  the  benefit "  (ver.  2).  The 
cultivation  of  the  Christian  spirit  promotes  a  better  understanding  between 
master  and  servant.  They  learn  to  respect  each  other,  and  to  discharge  their 
mutual  obligations  with  cordiality  and  justice. 

III.  Christianity  enforces  the  sacredness  of  duty  in  servitude. — "These 
things  teach  and  exhort."  Religion  must  be  carried  into  every  department  and 
relationship  in  life.  However  humble  and  trying  our  lot,  it  has  its  duties,  and 
religion  teaches  us  to  find  alleviation  in  every  hardship  by  faithfully  doing  the 
duty  of  the  moment.  Duty  can  be  satisfied  with  its  doings,  but  love  has  never 
done  enough.  The  dying  Nelson  said,  "  Thank  God,  I  have  done  my  duty." 
The  dying  saint  can  only  say,  "  I  am  an  unprofitable  servant." 

Lessons. — 1.  Chi'istian  liberty  has  its  legitimate  restraints.  2.  Christianity 
teaches  the  true  dignity  of  labour.  3.  Practical  Christianity  will  inevitably  rectify 
the  unjust  inequalities  between  master  and  servant. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES 

Vers.  1,  2.  Duties  of  Servants.  recognises  between  Christian  masters 

I.  Christian  servants  should  prevent     and  servants  (ver.  2). 

scandal  to  religion  by  showing  respect         III.    The    participation    in    equal 

to  their  masters  as  such  (ver.  1).  religious  privileges  should  make  the 

II.  Should  not  presume  on  the  servant  more  conscientious  and  diligent 
equal    brotherhood    which     religion  (ver.  2). 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH,— Verses  3—5. 

The  Vagaries  of  False  Teachers — 

I.  Ignore  the  wholesome  doctrines  of  the  Divine  Teacher  (ver.  3). — There 
is   no   possible  folly  that  the  unregenerate  mind  will  not  adopt  and  eagerly 

43 


CHAP.  vi.        nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY. 


champion  as  if  it  were  the  soberest  truth.  Christ  is  Himself  the  Truth  in  its 
highest  and  most  complete  embodiment,  and  His  words  are  full  of  invigorating 
moral  health.  The  teacher  who  has  no  regard  for  the  teachings  of  Christ,  but 
is  carried  away  \yith  the  crude,  unshapen  fancies  of  his  own  brain,  deceives 
others  and  is  himself  deceived.  No  wonder  that  the  mind  that  cherishes 
unwholesome  doctrines  becomes  itself  diseased,  and  its  high-flown  theories  are 
but  the  ravings  of  a  fanatic. 

II.  Are  a  compound  of  pride  and  ignorance. — "He  is  proud,  knowing 
nothing"  (ver.  4).  He  is  wrapt  in  smoke,  darkened  with  the  fumes  of  his 
inordinate  self-conceit.  The  man  who  boasts  of  superior  knowledge  betrays  his 
utter  ignorance  ;  and  ignorance  is  the  foster-parent  of  pride.  True  knowledge 
makes  a  man  modest  and  humble.  The  wisest  men  feel  that  they  know  nothing 
compared  with  what  they  are  capable  of  knowing.  A  man  who  was  regarded 
as  a  marvel  of  learning  once  said :  "I  seem  to  myself  like  a  basket  in  which 
are  being  carried  away  the  fragments  of  a  hotel — a  bit  of  this,  the  fag-end  of 
that,  and  all  sorts  of  things  jumbled  up  together.  I  do  not  know  anything 
except  little  fragmentary  parts  of  this,  that,  and  the  other." 

III.  Are  the  occasion  of  meaningless  controversy  and  quarrelsomeness. — 
"  Doting  about  questions  and  strifes  of  words  .  .  .  perverse  dispu tings  of  men  of 
corrupt  minds,  and  destitute  of  the  truth  "  (vers.  4,  5).  Controversy  is  valueless 
where  there  is  a  lack  of  knowledge  and  exact  definition.  Words  are  but  wind, 
unless  there  is  the  clear  recognition  of  substantial  and  unvarying  truth. 
Reckless  controversy  raises  more  disputes  than  it  settles,  and  generally  intensifies 
the  quarrel.  A  corrupt  heart  reappears  in  corrupt  speech.  A  question  of  mere 
words  creates  endless  confusion,  envyings,  and  strife. 

IV.  Are  the  prolific  offspring  of  an  utterly  false  conception  of  godliness. — 
"Supposing  that  gain  is  godliness"  (ver.  5).  Godliness  was  espoused  and 
advocated  by  the  false  teachers  as  a  means  of  gain.  There  is  nothing  more 
despicable  than  to  make  money  out  of  religion,  or  to  be  religious  because  of  the 
gains  it  brings.  The  love  of  gain  endangers  righteous  principles.  An  old 
Elector  of  Brandenburg  once  said  to  the  Duke  of  Saxony,  "  How  do  you 
manage  to  coin  so  much  money,  you  princes  of  Saxony  ?  "  "  Oh,"  replied  he, 
"  we  make  money  by  it."  And  so  they  did,  by  the  quantity  of  alloy  they  put 
into  their  coin.     Godliness  is  gain  ;  but  gain  is  not  godliness. 

V.  Are  to  be  deliberately  shunned. — "From  such  withdraw  thyself"  (ver.  5). 
To  be  associated  with  tricksters,  whether  in  religion  or  commerce  is  to  lose  caste. 
We  are  to  "  avoid  the  appearance  of  evil,"  and  "  have  no  fellowship  with  the 
unfruitful  works  of  darkness." 

Lessons. — 1.  Error  is  a  wicked  caricature  of  truth.  2.  Ignorance  may  he 
detected  by  its  'proud  pretensions.     3.  Godliness  and  false  doctrine  are  antagonistic. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers.   3-5.    The  Provision  made   in  the  doctrines  revealed  in  Scripture  are 

the  Plan  of  Salvation  by  the  Free  Grace  '  fitted  by  their  nature  to  produce  each 

of  God  through  Faith  to  secure  the  In-  its  own  specific  effect  on  his  heart  and 

terests  of  Morality  and  promote  Holiness  conduct ;  and  if  these   doctrines  were 

of  Life.  clearly  understood,  firmly  believed,  and 

I.  The  state  of  mind  of  any  man  at  liberty  to  produce  their  full  effects 

and    also    his   outward    conduct  are  upon  his  soul,  the  result  would  be  a 

necessarily    influenced    by    what    he  character  similar,  in  all  respects  to  the 

believes,   so   far   as   it   may  be   of   a  character  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 

nature  fitted  to  influence  him,  and  all  II.  In  the  plan  of  redemption  pro- 
44 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY,        chap.  vi. 


vision     is     made     for    enlisting    the  people  stand  related  to  Him  as  children 

powerfully  operative  affections  of  love  to  their  parents,  and  thereby  a  founda- 

and  gratitude  on  the  side  of  holiness.  tion  is  laid  for  their  being  animated  by 

III.    The     scheme    of    redemption  the  spirit  of  children.     2.   Are  united 

unites  us  to  Christ  in  several  relations  to  Him  on  the  footing  on  vMch  a  wife 


which  contain  in  them  the  basis  of 
certain  combinations  of  affections  and 
principles  which  are  most  operative 
in  human  affairs . — 1 .  Chrisis  redeemed 


is  united  to  her  husband,  3.  In  the 
relation  of  soldiers  to  their  general  and 
sovereign. — A  nonymous. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  6—8 

Godliness  the  Highest  Gain — 

I.  Because  it  ensures  the  supply  of  absolute  necessities.—"  Having  food  and 
raiment  let  us  be  therewith  content  "  (ver.  8).  Our  real  wants  are  few.  What 
do  we  need  more  than  food  and  covering  ?  They  who  fear  the  Lord  have  the 
promise  of  sustenance  (Isa.  xxxiii.  16  ;  Ps.  xxxvii.  3).  The  godly  are  under  the 
special  care  of  the  Divine  Universal  Provider. 

II.  Because  it  promotes  a  spirit  of  contentment.—"  Godliness  with  content- 
ment is  great  gain  "  (ver.  6).  Godliness  is  a  great  means  of  gain — not  of  that 
gain  which  breeds  discontent  in  its  covetous  pursuit,  but  the  present  and  eternal 
gain  which  piety  brings  to  the  soul.  Godliness  is  gain  when  it  is  accompanied 
with  the  contentment  it  inspires.  It  not  only  feels  no  need  of  what  it  has  not, 
but  also  has  that  which  exalts  it  above  what  it  has  not.  Godliness  is  its  own 
sufficiency,  and  satisfies  every  want  of  the  complex  nature  of  man.  Godliness, 
even  with  affliction,  is  great  gain.  A  minister  recovering  from  a  dangerous  illness 
confessed,  "This  six  weeks'  illness  has  taught  me  more  divinity  than  all  my  past 
studies  and  all  my  ten  years'  ministry  put  together." 

III.  Because  the  contentment  accompanying  true  godliness  is  independent 
of  worldly  possessions  (ver.  7).— Godliness  reminds  us  of  the  condition  in  which  we 
entered  the  world,  and  in  which  we  shall  leave  it.  We  brought  nothing  with  us  ; 
we  shall  take  nothing  away.  If  we  have  little,  we  are  taught  to  be  content 
with  that  little  ;  if  we  have  much,  we  are  taught  how  fragile  is  our  hold  upon 
our  possessions — not  to  set  our  hearts  upon  them,  but  use  them  as  stewards  who 
must  give  an  account  to  the  Giver  of  all  good.  Richard  Boyle,  the  great  Earl 
of  Cork,  outlived  most  of  those  who  had  known  the  meanness  of  his  beginning. 
He  never  forgot  it  himself,  but  took  pains  to  preserve  the  memory  of  it  to 
posterity  in  the  motto  he  always  used,  and  which  he  caused  to  be  placed  on  his 
tomb  :  "  God's  providence  is  my  inheritance." 

Lessons. — 1.  Our  spiritual  gains  are  our  truest  wealth.  2.  Contentment  is  a 
special  eyidowment  of  godliness.     3.  The  godly  man  makes  the  best  of  both  worlds. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 


Vers.  6-8.  The  Cultivation  of  Chris- 
tian Contentment. 

I.  Godliness    is    itself    a    gain. — 

1.  Because  it   is   a   satisfying   reality. 

2.  Because    it    gives     us    the     highest 
pleasures  of  which  we  are  capable. 

II.  Godliness  with  contentment  is 
great  gain. — 1.  Contentment  is  the  out- 
come of  godliness.     2.  Reasons  for  culti- 


vating Christian  contentment,  (1)  We 
have  nothing  (ver.  7).  (2)  We  have 
need  of  nothing  (ver.  8).  (3)  We  are 
in  danger  of  being  entangled  by  striving 
after  earthly  things  (vers.  9,  10). 
3.  The  advantages  of  cultivating  Chris- 
tian contentment.  (1)  It  will  protect 
us  from  the  temptation  to  become  rich 
anyhow.     (2)  It  will   shield   us   from 

45 


CHAP.  VT.        nOMILETW  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY. 


avarice.     (3)  It  will  teach  us  to  acquire  II.  A  bridesmaid. — "  Contentment." 

spiritual  riches.     (4)  It  will  gladden  III.    Her     great     dowry. — "Great 

the  brief  space  of  our  eartlily  probation.  gain." 

— Laij  Preacher.  IV.  The  present  payment. — "  God- 

liness with  contentment  is  great  gain." 

Ver.  6.   Contentment.  1.   What  the  world  counts  gain  is  loss. 

I.  The  text  presents  us  with  a  bride.  2.  What  the  world  counts  loss  is  gain, — 

—"Godliness."  T.  Fuller. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  9,  10. 

Insatiable  Avarice — 

I.  Has  its  root  in  the  love  of  money. — "  The  love  of  money  is  the  root  of  all 
evil  "  (ver.  10).  Not  money,  but  the  love  of  it,  is  the  root  of  evil.  Hence  the 
warning,  "  If  riches  increase,  set  not  thy  heart  upon  them."  Money  has  been 
the  bait  that  has  enticed  many  astray.  They  ran  well  for  a  time,  till,  as  in  the 
fable  of  Atalanta,  a  golden  ball  was  cast  in  their  path,  and,  stooping  to  pick  it 
up,  they  lost  the  race.  The  love  of  money  kills  all  other  love.  Men  have  sold 
their  consciences,  their  friends,  their  family,  for  pelf.  Avarice  degrades  our 
manhood. 

II.  Weans  the  soul  from  the  truth. — "  Which  while  some  coveted  after,  they 
have  erred  from  the  faith"  (ver.  10).  Avarice  is  a  master- passion  which  subdues 
and  enthrals  our  better  self.  God  is  exchanged  for  gold,  religion  for  money- 
getting.  A  relish  for  spiritual  things  cannot  coexist  with  the  love  of  lucre. 
Faith  becomes  dim  in  the  presence  of  shining  coins.  An  American  millionaire 
was  so  enslaved  with  money-getting  that  he  complained  he  was  kept  on  the 
drive  from  morning  to  night.  Wealth  is  a  splendid  opportunity  for  doing  good, 
but  to  the  best  it  is  a  dangerous  temptation. 

III.  Curses  the  soul  with  the  pangs  of  discontent. — "And  pierced  them- 
selves through  with  many  sorrows  "  (ver.  10).  The  miser  is  in  perpetual  dread 
of  poverty.  The  more  he  has  the  more  he  wants.  Avarice  is  insatiable.  Money 
cannot  give  health  or  happiness,  nor  can  it  prolong  life  by  a  single  day. 
Cardinal  Beaufort,  Chancellor  of  England  in  the  reign  of  Henry  YI.,  as  he  lay 
dying  exclaimed  :  "  Wherefore  should  I  die,  being  so  rich  ?  If  the  whole  realm 
would  save  my  life,  I  am  able  either  by  policy  to  get  it  or  by  riches  to  buy  it. 
Fie  !  will  not  death  be  hired  ?  Will  money  do  nothing  ?  "  The  miser  is  the 
most  miserable  of  men,  and  of  all  men  to  be  the  most  pitied. 

IV.  Plunges  the  soul  into  a  course  of  sin  that  ends  in  perdition. — "  Which 
drown  men  in  destruction  and  perdition  "  (ver.  9).  Wealth  leads  to  luxury,  self- 
indulgence,  and  a  host  of  sins  that  defile  and  then  damn  the  soul.  Few  men  can 
resist  the  allurements  of  sudden  fortune  :  they  plunge  into  excesses  that  soon  end 
them,  or  their  money.  The  bane  of  the  avaricious  man  is  often  the  instrument 
of  his  punishment.  About  the  time  the  apostle  was  denouncing  the  sin  of 
covetousness  in  this  epistle,  Seneca  was  decrying  the  same  evil  and  composed 
his  ethics ;  but  as  if  to  show  the  impotence  of  his  own  precepts,  he  was  accused 
of  having  amassed  the  most  ample  riches — a  circumstance  that  was  no  doubt  the 
cause  of  his  finally  falling  a  victim  to  the  jealousy  and  avarice  of  Nero. 

Lessons. — 1.  Avarice  grows  on  what  it  feeds.  2.  The  sin  of  avarice  is  the  parent 
of  many  other  sins.     3.  Avarice  unfits  the  soul  to  appreciate  the  truth. 


46 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY.        chap.  vi. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  9.  The  Danger  of  Riches.  Ver.  10.  The  Love  of  Money — 

I.  Who  are  the  rich? — 1.  They  who  I.  Tends  to  arrogate  and  narrow 
desire  more  than  food  and  covering.  and  impel  the  whole  action  and  passion 
3.  They  who  endeavour  after  more  than  of  the  soul  toward  one  exclusive 
food  and  covering.  3.  They  who  lay  up  object,  and  that  an  igpioble  one. 
treasures  on  earth.  4.  They  who  possess  II.  Throws  a  mean  character  into 
more  of  this  world's  goods  than  they  the  estimation  of  all  things. — They 
use  according  to  the  will  of  the  donor.  are  allestimated  according  to  a  standard 
5.  They  who  delight  in  money.  of  money- value,  and  in   reference   to 

II.  Dangers  of  the  rich. — 1.  They     gain. 

enter  into  temptation.    2.  They  fall  into  III.  Places  a  man  in  a  very  selfish 

silly  and  hurtful  desires.  relation  to  other  men  around  him. 

III.  Duties  of  the  rich. — 1.  Gain  all  TV.  Creates  a  settled  hardness  of 
you  can.     2.  Save  all  you  can.    3.  Give  character. 

all  you  can.     4.  All  that  is  laid  out  in  V.  Operates  with  a  slow  but  con- 

this  ma7i7ier  is  really  given  to  God. —      tinual  effect  to  pervert  the  judgment 
Wesley.  and  conscience. — /.  Foster. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  11,  12. 

Pursuit  of  the  True  Riches. 

I.  Pursuit  of  the  true  riches  is  alone  worthy  of  the  man  of  God. — "  But  thou, 
O  man  of  God,  flee  these  things;  and  follow  after"  (ver.  11).  God,  and  not 
worldly  riches,  is  the  sole  object  of  the  good  man's  desires.  He  has  got  a 
glimpse  of  the  other  side  of  earthly  things.  He  sees  their  fleeting  and 
evanescent  character,  and  their  incapacity  to  satisfy  the  soul.  He  soars  after 
higher  and  Diviner  things.  He  cannot  rest  in  the  material,  but  finds  hi& 
pleasure  in  seeking  those  things  that  are  above.  His  conception  of  God  lifts 
him  abo^ve  everything  that  has  limits.  He  sees  another  world  shining  with  the 
lustre  of  unfading  riches. 

II.  The  true  riches  are  spiritual. — "Righteousness,  godliness,  faith,  love, 
patience,  meekness"  (ver.  11).  No  longer  a  man  of  the  world,  the  good  man 
finds  his  enjoyment  and  wealth  in  spiritual  realities.  He  covets  the  grace 
which  enables  him  to  act  righteously  towards  God  and  man,  to  possess  the  faith 
that  brings  the  distant  near  and  makes  the  unseen  visible,  a  love  that  works  in 
him  a  sublime  patience  in  the  midst  of  the  greatest  trials,  and  a  courageous 
meekness  that  is  the  marvel  and  despair  of  his  bitterest  opponents.  The  true 
riches  of  a  man  are  within  him. 

III.  Pursuit  of  the  true  riches  involves  an  earnest  conflict  for  the  truth. — 
1.  Conflict  for  the  truth  is  demanded  hy  the  prof ession  of  it  already  made.  "And 
hast  professed  a  good  profession  before  many  witnesses"  (ver.  12).  Having 
entered  into  the  conflict,  the  Christian  soldier  must  comport  himself  with 
resolute  courage.  Having  won  so  many  victories  already,  he  is  urged  on  to 
fresh  conquests.  The  consciousness  that  he  is  engaged  in  a  good  fight  nerves  him 
with  strength  and  determination.  The  least  relapse  into  unwatchfulness  and 
ease  will  be  fatal  to  final  \ictory.  The  highest  prizes  of  the  Christian  life  are 
not  gained  without  strenuous  and  persevering  effort.  2.  The  final  reward  of 
the  conflict  is  in  the  future.  "  Lay  hold  on  eternal  life,  whereunto  thou  art  also 
called"  (ver.  12).  The  Christian  soldier  is  battling  not  only  for  time,  but 
eternity — not  only  for  the  present  life,  but  for  life  eternal.  The  prize,  though  in 
the  future,  is  not  uncertain ;  it  is  not  a  phantom  hanging  in  the  air,  but  a 
substantial  reality  to  be  laid  hold  on  and  firmly  grasped.     Even  now  by  faith 

47 


CHAP.  VI.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY. 


he  has  the  substance  of  the  thing  hoped  for,  and  after  which  he  strives  with 
increasing  earnestness.     By-and-by  he  will  wear  the  victor's  crown. 

Lessons. — 1.  Religion  is  a  conflict.     2.  It  is  a  goodfl^ht  in  itself  and  its  issues. 
3.  The  victor  will  be  enriched  with  eternal  glory. 


GERMS  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 


Ver.  11.  Patience — 

T.  Secures  the  possession  of  our 
souls  in  every  circumstance  that  tends 
to  discompose  our  minds. 

II.  Prevents  hasty  and  rash  con- 
clusions. 

III.  Will  fortify  against  unlawful 
methods  for  accomplishing  our  de- 
liverance. 

IV.  Disposes  the  soul  to  persever- 
ance in  the  way  of  duty. — Pulpit 
Assistant. 

Ver.  12.  The  Good  Eight  of  Faith. 

I.  In  what  does  the  fight  of  faith 
consist? — 1.  Faith  conflicts  with  the 
misgivings  arising  from  the  accusations 
of  an  enlightened  conscience.  2.  Has 
to  contend  against  the  depravity  of  our 
nature.  3.  Has  to  contend  with  the 
world.  4.  Has  to  combat  with  spiritual 
wickedness. 

II.  How  is  the  faith  of  the  Chris- 
tian to  be  strengthened  for  this  fight  ? 
— 1.  By  entertaining  loorthy  conceptions 
of  God^  on  whose  testimo7iy  it  rests. 
2.  By  cultivating  an  acquaintance  with 


the  truths  it  embraces.  3.  By  a  con- 
sideration of  the  iifistances  in  which  it 
has  not  been  disappointed.  4.  Seek  an 
iyicrease  of  faith  by  prayer. 

III.  What  inducement  have  we  to 
fight? — 1.  The  command  of  God. 
2.  The  weapons  of  the  fight.  3.  The 
enemies  encountered  in  the  fight.  4.  The 
certainty  of  success  in  the  fight. — Stewart. 

The  Battle  of  Life. 

I.  Faith  believes  in  self-conquest. 

II.  In  the  victory  of  Jesus  Christ 
over  every  foe  hostile  to  righteousness. 

Eternal  Life 

I.  The  object— "  Eternaliife."  \.  It 
is  the  highest  form  of  life.  2.  It  consists 
in  the  perfect  development  of  spiritual 
life.     3.  It  is  to  be  enjoyed  in  heaven. 

II.  The  exhortation. — "Lay  hold." 
1.  By  embracing  the  gospel  in  which  it 
is  revealed.  2.  By  union  with  Christ 
in  whom  it  is  centred.  3.  By  cherishing 
the  principles  in  which  it  is  embodied. 
4.  By  vigorous  use  of  all  appointed 
means. — G.  Brooks. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13—16. 

A  Solemn  call  to  Fidelity — 

I.  Uttered  as  in  the  presence  of  the  life-giving  God  and  witnessing  Christ 
(ver.  13). — One  cannot  read  this  impressive  verse  without  catching  somewhat 
of  the  solemnity  of  tone  in  which  it  was  uttered.  As  though  conscious  his  own 
career  was  closing,  the  apostle  seems  to  hand  on  his  unfinished  work  to  Timothy, 
and  he  urges  him  to  faithfulness  here  by  the  present  manifestation  of  God's 
power  in  quickening  and  preserving  all  things,  and  by  reminding  him  of  the 
deep  significance  of  the  testimony  that  Christ  sealed  with  His  death.  The  testi- 
mony that  Christ  bore  was  that  He  was  King  and  that  His  kingdom  was  of 
the  truth — a  testimony  that  embraced  the  whole  gospel.  Timothy's  confession 
was  therefore  to  include  the  whole  truth  of  Christianity.  We  see  therefore  the 
gravity  of  the  charge  committed  to  the  young  evangelist.  Unborn  generations 
were  concerned  in  his  fidelity. 

II.  In  maintaining  and  handing  down  the  truth  inviolate  to  the  latest 
times  (ver.  14). — If  we  have  a  pure  gospel  to-day,  we  owe  it  to  the  faithful  and 

48 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY.        ohaf.  vi. 


holy  Timothys,  who,  living  at  the  beginning  of  the  gospel  era,  maintained 
the  truth  in  its  integrity,  and  passed  it  on  unmixed  and  unimpaired  to  their 
immediate  successors.  It  is  not  less  our  solemn  duty  to-day  to  preserve  the 
truth  inviolate,  to  faithfully  and  vigorously  propagate  it,  and  hand  it  down  as 
a  sacred  deposit  to  the  generation  following.  So  shall  the  bright  succession  run 
till  the  glorious  appearing  of  Him  who  is  the  living  embodiment  and  transcendent 
theme  of  the  highest  truth. 

III.  Enforced  by  a  sublime  description  of  the  Deity. — 1.  As  the  absolute 
Ruler.  "The  blessed  and  only  Potentate,  the  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of 
lords"  (ver.  15).  Blessed  in  Himself,  and  the  source  of  unspeakable  blessedness 
to  all  who  voluntarily  submit  to  His  loving  and  righteous  rule.  2.  As  inherently 
and  independently  immortal.  "  Who  only  hath  immortality"  (ver.  16).  Having 
incorruptible  life  in  Himself,  in  His  own  essential  Divine  essence,  and  not  merely 
derived  as  in  all  other  immortal  beings,  the  Lord  of  life  and  glory  bestows 
eternal  life  on  all  who  believe  on  Him.  Incorruptible  life  is  not  inherent  in  the 
human  soul ;  it  is  the  gift  of  God.  3.  As  dwelling  in  unapproachable  splendour. 
"  Dwelling  in  the  light  which  no  man  can  approach  unto  ;  whom  no  man  hath 
seen,  nor  can  see  "  (ver.  16).  If  we  cannot  gaze  at  the  sun  because  of  its  dazzling 
brightness,  how  much  less  can  mortal  man  gaze  upon  the  blinding  and  inexpress- 
ible glory  of  God  !  We  must  ourselves  be  clothed  with  the  Divine  splendour  in 
order  that  we  may  bear  the  revelation  of  the  beatific  vision.  4.  To  whom 
everlasting  honour  and  power  are  ascribed.  "To  whom  be  honour  and  power 
everlasting.  Amen"  (ver.  16).  This  magnificent  description  of  Jehovah  would 
add  solemnity  and  emphasis  to  the  charge  here  given  to  Timothy.  Our  fidelity 
must  be  maintained"  as  in  the  immediate  presence  of  the  all- seeing  God,  who  is 
conscious  of  every  defection  of  which  we  may  be  guilty,  and  who  will  not  fail  to 
help  us  in  our  struggles  and  reward  our  faithful  devotion  with  unspeakable  and 
lasting  glory. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  truth  dema,nds  incorruptible  fidelity.  2.  God  has  committed 
the  fortunes  of  His  truth  to  His  own  commissioned  messengers.  3.  The  progress  of 
the  truth  is  every  moment  watched  by  the  all-seeing  Eye. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  13, 14.  The  Truth  of  the  Gospel— 

I.  Was  attested  by  Christ  at  a 
crucial  moment  (ver.  13). 

II.  Is  to  be  kept  inviolate  (ver.  14). 

III.  The  keeping  of  the  truth  is 
aided  by  the  quickening  and  preserva- 
tive power  of  God  (ver.  13). 

IV.  Is  to  be  kept  every  moment  as 
in  the  presence  of  God  (ver.  13). 

V.  Is  to  be  kept  to  the  end  of  the 
gospel  dispensation  (ver.  14). 


Vers.  15,  16.  The  Glory  of  God— 

I.  Is  revealed  by  Christ  in  all 
its  beneficent  and  regal  splendour 
(ver.  15). 

II.  Seen  in  His  possessing  and 
bestowing  immortality  (ver.  16). 

III.  Surpasses  all  human  compre- 
hension (ver.  16). 

IV.  Will  elicit  everlasting  praise 
(ver.  16). 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  17—19. 

The  True  Use  of  Riches — 

I.  Is  not  to  trust  in  them  but  in  God  the  Giver  of  all  things  (ver.  17). — 
Riches  are  given  for  use,  not  for  storage.  The  moment  we  begin  to  selfishly 
store  them,  we  begin  to  trust  in  them.  Money  is  a  circulating  medium,  and 
its  true  value  is  in  its  wise  and  judicious  circulation.     Our  use  of  money  is  part 

E  49 


CHAP.  M.         IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    L   TIMOTHY. 


of  onr  education  in  life,  and  needs  as  much  care  and  thought  as  the  business 
that  produces  it.  God  only,  and  not  wealth,  maintains  the  world :  riches  not 
jiroperly  used  only  make  people  proud  and  lazy.  The  Greeks  spoke  of  Plutus, 
the  god  of  riches,  as  a  fickle  divinity,  representing  him  as  blind,  to  intimate  that 
he  distributes  his  favours  indiscriminately ;  as  lame,  to  denote  the  slowness  with 
which  he  approaches  ;  and  winged,  to  imply  the  velocity  with  which  he  flies  away. 
Wealth  is  but  one  of  God's  gifts  :  to  trust  in  it  is  to  trust  in  the  creature  rather  than 
the  Creator.     To  trust  in  riches  is  committing  ourselves  to  a  great  uncertainty. 

II.  To  distribute  them  with  a  liberal  and  cheerful  benevolence  (ver.  18). — 
To  lavish  wealth  on  personal  luxuries  is  to  abuse  it  and  ourselves.  On  the 
statue  of  Joseph  Brotherton  is  the  inscription,  "A  man's  riches  consist  not 
in  the  amount  of  his  wealth,  but  in  the  fewness  of  his  wants."  Zeno,  the 
philosopher,  remonstrating  with  certain  of  his  pupils  for  their  extravagance, 
they  excused  themselves  by  saying  that  they  were  rich  enough  to  indulge  in 
extravagance.  "  Would  you,"  said  he,  "  excuse  a  cook  who  should  over-salt  his 
meat  because  he  had  a  superabvmdance  of  salt?"  Wealth  is  kept  sweet  and 
sound  by  Hberal  distribution.  The  rich  man  is  a  steward  of  God's  gifts,  and 
will  have  to  give  an  account  of  the  use  he  has  made  of  his  wealth.  The  noblest 
use  of  money  is  to  do  good  to  others,  and  to  help  to  extend  the  kingdom  of 
Christ.     It  is  better  to  be  rich  in  good  works  than  in  good  investments. 

III.  Will  be  rewarded  with  eternal  felicity  (ver.  19). — To  spend  hfe  in 
getting  and  keeping  money  is  to  be  poor  indeed ;  to  spend  it  in  a  liberal  use 
of  our  means  in  the  cause  of  God  is  to  be  enriched  with  eternal  life — which  is 
life  indeed.  There  is  truth  and  instruction  in  the  inscription  on  an  Itahan 
tombstone,  "  What  I  gave  away  I  saved ;  what  I  spent  I  used ;  what  I  kept 
I  lost."  Giving  to  the  Lord,  says  one,  is  but  transporting  our  goods  to  a 
higher  floor.  The  Princess  Eugenie,  sister  to  the  King  of  Sweden,  once  sold 
her  diamonds  to  raise  funds  to  complete  a  hospital.  When  the  building  was 
completed,  she  visited  the  hospital,  and  standing  beside  a  suffering  inmate  who 
thanked  her  with  tears  of  gratitude,  she  exclaimed,  "Ah,  now  I  see  my 
diamonds  again ! " 

Lessons. — 1.  Riches  are  a  great  responsibility.  2.  A  liberal  hand  creates  many 
a  cheerful  heart.     3.  Earthly  wealth  may  be  transformed  into  heavenly  riches. 

GERM  NOTES  ONT  THE    VERSES. 

Yer.  17.   Human  Affections  7'adsed,  the  very  state  the  Christian  already 

not  destroyed,  by  the  Gos'pel.  possesses  or  anticipates. — A.  Butler. 

I.  The  same  affections  which  clinff  ^j       io   m    ^    j  nr    ? 

to  the  lowly  earth  are  those  which  7^rnifl  wL?"!         ^         a      t 

must  struggle,  under  celestial  guid-  ,,L?°<1  ^o/ks  are  not  gromids  of 

ance,  to  find  their  rest  in  God.  acceptance.- 1.    m    t,-n^    and   only 

TT    mi-       1           o  ^1        .         I  r^    -.   .  ground  of  a  sinners  reconciliation  with 

II    The  glory  of  the  eternal  God  IS  g^^   ,-,   ^^,   atonement   of   Christ   and 

unveiled  m  all  its  majesty  as  the  ob-  q^^^,  j^.,,               2.    Good  works  are 

ject  which  IS  to  fix  the  aifections   of  not  preparations  for  our  acceptance. 

"^^^'  II.    Good  works   are  measures  of 

III.    In  the  treasuries  of  heaven  reward.— 1.    God's  own  glory  is  pro- 

are  laid  up  all  that  you  truly  covet,  motedbythem.    2.  They  are  disciplinary, 

even   while    you    labour    after    their  and  constitute  the  most  effective  means 


mockeries  on  earth.  of  religious  improvement.     3.  They  com- 

ly.    Every  attribute  of  the  eager  prehend  all  the  acts  by  which  misery  can 

candidate  for  earthly  happiness  and  be  redressed,  happiness  increased,  and 

security  is  but  the  poor  semblance  of  souls  saved, — Olin. 
50 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY.        chap.  vi. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  20,  21. 

The  Gospel  a  Sacred  Trust — 

I.  To  be  preserved  and  handed  on  inviolate. — "O  Timothy,  keep  that 
which  is  committed  to  thy  trust"  (ver.  20).  The  apostle  returns  again,  and 
for  the  last  time  before  concluding  his  epistle,  to  the  subject  uppermost  in  his 
mind,  and  reiterates  the  solemn  charge  to  fidelity.  He  makes  a  touching  and 
impressive  personal  appeal,  indicating  his  affection  for  Timothy,  and  his  fears 
of  approaching  corruptions.  "  O  Timothy,  keep  the  truth ;  guard  it  from 
spiritual  thieves,  and  from  the  subtle  infusion  of  errors  which  its  enemies  are 
industriously  generating.  It  is  not  thine  but  another's  property  with  which 
thou  hast  been  entrusted  :  diminish  it  not  at  all." 

II.  Not  to  be  degraded  by  profitless  and  ignorant  controversies. — "Avoid 
profane  and  vain  babblings,  and  oppositions  of  science  falsely  so  called  "  (ver.  20). 
The  gospel  is  a  Divine  revelation,  not  to  be  criticised,  but  believed.  To  attempt 
to  improve  it  is  to  spoil  it.  It  is  not  the  child  of  reason,  but  the  guide  and 
regulator  of  reason ;  it  is  not  contrary  to  reason,  though  it  is  above  it.  If 
the  gospel  rested  on  human  philosophy  and  a  false  science,  it  would  be  utterly 
unreliable,  and  its  preaching  a  tissue  of  "vain  babbUngs."  The  true  science 
is  the  evolution  of  Christian  faith ;  all  else  is  counterfeit.  The  knowledge  of 
the  gospel,  communicated  by  the  Spirit,  is  superior  to  all  human  science  and 
philosophy.  The  germ  of  the  Gnostic  heresy  of  the  dual  principles  of  good  and 
evil  was  beginning  to  sprout,  and  soon  after  developed  into  "oppositions  of 
science  falsely  so  called." 

III.  To  mix  human  errors  with  the  gospel  is  to  mistake  its  spirit  and  drift. — 
*'  Which  some  professing  have  erred  concerning  the  faith  "  (ver.  21).  Vincentius 
Lirinensis,  in  the  first  half  of  the  fifth  century,  thus  comments  on  these  verses  : 

'That  which  was  entrusted  to  thee,  not  found  by  thee — which  thou  hast 
received,  not  invented ;  a  matter  not  of  genius  but  of  teaching,  not  of  private 
usurpation  but  of  public  tradition ;  a  matter  brought  to  thee,  not  put  forth 
by  thee,  in  which  thou  oughtest  to  be  not  an  enlarger  but  a  guardian,  not  an 
originator  but  a  disciple,  not  leading  but  following.  Keep  the  deposit ;  preserve 
intact  and  inviolate  the  talent  of  the  catholic  faith.  What  has  been  entrusted 
to  thee,  let  that  same  remain  with  thee;  let  that  same  be  handed  down  by 
thee.  Gold  thou  hast  received ;  gold  return.  I  should  be  sorry  thou  shouldest 
substitute  ought  else.  I  do  not  want  the  mere  appearance  of  gold,  but  its 
actual  reality.  Not  that  thero  is  to  be  no  progress  in  religion  in  Christ's 
Church.  Let  there  be  so  by  all  means,  and  the  greatest  progress;  but  then 
let  it  be  real  progress,  not  a  change  of  the  faith.  Let  the  intelligence  of  the 
whole  Church  and  its  individual  members  increase  exceedingly,  provided  it  be 
only  in  its  own  kind,  the  doctrine  being  still  the  same.  Let  the  religion  of  the 
soul  resemble  the  growth  of  the  body,  which,  though  it  develops  its  several 
parts  in  the  progress  of  years,  yet  remains  the  same  as  it  was  essentially." 

IV.  The  grace  of  God  the  best  preservative  from  error. — "Grace  be  with 
thee.  Amen"  (ver.  21).  The  grace  of  God  reveals  the  truth,  communicates  the 
truth,  suffuses  every  power  and  faculty  of  the  soul  which  embraces  the  truth, 
and  is  the  influence  that  keeps  the  truth  pure  and  vitally  operative  in  the 
Christian  life.  The  grace  that  bestows  the  truth  can  alone  keep  it.  The  grace 
of  God  makes  us  what  we  are,  and  must  make  us  what  we  ought  to  be. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  gospel  that  saves  ics  can  save  others.  2.  We  receive  the  gospel 
not  only  for  ourselves,  but  in  trust  for  others,  3.  To  depend  on  human  reason 
for  salvation  is  to  be  lost 

51 


CHAP.  VI.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    TIMOTHY. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  20,  21.  Science  in  its  Relation  Divine  Person  from  whom  all  law  pro- 

to  the  Christian  Faith.  ceeds. 

I.  Scientific  study  may  be  abused  IV.  The  tone  of  mind  fostered  by 
to  mischievous  results.  such  a  study  is  a  preservative  against 

II.  Has  a  tendency  to  bring  the  religious  instability. 

mind  into  collision  with  a  number  of  V.    The  true  tendency  of  such  a 

religious  difficulties.  study  is  to  lead  men  to  Christ. 

III.  May  possibly  tempt  the  mind  VI.  Christ  is  the  answer  to  ques- 
to  regard  God  as  the  law  of  the  tions  which  science  cannot  answer. — 
universe    rather    than    as    the    one  Harvey  Goodwin, 


52 


THE   SECOND   EPISTLE   TO 

TIMOTHY. 


INTRODUCTION. 

Time  of  writing. — Single,  but  undismayed,  and  even  glorying  in  the  possibility 
of  proclaiming  Christ  in  the  imperial  court,  St.  Paul  had  made  his  first  defence 
before  the  emperor  during  his  second  imprisonment  at  Rome ;  and  in  the  short 
time  that  elapsed  before  he  would  have  to  appear  a  second  time,  he  wrote  asking 
his  dear  friend  Timothy  to  pay  him  a  last  \dsit.  This  being  so,  the  date  of  our 
epistle  would  be  a.d.  67  or  68,  towards  the  end  of  Nero's  reign,  although  there 
is  some  amount  of  uncertainty  about  the  tradition  of  the  martyrdom.  There  is 
a  slightly  preponderant  probability  that  Timothy  was  in  Ephesus  when  this 
epistle  came  to  hand,  though  the  notices  of  places  seem  rather  strange  on  that 
supposition. 

Object  of  the  epistle. — The  apostle's  main  purpose,  in  keeping  with  the  chief 
place  which  the  kingdom  of  Christ  ever  had  in  his  thought  and  conduct,  was  to 
instruct  Timothy  with  regard  to  the  heresies  that  were  multiplying  around  and 
within  the  Church,  and  to  encourage  him  in  the  midst  of  all  the  trials  which 
would  come  upon  him  as  a  Christian  and  an  official  of  the  Church.  The  personal 
element  in  this  epistle  is  strongly  marked.  *'  In  no  epistle  does  the  true,  loving, 
undaunted,  and  trustful  heart  of  the  great  apostle  speak  in  more  consolatory  yet 
more  moving  accents  ;  in  no  portion  of  his  writings  is  there  a  loftier  tone  of 
Christian  courage  than  that  which  pervades  these,  so  to  speak,  dying  words — 
nowhere  a  holier  rapture  than  that  with  which  the  reward  and  crown  of  faithful 
labour  is  contemplated  as  now  exceeding  nigh  at  hand  "  {Ellicott). 
Outline  of  the  epistle. 

Ch.     i.     3 — 5.     Paul's  desire  to  see  Timothy,  whom  he  always  remembers. 
6 — 8.     Injunction  to  stir  up  the  gift,  to  be  brave,  and  suffer. 
9 — 12.     The  grace  of  God  manifested  in  Paul's  example. 
13 — 15.     Charge  to  hold  fast  the  doctrine  and  the  sacred  deposit. 
16 — 18.     Contrast  of  Phygellus  and  Hermogenes  with  Onesiphorus. 

53 


INTRODUCTION.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    It    TIMOTHY. 


Ch.   ii.  1 — 13.     Caution  in  the  choice  of  Church  officers,  and  personal  devo- 
tion to  the  Lord,  after  the  type  of  Paul  himself. 
14 — 19.     Against  heresy,  which  corrupts  many,  but  is  powerless  to 
hurt  the    *'  foundation  of   God " ;    sure,   and   doubly 
sealed. 
20 — 26.     The  attitude  Timothy  is  to  maintain  towards  heretics. 
Ch.  iii.  1 — 17.     Characteristics  of  the  coming  days,  with  inevitable  perse- 
cutions   for   those    not    of    the  world.     Value  of  the 
Scriptures. 
Ch.  iv.     1 — 5.     Solemn  charge  to  Timothy  to  official  and  personal  diligence. 
6 — 18.     Personal  retrospect,  hope,  and  surroundings  of  St.  Paul. 
19 — 22.     Greetings,  urgent  request  for  Timothy's  arrival,  and  bene- 
diction. 


54 


CHAPTER  I. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  According  to  the  promise. — The  purport  of  the  promise. 

Ver.  2.  My  dearly  beloved  son. — The  translators  perhaps  thought  the  simple  "  beloved  " 
too  cold,  and  so  put  in  the  adverb. 

Ver.  3.  I  thank  God. — We  have  here  the  purely  classical  form,  which  means  "  to  entertain 
and  show  thankfulness."  Whom  I  serve. — The  idea  in  the  word  is  that  of  paid  service,  but 
St.  Paul  would  not  emphasise  it,  since  he  so  often  styles  himself  a  bond-slave  of  the  Lord. 
From  my  forefathers. — There  does  not  seem  much  to  choose  between  "  in  the  manner  handed 
down  by  my  progenitors  "  and  "  with  the  feelings  inherited  from  my  ancestors."  With 
pure  conscience. — With  the  consciousness  that  there  is  no  duplicity  in  what  he  does.  The 
statement  cost  Paul  ill-usage  once  (Acts  xxiii.  1).  Night  and  day.— St.  Luke  adopts  this 
order  ;  St.  John  says  "  day  and  night." 

Ver.  4.  Greatly  desiring. — An  intensive  form  of  the  word. 

Ver.  5.  Which  dwelt. — Made  its  home.  In  thy  grandmother. — Lois  is  not  elsewhere 
mentioned. 

Ver.  6.  Stir  up  the  gift. — As  the  soldier  draws  together  the  embers  of  his  watch-fire, 
making  the  flame  leap  up,  so  St.  Paul  would  have  this  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ  attend 
to  the  charisma  or  gift  within  him.     R.V.  margin,  "  stir  into  flame." 

Ver.  7.  Spirit  of  fear. — Or  cowardice.  Alford  thinks  there  is  a  touch  of  severity  in  this 
word  for  "fear,"  putting  before  Timothy  his  timidity  in  such  a  light  as  to  shame  him.  If 
so,  Timothy  was  not  himself.     A  sound  mind. — R.V.  "  discipline."     Margin,  "Gr.  sobering." 

Ver.  8.  Of  me  His  prisoner. — This  might  mean — (a)  the  prisoner  belonging  to  Him ;  or 
(V)  one  who  is  a  prisoner  for  His  sake ;  or  again  (c)  one  whom  He  has  bound :  (5)  seems 
best.  Be  thou  partaker  of  the  afflictions  of  the  gospel. — R.V.  "suffer  hardship  with  the 
gospel."  Alford,  Huther,  and  Ellicott  prefer  "  but  suffer  [with  me]  for  the  gospel."  According 
to  the  power  of  God. — "  In  accordance  with  the  power  of  God  which  is  effectual  in  thee,"  or 
"which  will  not  fail  thee." 

Ver.  9.  Not  according  to  our  works,  but .  .  .  His  own  purpose. — "  Purpose  "  here  must  not 
be  interpreted  quite  as  "  foreordination." 

Ver.  10.  By  the  appearing. — Lit.  "  by  the  epiphany."  This  is  the  only  use  of  the  word  to 
describe  the  advent  of  Christ  in  the  flesh.  It  not  only  covers  the  act  and  moment  of  arrival, 
but  indicates  the  resultant  presence.  In  2  Maccabees  the  word  is  used  frequently  of  God's 
miraculous  interposition  on  behalf  of  His  people.  Who  hath  abolished. — In  the  Septuagint 
this  word  means  "  to  make  to  cease."  In  St.  Paul's  writings  it  always  denotes  a  complete 
ceasing,  an  annihilation.  Compare  also  Heb.  ii.  14 :  "  In  order  that  He  might  destroy 
[R.V.  bring  to  nought]  .  .  .  the  devil." 

Ver.  11.  A  preacher,  and  an  apostle,  and  a  teacher. — The  first  with  reference  to  the  work 
and  the  method  of  doing  it ;  the  second  with  reference  to  his  commission  and  the  authority 
behind  him  ;  the  third  with  reference  to  the  recipients  of  the  message,  who  need  continual 
instruction  in  it. 

Ver.  12.  For  I  know  whom  I  have  believed. — A.V.  margin,  "trusted."  Note  the  distinction 
between  knowledge  and  trust.  Faith  with  Paul  has  to  do  with  salvation  as  a  present  thing. 
That  which  I  have  committed  unto  Him. — The  Greek  is  capable  of  two  meanings,  as  the 
R.V.  margin  shows.  "  My  deposit "  may  be  that  which  I  entrust  to  another,  or  that  which 
another  commits  to  my  care.     See  ver.  14. 

Ver.  13.  Hold  fast  the  form  of  sound  words.— R.V.  "Hold  the  pattern."  The  word  for 
"  form  "  or  "  pattern  "  occurs  again  only  1  Tim.  i.  16.  "  Sound  words  "  are  healthy  words.  Sin  is 
a  diseased  state  of  the  nature;  healthy  words  are  the  outcome  of  a  sound  heart  (Matt.  xii.  35). 

Ver.  15.  Turned  away  from  me. — This  does  not  mean  that  they  had  departed  from  the 
place  where  he  was,  but  that  they  had  turned  away  their  faces  from  him. 

Ver.  16.  The  Lord  give  mercy. — This  expression  is  not  found  again  in  the  New  Testament. 
The  supposition  that  Onesiphorus  was  dead,  and  that  therefore  we  have  here  warrant  for 
praying  for  the  dead,  seems  to  overlook  that  St.  Paul  does  not  ask  God  to  show  mercy  to 

55 


CHAP.  I.  nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.   TIMOTHY. 


Onesiphorus  alone,  but  to  his  house.  Surely  all  were  not  dead  1  He  oft  refreshed  me. — The 
word  properly  means  "  to  cool  again."  Like  a  breath  of  sweet  cool  air  to  a  fever-ridden 
patient,  or  a  draught  of  spring  water  to  a  dust-covered  and  hot  traveller,  so  had  the  visits 
of  Onesiphorus  been  to  Paul  in  his  confinement. 

Ver.  17.  Very  diligently. — Alford  translates  the  comparative  form  "  with  more  diligence 
than  could  have  been  expected."    R.V.  says  simply  "  diligently." 

Ver.  18.  Hay  find  mercy. — Apparently  a  play  on  words.  "  He  found  me ;  may  he  find 
mercy."  The  best  key,  perhaps,  is  to  contrast  iv.  IG,  where  the  apostle  indulges  the 
charitable  hope  that  the  fickle  friends  who  deserted  him  at  his  sorest  need  may  not  have 
to  answer  for  it.  Thou  knowest  very  well. — Lit.  "  thou  knowest  it  better  "  (than  there  is 
any  need  to  say  it). 

MAIN  nOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1,  2. 

Apostolic  Greeting. 

I.  Explains  the  source  and  purpose  of  his  apostleship. — 1.  The  source.  "  An 
apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  by  the  will  of  God  "  (ver.  1 ).  Bengel  calls  this  epistle 
the  last  testament  and  swanlike  death-song  of  Paul.  To  the  last  he  is  careful 
to  remind  the  Church  that  his  commission  was  not  of  men,  nor  was  it  self- 
assumed,  as  in  the  case  of  the  false  teachers  he  refuted,  but  that  it  came  direct 
from  God.  It  originated  in  the  will  of  God,  and  that  will  was  his  supreme 
authority  and  guide.  He  traces  his  apostleship  to  the  highest  source.  2.  The 
purpose.  "  According  to  the  promise  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (ver.  1).  He  was 
appointed  an  apostle  to  make  known  and  carry  into  effect  this  promise  of  life. 
All  other  aims  in  life  were  subsidiary  to  this.  His  happiest  moments  were 
spent  in  publishing  the  gospel  of  hope  for  a  perishing  world  ;  and  his  best 
abihties  were  tasked  to  the  utmost  in  defending  it.  This  cheerful  view  of  the 
gospel  as  "  the  promise  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus "  would  inspire  fortitude  in 
Timothy  in  the  midst  of  tribulation,  and  give  him  courage  to  undertake  the  journey 
to  Rome,  which  would  be  attended  with  much  peril.  The  gospel  is  the  only 
system  that  promises  life  and  hope  to  humanity. 

II.  Expresses  affectionate  appreciation. — "  To  Timothy,  my  dearly  beloved 
son "  (ver.  2).  The  attachment  existing  between  Paul  and  Timothy  was  of  no 
ordinary  type.  Neither  of  them  would  have  been  the  men  they  were  but  for 
this  friendship  :  the  one  was  the  complement  of  the  other.  Their  diversities  of 
age,  of  abilities,  of  temperament,  and  of  attainments  welded  them  together  in 
closer  sympathy  and  love.  The  outburst  of  affectionateness  in  this  address  is 
the  more  pathetic  in  view  of  the  apostle's  approaching  martyrdom. 

III.  Invokes  the  bestowal  of  Divine  blessing. — "  Grace,  mercy,  and  peace, 
from  God"  (ver.  2).  These  words,  though  the  usual  formula  in  the  apostle's 
greeting,  are  more  than  merely  formal  in  their  intrinsic  meaning  and  desire. 
They  constitute  an  intense  prayer  that  the  best  blessings  of  heaven  may  be 
the  rich  and  conscious  dower  of  the  person  addressed.  The  trinity  of  blessings — 
"  Grace,  mercy,  and  peace" — include  the  best  gifts  of  the  Trinity  of  Divine  Persons. 

Lessons. — 1.  Power  to  preach  is  a  Divine  gift.  2.  True  love  is  lavish  and  sin- 
cere in  its  greetings.    3.  The  choicest  Divine  blessings  ai'e  enjoyed  in  answer  to  prayer. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  3—5. 

Anxiety  for  the  Spiritual  Welfare  of  the  Absent — 

I.  Evidenced  in  unceasing  prayer  (ver.  3). — While  Paul  thanked  God  for  the 
faith  already  existing  in  Timothy,  and  because  of  the  evidence  he  gave  of 
growth  in  faith,  he  prays  constantly  and  with  the  greater  urgency  for  its 
increase.  Prayer  is  the  more  joyous  when  offered  on  behalf  of  one  already 
saved.  Little  headway  is  made  in  piety  where  there  is  not  much  earnest  prayer. 
Our  desire  for  the  spiritual  improvement  of  those  we  love  will  break  out  in 
56 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.    TIMOTHY.  chap.  i. 


prayer ;  and  the  more  we  pray  the  more  anxious  we  are  that  prayer  should  be 
answered  on  their  behalf,  and  the  greater  interest  we  have  in  their  highest  good. 

IT.  Revealed  in  the  intense  longing  for  the  joy  of  a  personal  interview 
(ver.  4). — While  we  pray  for  the  absent  we  are  not  altogether  free  from  anxiety 
on  their  behalf.  When  Paul  last  parted  from  Timothy,  he  left  the  young, 
sensitive  evangelist  in  tears  (Acts  xx.  37),  and  he  remembered  the  times  he  had 
seen  him  weep  under  the  strain  of  strong  religious  emotions.  The  aged  apostle 
yearned  to  see  Timothy  once  more,  to  converse  with  him,  to  impart  yet  more 
counsel,  and  to  enjoy  the  fellowship  of  kindred  spirits.  A  letter,  however  valued, 
is  a  cold  medium  through  which  to  transmit  the  love  of  a  warm  heart.  It  is 
helpful  to  piety  to  enjoy  congenial  intercourse  by  speech  and  look  and  feeling. 

III.  Shown  in  recaUing  the  claims  of  traditional  piety  (ver.  5). — Timothy 
had  a  religious  training.  His  mother  Eunice  was  a  believing  Jewess,  though 
his  father  was  a  heathen.  Paul  also  knew  his  grandmother  Lois  as  a  godly 
woman.  So  that  Timothy  was  cradled  in  the  midst  of  pious  influences.  Paul 
recognised  faith  in  Timothy,  not  merely  as  a  blessing  transmitted  to  him  from 
his  pi-ogenitors,  but  as  a  personally  enjoyed  reality.  Children  cannot  thank 
God  sufiiciently  for  a  godly  parentage.  If  they  reject  the  gospel,  the  piety  of 
their  parents  will  witness  against  them,  and  aggravate  their  condemnation. 

Lessons. — 1.  2^he  absent  should  be  specially  rememhei^ed  in  prayer.  2.  Christian 
fellowship  is  a  stimulus  to  growth  in  grace.  3.  It  is  a  joy  to  parents  to  see  their 
children  walking  with  them  in  the  way  to  heaven. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers.  3,  4.  A  Sympathetic  Friend —     persuasion  of  charity.    3.  The  persuasion 

I.  Constantly  prays  for  the  absent.        of  a  wellund  strong -grounded  opinion. 

II.  Remembers  the  tears  shed  at  III.  The  wisest  of  men  easily  may 
parting.  and  sometimes  are  deceived  in  count- 
Ill.  Finds  his  joy  in  personal  inter-  ing  them  good  which  are  very  counter- 
course,  feit. — 1.  In  close-natured  men^  such  as 

lie  in  at  a  close  guard  and  offer  no 

Ver.  5.  How  far  Grace  can  be  entailed.  play,    whose   well   is    deep,    and   men 

I.  Though  grace  be  not  entailed  generally  want  buckets  to  measure 
from  parent  to  child,  yet  the  children  them.  2.  In  various  and  inconstant 
of  godly  parents  have  a  great  ad-  men,  which  like  Proteus  never  appear 
vantage  in  religion. — 1.  The  advantage  twice  in  the  same  shape,  but  differ  as 
of  the  promise.  2.  Of  good  precepts,  much  from  themselves  as  from  other 
3.  Of  good  precedents.  4.  Of  correction.  men,  and  are  only  certain  in  uncer- 
5.  Of  many  a  good  prayer.  tainty.       3.     In     affected    dissemblers. 

II.  The  persuasion  of  good  in  others.  Hypocrisy  is  as  like  piety  as  hemlock 
— 1.  There  is  the  persuasion  of  inf alii-  to  parsley,  and  many  hath  been 
bility.,  and  this  only  God  hath.     2.  The  deceived  therein. — T.  Fuller. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  6,  7. 

The  Responsibility  of  Divine  Gifts. 

I.  Divine  gifts  are  a  moral  equipment  for  the  highest  service.— 1.  A  spirit 
of  fearlessness.  "For  God  hath  not  given  us  the  spirit  of  fear;  but  of  power" 
(ver.  7).  Not  a  spirit  of  cowardice,  but  of  courage.  (1)  This  courage  enables 
us  to  confront  and  vanquish  the  enmity  and  reproach  of  the  world.  (2)  To 
bear  up  under  religious  trials.  (3)  Is  a  Divinely  inspired  courage.  2.  A  spirit 
of  love  (ver.  7).     The  spirit  of  love  is  a  necessary  counterpoise  to  the  spirit  of 

57 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  C0M3IENTARY :    II.    TIMOTHY. 


power,  and  prevents  it  from  degenerating  into  bravado  and  presumptuous  daring. 
(1)  This  love  is  disinterested.  (2)  Universal.  (3)  Inexhaustible.  3.  The 
spirit  of  a  sound  mind  (ver.  7).  The  spirit  of  self -discipline  and  self-government — 
(1)  Has  a  keen  perception  and  sober  discrimination  of  the  truth.  (2)  A  love 
of  the  truth.  (3)  Love  in  the  acquisition  of  the  truth.  (4)  In  the  right  use 
of  the  truth.  What  the  ballast  is  to  the  balloon,  the  safety-valve  to  the  steam- 
engine,  the  beam  to  the  balance,  the  rudder  to  the  ship,  that  the  sound  mind 
is  to  the  Christian  character. 

II.  The  possession  of  Divine  gifts  involves  responsibility  for  their  use. — God 
bestows  gifts  not  for  display  or  adornment,  but  for  use.  Gifts  unused  will  rust ; 
it  is  only  as  they  are  exercised  that  they  shine  and  illuminate  ourselves  and 
others.  No  man  knows  what  he  can  do  till  he  tries.  God  has  left  no  man 
without  a  gift ;  there  are  latent  possibilities  in  every  man.  The  world  is  all 
the  poorer  to-day  because  of  its  unused  talents.  It  is  pitiable  to  see  talent 
misdirected.  Alexander  the  Great  meeting  with  a  man  who,  with  much  practice, 
could  throw  small  peas  through  a  needle's  eye  without  once  missing,  ordered 
him  a  present  suitable  to  his  employment — a  basket  of  peas.  We  accomplish 
our  mission  in  life  by  faithfully  and  diligently  using  God's  gifts. 

III.  We  need  to  be  stimulated  to  renewed  zeal  in  the  use  of  Divine  gifts.— 
*'  Stir  up  the  gift  of  God,  which  is  in  thee  "  (ver.  6).  Away  from  the  magnetic 
influence  of  Paul,  Timothy  might  be  tempted  to  be  remiss.  The  apostle  recognises 
the  existence  of  the  gift — the  gift  of  grace  and  faith — of  which  Timothy  gave 
evidence  at  hi^  ordination,  and  urges  him  to  keep  it  in  active  exercise.  The  best 
of  men  need  reminding  of  past  blessings,  and  to  exert  the  power  they  already 
possess.  Keble  said  on  one  occasion,  he  wished  he  could  attend  an  ordination 
service  every  year  of  his  life,  that  he  might  be  reminded  of  first  principles.  We 
can  never  make  the  best  of  ourselves,  or  benefit  others,  without  vigorous  effort. 

Lessons. — 1.  No  one  man  possesses  every  gift.  2.  God  has  left  no  man  without 
a  gift.     3.   We  should  use  the  gifts  we  have  so  as  to  honour  God. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES, 

Ver.  6.  Our  Gift  and  the  Divine  fidence  towards  our  heavenly  Father 
Claim.  and   deprives  us   of   all  resolution  in 

I.  There  is  the  ethnic  or  rare  gift.       doing  what  is  right. 

II.  There  is  the  family,  hereditary  II.  In  what  it  consists. — 1.  A  spirit 
gift.  of  power.     It  denotes  such  a  powerful 

III.  There  is  to  each  one  a  gift  impression  of  Divine  truth  and  heavenly 
from  God  distinctly  personal.  blessings  as   inspires  us   with   vigour 

lY.  We  thus  come  to  the  Christian  and  resolution  of  mind  in  all  we  are 

gift. — A  general  capacity  for  service  ;  called  to  do,  in  order  to  form  ourselves 

a  gift  composed  of  many  gifts. — Raleigh,  upon  the  precepts  of  the  gospel  and  to 

maintain   its   influence   in  the  world. 

Ver.    7.    The   Christianas  prevailing  It   is   a   spirit  of  energy  in  all  that 

Spirit  of  Mind.  concerns  the  work  of  God,  in  opposi- 

I.  To  what  it  stands  opposed. — "  A  tion   to   everything    like   indifference, 

spirit  of  fear."     Not  the  natural  passion  unsteadf astness,   unfruitf ulness.     2.  A 

of  fear,  or  a  sense  of  danger ;  not  the  spirit   of  love.     The   love   of    God — a 

reverential  fear  of  God  ;  but  a  prevail-  devout  adoration   of   His   excellencies 

ing  disposition  of  terror  and  timidity,  and  a  grateful  sense  of  His  benefits, 

a  slavish  dread  of  God  as  judge,  or  of  powerfully  constraining  us  to  imitate 

man  as  an  adversary,  such  a  shrinking  those  perfections  we  adore,  and  mani- 

of  the  soul  as  destroys  all  holy  con-  fest  towards    others  that   love   which 

58 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.    TIMOTHY.  chap.  i. 


we  acknowledge.  3.  The  spiint  of  a  austerity,  and,  without  soundness  of 
sound  mind.  The  same  thing  as  mind,  rushing  into  extravagance.  We 
wisdom,  prudence,  a  sober  judgment,  see  the  spirit  of  love,  without  power, 
accompanied  by  composure  and  self-  sinking  into  a  soft  timidity,  and,  with- 
command  ;  good  sense,  exalted  and  out  soundness  of  mind,  yielding  the 
enlightened  by  heavenly  wisdom,  a  most  sinful  compliances.  We  see  the 
mind  free  from  the  perturbations  of  spirit  of  a  sound  mind,  without  power, 
passion  and  the  extravagance  of  folly,  settling  in  sloth,  and,  without  love, 
capable  of  judging  soundly  and  acting  souring  into  selfishness.  Without  the 
with  sobriety.  spirit  of  power,  all  is  feebleness  ;  with- 
III.  Its  excellence  and  use  in  the  out  the  spirit  of  love,  all  is  ferocious- 
Christian  life. — A  spirit  "  God  hath  ness  ;  without  the  spirit  of  a  sound 
given  us."  All  its  principles  are  cal-  mind,  all  is  foolishness.  The  first  is 
culated  to  support  each  other  and  to  the  acting  hand,  the  second  the  feeling 
form  by  their  union  a  complete  and  heart,  the  last  the  directing  head, 
consistent  character.  We  see  the  spirit  — J.  Brewster. 
of  power,  without  love,  hardening  into 

MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  8—12. 

The  Hardships  of  the  Ministerial  life — 

I.  Are  to  be  fearlessly  endured. — 1.  In  company  with  the  bravest  of  God's 
servants.  "  Be  not  thou  therefore  ashamed  of  the  testimony  of  our  Lord,  nor  of  me 
His  prisoner  :  but  be  thou  partaker  of  the  afilictions  of  the  gospel "  (ver.  8). 
These  words  come  with  weight  from  the  lips  of  a  brave  old  warrior  like  Paul, 
and  could  not  but  inspirit  the  timid  evangelist  as  they  have  inspired  the  courage 
of  many  sufferers  for  the  truth  since  that  day.  Shame  is  the  result  of  fear ; 
but  the  love  of  Christ  and  His  truth  conquers  fear  and  gives  us  boldness  in 
witnessing  and  in  suffering  for  Him.  Some  of  the  noblest  men  and  women  who 
have  ever  lived  have  endured  inexpressible  tortures  for  the  gospel's  sake.  We 
may  never  be  called  to  suffer  as  they  did ;  but  whatever  may  be  our  afflictions 
in  the  gospel,  their  heroism  and  fortitude  will  ever  be  an  example  to  animate 
and  sustain  us.  2.  Being  assured  of  Divine  help.  "  According  to  the  power 
of  God  "  (ver.  8).  The  early  martyrs  were  strengthened  in  the  midst  of  their 
sufferings  not  only  by  the  truth  in  which  they  believed  and  which  became  so 
precious  to  them,  but  by  the  power  of  God  directly  imparted  to  their  souls. 
He  who  originated  the  gospel  and  who  has  saved  us  will  never  fail  to  help  us 
in  whatever  sufferings  we  may  be  involved  for  the  sake  of  the  gospel.  "  Think 
not,"  writes  Chrysostom,  "  that  thou  hast  to  bear  these  afflictions  by  thine  own 
power  ;  nay,  it  is  by  the  power  of  God.  It  was  a  greater  exercise  of  power  than 
His  making  the  heaven.  His  persuading  the  world  to  embrace  salvation."  The 
help  of  God  fills  the  soul  with  fearlessness,  and  enables  us  even  to  rejoice  in 
tribulation. 

II.  Are  trifling  compared  with  the  substantial  character  of  the  gospel. 
— 1.  This  gospel  provides  a  plan  of  salvation  Divinely  prearranged  (ver.  9).  The 
purpose  to  save  was  in  the  Divine  mind  before  the  world  began,  and  was 
elaborated  independent  of  any  works  of  our  own.  Though  we  are  sinners, 
God  calls  us  with  a  holy  calling ;  the  call  comes  wholly  from  God  and  claims 
us  wholly  for  God.  The  blessings  offered  to  us  in  the  gospel  abundantly 
recompense  us  for  whatever  affliction  we  are  called  to  endure.  2.  This  gospel 
reveals  an  immortality  of  blessedness  by  the  manifestation  of  Christ  (ver.  10). 
The  epiphany  of  Christ  has  wonderfully  changed  the  outlook  for  humanity. 
Death,  the  dread  and  bondage  of  universal  men,  is  abolished  by  the  gospel,  and 

59 


CHAP.  I.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    IL   TIMOTHY, 


the  endless  glories  of  another  world  are  unveiled.  In  the  Zend-Avesta  we  are 
told  there  is  a  tree,  the  king  of  trees,  which  is  called  the  Death-Destroyer.  It 
grows  by  the  fountain  of  Ardecision — that  is,  by  the  water  of  Ufe — and  its  sap 
confers  immortahty.  It  is  but  a  tradition  taken  from  the  Bible.  To  come  to 
Christ,  to  feed  on  Him  by  faith,  as  He  is  made  known  to  us  in  the  gospel,  is  to 
gain  an  immortality  of  bliss.  3.  The  proclamation  of  this  gospel  is  an  honou7'able 
arul  impoi'tant  commission  (ver.  11).  The  apostle  regarded  it  as  the  highest 
distinction  of  his  life  that  he  was  appointed  a  preacher  and  apostle  of  the  gospel 
and  a  teacher  of  this  glad  evangel  to  the  Gentiles,  who  had  till  his  day  been 
shut  off  from  the  religious  privileges  that  had  been  exclusively  claimed  by  the 
Jews.  The  first  Jewish  Christian  believers  were  slow  to  admit  that  the  heathen 
had  an  equal  right  with  themselves  to  all  the  blessings  of  the  new  covenant. 
The  Jewish  prejudices  of  Paul  were  destroyed  by  his  miraculous  conversion,  and 
it  was  revealed  to  him  that  his  great  life-mission  was  to  proclaim  to  the 
Gentiles  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ,  in  which  they  had  an  equal  share 
with  all  nations.  The  Christian  missionary  is  honoured  with  a  world-wide 
commission. 

III.  Are  counterbalanced  by  the  assurance  of  personal  safety  in  the  future 
(ver.  12). — God  had  committed  to  Paul  the  gospel  as  a  sacred  deposit  for  the 
salvation  of  others  ;  and  he  has  committed  himself — his  body,  soul,  and  spirit — 
as  a  holy  deposit  to  the  Divine  care,  to  be  kept  to  the  day  of  eternal  redemption: 
The  same  gospel  which  he  declares  to  others  is  the  only  ground  for  the  preacher's 
own  salvation.  The  celebrated  Philippe  de  Mornay,  prime  minister  of  H  enry  IV. 
of  France,  one  of  the  greatest  statesmen  and  the  most  exemplary  Christians  of 
his  age,  being  asked  a  little  before  his  death  if  he  still  retained  the  same 
assured  hope  of  future  bliss  which  he  had  enjoyed  during  his  illness,  replied, 
"I  am  as  confident  of  it  from  the  incontestable  e\ddence  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  as 
I  ever  was  of  any  mathematical  truth  from  all  the  demonstrations  of  Euclid." 

Lessons. — 1.  Fidelity  in  ministerial  work  involves  labour  and  suffering. 
2.  Whatever  hardships  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  imposes  should  he  cheerfully 
borne.     3.  The  more  we  suffer  for  the  truth  the  greater  will  he  our  reivard. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES 

Ver.  8.  The  Folly  of  Moral  Cowar-  Ver.  10.  Death  defeated, 

dice.  I.  Let  us  inquire  why,  since  Christ 

I.  Indolent  indecision  is  an  instru-  has  abolished  death,  it  is  appointed 
ment  of  Satan  for  preserving  the  to  all  men  to  die. — 1.  This  is  from 
spirits  of  men  in  captivity  to  his  will,  no  want  of  power.     2.  From  no  want 

II.  Shame — the  fear  of  man's  of  merit  in  the  work  of  hum^an  redemp- 
opinion— is  another.  tion.     3.  But  it   is  in   order   that   the 

III.  Are  you  ashamed  of  believing  truth  of  God  might  be  vindicated.  4.  In 
certain  established  truths  such  as  the  order  that  it  may  remain  as  an  example 
gospel  comprises  ?  of  the  evil  of  sin.     5.  In  order  that  it 

IV.  Is  it  of  the  prudence  of  your  may  remahi  as  a  way  of  destroying  sin. 
course  you  are  ashamed?  6.  In  order  to  hint  at  the  immortality 

V.  Is  it  of  your  superiority  to  beyond  the  grave.  7.  In  order  to  teach 
common  temptations,  of  hopes  that  men  the  lesson  of  faith  in  God.  8.  In 
place  you  above  the  pleasures  of  this  order  to  enhance  the  glory  of  the  ultimate 
world,  and  a  serenity  unaffected  by  its  conquest  of  the  Redeemer. 

troubles?  II.  Let  us  inquire  in  what  sense 

VI.  Are  you  indeed  ashamed  of  Christ  hath  abolished  death. — 1.  It 
communion  with  God  ? — A .  Butler.  is  not  a  mark  of  God's  vindictive  dis- 

60 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.    TIMOTHY.  chap.  i. 


'pleasure.  2.  The  empire  of  death  is  not  world  explained  and  vindicated.  3.  See 
perpetual. — Uomiletic  Quai^terly.  the  justification  of  his  choice.    4.  Inquire 

whether  you  will  he  a  partaker  of  the 

The  Christian  in  Heaven.  same  blessedness. —  W.  Jay, 

I.  The   Scripture  aids    us  in  con-  j  .. 

ceiving   of    the    heavenly   world.-         f  aS^ftth  revealed  the  fact. 
1.  It  ambles  us  to  con^^veof^t  nerja-  jj    j^^  j  j^^^^  ^j^^^   ^j^  ^j^^ 

Uvd!/.     2.  Figuratively.     Z.  Compara-     Ught  we  hive  on  the  nature  of  the 

'1l  The  prSi  constituents  of  JjJl,JrtS'  *^^  """^^  °'  "^'^''"  ''^ 
the    heavenly    state.-l     You    muy     ™  ^J-  j    j^^^  j 

reckon    upon    pre-eminent     knowtedqe.  ,  i,.-    _^ivi.    4.    Ti.4.i.i.i. 

oorf  -*  Qr»7z.v^7  brought  immortality  to  light,  but  has 
z.  rerfect  purity.     6.  Veiiq fitful  asso-  i  j  xi.  r  i,-        -i. 

.  ..   -^      f  n    41.  J    '  -L*  revealed  the  means  of  reaching  it. — 

ciations.     4.   On  the  presence  and  sinht       r   tt       1. 

/•  .7      c     •  r.    rri  4.  •    4  J'  Hamilton, 

oj  the  baviour.     0.  Ike  most  exquisite 

enjoyment.       6.  The   perpetuity   of  all  Ver.  1 2.  Faith  out  of  Danger — 

this.  I.  Because  of  what  we  know  of  the 

III.  The    Christian    in    his    final  character  of  the  Saviour. 

destiny. — 1.  He    is   in    heaven    as    a         II.  Because  we  know  His  abilitj'. 

7nonument  of  Divine  grace.     2.  See  the  III.  Because  of  our  persuasion  of 

conduct   of  God   towards   him   in   this  His  fidelity. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  13,  14. 

Truth  and  the  Soul. 

I.  That  truth  to  be  efficacious  must  be  clearly  and  vividly  apprehended. — 

"  Hold  fast  the  form  of  sound  words,  which  thou  has  heard  of  me"  (ver.  13). 
The  **  form  "  means  a  pattern  plainly  delineated  and  forcibly  impressed  on  the 
mind  by  the  sound  words  which  fell  from  the  lips  or  pen  of  the  apostle. 
Clearness  in  the  mental  conception  of  the  truth  is  necessary  in  order  to  grasp 
its  meaning,  see  its  beauty,  and  feel  its  power.  Loose  views  of  truth  leave  the 
soul  more  exposed  to  the  ravages  of  error,  and  to  become  an  easy  victim  to  false 
teachers. 

II.  That  truth  is  efficacious  when  received  in  the  exercise  of  faith  and  love. — 
"In  faith  and  love  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus"  (ver.  13).  Faith  and  love  are 
"the  element  in  which  my  sound  words  had  place,  and  in  which  thou  art  to 
have  the  vivid  impression  of  them  as  thy  inwardly  delineated  pattern,  moulding 
conformably  thy  outward  profession"  (Fausset).  The  truth  is  a  revelation  of 
Christ ;  and  in  order  to  a  saving  appropriation  of  Christ  the  soul  must  be  not 
only  profoundly  convinced  that  He  is  the  truth,  but  also  cordially  embrace 
Him  with  a  loving  faith — a  faith  that  works  by  love. 

III.  That  truth  is  to  be  firmly  held  and  jealously  guarded. — "  Hold  fast 
the  form  of  sound  words.  .  .  .  That  good  thing  which  was  committed  unto  thee 
keep"  (vers.  13,  14).  Having  once  got  the  truth,  never  part  with  it.  It  is  a 
goodly  deposit,  to  be  constantly  fenced  round  with  watchful  care,  and  resolutely 
defended  from  all  attacks  of  error.  If  we  keep  the  truth,  the  truth  will  keep 
us.  It  is  too  precious  to  lose,  and  the  pains  it  has  cost  us  to  acquire  should 
teach  us  to  value  it  the  more.  The  struggle  to  maintain  the  truth  may  be 
fierce,  but  it  is  often  only  brief  ;  and  every  triumph  adds  enormously  to  our 
spiritual  strength.  The  more  real  truth  becomes  to  the  soul,  the  more  firmly  it 
is  held  and  the  more  potent  is  its  influence.  Better  to  yield  up  our  life  than 
yield  up  the  truth. 

IV.  That  truth  can  be  safely  kept  only  by  the  aid  of  the  indwelling  Spirit. 
— "  .Keep  by  the  Holy  Ghost  which  dwelleth  in  us"  (ver.  14).     The  Holy  Ghost 

01 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.    TIMOTHY, 


is  the  Spirit  of  truth.  It  is  He  who  reveals  it  to  the  soul,  deposits  it  there  as 
a  sacred  trust,  makes  it  efficacious  in  renewing  the  whole  man,  uses  it  as  a 
sanctifying  instrument ;  and  He  only  can  effectually  guard  it  from  the  robbers 
who  are  seeking  to  rifle  the  soul  of  its  hallowed  possession.  The  Spirit  plays  a 
prominent  part  in  the  ministration  of  the  truth.  This  should  be  constantly 
remembered,  and  His  Divine  aid  fervently  invoked. 

Lessons. — 1.  Truth  should  he  studiously  and  prayerfully  sought.  2.  Truth 
when  found  should  he  faithfully  maintained.  3.  The  soul  realises  its  highest 
happiness  in  the  love  of  the  truth. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  13.  The  Form  of  Sound  Word,s.  YII.  God  has  appointed  a  day  for 

I.  There  i  exists  an  infinite  Being,     judgment. 

the  great  first  Cause,  whom  we  call  ^IH-  Do  not  exchange  this  form  of 
qq^  sound  words  for  the  uncertainties  and 

II.  The   Holy    Scriptures  are  the     deh^ions  of  infideUty. 

only  sufficient  and  authorised  rule  of  ^  ^^:  Beware  of  error  in  your  religious 

faith  and  nractice  doctrines. 

TTT    mv        XV    •        ^^A   A^^4r\.   r.f  ^'  Bowarc  of  holding  the  truth  in 

III    The   sufferings  and  death  of  ^righteousness.-^.  Bfomhy. 

Christ  are  a  full  atonement  for  the  °                                    -^ 

sins  of  mankind.  y^^,   14    Religion  a  Good  Thing. 

IV.  Man  must  undergo  a  great  j  Committed  to  us  as  a  sacred 
moral  change.  deposit. 

V.  The  soul  of  man  is  immortal.  n.  is  the  work  of  the  indwelling 

VI.  There  will  be  the  resurrection     Spirit. 

of  the  dead.  III.  Is  to  be  jealously  guarded. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  15—18. 

The  Good  Man  in  Trouble — 

I.  Is  pained  by  the  desertion  of  former  friends  (ver.  15). — Phygellus  and 
Hermogenes  and  other  Christians  of  Asia  Minor  had  probably  been  asked  to 
interest  themselves  in  Paul's  case,  or  to  render  some  service  to  him ;  but  they 
refused,  and  did  not  even  show  sympathy  with  him  in  his  trouble.  Some  of  the 
Asian  brethren  had  escorted  him  on  his  way  to  Home  as  far  as  Nicopolis ;  but 
when  he  was  apprehended  in  that  place,  they  turned  away  from  him,  not  willing 
to  risk  the  perils  of  being  connected  with  Paul  the  prisoner.  The  desertion  of 
a  friend  is  all  the  more  keenly  felt  when  we  are  in  difficulties,  and  when  we 
recall  his  former  kindnesses. 

II.  Is  cheered  by  one  conspicuous  example  of  proved  fidelity  (vers.  16-18). — In 
contrast  with  the  fickleness  of  others  Paul  mentions  the  devotion  and  generosity 
of  Onesiphorus,  who  so  far  from  being  ashamed  of  the  prisoner  sought  him  out 
diligently,  and  ministered  to  the  apostle's  wants  in  Rome,  as  he  had  done  before 
in  Ephesus.  One  friend  in  adversity  is  an  unspeakable  comfort,  and  the  dis- 
tressed heart  clings  to  him  Avith  the  greater  tenacity.  There  are  times  when  we  K- 
are  completely  thrown  back  upon  the  one  Friend  who  is  above  all  others,  and 
who  never  fails  us  in  our  extremity. 

III.  Breathes  a  fervent  prayer  for  the  man  who  ministered  sympathy  and 
help. — "  The  Lord  give  mercy  unto  the  house  of  Onesiphorus.  .  .  .  The  Lord  grant 
unto  him  that  he  may  find  mercy  of  the  Lord  in  that  day"  (vers.  16,  18).  On 
the  assumption  that  Onesiphorus  was  dead  when  this  prayer  was  uttered,  a  fierce 
controversy  has  raged  round  these  words  in  favour  of  prayers  for  the  dead.     If 

^3 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.   TIMOTHY.  chap.  ii. 


we  admit  that  Onesiphorus  was  dead,  this  prayer  can  mean  nothing  more  than 
that  God  will  have  mercy  at  the  day  of  judgment  on  those  who  have  done  good 
to  us  and  others  during  their  life  on  earth,  which  is  a  very  different  thing  from 
the  prayers  for  the  dead  which  are  advocated  and  practised  by  a  certain  school. 
But  it  cannot  be  satisfactorily  proved  that  Onesiphorus  was  dead  at  the  time 
these  words  were  written.  His  household  would  not  retain  his  name  after  the 
master  was  dead  ;  and  we  have  no  example  of  Paul  praying  for  the  dead.  God 
blesses  not  only  the  good  man  himself,  but  all  his  household  ;  and  it  is  a  natural 
and  appropriate  prayer  that  God  would  show  mercy  to  those  who  have  shown 
mercy  to  us  in  our  sufferings  and  need. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  good  are  not  exempt  from  trouble.  2.  Trouble  tests  the  reality 
of  professed  friendship.  3.  In  his  greatest  trouble  the  good  man  is  not  utterly 
forsaken. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Yer.  1 6.   Onesiphorus.  Christian  mode  of  expressing  gratitude. 

I.  The    conduct   of    Onesiphorus. —      (5)  By    kindness    to    Christians    we 

1.  He   visited    the    apostle    in  prison.-  acquire  an   interest  in   their  prayers. 

2.  He  refreshed  him  by  his  conversation.  _  (6)  Deeds  of  charity  are  not  meritori- 

3.  He  made   common  cause  with  him.  ous  in  the  sight  of  God. — G.  Brooks. 

4.  On  other  occasions  he  rendered  him  -- 

active  service.  Ver.  1 8.  aS'^.  PauVs  Prayer  for  Onesi- 

II.  Requital  of  Paul. — 1.  Grateful     phorus. 

remembrance  of  him  in  his  own  heart.  "       I.  The  day  the  apostle  speaks  of. — 

2.  Fond  mention  of  him   to  Timothy.      1.  His  thoughts  were  often  dwelling  on 

3.  Earnest   prayer  for   him    to    God.  -     that  day.     2.  It  intimates  that  that  day 

(1)  Look  more  on  the  bright  than  on  is  a  most  important  one.  Other  days 
the  dark  side  of  the  picture  of  your  lot.      are  important  to  some,  but  this  will  be 

(2)  Christianity   does   not   extinguish      important  to  all. 

any  of  the  innocent  feehngs  of  human  II.  His  prayer. — 1.   Our  final  salva- 

nature,  and  improves  those  which  are  tion  in  the  great  day  of  the  Lord  will 

amiable.     (3)  Beneficence  is  a  native  be  an  act  of  mercy.     2.   We  all  still  need 

proof   of    Christianity,  and   a  leading  mercy.     3.   We  all  must  find  mercy. — 

test,     specially    in     the    affluent,     of  C.  Bradley, 
Christian   character.     (4)  There   is   a 


CHAPTER   II. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES, 

Ver.  1.  Be  strong. — R.V.  "  be  strengthened,"  and  continue  so. 

Ver.  2.  Among  many  witnesses. — The  instrumental  form,  lit.  "  by  the  mediation  of," 
here  is  equal  to  "  in  presence  of  many  witnesses,"  who  were  present  to  confirm  the  word. 
Able  to  teach  others.— The  others  would  not  always  be  docile  learners — others  of  a  difEerent 
quality  or  spirit,  it  is  indicated. 

Ver.  3.  Endure  hardness. — R.V.  "  Suffer  hardship  with  me."  Compare  i.  8,  where  the  same 
word  occurs.  It  would  seem  more  consistent  to  refer  the  fellowship  in  each  case  to 
St.  Paul,  in  behalf  of  the  gospel. 

Ver.  4.  No  man  that  warreth  entangleth  himself. — R.V.  "No  soldier  on  service."  The 
word  for  "  entangleth  himself  "  occurs  again  only  2  Pet.  ii.  20.  St.  Paul  had  before  him  living 
illustrations  of  his  saying.  The  Roman  soldier  carried  his  home  on  his  back.  Who  hath 
chosen  him  to  he  a  soldier. — R.V.  "  who  enrolled  him  as  a  soldier."  This  phrase  is  represented) 
by  one  word  in  the  original.     It  is  the  term  for  the  general  who  collects  an  army. 

63 


CHAP.  II.  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.    TIMOTHY. 


Ver.  5.  Strive  for  masteries.— R.V.  "contend  in  the  games."  In  the  best  Attic  Greek  the 
word  would  mean  to  work,  to  endure.  Lawfully.— 1  Tim.  i.  8.  Conformably  to  law.  Not 
merely  of  the  contest  itself,  but  also  of  the  preparation  and  training  for  it. 

Ver.  6.  The  husbandman  that  laboureth.— The  notion  of  "  laboureth  "  is  that  of  the  weari- 
ness and  lassitude  which  follow  the  straining  of  his  powers  to  the  utmost.  The  lesson 
seems  to  be  '*  No  sweat,  no  sweet." 

Ver.  7.  Understanding.— Here  means  the  power  of  putting  things  together.  It  is,  as 
Bishop  Lightfoot  suggests,  the  critical  application  of  wisdom  to  details. 

Ver.  9.  I  suffer  trouble.— R.V.  "hardship."  As  an  evil-doer. — He  is  treated  as  one  would 
be  whose  whole  aim  was  to  do  evil— a  constant  menace  to  society.  Unto  bonds.—"  Up  to 
the  point  of  bonds."  The  indignity  of  the  imprisonment  was  keenly  felt  by  St.  Paul,  as  well 
as  bodily  discomfort.  But  the  word  of  God  is  not  bound.— Chrysostom  explains,  "  My  hands 
are  bound,  but  not  my  tongue."  A  better  contrast  is  between  the  messenger  and  the 
message.     They  have  bound  the  messenger,  but  the  message  runs  on  and  defies  bondage. 

Ver.  10.  I  endure  all  things.— This  does  not  denote  suffering  pure  and  simple,  but  the 
willing,  steadfast  endurance  of  it  {IIuther)—2.  brave  bearing  up  rather  than  a  passive 
endurance  {Ellicott). 

Ver.  11.  It  is  a  faithful  saying.  — /.<?.  what  follows.  "  We  cannot  be  certain  whether  the 
sentences  following  are  strophes  from  a  Christian  hymn  or  not— probably  they  are" 
{Hiithery  If  we  be  dead. — R.V.  "if  we  died."  Some  have  thought  that  St.  Paul  writes  of 
the  actual  death  of  the  body  in  martyrdom.  The  parallel  thought  in  Rom.  vi.  8  seems  to  be 
against  this.  Others  say,  "  The  definite  event  indicated  by  the  form  of  the  verb  takes  place 
in  baptism." 

Ver.  12.  If  we  deny  Him. — If  by  any  possibility  through  fear  of  suffering  we  should 
deny  any  relationship  to  Him. 

Ver.  13.  If  we  believe  not.— R.V.  "if  we  are  faithless,"  Meyer  contends  that  the  word 
always  means  to  be  unbelieving  in  the  New  Testament.  EUicott  and  Alford  agree  that  it  is 
not  simply  unfaithfulness  but  definitely  unbelief  that  is  meant  here. 

Ver.  14.  Charging  them. — Adjure  them  on  their  oath  of  fealty. 

Ver.  15.  Study  to  shew  thyself. — R.V.  "Give  diligence  to  present  thyself."  The  word 
expresses  eager  striving,  and  has  a  suggestion  of  making  haste  (cf.  iv.  9,  21).  A  workman 
that  needeth  not  to  he  ashamed. — One  who  has  nothing  to  be  ashamed  of  either  in  his 
methods  of  work  or  in  the  examination  of  his  work.  For  the  idea  see  1  Cor.  iii.  13. 
Rightly  dividing  the  word  of  truth. — R.V.  "  handling  aright,"  lit.  *'  cutting  straight." 
The  idea  of  cutting  was  gradually  lost  as  the  word  came  to  signify  to  manage  rightly,  to  go 
about  a  thing  in  the  best  way.     Same  word  in  LXX.  of  Prov.  iii.  6,  "  direct." 

Ver.  16.  Profane. — 1  Tim.  i.  9,  iv.  7,  vi.  20.  That  which  is  common  to  all — in  a  religious 
sense,  of  things  not  withdrawn  by  consecration  from  general  use.  The  natural  antagonism 
between  profane  and  holy  grew  into  a  moral  antagonism.  They  will  increase. — They  will 
beat  forward.     See  the  note  on  "  profiting  "  in  1  Tim.  iv.  15.     Compare  also  2  John  ii.  9. 

Ver.  17.  Will  eat  as  doth  a  canker. — R.V.  "gangrene."  An  eating  ulcer  like  a  cancer, 
called  in  Galen  "the  cold  burn."  Hippocrates  says  it  is  "the  state  of  a  tumour  between 
inflammation  and  entire  mortification."     Luke  the  physician  was  with  St.  Paul  (iv.  11). 

Ver.  18.  Saying  that  the  resurrection  is  past  already. — As  though  they  said,  "  The  only 
resurrection  you  are  ever  likely  to  know  has  taken  place  already;  for  the  flesh,  once 
corrupted,  never  risesagain." 

Ver.  19.  The  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure.— R.V.  "the  firm  foundation  of  God 
standeth."  St.  Paul's  one  foundation  is  Jesus  Christ  in  His  complete  character  and  work. 
Having  this  seal. — Probably  in  allusion  to  the  practice  of  engraving  inscriptions  over  doors 
and  on  pillars  and  foundations. 

Ver.  20.  Of  earth. — Of  burnt  clay.  St.  Paul  says  God's  treasure  is  entrusted  to  earthen 
vessels  (2  Cor.  iv.  7). 

Ver.  21.  Purge  himself  from  these.— The  form  of  the  word  "  purge  "  is  intensive,  as  Chrysos- 
tom noted :  "  He  said  not  cleanse,  but  cleanse  out,  that  is  cleanse  absolutely."  It  is  no 
indifferent  reform  that  will  please  St.  Paul,  but  reform  altogether,  like  Hamlet's.  Meet  for 
the  master's  use.— Fit  for  using  by  the  master  of  the  house. 

Ver.  22.  Youthful  lusts.— Pertaining  to  youth  and  characteristic  of  it.  "Effeminate 
luxury,  immoderate  laughter  [pleasure],  empty  honour,  and  suchlike  things"  {Theodoref). 
Follow  righteousness.— As  in  1  Tim.  vi.  11,  the  apostle  warns  Timothy  to  flee  from  some 
things  and  follow  others,  so  he  does  here.  With  them  that  call  on  the  Lord. — The  question 
here  is  whether  Timothy  is  to  follow  righteousness,  etc.,  with  them,  or  whether  he  is  to 
adopt  a  pacific  course  towards  those  who  call,  etc.  With  Heb.  xii.  14  in  view,  perhaps  the 
view  of  Ellicott  and  Huther  that  the  latter  is  tlie  meaning  is  the  better. 

Ver.  24.  And  the  servant  of  the  Lord  must  not  strive.— The  wrangling  spirit  that  delights 
in  strife  should  never  be  seen  in  the  messenger  of  the  gospel  of  peace  and  good- will.  But 
be  gentle.— The  word  occurs  again  in  New  Testament  only  at  1  Thess.  ii.  7.     "  It  is  used 

64 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.    TIMOTHY.         chap.  ii. 


of  an  amiable  conduct  or  disposition  of  a  superior  towards  an  inferior,"  or  "  an  outward 
mildness  and  gentleness  especially  in  bearing  with  others."  Apt  to  teach. — He  must  be 
didactic — not  only  having  the  ability  but  the  willingness  to  teach.  Though  the  public 
address  in  the  congregation  was  permitted  to  every  one  with  a  charisma,  still  the  bishop  in 
particular  had  to  know  how  to  handle  doctrine.  Patient. — Able  to  endure  evil,  as  it  is 
directed  against  himself.  On  the  necessity  of  a  high  priest  being  compassionate  to  th« 
erring  see  Heb.  v.  2, 

Ver.  25.  Those  that  oppose  themselves. — When  a  man  imagines  those  who  are  bent  on  his 
welfare  are  his  worst  enemies,  he  sets  himself  with  very  determined  opposition. 

Ver.  26.  That  they  may  recover  themselves. — A.V.  margin,  "awake."  R.V.  margin, 
*'  Gr.  return  to  soberness."  TLe  preposition  in  the  compound  word  may  express  motion  from 
beneath,  and  so  the  word  would  mean  that  they  may  come  up  out  of  the  stupefaction 
which  holds  them  down,  but  the  classical  meaning  is,  to  become  sober  again.  Heretical 
teaching,  like  intoxication,  clouds  men's  wits.  Who  are  taken  captive  by  him  at  his  will. — 
R.V.  "  having  been  taken  captive  by  the  Lord's  servant  unto  the  will  of  God."  The  sense 
conveyed  by  the  A.V.  (which  is  the  interpretation  given  by  most  modern  commentators) 
is  singularly  flat  and  insipid,  says  Bishop  EUicott.  The  R.V.,  which  gives  the  interpreta- 
tion of  Wetstein,  Bengel,  and  others,  is  equally  objectionable,  says  the  same  authority,  who 
adopts  with  but  little  hesitation  the  interpretation  of  Beza.  This  connects  "  that  they  may 
recover  themselves  out  of  the  snare  of  the  devil  "  with  "  unto  His  will,"  i.e.  unto  God's 
will.  So  we  get  the  translation,  "  And  that  they  may  return  to  soberness  out  of  the  snare 
of  the  devil,  though  holden  captive  by  him  to  do  his  will."     See  R.V.  marginal  note. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC 8  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  1,  2. 

The  Permanence  of  Christian  Doctrine. 

I.  That  Christian  doctrine  becomes  more  vivid  as  the  soul  is  strengthened  by 
Divine  grace. — "  Thou  therefore,  my  son,  be  strong  in  the  grace  that  is  in  Christ 
Jesus"  (ver.  1).  In  contrast  to  the  weak  conduct  of  those  who  had  forsaken 
him,  and  in  imitation  of  the  devotion  of  a  man  like  Onesiphorus  and  of  his  own 
resolute  attitude,  the  apostle  exhorts  Timothy  to  seek  increased  spiritual  strength. 
In  our  own  strength  we  can  do  nothing ;  but  in  the  grace  supplied  by  Christ  to 
all  who  believe  in  Him  and  ask  Him,  we  find  all  we  need  for  strengthening  our 
own  Christian  character,  and  for  imparting  instruction  to  others.  Our  power  to 
do  good  will  depend  upon  the  degree  in  which  the  truth  influences  our  own  souls. 
In  the  meeting  of  Elijah  and  Ahab  at  the  plot  of  Naboth  we  have  an  illustra- 
tion of  the  contrast  between  strength  and  weakness  :  the  righteous  man  is  strong, 
the  wicked  man  weak  and  vacillating. 

II.  That  the  reality  of  Christian  doctrine  is  attested  by  reliable  witnesses. — 
*'  The  things  that  thou  hast  heard  of  me  among  many  witnesses  "  (ver.  2) — by 
means  of  many  witnesses.  Every  true  believer  is  a  witness  of  the  truth.  In 
other  words,  the  truth  is  its  own  witness,  exemplified  in  the  changed  lives  and 
righteous  conduct  of  those  who  have  embraced  it.  The  public  teacher  is  called 
by  his  office  to  be  a  faithful  and  true  vdtness,  and  the  soundness  of  his  doctrine 
is  attested  by  the  manifold  witnesses  of  its  transforming  power. 

III.  That  the  permanence  of  Christian  doctrine  is  secured  by  careful  trans- 
mission to  faithful  and  competent  teachers. — "  The  same  commit  thou  to  faithful 
men,  who  shall  be  able  to  teach  others  also"  (ver.  2).  There  is  only  ore  gospel, 
and  this  has  been  authenticated  by  its  own  intrinsic  value  and  by  the  testimony 
of  incorruptible  witnesses,  and  every  care  must  be  taken  to  preserve  this  gospel 
inviolate  and  transmit  it  in  its  purity  and  strength  to  future  generations.  Care 
must  also  be  taken  that  the  human  vehicle  of  the  truth  be  duly  fitted  and 
prepared  to  convey  it  to  others.  Here  we  have  the  earUest  indication  of  the 
formation  of  a  theological  school,  which  shall  not  only  train  men  to  instruct  the 
ignorant,  but  to  defend  and  maintain  the  truth  in  its  integrity.  The  teachers 
of  Christian  doctrine  must  be  not  only  able  to  teach,  but  be  men  of  unblemished 
character  and  undoubted  fidelity.     Truth  will  be  rendered  permanent  not  simply 

F  65 


CHAP.  II.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.    TIMOTHY. 


by  human  creeds  and  ecclesiastical  traditions,  but  by  living  witnesses  of  its 
converting  power. 

Lessons. 1.   Christian  doctrim  and  practice  must  go  together.     2.   We  can  only 

witness  for  the  truth  as  ive  know  it.     3.  Experimental  religion  is  the  best  gua/rantee 
of  the  permanence  of  truth. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  1,  2.  The  Custody  of  the  Gospel,  of  faithful    and   competent    teachers 

I.    The    truth    of   the  gospel  has  (ver.  2). 
been    verified   by  reliable   witnesses         III.  Personal  growth  in  the  grace 

(ver.  2).  of  Christ  is  essential  to  the  safe  custody 

li.  Is  to  be  handed  on  to  the  custody  of  the  gospel. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  3—7. 

Phases  of  the  Christian  Life. 

I.  The  Christian  life  is  a  military  service. — 1.  The  power  of  endurance  is 
acquired  by  continuous  drill.  "  Thou  therefore  endure  hardness,  as  a  good  soldier 
of  Jesus  Christ "  (ver,  3).  "  Military  service  involves  self-sacrifice,  endurance, 
discipline,  vigilance,  obedience,  ready  co-operation  with  others,  sympathy, 
enthusiasm,  loyalty"  (Plummer).  Tertullian  writes:  "Even  in  peace  soldiers 
learn  betimes  to  suffer  warfare  by  toil  and  discomforts,  by  marching  in  arms, 
running  over  the  drill-ground,  working  at  trench-making,  constructing  the 
tortoise,  till  the  sweat  runs  again.  In  like  manner  do  ye,  O  blessed  ones,  account 
whatever  is  hard  in  your  lot  as  discipline  of  the  powers  of  your  mind  and  body. 
Ye  are  about  to  enter  for  the  good  fight,  in  which  the  living  God  gives  the  prizes, 
and  the  Holy  Spirit  prepares  the  combatants,  and  the  crown  is  the  eternal  prize 
of  an  angel's  nature,  citizenship  in  heaven,  glory  for  ever  and  ever.  Therefore 
your  trainer  Jesus  Christ  has  seen  good  to  separate  you  from  a  state  of  freedom 
for  rougher  treatment,  that  power  may  be  made  strong  in  you."  2.  The  efficiency 
of  service  must  not  be  impaired  by  beiiig  excessively  engrossed  with  other  occupations 
(ver.  4).  The  soldier  is  wholly  devoted  to  his  profession,  and  his  term  of  service 
is  spent  either  in  warfare  or  in  preparation  for  it.  He  abandons  all  other 
occupations  :  they  would  interfere  with  his  efiiciency  and  with  his  prospects  of 
promotion.  So  the  Christian  soldier,  if  he  is  to  render  good  service,  must  not 
be  entangled  with  worldly  affairs  :  not  that  he  can  ignore  them  or  neglect  them ; 
but  he  must  guard  against  their  interfering  with  the  obedience  he  owes  to  His 
heavenly  Commander. 

II.  The  Christian  life  is  an  athletic  contest. — 1.  Victory  is  gained  only  by 
great  effort.  "And  if  a  man  also  strive  for  masteries"  (ver.  5).  Tertullian, 
continuing  his  address  to  martjirs,  passes  by  an  easy  transition  from  training 
for  military  service  to  training  for  athletic  contest.  "  For  the  athletes  also  are 
set  apart  for  stricter  discipline  that  they  may  have  time  to  build  up  their 
strength.  They  are  kept  from  luxury,  from  daintier  meats,  from  too  pleasant 
drink ;  they  are  driven,  tormented,  distressed.  The  harder  their  labours  in 
training  the  greater  their  hopes  of  victory.  Virtue  is  built  up  by  hardness,  but 
by  softness  is  overthrown."  2.  Reward  is  given  only  to  those  who  faithfully 
observe  the  rules  of  the  contest.  "  Yet  is  he  not  crowned,  except  he  strive  lawfully  " 
(ver.  5).  The  athlete,  though  gaining  the  victory,  is  not  crowned  unless  he  has 
observed  all  the  conditions  of  the  contest,  and  the  preparation  for  it  as  to  self- 
denying  diet,  exercise,  self-restraint,  chastity,  and  decorum.  So  in  the  Christian 
course  the  prize  is  given  to  him  who  has  obeyed  all  the  rules.     To  share  the 

66 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    IL   TIMOTHY,        chap.  ii. 


glory  of  Christ  we  must  share  His  suffering :  if  we  shrink  from  the  cross,  we 
miss  the  crown. 

III.  The  Christian  life  is  moral  husbandry. — 1.  Implying  diligent  toil.  "The 
husbandman  that  laboureth  "  (ver.  6).  The  husbandman  knows  that  according 
to  the  labour  put  into  the  soil  will  be  its  fruitfulness.  Christianity  not  only 
inculcates  work,  but  ennobles  it.  Work  is  necessary  for  sustenance,  and  is  the 
condition  of  all  growth.  Mental  and  moral  excellence  are  attained  only  by 
great  labour.  2.  The  diligent  worker  is  entitled  to  reward.  "  Must  be  first 
partaker  of  the  fruits  "  (ver.  6).  The  first  to  enjoy  the  results  of  work  should  be 
he  who  has  been  most  diligent.  '*  In  all  labour  there  is  profit."  Work  is  the 
pathway  to  success  and  honour. 

IV.  The  manifold  phases  of  the  Christian  life  require  earnest  thought. — 
*'  Consider  what  I  say  "  (ver.  7).  Christianity  must  be  studied  in  its  many-sided 
aspects ;  and  it  will  always  be  suggestive  to  regard  it  as  a  military  service,  an 
athletic  contest,  and  as  moral  husbandry.  But  much  as  we  reflect  and  ponder, 
it  is  the  Lord  only  who  can  give  us  true  understanding  in  all  things.  "  Timothy 
is  not  the  only  Christian  or  the  only  minister  who  is  in  danger  of  being  disgusted, 
disheartened,  and  dismayed  by  the  coldness  and  apathy  of  professing  friends,  and 
by  the  hostility  and  contempt  of  secret  or  open  enemies.  We  are  at  times 
inclined  to  murmur  because  the  rest  for  which  we  so  often  yearn  is  not  given  us 
here — rest  from  toil,  from  temptation,  from  sin.  Such  a  Sabbath  rest  is  the 
prize  in  store  for  us ;  but  we  cannot  have  it  here.  And  if  we  desire  to  have  it 
hereafter,  we  must  keep  the  rules  of  the  arena — self-control,  self-sacrifice,  work  " 
(Plummer). 

Lessons. — 1.  Religion  is  adapted  to  all  conditions  of  life.  2.  Obedience  is  the 
pathvMy  of  safety  and  success.  3.  The  highest  prizes  of  religion  are  not  secured 
without  self-denying  effort. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES, 

Vers.  3,  4.  The  Military  Discipline —  how  to  put  a  more  genial  look  on  our 

I.  Requires  the  putting  off  or  ex-  crosses  and  required  self-denials, 
cision  of  the  world  as  an  interruptive  IV.  The  military  discipline  has  as 
and  disqualifying  power.  little  direct  concern  to  beget  happiness 

II.  Raises  spirit  and  high  impulse     as  it  has  to  compel  self-abnegation, 
by  a  training  under  authority  exact         V.  Whatever    we    get    we    must 
and  absolute.  somehow  fight  for  it. — Bushnell. 

III.  We  find  in  military  discipline 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  8—13. 

The  Apostolic  Gospel — 

I.  Had  for  its  leading  theme  the  resurrection  of  Christ  from  the  dead. — 

"  Remember  that  Jesus  Christ  of  the  seed  of  David  was  raised  from  the  dead 
according  to  my  gospel "  (ver.  8).  The  apostles  gave  special  prominence  to  the 
resurrection  of  Christ.  It  was  the  most  astounding  event  of  the  time,  and  was 
an  unanswerable  evidence  of  the  Divine  power  of  Jesus.  The  Jews  could  not 
deny  the  fact,  for  they  or  their  friends  were  witnesses  of  it :  all  their  plots 
against  Jesus  were  baffled ;  their  rage  was  impotent.  The  gospel  to-day 
preaches  not  a  dead  but  a  living  Christ — Christ  incarnate,  Christ  crucified, 
Christ  risen,  Christ  regnant  and  triumphant. 

II.  Entailed  suffering  in  its  proclamation. — "  Wherein  I  suffer  trouble.  ...  I 
endure  all  things  for  the  elect's  sakes  "  (vers.  9,  10).  The  enemies  of  the  gospel 
could  not  destroy  its  facts  or  answer  its  arguments  :  they  took   their  revenge 

67 


CHAP.  II  JTOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.    TIMOTHY. 


on  its  propagators,  whose  only  fault  was  that  they  spoke  the  truth.  They 
testified  of  what  they  had  seen  and  felt — they  could  not  do  otherwise  ;  and  for 
this  they  suffered.  It  is  hard  to  suffer  for  telling  the  truth  ;  but  it  would  be 
harder  still  for  the  true  preacher  to  tell  a  lie.  Suffering  for  the  gospel's  sake 
has  helped  its  spread.  The  most  savage  persecutors  have  been  convinced  and 
conquered. 

III.  Eevealed  the  greatness  of  man's  salvation. — "That  they  may  also 
obtain  the  salvation  which  is  in  Christ  with  eternal  glory"  (ver.  10).  The 
apostles  not  only  announced  the  resurrection  of  Christ  as  an  undeniable  fact, 
but  showed  how  that  fact  brought  hope  and  salvation  to  perishing  men.  The 
world  had  never  before  heard  such  news  ;  it  seemed  almost  too  good  to  be  true. 
The  grandeur  of  the  blessings  offered,  staggered  them.  Salvation  is  not  only 
rescue  from  present  and  future  misery,  but  is  the  affluent  bestowment  of 
unutterable  and  eternal  glory  ;  it  is  an  ever-expanding  benediction. 

IV.  Affirmed  certain  important  and  suggestive  truths  (vers.  11-13). — The 
symmetrical  form  of  "  the  faithful  saying,"  and  the  rhythmical  balance  of  the 
parallel  clauses  in  these  verses,  make  it  probable  that  they  formed  part  of  an 
ancient  Church  hymn.  The  apostolic  gospel  is  here  compressed  into  a  short, 
intelligible,  and  suggestive  formula.  To  die  with  Christ  is  to  live  with  Him  ;  to 
suffer  with  Him  is  to  reign  with  Him ;  to  deny  Him  is  to  be  denied  :  if  we 
believe  Him  not,  his  faithfulness  remains  intact.  The  phrases  constitute  an 
epitome  of  the  gospel  as  to  its  reception  and  results.  If  man  changes,  Christ 
cannot  change — another  argument  to  remain  steadfast  in  the  faith. 

Lessons.— 1.  The  leading  theme  of  the  gospel  is  Christ.  2.  The  gospel  cannot 
he  silenced  hy  persecution.     3.   The  glory  of  the  gospel  is  its  saving  effects. 

GERM  NOTES   ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.    10.      Salvation    with    Eternal  Vers.  12,  13.  Denial  of  Christ. 

Glory.  I.  We  may  take  the  part  of  His 

I.  The  necessity  of  salvation. — 1.  Sin  enemies,  or  ignore  His  supreme  claim 
is  the  cause  of  danger  and  ruin.    2.  Sal-  to  allegiance. 

ration  cannot   he  procured   hy  human  II.  We    may   transform    Him   into 

arts  or  inventions.  a  myth,  a    fairy  tale,   a    subjective 

II.  The  source  of  salvation. — "In     principle. 

Christ  Jesus."     1.  By  designation  and  III.  Find  a  substitute  in  our  own 

promise.     2.  By  qualification.     3.  Sal-  life  for  His  gp'ace. 

vation  is  dispensed  hy  Him.  IV.    Assume    that    He   is   not    the 

III.  Salvation  on  earth  is  succeeded  ground  of  our  reconciliation,  nor 
by  eternal  glory  in  heaven. — 1.  Free-  the  Giver  of  salvation,  nor  the  sole 
domfroynsin  and  its  consequences.  2.  In-  Head  of  His  Church. — Local  Preacher's 
troditctioninto  heaven.    3.  The  everlasting  Treasury. 

vision  of  Deity. — Helps  for  the  Pidpit. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  14—18. 

Solemn  Exhortations  on  Vital  Themes. 

I.  To  avoid  unnecessary  controversy. — 1.  Controversy  assumes  a  very  different 
spirit  when  conducted  as  in  the  presence  of  God.  "  Charging  them  before  the 
Lord  "  (ver.  14).  The  efforts  of  the  controversialist  are  usually  directed  more 
to  gaining  a  victory  over  his  opponent  than  to  secure  the  triumph  of  the  truth  : 
the  contest  is  apt  to  degenerate  into  personalities,  and  the  truth  is  clouded  with 
the  mists  of  human  passions.  The  true  champion  of  the  truth  must  be  willing 
to  efface  himself,  and  to  remember  the  cause  is  not  his  but  God's.  He  must 
68 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.    TIMOTHY.        chap.  ii. 


conduct  his  case  as  in  the  presence  of  God,  and  be  assured  that  God  will 
triumphantly  defend  His  own  cause.  Nothing  is  gained  if  the  truth  suffers  in 
the  least  degree.  2.  Verbal  controversy  is  pi'ofitless.  "  That  they  strive  not 
about  words  to  no  profit  "  (ver.  14).  "  We  have  two  ears  and  one  tongue,"  said 
Zeno,  "  that  we  may  hear  much  and  talk  little."  A  remarkable  modern  writer 
asserts  that  empty  talk  is  on  the  increase  in  the  world.  The  superabundance 
is  alarming ;  a  new  deluge  is  threatened ;  the  spirit  is  lost  in  hollow  words. 
Invention  in  all  spheres  is  on  the  increase,  the  invention  of  pretences  remarkably 
so.  One  feels  inclined  to  call  out  with  Hamlet  despairingly,  "  Words,  words, 
words  !  "  Words  are  the  dominant  power  nowadays  in  so-called  intellectual 
pursuits  :  it  is  not  the  informing  spirit,  but  the  phrase,  which  is  puffed  and 
offered  for  sale.  3.  Verbal  controversy  tends  to  unsettle.  "  To  the  subverting  of 
the  hearers"  (ver.  14).  Much  talking  does  not  build  up,  but  pulls  down.  Idle 
controversies  have  wrought  widespread  mischief.  The  metaphysical  contest 
between  the  Jesuits  and  Jansenists  on  the  sufficiency  and  efficacy  of  the  grace 
of  God  in  salvation  thickened  into  a  confusion  of  words,  till  the  Jesuits  introduced 
into  this  logomachy  papal  bulls,  royal  edicts,  and  a  regiment  of  dragoons. 

II.  To  aim  at  becoming  a  worker  in  the  truth  Divinely  approved. — 1.  This 
is  attained  only  by  diligent  study.  "  Study  " — be  earnest,  diligent — *'  to  shew 
thyself  approved  unto  God  "  (ver.  15).  It  is  presumption  to  expect  the  help  of 
the  Spirit  without  earnest  study  and  prayer.  Patient  and  sustained  investigation 
will  lead  to  rare  discoveries  of  truth.  In  all  our  studies  we  should  seek  not  our 
own  intellectual  gratification,  but  the  Divine  approval.  The  loftiest  inquiries 
after  truth  terminate  in  God.  2.  This  gives  courage  in  declaring  and  defending 
the  truth.  "  A  workman  that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed,  rightly  dividing  the 
v/ord  of  truth  "  (ver.  1 5).  Dividing  the  word  is  a  metaphor  taken  from  a  father 
or  steward  cutting  and  distributing  bread  among  his  children.  We  must  have 
the  confidence  and  courage  to  cut  a  straight  line  for  the  truth  in  which  we  can 
walk  straightforward,  turning  neither  to  the  right  nor  the  left.  When  we 
confuse  the  truth,  we  become  ourselves  confused  and  exposed  to  shame. 

III.  To  be  superior  to  the  profanity  that  wraps  up  error  in  the  garb  of 
truth. — 1.  Profanity  in  speech  engenders  sin  (ver.  16).  Sin  in  speech  soon 
becomes  sin  in  act.  A  profane  coachman,  pointing  to  one  of  the  horses  he  was 
driving,  said  to  a  pious  traveller,  "  That  horse,  sir,  knows  when  I  swear  at 
him."  "  Yes,"  said  the  traveller,  "  and  so  does  One  above."  Shun  profane  and 
vain  babblings ;  stand  above,  separate  from,  be  superior  to  them.  2.  Error  is 
a  deadly  disease.  "  Their  word  will  eat  as  doth  a  canker  :  of  whom  is  Hymenseus 
and  Philetus"  (ver.  17).  The  consuming  progress  of  mortification  is  the  image. 
They  pretend  to  give  rich  spiritual  pasture  to  their  disciples  :  the  only  pasture 
is  that  of  a  spiritual  cancer,  or  gangrene,  feeding  on  their  vitals  (Fausset). 
3.  Error  on  one  fundamental  truth  is  disastrous  to  faith  (ver.  18).  To  teach 
that  the  Resurrection  is  past  is  to  take  away  one  important  feature  of  our  hope 
as  to  future  bliss.  We  must  not  confuse  the  future  resurrection  of  the  body 
with  the  spiritual  resurrection  of  the  soul  from  the  death  of  sin.  The  truths  of 
the  gospel  are  homogeneous  :  to  reject  one  is  to  impair  our  faith  in  all. 

Lessons. — 1.  Truth  is  rarely  helped  by  controversy.  2.  Progress  in  truth  is 
pleasing  to  God.     3.  Error  is  the  foe  of  practical  godliness. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  15.  The  Important  Function  of  truth  is  clearly  and  accurately  to 
the  Gospel  Ministry.  distinguish  truth  from  error. 

II.  To  mark  the  proper  distinctions 
I.  Rightly  to  divide  the  word  of     between  the  law  and  the  gospel. 

G9 


CHAP.  II.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   II.    TIMOTHY. 


III.  To  point  out   the  proper  con-  Vers.  16-18.  Useless  Talk— 
nection  and  harmony  which  subsist  I.  Tends  to  augment  impiety  (ver. 
among  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel.  16). 

IV.  To  treat  the  various  branches  II.  Corrupts  and  destroys  the  life 
of  Divine  revelation  according  to  their  of  godliness  (ver.  17). 

just  importance  and  influence.  III.   Is  fruitful  in   spreading  per- 

V.  To  unfold    the  truths  of   God  nicious  errors  (ver.  18). 
seasonably  and  in  a  suitableness  to  IV.  Unsettles  the  faith  of  young 
the  calls  of  Providence  and  the  cir-  converts. 

cumstances  of  mankind. — P.  Hutchison. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH. —Verses  19—22. 

The  Security  and  Purity  of  the  Church. 

I.  The  Church  is  Divinely  founded. — "  The  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure" 
(ver.  19).  Or,  according  to  K.V.,  "  Howbeit  the  firm  foundation  of  God 
standeth."  The  Church  is  secure  because  it  rests  on  God  :  no  other  foundation 
could  bear  the  magnificent  superstructure  which  is  being  built  upon  it.  There 
is  a  story  told  of  Julian  the  Apostate  that,  in  his  youth,  be  tried  to  raise  a 
memorial  shrine  to  the  holy  Mamas ;  but  as  he  built,  the  earth  at  the  foundation 
crumbled — God  and  tbe  holy  martyr  refusing  to  accept  the  labour  and  offering 
of  his  hands.  It  is  a  significant  allegory  of  men  who  toil  and  build  on  rotten 
and  insecure  foundations. 

II.  The  Church  has  a  Divine  and  a  human  aspect. — 1.  The  Divine  aspect. 
This  is  indicated  in  the  inscription,  "The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  His" 
(ver.  19).  The  members  of  the  Church  live  in  different  ages,  in  different  climes, 
among  different  nationalities,  and  in  varying  conditions;  but  the  Lord  knows 
them  all,  and  each  one  has  his  place  in  the  grand  Divine  commonwealth.  The 
omniscient  God  is  the  strength  and  comfort  of  His  Church.  2.  The  human 
aspect.  "  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ  depart  from  iniquity  " 
(ver.  19).  The  Lord  recognises  as  His  only  those  who  are  holy.  Some  seventy 
years  after  Pentecost  the  veil  is  lifted  by  the  hand  of  a  Roman  statesman  from 
the  comparative  obscurity  ^ of  >Hthe  Christian  Church,  and  discloses  an  army  of 
soldiers  of  the  cross  whose  bond  of  union  is  still  stamped  conspicuously  with 
the  apostolic  seal,  "  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ  depart  from 
iniquity."  At  the  commencement  of  the  second  century  Pliny  reports  to 
Trajan,  as  the  result  of  what  he  could  extort  from  the  Christians  in  his  province, 
"  that  this  was  the  sum  of  their  fault  or  error,  that  they  were  wont  to  meet 
together  on  a  stated  day  before  sunrise  and  sing  a  hymn  to  Christ  as  God,  and 
bind  themselves  by  a  sacramentum  that  they  would  not  commit  theft  or  robbery 
or  adultery,  that  they  would  not  break  faith  nor  repudiate  a  trust."  A 
memorable  record!  honourable  to  the  Roman  to  whose  impartial  accuracy  it 
is.  due,  as  well  as  to  the  Church  whose  clear  and  simple  character  it  reflects, 
and  more  precious,  alike  in  its  historical  and  in  its  practical  instruction,  than 
many  a  famous  volume  {Wace). 

III.  The  grade  of  membership  in  the  Church  depends  on  moral  character 
(v^er.  20). — As  in  a  great  house  there  are  vessels  of  gold  and  silver,  and  wood 
and  earth — their  use  being  according  to  their  quality — so  in  the  Church  every 
member  has  his  place  and  use.  "  The  ark  of  Noah  is  a  type  of  the  Church  : 
as  in  the  former  there  were  together  the  leopard  and  the  kid,  the  wolf  and  the 
lamb,  so  in  the  latter  the  righteous  and  sinners,  vessels  of  gold  and  silver,  with 
vessels  of  wood  and  earth  "  (Jerome).  The  distinguishing  feature  in  the  Church 
is  not  wealth,  ability,  or  social  distinction,  but  holiness. 

IV.  High  moral   character  qualifies  for  exalted  service  in  the  Church 
70 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    It.   TIMOTHY.         chap.  it. 


(ver.  21). — Paul  was  himself  a  vessel  of  honour :  once  among  those  of  wood 
and  of  earth,  he  afterwards  became  by  grace  one  of  gold.  Full  out-and-out 
consecration  to  God  is  the  qualification  for  noblest  work.  God  entrusts  His 
loftiest  missions  to  His  holiest  servants. 

V.  The  Church  demands  purity  in  all  its  members  (ver.  22). — Especially 
are  youthful  lusts  to  be  shunned.  There  are  some  temptations  which  are  best 
conquered  by  flight.  The  graces  of  righteousness,  faith,  charity,  must  be 
followed  in  "  peace  vdth  all  that  call  upon  God  out  of  a  pure  heart."  The 
Church  is  the  centre  of  peace  and  purity. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  Church  is  dear  to  God.  2.  The  Church  is  a  witness  for  God, 
3.  The  Church  is  powerful  only  as  it  is  pure. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Yer.    19.    Christians    must  forsake  they  hear  Him.     5.  By  the  work  they  do 

Evil.  for  Him.     6.  By  their  suffering  for  and 

I.  Those    described. — "Every    one  with  Him.     7.  As  waiting  for  Him. 
that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ." —  II.  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the 

1.  To  name  the  name  of  Christ  is  to  name  of  Christ  depart  from  iniquity. 
accept  Him.  2.  To  profess  Him  openly.  ■ — 1.  Naming  the  name  of  Christ  comes 
3.  To  be  identified  ivith  Him,.  before  departing  from,  iniquity.     2.   Is 

II.  The  command. — "  Depart  from  to  befolloioed  by  departing  from  iniquity. 
iniquity."  1.  Because  a  departure  fromj  3.  Naming  the  name  of  Christ  and  de- 
iniquity  is  involved  in  accepting  Christ,  parting  from  iniquity  thus  go  together, 

2.  Because  otherwise  ice  Tnust  be  involved      — R.  S.  Candlish. 
in    the   deepest    guMt.     3.    Because   we 

must  be  acting  a  part  characterised  by  Ver.  21.  Fit  for  the  Master's  Service. 

the  vilest  hypocrisy.    4.  Because  in  Christ  I.    There  are   some  in  the  Church 

there  is  grace  and  strength  to  obey  this  the  Master  cannot  use  because  they 

command. — Stewart.  are   not   fit  for    service. — 1.    Because 

they  hold  false  doctrines.     2.    Because 

The  Foundation  of  God.  they  are  given  to  vain  babbliiigs. 

I.  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  II.    What   constitutes    fitness    for 

His. — 1.  As  redeemed  by  Him.     2.  By  Christ's    service? — 1.     Uprightness    of 

the  Spirit^ s  work  in  them.     3.    By  the  character.    2.  Fidelity  to  duty.    3.  Love, 

need  they  have  of  Him.     4.  By  the  love  4.  Peace. — Lay  Preacher. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  23—26. 

The  Duty  of  the  Gospel  Teacher. 

I.  To  remember  that  he  is  the  servant  of  the  Lord  (ver.  24). — The  minister 
of  the  gospel  is  not  the  servant  of  man,  or  of  a  clique  or  party,  nor  is  he  the 
servant  of  the  Church  excepting  so  far  as  in  serving  the  Church  he  is  serving 
the  Lord.  His  high  distinction  is  to  be  the  servant  of  the  Lord ;  from  Him  he 
receives  his  commission  and  authority,  and  to  Him  he  is  accountable.  The 
servant  should  seek  to  imitate  the  spirit  and  example  of  his  Master. 

II.  To  be  careful  to  avoid  themes  provocative  of  useless  contention  (ver.  23). — 
A  spark  will  raise  a  conflagration ;  a  single  word  may  light  the  lurid  torch  of 
war.  "  You  may  tame  the  wild  beast ;  the  conflagration  of  the  American  forest 
will  cease  when  all  the  timber  and  the  dry  wood  is  consumed  ;  but  you  cannot 
arrest  the  progress  of  that  cruel  word  you  uttered  carelessly  yesterday  or  this 
morning  "  {Robertson).  Of  all  men  the  minister  of  the  gospel  should  be  cautious 
and  circumspect  in  speech.     An  indiscreet  word  may  lead  to  endless  contention. 

III.  To  mingle  gentleness  and  patience  with  sound  and  faithful  instruction 

71 


CHAP.  III.       HOMILETIC  COMxMENTARY :    11,   TIMOTHY. 


(vers.  24,  25).— The  successful  teacher  must  have  not  only  intelligence  and 
ability,  but  the  aptitude  that  comes  from  patient  study  and  the  gentleness 
which  is  the  fruit  of  stern  self -discipline.  He  is  to  be  gentle  that  he  may  not 
be  the  cause  of  wrong,  and  patient  so  as  to  endure  wrong.  To  gain  influence 
with  others  we  must  practise  much  self-suppression.  The  simplest  statement 
of  truth  will  sometimes  raise  opposition.  It  should  be  our  aim  to  allay  or 
disarm  opposition,  so  that  the  taught  may  receive  with  meekness  the  engrafted 
word.  Truth  is  most  effective  in  the  mind  prepared  for  its  reception.  The 
judicious  teacher  will  know  when  and  how  to  speak. 

IV.  To  aim  at  the  moral  rescue  of  those  ensnared  in  error  (vers.  25,  26). — 
The  gospel  teacher  has  to  contend  not  only  with  subtle  phases  of  error,  but 
with  the  devil,  the  great  master-spirit  of  all  error.  To  rescue  man  from  sin 
is  to  snatch  him  from  the  clutches  of  the  evil  one.  Everything  depends  on  the 
manner  and  spirit  in  which  the  truth  is  presented,  and  every  possible  means 
should  be  used  to  ensure  success.  Anthony  Blane,  one  of  Felix  Neff's  earlier 
converts,  was  very  earnest  in  winning  souls  for  Christ.  The  enemies  of  the 
gospel  were  angry  at  his  success,  and  treated  him  with  scoffs  and  threats.  One 
night  he  was  followed  by  a  man  in  a  rage,  who  struck  him  a  violent  blow  on 
the  head.  "  May  God  forgive  and  bless  you  !  "  was  Anthony's  quiet  and  Christian 
rejoinder.  A  few  days  after  the  same  man  met  him  in  a  narrow  road,  and 
stretching  out  his  hand  beseechingly,  cried  in  a  tremulous  voice,  "  Mr.  Blane, 
forgive  me,  and  let  all  be  over  !  "  Thus  did  this  disciple  of  Christ,  by  gentle 
and  peaceful  words,  make  a  friend  of  an  enemy. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  best  teacher  is  always  anxious  to  learn.  2.  To  teach  others  to 
profit  we  must  he  masters  of  oK^r selves.  3.  The  highest  end  of  teaching  is  the  salvation 
of  others. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers.  23-26.  The  Model  Preacher—  III.  Is  thoroughly  master  of   his 

theme. 


I.  Avoids  occasions  of  strife. 

II.  Understands  the  use  an( 
of  gentleness.  Satan. 


IV.  Aims  at  the  immediate  rescue 
II.  Understands  the  use  and  power     of  men  from  the  thraldom  of  sin  and 


CHAPTER  III. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  In  the  last  days. — In  the  time  just  before  the  Lord's  appearing,  in  which  wicked- 
ness will  come  to  a  head — a  head  that  will  be  crushed.  Perilous  times  shall  come. — 
"  Grievous  seasons  will  ensue." 

Ver.  2.  Lovers  of  their  own  selves. — "  No  man  ever  yet  hated  his  own  flesh,"  says 
St.  Paul.  The  men  here  spoken  of  are  they  who  make  undue  provision  for  softness  and  ease, 
the  self-indulgent.  Covetous. — Obliterates  the  similarity  of  sound.  As  we  might  say, 
"lovers  of  selves"  and  "lovers  of  silver"  as  it  ministers  to  self.  Boasters. — "The  word 
originally  designated  the  vagabond  mountebanks,  conjurors,  etc.,  and  from  them  was  trans- 
ferred to  any  braggart  or  boaster  vaunting  himself  in  possession  of  that  which  was  not 
his"  {Trench).  Proud. — R.V.  "haughty."  Such  as  out  of  a  swollen  estimate  of  their  own 
importance  look  down  on  others.  Quoting  Prov.  iii.  34,  St.  James  and  St.  Peter  remind  us 
that  "  God  resisteth  " — sets  Himself  in  battle-array  against — "  the  proud."  Unthankful. — 
The  graceless.  The  only  other  use  in  the  New  Testament  describes  those  who  take  good 
from  the  hand  of  the  all-bountiful  Father  without  grace  (Luke  vi.  35). 

Ver.  3.  Without  natural  aifection. — Especially  that  between  parents  and  children.    Truce- 

72 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.   TIMOTHY.       chap.  hi. 


breakers. — R.V.  "implacable."  "The  absolutely  irreconcilable"  (T'/'^TicA).  False  accusers. — 
R.V.  "slanderers."  Gr.  5idj3o\ot  (whence  "aevils").  Despisers  of  those  that  are  good. — 
Gr.  "  no  friends  of  the  good." 

Ver.  4.  Traitors.— The  word  is  used  of  Judas  (Luke  vi.  16)  and  the  Jewish  authorities 
(Acts  vi.  52).  It  means  men  among  whom  there  is  no  fidelity.  Heady.— R.V.  "  headstrong  "  — 
lit.  "  falling  forward  " — the  reckless,  impetuous.  Lovers  of  pleasures  more  than  lovers  of  God. 
— R.V.  "  rather  than  lovers  of  God."  If  the  love  of  pleasure,  coarse  or  refined,  is  paramount, 
it  will  be  at  the  cost  of  the  love  of  God. 

Ver.  5.  Having  a  form  of  godliness,  but  denying  the  power  thereof. — It  is  a  new  heathendom 
under  a  Christian  name  which  St.  Paul  here  describes. 

Ver.  6.  Silly  women. — The  diminutive  term  ("  little  women  ")  is  not  found  again  in  New 
Testament.    The  contemptuous  epithet  indicates  their  weakness  and  proneness  to  temptation. 

Ver.  7.  Never  able. — In  the  nature  of  things  whilst  such  conditions  lasted.  To  come  to 
the  knowledge. — I.e.  the  complete  knowledge. 

Ver.  8.  Jannes  and  Jambres. — According  to  Jewish  tradition,  sons  of  Balaam,  at  first 
teachers,  then  opponents,  of  Moses.     They  perished  with  the  Egyptians  in  the  Red  Sea, 

Ver.  9.  Shall  be  manifest. — "  Thoroughly  exposed."  As  theirs  also  was. — R.V.  "  came  to 
be."  The  pronoun  points  to  these  men  far  removed  as  monitory  specimens  of  those  who 
oppose  truth, 

Ver,  10.  But  thou  hast  fully  known. — R.V.  "  didst  follow."  The  mental  process  of  investi- 
gation and  the  moral  process  of  imitating  the  good  seem  to  blend  in  this  expression,  as  the 
words  following  indicate. 

Ver.  11.  What  persecutions  I  endured. — The  old  man  lives  over  again  the  life  of  hardship 
and  glorifies  his  Deliverer. 

Ver.  13.  Seducers. — R.V.  "impostors."  There  is  "a  reference  to  incantation  by  howling, 
and  then  to  the  practice  of  magic  generally,  and  thence  to  deception  and  imposture 
generally "  (Mlicott).  Shall  wax  worse  and  worse — "  Shall  make  advance  toward  the 
worse."  In  ver.  9  the  apostle  says  they  shall  not  advance  further  without  exposure ;  here 
he  seems  to  say  that  after  exposure  they  do  not  mind  to  what  lengths  they  go.  The 
Nemesis  of  deception  is  self-deception. 

Ver.  14.  Knowing  of  whom. — R.V.  margin,  "  Gr.  what  persons."  The  apostle  does  not  take 
the  sole  credit  of  the  discipleship  of  Timothy,  whose  "  faith  does  not  stand  in  the  wisdom 
of  men,  but  in  the  power  of  God." 

Ver.  15.  From  a  child. — R.V.  "a  babe,"  from  earliest  infancy.  The  Holy  Scriptures. — 
R.V.  "  the  sacred  writings."  A  comprehensive  term  including,  like  our  Lord's  threefold 
division  in  Luke  xxiv.  44,  all  the  Jewish  canonical  Scriptures. 

Ver.  16.  All  scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God,  and  is  profitable. — R.V.  "  Every 
scripture  inspired  of  God  is  also  profitable."  Note  that  the  "  scripture"  of  this  verse  is  not 
the  same  as  the  "  sacred  writings  "  of  ver.  15.  Here  it  is  simply  "  every  writing  inspired  of 
God."  The  inbreathing  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  condition  of  its  being  profitable.  For 
correction. — Setting  upright  again  something  that  was  out  of  the  perpendicular.  For 
instruction. — Fatherly  discipline  or  process  of  education,  often  by  chastisement  or  severe 
methods.     The  word  of  God  does  not  always  speak  smooth  things  to  us. 

Ver,  17,  Throughly  furnished. — Completely  fitted  out,  as  a  soldier  with  full  accoutre- 
ments, or  a  workman  with  tools. 

MAIN-  HOMILETICS    OF   THE    PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—5. 

The  End  of  the  Chi'istian  Dispensation. 

I.  It  will  be  a  period  of  great  moral  danger. — "  In  the  last  days  perilous 
times  shall  come  "  (ver.  1) — difficult  and  grievous  times,  when  it  will  be  difficult 
to  know  what  is  to  be  done,  what  to  believe,  who  to  believe,  how  to  act.  There 
will  be  indifference  to  revealed  truth,  nay,  to  all  truth  ;  making  light  of  error, 
and  not  reproving  it ;  holding  that  all  religions  are  so  far  right  and  acceptable, 
and  that  there  are  a  thousand  ways  to  heaven,  if  there  be  a  heaven  or  a  hell 
at  all.  Laxity  of  opinion  and  laxity  of  morals  will  prevail.  Immorality  will 
overflow  in  every  form,  and  not  be  condemned.  A  loose  faith,  a  loose  practice, 
an  easy  law,  an  easy  gospel,  all  the  worst  forms  of  a  benumbing  latitudinarianism 
wiU  prevail. 

II.  It  will  be  a  period  in  which  all  kinds  of  vice  will  abound  (vers.  2-4). — 
The  catalogue  of  sins  enumerated  in  these  verses  indicate  a  relapse  of  the 
professing  Christian  Church  into  the  worst  vices  of  the  rankest  heathenism. 
Even  the  young  will  be  infected  with  the  degeneracy  of  the  times.     The  leading 

73 


CHAP.  III.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.    TIMOTHY. 


characteristic  of  the  sinners  of  that  age  is  described  in  the  phrase,  *'  Lovers  of 
pleasures  more  than  lovers  of  God." 

III.  It  will  be  a  period  in  which  true  godliness  will  be  falsified. — *'  Having 
a  form  of  godliness,  but  denying  the  power  thereof"  (ver.  5).  Yice  is  only- 
aggravated  when  it  is  practised  under  the  garb  of  religion  ;  its  assumed  guise 
renders  it  not  less  but  more  detestable  :  it  is  a  daring  attempt  to  drag  God  down 
to  the  level  of  our  sins.  Samuel  Kutherford  has  said  that  there  is  a  spice 
of  hypocrisy  in  us  all.  This  may  be  so ;  but  it  is  another  thing  when  we 
consciously  and  deliberately  act  the  hypocrite.  The  hypocrite  maps  out  the 
road  to  heaven,  knows  it  well,  has  sounded  with  plummet  the  depths  of  the 
promises,  and  can  talk  about  them.  But  he  has  accepted  a  two-parts  Christ. 
There  is  a  little  pet  sin  snugly  tucked  up  in  a  warm  corner  of  his  heart  that 
he  is  unwilling  to  part  with.  Christ  is  his  priest,  his  prophet,  but  he  will  not 
have  Him  as  his  king  ;  he  will  not  have  this  Man  to  reign  over  and  in  him. 

IV.  It  will  be  a  period  in  which  there  will  be  little  hope  of  reclaiming  the 
apostates. — "  From  such  turn  away  "  (ver.  5).  Their  case  is  hopeless ;  all  efforts 
to  benefit  them  are  unavailing;  they  must  be  left  to  the  just  recompense  of 
their  evil  ways.  It  is  the  acme  of  obstinate  wickedness  when  all  hope  of 
recovery  has  to  be  abandoned.  If  the  gospel  is  persistently  rejected,  there  is  no 
possibility  of  salvation.  It  is  a  sad  reflection  that  there  may  be  those  now  in  our 
midst  who  are  as  desperately  vile  as  any  in  the  last  days  can  be. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  last  days  will  be  conspicuous  for  aboundiiig  iniquity.  2.  The 
last  days  will  be  a  severe  trial  of  faith.  3.  The  last  days  will  witTiess  the  signal 
punishment  of  the  unbelieving. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  1,  2.  Self-love.  rate  from,  the  love  of  God  and  our  neigh- 

I.  Self-love  pursuing  what  is  upon     bours. — Waterland. 
the  whole  absolutely  best  for  us  is 

innocent  and  good.  Ver.  5.  A  Form  of  Godliness  without 

II.  There  can  be  no  culpable  self-     the  Power. 

love  but  in  respect  of  temporal  things.         I.  A  form  of  godliness. — 1.  An  out- 

— Even  in  this  respect  there  may  be  ward  profession   of  religion.       2.    An 

degree  of  self-love,  not  only  innocent  affectatio7i  of  godly  discoui-se.    3.  Affect- 

but  praiseworthy.  ing  certain  modes  and  fashionable  ges- 

III.  A  vicious  self-love. — 1.  Mani-  tures  of  godliness.  4.  A  reliance  on 
fested    in    pride.      2.    Sensuality.      3.  outward  duties  of  religion. 

Avarice  or  selfinterestedness.  II.  A   man   may   have   a    form   of 

Lessons. — \.  Self  lovers  are  not  greater  godliness   when  yet  he   is   very   far 

enemies  to  others  in  intention  than  they  from  the  power — the  truth  and  reality 

are  in  effect  to  themselves.     2.  There  can  of    it. — Formalists    are    described    in 

be  no  such  thing  as  true  happiness  sepa-  vers.  2-4. — Bishop  Bidl. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  6—9. 

Characteristics  of  False  Teachers. 

I.  They  furtively  insinuate  themselves  into  the  midst  of  domestic  life. — 
"For  of  this  sort  are  they  which  creep  into  houses"  (ver.  6).  As  a  serpent 
crawls  towards  its  prey,  or  as  a  wolf  stealthily  attacks  the  sheepfold.  The 
peace  of  many  a  home  has  been  destroyed  by  the  cunning  of  unprincipled  men. 

II.  They  practise  their  wiles  on  weak  women. — 1.  Women  whose  sinful  lives 
make  them  a  prey  to  conflicting  passions.  "And  lead  captive  silly  women  laden 
with  sins,  led  away  with  divers  lusts "  (ver.  6).     The  most  abandoned  woman 

74 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.    TIMOTHY.       chap.  in. 


has  her  moments  of  remorse,  when  her  conscience  is  roused  and  her  soul  bowed 
down  under  the  load  of  conscious  sin.  It  is  then  that  the  false  teacher,  who 
promises  ease  of  conscience,  is  eagerly  listened  to,  especially  if  too  much 
restriction  is  not  placed  on  the  indulgence  of  unholy  desire.  2.  Women  who 
crave  for  novelty  rather  than  the  knowledge  of  the  truth.  "  Ever  learning,  and 
never  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth "  (ver.  7).  They  qidckly 
disparage  what  they  already  know  by  the  restless  desire  and  curiosity  to  gain 
something  new.  It  is  not  a  paradox  but  a  truth  to  say  that  their  constant 
craving  for  knowledge  leaves  them  utterly  ignorant,  for  nothing  can  be  known 
that  is  forgotten  as  soon  as  it  is  learned.  The  Gnostic  teachers,  like  more  recent 
heretics,  laid  hold  of  the  female  sex  and  encouraged  them  to  use  all  their 
seductive  arts  in  popularising  their  theories. 

III.  They  have  their  prototypes  in  past  ages. — 1.  In  men  who  auda- 
ciously opposed  the  truth.  "  Now  as  Jannes  and  Jambres  withstood  Moses, 
so  do  these  also  resist  the  truth  "  (ver.  8).  These  were  the  traditional  names 
of  the  Egyptian  magicians  who  sought  by  their  conjuring  tricks  to  discredit 
the  authority  of  Moses.  It  is  the  ambition  of  false  teachers  to-day  to  imitate 
and  if  possible  outrival  the  preacher  of  the  gospel.  2.  In  men  whose  degraded 
minds  rendered  them  incapable  of  appreciating  the  truth.  "  Men  of  corrupt 
minds,  reprobate  concerning  the  faith "  (ver.  8).  Their  own  vitiated  tastes 
and  misused  powers  incapacitated  them  from  testing  the  truth.  They  were 
bewitched  and  misled  by  their  own  foolish  errors,  and  infatuated  by  their 
own  sins. 

lY.  The  inevitable  exposure  of  their  wicked  and  insensate  folly  limits 
their  power  for  mischief. — "  But  they  shall  proceed  no  further  :  for  their  folly 
shall  be  manifest  "  (ver.  9).  Wise  as  they  maj^  seem,  their  folly  shall  be 
exposed.  In  all  wickedness  there  is  an  element  of  weakness  which  limits  its 
power  to  do  evil.  They  who  seek  to  deceive  others  end  in  being  most  deceived 
themselves. 

Lessons. — 1.  False  teachers  are  not  particular  as  to  the  instruments  they 
employ.  2.  Error  hopelessly  degrades  its  victims.  3.  False  teachers  expose 
themselves. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  8,  9.   Opposition  to  the  Truth —  III.  The  foUy  of  such  an  attitude 

I.  Is  the  offspring  of  ignorance  and  will  be  exposed  and  the  opponents 
obstinate  wickedness.  signally  punished. 

II.  Is  limited  in  its  power. 

MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PAR  AGRA  PH. —Verses  10—13. 

Charactei'istics  of  a  Genuine  Teacher. 

I.  The  genuine  teacher  is  known  by  the  character  of  his  doctrine  and  the 
integrity  of  his  life  (ver.  10). — In  contrast  with  the  false  teachers  the  apostle 
appeals  to  his  own  teaching  and  manner  of  life.  Both  were  well  known  and 
had  been  tested  in  trying  circumstances.  The  genuine  teacher  is  not  actuated 
by  selfish  motives,  but  by  a  desire  to  spread  the  truth  and  promote  the  glory  of 
Christ,  and  the  purity  of  his  aim  is  evident  in  the  Christian  spirit  with  which 
he  treats  his  opponents  and  vilifiers. 

II.  The  genuine  teacher  is  known  by  his  sufferings  for  the  truth. — 
1.  Suffering  for  the  truth  is  the  lot  of  the  faithful  (vers.  11,  12).  Christianity 
condemns  all  other  religions  and  claims  to  be  the  only  religion  ;  it  enjoins 
precepts  directly  contrary  to  the  instincts  of  the  natural  man,  and  it  predicts 

75 


CHAP.  III.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.    TIMOTHY. 


that  persecutions  are  sure  to  overtake  its  most  ardent  followers.  But  it 
promises  help  in  suffering  and  a  future  reward  of  unspeakable  glory.  A  man 
must  be  truly  in  earnest  who  embraces  Christianity  with  all  its  conditions  and 
consequences.  2.  From  all  suffering  for  the  truth  God  graciously  delivers.  "  But 
out  of  them  all  the  Lord  delivered  me  "  (ver.  11).  If  Paul  was  delivered  from 
trials,  unparalleled  in  their  number  and  severity,  the  most  oppressed  servant 
of  Christ  need  not  despair.  With  this  example  before  us  we  need  not  fear 
whatever  persecution  and  suffering  may  be  entailed  in  a  faithful  propagation 

of  the  truth. 

III.  The  genuine  teacher  is  known  by  contrast  with  the  wicked  and  decep- 
tive charlatanry  of  false  teachers. — "  But  evil  men  and  seducers  shall  wax 
worse  and  worse,  deceiving,  and  being  deceived"  (ver.  13).  Magical  arts  were 
practised  at  Ephesus ;  but  these  were  abandoned  by  all  who  embraced  Christ.  The 
false  teachers  did  not  hesitate  to  use  the  tricks  of  the  conjuror  to  deceive  the 
unwary ;  and  as  they  became  more  reckless  in  their  methods  and  more  wicked  in 
their  lives,  they  ended  by  being  themselves  deceived.  As  Bengel  remarks,  "  He 
who  has  once  begun  to  deceive  others  is  the  less  easily  able  to  recover  himself 
from  error,  and  the  more  easily  embraces  in  turn  the  errors  of  others."  There  is 
the  widest  contrast  between  the  showy  and  tricky  charlatanry  of  false  teachers, 
and  the  sedate  straightforwardness  and  calmly  fervent  zeal  of  the  gospel  preacher. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  truth  forms  the  character  of  its  advocate.  2.  Christianity 
teaches  it^s  how  to  endure  and  conquer  suffering.  3.  The  genuine  teacher  is  a 
living  witness  for  the  truth. 

GERM   NOTES    ON    THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  10,  11.  Personal  Integrity —  1.  The  believer  complies  with  the  will  of 

I.  Is  founded  on  belief  in  the  truth  God.  2.  Presents  his  services  as  an 
(ver.  10).  offering  to  God.     3.  Aims  at  the  glory 

II.  Is  manifested  in  the  life  (ver.  10).      cf  God.      4.    Seeks  the  enjoyment  of 

III.  Is  seen  in  the  carrying  out  of     God. 

a  definite  purpose  (ver.  10).  II.  The  text  declares  the  origin  of 

IV.  Is  exemplified  in  the  virtues  of  the  morality  of  the  believer. — "  In 
the  Christian  character  (ver.  10).  Christ  Jesus."     1.  Implies  union  with 

V.  Is  tested  and  strengthened  by  Christ.  2.  Ch7Hst  frees  from  condemna- 
sufFering  (ver.  11).  tion  and  punishment     3.    Christ  fur- 

VI.  Recognises  the  special  help  of     nishes  motives  to  ohedietwe. 

God  in  affliction  (ver.  11).  III.   The  text  declares  the  conse- 

quence of  the  morality  of  the  believer. 
YeY.\2.  The  Persecution  of  Goodness.  — "Shall  suffer  persecution."  1.  The 
I.  The  text  characterises  the  moral-     world  hates  godliness.     2.  The  world  is 

ity  of  believers. — They   "  live  godly."      reproved  by  godliness. — Stewart. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  14—17. 

The  Use  of  the  Bible  in  the  Christian  Life. 

I.  Instruction  in  the  Bible  from  earliest  youth  imposes  fidelity  to  its  teach- 
ings (vers.  14,  15). — Timothy  had  been  taught  the  Scriptures  from  his  childhood. 
The  reverence  of  his  Jewish  mother  for  the  word  of  God  was  transferred  to  her 
child,  and  his  early  life  was  impregnated  with  the  spirit  and  teaching  of  the 
Old  Testament.  In  the  study  thus  early  begun,  and  still  further  developed  as 
the  years  sped  on,  Timothy  is  urged  to  continue.  Childhood  is  the  most  im- 
pressionable age,  and  instructions  then  received  are  never  forgotten.  Nothing 
makes  so  lasting  an  impression  on  the  young  mind  as  the  word  of  God. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.    TIMOTHY.       chap.  hi. 


II.  The  most  accurate  knowledge  of  the  Bible  will  not  save  the  soul  apart  from 
faith  in  Christ. — "  Which  are  able  to  make  thee  wise  unto  salvation  through 
faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (ver.  15).  It  is  a  good  thing  to  drill  the  young 
mind  in  a  knowledge  of  the  word  of  God  and  to  store  it  with  memory  texts, 
but  care  should  be  taken  to  show  how  all  scripture  reveals  Christ  and  leads  to 
Christ.  The  knowledge  of  the  Bible  makes  us  wise  in  knowing  Christ  as  our 
Saviour.  He  who  has  not  faith  has  not  the  true  wisdom.  The  Jews  knew  the 
Bible  well,  but  they  remained  ignorant  because  they  rejected  Christ. 

III.  The  Bible  is  a  collection  of  Divinely  inspired  writings. — "All  scripture 
is  given  by  inspiration  of  God  "  (ver.  16).  B.Y.  *'  Every  scripture  inspired  of  God" 
As  most  of  the  New  Testament  books  were  written  when  Paul  wrote  this  his 
latest  epistle,  they  are  included  in  the  clause.  Knapp  defines  inspiration  as, 
"  An  extraordinary  Divine  agency  upon  teachers  whilst  giving  instruction,  oral 
or  written,  by  which  they  were  taught  how  and  what  they  should  speak  or 
write."  The  Bible  is  true  because  it  is  God-inspired.  The  same  cannot  be  said 
of  any  other  book.  A  learned  infi_djl  who  examined  the  Bible  for  himself,  and 
came  to  the  irresistible  conclusion  of  its  Divine  authorship,  said,  "  It  would 
have  been  as  easy  for  a  mole  to  have  written  Sir  Isaac  Newton's  treatise  on 
optics  as  for  uninspired  men  to  have  written  the  Bible." 

IV.  The  prime  use  of  the  Bible  is  to  teach  authoritative  truth  and  mould 
the  Christian  life. — 1 .  The  study  of  Divine  truth  disciplines  the  mind  cmd  heart. 
*'  Is  profitable  for  doctrine,  for  reproof,  for  correction,  for  instruction  in  righteous- 
ness "  (ver.  1 6).  Doctrine  and  reproof  embrace  the  speculative  parts  of  divinity, 
correction  and  instruction  the  practical.  The  devout  and  diligent  study  of  the 
Bible  is  a  mental  and  moral  discipline.  Every  man  is  definitely  the  better  for 
close  and  thoughtful  contact  with  the  word  of  God.  Queen  Elizabeth  said, 
"  I  walk  many  times  in  the  pleasant  fields  of  the  Holy  ScripTures7"where'Tpiclc 
up  the  goodliest  herbs  of  sentences  by  pruning,  eat  them  by  reading,  digest 
them  by  musing,  and  lay  them  up  at  length  in  the  high  seat  of  memory  by 
gathering  them  together,  so  that,  having  tasted  their  sweetness,  I  may  less 
perceive  the  bitterness  of  life."  2.  The  study  of  Divine  truth  is  a  moral  equip- 
ment for  the  highest  service.  "  That  the  man  of  God  may  be  perfect,  throughly 
furnished  unto  all  good  works  "  (ver.  1 7).  The  man  of  God  loves  the  book  of 
God ;  by  its  study  he  is  more  fully  perfected  in  his  moral  character,  and  out  of 
its  treasury  he  is  accoutred  for  all  the  requirements  of  his  work.  The  best  work 
is  done  by  the  man  who  knows  his  Bible  best. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  Bible  is  the  GodAnspired  hook.  2.  The  young  should  he 
taught  to  know  and  love  the  Bihle.  3.  The  Bihle  supplies  the  hest  armour  and 
weapons  for  the  Christian  warrior. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSE1S. 

Ver.    1 5.   The  Importanx^e  of  Early  me7i  ivise  unto  salvation  through  faith, 

liistruction  in  the  Bible.  — P.  Hutchison. 

I.  The  advantage  of  a  knowledge 

of  the  Scriptures. — 1.  They  communi-  Vers.   16,   17.   The  Inspiration  and 

cate  truths  of  immense  value.     2.  These  Utility  of  the  Scriptures, 

truths  cannot  he  obtained  hut  by  Divine  I.  The  inspiration  of  the  Scriptures. 

revelation.     3.  Their  knowledge  is   the  — 1.   What  is  inspiration!     The  infal- 

noblest  imp)rovement  of  the  mind.  lible  record  of  an  infallible  revelation. 

II.  The  Holy  Scriptures  are  made  2.  The  object  of  inspiration.  To  give 
effectual  to  salvation. — \.  They  discover  certainty  to  that  written  under  its 
the  method  of  salvation.     2.  They  make  guidance. 

77 


CHAP.  IV.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    IL    TIMOTHY. 


II.  The  utility  of  the  Scriptures.—  Scriptures,  but  only  the  man  of  God 

1.     As     an     unvarying    standard     of  can  have  fellowship  with  it. 
doctrine.     2.    Useful  in  the  confutation  jj     gy    t^ig    fellowship    with    God 

of  all  religious  error.     3.    Useful  as  an  ^j^g  jj^qj^  ^f  Qq^  becomes  complete. 
infallible  stanclard  of  right  and  wrong  fellowship   with    God 

4.    Usefid  for  rnst^^uctwn  m  rzyhteous-  ^^^    ^J^^  ^^^  P^  ^^ 

ness.-Homiletu^  Monthly.  ^^^^  ^^^  ^^^^^  ^^^1  work.-Prec^cAer'. 

Insjyiration  Magazine. 
I.  The  breath  of  God  is  in  the  Holy 


CHAPTER  IV. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1,  I  charge  thee  before  God. — As  in  ii.  14.  The  word  of  itself  does  not  mean  to 
swear,  but  only  as  connected  with  "  in  the  presence  of  God." 

Ver.  2.  Preach  the  word. — I.e.  herald  the  word  of  reconciliation.  Be  instant  in  season, 
ont  of  season. — Stand  over  them  opportunely  and  inopportunely,  on  the  bare  chance  of  doing 
good.  Reprove. — Includes  the  blame  of  everything  blameworthy  and  the  conviction  of  it. 
In  juristic  language  confute.    Rebuke. — Blame,  with  a  decided  manifestation  of  dislike. 

Ver.  3.  Sound  doctrine. — E.V.  margin,  "  healthful  teaching."  As  in  i.  13,  ii.  17,  we  are 
reminded,  by  the  terminology,  of  St.  Luke's  presence.  Having  itching  ears. — This  tickling 
is  usually  taken  to  mean  a  pleasant  sensation. 

Ver.  5.  But  watch  thou.— K.V.  "But  be  thou  sober."  The  reference  is  to  the  clearness 
and  wakefulness  of  attention  which  attends  on  sobriety.  Endure  afflictions. — Before,  the 
old  apostle  had  said  "  with  me,"  now  he  says  "suffer  hardship,"  as  though  Timothy  would 
have  to  meet  it  when  Paul  no  longer  shared  it.     See  next  verse. 

Ver.  6.  For  I  am  now  ready  to  be  oflfered. — R.  V.  "  I  am  already  being  offered."  R.V.  margin, 
"  poured  out  as  a  drink-offering."  When  the  gaoler  took  the  cup  of  hemlock  to  Socrates,  the 
philosopher  asked,  "  Is  it  allowable  to  make  a  drink-offering  of  it  ?  "  Paul's  spirit  was  the 
libation.  Note  the  emphatic  I  in  contrast  to  "  thou  "  (emphatic  too)  in  ver.  5.  The  time  of 
my  departure  is  at  hand. — R.V.  "is  come."  In  Phil.  i.  23  the  desire  for  this  weighing 
anchor  is  expressed.  Now  the  hour  has  arrived.  Socrates,  again,  prayed  to  the  gods  that 
they  would  bless  the  voyage  and  render  it  happy. 

Ver.  7.  I  have  fought  a  good  fight,  I  have  finished  my  course,  I  have  kept  the  faith. — "  All 
three  propositions  denote  the  same  thing.  The  second  gives  prominence  to  one  particular 
form  of  contest,  while  the  third  clearlj'-  expresses  how  entirely  Paul  had  done  with  life  " 
{Hofmawi). 

Ver.  8.  Henceforth. — Lit.  "As  concerns  the  rest.'  At  the  end  of  his  life  there  remains 
nothing  more  than  to  receive  the  reward.  A  crown  of  righteousness. — The  just  award  of 
the  impartial  Umpire. 

Ver.  9.  Do  thy  diligence  to  come  shortly  unto  me. — Make  all  possible  speed  to  arrive,  or 
on  earth  we  shall  not  meet  again.  Perhaps,  however,  it  was  the  loneliness  of  the  apostle 
that  made  him  yearn  for  Timothy.     Compare  vers.  10,  11,  with  ver.  21. 

Ver.   10.  Demas  hath  forsaken   me. — The  word  means  to  leave  in  the  lurch,  or  in  evil 
circumstances.     The  atmosphere  of  the  prison  and  close  association  with  Paul  in  his  present* 
circumstances  could  only  be  endured  by  true  love  and  brave  devotion. 

Ver.  11.  Mark. — He  had  left  the  apostle  at  Perga,  and  afterwards  the  desire  of  Barnabas 
to  take  him  along  with  Paul  and  himself  led  to  a  rupture  between  the  apostles.  It  is 
pleasant  to  see  that  the  old  man  nearing  his  end  has  forgiven  Mark  and  admits  his 
serviceableness. 

Ver.  13.  The  cloke  that  I  left  at  Troas.— The  word  for  "  cloke  "  signifies  a  cloak  with  a 
hood,  such  as  travellers  and  soldiers  used,  and  which  often  formed  their  only  shelter  from 
the  weather. 

Ver.  14.  The  Lord  reward  him  according  to  his  works. — R.V.  "  the  Lord  will  render,"  etc. 
What  the  Jew  Alexander  would  have  said  to  the  Ephesian  mob  we  cannot  now  know,  but 
he  must  have  been  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  Jewish  element  in  the  mob,  and  therefore  we 
conclude  it  was  he  to  whom  St.  Paul  here  refers  (cf.  Acts  xix.  33,  and  margin  R.V.). 

Ver.  16.  At  my  first  answer. — R.V.  "defence"  (Gr.  ditoXoyia).    On  his  first  appearance  in 

78 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.    TIMOTHY,       chap.  iv. 


the  emperor's  court.  No  one  stood  with  me. — R.V.  "  took  my  part,"  i.e.  as  advocate.  All 
men  forsook  me.— bt.  Paul  was  in  the  lion's  mouth  (ver.  17),  and  men  fled  from  the  stroke 
of  the  paw. 

Ver.  17.  The  Lord  stood  with  me.— In  sharp  contrast  to  those  who  fled,  leaving  the  apostle 
in  his  evil  hour.  That  all  the  Gentiles  might  hear. — "God  gave  us  not  the  spirit  of 
cowardice,"  St.  Paul  had  already  written.     He  miglit  say  with  Caesar: — 

*'  Cowards  die  many  times  before  their  deaths ; 
The  valiant  never  taste  of  death  but  once." 

It  seems  to  have  been  of  vastly  more  consequence  to  St.  Paul  that  the  story  of  the  Crucified 
should  be  told  in  the  court  of  Nero,  thjin  that  it  might  cost  him  his  head  to  tell  it.  And  I 
was  delivered  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  lion. — The  lion  was  in  all  probability  Nero.  When 
Marsyas  announced  to  Agrijipa  the  death  of  Tiberius,  he  did  so  in  the  words,  "  The  lion  is 
dead." 

Ver.  18.  And  the  Lord  shall  deliver  me. — Not  a  poor  mangled  fragment  of  me,  "  As  a 
shepherd  rescueth  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  lion  two  legs,  or  a  piece  of  an  ear"  (Amos  iii.  12). 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—5. 

The  Sublime  Mission  of  the  Preacher. — 

I.  Is  to  be  fulfilled  as  in  the  presence  of  the  Divine  Judge  to  whom  alone  he 
is  ultimately  accountable  (ver.  1). — The  apostle  speaks  as  one  who  will  himself 
soon  be  in  the  immediate  presence  of  God,  and  as  if  he  already  felt  the 
overwhelming  awe  of  that  presence.  Before  that  sacred  presence  every 
preacher  must  sooner  or  later  stand,  and  give  an  account  of  his  stewardship. 
All  his  work  should  be  done  with  reference  to  the  day  of  the  Lord's  appearing. 
*'  Christ's  kingdom  is  real  now,  but  not  visible.  It  shall  then  be  both  real  and 
visible.  Now  He  reigns  in  the  midst  of  His  enemies,  expecting  till  they  shall 
be  overthrown.     Then  He  shall  reign  with  His  adversaries  prostrate." 

II.  Necessitates  the  mastery  of  every  method  in  order  to  attain  efficiency 
(ver.  2).— He  must  learn  to  be  urgent  in  proclaiming  the  word  in  all  seasons. 
As  Chrysostom  says,  "  Just  as  the  fountains,  though  none  may  draw  from 
them,  still  flow  on,  and  the  rivers,  though  none  drink  of  them,  still  run,  so  must 
we  do  all  on  our  part  in  speaking,  though  none  give  heed  to  us."  He  must 
study  how  to  reprove  and  confute  the  gainsayers,  as  well  as  how  to  instruct 
the  willing  hearers ;  be  patient  and  forbearing  with  the  one  class,  and 
unceasingly  diligent  with  the  other.  Every  effort  should  be  made  to  gain  the 
best  qualifications  for  making  known  the  gospel  and  winning  souls. 

III.  Should  be  faithfully  prosecuted  in  times  of  defection  and  error 
(vers.  3,  4). — "  He  who  despises  sound  teaching,"  says  Bengel,  "  leaves  sound 
teachers ;  they  seek  instructors  like  themselves."  Teaching  that  aims  simply 
to  please  can  never  instruct.  Love  of  novelty  and  change  is  inimicable  to 
progress  in  Divine  things.  "  Itch  in  the  ears  is  as  bad  as  in  any  other  part 
of  the  body,  and  perhaps  worse."  When  so  many  are  turning  away  from  the 
truth,  it  is  the  more  incumbent  on  the  true  preacher  to  be  in  earnest  in 
faithfully  declaring  the  truth.  Error  must  be  confuted  by  the  clear  and 
emphatic  enunciation  of  sound  doctrine. 

IV.  Demands  constant  vigilance  and  courageous  devotion  to  duty  (ver.  5). — 
Paul,  feeling  that  he  must  soon  be  removed  from  the  scene  of  conflict,  calls  on 
Timoth}^  to  take  his  place  and  acquit  himself  with  vigilance  and  courage.  A 
time  comes  when  our  trusty  friend  and  adviser  is  removed,  and  we  must  depend 
more  upon  ourselves — "  swim  without  the  corks."  All  our  previous  experience 
has  been  a  preparation  for  this.  We  must  not  shrink  from  the  task,  but 
brace  ourselves  up  to  our  work,  and  fall  back  more  completely  on  God. 

Lessons. — 1.  Faithful  preaching  is  an  antidote  to  error.  2.  The  preacher  should 
strive  to  excel  in  the  best  method  of  putting  truth.  3.  The  preacher  should  have 
eternity  always  in  vieiv. 

79 


CHAP.  IV.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    IL    TIMOTHY. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  4.  The  Deficient  and  Dangerous  YI.    The    light    of    reason    cannot 

Nature  of  the  Infidel  Scheme.  show  that  God  will  extend  His  pardon- 

I.  It    does   not    teach    man    as   a  ing  mercy  to  sinners. — P.  Hutchison. 
sinner  how  to  worship  God. 

II.  It    is   an    insufficient    rule    of  Yer.  5.  A  Chamjyionfor  the  Truth — 
moral  duty.  !•  Must  exercise  ceaseless  vigilance. 

III.  The  light  of  reason  cannot  fix  — "  Watch  thou  in  all  things." 

and  ascertain  the  doctrine  of  a  future  II.  Must  be  patient  in  suffering.— 

state  of  rewards  and  punishments.  "■  Endure  afflictions." 

IV.  Is  insufficient  to  investigate  III.  Must  be  active  in  aggressive 
the  origin  of  moral  evil,  or  to  show  mission  work. — "  Do  the  work  of  an 
how  it  can  be  remedied.  evangelist." 

Y.  Sinners  cannot  be  saved  by  any  I Y.  Must  leave  nothing  undone  that 

obedience    they    can    yield    to    the  will  advance  the  truth.—"  Make  full 

dictates  of  reason  and  conscience.  proof  of  thy  ministry." 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.—Verses  6—8. 

The  Faithful  Minister  in  the  Presence  of  Death — 

I.  Undismayed  by  the  terrors  of  approaching  martyrdom. — "I  am  now 
ready  to  be  offered,  and  the  time  of  my  departure  is  at  hand  "  (ver.  6).  What- 
ever hopes  Paul  might  have  had  of  his  probable  release  are  now  dismissed. 
Without  a  murmur,  without  seeking  revenge  upon  his  adversaries,  he  is  ready 
to  be  poured  out  as  a  libation,  to  shed  his  own  blood  in  the  cause  he  loved  more 
than  his  own  life.  Death  has  no  terror ;  it  is  but  a  peaceful  departure.  The 
anchor's  weighed,  the  moorings  are  loosed,  and  he  is  starting  on  the  last  voyage. 

II.  Sustained  by  the  consciousness  of  a  well-spent  life. — 1.  The  Christian 
life  is  a  conflict.  "I  have  fought  a  good  fight"  (ver.  7).  2.  Tlie  Christian  life 
is  a  race.  "I  have  finished  my  course"  (ver.  7).  3.  The  Christian  life  is  a 
stewardship.     "  I  have  kept  the  faith  "  (ver.  7). 

III.  Exulting  in  the  certainty  of  adequate  future  reward  (ver.  8). — The 
"  henceforth  "  marks  the  decisive  moment.  He  looks  to  his  state  in  a  threefold 
aspect.  1.  The  present.  "I  have  fought."  2.  The  immediate  future.  "There 
is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown."  3.  The  future.  "  The  Lord  will  give  in  that  day." 
A  crown,  or  garland,  used  to  be  bestowed  at  the  Greek  national  games  on  the 
successful  competitor.  The  crown  is  in  recognition  of  righteousness  wrought 
in  Paul  by  God's  Spirit :  the  crown  is  prepared  for  the  righteous ;  but  it  is  a 
crown  which  consists  in  righteousness.  Righteousness  will  be  its  own  reward. 
A  man  is  justified  gratuitously  by  the  merits  of  Christ  through  faith ;  and  when 
he  is  so  justified,  God  accepts  his  works  and  honours  them  with  a  reward  which 
is  not  their  due,  but  is  given  of  grace  (Fausset).  Even  at  this  solemn  crisis 
the  large-heartedness  of  the  doomed  apostle  is  apparent.  He  thinks  not  only 
of  his  own  reward,  but  of  the  reward  also  of  all  believing  souls  who  love  and 
are  longing  for  the  appearing  of  their  Lord. 

Lessons. — 1.  We  truly  live  only  as  ive  live  unto  God.  2.  We  should  ever  he 
more  concerned  about  living  than  about  dying.  3.  Death  admits  the  faithful  into 
a  larger  life. 

80 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.    TIMOTHY.       chap.  iv. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES, 

Vers.    6-8.  The   Christianas   Course^  Yer.  7.   "  /  have  kept  the  faith." 

Conflict,  and  Crown.  I.  A  phenomenon  is  to  be  accounted 

I.  The  view  in  which  the  apostle     for— the  origin   of  this   remarkable 


represents  his  decease. — "I  am  now 
ready  to  be  offered,  and  the  time  of 
my  departure  is  at  hand."  1.  He  ex- 
presses neither  terror  nor  reluctance,  hut 
speaks  of  death  calmly  as  a  sacrifice  and 
offering  to  God.  2.  He  regards  death 
as  the  transferring  of  our  life  from  the 
service  of  God  on  earth  to  the  presence 
of  God  in  heaven. 

II.  The  reflections  with  which  the 


language. — 1.  The  deep-seated  senti- 
ments of  natural  religion  will  not 
account  for  it.  2.  Still  less  the  ancient 
natural  theology.  3.  It  is  accounted 
for  only  in  Christ  the  life. 

II.  The  world  with  the  gospel  is 
a  new  world. — 1.  The  text  reminds  us 
that  the  Christian  is  charged  with  a 
sacred  trust.  "The  faith."  2.  The 
discharge  of  this  trust  involves  constant 


-,.,.»  vigilance  and  effort.     3.    A    time  may 

apostle  looks  back  upon   his  life  on  arrive  in  the  prosecution  of  the  Christian 

earth.— 1.  He  Mens  it  to  a  good  fight  ^^^^^^^  ^^  ^^  ^-^  ^^-^^  ^|^^  apostle,  when 

—a  conflict  which   occasioned  no  re-  tj^  ^i^^  turns  from  the  past  and  gives 

morse,  m  which  he  struggled  to  save  Uself  up  to  the  expectation  of  the  future. 

and  not  to  destroy— good  m  its  object,  ^    jj^^  ^^^  ^^  sufficiently  admire  that 
in  all  Its  means,  in  its  effect  upon  all  i    ^j^^^j^^    ^^    turning   our    mind 

employed  in  its  labours,  upon  a  1  m-  f^^^  ^^^.^^  ^^  ^^^^^^^  ^^^j^^^  ^^  ^^  ^^^^ 

terested  m  its   success.     2     He  likens  ^J^^  rnention  of  death,  or  to  speak  of  it 

It   to   a   race.  J' 1    have   finished   my  only  in  terms  of  disparagement !     5.  A 

course.       3.   He  is  conscious  of  fidelity.  ^^^^^^  self  estimate  of  Christian  fidelity 

"I  have  kept  the  faith.       He  had  not  ^^  perfectly  compatible  with  a  sense  of 

only  run  the  Christian  race,  but  had  ^^^^^^  dependence  on  the  grace  of  God. 

duly   observed   the  rules   or   the   con-  ^^    j   jj^rris 

test. 

III.  The  hope  by  which  the  dying 
apostle  is  cheered  in  his  view  of  an 
eternal  world. — "Henceforth  there  is 
laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteous- 
ness." He  looks  forward  with  joyful 
assurance  to  a  more  than  sufficient 
recompense  of  all  his  toils  and  perils — 
not  as  payment  of  a  claim  he  had 
earned  or  deserved,  but  as  a  glorious 
and  bounteous  gift.  Not  a  mere 
honorary  crown  or  empty  ornament 
like  those  bestowed  on  successful  victors 
and  warriors,  but  a  crown  connected 
with  a  kingdom — a  kingdom  of  right- 
eousness.— J.  Brewster. 


Ver.  8.  Love,  the  Preparation  for 
Christ^s  Coming. 

I.  If  any  one  would  love  that  day 
he  must  have  a  clear  and  deep  per- 
ception of  the  hatefulness  of  sin. 

II.  We  cannot  love  the  day  of 
Christ  except  we  be  dead  to  this 
world. 

III.  This  love  of  His  appearing  is 
the  direct  and  natural  effect  of  love 
to  Christ  Himself. — The  love  of  His 
unseen  presence  now  is  the  true  and 
all -comprehending  discipline  to  prepare 
us  for  the  coming  of  our  Lord. — ■ 
H.  E.  Manning. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  9—13. 

Suffering  for  the  Truth — 

I.  Has  often  to  be  endured  with  a  loneliness  that  craves  for  society.-^"  Do 

thy  diligence  to  come  shortly  unto  me  "  (ver.  9).  Ther,e  is  a  beautiful  pathos 
in  these  words,  indicating  the  apostle's  sense  of  loneKness.  "  My  end  is  drawing 
near ;  some  have  forsaken  me  :  I  yearn  for  the  comfort  and  refreshment  of  a 

a  81 


CHAP.  IV.        IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.    TIMOTHY. 


congenial  spirit :  my  beloved  Timothy,  use  all  speed  in  coming  to  me."     Loneli- 
ness is  sometimes  more  diflicult  to  endure  than  pain. 

II.  The  loneliness  of  suffering  is  intensified  by  the  desertion  of  the  timid. — 
"For  Demas  hath  forsaken  me,  having  loved  this  present  world"  (ver.  10). 
Demas  was  once  an  active  fellow-labourer  (Col.  iv.  14;  Philem.  24).  For 
some  time  the  apostle  must  have  observed  the  slackening  of  his  zeal,  his  love 
of  ease  and  comfort,  his  growing  dislike  to  the  hardships  of  pioneer  work,  his 
shrinking  from  the  peril  of  being  in  Rome  as  a  Christian  and  an  associate  of 
Paul ;  and  the  climax  of  his  declension  was  reached  when  he  deserted  Paul  at 
a  time  when  he  most  needed  help  and  companionship.  The  desertion  of  a  friend 
always  happens  at  the  wrong  time. 

III.  Suffering  for  the  truth  does  not  quench  the  zeal  for  its  active 
propagation. — "  Crescens  to  Galatia,  Titus  unto  Dalmatia"  (ver.  10).  "And 
Tychicus  have  I  sent  to  Ephesus  "  (ver.  12).  From  his  Roman  prison  Paul  is 
the  director-general  of  a  world-wide  mission,  and  he  is  interested  in  every 
movement  of  its  messengers.  Their  engagement  in  the  great  work  also 
explained  their  absence  at  this  critical  period.  Paul  had  also  seized  every 
opportunity  duiing  his  imprisonment  to  preach  the  gospel.  The  work  of  God 
was  always  uppermost  with  him. 

lY.  Suffering  for  the  truth  appreciates  the  friendship  of  the  faithful. — 
**  Only  Luke  is  with  me  "  (ver.  11).  It  was  a  comfort  to  the  noble  sufferer  to 
have  with  him  one  friend  on  whom  he  could  rely.  A  friend  in  need  is  a  friend 
indeed.  Friendship  is  more  valuable  when  it  is  tested,  and  when  it  bears  the 
strain.  It  is  in  the  power  of  one  friend  to  render  valuable  service  ;  and  a  noble 
nature  does  not  fail  to  appreciate  it. 

V.  Suffering  for  the  truth  recognises  the  valuable  services  of  the  man 
whose  former  vacillation  had  occasioned  anxiety  and  strife. — '*  Take  Mark, 
and  bring  him  with  thee :  for  he  is  profitable  to  me  for  the  ministry  "  (ver.  11). 
Mark  had  been  under  a  cloud  for  forsaking  the  work,  and  was  the  cause  of  a 
sharp  contention  between  Paul  and  Barnabas  (Acts  xv.  37-40,  xiii.  5,  13). 
But  Mark  had  repented,  and  was  now  another  man,  chastened  and  stimulated 
by  the  lesson  of  his  brief  relapse.  Paul's  sharp  censure  is  wiped  out  by  high 
praise — another  example  of  the  generous  nature  of  the  apostle,  which  even 
suffering  did  not  sour. 

YI.  Suffering  for  the  truth  does  not  render  us  indifferent  to  the  needs  of 
body  and  mind.—"  The  cloke  that  I  left  at  Troas  with  Carpus,  when  thou 
comest,  bring  with  thee"  (ver.  13).  The  cloak  had  no  doubt  been  worn  by  the 
apostle  as  a  warm  wrap  in  many  a  cold,  exposed  journey,  and  would  be  known 
to  his  friends  as  an  old,  familiar  article  of  his  clothing.  He  needed  it  again,  for 
winter  was  near  (ver.  21).  "And  the  books,  but  especially  the  parchments" 
(ver.  13).  The  books  he  needed  to  carry  on  his  work  of  translation  for  the 
benefit  of  the  Church  ;  and  the  parchments  perhaps  contained  translations 
already  done,  and  some  of  his  own  inspired  epistles.  Brief  as  his  life  might 
be,  the  mind  must  be  fed,  and  work  must  not  stop.  Tyndale,  imprisoned  in  the 
Castle  of  Yilvorden,  asked  for  warmer  clothing,  and  above  all  for  his  Hebrew 
Bible,  grammar,  and  dictionary. 

Lessons. — 1.  True  greatness  is  conspicuous  in  sujffering.  2.  The  sufferer  appre- 
ciates genuine  sympathy.     3.  Suffering  for  the  truth  helps  to  spread  it.  \ 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Yer.  10.  The  Defection  of  Demas.  comfort,    co-operation.     2.  He  forsook 

I.   His   offence. — 1.  He  forsook   the      the    Christian   cause.     Fled    from   the 

apostle.     When   he  needed  sympathy,      post  of  duty  because  it  was  the  post  of 

82  • 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.    TIMOTHY.        chap.  iv. 


danger.  3.  Ue  forsook  the  Saviour. 
Either  for  a  season  or  permanently. 
Either  as  a  backslider  or  as  an 
apostate. 

II.  The  principle  by  which  he  was 
actuated. — 1.  It  rnight  be  the  love  of 
ease.  2.  It  might  he  the  love  of  honour. 
3.  It  might  he  the  love  of  wealth.  4.  It 
might  he  the  love  of  life. 

Demas. 

I.  Demas  an  apostate  after  having 
done  and  endured  much  in  the  cause 
of  Christ. — His  profession  of  Christi- 
anity must  have  exposed  him  to  hard- 
ship and  danger.  There  must  have 
been  in  him  tokens  of  genuine  con- 
version, seeing  they  could  bear  the 
test  of  hardship  incurred  in  defence 
of  the  truth.  He  had  given  proof  of 
sincerity  in  bringing  others  to  Christ. 
What  hai'dship  could  not  do,  what 
peril  could  not  do,  was  effected  by  the 
allurements  of  a  world  whose  god  is 
the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air  ; 
and  the  man  who  had  been  ready 
to  undergo  martyrdom,  who  would 
not  have  flinched  from  the  apparatus 
of  torture,  failed  in  withstanding 
the  blandishments  of  pleasure,  and 
was  conquered  by  lust  after  defying 
persecution. 

II.  Demas  an  apostate  though  he 
had  to  quit  St.  Paul  when  that 
apostle  was  on  the  point  of  sealing 
his  confession  with  his  blood. — Demas 
was  for  a  long  time  steadfast.  He  had 
St.  Paul  to  instruct  him,  to  reprove,  ex- 
hort, and  encourage  him  ;  and  perhaps 
he  thought,  because  he  felt  his  bosom 
glow  as  this  man  insisted  on  noble 
truths  and  delivered  sublime  and  noble 
messages,  he  was  necessarily  impreg- 
nated with  the  very  spirit  of   Chris- 


tianity, and  bound  too  firmly  to  the 
cause  of  the  Redeemer  to  be  induced  to 
forsake  it  by  any  common  temptation. 
But  the  world  gained  an  opportunity 
of  plying  Demas  with  its  seductions 
— an  opportunity  of  which  we  may 
suppose  it  to  have  been  partially  de- 
prived whilst  he  was  in  the  dungeons 
of  St.  Paul — and  thus  was  it  seen 
what  a  mere  thing  of  sand  is  religion 
which  depends  upon  a  preacher  for  its 
warmth  and  strength.  St.  Paul  was 
most  rich  in  Christian  experience 
when  closest  in  his  intercourse  with 
heaven  ;  and  when  he  appealed  with 
his  grey  hairs  to  every  sensibility,  one 
would  have  thought  desertion  impos- 
sible. Oh  the  degrading,  deadening 
tendency  of  an  attachment  to  time 
and  sense  ! — H.  Melvill. 

Yer.  11.  ^^  Only  Luke  is  tmth  me." 
Christian  Loneliness. 

I.  That  there  are  times  when  the 
people  of  God  are  forsaken  and  left 
mainly  to  themselves. 

II.  That  the  good  man  is  never 
left  altogether  alone. 

III.  That  Divine  helpfulness  is 
aiforded  to  compensate  for  the  lack 
of  human  sympathy. 

Lessons. — 1.  We  have  here  a  picture 
of  nohle  Christian  endurance.  2.  Of 
suhrnission.     3.   Of  fidelity. 

"Ver.  13.  Human  Means  useful  to 
Inspired  Persons. 

I.  The  poverty  of  the  first  preachers 
of  the  gospel. — A  cloak  and  a  few 
books. 

II.  Even  Divinely  inspired  men  did 
not  so  wholly  depend  upon  Divine 
inspiration,  but  made  use  of  ordinary 
helps  and  means. — Bishop  Bidl. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  U,  15. 

Opposition  to  the  Truth — 

I.  Is  often  violently  persistent. — "For  he  hath  greatly  withstood  our 
words"  (ver.  15),  Probably  the  Alexander  at  Ephesus,  put  forward  by  the 
Jews  during  the  riot  there  (1  Tim.  i.  20).  He  was  then  excommunicated,  but 
afterwards  restored,  and  by  his  able  and  determined  opposition  was  a  thorn  in 
Paul's  side.    A  renegade  is  all  the  more  troublesome  because  of  the  acquaintance 

83 


CHAP.  IV.       'HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.    TIMOTHY. 


with  the  side  he  once  espoused  and  now  attacks,  using  his  knowledge  of  both 
sides  with  subtle  and  malicious  dexterity. 

II.  Is  fraught  with  much  mischief. — ^'Alexander  the  coppersmith  did  me 
much  evil"  (ver.  14).  Though  again  restored  to  the  Church  and  to  the  con- 
fidence of  the  apostle,  he  never  forgot  the  indignity  of  his  expulsion,  and  vented 
his  spleen  on  the  man  who  had  shown  him  kindness,  accusing  Paul  before  the 
Koman  judges  either  of  incendiarism  or  of  introducing  a  new  religion.  He 
misrepresented  facts,  as  suchhke  men  usually  do,  and  was  perhaps  a  chief  agent 
in  procuring  the  martyrdom  of  Paul.  It  is  in  the  power  of  a  restless,  discon- 
tented, and  malicious  opponent  to  do  mischief  he  can  never  repau\ 

III.  Should  put  the  faithful  teacher  on  his  guard. — "  Of  whom  be  thou  ware 
also"  (ver.  15).  An  unprincipled  opponent  is  difficult  to  manage.  All  kindly 
and  courteous  advances  he  construes  into  fear  ;  and  even  our  silence  he  counts  as 
submission  and  claims  as  a  victory.  Knowing  the  unfair  use  he  will  make  of 
our  words,  we  should  be  cautious  not  to  give  him  the  least  advantage. 

IV.  Will  not  escape  Divine  punishment. — "  The  Lord  reward  him  according 
to  his  works"  (ver.  14).  Baffled  in  all  our  efforts  to  silence  or  to  restore  a 
refractory  opponent,  we  can  leave  him  to  God.  The  Christian  teacher  should  be 
above  the  indulgence  of  personal  revenge.  The  obstinate  sinner  will  be  certainly 
punished  according  to  his  deeds ;  and  the  punishment  will  be  both  just  and 
adequate. 

Lessons. — 1.  Truth  is  hated  because  it  reproves  our  conscious  sins.  2.  A 
vindictive  spirit  is  utterly/  imj)otent.  3.  God  will  reckon  with  the  enemies  of  His 
truth. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  16—18. 

A  Brave  Defender  of  the  Faith — 

I.  Is  often  deserted  by  those  from  whom  he  expected  help. — *'  At  my  first 
answer  no  man  stood  with  me,  but  all  men  forsook  me  "  (ver.  16).  At  his  first 
public  examination  in  the  Koman  court  Paul  had  to  defend  himself  alone. 
Those  who  might  have  spoken  for  him  absented  themselves.  Their  fears  of 
being  charged  with  complicity  with  the  prisoner  daunted  their  courage,  and 
they  fled.  It  is  a  bitter  disappointment  to  be  forsaken  at  a  crucial  moment ; 
but  the  brave  heart,  sustained  by  the  truth,  will  not  flinch. 

II.  Charitably  recognises  the  special  difficulties  of  his  timid  friends. — "  I 
pray  God  that  it  may  not  be  laid  to  their  charge  "  (ver.  16).  The  emphasis  is 
on  their.  "  They  were  intimidated  :  their  drawing  back  from  me  was  not  from 
bad  disposition  so  much  as  from  fear  ;  it  is  sure  to  be  laid  to  the  charge  of  those 
who  intimidated  them."  Paul,  like  Stephen,  would  have  offered  the  same  prayer 
for  his  persecutors  (Acts  vii.  60)  (Fausset).  Another  side-light  on  the  character 
of  Paul ;  his  large- heartedness  excused  the  weakness  of  his  friends,  and  he 
prays  for  their  exculpation. 

III.  Is  sustained  at  a  critical  moment  by  Divine  power. — 1.  He  is  strengthemd 
by  the  conscious  presence  of  the  Lord.  "  Notwithstanding  the  Lord  stood  with 
me,  and  strengthened  me"  (ver.  17).  That  was  sufficient:  the  enemies  might 
do  their  worst ;  Paul — and  the  Lord — were  more  than  a  match  against  their 
most  malignant  cruelty.  When  friends  forsake  us,  God  draws  nearer,  and 
His  almighty  strength  turns  suffering  into  joyous  triumph.  2.  He  is  enabled 
fearlessly  to  declare  the  truth  under  circumstances  that  give  it  special  publicity. 
"  That  by  me  the  preaching  might  be  fully  known,  and  that  all  the  Gentiles 
might  hear"  (ver.  17).  Rome  was  the  capital  of  the  empire,  of  the  Gentile 
world,  and  was  the  centre  to  which  all  news  and  commerce  came,  and  from  it 
was  again  distributed  to  the  remotest  provinces.     The  trial  of  Paul,  conducted 

84 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.    TIMOTHY.        chap.  IV. 


in  a  public  manner,  became  notorious.  His  defence  was  a  sermon  in  which  he 
was  careful  to  put  the  leading  truths  of  the  gospel ;  and  his  well-known  mission 
as  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  would  give  his  teaching  favour  in  the  eyes  of  the 
Romans,  and  would  be  likely  to  be  rehearsed  throughout  the  empire.  The 
earnest  preacher  seizes  every  opportunity  of  publishing  the  gospel.  3.  He  is 
delivered  from  immediate  peril.  *' And  I  was  delivered  out  of  the  mouth  of  the 
lion"  (ver.  17).  He  was  acquitted  from  his  first  charge,  or,  what  amounted  to 
the  same  thing,  there  was  an  indefinite  adjournment  of  the  case.  "  The  mouth 
of  the  lion  "  need  not  mean  the  lion  of  the  amphitheatre,  or  Nero,  or  Satan.  It 
is  perfectly  intelligible  to  regard  it  as  describing  a  terrible  danger,  the  peril  of 
death.  From  this  he  was  for  the  time  being  delivered.  4.  He  is  assured  of 
final  deliverance  and  everlasting  safety.  "  And  the  Lord  shall  deliver  me  .  .  .and 
preserve  me  unto  His  heavenly  kingdom"  (ver.  18).  The  impending  danger  is 
past ;  but  all  danger  is  not  past.  The  enemies  of  Paul  will  still  be  busy,  and 
may  at  last  succeed — as  they  did  succeed — in  securing  a  sentence  of  condemna- 
tion. But  all  this  did  not  alter  the  apostle's  faith  in  the  Divine  deliverance. 
The  evil  work  of  his  enemies  would  turn  out  for  his  good.  The  Lord  will  make 
their  work  of  death  the  means  of  translation  into  His  heavenly  kingdom. 
Richard  Cameron,  lying  mortally  wounded  on  the  battle-field  of  Airdsmoss,  said : 
*'  I  am  dying  happy — happy  ;  and  if  I  had  a  thousand  lives  I  would  willingly  lay 
them  all  down  one  after  another  for  Christ.  Oh  !  Lie  is  near  me  :  I  think  I 
see  Him.  I  am  just  coming,  Lord  Jesus."  5.  He  ascribes  unceasing  praise  to 
his  Divine  Deliverer.  ''  To  whom  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen  "  (ver.  18). 
"  The  very  hope,"  says  Bengel,  "  produces  a  doxology.  How  much  greater  will 
be  the  doxology  which  the  actual  enjoyment  shall  produce  !  "  With  a  heart  full 
of  thankfulness  to  the  Master  who  has  strengthened  him  in  his  sufferings  and 
whose  bliss  he  is  about  to  share,  the  brave  defender  of  the  faith  leaves  us  with  a 
doxology  of  praise  to  Christ  on  his  dying  lips. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  gospel  makes  the  noblest  heroes.     2.   God  never  deserts  His 
servants  in  extremity.     3.  The  truth  we  defend  will  be  our  salvation  and  glory. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Yers.  16,  17.  A  Gospel  Hero — 

I.  Fighting  for  the  truth  single- 
handed. — "At  my  first  answer  no  man 
stood  with  me  "  (ver.  16). 

II.  Though  deserted  by  friends,  not 
vindictive. — "  All  men  forsook  me  :  I 
pray  God  that  it  may  not  be  laid  to 
their  charge"  (ver.  16). 

III.  Divinely  sustained. — "Notvrith- 
standing  the  Lord  stood  with  me,  and 
strengthened  me"  (ver.  17). 

IV.  Using  his  defence  as  an  oppor- 
tunity for  declaring  the  truth. — "•  That 


by  me  the  preaching  might  be  fully 
known,  and  that  all  the  Gentiles  might 
hear"  (ver.  17). 

V  Rescued  from  threatened  peril. 
— "  I  was  delivered  out  of  the  mouth 
of  the  lion  "  (ver.  17). 

Yer.  18.  Divine  Deliverance — 

I.  Often  signally  displayed. 

II.  Is  a  salvation  from  all  evil. 

III.  Is  the  guarantee  of  future 
blessedness. 

lY.  Should  call  forth  exalted  praise. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  19—22. 

A  Martyr's  Last  Woi'ds — 

I.  Breathe  the  spirit  of  love  towards  tried  and  faithful  friends. — "  Salute 
Prisca  and  Aquila,  and  the  household  of  Onesiphorus"  (ver.  19).  How 
tenderly  this  salutation  would  be  prized  when  the  friends  received  intelligence 
of  the  apostle's  fate !     Love  is  precious  the  more  it  is  tested  and  tried.     The 

65 


CHAP.  IV.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :    II.   TIMOTHY. 


heart  is  impoverished  indeed  that  cannot  find  room  for  its  best  friends.     Love 
reveals  itself  in  words  afid  deeds. 

II.  Indicate  unabated  interest  in  the  movements  and  condition  of  former 
fellow-labourers. — "  Erastus  abode  at  Corinth  :  but  Trophimus  have  I  left  at 
Miletum  sick"  (ver.  20).  Erastus  v^^as  a  frequent  companion  of  Paul  (Acts 
xix.  22),  possibly  the  same  as  referred  to  in  Kom.  xvi.  23,  and  was  the  chamber- 
lain or  city  steward  and  treasurer  of  Corinth.  As  he  left  Trophimus  in 
sickness  at  Miletus,  we  learn  that  his  power  of  heahng  the  sick  was  limited 
and  exercised  only  on  special  occasions  and  for  a  special  purpose.  To  the  last 
Paul  kept  in  touch  with  his  fellow- workers,  and  retained  his  anxious  concern 
for  the  spread  of  the  gospel. 

III.  Reveal  a  yearning  for  sympathetic  companionship  in  the  prospect  of 
approaching  doom. — "  Do  thy  diligence  to  come  before  winter  "  (ver.  21).  Before 
the  winter  storms  begin,  when  navigation  would  be  impossible,  or  it  may  be 
too  late.  And  Paul  would  need  his  cloak  to  protect  him  from  winter  cold. 
A  companion  like  Timothy  was  what  the  apostle  especially  desired;  but  we 
have  no  record  that  the  longed-for  interview  ever  took  place.  How  many  of 
our  yearnings  are  never  satisfied  !  And  yet  they  are  not  altogether  useless. 
The  highest  cravings  of  the  soul  are  gratified  only  in  Christ. 

IV.  Do  not  neglect  the  grace  of  Christian  courtesy. — "  Eubulus  greeteth 
thee,  and  Pudens,  and  Linus,  and  Claudia,  and  all  the  brethren"  (ver.  21). 
Pudens  and  Claudia  afterwards  married — she  a  Roman  knight,  he  a  Briton 
surnamed  Bufina.  Linus  afterwards  became  a  bishop.  Eubulus  is  identified 
with  Aristobulus,  who,  with  his  converts,  is  said  to  have  been  among  the  first 
evangelists  of  Britain.  Paul  himself,  says  Clement,  "  visited  the  farthest  West 
— perhaps  Britain,  certainly  Spain — .and  was  martyred  under  the  rulers  of 
Rome,  who  were  Nero's  vicegerents  in  his  absence  from  the  city."  Paul  was  not 
so  absorbed  Avith  his  own  troubles  as  to  neglect  to  send  the  joint  commendations 
of  the  saints  in  Rome.     Christianity  is  the  essence  of  true  courtesy. 

V.  Concludes  with  the  invocation  of  Divine  blessing. — "  The  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  be  with  thy  spirit.  Grace  be  with  you.  Amen "  (ver.  22).  Grace  is 
invoked  for  Timothy  and  the  members  of  the  Ephesian  and  neighbouring 
Churches  to  whom  this  epistle  would  be  read.  We  need  no  more  to  make  us 
happy  and  inspire  us  to  Christian  work  than  the  presence  of  Christ  and  the 
enriching  favour  of  God. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  uncertainty  of  life  should  intensify  our  interest  in  God's  work. 
2.  Courtesy  is  a  grace  of  the  Christian  spirit.  3.  We  cannot  die  better  than  with 
a  prayer  for  others  on  our  lips. 


86 


THE   EPISTLE   OF   PAUL   TO 

TITUS. 


INTRODUCTION. 

Titus. — Of  all  the  companions  who  surrounded  Paul,  Titus  seems  to  have 
been  the  most  respected  for  his  practical  vigour  and  efficiency,  though  Luke 
and  Timothy  may  have  been  more  personally  beloved.  All  that  we  know 
of  him  is  that  he  was  a  Gentile  convert  who  accompanied  St.  Paul  to  Jerusalem 
from  Antioch,  and  made  apparently  a  voluntary  offer  to  become  a  Jew.  This, 
and  what  we  learn  from  allusions  in  the  epistles,  is  all  the  information  we  have 
of  him.  Since  Titus  was  made  of  sterner  stuff  than  Timothy,  St.  Paul  had  on 
one  occasion  countermanded  a  mission  of  the  latter  to  Corinth  and  had  sent 
Titus  in  his  place.  Indeed,  on  three  separate  occasions  Titus  had  been  sent 
to  introduce  order  and  submission  into  that  turbulent  Church.  Towards  the 
close  of  St.  Paul's  life  he  was  despatched  to  Dalmatia.  After  this  he  disappears 
from  history  [Farrar). 

Outline  of  the  epistle. 

Ch.  i.     1 — 4.     Greeting,  containing  an  epitome  of  the  gospel. 
5 — 9.     Character  of  the  elders  to  be  appointed. 
10 — 16.     The  dangerous  character  of  the  Cretans,  especially  when 
united  with  Judaic  Gnosticism. 
Ch.  ii.    1 — 5.     The  teaching  of  Titus  regarding  the  aged  men  and  aged 

women,    and   what  they   in   turn   are   to   teach   the 
younger  women. 
6 — 8.     The  conduct  of  young  men,  to  whom  Titus  is  to  be  an 

example  in  works  and  doctrine. 
9 — 10.     The  conduct  of  slaves,  for  the  gospel's  sake. 
11 — 15.     All  these  precepts  are  rooted  in  the  gospel. 
Ch.  iii.   1,  2.     Attitude  of  Christians  to  authorities  and  all  men. 
3 — 7.     Based  on  the  change  effected  by  the  gospel. 
8 — 11.     By  positive  statement  of  truth  Titus  must  counteract  error 
— not  by  profitless  argument  or  speculation. 
12 — 15.     Personal  messages  and  conclusion. 

87 


CHAP.    1 


HOmiETIC  COMMENTARY :    TITUS. 


CHAPTER  I. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Paul,  a  servant  of  God.— R.V.  margin,  "  Gr.  bond-servant."  This  designation,  which 
indicates  generally  the  official  position,  is  not  usually  found  in  the  inscriptions  of  the 
Pauline  epistles.  In  Romans  and  Philippians  we  have  "  servant  of  Jesus  Christ."  According 
to  the  faith.— A  somewhat  difficult  expression,  but  meaning  apparently  "  with  reference  to 

the  faith." 

Ver.  2.  God,  that  cannot  lie.— Since  we  have  no  negative  term  that  says  what  the 
adjective  .'^ays  in  tlie  original,  we  must  so  translate.  The  apostle  wants  to  bring  out  God's 
eternal  antipathy  to  falsity. 

Ver.  3.  In  due  times.— R.V.  "  in  his  own  seasons  " — a  contrast  to  the  words  '*  before  the 
world  began  "  (A.V.)  or  "  before  times  eternal "  (R.V.)  in  ver.  2. 

Ver.  4.  Titus,  mine  own  son.— R.V.  '-my  true  child."  The  same  title  of  honour  is  given  to 
Timothy  (1  Tim.  i.  2).  After  the  common  faith. — The  faith  in  which  Paul  and  Titus  alike 
are  sharers.  How  the  inclusion  of  all  Christians  with  them  would  be  too  general  does  not 
appear. 

Ver.  5.  That  thou  shouldest  set  in  order. — St.  Paul  means  that  Titus  should  completely 
set  right,  upon  a  thorough  basis,  all  the  affairs  of  the  Cretan  Church.  It  is  the  important 
wt)rk  of  organisation  and  consolidation  that  is  entrusted  to  him. 

Ver.  6.  Blameless.— Not  liable  to  be  arraigned  by  having  been  found  in  a  fault.  Not 
accused  of  riot.— Lit.  "not  in  the  category  of  extravagance."  It  is  a  wasteful  squandering 
of  means,  from  which  follows  a  dissolute,  debauched  manner  of  living  (^Trench). 

Ver.  7.  For  a  bishop  must  be  blameless. — He  whose  office  it  is  to  watch  over  other 
souls  must  himself  be  beyond  reproach  or  suspicion.  As  God's  steward  in  the  house  he 
must  not  be  accused  of  wasting  (Luke  xvi.  1,  2).  Not  self-willed. — Properly,  one  who  is  so 
pleased  with  his  own  ideas  and  will  that  nothing  pleases  him  besides  :  "  Qui  nisi  quod  ipse 
facit  nihil  rectum  putat"  {Terence,  quoted  by  Trench).  Not  soon  angry. — "Not  irascible." 
Is  this  a  note  of  difference  between  Timothy  and  Titus  ?  The  former  does  not  need  this 
word  in  his  shrinking  gentleness  :  the  capacity  for  sharp  rebuke  lies  in  Titus  (i.  13) ;  perhaps 
it  was  necessary  to  guard  against  the  outburst  of  the  latent  fire  in  his  nature. 

Ver.  9.  By  sound  doctrine. — Hygienic,  wholesome  teaching. 

Ver.  10.  Vain  talkers. — Men  of  aimless  speech,  which  is  devoid  of  any  good  result. 
Men  whose  speech  tendeth  to  poverty.  Deceivers. — The  word,  which  is  peculiar  to  St.  Paul, 
and  perhaps  coined  by  him  (see  Gal.  vi.  3),  brings  out  the  idea  of  subjective  fancies 
{Lightfoot). 

Ver.  11.  Whose  mouths  must  be  stopped.— The  verb  means  "something  must  be  put  on 
their  mouths  "—they  must  be  muzzled ;  but  it  afterwards  came  to  mean,  "  to  check  speech." 

Ver.  12,  A  prophet  of  their  own. — Epimenides,  the  poet  alluded  to,  was  a  contemporary 
of  the  seven  wise  men,  and  by  some  was  reckoned  as  one  of  them.  He  was  born  in  the 
sixth  century  B.C.  The  saying  quoted  by  St.  Paul  is  from  a  lost  work.  The  Cretians  are 
alway  liars.— Chrysostom  refers  the  words  chiefly  to  the  pretence  that  Jupiter  lay  buried 
amongst  the  Cretans  ;  but  in  ancient  times  they  were  notorious  for  falsehood,  so  that  "  to 
Cretise  "  was  equivalent  to,  "to  lie  and  deceive." 

Ver  13.  This  witness  is  true.— Not  only  does  a  competent  person  attest  it,  but  it  agrees 
with  fact.  Eebuke  them  sharply.— With  a  sharply  cut  style,  curtly,  with  thorough-going 
8ternne.ss  (il/^y/'r).  &    &      &« 

f  ^^ ♦'•.?"''■  ^J^^°  ^^®  P^^®  *^^  things  are  pure.— This  saying  concentrates  all  the  opposition 
to  nctitious  holiness  and  purity  which  made  the  apostle  the  object  of  the  cordial  hatred  of 
Juaaism.  A  greater  than  Paul  had  paid  His  life  for  similar  teaching.  Unto  them  that  are 
1  fi  '  ■  m?°^  ^^?  ^^  pure.— The  best  food  in  vessels  all  foul  will  only  be  an  object  of 
Kjathmg.  Their  mind.— 'I heir  practical  reason.  And  conscience.— The  human  conscious- 
ness connected  with  action,  and  expressing  itself  regarding  the  moral  value  of  it. 
w>;;oW  11  T*^«y  process.-"  They  declare,  affirm."  This  seems  best  in  view  of  the  "deny" 
Which  foil.  .ws.  Compare  John  i.  20 :  "  He  confessed,  and  denied  not."  "  Their  confession  is  a 
88 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    TITUS. 


CHAP.  I. 


true  one  so  far,  that  they  have  the  knowledge,  and  belie  it "  {Alford).  Being  abominable. — 
A  strong  word,  meaning  "  to  emit  a  stench."  For  the  idea  of  offensiveness  to  God  compare 
Isa.  Ixv.  5,  and  contrast  2  Cor.  ii.  15 ;  Eph.  v.  2. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—4. 

An  Apostolic  Salutation — 

I.  Sets  forth  the  authority  and  scope  of  the  apostolic  office. — 1.  Its  authority 
is  Divine.  "  Paul,  a  servant  of  God,  and  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ"  (ver.  1). 
"  Which  is  committed  unto  me  "  (ver.  3).  In  confronting  the  false  teachers, 
Paul  is  always  careful  to  insist  upon  his  Divine  call  to  the  apostleship,  in 
contrast  with  their  self- constituted  authority.  There  are  times  of  doubt  and 
trial  when  the  minister  of  the  gospel  has  to  fall  back  upon  the  assurance  of 
the  Divine  call  :  about  this  he  has  no  doubt ;  here  the  anchor  holds.  2.  Its 
scope  is  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  of  hope.  (1)  The  hope  of  eternal  life.  "  In 
hope  of  eternal  life "  (ver.  2).  On  this  hope  the  apostle  rested  his  desire  and 
aim  to  advance  the  faith  of  God's  people  and  their  fuller  knowledge  of  the 
truth.  (2)  A  gospel  long  promised  and  at  length  revealed.  "  Which  God,  that 
cannot  lie,  promised  before  the  world  began  ;  but  hath  in  due  times  manifested 
His  word  through  preaching  "  (vers.  2,  3).  The  gospel  was  in  the  Divine  mind 
before  the  ages  began,  was  then  promised  to  the  world  in  the  earliest  history 
of  man,  was  dimly  and  gradually  unfolded  to  suit  the  stages  of  human 
development,  and  finally  was  fully  revealed  by  preaching.  (3)  A  gospel 
intended  to  promote  godliness  through  faith.  "According  to  the  faith  of  God's 
elect,  and  the  acknowledging  of  the  truth  which  is  after  godliness"  (ver.  1). 
Faith  is  a  faculty  susceptible  of  growth.  Faith  apprehends  the  meaning  of  the 
gospel,  and  then  appropriates  its  power  to  live  a  godly  life. 

II.  Addressed  to  one  who  is  highly  esteemed. — "To  Titus,  mine  own  son 
after  the  common  faith  "  (ver.  4).  Paul  regards  Titus  as  his  genuine  child,  as 
he  was  the  instrument  of  his  conversion  to  the  faith  which  is  common  to  all 
the  people  of  God,  comprising  believers  in  all  nations  into  a  common  brother- 
hood, Gentiles  as  well  as  Jews,  and  therefore  including  Titus,  who  was  himself 
a  Gentile.  The  preacher  regards  his  converts  with  unusual  affection,  and  is 
deeply  interested  in  their  progress  in  grace  and  usefulness. 

III.  Invokes  the  impartation  of  richest  blessings.— "  Grace,  mercy,  and 
peace  "  (ver.  4).  "  Mercy  "  is  omitted  in  some  of  the  oldest  manuscripts ;  but 
one  of  the  best  and  oldest  manuscripts  supports  it.  Mercy  and  peace  spring  out 
of  grace,  the  fountain  of  all  blessings.  If  we  have  God's  favour,  we  have  every 
blessing  the  soul  can  need  or  that  Christ  can  bestow. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  Christian  teacher  should  have  a  firm  grasp  of  truth.  2.  The 
veteran  minister  is  full  of  wise  and  loving  counsels  to  the  young.  3.  Good  wishes 
to  others  is  genuine  Christian  courtesy. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  1.  '"'' The  truth  which  is  after 
godliness." 

The  Gospel  of  Truth. 

I.  The  gospel  is  simply  a  truth. 

II.  It  is  an  operative  truth. 

III.  It  operates  to  the  best  effect. — 
It  produces  godliness.  1.  Giving  a 
right  notion  of  God.  2.  A  7nght  notion 
of  what  concerns  the  duty  of  man. 


Lessons. — 1.  The  nature  and  prime 
design  of  religion  is  to  he  an  instrument 
of  good  life.  2.  That  so  much  know- 
hdge  as  is  sufficient  to  engage  men  in 
the  practice  of  godliness  serves  the  neces- 
sary ends  of  religion.  3.  That  whatever 
undermines  the  motives  of  a  good  life  is 
conPi^ary  to  and  destructive  of  religion. 
— South. 

89 


CHAP.   I. 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    TITUS. 


Ver  ">    The  Gospel  Revelation.  H-  A  sacred  trust.    ^    ^ 

I.   A   glorious  prospect.-"  Eternal         HI.  A  Divine  commission. 

life  " 

II    A  truth-speaking  God.  Ver^  4.  A  Christian  Greetiri^. 

I J  I.    An    old-standing    promise.—         I.  Recognising  a  spiritual  relation- 

**  Before  the  world  began."  ship.  n^  vi       • 

'^  II.  Invoking  a  threefold  blessing. 

Ver  3    The  Preaching  of  tUWcyrd,  HI.    Describing    the    source    and 

I.  A  timely  revelation.  medium  of  the  blessing.— i^.  W, 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH,— Verses  5—9. 

Qualifications  of  a  Christian  Bishop. 

I.  His  domestic  life  must  be  irreproachable  (vers.  5,  6).— Titus  was  left  in 
Crete  to  establish  Church  order,  and  to  ordain  presbyters,  or  bishops,  over 
congregations  in  the  different  cities.  There  were  many  Christians  in  the  island, 
biit^Chiircli  organisation  was  very  imperfect.  The  bishop,  occupying  so  pro- 
minent a  position  as  overseer,  must  be  blameless  in  life,  and  a  pattern  of 
consistency  and  authority  in  his  own  family,  having  Lis  children  under  thorough 
Christian  control.  His  governmental  power  must  be  evident  in  his  own 
household. 

II.  He  must  possess  a  high  moral  character  (vers.  7,  8). — The  Church  is  God's 
house,  over  which  the  minister  is  steward.  He  is  to  be,  not  imperious,  but 
temperate,  not  making  his  office  a  means  of  gain,  to  be  hospitable — a  necessary 
virtue  in  those  early  days — to  be  a  lover  of  all  that  is  good,  self-denying,  just 
towards  men,  and  holy  towards  God. 

III.  He  must  be  a  competent  preacher. — 1.  Having  himself  a  firm  grasp  oft/ruth. 
"  Holding  fast  the  faithful  word  as  he  hath  been  taught  "  (ver.  9).  Whoever 
may  be  on  the  quicksands  of  doubt  and  error,  the  minister  must  know  and  keep 
his  ground.  Hesitation  in  the  pulpit  means  confusion  in  the  pew.  2.  Ahle  to 
present  the  truth  with  convincing  power.  "  That  he  may  be  able  by  sound 
doctrine  both  to  exhort  and  convince  the  gainsay ers  "  (ver.  9).  Not  only  has 
the  Church  to  be  edified  and  encouraged,  but  unbelievers  must  be  reproved, 
convinced  of  the  error  of  their  ways  and  brought  to  Christ.  The  great  function 
of  preaching  is  to  persuade  men,  and  to  do  this  effectively  the  preacher  must 
himself  be  sound  in  doctrine,  and  fully  persuaded  of  the  supreme  claims  of  the 
truth. 

Lessons. — 1.  Church  government  is  an  important  duty.  2.  Governors  of  the 
Chvrch  should  possess  both  grace  and  gifts.  3.  Preaching  occupies  a  prominent 
place  in  building  up  and  extending  the  Church. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Ver.  5.  Church  Order.  II.  Domestic  and    social    relation- 

I.  Ministers  have  special  work  as  ships  are  helps  rather  than  hindrances 
well  as  general.  to  Christian  service. 

II.  The  work  of  the  best  men  needs  III.  Good  family  government  is  a 
revision  by  others.  guarantee  for  efficient  Church  govern- 

III.  Every  Church   should  have  a     ment. 
leader  or  overseer. 

Ver.  7.  The  Negative  Side  of  a  Good 
Ver.  6.  Church  Officers.  Man's  Character. 

1.  Character  is  the  primary  quali-         I.    He  must  be  without  reproach, 
tication  for  office  in  the  Church.  II.  Must  not  seek  his  own  pleasure. 

90 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    TITUS.  chap.  i. 


III.  Must  control  his  temper.  V.  Must  hold  all  his  passions  under 

IV.  Must  be  abstinent.  control. 

V.  Must  not  be  covetous.  Lessons.  —  1.    We    see   the    twofold 

nature  of  goodness.     2.  The  unselfish- 

Ver.  8.  The  Positive  Side  of  a  Good  ness  of  goodness.     3.  The  dependence  of 

Man's  Cha7'acter.  a  good  life  on  a  right  spirit. 

I.  He  must  be  willing  to  share  the 

bounties    of    God's    providence    with  Ver.  9.  Characteristics  of  a  Successful 

others.  Preacher. 

II.  Must  be  a  lover  of  all  that  is  I.  Personal  conviction  of  the  truth, 
good.  II.  Aptness  to  teach  others. 

III.  Must  be  prudent.  III.  Power  of  persuasion  and  con- 

IV.  Devout.  viction. — F.  W. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PAR  AG  RAPE. —  Verses  10—14. 

The  Mischief  of  Reckless  Speech. 

I.  Reckless  speech  occasions  great  disorder. — ''  For  there  are  many  unruly 
and  vain  talkers  and  deceivers  .  .  .  who  subvert  whole  houses"  (vers.  10,  11). 
Excessive  speech  is  always  foolish,  and  is  the  index  to  a  mind  too  full  of 
conceit  to  have  any  room  for  wisdom.  Churches  and  families  are  led  into 
'■quarrels  and  divisions  by  reckless  talkers.  They  indulge  in  unkind  and 
calumnious  words,  perverse  meanings  are  given  to  the  sayings  of  those  they 
dislike,  bitter  and  provoking  things  are  said  of  our  neighbours'  characters,  and, 
above  all,  they  utter  those  evil,  corrupt  words  that  do  the  devil's  work,  enticing 
others  on  to  sin.  Such  vain  talkers  exult  in  the  confusion  and  uproar  they 
themselves  create. 

II.  Reckless  speech  is  morally  degrading. — 1.  Has  no  regard  for  the  true  gospel. 
"  Specially  they  of  the  circumcision  "  (ver.  10).  "  Giving  heed  to  Jewish  fables, 
and  commandments  of  men,  that  turn  from  the  truth  "  (ver.  14).  Josephus  tells 
us  there  were  many  Jews  in  Crete.  The  Jewish  leaven  remained  in  them  after 
conversion,  and  they  would  become  an  easy  prey  to  the  advocates  of  a  corrupted 
Judaism  and  an  emasculated  Christianity.  The  voluble  Jewish  talkers  made 
sad  havoc  of  the  gospel.  2.  Will  say  anything  for  gain.  "  Teaching  things 
which  they  ought  not,  for  filthy  lucre's  sake  "  (ver.  11).  They  talked  for  a 
living,  and  were  utterly  unscrupulous  as  to  what  they  said,  so  long  as  they  got 
the  money.  Their  chief  object  was  gain,  not  profitable  instruction.  3.  De- 
generates into  lying  and  sensuality.  "  The  Cretians  are  always  liars.  .  .  .  This 
witness  is  true"  (vers.  12,  13).  The  quotation  is  from  the  Cretan  writer 
Epimenides.  He  was  sent  for  to  purify  Athens  from  its  pollutions  occasioned 
by  Cylon,  and  was  regarded  as  a  diviner  and  prophet.  "To  Cretanise"  was 
proverbial  for  "  to  lie,"  as  "  to  Corinthianise  "  was  for  "to  be  dissolute."  Lying 
and  sensuality  go  together.  Some  people  lie  for  the  love  of  lying,  and  become 
almost  incapable  of  speaking  the  truth.  "  In  the  multitude  of  words  there 
wanteth  not  sin"  (Prov.  x.   19). 

III.  Reckless  speech  should  be  emphatically  condemned. — "  Whose  mouths 
must  be  stopped  "  (ver.  11).  "  Wherefore  rebuke  them  sharply,  that  they  may  be 
sound  in  the  faith  "  (ver.  13).  The  inveterate  talker  is  not  easily  cured.  Gentle 
methods  are  of  no  avail  in  dealing  with  him  :  his  perversity  must  be  boldly 
attacked  and  sharply  rebuked.  If  he  is  not  silenced,  others  he  has  led  astray 
may  be  reclaimed. 

"  Words  are  mighty,  words  are  living. 
Serpents  with  their  venomous  stings; 
Or  bright  angels  crowding  round  us, 
With  heaven's  light  upon  their  wing«. 

91 


CHAP.    I. 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    TITUS. 


"Every  word  has  its  own  spirit, 
True  or  false,  that  never  dies; 
Everj'  word  man's  lips  have  uttered 
Echoes  in  God's  skies." 

Lessons.— /?6c^/m  speech— I.  Is  a  sign  of  pitiable  ignorance.  2.  Is  mis- 
chievous both  to  speaker  and  listener.     3.   Will  meet  with  its  just  pmiish^nent. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers     10-12     The    Vice  of  Aimless  Ver.  13.  Christian  Reproof — 

m^l^  I.    Should  always  be  based  on  a 

I    The  chief  hindrances  to  religion  certain  conviction, 

are 'often  in  the  Church  itself.  II.  Should  be  thorough  and  effective. 

II.  Hindrances  in  the  Church  must  III.  Should  be  for  the  sinner's  good, 
be    removed. — 1.   Discipline    must    be 

exercised   in   love.      2.    The   p'osperity  Ver.    14.    The   Perverting   Power  of 

of    the    Church     must     be     considered  Trivialities. 

befwe   that  of  individuals.     3.  Every  I.  By  distracting  attention  from  the 

age   has   its  '  own  obstructions   to  the  essentials  of  religion. 

truth.  II-  By  dissipating  the  strength  of 

III.  Communities  are  aflfected  by  the  mind. 

the  conduct  of  individuals.— Aimless  III.  By  attributing  to  the  human 
talk  leads  to— 1.  Unti^thfidness.  an  authority  belonging  only  to  the 
2.  Semiudity.     3.  Sloth.  Divine.— /^\  W. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  15,  16. 

Moi'al  Defilement — 

I.  Arises  from  unbelief. — **Unto  them  that  are  defiled  and  unbelieving  is 
nothing  pure"  (ver.  15).  Faith  gives  spiritual  insight,  and  enables  us  to  dis- 
tinguish the  moral  qualities  of  things.  Parity,  like  the  forgiveness  of  sin,  is 
attained  through  faith.  "  Whatsoever  is  not  of  faith  is  sin  "  (Rom.  xiv.  23). 
UnbeUef  is  itself  defiling,  and  leads  to  increased  defilement.  If  men  really  believed 
in  virtue  they  would  never  commit  the  wickedness  they  do. 

II.  Affects  the  whole  man.— "Even  their  mind  and  conscience  is  defiled" 
(ver.  15).  The  mind  is  the  mental  sense  and  intelligence.  Conscience  is  the 
moral  consciousness  of  the  conformity  or  discrepancy  between  our  motives  and 
acts  on  the  one  hand,  and  God's  law  on  the  other.  A  conscience  and  a  mind 
defiled  are  represented  as  the  source  of  the  errors  opposed  in  the  Pastoral 
epistles  (Fausset).  When  the  conscience  is  defiled,  the  whole  soul  is  defiled.  "  Trust 
that  man  in  nothing,"  said  Sterne,  "  who  has  not  a  conscience  in  everything." 
When  the  compass  loses  its  proper  polarity  at  sea,  the  whole  course  of  the  vessel 
might  be  altered  by  it ;  and  when  the  conscience  loses  its  right  direction,  its 
responsibility  to  God,  its  deference  and  inclination  to  His  law  by  its  continued 
\-iolation  of  the  higher  duties,  the  heart  is  filled  with  fears,  and  the  dispensations 
of  Providence  are  suspected  to  be  judgments  when  they  may  be  real  and  satisfying 
mercies. 

III.  Is  evident  in  the  outward  life  (ver.  16).— The  profession  of  godliness  is 
a  he,  and  there  is  no  abomination  with  which  the  conduct  may  not  be  polluted, 
though  expressing  abhorrence  of  things  indifferent.  Disobedience  to  God  and 
lack  of  faith  in  goodness  produce  a  spirit  of  inveterate  wickedness  which  will 
issue  in  final  rejection.  A  sinful  life  when  tested  will  be  found  utterly  worthless, 
and  will  he  eternally  reprobated. 

IV.  Purity  is  not  in  outward  things,  but  in  a  right  state  of  the  heart.— 
92 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    TITUS, 


CHAP.    II. 


"  Unto  the  pure  all  things  are  pure  "  (ver.  15).  Material  things  have  no  moral 
quality.  They  are  pure  or  impure  according  to  the  disposition  and  moral  state 
of  him  who  uses  them.  In  the  first  ages  of  the  Church  a  traveller  exhausted 
with  his  journey  called  on  Spiridion,  Bishop  of  Cyprus,  on  a  day  which  the 
Church  had  set  apart  for  fasting.  Spiridion  instantly  ordered  refreshments,  and 
invited  him  by  his  own  example  to  eat.  "  No,  I  must  not  eat,"  said  the  stranger, 
"  because  I  am  a  Christian."  "  And  because  you  are  a  Christian,"  replied  the 
bishop,  "  you  may  eat  without  scruple,  agreeably  to  the  decision  of  an  apostle — 
*  Unto  the  pure  all  things  are  pure.'  " 

Lessons. — 1.   Unbelief  is  more  a  moral  than  a  mental  obliquity.     2.  Sin  is  at 
the  root  of  false  doct^^ine.     3.  The  heart  is  purified  by  faith  in  the  truth. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  15.  Purity. 

I.  To  the  pure  all  things  and  all 
persons  are  pure,  because  their  purity 
makes  all  seem  pure. 

II.  To  the  pure  all  things  not  only 
seem  pure,  but  are  really  so,  because 
they  are  made  such. 

III.  All  situations  are  pure  to  the 
pure. 

Lessons. — 1.  We  learn  to  understand 
the  Fall.  2.  We  learn  to  understand  the 
Millennium,.  These  things  are  not  to  be 
for  ever. — F.  W.  Robertson. 


Purity  of  Heart  leading  to  Purity  of 
Life. 

I.  The  heart  is  the  source  of  life. 

II.  Defilement  has  a  tendency  to 
spread. 

Ver.  16.  The  Judgment  of  Hypocrisy, 

I.  Hypocrisy  the  occasion  of  atheism. 

II.  Is  offensive  even  to  the  ungodly. 

III.  Is  practical  disobedience. 

IV.  Is    universally    condemned. — 
F.  W. 


CHAPTER   II. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 


Ver.  2.  That  the  aged  men  be  sober. — As  in  1  Tim.  iii.  2-11,  the  bishops  and  deacons. 
Properly  the  word  "  sober  "  here  means  not  addicted  to  much  wine ;  then  it  comes  to  be 
applied  to  the  spirit  which  is  not  inflamed  with  passion.  Grave. — "  The  English  word  which 
we  want,  to  translate  the  original,  is  one  in  which  the  sense  of  gravity  and  dignity,  and  of 
these  as  inviting  reverence,  is  combined — a  word  for  which,  I  fear,  we  may  look  long  without 
finding"  (Tm«6'7i). 

Ver.  3.  In  behaviour  as  becometh  holiness. — K.V.  "  reverent  in  demeanour."  That  they 
deport  themselves  fittingly  with  the  reputation  they  bear  for  being  consecrated  characters. 
Such  behaviour  will  beget  reverence  and  awe.  Not  given  to  much  wine. — E.V.  "  enslaved 
to."  St.  Paul  evidently  did  not  think  much  of  the  Veritas  in  vmo.  If  it  loosened  the 
tongue,  it  was  to  slander.  Teachers  of  good  things. — One  word  in  the  Greek — "  teachers-of- 
the-beautiful."  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  in  the  Pastorals,  whose  design  was  to  call  the 
attention  of  Christians  to  the  beauty  and  nobility  of  perseverance  in  holiness,  this  word 
for  the  beauty  of  goodness  is  often  employed. 

Ver.  4.  That  they  may  teach. — R.V.  "may  train."  The  word  almost  suggests  that  there 
was  a  certain  amount  of  levity  amongst  the  younger  wives  inconsistent  with  a  profession 
of  Christianity. 

Ver.  5.  Keepers  at  home. — R.V.  •'  workers  at  home."  The  term  in  the  R.V.  comprehends 
and  adds  to  that  in  the  A.V. 

Ver.  7.  Shewing  thyself  a  pattern.— Titus  was  not  to  be  hke  the  scribes  and  Pharisees 
of  whom  our  Lord  spoke,  who  say  what  others  should  do  and  do  not  themselves  observe  it. 
In  doctrine  .  .  .  uncorruptness. — As  befits  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour.  There  must 
be  no  admixture  of  error,    gravity. — See  the  adjective  corresponding  in  ver.  2  and  note. 

93 


CHAP.   II. 


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:    TITUS. 


Ver  8    May  be  ashamed.-"  That  possibly  he  may  come  to  feel  shame." 

Ver.  S;  To  please  them  well.-"  To  give  satisfaction."    "  Our  own  servants   phrase,    says 

^  V^'e'r'^'lO  Not  purloining. -Putting  anything  apart  for  themselves  {Wi^smgery  The  word 
is  used  of  the  act  cf  Ananias'  keeping  back.  It  was  an  act  of  embezzlement  of  God  s 
prorTrtv  May  adorn. -Like  the  wise  virgins  who  trimmed  their  lamps,  these  Cretan 
slaves  arc  to  let  the  light  of  the  teaching  shine  in  them.  , 

Ver  1 1  Hath  appeared.-In  an  epiphany.  The  Sun  of  Kighteousness  with  health  m  His 
beams  hacl  chased  away  the  "  hidden  things  of  darkness."     Like  the  sun  s  light,  the  blessings 

of  tj-race  were  to  all  men.  ,  .    -,      j,  i.-  •a.-l,  ^^£       £ 

Ver  1'^  Denying  ungodliness.— Repudiating  any  kind  of  connection  with  a  lite  of 
irrcligion  And  worldly  lusts.- Desires  that,  like  carrion-vultures,  fatten  on  the  corrupting 
thin"-^  of  this  world.  Soberly,  righteously,  and  godly.— The  grace  of  God  disciplines  us 
in  relation  to  ourselves,  our  fellow-men,  and  our  God.  If  it  had  free  scope,  we  should  be 
self-respecting,  respected,  and  Divinely  blessed.  ,,       ,     .  .  -ott    ..i 

Ver  18.  That  blessed  hope.— The  object  of  hope.  And  the  glorious  appearing.— R.V.  "the 
appearinf^  of  the  glorv."  The  epiphany  of  grace  was  noticed  in  ver.  11 ;  now  the  apostle 
conies  to*"  speak  of  another  shining  upon  the  world  in  glory.  Of  the  great  God  and  our 
Saviour.— The  great  question  here  is:  "Are  there  two  subjects,  or  one  only  ?"  For  two 
subjects,  the  one  being  God,  and  the  other  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  it  is  argued :  (a)  that 
we  never  find  the  phrase  "Jesus  Christ  our  God";  (b)  that  we  do  find  God  and  our  Lord 
Jesus  as  two  subjects ;  (c)  that  the  addition  "  great  "indicates  God  as  an  independent  subject. 
For  one,  "  the  great  God,  even  our  Lord,"  it  is  argued :  {a)  that  epiphany  is  always  applied 
to  the  Son  ;  (b)  that  the  immediate  context  refers  to  the  Son  ;  (c)  that  the  following  abase- 
ment explains  the  unusual  term  "  great  God  " ;  (d)  that  "  great,"  if  used  of  the  Father,  would 
be  superfluous.  The  R.V.  rendering  would  put  the  matter  beyond  question  if  we  were 
shut  up  to  it. 

Ver.  14.  Who  gave  Himself.— "The  forcible  Himself,  His  whole  self,  the  greatest  gift  ever 
given,  must  not  be  overlooked"  (EUicott).  For  us. — Not  in  our  stead  here,  but  on  our 
behalf.  From  all  iniquity. — Which  is  regarded  as  having  had  us  in  thrall.  A  peculiar 
people. — R.V.  "a  people  for  His  own  possession."  They  were  to  be  regarded  as  God's 
property. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.—Verses  1—3. 

Christianity  and  Old  Age. 

I.  Christianity  teaches  what  should  be  the  special  virtues  of  aged  men  (vers. 
1,  2). — Aged  men  should  not  refuse  to  receive  instruction  from  another  because 
he  is  young,  if  his  teaching  is  sound  and  wholesome.  Experience  teaches  the 
necessity  of  vigilance ;  and  to  be  vigilant  the  aged  must  be  sober.  Dignified 
gravity  is  becoming  in  old  age.  The  three  graces — faith,  hope,  charity — are  the 
beauty  and  glory  of  old  men.  Patient  endurance  is  supported  by  hope ;  and  it 
is  a  grace  befitting  the  aged,  being  the  result  of  a  ripened  experience  gained 
by  \nctory  over  many  trials.  The  chief  attractions  of  age  are  in  the  future. 
"  Winter,"  says  Richter,  "  which  strips  the  leaves  from  around  us,  makes  us  see 
the  distant  regions  they  formerly  concealed ;  so  does  old  age  rob  us  of  our  enjoy- 
ments only  to  enlarge  the  prospect  of  eternity  before  us." 

II.  Christianity  teaches  what  should  be  the  special  virtues  of  aged  women 
(ver.  3).— Purity  is  the  precious  jewel  of  woman,  whether  old  or  young.  The 
deportment  of  aged  women  should  be  in  harmony  with  holiness,  as  becometh 
women  consecrated  to  God,  and  as  Christian  priestesses.  Slander,  the  besetting 
sin  of  some  elderly  women,  and  intemperance,  the  besetting  sin  of  the  Cretans 
and  of  other  women  nearer  home,  should  be  strictly  avoided.  A  woman  enslaved 
to  wine  is  a  she-demon.  Aged  women  should  be  an  example  to  younger  women 
in  the  teaching  and  practice  of  all  that  is  pure  and  good.  It  is  impossible  to 
exaggerate  the  value  of  the  influence  of  one  good  woman.  Samuel  Morley's 
inotlier  was  a  woman  of  rare  piety,  and  the  great  philanthropist  often  confessed, 

I  am  much  what  my  mother  has  made  me." 

III.  This  teaching  should  be  appropriately  enforced.—*'  Speak  thou  the 
things  which  become  sound  doctrine"  (ver.   1).     Sound  doctrine  is  suited  to  all 

94 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    TITUS. 


CHAP.    II. 


ages  and  classes,  and  should  be  faithfully  inculcated,  irrespective  of  the  disparity 
of  years  between  the  teacher  and  the  taught. 

Lessons. — 1.  Christianity  has  duties  suited  to  every  period  and  relation  of  life, 
2.  Christianity  is  the  comfort  and  ornament  of  old  age.  3.  The  aged  Christiam, 
should  be  an  example  and  encouragement  to  the  young. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 


Ver.  1.  The  Preacher's  Directory. 

I.  He  should  be  a  preacher. 

II.  He  should  be  himself. 

III.  He  should  be  a  student. 

IV.  He  should  be  practical. 

Ver.  2.  The  Temptations  and  Duties 
of  old  Men. 

I.  Three  sins  to  be  avoided. — 
1.  Indulgence  in  wine.  2.  Irreverence. 
3.  Folly. 

II.  Three  virtues  to  be  cherished.  — 
1.  Stability.     2.  Love.     3.  Patience. 


Ver.  3.  The  Dangers  and  Duties  of 
Women. 

I.  Women  have  dangers  peculiar  to 
their  age. 

II.  Women  have  duties  according 
to  their  age. 

Lessons. — 1.  True  religion  is  the 
foundation  of  home  happiness.  2.  The 
secret  of  domestic  prosperity.  3.  True 
religion  at  home  can  alone  ensure  the 
esteem  of  those  abroad. — F.  W, 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  4—8. 

Christianity  and  the  Young. 

I.  Christianity  has  a  message  to  young  married  women  (vers.  4,  5). — They 
are  to  be  discreet  and  self -restrained  in  their  behaviour  ;  to  love  their  husbands 
and  children,  the  foundation  of  all  domestic  peace  and  happiness  ;  to  be  keepers 
at  home,  the  guardians  of  the  house,  and  to  find  their  sphere  of  highest  usefulness 
in  the  duties  of  the  home  circle :  whilst  thrifty  as  housewives,  they  are  to  be 
good  and  kind,  not  churlish  and  niggardly ;  to  show  love  to  their  own  husbands 
by  a  dutiful  submission  ;  and  thus  guard  the  gospel  from  the  reproach  which 
their  inconsistencies  would  occasion.  *'  Unless  we  are  virtuous,  blasphemy  will 
come  through  us  to  the  faith."  To  fail  in  any  duty  is  to  discredit  the  religion 
we  profess. 

II.  Christianity  has  a  message  to  young  men  (ver.  6). — The  burden  of  that 
message  is  to  be  sober-minded,  self-restrained.  Youth  is  tempted  to  excess,  and  it 
is  no  easy  task  to  repress  its  wild  impulses  and  passions.  The  youth-time  that 
is  spent  in  pleasure  and  folly  will  lay  the  foundation  of  a  premature  and 
suffering  old  age.  Beza,  the  Swiss  reformer,  in  his  last  will  and  testament 
thanks  God  that  he  was  brought  to  know  Him  at  the  age  of  sixteen,  and  thus, 
by  having  the  fear  of  God  before  him,  escaped  the  pollutions  of  the  world.  We 
talk  about  a  man  beginning  life  at  twenty  one,  but  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten  all 
the  questions  of  eternity  are  decided  before  that.  The  first  twenty  years  of  a 
man's  life,  as  a  rule,  mould  what  his  eternity  will  be. 

III.  Christianity  has  a  message  to  young  ministers  (vers.  7,  8). — They  are  to 
be  patterns  of  good  works — lively,  diligent,  zealous.  Their  purity  and  sincerity 
of  motive  and  aim  must  be  apparent  in  their  teaching  ;  and  their  speech  in 
public  and  private  must  be  pervaded  by  a  dignified  seriousness,  that  the  adversary 
of  the  truth  may  be  put  to  confusion  by  the  power  of  the  word  and  the  evident 
sincerity  and  enthusiasm  of  the  preacher.  All  the  freshness,  charm,  and  romance 
of  youth,  its  poetry,  high-spiritedness,  and  unlimited  capacity  for  work,  should  be 
put  into  every  ministerial  duty.     Youth  is  a  golden  opportunity  with  which  we 

95 


CHAP.    II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    TITUS. 


can  buy  a  rich  inheritance  of  future  blessedness  and  joy.     The  young  minister 
will  never  again  have  the  vigour  and  possibilities  of  work  he  possesses  to-day. 

Lessons— 1  Migion  does  not  destroy  but  augments  the  pleasures  0/  youth, 
2.  Religion  is  the  guide  and  guardian  of  youth.  3.  We  are  never  too  young  to 
love  and  serve  God. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver  6.  Sober-mindedness.  V.  Is  quite  necessary  for  the  subor- 

I.  Sober-niindedness  is  a  just  judg-  dinate  schemes  and  purposes  of  life.— 

ment  of  things,   and   this  judgment  J.  Foster. 

exercised  in  real  effective  authority. 

II     Must  be   consciously  held    as  Vers.  7,  8.  The  Power  of  Truth. 

under  the  sanction  and  as  having  the  I.     The    power    of   truth    in    the 

authority  of  the  Supreme  Power.  preacher.— 1.   His    teaching    will    be 

III.  Cannot  be  attained  without  the  living  and  real.  2.  Will  so  preach  the 
person's  forming  a  sound  judgment  of  t^mth  as  to  convince  others  of  his  sin- 
his  own  mind.  cerity. 

IV.  Must  maintain  a  systematic  II.  The  power  of  truth  on  others.— 
strong  restraint  on  the  passions,  fancy,  1.  Will  silence  criticism.  2.  Put  oppo- 
tempers,  appetites.  sitioii  to  shame  and  confusion. — F.  W. 

MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  9,  10. 

Christianity  and  Slavery. 

I.  Christianity  enjoins  respectful  obedience  to  the  master  (ver.  9). — The 
apostles  and  their  successors  taught  neither  to  the  slaves  that  they  ought  to 
resist  a  dominion  which  was  immoral  both  in  effect  and  in  origin,  nor  to 
the  masters  that  as  Christians  they  were  bound  to  set  their  servants  free. 
Christianity  did  indeed  labour  for  the  abolition  of  slavery,  but  by  quite  other 
methods.  It  taught  masters  and  slaves  alike  that  all  men  have  a  common 
Divine  parentage  and  a  common  Divine  redemption,  and  consequently  are 
equally  bound  to  show  brotherly  love,  and  equally  endowed  with  spiritual 
freedom.  It  showed  that  the  slave  and  his  master  are  alike  children  of  God, 
and  as  such  free ;  and  alike  servants  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  as  such  bondmen — 
bondmen  in  that  service  which  is  the  only  true  freedom.  And  thus  very  slowly 
but  surely  Christianity  disintegrated  and  dispersed  those  unwholesome  conditions 
and  false  ideas  which  made  slavery  possible  {Plmnmer).  The  servant  is  exhorted 
to  render  to  his  master  a  ready  and  cheerful  obedience,  to  strive  to  gain  the 
good- will  of  the  master  by  showing  an  interest  in  all  the  work  committed  to 
him,  and  to  avoid  a  contradictious  and  sullen  disposition. 

II.  Christianity  requires  honesty  and  faithfulness  in  service.— "  Not  pur- 
loining, but  shewing  all  good  fidelity"  (ver.  10).  Stealing  was  a  common  vice 
of  slaws,  and  their  abject  and  helpless  condition  nourished  the  practice.  But 
the  Christian  servant  is  taught  that  to  appropriate  what  belongs  to  another 
is  a  grievous  sin  in  the  sight  of  God  and  man.  He  is  not  simply  to  appear 
honest,  but  to  be  honest.  Plato  illustrates  what  is  a  truly  honest  man  by 
the  story  of  Gyges'  ring  which  made  the  wearer  invisible.  He  that  would  be 
honest  when  he  could  be  dishonest  without  being  found  out  was  a  truly  honest 
man.     Tlie  honest  servant  will  show  all  possible  fidelity  in  every  act. 

III.  The  genuine  religion  of  a  slave  is  a  recommendation  of  Christianity.— 
"That  they  may  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour  in  all  things"  (ver.  10). 
The  love  of  God  in  becoming  our  Saviour  is  a  powerful  motive  to  adorn  His 

96 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    TITUS.  chap.  ii. 


doctrine  in  our  lives.  Adornment  makes  that  which  is  adorned  more  conspicuous 
and  better  known,  and  enhances  the  merit  of  that  which  it  adorns.  Even 
slaves  should  not  think  their  example  a  matter  of  indifference  :  their  religion 
exalts  and  beautifies  them.  Man  does  not  ennoble  religion,  but  religion  ennobles 
him.  The  pearl  in  the  oyster  sheds  a  beauty  over  the  whole  shell.  "  The 
heathen,"  said  Chrysostom,  "  do  not  judge  of  the  Christian's  doctrines  from  the 
doctrine,  but  from  his  actions  and  life." 

Lessons. — 1.  Christianity  did  not  violently  interfere  in  the  early  age  with  the 
institution  of  domestic  slavery.  2.  But  introduced  principles  which,  legitimately 
developed,  made  slavery  impossible,  3.  Christianity  elevates  man  in  all  conditions 
of  life. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  9,  10.  The  Duties  of  Servants.  III.  Respectfulness  of  manner. 

I.  Obedience.  IV.  Honesty. 

II.  Acceptableness  of  service.  V.    Fidelity. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  11—14. 

The  Gospel  of  Grace — 

I.  Reveals  salvation  for  all  (ver.  11). — RV.  "The  grace  of  God  hath 
appeared,  bringing  salvation  to  all  men."  The  purpose  of  God  to  save  the  race 
was  slowly  unfolded  to  the  world.  The  brightest  and  fullest  manifestation  of 
that  purpose  was  the  coming  of  Christ  the  Saviour ;  and  yet  the  world  has 
been  slow  to  believe  that  He  came  to  save  all  men.  The  revelation  of  the 
gospel  has  been  a  revelation  of  the  character  of  God  and  of  His  boundless  grace, 
embodied  and  illustrated  in  His  incarnate  Son. 

II.  Demands  a  life  of  self-denial  and  moral  consistency  (ver.  12). — The 
gospel  insists  upon  the  inseparable  connection  between  creed  and  character, 
doctrine  and  life.  It  is  a  discipline,  enforcing  self-restraint  in  a  world  where 
sin  is  the  normal  state  of  things,  and  enabling  us  to  live  soberly,  righteously, 
and  godly,  as  a  constant  reproof  to  the  world's  sin,  and  as  an  example  and 
stimulus  to  all  who  are  striving  to  conquer  the  world-spirit.  The  gospel  of 
grace  is  a  world-renewing  power. 

III.  Furnishes  the  hope  of  unparalleled  blessedness. — 1.  A  blessedness 
enhanced  by  the  second  advent  of  Christ  in  glory  (ver.  13). — The  hope  created  by 
the  first  advent  grows  in  blessedness  with  the  prospect  of  the  glory  of  the 
second  coming,  when  the  great  God  and  Saviour  will  be  revealed  in  all  the 
splendour  of  His  mediatorial  majesty.  In  that  glory  all  who  look  and  long  for 
His  appearing  shall  share,  and  their  hope  shall  then  have  its  fullest  realisation. 
2.  A  blessedness  involved  in  the  p^ovisio7is  of  redemption  (ver.  14).  The  aim  of 
redemption  was  not  only  to  release  us  from  the  bondage  and  penalty  of  sin^  but 
from  all  its  power  and  pollution.  For  this  purpose  Christ  gave  His  whole  self, 
the  greatest  gift  ever  bestowed  by  heaven  or  received  by  earth.  The  final  result 
of  redemption  is  to  prepare,  by  the  moral  discipline  of  the  gospel,  a  holy  people 
who  shall  be  zealous  in  doing  and  promoting  all  good  works.  These  verses 
contain  a  suggestive  summary  of  the  apostle's  teaching,  and  an  enlarged 
conception  of  the  gospel  of  grace. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  gospel  is  a  manifestation  of  God's  grace  to  m£tn.  2.  The 
gospel  gives  power  to  live  a  holy  and  useful  life.  3.  The  gospel  reveals  a  future 
of  glorious  blessedness. 

H  -     -  97 


CHAl.    II. 


JWMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    TITUS. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES, 

Vers.  11-14.   What  God  expects  from  Ver.  11.  The  Universal  Offer  of  Sal- 
ves, and  what  He  does  for  us.  vation—           .         ^                 .                , 
,,r^  X  -n  J           ♦    A./.«,  ,ic  I.  Irrespective  of  our  varying  moral 
I.   What  God  expects  from  us.—  ^.^^^^^^^0^/ 

1.  Aversion,  to  ungodliness  mvd  loorldly  ^^^^^^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^^^  ^^ 
h^ts.      2.    The    practice    of   sobriety  ^^^    ^^^^^^^  ^^^  ^^^^^  ^^^ 
righteousness,   and  jodlimss.     6.    lo  ^^  Because  Christ  died  for  aU. 
cherish  the  hope  of  the  second  advent  of 

our  Lord.  Ver.    14.   The  Consecrating  Saviour 

II    What   God  does   for  us. — "He  and  the  Consecrated  People. 
gave*  Himself    for  us."     The  object         I.  The  consecrating  Saviour.— 1.  He 

of  Christ's  self-sacrifice  was:    1.   Foi^  gave  Himself     2.  He  gave  Himself  a 

our  redemptio7i—"'  from  all  iniquity."  ransom.     3.    The  object  of  this  was  to 

2.  Possession  of  Christ  in  a  state  of  purify  men. 

separation  and  purity.     "Purify  unto  II.  The  consecrated  people.— l.i^reec^ 

Himself  a  peculiar  [purchased]  people."  from  the  power  of  sin.    2.  Brought  under 

3.  Fruiifulness.      "Zealous    of    good  the  Divine  rule.     3.  Specially  devoted  to 
works."—/.  C.  Trotter.  good.     4.  Ardent.      5.  Diligent. — F.  W. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF   VERSE   15. 

The  Christian  Teacher — 

I.  Should  be  master  of  all  methods  of  effective  instruction.—"  These  things 
speak,  and  exhort,  and  rebuke."  The  minister's  task  is  a  constant  and  endless  one. 
He  must  know  how  to  instruct,  exhort,  persuade,  and  reprove.  All  the  resources 
of  learning,  eloquence,  and  spiritual  power  are  needed  to  do  our  work  efiiciently. 
The  great  aim  of  all  preaching  is  to  bring  sinners  directly  to  Christ.  On  Egypt's 
far-off  soil,  as  the  morning  beams  lit  up  the  eastern  sky,  an  officer  lay  dying. 
With  gallant  daring  he  had  led  his  followers,  guided  alone  by  the  pale  starlight 
of  the  heavens,  until  at  last  they  reached  the  enemy  ;  and  now  the  strife  is  over, 
but  he  is  "wounded  mortally.  As  the  general,  his  cheeks  bedewed  with  tears, 
gazed  down  with  sadness  on  his  face,  a  sudden  radiance  illumined  for  a  moment 
the  youth's  countenance  as,  looking  up  to  Wolseley,  he  exclaimed,  "  General, 
didn't  I  lead  them  straight  ?  "  and  then  he  died.  O  brothers,  when  o'er  our 
eyes  there  steals  the  film  of  death,  and  when  the  soul  flits  solemnly  from  time 
into  eternity,  may  it  be  ours  to  say  in  truthful  earnestness  to  Christ  concerning 
those  committed  to  our  care — We  led  our  people  straight ! 

II.  Should  speak  with  unhesitating  confidence  in  the  truth.— "  With  all 
authority."  The  minister  is  an  ambassador  for  Christ,  and  speaks  not  in  his 
own  name,  but  in  the  name  and  with  the  authority  of  the  great  King  he  repre- 
sents. The  truth  inspires  him  with  power ;  and  the  more  he  studies  and  realises 
its  virtue  in  himself,  the  more  he  is  convinced  of  its  supreme  claims  and  enforces 
those  claims  with  overwhelming  emphasis.  To  palter  and  hesitate  in  the 
declaration  of  the  truth  is  to  be  unfaithful  to  his  trust  and  to  the  best  interests 
of  his  hearers. 

III.  Should  command  the  respect  of  those  he  teaches  and  governs.—"  Let 

no  man  despise  thee."  He  should  speak  with  such  vigour  and  assurance  as  to 
compel  attention,  and  warn  with  such  authority  that  no  one  may  think  himself 
above  the  need  of  admonition.  Channing  once  said  :  "  There  is  no  office  higher 
than  that  of  a  teacher  of  youth,  for  there  is  nothing  on  earth  so  precious  as  the 
mind,  soul,  and  character  of  the  child.  No  ofiice  should  be  regarded  with  greater 
98 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    TITUS.  chap.  hi. 


respect."  How  much  more  is  this  true  of  the  Christian  minister !  He  should  so 
speak  and  act  as  to  commend  the  dignity  and  power  of  his  commission  to  the 
most  indifferent. 

Lessons. —  1.  The  Christian  minister  deals  with  themes  of  the  highest  importance. 
2.  The  presentatio7i  of  Christian  truth  should  be  a  subject  of  earnest  and  constant 
study.     3.  The  more  we  are  possessed  with  the  truth  the  more  effectively  we  teach  it. 


CHAPTER  III. 
CRITICAL   AND   EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Principalities  and  powers. — The  two  words  stand  thus  together  to  give  fuller 
expression  to  the  notion  of  authority.    To  obey  magistrates.— R.V.  "  to  be  obedient." 

Ver.  2.  To  be  no  brawlers. — R.V.  "  not  to  be  contentious."  As  in  1  Tim.  iii.  3.  Gentle. — 
8uch  a  man  recognises  that  very  often  the  summum  jus  is  summa  injuria^  and  therefore  goes 
back  from  his  legal  rights.     His  opposite  is  Shylock. 

Ver.  3.  Serving  divers  lusts  and  pleasures. — As  in  ii.  3  we  saw  the  women  needed  to 
guard  against  the  slavery  of  wine,  so  here  various  desires  and  pleasures  are  said  to  have  had 
sway.  Living  in  malice  and  envy. — Passing  the  life  in  the  indulgence  of  what  we  could 
get,  and  envy  of  what  we  could  not. 

Ver.  4.  After  that  the  kindness.— The  original  word  {xp'n<^'''(irrii)  is  a  beautiful  word  for  a 
beautiful  grace,  pervading  and  penetrating  the  whole  nature,  mellowing  there  what  would 
have  been  harsh  and  austere.  Christ's  yoke  is  said  to  be  easy  (x/3^<J'r6s)5  ^•^-  it  has  nothing 
galling  in  it.  And  love  of  God  our  Saviour  toward  man. — The  R.V.,  by  bringing  "  love  toward 
man  "  into  closer  connection,  has  brought  us  nearer  to  "  philanthropy  " — St.  Paul's  word. 
It  was  necessary  to  cleanse  the  word  from  its  heathenish  use  and  degeneracy  of  meaning 
before  taking  it  into  the  New  Testament.     Only  again  there,  Acts  xxviii.  2. 

Ver.  5.  Not  by  works  of  righteousness  which  we  have  done. — R.V.  •*  works  done  in  right- 
eousness, which  we  did  ourselves."  They  are  works  done  in  the  spirit  of  a  righteous  man 
which  are  spoken  of.  But  according  to  His  mercy. — "  If  of  grace  [mercy],  it  is  no  more  of 
works."  Our  verse  is  a  truly  Pauline  sentiment,  and  may  say  something  for  the  authenticity 
of  the  letter.  See  Ezek.  xxxvi.  21  :  "I  had  pity  for  Mine  holy  name.  ...  I  do  not  this  for 
your  sakes,"  By  the  washing  of  regeneration.— R.V.  margin,  "  through  the  laver."  Baptismal 
regeneration  can  only  be  found  here  by  substituting  the  sign  for  the  thing  signified.  [Note 
in  this  verse  the  use  of  the  prepositions.  "Not  out  of  works,"  "  w  righteousness,"  accord- 
ing to  His  mercy,"  "  hy  means  of  the  washing."] 

Ver.  7.  Being  justified  by  His  grace. — The  pronoun  leads  Alford  to  say  it  is  the  grace  of 
the  Father.  If  St.  Paul  had  been  fastidious  in  his  use  of  words  we  might  think  so.  It 
seems  better  to  admit,  with  Winer,  that  the  usage  is  departed  from  in  this  case — the  grace 
being,  as  usual,  that  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Ver.  8.  Affirm  constantly. — R.V.  "confidently."  Not  like  a  man  who  is  only  half  convinced 
of  the  truth  of  what  he  states,  nor  like  a  man  who  is  ashamed  of  what  he  says,  though  he 
may  acknowledge  its  truthfulness.  Might  be  careful  to  maintain  good  works.  -  To  be 
interested  to  the  point  of  anxiety  in  the  maintenance  of  noble  works. 

Ver.  9.  Avoid. — As  in  2  Tim.  ii.  16.  "  The  meaning  seems  to  come  from  a  number  of 
persons  falling  back  from  an  object  of  fear  or  loathing  and  standing  at  a  distance  round  it" 
{AJford). 

Ver.  10.  A  man  that  is  an  heretick. — R.V.  "  heretical  "  ;  margin,  '♦  factious."  It  does  not 
appear  from  this  as  if  the  right  of  private  judgment  were  the  same  thing  as  to  be  a  heretic. 
He  is  the  heretic  who  disseminates  his  private  opinions  for  the  specific  purpose  of  raising 
dissension.  After  the  first  and  second  admonition. — The  admonition  is  a  reprimand  in- 
cluding both  blame  and  exhortation.  We  may  remind  ourselves  of  our  Master's  words  : 
(1)  "Tell  him  his  fault  between  thee  and  him  alone";  (2)  "Take  with  thee  one  or  two 
more"  ;  (3)  "  Tell  it  to  the  Church."  These  are  the  three  steps  before  avoiding  the  impeni- 
tent brother.  Reject.— R.V.  "refuse";  margin,  "avoid."  It  was  a  procedure  wholly  as 
unwarranted  as  wicked  when  this  was  interpreted  "  torture  him,"  whether  in  body  or  mind. 

Ver.  11.  Being  condemned  of  himself. — R.V.  "  self-condemned."    Christ  said  to  the  Jews, 

99 


CHAT.    III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    TITUS. 


"  Think  not  that  I  will  accuse  you  to  the  Father :  there  is  one  that  accuseth."  Such  a  sinner 
would  be  called  hi^li-banded  in  the  Old  Testament.  j  •    xu    q    •  4. 

Ver  \•^  Zenas  the  lawyer. -Otherwise  unknown.  Either  a  Jew  learned  m  the  Scriptures, 
or  2.  juris  consultns.     Perhaps  the  "lawyer"  may  show  what  he  was  before  conversion,  like 

Matthew  "the  imblican."  .   ,  ,         ^t  ^  j?  -i     i.-       •  e\ 

Ver.  14.  Let  ours  also.-R.V.  "our  people."    Good  works.— Not  for  salvation  (see  ver.  5), 

but  for  necessary  wants. 
Ver.  15.  Them  that  love  us.— That  are  dear  to  us  as  we  are  to  them. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—3. 

Christianity  and  the  Civil  Powers. 

I.  Christianity  is  on  the  side  of  law  and  order  (ver.  1).— The  Cretans  were 
easily  excited  to  rebellion,  and  the  Jewish  element  in  the  island  fostered  any 
disposition  to  \dolence  against  Christianity.  Hence  Titus  is  urged  to  enforce  on 
his  people  a  ready  obedience  to  magistrates,  and  to  render  cheerful  help  in 
maintaining  the  public  peace.  Christianity  is  ever  on  the  side  of  law  and  order, 
and  does  more  to  prevent  war  and  suppress  rebellion  than  thousands  of  soldiers 
and  policemen.  The  civil  powers  find  powerful  allies  in  all  Christian  Churches 
and  institutions. 

II.  Christianity  does  not  sanction  the  disparagement  of  civil  officers. — 
"  Speak  evil  of  no  man  ...  be  no  brawlers  "  (ver.  2).  Especially  not  to  speak  evil 
of  dignitaries  and  magistrates.  The  civil  officer  is  the  embodiment  and  represen- 
tative of  law ;  and  whatever  his  character  may  be  otherwise,  the  law  must  be 
respected  in  him.  The  civil  powers  have  often  made  great  mistakes  in  harassing 
the  Christian  Church,  and  the  only  retaliation  the  Church  has  made  has  been 
to  defend  the  rights  and  privileges  of  the  magistracy.  The  warning  against 
brawls  was  not  only  applicable  to  the  Cretans,  who  were  notoriously  quarrelsome, 
but  is  directed  against  all  who  would  disturb  the  peace  of  the  Church  or  of  the 
community  by  giving  way  to  a  petulant  and  fault-finding  spirit. 

III.  Christianity  teaches  becoming  behaviour  towards  all  men. — "  But  gentle, 
shewing  all  meekness  unto  all  men "  (ver.  2).  The  Christian  spirit  is  for- 
bearing and  kindly,  not  urging  its  rights  to  the  uttermost,  lest  by  doing  so  it 
should  stir  up  wrath  and  bitterness.  Instead  of  indulging  a  passionate  severity, 
it  disarms  opposition  by  meekly  enduring  wrong.  "  Morning  by  morning," 
writes  Maclaren,  "  God's  great  mercy  of  sunrise  steals  upon  a  darkened  world  in 
still,  slow  self-impartation ;  and  the  light  which  has  a  force  that  has  carried  it 
across  gulfs  of  space  that  the  imagination  staggers  in  trying  to  conceive,  yet 
falls  so  gently  that  it  does  not  move  the  petals  of  the  sleeping  flowers,  nor  hurts 
the  lids  of  an  infant's  eyes,  nor  displaces  a  grain  of  dust.  So  should  we  live  and 
work,  clothing  all  our  power  in  tenderness,  doing  our  work  in  quietness,  dis- 
turbing nothing  but  the  darkness,  and  with  silent  increase  of  beneficent  power 
filling  and  flooding  the  dark  earth  with  healing  beams."  If  God  is  so  kind  and 
beneficent  to  all,  we  ought  to  be  meek  and  gentle  towards  each  other. 

^  IV.  Christianity  enforces  obedience  to  the  civil  powers  by  reminding  us  of 
our  former  lawless  life  (ver.  3).~The  recollection  of  our  own  wild  and  reckless 
conduct  in  the  past,  and  the  forbearance  often  shown  to  us,  should  teach  us  to 
stand  by  those  whose  duty  it  is  to  maintain  public  order  and  decorum. 

Lessons. — 1.  Christianity  is  the  guardian  and  promoter  of  peace.  2.  Civil 
authority  is  potent  as  it  is  imbued  with  the  Christian  spirit.  3.  Sin  is  the  cause 
of  rebellion  and  disorder. 


100 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    TITUS.  chap.  hi. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  1.  The  Authority  of  Law.  Vers.  2,  3.  The  Transforming  Power 

I.  Law  is  of  God.  of  the  Gospel, 

II.  Authority  is  derived  from  God.  I.  What  even  Christians  were. — 

III.  Obedience  to  law  an  essential  1.  They  were  distinguished  hy  folly, 
preparation  for  good  works.  2.   Disohedie^nce.      3.    Liability    to    de- 

Lessons. — 1.  Duty  once  learned  may  ception.     4.    Sensuality.      5.    Passion, 

be  and  often  is  forgotten.     2.  Duties  of  6.   Unloveliness.     7.    Unbrotherliness. 
every-day  life  are  most  readily  forgotten.  II.    What     Christians      become. — 

3.   Christian  ministers  are  reqidred  to  1.  Their  lives  display  humility  of  spirit, 

remind  their  hearers  of  duty^  as  well  as  2.  Gentleness  in  action.     3.    Truthful- 

to  proclaim  privileges.  ness  in  word. — E.  W. 

MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  4—7. 

The  Programme  of  Salvation. 

I.  Salvation  originates  in  the  philanthropy  of  God  (ver.  4). — There  was 
nothing  impelling  God  to  save  men  but  His  own  loving-kindness.  His  grace, 
flowing  over  in  streams  of  beneficence,  is  the  practical  manifestation  of  that  love. 
Love  is  its  own  perennial  fount  of  blessing  and  the  inspiration  of  the  noblest 
acts.  Life  without  love  would  be  intolerably  dreary.  Love  is  unselfish,  and  must 
find  outlets  for  its  exercise,  though  it  is  lavished  on  unworthy  objects.  Life,  the 
world,  the  universe,  is  all  the  richer  for  the  revelation  of  the  love  of  God. 

II.  Salvation  is  an  act  of  unmerited  mercy. — "Not  by  works  of  righteousness 
.  .  .  but  according  to  His  mercy  He  saved  us  "  (ver.  5).  As  an  old  writer  has 
said,  "  We  neither  did  works  of  righteousness  nor  were  saved  by  them,  but  His 
goodness  did  the  whole."  Salvation  is  a  manifestation  to  the  soul  of  the  Divine 
mercy.  Faith,  as  our  part  in  the  personal  realisation  of  salvation,  is  not  mentioned, 
but  is  presupposed.  The  object  of  the  apostle  here  is  to  describe  the  Divine  side 
of  the  work,  and  to  show  that  our  salvation  was  brought  about  independent  of 
all  merit  on  our  part.     Every  saved  sinner  can  sing, — 

"  'Tis  mercy  all,  immense  and  free, 
For,  O  my  God,  it  found  out  me." 

III.  Salvation  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit. — "  By  the  washing  of  regenera- 
tion, and  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  which  He  shed  onus  abundantly"  (vers.  5,  6). 
As  the  priests  in  the  old  tabernacle  had  to  wash  in  the  la  ver  of  cleansing  before 
they  could  enter  in  the  Holy  Place  to  minister  before  the  Lord,  so  the  sinner 
must  be  cleansed  in  the  la  ver  of  regeneration  before  he  can  enter  upon  the  service 
of  God,  in  which  service  the  work  of  inward  renewal  is  perpetually  going  on. 
The  washing  and  the  renewing  are  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spiiit,  and  the  renewing 
is  perfected  by  the  abundant  shedding  forth  of  the  Spirit's  influence.  "  I  know 
my  soul  am  as  clean  as  cotton,"  said  an  old  Baptist  negro,  "  'cause  I  was  immersed 
when  de  tide  was  running  over." 

IV.  Salvation  entitles  man  to  an  inheritance  of  future  blessedness. — **  Made 
heirs  according  to  the  hope  of  eternal  life  "  (ver.  7).  Being  justified  by  Divine 
grace,  we  are  constituted  heirs  of  God,  and  the  heirship  inspires  the  hope  of 
possessing  the  inheritance  of  eternal  life,  and  entitles  us  to  it.  Eternal  life  is 
the  grand  realisation  of  the  hope.  Until  we  are  saved  we  are  without  hope  ;  but 
once  possessing  the  blessed  hope  we  have  the  strongest  motive  for  leading  a  Ufe 
of  practical  hohness,  which  is  the  prominent  argument  of  the  apostle  in  the 
paragraph. 

101 


CHAP.   III. 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    TITUS. 


Lessons  —1  Salvation  is  wholly  a  Divim  work.  2.  Salvation  is  realised  by  th^ 
agemy  of  'live  Holy  Spirit.     3.  Salvation  fits  tU  soul  for  eUrmil  glory. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers  4  7  —The  Source  of  Salvation,  any  evil.     2.  In  particular,    salvation 

I  -Salvation    is    based  on  Divine  from  sin.      From    its   guilt     misery, 

•  power,  and  stain,  and  irom  the  wrath 

iJ'i^^^y-  of  God.     3.  It   is  a  certain   salvation. 

II.  Is  independent  of  human  merit.  ,,^^  ^^^^^  ^^„    rj.^^  veracity  of  God 

III.  Is  provided  abundantly. — I.  As  ensures  it;  the  experience  of  the  be- 
an  exhibition  of  abundant  mercy.     1.  As      hever  exemplifies  it. 

a  remedy  fw  great  sin.     S.  As  a  pro-  jj^  xhe  medium  through  which  it 

vision  for  all  who  loill  repent.  flows. — Not  through  human  goodness, 

lY.  Is  everlasting. — 1.  Justification  but  Divine  mercy,  both  in  its  origin  and 

a  ground  of  hope.     2.  Eternal  life  the  course. 

object  of  hope.— E.  W.  III.  The  agency  by  which  it  is  im- 
parted.— The  cleansing  and  renewing 

Ver.  5.  Salvation.  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

I.  The    salvation    effected  for   us.  lessons. — 1.  Here  we  have  cause  for 

— 1.  In  general,   the   deliver an^  from  humility.     2.  Gratitude.     3.  Diligence, 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF   VERSE  8. 

Good  Works — 

I.  Are  in  harmony  with  the  genius  of  the  gospel. — "This  is  a  faithful 
saying,  and  these  things  I  will  that  thou  affirm  constantly."  The  gratuitousness 
of  God's  gift  of  salvation,  the  great  theme  of  gospel  revelation,  is  an  ever-present 
and  powerful  motive  to  practical  benevolence.  The  vain  and  unprofitable 
questions  reprobated  by  the  apostle  do  not  incite  to  good  works,  but  are  a 
serious  hindrance.  The  gospel  is  the  only  system  that  helps  us  to  be  good  and 
do  good.  In  some  of  the  American  lakes  the  boats  are  strangely  hindered  in 
their  progress.  They  are  drawn  downwards,  and  the  use  of  the  oar  is  difficult, 
because  of  the  magnetic  power  of  deep  mud  concealed  below  the  surface  of  the 
waters.  So  it  is  in  the  lives  of  men  and  the  life  of  the  world.  Good  works  are 
vessels  that  cannot  advance  without  difficulty  over  the  waves  of  life,  because 
of  evil  which,  as  mud,  has  slowly  gathered.  There  must  be  purgation  :  new 
proclaimings  and  enforcing  of  the  gospel  must  become  as  the  powerful,  cleansing 
flow  of  a  great  stream. 

II.  Must  spring  from  an  active  faith. — "  That  they  which  have  believed  in 
God."  Faith  enables  us  to  see  that  God  is  good,  approves  of  good,  and  will 
bless  only  what  is  good.  We  learn  to  credit  all  that  God  says  as  being  true 
and  faithful,  and  we  become  anxious  and  diligent  to  do  what  will  please  Him. 
We  believe  also  that  He  will  certainly  punish  every  dereliction  of  duty.  Faith 
is  a  power  ever  working  in  the  direction  of  good. 

III.  Must  be  consistently  and  steadily  maintained. — "  Be  careful  to  maintain 
good  works."  "  Good  works,"  says  Luther,  "  do  not  make  a  Christian ;  but 
one  must  be  a  Christian  to  do  good  works.  The  tree  bringeth  forth  the  fruit, 
not  the  fruit  the  tree.  None  is  made  a  Christian  by  works,  but  by  Christ; 
and  being  in  Christ,  he  brings  forth  fruit  for  Him."  Do  all  the  good  you  can 
(1  Tim.  vi.  17-19),  in  all  the  ways  you  can  (1  Cor.  xv.  58),  to  all  the  people 
you  can  (Matt.  v.  44,  45),  at  all  the  times  you  can  (Prov.  iii.  27,  28),  as  long 
as  you  can  (Eccles.  ix.  10) ;  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God  (1  Cor.  x.  31). 

IV.  Are  beneficial  to  ourselves  and  to  others. — **  These  things  are  good 
102 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    TITUS,  chap.  hi. 


[to  ourselves]  and  profitable  unto  men  [to  others]."  A  good  deed  has  a  reflex 
influence.  Like  mercy,  it  is  twice  blessed ;  it  blesses  him  who  gives  and  him 
who  takes.  It  adds  to  the  volume  of  the  beneficent  force  that  is  working  out 
the  regeneration  of  the  world.  We  cannot  bless  others  without  being  blessed 
ourselves. 

Lessons. — The  gospel  is  the  ministrant  of  universal  good.  2.  To  do  good  we 
must  first  he  good.  3.  Good  works  have  no  merit,  hut  no  one  is  a  Christian 
without  them. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  9—11. 

A  Contumacious  Spirit — 

I.  Is  mainly  occupied  with  the  discussion  of  useless  questions  (ver.  9). — The 
tendency  of  the  contentious  spirit  is  to  dwell  on  the  minute  and  trifling,  and 
exalt  them  into  undue  importance.  The  method  of  investigation  proceeds  on 
a  false  basis.  The  disputatious  man  strives  to  make  human  traditions  agree 
with  the  law,  instead  of  judging  all  human  theories  by  the  light  and  authority 
of  the  law ;  it  is  a  vain  attempt  to  make  God  agree  with  man.  It  is  a  waste 
of  time  and  power.  It  produces  no  moral  good,  but  is  the  harbinger  and  active 
cause  of  much  evil.     It  sows  the  seeds  of  future  heresies. 

II.  Should  be  faithfully  admonished,  and  then  left  to  itself. — "A  man 
that  is  an  heretick  after  the  first  and  second  admonition  reject"  (ver.  10).  A 
heretic  is  a  man  of  contumacious  spirit,  self-willed,  and  contending  for  his  own 
theories,  though  they  are  opposed  and  contradictory  to  the  universally  received 
doctrines  of  the  Church  and  the  unmistakable  revelations  of  the  word  of  God. 
Such  a  man  must  be  faithfully  warned,  not  once,  but  twice ;  and  if  he  refuses 
to  be  advised  and  continues  recalcitrant,  leave  him  to  himself — have  nothing 
more  to  do  with  him,  either  in  admonition  or  intercourse.  We  cannot  help  a 
man  who  refuses  the  kindliest  suggestions,  and  to  be  controlled  by  anything 
but  his  own  wild,  ungovernable  temper. 

III.  Brings  about  its  own  punishment. — ''Knowing  that  he  that  is  such 
is  subverted,  and  sinneth,  being  condemned  of  himself"  (ver.  11).  His  perversity 
is  his  ruin.  He  cannot  say  no  one  has  told  him  better.  He  wilfully  sins 
against  knowledge,  and  against  the  faithful  warnings  of  those  who  have  striven 
to  bring  him  to  a  better  mind.  He  is  self-condemned,  and  his  punishment  is 
to  be  in  perpetual  restlessness  and  uncertainty.  *'  There  is,"  says  Pascal,  "  an 
intestine  war  in  man  between  reason  and  the  passions.  He  might  enjoy  some 
repose  had  he  reason  alone  without  passion,  or  passion  alone  without  reason. 
But  having  both,  he  must  needs  live  in  a  state  of  warfare,  since  he  cannot 
maintain  peace  with  one  without  being  at  war  with  the  other.  Hence  he  is 
always  divided,  and  always  at  variance  with  himself."  The  gospel  is  the  cure 
of  the  contumacious ;  but  even  this  will  not  avail  unless  it  be  believingly  received. 

Lessons. — 1.  A  contentious  spirit  magnifies  trifles.  2.  There  is  much  useless 
talk  in  the  world.     3.  Nothing  can  he  dooie  to  rescue  the  man  who  rejects  the  gospel. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Ver.  9.  Some  Hints  to  Preachers.  IV.    Trivial   questions  are   out  of 

I.  Fundamental  truths  are  to  be  place  in  the  pulpit. — 1.  It  is  possible 
COntiilually  enforced.  to    have    repetition    without    sameness. 

II.  Practical  preaching  is  never  2.  Pelief  that  does  not  change  the  life 
out  of  season.  is  useless.     3.  The  law  is  to  he  oheyed 

III.  Christian  duties  are  of  universal     in  spirit  rather  than  in  letter. 


application. 


103 


CHAP.    III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    TITUS. 


Vers  W,\\.  The  Treatment  of  Heresy.  III.    Hardened  heretics  are  to  be 

I    Heresy  is  not  an  unsound  opinion,  rejected.— 1.  But  this  only  applies  to 

but  an  unsound  life.  exclusion   from    Christian  fellowship. 

II.  Is  to  be  dealt  with  firmly,  but  2.    It  is  no  warrant  for  persecution. 

gently.— 1.     Firmly,    by    admonition.  3.    Excluded  heretics  are  to  he  deermd 

2.  Gently,  by  repeated  admonitions.  objects  of  pity. — F.  W, 

MAIN  IIOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  12—15. 

Concluding  Counsels — 

I.  Indicate  an  absorbing  interest  in  the  welfare  of  the  Church  (vers.  12, 13). — 
Arteiiias  or  Tycbicus  is  to  succeed  Titus  in  Crete,  so  that  he  may  join  Paul 
at  Nicopolis,  the  city  of  victory,  so  called  from  the  great  historic  battle  of 
Actium,  and  in  which  city  Paul  is  arranging  to  spend  the  winter.  He  summons 
Titus  to  his  side  to  help  him  in  the  work,  or  to  give  him  directions  as  to  extending 
missionary  operations  and  breaking  up  new  ground.  Zenas  and  Apollos  are  to 
be  supplied  with  all  the  means  necessary  for  their  journey  and  the  exigencies  of 
their  w^ork.  Paul  forgets  himself  in  his  absorbing  devotion  to  the  work  of  God. 
The  cause  of  Christ  must  be  supreme,  and  everything  else  subsidiary  and  made 
helpful  to  its  support  and  diffusion. 

II.  Emphasis  is  laid  on  the  necessity  of  maintaining  good  works  (ver.  14). — 
Active  benevolence  is  a  fruit  of  grace.  Thus  early  in  Church  history  it  is 
discovered  and  enforced  that  true  religion  is  intensely  practical,  and  recommends 
itself  by  the  life  and  conduct  it  produces.  The  needs  of  the  Church  and  of  the 
world  afford  unceasing  opportunities  for  doing  good.  Our  benevolent  acts  may 
be  abused,  but  that  is  no  reason  for  ceasing  to  be  generous.  "  I  would  rather," 
said  a  Christian  philanthropist,  "  relieve  two  undeserving  objects  than  that  one 
deserving  person  should  escape  my  notice."  Mark  Antony,  when  depressed  and 
at  the  ebb  of  fortune,  declared  he  had  lost  all,  except  what  he  had  given  away. 

III.  Finally  express  the  best  Christian  wishes  (ver.  15). — Christian  greeting 
is  special  and  personal — "  All  that  are  with  me  salute  thee  "  ;  and  it  is  general 
and  all-inclusive — "  them  that  love  us  in  the  faith  "  ;  and  in  both  cases  it  is 
genuine  and  sincere.  The  best  Christian  wishes  are^summed  up  in  the  benedic- 
tion of  grace  to  all — "Grace  be  with  you  all."  The  heathen  salutation  was 
**  health."  There  is  a  hfe  of  the  flesh  and  there  is  a  life  of  the  spirit — a  truer, 
more  real,  and  higher  life ;  above  and  beyond  all,  the  apostle  wished  them  this, 
not  health  or  happiness,  but  grace — the  wealth  of  the  gospel  compressed  into 
one  great  benediction. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  best  Christian  worker  is  the  happiest.  2.  Christianity  is  a 
system  of  active  benevole^nce.  3.  The  Christian  minister  finds  among  his  people 
constant  themes  for  prayer. 


GERM   NOTES   ON   THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  12-14.  A  Good  Man's  Personal  IV,    Personal    solicitude    for    the 

Conxierns.  spiritual  prosperity  of  others. 

I.  Personal  selection  of  agents. 

n.  Personal  desire  for  compamon-  ?^JitL^&;^ShtfVhris- 

^                                                ■<  tian  friendship. 

III.  Personal  consideration  for  ab-  II.  Is  crowned  by  a  solemn  benedic- 

sent  friends.  tion.— i^.  W, 
104 


THE    EPISTLE    OF    PAUL    TO 

PHILEMON. 


INTEODUCTION. 

Philemon,  a  convert  of  St.  Paul  apparently  during  the  period  of  his  Ephesian 
sojourn,  had  joined  the  company  of  believers  in  Christ  at  Colossse.  Amongst 
the  members  of  the  Church  gathering  for  worship  in  his  house  he  appears  to 
have  gained  esteem.  Of  the  traditions  by  which  he  became  bishop  and  then 
martyr  no  notice  need  be  taken.  It  seems  to  have  been  a  common  thing  in  the 
case  of  men  of  whom  we  know  little  and  would  fain  know  more,  first  to  make 
bishops  and  then  martyrs  of  them,  and  then  to  be  shocked  at  the  impiety  of  any 
who  doubted  the  tradition. 

Onesimus,  the  slave  of  Philemon,  for  some  offence  against  his  master,  had  been 
obliged  to  flee,  which  was  a  further  offence  in  the  eye  of  the  law.  He  seems  to 
have  taken  shelter  where  such  characters  oftenest  do — in  the  crowds  and  purlieu^ 
of  a  great  city.  That  he  had  fled  to  St.  Paul  on  purpose,  as  Meyer  says,  we 
cannot  think.  For  anything  he  knew,  Paul  was  as  likely  to  turn  informer  and 
hand  him  over  to  the  fugitivarii,  or  slave-detectives,  as  he  was  likely  to  become 
intercessor  for  him  with  his  master.  How  they  met  we  cannot  tell ;  but  Paul 
seems  to  have  conceived  a  strong  affection  for  him,  which  he  requited  by  devoted 
service. 

Occasion  and  style  of  the  letter. — The  aim  of  St.  Paul  in  this  letter  is  to 
procure  for  Onesimus  a  free  pardon,  and,  hard  test  of  Philemon's  Christianity 
as  it  would  be,  his  reception  into  the  company  of  brethren  at  Colossse.  Tychicus 
was  just  about  to  leave  for  the  home  of  Philemon,  so  St.  Paul  took  the  oppor- 
tunity to  send  the  fugitive  back  along  with  him,  carrpng  the  letter  which  was 
to  effect  his  reconcihation.  "  The  aim  of  the  letter  is  pursued  with  so  much 
Christian  love  and  wisdom,  with  so  great  psychological  tact,  and,  without 
sacrifice  of  the  apostohc  authority,  in  a  manner  so  thoughtfully  condescending, 
adroit,  deHcate,  and  irresistible  that  the  brief  letter — which  is  in  the  finest  sense 

105 


INTRODUCTION.     nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    PHILEMON. 


*  seasoned  with  salt '  as  a  most  precious  and  characteristic  reUc  of  the  great 
apostle— belongs,  even  as  regards  its  Attic  refinement  and  gracefulness,  to  the 
epistolary  masterpieces  of  antiquity."     It  is  sufficient  that  this  high  praise  is  from 
so  competent  a  critic  as  Meyer. 
Outline. 
Vers.    1 — 3.     Address  and  greeting. 

4 — 7.     A  fine  tribute  to  the  Christian  character  of  Philemon. 
8 — 21.     The  object  proper  of  the  epistle — intercession  for  Onesimus. 
22 — 25.     Request  for  preparing  to  entertain  the  apostle.     Salutations 
and  conclusion. 


106 


CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  A  prisoner. — There  is  evident  design  in  this  opening  word  of  the  letter.  How 
could  Philemon  resist  an  appeal  which  was  penned  within  prison- walls  and  by  a  manacled 
hand  ?  Unto  Philemon. — A  citizen  of  Colossae,  who  owed  his  conversion,  his  better  self, 
to  the  apostle  (ver.  19).  We  know  nothing  of  him  but  what  this  letter  reveals  of  his 
character, 

Ver.  2.  Our  beloved  Apphia. — K.V.  '*  Apphia  our  sister."  It  is  a  safe  inference,  from  the 
connection  of  the  names,  that  Apphia  was  the  wife  of  Philemon.  Since  the  name  always 
retains  the  aspirate,  it  cannot  be  the  Roman  name  Appia  {Lightfoot).  Archippus  our 
fellow-soldier. — Less  confidently,  but  still  reasonably,  inferred  to  be  the  son  of  Philemon  and 
Apphia,  in  the  fellowship  of  Christian  service,  either  at  Colossae  or  Laodicea,  preferably  the 
latter. 

Ver.  4.  I  thank  my  God. — There  the  apostle  carries  all  his  joys  and  troubles  into  the 
presence  of  his  God. 

Ver.  5.  Hearing  of  thy  love. — Perhaps  the  bearer  of  the  refreshing  news  was  Epaphras. 
The  love  of  Philemon  is  tiiC  chief  element  so  far  as  the  immediate  purpose  of  the  apostle  is 
concerned.  And  of  the  faith. — The  explanation  of  this  order  generally  given  is  by  the 
figure  called  chiasmus.  In  ver.  5,  "  love  and  faith " ;  in  vers.  6  and  7,  "  faith  and  love." 
Meyer's  explanation  is  that  faith  here  means  fidelity,  and  is  not  to  be  taken  in  the  dogmatic 
sense. 

Ver.  6.  That  the  communication  of  thy  faith. — R.V.  "fellowship."  Two  interpretations 
of  this  phrase  deserve  consideration.  (1)  Your  friendly  offices  and  sympathies,  your  kindly 
deeds  of  charity  which  spring  from  your  faith.  (2)  Your  communion  with  God  through 
faith.     The  parallel  passages  strongly  support  the  former  sense  {Ligktfoof). 

Ver.  7.  Because  the  bowels  of  the  saints  are  refreshed  by  thee,  brother. — E.V.  "hearts," 
This  letter,  short  as  it  is,  contains  this  expression  three  times.  Ligbtfoot  considers  the 
prominent  idea  to  be  that  of  terror,  grief,  despondency,  etc.,  and  the  refreshing  as  a 
preparation  for  the  renewal  of  labour  or  suffering. 

Ver.  8.  Though  I  might  be  much  bold. — R.V.  better,  "though  I  have  all  boldness." 
St.  Paul  feels  that  his  relationship  to  Philemon  might  warrant  the  casting  away  of  reserve 
in  speech.  To  enjoin  thee  that  which  is  convenient. — R.V.  "  befitting."  To  lay  down 
what  would  be  proper, 

Ver.  9.  For  love's  sake  I  rather  beseech. — Such  a  gentleman  as  the  apostle  was  {Coleridge). 
The  love  that  "  liopeth  all  things "  seems  here  to  be  intended.  Paul  the  aged. — So  R.V. 
text.  R.V.  margin,  "Paul  an  ambassador."  Ambassadors  being  generally  venerable  men, 
perhaps  the  apostle  meant  to  convey  the  double  idea  of  age  and  office. 

Ver.  10.  My  son  Onesimus. — The  R.V.,  like  the  Greek,  holds  back  the  name  that  might 
raise  some  feeling  in  Philemon's  breast.  Whom  I  have  begotten. — If  Philemon  had  been 
a  cynic,  he  might  have  said  the  pain  had  been  his  (ver.  18),  whilst  Paul  seems  to  have  had 
only  the  joy  over  this  child  of  his  captivity. 

Ver.  11.  Unprofitable  .  .  .  profitable. — We  have  here  a  play  on  words.  Christus  was 
often  pronounced  by  Pagans  Chrestus,  so  that  the  adjectives  6.xpwtos,  eijxpw^os,  would 
suggest  the  meanings  of  "  non-Christian  "  and  a  "  good  Christian  "  {Farrar). 

Ver.  12.  Whom  I  have  sent  again. — There  were  police — the  fugitivarii — whose  duty  it 
was  to  track  out  runaway  slaves  :  love  succeeds  better. 

Ver.  13.  I  would  have  retained. — "  I  could  have  wished  I  might  keep  him."  Paul  was 
not  a  man  to  take  a  liberty  with  a  friend.  In  thy  stead.— It  was  not  with  Philemon's 
consent  that  Onesimus  was  in  Rome  ;  but  if  he  might  be  his  proxy,  St.  Paul  knew  that  would 
be  the  most  likely  way  to  have  retained  the  runaway  for  himself. 

Ver.  14.  That  thy  benefit. — Lit.  "  thy  good."  There  are  spontaneous  benefactions,  and 
others  that  are  given  reluctantly,  but  without  a  tell-tale  face. 

Ver.  15.  Perhaps  he  therefore  departed.— He  does  not  say,  "For  this  cause  he  fled,"  but 
"  For  this  cause  he  was  parted  " ;  for  he  would  appease  Philemon  by  a  more  euphemistic  phrase 
(Chrysostom).  That  thou  shouldest  receive  him  for  ever. — Not  the  design  of  Onesimus,  but 
"  there's  a  Divinity  that  shapes  our  ends."  Paul  sees  the  design  in  the  event  which  he 
reckons  upon  securely. 

107 


VERS.  1—7.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    PHILEMON. 


Ver.  16.  Not  now  as  a  servant.— The  apostle  utters  no  syllable  of  "  emancipation,"  though 
we  can  almost  think  he  is  playing  round  the  word. 

Ver.  17.  If  thou  count  me  therefore  a  partner. —The  master-stroke  of  the  apostle's  policy. 
Who  would  not  pay  a  goodly  price  for  the  privilege  of  calling  such  a  man  comrade  or  friend  ? 
Receive  him  as  myself. — Not  as  a  slave,  nor  a  pardoned  slave,  nor  a  freedman,  but  as  an 
apostle  0'..  God  (cf.  Gal.  iv,  14). 

Ver.  IC.  Put  that  on  mine  account. — As  we  should  say  in  modern  mercantile  language, 
«'  Debit  me  with  it." 

Ver.  19.  I  Paul  have  written  it.— R.V.  "I  Paul  write  it."  A  signature  to  a  deed  in 
ancient  or  nicdireval  times  would  commonly  take  this  form,  '•  I  so-and-so  "  {JAghtfoof).  Thou 
owest  unto  me  even  thine  own  self. — This  is  St.  Paul's  creditor  side  of  the  account.  With 
this  debt  outstanding  he  can  meet  the  payment  on  account  of  Onesimus. 

Ver.  20.  Let  mu  have  joy.— Tb.e  apostle  appeals  to  what  has  been  a  customary  thing  with 
Philemon  (ver.  7).     The  verb  is  at  the  root  of  the  name  Onesimus. 

Ver.  21.  Thou  wilt  also  do  more  than  I  say. — What  would  he  do  ?  Set  Onesimus  at  liberty  1 
If  so,  this  reserve  is  eminently  characteristic  of  the  gospel.  Slavery  is  never  directly  attacked 
as  such,  but  principles  are  inculcated  which  must  prove  fatal  to  it  {Lightfoot). 

Ver.  22.  Prepare  me  also  a  lodging. — "  There  is  a  gentle  compulsion  in  this  mention  of  a 
personal  visit  to  Colossae.  The  apostle  would  thus  be  able  to  see  for  himself  that  Philemon 
had  not  disappointed  his  expectations  "  {Lightfoot).  What  would  one  not  have  given  to 
be  present  if  ever  Philemon  did  play  the  hosti  to  Paul  afterwards,  Onesimus  being  "  one  of 
them  that  sat  at  meat  with  him  "  ! 

MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PAEAGRAPH.— Verses  1—3. 

Chnstian  Salutation — 

I.  Significant  as  proceeding  from  a  devoted  champion  of  the  truth. — "  Paul, 
a  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ "  (ver.  1 ).  A  designation  not  adopted  for  effect,  and 
yet  most  effective  by  its  undesignedness  and  simple  truth.  Paul  speaks  not  as 
the  apostle,  but  as  the  friend,  and  this  description  of  himself  as  a  prisoner  of 
Jesus — a  sufferer  for  the  gospel — would  go  straight  to  Philemon's  heart.  He 
drops  all  allusion  to  the  authority  of  his  office,  and  "  lets  Philemon  hear  the 
fetters  jangling  on  his  limbs — a  more  powerful  plea.'  It  was  for  the  cause  of 
Christ  that  Paul  was  in  the  Roman  prison.  Jewish  hatred  had  succeeded  in 
shutting  up  the  ringleader  of  the  Christian  movement  ;  but  Paul  was  less 
concerned  than  they  in  the  course  events  were  taking.  It  enabled  him  to  preach 
the  gospel  in  the  metropolis  of  the  world -empire. 

II.  Addressed  to  an  exemplary  Christian  household  (vers.  1,  2). — Philemon  is 
first  mentioned  as  the  head  of  the  house,  then  Apphia  his  wife,  Archippus, 
probably  their  son,  and  the  little  company  of  believers  who  were  very  likely 
accustomed  to  meet  under  Philemon's  roof,  the  whole  regarded  as  constituting 
a  Church.  We  have  here  a  glimpse  of  a  quiet  Christian  home  in  the  early 
times.  The  gospel  makes  most  solid  progress  when  the  family  is  converted  and 
consecrated  to  Christ.  Christianity  imposes  upon  every  believer  the  sacred  duty 
of  showing  piety  at  home. 

III.  Supplicates  the  bestowal  of  special  blessings  (ver.  3). — Grace  is  the 
unmerited  but  all-comprehensive  favour  of  God,  and  peace  an  enjoyment 
resulting  from  grace,  and  a  blessing  to  be  diligently  sought  and  increasingly 
cultivated.     Grace  and  peace  comprise  Heaven's  choicest  benedictions. 

Lessons. — 1.  Prison  life  cannot  suppress  Christian  freedom.  2.  Religion 
hallows  family  life.     3.   Our  greatest  blessings  come  through  prayer. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  4—7. 

Distinguished  Christian  Eoccellence — 

I.  Is  an  occasion  of  thanksgiving  and  prayer. — *'  I  thank  my  God,  making 
mention  of  thee  always  in  my  prayers "  (ver.  4).     The  frequent  expression  of 
108 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    PHILEMON,     vers.  4—11. 


the  apostle's  thanks  and  prayers  indicates  his  habitual  devoutness  of  spirit.  A 
prayerful  heart  is  keenly  appreciative  of  the  least  evidence  of  Christian  excel- 
lence, and  joyfully  thanks  God  as  the  Source  and  Giver  of  all  good.  Prayer  and 
gratitude  are  usually  blended  together. 

II.  Manifested  in  a  loving  heart  (ver.  5). — Love,  though  mentioned  first,  is 
really  the  result  of  faith,  but  it  is  the  grace  the  apostle  in  this  instance  wishes 
to  prominently  refer  to,  and  to  be  exercised  towards  the  runaway  slave.  Love 
is  the  essence,  the  strength,  and  the  ornament  of  the  Christian  character. 
Without  love  all  other  graces  are  cold  and  inactive. 

III.  Practically  appreciates  the  best  things  in  the  Christian  life  (ver.  6). — 
The  apostle's  prayer  for  Philemon  desires  the  enlargement  of  the  fellowship  of 
his  faith  so  as  to  recognise  and  experience  every  good  thing  of  which  Christ  is 
the  source.  The  germs  of  all  Christian  excellencies  are  planted  in  the  heart  when 
we  believe  in  Christ,  but  they  must  be  nurtured  into  growth  and  expansiveness 
by  exercise  and  by  practical  benevolence.  In  every  Christian  heart  there  are  the 
potentialities  of  all  good  :  every  grace  is  developed  by  use. 

IV.  Shown  in  sympathetic  benevolence  (ver.  7). — Philemon's  good  to  others, 
in  supplying  the  wants  and  cheering  the  hearts  of  the  saints,  was  a  joy  and 
comfort  to  the  apostle.  All  our  works  should  be  done,  as  a  primal  motive,  to  please 
God  ;  but  it  is  no  small  motive  to  persevere  in  well-doing,  that  our  good  deeds 
give  pleasure  to  those  we  esteem  and  love.  "  Neither  Paul  nor  Philemon 
ireamed  that,  made  immortal  by  the  word  of  the  former,  the  same  transient  act 
would  find  its  way  across  the  centuries,  and  would  '  smell  sweet  and  blossom  in 
the  dust '  to-day." 

Lessons. — 1.  The  Christian  life  is  a  life  of  love.  2.  Christianity  is  practical 
benevoleiice.     3.  Growth  in  piety  is  an  occasion  of  joy  to  the  good. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  4.   Thanksgiving  and  Prayer —  Vers.  5-7.  Christian  Love — 

I.  Are  the  evidences  of  a  genuine  I.  Is  the  product  of  a  vital  faith 
Christian  spirit.  (ver.  5). 

II.  Should  be  always  united.  II.    Is  the  love  of  God  and  man 
TIL    Act    and    react    upon    each  (ver.  5). 

otlier.  III.   Sees  good  so  far  as  it  sees 

IV.  Should    be    constantly    culti-  Christ  in  everything  (ver.  6). 

vated.  IV.  Occasions  joy  to  others  by  its 

V.  Are  pleasing  to  God.  timely  and  beneficent  ministries. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  TEE  PARAGRAPH.—    Verses  8—11. 

A  Plea  for  a  Delinquent  Slave — 

I.  Is  not  enforced  by  mere  authority  (ver.  8). — Paul  here  acknowledges  that 
what  authority  he  has  is  not  in  himself,  but  in  Christ.  He  prefers  to  beseech 
where  he  might  command.  It  is  never  wise  to  use  all  the  power  we  have.  Force 
should  be  the  very  last  resource.  There  is  a  power  in  gentleness  that  rarely  fails, 
and  it  is  always  best  to  try  that  first. 

II.  Is  urged  on  the  ground  of  personal  affection. — "  For  love's  sake  I  rather 
beseech  thee "  (ver.  9).  To  deepen  the  pathos  of  his  entreaty,  Paul  appeals  to 
his  age  and  to  his  condition  as  a  prisoner  of  Christ — two  considerations  that  could 
not  fail  to  quicken  the  love  of  Philemon  towards  the  friend  to  whom  he  owed 
more  than  he  could  repay.     **  The  rocking -stones  which  all  the  storms  of  winter 

109 


VERS.  9,  U).      nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    PHILEMON. 


may  howl  round  and  not  move  can  be  set  swinging  by  a  light  touch.  Una  leads 
the  lion  in  a  silken  leash.  Love  controls  the  wildest  nature.  The  demoniac, 
whom  no  chains  can  bind,  is  found  sitting  at  the  feet  of  incarnate  Gentleness. 
So  the  wish  of  love  is  all-powerful  with  loving  hearts,  and  its  faintest  whisper 
louder  and  more  constraining  than  all  the  trumpets  of  Sinai "  {Maclaren). 

III.  Recognises  the  closeness  of  spiritual  relationship  (ver.  10). — The  slave 
for  whose  restoration  Paul  pleads  is  a  new  man.  Coming  under  the  influence 
of  the  apostle's  preaching  in  the  very  city  in  which  he  was  in  hiding,  he  repented 
and  embraced  the  truth.  The  man  in  bonds  was  the  instrument  of  the  slave's 
spiritual  freedom  ;  and  Onesimus  is  now  recognised  as  a  son  of  Paul,  and  there- 
fore a  brother  of  Philemon.  This  tender  spiritual  relationship  intensified  the 
plea  for  kindly  and  considerate  treatment. 

IV.  Strengthened  by  the  fact  of  genuine  conversion. — "  Which  in  time  past 
was  to  thee  unprofitable,  but  now  profitable  to  thee  and  to  me"  (ver.  11).  Paul 
does  not  excuse  the  slave's  past  conduct.  He  may  have  been  the  worst  of  his 
class,  the  cause  of  more  loss  than  profit  to  his  owner,  and  ending  a  worthless 
career  by  theft  and  flight.  But  his  conversion  was  real,  and  Paul  had  proof  of 
it  in  the  valuable  service  he  had  rendered  to  him.  The  changed  life  and  well- 
tested  qualities  of  the  Christian  character  of  the  slave  would  render  him  of  real 
value  in  the  future  service  of  his  Master.  "  Christ  does  not  need  to  be  besought 
to  welcome  His  runaway  good-for-nothings,  however  unprofitable  they  have  been. 
That  Divine  charity  of  His  forgives  all  things,  and  hopes  all  things  of  the  worst, 
and  can  fulfil  its  own  hope  in  the  most  degraded." 

Lessons. — 1.  Entreaty  is  more  potent  than  command.  2.  The  gospel  can  trans- 
form the  worst  characters.     3.  Christianity  recognises  the  true  brotherhood  of  man. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES, 

Ver.  9.  The  Christianity  of  Old  Age.  strange,  and  full  of  temptations.     Yet 

I.  In  the  two  most  marked  charac-  it  was  the  place  of  his  spiritual 
teristics  of  old  age — the  obtuseness  of  birth. 

immediate  perception  and  the  freshness         III.   Under   Paul's    preaching. — A 

of    remote    memories— may    we    not  hearer,  a  convert. 

discern  an  obvious  intimation  of  the         IV.  Attendant  on  Paul. Reality  of 

great  future,  and  a  fitting  preparative  his  conversion  proved  by  his  desertion 

for  its  approach  ?  of  evil  companions  and  courses,  by  his 

II.  The  veneration  for  old  age  which  ser\dces  to  Paul,  and  by  his  willingness 
Christianity  inspires  comes  not  from  to  return  to  Philemon.  Paul's  affection 
the  past  alone,  but  rather  from  the  for  the  slave,  and  his  uprightness  to  his 
future.  owner. 

III.  Christianity  teaches  the  aged  V.  In  Colossae  again.— Return,  re- 
disciple  how  to  regard  the  world  and  conciliation,  joy.  Faint  picture  of  the 
himself  as  leaving  it.  joy  in  heaven. 

IV.  The  aged,  ere  they  depart,  are  Lessons.— 1.  Adore  the  riches  of  Divine 
able  to  report  to  us  something  of  the  grace  in  the  conversion  of  Onesimus. 
exactitude  of  the  Divine  retribution.  —  2.  Do  not  presume  on  his  case.  3.  The 
Martmeau.  advantage  of  living  in  a  religious  family. 

— G.  Brooks. 
Ver.   10.  ^  Plea  f 01'  Onesimus. 

I.  In  Philemon's  house. — His  privi-  Paul  and  Oiiesimus. 

leges.     His  dishonesty.  I.  Here  we  see  the  providence  of  God 

II.  At    Home. — A   large   city   and  at  work. 
110 


L 

HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    PHILEMON  II.   vers— 16. 


II.  The   power   of  Jesus  Christ   to  Ver.    11.   The    Christian  Solution  oj 
gave.  Social  Problems. 

III.  We  learn  how  to  become  peace-  I-  ^f  problems  like  slavery.— 1.  Its 
makers  method — disintegration^  not   revolution. 

TV    Wp  Iparn  how  to  make  restitu-  ^-  ^^^^  reform  of  the  individual. 

tion  ^^'  ^^^^^  problem  of  employers  and 

.  employed. — By  imbuing  employers  with 
V.  We  learn  how  to  forgive.  ^  Christian  spirit.  2.  By  imbuing  em- 
NY.  We  learn  that  all  men  are  one  ploijees  with  the  same  spirit. 

in  Jesus  Christ.  III.  Of  the  problem  of  the  lapsed 

VII.  We    learn   wh       it   is   to   be  masses. — 1.    By    their    evangelisation. 

diligent  in  season  and  out  of  season.  2.  By  continued  brotherly  oversight. — 

—W.  Galbraith.  S.  E.  Keeble. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  12—16. 

The  Christian  Teacher  and  the  Slave. 

I.  The  Christian  teacher  acknowledges  the  civil  rights  of  the  slave-owner. — 

*'  Whom  I  have  sent  again  "  (ver.  12).  Paul  did  not  propose  to  keep  Onesimus, 
nor  did  he  ask  for  his  liberation  from  slavery,  unless  the  words  in  ver.  21  — 
*'  Knowing  that  thou  wilt  also  do  more  than  I  say  " — may  be  so  construed.  Even 
in  these  words  there  is  no  definite  request  for  the  ^3x1  ^? ^' ^ '^'^i^^  of-tba  s] q, yp,  but 
only  a  delicately  expressed  hint.  Nor  did  Onesimus  object,  but  seemed  eager 
to  go  back  to  the  master  he  had  wronged.  The  time  had  not  then  come,  as  it 
did  come,  for  the  Christian  teacher  to  boldly  attack  the  inhuman  system  of 
slavery,  which  was  so  deeply  and  widely  interwoven  with  the  social  life  of  that 
day.     The  law  sanctioned  the  system  :  the  apostle  respected  the  law. 

II.  He  identifies  himself  with  the  condition  of  the  slave,  and  recognises  the 
value  of  his  services  in  the  gospel. — "  Receive  him,  that  is,  mine  own  bowels 
[my  own  heart] ...  he  might  have  ministered  unto  me  in  the  bonds  of  the  gospel" 
(vers.  12,  13).  Onesimus  had  so  endeared  himself  to  Paul  that  he  regarded  him 
as  a  part  of  himself,  and  had  found  his  services  so  helpful  that,  if  he  had 
harboured  the  thought,  he  would  fain  have  retained  him.  He  was  sure 
Philemon  would  have  sanctioned  such  an  arrangement ;  but  justice  demanded 
that  he  should  be  returned  to  his  master,  who  could  not  but  receive  kindly  the 
slave  of  whom  his  friend  Paul  spoke  so  highly,  and  with  whom  he  so  thoroughly 
identified  himself.  "  We  are  all  Christ's  Onesimuses,  and  He  out  of  His  pure 
love  makes  Himself  one  with  us  and  us  one  with  Him." 

III.  He  hesitates  to  claim  what  he  believes  the  slave's  master  would  have 
cheerfully  rendered  (ver.  14). — Paul  might  have  kept  Onesimus,  and  could 
easily  have  gained  the  consent  of  Philemon  to  do  so ;  but  with  that  fine  deUcacy 
of  feeling  that  always  distinguishes  the  true  Christian  gentleman,  he  declined 
to  force  an  act  of  kindness  which  would  lose  all  its  grace  and  value  if  not 
spontaneous.  "  The  principle  underlying  these  words  is,  that  where  the  bond 
of  love  is,  compulsion  takes  the  sweetness  and  goodness  out  of  even  sweet  and 
good  things.  Freedom  is  essential  to  virtue.  That  freedom  Christianity  honours 
and  respects.  So  in  reference  to  the  offer  of  gospel  blessings,  men  are  not 
forced  to  accept  them,  but  appealed  to,  and  can  turn  deaf  ears  to  the  pleading 
voice,  *  Why  will  ye  die  ?  '  For  nothing  is  good  but  the  free  turning  of  the 
will  to  goodness,  and  nothing  bad  but  its  aversion  therefrom  "  (Maclaren). 

lY.  He  discerns  the  Divine  purpose  in  a  personal  incident  of  sJave  life 
(vers.  15,  16). — Onesimus'  escapade,  and  Philemon's  loss  of  hisser^dces  for  a  time, 
led   to  the   slave's  conversion,  and  his  return  to  his  master  with  heightened 

111 


VERS.  12-19.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    PHILEMON. 


qualifications  for  ser\dce,  and  in  a  new  spiritual  relationship  —"  above  a  slave, 
a  brother  beloved."  So  God's  purpose  of  mercy  works  through  all  the  ways 
which  our  folhes  have  made  crooked.  The  history  of  every  conversion  is  full 
of  suggestive  incidents  that  illustrate  the  gracious  overruhng  of  our  waywardness 
and  transgressions. 

Lessons.— 1.  The  minister  of  the  gospel  has  a  special  love  for  his  converts, 
2.  Christianity  teaches  us  to  respect  the  rights  of  others,  3.  The  samng  power  of 
God  is  realised  in  the  most  unlikely  circwmstances. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 


Vers,  12-14.     Restitution — 

I.  An  undeniable  Christian  duty 
(vBr.   12). 

II.  Resists  all  temptations  not  to 
do  what  is  just  and  right  (ver.  13). 

III.  Does  not  bargain  for  conditions 
(ver.  14). 

IV.  Leaves  the  wronged  one  free  to 
forgive  the  wrong  done  and  for  which 
restitution  is  offered. 


Vers.  15,  16. 
dual  Life — 


Providence  in  Indivi- 


I.  Works  out  its  plans  in  the  midst 
of  sin  and  suffering. 

II.  Accomplishes  its  purpose  in  the 
most  unexpected  manner  and  by  the 
unlikeliest  methods  (ver.  15). 

III.  Is  always  beneficent  in  its 
alms  and  results  (vers.  15,  16). 

IV.  Exalts  the  individual  into 
the  highest  spiritual  relationship 
(ver.  16). 

V.  Brings  loving  hearts  into  closer 
union  with  each  other  (ver.  16). 


MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  17—19. 


The  Unselfishness  of  Christian  Love — 

I.  Recognises  the  equal  rights  of  Christian  fellowship. — "  If  thou  count  me 
therefore  as  a  partner,  receive  him  as  myself"  (ver.  17).  Paul  claims  for  the 
converted  slave  the  same  share  and  comradeship  in  Christian  blessings  as  he 
and  Philemon  enjoyed.  Love  overleaps  all  minor  distinctions,  and  admits  its 
object  into  a  full  participation,  on  equal  terms,  of  its  holiest  fellowship. 

II.  Generously  undertakes  responsibility  for  the  deserving. — "If  he  hath 
wronged  thee  ...  I  will  repay  it"  (vers.  18,  19).  "The  formal  tone  of  the  promise 
rendered  more  formal  by  the  insertion  of  the  name — and  perhaps  by  that 
sentence  only  being  in  his  own  handwriting — seems  to  warrant  the  explanation 
that  it  was  half  playful ;  for  he  could  never  have  supposed  that  Philemon  would 
exact  the  fulfilment  of  the  bond,  and  we  have  no  reason  to  suppose  that,  if  he 
had,  Paul  could  really  have  paid  the  amount.  But  beneath  the  playfulness  there 
lies  the  implied  exhortation  to  forgive  the  money  wrong  as  well  as  the  others 
which  Onesimus  had  done  him  "  {Maclaren).  Love  is  often  abused  by  under- 
taking obligations  for  the  undeserving,  but  this  does  not  prevent  its  helping 
the  worthy.  Love  would  rather  suffer  itself  than  that  others  should  suffer,  even 
by  its  cautious  suppression. 

III.  Pleads  for  others  by  a  delicate  reminder  of  spiritual  indebtedness. — 
"Albeit  I  do  not  say  to  thee  how  thou  owest  unto  me  even  thine  own  self 
besides"  (ver.  19).  Philemon  owed  Paul  more  than  the  mere  money  loss  of 
which  Onesimus  was  guilty.  He  owed  his  spiritual  life  which  he  had  received 
through  the  apostle's  ministry.  Love  does  not  parade  its  services  and  insist 
upon  its  claims  as  if  it  were  a  matter  of  barter  and  exchange.     We  owe  our 

112 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    PHILEMON,  vers.   17-25. 


all  to  Christ,  but  He  does  not  harass  us  for  the  payment  of  the  debt.     He 
lovingly  reminds  us  of  it,  to  make  obedience  all  the  easier  and  pleasanter. 

Lessons. — 1.     Religion    admits    to   a   hallowed  fellowship   with   all   the  good. 
2.  Love  willingly  shoulders  the  burdens  of  others.     3.  Love  is  irresistibly  persuasive. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  17.  Put  Yourself  in  His  Place.  II.  Is  a  faint  imitation  of  the  con- 

I.  Christianity  has  compassion  for  duct  of  the  Divine  Redeemer. 

the  erring.  HI   Does  not  and  cannot  annihilate 

II.  The    Christian   benefactor  re-  individual  responsibility, 
members  how  much  he  has  been  him- 

self  forffiven 

III.  Christianity  is  a  partnership  ^^r-  ^^'  ^^*  TJndischargeable  Debt. 
in    Divine    and    spiritual    treasures  I.    We  can  never  repay  the  man 
which  it  invites  all  men  to  share.  who  led  us  to  Christ. 

IV.  Christianity  raises  the  worst  jj    ^he  charm  of  the  service  ren- 
of  slaves  to  the  highest  freedom.  ^^^ed  would  be  destroyed  if  the  debt 

Vers.   18,    19.     Vicarious  Responsi-  could  be  discharged. 

Ulity —  III.    TJndischargeable    debts    will 

I.  Becomes  willingly  chargeable  for  augment  the  enjoyment  of  souls  in 

the  debts  of  the  truly  penitent.  heaven. 


MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  20—25. 

Christian  Entreaty — 

I.  Is  based  on  the  joy  which  an  act  of  kindness  affords. — *'  Let  me  have  joy 
of  thee  in  the  Lord  "  (ver.  20).  It  would  weigh  with  a  nature  like  Philemon's 
that  compliance  with  the  request  would  give  pleasure  to  Paul :  it  would  help 
him  in  his  own  Christian  experience.  *'  Refresh  my  heart  in  the  Lord."  It 
is  an  inducement  to  be  kind  that  it  will  please  those  we  love ;  but  the  highest 
motive  for  doing  good  is  that  it  will  please  God.  It  stirs  the  heart  to  duty 
when  it  knows  that  every  act  of  goodness  gladdens  the  heart  of  God. 

II.  Has  confidence  in  the  generous  response  of  the  Christian  spirit. — 
"  Having  confidence  in  thy  obedience  .  .  .  knowing  that  thou  wilt  also  do  more 
than  I  say"  (ver.  21).  The  Christian  heart  cannot  withstand  the  appeal  of 
unselfish  love.  It  responds  quickly,  not  as  rendering  a  slow,  mechanical 
obedience,  but  as  if  eager  to  lavish  its  wealth  of  generosity  and  do  more  than 
it  is  asked.  "  When  love  enjoins,  there  should  be  trust  in  its  tones.  It  will 
act  like  a  magnet  to  draw  reluctant  feet  into  the  path  of  duty.  A  will  which 
mere  authority  could  not  bend,  like  iron  when  cold,  may  be  made  flexible  when 
warmed  by  this  gentle  heat.  If  parents  oftener  let  their  children  feel  that 
they  had  confidence  in  their  obedience,  they  would  seldom  have  to  complain 
of  their  disobedience"  (Maclaren). 

III.  Is  more  likely  to  succeed  with  the  immediate  prospect  of  a  personal 
interview  (ver.  22). — A  letter  at  the  best  is  but  a  cold,  formal  vehicle  to  convey 
the  heart's  desires.  The  prospect  of  Paul  visiting  Colossse  in  person  would  tend 
to  secure  a  kindly  reception  for  Onesimus.  But  the  apostle  does  not  write  as 
if  he  had  any  doubt  on  that  score.  He  looks  forward  to  the  pleasure  of  social 
and  Christian  intercourse  with  one  whose  generosity  is  undoubted,  and  hopes 
that  the  prayers  of  the  Church  in  Philemon's  household  on  his  behalf  may  be 

I  113 


VERS.  20-25.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    PHILEMON. 


answered  in  his  liberation,  so  that  he  may  soon  be  with  them.  The  joy  of 
once  more  meeting  his  father  in  the  gospel  would  make  Philemon  eager  to 
c^ratify  his  wishes.  So  the  prospect  of  one  day  seeing  Christ  as  He  is  should 
mspire  us  with    eagerness  to  fulfil  all  His  wishes  concerning  us. 

IV.  Concludes  with  salutations  and  prayer  (vers.  23-25). — Epaphras,  who 
had  been  sent  by  the  Colossian  Church  to  minister  to  the  wants  of  Paul,  and 
who  was  so  closely  identified  with  the  apostle  as  to  be  called  his  "  fellow- 
prisoner,"  is  naturally  mentioned;  and  he,  along  with  two  Jews  and  two 
Gentiles'  joins  in  the  Christian  greeting.  The  parting  prayer  is  suggestive. 
In  the  bef'innincy  of  the  epistle  Paul  invoked  grace  upon  the  household  "  from 
God  our  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ";  now  he  represents  that  grace 
ai)  the  gift  of  Christ.  *'  In  Him  all  the  stooping,  bestowing  love  of  God  is 
gathered  that  from  Him  it  may  be  poured  on  the  world.  That  grace  is  not 
diffused  hke  stellar  light  through  some  nebulous  heaven,  but  concentrated  in 
the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  who  is  the  Light  of  men.  That  fire  is  piled  on  a 
hearth  that  from  it  warmth  may  ray  out  to  all  that  are  in  the  house.  The 
grace  of  Christ  is  the  best  bond  of  family  life.  Here  it  is  prayed  for  on  behalf 
of  all  the  group,  the  husband,  wife,  child,  and  the  friends  in  their  home-church. 
Like  grains  of  sweet  incense  cast  on  an  altar  flame  and  making  fragrant  what 
was  already  holy,  that  grace  sprinkled  on  the  household  fire  will  give  it  an 
odour  of  a  sweet  smell,  grateful  to  men  and  acceptable  to  God"  (Maclaren). 

Lessons. — 1.  The  Christian  is  ever  ready  to  plead  for  the  unfortunate.  2.  Love 
is  generous  both  in  its  gifts  and  expectations.  3.  Love  prompts  and  then  rejoices 
in  every  act  of  kindn£ss. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES, 

Ver.  20.  The  Stimulating  Power  of  III.  Yearn  for  personal  fellowship 

Kindness —  (ver.  22). 

I.  Excites  the  best  affections.  IV.  Are  fed  by  belief  in  the  power 

II.  Creates  the  holiest  joy.  of  prayer. 

III.  Intensifies  our  appreciation  of 

the  power  and  love  of  God.  Vers.  23-25.  Christian  Salutations — 

I.  Indicate  the  unity  and  reality  of 

Vers.  21,  22.    The  Expectations  of  the  Christian  brotherhood. 

Lowe —  II.  Are  tokens  of  genuine  mutual 

I.  Inspire  confidence  in  the  good-  aflfection. 

ness  of  others  (ver.  21).  III.  Are  prompted  by  the  affluent 

II.  Are  realised  beyond  all  power  realisation  of  Divine  grace, 
of  expression  (ver.  21). 


114 


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE 

HEBREWS. 


INTRODUCTION. 

It  cannot  be  said  that  the  dispute  concerning  the  authorship  of  this  epistle  or 
treatise  has  been  settled,  but  it  may  be  said  that  the  general  result  of  the 
elaborate  and  long -continued  discussion  is  confidence  in  its  Pauline  character, 
but   not   in   its   Pauline   authorship.      The   inscription   to   the    epistle   in   the 
Authorised  Version  carries  no  authority,  and  repiesents  no  more  than  private 
opinion.     Whether  it  is  to  be  regarded  or  not  as  the  actual  work  of  St.  Paul 
cannot  be  decided  by  early  Church  traditions.     It  must  depend  on  a  critical 
examination  of  the  language,  style,  tone,  and  doctrinal  settings  of  the  epistle, 
as  these  are  compared  with  the  admitted  epistles  of  the  apostle.     The  differences, 
indeed,  between  it  and  them  are  so  evident  that  the  cursory  reader  cannot  fail 
to  recognise  them.     And  making  all  due  allowance  for  the  differences  in  the 
language,  style,  and  thought  of  authors  at  different  times  in  their  lives,  as  well 
as  the  differences  which  belong  to  variety  of  subjects,  and  effort  to  adapt  to 
varying  conditions  in  those  addressed,   it  must  be  admitted  that  the   marks 
of  St.  Paul's  own  handiwork  cannot  be  traced  in  this  epistle.     Paul's  rhetoric 
is  intense,  the  rapid  utterance  of  strong  passion  ;  the  rhetoric  of  this  writer  is 
formal,   studied,  precise.     St.  Paul  magnified   his  office  as  the  apostle  to  the 
Gentiles,  and  it  is  hardly  conceivable  that  he  could  write  a  treatise  without  once 
mentioning  them,  or  showing  any  concern  for  their  particular  interests.     It  was 
not  in  St.  Paul's  way  to  prepare  a  sketch  or  outline  of  the  thought  and  argument 
which  he  wished  to  present ;  this  writer  has  evidently  worked  out  a  pre-arranged 
plan,  and  his  digressions  are  practical  applications  of  each  part  of  his  theme. 
But  the  point  which   seems  to  be  of   the  greatest  importance  is,  that  while 
St.  Paul  and  the  writer  of  this  epistle  both  deal  with  the  inferiority  of  Judaism 
to  Christianity,  St.  Paul  sees  it  as  a  scaffolding  which  can  be  taken  down  when 
the  permanent  building  is  erected,  while  this  writer  sees  it  to  be  the  germ  out 
of  which  Christianity  has  come  as  an  unfolding.     This  difference  of  standpoint 
almost  assures  the  non- Pauline  character  of  the  work.     St.  Paul's  contentions 

115 


liJTKODUCTlUN. 


HUMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  HEBREWS. 


with  the  Judaising  party  tended  to  make  him  intense  and  even  bitter  in  his 
references  to  the  older  dispensation,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  epistles  to  the 
Romans  and  Galatians.  Boast  though  he  does  over  his  Jewish  origin  and 
relations,  there  is  almost  a  pugnacious  tone  when  the  two  systems  have  to  be 
contrasted.  But  in  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  the  tone  is  eminently  conciliatory  ; 
there  is  nothing  that  could  shock  even  the  unconverted  Jews.  The  writer  sees 
in  Judaism  not  so  much  a  law  as  a  system  of  worship ;  and  Christianity  is  but 
the  unfolding  and  flowering  of  the  primary  truths  that  were  kept  safe,  and 
carried  through  the  ages,  by  the  Jewish  types.  The  writer  had,  indeed,  an  idea 
of  the  Divine  education  of  the  race  which  it  is  difficult  to  associate  with 
St.  Paul.  To  these  considerations  it  is  usual  to  add  that  the  two  writers  use 
the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  in  different  ways  ;  and  that  the  writer  of  the 
"Hebrews"  shows,  in  a  very  marked  way,  the  influence  of  the  teachings  of  Philo, 
the  Alexandrian  Jew.  If  the  writer  came  under  the  direct  influence  of  St.  Paul, 
it  is  certain  that  he  also  came  under  the  influence  of  the  Alexandrian  School. 
The  following  writers  tend  to  favour  the  Pauline  authorship  :  Stuart,  Davidson, 
Wordsworth.  The  following  represent  the  Continental  divines  who  are  opposed 
to  the  Pauline  authorship :  Luther,  Erasmus,  Calvin,  Melancthon,  Grotius, 
LeClerc,  Tholuck,  Delitzsch.  Dr.  R.  W.  Dale  seems  to  consider  the  argu- 
ments for  and  against  as  about  equally  good. 

Various  suggestions  of  likely  authors  from  among  the  Pauline  disciples  have 
been  made.  Barnabas,  Luke,  Clement,  Mark,  Titus,  Sylvanus,  and  Aquila  have 
been  named,  but  the  trend  of  modern  opinion  is  decidedly  in  favour  of  the 
authorship  of  Apollos,  as  he  appears  to  meet  all  the  exigencies  of  the  case.  He 
belonged  to  Alexandria  ;  was  remarkable  for  eloquence ;  and  came  under  the 
direct  influence  of  St.  Paul.  Dean  Plumptre,  writing  in  the  Expositor ^ 
May  1875,  worked  out  a  very  interesting,  but  quite  independent,  argument  for 
the  authorship  of  Apollos.  There  is  a  work  belonging  to  the  same  period  as  the 
epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  but  it  is  not  a  Christian  work.  It  is  known  as  the 
Wisdom  of  Solomon,  and  it  is  anonymous.  The  dean  very  elaborately  shows 
that  certain  words  and  phrases  are  characteristic  of  and  peculiar  to  both  this 
book  and  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  Both  works  are  manifestly  indebted 
to  Philo,  the  leader  of  Jewish  thought  in  Alexandria.  The  dean's  suggestion 
is,  that  Apollos  wrote  both  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon  and  the  epistle  to  the 
Hebrews, — the  former  before  knowing  the  truth  in  Christ,  and  when  only 
acquainted  with  the  baptism  of  John,  and  the  Jewish  reformation  that  was 
inaugurated  by  him;  the  latter  after,  when  instructed  in  the  way  of  God 
more  perfectly.  Luther  started  the  idea  that  Apollos  may  have  been  the  author. 
Dean  Farrar  warmly  supports  the  suggestion,  going  so  far  as  to  say  that 
either  Apollos  wrote  the  epistle  or  it  is  the  work  of  some  author  who  is  to 
us  entirely  unknown.  He  bases  his  judgment  on  the  following  considerations : 
Apollos  was  a  Jew.  He  was  a  Hellenist.  He  was  an  Alexandrian.  He  was 
famed  for  his  eloquence,  and  his  powerful  method  of  applying  Scripture.  He 
was  a  friend  of  Timotheus.  H^  had  acquired  considerable  authority  in  various 
lie 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  HEBREWS,    introduction. 

Churches.  He  had  been  taught  by  the  apostle.  He  adopted  an  independent 
Une  of  his  own  (1  Cor.  iii.  6).  We  have  no  trace  that  he  was  ever  at  Jerusalem  ; 
and  yet  his  style  of  argument  was  specially  effective  as  addressed  to  Jewish 
hearers.  There  need  be  no  difficulty  in  accepting  the  Divine  inspiration  of 
Apollos  for  the  work  of  writing  this  epistle,  seeing  that  we  fully  accept  the 
inspiration  of  St.  Peter's  disciple,  Mark,  and  of  St.  Paul's  other  disciple,  Luke, 
for  the  writing  of  the  gospels. 

No  certain  knowledge  can  be  gained  concerning  either  the  place  from  which 
the  epistle  was  written,  or  the  persons  who  were  first  addressed.  The  date  even 
is  undefined,  save  that  its  contents  indicate  the  Temple  at  Jerusalem  as  still 
standing.  The  object  of  the  epistle  is,  however,  very  well  defined.  It  is 
designed  to  be  corrective  of  the  special  dangers  to  which  the  Hebrew  Christians 
were  at  that  time  exposed,  especially  the  danger  of  relapsing  into  Rabbinical 
Judaism.  They  were  liable  to  persecution  both  from  the  pagans  and  from  the 
strict  Jews.  They  were  tempted  to  apostatise  from  their  faith  in  Christ.  They 
were  perplexed  by  the  difficulties  of  ordering  opinion  and  conduct  according  to 
the  rules  of  Mosaism,  and  also  to  the  principles  of  Christianity.  They  were 
attracted  to  a  sort  of  reformed  Judaism,  which  assumed  to  treat  Christianity 
as  unnecessary.  Dr.  Moulton  gives  a  suggestive  note  on  the  conditions  which 
called  for  the  epistle :  *'  The  Christians  addressed  were  in  eminent  danger  of 
apostasy.  The  danger  was  occasioned  partly  by  seductions  from  without,  partly 
by  weakness  within.  Even  when  the  fabric  of  Jewish  power  was  falling,  the 
influence  of  its  past  history,  its  glorious  treasure  of  promise,  its  unique  associa- 
tions, retained  a  wonderful  power.  As  we  look  back  on  the  years  preceding  the 
fall  of  Jerusalem,  the  case  of  the  people  may  seem  to  us  hopeless  ;  but  the 
confidence  of  the  nation  was  unbroken,  and  even  at  that  period  we  note 
outbursts  of  national  pride  and  enthusiastic  hope.  Bitter  hate  and  -contempt 
for  Christianity  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  attraction  of  their  ancestral  worship 
and  ritual  on  the  other,  had  apparently  won  a  victory  over  the  constancy  of 
some  Christians  belonging  to  this  Hebrew  community.  Where  open  opposition 
had  not  prevailed,  the  tone  of  Christian  faith  had  been  lowered.  The  special 
temptations  of  these  Christians  seem  to  have  been  towards  a  loss  of  interest  in 
the  higher  Christian  truths,  and  a  union  of  elementary  Christian  teaching  with 
that  to  which  they  had  been  accustomed  as  Jews." 

The  homiletical  treatment  of  the  several  paragraphs  may  be  wisely  prefaced 
by  a  general  survey  of  the  course  of  the  writer's  argument.  The  leading  purpose 
is  to  show  the  relation  of  Christianity  to  Judaism,  and  at  the  same  time  the 
essential  superiority  of  Christianity  as  a  spiritual  over  Judaism  as  a  formal  system. 
1.  There  is  a  comparison  of  the  manner  in  which  the  revelation  is  given  in  the 
two  dispensations.  The  law,  by  the  disposition  of  angels,  who  are  only  servants ; 
the  gospel,  by  the  manifestation  of  the  Son,  who  is  a  direct  source  of  authority. 
Upon  this  argument  an  exhortation  is  based.  Apostasy  was  terribly  punished 
under  the  old  and  formal  dispensation.  How  much  more  must  it  be  terribly 
punished  under  the  higher  and  spiritual  dispensation  !     2.  Then  comes  a  com- 

117 


INTRODUCTION.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  HEBREWS. 


parison  of  the  mediators  of  the  two  dispensations.  In  respect  of  faithfulness 
both  Moses  and  Christ  win  Divine  approval ;  but  Moses  only  takes  a  place  as 
part  of  the  furniture  of  the  old  dispensation— Christ  takes  place  with  God  as  the 
Founder  and  Builder  of  the  new.  Moses  was  a  servant  in  the  house  ;  Christ  is 
the  Son  over  the  house.  An  exhortation  follows,  based  on  the  historical  fact 
that  many  of  the  Israelites  failed,  by  reason  of  unbelief,  to  gain  the  promised 
rest  of  Canaan.  Soul-rest  in  Christ  is  equally  imperilled  by  unbehef.  3.  Then 
comes  a  comparison  of  the  high  priests  of  the  two  dispensations.  A  common 
relation  to  the  people  through  a  human  experience.  Likeness  in  being  both 
appointed  by  God  to  office.  Difference  in  the  types — Old  Testament  after  type  of 
Levi ;  New  Testament  after  type  of  Melchizedek.  The  course  of  the  comparison 
is  arrested  in  order  to  insert  an  exhortation  and  reproach.  Imperfections  of 
Christians  make  the  deep  things  of  God  difficult  of  apprehension.  Continuance 
of  imperfections  put  in  grave  peril  of  apostasy.  There  is  encouragement  for  all, 
who  would  be  steadfast,  in  the  promises  of  God,  confirmed  by  His  oath.  Then 
the  winter  reverts  to  his  comparison  of  the  priestly  orders.  Melchizedek  was 
priest  before  Levi,  and  even  received  the  homage  of  Levi.  The  Levitical  order 
was  subject  to  death  and  change.  The  order  of  Melchizedek,  being  spiritual,  is 
permanent.  Christ  belongs  to  the  Melchizedek  order  ;  for  He  sprang  from  the 
tribe  of  Judah,  not  of  Levi.  A  priest  was  promised  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek. 
That  promise  is  not  fulfilled  unless  it  is  fulfilled  in  Christ.  Resuming  the  com- 
parison, the  writer  shows  that  in  Judaism  the  appointment  was  made  without  an 
oath,  in  Christianity  with  an  oath.  Moreover,  the  Jewish  priests  were  many ; 
the  spiritual  Priest  is  one.  Levitical  priests  had  their  sphere  in  earthly  and 
ceremonial  affairs,  Christ  in  heavenly  and  spiritual  affairs.  The  first  covenant 
was  in  every  way  imperfect  and  educational,  the  second  was  in  every  way 
superior.  •  4.  Then  follows  a  comparison  of  the  services  of  the  two  priesthoods. 
The  following  points  are  presented :  ( 1 )  The  ceremonial  indicated  that  the  way 
into  the  holiest  was  not  made  plain.  That  way  is  made  plain  by  Christ.  (2)  The 
old  service  was  entirely  outward,  formal,  ceremonial.  There  might  be  spiritual 
life  in  it,  but  there  need  not  be  to  constitute  effective  service.  The  service  of 
Christ  is  altogether  spiritual.  (3)  The  old  sacrifices  were  of  unwilling  beasts ; 
the  sacrifice  of  Christ  was  that  of  His  own  will.  His  own  consenting  personality. 
(4)  Salvation  and  pardon  were  associated  with  blood  and  death.  So  they  are 
in  Christ  in  a  spiritual  manner.  (5)  The  old  sacrifices  were  numerous ;  the  one 
sacrifice  of  Christ  is  offered  once  for  all.  (6)  The  old  sacrifices  had  their  spiritual 
vii-tue  only  so  far  as  they  were  typical  of  Christ's  sacrifice.  (7)  The  cleansings 
effected  by  the  old  ritual  concerned  only  ceremonial  relations,  and  were  only 
temporary.  Christ's  cleansing  is  perfect  because  it  is  the  renewal  of  the  will. 
(8)  The  old  priests  were  ever  coming  to  the  altar ;  Christ,  having  offered  His 
sacrifice  once,  is  seated  on  His  throne.  The  remainder  of  the  epistle  is  hortatory. 
These  being  our  privileges,  let  us  take  good  heed  that  we  do  not  fall  short  of 
them,  by  reason  of  any  unfaithfulness  or  apostasy,  and  let  us  inspire  our  souls 
to  noble  things  by  keeping  ever  before  us  the  thought  of  those  heroic  souls  who 
118 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  HEBREWS,    introduction. 

won  the  victory  of  constancy  and  faith.  Throughout  the  epistle  there  is  nothing 
to  cause  offence  to  any  sensitive  Jew.  The  one  thing  the  writer  is  anxious  to 
show  is,  that  a  Jew  comes  up  into  Christianity  much  as  a  Jew  boy  comes  up  out' 
of  the  Hmited  sphere  of  thought  and  interest  of  his  boyhood  into  the  larger,  wider 
sphere  of  his  manhood.  But  he  should  not  want  to  go  back  into  his  boyhood 
stage  again. 

These  preliminary  explanations  will  put  the  reader  en  rapport  with  the  epistle. 
We  deal  with  it  entirely  as  furnishing  suggestions  for  homiletic  treatment ;  the 
exegetical  and  expository  elements  are  introduced  in  this  commentary  only  so  far 
as  they  may  be  necessary  in  order  to  sustain  the  homiletic  hints.  Succinctness 
and  suggestiveness  are  constantly  kept  in  view,  as  the  work  proposes  to  be 
thoughts  for  thinkers. 


The  Pauline  Authorship  Freshly  Presented. 

The  Rev.  W.  M.  Lewis,  in  the  Thinker  (September  1893),  admitting  that  the 
Pauline  authorship  cannot  be  maintained  by  the  arguments  hitherto  adduced  by 
its  advocates,  the  place,  time,  and  circumstances  given,  during  the  life  of  Paul, 
to  its  production  leaving  its  difficulties  unexplained,  thinks  the  proposition  can 
be  maintained  that  "  it  was  the  joint  production  of  St.  Paul  and  St.  Luke  during 
the  imprisonment  of  the  former  at  Csesarea,  a.d.  58-60." 


119 


CHAP.  I.  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS. 


CHAPTER  I. 
THE  ESSENTIAL  SUPERIORITY  OF  THE  REVELATION  IN  THE  SON. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  God. Placed  abruptly,  as  the  first  and  emphatic  word,  in  the  English  translation; 

and  properly  so  placed,  because  the  unity  of  God  is  the  truth  concerning  which  the  Jews 
were  so  supremely  jealous,  and  the  message  of  this  treatise  could  not  have  been  received  by 
the  Jews  if  it  had  raised  the  faintest  suspicion  of  sympathy  with  the  Gnostic  heresy,  that 
the  Old  Testament  dispensation  was  the  work  of  another  and  inferior  deity  (demiurge). 
The  monotheistic  truth  was  entrusted  to  the  care  of  the  Abrahamic  race  ;  and  at  the 
present  day  the  great  stumbling-block  in  the  way  of  the  Jew's  acceptance  of  Christianity  is 
the  tri-theistic  notion  which  he  gets  from  the  form  of  the  Christian  teachings  concerning 
the  Trinity.  Sundry  times  and  in  divers  manners. — "At  many  times  by  many  persons." 
The  writer  appears  to  be  thinking  of  revelations  by  persons,  not  of  revelations  by  things. 
Revelations  by  persons  can  be  compared  with  the  revelation  in  the  person  of  the  Son. 
R.V.  renders,  "  by  divers  portions  and  in  divers  manners."  Alf ord,  *'  in  many  portions  and 
in  divers  manners."  Stuart,  *'  in  various  parts  and  in  various  ways."  Webster  and 
Wilkinson,  "in  manifold  portions  and  manifold  methods."  The  fragmentary,  and  conse- 
quently imperfect,  character  oE  all  the  earlier  revelations  is  distinctly  indicated.  The 
variety  of  agents  and  agencies  indicates  the  constant  need  for  precise  adaptation  to 
differing  conditions.  The  incomplete  and  preparatory  character  of  the  earlier  revelations 
is  indicated  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  treatise,  and  it  is  the  foundation  on  which  the 
writer's  argument  is  raised.  He  had  to  remove  the  impression  which  had  been  made  so 
deeply  on  the  Jewish  mind,  that  the  revelation  in  the  Mosaic  system  was  final  and  complete. 
As  there  must  be  relativity  to  imperfect  creatures,  who  are  always  in  some  educational 
stage,  no  revelation  made  to  them  can  ever  be  absolutely  final.  It  should  be  an  advance 
beyond  anything  previously  given,  but  it  always  involves  the  possibility  of  an  advance 
beyond  itself.  It  is  important  to  keep  the  word  "  revelation"  for  the  Divine  matter  that 
is  communicated,  and  the  word  "  inspiration "  for  the  Divine  power  which  rests  on  the 
agents  employed  for  communicating  it  to  men.  Spake  in  time  past. — Or  having  spoken 
then  in  one  way,  speaks  now  in  another  way.  Since  the  communication  of  thought  from 
man  to  man  is  chiefly  made  through  the  agency  of  words,  words  must  be  the  principal 
medium  for  communicating  the  thoughts  of  God  to  the  mind  of  man.  The  possibility  of  a 
book-revelation  was  much  discussed  in  the  early  part  of  this  century ;  but  that  is  only 
a  detail  when  the  principle — and  the  historical  fa  ct — of  a  7vord-xe\e\2A^\on  is  accepted.  It 
only  concerns  the  mode  of  preserving  the  words.  Revelation  is  God  speaking,  putting  His 
thought  into  some  form  of  words  which  will  allow  of  our  apprehending  it.  The  term 
\670s,  or  "  word,"  properly  means,  "  that  medium  or  agency  which  translates  one  man's  heart 
to  another."  When  this  treatise  was  written,  no  fresh  revelation  had  come  from  God  in 
any  prophet  for  more  than  four  hundred  years.  The  ministry  of  John  the  Baptist  is  not 
taken  into  consideration,  because  it  properly  belongs  to  the  Messianic  age  ;  and  what  John 
had  to  say  did  not  immediately  concern  this  writer's  argument.  It  did  not  in  any  of  its 
characteristic  features  belong  to  the  series  of  the  earlier  Divine  revelations.  The  fathers. — 
A  Pauline  form  of  expression.  See  Rom.  ix.  5,  xi.  28,  xv.  8.  By  the  prophets. — More 
precisely  in  the  prophets :  not  Std,  but  ev ;  in  the  persons  of  the  prophets ;  God  in  them, 
speaking  by  means  of  them.  The  word  "  by  "  separates  the  message  from  the  messenger  ;  the 
word  "  in  "  suggests  that  the  messengers  were  essential  to  the  message  ;  and  this  prepares  for 
the  comparison  with  the  Son,  who  both  brought  a  message  and  was  the  message.  Philo 
says,  "  The  prophet  is  an  interpreter,  while  God  from  within  whispers  what  he  should  utter." 
The  term  "  prophets  "  should  here  be  taken  in  a  comprehensive  way,  as  including  all 
persons  whom  God  has  ever  been  pleased  to  use  as  mediums  for  communicating  His  will  to  men. 
Ver.  2.  These  last  days.— R.V.  "  at  the  end  of  these  days."  Two  ideas  are  suggested  ;  the 
second  is  the  more  suitable.  1.  At  the  end  of  this  present  pre- Messianic  age  of  the 
world.     2.  In  these  days  that  are  the  last  time.     Perhaps  it  is  better  to  take  the  words  as 

120 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  i. 


simply  meaning  "nowadays,"  in  our  times.  The  last  times  are  always  those  in  which  an 
author  writes.  It  is  not  necessary  to  assume  that  this  writer  had  in  mind  the  "  end  of  the 
world."  By  His  Son. — In  a  Son.  The  article  is  omitted  in  order  to  make  the  point,  that 
the  revelation  came  in  One  who  stood  to  God  in  the  relation  of  Son,  ^v  vi<^ ;  and  the  absence 
of  the  article  makes  the  expression  emphatic,  *'  He  is  Son,  and  nothing  else."  Alford 
suggests  reading,  "In  Him  who  was  Son  of  God."  Appointed. — Constituted,  ordained. 
Reference  is  especially  to  His  revelational  and  redemptive  mission.  The  eternal  Sonship 
is  not  in  thought  here.  Heir  of  all  things. — The  classical  meaning  of  the  Greek  word 
K\r}pov6fios  is  one  who  either  acquires  by  lot  or  inherits  by  death.  The  writer  would  set 
forth  that  this  only  Son  is  virtual  possessor  with  the  Father  of  all  things.  Made  the  worlds. 
— The  universe,  as  apprehended  by  man's  senses.  The  material  world  is  the  first  revelation 
of  God,  and  the  basis  of  natural  religion.  All  Divine  activity  in  the  material,  sensible 
spheres  is  properly  thought  of  as  the  operation  of  the  Divine  Son.  He  is  the  medium  of  all 
Divine  working  in  man's  sphere.  The  exalted  and  unique  pre-eminence  of  the  Son  of  God 
is  the  writer's  topic.  For  the  idea  of  the  Son  as  Creator  of  the  worlds,  compare  Eph.  iii.  9 ; 
Col.  i.  15-19;  John  i.  3,  10;  1  Cor,  viii,  6;  Heb.  i.  10.  The  word  aiQvas  may  mean  "age," 
"  period  of  time  "  ;  but  that  is  not  to  the  point  here.  Alford  treats  the  assertion  very  compre- 
hensively :  "  So  that  the  universe,  as  well  in  its  great  primeval  conditions,  the  reaches  of 
space,  and  the  ages  of  time,  as  in  all  material  objects  and  all  successive  events,  which 
furnish  out  and  people  space  and  time,  God  made  by  Christ."  Compare  the  following 
sentences  from  Philo  :  "  You  will  discover  that  the  Cause  of  it  [the  world]  is  God  .  .  . 
and  the  Instrument  the  Word  of  God,  by  whom  it  was  equipped."  "  But  the  Shadow  of 
God  is  His  Word,  whom  He  used  as  an  Instrument  in  making  the  world." 

Ver.  3.  Brightness  of  His  glory. — R.V.  "effulgence  of  His  glory,"  The  bright  shining 
forth.  Light  flowing  from  a  luminous  body  ;  seen,  as  ray,  in  our  atmosphere,  and  enabling 
us  to  apprehend  a  glory  which  is  wholly  beyond  mortal  vision,  "  The  glory  of  Christ  is  the 
glory  of  the  Father,  jui^t  as  the  sun  is  only  revealed  by  the  rays  which  stream  forth  from  it " 
(^Farrar).  Express  image. — Impression  as  of  a  seal.  The  word  xc-P^i^tvp  ^^J  mean  a 
stamping  instrument,  or  one  who  stamps,  or  the  thing  stamped  which  takes  the  impress ; 
so  exact  image.  Compare  seal  and  die,  picture  and  photograph,  photograph  and  sculptured 
figure.  Philo  says  of  wisdom,  "  She  is  the  effulgence  of  the  everlasting  Light,  the  unspotted 
mirror  of  the  power  of  God,  and  the  image  of  His  goodness."  The  word  inrdo-raa-is  is  an 
exceedingly  difficult  one  to  explain,  because  so  many  different  ideas  have  been  attached  to  it, 
and  made  bases  of  doctrine.  In  classical  use  vTrocrraa-is  means  (1)  foundation,  (2)  steadfast- 
ness, (3)  resolution,  (4)  substance  or  essence.  In  the  sense  of  "  person  "  it  was  first  used 
by  Greek  writers  after  the  Arian  Controversy  began.  Athanasius  used  it  as  distinct  from 
ovaia.  The  general  meaning  of  the  figures  may  be  thus  given :  If  God  is  Light,  Christ  is 
the  Radiance  ;  if  God  is  Substance,  Christ  is  the  Manifestation.  The  words  "  by  Himself  " 
are  not  in  the  original.  Purged  our  sins. — R.V.  "  made  purification  of  sins."  Stuart  says  that 
in  Hellenistic  Greek  the  word  Kadapia/xds  is  also  employed  for  expiation,  and  carries  the  idea 
of  atonement.  To  make  purification  by  the  removal  of  sins  may  be  illustrated  by  John 
i,  29 ;  1  John  iii.  5 ;  2  Pet,  i,  9.  In  the  LXX,  the  Day  of  Atonement  is  called  the  Day  of 
Purification.  Sat  down. — The  position  at  the  right  hand  of  one  on  a  throne  implies  com- 
manding, ruling,  administrative  authority.  For  Jehovah's  investiture  of  the  Son  of  Man 
with  unlimited  dominion,  see  Dan.  vii.  14  ;  and  with  supreme  dignity,  see  Eph.  i.  20,  21. 
Farrar  says,  "  The  description  of  Christ  in  these  verses  differed  from  the  current  Messianic 
conceptions  of  the  Jews  in  two  respects :  (1)  He  was  Divine  and  Omnipotent;  (2)  He  was 
to  die  for  our  sins." 

Ver.  4.  Being  made. — R.V,  "  having  become."  Christ  as  Son  always  was  superior  to  the 
angels  in  dignity  and  essence  ;  the  writer  asserts  that  He  became  mediatorially  superior 
to  the  angel-ministrants  of  the  old  dispensation,  as  the  agent  of  the  sublime  scheme  of 
spiritual  redemption.  By  right  of  inheritance  He  has  a  better  name.  By  right  of  commission 
He  has  gained  a  better  name.  Compare  Phil,  ii,  9.  Trapd  after  the  comparative  degree  is 
peculiar  to  this  epistle.  The  new  paragraph  shows  how  the  name  and  dignity  of  Jesus 
Christ  can  be  established  by  the  testimony  of  Scripture,  the  Scripture  being  treated  on  the 
then  familiar  Jewish  method,  Messianic  references  being  much  more  freely  recognised  than 
we  can  approve  from  strictly  logical  standpoints. 

Ver,  5,  Angels. — Properly,  any  living  being  carrying  out  the  Divine  will  is  an  angel,  a 
messenger,  a  servant.  But  the  word  "  angel "  is  precisely  kept  for  such  messengers  as 
belonged  to  other  than  the  earthly  sphere.  The  angelophauies  of  the  Old  Testament  were 
foreshadowings  of  the  revelation  in  the  "  Man  Christ  Jesus."  Said  He. — The  interrogation  is 
intended  to  be  a  strong  negation.  Begotten  Thee. — Constituted  Thee  ;  but  the  term  is  designed 
to  indicate  the  different  relation  in  which  Christ  stands  to  God  and  the  angels  stand  to 
Him.  To  angels  He  is  Creator ;  to  Christ  He  is  Father.  Three  references  of  the  term  have 
been  assigned:  (1)  the  eternal  generation  of  tie  Son;  (2)  His  incarnation;  (3)  His  full 
manifestation,  as  the  obedient  Son,  in  His  resurrection,     "  The  idea  of  the  eternal  generation 

121 


CHAP.   I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY i   HEBREWS, 


of  the  Son  is  the  pure  offspring  of  the  metaphysics  of  the  Greek  Fathers,  rather  than  of  New 

'"'iTT'^^-lleT^^^^^^  "When  He  again  bringeth."  First-begotten.-R.Y.  "first- 
born  "*  Another  expression  for  Son,  but  adding  to  Son  the  right  of  primogeniture.  Son 
and  Heir.  Onlv  Son  and  only  Heir.  See  Rev.  i.  5;  Col.  i.  15,  18  ;  Rom.  viii.  29;  Heb. 
xii  £*>  23  The  quotation  may  be  from  Ps.  xcvii.  7,  or  Deut.  xxxii.  43.  The  latter  is  the  more 
probaT)le  source,  as  the  LXX.  Version  reads,  "  Rejoice,  ye  heavens,  along  with  Him,  and  let 

the  angels  of  God  worship  Him."  .....      ^     ^u-  *,  -      . 

Vcr  7  The  difficulty  of  this  verse  lies  m  its  setting  inanimate  things  after  animate. 
DeUtzscii  renders,  "  Who  maketh  His  messengers  out  of  winds."  The  writer's  point  appears 
to  be  this :  As  even  material  objects  may  be  the  messengers  or  angels  of  God,  so  to  be  an 
angel  in  the  higher  sense  is  to  be  no  more  than  a  minister  of  the  Divine  will.  But  the  Son 
is  one  with  the'^Divine  will,  and  in  doing  that  will  does  His  own.  Dr.  Moulton  explains  in 
another  way  :  •'  Tlie  meaning  appears  to  be  that  God,  employing  His  messengers  for  His 
varied  purposes,  sends  them  forth  in  what  manner  He  may  please,  clothing  them  with  the 
appearance  of  the  resistless  wind  or  the  devouring  fire." 

Ver.  8.  Sceptre  of  righteousness.— Lit.  "rod  of  straightness." 

Ver.  10.  The  102nd  Psalm  is  not  so  clearly  Messianic ;  but  if  the  consciousness  of  the  original 
writer  was  aware  of  nothing  more  definite  than  a  description  of  the  eternity  of  Jehovah, 
it  is  yet  competent  to  an  inspired  New  Testament  writer  to  tell  us  that  this  language  is 
applicable  to  our  Lord. 

Ver.  14.  The  word  for  ministering,  XeirovpyiKa,  is  not  classical,  but  it  is  used  in  the  LXX., 
and  it  implies  "  sacred  service."  Heirs  of  salvation,— Because  salvation  is  conceived  as  both 
a  present  state  and  a  final  fruition  :  "  Made  heirs  according  to  the  hope  of  eternal  life  " 
(Tit.  iii.  7).    The  Jewish  conceptions  of  angels  need  not  be  made  into  a  Christian  angelology, 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses   1—4. 

The  Earthly  Mission  of  the  Divine  Son. — This  so-called  epistle  is  remarkable 
as  having  no  opening  salutation  or  prayer.  The  beginning  is  abrupt,  as  arresting 
attention,  after  the  manner  of  the  rhetorician.  Being  addressed  to  Christian 
Jews,  it  opens  with  the  conciliatory  assertion  of  the  unity  of  God.  Compare 
Gen.  i.  1.  There  is  one  God,  from  whom  has  come  all  the  various  revelations 
which  men  have  received.  He  is  God,  and  only  God.  The  writer  belongs  to  the 
Alexandrian  School,  but  he  has  no  sympathy  with  those  who  regarded  the  Old 
Testament  system  as  the  work  of  a  demiurge.  He  would  not  exalt  Christianity 
by  depreciating  Mosaism.  The  stand  taken  by  the  writer  is  distinctly  Jewish  : 
"  The  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord."  The  former  revelations  were  real  revelations, 
no  matter  how  long  a  time  their  coming  may  have  covered,  or  how  various  may 
have  been  their  forms  and  agencies.  Law,  prophecy,  type,  allegory,  didactic 
teaching,  promise,  threatening,  oracle — all  may  fully  be  recognised  as  agencies 
used  for  the  communication  of  the  Divine  will  to  men.  All  that  need  be  aflfirmed 
is,  that  the  Christ-revelation  is  higher  than  any  previous  revelation,  because  the 
conditions  demanded  a  higher.  It  was  an  advance  along  the  same  Hne.  It  is 
not  something  altogether  new,  so  there  need  be  no  antecedent  prejudice  against 
it.  It  is  in  the  regular — it  might  even  be  said  the  necessary — line  of  progression. 
The  pious  Jew  need  have  no  hesitation  about  taking  this  step  forward.  It  is 
but  the  older  opened  out,  as  the  bud  unfolds  into  the  flower.  It  is  as  relative  to 
the  age  of  the  writer,  and  the  ages  that  were  coming,  as  the  older  revelations 
had  been  relative  to  the  ages  that  were  past.  It  was  precisely  what  the  older 
had  prepared  for  ;  and  no  one  was  called  to  speak  depreciatingly  of  the  preparatory 
stages  of  a  Divine  work  which  concerned  humanity,  rather  than  any  mere 
section  of  it.  The  conciliatory  character  of  the  opening  words  of  the  epistle  is 
quite  evident.  The  writer  would  have  obtained  no  unprejudiced  hearing  from  a 
Jewish  audience  if  he  had  begun  by  claiming  that  Christianity  was  an  independent, 
original,  and  unconnected  revelation.  The  Jew  would  have  firmly  replied, 
"  Since  Jehovah  has  revealed  Himself  to  us,  that  which  is  true  is  not  new,  and 
that  which  is  new  is  not  true."  This  conciliatory  attitude  towards  the  older 
122 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS.  chap.  l. 


dispensation  enables  the  writer  to  affirm  that  the  older  and  the  later  revelations 
can  he  compai-ed  because  they  lie  in  the  same  plane.  The  revelation  in  a  Son 
can  be  compared  with  revelation  in  a  prophet,  or  in  an  angel,  because  they  are 
all  revelations  made  through  human  agencies.  The  person  chosen  as  the  agent 
for  the  latest  revelation  is  a  Son.  Christ  is  indeed  the  eternal  Son,  to  be  thought 
of  as  the  agency  of  God  when  acting  in  the  sphere  of  created  things.  But  the 
writer  has  rather  in  mind  that,  for  relation  to  our  world,  and  to  ensure  our 
apprehension  of  His  person,  relation,  and  mission,  He  is  constituted  Son,  because 
that  relationship  both  fathers  and  children  can  so  fully  understand  and  enter  into. 
To  call  Christ  the  Son  is  distinctly  revelational  to  us.  In  a  brief  passage  the 
writer  summarises  what,  as  Son,  Jesus  came  to  earth  to  do. 

T.  To  reveal  God  to  us. — R. V.  '*  who  being  the  effulgence  of  His  glory,  and 
the  very  image  of  His  substance."  This  may  seem  to  be  the  work  of  every 
prophet.  Take  the  deepest  view  of  every  man  entrusted  with  a  revelation,  and 
we  find  that  he  is  making  God  better  and  more  worthily  known.  Knowledge 
of  God  is  the  eternal  life.  But  we  cannot  know  God  save  through  His  revelations 
of  Himself  to  us.  This  truth  men  stoutly  resist.  In  every  age  they  have  tried 
by  searching  to  find  out  God  ;  and  in  every  age  the  quest  has  failed.  The 
religions  of  the  world  represent  the  best  success  that  has  been  attained,  and 
there  is  no  adequate  representation  of  God  in  any  one  of  them  ;  and  if  the  best 
conceptions  of  all  were  gathered  together,  the  figure  of  the  Divine  would  be 
found  incomplete  and  unworthy.  "  Lo,  these  are  parts  of  His  ways :  but  the 
thunder  of  His  power  who  can  understand  ?  "  Precisely  the  things  which  cannot 
be  found  out  aright  by  unaided  man  are  God's  relationship  to  us  and  the 
character  which  tones  that  relationship.  Christ  came  to  be  the  ray  in  the 
earthly  atmosphere  which  enabled  men  to  apprehend  the  mysterious  orb  of 
eternal  Light.  He  was  the  Son  revealing  the  Father.  Christ  came  to  be  the 
seal  which  should  declare  the  stamp  which  had  impressed  it — to  be  a  life- character 
which  should  make  real  to  us  the  Divine  character.  Fatherhood  and  personal 
love  Christ  came  to  reveal.  And  so  to  know  God  in  a  way  that  gives  life  is  to 
"  know  Jesus  Christ  whom  He  hath  sent."  The  following  points  may  be  developed  : 
1.  God  must  reveal  Himself  to  be  known.  2.  God  must  adapt  His  revelations, 
or  they  will  reveal  nothing  to  those  who  receive  them.  3.  God  must  advance  His 
revelations,  or  they  will  not  meet  the  needs  of  a  progressive  race.  4.  God  cannot 
be  thought  of  as  ending  His  revelations  while  the  race  continues  to  be  progressive. 

II.  To  bring  God's  power  for  our  help. — "  And  upholding  all  things  by  the 
word  of  His  power."  This  is  intended  to  bring  home  to  the  Jews  and  to  us  the 
infinite  ability  of  Christ.  He  is  fully  competent  for  the  work  entrusted  to  Him. 
He  brings  Divine  power  to  the  fulfilment  of  His  mission.  The  writer  asserts  His 
oneness  with  God — the  Divine  in  the  human.  The  impression  that  God  was,  in 
Christ,  with  men  for  their  help,  is  precisely  the  impression  of  our  Lord's  miracles. 
What  the  pagans  of  Lystra  felt  about  Paul  and  Barnabas,  when  the  lame  man 
was  healed,  is  what  we  ought  to  feel  about  Christ,  as  we  watch  Him  doing  His 
mighty  works.  This  should  satisfy  us — God  Himself  is  intervening  for  us.  "  God 
was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself." 

III.  To  deal  with  our  sins. — B..Y.  *'  when  He  had  made  purification  of  sins"; 
A.V.  "  purged  our  sins."  The  thought  is  a  Jewish  one.  Illustration  may  be 
taken  from  the  ceremonies  of  the  "  day  of  atonement."  But  the  idea  is  Hmited 
here  to  cleansing  or  purifying  work.  Christ  came  to  arrange  for  the  cleansing 
away  of  sins.  In  a  sense  Christ's  mission  was  a  Hmited  one  ;  and  yet  it  was  so 
truly  at  the  very  heart  of  things  as  to  become  unHmited.  Sin  is  man's  supreme 
woe.  It  is  of  no  use  whatever  to  deal  with  its  consequences  only ;  it  must  be 
dealt  with  at  its  root,  which  is  the  sinful — and  biassed — will  of  man.  In  the 
recovery  of  the  human  will  is  found  the  great  redemptive  sphere.     But  what 

123 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


was  probably  in  the  mind  of  the  writer  when  he  thus  alluded  to  sins  was  the 
distinction  between  sins  and  ceremonial  offences,  which  appears  again  and  again 
in  the  epistle.  The  earUer  system  dealt,  illustratively,  with  uncleanness.  Chris- 
tianity deals,  practically,  with  moral  evil,  and  effects  the  purification  of  sins. 
And  this  is  the  precise  Divine  intervention  that  we  want.  Jesus,  God  with  us, 
saving  us  from  our  sins. 

IV.  To  gain  a  special  power  for  permanently  dealing  with  our  sins.— R.Y. 
"  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high."  Not  as  One  who  had 
completed  His  work,  and  could  retire  to  enjoy  His  rest  and  reward  ;  but  as  One 
who,  having  done  a  preliminary  part  of  His  work,  takes  up  a  fitting  position  for 
permanently  carrying  it  on.  The  visions  of  Stephen,  and  of  Paul  at  Damascus, 
indicate  the  activity  of  the  glorified  Christ.  And  this  epistle  argues  for  a  con- 
tinual and  even  eternal  priesthood.  The  earthly  experience  of  Jesus  involves 
special  fitness  for  a  permanent  ministry.  "  He  ever  Uveth  to  make  intercession 
for  us."  These  truths  have  to  be  duly  illustrated  and  enforced  :  1.  God  would 
have  us  know  Him  aright — in  His  Son.  2.  God  is  concerned  for  our  deepest 
need — and  that  comes  out  of  our  sin.  3.  God  has  made  both  immediate  and 
permanent  provision  for  meeting  our  deepest  need — in  Jesus,  who  is  our  Saviour 
and  His  Son. 

The  Gospel  in  the  Old  Testament. — Every  revelation  of  God  to  men  is  a  gospel ; 
it  is  "  good  news."  It  is  a  Di\dne  intervention  for  helping  man.  It  assumes 
that  man  is  in  some  condition  that  calls  for  the  friendly  hand.  It  may  be  a 
condition  involved  in  his  creaturely  dependence,  or  it  may  be  a  condition  involved 
in  his  wilfulness  and  sin.  It  is  always  in  such  precise  adaptation,  and  it  always 
has  in  view  such  a  gracious  purpose,  that  it  always  is  a  gospel. 

I.  It  is  always  a  gospel  by  reason  of  its  relativity.  Both  the  form  of  it  and 
the  substance  of  it  are  always  precisely  adapted  to  the  people  to  whom  it  is  sent, 
and  to  the  conditions  in  which  they  are  placed. 

II.  It  is  always  a  gospel  by  reason  of  its  limitations.  It  were  no  good  news 
for  God  to  tell  us  now  what  we  could  not  understand  save  by  living  the  hfe  of 
two  thousand  years  hence.  It  could  have  been  no  gospel  to  tell  Abraham  what 
only  Peter  could  understand.  We  ought  not  to  read  too  much  into  the  Old 
Testament  revelations,  because  the  grace  of  them  lay  in  their  wise  limitations. 

III.  It  is  always  a  gospel  because  it  fits  into  an  advancing  series, — each  a 
gracious  message  within  its  limits,  but  nothing  standing  alone  ;  each  having 
this  further  gospel  in  it,  that  it  prepared  for  something  better,  and  made 
something  better  necessary.  It  created  an  unrest ;  it  held  out  a  hope  :  so  every 
early  revelation  was  a  gospel  which  moved  men  on  towards  the  great  gospel  of 
the  Son. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  1.  God.     The  Theological  Postu-  he  accepts  certain  facts  which  cannot 

late. — The  abruptness  with  which  the  be  proved,  and  which  it  is  mutually 

writer  commences  his  work  gives  it  the  agreed  shall  be  accepted  without  proof, 

character  of  a  treatise  rather  than  an  Euclid  must  ask  for  the  acceptance  of 

epistle.     No  Hebrew  writer  would  for  certain   axioms  and  postulates  before 

one    moment    entertain    the    idea    of  he  can  work  out  a  single  mathematical 

proving  that  God  is  :  that  is  the  one  problem.     And  there  is  one  thing  that 

admitted  fact  on  which  all  his  thinking  must  be  admitted  before  any  theological 

rests.     It  is  not  possible  for  man  to  system  can  be  constructed.     It  is  an 

argue  on  any  scientific  subject  unless  absolutely   unprovable   thing,  because 
124 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  i. 


every  proof  that  can  be  offered  must  revelation  proceeds  it  never  makes  a 
rest  on  assumptions,  not  on  knowledge,  greater  demand  on  faith  than  in  its 
since  man  has  no  power  to  know  in  opening  sentence.  It  is  well  for  us  to 
the  sphere  to  which  this  primary  truth  observe  this  striking  fact.  No  attempt 
is  related.  It  is  the  being  of  God.  A  is  made  in  Holy  Scripture  to  prove  the 
man  may  deny  the  being  of  a  God.  being  of  God.  There  is  the  assertion 
Then  we  cannot  talk  theology  with  him  ;  that  He  is,  but  no  more.  The  exist- 
nor  can  we  give  him  any  idea  of  his  ence  of  God  must  be  accepted  as  the 
moral  duty.  Scripture  makes  no  at-  beginning  of  human  thinking.  A  re- 
tempt  to  prove  that  there  is  a  God.  velation  cannot  be  addressed  to  people 
It  helps  us  to  apprehend  what  He  is,  who  do  not  beforehand  believe  in  God. 
but  not  that  He  is.  It  starts  with  the  St.  Paul,  when  preaching  at  Athens, 
sublime  assertion,  *'  In  the  beginning  made  no  attempt  to  prove  the  being  of 
God."  It  proposes  to  deal  only  with  God.  He  assumes  His  existence  :  "  God 
men  who  accept  that  altogether  in-  that  made  the  world  and  all  things 
comprehensible  fact  as  their  starting-  therein."  We  are  told  everywhere  a 
point.  Back  of  that  assertion  no  man's  great  deal  about  God's  operations  of 
intellect  can  go.  The  absolute  Being,  power  and  grace ;  but  there  is  no  con- 
God,  no  created  being  ever  can  know.  sideration  or  discussion  anywhere  of 
A  beginning,  as  related  to  the  unknown  human  doubts  about  His  existence, 
absolute  Being,  no  man  can  conceivably  What  may  be  the  reason  for  this  very 
imagine.  There  is  nothing  possible  to  remarkable  fact  ?  One  certainly  is, 
us  but  to  begin  our  thinking  with  this  that  God  has  set  the  proofs  of  His 
as  our  accepted  first  fact,  our  founda-  existence  so  abundantly  on  His  other 
tion  truth — God  is.  God — begin  there  ;  handiwork  that  He  did  not  need  to 
one  Being  ;  one  uncreated,  independent  rewrite  them  in  His  book.  He  has 
Being,  sole  Source  and  absolute  Con-  even  put  them  in  the  very  constitution 
troller  of  all  things  and  beings  that  of  our  mental  nature.  We  can  never 
exist.  see  anything  without  at  once  thinking 

there  must  have  been  a  cause  for  it ; 

Ver.    1.  God  First. — The  first  verse  and  we  follow  the  chain  of  causes  until 

of  Holy   Scripture   asserts    something  we  find  some  living  agent.     Our  minds 

that  God  has  done.     "  God  created  the  refuse  to  stop   at   anything   short   of 

heavens  and  the  earth."     But  there  is  that.     We  see  a  book  ;  we  cannot  help 

something  that  goes  before  the  Divine  thinking  of  the  writer  and  the  printer, 

action.     God  Himself  must  exist — the  We  see  a  machine ;  the  orderly  working 

uncaused,  the  eternal  Being.     "  In  the  of  it,  or  its  productions,  will  not  satisfy 

beginning  God."     This  is  the  place  for  us.     We  know  there  was  an  inventor 

Him,    the   only   place,    the    place    in  and  maker.     And  this  peculiarity  of 

which  all  reverent  souls  will  ever  keep  our  minds  leads  us  back  to  a  living 

Him.     The  first  and  foundation-stone  Being,    source   of    all   created   things, 

of  the  great  temple  of  revealed  truth  Precisely  meeting  that  peculiarity,  in 

is  a  declaration  which  grasps  all  space,  perfect  harmony  with  it,  we  are  sur- 

all  being,   all  time,   and  bids  us  see,  rounded  with  objects  which  we  did  not 

before   them,    above   them,  and   alto-  make,    which    no    man    made,    trees, 

gether  independent  of  them,  one  lonely,  flowers,    streams,    mountains,    clouds, 

infinite  Being,  having  life  in  Himself.  creatures  ;    trace     back    their    origin 

When  there  was  no  heaven   and   no  through  what  developments  we  may, 

earth,  in  the  silent,  dark  eternities,  in  our  mind  will  push  the  series  on  and 

the   beginning,   there   was   God.     The  on  until  we  find  some  living  Being,  and 

first  utterance  of  the  Divine  W^ord  is  then  only  will  it  rest.     We  may  leap 

altogether  beyond  the  grasp  of  human  at  once  back  from  the  thing  to  the 

reason  ;    the    first    appeal   of    Divine  living  Creator ;  or  we  may  go,  slowly 

revelation  is  made  to  faith  :  and  as  the  and  laboriously,  under  scientific  guides, 

125 


CHAP.    I. 


HOMILETIC  C03IMENTARY:    HEBREWS, 


through  the  long  and  various  processes  life ;  and  all  the  yet  higher  forms  of 

of  development  and  growth ;  but  at  last,  human   life.     And   in   affirming  that 

when  we  have  reached  the  beginning,  all  existence  came  from  the   hand  of 

there  is  God.   There  is  also  settled  into  God,  Moses  includes  all  those  natural 

our  souls  the  conviction  of  our  depend-  forces  and  laws  which  act  in  creation, 

ence ;  no  persuasions  can  remove  from  Every  created   thing  has   a  power  to 

US  the  feeling  that  we  are  not  self-  act  on  every  other  created  thing.     The 

centred.     Our   very  leaning   on    each  sun  is  holding  the  earth  in  its  place ; 

other  we  feel  is  but  the  shadow  of  the  but  the  earth  is  as  truly  helping  to 

sublimer  reaUty — we  all  lean  on  God.  hold  the  sun  in  his.     The  atmosphere 

Our  bodies  are  dependent  on  nurture,  is  influenced  by  and  influences  the  land 

food,  atmosphere.     The  length  of  our  and  the  water.     Every  living  being  is 

lives,  the  measure  of  our  health,  the  at  once  the  subject  and  the  source  of 

place   of   our  lot,   the    forms    of    our  some   material    influence.      All   these 

diseases,  are  all  things  out  of  our  own  powers,  laws,  forces — whatever   name 

control.    The  universal  sense  of  depend-  man  may  give  to  them — are  gathered 

ence  has  found  universal  expression  in  up   by   Moses,    and  he  boldly  affirms 

human  worship.     In  every  age  and  in  that  all  these  also  are  from  God^ 

every  land  men  have  felt  that  they  II.  The  relation  of  God,  as   Cause 

leaned  upon  a  superior  and  invisible  and  Arranger,  to  all  the  changes  of 

Power,  and  with   rites   and   offerings  creation. — Changes    are   going   on   in 

they  have  ever  sought  to  propitiate  nature     continually, — changes     some- 

Him.     The  first  chapter  of  Genesis  is  times,   indeed,   very   silent   and    very 

the  assertion  of  God's  eternal  existence,  gradual ;  but  sometimes  such  as  men 

and  an  account  of  His  revelation  of  call   wild,   sudden,    wayward.      Then, 

Himself  in   creation.      We   need   not  it   may   be  asked,  are  these  changes 

regard  the  chapter  as  literally  descrip-  the  introduction   of  some  new  power, 

tive;  indeed,  any  approach  to  a  scientific  the   working   of   some   new  and  rival 

description  would  have  been  quite  un-  divinity  ?     Is  it  that  some  evil   spirit 

suited  to  the  Hebrews  of  Moses'  day.  has  entered  into   God's  creation,   and 

What  may  be  found  in  the  chapter  is  is  conflicting  with  Him,    overturning 

in  perfect  harmony  with  the  opening  His  plans,  producing  riot  and  disorder  ? 

sentence,   which  declares  the  absolute  That,  indeed,  men  have  always  been 

unity  of  God.     The  chapter  asserts  the  too    ready   to   suspect.       Again    and 

exclusive  relation  of  this  one  God  to  again   men  have   taken   up   the   idea 

everything  man  can  see,  or  hear,  or  of  two  supreme  powers,  one  good,  and 

feel,  or  know.  the   other   evil ;    and   the  changes   of 

I.    The   relation   of  God,  as    Cause  creation  and  life   are    represented   as 

and  Creator,  to  the   whole   circle  of  being  their  conflict.     Moses  shows  us 

existences. — Could  any  language  more  one   living  God   at   the   beginning    of 

perfectly    cover    the   entire    fields    of  all  changes,  designing  all  change,  and 

human  observation,  all   time,  and  all  presiding    over    all    change, — dealing 

things  ?  We  may  conceive  of  no  created  with  chaos,  tohu  and  hohu^  emptiness 

thing,  no  existing  thing,  to  which  Moses  and    confusion  ;    calling    forth    light, 

has  not  here  attached  the   assurance,  and   settling   order;    separating    land 

God  made   it;   God  ordained  it;  God  from  water,   and  Hfting  waters   from 

arranged  it.     The  chapter  includes  all  waters.    Changes  through  long  periods 

the  components  of  the  earth's  crust ;  all  fitted  the  earth  for  man  s  abode.     But 

the    treasures    of    the  mighty   deep;  all  change  God  ordered,  and  over  all 

all  the  elements   of   the  atmosphere;  its  processes  He  presides.     No  second 

all   the   hosts    of    heaven,   from    the  power  can  find  room ;  no  second  deity 

ruHng  sun  to  the  faintest  distant  star  ;  is  wanted.     *'  Hear,  O  Israel,  the  Lord 

all  the  multipHed  forms  of   vegetable  our  God  is  one  Lord." 

life;  all  the  higher  forms  of  animal  IIJ.  T^e  relation  of  God,  as  Cause 
126 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   I 


and  Controller,  to  the  entire  range  of 
development  in  creation. — The  whole 
field  of  animal  and  vegetable  life  is 
presented  to  our  view.  The  order  in 
which  Moses  arranged  the  creatures 
has  not  been  improved  in  these  latter 
days.  First,  the  low  forms  of  fish-life 
(water-life),  through  the  egg-bearing 
classes  upwards  to  the  mammals,  that 
bring  forth  from  their  own  bodies,  and 
suckle  their  young.  All,  in  their 
growth  and  development,  are  God's, 
and  the  objects  of  His  care.  In  every- 
thing living  there  is  the  faculty  of 
reproduction,  the  power  to  prolong 
the  existence  of  its  kind.  Vegetation 
casts  its  seeds  and  bears  its  fruits. 
Animals,  from  insects  to  men,  are  able 
to  preserve  their  existence  generation 
after  generation.  We  ask :  Is  this 
some  strange  power  developed  by  the 
creatures  themselves  ?  Have  they 
within  themselves  any  creative  ener- 
gies ?  Are  they,  in  any  sense.  Divine  ? 
No,  says  this  chapter.  All  this  is  still 
only  a  part  of  the  one  plan  and  the 
one  arrangement.  It  is  the  Divine 
idea  of  development.  God  gave,  to 
plant  and  creature,  seed  after  its  kind. 
We  have  found  then  the  place  for 
God  in  the  world.  He  is  first,  before 
all  things  ;  He  is  "in  the  beginning." 
Then  we  have  found  the  place  for  God 
in  a  man's  life.  He  must  be  firsts 
always  and  everywhere  first^ — first 
in  all  a  man's  doings  ;  first  in  all  a 
man's  thoughts ;  first  in  all  a  man's 
aims ;  first  in  all  a  man's  interests ; 
first  in  all  a  man's  relationships ;  first 
in  all  a  man's  worship ;  and  first  in 
all  a  man's  hopes.  And  this  we  con- 
stantly afiirm :  the  adequate  moral 
culture  of  a  man  is  not  possible  unless 
he  will  give  to  God  His  due  place ; 
and  that  is  first  everywhere,  and  in 
everything. — Partly  from  ^^Age  o/Gh^eat 
Patriarchs." 

The  One  God  of  Judaism  and  Chris- 
tianity.— The  epistle  must  be  read  in 
the  light  of  the  main  purpose  of  its 
author — "  to  secure  his  Hebrew  readers 
against  the  peril  of  an  apostasy  to 
which  they  were  tempted  by  the  delay 


of  Christ's  personal  return,  by  the 
persecutions  to  which  they  were  sub- 
jected, and  by  the  splendid  memories 
and  exalted  claims  of  the  religion  in 
which  they  had  been  trained."  Three 
suggestions  have  been  made  as  account- 
ing for  the  absence  of  the  writer's 
name.  1.  The  matter  dealt  with  was 
so  weighty  that  the  writer  desired  to 
merge  his  own  personality.  2.  A 
shorter  private  letter  accompanied  this. 
3.  The  name  is  concealed  because  of 
the  relations  between  the  writer  and 
those  to  whom  he  was  writing. 

The  primary  religious  truth  en- 
trusted to  the  keeping  of  the  Hebrew 
race  is  that  of  the  unity  of  God.  Of 
this  truth,  ever  since  the  Babylonian 
Captivity,  the  Jew  has  been  profoundly 
jealous.  Whatever  is  taught  to  the  Jew 
must  be  in  recognised  consistency  with 
this  primary  truth.  In  the  heat  of  con- 
troversy the  apostle  Paul  spoke  sHght- 
ingly  of  the  Mosaic  system,  as  "  weak 
and  beggarly  elements."  This  writer 
takes  care  to  prevent  misunderstanding 
by  his  opening  sentences.  One  and 
the  same  God  is  the  Author  of  both 
Judaism  and  Christianity.  And  this  in- 
volves the  necessary  relation — we  may 
even  say  the  interdependence — of  the 
two  systems.  Gnosticism  attributed 
the  Old  Testament  to  an  inferior  and 
even  malignant  deity,  who  was  called 
the  "  demiurge." 

Divine  Revelations.  —  Revelations 
come  from  God  to  men  through 
Divinely  appointed  agents  and  agencies. 
They  are  chosen  in  order  to  secure 
adaptation.  They  are  arranged  in  a 
progressive  order,  which  we  can  more 
or  less  perfectly  recognise.  "  It  has 
never  been  God's  method  to  reveal 
all  His  relations  to  mankind  at  once. 
He  revealed  Himself  *in  many  por- 
tions.' He  lifted  the  veil  fold  by  fold. 
First  came  the  Adamic  dispensation ; 
then  the  Noachic ;  then  the  Abrahamic ; 
then  the  Mosaic  ;  then  the  prophetic  ; 
then  the  Ezraic ;  then  the  Christian." 
*'The  first  great  truth  which  God 
prominently  revealed  was  His  Unity ; 
then   came   the  earliest  germ   of  the 

127 


CHAP.    I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


Messianic  hope  ;  then  came  the  Moral 
Law ;  then  the  development  of  Mes- 
sianism  and  the  belief  in  Immortality  "  ; 
then  the  mission  of  the  Son  (FaTt^ar). 
Diversity,  both  in  substance  and  in 
form,  marks  all  first  stages  of  Divine 
revelation ;  but  the  advancing  tendency 
is  towards  unity.  When  preparatory 
revelations  do  their  appointed  work, 
they  make  a  final  and  universal  reve- 
lation possible.  The  highest  revelation 
only  removes  the  lower  and  earlier  by 
bringing  fully  out  their  best.  There  is 
a  sense  in  which  Judaism  is  abrogated  : 
there  is  a  fuller  sense  in  which  it  lives 
again  in  Christianity.  There  is  a  direct 
connection  and  relation  between  all 
revelations  that  are  Divine.  There 
never  has  been  and  there  never  can 
be  such  a  thing  as  an  isolated  Divine 
revelation.  Everything  God  does  and 
everything  God  says  fits  harmoniously 
into  a  whole  of  gracious  Divine  purpose. 
This  is  true  of  God's  revelations  in  all 
lands  and  in  all  times. 

The  Essential  Idea  of  a  Prophet. — A 
prophet  is  one  who  becomes  a  voice 
for  communicating  some  will  of  God 
to  the  minds  of  men.  But  God's  voice 
comes  to  men  through,  by  means  of, 
and  not  over,  or  as  over-mastering, 
the  individuality  of  the  prophet.  This 
is  true  of  the  teaching  prophets  of 
modern  times.  And  herein  the  Jehovah 
prophet  and  the  evangelical  prophet 
are  to  be  distinguished  from  the  pagan 
receiver  and  transmitter  of  oracles. 
God's  messages  to  men  are  sent  to 
men  in  the  forms  and  with  the  mental 
imprint  which  those  who  convey  them 
can  put  upon  them.  The  messages  of 
God  are  often  parabolic,  but  they  are 
seldom,  if  ever,  enigmatical  as  oracles 
usually  are. 

Divine  Selection  for  Service. — Men 
in  every  age  are  honoured  by  being 
Divinely  selected  for  service.  There 
are  still  such  selected  men  for  the 
ministry  of  modern  days;  but  their 
work  may  be  to  expound  a  revelation 
rather  than  to  carry  and  find  voice 
for  one.      It  must  be  borne  in  mind 

128 


that  the  men  who  expound  a  revelation 
may  be  as  truly  in  the  endowment  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  their  work  may 
be  as  spiritually  authoritative,  as  that 
of  those  who  receive  a  revelation.  The 
only  authority  in  a  prophet  or  teacher 
which  we  can  recognise  is  that  which 
comes  through  absolute  committal  to 
the  Divine  lead. 

The  Characteristics  of  Early  Revela- 
tions.    TToXv/XepOiSy      TToAvTpOTTWS.         The 

first  word  means  in  numerous  parts 
or  parcels — which,  however,  were  no 
doubt  given  at  sundry  timeSy  so  that 
the  rendering  in  the  A.Y.,  though 
imperfect,  is  legitimate.  The  idea  is 
that  God  did  not  at  once  open  up  the 
fulness  of  His  mind  and  unfold  to 
view  the  treasures  of  His  grace.  His 
plan  proceeded  on  the  principle  of 
"  here  a  little "  and  "  there  a  little." 
His  revelation  was  given  "  piecemeal." 
It  came  "  bit  by  bit,"  as  the  fathers 
might  be  able  to  receive  it.  The 
revelation  was  not  only  in  numerous 
parts  or  portions,  it  was  given  ioi  divers 
manners  (TroAvrpoTro)?).  Our  trans- 
lators received  this  rather  cumbrous 
translation  from  the  Geneva  Version. 
Wycliffe's  rendering  was  more  literal, 
in  many  manners.  Tyndale's  was 
simpler,  many  wayes.  The  reference, 
as  the  Duke  of  Manchester  correctly 
remarks,  is  not  to  the  various  modes 
in  which  God  communicated  His  mind 
to  the  prophets,  such  as  visions,  voices, 
dreams,  etc.  ;  it  is  to  the  various  forms 
which  the  subject-matter  of  the  com- 
munications was  made  to  assume,  as  it 
passed  on  through  the  prophets  to  the 
people  at  large.  There  were  com- 
mandments. There  were  promises. 
There  was  history.  There  were  ex- 
hortations, expostulations,  invitations, 
warnings,  pleadings,  threatenings. 
There  were  predictions  and  types, 
parables  and  proverbs,  psalms  and 
songs.  God  spoke,  as  Cardinal  Cajetan 
observes,  "  to  the  intellect,  to  the 
imagination,  to  the  senses  "  (intelligibi- 
liter,  imaginahiliter,  sensihiliter).  He 
addressed  at  one  time  the  principle  of 
hope,  at  another  the  principle  of  grati- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.    I. 


tude,  at  another  still  the  principle  of 
competition  and  rivalry  (compare  Rom. 
X.  19),  then  perhaps  the  principle  of 
fear,  or  the  nobler  principle  of  con- 
science, and  of  the  consciousness  of  a 
certain  Divine  imperative  speaking  in 
authoritative  tones  within  the  con- 
science. Thus  "  in  manifold  fashion  " 
did  God  reveal  His  mind  to  the  fathers. 
— J.  Moriso7i,  D.D. 

Monotheism  and  Purity. — The  idea 
of  monotheism  and  the  principle  of 
purity  might  seem  hardly  enough  to 
be  the  chief  results  of  so  systematic 
a  discipline  as  that  of  the  Hebrews. 
But  in  reality  they  are  the  cardinal 
points  in  education.  The  idea  of 
monotheism  out-tops  all  other  ideas  in 
dignity  and  worth.  The  spirituality 
of  God  involves  in  it  the  supremacy  of 
conscience,  the  immortality  of  the  soul, 
the  final  judgment  of  the  human  race. 
For  we  know  the  other  world,  and  can 
only  know  it,  by  analogy  drawn  from 
our  own  experience.  With  what  then 
shall  we  compare  God  ?  With  the 
spiritual  or  the  fleshly  part  of  our 
nature  ?  On  the  answer  depends  the 
whole  bent  of  our  religion  and  of  our 
morality.  For  that  in  ourselves  which 
we  choose  as  the  nearest  analogy  of 
God  will  of  course  be  looked  on  as  the 
ruling  and  lasting  part  of  our  being. 
If  He  be  one  and  spiritual,  then  the 
spiritual  power  within  us,  which  pro- 
claims its  own  unity,  and  independence 
of  matter,  by  the  universality  of  its  de- 
crees, must  be  the  rightful  monarch  of 
our  lives ;  but  if  there  be  gods  many  and 
lords  many,  with  bodily  appetites  and  . 
passions,  then  the  voice  of  conscience 
is  but  one  of  those  widespread  delu- 
sions which,  some  for  a  longer,  some 
for  a  shorter  period,  have  before  now 
misled  our  race.  Again,  the  same 
importance  which  we  assign  to  mono- 
theism as  a  creed  we  must  assign  to 
chastity  as  a  virtue.  Among  all  the 
vices  which  it  is  necessary  to  subdue 
in  order  to  build  up  the  human  char- 
acter, there  is  none  to  be  compared 
in  strength  or  in  virulence  with  that 
of  impurity.     It  can  outlive  and  kill 


a  thousand  virtues  ;  it  can  corrupt  the 
most  generous  heart ;  it  can  madden 
the  soberest  intellect ;  it  can  debase 
the  loftiest  imagination.  But  besides 
being  so  poisonous  in  character,  it  is 
above  all  others  most  difficult  to  con- 
quer. And  the  (Hebrew)  people,  whose 
extraordinary  toughness  of  nature  has 
enabled  it  to  outlive  Egyptian  Pha- 
raohs, and  Assyrian  Kings,  and  Roman 
Csesars,  and  Mussulman  Caliphs,  was 
well  matched  (by  its  strong  grip  of 
the  unity  of  God)  against  a  power  of 
evil  which  has  battled  with  the  human 
spirit  ever  since  the  Creation,  and  has 
inflicted,  and  may  yet  inflict,  more 
deadly  blows  than  any  other  power  we 
know  of. — Bishop  Temple. 

God  m  Relations. — "  Having  of  old 
time  spoken."  That  is,  God  put  Him- 
self into  communication  with  the  moral 
beings  whom  He  had  made  in  His  own 
image ;  set  Himself  in  relations  with 
them,  and  can  be  known  by  them  only 
through  those  relations.  Man  has 
always  gone  astray  when  He  has  tried  to 
know  what  God  is  essentially,  absolutely. 
Philosophising  about  God  has  never 
proved  satisfactory,  because  man's  facul- 
ties, and  man's  language,  the  instrument 
of  his  faculties,  are  altogether  below  the 
range.  He  must  be  God  who  would 
know  God's  absolute  being  and  nature. 
This  is  indeed  involved  in  the  very 
conception  man  forms  of  God.  His 
transcendency  is  an  essential  element 
in  the  conception.  In  what  sense  then 
can  God  be  known  by  the  moral  beings 
He  has  made  ?  In  the  same  way  as 
they  know  everything  else.  Man 
knows  nothing  in  essence,  but  anything 
and  everything  in  relations.  Man  is 
as  truly  bafliled  by  the  essence  of  a 
stone  as  by  the  essence  of  God.  He 
can  know  the  stone  through  its  rela- 
tions, and  he  can  know  God  through 
His  relations,  and  in  no  other  way.  All 
the  relations  to  Hi§  created  world  and 
created  beings  in  which  God  has  been 
pleased  to  put  Himself  are  revelations 
of  Himself.  And  the  limit  of  man's 
knowledge  of  God  is  God's  revelations 
of  Himself.     They  come  through  the 

121) 


CHAP.   I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


speech  of  men,  but  they  come  in  many 
other  ways.  It  was  the  genius  of  the 
Jews  to  discover  God  in  multiphed  and 
various  relations,  and  their  dignity 
and  their  mission  to  the  race  lay  in 
their  fuller  and  worthier  apprehension 
of  God.  This  was  taught  in  a  very 
significant  way  to  tl^e  founder  of 
the  Jewish  dispensation.  When  God 
appeared  to  Moses  in  the  symbol  of 
the  burning  bush,  Moses,  with  the 
natural  curiosity  of  man,  asked  for  the 
name  of  Him  who  spoke  to  him.  It 
was  the  way  in  which  he  asked  for  an 
apprehension  of  the  essence  of  God. 
The  reply  is  a  virtual  refusal.  It 
meant  this  :  "  I  am  Being— th^t  is  all 
you  can  know  concerning  Me.  What 
I  am  to  you  you  can  know.  You  know 
through  what  I  have  been  to  men 
before  you.  I  am  the  God  of  Abraham 
and  Isaac  and  Jacob — a  God  ever 
standing  in  relations,  which  are  the 
only  possible  and  the  altogether  satis- 
fying revelations." 

Revelations  in  the  TVorld's  Education. 
— We  may  rightly  speak  of  a  childhood, 
a  youth,  and  a  manhood  of  the  world. 
The  men  of  the  earliest  ages  were  in 
many  respects  still  children   as  com- 
pared   with    ourselves,    with    all    the 
blessings   and   all    the    disadvantages 
that    belong   to   childhood.     We   reap 
the  fruits  of  their  toil,  and  bear  in  our 
characters  the  impress  of  their  cultiva- 
tion.    Our  characters  have  grown  out 
of   their  history,   as  the  character  of 
the  man  grows  out  of  the  history  of  the 
child.     There  are  matters  in  which  the 
simplicity  of   childhood  is  wiser  than 
the  maturity  of  manhood,  and  in  these 
they  were  wiser  than  we.     There  are 
matters  in  which  the  child  is  nothing 
and  the  man  everything,  and  in  these 
we  are  the  gainers.     And  the  process 
by  which  we  have  either  lost  or  gained 
corresponds,  stage  by  stage,  with  the 
process  by  which  the  infant  is  trained 
for  youth,  and  the  youth  for  manhood. 
This   training   has   three  stages.      In 
childhood  we   are   subject  to   positive 
rules  which  we  cannot  understand,  but 
are  bound  implicitly  to  obey.    In  youth 

130 


we  are  subject  to  the  influence  of 
example,  and  soon  break  loose  from  all 
rules  unless  illustrated  and  enforced 
by  the  higher  teaching  which  example 
imparts.  In  manhood  we  are  com- 
paratively free  from  external  restraints, 
and  if  we  are  to  learn  must  be  our 
own  instructors.  First  come  rules, 
then  examples,  then  principles.  First 
comes  the  Law,  then  the  Son  of  Man, 
then  the  Gift  of  the  Spirit.  The  world 
was  once  a  child  under  tutors  and 
governors  until  the  time  appointed  by 
the  Father.  Then,  when  the  fit  season 
had  arrived,  the  Example  to  which  all 
ages  should  turn  was  sent  to  teach 
men  what  they  ought  to  be.  Then 
the  human  race  was  left  to  itself  to  be 
guided  by  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit 
within. — Bishop  Temple. 

Rabbinical  Degrees  of  Revelation. — 
The  Jewish  doctors  observed  four  de- 
grees of  Divine  revelation.     The  first 
they  called  Prophecy,  which  included 
vision    and    any    apparition   whereby 
the   will   of    God   was    made    known. 
They   had    a    second   way   of    Divine 
revelation,  which  they  called  the  In- 
spiration of  the  Holy  Ghost,  whereby 
the  party  was  enabled  without  vision 
or  apparition    to   prophesy,  either    as 
prophesying  is  taken  for  the  foretelling 
of  things  to  come,  or  for  the  resolving 
of  things  in  doubt.     The  Rabbins  give 
us  the  difference  between  these   two, 
prophecy  and  inspiration  :  in  prophecy 
(though  it  was  from  the  Holy  Ghost) 
a    man   was    cast   into    a    trance    or 
brought    into   an   ecstasy,    his    senses 
being  taken   away  ;  but  speaking   by 
inspiration    of    the    Holy   Ghost   was 
without  any  such  change  in  or  impres- 
sions upon  the  body.     So  David  and 
other  penmen  of  the  Scriptures  wrote 
by  the   immediate  inspiration    of   the 
Holy   Ghost,    yet  without  visible   ap- 
paritions  to   them   or   visible   change 
upon    them.       And    in    a    third    way 
God   revealed   Himself   by  Urim  and 
Thummim,  which  was  an  answer  given 
by  the  ephod,  or  by  the  stones  that 
were  on  the  breastplate  of   the  high 
priest.     These  three   ways   of   Divine 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   I. 


revelation,  as  they  observe,  ceased  in 
the  Second  Temple,  the  Jewish  writers 
having  this  tradition,  that  after  the 
later  prophets,  Haggai,  Zechariah,  and 
Malachi,  the  Holy  Ghost  departed  from 
*'  Israel,"  meanin/j  the  Holy  Ghost 
not  in  the  ordinary  work  of  sanctifica- 
tion,  but  in  those  extraordinary  ways 
of  prophecy,  inspiration,  and  of  the 
Urim  and  Thummim.  There  was  yet 
a  fourth  way  of  Divine  revelation, 
which  they  call  Bathcol,  the  daughter 
of  a  voice,  or  echo,  declaring  the  will  of 
God  immediately  from  heaveUo  Such 
some  conceive  to  be  the  voice  heard 
from  heaven  (Matt.  iiL  17),  proclaiming 
the  testimony  of  God  concerning  Christ. 
It  is  manifest  that  these  distinctions 
are  too  subtle.  It  is  better  to  think 
that  Divine  revelations  differ  in  kind, 
but  not  strictly  in  degree,  because  they 
are  always  relative  to  the  occasion, 
and  precise,  and  adapted,  and  therefore 
perfect  to  the  occasion.  Imperfection 
and  limitation  can  properly  be  appHed 
only  to  our  power  of  recipiency.  A 
similar  line  of  thought  may  be  taken 
in  relation  to  inspiration. 

God. — The  abrupt  beginning  of  this 
epistle  claims  attention.  It  reminds  us 
of  the  abrupt  beginning  of  the  book 
of  Genesis.  Scripture  never  proves  the 
being  of  God.  It  assumes  it.  It  deals 
with  men  only  who  assume  it.  In 
this  only  have  men  and  the  revelation 
a  common  platform.  This  it  assumes  : 
1.  God  is.  2.  God  only  is.  3.  Man 
can  know  Him — in  part.  4.  Man 
cannot  know  Him — perfectly.  5.  Man's 
power  of  apprehending  God  is  adequate 
to  man's  moral,  but  not  to  man's 
mental  necessities. 

Christ  the  Son. — God  had  a  Word  to 
spell — His  own  Name.  By  degrees 
He  did  it.  At  last  it  came  entire. 
The  Word  was  made  flesh.  In  this 
epistle  the  writer  labours  to  show  that 
Christianity  was  the  fulfilment  of  the 
idea  latent  in  Judaism — that  from 
the  earliest  times  and  in  every  institu- 
tion it  was  implied.  This  point  is 
considered  :  The  manifestation  of  God 


through  a  Son  was  implied,  not  reahsed, 
in  the  earlier  dispensation. 

I.  It  was  implied,  not  fulfilled,  in 
the  kingly  office.— See  Ps.  ii.,  xlv.,  ex. 
David  was  emphatically  the  type  of 
the  Jewish  regal  idea.  The  true  King 
of  men  is  a  Son  of  God ;  One  who  is 
to  His  fellow-men  God  and  Lord,  as 
the  Jewish  bride  was  to  feel  her  royal 
husband  to  bo  to  her  ;  One  who  is  a 
priest;  One  v/ho  may  be  poor  and 
exiled,  yet  not  less  royal.  Whence  is 
this  idea  fulfilled  by  Judaism  ?  Is 
it  fulfilled  in  David?  In  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  alone  all  these  fragments, 
these  sundry  portions  of  the  revealed 
Idea  of  Royalty,  met. 

II.  It  was  implied  in  the  race  of 
prophets. — They  were  not  merely  pre- 
dictors of  the  future ;  the  office  of 
the  prophet  was  with  the  present. 
He  read  eternal  principles  beneath  the 
present  and  the  transitory,  and  in 
doing  this  of  course  he  prophesied  the 
future ;  for  a  principle  true  to-day  is 
true  for  ever.  It  was  the  very  con- 
dition of  his  inspiration  that  he  should 
be  one  with  the  people.  So  far  from 
making  him  superhuman,  it  made 
him  more  man.  He  felt  with  more 
exquisite  sensitiveness  all  that  belongs 
to  man,  else  he  could  not  have  been 
a  prophet.  He  was  more  man  just 
because  more  Divine — more  a  son  of 
man  because  more  a  Son  of  God.  If, 
then.  One  had  come  claiming  to  be 
the  Prophet  of  the  Race,  and  was  a 
Sufferer;  claiming  to  be  the  Son  of 
God,  and  yet  peculiarly  man  ;  the  Son 
of  man  ;  the  Son  of  man  just  because 
Son  of  God  ;  more  Divine  because  more 
human, — then  this  was  only  what  the 
whole  race  of  Jewish  prophets  should 
have  prepared  them  for.  God  had 
now  spoken  by  a  Son  in  whom  the 
idea  of  the  true  prophet  was  realised 
in  its  entireness. 

III.  The  priesthood  continued  this 
idea  latent. — The  writer  of  this  epistle 
saw  three  elements  in  the  priestly  idea  : 

1.  That    he    should   be   ordained   for 
men    in    things    pertaining    to    God. 

2.  That    he   should    offer   gifts    and 
sacrifices.       3.    That    he    should    be 

131 


CHAP.    I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


called  by  God,  not  be  a  mere  self- 
assertor.  .  .  .  The  spiritual  Jew  dis- 
cerned that  entire  surrender  to  the 
Divane  Will  is  the  only  perfect  sacri- 
fice, the  ground  of  all  sacrifices,  and 
that  which  alone  imparts  to  it  a 
significance,  lie  who  can  offer  it  in 
its  entireness,  He  alone  is  the  world's 
atonement;  He  in  whose  heart  the 
law  was,  and  who  alone  of  all  man- 
kind was  content  to  do  it,  His  sacrifice 
alone  can  be  the  sacrifice  all-sufficient 
in  the  Father's  sight  as  the  proper 
sacrifice  of  humanity.  He  who 
through  the  eternal  Spirit  offered 
Himself  without  spot  to  God,  He  alone 
can  give  the  Spirit  which  enables  us 
to  present  our  bodies  a  living  sacrifice, 
holy  and  acceptable  to  God.  He  is 
the  only  High  Priest  of  the  universe. 
■ — F.  W.  Robertson. 

Vers.  ],  2.  The  Perfection  of  the 
Evangelical  Revelation. — "  Hath  at  the 
end  of  these  days  spoken  unto  us  in 
His  Son."  The  term  "  evangelical "  is 
not  used  in  its  Scriptural  sense,  when 
it  is  confined  to  a  particular  setting  of 
doctrines  of  sin  and  atonement.  God's 
evangel,  gospel,  good  news,  is  that  He 
has  sent  to  us  His  Son,  and  that  His 
Son  has  something  to  show  to  us, 
something  to  sai/  to  us,  and  some- 
thing to  do  for  us.  If  Divine  revela- 
tions to  men  have  come  in  a  progressive 
order,  the  climax  has  been  reached  in 
the  revelation  of  the  Son  and  through 
the  Son.  This  may  be  worked  out 
along  several  lines.  One  only  we 
suggest,  as  having  some  freshness  and 
point.  Take  the  progressive  views  of 
God  given  in  the  advancing  revela- 
tions. Notice  the  terms  and  human 
relationships  used  for  each  revelation, 
and  show  how  the  Sonship,  which 
reveals  Fatherhood,  is  the  crown  and 
perfection  of  revelations. 

The  Son  a  Spoken  Word— '' Ksith 
spoken  unto  us  in  His  Son."  A  word 
is  that  which  conveys  the  thought  of 
one  mind  to  the  mind  of  another. 
Anything — not  merely  speech — that 
puts  what  is  in  your  mind  into  my 

132 


mind  is  a  word.  The  word  is  more 
than  speech  ;  it  may  be  better  than 
speech — a  look,  a  movement,  a  sign, 
a  vision,  a  person.  Illustrate  :  Eastern 
kings  consider  it  a  mark  of  dignity 
not  to  speak,  but  to  make  their  will 
known  by  dumb  signs.  It  is  said  that 
girls  in  Lancashire  mills,  being  unable 
to  talk  to  one  another  because  of  the 
deafening  machinery,  get  into  the 
way  of  telling  each  other  long  tales 
by  the  motions  of  the  mouth,  face, 
and  arms,  without  speaking  a  word. 
Jesus  the  Son  is  the  Word  which 
carries  to  us  the  most  wonderful  and 
most  gracious  thoughts  that  God  has 
ever  cherished  concerning  us.  He  is 
the  love  of  God  embodied.  He  is  come 
to  say,  "  God  loves,  and  therefore  saves." 
It  is  not  so  much  that  He  has  a  word 
to  say  to  us  ;  it  is  that  He  is  the  Word. 
The  Man  is  the  Word  ;  the  Personality 
is  the  Word  ;  the  Son  is  the  Word. 

T.  A  man  can  be  a  word. — 1.  A\ 
prophet  can  be  a  word.  Illustrate  :  | 
Samuel,  Isaiah,  Jeremiah.  They  were  I 
— it  is  not  only  that  they  brought — / 
messages  from  God.  2.  An  angel 
can  be  a  word.  The  angel  who  spoke 
to  the  shepherds  embodied  the  truth 
that  God  is  concerned  for  sinful  man. 
3.  A  fellow-man  can  be  a  word. 
Think  what  impressions  for  God 
good  men  have  made  upon  us.  Then 
the  "  Man  Christ  Jesus "  can  be  a 
word.  The  humanity  of  Christ  is 
jealously  affirmed.  But  we  must  keep 
before  us  that  it  is  a  whole  humanity. 
We  must  accept  it  with  its  natural- 
ness— true  manhood ;  its  uniqueness — 
typical  manhood  ;  its  mystery — typical 
manhood  is  Divine.  St.  John  uses 
three  terms  to  vitalise  for  us  the 
human  personality  of  Christ :  1.  "  Made 
flesh  " — a  real  bodily  being.  This  is 
the  impression  produced  on  us  by  His 
coming  as  an  infant.  A  certain  un- 
reaHty  is  in  Adam's  humanity,  if  we 
think  of  him  as  made  a  full-grown 
man.  2.  "Dwelt  among  us."  He 
made  His  own  personal  impression. 
He  was  actually  put  into  the  common 
every- day  of  life.  3.  "  Full  of  grace 
and  truth."     The  impression  that  He 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  I. 


made  was  the  impression  of  a  char-  suppUed.  There  is  not  even  the  article 
acter.  The  closer  men  come  to  in  the  original.  And  hence  Wake- 
Christ,  the  more  do  they  feel  that  the  field  translates  *'  by  a  Son,"  and 
most  wonderful  thing  about  Him  was  Rotherham  "  in  a  Son."  Unhappily, 
not  what  He  said  or  what  He  did,  however,  for  there  is  no  indefinite 
but  what  He  was.  The  "  Man  Christ  article  in  the  original.  And  yet  we 
Jesus  "  was  God's  thought  of  man  put  could  not  possibly  say,  in  our  English 
into  a  human  life,  so  that  the  thought  idiom,  in  Son.  The  area  that  is 
might  be  influential  in  our  lives.  We  covered  by  the  Greek  article  is  by 
know,  in  Christ,  what  God  wants  us  no  means  coextensive  with  the  area 
to  be.  which  is  covered  by  the  English.     And 

II.  A    son  can  be  a  word. — When  hence   we  should    here   either   render 

we  apprehend  the  glory  of  Christ,  we  the  phrase  in  "  the  "  Son,  or  use  the 

find   that   it   is    His    Sonship.     "  The  pronoun  in  *'  His "  Son.     It  is  better 

glory  as  of  the  Only  Begotten  of  the  to  adopt  the  article.     The  idea  is,  in 

Father."     The    *'  Man    Christ  Jesus "  Him   who   is   emphatically    Son.     The 

is  a  Son.     His  character  is  Sonship.  word  was  of  itself  so  demonstratively 

It  tells  us  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  conspicuous,  that,  in  the  Greek  idiom, 

relation  in  which  we  should  stand  to  it  could  dispense  with  the  demonstra- 

the  Father.     The  glory  of  Christ's  life  tive  article.     Others,  it  is  true,  besides 

on   earth  being   sonship,  we  can   see  Jesus,  are  sons  of  God.     The  poverty 

that  this — sonship — must  be  the  glory  of  human  language  could  not,  in  the 

of  our   lives   in   Christ.     This  is  pre-  currency  of  common  usage,  afford  to 

cisely  the  *'  spoken  word  "  that  Jesus  surrender  the  term  to  be  the  exclusive 

is — Saviour  by  recovering  sons  to  son-  designation  of  the  only  begotten  One. 

ship.     But  what  does  that  involve  for  But,    nevertheless.    He    is    Son    pre- 

Christ  ?      How    does    He    accomplish  eminently.     He  is  partaker,  not  only 

that  saving  work?     1.  By  the  drama  in   a    moral   point   of   view,  but  also 

of  a  human  life.  He  must  show  son-  physically   or   metaphysically,   of   the 

ship  under  human  conditions.     2.  The  Father's  natuie.     He  is   *'  true  God." 

winning  of  the  acceptance  of  His  own  And  thus,  in  relation  to  the  universe, 

Sonship.      3.   The   right   to  give  His  He  is  the  one  Prince  Royal.     "  By " 

standing,   as  an  accepted   Son,  to  us.  or  "  in "  this  Son  God  spoke  *'  in  the 

4.  Gaining  the  power  to  help  us  to  he  end  of  these  days."     There  is  an  in- 

what  He  represents  us  as  being.     The  tentional  antithesis  to  the  expression 

glory  of  Christ  is  this — He  is  perfect  "  in  "  the  prophets.     God's  speech  was 

Son,  and  is  helping  us  into  His  per-  indeed  "  in "    the   prophets ;    but   yet 

feet  Sonship.  more    emphatically     '^in"    the    Son. 

God's  words  were  in   both.      But   as 

Sonship  as  a  Final  Revelation. — ''  In  neither  Son  nor  prophets  were  mere 
Christ  all  the  fragments  of  previous  mechanical  sounding-boards  or  echoes, 
revelation  were  completed,  all  the  but  receivers,  reproducers,  and  inter- 
methods  of  it  concentrated,  and  all  preters,  the  outcome  of  words  was  very 
its  apparent  perplexities  and  con-  different  in  the  two  cases.  .  .  .  The 
tradictions  solved  and  rendered  in-  Son  was  Himself,  in  His  very  essence, 
telHgible.  Sonship  naturally  suggests  the  Word  of  God.  All  that  He  was, 
heirship,  and  in  Christ  was  fulfilled  as  well  as  all  that  He  said  and  did, 
the  immense  promise  to  Abraham  that  was  representation  and  revelation  of 
his  seed  should  be  heir  of  the  world."  the  mind  and  heart  of  the  Father. — 
— Farrar,  J.  Mm^ison,  D.D. 

"  By  His  Son."    Revelation  by  "  SmiJ*  Last  Days. — Last  days,  or   the  end 

— The    pronoun,    as   is    indicated   by  of  the  days,  may  be  only  relatively  last, 

the  italic  type  in  our  Bibles,  has  been  The  absolute  last  of  Di\ane  revelations 

133 


CHAP.   I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS, 


to  men  we  cannot  possibly  know.  That 
revelation  under  which  we  live  is  the 
last  to  us  :  and  for  our  response  to 
it  we  must  be  judged.  Last  dayc  are 
the  fruitage  for  which  earlier  days  have 
prepared.  The  revelation  in  Christ  is 
the  fruitage  of  all  the  revelations.  In 
the  Divine  order  all  ''last  days"  are 
beginnings.  The  last  days  of  winter 
are  the  beginning  of  spring;  the  last 
days  of  childhood  are  the  beginning  of 
manhood ;  the  last  days  of  patriarch- 
ism  are  the  beginning  of  Mosaism  ;  the 
last  days  of  Christianity  will  be  the 
beginning  of  a  now  unknown  something. 
God's  last  days  are  never  abrupt ;  they 
are  a  quiet  gliding  into  the  new  order. 

The  Conti'ast  between  Servant  and  Son. 
— This  is  brought  out  by  our  Divine 
Lord  in  His  parable  of  the  wicked 
husbandmen,  who,  though  they  had 
killed  the  servants,  were  fully  expected 
to  reverence  the  son,  and  yield  them- 
selves to  the  persuasion  and  authority 
that  he  brought.  Son  and  servant 
both  fulfil  a  mission.  They  differ 
(1)  in  personal  rank  ;  (2)  in  relation 
to  the  Divine  mind  and  will ;  (3)  and 
in  their  direct  interest  in  their  work. 
The  Son  reveals  God  in  being  a  Son, 
as  well  as  by  what  He  said  and  did 
and  suffered  as  the  Son.  Christ  Him- 
self is  the  great  revelation.  The 
eternal  generation  of  the  Son  is  an 
idea  that  we  owe  to  the  Greek  Church. 
The  writer  of  this  epistle  does  not  deal 
with  it,  but  regards  Jesus  as  constituted 
(or  appointed)  Son  for  the  purposes  of 
His  special  redemptive  mission.  "  Gene- 
ration "  is  an  earthly  term  which  cannot 
fittingly  be  applied  to  spiritual  or  Divine 
things.  As  Son  He  takes  the  authori- 
tative place  that  belongs  exclusively  to 
God.  God  is  owner  of  all  things  ;  the 
Son  is  owner  of  all  things,  because  He 
is  heir  of  all  things.  The  heir  to  any 
estate  differs  essentially  from  a  servant 
on  the  estate.  The  Son  may  be  thought 
of  as  God  operating  in  the  material,  the 
sense,  sphere.  Distinguish  between 
God  sending  a  servant  to  execute  some 
commission  for  Him,  and  His  being 
present  Himself,  in  the  person  of  His 
134 


Son,  to  execute  His  own  commission. 
The  Son  is,  as  it  were,  the  visibility 
and  materiality  of  God.  Or,  as  the 
hymn  expresses  the  sublime   truth, — 

"  God  manifestly  seen  and  heard, 
And  Heaven's  beloved  One." 

Yer.  3.  The  Effulgence  of  the  Glory. — 
Our  Lord  is  "  the  brightness  of  the 
glory  of  the  Divine  Father."  A  distinc- 
tion of  personalities  is  assumed.  And 
it  is  further  assumed  that,  in  the 
Divine  arrangements  in  reference  to 
creation  in  general,  and  human  redemp- 
tion in  particular,  the  Father  represents 
the  Godhead,  and  may  therefore  be 
emphatically  designated  *'  God."  By 
the  glory  of  the  Father,  Schottgen 
would  understand  the  Shekinah,  or 
cloud-enveloped  pillar  of  light — a  no- 
tion too  artificial  and  narrow.  We 
naturally  expect  a  broader  and  grander 
idea,  such  as  "  the  sum  of  the  Divine 
perfections,"  and  thus  "the  essential 
glory  of  Deity. "  That  is  a  "  glory  "  which 
has  "  glowed  "  from  everlasting,  and 
which  will  glow  on  for  ever,  indiminish- 
able.  The  radical  idea  would  doubtless 
be  derived  from  a  sensuous  source,  light. 
The  glory  of  the  Lord  "  shines  "  where- 
ever  it  is  revealed  (Luke  ii.  9  ;  Rev. 
xviii.  1,  xxi.  23).  At  every  rift  or 
outlet  there  is  the  radiation  of  that 
light  within,  which  is  inaccessible. 
"  God  is  Light."  Our  Saviour  is  the 
brightness  of  the  Divine  light  or  glory. 
The  light  shines  forth  in  Him,  and  then 
through  Him  upon  creation.  "The 
words,"  says  Dr.  Owen,  "denote  the 
Divine  nature  of  Christ ;  yet  not  abso- 
lutely, but  as  God  the  Father  in  Him 
doth  manifest  Himself  to  us."  The 
word  "  brightness  "is  given  in  all  the  old 
English  versions,  from  Wy cliff e  down- 
wards. It  is  the  reproduction  of  the 
Latin  splendor,  the  Yulgate  Version. 
It  is  thus  a  venerable,  yet  rather  a 
feeble  rendering.  The  idea  of  eradiation 
is  inherent  in  the  original  term  (air- 
avyacr/xa).  Our  Lord  is  the  manifestive 
eradiation  of  the  Divine  glory.  Wells' 
translation  of  the  word  is  "shining  forth." 
Jesus  is  the  "  effulgence  "  of  the  Father's 
glory ;  "  e^-f  ulgence  "  rather  than  ?*e-ful- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   I. 


gence,"  though  Erasmus  and  Calvin  give 
the  latter.  Our  Saviour,  indeed,  is  the 
image  and  reflection  of  the  Father,  but 
that  is  not  the  representation  before 
us.  Eflluence  is  denoted.  Killiet's  ren- 
dering is  rayonnement.  Effulgence  is 
Wynne's  word,  and  is  given  by  Mac- 
knight,  Rodolphus,  Dickinson,  Penn, 
and  many  other  translators.  Milton 
happily  reproduced  the  idea  in  the  line 
"  Bright  effluence  of  bright  essence, 
increate "  {Paradise  Lost,  iii.  6). — 
J.  McfTisoriy  D.D. 

Christas  Pui^ger  of  Sins. — "  When  He 
had  made  purification  of  sins."  This 
allusion  to  our  Kedeemer's  earthly 
mission  assumes  the  understanding  of 
its  object  and  its  method  by  the  dis- 
ciples. But  they  were  mostly,  if  not 
exclusively,  Jews,  and  would  think  of 
the  Redeemer's  work  with  the  aid  of 
the  figures  of  the  old  Mosaic  ritual. 
"  Clean  "  and  "  unclean  "  were  the  great 
words  of  the  Mosaic  system.  Only 
the  "  clean  "  were  allowed  to  take  part 
in  the  Jewish  worship.  All  sorts 
of  things  made  men  ceremonially 
"  unclean."  The  unclean  man  was  out 
of  relations.  He  must  be  "reconciled" 
and  *'  restored."  He  could  only  be  by 
becoming  clean  ;  then  the  priest  could 
make  purification  for  him,  and  then  he 
could  be  restored  as  clean.  The  sacri- 
ficial system  of  Judaism  has  received 
so  much  attention,  that  the  importance 
of  the  distinction  between  "  clean  "  and 
"  unclean  "  in  relation  to  our  Lord's 
"  purification  "  and  "  propitiation  "  has 
been  neglected.  Relative  to  the  eternal 
temple,  the  sanctuary  of  God,  the 
Divine  favour,  man's  sins  have  involved 
his  shutting  out  ;  he  is  "  unclean,"  he 
cannot  pass  the  gates.  With  this 
condition  of  things  Christ  dealt.  He 
took  on  Himself,  as  a  work  that  He 
alone  would  do.  He  "  by  Himself,"  the 
work  of  dealing  with  man's  uncleanness, 
and  restoring  man's  relations  to  the 
eternal  temple,  and  to  the  favour  of 
God.  There  was  nothing  to  be  done 
in  the  way  of  propitiating  God,  for  He 
must  be  thought  of  as  distressed  by 
man's  uncleanness,  and  longing  to  have 


him  restored.  There  was  much  to  bo 
done  in  order  to  meet  the  necessary 
conditions  of  entrance  into  the  heaven- 
lies  ;  but  that  work  had  to  be  done  in 
man,  and  therefore  for  inan.  Christ 
had  to  get  man  clean  in  will  and  purpose 
(not  actually  clean,  that  was  not  neces- 
sary ;  that  was  involved,  but  that 
might  come  after) ;  when  Christ  had 
man  clean  in  will  and  purpose,  He 
could  represent  him  as  clean  before 
God.  He  could  go  into  the  eternal 
temple  in  His  own  personal  right,  as 
a  clean  man,  and  get  the  right  to  go 
in  for  every  man  whom  He  had  made 
clean  in  will  and  purpose.  So  Jesus 
"  made  purification  of  sins,"  and  restored 
unclean  man  to  the  spiritual  and 
eternal  temple. 

Sitting  at  the  Right  Hand  of  God. — 
The  end  and  pvirpose  for  which  Christ 
ascended  was  that  He  might  sit  on 
the  right  hand  of  God  (Luke  xx.  42, 
xxii.  69).  Some  might  suppose  that 
all  the  prophecies  and  figures  of  the 
Old  Testament  are  fulfilled  by  the 
establishment  of  our  Lord's  kingdom 
upon  earth,  which  we  see  on  all  sides ; 
but  certainly  a  great  deal  more  than 
this  is  intended,  when  such  particular 
mention  is  made  in  Scripture  of  a 
power  on  the  right  hand  of  God  being 
given  to  our  Lord  on  His  ascending 
to  heaven.  Thus  our  Lord  Himself, 
on  the  Ascension  Day,  said,  "  All  power 
is  given  unto  Me  in  heaven  and  in 
earth."  But  since  we  believe  Him  to 
be  God  equal  to  the  Father,  and  with 
power  equal  to  the  Father  from  ever- 
lasting, how  can  it  be  said  that  power 
is  then  given  to  Him  as  if  for  the  first 
time  ?  All  this  is  said  of  Christ,  not 
as  the  Son  of  God,  but  as  the  Son  of 
man.  It  is  our  poor  human  nature 
that  is  so  highly  exalted  in  Jesus 
Christ  and  set  on  the  right  hand  of 
God ;  it  is  that  human  nature  which 
in  Christ  overcame  the  enemy,  and 
returned  with  garments  dyed  in  blood 
from  Edom.  To  speak  after  the 
manner  of  men,  how  is  every  nation 
always  studious  that  one  of  themselves 
should  be  in  the  court   of   a  foreign 

135 


CHAP.   I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


king,  to  represent  their  interests,  to 
speak  for  them,  and  through  whom 
they  themselves  might  find  access. 
And  even  we,  says  the  writer,  have 
through  liim  admission  and  approach 
to  the"  throne  of  grace.  As  a  ship  is 
secure  and  steadfast  when  its  anchor  is 
firmly  fixed  in  the  land,  so  amid  the 
waves  and  storms  of  this  life  may  our 
confidence  be,  if  we  have  our  hearts 
with  Christ  in  heaven  (see  Heb.  vi.  19). 
St.  Paul  so  often  alludes  to  the  doctrine 
of  Christ's  resurrection  to  urge  the 
necessity  of  our  being  risen  with  Him 
upon  earth ;  so  does  he  also  to  that  of 
His  being  in  heaven,  as  a  reason  for 
our  being  in  mind  and  thought  there 
with  Him.  As  He  continued  forty 
days  on  earth  after  His  resurrection, 
so  after  they  are  risen  with  Him  from 
the  death  of  sin  in  baptism  have 
Christians  to  continue  for  their  pil- 
grimage on  earth,  it  may  be  for  forty 
years  of  trial  in  the  wilderness  before 
they  ascend  to  heaven ;  but  to  live  as 
those  whose  treasure  is  in  heaven,  and 
whose  hearts  are  therefore  ever  dwell- 
ing and  abiding  there.  When  our 
blessed  Saviour  says  that  "  all  power 
is  given  Him  in  heaven  and  in  earth," 
He  means  some  great  and  new  power 
with  regard  to  us,  some  power  to  be 
exercised  for  our  benefit,  if  we  are  His 
true  children.  And  when  it  is  said 
that  He  is  sitting  on  the  right  hand 
of  God,  or  when  He  is  seen,  as  by 
St.  Stephen  at  his  death,  standing  at 
the  right  hand  of  God,  this  signifies, 
that  whether  He  is  spoken  of  as  sitting, 
i.e.  in  a  state  of  rest  after  His  labours, 
or  as  standing,  i.e.  as  ready  to  succour 
and  aid  those  who  call  to  Him,  yet  it 
is  always,  in  both  cases,  at  the  right 
hand  of  power,  i.e.  with  some  wonderful 
power  given  unto  Him  in  His  Church 
for  our  sakes, — power  greater  than  was 
exercised  by  Him  here  on  earth  before 
His  death ;  greater  than  was  ever 
vouchsafed  to  man  before  Christ's 
ascension  into  heaven.  In  two  points 
of  view,  therefore,  have  we.  Christians, 
great  and  extraordinary  privileges  to- 
wards a  holy  life  since  the  ascension 
of  Christ.     First,  that  we  have  in  Him 

136 


a  Mediator  and  Intercessor  in  heaven ; 
and,  secondly,  that  we  have  on  earth 
the  great  Comforter,  whom  He  has 
sent  down  from  the  Father. — Isaac 
Williams,  B.D. 

The  Right  Hand  of  God. — Sitting  at 
the  right  hand  was  regarded  both 
among  the  Greeks  and  Orientals  as 
entailing  the  greatest  dignity :  it  was 
the  position  of  the  highest  honour,  and 
even  involved  participation  in  the  royal 
dignity  and  power.  As  an  illustration 
from  classical  writings  we  may  cite 
Pindar,  who  speaks  of  Minerva  as  at 
the  right  hand  of  Zeus,  associated  with 
him  in  his  sovereignty,  and  receiving 
his  commands  for  the  other  gods.  And 
Callimachus  says  that  Apollo  is  able 
to  reward  the  chorus,  if  they  sing  to 
please  him,  because  he  sits  at  the  right 
hand  of  Zeus.  As  an  illustration  from 
Eastern  life,  a  passage  may  be  quoted 
from  Eichhorn.  Ibn  Cotaiba  says : 
"  The  ridafat  is  the  dignity  of  sitting 
next  to  the  king.  But  the  radaf  (he 
who  holds  rank  after  the  king)  sits  on 
his  right  hand  ;  and  if  the  king  drinks, 
the  radaf  drinks  next  before  all  others  ; 
and  if  the  king  goes  out  upon  an  ex- 
pedition, the  radaf  sits  on  his  seat 
and  acts  in  his  room  till  he  returns ; 
and  if  the  king's  army  goes  forth  to 
war,  the  radaf  receives  a  fourth  part 
of  the  booty." 

God  is  apprehended  with  the  Christ- 
help. — The  glory  of  God — His  essential 
being — is  beyond  the  vision  of  the 
human  eye,  or  the  grasp  of  the  human 
mind.  It  is  said  that  if  a  man  could 
stand  on  the  outer  edge  of  the  earth's 
atmosphere  he  would  find  unrelieved 
darkness,  in  which  no  sun  or  stars 
could  be  seen.  The  sun's  rays  in  the 
earth -atmosphere  reveal  to  us  the  sun  ; 
but  what  we  see  are  the  rays,  not 
the  sun.  The  Shekinah  glory  in  the 
Tabernacle  and  Temple  brought  the 
sense  of  God's  presence  home  to  Jewish 
hearts ;  but  what  was  seen  was  a 
light-filled  cloud,  not  God.  Moses, 
with  the  help  of  the  "back  parts," 
realised  the  glory  of  Jehovah  ;  but  what 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.  r. 


he  saw  was  the  after- glow,  not  Jehovah. 
So  Christ  is  the  ray  that  reveals  God, 
the  Shekinah  that  declares  His  pre- 
sence, the  after-glow  that  suggests 
His  glory.  Philo  compares  man  to  a 
coin  which  has  been  stamped  by  the 
Logos  with  the  being  and  type  of  God. 

The  Revelation  of  Moral  and  Spiritual 
Attributes. — What  of  God,  as  the  su- 
preme Moral  Being,  can  be  apprehended 
by  man  Christ  came  to  help  him  to 
apprehend.  The  Christ-revelation  is 
not  of  God's  natural  attributes,  but 
of  His  moral  and  spiritual.  Therefore 
the  revelation  is  through  a  person,  and 
a  life  of  relationships.  It  is  essentially 
the  revelation  of  the  Divine  Fatherli- 
ness,  and  not  in  any  sense  of  any 
materiality  or  personality  of  the  Divine 
Father.  We  may  argue  these  from 
the  revelation,  but  the  revelation  itself 
concerns  character  and  characteristics. 

Providence  as  Persistent  Divine 
Activity. — The  Son  bears  the  same 
relation  to  Providence  that  He  does 
to  creation.  Philo  calls  the  Logos 
"the  Chain-band  of  things  :  Pilot  and 
Steersman  of  everything.  Creator  and 
Upholder  by  the  word  of  His  power." 
God  operating  in  the  sphere  of  material 
things,  to  create  them,  or  arrange 
them,  or  maintain  them,  or  rearrange 
them,  is  always  God  the  Son.  God  can 
only  be  thought  of  as  always  active, 
so  He  is  always  God  the  Son ;  and  this 
is  the  "  eternal  Sonship." 

A  Son! 8  Purging  Work. — Purging,  as 
applied  to  sin,  is  cleansing  work,  not 
bearing  of  penalty. 

Ver.  4.  Essential  Difference  between 
Son  and  Angel. — The  differences  be- 
tween Christ  and  angels,  in  a  general 
way,  concern  their  respective  ranks  and 
relationships.     But  the  difference  that 


is  most  impressive  is  the  difference  in 
the  authority  with  which  their  work  is 
done,  and  their  mission  carried  through. 
Angels  do  God's  will,  and  with  more 
or  less  of  conflict  with  their  own  wills 
make  God's  will  their  own.  Christ 
does  God's  will  too,  but  He  does  it 
without  any  conflict,  because  God's  will 
is  His  own.  "  I  do  always  the  things 
that  please  Him."  There  is  no  inten- 
tion to  undervalue  angelic  ministra- 
tions ;  but  it  is  of  supreme  importance 
to  set  out  most  clearly  that  Christ 
is  altogether  beyond  their  range — a 
different,  a  higher  being.  Christ  is 
spoken  of  as  "begotten"  (ver.  5); 
as  "Son"  (ver.  5);  angels  are  said  to 
worship  Him  (ver.  6) ;  He  is  spoken 
of  as  "God"  (ver.  8);  as  "Creator 
and  Controller"  (vers.  10,  12);  as 
"Throne-sharer"  (ver.   13). 

ATigel-service  as  doing  God^s  Will. — 
Service  must  be  rendered  if  it  costs  us 
the  breaking  of  our  will.  Service  only 
becomes  liberty  and  joy  when  we  can 
rise  to  the  Christ-spirit,  and  God's  will 
becomes  ours  because  it  is  so  freely,  so 
fully,  and  so  lovingly  accepted.  An 
angel  serves  with  a  strain.  He  makes 
more  or  less  conscious  effort  to  get  and  to 
keep  his  will  in  harmony  with  God's  will. 
The  Son  serves  without  a  strain.  He 
never  needs  to  make  any  effort  to  get 
or  keep  His  will  in  harmony  with  His 
Father's  will,  for  He  embodies  His 
Father's  will.  We  only  enter  into  the 
full  joy  of  service  when  we  rise  above 
the  constraint  of  the  servant  into  the 
liberty  of  the  son.  Hence  the  exceed- 
ing value  of  the  work  the  Divine  Son 
does  for  us,  in  making  His  Sonship  ours, 
and  putting  us  into  the  inheritance 
with  Him.  "  Heirs  of  God,  and  joint- 
heirs  with  Christ."  Sonship  was  for 
Christ,  and  is  for  us,  the  "  more  excel- 
lent name." 


137 


CHAP.   I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


MAIN  IIOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses   5—14. 

The  Service  of  a  Servant  ayid  the  Service  of  a  Son. — The  essential  dignity  of 
Christ  is  seen  in  a  contrast  between  a  servant  and  a  son.  Angels  are  taken 
for  the  first  contrast  because  they  are  the  highest  form  of  servants  that  man  can 
conceive,  because  their  work  was  in  the  world  before  that  of  Moses,  and  because 
they  were  directly  associated  as  ministers  with  the  earlier  dispensation.  Angels 
have  a  very  prominent  place  in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures.  They  are  the 
servants  of  the  Divane  house,  agents  who  do  the  Divine  Master's  bidding, 
*'  ministering  spirits."  The  contrast  of  angels,  the  servants,  with  Christ  as  the 
Son  is  a  fair  one,  because  Christ  is  Himself  one  of  God's  angels,  a  ministering 
spirit.  He  said  of  Himself  :  "  I  am  among  you  as  He  that  serveth";  "  I  came 
not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister."  But  the  contrast  between  the 
Angel-Christ  and  other  angels  is  very  striking  and  impressive.  "  To  which  of 
the  angels  has  God  said  at  any  time.  Thou  art  My  son ;  this  day  have  I  begotten 
thee  ? "  Of  the  angels  this  kind  of  thing  is  said,  "  Who  maketh  winds  His  angels, 
and  flames  of  fire  His  ministers."  Of  the  Son  this  unique  kind  of  thing  is  said, 
"  Thy  throne,  O  God,  is  for  ever  and  ever ;  a  sceptre  of  righteousness  is  the 
sceptre  of  Thy  kingdom." 

I.  Ministry  to  others  is  common  to  a  servant  and  to  a  son. — The  Scripture  is 
full,  from  Genesis  to  Revelation,  of  the  ministering  of  the  angels  to  the  sons  of 
God.  They  kept  the  way  of  the  Tree  of  Life,  lest  our  erring  first  parents  should 
stamp  immortality  upon  their  sin.  They  visited  the  patriarch  Abraham,  to  give 
him  knowledge  of  the  Divine  thought  concerning  Sodom.  They  went  up  and 
down  that  ladder  of  help  between  earth  and  heaven  which  Jacob  saw  in  his 
night -visions.  One  mysterious  angel  wrestled  with  the  anxious  patriarch  on 
Jabbok-side,  through  the  long  night  unto  the  breaking  of  the  day.  He  who 
came  down  to  Sinai  to  give  His  fiery  law  was  attended  by  thousands  of  angels. 
Grieved  at  the  sin  of  His  people,  Jehovah  almost  withdrew  His  promise  to  go 
with  them,  and  offered  Moses  to  provide  an  angel-guide  instead.  An  angel-form 
cheered  Joshua  with  assurances  as  he  entered  on  the  invasion  of  Canaan.  To 
Manoah  the  angel  brought  the  tidings  of  the  coming  hero  who  should  be  born 
in  his  house.  Angel-help  was  so  fully  realised  by  the  psalmist  that  he  could 
assure  his  heart  in  this — "  He  shall  give  His  angels  charge  concerning  thee,  to 
keep  thee  in  all  thy  ways :  they  shall  bear  thee  up  in  their  hands,  lest  thou  dash 
thy  foot  against  a  stone."  An  angel  with  a  drawn  sword  stood  over  Jerusalem 
when  David's  presumption  m,ust  be  punished.  An  angel  kept  three  Hebrew 
youths  safe  from  harm  in  the  very  midst  of  the  fire,  and  the  prayerful  man 
unharmed  among  the  lions.  Angels  brought  the  promise  of  a  forerunner,  and 
of  a  Messiah  ;  and  with  their  joy-songs  angels  heralded  Messiah's  birth.  Angels 
waited  on  Jesus  in  His  time  of  temptation.  Angels  watched  the  place  where 
they  laid  Him  dead.  Angels  spoke  the  promise  of  His  coming  again.  Angels 
led  apostles  out  of  their  prison-house.  Angels  brought  revelations  in  lonely 
Patmos.  And  angels  are  to  be  with  Jesus  when  He  cometh  in  His  glory. 
Everywhere  we  may  find  illustrations  of  the  many-sided  truth,  that  God  uses 
agents  to  carry  out  His  purposes  of  wisdom  and  grace.  Sometimes  He  uses 
men ;  sometimes  the  various  forces  of  nature ;  sometimes  He  call§  for  the  service 
on  our  behalf  of  these  creatures  of  His  who  belong  to  other  spheres  than  ours, 
and  yet  can  come  into  our  spheres,  exert  influence  on  us,  and  even  become 
apprehensible  to  our  senses.  There  seem  to  be  in  some  of  these  angel-mani- 
festations of  the  Old  Testament  foreshadowings  and  suggestions  of  the  glorious 
incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God.  It  is  not  unreasonable  that  we  should  reverently 
recognise  the  Angel- Jehovah  in  Abraham's  visitor,  and  in  Jacob's  night- wrestler. 
138 


HOMILETtC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  1. 


But  the  work  of  ministering  is  not  the  work  of  angels  alone.  It  is  the  noble 
side  of  all  relationships,  human  and  Divine.  It  gives  the  distinction  between  the 
spirit  of  the  world  and  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  spirit  of  the  world  is  ''getting" ; 
the  Spirit  of  God  is  "  serving."  Seeking  the  good  of  himself  is  man's  temptation 
to  sin.  Seeking  the  good  of  others  is  the  sure  indication  of  man's  recovery  to 
virtue.  Only  as  he  becomes  an  angel,  a  "  ministering  spirit,"  does  man  enter 
into  full  Idnship  with  God,  with  God  in  Christ.  Angels  are  our  helpers  ;  but  it 
is  also  true  that  angels  are  our  teachers,  our  examples.  We  learn  from  them 
what  is  the  noble  life,  what  our  life  would  become  if,  from  us,  the  self-seeking 
of  our  sinfulness  were  wholly  taken  away.  "  Ministering  " — that  is  the  Divine 
idea,  for  the  Divine  Being  Himself,  and  for  all  the  creatures  that  are  made  in 
the  Divine  image.  We  can  rise  no  higher  than  that,  for  that  is  the  sublime 
height  of  God  Himself.  God  works.  That  is  true,  but  His  work  is  a  ministry 
of  blessing  for  His  creatures.  He  is  always  about  our  path  and  our  lying  down 
— the  infinite  Angel,  ever  doing  us  good.  Call  nature-forces  by  some  grand 
name  of  law,  which  takes  the  living  will  and  beating  heart  out  of  them,  and 
you  make  our  human  life  poor  and  low  indeed.  Let  the  winds  be  God's  angels, 
and  the  storms  God's  angels,  and  the  spring- breathings  God's  angels,  and  the 
gentle  rain  God's  angels.  Winter  snow,  and  spring  sunshine,  and  summer  rain, 
and  autumn  heat  are  God  Himself  ministering — they  are  His  own  angel -service 
to  His  creatures.  When  God  takes  upon  Him  our  human  nature,  shadows 
Himself  in  human  form,  then  we  see  an  angel,  a  ministering  spirit — the  Angel 
of  the  Covenant.  The  angel-mark  is  most  plain  on  all  the  human  life  of  Jesus. 
He  "went  about  doing  good."  Service  was  the  characteristic  of  His  most 
blessed  life.  His  lesson  on  ministering  was  given  in  the  upper  room,  when  He 
went  round  and  washed  the  disciples'  feet.  We  may  call  that  the  great  angel- 
lesson.  For  the  work  of  Christ's  Church  will  go  into  these  few  words, 
*'  ministering  unto  the  necessities  of  saints." 

II.  The  ministry  of  a  servant  is  doing  another's  will. — It  is  the  characteristic 
of  a  servant  that  he  does  not  share  in  his  master's  counsels ;  he  "  knoweth  not 
what  his  lord  doeth."  He  does  not  understand  the  plan  into  which  his  work 
fits.  Enough  for  him  to  receive  definite  commands  without  questioning,  and  to 
fulfil  them  without  hesitation.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  recognising  this  as  the 
characteristic  of  servants,  lifted  His  relations  to  His  personal  disciples  into  a 
higher  plane.  He  said  to  them,  *'  I  have  called  you  friends;  for  whatsoever  I 
have  heard  of  the  Father  I  have  made  known  unto  you  "  (John  xv.  15).  But 
confidential  servants  are  still  servants  who  take  their  commands  from  another. 
Even  if  they  are  permitted  to  consult  with  their  master,  the  decision  rests 
wholly  with  him,  and  his  will  is  done,  not  theirs.  Even  angels  cannot  be 
thought  of  as  doing  their  own  will.  There  are  vague  allusions  to  some  who 
"  lost  their  first  estate  "  because  they  resolved  to  follow  their  own  wills.  Servants 
are  not  inventive  :  they  make  no  plans  ;  they  only  carry  out  plans.  Their  essential 
attitude  is  figured  in  the  seraphim  of  Isaiah's  vision  :  "  Each  one  had  six  wings ; 
with  twain  he  covered  his  face,  and  with  twain  he  covered  his  feet,  and  with 
twain  he  did  fly "  ;  or,  twain  he  held  poised  ready  in  a  moment  to  fly,  when  a 
command  came  from  the  throne  (Isa.   vi.   2). 

III.  The  ministry  of  a  son  is  doing  his  own  will. — ISTot  as  distinct  from, 
or  opposed  to,  his  father's  will,  but  as  being  his  father's  will.  Ideally,  in 
relation  to  the  exercise  of  authority,  the  son's  will  is  the  same  as  the  father's  ; 
and  our  Lord  continually  asserted  the  absolute  identity  of  His  will  with  the 
Father's.  The  servant  puts  his  own  will  aside  in  order  to  do  the  master's  will. 
The  Son  does  His  own  will  in  doing  his  Father's.  This  indicates  an  essential 
distinction  between  angels  and  Christ.  Some  help  may  be  gained  from  an 
illustration  of  the  sentiments  entertained  on  a  great  landed  estate.     All  the 

139 


CHAP.   I. 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS. 


officials  and  servants,  even  up  to  the  steward,  have  simply  to  do  the  nobleman's 
will.  But  the  son  and  heir  is  treated  with  the  same  respect  as  the  father,  and 
is  recognised  as  having  the  same  unique  authority.  Applying  this  distinction 
between  servant  and  son  to  the  mission  of  redemption,  we  see  that  angels  and 
prophets  executed  certain  parts  of  the  mission  that  were  entrusted  to  them,  but 
were  not  in  the  secret  of  the  connections  of  the  parts,  or  of  the  Divine  purpose ; 
but  Christ,  the  Di\dne  Son,  carried  out  a  mission  which  was  His  own  design, 
because  His  Father's— the  expression  of  His  own  love,  because  of  His  Father's 
love  ;  and  it  was  wrought  by  His  own  authority,  which  was  His  Father's.  Thus 
in  so  many  ways  the  waiter  of  this  epistle  presses  on  attention  the  superiority 
of  the  Christian  dispensation,  in  that  it  was  administered  by  One  who  occupied 
so  unique  a  position,  who  belonged  to  so  different  a  range  of  beings. 

The  highest  conception  of  life,  then,  is  ministering  service.  However  exalted 
in  rank  and  station  a  man  may  be,  and  whatever  his  degree  of  authority  may 
be,  his  true  dignity  lies  in  being,  as  Christ  was,  an  a7^^e^helper,  ever  "  waiting 
on  his  ministering." 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  5.  Figurative  Use  of  the  Term 
"  Begotten^ — God's  appointment  to  an 
office,  or,  more  exactly.  His  removing 
of  all  obstacles  and  putting  a  man 
actually  into  the  office  He  has  ap- 
pointed for  him,  is  called  "  begetting 
him."  Thus  David  was  Divinely  be- 
gotten when  he  was  set  by  God  as 
king  upon  the  holy  hill  of  Zion.  "  I 
have  this  day  established  thee  as  My 
chosen  king,  and  thus  constituted  thee 
My  son."  When  this  figurative  use  of 
the  term  is  clearly  apprehended,  we 
are  relieved  from  anxiously  endeavour- 
ing to  understand,  what  never  can  be 
understood,  the  mysterious  eternal 
relations  of  the  Divine  Father  and 
the  Divine  Son.  Our  Lord  was  "  be- 
gotten "  when  the  fulness  of  times  had 
come,  when  preparations  were  com- 
pleted, when  obstacles  were  removed, 
and  He  could  be  put  into  His  office,  and 
could  begin  His  work  as  Messianic 
Saviour.  "  Begotten  "  rather  suggests 
*'  giving  birth  to"  than  "  conceiving." 

DavidJs  Son  and  Lord. — Wonder  not 
to  find  one  and  the  same  to  be  the 
Prince  and  Priest,  God  and  man,  the 
rod  and  root,  the  root  and  the  offspring 
of  David  his  son,  and  yet  his  Lord; 
for  these  things  belong  to  one  Person, 
who  is  both  God  and  man  ;  some  of 
them  as  He  is  God,  and  some  of  them 

140 


as  He  is  man,  and  some  as  God-man. 
— Jerome. 

The  Warship  oj  the  Angels. — Often 
the  idea  of  worship  in  Scripture  is  not 
"  offering  religious  homage  to,"  but 
"  solemnly  recognising  the  dignity  of." 
It  is  often  what  may  be  understood  by 
"  worthship,"  or  recognising  and  ac- 
knowledging the  worth  or  superiority 
of  a  person.  That  appears  to  be  the 
idea  of  the  word  "  worship "  in  this 
verse.  It  is  not  necessary  to  the 
writer's  argument  to  show  that  angels 
offer  the  Divine  Son  religious  homage  ; 
it  is  to  the  point  to  show  that  they 
recognise  His  unique  person.  His  tran- 
scendent worth.  His  special  rights,  and 
His  extraordinary  commission.  There 
may  be  ranks  and  orders  of  angels,  as 
servants,  but  they  never  for  one  moment 
think  of  classing  Christ  even  with 
any  in  their  highest  ranks.  They 
worship  Him  as  one  altogether  beyond 
the  angel,  the  servant,  range. 

Fatherhood  apprehended  through  Son- 
ship. — "  I  will  be  to  Him  a  Father, 
and  He  shall  be  to  Me  a  Son."  As 
Son,  "  the  express  image  of  [the 
Father's]  person."  When  Christ  came 
into  the  world.  He  said  plainly  to  His 
disciples,  who  were  supposed  to  under- 
stand Him,  "  He  that  hath  seen  Me 


HOMILETW    COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAT.    I. 


hath  seen  the  Father."     We  may  then 
say  that  it  is  the  work  of  every  man 
to  find  the  Father  in  Christ.     No  man 
has  truly  seen  the  Son  who  has  not 
found  the  Father  in  Him.     And  if  we 
may  think  of  God  as  our  Father,  we 
shall  surely  have  the  truest  and  most 
trustful  view  of  Him.    If  God  is  pleased 
to  reveal  Himself  to  any  of  His  crea- 
tures,   He   must    do   so   through   the 
nature    of    those   creatures.     If    God 
determined  to  show  Himself  to  nnan, 
He  must  not  come  to  him  as  a  cherub 
or  as  an  angel,  but  as  a  man.     So  we 
are  told,  "  Verily  He  took  not  on  Him 
the  nature  of  angels,  but  He  took  on 
Him    the    seed    of    Abraham."     But 
there    are  varieties    of    aspects    under 
which  man  may  be  viewed,  according 
to  the  relationships  in  which  he  stands  ; 
and   besides   coming   as   a   man,    God 
must  show  Himself  in  some  particular 
form    of    man.       Men   are   kings,    or 
prophets,  or  judges,  or   husbands,    or 
fathers,  or  sons,  or  brothers  ;  and  God 
must  make  choice  of  the  one  among 
the  many  forms  of  relationship — forms 
of   manhood — which    shall   most   per- 
fectly represent  Him.     We  need  not 
assume  that  God  has  restricted  Him- 
self to  just  one  aspect.     He  is  indeed 
represented    as    Shepherd,    Husband, 
Friend,    Prophet,    Priest,    and    King ; 
but  we  can  have  only  one  feeling — that 
if  God  should  be  pleased  in  a  special 
manner  to  choose  the  form  and  term 
of  Father,  He  would  come  nearest  to 
us,  and  give  us  the  very  tenderest  and 
holiest  suggestions  concerning  Himself. 
Many  try  to  persuade  themselves  that 
they  are  bound  to  think  of  God  chiefly 
as    a    King.      Certain    exigencies    of 
Christian  doctrine  absolutely  demand 
the  conception   of   a  Moral  Governor. 
But  surely  it  should  not   be  difficult 
for    us    to   recognise   that    the    term 
Father  involves  all  the  righteousness, 
authority,    and    government    included 
in  kingship,  and  is  altogether  a  higher 
and  profounder  conception.     None  of 
us  can  say  that  we  feel  our  hearts  at 
all  stirred  by  the  mention  of  a  king. 
A  king  is  a  person  to  be  feared,  obeyed, 
and    served,    but    not    necessarily    a 


person  to  be  loved.  But  there  never 
has  been  age  or  land  in  which  the 
dearest  thoughts,  and  tenderest  memo- 
ries, and  most  reverent  feelings  of 
men's  hearts,  have  not  gathered  round 
the  idea  of  father  and  of  mother :  for 
men  everywhere  parents  have  pre- 
sented the  ideals  of  all  that  was  pure, 
and  true,  and  reverent,  and  good.  It 
must  be  that  we  shall  come  near  to 
God,  if  He  be  indeed  the  "  Everlasting 
Father."  It  is  sometimes  said  that 
the  term  "  Father "  will  not  do  for 
God,  because  it  makes  Him  out  to 
be  all  kindness  and  indulgence,  and 
shrouds  all  His  awful  attributes  with 
a  veil  of  love,  making  Him  indeed  to 
be  all  love.  But  if  it  does,  what  could 
be  more  deeply  true  ?  Do  we  not  read, 
"  God  is  love  "  ?  When  men  realise 
what  an  uncompromising,  searching, 
holy  thing  love  is,  they  will  never  be 
afraid  to  say  of  Him,  "  God  is  love." 
But  this  representation  of  the  Father- 
hood of  God  is  most  imperfect  and 
unworthy.  We  never  for  a  moment 
think  of  passing  by  justice  and  autho- 
rity in  order  to  exalt  love,  when  we 
call  God  "  our  Father."  Would  it  be 
fair  to  say  of  any  good  earthly  father, 
*'  He  is  all  love,  all  indulgence  ;  there 
is  no  justice,  no  reverence,  no  govern- 
ment in  him  "  ?  The  better  father  he 
is,  the  more  authority  he  exercises,  the 
more  holy  fear  he  demands.  What  is 
God  to  you  when  you  think  of  Him  as 
King  ?  Do  you  not  feel  as  if  He  were 
shifted  right  back,  out  of  sight,  out  of 
reach — seated  on  a  glorious  throne, 
and  you  outside  the  gates,  the  great 
shut  gates  ?  Thoughts  of  majesty, 
glory,  august  power,  and  exact  judg- 
ment, oppress  you.  You  feel  that,  as 
a  King,  tremendous  considerations, 
wide  as  the  infinite  creation,  sway 
His .  decisions,  amidst  which  you  may 
easily  become  a  forgotten  trifle.  But 
what  is  God  to  you  in  those  moments 
when  you  can  realise  that  He  is  a 
Father  indeed  ?  Is  there  any  failing 
of  reverence  for  Him  ?  Is  your  sense 
of  justice,  righteousness,  law,  authority, 
weakened  when  you  think  of  Him  as 
Father  ?     You  may  try  to  make  God 

Ul 


CHAP.    T. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


great  by  describing  His  Kingship  ;  we 
will  sit  at  the  feet  of  Christ  the  Son, 
and  lenrn  from  Him  how  rightly  to 
know  the  true  God  and  eternal  life. 
And  Christ  shows  us  a  weeping  prodi- 
gal, pressing  his  face  into  a  father's 
bosom  ;  heart  is  beating  to  heart — the 
one  in  all  the  anguish  of  penitence,  the 
other  in  all  the  anguish  of  pitying, 
fatherly  love.  Now  the  father's  arms 
are  round  the  restored  boy ;  and  who 
shall  say  that  all  highest  law  is  not 
vindicated,  when  that  father  wipes 
away  the  tears,  and  calls  for  music 
and  dancing,  the  best  robe  and  the 
fatted  calf  ?  How  deep  to  our  hearts 
it  goes  if  we  may  call  God  our  Father ! 
Who  ever  saw  weeping  rebels  lying  on 
kings'  bosoms?  It  must  be  that  we 
are  deeper,  far  deeper,  into  the  very 
heart  of  truth  about  God,  if  He  will 
let  us  think  of  Him  as  our  "  Father  in 
heaven."  And  is  this  truth  of  the 
Divine  Fatherhood  one  which  must  be 
put  under  limitations  and  restrictions  ? 
Must  it  be  anxiously  guarded  from 
possible  misconceptions,  and  shielded 
round  as  belonging  to  men  only  under 
certain  conditions  ?  It  is  enough  to 
reply,  Christ  never  fenced  it  off. 
Christ  never  limited  its  application  ; 
then  why  should  we?  Christ  never 
seemed  afraid  of  preaching  it  freely 
everywhere.  He  evidently  expected  to 
bless  men,  to  awaken  a  new  spirit  in 
men,  the  true  spirit,  the  child -spirit, 
by  telling  them  of  their  Father  in 
heaven.  If  we  follow  Christ,  we  too 
will  show  men  the  Father- God  every- 
where in  Christ's  life  and  teaching  ;  the 
Father-God  especially  in  death,  sacri- 
fice, and  atonement.  BeUeve  then  in 
the  Father.  Learn  of  Christ  the  Son 
so  to  believe.  Then  the  Spirit  of  the 
Son  will  grow  strong  in  you ;  and 
from  Jesus,  your  brother,  you  will 
learn  well  how  to  be  a  son  of  the 
heavenly  Father. 

Ver.  6.  Chj^ist's  Incariiation. — The 
doctrine  of  the  Divinity  of  Christ  is  as 
important  as  any  in  the  whole  Bible, 
and  it  stands  not  on  one  or  two  doubt- 
ful passages  of  Scripture,  but  on  the 
142 


plainest  and  almost  numberless  declara- 
tions of  the  inspired  writers.  In  the 
passage  before  us  the  apostle  is  showing 
the  infinite  superiority  of  Jesus  above 
the  highest  orders  of  created  beings  ; 
and  he  adduces  a  whole  series,  as  it 
were,  of  testimonies  in  proof  of  this 
point.  The  one  which  we  have  now 
read  is  taken  from  the  97th  Psalm, 
and  confessedly  relates  to  Jesus. 

I.  Christ  is  a  proper  object  of  Divine 
worship. — 1.  The  comrriaTid  contained 
in  the  text  is  itself  decisive  upon  the 
point.  God  is  a  jealous  God,  and  claims 
Divine  worship  as  His  inalienable 
prerogative  ;  yet  He  at  the  same  time 
requires  it  to  be  given  to  His  Son. 
Therefore  the  Son  is  worthy  of  that 
high  honour.  2.  The  practice  of  the 
Christian  Church  confirms  it  beyond 
a  doubt.  Stephen,  full  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  saw  the  glory  of  God,  and  Jesus 
standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God,  and 
addressed  himself  to  Jesus.  St.  Paul 
under  buffetings  of  Satan  applied  to 
Jesus  for  relief,  and  was  answered ; 
for  from  that  time  he  "  gloried  in  his 
infirmities."  The  whole  Church  of 
God  worships  Christ.  3.  To  worship 
Christ  is  the  highest  act  of  obedience  to 
the  Father.  Every  knee  shall  bow  to 
Jesus.  All  must  "  honour  the  Son, 
as  they  honour  the  Father." 

II.  His  incarnation  affords  a  special 
call  to  all,  both  in  heaven  and  earth, 
to  worship  Him. — 1.  His  incarnation 
affords  the  brightest  discovery  of  the 
Divine  perfectioiis.  The  angels  had 
seen  God's  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness 
in  the  creation  and  government  of  the 
world.  But  the  Incarnation  revealed 
His  condescension  and  grace.  The 
angels  sang  "  Glory  to  God  in  the 
highest,"  and  so  should  we.  2.  It 
ojye^is  a  way  for  our  reconciliation  with 
God.  When  Christ  was  manifested 
in  the  flesh.  His  mediatorial  work  com- 
menced ;  and  that  course  of  sufferings 
and  obedience,  which  is  the  meritorious 
ground  of  our  acceptance,  was  begun. 
3.  It  reu7iites  men  and  aiigels  under 
one  Head.  Jesus,  by  becoming  man, 
gathers  together  again  both  men  and 
angels  under  Himself  as  their  common 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   L 


Head.  In  heaven  saints  and  angels 
join  in  one  general  chorus,  ascribing 
"  salvation  to  God  and  to  the  Lamb." 
To  enforce  the  injunction  we  would 
say :  ( 1 )  Welcome  Him.  Be  not  in- 
different. Sing  hosannas.  Captious 
Pharisees  may  condemn  ;  but  if  we 
keep  silence,  the  very  stones  will  cry 
out  against  us.  (2)  Submit  to  Him.. 
Jesus  has  set  up  His  kingdom.  "  Kiss 
the  Son."  Present  your  offerings  before 
Him,  in  token  of  your  allegiance  and 
unreserved    subjection    to     His    will. 

(3)  Depend  upon  HiTYi.  Let  His 
vicarious  sufferings  and  obedience  be 
the   stay  and  support  of   your   souls. 

(4)  Glwy  in  Him.  Since  He  is  the 
boast  of  all  in  heaven,  let  Him  be 
the  boast  of  all  on  earth.  Let  the 
frame  of  your  hearts  be  joyous. 
Exulting  and  triumphant,  worshipping 
Him  here,  you  shall  be  brought  to 
worship  Him  for  evermore  in  heaven 
above. — Charles  Simeon,  M.A. 

Ver.  7.  Material  Angels. — The 
Hebrew  words  for  "  angels "  and 
"  spirits "  (Psalm  civ.  4)  have  double 
meanings ;  the  former  denoting  also 
messengers,,  the  latter  "  winds."  The 
psalmist  thought  of  those  subtle  but 
powerful  agents,  wind  and  fire,  as 
created  by  God,  and  employed  to  execute 
His  will.  And  in  perfect  accordance 
with  the  spirit  of  the  psalmist,  the 
verse  is  applied  here  to  angels,  whose 
inferiority  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
indicated  by  the  fact  that  they  are 
ranked  as  messengers  with  these  sub- 
ordinate physical  agencies.  Sir  Harry 
Vane  has  this  quaint  remark,  "As 
man  in  his  bodily  state  was  made  dust 
of  the  ground,  so  the  angels  were  made 
a  flame  of  fire  in  their  natural  con- 
stitution." "  The  force  of  the  passage 
lies  in  the  vividness  with  which  it 
presents  the  thought  of  the  Most  High 
served  by  angels  who  *  at  His  bidding 
speed,'  untmng  as  the  wind,  subtle  as 
the  fire." 

Angels. 

L  The  nature  of  angels. — Spirits. 

11.  The    Lord    of    angels.—"  Who 


maketh,"   etc.     What   must  His   own 
spirituality  be  who  maketh  spirit? 

111.  The  ministry  of  angels. — 
1.  Their  office.  "  Ministers."  2.  Their 
activity  or  zeal.  "  A  flaming  fire." 
3.  Their  dependence.  Mads  ministers. 
— G.  Rogers. 

The  Psalmisfs  Figures.  —  "Who 
maketh  His  angels  'into'  winds.  His 
ministers  'into'  flaming  fire"  (Ps.  civ.  4). 
It  is  a  poet  who  writes.  His  spirit,  at 
the  moment  that  we  Hsten  to  him, 
is  in  one  of  its  loftiest  moods.  His 
language  is  by  no  means  intended  to 
be  strictly  scientific  or  tamely  prosaic. 
It  glances,  representatively,  at  the 
phenomena  of  storms,  and  especially 
of  thunder-storms,  which  have  always 
excited  among  men  a  profoundly  ethical 
interest.  The  rapidity  of  movement 
in  the  perturbed  elements,  the  fury  of 
the  gale  rising  into  the  hurricane  or 
the  tornado,  the  lurid  grandeur  of  the 
flashes  as  they  fitfully  illumine  the 
over-arching  darkness,  strike  into  an 
attitude  of  solemn  and  religious  awe 
every  unsophisticated  spirit.  The 
psalmist  spoke  as  a  true  hierophant  of 
nature,  and  of  human  nature,  when 
he  assumed  that  in  these  storms  there 
is  the  presence  and  agency  of  God. 
And  not  His  sohtary  presence  and 
agency  alone.  He  is  surrounded  with 
His  spiritual  attendants.  And  when  He 
has  designs  of  retributive  providence 
to  fulfil,  He  sends  them  forth  on  His 
errands,  investing  them  for  the  occasion 
with  what  phenomena  may  be  befitting 
— the  phenomena  of  the  hurricane,  the 
thunder,  or  the  gleaming  bolts  of  fire. 
That  is,  "  He  makes  His  angels  tem- 
pests, His  ministers  a  flame  of  fire." 
When  we  gaze  on  the  storm -drift,  and 
feel  awed  by  the  flashes  that  leap  out 
from  the  darkness,  lo,  God's  ministers 
are  there  !  His  servants  are  working 
there  ! — J.  Morison,  D.D. 

Ver.  8.  The Son^sKingdomis Spiritual. 
— To  convince  men  of  this  was  the 
apparently  unsuccessful  endeavour  ,of 
our  Lord's  public  teaching,  but  more 
especially  of  His  esoteric  teaching  of 

143 


CHAP.   I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


His  disciples.  The  keynote  of  His 
kingdom  was  "  righteousness."  The 
force  of  His  kingdom  was  moral  good- 
ness; and  the  triumphs  of  His  kingdom 
were  triumphs  over  moral  evil.  His 
dealings  with  physical  and  material 
evils  were  strictly  illustrative  of  His 
true  work.  His  kingship  and  kingdom 
are  indicated  in  His  answer  to  Pilate  : 
"  To  this  end  have  I  been  born,  and  to 
this  end  am  I  come  into  the  world, 
that  I  should  bear  witness  unto  the 
truth.  Every  one  that  is  of  the  truth 
heareth  My  voice "  (John  xviii.  37). 
Kighteousness  belongs  to  character. 
To  work  righteousness  is  to  work  in 
man's  moral  and  spiritual  nature.  The 
kingdom  of  a  son  is  a  kingdom  of 
obediences,  submissions,  and  services, 
and  these  are  things  of  character — 
spiritual  things.  ( 1 )  The  Son's  kingdom 
is    a    kingdom     of     spiritual    beings. 

(2)  The  Son's  rule  is  a  spiritual  imle. 

(3)  The  Son's  aim  is  a  spiritual 
aim.  (4)  The  Son's  acceptance  with 
the  Father  is  based  on  His  spiritual 
work  of  "  bringing  sons  unto  glory." 
But  the  redemptive,  regenerative,  re- 
storative, and  sanctifying  work  which 
the  Son  does  in  souls  will  be  sure  to 
reach  out  its  influence  so  as  to  embrace 
the  body  and  the  earthly  relations. 
The  spiritual  proves  to  be  the  all- 
inclusive.  "  The  kingdom  of  God  is 
within  you."  Then  it  is  you,  wherever 
you  may  be  found,  and  in  whatever 
relations  you  stand. 

Ver.  10.  The  Quotation f7'om Psalm cii, 
— If  the  writer  had  deemed  it  necessary 
to  account  for  the  use  that  he  makes 
of  the  passage,  he  might  have  unfolded 
his  idea  in  some  such  manner  as  the 
following :  "  And  in  truth,  since  it 
is  the  Son,  who,  as  we  have  seen, 
is  the  manifestive  effulgence  of  the 
Father's  glory,  and  the  manifestive 
impress  of  the  Father's  hidden  sub- 
stance ;  and  since,  consequently,  it  is 
the  Son,  who,  in  manifestation  of  the 
Father,  acted  in  the  creation  of  the 
universe,  and  still  acts  in  the  main- 
tenance of  all  things  by  the  word  of 
His  power, — the  grand  words  of  the 

144 


102nd  Psalm  are  truly  and  admirably 
descriptive  of  His  super-angelic  glory." 
We  need  to  divest  our  minds  of  the 
stiff  artificialities  of  logic  which  we  are 
too  apt  to  bring  with  us  when  we  come 
to  the  unsophisticated  representations 
of  Scripture. — /.  M orison,  D.D. 

Vers.  10,  11.  The  Agency  of  the  Divine 
Son    in    Nature. — The   writer   sees    a 
distinct  reference  to  the  Second  Person 
of  the  Divine  Trinity  in  the  allusion  of 
the  psalmist.     But  this   must  involve 
a  Christian  reading  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment   Scriptures,    as  it  would  be  im- 
possible to  prove  that  the  Jews  ever 
thought  of  their  expected  Messiah  as 
the  Second  Person  of  a  Divine  Trinity. 
Indeed,    so    intense    was    the    Jewish 
jealousy   of  their   nation's  truth — the 
unity  of  God — that  it  is  not  conceivable 
that  they  ever  accepted  any  formulated 
doctrine  of  a  Trinity  of  Persons  in  the 
Godhead.      We    may   find    intimations 
of  the  threefoldness  of  God  in  the  Old 
Testament,  but  it  is  important  that  we 
should   recognise    the   doctrine   of   the 
Trinity   as   a    Christian   creation.     It 
would  seem  to  have  been  a  prevailing 
thought  of  the  age  of  the  apostles,  that 
the  Divine  Son  was  the  agent  in  the 
creation  of  the  world  ;  for  Philo  repre- 
sents his  Logos  to  have  been  the  instru  - 
ment   in    creation.     And   the    apostle 
Paul   (Col.    i.    15,   16)  makes   an   im- 
portant point  of  this  relation  :  "  Who 
is  the  image  of  the  invisible  God,  the 
first-born  of  all  creation  :  for  in  Him 
were  all  things  created,  in  the  heavens 
and  upon  the  earth,  things  visible  and 
things    invisible,    whether  thrones,    or 
dominions,  or  principalities,  or  powers  : 
all  things  have  been  created  through 
Him,  and  unto  Him  :  and  He  is  before 
all   things,    and    in    Him    all    things 
consist."      We    have    to    be    equally 
jealous  of  the  two  truths,  that  of  the 
Divine   Unity  and  that  of  the  Divine 
Trinity.     We  have  to  watch  carefully 
lest   Tritheism    should    get   into    our 
conceptions,  under  some  subtle   guise. 
Relative  to  the  material  world  we  may 
think  in  this  way  :  We  may  associate 
God  the  Father  with  the  design  of  it ; 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   T. 


God  the  Son  with  the  execution  of  the 
design ;  God  the  Spirit  with  the 
quickening  of  the  Hfe  in  it,  which  was 
a  part  of  the  design.  Or  it  may  be 
put  in  this  way  :  God,  the  one,  is  the 
Creator  of  all  things.  But  when  we 
think  of  the  design  of  creation,  it  is 
God  absolute  we  think  of.  When  we 
think  of  earth  actually  taking  shape, 
it  is  God  acting  in  the  sense-sphere  we 
think  of.  When  we  think  of  that 
unseen,  mysterious  thing  as  associated 
with  material  beings,  it  is  the  Spirit- 
God,  breathing  life,  that  we  think  of. 
The  distinctions  in  God  are  in  our 
apprehension  of  Him,  whatever  else 
they  are. 

Ver.  12.  His  Unfailing  Years. — "And 
thy  years  shall  not  fail."  We  are  asked 
to  adore  and  to  trust  this  changeless 
One.  But  can  we  ?  Is  He  not  too 
unlike  ourselves  ?  Must  there  not  be 
some  congeniality  of  nature,  some  touch 
in  Him  of  oneness  with  us  before  we 
can  enter  into  such  a  fellowship  of  love 
and  trust  ?  Yes,  we  do  crave  a  real 
sympathy  ;  and  a  real  sympathy  can 
only  be  felt  by  one  who  is  truly,  or  who 
has  been  truly,  in  the  human  conditions. 
As  we  are  constituted,  if  we  knew 
God  simply  as  abstract  Deity,  as 
infinite  Being,    with  Divine  qualities, 


but  without  the  living,  breathing, 
human  presentation  of  them — if  He 
were  God  indeed,  but  not  "  God  mani- 
fest in  the  flesh,"  He  would  not  be  to 
us  so  fully  and  perfectly,  and  so  much 
to  our  hearts'  satisfaction,  "  the  Lord 
our  God."  We  need  some  one  unlike 
ourselves — some  one  who  does  not 
change  or  pass  away  ;  and  yet  we  need 
some  one  like  ourselves,  with  all  our 
best  affections,  our  greatest  qualities, 
perfectly  realised  and  enshrined  in 
himself.  This  we  have  in  Jesus  of 
Nazareth,  and  alone  in  Him.  Who  is 
it  whose  "  years  "  shall  not  fail  ?  He 
who  was  born  into  a  human  home, 
who  grew  up  from  childhood  to  man- 
hood like  us — He  it  is  whom  we  are 
asked  to  trust.  Here  is  our  refuge, 
and  we  find  a  perfect  security  in  it — a 
security  which  we  need  at  all  times 
as  mortal  and  as  sinful  creatures,  but 
of  which  we  feel  the  need  especially 
when,  by  common  consent,  we  make  a 
barrier  in  our  thought  between  the 
years.  Where  can  a  fountain  of  con- 
solation be  found  for  human  weariness, 
distress,  solicitude,  sorrow,  if  not  in 
Him  who  sounded  all  depths  of  mortal 
misery,  travelled  through  the  wide 
expanse  of  all  human  need,  died  our 
human  death,  and  rose  victor  for  us 
in  life  immortal  ? — Alex.  Raleigh,  D.D, 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  I. 


Ver.  1.  Occasional  Revelations. — There  are 
days  on  which  the  sun  makes  the  clouds  his 
chariot,  and  travels  on  curtained  behind 
them.  Weary  of  shining  before  a  drowsy, 
thankless  world,  he  covers  the  glory  of  his 
face,  but  will  not  quite  take  away  the 
blessing  of  his  light ;  and  now  and  then,  as 
it  were  in  pity,  he  withdraws  the  veil  for  a 
moment,  and  looks  forth  to  assure  the  earth 
that  her  best  friend  is  still  watching  over 
her  in  the  heavens,  like  those  occasional 
visitations  by  which  the  Lord,  before  the 
birth  of  the  Saviour,  assured  mankind  that 
He  was  still  their  God. —  Giiesses  at  Truth. 

Ver.  2.  Christ  the  Smi. — Plutarch  tells  us 
that  when  Themistocles,  in  the  hour  of  his 
exile,  wished  to  be  reconciled  with  the  king 
of  the  Molossians,  whom  he  had  previously 
offended,  he  took  the  king's  s(Dn  in  his  arms, 
and  kneeled  down  before  the  household  gods. 


The  plea  was  successful ;  in  fact,  it  was  the 
only  one  the  Molossians  looked  upon  as  one 
not  to  be  refused,  and  so  the  philosopher 
found  a  refuge  among  them.  And  do  not 
we  come  in  this  way  when  we  approach  the 
Majesty  on  high  ?  We  take  hold  of  the 
King's  Son. 

Ver.  3.  Brightness  or  Effulgence. — The 
word  rendered  "  brightness  "  here  occurs  no- 
where else  in  the  New  Testament.  It  means, 
properly,  a  reflected  splendour,  or  the  light 
which  emanates  from  a  luminous  body.  The 
rays  or  beams  of  the  sun  are  its  "  bright- 
ness," that  by  which  the  sun  is  seen  and 
known.  The  sun  itself  we  do  not  see ;  the 
beams  which  flow  from  it  we  do  see.  The 
meaning  of  this  passage  is,  that  if  God  be 
represented  under  the  image  of  a  luminous 
body,  as  He  is  in  the  Scriptures  (see  Ps. 
Ixxxiv.  11 ;  Mai.   iv.  2),  then  Christ  is  the 

145 


CHAP.   I. 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


radiance  of  the  light,  the  brightness  of  that 
luminary  by  which  only  He  is  known.— 
Stuart. 

Vex.  11.  God  ever  the  same.— On  every 
Mohammedan  tombstone  the  inscription 
begins  with  the  words,  '•  He  remains."  This 
api'lies  to  God,  and  gives  sweet  comfort  to 
the  bereaved.  Friends  may  die,  fortune  tly 
away,  but  God  endures— He  remains. 

Contrast  of  the  Created  and  ths  Uncreated.— 
The  heavens  and  the  earth— those  who  know 
them  best  have  them  most,  for  they  know 
best  their  glory  ;  but  they  shall  all  wax  old 
as  doth  a  garment,  and  when  they  shall  have 
served  their  purpose  God  shall  fold  them  up 
and  lay  them  by,  and  as  a  vesture  shall  He 
change  them,  and  they  shall  be  clianged,  but 
He  is  the  same  for  ever  and  His  years  shall 
not  fail.  Why  should  they?  What  are 
years  to  God?  Time  did  not  make  Him. 
He  made  time,  and  can  unmake  it,  and  then 
it  will  be  eternity,  not  time,  and  a  thou- 
sand years  will  be  as  one  day,  and,  what  is 
more,  one  day  will  be  as  a  thousand  years. — 
C.  Kingsley. 

Ver.  14.  The  Jfinistry  of  Anr/els.—'' Are 
they  not  all  ministering  spirits,"  says  St. 
Paul,  "  sent  forth  to  minister  to  them  who 
shall  be  heirs  of  salvation  ?  "  In  this  passage 
we  are  plainly  taught  that  ministering  to  the 
saints  is  a  standing  employment  of  angels 
throughout  the  ages  of  time.  Accordingly 
they  are  exhibited  in  Jacob's  vision  of  a 
ladder  as  "  ascending  and  descending  "  from 
heaven  to  earth  and  from  earth  to  heaven 
continually  in  the  discharge  of  this  great 
duty.  According  to  this  declaration  also  we 
are  "furnished  by  the  Scriptures  with  numer- 
ous examples  of  their  actual  ministry  to  the 
children  of  God.  Thus  angels  delivered  Lot 
from  Sodom,  Jacob  from  Esau,  Daniel  from 
the  lions,  his  three  companions  from  the 
fiery  furnace,  Peter  from  Herod  and  the 
Jewish  Sanhedrim,  and  the  nation  of  the 
Israelites  successively  from  the  Egyptians, 
Canaanites,  and  Assyrians.  Thus  they  con- 
ducted Lot,  Abraham,  and  the  Israelites  in 
seasons  of  great  difficulty  and  danger  to 
places  and  circumstances  of  safety  and  peace. 
Thus  tliey  conducted  Gideon  to  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  Midianites,  Joseph  and  Mary  to 
Eg}pt,  Piiilip  to  the  eunuch,  and  Cornelius 
to  Peter,  to  the  knowledge  of  the  gospel 
through  him,  and  to  the  salvation  of  himself, 
his  family,  and  his  friends.  Thus  angels 
instructed  Abraham,  Joshua,  Gideon,  David, 
Elijah,  Daniel,  Zechariah  the  prophet,  Zach- 
ariah  the  father  of  John  the  Baptist,  the 
Virgin  Mary,  the  apostles,  and  their  fellow- 
disciples.  Thus  they  comforted  Jacob  at 
the  approach  of  Esau,  Daniel  in  his  peculiar 
sorrows  and  dangers,  Zechariah  in  the  suffer- 
ings of  his  nation,  Joseph  and  Mary  in  their 


perplexities,  Christ  in  His  agony,  the  apostles 
and  their  companions  after  His  resurrection, 
Paul  immediately  before  his  shipwreck,  and 
the  Church  universally  by  the  testimony  and 
instruction  given  in  the  Revelation  of  St. 
John.— I>n-ight, 

Two  Kinds  of  Angels.— The  Rabbins  have  a 
beautiful  bit  of  teaching  buried  among  their 
rubbish  about  angels.  They  say  that  there 
are  two  kinds  of  angels— the  angels  of 
service  and  the  angels  of  praise,  of  which 
two  orders  the  latter  is  the  higher,  and  that 
no  angel  in  it  praises  God  twice,  but  having 
once  lifted  up  his  voice  in  the  psalm  of 
heaven,  then  perishes  and  ceases  to  be.  He 
has  perfected  his  being ;  he  has  reached  the 
height  of  his  greatness ;  he  has  done  what  he 
was  made  for :  let  him  fade  away.  The  garb 
of  legend  is  mean  enough,  but  the  thought 
it  embodies  is  that  ever  true  and  solemn  one 
without  which  life  is  nought :  "  Man's  chief 
end  is  to  glorify  God."— ^.  Maclaren,  B.D. 

Angels.— QuTions  and  extravagant  notions 
have  been  entertained  about  the  angels.  The 
Rabbins  taught  the  strangest  things.  They 
say  that  the  ministry  of  angels  may  be 
divided  into  two  parts— that  of  praising  God, 
and  that  of  executing  His  behests.  In 
regard  to  the  praising  there  are  six  hundred 
and  ninety-four  thousand  myriads  who 
daily  praise  the  name  of  God.  From  sun- 
rise to  sundown  they  say,  "Holy,  holy, 
holy,"  and  from  sundown  to  sunrise, 
"  Blessed  be  the  Glory  of  God  from  Plis 
place."  Every  day  ministering  angels  are 
created,  whose  apparent  destiny  is  only  to 
raise  the  praises  of  God,  after  which  they 
pass  away  into  the  fiery  stream  whence  they 
originally  issued.  A  new  angel  is  created 
to  execute  every  behest  of  God,  and  then  he 
passes  away.  It  is  characteristic  of  the 
Oriental,  and  especially  of  the  Semitic 
mind,  to  see  in  every  event,  even  the  most 
trivial,  a  direct  supernatural  interference, 
wrought  by  the  innumerable  unseen  ministers 
— both  good  and  evil— of  the  Divine  will. 

The  Sight  of  the  Angels.— ks  it  is  given  us 
in  the  night  of  this  world  to  behold  the 
heavens  studded  with  stars,  great,  glorious, 
and  beautiful,  in  like  manner  has  Scripture 
opened  to  our  view  a  sight  of  the  blessed 
angels.  They  appear  as  stars  around  us, 
but  no  unconcerned  spectators  in  their  silent 
watches.  Michael,  "  who  is  as  God  " ;  Gabriel, 
"the  strength  of  God";  Raphael,  "the 
healing  of  God  "  (so  their  names  signify). 
They  are  ministering  spirits  sent  by  Him, 
shadows  of  His  presence.  He  has  revealed 
to  us  their  deep  concern  for  our  welfare,  their 
active  ministrations  about  us  day  and  night, 
and  especially  their  peculiar  regard  for 
those  who  are  of  a  meek  spirit,  and  despised 
of  the  world.  What  a  dignity  does  this  shed 
on  our  daily  life  {—Isaac  Williams,  B.D. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.    I. 


Every  Man's  Angels.  —In  a  Turkish  allegory 
every  man  is  said  to  have  two  angels — one 
on  his  right  shoulder,  and  another  on  his 
left.  When  he  does  anything  good,  the 
angel  on  the  right  shoulder  w^rites  it  down, 
and  seals  it,  because  what  is  done  is  done  for 
ever.  When  he  does  evil,  the  angel  on  the 
left  shoulder  writes  it  down.  He  waits  till 
midnight.  If  before  that  time  the  man  bows 
his  head  and  exclaims,  "  Gracious  Allah  ! 
I  have  sinned ;  forgive  me  I "  the  angel  rubs 
it  out ;  and  if  not  at  midnight,  he  seals  it,  and 
the  angel  upon  the  right  shoulder  weeps. 

The  Aotgels  of  the  Grass. — The  Talmud 
says,  "  There  is  not  a  thing  in  the  world, 
not  even  a  tiny  blade  of  grass,  over  which 
there  is  not  an  angel  set." 

Ministering  Angels. — 
They  are  evermore   around   us,  though   un- 
seen to  mortal  sight. 
In  the  golden  hour  of  sunshine  and  in  sor- 
row's starless  night. 
Deepening  earth's  most  sacred  pleasures  with 

the  peace  of  sin  forgiven. 
Whispering  to  the  lonely  mourner  of  the 
painless  joys  of  heaven. 

Seeing  all  our  guilt  and  weakness,  looking 

down  with  piteous  eyes, 
For  the  foolish  things  we  cling  to  and  the 

heaven  that  we  despise  ; 
They  have  been  our   guardian  angels  since 

the  weary  world  began. 
And  they  still  are  watching  o'er  us  for  His 

sake  who  died  for  man. — Anon. 

The  Angel-hel])er . — How  sentimental  ideas 
of  angels  cling  about  us,  and  may  helpfully 
cling,  is  illustrated  in  the  story  of  one 
Theodorus,  a  martyr  who  was  put  to  extreme 
torments  by  Julian  the  Apostate,  and  dis- 
missed again  by  him  when  he  saw  him  un- 
conquerable. Rufinus,  in  his  history,  says 
that  he  met  with  this  martyr  a  long  time 
after  his  trial,  and  asked  him  whether  the 
pains  he  felt  were  not  insufferable.  He 
answered  that  at  first  it  was  somewhat  griev- 
ous, but  after  a  while  there  seemed  to  stand 
by  him  a  young  man  in  white,  who  with  a 
soft  and  comfortable  handkerchief  wiped  off 
the  sweat  from  his  body  (which  through 
extreme  anguish  was  little  less  than  blood), 
and  bade  him  be  of  good  cheer,  insomuch  as 
then  it  was  rather  a  punishment  than  a 
pleasure  to  him  to  be  taken  off  the  rack. 
When  the  tormentors  had  done,  the  angel 
was  gone. 

Ministrant  Spirits. — Angels  are  "all," 
without  exception,  ministrant  spirits.  Their 
duties  are  ever  "  liturgical,"  never  lordly  or 
regal.  They  render  the  service  of  lieges  to 
the  Lord  of  the  universe,  and  are  busied  on 
the  footstool,  while  Jesus  sits  on  the  throne. 
Even    when    charged    with     their    highest 


behests,  they  but  help,  in  some  minor 
respects,  the  disciples  of  our  Lord.  They 
are  sent  forth  to  minister  ''for  them  " — that 
is,  "-for  their  benefit." — J.  Morison,  D.D. 

Heaven  a  Place  of  Universal  Ministry, — 
Dr.  George  Macdonald  makes  a  quaint 
character  in  Thomas  Wingfold,  Curate^ 
dreamily  figure  the  heavenly  state,  and, 
behold,  all  things  seem  to  go  on  there  even 
as  here  on  earth.  There  is  buying  and 
selling,  but  there  is  no  getting  gain,  because 
every  one  has  learned  the  glory  of  "  minister- 
ing," and  so  each  one  just  serves  his  brother 
— each  one  hoping  for  nothing  again,  each 
one  getting  everything  by  getting  the  service 
of  his  brother.  Could  there  be  a  sublimer, 
or  a  more  enchanting  conception  of  heaven, 
the  home  of  God,  of  whom  we  may  reverently 
think  as  the  "  infinite  Angel,"  the  glorious 
and  eternal  Ministrant,  who  ennobles 
ministry  for  all  His  creatures  by  His  own 
unceasing  service  ? 

Ver.  14.  Angel-service. — Service  is  not 
an  incident  in  the  history  of  angels  ;  it  is 
their  whole  history.  This  category  suits 
the  nature  of  angels  so  far  as  we  have  the 
means  of  knowing  it.  They  are  associated 
with  the  elements  and  powers  of  nature — 
are  these  under  another  name.  They  are 
changeable  in  form,  appearing  now  as  winds, 
now  as  fire.  They  are  perishable,  transient, 
as  the  pestilence  and  the  storm,  as  tongues  of 
flame,  or  the  clouds,  or  the  dew.  They  are  one 
and  many  in  turn :  the  one  splitting  up  into 
the  many,  and  the  many  recombining  into 
one.  They  are  impersonal,  or  imperfectly 
personal,  lacking  will  and  self-conscious- 
ness. Thinking,  deliberating,  resolving,  is 
not  their  affair,  but  execution  :  "  Ye  ministers 
of  His,  that  do  His  pleasure."  They  are 
incapacitated  for  rule  by  the  simplicity  of 
their  nature.  The  angel-princes  cannot  take 
a  wide  survey  of  a  nation's  character  and 
desert,  like  the  prophets.  They  are  blind 
partisans,  mere  personifications  of  national 
spirit.  As  a  matter  of  course  each  angel- 
prince  takes  his  nation's  side  in  a  quarrel. 
A  prince  of  Persia  is  on  the  side  of  Persia, 
and  the  prince  of  Greece  on  the  side  of 
Greece.  A  human  will  is  the  meeting-place 
of  many  forces  brought  into  harmony  ;  an 
angelic  will  is  a  single  force  moving  in  a 
straight  line  towards  a  point.  Angels  are 
mere  manifestations  or  expressions  of  the 
will  of  God.  To  impute  to  them  dominion 
were  to  infringe  on  the  monarchy  of  God, 
it  were  to  reinstate  paganism.  Angel- 
worship  is  nature-worship  under  another 
name,  not  improved  by  the  change  of 
name.  No  wonder  the  author  of  this  epistle 
is  so  careful  to  connect  angels  with  the  idea 
of  service.  It  is  his  protest  against  the 
angelolatry  which  had  crept  into  Israel  from 
Persian  sources. — A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D. 

U7 


CHAP.   II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS^. 


Ana  el- succour.—  'I'liey  for  us  fight,  they  watch  and  duly  ward, 

How  oft  do  they  their  silver  bowers  leave,  And  their  bright  squadrons  round  about  us 
And  come  to  succour  us  who  succour  want  1  plant,  ,  .       -  -, 

How  oft  do  they  with  golden  pinions  cleave  And  all  for  love  and  nothing  for  reward. 

The  flitting  skies  like  flying  pursuivant,  Oh  !  why  should  heavenly  God  for  men  have 
Against  foul  fiends  to  aid  us  militant !  such  regard  1—S])enser. 


\ 


CHAPTER  II. 
THE  HIGHER  RESPONSIBILITIES   OF  HIGHER  REVELATIONS 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

The  rhetorical  character  of  the  epistle  is  indicated  in  the  hortatory  passages  that  are  so 
freely  inserted.  The  exhortation  here,  vers.  1-4,  introduces  the  reason  for  the  peril  of 
apostasy.  It  was  the  temporary  humiliation  of  the  Son  which,  unless  its  purpose  was 
clearly  understood,  might  so  easily  be  misapprehended,  and  lead  to  a  denial  of  His 
pre-eminence  and  Divine  dignity.  This  brings  the  writer  again  to  his  argument.  The 
humiliation  of  the  Son  was  a  necessity  for  the  carrying  through  and  perfecting  of  His 
high-priestly  work. 

Ver.  1.  Therefore. — Because  such  superiority  belongs  to  Christ  as  the  Author  and  Head 
of  the  new  dispensation.  It  is  an  Eastern  idea  to  honour  an  invited  guest  by  sending  a 
servant  of  the  highest  rank  to  call  him  to  the  feast.  Meeting  this  idea,  the  writer  sets  forth  T^ 
the  supreme  dignity  of  Christ  as  giving  special  claim  to  the  invitation  He  brings.  More 
earnest  heed.— Scripture  conceives" of  attention  as  an  effort  of  will,  with  a  view  to  the 
active  obedience  of  what  is  heard.  Diligent  application  of  the  mind.  Intelligent  under- 
standing is  the  proper  basis  of  faith.  We  have  heard.  —Distinct  reference  to  the  gospel 
as  the  Divine  revelation  made  to  2is.  Slip.— R.V.  "lest  haply  we  drift  away  from  them." 
The  word  TrapappvQ/xep  has  two  meanings:  (1)  to  fall,  stumble,  perish;  (2)  to  suffer  to  flow 
from  memory,  to  forget.  The  Greek  usage,  as  collected  by  Wetstein,  is,  ♦'  to  flow  as 
liquids."  Best  translation  is,  "lest  we  should  glide  by  them."  Not  "run  out  as  leaky 
vessels,"  a  rendering  first  given  in  the  Genevan  Testament,  1557  A.D.  "  Unless  the  mind 
be  held  closely  to  the  words  that  God  has  spoken,  it  must  drift  away  from  them,  and  from 
the  salvation  which  they  promise." 

Ver.  2.  Word. — Reference  is  to  the  law  given  on  Sinai,  and  said  to  have  been  given  by 
"the  disposition  of  angels."  See  Acts  vii.  53;  Gal.  iii.  10;  Deut.  xxxiii.  2.  Was  stedfast. 
—Proved  steadfast,  its  sanctions  being  fully  upheld.  Transgression.— The  figure  in  this 
word  is  lost  in  the  English  translation.  It  is  "walking  alongside  of,"  and  so,  not  walking 
wj  the  path.  The  reference  is  to  positive,  intentional  sin.  Disobedience. — The  figure  in 
this  word  is  "  hearing "  :  "  to  hear  beside " ;  so  "  to  hear  by  stealth,"  or  inaccurately. 
Moral  heedlessness.  The  reference  is  to  negative  sin,  or  neglect.  Recompence  of  reward. — 
Pay  for  conduct.  Reward  of  retributive  justice,  including  punishments.  A  wide  use  of 
the  term  "  reward." 

Ver.  3.  We  escape. — We  to  whom  the  revelation  ministered  by  the  Son  has  come.  Escape 
the  judgment  that  must  fall  on  those  more  highly  privileged.  Great  salvation. — Proper 
word  for  the  mission  of  the  Son.  The  Jewish  revelation  maybe  called  a  "government," 
or  a  "  regulation " ;  it  was  not  evidently  a  salvation.  The  greatness  is  especially  seen  in 
its  having  a  Divine  Administrator.  By  the  Lord. — Jesus  Himself.  Compare  directly  in  the 
Son,  and  indirectly  by  the  medium  of  angels  and  Moses.  Confirmed. — Ratified.  Them 
that  heard. — Apostles  and  first  disciples,  of  whom  the  writer  of  this  epistle  was  not  one. 
The  more  unquestionable  the  gospel  message  was,  the  greater  was  the  responsibility  of 
those  to  whom  it  came. 

Ver.  4.  Signs. — Tokens  or  indications  of  the  near  presence  of  God  ;  a  seal  of  power  put 
on  the  person  who  accomplishes  the  miracle.  Wonders. — Astonishing  events,  which  the 
beholder  can  reduce  to  no  law  with  which  he  is  acquainted.  Christ's  miracles  are  never 
called  "  wonders  "  only.  Divers  miracles. — Or  manifold  powers.  Principal  reference  is 
intended  to  the  miracles  and  spiritual  endowments  of  the  early  Church.  "  Wonders," 
indicating  the  effect  on  bystanders ;  "  signs,"  indicating  that  they  had  a  moral  purpose  ; 
"  miracles,"  or  proofs  of  the  presence  and  working  of  a  Divine  power  ;  "  gifts,"  endowments 
for  use,  such  as  tongues,  and  power  to  interpret.  The  word  "gifts"  should  be 
"  distributions." 

148 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  CttAl?.  li. 


Ver.  5.  "World  to  come. — The  new  dispensation.  Rabbinical  teaching  was  divided  under 
two  heads  :  (1)  liaolain  hazzeh  (the  present  world),  and  (2)  haolcim  hahbd  (the  world  to 
come).  The  period  referred  to  in  this  verse  is  that  which  succeeds  the  exaltation  of  Christ. 
But  the  word  used  by  the  writer  strictly  means  "  the  inhabited  earth." 

Ver.  6.  The  writer  brings  this  quotation  from  the  8th  Psalm  to  show  that  man  is 
recognised  as  inferior  to  angels.  This  he  admits  must  apply  to  Jesus,  the  Head  of  the  new 
dispensation.  He  has  therefore  to  meet  the  Jewish  objection,  that  Judaism,  ministered 
by  angels,  must  be  a  higher  dispensation  than  Christianity,  which  was  ministered  by  a  man. 
Notice  that  this  writer  does  not  affirm  the  Davidic  authorship  of  the  psalm.  The  quotation 
is  taken  from  the  LXX.  Version.  The  writer's  thought  may  be  thus  given  :  "  According 
to  Scripture  the  world  is  subjected  to  man,  not  to  angels.  We  ought  therefore  to  cherish 
high  notions  of  man's  dignity.  Man  has  not,  however,  yet  gained  his  full  sovereignty. 
There  is  hope  for  him  now ;  for  we  do  see  the  "  Man  Christ  Jesus,"  though  humiliated  for 
a  purpose,  crowned  with  glory  and  honour,  and  constituted  the  Head  of  the  race.  In  Him 
and  through  Him  man  will  reach  His  full  dignity."  "  There  is  One  in  whom  the  Divine 
purpose  is  fulfilled  in  all  its  parts." 

Ver.  9.  To  understand  this  verse  we  must  keep  in  view  the  Jewish  objection  which  the 
writer  is  combating.  It  may  be  stated  thus :  "  The  Christ  whom  you  are  so  greatly 
exalting  was  only  a  man,  and  suffered  an  ignominious  death.'*  He  replies :  "  There  was  a 
necessity  for  that  humiliation  to  share  our  humanity,  and  a  necessity  for  that  experience  of 
death.  And  on  the  ground  of  consenting  to  that  humiliation,  and  suffering  that  death.  He 
is  crowned  with  glory  and  honour."  Compare  St.  Paul's  glorying  in  "  Christ  and  Him 
crucified."  Taste  death. — Pa  sing  through  a  complete  human  experience.  For  every  man. — 
In  order  to  gaia  redemptive  power  on  every  man. 

Ver.  10.  Became  Him. — God,  rhetorically  described  in  the  next  clause.  Many  sons. — 
An  assertion  of  the  relation  of  man  to  God  which  Christ  the  Son  fully  represents.  Captain. — 
Better,  "  Bringer-on."  Christ  is  the  living  Leader  of  souls.  "  Author "  is  a  suitable  term. 
Perfect. — In  the  sense  of  "perfectly  competent."  But  two  thoughts  seem  to  be  included  : 
(1)  perfectly  fitted  for  His  work  of  bringing  on;  (2)  perfect,  as  crowned  with  glory  and 
YionoMr,  for  reward.  It  became  God  to  give  the  reward.  Sufferings. — The  characteristic  lot 
of  humanity. 

Ver.  11.  Sanctifieth. — The  LXX.  and  the  New  Testament  use  of  the  word  d7tdfw  is  the 
selecting  out,  and  adopting  for,  God's  service.  It  suggests  the  moral  side  of  the 
Redeemer's  work.  All  of  one. — Of  one  and  the  same  human  nature.  If  Christ  was  to 
exert  moral  power  on  us,  manifestly  He  must  be  a  moral  being  in  our  sphere,  and  familiar 
with  our  experience.  Brethren. — Real  brother-men.  Tiie  full  value  of  our  Lord's  humanity 
in  relation  to  His  complete  redemptive  work  is  only  now  coming  into  the  full  view  of 
theologians. 

Ver.  14.  Partakers  of  flesh  and  blood This  opposes  the  errors  of  the  Docetas.    The  devil. 

— A  deadly  power  of  leading  men  into  sin  is  ascribed  to  the  devil  (see  John  xvi.  11  ; 
Eph.  ii.  2,  vi.  12  ;  1  Cor.  ii.  15  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  14).  Stuart  explains,  "  To  render  null  the  deadly 
power  of  Satan  is  to  prevent  the  effects  of  it,  as  bringing  men  to  incur  the  sentence  of 
spiritual  death." 

Ver.  15.  Fear  of  death. — Not  physical  dying,  but  the  sin-sense,  which  darkens  the  future. 

Ver.  16.— R.V.  "  For  verily  not  of  angels  doth  He  take  hold,  but  He  taketh  hold  of  the 
seed  of  Abraham."    Does  not  redemptively  interest  Himself  in  angels. 

Ver.  17.  Behoved  Him — It  was  as  becoming  as  it  certainly  was  necessary.  High  priest. — 
This  allusion  rhetorically  introduces  the  writers  next  comparison.  The  great  point 
impressed  in  this  chapter  is,  that  the  Son  accomplishes  His  redemptive  work  largely  through 
the  power  of  sympathy  ;  to  secure  that  sympathy  He  must  have  fellow-experience  with  man 
in  His  sufferings  and  death. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  1—4. 

Three  Great  Things. — A  remarkable  feature  of  this  epistle  is  the  frequent 
introduction  of  hortatory  passages,  which  remind  us  of  the  preacher  rather 
than  of  the  letter- writer.  Those  passages  reveal  the  distinctly  practical  object 
of  the  writer.  He  is  concerned  with  doctrine  for  the  sake  of  its  practical  y 
appUcations  to  life  and  conduct,  rather  than  for  the  sake  of  its  theological  J 
interests.  Ever  before  his  mind  is  the  danger  of  the  Jewish  Christians  relapsing 
from  their  Christian  profession  into  their  old  and  formal  Judaism.  And  in 
dealing  with  them  he  does  not  wholly  trust  to  argument  as  an  appeal  to  mind  ; 
he  uses  urgent  persuasions — the  personal  force — as  an  appeal  to  heart.     "  Out 

149 


CHAP.  It.  HOmLETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


of  the  heart  are  the  issues  of  life."     But  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  the 

-      ■        "    "  '  *   '  and   are 


old  covenant.  These  are  representative  of  the  judgments  which  come  on  those 
who  are  unfaithful  to  God's  covenant  with  man.  To  that  covenant  all  ot  us 
are  found  unfaithful,  and  all  of  us  stand  exposed  to  judgment.  2.  Neglect 
implies  that  a  way  of  rescue  has  been  provided.  What  was  the  way  under  the 
old  covenant?  IllustriiiecL^y. the  arrangement  of  cities  of  refuge.  The  way 
of  bringing  sacrifice;  sin,  trespass,  burnt  offerings.  These  foreshadow  and 
represent  tlie  spiritual  sacrifice  which  Christ  offered,  and  which  we  offer  —"  our 
bodies  a  living  sacrifice."  3.  Neglect  further  implies  some  preoccupation 
hindering  attention.  The  preoccupation  of  some  mistaken  views.  What  would 
le.id  an  old  Jew  to  neglect  sacrificing?  4.  The  greatness  of  the  salvation 
implies  a  serious  increase  of  peril  for  the  negligent.  That  older  salvation  from 
ceremonial  penalty  was  a  great  salvation.  It  was  God's  own  intervention. 
Now  the  salvation  is  from  sins,  and  involves  the  sacrifice  of  God's  own  Son. 
5.  The  tone  of  the  question  "  How  escape  ?  "  implies  the  hopelessness_qf  jfinding 
any  other  rescue.  As  addressed  to  the  Jewish  Christians,  it  pleads  in  this  way  : 
You  cannot  fall  back  on  the  old,  now  you  know  its  essentially  preparatory 
character,  and  its  limited,  ceremonial  range.  And  certainly  you  cannot  fall 
away  to  idolatrous  schemes,  seeing  that  your  old  religion  was  so  decided  an 
advance  upon  them.     Once  advance,  you  can  never  go  back. 

I.  The  great  salvation. — A  Divine  intervention  for  man's  relief  and  help. 
God's  constant  work  is  redeeming ;  that  work,  at  its  highest  level,  is  redemption 
from  sin.  Think  of  the  greatness  of  this  salvation.  1.  In  its  sphere — sin's 
penalty  and  power.  2.  In  its  range— all  humanity.  3.  In  its  agency — 
personal  surrender  and  self-sacrifice.  These  are  not,  however,  immediately 
present  to  the  writer's  mind.  He  sees  the  greatness  of  the  salvation  (1)  in 
the  Agent  working  it  out ;  (2)  in  the  agents  conveying  the  report  of  it ;  (3)  in 
the  miracles  supporting  the  agents. 

II.  The  great  responsibility.— "  How  shall  we  escape?"  The  plea  is  based 
on  the  universally  working  law  that  "  privilege  brin^sresponsibility."  This  is 
one  of  the  truths  of  fact  that  were  prominent  in  ourTCord's  teaching.  But  it 
is  very  easy  for  men  to  say,  "Then  we  are  better  off  without  the  privilege,  and 
may  envy  the  heathen  who  have  none."  We  must  not  think  thus,  because  our 
glory  and  our  joy  lie  in  advance,  in  progress.  Animals  make  no  progress. 
Birds_build  their  nests  to-day  just  as  they  built  them  in  the  trees  of  Paradise. 

<^For  a  man  to  hear  the  gospel  is  for  him  to  become  another  man.  ./  He  can  never 
be  the  same  again.  He  has  stepped  up  into^ .privilege.  He  must  be  judged  in 
the  light  of  the  new  knowledge. 

III.  The  great  condemnation. — "If  we  neglect."  Apply  to  the  Jewish 
Christians,  who  were  not  rejecting,  only  neglecting.  In  some  audiences  it  might 
be  necessary  to  plead  that  Christ  was  being  rejected.  In  ordinary  congregations 
the  danger  is  not  rejection,  but  neglect.  There  is  :  1.  The  neglect  of  indifference. 
2.  The  neglect  of  preoccupation.  3.  The  neglect  of  shaken  confidence. 
Rejection  may  be  the  sin  of  the  one  here  and  there.  Neglect  is  the  sin  of  the 
many.  But  is  it  reasonable  to  make  so  much  depend  on  simple  neglect  ?  It  is, 
if  you  recognise  what  moral  character  is  shown  in  rejection,  and  what  in  neglect. 
Neglect  IS  more  hopeless  than  rejection.  Those  who  reject  may  think  again. 
Those  who  neglect  let  the  opportunity  slip  by.  For  those  who  neglect  there 
is  the  misery  of  having  missed  eternal  life  because  they  would  make  no  effort. 

150 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.    11. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES, 


Ver.  1.  ^'' Let  slip" — You  know  how 
it  is  when  water  is  poured  into  a  leaky 
bucket  :  it  runs  out  quickly ;  it  is  very 
soon  all  gone.  When  we  have  bad 
memories,  our  minds  are  such  a  leaky 
vessel ;  the  things  that  we  are  taught 
run  away  from  us  as  water  runs 
through  a  sieve.  And  so  this  lesson 
about  holding  fast  is  a  very  important 
one ;  it  is  the  same  duty  that  the 
angel  in  the  Apocalypse  urges  on  the 
Christians  of  the  "  seven  Churches." — 
R.  Newton. 

Drifting. — Drifting  !  drifting  !  that 
is  the  precise  word.  The  boat  is 
unanchored.  It  is  at  the  moment  in 
a  quiet  place ;  but  by-and-by  the 
tide  ebbs  and  bears  it  in  its  bosom  on 
to  the  middle  of  the  current,  and  then 
it  is  carried  out  and  away,  and  perhaps, 
if  no  one  has  observed  its  motions, 
irrecoverably  lost. — Dr.  Tayler. 

Drifting  from  Chinst. — "  Lest  haply 
we  drift  away."  Those  who  delibe- 
rately renounce  their  Divine  hope  are 
few  ;  those  who  make  shipwreck  of  faith 
by  imperceptibly  getting  further  and 
further  away  are  many.  This  drifting 
away  is  possible  :  1.  Because  we  are 
not  always  moored  to  Christ  when  we 
are  brought  to  Him.  2.  Because 
there  are  powerful  adverse  currents 
which  tend  to  carry  us  from  the 
Saviour.  3.  Our  departure  from 
Christ  may  be  for  some  time  imper- 
ceptible. To  drift  from  Christ  is  to 
drift  to  ruin.  (1)  It  is  to  forsake  the 
only  refuge  for  sinful  men.  (2)  It  is 
to  disregard  the  supreme  claims  of 
Christ.  (3)  It  is  to  resist  the  grace 
that  has  brought  us  close  to  Him. 
Conclusion:  1.  If  we  are  moored  to 
Christ,  our  blessedness  consists  in  the 
maintenance  of  close  fellowship  with 
Him.  2.  Though  we  are  close  to 
Christ,  we  are  in  great  peril  until  we 
are  anchored  there.  3.  If  we  are 
drifting  away  from  Christ,  everything 
depends  on  our  returning  before  we 
get  further  off. — Charles  New, 


Drawn  on  to  the  Coral  Reefs. — In 
the  Southern  Seas  sailing  vessels,  when 
there  is  no  wind,  dare  not  approach 
the  islands  nearer  than  two  or  even 
three  miles.  Currents  constantly  flow 
towards  the  land,  and  they  insensibly 
act  upon  the  vessels,  so  that  they  drift 
to  destruction  on  the  coral  reefs. 

Drifting  frcrni  the  Truth. — The  idea 
is,  that  these  Jewish  Christians,  to 
whom  the  epistle  was  addressed,  were 
in  danger  of  being  carried  away  from 
the  gospel  of  Christ,  just  as  a  vessel  f,^ 
will  be  drifted  down  the  stream  unless 
it  is  held  firmly  to  its  anchorage,  or 
unless  there  is  constant  exertion  on 
the  part  of  those  who  are  on  board 
to  resist  the  current.  There  was  a 
strong  tide  running,  and  unless  they 
gave  earnest  heed  to  the  gospel  they 
would  be  swept  away  into  their  old 
Jewish  life. — R.  W.  Dale. 

Ver.  3.  Great  Salvation  because  Great 
Saviour. — On  the  intrinsic  greatness 
of  the  salvation  the  writer  does  not 
dwell.  It  is  implied  in  the  unique 
dignity  and  commission  of  Him  through 
whom  it  is  given.  To  the  Jewish 
Christians  the  message  of  the  salvation 
came  :  1.  Direct  from  Christ.  2.  Then 
from  those  who  actually  knew  Christ. 
3.  And  their  testimony  was  sealed  by 
the  miracles  of  healing  and  blessing 
which  they  wrought. 

No  escaping  if  there  is  neglecting. — 
Consider  the  argument  of  this  epistle. 
It  is  an  argument  against  apostasy. 
These  Hebrew  Christians  were  in 
danger  of  going  back  to  an  effete 
Judaism ;  but  "  the  Old  Testament 
dispensation,  with  its  prophets  and 
priests  and  Temple  and  sacrifices,  was 
only  a  type  of  Christ,  and  was  to 
disappear  when  Christ  Himself  had 
come."  The  revelation  of  God  in  His 
Son  is  the  culminating  revelation. 
That  having  been  made,  that  which 
has  led  to  it  and  introduced  it  is  no 

151 


CHAP.    II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


longer  necessary,  and  to  cling  to  it  is 
to  cling  to  superfluity.  The  man  who 
trusts  in  Jesus  is  safe  whether  the 
Temple  fall  or  stand,  whether  he 
worship  within  its  precincts  or  be 
thrust  out  of  them.  Then  the  epistle 
goes  on  to  substantiate  this  truth  by 
various  argumentation.  ^  Angels,  the 
f  messengers  of  God,  had  to  do  with  the 
/  introduction  of  the  old  economy ;  but 
1  Christ,  the  Founder  of  the  new  economy, 
is  superior  to  angels.  His  title  is  supe- 
rior. He  is  called  the  Son  of  God. 
No  angel  was  ever  called  the  son  of 
God  in  such  terms  as  would  involve 
sameness  of  nature  with  God ;  but 
Christ  is.  Therefore  He  is  superior  ; 
but  angels  are  required  to  woi'ship 
Christ.  Therefore,  again.  He  is 
superior.  Then,  again,  the  angels  are 
called  winds  and  lightning — names 
implying  servitude;  but  Christ  is  He 
at  whose  behests  the  angels  go  forth 
as  winds  and  as  lightnings ;  and  so, 
as  King  over  them,  Christ  is  their 
superior.  And  therefore,  since  Christ 
is  thus  the  superior  of  angels,  the 
dispensation  which  He  Himself  per- 
sonally introduced  must  be  higher  in 
authority,  and  more  enduring  in  exist- 
ence. This,  then,  is  the  first  argument 
in  substantiation  of  the  theme  of  the 
epistle.  But  the  Bible  is  the  most 
practical  of  books.  Let  a  truth  but 
be  established,  and  at  once  it  springs 
to  press  that  truth  in  application.  So 
before  another  argument  is  introduced 
to  substantiate  further  the  mighty 
theme  of  the  epistle,  the  discussion 
tarries  for  pressing  the  truth  it  has 
carried  home.  If,  though  this  pre- 
paratory dispensation  was  less  in 
authority  and  grandeur,  yet  if  even 
this  lower  and  lesser  word  spoken  by 
angels  and  delivered  to  men  by  Moses 
was  nevertheless  a  word  most  firm ;  if 
disobedience  even  to  that  lower  and 
lesser  word  was  always  followed  with 
its  threatened  penalty, — then  how  shall 
we  escape  if  we  neglect  this  so  great 
salvation  ;  this  word,  the  highest  and 
most  precious  possible,  which  the  Son 
of  God  Himself  has  come  to  tell  us? 
Such   is  the   setting   of   the    inspired 

152 


argument.  A  most  pertinent  question, 
How  shall  we  escape  if  we  neglect  ?  . , 
1.  There  can  be  no  further  and  othert 
Divine  revelation  as  to  salvation  from 
sin.  In  Christ  dwelleth  all  the  fulness 
of  the  Godhead  bodily  (Eph.  ii.  9). 
God  cannot  speak  more  plainly  than 
He  has  spoken  by  His  Son.  2.  There 
can  be  no  other  and  further  Divine 
sacrifice  for  sin.  God  has  nothing  more 
to  give  than  He  has  already  given. 
Even  infinity  does  not  possess  a  precious- 
ness  beyond  that  of  the  only  begotten 
Son.  3.  Our  own  good  works  cannot 
possibly  match  or  go  beyond  the  efiicacy 
residing  in  the  finished  work  of  Christ. 
To  trust  in  them,  rather  than  in  what 
He  has  done,  is  not  only  folly — it  is 
Sacrilege.  4.  No  sacramental  rite  ad- 
ministered by  man  can  possibly  equal 
the  completed  atonement  wrought  by 
Christ  and  ministered  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  the  believing  soul.  5.  In~ 
every  sense  this  salvation  is  a  salvation/ 
utmost.  In  no  way  can  we  touch  or 
pass  beyond  that  limit.  How,  then, 
can  we  escape  if  we  neglect  ?  6.  And 
to  neglect  it  is  to  refuse  it. 

Responding  to  our  Privileges. — Per- 
haps you  have  not  noticed  the  force  of 
the  text  as  it  stands  in  its  connection. 
It  really  is  a  very  serious  warning  to 
converted  people ;  the  neglect  referred 
to  is  the  sort  of  neglect  to  which  pro-  | 
fessing  Christians  are  tempted.  It  s, 
sets  us  upon  the  inquiry,  "  How  may 
you  and  I,  who  have  so  long  borne 
the  Christian  name,  be  found  to-day 
neglecting  the  responsibilities,  claims, 
and  duties  of  the  '  great  salvation  '  ?  " 
The  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  is  dis- 
tinctly addressed  to  Hebrew  Christians, 
to  Christians  who  had  been  Jews,  and 
for  the  most  part  devout  and  zealous 
Jews.  From  the  tone  of  the  epistle 
we  gather,  that  these  Judaic  Christians 
were  placed  under  some  special  perils 
and  temptations.  There  was  evidently 
some  grave  danger  of  their  returning 
upon  the  formalities  of  that  Mosaic 
system  out  of  which  they  had  come. 
The  writer  seems  deeply  impressed  with 
the  peril,  the  disgrace,   the  hopeless- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.    II. 


ness,  of  apostasy.  The  danger  of  those 
Hebrew  Christians  recurs  in  every  age. 
It  is  ours  to-day  as  truly  as  it  was 
theirs  yesterday.  Those  who  have 
gained  a  spiritual  rehgion  are  exposed 
to  the  temptation  to  pass  back  upon  a 
sensuous  rehgion.  The  rehgion  of  the 
surrendered  will  and  the  heart's  love 
is  difficult  to  maintain  ;  easily  we  come 
to  substitute  for  it  a  religion  of 
attending  services,  observing  sacra- 
ments, and  pressing  conduct  into 
moulds.  The  Christian  Jews  ad- 
dressed in  this  epistle  had  stepped 
up  out  of  formal  Judaism  into  spiritual 
Christianity.  They  had  served  the 
law  written  upon  tablets  of  stone  ;  now 
they  had  learned  to  serve  the  law 
written  on  the  mind  and  heart.  They 
had  been  religious  by  following  and 
obeying  rules ;  they  had  become  re- 
ligious by  responding  to  Divine  inward 
inspirations.  They  had  been  associated 
with  a  material  Temple  ;  they  had  now 
discovered  that  man  can  be  the 
"temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the 
Spirit  of  God  can  dwell  in  him."  They 
had  lived  by  the  letter ;  they  now  lived 
in  the  Spirit.  But  it  was  only  with 
extreme  difficulty  that  they  could  keep 
up  in  that  high,  spiritual  atmosphere. 
We  can  quite  understand  their  diffi- 
culty. The  interests  of  the  old  Mosaic 
system  clung  to  them.  They  had  been 
the  associations  of  theii*  earhest  years. 
Judaism  was  the  religion  of  their 
childhood  and  youth.  Every  senti- 
ment of  reverence  and  affection 
gathered  round  the  old  system.  No 
man  ever  yet  found  it  easy  to  grow 
out  of  his  youth-time  associations. 
Some  of  us  to-day  can  scarcely  say 
that  we  have  quite  outgrown  that 
hard,  unloving  Calvinism  which  was 
the  atmosphere  of  our  boyhood.  It  is 
stern  work  this  growing  in  spiritual 
things.  And  formal  religion,  which 
gives  us  something  for  the  eyes  to 
look  on,  for  the  hands  to  handle,  and 
for  the  knees  to  do,  always  has  a 
strange  fascination  for  sense-bound 
man.  Formal  religion,  that  requires 
routine,  but  asks  for  no  mind  and  no 
feeling,    always    has   been   attractive, 


and  it  always  will  be.  The  many 
will  always  find  a  sort  of  contentment 
in  that  lower  stage.  Enough  for  them 
to  ask,  *'  What  good  thing  can  I  do 
to  inherit  eternal  life  ? "  The  sad 
thing  is,  that  the  religion  of  forms  and 
ceremonies  should  even  keep  its  fasci- 
nation for  those  to  whom  the  glories  of 
spiritual  religion  have  once  been  un- 
folded. Well  may  the  apostle  exclaim, 
in  a  passion  of  indignation,  "  But  now, 
after  that  ye  have  known  God,  or 
rather  are  known  of  God,  how  turn 
ye  again  to  the  weak  and  beggarly  ; 
elements,  whereunto  ye  desire  again  , 
to  be  in  bondage  ?  Ye  observe  days,  i 
and  months,  and  times,  and  years.  I  : 
am  afraid  of  you,  lest  I  have  bestowed 
upon  you  labour  •  in  vain."  And  we 
must  take  into  due  account  another 
fact.  The  advocates  of  the  Mosaic 
system,  who  resisted  the  claims  of 
Christianity,  were  intensely  active  in 
demanding  continued  obedience  to  the 
Jewish  laws  and  rules.  What  are 
called  "  Judaising  teachers  "  followed 
Paul  everywhere,  and  persisted  in 
claiming  that  every  Christian  convert 
should  keep  Mosaic  rules ;  should  be 
circumcised,  should  make  vows,  should 
observe  rites,  and  should  bring 
sacrifices,  just  as  if  he  were  a  Jew. 
They  declared  that  the  formal  religion 
could  never  be  superseded,  could  never 
rise  into  anything  higher  or  more 
spiritual.  The  New  Testament  tells 
us  of  the  peril  of  falling  back  on 
formal  Judaism  from  spiritual  Chris- 
tianity. The  history  of  the  first  three 
centuries  of  the  Church  shows  us  the 
peril  of  falUng  back  on  paganism  from 
spiritual  Christianity.  It  is  a  sad 
story.  The  Gentile  converts  brought 
in  Gentile  ways,  and  soon  Christianity 
became  the  old  paganism,  with  new 
associations.  The  Church  ritual  that 
is  so  fascinating  to  men  to-day,  is,  in 
almost  every  detail,  old  pagan  ritual 
carried  in  to  the  ruinous  overlaying  of 
spiritual  Christianity.  It  is  of  course 
possible,  in  a  spirit  of  self-complacency, 
for  us  to  say  that  all  this  concerns 
the  apostolic  Christians  and  the  early 
Church  Christians,  and  it  is  very  sad, 

153 


CHAP.   11. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


but  then  it  has  nothing  whatever  to  do 
with  us.     I  want  to  show  you  that,  in 
forms   and  ways  suitable   to  our  own 
cases,  tliis  danger  of  falHng  from  spirit- 
iial  reUgion  back  upon  formal  rehgion 
is  precisely  the  danger  to  which  you  and 
I  are   exposed  to-day.     We   need   the 
warning,  lest  we  too  should  be  found 
"  neglecting  the  great  salvation."     Our 
own  religion  begins  in   formality   and 
routine.       Mother   makes   us   say   our 
prayers,  and  sees  that  we  say  them  regu- 
larly ;    and  it  is  only  saying  players. 
Mother  takes  us  to  the  services,  and  sees 
that  we  behave  suitably.    For  long  years 
every  child's,  every  boy's,  religion  is  in 
the  Judaic  stage.     It  consists  in  doing 
things  that  ought  to  be  done.     Then 
may   come   the   experience   which  we 
call  "  conversion  " ;  the  soul's  awaken- 
in<y  to  personal  relation   with  Divine 
and  eternal  things.     We  rise,  in  that 
hour  of  personal  decision,  to  spiritual 
religion.     Bat  it  is  as  hard  for  us  to 
keep  up  there,  in  that  spiritual  region, 
as   it   was  for   the   converted  Jew   to 
keep   up    in    the    refined    atmosphere 
of  spiritual  Christianity.     You  and  I 
are  always  ready  to  fall  back  on  our 
old    boy-religion    of    ordered   prayers, 
attended  services,  and  shaped  conduct. 
We  have  no  harder  task  than  that  of 
keeping   ourselves    right   up   in    that 
spiritual  realm,  which,  in  the  power  of 
God's  Spirit,  we  have  entered.     You 
can  easily  become  a  formal  Christian. 
It  will  cost  you   much  and  constant 
watchfulness   and    endeavour    if    you 
keep     a     spiritual     Christian.      The 
tendency    is    an    ever-enduring     and 
universal  one.     It  belongs  to  biassed 
and  deteriorated  human  nature;   and 
the     epistle     to     the     Hebrews     has 
always  been  wanted,  and  will  always 
be  wanted,  because  it  deals  with  this 
tendency.     It    does    so    partly    by   a 
series  of    arguments,    and   partly    by 
a    series  of   persuasions.      These   are 
blended    in     a     very     striking     way 
throughout   the   epistle,  each   branch 
of  the   argument   being    followed   by 
a   characteristic   warning   or    persua- 
sion.     The    argument    is    mainly    a 
rhetorical    comparison    between    the 

154 


agents    and    mediators    employed    m 
connection  with  the  two  dispensations 

the  Jewish  and  the  Christian— and 

between  the  sacrifices  required  in  the 
two  dispensations.     We  only  now  take 
the  first  of  these  comparisons,     \yhat 
has  to  be  compared  is  the  two  Divine 
dispensations,  the  two  great  religious 
systems    established    by    the    Divine 
revelation — the     formal      system      of 
Judaism,     the     spiritual     system     of 
Christianity.     It  must  first  of  all  be 
made  perfectly  clear  that  these  systems 
were     not     antagonistic.      They     are 
related  to  each  other ;  they  are  in  no 
sense   opposed    to   each   other.     They 
may  be  helpfully  compared ;  they  may 
never  be  contrasted.     They  stand  in  an 
order  of  time.     That  is  not  first  which 
is  spiritual,  but  that  which  is  carnal, 
and  afterward  that  which  is  spiritual. 
The  one  is  the  preparation  for  the  other, 
the  necessary  preparation;    it    is   the 
schoolmaster  that  trains  for  the  life  in 
Christ.     The  earlier  unfolds   into  the 
later,  and  it  may  pass  away  when  it  has 
done  its  preparation  work.     The  seed 
we  sow  in  the  ground  is  preserved  by 
the  husk,  and  the  germ  of  the  future 
plant  is  fed  by  the  starch  stored  in 
the  seed.     But  when  the  germ  bursts 
forth  into  leaf,  the  flour  and  the  husk 
may  die.     They  have  done  their  work, 
and  passed  into   the  plant  that  is  to 
be.      The    spring   bud    is   encased   in 
a   sheath,   and   protected   while   it   is 
maturing ;  but  when  the  flower  opens, 
the  sheath  may  fade  and  drop  off.     It 
has  done  its  work,  and  really  lives  still 
in  the  beauty  of  the  summer  flower. 
The  children's  scrap-books  and  picture- 
books   are   put   away  on  the   shelf — 
every  home   has  a  big   pile  of  them  : 
they  seem  to  be  useless  ;  nay,  they  live 
on  in  the  cultured  power  to  read  which 
they  have  quickened  and  trained.    The 
apostle   Paul    puts   the   matter    in    a 
clever  and  suggestive  sentence  :  "When 
that  which  is  perfect  is  come,  then  that 
which  is  in  part  shall  be  done  away. 
When  I  was  a  child,  I  spake  as  a  child, 
I  understood  as  a  child,  I  thought  as 
a  child ;  but  when  I  became  a  man,  I 
put  away  childish  things."    Ceremonial 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  ii. 


Judaism  is  as  the  toys  in  the  cupboard,  lest  at  any  time  we  should  let  them 

and  as  the  picture-books  on  the  shelf,  slip.    For  if  the  word  spoken  by  angels 

They    have   had  their  day,   and  done  was  stedfast,  and  every  transgression 

their  work,  but  we  do  not  want  them  and  disobedience  received  a  just  recom- 

now.     Somehow  we   never   quite   lose  pence  of  reward  ;  how  shall  we  escape, 

our  interest  in  the  toys  and  the  books  ;  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  ?  "     It 

and  some  never  lose  interest  in  formal  is  suggestive  that  the  old  dispensation 

Judaism.     But  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  and  the  new  one  should  both  be  called 

has  come,  and  "  where  the  Spirit  of  the  a  "  salvation."     It  is  evidently  named 

Loi'd  is  there  is  liberty."  from  its  initial  incident.     Its  true  be- 

I.   In  the  passage  from    which   the  ginning    was    the   gi-eat   and   glorious 

text  is  taken  the  agents   of  the  two  redemption  of  Israel  from  the  Egyptian 

dispensations  are  compared.     It  was  bondage,  when  Pharaoh's  chariots  and 

the  received  opinion  of  the  Jews  that  host  were  cast  into  the  sea,  and  Israel 

their  law  was  given  on  Mount  Sinai  walked   a   wondrous   way,  and   began 

"by  the  disposition  of  angels."     That  their  national  life  from  those  farther 

was  thought  to  declare  the  supreme  shores  as  a  delivered,  redeemed  people, 

grandeur    of    the    revelation,    of    the  They  sang  in   their  song  of  triumph, 

law-giving.     Angels !     But  what   are  *'  The  Lord  is  become  my   salvation : 

angels  ?     What  are  angels  more  than  He   is   my  God,   and   I    will   prepare 

we  ?      Are   they   not    all    ministering  Him  an  habitation ;  my  father's  God, 

spirits?     Created  dependent  servants,  and    I   will   exalt    Him."      But   that 

executing  their  Lord's  bidding,  even  as  "  salvation  "  brought  Israel  under  the 

we  are  ?     The  spiritual  revelation  and  claim  to  serve  Jehovah,  and  Jehovah 

law  given  from  Mount  Sion  came  by  only.      They  were   bound   to   receive, 

Jesus  Christ,  God's  only-begotten  and  and  to  obey  strictly  and  carefully,  all 

well-beloved  Son,  who  is  the  "  heir  of  the  law  that  Jehovah  might  be  pleased 

all  things,   and   by  whom  God  made  to  declare  to  them ;   and  seeing  that 

the  world ;    who  is  the  brightness  of  they  were  a  nation  in  its  child-stage, 

the  Father's   glory,    and   the   express  Jehovah  graciously  adapted  His  revela- 

image   of    His   person ;    who   upholds  tion  and  His  law  to  them,  gave  the 

all  things  by  His  own  power."     The  knowledge  of  His  will  through  elaborate 

applications  and  enforcements  of  the  pictures  of  rites,  and  ceremonials,  and 

Mosaic  law  were  made  by  a  series  of  observances,    and    ruled    conduct    by 

prophets,    among    whom    were    many  precise   laws   covering  all   their  daily 

great,  many  extraordinary  men.    ''God  life  and  relations — "a  people  saved  by 

who   at   sundry   times   and   in  divers  the   Lord."     They  knew  their   Lord's 

manners  spake  in  time  past  unto  the  will ;    and    "  every   transgression   and 

fathers  by  the  prophets."     The  appli-  disobedience  received  a  just  recompence 

cations  and  enforcements  of  spiritual  of    reward."      And    so    the   new   dis- 

Christianity  are  made  by  the  apostles  pensation  is  called  a  "salvation,"  "so 

of    Jesus.       The    word    at    first   was  great  salvation,"  because  it  too  began 

"spoken  by  the  Lord,"  but   "it  was  with  a  great  and  glorious  redemption 

confirmed  unto  us  by  them  that  heard  — the    redemption     wrought    in    the 

Him."     On  the  face  of  it,  therefore,  ministry   and    sacrifice   of    our    Lord 

this   new  revelation  of   God's  will  to  Jesus  Christ.      And   that  redemption 

men  is  altogether  higher  and  nobler  :  brings  us  under  claim  to  serve  Jehovah 

it  brings  to  us  higher  privileges ;    it  Christ.     We  are  bound  to  receive  and 

involves  us  in  heavier  responsibilities ;  obey   His    law    in   everything.      And 

it  can  crush  us  with  heavier  penalties.  that  law,  in  its  most  searching  spiritual 

This  is  the  argument,  and  this  is  its  way,  takes  motive,   principle,  feehng, 

attendant  persuasion :   "  Therefore  we  enriches  them  with  new  force,  and  so 

ought  to  give  the  more  earnest  heed  affects  all   our  conduct   from   within. 

to  the  things  which  we  have  heard,  The  ransomed  of  the  Lord  ought  to 

155 


CHAP.   11. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


respond  to  all  the  claims  and  re- 
sponsibilities involved  in  so  "great 
salvation." 

II.  The  penalties  of  the  two  dis- 
pensations are  compared. — There  is  an 
appearance  of  severity  in  the  Mosaic 
sanctions.  But  we  need  not  misunder- 
stand it  or  exaggerate  it.  All  first 
education  is  necessarily  precise  and 
severe.  It  ought  to  be.  Parents  and 
school-teachers  properly  begin  by  re- 
quiring exact  obedience  on  penalty  of 
punishments  and  deprivations.  Jouhert 
finely  says  that  the  universal  law  of 
training  is  "force  till  right  is  ready." 
There  is  a  severe  side  to  Christianity, 
though  it  does  not  show  as  plain  as 
the  severe  side  of  Judaism.  It  is 
severer :  its  demands  are  more  com- 
prehensive and  searching ;  they  concern 
motive  and  feeling.  Its  penalties  are 
severer  :  they  come  upon  the  soul ;  they 
break  off  its  relations  with  God ;  they 
involve  "  the  second  death."  "  Of 
how  much  sorer  punishment  are  they 
worthy "  whose  neglect  of  the  great 
salvation  may  be  figuratively  described 
as  "trampling  underfoot  the  Son  of 
God,  counting  the  blood  of  the  covenant 
an  unholy  thing,  and  doing  despite 
unto  the  Spirit  of  grace."  That  severer 
side  of  spiritual  Christianity  directly 
concerns  you  and  me.  With  what 
condition  of  religious  life  may  we  think 
the  warnings  deal  ?  1.  Penalties  hang 
over  all  who  pass  hack  upon  formality. 
"  Having  begun  in  the  Spirit,  are  ye 
now  made  perfect  in  the  flesh."  I 
beseech  you,  search  and  see  whether 
formalism  has  crept  into  any  of  the 
features  of  your  religious  life.  Once 
your  soul  shaped  all  your  doings  and 
relations.  Is  it  now  thus  with  you? 
The  routine  is  kept  up,  the  order  is  gone 
through ;  but  there  is  no  soul  inspiring 
it  now.  You  say  your  prayers;  you 
do  not  pray.  You  attend  the  services ; 
you  do  not  worship.  You  observe 
sacraments ;  you  do  not  feed  with  ever- 
fresh  appetite  upon  the  Bread  of  Life. 
There  is  a  terrible  disease  from  which 
men  suffer,  often  for  a  long  time  with- 
out knowing  it.  The  very  substance 
of  the  heart  actually  hardens.     There 

156 


is  a  strange  dropping-well  at  Knares- 
boroughj  Eng.  As  the  water  falls  on 
living  substances  it  encrusts  them  with 
stone.  That  "disease"  has  its  religious 
counterpart;  that  "well"  has  its  reli- 
gious antitype.  Scripture  describes  the 
man  who  has  fallen  back  from  spiritual 
upon  formal  religion :  He  is  "  dead 
while  he  liveth."  The  penalty  of  formal 
religion,  what  is  it  ?  To  be  dead,  soul- 
dead.  V/hat  more  awful  penalty  can 
you  possibly  think  of  ?  2.  Penalties 
hang  over  all  who  shrink  from  gospel 
responsibilities.  Neglecting  the  sal- 
vation is  neglecting  the  things  the 
salvation  involves.  These  I  will  only 
state  in  two  forms :  ( 1 )  We  are  put 
into  the  school  of  Christ.  It  is  perilous 
work  to  show  ourselves  unwilling  to 
learn  of  Him.  (2)  We  are  put  into 
the  rule  of  Christ.  And  it  is  perilous 
work  to  shrink  from  any  form  of  the 
obedience  to  which  He  calls  us.  What 
hope  of  escape,  in  the  great  testing 
day,  can  the  unspiritual  Christian 
have?  What  hope  of  escape  can  the 
disobedient  Christian  have?  What 
hope  of  escape  can  the  negligent, 
unfaithful  Christian  have?  "Every 
man's  work  shall  be  tried  of  what  sort 
it  is."  Are  you  neglecting  any  of  the 
claims,  responsibilities,  duties,  of  this 
great,  this  spiritual  salvation  ?  What 
— say  what  is  your  hope  of  escape  in 
the  testing  day  of  God  ? 

Ver.  4.  Spiritual  Gifts  witnessing  to 
the  Salvation. — "  Gifts  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  according  to  His  own  will."  The 
writer  has  evidently  in  mind  the  extra- 
ordinary gifts  which  were  bestowed  on 
the  early  Church.  The  disciples  were 
bidden  by  their  ascending  Lord  to 
"tarry  in  Jerusalem,  until  they  were 
endued  with  power  from  on  high." 
What  that  power  was,  and  what  were 
the  outward  signs  of  its  coming,  we 
learn  at  the  Day  of  Pentecost.  What 
the  power  developed  into,  and  how  it 
differentiated,  so  as  to  gain  adaptation 
to  every  necessity  of  the  Church, 
St.  Paul  tells  us  in  1  Cor.  xii.  8-11  ; 
and  he  most  carefully  associates  the 
gift  or  power  with  the  presence  of  the 


IJOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  ii. 


indwelling  Spirit.     "  For  to  one  is  given  to  some  natural  faculty.     But  it  was 

through  the  Spirit  the  word  of  wisdom ;  something  new. 

and  to  another  the  word  of  knowledge,  II.   Every    person    regenerate    in 

according  to  the  same  Spirit  :  to  another  Christ   had   some    special   gift. — This 

faith,  in  the  same  Spirit ;  and  to  another  truth  has  not  been  fully  apprehended ; 

gifts  of  healings,  in  the  one  Spirit ;  and  and   so  the  gift  of   each  disciple   has 

to  another  workings  of  miracles  ;  and  neither  been  looked  for  by  himself  nor 

to  another  prophecy  ;  and  to  another  by  others  ;  and  consequently  the  Church 

discerning  of  spirits  :  to  another  divers  is   full   of   men  with   unused,   and  so 

kinds  of  tongues  ;  and  to  another  the  virtually  lost  gifts, 

interpretation  of  tongues  :  but  all  these  III.  The  gifts   are  the  sign  of  the 

worketh  the  one  and  the  same  Spirit,  presence    and  the   inworking  of  the 

dividing  to  each  one  severally  even  as  Divine   and    indwelling   Spirit. — This 

He  will."     In  the  possession  of  these  is  their  deepest  significance.     We  have 

gifts  the  Church  has  one  of  its  best  them  only  because  we  have  the  Spirit, 

evidences   of    the    "great    salvation."  The  Spirit  comes  to  us  before  the  gifts. 

The  bestowment  of  the  gift  is  God's  lY.  The  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit 

direct  witness  to  the  "  salvation."  is  the  seal  of  our  personal  salvation. — 

I.  Gifts  are  special  enduements  of  And  so  the  gifts  which  declare  that  we 

power. — The   man   who   has   the   gift  have  the  Spirit  witness  that  we  are 

has  something  which  he  had  not  before.  the  saved  ones  on  whom  the  Lord  has 

It  might  or  it  might  not  bear  relation  "  set  His  mark." 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses   5—18. 

The  Representative  Manhood  of  the  Divine  Son. — It  is  necessary  to  deal  with 
this  passage  as  a  whole,  because  only  one  subject  is  really  treated  in  it.  The 
writer  has  referred  to  the  angels,  and  has  shown  the  superiority  of  Jesus  to  them 
in  being  the  Divine  Son.  But  he  had  spoken  of  the  angels  as  "  ministering 
spirits."  Not  men ;  not  in  the  earthly  range  ;  and  so  not  effective  agents  in 
accomplishing  human  redemption.  If  he  had  dwelt  upon  the  superiority  of 
Christ  to  angels,  he  must  also  recognise  His  temporary  inferiority  to  angels.  If 
he  dwells  first  on  the  primary  truth  of  our  Lord's  Deity,  he  must  also  present 
the  equally  essential  truth  of  His  humanity.  *'  He  was  made  a  little  lower  than 
the  angels  "  by  becoming  a  man ;  and  a  man  He  must  become  if  He  would 
accomplish  the  redemption  of  man.  "  The  temporary  humiliation  was  the 
voluntary  and  predestined  means  whereby  alone  He  could  accomplish  His 
redemptive  work."  But  the  writer  approaches  his  theme  from  a  fresh  and 
somewhat  unusual  side ;  we  might  almost  say  that  he  comes  round  to  it  in  an 
indirect  way.  This  is  his  point,  "  The  voluntary  humiliation  of  Jesus  was  a 
necessary  step  in  the  exaltation  of  humanity." 

I.  God's  promise  to  man  is  vindicated  in  Christ. — In  having  the  limitations 
of  a  human  body,  with  its  five  senses,  man  is  made  "a  little  lower  than  the 
angels  " ;  but  in  the  earth-sphere  where  he,  in  the  body,  is  placed  he  is  supreme, 
he  is  lord,  ever}i}hing  is  subject  to  him.  So  God  constituted  his  relations.  Amid 
all  earthly  things  man  stands  first,  *'  crowned  with  glory  and  honour."  "  Set 
over  the  works  of  God's  hands,"  the  entire  material  universe.  And  having  "  all 
things  put  in  subjection  under  his  feet."  1.  Bule  in  the  earthly  and  human 
spheres  is  in  no  sense  given  to  angels.  *'  Unto  the  angels  did  He  not  subject  the 
inhabited  earth  [margin,  B.V.]  whereof  we  speak."  2.  But,  as  a  matter  of  fact, 
this  complete  rule,  which  God  designed  for  him,  has  never  yet  been  realised  by 
ordinary  man.  *'  Now  we  see  not  yet  all  things  put  under  him."  That  fact  is 
explained  by  man's  wilfully  breaking  loose  from  the  laws  and  conditions  which 

157 


CHAP.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


God  had  arranged,  and  so  bringing  sin  and  death  into  the  world,  things  which 
are  entu-ely  beyond  man's  control,  by  which  he  has  always  been  mastered.  All 
things  then  are  not  subject  to  the  ordinary  man.  There  is  very  much  that  is 
subject  to  him.  In  one  direction  he  is  limited.  Death,  and  the  sin  which  makes 
it  a  necessity,  man  cannot  control.  3.  This  complete  rule  over  absolutely  all 
things  in  the  earth-sphere  is  realised  in  one  Man,  the  representative  Man,  the 
"  Man  Christ  Jesus."  The  Son  was  made  "  a  little  lower  than  the  angels,"  made 
a  man,  in  order  that  He  might  deal  with  the  one  thing — death — which  man  had 
no  power  to  conquer.  As  a  man  only  was  it  possible  for  Him  to  "  taste  death," 
and  in  tlie  very  experience  of  it  conquer  it.  **  Through  death  He  might  bring 
to  nought  him  that  had  the  power  of  death."  It  was  as  if  an  alien  power  held 
death ;  and  from  him  man  could  never  wrest  it ;  so  all  his  Hfe,  master  whatsoever 
he  might,  man  was  afraid  of  death,  and  subject  to  its  bondage.  Christ  the  man 
won  for  man  the  mastery  of  the  one  thing  that  completed  man's  mastery  of  the 
earth,  and  now,  in  Christ,  God's  promise  to  man  is  realised — "  all  things  are  in 
subjection  unto  Him." 

II.  See  how  much  is  involved  in  the  vindication. — Death  is  only  a  climax 
and  result.  It  involves  so  much.  And  He  who  gains  the  mastery  of  death  must 
gain  with  it  the  mastery  of  all  that  it  involves.  1.  It  is  the  climax  of  sin. 
"  Sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death."  Then  it  must  be  evident  that 
Christ  has  gained  the  power  to  deal  with  and  master  human  sin.  2.  But  the 
writer  has  another  thing  in  mind.  Suffering  is  in  the  world,  as  God's  disciplinary 
agency  for  the  correcting  of  sin.  And  He  who  conquers  death  for  man,  and 
masters  sin  for  man,  must  also  have  the  power  to  deal  with  suffering.  And  just 
as  He  yielded  to  death  and  took  all  its  bitterness  away,  so  He  yielded  to  suffering 
and  took  all  its  bitterness  away ;  nay,  even  gained  His  power  to  sanctify  suffering, 
and  take  away  sin  by  suffering — was  made  a  perfect  Bringer  on  of  souls  to 
glory  by  suffering.  What  have  we  then  in  Christ  when  we  can  fully  embrace 
the  double  truth  of  His  Deity  and  His  humanity?  1.  His  sympathy — 
born  of  actual  experience — in  our  times  of  suffering.  2.  His  representative 
triumph  over  death,  which  secures  us  relief  from  the  "  fear  of  death."  3,  The 
destruction  of  death  itself  in  its  relation  to  sin  ;  and  His  present  living  mastery 
—as  our  Head— of  the  sins  that  bring  on  death,  and  the  sufferings  that  were 
necessary  to  exhibit  the  evil  of  sin,  and  to  discipline  man  in  his  efforts  to  master 
sin.  "  It  behoved  Him  to  be  made  in  all  things  like  unto  His  brethren,"  that  He 
might  deliver  them  from  their  sin  and  death  bondage,  and  come  into  their  lives 
as  a  sympathetic  and  efficient  spiritual  helper. 

{In  "  Suggestive  Notes"  see  passage  from  Moses  Stuart.) 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  5.  "  The  Infinite  Superiority  of  severest  temptations  came  in  two  great 

Jesus  to  the  Angels  is  not   diminished  and  solemn  crises — in  the  wilderness 

but  rather  enhanced  by  the  temporary  and  at  Gethsemane — yet  Scripture  leads 

humiliation  which  was  the  voluntary  us  to  the  view  that  He  was  always  liable 

and  predestined  means  whereby  alone  to   temptation,    though    without     sin. 

He  could  accomplish  His   redemptive  because   the    temptation    was    always 

work."  repudiated  with  the  whole  force  of  His 

will  throughout  the   whole   course   of 

The  Temptahleness  of  Ch^isfs  Man-  His  life   of   obedience."     It  is   indeed 

hood. — "  Temptation  of  its  own  nature  essential  to  any  and  every  moral  being 

involves  suffering,  and  it  is  too  gene-  that  he  shall  be  temptable,  and  it  shall 

rally  overlooked  that  though  our  Lord's  be  possible  to  yield  to  temptation  and 

158 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.  n. 


fall.  This  truth  is  illustrated  in  the 
legend  of  the  fall  of  the  angels.  Too 
often  angels  are  thought  of  as  untempt- 
able.  What  is  promised  to  us  is  not 
a  future  removal  of  the  liabilities  of 
the  moral  nature,  which  we  shall 
always  have,  but  a  Divine  life  in  our 
will,  which  will  give  us  the  absolute 
security  that  Christ  enjoyed. 

The  Objection  to  Salvation  by  a 
Fellow -man. — As  the  Jews,  one  and 
all,  conceded  that  the  dispensation  of 
the  Messiah  would  be  of  a  higher  order 
than  that  of  Moses,  proof  that  Jesus 
was  the  sole  mediator  or  head  of  the 
new  dispensation,  and  that  angels  were 
not  employed  as  mediators  or  inter- 
nuntii  in  it,  would  satisfy  them  that 
Jesus  was  superior  to  angels.  But 
the  unbelieving  Jew  would  be  likely  to 
urge  the  seeming  absurdity  of  renounc- 
ing subjection  to  a  dispensation  of 
which  angels  were  the  mediators,  and 
of  acknowledging  a  subjection  to  one 
of  which  the  professed  head  and 
mediator  appeared  iii  our  nature.  It 
was  repulsive  to  the  feelings  of  the 
unbelieving  Jews,  that  one  to  all 
appearance  like  a  man,  and  made  up 
of  flesh  and  blood  in  the  same  manner 
as  themselves,  should  advance  a  claim 
to  the  exalted  honour  of  a  superior 
and  Divine  nature.  The  writer  con- 
cedes the  fact  entirely,  that  Jesus  had 
a  nature  truly  and  properly  human. 
But  instead  of  granting  that  this  proves 
the  new  dispensation  to  be  inferior  to 
that  of  Moses,  he  proceeds  to  adduce 
evidence  from  the  Old  Testament 
Scriptures,  to  show  that  man,  or  the 
.human  nature  in  the  person  of  the 
Messiah,  should  be  made  Lord  of  the 
universe.  Consequently,  in  this  nature, 
Jesus  the  Messiah  is  superior  to  angels. 
Nay,  more,  it  was  becoming  that  God 
should  exalt  Jesus,  in  consequence  of 
His  obedience  unto  death.  To  suffer 
this  death.  He  must  needs  take  on  Him 
a  nature  like  ours.  And  as  His  object 
was  the  salvation  of  men  (and  not  of 
angelic  beings),  so  He  participated  in 
the  nature  of  men,  in  order  that  by 
experience  He  might  know  their  suffer- 


ings, temptations,  and  trials,  and  thus 
be  prepared,  in  a  peculiar  manner,  to 
be  compassionate  and  ready  to  succour. 
The  sum  of  the  whole  is  :  "  The  posses- 
sion of  a  human  nature  by  Jesus  is  far 
from  being  a  reason  why  the  ancient 
dispensation  (of  which  angels  were 
the  internuntii)  is  preferable  to  the 
new  one  ;  for — 1.  This  very  nature  is 
exalted  far  above  the  angels.  2.  With- 
out participating  in  this  nature,  Jesus 
could  not  have  made  expiation  for  sin 
by  His  death.  3.  The  possession  of 
such  a  nature  did  contribute  in  a 
peculiar  and  endearing  manner  to  con- 
stitute Him  such  a  Saviour  as  men 
could  approach  with  the  greatest 
boldness  and  confidence,  in  all  their 
wants  and  in  all  their  woes  "  (Moses 
Stuart). 

Ver.  8.  The  Limited  Su'prem,acy  of 
Man. — Scripture  is  no  story  of  the 
material  universe.  Man  is  the  central 
figure  there,  or,  to  speak  more  truly, 
the  only  figure ;  all  else  serves  but  as 
a  background  for  him.  He  is  not  one 
part,  not  the  highest  merely  in  the 
scale  of  its  creatures,  but  the  lord  of 
all ;  all  the  visible  creation  borrow 
their  wealth  and  significance  from 
their  relationship  to  him.  Such  he 
appears  in  the  ideal  worth  and  dignity 
of  his  unf alien  condition ;  even  now, 
when  only  a  broken  fragment  of  the 
sceptre  with  which  he  once  ruled  the 
world  remains  in  his  hands,  such  he  is 
commanded  to  regard  himself  still. — 
Trench. 

Man  a  King. — Man  is  a  king  ;  God 
hath  put  a  crown  upon  his  head,  and 
not  only  so,  but  hath  given  him  a 
territory  and  subjects  (see  Gen.  i.  26), 
where  what  David  means  by  "  all 
things "  is  in  the  same  manner  enu- 
merated. St.  Paul,  however,  extends 
the  meaning  of  "  all  things  "  far  beyond 
this.  David's  "  all  things  "  and  Paul's 
"  all  things "  are  not  the  same  :  the 
one  is  thinking  of  the  visible  world,  the 
other  of  the  invisible  woiid  ;  the  one 
speaks  of  that  within  us,  the  other  of 
that  which  is  to  come.    The  words  may 

159 


CHAP.    II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


be  true  of  man,  but  in  their  higher 
sense  they  are  truer  of  Christ  as  the 
great  Head  of  mankind,  and  of  man 
only  in  llim,  in  whom  only  is  to  be 
seen  their  proper  fulfilment. — J.  S. 
Perowiie,  D.D. 

MavbS  Authority  in  Creation. — The 
trust  of  material  things  committed  to 
man,  as  recorded  in  Gen.  i.  26,  28, 
man  has  fully  responded  to.  It  may 
be  truly  said  that  no  living  creature 
has  been  unable  to  yield  to  his 
authority  :  no  nature-force  has  refused 
to  be  yoked  to  do  his  bidding  ;  and  no 
combination  of  difficult  circumstances 
has  baffled  his  masterfulness.  But 
man  has  failed  to  rule  himself.  Having 
made  the  fatal  mistake  in  not  ruling 
himself,  he  cannot  now  recover  his 
power  of  moral  self-command.  Christ, 
the  ideal  Man,  came  to  this  world  to 
give  man  back  his  lost  power  over 
himself.  His  redemption  is  the  re- 
covery of  man  to  his  ideal.  It  is  the 
completing  of  man's  supremacy  over 
everything,  by  winning  for  him  the 
supremacy  over  himself.  The  sign  of 
man's  limited  supremacy  is  his  abso- 
lute inability  to  mate  and  master  death, 
which  is  the  issue  and  seal  of  sin.  Be- 
fore death  man  stands  morally  helpless, 
because  before  sin  he  is  ineffective. 
Then  the  Saviour  of  man  must  show 
that  He  can,  as  man,  deal  efficiently 
with  sin,  by  dealing,  as  man,  efficiently 
with  death.  In  man's  name,  and  for 
man,  and  as  man,  Jesus  wrestled  with 
death,  and  conquered  it ;  and  so  He 
has  gained  for  man  his  full  supremacy. 
In  Christ  "  all  things "  are  now  put 
under  him. 

Burning  the  Earth. — Any  one  casu- 
ally reading  this  verse  might  imagine 
that  the  last  clause  refers  to  the 
*'  thorns  and  briars,"  especially  as  this 
idea  seems  to  be  supported  by  com- 
parison of  the  passage  with  Isa. 
ix.  18,  xxiii.  12,  etc.  The  original 
Greek,  however,  for  "  whose  "  (^s)  is  in 
the  singular  number,  and  must  relate 
to  the  land,  "  which  beareth  thorns  and 
briars."     St.  Paul  alludes  to  the  cus- 

160 


tom,  common  to  the  Romans,  and  other 
heathen  nations,  of  burning  the  barren 
fields,  or,  rather,  the  stubble,  etc., 
standing  upon  them,  according  to 
Virgil,  who,  in  his  book  on  husbandry 
{Georg.,  i.  84),  lays  down  this  rule  : — 

"  'Tis  well  to  set  on  fire  the  barren  fields, 
And  burn  in  crackling  flames  the  stubble 
light." 

Vers.  8,  9.  Manhood  crowned  in 
Jesus. — The  text  brings  before  us  a 
threefold  sight.  It  bids  us  look  around ; 
and  if  that  sadden  us,  it  bids  us  look 
up,  and  thence  it  bids  us  draw  confi- 
dence to  look  forward.  There  is  an 
estimate  of  present  facts,  there  is  a 
perception  by  faith  of  the  unseen  fact 
of  Christ's  glory,  and  there  follows  from 
that  the  calm  prospect  for  the  future 
for  ourselves  and  for  our  brethren. 

I.  Look  at  the  sight  around  us. — 
"  We  see  not  yet  all  things  put  under 
man."  It  is  a  sight  of  human  incom- 
pleteness. Where  are  the  men  of 
whom  any  portion  of  the  psalmist's 
words  are  true.  Look  at  them — are 
these  the  men  of  whom  he  sings  ? 
Visited  by  God  !  crowned  with  glory 
and  honour !  having  dominion  over  the 
works  of  His  hands  !  Is  this  irony  or 
fact  ?  1.  Let  consciousness  speak. 
2.  Let  biographies  speak.  3.  Let  ob- 
servation speak. 

II.  Look  upwards  to  Jesus. — Christ 
in  glory  appears  to  the  author  of  this 
epistle  to  be  the  full  realisation  of  the 
psalmist's  ideal.  Our  text  deals  only 
with  the  exalted  dignity  and  present 
majesty  of  the  ascended  Lord ;  but 
both  the  ascended  Christ  upon  the 
throne,  and  the  historical  Christ  upon 
tho  earth,  teach  us  what  man  may  be, 
the  one  in  regard  of  dignity,  the  other 
in  regard  of  goodness.  Here  is  a  fact. 
Such  a  life  was  verily  once  lived  on 
earth — a  life  of  true  manhood,  what- 
ever more  it  was.  And  that  life  is 
to  be  our  standard.  In  Jesus  Christ 
is  the  type ;  and,  albeit  it  is  alone  in 
its  beauty,  yet  it  is  more  truly  a  speci- 
men of  manhood  than  the  fragmentary, 
distorted,  incomplete  men  are  who  are 
found   everywhere   besides,     Christ   is 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   II. 


the  power  to  conform  us  to  Himself,  as 
well  as  the  pattern  of  what  we  may  be. 
But  what  does  Scripture  teach  us  to 
see  in  the  exalted  Lord  ?  1.  ^  per- 
petual manhood.  There  is  a  strong 
tendency  in  many  minds  to  think  of 
Christ's  incarnation  and  humanity  as 
transitory,  the  wearing  of  a  garb  of 
human  nature  but  for  a  moment.  The 
Biblical  representation  is,  that  for  ever- 
more, by  an  indissoluble  union,  the 
human  is  assumed  into  the  Divine, 
and  that  *'  today  and  for  ever "  He 
remains  the  Man  Christ  Jesus.  With- 
out this  truth,  that  mighty  work  which 
He  ever  carries  on,  of  succouring  them 
that  are  tempted,  and  having  compas- 
sion with  us,  were  impossible.  2.  A 
corporeal  manhood.  The  resurrection 
and  ascension  of  Jesus  Christ  are  our 
great  reasons  for  believing  that  man, 
in  his  perfect  condition,  has  body  as 
well  as  spirit.  And  that  belief  is  one 
chief  means  of  giving  definiteness  and 
reality  to  our  anticipations  of  a  future 
life.  3.  Transfigured  manhood.  The 
natural  body  changed  into  the  spiritual 
body.  4.  Sovereign  manhood.  Here 
is  a  Man  exalted  to  absolute,  universal 
dominion. 

III.  Look  forward.  —  The  day  is 
coming  wherein  men  shall  be  all  that 
God  proposed,  and  all  that  their 
Saviour  is.  Christ  is  the  measure  of 
man's  capacities.  He  is  the  true 
pattern  of  human  nature.  Christ  is 
the  prophecy  and  pledge  of  man's 
dominion.  From  Christ  comes  the 
power  by  which  the  prophecy  is  ful- 
filled, and  the  pattern  reproduced  in  all 
who  love  Him.  He  is  more  than  Pattern 
— He  is  Power;  more  than  Specimen 
— He  is  Source ;  more  than  Example — 
He  is  Redeemer.  The  answer  to  my 
own  evil  conscience,  to  the  sad  infer- 
ences from  man's  past  and  present,  to 
the  conclusions  which  are  illegitimately 
sought  to  be  extended  from  man's 
material  place  in  a  material  universe 
to  man's  spiritual  place  as  an  immortal 
and  moral  being,  Hes  in  that  twofold 
sight, — Christ  on  His  cross  the  measure 
of  man's  worth  in  the  eyes  of  God,  and 
of  man's  place  in  the  creation ;  Christ 


on  the  throne  the  prophecy  of  man's 
dignity,  and  of  His  most  sure  dominion. 
— A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Ver.  9.  The  Bitter  Cup. — Jesus  on 
the  cross  !  Why  is  He  there  ?  By 
the  force  of  circumstances  ?  Hell  and 
earth  had  conspired  against  Him. 
Every  power  and  device  which  malice 
could  summon  are  there  to  play  their 
infernal  part  in  His  crucifixion.  He 
dies  by  the  hand  of  the  law,  moved 
by  hatred ;  no — but  by  the  grace  of 
God.  Did  He  die  for  expediency' 
sake  ?  Must  one  life  be  sacrificed  to 
assert  the  rights  of  truth  and  justice  ? 
No — but  "  by  the  grace,"  etc.  "  For 
God  so  loved  the  world,"  etc.,  and 
"  delivered  Him  up  for  us  all."  The 
cup  was  sometimes  the  emblem  of 
bitterness.  So  in  Isa. li.  17  :  "Awake, 
awake,  stand  up,  0  Jerusalem,  which 
hast  drunk  at  the  hand  of  the  Lord 
the  cup  of  His  fury  ;  thou  hast  drunken 
the  dregs  of  the  cup  of  trembUng,  and 
wrung  them  out."  The  cup  of  hem- 
lock. And  He  said  in  Gethsemane, 
"  The  cup  which  the  Father  hath 
given  Me,  shall  I  not  drink  it  ? " 
"  They  gave  Me  also  gall  for  My 
meat ;  and  in  My  thirst  they  gave 
Me   vinegar  to  drink"  (Ps.  Ixix.  21). 

I.  The  death  of  Christ  was  an  act 
of  voluntary  submission  to  the  will 
of  the  Father. — The  admiral  of  the 
Orient  had  a  beautiful  son  of  thirteen 
years,  who  was  on  board  with  him  in 
the  battle  of  the  Nile.  He  was  at 
his  post  according  to  his  father's 
orders  when  the  ship  took  fire,  and 
he  stood  at  his  post  until  the  powder 
magazine  was  fired,  and  the  ship  blown 
to  atoms.  This  is  a  faint  picture  of 
the  terrible  sufferings  through  which 
the  Son  of  God  passed.  In  the  garden 
the  storm  began  to  rage,  and  the 
flames  issued  from  the  hold  ;  then  He 
cried,  "  Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let 
this  cup  pass  from  Me."  But  there 
was  no  answer.  Again  He  cried,  with 
blood-sweat  running  down  His  brow, 
but  no  answer.  The  storm  raged 
more  furiously.  The  nails  are  driven 
through   His  hands  and  feet.     He  is 

M  161 


CHAP.    II. 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS. 


on  the  cross,   and  the  flames  of  hell 
are  burning    around   Him.     He  cried 
again,   "My  God,  My  God,  why  hast 
Tliou  forsaken  Me  ?  "     But  no  answer. 
Crash  goes  the  vessel,  and  down  He 
sank  into  the  gulf  of  death.     "It  is 
finished !  "      The    heavens    are    black 
with  the  smoke.     The  earth  trembles. 
The   old    ship  of  the   ceremonial   law 
which    had    weathered    many   storms, 
and  borne  thousands  of  precious  souls 
on  its  deck  to  glory,  is  totally  wrecked. 
The  old  Aaronic  priesthood  is  shattered, 
and  the  Son  of  God  goes  down  in  the 
catastrophe  to  show  that  there  is  One 
who   obeys   the   Divine   behests    even 
unto    death.      All    ye    fallen    angels 
behold  Him,  and  ye  stiff-necked  sons 
of  men  witness  the  One  who  follows 
the  Captain's  orders  to  the  bitter  end ! 
"For   this    cause   the    Father   loveth 
Me,"  etc.     "  Lo,  I  come,  O  God,  to  do 
Thy   will,"   etc.     He  tasted   death  by 
the   grace   of   God,   and  the  cup  was 
drained  by  the  lip  of  love. 

II.  The  death  of  Christ  is  the 
highest  demonstration  of  God's  mercy. 
— The  gracious  promise  at  Eden's 
gate — the  woman's  seed  ;  the  breath 
of  mercy  tempering  the  moral  law  on 
Sinai,  "  Keeping  mercy  for  thou- 
sands," etc. — all  was  mercy.  As  the 
lamb  dies  on  the  ancient  altar,  mercy 
speaks  of  repentance  and  peace.  On 
Calvary  wisdom  is  out  of  sight,  power 
is  in  the  shade;  but  mercy  stands 
before  justice  in  full  array.  Jesus 
dies  because  God  is  merciful. 

III.  The  death  of  Christ  is  the 
mightiest  instrument  for  man's  salva- 
tion.— It  is  the  lever  with  which  God 
lifts  up  the  human  race.  It  has 
opened  the  way  to  the  Father — a 
sacrifice  for  sin.  In  the  Hght  of  the 
cross  justice  shines  brighter  than  in 
the  bowers  of  Eden.  He  has  made 
the  law  honourable.  Be  not  afraid ; 
the  living  way  to  the  Father  through 
His  flesh  is  straight  and  safe.  It  has 
dealt  a  deadly  blow  to  sin.  The  hero 
and  the  suitors.  Taking  down  the 
old  bow,  and  striking  home  the  arrow. 
Sin  dies :  the  death-scene  and  funeral 
were  witnessed  on  Calvary. 

162 


lY.  Jesus  is  crowned  with  ever- 
lasting glory.— There  is  no  more 
bitterness  in  the  cm^.— Weekly  Pulpit. 

Yer.  10.  The  Physical  Suffering,  or 
Cross  of  Christ.— The  apostle  is  here 
virtually  making  answer  to  Anselm's 
famous  question,   "  Cur  Deus  Homo." 
In  the  previous   verse,   finding    Jesus 
made  a  little  lower  than  the    angels, 
and,  for  the  suffering  of  death,  crowned 
with  glory  and  honour,  it  is  as  if  the 
apostle's  mind  began  to  ask  :  V/hy  did 
He  suffer  thus,  or  come  in  the  way  of 
suffering  at  all?     Why  could  not  God, 
the  Almighty,  strike   out  the  needed 
salvation  by  a  shorter  method,  with- 
out suffering,  viz.  by  His  omnipotent 
force  ?     Whereupon  He  makes  answer, 
virtually,   that    force    is    out    of    the 
question,    because   the    needed   salva- 
tion is  a  purely  moral  result,  which 
can   be   accomplished    only  by   moral 
means  and  motives.     The  declaration 
of  the  apostle's  answer  is,  that  God, 
the     Almighty,     must     needs     work 
morally  in   such   a  case,  and  not  by 
force ;  and  that  Christ,  the  Leader,  is 
made  perfect,   or  perfectly  competent, 
as  regards  the  moral  new  creation,  or 
bringing  up  into  glory,  by   His  cross 
and  the  tragic  eloquence  of  His  death. 
Let  then  our  question  be  :  Why  should 
Christ,  in  the  redeeming  of  souls  and 
bringing    them     unto    glory,    subject 
Himself  to  physical  suffering  ? — what, 
in   other   words,  were  the   necessities 
and    uses    of    that    suffering  ?      The 
question  is  here  confined  to  physical 
suffering.     He    encountered    two  dis- 
tinct kinds  of  suffering — mental  and 
bodily — that  which  belongs  to  burdened 
feeling  and    wounded  sensibility,  and 
that    which    is    caused    by    outward 
privation,  or  violence  done  against  the 
physical  nature.     In  the  New  Testa- 
ment  the   word   *' suffering "   is   only 
applied  to   the   latter.     But   physical 
suffering,  taken  by  itself,  or  as  being 
simply  what  it  is  in  itself,  is  never  a 
thing  of  value.      On  the  contrary,  it 
is,  so  far,  a  thing  on  the  losing  side  of 
existence.     It  is  not,  in  fact,  a  com- 
modity of  any  kind,  exchangeable  or 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   II. 


not  exchangeable,  but  a  simple  incom- 
modity,    a  quantity    purely    negative, 
and  a  worse  than  worthless  fact.     And 
this    is     true    of     Christ's    suffering. 
Taken  as  physical  pain  simply,  nothing 
is  to  be  made  of  it.     It  has  no  relation 
to  personal  desert ;  and,  regarding  the 
Divine  order  of  the  Sufferer,  it  is  even 
a    shocking    anomaly,    which    reason 
cannot   comprehend,    and    faith    only 
can    accept.     God    does    not   exact   a 
retributive  suffering,  even  in  what  is 
called  His  justice,  because  He  wants 
so    much    in   quantity    to    even    the 
amount  of  wrong,  but  only   that  He 
may    vindicate   the  right   and  testify 
His  honour  to  it  by  a  fit  expression. 
It  may  be  said  :  Are  not  the  physical 
sufferings  of  Christ  what  are   called, 
in  the  Scripture,  His  sacrifice  for  sin  ? 
And  what  is  the  use  of  sacrifice  but  to 
atone  God's  justice  ?     But  the  fact  is, 
that    all    the    sacrificial    and    lustral 
figures  set  forth  the  sacrifice,  not  as  a 
way  of  reconciling  God  to  us,  but  of 
reconciling   us  to  God.     And  so  uni- 
versally— I  do  not  know  the  instance 
where  Christ's  cross  and  physical  suffer- 
ing are  conceived  as  a  making  satis- 
faction to  God's  justice.     It  is  quite 
conceivable    that    Christ    could    have 
been  incarnated  into  the  world  in  such 
a    way    as    to    involve    no    physical 
liability  at  all.    There  was  no  necessary 
condition  of  physical  suffering  implied 
in   His  Messiahship.     Why   then   did 
He  come  under  conditions  of  suffering  ? 
what  uses  did  He  expect  to  serve  by 
it,  such  as  would  compensate  the  loss  ? 
It  was  done  that  He  might  be  made 
perfect    by    such    suffering, — perfect, 
that  is,  not  in  His  character,  but  in 
His    official    competency ;    perfect   as 
having  gotten  power  over  men,  through 
His   sufferings,    to    be   the    sufficient 
Bringer-on,  or  Captain,  He  undertakes 
to  be,    in   bringing    many   sons   unto 
glory.     Coming  down  to  do  a  work  of 
love.  He  simply  took  the  liabilities  of 
a  human  person  doing  such  a  work. 
What  then  is  the  manner  and  degree 
of  that  power  over  men's  convictions 
and  feelings  which  Christ  obtained  by 
His  physical  suffering  ? 


I.  The  manner  in  which,  by  His 
physical  suffering,  He  magnifies  and 
sanctifies  the  law  in  men's  con- 
victions.— The  true  Christian  idea  is 
that  Christ  is  magnifying  the  law  and 
making  it  honourable,  not  before  the 
remote  altitudes,  but  before  the 
sinning  souls  of  this  world  by  whom 
it  has  been  trampled.  Christ  came  into 
the  world  with  a  perfect  right  to  be 
exempted  from  physical  suffering. 
There  is  nothing  in  His  character  to 
require  this  kind  of  discipline,  or  even 
to  make  it  just.  He  also  had  power 
to  put  all  suffering  by,  and  sail  over 
the  world  as  the  stars  do,  in  a  region 
of  calm  and  comfort  above  it.  But 
He  would  not  infringe  on  the  penal 
order  of  God's  retributions.  Having 
taken  humanity.  He  takes  all  the 
judicial  liabilities  of  human  society 
under  sin,  preferring  in  this  manner 
to  submit  Himself  to  the  corporate 
order  of  God's  judgments,  and  testify 
in  that  manner  His  profound  homage 
to  law  and  justice.  He  will  let  the 
world  be  to  Him  just  that  river  of 
vinegar  and  gall  which  its  sins  have 
made  it  to  itself.  So  He  bears  the 
world's  bitter  curse,  magnifying,  even 
by  His  pains,  the  essential  sanctity 
of  law  and  justice.  He  powerfully 
honours  that  justice  in  its  dealings 
with  the  world,  by  refusing  to  let  even 
His  innocence  take  Him  out  of  the 
murderous  and  bloody  element  it 
mixes.  Hence  the  marvellous,  unheard 
of  power  His  life  and  gospel,  and 
especially  His  suffering  death,  have 
exerted  in  men's  consciences. 

II.  The  physical  suffering  of  Christ 
has  an  immediate  value,  under  that 
great  law  of  human  nature,  that 
ordains  the  disarming  of  all  wrong, 
and  the  prostration  of  all  violence,  by 
a  right  suffering  of  the  evils  they 
inflict. — Nothing  breaks  the  bad  will 
of  evil  so  completely  as  to  have  had 
its  way,  and  done  its  injury,  and  looked 
upon  its  victim.  When  the  wrath  of 
transgression  hurls  itself  upon  the 
Lord's  person,  sparing  not  His  life, 
nor  even  letting  Him  die  easily  or  in 
respect,  the  bad  will  is  only  the  more 

163 


CHAP.  n. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


fatally  broken,  that,  accomplishing  so 
much  in  a  way  so  dreadful,  it  has  yet 
accomplished  nothing.  Suffering  kills, 
how  often,  the  wrong-doing  that  in- 
flicts it. 

III.  The  sublime  morality  or  moral 
worth  of  Jesus  could  never  have  been 
sharply  impressed,  except  for  the  sen- 
sibilities appealed  to  by  His  physical 
suffering. — If  He  had  lived  in  condi- 
tion, and  died  as  one  admired  for  His 
excellence,  the  real  depth  of  His  virtue 
could  never  have  been  conceived.  All 
the  most  effective  powers  of  moral 
impression  contained  in  His  character 
would  have  been  wanting  if  He  had 
not  borne  the  lot  of  wrong  and  bitter 
suffering. 

IV.  It  is  only  by  His  suffering  in 
the  flesh  that  He  reveals  or  fitly 
expresses  the  suffering  sensibility  of 
God. — As  certain  as  God  has  any  sen- 
sibility, such  as  belongs  to  a  perfect 
mind  and  heart,  that  sensibility  must 
be  profoundly  moved  by  all  misery,  im- 
parity, and  wrong.  Impassible,  physi- 
cally spealdng.  He  is  not  impassive  to 
evils  that  offend  or  grieve  His  moral 
perfections.  He  suffers  because  He  is 
a  perfect  being,  and  according  to  the 
measures  of  His  perfection.  This 
Christ,  for  our  salvation's  sake,  has 
taken  tha  flesh  and  suffered  even  death 
in  order  to  impress.  Nature,  in  her 
scenes  and  objects,  had  no  power  to 
express  this  moral  pain  of  God's  heart. 
The  ancient  providential  history  was 
trying,  always  vainly,  to  elaborate  the 
same.  Nothing  could  ev^er  express  it 
but  the  physical  suffering  of  Jesus. 
And  everything  turns  here  on  the 
matter  of  physical  suffering  ;  for,  to 
our  coarse  human  habit,  nothing  else 
appears  at  first  to  have  much  reality. 
And  here  comes  to  view  the  relation 
of  the  agony  to  the  cross.  One  is 
the  reaUty,  the  other  is  the  outward 
sign  or  symbol.  In  one  view  it  is  even 
a  scandal  that  we  make  so  much  more 
of  the  cross  than  we  do  of  the  agony. 
The  grand  thing  to  be  revealed  is  that 
which  stands  in  the  agony;  and  the 
superior  value  of  the  cross,  or  physical 
{iuftering,  lies  in  the  fact  that  it  comes 

1(54 


to  us,  at  our  low  point,  speaking  to  us 
of  the  other,  in  a  way  that  we  can 
feel. 

V.  It  was  necessary  that  Christ 
should  suffer  in  the  body,  and  get 
power  over  men  by  that  kind  of 
suffering,  because  the  world  itself  is 
put  in  a  tragic  economy,  requiring 
its  salvation  to  be  an  essentially  tragic 
salvation. — Human  history  is  tragic 
in  its  characters  and  scenes,  and  its 
mateiial  generally.  The  great  crimes 
are  tragic,  and  the  great  virtues  scarcely 
less  so.  So  if  Christ  will  pluck  away 
eternal  judgment  for  the  world,  He 
must  bleed  for  it.  So  great  a  salvation 
must  tear  a  passage  into  the  world  by 
some  tragic  woe.  The  tragic  power  of 
the  cross  takes  hold  of  all  that  is 
dullest  and  hardest  and  most  intract- 
able in  our  sin,  and  moves  over  palsied 
nature,  all  through,  in  mighty  throbs 
of  life.  And  this  is  Christianity, 
meeting  us  just  where  we  most  require 
to  be  met.  Christ  is  a  great  Bringer- 
on  for  us,  because  He  suffers  for  us. 
Christianity  is  a  mighty  salvation, 
because  it  is  a  tragic  salvation.  — 
Horace  Bushnell^  D.D. 

The  Mm'ol  Necessity  for  Christ's 
Death. — Unlike  St.  Paul,  the  writer 
never  enters  into  what  may  be  called 
*'  the  philosophy  of  the  plan  of  salva- 
tion." He  never  attempts  to  throw 
any  light  upon  the  mysterious  subject 
of  the  antecedent  necessity  for  the 
death  of  Christ.  He  dwells  upon 
Christ's  death  almost  exclusively  in  its 
relatio7i  to  us.  The  expression  which 
he  here  uses,  "  it  was  morally  fitting 
for  Him,"  is  almost  the  only  one  which 
he  devotes  to  what  may  be  called  the 
transcendent  side  of  Christ's  sacrifice — 
the  death  of  Christ  in  its  relation  to 
God.  The  "  moral  fitness"  here  touched 
upon  is  the  necessity  for  absolutely 
sympathetic  unity  between  the  High 
Priest  and  those  for  whom  He  offered 
the  perfect  sacrifice  (Luke  xxiv.  46). 
Philo  also  uses  the  phrase  "it  became 
Him." — Farrar. 

Perfect  through  buffering,-— The  text 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.  II. 


gains  clearness  if  for  the  word 
"  Captain  "  we  put  the  more  general 
term  "Leader,"  or  read  the  verse  thus: 
"In  bringing  many  sons  to  glory,  to 
make  the  Bringer-on  of  their  salva- 
tion perfect  through  suffering."  By 
"  perfect "  we  understand  perfectly 
(^fticient  to  sustain  and  to  fulfil  His 
office,  and  to  accomplish  His  work,  of 
"  bringing  many  sons  unto  glory." 

I.  The  sufferings  of  Jesus. — 1.  Some 
of  the  deepest,   though  least   compre- 
hensible, of  the  sufferings  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  must  have  come  out  of  His  very 
being  and  nature.    He  was  God,  with 
all  the  feeling  of  God  towards  sin  and 
its  consequences.       His   body  of    flesh 
and  blood  must  have  been  to  Him  a 
constant  limitation  and  burden.     That 
human  nature  which  Jesus  took,  He 
took  as  it  was — no  longer  the  perfect 
thing  of  the  Eden  Paradise,  but  lowered, 
enfeebled,    in    some    strange   ways    a 
bruised  and  wounded  thing,  shaped  and 
fitted   through   long  years   to  be   the 
agency   of   man's    depraved   will    and 
sinful  soul.     A  sinful  nature  the  Son 
of  God  could  not  take ;  but  a  bodily 
nature    as   marred   and   enfeebled   by 
sin  He  did  take  ;  and  we  can  but  very 
unworthily  conceive  the  strain  on  His 
daily  life    of    the  effort  to    utter   His 
pure  soul  through  that  frail  and  feeble 
body.     And  that  Divine-human  being 
was  not  set  in  seclusion,  and  fitted  to 
a   place   where   no   annoyance   should 
reach  it.     It  was  put  in  the  very  midst 
of   the  world,   and  the  world's  worst. 
A  pure  soul  can  only  be  happy  in  pure 
surroundings.     Ensphere  true  goodness 
in    evil,    and   you    may   not    thereby 
turn  the  good  to  evil,   but  you  can- 
not help  piercing,  wounding,  grieving, 
goodness  to  the  very  heart.     2.  Some 
of  the  svifFerings  of  Jesus  must  have 
come  out  of  His  unusual  capacity  for 
sympathy.     To  sympathise  is  to  have 
a  fellow-feeling  with  a  sufferer,  and  to 
take  his  burden  upon  our  heart.     Then 
if  Christ  bore  the  burden  of  the  sins 
and  sorrows  of  this  grief- loaded,  weary 
earth    of    ours,    must    He    not    have 
suffered  ?    Even  love  is  scarcely  possible 
without   suffering.     The  worthier  the 


love  is,  the  more  it  makes  us  one  with 
its   object ;    and   if   it   unites  us  with 
his  joys,  makes  us  keenly  sensible  of 
his  sorrows,  and  deeply  touched  by  his 
sins.    3.  Something  of  the  sufferings  of 
Jesus  appear  as  we  consider  the  work 
He  undertook.     (1)  Part  of  that  work 
was  to  make  men  see  and  feel   that 
God  was   their   Father.     The    memory 
of  their  sufferings  and  sacrifices  on  our 
behalf  make  precious  to  us  our  earthly 
father  and  mother.     If  God  is  to  be 
apprehended    by   us   as  our   heavenly 
Father,  it  can  only  be  in  the  revelation 
of   His  fatherly  sacrifices  and  suffer- 
ings, borne  in  the  endeavour  to  redeem 
us,  and  win  us  away  from  evil.     But 
that   work   Jesus   the    Son   must    do. 
That  revelation  of  the  fatherliness  of 
God    He   must    make.      (2)    He   was 
to  demonstrate  to  men  the  evil  of  sin. 
Men  can  never  know  that  save  through 
its  consequences.    Death — the  death  of 
peace    and   purity   and    hope — is   the 
great   revealer  of   sin.     So   our    Lord 
let  men  see  in  Himself  the  evil  of  sin. 
He  laid   Himself  open  to  the  fiercest 
attacks,    and    rudest    buffetings,    and 
deepest  anguish  that  sin  could  bring 
upon  a  man.     He  put    Himself   into 
our    human  nature,  that  in  suffering 
He  might  show  the  world  what  sin  is, 
and  what  sin  can  do.     The  corruption 
of  Greece  was  shown  up  when  it  had 
spent  itself   in  the  hemlock-death   of 
its  great  teacher  Socrates.     The  utter 
and  hopeless  badness  of  humanity  is 
seen  in  this — men  even  turned  out  and 
crucified  incarnate  virtue,  in  the  person 
of  God's  dear  Son. 

II.  How  did  the  sufferings  of  our 
Lord  fit  Him  to  be  the  Bringer-on  of 
sons  to  glory? — 1.  Those  sufferings 
brought  Him  experience.  God  saves 
moral  beings  by  bringing  moral  forces 
to  bear  on  them.  He  brings  the  most 
persuasive  influence  by  giving  to  us 
a  human  Saviour.  We  want  to  feel 
sure  that  He  has  experience,  and  an 
experience  like  ours.  If  He  has  indeed 
trodden  our  valleys  of  humiliation, 
then  He  does  know  our  human  Hfe 
altogether,  and  can  help  us.  2.  The 
sufferings  of  Jesus  set  Him  most  fully 

1G5 


CHAP.   II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS. 


in  the  love  and  trust  of  His  people. 
He  might  have  been  the  founder  of 
a  rehgious  ceremonial ;  but  a  new 
rehgious  system  could  never  bring  any 
soul  to  glory.  He  might  have  been  a 
ffreat  reformer  ;  but  a  reformation  is 
not  necessarily  a  salvation.  He  might 
have  been  a  teacher,  with  new  truths 
and  principles ;  but  to  furnish  stimu- 
lus for  the  intellect  of  man  is  not 
to  change  and  renew  his  heart.  No 
man  can  be  really  a  new  man  until 
his  heart  is  reached.  Our  Lord 
Jesus,  then,  if  He  is  to  save  the  world, 
must  get  into  the  world's  heart.  He 
must  draw  out  to  Himself  the  full 
affection  of  a  man's  soul.  But  how 
shall  that  be  done  ?  By  an  exhibition 
of  perfect  purity  and  beauty?  Men 
can  admire  without  loving.  By  a 
revelation  of  Divine  claims  ?  Men  are 
too  bnsy  to  heed  them  ;  and  unless  God 
utters  His  laws  amid  thunders  such  as 
those  of  Sinai,  men  will  not  heed. 
Then  let  us  adore  the  Divine  solution 
of  the  mystery.  God  sets  before  men 
a  sacrificed,  suffering,  dying  Saviour. 
ISTo  man  can  pass  by  the  cross  of 
Calvary  altogether  unmoved,  for 
suffering  is  sacred  to  every  man.  The 
suffering  Saviour  gets  into  the  world's 
heart,  according  to  His  own  word, 
"  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth, 
will  draw  all  men  unto  Me."  3.  The 
sufferings  of  Jesus,  in  their  result, 
showed  the  way  open,  through  suffering, 
to  glory.  Suffering  is  God's  witness 
to  the  evil  of  sin.  Every  pain,  wrong, 
passion,  disease,  is  a  letter  designed  to 
help  us  in  spelling  out  the  abominable- 
ness  of  sin.  Yet  the  grace  of  God 
turns  the  evil  into  good,  changes 
earthen  clay  into  better  than  fine 
gold,  compels  suffering  to  become  even 
a  pathway  to  glory.  God  sent  His 
own  Son  to  tread  that  pathway  first ; 
and  He  opens  the  way  for  us.  We 
watch  Him  struggling  through  the 
common  sorrows  of  a  human  life, 
through  the  over-crowding  sorrows  of 
an  ignominious  death,  and  we  behold 
J  Jim  at  last  reaching  a  throne  of  ever- 
lasting dominion,  and  seated  for  ever 
on  the  right  hand  of  God.  Along  that 
166 


pathway  to  a  like  glory  He  is  leading 
us.  Apply  :  1 .  Jesus  is  the  Bringer-on 
of  sons  to  glory.  2.  Jesus  is  the  only 
Bringer-on. 

Ver.  11.  Christ  the  Friend. — This 
verse  is  a  statement  of  the  union  that 
exists  between  Christ  and  His  people, 
and  of  the  perfect  sympathy  which  the 
Elder  Brother  feels  for  the  other 
members  of  the  family  of  God. 

I.  The  vitality  of  the  union  that 
exists  between  Christ  and  His  Church. 
— 1.  The  union  between  Christ  and  a 
believer  is  not  so  much  one  of  co- 
operation as  one  of  incorporation.  For 
as  my  limbs  are  a  part  of  my  body, 
as  the  branch  is  part  of  a  tree,  so 
Christ  and  His  people  are  verily  and 
indeed  members  one  of  another.  And 
the  union  between  Christ  and  His  true 
Church — the  members  of  His  body — 
can  never  be  dissolved.  2.  Treat  this 
truth  as  a  solemn  reality.  Do  not 
think  of  it  as  a  mere  theory  or 
doctrine  or  speculation.  It  is  a  great 
fact  to  live  by  day  by  day.  3.  Since 
the  Saviour  and  His  people  are  to- 
gether sons  of  one  God,  He  in  His  love 
and  condescension  annihilates  the  dis- 
tance that  is  between  them,  and  He 
calls  them  brethren.  He  is  "  the  first- 
born among  many  brethren."  He  **  is 
not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren." 

II.  Connected  with  this  truth  there 
is  the  assurance  of  Christ's  constancy. 
— There  is  no  sorrow,  no  emotion,  that 
we  need  hide  from  our  "  Brother  "  in 
heaven ;  for  there  is  no  pang  that  the 
members  feel  which  is  not  felt  by  Him. 
Nor  is  there  any  interruption  to  His 
sympathy. 

Application. — As  Christ  is  "not 
ashamed  to  call  us  brethren,"  let  none 
of  us  be  ashamed  of  Him.  And  re- 
member that  to  confess  Christ  is  to 
maintain  His  authority  when  it  is 
despised,  to  uphold  His  laws  when 
they  are  contemned,  to  oppose  His 
enemies  where  we  may  make  enemies 
ourselves.  Let  us  thus  confess  Christ 
our  Friend. — Canon  Bell. 

Vers.  11-13.  The  Perfect  Manhood  of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   11. 


Chinst. — "  Sanctify  "  in  the  text,  and 
throughout  this  epistle,  does  not  refer 
to  the  cleansing  work  of  the  Spirit,  but 
to  the  atoning  work  of  the  Son.  The 
teaching  of  the  text  is — the  perfect 
manhood  of  our  blessed  Lord. 

1.  The  proposition. — That  "  both  He 
that  sanctifieth  and  they  who  are 
sanctified  are  all  of  one."  Of  one  what  ? 
"  Father,"  "  family,"  *'  race,"  "  blood," 
"  character  "  ?  No  ;  of  one  "  nature  " 
(ver.  10).  The  perfect  manhood  of  the 
Son  of  God  is  part  of  our  faith,  and 
the  very  foundation  of  our  hope  of 
heaven.  The  disciples  needed  all  the 
evidence  of  His  stupendous  miracles, 
the  dazzling  scene  of  His  transfigura- 
tion, the  crowning  proof  of  His 
resurrection,  to  convince  them  that  He 
was  perfect  God  ;  we  need  to  feel  that 
if  in  any  respect  He  had  been  unlike 
"  His  brethren,"  it  would  have  de- 
feated one  great  purpose  of  His 
mission.  He  was  precisely  *'  of  one " 
with  us. '  \.  Ill  person.  His  body, 
though  always  a  chaste  and  perfect 
temple  in  which  the  fulness  of  the 
Godhead  might  dwell,  had  none  of  that 
superhuman  glory  with  which  we  so 
often  associate  it.  John  the  Baptist 
"  knew  Him  not "  till  he  saw  the  Spirit 
descend  on  Him.  "Is  not  this  the 
carpenter's  son  ? "  Mary  supposed 
"  Him  to  be  the  gardener."  2.  In 
this  perfect  body  there  was  enshrijied  as 
perfectly  human  a  soid.  The  condi- 
tions of  the  Incarnation  required  that 
both  natures  should  exist  in  all  their 
perfectness,  in  unity  of  person,  but 
without  any  confusion  of  substance — 
and  these  two  conditions  were  fulfilled 
in  the  Saviour.  We  have  no  more  right 
to  deify  the  Saviour's  manhood  than 
to  humanise  His  Godhead.  The  human 
soul  of  the  Saviour  was  so  far  distinct 
from  His  Deity  as  to  be  in  every 
respect  finite.  His  human  soul  was 
not  possessed  of  an  unassailable  purity. 
As  a  human  soul  He  wept.  He  prayed. 
He  suffered.  3.  This  oneness  of  nature 
between  the  Christian  and  His  Lord  is 
dependent  not  simply  on  the  memory 
that  He  was  incarnate  once,  but  on  the 
fact  also   that   He    is   incarnate    now. 


Never  was  the  Saviour  more  truly  a 
man  than  He  is  now.  Note  His 
appearances  to  His  disciples  after  His 
resurrection,  the  manner  of  His  ascen- 
sion. He  is  *'God  over  all";  but  no 
less  surely  is  He  perfect  Man,  throbbing 
with  the  memory  of  human  sorrow, 
touched  with  the  feeling  of  human 
infirmity,  filled  with  sympathy  for 
human  nature. 

II.  The  confirmation  of  this  doc- 
trine in  the  Scriptures  (vers.  12, 13). — 
The  first  is  taken  from  Ps.  xxii.  22 — 
a  psalm  prophetic  of  our  Lord's  suffer- 
ings. 1.  *^  I  will  declare  .  .  .  unto  My 
breth7'en."  This  prophecy  was  fulfilled. 
"No  man  hath  seen  God,"  etc.  "I 
have  declared  Thy  name  unto  them, 
and  I  will  declare  it."  2.  "/w  the 
midst  of  the  Chu7'ch  I  will  sing  praise 
unto  Thee."  This  was  fulfilled.  Imme- 
diately before  His  passion  they  sang  a 
hymn.  3.  He  engaged  in  human  em- 
ployments ;  and  while  we  share  in  these 
employments,  we  are  truly  of  one  with 
Him.  What  honour !  He  is  not 
ashamed  to  call  you  His  brother,  sister, 
mother.  {\)  To  Christians.  How  often 
since  you  have  named  the  Saviour's 
name  has  He  been  "  ashamed  to  call  " 
you  brethren  ?  Are  you  faithful  or 
faithless  ?  How  often  ashamed  to 
confess  Him  before  a  sneering  world  ? 
*'  If  any  man  sin,  we  have  an  Advocate 
with  the  Father."  "  Seeing  then  that 
we  have  such  a  High  Priest  passed 
into  the  heavens,  Jesus  ...  let  us  come 
boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace,"  etc. 
(2)  To  unconverted.  Seek  Him  now. 
Peligion  is  here  presented  in  its  most 
alluring  form.  Come.  Plead  His 
atonement,  and  know  what  it  is  to 
be  "  all  of  one  "  with  Christ. — Frederic 
Greeves,  D.D. 

Ver.  14.  The  Personality  of  the  Devil. 
— This  was  one  reason  why  the  Son  of 
God  took  on  Him  our  nature,  that 
He  might  put  Himself  into  circum- 
stances where  death  was  possible,  in 
order  that  by  dying  He  might  free  us 
from  our  ancient  enemy.  He  has  won 
the  victory,  and  it  is  our  fault  if  we 
are  not  free. 

167 


CHAP.   II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


T.  The  being  who  was  to  be  reduced  always  ivhat  he  is  noio.     He  was  once 

to   impotence  by  the  death  of  Jesus  a    glorious    archangel.      He    became 

Christ  —What  do  we  know  about  his  what  he  is  now  by  his  own  act  and 

history,  character,  his  power  of  affect-  deed.       The    Bible    always    represents 

incT  ourselves  and  our  destiny  ?     Some  Satan,  not  as  a  self- existent,  evil  being, 

say :  1.  "  It  is  an  unjjleasant  subject^  but   as  a   fallen    and   apostate  angel. 

Nothing  is  gained,  and  much  is  lost.  There  is  no  such  thing  in  the  universe 

bv  shrinking  from  fact  because  fact  is  of  the   almighty  and  all-good  God  as 

disagreeable.     Religion,  beyond  every-  a  self-existing,  originally  created  devil. 

thing   else,   should   have   the   courage  2.  The  Satan  of  Scripture  has  limited, 

to  look  truth  in  the  face.      2.  "  The  although    extensive,   powers.       It   is    a 

devil  is  an  unp'ofitahle  subject  for  dis-  mistake    to    think  _  of    this    being    as 

cnssion.''     Much,   practically,   depends  omnipresent.     He  is  often  enough    in 

on  our  believing  in  him  or  not.     We  the  way — not  always— not  everywhere, 

are  more  profoundly  affected  by  feel-  His  power  is  only  for  a  given  period, 

ing  ourselves  close  to  a  living  being,  III.  "How  can  you  reconcile  the 

than  by  feeling   ourselves   under  the  continued  toleration  of  such  a  being 

vague   and  more  intangible  influence  as  the  Evil   One   by   God,   with   His 

of  a  negative  principle.      When  it  is  attributes  of  goodness  and  almighti- 

embodied  in  a  living  intelligence— in  a  ness  ?  " — The  Master  of  the  universe 

living  will — the  case  is  very  different.  sees  farther  than  we  do,  and  will  one 

How  can  evil  itself  be,  strictly  speak  day,  perhaps,  enable  us  to  understand 

ing,  a  principle  !     Evil  is  a  perverted  in  a  measure  these  rules  of  His  govern- 

selfish  quality  of  the  will  of  an  already  ment  which  perplex  us  now. 

existing  personal  creature.     Evil  could  TV.  Let  US   fix  in   our  minds   the 

not  exist  apart  from  such  a  creature  words  and  lessons  of  the  text. — Sin 

unless  the  will  of  such  a  creature  was  brought  death.    Jesus,  as  man,  invaded 

free.     When  we  speak  of  the  person-  this  region  of  human  experience,  and 

ality  of  Satan,  we  mean  that  he  is  an  conquered  for  Himself  and  for  us  its 

intelligence  capable  of  reflecting  on  his  old    oppressor.      Let    us    follow    the 

own  existence ;  he  is  a  will  which  has  guidance    of    faith.      The    lessons   of 

had    the    power    of    determining    its  Calvary  do  not  lessen  with  the  lapse 

destiny.  of  time ;    and,  among   these,  not  the 

II.  There  is  no  real  room  for  ques-  least  blessed  is   the  enfeeblement  of 

tion  as  to  the  existence  of  a  personal  Satan,  and   the  deliverance   of   those 

evil  spirit,  if  we  believe  the  Bible  to  who,  through  fear  of  death,  would  else 

be  a  trustworthy  source  of  information  be  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage. 

on  the  subject. — All  that  implies  per-  —H.  P.  Liddon,  D.D. 
sonality  is  attributed  to  Satan  in  Holy 

Scripture,     as     distinctly     as     it     is  Yer.  15.  The  Fear  of  Death  a  Life- 

attributed  to  God.     The  New  Testa-  long   Bondage. — It  is   not   possible  to 

ment  representation  is  fuller  and  more  over-estimate  the   value  to  humanity 

sustained  than  that  of  the  Old  Testa-  of  the  "  sanctity  of  human  life."     It 

ment.     Jesus  Christ  spoke  of  Satan's  is  the  primary  law  stamped  upon  the 

personality  :    e.g.    in    parable   of    the  new  human  race  when  it  stepped  forth 

sower ;  the   saying  about  Judas ;  His  from  the  Ark  to  take  possession  of  a 

denunciation  of  the  Jews.     His  prayer  cleansed  earth.  "  Whoso  sheddeth  man's 

bequeathed  to  us,  "  Deliver  us  from  the  blood,  by  man  shall  his  blood  be  shed  : 

Evil  One."     The  facts  of  human  life  for  in  the  image  of  God  made  He  man  " 

bear  out  what  we  learn  from  the  lips  (Gen.  ix.  6).     The  sanctity  of  life  is  the 

of  Jesus  Christ.     There  are  two  points  basis   of   society,  for   it   makes   every 

in  the  Christian  representation  of  the  man  jealous  of  his  brother's  life  for  the 

Evil   One   to   which   attention  should  sake  of  preserving  his  own.     There  is 

specially  be  given.     1.  Satan  was  not  no  safety  for  any  one  in  lands  where 

168 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.    II. 


this  primary  law  for  humanity  is  not 
recognised.     But  there  is,  of  necessity, 
an   apparently   bad  side  to  this  good 
law.    It  involves  dread  of  death.    And 
this  dread  is  universal.     It  applies  to 
all  beings  in  whom  is  the  breath  of 
life.     It  is   natural.     But   the   moral 
nature   of   man    at    once    puts  a  new 
sanctity  on  life,  and  a  new  dread  on 
death.      The    moral   being    man   has 
brought   sin  into  the  world,   and  put 
a    new   significance   upon   death.      In 
the    consciousness    of    having    sinned 
there  has  come  the  fear  of  penalties 
that   must  attend  upon  the  sin,  and 
a  dread  of  death  as  taking  us  where 
those  penalties  must  be  endured.     So 
the  consciousness  of  sin  has  put  on  men 
a  life- long  dread  of  death.     And  that 
dread  has  come  to  be  so  stamped  upon 
the  race  that  it  seems  like  a  second 
nature,    and   the    good   cannot   shake 
themselves  altogether  free  of  it.     The 
saintly  soul  could  only  say  this  much, 
"  I  am  not  afraid  of  death,  but  I  am 
afraid  of  dying."     What  can  give  us 
liberty  from  this  enslaving  fear  ?    Only 
the  possession  of  a  new  life — soul -life 
— which  death  is  altogether  powerless 
to  touch.     Over  the  animal- life  of  man 
death  has   its  power.     Over  the   real 
life,  the  soul-life,  when   quickened  in 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  through 
faith  in  Christ,  death   has  no  power. 
The  life  in  Christ  is  a  spiritual  and 
eternal  life.     Jesus  Himself  said,  "  He 
that  believeth  in  Me  shall  never  die." 
By  the  new  life  He  gives.  He  delivers 
those   who    *'  through   fear    of    death 
were    all    their    lifetime    subject    to 
bondage." 

Vers.  16-18.  Christ  made  like  us  in 
all  things. — Two  points  in  which  Christ 
was  different  from  us  :  1.  In  being 
God  as  well  as  man.  2.  In  being 
without  sin.  In  these  things  He  had 
to  be  unlike  His  brethren,  or  He  could 
not  have  been  a  Saviour  at  all.  In 
all  other  things  it  behoved  Him  to  be 
made  like  vmto  us.  There  was  no 
part  of  our  condition  that  He  did  not 
humble  Himself  unto.  1.  He  passed 
through  all  the  terms  of  our  life  from 


childhood  to  manhood.  He  was  an 
infant  of  days.  He  bore  the  trials 
and  pains  of  boyhood.  He  suffered 
the  afflictions  and  anxieties  of  manhood. 
2.  He  tasted  the  difficulties  of  many 
situations  in  life.  3.  He  had  special 
trials  in  connection  with  His  own 
family.  4.  He  was  assailed  by  Satan. 
5.  He  was  tested  by  God.  The  pur- 
pose of  His  human  experience  was : 
(1)  to  make  an  atonement  for  our 
sins ;  (2)  to  succour  His  people  under 
their  trials. — R.  M.  McCheyne. 

Yer.  17.  Priestly  Reconciliations. — 
"  To  make  propitiation  for  the  sins  of 
the  people."  There  is  no  attempt  to 
explain  precisely  how  the  high  priest 
made  the  propitiations.  Attention  is 
fixed  upon  his  ability  to  do  it ;  and 
the  ability  is  found  very  largely  to 
depend  upon  his  personal  character. 
He  could  make  propitiation  because 
he  was  a  "  merciful  and  faithful  high 
priest " — merciful  by  reason  of  his 
common  experience  with  those  whom 
he  represented.  He  well  understood 
their  sins  of  frailty  and  of  will,  because 
he  shared  them.  If  a  rebellious  nation 
sent  an  intercessor  to  plead  for  pardon, 
they  would  select  one  of  themselves, 
one  most  deeply  interested  in  all  their 
trouble,  and  the  best  and  most  accept- 
able man  among  them.  That  man 
would  not  only  propitiate  by  what  he 
said  and  did — he  would  propitiate  by 
what  he  was  ;  for  standing  before  the 
king,  that  man  would  show  what  the 
people  were,  and  wanted  to  be.  He 
would  embody  the  people  to  the  view 
of  the  king ;  and  nothing  could  possibly 
propitiate  a  king  like  such  a  living 
persuasion  that  his  people  had  come 
to  be  right,  were  right,  and  meant  to 
be  right.  Along  this  line  the  old 
priestly  reconciliations  of  Mosaism  gain 
simple  and  natural  explanation.  The 
high  priest  was  acceptable  to  Jehovah, 
because  he  was  in  right  relations.  But 
he  stood  for  the  people,  and  they  were 
as  acceptable  as  he,  because  they  were 
in  the  same  right  relations.  Along 
this  line  the  propitiation  of  Jesus  can 
be  explained.    He  is  personally  accept- 

169 


CHAP.    II. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


able  to  God  as  a  man,  but  He  stands 
before  God  for  all  who  are  in  the  same 
relations  of  purposed  love  and  obedience 
as  lie ;  and  they  are  accepted  in  and 
with  liim. 

Sympathetic  Intercession. — When  a 
tender-hearted  mother  would  plead 
with  the  judge  for  a  child  about  to  be 
condemned,  how  would  hei-  tears  trickle 
down,  what  v/eeping  rhetoric  w^ould 
she  use  to  the  judge  for  mercy  !  Thus 
the  Lord  Josus  is  full  of  sympathy  and 
tenderness  (Ileb.  i'.o  17),  that  He 
might  be  a  merciful  High  Priest ;  He 
has  left  His  passion,  yet  not  His  com- 
passion. An  ordinary  lawyer  is  not 
affected  with  the  cause  he  pleads,  nor 
does  he  care  what  way  he  goes  ;  it  is 
his  profit  makes  him  plead,  not  affection. 
But  Christ  intercedes  feelingly ;  it  is 
His  own  cause  which  He  pleads  in  the 
cause  of  His  people. — T.  Watson. 

Ver.  1 8.  The  Helper  of  the  Tempted. 
— In  promise  (Gen.  iii.  15)  and  in 
fact  (Matt.  iv.  1)  the  Saviour's  work 
from  the  very  first  is  associated  with 
the  tempted ;  and  put  His  mission  in 
any  words  you  will,  you  cannot  hide 
the  link  which  unites  Christ  unto  the 
tempted,  and  the  tempted  unto  Christ. 
Wherefore  did  we  need  a  Saviour,  if 
not  because  we  were  overborne  with 
evil,  and  of  ourselves  had  not  strength 
enough  to  cope  with  it  ?  A  Christ  who 
could  not  help  me  in  my  temptations 
would  be  no  Saviour  to  me.  He  might 
startle  me  with  revelations,  astonish 
me  by  works,  amaze  me  with  power, 
awe  with  holiness,  instruct  me  by 
teaching ;  but  if  in  the  infirmity  |of 
my  moral  weakness  He  could  not 
stand  by  my  side,  put  His  shoulder  to 
my  shoulder,  and  help  me  to  fight  the 
daily  battle  of  my  daily  life,  whatever 
else  He  might  be  to  me,  He  could 
never  be  my  Saviour  ;  for  it  is  only 
as  we  are  made  strong  to  resist  and 
overcome  temptation  that  we  can 
be  saved.  This  relation  of  Chris- 
tianity to  the  tempted  is,  in  fact,  one 
of  the  secrets  of  its  hold  upon  the 
human  heart.     To  be  a  Christian  at 

170 


all  we  must  start  from  the  conscious- 
ness of  weakness ;  and  the  religion  of 
Christ   is   the  religion   of  the    strong, 
only  by  being  first  the  religion  of  the 
weak.      Christ   is   the  Helper   of  the 
tempted,  by  sympathy  learnt  in   the 
endurance   of    the   same    temptations 
from  which  He  came  to  save.     Some 
things  can  only  be  learnt  by  experi- 
ence.    Sympathy  is  one.     There  were 
some  things  which   were  not  Christ's 
to  know,  until  like  us,  by  bitter  human 
experience.   He  had   learnt   them    for 
Himself.      He  shared   our    experience 
of  temptation  in  its  full  completeness. 
Wherever  w^e  are  tempted,  so  was  He 
— through    the    senses,    the    appetite, 
the  reason,  the  imagination,  the  affec- 
tion, the  ambition,  the  will — tempted 
wherever    there    seemed    a    point     of 
vantage  for  the  tempter.     The    three 
temptations  on  the   threshold   of    His 
public  work  were  representative.     They 
were  representative  of  temptations  in 
His  unrecorded  history,  of  the  number 
and  intensity  of  which  we  can  form  no 
idea.     We  cannot  too  fully  accept  the 
great  doctrine  of  the  completeness  of 
our  Lord's  humanity.     By  sympathy, 
learnt  through    the   temptations  of   a 
common   human  experience,  Christ  is 
the    Helper    of    the    tempted.      But 
sympathy  does  not  seem  enough  ;  we 
want  strength.      Will  this  sympathy 
of  Christ  bring  us  strength  ?     It  will. 
The  sphere  of  sympathy  is  spiritual, 
and  within  that  sphere  there   is  no- 
where to  be   found  such  strength    as 
that    which    comes    from    sympathy. 
Its  power  is  electric.     Men,  naturally 
cowards,  by  sympathy  have  been  made 
brave,  and  there  is  no  trial  of  human 
suffering    which    sympathy    has    not 
enabled  men  and  women  courageously 
to   bear.      Amongst    the   world's    re- 
generating influences  there  is  none  for 
a  moment  comparable  to  the  sympathy 
of  Christ.     For  the  sympathy  of  the 
strong  helps  always  to  strengthen  the 
weak.     If  I  wanted  to  strengthen  a 
morally  weak  man,  I  would  link  him 
with  a  man  as  strong  as  he  was  weak, 
quite    sure    that    the    companionship 
would  act  on  him  like  a  tonic,  or  be 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   It. 


to  him  like  the  sweet,  fresh  breath  of 
mountain  aii'.  And  thus  it  is  that 
Christ,  in  His  great  sinless  strength, 
is  the  Helper  of  the  tempted.  Let 
this  be  no  empty  doctrine  to  you,  no 
mere  point  of  theology,  or  article  in  a 
creed,  void  of.  all  reality  and  force. 
Let  it  be  a  living  truth,  as  vital  as 
your  own  heart's  blood.  It  will  nerve 
you  for  mastery  over  the  infirmities 
of  your  nature.  It  will  inspire  you 
to  resist  the  evils  of  an  evil  world. 
And  it  will  help  you  to  victories  of 
faith  and  love,  to  conquests  of  con- 
science, and  of  character  Hke  unto 
your   Lord's. — Johnson  Barker^  LL.B. 

Experience  the  Secret  of  Moral  Power, 
— "  He  himself  hath  suffered  being 
tempted."  The  reality  of  our  Lord's 
human  expeiiences  is  constantly  en- 
forced by  the  apostles.  In  the  early 
days  of  the  Church  there  was  a 
tendency  to  present  the  Divinity  of 
Christ  in  such  a  way  as  to  imperil 
the  truth  of  His  real,  flesh  and  blood, 
humanity.  It  was  thought  derogatory 
to  a  Divine  Saviour  to  represent  Him 
as  sharing  the  common  woes  of  the 
human  lot.  But  unless  we  see  w^orthily 
our  Lord's  veritable  humanity,  it  must 
be  impossible  for  us  to  understand  how 
He  can  be  a  power  of  redemption  to  us. 
He  is  our  Saviour  only  through  His 
manhood. 

I.  Moral  beings  can  only  learn 
through  experience. — A  moral  being 
is   not   intellectual   only.      He  has   a 


further  sphere  of  feeling  and  emotion. 
He  is  a  being  with  a  will,  which  can 
be  influenced  by  his  mind,  but  is  much 
more  influenced  by  principles  and  feel- 
ings. And  experience  alone  affects  the 
feelings.  See  how  a  moral  being  is 
made,  and  is  developed.  Life  does  it ; 
experience  does  it :  learning  can  do  but 
a  little  of  it.  Christ  could  not  have 
taken  rank  with  us  as  a  moral  being 
if  He  had  not  shared  the  experience 
which  makes  us  moral  beings.  *'  In 
all  points  tempted  like  as  we  are." 

II.  Moral  beings  get  power  to  help 
one  another  only  through  a  common 
experience. — It  is  somewhat  strikingly 
said  of  Tennyson  that  he  had  no 
experience  of  vice,  and  so  all  the  sins 
in  his  poetry  are  human  frailties.  It 
is  constantly  observed  that  the  best 
religious  workers  in  any  class  of  society 
are  persons  belonging  to  the  class  who 
have  full  experience  of  the  class.  If 
Christ  was  to  gain  moral  power  to  help 
man,  He  must  have  the  experience  of 
man,  of  all  that  is  essential  to  man, 
not  of  all  that  is  accidental  to  sin. 
The  experience  of  man's  conflicts  was 
essential,  but  not  the  experience  of 
man's  defeats.  It  is  not  essential  to 
man  to  fail  in  the  moral  struggle. 
Illustrate  from  man's  moral  power 
to  (1)  sympathise  with  ;  (2)  to 
strengthen;  (3)  to  advise;  (4)  to 
dehver,  his  brother.  He  can  only 
do  it  out  of  experience.  This  must 
be  true  of  Christ  as  the  typical  moral 
Helper  of  humanity. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  II. 


Ver.  3.  Perils  of  simply  neglecting. — 
Simply  neglect  the  great  salvation,  and  you 
will  make  your  everlasting  ruin  sure.  Many 
foolish,  faithless  parents  have  killed  their 
child,  not  by  administering  slow  poison,  or 
striking  an  assassin-knife  through  its  young 
heart,  but  by  the  simple  neglect  of  the  first 
laws  of  health.  Many  parents,  too,  have 
wrung  their  hands  in  agony  over  a  ruined 
son,  fallen  into  disgrace,  not  because  they 
have  led  that  son  into  ruin,  but  because 
they  had  let  him  alone,  and  left  him  to  rush 
into  the  cause  of  his  misery  unrestrained. 
Neglect  was  the  boy's  ruin.  There  is  no 
need  for  a  man  to  row  towards  Niagara's 


cataract — resting  on  his  oars  is  quite  enough 
to  send  him  over  the  awful  verge  into  eternal 
ruin. — T.  L.  Cuyler. 

The  Insult  of  neglecting  Religion. — I  can 
understand  that  man  who  says,  "I  have 
examined  all  the  evidence,  I  have  weighed 
and  tested  every  argument,  and  I  have 
come  to  the  couclusion  that  the  Bible  is 
a  fable,  Christianity  is  a  romance,  and  all 
that  it  says  of  eternity,  death,  and  judg- 
ment the  visions  of  a  mere  baseless  dream." 
I  pity  and  deplore  his  conclusions  ;  but  there 
is  a  consistency  about  it.  I  very  much 
doubt  if  it  be  not  a  greater  insult  to  God 

171 


CHAP.    IT. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


to  neglect  religion,  which  is  altogether 
inexcusable,  than  it  is  to  reject  it. — 
Dr.  Cumming. 

How  escape  I*— The  question  "How  shall 
we  escape  ?  "  implies  (1)  peril ;  (2)  provided 
rescue;  (3)  neglect  of  provision;  (4)  con- 
sequent increase  of  peril ;  and  (5)  hopeless- 
ness of  finding  any  other  rescue. 

Ver.  4.  The  Temporary  Musion  of  Miracles. 
"_A  gardener,  when  he  transplanteth  a 
tree  out  of  one  ground  into  another,  before 
the  tree  takes  root,  sets  stays  to  it,  and 
poureth  water  at  the  root  of  it  daily;  but 
when  it  once  taketh  root  he  ceaseth  to  water 
it  any  more,  and  putteth  away  the  stays  that 
he  set  to  uphold  it,  and  suffereth  it  to  grow 
with  the  order  and  influences  of  the  heavens. 
So  the  Lord,  in  planting  of  religion.  He  put 
miracles  as  helps  to  stay  it ;  but  when  it  was 
once  confirmed  and  fastened,  and  had  taken 
deep  rooting.  He  took  away  such  helps ;  so 
that,  as  St.  Augustine  hath  it.  He  that 
looketh  for  a  miracle  is  a  miracle  himself ; 
for  if  the  death  of  Christ  will  not  work 
faith,  all  the  miracles  in  the  world  will  not 
do  it. — Spencer. 

Cycles  of  Miracles. — The  power  and  ac- 
ceptableness  of  the  evidence  afforded  by 
miracles  is  relative  to  the  age  to  which  they 
are  given.  Therefore  it  will  be  found  that 
they  have  always  come  in  cycles,  and  only 
in  cycles. 

Ver.  10.  Captain  of  our  Salvation. — We 
are  the  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ.  Now 
that  which  nerves  the  soldier's  arm  and 
strengthens  his  heart  as  he  goes  forth  to 
battle,  is  not  so  much  the  multitude  of  the 
army  of  which  he  forms  a  part,  as  the 
character  of  the  chief  whom  he  is  following. 
It  is  related  that  in  one  of  the  Duke  of 
Wellington's  battles  a  portion  of  the  army 
was  giving  way,  under  the  charge  of  the 
enemy,  when  he  rode  into  the  midst  of 
them.  A  soldier  called  out  in  ecstasy, 
''There's  the  duke — God  Mess  him!  I'd 
rather  see  his  face  than  a  whole  brigade  " ; 
and  these  words,  turning  all  eyes  to  their 
chief,  so  reassured  his  comrades  that  they 
repulsed  the  foe.  For  he  is  beside  us,  they 
felt,  who  was  tiever  defeated  yet,  and  mill  not 
he  defeated  now.  A  military  friend  with 
whom  I  conversed  on  this  subject  said,  that 
though  he  had  never  heard  the  anecdote, 
he  could  well  conceive  it  to  be  true  :  the 
presence  of  that  distinguished  general,  he 
added,  was  at  any  time  worth  five  thousand 
men. — Tait. 

''Perfect  "  as  applied  to  Christ. — The  Greek 
word  translated  "  perfect,"  which  occurs 
very  often  in  this  epistle,  was  used  amoog  the 
heathen  in   a  specific  sense  ;    for  instance. 

172 


one  thoroughly  initiated  into  the  arcana,  or 
other  mysteries,  was  called  a  "  perfect  "  man. 
The  meaning  was  not  morally  or  personally 
perfect,  but  thoroughly  acquainted  with  all 
the  facts  or  mysteries  of  the  caste  or  service. 
Our  blessed  Lord  was  made  perfect  by  being 
thoroughly  acquainted  with  human  nature 
in  all  its  points,  save  that  of  sin,  and  so 
became  the  author  of  eternal  salvation  by 
being  initiated  into  all  the  sorrows  and  woes 
of  humanity. — Dr.  Cumming. 

Blessings  coming  through  Suffering. — In 
proportion  as  a  horse  is  well  trained  and 
gentle,  he  had  to  suffer  in  being  broken  in. 
The  white  beautiful  teeth  of  a  little  child, 
that  look  so  much  like  ivory,  cause  much 
pain  before  they  grow  up  in  that  regular 
row.  A  gentleman  in  Hartford  (America) 
had  a  beautiful  little  daughter.  But  oh,  how 
her  parents  grieved  when  they  found  that 
she  was  deaf  and  dumb,  and  could  never 
speak  or  hear.  She  was  bright  and  lovely, 
and  no  child  among  them  all  nestled  so 
near  a  father's  heart  as  little  Alice  ;  and  so 
anxious  was  he  for  her,  that  he  had  no  rest 
till  the  Deaf  and  Dumb  Asylum  was 
established,  at  which  hundreds  of  such 
unfortunate  children  have  been  educated; 
so  that  all  this  great  good  may  be  said  to 
have  grown  out  of  the  sufferings  of  little 
Alice.— J9r.  Todd. 

Ver.  14.  Christ's  Victory  over  Satan, — When 
the  devils  saw  Christ  on  the  cross,  there 
stood  the  exulting  fiend,  smiling  to  himself, 
"Now  I  have  the  King  of  glory  in  my 
dominion,  I  have  the  power  of  death,  and  I 
have  the  power  over  the  Lord  Jesus."  He 
exerted  that  power  till  Christ  died  in  bitter 
anguish.  But  how  short-lived  was  that 
hellish  victory,  how  brief  the  Satanic 
triumph !  When  Christ  cried,  "  It  is 
finished  1 "  He  shook  the  gates  of  hell. 
Down  from  the  cross  the  Conqueror  leaped, 
pursued  the  fiend  with  thunder- bolts  of 
wrath.  Swift  to  the  shades  of  hell  did  the 
fiend  fly,  and  swift  descending  went  the 
Conqueror  after  him,  and  seizing  him, 
dragged  him  to  His  chariot-wheel — dragged 
him  up  the  steeps  of  glory,  the  angels  shout- 
ing all  the  while.  He  had  led  captivity 
captive,  and  received  gifts  for  men. — C.  H. 
Spur g  eon. 

Life  given  for  life. — When  Mahomet,  the 
second  of  that  name,  besieged  Belgrade,  in 
Servia,  one  of  the  captains  at  last  got  upon 
the  wall  of  the  city,  with  his  colours  dis- 
played. A  noble  Bohemian  espying  this,  ran 
to  the  captain,  and  clasping  him  fast  about 
his  middle,  asked  one  Capistranus,  standing 
beneath,  whether  it  would  be  any  danger  of 
damnation  to  his  soul  if  he  should  cast  him- 
self down  headlong  with  that  dog  (so  he 
termed  the  Turkish  captain),  to  be  slain  with 


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   III. 


him.  Capistranus  answered  that  it  was  no 
danger  at  all  to  his  soul.  The  Bohemian  forth- 
with tumbled  himself  down,  with  the  Turk  in 
his  arms,  and  so  by  his  own  death  saved 
the  life  of  all  the  city.  8uch  an  exploit  as 
this  Christ  plays  upon  the  devil.  The  devil, 
like  the  great  Turk,  besieged  not  only  one 
city,  but  even  all  mankind.  Christ  alone, 
like  this  noble  Bohemian,  encountered  with 


him  ;  and  seeing  the  case  was  so,  that  this 
dog,  the  devil,  could  not  be  killed  stark  dead, 
except  Christ  died  also,  therefore  He  made 
no  reckoning  of  His  own  life,  but  gave 
Himself  to  death  for  us,  that  He  only  dying 
for  all  the  people,  by  His  death  our  deadly 
enemy  might  for  ever  be  destroyed. — Old 
Author^  1610. 


CHAPTER    III. 
COMPARISON   OF  THE  TWO   GREAT  MEDIATORS. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 


In  the  estimation  of  the  Jews  the  pre-eminence  of  the  Law — by  that  term  meaning  the 
Old  Testament  dispensation — was  seen  in  three  things  :  (1)  it  was  ministered  by  angels ; 
(2)  it  was  in  the  hands  of  a  mediator  of  singularly  exalted  character;  (3)  its  principal 
official  was  a  high  priest  of  superior  dignity  and  authority.  Having  compared  the 
ministry  of  angels  with  the  ministry  of  the  Son,  and  brought  out  the  superiority  of 
the  new  dispensation,  and  answered  the  objections  which  might  be  grounded  on  the 
humiliation  and  shameful  human  death  of  the  Son,  the  writer  proceeds  to  compare  Christ 
with  the  two  great  officials  cf  the  older  dispensation.  In  the  comparison  of  the  mediators 
the  following  points  are  presented  :  1.  In  the  one  respect  of  faithfulness  there  is  similarity. 

2.  In  another   matter  there  is  equality;   for  God  is  the  Author  of  both  dispensations. 

3.  Moses,  however,  does  but  take  a  place  as  part  of  the  furniture  of  the  house ;  Christ 
takes  His  place  with  God  as  the  Founder  and  Builder  of  it.  4.  Moses  was  a  servant 
in  the  house ;  but  Christ  was  the  Son,  who  is  over  the  house.  Then  follows  a  hortatory 
passage  bearing  on  the  peril  of  apostasy. 

Ver.  1.  Wherefore.— Lit.  "  whence."  Allowing  what  has  been  said  of  Christ  to  be 
true,  there  is  ground  for  fixing  further  and  even  closer  attention  upon  Christ.  Holy 
brethren. — An  expression  indicating  the  conciliatory  tone  of  the  epistle.  As  separated 
unto  Jehovah,  the  Jews  were  a  "  holy  nation."  The  writer  makes  no  assertion  of  their 
personal  holiness ;  he  does  but  recognise  the  Jews  as  a  people  separated  by  God  unto 
Himself.  "This  people  have  I  formed  for  Myself;  they  shall  shew  forth  My  praise." 
"  Brethren  "  asserts  the  common  relation  of  Jew  and  Christian  to  special  revelations 
from  God.  The  word  means  "  one  of  the  same  faith  or  profession  " ;  but  it  carries  also 
the  idea  of  friendly  feeling,  mutual  sympathy.  Heavenly  calling. — Privileges  of  the 
new  dispensation.  "Heavenly"  may  be  taken  as  equivalent  to  "spiritual,"  and  as 
contrasted  with  the  material  features  of  the  Jewish  calling.  Consider. — Fix  your  attention 
on.  A  worthy  apprehension  of  the  person  of  Christ  would  preserve  these  Jewish  Christians 
from  the  temptation  to  return  upon  the  older  system.  So  Jesus  endeavoured  to  give  His 
disciples  right  ideas  concerning  Himself.  Starting  thought  by  asking  them,  "  What  think 
ye  of  Christ  ?  "  Apostle. — Compare  ayyeKo^.  That  word  is  not  used  here  because  the 
writer  had  already  used  it  in  a  special  sense.  The  Jews  called  the  minister  or  ruler  of 
the  synagogue  an  apostle.  The  word  means  "sent  one";  "mediator,"  "communicator" 
between  two  parties  ;  and  comparison  can  be  made  between  Moses  and  Christ,  because  they 
bore  similar  relations  to  each  of  the  dispensations.  Our  profession. — Either  (1)  whom  we 
confess ;  or  (2)  what  we  confess.  A  doubtful  passage  in  Philo  calls  the  Logos  "  the  Great 
High  Priest  of  our  Confession."  Bengel  marks  the  distinction  between  Apostle  and  High 
Priest :  "  As  Apostle,  Jesus  pleads  the  cause  of  God  with  us ;  as  High  Priest,  He  pleads 
our  cause  with  God."  Christ  Jesus.— The  best  manuscripts  omit  the  word  "  Christ."  Stiiart 
gives  the  point  of  the  verse  thus,  "  If  the  curator  cedis  sacrce  et  novce  be  compared  with 
the  curator  cpdis  sacra)  et  antiqucr,  the  result  will  be  such  as  the  sequel  discloses." 

Ver.  2.  Faithful.— In  carrying  out  the  particular  duties  of  His  office.  For  the  faithfulness 
of  Moses  see  Num.  xii.  7.  House. — Not  the  tabernacle  only,  but  the  entire  theocratic 
system.  Compare  "  the  house  of  God  which  is  the  Church  of  the  living  God  "  (1  Tim.  iii.  15). 
Moulton  says,  "  The  house,  or  household,  is  God's  people  Israel." 

173 


CHAP.  III.  nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS. 


Ver  3  This  man.— R.V.  "He"— that  is,  Jesus.  More  glory.— Or,  a  fuller  glory.  Farra/r 
points  out  that  the  "  Jews  had  begun  to  elevate  Moses  into  a  position  of  almost  super- 
natural grandeur,  which  would  have  its  effect  on  wavering  and  almost  apostatising 
converts  "  Builded  the  house.— Not  "  founding  a  family,"  but  establishing  a  dispensation, 
under  tlie  figure  of  erecting  and  furnishing  a  house.  Christ  was  really  the  Founder 
of  the  house  in  which  Moses  was  an  official.  So  Christ  has  higher  honour  than  Moses. 
Observe  the  assumption  that  the  Divine  Son  was  miuistrant  of  the  older  dispensation. 
He  is  the  Executor  of  the  Divine  purpose  in  all  material  spheres 

Ver.  4.— The  thought  here  is  that  every  house  has  its  maker,  and  we  must  conceive 
of  a  Maker  of  this  house,  or  dispensation.      It  can  be  no  other  than  God. 

Ver.  5.  Servant— Ministering  according  to  the  will  of  another.  Not  dovXos,  slave,  nor 
dicLKOvos,  niinistor,  but  depdiroov,  voluntary  attendant. 

Ver  6.  Over  His  own  house.— R.V.  "over  His,"  i.e.  God's  "house."  House  are  we.— 
For  the  figure  see  2  Cor.  vi.  16;  Eph.  ii.  21,22;  1  Pet.  ii.  5.  The  rights  of  sonship  are 
wholly  distinct  from  and  superior  to  the  rights  of  servant-hood.  Sonship  involves 
independent  authority.     Hold  fast.— A  transition  to  the  hortatory  passage. 

Vers.  7-19  form  part  of  an  exhortation,  based  on  the  superiority  of  Christ  over  Moses, 
and  the  conduct  of  the  Jewish  people  in  their  relation  to  Moses.  They  were  the  chosen 
people  of  God,  and  yet  they  provoked  Him  by  their  unbelief,  and  were  consequently 
precluded  from  entering  the  rest  of  Canaan.  A  promise  of  rest  is  also  given  to  us. 
What  is  it  ?  It  cannot  be  the  Sabbatic  rest  of  God  from  the  work  of  creation  :  it  cannot  be 
the  rest  of  settling  in  Canaan.  It  is  the  rest  of  belief  in  Christ,  ceasing  from  our  own 
works  and  trusting  in  Christ,     liCt  us  take  care  lest  we  also  fail  to  gain  our  rest. 

Ver.  7.  Holy  Ghost. —Better  throughout  the  epistle  "Holy  Spirit."  Here  conceived 
as  Inspirer  of  the  Bible-writers ;  and  inspiration  carries  persuasion  and  authority  (vers, 
7-11  are  a  parenthesis).  In  what  sense  was  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  older  dispensation? 
The  prophetic  gifts,  and  the  special  endowments  of  such  kings  as  Saul  and  David, 
gave  the  Jews  their  idea  of  inspiration. 

Ver.  8.  Harden  not. — Do  not  resist  good  influence.  See  case  of  Pharaoh.  The  peril 
of  free-will  is  that  we  can  "  harden  ourselves  against."  Provocation.- Or  time  of  provoca- 
tiou  :  from  iriKpaivoj,  to  embitter.  One  typical  occasion  is  referred  to  (Exod.  xvii.  7.  Compare 
1  Cor.  X.  1-12).  Day  of  temptation. — If  single  day  be  meant,  the  reference  may  be  to 
the  aggravations  of  the  time  of  worshipping  the  golden  calf.  But  the  expression  may 
be  intended  to  sum  up  the  thirty-eight  years  of  testing  Israel  amid  the  wilderness 
experiences.     Those  years  of  wandering  in  the  desert  made  up  their  "  day  of  testing." 

Ver.  9. — Then  comes  a  play  on  the  words  "tempted,"  "proved,"  Me.  They  tested 
Me  in  an  evil  and  unworthy  spirit.  God  may  be  tested  by  us  when  we  want  to  believe, 
but  feel  as  if  we  could  not.  God  must  never  be  put  to  the  test  by  us  in  a  spirit  of 
doubting  and  suspicion,  and  with  a  view  to  the  support  of  our  self-schemes,  and  of 
our  unbelief. 

Ver,  10,  Grieved. — The  figure  in  the  word  is  "running  a  ship  ashore." 
Ver.  11.  My   rest. — For  the   Jews   that   was   Canaan.     It    was    called     "rest"    because 
it   came   after  their  long  wanderings.     The   figure   of   God   swearing  is    consistent   with 
the  idea  of  Him  as  an  Eastern  king.     But  the  swearing  is  strictly  official. 

Ver.  12. — Carries  on  the  "wherefore"  or  "whence"  of  ver.  7.  Evil  heart  of  unbelief. — 
Di)ubting  may  be  good  or  bad,  right  or  wrong,  according  to  the  state  of  will  that 
is  behind  it.  An  evil  heart  wants  to  doubt,  and  is  keen  to  find  reasons  and  excuses. 
Faith,  vi^hen  intellectual  only,  is  belief',  when  inspired  by  heart-feeling,  it  is  trust. 
Departing. — In  the  sense  of  apostatising. 

Ver.  13.  Exhort. — Admonish  ;  use  Christian  fellowship  for  the  establishing  of  faith. 
Deceitfulness  of  sin. — Sinful  delusions;  either  influence  of  Judaising  teachers,  or  of 
persecution  and  worldliness. 

Ver.  14.  Partakers  of  Christ.— Of  His  living  and  saving  grace. 

Ver.  19.  Could  not.— Tlie  failure  was  altogether  on  their  side.  The  word  "  unbelief  " 
reminds  us  that  the  reason  of  failure  was  a  heart-Te2kSon. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses   1—6. 

Christ  above  Moses. — The  bigoted  Jewish  party  distressed  the  Christian  Jewish 
party,  by  urging  that  the  Jewish  dispensation  was  manifestly  superior  to  the 
Christian,  on  two  grounds:  (I)  it  was  ministered  by  angels;  (2)  its  agent 
was  the  most  remarkable  man  that  had  ever  lived.  In  the  previous  two 
chapters  the  assumed  superiority  in  the  ministration  of  angels  has  been  dealt 
174 


'HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  hi. 


with.  Now  the  writer  deals  with  the  extravagant  claims  advanced  on  behalf 
of  Moses  (see  Illustration),  and  shows  that  in  nature,  relation  to  God,  and 
office,  Christ  is  altogether  above  Moses. 

I.  Fix  attention  on  the  Head  of  the  new  dispensation. — The  word  "con- 
sider" means  "fix  your  thoughts  attentively  on."  His  unique  nature,  as  the 
Divi'.ie-human  Being,  and  His  primary  and  essential  relationship  to  God  as 
Son,  have  already  been  treated.  Now  attention  is  fixed  upon  His  office.  The 
writer  takes  an  ideal  rather  than  an  actual  view  of  Moses.  In  fact,  Moses  was 
prophet  or  apostle,  and  Aaron  was  high  priest ;  but  Aaron's  association  with 
Moses  was  a  Divine  after- thought.  Ideally,  and  in  the  Divine  plan,  Moses  was 
the  head  of  the  dispensation,  and  was  both  the  prophet  and  the  priest,  and 
as  such  was  the  type  of  Messiah  the  Christ.  A  man  occupying  the  position  of 
Moses  must  be  what  Bengel  says  Christ  is.  Apostle  from  God  to  man,  and 
High  Priest  from  man  to  God.  "As  Apostle  Jesus  pleads  the  cause  of  God 
with  us ;  as  High  Priest  He  pleads  our  cause  with  God."  The  complete 
mediatorship  of  the  Old  Testament  was,  in  fact,  in  the  hands  of  Moses  and 
Aaron  combined,  and  regarded  as  one.  The  Mediatorship  of  the  new  dispensa- 
tion is  in  the  hands  of  Christ  alone,  and  He  is  actually  one.  Here  is  a  mark 
of  superiority.  1.  One  side  of  Christ's  work  is  represented  by  the  term  ^^  Apostle,'^ 
which  is  virtually  the  same  as  "  prophet."  Both  terms  mean  "  messenger," 
"  sent  one."  Both  imply  a  direct  commission  from  God  to  men ;  a  Divine 
message  which  they — prophet  or  apostle — have  to  put  into  their  human  language 
for  the  apprehension  of  men.  Moses  and  Christ  were  both  revealers,  prophets, 
teachers,  for  God.  Fixing  attention  on  Christ,  we  can  see  two  marked  pecu- 
liarities :  (1)  His  message  was  Himself,  in  a  sense  that  Moses'  message  was  not. 
(2)  His  message  belonged  to  the  sphere  of  spiritual  things,  not  of  material  or 
ceremonial.  2.  Another  side  of  Christ's  work  is  represented  by  the  term 
^^  High  Priest."  Later  in  the  epistle  this  term  is  treated  more  fully.  Here 
one  thing  more  especially  is  in  the  mind  of  the  writer.  One  work  of  the 
Mosaic  high  priest  was  to  "  make  reconciliation  [propitiation]  for  the  sins  of 
the  people"  (chap.  ii.  17).  The  limited  idea,  which  need  not  injuriously  affect 
the  larger  idea,  which  we  shall  have  to  consider  later  on,  is  this.  When  as 
a  prophet  Moses  brings  a  message  from  God,  the  fact  must  be  taken  into  account 
that  men  will  use  their  free  wills  upon  the  message,  and  will  receive  it  or 
reject  it :  the  rejection  of  it  will  be  sin,  and  will  lead  to  sin,  and  will  put  men 
out  of  relation  with  God.  The  prophet  therefore  will  need  to  be  also  priest, 
and  deal  with  the  restoration  and  reconciliation  of  those  who  break  their 
relations  with  God  by  rejecting  His  message.  And  this  which  applies  to  Moses 
must  apply  also  to  Christ,  who,  if  He  is  Apostle,  must  needs  also  be  Priest. 

II.  Compare  the  heads  of  the  two  dispensations. — Lest  the  writer  should 
be  thought  in  any  sense  to  lower  the  dignity  of  Moses,  he  freely  recognises  that 
both  the  apostle  and  high  priest  of  the  old  dispensation,  and  the  Apostle  and 
High  Priest  of  the  new,  were  faithful  to  their  several  trusts.  There  is  no  call 
whatever  for  exalting  Christ  by  the  depreciation  of  any  other  of  God's  servants. 
Accept  every  man  at  his  best ;  estimate  his  life  and  work  most  charitably  and 
most  hopefully,  and  still  there  will  be  no  difficulty  in  showing  the  unique 
superioiity  of  Him  who  is  Son  of  God,  Son  of  man,  and  Saviour  from  sin.  The 
faithfulness  of  Moses  is  asserted  in  Num.  xii.  7. 

III.  Contrast  the  heads  of  the  two  dispensations. — The  use  of  the  term 
"  house  "  as  a  figure  for  dispensation,  or  religious  system,  suggests  the  points  of 
contrast.  "The  house  is  God^s  house  or  household,  i.e.  the  theocratic  family 
of  which  the  tabernacle  was  a  symbol.  See  1  Tim.  iii.  15.  1.  Christ  was 
more  honourable  than  Moses,  as  a  person,  seeing  that  He  was  Owner  of  the 
house  in  which  Moses  was  a  servant.     2.  And  Christ's  range  of  service  was 

175 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


higher  than  that  of  Moses,  as  owner-faithfulness  must  always  be  in  a  higher 
plane  than  servant-faithfulness— though,  as  faithfulness,  both  may  stand  in 
equal  acceptance.  The  contrast  of  service  may  also  be  seen  in  this :  (1)  That 
of  Moses  was  a  service  of  preparation;  (2)  that  of  Christ  was  a  service  of 
fulfilment.  Do,  then,  all  honour  to  Moses.  Recognise  the  dignity  of  his  posi- 
tion and  the  faithfulness  of  his  service,  and  still  it  is  reasonable  to  ask  that 
men  should  pass  from  Moses  to  Christ,  seeing  that  He  is  no  servant  in  the 
house,  but  Son  over  His  own  house.  Carry  all  thankfulness  for  the  earher 
revelation,  and  all  honouring  of  the  agent  of  that  revelation,  over  with  you  into 
the  reception  of  the  later,  completing,  and  spiritual  revelation,  of  which  the  Son 
of  God  is  the  agent.  Keep  considering,  fixing  attention,  and  ever  learning 
more  concerning,  the  "Apostle  and  High  Priest  of  our  confession." 

Jewish  Glmnfying  of  Moses. — Eagerly  as  the  writer  is  pressing  forward  to 
develop  his  original  and  central  conception  of  Christ  as  our  eternal  High  Priest, 
he  yet  has  to  pause  to  prove  His  superiority  over  Moses,  because  the  Jews  had 
begun  to  elevate  Moses  into  a  position  of  almost  supernatural  grandeur,  which 
would  have  its  effect  on  the  imaginations  of  wavering,  and  almost  apostatising, 
converts.  Thus  the  Rabbis  said  that  "the  soul  of  Moses  was  equivalent  to  the 
souls  of  all  Israel "  (because  by  the  cabalistic  process  called  Gematria  the 
numerical  value  of  the  letters  of  "Moses  our  rabbi"  in  Hebrew  equal  613, 
which  is  also  the  value  of  the  letters  of  "  Lord  God  of  Israel ").  They  said 
that  "  the  face  of  Moses  was  like  the  sun  "  ;  that  he  alone  "  saw  through  a 
clear  glass,"  not  as  other  prophets  "  through  a  dim  glass  " ;  and  that  whereas 
there  are  but  fifty  gates  of  understanding  in  the  world,  "  all  but  one  were 
opened  to  Moses."  St.  Paul,  in  2  Cor.  iii.  7,  contrasts  the  evanescing  splendour 
on  the  face  of  Moses  with  the  unchanging  glory  of  Christ. — Farrar. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON   SKETCHES. 

Ver.    1.    Messenger    and    Priest, —  near  the  altar  to  minister  (Exod.  xxx. 

1.  Consider   Christ  as  the  Apostle   or  19-21).     He  must  offer  daily,  morning 

Messenger  of  God.  The  word  "  apostle  "  and  evening,  the  peculiar  meat-offering 

means  "  messenger  " — one  ordained  and  he  offered  on  the  day  of  his  consecra- 

sent  on  a  particular  embassy.    2.  Con-  tion  (Exod.  xxix.).     He  must  perform 

sider  Christ  as  the  High  Priest  of  our  the  ceremonies  of  the  day  of  expiation 

profession.      The   duty   of    the    High  (Lev.    xvi.).      He    must    arrange    the 

Priest  was  twofold  :    to  make  atone-  shewbread  every  Sabbath,  and  eat   it 

meat;  to  make  intercession.     (1)  Con-  in  the  holy  place  (Lev.  xxiv.  9).     He 

sider    Christ    as     making    atonement,  must  judge  of  the  leprosy,  and  adjudi- 

(2)  Consider  Christ  as   making  inter-  cate  in  certain  legal  questions.     When 

cession. — R.  M.  McClieyne.  there  was  no  Divinely  inspired  judge, 

the  high  priest  was  the  supreme  ruler, 

The  Duties  of  the  High  Friest. — He  until   the   time   of   David,  and  again 

must  be  free  from  every  blemish  and  after   the   return    from  the  Captivity 

defect   (Lev.    xxi.    16-23).      He   must  (1   Sam.  iv.  18).     Other  duties  were : 

not    observe    the     external    signs    of  Bearing   before   the    Lord   the  names 

mourning  for  any  person,  or  leave  the  of  Israel  for  a  memorial  (Exod.  xxviii. 

sanctuary  upon    receiving  intelligence  12,   29);   inquiring   of   God  by  XJrim 

of  the  death  of  even  father  and  mother,  and   Thummim   (1    Sam.    xxiii.    9-12, 

He   must    wash   his   hands    and    feet  xxx.  7,    8) ;  consecrating   the   Levites 

when  he  went  into  the  tabernacle  of  (Num.      viii.       11-21);        appointing 

the  congregation,  and  when  he  came  priests    to    offices    (1    Sam.    ii.    36)  i 

176 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  iii. 


interceding  (Num.  xvi.  43-48) ;  bless- 
ing (Lev.  ix.  22,  ^^).— After  Kitto. 

Considei*  Christ. 

I.  One  great  comprehensive  demand 
— consider  Christ. — The  word  implies 
an  earnest,  fixed,  prolonged  attention 
of  mind.  A  Christian  man's  thoughts 
should  be  occupied  with  his  Saviour. 
A  simple  and  obvious  remark,  but  one 
much  forgotten  in  practice.  The  mea- 
sure of  a  man's  Christianity  is  the 
occupation  of  his  mind  and  heart 
with  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus. 
There  is  implied  in  the  word 
"consider":  1.  That  the  occupation 
of  mind  must  be  the  result  of  con- 
scious effort.  2.  It  must  be  the  look 
of  eager  interest ;  it  must  be  iiitense 
as  well  as  fixed.  3.  It  must  be  steady 
or  continuous. 

II.  The  great  aspects  of  Christ's 
work  which  should  fix  our  gaze. — 
We  have  Himself  proposed  as  the 
object  of  our  thoughts ;  not  merely 
the  truth  concerning  Him,  but  Him 
as  brought  near  us  by  the  truth. 
Scripture  never  deals  with  Christ's 
work  apart  from  Him,  the  worker, 
nor  presents  truth  in  the  hard  and 
abstract  form  which  it  must  necessarily 
take  when  men  begin  to  reflect  upon 
it,  and  try  to  arrange  their  thoughts 
into  something  like  order  and  con- 
sistency. Two  aspects — consider  Him 
as  Apostle  and  as  High  Priest.  He 
is  the  "  Apostle "  of  our  profession. 
No  declaration  was  more  common  on 
our  Lord's  lips  when  on  earth  than 
that  He  was  "  sent  of  God."  He  is 
the  sole  messenger,  sent  by  God  as 
none  others  are  sent,  to  declare  His 
whole  name  once  and  for  all,  to  bring 
His  whole  love,  not  only  to  serve 
but  to  save,  not  only  to  help  but  to 
rule,  the  sons  of  men.  His  brethren. 
The  Apostolate  and  the  Priesthood 
are  to  be  included  in  the  one  word. 
Mediator.  The  idea  of  priesthood 
depends  upon  that  of  sacrifice,  and  the 
idea  of  sacrifice  is  incomplete  without 
that  of  expiation.  The  idea  of  priest- 
hood includes  that  of  representation, 
and  the  priestly  representation  of  the 


N 


people  is  incomplete  without  the 
presence  of  the  priest  within  the  veil. 
III.  The  great  reasons  for  this 
occupation  of  mind  and  heart  with 
Christ,  our  Mediator. — They  are :  L 
Our  relation  to  Christ,  and  the  benefit 
we  derive  from  it.  2.  The  calling  of 
which  we  are  partakers.  3.  The 
avowal  which  we  have  made  concerning 
Him.  Cultivate  the  habit  of  fixed 
calm  meditation  on  Christ. — A.  Mac- 
laren,  D.D. 

Two  Terms  for  the  Oifie  Mediator. — 
Such  passages  as  1  Tim.  ii.  5,  Gal. 
iii.  20,  set  forth  the  position  of  Christ 
as  Mediator.  A  mediator  must  sustain 
a  twofold  relation — a  relation  to  each 
party  between  whom  he  mediates. 
He  may  do  a  twofold  work — that  of 
interpreter,  and  that  of  reconciler. 
In  the  case  of  Christ  this  twofold 
relation  and  twofold  work  will  come 
out  if  we  consider — 

I.  Christ  as  God's  Apostle  to  men. 
— Christ  is  God  in  respect  of  wisdom ; 
as  High  Priest  He  is  man,  in  order  to 
be  true  representative.  To  unfold  the 
idea  of  apostle  take  two  analogies : 
1.  Moses,  as  an  apostle  in  the  distinct 
sense  of  interpreter.  2.  The  twelve 
apostles,  in  the  distinct  sense  of 
teachers.  Show  how  both  involved  also 
the  idea  of  ruling,  and  point  out  the 
relations  of  Moses  to  God  and  the 
apostles  to  Christ.  The  ruling  will 
take  up  the  later  Jewish  idea  of 
aTTocTToAos,  as  curator. 

II.  Christ  as  man's  High  Priest  to 
God. — Bring  in  the  second  idea  of 
mediator,  viz.  reconcilement  and  in- 
tercession. 1.  The  high  priest  was 
commissioned  by  the  people  to  go  into 
the  Holy  of  Holies  for  them  ;  so  Christ 
is  commissioned  by  us  to  go,  as  our 
Representative,  into  the  eternal  Holy 
of  Holies.  2.  The  high  priest  not 
only  went  as  the  first  representative, 
but  he  took  with  him  the  terms  on 
which  he  asked  for  reconciliation  ;  and 
so  Christ  took  with  Him  into  the 
eternal  Holy  of  Holies  the  terms  on 
which  He  pleaded  for  reconciliation. 
3.  The   high  priest   had   himself   pre- 

177 


CHAP.    III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


viously  prepared  these  terms;  and  so 
Christ  Himself  prepared  the  terms, 
and  was  indeed  in  Himself  the  terms 
on  the  ground  of  which  He  asked 
acceptance.  4.  The  high  priest, 
having  gained  acceptance,  asked  of 
the  propitious  and  reconciled  God  the 
supply  of  blessings  to  the  people ;  and 
so  Christ,  having  gained  acceptance  for 
men,  becomes  their  Intercessor. 

The  Heavenly  Calling.— Heavenly  is 
placed  in  contrast  with  earthly.  It 
precisely  answers  to  the  contrast 
spiritual  and  material.  The  heavenly 
temple  represents  the  spiritual  worship 
of  God.  The  heavenly  world  is  that 
in  which  the  spiritual  life  is  lived. 
And  so  the  "  heavenly  calhng  "  is  that 
call  of  God  to  live  a  life  of  spiritual 
relations  with  Him  which  has  come 
to  us  through  Jesus  Christ.  Response 
to  the  call  is  possible  with  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Christ  our  Apostle  and  High  Priest. 
— Consider  the  offices  and  relations  of 
Christ   Jesus.     That   is    precisely   the 
work  that  we  should  do  in  preparing 
our  hearts  for  our  sacramental  service. 
The  text  seems  to  brace  up  our  atten- 
tion,  in  view  of  some  unusually  im- 
portant subject  that  is  to  be  considered. 
The  writer  has  already  presented  two 
subjects.     He  has  shown  the  contrast 
between  Christ  as  the  Son  and  angels 
as    servants,    as    ministering     spirits. 
His  primary  and  essential  relation  to 
God  is   altogether   unique.      None    in 
heaven  and   none  on  earth  can  ever 
stand  in  precisely  His  relation.     And 
he    has    dwelt    on    the    humanity   of 
Christ,  bringing  Him  out  of  the  realms 
of    mystery,    and   making   clear    His 
brotherhood   with   us    in   the   human 
limitations  and   infirmities.       *'  Foras- 
much  then  as  the  children   are  par- 
takers  of    flesh   and    blood,    He   also 
Himself    likewise    took    part    in    the 
same  ;  that  through  death   He  might 
destroy   him    that    had   the    power  of 
death,  that   is,   the  devil,  and  deliver 
them  who  through  fear  of  death  were 
all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage." 

178 


Now  the  writer  proceeds  to  deal  with 
the    superiority    and     the    exceeding 
glory  of  His  offices  in  relation  to  God 
and  man,   comparing   them    with    the 
highest   offices  in   the  Old  Testament 
economy.       He     calls     attention     by 
addressing     his     readers     as     "holy 
brethren."      Saints,   brethren  in  faith 
and  feeling,  as  consecrated  with  him 
to  Christ  and  to  Christ's  service.     By 
"  heavenly    calUng "    he    figuratively 
describes  the   more  spiritual  blessings 
to   which    men    were    introduced    by 
Christ  Jesus.      And  Christ  being  the 
very  centre  of  this  new  spiritual  dis- 
pensation,   deserves    special    attention 
and     consideration ;    we     cannot     too 
resolutely  fix  eye  and  heart  on  Him. 
"Apostle"    and    "High    Priest"    are 
terms  that  explain  the  more  general 
and  comprehensive  w^ord  "  Mediator." 
That  is  a  characteristic  term  used  by 
the    apostle    Paul.       Writing   to    the 
Galatians,    he    says,    "The    law    was 
ordained  by  angels  in  the  hand  of  a 
mediator.     Now  a  mediator  is  not   a 
mediator  of  one,  but  God  is  one  "  (Gal. 
iii.   19,  20).     Writing  to  Timothy,  he 
says,    "  There   is    one   God,    and    one 
Mediator  between  God  and   man,   the 
Man  Christ  Jesus  "  (1  Tim.  ii.  5).    Now 
a  mediator  sustains  a  twofold  relation- 
ship— a  relation  to  each  of  the  parties 
between  whom  he  mediates.     It  is  this 
twofold  work  that  is  brought  out  by 
the  terms  used  in  our  text.     A  mediator 
may  do  a  twofold  work — he  may  be 
an    interpreter,    and    he    may    be    a 
reconciler.     This  will  come  out  clearly 
to  view  in  relation  to  Christ  if  we  put 
it  in  this  way  :  Jesus  Christ  is  God's 
Apostle  to  man,  and  Jesus  Christ  is 
man's  High  Priest  to  God.     You  will 
easily  see  how  these  terms  conserve  the 
truths  of  which  we  are  so  supremely 
jealous.     Christ  is  God  revealing  Him- 
self to  man  ;  He  is  God's  Representative. 
And  Christ  is  man  entering  into  com- 
munion with  God — man's  Representa- 
tive.    So  we  have  freshly  suggested  to 
us  the  dual  truth  of  the    Deity  and 
humanity  of  Christ. 

I.  Christ  is  God's  Apostle  to  man.— 
The   word    "apostle"    simply    means 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   III. 


*'  one  sent,"  a  person  under  com- 
mission— one  who  is  entrusted  with 
some  duty  to  discharge  for  another. 
Every  ambassador  is  an  apostle ;  every 
missionary  is  an  apostle ;  every  prophet 
is  an  apostle.  The  term  has  been 
especially  applied  to  twelve  of  our 
Lord's  disciples  because  they  were  the 
first  persons  to  receive  His  commission, 
and  to  be  sent  out  as  preachers  of  His 
gospel.  But  the  term  was  subsequently 
applied  to  Silas  and  Barnabas  and 
Paul.  We  need  not  think  of  any 
special  authority  belonging  to  the  so- 
called  apostles  ;  they  were  simply  men 
entrusted  with  a  Divine  message  and 
mission  for  men ;  they  were  the 
prophets  or  preachers  of  the  new  dis- 
pensation. Their  office  was  in  no  sense 
restricted  to  themselves.  They  were 
what  their  Master  was  ;  and  we  are 
what  both  they  and  their  Master  was. 
We  are  all  God's  sent  ones,  God's 
ambassadors,  God's  apostles  to  our 
fellows.  1.  Moses  was  an  apostle  in 
the  distinct  sense  of  being  an  inter- 
preter. The  writer  of  this  epistle  had 
Moses  in  his  mind,  for  he  immediately 
refers  to  him,  saying  of  Christ  the 
Apostle,  "Who  was  faithful  to  Him 
that  appointed  Him,  as  also  Moses  was 
faithful  in  all  his  house."  The  inspira- 
tion of  Moses  to  his  work  came  out  of 
the  conviction  that  he  was  a  sent 
one,  Divinely  commissioned ;  and  his 
authority  with  the  people  followed 
upon  their  belief  that  he  was  Divinely 
sent.  He  had  been  arrested  of  God 
that  day  when  he  was  compelled  to 
turn  aside  and  see  that  great  sight, 
the  bush  that  burned  and  yet  was  not 
consumed.  That  day  God  made  Moses 
an  apostle,  and  this  was  his  commission  : 
"  Now  therefore,  behold,  the  cry  of  the 
children  of  Israel  is  come  unto  Me : 
and  I  have  also  seen  the  oppression 
wherewith  the  Egyptians  oppress  them. 
Come  now  therefore,  and  I  will  send 
thee  unto  Pharaoh,  that  thou  mayest 
bring  forth  My  people  the  children  of 
Israel  out  of  Egypt."  His  work  is 
usually  put  into  the  word  "  mediator." 
He  was  the  "go-between."  And  as 
such   the   people  fully  accepted   him ; 


for  when  God's  great  thunder- voice, 
proclaiming  the  law  from  Sinai,  filled 
the  people  with  alarm,  they  made  this 
their  prayer  to  Moses,  "  Speak  thou 
with  us,  and  we  will  hear  :  but  let  not 
God  speak  with  us,  lest  we  die."  As 
apostle,  or  mediator,  or  ambassador, 
we  may  look  at  the  work  of  Moses 
from  three  sides  :  (1)  He  was  to  reveal 
God's  will.  This  he  could  only  do  as 
the  will  was  revealed  to  him  ;  and  that 
he  might  be  fitted  to  receive  it,  he 
spent  those  long  days  in  communion 
with  God.  It  was  not  that  what 
Moses  received  would  take  forty  days 
to  tell :  it  was  that  only  after  prolonged 
abstraction  and  devotion  could  Moses 
be  spiritually  fitted  to  receive  the 
revelation.  When  it  did  come  to  him, 
it  proved  to  be  ten  clear-cut  sentences. 
They  embodied  God's  will  for  the  people, 
and  that  will  Moses  was  commissioned 
to  reveal  to  the  people.  It  may  be 
said  that  the  tables  of  the  law  could 
have  been  handed  to  Moses  in  an  hour. 
And  so  they  could,  but  in  that  case 
Moses  would  not  have  so  entered  into 
the  soul  of  them,  gained  such  sympathy 
with  them,  or  felt  the  applications  of 
them,  as  would  enable  him  rightly  to 
reveal  them  to  the  people.  On  his 
revealing  work  had  to  rest  the  impress 
of  his  own  soul-culture  and  soul- 
sympathies.  (2)  For  it  must  be  borne 
in  mind  that  Moses  had  not  only  to 
reveal  God's  v/ill,  but  also  to  interpret 
the  revelation.  It  is  now  known  to  all 
Bible  scholars  that  the  elaborations 
and  details  of  Levitical  law  given  to 
us  in  later  Exodus,  Leviticus,  and 
Numbers,  were  worked  out  by  Moses 
after  his  time  on  Sinai,  and  in  the 
power  of  the  inspiration  he  there  re- 
ceived. His  apostolic  service  was  in 
part  working  out  the  great  principles 
of  the  Sinaitic  law  into  all  the  relations 
and  duties  of  life.  And  that  was  the 
work  of  years.  (3)  And  the  writer  of 
the  Hebrews  points  out  another  feature 
of  Moses'  apostleship  :  he  was  to  preside 
over  and  rule  his  house,  or  dispensation ; 
for  he  who  reveals  and  interprets  the 
Divine  will  cannot  help  gaining  supreme 
influence   and   authority  in  so   doing. 

179 


CHAP.   III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


But  the  only  healthy  authority  over 
men  is  that  which  comes,  not  by  any 
form  of  personal  claim,  but  by  virtue 
of  the  commission  entrusted  to  us.  We 
have  dwelt  for  a  moment  on  the 
apostleship  of  Moses  because  he  helps 
us  to  understand  the  sense  in  which 
Christ  was  an  Apostle—"  the  Apostle 
of  our  profession."  To  us  He  is  the 
Sent  One  who  reveals  to  us  God.  If 
I  were  required  to  put  the  mission  of 
Christ  into  a  sentence,  and  were  allowed 
only  one  sentence  in  which  to  put  it, 
I  would  say  this,  "  He  came  to  show 
us  God."  "  This  is  eternal  life,  to  know 
Thee,  the  only  true  God."  And  He 
revealed  this  concerning  God — you  will 
never  apprehend  God  aright  until  you 
take  your  human  father-idea  at  its 
best,  and  apply  it  to  Him.  Ask  me 
what  is  the  very  essence  of  Christ's 
Apostleship,  the  one  all-controlling 
purpose  for  which  He  was  sent.  I 
answer,  "  To  reveal  the  Fatherliness  of 
God."  I  prefer  to  answer,  "  To  show 
the  Fatherliness  of  God."  But  He  is 
our  Apostle  in  a  further  sense,  for  He 
interprets  to  us  the  will  of  God.  When 
He  has  told  us  and  shown  us  what 
God  is.  He  proceeds  to  tells  us  and  to 
show  us  what  God  wishes.  The  Son 
interprets  the  Father.  And  just  as 
Moses  elaborated  the  great  principles 
of  the  Sinaitic  revelation,  so  our  Lord 
Jesus  elaborates  and  applies  to  all  the 
duties  and  relations  of  our  lives  the 
mind  and  will  of  our  Father.  And 
as  in  the  case  of  Moses  authority  was 
seen  to  grow  out  of  commission,  so 
with  the  Apostle  of  our  profession, 
Christ  Jesus,  He  is  become  the  Head 
of  all  those  who  love  and  serve  God — 
*'  Head  over  all  things  to  His  Church  "  ; 
and  this  office  and  relation  we  give 
Him  with  all  our  hearts.  He  is  our 
Moses,  God's  Sent  One  to  us,  who  reveals 
to  us  God,  interprets  to  us  His  will, 
and  takes,  what  we  lovingly  and  grate- 
fully give  Him,  supreme  lordship 
and  rule  over  our  hearts  and  lives. 
'Z.  The  twelve  disciples  of  Christ  were 
apostles  in  the  distinct  sense  of  being 
teachers.  This  is  an  advance  on  the 
L  lea  of  an  apostle  as  interpreter,  and 

180 


adapts  the  figure  to  more  settled  and 
continuous  relations.  We  occasionally 
want  revealers  and  interpreters ;  we 
always  want  teachers.  In  this  sense 
the  disciples  had  only  a  tentative 
apostleship  while  Christ  lived.  That 
was  their  preparation-time  for  the 
teaching- work  of  the  future — the  time 
when  they  were  being  taught  to  teach. 
After  the  ascension  of  their  Divine 
Lord,  we  can  clearly  see  what  was  their 
office  and  their  work.  Christ  sent  them 
forth  in  His  name,  as  His  witnesses, 
His  ambassadors.  They  were  to  tell 
men  anything  and  everything  that 
they  knew  about  Him,  what  He  had 
been,  what  He  had  said,  and  what  He 
had  done.  If  they  began  to  do  this, 
they  would  realise  that  the}^  w^ere  sent 
to  preach.  If  they  continued  to  do  this, 
they  would  realise  that  they  were  sent 
to  teach.  And  out  of  this  teaching  of 
those  who  accepted  Jesus  as  their 
Saviour  would  surely  grow  their  work 
of  forming  and  guiding  the  assemblies, 
or  Churches.  But  in  all  this  those 
apostles  were  but  repeating  what  Christ 
Himself  had  been,  and  exhibiting  what 
Christ  is  in  the  higher  sense,  in  His 
present  spiritual  relations  with  His 
Church.  He  is  still  the  Apostle  of  our 
profession,  the  present  Teacher  of  His 
Church,  in  the  working  of  His  Holy 
Spirit.  He  alone  has  the  right  to 
teach,  to  reveal  truth  and  duty,  and 
to  rule  in  His  Church  ;  and  we  may 
not  let  any  conceptions  of  a  past  and 
completed  Mediatorship  keep  us  from 
realising  that  He  is  to-day  the 
Apostle  of  our  profession,  the  Teacher 
who,  by  His  Spirit,  still  to-day,  leadeth 
us  into  all  truth.  It  is  the  present 
actual,  effective  relation  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  to  our  soul-life  and  culture  that 
comes  into  our  view  when,  in  the 
presence  of  the  sacramental  emblems, 
we  consider  the  Apostle  of  our  profession. 
It  is  of  that  living  relation  we  need 
to  be  supremely  jealous. 

II.  Christ  is  man's  High  Priest 
with  God. — Now  the  essential  idea  of 
the  high  priest  was  representation.  He 
stood  for  the  people;  he  represented 
them  in  all  dealings  with  God,     The 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  CHAt>.  ill. 


more  important  features  of  his  work  the    eternal     Spirit    offered    Himself 

were    reconcilement    and   intercession,  without  spot  to  God,  purge  your  con- 

1.    The   high    priest   went   on   behalf  science  from  dead  works  to  serve  the 

of  the  people  into  the  Holy  of  Holies.  living   God  ? "      3.  Now   we   come   to 

The   incidents   of    the   great    Day   of  a  point  which  is  of  great  importance, 

Atonement  set  forth  the  work  of  the  and   yet  can   only   with  difficulty   be 

high   priest  very  vividly.     His  every-  presented.     It  may  be  easy  to  grip  in 

day  work  is  seen  in  the  light  of  that  a    formal    way ;    it  is   hard   to    reach 

one   day's  work.     "  The    priests  went  in  that  spii'itual  manner  in  which  we 

always  into  the  first  tabernacle,  accom-  always  seek  to  apprehend  truth.     The 

plishing    the    service.       But   into    the  high  priest  had  himself  prepared  the 

second   went    the    high   priest    alone,  terms  on  which  he  sought  the  people's 

once  every  year."     And  so  Christ  our  acceptance.     He  was  to  put  his  hands 

High  Priest  has  gone,  not  once  for  the  on  the  living  creature  ;  he  was,  as  his 

year,but  oncefor  alljintotheheavenlies,  own  act,  to  take  the  life  of  the  living 

heaven  itself,   the  region  of   spiritual  creature  ;  he  was  to  take  the  blood  with 

and   eternal    realities ;    *'  Christ   being  him,  as  if  it  were  a  part  of  himself, 

come,  an  High  Priest  of  good  things  into  the  holy  place.     He  went  in  at 

to  come,"  enters  a  "  greater  and  more  once  a  priest  and  a  sacrifice,  in  both 

perfect  tabernacle,  one  not  made  with  representing  the  people.     They  went, 

hands,  that  is  to  say,  not  of  this  build-  in    him,    seeking    Divine    acceptance., 

ing."    Our  interests  with  God  absolutely  It   is  the   foreshadowing,    the   solemn 

and  entirely  stand  in  Christ  our  High  picturing  of  the  spiritual  mystery  of 

Priest,  who  is  for  us  in  the  world  of  the  union  we  find  in  Christ.     He  pre- 

spiritual  and  Divine  realities.     2.  The  pared,  as  our    High  Priest,   His  own 

high  priest  not  only  went  into  the  Holy  sacrifice.      It   was   Himself.      It   was 

of  Holies,  he  took  with  him  the  terms  His  own  surrender.     It  was  His  own 

of    acceptance  ;    *'  not   without    blood,  yielded  life.    It  was  His  own  obedience 

which  he  offered  for  himself  and  for  unto  death.    He  went  into  the  spiritual 

the  errors  of  the  people."     The  blood  Holy  of    Holies  with  His  sacrifice,  at 

that  he  took  represented   the  devoted  once  our  Priest  and  our  Offering.     His 

life  of  a   creature   on  whom  the  sins  redemptive  work  was  His  alone.     And 

of    the    people    had    been    confessed.  He  is.  Himself,  now,  in  the  presence 

That  creature  represented  the  humble,  of  God,   our  Sacrifice,  the   ground   of 

penitent  reconsecration  of  the  people,  our  acceptance,  and  our  Priest  plead- 

the  fresh  giving  of  themselves  in  love  ing  for  our  acceptance  on  the  ground 

and  obedience  to  Jehovah  ;  it  was  the  of  His  sacrifice.    The  truth  is  embodied 

blood,    or    life,   of   the   creature   that  for  us  in  a  striking  symbol.     Before 

symbolised    that     purposed    complete  the  eternal  throne  is  seen  the  Mediator 

obedience  which  the  high  priest  took  of    the    new     covenant ;    but    behold 

into  the  Holy  of    Holies  as   the  plea  Him  !     Is  it  not  a  surprise  that  sug- 

and  the  ground  of  acceptance.      And  gests  inquiry  ?     He  is  a  "  Lamb  as  it 

so  Jesus  Christ,  the  High  Priest  of  our  had  been  slain."     Once  again  :    4.  The 

profession,  took  into  the  spiritual  Holy  high     priest,     having    gained    accept- 

of  Holies  His  own  proved  and  perfected  ance,  sought  blessings  for  the  people, 

obedience,    sealed    in    His    life-blood,  While  the  high  priest  was  within  the 

which  carries  with  it,  and  pledges,  ours  veil,  on  that  great   Atonement  Day, 

as  the  plea  and  the  ground  on  which  the   vast   company    of    Jews   crowded 

He  claims   acceptance   for   us.     *'  By  the   outer   courts,    and   watched  most 

His  own  blood  [or,  with  His  own  blood]  anxiously  for  the  moving  of  the  outer 

He  entered  in  once  for   all  into  the  veil   of  the  tabernacle,   and  the  first 

holy    place,    obtaining    thus    eternal  sight  of  the  returning  priest.     If  he 

redemption  for  us.  .  .  .  How  much  more  were  delayed,  the  intense   excitement 

shall  the  blood  of  Christ,  who  through  moved  those  people  to  press  nearer  in 

181 


CHAP.  III.  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


their  anxious  watching  ;  and  when  at 
hist  he  came  forth,  and  the  light  of 
acceptance  was  on  his  face,  we  can 
picture  to  ourselves  how  every  heart 
tlu-illed  with  thankful  joy,  and  how 
every  head  was  bowed,  as  he  stood  and 
breathed  forth  the  benedictions  he 
had  won  for  them  from  their  God. 
We  do  not  wait  expecting  to  see  our 
great  High  Priest  come  forth  from 
the  heavenlies,  to  speak  in  human 
words  the  forgiveness  and  acceptance 
He  has  won  for  us  ;  but  we  do  expect 
Him  to  come  in  spiritual  fashion  to 
our  waiting  souls,  with  Divine  com- 
fortings  and  assurances.  We  think 
of  Him  as  entered  once  into  the  holy 
place,  there  to  abide  for  ever ;  always 
there,  the  "  Lamb  as  it  had  been 
slain,"  the  ground  of  our  acceptance ; 
always  there,  the  "Angel  of  the 
covenant,"  waving  the  golden  censer 
wherein  are  the  prayers  of  the  saints  ; 
always  there,  the  Medium  whence 
comes  to  us  every  spiritual  good ; 
always  there  representing  us.  There 
where  one  day  we  hope  to  be  beside 
Him.  He  is  at  once  our  Moses  and 
our  Aaron  joined  in  one — Moses  as 
God's  Apostle,  Aaron  as  our  High  Priest 
with  God.  What  then  do  we  need 
for  the  strengthening  and  comforting 
and  satisfying  of  our  souls  ?  A 
steadier  setting  of  eye  on  Jesus  Christ. 
Consider  Him.  Consider  His  mission. 
His  work.  His  offices,  His  relations. 
Consider  what  He  is  to  God.  Con- 
sider what  He  is  to  us.  More  and 
more  it  is  being  pressed  on  attention 
that  Christ  Himself  is  the  centre  of 
the  Christ-revelation.  Christianity  is 
no  organised  force  of  doctrines  and 
demands.  It  always  was,  though  men 
have  overlaid  it — it  is  to-day,  though 
men  crowd  creeds  and  rites  into  it — 
the  living  power,  to  convict,  convert, 
redeem,  comfort,  teach,  and  sanctify, 
of  the  living  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Him- 
self. My  Sacrifice  for  sin — it  is  Christ 
Himself.  My  ground  of  acceptance 
with  God — it  is  Jesus  Himself.  My 
Advocate  with  the  Father — it  is  Jesus 
Himself.  My  one  only  and  all-suffi- 
cient  Teacher — it    is    Jesus   Himself. 

182 


"  Consider  the  Apostle  and  High 
Pi'iest  of  our  profession  " — our  Alpha 
and  our  Omega — our  All  in  all,  it  is 
the  ever-living,  glorified,  spiritual, 
Divine  Lord  Jesus. 

Ver.  2.  Faithfulness  is  independent 
of  the  Nature  of  our  Trust. — Two  per- 
sons are  introduced  here  for  the  sake 
of  a  comparison  which  is  to  be  made 
between  them.  But  first  of  all  it 
must  be  seen  that  in  character  they 
are  one.  Both  good  men,  and  both 
faithful  men.  Their  trusts  differ. 
The  relations  in  which  they  stand  to 
their  work  differ.  But  no  disadvan- 
tage, in  personal  character,  attaches 
to  either.  Jesus  was  "  faithful  to  Him 
that  appointed  Him,  as  also  was  Moses 
in  all  his  house."  Faithfulness  is  a 
\drtue.  It  includes  the  purpose  of  the 
will.  A  man  must  mean  to  be  faith- 
ful, or  there  can  be  no  moral  value  in 
his  faithfulness.  Faithful  by  natural 
disposition,  and  faithful  by  accident, 
have  no  moral  quality  in  them.  But 
the  purpose  of  the  will  must  be  matched 
by  the  endeavour  of  the  life.  For  will 
is  only  virtuous  when  it  finds  fitting 
expression  in  conduct  and  relations. 
Faithfulness  implies  the  recognition 
of  dependence,  the  sense  of  responsi- 
bility, the  clear  knowledge  of  what 
ought  to  be  done,  and  the  personal 
interest  and  pleasure  of  a  man  in  the 
doing.  The  term  "  faith-/wZ "  suggests 
the  carrying  out  of  the  work  entrusted 
thoroughly ;  going  beyond  the  limits 
of  bare  necessity  to  do  the  work  even 
over-efficiently,  if  that  be  possible, 
the  thoroughness  indicating  that  the 
heart  is  wholly  in  it.  With  such  views 
of  faithfulness  read  the  life-work  both 
of  Moses  and  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 

I.  Faithfulness  is  not  dependent  on 
ability. — The  man  who  has  the  trust 
of  ten  talents  has  no  better  possibility 
of  faithfulness  than  the  man  who  has 
the  trust  of  one.  It  may  be  that  the 
men  of  marked  ability  get  the  re- 
cognition of  faithfulness  from  their 
fellow-men.  The  faithful  man  who 
has  no  special  ability  is  absolutely 
secure    of    the    recognition    of    God, 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.    III. 


And   "there  are  last  which  shall  be 
first." 

II.  Faithfulness  is  not  dependent 
on  trusts. — As  there  are  all  sorts  of 
persons  to  make  up  a  world,  so  there 
are  all  sorts  of  missions  for  meeting 
the  world's  needs.  Everybody  cannot 
have  what  men  call  high  and  honour- 
able trusts.  Some  must  have  the 
lowly  ones,  even  what  men  think  the 
unlovely  ones.  In  them  they  can  be 
as  faithful  as  the  favoured  few. 

III.  Faithfulness  is  not  dependent 
on  success. — A  grave  mistake  is  often 
made  in  relation  to  this.  We  think 
those  are  proved  to  be  faithful  who 
succeed.  God  knows  His  faithful 
ones  who  fail.  We  are  not  bound  to 
succeed.  Succeed  or  fail,  we  are 
bound  to  be  faithful,  and  that  we 
can  he. 

Ver.  4.  The  House  and  its  Builder. 
— Had  the  house  a  builder,  or  did  it 
build  itself  ?  This  is  a  question  which  is 
occupying  many  minds,  many  tongues, 
many  pens,  just  now,  one  to  which 
various  answers  are  given,  though  only 
two  of  them  seem  worth  considering. 
If  we  say,  *'  The  house  built  itself," 
that  clearly  is  a  straightforward 
answer  to  the  question,  however  un- 
satisfactory it  may  prove  on  examina- 
tion. And  if  we  say,  "  The  house  was 
built  by  God,"  that  again  is  clearly 
an  answer  to  the  question,  and  an 
answer  which  seems  at  once  to  com- 
mend itself  to  our  common  sense, 
however  disputable  it  may  be.  But 
if  we  have  nothing  more  to  say  than 


*'  We  do  not  know,"  clearly  we  do  not 
answer  the  question  at  all ;  we  do  not 
even  show  it  to  be  unanswerable ;  we 
simply  admit  our  incapacity  to  answer 
it ;  and  though  that  may  be  a  sufficiently 
interesting  fact  to  us,  it  has  no  interest 
for  the  world  at  large,  which  cares 
very  little  for  us,  but  cares  a  great 
deal  for  the  question  we  have  raised. 
~S.  Cox,  D.D. 

The  Relativity  ofClhrist  and  Moses  to 
their  Dispensations. — The  term  "  house  " 
here  properly  suits  the  idea  of  build- 
ing, but  the  writer  is  referring  to  the 
"  dispensations,"  or  religious  systems, 
which  are  associated  with  the  names 
of  Moses  and  of  Christ.  In  some  sense 
both  were  the  founders  and  organisers 
of  their  dispensation.  But  not  in  the 
same  sense.  And  the  writer  suggests 
that  the  differences  are  of  greater 
importance  than  the  similarities.  The 
earlier  is  not  properly  called  the 
Mosaic  dispensation  ;  it  should  be  called 
the  Jehovah  dispensation  ;  for  Jehovah 
was  the  founder  of  it,  and  the  Jehovah 
revelation  is  the  very  heart  of  it. 
And  Moses  was  no  more  than  the 
earth -ministr ant  of  it,  who  must  stand 
beside  but  never  before  Jehovah.  The 
later  is  not  properly  called  the  Chris- 
tian dispensation  ;  it  should  be  called 
the  Father  dispensation.  But  Christ 
stands  in  an  altogether  unique  relation 
to  it.  He  does  not  minister  it ;  He 
embodies  it.  It  is  His  Sonship,  and 
what  His  Sonship  did,  does,  and  can 
do  for  men. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH. —Verses  7—19. 

The  Warning  of  Ancient  Failures. — This  passage  is  hortatory.  It  is  an  earnest 
appeal  and  warning  breaking  in  upon  the  course  of  argument,  after  the  manner 
of  this  writer.  What  is  its  special  point  of  view  ?  The  times  of  Moses  have 
been  prominent  in  the  writer's  thought.  They  were  times  which  there  was 
a  strong  disposition  to  unduly  magnify.  It  was  easy  to  slip  over  the  painful 
things  in  the  older  history.  But  they  were  there,  and  were  there  for  the 
permanent  warning  of  God's  people.  The  evils,  and  especially  the  great  evil 
of  unbehef,  which  broke  relations  with  Jehovah,  prevented  many  from  realising 
the  fulfilment  of  God's  promise,  and  delayed  the  fulfilment  for  many  years,  were 
evils  still  working ;  and  they  would  prove  as  effective  as  ever  in  delaying  or 

183 


CHAP.    III. 


HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENT  A  RY:    HEBREWS. 


removing  the  spiritual  blessings  of  the  new  covenant.     Apostasy  is  always  the 
bad  fruitage  of  cherished  unbelief.  ,  „ 

I.  The  responsibility  of  self  rests  upon  self.—"  Harden  not  your  hearts. 
A  man  has  control  of,  power  of  influence  upon,  his  own  heart  for  good  or  for 
evil.  He  can  deal  with,  restrain,  check,  qualify,  resist,  the  influences  which 
rest  upon  his  own  heart.  Therefore  it  is  said,  "  Keep  thy  heart  with  all 
dili^^ence,  for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  Hfe."  Every  man  is  responsible  for 
himself  to  himself,  as  well  as  to  God.  And  this  is  true  in  relation  to  unbelief. 
Net'ligence  of  spiritual  culture,  injudicious  reading,  unsuitable  associations, 
and  other  things,  tend  to  nourish  unbelief  ;  but  these  are  all  within  a  man's  own 
control.  "Take  heed,  brethren,  lest  there  be  in  any  of  you  an  evil  heart  of 
unbelief,  in  departing  from  the  living  God." 

II.  The  responsibility  for  each  rests  on  the  other. — "  But  exhort  one  another 
day  by  day  .  .  .  lest  any  of  you  be  hardened  by  the  deceitfulness  of  sin."  It 
is  true  that  each  man  must  "  bear  his  own  burden  "  ;  but  it  is  also  true  that 
each  must  bear  the  other's  burden  ;  the  strong  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak. 
We  ca7i  come  into  each  other's  lives  as  gracious  remedial  forces  ;  and  this  is 
especially  true  when  mischievous  teachers  are  exerting  injurious  influence,  and 
the  young,  or  those  of  receptive  or  sceptical  dispositions,  are  placed  in  special 
temptation.     We  can  "  exhort  one  another." 

III.  Our  anxiety  should  concern  the  subtlety  of  sin  and  temptation. — 
Unbehef  begins  in  secret  questionings  and  doubtings  :  it  easily  grows  into  a 
fatal  habit.  The  tempter  keeps  up  the  subtlety  of  Eden  by  suggesting  sus- 
picions,— "Yea,  hath  God  said."  But  the  kind  of  subtlety  indicated  here  is 
the  exaggeration  of  a  lower  truth  so  as  to  push  a  higher  one  out  of  thought. 
The  magnifying  of  Moses  was  intended  to  push  out  of  thought  the  spiritual 
claims  of  Christ. 

IV.  The  direction  in  which  evil  works  is  generally  towards  unbelief. — Trust 
is  the  element  in  which  spiritual  life  thrives.  Therefore  the  main  effort  of  evil 
is  to  disturb  that  trust.  Suspicion,  doubt,  unbelief,  are  the  elements  in  which 
evil  thrives.  This  is  illustrated  in  the  experience  of  the  Israelites  during  their 
forty  years  of  desert  experience.  It  is  the  experience  of  rehgious  life  to-day. 
An  age  of  criticism  is  an  age  of  enfeebled  spiritual  life. 

V.  Unbelief  always  means  hindrance  from  blessing. — It  did,  when  those 
who  came  out  of  Egypt  with  Moses  died  in  the  wilderness  (save  the  two  men 
of  faith,  Caleb  and  Joshua).  It  did,  when  it  kept  the  nation  back  from  Canaan 
for  eight-and-thirty  years.  It  does,  for  God  can  make  no  response  where  there 
is  doubt  or  unbelief.  He  cannot,  because  His  response  could  be  no  blessing 
to  men  who  were  in  such  a  mood  of  mind.  God's  ever-working  law  of  blessing 
is  succinctly  given  by  the  Lord  Jesus  thus,  "  According  to  your  faith  be  it  unto 
you."  The  good  man  always  responds  to  trust.  He  can  do  anything  for  those 
who  commit  their  interests  wholly  to  him.  And  the  good  God  is  checked  from 
blessing  by  nothing  else  as  He  is  by  distrust.  The  saddest  thing  is  said 
concerning  the  towns  beside  the  Lake  of  Galilee,  in  relation  to  the  Lord  Jesus, 
"  He  could  not  do  many  mighty  works  there  because  of  their  unbelief."  Do 
we  ask  anjrthing  of  God  ?  His  first  word  in  response  always  is,  "  Belie  vest  thou 
that  I  am  able  to  do  this  ?  " 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  7.  The  Holy  Ghost  in  the  Old  Spirit  bears  relation  to  man  the  spirit. 
Testament. — "  Even  as  the  Holy  Ghost  For  man  is  a  spirit.  The  great  Spirit 
saith,"  in  the  book  of  psalms.    God  the      can  overshadow,  hallow,   help,  purify^ 

184 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  ill. 


teach,  us  dependent  spirits.  Luther 
illustrates  the  relation  of  the  Divine 
Spirit  to  the  human  spirit  by  the  effect 
of  fire  in  heating,  and  in  some  respects 
changing  the  character  of,  water,  so 
that  under  the  power  of  the  fire  the 
water  can  do  what  of  itself  it  could 
not  do.  The  great  fire-spirit  can 
penetrate  and  influence  the  water- 
spirit.  God,  as  a  Spirit,  must  always 
have  borne  relations  to  the  human 
spirit,  and  this  superadding  and  in- 
working  of  God's  Spirit  must  always 
have  been  the  secret  source  of  all 
moral  goodness.  The  inspirings  of  God 
are  not  the  exclusive  privilege  of  any 
one  age.     Illustrate  this  from — 

I.  The  patriarchal  period. — We  can- 
not expect  to  find  much  respecting  a 
subject  which  is  the  burden  of  God's 
last  and  highest  revelation  in  this 
primitive  age.  We  may,  however,  look 
for  some  hints  that  would  indicate, 
even  then,  the  apprehension  of  God  as 
working  for  man,  not  only  externally 
in  nature  and  providence,  but  in  the 
very  heart  of  things,  and  upon  the 
mind  or  spirit  of  men.  We  ought  not, 
however,  to  be  surprised  if  we  also 
meet  with  some  confusion  between 
man's  spiritual  nature  and  the  Spirit 
of  God,  or  the  spiritual  working  of 
God.  As  specimens  of  the  references 
that  may  be  found,  turn  to  three 
passages  :  1.  Gen.  i.  2  :  "  The  Spirit 
of  God  moved  upon  the  face  of  the 
waters."  The  Spirit  is  evidently  ap- 
prehended as  the  great  quickening 
principle,  bearing  intimate  relation  to 
Hfe,  and  so  dealing  with  the  inward, 
secret  heart  of  things.  2.  Gen.  vi.  3  : 
"  My  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive 
with  man,  for  that  he  also  is  flesh." 
The  reference  may  be  either  to  the 
Holy  Spirit,  or  to  the  spiritual  as 
opposed  to  the  animal  principle  in 
man.  Whichever  meaning  we  prefer, 
the  passage  indicates  discernment  of 
the  relation  God  bears  to  the  inner, 
spiritual  nature  of  man.  3.  Gen.  xli. 
38  :  "  Can  we  find  such  a  one  as  this 
is,  a  man  in  whom  the  Spirit  of  God 
is?"  Without  pressing  unduly  the 
meaning  of  Pharaoh  in  his  vise  of  the 


term   "  Spirit  of  God,"  we  have  here 
also  the  indication  of  the  same  idea  on 
the  part  even  of  the  idolatrous  peoples. 
Besides  such  passages  as  these  we  have 
many   suggestions   of   God's   inwardly 
helping  men  in  those  days.     At  first 
we  have  only  external  relations  with 
Adam  and   Noah,   excepting   perhaps 
the  hint  of  internal  relations  afforded 
by  the  terms  in  which  Enoch  is  spoken 
of:    "Enoch   walked   with    God,    and 
he  was  not,  for  God  took  him."     Pass- 
ing thus  into  the  spiritual  world  seems 
to     suggest     Divine    culture    of    the 
spiritual  nature.     But   by-and-by  we 
come  to  visions,  dreams,  inward  voices, 
seen    and    heard    by    Abraham    and 
Jacob.     These    reveal     personal    and 
individual  relations  of  God  with  men, 
and     His    immediate     communication 
with   man's   mind    and   spirit.     These 
visions,  dreams,  and  inward  voices  are 
the  proper  beginnings  and  foreshadow- 
ings    of    the    spiritual    impulses,    the 
inner   workings    of    the    Holy    Spirit, 
which   we   know.     And   observe   how 
exactly  Abraham's  faith  was  like  ours. 
He   believed   an   inward   voice  which 
could  not  be  absolutely  verified,  even 
as  by  our  faith  we  now  lay  hold  of  the 
unprovable.     "  Blessed,"   said    Christ, 
"  are  they  who  have  not  seen,  and  yet 
have  believed."     It  is  said  in  relation 
to   the   offering   of    his   son   God    did 
tempt  Abraham.     This  tempting,  test- 
ing, trying  of  Abraham  was  manifestly 
God  spiritually  dealing  with  Abraham's 
spiritual  nature.      And  the  same  re- 
mark may  be  applied  to  the  scene  at 
Jabbok :  it  was  the  wrestling  together 
of   the  Divine   Spirit  and  the  human 
spirit  of  Jacob. 

II.  The  Mosaic  period. — This  was 
coincident  with  a  more  extensive  and 
exact  outward  revelation  of  God.  The 
prominent  thing  is  minute  and  elabo- 
rate ceremonial  :  the  entire  outward 
life  of  the  people  in  its  social,  political, 
and  religious  phases  coming  under 
Divine  regulation.  We  may,  however, 
reasonably  expect  clearer  signs  of  the 
recognition  of  the  inward  workings  of 
God  on  the  part  of  those  who,  within 
the   ceremonial,  cultured  their   inner, 

165 


CHAP.    III. 


TIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS, 


spiritual    nature.     We  find  a  number 
of  passages  in  which  the  skill,  talents, 
power  to  prophesy,  and  to  deliver  the 
country,   are  traced  to  the  inworking 
of   the  Spirit   of  God.     As  specimens, 
refer   to    Exod.    xxxi.    2,    3 :  "I  have 
called  Bezali  el  .   .  .   and  I  have  filled 
him  with  the  Spirit  of  God,  in  wisdom, 
and  in  understanding,"  etc.     Bezaleel's 
talents,   genius,  are  directly  traced  to 
the    inspiration    of    God.     The    same 
applies  to  Balaam's  power  of  prophesy- 
ing.    See  Num.  xxiv.  2  :  ''And  Balaam 
lifted  up   his  eyfes,  and  he  saw  Israel 
abiding  in  his  tents  according  to  their 
tribes ;  and   the    Spirit   of  God    came 
upon   him."     See  also  in  reference  to 
the  judges  : — Judg.  iii.  10  :  Othniel — 
*'  The    Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon 
him    and  he  judged   Israel  and  went 
out   to   war."     Judg.    vi.    34 :    *'  The 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  Gideon." 
So    of    Saul    and    Saul's    messengers. 
1  Sam.  X.  10:  "  A  company  of  prophets 
met  him ;  and  the  Spirit  of  God  came 
upon   him,   and  he  prophesied  among 
them."     1  Sam.  xix.  20 :  ''  The  Spirit 
of   God  was  upon   the  messengers   of 
Saul,  and  they  also  prophesied."     There 
is  an  exceedingly  interesting  passage 
in  Num.   xi.  17,  etc.     Moses  felt  op- 
pressively the  burden  of  his  charge  in 
the  ruling  and  judging  of  so  great  a 
people.     God   graciously  arranged  for 
the  appointment  of  seventy  elders  to 
relieve  him  of  part  of  the  burden.     In 
connection  with  this  arrangement  God 
said,     "I    will     take    of    the    spirit 
which   is  upon  thee,  and  will  put  it 
upon   them."     See   ver.    25 :    *'  When 
the  spirit  rested  on  them  they  prophe- 
sied,   and   did    not    cease."     Compare 
ver.  29.     Here  we  have  very  distinctly 
presented  Moses'   own  spirit,  and  the 
Spirit  of  God   overshadowing  and   in- 
spiring it.     God  is  called  the  God  of 
the   spirits  of  all  flesh    in  Num.   xvi. 
22,  and  xxvii.  16,  17.     And  we  have 
the  hardening  of  the    hearts   of  men 
traced  to  the  operation  of  God's  Spirit, 
as  in  Deut.  ii.   30  :   '*  But  Sihon  king 
of  Ileshbon  would  not  let  us  pass  by 
him:  for  the  Lord  thy  God  hardened  his 
spirit,  and  made  his  heart  obstinate." 

186 


III.  The  Davidic  period. — Here  one 
or  two  passages  will  sufiice  to  remind 
of  more  familiar  ones.  Turn  to  Ps.  li. 
10-12:  "Cast  me  not  away  from 
Thy  presence ;  and  take  not  Thy  Holy 
S'pi7'it  from  me."  Here  you  observe 
that  repentance  was  bringing  up  to 
light  some  of  the  deepest  feelings  and 
convictions  of  David's  soul ;  it  was 
making  him  intensely  spiritual :  so  he 
came  to  realise  his  inner  dependence 
on  the  teachings  and  movings  of  God's 
Spirit,  and  was  led  to  express  his 
fear  lest  at  any  time  he  should  be  left 
without  the  succour  of  the  Spirit.  See 
also  Ps.  cxliii.  10  :  "Teach  me  to  do 
Thy  will ;  for  Thou  art  my  God  :  Thy 
Spirit  is  good  ;  lead  me  into  the  land 
of  uprightness."  But  even  in  this 
period  it  is  evident  that  the  externality 
of  God,  the  things  God  does  for  us, 
still  occupy  chief  attention.  God  is 
rock,  refuge,  fortress,  deliverer.  The 
inward  inspirations  of  God  are  clearly 
recognised,  and  lovingly  dwelt  upon, 
only  in  the  intenser,  more  spiiitual 
moments  of  life. 

lY.  The  prophetic  period. — And 
what  may  we  expect  in  this  prophetic 
age  ?  Its  characteristic  feature  is  a 
struggle  to  bring  to  its  proper  light 
and  influence  the  inward  claims  and 
workings  of  God.  The  prophets  do  not, 
however,  fully  deal  with  the  nature  of 
this  inward  working  of  God.  That 
would  have  been  to  anticipate  Pente- 
costal times.  They  assume,  assert,  and 
vindicate  the  fact,  and  then  proceed  to 
urge  the  duty  of  man's  offering  spiritual 
response  to  the  fact.  They  were,  as 
prophets,  inwardly,  Divinely  moved 
men.  Not  really  different  from  others, 
only  the  prominent  examples  of  inspira- 
tion which  every  heart  open  to  God 
might  surely  know.  So  their  very 
presence  asserted  God's  spiritual  rela- 
tions with  spirit.  In  the  histories  of 
the  prophetic  period  we  have  the  con- 
tinuation of  the  idea  on  which  we  have 
dwelt :  that  talent,  especially  prophetic, 
is  due  to  the  working  of  God's  Spirit. 
Elisha  desires  a  first-born's  portion  of 
Elijah's  spirit  (2  Kings  ii.  9,  15).  Pul 
and  Tiglath-pileser  are  said  to  be  stirred 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.    III. 


up  to  war  by  the  Spirit,  as  we  have 
seen  Sihon  was  hardened.  And  the 
captives  of  Babylon  were  roused  up  by 
the  Spirit  to  return  to  their  own  land 
(Ezra  i.  5).  In  the  actual  prophecies 
we  have  again  and  again  the  formula, 
"  The  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto 
me,"  implying  operation  of  God  on 
the  spirit.  Nehemiah  says  in  his 
prayer,  "  Yet  many  years  didst  Thou 
forbear  them,  and  testified  against 
them  by  Thy  Spirit  in  Thy  prophets." 
Isaiah  speaks  of  the  wanderings  of 
Israel  in  the  desert  in  this  way  : — Isa. 
Ixiii.  10,  11  :  "But  they  rebelled,  and 
vexed  His  Holy  Spirit  :  therefore  He 
was  turned  to  be  their  enemy,  and  He 
fought  against  them.  Then  He  remem- 
bered the  days  of  old,  Moses,  and  His 
people,  saying,  Where  is  He  that 
brought  them  up  out  of  the  sea  with 
the  shepherd  of  His  flock  ?  where  is 
He  that  put  His  Holy  Spirit  within 
him  ?  "  Ezekiel  often  speaks  of  the 
inner  impulses  of  the  Spirit.  Zechariah, 
speaking  of  the  former  time,  says 
(vii.  12),  "  Yea,  they  made  their  hearts 
as  an  adamant  stone,  lest  they  should 
hear  the  law,  and  the  words  which  the 
Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent  in  His  Spirit 
by  the  former  prophets."  Enough  has 
been  said  to  show  that  throughout 
all  ages  of  the  world  men  have,  with 
more  or  less  distinctness,  recognised 
the  relation  between  God  the  Spirit 
and  man's  spirit ;  with  more  or  less 
clearness  men  have  seen,  as  one 
text  expresses  it,  that  "  there  is  a 
spirit  in  man,  and  the  inspiration  of 
the  Almighty  giveth  him  under- 
standing." But  it  will  be  suggested 
to  your  minds  to  inquire  :  Have  we 
any  reason  for  identifying  this  work 
of  the  Spirit  in  Old  Testament  times 
with  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in 
this  our  Christian  dispensation  ?  Is 
the  Spiint  of  God  spoken  of  in  the  old 
age  to  be  identified  with  the  Holy  Ghost 
of  the  new?  If  it  is  not,  then  we 
shall  have  to  face  the  difficulty  of  two 
senses  in  which  the  Spirit  of  God  is 
spoken  of  in  Scripture,  and  to  deal 
with  the  confusion  of  imagining  there 
has  been  no  unity  in  the  Divine  dealings 


with  our  race.  All  thought  of  God's 
education  of  the  world  must  be  put 
away,  and  we  must  think  of  His 
ways  with  us  as  a  number  of  abrupt 
and  unconnected  dealings,  fashioned 
for  adaptation  to  peculiar  and  unex- 
pected circumstances.  "The  God  of 
the  whole  earth"  He  can  hardly  "be 
called."  Turn  to  two  passages  in  the 
epistles  of  Peter  (1  Pet.  i.  10,  11): 
"  Of  which  salvation  the  prophets  have 
enquired  and  searched  diligently,  who 
prophesied  of  the  grace  that  should 
come  unto  you  :  searching  what,  or 
what  manner  of  time  the  Spirit  of 
Christ  which  was  in  them  did  signify, 
when  it  testified  beforehand  the  suffer- 
ing of  Christ  and  the  glory  that  should 
follow."  Now  the  spirit  of  the  prophets 
is  declared  to  have  been  the  Spirit  of 
Christ.  The  Spirit  of  Christ  is  none 
other  than  the  Holy  Ghost :  for  in 
2  Pet.  i.  21  it  is  said,  "For  the 
prophecy  came  not  in  old  time  by  the 
will  of  man  :  but  holy  men  of  God 
spake  as  the}^  were  moved  by  the  Holy 
Ghost."  We  may  therefore  say  that, 
apprehended  in  its  most  simple  form, 
the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Holy  Ghost,  the 
Third  Person  of  the  Trinity,  may  be 
conceived  of  as  God  acting  upon  man's 
spirit,  inspiring,  moving,  leading  him 
to  the  apprehension  of  all  moral  truth, 
and  the  expression  in  conduct  of  all 
moral  goodness.  "  There  is  a  spirit  in 
man,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  influences 
it,  giving  to  it  understanding  and 
impulse." 

Ver.  10.  Can  God  suffer? — Is  there 
any  sensibility  in  God  that  can  suffer  ? 
Is  He  ever  wrenched  by  suffering  ? 
Nothing  is  more  certain.  He  could 
not  be  good,  having  evil  in  His 
dominions,  without  suffering  even 
according  to  His  goodness.  For  what  is 
goodness  but  a  perfect  feeling  ?  And 
what  is  a  perfect  feeling  but  that  which 
feels  towards  every  wrong  and  misery 
according  to  its  nature  ?  And  thus  it 
is  that  we  freely  impute  to  Him, 
whether  we  observe  it  or  not,  every 
sort  of  painful  sensibility  that  is 
related  to  bad  and  suffering  subjects. 

187 


CHAP.   III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


We  conceive  of  Him  as  feeling  dis- 
pleasure, which  is  the  opposite  of 
pleasure.  We  ascribe  it  as  one  of 
His  perfections  that  He  compassionates, 
which  means  that  He  suffers  with  the 
fallen.  We  conceive  that  He  loathes 
what  is  disgusting,  hates  what  is 
cruel,  suffers  long  what  is  perverse, 
grieves,  burns,  bears,  forbears,  and 
is  even  afflicted  for  His  people,  as 
the  Scripture  expressly  declares.  All 
which  are  varieties  of  suffering.  We 
also  ascribe  it  to  God,  as  one  of  His 
perfections,  that  He  is  impassible ; 
but  here,  if  we  understand  ourselves, 
we  mean  that  He  is  physically  im- 
passible, not  that  He  is  morally  so. 
Moral  impassibility  is  really  to  have 
no  sensibilities  of  character,  which  is 
as  far  as  possible  from  being  any  per- 
fection. Indeed  there  is  a  whole  class 
of  what  are  called  passive  virtues  that 
cannot,  in  this  view,  belong  to  God 
at  all,  and  His  perfection  culminates 
without  including  more  than  half  the 
excellencies  demanded  even  of  us,  in 
the  range  of  our  humble,  finite  capacity. 
There  is  then  some  true  sense  in  which 
even  God's  perfection  required  Him  to 
be  a  suffering  God — not  a  God  un- 
happy, or  less  than  perfectly,  infinitely 
blessed;  for  though  there  be  many 
subtractions  from  His  blessedness,  there 
is  never  any  diminution  ;  because  the 
consciousness  of  suffering  will  bring 
with  it,  in  every  case  and  everlastingly, 
a  compensation  which,  by  a  great  law 
of  equilibrium  in  His  and  all  spiritual 
natures,  fully  repays  the  loss  ;  just  as 
Christ,  assailed  by  so  many  throes  of 
suffering  sensibility — in  the  temptation, 
in  His  ministry,  in  the  garden — still 
speaks  of  His  joy,  and  bequeaths  it  as 
a  gift  most  real  and  sublime  to  His 
followers.  It  is  this  suffering  sensibility 
of  God  that  most  needed  to  be  revealed, 
and  brought  nigh  to  human  feeling, 
in  the  incarnate  mission  of  Jesus. — 
Horace  Bushiiell,  D.D. 

Ver.  12.  Good  Unbelief  and  Bad.— 
"An  evil  heart  of  unbelief."  A  head 
of  unbeUef  may  be  good;  a  heart  of 
imbeHef  must  be  bad.     Doubt  may  be 

188 


a  condition  of  mental  growth ;  suspicion 
and  mistrust  spoil  all  moral  relations. 
It  is  said  of  the  Beroeans,  "  Now  these 
were  more  noble  than  those  in  Thessa- 
lonica,  in  that  they  received  the  w^ord 
with  all  readiness  of  mind,  examining 
the  Scriptures  daily,  whether  these 
things  were  so."  But  their  superior 
nobility  consisted  in  their  taking  an 
attitude  of  interested  doubt.  They 
listened  well,  but  would  not  believe 
until  they  had  removed  their  reason- 
able hesitation  by  full  inquiry.  It 
may  even  be  said  that  a  man  cannot 
be  capable  of  faith  if  he  is  incap- 
able of'  unbelief.  A  mere  uninquiring 
recipiency  indicates  a  very  undeveloped 
moral  nature.  A  man  is  not  manly 
unless  he  is  able  to  say,  "  I  can  doubt, 
but  I  do  believe."  Doubt  is  the 
impulse  to  inquiry  and  search  ;  and 
therefore  absolute  certainty  is  not 
attainable  by  man  in  relation  to  any- 
thing in  which  he  is  interested.  He 
is  always  under  inspu-ation  to  "  prove 
all  things."  Unbelief  of  the  head  then 
may  be  good.  Intelligence  involves 
doubting.  He  who  receives  everything 
thinks  about  nothing,  and  receives 
only  as  a  sponge  does.  All  mental 
attainments  are  battles  with  unbelief. 
"  I  am  not  sure  about  it "  ;  then,  "  I 
must  satisfy  myself  about  it."  Intelli- 
gent men  go  through  doubt  to  faith. 
Unbelief  of  the  heart  is  bad.  That 
is  the  unbelief  which  is  so  sternly 
rebuked  in  the  Scriptures.  A  man 
may  doubt,  but  want  to  believe  if  he 
can.  A  man  may  doubt,  and  want  to 
find  excuse  for  not  belie\4ng  if  he  can. 
The  one  is  good,  and  the  other  is  evil. 
The  Israelites  of  the  wilderness  did 
not  fail  by  reason  of  intellectual 
unbelief,  but  by  reason  of  failure  in 
heart-trust  :  their  sin  was  an  "  evil 
heart  of  unbelief."  Capernaum  and 
the  cities  of  Galilee  were  not  condemned 
for  intellectual  unbelief,  but  for  heart- 
resistance  of  the  claims  of  the  great 
Teacher.  The  unbelief  that  imperils 
is  not  opinion,  but  feeling,  mood,  bias. 
It  is  a  resistance  of  the  will,  a  moral 
condition  which  makes  evidence  in- 
effective,    and     persuasion     helpless. 


EOMILETIC  COMMEXTARY:    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   ni. 


When   the  heart  influences  the  head, 
unbelief  becomes  ruinous. 

Ver.  13.  T}ie  Deceitfuhiess  of  Sin. — 
The  most  marked  characteristic  of  sin 
is  indicated  in  its  first  personification, 
when  it  was  set  in  relation  to  man's 
moral  fall.  "  Xow  the  serpent  was 
more  subtle  than  any  beast  of  the  field 
which  the  Lord  God  had  made.' 
Subtlety,  secret  movement,  insincerities, 
and  deceptions,  are  essentials  in  the 
working  of  sin.  That  they  must  be  so 
is  seen  at  once  when  we  apprehend 
that  sin  is  no  creative  agency,  but  a 
disturbing  and  upsetting  agency.  If 
a  man  is  going  to  do  something,  he  can 
be  open  and  above-board  ;  but  if  he  is 
going  to  upset  something,  he  will  have 
to  work  in  secret  and  practise  decep- 
tions. The  enemy  who  sowed  tares  in 
the  wheat -field  had  to  do  it  secretly 
and  deceptively  while  men  slept.  The 
special  deceit  fulness  of  sin  referred  to 
here  is  its  way  of  affecting  a  man's 
will  and  purpose  and  heart  in  relation 
to  the  religious  life.  Its  agency  is 
self-interest.  In  the  save«i  man  the 
self-interest  is  dethroned,  and  the 
Christ -interest  enthroned.  The  work 
of  evil  is  the  subtle  endeavour  to  re- 
vive the  self-intei*est.  The  man  finds 
himself  growinorly  interesting  to  him- 
self, and  before  he  is  aware  he  finds 
his  heart  self-hardened  against  Christ 
through  the  deceitful  workings  of  sin. 

Our  Only  Possession — To-day. — In 
what  sense  can  a  man  be  said  to 
possess  anything  ?  Strictly  speaking 
a  man  has  nothing  but  the  use  of 
things.  As  the  old  satirist  expresses 
it.  the  man  who  sits  down  to  a  loaded 
table  of  luxuries  really  has  no  more 
than  the  little  that  he  can  eat.  The 
farmer  thought  he  possessei  ^roods  and 
time.  ''  Sold,  thou  hast  much  goods 
laid  up  for  many  years.'"  He  had 
power  to  hold  no  handfid  of  the  goods 
and  no  day  of  time.  We  speak  of 
what  we  will  do  on  the  morrow,  and  no 
man  has  any  to-morrow  until  God  gives 
it  to  him,  and  then  he  has  to  call 
it  "to-day," 


'•  To-morrow.  Lord,  i=  Thine, 
Lodged  in  Thy  sovereign  hand."' 

A  man  has  one  thing  only — the  present 
hour.  To-day — that  is  our  only  actual 
possession.  Everything  else  save  the 
thing  of  the  hour,  and  everj'  pomir  j 
hour,  is  God's  possession,  not  otirs ;  H  e 
will  give  it  to  us  if  it  pleases  Him 
so  to  do. 

Ver.  14.  Safety  in  continuing. — "If 

we  hold  fast  the  beginning  of  our 
confidence  firm  unto  the  end."  St. 
Paul  expresses  the  same  truth  in 
commending  "patient  continuance  in 
well-doing."  And  the  risen  and 
Hving  Lord  bade  His  Chijrch  be 
'•  faithful  imto  death."  Older  Scrip- 
tures present  the  same  truth.  ••  Then 
shaU  ye  know,  if  ye  foUow  on  to  know 
the  Lord."' 

I.  There  is  no  safety  in  beginning 
a  Christian  profession. — There  might 
be.  if  we  were  translated  as  soon  as 
we  had  planted  our  first  footstep  on 
the  Christian  highway.  There  is  not, 
because  that  first  step  does  but  start 
a  pilgrimage,  which  is  a  serious  test- 
ing of  that  beginning.  The  teaching 
which  exaggerates  the  safety  of  an  act 
of  beginning  is  mischievous. 

II.  There  is  no  safety  in  spasmodic 
experiences. — Such  as  are  provided  for 
Christians  in  times  of  rehgious  excite- 
ment. Many  think  they  are  safe 
because  they  have  felt  intense  feelings 
occasionally. 

III.  There  is  only  safety  in  con- 
tinuance and  persistency. — Because 
the  Christian  life  is  a  moral  cult,  an 
advancing  sanctification.  a  man  onlj 
keeps  right  by  keeping  on, 

Ver.  16.  Belief  of  a  Dark  Picture. — 
The  story  of  the  murmuring,  distrust- 
fulness,  and  self-interested  rebellious- 
ness of  ancient  Israel  in  the  wilderness 
is  a  sad,  dark  story.  It  never  ceases  to 
surprise  and  pain  us ;  and  we  never 
feel  that  the  excuses  offei^  for  them 
are  sufiicient  to  reheve  the  darkness. 
They  were  the  chosen  people  of 
Jehovah,  brought  out  of  a  stern 
bondage    by    magnificent    displays   of 

189 


CHAP.    III. 


HO}fTLETlC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


Divine  power  which  ought  to  have 
inspired  absohite  confidence— provided 
for  in  every  way,  every  recurring 
need  graciously  met,  every  foe  held 
off,  and  a  plain  way  made  for  the 
possession  of  the  Promised  Land.  And 
yet  persistent  rebellion  at  last  reached 
a  climax,  and  the  judgment  went  forth 
that  doomed  every  man  who  had  come 
out  of  Egypt  to  find  a  grave  in  the 


wilderness.  It  was  the  doom  of  those 
who  could  not  take  God  at  His  word, 
and  trust  Him  fully.  There  is  a  relief 
to  the  almost  too  dark  picture.  Two 
men  stand  out  to  view.  They  will  be 
spared.  They  will  enter  the  Promised 
Land.  And  what  is  there  peculiar  in 
their  case  ?  They  kept  their  trust  in 
God.  They  *'  followed  the  Lord  fully." 
God  always  honours  full  trust. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO   CHAPTER  III. 


Ver.  1.  The  Moral  Influence  of  a  Leader. 

There    is    a    touching    fact    related    in 

history  of  a  Highland  chief,  of  the  noble 
house  of  MacGregor,  who  fell  wounded  by 
two  balls  at  the  battle  of  Prestonpans. 
Seeing  their  chief  fall,  the  clan  wavered, 
and  gave  the  enemy  an  advantage.  The 
old  chieftain,  beholding  the  effects  of  his 
disaster,  raised  himself  up  on  his  elbow, 
while  the  blood  gushed  in  streams  from  his 
wounds,  and  cried  aloud,  "  I  am  not  dead, 
my  children;  I  am  looking  at  you  to  see 
you  do  your  duty."  These  words  revived 
the  sinking  courage  of  the  brave  High- 
landers. There  was  a  charm  in  the  fact 
that  they  still  fought  under  the  eye  of  their 
chief.  It  roused  them  to  put  forth  their 
mightiest  energies,  and  they  did  all  that 
liuman  strength  could  do  to  turn  and  stem 
the  dreadful  tide  of  battle. 

Ver.  4.  God  in  Nature. — See  here ;  I 
hold  a  Bible  in  my  hand,  and  you  see  the 
eover,  the  leaves,  the  letters,  the  words,  but 
you  do  not  see  the  writers,  or  the  printer, 
the  letter-founder,  the  ink-maker,  the  paper- 
maker,  or  the  binder.  You  never  did  see 
them,  you  never  will  see  them,  and  yet 
there  is  not  one  of  you  who  will  think 
of  disputing  or  denying  the  being  of  these 
men.  1  go  further ;  1  affirm  that  you  see 
the  very  souls  of  these  men  in  seeing  this 
book,  and  you  feel  yourselves  obliged  to 
allow  that,  by  their  contrivance,  design, 
memory,  fancy,  reason,  and  so  on,  the  book 
was  made.  In  the  same  manner,  if  you  see 
a  picture,  you  judge  there  was  a  painter; 
if  you  see  a  house,  you  judge  there  was  a 
builder  of  it ;  and  if  you  see  one  room  con- 
trived for  this  purpose  and  another  for  that, 
a  door  to  enter,  a  window  to  admit  light,  and 
a  chimney  to  hold  lire,  you  conclude  that  the 
builder  was  a  person  of  skill  and  forecast, 
who  formed  the  house  with  a  view  to  the 
accommodation  of  its  inhabitants.  In  this 
manner  examine  the  world,  and  pity  the 
man  who,  when  he  sees  the  sign  of  a  wheat- 
sheaf,  hath  sense  enough  to  know  that  there 
is  a  joiner,  and   somewhere  a  painter,  but 

190 


who,  when  he  sees  the  wheatsheaf  itself, 
is  so  stupid  as  not  to  say  to  himself, 
"This  had  a  wise  and  good  Creator." — 
R.  Robinson. 

Ver.  13.  The  Power  of  Habits. — "  Hardened 
through  the  deceitful  ness  of  sin."  The 
longer  you  sit  under  the  gospel  and  con- 
tinue in  sin,  the  more  easily  you  can  hear 
it  without  alarm.  If  a  person  were  obliged 
to  sleep  near  a  waterfall,  he  would  not  be 
able  for  the  first  few  weeks  to  sleep 
soundly  for  the  noise,  but  in  a  very  short 
time  he  would  hardly  be  able  to  sleep 
without  it.  I  have  seen  in  Scotland  a  dog, 
during  the  blacksmith's  labour  at  the  anvil, 
sleeping  soundly  with  the  shower  of  live 
sparks  falling  around  him. — Dr.  Cumming, 

So  used  to  it. — You  may  observe,  in 
travelling  on  a  railroad,  how  the  young  cattle 
run  away  in  terror  from  the  engine,  while 
those  that  have  often  seen  it  pass  go  on 
quietly  grazing  and  do  not  regard  it ;  so  one 
who  has  been  accustomed  to  be  a  "  hearer  of 
the  word,  and  not  a  doer,"  will  acquire  more 
and  more  of  the  same  kind  of  familiarity. 
Suppose  that  there  is  in  your  neighbour- 
hood a  loud  bell,  that  is  ringing  very  early 
every  morning  to  call  the  labourer  to  some 
great  manufactory.  At  first  and  for  some 
time  your  rest  will  be  broken  by  it ;  but  if 
you  accustom  yourself  to  be  still,  and  try 
to  compose  yourself,  you  wdll  become  in  a 
few  days  so  used  to  it  that  it  will  not  even 
wake  you.  But  any  one  who  makes  a  point 
of  rising  immediately  at  the  call  will 
become  so  used  to  it,  in  the  opposite  way, 
that  the  sound  will  never  fail  to  rouse  him 
from  the  deepest  sleep.  Both  will  have 
been  accustomed  to  the  same  bell,  but  will 
have  formed  opposite  habits  from  their 
contrary  modes  of  action.  Of  sporting  dogs 
there  are  some,  such  as  the  greyhound,  that 
are  trained  to  pursue  hares ;  and  others 
which  are  trained  to  stand  motionless  when 
they  come  upon  a  hare,  even  though  they 
see  it  running  before  them.  Now  both 
are  accustomed   to   hares,    and   both   have 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  iv. 


originally    the    same    instincts — all    dogs  attached  to  the  end  of  that,  and  so  on,  and 

having  an   instinctive   tendency  to   pursue  so   on,  each   thickening   in   diameter   until 

game.     But  the  one  kind  has  alv^ays  been  they  got   to  a   cable.     That  is  the  way  in 

accustomed  to  run   after   a   hare,  and   the  which  the  devil  has  got  hold  of  a  great  many 

other    has    always    been     chastised    if    it  of  us.     He  weaves  round  us  silken  threads 

attempted  to  do  so,  and  has  been  trained  to  to  begin  with,  slight,  as  if  we  could  break 

stand  still. —  Whately.  them  with  a  touch  of  our  fingers,  and  they 

draw  after  them,  as  certainly  as  destiny,  at 

Perilous  Begiimings. — You  remember  the  each  remove,   a  thickening  chain,  until   at 

old    story    of    the    prisoner   in    his    tower,  last  we  are  tied  and  bound,  and  our  captor 

delivered  by  his  friend,  who  sent  a  beetle  to  laughs   at   our  mad   plunges    for   freedom, 

crawl  up  the  wall,  fastening  a  silken  thread  which  are  as  vain  as  a  wild  bull's  in  the 

to  it,  which  had  a  thread  a  little  heavier  hunter's  nets. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 


CHAPTER    IV. 
SOUL-REST. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

This  chapter  should  not  have  been  separated  from  the  previous  one,  as  it  is  a  -continuation 
of  the  hortatory  passage.  There  is,  however,  a  break  in  the  treatment  of  the  subject.  In 
the  clause  vers.  1-13  the  writer  has  in  mind  possible  objections  to  his  mode  of  treating 
Old  Testament  Scriptures.  It  might  be  said  (1)  that  the  "  rest "  spoken  of  was  merely  quiet 
possession  of  an  earthly  inheritance,  and  had  no  deeper  spiritual  applications.  Or  it  might 
be  said  (2)  that  the  exclusion  of  the  Israelites  from  Canaan  was  based  on  their  murmuring 
and  rebellion  rather  than  on  their  unbelief ;  and  so  the  case  did  not  properly  sustain  the 
writer's  exhortation.  He  therefore  dwells  more  fully  on  the  point.  Really,  the  "  rest  "  that 
was  offered  to  believers  in  the  olden  time  is  the  "  rest "  proffered  to  believers  now  ;  and  they 
still  may  lose  the  rest  through  unbelief.  The  rest  really  offered,  then  and  now,  is  spiritual ; 
it  is  the  "  rest"  of  trust  in  and  obedience  to  Jehovah. 

Ver.  1.  Fear. — Not  in  the  sense  of  "  be  afraid  of  something  happening,"  but  meaning,  "  let 
us  take  care  ;  be  on  the  aleit  as  those  who  are  in  the  midst  of  dangers  ;  act  watchfully." 
Left  us.— Or,  "since  a  promise  still  remains  unrealised."  The  usual  sense  of  the  word  is 
"  neglect."  Lest  by  neglect  of  the  promise  made  to  us.  Stuart  prefers  "  left  behind,"  "  is  still 
extant."  Then  the  idea  is,  that  "  the  promise  which  was  implicity  made  to  believers  among 
the  ancient  people  of  God  is  still  in  being,  and  is  made  to  us,  Christians."  His  rest. — Said  to 
enlarge  our  ideas  of  its  character.  It  is  His  rest,  and,  like  Him,  it  is  spiritual.  Come  short 
of  it.— Fail  of  obtaining  it :  see  Heb.  xii.  15;  Rom.  iii.  23;  1  Cor.  i.  7.  The  point  here  is 
the  Christian  share  in  the  deeper  meanings  of  the  Old  Testament  promises  of  rest.  To  the 
writers  of  the  New  Testament  the  Old  Testament  glowed  in  the  Christian  light. 

Ver.  2.  Gospel  preached. — Not  the  evangelical  doctrines,  but  the  goodness  of  a  promised 
rest.  Not  profit  them.— Because  the  condition  on  their  side  was  lacking.  That  condition 
was  faith,  expie.'^sed  in  trust  and  obedience. 

Ver.  3.  Do  enter  into  rest. — The  clauses  of  the  verse  need  rearranging.  "  But  yet  the 
works  were  finished  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,  as  He  said.  As  I  have  sworn  in  My 
wrath,  if  they  shall  enter  into  My  rest  "  ;  or,  "  they  shall  not  enter."  The  quotation  is  made 
for  the  sake  of  tLe  words  "  My  rest,"  to  indicate  that  the  reference  was  to  God's  own  rest, 
His  spiritual  heavenly  rest,  and  not  merely  to  a  material,  physical,  or  national  rest  of  God's 
providing.  God's  rest  after  work  is  the  suggestion  and  figure  of  spiritual  rest.  "  The 
immense  stress  of  meaning  laid  on  incidental  Scriptural  expressions,  such  as  '  My  rest,' 
and  '  to-day,'  was  one  of  the  features  of  Rabbinic  as  well  as  Alexandrian  exegesis  "  {Farrar). 

Vers.  4,  5. — These  quotations  are  introduced  to  prove  that  the  promise  did  not  merely 
concern  the  Canaan  rest.  The  passage  in  Genesis  could  not  refer  to  Canaan,  nor  could  the 
passage  taken  from  Psalm  xcv.,  seeing  that  it  was  penned  long  after  the  Canaan  rest  had 
been  won. 

Ver.  6.  Some  must  enter. — The  promise  is  still  open.  We  cannot  think  that  God  makes 
and  renews  His  promises  in  vain.  Evidently  a  clause  is  omitted  here,  either  by  accident 
or  designedly  for  rhetorical  purposes.     We  may  supply  from  ver.  1,  "  Let  us  fear  lest  we 

191 


CHAP.  IV.  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


also  come  short."  Unbelief. — Here  direideiav,  the  disobedience  which  is  the  sign  and 
expression  of  unbelief. 

Ver.  7.— Reference  again  to  the  quotation  from  the  psalm,  in  order  to  show  that  the 
promise  was  renewed  long  after  Canaan  was  gained,  and  that  the  rest  could  always  be 
had  "  to-day."  It  must  therefore  be  a  spiritual  rest.  The  statement  "  in  David  "  is  equiva- 
lent to  "  in  the  book  of  Psalms,"  which  went  under  David's  name.  But  in  the  LXX.  Version 
Psalm  xcv.  is  actually  ascribed  to  David. 

Ver.  8.  Jesus. — The  Greek  form  of  the  Hebrew  V^'\T\^y  Joshua.  Compare  Acts  vii.  46,  in 
which  the  Greek  reads  'Irjcov.  The  name  is  an  interesting  one.  At  first  Hoshea,  it  became 
Hoshua,  or  the  Helper ;  then  the  Divine  name  was  prefixed,  and  it  became  Je-hoshua,  con- 
tracted Joshua,  God  the  Helper.     The  R.V.  gives  the  name  in  this  verse  as  Joshua. 

Ver.  9.  Remaineth. — Or  the  promise  clearly  lies  open  for  us.  "  Few  things  are  more 
striking  in  the  epistle  than  the  constant  presentation  of  the  thought  that  Scripture  language 
is  permanent,  and  at  all  times  present.  The  implied  promise,  therefore,  repeated  when- 
ever  the  '  to-day '  is  heard,  must  have  its  fulfilment "  (Moulton).  People  of  God. — The 
spiritual  Israel  of  every  age. 

Ver.  11. — The  point  of  this  exhortation  is,  that  we  have  One  to  deal  with  who  will  discern, 
and  will  surely  punish,  the  most  secret  disobedience,  the  most  inner  apostasy.  Labour. — Be 
zealous  ;  give  all  diligence  ;  make  every  due  endeavour.     See  2  Pet.  i.  10,  11  ;  Phil.  iii.  14. 

Ver.  12.  Word  of  God. — Either  (1)  the  personal  Word,  the  A6yos ;  or  (2)  the  revealed 
word,  to  which  the  writer  has  been  appealing ;  or  (3)  the  spoken  word  of  God,  which  may 
come  to  men  through  human  agents  now.  Probably  the  second  is  the  more  preferable 
explanation,  because  to  this  writer  Scripture  is  constantly  thought  of  as  a  direct  Divine 
utterance.  It  is  not  simply  the  written  word,  but  that  word  as  the  voice  for  every  age  of 
the  living  God.  Quick. — Alive,  active.  Soul. — ^pvx'n,  the  animal  soul,  spirit  ;  irveOfxa,  that 
part  of  our  nature  in  which  the  Divine  Spirit  works.  Not  a  separating  of  these  things  from 
one  another,  but  a  dividing  so  as  to  lay  them  both  bare  to  view.  "  The  awakening  and 
alarming  of  the  conscience,  the  felt  opening  up,  the  dissection  of  the  ultimate  principles  of 
the  moral  and  spiritual  life,  is  the  effect  of  the  word  here  intended  "  (  Webster  and  Wilkinson). 
For  the  sword-figure  see  Isa.  xlix.  2;  Eph.  vi.  17;  Rev.  i.  16;  and  Wisd.  xviii.  15,  16. 
Joints  and  marrow. — A  very  strong  figure.  Dividing  the  joints  or  limbs  from  the  body,  and 
piercing  through  the  very  bone  to  the  marrow.  "  The  divine  commination  is  of  the  most 
deadly  punitive  efficacy." 

Ver.  13.  Naked.— Or  laid  bare ;  as  the  throat  of  a  victim  is  bared  for  sacrifice ;  Greek,  "  to 
take  by  the  neck,"  as  do  wrestlers.  Perhaps  the  better  meaning  is  "  fully  exposed  to  view." 
No  self-deceptions  can  hide  the  truth  from  God.  Farrar  suggests  that  the  figure  may 
be  taken  from  the  anatomic  examination  of  victims  by  the  priests,  which  was  called 
momosTiopia,  since  it  was  necessary  that  every  victim  should  be  "  without  blemish."  But  he 
prefers  the  usage  of  Philo,  which  decides  the  meaning  to  be  ♦'  laid  prostrate  "  for  examina- 
tion.    R.V.  "  naked  and  laid  open." 

Vers.  14-16  should  be  regarded  as  a  transition.  The  Priesthood  of  Christ  had  been 
referred  to  in  chaps,  ii.  17,  iii.  1.  In  fact,  all  the  points  previously  made  are  recalled  to 
mind  in  vers.  14,  15.  The  High  Priest :  His  exaltation  (chaps,  i.  3,  iv.  13,  ii.  9)  ;  His  Divine 
Sonship  (chaps,  i.,  iii.  6);  His  compassion  (chap.  ii.  11-18). 

Ver.  14.  Great  High  Priest.— At  the  time  of  the  writer  the  term  "  high  priest "  was  applied 
to  more  than  one  person.  "  Great "  separates  "  Priest"  from  all  others.  Into  the  heavens.— 
Lit.  "  through  the  heavens  "  (dieXTjXvddTa),  as  the  high  priest  of  the  old  economy  "  through 
the  vail."  In  the  Hebrew  idiom,  God  dwells  above  the  firmament,  Christ  is  represented  as 
passing  through  it. 

Ver.  15.  Touched.— With  the  sympathy  of  a  fellow-experience.  Infirmities.— Not  sufferings, 
not  sins,  but  distinctly  the  frailties  which  made  peril  of  apostasy.  Tempted. —There  is  no 
sin  in  being  subject  to  temptation.  If  Jesus  could  not  be  tempted.  He  was  not  a  man ;  if 
He  yielded  to  temptation,  He  could  not  be  a  Saviour  Without  sin.— This  is  not  difficult  to 
understand  when  we  recognise  that  sin  is  a  tiling  of  the  will— that  is,  of  ourselves,  of  our 
souls. 

Ver.  16.  Boldly— Lit.  "  with  freedom  of  speech."  Time  of  need.—Stuart,  "  timely  assist- 
ance."   Alford,  "  for  help  in  time,  while  yet  open  to  us." 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  TEE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—11. 

God's  Rest  for  His  People  in  Every  Age. — In  this  passage  there  is  a  looking  hack 

to  the  rest  of  Canaan,  promised  to  the  fathers,  but  missed  by  them  through 

unbelief.     There  is  a  looking  on  to  the  yet  unreaHsed  rest  of  the  heavenly,  in 

order  to  gain  an  impulse  to  new  zeal  in  Christian  service.     But  the  rest  which 

192 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  iv. 


more  especially  comes  to  view,  and  has  present  application  to  the  people  of 
God,  is  that  rest  of  the  soul  which  waits  on  steadfast  faith — the  true  Sabbatic 
rest,  of  which  the  rest  of  Canaan  was  but  a  poor  and  imperfect  type.  That 
rest  of  soul  is  an  unexhausted  and  inexhaustible  good.  The  promise  of  it  lies 
open  and  unfulfilled  yet.  \ 

I.  What  is  God's  rest? — Reference  is  made  in  this  chapter  to  the  Sabbatic 
rest  of  creation,  regarded  as  God  ceasing  from  His  active  labours.  This  may 
serve  to  illustrate  the  rest  of  God  ;  it  cannot  be  the  very  rest  which  He  promises 
His  people.  Reference  is  also  made  to  the  rest  which  Israel  found,  as  a  nation, 
in  the  land  of  Canaan,  after  long  bondage  in  Egypt,  and  long  wandering  in  the 
desert  of  Arabia.  This,  too,  may  serve  for  illustration ;  but  even  for  the  people 
of  Israel  it  was  not  the  true  rest  of  God.  His  promise  to  them  was  larger  far 
than  any  bodily  contentments,  any  easy,  prosperous  circumstances.  Neither 
the  Sabbath  nor  Canaan  are  more  than  symbols  of  the  true  rest  of  God.  This 
may  be  said  about  that  rest.  Since  God  provides  it  for  His  creatures,  it  must 
be  (1)  like  Himself  ;  (2)  adapted  to  the  deepest  and  the  best  in  them.  1.  If  God's 
rest  is  like  Himself,  it  must  stand  related  to  character,  not  to  conditions,  and 
not  to  attributes.  The  war  in  heaven,  of  which  Milton  sings,  may  not  be 
thought  of  as  disturbing  the  eternal  rest  of  God.  But  the  infinite  peace  of  God 
should  not  be  so  described  as  to  separate  Him  from  human  interests,  and 
produce  the  impression  that  the  varied  states  of  His  creatures  never  move  Him 
to  pity  or  sympathy  or  grief.  God  is  ever  at  rest,  because  the  changes  of 
circumstance  never  imperil  the  basis  principles  of  His  character.  Round  about 
Him  are  ever-hanging  "clouds  and  darkness";  laving  His  very  footstool  may 
be  the  ever-restless  sea  ;  but  "justice  and  judgment"  are  the  habitation  of  His 
throne.  We  are  "  restless,  unquiet  sprites,"  as  Keble  calls  us,  not  because  we 
are  in  the  midst  of  variable  conditions  and  circumstances,  or  because  these  affect 
our  feeling ;  but  because  these  varying  circumstances  put  in  peril  the  principles 
of  our  character.  We  are  not  centred,  settled,  fixed  for  ever,  in  our  trust  and 
goodness,  and  so  we  are  driven  with  every  wind  and  tossed.  If  a  Christian  man 
comes  into  trouble,  he  begins  at  once  to  question  the  foundation  of  his  hope. 
We  may  think  of  God  as  having  eternal  rest,  because  even  if  "  the  elements 
melted  with  fervent  heat,  and  the  earth,  and  all  therein,"  were  burned  up,  God 
could  never  question  the  righteousness  of  His  being,  or  the  principles  of  His 
eternal  rule.  We  must  think  thus  of  Him  if  He  is  the  eternally  Good  One. 
Or  it  may  be  put  in  this  way  :  Rest  comes  from  the  dominion  of  one  faculty  in 
us  ;  under  its  rule  all  the  various  powers  of  our  nature  fall  into  order,  take 
their  place,  and  keep  the  peace.  War  may  be  a  thing  of  the  soul  as  well  as 
of  the  circumstances;  and  the  inward  war  consists  in  the  conflict  of  motives. 
Mind  and  will  and  judgment  and  affections,  when  out  of  harmony,  make  war 
in  the  soul.  Now  we  can  conceive  of  nothing  like  that  in  God.  He  is  at  rest 
because,  in  His  Divine  nature,  there  is  the  order  and  harmony  that  follow  the 
rule  of  the  highest  faculty — and  that  in  God  can  only  be  love.  The  law  works 
for  us  also.  We  must  give  the  dominion  to  our  highest  faculty — and  for  the 
creature  that  is  trust.  2.  God's  rest  provided  for  man  must  be  adapted  to  man, 
to  the  deepest  and  best  that  is  in  him.  Man,  as  man,  is  ever  seeking  rest.  The 
Bible  presents  him  to  us  as  striving  to  win  back  a  lost  Paradise.  Poetry  rings 
out  a  melancholy  wail  over  the  "Golden  Age"  that  is  gone,  and  bids  us  gain 
rest  in  tender  memories,  and  lofty  imaginations,  and  beautiful  thoughts,  thus 
raising  ourselves  up  above  the  stern,  hard,  iron  age  of  the  present.  Man, 
as  a  sinner,  is  ever  seeking  rest.  Who  shall  roll  away  the  burden  ?  Man,  as 
redeemed,  is  still  seeking  rest.  Rest  for  minds,  in  the  great  agitation  of 
conflicting  theories.  Rest  for  wills  amidst  the  claims  of  opposing  duties.  Vv'e 
differ  so  much  from  each  other  that  what  may  be  rest  for  one  of  us  would  be 

o  193 


CHAP.  IV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


no  rest  for  another.  Yet  for  all  there  is  the  one  law — rest  never  comes  by 
knowing,  always  by  trusting,  God's  rest  begins  within  us,  in  the  faith  we  set 
on  God.  It  spreads  out  through  all  the  forces  and  expressions  of  our  being, 
and  ensures  the  rest  of  settled,  established  character.  It  reaches  to  our  circum- 
stances, influencing  them,  modifying  them,  bringing  them  into  its  obedience  ; 
and  so  it  grows  from  being  the  rest  of  the  soul  to  become  the  eternal  rest  of 
heaven. 

II.  Who  may  hope  to  gain  this  present  rest  of  God? — As  the  rest  of  faith 
it  must  be  for  those  who  believe.  But  faith  is  not  the  merely  intellectual 
acceptance  of  a  sentence  embodied  in  a  creed.  It  is  the  spirit  of  trust.  It  is 
reliance,  dependence.  It  is  the  yielding  of  the  self  to  God.  It  is  the  staying 
of  the  heart  on  God.  It  is  the  personal  confidence  of  the  Father's  love.  It  is 
the  heart's  grasp  of  the  Divine  righteousness  and  goodness,  as  revealed  in  Jesus 
Oil  list.  But  the  believing  that  brings  rest  is  not  a  single  act,  or  even  a  state 
once  reached.  The  Greek  language  had  an  advantage  over  ours.  It  could 
express,  by  the  form  of  the  verb,  the  idea  of  having  begun,  and  continuing  still. 
It  is  not  "  we  have  believed,"  but  "  we  have  begun  to  believe,  and  we  are 
keeping  on  the  trust."  And  because  the  trust  is  maintained  day  by  day,  the 
rest  of  the  soul  is  renewed  day  by  day. 

III.  How  far  may  this  "  rest  of  Gfod  "  be  a  present,  conscious  possession  ? — 
It  is  a  mistake  to  assume  that  all  the  facts  and  processes  of  the  reUgious  life 
must  come  into  conscious  recognition.  All  the  finest  things  in  soul-growth  elude 
observation.  The  best  violets  are  usually  hidden  away  under  the  leaves.  The 
most  delicate  graces  cannot  bear  a  look  or  a  touch.  So  "  rest  "  may  be  the 
possession  of  a  soul,  and  the  mind  may  not  be  laying  the  fact  before  itself  for 
consideration.  And  rest  will  never  be  gained  by  directly  seeking  for  it.  It 
will  be  gained  by  simply  doing  our  duty ;  by  keeping  up  that  trusting  which 
finds  its  best  expression  in  obedience ;  by  living  for  Christ ;  by  growing  into  His 
likeness  ;  by  perfecting  our  sympathy  with  the  great  and  beneficent  purposes 
of  God  ;  by  perseverance  in  well-doing  ;  by  "  holding  fast  the  profession  of  our 
faith  without  wavering."  "  Be  stedfast,  unmoveable,  always  abounding  in  the 
work  of  the  Lord,"  and  it  will  be  evident  enough  that  you  have  reached  the 
soul-rest  of  Qod.  We  must  wait  for  the  fulness  of  our  rest ;  none  of  us  need 
wait  for  the  beginnings  of  o  ir  rest.  If  we  cannot  have  the  fruition,  we  can 
have  the  foretaste.  We  can  receive  now  the  "  end  of  our  faith,"  even  the 
*'  salvation  of  our  souls." 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.   1 .  The  Rest  of  Sonship. — Rest  rest    ^7^    our   trouble.      Best   from    a 

for    any  man   can   only  come    out  of  burdened    conscience  men    want;    the 

finding  the  Father  in  heaven.     No  one  higher  rest  of  a  changed  and  renewed 

can  find  the  Father  until  he  gets  the  nature  they  little  value.     There   is  a 

Spirit  of  the  Son  into  his  heart.  better    rest    possible    of    attainment  : 

I.  Rest  for  man. — There  is  (1)  rest  rest   in  trouble;   rest   in  submitting; 

from  the  burden  of  ceremonial  rites;  rest    in    the   sanctified    effect    of    the 

(2)  rest  from  the  burden  of  the  sorrows  trouble.     The  spirit  of  a  son,  that  is 

of  Hfe ;  (3)  rest  from  the  burden  of  the  the  secret  of  rest. 

slavery  of  sin;  (4)  rest  of  body;  II.  Rest  for  Christ  and  in  Christ 
(5)  rest  of  mind ;  (6)  rest  of  con-  for  man. — Christ  had  no  rest  from 
science ;  (7)  rest  of  death  ;  (8)  rest  of  earthly  troubles,  but  He  had  heart- 
heaven.  But  men  want  rest /rom  their  rest  in  the  midst  of  troubles.  But  for 
troubles,  and  the  only  worthy  rest  is  that  inward  soul-rest  the  human  hfe 
194 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.    IV. 


of  Christ  could  not  have  been  lived 
through.  Rest  came  from  the  willing- 
ness with  which  He  bore  the  burdens 
that  His  Father  laid  upon  Him.  It  was 
the  rest  of  submission,  of  cross-bearing, 
of  sacrifice,  of  meekness  and  lowliness 
of  heart,  of  cherished  obedient  sonship. 
To  find  rest  we  are  directed  to  Christ 
Himself.  In  Him  we  may  find  the 
rest  of  (1)  an  all-satisfying  love.,  (2)  an 
all-sufficient  ivisdom,  (3)  an  almighty 
power.  When  we  ask  how  this  rest 
of  soul  in  Christ  becomes  ours  amidst 
the  duties  and  anxieties  and  sorrows 
of  life,  then  we  are  directed  to  Christ's 
yoke  and  yoke-bearing.  We  may  gain 
rest  by  bearing  the  same  yoke,  and  by 
bearing  it  in  the  same  way.  Christ 
bore  His  yoke  in  the  spirit  of  a  son. 
Let  Him  teach  you  the  glory  of  being 
a  child,  a  son.  If  only  you  were  son- 
like  in  spirit,  satisfied,  at  home  with 
God,  loving  a  Father's  will,  you  would 
find  that  sin  was  gone  from  its  power  ; 
and  as  the  yoke  of  life  rested  on  you, 
you  would  feel  how  true  were  the 
Saviour's  words,  "  My  yoke  is  easy, 
and  My  burden  is  light." 

Ver.  2.  The  Causes  of  Unprofitable 
Hearing. — The  censure  here  passed  by 
the  apostle  upon  certain  hearers  who 
failed  to  profit  by  the  preaching  of  the 
word  refers  more  immediately  to  the 
Israelites  vmder  Moses  in  the  desert. 
The  unprofitableness  of  preaching  has 
throughout  Christendom  been  the  sub- 
ject of  complaint  to  some  and  of 
lamentation  to  others.  Hearers  say 
the  word  preached  is  unprofitable,  not 
from  their  want  of  faith  or  piety,  but 
want  of  zeal,  ability,  discretion,  energy, 
originality  of  the  preacher.  It  may  be, 
however,  through  perverseness,  inat- 
tention, or  unbelief  in  the  hearers. 

T.  Unprofitable  hearing  is  the  result 
of  irregular  attendance  at  the  house 
of  God.— Frequent  absence  from  the 
services  of  the  sanctuary  can  never 
be  compatible  with  edification.  The 
services  are  frequent,  regular ;  the  in- 
vitations to  hear  audible  and  intelligible. 
Health,  pleasures,  business,  study,  are 
the  excuses.     The  grace  of  God  is  not 


to  be  expected  by  the  irregular  wor- 
shipper. 

II.  Another  fault  in  hearers :  those 
who,  by  being  absent  in  mind  and 
spirit,  make  their  bodily  presence  of 
no  avail. — It  is  possible  for  the  mind 
t6  be  so  entii-ely  abstracted  from  any 
subject  under  discussion  as  scarcely  to 
be  sensible  that  a  discourse  is  preached. 
Others  intend  to  listen,  but  their 
attention  is  easily  diverted  to  other 
objects.  The  light-minded  hearers  are 
particularly  subject  to  this  tendency ; 
but  those  professing  more  solidity  of 
character  are  often  not  less  guilty  of 
imperfect  and  wavering  attention. 

III.  Another  fault  in  hearers: 
those  who  attend  with  improper  dis- 
positions either  with  regard  to  the 
minister  or  to  their  fellow-hearers. — 
Those  who  criticise  the  preacher  in  an 
arbitrary  and  dictatorial  manner,  and 
to  other  hearers,  are  apt  to  be  censorious 
in  their  application  of  the  truth  or 
duty  inculcated.  They  criticise  the 
doctrines  delivered,  or  the  arrangement 
of  the  subject,  or  the  style  of  the 
composition.  Whatever  variety  may 
be  permitted  in  our  discourses  must  be 
found  only  in  our  application  of  doctrine, 
and  never  in  the  doctrine  itself.  We 
may  occasionally  venture  on  new  illus- 
trations, but  never  new  discoveries. 

IV.  Those  who  aim  the  shafts  of 
their  criticism  not  so  much  at  the 
preacher  as  at  their  fellow-hearers. — 
Every  practical,  edifying  discourse  holds 
up  vice  to  shame  and  reprobation,  and 
commends  and  enforces  virtue  ;  by  the 
threatenings  of  God  it  warns  sin, 
unbelief,  and  spiritual  instability,  and 
by  His  promises  it  encourages  faith, 
piety,  and  persevering  holiness.  The 
censorious  hearer  of  these  praises  and 
denunciations  applies  the  former  to 
himself  and  the  latter  to  his  neighbour. 
Uncharitableness  is  an  undoubted  sign 
of  unbelief.  Let  us  pray  for  faith, 
that  we  may  be  willing  to  receive 
instruction  without  insisting  arbitrarily 
on  favourite  methods  of  our  own  as 
indispensable  to  justification,  and  that 
we  may  be  preserved  from  censorious- 
ness;  and  that,  being  desirous  of  im- 

195 


CHAP.    IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


provement  to  ourselves  as  well  as  of 
being  charitable  to  others,  we  may, 
before  presuming  to  remove  the  mote 
out  of  our  brother's  eye,  consider  the 
beam  that  is  in  our  own. — William 
Sitwlair,  D.D. 

Mixed  loith  Faith. — The  attempts 
wliich  are  continually  made  to  gauge 
the  word  of  God  by  other  standards 
than  that  of  faith  leave  men  in  doubt 
as  to  its  Divine  origin.  The  conflict 
of  science  and  revelation,  how  does 
this  happen?  By  applying  the  same 
test  to  both.  The  astronomer  and  the 
chemist — observation  by  the  one,  laws 
of  combination  by  the  other. 

I.  Mixed  with  faith  on  account  of 
the  Divine  nature  of  the  word,  yea, 
it  might  be  said  the  Diviner  nature  of 
the  word. — A  piece  of  workmanship, 
when  examined,  will  afford  much  in- 
formation respecting  the  worker — 
wisdom,  power,  etc.  ;  but  the  person  is 
out  of  sight  until  you  meet  him.  So 
with  God ;  His  works  reveal  His 
attributes,  but  not  Himself— instance 
Job.  "Oh  that  I  knew,"  etc.  (Job 
XXI ii.  2-9).  But  a  moment's  reflection 
on  the  method  of  revelation  will  lead 
to  the  belief  that  God  has  revealed 
Himself  in  the  dream,  the  vision,  the 
sacrifice,  inspiration,  etc.  We  must 
take  these  paths,  we  must  fall  into 
these  grooves,  become  saturated  with 
this  spirit  in  order  that  the  word  may 
profit  us.  Faith,  then,  is  that  sympathy 
with  spiritual  things  which  enables  us 
to  distinguish  between  them.  It  is  our 
common  experience  that  to  be  in  the 
spirit  of  the  thing  is  necessary  either 
to  its  discharge  or  enjoyment.  How 
much  more  so  in  the  higher  branches 
of  life — genius,  art,  aesthetics.  John 
in  the  Spirit  in  Patmos,  etc. 

II.  Mixed  also  with  faith,  for  this 
is  the  only  entrance  into  our  inner 
life. — There  are  three  classes  of  observa- 
tions. The  common,  as  when  one's 
attention  is  drawn  to  an  object  to 
observe  it.  The  second  is  the  looking 
for  that  object,  in  order  to  a  deeper 
acquaintance  with  it.  The  third  is 
the    assimilation   of    the    object    and 

196 


ourselves.  So  there  are  three  classes 
of  hearers — the  accidental^  the  honest, 
and  the  earnest.  In  the  case  of  the 
latter  the  dream,  the  vision,  the  sacrifice, 
the  inspiration,  become  our  own.  See 
with  a  prophet's  eye,  feel  with  a  priest's 
heart,  handle  with  an  apostle's  touch. 
If  we  take  one  comparison — the  union 
of  the  vine  and  the  branches — that 
union  is  Divine,  mysterious,  com- 
municative, complete.  The  sap  travels 
along  the  various  ducts  to  every  part, 
even  the  twig  and  the  leaf.  Look  at 
this,  and  you  will  perceive  that  faith 
is  the  union  of  the  soul  to  Christ, 
whereby  all  that  He  is  to  us  as  a 
Saviour  flows  into  our  experience. 
There  cannot  be  an  entrance  if  the 
door  is  not  opened.  There  cannot  be 
life  unless  the  food  is  assimilated. 
There  cannot  be  salvation  unless  the 
heart  is  in  sympathy  with  Christ. 
Israelites  were  buried  in  the  wilderness. 
Sinners  die  at  the  cross. 

III.  Mixed  with  faith  also,  as  the 
stage  is  a  preliminary  one— one  not 
of  actual  possession,  but  of  trust  and 
expectancy. — Faith  is  occupied  with 
foundations,  beginnings,  preliminaries, 
plans,  and  materials.  "Brethren, 
I  count  not  myself  to  have  appre- 
hended." The  life  which  God  prescribed 
— the  collecting  of  materials  for  the 
new  Jerusalem.  Prophets,  priests, 
and  kings  lived  that  life,  expectancy 
inspiring  action  to  prepare.  The  same 
Divine  plan  exists  again  in  the  life  of 
the  believer  :  "  For  we  have  no  con- 
tinuing city  here,  we  look  for  one  to 
come"  The  grand  time  is  to  come. 
Let  us  look  at  it.  Above  doubt  or 
fear,  free  from  sin,  delivered  from  the 
influences  of  circumstances,  raised  into 
close  communion  with  God,  and  into 
the  fellowship  of  His  Son.  In  view 
of  that  period  faith  says,  "  Let  us  he 
ready."  More  prayer,  more  trust,  more 
of  His  word  in  the  heart :  "  According 
to  your  faith  be  it  unto  you." — Anon. 

Promises  prove  larger  than  Perform,- 
ances  through  Marus  Weaknesses. — It 
sometimes  seems  as  if  God's  promises 
were   unfulfilled ;    and   we    are    even 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.    IV 


tempted  to  say  that  they  were  too 
large  ever  to  be  fulfilled.  But  we 
must  beware  of  admitting  the  idea 
that  God  ever  leads  on  His  people 
with  promises  and  hopes  which  He 
never  intends  to  fulfil.  The  promises 
of  God  always  represent  what  He 
would  do  if  He  could  ;  but  seeing  God 
deals  with  moral  beings,  to  whom  He 
has  committed  the  trust  of  effective, 
but  limited,  free  wills,  no  promise  that 
God  ever  makes  can  be  absolute  ;  it 
must  be  conditioned,  and  the  condition 
affects  man.  The  promise  cannot  be 
fulfilled  unless  man  is  in  such  a  state 
that  the  promise  can  do  for  him  what 
God  intended  it  to  do.  Man  alone 
spoils  the  complete  fulfilment  of  every- 
thing God  has  promised. 

Yer.  4.  The  First  Seventh-day  Rest. — 
If  God  intended  us  to  keep  the  Sabbath 
holy,   why  did  He  not  from  the  very 
first  give  to  man  a  more  definite  and 
emphatic  command  concerning  it  ?     It 
may  be  answered,  that  God  designed 
keeping  Sabbath  to  be  a  moral  act  of 
willinghood,   loyalty,   and   holy  imita- 
tion ;  it  was  not  to  be  a  matter  of  mere 
forced  obedience.     If  our  first  parents 
had  kept  their  communion  with  God, 
it     would     have    been     their     joyous 
endeavour    to    be    like    Him    in    all 
things.      Example   is    a    higher    and 
more  universal  force  than  command- 
ment.     Commands   we   give   to  mere 
children.      Examples  are  the  inspira- 
tion of  men.     At  first  God  dealt  with 
His   creatures   as    moral   beings   who 
were   made   in   His   own    image,    and 
were  capable  of  enjoying  His  fellow- 
ship.    When  man  became  deteriorated, 
God  graciously  accommodated  Himself 
to  his  low,  ignorant,  and  childish  con- 
dition, and  gave  him  commands.     The 
example  of  God  means  that  His  abiding 
presence  with  us  is  apprehended,  and 
is  the  joy  and  power  of  our  lives.     And 
all  to  whom  that  Divine  presence  is  a 
reality  will  feel  that  nothing  can  pos- 
sibly make  the  Sabbath  so  sacred  to 
them   as   the   example   of    Him    who 
rested  from  His  work  on  the  seventh 
day,  sanctified  and  hallowed  it.     God 


put  aside  His  relation  to  material 
things  as  their  Creator,  and  occupied 
Himself  in  the  world  of  spirit ;  and 
that  was  His  resting.  Our  putting 
aside  our  relation  to  common  life-work, 
and  occupation  of  thought  and  heart 
with  spirit-things,  unseen  and  eternal 
things,  would  be  our  human  imitation 
of  the  Divine  example,  and  our  resting. 
St.  Augustine  says  :  "  God  rested — not 
as  if  He  were  wearied.  No,  the 
*  Creator  of  the  ends  of  the  earth 
fainteth  not  neither  is  weary ' ;  but  He 
saw  what  He  had  made  was  good,  and 
contemplated  His  own  works,  and 
rejoiced  in  them  ;  and  thus  commended 
to  us  the  state  of  contemplation  as 
higher  than  that  of  labour,  and  as  a 
state  to  be  attained  by  labour." 

Ver.  7.  The  Present. — We  do  well 
to  look  back,  that  by  seeing  our  past 
blessings  we  may  be  grateful  for  them  ; 
by  seeing  past  errors  we  may  be 
humbled ;  by  observing  their  conse- 
quences we  may  be  warned.  We 
ought  to  look  forwards  to  measure 
our  own  strength,  refresh  our  spirits, 
and  to  see  the  light  shining  on  the 
distant  hills.  Our  true  life — only  life 
we  can  count  upon — is  now. 

I.  Each  day  has  its  own  gifts. — All 
good  gifts  are  exactly  what  we  make 
of  them.  Pray  that  God  w^ill  teach 
us  rightly  to  use  the  gifts  of  every 
day. 

II.  Each  day  has  also  its  immediate 
opportunities. — Slight  it  may  be,  but 
full  of  possibility  of  blessing.  Many 
spend  their  days  in  doing  unkindnesses, 
in  light  criticisms,  jealous  depreciations 
— women  whose  whole  lives  dwindle 
into  some  acrid  rivulet  of  gossip, 
slander,  and  spite.  How  often  do 
better  spirits  lose  precious  opportunities 
of  pleasing  God  by  performing  nameless 
acts  of  kindness.  A  word  spoken  in 
due  season,  how  good  it  is.  "  Time  is 
money."  That  is  the  least  thing  it  is 
— for  time  is  eternity. 

III.  Also  its  own  stores  of  pure  and 
innocent  happiness. — To  those  who 
walk  through  the  world  with  open 
eyes    every    day     reveals     something 

197 


CHAP.   IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS, 


beautiful — in  nature,  in  city-life,  in 
home-life.  In  idle  repinings,  in  dis- 
contented selfislmess,  we  lose  every- 
thing. Our  best  hopes,  our  richest 
treasures,  our  destiny  on  earth,  yea 
heaven  itself,  lie  not  in  the  visionary 
future,  but  in  the  here  and  now. 

IV.  Every  day  has  its  duties. — 
Riches  may  fly  away,  fame  may  vanish, 
friends  may  die,  but  duty  never  ceases. 
Are  we  happy  ?  Let  us  work  Un- 
happy ?  Action  is  the  best  of  solaces. 
Bitterly  disappointed?  If  we  cannot 
build  upon  the  foundations,  let  us 
build  upon  the  ruins.  Is  the  future 
uncertain  ?  Whatever  it  is  to  be,  it 
will  come.  There  is  always  something 
to  be  done.  Each  day  has  its  duty. 
After  the  Resurrection  the  apostles 
found  Christ  in  faithful  work. 

V.  Every  day  has  also  its  supreme 
duty — the  duty  of  repentance,  of 
getting  nearer  to  God,  and  seeing 
His  face. — If  this  duty  be  neglected, 
no  other  duty  can  be  a  substitute  for 
it.  There  is  one  thing  needful.  We 
"know  not  what  a  day  or  an  hour 
may  bring  forth."  "  Set  thy  house  in 
order,  for  thou  shalt  die,  and  not  live." 

VI.  Every  day  has  its  gracious 
help. — There  is  One  of  infinite  help 
always  at  hand.  God  is  our  help  and 
strength.  He  loves  us,  and  will  not 
forsake  us.  He  who  gave  His  own 
Son  for  our  sins,  shall  He  not  with 
Him  also  freely  give  us  all  things  ? 
Jesus  our  Intercessor.  The  Holy 
Spirit  our  Helper.  The  golden  ladder 
between  earth  and  heaven  is  prayer. 
Let  us  ask  Jesus  to  take  us  by  the 
hand,  and  then  whatever  the  future 
may  have  in  store  for  us  we  shall  be 
able  to  face  it  with  man's  inalien- 
able dignity  and  unconquerable  will. — 
F.  W.  Farrar,  D.D. 

Ver.  7.  Man's  Power  over  his  Own 
Heart. — "  Harden  not  your  heart." 
The  counsel  is  worthless  unless  it  is  in 
the  power  of  man  to  harden  his  heart. 
That  he  can  do  so  receives  its  most 
striking  proof  and  illustration  from 
the  Biblical  account  of  Pharaoh 
Menephthah.     Calamities     which     do 

198 


not  subdue  the  heart  harden  it.  The 
hardening  itself  is  judicial  and  just, 
when  it  is  a  consequence  of  previously 
formed  habits. 

I.  Man  has  power  over  his  heart 
through  his  intellect. — He  can  reject — 
refuse  to  receive  or  believe — the  things 
which  would  act  persuasively  on  his 
heart. 

II.  Man  has  power  over  his  heart 
through  his  will. — He  can  refuse  to 
let  the  heart  yield  to  softening  and 
subduing  influences. 

III.  Man  has  power  over  his  heart 
through  his  self-interests. — He  can 
make  them  crush  the  tenderest  sus- 
ceptibilities. 

IV.  Man  has  power  over  his  heart 
through  his  habits. — He  can  make 
them  effect  a  life -bondage  which  the 
intensest  emotions  will  be  powerless  to 
break.  So  a  man  can  harden  his  own 
heart. 

Ver.  ^.  An  Outward  and  Temporary 
Mission. — Joshua  is  especially  interest- 
ing when  viewed  from  one  point. 
His  mission  was  not,  in  the  usually 
accepted  sense,  religious.  It  was 
national ;  it  concerned  external  re- 
lations and  material  things.  And  that 
was  for  Joshua  religion,  his  religious 
mission.  We  are  constantly  erring  by 
making  unnecessary  distinctions  be- 
tween the  secular  and  the  sacred,  and 
putting  superior  honour  on  life- 
missions  which  we  class  as  sacred. 
But  if  a  man  works  for  God  his  work 
ceases  to  be  secular ;  it  becomes  sacred. 
The  division  is  altogether  lost.  Joshua's 
material  and  outward  work  of  war, 
settling,  organising,  dividing,  was  every 
whit  as  sacred  as  Moses'  work  in 
revelation  and  religion.  What  makes 
a  life-mission  sacred  is  the  cherished 
spirit  and  purpose  of  the  man  who 
carries  it  out.  And  the  spirit  which 
ennobled  and  sanctified  Joshua's  out- 
ward and  temporary  mission  is  fully 
revealed  in  his  declaration,  "  As  for 
me  and  my  house,  we  mil  serve  the 
Lord." 

Ver.    9.   SouWest  for  To-day. — The 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   IV. 


word  "  therefore  "  introduces  the  con- 
clusion and  appUcation  of  an  argument. 
This  conclusion  throws  light  on  the 
Old  Testament  revelation,  and  gives 
us  the  right  to  use  the  old  promises 
for  our  strengthening  and  comforting. 
God's  promises  are  never  given  as  mere 
accidents ;  they  come  on  special  occa- 
sions, but  they  rest  upon  Divine 
reasonings  and  judgments  ;  they  may 
precisely  fit  one  particular  circum- 
stance, but  the  circumstance  is  illus- 
trative of  other  circumstances,  and 
the  promise  is  found  to  fit  the  ever- 
recurring  similar  need.  Human  ex- 
periences are  strangely  repeated 
through  the  ages;  and  moral  and 
spiritual  experiences  are  also  strangely 
alike.  The  promises  of  God  are 
adapted  to  the  ordinary  outworking 
of  natural,  social,  intellectual,  moral 
laws — laws  which  are  permanently, 
unchangeably,  and  irresistibly  working. 
The  promises  of  God  translate  them- 
selves afresh  for  application  to  each 
new  generation,  the  old  words  ever 
taking  on  a  new  and  living  meaning. 
The  promise  made  to  Abraham — "  In 
thy  seed  shall  all  the  families  of  the 
earth  be  blessed" — was  a  special 
promise  to  him  and  to  his  particular 
race.  But  it  stands  true  to-day  ;  for 
all  the  families  of  the  earth  are  blessed 
in  the  witness  of  every  man  who  lives 
such  a  life  of  faith  as  Abraham  lived. 
The  men  of  faith  are  to-day  the 
saviours  of  society.  No  material 
promise  that  God  has  ever  made  can 
be  exhausted  in  any  providential 
circumstances.  Each  one  of  them  has 
its  spiritual  counterpart,  which  carries 
its  continuous  applications.  God  has 
promised  **  rest "  to  His  people.  At 
first  it  meant  the  rest  of  a  settled, 
cultivated  land,  after  long  years  of 
weary  wilderness-wandering.  But  it 
could  not  exhaust  itself  with  that. 
The  promise  is  not  outworn.  God  has 
fulfilled  it,  in  various  senses,  over  and 
over  again.  But  it  keeps  still  its  old 
freshness  and  its  old  fulness,  and  it 
is  rich  with  meanings  and  applications 
for  us  all  to-day.  There  "  remaineth  " 
a  rest.     It  is  still  the  Divine  provision. 


It  is  always  available,  always  just 
before  us,  the  inspiration  of  all  true 
workers.  There  is  indeed  a  sense  in 
which  that  rest  may  be  and  is  reached 
even  now.  "  We  which  have  believed 
do  enter  into  rest."  There  is  a  sense 
in  which  that  rest  is  always  held  just 
before  us,  just  out  of  grasp,  the  cheer 
and  inspiration  of  every  endeavour. 
God's  promise  to  His  people  in  every 
age  will  go  into  one  word — "rest." 
But  we  must  put  more  and  better 
meaning  into  the  term  than  mere 
lying  down  in  weariness  and  idleness. 
That  is  but  the  rest  which  frail  and 
feeble  bodies  may  need.  For  souls 
attainment  is  rest,  the  completion  of 
labour  is  rest,  the  contemplation  of 
the  results  of  anxious  and  arduous 
endeavour  is  rest.  The  schoolboy  gains 
rest  when  he  rises  above  the  anxious 
strain  of  dealing  with  first  principles 
and  difficulties.  It  is  rest  to  be  able 
to  do  one's  work  easily.  The  man  in 
middle  age  gains  rest  as  he  finds 
business  established,  income  regular 
and  steady,  and  a  good  sum  put  by 
against  the  "  rainy  day."  The  old  man 
finds  rest  in  the  Land  of  Beulah,  where 
he  may  sit  awhile,  and  gratefully 
think  over  a  useful,  earnest,  and  de- 
voted life,  in  all  whose  scenes  the  grace 
of  God  has  been  abundantly  magnified. 
Best — the  true  rest — it  is  not  sleep  ; 
that  is  but  an  image  of  it,  and  an 
image  of  only  one  feature  of  it.  It  is 
not  death ;  we  only  call  that  rest  when 
our  sufferer  has  so  intensely  suffered, 
and  the  strain  on  the  dying  and  on 
the  watchers  has  been  so  great,  that 
death  is  welcome  as  a  release  from 
well-nigh  unbearable  agony  and  dis- 
tress. It  is  not  heaven,  unless  we  are 
able  to  think  of  heaven  as  a  state 
rather  than  a  place,  and  can  enter 
into  the  spiritual  things  materially 
figured  for  us  in  pearly  gates,  and 
golden  streets,  and  many  mansions. 
Rest  is  a  soul-condition,  which  makes  its 
own  surroundings.  Heaven  is  around 
us  when  heavenliness  is  within  us. 
"  Heavenly-mindedness  "  is  the  "rest 
that  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God," 
and  we  can  have  it  and  keep  it  tww^ 

199 


CHAP.    IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   HEBREWS. 


To  dwell  on  this  more  fully  in  detail, 
we  may  see  that  the  fulfilment  of  God's 
promise  of  rest  is — 

I.  Adapted  to  conditions. — Look 
out  over  life,  and  see  how  various  are 
the  ideas  of  rest  that  are  entertained 
under  pressure  of  the  various  circum- 
stances of  the  life.  Take  a  single  Hfe, 
and  notice  how  changeful  are  the  ideas 
of  rest  men  have  at  different  times, 
and  when  overmastered  by  varying 
cares.  The  traveller  longs  for  the  rest 
of  home ;  the  student  longs  for  the 
rest  of  attainment.  The  critical-minded 
man  longs  for  the  rest  of  simple  faith. 
The  -tempted  long  for  the  rest  of 
security.  The  over-worked  worker 
longs  for  the  rest  of  limitation.  The 
feeble  long  for  the  rest  of  health. 
The  sufferer  longs  for  the  rest  of  sleep. 
The  old  man,  left  alone  in  the  midst  of 
the  graves  of  his  beloved,  oftentimes 
sighs  for  rest,  and  finds  his  soul  burst- 
ing forth  and  saying,  "  Oh  that  I  had 
wings  like  a  dove !  then  would  I  flee 
away,  and  be  at  rest."  It  is  curious 
to  note  how  conceptions  of  heaven 
match  condition.  It  is  carried  indeed 
too  far  by  those  who  make  heaven  the 
spiritual  counterpart  of  the  earthly, 
and  then  say  that  whatsoever  a  man 
desires  most  here,  and  cannot  attain 
here,  he  shall  have  fully  supplied 
there.  The  Old  Testament  promise  of 
rest  was  partly  fulfilled  in  the  provi- 
sion of  the  Sahhath  rest — that  weekly 
putting  aside  of  the  toils  and  cares  of 
ordinary  life  which  has  been  the  beati- 
tude of  all  the  generations,  the  weekly 
foretaste  and  suggestion  of  heaven. 
For  the  Jewish  people  it  was  fulfilled 
when  Joshua  divided  among  them  the 
fields  and  cities  of  the  conquered 
Canaanites,  and  the  weary  wilderness 
wanderers  settled  down  in  homes  of 
their  own.  It  was  fulfilled  for  the 
Jewish  nation  when  they  came  out  of 
the  struggle  and  strain  of  a  formative 
time  into  the  rest  and  peace  of  the 
Davidic  rule.  In  a  way  it  was  ful- 
filled for  David  himself  when,  with 
great  rejoicings  of  heart,  he  succeeded 
in  bringing  the  sacred  Ark  to  Zion. 
In  a  small  sense  it  was  fulfilled  vv^hen 
200 


that  little  band  of  returning  exiles 
entered  the  city  of  their  fathers, 
though  the  city  was  but  a  ruin,  the 
Temple  destroyed,  the  walls  broken 
down,  and  the  gates  burned.  They 
tried  to  think  it  was  home  and  rest — 
it  was  poor  home  and  no  rest.  "  There 
remaineth  a  rest."  It  is  for  the  people 
of  God  to-day.  But  it  is  dependent 
on  their  condition  ;  it  varies  to  them 
according  to  their  varying  condition. 
Are  we  carnally-minded  ?  Our  heaven 
will  match  our  condition.  Are  we 
spiritually- minded?  Our  heaven  will 
match  our  condition.  Are  we  young, 
and  looking  out  on  life  with  large  eyes 
of  hope  ?  Then  our  heaven ,  our  thought 
of  rest,  will  match  our  condition.  Are 
w^e  old,  is  life  almost  all  behind  us,  and 
are  our  beloved  only  just  over  there,  on 
the  further  shore  ?  Then  our  heaven 
will  match  our  condition.  Are  we 
poor,  struggling  almost  in  vain  to  keep 
a  place  and  win  daily  bread  ?  Then 
rest  and  heaven  will  be  fashioned  for 
us  by  our  daily  struggles.  Are  we 
rich,  so  that  the  needs  of  the  hour  are 
fully  met  ?  Then  our  heaven  will  take 
shape  from  our  condition,  and  seem 
to  be  a  continuity  and  permanence  of 
present  privileges.  But  is  it  not  full 
of  comfort  to  be  assured,  that  the 
promise  of  God  can  come  into  such 
direct  adaptation  to  each  one  of  us, 
and  be  the  satisfaction  of  the  deepest 
and  best  in  every  individual  ?  God's 
rest  is  to  us  as  we  are  to  it.  Improve 
our  moral  and  spiritual  condition,  and 
the  rest  grows  nobler,  fills  with  richer 
meaning,  and  gains  more  inspiring 
force.  It  loses  its  material  envelope, 
and  appears  as  what  it  is — the  soul's 
rest  in  God,  which  includes  everything. 
Faher  expresses  the  soul's  eternal  rest 
in  God  in  poetical  and  mystical  lan- 
guage, when  he  says, — 

"  Prostrate  before  Thy  throne  to  lie. 
And  ever  gaze  on  Thee." 

II.  The  fulfilment  of  God's  promise 
of  rest  depends  on  our  preparations. 

— Why  is  the  fulfilment  often  so  dis- 
appointing ?  Because  the  rest  has 
merely  been  longed  for ;  it  has  not 
been    prepared    for.      Many    a    man 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTAHY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.  IV. 


leaves  business — retires,  as  it  is  called 
— and  expects   to   enjoy  a  few  years 
of  delightful  rest,  and   he  is  wofully 
disappointed.     He  cannot  rest  :  he  is 
bored    to    death   with    the   dulness    of 
having  nothing   to  do ;  he  frets  daily 
with  wishing   that  he   could  put   the 
harness  on  again.      The  fact  is  that, 
though  he  wanted  the  rest,  he  never 
thought  of  preparing    himself    for   it. 
And  a  man   can  no   more   enjoy  the 
time  of  retirement  without  preparation 
for  it,  than  a  man  can  win  the  power 
to  retire,  through  efficiency  in  business, 
without  an  apprenticeship  of  prepara- 
tion.    God  did  not  let  Israel  enter  its 
land  of  rest  until  after  long  discipline 
in    Egypt    and    long   testings    in    the 
wilderness.      Think    of    the   heavenly 
rest  remaining  for  the  people  of  God, 
and  we  may  be  reminded  that  all  life, 
in  the  Di\dne  leading,  is  preparation  for 
it.    What  we  fear  concerning  ourselves 
and    concerning    others   is,    that    the 
daily  life  we  are  living  is  no  fitting 
or  adequate  preparation.     Not  for  one 
moment  would   we   suggest   that   the 
preparation    for   heaven   is   something 
different   from,   or  distinct   from,    the 
preparation  for  life,  daily  life.    Heaven 
is  established  righteousness  ;  but  then 
it  is  precisely  that  righteousness  which 
gets  established  here — that  righteous- 
ness which  we  who  bear  Christ's  name 
should   be   at  work   to   culture  every 
day.      Prepare    to   live — in    so   doing 
you    prepare  to   die,  and  in  so   doing 
you  prepare  for  heaven.    Heaven  is  life 
fruitened.      Think  of  the  rest  sought 
by   the    people   of    God    as   heart-rest 
from  care — the  rest  which  comes  now, 
and  which  a  man  keeps  in  the  very 
midst   of   his   troubles   and  distresses. 
"  We   have   all  heard   the  experience 
of  long-continued  sufferers  from  bodily 
pain.      They  have   told   us    how  they 
chafed  and  fretted   to  be   free,  when 
first  the  yoke  of  life-long  helplessness 
and  anguish  was  laid  upon  them  ;  they 
wore    their   hearts    sore    against    the 
yoke.     But  they  learned  of  Christ  to 
submit,  not  to  chafe  and  fret,  to  bear 
— as  Keble  so  exquisitely  expresses  it, 
'  Wishing,  no  longer  struggling  to  be 


free.'      And  in    their  calm  faces   and 
deep   thoughtful   eyes   you  may   read 
their    heart-rest — '  the    rest   that   re- 
maineth  for  the  people  of  God.' "     But 
the     realisation     of     that     heart -rest 
depends  on  culture  and  preparation — 
preparation    oftentimes    in    the  provi- 
dential discipline  of  God,  responded  to 
by  the  heart-culture  of  him  who  longs 
to  enter  into  this  present  rest.     God 
cannot  give   some   of   us  present  rest, 
because    we    have    not    got    ourselves 
ready  for  it.     God  has  to  keep  some 
of  us  a  long  time  in  the  shadows  of 
the  earthly,  because  we  do  not  get  on 
with  our  preparations  for  the  heavenly. 
III.  The  fulfilment  of  any  one  of 
God's  promises  of  rest  opens  the  way 
to  new  longings  for  rest. — For  no  rest 
God   gives   must   ever   be   confounded 
with    satisfaction,    with    the    end    of 
enterprise  and  hope.     If  so,   we  may 
as  well   cease   to  be  creatures,  moral 
beings  which  should  have  a  boundless 
possibility  in  them.    Attainment  oj^ens 
up  the  prospect  of  attainment.     The 
mountain-climber    reaches    one    peak 
only  to  see  the  peaks  rising  high  above 
him.       It   is    thus    with    "  learning," 
and  it  is   thus    with    "  art."       Robert 
Buchanan  cries  out  thus  to  his  poet- 
friend  in  heaven,  David  Gray, — 

"  Must  it  last  for  ever, 
The  passionate  endeavour, 
Ay,  have  you,   there   in   heaven,  hearts   to 
throb  and  still  aspire  ? 

In  the  life  you  know  now, 
Render'd  white  as  snow  now. 
Doth    a    fresh  mountain-range    arise,   and 
beckon  higher — higher  ? 

Are  you  dreaming,  dreaming, 
Is  your  soul  still  roaming, 
Still  gazing  upward  as  we  gazed,  of  old,  in 
the  autumn  gloaming  ?  " 

All  earthly  resting-places  are  but 
arhours  in  the  "  Hill  Difficulty,"  that 
rises  steeply,  up  and  up,  to  the  ever- 
lasting gates.  Into  the  arbours  God 
lets  us  pass  for  a  while;  but  there  is 
no  making  tent  or  tabernacle,  and 
abiding  there.  Onward,  upward ;  ever 
onward,  ever  upward,  until  the  white 
cloud  wraps  us  round,  and  we  too  are 
away  with  God.  The  seeking  soul  may 
enter  into  the  rest  of  the  full  surrender. 
And   such   a   soul   never    forgets   the 

201 


CHAP.    IV. 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS. 


Divine  peace  that  comes  when  the  last 
self-hold  is  loosened,  the  eye  is  fixed 
on  the  cniciiied  and  risen  One,  and 
the  love  goes  wholly  forth  in  one 
sublime  self-yielding  and  sacrifice. 
The  sincere  and  earnest  soul  longs  to 
gain  the  arbour  of  the  full  and  entire 
trust.  He  would  have  the  first  pas- 
sionate act  of  first  love  pass  into  the 
restful  habit  of  rehance,  that  keeps 
the  soul  in  peace.  The  great  impulse 
sometimes  comes  upon  us,  and  we  long 
for  the  rest  of  holiness — the  rest  of 
an  abiding,  easy  mastery  of  sinful  in- 
clination. And  then  the  soul  is  set 
upon  longing  for  the  rest  of  heaven ; 
which  is  but  this — holiness  set  in  holy 
surroundings.  The  rest  of  heaven  is 
the  rest  that  an  earnest,  spiritually- 
minded  Christian  wants  ;  it  is  the  rest 
of  unhindered  goodness,  the  "crown 
of  righteousness."  Our  life  goes  by 
stages.  Attainment  is  rest  and  a 
stage.  The  material  is  ever  leading 
on  to  the  spiritual,  and  the  spiritual 
is  ever  opening  into  the  heavenly. 
Our  present  limit  of  conception  is  the 
heavenly  rest;  but  that  can  only  be 
some  new  kind  of  toil ;  and  away,  in 
advance  of  it,  must  be  the  inspiration 
of  some  yet  higher  rest  for  the  toilers 
then,  as  this  heaven  is  the  rest  for  the 
toilers  now.  This  we  may  say  for 
the  assuring  of  our  hearts — He  who 
so  anxiously  provides  rest  for  the 
weary  surely  provides  grace  for  the 
toiler ;  and  life  now  is  the  rest  of  His 
service.  And  this  we  may  say — the 
secret  of  all  rest  is  rest  of  heart. 
And  that  we  may  all  have  now.  It 
is  the  rest  of  faith.  We — yes,  we — the 
sons  of  toil  and  care  and  fear,  who 
are  often  so  weary  of  earth's  worries 
and  weaknesses  and  misunderstandings 
that  we  can  wail  with  Marianna  of 
the  Moated  Grange,  and  say, — 
"  I'm  awear}',  I'm  aweary ; 

Would  God  that  I  were  dead  I  " — 

we — even  we — may  enter  now,  and 
possess  now,  the  "  rest  that  remaineth 
for  the  people  of  God." 

Two    Wm^ds  for    Rest. — In    ver.    8 
"  rest "   signifies   rest   from  weariness. 

202 


The  ''  rest  "  in  ver.  9  is  another  word — 
nobler,  and  moi'e  exalted.  It  signifies 
the  I'est  of  a  soul  made  perfect.  It  is 
the  inward  peace  of  the  Sabbath.  It 
is  not  the  rest  of  insensibility,  the 
rest  of  the  sleeper,  unconscious  of  the 
presence  of  good  or  evil  agencies  around 
him.  The  rest  of  God  is  not  the  rest 
of  inactivity.  The  things  of  God  come 
to  perfection.  Perfection  means  fruit- 
bearing,  and  fruit- bearing  means  work. 
There  is  no  idleness  even  in  heaven. 
God's  rest  is  perfect,  nothing  can  disturb 
it.  Years  ago  our  fleet  was  shattered 
by  a  violent  gale.  It  was  found, 
however,  that  some  ships  were  un- 
affected by  its  violence.  They  were 
in  what  mariners  call  "  the  eye  of  the 
storm."  While  all  around  was  desola- 
tion, they  were  safe.  So  Jehovah's 
children  find  that  amid  the  turbulent 
billows  of  life's  tempest  "  there  re- 
maineth a  rest  for  the  people  of  God." 
Why  cannot  we  have  perfect  rest  on 
earth  ?  You  lack  knowledge.  There 
is  nothing  more  terrible  than  suspense. 
You  are  waiting  for  information — yovi 
cannot  rest.  Not  only  knowledge  is 
imperfect  here,  everything  is  imperfect. 
Therefore  we  cannot  rest.  Selfishness 
produces  restlessness.  Fear  is  a  great 
cause  of  it.  "  Perfect  love  casteth  out 
fear."  When  you  know,  as  St.  John 
knew,  that  you  have  found  the  bosom 
of  God,  and  that  He  has  all  power  in 
heaven  and  earth,  you  are  at  rest. — 
Hawthoi^n  Homilies. 

God^s  Rest. — 
And  I   smiled    to   think  God's   great- 
ness flowed  around  our  incomplete- 
ness. 
Round  our  restlessness  His  rest. 

E.  B.  Browning. 

Vers.  9,  10.  Entrance  into  GodSs 
Rest. — The  truth  taught  here  is  that 
Faith,  and  not  Death,  is  the  gate  to 
participation  in  Christ's  rest — that  the 
rest  remained  over  after  Moses  and 
■  Judaism,  but  came  into  possession 
under  and  by  Christ.  The  old  system 
had  in  it,  for  its  very  heart,  a  promise 
of  rest ;  but  it  had  only  a  promise.     It 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   IV. 


could  not  give  the  thing  that  it  held 
forth.  It  could  not,  by  the  nature  of 
the  system.  The  psalmist  represents 
the  entrance  into  that  rest  as  a  pri\alege 
not  yet  realised,  but  waiting  to  be 
grasped  by  the  men  of  his  day  whose 
hearts  were  softened  to  hear  God's 
voice.  That  rest  was  only  a  fair  vision, 
and  this  writer  says  it  remains  un- 
possessed as  yet,  but  to  be  possessed. 
God's  word  has  been  pledged.  The 
Divine  mercy  will  not  be  baulked  of 
its  purposes  by  the  unbelief  of  the 
Jews :  the  rest  remains  for  all  who 
believe  to  partake  of.  The  position  that 
the  rest  promised  to  the  Jew  remains 
to* be  inherited  by  the  Christian  is 
established  on  a  second  ground.  Christ 
our  Lord  has  entered  into  His  rest — 
parallel  with  the  Divine  tranquillity 
after  creation.  And  seeing  that  He 
possesses  it,  certainly  we  shall  possess 
it  if  only  we  hold  fast  by  Him. 

I.  This  Divine  rest,  God's  and 
Christ's. — The  writer  is  drawing  a 
parallel  between  God's  ceasing  from 
His  creative  work  and  entering  into 
that  Sabbath  rest  when  He  "  saw 
everything  that  He  had  made,  and 
behold  it  was  very  good,"  and  Christ's 
ceasing  from  the  work  of  redemption 
and  passing  into  the  skies  to  the 
Sabbath  of  His  everlasting  repose. 
The  "  rest  of  God  "  is  difficult  to  under- 
stand. It  belongs  necessarily  to  the 
Divine  nature.  It  is  the  deep  tran- 
quillity of  a  nature  self-sufficing  in  its 
infinite  beauty,  calm  in  its  everlasting 
strength,  placid  in  its  deepest  joy,  still 
in  its  mightiest  energy ;  loving  without 
passion,  willing  without  decision  or 
change,  acting  without  effort ;  quiet, 
and  moving  everything ;  making  all 
things  new,  and  itself  everlasting ; 
creating,  and  knowing  no  diminution 
by  the  act ;  annihilating,  and  knowing 
no  loss  though  the  universe  were  barren 
and  unpeopled.  God  is,  God  is  every- 
where, God  is  everywhere  the  same,  God 
is  everywhere  the  same  infinite  love, 
and  the  same  infinite  self-sufficiency ; 
therefore  His  very  being  is  rest.  The 
rest  of  Christ  is  like  the  rest  of  God, 
even   in   respect   of    this   Divine   and 


infinite  nature.  Besides  this  repose 
that  belongs  to  the  Divine  nature, 
there  is  the  rest  which  is  God's  tranquil 
ceasing  from  His  work,  because  God 
has  perfected  His  work.  God  does  not 
rest  as  weary,  but  as  having  done 
what  He  meant  to  do.  The  rest  of 
God  is  the  expression  of  the  perfect 
Divine  complacency  in  the  perfect 
Divine  work.  And  so  Christ  is  said 
to  rest  when  His  redemption  work 
was  completed.  Further,  the  Di\ine 
tranquillity  is  a  rest  that  is  full  of  work. 
"  My  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and 
I  work."  And  Christ's  work  of  re- 
demption, finished  upon  the  cross,  is 
perpetually  going  on.  Christ's  glorious 
repose  is  full  of  energy  for  His  people. 
He  intercedes  above.  He  works  on 
them ;  He  works  through  them ;  He 
works  for  them.  The  rest  of  God,  the 
Divine  tranquillity,  is  full  of  work. 

II.  The  rest  of  God  and  of  Christ 
is  the  pattern  of  what  our  earthly  life 
may  become. — We  can  come  to  be  like 
Him — like  Him  in  the  substance  of 
our  souls ;  like  Him — copy  of  His 
perfections ;  like  Him — shadow  and 
resemblance  of  some  of  His  attributes. 
And  here  lies  the  foundation  for  the 
belief  that  we  can  "  enter  into  His 
rest."  Faith,  which  is  the  means  of 
entering  into  rest,  will  make  life  no 
unworthy  resemblance  of  His  who, 
triumphant  above,  works  for  us,  and, 
working  for  us,  rests  from  all  His  toil. 
Trust  Christ !  and  a  great  benediction 
of  tranquil  repose  comes  down  upon 
the  calm  mind  and  settled  heart. 

III.  This  Divine  rest  is  a  prophecy 
of  what  our  heavenly  life  shall  surely 
be. — Heaven  is  the  earthly  life  of  a 
believer  glorified  and  perfected.  If 
here  we  by  faith  enter  into  the 
beginning  of  rest  yonder,  through  death 
with  faith  we  shall  enter  into  the 
perfection  of  it. — A.  Maclaren,  B.J). 

Ver.  11.  The  Heavenly  Rest. — These 
words  illustrate  the  trutli  that  the 
whole  history  of  the  Jewish  Church 
was  one  long  prophecy  and  type  of  the 
Christian  Church  in  every  age.  The 
rest  of  Canaan  typified  the  higher  and 

203 


CHAP.   IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


nobler  "  rest  of  heaven,"  and  we  are 
warned  in  the  text  that  unbeHef  will 
surely  exclude  from  that  rest. 

I.  The  gospel  revelation  meets  all 
the  deepest  needs  of  man.— It  holds 
out  to  him,  weary  with  the  conflict  of 
life,  the  hope  of  an  eternal  life.  In 
the  fulness  of  early  vigour  the  promise 
of  rest  may  be  passed  by  as  a  thing 
little  cared  for  ;  but  as  the  years  go 
by  we  welcome  the  thought  of  perfect 
rest,  as  the  weary  traveller  welcomes 
the  sight  of  home. 

II.  The  gospel  revelation  promises 
a  "  rest "  compatible  with  the  noblest 
and  highest  activity  of  all  the  powers 
man  possesses. — After  a  time  of  perfect 
rest,  our  natures  would  begin  to  yearn 
for  a  "renewal  of  youth,"  for  fresh 
endeavours  and  attainments.  The 
hope  is  held  out  to  us  of  exchanging 
a  frail  body  for  one  "  raised  in  glory  " 
and  "  in  power,"  with  capacities  of 
exertion  and  endurance  unimaginable 
here ;  and  the  soul,  for  ever  freed 
from  its  limitations  of  knowledge  and 
from   its   sin,    shall   rise   to  unknown 


heights  of  intellectual  and  spiritual  ele- 
vation. To  be  possessors  of  "eternal 
life,"  when  all  the  powers  of  our  nature 
are  being  exerted  to  their  full  capacity 
of  energy  in  achievement  and  service, 
and  yet  to  have  all  the  peace  and 
repose  that  "  rest "  means,  this  is  a 
heaven  which  alone  fully  satisfies  man, 
and  this  is  the  future  the  gospel 
reveals.  Heaven  is  often  carnalised 
into  a  place  of  sensuous  ease  and  selfish 
enjoyment ;  but  the  gospel  is  not  re- 
sponsible for  our  perversions  of  its 
revelation. 

III.  Faith  is  the  necessary  condi- 
tion of  this  spiritual  life. — Life  in 
God  on  this  side  of  the  grave  is  the 
condition  of  life  in  God  on  the  other. 
That  life  is  "  hid  with  Christ  in  God," 
and  we  can  only  live  it  as  we  live  "  by 
faith,  not  by  sight."  The  warning 
from  the  exclusion  of  Israel  from  the 
land  of  promise  through  unbelief 
comes  to  us  :  *•  Let  us  labour  to  enter 
into  rest,  lest  any  man  fall  after  the 
same  example  of  unbelief." — G,  S. 
Barrett,  B.A.,  D,D. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  12,  13. 

The  Searching  Power  of  the  Living  Woi^d. — This  passage  asserts  the  searching, 
testing  power  of  the  Word  of  God.  Observe  the  connection  in  which  it  stands. 
Beware  of  falling  from  the  Christian  profession.  Beware  of  unbelief  and 
presumption.  Your  dangers  are  many  and  great.  The  Divine  observations 
and  testings  are  most  exact  and  searching.  "  Thou  knowest  my  downsitting 
and  my  uprising ;  Thou  understandest  my  thought  afar  off."  "  Quick,"  with 
either  the  idea  of  enduring  or  of  activity.  The  Word  is  in  actual  operation ;  it 
is  not  a  thing  of  mere  possibilities.  "  Sharper  than  two-edged  sword  " ;  the 
Bible  i^ea  of  keeimess — perfect  discrimination.  "  Soul  and  spirit "  ;  material  and 
spiritual  life.  "  Joints  and  marrow,"  or  bone  and  marrow  ;  metaphor  from  the 
bodily  frame.  "  Thoughts  and  intents  "  ;  mere  ideas,  and  ideas  when  formed  into 
resolves ;  metaphor  from  the  intellectual  life.  Notice  the  impression  of  present, 
perfect,  subtle  searching  which  is  produced  by  the  terms  of  the  text.  No 
language  could  have  been  more  effective. 

I.  What  is  this  Word  of  God.— Divest  the  mind  of  the  idea  that  the 
Scriptures  are  chiefly  or  only  referred  to.  That  is  the  common  use  of  the  text 
as  quoted  in  extempore  Christian  prayers.  At  one  time  the  term  Word  was  a 
much  more  important  expression  than  it  is  now.  To  the  early  Christians,  and 
in  early  Church  philosophy,  the  term  Word,  or  Logos,  had  its  own  special 
significance.  We  know  how  much  St.  John  makes  of  it  in  the  prologue  of  his 
gospel ;  and  he  wrote  at  a  time  when  a  half- Jewish  and  half-pagan  philosophy 
was  getting  influence  in  the  Church.  As  it  is  used  in  Scripture  the  term 
includes:  1.  The  conditions  under  which  our  first  parents  had  their  rights  to 
204 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap,  iv 


Paradise.  The  Word  of  God  given  to  Adam.  The  mode  of  communication  we 
cannot  now  know.  Somehow  the  thought  and  will  of  God  were  intelligently 
conveyed  to  their  minds.  2.  The  manifestations  of  God  and  His  will  to  men 
in  the  patriarchal  age.  The  modes  of  communication  being  visions,  dreams, 
angelic  appearances,  living  voices — all  being  Words  of  God.  Illustrate  by  the 
Jewish  idea  of  the  Memra,  as  the  Second  Person  of  the  Trinity.  3.  The  special 
disclosure  of  the  Divine  mind  concerning  a  particular  people.  The  modes  of 
communication  being  by  a  mediator,  Moses,  and  by  a  ceremonial  worship. 
4.  The  human  life  on  earth  of  the  Son  of  God,  whom  we  call  the  Incarnate 
Word.  This  is,  in  the  very  highest  sense,  the  Word  of  God.  5.  The  active 
energy  of  the  Divine  Spirit  v/orking  in  the  hearts  of  men.  So  far  as  it  is 
revealing  and  teaching  it  becomes  the  Word  of  God.  6.  The  Written  Word, 
as  contained  in  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.  Through 
printing  and  education  this  has  come  to  be  the  most  effective  form  of  the  Word. 
From  this  sketch  of  the  forms  of  the  Word,  it  may  be  shown  that  it  is 
essentially  this  :  the  manifestation  of  God  to  men  ;  the  communication  of  the 
thought  and  will  of  God  to  men  ;  the  translation  of  the  mind  of  God  into  some 
form  of  language  that  men  can  understand.  It  is  affirmed  of  nature,  "  There 
is  no  speech  nor  language,  (yet)  their  line  is  gone  out  into  all  the  earth."  There 
are  more  or  less  perfect  degrees  in  which  words  utter  thoughts.  They  serve 
both  to  convey  and  to  conceal  our  meaning.  So  in  God's  Word  there  are 
different  degrees  of  clearness.  We  find  it  given  under  a  variety  of  con- 
ditions, and  in  forms  appropriate  to  each  condition.  The  Word  in  Christ, 
and  taught  by  His  Spirit,  represents  the  highest  form  of  Divine  communication. 
II.  How  does  the  Word  of  God  search  and  try  men? — The  Word,  we  have 
seen,  is  God  bringing  Himself  into  such  relations  with  men  as  men  can  realise. 
The  Word  is  God.  It  is  essential  to  God  that  He  must  be  a  searching  power 
wherever  He  comes.  This  is  affirmed  in  Scripture,  and  by  the  experience  of 
belie veis.  *'  All  things  are  naked  and  open  unto  the  eyes  of  Him  with  whom 
we  have  to  do."  What  is  true  of  God  Himself  is  true  of  all  modes  of  His  Word. 
1.  The  Written  Word.  It  searches  by  the  force  of  its  commands,  examples, 
counsels,  warnings — wonderfully  fitting  into  all  the  circumstances  of  life. 
Sinning  man  dreads  the  Scriptures.  2.  The  Incarnate  Word.  Searches  by 
the  contact  of  His  purity  and  perfection.  No  man  can  fail  to  admit  the  moral 
perfection  of  Christ.  A  man  feels  it.  All  the  power  is  exerted  which  attends 
on  putting  the  standard,  the  model,  beside  the  copy.  Jesus  is  the  one  and  only 
model  of  a  man  who  reached  heaven  by  His  own  goodness.  3.  The  Living 
Word,  or  Holy  Spirit.  This  is  declared  to  be  the  effect  of  His  inworking — He 
*'  convinces  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment  "  ;  and  this  is  His  constant 
operation  in  the  Christian  soul.  This  searching  quality  ought  to  attach  to  the 
preached  Word  :  it  does  whenever  it  is  really  the  Word  of  God. 


SUGGESTIVE   NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Vers.    12,   13.  The  Divine  Thought-  *' discerner  of  the  thoughts  and  intents 

reader. — "All   things   are   naked   and  of    the   heart."      If    we    can   explain 

laid  open  before  the  eyes  of  Him  with  man's  thought-reading  power,  the  ex- 

whom  we  have  to  do."     Much  is  now  planation  will  help  us  to  understand 

made  of  the  skill  in  thought-reading  the  perfect  thought-reading  power  of 

which  seems  to  be  the  special  endow-  God. 

ment    of     particular     persons.       The  I.  If  thought-reading  be  an  unusual 

assertion  is  made  that  God  is,  in   an  gift  or  endowment,  a  particular  form 

absolute    and    unqualified    sense,    the  of    human    genius,    it    is    a    Divine 

205 


CHAP.  IV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


bestowment,  or  rather  trust;  and  God  III.  If  thought-reading  be  a  result 

cannot  give  what  He  does  not  possess  :  of  knowledge  of  mental  laws,  God  has 

what  God  possesses   constitutes  Him  the  perfect  knowledge.      Thinking  is 

what  He  is.     He  has  this  genius  of  entirely  in  the  control  of  laws.     And 

thought-reading    in    a    perfection    of  every  man's   thoughts   are   the   strict 

which  man's  limited    power   can    give  operation  of  laws,  which  always  work 

no  adequate  idea.     Man's  power  is  in  as   they   do   in    any   one    case.       God 

body  limitations.  knows  what  we  think,  for  He  knows 

II.  If  thought-reading  be  dependent  all  the  working  of  the  thought-laws, 
on    sympathy,    it    must    be   a    Divine 

attribute.     Familiar  to  men  long  be-  TheTesting-power  of  the  Logos. — Show 

fore  "thought-reading"  was  heard  of  how   the   discerning   of   the   thoughts 

was    the   power    of    persons    in   close  and  intents  of  the  heart  is   ascribed 

sympathy — as     friends,    or    husbands  to    God.      That     such     discerning    is 

and   wives — to  understand  each  other  characteristic  of  the  Incarnate  Word, 

without   the   use  of   words.      Sympa-  or   Gospel ;  of  the  Written  Word,  or 

thetic   friends  constantly  know   what  Scriptures  ;  and  of  the   Living  Word, 

friends  are  thinking.      With  God  we  or  Spirit.     It  ought  to  be  a  marked 

associate   the  revelations  of  a  perfect  characteristic  of  the  preached  Word, 

sympathy.  or  ministry. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PAR  AGRA  PH. —Verses  U— 16 

The  Divme-human  High  Priest. — This  passage  introduces  the  consideration 
of  the  priesthood  of  Christ,  to  which  brief  reference  is  made  in  chap.  iii.  1. 
Three  things  are  argued :  1 .  His  extraordinary  dignity.  2.  His  perfect 
character.  3.  His  glorious  work.  The  high  priest  was  the  prominent  man, 
the  example,  of  the  Old  Testament  dispensation.  There  is  an  important 
distinction  between  a  model  and  an  example,  which  needs  to  be  kept  in  view. 
F.  W.  Kobertson  skilfully  explains  that  distinction.  "  You  copy  the  outline 
of  a  model ;  you  imitate  the  spirit  of  an  example.  Christ  is  our  Example,  not 
our  Model.  You  might  copy  the  life  of  Christ,  make  Him  a  model  in  every  act, 
and  yet  you  might  not  be  one  whit  more  of  a  Christian  than  before.  You 
might  wash  the  feet  of  poor  fishermen  as  He  did,  and  live  a  wandering  life, 
with  nowhere  to  lay  your  head.  You  might  go  about  teaching,  and  never  use 
any  words  but  His  words,  never  express  religious  truth  except  in  Bible  language ; 
have  no  home,  and  mix  with  publicans  and  sinners.  Then  Christ  would  be  your 
Model ;  you  would  have  copied  His  life  like  a  picture,  line  for  line,  and  shadow 
for  shadow,  and  yet  you  may  not  be  Christ-like.  On  the  other  hand,  you  might 
imitate  Christ,  get  His  Spirit,  breathe  the  atmosphere  of  thought  that  He 
breathed,  do  not  one  single  act  which  He  did,  but  every  act  in  His  Spirit ;  you 
might  be  rich,  whereas  He  was  poor  ;  never  teach,  whereas  He  was  teaching 
always ;  lead  a  life  in  all  outward  particulars  the  very  contrast  and  opposite  of 
His ;  and  yet  the  spirit  of  His  self-devotion  might  have  saturated  your  whole 
being,  and  penetrated  into  the  life  of  every  act,  and  the  essence  of  every 
thoughts*  Then  Christ  would  have  become  your  Example ;  for  we  can  only 
imitate  that  of  which  we  have  caught  the  spirit."  But  if  we  make  Christ  our 
Example  two  things  need  to  be  carefully  explained.  1.  He  must  be  in  our 
plane,  or  we  cannot  hope  to  follow  Him  or  to  be  like  Him.  2.  He  must  be 
out  of  our  plane,  He  must  belong  to  a  higher  plane,  or  we  cannot  be  satisfied 
with  Him.     Fixing  thought  on  Him  figured  as  our  High  Priest,  observe — 

I.  Christ  was  one  with  men. — In  the  records  left  us  of  His  life  there  is  a 
more  evident  effort  to  convince  us  of  His  veritable  humanity  than  of  His 
Div^iuity.     It  is  as  though  men  were  sure  to  light  on  the  idea  of  His  being 

206 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  iv. 


extraordinary,  and  it  needed  to  be  proved  that  He  was  really  man.  In  his  first 
epistle  St.  John  does  not  argue  or  assert  that  Christ  was  God.  That  seems  to 
have  been  believed.  St.  John  demands  belief  in  Christ  as  having  *'  come  in  the 
flesh."  Illustrate  :  1.  The  significancy  of  our  Lord's  living  so  long  a  time  as 
thirty  years  of  common  and  ordinary  human  life,  fully  recognised  during  that 
time  as  a  man  among  men.  2.  The  distinct  apprehension  of  His  ordinary 
manhood  by  His  brethren,  and  by  the  people  of  Nazareth.  3.  The  perfect 
humanness  of  the  habits  and  exhibited  feelings  of  Christ's  life.  Sensitiveness 
to  suffering,  bodily  and  mental.  He  was  humanly  affected  towards  the  character 
and  conduct  of  others.  He  was  weary,  hungry,  sleepy.  4.  The  simple  human 
character  of  our  Lord's  death.  One  might  expect  such  a  Being  to  die  in  some 
sublime  way.  But,  physically,  our  Lord's  was  just  a  common  and  usual  man's 
death  ;  and,  morally,  it  was  remarkable  as  a  good  man's  innocent  death.  With 
the  idea  of  the  humanness  of  Christ  before  us,  we  cannot  but  feel  that  His 
character  is  the  expression,  the  outliving,  of  our  ideal  of  humanity;  it  is  the 
realised  perfect  character  for  a  man. 

II.  Christ  was  distinct  from  sinners. — It  is  important  to  estimate  clearly 
the  distinction  between  a  man  and  a  siimer.  The  condition  of  our  world  would 
be  hopeless  if  the  two  terms  were  convertible.  All  that  belongs  to  man  was 
in  Christ,  but  nothing  that  belongs  to  the  sinner.  But  Christ  was  not  distinct 
from  sinners  because  His  nature  was  imperfect,  incomplete,  on  any  side.  It 
was  a  whole.  Some  may  only  be  separate  from  sinners  in  some  points,  because 
they  have  no  capacities  for  certain  particular  sins.  There  is  no  virtue  in 
their  sinlessness,  any  more  than  there  is  honesty  in  a  thief  whose  hands  have 
been  cut  off.  This  sense  of  our  Lord's  distinctness  was  produced  on  all  who 
came  in  contact  with  Him.  Illustrate  :  The  disciples — as  in  the  call  of  Matthew. 
People — "  speaks  with  authority,  and  not  as  the  scribes."  Enemies  and 
indifferent — see  money-changers  in  Temple-courts.  "  Never  man  spake  like  this 
man."  His  judge  and  the  Roman  soldiers — see  the  awe  of  Pilate,  and  the 
exclamation  of  the  centurion.  The  same  truth  is  borne  in  on  us  by  the  record. 
As  we  study  the  man  we  feel  that  He  is  more  than  man,  other  than  man. 
There  are  two  aspects  in  which  His  distinctness  from  sinners  is  impressively 
shown.  \.  His  acts  are  never  doubtful.  There  has  never  been  a  merely 
human  life  without  some  incidents  of  questionable  truth  and  virtue.  In  Christ's 
life  there  is  no  record  of  any,  but  a  distinct  impression  is  left  on  us  that  there 
were  none  to  record.  This  is  a  coin  that  you  need  not  ring  twice.  2.  His  acts 
were  never  selfish.  This  is  largely  characteristic  of  human  acts ;  it  is  too 
constantly  the  "  fly  "  in  the  best  pots  of  ointment.  Christ's  acts  were  all  done 
under  a  profound  sense  of  duty,  and  under  a  sublime  impulse  of  love.  The  acts 
were  right  inform,  and  the  life  and  feeling  that  inspired  them  were  right  also. 

III.  The  Divine-human  High  Priest  exerts  the  most  ennobling  and  sanctifying 
power  upon  us. — Precisely  what  man  needed  was  salvation  by  God  through 
man,  through  manhood ;  what  he  needed  was  a  moral  redemption.  The  Saviour 
of  the  world  must  be  a  Divine  man.  Only  such  a  Saviour — 1.  Could  demonstrate 
the  distinction  between  man  and  sin.  2.  Could  bring  to  light  the  higher 
possibilities  that  are  in  human  nature  as  God  designed  it.  3.  Could  exhibit 
the  ennobling  influence  of  the  two  great  principles  of  our  nature — dependence, 
and  the  sense  of  duty.  Ever  near  to  God,  ever  doing  the  will  of  God,  these  are 
the  essentials  of  true  manhood.  4.  Could  show  the  charm  which  character, 
moral  excellence,  can  put  on  all  the  relations  of  life.  5.  And  could  reveal  a 
sublime  future  for  the  race :  as  High  Priest,  working  until  all  whom  He 
represents  have  become  like  Him  in  fact.  Then  we  are  to  be  the  people 
belonging  to  this  great  High  Priest,  the  Son  of  God.  What  made  men 
disciples  of  Christ  while  He  was  on  earth  ?     That  makes  men  disciples  now. 

207 


CHAP.    IV. 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Vers.  14-16.  Safety  through  the  Great 
High  Priest.— Th.Q  epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  is  an  argument  against 
apostasy.  Everywhere,  throughout 
this  epistle,  the  signal-lights  of  danger 
are  swung  out  along  the  Christian 
track.  The  fear  which  sometimes 
startled  the  steadfast  and  heroic  heart 
of  Paul — lest,  having  preached  to 
others,  he  himself  should  be  a  castaway 
— is  declared  to  be,  in  this  epistle,  for 
every  Christian  a  reasonable  and  sub- 
stantial fear  (chap.  vi.  4-6).  Against 
the  too  common  tendency  of  putting 
the  main  stress  of  the  Christian  life 
upon  its  beginning^  of  reckoning  upon 
heaven  because  one  imagines  himself 
once  to  have  been  in  Christian  mood 
and  spirit,  though  he  certainly  is  not 
now,  this  epistle  is  a  prolonged  Divine 
warning.  "  Let  us  hold  fast  our  pro- 
fession," or,  as  the  original  has  it,  "  let 
us  be  strong  in  holding  fast  to  it" — 
that  is  the  solemn  and  strenuous  ex- 
hortation of  this  epistle.  And  in  order 
to  make  its  warning  real  and  sure, 
the  epistle  falls  back  upon  the  ancient 
Scripture,  and  brings  forward  a  clear 
instance  of  a  good  beginning  and  a 
bad  ending  (chap.  iv.  11).  The 
Hebrews  started  well.  But  the  ex- 
periences of  the  wilderness  w^ere  too 
much  for  them.  They  never  enjoyed 
the  Canaan  rest.  They  were  unworthy 
and  apostate.  Their  carcasses  mould- 
ered in  the  wilderness.  Now  these 
later  Hebrews  to  whom  this  epistle 
was  addressed  had  begun  well.  They 
had  acknowledged  Jesus  as  their 
spiritual  Moses — the  Messiah  of  pro- 
mise and  of  prophecy.  Under  His 
leading  they  had  begun  their  march 
out  of  the  spiritual  Egypt,  through 
this  worldly  wilderness,  to  the  spiritual 
Canaan — to  heaven,  the  home  and  rest 
of  those  who  believe  in  and  follow 
Christ.  But  the  worldly  wilderness 
was  full  of  difficulties,  and  these 
Hebrew  Christians  showed  signs  of 
faltering.  The  Hebrew  nation  was 
against   them ;    the    resplendent    and 

208 


still  standing  Temple  was  against 
them  ;  worldly  success  and  the  chance 
for  livelihood  were  against  them ; 
bitter  scorn  and  contumely  were 
against  them.  Yet  this  epistle  assures 
them  there  is  no  safety  in  apostasy; 
there  is  safety  only  in  steadfastness. 
Apostasy  is  destruction.  Still  must 
they  hold  fast  their  profession  (chap, 
iv.  1  ;  also  ver.  1 1 ). — Homiletic  Review. 

Holding  fast  our  Profession. — Now 
the  question  comes,  "  Can  we  hold  fast 
our  profession  ?  "  Yes,  and  our  great 
High  Priest  is  the  reason  and  the 
power.  We  are  not  left  on  a  lonely 
pilgrimage.  We  are  not  left  to  a 
single-handed  conflict.  1.  Since  He  is 
High  Priest,  He  has  made  atonement 
for  us.  2.  Since  He  is  High  Priest, 
He  now  makes  intercession  for  us. 
3.  His  atonement  is  accepted,  and  His 
intercession  is  worthy,  for  His  resur- 
rection has  set  triumphant  seal  upon 
them.  "He  has  passed  into  the 
heavens."  4.  He  has  Himself  been 
tried,  * '  tern  pted  in  all  points  like  as 
we  are."  So  He  is  athrill  with 
sympathy.  5.  He  knows  temptation, 
yet  He  has  vanquished  it ;  He  is  with- 
out sin.  Herein  is  help  peculiar — the 
help  of  a  victorious  strength. 

Yer.  15.  Chrisfs  Sympathy  with  the 
Infirm. — How  many  are  burdened  with 
a  sense  of  deficiency,  with  their  un- 
likeness  to  others — their  inability  to 
do  what  others  can,  or  peihaps  what 
they  could  once ;  how  many  see  others 
come  to  the  house  of  God,  and  are 
distressed  that  through  weakness  they 
cannot ;  how  many  feel  themselves  a 
burden  to  others,  who  would  rather 
that  others  should  burden  them  ;  how 
many  mourn  that  their  lives  are  use- 
less and  inactive !  They  want  one 
who  will  take  their  part,  comfort  them 
by  his  tenderness,  sustain  them  with 
his  arm.     In  the  text  is  such  an  one. 

I.  Consider  the  fact  of  the  sym- 
pathy of  the  Lord  Jesus.     It  is  assured 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  iv. 


by — 1,  His  personal  human  experience,  period  and  for  definite   purposes,    He 

2.  His   perfect    knowledge    and   love,  took  part  in  frail  humanity ;  but  that 

3.  His  vital  union  with  His  people.  when  these  purposes  were  accomplished 

II.  Consider  this  sympathy  in  its  the  man  for  ever  perished,  and  the 
connection  with  His  high-priestly  spirit  reascended,  to  unite  again  with 
work.  1.  As  High  Priest  He  has  pure,  unmixed  Deity.  But  our  Lord's 
direct  intercourse  with  us.  2.  He  resurrection  life  should  be  the  corrective 
prays  for  the  supply  of  our  need.  of  this  notion.  And  this  suggests  the 
3.  He  brings  us  to  the  Father.  truth   of   the   human   heart   of    God. 

III.  Consider  that  this  sympathy  Man  resembles  God.  Love  does  not 
with  infirmity  is  the  pattern  for  His  mean  one  thing  to  man  and  another 
people.  1.  It  rebukes  our  hardness.  thing  to  God.  The  present  manhood 
2.  It  shows  one  of  the  great  needs  of  Christ  conveys  this  deeply  important 
of  the  world.  3.  It  suggests  a  re-  truth,  that  the  Divine  heart  is  human 
compense  for  suffering.  He  suffered  in  its  sympathies.  3.  There  is  a  con- 
that  He  might  sympathise  with  suf-  nection  between  what  Jesus  was  and 
ferers  ;  that  is  why  we  suffer. — Charles  what  Jesus  is.  He  can  be  touched 
New.  now    because   He   was   tempted   then. 

His  past  experience  has  left  certain 
Tempted,  not  overcome  by  Temptation.  effects  durable  in  His  nature  as  it  is 
— *'  In  all  points  tempted  "  must  not  now.  It  has  endued  Him  with  certain 
be  taken  as  meaning  in  all  points  qualifications  and  certain  susceptibilities 
sharing  our  experience  in  dealing  with  which  He  would  not  have  had  but  for 
the  temptation.  Christ  did  not  share  that  experience, 
anybody's  experience  of  yielding  to  I.  The  Redeemer's  preparations  for 
temptation.  He  was  never  overcome  His  Priesthood. — The  preparation  con- 
by  temptation.  But  that  was  not  sisted  in  being  tempted.  But  tempta- 
essential  to  human  experience.  That  tion  as  applied  to  a  Being  perfectly 
was  fallen  man's  experience.  And  free  from  tendencies  to  evil  is  not 
Christ  was  man,  not  fallen  man.  Find  easy  to  understand.  Temptation  has 
what  is  essential  to  man.  Christ  ex-  two  senses  :  it  means  test  or  pro- 
perienced  that.  bation ;  it  means  also  trial,  involving 

the  idea  of  pain  or  danger.  Trial 
Vers.  15,  16.  The  Sympathy  of  Christ.  placed  before  a  sinless  Being  is  in- 
— According  to  these  verses  the  Priest-  telligible  enough  in  a  sense  of  pro- 
hood  of  Jesus  Christ  is  based  upon  the  bation  ;  it  is  a  test  of  excellence.  And 
perfection  of  His  humanity ;  and  that  Scripture  plainly  asserts  this  as  the 
implies  that  He  was  possessed  of  a  character  of  Christ's  temptation.  Not 
human  soul  as  well  as  a  human  body.  only  test,  but  trial.  There  was  not 
1.  Accordingly  in  the  life  of  Christ  merely  test  in  the  temptation,  but 
we  find  two  distinct  classes  of  feeling.  there  was  also  painfulness  in  the 
When  He  hungered  in  the  wilderness,  victory.  How  could  this  be  without 
etc..  He  experienced  sensations  which  any  tendency  to  evil  ?  Analyse  sin. 
belong  to  the  bodily  department  of  In  every  act  of  sin  there  are  two 
human  nature.  But  His  grief,  friend-  distinct  steps  :  there  is  a  rising  of 
ship,  fear,  etc.,  were  the  affections  of  a  desire  which  is  natural,  and,  being 
an  acutely  sensitive  human  soul,  alive  natural,  is  not  wrong ;  and  there  is 
to  all  the  tenderness  and  hopes  and  the  indulgence  of  that  desire  in  for- 
anguish  with  which  human  life  is  bidden  circumstances,  and  that  is  sin. 
filled,  qualifying  Him  to  be  "  tempted  Sin  does  not  consist  in  having  strong 
in  all  points  like  as  we  are."  2.  The  desires  or  passions  :  in  the  strongest 
Redeemer  not  only  was  but  is  man.  and  highest  natures,  all,  including  the 
It  is  imagined  that  in  the  history  of  desires,  is  strong.  Sin  is  not  a  real 
Jesus'   existence,    once,    for   a   limited  thing.      It   is   rather   the   absence  of 

P  209 


CHAP.    IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


something,  the  will  to  do  right.  Sin 
is  not  in  the  appetites,  but  in  the 
absence  of  a  controlling  will.  There 
were  in  Christ  all  the  natural  appetites 
of  mind  and  body.  Conceive  then  a 
case  in  which  the  gratification  of  any 
one  of  these  inclinations  was  incon- 
sistent with  His  Father's  will.  At 
one  moment  it  was  unlawful  to  eat, 
though  hungry :  and  without  one 
tendency  to  disobey,  did  fasting  cease 
to  be  severe  ?  Christ  suffered  from 
the  force  of  desire.  Though  there 
was  no  hesitation  whether  to  obey  or 
not,  no  strife  in  the  will,  in  the  act  of 
mastery  there  was  pain.  There  was 
self-denial ;  there  was  obedience  at 
the  expense  of  tortured  feeling.  Not 
by  the  reluctancy  of  a  sinful  sensation, 
but  by  the  quivering  and  the  anguish 
of  natural  feeling  when  it  is  trampled 
upon  by  lofty  will,  Jesus  suffered, 
being  tempted.  His  soul  was  tempted. 
II.  The  Redeemer's  Priesthood. — 
By  Priesthood  is  meant  that  office  by 
which  He  is  the  medium  of  union 
between  man  and  God.  The  capacity 
for  this  has  been  indelibly  engraven 
on  His  nature  by  His  experience  here. 
All  this  capacity  is  based  on  His 
sympathy.  We  are  scarcely  aware 
how  much  the  sum  of  human  happi- 
ness in  the  world  is  indebted  to 
this  one  feeling — sympathy.  Of  this 
sympathy  Christ,  in  its  fulness,  was 
susceptible.  The  sympathy  of  Christ 
was  not  merely  love  of  men  in  masses ; 
He  had  also  discriminating,  special 
sympathy  with  individuals.  The 
priestly  powers  conveyed  by  this 
faculty  of  sympathising  are  two : 
1.  The  power  of  mercy.  2.  The  power 
of  having  grace  to  help.  There  are 
two  who  are  unfit  for  showing  mercy  : 
he  who  has  never  been  tried  ;  and 
he  who,  having  been  tempted,  has 
fallen  under  temptation.  The  qualifi- 
cation in  the  text,  "without  sin," 
is  very  remarkable ;  for  it  is  the 
one  we  least  should  think  of.  Un- 
thinkingly we  should  say  that  to  have 
erred  would  make  a  man  lenient ;  but 


it  is  not  so.  He  alone  is  fit  for  show- 
ing manly  mercy  who  has,  like  His 
Master,  felt  the  power  of  temptation 
in  its  might,  and  come  scathless 
through  the  trial.  We  must  not 
make  too  much  of  sympathy  as  mere 
feeling.  Feeling  with  Christ  led  to 
this,  *'  He  went  about  doing  good." 
Sympathy  with  Him  was  this,  "  Grace 
to  help  in  time  of  need."  The  sym- 
pathy of  the  Divine-human  !  He 
knows  what  strength  is   needed. 

In  conclusion,  draw  two  inferences  : 
1.  He  who  would  sympathise  must 
be  content  to  be  tried  and  tempted ; 
he  must  be  content  to  pay  the  price 
of  the  costly  education.  But  it  is 
being  tempted  in  all  points,  yet  with- 
out sin,  that  makes  sympathy  real, 
manly,  perfect,  instead  of  a  mere 
sentimental  tenderness.  2.  It  is 
this  same  human  sympathy  which 
qualifies  Christ  for  judgment.  The 
Father  hath  committed  all  judgment 
to  Him,  because  He  is  the  Son  of  man. 
The  sympathy  of  Christ  extends  to  the 
frailties  of  human  nature,  not  to  its 
hardened  guilt ;  He  is  "  touched  with 
the  feeling  of  our  infirmities.'" — F.  W. 
Robertson, 

Ver.  16.  Boldness  at  the  Throne  of 
Grace. — The  throne  of  grace  is  the 
reality  figured  in  the  mercy- seat,  or 
propitiatory,  or  cover  of  the  Ark,  that 
was  in  the  Holy  of  Holies.  As  the 
high  priest  in  the  old  dispensation 
went  in  once  a  year  with  the  incense 
and  the  blood,  and  brought  blessings 
for  the  people  from  that  throne  of 
grace,  so  Jesus,  as  the  great  High 
Priest  of  the  race,  went  into  the 
spiritual  Holy  of  Holies,  and  gained 
blessings  for  us  from  the  "  throne  of 
grace."  Only  there  is  this  distinction  : 
the  old  priest  came  out ;  Christ,  our 
Priest,  stays  in, — the  veil  is  never 
closed  behind  Him,  and  we  can  go  in  ; 
the  way  is  open  for  us  to  go  and  ask 
for  blessings,  and  we  can  go  boldly 
because  He  is  there,  to  be  the  ground 
of  our  acceptance,  and  to  plead  for  us. 


210 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS.  chap.  iv. 


ILLUSTRATIONS    TO    CHAPTER    IV. 


Ver.  1.  Spiritual  Shipwreck. — A  few  years 
since  a  noble  ship  left  the  shores  of  England 
for  a  distant  colony.  She  had  a  valuable 
freight  of  emigrants,  forced  from  tljeir 
fatherland  by  the  decrees  of  a  bitter  fate  - 
brides  whose  bosoms  glowed  with  the 
glorious  enthusiasm  of  youthful  love — chil- 
dren also  returning  to  the  bosom  of  fond 
parents,  whom  long  years  had  separated. 
The  ship  sailed  majestically  along,  and 
methinks  I  hear  now  the  music  and  the 
dancing  on  the  decks  during  the  calm  moon- 
lit evenings.  At  length,  "  Land  ahead  !  "  is 
shouted  from  a  hundred  lips.  Their  adopted 
country  looms  in  the  distance.  They  hasten 
to  prepare  for  the  landing.  Only  another 
night  need  be  passed  on  the  sea,  but  it  is 
their  last  in  this  world.  The  thick  darkness 
gathers  around  them  like  a  funeral  pall,  the 
winds  rise  as  if  to  sing  their  dying  requiem, 
and  in  one  fatal  moment  that  noble  vessel 
splits  on  the  rocks  !  And  now  wild  shrieks 
of  despair  struggle  with  the  howl  of  the 
tempest,  and  soon  all  is  over,  as  the  whole 
of  ttiat  ship's  company,  save  one,  sink  into 
a  watery  grave.  The  ship  becomes  a  wreck 
in  sight  of  port !  A  man  may  go  very  far 
towards  religion  and  yet  be  lost. — Henry 
Gill. 

Ver.  3.  The  Rest  of  Trv sting  the  Living 
Christ. — An  aged  Christian,  when  spoken  to 
about  his  hope,  was  accustomed  at  once  to 
advert  to  the  date  of  his  conversion,  and 
only  showed  anxiety  to  be  sure  that  his  first 
act  of  faith  was  a  saving  one.  He  went  to 
visit  a  young  Christian  woman  who  lay 
dying  of  consumption.  Her  faculties  were 
all  clear,  and  her  heart  was  full  of  the  "  rest 
of  God,"  the  rest  of  simple  trust.  That  aged 
Christian  feared  for  her,  because  she  showed 
no  anxiety  about  her  first  act  of  faith.  In 
answer  to  him  she  said,  "  Why  should  I 
trouble  about  such  things  ?  Does  it  not 
say,  '  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth 
from  all  sin  '  ?  It  is  not  only  '  has  cleansed ' ; 
it  is  this,  '  is  cleansing '  me  every  day.  I  am 
in  the  hands  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  surely 
I  may  leave  that  altogether  with  Him." 

True  Rest. — 
Rest  is  not  quitting  the  busy  career ; 
Rest  is  the  fitting  of  self  to  the  sphere ; 
'Tis  the  brook's  motion,  clear  without  strife, 
Fleeing  to  ocean,  after  its  life. 
Deeper  devotion  nowhere  hath  knelt, 
Fuller  emotion  heart  never  felt  ; 
'Tis  loving  and  serving  the  highest  and  best, 
'Tis  onwards,  unswerving,  and  that  is  true  rest. 
T.  Sullivan  Dvoight. 

Rest  after  Toil.— 
(Sleep  after  toil,  port  after  stormy  seas, 
Ease  after  war,  death  after  life,  does  greatly 
please. — Spenser's  "  Faerie  Queen" 


Ver.  7.  Procrastination. — Few  examples 
can  be  found  in  history  which  more  strik- 
ingly illustrate  the  danger  of  procrastination 
than  that  of  the  "  tragedy  of  Glencoe " ; 
and  though  at  this  day  nearly  two  centuries 
have  elapsed  since  the  dreadful  tale  first 
struck  terror  upon  the  minds  of  those  who 
beard  it,  even  yet  it  speaks  to  us  with  a 
voice  of  warning.  The  early  part  of  the 
reign  of  King  William  III.  was  much  dis- 
turbed by  discontent  and  rebellion  among 
the  turbulent  tribes  in  the  north  of  Scotland. 
Proud  and  fierce  they  were  by  nature,  and 
their  habits  of  life,  which  w-ere  not  unlike 
those  of  some  of  the  Bedouin  tribes  of 
Arabia  (for  their  chief  subsistence  was  by 
plunder  and  theft),  made  them  peculiarly 
untractable  when  King  William  attempted 
to  place  them  under  the  wholesome  laws  to 
which  their  more  peaceable  neighbours  in 
the  south  were  already  subject.  Various 
means  were  tried  to  conciliate  them,  and 
large  sums  of  money  offered  as  compensa- 
tion for  any  loss  which  they  might  sustain 
by  the  new  rule,  but  without  effect,  and  it 
was  found  necessary  to  appeal  to  the  strong 
arm  of  the  law.  William,  therefore,  issued 
a  proclamation,  which  he  had  duly  circu- 
lated amongst  the  rebel  chiefs,  that  all  were 
to  repair  to  a  given  spot  on  or  before 
December  31st,  and  there  sign  a  declaration, 
and  take  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  king. 
All  who  neglected  to  comply  with  this 
command  by  the  time  given  were  to  be 
treated  as  outlaws,  and  be  liable  to  death  as 
traitors  to  the  Crown.  It  was,  of  course, 
useless  for  any  of  these  rebel  chiefs,  with 
their  handful  of  followers,  or,  indeed,  for 
them  all  combined,  to  have  attempted  re- 
sistance to  William's 'well-trained  and  power- 
ful army.  So  that  one  might  have  reason- 
ably supposed  that  all  the  chiefs  would  have 
immediately  hastened  to  comply  with  the 
command  ;  but  it  was  a  severe  blow  to  their 
pride,  and  for  a  long  time  many  of  them 
refused  to  sign.  At  length,  as  the  time 
drew  near,  one  by  one  they  gave  way,  and 
by  December  31st  all  had  affixed  their 
names  to  the  paper,  and  had  taken  the 
oaths,  excepting  one  chief.  Mac  Ian  was 
the  leader  of  the  smallest  but  haughtiest  of 
the  tribes,  and  it  was  no  light  source  of 
gratification  to  him  to  see  one  and  another 
of  his  more  powerful  neighbours  submit  to 
the  king,  while  he  alone  held  aloof.  Not 
that  he  intended,  for  a  moment,  to  finally 
resist ;  he  knew  that  with  the  small  force 
at  his  command  (not  above  two  hundred 
souls  in  all)  this  was  impossible,  but  he  did 
hope  to  be  the  last  of  the  Scottish  chiefs  to 
submit,  and  thus  be  accounted  most  brave 
of  them  all.  A  day  or  tw^o  before  the  31st 
he  set  out  for  Dunbar,  but  a  heavy  fall  of 

211 


CHAP.   IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


snow  had  rendered  the  roads  almost  impass- 
able, and  so  impeded  his  progress  that 
though  he  made  most  desperate  efforts  he 
did  not  arrive  till  nearly  a  week  after  the 
time,  when  he  found  the  king's  messenger 
had  left  for  London,  and  without  his  signa- 
ture. It  happened  that  the  three  men  in 
whose  hands  it  lay  to  execute  the  king's 
threat  of  vengeance  on  those  who  neglected 
\o  comply  with  his  command  were  deadly 
enemies  of  Mac  Jan's,  and  only  rejoiced  to 
see  that  his  foolish  delay  had  placed  him  in  a 
position  where  he  was  liable  to  be  treated 
as  a  traitor,  and  on  the  arrival  of  the 
messenger  in  London  hastened  to  execute 
judgment  on  the  offender.  A  band  of 
soldiers  was  at  once  raised  and  commissioned 
to  hasten  to  Glencoe,  the  little  valley  where 
Mac  Ian  and  his  followers  dwelt,  to  surround 
every  outlet  by  which  tbey  might  escape, 
and  put  all  to  the  sword.  On  a  given  night 
the  onslaught  was  made,  and  Mac  Ian  and 
many  of  Lis  followers  fell  victims  to  the 
soldiery,  who  spared  neither  old  man  nor 
maiden,  but  slauglitered  all  who  came  in 
the  way.  Many,  indeed,  escaped  by  hiding 
in  the  rocks,  though  of  these  not  a  few 
perished  with  cold,  and  exposure  to  the 
frost,  and  by  hunger.  There  was  doubtless 
much  cruelty  in  so  rigorously  carrying  out 
the  king's  command,  especially  as  the  chief 
had  been  willing  to  submit ;  but  the  lesson 
most  forcibly  taught  is,  "  Put  not  off  till 
to-morrow  what  should  be  done  to-day." 
How  many  a  foolish  one  throughout  this 
land  now  hazards  his  soul  as  Mac  Ian 
hazarded  his  life,  by  delaying  to  make  his 
peace  with  the  great  King  of  kings !  who 
now  proffers  mercy  to  all  who  will  repent, 
and  submit  to  His  gracious  rule,  but  who 
will  one  day  close  the  book,  and  then  all 
whose  names  are  not  inscribed  within  its 
blessed  pages  will  be  for  ever  exposed  to 
His  just  wrath  and  indignation. 

Ver.  12.  The  BouUe-edged  X7iife.—The 
Jewish  priest  required  a  strong  and  skilful 
hand  to  do  the  ordinary  work  of  his  holy 
calling.  It  needed  both  strength  and  skill 
to  lay  the  victim  on  the  altar,  to  guide  the 
sharp  two-edged  sacrificial  knife  straight 
through  the  carcass,  till  the  very  backbone 
was  severed,  the  whole  laid  bare,  and  the 
very  joints  and  marrow  exposed  and  sepa- 
rated. For  this  reason  (as  well  as  because  he 
was  a  type  of  Him  who  is  perfect),  because 
such  persons  ordinarily  are  deficient  in 
bodily  strength,  no  deformed  person  could 
be  high  priest,  he  could  not  do  the  work 
required  of  him.  There  is  a  knife  sharper 
than  that  two-edged  sword,  and  a  hand  to 
guide  its  blade  and  apply  its  edges  and 
point  stronger  and  surer  than  the  Jewish 
priest's.  That  knife  is  the  word  of  God : 
it  is  a  "  living  "  word ;  it  has  a  power  to 
lay  open  hearts  far  greater  than  that  sacri- 

212 


ficial  knife  had  to  lay  bare  the  bodies  of  the 
sacrifice;  its  edge  is  sharper  than  that  of 
the  two-edged  sword;  and  when  driven 
home  and  directed  by  the  hand  of  the 
Almighty  Spirit,  "it  pierces  even  to  the 
dividing  asunder  of  the  joints  and  mar- 
row, the  soul  and  spirit,"  and  lays  bare 
"  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart." — 
W.  W.  Champneys,  M.A. 


The  Force  of  Conscience. — A  man  who  was 
remarkable  for  his  ignorance  and  wicked- 
ness was  visiting  some  of  his  relations 
on  the  last  day  that  our  mission-tent  was 
used.  They  tried  to  persuade  him  to  come 
to  our  closing  meeting  ;  but  finding  their 
entreaties  prevailed  nothing,  one  of  them 
asked  if  he  would  go,  provided  some  one 
would  give  him  a  sum  of  money.  He 
answered,  "  Yes,  he  would  do  anything  for 
money."  "  Would  he  go  for  a  shilling  ? " 
"  Would  he  go  for  a  meal's  victuals  ? " 
"  Yes."  "  Then  I  will  give  you  one."  A 
loaf  was  then  broken  in  two,  and  one  half 
of  it,  with  some  butter  and  cheese,  was 
deposited  at  a  cottage  near  the  tent,  it 
being  understood  that  the  man  was  to  have 
it  immediately  the  service  was  over.  This 
being  done,  the  man  came  to  the  tent.  My 
sermon,  being  founded  upon  "  The  end  of 
all  things  is  at  hand,"  etc.,  turned  a  good 
deal  upon  the  future  judgment,  and  made 
way  for  some  remarks  from  Mr.  Pocock,  in 
the  course  of  which  he  described  the  Judge 
descending,  the  judgment  set,  and  the 
books  opened ;  and  then  remarking  that 
every  word,  and  every  work,  and  every 
secret  thing  would  then  be  exposed,  he 
exclaimed,  "Who  was  it  at  such  a  time 
opened  his  neighbour's  potato-pit,  and  de- 
prived a  poor  family  of  their  stock  of  winter 
provisions  ?  There  he  is  ;  bring  him  forward 
— what !  is  that  he  ? "  etc.  Conscience  now 
smote  this  man  ;  he  had  been  guilty  of  this 
very  crime,  and,  filled  with  alarm,  went 
home  without  his  victuals.  The  next  morn- 
ing he  went  to  the  woman  whose  potato-pit 
he  had  robbed,  and  confessed  his  crime, 
adding,  '*  Mr.  Pocock  wouldn't  ha'  knawed 
I,  but  my  hankercher  weren't  tied  like 
anybody  else's  1  "  What  is  specially  remark- 
able in  this  case  is,  that  Mr.  Pocock  knew 
nothing  of  the  man,  nor  had  he  ever  heard 
of  such  a  circumstance  as  a  potato-pit  being 
opened  and  robbed  in  the  neighbourhood  ; 
but  he  simply  hit  upon  the  observation  as 
involving  a  general  thing,  without  the 
slightest  idea  of  any  individual  case. 
Surely  there  was  something  more  than 
chance  in  all  this.  Who  can  tell  but  this 
very  occurrence  saved  this  poor  fellow  from 
the  gallows  ? — Memoirs  of  the  Rev.  John 
Pyer. 

Ver.  13.  Examining  the  Entrails. — The 
Greek  word  here  is  taken  from  the  practices 


y 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  cfiAP.  V. 


that  accompanied  the  offering  of  animals  in  through  the  pathless   forests,  he  breaks   a 

sacrifices.     It    is     said    that,     in     ancient  twig  ever  and  anon  as  he  goes,  that  those 

nations,  when   the  animal  that  was  to  be  who  come  after  may  see  the  traces  of  his 

sacrificed     had     been     killed,     the     priest  having  been  there,  and  may  know  that  they 

examined   microscopically   all    the   entrails  are  not  out  of  the  road.     Oh,  when  we  are 

and  bowels,   and  watched  certain   spots  or  journeying  through   the  murky  night,   and 

symptoms,    from  which  he   argued   success  the  dark  woods  of  affliction  and  sorrow,  it 

or  misfortune  in  the  enterprise  in  which  the  is  something  to  find  here  and  there  a  spray 

oJBferer  was   embarked  ;   and    tlierefore    the  broken,  or  a  leafy  stem  bent  down  with  the 

apostle  says,  that  all  things  are  as  clearly  tread  of  His  foot  and  the  brush  of  His  hand 

noted  by  God  as  the  entrails  of  the  victim  as   He   passed,  and   to   remember  that   the 

were  laid  bare  and  examined  by  the  priest.  path  He   trod   He   has  hallowed,  and  that 

— Dr.  Cumminy.  there  are  lingering  fragrances  and   hidden 

strengths  in  the  remembrance,  "  in  all  points 

Ver.  15.  The  Help  of  our  Lord's  Human  tempted  as  we   are,"  bearing  grief  for  us, 

Experiences. — They    tell    us    that   in  some  bearing  grief  7vith  us,  bearing  grief  like  us, 

trackless    lands,    when    one   friend    passes  — A.  Maclaren^  D.D. 


CHAPTER  V. 
CHARACTER-FITNESS  FOR  HIGH-PRIESTLY  WORK. 

CRITICAL   AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

The  writer  now  fixes  attention  on  the  high-priesthood,  shows  what  are  its  characteristic 
and  essential  features,  and  makes  comparisons  with,  and  in  part  contrasts  with,  the  high- 
priesthood  of  Christ.  His  points  are:  1.  The  priest  was  appointed  for  men;  on  behalf  of, 
to  superintend  and  direct  the  concerns  which  men  have  with  God.  2.  The  priest,  by 
reason  of  his  own  personal  experiences  of  human  infirmity,  must  be  able  to  sympathise. 
3.  The  priest  could  only  be  constituted  such  by  Divine  appointment.  In  showing  that 
Christ  is  an  abiding  and  all-sufficient  High  Priest  and  Saviour,  the  writer  is  led  to  speak  of 
deep  and  difficult  things,  involving  a  very  full  and  spiritual  knowledge  of  the  sacred  word. 
He  therefore  stops  in  his  argument  to  reprove  the  slowness  and  dulness  of  the  spiritual 
understanding  of  those  to  w^hom  he  writes. 

Ver.  1.  Taken  from  among  men. — Or,  "since  he  is  taken."  There  is  no  suggestion  that 
Christ  was  not  &o  taken.  The  expression  simply  means,  "inasmuch  as  taken  from  men." 
To  this  condition  the  eternal  Word  conformed  by  becoming  incarnate.  For  men. — On  men's 
behalf;  for  the  benefit  of  men  (yv4p).  Not  meaning  "instead  of."  Things. — ra  tt/oos  top 
Qebv :  men's  religious  concerns  ;  such  of  them  at  least  as  deal  with  ceremonial  relations, 
worship,  and  sacrifice.  Gifts  and  sacrifices. — bCbpa  koI  dvaias,  thank-offerings,  and  sin-  and 
trespass-offerings,  the  latter  differing  from  the  former  in  involving  the  life  of  a  victim. 
In  classical  Greek  the  word  "  sacrifices  "  is  only  used  to  mean  "  slain  beasts."  In  Old 
Testament  usage  the  term  "  gifts "  included  both  unbloody  and  bloody  offerings.  All 
forms  of  offering  had  to  be  presented  by  the  priest.  So  all  forms  of  spiritual  gift  and 
sacrifice  have  to  be  presented  by  Christ  as  the  great  High  Priest. 

Ver.  2.  Have  compassion. — [xerpLoiradetv.  The  classical  usage  of  this  word  is  thus 
explained :  The  Stoics  said  man  should  be  diradrjSy  not  subject  to  passions.  The  Platonists 
said  man  should  be  fierpLOTradris,  moderate  in  affections,  and  not  diradrjs.  The  use  of  the 
verb  is  peculiar  to  the  New  Testament.  The  leading  idea  of  the  word  is  to  be  moderate  in 
our  feelings  and  passions  ;  here  wisely  restrained  in  dealing  with  those  who  err  through 
ignorance.  The  word  is  found  both  in  Philo  and  Josephus.  Margin,  "  reasonably  bear 
with";  R.V.  "bear  gently  with."  Ignorant  >  ..  out  of  the  way.— R.V.  "ignorant  and 
erring."  Those  whose  burdens  are  sins  of  frailty,  and  those  whose  burdens  are  sins  of 
wilfulness.  Both  classes  seek  and  need  the  sympathy  of  the  high  priest.  Himself  also. — 
A  frail  man.  Fellow-experience  is  the  condition  of  all  true  help  given  to  others.  Those 
who  have  not  themselves  erred  are  proverbially  harsh  :  dad^vda  here  means  moral  infirmity, 
not  the  natural  frailty  of  the  physical  system. 

Ver.  3.  Reason  hereof. — By  reason  of  his  own  moral  infirmity,  which  involves  his  own 
sin.    Reference  may  be  intended  to  the  particular  ceremonies  of  the  Day  of  Atonement, 

213 


CHAP.  V.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS. 


(In  chap.  vii.  26-28  the  difference  in  this  respect  between  the  old  high  priest  and  Christ  is 
presented.)     He  ought.—"  He  is  bound  not  merely  as  a  legal  duty,  but  as  amoral  necessity." 

Ver.  4.  Unto  himself.— The  jealousy  with  which  the  high-priesthood  was  kept  in  the 
God-appointed  family  of  Aaron  is  a  remarkable  feature  of  the  old  economy.  Farrar  quotes 
the  following  sentence  from  one  of  the  Jewish  Midrashim :  "Moses  says  to  Korah,  *  If 
Aaron,  my  brother,  had  taken  upon  himself  the  priesthood,  ye  would  be  excused  for 
murmuring  against  him  ;  but  God  gave  it  to  him.'  "  See  Num.  xvi.-xviii.  R.V.  gives  the 
verse  precisely,  "  And  no  man  taketh  the  honour  unto  himself,  but  when  he  is  called  of  God, 
as  was  Aaron." 

Ver.  5.  Glorified.— Did  not  claim  honour  for  Himself  (John  viii.  54;  Rom.  xi.  13). 
Begotten  Thee.— As  applied  to  an  office,  this  means  "exalted." 

Ver.  7.— This  and  the  two  following  verses  illustrate  ver.  2  in  reference  to  Christ.  "  I 
have  shown  you  that  a  priest  must  have  experience  and  fellow-feeling  ;  our  great  High 
Priest  has."  Days  of  His  flesh.— As  distinguished  from  His  present  day  of  glory.  The 
special  scene  in  the  mind  of  the  writer  appears  to  be  the  agony  in  Gethsemane.  That  scene 
should  be  read  in  the  light  of  this  text.  There  can  be  no  question  about  Christ's  having 
an  actual  experience  of  man's  inward  soul-troubles.  The  difficulty  of  the  verse  is  connected 
with  the  sentence,  "  and  was  heard  in  that  He  feared,"  airb  ttjs  evXajSeias ;  R.V.  "  having  been 
heard  for  His  godly  fear";  "because  of  His  reverential  awe."  The  words  may  mean, 
"  because  of  His  fear " ;  or,  "  on  account  of  His  fear  "  ;  or,  "  in  respect  of  that  which  He 
feared."     Stuart  prefers,  "  was  delivered  from  that  which  He  feared." 

Ver.  8.  Learned  He. — Or,  "  He  was  subjected,  though  so  exalted  a  personage,  to  learn 
experimentally,  what  it  is  to  obey  in  the  midst  of  sufferings." 

Ver.  9.  Made  perfect. — In  the  sense  of  being  adequately  fitted  for  His  work,  and  entirely 
competent  to  undertake  it.  Eternal  salvation. — In  the  sense  of  being  a  continuous,  abiding, 
perpetual,  ever- working  power  to  save  and  sanctify.  The  word  "  eternal "  in  the  New 
Testament  is  often  used  as  equivalent  to  "  spiritual."  And  the  spiritual  is  necessarily  the 
permanent. 

Ver.  11.  Hard  to  be  uttered. — R.V.  "  hard  of  interpretation."  But  the  difficulty  was  mainly 
due  to  the  spiritual  incapacity  of  those  to  whom  the  epistle  was  written.  Dull  of  hearing. 
— Not  of  listening,  but  of  apprehending. 

Ver.  12.  First  principles.— Rudiments  ;  lit.  "rudiments  of  the  beginning."  Oracles  of 
God. — Not  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures,  but  the  truths  and  doctrines  which  God  has 
revealed  under  the  gospel.  Need  of  milk. — Farrar  says  young  students  or  neophytes  in 
the  Rabbinic  schools  were  called  thinokoth,  "sucklings." 

Ver.  13.  Unskilful. — Or,  "  one  who  has  not  that  skill  or  experience  in  regard  to  anything 
which  is  requisite  to  a  due  apprehension  and  consideration  of  it."  Word  of  righteousness — 
which  cultures,  builds  up,  the  life  of  righteousness.  Babe. — For  Pauline  use  of  this  figure 
see  Gal.  iv.  3 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  6 ;  Eph.  iv.  13,  14  ;  and  also  1  Cor.  xiv.  20. 

Ver.  14.  Full  age.— R.V.  "fall-grown  men."  reXeiov,  "  grown  up"  ;  "matured."  Senses. — 
Here,  spiritual  faculties  ;  the  internal  senses  of  Christians,  alaSriTripia.  The  word  is  not  found 
anywhere  else  in  the  New  Testament.  Good  and  evil. — Not  mere  right  and  wrong,  but  the 
value  or  worthlessness  of  the  forms  and  aspects  in  which  the  Christian  truth  might  be 
presented  to  them  by  different  teachers. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—10. 

Qualifications  of  Priesthood. — The  subject  which  mainly  occupies  the  attention 
of  this  writer  is  introduced  in  chap.  iv.  14-16,  which  should  properly  begin 
chap.  V.  The  references  to  the  Divine  nature  of  Christ  in  chap,  i.,  and  to  the 
human  nature  of  Christ  in  chap,  ii.,  were  introductory  to  the  full  consideration 
of  the  relation  in  which  this  Divine-human  person  stood  to  men,  and  of  the 
office  which  He  held  in  order  to  accomplish  man's  full  redemption.  He  was 
v/riting  to  Jews,  who  were  not  only  familiar  with  the  priestly  system,  but  were 
liindered  by  their  interest  in  its  formality  from  apprehending  its  spiritual 
fulfilment  in  Christ.  As  the  writer  had  both  compared  and  contrasted  Moses 
and  Christ,  giving  all  honour  to  Moses  that  was  due  to  him,  but  giving  the 
greater  honour  to  Christ,  so  now  he  both  compares  and  contrasts  the  older 
formal  high  priest  and  the  new  spiritual  High  Priest,  giving  honour  to  the  old, 
while  showing  that,  having  fruitened  in  the  new,  it  may  be  allowed  to  pass 
away.  In  the  passage  chap.  iv.  14-16  what  is  involved  in  %\iQ  humanity  and 
214 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  v. 


sinless  experience  in  a  sinful  world  of  the  new  High  Priest  is  stated  in  a 
general  way.  In  the  passage  now  before  us  the  qualifications  of  the  new  High 
Priest  are  given  more  in  detail,  and  with  the  qualifications  of  the  Jewish  priests 
in  mind.  The  comparison  of  the  Aaronical  priesthood,  as  to  dignity,  duties, 
office,  and  utility,  with  that  of  Christ,  and  of  their  functions  with  His,  makes 
up  the  body  of  the  epistle,  extending  to  chap.  x.  18.  Stuart  gives  the  com- 
parisons of  the  passage  now  before  us  thus  :  "  1.  Every  priest  is  appointed  on  behalf 
of  men,  in  order  that  he  may  superintend  and  direct  the  concerns  which  men 
have  with  God,  and  may  present  their  oblations  and  sacrifices  before  Him. 
2.  Every  priest  being  himself  '  compassed  with  infirmity,'  is  prepared  by  his 
own  experience  to  sympathise  with  others  in  like  condition  ;  and  because  of  his 
own  sins  and  imperfections,  it  becomes  his  duty  to  offer  expiatory  sacrifices  for 
himself  as  well  as  for  them.  3.  No  priest  appoints  himself  to  the  sacred  office  ; 
his  appointment  is  by  Divine  direction."  But  the  comparison  may  be  somewhat 
more  fully  elaborated. 

I.  A  necessary  qualification  of  priesthood  is  a  Divine  call. — "  No  man 
taketh  the  honour  unto  himself,  but  when  he  is  called  of  God,  as  was  Aaron." 
This  is  an  appeal  to  the  sentiment  of  the  stricter  Jews,  who  regarded  with 
extreme  jealousy  the  exclusive  rights  of  the  Aaronic  priesthood.  It  alone  was 
the  appointment  of  God.  It  was  an  easy  thing  for  an  objector  to  distress  the 
Jewish  Christians  by  urging  on  their  attention  that  Christ  could  have  jio  claims 
to  the  high-priesthood,  seeing  that  He  belonged  to  the  tribe  of  Judah,  not  to 
the  tribe  of  Levi,  and  not  in  any  sense  to  the  Aaronic  family.  The  answer  is  as 
simple  as  it  is  satisfactory.  True,  God  appointed  Aaron.  True,  no  one  can 
alter  the  appointment  but  He  who  made  it.  But  God  is  not  imprisoned  in  His 
own  appointments.  He  can  alter  them  if  He  wills  so  to  do.  His  fresh  appoint- 
ments are  as  valid  as  His  earlier  ones.  He  has  superseded  the  Aaronic 
priesthood.  He  has  called  Jesus  to  a  permanent  spiritual  priesthood ;  and  this 
the  Scriptures  plainly  testify.  Two  passages  are  given,  and  these,  according  to 
Jewish  principles  of  interpretation,  would  be  regarded  as  fully  satisfactory 
evidence.  We  should  pay  more  heed  to  the  evidence  of  the  Incarnation,  and  of 
the  Divine  voice  of  attestation  at  our  Lord's  baptism  and  transfiguration. 

II.  A  necessary  qualification  of  priesthood  is  gracious  character. — The  high 
priest  ought  always  to  have  been  the  ideal  good  man  of  his  generation — "who 
can  bear  gently  with  the  ignorant  and  erring,  for  that  he  himself  also  is 
compassed  with  infirmity."  Our  almost  exclusive  attention  to  the  sacrificial  side 
of  priestly  work  has  prevented  our  giving  due  heed  to  the  priestly  example  and 
moral  influence.  A  side-light  is  thrown  upon  it  by  the  narrative  of  Hannah's 
visit  to  the  tabernacle.  The  high  priest  Eli  noticed  her,  and  felt  it  to  be  a  part 
of  his  duty  to  reprove  what  seemed  to  be  a  fault  in  her.  There  can  be  no  doubt 
that  the  high  priests  were  the  moral  and  religious  advisers  of  the  people.  It 
was  not  only  that  the  people  inquired  of  God  through  the  high  priest,  who  had 
the  oracle,  they  also  sought  advice  from  him  in  the  difficulties  and  perplexities 
of  their  commonplace,  everyday  effort  to  live  the  godly  life.  It  was  absolutely 
essential  therefore  that  he  should  have  (1)  a  gracious  natural  disposition; 
(2)  a  wisely  trained  and  cultured  character ;  and  (3)  the  discipline  of  pei-sonal 
experience  of  the  sorrows  of  human  life.  Grant  this,  and  it  may  easily  be  shown 
that  the  Lord  Jesus,  as  the  spiritual  High  Priest,  altogether  surpasses  any 
previous  priest  in  this  threefold  qualification.  In  Him  there  was  unusual 
natural  power  of  sympathy  ;  complete,  all-round  culture  of  character ;  and  very 
full  discipline  through  experience  of  suffering.  "  Having  been  made  perfect, 
He  became  unto  all  them  that  obey  Him  the  Author  of  eternal  salvation." 
Christ's  character  is  power. 

III.  A  necessary  qualification  of  priesthood  is  the  discipline  of  experience. — 

215 


CHAP.  V.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS. 


Mention  has  been  made  of  this  in  its  relation  to  character ;  now  we  see  it  in 
relation  to  official  duties,  A  man  must  know  life,  as  it  can  only  be  known,  by- 
passing through  its  varied  experiences,  if  he  is  to  advise,  convict,  aid,  or  comfort 
his  fellows.  The  tone  on  a  man's  work  is  strangely  changed  when  he  has  come 
through  suffering.  The  older  priests  lived  a  family  life  through  a  great  part 
of  the  year,  and  so  shared  common  human  experiences.  If  the  veil  were  lifted 
from  the  first  thirty  years  of  our  Lord's  life,  we  should  probably  be  surprised 
to  see  how  severe  was  the  discipline  of  experience  that  He  passed  through. 
Two  things  are  prominent  in  this  passage:  1.  Our  Lord's  experience  of  pi^ayer 
(ver.  7).     2.  Our  Lord's  experience  of  suffei'ing  (ver.  8). 

IV.  A  necessary  qualification  of  priesthood  is  a  Divinely  appointed  order. — 
"  Named  of  God  a  high  priest  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek."  A  man  called 
of  God  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  an  independent  man,  who  may  carry  out  his 
priesthood  in  his  own  ways.  He  belongs  to  some  order.  But  God  has  more 
than  one  order.  All  we  have  to  be  anxious  about  is,  that  the  man  should  be 
in  one  of  God's  orders.  He  has  temporary  orders,  such  as  that  of  Levi ;  and 
He  has  permanent  orders,  like  that  of  Melchizedek.  He  has  hereditary  orders, 
and  orders  of  personal  Divine  call.  This  subject  is  treated  more  fully  in  a  later 
chapter  of  the  epistle. 

In  application  show  that  the  qualifications  of  priesthood  are  the  qualifications 
of  all  who  engage  in  the  sacred  ministry,  and  indeed  of  all  who  are  endeavouring 
to  serve  others  in  the  name  of  Christ. 


SUGGESTIVE    NOTES   AND    SERMON   SKETCHES. 

Vers.     1-10.    Fitness    of  tlte    High  which  is  both  suggestive  and  illustra- 

Priest. — The  general  idea  of  this  pass-  tive  :  *'  The   word   ix^TpioiraOdv   means 

age   has    been   thus   given  :    "  For  as  properly  *  to  show  moderate  emotions.' 

every  human   high   priest   shares   the  All   men   are  liable   to  emotions  and 

nature   of   those   on   behalf  of   whom  passions     {jrdOri).      The     Stoics     held 

he  appears  before  God,  and  thus  can  that  these  should  be  absolutely  crushed, 

be  compassionate  towards  them ;  and,  and  that  *  apathy '   {airdOua)  was  the 

moreover,  can  only  receive  his  appoint-  only   fit   condition   for   a  philosopher. 

ment   from   God;    so    Christ   is   God-  The  Peripatetics,  on  the  other  hand, 

appointed.     He  has  learned  His  obe-  — the   school   of   Aristotle — held  that 

dience  through    sufferings,    and,    thus  the    philosopher    should    not    aim    at 

made  perfect,  is  declared  by  God  High  apathy,  because  no  man  can  be  abso- 

Priest  for  ever."  lutely  passionless  without  doing  extreme 

mr     1?  J"  m  '  *'     u        r^v.  '  violence  to  nature ;  but  that  he  should 

The  Essence  of  (Jhristiamty. — Chris-  .  ^  .      ,/       ^i    x  •  •  -j. 

tianity  is   obedience   to   a    Person,   a  %«1"/^«  rmtmopathy-th^t  is,  a  spirit 

^T    1.  T     J      Q  i.^-    •       A    nu  •  i.  01     'moderated    emotion       and    selt- 

Master,  a  Lord,     submission  to  Christ  .     i       mi  i   •     i-        i   i    -i    • 

u         4.    •         4-\.^    -a  r.4.        4.         J    j-u  control.      Ihe  word  is  lound    both  m 

characterises    the    nrst    act    and    the  -m  m  -.     ^        ■,  -r 

whole    action    of    the    spiritual    life.  ^^'''^  ..^""^     Josephus.      In    common 

XT  j-u  ^  J--        u  usae^e  it  meant  '  moderate  compassion, 

Hence    the    necessary   connection   be-  •    °    ,i      cix  •      i    1 1   .    •.    >  ^    i  . 

tween  faith  and  obedience.     Whatever  ""'T  ^^       t  I  ^^  ^   •  '^u 

I.         u  ^      4-u^^^i      1.         i.  only    a    weakness    but    a    vice.       Ihe 

may   have   been   the  moral    character  ox  •      s    //>  ^  ^  i  -^    i      t 

previously,  this  is  the  uniform  mark  Stoic  a^a^eta  would  have  utterly  dis- 

c  i.-u  X.         ^   i.^-  ^     e       1     J.-  qualined  any  one  tor  true  priesthood, 

or  those  who  are   heirs   oi   salvation,  A       t      i-iiixi  j.- 

that  they  obey  Christ   with  a  direct  °"1  Lord  yielded  to  human  emotions, 

•^ .   ,    *^,  •  such  as  pity,  sorrow,  and  lust  answer  ; 
conscious  intention.  ixixtttj  juj 

and  that  He  did  so  and  could  do  so, 

Ver.  2.  The  Compassion  of  a  Priest.  *  yet  without  sin,'  is  expressly  recorded 

— Farrar    gives    the    following    note,  for  our  instruction." 

216 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  V. 


Ver.  7.  The  Divine-human  Model  But  the  character  and  right  mood  of 
of  Prayer. — E.Y.  "  And  having  been  him  who  prays  is  not  so  often  corn- 
heard  for  His  godly  fear."  There  can  mended  to  our  attention.  And  just 
be  no  doubt  that  the  writer  had  chiefly  that  is  the  gist  of  the  example  of 
in  mind  the  scene  of  Gethsemane.  But  intercessory  prayer  of  our  Divine- 
while  the  agonising  prayer  of  our  human  Lord.  He  was  what  ensured 
Divine  Lord  on  that  occasion  is  a  the  answer  to  His  plea, 
model    of    some    kinds    of    Christian 

prayer,  it  cannot  be  taken  as  a  model  Yers.  8,  9.  Learning  the  Obedience  of 
of  all  kinds.  It  was  a  model  of  the  Sonship. — An  abstract  relationship  is 
prayer  by  the  aid  of  which  man  brings  of  little  interest  apart  from  the  fulfil- 
his  will  into  full  accord  with  the  ment  of  those  duties  that  are  involved 
Divine  will ;  and  so  it  was  a  prayer  in  the  relationship.  It  is  a  compara- 
of  preparation  for  doing  high-priestly  tively  unimportant  thing  that  Christ 
service.  And  this  seems  to  be  in-  stood  in  relation  to  God  as  a  Son. 
dicated  by  the  form  of  the  sentence  It  is  a  most  important  thing,  a  most 
given  in  the  Revised  Version.  God's  powerful,  effective,  persuasive  thing, 
recognition  rested  on  the  character  of  that  He  showed  and  proved  His  Son- 
the  suppliant,  as  shown  in  His  supreme  ship  in  a  life  of  obedience,  which  was 
anxiety  concerning  God's  will,  and  in  fully  tested  by  suffering. 
His  readiness  to  undergo  suffering  in  I.  This  absolute  fact  about  Christ 
order  to  carry  out,  and  so  to  glorify,  — He  is  "the  Son." — "Though  He 
the  Divine  will.  "  Having  been  heard  were  a  Son."  That  appears  to  be  a 
for  His  godly  fear^  That  is  the  one  fact  of  extreme  plainness  and  sim- 
feature  of  the  scene  of  Gethsemane  on  plicity  ;  and  yet  the  fiercest  theological 
which  the  writer  fixes  for  his  present  battles  have  raged  around  it.  Is  the 
purpose ;  and  it  is  precisely  to  his  Son-relation  of  Christ  to  God  a  rela- 
point.  He»  is  deahng  with  the  im-  tion  that  involves  equality  with  God 
portance  of  character  in  a  high  priest,  or  subordination  to  Him  ?  Must  we 
and  with  the  sublime  way  in  which  think  of  His  Sonship  as  an  eternal 
the  character  of  Jesus  gave  Him  high-  relation  which  He  sustained  towards 
priestly  power.  A  man's  intercession  the  Father  before  all  worlds?  or  is 
can  be  no  mere  perfunctory,  official  it  only  the  mode  of  His  revelation 
duty.  It  is  the  power  of  the  man;  to  men,  the  aspect  under  which  His 
it  is  the  acceptableness — the  repre-  mediatorship  is  presented,  the  relation 
sentative  acceptableness — of  personal  demanded  by  the  exigencies  of  human 
and  gracious  character.  Gethsemane  redemption  ?  Such  grave  questions 
teaches  us  that  a  man  must  be  in  interest  theologians,  but  if  we  could 
right  mind-moods,  and  right  heart-  settle  them  we  should  not  be  satisfied, 
moods,  if  his  prayer  is  to  be  heard  The  Divine  voice  said,  "This  is  My 
and  answered.  And  while  this  is  true  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well 
of  man's  prayers  for  personal  blessings,  pleased."  We  turn  to  the  Man  who 
it  is  even  more  true  of  his  intercessions,  was  thus  addressed ;  we  watch  His 
It  is  not  merely  a  submissive  mood  Hfe  ;  we  observe  His  spirit  and  con- 
that  he  must  cherish.  The  Divine-  duct,  in  order  to  find  out  the  charms 
human  Model  in  Gethsemane  has  a  that  lay  in  His  Sonship.  There  is  no 
more  searching  appeal  to  us  than  that,  term  of  relationship  which  can  surpass 
It  is  a  submission  which  is  seen  to  in  interest  that  of  sons.  God  takes 
involve  personal  suffering  and  sacrifice.  to  represent  Himself  the  highest, 
That  alone  reveals  such  a  character,  tenderest,  and  most  affecting  relation- 
such  a  godly  fear,  as  will  ensure  an  ship  into  which  His  creatures  can 
intercessor's  prayers  being  heard.  The  come.  We  do  not  read  aright  the 
character  and  quahty  of  prayer  is  story  of  Christ's  life  on  the  earth, 
often  dwelt  on.    We  may  "  ask  amiss."  save    as    we    discern,   in    it    all,    the 

217 


CttAP.   V. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


exhibition  and  illustration  of  His  Son- 
ship,  the  obedience  of  the  child,  the 
devotion  of  the  Son.  This  is  the  fact 
concerning  Christ,  He  is  a  Son.  But 
this  fact  must  not  stand  alone.  The 
Sonship  must  come  out  to  view;  it 
must  be  shown,  tested,  proved. 

II.  The  trial,  or  proof,  of  His  Son- 
ship. — "  Learned  He  obedience  by  the 
things  which  He  suffered."  If  this 
trial  is  to  be  of  interest  to  us,  and 
morally  effective  on  us,  it  must  be 
made  in  this  our  earthly  sphere,  and 
under  our  human  conditions.  If  He 
be  only  the  eternal  Son,  then  there 
may  have  been  expressions  and  testings 
of  that  Sonship  in  the  "  heavenly 
places  "  ;  but  we  could  not  apprehend 
those  forms  of  testing,  and  we  could 
feel  but  little  impulse  from  their  reve- 
lation to  us.  The  whole  fascination 
gathers  round  Christ,  because  He  alone 
shows  us  perfect.  Divine  Sonship,  lived 
out  in  human  scenes,  and  under  human 
conditions.  Each  relationship  in  which 
men  stand  has  some  one  thing  which 
is  its  essential  feature  and  character- 
istic. The  essential  of  kingship  is  the 
spirit  of  judgment ;  of  fatherhood, 
loving  authority  ;  of  motherhood,  sacri- 
ficing affection ;  of  sisterhood,  thought- 
fulness  for  others ;  and  of  sonship, 
obedience.  We  have  no  right  to  the 
name  of  son  save  as  we  obey.  We 
take  the  life  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and 
search  it,  seeking  for  signs  of  that 
which  we  know  to  be  the  very  essence 
of  sonship,  and  we  receive  surprising 
impressions  of  the  perfectness  and 
Divine  beauty  of  His  obedience.  He 
spoke  the  Father's  words ;  He  did 
the  Father's  works ;  He  showed  the 
Father's  spirit ;  He  fulfilled  the  Father's 
mission ;  He  glorified  the  Father's 
name.  Watching  that  life  of  earnest, 
cheerful,  hearty,  loving  obedience,  who 
of  us  does  not  say,  "  We  know  now 
what  sonship  to  God  means,  we  feel  now 
its  transcendent  charm  and  beauty "  ? 
But  the  obedience  of  sonship  is  no  mere 
series  of  acts.  It  is  that  series  of  acts 
only  as  they  are  instinct  with  the 
spirit  of  obedience,  done  in  the  freeness 
of  the  will,  under  the  impulse  of  the 

218 


affection  of  the  heart.  A  life  full  of 
obedient  acts  will  never  make  or  glorify 
a  sonship,  any  more  than  a  wealth 
of  apples,  tied  on,  can  make  a  fruitful 
tree.  They  must  be  the  utterances 
of  the  soul's  life  in  God.  And  the 
great  charm  of  our  Saviour's  life  is 
this — His  acts  sufiice  to  open  and 
reveal  to  us  a  loving,  devoted,  obedient 
soul.  But  was  that  Sonship  never 
tested  or  tried  ?  Was  it  easy  for  Jesus 
to  be  good  ?  Did  He  never  know  trial 
or  temptation  ?  Did  His  ship  sail 
over  the  ocean  of  life  all  in  fair 
weather?  Did  never  one  black  cloud 
skirt  the  horizon  for  Him  ?  Did  never 
one  storm -wind  raise  the  tossing  waves  ? 
If  we  had  to  say  that  Jesus  knew  no 
testings,  then  almost  all  the  glory  of 
Christ  would,  for  us,  fade  away.  His 
nearness,  His  brotherhood,  would  be 
gone.  But  .suffering,  tried,  and  tempted 
as  He  was.  He  is  infinitely  attractive 
to  suffering,  tried,  and  tempted  men. 
How  is  it  that  suffering,  here  on 
earth,  becomes  such  a  testing  and 
proving  of  obedience  ?  In  this — suffer- 
ing provides  a  scene  in  which  a  conflict 
can  be  carried  on  between  self-will  and 
God's  will.  Every  scene  of  suffering 
in  our  life  is  really  this — God  providing 
a  battle-ground  in  which  the  son  in 
us  may  win  a  victory  over  the  self. 
All  suffering-times  are  represented  in 
Gethsemane.  Suffering  of  any  kind  is 
never  pleasing  to  self.  We  shrink 
from  it,  resist  it,  mourn  over  it. 
Natural  inclination  never  helps  us  to 
bear  it.  But  the  question  is  put  to 
the  son,  "  Can  you  bear  this  as  duty  ? 
Can  you  master  your  own  feeling,  and 
bear  it  as  your  Father's  will  ?  "  The 
perfect  Son,  and  all  who  catch  His 
Spirit,  answer  "Yes,"  and  are  obedient 
even  unto  death. 

III.  The  proved,  tested  Sonship  of 
Jesus  becomes  a  mighty  moral  power 
on  human  hearts. — 1.  There  is  no- 
thing touches  our  hopefulness  like 
it.  2.  We  soon  get  bewildered  and 
agitated,  wanting  guidance  as  to  what 
shall  constitute  the  spirit  and  life  of 
a  son.  Then  we  look  to  Christ,  and 
see   what   sonship   means ;  practically 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   V. 


and  plainly  we  discern  how  it  works 
out  in  common  life,  how  it  acts  even 
under  the  test  of  suffering.  3.  It 
glorifies  service,  submission,  obedience, 
ministry.  Christ  changes  tlie  very 
ground  of  our  estimate  of  moral 
qualities ;  sets  that  first  which  was 
last,  and  that  last  which  was  first. 
The  world -despised  virtues  of  meekness, 
patience,  dependence,  submission,  and 
obedience  are  lifted  into  the  first  place 
in  our  esteem ;  we  see  them  to  be  the 
elements  of  a  true  and  noble  sonship ; 
and  the  world -praised  qualities  of 
valour,  and  courage,  and  energy,  and 
wisdom,  and  genius  go  for  evermore 
into  a  second  place ;  they  are  only  the 
elements  of  a  true  and  nohle  manhood. 
4.  And  the  proved  Sonship,  shown  in 
obedience,  tested  in  suffering,  is  a  secret 
of  our  Lord's  saving  power — His  power 
to  deliver  men  from  their  sins,  their 
sin,  and  their  self :  His  own  beautiful 
Sonship  touching,  quickening  theirs  ; 
finding  them  out  in  their  wandering, 
prodigal  misery,  and  wakening  in  their 
lost  souls  the  cry  of  the  child,  "  I 
will  arise,  and  go  to  my  Father." 
Shown  to  be  obedient,  even  through 
suffering.  He,  "  being  made  perfect, 
becomes  the  Author  of  eternal  salva- 
tion unto  all  them  that  obey  Him." 

Yer.  9.  Eternal  Salvation. — It  is  not 
possible  to  limit  the  meaning  of  the 
word  "  eternal "  to  the  time  figure  that 
is  in  it,  and  then  intelligently  apply 
the  word  to  the  various  things  to 
which  the  Scripture  writers  apply  it. 
Putting  their  references  and  associa- 
tions before  us,  we  cannot  but  be 
impressed  by  the  necessity  for  finding 
some  less  limited  connotation  for  the 
term.  It  will  increasingly  come  to 
us  that  we  use  the  term  "  spiritual " 
very  much  as  Scripture  writers  used 
"eternal."  They  spoke  of  "heaven" 
and  the  "  heavenly,"  and  we  under- 
stand them  to  mean  the  other,  unseen, 
spiritual  world.  We  know  they  did 
not  mean  a  place,  a  local  habitation. 
In  the  same  way  they  spoke  of 
"  eternal "  things,  and  we  know  that 
they  meant   "otherwise"   things,  im- 


material things,  spiritual  things,  things 
related  to  the  real  life  of  the  souls  that 
we  are.  Thus  we  find  the  following 
associations  of  the  word  "  eternal " 
(there  are  more  if  we  take  the  answer- 
ing word  "  everlasting  ") :  "  Eternal 
God,"  "  eternal  excellency,"  "  eternal 
condemnation,"  "  eternal  sin  "  (R.  V.), 
"  eternal  power,"  "  eternal  weight," 
"  eternal  house,"  "  eternal  purpose," 
"  eternal  King,"  "  eternal  glory,"  "  eter- 
nal salvation,"  "  eternal  judgment," 
"  eternal  redemption,"  "  eternal  Spirit," 
"  eternal  inheritance,"  "  eternal  fire," 
"  eternal  life."  In  many  cases  it  is 
absolutely  necessary  to  put  some 
special  meaning  to  the  term,  if  the 
time  limitation  is  in  any  way  to  be 
preserved.  Take  two  illustrative  cases. 
Sin  is  an  act,  and  in  its  very  nature 
temporary.  To  say  "eternal  sin" 
must  be  made  to  mean  a  continuous 
and  unchanging  bad  mood  of  man,  a 
continuous  state  of  sinfulness.  But 
our  Lord  was  speaking  of  an  act,  the 
act  of  blasphemy  against  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  that  is  a  spiritual  sin,  a 
sin  of  our  spirit,  against  the  great 
Spirit.  So  with  "  eternal  judgment." 
The  word  may  be  applied  to  the  con- 
sequences of  judgment,  but  the  judg- 
ment as  an  act  is  temporary.  So 
"  eternal  salvation  "  is  not  persistently 
continuous  salvation.  What  Christ 
gained  power  to  give  us  was  soul 
salvation,  spiritual  salvation :  that  is 
continuous  by  its  very  nature. 

Christ  Perfect. — The  Greek  word 
translated  "  perfect "  was  used  among 
the  heathen  in  a  specific  sense :  for 
instance,  one  thoroughly  initiated  into 
the  arcana  or  other  mysteries  was 
called  "  a  perfect  man."  The  meaning 
was  not  morally  or  personally  perfect, 
but  thoroughly  acquainted  with  all  the 
facts  and  mysteries  of  the  caste  or 
service.  Now  Christ  was  made  perfect 
by  being  made  thoroughly  acquainted 
with  human  nature  in  every  point, 
even  to  its  lowest  depths,  which  needed 
thirty- three  years  of  the  Son  of  God 
to  fathom  it. — Dr.  Cumming. 

219 


CHAP.  V.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  11—14. 

A  Hindrance  to  Advanced  Teachers. — Those  under  Christian  instruction  ought 
to  grow  stage  by  stage,  so  as  to  be  able  to  receive  higher  and  fuller  teachings. 
They  are  expected  to  "  grow  in  grace,"  in  everything  that  relates  to  Christian 
character ;  but  also  to  grow  "  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  in  the 
mental  apprehension  of  Divine  and  eternal  things.  It  is  necessary  to  point  out 
that  gi'owth  in  Christian  knowledge  is  in  every  way  as  important,  as  essential 
indeed,  as  growth  in  Christian  grace.  So  often  credit  is  claimed  for  keeping  to 
first  principles  and  Christian  simplicities  ;  it  is  a  ground  of  reproach,  not  of 
credit.  It  is  like  grown  men  and  women  reading  nothing  but  the  picture-books 
of  their  childhood.  The  Christian  teaching  properly  advances  from  the  sim- 
plicities suited  to  the  child-stage  of  religious  life,  to  the  philosophy  and  theology, 
and  even  what  may  be  called  "  mysticism,"  suited  to  the  full-grown  stage  of 
religious  life.  The  milk  of  Christian  truth  is  good,  but  it  is  good  for  babes.  He 
is  a  poor  Christian  who  keeps  always  to  his  milk.  He  does  no  honour  to  the 
grace  that  he  has  received.  The  hindrance  this  writer  complains  of  is  failure 
to  grov)  under  Christian  instructions.  But  it  may  be  unfolded  so  as  to  present 
its  various  applications.  The  hindrance  may  appear  as — 1.  Dulness  of  hearing, 
as  if  the  ear  were  stopped  up  with  other,  selfish,  or  worldly  interests.  2.  Lack 
of  receptivity  for  truth.  There  is  often  great  readiness  for  religious  emotions 
and  sensations  ;  and  these  almost  always  go  with  a  lack  of  interest  in  truth, 
other  than  the  stock  ideas  of  some  sect.  3.  Inability  to  deal  with  truth. 
*'  Senses  not  exercised  to  discern  between  good  and  evil."  Either  stubborn 
resistance  of  all  truth  that  sounds  new,  or  fatal  readiness  to  take  up  with 
everything  new.  4.  Clinging  to  child-simplicities  ;  forgetful  that  truth  cannot 
be  its  full,  best  self  for  children,  because  it  must  be  qualified  and  adapted  to  them. 
We  think  gospel  simplicities  are  the  truth ;  they  are  but  the  truth  for  children. 
We  may  be  grown,  yet  only  a  child  in  Christ.  We  may  be  grown,  and  a  man 
in  Christ, 


SUGGESTIVE   NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Yer.  12.  The  Scriptures  as  Oracles  of  word.       Farrar  thinks  that   the  term 

God. — The  term  "  oracles "  may  give  us  is   not  intended   to  apply   to   the  Old 

some  right  views  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  Testament  at  all,  but  belongs  only  to 

but  there  is  grave  danger  of  its  giving  the  Christian  principles  and  doctrines 

us   wrong  ideas.     It  certainly  will  if  which   the  writer  so  evidently  has  in 

we  fail  to  see  the  radical  distinctions  mind.  It  seems,  however,  from  allusions 

between  the  oracles  of  heathenism  and  in   Philo  and  other   writers,  that  the 

paganism,  and  the  oracles  of  either  the  term  "  oracles  of  God  "  was   in  those 

Old  or  the  New  Testament    religion,  days     commonly     employed     for     the 

Our    Scriptures    are    not    like    pagan  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament.     The 

oracles,  and  the  idea  of  Divine  inspira-  pagan  idea  of  "  oracles"  maybe  wisely 

tion  which  is  toned  by  those  oracular  contrasted  with  the  idea  of  Christian 

associations  is  altogether  false  and  un-  teachers  who  used  the  term  "  oracles  " 

worthy.      XoytW    ®cov    means,    "  doc-  of   the    Scriptures.      A   pagan   oracle 

trines,"    **  communications  "    of    God  ;  was  an  answer  to  a  question  submitted 

and     the     association    of    the     word  to  some  god  ;  the  answer  was  a  precise 

"  oracle "     belongs     entirely     to     our  sentence,     often     of     an    enigmatical 

English  translation.     No  precise  idea  character,  which  could  be  adapted  to 

answering  to  it  is  found  in  the  Greek  the  event  that  might  happen,  whatever 

220 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   V. 


that  event  might  be.  The  medium 
used  in  communicating  the  answer  had 
no  part  (or  was  assumed  to  have  no 
part)  in  shaping  the  answer.  Often 
the  oracle  only  came  to  a  person  who 
was  in  a  state  which  permitted  her 
taking  no  intelligent  part  in  the  com- 
munication she  made.  So  uncertain 
was  the  meaning  of  the  messages  given 
that  the  word  "  oracle "  has  come  to 
mean,  "a  grand  sounding  utterance 
which  nobody  can  be  ever  quite  sure 
that  he  understands."  It  is  evident 
that  none  of  these  ideas  can  be  asso- 
ciated with  our  Scriptures,  which  are 
Divine  revelations  through  legend, 
biography,  history,  incident,  rite,  song, 
proverb,  and  prophecy,  always  assum- 
ing that  the  thought  God  puts  into 
men,  but  the  shaping  of  the  thought 
is  given  by  the  men.  Men  spake  and 
wrote  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  who  was  in  them. 

Ver.  13.  Signs  of  Unskilfulness  in 
Christian  Teachers. — "  Unskilful  in  the 
word  of  righteousness."  R.Y.  "with- 
out experience  of  the  word  of  righteous- 
ness." Two  distinct  ideas  are  suggested 
by  these  two  renderings,  and  yet  the 
two  are  so  closely  associated  that  they 
are  really  but  one.  TheA.Y.  suggests 
inefficiency,  the  R.Y.  inexperience ; 
but  it  is  at  once  evident  that  the 
inefficiency  is  the  natural  and  necessary 
result  of  the  inexperience.  Skill  comes 
by  practice  ;  and  this  is  as  true  of 
Christian  teaching  as  of  other  things. 

I.  Skill  for  teaching  comes  by 
personal  experience  of  the  truth. — A 
man  can  only  teach  what  he  himself 
has  tasted  and  handled  and  felt  of  the 
word  of  life  ;  and  his  power  in  teaching 
will  depend  on  the  measure  of  his 
tasting  and  handling.  This  especially 
applies  to  advanced  truths,  which  can 
only  be  wisely  dealt  with  when  there 
is  ripe  experience. 

II.  Skill  for  teaching  comes  by 
practice  in  teaching. — And  that  will 
both  compel  a  man,  and  enable  a  man, 
to  advance  in  the  range  of  his  teaching 
subjects.  The  practised  teacher  cannot 
keep  in  the  simplicities. 


•  III.  The  unskilful  teacher  is  the 
man  who  can  only  keep  in  the  lower 
range,  who  satisfies  himself  with  the 
milk  suitable  for  babes,  and  will  not 
see  that  if  he  would  feed  grown  men 
he  must  have  strong  meat  of  truth 
suited  for  them. 

Yer.  14.  Exercising  the  Moral  Dis- 
cernment.— "  Senses  exercised  to  discern 
good  and  evil."  We  speak  of  the 
"  moral  sense."  The  senses  of  the  body 
are  taken  to  suggest  the  spiritual 
faculties  {alcrOrjTrjpLa).  We  have  the 
bodily  senses,  eye,  ear,  touch,  taste, 
smell,  as  faculties  and  possibilities. 
The  mother  anxiously  watches  her 
new-born  babe,  to  see  if  all  the  sense- 
possibilities  are  there.  But  they  have 
to  be  developed  by  exercise,  training, 
and  discipline,  into  actually  operative 
life- forces,  which  will  take  the  whole 
body  and  the  whole  life  into  their 
control.  And  so  with  the  moral  sense, 
the  recognition  of  distinction  between 
good  and^evil.  We  have  it  as  a  mere 
possibihty.  Let  a  man  have  no  culture 
of  the  moral  sense,  or  let  the  culture 
be  a  mere  accident,  and  you  have  either 
a  useless  or  a  dangerous  man.  Every 
force  that  bears  on  the  growing  child 
is  a  force  unto  the  culture  of  the 
moral  sense.  Parenthood  is ;  teacher- 
hood  is ;  friendship  is ;  religion  is. 
And  there  is,  as  in  all  growth,  un- 
folding in  detail,  differentiation.  As 
in  nature  there  is  development  in  the 
ear,  from  a  simple  box  to  the  com- 
plicated human  organ,  so  with  the 
moral  sense,  through  exercise  there  is 
unfolding  from  simple  discernment  of 
the  distinction  between  right  and 
wrong  to  sensitive  recognition  of  the 
true,  the  good,  the  beautiful,  as  the 
adapted  right. 

Soul-food  adapted  to  Age  and 
Capacity. — "  But  solid  food  is  for  full- 
grown  men."  Body-life  and  soul-life, 
both  depend  on  nourishment  and  food. 
That  is  the  law  of  all  life  other  than 
the  life  of  God  Himself.  Angels  live 
on  angels'  food ;  souls  live  on  ap- 
propriate souls'  food ;  and  bodies  live 

221 


CHAr.   V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


by  meat  and  drink  and  air.  Science 
tells  us  that  bodily  life,  health,  fatness, 
vigour,  directly  depend  on  the  character 
and  quantity  and  appropriateness  of 
the  food  supplied.  Given  vitality,  and 
freedom  from  active  disease,  and  any 
bodily  result  that  is  desired  can  be 
obtained  by  giving  flesh-forming  or 
bone-forming  or  brain-making  foods. 
But  our  farmers  knew  this  experi- 
mentally long  ago,  though  they  were 
ignorant  of  scientific  terms.  The 
results  which  they  can  with  certainty 
produce,  in  relation  to  beast  or  bird, 
can  be  just  as  certainly  produced  in 
man,  so  far  as  he  is  one  of  the  animals  ; 
and  medical  science  in  modern  times 
is  in  part  devoted  to  the  discovery  of 
flesh -forming  and  health -nourishing 
foods.  It  is  even  found  that  a  man's 
food  must  bear  a  direct  relation,  in 
quantity  and  quality,  to  the  work 
which  he  is  called  to  do.  This  was 
impressed  upon  us  in  a  very  striking 
way  by  the  experience  of  our  soldiers 
during  the  Crimean  war.  They  were 
terribly  exposed  in  the  muddy  trenches 
during  that  severe  winter,  and  at  first 
the  mortality  among  them  was  fright- 
ful. But  it  was  observed  that  the 
French  soldiers,  though  exposed  to 
the  same  toils  and  perils,  did  not  suffer 
so  much  ;  and  on  inquiry  the  reason 
for  the  difference  was  found  to  be  this 
— the  French  ofiicers  increased  the 
quantity  and  improved  the  character 
of  the  rations  when  their  men  had  to 
endure  unusual  exposure  and  fatigue, 
whereas  our  officers  continued  the 
regulation  ration  under  all  the  cir- 
cumstances. The  mortality  was  soon 
checked  when  food  was  properly  ad- 
justed to  work.  The  health,  vigour, 
and  work  of  our  souVs  life  just  as 
directly  depend  upon  the  food  with 
which  it  is  nourished.  Would  we  get 
more  work  out  of  our  souls,  we  must 
feed  them  better.  Do  we  expose  our 
souls  to  much  peril  ?  We  must  im- 
prove and  increase  their  food.  The 
real  trouble  so  often  is  that  we  are 
under  soul -fed,  injudiciously  soul-fed. 
So  often  our  sou]s  are  really  half 
starved ;    their    voice   is   so  weak ;    it 

222 


is  hardly  more  than  a  whisper;  the 
soul-hands  are  so  feeble  that  they 
cannot  grasp  Christian  work.  Even 
in  the  land  of  spiritual  plenty  we  may 
fail  to  grow  into  strength.  Classifica- 
tions are  quite  unsatisfactory  because 
they  are  incomplete,  but  still  they  do 
help  to  clear  apprehensions.  We  may 
therefore  speak  of  the  soul's  life  as  being 
faith  and  love^  and  as  having  for  its 
natural  expressions  worship  and  work. 
Then  the  soul-food  provided  must  bear, 
in  the  most  direct  and  efficient  way,  on 
these  four  things.  Here  is  a  sublime 
but  most  practical  problem  for  each 
one  of  us  to  solve  :  What  will  nourish 
into  the  fullest  health  and  strength  my 
soul's  faith  and  my  soul's  love  ?  What 
will  strengthen  my  soul's  brain  and 
heart  for  holy  worship,  for  prayer  and 
praise,  and  my  soul's  muscle  and  nerve 
for  holy  work  ?  And  as  circumstances 
arise  making  greater  demands  on  the 
vigour  of  our  souls,  on  our  faith,  our 
devotion,  our  love,  or  our  hope,  we  must 
see  to  it  that  an  adequate  increase  of 
spiritual  food  is  made.  God  offered  to 
the  wearied  Elijah  angels'  food  a  second 
time^  as  if  one  good  meal  were  not 
enough,  using  this  persuasion,  "  Arise, 
and  eat ;  because  the  journey  is  too 
great  for  thee.  And  he  arose,  and  did 
eat  and  drink,  and  went  in  the  strength 
of  that  meat  forty  days  and  forty  nights 
unto  Horeb  the  mount  of  God."  And 
speaking  of  the  putting-forth  of  miracu- 
lous and  unusual  spiritual  energy,  our 
Lord  most  impressively  said,  "  This 
kind  goeth  not  out  but  by  prayer  and 
fasting."  Here  we  all  so  sadly  fail. 
We  keep  the  soil  so  poor.  We  keep 
the  plant  indoors,  and  never  let  the 
nourishing  rains  fall  on  it.  And  yet 
we  may  be  quite  sure  that  there  is  this 
absolute  law  for  all  body-life  and  for 
all  soul-life — if  more  is  to  be  got  out 
of  body  or  out  of  soul,  more  and  better 
food  must  be  given  to  them. 

Lost  Interest  in  Higher  Christian 
Truth. — Those  who  are  addressed  had 
lost  interest  in  the  deeper  truths  of 
Christianity,  those  truths  which  alone 
expressed    and    explained    its    proper 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.    VI. 


nature.  Their  temptation  was  appa- 
rently towards  mingling  a  rudimentary 
Christian  doctrine  with  the  teaching  of 
the  synagogue.  Yielding  to  this,  they 
would  lose  all  real  knowledge  of  the 
very  elements  of  Christian  truth,  and 
with  this  all  true  knowledge  of  the  Old 
Testament  itself.     **  Solid  food  belongs 


to  full-grown  men."  If  they  occupied 
themselves  with  the  rudiments  alone, 
their  spiritual  senses  could  not  be 
trained  by  use  (or  habit)  in  distin- 
guishing between  good  and  evil,  truth 
and  falsehood,  in  the  various  systems  of 
teaching  which  men  offered  as  the  doc- 
trine of  Christ.— PT.  F,  Moulton,  D.D, 


ILLUSTRATIONS   TO    CHAPTER    V. 


Ver.  1.  Sacrifice. — Amidst  the  various 
elements  of  worship  which  were  to  be  carried 
on  in  and  around  the  tabernacle,  the  most 
conspicuous  was,  so  far  as  we  can  judge, 
peculiarly  fitted  to  the  mind  of  an  Arabian 
tribe.  We  may  indulge  in  philosophical  or 
theological  speculations  concerning  the  in- 
stitution of  sacrifice,  but  historically  (and 
this  is  the  only  point  of  view  in  which  we 
are  now  to  consider  it)  we  cannot  overlook 
its  adaptations  to  the  peculiar  period  of  the 
Israelites'  existence  in  which  we  find  it  first 
described  at  length.  Some  of  the  forms  are 
identical  with  those  of  Egypt  and  of  India. 
But  it  is  remarkable  that  the  institution 
(taken  in  its  most  general  aspect),  after 
having  perished  everywhere  else  among  the 
worshippers  of  one  God,  still  lingers  among 
that  portion  of  the  Semitic  nations  which 
more  than  any  other  represents  the  conditions 
of  Israel  at  Sinai.  Extinct  almost  entirely 
in  the  Jewish  race  itself,  it  is  still  an  impor- 
tant part  of  the  worship  of  the  Bedouin 
Arabs.  In  the  desert  of  Sinai  itself  sacrifice 
is  almost  the  only  form  which  Bedouin 
religion  takes,  at  the  chief  sanctuary  of  the 


peninsula,  the  tomb  of  Sheykh  Saleh,  and  on 
the  summit  of  Serbal.  When  Burckhardt 
wished  to  penetrate  into  the  then  inaccessible 
fastness  of  Petra,  the  pretext  which  afforded 
him  the  greatest  security  was  that  of  pro- 
fessing a  desire  to  sacrifice  a  goat  at  the 
tomb  of  Aaron. — Dean  Stanley. 

Ver.  9.  Learning  Obedience. — An  American 
writer  tells  a  story  of  the  veteran  General 
Sumner  at  the  battle  of  Antietam.  His  son, 
young  Captain  Sumner,  a  youth  of  twenty- 
one,  was  on  his  staff.  The  old  man  calmly 
stood  amidst  a  storm  of  shot  and  shell,  and 
turned  to  send  him  through  a  doubly  raging 
fire  upon  a  mission  of  duty.  He  might  never 
see  his  boy  again,  but  his  country  claimed 
his  life  ;  and,  as  he  looked  upon  his  young 
brow,  he  grasped  his  hand,  encircled  him  in 
his  arms,  and  fondly  kissed  him.  "  Good- 
bye, Sammy  I "  "  Good-bye,  father  I  "  And 
the  youth,  mounting  his  horse,  rode  gaily  on 
the  message.  He  returned  unharmed,  and 
again  his  hand  was  grasped  with  a  'cordial, 
"  How  d'ye  do,  Sammy  ? "  answered  by  a 
grasp  of  equal  affection. 


CHAPTER  VI. 
THE  PERIL  OF  FAILING  TO  ADVANCE  IN   CHRISTIAN  LIFE. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Therefore. — ho,  since  only  the  reXeiOL,  advanced  ones,  are  capable  of  receiving 
advanced  instruction,  you  may  well  seek  to  become  such.  Stuart  reads,  "  Quitting  the 
mere  initial  state  of  pupilage,  advance  forward  to  a  maturer  state  of  instruction  and 
knowledge  " ;  or,  "  make  such  advances  that  it  shall  be  unnecessary  to  repeat  elementary 
instruction  in  the  principles  of  Christianity."  The  writer  generously  assumes  that  they 
are  ready  for,  and  would  gladly  receive,  higher  teachings.  Principles. — Rudiments  ;  first 
elements.  Such  simple  verities  as  we  can  teach  children.  Unto  perfection. — That  complete- 
ness of  Christian  manhood  which  implies  power  to  deal  with  abstruse  and  difficult  subjects, 
such  as  that  one  which  was  at  tlie  time  in  the  mind  of  the  writer,  viz.  the  Priesthood  of 
Christ  as  belonging  to  the  order  of  Melchizedek.  "  Let  us — I,  as  your  teacher,  leading  you 
on  with  me — press  on  to  maturity  of  Christian  knowledge."  Laying  again. — Foundations 
ought  to  require  laying  only  once ;  first  principles  ought  to  require  teaching  only  in  the 

223 


CHAP.  VI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS. 


first  stages  of  the  religious  life.  In  failure  to  grow,  mentally  and  spiritually,  is  always  found 
the  great  peril  of  apostasy.  Life  of  every  kind,  if  it  is  to  be  kept  in  health,  must  ^row. 
Repentance. — The  first  lesson  of  the  gospel  (Mark  i.  15).  Dead  works. — See  chap.  ix.  14. 
Works  in  which  there  is  no  principle  of  life.  Such  as  cause  defilement,  and  require 
purification,  because  they  are  sinful  (Gal.  v.  19-21),  and  because  their  wages  is  death. 

Ver.  2.  Baptisms. — A  plural  form  ;  therefore  Alford  thinks  the  Jewish  washings  must  be 
meant.  But  the  writer  is  clearly  referring  to  the  first  principles  of  the  distinctive  Christian 
teachings.  The  Syriac  Version  has  the  singular  here  ;  and  it  is  evident  that  no  stress  is  to 
be  laid  on  the  plural  form.  If  importance  be  attached  to  the  plural,  it  may  be  regarded  as 
including  John's  baptism  and  Christian  baptism ;  and  we  know  that  some  disciples  under- 
went both  baptisms.  pd-rrTcafxa  is  the  proper  word  for  Christian  baptism,  but  the  word  here 
used  is  pairTia/jLQv.  Farrar  suggests  that  the  word  may  imply  the  teaching  which  enabled 
Christian  catechumens  to  discriminate  between  Jewish  washings  and  Christian  baptism. 
The  order  of  first  Christian  principles  given  here  may  be  illustrated  from  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles.  1.  The  doctrine  of  repentance,  or  sense  of  need ;  dead  works  being  helpless  in 
saving.  2.  The  doctrine  of  faith,  or  out  looking  for  help.  3.  The  doctrine  of  baptisms,  or 
public  profession  of  faith.  4.  The  doctrine  of  laying  on  of  hands,  or  sealing  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  5.  The  doctrines  of  resurrection  and  judgment,  the  inspiration  of  godly  living.  These 
are  the  two  prominent  truths  taught  by  the  apostle  Paul,  to  whose  school  the  writer  belonged. 
All  these  doctrines  are  classed  as  rudimentary  first  principles. 

Ver.  3.  This  will  we  do. — Not,  "  attend  again  to  these  first  principles  " ;  but  "  go  on  to  deal 
with  the  higher  things."  The  word  "  we  "  is  here  used  theoretically.  "  Assuming  your  anxiety 
to  grow,  realising  our  dependence  on  Divine  help ;  and  remembering  to  what  peril  of  falling 
the  ignorant  are  exposed."  Then  the  writer  deals  with  a  case  "  excepted  by  God  Himself 
from  all  efforts  of  the  Christian  teacher;  in  this  case,  though  nothing  can  avail  except 
the  laying  of  a  new  foundation  of  repentance,  God  has  appointed  no  agencies  by  which 
such  foundation  can  be  laid  "  {Moultoii). 

Ver.  4.  Impossible.— Either  a  strong  word  for  *' exceedingly  difficult,"  or,  more  probably, 
"impossible  under  existing  provisions  and  conditions."  But  this  must  not  be  thought  of 
as  involving  "  impossible  under  any  provisions  and  conditions."  What  God  does  must  not 
be  thought  of  as  limiting  what  God  may  do.  Observe  the  use  of  the  term  in  Mark  x.  23-27. 
It  is  a  favourite  term  with  this  writer  :  see  chap.  v.  18,  x.  4,  xi.  6.  "  The  purport  of 
the  whole  clause  is  to  this  effect — that  the  persons  apostatising  from  the  Christian 
profession,  after  they  have  had  experience,  so  far  as  man  can  judge,  of  the  power  of 
Christianity,  it  is  impossible  by  the  ordinary  means  of  grace  to  renew  them  to  repentance, 
for  they  renounce  the  very  considerations  by  which  Divine  power  works  on  the  minds  of 
men  "  {Barker).  Enlightened. — Simply  instructed  ;  the  word  does  not  imply  having  illu- 
mination. A  man  can  never  be  the  same  man  again  after  hearing  of  Christ  the  Saviour. 
He  must  come  under  new  responsibility,  and  this  may  either  save  or  crush  him.  Tasted. — 
Begun  experimental  acquaintance  with.  Heavenly  gift. — The  privileges  and  blessings  of 
the  gospel.  Some  think  Christ  Himself — the  "  unspeakable  gift " — is  meant.  Partakers  of 
the  Holy  Ghost. — See  Acts  xix.  1-6.  Perhaps  allusion  may  be  to  the  "  gifts  "  of  the  early 
Church,  regarded  as  signs  and  sealings  of  the  Spirit. 

Ver.  5.  Good  word  of  God.— Enjoyed  the  consolations  administered  and  the  hopes  excited 
by  the  Divine  promises  which  the  gospel  proffers.  World  to  come.— K.V.  "age  to  come  ": 
the  Christian,  spiritual  dispensation.  Reference  appears  to  be  to  the  miraculous  powers  in  the 
early  Church.  Stuart  summarises  the  points  of  the  paragraph  (vers.  1-5)  thus  :  '•  There  is  a 
regular  gradation.  1.  They  had  been  taught  the  principles  or  doctrines  of  Christianity.  2.  They 
had  enjoyed  the  privileges,  or  means  of  grace,  which  the  new  religion  afforded.  3.  They 
had  experienced,  in  general,  various  gifts  and  graces  bestowed  by  the  Spirit.  4.  They  had 
cherished  the  hopes  which  the  promises  of  the  gospel  inspire.  5.  They  had  witnessed, 
some  of  them  may  even  have  experienced,  those  special  miraculous  powers  by  which  the 
gospel  was  fully  shown  to  be  a  religion  from  God.  They  had  the  fullest  evidence,  internal 
and  external,  of  the  Divine  origin  and  nature  of  the  Christian  religion.  Consequently,  if 
they  apostatised  from  it,  there  remained  no  hope  of  their  recovery." 

Ver.  6.  Fall  away.— R.V.  "and  then  fell  away."  The  defection  meant  is  a  practical 
renunciation  of  Christianity,  and  return  to  Judaism.  Many  did  thus  fall  back  to  formal 
Judaism  in  that  time  of  persecution  and  danger.  Crucify  to  themselves. — Acting  as  those 
did  who  actually  crucified  the  Lord.  His  crucifixion  was  but  the  seal  of  their  rejection  of 
Him  as  Messiah.  The  case  used  is  the  "  dative  of  disadvantage,"  to  their  own  destruction. 
Open  shame. — Expose  Him  to  scorn,  as  one  proved  to  be  unworthy  of  trust  or  service.  "  By 
renouncing  their  adherence  to  Christianity,  they  would  openly  declare  their  belief  that 
Christ  was  only  an  impostor,  and,  of  course,  that  He  suffered  justly  as  a  malefactor.  By 
returning  again  to  Judaism,  they  would  approve  of  what  the  Jews  had  done,  and  thus  they 
would,  as  it  were,  crucify  Christ,  and  expose  Him  to  be  treated  by  unbelievers  with  scorn 
and  contumely  "  {Stuart). 

224 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  vi. 


Ver.  7.  Herbs. — ^orav-qv.  Hebraistic  use,  "  any  kind  of  vegetation  ";  classic  use,  '*  herbage," 
or  *'  vegetation,"  not  including  bread-corn. 

Ver.  8.  Burned. — Not  the  land,  but  the  worthless  and  mischievous  produce.  But  see 
Isa.  xliv.  15,  and  recall  the  fate  of  the  Vale  of  Siddim.  Point  of  illustration  is  :  the  earth 
is  recipient  of  Divine  favours;  much  depends  on  its  response.  What  can  be  done  more 
for  that  which  yields  a  response  of  barrenness,  or  only  bad  growths,  to  the  rains  of  God  ? 
It  is  a  rhetorical  illustration.  In  case  of  land  it  is  a  matter  of  inability ;  in  case  of  man 
it  is  a  matter  of  will. 

Vers.  9,  10. — The  writer  now  turns  from  warning  to  conciliation  and  encouragement.  He 
urges  steadfastness,  diligence,  and  growth.  Better  things. — Than  any  such  tendency  to 
apostatise.  Accompany  salvation. — Full  salvation  is  meant,  which  includes  growth  and 
sanctifying.  Farrar  renders,  "that  are  akin  to  salvation":  "near  to,  conjoined  with, 
salvation."  As  apostates  are  Kardpas  iyyves,  nigh  unto  a  curse,  so  those  who  persevere  in 
maintaining  the  true  religion  are  ix^fxevoi  a-ujTrjpias,  their  salvation  is  at  hand.  Labour  of 
love. — Christian  service  is  ever  the  best  Christian  defence. 

Ver.  11.  Same  diligence. — Continuing  efforts  until  you  have  reached  the  very  fulness  of 
the  stature  of  Christ.  Full  assurance  of  hope. — Indicating  confirmed  Christian  stability, 
beyond  all  fear  of  falling  away. 

Ver.  12.  Slothful. — Kemiss  in  discharge  of  Christian  duties,  or  in  using  all  means  of 
Christian  culture.  Always  peril  of  Christian  indifference.  The  word  pudpoi,  "  tardy,"  is 
applied  either  to  body  or  mind,  to  external  actions  or  internal  conceptions. 

Ver.  13. — The  connection  of  thought  may  be  thus  given  :  "  Follow  the  godly,  I  say.  Take 
one  such  for  an  instance.  Abraham.  See  how  graciously  God  met  his  steadfast  goodness." 
But  how  does  this  illustrate  the  point  ?  Thus  God  revealed  Himself  to  Abraham,  even  as, 
in  Christ,  he  has  revealed  Himself  to  you.  Abraham  believed.  Abraham  patiently  con- 
tinued. Abraham  has  long  ago  attained  the  promise.  But,  from  this  illustration  it  might 
be  argued  that  Abraham  bad  the  advantage  of  a  positive  oath  and  promise  :  there  was  no 
uncertainty  trying  his  faith.  The  writer  replies,  "  Neither  is  there  in  Christianity."  That  is 
the  new  grace  of  Him  who  has  proved  Himself  faithful.  What  then  are  the  two  immutable 
things?  The  promise  and  oath  of  God.  Given  for  confirming  our  faith.  Stua7't  says, 
"  the  oath  that  David  should  have  a  son,  and  the  oath  that  Christ  should  be  a  priest  after 
the  order  of  Melchizedek." 

Ver.  19.  Anchor  of  the  soul. — This  is  a  figure  of  hope ;  it  was  a  familiar  emblem  from 
very  early  days.  It  is  the  hoj?e,  not  the  anchoi\  which  is  thought  of  as  entering  within  the 
veil,  resting  on  the  living,  exalted,  spiritual  High  Priest.  It  is  not  necessary  to  think  of 
the  anchor  as  holding  within  the  veil.  Hope  holds  there,  not  the  mere  emblem  of  the 
hope.    The  figure  of  heaven  is  borrowed  from  the  Jewish  sanctuary. 


MAU^  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH,— Verses  1—8. 

The  Peril  and  Prevention  of  Apostasy. — The  teaching  of  this  passage  is  enforced, 
and  in  part  explained,  by  an  illustration  taken  from  nature.  Fixing  attention 
on  that  illustration,  we  may  be  able  to  present  the  point  of  the  teaching.  The 
writer's  mind  is  evidently  full  of  the  cases  of  apostasy  from  the  faith  in  Christ 
which  had  occurred,  and  of  the  temptations  to  apostasy  which  seriously  imperilled 
many  who  had  professed  the  faith  in  Christ.  What  could  be  done  ?  It  seemed 
hopeless  to  try  and  recover  the  apostates.  The  case  of  such  a  man  as  Julian 
was  beyond  the  reach  of  all  human  influences.  But  how  could  the  wavering  ones 
be  steadied  ?  and  how  could  all  the  members  of  the  Church  be  guarded  ?  1.  The 
writer  urges  that  safety  lies  in  vigorous  growing — growing  in  spiritual  life^ 
one  chief  agency  of  such  growth  being  advance  in  knowledge  of  Christian  truth. 
Full  occupation  of  mind  and  heart  with  heavenly  and  Divine  things  is  the  best 
and  healthiest  defence  against  any — even  the  most  subtle — attractions  of  error. 
This  our  Lord  taught  in  His  illustration  of  the  evil  spirit  which  went  out 
of  a  man,  and  left  him  "  empty,  swept,  and  garnished."  The  man  did  not  fill 
the  empty  spaces  with  good,  so  the  evil  spirit  returned  to  the  vacancy,  and  filled 
it  full  with  others  worse  than  himself.  2.  And  the  writer  warns,  with  extreme 
severity,  of  the  hopeless  condition  into  which  wilful  apostasy  brings  a  man.  It 
is  the  highest  moral  force  that  can  act  upon  a  man  which  persuades  a  man  to 
be  a  Christian.     If  a  man  has  felt  that  influence,  and  after  experience  of  it 

q  225 


CHAP.  VI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


resolutely  and  wilfully  puts  it  away  from  him,  what  can  be  done  for  such  a  man  ? 
You  cannot  expect  any  lower  influences  to  act  upon  the  man  who  has  rejected  the 
highest  ;  and  there  is  no  other  and  superior  influence  that  can  act  upon  him. 
The  apostate  makes  his  own  condition  an  altogether  hopeless  one.  While  a 
man  is  undecided,  the  Christian  persuasions  are  working  on  him.  When  a  man 
resists  the  Christian  persuasions,  there  is  yet  hope  that  they  may  gain  convincing 
power  upon  him.  But  when  a  man  has  yielded  to  the  Christian  persuasions, 
and  made  professions  of  faith  in  Christ,  and  come  into  a  share  of  the  Christian 
experiences,  and  then  deliberately  thrown  it  all  up,  and  taken  a  stand  of  opposi- 
tion to  Christ,  the  persuasions  have  become  wholly  ineffective,  and  there  are 
no  other  that  can  possibly  influence  him.  The  man  must  be  left  to  himself.  It 
is  impossible  to  "  renew  him  again  to  repentance."  Take  Julian,  the  apostate 
emperor  of  later  days,  as  an  example.  To  illustrate  this  the  writer  shows  that 
there  are  conditions  which  make  the  husbandry  of  the  earth  hopeless  and  useless. 
His  illustration  is  especially  effective  for  Eastern  lands,  where,  in  ancient  times, 
the  natural  characteristics  of  the  surface  soil  were  not  changed  by  deep  ploughing 
or  chemically  adapted  manures.  The  ploughing  was  but  surface  scratching ; 
and  the  land  was  left  untilled  that  failed  to  reward  the  tiller,  or  that  only 
brought  forth  "  caltrops,"  thorns,  and  briars.  The  earth,  or  the  land,  or  the 
fields  are  represented  as  receiving  all  needful  blessing  from  God  and  from  man. 
From  God^  in  the  frost  that  breaks  up  the  clods,  the  snow  that  keeps  the  soil 
warm  and  supplies  it  with  chemical  elements,  the  rains  that  make  all  life  in  it  to 
break  forth ;  from  man,  in  the  work  of  the  plough,  the  spade,  and  the  harrow, 
and  in  the  scattering  of  various  seed.  What  could  have  been  done  to  the  fields 
more  than  God  and  man  have  done  for  them  ?  Now  what  may  be  the  response 
of  the  fields  ?  And  what  will  be  a  fitting  estimate  and  treatment  of  the  fields 
in  view  of  their  varying  response  ?     The  Christian  professor  is  as  a  field. 

I.  The  field  may  nourish  a  growth  of  plant  life  unto  satisfactory  fruitage. — 
Compare  the  **  good  soil "  of  our  Lord's  parable  of  the  "  sower."  It  brings  forth 
fruit,  some  thirty,  some  sixty,  and  some  a  hundred-fold.  In  the  passage  before 
us  attention  is  fixed  upon  the  fact  that  what  comes  forth  out  of  good  soil  keeps 
on  growing,  until  it  has  reached  its  perfection.  Its  health  and  its  safety 
depend  on  and  are  declared  by  its  continuous  growth.  That  is  the  immediate 
point  of  the  writer.  Christians  must  grow,  or  they  will  not  be  safe.  Nothing 
resists  evil  influences  like  healthy  and  vigorous  growing.  St.  Peter  is  as  clear 
on  this  point,  for  he  gives  this  pressing  advice  to  Christian  disciples  :  "  Beware 
lest,  being  carried  away  with  the  error  of  the  wicked,  ye  fall  from  your  own 
stedfastness.  But  grow  in  the  grace  and  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ"  (2  Pet.  iii.  17,  18). 

il.  The  field  may  fail  to  nourish  anything  worth  harvesting.—It  may  be 
able  to  put  no  energy  into  anything  that  comes  out  of  it.  It  can  only  grow 
leaves,  or  poor  flowers  that  are  not  worth  picking  :  only  green  stalks,  on  which 
stand  small  shrivelled  ears,  which  even  the  insects  have  not  cared  to  fructify. 
It  is  such  poor,  weak  growth  as  this  that  is  exposed  to  all  kinds  of  peril.  Frosts 
nip  such  blades.  Fungus  gets  on  such  branches.  Bains  beat  down  such  stalks. 
Bust  gathers  in  such  ears.  And  the  like  peril  comes  to  men,  when  their 
response  to  the  grace  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  is  of  the  same  kind.  They  do  not 
thrive ;  they  do  not  grow  ;  there  is  no  vigour  in  their  growing.  The  soil 
of  their  souls  evidently  needs  nourishing,  lest  they  should  find  their  poor  fruitage 
only  fit  for  burning  in  the  Day  of  God. 

III.  The  field  may  grow  nothing  but  weeds. — The  farmer's  labour  is  expended 
upon  it,  the  gracious  agencies  of  nature  act  upon  it,  and  yet  the  farmer  is 
wholly  disappointed.  It  seems  as  if  both  God's  work  and  his,  which  had  been 
so  freely  received  by  the  field,  had  all  been  rejected.     He  walks  over  the  field, 

226 


HOMILETIC  COJLVENTARY:    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   VI. 


watching  for  signs  of  plant  life  from  his  seeding;  and  there  is  nothing  save 
thistle,  and  ragwort,  and  dock,  and  nettle,  and  tare.  It  bears  nothing  but 
thorns  and  briars.  The  farmer  turns  away  in  despair.  The  field  is  rejected  ; 
it  is  nigh  unto  cursing.  Nothing  can  be  done  for  it.  By-and-by  the  thorns 
and  briars  must  be  cut  down  and  burned.  There  is  a  point  in  God's  husbandry 
of  souls  when  it  Feems  useless  to  do  anything  more.  The  utmost  has  been  done, 
and  resisted,  and  rejected,  or  turned  to  wrong  uses,  and  made  to  nourish  thorns 
and  briars,  not  good  plants.  What  can  be  done  to  the  well-tended  vineyard 
that  only  yields  sour  grapes  ?  Thus  righteously  saith  our  God  :  "I  will  lay 
it  waste :  it  shall  not  be  pruned  nor  digged.  I  will  also  command  the  clouds 
that  they  rain  no  rain  upon  it."  What  can  be  done  for  a  wilful  apostate? 
He  "  is  nigh  unto  cursing."  In  the  realm  of  motives  there  are  none  left  which 
can  persuade  that  man  to  repentance. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  1.  The  Peril  of  Keeping  to 
Religious  Simplicities. — The  peril  lies 
in  this — we  cannot  help  growing  (1)  in 
body,  (2)  in  mind,  (3)  in  experience, 
(4)  in  moral  power  ;  and  if  we  do  not 
also  grow  in  religion,  we  get  our  nature 
out  of  its  harmonies ;  manliness  and 
childishness  vainly  strive  to  dwell 
amicably  together ;  and  the  result, 
sooner  or  later,  is  that  the  manliness 
cannot  do  with  the  childishness,  but 
suggests  all  manner  of  doubts  and 
difficulties,  which  are  only  too  likely 
to  upset  the  religious  faith  altogether. 
Picture-books  are  best  for  children,  and 
picture-teaching  for  child-souls.  But 
it  is  a  pitiable  thing  to  see  a  man 
clinging  passionately  to  the  picture- 
books  of  his  infancy.  Yet  that  is 
done  by  the  men  who,  having  reached 
Christian  manhood,  will  hear  of  no- 
thing, and  think  they  can  profit  by 
nothing,  save  the  first  principles,  the 
child-simplicities,  of  the  Christian  faith. 
We  need  to  see  that  the  simplicities 
are  fully  preserved  in  the  advanced 
teachings.  The  flower  and  the  seed 
contain  those  cotyledon  lobes  that  first 
burst  the  soil  ;  but  how  foolish  the 
man  would  be  who  persisted  in  caring 
nothing  for  the  flower  or  the  seed,  but 
everything  for  the  cotyledon  lobe.  The 
peril  is  threefold.  1.  The  man  puts 
his  own  nature  out  of  harmony.  2. 
The  simple  things  will  not  stand  the 
application  to  them  of  his  enlarged  and 
cultivated  power  and  experience.     He 


is  a  man  trying  to  get  himself  into  a 
boy's  jacket.  3.  The  lack  of  harmony 
between  the  man's  mind  and  religion 
makes  his  example  to  others  not  only 
ineffective,  but  injurious  ;  for  he  sug- 
gests that  a  man  must  degrade  his 
mental  manhood  if  he  is  to  be  religious. 
Only  the  man  who  grows  on,  body  and 
mind  and  soul,  towards  perfection,  can 
realise  the  Divine  idea  for  him,  or 
worthily  bear  the  name  of  disciple  of 
the  "  Man  Christ  Jesus." 

The  Christian  First  PriTiciples. — 
For  convenience  and  symmetry  these 
may  be  arranged  in  three  great  pairs 
of  truths. 

I.  Revelation  of  God  through  the 
written  word ;  incarnation  of  God  in 
the  living  Word. 

II.  Expiation  of  sin  by  blood  of 
Christ ;  justification  of  the  sinner  by 
faith  in  Christ. 

III.  Regeneration  of  heart  by  the 
Holy  Spirit;  resurrection  of  body  by 
the  same  Spirit. 

Now  observe  the  first  pair  concern 
God  the  Father  ;  the  second  pair,  God 
the  Son ;  the  third  pair,  God  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Observe  also  that  there  is  a 
threefold  mediation  :  1 .  The  mediation 
of  the  word  of  God  between  God  and 
human  ignorance.  2.  The  mediation 
of  the  Christ  between  God  and  human 
guilt.  3.  The  mediation  of  the  Spirit 
between  God  and  human  inability. — 
Homiletic  Review, 

227 


CHAP.   VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


Leaving  First  Principles. — We  are 
to  leave  them  as  the  scholar  leaves 
the  letters  of  the  alphabet, — leav- 
ing them  only  to  use  them  ;  leaving 
them  that  he  may  bring  out  all  their 
powers,  and  employ  them  in  startling 
combinations,  as  the  instrument  for 
acquiring  or  diffusing  thought.  We 
are  to  leave  them  as  the  plant  leaves 
the  root,  when  it  towers  into  a  majestic 
tree,  leaving  it  only  that  it  may  the 
more  depend  upon  it ;  and  day  by  day 
drawing  from  it  those  fresh  supplies  of 
vital  sap  which  it  pours  into  the  fresh 
leaves,  fresh  boughs,  ever  fresh  and 
ever  beautiful  formations  of  that  life 
which  refreshes  the  hungry  with  its 
clusters,  or  the  weary  with  its  shade. 
We  are  to  leave  them  as  the  builder 
leaves  his  foundation,  that  he  may 
carry  up  the  building,  storte  above 
stone,  story  above  story,  tower  above 
tower,  from  the  dusky  basement  to  the 
sunlit  pinnacle ;  always  leaving  the 
foundation,  yet  always  on  it,  and  on  it 
with  the  most  massive  pressure  and  the 
most  complete  dependence  when  most 
he  leaves  it. — Charles  Stanford. 

Tim  Double  Meaning  of  "  Repentance." 
— The  word  /xcravota,  which  occurs  in 
this  verse,  has  here  and  in  other  places 
a  wider  meaning  than  "repentance," 
as  we  now  understand  it.  In  its  full 
significance  it  serves  equally  to  denote 
the  turning  away  from  what  is  opposed 
to  God  (Acts  viii.  22),  and  also  the 
turning  to  God  (Acts  xx.  20).  In 
either  instance  the  process  is  identical 
in  result,  though  contemplated  from  dif- 
ferent points  of  view.  Its  beginning 
is  in  the  conscious  individual  spirit  life, 
and  the  result  is  a  distinct  and  powerful 
effect  produced  upon  the  will  by  means 
of  Divine  grace. 

Vers.  1,  2.  The  Jewish  Christian 
Catechism. — A  catechism  is  supposed  to 
confine  itself  to  the  primary  truths  and 
principles  of  the  subject  it  treats,  and 
to  set  them  forth  clearly  and  succinctly. 
What  then,  according  to  this  writer, 
are  the  first  principles  of  the  doctrine 
of  Christ  ?  At  first  we  are  surprised 
at  the   list   that  he   gives — as    much 

228 


surprised  by  what  he  includes  as  by 
what  he  omits.  But  the  list  must  be 
examined  as  prepared  for  the  Jewish 
Christian  Churches  of  that  particular 
time ;  and  they  were  likely  to  have 
practices  and  ideas  which  have  long 
since  passed  away.  Some  of  their 
"  simplicities "  then  have  no  applica- 
tion to  us,  and  it  is  a  mistake  to  force 
meanings,  suitable  to  us,  into  "  first 
principles,"  which  had  special  meaning 
for  them.  The  list  contains  six  items. 
Repentance,  faith,  resurrection,  and 
final  judgment  we  can  recognise  as 
still  '*  first  principles  "  of  the  Christian 
faith.  But  what  were  the  teachings 
in  the  Jewish  Church  concerning  "  lay- 
ing on  of  hands,"  and  "  baptisms,"  or 
"  washings,"  we  can  only  guess.  There 
was  some  particular  Jewish  feature 
about  these,  some  retention  of  Jewish 
custom,  which  has  quite  faded  out  of 
our  knowledge.  The  Christian  associa- 
tions of  baptism  and  laying  on  of  hands 
cannot  with  any  certainty  be  identified 
with  those  of  the  early  Jewish  Chris- 
tian Church.  The  "  first  principles  " 
may  therefore  be  thus  divided :  1. 
Two  spiritual  qualities,  absolutely  essen- 
tial to  the  entrance  into  and  mainte- 
nance of  Christian  life  at  all — repent- 
ance and  faith.  Observe  the  sphere  of 
the  repentance — *'  from  dead  works  "  ; 
and  the  sphere  of  the  faith — "  toward 
God."  There  is  no  specific  mention 
made  of  faith  in  Christ.  2.  Two 
eschatological  t7'uths — the  Resurrection 
and  the  Judgment.  These  are,  singu- 
larly enough,  the  only  truths  stated 
as  being  first  principles ;  and  these 
we  reckon  to  be  advanced  truths,  not 
simplicities.  Probably  they  were  pro- 
minent in  the  Jewish  faith,  and  so 
became  prominent,  and  took  too  ex- 
clusive attention,  in  the  Jewish  Chris- 
tian Churches.  3.  Two  syinholical  acts 
— washings  and  laying  on  of  hands. 
These  seem  to  have  taught  two  things  : 
(1)  the  absolute  necessity  for  putting 
away  all  evil;  (2)  the  certainty  of 
the  communications  of  Divine  grace 
to  thos:  thus  cleansed. 

Yer.    4.   The  Morally   Impossible, — 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.  VI. 


There  is  the  physically  impossible  and 
the  mentally  impossible,  and  these 
help  us  to  understand  the  morally  im- 
possible. The  word  "impossible"  is 
constantly  used  as  if  it  were  some 
definite  and  absolute  thing.  We  say, 
"  It  is  an  impossibility."  But  the  im- 
possible is  always  strictly  relative  to 
the  being  of  whom  it  is  spoken.  Our 
Lord  corrected  the  mistake  when  He 
spoke  of  two  impossibilities,  the  im- 
possible to  man  being  possible  with 
God ;  but  God  having  his  own  impos- 
sibilities, relative  to  Himself.  The 
physically  impossible  is  simply  that 
which  is  out  of  the  range  of  powers 
that  belong  to  a  physical  being.  It  is 
impossible  for  a  hen  to  swin,  or  for  an 
arm  to  do  the  work  of  an  eye.  It  is 
possible  for  a  duck  to  swim,  and  for  an 
eye  to  do  the  work  of  an  eye.  In  the 
same  way  the  mentally  impossible  is 
simply  that  which  is  out  of  the  range 
of  the  mental  conditions,  faculties,  and 
laws.  Given  this  as  the  condition  of 
human  thinking,  two  straight  lines 
cannot  enclose  a  space,  and  it  is  im- 
possible for  two  lines  ever  to  enclose  a 
space — impossible  so  long  as  the  mind 
attaches  a  particular  meaning  to  the 
terms  "straight  line"  and  "space." 
Or  let  the  condition  of  human  thinking 
be  that  what  it  names  "  two  "  added  to 
"  two  "  shall  make  "  four  "  ;  then  it  is 
impossible  for  two  and  two  ever  to 
make  five.  And  the  morally  impossible 
is  as  relative  to  the  moral  being  of 
whom  it  is  spoken.  A  moral  being  is 
a  limited  being,  he  cannot  act  beyond 
his  range.  There  is  that  which  is  con- 
sistent with  its  own  nature,  and  it  is 
impossible  for  it  to  be  something  other 
than  it  is.  St.  John  helps  us  to  under- 
stand this  when  he  says  that  the  man 
who  is  "  born  of  God  "  cannot  sin.  It 
is  morally  impossible  because  it  is  con- 
trary to  his  renewed  nature.  Apply 
this  to  God.  Through  His  revelations 
to  us,  and  relations  with  us,  we  have 
distinct  conceptions  of  God.  He  is 
"  righteous  in  all  His  works,  and  holy 
in  all  His  ways."  He  is  light  and  He 
is  love  ;  He  is  true ;  He  is  faithful. 
The  morally  impossible  to  God  is  any- 


thing and  everything  inconsistent  with 
Himself.  He  cannot  do  the  absurd; 
He  cannot  do  the  untrue  ;  He  cannot 
do  the  unkind,  and  so  on.  The  im- 
possible, to  the  infinitely  good  Being, 
is  simply  anything  and  everything  that 
is  inconsistent  with  Himself,  with  what 
He  is,  with  what  we  know  Him  to  be. 

Vers.  4,  5.  First  Tastings  of  Divine 
Things. — "  Tasted  of  the  heavenly  gift." 
"  Tasted  the  good  word  of  God."  The 
word  "  taste  "  seems  to  have  been  care- 
fully chosen,  and  with  a  view  to  a 
precise  persuasion.  The  writer  was 
anxious  about  those  whom  he  addressed 
because  they  were  satisfying  themselves 
with  the  rudiments  of  Christian  truth 
and  the  beginnings  of  Christian  experi- 
ence. They  kept,  as  it  were,  just 
tasting ;  they  did  not  eat,  so  as  to  get 
really  nourished  in  the  Christian  truth 
and  life.  He  points  out  the  peril  of 
that  merely  casual  and  partial  relation. 
Those  who  only  "  taste  "  have  no  soul- 
strength  to  resist  temptation  and  trial. 
Here  another  point  is  in  his  mind. 
That  mere  tasting  brings  with  it  solemn 
and  awful  responsibilities.  If  a  man 
only  begins  the  Christian  life,  if  a 
man  only  accepts  the  rudiments  of  the 
Christian  faith,  if  a  man  has  only 
felt  the  first  movings  of  the  Divine 
Spirit,  he  has  passed  over  a  line,  and 
can  never  go  back  to  what  he  was. 
He  has  become  a  new  man ;  he  can 
never  be  the  same  man  again.  If  he 
does  not  advance  to  the  full  possession 
and  enjoyment  of  the  new  life,  he  will 
find  himself  one  of  the  most  miserable 
of  men.  He  has  broken  away  from 
the  old  relations,  which  did  satisfy 
him,  and  he  can  never  get  really 
satisfied  with  them  again.  And  his 
mere  rudimentary  relations  to  Chris- 
tianity cannot  satisfy  him  either. 

Ver.  6.  Exhaustion  of  the  Power  of 
Renewal. — To  "  taste  the  good  word  of 
God  and  the  powers  of  the  world  to 
come  "  is  to  be  renewed  ;  and  the  man 
must  have  been  susceptible  to  influ- 
ences of  renewal,  if  he  has  that  ex- 
perience.    Those  influences  of  renewal 

229 


CHAP.   VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


are  the  very  highest  that  can  act  on 
a  man.  But  if  the  man  who  has  felt 
the  power  and  persuasion  of  them  falls 
back  into  the  world,  and  the  low  life 
unto  self  and  sin,  those  powers  of 
renewal  have  become  poiverless  on  him. 
He  has  turned  against  them  ;  he  is 
no  longer  susceptible  to  their  influence  ; 
there  is  nothing  in  him  now  on  which 
they  can  work.  He  cannot  be  renewed 
again  unto  repentance,  for  there  is 
nothing  in  him  to  respond  to  persuasion. 
It  is  a  most  solemn  consideration  that 
unless  the  early  religious  experiences 
are  followed  up  by  a  healthy  growth, 
there  is  the  gravest  peril  of  the  ex- 
haustion of  the  religious  sensibility  ; 
and  this  is  more  especially  the  peril 
when  the  first  tastings  and  the  early 
experiences  are  connected  with  seasons 
and  scenes  of  religious  excitement  and 
emotion.  The  over-strain  of  religious 
feeling  is  followed  by  the  exhaustion  of 
religious  capacity. 

Crucifying  the  Son  of  God  afresh. — 
Various  as  have  been  God's  dealings 
with  the  world,  there  is  a  terrible 
impartiality  in  His  dispensations  to 
His  rational  creatures.  He  can  hear 
us  all  in  the  same  court,  and  judge  us 
out  of  the  same  books.  He  can  see 
through  the  intricacies  of  His  own 
diversified  government.  The  whole 
world  is  under  a  moral  government, 
though  we  alone  are  in  a  written 
covenant;  all  live  to  God,  though  we 
alone  have  professed  "  the  law  of  the 
Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus."  As  a 
sort  of  equity  is  preserved  in  God's 
arrangements  of  the  relation  between 
His  Church  and  the  world,  so  doubt- 
less there  is  something  not  unlike  it  in 
His  arrangements  of  the  ages  and  pro- 
vinces of  the  Church  itself.  While  the 
human  nature  of  the  Church  is  uniform, 
its  trials  must  be  nearly  so.  The 
probation  God  enforces  is  distributed 
pretty  evenly  through  all  ages  and 
classes.  If  we  are  not  asked  to  perish 
at  the  stake  in  one  terrific  trial  of 
faith  and  fortitude,  we  are  summoned 
to  a  life  of  houi-ly  self-denial.  Tempta- 
tions may  vary  outwardly;  but  while 

230 


the  human  nature  on  which  they 
operate  remains  unchanged,  they  must 
be  found  in  substance  much  the  same. 
Of  all  the  repetitions  of  trial  from 
generation  to  generation,  that  ex- 
pressed in  this  text  is  the  most  start- 
ling and  fearful.  The  crucifixion  of 
Christ,  in  its  literal  reality,  stands 
alone  in  the  history  of  man.  It  was 
the  last  and  darkest  depth  of  human 
criminality.  Never  surely  is  man,  in 
all  the  possibilities  of  futurity,  destined 
again  to  consummate  a  wickedness  like 
this !  But  heaven  has  not  spared  us 
this  trial.  There  is  in  man  a  con- 
tinued capacity  of  "  crucifying  afresh 
the  Son  of  God  " — a  power  to  act  over 
again  all  the  scene  of  His  torture,  to 
league  with  the  mahgnant  priests  and 
the  scoffing  soldiers,  to  buffet  the  un- 
resisting cheek,  to  bind  on  the  crown  of 
thorns.  No  doubt  the  crime  is  a  pecu- 
liar one,  not  ordinarily  exemplified.  The 
writer  speaks  of  deliberate  apostasy 
from  the  faith  of  Jesus.  But  there  is 
no  one  characteristic  of  direct  and 
utter  apostasy  which  does  not,  in  its 
own  degree,  belong  to  those  daily  deser- 
tions of  the  cause  of  Jesus  which  ally 
the  miserable  votaries  of  the  god  of 
this  world  with  the  avowed  enemies 
of  Christ  in  every  age.  There  are 
the  apostasies  of  the  social  table,  of 
the  fireside  and  the  market-place,  the 
refined  apostasies  of  our  own  modern 
and  daily  life,  as  real  as  the  imperial 
treachery  of  a  Julian,  or  the  cold- 
blooded abandonment  of  a  Demas. 
There  is  a  test  we  can  apply.  Pass 
from  what  you  anight  do  if  you  but 
were  as  you  never  can  be,  to  what  you 
are  doing  in  the  position  where  God 
has  placed  you.  Reflect  on  the  frame 
and  temper  of  mind,  on  the  weakness 
and  the  wickedness,  that  made  the 
chosen  people  of  God  the  murderers 
of  His  Son,  and  try  if  you  cannot 
catch  some  faint  image  of  that  treachery 
in  your  own  hearts.  Doubtless  the 
accuracy  of  the  image  will  vary  in 
degree  :  here,  through  progressive  sanc- 
tification,  all  but  obliterated ;  here, 
through  remaining  worldhness,  vivid 
and  undeniable ;    here,  through   total 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.  VL 


rejection  of  Christ,  all  but  complete. 
Christ  was  a  favourite  with  the  mass  of 
the  people  ;  and  yet  His  people  were 
the  fierce  invokers  of  His  blood  on  them 
and  their  children.  Is  no  parallel  to 
this  found  in  the  Christian  world 
around  us  ?  How  many  flock  round 
Christ  with  enthusiasm,  so  long  as  He 
is  made  the  standard-bearer  of  a  party, 
professing  boundless  admiration,  devo- 
tion, and  love,  who,  when  the  true 
hour  of  trial  comes,  relinquish  their 
short-lived  discipleship,  turn  with  the 
tide,  and  swell  the  torrent  of  the 
persecutors  of  the  body  of  Christ !  Or 
look  at  the  wretched,  wavering,  timo- 
rous Pilate — ^willing  to  save,  but 
afraid  to  resist,  anxious  to  do  right  as 
long  as  virtue  costs  no  trouble  :  has 
this  crucifier  of  Christ  no  image  among 
us  ?  Are  there  no  compounders  be- 
tween earth  and  heaven,  who  would 
have  the  best  of  this  life  and  the  life 
to  come  ?  Not  far  removed  from  this 
is  the  case  of  those  rulers  who  struggled 
against  their  very  faith,  lest  it  should 
hazard  their  popularity.  These  poor 
dependants  on  human  fame  stand  not 
alone  in  the  world.  Among  the  higher 
ordei's  of  society,  especially,  the  verdict 
of  society  becomes  of  such  tremendous 
consideration  ;  it  is  vague  and  vast 
enough  to  hide  God  and  His  judgment 
altogether  from  our  view.  And  what 
is  peculiarly  dangerous  about  this 
influence  is  the  insidiousness  of  its 
advances.  Religion  is  not  proved  to 
be  absurd,  but  assumed  to  be  so. 
There  is  deeper  guilt  than  this.  There 
is  a  Judas-like  selling  of  the  Master 
for  paltry  gain  ;  there  is  the  blasphemy 
that  denies  to  Christ  His  Divine  rights  ; 
there  is  the  shame  of  preferring  some 
Bar  abbas  to  Him  ;  there  is  the  hypo- 
crisy of  acknowledging  Him  only  with 
the  lip.  When  we  are  told  that  wilful 
rejection  of  Christ  can  still,  in  some 
sense,  perpetuate  His  shame,  who  shall 
dare  to  set  accurate  limits  to  these 
awful  revelations  ?  Were  it  possible 
to  renew  in  all  its  literal  horrors  the 
degradation  and  insult  of  Calvary, 
were  each  deliberate  sin  to  disgrace 
Him  as  He  was  disgraced  before,  who 


among  us  could  endure  to  risk  such 
atrocious  guilt  ?  Yet,  if  there  be  truth 
in  Scripture,  such  guilt,  or  guilt  like 
this,  is  in  effect  yours,  when,  taught  to 
approach  a  covenanted  God  in  Christ, 
you  turn  with  contempt  from  Him 
who  loved  and  bought  you. — W,  Archer 
Butler,  M.A. 

Crucifying  Christ  Nowadays. — More 
people  crucified  Christ  in  the  old  days 
than  the  soldiers  who  fastened  Him 
to  the  cross.  Indeed,  they  were  not 
His  real  crucifiers.  They  must  bear 
the  guilt  of  our  Lord's  death  who 
planned  to  secure  it.  And  they  were 
the  recognised  religious  people  of  the 
day.  Their  inspiration  to  their  wicked 
deed  was  the  self-seeking  character  of 
their  so-called  religion.  Our  Lord, 
with  His  spiritual  teachings,  opposed 
their  self-interests,  and  disturbed  their 
self-satisfactions,  and  therefore  they 
resolved  to  be  rid  of  Him,  and  with 
shameless  schemes  they  accomplished 
their  end.  That  conduct,  with  that 
inspiration,  has  been  repeated  in  every 
age.  The  crucifiers  of  Christ  to-day 
are  not  His  open  enemies,  but  His 
professed  friends,  whose  self-interest 
and  self-satisfaction  are  affected  by 
His  claims  as  a  spiritual  Saviour,  who 
is  to  be  served  by  submission,  self- 
surrender,  righteousness,  and  charity. 

Putting  Christ  to  Shame. — The  shame 
of  being  rejected  after  being  accepted 
and  tried.  Only  a  certain  measure  of 
shame  can  be  regarded  as  attaching 
to  a  thing  which  has  been  carefully 
examined  and  then  rejected.  This 
measure  of  shame ;  the  man  who  exa- 
mines it  decides  that,  in  his  judgment, 
it  is  not  what  it  professes  to  be,  and 
it  cannot  do  what  it  professes  to  do. 
Submit  the  claims  of  Christ  as  Saviour 
from  sin  to  the  judgment  of  any  man, 
and  only  a  certain  measure  of  shame 
attaches  to  Him,  if  the  man  rejects 
the  claim.  So  far  as  the  man  is  con- 
cerned Christ  is  not  what  He  professes 
to  be.  But  if  a  man,  after  considera- 
tion, accepts  a  thing,  gives  it  fair  trial, 
and  has  full  experience  and  knowledge 

231 


CHAP.   VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


of  it,  and  then  rejects  it,  the  thing  is 
utterly  disgraced.  It  is  put  to  shame 
before  others ;  the  man  makes  public 
declaration  of  its  worthlessness.  And 
when  Christ's  claims  are  accepted,  and 
His  service  tried,  and  then  He  is 
rejected,  and  His  service  abandoned.  He 
is  put  before  all  men  to  an  open  shame. 
He  is  declared  to  be  one  who  has  been 
"weighed  in  the  balances"  of  actual 
experience  and  "  found  wanting." 

A  Moral  State  beyond  Persuasion. — 
"  It  is  impossible  to  renew  them  again 
to  repentance."  But  the  impossibility 
is  not  here  treated  from  GodJs  side,  but 
from  the  apostate  'nian^s  side.  It  is 
not  a  question  what  God  can  do,  but 
what  the  man  will  allow  to  he  done. 
The  man  has,  by  his  own  action,  put 
himself  into  such  a  moral  state  that 
the  Christian  influences  can  no  longer 
affect  him.  He  has  hardened  his 
heart  by  wilful  resistance  until  it  has 
become  like  a  trodden  field -path,  and 
the  seeds  will  not  sink  in.  So  long  as 
that  wilful  apostasy  continues,  there 
is  no  visible  hope  for  the  man.  There 
is  no  getting  through  self-inflicted 
hardness.  It  may  be  shown  that  there 
is — 1.  A  moral  state  which  turns  all 
old  persuasions  aside.  It  is  the  state 
of  the  man  who,  after  having  felt  the 
persuasions  of  Christ,  finally  decides 
to  resist  them.  It  is  of  no  use 
whatever  to  try  those  persuasions 
on  the  man  any  more.  2.  It  is  the 
moral  state  which  is  unprepared  to 
consider  any  new  persuasions.  Perfectly 
satisfied  with  his  decision  against,  the 
man  will  not  open  the  question  again 
under  any  consideration.  3.  It  is 
the  moral  state  of  the  man  for  whom 
there  can  really  be  no  other  persuasion, 
because  he  has  come  under  and  has 
felt  the  power  of,  the  very  highest  that 
can  move  the  heart  and  will  of  man. 

Sin  beyond  Remedy. — The  possibility 
of  sinning  beyond  remedy  is  illustrated 
in  the  cases  of  nations  and  cities,  and 
it  is  shown  in  cases  of  individuals. 

I.  Nations  that  have  sinned  beyond 
hope  of  remedy. — A  group  of  small 

232 


nations,  of  which  Sodom  and  Gomorrah 
were  the  chief,  was  settled  in  the 
luxurious  district  of  the  Lower  Jordan. 
But  riches  and  idleness  corrupted  them 
quickly,  the  characteristic  sins  of  the 
Canaanites  flourished  among  them 
triumphantly,  and  the  awful  moral 
degradation  into  which  they  sunk  is 
indicated  in  the  story  of  wild  night - 
rioting  that  is  preserved  for  us  in  the 
book  of  Genesis,  and  in  the  fact  that 
the  most  demoralising  of  human  sins 
is  permanently  called  after  the  name 
of  Sodom.  The  cry  of  the  cruelly 
wronged  ones,  the  victims  of  lust  and 
violence,  rose  up  again  and  again  into 
the  ears  of  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth  ;  yet 
He  bore  with  these  sinners,  inquired 
concerning  them,  and  held  back  the 
judgments  which  their  sins  demanded. 
But  it  was  at  last  made  quite  plain 
that  they  were  sinners  beyond  remedy. 
"  The  men  of  Sodom  were  wicked,  and 
sinners  before  the  Lord  exceedingly." 
*'  The  guilt  of  Sodom  stands  confessed 
— guilt  which  fire  only  can  purge. 
Her  own  mouth  has  proclaimed  it. 
The  awful  sentence — the  justice  of 
which  no  one  can  question  now — is 
forthwith  written  upon  the  dust  of 
her  city,  announcing  that  she  has  been 
*  weighed  in  the  balances,  and  found 
wanting,'  and  that  her  hours  have  been 
numbered  and  finished."  For  such 
sin  there  could  be  no  remedy,  and 
the  fire  of  God  fell.  The  Canaanite 
nations  inhabiting  Canaan  at  the 
time  of  the  Israelite  invasion  are 
made  the  illustrations  for  the  world  of 
this  fact,  that  sin  may  grow  to  be 
beyond  remedy.  Four  hundred  years 
later  than  the  destruction  of  Sodom, 
those  nations  had  become,  in  daring 
and  utterly  abominable  iniquity,  what 
Sodom  had  been.  The  utter  destruc- 
tion of  them,  as  nations,  was  the 
inevitable  judgment  of  God.  Jericho, 
the  first  city  utterly  destroyed,  was 
the  local  seat  of  the  worship  of 
Ashtoreth,  the  consort  of  Baal ;  and 
it  represented  all  that  was  foulest 
and  most  revolting  in  the  heathenism 
of  the  Canaanites.  "  The  heathenism 
of   Palestine    and   Syria   was   so  foul 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   VL 


and  degrading  in  every  sense,  that 
there  is  no  state,  even  at  this  time, 
which  would  not  put  it  down,  if 
necessary,  by  the  severest  penalties." 
Here  again  the  Divine  forbearance 
tarried  long,  even  until  the  sin  had 
grown  to  be  beyond  remedy.  The 
prophets  of  Israel  and  of  Judah  are 
called  to  present  the  examples  of  the 
Divine  dealings  with  the  neighbouring 
nations  for  the  warning  of  Israel. 
Again  and  again  they  show  the 
Divine  judgments  hanging  over  a 
people,  restrained  in  the  Divine  long- 
suffering  until  the  sin  has  plainly 
grown  beyond  remedy,  and  then 
descending  and  overwhelming  them. 
But  Israel  failed  to  receive  the  warn- 
ing or  to  learn  the  lesson,  and  so  it 
must  pass  through  similar  experiences. 
Despising  God's  messengers,  resisting 
God's  prophets,  going  on  in  sin,  at  last 
it  comes  to  this — there  is  no  more  hope 
of  remedy,  and  ruin  is  at  their  gates. 

II.  Cities  that  have  sinned  beyond 
hope  of  remedy. — We  are  reminded  at 
once  of  Nineveh,  that  great  city  to 
which  the  warning  of  coming  doom 
was  spoken  by  the  prophet  Jonah. 
Its  "cup  of  iniquity"  was  full.  But 
the  doom  was  averted  by  a  great  act 
of  national  repentance.  In  Jonah's 
time  the  sin  of  Nineveh  had  not  gone 
quite  beyond  remedy.  But  its  goodness 
proved  to  be  evanescent  as  the  morning 
cloud.  They  fell  back  upon  their  sins, 
and  at  last  sin  grew  beyond  remedy, 
and  Nineveh  fell,  and  great  was  the 
fall  of  it.  Capernaum,  that  city  by 
the  Lake  of  Galilee,  was  exalted  unto 
heaven  in  privilege,  for  it  was  the 
abode  of  the  Son  of  man,  and  the 
sphere  of  the  great  Teacher.  But 
unbelief  and  indifference  were  its 
sins.  They  grew  until  they  reached 
beyond  remedy,  and  then  even  favoured 
Capernaum  must  be  cast  down  to  hell. 
There  are  city  sins,  in  which  we  may 
share,  which  call  down  the  righteous 
judgments  of  God.  Let  us  most 
seriously  concern  ourselves  with  them, 
for  they  also  may  grow  to  be  beyond 
remedy. 

III.  Individuals  that  have  sinned 


beyond  remedy. — Two  figures  rise  at 
once  into  view — Pharaoh,  king  of  Egypt, 
and  Saul,  king  of  Israel.  Pharaoh 
resisted  persuasion  and  appeal.  He 
would  not  be  humbled,  so  the  pride  of 
Egypt  must  be  broken  by  the  death  of 
the  first-born,  and  by  the  disaster  in 
the  Bed  Sea.  Saul  would  put  his  will 
against  God's  will.  He  was  reproved, 
but  he  kept  on  in  his  self-willed  ways, 
until  there  was  no  remedy,  and  the 
calamity  of  Gilboa  must  sweep  away 
both  him  and  his  dynasty.  The  truth 
may  come  with  some  direct  applications 
to  ourselves.  We  have  sins  that  easily 
beset  us :  sensual  indulgences,  self- 
pleasing  luxuries — it  may  even  be  that 
some  of  us  are  knowingly  and  deter- 
minedly living  in  sin^  and  resisting  all 
the  gracious  pleadings  and  warnings 
and  persuadings  of  God's  servants. 
Then  let  us  look  fairly  at  this  most 
searching  fact  to-day.  Our  sin — yes, 
our  sin — may  get  to  be  beyond  remedy, 
beyond  the  reach  of  Divine  correction, 
and  then  the  judgments  of  God  that 
overwhelm  must  fall — even  upon  us. 

Yer.  7.  The  Reward  of  Responsiveness. 
— The  case  before  the  mind  of  the 
writer  is  that  of  the  man  who  has 
made  profession  of  Christian  faith,  and 
has  come  into  the  Church,  and  been 
subject  to  those  gracious  influences 
which  should  nourish  Christly  char- 
acter, Christly  service,  and  the  Christly 
life.  A  man  may  respond  to  those 
influences,  and  thrive  and  grow  into 
Christian  perfection  ;  and  the  perfec- 
tion into  which  he  grows  will  be  the 
blessed  reward  of  his  responsiveness. 
Or  a  man  may  fail  to  respond  to  those 
influences.  They  may  waste  them- 
selves upon  him.  He  may  remain  in 
the  rudimentary  conditions,  and  fail  to 
grow.  ■  He  may  grow  nothing  but  the 
weeds  and  thorns  that  are  character- 
istic of  barren  and  worthless  soils^ 
And  this  will  be  the  curse  of  his  lack 
of  responsiveness.  The  illustration  is 
taken  from  the  land.  Some  land  is 
hungry ;  it  will  eat  up  everything  that 
is  put  into  it,  but  it  will  yield  back 
nothing    of    value,    only    thorns    and 

233 


CHAP.  VI.  nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


weeds,  thistles  and  ragwort,  and  docks  is  even  perilous  if  it  remain  alone, 
and  sorrel,  that  can  give  pleasure  or  There  are  some  learned  men  who  are 
food  to  nobody .  It  is  unresponsive  land;  simply  receptive  of  knowledge.  It 
it  is  "nigh  unto  cursing";  its  "end  goes  in,  any  quantity  goes  in,  and 
is  to  be  burned."  There  is  other  land  stays ;  it  is  there — that  is  all  you  can 
that  is  both  receptive  and  responsive.  say  about  it.  And  so  there  are  persons 
It  drinks  in  the  rain  and  keeps  it ;  it  greedily  receptive  of  Christian  influ- 
turns  all  good  influences  to  living  uses  ;  ences,  who  simply  receive  them,  and 
it  makes  a  fructifying  seed-bed  for  make  no  response  to  them  either  in 
the  seeds  and  plants  ;  it  brings  forth  more  gracious  living,  or  in  nobler  and 
herbs  to  the  abundant  satisfaction  of  more  devoted  service.  Responsiveness 
those  who  own  it  and  toil  in  it ;  and  to  Christian  influences  is  the  desirable 
that  responsive  land  abundantly  re-  thing,  and  upon  it  alone  the  reward 
ceives  the  blessing  of  God.  Receptive-  and  acceptance  of  God  rests, — re- 
ness  to  Christian  influences  is  valuable  sponse  in  growth,  in  activity,  in 
and  important.  It  may  well  be  fruitage,  in  seeding ;  and  in  these 
earnestly  urged  ;  it  may  well  be  wisely  responses  the  soul  finds  its  ever- 
cultivated.     But  it  is  not  enough ;  it  enlarging  joy  and  satisfaction. 


MAIJ^  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  9—12. 

Blended  Hopes  and  Fears. — The  writer  of  this  epistle  evidently  occupied 
a  ministerial  position  in  relation  to  the  Churches  he  addressed.  There  is 
the  union  of  recognised  authority  with  personal  interest  and  anxiety  in  his 
advice  and  reproofs.  It  may  be  at  any  time  ministerial  duty  to  say  stern, 
severe,  searching  things,  but  they  should  never  be  said  in  a  hard  or  harsh  tone. 
Personal  interest  and  affection  should  at  once  quahfy  the  severity,  and  make  it 
all  the  more  severe.  The  spirit  of  Christian  reproof  is  given  in  this  sentence : 
"As  my  beloved  sons,  I  warn  you."  The  strong  things  this  writer  found  it 
necessary  to  say  concerning  wilful  apostasy  might  offend  some,  and  might  give 
many  a  wrong  impression  of  the  writer  and  of  Christianity.  He  must  make  it 
plain  that  he  was  dealing  with  a  possible  case,  and  not  assuming  that  they  were 
in  such  a  condition.  It  was  necessary  to  point  out  what  might  be,  in  order  to 
gain  an  influence  over  the  evil  things  which  might  work  out  into  such  hopeless 
relations.  To  see  where  a  road  leads  is  often  enough  to  convince  us  that  it 
cannot  be  the  right  road.  Every  minister  of  Christ  shares  the  experience  of 
this  writer  concerning  those  entrusted  to  his  charge. 

I.  He  has  hope  in  some. — The  hope  is  based  on  recognised  signs  of  Christian 
life.  Hope  is  essential  to  the  Christian  ministry.  There  should  be  persistency 
in  looking  at  the  brighter  side  of  things,  quickness  to  discern  every  sign  and 
possibility  of  good,  and  skill  to  nourish  it  into  expression  and  strength.  In 
many  really  good  people,  good  has  a  way  of  hiding  and  almost  disguising  itself  ; 
and  ministers  need  the  wisdom  of  hopefulness  in  dealing  with  such  persons.  It 
may  be  that  some  in  every  Christian  Church  cause  grave  anxiety ;  it  is  almost 
always  true  that  the  many  inspire  confidence,  win  affection,  and  become  to  the 
minister  his  "  joy  and  crown  of  rejoicing  "  in  the  day  of  God.  He  must  never 
shrink  from  the  duty  of  dealing  with  the  careless,  the  inconsistent,  and  the 
wilful,  but  he  can  never  do  his  work  worthily  unless  he  persistently  hopes  for  the 
best.  And  the  signs  of  healthy  Christian  life,  which  man  may  observe  and  God 
is  sure  not  to  forget,  are  summed  up  in  this  :  "  your  work,  and  the  love  which 
ye  shewed  toward  His  name,  in  that  ye  ministered  unto  the  saints,  and  do 
minister."  1.  Your  work ;  activity  and  energy  are  satisfactory  indications  of 
vigorous  and  healthy  life.     2.  Love  for  Christ's  name,  seen  in  doing  the  service 

234 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  vi. 


which  He  did,  and  wants  done.  Christ's  name  is  a  synonym  for  service  to 
others,  ministry  to  others.  There  is  something  of  OhristHness  in  all  self-deny- 
ing ministry  ;  the  full  true  Chris tlmess  when  the  ministry  is  distinctly  rendered 
for  Christ,  and  as  Christ's.  Defection  from  the  Christian  spirit  shows  itself  at 
once  in  failing  ministry  to  others.  Where  soul -health  flags  there  is  no  love  of 
service. 

II.  He  has  fears  for  some. — And  the  fears  find  expression  in  anxious  prayers 
on  their  behalf.  Three  things  are  objects  of  desire  and  prayer  :  1.  Where 
there  is  trembling  and  sign  of  weakness,  the  minister  has  his  fears,  and  prays 
that  these  may  be  replaced  by  steadfastness,  the  firm  tread,  and  upright  pose 
of  the  man  who  feels  the  strength  of  good  health.  2.  Where  there  is  flagging, 
through  failing  interest  in  Divine  things,  the  minister  has  his  fears,  and  prays 
that  a  new  spirit  of  persistency  may  be  given,  and  the  aims  of  the  Christian  life 
become  the  inspiration  of  new  and  holier  endeavour.  3.  Where  there  is 
sluggishness,  the  dulness  of  stealthy  spiritual  disease,  which  saps  the  vital  energy, 
and  makes  life  a  weariness,  and  lays  the  soul  open  to  the  attacks  of  spiritual 
disease,  there  the  minister  has  his  grave  fears,  and  prays  for  grace  to  enable 
him  to  arouse  and  revive,  by  presenting  in  an  inspiring  way  the  example  of 
them  who  "  through  faith  and  patience  inherit  the  promises."  What  the 
minister  wants  for  all  his  people  is,  that  they  should  have  two  graces — faith  and 
patience  ;  that  each  should  be  in  full  vigour  of  health  ;  that  the  two  should 
harmoniously  and  helpfully  blend  together ;  and  so  blending,  protect  from  all 
attacks  of  temptation,  open  or  insidious, — faith  ever  looking  toward  higher 
things,  and  patience  ever  enduring  while  those  higher  things  are  being  attained. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.    9.    The     Hopefulness    of    the  its  best  things  as  things  to  come.     But 

Christian     Teacher. — "  We     are     per-  the  hopefulness  of  the  Christian  teacher 

suaded  better  things  of  you."     A  well-  is  only  sometimes  a  happy  disposition, 

known  and  greatly  honoured  Christian  The   nature   of    the    minister's    work 

preacher,in  advising  a  younger  minister,  tends  to  nourish  depression.     Hopeful- 

once  said,  "  I  would  not  care  to  preach,  ness  is   usually  a  gracious  disposition 

if  the  Christian  rehgion   were   not  a  won  out  of  fierce  conflict,  won  for  the 

religion  of   hope."     Whatever  subject  sake  of  gaining  efliciency  in  the  service 

that  good  man  dealt  with,  he  persisted  of   men,   and   of   rightly   representing 

in  seeing  the  hopeful  side  of  it,  though  Him  who  saves  us  by  kindling  hope, 
he  bore  the  burden  of  a   frail  body, 

and   was  placed   in   circumstances   of  Ver.  10.  God^s  Observations  and  Re- 

great  strain  and  difficulty.     In  hope-  memhrances. — "  God  is  not  unrighteous 

fulness  concerning  those  to  whom  he  to    forget    your    work."      When    the 

ministers,  the  preacher  gains  his  power.  Divine  inspections  are  dealt  with,  the 

He  has  reason  to  nourish  a  spirit  of  observation  of  our  frailties,  short-com- 

hopefulness :  (1)  in  view  of  the  truths  ings,   and  sins    is  usually  commended 

with   which    he   has   to   deal ;    (2)  in  to  our  attention.     The  Divine  observa- 

view  of  the  presence  of  the  Spirit  with  tion  is  made  a  ground  for  nourishing  a 

him,  in  doing   the  service  of  Christ ;  holy  fear.     But  we  have  lost  much  in 

(3)  in  view  of  the  inspiring  power  of  fixing  too  close  an   attention  on  this 

hope  on  the  human  heart ;  (4)  in  view  side   of    the    Divine    observation.       It 

of  the  fact  that  just  what  the  pressure  ought  to  be  made  the  means  of  nourish- 

of  weekly  life  does  for  men  is,  take  ing    a    holy   restfulness,    and    a   holy 

the  hope  out  of  them  ;  (5)  and  in  view  joy.     The   inspection   takes   notice   of 

of  the  fact,  that  Christianity  holds  out  everything  that  is  good  and  hopeful  in 

235 


CHAP.   VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


us.  The  inspection  always  considers 
the  good  things  in  their  relation  to  the 
capacities  and  possibilities  of  the  indi- 
dividual  who  does  them,  and  so  calls 
things  very  good  which  the  individual 
mourns  over  as  sadly  below  his  own 
standard.  And  it  is  of  the  essence  of 
God's  righteousness  that  He  never 
forgets  what  He  observes.  His  deal- 
ings with  us  are  based  on  what  He 
remembers^  as  w^ell  as  what  He  sees. 

Ver.  11.  Hope  elevated  into  Full 
Assurance. — "  Full  assurance  of  hope 
unto  the  end."  E..V.  "  fulness  of  hope 
even  to  the  end."  Can  human  hope 
ever  rise  to  "full  assurance,"  to  abso- 
lute confidence  ?  Not  in  a  strict  sense. 
The  element  of  human  frailty,  that 
necessarily  involves  uncertainty,  must 
always  be  in  it.  It  can  never  cease  to 
be  hope,  because  trust,  which  is  the 
ground  of  hope,  can  never  be  removed 
from  the  creature,  who  is,  and  for  ever 
must  be,  a  dependent  being.  If  hope 
then  is  to  grow  and  enlarge,  what  can 
it  grow  into  ?  The  R.V.  may  help 
us.  It  can  grow  into  ^^ fulness,"  into 
maturity,  into  completeness,  into  its 
ideal,  into  itself  at  its  best  possible. 
The  man  who  has  nourished  the  grace 
of  hope  into  its  maturity  has  whatever 
is  meant  by  "  full  assurance."  And 
matured  hope  can  do  a  most  full  and 
gracious  work  in  the  Christian  life — 
especially  in  steadying  it.  Therefore 
the  anchor  is  the  symbol  of  hope, 
because  it  keeps  the  vessel  steady  when 
tides  sway,  currents  draw,  and  winds 
drive.  When  the  hold  of  Christian 
hope — its  hold  of  the  present  realities 
of  our  Christian  standing,  and  its  hold 
of  the  exceeding  great  and  precious 
promises,  and  its  hold  of  God  as  the 
infinite  satisfaction  for  our  future — 
is  firm  and  full  and  strong,  then  we 
can  move  calmly  among  the  ever- 
changing,  often  trying,  scenes  of  our 
mortal  life.  With  the  good  hope  of 
the  heavenly  Canaan,  we  can  deal 
wisely  with  the  wearying  experiences 
of  our  "  forty  "  long  wilderness  years. 
It  is  not,  however,  very  frequently  or 
very  forcibly   presented  in   Christian 

236 


teachings,  that  Christian  hope  may 
and  ought  to  grow  into  something, 
and  that  we  are  responsible  for  its 
nourishment  and  growth  into  some- 
thing. It  may  be  well  therefore — 1.  To 
show  what  a  passionate,  but  unin- 
telligent, and  sentimental  thing — often 
utterly  unworthy  thing — hope  is  in  the 
young  Christian.  Its  value  is  not  un- 
fairly represented  by  the  expectations 
of  Pliable  in  the  PilgriirCs  Progress. 
2.  To  show  what  a  thing  of  mixed 
value  hope  is  in  the  middle-aged 
Christian  ;  often  by  no  means  cleared 
of  its  sordid  and  sentimental  elements, 
and  indeed  often  crushed  down  into 
silence,  by  the  fierce  strain,  the  weary- 
ing care,  and  the  overwhelming  dis- 
appointments of  life.  To  the  middle- 
aged  Christian  there  is  seldom  any 
vision  from  Delectable  Mountains,  and 
Heaven  seems  "  far  to  go."  3.  To 
show  how  in  days  of  Christian  maturity 
hope  comes  out  clear,  gains  its  fulness, 
and  anchors  the  soul  in  quietness, 
security,  and  peace.  . 

Ver.  12.  The  Peril  of  Slothfulness. — 
"Be  not  slothful,"  R.V.  "sluggish." 
Slow-blooded ;  showing  no  enterprise 
or  energy.  "  Let  us  then  be  up  and 
doing."  In  the  religious  life  there  is 
supreme  peril  in  resting  content  with 
anything  that  has  been  attained.  The 
laissez-faire  principle  must  be  stoutly 
resisted,  if  any  attempt  is  made  to 
apply  it  in  the  Christian  life.  There- 
fore the  apostle  Paul  so  vigorously 
describes  his  own  resolve,  "  Not  that 
I  have  already  obtained,  or  am  already 
made  perfect :  but  I  press  on,  if  so  be 
that  I  may  apprehend  that  for  which 
also  I  was  apprehended  by  Christ 
Jesus."  And  the  living  Lord  sends 
His  messages  to  His  seven  Churches, 
making  His  promises  only  to  "him 
that  overcometh,"  which  must  mean 
that  he  has  kept  up  the  fight  even  to 
the  end. 

I.  Under  what  circumstances  is  a 
spirit  of  slothfulness  likely  to  creep 
over  the  professing  Christian? — 1.  It 
is  a  frequent  attendant  on  certain 
natural  dispositions.     The  man  who  is 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   VI. 


\ 


slow- moving,  sluggish,  listless,  in  busi- 
ness affairs,  is  sure  to  carry  his  natural 
disposition  into  his  religion.  His  life- 
work  is  correcting  natural  disposition. 
2.  It  is  associated  with  conditions  of 
bodily  health.  There  is  lowered  vitality 
where  there  is  not  active  disease  ;  and 
subtle  diseases  usually  show  themselves 
in  languor,  and  flagging  interest  in 
things  ;  and  our  bodily  states  affect  the 
spirit  in  which  our  religious  duties  are 
done.  3.  Slothfulness  and  indifference 
are  often  the  rebounds  from  times  of 
strained  religious  excitement  and  emo- 
tion. It  should  always  be  borne  in 
mind  that  unusual  religious  emotion 
cannot  be  maintained,  and  the  re- 
bound fiom  it  is  always  serious.  4. 
Slothfulness  in  religious  life  may  come 
with  unusual  business  demands.  A 
man  may  be  compelled  to  give  up  his 
Christian  work  for  a  time,  and  then 
he  has  no  interest  in  taking  it  again. 
5.  Slothfulness  is  sometimes  a  result 
of  Christian  jealousy.  Otliers  seem  to 
be  doing  the  work  better  than  we  are, 
and  then  we  say,  "  Let  them  do  it," 
and  put  ourselves  out  of  the  ranks  of 
the  workers. 

II.  What  perils  lie  in  the  path  of 
those  who  give  way  to  slothfulness? 
— 1.  This  peril — their  own  souls  cease 
to  grow,  because  they  have  no  exercise. 
2  This  peril — temptation  and  religious 
disease  secure  their  opportunity.  3. 
This  peril — the  final  judgment  of  their 
Divine  Master,  who  will  surely  be 
severe  in  dealing  with  those  who  "  came 
not  to  the  help  of  the  Lord  against 
the  mighty." 

Slothfulness. — '*  Slothful " —  a  word 
which  has  quite  passed  out  of  common 
use.  It  may,  however,  be  only  the 
more  suggestive  to  us  for  that  reason. 
Sometimes  our  familiar  employment  of 
a  word  plucks  out  all  vigour  and  force 
from  its  meanings.  It  is  a  strong  old 
Saxon  word,  very  little  changed.  The 
Saxon  form  is  slewdih^  from  slaw^  slow  ; 
and  the  idea  of  the  word  is  tardiness, 
disinclination  to  action  or  labour ; 
sluggishness,  as  represented  by  the 
level  river  in  contrast  with  the  fresh - 


flowing,  hurrying,  eddying  mountain 
stream.  It  may  even  be  dull,  as  the 
same  word  is  translated  in  chap.  v.  1 1 : 
"Ye  are  dull,  or  slothful  of  hearing; 
take  heed  lest  ye  become  dull  alto- 
gether." This  slothfulness  was  the 
charactei'istic  sin  of  the  civilised  and 
effeminate  times  of  the  book  of 
Proverbs.  It  is  the  great  sin,  in 
respect  of  religious  things,  of  all 
highly  civilised  and  luxurious  ages  and 
nations,  and  the  great  peril  of  all 
persons,  who  are  not  placed  under  the 
stern  necessity  of  working  with  hand 
or  brain  for  their  daily  bread.  But  a 
more  precise  idea  can  be  given  to  this 
term  as  it  is  used  in  this  epistle. 
Slothfulness  is  action  which  has  in  it 
no  energy;  nothing  of  that  essential 
characteristic  of  manliness — energy. 
The  precise  danger  against  which  we 
are  warned  in  the  text  is  that  of 
dropping  down  from  the  earnestness 
of  our  first  love,  to  live  a  Christian 
life  without  energy.  Such  words  as 
"  energy "  we  know  apply  directly  to 
success  in  business  life,  but  it  seems 
strange  to  apply  such  a  term  to 
Christian  life  and  work.  We  dwell  so 
often  on  the  submissive,  patient,  and 
trustful  sides  of  Christian  duty,  that 
we  may  profitably  consider  other  sides 
which  are,  perhaps,  too  much  neglected 
in  religious  teachings.  If  a  religious 
life  is  to  be  worth  anything  at  all,  it 
must  be  a  life  in  earnest.  The  epistle 
to  the  Hebrews  we  cannot  affirm  with 
certainty  was  written  by  Paul,  but 
it  is  certainly  Pauline  in  tone  and 
doctrine ;  it  belongs  most  closely  to 
Paul's  order  of  thought.  It  is  more 
rhetorically  constructed  than  any  of 
Paul's  known  epistles.  There  is  a 
balancing  of  sentences,  a  sense  of 
artistic  effect,  a  choice  of  language, 
and  a  wealth  of  elaborated  illustration 
which  we  do  not  find  in  Paul's  intenser 
writings  ;  and  there  is  a  breaking  up 
of  the  argument  for  the  sake  of  in- 
troducing hortatory  passages,  which 
belongs  to  the  public  speaker  rather 
than  the  logical  writer.  Paul  has, 
indeed,  passages  of  splendid  eloquence; 
but  they  are  specimens  of  the  natural 

237 


CHAP.    VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


eloquence  to  which  an  impassioned 
soul  rises,  rather  than  the  eloquence 
which  attends  speaking  gifts  and 
elaborate  education.  Such  an  eloquent 
contrast  as  that  given  in  the  twelfth 
chapter  of  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
between  the  Mounts  Sinai  and  Sion 
you  feel  is  the  result  of  study  and  care. 
The  occasion  of  writing  this  epistle 
is  evidently  the  observation,  or  the 
tidings,  of  flagging  and  relaxed  energy 
marking  the  Christian  life  and  work 
of  the  disciples,  and  putting  them  in 
peril  of  final  apostasy  from  the  Chris- 
tian faith.  They  were  caught  in  the 
downward  current,  and,  though  they 
discerned  it  not.  Christian  teachers 
knew  that  the  rapids  and  the  fatal 
falls  were  near.  The  cause  of  such  sloth- 
fulness  was  partly  the  state  and  tone  of 
society  in  that  age,  partly  the  enervat- 
ing influence  of  a  divided  effort.  The 
disciples  could  not  rise  wholly  up  out 
of  Judaism,  but  painfully  tried  to 
blend  Jewish  observances  with  Christian 
spirituality.  The  corrective  proposed 
is  a  worthier  estimate  of  Christ  and 
of  Christianity,  in  contrast  with  the 
great  Jewish  officials  and  Judaism. 
Each  stage  in  the  contrast  is  relieved 
by  passages  of  direct  and  intense 
personal  application  and  persuasion. 
Our  chapter  is  one  of  these  digressions, 
partly  persuasive,  partly  introductory 
to  a  difficult  branch  of  the  subject, 
viz.  the  deeper  meaning  of  the  Old 
Testament  figure  of  Melchizedek.  The 
writer  urges  that  there  ought  to  be 
kept  up  an  exceeding  interest  in  Chris- 
tian growth — growth  in  intelligence, 
growth  in  activity,  growth  into  the 
very  fulness  of  the  Christian  manhood. 
Christians  ought  to  respond  to  the 
various  influences  culturing  growth, 
even  as  the  earth  ought  to  respond 
to  the  refreshing  rains.  What  must 
become  of  earth  that  lies  barren,  or 
only  brings  forth  thorns  and  briars, 
merely  receiving  all  those  quickening 
rains,  and  never  worthily  responding  ? 
Surely,  "it  is  nigh  unto  cursing  ;  its 
end  is  to  be  burned."  But  counsels 
couched  in  this  repi-oachful  tone  tend 
only  to  depress ;  so  he  speaks  brightly 

23S 


and  hopefully,  as  indeed  he  well  may, 
of  the  Church  as  a  whole  ;  there  was 
a  general  desire  for  growth,  and  signs 
of  the  spirit  of  energy.  But  he  was 
afraid  of  individuals,  and  of  their 
hindering,  repressive  influence.  He 
has  a  word  of  earnest  persuasion  for 
them.  "  We  desire  that  every  one  of 
you  do  shew  the  same  diligence  to  the 
full  assurance  of  hope  unto  the  end." 
Show  the  same  diligence.  Be  not 
slothful.  Share  all  together  in  the 
Church  energy,  activity,  and  growth. 
Worthily  follow  the  examples  of  those 
heroic  men  who,  by  daily  faith  that 
kept  alive  daily  energy,  and  by  daily 
patience  that  kept  the  energy  from 
flagging,  have  obtained  the  promises. 
Remember  Abraham,  the  father  of 
the  trustfully  patient,  and  be  quite 
sure  that  for  you  also  the  inspiring 
promises  are  pledged  in  the  "  immuta- 
bility of  God's  counsel." 

I.  The  sin  of  slothfulness  in  the 
Christian  life. — The  word  does  not 
mean  mere  "  slowness  of  movement." 
That  may  be  a  characteristic  of  the 
natural  disposition ;  it  may  belong  to 
the  firm,  strong,  but  slow  pulse,  and 
may  be  quite  compatible  with  a  true 
energy.  It  is  opposed  to  "  diligence," 
so  we  may  say  that  it  is  the  taking 
up  of  a  Christian  profession  weakly, 
manifesting  in  the  Christian  life  no 
earnestness,  easily  permitting  the 
claims  it  makes  on  us  to  be  relaxed 
or  denied  for  the  sake  of  our  self- 
indulgences.  We  know  the  sin  and 
its  ruinous  consequences  well  enough 
in  business  life.  We  have  often  been 
wearied  out  with  the  kid-gloved  young 
man,  who  counts  business  a  bore, 
dawdles  about,  puts  no  soul  into  any- 
thing, drags  through  his  day's  work, 
and  tries  the  patience  of  everybody 
that  has  to  do  with  him.  Can  it 
possibly  be  that  he  represents  the  way 
in  which,  by  our  Christian  slothfulness, 
we  are  wearying  God  and  all  good 
men  ?  It  must  be  a  sin  to  live  a  listless, 
easyful  Christian  life  :  a  sin  like  that 
of  the  soldier  who  hides  among  the 
stuff,  or  feigns  a  sickness,  when  the 
trumpet-blast  is  summoning  all  heroic 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS. 


CHAT.    VI. 


souls  to  the  front.  It  must  be  sin 
in  view  of  those  all-absorbing  claims 
of  King  Jesus  under  which  we  come. 
He  demands  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  life, 
time,  powers,  all.  No  man  can  be 
truly  ilis  without  being  wholly  His. 
It  must  be  sin  in  view  of  the  consecra- 
tion vow  which  we  have  made,  yielding 
ourselves  up  as  living  sacrifices,  like 
the  whole  burnt-offering,  given  over, 
body,  and  fat,  and  skin,  and  Hood,  and 
life,  for  a  whole  consuming  on  the 
Lord's  altar.  It  must  be  sin  in  view  of 
that  great  work  in  the  world  which 
has  yet  to  be  done  ere  Christ  shall 
"  see  of  the  travail  of  H  is  soul  and  be 
satisfied."  It  must  le  the  sin  of  the 
most  shameful  ingratitude  when  we 
remember  how  He  bought  us  with  His 
precious  blood,  giving  Himself  unto 
the  death  for  us.  Think,  I  beseech 
you,  what  manner  of  persons  we 
ought  to  be  who  profess  to  live  with 
the  "  love  of  Christ  constraining  us." 
And  yet  what  a  frequent  sin  it  is ! 
Mark  is  slothful,  shrinks  from  fatigu- 
ing, dangerous  journeys  in  the  cause  of 
Christ ;  as  Matthew  Henry  so  quaintly 
puts  it,  "He  wanted  to  go  home  and 
see  his  mother."  Demas  fails,  even 
in  the  hour  of  the  apostle's  need  :  he 
could  not  put  any  energy  into  his 
Christian  life,  through  the  love  of  this 
present  world.  Even  Timothy  must 
be  reproved  for  yielding  to  his  retiring, 
studious  disposition,  and  shrinking 
back  from  the  active  features  of 
ministerial  duty.  And  with  withering 
severities  the  angel  of  the  Churches 
pleads  with  the  Laodiceans,  "  Thou  art 
neither  cold  n(  r  hot.  ...  I  would  thou 
wert  cold  or  hot."  The  stability,  the 
usefulness,  the  joy,  and  the  ultimate 
triumph  of  the  Christian  life  absolutely 
depend  on  our  taking  it  up  with 
energy.  It  is  miserable  to  think  of 
Christian  people  that,  some  on  boards, 
and  some  on  broken  pieces  of  the  ship, 
they  shall  all  escape  safe  to  land. 
What  noble  soul  will  care  to  drift  into 
the  harbour  of  God  like  that  ?  Let 
us  be  in  earnest,  and  win  an  "  abun- 
dant entrance."  As  we  pass  round 
over  the  bar,  let  every  flag  be  flying. 


every  man  be  at  his  post ;  a  battered 
hull,  but  sound ;  rent  but  mended 
canvas  filling  with  the  heavenward 
breeze,  and  round  the  crowded  harbour 
the  thousand  white-robed  shouting  our 
glad  welcome,  and  saying, — 

**  Come  in,  come  in  ;  eternal  glory  thou  shalt 
win." 

That  is  the  way  to  go  to  heaven  and 
God  from  an  earnest  Christian  life. 
A  little  hut,  built  of  half-burnt  logs 
and  boards,  was  raised  amid  the 
smouldering  fire-ruins  of  Chicago,  the. 
first  sign  of  the  restoration  of  that 
desolated  city,  and  on  the  front  was 
placed  this  inscription  : — 

"  William  D.  Kerfoot  ; 
All  gone  except  wife,  children,  and  energy," 

With  energy  all  could  be  retrieved. 
With  energy  a  noble  Christian  life  can 
be  lived.  Work  for  Christ  is  worth 
doing  "with  both  hands  earnestly." 
"  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do, 
do  it  with  thy  might."  "  Do  it  heartily, 
as  to  the  Lord,  and  not  unto  men." 
"  Curse  ye,  Meroz,  saith  the  Lord  ;  for 
they  came  not  unto  the  help  of  the 
Lord  against  the  mighty."  Beware 
of  this  subtle,  seductive,  ruinous  Chris- 
tian sin  of  slothfulness ! 

II.  The  temptations  to  the  sin  of 
Christian  slothfulness  in  modern  life. 
— Certainly  there  is  no  temptation  to 
slothfulness  in  modern  business  life. 
Intensity,  haste,  keenness,  over-grasp- 
ing, are  the  modern  business  sins.  But 
this  business  life  of  ours  in  many  w^ays 
brings  temptation  to  a  weak  Chris- 
tian living.  Observe  how  it  tends 
to  exhaust  energy,  expending  all  the 
gathered  stores  of  physical  and  mental 
strength,  and  leaving  none  to  be  given 
to  Christian  uses.  What  sort  of  men 
are  you  w^hen  the  day's  work  is  done  ? 
It  can  be  put  in  a  few  words  :  fit  only 
for  the  social  dinner-table  and  the 
easy-chair.  All  else  but  actual  busi- 
ness hours  must  be  devoted  to  recruit- 
ing strength  for  the  coming  business 
hours.  Christ  and  His  claims  are 
simply  crowded  out.  Sounding  almost 
unheard  in  every  office  and  warehouse 
and   shop   are  words  of  Christ's  with 

239 


CHAP.   VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS. 


which  He  fain  would  still  the  fevers, 
and  calm  the  hurrying  waves,  of  modern 
life.  "Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of 
God  and  His  righteousness,  and  all 
these  things  shall  be  added  unto  you." 
Then,  too,  it  brings  wealth,  and  the 
enervating  influence  of  luxury.  Pre- 
cisely the  sin  of  old  Sodom,  old 
Jerusalem,  and  old  Tyre,  against  which 
a  prophet's  voice  is  ever  needed. 
"  Pride,  fulness  of  bread,  and  idleness  " 
were  in  them  and  their  daughters, 
telling  fatally  upon  the  national 
energy.  We  know  how  our  very  food 
affects  us,  and  we  only  care  to  rest. 
Once  at  home  we  can  find  plentiful 
excuse  for  shrinking  from  Christian 
worship  or  work.  Other  things  besides 
business  are  seriously  telling  on  the 
energy  of  religious  life.  I  do  but 
suggest  them  to  your  thought,  that 
you  may  ponder  over  them  seriously. 
To  what  an  alarming  extent  personal 
Christian  effort  is  excused  by  an 
arrangement  for  money  payment ;  as 
if  cold  cash  could  ever  do  in  the  world 
for  Christ  what  living  souls  can  !  The 
extravagant  pursuit  of  mere  pleasure, 
and  interest  in  the  excitingly  sensa- 
tional, and  weakly  sentimental,  in 
literature.  Intelligent  Christian  even- 
ings are  out  of  fashion,  and  our  houses 
are  flooded  with  tale- books,  until  we 
can  get  our  children  to  read  nothing 
that  is  solid  and  instructive.  And 
then  in  other  departments  of  life  we 
have  the  open  enthronement  of  intellect 
as  the  deity  for  modern  worship. 
Men  have  not  yet  dared  to  call  her 
"  Minerva"  or  "Athene,"  and  claim 
for  her  a  temple  and  an  altar;  but 
the  goddess  of  wisdom  is  fast  pushing 
Jehovah,  the  God  of  righteousness  and 
love,  out  of  His  claim  to  men's 
thoughts.  Now  can  you  seriously 
weigh  the  influence  of  all  these  things 
on  Christian  energy,  on  religious  life  ? 
Can  you  see  how  these  things  account 
for  the  religious  easyfulness  that  is 
all  around  us — an  easyfulness  that 
makes  all  Christian  work  drag  heavily  ? 
Can  you,  by  the  help  of  these  things, 
explain  the  pleasant  way  in  which  you 
are  being  borne  along  to  heaven,  as  if 

240 


in  some  delightful  gondola,  on  a  still 
and  flowing  stream — your  boat  fitted 
up  with  exquisite  taste,  pleasant  com- 
panions around  you,  delightful  music 
to  soothe  you  into  a  dreamy  half- 
sleep,  rowers  to  dip  their  oars  in  the 
sparkHng  waters  and  relieve  you  of 
all  the  toil,  and  a  strange  delusion 
possessing  you  that  in  this  way  you 
may  sail  on,  and  never  know  a  windy, 
stormy  ocean,  and  never  feel  one 
tossing  wave  until  the  boat  rounds  in 
to  the  heavenly  landing-stage  ?  Awake, 
0  sleeper !  Arise  from  the  death  of 
such  delusions !  Let  Christ  give  you 
light ;  let  Christ  inspire  you  to  higher 
things  with  His  constraining  love. 
Christian  life  is  conflict;  Christian 
life  is  pilgrimage ;  Christian  life  is 
toil.  No  rowers  can  ever  row  for  you 
while  you  recline  on  soft  pillows  of 
ease.  The  Christian  boat  is  no  fancy- 
painted  gondola.  It  is  a  stout  fisher- 
man's boat  ;  and  there  is  nothing  for 
thee  but  thine  own  hand  to  the  oars, 
and  a  life  of  hard  pulling  against  the 
down-rushing  stream.  Christian  work 
demands  your  help.  A  heaven  that 
could  be  any  real  joy  to  you  is  to  be 
won.  Your  crown  is  to  be  gained 
through  a  present  victory  over  self 
and  circumstance  and  sin  !  "Be  not 
slothful."  Too  surely  all  nerveless 
living  induces  disease.  Slothfulness  is 
a  plague-spot ;  soon  it  spreads  into 
unbelief,  grows  into  indifference,  eats 
inward  until  it  become  apostasy,  and 
at  last,  reaching  the  vitals,  it  becomes 
spiritual  and  eternal  death.  Well 
indeed  may  the  Son  of  man  say,  "  I 
would  thou  wert  cold  or  hot." 

"  Who  would,  share  Abraham's  blessing 

Must  Abraham's  path  pursue  ; 
A  stranger  and  a  pilgrim, 

Like  him,  must  journey  through. 
The  foes  must  be  encountered, 

The  dangers  must  be  passed ; 
Only  a  faithful  soldier 

Receives  the  crown  at  last." 

III.  The  dishonour  which  Christian 
slothfulness  puts  upon  those  saints 
and  heroes  who  have  gone  before  us, 
and  who  seek  to  live  again  in  us. — 

"Them  who,  through  faith  and  patience, 
inherit   the   promises."     We   are    not 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  VL 


sure  that  hero-worship,  or  the  inspira-  also    an     unsurpassed     humbUiig     in 

tion  of  heroic  examples,  is  as  mighty  the   influence    of    heroic   and    saintly 

in    our   day   as   in   some   past   times,  examples.      They    will     cure    us,    as 

Pride  in   one's  own  age  was  perhaps  nothing    else   will,   of    our    self-confi- 

never  carried  to  such  an  extreme  as  it  dence  and  self-sufficiency.     That  which 

is  now.     Men  can   speak  lightly  and  is  true  of  the  ministers  is  true  of  the 

even  disdainfully  of  the  grandest  men  people.     If   we  find   conceit   growing, 

that   have   ever   lived,  and  we   think  and  we  are  beginning  to  think  of  our- 

ourselves  quite   competent  to  criticise  selves  more  highly  than  we  ought  to 

the   greatest    productions    of    human  think,  we  take  down  the  Life  of  John 

genius.      We   often   notice   a    failing  Howe,  who  pressed  near  to  the  foun- 

reverence   for  God ;  there  runs  along  tains  of  God's  truth  till  he  felt  that 

with  it  a   failing   reverence  for   good  he  drank  right  from  the  fresh  spring, 

and  great  men,  and  these  are  surely  Or    of    Edward    Payson,    or    R.    M. 

bad   signs   of    the   times.      This    age  McCheyne,  men  who  lived  in  the  secret 

deals   more    with    things    than    with  place  of  the  Most  High.     Or  of  Nor- 

persons,  and  it  is  as  an  antidote  to  this  man  McLeod,  broad  as  the  world  in 

tendency   that   we   persist   in   setting  heavenly.  Divine  charity,  but  gentle, 

forth  the  person  of  the  Son  of  God  :  humble,  simple,  playful  as  a  child,  and 

not   first    His   doctrine,  not  first  His  knowing  on  earth  no  joy  but  serving 

work,  but  first  Himself.     True  great-  — serving  God  and  his  fellow-men.     It 

ness  in  every  age  is  a  response  to  the  is   one    of   the   characteristics   of   our 

influence  of  sublime  human  examples,  religion   that   it   presents   to   us,  and 

*'  The   real   interest   of    the   Scripture  keeps    ever    before    us,    a   galaxy    of 

books  centres   about  persons,  who  re-  heroes,  of  noble  men  and  women,  like 

produce   and   exhibit  in   their  human  a  great  sky  full  of  various  stars,  cir- 

lives   the   purposes  of   the   Father   of  cling  about  that  wondrous  light,  that 

all.  .  .  .  The   lives   of   the  saints  are  central     pole-star,     the     Lord     Jesus 

always  in  some  form  a  chief  part  of  Christ.     The  Bible  and  the  Christian 

the  spiritual  food  of  every  generation.  ages  do  not  give  us  so  much  a  record 

Their  experiences   are   assimilated  by  of   achievements  as  a  record  of  men. 

us,  and  enter  into  our  own  lives.     The  And  no  man  can  know  the  Lord,  the 

pious  propagate  their  piety,  the  brave  Lord    Jesus    Christ,    by   any    critical 

man    propagates    his    courage,    there  estimate  of  His  works ;    He  must  be 

is  a  spiritual  descent  and  inheritance  apprehended  in  His  person  ;  He  must 

more   sure    than   that   of    the    race"  make     the     impression     of    a    living 

(LI.  DavieSf^^  Gosp.  Mod.  Life"  ^.  173).  man.     Think   of    that   roll   of   heroes 

The   power    of    heroic    examples    has  given  by  the  writer  of  the  epistle  to 

perhaps   never  been   so  forcibly  illus-  the  Hebrews  with  an  eloquence  that 

trated   as   in   the   case   of    the   great  makes  it  come  to  us  like  the  swell  of 

French  Revolution.    Men  were,  indeed,  some  grand  organ-note,  pealing  forth, 

terribly   mistaken   in   their   modes   of  until  it  fills  the  whole  place  with  its 

action,  and  borne  beyond  all  sobriety  thrilling   tones.      What   is   the   thing 

in  the  enthusiasm  of  a  great  national  which  we  especially   observe   in   that 

hope ;    but  the  leaders   were   for   the  great  cloud  of  witnesses  ?     They  lived 

most  part  grand  men,  men  of  heroic  their  lives  in  the  world  with  energy, 

soul,  and  it  is  instructive  to   observe  Their  religion  was  their  glory.     They 

that   their   heroism  was  fed  by  read-  were  godly  "  men  in  earnest."     Watch 

ing     Plutarch's    Lives     of   the    Great  them  as  they  pass  in  panoramic  order 

Romans.      Luther  cultured  his  brave,  before    you — Abel,    and    Enoch,    and 

courageous  spirit  by  constant  fellow-  Noah,  and  Abraham,  and  Jacob,  and 

ship  with  the  great  Israelite  prophets,  Joseph,   and  Moses,  and  Gideon,   and 

reading  them  till  their  ardour  burned  Barak,    and    Samson,    and   Jephthah, 

in    his    own    breast.      But    there    is  and  Samuel,  and  David,  and   Elijah, 

B  241 


CHAP.   VI. 


HOMTLETIC  commentary :    HEBREWS. 


and  Isaiah,  and  Jeremiah,  and  Daniel. 
Nay,  this  is  but  the  beginning  of  the 
splendid  muster-roll  of  the  godly ;  add 
the  "glorious  company  of  the  apostles," 
and  the  "  noble  army  of  martyrs," 
and  the  foiemost  men  of  the  Christian 
ages — Augustine,  and  Bernard,  and 
Luther,  and  Calvin,  and  Latimer,  and 
Ci'anmer,  and  Loyola,  and  Knox,  and 
Baxter,  and  a  host  of  others.  Come 
down  into  our  own  passing  years,  and 
add  the  names  of  such  as  ha\e  come 
within  our  own  spheres  of  thought — 
Wilberforce,  and  Martyn,  and  Lincoln, 
and  Hedley  Vicars,  and  Havelock,  and 
Arnold,  and  Robertson,  and  Chalmers, 
and  Guthrie,  and  many  more.  Add, 
still  again,  those  whom  we  have  known 
and  loved,  with  intensity  because  with 
reverence,  in  personal  relationship  and 
friendship.  Think  of  those  "  holy 
souls  and  meekly  who  the  cross  of 
suffering  bore."  Think  of  the  noble 
souls  who  stood  well  in  the  front  of 
God's  great  war — earnest  souls  whose 
life-joy  was  the  service  they  rendered 
to  the  Master  whom  they  loved.  What 
a  splendid  crowd  of  witnesses !  Oh 
the  glorious  vision  of  the  saints  of 
God  !  Sainted  fathers,  sainted  mothers, 
sainted  pastors,  sainted  heroes.  They 
have  inherited  the  promises,  and  now 
they  rest.  But  how  ?  Through  '*  faith," 
which  is  but  another  name  for  energy 
— energy  seen  on  another  side  ;  and 
through  "  patience,"  which  enabled 
them,  amid  all  their  toils  and  dis- 
couragements and  failures,  to  keep 
up  their  energy.  They  live  again  in 
us.  What  dishonour  do  we  put  upon 
such  men,  then,  if  our  Christian  living 
is  faithless  and  weak,  self-indulgent 
and  restless  and  fi-etf ul  !  How  we 
disgrace  our  fathers  and  our  grand- 
fathers, our  sainted  mothers  and  grand- 
mothers, and  all  the  Christian  dead, 
if  we  sink  down  so  low  as  to  make  our 
lives  a  mere  response  to  the  questions  : 
"  What  shall  we  eat  ?  What  shall  we 
drink  ?  And  wherewithal  shall  we 
be  clothed  ? "  Brethren,  surely  this 
ought  not  so  to  be !  They  live  again 
in  us.  They  were  the  Church  of  Christ 
for  their  time,  and  we  are  for  ours. 

242 


Would  to  God  that  in  earnest,  energetic 
Christian  lives  we  could  be  worthy  of 
them !  Nay,  would  to  God  that  we 
might  be  worthy  of  Him  whom  they 
and  we  alike  should  imitate,  who  hath 
called  us  by  His  grace  unto  His  king- 
dom and  glory.  I  know  of  no  promises 
to  cheer  the  self-indulgent.  I  know 
of  no  high  words  of  hope  to  speak  to 
those  who  are  at  ease  in  Zion.  But 
there  are  words  of  thrilling  inspiration 
for  those  who  will  fight  and  toil.  Do 
you  say,  "  No  cross  "  ?  Then  the  King 
will  surely  say,  "  No  crown."  If  you 
will  but  take  up  that  cross  brightly, 
cheerfully,  lift  it  on  your  shoulder,  go 
forth  to  life  with  it  a  brave,  earnest 
man,  full  of  energy  for  Christ,  then  He 
shall  speak  a  "  Well  done,  good  and 
faithful  servant,"  and  crown  you  with 
the  crown  of  "full,  and  everlasting, 
and  passionless  renown."  Be  earnest. 
Be  earnest  for  Christ.  Be  earnest  for 
holiness.  Be  earnest  for  souls.  "To 
him  that  overcometh  "  ease,  and  sloth, 
and  disposition,  and  pleasure,  and  the 
age,  and  circumstances,  winning  them 
all  for  Christ — "  to  him,"  saith  the 
Master,  "will  I  give  to  eat  of  the 
hidden  manna,  and  will  give  him  a 
white  stone,  and  in  the  stone  a  new 
name  written  which  no  man  knoweth 
saving  he  that  receiveth  it."  "  Him 
that  overcometh  will  I  make  a  pillar 
in  the  temple  of  My  God,  and  he  shall 
go  no  more  out  :  and  I  will  write  upon 
him  the  name  of  My  God,  and  the  name 
of  the  city  of  My  God  .  .  .  and  I 
will  write  upon  him  My  new  name." 
Would  it  surprise  you  to  find  that 
name  just  meant  this  :  the  Unslothful 
— a  man  earnest  unto  death  ? 

The  Lives  of  the  Saints. — "  All 
saints "  are  the  great  cloud  of  wit- 
nesses by  whom  we  find  ourselves 
compassed  about  when  we  move  back- 
wards in  thought  through  the  ages  of 
Church  history.  To  remember  those 
who  have  gone  before  us,  who  have 
trod<len  to  the  end  the  path  we  are 
treading,  who  have  fought  in  the 
honourable  conflict  in  which  we  also 
are  fighters,  seems  a  kind  of  spiritual 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   VI. 


obligation  ;  but  it  is  also  one  of  the 
best  exercises  for  spiritual  training. 
The  crown  of  all  that  the  Bible  has 
to  reveal  to  us  is  the  life  of  the 
Son  of  God  in  our  flesh.  In  every 
age  of  the  Church  attention  has 
been  paid  to  the  lives  of  good  men. 
There  has  been  no  difference  in  this 
respect  between  Roman  Catholics  and 
Protestants.  All  sects  and  schools 
have  had  their  lives  of  the  saints.  In 
the  New  Testament  "the  saints"  are 
all  the  members  of  the  Church,  and 
their  sanctity  or  holiness  was  regarded 
as  depending  not  on  their  personal 
character,  but  on  their  calling.  The 
ecclesiastical  use  of  the  word  is  not 
precisely  the  same  as  this.  The  saints 
we  are  to  follow  were  men  of  faith 
and  of  patience.  By  faith  they  over- 
came the  world  ;  by  patience  they  stood 
fast  under  the  trials  of  their  conflict. 
Whatever  their  opinions  may  have 
been,  whatever  their  imperfections 
and  lapses  even  may  have  been,  men  of 
eminent  faith  and  of  eminent  patience 
are  witnesses  of  the  best  things  to  us, 
and  worthy  leaders  in  the  onward 
march  of  humanity.  Such  men  have 
been  the  living  heart  of  the  Church, 
the  salt  of  the  earth.  They  have  not 
always  been  honoured  and  promoted 
in  their  lifetime.  The  true  saints 
have  encountered  difiiculties  which 
were  mountains  requiring  all  their 
faith  to  remove ;  they  have  undergone 
tribulations,  such  as  neglect,  perse- 
cution, contempt,  which  proved  their 
Divine  gift  of  patience  to  the  utter- 
most. It  is  a  good  thing  that  we 
should  try  to  obtain  a  closer  acquaint- 
ance with  the  good  Christians  who 
have  been  in  some  way  nearer  to 
ourselves — with  those,  for  example,,  of 
our  own  race  and  country,  whose 
circumstances  and  trials  and  achieve- 
ments we  may  be  better  able  to 
understand.      There   is   a    continuous 


national  hfe  which  is  enriched  by  every 
faithful  life  that  is  thrown  into  it, 
and  the  contribution  is  more  valuable 
when  such  a  life  is  made  the  subject 
of  an  interesting  record.  Instances  : 
W.  Wilberforce,  Ab.  Lincoln,  Hedley 
Vicars,  Arnold  of  Bugby,  Robertson 
of  Brighton.  These  are  lives  that  have 
become  public  property,  by  being  led 
in  conspicuous  stations.  But  there 
have  been  lives  of  faith  and  patience 
known  to  us  individually  which  never 
drew  the  eyes  of  the  public  upon  them. 
There  is  always  "  the  world  "  to  be  over- 
come ;  and  this  is  the  victory  that 
over  Cometh  the  world,  even  our  faith. 
Every  example  of  persevering  loyalty 
to  the  will  of  God,  and  of  confidence  in 
the  ultimate  dominion  of  that  will,  is 
an  addition  to  the  blessed  company  of 
the  saints.  In  every  life  there  are 
frequent  calls  for  exercising  patience. 
There  has  been  no  high  Chi-istian 
virtue,  no  eminent  nobility  of  life, 
without  patience.  Where  patience  of 
the  true  quality  has  been  shown,  a 
patience  sustained  by  hope,  a  sweet 
and  kindly  patience,  there  we  ought 
to  recognise  the  true  saintship.  The 
innumerable  company  of  the  saints  is 
not  a  distant  body  of  another  nature 
than  ours;  it  includes  those  who^ 
whether  they  be  still  with  us  or 
have  gone  before  us,  have  displayed 
the  like  faith  and  patience.  These 
beckon  to  us  to  follow  them  in  hope. 
When  we  commune  with  ourselves 
most  sincerely,  which  kind  of  life 
seems  really  the  noblest  and  most  to 
be  preferred,  that  of  men  who  strove 
and  suffered  in  faith  and  patience, 
whether  they  were  happy  in  this 
world  or  not,  or  that  of  those  who 
have  selfishly  steered  their  course  so 
as  always  to  get  the  most  pleasure,  and 
to  avoid  the  most  pain  ? — J.  Llewellyn 
Davies,  M.A. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13—20. 

Two  Immutable  Things. — In  this  epistle  there  is  certainly  one  of  the  marked 
characteristics  of  the  Pauline  style.  St.  Paul  was  constantly  swept  aside  from 
the  main  line  of  his  argument  by  new  thoughts  suggested  by  words  he  used. 

243 


CHAP.  VI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


And  he  does  not  always  come  back  precisely  upon  the  point  where  he  broke  off. 
The  writer  here  ha^  a  train  of  thought  suggested  by  speaking  of  those  who 
"  through  faith  and  patience  inherit  the  promises."  He  checks  himself  to  make 
mention  of  one,  the  patriarch  Abraham.  But  it  is  not  difficult  to  trace  the 
continuance  of  his  main  argument.  He  had  been  urging  the  Jewish  Christians 
to  a  persistent  steadfastness.  But  what  can  he  say  to  strengthen  them  in  making 
the  effort  ?  What  can  he  do  better  than  remind  them  that  God  is  always  on 
the  side  of  goodness  ?  He  has,  through  all  the  ages,  encouraged  His  people  to 
persevering  and  steadfast  goodness,  by  two  immutable  things — His  promise,  and 
the  oath  that  confirms  it.  Abraham  is  the  example  of  those  who  can  unite 
faith  in  God  with  patient  waiting  for  Him.  To  him  came  the  comforting  of 
God's  well-assured  promise,  "  Blessing  I  will  bless  thee."  In  the  ways  of  men 
promises  are  things  to  be  relied  on  and  acted  on.  Promises,  when  confirmed  by 
solemn  oath,  become  covenants,  and  are  regarded  as  absolutely  reliable.  "  In 
every  dispute  of  theirs  the  oath  is  final  for  confirmation."  I.  The  ground 
of  Abraham's  hope  was  God's  solemnly  confirmed  promise  to  him.  II.  The 
ground  of  our  hope  is  God's  promise  of  eternal  blessing,  eternal  life,  in  Christ 
Jesus,  sealed  and  confirmed  as  it  is  by  the  Divine  assurance  and  oath.  It 
is  evident  that  the  term  "  oath "  is  not  used  in  the  precise  way  that  is 
familiar  to  us.  It  means  generally  *'  a  solemnly  assured  promise."  There  is 
therefore  good  reason  for  considering  Stuart's  suggestion,  that  the  two 
immutable  things  are  :  1 .  The  solemn  declaration  and  assurance  that  Abraham 
should  have  a  son,  in  whom  all  nations  should  be  blessed.  Abraham  was 
encouraged  and  strengthened  to  endure  all  disabilities  by  that  assurance.  He 
lived  and  suffered  and  acted  in  the  inspiration  and  cheer  of  it.  2.  The  solemn 
declaration  and  assurance,  to  which  God,  as  it  were,  pledged  His  faithfulness, 
that  Abraham's  son,  David's  son,  the  Messii^h,  should  be  man's  High  Priest  for 
ever,  and  after  the  permanent  human  order  of  Melchizedek,  not  the  temporary' 
and  strictly  Jewish  order  of  Aaron.  Both  these  promises  are  regarded  as 
solemnly  confirmed  and  sealed,  because  both  are  written  down  in  the  infallible 
Scriptures,  to  which  God  is  solemnly  pledged, — one  in  Gen.  xxii.  18;  the  other 
in  Ps.  ex.  4. 

I.  God's  solemn  pledges  to  His  people. — 1.  They  are  given  in  ways  that 
show  gracious  Divine  consideration  for  human  weakness.  2.  They  are  given 
in  ways  that  make  a  basis  for  absolute  confidence.  3.  They  are  represented  by 
the  extremest  ways  in  which  men  gain  the  confidence  of  their  fellow- men. 
4.  They  are  written  down  in  the  sacred  Scriptures  so  that  there  may  be  no 
disputing  about  their  character  and  meaning.  5.  So  written,  they  become 
equally  Divine  pledges  to  the  people  of  God  in  each  succeeding  generation. 
6.  The  honour  of  God's  name  is  involved  in  any  failure  to  keep  the  promises  so 
solemnly  made.  And  God  is  a  jealous  God — jealous  of  the  honour  of  His  own 
name. 

II.  A  representative  instance  of  God's  faithfulness  to  His  pledge. — The  case 
of  Abraham.  Specially  interesting  to  Jews,  because  Abraham  was  the  great 
race-father.  God  made  a  solemn  promise  to  him.  But  it  was  one  which  it 
seemed,  naturally,  impossible  to  fulfil.  Nevertheless  Abraham  accepted  the 
assurance,  relied  on  the  promise,  and  found,  what  God's  people  find  over  and 
over  again,  that  the  impossible  with  men  is  possible  with  God,  and  that  God's 
word  never  does  "  return  unto  Him  void."  The  promised  son  was  born  ;  in  his 
descendants  came  the  Messiah,  and  in  Him  all  nations  of  the  earth  have  been 
and  are  blessed. 

III.  The  universally  interesting  instance  of  God's  faithfulness  to  His  pledge. 
— As  solemnly  as  Abraham  was  assured  that  all  nations  should  be  blessed  in 
him,  so  solemnly  was  humanity  assured  that  Messiah  should  be  the  Priest  pf 

244 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   VI. 


humanity  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek.  That  may  seem  strange  and  almost 
impossible  to  men  who  could  recognise  no  priesthood  but  the  limited  Levitical. 
But  the  pledge  is  kept.  Christ  is  that  priest ;  and  if  He  seems  to  supersede  the 
high  priest  for  Jews,  it  is  only  because  He  is  God's  High  Priest  for  humanity, 
Jews  included. 


SUGGESTIVE    NOTES   AND    SERMON   SKETCHES. 


Ver.  13.  Swearing  as  Asseveration. — 
An  examination  of  the  references  to 
swearing  and  oath -taking  in  a  Bible 
Concordance  will  impress  the  famili- 
arity of  the  custom  in  Bible  times.  It 
was  the  ancient  way  of  assuring  things 
which  has  in  modern  times  been  re- 
placed by  the  signing  of  documents. 
1.  Swearing  may  be  wrong.  What  is 
now  commonly  understood  by  swearing 
is  always  wrong.  It  is  the  "taking  of 
God's  name  in  vain,"  which  is  the 
expression  of  irreverence  or  unre- 
strained passion.  2.  Swearing  may 
be  duty.  It  is  when  we  are  called  upon 
seriously  to  confirm  our  word  with  an 
oath,  in  a  court  of  justice.  3.  Swear- 
ing may  be  the  befitting  thing.  It  is 
when  the  solemn  confirmation  of  our 
w  ord  is  called  for.  But  Jesus  taught 
that  in  the  utterances  of  His  followers 
there  should  always  be  such  a  ring  of 
truth,  that  their  words  should  never 
need  such  confirmations.  Only  in  con- 
descension to  man's  weakness  can  God 
ever  confirm  His  word  with  an  oath. 
And  He  can  only  swear  by  Himself, 
as  there  is  no  one  greater  than  He  to 
whom  His  appeal  can  be  made. 

Yer.  15.  The  Issue  of  God^s  Waiting - 
time. — "  And  thus,  having  patiently 
endured,  he  obtained  the  pi-omise." 
However  long  God  may  call  us  to  wait 
for  the  fulfilment  of  His  promise,  the 
fulfilment  comes  at  last  ;  but  when  it 
comes,  it  may  not  come  to  the  person 
who  first  received  the  promise,  or  it 
may  not  come  in  the  form  which  he 
expected  it  to  take.  Abraham  himself 
did  not  receive  the  promise  in  its 
fulfilment,  but  his  posterity  did. 
Abraham  did  receive  the  fulfilment 
of  the  promise,  if  its  spiritual  sig- 
nificance   be    apprehended;     for    the 


spiritual  blessing  which  holding  the 
promise  was  to  him  was  its  really  best 
fulfilment.  This  gives  us  two  prin- 
ciples which  can  be  applied  to  our 
Christian  expectations. 

I.  Whatever  God  has  literally  pro- 
mised will  be  actually  and  literally 
fulfilled,  however  long  the  fulfilment 
may  seem  to  tarry,  and  even  if  the 
the  waiting-time  overpasses  any  one 
man's  life. 

II.  The  spiritual  blessing  which  God 
makes  our  times  of  trustful  waiting  for 
the  fulfilment  of  His  promise  to  be,  are 
the  very  best  fulfilment  of  that  promise. 
In  our  trustful  waiting  we  now  "  re- 
ceive the  end  of  our  faith,  even  the 
salvation  of  our  souls." 

Ver.  17.  The  ImTnutability  of  God^s 
Counsel  impressed  upon  His  People. — 
B.V.  "  Wherein  God,  being  minded  to 
shew  more  abundantly  unto  the  heirs 
of  the  promise  the  immutability  of  His 
counsel,  interposed  with  an  oath." 
God's  taking  oath  to  confirm  His  pro- 
mise was  an  act  of  most  gracious  and 
pitiful  condescension  to  the  weakness 
of  men — condescension  indeed  to  admit 
for  one  moment  the  bare  possibility 
that  He  might  not  be  true  to  His 
word.  Such  a  suspicion  might  arise 
in  man's  frail  heart ;  but  it  is  a  marvel 
of  grace  that  God  should  recognise  it, 
and  so  patiently  and  so  graciously 
arrange  for  its  removal,  by  taking 
solemn  oath  for  the  confirmation  of  the 
promise.  As  if,  for  the  comforting  of 
man,  and  as  if  He  were  a  man  with 
men,  He  would  pledge  His  very  life 
upon  His  faithfulness.  That  marvel 
of  condescending  grace  is  seldom 
worthily  estimated,  and  our  response 
of  absolute  and  entire  trustfulness  is 
seldom  worthily  made.    The  unchange- 

245 


CHAP.  VI.  jHOMILETIC  commentary :    HEBREWS. 


ableness  of  God's  word  and  God's  plan,  refuge."     Not   for   self-confident   per- 

the  "immutability  of  God's  counsel,"  sons. 

needs  to  be  impressed  upon  us.     But  II.  It  is  a "  hope  sure  and  stedfast." 

when  we  speak  of  change  in  relation  to  — It  rests  on  the  promise  of  God.     We 

God,  it  is  necessary  to  speak  with  great  need   it   in   the  face  of   the  frequent 

care  and  precision.     There  never  can  defeats  of  natural  earthly  hopes,  and 

be  change  in  His  plan  or  purpose,  there  the  frequent   discouragements   of   our 

must  be  change  in  His  modes  of  carry-  personal  experience  and  service, 

ing  out  His  purposes,  if  He  is  to  adapt  III.  It  "  enters  within  the  veil." — 

them  to  the  ever-changing  moods  and  Thus  it  is  like  an  anchor  that  goes  into 

circumstances   of    His    uncertain    and  the  sea — its  proper  place.     Its  security 

ever-changing  creatures.    But  that  sort  is  in  heaven,  where  Christian  believers 

of  change  we  know  is  quite  consistent  have  and  hold  all  their  best  things.  The 

with  the  steadfast  and  unwavering  pur-  writer  of  this  epistle  never  lost  sight 

pose  of  our  human  parenthood.    Within  of  the  priesthood  and  the   sanctuary, 

the  human  limits,  parents  are  at  once  Nothing    can    twine    itself   about   the 

unchangeable  and  changeable.     But  it  person  or  injure  the  life  of  the  great 

is  always  a  most  serious  endeavour  of  High  Priest  v/ho  is  '*  within  the  veil." 

wise  parents  to  fix  the  conviction  of  We  hope  in  Him,  think  of  Him,  and 

their  faithfulness  and  unchangeableness  wait — that  is  our  hope, 

on  the  minds  of  their  children.     It  is  lY.  The  hope  illustrated. — 1.  It  is 

the  support  of  their  authority  ;    it  is  an  anchor  of  the  soul.     A  most  appo- 

the  ground  of  their  claim  to  full  trust.  site    and   instructive    metaphor.      The 

Just  so,  and  in  the  higher,  the  infinite  anchor   gives  steadiness  and  security, 

sense,  God  must  adequately  impress  on  So  of  our  hope  that  goes  down  beneath 

us  the  "  immutability  of  His  counsel,"  the  surf  ace-troubles  of  life,  and  grapples 

because  on  our  confidence  in   it   rests  with   some  secret  ground  of   strength 

our  response  to  His  authority,  and  our  and    comfort.       2.  The  folly  of  going 

trust  in  Himself.  to  sea  without  an  anchor.     Men  have 

impulse,   energy,   but  no   hold  on  the 

Vers.  17-19.  The  Anchor  of  Hope. —  promises  of  God,  no  good  hope  through 

One  of  the  saddest  things  that  was  ever  grace.     So,  too,  unsound  anchors  and 

said  about  the  heathen  world  is  said  by  chains    are  worse  than    having  none, 

the  apostle  Paul,  who  wrote  of  it  as  A   little   profession,   a    faint  hope,   is 

having  no  hope.    The  agnostic  literature  an  unsound  anchor.     3.  A  well-taughty 

of  our  own  period  is  doing  what  it  can  well- disciplined  Christian  has  good  hope, 

to  drag  Christendom  back  and  down  to  and  is  secure  against  going  on  the  shoals 

the  same  dismal  abyss.     A  grim,  hard  of  doubt,  or  the  hard  rocks  of  despair. 

unbelief  seeks  to  bound  our  little  life  When  life  is  troubled,  conscience  agi- 

for  us,  and  there  is  no  hereafter.     We  tated,  and  the  heart  tossed  with  tem- 

have  a  foundation  in  a  Divine  promise  pests  and  conflict,  the  Christian   can 

— a   hope  of   eternal  life.      We  have  hope  in  God.     The  shipwreck  of  faith 

*'  an  assurance  of  hope  unto  the  end,"  is  well  prevented  by  the  strong  anchor 

that  is  a  certainty  as  opposed  to  un-  of   hope.      There   is  no  perfect   calm, 

certainty,  meagreness,  and  shallowness.  W^e  must  put  our  hope  in  the  promise  of 

This  blessed  hope  is  described  and  illus-  eternal  life,  which  God  has  given  to  us 

trated  in  the  text.  in  Christ  Jesus.    That  is  our  anchorage 

I.  It   is  a  "  hope  set  before  us." —  ground.     If,  Hke  Bunyan's  pilgrim,  we 

That  form  of  expression  is  to  be  found  "  feel  the  ground,"  we  shall  "  see  the 

again  and  again  in  this  epistle.     It  is  Gate    and    Him    standing    by    it    to 

not  uncertain,  but  devised,  planned,  and  receive  us." — Donald  Eraser,  D.D. 
provided  for  by  the  God  of  our  love. 

"Confirmed  by  an  oath."     "  Set  before  Ver.  18.  The  Immutable  Promises  of 

us."    Whom  ?     Those  who   *'  flee  for  God, — This  is  one  of  the  most  inspiring 

24a 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   VI. 


and  helpful  passages  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. The  key  to  it  is  in  the  dual 
thought  presented,  and  which  runs  all 
through  the  paragraph.  God  gave  to 
Abraham  a  promise  which  He  con- 
firmed by  oath.  These,  His  word  and 
His  oath,  are  the  two  immutable 
things ;  they  constitute  not  only  a 
consolation,  but  a  strong  consolation  ; 
we  have  not  only  an  ancJior,  but  an 
anchorage ;  the  woid  is  sure,  and  the 
oath  makes  it  steadfast.  This  double 
form  of  presentation  thus  pervades  the 
passage.  God  condescends  to  human 
frailty  and  the  weakness  of  our  faith. 
He  gives  His  word  of  promise,  and  then 
confirms  it  with  an  oath  ;  and  because 
He  can  swear  by  no  greater,  swears 
by  Himself.  A  deeper  thought  lies 
here.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  living,  incar- 
nate oath  of  God — His  word  of  promise 
made  flesh,  and  thus  doubly  secured 
to  the  believer.  The  word  of  God  is 
our  anchor  ;  but  the  anchor  needs  an 
anchorage ;  and  Jesus,  the  forerunner, 
takes  the  anchor  and  lodges  it  within 
the  veil,  making  it  fast  to  the  rock  of 
ages.  The  introduction  of  the  person 
of  Christ  here  is  to  be  accounted  for  on 
this  ground — that  He  represents  God's 
confirming  oath  ;  and  hence  without 
Him  the  promise  would  lack  its  con- 
firmation. (Compare  Heb.  vii.  22,  also 
2  Cor.  i.  18-20.)  The  theme  suggested 
is  the  immutable  promises  of  God. 
1.  God  has  given  His  word,  and 
cannot  lie.  2.  God  has  given  His 
oath,  and  cannot  perjure  Himself. 
3.  God  has  given  His  Son,  and  so  has 
given  Himself.  Christ  incarnates  His 
word  of  promise  and  His  oath  in 
Himself,  and  fulfils  both.  He  adds 
the  yea  of  confirmation  to  God's  word. 
He  seals  the  promise  with  His  own 
blood.  Practical  thoughts :  1.  The 
folly  of  unbelief.  The  land  of  promise 
is  before  us,  but  we  are  slack  to  possess 
it.  All  depends  on  our  appropriation. 
(Compare  Josh.  i.  3.)  Only  what  we 
measure  off  with  our  own  feet  do  we 
actually  possess  and  enjoy.  2.  The 
sin  of  unbelief.  We  virtually  make 
God  both  a  liar  and  a  false  swearer  by 
not  accepting  His  promise.     We  dis- 


honour and  disobey  so  far  as  we  lack 
faith.  3.  The  inseparableness  of  the 
word  written  and  the  word  incarnate. 
He  who  appropriates  or  rejects  the 
promises  appropriates  or  rejects  Jesus. 
No  man's  anchor  has  an  anchorage 
until  he  finds  Jesus  as  his  Saviour. 
4.  Faith  and  hope  are  close  akin 
(Heb.  xi.  1).  To  believe  God's  word 
begets  hope.  The  more  confident  the 
faith  the  more  assured  the  hope.  Both 
reveal  their  real  value,  like  an  anchor, 
only  when  subjected  to  the  strain  of 
trial. — Anon. 

Taking  Sanctuary  with  Christ. —  A^ 
"  Fled  for  refuge  to  lay  hold  of  the 
hope  set  before  us."  There  are  two 
sets  of  associations  which  will  mate- 
rially help  us  in  the  endeavour  to 
understand  and  to  apply  this  some- 
what figurative  expression.  There  are 
one  or  two  cases  mentioned  in  Old 
Testament  Scriptures  in  which  men 
whose  lives  were  imperilled  fled  for 
personal  safety  into  the  tabernacle 
precincts,  and  caught  hold  of  the 
horns  of  the  altar  of  burnt  offering, 
evidently  with  the  idea  that  they 
could  not  be  slain  while  they  held 
those  horns.  Adonijah,  an  elder  son 
of  David,  made  a  desperate  effort  to 
secure  the  succession  to  David  s  throne. 
He  was  thwarted  by  the  promptitude 
of  Solomon  and  Bathsheba ;  and  then, 
knowing  that  he  had  forfeited  his  life 
by  his  rebellious  scheme,  "he  arose, 
and  went,  and  caught  hold  on  the  horns 
of  the  altar."  Solomon  graciously 
accepted  this  symbolical  appeal,  and 
granted  him  the  right  of  asylum  which 
he  thus  claimed.  Because  Adonijah 
had  been  successful,  Joab,  one  of  the 
rebellious  party,  and  a  much  more 
dangerous  man,  thought  he  would  try 
the  same  plan,  and  demand  the  same 
asylum.  He  also  "  took  sanctuary." 
"And  Joab  fled  unto  the  tabernacle 
of  the  Lord,  and  caught  hold  on  the 
horns  of  the  altar."  But  Solomon 
refused  in  this  case  to  recognise  the 
right  of  asylum ;  and  as  Joab  would 
not  voluntarily  come  forth  from  the 
holy  place,  he  ordered  Benaiah  to  fall 

247 


CHAP.   VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


upon  him  and  kill  him,  even  as  he 
clung  to  the  "  horns."  It  is  not 
necessary  now  to  vindicate  the  wisdom, 
or  the  rightness,  or  the  policy  of 
Solomon's  different  action  in  these  two 
cases ;  we  only  need  attend  to  the  fact, 
that  laying  hold  of  the  horns  of  the 
altar  was  one  of  the  ancient  modes  of 
claiming  sanctuary,  or  protection  from 
the  legal  consequences  of  misdeeds. 
It  should,  however,  be  fully  under- 
stood that  no  sanctuary  was  allowed 
for  wilful  and  determined  criminals, 
though  it  was  always  difficult  to 
decide  who  were  to  be  classed  as  such. 
Sanctuary  was  recognised  for  those 
who  had  done  some  wrong  by  haste, 
or  inadvertently,  or  by  accident,  or 
through  circumstances  that  were  quite 
beyond  their  own  control.  It  was 
altogether  a  degradation  of  the  idea 
of  "  sanctuary "  when,  in  the  middle 
ages,  villains  and  criminals  were 
shielded  from  the  proper  punishment 
of  their  crimes.  It  is  interesting  to 
know  that  the  right  of  sanctuary  was 
enjoyed  by  various  districts  and  build- 
ings in  London.  "  In  times  when 
every  man  went  armed,  when  feuds 
were  of  hourly  occurrence  in  the 
streets,  when  the  age  had  not  yet 
learned  the  true  superiority  of  right 
over  might,  and  when  private  revenge 
too  often  usurped  the  functions  of 
justice,  it  was  essential  that  there 
should  be  places  whither  the  homicide 
might  flee,  and  find  refuge  and  pro- 
tection until  the  violence  of  angry 
passions  had  subsided,  and  there  was 
chance  of  a  fair  trial.  Whitefriars 
was  once  a  refuge  for  all  criminals 
except  traitors  ;  but  in  the  fifteenth 
century  it  afforded  shelter  to  debtors 
only.  The  ancient  sanctuary  at  West- 
minster is  of  historical  celebrity  as  the 
place  where  Elizabeth  Gray,  queen  of 
Edward  IV.,  took  refuge  when  War- 
wick, the  kingmaker,  marched  to 
London  to  dethrone  her  husband,  and 
set  Henry  VI.  on  the  throne.  The 
precinct  of  St.  Martin  le  Grand  was 
also  a  sanctuary.  So  was  the  Savoy  ; 
and  it  was  the  custom  of  its  inhabitants 
to  tar  and  feather  those  who  ventured 

243  .    . 


to  follow  their  debtors  thither."  Dr. 
Turner,  the  missionary  in  Polynesia, 
tells  us  that,  in  the  Samoan  Islands, 
the  manslayer,  or  the  deliberate 
murderer,  flies  to  the  house  of  the 
chief  of  the  village,  or  to  the  house 
of  the  chief  of  another  village  to  which 
he  is  related  by  the  father's  or  the 
mother's  side.  In  nine  cases  out  of 
ten  he  is  perfectly  safe  if  he  remains 
there.  In  such  instances  the  chief 
delights  in  the  opportunity  of  showing 
his  importance.  The  other  set  of 
associations  likely  to  help  us  in  under- 
standing the  metaphor  of  the  text 
is  that  connected  with  the  very  familiar 
Mosaic  "  cities  of  refuge."  Indeed, 
that  is  more  likely  to  have  been  in 
the  mind  of  the  writer,  and  to  have 
guided  his  thought,  than  the  less 
famihar  sanctuary  safety  of  the  horns 
of  the  altar.  Moses  was  instructed 
to  make  an  arrangement  which  would 
give  an  unintentional  manslayer,  in 
any  part  of  the  country,  a  temporary 
asylum  from  the  family  goel,  or 
avenger  of  blood.  Three  cities  on 
each  side  Jordan  were  made  refuge 
cities,  and  the  roads  giving  access  to 
these  cities  were  required  to  be  kept 
in  good  repair,  so  that  the  man 
fleeing  from  the  avenger  might  have 
no  hindrance.  A  man  with  the  stain 
of  a  brother's  blood  upon  him  must 
flee  for  his  life  to  the  nearest  city 
of  refuge ;  or,  as  our  text  expresses 
it,  "  he  must  flee  for  refuge  to  the 
hope  set  before  him."  With  these 
two  sets  of  associations  in  our  minds, 
can  we  find  the  applications  of  our 
text  to  our  own  religious  conditions  ? 
If  we  are  Christians  indeed,  we  have 
taken  sanctuary  with  Christ ;  we  are 
in  the  Christ -sanctuary  ;  we  have,  as 
it  were,  firm  hold  of  the  "  horns  of 
the  altar "  ;  we  *'  have  fled  for  refuge 
to  lay  hold  of  the  hope  set  before 
us."  The  writer  is  using  persuasion  to 
Christian  professors. 

I.  A  Christian  is  one  who  has 
had  cause  to  flee. — He  has  been  a 
sinner,  and  such  a  sinner  that  he  has 
forfeited  his  life.  The  law  has  reached 
him,   "The  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS. 


CHAP.    VI. 


die."  We  need  not  speak  exaggeratedly 
about  this,  or  in  any  unreal,  excited, 
sentimental  way.  The  Christian  has 
not  been  a  murderer,  or  a  thief,  or  a 
slanderer,  or  unclean.  He  may  look 
at  the  great  commands  that  affect 
moral  relations,  with  the  rich  young 
ruler,  and  say  as  sincerely  as  he  did, 
"  All  these  have  I  kept  from  my  youth 
up."  And  yet  the  fact  may  remain,  that 
relative  to  the  searching  spiritual  law 
of  God  which  demands  a  spiritual  per- 
fection of  motive  as  well  as  of  conduct, 
and  the  supreme  devotion  of  the  whole 
man  to  the  glory  of  God,  he  is  found 
wanting,  judged  a  sinner,  guilty  before 
God.  He  has  sinned  with  his  soul ; 
he  must  die.  We  can  never  get  that 
sense  of  our  sin  which  makes  us  feel 
the  need  of  Jesus  as  our  Saviour  while 
our  attention  is  fixed  on  acts  of  sin. 
It  is  not  until  we  come  to  apprehend 
what  sin  really  is,  not  until  we  see 
it  to  be  the  soul's  rebellion  against  God 
in  order  to  exalt  itself,  that  we  see 
how  righteously  there  hung  over  us  the 
rebel's  doom — the  doom  of  the  spiritual 
and  eternal  death.  Once  the  avenger 
of  God's  outraged  honour  and  claim 
was  aroused,  was  at  our  heels,  and  we 
had  cause  to  flee.  Bunyan  pictures 
Graceless  awakened  to  see  himself 
a  sinner,  and  exposed  to  the  sinner's 
death.  In  his  hand  is  the  roll,  in 
which  he  reads.  There  is  the  direction 
which  he  needs.  He  has  cause  to 
flee ;  and  it  reads,  *'  Flee  from  the 
wrath  to  come." 

II.  A  Christian  is  one  for  whom 
a  refuge  has  been  provided. — It  is 
pictured  and  anticipated  in  the  old 
cities  of  refuge  for  the  manslayer.  It 
is  a  secure  refuge  ;  it  is  near  at  hand  : 
the  access  to  it  is  easy.  But  the  old 
city  was  only  a  materialising  of  the 
the  spiritual  reality.  The  refuge  pro- 
vided for  the  soul -sinner  is  a  man, 
a  fellow- man,  a  Divine  Man — alto- 
gether competent,  for  He  has  gained 
the  full  right  and  the  full  power  to 
become  man's  sanctuary.  The  psalmist 
had  his  foreshadowing  of  the  truth 
which  is  so  plain  to  us  when  he  said, 
"I  flee  unto  Thee  to  hide  me."     An 


imperilled  criminal  may  find  refuge  in 
a  house,  in  a  tabernacle,  in  a  city  ;  but 
an  imperilled  soul — and  remember  you 
once  were  a  sow^-sinner,  that  is  the 
supreme  fact  of  the  past  which  de- 
mands such  anxious  attention — cannot 
find  refuge  at  an  altar,  in  a  churchy  or 
even  in  an  appointed  city  of  refuge. 
No  sanctuary  that  you  ever  heard  of  is 
any  good  at  all  to  you,  you  soul-sinner. 
The  imperilled  soul,  after  whom  the 
eternal  death-avenger  is  pursuing,  can 
find  no  refuge  save  in  God — nay,  nay, 
there  is  something  far  deeper,  far 
more  wondei'ful  than  that — only  in 
the  God-man,  in  God  come  into  the 
soul's  actual  sphere,  to  stretch  out  arms 
of  welcome,  and  to  make  precisely 
adapted  defences  and  securities.  That 
Samoan  custom  to  which  allusion  has 
been  made  suggests  the  true  and 
spiritual  refuge-provision.  The  man 
fleeing  for  his  life  fled  to  a  man,  the 
strongest,  noblest,  most  powerful  man 
within  his  reach  ;  and  the  man,  the 
chief,  became  his  sanctuary  :  and  Christ 
Himself  is  our  refuge  provided. 

III.  A  Christian  is  one  who  has  fled 
to  the  refuge  provided. — It  was  much 
that  three  cities  this  side  Jordan,  and 
three  cities  that  side,  were  known 
throughout  the  land  to  be  "  cities  of 
refuge."  But  the  knowledge  never 
secured  any  manslayer  from  the 
avenger  of  blood.  Only  his  actual 
energetic  flight  over  bridge  and  road, 
only  his  breathless  hurrying  till  he 
could  almost  leap  the  last  step  within 
the  gates  of  the  city,  could  secure  him. 
He  must  flee  for  refuge.  It  is  much 
that  an  all-suflicient,  almighty,  in- 
finitely adapted,  and  most  gracious 
Saviour-refuge  has  been  provided  for 
us.  We  may  dwell  with  the  utmost 
satisfaction  upon  His  Divine  person, 
His  finished  righteousness.  His  per- 
fect work.  His  recognised  merit.  His 
entrusted  power  to  save,  and  His 
satisfying  attractiveness ;  but  the 
meditation,  and  even  the  knowledge, 
never  yet  saved  one  soul  from  the  fatal 
grip  of  the  avenger  who  executed  the 
eternal  death-penalty  on  soul-sinners. 
Adonijah      would     have     found      no 

249 


CHAP.   VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


clemency  if  he   had   satisfied   himself 
with  knowing  about  the  safety  gained, 
and  the  rights  secured,  by  clutching  the 
horns  of  the  altar.     He  must  flee  to 
the  tabernacle,  and  clutch  them ;  and 
there  must  be  no    possibility    of    mis- 
taking the    fact    that    he  does  clutch 
them.     And  we  cannot  be  Christians 
if    we   only    know    about    Christ   our 
refuge.       We    must   have    come    into 
personal    relations    with    Him.       We 
nuist    have   fled   to   Him   for   refuge. 
We  must  have  actually  taken  sanctu- 
ary with  Christ.     We  must  be  behind 
Him,   safe  behind    Him,    so   that    He 
shall   meet   and  answer   all  our  foes. 
The  apostle  Paul  has  a  famous  passage, 
which  is  the  exulting  triumph  of  the 
soul  that  has  fled  for  refuge,  that  is  ac- 
tually in  the  sanctuary.     It  is  the  song 
of  the  soul's  safety.     *'  Who  shall  lay 
anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ? 
It  is    God  that  justifieth  :    who  is  he 
that   shall    condemn?       It   is    Christ 
Jesus  that  died ;  yea  rather,  that  was 
raised  from  the  dead,  who  is  at    the 
right  hand  of  God,  who  also  maketh 
intercession  for  us.     Who  shall  sepa- 
rate us  from  the  love  of  Christ  ?  " 

IV.  A  Christian  is  one  who  has 
found  more  than  he  expected  in  the 
refuge  to  which  he  has  fled. — Here 
we   leave  all   the  earthly   symbols   of 
Christ  our  sanctuary  far,  far  behind. 
The  old  city  of  refuge  provided  safety 
— nothing   more  ;    or  rather    nothing 
more  that  was  unusual.     The  "  horns 
of  the  altar  "  provided  safety — nothing 
more.        The    middle- age    sanctuaries 
provided  safety,  and  little  or  nothing 
more.      And  if  all    I    could    tell   you 
about     Christ      the    soul's    sanctuary 
were  that   it  provided   for    the    soul's 
safety,    but    nothing    more,     I    would 
scarcely    care   to    tell    the    story — at 
least,    there  would    be  no    passion   of 
intense    persuasion     in     the     telling. 
Some  people  think  to  take  sanctuary 
with  Christ  that  they  may  be  secure 
from    going     to     hell.       Many    want 
Christ  for   nothing   more   than  safety 
from    their    spiritual   peril.      Let   us 
begin  with  that,  but  do  not  let  us  stay 
with  that.    Take  sanctuary  with  Christ 

250 


for   shelter    from   the   eternal   death- 
avenger  ;  and  if  you  are  true-hearted, 
you  will  soon  find  that  taking  sanctuary 
is  an  altogether  more  precious,  more 
inclusive,  more  wonderful  thing   than 
you  could  have  imagined.     Christ  our 
sanctuary    is    a   provision  for  present 
enjoyment,   and  an  inspiration  to  our 
hope.      All    thought   of   peril    passes 
away  in  the  restful,  happy,  beautiful 
life  we  can  live  in  this  sanctuary  ;  and 
everything  in  it  seems  full  of  reminders 
of  the    "house  not  made  with   hands 
eternal   in   the  heavens."      In  Christ 
our   sanctuary    we    are    safe — that   is 
true.     In  Christ  our  sanctuary  we  are 
being  saved — that  is  yot  more  precious 
truth.     In    Christ   our   sanctuary   we 
have  the  pledge  of  eternal  salvation — 
that  is  the  unspeakably  precious  truth. 
We  fled  for  refuge  to  a  Saviour,  and 
we  find  that  we  have  fled  for  refuge  to 
gain   a  hope  full  of  immortality    and 
bliss.       Would   you   be    a    Christian  ? 
Verily  you  have  good  cause  to  flee.     A 
refuge    has    been    provided    for   you. 
You    must   flee    to    it,  or   it   can   be 
no    refuge   to  you.      If   you  do   take 
sanctuary  with  Christ,  there  is  safety 
for   you,  joy   unspeakable  for  you,   a 
hope  laid  up  in  heaven  for  you. 

Ver.  19.  Hope  as  a  Christian  Grace. 
— Hope  is  the  looking  for  something 
to  come  with  an  earnest  longing  and 
desire.  What  is  it  that  Christians 
hope  for  ?  Is  it  not  for  "  fulness  of 
joy"  in  the  presence  of  God,  for  the 
"  pleasure "  which  is  at  His  "  right 
hand  for  evermore  "  ?  There  can  be  no 
true  hope  where  there  is  not  some 
faith  and  some  love.  If  we  have  no 
faith,  no  living  interest  in  the  things 
of  another  world — no  strong  feeling  of 
their  vast  importance — how  can  we 
hope  for  them  ?  And  we  only  hope 
for  that  on  which  we  have  set  our 
affections  ;  and  hope,  in  its  very  nature, 
springs  from  and  implies  a  love  of 
that  which  we  hope  for.  Perhaps  we 
do  not  think  enough  of  hope,  as  a 
Christian  grace  and  duty.  We  strive 
after  a  brighter  faith  and  a  warmer 
love,  but  suflter  our  hope  to  be  weak  and 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS, 


CPfAP.   VI. 


dim.  We  do  not  dwell  enough  on  the 
glorious  things  which  it  is  our  privilege 
to  hope  for.  God  has  given  us  hope  as 
a  help  and  support  to  other  higher 
motives. — W.   Walsham  How^  D.D. 

The  Anchor  Figure  for  Christian  Hope. 
— The  anchor,  in  one  form  or  another, 
was  known  among  the  most  ancient 
navigators  of  whom  we  have  any  re- 
cord ;  and  very  early,  as  was  natural, 
it  became  a  symbol  of  hope.  The 
Jews  were  not  a  maritime  people,  and 
they  probably  borrowed  both  the 
anchor,  and  the  symbohc  use  of  it, 
from  their  Gentile  contemporaries. 
From  the  text  it  appears  that  the 
anchor,  as  a  symbol  of  hope,  was 
well  known  in  the  apostolic  Church. 
The  early  Christians  engraved  it  on 
rings,  sculptured  it  on  monuments, 
and  on  the  walls  of  cemeteries  and 
catacombs.  Sometimes  the  symbol 
was  associated  with  the  fish,  which 
was  regarded  as  the  symbol  of  Christ 
Himself.  The  anchor  still  holds  its 
place  as  a  sign  of  hope,  and  will  do  so 
probably  to  the  end  of  time. 

The  SouVs  Anchor-hold. — Christ  is 
the  soul's  anchor.  He  is  within  the 
veil.  He  is  there  for  us — there  in 
such  real  connection  with  us  as  is 
represented  by  the  relation  of  the 
anchor  to  the  vessel.  The  illustration 
can  only  be  taken  in  a  general  way, 
suggesting  the  stability  of  that  in 
which  the  anchor  holds  ;  the  strength 
of  the  grip  with  which  it  holds ; 
and  the  real — though  not  necessarily 
apparent — safety  and  restfulness  of 
that  for  whose  sake  the  anchor  holds. 
The  verse  is  a  somewhat  difficult  one, 
and  the  metaphor  is  more  involved 
than  our  Western  precision  of  think- 
ing can  readily  appreciate.  Stuart 
gives  the  meaning  so  as  to  put  the 
stress  on  the  quality,  soundness,  of 
the  anchor.  '*  Which  hope  we  are  in 
possession  of,  e'xo/xci/,  and  it  will  prove 
to  us,  in  our  troubles  and  distresses, 
what  an  anchor  of  sound  materials, 
and  one  firmly  fixed,  will  be  to  a  ship 
in  a  tempest,  i.e.  it  will  keep  us  from 


making  *  shipwi-eck  of  the  faith.' 
^A(T(f>aXrj  means,  that  vjhich  will  not 
fail,  i.e.  like  an  anchor  of  good 
materials,  which  will  not  give  way. 
Our  Hope  enters  into  the  inner  sanctu- 
ary, where  God  dwells.  The  meaning 
is,  that  the  objects  of  hope  are  in 
heaven.  The  sentiment  then  is  this : 
Hold  fast  the  objects  of  your  Chris- 
tian hope.  These  will  keep  you  steady 
in  your  adherence  to  the  Christian 
religion,  and  preserve  you,  like  an 
anchor,  from  making  shipwreck  of 
your  faith."  Then  the  soul's  anchor- 
hold  is  its  hope.  We  have  said  above 
that  the  soul's  anchor  is  Christ.  Both 
are  true.  And  perhaps  if  we  could 
see  more  than  the  surface  of  things, 
if  we  could  see  the  depths  of  things, 
we  might  find  these  two  to  be  really 
one.  When  our  thoughts  circle  about 
ourselves,  our  anchor  seems  to  be  our 
hope,  which  we  put  out  into  the 
heavenly  things,  and  try  to  steady  our- 
selves by  getting  a  strong  hold.  But 
when  we  are  in  worthier  and  less 
self-centred  moods  of  thought,  we  lose 
satisfactions  in  our  hope,  in  anything 
that  is  ours,  and  see  Christ  to  be  our 
anchor,  close  fastened  to  us  here  amid 
the  seas  of  time,  but  actually  reaching 
into,  actually  there  in  the  heavenly 
world,  gripping  tight  for  us  the  ever- 
lasting rocks,  and  holding  us  so  firm 
that  no  wildest  storm  of  earth  can 
ever  shift  us  from  our  Christian  place. 

Ver.  20.  Jesus  as  our  Forerunner. 
— '*  Whither  as  a  forerunner  Jesus 
entered  for  us."  The  use  of  the  term 
*'  forerunner "  reminds  us  at  once  of 
John  the  Baptist,  and  suggests  a  com- 
parison or  contrast  between  John  as 
the  forerunner  of  Jesus,  and  Jesus  as 
the  forerunner  of  His  Church.  It  is 
necessary  to  the  idea  of  a  forerunner 
that  (1)  he  announces  one  coming; 
(2)  that  his  presence  pledges  the 
certainty  of  his  coming  ;  and  (3)  that 
he  secures  all  due  preparations  for  the 
coming.  In  these  senses  we  may  look 
at  the  work  of  John  the  Baptist  as 
the  forerunner  of  the  earthly  Messiah. 
He  announced  the  Coming  One.     His 

251 


CHAP.   VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS. 


presence  was  the  pledge  that  He  was 
coming,  and  the  assurance  that  He 
was  coming  at  once.  And  his  work 
as  forerunner  was  only  completed  in 
his  endeavour  to  secure  the  necessary 
moral  preparations  for  the  coming.  It 
is  manifest  that  these  peculiarities  of 
a  forerunner  can  only  be  applied  to 
Jesus  in  modified  ways,  if  He  be  re- 
garded as  the  forerunner  of  the  Church, 
as  the  Church  comes  to  its  spiritual 
privilege  and  heritage  ;  and  that  other 
ideas  must  be  associated  with  Christ 
as  forerunner.  He  does  go  into  the 
spiritual  world  to  say  that  His  Church 
is  coming,  and  to  pledge  His  Church's 
coming,  and  to  prepare  for  His  Church's 
coming ;  but  we  must  not  miss  His 
pecuUarity  as  forerunner — He  is  the 
ground  on  which  the  Church  has  the 
right  to  come,  and  the  source  of  the 
Church's  power  to  come. 

The  Order  of  Melchizedeh. — In  what 
sense  was  Christ  a  priest  after  the 
order  of  Melchizedek?  The  question 
may  be  answered  thus  :  The  Aaronic 
priesthood  was  typical  of  Christ,  but 


in  two  principal  respects  it  failed  in 
representing  the  great  Antitype.  It 
consisted  of  succeeding  generations  of 
mortal  men  ;  it  consisted  of  priests  not 
royal.  The  Holy  Ghost,  on  the  other 
hand,  suddenly  brings  Melchizedek 
before  us  in  the  patriarchal  history. 
A  royal  priest,  with  the  significant 
names  "  King  of  righteousness "  and 
"King  of  peace"  (Gen.  xiv.  18-20), 
and  as  suddenly  withdraws  him. 
Whence  he  comes  and  whither  he  goes 
we  know  not.  As  a  private  man  he 
had  an  unwritten  history,  like  others ; 
but  as  a  royal  priest  he  ever  remains, 
without  father,  without  mother,  with- 
out origin,  succession,  or  end ;  and 
therefore,  as  Paul  says  (Heb.  vii.  3), 
made  beforehand  of  God  an  exact  type 
of  the  eternity  of  the  priesthood  of 
Christ  (Ps.  ex.  4).  The  prophecy  was 
"  Thou  shalt  be  a  priest  for  ever"  or 
an  eternal  priest,  "  after  the  order 
of  Melchizedek."  The  similitude  of 
this  type  therefore  included  two 
things  :  1.  An  everlasting  priesthood. 
2.  The  union  of  the  kingly  and  priestly 
functions  in  one  person. — Hodge. 


ILLUSTRATIONS    TO    CHAPTER    VI. 


Ver.  8.  Burning  over  the  Ground. — This 
lad  who  is  setting  fire  to  these  briars  and 
thorns  is  doing  the  very  act  which  typified 
the  awful  state  of  those  apostates  whom  it 
was  impossible  to  renew  again  unto  repent- 
ance. He  finds  it  difficult  to  set  the  thorns 
on  fire,  for  it  is  too  late  in  the  season. 
Before  the  rains  came  this  whole  mountain- 
side was  in  a  blaze.  Thorns  and  briars  grow 
so  luxuriantly  that  they  must  be  burned 
off  always  before  the  plough  can  operate. 
The  peasants  watch  for  a  high  wind,  and 
then  the  fire  catches  easily,  and  spreads 
with  great  rapidity.  It  is  really  a  beautiful 
sort  of  fireworks,  especially  seen  at  night. — 
Thomson. 

Virgil  on  turning  the  Ground. — This  prac- 
tice of  burning  over  the  ground  is  very 
ancient  in  other  lands  besides  this,  and  as 
there  are  neither  fences  nor  habitations  in 
the  open  country  to  be  injured  by  fire,  there 
is  no  danger  in  it.  Virgil  says, — 
"  Long  practice    has   a   sure    improvement 

found, 
With  kindled   fires  to  burn  the    barren 

ground, 

262 


When  the    light  stubble,  to    the  flames 

resigned, 
Is  driven  along,  and  crackles  in  the  wind." 

1  Georgia 

The  Uses  of  burning  the  Ground  — The  poet 
speculates  about  the  possible  ways  in  which 
the  burning  is  beneficial ;  as,  whether  "  the 
hollow  womb  of  the  earth  is  warmed  by  it," 
or  some  "  latent  vice  is  cured,"  or  redundant 
humours  "  driven  off,  or  that  new  breath- 
ings "  are  opened  in  the  chapped  earth,  or 
the  very  reverse.  But  the  Arab  peasant 
would  say  that  two  very  good  reasons  not 
mentioned  by  the  poet  were  all-sufficient: 
that  it  destroyed  and  removed  out  of  the 
way  of  the  plough  weeds,  grass,  stubble,  and 
thorn-bushes;  and  that  the  ashes  of  this 
consumed  rubbish  was  a  valuable  manure  to 
the  land. — Thomson,  '•'■  Land  and  Book.''' 

Ver.  13.  Three  Kinds  of  Oaths,  or  Swearing, 
— In  early  times  we  find  no  scruples  about  the 
employment  of  the  oath.  As  then  humanity 
had  to  be  accustomed  to  a  mutual  reverence 
for  truth  and  fidelity,  it  was  natural  that 
its  use  should   be  frequent  and  its  signs 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   VI. 


forcible.  We  may  distinguish  three  kinds: 
1.  The  simple  kind,  when  a  private  indi- 
vidual would  confirm  something  in  a  sacred 
manner  by  his  own  spontaneous  action. 
He  would  call  on  the  name  of  his  God, 
and  the  Semitic  nations  raised  the  right 
hand,  as  if  in  a  challenge,  to  heaven.  Along 
with  the  name  of  God,  the  person  swearing 
would  at  the  same  time  designate  His  other 
attributes.  His  power  and  greatness,  or  what- 
ever else  of  the  essence  of  this  God  appeared 
to  him  at  the  moment  of  swearing  of  special 
significance.  One  of  the  shortest  and  finest 
of  the  asseverative  phrases  is  that  of  the 
last  king  of  Judah  :  "  As  Jahveh  lives,  who 
has  created  for  us  this  soul"  (Jer.  xxxviii.  16). 
There  is  a  peculiar  Hebrew  word  which 
means  "  to  bind  oneself  by  seven  [things]." 
According  to  this,  the  person  swearing 
deemed  it  necessary  to  call  upon  seven  things 
as  witnesses  of  his  declaration,  or  as  en- 
during monuments  of  the  truth.  It  might 
be  seven  men  whom  he  invoked,  or  seven  gods, 
or  else  he  might  touch  seven  sacred  objects, 
or  take  seven  steps  to  a  sacred  stone.  (This 
last  was  customary  amongst  the  ancient 
Indians  in  concluding  treaties.)  Sometimes 
seven  sacrificial  animals  were  presented 
(Gen.  xxi.  27-31).  2.  The  oath  became  an 
adjuration,  when  it  was  used  to  compel 
another  to  confess  the  truth,  or  observe  a 
command.  Then  the  punishments  impre- 
cated from  heaven  would  undoubtedly  be 
always  expressed  in  the  strongest  language. 
In  the  patriarchal  times  the  person  who 
desired  to  bind  another  to  the  strictest  truth 
used  to  make  the  latter  lay  his  hand  under 
his  own  hip,  on  that  part  of  the  body  out 
of  which,  according  to  ancient  ideas,  posterity 
proceeded.  Thus  he  would  refer  the  latter 
to  the  whole  of  posterity  at  once,  and 
to  its  revenge  should  he  break  his  promise. 
3.  When  the  oath  was  employed  in  making 
contracts  or  alliances,  each  of  the  two 
contracting  parties  made  the  other  utter 
aloud  the  words  of  the  contract  which  con- 
cerned him,  these  mutual  promises  being 
accompanied  by  similar  oaths  and  impre- 
cations.— Biblical  Things, 

Swearing  by  laying  Hands  on  the  Koran. — 
The  present  mode  of  swearing  among  the 
Mahometan  Arabs,  that  live  in  tents  as  the 
patriarchs  did,  according  to  De  la  Rogue ^ 
is  by  laying  their  hands  on  the  Koran. 
They  cause  those  who  swear  to  wash  their 
hands  before  they  give  them  the  book  ; 
they  put  their  left  hand  underneath,  and 
the  right  over  it.  Whether,  among  the 
patriarchs,  one  hand  was  under  and  the 
other  upon  the  thigh  is  not  certain.  As 
the  posterity  of  the  patriarchs  are  described 
as  coming  out  of  the  thigh,  it  has  been 
supposed  that  this  ceremony  had  some  rela- 
tion to  their  believing  the  promise  of  God, 
to  bless  ^11  the  nations  of  the  earth  by 


means   of  One  that  was  to  descend  from 
Abraham. — Harmer. 

Oath  *♦  By  the  life  of  Pharaoh  "  (Gen.  xlii. 
15). — Extraordinary  as  the  kind  of  oath 
which  Joseph  made  use  of  may  appear  to 
us,  it  still  continues  in  the  East.  Mr. 
Hanway  says  the  most  sacred  oath  among 
the  Persians  is  "  By  the  king's  head  "  ;  and 
among  other  instances  of  it  we  read  in  the 
travels  of  the  ambassadors  that  "  there  were 
but  sixty  horses  for  ninety-four  persons. 
The  nt'hemander  (or  conductor)  swore  by  the 
head  of  the  king  (which  is  the  greatest  oath 
among  the  Persians)  that  lie  could  not 
possibly  find  any  more."  And  Thevenot  says  : 
"  His  subjects  never  look  upon  him  but  with 
fear  and  trembling;  and  they  have  such 
respect  for  him,  and  pay  so  blind  an  obe- 
dience to  all  his  orders,  that  how  unjust 
soever  his  commands  might  be,  they  perform 
them,  though  against  the  law  both  of  God 
and  nature.  Nay,  if  they  sware  by  the 
king's  head,  their  oath  is  more  authentic, 
and  of  greater  credit,  than  if  they  swore  by 
all  that  is  most  sacred  in  heaven  and  upon 
earth." — Burder. 

Touching  the  Altar. — Patrick  tell  us  that 
it  was  the  custom  of  all  nations  to  touch  the 
altar  when  they  made  a  solemn  oath,  calling 
God  to  witness  the  truth  of  what  they  said, 
and  to  punish  them  if  they  did  not  speak  the 
truth. 

Smearing  lawfully. —  Cruden  says:  That  a 
person  swear  lawfully,  must  have  a  regard 
1.  First  to  the  object  \  that  he  swear  by  the 
Lord  alone;  for  seeing  we  deify  and  make 
that  our  god  which  we  swear  by,  therefore 
we  forsake  the  true  God  if  we  swear  by  that 
which  is  no  God  (Jer.  v.  7).  2.  To  the 
manner  \  that  he  swear  in  truth,  in  judg- 
ment, and  in  righteousness  (Jer.  iv.  2) ;  that 
he  swear  not  falsely  or  deceitfully,  but  that 
which  is  agreeable  to  truth ;  that  he  swear 
not  rashly,  but  upon  due  consideration  of  all 
circumstances;  and  that  he  swear  nothing 
but  what  is  agreeable  to  justice  and  equity. 
3.  He  must  have  a  regard  to  the  end  ;  that 
God  may  be  glorified,  our  duty  discharged, 
controversies  appeased,  our  brethren  satisfied, 
or  our  own  or  others'  innocency  cleared. 

Ver.  18.  The  True  Refuge. — During  the 
rebellion  in  Ireland  in  1798,  the  rebels  had 
long  meditated  an  attack  on  the  Moravian 
settlement  at  Grace  Hill,  Wexford  County. 
At  length  they  put  their  threat  in  execution, 
and  a  large  body  of  them  marched  to  the 
town.  When  they  arrived  there,  they  saw 
no  one  in  the  streets  nor  in  the  houses. 
The  brethren  had  long  expected  this  attack  ; 
but  true  to  their  Christian  profession,  they 
would  not  have  recourse  to  arms  for  their 
defence,  but  assembled  in  their  chapel,  and 

253 


CHAP.  VII.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


in  solemn  prayer  besought  Him  in  whom 
they  trusted  to  be  their  shield  in  the  hour 
of  danger.  The  ruffian  band,  hitherto  breath- 
ing nothing  but  destruction  and  slaughter, 
were  struck  with  astonishment  at  this  novel 
sight.  Where  they  expected  an  armed  hand, 
they  saw  it  clasped  in  prayer — where  they 
expected  weapon  to  weapon,  and  the  body 
armed  for  the  fight,  they  saw  the  bended 
knee  and  humble  head  before  the  altar  of 
the  Prince  of  peace.  They  heard  the  prayer 
for  protection  ;  they  heard  the  intended 
victims  asking  mercy  for  their  murderers ; 
they  heard  the  song  of  praise,  and  the  h3^mn 
of  confidence,  in  the  "  sure  promise  of  the 
Lord,"  They  beheld  in  silence  this  little 
band  of  Christians  ;  they  felt  unable  to  raise 
their  hand  against  them  ;  and  after  lingering 
in  the  streets  which  they  filled  for  a  night 
and  a  day,  with  one  consent  they  turned  and 
marched  away  from  the  place,  without  having 
injured  an  individual  or  purloined  a  single 
loaf  of  bread.  In  consequence  of  this  signal 
mark  of  protection  from  heaven,  the  in- 
habitants of  the  neighbouring  villages 
brought  their  goods,  and  asked  for  shelter 
in  Grace  Hill,  which  they  called  the  City  of 
Refuge. 

Ver.  19.  The  Anchor -symbol  in  the  Cata- 
Gomhs. — Because  the  anchor  is  often  the  sole 
hope  and  resource  of  the  sailor,  it  came  to 


be  called  by  the  ancients  "  the  sacred 
anchor,"  and  was  made  the  emblem  of 
"hope."  By  the  early  Christians  it  was 
naturally  adopted,  sometimes  with  regard 
to  the  stormy  ocean  of  human  life,  at  other 
times  in  relation  to  the  persecutions  and 
dangers  of  the  ship  of  the  Church.  It  is 
found  engraved  on  rings,  and  depicted  on 
monuments,  and  on  the  walls  of  cemeteries 
in  the  catacombs.  The  symbols  on  sepulchral 
tablets  often  contain  allusions  to  the  name 
of  the  deceased.  The  Chevalier  de  Rossi 
states  that  he  has  three  times  found  an 
anchor  upon  tituli,  bearing  names  derived 
from  spes,  the  Latin,  or  elj)is,  the  Greek  word 
for  "  hope,"  upon  the  tablet  of  a  certain 
ELPIDIVS,  and  upon  two  others,  in  the 
cemetery  of  Priscilla,  two  women,  ELPIZVSA 
and  SPE8.  In  some  cases  above  the  trans- 
verse bar  of  the  anchor  stands  the  letter  E, 
which  is  probably  the  abbreviation  of  the 
word  elj)is.  Further,  we  find  the  anchor 
associated  with  the  Jish,  the  symbol  of  the 
Saviour.  It  is  clear  that  the  union  of  the 
two  symbols  expresses  "  hope  in  Jesus  Christ," 
and  is  equivalent  to  the  formula  so  common 
on  Christian  tablets,  "  Spes  in  Christo," 
*'  Spes  in  Deo,"  "  Spes  in  Deo  Christo."  The 
fact  that  the  transverse  bar  of  an  anchor 
below  the  ring  forms  a  cross  may  have 
helped  towards  the  choice  of  the  anchor 
as  a  Christian  symbol. 


CHAPTER  VII. 
THE  TYPE  OF  UNIVERSAL  PRIESTHOOD. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  Melchizedek. — Already  three  times  referred  to  (chaps,  v.  6,  10,  vi.  20) ;  in  each 
case  the  order  of  priesthood  which  Melchizedek  represents,  rather  than  the  man  himself, 
is  in  the  writer's  mind.  Melchizedek  is  a  very  vague  and  indistinct  figure.  All  that 
is  actually  known  concerning  him  is  found  in  Gen.  xiv.  18-20.  He  is  mentioned  in 
Ps.  ex.  4.  The  writer  gives  a  mystical  explanation  of  these  brief  references  to  a  priestly 
order,  antecedent  to,  and  independent  of,  the  order  of  Aaron.  Notice  that  Melchizedek  is 
the  only  priestly  figure  presented  in  tradition  or  history  prior  to  the  anointing  of  Aaron. 
Farrar  reminds  us  that  the  "  Jews  attached  high  honour  to  the  name  of  Melchizedek,  whom 
they  identified  with  Shem ;  and  Philo  had  already  spoken  of  Melchizedek  as  a  type  of  the 
Logos."  The  mystical  explanation  of  his  priestly  order  is  the  advanced  truth  for  which  the 
writer  feared  that  his  readers  were  hardly  prepared.  Salem. — Perhaps  another  name  for 
Jebus,  which  was  afterwards  Jerusalem.  Perhaps  it  is  an  appellative,  rather  than  the  name 
of  a  place  (see  ver.  2).  Farrar  identifies  it  with  the  town  near  Shechem  (see  Gen.  xxxiii.  18  ; 
Johniii.  23);  and  this  is  the  view  of  Jerome.  Priest — Gen.  xiv.  18.  It  was  common  among 
the  ancients  for  the  kings  to  be  priests  also,  as  in  the  time  of  the  Maccabees;  but  we  look 
for  something  unusual  in  this  priesthood  of  Melchizedek.  The  suggestion  made  by  Miss 
Corbaux,  in  her  work  on  the  Rephaim,  is  worthy  of  special  attention.  She  thinks  that 
Salem  was  the  central  seat  of  their  authority,  and  that  the  king  who  reigned  there  was 
the  supreme  head  of  their  nation,  to  whom  the  different  tribes  were  subordinate.  If 
Melchizedek  had  been  a  mere  local  chief,  it  is  difficult  to  see  why  the  King  of  Sodom,  an 
Emim  prince,  and  why  Abraham,  should  pay  him  the  deference  they  did.  ♦'  But  the  moment 
the  important  fact  comes  in  by  way  of  explanation,  supported  by  sufficient  extrinsic  evidence, 

254 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.         chap.  vii. 


that  the  King  of  8alem  was  the  supreme  chief  of  the  entire  nation,  and  the  local  chiefs 
of  the  tribes  were  his  subordinates,  the  whole  transaction  recorded  in  Genesis  becomes 
intelligible,  because  we  understand  the  mutual  relation  of  all  the  parties  concerned  in  it." 
This  suggests  that  Melchizedek  was  the  one  high  priest  of  the  day,  and  not  one  of  many 
priests.  Most  high  God. — K.V.  "  God  most  high."  EL  elion,  also  a  title  of  God  among  the 
Phoenicians.  Distinctly  the  one  and  only  God,  specially  known  to  the  Hebrews  as  '*  Jehovah." 
A  true  high  priest  of  the  true  God.  There  need  be  no  assumption  that  the  knowledge  of 
the  true  God  was  confined  to  the  family  of  Abraham.  Slaughter. — Better,  smiting,  with  the 
sense  of  defeat.     Blessed  him. — This  is  significant,  as  indicnting  a  distinctly  priestly  act. 

Ver.  2.  King  of  righteousness.— /5^a<rtXei>s  dLKaLocvvris.  King  of  peace.— /Sao-iXci's  dp-qv-q^. 
Philo  also  interprets  "  King  of  Salem  "  as  "  King  of  peace."  A  mystical  connection  between 
the  two  names  may  be  intended,  since  "  righteousness  "  is  the  necessary  antecedent  to  "  peace." 
See  Tsa.  xxxii.  17  ;  Piph.  ii.  14,  15,  17 ;  Kom.  v.  1. 

Ver.  3.  Without  father,  etc. — Tliese  are  not  stated  as  actual  facts  concerning  Melchizedek. 
They  are  true  so  far  as  the  narrative  of  Genesis  presents  him  to  us.  He  is  set  before  us 
without  any  genealogy.  The  writer  argues  from  the  silence  of  Scripture.  *'  The  fact  that 
Melchizedek  had  no  recorded  father  or  mother  or  lineage  enhanced  his  dignity,  because 
the  Aaronic  prie!?thood  depended  exclusively  on  the  power  to  prove  a  direct  descent  from 
Aaron,  which  necessitate(l  a  most  scrupulous  care  in  the  preservation  of  the  priestly 
genealogies."  The  Arabians  say  of  a  man  who  has  by  his  own  effoits  procured  an  exalted 
place  of  honour,  and  who  is  descended  from  ignoble  parents,  he  had  no  father — that  is,  he 
is  not  named  from  his  fatlier,  does  not  derive  his  titles  and  honours  fiom  his  father. 
Beginning  of  days. — Or  a  fixed  and  limited  period  during  which  to  exercise  his  priesthood. 
For  limitation  of  I.evitical  service  see  Num.  iv.  3,  23,  35,  43,  47;  and  compare  Num.  viii. 
24,  25.  Continually. — Perpetually.  As  we  have  no  intimation  of  its  ever  having  ceased,  we 
assume  it  is  still  going  on. 

We  are  now  prepared  for  the  arguments  or  illustrations  that  are  to  be  based  on  this  man's 
name  and  history — on  what  is  not  known  about  him  as  well  as  what  is  known.  The  writer 
treats  Scripture  in  a  singular  way. 

A  general  sketch  of  the  comparison  of  the  orders  may  be  given,  in  order  to  show  that  the 
order  of  Melchizedek's  priesthood  better  represents  that  of  Christ  than  the  Levitical.  It 
should  be  noticed  that  Q\\x\'^\!^  priesthood  gets  illustration  from  Melchizedek,  but  Christ's 
work  as  a  priest  gets  illustration  from  Aaron.     These  are  the  chief  points  brought  out  : — 

(1)  To  show  the  dignity  and  superiority  of  the  order  of  Melchizedek. 

(a)  Abraham,  though  founder  of  the  Jewish  people,  gave  tithes  to  Melchizedek. 

(b)  Though  Levi  was  appointed  to  receive  tithes,  nevertheless,  in  the  person  of 

Abraham,  he  virtually  paid  tithes  to  Melchizedek. 

(2)  Continuing  the  comparison  between  the  orders. 

(«)  The  office  of  Levi  was  subject  to  change  and  death ;  the  office  of  Melchizedek 
was  permanent  and  perpetual. 

(b)  The  prophecy  of  Messiah  as   belonging  to  another  priesthood  indicated  the 

imperfection  of  the  first  priesthood. 

(3)  Proof  that  Christ  is  Priest  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek. 

(«)  He  sprang  from  the  tribe  of  Judah,  not  the  tribe  of  Levi. 
(&)  There  was  a  priest  promised  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek, 

(c)  That  promise  is  only  fulfilled  in  Christ. 

(4)  Further  extension  of  the  comparisons. 

(a)  Appointment  of  priests  was  without  an  oath,  and  with  an  oath. 

(J)  Priests  of  Levi  were  many ;  Melchizedek  was  one  priest. 

(c}  The  sacrifices  of  Levi  were  many,  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  was  one. 

(d)  Christ  is  a  heavenl}^  spiritual  Priest ;   Levites  were  only  earthly,  ceremonial 

priests, 
Christ  could  not  be  an  earthly  priest,  seeing  that  God  had  already  appointed  such.     He 
must  be  a  priest  after  a  new  order.     So  the  writer  keeps  close  to  his  point,  the  uniqueness  of 
Christ.     He  belongs  to  his  own  plane. 

Ver.  4.  How  great. — Lit.  "  of  what  exalted  rank."  Jesus  had  shown  great  reverence  for 
Abraham.  Spoils. — Lit.  "  the  top  part  of  a  heap  of  grain."  Then  firstfruits.  "As  offerings 
were  made  to  their  gods,  by  the  Greeks,  from  spoils  taken  in  war,  d/cpo^iVm  came  at  last  to 
signify,  in  the  Greek  language,  any  kind  of  spoils  from  which  an  offering  for  the  gods 
was  taken. 

Ver.  5.  Take  tithes.— See  Num.  xviii.  28-30;  Deut.  xiv.  22,  27-29.  Tithe-giving  was  a 
recognition  of  superior  dignity.  Out  of  the  loins. — A  Hebrew  figure  (Gen.  xxxv.  11): 
descendants  from  Abraham. 

Ver,  6.  Descent. — P.V.  "genealogy";  margin,  "pedigree."  Received.— R.V.  "hath  taken." 
dedeKOLTioKe  is  Hellenistic ;  found  only  in  the  New  Testament  and  the  LXX.  Blessed. — The 
act  of  a  superior. 

255 


CHAP.  VII.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


Ver.  7.  Less.— Simply  inferior  in  rank  or  office.    Lit.  "  Inferiority  is  blessed  by  superiority." 

Ver.  8.  That  die. — Not  natural  death ;  whose  term  of  ministry  ends.  The  writer  has  in 
mind  the  limita^^ion  of  the  Levitical  priestly  office,  as  a  sign  of  its  inferiority.  There. — In 
the  Scripture  narrative  of  Melchizedek.  Liveth. — No  mention  being  made  of  his  priesthood 
ending,  it  is  taken  as  continuing.  The  writer  is  raising  an  argument  to  prove  the  perpetuity 
of  Christ's  priesthood. 

Ver.  9.  May  so  say. — Or,  *'  If  I  may  be  allowed  the  expression."  The  apology  indicates  a 
fear  that  what  he  was  about  to  say  would  seem  far-fetched  and  exaggerated;  and  it  is 
a  kind  of  argument  that  Western  minds  are  very  imperfectly  able  to  appreciate.  Note  that 
Isaac  was  not  born  until  fourteen  years  after  the  incident  of  the  tithe-paying.  The  writer's 
suggestion  must  be  taken  as  popular  and  rhetorical,  not  as  logical  or  scientific.  Payed 
tithes. — The  whole  race,  according  to  Eastern  ideas,  may  be  spoken  of  as  paying  tithes, 
representatively,  in  Abraham,  its  head  ;  and  Levi  is  included  in  the  race.  "  The  descendants 
of  Abraham  cannot  but  occupy  a  lower  position  in  presence  of  one  who  appears  as  Abraham's 
superior."  Only  "  in  a  certain  sense "  was  Levi  then  potentially  existent.  The  argument 
depends  on  patriarchal  and  tribal  notions  and  sentiments. 

Ver.  11. — Here  begins  the  argument  of  the  next  nine  verses.  Perfection. — A  difficult  word ; 
the  full  meaning  of  everything  that  could  be  required  of  a  human  priesthood.  "  Power  of 
perfectionment,  capacity  to  achieve  the  end  in  view."  This  was  not  to  be  attained  through 
the  Levitical  priesthood.  Some  say  the  term  means  "accomplishment";  others  "sancti- 
fication  " ;  others  "  consummate  happiness  " ;  others  "  moral  rectitude."  Compare  chap.  ix. 
9-14;  X.  1,  2-4;  3,  14.  The  point  of  the  writer  is,  that  it  could  not  meet  the  entire  circle 
of  human  need.  It  could  neither  spiritually  purify  their  worshippers,  nor  free  them  from 
the  conscience-burden  of  their  sins,  nor  from  their  apprehension  of  eternal  punishment. 
There  was,  therefore,  manifest  room  for  another  priesthood  after  another  order. 

Ver.  12,  Being  changed. — Better,  "being  transferred";  a  mild  and  delicate  term  is  pur- 
posely chosen,  fieTaTidrjfjLL.  "  It  is  a  characteristic  of  the  writer  to  be  thus  careful  not  to 
shock  the  prejudices  of  his  readers  more  than  was  inevitable.  His  whole  style  of  argument, 
though  no  less  effective  than  that  of  St.  Paul  in  his  own  sphere,  is  more  conciliatory, 
more  deferential,  less  vehemently  iconoclastic.  This  relation  to  St.  Paul  is  like  that  of 
Melancthon  to  Luther  "  {Farrar').  Also  of  the  law. — From  a  ceremonial  to  a  spiritual  range. 
With  the  ceremonial  alone  had  the  Levitical  priest  to  deal.  This  change  of  the  law  is  not 
sufficiently  recognised.  It  is  easy  to  go  astray  if  we  attempt  to  explain  the  work  of  Christ 
by  the  formal  terms  of  the  Mosaic  law.  Christ  is  the  fulfilment  of  its  spiritual  suggestions 
and  meanings. 

Ver.  14.  Out  of  Juda. — Whatever  may  be  the  difficulties  of  our  Lord's  genealogies,  as 
given  in  Matthew  and  Luke,  the  fact  is  clear  that  He  belonged  to  Judah,  not  Levi.  This 
is  mentioned  as  one  instance  of  change  in  the  law. 

Ver.  15.  More  evident. — Because  there  is  a  distinct  prophecy  and  promise  of  another 
priest.    Ariseth. — Is  to  arise. 

Ver.  16.  Carnal. — Fleshly,  in  the  range  of  the  outward,  the  material.  Not  here  "fleshly" 
in  its  bad  sense,  but  simply  "human."  Power  of  an  endless  life. — Stuart  renders  iPToXrjs 
aapKiKTJs  as  preceptum  caducum,  an  obligation  of  a  temporary,  perishable  nature  ;  and  fw'^s 
aKaTokvTov,  indissoluble  life,  or  perpetuity.  The  word  d/caraXivros  is  not  elsewhere  found  in 
the  New  Testament.  Based  on  the  assumption  that  the  priesthood  of  Melchizedek  was 
without  limitations  of  time. 

Ver.  18.  Disannulling. — Setting  aside  from  its  active  place  and  work,  as  that  which  has 
had  its  day,  and  is  no  longer  efficient.  It  had  to  be  superseded.  A  stronger  word  is  now 
used  than  that  in  ver.  12.  Weakness,  etc. — See  following  verse.  Sufficient  in  relation  to 
man's  spiritual  needs.  The  Jews  recognised  imperfection  in  the  Mosaic  system,  as  they 
expected  perfection  only  when  Messiah  should  have  appeared. 

Ver.  20.  Not  without  an  oath. — Sign  of  an  immediate  call.  Compare  the  Levitical  priests, 
who  came  into  office  by  simple  right  of  descent.     See  the  allusion  to  Ps.  ex.  4. 

Ver.  22,  Better  testament. — diadrjKTj  should  have  been  translated  covenant.  Heb.  Bertth. 
Of  "  testaments  "  the  Hebrews  knew  nothing. 

Ver.  24.  Continueth  ever. — A  firm  assertion  of  the  present  living  priesthood  of  Christ. 
Unchangeable. — R.V.  margin,  "  hath  a  priesthood  that  doth  not  pass  to  another."  Vulgate, 
seminternmii.  Stuart,  "  without  succession."  Moulton,  "  Since  His  life  is  indissoluble, 
none  can  trespass  on  His  right  and  invade  His  priesthood." 

Ver.  25.  Save. — To  be  understood  here  as  embracing  the  various  services  to  men  that  are 
represented  in  the  work  of  the  high  priest.  Uttermost. — Or  "  consummate  end."  Completely 
deal  with  even  their  highest,  most  spiritual  needs.  Judaism  could  not  "  save  to  the 
uttermost,"  because  its  range  was  confined  to  ceremonial  offences.  Make  intercession. — 
Lit.  to  interpose  on  their  behalf  who  employ  him  as  their  High  Priest, 

Ver.  26.  Became  us. — Was  necessary  for  us,  who  are  conscious  of  these  higher,  spiritual 
needs.    That  which  is  precisely  "  befitting  "  may  be  spoken  of  as  necessary.    Holy. — Internal, 

256 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.         chap,  vil 


Harmless.  — External.  One  who  does  no  evil.  XTndefiled. — This  is  the  opposite  to  the 
"  unclean  "  of  Judaism.  Free  from  ceremonial  charge.  Separate  from  sinners. — Diverse 
from  them  ;  unlike  them  ;  having  no  sort  of  fellowship  with  them.  Made  higher  than  the 
heavens. — Exalted  above  the  heavens.  Compare  chap.  i.  3.  For  this  idea  of  Christ's  exalta- 
tion in  acknowledgment  of  the  perfect  fulfilment  of  His  mission,  see  Phil.  ii.  9 ;  Col.  i.  8 ; 
Heb.  ii.  9,  viii.  1 ;  Rev.  v.  12;  Matt.  xxv.  31. 

Ver.  27.  Daily. — The  high  priest  officiated  every  day,  as  well  as  on  the  Day  of  Atonement 
(Heb.  vi.  19-22 ;  Num.  xxviii.  3,  4).  His  own  sins. — See  the  order  of  ceremonies  on  the 
Day  of  Atonement.  Offered  up  Himself. — Surrendered  Himself  in  life  and  death  obedience  ; 
this  was  the  one  sacrifice. 

Ver.  28.  Inj&rmity. — Here  moral  infirmity,  which  involved  the  need  of  their  oflEering 
sacrifices  for  themselves.  Since  the  law. — And  therefore  a  later  and  fuller  manifestation 
of  the  will  of  God.  Consecrated. — As  High  Priest  for  a  perpetual  service  to  sinful  men. 
Stuart  renders,  "  the  Son,  who  is  for  ever  exalted  to  glory."  K.V.  reads,  "  a  Son  perfected 
for  evermore."  Whose  unchangeable,  untransmissible,  ever-living  priesthood  is  our  ground 
of  hope. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH—Verses  1—3. 

The  Historical  and  Symbolical  Melchizedek. — Only  a  passing  allusion  is  made 
to  Melchizedek  in  the  book  of  Genesis.  He  flashes  into  view  for  a  brief  moment, 
and  then  passes  back  into  the  darkness.  So  vague  is  our  knowledge  of  him  that 
many  have  doubted  whether  he  is  to  be  regarded  as  an  historical  personage,  or 
only  a  poetical  or  legendary  character. 

I.  The  Historical  Melchizedek. — For  many  it  settles  the  question  of  his 
historical  character  that  he  is  mentioned  in  a  Bible  book  ;  but  the  critical- 
minded  are  disturbed  by  the  evident  legendary  character  of  some  parts  of  the 
book  of  Genesis,  and  find  it  difficult  to  decide  what  is  historical  and  what  is  not. 
This  much  may  be  said,  Melchizedek  is  as  real  a  person  as  Abraham.  To  accept 
the  narrative  of  the  slaughter  of  the  kings  involves  accepting  the  payii)g  of 
tithes  to  Melchizedek.  Kecent  researches  have  confirmed  the  view  that  from 
very  early  times  Salem,  or  Jerusalem,  was  inhabited,  and  occupied  a  central 
position,  and  a  special  sovereignty,  in  relation  to  the  tribes  that  dwelt  around. 
If  this  be  so,  the  sovereign  rights  of  Melchizedek  may  be  fully  understood.  The 
word  Melchizedek  means  "  king  of  righteousness,"  which  may  mean,  or  suggest 
the  meanings,  "  king  of  morals,"  "  king  of  religion,"  which  is  essentially 
righteousness ;  or  "  righteous  king,"  recognised  and  named  because  of  his 
character ;  or  "  one  who  rules  in  righteousness "  ;  or  "  one  whose  rule  makes 
for  righteousness."  The  name  at  least  suggests  that  he  was  no  mere  king  of 
a  ceremonial  system,  but  a  king  of  the  spiritual  things  of  character,  and  so  a 
fitting  foreshadowing  of  Him  who  was  "  Lord  of  lambs  the  lowly.  King  of 
saints  the  holy."  "  Whence  he  came,  from  what  parentage,  remains  untold ; 
nay,  even  of  what  place  he  was  king  remains  uncertain  (for  Salem  may  be 
either  Jerusalem  or  the  smaller  town  of  which,  in  after-times,  the  ruins  were 
shown  to  Jerome,  not  far  from  the  scene  of  the  interview).  He  appears  for  a 
moment,  and  then  vanishes  from  our  view  altogether."  His  name  is  Semitic, 
but  he  dwelt  among  Canaanitish  people.  Possibly  he  was  a  relic  of  the  older 
inhabitants,  and  for  this  reason  held  in  peculiar  reverence.  In  some  respects  he 
may  be  compared  to  Balaam.  Historically  treated,  three  things  claim  attention  : 
1.  His  kingship,  which  may  have  been  that  of  a  particular  town,  but,  more 
probably,  was  a  suzerainty  over  the  whole  land.  That  kingship  was  exercised 
for  righteousness,  and  therefore  Melchizedek  was  a  peacemaker.  It  is,  however, 
quite  possible  that  he  was  not  an  actual  reigning  king,  but  the  kingly  man  of 
the  age — the  standard  of  goodness,  the  model  of  righteousness.  If  so,  we  can 
better  understand  his  being  also  priest.  2.  His  priesthood.  It  is  true  that  in 
early  ages  the  heads  of  tribes  were  also  priests  of  the  tribe;  but  it  is  much 

s  257 


CHAP.  VII.         HOMILETIC  COMMEXTARY :    HEBREWS. 


more  true  that  the  exceptionally  good  man  always  is  a  priest  to  his  fellows,  a 
ministrant  of  heavenly  blessings  to  them,  and  an  intercessor  with  God  for  them. 
The  best  man  is  always  both  kingly  and  priestly.  3.  His  religion.  There  need 
be  no  diliiciilty  about  recognising  this  as  the  genuine  rehgion  of  humanity,  the 
woi-ship  of  the  one  God  according  to  the  principles  of  His  universal  revelation  to 
humanity.  '•  His  pure  and  holy  faith  in  the  '  Most  High  God  '  was  doubtless  a 
relic  of  the  anciently  universal  recognition  of  the  one  Creator.  .  .  .  God  has  at 
no  time  left  Himself  ^^'ithout  a  witness  even  in  lands  se<-luded  from  the  direct 
privileges  of  His  people."  El  or  II  was  the  ancient  supreme  god  of  the  Semitic 
races  of  Babylonia. 

II.  The  Symbolical  Melchizedek. — If  he  belonged  to  the  earlier  races  of 
Palestine,  and  was  above  the  average  size  of  the  existinor  inhabitants,  va£:ue 
ideas,  and  strange  legends,  might  easily  gather  about  him.  The  people  around 
would  know  nothing  about  him,  about  his  father,  or  about  the  office  he  held  : 
they  would  only  feel  a  vague  reverence  for  the  imusual-looking,  beneficent,  and 
other-world  sort  of  man  who  moved  to  and  fro  amongst  them.  He  became  the 
symbol  of  the  permanent  priest  of  humanity  ;  who  must  be — 1.  Human,  yet 
distinct  from  humanity.  2.  Able  to  gain  power  by  what  he  is  in  holy 
character.  3.  Presenting  the  claims  of  righteousness  wherever  he  goes. 
4.  Always  the  same,  in  order  to  stamp  righteousness  as  an  unchangeable  thing. 
No  more  fitting,  and  no  more  suggestive,  symbol  of  Christ,  man's  spiritual  and 
eternal  priest,  could  be  wished  for. 


SUGGESTIVE  XOTES  AXD   SERMOX  SKETCHES. 

Ver.    1.    The  Historical    Figure    of  appears  to  us   the  most  simple.     AU 

Melchizedek. — This  passage,  which  has  these    authors   substantially   agree   in 

ofttimes  been  misunderstood,  presents  the  meaning  they  attach  to  the  first 

no   real  difficulties.     The   last   clause,  two  clauses.    That  the  words  "  without 

"  without    descent,"  is  explanatory  of  father  and  without  mother "  may  be 

the  two  former.     Melchizedek  is  thus  used   in  a  modified  sense   to   incUcate 

styled    "  without   father    and  without  those  whose  parentage  is  either  obscure 

mother "  simply  because  he  was  not,  as  or    unknown,    is    evident    from    many 

were  the  Levitical  priests,  recorded  in  passages    in    the    Greek    and    Latin 

any    genealogy.     This   is    made    more  writers.     Thus  Ion,  in  Euripides,  con- 

plaiu  by  the  language  used  in  ver.  6  :  ceiring  himself  of   mean   birth,    says, 

"But  he  whose  descent  is  not  counted  ''As  I  am  without  mother,  and  with- 

from  them  [i.e.  the  sons  of  Leri,  ver.  5]  out    father,    I    attend   the   temple    of 

received  tithes,"  etc.     "  These  words,"  Apollo."      So    Philo    calls    Sarah,    of 

says     Tholuck,     "  denote     him    whose  whose    mother    no    mention    is    made, 

genealogy  is  unknown  ;  while  a  priest,  "  without  mother."     In  Latin  authors 

in  the  Le^"itical   sense,  could   not,  by  this    usage     is     still     more     common, 

any  means,  dispense  with  the  proof  of  Seneca,  in  his  108th   Epistle,    writes  : 

his  descent."     Stuart  and  others  differ  "  There    are    two    Poman    kings,    of 

sHghtly  from  the   explanation   of    the  whom  the  one  has   not  a  father,  the 

phrase  "  without  descent  "  given  above.  other  a  mother."     He  then  refers  to 

They  take  the   sense   to   be,    "  whose  Serrius  TuUius    and  Ancus    Martins, 

father  and  mother  are  not  mentioned  Of  the  former  king,  lAxy  states  that 

in  Scripture."    Kuinoel  takes  the  mean-  he  was  born  of  a  female  slave,  "of  no 

ing  to  be,  "  who  had  not  a  father,  a  father."   Horacespeaksof  men  "sprung 

priest,  nor  a  mother  the  daughter  of  a  from  no  ancestors  "  who  had  risen  to 

priest."     The  sense  given  by  Tholuck,  great  eminence  and  renown.     Even  the 

from  whom  Kuinoel  differs  but  httle,  Rabbins  have  the  same  sort  of  speech. 

258 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.    VII. 


In  the  Bereshith  Rabhi,  sect.  18,  18,  2, 
it  is  said,  "The  (J entiles  have  no 
father,''  having  no  Jewish  pedigree. 
The  explanation  given  above  is  further 
sustained  by  the  ancient  versions  and 
the  most  eminent  commentators.  The 
Syria  c  Version,  pecidiarly  valuable  for 
its  antiquity  and  fidelity,  admirably 
renders  the  passage  thus  :  "  Whose 
father  and  mother  are  not  inscribed 
among  the  genealogies."  The  Arabic, 
being  taken  from  the  Syriac,  substan- 
tially agrees  with  it.  Chrysostom  and 
Theophylact  entertain  the  same  opinion. 
Suidas  thus  writes  :  "  He  is,  there- 
fore, declared  to  be  without  descent  or 
genealogy,  because  he  is  not  of  the 
seed  of  Abraham,  but  of  Canaanitish 
origin  .  .  .  therefore  he  is  destitute  of 
the  honour  of  a  genealogy."  "  Thus," 
says  Dr.  Owen,  "  was  Melchizedek  with- 
out father  and  mother,  in  that  the 
Spirit  of  God,  who  so  strictly  and  ex- 
actly recorded  the  genealogies  of  other 
patriarchs,  etc.,  speaks  nothing  to  this 
purpose  concer nin  g  h  im . "  The  opinions 
of  better  and  later  critics  have  already 
been  given  ;  to  these  tw^o  or  three  more 
may  be  added.  Dr.  Kobinson  informs 
us  that  Melchizedek  is  styled  "with- 
out father,  without  mother,"  because 
neither  his  father  nor  his  mother 
was  found  in  the  Hebrew  genealogies. 
"  Being  a  Canaanite,  and  not  standing 
in  the  public  genealogical  registers,  as 
belonging  to  the  family  of  Aaron,  he 
w^as  a  priest,  not  by  right  of  sacerdotal 
descent,  but  by  the  grace  of  God."  His 
priesthood,  therefore,  is  of  a  higher 
and  more  ancient  order  than  that  of 
Aaron.  "  The  context,"  says  Schleusner, 
"requires  us  to  believe  that  Melchizedek 
is  called  '  without  father '  by  Paul 
because  his  father  was  not  inscribed  in 
the  genealogies  of  the  Jewish  priests." 
It  may,  however,  appear  somewhat  to 
militate  against  this  interpretation 
that  Melchizedek  is  mentioned  imme- 
diately after  the  passage  cited  above  as 
having  "  neither  beginning  of  days  nor 
end  of  life."  We  may  answer  this 
objection  in  two  ways.  With  Tholuck, 
we  may  adopt  the  language  of  Chry- 
sostom, and  say,  "  How  '  having  neither 


beginning  of  days  nor  end  of  life '  ? 
How?  as  it  is  not  contained  in 
Scripture ;  this  is  '  having  no  begin- 
ning,' this  is  '  having  no  end.'  "  "  We 
must,"  Tholuck  goes  on  to  add,  "at 
'  having  neither  beginning  of  days  nor 
end  of  life,'  conceive  added,  '  in  history.' 
These  words  would  then  be  understood 
of  the  Mosaic  annals,  or  of  the  early 
chronologies  referred  to  by  Josephus." 
There  is  another  answer.  It  is  this, 
in  the  language  of  Stnart :  " '  Having 
neither  beginning  of  days  nor  end  of 
life ' ;  i.e.  who,  as  high  priest,  has  no 
limited  time  assigned  for  the  commence- 
ment and  explication  of  his  ofiice  ;  for 
so  the  following  clause  leads  us  to 
interpret  this  expression.  The  Levi- 
tical  priests  were  limited  in  their 
service  (see  Num.  iv.  3,  xxxiii.  35, 
43,  47:  compare  viii.  24,  25).  The 
meaning  of  the  writer  then  is,  that 
Melchizedek's  priesthood  was  limited 
to  no  definite  time,  i.e.  sacerdos  per- 
petuus, a  priest  without  limitation  of 
ofiice."  The  latter  explanation  strikes 
us  as  being  the  best.  Melchizedek 
appears  then,  in  history,  as  an  enig- 
matic priest-king.  From  what  race  he 
sprang,  where  he  obtained  his  know- 
ledge of  the  true  God,  w^hat  was  the 
nature  and  authority  of  his  priestly 
ofiice,  we  know  not.  He  comes  before 
us  as  a  mysterious  being.  He  dis- 
appears we  know  not  when  or  where. 
In  the  dignity  and  perpetuity  of  his 
priesthood,  how  admirable  a  type  he  is 
of  our  High  Priest — a  priest  for  ever 
after  the  order  {i.e.  of  an  order  or 
rank  like  that)  of  Melchizedek. — 
Biblical  Treasury. 

Yer.  3.  A  Successor  to  Melchizedeh. — 
Recent  discoveries  of  Oriental  archae- 
ology have  established  the  strictly 
historical  character  of  the  account  of 
the  campaign  of  Chedorlaomer  and  his 
allies  against  Palestine.  The  accounts 
of  Melchizedek,  king  of  Salem,  which 
the  critics  were  unanimous  in  pro- 
nouncing to  be  mythical,  have  also 
received  an  unexpected  confirmation 
from  the  same  source.  The  new  light 
has   come   from   the   decipherment   of 

259 


CHAP.   VII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


the  Tel-el-Amarna  tablets.  "Among 
the  correspondents  of  the  Egyptian 
Pharaohs,  whose  letters  have  been 
found  at  Tel-el-Amarna,  is  a  veritable 
successor  of  the  priest-king  Melchize- 
dek.  Ebed-Tob,  the  king  of  Uru-Salim, 
or  Jerusalem,  was  indeed  a  vassal  of 
Egypt ;  but  he  was  a  vassal  who  boasts 
that,  unlike  the  other  Egyptian  gover- 
nors in  Canaan,  he  did  not  owe  his 
position  to  the  Egyptian  monarch,  nor 
was  his  royal  dignity  inherited  ;  it  was 
neither  his  father  nor  his  mother,  but 
an  oracle  of  the  god — '  the  mighty 
king ' — whom  he  worshipped,  that  had 
conferred  it  upon  him.  This  god  bore 
the  name  of  Salim,  the  god  of  *  peace.' 
The  royal  priest,  accordingly,  who  ruled 
in  Uru-Salim,  *  the  city  of  SaHm,' 
might  be  called  *  the  king  of  Salim,' 


with  even  more  truth  than  *king  of 
Jerusalem.'  Like  the  descendants  of 
David,  whom  Isaiah  beheld  in  pro- 
phetic vision  (vii.  6),  he  was  a  '  prince 
of  peace.'  The  description  given  of 
himself  by  Ebed-Tob,  in  his  letters  to 
the  Egyptian  monarch,  explains  the 
suddenness,  as  it  were,  with  which 
Melchizedek  is  introduced  upon  the 
scene.  His  father  is  unmentioned. 
As  the  author  of  the  epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  says  (vii.  3),  he  comes  before 
us  *  without  father,  without  mother, 
without  descent.'  Like  Ebed-Tob,  it 
was  not  from  his  father  or  mother  that 
he  inherited  his  royal  office — he  had 
been  appointed'to  it  by  the  deity  whom 
he  worshipped,  and  he  was  king  be- 
cause he  was  also  priest." — After  Sayce, 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  4—10. 

The  Greatness  of  Melchizedeh. — Not  as  a  man,  or  as  a  king,  but  as  the  remark- 
able representative  of  an  order  of  priesthood  antecedent  to  the  Aaronic, 
independent  of  the  Aaronic,  continuous  in  a  line  outside  of  Jewish  exclusiveness, 
and  coming  into  world -prominence  once  again  in  the  priesthood  of  the  Son  of 
God.  *'  We  have  long  looked  upon  Abram  as  the  one  witness  to  monotheism 
among  an  idolatrous  people,  and  to  see  him  holding  a  position  inferior  to  this 
hitherto  unknown  chieftain  is  an  unexpected  difficulty."  Abraham  was  himself 
a  king-priest  in  his  tribe,  and  yet  he  at  once  acknowledged  a  supremacy  in 
Melchizedek.  He  did  not  look  on  him"  as  one  tribal  patriarch  would  look  upon 
another,  who  stood  in  a  position  of  equality.  Abraham  distinctly  recognised 
a  superior  person,  one  in  a  higher  standing  with  the  same  God  whom  He  served. 

I.  The  greatness  of  Melchizedek  is  seen  in  his  receiving  tithes  from 
Abraham. — It  is  not  that  Abraham  made  certain  handsome  presents  to  the 
supreme  king  of  the  country ;  it  is  that  he  "  paid  tithes,"  which  are  distinctly 
religious  dues,  the  proper  claim  of  the  priests.  Jewish  priests  claimed  tithes 
of  their  brethren  by  the  authority  of  God  ;  and  Abraham  must  have  realised 
that  Melchizedek  was  priest  by  Divine  authority,  or  he  would  never  have  given 
him  the  priest's  portion.  The  argument  is,  that  Abraham's  act  shows  him  to  have 
recognised  in  Melchizedek  one  greater  than  himself  ;  but  Abraham  was  a  race- 
father,  and  by  his  act  represented  his  race.  None  of  his  descendants  could 
be  greater  than  himself,  and  none  of  them,  therefore,  could  be  greater  than 
Melchizedek.  The  conclusion  to  which  the  writer  would  lead  is  this  :  Jesus 
is  priest  of  the  order  of  Melchizedek ;  therefore,  if  his  priesthood  is  superior  to 
the  Aaronic,  the  priesthood  of  Jesus  must  also  be  superior.  Abraham's  descen- 
dants may  be  required  to  pay  tithes  to  the  descendant — or,  if  you  will,  the 
continuance — of  Melchizedek. 

II.  The  greatness  of  Melchizedek  is  seen  in  his  blessing  Abraham. — The 
blessing  given  by  a  priest  is  the  assurance  of  the  acceptance  and  approval  of 
God.  The  blessing  of  Melchizedek  was  the  Divine  recognition  of  Abraham's 
pi'ompt  and  decisive  action  in  the  overthrow  of  the  invaders,  and  recovery  of  the 

260 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.         chap.  vii. 


spoil.  But  Abraham  would  never  have  cared  to  receive  a  blessing  from  a  smaller 
man,  and  a  man  in  a  lower  office  than  himself.  "  Without  any  dispute  the  less 
is  blessed  of  the  better."  The  suggestion  is,  that  Christ,  as  of  the  order  of 
Melchizedek,  wants  no  blessing  from  the  house  of  Aaron.  The  bigoted  Jews 
exaggerated  the  dignity  and  authority  of  the  Jewish  priests.  The  truth  is, 
that  they  needed  to  seek  the  blessing  of  Him  who  represented  the  superior 
order  of  Melchizedek. 

III.  The  greatness  of  Melchizedek  as  the  type  of  an  undying  priest. — It  was 
a  distinct  stamp  of  inferiority  that  the  Levitical  priests  only  held  office  for 
a  fixed  term  of  years.  It  was  not  for  them  an  office  belonging  to  their  lives. 
Melchizedek's  office  was  continuous  with  his  life.  It  is  suggested  that  Christ's 
office  is  also  continuous  with  His  life,  and  He  lives  for  ever.  It  is  not  natural 
life,  or  future  immortality,  that  is  dealt  with  in  ver.  8,  but  an  enduring, 
unlimited  time  of  priesthood.  *'  So  far  as  the  letter  of  Scripture  is  concerned, 
Melchizedek  stands  in  a  perpetuity  of  mystic  life."  And  Christ,  having  risen 
from  the  dead,  dieth  no  more,  but  "  abideth  a  priest  continually." 

IV.  The  greatness  of  Melchizedek  as  receiving  tithes  from  Levi. — In  a 
representative  way  Abraham's  act  included  that  of  his  race,  and  therefore 
that  of  Levi.  The  writer  presents  this  point  in  a  way  which  would  be  more 
impressive  on  those  who  made  much  of  genealogies  than  it  is  upon  us.  The 
representative  act  may  be  used  to  impress  yet  again  the  independence  and 
superiority  of  Christ's  priesthood. 

In  conclusion  show  that  Christ's  priesthood  is — 1.  For  humanity,  not  for 
a  section  of  it.  2.  That  it  is  spiritual,  and  concerns  men's  primary,  not  merely 
ceremonial,  relations  with  God.  Therefore  men  need  not  fear  to  let  formal, 
Aaronic  priesthoods  pass  away,  and  satisfy  themselves  with  the  great,  the  true 
Melchizedek. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH,— Verses  11—17. 

The  Two  Priestly  Orders. — It  must  be  evident  to  every  candid  reader  of  this 
epistle  that  its  author  does  not  use  the  older  Scriptures  as  confirmation  or  proof 
precisely  in  the  way  that  we  do.  He  probably  follows  the  method  taught  in  the 
Rabbinical  schools,  which  laid  undue  stress  upon  single,  and  often  subordinate, 
words.  It  is  necessary  to  bear  in  mind  that  truths  are  eternally  true,  but  the 
methods  in  which  they  are  presented  and  proved  belong  to  each  particular  age, 
and  are  precisely  adapted  to  each  age.  We  are  not  obHged  to  recognise  the  force 
of  every  argument  that  has  ever  been  used  to  support  a  truth.  The  Divine 
inspiration  works  through  the  mental  methods  and  mental  moods  of  each  age, 
with  a  precise  adaptation  to  one  age,  and  a  general  adaptation  to  all  ages. 
What  the  student  has  to  do  is  to  put  himself  into  the  times  when  a  particular 
method  of  proof  was  used,  and  so  get  to  feel  its  precise  force.  And  this  may  be 
quite  in  harmony  with  his  endeavours  to  find  and  use  the  method  of  proof  which 
may  be  effective  on  his  own  generation.  These  remarks  are  important  because 
the  proofs  from  Scripture  given  in  this  epistle  often  become  a  grave  stumbling- 
block  to  critical-minded  readers.  All  the  offices  which  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
represented  as  filling  are  interesting  to  us.  Some  we  can  appreciate  at  once. 
Some  require  much  and  careful  thought  before  we  are  able  to  trace  their 
permanent  relations  and  value.  And  some  are  difficult  to  appraise  aright, 
because  we  have  no  help  from  our  associations.  Such  an  office  is  that  of  priest. 
We  are  not  in  any  sense  familiar  with  it.  It  does  not  come  into  the  range  of 
ordinary  Christian  thought,  but  it  was  bound  up  with  the  religious  thought,  and 
the  daily  life,  of  the  Jews.     And  this  writer  addressed  Jews,  to  whom  the  high 

261 


CHAP.  VII.         EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


priest  was  a  most  familiar  figure,  and  who  had  thoughts  about  him  that  we 
can  hardly  realise.  In  endeavouring  to  detach  the  Jewish  Christians  from  their 
new-found  faith  in  Christ,  the  bigoted  Jews  made  a  strong  point  of  the  fact  that 
Jesus  could  not  be  a  priest,  seeing  that  they  all  admitted  the  Aaronic  priesthood 
to  be  the  direct  appointment  of  God.  So  far  from  Jesus  being  in  the  Aaronic 
order,  He  did  not  even  belong  to  the  tribe  of  Levi,  but  to  a  tribe  of  which  nothing 
had  been  said  concerning  priesthood.  This  was  a  very  fair  plea  from  their  out- 
ward, n  itional,  and  limited  standpoint.  It  is  indeed  so  fair  a  plea  that  the 
writer  of  this  epistle  feels  bound  to  give  it  elaborate  and  careful  consideration, 
meeting  this  strictly  Jewish  objection  on  strictly  Jewish  lines.  Admitting  that 
God  did  establish  tlie  Aaronic  order  of  priesthood,  and  that  it  stood,  and  always 
had  stood,  upon  the  Divine  authorisation,  he  argues^— 1.  That  God's  having 
appointed  one  order  does  not  involve  that  He  never  has  appointed,  and  never  will 
appoint,  any  other.  In  asserting  the  priesthood  of  Christ,  it  is  only  necessary  for 
him  to  prove  that  the  same  God  appointed  Him,  in  His  order,  as  appointed  the 
Aaronic  priests  in  theirs ;  and  consequently  that  Christ,  as  priest,  equally  acts 
upon  Divine  authorisation.  2.  But  he  can  advance  on  this,  and  say,  not  only 
may  God  appoint  another  order  of  priesthood,  but  He  has  done  so  ;  He  ha^d  done 
so  long  before  He  established  the  Aaronic  order,  and  entirely  independent  of  it. 
The  order  of  Melchizedek  was  no  seed  out  of  which  the  Aaronic  order  grew ;  it 
was  a  priesthood  for  men  quite  distinct  from  the  priesthood  for  a  particular 
nation — the  Jews.  Patriarchal  priesthood  was  established  by  God  long  ages 
before  the  Levitical.  It  was  a  universal  human  priesthood,  and  out  of  the  range 
of  the  limited  Mosaic  revelation.  3.  Then  he  is  able  to  make  a  somewhat  sur- 
prising assertion.  The  earlier  order  of  Melchizedek  was  recognised  by  the  later 
as  higher  than  itself,  and  the  earlier  order  actually  received  the  representative 
homage  of  the  later.  It  received  tithes  from  Abraham.  "  And  so  to  say,  through 
Abraham,  even  Levi,  who  received  tithes,  hath  paid  tithes ;  for  he  was.yet  in  the 
loins  of  his  father  when  Melchizedek  met  him."  4.  The  appeal  is  now  made  to 
Scripture.  God  can  make  a  new  order  ;  God  had  made  another  order  ;  and  God 
has  actually  promised  in  the  Scripture  to  raise  up  a  new  priest  after  the  older 
order.  5.  That  promise,  he  claims,  was  fulfilled  in  the  raising  up  of  Jesus,  and 
constituting  Him  priest,  not  as  the  Aaronic,  *'  after  the  law  of  a  carnal  com- 
mandment," but  as  the  order  of  Melchizedek,  "  after  the  power  of  an  endless 
[indissoluble]  life."  It  is  important  that  we  should  understand  the  distinctions 
between  the  two  priestly  orders,  so  that  we  raay  recognise  the  peculiarities  of  the 
priesthood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

I.  The  order  of  Melchizedek  had  all  the  permanent  essentials  of  priesthood. 
— And  these  are  three  :  1.  The  power  of  intercession.  Too  readily  we  assume 
that  the  essential  thing  in  priesthood  is  presidency  over  a  religious  ceremonial, 
which  includes  sacrifice.  But  this  is  an  accident  of  priesthood  ;  the  essential  thing 
is  his  acting  as  medium  of  communication  between  God  and  man — the  difference 
between  a  "  priest "  and  a  *'  prophet "  being  that  a  priest  so  acts  constantly,  and 
the  prophet  so  acts  occasionally.  In  thinking  of  the  Jewish  high  priest  we 
seldom  see  the  importance  of  wearing  the  breastplate,  and  being  the  people's 
mediator.  Melchizedek  was  an  intercessor.  He  stood  for  Abraham  to  present 
to  God  the  tithes  of  thanksgiving.  He  stood  for  God  to  present  to  Abraham 
acceptance  and  blessing.  2.  The  power  of  character.  Ideally  this  is  absolutely 
essential  to  priesthood.  It  is  the  secret  of  acceptance  with  God,  and  the  secret 
of  influence  on  men.  It  is  the  basis  of  reverence  and  trust.  It  was  not  guaranteed 
in  Jewish  priests,  seeing  their  office  was  hereditary  :  it  was  found  in  Melchizedek, 
as  indicated  in  the  respect  shown  him,  which  Abraham  felt,  and  responded  to. 
3.  The  power  of  continuity.  A  priesthood  which  is  really  efficient  cannot  be 
thought  of  as  stopped  or  changed.     If  there  is  need  for  change  in  it,  then  there 

262 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.         chap.  vii. 


must  be  some  imperfection  in  it,  or  in  its  adaptations.  The  priesthood  of 
Melchizedek  was  never  changed  while  he  lived.  The  ideal  priesthood  of  man, 
which  he  represented,  God  established  for  ever  ;  He  has  never  changed  it  :  in  the 
line  of  the  absolute  priesthood  of  universal  humanity  Jesus  came. 

II.  The  order  of  Aaron  had  certain  temporary  characteristics. — Especially 
may  be  noticed  its — 1.  Limitation  to  a  (1)  nation,  (2)  tribe,  (3)  time.  Jewish 
priests  only  held  office  from  thirty  to  sixty  years  of  age.  2.  Its  hereditary 
character,  which  did  not  involve  any  direct  Divine  call  to  individuals.  A  man 
was  an  Aaronic  priest,  not  because  he  was  singularly  fitted  for  the  office,  but 
because  his  father  was  a  priest.  3.  Its  sacrificial  character.  Careful  distinction 
needs  to  be  made  between  the  great  and  universal  human  ideas  of  sacrifice,  and 
the  small  and  particular  Jewish  ideas  of  sacrifice,  connected  with  a  local  religion, 
a  limited  revelation,  and  an  elaborate  social  and  ceremonial  system.  The  priests 
of  the  Jewish  cult  must  be  distinguished  from  the  priests  of  humanity.  In 
Judaism  the  system  was  greater  than  any  individual. 

III.  The  priesthood  of  Christ  represents  the  permanent,  and  not  the  temporary, 
ideas  of  priesthood. — Therefore  it  is  said  to  be  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek, 
and  not  after  the  order  of  Aaron.  1.  He  is  our  Intercessor.  This  is  the  essential 
side  of  priestliness.  It  need  not  be  affirmed  that  Melchizedek  presented  no 
sacrifice,  but  it  should  be  noticed  that  no  mention  is  made  of  any  in  the  narrative 
(Gen.  xiv.),  and  that  the  interceding  element  of  his  priesthood  is  the  one  set  forth 
prominently.  2.  His  power  lies  in  His  personal  character.  "  Such  a  high  priest 
became  us,  boly,  guileless,  undefiled,  separate  from  sins."  He,  on  this  ground, 
stands  in  acceptance  with  God  :  "  He  offered  Himself  without  spot  to  God."  He, 
on  this  ground,  gains  influence  on  men,  who  always  respond,  with  their  confidence, 
to  ideal  goodness.  3.  And  His  relation  is  a  continuous  one.  He  has  an 
unchangeable  priesthood,  in  the  power  of  an  endless  Hfe.  What  He  is  to  us  He 
is  for  ever,  He  is  so  long  as  we  need  Him. 

Conclusion. — The  cry  of  human  souls,  in  the  sense  of  their  separation  from  God, 
is  for  a  priest,  an  intercessor.  That  cry  can  never  be  stilled  by  the  ministry  of 
any  man.  It  can  be  quieted,  and  the  soul  can  be  satisfied,  with  the  full,  and 
practical,  acceptance  of  Jesus  as  actually  now,  for  us,  "  our  great  High  Priest, 
passed  into  the  heavens,"  "  ever  hving  to  make  intercession  or  us." 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Yer.  11.  Perfection  as  Complete  is  quite  conceivable.  And  only  such 
Meeting  of  RequireTuents. — Perfection  perfection  can  be  of  any  real  or  vital 
applied  to  the  uncreated,  independent  interest  to  us,  because  only  such  per- 
Being,  God,  is  an  absolute  quality.  It  fection  is  attainable  by  us.  Another 
is  the  standard.  But  perfection  ap-  idea  of  perfection  is  embodied  in  the 
plied  to  any  one,  or  anything,  in  the  word  "  entire."  It  is  often  applied  to 
created  sphere,  can  never  be  more  than  animals.  Given  a  whole  set  of  organs 
a  relative  thing.  It  may  reach  the  and  capacities  as  belonging  to  an 
standard  of  its  particular  class  or  order.  animal,  if  we  find  all  those  organs 
An  absolutely  perfect  man  is  incon-  and  capacities  in  any  animal,  and 
ceivable.  A  man  perfect,  according'  those  organs  all  in  full  health,  and 
to  the  perfection  that  is  possible  to  harmonious  proportions,  we  call  that 
humanity,  is  conceivable.  An  act  of  a  animal  "  entire."  And  it  is  easy  to 
created  human  being  that  is  absolutely  see  how  the  idea  can  be  applied  in 
perfect  is  inconceivable,  but  an  act  the  Christian  life.  But  in  our  text 
judged  perfect  according  to  the  standard  the  idea  of  ''perfection,"  though  re- 
ef the  class  of  acts  to  which  it  belonged  lated,  is  somewhat  different.     A  thing 

263 


CHAP.  VII.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


is  "  perfect "  when  it  precisely  and  cumulative  powers  of  vegetable  life 
fully  meets  what  is  reasonably  re-  are  only  feeble  types  of  that  higher, 
quired  and  expected  of  it.  So  a  man  fearfully  vaster  power,  that  pertains 
who  invents  or  makes  a  machine  to  the  endless  life  of  a  soul — that 
strives  to  make  it  "  perfect  "  in  the  power  that,  known  or  unknown,  dwells 
sense  of  adequately  meeting  what  is  in  you  and  in  me.  The  possible 
expected  of  it.  It  is  "  imperfect "  if  majesty  to  which  any  free  intelligence 
it  leaves  any  expectation  unfulfilled,  or  of  God  may  grow,  in  the  endless  in- 
only  half  fulfilled.  In  this  sense  of  crement  of  ages,  is  after  all  rather 
"  perfection "  the  old  Mosaic  economy  hinted  than  imaged  in  their  merely 
of  sacrifices,  and  ceremonies,  and  vegetable  grandeur.  Mere  attention 
formal  rules  has  to  be  judged.  And  to  eternal  duration  limits  thought  and 
so  judged,  the  wiiter  is  compelled  to  apprehension.  If  we  look  no  further, 
condemn  it  as  imperfect.  Given  the  that  is  only  the  eternal  continuance 
reasonable  expectations  of  a  particular  of  its  mediocrity  or  comparative  little- 
nation,  in  a  particular  set  of  circum-  ness.  Its  eternal  growth  in  volume 
stances,  and  at  a  particular  time,  and  and  power  is,  in  that  manner,  quite 
the  Levitical  system  may  be  con-  lost  sight  of.  The  growth  of  the  soul 
sidered  '*  perfect."  But  given  the  re-  is  a  merely  spiritual  growth,  indicated 
quirements  of  man  as  man,  of  man  as  by  no  visible  and  material  form  that 
a  moral  being,  of  man  as  sinful,  of  is  expanded  by  it  and  with  it.  As  in 
man  as  out  of  relations  with  God,  old  age  there  seems  to  be  an  apparent 
of  man  as  deteriorated  by  his  wilful-  limit  to  the  spiritual  powers  and  f acul- 
ness — given  the  requirements  of  man's  ties,  we  drop  into  the  impression  that 
conscience  and  will,  and  relations  with  these  have  now  passed  their  climacteric. 
God,  and  with  fellow-men,  and  then  But  the  soul  outgrows  the  growth 
the  Levitical  system  must  be  con-  and  outlives  the  vigour  of  the  body, 
demned ;  perfection  is  not  that  formal,  which  is  not  true  in  trees.  In  the 
outward  way.  A  spiritual  religious  beginning  of  the  soul's  history,  it  is 
system  is  wanted  in  order  to  meet  a  mere  seed  of  possibility.  But  a 
spiritual  conditions.  doom    of    growth   is    in    it,    and    the 

hidden  momentum   of   an   endless  life 

Yer.   16.  The  Power  of  an  Endless  is  driving  it  on.     What  a  chasm  there 

Life.  — The    suggestion    is,     that    the  is  between  the  idiot  and  the  man  !    One 

priesthood  of   Christ  is  graduated  by  a  being  unprogressive,  a  being  who  is 

the  wants  and  measures  of  the  human  not   a  power ;    the  other   a  careering, 

soul,  as  the  priesthood  of  the  law  was  force  started  on  its  way  to  eternity, 

not ;  that  the  endless  life  in  which  He  a  principle  of  might  and  majesty  begun 

comes  matches  and  measures  the  end-  to  be  unfolded,  and  to  be  progressively 

less  life  in  mankind  whose  fall  He  is  vmfolded  for  ever.    Intelligence,  reason, 

to   restore  ;  providing   a   salvation   as  conscience,  observation,  choice,  memory, 

strong  as  their  sin,  and  as  long  or  last-  enthusiasm — all  the  fires  of  his  inborn 

ing  as  the  run  of  their  immortality.  eternity  are  kindling  to  a  glow,  and, 

I.  The  power  of  an  endless  life  in  looking  on  him  as  a  force  immortal, 

man,  what  it  is,  and,  as  being  nnder  just  beginning  to  reveal  the  symptoms 

sin,    requires. — The    word    translated  of  what  he  shall  be,  we  call  him  man. 

"  power "  in  the  text  is  the  original  of  And  yet  we  have,  in  the  power  thus 

our  word  "  dynamic,"  denoting  a  cer-  developed,  nothing  more  than  a  mere 

tain  impetus,  momentum,  or  causative  hint  or  initial   sign  of  what  is  to  be 

force,    which   is    cumulative,    growing  the  real  stature  of  his  personality  in 

stronger  and  more  impelling  as  it  goes,  the  process  of  his  everlasting  develop- 

And  this  is  the  nature  of  life  or  vital  ment.      We   exist    here  only    in    the 

force  universally — it  is  a  force  cumu-  small,   that   God   may   have   us   in  a 

lative  as   long   as   it  continues.     The  state  of  flexibility,  and  bend  or  fashion 

264 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.        chap.  vil. 


us,  at  the  best  advantage,  to  the  model 
of  His  own  great  life  and  character. 
And  most  of  us,  therefore,  ha\'e 
scarcely  a  conception  of  the  exceeding 
weight  of  glory  to  be  comprehended 
in  our  existence.  Illustration  may  be 
taken  from  the  faculty  of  memory, 
imagination,  acquisition — from  the 
executive  energy  of  the  will,  from  the 
benevolent  affections,  and  from  all 
the  active  powers.  What  force  must 
be  finally  developed  in  what  now 
appears  to  be  the  tenuous  and  fickle 
impulse,  and  the  merely  frictional 
activity  of  a  human  soul !  But  this 
expression  looks  on  the  soul  as  a  falling 
power,  a  bad  force,  rushing  downward 
into  ruinous  and  final  disorder.  It 
was  this  which  made  the  mighty  priest- 
hood of  the  Lord  necessary.  By  what 
adequate  power,  in  earth  or  in  heaven, 
shall  man's  sin  be  taken  away  ? 

IT.  What  Christ,  in  His  eternal 
priesthood,  has  done ;  or  the  fitness 
and  practical  necessity  of  it,  as  re- 
lated to  the  stupendous  exigency  of 
our  redemption. — The  great  impedi- 
ment which  the  gospel  of  Christ 
encounters  in  our  world  is  that  it  is 
too  great  a  work.  It  transcends  our 
belief — it  wears  a  look  of  extrava- 
gance. We  are  beings  too  insignificant 
and  low  to  engage  any  such  interest 
on  the  part  of  God,  or  justify  any 
such  expenditure.  In  the  contempla- 
tions started  on  this  subject,  the  pur- 
pose is  to  start  some  conception  of 
ourselves,  in  the  power  of  an  endless 
life,  that  is  more  adequate.  Mere 
immortality,  or  everlasting  continuance, 
when  it  is  the  continuance  only  of 
littleness  or  mediocrity,  does  not  make 
a  platform  or  occasion  high  enough 
for  this  great  mystery  of  the  gospel. 
It  is  only  when  we  see  in  human  souls, 
taken  as  germs  of  power,  a  future 
magnitude  and  majesty  transcending 
all  present  measures,  that  we  come 
into  any  fit  conception  at  all  of 
Christ's  mission  to  the  world.  This 
power  of  endless  life,  could  we  lay  hold 
of  it,  could  we  only  grasp  the  force 
there  is  in  it,  how  true  and  rational, 
how  magnificently   Divine  would   the 


great  salvation  of  Christ  appear,  and 
in  how  great  dread  of  ourselves  should 
we  hasten  to  it  for  refuge  !  Then  it 
would  shock  us  no  more  that  visibly  it 
is  no  mere  man  that  has  arrived.  Were 
He  only  a  human  teacher,  reformer, 
philosopher,  coming  in  our  human 
plane  to  lecture  on  our  self-improve- 
ment as  men,  in  the  measures  of  men. 
He  would  even  be  less  credible  than 
now.  Nothing  meets  our  want,  in 
fact,  but  to  see  the  boundaries  of 
nature  and  time  break  way  to  let  in  a 
Being  and  a  Power  visibly  not  of  this 
world.  Let  Him  be  made  a  priest  for 
us,  and  not  after  the  law  of  a  carnal 
commandment,  but  after  the  power  of 
an  endless  life.  Humbled  to  the  flesh 
and  its  external  conditions.  He  will 
only  the  more  certainly  even  Himself 
with  our  want,  if  He  dares  to  say, 
"  Before  Abraham  was,  I  am."  The 
great  salvation  is  a  work  supernatural 
transacted  in  the  plane  of  nature  ;  and 
what  but  such  a  work  could  restore  the 
broken  order  of  the  soul  under  evil? 
It  incarnates  God  in  the  world ;  and 
what  but  some  such  opening  of  the 
senses  to  God,  or  of  God  to  the  senses, 
could  reinstate  Him  in  minds  that 
have  lost  the  consciousness  of  Him, 
and  fallen  off  to  live  apart?  What 
but  this  could  enter  Him  again,  as  a 
power,  into  the  world's  life  and  history  ? 
We  are  astonished  by  the  revelation  of 
Divine  feeling ;  the  expense  of  the 
sacrifice  wears  a  look  of  extravagance. 
If  we  are  only  the  dull  mediocrities  we 
commonly  take  ourselves  to  be,  it  is 
quite  incredible.  But  if  God,  seeing 
through  our  possibilities  into  our  real 
eternities,  comprehends  in  the  view  all 
we  are  to  be  or  become,  as  powers  of 
endless  life,  is  there  not  some  proba- 
bility that  He  discovers  a  good  deal 
more  in  us  than  we  do  in  ourselves, 
enough  to  justify  all  the  concern  He 
testifies,  all  the  sacrifice  He  makes  in 
the  passion  of  His  Son  ?  Inasmuch  as 
our  understanding  has  not  yet  reached 
our  measures,  we  plainly  want  a  gi^ace 
which  only  faith  can  receive.  Christ 
therefore  comes  not  as  a  problem  given 
to   our    reason,    but    as    a     salvation 

265 


CHAP.  VII.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


offered  to  our  faith.  His  passion  nothing  else  can  cut  it.  That  note  of 
reaches  a  deeper  point  in  us  than  we  value  is  taken  to  bring  home  to  our 
can  definitely  think^  and  His  eternal  minds  the  infinite  value  of  Christ  our 
Spirit  is  a  heahng  priesthood  for  us,  Priest  and  Saviour.  He  has  an  "  end- 
in  the  lowest  and  profoundest  depths  less,"  or  an  "  indissoluble,"  priesthood, 
of  our  great  immortality,  those  which  It  is  not  possible  for  us  to  conceive  the 
we  have  never  seen  ourselves.  He  is  conditions  of  humanity  for  which  that 
somehow  able  to  come  into  the  very  priesthood  is  not  necessary  and  effective, 
germ  principle  of  our  life,  and  be  a  It  is  not  possible  for  us  to  conceive  of 
central,  regulating,  new- creating  force  any  forces  that  can  ever  so  affect  that 
in  our  disordered  growth  itself.  And  priesthood  as  to  make  changes  in  it 
if  we  speak  of  righteousness,  it  is  ours  which  will  imperil  its  efficiency, 
when  it  is  not  ours.     How  can  a  being 

unrighteous  be  established  in  the  sense  An  Endless  Life. — Life  !  the  dearest 
of  righteousness  ?  Logically,  or  accord-  and  most  wonderful  thing  we  know — 
ing  to  the  sentence  of  our  speculative  wonderful  in  its  universality,  its  diver- 
reason,  it  is  impossible.  And  yet,  in  sity,  its  mystery.  Next  comes  life's 
Christ,  we  have  it !  We  are  con-  crowning  wonder,  death.  Life's  greatest 
sciously  in  it,  as  we  are  in  Him ;  and  question  is.  What  is  it  to  be  dead  ? 
all  we  can  say  is,  that  it  is  the  What,  in  death  and  after  death,  becomes 
righteousness  of  God,  by  faith,  unto  of  life  ?  The  answer  of  the  text  is.  The 
all,  and  upon  all,  them  that  believe. —  human  race  has  th^poiver  of  an  endless 
Horace  Bashnell,  D.D.  life.      We   can,    indeed,    no   more    be 

eternal,    as  God    is,   than   we  can   be 

An  Indissoluble    Life. — The    Greek  almighty,   or    all-present,    as   God   is. 

word  would  be  more  precisely  rendered  What  is  possible  for  us  is  an  immortal 

an    *'  indissoluble  "    life.       There     are  life  in  the  eternal  life  of  God — to  keep 

no  conceivable  agencies,  influences,  or  in  and  after  death  our  consciousness, 

forces  that  can  break  it  up.     Let  a  memory,  will,  and  affections — ourselves  : 

thing  once  be  moved,  and  it   will  go  to  find  ourselves  alive  after  death,  and 

on  moving  for  ever,  unless  something  alive  for  evermore.     1.  Without  laying 

acts  upon  it  to  check  it.     Let  a  thing  undue  stress  upon  it,  the  mere  existence 

once  exist,  and  it  will  never  cease  to  of  a   world-wide   belief  in  an  endless 

exist,   unless  some   outside  force   acts  life  is,  in  a  world  with  such  a  history 

upon  it  to  destroy  it.     Let  a  thing  be  and  such  daily  experiences  as  ours,  very 

a   whole,    it   will  remain  a  whole  for  wonderful.     The  history  of  the  world 

ever,  if  no  power  breaks  it  up.     Thus  is  a  history  of  death.     And  yet  men 

we  are  absolutely  assured  of  the  con-  refuse  to  believe  in  death  !     In  Green- 

tinuty  and  unchangeableness  of   God,  land  and  in  Greece,  in  Rome  and  Egypt, 

because  it  is  wholly  impossible  for  us  Persia  and  India,  men  have  persistently 

to  conceive  of  any  being,  or  force,  or  refused    to   believe   the   testimony   of 

combination  of  forces,  that  can  affect  death  ;    and   wherever   they   raised   a 

them   so   as   to   make  any  change  in  stone   to   chronicle   a   death,  on  that 

Him.     It  may  further  be  observed  that  stone,   by  word  or  rude  symbol,  they 

continuity  is  one  of  our  chief  "notes  recorded  their  undaunted   faith   in   a 

of  value."     We  estimate  things  in  the  life  beyond  the  grave.     Here  then  is  a 

light   of  their  persistency.     They  are  creed  old  as  time,  wide  as  the  world, 

valuable  if  they  will  last  unchanged  for  catholic   as  the  race,  native  to  every 

a  long  while.     The  diamond  is  counted  climate,  and  common  to  every  religion, 

the  most  valuable  of  all  earthly  posses-  2.  Do  not  men's  mental  powers  point 

sions,  not  for  its  appearance,  but  for  its  to  another  life?     All  but  man  reach 

imperishableness.     We  know  of  nothing  their  highest  development  here.     Man 

that   can   destroy   it ;  it   outlasts   the  dies  with  the  best  powers  undeveloped, 

generations ;  it  can  cut  its  kind,  but  His  great  actions  are  only  specimens, 

266                                                  .  , 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   VII. 


earnests  of  what  he  could  do  were  not 
time  too  niggard  of  its  days.  We  may 
see  the  possible  progress  by  the  actual 
achievement  of  man.  3.  What  is 
God  to  us — what  are  we  to  God  ? 
Man  is  a  creature  with  strong  long- 
ings for  life,  and  apparently  fitted  for 
immortality.  God  is  not  playing  with 
human  hfe.  He  is  our  Father  in 
heaven,  and  we  are  His  children. 
And  here  is  the  ground  of  our  faith : 
Man  has  a  capacity  for  life  ;  God  a 
desire  that  we  should  live.  Eternal 
life  is  the  gift  of  eternal  love. — J.  M. 
Gibbon. 

Yer.  17.  The  Order  of  Melchizedek. — 
The  references  to  Melchizedek  are 
found  in  Gen.  xiv.  18-20  ;  Ps.  ex.  4. 
"  Without  descent "  means  without 
genealogy,  such  as  Levitical  priests 
had.  "  Without  end  of  life"  means  that 
no  limit  of  age  attached  to  his  ofiice, 
as  to  that  of  Jewish  priests.  Observe 
the  application  of  the  argument  of  this 
chapter  to  the  fact,  that  the  Jewish 
religious  system  was  a  temporary  one, 
that  it  had  now  done  its  work,  and  was 
decaving  and  passing. 

I.  The  order  of  Melchizedek  involves 
superiority  to  the  Levitical  order. — 
Abraham,  the  Jewish  race-father,  paid 
tithes  to  Melchizedek.  The  contrast 
was  so  pointed  when  the  writer  pre- 
sented it,  because  then  the  Jewish 
system  was  evidently  decaying.  The 
Jews  clung  desperately  to  it,  but  never- 
theless it  was  fast  slipping  out  of  their 
grasp.     1.  The   order   of    Melchizedek 


is  antecedent  to  that  of  Aaron. 
2.  The  order  of  Melchizedek  is  inter- 
cessory, not  sacrificial.  3.  The  new 
priesthood,  being  spiritual  and  univer- 
sal, must  of  necessity  supplant  that 
which  is  material  and  local. 

II.  The  order  of  Melchizedek  in- 
volves the  direct  appointment  of  God. 
— The  Jewish  priests  came  into  ofiice 
by  regular  succession  from  fatlier 
to  son,  and  no  priest  was  ever  able 
to  claim  direct  Divine  appointment. 
Both  Melchizedek  and  Christ  were 
specially  called  by  God.  Illustrate  by 
the  witness  of  the  Divine  voice  at  our 
Lord's  baptism. 

III.  The  order  of  Melchizedek  in- 
volves the  perpetuity  of  priesthood. 
—There  is  no  account  of  Melchizedek's 
having  died — no  account  of  his  priest- 
hood's ever  closing.  And  Christ's  death 
was  but  the  beginning  of  His  spiritual 
and  eternal  life.  "  Abideth  a  priest 
for  ever." 

IV.  The  order  of  Melchizedek  in- 
volves the  union  of  two  offices,  king 
and  priest. — "  King  of  righteousness." 
1.  That — righteousness — is  the  end 
and  object  of  his  rule.  2.  That  -  -right- 
eousness— is  the  characteristic  of  the 
peoples  whom  he  rules.  "  Eling  of 
peace " — which  of  necessity  always 
attends  upon  the  triumph  of  righteous- 
ness. "  Righteousness  and  peace  have 
kissed  each  other."  They  always  do. 
Christ  in  the  eternal  temple  is  our 
King-priest.  King  of  righteousness, 
which  is  for  sinful  humanity  the  essen- 
tial condition  of  peace. 


MAIN  EOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  18—22. 

The  Reversion  to  an  Older  Order  of  Priesthood. — Here  was  a  difliculty  for  the 
bigoted  Jews  to  explain  if  they  could.  When  God  proposed  to  call  out  a  new 
priest,  why  did  He  not  choose  a  man  out  of  the  house  of  Aaron,  and  arrange  his 
priesthood  on  the  Aaronic  lines  ?  The  only  answer  that  can  be  given  is,  that  the 
Aaronic  priesthood  had  worn  itself  out ;  its  mission  had  only  been  temporary,  it 
had  now  come  to  its  end :  it  was  an  effete  thing,  and  therefore  an  ineffective 
thing.  Illustration  may  be  taken  from  the  king-priests  of  the  Maccabean  era, 
or  from  the  Annas  or  Caiaphas  of  our  Lord's  time.  It  is  manifest  that  the  Priest- 
saviour  of  a  sinful  world  could  never  have  come  in  the  order  of  which  such  men 
were  representatives.  The  reversion  to  the  older  order  is  the  public  declaration 
of  the  helpless  inferiority  of  the  later. 

267 


CHAP.   VII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBMEWS. 


I.  The  inferiority  is  seen  in  its  temporary  character. — It  was  a  priesthood 
for  a  nation,  not  for  the  world  ;  for  a  time,  and  not  for  ever — the  for  ever  of  the 
hfe  of  humanity.  The  Jewish  was  a  temporary  revelation,  a  preparation  for 
a  fuller  revelation  that  was  to  come,  and  be  universal  and  permanent.  The 
temporary  is  transitional,  and  there  need  be  no  alarm  when  the  time  comes  for 
it  to  pass  away.  Christianity  is  no  reformed  Judaism ;  it  is  the  return  upon 
the  primary  principles  of  God's  dealing  with  humanity.  But  in  one  line  Judaism 
prepared  the  way  for  it.  St.  Paul's  teaching  of  the  relation  of  Christianity  to 
the  Mosaic  system  should  be  noted. 

II.  The  inferiority  is  seen  in  its  limited  range. — This  is  only  hinted  at  here, 
and  further  unfolded  later  on  in  the  epistle.  It  is  suggested  in  the  sentence, 
"  the  weakness  and  unprofitableness  thereof,"  The  range  of  Judaism  was  outward 
and  ceremonial.  It  took  man's  conduct  and  relations — not  his  will,  heart,  motives 
— into  its  management,  imposed  its  penalties  upon  disobedience,  and  arranged  its 
sacrificial  and  ceremonial  conditions  of  restoration  to  privilege.  But  man  wants 
more  than  the  ordering  of  his  conduct :  he  wants  a  power  of  inward  renewal, 
an  object  of  love  who  can  be  to  him  a  supreme  inspiration  to  righteousness. 

III.  The  inferiority  is  seen  in  its  imperfect  agents. — Stress  is  laid  on  the  fact 
that  each  priest  is  not,  as  an  individual,  directly  called,  and  set  apart  for  his 
ofiice  by  God.  There  is  no  precise  recognition  of  ability  and  fitness — no  Divine 
consecration  of  each  man.  Consequently  a  Jewish  priest  might  be  a  good  man, 
or  he  might  not.  He  was  a  priest  because  his  father  was,  and  not  because  he 
himself  was  a  good  and  priestly  man.  Their  imperfection  as  persons  stands  out 
distinctly  in  contrast  with  Melchizedek,  who,  by  direct  selection  and  appointment, 
was  priest  of  the  Most  High  God ;  and  in  contrast  with  Christ,  who  in  Scripture 
is  declared  to  be  '*  a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek,"  and  to  whom 
the  Divine  call  directly  came  at  Jordan :  "  This  is  My  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I 
am  well  pleased."  It  was  an  inferior  covenant,  administered  by  inferior  men. 
Valuable  enough  for  its  time,  and  for  its  mission  ;  but  its  time  had  passed,  and 
its  mission  was  done.  Let  it  go.  The  greater  High  Priest  had  come,  the  surety 
of  an  altogether  better  and  spiritual  covenant.  Cease  to  exaggerate  the  import- 
ance or  authority  of  the  Aaronic  priesthood.  Welcome  the  new  Priest,  the 
Melchizedek  of  the  new  era,  on  whom  the  most  solemn  Divine  assurance  rests — 
you  have  read  it  many  a  time  in  the  word,  you  know  its  full  significance  now  : 
*'  Thou  art  a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek." 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Yer.  18.  Good  Things  may  become 
Ineffective. — We  have  always  to  take 
account  of  the  fact  that,  while  the 
animal  world  can  repeat  itself  genera- 
tion after  generation  with  absolute 
precision,  the  moral  world  never  has 
repeated  itself,  and  never  can  repeat 
itself,  in  two  succeeding  genera- 
tions. "  One  generation  passeth,  and 
another,  and  a  differently  thinking,  and 
differently  circumstanced,  generation 
cometh ;  but  the  earth  abideth  ever." 
The  birds  build  their  nests  to-day 
exactly  as  the  same  birds  built  them  in 
the  trees  of  Paradise.     The  foxes  make 

268 


their  burrowed  holes  just  as  they  made 
them  of  old  in  the  hillsides  of  Palestine. 
But  man  makes  his  house  to-day  alto- 
gether otherwise  than  Adam  did  when 
he  wove  tree -branches  into  a  bower 
outside  Eden.  Moral  man  moves 
forward.  He  does  not  think  to-morrow 
as  he  thought  to-day.  He  wants 
something  more  to-morrow  than  he 
wanted  to-day.  And  the  Divine  reve- 
lations to  the  moral  being,  man,  must 
always  be  precisely  relative  to  what 
he  is,  and  thinks,  and  wants,  when  the 
revelation  is  given.  Indeed,  a  revela- 
tion which,  in  form,  can  adapt  itself  to 


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.         chap.  vii. 


all  the  generations  of  humanity,  is  in- 
conceivable and  impossible  in  the  very 
nature  of  things.  There  are  per- 
manences in  humanity ;  moral  man 
has  his  unchanging  essentials,  and 
there  is  an  essential  in  all  Divine 
revelation  which  meets  the  essential 
and  permanent  in  man,  but  we  are 
not  dwelling  upon  that  feature  now\ 
If  man  is  ever  changing — moral  man, 
intellectual  man,  social  man — and 
revelation  must  of  necessity  change  to 
adapt  itself  to  the  changes^  then  things 
that  are  good,  right,  adapted,  Divine, 
may  come  to  be  practically  ineffective, 
and  have  to  be  put  up  on  the  shelf  of 
history.  Illustration  may  be  taken 
from  the  work  of  the  Puritan  divines, 
or  the  Schoolmen,  or  the  Cambridge 
Platonists, — most  valuable  and  effective 
in  their  day  ;  most  ineffective  in  our 
day.  The  world's  lumber-room  is  full 
of  good  things  that  have  had  their  day, 
and  have  ceased  to  be  living  forces. 
The  stamp  of  the  Divine  on  the  Mosaic 
economy  in  no  way  exempts  it  from 
the  operation  of  the  ever- working 
Divine  laws,  which  are  superior  to 
any  local  and  particular  revelation. 
Mosaism  was  a  good  thing,  but  the 
world's  progress  made  it  ineffective. 

Ver.  19.  Law  i^eplaced  by  Ho2)e. — 
Law  is  an  external  and  authorised 
direction,  which  takes  the  ordering  of 
a  man's  conduct  and  relation  into  its 
control.  Strictly  speaking,  the  range 
of  law — certainly  of  revealed  law — is 
external :  it  has  nothing  to  do  with 
thought,  or  feeling,  or  vdll  :  it  is 
concerned  with  actions,  with  conduct. 
The  apostle  Paul  states  this  with 
great  plainness  and  force,  when  he 
compares  the  righteousness  which 
comes  by  the  law,  and  the  righteous- 
ness which  comes  by  Christ.  "  For 
Moses  writeth  that  the  man  that 
doeth  the  righteousness  which  is  of 
the  law  shall  live  thereby.     But  the 


righteousness  which  is  of  faith  saith 
thus  ...  If  thou  shalt  confess  with 
thy  mouth  the  Jesus  as  Lord,  and 
shalt  believe  in  thy  heart  that  God 
raised  Him  from  the  dead,  thou  shalt 
be  saved."  Law,  as  ordering  of  con- 
duct, has  its  time  and  place  and  work ; 
it  belongs  to  the  rudimentary  stages 
of  the  ^noral  life.  It  is  the  proper 
thing  for  the  child  life  of  individuals, 
of  nations,  and  of  humanity.  Jouhert 
says  the  great  principle  guiding  the 
education  of  humanity  is,  "  Force  till 
right  is  ready."  Hope  is  an  effective 
force  on  thought,  feeling,  ambition. 
It  is  the  inward  inspiration  of  effort 
to  win  righteousness.  Hold  something 
before  a  man,  and  you  make  the  man 
act  from  himself  with  the  view  to  the 
attainment  of  that  which  he  hopes 
for.  Here  is  the  difference  between 
law  and  hope.  Law  takes  the  man 
into  its  control,  and  makes  the  man 
do  what  it  would  have  him  do.  Hope 
makes  the  man  take  himself  into  his 
own  control,  and  Vring  himself  into  all 
obediences  and  goodnesses.  Therefore 
hope  is  such  an  advance  upon  law, 
that  we  may  say  the  Divine  anxiety, 
(and  the  answering  human  anxiety)  is 
to  get  the  orderings  of  law  replaced 
by  the  inspirations  of  hope.  Christ 
both  elevates  and  redeems  humanity, 
by  bringing  in  a  hope.  It  is  a  better 
hope,  because  all  the  law  could  offer 
was  the  acceptance  and  reward  of 
obedient  acts ;  but  this  hope  offers 
the  acceptance  of,  and  Divine  satisfac- 
tion in,  loyal,  loving,  obedient  jyersons. 
That  which  is  the  law  for  the  in- 
di\ddual,  the  nation,  and  humanity, 
is  also  the  law  for  the  Christian  ex- 
perience. The  young  Christian  can 
only  begin  with  laws  and  rules  for  the 
precise  shaping  of  Christian  habits  and 
conduct.  If  he  grows,  that  law  power 
will  pass,  and  give  place  to  the  en- 
nobling and  sanctifying  inspiration  of 
Christian  hope. 


269 


CHAP.  VII.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  23—28. 

Our  Priestly  Saviour. — The  main  purpose  of  this  epistle  is  the  exaltation  of 
the  person,  the  offices,  and  the  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  by  comparing,  and  in 
some  ways  contrasting,  Him  with  the  most  honoured  persons  associated  with 
the  older  history  and  dispensation — with  angels,  with  the  patriarch  Abraham, 
with  Moses,  with  the  high  priest.  The  text  stands  nearly  at  the  height  of  the 
comparisons  of  the  j^erson  and  office,  and  introduces  the  comparison  of  His  work. 

I.  The  nature  of  Christ's  office. — He  is  the  "living  Intercessor."  It  is 
anxiously  set  before  us  that  our  Lord  actually  holds  present  office.  The  idea 
that  His  work  was  completed  while  He  was  here  on  earth  is  only  true  when  it  is 
precisely  and  carefully  stated,  and  with  due  qualifications.  The  work  of  Christ 
is  both  present  and  past.  The  past  explains  the  efficiency  of  the  present ; 
the  present  guarantees  the  acoeptabletiess  of  the  past.  The  present  work  is 
essentially  the  same,  but  not  formally,  or  to  outward  seeming,  the  same  that  He 
carried  through  in  the  past :  He  is  in  the  office,  and  does  the  precise  work  now 
for  which  the  earth  experience  has  fitted  Him.  It  is  therefore  better  for  us  to 
say  of  Christ,  not  "  He  has  redeemed,"  but  "  He  can  redeem,  and  doesP  Describe 
the  office  of  intercessor,  as  illustrated  in  Moses,  in  the  Jewish  high  priest,  and 
in  the  Scripture  figure  of  the  "  Angel  of  the  covenant."  Observe  that  the  work 
of  our  Lord's  present  office  is  stated  in  the  passage  to  be,  not  cmly  mediating  for 
Christians  in  the  supplying  of  Christian  needs,  but  also  an  actual  present 
saving  of  men.  "  Save  to  the  uttermost  all  coming  to  God  by  Him.'*  Ohrist  is 
set  now  in  the  office  of  dispenser  of  the  salvation  that  He  has  won  for  men. 
Man,  as  a  moral  being,  is  to  be  saved,  not  by  a  salvation,  but  by  a  Saviour, 
through  the  agency  of  a  salvation.  The  familiar  words,  "  Simply  to  thy  cross  I 
cling,"  are  a  poetical  figure,  which,  stated  in  a  plain,  prosaic  way,  would  be, 
"  Simply  to  Thyself  I  cling."  In  unfolding  our  Redeemer's  particular  office  as 
priestly  Saviour,  show — 1.  Its  sphere.  Heaven  as  the  symbol  of  the  spiritual. 
The  souls  of  men.  The  presence  of  the  eternal  Father.  2.  Show  its  work. 
Saving,  in  the  large  and  comprehensive  sense  of  effecting  all  deliverances  from 
all  moral  evils,  and  from  all  their  consequences.  3.  And  show  the  ways  in 
which  He  has  won  the  fitness,  and  the  ability,  to  be  this  living  Saviour. 
"  Therefore  God  also  hath  highly  exalted  Him."  (1)  By  the  faithful  execution 
of  a  particular  work  entrusted  to  Him,  He  has  proved  Himself  worthy  of  a 
higher  trust.  According  to  His  own  principle,  embodied  in  the  parables  of  the 
"talents"  and  the  "pounds."  (2)  By  the  intimacy,  variety,  and  completeness 
of  His  human  experience,  He  has  become  precisely  fitted  for  the  sympathetic 
application  of  the  saving  power. 

II.  The  extent  of  the  power  which  belongs  to  Christ's  present  office. — "  To 
the  uttermost."  This  expression  comprehends — 1.  Power  to  meet  the  precise  case 
of  every  one.  And  salvation  is  not  quite  the  same  thing  for  every  man.  It  must 
be  adapted  to  individuality.  2.  Power  to  completely  satisfy  the  needs  of  each 
one.  Here  Christ's  power  is  contrasted  with  that  of  Jewish  high  priests,  who 
could  not  touch  soul-sin.  The  infinite  ability  of  Christ  is  our  encouragement  in 
the  committal  of  our  entire  saving  and  sanctifying  to  Him. 

III.  The  persons  for  whom  especially  the  power  is  exercised. — Does  the 
expression  of  ver.  25  mean  "  everybody  "  ?  And  if  not,  what  are  its  suggested 
limitations  ?  Those  who  come  into  the  saving  power  are  those — 1.  Who  spiritually 
turn  towards  God.  There  must  be  some  opening  of  the  soul  to  God.  2.  Those 
who,  in  thus  turning,  seek  the  help  of  Christ.  To  these,  and  under  these 
conditions,    He   becomes   an  all-sufficient  and  almighty  Saviour.     Or  we  may 

270 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.    VII. 


say,  that  the  condition  of  getting  the  exercise  of  this  saving  power  is,  that  a  man 
fully  trusts  his  case  to  Christ.  But  nobody  ever  does  that  until  he  has  ceased 
to  feel  that  he  can  very  well  manage  it  himself.  These  considerations  reaffirm 
the  two  essential  things  in  every  coming  to  God  through  Christ — penitence  and 
faith.  Reimpress  the  important  truth,  that  the  intercession  of  our  Divine  Lord 
is  founded  on  His  voluntary  offering  of  Himself  without  spot  to  God. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES, 


Ver.  22.  Christ  as  Surety  of  a 
Covenant. — Dr.  Moulton^s  note  on  the 
word  "  covenant "  may  be  found 
specially  helpful  :  "  This  is  the  first 
occurrence  in  this  epistle  of  a  very 
interesting  word  [StaOyKr]),  which  here- 
after will  occupy  an  important  place 
in  the  argument.  Throughout  the 
Gi-eek  translation  of  the  Old  Testament 
it  is  used  to  represent  a  Hebrew  word 
which  is  (more  than  two  hundred  times) 
rightly  rendered  '  covenant '  in  our  ver- 
sion ;  and,  like  the  Hebrew  word,  it 
is  applied  both  to  mutual  agreements 
between  man  and  man,  and  to  '  cove- 
nants '  or  engagements  into  which  God 
enters  in  regard  to  man.  In  classical 
Avriters  StaO-^Kr]  commonly  denotes  a 
"  testament " ;  and  hence  in  the  old 
Latin  translation  of  the  Scriptures  tes- 
tamentum  became  the  common  render- 
ing of  the  word.  As,  however,  this 
1  e  idering  is  very  often  found  where  it 
is  impossible  to  think  of  such  a  mean- 
ing as  will  (e.g.  in  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  5, 
where  no  one  will  suppose  the  psalmist 
to  say  that  the  enemies  of  God  '  have 
arranged  a  testament  against  Him '),  it 
is  plain  that  the  Latin  testanientum 
was  used  with  an  extended  meaning, 
answering  to  the  wide  application  of 
the  Greek  word.  St.  Paul's  designation 
of  the  Jewish  Scriptures  as  the  'old 
covenant' (2  Cor.  iii.  14)  thus  became 
familiarly  known  as  *the  Old  Testa- 
ment.' .  .  .  Here  only  is  Jesus  spoken 
of  as  a  Surety,  elsewhere  as  Mediator 
(chaps,  viii.  6,  ix.  15,  xii.  24).  As 
through  the  Son  of  man  the  covenant 
becomes  established,  so  in  Him  it 
remains  secure ;  the  words  addressed 
by  God  to  Him  as  Priest  and  King 
contain  the  pledge  of  its  validity  and 
permanence."    "Ey-^vos  means  sponsor, 


pledge,  surety.  In  a  covenant  each 
party  may  be  represented  by  some  one 
who  will  guarantee  their  good  faith. 
The  case  is  conceivable  in  which  the 
same  person  may  guarantee  the  good 
faith  of  both  parties  ;  and  then  such  a 
person  would  stand  as  a  living  pledge 
of  the  fulfilment  of  the  terms  of  the 
covenant  on  both  sides.  That  conceiv- 
able thing  is  actually  realised  in  the 
case  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  in  relation 
to  the  new  Christian  covenant.  He 
stands  for  God,  and  pledges  His  good 
faith.  He  stands  for  man,  and  pledges 
his  good  faith.  And  so  long  as  Jesus 
lives  ive  have  the  assurance  that  God 
will  keep  His  v;ord\  and  God  has 
the  assurance  that  we  will  keep  ours. 
Christ  pledges  us  both. 

Vers.  23-28.  Uttermost  Salvation. — 
We  are  taught  here — 

I.  The  perfection  of  Christ's  priest- 
hood.— He  is  lifted  above  all  other 
priests — 1.  By  the  immortality  of  His 
nature  (ver.  24).  Pie  only  hath  im- 
mortality. 2.  By  the  ^perfection  of  His 
character  (ver.  26).  Glorious  in  holi- 
ness. 3.  By  the  efficacy  of  His  sacrifice 
(ver.  27).  So  rich  and  prevalent  that 
offering  of  the  cross. 

II.  The  consequent  perfection  of 
Christ  s  saving  power  (ver.  25). — 
Christ  is  able  to  save  in  every  way, 
in  all  respects,  "  unto  the  uttermost," 
so  that  every  want  and  need,  in  all 
its  breadth  and  depth,  is  utterly  done 
away.  1.  His  salvation  extends  to  the 
worst.  Such  is  the  greatness  of  Christ's 
sympathy  and  power,  that  He  reaches 
down  to  the  lowest,  and  can  lift  the 
lowest  to  heights  of  purity  and  glory. 
2.  His  salvation  comprehends  all.  In 
this  sense  He  saves  to  the  uttermost. 

271 


CUAP.  VII.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


Philanthropists    usually    select     some 
particular  class  of  sinners  or  sufferers 
as   their   sphere    of    beneficence — one 
cares  for  the   slave,    another   for  the 
prisoner,  a  third  for  the  orphan ;  but 
Christ   is    "the    Sa\dour  of  all  men." 
There  is   a  E-abbinical  legend  to  the 
effect  that,  when  the  law  was  given  at 
Sinai,  all  the  yet  unborn  souls  of  the 
Jewish  nation  were  assembled  to  hear 
it.     Certainly,    when   Christ   died   on 
Calvary,    He    saw   around    Him    the 
spirits   of   all  flesh,  and   bare  in   His 
body     the     iniquities     of     them     all. 
3.  His  salvation  is  complete.     "  Utter- 
most "  signifies  completeness  ;  it  forms 
an   antithesis   here  to  ver.  19,  where 
it   is   stated  "  the  law  made   nothing 
perfect."    Christ  shall  fully  restore  our 
nature    to    purity,  to   beauty,  to  joy. 
There  is  such  a  thing  as  being  saved 
from  fire,  and  yet   the   nerves   to  be 
shattered,  and  the  flesh  scarred;  such 
a   thing    as   being   saved    from   ship- 
wreck,   and    yet     to    stand    bleeding 
and  beggared  on  the    shore ;   such   a 
thing   as    being    saved   in    the  day  of 
battle,  and  yet  to  have  lost    a  limb. 
Not  with  such  a  salvation  does  Christ 
save  His  people.     4.  His  saving  power 
continues    undiminished    hy    lapse    of 
time.     The  power  of  Christ  is  as  fresh 
and    full    to-day  as   it    ever   was ;    so 
it    will   continue    to   the    latest    age. 
5.  His  salvation  confers  eternal  security 
and  joy.     He  ever  liveth  to  continue 
the  fellowship  between  His  saints  and 
God       So    all-comprehending    is    the 
salvation   of   Jesus   Christ,    He   saves 
from   deepest   depths,  to    ends  of  the 
earth,    to    end     of    time :    He    saves 
thoroughly  ;  He  saves  with  the  power 
of  an  endless  life. 

III.  The  subjects  of  Christ's  saving 
grace. — Them  that  come  unto  God  by 
Him,  come  penitently.,  come  boldly^ 
come  now. — W.  L.  Watkinson. 

Ver.  24.  No  Change  in  ChrisCs 
Priestly  Relations  conceivable. — If  the 
relations  were  material  and  temporal, 
change  in  them  would  be  quite  possible, 
and  might  indeed  reasonably  be  ex- 
pected.    Those  relations  are  spiritual 

272 


and  eternal,  and  they  are  therefore 
permanent  and  unchangeable.  Or  we 
may  say,  that  the  priestly  relations 
of  Christ  do  not  concern  the  merely 
accidental  conditions  of  men,  but  the 
essential  and  universal  conditions  ; 
and  so  the  adaptations  of  His  priestly 
ministry  can  never  pass  or  change. 
The  thought  of  the  writer  may  not, 
however,  be  so  comprehensive  and  so 
philosophical  as  this.  The  point  im- 
mediately before  him  is  the  limited 
time  in  which  a  Mosaic  high  priest 
served  his  office,  and  the  unlimited 
time  that  Christ,  as  our  spiritual  High 
Priest,  serves  His.  This  was  suggested 
by  the  prominent  fact  concerning 
Melchizedek,  that  there  was  no  fixed 
beginning  to  his  office,  and  no  fixed 
termination.  If  an  office  is  put  into 
the  hands  of  a  succession  of  men,  it 
is  manifestly  entrusted  to  a  variety  of 
men  ;  and  many  men  have  many  ways. 
The  methods  of  carrying  out  the  duties 
of  the  office  must,  of  necessity,  vary. 
Each  man  will  put  his  own  impress 
upon  it.  But  if  an  office  could  be 
held  by  one  person  throughout  all 
generations,  and  that  one  person  had 
the  power  of  precisely  adapting  his 
principles  and  his  methods  to  each 
generation,  he  would  virtually  hold 
an  unchangeable  office.  And  that  is 
precisely  what  we  are  to  understand 
concerning  Christ.  He  is  the  one  and 
only  spiritual  High  Priest  of  humanity. 
There  was  no  time,  since  humanity 
has  existed,  in  which  He  was  not  its 
High  Priest.  He  was  spiritual  High 
Priest  when  there  were  formal  high 
priests  according  to  the  law.  And 
there  will  be  no  time,  while  humanity 
exists,  in  which  He  will  not  be  High 
Priest.  If  we  do  but  grip  the  idea 
that  He  is  spiritual  High  Priest  to 
spiritual  humanity — and  that  alone  is 
humanity — we  shall  easily  see  that 
change  in  the  principles  and  methods 
of  His  priesthood  cannot  be,  for  the 
very  simple  reason  that  the  condi- 
tions and  needs  of  spiritual  humanity 
— of  the  souls  which  men  are — never  do 
change,  and  so  there  can  be  no  call  for 
any  change  to  meet  their  new  needs. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   VII. 


Yer.  25.  The  Eternal  Saviour. — 
Happily  we  are  not  dependent  on  this 
or  any  other  single  passage  of  Scrip- 
ture for  our  belief  in  the  doctrine  that 
Christ's  power  to  save  is  practically 
unlimited.  We  are  not  certain  that 
the  word  rendered  "  to  the  uttermost  " 
has  more  than  a  temporal  significance. 
Probably  it  has.  But  if  the  text  does 
not  positively  affirm,  it  supports  and 
suggests  the  truth,  left  beyond  all 
doubt  elsewhere,  that  the  power  of 
Christ  to  save — 

I.  Is  unconditioned  by  the  charac- 
ter of  the  case. — However  complicated 
or  aggravated  that  may  be,  no  fear 
or  doubt  need  be  entertained  for  a 
moment.  Men  may,  and  they  sometimes 
do,  think  that  their  sin  is  unpardon- 
able, or  that  their  true  manhood 
cannot  be  restored,  that  no  human 
or  Divine  power  can  raise  and  renew 
them.  But  Scripture  and  experience 
alike  prove  that  they  are  wrong. 
There  is  no  depth  of  iniquity  to  which 
man  can  descend  from  which  the  power 
of  Christ  cannot  lift  him  up.  There 
are  no  crimes  against  heaven  and 
earth  which  the  mercy  of  God  in  Jesus 
Christ  will  not  cover.  He  saves  to  the 
uttermost. 

II.  Extends  through  the  whole  of 
our  human  life. — We  may  have  to 
change  priests  or  pastors,  and  we  may 
be  troubled  by  the  fact.  We  have  not 
to  change  one  Saviour  for  another. 
The  thought  is  too  familiar  to  affect 
us,  but  it  is  a  very  precious  truth,  that 
all  our  life  through  we  have  to  do 
with  an  unchanging  Lord  and  Friend. 
It  means — 1.  That  Christ  is  ours 
through  all  the  successive  periods  of 
our  life,  each  one  of  which  has  its 
own  dangers  and  difficulties,  and 
demands  special  grace  and  power.  Of 
Him  do  we  all  receive  "grace  upon 
grace,"  one  kindness  after  another, 
varying  according  to  the  stage  we 
have  reached,  and  to  the  peculiar  need 
of  the  passing  hour  (see  John  i.  16). 
2.  That  in  any  great  sorrow  or  emer- 
gency that  may  overtake  us  we  are  sure 
to  have  our  Divine  Friend  to  whom 
we  can  resort,  and  on  whose  sympathy 


and  succour  we  can  rely.  3.  That  in 
the  great,  continuous  work  of  spiritual 
culture  we  may  count  on  His  help. 
We  are  in  some  serious  danger  of 
supposing  that  there  are  faults  in 
our  character,  and  blemishes  in  our 
behaviour,  which  are  irremovable,  and 
must  be  accepted  as  an  inevitable 
detraction  from  our  worth  and  in- 
fluence. But  by  what  right  do  we 
accept  these  as  permanent  and  in- 
curable ?  With  an  ever-living  Saviour, 
a  helpful  High  Priest,  *'  ever  living  to 
make  intercession,"  able  to  save  His 
people  to  the  uttermost  from  all  their 
sin  and  shortcoming,  we  ought  to  be 
striving  for  and  expecting  a  full 
deliverance,  a  complete  salvation, 
through  sanctity  of  spirit  and  excel- 
lency of  life.  We  have  no  leave  to 
settle  down  into  a  complacent  toler- 
ance of  any  evil  thing  in  temper  or 
in  spirit,  in  speech  or  in  conduct. 

III.  Will  continue  through  all 
generations. — Many  systems  have  had 
a  brief  day  of  power  and  have  passed 
away.  They  have  had  adventitious  or 
spasmodic  advantages,  and  have  done 
great  things  for  a  little  while.  Then 
testing  time  has  come,  and  they  have 
waned  and  disappeared.  Jesus  Christ 
has  not  lost  one  jot  or  tittle  of  His 
power  to  save  and  heal.  Where  His 
truth  has  been  corrupted  it  has  been 
enfeebled,  as  we  can  well  understand 
it  must  be  ;  but  where  it  has  been 
cleansed  of  its  accretions,  and  has  been 
presented  in  its  purity,  it  has  proved 
"  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation." 
This  it  is  proving  now.  At  home  and 
abroad  it  is  found  to  be  the  one 
sovereign  power  that  transforms  the 
base,  that  viplifts  the  degraded,  that 
arouses  the  sluggish,  that  calls  the 
worldly  to  the  service  of  God,  that 
makes  the  selfish  to  be  concerned  for 
the  welfare  of  their  kind,  that  comforts 
the  sorrowful,  that  cheers  the  lonely, 
that  gives  peace  in  strife,  and  hope  in 
death.  It  shows  no  signs  of  age,  no 
symptoms  of  decay.  There  is  nothing 
ready  to  supply  its  place.  Eighteen 
centuries  of  physical  research  and 
philosophic  inquiry  have  not  provided 

273 


CHAP.  VII.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS. 


any  substitute  for  Christian  truth. 
It  is  Christ  alone  who  can  speak  to 
us  with  authority  upon  God,  upon  sin, 
upon  human  life,  upon  the  future ;  it 
is  He  alone  that  can  give  rest  to 
heavy-laden  souls.  Christ  is  proving 
to  be  the  eternal  Saviour  to  whom 
mankind  in  every  age  can  turn  with 
trustful  and  thankful  heart.  To 
whom,  if  not  to  Him,  shall  we  go  ? 
He  only  has  the  words  of  eternal  life 
on  His  lips,  and  the  gift  of  eternal  life 
in  His  hand.  But  if  we  would  find  we 
must  seek.  It  is  "  they  who  draw 
near  to  God  through  Him  "  that  are 
saved.  We  must  —1.  Gladly  and 
gratefully  receive  the  great  truth  of 
God's  Fatherhood  as  taught  by  Jesus 
Christ.  2.  Confidently  approach  our 
heavenly  Father  through  His  media- 
tion. 3.  Eagerly  accept  the  grace  of 
God  unto  eternal  life  for  His  sake. — 
Selected. 

Salvation  to  the  Uttermost.  —  The 
writer  is  dealing  with  that  continuous 
work  of  saving  which  was  the  ministry 
entrusted  to  the  old  Jewish  priests, 
and  is,  in  the  highest  senses,  the 
ministry  entrusted  to  our  great  High 
Priest.  It  needs  to  be  well  kept  in 
mind,  that  the  old  priests  did  not 
merely  do  one  great  saving  work  for 
the  people,  they  stood  in  constant  sav- 
ing relations  with  them.  Every  year, 
nay,  every  day,  they  were  executing 
some  saving  ministry  for  them  ;  and 
the  very  essence  of  their  saving  work 
consisted  in  this — they  were  the 
mediums  through  whom  any  one  who 
wanted  to  come  to  God  with  a  petition, 
or  an  act  of  devotion,  found  access  to 
Him,  and  acceptance  with  Him.  To 
express  the  work  of  the  old  priests  in 
the  language  of  this  text,  "  they 
were  able,  in  limited  measures,  to  save 
those  who  came  to  God  through  them, 
seeing  that  they  were  the  appointed 
persons  for  making  intercession." 
When  this  is  clearly  seen,  the  contrast 
between  the  limitations  of  the  old 
priestly  ministries,  and  the  perfections 
of  the  ministries  of  Jesus,  our  great 
High   Priest,  comes   to   view   with   a 

274  ^ 


singular  and  surprising  force.  "  Where- 
fore also  He  is  able  to  save  to  the 
uttermost  them  that  draw  near  unto 
God  through  Him,  seeing  He  ever 
liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them." 
"  Wherefore "  is  the  usual  term  for 
introducing  the  conclusion  of  an  argu- 
ment. And  it  is  necessary  to  under- 
stand what  the  writer  has  been 
presenting,  from  which  he  draws  this 
conclusion.  He  is  writing  to  profess- 
ing Christians  about  themselves.  He 
knows  the  perils  and  temptations  to 
which  they  are  exposed,  but  he  has 
every  confidence  in  the  sincerity  and 
earnestness  of  their  Christian  life.  He 
wants  to  help  them  to  enter  fully  into 
all  their  Christian  privileges.  In  this 
part  of  his  epistle  he  is  trying  to  show 
these  Christian  Jews  that  Christ,  in 
His  subHme  spiritual  work,  as  High 
Priest  of  the  new  and  spiritual  dispen- 
sation, must  be  in  every  respect  superior 
to  the  old  temporal  high  priests  of  the 
old  formal  and  typical  dispensation. 
In  the  verses  immediately  preceding 
this  text  the  argument  is  brought  to 
one  point.  These  old  Jewish  priests 
were  necessarily  insulSicient,  because 
they  could  not  continue  in  their  office 
by  reason  of  death.  "  The  vacancies 
cau>:ed  in  their  number  by  the  ravages 
of  death  required  to  be  constantly 
replenished."  They  cannot  be  thought 
of  as  altogether  efficient  when  they 
entered  on  their  office.  They  gained 
efficiency  by  practice  and  experience. 
But  as  they  could  not  continue  by 
reason  of  death,  their  practised  effici- 
ency could  only  reach  a  certain  point, 
and  then  it  was  broken  off.  The  dying 
priest  could  not  transmit  his  efficiency 
to  the  new  priest  who  took  his  office ; 
the  new  man  had  to  gain  his  efficiency 
in  precisely  the  same  way,  and  then  to 
die  as  soon  as  he  had  gained  it.  But 
see  how  this  affected  the  people,  who 
sought  the  priest's  sympathy  and  help 
in  their  "  drawing  near  to  God." 
They  would  get  to  know  and  love  the 
priest ;  they  would  find  one  especially 
sympathetic  and  helpful,  in  dealing 
with  their  weaknesses  and  difficulties. 
But  he  would  die,  and  they  would  feel 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.         chap.  vii. 


quite  at  sea  with  the  new  man,  who 
would  surely  be  of  another  tempera- 
ment, and  would  surely  adopt  new 
methods.  It  would  be  a  long  time  before 
they  would  quite  fit  to  the  new  man  and 
the  new  regime.  I  think  it  was  in  the 
Catholic  Cathedral  at  Arundel  that 
this  came  home  to  me  with  singular 
power.  On  one  side  of  the  nave  there 
are  recesses,  partitioned  off,  with  the 
partitions  pierced  by  small  grated 
windows.  These  are  the  confessional 
chambers,  where  souls  confidentially 
seek  the  aid  of  a  priest  in  securing 
their  access  to  God,  and  confirming 
their  relations  with  Him.  Outside 
each  recess  is  a  card,  with  the  name 
of  the  priest  who  could  be  consulted 
there.  On  one  of  the  cards  had  been 
put  the  word  "  dead  "  ;  and  I  thought 
of  the  poor  souls  who  had  found  him 
their  spiritual  helper  coming  to  seek 
him  in  vain,  and  broken-heartedly 
trying  to  get  another  priest  to  under- 
stand and  sympathise  with  them,  as 
their  old,  and  perhaps  life-long,  friend 
had  done.  It  brought  up  vividly  the 
insufiiciency  of  the  old  priesthood,  by 
reason  of  its  limitations.  It  helped 
to  the  realisation  of  the  infinite  and 
unchangeable  efficiency  of  our  great 
High  Priest,  who  is  our  Priest  in  the 
"  power  of  an  endless  life."  Christ 
continueth  ever,  and  His  priesthood 
continues  with  Him.  He  gains  an 
efficiency  of  service  to  us  which  never 
breaks  off,  is  never  interrupted,  and 
never  stops.  Of  this  we  may  be 
absolutely  assured :  we  shall  never  be 
shifted  off  to  another  priest ;  we  shall 
never  be  compelled  to  try  and  fit  our- 
selves to  another.  He  abideth  our 
Priest  continually,  here  and  now,  yonder 
and  by-and-by.  We  need  never  think 
of  our  life  under  any  conditions  in 
which  we  shall  not  have  Jesus  as  our 
Priest.  We  get  full  trust  in  Him, 
and  that  trust  never  will  be  broken 
off.  See  then  why  the  Levitical  priest- 
hood, and  every  other  human  priest- 
hood, must  be  considered  as  far  inferior 
to  that  of  Jesus.  "  As  men  in  a  frail 
and  dying  state  are  constituted  priests, 
the  consequence  is,  that  the  priesthood 


is  liable  to  continual  change,  and  must 
necessarily  pass  from  the  hands  of  one 
to  another,  in  a  short  time.  Not  so 
in  the  case  of  Christ,  who,  being 
exalted  above  the  heavens,  and  consti- 
tuted High  Priest  in  the  temple  not 
made  with  hands,  hath  an  immutable 
priesthood,  subject  to  no  succession." 
Christ's  endless  life  involves  the  con- 
tinuity of  His  office,  and  this  involves 
His  ability  to  save  His  saved  ones  to 
the  uttermost.     Consider — 

I.  Christ's  continuous  work  of  sav- 
ing  the    saved. — Scripture    does    not 
speak  of  a  man's  salvation  as  a  thing 
completed  at  a  given  time,  or  in  any 
single  act.     It  is  a  Divine  process  in 
souls  which  has  a  beginning,  but  is  of 
no  value  unless  it  is  continued.     Scrip- 
ture  speaks   of    *'  full    salvation,"    of 
salvation  in  advance,  "  ready  to  be  re- 
vealed."    The  term  "  saving  "  covers  all 
that  God  does  in  the  spiritual  recovery 
and  culture  of  men.     It  is  true  that 
we  are  saved.     It  is  more  true   that 
we  are  being  saved,  that  we  are  put 
into    Christ's    power    for    saving,    and 
that  He  is  now  doing  that  saving  work. 
When   is   a    man  saved  ?     When  the 
whole  work  of  grace  entrusted  to  the 
ministry  of  the  great  High  Priest  is 
fully  wrought  out  in  him.     Then,  and 
not  till  then.     It  is  the  hope  of   our 
life,   it  is  the  inspiration  of  all  high 
endeavour,  that  we  saved  ones  are  being 
saved.      And    does   not    this   way   of 
stating  truth  come  close  home  to  us  ? 
Is  not  this  just  what  we  feel  can  alone 
satisfy    us  ?     We    cannot   be   satisfied 
with  that   salvation  which  began  our 
relations    with    Christ.     In    our    best 
moments   we  want   to   know  this — Is 
He   following    up    His    saving   w^ork  ? 
In    a    Christmas    sermon    by   George 
Macdonald,  the  continued  saving  work 
that  Jesus  has  to  do  in  us  is  suggested 
in   His  inimitable  way.      *'  It  is  as  if 
God   spoke    to   each   of    us    according 
to  our  need.     My  son,    My  daughter, 
you  are  growing  old  and  cunning  ;  you 
must   grow   a   child   again,   with   My 
Son,  this  blessed  birth -time.     You  are 
growing    old    and   selfish ;    you    must 
become  a  child.     You  are  growing  old 

275 


CHAP.   VII. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


and  careful ;  you  must  become  a  child. 
You  are  growing  old  and  distrustful ; 
you  must  become  a  child.  You  are 
growing  old,  and  petty,  and  weak,  and 
foolish ;  you  must  become  a  child — My 
child,  like  the  baby  there,  that  strong 
sunrise  of  faith,  and  hope,  and  love, 
lying  in  his  mother's  arms  in  the 
stable."  What  is  that  but  saying  in 
a  poetic  way  that  Christ's  continuous 
work  is  "saving  the  saved."  In  the 
text,  however,  the  comprehensive  word 
"  save  "  is  put  into  one  particular  rela- 
tion, but  it  is  the  all-inclusive  relation. 
Christ  is  saving  us  by  helping  us  to 
"  come  to  God,"  to  "  draw  near  to 
God,"  to  keep  in  right  and  close 
relations  with  God,  and  to  bring  all 
our  ever- varying  and  ever- multiplied 
needs  and  wants  to  Him.  All  the 
saving  work  will  go  on,  if  only  we 
keep  constantly  "  coming  boldly  to  the 
throne  of  the  heavenly  grace."  Our 
Priest  keeps  up  the  relations,  is  our 
constant  medium ;  and  so  we  go  on 
towards  the  "  full  salvation." 

II.  The  ground  of  His  ability  to 
save  the  saved. — It  rests  upon  this, 
"  He  ever  liveth."  He  has  the  power 
which  belongs  to  an  endless  and  in- 
dissoluble life.  He  is  a  priest  for 
ever.  There  can  be  no  question  of 
His  power  to  carry  through  what  He 
has  undertaken.  Man's  work  never 
can  be  guaranteed  as  complete.  Death 
comes  to  men  at  all  times,  and  stops 
their  work ;  and  whenever  he  comes, 
he  compels  a  man  to  cry  out  and  say, 
"  My  purposes  are  broken  off."  The 
symbol  of  man's  incomplete  life  under- 
takings is  the  broken  pillar  over  the 
graves  in  the  cemetery.  Christ's  work 
can  be  absolutely  guaranteed  as  com-' 
plete,  for  death  can  never  arrest  Him, 
can  never  pluck  His  priesthood  away, 
and  give  it  to  another.  It  continues 
to  the  very  uttermost  of  human  need. 
It  is  unchangeable,  since  it  keeps  ever 
in  the  same  all-wise,  all-loving,  and 
all-sympathetic  hands.  The  ground  of 
Christ's  ability  to  save  the  saved  is  that 
experience  of  the  needs  of  the  saved 
which  He  gained  by  His  own  life  among 
men.    He  can  be  a  merciful  and  faithful 

276 


High  Priest  in  things  pertaining  to 
God.  It  is  that  trust  of  the  high- 
priestly  oiiice  which  God  has  made  to 
Him,  as  the  recognition  of  His  infinite 
acceptableness  and  efficiency.  Able — 
His  ability  is  Divinely  recognised  in 
His  trust.  But  what  we  need  more 
especially  to  see  is,  that  the  adequate 
impression  of  His  ability  is  made  upon 
our  hearts  by  the  assurance  that  "  He 
ever  liveth."  If  death  cannot  touch 
Him,  then  we  know  that  nothing 
else  can.  If  death  cannot  put  limits 
on  His  priesthood,  nothing  else  can. 
The  ability  is  unchangeable.  He  will 
never  be  other  to  us  than  we  have 
proved  Him  to  be,  and  He  can  save  us 
to  our  "uttermost." 

III.  The  method  of  His  work  in 
saving  the  saved. — "  To  make  inter- 
cession for  them."  Sometimes  we  see 
that  work  as  what  the  living  Lord 
Jesus  does,  by  His  Spirit,  in  His 
people ;  and  then  we  call  it  His  saiicti- 
fying  work.  But  here  the  writer 
dwells  on  another  method  in  which  the 
saving  work  is  carried  out.  He  secures 
the  supply  of  all  the  need  which  the 
saved  ones  ever  recognise,  and  want  to 
carry  to  God,  seeking  its  supply.  No 
matter  when  or  where,  or  for  what, 
the  saved  one  wants  to  draw  near  to 
God,  to  come  to  the  throne  of  the 
heavenly  grace,  there  is  his  High 
Priest,  ready  to  take  his  prayer,  to 
present  it  perfumed  with  the  ever- 
acceptable  incense  of  His  own  merit, 
and  to  guarantee  him  answers  of 
blessing  and  of  peace.  "  He  ever 
liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us "  ; 
and  by  that  method  of  helping  us 
He  is  ever  carrying  out  His  work  of 
saving  the  saved.  Our  relations  with 
God  are  never  broken ;  our  com- 
munications with  God,  our  com- 
munications from  God,  are  never 
stopped,  and  we  are  sure  they  never 
will  be  stopped,  for  our  High  Priest, 
our  Intercessor,  is  there,  and  always 
will  be  there. 

IV.  The  limit  of  His  efficiency  in 
saving  the  saved. — "Unto  the  utter- 
most." It  is  not  possible  even  to 
suggest  all  the  difficulties  and  anxieties 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.  VII. 


and  distresses  into  which  Christ's 
people  may  get  ;  they  never  get  into 
any  which  put  them  beyond  the  high- 
priestly  power  of  Christ.  We  may 
have  proved  His  power  to  strange  and 
exceeding  Hmits,  but  we  have  never 
gone  beyond  Him,  and  we  never  shall. 
He  can  save  His  saved  ones  to  the 
uttermost.  Think  again  of  the  poor 
souls  that  in  their  thousand-fold  dis- 
tresses go  seeking  the  sympathy  and 
help  of  some  human  priest.  What  a 
wealth  of  woe  has  been  poured  into 
the  eai's  of  father-confessors  through 
all  the  long  ages  !  But  how  often,  oh 
how  painfully  often,  the  priest  is  help- 
less, agonisingly  helpless  !  The  sup- 
pliant goes  utterly  beyond  him  with  his 
great  cry  for  help.  No  saved  one  ever 
yet  got  beyond  the  great  High  Priest 
with  the  cry  of  his  need.  He  has 
always  been  able  to  save  the  saved 
ones  to  the  uttermost.  And  He 
always  will  be :  for  He  ever  lives. 
What  He  was  yesterday.  He  is  to-day, 
and  He  will  be  for  ever  ;  and  never 
shall  the  hour  come  round  when  we 
may  not  draw  near  with  our  burdened 
hearts,  and  find  Him  there — there 
ready — there  as  He  has  ever  been  : 
"able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost  all 
that  would  draw  near  unto  God,  seeing 
He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession 
for  them." 

A  Living  Saviour,  therefore  a  Com- 
plete Salvation.- — The  saint  learns  that 
salvation  must  be  continuous,  that  he 
can  no  more  keep  than  redeem  himself, 
and  that  he  needs  a  Saviour,  not  for 
once,  but  for  always,  not  in  the  first 
stages  of  redemption  only,  but  every 
step  of  the  way — in  a  word,  what  we 
have  in  the  text.  One  who  is  *'  able  to 
save  to  the  uttermost."  And  this  His 
ability  is  because  ^'  He  ever  liveth  to 
make  intercession."  Salvation  will  be 
to  us  what  it  might  be  in  proportion 
as  we  look  for  it,  not  to  the  cross,  but 
to  Him  who,  once  crucified,  is  now 
living — living  for  evermore,  to  continue 
in  heaven  the  work  begun  on  earth. 

I.  The  text  reveals  our  Lord  as 
living  to  save, — The  Atonement  does 


not  include  the  whole  work  of  salva- 
tion. As  Saviour  Christ  never  rests. 
He  ascended  to  carry  on  His  work  to 
further  developments.  1.  Nothing  less 
than  this  reaches  the  perfection  of 
grace.  2.  Without  this  His  work  on 
earth  were  unavailing.  3.  Only  this 
explains  our  continued  spiritual  en- 
richment. 

II.  The  method  by  which  our  Lord 
carries  on  His  saving  work  in  heaven 
is  that  of  ceaseless  intercession. — 
1.  This  intercession  is  for  those  that 
come  unto  God  by  Him.  2.  It 
secures  for  them  everything  they 
ask.     3.   And  it   includes  all  possible 

gOOfl. 

III.  This  intercession  enables  Him 
to  save  to  the   uttermost. — 1.  To  the 

uttermost  depth  of  depravity.  2.  To 
the  uttermost  Km  it  of  time.  3.  To 
the  uttermost  measure  of  perfection. — 
Charles  New. 

Yer.  26.  Christ  as  Separate  from  the 
World. — With  us  of  to-day  it  is  the 
commendation  of  Jesus  that  He  is 
so  profoundly  humbled,  identified  so 
affectingly  with  our  human  state.  But 
the  power  He  had  with  the  men  of  His 
time  moved  in  exactly  the  opposite 
direction,  being  the  impression  He 
made  of  His  remoteness  and  separate- 
ness  from  men,  when  He  was,  in  fact, 
only  a  man  as  they  supposed,  under 
all  human  conditions.  The  contrast, 
however,  between  their  position  and 
ours  is  not  so  complete  as  may  at  first 
seem  to  us,  for  that  which  makes  their 
impression  makes,  after  all,  a  good 
part  of  ours.  The  present  subject  is — 
The  separateness  of  Jesus  from  men ; 
the  immense  power  it  had,  and  must 
ever  have,  on  their  feeling  and  char- 
acter. Christ  was  not  separated  as 
being  at  all  withdrawn,  but  only  that, 
in  drawing  Himself  most  closely  to 
them,  He  was  felt  by  them  never  as 
being  on  their  level  of  life  and  char- 
acter, but  as  being  parted  from 
them  by  an  immense  chasm  of  dis- 
tance. His  disciples  had  no  definite 
ideas  as  to  His  being  a  higher  nature 
incarnate.     His     miracles,     and     the 

277 


CHAP.  VII.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS. 


expectation  of  Messiah,  may  have  had  rise     to    higher    thoughts,    and     are 

something  to  do  with  their  impressions.  wakened  to  a  conscious  struggle  after 

But    there    was    nothing   that   should  God. 

separate  Him  specially  from  mankind  III.  What   is  the   solution  of  this 

as  being  a  more  than  humanly  super-  profound    impression   of  separateness 

lative  character.  made  by  Christ  on  the  world  ? — His 

I.  Notice  how  the  persons  most  miracles  and  the  repute  of  His  Messiah- 
remote  and  opposite,  even  they  that  ship  do  not  wholly  account  for  it.  It 
finally  conspired  His  death,  were  may  be  said  that  He  produced  this 
impressed  or  affected  by  Him. — Spite  impression  artificially,  by  means  of 
of  their  treatment  of  Him,  we  can  certain  scenes  and  observances  designed 
easily  see  that  there  is  growing  up,  to  widen  out  the  distance  between 
in  their  minds,  a  most  peculiar  awe  Him  and  the  race.  Were  the  really 
of  His  person.  And  it  appears  to  astounding  assumptions  put  forth  by 
be  excited  more  by  His  manners  and  Christ  designed  as  declarations  or 
doctrine,  and  a  certain  indescribable  assertions  of  a  superhuman  order  in 
originality  and  sanctity  in  both,  than  His  natural  person  ?  Certainly  He 
by  anything  else.  The  public  mind  is  challenging,  in  such  utterances, 
became  gradually  saturated  with  a  honours  and  prerogatives  that  are  not 
kind  of  awe  of  His  person,  as  if  He  human.  At  the  same  time,  if  He  had 
might  be  some  higher,  finer  nature  not  before  separated  Himself  heaven- 
come  into  the  world.  It  grew  until  wide  from  men,  by  His  character,  and 
it  became  a  general  superstition.  The  produced,  in  that  manner,  a  sense  of 
problem  with  the  officials  was,  not  how  some  wonderful  mystery  in  Him,  He 
to  arrest  any  common  man,  or  sinner  would  have  been  utterly  scouted  and 
of  mankind,  but  a  superior,  mysterious,  hooted  out  of  the  world  for  His  pre- 
fearful  One,  and  there  wanted,  as  they  posterous  assumptions.  Indeed,  the 
imagined,  some  kind  of  magic  to  do  minds  of  His  disciples  were  so  much 
it.  They  took  up  thus  an  impression  occupied  with  the  impressions  they 
that,  if  they  could  suborn  one  of  His  felt,  under  the  realities  of  His  charac- 
followers,  it  would  break  the  spell  of  ter,  that  they  scarcely  attended  to  the 
His  power,  and  they  could  proceed  strange  assumptions  of  His  words,  and 
safely.  Pilate  was  profoundly  im-  did  not  even  seem  to  have  taken  their 
pressed  with  the  sense  of  something  meaning  till  after  His  death.  The 
superior,  more  wise,  or  holy,  or  sacred,  impression  of  Christ's  separation  was 
than  he  had  seen  before.  The  cen-  made,  not  by  scenes,  nor  by  words  of 
turion,  in  presence  of  the  cross,  ex-  assertion,  nor  by  anything  designed 
claimed,  "  Truly  this  was  the  Son  of  for  that  purpose,  but  it  grew  out  of 
God  !  "  His  life  and  character — His  unworldli- 

II.  Notice  how  the  disciples  were  ness,  holiness,  purity,  truth,  love ;  the 
impressed  or  affected  by  the  manner  dignity  of  His  feeling,  the  tran- 
and  spirit  of  Jesus. — The  remarkable  scendent  wisdom  and  grace  of  His 
thing  is,  that  He  took  possession  of  conduct.  He  was  manifestly  one  that 
them  strangely,  even  at  the  very  first,  stood  apart  from  the  world  in  His 
and  yet  they  appear  to  be  more  and  profoundest  human  sympathy  with  it. 
more  impressed  with  the  distance  He  rose  up  out  of  humanity,  or  the 
between  Him  and  themselves,  the  human  level,  into  Deity  and  the 
longer  they  know  Him,  and  the  more  separate  order  of  uncreated  life,  by 
intimate  and  familiar  their  acquaint-  the  mere  force  of  His  manner  and 
ance  with  Him.  Of  this  St.  Peter  character,  and  achieved,  as  man,  the 
affords  a  striking  example.  This,  in  sense  of  a  Divine  excellence  before 
part,  is  their  blessing  ;  for,  as  they  are  His  personal  order  as  the  Son  of  God 
humbled  by  it,  so  they  are  raised  by  was  conceived.  And  so  it  finally 
it,    feel   the    birth    of   new   affinities,  became  established  in  men's  feelings, 

278 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   VII. 


as  it  stood  in  His  last  prayer,  that 
there  was  some  inexplicable  oneness 
where  His  inmost  life  and  spirit 
merged  in  the  Divine  and  became 
identical.  How  great  a  thing  it  is 
that  such  a  Being  has  come  into  our 
world  and  lived  in  it !  What  is  meant 
by  holiness,  and  what  especially  is  its 
power,  or  the  law  of  its  power  ?  It  is 
the  sense  of  a  separated  quality  in  one 
who  lives  on  a  footing  of  intimacy  and 
oneness  with  God.  It  means  being 
drawn  apart,  or  exalted,  by  being 
consecrated  to  God  and  filled  with 
inspiration  from  God.  This  is  holi- 
ness— the  condition  of  a  man  when  he 
is  separated  visibly  from  the  world, 
and  raised  above  it  by  a  Divine 
participation.  Christianity  is  a  re- 
generative power  upon  the  world  only 
as  it  comes  into  the  world  in  a 
separated  character — as  a  revelation 
or  sacred  importation  of  holiness.  In 
this  lies  the  efficacy  of  Christ's  mission, 
that  He  brings  to  men  what  is  not  in 
them,  what  is  opposite  to  them — the 
separated  glory,  the  holiness  of  God. 
We  want  a  salvation  which  means  a 
grace  brought  into  the  world  that  is 
not  of  it.  So  Christ  will  not  be  a 
popular  Saviour.  His  profound  singu- 
larity, as  a  Being  superior  to  sin  and 
to  all  human  conventionalities,  would 
offend  men,  and  drive  them  quite 
away.  There  is  no  greater  mistake, 
as  regards  the  true  manner  of  im- 
pression on  the  world,  than  that  we 
impress  it  by  being  homogeneous  with 
it.  It  is  not  the  being  popular  that 
makes  one  a  help  to  religion, — no  holy 
man  was  ever  a  truly  popular  charac- 
ter. There  is  no  just  mode  of  life,  no 
true  holiness,  or  fruit  of  holy  living, 
if  we  do  not  carry  the  conviction,  by 
our  self-denial,  our  sobriety  in  the 
matter  of  show,  and  our  withholding 
from  all  that  indicates  our  being  under 
the  world,  that  we  are  in  a  life 
separated  to  God.  And  there  is  most 
profound  philosophy  in  this — '*  Come 
out  from  among  them,  and  be  ye 
separate." — Horace  Bushnell^  D.D, 

The  Divine  Cha/rm  of  Chrises  Charac- 


ter.— "  Holy,  harmless  [guileless,  R.V.], 
undefiled,  separate  [separated,  It.V.] 
from  sinners."  1.  The  Christ  whom 
the  Jews  expected  was  one  whose 
works  should  be  great — by  no  means 
one  in  whom  there  should  be  a  hu- 
manly superlative  character.  2.  The 
separation  of  Christ  from  sinners  was 
not  one  which  came  out  of  words  of 
assertion,  but  one  which  grew  out  of 
His  character  and  His  life.  3.  We 
have  had  among  us  a  Visitor,  living 
out  in  the  moulds  of  human  character, 
conduct,  and  feeling  the  perfections 
of  God.  Who,  after  this,  can  ever 
think    it    a    low    and    common    thing 

(1)  to    fill     these     human     spheres; 

(2)  walk  these  ranges  of  human 
life  ;  and  (3)  do  these  common-place, 
every-day,  human  duties  ? — After 
Bushnell. 

Ver.  27.  One  Sacrifice  suffices. — 
"  Once  for  all,  when  He  offered  up 
Himself."  That  sacrifice  suffices  for 
two  good  reasons :  1.  It  is  the  real 
thing,  to  which  all  the  pictorial, 
illustrative,  and  typical  sacrifices 
pointed.  2.  It  is  so  altogether 
satisfactory,  that  there  cannot  possibly 
ever  be  any  call  to  have  it  repeated. 
Why  should  it  be?  The  supreme 
question,  in  regard  to  any  sacrifice,  is 
this — Is  it  acceptable  to  God  ?  Will 
He  make  it  a  basis  on  which  to  accept 
us  ?  If  it  is  acceptable  to  Him,  if 
He  does  accept  us  on  the  ground  of  it, 
what  more  has  to  be  said  ?  Who  has 
any  right  to  complain  ?  On  what 
ground  can  any  other  sacrifice  be 
asked  for  ?  And  that  is  precisely  what 
we  claim  to  be  the  fact  concerning  the 
sublime  self-sacrifice  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  concerning  the  offering  of 
Himself.  God  is  infinitely  satisfied 
with  it  :  He  is  willing  to  accept  us 
on  the  ground  of  it.  And  there  is 
nothing  more  to  be  said,  and  nothing 
more  can  be  required.  God  requires 
no  other  sacrifice ;  He  has  accepted 
this,  and  makes  no  other  demand. 
We  cannot  possibly  require  any  other 
sacrifice,  for  we  have  gained  all  the 
acceptance  that  we  can  ever  want  on 

279 


CHAP.  VII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


the  ground  of  this.     "  By  one  offering  "      perfected    for 
Christ  has  gained  all-sufficient  power      sanetified/' 
to  save  unto  the  uttermost :  "  He  hath 


ever    them    that    are 


ILLUSTRATIONS   TO    CHAPTER    VIL 


Ver.  5.  Tithes  in  the  Christian  Church. — 
The  revenue  of  the  Church  was  increased  by 
tithes  or  firstfruits.  The  primitive  Church 
might  be  expected  to  have  introduced  this 
ordinance  of  the  Jews  from  the  beginning ; 
but  it  was  wholly  unknown  until  the  fourth 
or  fifth  century.  Irenaeus,  indeed,  speaks 
of  firstfruits  at  an  earlier  period,  but  it  is  a 
disputed  passage,  and  only  relates  to  the 
wine  and  bread  of  the  Eucharist  as  the 
firstfruits  of  Christ.  Besides  Irenaeus, 
Chrysostom,  Gregory  Nazianzen,  Hilary, 
Augustine,  and  others,  all  enjoin  the  paying 
of  tithes  as  a  duty,  and  not  in  imitation  of 
the  Jews.  These  tithes  and  firstfruits  the 
primitive  Christians  gave  as  a  free-will 
offering,  and  not  by  constraint  of  law,  of 
which  there  appears  no  indication  in  the 
first  five  centuries.  The  Council  of  Ma9on, 
in  the  year  585,  ordered  the  payment  of  tithes 
in  the  Church,  as  the  restoration  of  an 
ancient  and  venerable  custom.  This,  it  will 
be  observed,  was  merely  an  ecclesiastical 
law.  No  mention  is  made  of  any  enactment 
of  the  State.  Charlemagne  first  required 
the  payment  of  tithes  by  statute  law,  and 
enforced  the  duty  by  severe  penalties.  That 
emperor  himself  paid  tithes  from  his  private 
property  and  his  Saxon  possessions.  His 
successors  confirmed  and  completed  the 
system  of  tithe  by  law,  which  was  subse- 
quently introduced  into  England  and  Sweden. 
— L.  Coleman. 

Ver.  25.  "  He  redeemed  me  !  " — The  tears 
of  a  slave  girl  just  going  to  be  put  up  for 
sale  drew  the  attention  of  a  gentleman  as 
he  passed  through  the  auction  mart  of  a 
Southern  slave  state.  The  other  slaves  of 
the  same  group,  standing  in  a  line  for  sale 
like  herself,  did  not  seem  to  care  about  it, 
while  each  knock  of  the  hammer  made  her 
shake.  The  kind  man  stopped  to  ask  why 
she  alone  wept,  and  was  told  that  the  others 
were  used  to  such  things,  and  might  be  glad 
of  a  change  from  the  hard,  harsh  homes  they 
came  from,  but  that  she  had  been  brought 
up  with  much  care  by  a  good  owner,  and 


she  was  terrified  to  think  who  might  buy 
her.  "  Her  price  ? "  the  stranger  asked. 
He  thought  a  little  when  he  heard  the  great 
ransom,  but  paid  it  down.  Yet  no  joy  came 
to  the  poor  slave's  face  when  he  told  her  she 
was  free.  She  had  been  born  a  slave,  and 
knew  not  what  freedom  meant.  Her  tears 
fell  fast  on  the  signed  parchment,  which 
her  deliverer  brought  to  prove  it  to  her. 
She  only  looked  at  him  with  fear.  At  last 
he  got  ready  to  go  his  way,  and  as  he  told 
her  what  she  must  do  when  he  was  gone,  it 
began  to  dawn  on  her  what  freedom  was. 
With  the  first  breath  she  said,  "  I  will  follow 
him  !  I  will  serve  him  all  my  days  ! "  and  to 
every  reason  against  it  she  only  cried,  "  He 
redeemed  me !  He  redeemed  me !  He 
redeemed  me  1 "  When  strangers  used  to 
visit  that  master's  house,  and  noticed,  as  all 
did,  the  loving,  constant  service  of  the  glad- 
hearted  girl,  and  asked  her  why  she  was  so 
eager  with  unbidden  service  night  by  night 
and  day  by  day,  she  had  but  one  answer, 
and  she  loved  to  give  it — "  He  redeemed  me  ! 
He  redeemed  me  !  He  redeemed  me  I  " 
"  And  so,"  said  the  servant  of  Christ,  who 
spent  a  night  on  his  journey  in  a  Highland 
glen,  and  told  this  story  in  a  meeting  where 
every  heart  was  thrilled,  "  let  it  be  with  you. 
Serve  Jesus  as  sinners  bought  back  with 
blood  ;  and  when  men  take  notice  of  the  way 
you  serve  Him,  the  joy  that  is  in  your  looks, 
the  love  that  is  in  your  tone,  the  freedom  of 
your  service,  have  one  answer  to  give — *  He 
redeemed  me  I ' " 

Intercession. — "  A  child,"  saith  Ambrose, 
"  that  is  willing  to  present  his  father 
with  a  posy  goes  into  the  garden,  and 
there  gathers  some  flowers  and  some  weeds 
together;  but  coming  to  his  mother,  she 
picks  out  the  weeds,  and  binds  the  flowers, 
and  so  it  is  presented  to  the  father."  Thus, 
when  we  have  put  up  our  prayers,  Christ 
comes  and  picks  away  the  weeds,  the  sin 
of  our  prayers,  and  presents  nothing  but 
flowers  to  His  Father,  which  are  a  sweet- 
smelling  savour. — Thomas  Watson. 


280 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.        chap,  viil 


CHAPTER  VIII. 
THE   CONTRAST   OF   THE  TWO   COVENANTS. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES 

Virtually  a  new  topic  is  dealt  with  in  this  chapter.  Hitherto  the  personal  characteristics 
of  the  high  priest  have  occupied  the  chief  place  :  from  this  point  to  chap.  x.  18,  the 
ministration  of  the  high  priest  receives  special  attention.  The  writer  first  contrasts  the 
two  covenants.  God,  who  entered  into  the  old  covenant,  had  promised,  in  Jeremiah,  a  new 
covenant.  It  would  prove  to  be  superior  to  the  old  in  three  respects :  1.  Because  the  law 
of  it  would  be  written  on  the  heart.  2.  Because  it  would  be  a  universal  covenant,  not 
limited  to  any  one  race.  3.  Because  it  would  be  a  covenant  pledging  forgiveness  of  sins : 
and  so  dealing  with  what,  in  every  age,  is  found  to  be  man's  deepest  need.  *'  The  decrepi- 
tude of  the  old  covenant,  indicated  by  its  being  called  '  old,'  is  a  sign  of  its  approaching 
and  final  evanescence  "  (ver.  13). 

Ver.  1.  The  sum. — K€(pa.\acov ;  better,  as  R.V.,  "the  chief  point";  Stuart,  "the  most 
important  thing";  Theophylact,  "that  I  may  say  the  greatest  thing,  and  the  most  com- 
prehensive." The  idea  of  review,  or  recapitulation,  is  not  suitable  here.  The  superiority  of 
Christ's  person  and  ofiice  lead  on  to  the  superiority  of  Christ's  work  and  sacrifice.  The 
superiority  lies  in  this — the  work  of  Christ  is  spiritual.  So  the  sacrifice  He  offered  must  be  a 
spiritual  sacrifice.  Three  new  points  are  introduced :  1.  The  nature  of  Christ's  sacrifice. 
2.  The  place  where  it  is  offered.  3.  Its  efficacy  to  atone  for  sin.  Who  is  set. — R.V.  "  who 
sat  down";  perhaps  with  designed  contrast.  The  older  priests  stood  before  God  in  His 
earthly  sanctuary.  But  the  contrast  between  the  places  is  more  important  than  between 
the  attitudes.  In  the  heavens. — Spiritual  temple.  "  The  one  is  seated  on  the  throne  of 
God  in  the  heavens,  while  the  other  only  ministers  on  earth,  in  a  temple  reared  by  the 
hands  of  men."     Each  is  on  the  right  side  as  ministrant,  but  Christ  is  in  the  true  temple. 

Ver.  2.  Sanctuary. — The  spiritual,  heavenly  counterpart  of  the  Holy  of  Holies,  in  which 
the  ancient  high  priest  specially  and  alone  ministered.  Margin,  R.V.,  gives  "  holy  things." 
The  word  used  for  minister,  \eLTovpy6s,  means  public  "minister,"  not  merely  "servant." 
True  tabernacle. — Not  as  distinct  from  "  false,"  but  in  our  sense  of  "  real  ";  "  veritable  "  in 
contrast  with  "  unsubstantial"  The  tabernacle  in  heaven  is  the  "substance" ;  that  on  earth 
is  the  "accident,"  the  "image,"  the  illustration.  "The  Alexandrian  Jews,  as  well  as  the 
Christian  scholars  of  Alexandria,  had  adopted  from  Plato  the  doctrine  of  Ideas,  which  they 
regarded  as  Divine  and  eternal  archetypes  of  which  material  and  earthly  things  were  but 
the  imperfect  copies.  They  regarded  the  Mosaic  tabernacle  as  a  mere  sketch,  copy,  or 
outline  of  the  Divine  Idea  or  Pattern.  The  Idea  is  the  perfected  Reality  of  its  material 
shadow  "  {Farrar). 

Ver.  3.  Gifts. — Oblations ;  firstfruits  of  grain,  vegetables,  etc.  Sacrifices. — Offerings 
involving  the  devotion  of  animal  life.  "  Both  were  presented  to  God  by  the  priest,  who 
acted  as  intermmtius  between  Jehovah  and  the  offerer." 

Ver.  4.  On  earth. — In  the  ordinary  earthly  relations  with  men.  Seeing  there  were 
divinely  appointed  priests  for  the  earthly  sphere,  Christ  could  have  no  place  as  priest.  In 
the  Jewish  Temple  He  was  not  wanted.  Notice  how  carefully  this  writer  guards  the  Divine 
claims  of  Judaism,  while  recognising  the  limitation  of  its  sphere,  and  the  temporary 
character  of  its  mission. 

Ver.  5.  Example  and  shadow.— U7r65et7/ia,  image,  effigy,  copy,  resemblance.  "A  token 
suggesting,  and  designed  to  suggest,  the  original."  (r/cid,  shadow,  slight  and  imperfect 
image,  sketch.  "  The  shadow  has  no  substance  or  independent  existence,  but  represents 
only  the  outline  of  a  body."  "  The  tabernacle  is  only  a  sketch,  an  outline,  a  ground  pattern, 
as  it  were — at  the  best  a  representative  image — of  the  heavenly  Archetype."  The  words 
of  God  are  not  in  the  Greek.  Pattern. — Exod.  xxv.  40.  The  writer  seems  to  have  in 
mind  the  Jewish  tradition,  that  a  heavenly  tabernacle  was  actually  presented  to  the  vision 
of  Moses,  and  this  model  was  to  be  imitated  by  him  precisely.  The  passage  in  Exodus  does 
not  require  us  to  assume  a  visible  representation. 

Ver.  6.  More  excellent. — In  a  higher  range.  Old  priests  kept  in  the  material  range ; 
Christ  belongs  to  the  spiritual  range.  Read  the  clause,  "A  ministry  more  excellent  in 
proportion  as  He  is  also."  Better  covenant. — Seen  in  one  thing.  Under  the  old  there  was 
law  for  the  eyes  ;  under  the  new  there  is  law  for  the  heart. 

Ver.  7.  Faultless. — Not  merely  "  free  from  defect,"  but  "  incomplete,"  unable  fully  to 
meet  man's  case.  The  old  system  was  complete  enough  for  its  limited  sphere  and  purpose : 
fault  was  found  with  its  limitations.     No  place  have  been  sought. — There  would  have  been 

281 


CHAP.  VIII.        IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


no  occasion  for  introducing  another.  The  ground  would  have  been  covered.  It  may  be  said, 
Why  then  did  not  God  make  Judaism  fully  efficient?  The  answer  may  be  given  in  the 
words  of  St.  Paul,  "That  is  not  first  which  is  spiritual,  but  that  which  is  natural,  and  after- 
ward that  which  is  spiritual."     The  spiritual  always  has  to  be  prepared  for. 

Ver.  8.  He  saith.— See  Jer.  xxxi.  31-34.  I  will  make.— Lit.  "I  will  cut";  cutting  a 
covenant  was  a  familiar  phrase,  referring  to  the  custom  of  slaying  victims  at  the  sealing 
of  a  covenant. 

Ver.  9.  Not  according  to. — But  different  from ;  having  a  different  central  idea.  The 
proved  infirmity  of  men  called  for  some  alteration  of  the  covenant  terms.  They  needed  to 
be  dealt  with  in  another  way. 

Ver.  10.  Covenant,  etc. — This  is  the  term  of  the  new  covenant ;  in  it  God  undertook  to 
inspire  hearts,  and  not  merely  to  guide  conduct.  Into  their  mind. — Deeply  infix.  This  is 
fulfilled  in  Christ.  His  love  is  the  best  of  all  persuasions  to  righteousness.  Contrast 
•'  law "  and  "  love "  as  motive-powers ;  or  obedience  rendered  from  "  fear "  or  from 
♦*  affection."     Notice  how  fully  the  writer  brings  out  the  moral  value  of  the  Redeemer's  work. 

Ver.  11.  Not  teach,  etc. — This  describes  generally  the  contrast  between  the  time  when 
a  difficult  law  covered  conduct,  and  the  time  when  the  love  of  Christ  constrained.  We  need 
not  press  this  beyond  the  proprieties  of  the  figure.     See  Isa.  liv.  13. 

Ver.  13.  A  new.— The  writer  fixes  attention  on  this  word.  It  involved  the  former 
covenant  taking  its  place  among  things  old  and  done  with.  If  the  new  has  come,  and  it  is 
manifestly  a  fuller  display  of  the  Divine  love  and  power,  then  the  old  is  superseded.  It 
is  ready  to  vanish  like  a  shadow.  Let  it  go.  Ready  to  vanish  away. — Lit.  "  Now  that 
which  is  becoming  antiquated,  and  waxing  aged,  is  near  obliteration."  R.V.  "  But  that 
which  is  becoming  old,  and  waxeth  aged,  is  nigh  unto  vanishing  away."  "  What  is  very  old 
is  near  dissolution."  Observe  that  this  writer  could  not  have  thus  expressed  himself  after 
the  final  Roman  siege  of  Jerusalem,  which  resulted  in  the  sweeping  away  of  the  formal 
Mosaic  system. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF   THE   PARAGRAPH— Verses  1—6. 

The  Principal  Thing  concerning  Christ. — "This  is  the  sum"  does  not  mean 
"  this  is  a  brief  recapitulation."  It  means  "this  is  the  chief  point":  "  this  is 
the  most  important  thing  " ;  "  this  is  the  consideration  upon  which  attention 
should  be  most  anxiously  fixed."  It  is  virtually  a  new  topic  that  is  dealt  with 
here.  "  The  writer  has  treated  of  the  superiority  of  Christ's  priesthood,  in 
respect  to  duration  and  succession.  lie  has  shown  that  Christ  was  made  priest 
by  the  solemnity  of  an  oath,  while  the  Levites  were  not  introduced  to  their  office 
by  such  a  solemnity.  The  priesthood  of  the  latter  was  liable  to  continual  inter- 
ruption and  vicissitude,  from  the  frail  and  dying  state  of  those  who  were 
invested  with  the  oflftce  of  priest ;  while  the  perpetuity  of  Christ's  priestly  ofiice 
was  never  exposed  to  interruption  from  causes  of  this  nature.  And  the  Jewish 
priests  were  themselves  not  only  peccable,  but  peccant  men,  and  needed  to  offer 
sacrifices  on  their  own  account,  as  well  as  for  the  sake  of  others  ;  while  Christ 
was  holy,  and  perfectly  free  from  all  sin,  and  exalted  to  a  glorious  state  in 
which  lie  was  placed  for  ever  beyond  the  reach  of  it,  so  that  His  sacrifice  would 
endure  solely  to  the  benefit  of  sinful  men.  Now  the  writer  comes  to  the  con- 
sideration of  the  duties  themselves :  viz.  the  nature  of  the  sacrifice  which  Jesus 
offers ;  the  place  where  it  is  offered  ;  the  efficacy  which  it  has,  to  atone  for  sin ; 
and  the  difference,  in  regard  to  all  these  points,  between  the  sacrifice  offered  by 
Christ,  and  that  which  was  presented  by  the  Jewish  priests.  The  dignity  of  an 
office,  and  the  particular  qualifications  of  the  person  who  is  invested  with  it, 
are  things  which  in  their  own  nature  are  subordinate  to  the  great  end  which  is 
to  be  accomplished  by  the  office  itself  "  {Moses  Stuart).  The  passage  before  us 
introduces  the  new  subject  by  reaffirming  the  essentially  spiritual  range  and 
sphere  in  which  this  new,  and  altogether  greater.  High  Priest  works. 

I.  The  sphere  in  which  this  great  High  Priest  works  is  the  spiritual 
tabernacle. — Which  was  but  represented  and  foreshadowed  in  the  Jewish 
tabernacle.     The  points  presented  are — 1.  This  High  Priest  is  such  by  virtue  of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS,        chap.  viii. 


His  character,  which  is  a  spiritual  thing.  He  is  ''  holy,  guileless,  undefiled." 
2.  This  High  Priest  is  in  heaven,  the  sphere  in  which  God  is  and  works,  the 
sphere  of  spiritual  interests  and  relations.  3.  This  High  Priest  ministers  in 
"  holy  things  " — that  is,  spiritual  matters.  (This  is  the  marginal  reading  of  the 
word  "  sanctuary.")  Reference,  however,  may  be  intended  to  the  sjjiritual 
counterpart  of  the  Holy  of  Holies,  which  Jesus,  having  once  entered  for  us, 
never  leaves.  If  the  spiritual  is  higher  than  the  natural ;  if  it  is  that  which 
the  material  pictures  ;  if  it  is  the  reality, — then  the  Jewish  Christians  need  not 
hesitate  to  give  up  the  shadow  for  the  true,  the  spiritual  tabernacle,  and  the 
spiritual  Priest  who  ministers  in  it.  But  just  what  Christian  teachers  have 
found  supremely  difficult  in  every  age,  was  found  as  difficult  in  the  first 
Christian  age :  it  is  to  awaken  in  the  minds  and  hearts  of  men  a  fitting  sense 
of  the  value  of  the  spiritual ;  to  deliver  them  from  the  deteriorating  slavery  of 
the  "  material." 

II.  The  office  which  the  great  High  Priest  holds  is  a  spiritual  priesthood. — 
It  is  no  question  of  rivalry  with  the  Aaron ic  priests.  Jesus  cannot  be  compared 
with  them  at  all.  He  does  not  He  in  the  same  plane.  There  are  priests,  Divinely 
appointed,  "  who  serve  that  which  is  a  copy  and  shadow  of  heavenly  things." 
Jesus  has  nothing  to  do  with  firstfruits  of  grain,  oblations  of  meal  or  of  wine  ; 
blood  of  bulls  or  goats,  ashes  of  heifers,  or  sweet-smelling  incenf^e.  "  If  He  were 
on  earth.  He  would  not  be  a  priest  at  all."  A  spiritual  priesthood  deals  with 
the  removal  of  sin,  the  effecting  of  reconciliation,  the  oflcering  of  men  themselves 
to  God,  the  covenant  of  soul-obedience,  the  maintenance  of  communion  between 
God  the  Spirit  and  the  spirits  of  men.  A  spiritual  priesthood  is  the  mediacy 
of  spiritual  affairs.  As  a  priest  Jesus  must  indeed  have  somewhat  to  offer. 
His  offering  was  Himself.  His  sacrifice  was  this — "  He  offered  Himself  without 
spot  to  God."  That  is  the  true  sacrifice,  which  every  other  sacrifice  does  but 
represent.  St.  Paul  says,  "Christ  .  .  .  hath  given  Himself  for  us,  an  offering 
and  a  sacrifice  to  God  for  a  sweet-smelling  savour"  (Eph.  v.  2). 

III.  The  ministry  in  which  the  great  High  Priest  is  engaged  is  carrying 
out  the  conditions  pledged  in  a  spiritual  covenant. — He  is  established  as 
Mediator  of  a  better,  because  spiritual,  covenant,  which  hath  been  enacted 
upon  better,  because  spiritual,  promises.  "The  first  covenant  only  promised 
external  purification,  and  the  civil  or  ecclesiastical  pardon  of  an  offender 
who  complied  with  the  rites  w^hich  it  enjoined;  but  under  the  new  covenant 
real  pardon  of  sin  by  God  is  to  be  obtained,  with  purification  and  peace  of 
conscience,  the  hope  of  eternal  life,  and  union  at  last  with  the  assembly  of  the 
redeemed  in  a  better  world."  Christ  keeps  for  God  all  the  terms  of  the  new 
covenant  on  His  side,  and  graciously  and  efficiently  helps  inan  to  keep  all  the 
terms  of  the  new  covenant  on  his  side.  "  Judaism  was  but  a  shadow  of  which 
Christianity  was  the  substance ;  Judaism  was  but  a  copy  of  which  Christianity 
was  the  permanent  idea  and  heavenly  archetype ;  it  was  but  a  scaffolding 
within  which  the  genuine  temple  had  been  built ;  it  was  (now)  but  a  chrysalis 
from  which  the  inward  winged  life  had  departed  "  (Farrcur). 

Ver.  2.  The  Genuine  Tabernacle. — The  word  means  "  genuine,"  and  in  this 
epistle  "  ideal,"  "  archetypal."  It  is  the  antithesis  not  to  what  is  spurious,  but 
to  what  is  material,  secondary,  and  transient.  The  Alexandrian  Jews,  as  well 
as  the  Christian  scholars  of  Alexandria,  had  adopted  from  Plato  the  doctrine  of 
Ideas,  which  they  regarded  as  Divine  and  eternal  archetypes  of  which  material 
and  earthly  things  were  but  the  imperfect  copies.  They  found  their  chief  support 
for  this  introduction  of  Platonic  views  into  the  interpretation  of  the  Bible  in 
Exod.  XXV.  40,  xxvi.  30  (quoted  in  ver.  5).  Accordingly  they  regarded  the 
Mosaic  tabernacle  as  a  mere  sketch,  copy,  or  outline  of  the   Divine  Idea  or 

283 


CHAP.  VIII.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


Pattern.     The   Idea   is   the  perfected  ReaHty  of   its   material   shadow.     They 

extended  this  conception  much  further  : — 

"What  if  earth 
Be  but  the  shadow  of  heaven,  and  things  therein 
Each  to  the  other  like,  more  than  on  earth  is  thought  ? " 

The  "  genuine  tabernacle  "  is  the  heavenly  Ideal  (chap.  ix.  24)  shown  to  Moses. 
To  interpret  it  of  *'  the  glorified  body  of  Christ,"  by  a  mere  verbal  comparison 
of  John  ii.  19,  is  to  adopt  the  all-but-universal  method  of  perverting  the 
meaning  of  Scripture  by  the  artificial  elaborations  and  inferential  after- thoughts 
of  a  scholastic  theology. — Farrar. 

SUGGESTIVE   NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Vers.   1,   2.  The  Enthroned  Servant  localisation  of   His   present   corporeal 

Christ. — In  these  two  verses  strikingly  humanity,    and   the    ubiquity   of    His 

different  representations  of  our  Lord's  presence.     And   what   is    the    deepest 

heavenly  state  are  given.     In  the  one  meaning  of  it  all  ?     What  means  that 

He  is  regarded  as  seated  "on  the  right  majestic   session    at    "the  right    hand 

hand  of  the  throne  of   the  Majesty."  of  the  throne "  ?     Before  that  throne 

In  the  other  He  is  regarded  as  being,  "  angels  veil  their  faces."    If  in  action, 

notwithstanding  that  session,  a  "  minis-  they  stand  ;  if  in  adoration,  they  fall 

ter     of    the     sanctuary,"    performing  before  Him.     Creatures  bow  prostrate, 

priestly   functions    there.     The    royal  Who  is  He  that,  claiming  and  exer- 

repose  of  Jesus  is  full  of  activity  for  cising  a  quality  which  in  a  creature  is 

us.     Resting,  He  works ;  working.  He  blasphemy  and  madness,  takes  His  seat 

rests.     Reigning,   He  serves ;  serving,  in  that  awful  Presence  ?     Other  words 

He  reigns.  of  Scripture  represent  the    same  idea 

I.  The  seated  Christ. — "  Has  taken  in  a  still  more  wonderful  form  when 

His    seat."      The    writer,    addressing  they  speak  of  "  the  throne  of  God  and 

Hebrews,  who  were  steeped    in  Rab-  of  the  Lamb,"  and  when  He  Himself 

binical    thought,    takes    one   of    their  speaks  from  heaven  of  Himself  as  "  set 

own  words,  and  speaks  of  God  as  the  down  with  My  Father  on  His  throne." 

"  Majesty  in  the  heavens,"  emphasising  If  we  translate  the  symbol  into  colder 

the  idea  of  sovereignty,  power,  illimit-  words,    it    means    that    deep    repose 

able    magnificence.      "  At    the    right  which,  like  the  Divine  rest  after  crea- 

hand  "  of  this  throned  personal  abstrac-  tion,   is   not   for   recuperation    of   ex- 

tion,    "  the    Majesty,"    sits    the   Man  hausted  powers,  but  is  the  sign  of  an 

Christ  Jesus.     His  manhood  is  elevated  accomplished    purpose     and    achieved 

to  this  supreme  dignity.     The  eternal  task,   a   share   in   the    sovereignty   of 

Word  who  was  with  the  Father  in  the  heaven,  and  the  wielding  of  the  ener- 

beginning,  before  all  the  worlds,  went  gies     of     Deity — ^rest,     royalty,     and 

back  to  "  the  glory  which  He  had  with  power  belong  now  to  the  Man  sitting 

the  Father."     But  the  new  thing  was  at   the  right  hand   of   the  throne   of 

that    there    went,    too,    that    human  God. 

nature  which  Jesus  Christ  indissolubly  II.  The  servant  Christ. — "A  minister 
united  with  Divinity  in  the  mystery  of  of  the  sanctuary."  The  word  employed 
the  lowliness  of  His  earthly  life.  We  here  for  "  minister,"  and  which  I  have 
have  a  High  Priest  who,  in  His  man-  ventured  variously  to  translate  servant, 
hood,  in  which  He  is  knit  to  us,  hath  means  one  who  discharges  some  public 
taken  His  seat  on  the  right  hand  of  official  act  of  service,  either  to  God  or 
the  throne  of  the  Majesty  in  the  man,  and  it  is  especially,  though  by  no 
heavens.  There  is  a  profound  sense  means  exclusively,  employed  in  refer- 
in  which  that  session  of  Jesus  at  the  ence  to  the  service  of  a  ministering 
right  hand  of  God  proclaims  both  the  priest.      The   allusion    in  the  second 

284 


\ 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.        chap.  viii. 


portion  of  my  text  is  plainly  enough 
to  the  ritual  of  the  great  Day  of 
Atonement,  on  which  the  high  priest 
once  a  year  went  into  the  Holy  Place ; 
and  there,  in  the  presence  of  God 
throned  between  the  cherubim,  by  the 
offering  of  the  blood  of  the  sacrifice, 
made  atonement  for  the  sins  of  the 
people.  Thus  says  our  writer,  that 
throned  and  sovereign  Man  who,  in 
token  of  His  accomplished  work,  and 
in  the  participation  of  Deity,  sits  hard 
by  the  throne  of  God,  is  yet  ministering 
at  one  and  the  same  time  within  the 
veil,  and  presenting  the  might  of  His 
own  sacrifice.  Put  away  the  metaphor, 
and  we  just  come  to  this,  a  truth 
which  is  far  too  little  dwelt  upon  in 
this  generation,  that  the  work  which 
Jesus  Christ  accomplished  on  the  cross, 
all-sufficient  and  eternal  as  it  was,  in 
the  range  and  duration  of  its  efficacy, 
is  not  all  His  work.  The  past,  glorious 
as  it  is,  needs  to  be  supplemented  by 
the  present,  no  less  wonderful  and 
glorious,  in  which  Jesus  Christ  within 
the  veil,  in  manners  all  unknown  to 
us,  by  His  presence  there  in  the  power 
of  the  sacrifice  that  He  has  made, 
brings  down  upon  men  the  blessings 
that  flow  from  that  sacrifice.  Our 
salvation  is  not  so  secured  by  the  death 
upon  the  cross  as  to  make  needless  the 
life  before  the  throne.  Jesus  that  died 
is  the  Christ  that  is  risen  again,  who 
is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who 
also  maketh  intercession  for  us.  In 
its  implication  the  text  suggests  to  us 
other  ways  in  which  the  rest  of  Christ 
is  full  of  activity.  ''  I  am  among  you 
as  He  that  serveth^'  is  true  for  the 
heavenly  glory  of  the  exalted  Lord 
quite  as  much  as  for  the  lowly  humilia- 
tion of  His  life  upon  earth.  And  no 
more  really  did  He  stoop  to  serve  when, 
laying  aside  His  garments,  He  girded 
Himself  with  the  towel,  and  wiped  the 
disciples'  feet,  than  He  does  to-day 
when,  having  resumed  the  garments 
of  His  glorious  Divinity,  and  having 
seated  Himself  in  His  place  of  authority 
above  us.  He  comes  forth,  according  to 
the  wonderful  condescension  of  His 
own   parable,   to    serve   His    servants 


who  have  entered  into  rest,  and  those 
also  who  still  toil.  The  glorified  Christ 
is  a  ministering  Christ.  In  us,  on  us, 
for  us.  He  works,  in  all  the  activities 
of  His  exalted  repose,  as  truly  and 
more  mightily  than  He  did  when  here 
He  helped  the  weaknesses,  and  healed 
the  sicknesses,  and  soothed  the  sorrows, 
and  supplied  the  wants,  and  washed 
the  feet,  of  a  handful  of  poor  men. 
This  vision  of  the  ascended  Christ  is — 
1.  For  the  past  a  seal.  An  ascended 
Christ  forces  us  to  believe  in  an  atoning 
Christ.  2.  For  the  present  a  strength. 
See  Christ  on  the  throne,  and  He 
interprets,  dwindles,  and  yet  ennobles 
the  world  and  life.  3.  For  the  future 
a  prophecy.  There  is  the  measure 
of  the  possibiKties  of  human  nature. 
Whatever  that  Man  is,  we  may  be. — 
A,  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Ver.  3.  Gifts  and  Sacrifices. — In 
chap.  V.  1  the  same  distinction  is 
made  between  *'  gifts,"  or  oblations,  or 
free-will  offerings,  or  thank-offerings, 
and  sacrifices  for  sin,  which  include 
the  various  sin-  and  trespass -offerings, 
that  involved  taking  the  life  of  some 
animal.  The  two  words  are  put 
together  in  order  that  the  work  of  the 
old  priests  should  not  be  unduly  limited. 
If  it  were,  their  anticipation  of  the 
work  of  Christ  would  seem  to  limit 
His  work  also.  And,  in  fact,  the 
attention  which  has  been  so  exclu- 
sively given  to  the  bloody  sacrifices  of 
Judaism  has  involved  a  too  exclusive 
attention  to  the  sacrificial  side  of  our 
Redeemer's  work.  Christ  also  is  "  or- 
dained for  men  in  things  pertaining  to 
God,  that  He  may  offer  both  gifts  and 
sacrifices  for  sins."  The  high  priest 
acted  the  part  of  a  mediator  between 
God  and  men  ;  he  was  to  aid  men  in 
regard  to  their  spiritual  and  religious 
concerns.  It  is  infinitely  important 
that  our  Lord  should,  by  the  offering 
of  Himself  as  the  sacrifice  for  sin, 
secure  our  reconciliation  and  acceptance 
with  God.  But  we  must  beware  of 
keeping  our  interest  too  exclusively  to 
that.  It  is  the  most  serious  loss  to 
lose   Christ's   relations    to   the    whole 

285 


CHAP.  VIII         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS 


circle    of  our   religious    thought,    and 
feeling,  and  expression,  and  relation. 

Christ^s  Spiritual  Offeriiig. — "  Where- 
fore it  is  necessary  that  this  High  Priest 
also  have  somewhat  to  offer."  But 
His  range  is  the  spiritual.  There  is 
no  place  for  Christ  as  a  priest  in  the 
material  and  earthly  spheres.  "  There 
are  those  who  offer  gifts  according  to 
the  law."  We  can  understand  what 
gifts  Christ  can  offer  for  us,  if  we  can 
see  what  His  own  offering  was.  He 
offered  Himself,  in  His  human  body, 
to  God.  He  did  not  offer  only  some- 
thing He  possessed— He  offered  Him- 
self, as  a  spiritual  being.  He  offered 
to  God  His  love.  His  trust.  His 
obedience.  His  will.  His  life — Himself. 
No  matter  what  was  the  medium 
through  which  the  offering  was  made, 
that,  and  nothing  less  than  that,  was 
the  offering.  It  carried  with  it  every- 
thing He  possessed,  but  it  was  Him- 
self. And  the  offering  which  Christ 
makes  for  us  as  our  High  Priest  is  a 
spiritual  offering — it  is  ourselves.  He 
offers  us  to  God  even  as  He  offered 
Himself — our  love,  our  trust,  our 
obedience,  our  will,  our  life  ;  but  the 
offering  carries  with  it  all  our  posses- 
sions, all  we  have,  and  all  we  can  do. 
The  apostle  Paul  finds  the  precise 
term  for  the  spiritual  offering  which 
Christ,  as  our  Priest,  presents  for  us 
when  He  says,  "  I  beseech  you  that  ye 
present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice." 
Christ  offers  us  to  God  even  as  He 
offered  Himself. 

Ver.  6.  The  Spiritual  is  Every  Way 
Better. — "A  more  excellent  ministry." 
We  can  hardly  wonder  that  the 
apostles  found  it  so  difficult  to  lift  men 
into  the  region  of  spiritual  thoughts, 
and  feelings,  and  associations,  seeing 
that,  in  these  advanced  times,  we  still 
find  it  so  supremely  difficult  to  do  the 
same  thing.  Materialistic  conceptions 
of  the  redemption  work  namper  earnest 
and  enlightened  Christian  teachers 
to-day,  and  such  men  are  called 
vague  and  mystical  when  they  try 
to  do  the  same  work  that  the  writer 

286 


of  this  epistle  did.  Still  the  work 
must  be  done,  whatever  may  be  the 
personal  sacrifice  involved  in  the  doing. 
The  spiritual  is  the  real.  Christ 
is  a  spiritual  being ;  His  mission 
is  to  spiritual  beings  ;  He  deals  with 
spiritual  matters ;  He  deals  with 
them  in  spiritual  ways ;  and  He  works 
towards  spiritual  ends.  The  salvation 
He  provides  is  a  soul  salvation  for  men 
who  are  souls.  And  the  old  salvations 
of  Judaism,  and  the  bodily  healings 
of  our  Lord's  earthly  life,  are  strictly 
pictorial  and  illustrative ;  they  are  but 
"figures  of  the  true,"  and  the  spiritual 
is  every  way  the  better.  Writing  of 
the  antipathies  of  Jesus  to  the  for- 
malising, materialising,  and  outward 
teachings  of  the  Pharisees,  so  mis- 
chievous because  not  only  so  unspiri- 
tual,  but  so  opposed  to  the  spiritual, 
Dr.  A.  B.  Bruce  says  :  "  The  spirit  of 
Pharisaism  lives  on  through  the  ages, 
ever  embodying  itself  in  new  forms, 
and  growing  like  a  fungus  on  every 
manifestation  of  the  Divine  in  human 
life,  not  excepting  evangelic  religion 
itself,  which  might  be  supposed  to  be 
its  natural  antithesis.  The  protest  of 
the  Founder  of  our  faith  did  not  slay 
the  evil  thing  ;  it  only  clearly  revealed 
its  nature,  and  made  manifest  to  the 
whole  world  that  Christianity  and  it 
have  nothing  in  common.  Therefore 
the  protest  needs  to  be  continually 
renewed."  We  must  demand  that  our 
Lord  Himself,  His  life-work  on  earth, 
and  His  continuous  work  in  the 
heavenlies,  shall  all  be  seen  in  the 
spiritual  light.  Getting  what  illustra- 
tive help  we  may  from  material  things 
and  relations,  we  must  see  that  He 
is  spiritual.  His  atonement  was  a 
spiritual  one,  and  His  intercession  is 
spiritual ;  and  for  us  the  spiritual  is 
better ;  it  bears  relation  to  the  spiri- 
tual beings  that  we  are. 

Vers.  6-13.  Hand  Guidance  and 
Heart  Guidance. — The  first  covenant 
was  not  found  faultless ;  therefore  place 
was  found  for  another  and  a  better 
covenant. 

I.  The  first  covenant  was  the  guid- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.       chap.  viii. 


ance  of  the  hand  (ver.  9). — It  was 
very  condescending  and  gracious  on 
the  part  of  God  thus  to  conduct 
Israel,  but  such  guidance  is  suggestive 
of  many  imperfections.  1.  The  guid- 
ance of  the  hand  is  the  guidance  of 
childhood.  Thus  the  parent  leads  the 
child.  So  the  first  dispensation  dealt 
with  a  people  in  a  state  of  childhood. 
When  I  was  a  child  I  understood  as 
a  child,  I  thought  as  a  child,  but  when 
I  became  a  man  I  put  away  childish 
things.  How  often  may  we  be  re- 
minded of  these  words  in  reading  the 
history  of  Israel !  How  often  do  we 
feel  that  they  were  but  children  in 
moral  understanding  and  strength, 
and  that  God  dealt  with  them  as  such  ! 
This  is  the  precise  argument  of  the 
apostle  (Gal.  iv.  1-5).  2.  The  guid- 
ance of  the  hand  is  the  guidance  of 
blindness.  Thus  do  we  lead  a  blind 
man.  Israel  was  guided  by  precepts 
and  ceremonies,  "  seeing  through  a 
glass  darkly."  How  imperfectly  they 
apprehended  the  spirituality  of  the 
law,  the  real  glory  of  atonement,  the 
highest  perfection  of  character,  the 
future  life  !  And  God  guided  them  as 
a  blind  man  is  guided.  3.  The  guid- 
ance of  the  hand  is  the  guidance  of 
weakness.  You  stretch  out  the  hand 
to  support  the  old  or  sick  who  walk 
with  tottering  step.  Thus  Israel  was 
"  without  strength."  *'  The  law  was 
weak  through  the  flesh,"  and  God  by 
many  gracious  expedients  sought  to 
hold  up  the  ever-fainting,  sinking  race. 
This  economy  was  evidently  not   the 


best,  although  it  was  the  best  possible 
for  the  period,  and  the  fact  that  Israel 
on  such  a  large  scale  lapsed  into 
idolatry  and  sin  proved  the  weakness 
and  unprofitableness  of  their  carnal 
dispensation. 

II.  The  second  covenant  was  the 
guidance  of  the  heart. — 1.  It  is  the 
guidance  of  manhood  (ver.  10).  The 
child  is  controlled  by  what  is  external, 
the  man  by  what  is  internal  and 
spiritual.  So  the  Christian  dispensa- 
tion makes  the  mind  and  affections  the 
grand  source  of  obedience.  It  puts 
the  love  of  God  and  the  love  of  God's 
law  deep  into  the  soul,  and  trusts 
everything  to  this.  It  speaks  to  our 
rational,  affectional,  immortal  nature, 
and  seeks  to  harmonise  that  nature 
with  the  Divine  nature,  so  that  we 
may  instinctively  walk  in  the  right 
path.  2.  The  guidance  of  knowledge 
(ver.  11).  All  shall  possess  a  true 
spiritual  knowledge  of  God.  In  this 
dispensation  the  Spirit  illuminates  the 
soul,  and  we  know  the  things  which 
are  freely  given  to  us  of  God. 
3.  The  guidance  of  'power  (ver.  12). 
It  gives  that  purity  which  is  only 
another  name  for  power.  It  pardons 
sin,  cleanses  from  sin,  and  by  impart- 
ing righteousness  to  the  soul  enables 
us  to  go  from  strength  to  strength. 
The  Jews  are  condemned  for  failing 
under  the  first  dispensation,  although 
it  has  so  many  limitations  and  defects, 
but  how  much  more  shall  we  be 
condemned  if  we  fail  under  this  best 
of  covenants  ! — W.  L.  Watkinson. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  7—13. 

The  Spirituality  of  the  New  Covenant. — Here  is  an  important  fact,  which  the 
Jewish  Christians  are  called  to  face.  They  boasted  of  the  old  covenant.  They 
clung  to  it  tenaciously.  They  were  even  tempted  by  the  bigoted  party  to  return 
to  their  older  form  of  allegiance  to  it ;  and  yet  their  own  Scriptures  declared  that 
God  was  dissatisfied  with  it,  and  with  what  had  been  accomplished  by  means 
of  it,  and  had  promised  to  establish  with  His  people  a  new  and  better  covenant. 
Already  this  writer  had  spoken  of  the  older  covenant  as  "  weak,  unprofitable, 
and  earthly  "  (chap.  vii.  18).  It  is  a  great  addition  to  his  argument  to  be  able  to 
add,  that  Scripture  declares  God  Himself  to  have  been  dissatisfied  with  its  work- 
ing. In  support  of  his  position  the  passage  Jer.  xxxi.  31-34  is  quoted.  There  is 
an  important  difference  between  the  way  in  which  the  old  system  is  dealt  with 
in  this  epistle  and  in  the  recognised  Pauline  epistles.     "  To  St.  Paul  the  contrast 

287 


CHAP.  VIII.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


between  the  law  and  the  gospel  was  that  between  the  letter  and  the  spirit, 
between  bondage  and  freedom,  between  works  and  faith,  between  command  and 
promise,  between  threatening  and  mercy.  All  these  polemical  elements  disappear 
almost  entirely  from  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  which  regards  the  two  dis- 
pensations as  furnishing  a  contrast  between  type  and  reality.  This  was  the 
more  possible  to  Apollos  (if  he  was  the  writer),  because  he  regards  Judaism  not 
so  much  in  the  light  of  a  law  as  in  the  light  of  a  priesthood,  and  a  system  of 
worship."  In  three  respects,  according  to  the  promise  given  to  Jeremiah,  the 
new  covenant  would  be  better  than  the  old.  And  each  respect  is  an  advantage 
on  the  spiritucd  side. 

I.  The  laws  of  the  new  covenant  were  to  be  written  on  men's  hearts. — The 
laws  of  the  old  covenant  were  engraven  on  stone  slabs,  or  written  in  books,  to 
be  read  by  men's  eyes ;  and  a  thousand  things  would  blind  them  to,  or  hinder 
them  from,  reading  and  obeying.  And  the  obedience  offered  to  outward  and 
written  law  need  only  be  foimal  and  perfunctory.  In  the  new  covenant  God's 
laws  get  into  man's  will  through  man's  love.  The  persuasion  of  "  I  ought  "  is 
changed  into  the  sweet  constraint  of  "I  wish  to."  Christ,  the  ministrant  of  the 
new  covenant,  gets  His  power  in  men's  hearts,  and  sways  motives  and  will  to  an 
obedience  which  is  a  holy  joy. 

II.  The  privileges  of  the  new  covenant  will  be  universally  enjoyed. — ^A 
covenant  that  is  spiritual  is  free  from  all  local,  national,  or  race  restrictions.  It 
is  something  for  man  as  a  spiritual  being,  and  therefore  something  for  universal 
man.  Exclusiveness  was  characteristic  of  the  Mosaic  dispensation  ;  it  was  a 
necessary  feature,  because  the  covenant  was  formal,  and  the  terms  purely 
material  privilege.  All  barriers  between  Jew  and  Gentile,  bond  and  free,  male 
and  female,  are  removed  when  God  graciously  makes  spiritual  covenant  with 
spiritual  beings. 

III.  The  working  of  the  new  covenant  involves  free  forgiveness  of  the  sins 
of  the  older  covenant. — This  difficulty  might  come  to  the  minds  of  those  who 
were  called  to  enter  into  the  new  and  spiritual  covenant — What  is  to  be  done 
with  the  penalties  which  rest  on  us  because  of  the  breaking  of  the  old  ?  The 
promise  of  Jehovah  through  Jeremiah  is,  that  when  men  come  into  the  new 
covenant,  their  sins  and  inquities  shall  be  remembered  no  more.  When  men 
are  brought  into  right  relations  with  God,  their  past  can  be  dealt  with  in  a  way 
of  free  forgiveness.  Their  sins  can  be  blotted  out.  As  the  application  of  his 
point  the  writer  urges,  that  to  call  the  former  covenant  old  implies  that  it  had 
done  its  work,  had  become  effete,  and  was  ready  to  be  put  aside.  The  old 
covenant  did  not  match  the  new  times.  Nobody  need  regret  the  putting  aside 
of  that  old  covenant,  if  they  would  enter  fully  into  all  the  high  spiritual 
privileges  of  the  new.  *' What  is  very  old  is  near  dissolution."  "  If  '  nigh  unto 
vanishing '  at  the  time  when  Jeremiah  wrote,  well  might  it  now  be  believed  to 
have  passed  away."  Accept  fully  the  new  covenant,  which  pledges  on  your  part 
the  obedience  of  love. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Yer.    10.    God's    Side    in    the    New  make.     Fixing  such  exclusive  attention 

Covenant. — "  Called    of    God    a    high  on  what  Christ  suffered  and  did,  many 

priest."     One  of  the  grave  perils  of  the  persons  are  found  to  cherish  the  notion 

evangelical  setting  of  the  redemption  that  the  Atonement  is  something  which 

truths  lies  in  the  misapprehension  of  Christ   devised   and    carried    through, 

its  teaching  which  men  only  too  readily  if  not  in  opposition  to  God,  yet  in  some 

288 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS,        chap.  vni. 


way  to  get  over  difficulties  which,  for 
some  inscrutable  reason,  God  could  not 
surmount  Himself.  Notions  of  appeas- 
ing wrath,  and  uncareful  settings  of 
the  idea  of  propitiating,  tend  to  nourish 
such  untrue  and  unworthy  notions. 
It  is  the  absolutely  primary  and  essen- 
tial truth  of  Christianity  that  the 
Redemption  is  God's  redemption,  the 
Atonement  is  God's  own  providing,  and 
the  Sacrifice  is  God  Himself  in  sacri- 
fice. There  is  no  ground  whatever  for 
separating  God  from  Christ  in  the  work 
of  the  Atonement,  either  in  the  Scrip- 
tures, or  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Church. 
What  has  to  be  dealt  with  is  the 
cherished  sentiment  of  many  persons, 
and  the  evil  influence  of  undisciplined 
and  enthusiastic  teachers.  It  may 
therefore  be  shown — 1.  That  through- 
out our  Lord's  life,  and  as  a  marked 
characteristic  of  all  His  teachings.  He 
put  Himself  in  the  second  place,  and 
the  Father-God  first.  His  supreme 
idea  was  to  get  men  to  think  well 
of  God.  It  is  to  dishonour  Christ  to 
attempt  to  put  Him  in  a  place  which 
He  wholly  refused  to  occupy.  This 
kind  of  thing  He  asserted  continually  : 
"  The  Father's  who  sent  Me  " ;  "  Thou 
hast  sent  Me."  2.  The  apostles,  in 
their  teaching,  carefully  keep  Christ  in 
the  ministerial  and  mediatorial  place, 
and  ascribe  all  the  glory  of  the  world's 
redemption  to  God.  One  passage  may 
guide  the  Bible  student  to  many.  St. 
Peter,  speaking  of  Christ,  says,  "  Who 
by  Him  do  believe  in  God,  who  raised 
Him  up  from  the  dead."  3.  A 
redemption  for  man  could  not  be  satis- 
factory unless  it  were  God's  devising. 
This  may  be  shown  by  the  'figure  of  a 
covenant.  It  were  of  little  account  to 
us  if  God  were  forced,  by  something 
Christ  did,  to  enter  into  covenant  with 
us.  The  persuasion  is  on  us  to  enter 
into  covenant,  because  God  so  graciously 
offers  it,  and  provides  the  Person  for 
negotiating  it. 

Yer.  12.  The  CoTisiderateness  of  the 
New  Covenant. — "  For  I  will  be  mer- 
ciful to  their  iniquities,  and  their  sins 
will   I   remember  no  more."     This  is 


part  of  the  anticipative  description  of 
the  covenant  that  was  to  be  made  in 
the  latter  days ;  and  it  gives  the 
supreme  point  of  interest  in  that 
covenant.  In  a  sense  the  old  covenant 
of  works  had  in  it  no  considerateness. 
It  demanded  an  absolute  and  perfect 
formal  obedience  to  formal  rules,  and 
took  no  account  whatever  of  human 
frailties.  Its  terms  concerned  conduct ; 
every  man  was  assumed  to  be  able  to 
order  his  conduct ;  and  he  must  order 
it  so  as  to  secure  a  perfect  obedience, 
or  he  must  endure  the  punishment  that 
must  come  on  the  disobedient.  How 
inconsiderate  of  human  infirmity  the 
old  covenant  of  works  was  comes  into 
full  view  when  the  Pharisees  try  to 
translate  that  covenant  for  their  day, 
and  exaggerate  its  characteristics. 
They  elaborated  its  demands  until  they 
put  men's  lives  into  prison  bonds.  They 
allowed  no  excuses  for  failure,  and 
so  bound  grievous  burdens  on  men's 
shoulders  beyond  their  power  to  bear. 
The  sin  of  Rabbinism  lies  in  its  exag- 
geration of  the  inconsiderateness  of  the 
formal  covenant  of  works.  Or  the 
weakness  of  the  old  covenant,  and  the 
superiority  of  the  new,  may  be  seen 
from  another  point  of  view.  It  dealt 
with  men's  legal  offences,  not  with  their 
moral  conditions.  It  dealt  with  their 
sins  against  rules,  but  not  with  their 
sins  against  God.  It  did  not  take  into 
its  consideration  the  iniquities  which 
burdened  men's  consciences,  but  did  not 
find  expression  in  acts  which  disturbed 
relations.  The  considerateness  of  the 
new  covenant  is  seen  in  its  contrast 
with  the  old  in  both  these  respects. 
It  does  take  account  of  men's  frailties. 
It  seeks  a  response  of  good-will  from 
men,  and  is  pitiful  and  compassionate 
when  the  good- will  is  thwarted  from 
adequate  expression  by  human  infirmi- 
ties. Nay,  in  view  of  human  frailty, 
it  proposes  to  be  a  power  in  men. 
"  The  method  of  the  kingdom  is  to  have 
the  law  written  on  the  heart.  Thereby 
the  keeping  of  all  that  is  essential  is 
effectually  provided  for."  And  the 
covenant  does  deal  with  men's  iniqui- 
ties, with  men's  sins  before  God,  assur- 

289 


CHAP.  VIII.        UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS, 


ing  a  full  Divine  forgiveness  for  the 
things  which  burden  the  conscience 
and  oppress  the  heart. 

Yer.  1 3,  taken  with  chap.  x.  9.    The 
True   Sacrifice. — Simply   a  theological 
expression  of  the   imvarying  and  un- 
varied process  of  all  things  pertaining 
to  human  life.      From  the  embryo  to 
the  decaying  time  of  life,  all  constitu- 
tions of  men  everywhere  obey  this  law. 
As   soon   as   life   comes,    it   begins  to 
grow,    grows   to   greatness,    and   then 
passes   on  to   decay.     The  writer  dis- 
tinctly  states   that   these    "  tables   of 
stone,"    "  written    by    the    finger    of 
God,"  the   goat's  hair,  and  the  rams' 
skins  dyed  red,  and  the  badgers'  skins, 
and  all  these  things,  said  to  be  ordered 
by    God,    are   worn    out.       "  Finding 
fault "    with   them,    he   tells    us  that 
they   are    no   longer   of    any    possible 
utility ;  that  though  asserted  to  be  of 
Divine  origin,  yet  they   were  human 
in  their  conditions,  and  when  they  got 
down   to  earth  they  were   subject  to 
moth,  rust,  and  decay.     And,  holding 
up   the   old   covenant   as   a  worn-out 
vesture,  he  says,  "it  is  ready  to  vanish 
away."     Necessity  has  ordered   it   so, 
that  all  things  shall  seem  Divine  to 
men  which  are   accepted  as  such    by 
the  wisest  men  of  the  time ;    and,  on 
the  other  hand,  nothing  ought  to   be 
Divine  to  any  man  except  the  soul  of 
the  wisest  sees  it  to   be   so.     Do   we 
really  believe  that  God  instituted  these 
sacrifices  ?     The    conception    of    God 
which  led  to  sacrifice  was  like  most  of 
our  thoughts  about  God.     It  was  born 
in  the  human  heart.     It  was  of  hu- 
manity.    It    is    impossible   that   man 
can  conceive  of  any  God  except  in  his 
own  likeness.     The  thought  of  sacrifice 
proceeds  out  of  sinful  hearts,  addresses 
itself  to  sinful  souls,  and  it  belongs  to 
the  morning-time  of  the  world,  when 
men  were  unable  to  think  of  a  restora- 
tion   to    favour    without    a    material 
guarantee.     Those  who  are  weak  re- 
quire   the    crutch    of    Forms.     Man 
grows     slowly    out    of     the     childish 
trappings  of  a  time  when  only  through 
these  outward  things   could   be  made 

290 


visible     the    unseen.      The     prophets 
arose,  and  cast  scorn  upon  the  useless 
system  of  sacrifices.     The  people  still 
clung  to  it,  because  they  thought  that 
all  this  outward  business  was  a  very 
good  substitute  for  inward  repentance 
and  purity ;  but  their  wise  men  knew 
that  there  can  be  no  sacrifice  of  any 
avail   without  a  penitent  soul  and  a 
sad   heart.     Now   in   this   manner   of 
religion  you  can  have  habits  and  forms 
without    any    true     religion    at    all ; 
skeletons  without  any  life  ;  substitutes 
for   thought.     And   the  mere   observ- 
ances of  such  outward  forms,    things 
that   are  done  from  mere    habit,   are 
done  at  the  expense  of  the  soul.     Men 
come  to  fast  without  caring  or  fearing, 
to    bow    without    reverence,    to    sing 
without    enthusiasm.     Isaiah    scorned 
the   Sodom-apple    of    outward   purity 
when    there   was   no    heart  of  reality 
within.     At  last  these  forms  came  to 
be  looked  upon  as  dead.     Then  began 
the    bloodless     religion.     Wheresoever 
Paul     went,      there     the     knife     was 
sheathed,  the  fire  died  down,  the  beast 
ceased  to  be  offered  up.     Wheresoever 
Christ  was   preached,  and  the  religion 
of  Christ  was   introduced,  this  wonder- 
ful effect  always  followed — -the  ascend- 
ing smoke  of  the  sacrifice  on  the  altar 
was  for  ever  done  away  with.     Even 
in  the   Komish    Church,   they  do   not 
offer   sacrifice,    but    only    a   bloodless 
offering,    in    memory     of  a    sacrifice. 
The     orthodox     belief     touching    the 
death  of  Jesus   Christ  is  the  sublimest 
progress  that   man  has  ever  made,  up 
to   the  time   when,   through  the  very 
sublimity  of  this   progress,  it  became 
necessary  to  go  much  further.     What 
a  wonderful  difference  there  is  in  the 
spiritual  conception  of  sacrifice  !    When 
the   beast  died,   he   died  unwillingly ; 
but   when    the    Divine    sacrifice    was 
made,  it  was  the  sacrifice  of  Christ's 
own   will.     To   come    forth   freely   to 
save  the  people  is  one  thing,  but  to  be 
the  unwilling  victim  of  the  sacrificing 
priest  is  quite  another.     Therefore  the 
whole  thought  of  the  death  of  Christ, 
as   a   free-will   offering  laid    down  by 
Himself  in  the  midst  of  perfect  power 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.        chap.  viii. 


to  refuse,  is  an  amazing  gain,  a 
wonderful  improvement  in  spiritual 
conception.  If  we  look  at  it  from  the 
other  side  of  it,  what  a  gain  !  In  the 
old  times  man  supplied  the  victim ; 
in  the  new  times,  God.  In  the  old 
days  the  sinner  found  the  sacrificial 
lamb ;  in  the  new  days  the  God 
against  whom  man  had  sinned  found 
"  the  Lamb  of  God."  This  was  the 
greatest  gain  that  ever  theology  made, 
and  so  complete  was  it  that  man  dare 
not  afterwards  offer  his  little  pitiful 
sacrifices.  God  had  sent  a  sacrifice, 
and  it  was  impossible  after  that  to  be 
offering  rams  and  lambs  and  bulls. 
When  a  man  has  been  sacrificed,  when 
for  sinning  man  the  only  begotten 
Son,  the  beloved  of  God,  has  been 
sacrificed,  when  He  has  died,  man  sees 
at  once  that  all  other  sacrifices  now 
are  dust  and  ashes.  After  the  Son  of 
God  had  been  given,  what  could  come  ? 
After  this  great  High  Priest  had 
sacrificed  His  own  life,  after  this  Son 
of  man  had  entered  into  the  "  Holy 
of  Holies  "  and  sacrificed  Himself,  the 
'  knife  must  be  sheathed  for  ever,  and 
the  altar  become  cold.  "  There  re- 
maineth   now    no   more    sacrifice    for 


sin."  Doth  God  require  any  sacrifice 
before  He  can  forgive  ?  There  is 
the  life  of  Christ,  and  there  is  the 
death  of  Christ.  That  throws  light 
upon  the  old  Jewish  history.  He  is 
perfect  manhood  filled  with  Divineness, 
who  laid  down  His  own  will  in  order 
that  the  will  of  God  might  be  all  in 
all.  From  what  direction  shall  we 
gather  the  light  in  which  we  are  to 
view  the  death  of  Christ  ?  Shall  the 
light  be  borrowed  from  Paganism, 
Judaism,  and  the  old  world,  or  de- 
veloped from  the  whole  life  and  spirit 
of  Christ  Himself  ?  The  Atonement  is 
the  reconcilement  in  a  man  of  the 
Divine  and  the  human  so  perfectly, 
that  men  following  its  laws  are  neces- 
sarily redeemed?  In  them  the  hos- 
tility between  heaven  and  earth  has 
ceased;  the  will  of  God  has  been 
perfectly  done  ;  and  therefore  all  the 
ends  at  which  religion  has  ever  aimed 
have  been  attained,  and  the  supreme 
victory  won  at  last — the  victory  of 
the  Spirit  over  the  flesh,  of  duty  over 
pleasure,  of  the  will  of  God  over  the 
weak  wishes  and  desires  of  man. — 
George  Daw  son ,  M.A. 


ILLUSTRATION    TO    CHAPTER    VIII. 


Ver.  11.  From  the  Least  to  the  Greatest. — 
Why  tbis  order,  "  from  the  least  to  the 
greatest"?  We  might  tave  expected  the 
gospel  to  come  into  the  world  as  the  sun 
begins  to  shine,  first  tipping  with  gold  the 
summits  of  the  loftiest  hills,  and  thence 
finding  its  way  down  to  the  depths  of  the 
valleys.  Ko,  it  is  "  from  the  least  to  the 
greatest,"  as  if  that  were  the  natural  way 
for  Christianity  to  work.  And  so  it  is— it 
is  God's  way.  He  chooses  the  weak  things 
of  the  world  to  confound  the  mighty,  and 
"  out  of  the  mouths  of  babes  and  sucklings 
perfects  His  praise."  And  this,  by  the  way, 
affords  an  answer  to  an  objection  which 
may  be  made  to  our  Sabbath-school  opera- 
tions abroad.     It  may  be  said,  What  good 


can  your  little  work  do  there  ?  This  is  the 
old  objection — "  Master,  we  have  here  five 
barley  loaves,  and  two  small  fishes ;  but 
what  are  they  among  so  many  ? "  Yes, 
what  are  they  in  man's  hands  ?  We  know 
what  they  were  in  the  hands  of  our  Lord. 
"  From  the  least  even  to  the  greatest,"  that 
is  the  history  of  Christianity.  It  is  the 
little  grain  of  mustard  seed  dropped  into 
the  ground,  which  indeed  is  the  least  of 
seeds,  but  afterwards  becomes  a  tree  afford- 
ing shelter  for  the  birds  of  the  air :  it  is  like 
the  pebble  from  the  brook,  which  once  felled 
the  Philistine  giant ;  it  is  like  the  stone 
cut  from  the  mountain,  which  destroyed  the 
great  image,  and  filled  the  whole  earth. 


291 


CHAP.  IX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAPTEE  IX. 
CHRIST  IS  THE  END  OF  THE  LAW. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES, 

The  writer  proceeds  to  compare,  or  rather  contrast,  the  ordinances  of  ministration  under 
the  two  priesthoods.  1.  The  older  ceremonial  indicated  that  the  way  into  the  holiest  was 
not  made  plain.  In  Christ  it  is  made  plain.  2.  The  whole  service  of  Judaism  was  outward 
and  ceremonial.  That  of  Christ  is  spiritual.  3.  The  older  sacrifices  were  of  unwilling 
beasts.  That  of  Christ  was  the  sacrifice  of  His  own  will,  '*  His  own  consenting  personality." 
4.  Salvation  and  pardon  were  associated  with  blood  or  yielded  life.  This  is,  in  the  deepest, 
the  most  spiritual  sense,  true  of  Christ's  salvation.  5.  The  older  sacrifices  were  numerous. 
Christ's  was  a  single  sacrifice,  and  offered  once  for  all.  6.  The  old  sacrifices  had  their 
spiritual  power  only  as  typical  of  Christ's  sacrifice.  Christ's  sacrifice  is  the  antitype. 
7.  The  cleansing  efficacy  of  the  old  sacrifice  was  only  partial  and  temporary.  In  Christ 
is  perfect  and  final  cleansing.  8.  The  old  priests  were  ever  at  the  altar.  Christ,  having 
offered,  is  seated  on  His  throne.  Vers.  1-10  contain  descriptions  of  the  Holy  Place  and 
the  Holy  of  Holies ;  but  it  should  be  noticed  that  only  a  brief,  not  a  comjjlete,  recapitulation 
of  the  furniture  and  service  of  the  Temple  is  attempted. 

Ver.  1.  Then  verily. — Or,  "to  resume  our  comparison  then."  The  first. — Some  would 
supply  the  word  "  tent,"  "  tabernacle,"  but  the  word  "  covenant "  is  preferable.  See 
chap.  viii.  6,  7,  13.  Ordinances  of  Divine  service. — Or,  "  a  service  conducted  by  definite 
rules."  Xarpeia  signifies  the  public  service  of  the  tabernacle  ;  diKano/xara  the  formal  rules 
which  regulated  it.  Worldly. — Or  material,  as  opposed  to  "heavenly,"  or  spiritual,  A 
rhetorical  description  of  the  enclosed  sacred  area,  with  its  tent,  in  which  the  daily  Divine 
service  was  carried  on.  ko(tixlk6v  means,  "  of  a  terrestrial  nature."  If  the  meaning  had  been 
"ornate,"  "elegant,"  the  adjectival  form  would  have  been  Koa/jnoi. 

Ver.  2.  Tabernacle. — This  was  made  after  the  pattern  showed  to  Moses  in  the  mount ;  the 
later  Temples  were  but  enlarged  copies  of  it.  It  is  to  the  point,  therefore,  that  the  writer 
should  take  his  illustrations  from  the  original  work.  It  was  an  oblong  tent  divided,  by 
thick  veils,  into  two  chambers.  The  first. — Not  the  most  important  one,  but  the  one  that 
presents  itself  first  to  a  visitor.  For  the  furniture  of  the  (TK-rju-ri,  see  Exod.  xxv.  23-29, 
31-39,  xxxvii.  17-24 ;  Lev.  xxiv.  4-9 ;  1  Kings  vi.  The  altar  of  incense  is  omitted, 
and  the  altar  of  burnt-offering.  This  was  in  front  of  the  tent,  not  within  it.  Candlestick. — 
Exod.  xxv.  31-39,  xxxvii.  17-24.  Table. — Exod.  xxv.  23-29 ;  bread  consecrated  to  Jehovah 
was  regularly  placed  upon  it.  For  exhibition  of  the  bread,  see  Exod.  xxv.  30  ;  Lev.  xxiv. 
5-9.  The  earlier  Hebrew  name  was  "presence-bread."  Sanctuary. —ayta,  Holy  Place. 
Distinguished  from  dyia  ayiwv  of  ver.  3. 

Ver.  3.  Second  veil. — One  was  at  the  outer  door  of  the  Holy  Place;  the  second,  which 
was  a  double  one,  divided  the  Holy  Place  from  the  Most  Holy.  The  Hebrew  name  of  the 
inner  veil  is  given  in  Exod.  xxvi.  31-33 ;  Lev.  xvi.  2.  The  Hebrew  name  of  the  outer  veil 
is  given,  Exod.  xxvi.  31-33,  xxxvi.  35,  36.  Holiest  of  all. — R.V.  "  Holy  of  Holies  " ;  &yia 
ayicjv.  "  A  common  form  of  expression  in  Hebrew,  in  order  to  denote  intensity."  This 
apartment  was  regarded  as  the  earthly  dwelling-place  of  Jehovah.  In  Solomon's  Temple  the 
inner  chamber  was  called  the  "  Oracle." 

Ver.  4.  Golden  censer. — No  such  utensil  is  mentioned  by  Moses.  Moulton  renders 
"  having  a  golden  altar  of  incense,"  but  the  altar  of  incense  was  in  the  Holy  Place,  not  in 
the  Holy  of  Holies.  The  Eabbins  say  that  a  golden  censer  was  used  by  the  high  priest  on 
the  Day  of  Atonement.  Alford  suggests  reading  "having  belonging  to  it,"  rather  than 
"  having  in  it."  Farrar  suggests  some  sort  of  stand  on  which  the  priest  placed  the  incense- 
pot,  or  censer.  Or  the  altar  of  incense  may  be  referred  to,  and  treated  as  "  belonging  to  " 
the  special  ceremonies  of  the  Holy  of  Holies.  See  1  Kings  vi.  22.  Ark  of  the  covenant. — 
/cijSwro's,  a  chest  made  of  wood,  and  covered  with  laminae  of  gold  (Exod.  xxv.  10-16, 
xxxvii.  1-5).  Within  it  were  placed  the  two  tables  of  the  covenant,  and  the  lid  was  regarded 
as  the  mercy-seat.  Golden  pot.— See  Exod.  xvi.  32-34.  It  is  not  spoken  of  as  "golden"  in  the 
Hebrew,  but  the  LXX.  render  aTdfivov  xp^^^o^^-  Other  ancient  religions  represent  their 
supreme  mystery  by  a  closed  box.  The  idea  may  have  been  Egyptian.  It  is  disputable 
whether  the  pot  and  the  rod  were  within  the  box,  or  placed  beside  it— but  this  writer 
distinctly  understands  the  original  arrangement  to  have  included  all  within  the  box. 
Aaron's  rod. — See  Num.  xvii.  1-10.  The  manna  and  the  rod  were  Divine  covenant  seals. 
Tables. — Stone  tablets  ;  best  represented  by  modern  slates. 

Ver.   5.   Cherubims  of  glory.— Stuart^  "splendid  cherubim."      Barker,  "not    splendid 

292 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  ohap.  ix. 


cherubim,  but  cherubim  that  were  recipients  of  the  glory,  i.e.  of  the  Divine  manifestation, 
the  Sbekinah."  Farrar,  "  cherubim  of  the  Shekinah."  (Exod.  xxv.  18-22,  xxix.  43  ; 
Num.  vii.  89  ;  Ezek.  x.  19,  20.)  The  glory-cloud  was  the  visible  symbol  of  God's  presence,  and 
was  regarded  as  resting,  protected  by  the  outspread  wings  of  these  representative  figures. 
The  cherubim  were  "  emblems  of  all  that  was  highest  and  best  in  animated  nature — the 
grandest  products  of  creation  combined  in  one  living  angelic  symbol."  Mercy-seat. — The  lid 
or  covering  of  the  ark,  which  was  of  pure  gold  (Exod.  xxv.  17,  21).  The  place  of  propitiation 
whence  mercy  was  dispensed.  "  Over  this  mercy-seat  the  Divine  glory  was  seen,  i.e.  a 
supernatural,  excessive  brightness,  and  hence  God  was  supposed  to  be  seated  on  it,  as  His 
throne,  and  from  it  to  dispense  His  mercy,  when  atonement  was  made  for  the  sins  of  the 
people,  by  sprinkling  it  with  blood."  Particularly. — In  minute  detail.  The  writer  does  not 
propose  to  deal  with  all  the  Mosaic  service  ;  he  can  illustrate  his  point  from  the  greatest 
day  of  the  ritual — the  Day  of  Atonement. 

Ver.  6.  Thus  ordained. — Prepared,  or  adapted  to  their  several  purposes.  Went  always. — 
Regularly,  systematically.  Service. — Public  religious  services  ;  Xarpe/as.  These  included 
morning  and  even'.ng  oblations,  sacrifices  for  special  occasions,  and  private  offerings  of 
individuals. 

Ver.  7.  Second.— Inner  chamber.  "  There  was  a  graduated  sanctity  in  the  tabernacle  and 
in  the  Temple.  In  the  Temple  any  one  may  go  into  the  outer  court,  or  court  of  the 
Gentiles;  Jews  into  the  second  court  ;  men  only  into  the  third  ;  priests  only  in  their  robes 
into  the  Holy  Place  ;  and  only  the  high  priest  into  the  inmost  shrine."  Once  every  year. — 
On  the  tenth  day  of  the  seventh  month,  Tisri,  the  Day  of  Atonement.  The  several  times  of 
entrance  on  that  day  are  treated  as  one.  He  went  in  (1)  with  the  incense  j_  (2)  with  the 
blood  of  the  bullock  offered  for  his  own  sins  ;  (3)  with  the  blood  of  the  goat  offered  for 
the  sins  of  the  people  ;  and  it  is  probable  that  he  also  went  in  again  to  fetch  out  the 
censer  (Lev.  xvi.  12-16).  Not  without  blood. — The  type  of  self -surrender,  full  consecration. 
The  blood  was  sprinkled  seven  times  on  and  before  the  mercy-seat.  Errors. — Ceremonial 
mistakes,  involving  ceremonial  uncleanness  ;  sins  of  ignorance  and  frailty. 

Ver.  8.  Made  manifest. — Not  yet  laid  open.  *'  It  was  obstructed  by  numerous  ceremonial 
rites,  and  limited  as  to  times  and  persons."  "  Hence  the  deep  significance  of  the  rending 
of  the  veil  from  the  top  to  the  bottom  at  the  Crucifixion  "  (Matt,  xxvii.  51). 

Ver.  9.  Figure. — irapajSoX-^,  symbolical  presentation :  compare  tvttos.  To  the  conscience. 
— This  was  not  their  sphere.  The  old  economy  did  not  deal  with  the  inward  sense  of  sin  ; 
only  with  disturbed  outward  relations  caused  by  sin,  in  the  sense  of  infringement  of  formal 
rules.  Stuart  thus  paraphrases  :  "  The  Jewish  ritual,  from  the  commencement  of  it  down 
to  the  present  moment,  has  never  been,  and  still  is  not,  anything  more  than  a  t7j2Je  of  the 
Christian  dispensation,  which  has  already  commenced.  All  its  oblations  and  sacrifices 
were  ineffectual,  as  to  removing  the  penalty  due  to  sin  in  the  sight  of  Heaven,  or  procuring 
real  peace  of  conscience." 

Ver.  10.  Carnal  ordinances. — Omit  *'  and."  R.V.  "  beiTig  only  carnal  ordinances,"  i.e. 
"  ordinances  of  flesh  "  ;  which  "  relate  to  the  outward  state  of  things  only ;  closely  connected 
with  the  maintenance  of  external  privileges  and  relations,  but  (in  themselves)  nothing  more." 
Outward,  transitory,  superficial.    Imposed. — Compare  Acts  xv.  10,  28  ;  Gal.  v.  1. 

Ver.  11.  Good  things  to  come. — Lit.  "who  procures  future  blessings";  in  the  sense  of 
spiritual  blessings.  Farrar  suggests  the  reading  "of  the  good  things  that  have  come." 
Compare  the  expressions  "last  days,"  "latter  days."  Tabernacle. — Representing  heaven, 
the  spiritual  sphere,  after  the  figure  of  the  material  tent.  Made  with  hands. — A  rhetorical 
way  of  showing  its  distinction  from  the  Jewish  tabernacle. 

Ver.  12.  Neither  by  the  blood,  etc. — Referring  to  the  ceremonies  of  the  Day  of  Atone- 
ment. Goats  and  calves. — A  summarising  of  the  victims  offered,  not  a  precise  detail. 
Bullocks  may  be  put  for  calves.  His  own  blood. — As  the  heavenly  sanctuary  cannot  be 
thought  of  as  admitting  actual  blood,  that  spiritual  thing  which  the  blood  represented  must 
be  meant.  What  then  was  that  spiritual  thing  which  Christ,  as  spiritual  High  Priest, 
presented,  which  answers  to  the  symbol  of  the  blood  ?  What  is  the  soul  sacrifice  that  has 
"  blood  "  for  its  earthly  figure  ?  This  is  the  great  question  to  be  solved,  if  this  portion  of 
the  epistle  is  to  be  understood.  "  His  own  blood  was  the  offering  by  which  He  was 
admitted  as  our  High  Priest  and  eternal  Redeemer  into  the  Holy  of  Holies  of  God's 
immediate  presence."  Eternal  redemption. — Compare  the  temporary  redemption  which  was 
all  that  the  old  priest  could  accomplish.  The  spiritual  is  the  permanent.  Omit  the  words 
"  for  us."     The  XiJrpwo-is  effected  by  Christ  needs  no  repetition. 

Ver.  13.  Ashes,  etc. — Num.  xix.  2-9.  These  were  distinctly  for  purification  from  cere- 
monial offences.  Flesh. — I.e.  from  uncleanness  according  to  Mosaic  ideas  and  rules  ;  ritual 
disabilities. 

Ver.  14.  How  much  more. — The  form  of  argument  characteristic  of  this  epistle.  The 
argument  recalls  to  mind  what  has  already  been  said  concerning  the  dignity  of  the  person 
of  Christ.    Through  the  eternal  Spirit.  —One  of  the  most  difficult  expressions  in  the  epistle, 

293   ' 


CHAP.  IX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


It  may  mean  either  (1)  by  the  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  or  (2)  in  an  eternal,  that  is  a 
spiritual,  nature  or  manner ;  or  (3)  by  His  own  Divine  nature,  i.e.  with  the  full  con- 
currence of  His  own  eternal  spirit  or  will.  Ellicott  says,  "  in  spirit,  in  the  higher  sphere  of 
His  Divine  life  ;  the  irveufxa  of  Christ  is  not  here  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  the  higher  principle  of 
spiritual  life."  Through  this  spirit,  a  spirit  of  holiness,  a  spirit  of  indissoluble  life.  He 
offered  Himself  to  God.  This  made  such  a  self-offering  possible,  this  gave  to  the  offering 
infinite  worth.  It  must  refer  to  Christ's  own  spirit,  the  consenting  act  of  His  Divine 
personality.  This  expression,  offered  Himself,  explains  the  reference  to  the  blood  ;  the 
offering  of  the  blood  is  the  figure,  the  offering  of  Himself  is  the  fact.  Without  spot. — 
d/j,(afxov,  with  allusion  to  the  ground  of  acceptance  for  Jewish  victims.  Christ's  offering  of 
Himself,  if  it  had  been  that  of  a  stained  sinner,  could  not  have  been  acceptable.  Spotless, 
it  could  i)e  representative.  Dead  works. — The  term  "  deadl"  is  used  because  the  ashes,  referred 
to  above,  cleansed  those  who  were  made  unclean  by  contact  with  the  dead.  "  Dead  works  " 
may  mean  generally  sinful  works,  since  it  is  from  the  pollution  as  well  as  the  penalty  of 
sin  that  Christ's  offering  of  Himself  delivers  and  cleanses. 

Ver.  15. — The  writer  now  proceeds  to  show  that  this  real  sacrifice  of  Christ  was  the 
medium  through  which  full  forgiveness  and  personal  acceptance  were  vouchsafed  under  the 
old  covenant.  "  The  doctrine  of  vers.  15,  26,  together  with  the  passage  Rom.  iii.  25,  26, 
is  clear  and  conclusive  to  the  point,  that  from  the  fall  of  Adam  to  the  end  of  time  the 
way  of  salvation  is  one,  viz.  God's  free  grace  manifested  through  the  Redeemer's  self- 
sacrifice,  responded  to  by  the  thankful  trust  of  the  sinner  in  undeserved  Divine  mercy, 
and  in  the  medium  of  that  mercy  according  to  the  degree  of  its  revelation."  Stuart  gives 
the  sentiment  of  this  verse  thus  :  "  As  Jewish  sacrifices  rendered  the  offerer  externally  clean, 
so  the  blood  of  Christ  purifies  the  moral  or  internal  man,  and  removes  the  consequences  of 
sin.  On  this  account  (5id  tovto),  i.e.  because  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  produces  an  effect  such 
as  the  Jewish  sacrifices  did  not,  He  may  justly  be  called  the  '  Mediator  of  a  new  covenant,* 
differing  greatly  from  the  old."  For  this  cause. — Either  "on account  of  the  grandeur  of  His 
offering,"  or  "  as  bearing  relation  to  conscience  "  (see  ver.  14).  New  testament. — The  Greek 
word  is  "  covenant,"  btadijKT}  ;  testament  is  the  confusing  translation  of  the  A.V. ;  in  the  R.V. 
the  word  "  covenant  "  is  restored.  For  mediator  with  idea  of  "  negotiator,"  see  Moses  (Gal.  iii. 
19).  The  idea  expressed  is,  that  this  new  covenant  is  retrospective  as  well  as  prospective,  and 
is  the  explanation  of  the  spiritual  relationship  with  God  that  could  be  attained  under  the 
old,  and  preparatory,  and  formal  covenant.  The  new  covenant,  in  fact,  underlay,  and  was 
involved  in,  the  old  covenant.  That  was  indeed  such  an  expression  of  it  as  was  possible 
in  the  age  to  which  it  was  given.  By  means  of  death. — Christ's  surrender  of  Himself  in 
death.  In  the  light  of  it  as  the  covenant  acceptance  and  seal.  Redemption,  etc. — Those 
spiritual  transgressions  (including  penalties)  which  the  old  covenant  did  not  touch ; 
concerning  them  God  promised  forgiveness  on  the  condition  of  Christ's  obedience.  When 
that  obedience  was  rendered  the  promise  was  actually  fulfilled.  They  which  are  called.— 
The  Scripture  figure  for  the  sincerely  believing  and  pious.  Eternal. — Equivalent  to 
"  spiritual,"  which  includes  that  idea  of  permanence.  Inheritance. — Stuart  renders  "  bless- 
ings "  ;  "  proffered  good."  Compare  chap.  iii.  1,  "  partakers  of  a  heavenly  calling."  Farrar 
renders  "  eternal  heritage." 

Vers.  16,  17.  Testament. — diadrjKTj.  Here  rhetorically  used  in  its  Greek  and  Roman  sense 
of  "a  will,"  the  idea  being  suggested  by  the  mention  of  the  "inheritance"  (ver.  15),  and 
of  the  necessity  of  a  "  death."  The  covenant  ratified  by  the  death  of  Christ  is  compared 
with  a  testament  proved  valid,  and  rendered  operative,  by  the  death  of  the  testator.  But 
the  argument  is  rhetorical  rather  than  logical.  Death  of  the  testator. — It  lies  over  as  a 
promise,  but  the  testator's  death  alone  gives  possession.  Of  force. — Comes  into  power  and 
operation.  It  is  an  inoperative  thing,  a  mere  promise  through  all  the  long  ages,  until  Christ's 
death  brings  it  into  operation.  This  is  07ie  view  of  the  death  of  Christ,  but  it  appeals  much 
more  forcibly  to  Jewish  minds  than  to  ours. 

Ver.  18.  The  first  covenant. — Reverting  to  the  older  and  safer  term.  Vers.  16,  17,  are  a 
sort  of  aside,  a  sudden  thought  that  came  to  the  writer,  somewhat  in  the  Pauline  manner. 
Dedicated. — Or  "  initiated."  There  was  a  foreshadowing  of  the  death  of  Christ  in  the  blood- 
sealings  of  the  covenant. 

Ver.  19.  Spoken. — Read  aloud  the  commandments  which  were  the  covenant  requirements 
and  conditions.  Of  calves  and  of  goats. — A  general  expression  for  the  "sacrificial  victims." 
Goats  are  not  especially  mentioned  on  this  occasion  (Exod.  xxiv.  5).  Scarlet  wool,  and 
hyssop. — Not  mentioned  in  Exod.  xxiv.  "  The  water  (itself  an  emblem  and  means  of 
cleansing)  was  designed  to  prevent  the  coagulation  of  the  blood,  and  to  increase  the 
quantity  of  the  purifying  fluid.  The  *  scarlet  wool '  may  have  been  used  to  bind  the  hyssop 
to  the  stick  of  cedar- wood,  which  was  the  instrument  of  sprinkling  "  {Moulton).  The  book. 
— Not  specially  mentioned  in  Exod.  xxiv.  6-8.  ("  This  is  one  of  several  instances  in  which 
the  writer  shows  himself  learned  in  the  Jewish  legends,  Hagadoth.)  Book  and  people  may 
be  taken  as  representing  the  two  parties  to  the  covenant. 

294 


E03IILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  ix. 


Ver.  21.  Tabernacle.— Nothing  is  actually  said  of  their  being  so  sprinkled ;  only  of  their 
being  anointed  with  oil.     Josephus,  however,  confirms  the  text.     8ee  Exod.  xi.  9-11. 

Ver.  22.  Almost  all.— Some  were  cleansed  by  water  (Lev.  xvi.  2G,  28  ;  Num.  xxxi.  22,  23). 
The  cleansing  efficacy  of  blood  is  a  symbol,  not  a  fact.  Is  no  remission.— The  writer  does 
not  say  "of  sins,"  and  these  words  should  not  be  added  to  the  verse.  He  is  stating  a 
historical  fact  with  regard  to  the  old  Mosaic  system,  and  refers  entirely  to  ceremonial 
offences.     The  Rabbins  have  a  proverb,  "No  expiation  except   by  blood." 

Ver.  23.  Patterns.- Copies,  outlines,  earthly  representations.  These.— Blood-sheddings ; 
sacrifices*  of  beasts.  Heavenly  things. — Spiritual  things  ;  things  of  conscience  and  will ; 
the  spiritual  realities  of  sin  against  God  and  broken  relations  with  Him.  Better  sacrifices. 
— Spiritual  as  contrasted  with  material.  The  argument  of  the  writer  is  that  Christ's 
sacrifice  must  be  better,  because  it  is  the  Divine  Man's  surrendered  will ;  and  that  is  the 
very  highest,  sublimest  thing  in  God's  universe. 

Ver.  24.  Made  with  hands.— Touchable,  so  earthly.  Figures  of  the  true.— Observe  the 
writer's  frequent  repetition  of  this  idea.  He  was  most  anxious  to  get  the  Christian  Jews 
thoroughly  to  loosen  their  hold  on  that  old  Mosaic  system.  Heaven  itself. — The  holy 
place  of  God ;  the  spiritual  realm.  For  us.— As  the  high  priest  did.  First  position : 
Christ  is  in  the  spiritual  world  as  our  Mediator.  Second  position  :  One  such  spiritual  sacrifice 
suffices.  Imperfection  is  shown  by  the  need  for  repetition.  Repetition  is  needed  for 
"  picture  teaching,"  which  prepares  for  the  reception  of  something  that  can  be  final. 

Ver.  26.  Often  have  suffered. — Our  Redeemer's  work  is  still  regarded  as  covering  sin  from 
the  earliest  ages.  In  the  end  of  the  world. — Not  *'  absolute  end."  It  fits  in  with  the 
apostolic  idea  of  the  "  last  times."     Put  away  sin. — Clearly  a  moral  work. 

Ver.  27.  Once  to  die.— As  the  seal  of  sin.     Judgment.— As  the  Divine  recognition  of  sin. 

Ver.  28.  Once  offered. — Only  the  sacrifice  of  one  whole,  representative  life  could  be 
needed.  Bear  the  sins. — I.e.  bear  the  burden  or  work  of  putting  them  away.  Without 
sin. — Or  apart  from  sin ;  apart  from  all  connection  with  it,  because,  when  He  comes.  His 
redemptive  work  will  be  complete.  "  To  return  for  our  salvation  as  the  everlasting  Victor 
over  sin  and  over  death." 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—5. 

The  Mission  of  the  Symbolical. — It  must  have  been  a  cause  of  much  pain  to 
the  pious  Jews  that  it  had  been  found  impossible  fully  to  restore  the  old 
tabernacle  conditions  in  the  Temple  built  after  the  Captivity.  "  When  Pompey 
profanely  forced  his  way  into  the  Holy  of  Holies,  he  found,  to  his  great  astonish- 
ment, nothing  whatever  (vacua  omnia)."  This  writer  does  not  therefore  refer 
to  any  of  the  Temples — not  even  to  Solomon's — but  deals  only  with  the  original 
tabernacle  of  Moses,  that  was  fully  fashioned  and  furnished  "  according  to  the 
pattern  shew^n  him  in  the  mount."  There  only  could  the  symbolic  system  be 
seen  in  its  completeness.  In  making  comparison  between  the  old  material  and 
the  new  spiritual  dispensations,  it  was  quite  possible  for  the  writer  to  leave  the 
impression  that  he  underrated  the  old,  and  this  impression  might  cause  offence, 
and  hinder  men  from  receiving  his  teachings  and  persuasions.  Christian 
teachers  need  to  be  anxious  not  only  concerning  the  precision  with  which  they 
state  the  truth,  but  also  concerning  the  impressions  that  are  received,  and  the 
ideas  that  are  taken  up,  by  those  who  hear  them.  They  should  watchfully 
avoid  all  occasions  of  offence,  while  keeping  absolutely  loyal  to  God's  truth. 
This  fear  influences  the  writer  here,  and  leads  him  to  give,  in  a  very  reverent 
and  sympathetic  way,  his  estimate  of  the  real  value  and  significance,  as  religious 
teaching,  of  the  old  symbolic  system.  True,  it  was  temporary,  educative,  and 
preparatory,  but  it  was  the  precisely  fitting  thing  for  its  time  and  place ;  and  it 
enshrined  the  great  primary  truths  connected  with  God's  actual  and  possible 
relations  with  men,  that  could  be  liberated,  illustrated,  glorified,  and  made  the 
universal  heritage  of  men,  when  the  spiritual  High  Priest  had  come,  and  had 
taken  His  place  in  the  spiritual  and  eternal  temple.  This  paragraph  brings 
before  us  the  furniture  of  the  two  chambers  of  the  first  tabernacle,  and  reminds 
us  that  each  article  carried  a  spiritual  suggestion. 

295 


CHAP.  IX  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


I.  The  symbolical  meanings  of  the  things  in  the  first  chamber,  or  Holy 
Place. — It  is  singular  that  the  writer  does  not  mention  the  "  altar  of  incense," 
which  stood  in  the  centre  of  the  Holy  Place,  immediately  before  the  veil,  but 
brings  in  the  golden  censer,  which  carried  fire  from  this  altar  into  the  Holy  of 
Holies  on  the  Day  of  Atonement,  and  so  was  thought  of  as  properly  belonging 
to  the  "  Most  Holy  Place."  There  were  three  principal  articles  of  furniture  in 
the  first  chamber,  or  Holy  Place.  1.  The  altar  of  incense.  A  double  cube, 
with  horns,  made  of  shittim-wood,  overlaid  with  gold.  No  burnt-offering,  meat- 
offering, or  drink-offering  was  to  be  laid  upon  it ;  but  the  blood  of  the 
sin-offering  of  atonement  was  sprinkled  upon  its  horns  once  a  year.  Incense,  a 
sacred  composition  of  spices,  was  offered  by  burning  every  morning  and  evening, 
as  a  symbol  of  the  daily  thanksgiving  and  prayer  of  the  people.  2.  The  table 
of  shewhread.  This  was  placed  on  the  right,  or  north  side  of  the  chamber. 
The  table  was  oblong,  and  stood  on  legs.  It  was  of  shittim-wood,  and  was 
furnished  with  dishes,  spoons,  covers,  and  bowls,  of  pure  gold.  Upon  this  table 
were  placed,  every  Sabbath  Day,  twelve  cakes  of  fine  flour,  in  two  rows  of  six 
each,  with  frankincense  upon  each  row.  This  constant  offering  of  a  representa- 
tive of  the  people's  food  before  the  Lord  sanctified  their  common  eating  and 
drinking.  Man's  time  was  consecrated  to  God  by  the  separation  of  the  Sabbath 
for  His  entire  service.  Man's  body  was  consecrated  to  God  by  the  devotion  of 
his  possessions  as  sacrifices.  Man's  food  was  sanctified  by  the  presentation  of 
this  shewbread,  this  representative  bread,  before  the  Lord. 

"How  can  I,  Lord,  withhold 
Life's  brightest  hour 
From  Thee ;  or  gathered  gold. 
Or  any  power? 
Why  should  1  keep  one  precious  thing  from  Thee, 
When  Thou  hast  given  Thine  own  dear  Self  for  me?" 

a  E.  Mudie. 

3.  The  golden  candlestick.  Placed  on  the  left  or  south  side  of  the  altar  of 
incense.  Made  of  pure  beaten  gold,  having  a  straight  centre  rising  from  the 
stand,  and  three  curved  branches  on  either  side.  The  lamps  were  lighted  at  the 
time  of  the  evening  oblation.  The  Rabbins  say  that  only  the  central  lamp  was 
kept  alight  during  the  daytime.  The  famous  figure  of  the  candlestick  on  the 
Arch  of  Titus  cannot  be  an  exact  representation,  seeing  that  it  has  marine 
monsters  carved  upon  its  pediment,  which  would  have  been  a  direct  violation  of 
the  second  commandment.  "  As  in  a  house  light  is  as  necessary  as  food,  and 
the  lampstand  with  its  lighted  lamp  was  a  piece  of  furniture  as  necessary  as  the 
bread- vessel,  so  in  the  house  of  Jehovah  the  candlestick  symbolised  the  spiritual 
light  of  life,  which  He  gives  to  His  servants  with  the  words  by  which  they  live." 
The  candlestick  symbolised  the  people,  who  were,  thus  represented  as  always  in 
the  presence  of  Jehovah,  and  as  always  alight,  with  the  light  of  their  faith, 
and  love,  and  obedience. 

II.  The  symbolical  meanings  of  the  things  in  the  second  chamber,  the  Holy 
of  Holies. — That  chamber  itself  represented  the  truth  that,  while  man's  sin  had 
not  so  broken  relations  with  God  that  he  might  not  offer  worship,  or  the  service 
of  his  life,  it  had  made  impossible  those  close  relations  of  personal  friendship 
which  God  gave  His  creatures  in  Eden.  Man's  sin  had  made  the  "veil" 
necessary,  which  could  be  passed  only  on  well-defined  conditions,  and  only 
representatively  by  the  priest.  The  chamber  was  without  windows,  or 
ventilators,  and  absolutely  dark,  save  for  the  glory  of  the  Shekinah-cloud.  The 
ark  was  the  chief  thing  in  it.  It  symbolised  Jehovah's  throne ;  the  cover  was 
the  seat,  or  mercy-seat ;  the  cherubims  represented  the  attendants  on  the  throne ; 
and  the  tables  of  the  law  inside  the  ark  declared  the  foundation  principles  on 
which   He  who  sat  on  the  throne  ruled  His  people  and  dispensed  His  mercy. 

296  ,  , 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS.  chap.  IX. 


"  Justice  and  judgment  are  the  habitation  of  His  throne."  The  golden  pot  with 
the  manna,  and  Aaron's  rod  that  budded,  may  have  been  placed  beside  the  ark, 
rather  than  within  it,  and  were  representative  of  the  history  of  God's  people, 
and  of  His  special  deahngs  with  them.  They,  as  it  were,  kept  God  reminded 
of  the  people's  needs  and  the  people's  frailties.  Perhaps  the  golden  censer  is 
mentioned  with  a  special  purpose.  The  writer  wants  to  make  clear  how  limited 
access  to  God  was  under  the  old  system,  and  how  free  it  is  under  the  new ;  so 
he  reminds  us  that  even  the  old  high  priest  could  not  go  into  the  Holy  of  Holies 
without  the  shading  of  the  glory  of  God  with  the  smoke  of  incense.  He  must 
take  the  censer,  and  put  incense  on  the  coals  just  as  he  took  the  veil  aside,  so 
that  he  might  not  see  undimmed  the  glory  over  the  mercy-seat.  The  old 
symbols  dealt  with  the  primary  truths  that  are  now  fully  brought  to  light  by 
Jesus  Christ. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Yer.  2.  Types  in  the  Holy  Place. —  Ministry  in  the  Holy  Place. — The 
"The  candlestick,  and  the  table,  and  Holy  Place  was  used  for  the  more 
the  shewbread."  The  furniture  of  delicate  sacrifices  which  the  priests 
the  court  was  connected  with  sacrifice,  alone  offered,  and  the  rest  of  the 
that  of  the  sanctuary  itself  with  the  people,  including  the  Levites,  never 
deeper  mysteries  of  mediation  and  saw  with  their  own  eyes.  The  Holy 
access  to  God.  The  first  sanctuary  Place  was  a  dark  chamber,  and  a 
contained  three  objects :  the  altar  of  lamp  was  necessary  to  enable  the 
incense  in  the  centre,  so  as  to  be  priests  to  discharge  their  functions, 
directly  in  front  of  the  ark  of  the  The  golden  altar  became  an  altar  for 
covenant ;  the  table  of  shewbread  on  the  priests  alone,  at  which  nothing  but 
its  right  or  north  side ;  and  the  golden  the  most  delicate  substances  might  be 
candlestick  on  the  left  or  south  side,  offered — namely,  incense.  It  is  signi- 
These  objects  were  all  considered  as  ficant  that  the  shewbread  was  called 
being  placed  before  the  presence  of  *'  bread  of  the  face,"  "  bread  of  the 
Jehovah,  who  dwelt  in  the  "  Holiest  of  Divine  presence,"  "  loaves  of  the  setting- 
all,"  though  with  the  veil  between,  forth." 
The  daily  rite  for  the  altar  of  incense 

was  as  follows  :  The  priest  took  some  Yer.  3.  The  Typology  of  the  Veils. — 
of  the  sacred  fire  off  the  altar  of  burnt-  Inside,  the  Holy  of  Holies  was 
offering  in  his  censer,  and  threw  the  separated  off  only  by  a  drop-curtain, 
incense  upon  it ;  then,  entering  the  This  was  made  of  byssus,  and  was 
Holy  Place,  he  emptied  the  censer  fastened  by  golden  hooks  to  four 
upon  the  altar,  prayed,  and  performed  pillars  of  acacia-wood,  which,  like 
the  other  duties  of  his  office.  Mean-  the  planks,  were  covered  with  gold- 
while  the  people  prayed  outside ;  and  leaf,  and  carefully  secured  in  the 
thus  was  typified  the  intercession  of  ground  with  silver  sockets.  The  drop- 
Christ  in  heaven,  making  His  people's  curtain  was  undoubtedly  fixed  behind 
prayers  on  earth  acceptable.  The  them,  so  that  the  pillars  would  stand 
shewbread  (and,  connected  with  it,  outside  the  ten  ells,  while  a  trifle 
the  drink-offering  of  wine  placed  in  farther  to  the  front  hung  the  orna- 
the  covered  bowls  upon  the  table)  mental  junction  of  the  curtains  of 
represented  under  the  old  covenant  byssus.  In  front  of  the  whole  taber- 
the  same  truths  which  are  set  forth  nacle  an  outer  drop-curtain  of  greater 
by  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  strength,  probably  twofold,  was  hung 
under  the  new. — From  ^''Student's  on  to  five  pillars  of  acacia  wood,  which 
Scripture  History."  were  set  up  across  the  entire  breadth 

297 


CHAP.  IX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS. 


of  the  tabernacle.  It  displayed  the 
same  colours  as  the  internal  cur- 
tain, but  no  embroidered  cherubs  ;  the 
pillars  were  in  other  respects  adorned 
like  the  four  internal  ones,  but  had 
only  brazen  sockets. — Ewald. 

The  Use  of  Veils. — Curtains,  or  veils, 
must  be  studied  in  view  of  their  use, 
and  of  the  sentiments  concerning  them 
in  tent  life.  They  were  in  effect  as 
our  shut  and  locked  doors.  They  re- 
present— 1.  Claim  to  privacy  2.  Hin- 
drance to  admittance,  which  can  be 
only  on  conditions.  3.  And  they  sug- 
gest mystery,  something  purposely 
hidden  from  view. 

Yer.  4.  Types  in  the  Holy  of  Holies. 
— There  was  but  one  object,  the  ark 
of  the  covenant,  a  sacred  chest,  con- 
taining the  two  tables  of  the  law,  the 
cover  of  it  being  called  the  "  mercy- 
seat,"  and  the  cherub  figures  making 
a  sort  of  canopy  over  it.  The  cover 
was  a  plate  of  pure  gold.  This  was 
the  very  throne  'of  Jehovah,  who 
was  therefore  said  to  "  dwell  between 
the  cherubim."  It  was  also  called 
the  "  mercy-seat,"  or  "  propitiatory," 
because  Jehovah  there  revealed  Him- 
self, especially  on  the  great  Day  of 
Atonement,  as  "  God  pardoning  ini- 
quity, transgression,  and  sin."  Nor  was 
it  without  the  profoundest  allusion  to 
the  coming  dispensation  of  the  gospel 
that  God's  throne  of  mercy  covered 
and  hid  the  tables  of  the  law.  The 
attitude  of  the  cherubim  was  significant 
of  the  desire  of  angels  to  learn  the 
gospel  mysteries  that  were  hidden  in 
the  law. 

Contents  of  the  Ark. — "Nothing  is 
more  characteristic  of  the  earliest 
Jahveism,  nor  yet  of  greater  historical 
truth  and  certainty,  than  that  in 
place  of  the  idols  in  which  common 
heathenism  took  delight,  and  of 
certain  artificial  symbols  which  served 
the  same  purpose  for  a  heathenism 
which  was  aiming  at  something 
higher,  it  was  only  the  documents 
of   these   purest  truths,  and  of   these 

298 


contracts,  concluded  as  it  were  for  all 
eternity,  which  acquired  the  most 
precious  value,  and  the  highest 
sanctity,"  by  being  placed  in  the  sacred 
chest. — Ewald. 

Yer.  5.  The  Suggestion  of  the 
Cherubim. — No  actual  knowledge  of 
the/orms  of  the  figures  which  shadowed 
the  mercy- seat  can  be  obtained.  The 
common  Jewish  tradition  is,  that  they 
were  human  figures,  each  having  two 
wings.  They  must  have  been  of  small 
size,  proportioned  to  the  area  of  the 
mercy-seat.  Comparing  the  different 
references  to  form,  in  this  verse,  in 
2  Sam.  xxii.  11  (Ps.  xviii.  10);  Ezek. 
i.,  X. ;  Rev.  iv.,  it  would  appear  that 
the  name  "cherub"  was  applied  to 
various  combinations  of  animal  forms. 
Similar  combinations  were  made  by 
most  ancient  peoples  in  order  to  re- 
present conceivable  combinations  of 
powers,  such  as  are  denied  to  man 
in  his  earthly  state  of  existence.  It 
is  remarkable  that  amongst  the 
Egyptians,  the  Assyrians,  and  the 
Greeks,  as  well  as  the  Hebrews, 
the  creatures  by  very  far  most  fre- 
quently introduced  into  these  composite 
figures  were  man,  the  ox,  the  lion, 
and  the  eagle.  These  are  evidently 
types  of  the  most  important  of 
familiarly  known  classes  of  living 
material  beings.  The  Habbinists  re- 
cognised this  in  the  cherubim  as 
described  by  Ezekiel,  which  they 
regarded  as  representing  the  whole 
creation  engaged  in  the  worship  and 
service  of  God  (Rev.  iv.  9-11,  v.  13). 
It  would  be  in  harmony  with  this  view 
to  suppose  that  the  more  strictly  human 
shape  of  the  cherubim  of  the  mercy- 
seat  represented  the  highest  form  of 
created  intelligence  engaged  in  the 
devout  contemplation  of  the  Divine 
law  of  love  and  justice  (1  Pet.  i.  12). 
They  were  thus  symbols  of  worship 
rendered  by  the  creature  in  the  most 
exalted  condition.  It  is  worthy  of 
notice  that  the  golden  cherubim,  from 
between  which  Jehovah  spoke  to  His 
people,  bore  witness,  by  their  place 
on  the  mercy -seat,   to  His  redeeming 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS.  chap.  ix. 


mercy ;  while  the  cherubim  that  took  tained  in  the  chest.     For  the  cherub 

their   stand   with   the   flaming    sword  signified    in     the    first    instance    the 

at  the  gate  of  Eden,  to  keep  the  way  descent    of    the     Deity,    and     conse- 

of  the  tree  of  life,   witnessed   to    His  quently     the     spot    whither     it     had 

condemnation    of    sin    in    man.       The  descended    and    would    again    descend 

most  perfect  finite  intelligence  seems  perpetually,  and  there  manifest  itself, 

thus    to    be    yielding    assent    to    the  In    this    symbolical     application    the 

Divine  law  in  its  twofold  manifesta-  cherub    was   also   much   utilised   else- 

tion, — Speakers  Commentary.  where — in  the  sacred  tent  and  in  the 

Temple.     But   its   primary   and   most 

The  Offices  of  Cheruhim. — The  special  significant  position  was  over  the  ark 
offices  of  the  cherubic  figures  in  of  the  covenant,  where,  for  artistic 
the  tabernacle  appear  to  have  been,  reasons,  two  were  placed  face  to  face, 
first,  the  watching  and  guarding  of  and  in  this  application  they  indicate, 
the  ark,  and  the  sacred  law  deposited  in  the  first  instance,  how  strict  is 
within  the  ark,  towards  which  they  Jahveh's  watch  and  guard  over  the 
are  represented  as  looking,  and  over  sacred  words  contained  therein.  So 
which  they  spread  their  outstretched  far,  no  doubt,  the  sphynxes  lying 
wings ;  and,  secondly,  to  attend  and  facing  one  another  over  a  sacred 
bear  up  that  mystic  presence  of  shrine  or  sepulchre,  etc.,  are  very 
God  which  appeared  in  the  cloud  of  similar.  There  is  a  remarkable  re- 
glory  over  the  mercy-seat.  When  presentation  of  Garuda  {i.e.  a  cherub) 
the  tabernacle  is  set  up,  the  law  is  as  the  altar  for  the  ancient  Indian 
deposited  in  the  ark,  the  cloud  is  horse- sacrifice,  Ramayana.  But  the 
promised  to  rest  upon  the  covering  of  greatest  resemblance  of  all  is  found 
the  ark,  and,  as  the  cherubim  guard  in  some  lately  discovered  Assyrian 
the  law,  and  the  testimony  of  God,  pictures.  See  Layard. — Ewald. 
so   they   may   be  supposed  reverently 

to  surround -the  throne  of  His  glory,  Cherubim    as     Bej^resemtative     Wor- 

perhaps  they  were  supposed  to  bear  up  shippers. — The   cherubim    were    repre- 

the  throne  of  God  upon  their  wings,  sentatives    of     the    angelic     hierarchy 

and  to  carry  Him  when  He  appeared  worshipping  the  Divine  Majesty,  and 

in  His  glory. — Ibid.  adoring    His   love  to   man   in  Christ, 

and  devoutly  looking   down   into   the 

Cherubim    as    Guardians. — As   this  mysteries  of  the  gospel.     Josejyhus  says 

chest  was  to  have  contents  so  precious,  that  they  were  not  like  any  creatures 

two  cherubim  were   fixed  over   it,    to  ever  seen  on  earth  by  human  eyes,  but 

symbolise  the   fact   that  Jahveh  had,  that  Moses  had  seen  their  prototypes 

as    it   were,    descended  upon    it,    and  near     the     throne     of     God. — Bishop 

eternally    protected    what    was    con-  Wordsworth. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  6—10. 

The  Limitations  of  the  Symbolical. — Since  the  Jewish  Christians  were  tempted 
to  exaggerate  the  value  and  importance  of  the  Mosaic  ceremonial  system, 
because  it  had  been  unquestionably  given  directly  by  God,  the  writer  does  them 
good  service  by  pointing  out  that  it  was  essentially  a  symbolical  system, 
illustrative  of  spiritual  things  by  its  suggestive  and  symbolical  rites  and 
ceremonies.  But  the  symbolical  is  always  limited.  It  is  never  a  thing  itself ; 
it  is  always  the  representation  of  a  thing,  or  the  suggestion  of  a  thing.  When 
once  this  is  gripped,  the  Old  Testament  economy  is  readily  recognised  as  Kmited 
in  sphere,  and  limited  in  time.  This  may  be  opened  up  somewhat  fully  and 
with  present  applications,  because  a  symbolic  system  has  been  allowed  to 
grow   up  in   association   with   Christianity,   which  threatens   to  absorb   men's 

299 


CHAP.  IX  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS, 


attention,  and  take  them  back  from  the  elevations  of  spiritual  religion  to  the 
old  formal  Jewish  ideas  and  standpoints.  Our  attention  will  be  confined  to 
a  general  consideration  of  the  limited  nature  of  a  symbolical  religion. 

I.  The  symbolical  is  temporary. — The  symbols  must  be  in  precise  adaptation 
to  the  thoughts,  ideas,  mental  and  circumstantial  associations  of  a  nation  at 
a  particular  time.  Another  nation,  with  other  associations,  can  do  nothing 
with  the  symbols.  The  nation  itself  will  soon  grow  out  of  them,  look  on  them 
as  ancient  relics,  and  replace  them  with  new  ones.  The  temporary  character 
of  the  Old  Testament  symbols  is  seen  in  the  fact — 1.  That  much  of  the  ceremonial 
system  we  are  now  unable  effectively  to  explain,  because  we  cannot  recover 
the  early  associations  ;  2.  That  much  of  prophetical  and  apocalyptic  Scripture, 
being  based  on  the  early  symbols,  is  closed  to  us,  so  that  we  can  only  with 
uncertainty  guess  its  meaning,  and  oftentimes  have  to  manufacture  a  meaning 
of  our  own.  The  truths  taught  by  the  symbols  remain  as  the  heritage  of 
the  nation  and  the  race  for  ever,  but  the  forms  which  at  a  given  time 
illustrated  the  truths  pass  away,  as  do  our  nursery  books  when  we  have  gained 
the  power  to  deal  with  moral  principles  in  plain  statements. 

II.  The  symbolical  is  materialistic. — It  is  essentially  in  the  range  of  the 
senses.  It  is  the  sight  of  sacrifice  and  ceremony ;  it  is  the  smell  of  incense ; 
it  is  the  work  of  hands  ;  it  is  the  movement  of  body  ;  it  is  change  of  garments ; 
it  is  solemn  service.  It  is  altogether  outward.  But  the  material  is  not  the 
real ;  it  is  only  the  seeming,  the  showing,  of  the  real  which  is  spiritual.  "  The 
things  which  are  not  seen  are  eternal."  True,  man  is  a  dual  being, — a  spirit 
clothed  upon  with  a  body,  in  order  that  he  might  come  into  relations  with  a 
material  world ;  but  the  spirit  is  the  man,  not  the  body.  And  we  must  take 
care  not  to  press  the  interests  of  the  body — which  wants  symbolical  religion 
— so  as  to  stifle  the  cry  of  the  man  himself,  which  is  for  a  spiritual  religion.  So 
long  as  man  finds  he  needs  the  help  of  religious  symbols,  he  is  in  a  low  spiritual 
range.  Or  to  speak  in  the  manner  of  the  passage  before  us  he  is  having 
no  direct  access  to  God  in  the  Most  Holy  Place  of  His  spiritual  presence; 
he  is  only  in  outer  courts,  getting  some  sort  of  access  through  priests,  and 
sacrifices,  and  representative  rites. 

III.  The  sjrmbolical  is  preparatory. — It  has  no  value  in  itself.  Its  value 
lies  in  what  it  leads  to.  It  has  a  stage,  and  a  necessary  stage,  in  an  educative 
process.  It  is  the  "  kinder- gar  ten "  stage  of  the  world's  training  in  religion. 
It  may  be  likened  to  the  parabolic  form  in  which  so  much  of  our  Lord's  teach- 
ing was  given.  The  educative  value  of  the  parabolical,  and  of  the  symbolical, 
are  not  sufiiciently  recognised.  Both  start  and  culture  the  power  of  religious, 
spiritual  thinking.  The  parabolical  wraps  something  up,  and  half  hides  it, 
in  a  word-picture ;  the  symbolical  wraps  something  up,  and  half  hides  it,  in 
some  acted  rite.  In  both  cases  the  little  show  of  something  hidden  arouses 
attention,  wakens  thought,  inquiry,  research,  and  so  both  parabolical  and 
symbolical  become  distinctly  educative  of  spiritual  discernment.  It  is  no  fatal 
objection  to  this  fact,  that  so  often  the  symbolical  is  allowed  to  satisfy  us,  and 
then  our  moral  education  ends  with  it.  The  wrong  use  of  a  thing  affords  no 
proof  that  it  was  never  intended  to  be  used  aright.  The  symbolical  is  only 
used  aright  when  it  is  treated  as  a  preparatory  stage.  To  come  back  on  it  when 
spiritual  levels  have  been  reached  is  altogether  to  mistake  its  mission. 

IV.  The  symbolical  is  suggestive.— But  it  is  manifestly  limited  if  it  points 
to  something  beyond,  and  better  than  itself.  In  this  passage  certain  things  are 
recalled  to  mind.  1.  The  people  might  not  go  into  the  Holy  Place.  That 
was  suggestive.  Because  they  were  sinful,  even  their  tvorship  could  only  be 
presented  to  God  through  mediators,  and^Dy  appointed  ceremonies.  2.  The 
priests  might  not  go  into  the  Holy  of  Holies.     That  was  suggestive.     So  far 

300 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  ix. 


from  the  people  having  direct  access  to  God,  their  representatives,  the  priests, 
had  none.  They  dared  not  go  into  the  immediate  presence  ;  they  dared  not 
take  aside  the  veil.  3.  Only  the  high  priest  might  go  into  the  Holy  of 
Holies  ;  and  he  only  once  a  year,  and  only  on  the  most  solemn  conditions. 
That  was  suggestive  ;  those  conditions  represented  the  spiritual  conditions  which 
were  to  be  met,  not  for  a  nation,  but  for  humanity,  in  the  infinitely  acceptable 
sacrifice,  and  the  living  mediation,  of  the  Son  of  God.   ' 

But  the  limitation  of  the  symbolical  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  its  suggestive- 
ness  is  dependent  on — 1.  Capacity  to  deal  with  it.  We  have  seen  that  one 
nation  cannot  do  with  the  symbolism  of  another,  and  one  age  cannot  do  with  the 
symbolism  of  another ;  but  it  is  also  true,  that  within  a  nation  it  may  be  but 
a  select  few  who  can  get  at  the  meanings  of  the  symbols — the  many  simply 
take  them  as  they  are.  Heathen  customs  are  kept  by  the  thousands  without 
their  attaching  any  meaning  to  them  :  the  few  keep  them  with  understanding 
of  their  inner  significance.  We  have  to  awaken  in  men's  minds  the  interest 
in  truth-symbols,  for  the  sake  of  the  truth  they  symbolise.  2.  Sensitive 
moods.  The  poet  sees  meanings  in  prosaic  things,  because  of  his  poetic  moods. 
The  artist  sees  beauty  in  prosaic  forms,  because  of  his  artistic  moods.  And 
similarly  the  spiritual  mind  finds  and  feels  the  truth  in  symbols,  according  to 
his  sensitive  spiritual  moods.  Then  the  highest  ministerial  work  is  cultivating 
the  spiritual  faculties  of  men. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  6.  Eaithfulness  required  in  the  show,  and  indifference  to  the  every-day 
**  Usual." — "  The  priests  go  in  continu-  sweetness  of  common  relations, 
ally  into  the  first  tabernacle,  accom- 
plishing the  services."  There  is  the  Yqv.1.  The  Condition  of  the  Sprinkled 
constant  danger  of  supreme  interest  Blood. — The  significance  of  the  sprink- 
in  the  unusual  taking  off  men's  interest  ling  of  the  blood  is  not  generally  ap- 
from  the  usual  and  the  commonplace.  prehended.  Attention  is  so  exclusively 
Attention  is  fixed  on  the  sublime  given  to  the  sacrifice,  as  the  burning 
ceremonies  in  which,  occasionally,  the  of  the  victim,  or  parts  of  the  victim, 
high  priest  officiated  ;  and  so  attention  that  attention  is  diverted  from  what 
is  taken  from  the  importance,  and  the  was  the  very  essence  of  the  sacrifice, 
significance,  of  those  daily  ministries  which  was  taking  the  victim's  blood, 
which  bore  so  close  a  relation  to  the  which  was  its  life^  and  offering  that 
daily  religious  life  and  thought  and  life  to  God,  by  the  sprinkling  of  the 
feeling  of  the  people.  And  so  it  always  blood  upon  the  altar.  To  burn  a 
is  with  frail  man.  He  delights  in  sacrifice  was  to  give  a  body  to  God, 
the  astonishing,  but  wearies  with  the  and  it  typified  man's  devotion  of  his 
ordinary.  But  the  ordinary,  and  not  body  and  powers  and  relations  to  God. 
the  astonishing,  is  man's  real  life,  for  But  to  sprinkle  the  blood  was  to  give 
which  he  needs  upholding  grace.  a  life  to  God,  and  it  typified  man's  soul- 
Illustrate  from — 1.  Our  effort  to  meet  surrender,  the  gift  of  himself  to  God. 
times  of  great  affliction,  our  failure  to  When  this  is  rightly  apprehended,  the 
meet  daily  worries.  2.  Our  response  sprinkling  of  the  blood  is  seen  to  be 
to  the  sacredness  of  Sunday,  our  failure  the  very  essence  of  the  old  sacrifice,  and 
to  respond  to  the  sacredness  of  the  to  carry  its  deepest  meaning.  Ewald 
Christian  weekday.  3.  Our  close  suggests  fresh  lines  of  thought  in 
attention  in  times  of  "  missions  "  and  relation  to  this  intensely  interesting, 
"  revival  services,"  our  easy  neglect  of  but  unfamiliar,  subject.  In  the  spiritual 
the  usual  means  of  grace.  4.  Our  antitype  of  the  sprinkled  blood  may  be 
concern  to  culture  graces  that  make  a  found  the  most  satisfactory  settings  of 

501 


CHAP.    IX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


our  spiritual  Redeemer's  atonement 
work.  Ewald  says :  "  Under  any 
circumstances  the  sacerdotal  function 
commenced  with  the  slaughter,  in  so  far 
that  the  priest  caught  the  fresh  blood 
with  the  sacrificial  bowls,  in  order  to 
employ  it,  while  it  was  yet  warm,  in 
that  usage  which  formed  the  essential 
kerjiel  of  the  whole  sacred  rite.  In 
later  times,  as  we  know  for  certain, 
the  inferior  priests  caught  the  blood, 
and  handed  it  over  to  a  sacrificial 
priest  to  sprinkle  it.  The  sprinkling 
of  the  blood  was  itself  the  most  solemn 
moment :  in  ordinary  cases  the  priest 
sprinkled  it  only  on  the  corners,  and 
the  sides,  and  the  foot  of  the  altar,  but 
all  round  the  latter ;  just  as  in  general 
the  ancient  custom  required  on  the 
most  solemn  occasions  the  party  to  go 
round  the  altar,  in  a  circle,  praying, 
singing,  and  otherwise  fervently 
soliciting  the  divinity.  What  the 
priest  said  while  going  round  the  altar 
to  sprinkle  it  with  the  most  sacred 
element  of  the  sacrifice,  how  he  suppli- 
cated thereby  the  Divine  grace  for  the 
sacrificer,  and  how  he  announced  it, 
we  no  longer  can  tell  in  detail,  but  that 
it  did  take  place  in  this  way  there  can 
be  no  doubt.  A  stalk  of  the  shrub 
hyssop  (tsop)  was,  in  accordance  with 
ancient  custom,  used  for  the  sprinkling, 
one  end  of  it  being  dipped  in  the  blood. 
This  wood  must  once  in  early  times 
have  passed  for  pure  and  cleansing, 
just  as  among  the  Hindoos  and  Persians 
the  soma  (homa)  alone  is  used  as  a 
sacrificial  drink  ;  and  only  by  means  of 
this  instrument  did  it  seem  possible  to 
complete  properly  the  cleansing  atone- 
ment. It  was  in  the  sprinkling  of  the 
blood,  the  proper  sacrament  of  sacrifice, 
that  the  distinction  between  the  guilt - 
offering,  and  the  expiatory  offering  in 
the  narrow  sense,  came  most  clearly  to 
the  front ;  and  it  is  easy  to  understand 
why  it  would  reveal  itself  most  plainly 
there.  As  it  was  right  that  the  blood 
of  an  expiatory  offering  for  public 
transgression  (as  we  may  term  it  for 
the  sake  of  brevity)  should  be  made  far 
more  conspicuous  to  eyes  and  sense,  so 
it  was  sprinkled  on  an  elevated  place, 
or    even     on    one   which   was    extra- 

302 


ordinarily  sacred.  The  way,  too,  in 
which  this  was  done  was  marked  by 
three  stages.  If  the  atonement  was 
made  for  an  ordinary  man  or  for  a 
prince,  the  priest  sprinkled  the  blood 
against  the  high-towering  horns  of  the 
outer  altar,  and  poured  the  remainder 
as  usual  out  at  its  base ;  if  it  was 
made  for  the  community  or  for  the 
high  priest,  some  of  the  blood  was 
seven  times  sprinkled  against  the  veil 
of  the  Holy  of  Holies,  then  some  more 
against  the  horns  of  the  inner  altar, 
and  only  what  was  then  left  was  poured 
out  as  usual  at  the  base  of  the  outer 
altar.  The  third  and  highest  stage  of 
the  expiation  was  adopted  on  the  yearly 
Day  of  Atonement.  On  the  other  hand, 
in  the  case  of  guilt -offering,  no  reason 
existed  for  adopting  any  unusual  mode  of 
sprinkling  the  blood.  It  was  sprinkled 
just  as  in  other  cases  round  the  sides 
and  foot  of  the  outer  altar.  But  as 
soon  as  this  most  sacred  ceremony  of 
the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  was  com- 
pleted, then,  according  to  the  ancient 
belief,  the  impurity  and  guilt  were 
already  shaken  off  from  the  object  to 
which  they  had  clung.  It  seemed  as 
though  the  drops  of  blood,  sprinkled 
by  the  mighty  hand  of  One  who  was 
pure,  had  called  them  up,  and  irresist- 
ibly drawn  them  forth ;  for  thus  we 
must  plainly  interpret  this  procedure  in 
accordance  with  the  feeling  of  antiquity. 
Yet  shaken  off  as  they  were,  they  only 
passed  in  the  first  instance,  according 
to  the  same  view,  into  that  body 
whose  blood  had  so  irresistibly  driven 
them  forth  (as  well  as  into  the  ofiiciat- 
ing  priest).  The  rest  of  this  body, 
therefore,  was  now  deemed  to  have 
become  in  its  turn  unclean,  and  was 
regarded  with  all  the  dread  with  which 
anything  that  was  unclean  before  God 
was  looked  upon,  nay,  even  with  yet 
stronger  dread ;  it  was  just  here  that 
the  dark  side  of  this  whole  order  of 
sacrifices  was  felt  most  keenly.  Con- 
sequently all  the  remainder  of  the  body, 
just  as  it  was,  together  with  the  dung, 
was  burned  far  away  from  the  sanc- 
tuary at  some  common,  but  in  other 
respects  clean,  spot  (outside  of  the  camp 
or  city),  as  though  it  was  an  object  of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.    IX. 


horror,  which  covild  only   be   disposed 
of  c'lnd  annihilated  in  this  way." 

Ver.  8.  Fo^"  a  While  no  Open  Way  to 
God. — "The  way  into  the  Holy  Place 
hath  not  yet  been  made  manifest." 
The  old  tabernacle  and  its  limitations 
were  pictnre-tc.ichings  of  spiritual 
conditions  and  relations.  They  taught 
the  people  God's  nearness  to  them,  but 
made  them  feel  that  there  was  some- 
thing which  prevented  the  nearness 
from  being  closeness ;  which  necessi- 
tated the  raising  of  a  thin  and  slight, 
but  effective,  barrier ;  which  made 
impossible  that  sort  of  free  access  to 
God  which  Adam  enjoyed  in  Paradise, 
and  which  should  have  been  man's 
birthright.  That  hindrance  was  not 
something  placed  by  God,  in  the  exer- 
cise of  His  Divine  sovereignty.  It  was 
a  gracious  and  necessary  response  of 
God  to  the  condition  in  which  man  had 
placed  himself.  It  could  be  no  kindness 
in  an  earthly  father  to  keep  smiling  on 
a  child  while  that  child  was  wayward 
and  wilful.  The  cherubim  were  put 
at  the  gates  of  Eden  in  considerate 
love.  The  veils  hid  from  the  people 
the  Holy  Place,  and  from  the  priests 
the  Holy  of  Holies,  in  considerate  love. 
God  must  make  His  relation  to  man's 
wilfulness  apparent ;  and  man  must 
be  made  symbolically  and  representa- 
tively right,  as  a  beginning  of  his 
becoming  really  right,  before  an  open 
way  to  God  could  be  made. 

Yer.  9.  Conscience  under  the  Old 
Covenant. — "  Cannot,  as  touching  the 
conscience,  make  the  worshipper  per- 
fect." If  we  speak  precisely  concern- 
ing conscience,  we  keep  its  sphere  to 
that  which  belongs  to  God — God's  will, 
God's  standard,  God's  revelation.  It 
is  not  perhaps  strictly  correct  to  state 
it  in  this  way,  but  it  helps  by  sug- 
gesting an  important  distinction — 
Conscience  is  concerned  only  with  our 
idea  of  what  is  absolutely  right,  cr 
with  laws,  not  with  rules.  Men  make 
a  slavery  of  the  moral  life  when  they 
bring  conscience  into  the  spheres  of 
rule,     and     custom,     and     rite,     and 


etiquette.  It  follows  from  this,  that 
any  amount  of  attention  to  rules  and 
rites  will  fail  to  satisfy  the  conscience 
as  the  witness  in  us  to  what  is 
absolutely  right — right  in  the  sight 
of  God.  But  in  moral  education  it 
seems  that  conscience  of  the  eternally 
right  is  trained  through  cultivating 
conscience  in  relation  to  formal  rules. 
It  is  so  in  the  case  of  the  Jews  ;  it  is 
so  in  the  case  of  our  children  The 
Jew's  conscience  of  the  clean  and 
unclean  was  educating  him  to  a 
conscience  of  absolute  right  before 
God. 

Ver.  10.  Divers  Washings. — The  re- 
ligious rites  of  the  Mosaic  ceremonial 
must  have  involved  the  use  of  enor- 
mous quantities  of  water ;  and  it  has 
always  been  found  difficult  to  explain 
how  the  water  necessary  for  ablutions 
could  have  been  obtained  during  the 
forty  years'  wandering  in  the  wilder- 
ness. It  is  just  possible  that,  as  the 
following  facts  suggest,  their  ablutions 
were  performed  during  the  journey  by 
other  means  than  that  of  water.  An 
old  traveller  relates  that  the  Arabs, 
if  they  cannot  come  by  any  water, 
then  they  must  wipe  [themselves]  as 
clean  as  they  can,  till  water  may 
conveniently  be  had ;  or  else  it  suffices 
to  take  Abdees  [purification]  upon  a 
stone,  which  I  call  an  imaginary 
Abdees,  i.e.  to  smooth  their  hands 
over  a  stone  two  or  three  times,  and 
rub  them  one  with  the  other,  as  if 
they  were  washing  with  water — the 
like  Abdees  sufficeth  when  any  are 
sickly,  so  that  water  might  endanger 
their  life — and  after  they  have  so 
wiped,  it  is  guise^  i.e.  lawful,  for 
them  to  do  as  they  would  had  their 
purification  been  really  done  by  water. 
In  a  Mohammedan  treatise  on  prayer 
it  is  said,  "  In  case  water  is  not  to  be 
had,  that  defect  may  be  supplied  by 
earth,  a  stone,  or  any  product  of  the 
earth."  It  has  been  asserted  that 
sand  was  frequently  used  for  the  same 
purpose,  and  even  poured  over  the 
hands  like  water.  It  is  possible  that 
thus,    or    in    some   similar   way,    the 

303 


CHAP.   IX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


Israelites  in  the  desert  purified  them- 
selves when  water  was  scarce.  It  has 
also  been  suggested  that  it  might  have 
been  for  a  similar  purpose  that 
Naaman  the  Syrian  took  two  mules' 
loads  of  earth  back  with  him  from 
Palestine.  He  might  have  taken 
Jordan  water,  but  that  would  not  last. 
The  earth,  however,  would  serve  the 
same  purpose  for  many  years  (2  Kings 
v.  17).  In  the  old  tabernacle  the 
lowest  grade  of  purification  demanded 
a  washing  of  the  body  and  changing 
of  the  clothes,  as  well  as  the  removal 
of  any  objects  of  heathen  supersti- 
tion which  might  be  about.  For  the 
priests  on  duty  purifications  wholly 
special  to  themselves  were  necessary; 
they  must,  e.g.,  bathe  with  hands  and 
feet,  i.e.  with  the  whole  body,  in  the 
fore-court  of  the  sanctuary,  when  they 
desired  to  enter  the  sanctuary,  or 
approach  the  altar. 

Religion  an  Imposition,  and  Re- 
ligion a  Willing  Service. — *'  Imposed 
until  a  time  of  reformation."  Two 
kinds  of  religion  are  possible  to  the 
moral  beings  which  God  has  made. 
And  the  two  kinds  are  represented  in 
every  age  and  every  land — just  as 
truly  represented  in  our  day  as  in 
any  other.  Man's  religion  may  be 
the  obedience  of  rules  imposed  by  a 
competent  and  recognised  authority. 
Man's  religion  may  be  the  natural 
and  free  expression  of  his  own  good 
will,  swayed  by  the  persuasions  of  the 
Divine  love.  It  is  manifest  that  the 
second  form  of  religion  is  altogether  a 
higher  form  than  the  first.  It  is  the 
religion  of  a  cultured  being,  who  has 
gained  control  of  himself,  and  is,  in  a 


sense,  become  an  independent  being — 
a  man  indeed.  But  the  second  form 
of  religion  can  never  come  first  in 
the  case  of  man.  "First  that  which 
is  natural,  afterward  that  which  is 
spiritual,"  is  the  ever-working  and 
all-round  law  for  humanity.  A  moral 
education  begins  with  rules  imposed. 
A  man's  religion  begins  with  things 
to  be  done  in  response  to  authority. 
Only  in  an  advanced  time,  a  "time  of 
reformation,"  can  a  man  manage  his 
own  religion.  The  mistake  is  made 
when  men  are  content  to  stop  with 
a  religion  of  impositions.  1.  This  the 
Jewish  Christians  were  tempted  to  do, 
in  the  first  Christian  age.  They  could 
not  quite  give  up,  indeed  they  were 
sorely  tempted  to  fall  back  upon,  the 
impositional  religion  of  Judaism,  and 
even  upon  that  religion  as  exaggerated 
by  Rabbinism.  2.  This  ritual  re- 
hgions,  in  all  the  Christian  ages,  have 
tempted  men  to  do.  For  the  satisfac- 
tion of  undeveloped  spiritual  men  and 
women,  claims  of  authority  to  impose 
opinions,  duties,  and  rites  have  been 
made  on  behalf  of  a  Church,  or  of 
particular  orders  of  men  ;  and  many 
have  been,  and  are  to-day,  kept  in 
the  first  and  child  stages  of  religion. 
They  belong  to  Judaism ;  they  are  not 
lifted  into  the  free  life  of  Christianity. 
3.  But  it  is  necessary  to  add  that,  since 
our  modern  "  Time  of  the  Reforma- 
tion," Protestant  Christians  have  been 
subject  to  the  same  peril.  Careful 
thinking  will  reveal  the  fact,  that  the 
verbal  inspiration  theory  of  the  Bible 
has  made  it,  practically,  to  thousands 
of  Christians  the  text-book  of  a  merely 
impositional  religion. 


MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  11—17. 

The  High  Priest  of  Spiritual  Things. — The  greater  involves  the  less.  If  it  can 
be  shown  that  Christ  has  gained  for  a  man  a  right  of  free  personal  access  to 
God  Himself,  it  is  involved  that  He  has  gained  for  him  the  right  to  offer  his 
worship  himself.  If  He  has  opened  the  way  into  the  Holy  of  Holies,  He  must 
have  opened  the  way  into  the  Holy  Place.  This  explains  why  the  writer  carries 
his  reference  to  the  Holy  Place  no  further,  but  fixes  attention  on  the  Most 
Holy.  Recall  the  symbolical  ceremonies  of  the  Day  of  Atonement.  1.  The 
attention   of   the  priest  to  personal  cleanliness  and  suitable  clothing.     2.  The 

304 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS.  chap.  ix. 


sacrificial  ceremonies  by  means  of  which  he  gained  personal  acceptance  with 
God,  before  undertaking  to  represent  anybody  else.  3.  The  precise  acts  asso- 
ciated with  his  passing,  as  standing  for  the  people,  into  the  presence  of  Jehovah. 
(1)  Taking  the  golden  censer  out ;  (2)  putting  in  it  live  coals  ;  (3)  dropping  on 
the  coals  the  handful  of  incense,  just  as  he  took  the  veil  aside  ;  (4)  sprinkling  the 
blood  of  the  goat  on  the  mercy-seat ;  (5)  waiting,  anxiously  watching  for,  the  sign 
of  Divine  acceptance;  (6)  coming  forth  to  declare  unto  the  people  the  Divine 
forgiveness  and  favour.  But  notice  that,  when  he  came  forth,  he  closed  the  veil 
behind  him,  and  it  remained  closed  for  another  year.  Now  see  resemblances 
and  differences  between  the  work  of  the  old  high  priest  of  symbols,  and  the  new 
High  Priest  of  spiritual  realities. 

I.  Christ,  as  High  Priest,  entered  the  spiritual  Holy  of  Holies. — The  spiritual 
counterpart  of  that  material  chamber.  By  the  spiritual  presence  of  God  we 
mean  that  presence  which  we,  as  spirits,  may  realise  in  a  spiritual  way.  Direct 
access  of  spirit  to  spirit.  In  using  the  term  "  heavenly,"  there  is  some  danger  of 
our  making  material  figures  in  our  minds  of  the  eternal  abode  of  the  Eternal.  God 
is  a  spirit.  His  heaven  is  spiritual.  And  it  is  the  loss  of  free  spiritual  access 
to  the  spiritual  God  which  is  man's  supremo  loss ;  and  it  is  that  lost  access  which 
Christ  set  Himself  to  restore.  Man's  humanity,  as  the  medium  of  his  sin,  is 
the  veil  which  shuts  him  out  of  the  spiritual  Holy  of  Holies,  even  as  the  gates 
and  the  cherubim  shut  our  first  parents  out  of  Eden.  Christ  entered  through 
the  veil,  "  His  flesh,"  by  winning  His  humanity  wholly  for  God,  and  because  of 
His  sinlessness  H  e  could  go  right  in  ;  there  was  no  hindering  veil  of  a  sinful  body. 

II.  Christ,  as  High  Priest,  took  in  His  own  spiritual  blood. — The  figure  is 
taken  from  the  blood  of  the  goat  which  the  high  priest  took  in,  but  we  must 
see  the  spiritual  thing  which  the  figure  symbolised.  And  the  blood  that  Jesus 
took  was  His  own  life.  "The  blood  is  the  life."  In  ver.  14  it  is  precisely 
explained  for  us.  He  "  offered  Himself  without  spot  to  God."  He  had  fully 
won  His  body  and  His  earthly  life  for  God.  And  now  He  gave  Himself, — 
sinless  body,  obedient  will,  devoted  self — Priest  and  sacrifice  :  Himself,  as  it 
were,  the  old  high  priest ;  and  Himself,  as  it  were,  the  blood  which  the  old 
high  priest  took. 

III.  Christ,  as  High  Priest,  gained  spiritual  rights  and  privileges  for  us. — 
1.  Bights  of  free,  open,  permanent  access  to  God.  Our  being  human,  and 
having  these  sin-experienced  human  bodies,  no  longer  makes  a  veil  hiding  God 
away,  for  any  of  us  whose  wills  are  renewed  and  made  as  Christ's.  His  repre- 
sentative body-triumph  stands  for  us ;  and  the  veil  is  gone  for  us,  as  it  was  for 
Him,  and  we  have  "  boldness  of  access."  2.  Privileges  of  cleansed  consciences. 
Belief  from  that  sense  of  constraint  to  sin  which  distresses  every  man  so  long  as 
his  will  is  unrenewed.  Jewish  ceremonies  brought  removal  of  certain  penalties 
of  sins.  Christ  by  His  sacrifice  and  mediation  brings  deliverance  from  the 
sinfulness  which  works  out  into  sins.  3.  Privileges  and  rights  of  a  new  and 
spiritual  covenant ;  which  pledges,  on  God's  part,  spiritual  power  for  maintaining 
spiritual  life ;  and,  on  man's  part,  spiritual  service,  the  constant  holding  of 
himself  as  a  "  living  sacrifice  "  unto  God.  And  these  rights  and  privileges  are 
kept  up  for  us  by  the  abiding  presence  of  our  High  Priest  in  the  heavenly 
Holy  of  Holies,  where  He  is  with  His  blood,  Himself,  fully  surrendered  to 
God  in  our  name,  and  as  our  pledge. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  11.  The  Greater  Tabernacle. —  "Let  them  make  Me  a  sanctuary 
The  tabernacle  of  old  was  the  dwelling  where  I  may  dwell  among  them " ; 
of  God  in   the  midst  of  His  people :      "I  wiU  set  My  tabernacle  among  you 

X  305 


CHAP.   IX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


and  My  soul  shall  not  abhor  you.  And 
I  will  walk  among  you,  and  will  be 
your  God,  and  ye  shall  be  My  people  " 
(Exod.  XXV.  8;  Lev.  xxvi.  11,  12). 
Whatever  other  thoughts,  therefore, 
the  tabernacle  may  have  suggested, 
this  was  its  first  and  most  important 
aspect ;  and  it  need  only  further  be 
observed  that,  when  it  is  spoken  of  as 
the  dwelling-place  of  God,  it  is  of  God, 
not  in  His  abstract  Being,  but  as  He 
makes  Himself  known  to,  as  He  comes 
into  contact  with,  us.  It  is  not  a 
model  upon  a  small  scale  of  the  universe, 
as  if  He  of  whom  Solomon  at  the 
dedication  of  the  Temple  sublimely  said, 
"  Behold,  the  heaven  and  heaven  of 
heavens  cannot  contain  Thee,"  desired 
an  earthly  representation  of  His 
boundless  abode.  We  have  to  do  with 
God  in  the  relation  in  which  He  stands 
to  man.  Of  that  relation  as  it  existed 
toward  Israel  the  ctktjvi^  was  a  type. 
Yet,  further,  the  other  name  by  which 
the  structure  was  known,  and  which 
is  even  more  frequently  given  it  than 
that  of  tabernacle,  has  to  be  taken 
into  account.  It  was  the  "  tent  of 
meeting,"  words  unhappily  rendered  in 
the  A.Y.,  though  corrected  in  the 
R.Y.,  the  "tabernacle  of  the  congre- 
gation " ;  and  it  received  this  name 
because  there  God  met  with  Israel. 
'*  This,"  it  is  said,  *'  shall  be  a  continual 
burnt -offering  throughout  your  genera- 
tions at  the  door  of  the  tent  of  meeting 
before  the  Lord,  where  I  will  meet 
you,  to  speak  there  unto  thee.  And 
there  will  I  meet  with  the  children 
of  Israel "  (Exod.  xxix.  42,  43).  This, 
then,  was  the  meaning  of  the  taber- 
nacle. It  was  the  place  in  which  God 
dwelt,  and  at  which  He  met  with  His 
people,  and  they  with  Him.  It  had 
relation  to  the  Almighty,  not  as  the 
Ruler  of  the  universe,  but  as  One  who 
desired  to  bring  His  children  nearer  to 
Himself,  tha£  they  might  be  sanctified 
for  His  service,  and  be  made  to  rejoice 
in  His  favour.  It  spoke  to  man,  not 
as  a  creature  to  be  bowed  down  beneath 
the  thought  of  infinite  power,  but  to  be 
elevated  to  communion  and  fellowship 
with  that  holy  yet  merciful  Being  who 

306 


had  formed  him  to  show  forth  His 
praise,  and  to  find  in  doing  so  his  true 
dignity  and  joy.  If  this  was  the 
meaning  of  the  tabernacle  to  Israel, 
there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  what  is 
expressed  by  the  word  when  filled  with 
Christian  thought.  Christ  Himself 
is  the  Christian  tabernacle.  In  Him 
the  Father  dwells  with  men,  meets 
with  them,  and  makes  Himself  in  ever- 
increasing  measure  known  to  them. 
"  He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the 
Father  "  ;  "If  ye  had  known  Me,  ye 
should  have  known  My  Father  also" 
(John  xiv.  9,  viii.  19).  It  ought  to  be 
unnecessary  to  remind  the  reader  that 
this  idea  of  meeting  God,  of  His 
drawing  nigh  on  His  side  to  us,  and 
of  our  drawing  nigh  to  Him,  is  the 
distinguishing  feature  of  the  Christian 
dispensation,  and  that  it  is  dwelt  upon 
with  remarkable  frequency  and  em- 
phasis in  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews. 
Putting  these  considerations  together, 
we  appear  to  be  justified  in  coming  to 
the  conclusion  that  by  "  the  greater 
and  more  perfect  tabernacle  "  we  are 
to  understand  the  human  nature  of 
our  Lord,  or  our  Lord  in  His  incarnate 
state  ;  and  the  only  question  comes  to 
be,  whether  we  are  to  think  simply  of 
His  humanity,  as  it  was  on  earth,  or 
(with  Hofmann)  of  that  humanity  as 
it  exists  in  its  glorified  state  in  heaven. 
There  is  little  room  for  hesitation  as  to 
the  answer.  That  the  writer  of  this 
epistle  could  never  have  spoken  of  the 
earthly  body  of  Christ  as  "  not  made 
with  hands — that  is  to  say,  not  of  this 
creation  " — is  clear  from  the  statement 
of  chap.  X.  20,  where  he  refers  to  "  the 
new  and  living  way  which  Jesus  has 
dedicated  for  us  through  the  veil — 
that  is  to  say.  His  flesh" — words 
founded  upon  that  rending  asunder  of 
the  veil  of  the  Temple  at  the  Crucifixion, 
by  which  the  veil  was  not  so  much 
opened  as  abrogated  and  thrown  aside — 
words  also  in  which  it  is  not  without 
interest  to  notice  that  the  human 
name  "  Jesus "  is  used,  not,  as  now, 
the  higher  name  "  Christ."  The 
"  flesh "  of  our  Lord,  then,  i.e.  His 
humanity  under  its  earthly  conditions 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   IX. 


and  limitations,  was  in  like  manner 
something,  so  far  at  least  as  these  con- 
ditions were  concerned,  which  needed 
to  be  thrown  aside,  something  not 
spiritual,  heavenly,  and  unlimited,  and 
of  which  we  give  a  true  description 
when  we  say  that  it  was  "  of  this 
creation."  It  was  a  body  of  flesh,  and 
what  the  writer  understands  by  that 
word  we  see  from  his  use,  in  chap.  vii.  1 6, 
of  the  word  aapKLvos,  made  of  flesh  (not 
aapKLKo^,  fleshly),  when  he  employs  it 
to  express  the  character  of  that  Old 
Testament  dispensation  which  had 
been  superseded  by  the  higher,  to  which 
Christ  belonged.  Nor  is  this  all :  for 
throughout  his  epistle  the  redeeming 
work  of  our  Lord  is  conceived  of  as 
that  not  of  an  earthly,  but  of  a  heavenly 
High  Priest,  and  the  writer  would 
certainly  not  depart  from  that  con- 
ception at  the  moment  when  he  is 
contrasting  the  very  essence  of  Christ's 
work  with  that  of  the  high  priest  of 
Israel.  Once  admit,  therefore,  that 
the  "  greater  and  more  perfect  taber- 
nacle, not  made  with  hands — that  is 
to  say,  not  of  this  creation  " — is  the 
incarnate  Lord,  and  it  is  impossible  to 
pause  there.  We  must  also  admit  that 
it  is  that  Lord  in  His  human  nature 
exalted  and  glorified.  In  the  nature 
which  He  possessed,  when  He  returned, 
after  His  resurrection  and  ascension, 
to  His  Father  in  heaven.  He  carries 
out  the  great  work  of  bringing  God 
and  man  into  perfect  union  and  com- 
munion with  one  another.  In  the 
glorified  Redeemer  God  and  man  have 
their  true  and  everlasting  meeting- 
place. — Pro/*.  W.  Milligan. 

Ver.  14.  The  Offering  of  Himselj. — 
Our  Lord's  death  was  a  voluntary  offer- 
ing, a  sacrifice,  a  sacrifice  of  Himself. 
But  the  word  "  sacrifice,"  and  the 
associations  of  the  text,  bring  up  before 
us  the  Jewish  tabernacle  and  ritual. 
We  see  the  smoking  altars,  the  slain 
beasts,  the  waiting  worshippers.  And 
it  must  be  with  the  imagery  of  these 
altar  forms  in  our  minds  that  we 
approach  the  consideration  of  the  "  self- 
offering  "  of  Christ.     But  it  is  evident 


that  our  Lord's  death  was  not  a  sacri- 
fice after  the  precise  Jewish  pattern. 
We  visit  Calvary  on  that  ever-memor 
able  day,  and  we  say.  Where  is  the 
Temple  ?  Where  is  the  altar  ?  Where 
are  the  ofliciating  priests?  Where  is 
the  flowing  blood  ?  Where  is  the  float- 
ing incense  ?  We  can  find  none  of 
them.  In  the  outward  seeming  there 
is  no  sacrifice  here.  That  prsetorium, 
this  knoll,  are  no  temples.  -  That  howl- 
ing mob  was  no  devout  company  of 
worshippers.  Pilate  was  no  priest. 
The  cross  is  no  altar.  At  first  we  are 
bewildered,  and  it  is  only  as  we  search 
deeper  that  we  recover  our  confidence, 
and  find  that  within  this  strange 
appearance  there  is  the  great  spiritual 
reality  of  sacrifice.  In  expecting  Christ's 
sacrifice  to  answer  precisely  to  the 
Jewish  model  we  have  mistaken  the 
proper  relations  of  "  type  "  and  "  anti- 
type." A  type  is  a  representation, 
taking  eome  material  form,  for  an 
earlier  and  undeveloped  age,  of  some 
spiritual  thing,  which  is  to  be  after- 
wards realised  as  antitpye.  The  type 
and  antitype  cannot  be  of  the  same 
material  and  form.  A  picture  may  be 
the  type  of  a  man,  but  the  man  differs 
from  the  picture.  Earth  is  the  type 
of  heaven,  but  we  may  not  therefore 
conclude  that  in  everything  heaven  is 
like  es  rth  ;  it  is  the  spiritual  realisation 
of  the  type.  Properly  a  type  is  the 
representation,  in  other  forms  and 
modes,  of  some  spiritual  reality  which 
either  cannot  get  outward  expression 
at  all,  or  only  in  modes  which  could 
not  be  understood  when  the  type  was 
given.  In  treating  of  Christ's  sacrifice 
as  the  antitype  to  which  the  Jewish 
typical  sacrifices  pointed,  we  have  not 
perhaps  made  due  account  of  this  fact : 
the  sacrifice  of  Judaism  was  a  pictured 
material  representation ;  the  sacrifice 
of  Christ  is  an  inward  spiritual  reality. 
The  type  was  a  kind  of  drama,  wrought 
out  with  scenes  and  representative 
figures.  The  antitype  was  the  very 
life-story  itself,  wrought  out  in  mental 
agony,  and  soul -struggling  ;  and  ending 
in  sublime  moral  victory.  We  ought 
not,   therefore,   to    seek    any    precise 

307 


CHAP.   IX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


reproduction  of  the  Jewish  altar-forms 
in  connection  with  the  antitypical  and 
spiritual  sacrifice  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 

I.  Christ's  offering  was  a  sacrifice. 
— The  pious  Jew  sought  to  offer  a 
spiritual  sacrifice  by  means  of  the 
victim  he  brought  in  accordance  with 
Mosaic  rules.  And  though  the  days 
of  Judaism  are  long  past,  and  no  altars 
smoke  with  burning  victims  now,  it  is 
as  possible  as  it  ever  was  for  true 
hearts  to  make  oblation  of  themselves 
to  God;  and  when  we  say  that  the 
death  of  Christ  was  a  sacrifice,  we 
mean  that  it  was  such  a  sacrifice  as 
a  man  may  make,  not  merely  such  a 
special  and  peculiar  sacrifice  as  only  a 
Jew  may  make.  As  the  Jew  brought 
his  very  costliest  and  best,  and  sur- 
rendered it  wholly  to  God  in  testimony 
that  he  held  all  he  was  and  all  he 
bad  as  God's  and  for  Him,  so  Christ 
brought  Himself,  He  had  nothing,  so 
He  brought  all  He  was,  and  surrendered 
it  wholly,  "a  living  sacrifice " — devoted 
Himself  to  the  obedience  of  the  will  of 
God. 

II.  Christ's  offering  was  a  self- 
sacrifice. — The  only  true  sacrifice  is 
se^-sacrifice.  No  gift  reaches  the 
dignity  of  a  sacrifice  until,  to  give  it, 
a  man  has  deprived  himself,  given  up 
his  own  will  and  pleasure.  Every 
human  gift  is  measured  by  the  self- 
sacrifice  in  it.  No  redemptions  can 
ever  come  out  of  the  mere  giving  of 
things.  But  even  upon  God  a  kind  of 
power  may  be  gained  by  self-sacrifice. 
Mere  gifts  of  things  may  become  accept- 
able, and  even  propitiatory,  when  they 
serve  to  express  devotion  and  self- 
sacrifice.  If  a  man  can  suffer  for  God, 
can  give  up  for  God,  can  die  for  God, 
putting  his  inmost  soul  to  agony  in 
order  to  do  the  will  and  accomplish 
the  purpose  of  God,  he  gains,  as  it 
were,  a  kind  of  holy  moral  power  with 
God.  And  how  will  this  kind  of  power 
be  increased  when  it  is  the  self-sacrifice 
of  the  only  begotten  Son,  for  the  sake 
of  the  honour  of  the  eternal  Father  ? 

III.  Christ's  offering  was  a  spotless 
self-sacrifice. — In  the  preceding  chap- 
ter the  sinlessness  of  Christ  has  been 

308 


treated.  The  sacrifices  of  Judaism  had 
to  be  "  without  blemish."  A  perfect 
service  God  demands  of  every  creature 
He  has  made.  Not  an  absolutely, 
only  a  relatively,  perfect  service.  From 
a  man  God  asks  the  full  devotion  and 
sacrifice  of  all  that  belongs  to  his  man- 
hood. The  claim  is  just  and  good ; 
but  man,  by  his  wilfulness,  has  ren- 
dered himself  incapable  of  meeting  it. 
Jesus  Christ,  as  man,  brings  the  proof 
that  man  can  meet  God's  claim.  He 
lifts  up  into  view  the  great  law  of  our 
life,  and  shows  it  to  be  "  holy,  and  just, 
and  good."  He  submitted  to  human 
conditions,  and  in  them  worked  out  a 
perfect  obedience,  presenting  himself 
to  God  as  a  man  without  spot.  In 
Him  God  accepted  what  He  had  vainly 
sought  for  through  all  the  generations 
of  humanity — the  perfect,  spotless  obe- 
dience and  service  of  a  man.  The 
perfectness  of  Christ's  sacrifice  was  the 
ennobling  of  the  human  race.  It  lifted 
its  burden,  and  gave  it  hope.  To  the 
view  of  God  it  was  a  salvation  for  the 
race. 

IV.  Christ's  offering  was  a  spotless 
self-sacrifice  on  behalf  of  others. — 
Christ  is  our  Representative,  our  Vicar. 
As  Adam  dealt  with  God  for  the 
human  race,  not  instead  of  it,  in  the 
first  great  moral  trial,  carrying  weak- 
nesses and  moral  evils  to  the  race  in 
his  failure,  so  Christ,  as  the  second 
Adam,  dealt  with  God  for  the  race  in 
the  second  great  moral  trial,  carrying 
salvation,  forgiveness,  life,  and  hope 
to  the  race  by  His  spotless  obedience 
unto,  and  through,  death.  Christ's 
righteousness  does  not  supersede  ours  ; 
it  involves,  and  demands,  and  pledges 
ours.  His  sacrifice  was  not  made  in 
order  that  we  might  never  have  to 
make  any ;  but  He,  in  fulness,  offered 
what  we,  in  our  measure,  also  should 
offer.  And  in  acknowledging  Christ's 
offering  as  ours  we  declare  ourselves  to 
be  not  our  own,  and  we  testify  our 
determination  to  strive  also  to  offer 
ourselves  without  spot  to  God.  "  Keal 
human  life  is  a  perpetual  completion 
and  repetition  of  the  sacrifice  of 
Christ." 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   IX. 


Chrisfs  Eternal  Spii^it. — This  fact 
must  be  fully  faced — there  is  no 
instance,  in  the  New  Testament,  in 
which  the  Holy  Ghost  is  spoken  of  as 
the  "  eternal  Spirit."  The  assumption 
therefore  is,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  not 
referred  to  in  this  verse.  Moreover, 
this  writer  uses  the  term  "  Holy  Ghost  " 
(Heb.  ii.  4,  iii.  7,  vi.  4,  ix.  8,  x.  15)  ; 
and  if  on  one  occasion  he  uses  another 
term,  the  assumption  is  that  he  had 
in  his  mind  another  idea.  It  may 
also  be  shown  that  there  was  nothing 
to  suggest  the  Holy  Ghost  to  the 
writer  at  this  point.  He  was  dealing 
with  Christ's  voluntary  offering  of 
Himself  to  God.  His  own  will,  His 
own  spirit,  inspired  the  surrender,  and 
made  it  so  infinitely  acceptable.  It 
was  the  real,  genuine,  willing,  entire 
devotion  of  a  man's  self  to  God  in 
obedience  and  submission ;  and  this 
was  the  representative  Man.  If  the 
Holy  Ghost,  conceived  in  any  sense  as 
separate  from  Christ,  really  inspired 
our  Lord's  surrender,  then  it  was  not, 
genuinely  and  simply,  Christ's  offering 
of  Himself.  The  real  merit  of  the 
offering  belorgs  to  the  Holy  Ghost 
who  inspired  it,  not  to  Jesus — the  Man 
Christ  Jesus — who  made  it.  We  can- 
not use  the  term  "  spiritual  spirit," 
though  that  might  best  convey  the 
idea  that  is  in  the  term  "  eternal  spirit." 
We  may  say  *'  Divine  spirit " — the 
holy  will  and  resolve  of  a  Divine 
Being.  So  understanding  the  term, 
the  point  of  the  writer's  reference  to 
it  comes  fully  into  view.  "  By  His 
own  spirit — by  that  burning  love 
which  proceeded  from  His  own  spirit." 
Moses  iS'^Mar^  translates,  "in  an  eternal 
spiritual  nature " ;  and  he  explains 
thus :  "  It  is  in  the  heavenly  world, 
in  the  tabernacle  not  made  with  hands, 
that  the  offering  of  our  great  High 
Priest  is  made.  There  He  has  pre- 
sented Himself,  in  His  heavenly  or 
glorified  state,  in  His  eternal  spiritual 
condition,  or  possessed  of  an  eternal 
spiritual  nature."  Dr.  Moulton  says  : 
"  For  the  opinion  that  the  reference  is 
to  the  Holy  Spirit  there  seems  to  be 
no    foundation   in  the  usage  of   the 


New  Testament,  and  it  is  not  indicated 
by  anything  in  the  context.  The 
explanation  of  the  words  must  rather 
be  sought  in  the  nature  of  our  Lord, 
or  in  some  attribute  of  that  nature. 
The  TTvevfjia  of  Christ  is  not  the  Holy 
Spirit,  but  the  higher  princijyle  of 
spiritual  life,  which  was  not  the  Divinity 
(this  would  be  an  Apollinarian  as- 
sertion), but  especially  and  intimately 
united  with  it." 

Yer.  15.  The  Old  and  the  New --It 
was  a  part  of  the  mission  of  the 
apostles  not  to  transfer  the  allegi- 
ance of  the  Jews  from  one  God  to 
another,  but  to  teach  them  how  to 
serve  the  same  God  in  a  higher  dis- 
pensation, under  a  noble  disclosure  of 
His  character  and  attributes  by  new 
and  better  methods.  The  Old  was 
good  ;  the  New  was  better.  We  could 
scarcely  conceive  of  Christianity  as  a 
system  developed  in  this  world,  if  it 
had  not  been  preceded  by  the  Mosaic 
economy.  The  Old  was  local  and 
national  in  its  prime  intents  and  in 
its  results.  The  New  was  for  all  ages. 
The  Old  was  a  system  of  practices ; 
the  New  is  a  system  of  principles. 
The  Old  built  men  for  this  world. 
Therefore  it  hardly  looked  beyond  this 
world.  The  whole  force  of  the  New 
is  derived  from  its  supereminent  doc- 
trine of  the  future.  The  Old  addressed 
the  conscience  through  fear.  The 
New  aims  at  the  very  springs  of  moral 
power  in  the  soul,  and  that  through 
love.  The  Old  sought  to  build  up 
around  the  man  physical  helps.  It 
was  a  system  of  crutches  and  canes. 
The  New  strikes  straight  for  char- 
acter, by  the  force  of  a  man's  own 
will.  The  Old  Testament  was  not 
wholly  without  its  natural  religion. 
To  the  Hebrew  mind  nature  was  one 
vast  symbolism.  With  a  far  lower 
aim  in  character,  the  Old  kept  men 
in  bondage.  With  immeasurably  higher 
aim  and  larger  requisition,  the  New 
yields  liberty.  The  Old  was  a  dis- 
pensation of  secular  morals.  It  lived 
in  the  past.  The  New  is  a  system  of 
aspiration.      It    lives  in   the    future, 

309 


CfiAP.  IX.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


The  Old  was  a  system  in  which  men 
remembered ;  the  New  is  a  system  in 
which  men  aspire.  The  Old  Testa- 
ment was  God  hidden ;  the  New 
Testament  is  God  made  known  through 
Jesus  Christ — a  living  force.  We  are 
the  children  of  the  New  Testament, 
and  not  of  the  Old.  Woe  be  to  us 
if,  living  in  these  latter  days,  we  find 
ourselves  groping  in  the  imperfections 
of  the  Old  Testament,  instead  of 
springing  up  with  all  the  vitality  and 
supereminent  manhood  which  belongs 
to  the  New  Testament !  We  are  the 
children  of  a  living  Saviour.  To  be  a 
disciple  of  the  New  Testament  is  to 
have  a  living  Head.  It  is  to  have  a 
vital  connection  with  that  Head.  It 
is  to  be  conscious,  while  all  nature 
speaks  of  God,  and  while  all  the 
exercises  of  religion  assist  indirectly, 
that  the  main  power  of  a  true  religion 
in  the  soul  is  the  soul's  connection 
with  a  living  God.  Let  your  life 
mount  up  toward  God. — H,  Ward 
BeecJier. 

Redemption  through  Death. — Read 
*'  that,  death  having  taken  place  for 
redemption  from  the  transgressions,'* 
etc.  The  first  covenant  had  been 
broken  by  "  transgressions "  :  unless 
there  be  redemption  from  these — that 
is,  from  the  bondage  of  penalty  which 
has  resulted  from  these — there  can  be 
no  promise,  and  no  new  covenant.  In 
respect  of  this  bondage,  this  penalty, 
the  death  of  Christ  was  a  ransom — an 
offering  to  God  looked  at  in  the  light 
of  a  payment  in  the  place  of  debt, 
service,  or  penalty  due.  When  debt 
and  payment  are  changed  into  the 
corresponding  ideas  of  sin  and  punish- 
ment, the  ransom  gives  place  to  the 
sin-offering^  of  which  the  principle  was 
the  acknowledgment  of  death  deserved, 
and  the  vicarious  suffering  of  death. 
So  far  our  thought  has  rested  on  the 
removal  of  the  results  of  the  past. 
The  covenant  and  the  promise  relate 
to  the  establishment  of  the  better 
future.  Death  was  necessary  alike  for 
both.  "  The  offering  of  Christ's  life 
(Matt.  XX.   28)  was  a   ransom  or  an 

310 


offering  for  sin  ;  it  was  also  a  sacri- 
fice inaugurating  a  new  covenant, 
which  contained  the  promise  of  the 
eternal  inheritance  "  [Dr.  Moulton).  It 
will  be  seen  that  this  is  a  setting 
of  truth  designed  to  meet  the  ideas 
and  associations  of  Jews,  who  would 
want  to  be  assured  that  every  obliga- 
tion of  the  old  covenant  had  been 
fully  and  honourably  met.  What 
precisely  does  the  term  "  ransom " 
teach  us  when  applied  to  the  death  of 
Christ  ?  This  much  at  least :  that  the 
death  of  Jesus,  voluntarily  endured, 
is  somehow  the  means  of  delivering 
from  death  the  souls  of  the  many ; 
He  died,  that  they  might  live ;  He 
died  willingly,  because  He  believed 
that  thereby  He  could  render  this 
service.  This  much,  and  perhaps  not 
much  more.  How  the  death  of  the 
Son  of  man  brings  life  to  others, 
and  whether  the  life  thus  procured 
could  not  be  obtained  in  any  other 
way,  does  not  appear.  We  may  have 
recourse  to  the  sacrificial  system  in 
search-  of  the  needful  supplementary 
explanations. — Dr.  A,  B.  Bruce. 

Ver.  16.  The  Ratification  of  God^s 
Covenant. — For  "  testator,"  R.A^.  reads 
"  Him  that  made  it."  Doddridge  has 
paraphrased  thus :  "  For  where  a 
covenant  is,  it  necessarily  imports  the 
death  of  that  by  which  the  covenant 
is  confirmed :  since  sacrificial  rites 
have  ever  attended  the  most  celebrated 
covenants  which  God  hath  made  with 
man,  so  that  a  covenant  is  confirmed 
over  the  dead."  And  it  is  evident 
from  the  line  of  reasoning  which  the 
author  of  the  epistle  follows,  that  if 
SLaOrJKY]  is  to  be  taken  as  equivalent 
to  "covenant,"  then  the  death  of  the 
pacifier,  or  confirming  instrument,  is 
implied.  Parkhurst  and  others  suggest 
that  "  institution,"  or  *'  dispensation," 
gives  greater  force,  and  is  a  just  ren- 
dering. And  though  the  idea  of  a 
will  or  testamentary  document  (as 
given  in  our  A.Y.)  seems  to  fit  in 
with  vers.  16,  17,  there  is  much  diffi- 
culty in  harmonising  it  with  the  whole 
passage. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS.  chap.  ix. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  18—22. 

The  Blood  of  the  Covenant. — The  word  "  testament  "  used  in  the  previous  verses 
is  supplied  in  ver.  18,  and  it  would  have  been  better  to  have  put  in  the  old  and 
familiar  term  "  covenant."  This  is  done  in  the  R.Y.  Any  arrangement  made 
between  two  parties  for  their  mutual  benefit,  which  may  be  ratified  by  some 
common  act,  is  called  a  "  covenant."  In  the  simple  society  of  the  ancient  East, 
covenants  could  only  be  ratified  by  the  taking  of  mutual  vows  and  pledges,  or 
by  the  sharing  together  in  some  symbolical  and  suggestive  act.  Sometimes  a 
bargain  was  ratified  by  the  two  parties  joining  hands,  before  witnesses,  in  the 
gate  of  the  city ;  at  other  times  by  mutually  raising  a  heap  of  stones,  and 
calling  it  by  a  particular  name.  There  was  also  a  custom  of  this  kind  :  Wine 
was  poured  into  an  earthen  vessel,  and  the  contracting  parties,  cutting  their 
arms  with  a  knife,  let  some  of  the  blood  run  into  the  wine,  with  which  they 
stained  their  armour,  and  of  which  both  parties  drank,  uttering  at  the  same 
time  the  most  dreadful  curses  upon  the  party  that  violated  the  treaty.  In  this 
passage  the  ratification  of  the  Old  Testament  covenant  with  God  is  in  part 
described.  The  great  leader  and  lawgiver,  Moses,  had  been  in  the  mount  with 
God,  had  received  the  law  as  from  the  Divine  hand,  and  on  his  return  to  the 
camp  he  had  gathered  the  tribes  in  a  solemn  assembly,  and  received  from  them 
the  emphatic  declaration  of  their  resolve,  "  All  the  words  which  the  Lord  hath 
said  will  we  do."  Then  Moses  prepared  for  a  solemn  act  of  ratification.  He 
built  an  altar  under  the  hill;  that  altar  was  to  represent  Jehovah,  the  one 
party  to  the  covenant.  He  also  set  up  twelve  pillars,  according  to  the  number 
of  the  tribes  of  Israel.  These  represented  the  people,  the  other  party  to  the 
covenant,  the  party  to  whom  the  covenant  terms  were  offered.  Then  Moses 
slew  certain  animals,  and  divided  the  blood  that  flowed  from  them,  sprinkling 
some  on  the  altar,  in  token  of  God's  making  a  vow  to  observe  and  keep  all  that 
He  had  pledged  and  promised  in  the  covenant.  The  other  half  of  the  blood  he 
kept  back  awhile,  until  he  had  again  read  to  the  people  the  covenant  terms  and 
the  covenant  sanctions,  and  had  again  received  the  people's  acceptance  in  their 
united  exclamation,  "All  that  the  Lord  hath  said  unto  us  will  we  do,  and  be 
obedient."  Then  he  took  that  half  of  the  blood,  and  sprinkled  it  on  those  twelve 
representative  pillars,  expressing  thus  the  solemn  vow  of  the  people,  and  making 
the  vow  take  this  impressive  form  :  "  We  pledge  our  very  life  to  our  obedience. 
If  we  fail  to  keep  this  covenant,  let  our  life  be  forfeited,  let  that  life  be  taken,  as 
has  been  taken  the  life  of  these  beasts."  Now  in  this  ancient  and  formal  Jewish 
covenant  we  are  to  see  the  model  of  the  spiritual  covenant  which  God  makes  with 
man  in  creating  him,  and  arranging  his  sustenance  and  circumstance — the 
covenant  which  man  makes  with  God  in  accepting  life  at  His  hands.  Nobody 
is  obliged  to  live  :  to  choose  to  live  is  to  accept  God's  covenant  terms.  We  may 
not,  as  individuals,  be  able  to  appeal  to  a  personal  scene  of  ratification.  That 
was  done  for  our  humanity  by  our  first  human  father,  Adam — just  as  it  was 
done  for  all  the  Jewish  race  by  that  one  Mosaic  generation.  And  it  was  broken 
for  us  by  that  first  father,  as  representing  us.  So  we  all  come  into  the  world 
with  the  claims  of  the  everlasting  covenant  as  strong  upon  us  as  upon  Adam, 
but  with  all  those  disturbed  conditions  about  us  which  have  followed  upon 
breaking  the  covenant,  and  with  our  life  forfeit  (as  part  of  the  life  of  humanity), 
in  accordance  with  the  solemn  vow  and  pledge  of  that  covenant.  If  then  we 
are  to  be  restored  to  gracious  relations  with  God,  we  need— 

I.  That  God  should  be  honoured  by  the  surrender  of  the  life  that  was 
pledged,  if  the  covenant  was  broken. — The  Israelites  sealed  their  covenant  with 
blood.     They  thus  expressed  their  readiness  to  surrender  their  own  blood  if  they 

311 


CHAP.  IX  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


broke  the  covenant.  They  did  break  it,  and  their  lives  we  forfeited.  God  might 
have  demanded  the  Hfe  of  every  Israehte,  in  vindication  of  His  broken 
covenant.  The  fact  that  it  was  a  covenant  of  mercy  offered  by  God,  and  freely 
accepted  by  man,  only  makes  the  conditions  more  solemn.  God  can  righteously 
demand  one  of  two  things — obedience  to  the  covenant  conditions,  or  the 
yielding  of  the  forfeit.  No  man  can  save  his  honour,  if  he  permits  a  covenant 
made  with  him  to  be  broken,  without  taking  any  notice  of  the  forfeit  or  penalty. 
Meeting  us  in  our  human  sphere,  and  graciously  using  our  human  language,  God 
shows  us  that  He  could  not.  The  life  of  all  Israel  stood  forfeited  unto  God.  In 
this  we  have  a  model — a  representation  in  material  things  of  spiritual  realities — 
of  the  great  human  covenant.  To  that  also  life  is  vowed  and  pledged.  And 
that  covenant  too  is  broken.  Our  life,  our  whole  life,  is  forfeit  unto  God.  God 
cannot  pass  by  that  dishonoured  covenant  of  His  mercy.  The  penalty  to  which 
man  pledged  himself  to  submit  must  be  exacted.  Covenant -breakers  must  die, — 
die  the  death  of  the  Divine  absence  from  them ;  die  the  second,  the  spiritual 
death.  Or  else  such  satisfaction  must  be  offered  as  shall  uphold  the  Divine 
honour,  declare  the  righteousness  and  worth  of  the  Divine  covenant  in  a  most 
glorious  manner,  and  so  allow  the  penalty  to  be  remitted.  God  can  make  no 
new  covenant  with  men  until,  in  some  altogether  satisfactory  way,  the  old  is 
honoured.  And  this  every  man  feels  is  necessary  to  meet  his  deepest  sense  of 
right.  How  then  has  the  difficulty  been  met  ?  God  has  been  pleased  to  permit 
the  penalty  to  be  exacted  from  one  person  only,  a  great  race -head,  a  second 
Adam.  Instead  of  demanding  the  forfeited  life  of  every  man,  He  required  only 
the  death  of  the  representative  man.  And  then  comes  in  the  marvel  of  all 
marvels.  The  God  of  the  broken  covenant  was  willing  Himself  to  provide  that 
one  representative  man.  Here  is  a  glimpse  at  least  into  the  mystery  of  Christ's 
death.  God  saw  humanity  in  Him — God  accepted  Him  as  the  yielded  life  that 
was  forfeit  by  the  terms  of  the  broken  human  covenant  In  that  one  God- 
man's  voluntary  death  the  old  covenant  is  honoured,  even  while  it  is  put  away 
for  ever.  We  could  have  no  sure  ground  of  hope,  if  that  old  covenant  had  not 
been  so  gloriously  vindicated  and  honoured,  or  if  God  had  not  released  the 
Sin-bearer  from  the  grave,  and  accepted  Him  as  the  great  human  representative 

II.  We  need  that  the  covenant  should  be  newly  made  and  newly  ratified. — 
And  that  also  is  done  for  us  in  Christ.  He  who  bears  for  us  the  forfeit  of  the 
old  is  the  gracious  Mediator  of  the  new.  And  the  new  covenant  is  a  better 
covenant, — a  covenant  not  of  formal  terms,  but  of  gracious  promises ;  not  of 
particular  deeds,  but  of  the  inner  heart,  and  of  the  whole  life.  And  this  second, 
or  new,  covenant  was  also  ratified  by  blood- shedding.  It  was  taken  under 
the  same  tremendous  vows  as  the  old ;  it  was  sealed  by  an  infinitely  more  worthy 
sacrifice.  "  The  patterns  of  things  in  the  heavenlies  were  purified  with  blood  of 
bulls  and  goats,  but  the  heavenly  things  themselves  with  better  sacrifices  than 
these."  Yielding  His  life,  as  at  once  the  forfeit  of  the  old  covenant  and  the 
solemn  vow  of  the  new,  behold  God  and  man  are  now  one  again,  in  Christ. 
"  Ye  who  sometime  were  far  off  are  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ." 

III.  The  new  covenant  must  be  definitely  accepted  by  each  individual. — 
We  must  personally  and  voluntarily  enter  into  covenant.  Its  reconciliation,  its 
access,  its  privileges,  its  status,  cannot  be  ours  until  we  willingly  and  lovingly 
accept  the  covenant  made  for  us,  and  sealed  for  us,  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
He  stands  for  men  ;  by  his  own  act  of  surrender  each  man  must  ensure  that 
He  stands  for  Aim,  and  is  his  Representative,  his  Mediator,  and  his  Lord.  But 
each  must  enter  into  the  covenant  for  himself.  No  man  can  do  it  for  him. 
No  covenant  of  any  fellow- creature  will  stand  for  him.  Those  who  are 
within  the  privileges  and  responsibilities  of  the  new  covenant  are  counted 
one  by  one. 

312  , 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  ix. 


The  Blood  is  the  Life. — The  warm  blood  of  men,  and  of  quadrupeds  and  birds, 
seemed  to  contain  the  very  soul  or  life  of  the  living  earthly  creature — to  be 
almost  identical  with  his  soul.  Now  when  the  Hfe  and  the  soul  were  held  to  be 
something  sacred,  and  the  more  tender  feelings  of  certain  nations  took  this  view 
very  early,  it  would  follow  that  the  blood  too  must  be  considered  a  sacred  thing, 
and  be  regarded  quite  differently  from  the  rest  of  the  body.  The  sight  of  that 
which  was  held  to  be  the  soul  itself  carried  the  mind  immediately  to  thoughts 
of  God,  placed  directly  before  it  something  full  of  mystery,  and  filled  it  with 
profound  awe.  — Ewald. 

Death  for  Remission. — How  can  the  death  of  Christ  be  a  condition  of  the 
remission  of  sins?  This  the  C7^ux  of  the  whole  subject.  1.  The  writer  never 
suggests  that  Christ  liberates  us  from  liabiHty  to  punishment  by  being  Himself 
punished  in  our  stead.  It  is  true  he  said  that  Christ  "  was  offered  to  bear  the  sins 
of  many  "  (chap.  ix.  28),  but  he  does  not  say  that  this  was  to  bear  the  punishment 
of  sins ;  on  the  contrary,  he  carries  our  thoughts  away  to  ideas  of  sacrifices  in 
his  use  of  the  word  "  offered."  2.  Neither  does  the  writer  teach  that  the  value 
of  the  Atonement  was  derived  from  the  amount  of  pain  endured  by  our  Lord. 
As  we  have  seen,  he  attaches  great  importance  to  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  but 
this  is  in  regard  to  His  priesthood,  not  His  sacrifice.  He  became  a  perfect  priest, 
fully  able  to  sympathise  with  His  people,  by  means  of  the  things  which  He 
suffered.  Certainly  the  spirit  of  surrender  requisite  where  much  suffering  has 
to  be  faced  is  proportionately  greater  than  where  the  sacrifice  is  easily  made. 
Thus  suffering  comes  to  enhance  the  value  of  sacrifice.  But  it  does  this  indirectly, 
and  it  is  not  the  suffering  itself,  but  the  refusal  to  shrink  from  it,  which  is  valued. 
In  the  Hebrew  ritual  the  death  of  the  victims  was  as  painless  as  possible  ;  there 
is  not  a  hint  that  their  sufferings  entered  into  the  consideration  of  the  worshippers. 
The  real  sacrifice  was  made  by  the  offerer  in  the  surrender  of  his  property.  The 
case  of  our  Lord  is  entirely  different — for  one  thing,  because  He  appears  in  the 
two  functions  of  sacrificing  priest  and  sacrificial  victim.  It  is  in  regard  to  the 
former  of  these  functions,  as  the  priest  making  the  offering,  that  His  sufferhigs 
come  to  be  considered  with  supreme  interest.  3.  Where,  then,  is  the  specific 
value  of  His  sacrifice  ?  The  author  emphatically  contrasts  the  tabernacle  sacri- 
fices with  the  sacrifice  of  our  Lord,  affirming  that  the  former  could  only  have  a 
subjective  influence  on  the  worshippers  as  reminders  of  sin,  not  any  objective 
efficacy  in  expiration  thereof,  because  "  it  is  impossible  that  the  blood  of  bulls 
and  goats  should  take  away  sins  "  (chap.  x.  4).  That  is  to  say,  he  saw  quite  clearly 
that  no  animal  sacrifice  could  constitute  a  real  atonement.  Coming  to  the  very 
different  sacrifice  of  Christ,  he  quotes  from  Ps.  xl.,  "  Sacrifice  and  offering 
Thou  wouldest  not,  but  a  body  didst  Thou  prepare  for  Me  "  (chap.  x.  5).  The  first 
step,  then,  is  the  Incarnation.  Christ  comes  in  a  human  body.  The  following 
words  in  the  quotation  from  the  psalm  are  cited  to  indicate  the  purpose  of  the 
Incarnation  in  this  connection  :  "  Lo,  I  am  come  (in  the  roll  of  the  book  it  is 
written  of  Me)  to  do  Thy  will,  O  God  "  (chap.  x.  7).  Christ  was  incarnate  in  order 
that,  among  other  things.  He  might  be  subject  to  obedience.  We  are  reminded 
of  St.  Paul's  thought  that  He  took  on  Him  the  "  form  of  a  servant "  when  He 
was  "  found  in  fashion  as  a  man "  in  order  that  He  might  become  "  obedient 
even  unto  death  "  (Phil.  ii.  7,  8).  Further  on  the  author  tells  us  distinctly  that 
our  sanctification — and  the  whole  course  of  the  argument  shows  that  by  this 
he  means  our  consecration  to  God  in  the  cleansing  of  our  consciences,  i.e.  the 
effecting  of  the  Atonement — is  accomplished  by  our  Lord  doing  the  will  of  God  : 
*'  By  the  which  will  we  have  been  sanctified  "  (chap.  x.  1 0).  The  whole  of  our  Lord's 
life  was  a  course  of  perfect  obedience  to  the  will  of  God ;  that  obedience  was 
most  severely  tested,  and,  standing  the  test  triumphantly,  reached  its  crown  and 

313 


CHAP.  IX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS. 


climax  at  the  cross.  We  need  not  search  through  regions  of  theological  specu- 
lation ;  the  truth  is  writ  large  upon  the  plain  facts  of  our  Lord's  history.  He 
would  have  been  false  to  His  mission  if  He  had  turned  aside  at  the  last,  and  fled 
into  some  safe  retreat  out  of  the  reach  of  His  enemies  to  end  His  days  in  obscurity. 
He  was  a  martyr  to  His  mission.  His  death  was  more  than  martyrdom, 
because  He  was  more  than  man,  and  so  through  martyrdom  could  effect  what 
no  merely  human  martyr  ever  accomplished.  His  obedience  was  a  superhuman 
obedience  in  a  human  life.  Hence  its  supreme  value.  Can  we  not  understand 
how  God  would  accept  this  as  the  most  precious  of  all  offerings  ?  Primitive  man 
presents  fruits  from  his  farm  and  animals  from  his  flock.  These  are  simple, 
childlike  gifts,  Christ  offers  the  one  real  sacrifice  God  cares  for.  God  has  no 
delight  in  blood.  Mere  death  cannot  be  any  satisfaction  to  Him.  But  He 
rejoices  in  obedience  to  His  will ;  and  when  that  obedience  climbs  to  its  highest 
pinnacle  in  an  unflinching  submission  to  death,  He  has  the  greatest  offering  that 
can  be  made.  It  is  in  response  to  such  an  offering,  the  obedience  unto  death  of 
His  own  Son,  that  God  grants  remission  of  sins.  This  seems  to  be  the  idea  of 
the  author  of  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  and  I  venture  to  say  it  is  a  nearer 
approach  to  a  theory  of  the  Atonement  than  is  to  be  found  anywhere  else  in  the 
New  Testament. — Frof.  W.  F.  Adeney,  M.A, 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND   SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  22.  No  Remission  save  by  Blood- 
shedding. — Heathen  and  Jewish  sacri- 
fices rather  show  us  what  the  sacrifice 
of  Christ  is  not  than  what  it  is. — 
Jowett. 

Repentance  insufficient.  —  By  the 
general  prevalence  of  propitiatory  sacri- 
fices over  the  heathen  world,  the  notion 
of  repentance  alone  being  sufficient  to 
expiate  guilt  appears  to  be  contrary 
to  the  general  sense  of  mankind. — 
Bishop  Butler. 

Taking  the  Blood. — The  death  of  the 
victim,  instead  of  being  a  vicarious 
punishment,  was  no  essential  part  of 
the  transaction,  but  merely  incidental 
as  a  means  of  affording  the  blood. 
The  essence  of  the  whole  sacrificial 
service  was  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood, 
as  the  bearer  of  the  life,  upon  God's 
altar,  thus  symbolising  the  giving  away 
of  the  offerer's  life  to  God ;  in  other 
words,  his  returning  back  again  to 
God,  by  repentance  and  faith  and  self- 
dedication,  after  being  separated  from 
Him  by  sin. — Bdhr. 

The  Blood  as  a  Type. — Nearly  all 
things  were  purged  with  blood ;  cer- 
tainly without  blood  was  no  remission 

3U 


— that  peculiar  thing  "  remission  "  was 
inseparable  from  blood.  Sin-offerings 
were  not  merely  tokens  of  the  restora- 
tion of  friendship  between  God  and  the 
offender  ;  but  the  blood  was  the  type 
of  the  great  propitiation,  and  an 
acknowledgment,  on  the  part  of  the 
offerer,  that  he  had  himself  deserved 
death.  It  showed  also  that  the  death 
and  suffering,  not  of  the  offender,  but 
of  one  perfectly  guiltless  and  incapable 
of  sin,  alone  could  procure  remission. — 
Webster  and  Wilkinson. 

Sin  and  Tresvass  were  atoned  for, 
in  a  civil  and  ecclesiastical  point  of 
view,  by  appropriate  sacrifices  which 
bore  the  like  names.  But  in  this  case 
the  remission  was  only  from  a  temporal 
penalty  or  calamity.  It  was  not  pos- 
sible that  such  sacrifices  could  atone 
for  sin,  as  viewed  by  the  righteous 
governor  of  the  world.  God,  as  the 
head  and  king  of  the  Jewish  nation, 
granted  remission  of  the  penalty  which 
Jewish  law  inflicted  in  many  cases,  on 
certain  conditions.  But  this  had  respect 
merely  to  this  present  world,  and  not 
to  the  accountability  of  transgressors 
before  the  tribunal  of  the  universe,  in 
the  world  above.  Even  temporal  for- 
giveness could  not  be  obtained  without 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.  IX. 


shedding  of  blood — so  the  necessity  of 
atoning  blood  which  possessed  a  higher 
virtue  than  that  of  beasts,  in  order  to 
remove  the  penalty  against  sin,  that 
was  threatened  in  respect  of  a  future 
world. — Moses  Stuart. 

Remission  and  Blood-shedding. — In 
these  words,  "  apart  from  shedding  of 
blood  is  no  remission,"  we  may  find 
a  fact  stated  and  a  fact  suggested. 
The  fact  stated  is  that,  under  the 
Old  Testament  dispensation,  the  par- 
ticular thing  called  "  remission  "  was 
always  attended  with  "  blood-shedding." 
The  fact  suggested  is  that,  under  the 
New  Testament  dispensation,  Jesus 
Christ  did  actually  shed  His  blood 
for  the  remission  of  sins.  It  is  pos- 
sible to  sweep  away  all  the  deeper 
meanings  of  the  Jewish  sacrifices  by 
regarding  them  only  as  expressions  of 
dependence  and  trust.  We  have  to 
ask,  not  what  4s>  <sacrifice  to  a  man, 
but  what  to  a  sinful  man,  one  who 
carries  the  burden  of  conscious  trans- 
gression, and  the  fear  of  just  penalty. 
In  the  Jewish  sacrifices  the  sin  of  the 
individual  or  the  nation  was  sym- 
bolically transferred,  by  confession,  to 
the  victim  that  was  sacrificed.  The 
Jewish  view  of  sacrifice  is  thus  stated 
by  Abrabanel  :  "  The  blood  of  the 
offerer  deserved  to  be  shed,  and  his 
body  to  be  burned,  for  his  sin ;  only 
the  mercy  of  the  Divine  Name  accepted 
this  offering  from  him  as  a  substitute 
and  propitiation,  whose  blood  should 
be  instead  of  his  blood,  and  its  life 
instead  of  his  life."  In  the  New 
Testament  is  given  the  historical  fact 
that  Jesus  did  die ;  or,  to  use  the 
familiar  figure,  did  "  shed  His  blood." 
These  two  facts,  the  blood -shedding 
of  Judaism  and  the  blood-shedding  of 
Jesus,  answer  to  each  other,  as  do 
type  and  antitype.  "  The  patterns  of 
things  in  the  heavens  (spiritual  things) 
were  purified  with  these  (the  blood  of 
animals) ;  but  the  heavenly  things 
themselves  with  better  sacrifices  than 
these" — even  with  the  life,  the  will, 
the  surrender,  the  sacrifice,  of  a 
spiritual  being.     The  reality  was  not 


found  in  the  Jewish  sacrifices.  They 
were  but  pictures  of  the  reality.  They 
bore  relation  to  ceremonial  offences, 
not  to  sin,  in  a  spiritual  sense.  In 
the  Old  Testament  economy  there  was 
a  figure  and  an  underlying  reality. 
And  in  the  New  Testament  sacrifice 
there  is  a  corresponding  outward 
figure  and  underlying  spiritual  reality. 
The  Jewish  system  requii-ed  of  its 
worshipper  a  sacrifice  which  could 
have  a  twofold  relation  :  (1)  Could 
die  as  the  bearer  of  his  penalty,  and 
(2)  in  its  spotlessness  could  be  accepted 
in  his  stead.  That  was  the  figure ; 
but  the  man  who  rightly  apprehended 
that  ceremonial  penalty  and  pollution 
saw  it  to  represent  the  moral  penalty 
under  which  his  sin  had  brought  him, 
and  the  moral  pollution  with  which 
his  sin  had  defiled  him.  A  spiritually 
minded  Jew  must  have  said,  "  Restored 
to  the  tabernacle  service,  I  am  not 
restored  to  God  :  looked  upon  as  clean 
by  the  priests,  I  am  not  looked  upon 
as  clean  before  God.  No  blood  of 
beasts  can  touch  moral  pollution :  no 
death  of  bulls  or  goats  can  carry  away 
moral  penalty."  And  so  in  the  infinite 
sacrifice  and  meritorious  blood-shed- 
ding of  the  Son  of  God  there  is  a 
figure  and  an  answering  reality.  If 
the  sacrifice  of  Jesus  had  been  only  a 
spiritual  sacrifice,  if  it  had  found  no 
expression  in  bodily  sufferings  and 
bodily  death,  we  men,  so  imprisoned 
in  the  senses,  could  never  have  realised 
it,  could  never  have  reached  the 
blessing  of  it.  Christ's  bodily  suffer- 
ings and  blood -shedding  are  not,  in 
themselves.  His  great  sacrifice.  Tliey 
are  the  form  it  took  for  bodily  eyes  to 
see,  the  body  it  wore  for  this  mortal 
sphere,  the  temple  within  which  the 
real  sacrifice  of  an  obedient  will  was 
offered.  And  as  the  Jewish  worshipper 
looked  past  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of 
goats,  and  rested  in  the  spiritual 
sacrifice,  which  was  to  be  made  in  the 
person  of  Messiah,  so  the  Christian 
worshipper  now  goes  in  behind  the 
bodily  sufferings  and  human  death 
of  our  Divine  Lord,  which  are  to  him 
somewhat  as  the  outward  ceremonies 

315 


CHAP.  IX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS. 


were   to   the   Jew,   and    discerns    the  vindicated,    God's   honour  established, 

inner,    spiritual,    infinitely    satisfying  sin    exhibited  in   its   hatefulness,    sin 

sacrifice   presented  by  Him  when  He  smitten  and  broken  in  its  power,  and 

made  "  His  soul  an  offering  for  sin."  men  deterred  from  loving  and  seeking 

Sin   is    a    spiritual    thing.       It    may  it.     And  since  it  is  God  Himself  who 

express   itself   in    deeds   done   in    the  provided  the  sacrifice — nay,  God  Him- 

body  ;    but,    in    its    essence,    it    is   a  self  who  is  in  the  sacrifice — the  revela- 

thing  of  the  spirit  and  the  will.     The  tions  of  the  Divine  glory  and  justice 

sin   is    a  soul- sin.      The  penalty   is  a  do  not  affright  us ;  the  disclosures  of 

soul-death.      The  remission  can   only  the  infinite  hatefulness  of  sin  do  not 

come   by   a   soul- sacrifice.     When  we  overwhelm  us.     The  sacrifice  of  Jesus 

say  that  Christ,  as  our  sacrifice,  bore  brings  us  full  remission — holiness  and 

the    penalty   for    us,    we    mean    the  mercy  hand  in  hand :  in  it  "  righteous- 

spiritual   penalty.       It    found    fitting  ness  and  peace  have  kissed  each  other." 
outward  expression  in  the  agonies  of 

an  ignominious  and  violent  death,  but  Chrisfs      Voluntary     Sin-bearing. — 

the    infinite    depth    of    suffering    lay  When   we   see  the  offended  God,  the 

hidden — in  behind — in  the  Kedeemer's  injured  Sovereign,  holy,  just,  and  good 

soul.     Finding  only  once  what  seemed  — when    we  see  Him  at  such  a  cost 

a  suitable  utterance  in  human  language.  Himself  provide  the  expiation  which 

"  My  God,  My  God,   why  hast  Thou  the  dignity  of  His  own  law  demands, 

forsaken    Me  ? "     The   chief    objection  and  actually  send  His   Son  to  die  in 

against  the  truth  of  our  Lord's  sub-  our  room,  it  is  then  that  we  begin  to 

stitutionary  sacrifice  is,  that  it  repre-  see  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin,  the 

sents  the  innocent  as  suffering  for  the  beauty    and   majesty   of    the    Divine 

guilty,  which  is  supposed  to  override  character,     and     the    generous    tears 

our    natural    sense   of    justice.       But  which  suffuse   our    eyes  are   the   first 

higher    laws    do    affect    lower    ones.  tears  of  true  repentance  which  we  have 

Abraham   in   loyal  obedience   to   God  ever  shed.     That  cross  of  Christ,  with 

put  aside  parental  justice,  and  assayed  its  great  atoning  sacrifice,  lets  me  see 

to  offer  his  son.     Are  there  no  cases  in  God  to  be  so  great,  and  man  so  littl,e 

which  our  sense  of  justice  permits  the  — the  Sovereign  to  be  so  good,  and  the 

innocent  to  suffer  for  the  guilty  ?     Is  rebel  to  be  so  bad  :  it  shows  on  the 

there  any  law,  in  heaven  or  earth,  that  one  side  such  holiness  an^  such  love, 

prevents  an  innocent  man  from  volun-  whilst    it   shows    on    the    other   guilt 

tarily  taking  the  place  of  the  guilty  ?  so  heinous,  wickedness  so  inexcusable, 

Is  our  sense  of  justice  wronged  when  and   ruin   so  complete,  that  we  need 

a  man  knowingly  and  willingly  marries  not  wonder  though  we  find  man's  pride 

an  almost  bankrupt  woman,  and  makes  reject  the  humbling  truth.     Orthodox 

himself  legally  responsible  for  all  her  people  are  charged  with  teaching  that 

debts  ?     And  may  not  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  philosophy  of  sacrifice  consists  in 

knowingly,  and  willingly,  and  lovingly,  the  necessity  of  punishing — that  it  is 

marry   this    poor    bankrupt   bride   of  justice  to  let  the  blow  fall  somewhere, 

Humanity,    and,     with     His    eternal  no   matter   where ;    blood   must    flow, 

riches,    bear    all    the   burden   of    her  But  we  never  afiirm  that  God  visited 

debt?      May    not    the     Lord     Jesus  our  sins  on  the  head  of  one  who  had 

sustain  such  a  relation  to  us,  of  His  no  connection  with  these  sins  at  all. 

own  free,  generous,  pitying  sympathy,  God  visited  the  sin  on  the  head  of  One 

that,    most    righteously,    our    penalty  who,  though  personally  innocent  of  it, 

should  be  transferred   to  Him  ?      In  did   nevertheless   put    Himself   volun- 

the  voluntary  sacrifice  of   Christ ;    in  tarily  into  such  a  relationship  to  the 

that  yielding  of  His  soul,  through  the  sinners  as  involved  Him  in  the  fullest 

body,  to  the  sinner's  spiritual  death,  legal   responsibility   for    the   sin.      A 

all    men    may    see    God's    authority  man  is  beheaded  for  crimes  that  his 

316 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  ix. 


hands  have  committed — the  body  is  a  so  from  One  who,  as  the  Head  of  the 

whole.     So  Christ  and  His  Church  are  body,  was  as  righteously  responsible  for 

one   body  ;   He   is  the  Head.      When  them  as  if  He  had  committed  them  all. 

God  the   Father  exacted   the  penalty  — Article^  ^'■Family  Treasury ^^^  August 

of  His  people's  sins  from  Jesus,  He  did  1868. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  23—28. 

One  Spiritual  Sacrifice  is  Enough. — The  point  of  the  paragraph  is  evidently 
this — if  you  have  symbolical,  teaching  sacrifices,  you  must  repeat  your  object- 
lessons  over  and  over  again.  If  you  have  a  spiritual  sacrifice,  embodying  the 
principle  which  you  have  been  teaching,  once  will  do,  and  there  is  no  call  for 
repetition  ;  your  whole  energy  can  be  put  into  applying,  adapting,  and  working 
out  the  principle.  Christ's  was  a  spiritual  sacrifice ;  "  once  at  the  end  of  the 
ages  hath  He  been  manifested  to  put  away  sins  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself." 
"  Christ  also  having  been  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many." 

I.  Christ's  sacrifice  is  the  better  sacrifice. — So  much  better  as  is  represented 
by  the  difference  between  the  dumb,  unintelligent  animal,  and  the  speaking, 
thinking,  feeling  man,  who  has  both  will,  and  affections,  and  religious  instincts. 
The  gift  of  an  animal  could  not  interest  God  or  win  His  favour,  save  as  it 
stood  for  something,  expressed  something,  carried  to  God  a  man's  devotion  and 
love.  Then  when  a  man  was  able  to  give  that  devotion  and  love  directly,  as 
Jesus  Christ  did,  without  the  need  of  any  animal  to  express  His  surrender, 
then  we  have  the  "  better  sacrifice."  When  we  have  that  better  sacrifice  to 
represent  our  devotion  and  our  love,  we  can  contentedly  let  the  lower  forms  of 
sacrifice  pass  away.  We  are  satisfied  ;  we  are  now  worthily  represented  ;  it 
is  enough. 

II.  Christ,  with  His  sacrifice,  remains  in  the  spiritual  Holy  of  Holies. — The 
old  high  priest  went  into  the  second  chamber,  taking  the  blood  of  the  goat,  but 
he  did  not  stay  in  there  ;  only  the  few  drops  that  were  sprinkled  remained  there. 
He  came  out,  and  must  needs  go  in  again  by-and-by,  when  gathering  human 
mlfulness  and  sin  had  broken  off,  or  made  uncertain,  the  relations  of  the  people 
with  God.  But  our  spiritual  High  Priest  went  into  the  most  secret  chamber 
of  the  "  temple  not  made  with  hands,"  took  His  sacrifice,  which  was  Himself, 
with  Him,  and  has  never  come  out,  and  never  will.  He,  our  Priest,  is  there ; 
He,  our  sacrifice,  is  there.  And  our  standing  with  God  abides  ;  it  cannot  be 
imperilled.  It  is  a  standing  on  the  ground  of  His  acceptance,  of  the  merit 
of  His  sacrifice.  It  is  a  standing  secured  and  maintained  by  His  priestly 
mediation.  There  is  no  call  for  any  repetition  of  the  sacrifice,  for  any  renewal 
of  the  atonement  day.  The  day  never  comes  to  an  end.  That  is  the  better, 
the  all-satisfying  sacrifice  which  God  has  always  before  Him.  That  is  the 
all-sufiicient  priest,  who  never  has  to  go  into  the  Holy  of  Holies,  because  He  is 
there,  and  abides  there,  ever  ministering  in  His  unchangeable  priesthood. 

III.  Christ's  sacrifice  is  the  climax  of  sacrifices. — For  humanity  it  is  the 
perfect  sacrifice.  It  is  inconceivable  that  man  can  ever  have,  to  give  to  God, 
a  better  sacrifice  than  Christ  gave.  And  it  is  as  inconceivable  that  God, 
dissatisfied  with  that,  can  ever  want  another  from  man.  And  why  ?  Because 
the  absolutely  perfect  sacrifice  which  the  creature  man  can  make  to  God  is 
**  himself^  and  himself  at  the  very  best  that  man  can  possibly  beT  But  that  is 
precisely  the  sacrifice  which  Christ  offered  to  God.  It  was  the  "  sacrifice  of 
Himself,"  the  "  Man  Christ  Jesus."  It  was  Himself  as  tested  and  proved,  by 
the  strains  of  a  human  life,  and  the  agony  of  a  painful  and  shameful  death,  to 
be  the  very  best  man  that  could  possibly  be.     That  cannot  be  repeated.     It  is 

317 


CHAP.  IX  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  HEBREWS. 


a  climax  once  reached,  and  it  stands  for  us  for  ever.  Man  has  offered  to  God 
at  last  the  sacrifice  which  God  demands,  and  which  through  the  long  ages  his 
sacrifices  of  bulls  and  goats  did  but  vainly  aim  to  reach.  This  is  the  "  Lamb 
of  God"  who  offered  Himself  for  man,  and,  infinitely  acceptable  to  God,  "takes 
away  the  sin  of  the  world."  It  is  not  only  the  better  sacrifice ;  it  is  the  best. 
Let  man  think  the  matter  fully  out,  and  he  will  surely  fail  to  conceive  a  better 
sacrifice  for  humanity  than  Jesus  is. 

lY.  Christ's  sacrifice  need  not  be  repeated,  because  it  fully  accomplished  its 
ends. — This  is  intimated  in  the  reference  to  the  judgment  in  vers.  27,  28. 
Death  and  the  judgment  represent  all  the  woc3  brought  into  the  world  by  sin. 
A  redemption  can  do  everything  else,  if  it  can  deliver  us  from  the  death  we 
dread,  and  give  us  salvation  in  the  day  when  our  earthly  life  is  Divinely 
appraised.  This  is  the  power  of  the  redemption  in  Christ's  priesthood  and 
sacrifice.  "  Because  He  fives  we  shall  live  also."  And  when  before  the  throne, 
He,  our  Daysman,  will  be  there  for  us,  not  now  having  to  deal  with  our  sin, 
"  apart  from  sin,"  but  to  secure  our  full  and  final  "  salvation."  Actual  repetitions 
of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  there  cannot  be,  there  need  not  be,  for  the  sacrifice  is 
made  once  for  all.  Pictorial  and  symbolical  representations  of  the  sacrifice  may 
be  perilous,  as  suggesting  doubts  of  the  infinite  value  and  sufficiency  of  the  one 
offering  once  offered,  which  our  High  Priest  is  ever  in  the  act  of  offering.  The 
spiritual  reality  of  the  sacrifice  needs  to  be  fully  realised,  and  then  our  interest 
in  the  historical  occasion  of  the  sacrifice,  or  the  sublime  occasion  of  the  cross, 
would  be  felt  to  need  no  repetition  in  fact,  and  no  pictorial  or  mystical  repro- 
duction.    The  "  once  "  of  the  sacrifice  is  "  once  for  all "  ;  it  is  enough  for  ever. 

Yer.  24.  Heaven  itself. — It  is  manifestly  not  in  accordance  with  the  writer's 
purpose  to  show  that  Christ  has  entered  into  the  place  of  future  bliss  prepared 
for  God's  redeemed  people.  By  heaven  itself  he  means  the  spiritual  world, 
the  realm  of  spiritual  realities.  Heaven  itself  is  contrasted  with  the  "  holy 
places  made  with  hands."  The  tabernacle  was  a  material  tabernacle ;  Christ's 
mediation  belongs  to  the  spiritual  tabernacle.  Priests  ministered  with  material 
things,  the  patterns  and  pictures  of  spiritual,  heavenly  things ;  the  great  High 
Priest  with  the  spiritual,  heavenly  things  themselves.  In  the  earthly  tabernacle 
there  was  the  symbol  of  the  Divine  Presence ;  in  heaven,  in  the  spiritual  world, 
is  the  Presence  itself.     Christ's  work  wholly  belongs  to  the  spiritual  spheres. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Yer.  23.  The  Better  Sacrifice  is  Ch7nst  from  the  whole  Levitical  system. 
Himself. — After  we  have  made  the  Here  for  the  first  time  we  have  priest 
most  of  the  ancient  sacrificial  system,  and  victim  united  in  one.  Christ's 
we  are  still  much  in  the  dark  as  to  the  sacrifice  is  Himself.  Here  the  virtue 
connection  between  the  death  of  the  lies  not  in  the  blood,  though  that  is 
sacrificial  victim  and  the  pardon  of  formally  mentioned,  but  in  the  offering 
sin.  The  Levitical  sacrifices  did  not  of  a  perfect  will  through  the  eternal 
deal  effectually  with  the  problem.  spirit  of  holy  love.  In  this  offering 
They  were  merely  putative  atonements  God  can  take  pleasure,  not  because  of 
for  artificial  sins — for  the  ignorances  the  pain  and  the  blood-shedding,  but 
or  ritual  errors  of  the  people,  not  in  spite  of  these.  By  the  virtue  of 
for  their  great  moral  transgressions,  this  offering  God  is  reconciled  to  the 
More  light  comes  to  us  by  reflection  on  world,  and  can  regard  with  a  ba- 
the nature  of  the  sacrifice  by  which  nignant  eye  a  guilty  race.  We  are 
the  new  covenant  is  inaugurated  than  accepted  in  the  Beloved,  the  Messianic 

318 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   IX. 


King  and  His  subjects  being  an  organic 
unity  in  God's  sight. — Dr.  A.  B.  Bruce. 

Yer.     24.     The      Ascension. — "  Into 
heaven  itself."     We  celebrate  on  this 
day  the  foundation,  or  rather  the  first 
manifestation  to  the  world,  of  a  great 
kingdom,    of   which   our   Lord  is  the 
supreme    Head.     He  who  was  a  per- 
fect Man,  the  Exemplar  of  all  goodness, 
at  His  departure  was  only  removed  from 
us  in  respect  of  sensible  presence,  and 
did  not  cease  to  be  connected  with  us  ; 
He  was  transplanted  to  an    invisible 
throne   in    heaven,    where    He   reigns 
over  us   now,  the  King   both   of   the 
living  and  the  dead.     He  reigns  over 
the  Church   triumphant.       He  reigns 
over  this  world  below  in  which  man 
still    struggles    with    temptation    and 
sin.     What  ought  to  be  our  feelings 
who  know  that  our  Lord  and  God,  who 
reigns  in  heaven,  is  Tnan  too — that  He 
is  man  now,    and  will  be  for  ever  in 
the  fulness  of  glorified  human  nature  ? 
Different    feelings    possess    us    as   we 
contemplate      this     glorified      human 
nature   in   Christ   our   Judge,  or  our 
Intercessor.     How  would  great  num- 
bers   of    men    who    follow  their   wills 
in  this  world,  pursue  through  life  an 
avaricious  and  selfish  scheme,  give  all 
the  strength  of  their  faculties  to  gain 
worldly  ends,  but  who  do  it  all  under 
a  specious  outside,  and  have  explana- 
tions and  justifications  of   their   own 
conduct   to   themselves,    feel   if    they 
knew  that   they   had   to   undergo  an 
examination  and  an  estimate  from  a 
very   wise,    sagacious,    and  discerning 
7nan  here,  in  this  world  ?     Would  they 
not  immediately  be  in  a  state  of  the 
most  painful  fear  and  apprehension  ? 
The  Man  Christ  Jesus  now  scrutinises 
these  men.     However  we  may  fear  the 
countenance  of  man,  we  cannot  escape 
being    judged   by    One  who   is    man. 
What  a   motive    this  ought  to   be  to 
us  to  examine  ourselves,  to  be  true  to 
ourselves,  not  to  tamper  with  our  own 
consciences,  not  to  cloak  our  sins,  not 
to  dissemble  and  walk  in  crooked  ways  ! 
But  we  also  celebrate  the  entrance  into 
heaven  of  our   Mediator,   Intercessor, 


and  Advocate.  He  sits  there  as  High 
Priest  to  present  to  the  Father  His 
own  atonement  and  sacrifice  for  the 
sins  of  the  whole  world.  He  thus  sits 
as  High  Priest  and  Mediator  between 
God  and  man  because  He  is  man.  He 
who  is  man  could  plead  for  man.  It 
is  our  Lord's  supreme  place  in  the  uni- 
verse now,  and  His  reign  now  in  the 
worlds  visible  and  invisible,  which  we 
commemorate  in  His  ascension.  We 
are  specially  told  in  Scripture  never 
to  think  of  our  Lord  as  having  gone 
away  and  left  His  Church,  but  always 
to  think  of  Him  as  now  reigning,  now 
occupying  His  throne  in  heaven,  and 
from  thence  ruling  over  all.  This  day 
especially  puts  before  us  our  Lord  in 
His  human  nature,  because  it  was  in 
that  He  ascended  up  to  heaven.  As 
Judge,  He  sees  into  all  hearts ;  as 
Intercessor,  He  pleads  our  cause. — 
J.  B.  Mozley,  D.D. 

Yer.  27.  The  Death-law  for  Human- 
ity.— "  It  is  appointed  unto  men  once 
to  die."  In  this  man  does  but  take 
rank  with  the  animals,  and  share 
natural  conditions  with  them.  The 
law  of  creation  is  that  the  living  things, 
vegetable  and  animal,  shall  have  pos- 
session of  the  earth  in  a  constant 
succession,  no  one  creature  holding 
possession  long,  but  producing  its 
successor,  and  then  itself  passing  away 
in  what  is  called  '■''  death."  So  far  as 
man  is  an  animal,  there  is  nothing  to 
be  said.  It  would  be  a  woe  for  crea- 
tion if  man  broke  into  the  natural 
order  as  an  exception.  What  has  to 
be  seriously  considered  is — How  does 
the  death-law  affect  man  as  a  moral 
being,  a  being  into  whom  is  breath  d 
a  Divine  Hfe?  This  subject  demands 
a  treatise,  and  it  can  receive  but  a 
hint.  At  first  sight  we  incline  to 
think  that  God  might  have  arrested 
the  death-law,  and  given  man  an  im- 
mortality on  earth,  in  which  he  might 
grow  into  moral  perfection.  The 
reader  must  think  out  how  certainly, 
for  various  reasons,  moral  man  could 
never  have  reached  moral  perfection 
here  on  earth.     The   death  certainty 

319 


CHAP.  IX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


and    uncertainty     are    the    mightiest  true  representatively  ;  the  design  being 

moral  forces  acting  on  man.  to  let  the  people  feel  or  believe  that 

their  sins  are  being  taken  away,  as  if 

Ver.  28.   Christ  hearing  the  Sins  of  put    over   upon  the   piiests    or    upon 

Tra7isgressors. — In     what      sense     or  the   head   of  the  victims.     When  the 

manner  is  it  that  Christ  bears  the  sins  iniquities  of  Israel  were  put  upon  the 

of   the    world  ?     They   were    not    put  head  of  their  scape-goat,  and  he  was 

upon  Him,  or  transferred  to  Him,  so  driven  out  into  the  desert,  they  knew 

as   to   be    His  ?     That    is    impossible.  not  where,  there  was  neither  any  sin 

Guilt    is    a    matter    so    strictly    and  upon  the   goat    nor   any  punishment, 

eternally  personal,  that  nobody  can  be  The  reahty  of  the  whole  matter  stood 

in  it  but  the  transgressor  himself  to  in  what  was  representatively  signified, 

whom  it  belongs.     Apart  from  him  it  viz.     the   removal    and    clearance    of 

is  nothing.     Christ  does  not  bear  our  their  sin. 

sins  in  the  sense  that  He  bears  our  II.  A  more  particular  statement  of 
punishment.  Everlasting  justice  for-  the  subject-matter  included  under  the 
bids  any  such  commutation  of  places  general  answer  embraces  three  par- 
in  punishment.  It  is  not  conceivable  ticular  modes,  or  distinctly  and  ration- 
that  Christ  bears  our  sin,  in  the  sense  ally  conceived  methods,  of  bearing  sin 
that  the  abhorrence  of  God  to  our  by  Him  in  His  mission  as  a  Kedeemer. 
sin  is  laid  upon  Him,  and  expressed  1.  He  bears  the  sin  of  the  world,  by 
through  and  by  means  of  His  suffer-  that  assumption  which  His  love  must 
ings.  How  can  God  lay  abhorrence  needs  make  of  it.  Love  puts  every 
upon  what  is  not  abhorrent  ?  Christ,  being,  from  the  eternal  God  downwards, 
in  bearing  the  sins  of  transgressors,  into  the  case  of  all  wrong- doers, 
simply  fulfils  principles  of  duty  or  sufferers,  and  enemies,  to  assume  their 
holiness  that  are  common  to  all  moral  evil,  and  be  concerned  for  them, 
beings,  and  does  it  as  being  obliged  Being  love,  it  assumes  their  loss, 
by  those  principles.  If  there  is  any  danger,  present  suffering,  suffering  to 
fundamental  truth  in  morals,  it  is  that  be  ;  all  their  want,  sorrow,  shame, 
there  is  no  superlative  kind  of  merit  and  disorder ;  and  goes  into  their  case 
or  excellence  ;  that  so  far  as  kind  is  to  restore  and  save.  When  it  is  said 
concerned,  the  same  kind  is  for  us  all,  that  Christ  "  bare  our  sicknesses,"  it 
and  there  is  no  other.  We  are  not  cannot  mean  that  He  literally  bore 
then  to  look  for  some  artificial,  theo-  the  fevers,  leprosies,  etc.,  that  He 
logically  contrived,  never  before  heard  healed ;  it  means  that  He  took  them 
of  kind  of  good  in  the  bearing  of  sins,  upon  His  sympathy,  bore  them  as  a 
but  simply  to  look  after  what  lies  in  burden  upon  His  compassionate  love, 
the  first  principles  of  rehgious  love  In  that  sense,  exactly.  He  assumed 
and  devotion,  as  related  to  the  conduct  and  bore  the  sins  of  the  world.  He 
of  all.  took  them  on  His  love,  and  put  Him- 

I.  A  general  answer  is  this— that  self,  by  mighty  throes  of  feeling,  and 

Christ  bears  the  sins  of  the  world  in  a  sacrifice,    and  mortal   passion,    to  the 

certain  representative  sense,  analogous  working     out    of     their     deliverance, 

to  that  in  which  the  priests  and  the  Because  the  world  in  sin  took  hold  of 

sacrifices   of   the   former   altar-service  His  feeling,  was  He  able,  in  turn,  to 

bore  the  sins  of  the  people  worshipping.  get  hold  of  the  feeling  of  the  world. 

The  phrase,    "  he  shall  bear  his   sin,"  and   become    its    true    Deliverer   and 

or   "  bear  his  iniquity,"  when  applied  Saviour.     In  this  fact  lay  embosomed 

to  the   priests   and   sacrifices,    cannot  the  everlasting  gospel.     This  must  in 

mean  that  they  have  the  guilt  actually  no  way  be  apprehended  as  if  all  meant 

put  upon  them  :  the  words  are  to  be  was,  that  Christ  came  into  such  a  life 

taken   in   an    accommodated,    ritually  of  sympathy  and  death  of  passion  just 

formal  sense,  where  the  same  thing  is  to  give  us  an  example  which  we  are 

320 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  ix. 


to  copy.     Nothing  could  be  more  im-  it    ministering   love    and    forgiveness, 

potent    or    further    from    the    truth.  When   the   sin   found   such   a   Being, 

Giving  and  copying   examples   is   too  even     the     incarnate     Word    of    the 

tame   a    matter    to    be   conceived    as  Father,     taking    its    blows    in    such 

making  out  a  gospel.     2.  It  is  another  patience,  and  dying  under  the  blows, 

and   equally    true   conception   of    the  how  dreadful  the  recoil   of  feeling  it 

bearing  of  sins  by  Christ,  that  He  is  suffered  !     How  wild,  and  weak,  and 

incarnated  into  the  state   of   sin,  in-  low  was  it  made  to  appear  in  its  own 

eluding    all    the     corporate    woes    of  sight.     Thus     it    was    that,    in    His 

penalty  or  natural   retribution  under  bearing  of  sin   upon  the  cross,  Christ 

it — woes    that   infest    the   world,    the  broke  it  down  for  ever.     That  death 

body,    and    the    social    and    political  of  His  was  great  in  power,  not  because 

departments   of    human   affairs.     The  He  bore  it,  but  because  He  was  in  the 

"  curse,"  as  a   Scripture  term,    means  work  of  God's  love,  and  bore  it  on  His 

that  state  of  retributive  disorder  and  way,  unable  to  be  diverted  from  His 

disjunction  that  follows,  under  natural  end  by  that  or  any  other  death.     In 

laws,     the    outbreak    of    sin.     When  just   that  manner   and  degree  it  was 

Christ  comes  down  into  the  world,  to  in    His    heart   to    bear    sin. — Horace 

be    incarnate   in  it  and  do  His   work  Bushnell,  D.D. 
of   love.    He   enters    Himself   into  its 

coj:'porate  evils,   and  takes   them  just  Christ's  Second  Appearing. — "  Shall 

as  they  are.     His  body,  as  being  born  appear  a  second  time,  apart  from  sin, 

in  the  flesh,  has  the  mortal  maladies  to    them    that    wait   for    Him,    unto 

and  temptations  of  the  curse  working  salvation."     Some  care  is  necessary  if 

subtlely  in  it.     The  jealousy  of  Herod  we   are   to    see    why,    and   for    what 

is  the  curse  before  which  He  flies  into  purpose,    the   writer    introduced    this 

Egypt.     The    chief    priests,    and    the  reference  to  our  Lord's  second  appear- 

rabbins,  and  the   council,  and  Pilate,  ing.     Moses  Stuart  helps  us  by  trans- 

and  Herod,  all  combined  against  Him,  la  ting,  "  Shall  make  His  appearance  a 

only    represent   the   corporate   wrath,  second   time,    without    a    sin-offering, 

and    wrong,  and   curse  of  the  world,  for   the   salvation  of  those  who  wait 

3.  Christ  bears  the  sin  of  the  world,  for  Him."     Having  died  once  for  sin, 

in   the  sense  that  He  bears,  consent-  Jesus  will  never  repeat  His  sacrifice, 

ingly,  the  direct  attacks  of  wrong  or  and  there  can   be  no   possible  reason 

sin    upon    His    person ;    doing   it,    of  why    He    shoidd.     When    He    comes 

course,   in  but   a  few  instances,  such  again  it  will  be  for  another  purpose, 

as   may  have    been   included    in   His  even  to  bestow  rewards  on  those  who 

comparatively  short  life,  but  showing  trust  in  Him,  and  wait  for  His  coming, 

in   these   few   instances   how   all   the  Then  we  are  left  to  consider  what  sort 

human    wrongs    are    related    to    His  of  a  coming  it  must  be  which  distri- 

feeling,    or   would   be   if    He  suffered  butes  rewards   to    His    faithful   ones, 

them  all.     And  here  again  it  is  that  whose  life-stories  get  completed  at  all 

He    gets    an    amazing    power,    as    a  sorts  of  times  through  all  the  Christian 

Redeemer,   over  the  sin  of  the  world,  ages.     It  sets  us  upon  serious  thought 

He   did  not  come   into   the   world  to  how  it  is  that  the  martyrs  of  the  first 

suffer  these  wrongs  as  an  end,   or  to  age   can   be   made   to   wait   for  their 

brave    them    by    an     ostentation    of  reward  until  Christ  shall  come  again, 

patience.     Coming  into  the  world  as  in     some     material     way,     in     some 

the    incarnate     Word    of    God,    God  wondrous   day   that   is   yet   to  dawn, 

manifest   in   the   flesh.  He  bears  the  And    it    is    puzzling    to    think    how 

wrong-doing   of    sin,    not   deficiently,  a  bodily   appearance   of   Christ,   with 

but  as  feeling  after  the  sin  ;  letting  it  temporal   rewards,    can  possibly  meet 

see  what  wrong  it  has  in  its  nature  the  needs  of  redeemed  souls  who  have, 

to  do,  when  the  Son  of  God  comes  to  for   long   ages,   been   in  the  spiritual 

/  Y                                                 321 


CHAP.   IX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS, 


world  as  spiritual  beings.  It  is 
evident  that  our  apprehensions  of  the 
second  coming  of  Christ  need  to  be 
reconsidered,  and  need  to  be  spiritual- 
ised. There  can  be  no  doubt  that 
the  early  Christian  disciples  and 
Christian  teachers  anticipated  the 
bodily  reappearance  of  Christ  in  their 
time.  If  they  were  right  in  that 
anticipation,  then  Jesus  did  come  to 
earth  again  in  bodily  form  before  the 
last  of  His  apostles  died.  But  we 
have  to  face  the  fact,  that  He  did 
not  come  again  in  any  bodily  form  in 
those  times,  and  He  has  never  come 
in  such  form  at  any  time  since  then. 


What  can  we  do  in  face  of  this  fact, 
but  say  that  the  disciples  must  have 
misunderstood  His  promise,  and  trans- 
lated literally  what  He  meant  to  be 
taken  spiritually.  "  The  words  which 
I  speak  unto  you  are  spirit  and  are 
life."  Christ  does  come  again,  and 
come  with  rewards.  But  He  belongs 
to  the  spiritual  world;  His  rewards 
are  spiritual  rewards ;  He  gives  them 
to  spiritual  men  when  they  are  free 
from  the  entanglements  of  the  human 
body.  He  appears  again  to  the  soul 
in  the  moments  of  its  freedom — ap- 
pears for  perfecting  its  salvation. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  /X 


Ver,  14.  PMlo's  Divine  Spirit. — Professor 
Bruce  aptly  illustrates  this  passage  by  a 
citation  from  Philo.  The  question  in  the 
verse  is  this — How  should  the  blood  of  Christ 
have  so  unlimited  value  as  compared  w^ith 
that  of  bulls  and  goats  ?  The  reply  is  found 
in  the  phrase  "  by  an  eternal  spirit."  Philo 
in  one  place  says  that  a  man  has  two  souls : 
the  blood,  the  soul  of  the  man  as  a  whole ; 
the  Divine  spirit,  the  soul  of  his  higher 
nature.  "  We  may  conceive  our  author  as 
consciously  or  unconsciously  re-echoing  the 
sentiment,  and  saying :  '  Yes,  the  blood,  ac- 
cording to  the  Scriptures,  is  the  soul  of  a 
living  animal,  and  in  the  blood  of  the  slain 
victim  its  soul  or  life  was  presented  as  an 
offering  to  God  by  the  officiating  priest.  But 
in  connection  with  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  we 
must  think  of  the  higher  human  soul,  the 
Divine  spirit.  It  was  as  a  spirit  He  offered 
Himself,  as  a  self-conscious,  free,  moral 
personality ;  and  His  offering  was  a  spirit 
revealed  through  a  never-to-be-forgotten 
act  of  self-surrender,  not  the  literal  blood 
shed  on  Calvary,  which  in  itself  possessed 
no  more  intrinsic  value  than  the  blood  of 
Levitical  victims.' " 

Ver.  22.  Projntiation  hy  Sacrifice. — It  has 
often  been  remarked  that  the  idea  of  pro- 
pitiation by  sacrifice  is  to  be  found  in 
connection  with  all  the  sacrifices  of  heathen 
nations.  This  is  strikingly  illustrated  by 
the  following  account  of  one  of  the  festivals 
of  the  North  American  Indians : — Dr. 
Edward  Walsh  describes  a  village,  the 
houses  of  which  surrounded  a  large  green 
or  common,  in  the  centre  of  which  the 
council-house  or  temple  was  erected.  "  It 
was  lighted,"  he  says,  "  by  a  few  small, 
square  apertures,  close  to  the  eaves,  which 
also  let  out  the  smoke ;  consequently,  it 
was  somewhat  dark.     The  door  facing  the 

322 


west  had  a  rude  but  spacious  portico.    The 
roof,  which  had  a  high  pitch,  was  propped 
up   within  by  four   strong  posts,   between 
which  was  the  hearth,  with  a  large  kettle 
over  it.     There  was  a  seat  all  round,  and 
the  walls,  which  were  formed  of  split  plank, 
were  half-way  up  covered  with  mats.    Here 
we   found  a  great  number  of  Indians  as- 
sembled.    The  women  were  ranged  outside 
the  wall,  and  the  men  surrounded  the  fire 
inside,  at  the  head  of  whom  was  the  high 
priest   in   his    pontificals.       His    face   was 
painted  like  the  quarterings   of  a  coat  of 
arms,  and  he  was  furnished  with  a  beard : 
he  wore  on  his  head  a  high  tiara  of  beaver 
fur,  stuck  round  with  dyed  porcupine  quills  : 
he  had  over  his  chest  a  kind  of  stomacher, 
worked  in    figures,   and    ornamented  with 
wampum,  which  was  supposed  to  represent 
the  Jewish   Urim  and  Thummim ;   in   this, 
the  Indians  imagine  some  little  spirit  resides, 
which  they  talk  to  and  consult  in  dubious 
events.     Whilst  the  usual  dance  or  chorus 
was   performing,    a    dog  which    had    been 
previously  selected  and  fattened  was  boiling 
in  the  kettle :  when  cooked,  the  flesh  was 
cut  off,   and  the  bones  scraped  clean   and 
wrapped  up  in  its  skin.    The  flesh  was  then 
divided  into  small  bits,  and  handed  round 
on    a    wooden    platter,   to    all    those  that 
surrounded  the  fire  :  at  the  same  time,  the 
high  priest  dipped  a  branch  of  hemlock  pine 
in  the  broth,  and  sprinkled  it  everywhere, 
as  well  on  the  people  as  on  the  walls.     The 
ceremony  concluded  with  the  circular  dance 
and  chant,  in  which  the  women  joined.   This 
chant,  or  hymn,  is  sung  by  all  the  Indian 
nations  in    North    America,   however   they 
may  differ  in  custom  and  language.     Hum- 
boldt even  heard  it  in  Mexico,  and  it  is 
supposed  to  be  synonymous  with  the  halle- 
lujah of  the  Psalms.    It  was  pricked  down 
for  me  by  a   gentleman  who   understood 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   IX. 


musical  composition.  To  my  ears  it  sounds 
like  the  lullaby  of  the  nursery  : — 

'  Tarn  le  yah  al  lah  le  lu  lah  tam  ye  lah  yo 
ha  wah  ha  ha  hah  I ' 

It  must  be  admitted  that  this  ceremony 
bears  some  rude  resemblance  to  the  feast 
of  the  Passover,  substituting  a  dog  for  a 
lamb,  of  which  they  have  none ;  but  dogs 
are  sacrificed  on  all  solemn  occasions." 

Eastern  Covenant  Customs. — While  in 
Abyssinia,  Bruce  the  traveller  wished  to  go 
from  one  place  to  another,  and  the  sheikh 
had  assured  him  that  the  journey  might  be 
undertaken  with  safety.  "  But,"  said  Bruce, 
"  suppose  your  people  meet  us  in  the  desert, 
how  shall  we  fare  in  that  case  ?  Should  we 
fight  ?  "  "I  have  told  you,  sheikh,  already," 
said  he,  "  cursed  be  the  man  that  lifts  his 
hand  against  you,  or  even  does  not  defend 
and  befriend  you  to  his  own  loss,  even  were 
it  Ibrahim,  my  own  son."  Then  after  some 
conversation,  the  old  man  muttered  some- 
thing to  his  sons  in  a  dialect  Bruce  did  not 
understand,  and  in  a  little  time  the  whole 
hut  was  filled  with  people,  the  priests  and 
monks  of  their  religion,  and  the  heads  of 
families.  "  The  great  people  joined  hands, 
and  uttered  a  kind  of  prayer — really  the 
oath-^about  two  minutes  long,  by  which 
they  declared  themselves  and  their  children 
accursed  if  ever  they  lifted  their  hands 
against  me  in  the  field,  in  the  desert,  or 
on  the  river ;  or,  in  case  that  I  or  mine 
should  fly  to  them  for  refuge,  if  they  did 
not  protect  us  at  the  risk  of  their  lives, 
their  families,  and  their  fortunes,  or  as  they 
emphatically  expressed  it,  '  to  the  death  of 
the  last  male  child  among  them.'  Medicines 
and  advice  were  given  on  my  part,  faith  and 
promises  pledged  on  theirs  ;  then  two  bushels 
of  wheat  and  seven  sheep  were  carried  down 
to  my  boat." 

Classical  Covenant  Customs. — An  ancient 
writer  relates  that  Agamemnon,  the  leader 
of  the  Greeks  at  the  siege  of  Troy,  "  to 
confirm  his  faith  sworn  to  Achilles,  ordered 
victims  to  be  brought.  He  took  one,  and 
with  his  sword  divided  it  in  the  midst, 
placed  the  pieces  opposite  to  each  other, 
and  holding  his  sword,  reeking  with  blood, 
passed  between  the  separated  pieces."  Livy, 
the  Roman  historian,  relates  that  in  the  time 
of  Philip  of  Macedon,  father  of  Alexander 


the  Great,  it  was  the  custom,  at  the  lustration 
or  purification  of  the  armies,  to  cut  off  the 
head  of  a  dog,  and  then  make  the  whole 
army  file  between  the  head  and  the  trunk. 
Compare  Jer.  xxxiv.  18. 

The  Scottish  League  and  Covenant. — The 
most  remarkable  modern  reproduction  of  the 
ancient  covenant  may  be  found  in  Scottish 
history.  It  was  a  confession  of  faith  made 
in  the  year  557,  A.D.,  and  a  mutual  agreement 
to  maintain  that  confession  even  at  peril  of 
death.  "  As  the  hour  drew  near  people 
from  all  quarters  flocked  to  the  spot,  and 
before  the  commissioners  appeared  the 
Greyfriars  Church  and  Churchyard,  Edin- 
burgh, were  densely  filled  with  the  gravest, 
the  wisest,  and  the  best  of  Scotland's  pious 
sons  and  daughters.  The  long  roll  of  parch- 
ment was  brought,  the  meaning  and  purpose 
of  the  covenant  explained.  Then  a  deep  and 
solemn  pause  ensued;  not  the  pause  of 
irresolution,  but  of  modest  diffidence,  each 
thinking  every  other  more  worthy  than 
himself  to  place  the  first  name  upon  this 
sacred  bond.  An  aged  nobleman,  the 
venerable  Earl  of  Sutherland,  at  last  stepped 
slowly  and  reverentially  forward,  and  with 
throbbing  heart  and  trembling  hand  sub- 
scribed Scotland's  covenant  with  God.  All 
hesitation  in  a  moment  disappeared.  Name 
followed  name  in  quick  succession,  till  all 
within  the  Church  had  given  their  signatures. 
It  was  then  removed  into  the  churchyard, 
and  spread  out  on  a  level  gravestone.  Here 
the  scene  became  still  more  impressive. 
The  intense  emotions  of  many  became  irre- 
pressible. Some  wept  aloud ;  some  burst 
into  a  shout  of  exultation  ;  some  after  their 
names  added  the  words  '  till  death ' ;  and 
some,  opening  a  vein,  subscribed  with  their 
own  warm  blood.  And  when  every  particle 
of  space  was  filled,  there  was  another  solemn 
pause.  The  nation  had  framed  a  covenant 
in  former  days,  and  had  violated  its  engage- 
ments ;  if  they,  too,  should  break  this  sacred 
bond,  how  deep  would  be  their  guilt !  Such 
seems  to  have  been  their  thought ;  for,  as 
if  moved  by  one  spirit — the  one  eternal 
Spirit— with  low,  heart- wrung  groans,  and 
faces  bathed  in  tears,  they  lifted,  with  one 
consent,  their  right  hands  to  heaven,  avow- 
ing by  this  sublime  appeal  that  they  had 
now  joined  themselves  unto  the  Lord  in  an 
everlasting  covenant,  which  should  not  be 
forgotten." — T.  Guthrie. 


V  . 


323 


CHAP.  X.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAPTER  X. 
CHKIST'S   ONE   SACRIFICE  IS  ALTOGETHER   SUFFICIENT. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

The  first  eighteen  verses  of  this  chapter  are  in  the  nature  of  a  summary  of  what  has  already 
been  presented,  with  some  further  unfoldings  of  the  argument.  One  point  is  made 
especially  prominent ;  it  is  that  the  repetition  of  the  olden  sacrifices  testified  to  their 
inadequacy,  while  Christ's  one  offering  is  perpetually  availing  to  complete  the  purification 
of  those  who  are  affected  by  it.  The  main  thesis  of  the  writer  should  be  kept  well  before 
the  mind.  He  argues  that  the  Jewish  sacrifices  availed  for  nothing  more  than  external 
or  ceremonial  purifications,  but  the  one  offering  of  the  obedient  will  of  Christ  purifies  the 
soul  or  mind  (^(yvveibrjcnv^  from  the  uncleanness  of  sin,  and  renders  it  capable  of  offering 
acceptable  service  to  the  living  God. 

Ver.  1.  The  law. — Used  here  for  the  Mosaic  system  or  dispensation.  The  term  is  used 
in  the  New  Testament  with  other  meanings,  such  as  the  Ten  Commandments,  the  general 
law  relations  of  God  with  man.  See  St.  Paul's  use  of  the  word  in  Romans  and  Galatians. 
Shadow. — Imperfect  sketch.  Very  image. — Full  representation.  The  words  cklolv  and  eUibv 
are  related,  as  the  Latin  umhra  and  effigies  are.  See  chap.  i.  3.  Stuart  gives  the  point  of 
the  sentence  thus :  "  The  law  did  not  go  so  far  as  to  exhibit  a  full  image  of  future  blessings, 
but  only  a  slight  adumbration."  Farrar  quotes  the  following  sentence  from  St.  Ambrose : 
"The  Law  had  the  Shadow ;  the  Gospel  the  Image  ;  the  Reality  itself  is  in  Heaven."  Good 
things  to  come. — See  chap.  ix.  11.  The  spiritual  things  of  the  new  dispensation.  Christ 
is  the  very  image  of  God.  Christ's  work  is  the  very  image  of  heavenly  realities.  Only 
it  is  the  image,  not  the  reality.  Can  never. — This  vital  imperfection  lay  in  those  older 
sacrifices.  Perfect. — Much  importance  attaches  to  the  writer's  use  of  this  word.  Compare 
chap.  ix.  9,  10.  It  is  used  here  in  the  sense  of  fully  meeting  the  whole  circle  of  our  spiritual 
need.  The  ineffectiveness  of  the  sacrifices  is  shown  in  the  fact  that  the  sense  of  sin  which 
they  are  supposed  to  remove  recurs  again,  so  that  fresh  sacrifices  are  found  necessary. 

Ver.  2.  Not  have  ceased. — The  Mosaic  ritual  might  have  been  retained  if  it  had  proved 
efficient.  The  precise  thought  here  is,  however,  rather  this — *'  If  the  offerings  could  have 
perfected  those  who  presented  them,  would  not  the  offerings  have  ceased  ? "  It  might  be 
answered,  "  They  would  have  ceased  so  far  as  concerned  the  offerers  once  purged,  but  they 
would  have  had  to  be  constantly  renewed  for  the  sake  of  other  worshippers."  Conscience. — 
(Tvueid7)aiv ;  apprehension  of  the  consequences  of  sin  ;  consciousness  of  guilt.  Pardon  does 
not  remove  the  fact  of  our  guilt,  nor  destroy  the  memory  of  it,  but  it  does  remove  the  fear 
of  penalty,  and  bring  a  sense  of  freedom. 

Ver.  3.  Remembrance. — By  the  repetition  of  the  same  sacrifice  for  the  same  person.  The 
writer  dwells  on  his  point  so  fully,  because  this  view  of  the  essential  imperfection  of 
Judaism  would  be  exceedingly  distasteful  to  his  Jewish  readers.  But  the  inefficiency  would 
not  be  apparent  to  those  who  lived  under  the  Mosaic  dispensation.  It  came  to  view  only 
when  the  higher  and  spiritual  dispensation  was  introduced.  In  the  light  of  Christianity 
the  weakness  of  Judaism  appears.  Farrar's  note  on  this  verse  is  specially  suggestive : 
"This  view  of  sacrifices — that  they  are  'a  calling  to  mind  of  sins  yearly' — is  very  remarkable. 
It  seems  to  be  derived  from  Num.  v.  15,  where  'the  offering  of  jealousy'  is  called  'an 
offering  of  memorial,  bringing  iniquity  to  remembrance.'  Philo  also  speaks  of  sacrifices 
as  providing,  'not  an  oblivion  of  sins,  but  a  reminder  of  them.'  But  if  the  sacrifices  thus 
called  sins  to  remembrance,  they  also  daily  symbolised  the  means  of  their  removal,  so  that 
when  offered  obediently  with  repentance  and  faith  they  became  valid  symbols." 

Ver.  4. — "  This  verse  explains  those  which  precede.  No  inconsistency  really  belonged  to 
these  sacrifices  and  this  ceremonial,  though  so  often  repeated ;  for  it  was  impossible  that 
any  such  sacrifice  should  really  remove  sin.  The  offering  was  necessary,  and  it  answered 
its  purpose  ;  but  it  could  not  remove  the  necessity  for  another  and  a  better  offering " 
{Monlton).  Not  possible.— Compare  1  Sam.  xv.  22;  Tsa.  i.  11-17;  Jer.  vi.  20,  vii.  21-23; 
Amos  V.  21-24;  Mic.  vi.  6-8;  Hos.  vi.  6;  Ps.  xl.  6-8,  etc.  "Sins"  and  "blood  of 
animals  "  have  no  necessary  relation  to  each  other ;  none  save  that  which,  for  teaching 
purposes,  God  pleases  to  fix*  to  them.  Sins  can  only  be  taken  away  by  spritual  influences 
exerted  on  spiritual  conditions.  All  physical,  material  sacrifices  are  symbols  of  spiritual 
things.  So  is  Christ's  hodily  sacrifice.  (See  Outline  Homily  on  chap.  ix.  22.)  Sins.— Properly 
and  precisely  speaking,  sin  is  not  a  particular  act  which  is  done,  but  the  wilful  condition 
of  the  mind,  for  which  the  act  only  finds  expression.  In  this  verse  not  penalties  are  dealt 
with,  but  sins.  All  sacrifices  had  their  value,  not  in  themselves,  but  in  the  spiritual  condition 
of  the  worshippers,  as  is  clearly  seen  in  the  cases  of  Cain  and  Abel,  the  first  sacrificers. 

324 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS.  chap.  X. 


Ver.  5.  Wlien  He  cometh. — As  antitype  ;  spiritual  realisation.  See  Ps.  xl.  7.  Sacrifice 
and  offering. — The  two 'classes  of  sacrifice  that  Judaism  demanded.  Victims  sacrificed; 
slaughtered  beasts ;  and  unbloody  offerings  expressing  gratitude  and  dependence.  Wouldest 
not. — See  ver.  7.  No  desire  for  any  more  such  ;  desire  now  is  for  the  reality  that  was 
symbolised  in  them.  A  body  hast  Thou  prepared  Me.— The  Hebrew  seems  to  mean,  "  Mine 
ears  hast  Thou  opened,"  or  "  ears  hast  Tliou  dug,  or  hollowed  out,  for  Me."  The  Hebrews 
speak  of  "  opening  the  ears,"  and  of  "  uncovering  the  ears,"  in  order  to  designate  the  idea 
of  prompt  obedience,  of  attentive  listening  to  the  commands  of  any  one.  The  idea,  "  Mine 
ears  hast  Thou  bored  through  in  token  of  My  servitude,"  does  not  appear  at  all  suitable  here. 
Better  read,  *'  Thou  hast  given  Me  the  power  of  hearing,  so  as  to  obey.  A  channel  of 
communication  has  been  opened,  through  which  the  knowledge  of  God's  true  will  can  reach 
the  heart,  and  excite  the  desire  to  obey."  The  obedience  (sacrifice)  of  Christ  was  the 
full  surrender  of  His  will  to  the  will  of  God:  but  to  be  a  human  obedience,  bearing 
relation  to  us,  it  must  have  a  hody  sphere.  This  explains  the  physical  phase  of  the  great 
sacrifice. 

Ver.  6.  Burnt-offerings. — Should  be  "  whole  burnt-offerings."  These  represented  the  full 
surrender  of  himself  by  the  offerer,  when  they  were  made  really  spiritual  sacrifices. 
Usually  they  were  regarded  but  as  ceremonials.  The  idea  of  corrupt  Judaism  is,  that  God 
is  pleased  with  burnt-offerings  as  offerings,  and  for  their  own  sake. 

Ver.  7.  In  the  volume  of  the  book. — Besides  the  reference  to  Ps.  xl.,  the  writer 
intimates  that  this  is  the  general  burden  of  the  Messianic  allusions  in  the  Old  Testament 
Scriptures.  Come  to  do  Thy  will. — Clearly  stating  wherein  consists  the  true  spiritual 
sacrifice,  even  in  the  full  surrender  of  Christ's  whole  self  in  obedience  to  God,  through  life 
and  death.  Perfect  human  obedience  in  human  spheres  God  required.  He  who  rendered 
it  made  the  "  great  sacrifice." 

Ver.  10.  By  the  which  will.— Or  by  the  yielding  to  the  will,  in  obedience  unto  death. 
Or  by  the  voluntary  self-sacrifice  of  Christ.  We  are  sanctified. — Set  right  and  made  right. 
Observe  how  entirely  this  is  conceived  by  the  writer  in  a  spiritual  sense.  The  antitypical 
sacrifice  is  the  offering  of  the  will  of  Jesus,  in  obedience  to  the  Divine  will.  But  our  wills 
can  only  act,  and  gain  expression,  through  our  bodies  and  our  bodily  relations,  and  therefore 
our  liOrd's  sublime  self-surrender  took  a  bodily  form. 

Ver.  12.  This  man. — The  expression  is  intended  to  remind  us  of  His  relation  to  us  as 
federal  Head.  For  ever. — Or  as  we  use  the  word,  "  finally."  Never  again  to  be  repeated. 
Sat  down. — Implying  two  things  :  (1)  the  acknowledgment  of  the  acceptance  of  His 
sacrifice ;  and  (2)  the  delegation  to  Him  of  the  right  and  the  power  to  apply  to  men  the 
benefits  gained  by  the  sacrifice. 

Ver.  14.  Perfected  for  ever.— As  above,  "finally."  Not  "at  once,"  "entirely,"  "as  soon 
as  they  believe."     The  word  stands  in  relation  to  the  "  repetition  "  spoken  of  above. 

Vers.  15-18.  Holy  Ghost. — As  the  seal  and  witness.  The  redemption  wrought  by  Christ 
alters,  once  for  all,  our  standing  with  God.  But  this  writer  is  evidently  supremely  anxious 
to  impress  the  moral  value  and  sphere  of  the  redemptive  work.  Our  vital  and  saving 
relations  of  faith  and  love,  with  Christ,  bring  to  us  a  new  principle  of  obedience,  and 
inspiration  to  righteousness.  With  these  established  in  us,  all  the  past  of  our  sin  can 
be  freely  and  fully  forgiven.  This  concludes  the  doctrinal  portion  of  the  epistle,  and  the 
writer  proceeds  to  give  further  exhortations,  and  fresh  appeals  and  encouragements,  all 
clearly  intimating  that  his  main  purpose  was  not  speculative  or  theological,  but  practical 
and  moral.  Indeed,  the  w^riter  is  rather  a  rhetorician  than  a  theologian,  with  a  keener  eye 
to  the  setting  of  truth  that  tells  than  to  the  abstract  value  or  argumentative  soundness 
of  the  setting.  Under  the  influence  of  the  Alexandrian  School,  he  is  under  constant 
temptation  to  overpress  the  significance  of  single  words.  And,  altogether,  his  argument 
must  be  regarded  as  much  better  suited  to  the  mystical  mind  of  the  East  than  to  the 
logical  mind  of  the  West. 

Ver.  19. — Compare  chaps,  iv.  14-16.  Brethren. — A  sign  of  the  conciliatory  tone  which  the 
writer  is  anxious  to  preserve.  Boldness. — See  on  chaps,  iii.  6,  iv.  16.  Enter  into  the 
holiest. — Free  access  to  the  sanctuary.  This  point  the  writer  has  argued.  By  the  blood 
of  Jesus. — ev  rt^  ai/j,aTi.  Moulton  says,  "  It  is  not  that  we  enter  with  the  blood,  as  the  high 
priest  entered  the  Holy  of  Holies  (chap.  ix.  25) ;  no  comparison  is  made  between  Christ's 
people  and  the  Jewish  high  priest.  But  as  when  he  entered  within  the  veil  the  whole 
people  symbolically  entered  in  with  him,  so  do  we  enter  with  our  High  Priest,  who  '  by 
means  of  His  own  blood'  entered  for  us  into  the  immediate  presence  of  God.  In  that 
through  which  He  entered  we  have  our  '  boldness  to  enter.' " 

Ver.  20.  Consecrated.— Or  "  inaugurated."    His  flesh "  Through  His  suffering  humanity 

He  passed  to  H  is  glory." 

Ver.  21.  An  high  priest. — Upia  ixiyav,  a  great  priest.     See  Zech.  vi.  11-13. 

Ver.  22.  Sprinkled,  etc. — Allusion  is  to  the  ceremonies  by  which  the  Jewish  priests 
were  cleansed  from  ceremonial  defilements.  The  writer  thinks  of  Christian  believers  as 
being  "  priests  unto  God  "  (Rev.  i.  5,  6). 

325 


CHAP.  X.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREW^. 


Ver.  23. — For  faith,  R.V.  properly  reads  *'  hope."  Without  wayering. — Or,  "  so  that  it 
do  not  bend." 

Ver.  24.  Provoke. — A  singular  word  to  use  here,  because  it  is  generally  employed  in  a 
bad  sense.  There  seems  to  be  an  implied  reproof  of  the  contentions  of  the  disciples,  which 
had  been  *  provocations  "  in  a  bad  sense. 

Ver.  26.  Sin  wilfully. — Such  sins  contrast  with  sins  of  ignorance,  frailty,  and  error. 
Involving  the  will,  they  put  men  outside  the  influence  of  remedial  or  recovering  agencies. 
No  more  sacrifice  for  sins. — Lit.  "  no  sacrifice  for  sins  is  any  longer  left  to  them."  They 
wilfully  reject  that,  and  there  is  no  other  for  them.  It  is  distinctly  assumed  that  the  man 
keeps  in  this  wilful  mind.  If  he  comes  to  a  better  mind,  he  comes  within  the  range  of 
the  sacrifice  that  has  been  provided.  "  The  writer  does  not  say  that  they  have  exhausted 
the  infinite  mercy  of  God,  nor  can  we  justly  assert  that  he  held  such  a  conclusion ;  he  only 
says  that  they  have,  so  long  as  they  continue  in  such  a  state,  put  themselves  out  of  God's 
covenant,  and  that  there  are  no  other  covenanted  means  of  grace." 

Ver.  27.  Fiery  indignation. — R.V.  "a  certain  fearful  expectation  of  judgment,  and  a 
fierceness  of  fire."  Lit.  "  a  jealousy  of  fire."  The  Hebrew  suggests  "  vehement  displeasure." 
Compare  chap.  xii.  29 ;  Ps.  Ixxix.  5.  Devour  the  adversaries. — Not  sinners  generally, 
but  specifically  the  impenitent  Jews  and  the  wilful  apostates  from  the  Christian  faith. 
"  All  who  oppose  themselves  to  the  character,  claims,  and  kingdom  of  Christ."  Farrar's 
hint  concerning  the  limitation  of  this  threatening  deserves  careful  consideration  :  **  It  is 
at  least  doubtful  whether  the  writer  meant  to  imply  anything  beyond  that  prophecy  of 
doom  to  the  heirs  of  the  old  covenant  which  was  fulfilled*  a  few  years  later,  when  the  fire 
of  God's  wrath  consumed  the  whole  system  of  a  Judaism  which  had  rejected  its  own 
Messiah." 

Ver.  29.  Punishment. — Here  the  word  used  (rLixuiplas)  means  "  vengeance,"  or  "  retribution." 
"Vindictive  punishment  can  only  be  attributed  to  God  by  the  figure  of  speech  known  as 
anthropopathy ,  i.e.  the  representation  of  God  by  metaphors  drawn  from  human  passions." 
Trodden  underfoot. — A  strong  figure  taken  from  our  way  of  treating  a  thing  that  we  despise. 
Blood  of  the  covenant. — See  chap.  xiii.  20.  Done  despite  unto. — Openly  insulted  ;  ew^plaas, 
only  here  in  New  Testament ;  treating  with  spite,  malignity,  or  contempt.  Spirit  of  grace. — 
The  Spirit  who  bestows  grace,  i.e.  gospel  favours  and  privileges.  It  is  not,  however,  quite 
clear  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  referred  to. 

Ver.  32.  Illuminated. — Enlightened,  by  the  preaching  of  the  Christian  truth.  (Compare 
2  Cor.  iv.  6 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  9.)  At  a  later  period  the  word  (pioTLcrdiuTes  became  a  synonym 
for  "  to  baptise." 

Ver.  33.  Gazing-stock. — Lit.  "as  one  set  on  a  theatrical  stage." 

Ver.  34.  In  heaven. — An  incorrect  reading.  R.V.  has,  *'  knowing  that  ye  yourselves  have 
a  better  possession  and  an  abiding  one."  Moulton  thinks  the  translation  should  be, 
"  perceiving  that  ye  have  your  own  selves  for  a  better  possession  and  one  that  abideth." 
"  He  points  them  to  the  tranquil  self-possession  of  a  holy  heart,  the  acquisition  of  our  own 
souls,  as  a  sufficient  present  consolation  for  the  loss  of  earthly  goods,  independently  of  the 
illimitable  future  hope." 

Ver.  38.  The  just  shall  live  by  faith. — A  much-disputed  sentence.  In  some  manuscripts  the 
word  ixov  is  found,  which  alters  the  idea  of  the  clause.  6  dk  diKatos  ixov  e/c  iriffTeojs  i^rjo-eraiy 
would  mean,  "  But  My  righteous  one  shall  live  by  faith."  In  the  Hebrew  of  Habakkuk 
the  word  "faith"  means  "faithfulness"  or  "fidelity";  and  that  is  probably  the  writer's 
meaning  here.  He  is  commending  steadfastness  as  opposed  to  defection  from  the  faith. 
"  But  the  thought  of  faithful  constancy  to  God  is  inseparably  connected  with  trustful 
clinging  to  Him."    A  man  lives  indeed  if  he  is  faithful. 

MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—10. 

The  Shadow  and  Image  of  Sojcrijice. — The  law  of  all  effective  teaching  is, 
*'  Simplify  and  repeat."  This  writer  does  not  hesitate  to  repeat,  endeavouring 
to  fix  on  attention  the  points  which  he  regards  as  of  supreme  importance.  In 
the  first  portion  of  this  chapter  there  is  a  summary  of  previous  teachings.  He 
had  previously  spoken  of  the  *'  law,"  or  ceremonial  and  sacrificial  system  of 
Judaism,  as  a  copy,  or  shadow,  of  heavenly  or  spiritual  things  (chap.  viii.  5). 
He  does  not  deny  the  value  of  the  shadow,  but  it  is  a  value  which  strictly 
belongs  to  it  as  a  shadow,  and  we  must  never  get  to  value  it  for  its  own 
sake,  only  for  the  sake  of  the  reality,  whose  existence,  and  whose  presence, 
it  indicates.  "  Shadow "  is  an  imperfect  sketch,  a  mere  outline,  a  slight 
representation  or  resemblance.     "  Image  "  is  a  picture  filled  out  or  completed, 

326 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  x. 


and  made,  in  all  its  minuter  parts,  to  resemble  the  original.  Illustration  may 
be  found  by  contrasting  the  black  outline  portraits,  which  were  the  fashion 
fifty  years  ago — mere  shadows  of  our  friends— and  the  modern  photographs, 
which  give  us  their  very  image.  But  we  need  not  be  so  strictly  limited  to  the 
exact  meaning  of  the  terms  which  this  writer  uses.  And  this  explanation 
hardly  seems  to  catch  his  point  of  distinction.  A  shadow  is  not  an  independent 
thing.  It  is  thrown  by  something.  Something  real,  substantial,  exists,  which 
casts  the  shadow,  and  which  the  shadow,  in  some  imperfect  way,  represents. 
To  this  writer  the  spiritual  relations  of  men  with  God,  as  secured  by  the  spiritual 
sacrifice  of  the  spiritual  High  Priest,  form  the  reality,  the  thing  itself,  the 
**  image  "  ;  and  the  material,  outward,  ceremonial  system  of  Judaism  was  the 
shadow  which  it  flung  on  earth  beforehand,  to  give  men  some  outline  idea  of  it, 
and  prepare  them  for  realising  it  fully  by-and-by.     Taking  this  view,  we  inquire — 

I.  What  the  "  shadow  "  was. — A  system  of  rules,  rites,  sacrifices  ;  involving 
a  material  tabernacle,  articles  of  furniture,  and  an  order  of  priesthood.  All 
Divinely  arranged,  and  bearing  Divine  authority.  In  no  sense  to  be  thought  of 
as  an  independent  system,  or  an  independent  revelation.  It  was  the  shadow  that 
belonged  to  something,  and  told  of  what  it  belonged  to.  No  man  ever  saw  it 
aright  without  saying,  "  What  can  that  be  which  has  caused  this  shadow  ?  " 

II.  What  the  **  shadow  "  could  do. — Meet  the  needs  of  the  hour,  which  were 
not  purely  spiritual  needs.  Religious  education  was  then  in  no  sense  complete. 
It  was  in  its  pictorial  stage.  The  nation  of  Israel  was  then  in  its  formative 
period.  It  was  getting  all  its  civil,  social,  and  governmental  relations  pvit  into 
order.  All  its  interest  was  in  outward  things,  and  its  religion  had  to  be  in 
harmony,  and  to  be  concerned  also  with  outward  things.  So  the  "shadow" 
religious  system  was  occupied  with  arranging  religious  affairs,  and  rectifying 
them  when  they  became  disturbed. 

III.  What  the  "  shadow  "  could  not  do. — Satisfy  spiritual  needs.  Deal  with 
the  personal,  the  soul,  relations  of  men  with  God,  who  bore  on  them  the  con- 
science of  sin.  The  shadow  could  take  away  ceremonial  penalties  :  it  could  not 
take  away  sin.  It  could  not  "make  the  comers  thereunto  perfect."  It  might 
help  the  spiritually- minded  to  enter  into  that  spiritual  reahty,  that  eternal 
meaning  of  things,  which  its  outline  could  only  suggest. 

IV.  What  the  "  Image "  was. — A  spiritual  High  Priest,  abiding  ever  in  the 
presence  of  God  mediating  for  man.  The  spiritual  and  infinitely  acceptable 
sacrifice  of  the  High  Priest  Himself.  The  offering  of  a  spotless  life  of  obedience, 
tested  and  proved  by  the  strain  of  an  awful  death.  That  sacrifice  ever  in  God's 
view,  because  the  Priest  is  always  before  Him.  And  a  spiritual  covenant  which 
pledges,  not  the  mere  shaping  of  conduct,  but  the  renewal  of  men's  hearts  and 
wills  ;  the  implanting  of  a  love  which  will  make  obedience  both  easy  and  acceptable. 

V.  What  the  "  Image  "  could  not  do. — Fit  to  the  age  that  was  past ;  or  to 
those  who  persisted  in  keeping  the  attitude,  and  limited  capacity,  that  properly 
belonged  to  the  past.  The  times  were  changed ;  men's  spiritual  instincts  were 
awakened ;  and  the  system  that  was  called  for  could  do  nothing  for  those  who 
kept  down  on  the  materiaUstic,  symbohcal,  and  ceremonial  levels.  Farrar 
illustrates  the  awakened  spiritual  feeling  of  the  times  in  which  the  epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  was  written  when  he  says  :  "  Philo,  in  one  of  his  finest  passages,  shows 
how  deeply  he  had  realised  that  sacrifices  were  valueless,  apart  from  holiness, 
and  that  no  mere  external  acts  can  cleanse  the  soul  from  moral  guilt.  He  adds 
that  God  accepts  the  innocent  even  when  they  offer  no  sacrifices,  and  delights  in 
unkindled  altars  if  the  virtues  dance  around  them.  The  heathen  had  learnt  the 
same  high  truths." 

VI.  What  the  "  Image  "  could  do. — Remove  sins — the  spiritual  penalties  that 
necessarily  follow  sins :  the  conscience  of  sins  which  always  burdens  when  the 

327 


CHAP.   X. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


spiritual  nature  of  sin  is  apprehended.  It  effected  the  purging,  or  cleansing 
away,  of  sinfulness,  which  in  its  essence  is  child-wilf ulness  ;  and  this  goes  when 
into  the  child-heart  is  put  again,  through  the  sacrifice,  mediation,  and  grace  of 
Christ,  the  spirit  of  child-obedience.  The  dispensation  which  is  the  very  image 
and  reality  can  make  men  and  women  once  again,  and  once  for  ever,  "sons  and 
daughters  of  the  Lord  God  Almighty."* 

The  relativity  of  a  religion  of  shadows. — The  ejfficiency  of  a  religion  of  shadows 
lies  in  its  relativity  to  a  particular  age,  and  a  particular  people.  The  Syrian 
Version  gives  the  first  sentence  of  ver.  1  thus  :  "  The  law — not  having  the  reality 
of  the  things."  The  Greek  word  for  "  image "  means,  not  a  resemblance  or 
likeness,  but  the  essential  form  of  a  thing.  It  stands  as  the  representative  of 
o-to/xa,  the  body  or  substance. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND    SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  1.  The  Imperfect  Efficie^y  of 
the  Jewish  Sacrifices. — "  They  can  never 
with  the  same  sacrifices  year  by  year, 
which  they  offer  continually,  make 
perfect  them  that  draw  nigh  "  (R.V.). 
Dr.  J.  Harris  says:  "What  is  the 
Jewish  economy,  if  we  desire  to  reach 
its  interior  truths,  but  a  vast,  pro- 
found, elaborated  enigma — to  which 
the  gospel,  indeed,  brings  us  the  key, 
but  the  opening  and  exploration  of 
which  is  yet  incomplete  ?  "  The  legal 
sacrifices,  being  offered  year  by  year, 
could  never  make  the  comers  thereunto 
perfect,  for  then  there  would  have 
been  an  end  of  offering  them.  Could 
they  have  satisfied  the  demands  of 
justice,  and  made  reconciliation  for 
iniquity — could  they  have  purified  and 
pacified  conscience — then  they  had 
ceased,  as  being  no  further  necessary, 
since  the  offerers  would  have  had  no 
more  sin  lying  upon  their  consciences. 
But  this  was  not  the  case ;  after  one 
day  of  atonement  was  over,  the  sinner 
would  fall  again  into  one  fault  or 
another,  and  so  there  would  be  need  of 
another  day  of  atonement,  and  of  one 
every  year,  besides  the  daily  minis- 
trations. Whereas  now,  under  the 
gospel,  the  atonement  is  perfect,  and 
not  to  be  repeated,  and  the  sinner, 
once  pardoned,  is  ever  pardoned  as  to 


his  state,  and  only  needs  to  renew  his 
repentance  and  faith,  that  he  may 
have  a  comfortable  sense  of  a  continued 
pardon.  As  the  legal  sacrifices  did 
not  of  themselves  take  away  sin,  so 
it  was  impossible  they  should  (ver.  4). 
There  was  an  essential  defect  in  them. 
1.  They  were  not  of  the  same  nature 
with  those  who  sinned.  2.  They  were 
not  of  sufficient  value  to  make  satis- 
faction for  the  affronts  offei'ed  to  the 
justice  and  government  of  God.  They 
were  not  of  the  same  nature  that 
offended,  and  so  could  not  be  suitable. 
Much  less  were  they  of  the  same 
nature  that  was  offended,  and  nothing 
less  than  the  nature  that  was  offended 
could  make  the  sacrifice  a  full  satis- 
faction for  the  offence.  3.  The  beasts 
offered  up  under  the  law  could  not 
consent  to  put  themselves  in  the 
sinner's  room  and  place.  The  atoning 
sacrifice  must  be  one  capable  of  con- 
senting, and  must  voluntarily  substi- 
tute himself  in  the  sinner's  stead : 
Christ  did  so. — Matth£,w  Henry. 

Ver.  2.  The  Bad  Consciousness  taken 
away. — The  reading  is,  not  "  conscience 
of  no  more  sins,"  as  if  the  sins  were 
stopped,  but  "  no  more  conscience  of 
sins,"  as  if  the  conscience  of  sins 
already  past  were  somehow  extirpated. 


*  An  image  is  an  exact  draft  of  the  thing  represented  thereby.  The  law  did  not  go 
so  far,  but  was  only  a  shadow,  as  the  image  of  a  person  in  a  looking-glass  is  a  much  more 
perfect  representation  than  his  shadow  upon  the  wall.  The  law  was  a  very  rough  draft  of 
the  great  design  of  Divine  grace,  and  therefore  not  to  be  so  much  doted  on. — MattJww  Henry. 

328 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  HEBREWS. 


CHAP.  X. 


or  else  the  sins  taken  quite  away  from 
it,  and  for  ever  extirpated  themselves, 
as  facts,  or  factors  of  the  life.  How 
is  it,  or  how  is  it  to  be  imagined,  that 
Christ,  by  His  sacrifice,  takes  away 
the  condemning  conscience,  or  the  felt 
dishonour  of  transgression  ? 

I.  The  supposed  answers  that  are 
not  sufficient. — When  it  is  conceived 
that  Christ  has  borne  our  punishment, 
that,  if  it  were  true,  might  take  away 
our  fear  of  punishment ;  but  fear  is 
one  thing,  and  mortified  honour,  self- 
condemning  guilt,  self-chastising  re- 
morse, another  and  very  different 
thing.  Neither  will  it  bring  any  relief 
to  show  that  the  justice  of  God  is 
satisfied.  Be  it  so ;  the  transgressor 
is  none  the  better  satisfied  with  him- 
self. Is  it  conceived  that  what  has 
satisfied  the  justice  of  God  has  also 
atoned  the  guilty  conscience  ?  Will 
it  then  make  the  guilty  conscience 
less  guilty,  or  say  sweeter  things  of 
itself,  that  it  sees  innocence,  purity, 
goodness  Divine,  put  to  suffering  for 
it  ?  Is  it  then  brought  forward  to 
quell  the  guilt  of  the  conscience  that 
Christ  has  evened  our  account  legally 
by  His  sacrifice,  and  that  we  are  even 
justified  of  God  for  Christ's  sake? 
But  if  God  calls  us  just,  do  we  any 
the  less  certainly  disapprove  ourselves  ? 
Forgiveness,  taken  as  a  mere  release 
of  claim,  or  a  negative  letting  go  of 
right  against  transgression,  brings,  if 
possible,  even  less  help  to  the  conscience. 
Christ  had  forgiven  His  crucifiers  in 
His  dying  prayer,  but  it  was  the  very 
crime  of  the  cross,  nevertheless,  that 
pricked  so  many  hundred  hearts  on 
the  Day  of  Pentecost.  But  Christ 
renews  the  soul  itself,  it  will  be  said, 
and  makes  it  just  within,  when,  of 
course,  it  will  be  justified.  That  does 
not  follow.  But  the  fatherhood  of 
God — the  disciple  of  another  school 
will  take  refuge  under  that,  and  say 
that  here,  at  least,  there  is  truly  no 
more  conscience  of  sin.  Conscience,  in 
man,  is  God's  throne  of  judgment  in 
the  man.  If  God,  in  His  fatherhood, 
were  a  being  dealing  in  laxities  and 
fond  accommodations,  having  no  care 


for  His  rectoral  honour,  as  the  defender 
of  right  and  order,  we  certainly  are 
not  such  to  ourselves. 

II.  The  answer  that  is  given  by 
the  Scriptures  of  God.— Is  it  possible, 
and  how  far  possible,  to  change  the 
consciousness  of  a  soul,  without  any 
breach  of  its  identity  ?  In  this  manner, 
we  shall  find,  the  gospel  undertakes  to 
remove,  and  assumes  the  fact  of  the 
removal  of,  the  dishonour  and  self- 
condemnation  of  sin.  See  first  certain 
analogies.  A  thoroughly  venal,  low- 
principled  man,  elected  President  of  the 
United  States,  will  undergo,  not  un- 
likely, an  inward  lifting  of  sentiment 
and  impulse,  corresponding  with  the 
immense  lift  of  his  position.  He 
wants  to  deserve  the  place,  and  begins 
to  act  in  character  in  it.  How  many 
thousand  soldiers,  who  before  were 
living  in  the  low,  mean  vices,  lost  to 
character  and  self-respect,  have  been 
raised,  in  like  manner,  in  our  armies, 
to  quite  another  grade  of  being  !  The 
same  is  true,  in  a  different  way,  of 
all  the  gifted  ones  in  art  and  speech 
and  poetry  when  they  are  taken  by 
the  inspirations  of  genius.  When  such 
a  soul,  that  was  down  upon  the  level 
of  uses,  torturing  itself  into  production 
for  applause,  begins  to  behold  God's 
signature  upon  His  works,  then  he 
becomes  to  himself  quite  another 
creature.  In  such  examples  we  are 
made  familiar  with  the  possibility  of 
remarkable  liftings  in  the  consciousness 
of  men,  such  as  make  them  really 
other  to  .themselves,  and  set  them  in 
a  higher  range  of  being;  and  we  are 
prepared  for  that  more  wonderful 
ascent  above  ourselves  which  is  accom- 
plished in  Christ,  when  He  takes  us 
away  from  the  conscience  of  sins.  He 
does  it  by  so  communicating  God,  or 
Himself  as  the  express  Image  of  God, 
that  He  changes,  in  fact,  the  plane  of 
our  existence.  The  very  thing  that 
Christianity  proposes  is  to  bring  us  up 
into  another  level,  where  the  conscious- 
ness shall  take  in  other  matter,  and 
have  a  higher  range.  But  you  will 
not  conceive  how  very  essential  this 
idea  of  a  raising  of  the  consciousness 

329 


CHAt>.  X. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


may  be,  if  you  do  not  bring  up  dis- 
tinctly the  immense  fall  of  our  moral 
consciousness  in  the  precipitation  of 
our  sin.  In  their  true  normal  con- 
dition, as  originally  created,  human 
souls  are  inherently  related  to  God, 
made  permeable  and  inspirable  by  Him, 
intended  to  move  in  His  Divine  impulse 
for  ever.  A  sponge  in  the  sea  is  not 
more  truly  made  to  be  filled  and 
permeated  by  the  water  in  which  it 
grows,  than  a  soul  to  be  permeated 
and  possessed  by  the  infinite  Life.  It 
is  so  made  that,  over  and  above  the 
little  tiny  consciousness  it  has  of  itself, 
it  may  have  a  grand,  all-inclusive  con- 
sciousness of  God.  In  that  conscious- 
ness it  was  to  be,  and  be  Hfted  and 
blessed  evermore.  But  this  higher 
consciousness,  the  consciousness  of  God, 
is  exactly  what  was  lost  in  transgres- 
sion, and  nothing  was  left  of  course 
but  the  little  defiled  consciousness  of 
ourselves,  in  which  we  are  all  contriving 
how  to  get  some  particles  of  good,  or 
pleasure,  or  pride,  or  passion,  that  will 
comfort  us.  The  true  normal  footing 
or  plane  of  our  humanity  was  thus  let 
down,  and  it  is  exactly  this  which 
Christ  undertakes  to  restore.  As  soon 
as  the  soul  is  opened  to  God,  by  the 
faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  is  truly  born 
of  God,  it  begins  to  be  the  higher 
creature  God  meant  it  to  be — the  same 
yet  another.  The  disciple,  raised  thus 
in  his  plane,  has  the  same  conscious- 
ness, and  remembers  the  same  sins,  and 
is  the  very  same  person  that  he  was 
before ;  but  the  consciousness  of  God, 
now  restored,  makes  him  so  nearly 
another  being  to  himself,  that  the  old 
torment  of  his  sin  will  scarcely  so  much 
as  ripple  the  flow  of  his  peace.  If 
Christ  is  purging  thus  men's  con- 
sciences, by  lifting  them  above  them- 
selves, into  a  higher  range  of  life,  the 
conception  will  appear  and  reappear, 
in  many  distinct  forms,  and  weave 
itself  in  so  many  varieties,  into  the 
whole  texture  of  Christianity.  Three 
of  the  forms  may  be  noticed  :  1 .  Justi- 
fication hy  faith.  Gospel  justification 
turns  on  no  such  mere  objective  matter 
as  the   squaring   of   an   account,  nor 

330 


on  any  such  subjective  matter  as  our 
being  made  inherently  righteous ;  but 
it  turns  on  the  fact  of  our  being  so 
invested  with  God,  and  closeted  in  His 
righteous  impulse,  that  He  becomes  a 
felt  righteousness  upon  us.  Inherently 
speaking,  we  are  not  righteous;  our 
store  is  in  God,  not  in  ourselves  ;  but 
we  have  the  supply  traductively  from 
Him,  just  as  we  have  the  supply  of  light 
from  the  sun.  But  the  new  Divine 
consciousness  in  which  we  live  is  con- 
tinually conforming  us,  more  and 
more  deeply,  and  will  settle  us  at  last, 
in  its  own  pure  habit.  It  is  "  the 
righteousness  of  God,  which  is  by  faith 
of  Jesus  Christ,  unto  all  and  upon  all 
them  that  believe."  It  is  a  higher 
consciousness  which  God  generates  and 
feeds,  and  as  long  as  He  does  it  there 
is  no  more  conscience  of  sins.  2.  The 
same  truth  of  a  raising  of  our  plane 
appears  in  what  is  called  the  witness  of 
the  Spirit.  Being  spirit,  we  are  per- 
meable by  the  Divine  Spirit,  and  He 
has  a  way  of  working  in  our  working, 
so  as  to  be  consciously  known  as  a 
better  presence  in  our  hearts.  3.  It 
is  also  presented  in  what  is  said  of 
the  conscious  inhabitation  of  Christ. 
*'  Until  Christ  be  formed  in  you." 
"  I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in 
me."  It  is  as  if  Paul's  being  itself 
were  taken  well-nigh  out  of  its  identity 
by  Christ  revealed  in  it.  The  old  sin 
he  does  not  think  of.  The  con- 
science of  sins — it  may  be  that  he  has 
it  in  a  sense ;  for,  being  an  eternal 
fact,  he  must  eternally  know  it ;  but 
the  Christ- consciousness  in  him  ranges 
so  high  above  the  self- consciousness, 
that  he  lives  in  a  summit  of  exaltation, 
which  the  infinitesimal  disturbances  of 
his  human  wrong  and  shame  cannot 
reach.  When  once  you  have  conceived 
the  possibility  of  raising  a  soul  into 
a  higher  grade  and  order,  where  the 
consciousness  shall  take  in  more 
than  the  mere  self,  the  body  of 
God's  own  righteousness  and  love 
and  peace,  the  problem  is  solved, 
and  that  in  a  way  so  plain,  yet  so 
easily  ennobling  to  our  state  of  shame, 
that  it  proves   itself  by  its  own  self- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.  X 


supporting  evidence. — Horace  Bushnell, 
D.D. 

Conscience  of  Sins  after  Ceremonies. — 
**  Should  have  had  no  more  conscience 
of  sins."  Ritual  religions  can  never 
deal  with  any  more  than  the  legal 
penalties  attending  on  sin,  and  the 
outward  relations  into  which  men  are 
brought  by  sin.  There  may  be  a 
personal  and  spiritual  religion  within 
the  ritual,  and  finding  expression 
through  it,  or  there  may  not.  The 
spiritual  religion  within  is  by  no 
means  essential  to  the  efficiency  of  the 
ritual  I'eligion,  so  far  as  it  goes.  But 
it  is  evident  that  no  ritual  religion  can 
alone  suffice  to  meet  the  necessities  of 
man  as  a  spiritual  being,  standing  in 
spiritual  relations ;  afflicted  in  con- 
science, as  well  as  disturbed  in  relations, 
by  sin.  No  ritual  ever  yet  cleansed 
a  conscience  of  its  sense  of  sin,  or 
lifted  from  a  soul  its  burden  of  guilt. 
This  may  be  effectively  illustrated  by 
the  religion  represented  by  the  book 
of  Psalms.  Such  psalms  as  the  thirty- 
second  and  fifty-first  biing  before  us 
men  who  have,  or  who  have  had,  the 
conscience  of  sin.  But  they  do  not 
seek  their  soul -relief  from  Levitical 
sacrifices,  from  any  routine  ceremonies. 
They  evidently  feel  instinctively  that 
these  cannot  meet  their  case.  They  go 
direct  to  God  Himself,  past  all  cere- 
monies and  symbols,  seeking  personal 
relations,  and  immediate  forgiveness. 

Ver.  4.  Everything  to  its  Sphere. — 
Everything  that  exists  by  nature,  and 
everything  that  takes  shape  "  by  art 
and  man's  device,"  has  its  proper  sphere, 
its  adaptation  to  that  sphere,  and  its 
efficiency  within  that  sphere.  Nothing 
can  be  its  real,  best  self,  nothing  can 
be  really  efficient,  outside  of  or  tran- 
scending its  proper  sphere.  It  does  not 
fit.  It  is  too  large,  or  too  small,  or 
otherwise.  Blood  of  bulls  and  goats 
has  a  sphere,  strictly  limited  to  the 
removal  of  ceremonial  uncleanness. 
It  is  efficient  there.  It  is  helpless  in 
the  sphere  of  soul-sin  and  burdened 
conscience. 


Yer.  5.  A  Living  Sacrifice. — These 
words,  as  used  of  Christ,  unfold  the 
mystery  of  His  redeeming  work  :  as 
used  by  the  psalmist,  they  show  us 
what  is  the  spirit  of  the  redeemed  life. 
Christ  did  not  come  to  offer  a  sacrifice 
in  Jewish  mode,  or  to  offer  Himself  in 
the  mode  in  which  a  Jewish  sacrifice 
was  offered ;  but  to  do  that  which 
the  sacrifices  of  Judaism  typified,  to 
offer  the  obedience  of  a  life,  and  that 
obedience  in  a  human  body.  1.  God 
does  not  ask  of  any  man  first  what  he 
has.  He  asks  first  for  the  man  him- 
self— what  he  is.  2.  If  any  man  is 
willing  to  give  God  what  he  is,  then 
that  man  will  find  that  God  is  willing 
to  accept  what  he  has.  3.  But  how 
far  may  the  distinction  between  what 
a  man  has,  and  what  a  man  is,  be 
carried  ?  In  life  we  have  to  do  with 
some  persons  who  want  what  we  have ; 
but  we  have  to  do  with  others — alto- 
gether dearer  ones — who  can  be  satisfied 
with  nothing  less  than  ourselves — what 
we  are ;  just  our  love  is  their  wealth. 
It  is  somewhat  thus  with  God.  The 
design  of  God  in  giving  us  what  we 
have,  is  that  by  means  of  it  we  may 
carry  ourselves  to  Him.  What  a  man 
is  includes  his  body.  Man  is  not  a 
spirit  only  ;  he  is  a  spirit  in  a  certain 
particular  body,  which  has  certain 
particular  relations.  So  we  never  can 
give  ourselves  to  God  until  we  give  Him 
soul  and  body  together.  Show  how 
much  larger  an  idea  of  the  '*  living 
sacrifice  "  this  is  than  is  generally  con- 
ceived. To  make  any  gift  acceptable 
to  any  one — and  certainly  to  God — a 
man  must  put  himself  into  the  gift. 
Our  bodies  must  carry  us  to  God,  as 
the  body  of  Jesus  (and  indeed  of  the 
psalmist)  carried  Him. 

The  A  tonement. — Why  is  the  doctrine 
of  the  Atonement  called  an  immoral 
doctrine?  It  is  based,  it  is  said,  on 
injustice.  The  point  on  which  the 
objector  has  fixed  is  the  substitution  of 
one  man  for  another  to  suffer  for  sin. 
But  he  does  not  take  the  doctrine  of 
substitution  as  represented  and  inter- 
preted by  Christian  teachers,  but  barely 

331 


CHAP.  X. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


and  nakedly,  simply  as  the  principle  of 
vicarious  punishment.     So  stated,  the 
notion   is   certainly   a    barbarous   one. 
But   God    cannot    regard    punishment 
apart  from  the    person  to  whom  it  is 
due.     He  cannot  be  appeased  by  pain 
as  such,  without  reference  to  the  bearer 
of  it.    He  cannot  be  contented,  so  long 
as   the   punishment   is    suffered,    that 
another  than   the   criminal   should  be 
the   sufferer.     Such  a  bald  notion    of 
atonement  does  not  require  that  the 
sacrifice  should  be  voluntary.     Punish- 
ment,   vicarious    or    other,    does    not 
require   a    voluntary  sufferer — only  a 
sufferer.     A  striking  illustration  of  an 
atonement   was    found    in    the    state 
religion  of  Mexico.     The  gospel  is,  that 
love  is  of  the  very  essence  of  sacrifice, 
and  that  there  cannot  be  sacrifice  with- 
out will.     In  the  case  of  Christ  there 
was   no    earthly    altar,    no    expiatory 
form,  no  visible  priest.     Nobody  could 
have  told,  either  from  His  life  or  from 
His  death,  that  He  was  a  victim.     He 
died  by  the  natural  course  of  events, 
as  the  effect  of  a  holy  and  courageous 
life  operating  upon  the  intense  jealousy 
of   a  class ;  He   died   by  civil  punish- 
ment ;  and  yet  in  heaven  that  death 
pleaded   as   the   sacrifice   that   taketh 
away  the  sin  of  the  world.     But  that 
sacrifice  was  a  willing  self-offered  sacri- 
fice ;  and  this  takes  away  all  question 
of  injustice  to  the  victim.     In  common 
life    no   wrong    is    done    to   one    who 
volunteers  to  take  a  painful  office.    The 
existence  of  pain  and  evil  being  sup- 
posed, there   arises  a  special  morality 
upon  this  fact,  and  in  connection  with 
it.     It   is    the    morality   of    sacrifice. 
Sacrifice  then  becomes,  in  the  person 
who   makes   it,  the   most   remarkable 
kind  of  manifestation  of  virtue,  which 
ennobles  the  sufferer,  and  which  it  is 
no   wrong-doing    in    the    universe    to 
accept.     What  is  the  effect  of  such  an 
atonement  on  the  sinner  ?    The  willing- 
ness of  the  sacrifice  changes  the  mode 
of  the  operation  of  the  sacrifice,  so  that 
it  acts  on  a  totally  different  principle 
and  law  from  that  upon  which  a  sacri- 
fice, if  a  mere  substitution,  acts.    When 
a  man  substitutes  himself  for  another, 

332 


he  really  means  to  soften  the  heart  of 
the  judge,  to  stimulate  the  element  of 
mercy  in  the  judge.     The  gospel  puts 
the    doctrine   of    Atonement    in    this 
light.     The  mercy  of  God  the  Father 
is  called  out  toward  man  by  our  Lord's 
generous  sacrifice  of  Himself  in  behalf 
of   men.     Neither   in    natural   media- 
tion nor  in  supernatural  does  the  act 
of   suffering   love,    in    producing    that 
change   of   regard   to  which  it   tends, 
dispense   with    the    moral    change   of 
the   criminal.     We  cannot,  of  course, 
because    a    good    man    suffers    for   a 
criminal,  alter  our  regards  to  him,  if 
he     obstinately    remains    a    criminal. 
And   if   the   gospel    taught    any  such 
thing  in  the   doctrine  of   the  Atone- 
ment, it  would  certainly  expose   itself 
to   the    charge   of    immorality.      Un- 
doubtedly there  must  be  this  change, 
but  even  with  this  past  crime  is  not 
yet   pardoned.     There    is    room    for   a 
mediator — room    for    some    source    of 
pardon  which  does  not  take  its  rise  in 
a  man's  self,  although  it  must  act  with 
conditions.    But  viewed  as  acting  upon 
this  mediatorial  principle,  the  doctrine 
of   the  Atonement  rises  altogether  to 
another  level ;  it  parts  company  with 
the  gross  and  irrational  conception  of 
mere    naked    material    substitution   of 
one  person  for  another  in  punishment, 
and  it  takes  its  stand  upon  the  power 
of  love,  and  points  to  the  actual  effect 
of  the  intervention  of  suffering  love  in 
nature,  and  to  a  parallel  case  of  media- 
tion as  a  pardoning  power  in  nature. 
The  doctrine  of  Scripture,  so  far  from 
being  the  doctrine  of  mere  substitution, 
is  a  protest  against  that  doctrine ;  it 
makes    accurate    provision   for    moral 
claims ;  it   enforces  conditions   on  the 
subject   of  the  sacrifice ;  it  attributes 
a  reasonable  and   rational   ground  of 
influence    and   mode    of   operation   to 
the  sacrifice.     There   is,  however,  un- 
doubtedly, contained  in  the  Scriptural 
doctrine  of  the  Atonement,  a  kind,  and 
a  true  kind,  of  fulfilment  of  justice.     It 
is  a  fulfilment  in  the  sense  of  appeasing 
and   satisfying  justice.     And  so,  also, 
there  is  a  kind  of  substitution  involved 
in  the  Scriptural  doctrine  of  the  Atone- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.  X. 


merit,  and  a  true  kind ;  it  is  not  a 
literal,  but  a  moral  substitution.  The 
doctrine  of  the  Atonement  is  the 
doctrine  which  most  of  all  comes  into 
collision  with,  and  declares  most  unex- 
tinguishable  war  with,  materialistic 
ideas  of  the  Deity.  ...  So  rooted  is 
the  great  principle  of  mediation  in 
nature,  that  the  mediatorship  of  Christ 
cannot  be  revealed  to  us  without 
reminding  us  of  a  whole  world  of 
analogous  action,  and  of  representation 
of  action.  How  natural  thus  does  the 
idea  of  a  mediator  turn  out  to  be  ! 
Yet  this  is  exactly  the  point  at  which 
many  stumble  :  pardon  they  approve 
of  ;  reconciliation  they  approve  of  ;  but 
reconciliation  by  means  of  mediation 
is  what  they  cannot  understand.  Why 
not  dispense  with  a  superfluity  ?  they 
say ;  and  why  not  let  these  relieve  us 
from  what  they  consider  the  incum- 
brance of  a  mediator?  It  has,  how- 
ever, appeared  to  the  great  mass  of 
Christians  infinitely  more  natural  to 
be  saved  with  a  Mediator  than  without 
one. — J.  B.  Mozley,  D.D. 


A  Sacrifjce  in  the  Living  of  a  Human 
Life. — "A  body  hast  Thou  prepared 
Me."  A  human  body  is  the  medium 
through  which  a  soul — a  spiritual 
being — is  enabled  to  live  a  human  life 
on  the  earth — a  life  of  various  earthly 
relations.  What  is  here  affirmed  ap- 
pears to  be  this — that  God  was  pleased 
to  find  a  material,  human  body,  in 
which  His  Son,  the  spiritual  being 
Jesus,  could  live  out  a  human  life,  as 
a  human  son,  perfecting  an  obedience 
to  the  will  of  God,  which  should  be  a 
representative  obedience  for  humanity. 
And  it  seems  to  be  distinctly  declared 
that  the  real  spiritual  sacrifice  which 
Jesus  offered  to  God  on  behalf  of 
humanity  was  that  life  of  obedience 
and  submission  and  service  which  He 
lived  through — under  a  strain  and 
stress  which  reached  its  climax  in  the 
cross — in  that  human  body  which  God 
had  prepared  for  Him,  in  which  He 
could,  fully  and  representatively,  do 
and  bear  God's  will  for  humanity. 


The  Sacrifice  of  the  Body.  —This 
sentence  is  a  quotation  from  one  of 
the  Psalms,  but  it  is  not  quoted  with 
strict  accuracy.  In  the  psalm  there 
is  a  figure  ;  in  the  quotation  the  figure 
is  not  repeated,  it  is  translated,  and  its 
meaning  is  suggested.  In  Ps.  xl.  6 
the  words  are,  "  Sacrifice  and  offering 
Thou  didst  not  desire  ;  Mine  ears  hast 
Thou  opened."  But  the  Hebrew 
would  be  more  precisely  rendered, 
*'  Ears  hast  Thou  digged  or  pierced 
for  Me."  Two  explanations  of  this 
figure  have  been  offered.  There  was 
a  curious  ancient  custom,  which  some 
think  may  be  referred  to  here.  When 
a  Hebrew  voluntarily  resolved  to  be  the 
life-long  servant  or  slave  of  another 
person,  that  person  accepted  the 
surrender  by  boring  through  the  ear 
of  the  would-be  slave  with  an  awl. 
The  law  regulating  this  matter  is 
given  in  Exod.  xxi.  5,  6  :  "  And  if  the 
servant  [who  could  claim  his  freedom] 
shall  plainly  say,  I  love  my  master,  my 
wife,  and  my  children ;  I  will  not  go 
out  free  :  then  his  master  shall  bring 
him  to  the  judges ;  he  shall  also  bring 
him  to  the  door,  or  unto  the  door-post ; 
and  his  master  shall  bore  his  ear 
through  with  an  aul ;  and  he  shall 
serve  him  for  ever."  If  this  could  be 
received  as  the  basis  of  the  figure  in 
the  psalm,  the  sentence  would  then 
mean,  "  I  am,  through  life,  thy  volun- 
tary servant."  But  if  that  had  been 
the  reference,  a  certain  technical  word 
would  have  been  used ;  and  even  the 
English  reader  can  see  that  in  the 
psalm  both  ears  are  mentioned,  and 
the  Hebrew  boring  was  done  only  to 
one  ear.  The  better  explanation  is 
that  opening  the  ears,  digging  out  the 
ears,  hollowing  the  ears,  uncovering 
the  ears,  suggested  to  the  Hebrews 
the  idea  of  prompt  obedience,  of  atten- 
tive listening  to  the  commands  of  any 
one.  We  may  understand  the  figure  to 
mean,  "  Thou  hast  made  me  obedient," 
or  "I  am  entirely  devoted  to  thy 
service."  What  God  desires  is  not 
sacrifice,  but  hearing  ears,  and  con- 
sequently the  submission  of  the 
person  himself   in    willing    obedience. 

333 


CHAP.   X. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


Where  the  writer  of  the  epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  gained  his  translation  of  the 
figure  into  "  a  body  hast  Thou  prepared 
Me "  does  not  clearly  appear.  Some 
of  the  manuscripts  of  the  Septuagint 
Version  have  this  rendering,  and  the 
writer  may  have  met  with  one  of 
these ;  but  some  think  he  purposely 
made  the  alteration  so  as  to  make  the 
Messianic  reference  of  the  psalm  more 
distinct.  Ears  are  given  so  that  we 
may  hear  and  heed.  A  body  is  given 
so  that  we  may  obey  and  serve  in 
the  earthly  spheres.  And  Messiah  is 
represented  as  saying,  "  Lo,  I  come  [in 
the  body  which  Thou  hast  given  me] 
to  do  Thy  will,  O  God."  The  text  is 
part  of  an  argument.  The  writer  is 
urging  that  the  animal  sacrifices  of 
Judaism  availed  only  for  external  or 
ceremonial  purification.  They  vitally 
and  eternally  saved  nobody.  They 
i-epresented  the  true  sacrifice,  which 
God  then  accepted,  and  still  accepts — 
the  sacrifice  of  an  obedient  will,  and  of 
a  consecrated  life.  He  has  provided 
for  us  bodies ;  He  has  uncovered  for 
us  ears  ;  we  too  can  do  His  will.  Our 
text  then  embodies  a  great  principle 
which  I  want  to  state,  to  illustrate, 
and  to  enforce.  It  was  true  for  the 
psalmist ;  it  was  true  for  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ ;  and  it  is  true  also  for  us. 
The  principle  is  this — God  never  asks 
of  any  man  first  of  all  what  he  has. 
God  asks  of  every  man  first  of  all, 
himself,  what  he  is.  If  any  man  is 
willing  to  give  himself  to  God,  then 
God  will  lovingly  accept  also  what  he 
has. 

I.  God  never  asks  of  any  man  first 
of  all  what  he  has. — "  Sacrifice  and 
offering  Thou  wouldest  not,  neither 
hadst  pleasure  therein."  Sacrifice  and 
offering  both  represent  man's  gifts  to 
God.  They  are  things  which  a  man 
has ;  they  are  things  belonging  to 
man.  The  distinction  between  them 
is  a  Jewish  one.  Sacrifice  is  a  gift  to 
God  of  that  which  has  life — life  which 
can  be  surrendered.  Offering  is  a  gift 
to  God  of  something  which  has  no  life, 
but  which  can  be  used  in  God's  service. 
The  man  who  brought  a  bullock,  or  a 

334: 


lamb,  or  a  dove  made  his  gift  to  God  ; 
and  the  man  who  brought  his  shekel, 
or  his  flower,  or  his  jewel,  or  his  robe 
also  made  his  gift  to  God.  He  brought 
of  his  property — of  the  things  that  he 
had.  And  if  that  was  all  he  brought, 
God  never  asked  for  it,  and  never 
wanted  it.  "To  what  purpose  is  the 
multitude  of  your  sacrifices  unto  Me, 
saith  the  Lord ;  I  am  full  of  the  burnt- 
offerings  of  rams,  and  the  fat  of  fed 
beasts ;  and  I  delight  not  in  the  blood 
of  bullocks,  or  of  lambs,  or  of  he-goats. 
Bring  no  more  vain  oblations."  The 
prophet  Isaiah  gives  these  searching 
words  as  the  utterance  of  God's  Spirit 
through  him  ;  but  the  earlier  psalmist 
had  quite  as  clear  a  vision  of  the  truth 
that  God  never  has  cared  for  mere 
things.  "I  will  take  no  bullock  out 
of  thine  house,  nor  he-goats  out  of  the 
folds,  for  every  beast  of  the  forest  is 
Mine,  and  the  cattle  upon  a  thousand 
hills.  I  know  all  the  fowls  of  the 
mountains ;  and  the  wild  beasts  of  the 
field  are  Mine.  If  I  were  hungry,  I 
would  not  tell  thee :  for  the  world  is 
Mine,  and  the  fulness  thereof."  "  S  icri- 
fice  and  offering "  !  They  are  only 
things  of  which  man  claims  possession, 
and  which,  as  his  own,  he  consents  to 
give.  Cattle  from  his  folds,  corn  and 
fruit  from  his  fields,  gold  and  jewels 
from  his  treasuries.  In  what  sense  they 
are  his  does  not  readily  appear,  since 
man  has  nothing  to  possess,  but  every- 
thing lent  him  just  for  use  during  his 
brief  spell  of  life.  When  good  men 
give  to  God,  they  reverently  say,  "  Of 
Thine  own  have  we  given  Thee."  In 
the  sight  of  God  there  is  a  most  valid 
and  practical  distinction  between  what 
a  man  has,  and  what  a  man  is.  In 
our  sight  that  distinction  is  most 
strangely  confused.  We  are  constantly 
valuing  men  according  to  the  measure 
of  what  they  call  their  wealth.  God 
reckons  a  man's  possessions  at  nothing, 
save  as  it  deepens  the  man's  responsi- 
bility for  the  faithful  use  of  his  trusts. 
The  man  himself  is  of  priceless  worth. 
"  What  shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he  gain 
the  whole  world  and  lose  his  own 
soul  ? "     We  need  to  learn  how  to  dis- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   X. 


tinguish  between  the  essentials  and  the 
accidents  of  the  man  ;  between  the  man 
and  the  clothes  which,  at  a  given  time, 
he  may  happen  to  wear  ;  between  the 
man  and  the  material  circumstances 
with  which  he  may  be  surrounded. 
Job  expresses  the  distinction  very 
vigorously  when  all  his  things  that  he 
had  were  gone  from  his  grasp,  seized 
by  the  invader,  or  whirled  away  in  the 
storms.  "  Naked  came  I  out  of  my 
mother's  womb,  and  naked  shall  I 
return  thither."  Things  were  gone; 
but  he  was  what  he  was.  A  man 
carries  his  entire  self  into  the  next 
world.  Death  cannot  rob  him  of  that. 
Death  cannot  touch  or  injure  that. 
But  man  cannot  carry  into  the  next 
world  a  single  one  of  the  things  that 
he  only  has.  Death  has  its  power, 
on  them,  and  plucks  them  all  away — 
plucks  away  the  monarch's  crown,  and 
the  nobleman's  estate,  and  the  lady's 
gay  apparel  and  costly  jewels.  Death 
stands  before  the  dying  man,  and  com- 
pels him  to  surrender  absolutely  every- 
thing that  he  has.  Death  will  not  let 
the  man  take  even  his  grave-clothes 
with  him.  The  wild  Indian  will  have 
his  bow  and  arrows  put  into  the  grave 
with  him,  that  they  may  be  ready  for 
use  in  the  happy  hunting-grounds  he 
is  anticipating.  But  it  is  a  vain 
delusion.  They  only  rot  in  the  damp- 
ness of  the  grave.  When  a  late  Queen 
of  Madagascar  died,  they  arrayed  her 
in  her  most  gorgeous  dresses,  orna- 
mented her  with  her  jewels,  and  so 
laid  her  in  the  tomb.  But  they  only 
wasted  what  might  have  been  of  use 
to  somebody,  and  put  temptation  in 
the  way  of  thieve-s.  No  dresses  nor 
jewels  deck  her  majesty  in  the  other 
life.  She  is  just  herself,  and  a  poor 
miserable  self  she  must  be.  Moses  and 
Elijah  reappeared  from  the  glory,  but 
they  were  the  very  men  they  were, 
just  the  men,  even  the  earth-form  and 
dress  was  but  a  seeming.  Realise  the 
distinction  between  the  essentials  of  a 
man  and  the  accidents  of  a  man,  and 
then  you  will  understand  what  I  mean 
when  I  say,  that  God  never  has,  and 
never  will,   ask    first   of    all   for   the 


accidents  of  a  man.  1.  Because  what- 
soever a  man  may  seem  to  have,  it  is 
not  really  his.  It  is  only  a  loan  to 
him,  only  a  trust  to  him.  It  all 
belongs  to  God  ;  and  to  give  it  to  God 
is  only  to  give  God  His  own.  He  needs 
nothing  from  us.  "In  His  hand  are 
the  deep  places  of  the  earth ;  the 
strength  of  the  hills  is  His  also.  The 
sea  is  His,  and  He  made  it ;  and  His 
hands  formed  the  dry  land."  "  What 
have  we  that  we  have  not  received  ?  " 
2.  And  because  nothing  that  man  has 
could  reach  up  to  satisfy  the  claims  of 
God.  Know  God  as  the  infinite  moral 
Being,  the  Source  of  all  moral  being, 
as  the  eternal  Father  of  mankind,  and 
at  once  it  comes  to  mind  that  His 
claim  must  be  for  love,  for  trust,  for 
obedience,  for  service.  No  mere  mate- 
rial things  can  ever  satisfy  parent 
hearts.  Fathers  and  mothers  stand  in 
soul-relations,  and  they  can  never  be 
satisfied  with  other  gifts  from  their 
children  instead  of  soul -gifts.  So 
thoroughly  is  God  represented  as  de- 
spising mere  things  that  have  no  soul 
in  them,  that  when  men  failed  to  give 
themselves  in  and  with  their  gifts,  God 
actually  dealt  severely  with  their  gifts. 
Cain  brought  an  offering  oiily  of  things. 
He  was  not  himself  in  his  gift.  And 
"  unto  Cain,  and  to  his  offering,  the 
Lord  had  not  respect."  Pleading  with 
a  people  who  had  become  wholly  formal 
in  their  religious  gifts,  God  says,  "  In- 
cense is  an  abomination  unto  Me  ;  the 
new  moons  and  sabbaths,  the  calling 
of  assemblies,  I  cannot  away  with ;  it 
is  iniquity,  even  the  solemn  meeting." 
"  To  what  purpose  cometh  there  to  Me 
incense  from  Sheba,  and  the  sweet 
cane  from  a  far  country  ?  Your  burnt- 
offerings  are  not  acceptable,  nor  your 
sacrifices  sweet  unto  Me."  "  I  hate,  I 
despise  your  feast  days,  and  I  will 
not  smell  in  your  solemn  assemblies. 
Though  ye  offer  Me  burnt -offerings  and 
your  meat-offerings,  I  will  not  accept 
them ;  neither  will  I  regard  the  peace- 
offerings  of  your  fat  beasts.  Take 
thou  away  from  Me  the  noise  of 
thy  songs ;  for  I  will  not  hear  the 
melody   of   thy   viols"    (Amos   v.    21- 

335 


CHAP.    X. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


23).  This  truth  Is  indeed  set  forth  so 
plainly,  and  so  impressively,  that  it 
is  passing  strange  to  find  men  still 
deluded  by  the  notion  that  God  can  be 
pleased  \^'ith  gifts.  Heathen  people 
still  say,  "  Will  the  Lord  be  pleased 
with  thousands  of  rams,  and  with  ten 
thousands  of  rivers  of  oil  ?  shall  I  give 
my  firstborn  for  my  tran.sgre.ssion,  the 
fruit  of  my  body  for  the  sin  of  my 
soul  ? "  Christian  people  still  give 
goods,  or  prayers,  or  emotions.  And 
still  the  apostolic  words  may  be  used, 
and  we  may  say,  God  seeks  "  not  yours, 
but  you." 

II.  God  asks  of  every  man  the  gift 
of  himself,   of   what    he  is. — If    we 
separate  a  man  from    his  pos.sessions, 
from  the  things  that  he  only  has,  what 
is  gathered  up  in  the  man  ?     There  is 
body,  mind,  affectioris,  character,  soul. 
For  this  earth-sphere  a  man  is  not  a 
siiDple  spirit,  but  a  spirit  wdth  a  certain 
partioilar  enWronment.    And  it  is  this 
whole   self    wlach  God  asks.     "  Yield 
yourselves  unto  God,  as  those  that  are 
aUve  from  the  dead,  and  your  members 
as  irLStruments  of  righteousness  unto 
G<k1."     "  Glorify  God  in  your  body  and 
in   your   spirit,  which    are  His."     "  I 
Vjeseech  you   therefore,  brethren,  that 
ye  present  your  boclies  a  living  sacrifice, 
holy,    acceptable   unto   G^xl,  which    in 
your  rea.sfjnable  service."     We  find  our 
model  gift  in   the  Ixjrd  Jesus  Christ, 
who  gave  His  whole  IxxHly  and  spiritual 
manho^xl  in  one  life-long  devotion  U) 
Gfxl.     There  is  a  sense  in  which   men 
may  properly  l>e  regarded  as  not  already 
God's.     S^jmething  which  can  only  be 
calle^l  iridej;>endence  has  been  given  to 
us.     Though  it  is   place^l   under  strict 
limitations,  our  free-will  does  make  us 
separate    persrjns,    and    give    us   some 
sort   of   right   in    ourselves.     And  we 
well  know  how  self-will  exaggerates  the 
indefiendence,  and  throws  off  Gfxl,  say- 
ing, "  Who  is  the  hf)T(\,  that  we  should 
sf^rve  Him  ?  and  what  profit  should  we 
have,  if  we  pray  unto  Him  ?  "    In  what- 
soever sense   man  is    himself,   he   can 
give  that  self   to  God.     The  truth  is, 
that   the   only  thing  which   any  man 
has  that  he  can  give  to  God  is  himself. 

336 


This  every  man,  poor  or  rich,  wise  or 
ignorant,  can  give ;  and  this  is  every 
man's  grandest  and  noblest  gift. 

"  Lord,  in  the  streagth  of  grace,  with  a  glad 

heart  and  free, 
Myself,  my  residue  of  days,  I  consecrate 

to  Thee. 
Thy  ransomed  servant,  I  restore  to  Thee 

Thine  own  ; 
And  from  this  moment  Uve  or  die,  to  serve 

my  God  alone." 

A    man   can   give   his    will    to    God, 
voluntarily  choosing  Him,  and  accept- 
ting  His  ser\ice,  saving  with  the  noble 
Joshua,  "  Whatsover  others  do,  we  will 
serve  the  Lord."     A  man  may  give  his 
love  to  God  ;  and  of  such  a  man  God  will 
surely  say,  "  Because  he  hath  set  his 
love  upon  Me,  therefore  will  I  deliver 
him."     A  man  may  give  his  penitence 
to   God,    going   to    Him    and    saying, 
"  Father,  I  have  sinned,    and   am  no 
more    worthy   to    he  called  Thy   son." 
And  such  a  man  ever  finds  the  Father 
waiting  and   watching  for  his  return, 
and  hears  the  sweetest  sounds  of  home- 
welcome,   "  Bring  forth  the  best  robe, 
and  put  it  on  him  ;  and  put  a  ring  on 
his  hand,   and  shoes  on  his  feet ;  and 
bring  hither  the  fatted  calf,  and  kiU  it  ; 
and    let    us    eat    and    be    merry :    for 
this   my  son    was   dead,    and  is   alive 
again ;    he  was    lost,    and    is    found." 
A  man  may  give  to  Go^l  bis  obedience. 
It  is  this  which  comes  fully  into  view 
in  our  text  :  "  Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  come 
(in  the  volume  of  the  brxjk  it  is  written 
of  Me)  to  do  Thy  will,  O  Gfxi."     This 
is  what  Go^l  asks  of  you  and  me,  asks 
of  every  one  :  "  Be  Mine.     I  am  Father. 
Be  thou  My  son  indeed."     All  the  i-eve- 
lations  that  God  makes  to  men,  read  in 
the  light  of  their  deej>est  meanings,  are 
just  persuasions  to    making    full    sur- 
render  of   themselves   to    Him.      The 
type  of  them  all  is  to  be  found  in  the 
vision  given  to  Jacob  at  Bethel.     He 
felt  like  a  homeless  wanderer.     He  was 
bearing  the  hnvden  of  his  own  wrong- 
doing.    Yet  God  was  mindful  of  him, 
caring  for  him,  watching  him,  tending 
him  all  night  through  with  loving  angel 
ministries.        That    vision    was     Gx)d 
calling  upon  Jacob  to  give  Him  him- 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  x. 


.self ;  and  Jacob  did  it.     ''  And  Jacob  responded  by  giving  to  Christ  himself^ 

rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  and  took  and  that  gift  carried  with  it  his  money, 

the  stone  that  he  had  put  for  his  pillow,  his    abilities,  everything  that  Matthew 

and  set  it  up  for  a  pillar,  and  poured  had.     Some  time   ago  I   took  part  in 

oil   upon   the   top   of   it.     And  Jacob  a  scene   of  peculiar  interest  and  sug- 

vowed  a  vow,  saying,  If  God  will  be  gestiveness.     Well-nigh  two   thousand 

with  me,  and  will  keep  me  in  this  way  persons  were  assembled  in  the  largest 

that  I  go,  and  will  give  me  bread  to  chapel  in  Liverpool,  to  bid  God-speed 

eat,  and  raiment  to  put  on,  so  that  I  to   a    band  of   missionaries   who  were 

come  again  to   my  father's   house   in  about  to  leave  home  and  friends,  and 

peace ;  then  shall  the  Lord  be  my  God  :  devote  themselves  to  Christ's  service  in 

and  this  stone,  which  I  set  up  for  a  heathen  lands.     Twenty-three  men  and 

pillar,  shall  be  God's  house.     And   of  women  faced  that   great   audience    as 

all  which  Thou,  O  God,  shalt  give  me,  they  sat  together  upon  the  platform. 

I  will  surely  give  the  tenth  unto  Thee."  As  I  watched  them  I  thought  what  a 

III.    When   a   man    gives   to   God  variety  of  powers  and  talents  they  re- 

what   he   is,   God  graciously  accepts,  presented — what   various   riches   they 

with   him,  what  he  has. — How  very  had.      But   they    were   not   giving   to 

different  is  the  value  we  put  on  the  Christ  their  abilities,   their   doctoring 

various  gifts  that  we   receive !     Some  skill,  their   teaching   efficiencies,  their 

are   mere    gifts.     They   say   nothing  ;  power  to  draw  or  to  preach.    Those  men 

they  mean  nothing.     We  take  them,  and  women  were  giving  to  Christ  them- 

But  we  wish  we  had  not  to  take  them,  selves — themselves  as  spiritual  beings. 

We  put  them  aside,  after  a  cold  thanks-  The   company   on   that   platform  was 

giving.     And  we  do  not  much  care  if  -a   company   of   consecrated   men   and 

we  never  see  the  thing  any  more.     We  women  ;    their     manhood     and     their 

are  like  God  in  this — that  we  are  very  womanhood  lay  on  the  altar  of  Christ, 

indifferent    to    mere    things    as   gifts.  They   gave  "  their  own   selves   to  the 

But   the   very    same    gifts,    and   even  Lord."     But  they  gave  themselves  in 

inferior   gifts,    may   become    priceless,  their  bodies,  with   their   bodies.     The 

They  are  if  they  carry  to  us  a  heart's  gift  of  themselves  carried  with   it  all 

love — if  the  gift  is  the  person,  expressed  they   had;  and  the  God  who   so  gra- 

only  in  the  thing  that  is  offered.     Then  ciously   accepted   them,    as   graciously 

the   gifts   are   treasured.     Then    they  accepted   theirs   with   them.     And    so 

find  conspicuous  place.     Then  they  are  they  represented  a  whole  devotement — 

looked  at  again  and  again,  and  always  what  they  were,  and  what  they  had. 

seem  to  freshen  the  love-gift  of  which  There  they  sat,  the  realisation  of  the 

they   remind.     It   is   thus   with   God.  whole   burnt-offering    unto  the   Lord. 

At  one  time  sacrifice  and  offering  will  That  truth  fills  our  thoughts  and  hearts 

seem  to  Him  altogether  worthless.     It  — God  wants  us  first,  then  ours.     Have 

is    only    sacrifice    and    offering.      At  we  been  making  the  fatal  mistake,  and 

another  time  they  will  seem  to  Him  of  bringing,    as    offerings    to    God,     our 

priceless  value,  because   they   express  things  ?    Have  we  imagined  that  God's 

love,    and   trust,    and    obedience,    full  claim  could  be  satisfied  with  gifts  of  our 

heart- surrender.     When   v/e  can  say,  money,  of  anything  that  we  only  have  ? 

*'  Lo,  I  come  to  do  Thy  vnll,"  when  we  See  this  truth  once  again.     God  w^ants 

can  give  to  God  ourselves,  then  every-  you.     Yes,  first  you.     He  will  receive 

thing  we  bring  with  us  will  be  accept-  nothing  from  you  until  you  give  Him 

able  unto  Him.     Passing  by  the  receipt  yourself.     And  when  you  give  yourself, 

of  custom,  our  Lord  found  Matthew  you  cannot  help  giving  all  you  have, 

seated,  busily  engaged  with  his  work.  This  is  God's  order ;  you  cannot  alter 

Our  Lord  called  him.     But    Matthew  it — first    you^     then    yours.     This    is 

did  not  respond  by  giving  his  money,  the    Lord's   sacrifice — yourself   in   the 

Christ  cared  nothing  for  that.  Matthew  body  prepared  for  you. 

z  337 


CHAP.   X. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


Ver.  7.  Submission  and  Obedience. — 
The  "will  of  God"  is  a  present,  living 
reality.  It  is  not  something  shut  up 
in  a  book.  It  is  a  living  revelation  to 
us,  made  by  the  indwelling,  presiding 
Spirit.  We  may  know  the  "  will  of 
God  "  now  as  truly  as  our  fathers  did 
when  the  will  came  to  them  in  an 
audible  voice,  or  by  an  angel- messenger. 
We  may  even  conceive  the  time  when 
the  written  word  will  cease  to  be  the 
medium  of  the  will,  because  spiritual 
relations  will  be  perfected.  This  text 
presents  one  form  in  which  we  have 
to  accept  the  Divine  will,  and  it 
suggests  the  other ;  for  there  are  two 
forms  in  which  the  will  of  God  has  to 
be  met  :  (1)  By  submission — bearing  ; 
and  (2)  by  obedience — doing.  Promi- 
nence is  here  given  to  obedience.  In 
Gethsemane  prominence  is  given  to 
submission.  Too  often  it  is  urged  that 
submission  is  the  only  attitude  for  us 
to  take  in  relation  to  the  will.  This 
may,  indeed,  be  fittingly  commended 
to  the  sick,  the  suffering,  and  the 
dying,  but  it  is  not  the  attitude  most 
wisely  commended  to  the  healthy,  the 
active,  and  the  enterprising.  It  is  the 
glory  of  oiir  nature  that  we  are  not 
mere  things  to  be  acted  upon,  but 
persons,  agents,  by  and  through  whom 
ends  are  to  be  reached,  and  purposes 
accomplished.  Therefore,  while  it  is 
a  great  and  blessed  thing  to  submit 
to  the  will  of  God,  it  is,  for  active 
man,  an  even  greater  and  more  blessed 
thing  to  do  the  will. 

I.  Submission. — God  sometimes  deals 
with  us  as  if  He  would  convince  us 
that  He  is  the  Creator,  and  we  but 
the  creatures  of  His  power.  He 
sweeps  over  our  life  in  a  majesty  of 
wild  storm- wind,  and  there  is  nothing 
for  us  to  do  but  to  submit.  But 
usually  God  deals  with  us  in  such  ways 
.of  mingled  severity  and  tenderness, 
that  He  seems  to  be  asking  us  to  yield, 
even  making  it  easy  for  us  to  yield. 
And  there  is  nothing  essentially  Chris- 
tian about  our  submission  until  it 
becomes  both  voluntary  and  cheerful. 
Our  submission  is  never  possible  by 
knowing  what  God  is  doing  with  us; 

338 


it  is  only  possible  by  knowing  God 
Himself  better,  and  so  gaining  an  all- 
conquering  faith  (trust)  in  Him. 

II.  Obedience. — Illustrate  this  phase 
by  patriarchal  times.  Abraham  obeyed 
God  :  also  by  the  human  life  and 
devoted  service  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Our 
common  life  can  be  looked  at  in  two 
ways  :  (1)  As  the  scene  in  which  we  are 
doing  and  accomplishing  something  for 
ourselves  ;  or  (2)  as  the  scene  in  which, 
as  servants,  we  are  doing  and  accom- 
plishing the  will  of  God.  It  is  freely 
granted  that  the  former  way  of  viewing 
life  will  seem  the  most  attractive  to  us 
as  men ;  but  the  latter  may  be  com- 
mended as  the  altogether  noble,  and 
the  more  satisfying  way.  In  what 
spheres  can  the  will  of  God  be  dis- 
cerned ?  We  are  to  bring  our  thought, 
our  speech,  and  our  relationships  into 
the  obedience  of  Christ.  Then  in  these 
spheres  we  can  know  the  will.  And 
besides  the  more  general  disclosures  to 
us  of  the  Divine  mind,  the  open  heart 
will  be  always  able  to  discern  special 
calls  to  particular  forms  of  duty.  The 
ideal  Christian  life  is  a  full,  free,  con- 
stant, loving  response  to  the  Divine 
will,  in  a  holy  blending  of  submission 
and  obedience. 

The  Sacrifice  of  an  Obedient  Will. — 
This  is  a  quotation  from  the  fortieth 
Psalm,  and  it  is  helpful  to  understand 
precisely  what  thought  and  feeling 
the  psalmist  expressed  by  it.  Dean 
Perowne  says  :  "  The  psalmist  declares 
what  had  been  the  great  lesson  of  his 
affliction — how  he  had  learnt  that 
there  was  a  better  sacrifice  than  that 
of  bulls  and  goats,  even  the  sacrifice 
of  an  obedient  will.  It  is  as  if  he  had 
said,  *  Once  I  should  have  thought 
sacrifices  and  offerings  a  proper  and 
sufficient  acknowledgment.  Now  I 
feel  how  inadequate  these  are,  for  Thou 
hast  taught  me  the  truth ;  my  deaf, 
unwilling  ears  hast  Thou  opened,  that 
I  might  understand  that  a  willing 
heart  was  the  best  offering  I  could 
render.  Then,  being  thus  taught  by 
Thee,  I  said,  Lo,  I  come !  Presenting 
myself  before  Thee,  not  with  a  dead 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAr.   X 


and  formal  service,  but  with  myself  as 


a  living  sacrifice. 


The  Religion  of  Divine  Humility, — 
To  preach  Christ  is  to  preach  the 
doctrine  of  surrender  to  the  will  of 
God.  The  religion  of  Christ  has  been 
well  called  "The  Religion  of  Divine 
Humility."  This  is  Christianity  :  love 
to  God,  and  love  to  man ;  that  sur- 
render of  self-will  through  life  and 
death  which  marks  the  whole  existence 
of  the  Redeemer. — F.  W.  Robertson. 

Christ's  Own  References  to  the  Will 
He  obeyed. — It  is  some  disadvantage 
to  our  apprehension  of  the  will  of  God 
for  humanity,  and  so  the  will  of  God 
for  Jesus,  the  representative  man,  that 
in  this  chapter  it  is  so  closely  associated 
with  altar -forms.  Our  Lord's  own 
references  to  the  will  which  He  ful- 
filled are  free  from  this  association. 
As  He  regards  it,  it  is  a  moral 
obedience,  a  heart  obedience,  finding 
expression  in  doing,  bearing,  and 
suffering  whatever  may  be  recognised 
as  the  will  of  God  in  a  human  life.  In 
Gethsemane  it  was  seen  by  the  Lord 
Jesus  that  the  will  of  God  immediately 
before  Him  was  a  time  of  overwhelm- 
ing shame  and  suffering,  and  the  agony 
of  a  violent  and  dishonourable  death ; 
and  He  would  wholly  lift  Himself  up 
to  an  entire,  unquestioning,  and  un- 
complaining obedience. 

Vers.  7,  9.  The  Will  of  God  which 
Christ  came  to  do. — He  was  to  do  the 
will  of  God  in  several  ways.  "  Not 
only  as  a  prophet  to  reveal  the  will  of 
God  ;  not  only  as  a  king  to  give  forth 
Divine  laws ;  but  as  a  priest  to  satisfy 
the  demands  of  justice,  and  to  fulfil 
all  righteousness.  Christ  came  to  do 
the  will  of  God  in  two  instances  :  1.  In 
taking  away  the  first  priesthood,  which 
God  had  no  pleasure  in ;  not  only 
taking  away  the  curse  of  the  covenant 
of  works,  and  cancelling  the  sentence 
denounced  against  us  as  sinners,  but 
taking  away  the  insufficient  typical 
priesthood,-  and  blotting  out  the  hand- 
writing of  ceremonial  ordinances,  and 


nailing  it  to  His  cross.  2.  In  estab- 
lishing the  second,  that  is,  his  own 
priesthood  and  the  everlasting  gospel, 
the  most  pure  and  perfect  dispensation 
of  the  covenant  of  grace.:  this  is  the 
great  design  upon  which  the  heart  of 
God  was  set  from  all  eternity.  The 
will  of  God  centres  and  terminates  in 
it ;  and  it  is  not  more  agreeable  to  the 
will  of  God  than  it  is  advantageous  to 
the  souls  of  men ;  for  it  is  by  this  will 
that  we  are  sanctified,  through  the 
offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ 
once  for  all." — Mattheio  Henry. 

Ver.  10.  Christ^ s  Antitypical  Sacrifice. 
— This  epistle  being  directly  addressed 
to  Jewish  Christians,  it  is  of  first  im- 
portance that  we  should  endeavour  to 
understand  their  views.  They  were 
men  who  had  been  lifted  from  the 
material  to  the  moral.  That  was  the 
work  that  had  been  done  for  the  Jewish 
nation  by  the  later  prophets.  They 
were  men  that  had  been  lifted  from 
the  ritual  to  the  spiritual.  That  was 
the  work  which  had  been  done  for 
them  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  But 
these  Jewish  Christians  found  it  very 
difficult  to  keep  up  to  the  higher  level 
they  had  attained.  There  were  certain 
forms  in  which  temptations  to  revert 
to  their  old  standpoint  came  to  them. 
1.  Persecution  by  the  bigoted  and 
extreme  Jewish  section — represented 
by  Saul  of  Tarsus.  2.  An  exaggera- 
tion of  the  claims  of  Judaism  as 
an  unquestionable  revelation  from 
God — specially  honourable  as  having 
been  ministered  by  angels.  3.  The 
spiritualising  of  Philo  and  the  Alexan- 
drian School,  which  worked  for  a  reform 
of  Judaism,  and  shook  confidence  in 
Christ.  The  writer  of  this  epistle  has 
to  counteract  these  three  evil  influences. 
But  such  temptations  are  better  met 
by  persuasions  than  by  arguments : 
only  the  persuasions  must  be  based 
upon  arguments  precisely  adapted. 
One  great  point  is  made  by  the  writer : 
"  First  that  which  is  natural,  and 
afterward  that  which  is  spiritual.'* 
The  material  is  pictorial — it  is  the 
picture- teaching    of    truth,   which    is 

339 


CHAP.   X. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS. 


necessary  for  all  child-stages  of  the 
individual,  the  nation,  or  the  world. 
The  moral  is  the  reality  which  is  pic- 
tured in  the  material,  and  it  is  the 
proper  thing  for  the  man-stage.  We 
teach  children  arithmetic  by  showing 
them,  and  by  working,  balls  on  a  frame  ; 
by- and- by  they  come  to  apprehend 
the  principles  and  relations  of  numbers. 
But  what  has  such  comparison  to  do 
with  us,  who  have  no  association  with 
material  bodily  sacrifices  as  the  Jewish 
Christians  had  ?  Is  it  possible  that 
there  may  be  a  material,  pictorial  setting 
of  the  sacrificial  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  which  may  be  limiting  us  some- 
what as  the  ritual  of  Moses  limited 
the  Jews  ?  These  Christian  Jews  evi- 
dently had  not  spiritual  views  of  Christ's 
work,  and  Christians  now  may  keep 
in  the  pictorial  range  for  babes  when 
they  ought  to  be  in  the  spiritual  range 
for  men.  They  do  when  they  see 
Christ's  offering  of  Himself  to  be  a 
ritual,  not  a  spiritual  sacrifice. 

I.  The  surrendered  will  is  the 
sanctifying  sacrifice. — Trace  the  argu- 
ment. Those  old  Jewish  sacrifices  had 
no  value  in  themselves.  The  prophets 
— especially  Isaiah  and  Hosea — made 
that  quite  plain.  Their  value  lay  solely 
in  their  being  a  means  by  which  the 
will  of  a  man  was  offered  to  God. 
When  this  is  taught  so  as  to  be  fully 
apprehended,  formal  sacrifice  may  cease. 
It  has  done  its  work.  The  final  lesson 
is  the  Divine  acceptance  of  the  offer- 
ing of  Himself  which  came  to  Jesus. 
Christ's  whole  life  was  His  sacrifice. 
The  sacrifice  that  God  wants  is  the 
man,  not  something  a  man  gives.  The 
offering  of  a  man  himself  is  the  offering 
of  a  life — that  alone  is  the  man.  This 
makes  Christ's  death  the  final  act,  the 
seal,  the  perfecting  of  His  sacrifice ; 
because  that  death  completes,  rounds 
off,  the  life.  No  life  is  complete  until 
death  seals  it.  Christ's  death  is  the 
great  act  of  surrendered  will  under  the 
most  severe  testing- conditions.  Dead 
— human  Ufe  ended — there  is  a  whole 
man  offered  unto  God. 

II.  That  sacrifice — the  spiritual 
sacrifice  of  the  surrendered  wiU — was 

340 


offered  through  the  body.— Things  can 

have  no  influence  on  us  that  do  not 
come  within  our  range,  do  not  lie  in 
our  plane.  Moral  forces  are  compelled 
to  use  material  agencies  because  we 
are  in  material  limitations.  The  sur- 
render of  the  will  of  an  angel  is  nothing 
to  us.  The  surrender  of  the  will  of  a 
human  being  like  ourselves  is  every- 
thing to  us.  Christ  became  man  that 
He  might  be  able  to  offer  a  human 
sacrifice,  because  that  is  precisely  what 
we  ought  to  offer.  An  angel  could 
not  offer  our  sacrifice  :  the  Son  of  God, 
as  only  Son  of  God,  could  not.  Christ 
became  representative  man  that  He 
might  offer  His  sacrifice  of  Himself 
in  our  name,  as  standing  for  and 
pledging  us. 

III.  That  offering  satisfies  once  for 
all. — Picture-teaching  needs  repetition, 
"  line  upon  line,  precept  upon  precept." 
The  teaching  of  principles  is  done  once 
for  all.  Christ's  sacrifice  need  not  be 
repeated,  because  it  effected  its  end — 

1.  With  God.  Did  this  representative 
offering  of  the  surrendered  will  meet 
God's  requirement  from  us  His  crea- 
tures ?    The  answer  is  the  Resurrection. 

2.  With  men.  Was  that  devotion  of 
Christ  to  our  interests,  which  led  Him 
to  suffer  so  much  in  order  to  secure 
an  acceptable  sacrifice  for  us,  such  a 
devotion  as  could  be  really  persuasive 
on  us  ?  The  answer  is  our  experience. 
The  sacrifice  of  Christ  must  not  be 
repeated,  even  in  symbol.  To  repeat 
the  sacrifice  is  to  remove  Christ  from 
His  present  work  of  applying  the  gains 
of  His  sacrifice.  What  then  have 
we  to  keep  in  mind  ?  Is  it  only  the 
medium,  the  bodily  agency  of  the  great 
sacrifice  ?  Every  incident  of  the  Passion 
is  intensely  interesting  to  us.  But 
thei-e  is  a  mystery  within  it.  There 
is  a  real  spiritual  sacrifice.  It  is  a 
man's  surrendered  will.  We  cannot 
offer  a  material  sacrifice  with  Christ. 
We  can  offer  a  spiritual  sacrifice  with 
Him.  That  we  will  offer  it  He  pledges 
in  our  name.  But  our  sacrifice,  hke 
His,  must  be  made  through  our  bodies. 
Our  lives,  lived  unto  God,  are  our 
sacrifice  (see  Bom.  xii.  1). 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   X. 


The  First  and  Second  Sacrifices. — 
That  which  is  temporarily  efficient 
may,  and  indeed  must,  in  time  become 
inefficient,  because  the  conditions  which 
it  once  met  undergo  change.  What- 
ever concerns  the  accidents  of  things 
must  be  changed.  Whatever  concerns 
the  essentials  of  things  is  of  necessity 
unchangeable.  The  first  sacrifices, 
those  of  Judaism,  dealt  with  acccidental 
conditions  of  men.  The  second  sacrifice 
deals   with    the   essential    states    and 


relations  of  men.  The  first  sacrifices 
could  not  last ;  and  it  was  significant 
of  their  fading  away  that  the  Shekinah- 
glory  left  the  Temple,  that  even  the 
ark  was  lost,  and  the  tables  of  the 
covenant.  In  Pompey's  time  the 
Temple  was  but  an  empty  shell  with 
the  kernel  gone ;  for  when  he  forced 
his  way  into  the  Holy  of  Holies,  he 
found  only  an  empty  chamber.  The 
very  heart  and  life  of  the  old  sacrifices 
was  already  gone,  wholly  gone. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  11—18. 

The  Power  of  the  Spiritual  Sacrifice. — Over  and  over  again  the  nature  of  our 
Lord's  sacrifice,  as  the  sacrifice  of  an  obedient  will,  is  presented.  He  came  to 
*'  do  the  will  of  God  "  perfectly,  in  man's  name,  and  to  sacrifice  Himself  in  the 
doing.  We  know  the  power  of  an  old  formal  Jewish  sacrifice  of  bull  or  of  goat. 
It  could  cleanse  the  offerer  from  ceremonial  defilement,  and  restore  him  again  to 
tabernacle  relations.  In  this  paragraph  we  are  helped  to  realise  what  is  the 
power  of  the  spiritual  sacrifice  of  an  obedient  will.  "  By  the  which  will  we  have 
been  sanctified  through  the  offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ  once  for  all." 
"  For  by  one  offering  He  hath  perfected  for  ever  them  that  are  sanctified." 
The  word  "  sanctified "  here  is  not  used  of  progressive  sanctification,  but  of 
"  consecration  in  a  pure  state  to  God's  service." 

I.  Power  on  man  the  spirit. — Gec/rge  Macdonald  makes  one  of  his  characters 
speak  in  this  way  :  "  W^e  should  not  say,  We  are  bodies,  and  have  souls ;  we 
should  say.  We  are  souls,  and  have  bodies."  The  spiritual  sacrifice  has  its  range 
first  in  man's  spirit.  The  sacrifice  of  the  obedient  will  has  its  power  and  persua- 
sion" on  the  human  will.  The  essence  of  redemption  is  regeneration.  Formal 
sacrifices  have  their  power  to  change  men's  relations.  Christ's  sacrifice  has 
power  to  change  men  themselves.  They  become  *'  new  creatures  in  Christ 
Jesus,"  by  the  renewal  of  their  wills  in  the  holy  constraint  of  His  sacrificing  love. 
Christ  wins  us  to  Himself,  and  that  is  winning  us  to  His  obedient  Sonship. 

II.  Power  on  man  the  human. — For  man  is  not  pure  spirit ;  he  is  put  into,  and 
limited  by,  a  human  body ;  and  that  has  made  a  special  set  of  conditions,  which 
angels  have  no  power  to  adapt  themselves  to.  He  only  has  power  on  man 
the  human  who.  Himself,  though  spirit,  became  human  :  **  took  on  Him  the 
nature  of  Abraham,  was  made  in  likeness  of  man."  He  is  actually  in  our 
range  and  sphere — actually  in  our  human  limitations.  His  sacrifice  has  power 
on  us  because  it  is  ours,  it  is  human.  We  are  '*  sanctified  through  the  offering' 
of  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ  once  for  all." 

III.  Power  on  man's  enemies. — The  statement  of  ver.  13,  "From  hence- 
forth expecting  till  His  enemies  be  made  the  footstool  of  His  feet,"  may  be  simply 
rhetorical,  the  writer's  mind  being  full  of  the  psalms  from  which  he  had  been 
quoting,  and  so  carried  on  to  complete  his  reference.  But  there  may  be  a 
suggestion  intended  which  does  not  immediately  appear.  He  who  offered  the 
sacrifice  of  the  obedient  will,  and  so  gained  power  to  save,  will  surely  have 
enemies,  who  will  resist  His  work,  and  try  and  keep  men  from  rising  out  of  their 
material  systems,  to  accept  a  spiritual  salvation.  But  those  enemies  will  not 
conquer  Him.  He  will  eventually  constrain  even  them,  and  they  shall  submit, 
and  become  as  the  footstool  of  His  everlasting  throne.     And  those  who  accept 

m 


CHAP.  X.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


Him  as  their  Saviour  will  have  the  same  enemies  to  fight.  But  they  who 
"suffer  with  Him  shall  also  reign  with  Him."  Their  enemies — the  enemies 
of  the  spiritual — are  His,  and  their  subjection  is  guaranteed  in  the  holy  triumph 
which  He  is  sure  to  win. 

IV.  Power  on  men's  motives. — This  is  the  idea  of  the  covenant  which 
pledges  that  God,  in  and  through  Christ,  will  get  right  into  men's  hearts,  and 
so  constrain  them  with  His  love — that  they  shall  want  to  obey,  resolve  to  obey, 
strive  to  obey,  and  enjoy  obeying.  Fear  of  God  is  man's  usual  motive,  and  it 
never  yet  inspired  a  noble  life.  Love  is  Christ's  new  motive,  and  it  inspired  His 
noble  life,  and  it  can  inspire  ours. 

V.  Power  on  men's  sins. — The  prophet  Ezekiel  forshadowed  the  gospel 
dispensation  in  a  way  which  has  not  been  sufficiently  noticed.  He  says  that  if 
God  can  only  get  a  man  himself  right.  He  can  at  once,  fully  and  freely,  forgive 
all  His  sins.  "  If  the  wicked  will  turn  from  all  his  sins  that  he  hath  committed, 
and  keep  all  My  statutes,  and  do  that  which  is  lawful  and  right,  he  shall  surely 
live,  he  shall  not  die"  (Ezek.  xviii.  21).  It  is  a  part  of  the  new  covenant,  that 
whenever  we,  in  Christ,  become  sons  again,  with  God's  laws  in  our  love,  and 
God's  will  our  delight,  our  "  sins  and  iniquities  shall  be  remembered  no  more." 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES, 

Ver.  14.  The  Sanctifying  Power  of  a  acts  persuasively  upon  us,  urging  us 
Spiritual  Sacrifice. — "For  by  one  offer-  to  make  the  same  surrender  to  God. 
ing  He  hath  perfected  for  ever  them  3.  It  puts  into  a  state  of  separation 
that  are  sanctified."  "  Are  sanctified  "  unto  God  all  who  by  faith  are  linked 
should  be  rendered  "  are  being  sancti-  with.  it.  Christ  and  His  people  are 
fied."  To  understand  this  verse  it  is  together  sanctified.  4.  As  a  spiritual 
necessary  to  remember  that  the  cleans-  sacrifice  it  is  influential  in  our  spiritual 
ing  effected  by  means  of  the  old  Leviti-  relations ;  but  those  are  our  permanent 
cal  sacrifices  was,  from  the  Jewish  and  eternal  relations,  and  whatever 
point  of  view,  a  sanctifying.  The  man  sanctifying  work  is  done  in  them  can 
cleansed  and  restored  was  a  man  never  need  to  be  re-done.  Sanctify  a 
sanctified.  But  such  sanctifying,  such  man's  will,  and  you  have  sanctified  the 
ritual  cleansing,  was  only  the  shadow  man's  life,  and  sanctified  the  man  for 
and  suggestion  of  the  true  sanctifying,  ever.  We  may  gain  some  illustration 
the  spiritual  cleansing.  A  man  heart-  of  the  sanctifying  power  of  a  sur- 
cleansed,  conscience-cleansed,  and  so  rendered  will  by  considering  the  moral 
restored  to  his  right  relations  with  influence  upon  us  of  severe,  and  life- 
God,  is  the  man  truly  sanctified.  And  long,  and  hopeless  sufferers  from  disease, 
what  has  to  be  shown  is,  that  the  one  who  have  entered  into  the  perfect  peace 
spiritual  offering  which  Christ  made  of  of  yielding  their  wills  wholly  to  God. 
His  whole  human  life,  in  one  sublime 

and   perfect  obedience   to   the  will  of  Ver.    17.    Self-sacrifice    the    Way    to 

God,  has  an  effective  power  unto  such  Happiness. — The  way  of  happiness   is 

spiritual  sacrifice.     By  "perfected  for  the  path  of  principle,  and  the  governing 

ever  "  is  clearly  meant,  proved  wholly  principles  of  life,  which  lead  to  nobility 

effective,    so    that    no    other    supple-  of  character,  are  bound  up  in  Christ's 

mentary  agency  can  ever  be  necessary,  salvation.      Human   life,    even    under 

How  then  does  that  one  sacrifice  which  civilisation,  is  placed  face  to  face  with 

Christ  offered  act  in  a  way  of  sancti-  the  elements  of  danger, 

fying  upon  our  hearts  and  lives.    1.  It  I.  The    highest,   happiest,    noblest 

presents  to  us  the  model  of  what  a  life  is  a  life  of  self-sacrifice  in  common 

sanctified  life  for  humanity  is  '<     2,  It  conditions. — In    our    quiet    circle  we 

?42 


HOMILETIC  C0MMI!NTARY:    HEBREWS.  chap.  x. 


may    defeat    the     selfishness    that   is  because  the  law  expresses  the  law  of 

around  us  ;  and  if  we  cannot  undo  the  the  Lawgiver — the  great,  the  beautiful, 

selfishness  of  civilisation,  we  can  undo  the  holy  God. 

it  in  ourselves,  and  in  some  that  are         III.  God  in  Christ  is  the  expression 

round  our  life-path.     \ .  Let  no  one  say  of    supereminent    love. — To   feel    the 

that  God  has  placed  us  in  such  a  position  love  of  wife,  of  mother,  of   sister,  of 

that    to    he    selfish,    avaricious,    lustful,  child,    of    friend,    makes    us    feel    the 

worldly,  cannot  he  helped.     The  theory  dignity   of   life ;    to   feel   the    love   of 

of  **  can't  help  it "  is  hateful,  because  it  Jesus,  God  in  humanity,  makes  us  feel 

is  utterly  cowardly  and  entirely  false,  that  self-sacrifice  is  possible,  that  we 

"  Can't  help  it  "  is  the  answer  of  mate-  had  better  perish  than  be  selfish,  that 

rialism  ;    it     is     a     base     philosophy,  our  love  of  God  has  increased  the  great 

2.    Utilitarianism    will    not     help    us.  motive  of  our  love  of  men. 
There  is  no  morality  without  God.  IV.  Power    to    do   what    there   is 

II.  To  do  God's  will  is  a  motive  to  motive  to  enforce  is  submitted  to  us 

self-sacrifice. — God  is   the  sanction  of  all. — Grace    is   offered   in    answer   to 

moral  life.    In  our  calm  moments,  and  prayer,  to  help  us  to  do  His  will,  to 

in  our  moments  of  terror,  the  great  speak    His   will,  to   speak   His   word, 

motive  to   stay  us  constantly  in  life's  to  be  content  to  do  it,  with  His  law  in 

great   struggle   is   God.      We   can   do  us.     His  love  is  over  us ;  He  will  not 

right,  not  because  there  is  a  law,  but  forsake  us. — Canon  Knox- Little. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS    OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  19—25. 

Duty  rests  on  Privilege. — In  this  section  the  hortatory  portion  of  the  epistle 
really  begins  There  have  been,  again  and  again,  hortatory  "  asides  "  ;  now  there 
is  a  general  practical  application  of  the  truths  to  which  attention  has  been  so 
earnestly  directed.  The  main  position  of  the  writer  is  briefly  stated  afresh,  and 
in  terms  which  show  that  he  still  had  the  solemn  ceremonies  of  the  great  Jewish 
Day  of  Atonement  in  his  mind.  He  had  fixed  attention  on  this  fact — the  way 
into  the  Holy  of  Holies,  whei-e  God's  presence  was  manifested  in  sacred  symbols, 
had  never  been  open  and  free  to  everybody.  A  veil  hid  it  away,  and  that  veil 
never  might  be  passed  save  on  definitely  arranged  conditions.  *'  Into  the  second 
tabernacle  the  high  priest  went  alone,  once  in  the  year,  not  without  blood,  which 
he  offereth  for  himself,  and  for  the  errors  of  the  people."  That  was  picture- 
teaching  of  spiritual  things.  The  Holy  Ghost  signified  something  by  it.  The 
Holy  of  Holies  represents  the  *'  more  perfect  tabernacle,  not  made  with  hands  " — 
the  place  in  which  God  now  receives  His  people.  Free  access  there  is  lost  for 
man  by  reason  of  his  wilfulness  and  sin.  God  has  put  a  veil  which  no  sinful 
man  may  pass.  And  yet  the  fact  is,  that  the  veil  is  now  done  away.  The  fact 
is,  that  man  now  has  free  access  to  God's  spiritually  manifested  presence.  How 
has  this  come  about  ?  and  what  is  involved  in  our  now  having  this  extraordinary 
liberty  and  privilege  ?  The  first  question  is  answered  by  the  writer  in  this 
way  :  "  But  Christ  having  come,  a  High  Priest  of  the  good  things  to  come  [or 
that  are  come],  through  the  greater  and  more  perfect  tabernacle,  not  made  with 
hands,  that  is  to  say,  not  of  this  creation,  nor  yet  through  the  blood  of  goats 
and  calves,  but  through  His  own  blood,  entered  in  once  for  all  into  the  Holy 
Place,  having  obtained  eternal  redemption  for  us."  The  material  ceremonies  of 
the  material  tabernacle  secured  for  Israelites  material  privileges,  and  pictured 
and  foreshadowed  the  spiritual  ceremonies  of  the  spiritual  tabernacle  which 
secure  for  all  men  spiritual  privileges.  When  we  speak  of  Christ,  we  need  to 
remember  that  the  Holy  of  Holies  which  He  entered  is  the  spiritzial  presence  of 
God ;  that  the  blood  which  He  took  is  spiritual  blood,  the  offering  of  Himself, 

343 


CHAP.  X.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS. 


His  will,  His  life,  His  perfect  obedience  of  sonship  ;  that  the  veil  through  which 
He  entered  was  His  life  in  the  flesh,  in  which  the  perfection  of  His  obedience 
was  tested  and  proved  ;  and  that  the  benefits  and  privileges  which  He  secured 
for  us  were  wholly  spiritual  benefits,  summed  up  in  right  soul-standing  with 
God,  and  free  soul-access  to  Him.  This  privilege  is  restated  for  us  in  ver.  19  : 
*'  Having  therefore,  brethren,  boldness  to  enter  into  the  Holy  Place  by  the  blood 
of  Jesus,  by  the  way  which  He  dedicated  for  us,  a  new  and  living  way,  through 
the  veil,  that  is  to  say.  His  flesh ;  and  having  a  great  Priest  over  the  house  of 
God."  The  old  priest  went  into  the  old  sanctuary,  but  took  no  one  in  with 
him.  When  he  went  in,  he  closed  the  veil  behind  him.  When  he  came  out,  he 
carefully  closed  the  veil  again.  Our  new  and  spiritual  High  Priest,  being 
Himself  also  His  infinitely  acceptable  offering,  took  the  veil  aside,  and  went  in, 
leaving  the  veil  drawn  aside,  and  the  way  in  open  for  every  one  who  would  come 
to  God  by  Him.  TJiat  High  Priest  went  in,  and  n^ever  came  out  again,  and 
never  closed  the  veil  behind  Him,  and  never  will.  There  it  stands  to-day  just 
as  He  left  it,  thrust  right  back;  and  there  He  stands  to-day,  just  as  He  took 
His  stand  when  He  entered,  as  sacrifice  and  priest,  the  Holy  Place.  And  there 
the  open  way  is,  just  as  He  made  it ;  and  by  that  way  we  have  freedom  and 
boldness  of  access  to  God.  If  those  Christian  Jews  to  whom  the  epistle  was 
written  would  but  enter  fully  into  their  new  and  spiritual  privileges  in  Christ 
Jesus,  they  would  readily  let  the  old,  formal,  and  material  system  pass  away, 
and  they  would  be  no  longer  disturbed  in  mind  by  those  who  exaggerated  the 
importance  of  what  was  but  temporary  and  preparatory.  If  they  did  enter  fully 
into  their  spiritual  privileges,  they  would  surely  find  that  those  privileges 
brought  calls  to  duty,  and  that  the  earnest  and  persistent  fulfilment  of  the 
duty  ensured  the  constant  renewal  and  constant  enjoyment  of  the  privileges. 
The  safeguard  of  religious  truth  and  religious  privilege  is  not  contention  and 
dispute,  but  an  earnest,  devoted,  obedient  life  of  love  and  service. 

I.  Our  duty  to  ourselves. — It  is  not  selfishness  or  self-centredness  to  do  our 
duty  to  ourselves — to  meet  our  obligations  to  ourselves.  A  man  is  just  as  truly 
put  in  trust  of  himself  as  he  is  put  in  trust  of  others.  "  Every  man  must  bear 
his  own  burden,"  the  responsibility  of  being  himself.  No  man  can  rightly 
neglect  his  own  spiritual  life  upon  the  excuse  that  he  is  busily  attending  to  other 
people's.  Three  things  are  urged  by  this  writer,  as  included  in  our  duty  to 
ourselves — Prayer,  Purity,  Profession.  1.  We  must  freely  use  our  new-found 
privilege  of  access  to  God.  Prayer  is  the  spiritual  agency  by  means  of  which 
our  souls  pass  along  the  new  Christ-opened  way  into  the  presence  and  communion 
of  God.  "  Let  us  draw  near,  with  a  true  heart,  in  fulness  of  faith."  2.  We 
must  be  very  jealous  about  that  condition  of  using  the  new  Christly  way  which 
is  the  condition  on  our  side.  It  is  not  anybody/  who  may  pass  in,  only  those  who 
are  aiming  at  personal  purity,  who  are  setting  their  wills  upon  righteousness, 
whose  consciences  do  not  accuse  them  of  wilful  and  purposed  sin,  and  who  are 
putting  a  strong  hand  of  control  upon  their  daily  conduct  and  relations,  to 
ensure  that  they  run  in  lines  of  consistency  and  righteousness.  "  Having  our 
hearts  sprinkled  from  an  evil  conscience,  and  our  body  washed  with  pure  water  " 
— figures  evidently  taken  from  the  anxiety  of  the  high  priest,  on  the  Atonement 
Day,  to  secure  both  bodily  and  moral  purity  before  venturing  through  the  veil. 
3.  And  we  must  recognise  the  importance  of  a  steady  persistency  in  the  pro- 
fession of  our  faith,  and  a  constant  readiness  to  make  confession  of  our  faith, 
whenever  the  call  to  make  confession  comes.  Spiritual  safety  is  guaranteed 
when  a  man  has  no  idea  of  hiding  whose  he  is  and  whom  he  serves — when  he 
can  say,  even  before  those  who  persecute  him,  as  did  the  saintly  Poly  carp,  "  I 
am  a  Christian."  It  was  the  half-shame  and  half-fear  which  were  keeping  the 
Jewish  Christians  from  openly  confessing  Christ,  that  put  their  standing  in 

344  .   . 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS.  chap.  X. 


Christ  in  peril.      "  Let  us  hold  fast  the  confession  of  our  hope,  that  it  waver 
not." 

II.  Our  duty  to  one  another. — It  is  of  the  very  essence  of  a  Christian  Church 
that  those  who  stand  in  the  recovered  sonship  are  brought  into  mutually  helpful 
relations  in  the  recovered  brotherhood.  A  Christian  is  his  *'  brother's  keeper." 
We  are  responsible  to  one  another  for  what  we  can  do  for  one  another  in  the 
culture  and  fitting  expression  of  that  spiritual  life  which  we  have  in  common. 
It  is  not  often  set  before  us  with  sufficient  clearness  and  force,  that  our  duty  to 
fellow- Christians  is  not  merely  common-place,  every-day,  human  kindness.  This 
is  due  from  man  to  man  in  the  ordinary  human  brotherhood.  Our  call  is  to 
serve  our  Christian  brethren  precisely  in  the  sphere  of  their  Christian,  that  is, 
their  spiritual^  life.  "  Let  us  consider  one  another  to  provoke  unto  love  and 
good  works."  In  every  Church  there  are  the  strong  and  the  weak  :  "  Let  those 
who  are  strong  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak."  In  every  Church  there  are 
the  advanced,  the  experienced,  the  saintly  :  let  them  provoke  to  all  goodness  the 
beginners,  the  young,  and  those  whose  life  is  in  its  struggling-time.  Spiritual 
things,  virtues,  powers,  experiences,  are  never  to  be  thought  of  as  personal 
possessions :  they  are  trusts  for  use ;  they  are  for  mutual  edification.  The 
man  will  lose  them  who  thinks  to  keep  them  to  himself;  the  man  will  keep 
them  who  uses  them  in  service  to  others.  Provoke  others,  then,  to  love,  which 
is  the  essence  of  the  Christian  life ;  and  to  good  works,  which  are  the  essentials 
of  the  expression  of  the  Christian  life.  Each  may  be  the  "  helper  of  another's 
joy."  And  the  peril  of  the  Jewish  Christian  Churches  would  be  easily  removed, 
if  only  they  would  take  proper  spiritual  care  of  one  another. 

III.  Our  duty  to  the  Church. — We  stand  in  relation  not  only  to  one  another, 
but  also  to  the  Church,  as  a  body,  to  which  we  may  belong.  We  are  responsible 
for  our  personal  example  of  godliness,  and  for  our  loyalty  to  all  the  Church's 
arrangements  and  claims.  This  is  put  into  one  matter — one  which  we  are 
surprised  to  find  thus  early  in  the  history  of  the  Church  causing  serious  anxiety  : 
"Not  forsaking  the  assembling  of  ourselves  together,  as  the  manner  of  some 
is."  Nothing  puts  a  man's  spiritual  life  in  more  serious  peril  than  irregular 
attendance  at  the  services  of  his  Church  ;  nothing  more  readily  checks  the  process 
of  spiritual  culture;  nothing  affords  a  more  injurious  example  to  others;  and 
nothing  indicates  a  weaker  sense  of  the  responsibilities  under  which  a  man  comes 
in  entering  the  fellowship  of  a  Church.  These  duties  wait  on  privilege.  There 
can  be  no  enjoyment  of  the  privilege  without  meeting  the  obligations.  Let  no 
one  deceive  himself  on  that  point. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ye,v.\^.  Free  Admission  to  the  Holiest.  and  not  be  also  the  best  aspect /or 
— The  humility  which  is  suitable  to  the  others.  We  should  therefore  hold  each 
Christian  life  is  suitable  also  in  our  setting  of  religious  truth  charitably, 
relations  to  the  Christian  truth.  We  and  with  due  consideration  of  the  differ- 
never  can,  at  any  one  time,  see  wholes  ing  thoughts  and  feelings  of  others, 
of  truth.  As  with  our  bodily,  so  with  Each  man  has  a  different  apprehension 
our  mental  vision,  we  may  see  the  of  the  truth  of  the  Reconciliation  or 
front  and  one  side,  but  we  cannot  at  Atonement.  Some  approach  it  as 
the  same  time  see  the  other  side  and  philosophical  inquirers,  and  some  as 
the  back.  It  is  well  to  bear  in  mind  conscious  sinners.  (These  are  likely  to 
the  fact  that  each  representation  of  see  special  value  in  the  substitutionary 
truth  made  to  us  is  only  one  aspect  of  aspects  of  the  Redeemer's  work.)  Some 
it.     It  may  be  the  best  aspect  for  us^  as  saved  ones,  who,  looking  back,  try 

345 


CHAP.  X. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS. 


bo  understand  the  salvation.  (These 
are  likely  to  give  special  prominence 
to  the  moral  power  in  our  Redeemer's 
work.)  But  all  sides  and  aspects  of  a 
XfXith  must  be  taken  into  due  account 
if  we  would  apprehend  it  as  a  whole. 

I.  The  condition  of  entrance  into 
the  Holiest.— "By  the  blood  of  Jesus." 
Great  spiritual  verities  are  illustrated 
by  the  old  Jewish  ritual.  The ' '  Holiest " 
was  separated  from  the  *'  Tabernacle," 
picturing  for  us  the  truth  that,  as  men, 
the  worship  of  the  Creator,  the  God 
of  providence,  can  be  carried  on  daily ; 
but,  as  sinners,  God  is,  in  some  sense, 
hidden,  and  can  only  manifest  His 
favour  on  conditions.  The  "  mercy- 
seat"  is  within  the  space  called  the 
"  Holiest."  Many  think  of  the  "  mercy- 
seat"  as  if  it  were  a  common  thing 
belonging  to  the  outer  court,  and  always 
accessible.  Note  the  significance  of 
the  veil,  and  the  Tuode  of  entrance. 
The  conditions  on  which  sinners  can 
come  to  God  are  given  in  the  text  and 
context.  1.  The  blood  of  Jesus.  This 
was  required  on  God's  side.  It  was 
necessary  to  the  vindication  of  God's 
truth,  and  the  honouring  of  God's  law, 
so  that  no  dishonour  should  come  to 
Him  while  extending  His  mercy  to 
sinners,  and  so  that  all  presumption 
might  be  checked.  God  was  honoured 
in  Christ's  obedience  unto  death,  -in 
His  surrender  of  life,  or  blood- shedding. 
2.  The  humanity  of  Jesus — '*  His 
flesh."  This  was  required  on  man's 
side.  The  God  we  cannot  see  is 
behind  the  veil  of  Christ's  flesh.  Only 
through  the  humanity  of  Jesus  do  we 
come  to  God — to  know  God — to  hold 
communion  with  God.  It  is  quite 
impossible  for  us  men  to  come  to  a 
God  conceived  only  as  an  abstraction. 
He  must  be  God  manifest.  3.  The 
priesthood  of  Jesus.  This  is  needed 
both  by  God  and  by  us.  It  represents 
a  living  mediation.  On  such  a  basis 
we  may  well  have  "  boldness,  and 
access  with  confidence." 

II.  The  joy  of  being  in  the 
Holiest. — Having  free  admission  to  it 
is  a  "sacred  joy."  Conceive  the  joy 
of  the    high   priest    while   privileged 

346 


to  be  within  the  veil.  In  the  older 
days  there  was  no  abiding  there,  nor 
indeed  any  frequent  going  there. 
Show — 1.  Our  joy  in  gaining  admis- 
sion to  God.  Imagine  a  high  priest 
going  into  the  Holiest  for  the  first  time. 
Compare  our  first  sense  of  being  within 
the  veil.  2.  Our  joy  in  securing 
liberty  of  access.  Gaining  the  feeling 
of  a  right  to  enter.  The  right  of 
gracious  invitation,  and  an  offered 
way.  3.  Our  joy  in  using  our 
privilege.  Able  to  go  to  God  in  all 
our  difficulty,  trouble,  faintness,  feeble- 
ness, and  sin.  As  men,  we  can  always 
go  into  the  outer  court  to  praise, 
and  to  thank  God,  and  to  worship. 
Should  it  not  be  a  joy  indeed  to  us 
that — as  sinners — we  can  always  go 
into  the  "  Holiest  ?  " 

Conclusion. — 1.  How  firmly  based  is 
our  forgiveness  and  acceptance  with 
God!  The  "Holiest"  opened;  the 
"  veil  "  rent ;  the  "  blood  "  sprinkled; 
the  Priest  before  the  "  mercy-seat"  for 
us.  2.  How  large  is  our  privilege  of 
access  !  "  Boldness  to  enter  "  !  Is  it 
too  large  ?  Does  it  seem  to  be  too 
easy  ?  God's  commonest  mercies  are 
the  most  necessary,  yet  the  most 
neglected.  Shall  it  be  so  with  this  ? 
A  rent  veil,  and  none,  or  but  few, 
passing  through  it !  A  living  Priest, 
and  no  worshippers,  or  but  few,  for 
Him  to  present !  The  Angel  of  the 
covenant  standing,  and  no  prayers,  or 
but  few,  for  Him  to  put  into  His 
censer ! 

The  Veil  of  the  Flesh.— The  veil 
in  the  Temple  which  interposed 
between  the  worshipper  and  the 
visible  presence  of  Jehovah  is  com- 
pared to  the  body  of  Christ  (John  ii. 
21).  As  the  veil  concealed  the  glory 
of  Jehovah  from  ocular  sight,  so  the 
body  of  Jesus  shrouded  His  original 
glory.  As  God  dwelt  behind  the  veil 
in  the  earthly  Temple,  so  God  dwells 
behind  the  veil  of  human  flesh  in  the 
the  person  of  Jesus :  that  is,  God  can 
be  approached  only  by  means  of  Him. 
The  rending  of  the  Temple  veil  at  the 
death  of  Christ  attested  the  fact  that 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   X. 


His  death  gave  a  right  of  free  access 
to  every  man  to  the  presence  of  God. 
The  typical  meaning  which  is  here 
attached  to  the  veil  shows  that  the 
actual  approach  to  God  is  made  by  the 
existing  humanity  of  Jesus. — Webster 
and  Wilkinson. 

Ver.  20.  The  New  and  Living  Way^ 
— "  Consecrated,"  or  "  dedicated,"  or 
even  better,  "  inaugurated."  This  way 
was  opened  to  us  by  Christ ;  in  it  we 
follow  Him.  For  Him,  the  way  into 
the  Holiest  led  through  the  veil — His 
flesh.  As  the  veil  concealed  from  the 
high  priest  the  place  of  God's  pre- 
sence, which  he  could  enter  only  by 
passing  through  the  veil,  so,  although 
in  His  earthly  life  Jesus  dwelt  in  the 
presence  of  God,  yet  as  our  representa- 
tive He  could  not  enter  the  heavenly 
sanctuary  until  He  had  passed  through 
and  out  of  His  life  of  flesh  (see  chap, 
ix.  11).  There  is  probably  a  covert 
allusion  to  the  rending  of  the  Temple 
veil  in  the  hour  when  Jesus  thus 
passed  through  the  rent  veil  of  His 
flesh.  This  way  is  new  (chap.  ix. 
8,  12),  it  is  living,  for  in  truth  this 
"  way "  is  living  union  with  Christ 
(John  xiv.  6). — Dr.  Moulton. 

The  Body  of  Christ  a  Tabernacle. — 
In  many  passages  the  human  nature 
or  body  of  Christ  seems  to  be  regarded 
as  a  kind  of  temporary  tabernacle,  or 
veil  of  the  Divine  nature  which  dwelt 
in  Him.  As  God  dwells  behind  the 
veil  in  His  earthly  Temple,  so  God 
dwells  behind  the  veil  of  Jesus'  body 
in  His  spiritual  temple,  i.e.  He  can  be 
approached  only  through  the  medium 
of  this,  or  by  means  of  this. 

Yer.  23.  Holding  fast  Profession. 
— The  text  invites  consideration  of  the 
duties  involved  in  a  Christian  pro- 
fession, and  of  the  watchfulness  that 
is  necessary  if  we  are  to  keep  faithful 
to  it.  The  profession,  or  confession, 
of  Christ  is  a  voluntary  act ;  and  by 
voluntary  efforts  it  is  to  be  main- 
tained. 

I.  The  duties  involved  in  a  Chris- 


tian profession. — 1.  Allegiance  to 
certain  revealed  truths,  as  revealed. 
We  are  under  no  obligation  to  be  loyal 
to  those  truths  as  any  particular  man 
may  have  been  pleased  to  restate 
them.  2.  Submission  to  the  living 
rule  of  Christ.  3.  Keeping  of  certain 
well-defined  rules,  and  doing  of  certain 
carefully  prescribed  works.  After  un- 
folding each  of  these,  press  home  the 
command  of  the  text,  "  hold  fast,"  with 
(1)  head,  (2)  heart,  (3)  hand. 

II.  The  dangers  attending  a  Chris- 
tian profession. — The  great  danger 
called  to  mind  here  is  liability  to 
wavering.  1.  Liability  to  waver  from 
allegiance  to  truth.  Note  the  in- 
fluence of  speculation  and  criticism — 
the  wisdom  of  this  world ;  and  of 
religious  prejudice,  bigotry,  sectarian- 
ism, and  exclusiveness,  which  are 
always  trying  to  shift  us  from  God's 
truth  to  men's  opinions.  2.  Liability 
to  waver  from  submission  to  the  living 
rule  of  Christ.  Easily  drift  to  become 
self-pleasers  and  men-pleasers.  The 
inspiring  truth  of  Christ's  living  high- 
priesthood  is  meant  to  counteract  this. 
All  will  be  well  if  we  keep  Him  con- 
stantly in  soul-vision.  3.  Liability  to 
waver  in  the  fulfilment  of  Christian 
obligations.  That  danger  always  comes 
when  the  spiritual  health  flags,  and 
the  vital  force  is  lowered.  Depressed 
life  is  always  attended  with  neglect  of 
duty.  Health  and  activity  and  energy 
in  service  always  go  together. 

Holding  fast  Profession. — Observe — 

1.  The  duty  of  "holding  fast  profes- 
sion" itself.  Getting  and  keeping 
such  hold  as  will  effectually  secure  us 
against  (1)  persecution  ;  (2)  temptation. 

2.  The  manner  in  which  we  must  do 
this:  without  (1)  wavering;  (2)  with- 
out doubting;  (3)  without  disputing; 
(4)  without  dallying  with  temptation  to 
apostasy.  3.  The  motive  or  reason 
enforcing  this  duty.  God's  faithfulness 
to  His  promise  should  be  our  perpetual 
inspiration. 

Ver.  24.  Mutual  Consideration  and 
Mutual  Provocation. — As  Christian  in- 

347 


OHAP.  X. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


dividuals  responsibilities,  obligations, 
claims,  and  duties  come  to  us.  As 
members  of  Christian  communities  our 
fellow -members  have  claims  upon  us, 
and  we  have  claims  upon  them.  All 
human  relationships  involve  mutual 
responsibilities.  God  purposes  to  carry 
on  His  redeeming  and  sanctifying 
work  in  small  circles  by  the  piety,  the 
gracious  words,  and  hallowing  influ- 
ence of  individuals,  and  in  larger 
circles  by  the  piety,  devotion,  zeal,  and 
aggressive  activity  of  Churches. 

I.  We  ought  to  consider  one  an- 
other.— To  know  one  another,  to  be 
interested  in  one  another,  to  be  ready 
to  serve  one  another,  but  especially  to 
be  interested  in  the  Christian  well- 
being  and  progress  of  those  who  are 
united  to  us  in  the  Christian  fellow- 
ship. Take  interest  in  others,  and 
spheres  of  work  and  influence  are  sure 
to  open  before  us.  There  are  always 
spiritually  feeble  ones  whom  we  may 
strengthen :  the  permanently  feeble, 
who  are  always  finding  it  difficult  to 
maintain  the  religious  life  ;  the  tem- 
porarily feeble,  in  times  of  bodily  sick- 
ness, or  family  or  business  troubles. 
But  if  we  are  to  be  true  helpers  one 
of  another,  it  will  be  necessary  for 
us  to  watch  against  the  upgrowth  of 
those  jealousies  and  misunderstandings 
and  prejudices  that  tend  to  divide  us 
one  from  another.  We  should  give 
more  thought  to  our  oneness  in  Christ, 
and  less  to  our  mutual  peculiarities 
and  infirmities. 

II.  We  ought  to  provoke  one 
another  to  love  and  good  works. — 
This  we  may  do  by — 1.  Our  example  of 
Christian  living.  That  example  should 
be  no  doubtful  or  uncertain  witness. 
With  sincerity  we  should  be  able  to 
say,  "Be  ye  followers  of  me,  as  I  am 
of  Christ."  2.  By  our  joy  in  meeting 
Christian  obligations  and  fulfilling 
Christian  duties.  This  has  a  most 
inspiring   influence.      Illustrate    from 

(1)  attendance   on    means    of    grace ; 

(2)  generosity  and  charity ;  (3)  Chris- 
tian aggressive  work.  3.  By  our 
anxiously  using  our  opportunities  for 
speaking  to  others.     The  living  Chris- 

348 


tian  should  be  doing  the  same  work  as 
the  living  word,  which  is  given  "  for 
teaching,  for  reproof,  for  correction, 
for  instruction  which  is  in  righteous- 
ness." "  Ye  which  are  strong  ought 
to  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak," 
and  help  others  into  the  spirit  of 
"love"  and  the  life  of  "good  works." 

Pastor  and  People. — Attention  may 
be  fixed  on  the  way  in  which  the 
writer  puts  Idmself  into  his  recom- 
mendations and  counsels.  "  Let  us 
consider  one  another."  He  was  not 
only  a  brother-Christian,  he  was  a 
teacher,  he  may  have  been  an  apostle  : 
he  evidently  had  some  personal  office 
in  relation  to  the  Jewish  Christian 
Churches,  or  some  especial  authority 
in  them.  Advice  is  never  effectively 
given  when  the  adviser  in  any  sense 
holds  himself  aloof  from  the  advice  he 
gives.  It  is  most  effective  when  it  is 
evident  that  the  adviser  applies  the 
advice  to  himself.  He  carries  us  with 
him  when  he  says  we^  not  you.  Here 
then  pastor  and  people  are  called  upon 
to  "  consider  one  another "  and  to 
"  provoke  one  another." 

I.  What  can  pastors  do  for  the 
people? — The  word  "provoke"  is 
generally  used  by  us  in  a  bad  sense, 
but  it  need  not  be.  It  is  a  suitable 
word  with  which  to  describe  a  minister's 
work,  if  we  will  take  it  aright.  It 
means,  "  stir  up ;  urge  with  all  holy 
persuasions  ;  do  not  let  rest ;  keep  on 
stirring  up ;  never  mind  if  there  is 
resistance ;  keep  on  trying  to  get 
a  gracious  and  good  influence."  1. 
Ministers  may  provoke  by  presenting 
inspiring  examples.  "  Be  thou  an 
ensample  to  the  flock."  The  example 
should  not  be  merely  of  truthfulness, 
integrity,  purity,  and  "  heavenly, 
Divine  charity "  :  it  should  be  a 
specifically  Christly  example  of  forbear- 
ance— "  the  servant  of  the  Lord  must 
not  strive  " ;  of  gentleness  ;  of  meekness, 
in  its  nobler  sense  of  "  non-self-asser- 
tiveness  "  ;  of  sympathy,  which  enables 
him  to  come  helpfully  near  to  all  kinds 
of  human  sorrow.  But  we  may  not 
limit  ministerial  examples  to  Christly 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   X. 


graces ;  the  minister  must  be  an 
ensample  of  Christly  activity  and 
energy.  To  deal  with  this  fully  would 
need  an  audience  of  ministers.  Enough 
to  say  now,  that  a  minister  should  be 
what  he  can  make  himself  and  what 
Christ  can  make  him  ;  but  in  actual 
fact  he  too  often  is  only  what  the 
people  make  him,  and  then  he  is  far 
down  below  what,  in  his  moments  of 
noble  aspiration,  he  intensely  longs  to 
be.  He  would,  when  he  is  his  truest 
self,  provoke  men  by  an  inspiring  ex- 
ample. 2.  Ministers  may  "  provoke  " 
by  wise  and  strong  and  spiritual 
teachings.  Fearing  that  he  had  given 
offence  to  a  leading  member  of  his 
congregation  by  some  very  strong 
appeals  which  he  had  been  led  to 
make,  a  clergyman  foolishly  went  to 
him  to  explain  and  apologise.  The 
man  was  wiser  than  the  minister,  for 
he  very  quietly  replied,  saying,  '*  My 
dear  sir,  it  is  a  very  poor  sermon  that 
does  not  hit  somebody."  Smoothness 
and  platitudes  are  helpless,  hopeless, 
and  injurious  things.  Men  can  go 
to  sleep,  and  even  die  in  their  sins. 
A  minister  must  so  teach  as  to  pro- 
voke. He  must  provoke  men  to 
think ;  provoke  men  to  examine  the 
beliefs  which  they  are  holding  to-day 
for  no  other  reason  than  that  they  have 
held  them  for  years ;  provoke  them  to 
self-examinations,  that  they  may  see 
whether  their  spirit  and  their  conduct 
are  such  as  "  becometh  the  gospel  of 
Christ "  ;  provoke  them  to  see  whether 
they  are  cherishing  evil,  untrustful,  un- 
forgiving feelings  towards  any  others  ; 
provoke  them  to  put  away  their  sins 
and  self-indulgences  ;  provoke  them  to 
the  renewal  of  their  neglected  religious 
duties.  Christian  teachings  are  not 
sweet,  soft  playings  on  a  harp.  They 
are  not  mild  nothings  of  sentimental 
comfort.  They  are — they  ought  to  be 
— clarion -calls  to  come  forth  to  the 
"  help  of  the  Lord  against  the  mighty," 
who  in  these  days  are  imperilling  the 
Christian  truth,  the  Christian  right- 
eousness, and  the  Christian  charity. 
We  want  the  holy  provocations  of  a 
vigorous,  searching,  and  strong  minis- 


try. 3.  Ministers  may  provoke  by 
spiritual  quickenings.  There  is  some- 
thing required  more  than  example, 
and  more  than  teaching.  It  is  the 
mysterious  quickening  influence  of 
vigorous,  healthy,  refined,  sensitive, 
spiritual  life.  Sometimes  "\ye  use  the 
term  "mesmeric,"  and  we  say  of 
ministers  that  they  have  a  strange 
mesmeric  power  over  their  congrega- 
tions. Call  it  what  we  may,  we  all 
know  what  is  meant,  for  we  ourselves 
have  come  again  and  again  into  its 
power.  High  soul-life  has  quickened 
soul- life  in  us.  Spiritual  power  has 
provoked  the  dying  embers  of  our 
soul-life,  and  stirred  them  into  a  flame 
again.  That  supremely  good  work 
ministers  may  do  for  the  people.  They 
Tnay^  but  only  on  conditions  that  are 
not  easily  realised.  4.  And  ministers 
may  provoke  by  leading  the  people 
into  new  enterprises  and  good  works. 
The  initiative  need  not  always  come 
from  the  minister  ;  but  the  leadership 
of  the  enterprise,  when  started,  may 
properly  come  from  him ;  and  with 
wisdom,  courage,  and  persistency  he 
may  help  over  early  difficulties,  and 
guide  development  along  healthy  lines. 
II.  What  can  the  people  do  for 
their  pastors  ? — "  Provoke  to  love  and 
good  works."  Provoke  in  a  good 
sense.  Ministers  are  but  human. 
They  are  as  susceptible  to  kindly 
surroundings  of  trustfulness,  to  signs 
of  sympathy  and  affection,  as  other 
people  are  ;  and  they  readily  respond 
when  sweet  confidences  and  loving 
services  tell  how  God  is  using  them 
in  culturing  religious  life  and  virtue. 
The  spiritual  life  and  power  of  minis- 
ters flag  very  readily,  and  they  have 
always  to  set  the  counsel  well  in  view, 
"  Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence, 
for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life." 
What  then  can  the  people  do  for 
their  minister  ?  1 .  Trust  him.  He 
cannot  always  do  what  the  people 
think  to  be  wise ;  he  often  does  not 
do  what  the  people  think  he  ought 
to  do;  and  he  is  sure  to  say,  if  he 
really  is  a  man  of  God  and  not  a  mere 
time-server,  what  the  people  think  he 

349 


CHAP.   X. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


ought  not  to  say.  Trust  him.  If  he 
is  in  God's  lead  and  keeping,  trust 
him.  Depend  upon  it  God's  truth  and 
God's  honour  are  as  precious  to  him 
as  to  any  of  his  people.  2.  Stand  by 
him.  A  minister,  in  coming  to  preside 
over  a  people,  commits  his  reputation, 
his  ministerial  reputation,  to  their 
charge,  and  they  should  be  very  jealous 
of  it.  Calumniators  there  may  be  ; 
let  them  be  outside  his  Church.  The 
healthiest  thing  for  a  Church  to  do 
is  to  insist  that  it  will  discuss  the 
teachings  which  the  minister  presents, 
but  it  will  not  discuss  the  7niniste7\ 
How  wise  the  rebuke  of  the  good  man 
who,  checking  remarks  at  his  table 
that  tended  to  disparage  the  minister, 
calmly  but  firmly  said,  "  He  is  our 
minister,  and  I  never  allow  such  re- 
marks as  these  in  my  house."  3.  Fray 
for  him.  That  is  the  truest  and  most 
blessed  form  of  provocation.  When 
persons  get  out  of  sympathy  with  their 
minister,  they  always  cease  to  pray 
for  him,  or  their  prayer  becomes  a 
mere  grumbling  to  God  about  him. 
That  prayer-power  is  always  at  the 
command  of  a  congregation,  and  a 
marvellous  power  it  is  to  provoke  pas- 
tors unto  "  love  and  good  works."  And 
when  they  thus  each  provoke  the  other, 
what  a  noble  life  they  can  live  together 
as  pastor  and  people !  what  sacrificing 
services  they  can  render  together ! 
Services  then  are  times  of  refreshing. 
Christian  work  is  done  then  with  full 
consecration.  "  Let  us  consider  one 
another  to  provoke  unto  love  and 
good  works."  Let  us  use  our  power 
of  mutual  provocation. 

Ver.  25.  The  Duty  of  the  House  of 
God. — *'Not  forsaking  the  assembling 
of  ourselves  together."  We  have  all 
been  surprised  to  find  that  our  Chris- 
tian brethren  have  passed  through  our 
experience,  have  felt  our  feelings,  have 
battled  with  our  difiiculties,  and  have 
won  the  rest  which  we  have  gained,  by 
the  very  means  which  we  had  employed. 
As  soon  as  we  know  the  heart -story  of 
our  brethren,  we  find  in  how  large  a 
measure  it  is  true  that  "  no  tempta- 

350 


tion  has  taken  us  but  such  as  is 
common  to  man."  And  the  idea  we 
have  of  the  singularity  of  our  own 
experience  we  are  disposed  to  transfer 
to  the  Church  itself.  Men  say  that 
there  never  has  been  such  a  period  in 
the  Church's  history  as  the  present. 
It  has  never  been  surrounded  with  the 
same  evils  and  temptations,  or  been 
marked  by  the  same  peculiarities.  But 
the  truth  is,  that  there  is  no  tempta- 
tion that  has  taken  the  Churches  of 
to-day  but  such  as  is  common  to 
Churches.  In  the  early  days  of  first 
love  and  zeal,  the  Christian  teachers 
had  to  deal  with  a  difficulty  which 
sorely  troubles  the  Church  of  to-day. 
Men  were  neglecting  the  "  assembling 
of  themselves  together." 

I.  Religion  is  a  personal  thing,  an 
individual  thing,  a  spiritual  thing. — 
A  personal  thing — each  man  must 
attend  to  it  himself.  An  individual 
thing — no  man  can  lose  himself  in  a 
crowd  of  seekers  ;  he  must  stand  alone 
before  God,  and  carry  his  sin-burden 
alone  to  Christ.  A  spiritual  thing — 
mere  association  with  services  and 
ceremonies  cannot  secure  it ;  it  be- 
longs to  a  man's  heart,  not  his  hands 
or  his  head  or  his  tongue.  The  best 
things  are  liable  to  abuse.  Divine 
truths  suffer,  in  practically  working 
them  out,  through  our  infirmities. 
We  are  always  too  ready  to  exalt 
one  truth  above  another,  one  form 
of  duty  at  the  expense  of  another. 
Some  make  too  much  of  the  indi- 
viduality and  personality  of  rehgion, 
and  because  they  are  growing  all  by 
themselves,  are  growing  long  and  thin 
and  pale  and  weak,  as  many  "  only 
children  "  do  growing  up  all  by  them- 
selves in  homes.  A  man  set  by  him- 
self to  nourish  his  own  religion  can 
never  reach  the  highest  stages  of 
Christian  life  and  experience.  There 
is,  indeed,  a  long  roll  of  saintly  men 
and  women  who,  in  hermit  cells  and 
in  monastic  and  conventual  seclusion, 
have  sought  holiness,  but  their  lives 
have  always  fallen  short  of  the  Chris- 
tian ideal.  There  are  Christian  virtues 
which  never  can  be  nourished  in  this 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.  X. 


way.  All  that  part  of  Christian  char- 
acter which  relates  to  the  unselfish 
demands  association  with  others.  If  a 
Christian  is  to  be  in  health,  he  must 
not  only  breathe  Christian  feeling  and 
feed  on  Christian  truth,  he  must  also 
feel  the  power  of  daily  contact  with 
those  who  are  conscious  of  the  same 
sins,  glory  in  the  same  Saviour,  and 
labour  to  win  the  same  holiness.  Upon 
Christian  associations,  in  worship  and 
in  work,  the  culture  of  a  high,  worthy, 
Christian  life  depends. 

II.  The  religion  of  Jesus  Christ 
makes  plain  demand  on  us  not  only 
to  nourish  our  own  life,  but  also  to 
interest  ourselves  in  the  Christian 
life  of  others. — The  Christian  spirit  in 
us  urges  us  to  care  for  others,  that 
(1)  they  should  begin  the  godly  life, 
and  (2)  that  they  should  walk  worthy 
of  their  vocation.  We  are  gathered 
up  together  as  redeemed  sons  of  God, 
children  together  of  the  one  Father, 
heirs  together  of  the  same  infinite 
inheritance ;  and  there  is  properly 
expected  from  us  a  family,  a  brotherly, 
interest  in  each  other.  In  the  early 
days  of  the  Church  all  who  had  truly 
learned  of  Christ  consecrated  them- 
selves to  works  of  charity  and  mercy  : 
they  relieved  the  sick  and  afflicted ; 
they  instructed  in  Christian  truth ; 
they  preached  in  order  that,  if  possible, 
all  men  might  be  saved.  Our  Lord 
left  us  an  example.  In  His  life  the 
most  prominent  thing  is  care  for 
others,  self-sacrifice  in  the  effort  to 
bless  others.  He  is  never  seeking  to 
get  pleasure ;  He  is  always  trying 
to  give  pleasure.  And  He  gets  the 
truest  and  best  pleasure  in  the  giving. 
The  first  natural  cry  of  a  renewed 
soul  is  for  some  one  with  whom  to 
talk  about  the  new  emotions.  We 
cannot  be  glad,  as  Christians,  without 
wanting  somebody  to  stand  beside  us, 
and  join  their  voice  to  our  psalm  of 
thanksgiving.  We  cannot  pray,  but 
we  want  some  one  to  kneel  beside  us, 
and  utter  their  heart  out  along  with 
ours  in  fervent  wrestlings  and  suppH- 
cations.  We  cannot  Hsten  to  the 
preached  word  with  profit  unless  others 


sit  beside  us,  and  the  dews  of  Divine 
truth  are  refreshing  also  the  soil  of 
their  hearts.  Plants  and  trees  never 
do  well  unless  they  grow  together.  It 
is  a  pilgrim  path  we  have  to  tread,  but 
the  pilgrims  may  walk  together.  The 
spirit  of  sin  is  the  spirit  of  separa- 
tion. Sin  makes  men  walk  in  lonely 
paths,  thinking  their  own  thoughts, 
wrestling  with  their  own  doubts.  If 
it  were  not  the  spirit  of  sm,  we  might 
say  it  was  the  spirit  of  the  age  in 
which  we  live.  The  selfishness  of 
modern  business  competition  is  opposed 
to  that  generous  thoughtfulness  of 
others  which  properly  distinguishes 
the  Christian.  The  world  would  cut 
off  every  tie  that  binds  us  to  others. 
Christ  would  make  every  tie  hold 
more  closely. 

III.  Our  modes  of  assembling  to- 
gether are  practically  fitted  to  accom- 
plish both  these  ends — to  strengthen 
and  develope  our  own  religious  life, 
and  to  exhibit  and  express  our  in- 
terest in  the  religious  life  of  others. 
— Our  text  evidently  puts  our  "  as- 
sembling together "  as  a  means  of 
*' provoking  one  another  to  love  and 
good  works "  ;  and  that  is  the  only 
kind  of  "  provoking "  Christians  ever 
should  do.  Our  modes  of  assembling 
are  mainly  of  three  kinds :  1 .  We 
assemble  together  for  purposes  of 
Christian  fellowship.  2.  We  assemble 
together  for  purposes  of  worship  and 
instruction.  3.  And  we  assemble  to- 
gether to  remember  our  Lord's  death, 
with  the  help  of  His  appointed  em- 
blems. We  need  all  these  kinds  of 
meetings.  We  need  all  for  the  full 
development  of  our  own  life.  We 
need  all  for  the  adequate  expression 
of  our  consideration  for  others. 

The  Day  approaching. — Christians 
ought  to  observe  the  signs  of  the  times, 
such  as  God  has  foretold.  There  was 
a  day  approaching,  a  terrible  day,  to 
the  Jewish  nation,  when  their  city 
should  be  destroyed,  and  the  body  of 
the  people  rejected  of  God  for  rejecting 
Christ.  This  would  be  a  day  of  dis- 
persion and  temptation  to  the  chosen 

351 


CHAP.  X.  HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


remnant.     Now  the  apostle  puts  them  a   trying    day  coming   on  us  all,  the 

upon  observing  what  signs  there  were  day    of    our    death,    and    we    should 

of  the  approach  of  such  a  terrible  day,  observe  all  the  signs  of  its  approach - 

and  upon  being  the  more  constant  in  ing,    and    improve    them    to    greater 

meeting   together   and   exhorting   one  watchfulness  and  diligence  in  duty. — 

another,  that  they  might  be  the  better  Matthew  Henry, 
prepared   for   such  a  day.      There  is 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  26—31. 

The  Judgment  of  the  Wilful. — If  others  remind  the  Jewish  Christians  of  the 
authority,  inspiration,  and  value  of  the  Mosaic  ceremonial  system,  this  writer 
will  remind  them  of  the  solemn  sanctions  of  that  system.  If  he  has  proved  to 
them  that  the  dispensation  of  which  Christ  is  the  head  is  in  every  way  superior, 
it  follows  that  the  sanctions  will  be  found  altogether  more  searching  and  severe. 

I.  The  sanctions  of  the  Jewish  dispensation  (ver.  28). — Moses'  law  was  most 
considesrate  and  merciful  in  dealing  with  sins  of  frailty,  lapses  through  inad- 
vertence, weakness,  and  ignorance.  Its  rites  and  ceremonies  provided  for  all 
kinds  of  sin  arising  out  of  human  infirmities.  Its  severity  is  often  dwelt  on  ;  its 
mercifulness  is  far  more  remarkable  than  its  severity.  But  for  wilful  sin  based 
on  knowledge  that  what  was  done  was  sin  it  had  no  sacrifice.  Let  it  be  fully 
proved  by  witnesses  that  a  man  has  wilfully  done  what  he  knew  to  be  sin,  and 
then  he  is  recognised  as  a  man  who  has  set  at  nought  Moses'  law,  and  he  must 
die  without  compassion.  Every  care  must,  however,  be  taken  to  ensure  that  the 
man's  wrong  was  persistently  wilful,  and  that  it  was  intelligently  wilful,  being 
based  on  knowledge.  It  is  necessary  to  press  this  point  very  closely,  because 
upon  it  the  comparison  of  this  paragraph  depends. 

II.  The  sanctions  of  the  spiritual  dispensation. — Merciful  in  all  matters  of 
frailty,  it  also  is  severe,  with  a  yet  intenser  severity,  in  all  matters  of  wilfulness 
upon  and  after  knowledge  and  experience.  Lapses  or  slidings  from  the  faith  in 
Christ  are  not  dealt  with  here,  but  wilful  departures  from  the  faith  after  having 
confessed  it.  Apostasy  which  implies  resolute  wilfulness  is  here  indicated.  "  If 
we  sin  wilfully,  after  that  we  have  received  the  knowledge  of  the  truth."  In 
the  passage  four  things  are  presented  for  our  consideration  :  1.  The  true 
significance  of  such  wilful  apostasy.  It  might  seem  only  giving  up  one  particular 
phase  of  religion,  and  falling  back  upon  an  older.  It  might  be  represented  as  a 
loosening  of  hold  on  the  uncertain,  and  gripping  tight  that  which  had  been  the 
confidence  of  men  through  long  ages.  But  all  such  representations  only  obscured 
the  solemn  truth,  and  confirmed  men  in  their  wrong-doing.  See  the  wilful  de- 
parture from  Christ  aright,  and  it  has  a  most  terrible  threefold  significance,  which 
the  writer  does  indeed  present  in  the  line  of  Old  Testament  figures  and  associa- 
tions, but  which  readily  impress  their  solemnity  on  every  heart.  It  really  is  such 
an  insult  to  Christ,  as  (1)  would  be  involved  in  treading  underfoot  the  Son  of 
God.  It  is  such  an  awful  meanness  as  (2)  counting  the  blood  of  the  covenant, 
by  which  the  man  was  sealed  over  to  Christ  for  ever,  a  thing  to  be  lightly  trifled 
with — an  unholy  thing.  It  is  even  (3)  doing  despite  unto  the  Spirit  of  grace. 
In  the  common  associations  of  men  it  is  thought  an  insulting  thing  for  a  man 
to  throw  up  his  membership.  What  must  it  be  to  apostatise  from  Christ,  after 
a  man  has  professed  to  have  obtained  through  Him  eternal  salvation  ?  2.  The 
hoplessness  of  such  apostasy  regarded  as  a  moral  condition.  For  it  should  be 
clearly  seen  that  no  merely  intellectual  doubting  is  here  dealt  with.  The  apostasy 
is  a  settled  feeling  of  the  heart,  and  a  resolute  determination  of  the  will.  It  is 
a  hopeless  moral  state,  which  may  find  expression  in  a  specific  act.     It  is  hopeless 

352 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  x. 


because  it  is  immoral.  The  bringing  of  further  proofs  may  persuade  the 
intellect ;  but  if  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  has  made  its  persuasions  of  the  heart  and 
the  will,  and  then  that  persuasion  is  put  away,  refused,  and  resisted,  it  is  plain 
that  that  sacrifice  can  no  longer  be  used  as  persuasion  ;  and  there  is  no  other, 
no  higher  moral  force  that  can  be  exerted  upon  the  man ;  and  so  his  case  has 
become  necessarily  a  hopeless  one — unshielded  the  man  stands  exposed  to  the 
full  blasts  of  the  Divine  indignation.  "  There  remaineth  no  more  a  sacrifice  for 
sin,  but  a  certain  fearful  expectation  of  judgment,  and  a  fierceness  of  fire  which 
shall  devour  the  adversaries."  3.  The  punishment  of  such  apostasy  which  is 
inevitable.  He  who  ventures  outside  the  shelter  stands  exposed  to  the  storm. 
Figures  alone,  such  as  that  of  fire,  can  convey  to  human  minds  fitting  ideas  of 
Divine  indignation  and  wrath.  All  punishment  is  necessarily  relative  to  the 
being  punished ;  and  we  have  to  realise  what  punishment  of  a  spiritual  being, 
svich  as  man  is,  may  possibly  be.  Scripture  uses  two  words,  both  of  which  are 
of  awful  significance — "  eternal  punishment,"  and  "  eternal  death."  4.  The 
warning  which  the  possibility  of  such  apostasy  should  prove  to  those  who  are 
exposed  to  n^align  influences  and  subtle  temptations.  Take  heed  lest  you  yield 
even  a  step ;  it  may  be  putting  your  foot  upon  a  slide,  and  before  you  are  aware 
you  may  have  drifted  away.  See  how  "  fearful  a  thing  it  is  to  fall  into  the 
hands  of  the  living  God,"  as  you  must  if  you  are  found  outside  that  shelter  and 
resting-place  which  you  have  in  Christ.  Hold  fast  your  profession.  Help  one 
another  to  hold  fast.  For  Christ's  sake,  for  your  own  sake,  for  each  other's 
sake,  hold  fast. 

Note  on  "  sinning  wilfully. ^^ — The  word  "  wilfully  "  stands  in  contrast  with 
sins  of  weakness,  ignorance,  and  error.  If  the  writer  meant  to  say  that,  after 
the  commission  of  heinous  and  wilful  sins,  "  there  remaineth  no  more  sacrifice 
for  sins,"  this  would  not  only  be  the  most  terrible  passage  in  Scripture,  but 
would  do  away  with  the  very  object  of  redemption,  and  the  possibility  of  any 
forgiveness  of  sins.  It  would,  as  Kurtz  says,  "be  in  its  consequences  truly 
subversive  and  destructive  of  the  whole  Christian  soteriology."  But  the  meaning 
rather  is,  "  if  we  are  willing  sinners,"  "  if  we  are  in  a  state  of  deliberate  and 
voluntary  defiance  to  the  will  of  God."  He  is  alluding  not  only  to  those  sins 
which  the  Jews  described  as  being  committed  presumptuously  "with  uplifted 
hand"  (Num.  xv.  30  ;  Ps.  xix.  13 — see  vi.  4-8,  xii.  16,  17),  but  to  the  deliberate 
continuity  of  such  sins  as  a  self-chosen  law  of  life ;  as,  for  instance,  when  a  man  has 
closed  against  himself  the  door  of  repentance,  and  said,  "  Evil,  be  thou  my  good." 
Such  a  state  is  glanced  at  in  2  Pet.  ii.  20 ;  Matt.  xii.  43-45. — Farrar. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Yer.  26.  No  other  Sacrifice. — There  only  Sin-offering,  God  has  provided  no 

remaineth  no  longer  a  sacrifice  for  sins,  other  sacrifice. — Dr.  Moulton. 
so  far  as  they  are  concerned,  because 

that    offering    of    Jesus    which   they  Apostasy  is  Perdition. — If  you  make 

deliberately   reject   has   abolished    all  defection   from    Christianity,    and   re- 

the  earlier  sacrifices.     The  observances  nounce   your   hope  and   trust   in    the 

and  ceremonies  of  Judaism,  which  had  atoning  sacrifice  of  Christ,  no  other  is 

been  full  of  meaning  while  they  pointed  provided,  or  can  be  provided,  for  you 

to  Him  that  was  to  come,  have  lost  all  — no  other  makes  real  atonement  for 

their  virtue  through  His  coming.     Nay  sin  ;    this   being  renounced,  therefore, 

more,  for  such  sin  as  this,  the  sin  of  your  case  is  desperate.     The  saciifice 

knowing  and   Avilful   rejection  of   the  under  the  new  covenant  is  never,  like 

A  A  353 


CHAP.  X.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS. 


the  Jewish  offerings,  to  be   repeated.  and  equally  pleasant  on  the  other ;  not 

Apostasy  from  your  present  religion,  looking  as  the  sun  looks,  with  a  be- 

then,  is  final  perdition. — Moses  Stuart.  nignant  face  on  the  evil  and  on  the 

good ;  and  not  as  man  looks,  with  only 

No  Sacrifice  for  Some  Sins. — There  a  less  benignant  face  upon  the   evil, 

were   some    sins   under    the    law   for  He  stands  with  all  the  fervour  of  His 

w^hich  no  saciifices  were  provided ;  but  infinite  love  and  all  the  majesty  of  His 

yet  if  those  who  committed  them  did  unlimited  power, — approving  good,  and 

truly  repent,  though  they  might  not  legislating  for  it  on  the  one  side ;  and 

escape     temporal    death,    they    might  disapproving    evil,    and   abhorring   it, 

escape  eternal  destruction  ;  for  Christ  and  legislating  it   down  to  the  dust, 

would  come,  and  make  atonement. —  and  beneath  the  dust,  into  infamy  and 

Matthew  Henry.  eternal  penalty  on  the  other  side.     And 

if    there    be    one    truth   that   speaks 

Only   One  Atoning  Sacrifice. — They  throughout  the  Bible  like  the  voice  of 

have    rejected    the    work    of    Christ,  God,  and  resounds  with  all  the  grandeur 

and  it  cannot  be  done  for  them  over  of   Divine  intonation,   it  is  the  truth 

again.     There    is    one   atoning   sacri-  that  God  does  not  look  with  an  equal 

fice,   and  that   they   have  repudiated,  eye  upon  the  evil  and  the  good,  that 

He  does  not  say  that  they  have  ex-  He   is  a    discriminator   of    character, 

hausted  the  infinite  mercy  of  God,  nor  a  lover   of   that   which  is  right,   and 

can  we  justly  assert  that  he  held  such  a   hater  of   that   which    is    wrong. — 

a  conclusion;  he  only  says  that  they  H.   Ward  Beecher. 
have,  so  long  as  they  continue  in  such 

a   state,  put  themselves  out  of  God's  Vengeance. — To  our  minds  this  word 

covenant,  and  that  there  are  no  other  conveys   a   meaning   which    makes   it 

covenanted  means  of  grace.     For  they  unsuitable  for  appHcation  to  God.     It 

have  trampled   underfoot  the  offer  of  is  hardly  possible  for  us  to  separate 

mercy  in  Christ,  and  there  is  no  salvation  personal     feeling,     and     unrestrained 

in  any  other  (Acts  iv.  12). — Farrar.  passion,   from  it.     The  Bible  idea  of 

the  term  is  best  understood  by  think- 

Falling  from  Grace. — He  only  who  ing  of  the  family  goel,  avenger,  or  as 

stands   high   can    fall   low.     A   lively  it  is  in  Num.  xxxv.,  revenger  of  blood, 

reference  in  the  soul  to  what  is  good  is  That  family  revenger  took  vengeance ; 

necessary,  in  order  to  be  thoroughly  he  was  bound  to  take  vengeance ;  but 

wicked ;  hence  man  can  be  more  repro-  he  imported  no  personal  feeling  into 

bate  than  the  beasts,  and  the  apostate  his    vindication    of    outraged    family 

angels  than  apostate  man. — Tholuck.  sanctities.     Vengeance  was  the  solemn 

duty  of  his  position,  office,  and  relation. 

Ver.   30.   God   the  Hater  of  Sin. —  With   such    an    association   we    may 

God  stands  between  the  right  and  the  rightly  conceive  of  vengeance  as  applied 

wrong,  not  looking  pleasant  on  the  one  to  God. 


MAIN  HOMILETIGS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  32—39. 

The  Inspiration  of  Experience. — To  have  had  the  experience  of  the  joys  of 
salvation  may  increase  our  judgment  if  we  fail,  but  it  also  increases  our  stability 
if  we  "  hold  fast."  There  are  times  in  life  when  looking  back  upon  religious 
experiences  that  we  have  had  in  the  past  has  a  distinctly  weakening  influence 
on  our  religious  life,  making  us  morbid  and  depressed.  But  there  are  other 
times  when  such  reviewing  of  the  past  is  inspirational.  We  convince  ourselves 
of  the  reality  and  power  of  our  religion  by  remembering  what  it  was  to  us  in 
the  beginning  of  our  career,  and  what  it  has  been  again  and  again  to  us  in  the 

354 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS.  chap.  x. 


strain-times  of  life.  The  writer  here  thinks  that  reminding  the  Jewish  Chris- 
tians of  their  new-found  joy,  of  their  new-found  faith  in  Christ,  will  materially 
help  them  to  "  hold  fast  the  confession  of  their  faith,  that  it  waver  not."  His 
plea  is  this  :  '*  You  have  withstood  severe  suffering  and  persecution  for  Christ's 
sake.  You  did  not  fail  then,  and  why  should  you  suffer  yourselves  to  fail 
now  ?  " 

I.  The  former  experiences. — The  persecutions  which  arose  about  Stephen,  in 
the  very  first  months  of  the  Christian  history,  scattered  the  first  Jewish  Chris- 
tian Church,  and  brought  persecutions  on  the  members,  which  are  indicated 
by  the  activity,  energy,  and  unscrupulousness  of  Saul  of  Tarsus.  It  involved 
personal  sufferings,  open  insults  and  reproaches,  loss  of  property  and  work. 
And  some  of  those  to  whom  this  epistle  was  addressed  had  actually  come 
through  all  these  bitter  experiences,  and  had  come  through  them  well,  "  holding 
fast."  "  Ye  endured  a  great  fight  of  afflictions."  The  first  flush  of  faith,  and 
the  glow  and  enthusiasm  of  first  love,  no  doubt  helped  them  very  greatly  over 
their  difiiculties  then  ;  but  lengthened  experience  and  settled  principles  ought  to 
give  them  even  a  fuller  power  to  withstand  now.  They  should  be  far  better 
able  to  stand  a  strain  than  they  were  in  those  days  when  they  were  first 
"enlightened."  But  let  them  not  forget  that  they  had  passed  through  this 
experience.  It  had  been  proved  that  they  could  hold  their  Christian  faith 
through  times  of  temptation,  strain,  and  persecution. 

II.  The  new  afflictions. — They  were  sufficiently  like  the  old  to  make  their 
former  experience  avail.  They  were  sufficiently  unlike  the  old  to  make  a  special 
demand  for  watchfulness.  Persecutions  were  renewed,  and  they  could  but  take 
many  of  the  old  forms  ;  but  the  special  peril  of  the  hour  was  the  enticement  of 
subtle  persuasions  to  fall  back  upon  the  older  Jewish  faith,  the  faith  of  their 
childhood.  These  persuasions  came  from  those  in  close  association  with  them, 
and  became  very  serious  trials  of  their  faith. 

III.  The  conditions  of  renewing  the  old  victory  of  steadfastness. — 1.  The 
spirit  of  Christian  endurance.  2.  The  reahsation  that,  in  having  Christ,  they 
had  in  themselves  a  "  better  possession  "  than  could  be  taken  away  from  them 
by  any  persecutions.  3.  A  holy  boldness  that  would  enable  them  to  set  a  firm 
front  against  every  foe,  that  would  enable  them  to  resist  evil  influence  by 
attacking  the  evil.  4.  The  patience  which  could  rise  into  persistency,  be 
determined  to  know  the  will  of  God,  and   to  stand  by  it. 

IV.  The  reward  of  those  who  finally  overcome. — "  They  receive  the 
promise."  1.  They  are  in  a  state  of  readiness  for  the  Lord's  coming.  2.  They 
realise  the  true  life  now,  in  keeping  their  faith,  and  living  the  life  of  faith. 
3.  They  are  conscious  of  the  acceptance  and  favour  of  God,  who  finds  "  His 
pleasure  in  them."  4.  They  receive  the  full  salvation  of  the  soul — its  emanci- 
pation from  all  bodily  limitations,  and  full  unfolding  into  the  image  of  the 
I'isen  and  glorified  Son  of  God.  The  mention  of  the  life  of  faith,  the  life  ruled 
and  toned  by  a  steadfast  faith  in  God,  prepares  the  way  for  the  striking  series  of 
illustrations  of  the  power  of  faith  in  life  which  are  given  in  the  next  chapter. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  32.  Admonished  by  the  Past. —  human  experiences.      It  may  be  true 

"  But  call  to  remembrance  the  former  to  say  that,  strictly,  a  past  experience 

days."      At    different    times    and    in  is  never  repeated ;  for  if  the  thing  that 

various  moods  of  mind  we  find  our-  happens   is   the    same,   the   attendant 

selves     variously    impressed     by     the  circumstances  and  conditions  are  not 

sameness,  or  by  the  diversity,  of  our  the  same,  and  our  personal  states,  in 


CHAP.  X.  HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


relation    to    the   thing,   are    not    the  himself,  first  in  the  cares  and  sorrows 

same.     It  is  with  examples  taken  from  of  this  world,  and  then  in  perdition, 

our   own   past  as  it  is  with   the   ex-  — Hoijlcins, 
amples    offered    us    in     the     blessed 

human   life   of  our  Divine  Lord  ;  we  Christian     Patience.  —  Results     are 

can  copy  neither  in  any  minute  detail.  slowly   produced   in  the   natural,    the 

But   we   are   not    therefore    shut   off  moral,  and  the  spiritual  worlds.     Men 

from    following    the   example   of    our  who  only  gaze  upon  work,  and  have 

Divine   Lord,    nor   are   we    prevented  not    to    do    it,    are    often    impatient, 

from  being  duly  admonished  and  aided  Some  of  the  early  Christians  were  in 

by  our  own  past  experiences.     What  danger  even  of  apostasy  through  the 

we  require  to  see  is   that  all   things  want  of  patience  amid  the  trials  which 

enshrine  principles,  express  principles  they  had  to  endure, 

in  some  one  direction  and  with  some  I.    The    need    which    there    is    of 

precise  limitation.     We  remember  the  patience  in  Christian  life  and  work, 

thing,  the   incident,   the  conflict,    the  — There  are  difficulties  connected  with 

success    or    failure,    for    the   sake    of  our    life    and    work    common    to    all 

the  principle   which   found  expression  times.      1.  The  difficulty  of  fully  un- 

in  it,  and  may  gain  a  new  application  derstanding  the  gospel  ourselves,  and 

to    our    new    scenes    and    difficulties.  of    making   it   understood   by   others. 

There  is  a  sense  in  which   man   can  2.  The  moral  difficulties    we   have  to 

only  progress  by  forgetfulness  of  the  encounter  are  even  greater  than  the 

past — "  leaving   the    things   that   are  intellectual.     3.  We  need  patience  'on 

behind."      ''Let   the  dead   past   bury  account   of   the    opposition  which   we 

its  dead."     It  is  at  once  the  mission  have  to  encounter.     4.  On  account  of 

and  the  weakness  of   the  aged,  their  the  deep  obscurity  in  which  we  labour 

keeping    us  in   touch    with    the    past.  — obscurity  applying  to  the  results  of 

But  it   is   equally  true   that    nothing  our  labour   as  well   as    to    its  design, 

is  ever  safely  built  up — no  truth,  no  5.    And    on   account    of   delay  in  the 

character,    no    human    life,     nothing  fulfilment  of  God's  promises, 

moral — save  on  the  foundations  of  the  II.  The  root  from  which  patience 

past.     It  is  the  young  man's  mission  will  spring — confidence  or  faith. — The 

and  weakness  that  he  imagines  things  man  who  has  no  faith  in  the  soil  will 

are  new,  and  wants  everything  to  be  not  plough  it ;  the   man  who  has   no 

independent  of  everything  else.     The  faith  in  the  seed  will  not  sow  it ;  and 

point  in  relation  to  the  past  specially  the   man   who    has   no    faith    in   the 

presented  in  this  text  is,  that  former  return    of    the    seasons    will    neither 

experiences  have  put  good  principles,  plough  nor  sow.     So  it  is  in  spiritual 

right   motives,    and   good   inspirations  things. 

to  the  test — perhaps  to  a  severer  test  III.  The   reward    with   which   pa- 

than  they  are  ever  likely  to  be  sub-  tience  shall  at  length  be  crowned. — 

jected  to  again.     They  stood  the  test ;  It  hath  "  great  recompence  of  reward." 

they   stood   the   test   well:    then   you  Ye    shall    "receive    the    promise." — 

may    safely    trust     those     principles,  Absalom  Clark. 
motives,    and  inspirations   in  view  of 

new  emergencies.  The  Promises  call  for  Patience. — The 

greatest  part  of  the  saints'  happiness 

Yers.  35,  36.  The  Need  of  Patience,  is  in  promise.     They  must  first  do  the 

—Patience  is  the  ballast  of  the  soul,  will  of   God   before   they  receive   the 

that   will   keep   it    from    rolling   and  promise,    and    after    they   have    done 

tumbling  in  the  greatest  storms;  and  the   will   of   God   they  have   need   of 

he  that  will  venture  out  without  this  patience   to  wait   for  the  time  when 

to  make  him  sail  even  and  steady  will  the   promise   shall    be   fulfilled ;    they 

certainly  make  shipwreck  and  drown  have  need  of  patience  to  live  till  God 

356 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS. 


CHAP.  X. 


calls  them  away.  It  is  a  trial  of  the 
patience  of  Christians  to  be  content  to 
live  after  their  work  is  done,  and 
to  stay  for  the  reward  till  God's  time 
to  give  it  them  is  come.  We  must 
be  God's  waiting  servants  when  we 
can  be  no  longer  His  working  servants. 
— Matthew  Henry. 

Yer.  36.  The  Expectation  of  Future 
Blessedness. — Wheieas  we  have  here  the 
expression  of  "  receiving  the  promise," 
it  is  plain  the  promise  must  be  under- 
stood objectively — that  is,  that  trans- 
cendent good  that  was  promised ; 
namely,  that  principally  wherein  all 
the  promises  do  finally  and  lastly 
centre  :  which  it  is  plain  the  apostle 
here  most  especially  intends,  as  being 
eminently  called  "  the  promise." 

I.  The  business  of  a  sincere  Chris- 
tian in  this  world  is  to  be  doing  the 
will  of  God. — By.  the  will  of  God  we 
are  to  understand  the  object  of  His  will, 
or  that  which  He  wills — namely,  the 
thing  willed.  Our  duty  willed  by  Him 
and  not  mere  events,  that  must  be 
understood  to  be  the  object  of  this  will. 
Of  this  every  sincere  Christian  must 
be  the  active  instrument :  it  is  the 
business  of  a  devoted  person,  one  given 
up  to  God  in  Christ.  Such  only  are  in 
an  immediate  capacity  or  promptitude 
to  do  the  will  of  God  intentionally  and 
with  their  own  design,  though  it  be 
the  undoubted  duty  of  all  who  are 
naturally  capable  thereof. 

II.  Patience,  in  the  expectation  of 
the  blessedness  of  the  heavenly  estate, 
is  very  needful  to  every  sincere  and 
thorough  Christian. — Give  some  ac- 
count of  this  patience.  The  natural  con- 
stitution of  the  human  soul  disposeth  it 
equally  to  covet  and  pursue  a  desirable 
.good  as  to  regret  and  shun  a  hurtful 
evil.  The  want  of  such  a  desirable 
and  suitable  good,  understood  to  be  so, 
is  as  truly  afflicting  and  grievous  as 
the  pressure  of  a  present  evil.  An 
ability  to  bear  that  want  is  as  real  and 
needful  an  endowment  as  the  forti- 
tude by  which  we  endure  a  painful 
evil.  Therefore  it  equally  belongs  to 
patience  to  be  exercised  in  the  one  case 


as  well  as  in  the  other.  What  does 
patience  suppose,  as  it  hath  its  exercise 
this  way,  viz.  in  the  expectation  of 
future  blessedness  ?  (1)  That  blessed- 
ness, truly  so  called,  be  actually 
understood  and  apprehended  by  the 
expectants  as  a  real  and  most  desirable 
good  to  them.  (2)  That  the  delay 
and  deferring  of  this  blessedness  must 
be  an  afflicting  and  felt  grievance : 
otherwise  patience  can  have  no  place 
or  exercise  about  it.  Wherein  does 
patience  consist  ?  It  is  "  an  ability 
becomingly  to  endure."  But  its  refer- 
ence to  God  must  be  maintained.  And 
this  reference  must  be  to  Him  as  to  the 
Author  of  it  and  the  object  of  it.  Patience 
is  not  only  a  rational  temperament,  it 
is  also  a  gratuitous  donation,  a  gift  of 
the  good  Spirit  of  God.  God  is  said  to 
be  "  the  God  of  patience."  A  deference 
of  His  holy  pleasure  in  ordering  the 
occasions  of  such  exercise  is  carried  in 
the  notion  of  it.  It  hath  in  it  sub- 
mission to  the  will  of  God.  Consider 
patience  in  its  peculiar  ejffect — the  "work 
of  patience."  It  gives  a  man  a  mastery 
and  conquest  over  all  undue  and  dis- 
orderly passions.  It  fixes  the  soul  in 
a  composed  serenity  ;  creates  it  a  region 
of  sedate  and  peaceful  rest ;  infers  into 
it  a  silent  calm  ;  allays  or  prevents  all 
turbulent  agitations ;  excludes  what- 
soever of  noisy  clamour ;  permits  no 
tumults,  no  storm  or  tempest,  within^ 
— whatsoever  of  that  kind,  in  this  our 
expecting  state,  may  beset  a  man  from 
without.  Christ  said,  "  In  your  patience 
possess  ye  your  souls."  If  you  have  not 
patience,  you  are  outed  of  j^ourselves  ; 
you  are  no  longer  masters  of  your  own 
souls  ;  can  have  no  enjoyment  of  your- 
selves ;  and,  therefore,  are  much  less  to 
expect  a  satisfying  enjoyment  of  Him. 
The  temper  of  spirit  it  introduces  is 
a  dutiful  silence.  In  reference  to  the 
delay  of  the  blessedness  we  expect,  we 
ought  not  to  be  without  sense,  as  if 
it  were  no  grievance.  And  we  ought 
not  to  have  an  excessive  sense  of  it 
which  were  peevishness  or  impatience. 

III.  The  necessity  of  patience  arises 
from  a  consideration  of  the  principles 
from  whence  the  necessity  arises,  and 

357 


CHAP.  X. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    FIEBREWS. 


the  ends  which  it  is  necessary  unto. 

— The   principles   are   such   as  these : 
faith  of  the  unseen  state  ;  hope ;  love  ; 
holiness,  which  includes  hatred  of  the 
opposite — sin ;   and  a  tendency  to  the 
improving     and      heightening     itself. 
Where   there  is  an  inchoate  holiness, 
there   cannot  but  be  a  tendency  unto 
consummate     perfect     holiness.        As 
holiness    includes    conformity   to    the 
preceptive   will   of   God,    so  it  doth  to 
His  disposing  will  being  made  known. 
Therefore  when  we  understand  it  to  be 
His  pleasure  we  should  wait,  the  holy 
nature   itself,    which    prompts    us   so 
earnestly  to  desire  the  perfection  of  our 
state,  must  also  incline  us  patiently  to 
expect  it.     The  sovereign  and  supreme 
principle  is  the  blessed  Spirit  of  God 
Himself.      He     begets,     raises,      and 
cherisheth     such     desires     after     the 
blessedness   of   the   heavenly   state   as 
makes   this   patience    most   absolutely 
necessary.     Consider   the    ends   which 
patience  serves.     The  nearer  and  more 
immediate — "  our    doing    the    will    of 
God "  ;    the    remoter   and    ultimate — 
' '  our  inheriting  the  promise. "    Patience 
conduces  to  our  doing  God's  will.     Not 
that  it  is  the  proper  principle  of  doing 
it  —  active  vigour  is  that ;  yet  the  con- 
comitancy  of  patience  is  requisite  there- 
to.    Two   things  God  doth  ordinarily 
will  concerning   the  way  w^herein  He 
conducts  and  leads  on  those  that  pecu- 
liarly  belong   to   Him   to  the   blessed 
end  and  consummate  state  He  designs 
them    to,    the    one    whereof    is    also 
requisite  to  the  other  :  1.  Their  gradual 
growth  and   improvement   in   holiness 
and   all    dutiful    dispositions    towards 
Him,  till  they  come  nearer  to  maturity 
for   glory,    and    a    meetness    for    the 
heavenly  state.     2.  Their  maintaining 
an  intercourse  with  Himself  in  order 
thereto. — John  Howe. 

Yer.  38.  Drawing  Back. — As  the 
fig  tree  began  to  wither  so  his  gifts 
began  to  paire,  as  if  a  worm  was  still 
gnawing  at  them  ;  his  judgment  rusts 
like  a  sword  which  is  not  used  ;  his 
zeal  trembleth  as  though  it  were  in  a 
palsy ;  his  faith  withereth   as   though 

358 


it  were  blasted ;  and  the  image  of  death 
is  upon  all  his  religion.  After  this  he 
thinketh,  like  Samson,  to  pray  as  he 
did,  and  speak  as  he  did,  and  hath  no 
power,  but  wondereth,  like  Zedekiah, 
how  the  Spirit  is  gone  from  him.  Now 
when  the  good  Spirit  is  gone,  then 
Cometh  the  spirit  of  blindness,  and  the 
spirit  of  error,  and  the  spirit  of  fear, 
and  all  to  seduce  the  spirit  of  man. 
After  this,  by  little  and  little,  he  falls 
into  error,  then  he  comes  into  heresy ; 
at  last  he  plungeth  into  despair  :  after 
this,  if  he  inquire,  God  will  not  suffer 
him  to  learn  ;  if  he  read,  God  will  not 
suffer  him  to  understand ;  if  he  hear, 
God  will  not  suffer  him  to  remember  ; 
if  he  pray,  God  seemeth  unto  him  like 
Baal,  which  could  not  hear.  At  last 
he  beholdeth  his  wretchedness,  as  Adam 
looked  upon  his  nakedness ;  and 
mourneth  for  his  gifts,  as  Rachel  wept 
for  her  children,  because  they  were 
not.  All  this  cometh  to  pass  that  the 
Scripture  might  be  fulfilled  :  "  Whoso- 
ever hath  not,  from  him  shall  be  taken 
that  which  he  seemeth  to  have." — 
H.  Smith. 

Yer.  39.  Shrinking  Back  and  Keep- 
ing   On. — "But  we   are   not  of   them 
that  shrink  back  unto  perdition  ;   but 
of   them    that    have    faith   unto    the 
saving  of  the  soul."     There  is  no  more 
difficult  work  given  to  Christian  teachers 
to  do  than  to  "  reprove,  rebuke,  exhort, 
with  all  long-suffering  and  gentleness." 
It   is   easy   work,    there   is   a  certain 
personal    gratification    found    in    the 
work,  of  denouncing  and  condemning. 
The  denouncer  has  a  pleasant  conscious- 
ness of  moral  superiority ;  but  a  man 
must  have  himself  in  noble  restraint, 
and  go  well  out  of  himself  in  pitiful 
interest  in  others,  before  he  can  rebuke 
wisely   and   effectively,   and  put   com- 
passion and  Christly  sympathy  into  his 
reproofs.     The    writer   of   this   epistle 
had  a   very    serious  work  of  warning 
to  do.     It  so  thoroughly  possessed  him 
that  it  comes  out  into  varied  expression 
at  every  opportunity.     It  is  like  the 
ever-recurring  refrain  of  a   song  or  a 
piece  of  music.     And  he  seemed  him- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   X. 


self  to  get  almost  weary  of  it,  and  to 
fear  that  it  would  be  unduly  weary- 
ing and  depressing  to  those  whom  he 
addressed.  So  in  this  passage  he  tries 
hard  to  get  into  another  mood,  and  to 
write  trustingly  and  hopefully.  The 
mood  of  our  text  is  a  cheerful  one,  but 
the  cheerfulness  is  only  gained  through 
a  sti'uggle.  The  writer  has  evidently 
been  greatly  distressed  by  failures  from 
the  Christian  profession.  He  has  al- 
most overwhelming  impressions  of  the 
perils  to  which  Christian  professors 
were  exposed  in  his  days,  more  especi- 
ally Christian  professors  who  had  come 
out  of  Jewish  associations.  He  has 
every  confidence  and  satisfaction  in  the 
sincerity  and  stability  of  those  to  whom 
he  wrote,  and  yet  he  felt  that  he  must 
warn  them  carefully,  for  a  spirit  of 
self -security  might  creep  in  upon  them, 
and  then  the  temptations,  false  teach- 
ings, and  imperilling  influences  and 
associations  would  have  every  chance 
with  them;  for  "let  him  that  thinketh 
he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall." 
The  writer's  confidence  in  the  people 
was  partly  based  on  the  fact  that  he 
and  they  had  already  passed  through 
a  very  bitter  experience  together,  and 
they  had  acted  nobly  all  through  it, 
and  come  out  nobly  from  it.  He  knew 
therefore  how  they  could  *'  stand  fast 
in  the  Lord."  He  bids  them  "  call  to 
remembrance  the  former  days,  in  which, 
after  ye  were  enlightened,  ye  endured 
a  great  conflict  of  sufferings ;  partly, 
being  made  a  gazing-stock  both  by 
reproaches  and  afilictions  ;  and  partly, 
becoming  partakers  with  them  that 
were  so  used.  For  ye  both  had  com- 
passion on  them  that  were  in  bonds, 
and  took  joyfully  the  spoiling  of  your 
possessions,  knowing  that  ye  yourselves 
have  a  better  possession  and  an  abiding 
one."  It  may  be  asked.  If  they  had 
shown  themselves  so  noble,  why  should 
their  teacher  have  any  such  grave 
anxieties  concerning  them,  and  address 
such  careful  warnings  to  them  ?  The 
answer  is  twofold :  1.  In  the  very 
fact  of  their  coming  so  well  out  of  one 
time  of  strain  lay  a  peril  of  unwatch- 
fulness,  and  unpreparedness  to  meet  a 


fresh  time  of  strain.  An  army  is  never 
in  such  peril  as  in  the  hours  succeeding 
a  victory.  A  man  is  placed  in  the 
gravest  moral  peril  immediately  after 
he  has  gained  a  great  moral  success. 
It  is  so  easy  for  a  man  to  delude  him- 
self with  the  idea  that  one  success 
guarantees  continuous  success  ;  so  easy 
to  argue,  "I  have  stood,  therefore  I 
shall  stand  "  ;  so  easy  to  fail  to  realise 
that  life  is  a  continuous  moral  battle, 
a  series  of  surprises  ;  our  moral  foes  are 
skilful  in  assuming  various  devices, 
and  the  successes  of  our  past  form  no 
guarantee  whatever  for  triumph  in  the 
future,  even  our  experiences  but  feebly 
preparing  us  for  the  strain-times  that 
are  before  us.  Froude  reminds  us  that 
experience  is  like  the  stern -light  of 
a  ship,  it  does  but  cast  its  rays  upon 
the  way  that  has  been  taken.  To 
moral  victors  the  counsel  must  be  given, 
"  Be  not  high-minded,  but  fear.  2. 
But  the  other  answer  is  this — The 
new  peril  to  which  they  were  exposed 
bore  an  altogether  new  character,  and 
they  might  not  be  prepared  for  it. 
Their  early  experience  had  been  one  of 
active  persecution.  The  government 
and  society  of  the  day  had  been  arrayed 
against  them.  Some  of  them  had  been 
cast  into  prison,  many  of  them  had 
been  despoiled  of  their  goods,  their 
characters  had  been  maligned,  and 
they  had  been  hated  of  all  men  for 
Christ's  name's  sake.  And  such  times 
of  outward  persecution  and  material 
peril  have  passed  again  and  again  over 
Christ's  Church.  They  are  the  times 
of  which  the  most  can  be  made  in 
history,  but  they  are  not  the  times 
that  bring  the  gravest  peril  to  the 
spiritual  life  of  the  Church.  That  life 
has  always  survived  its  martyr  ages. 
If  there  is  a  seeming  exception  to  that 
"  always,"  it  is  found  in  the  driving  of 
evangelical  religion  out  of  France  for 
generations  by  the  persecutions  which 
culminated  in  Black  Bartholomew's 
Day.  But  even  in  France  evangelical 
religion  did  but  hide  its  head  awhile, 
waiting  its  opportunity  to  lift  it  high 
again  in  the  latter  days.  The  experi- 
ences of  persecuting  ages  never  fit  men 

359 


CHAP.  X.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


to  meet  all  the  forms  of  peril  in  which  well-nigh  overwhelming  danger  to  the 
the  Christian  life  may  be  placed,  and  ship.  It  has  a  strange  attractive  power 
they  do  us  some  injury  if  they  start  in  upon  the  under- waters.  Towards  the 
us  the  impression  that  all  strain  upon  reef  the  currents  are  setting,  and  they 
the  religious  profession  will  take  this  may  seize  the  ship,  and  bear  her  secretly 
outward  form.  These  Jewish  Chris-  on,  until  at  last,  no  hurried  turning 
tians  would  fail  to  see  the  new  forms  of  the  helm,  no  desperate  hanging  out 
that  temptation  was  taking,  if  they  of  every  yard  of  sail  that  the  ship  can 
persisted  in  thinking  that  all  tempta-  carry,  will  save  her ;  on,  on  she  is 
tion  would  follow  the  pattern  of  that  borne,  till  they  can  hear  the  wild  lash- 
which  they  had  already  gone  through  ing  of  the  waves  upon  the  coral  rocks, 
and  overcome.  The  evils  around  them  and  soon  the  ship  is  crashed  upon  them, 
now  were  of  a  subtle  character.  They  drawn  back,  and  crashed  again  upon 
came  even  from  the  fact  that  they  them,  until  the  fragments  of  a  hope- 
were  not  persecuted.  They  came  from  less  wreck  are  borne  over  the  reef  to 
that  easy-going  spirit  which  comes  tell  their  tale  of  woe.  Well,  indeed, 
when  there  is  no  evident  call  to  watch-  may  we  be  warned  of  the  perils  that 
fulness  and  enterprise.  They  came  from  belong  to  quiet  times  of  religious 
their  ability  to  put  their  Christian  experience.  Then — yes,  then  more 
weapons  aside  on  the  shelf ;  they  were  especially — there  be  many  that  shrink 
losing  the  power  to  use  them  skilfully,  back  to  perdition.  We  may  well  thank 
and  were  disinclined  to  take  them  our  Bible  Kevisers  for  that  very  sug- 
down  when  any  foe  appeared.  And  gestive  term  "  shrink  back."  They 
they  came  in  the  opportunity  the  seem  to  have  caught  the  writer's  idea 
leisure  afforded  for  the  influence  of  precisely.  He  evidently  fears  chiefly 
enervating  and  false  teachings,  and  for  a  spirit  of  religious  sluggishness,  do- 
the  attraction  of  pleasurable  but  de-  nothingness,  listlessness.  He  had  the 
moralising  self-indulgences.  When  the  same  kind  of  fear  about  his  people 
sky  is  clear,  the  air  dry,  the  sunshine  that  St.  Paul  had  about  Timothy, 
warm,  the  atmosphere  genial,  the  trees  That  quiet,  studious,  weakly-bodied 
budding,  and  the  flowers  opening  young  man  was  inclined  to  take  things 
freely,  when  there  is  no  warning  of  too  easily,  to  let  things  go  rather  than 
storm,  and  no  mutter  of  distant  war,  battle  with  them.  And  this  brought 
then  subtle  pestilence  may  be  stalking  grave  fears  for  him  to  his  father  in 
abroad,  and  secretly  imperilling  life  Christ ;  so  he  sent  him  this  arousing 
and  health.  The  Church  has  lost  most  message,  "  Endure  hardness,  as  a  good 
in  its  times  of  apparent  security.  It  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ."  And  what 
has  been  drawn  back  rather  than  this  writer  fears  is  not  a  determinedly 
driven  back.  The  ship  will  sail  the  going  back  from  the  faith  of  Christ, 
great  Southern  Seas,  safely  outriding  not  an  open  and  resolute  apostatising, 
the  great  gales,  and,  if  bruised,  still  nothing  disgraceful  like  the  forsaking 
sound,  when  it  has  been  smitten  with  of  Demas,  or  the  violent  enmity  of 
the  lightnings,  tossed  with  the  tem-  Julian ;  but  a  drifting  away,  a  shrink- 
pests,  and  helplessly  driven  before  the  ing  back,  a  silent  action  of  the  current 
hurricanes ;  and  then  it  v/ill  come  out  of  worldliness,  or  a  current  of  false 
into  smooth  seas,  and  the  blue  shall  teaching,  which  would  take  all  the 
reach  from  rim  to  rim,  no  more  than  inspiration  and  sanctifying  impulse  out 
a  gentle  breeze  shall  play  upon  the  of  the  Christian  faith,  until  the  Church 
waters,  and  it  shall  feel  restfully,  would  but  keep  its  name  to  live,  and 
peacefully,  unwatchfully  secure.  But  be  dead.  His  point  may  be  simply 
almost  out  of  sight  is  yonder  island,  illustrated  by  the  fish  in  a  rapid 
with  its  coral  reef,  over  which  the  stream.  So  long  as  they  actively  swim, 
waves  dash  violently.  That  island  is  let  their  life  go  out  in  energetic  efforts, 
a  source  of  new,  unknown,  subtle  and  they  can  go   up  the  stream,  advance 

360 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   X. 


against  the  current.  But  peril  lies  in 
sluggishness.  Cease  to  swim,  and  silent, 
ever-working  forces  act  upon  the  fish ; 
he  shrinks  back,  he  is  borne  downward, 
though  he  may  think  he  keeps  his 
place ;  presently  he  will  feel  the  power 
of  the  downward  swirl ;  it  will  be  be- 
yond his  power  of  resistance,  and  over 
the  great  fall  he  is  borne.  It  is  thus 
with  the  Christian.  He  need  only  do 
nothing  to  "  shrink  back  unto  perdi- 
tion." Relative  to  the  Christian  life, 
we  must  accept  of  the  world  as  a  force, 
like  a  descending  stream,  ever  bearing 
us  downward.  In  the  stream  of  the 
world  we  have  to  be,  we  must  be. 
Against  the  stream  we  have  to  swim 
if  we  would  reach  the  restful  lake  of 
the  holy  ones.  Against  the  stream, 
always  against  the  stream,  day  and 
night  against  the  stream — that  is  how 
it  must  be  mth  us.  Relax  one  moment, 
the  current  seizes  you,  and  ere  you 
know  it  you  have  shrunk  back  a  little 
way.  Get  into  a  listless,  careless  way 
in  the  religious  life,  and  it  is  inevitable 
that  downward  you  go.  Perhaps  you 
will  even  be  so  fascinated  at  first  that 
you  will  quite  enjoy  the  rest  from  toil 
and  strain,  and  find  all  around  so 
pleasant  that  you  feel  sure  the  end 
must  be  like  the  way.  But  what  an 
awful  delusion  all  that  is  !  See  which 
way  are  you  moving  ?  The  lake  of 
holiness  and  God  is  not  that  way.  You 
are  '*  shrinking  back,"  you  are  going 
down,  the  rapids  are  that  way,  the 
frightful  fall  is  that  way,  the  whelming 
waters  are  that  way.  Shrinking  back 
is  always  "  unto  perdition."  There  are 
two  ways  of  living  the  Christian  life. 
There  is  '*  keeping  on,"  and  there  is  "let- 
ting go."  The  "  keeping  on  "  folk  are 
they  who  have  faith  (and  let  it  inspire 
activity  and  effort)  unto  the  saving  of 
the  soul.  The  "  letting  go  "  folk,  who 
make  no  effort  to  follow  on  and  keep 
up,  are  they  who  "  shrink  back  unto 
perdition."  Would  you  be  "  keeping 
on  "  ?  Then  you  must  mean  to  keep  on, 
plan  to  keep  on,  master  yourself,  and 
master  your  circumstances,  in  order  to 
keep  on.  Keeping  on  is  never  a 
matter  of  accident,  it  is  always  a  matter 


of  thought  and  effort.  Keeping  on  the 
whir  and  whirl  of  machinery  means 
persistent  toil  in  renewing  the  fires, 
and  replenishing  the  boilers.  Would 
you  be  "  letting  go  "  ?  Then  no  resolve 
whatever  is  needed,  you  are  required 
to  make  no  effort,  you  simply  need  do 
nothing  :  cease  to  keep  on,  stop,  and 
you  will  surely  drift.  You  can  only 
keep  up  to  a  level  reached  by  persist- 
ently striving  to  reach  a  level  beyond. 
The  law  of  the  garden  is  the  law  of 
the  soul.  Toil,  weed,  watch,  culture, 
plant,  put  energy  into  it,  wisely 
directed,  well- adapted  energy  into  it, 
and  the  garden  will  be  an  ever- 
increasing  joy  to  you.  But  stop,  be 
careless,  leave  it  alone,  cease  to  work 
at  it — that  is  all  you  need  do — do 
nothing — it  will  soon  be  overgrown 
w^ith  weeds,  a  ruin  and  a  disgrace. 
Toil,  strive,  watch,  be  active,  enter- 
prising, energetic,  in  the  religious  life, 
and  beauty,  power,  joy,  will  abundantly 
respond  to  you.  Let  things  go,  let 
duty  be  done  perfunctorily,  and  worship 
become  formality ;  rest  upon  a  past 
experience  j  want  nothing  higher  or 
better ;  get  through  a  religious  life 
somehow,  anyhow,  with  a  wretched 
sort  of  lifeless  hope  that  somehow  all 
will  come  out  right  at  last, — you  can 
picture  that  soul -garden  ;  you  do  not 
need  that  I  should  picture  it  for  you. 
It  is  evidently  "  shrinking  back  unto 
perdition."  The  cultured  place  is  fast 
becoming  a  wilderness.  In  the  religious 
life  there  is  one  absolute  and  universal 
law  always  working  :  "  Strive,  and  you 
shall  live  "  ;  *'  Cease  to  strive,  and  you 
shall  die."  Let  the  oars  lie  still  on 
the  rapid  stream  of  life — the  oars  of 
your  soul's  boat — you  need  do  nothing 
more,  the  stream  of  life  will  do  its 
fatal  work  only  too  surely — '*  you  will 
shrink  back  unto  perdition."  The 
truth  may  be  illustrated  in  our  several 
Christian  spheres.  1.  The  Christian 
life  demands  anxious  and  continuous 
attention  to  personal  culture.  Flag  in 
it,  stop  it,  and  your  Christian  character 
will  soon  shrink  back.  2.  The  Christian 
life  demands  active  endeavour  to  exert 
gracious  personal  influence,  and  to  use 

3G1 


CHAP.   X. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   HEBREWS. 


in  service  entrusted  talents  and  gifts. 
Persistently  send  out  holy  influences, 
and  you  will  keep  and  enlarge  your 
powers  of  influencing.  Stop  all  effort 
to  influence,  and  the  very  ability  will 
fade  away,  as  the  blacksmith's  muscle 
becomes  flaccid  when  he  ceases  to  wield 
the  hammer.  3.  The  Christian  life 
demands  a  persistency  and  continuity 
of  attendance  on  Christian  worship  and 
means  of  grace.     Begin  to  flag ;  do  not 


go  sometimes ;  become  irregular ;  go 
when  you  feel  inclined,  not  when  you 
ought ;  and  you  will  soon  cease  to  get 
a  blessing,  and  easily  shrink  back  into 
indifference.  But  the  writer  of  our 
text  wrote  hopefully,  and  we  would 
speak  hopefully  to  you.  We  must  warn 
you  faithfully ;  but  we  hope  that  you 
are  "not  of  them  that  shrink  back 
unto  perdition,  but  of  them  that  have 
faith  unto  the  saving  of  the  soul." 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO    CHAPTER   X, 


Ver.  18.  Remission  of  Sins. — A  French  girl 
of  fourteen  once  appeared  before  Napoleon, 
and  casting  herself  at  his  feet  cried,  "  Pardon 
sire  !  pardon  for  my  father  !  "  "  And  who 
is  your  father  ?  "  asked  Napoleon  ;  "  and  who 
are  you  1 "  "  My  name  is  Lajolia,"  she  said  ; 
and  with  flowing  tears  added,  "  but  sire,  my 
father  is  doomed  to  die."  "  Ah  !  young 
lady,"  replied  Napoleon,  *'  I  can  do  nothing 
for  you.  It  is  the  second  time  your  father 
has  been  found  guilty  of  treason  against  the 
State."  "  Alas  1 "  exclaimed  the  poor  girl, 
•*  I  know  it,  sire  ;  but  I  do  not  ask  for  justice  ; 
I  implore  pardon.  I  beseech  you,  forgive, 
oh,  forgive  my  father  ! ''  After  a  momentary 
struggle  of  feeling,  Napoleon  gently  took 
the  hand  of  the  young  maiden,  and  said, 
"  Well,  my  child,  for  your  sake,  I  will  pardon 
your  father.  That  is  enough  ;  now  leave 
me." 

Ver.  27.  Fear  of  the  Judgment. — Jerome 
used  to  say,  that  it  seemed  to  him  as  if  the 
trumpet  of  the  last  day  was  always  sounding 
in  his  ear,  saying,  "  Arise,  ye  dead,  and  come 
to  judgment."  The  generality,  however, 
think  but  little  of  this  awful  and  important 
period.  A  Christian  king  of  Hungary  being 
very  sad  and  pensive,  his  brother,  who  was 
a  gay  courtier,  was  desirous  of  knowing  the 
cause  of  his  sadness.  "  Oh,  brother,"  said 
the  king,  "  I  have  been  a  great  sinner  against 
God,  and  know  not  how  to  die,  or  how  to 
appear  before  God  in  judgment."  His  brother, 
making  a  jest  of  it,  said,  "  These  are  but 
melancholy  thoughts."  The  king  made  no 
reply ;  but  it  was  the  custom  of  the  coun- 
try, that  if  the  executioner  came  and  sounded 
a  trumpet  before  any  man's  door,  he  was 
presently  led  to  execution.  The  king,  in  the 
dead  of  the  night,  sent  the  executioner  to 
sound  the  trumpet  before  his  brother's  door ; 
who,  hearing  it,  and  seeing  the  messenger 
of  death,  sprang  into  the  king's  presence, 
beseeching  to  know  in  what  he  had  offended. 
"Alasl  brother,"  said  the  king,  "you  have 
never  offended  me.  And  is  the  sight  of  my 
executioner  so  dreadful  ?  and  shall  not   I, 

3G2 


who  have  greatly  offended,  fear  to  be  brought 
before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ  ?  " 

Ver.  33.  A  Gazing -stoclt. — The  Greek  word 
here  used  means  to  expose  to  view  as  in 
a  public  theatre,  which  was  commonly  done 
in  those  days.  The  expression  here  is  figura- 
tive, yet  it  was  afterwards  literally  carried 
out,  when  Christians  were  exposed  in  the 
theatres,  not  only  to  opprobrium  and  insult, 
but  made  the  victims  of  wild  beasts,  or 
assaulted  by  gladiators. 

Ver.  36.  Patience  liJiened  to  a  Jewel. — "  I 
compare  patience  to  the  most  precious  thing 
that  the  earth  produces — a  jewel.  Pressed 
by  sand  and  rocks,  it  reposes  in  the  dark 
lap  of  the  earth.  Though  no  ray  of  light 
comes  near  it,  it  is  radiant  with  imperishable 
beauty.  Its  brightness  remains  even  in  the 
deep  night  ;  but  when  liberated  from  the 
dark  prison,  it  forms,  united  to  gold,  the 
distinguishing  mark  and  ornament  of  glory, 
the  ring,  the  sceptre,  and  the  crown,"  said 
the  wise  Hillel.  "  Her  end  and  reward  is  the 
crown  of  life." — Krummaclier. 

The  Leaves  teaching  Patience. — O  im- 
patient ones  !  Did  the  leaves  say  nothing 
to  you  as  they  murmured  when  you  came 
hither  to-day  ?  They  were  not  created  this 
spring,  but  months  ago,  and  the  summer 
just  begun  will  fashion  others  for  another 
year.  At  the  bottom  of  every  leaf -stem  is  a 
cradle,  and  in  it  is  an  infant  germ ;  and  the 
winds  will  rock  it,  and  the  birds  will  sing  to 
it  all  summer  long ;  and  next  season  it  will 
unfold.  So  God  is  working  for  you,  and 
carrying  forward  to  the  perfect  development 
all  the  processes  of  your  lives. — H.  Ward 
Beecher. 

The  Work  of  Patience. — Patience  is  the 
guardian  of  faith,  the  preserver  of  peace, 
the  cherisher  of  love,  the  teacher  of  humility. 
Patience  governs  the  flesh,  strengthens  the 
spirit,  sweetens  the  temper,  stifles  anger, 
extinguishes  envy,  subdues  pride ;  she  bridles 


HOMILEflC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  cftAP.  XI. 


the  tongue,  refrains  the  hand,  tramples  upon 
temptations,  endures  persecutions,  consum- 
mates martyrdom.  Patience  produces  unity 
in  the  Church,  loyalty  in  the  State,  harmony 
in  families  and  societies ;  she  comforts  the 
poor,  and  moderates  the  rich  ;  she  makes  us 
humble  in  prosperity,  cheerful  in  adversity, 
unmoved  by   calumny   and    reproach ;    she 


teaches  us  to  forgive  those  who  have  injured 
us,  and  to  be  the  first  in  asking  forgiveness 
of  those  whom  we  have  injured  ;  she  delights 
the  faithful  and  invites  the  unbelieving ;  she 
adorns  the  woman,  and  improves  the  man,  is 
loved  in  a  child,  praised  in  a  young  man, 
admired  in  an  old  man ;  she  is  beautiful  in 
either  sex  and  every  age.  -  Home. 


CHAPTER  XI. 
ILLUSTRATIONS  OF  FAITH  AS  A  PRACTICAL  POWER  IN  LIFE. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

This  chapter  contains  a  series  of  illustrations,  taken  from  the  heroic  ages  of  Hebrew  history, 
of  the  nature  and  influence  of  faith  in  God.  The  writer  desires  to  show  that  faith  makes 
a  motive  and  inspiration  for  daily  life  and  conduct  as  sufficient  and  as  satisfactory  as  distant 
announcements  and  demonstrative  proofs.  In  impressing  the  temporary  character  of  the 
Mosaic  religious  system,  the  writer  is  careful  to  preserve  everything  belonging  to  the  older 
age  that  had  a  universal,  a  simply  human  character.  And  faith  is  the  same  thing  sustaining 
patriarchs,  prophets,  and  martyrs  of  the  olden  time  or  the  new. 

Ver.  1.  Substance  of  things  hoped  for. — Here  the  word  means  "confident  expectation"; 
and  this  is  so  real  that  the  man  of  faith  acts  as  if  he  already  had  what  he  hoped  for. 
Things  only  "  hoped  for  "  have  no  actual  jjresent  reality  to  us.  They  gain  practical  reality 
in  the  faith  that  grasps  them.  That  faith  gives  the  present  enjoyment  of  them.  Evidence. 
— Demonstration,  proof.  Faith  in  the  Divine  word  supplies  the  place  of  and  is  equivalent  to 
proof.  It  satisfies  the  mind,  and  it  inspires  conduct  just  as  a  proof  or  demonstration  should 
do.  Stuart  points  out  that  the  "  faith  "  mentioned  here  is  not  specifically  what  is  under- 
stood by  "saving  faith"  ;  but  rather  faith  as  a  practical  principle  and  power,  influencing 
all  life  and  conduct.  "  The  true  and  essential  nature  of  faith  is  confidence  in  God,  belief  in 
His  declarations."     Faith  here  is  the  principle  of  pious  and  \irtuous  belief  and  action. 

Ver.  2.  Elders. — Heroes  and  saints  of  the  older  age. 

Ver.  3.  Worlds. — Greek  "ages,"  i,e.  the  world  regarded  from  the  standpoint  of  human 
history.  "  The  '  time-world '  necessarily  presumes  the  existence  of  the  space-world  also  " 
(^FaTrar). 

Ver.  4.  More  excellent. —  Because  Abel  made  it  the  offering  of  himself.  It  is  the  offering 
of  the  man  himself,  through  his  sacrifice,  that  God  accepts.  Dead  yet  speaketh. — Philo  says, 
"  Abel — which  is  most  strange — has  both  been  slain  and  lives." 

Ver.  6.  Believe  that  he  is. — The  two  absolutely  fundamental  truths  of  universal  religion 
are  :  (1)  God  exists  ;  (2)  God  is  moral  Governor  of  the  universe,  and  as  such  rewards  the 
pious,  and  punishes  the  ungodly. 

Ver.  7.  Righteousness  which  is  by  faith. — Which  is  according  to  faith.  "  Faith  in  this 
writer  never  becomes  the  same  as  mystic  oneness  with  Christ,  but  means  general  belief  in 
the  unseen.  And  '  righteousness '  is  not  '  justification,'  but  faith  manifested  by  obedience. 
Throughout  this  chapter  righteousness  is  the  human  condition  which  faith  produces,  not 
the  Divine  gift  which  faith  receives  "  {Farrar). 

Ver.  19.  Received  him  in  a  figure. — Lit.  "  in  a  parable."  Stuart  thinks  the  reference  is 
to  Abraham's  having  originally  received  Isaac  as  one  born  of  parents  who  were  virtually 
dead.  But  the  reference  is  clearly  to  the  scene  on  Mount  Moriah  ;  and  it  must  mean  that 
when,  in  full  purpose,  Abraham  had  laid  his  son  on  the  altar,  he  was  potentially  sacrificed, 
and  Abraham  received  him  again  as  one  brought  back  from  the  death  to  which  he  had 
devoted  him. 

Ver.  21.  Leaning  upon  the  top  of  his  staff. — Probably  meaning  "upon  the  head  of  the 
bed  " ;  only  this  assumes  more  of  a  bedstead  than  was  usual  among  tribal  Eastern  people. 
The  LXX.  rendered  mltteh,  staff,  instead  of  mittah,  bed.  The  idea  is  that  aged  Jacob, 
rising  from  his  bed,  and  unable  to  support  himself,  leaned  on  the  staff  associated  with  his 
pilgrimage,  and  bowed  over  the  staff  in  an  act  of  worship.  The  Vulgate  renders,  "  he  adored 
the  top  of  Joseph's  staff  " ;  and  Cornelius  k  Lapide  quotes  the  sentence  in  defence  of  image- 
worship. 

Ver.  23.  Proper  child. — Goodly  child ;  unusual  for  beauty  and  signs  of  intelligence ; 
affTitov,  goodly,  fair,  beautiful  (Acts  vii.  20,  "  fair  to  God "). 

363 


CHAP.  XI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


Ver.  24.  Refused  to  be  called.  —This  is  based  wholly  on  Jewish  legends. 

Ver.  37.  Sawn  asunder. — The  traditional  mode  of  Isaiah's  death.  Tempted. — I.e.  severely 
tested.  A  conjecture  has  been  made  that  the  word  should  be  iirpriffdrjaav,  they  were 
burned,  instead  of  iireLpda-drjaav.  But  it  may  mean  that  every  eifort  was  made  to  induce 
tbem  to  apostatise.  Illustrate  from  the  efforts  to  induce  the  last  of  the  seven  Maccabean 
brothers  to  apostatise.     See  2  Mace.  vii. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—3. 

Faith  and  Reason. — It  is  necessary  to  consider  precisely  what  idea  of  faith 
this  writer  has,  and  illustrates  in  this  chapter.  It  is  manifest  at  once  that  he 
is  not  attempting  any  general  description  of  faith.  If  we  had  to  understand 
him  in  that  sense,  we  should  have  to  say  that  his  definition  was  an  imperfect 
one,  because  it  excludes  so  much.  His  mind  was  full  of  a  particular  class  of 
people,  who  were  under  particular  circumstances  of  temptation  and  difficulty, 
and  his  setting  of  truth  is  strictly  and  exactly  adapted  to  them.  The  Jewish 
Christians  had  entered  the  spiritual  dispensation  in  which  y^i^A  is  the  medium, 
and  they  were  seriously  tempted  to  drift  back  into  the  material  dispensation  in 
which  sense  is  the  medium.  The  case  is  put  strongly  in  the  words,  "  But  we  are 
not  of  them  that  shrink  back  unto  perdition,  but  of  them  that  have  faith  unto 
the  saving  of  the  soul."  But  it  would  seem  to  those  Jewish  Christians  as  if  he 
were  urging  them  to  break  altogether  away  from  their  old  history  and  old 
associations,  and  that  was  a  very  hard  thing  for  the  Jew,  who  had  such  a 
passionate  attachment  to  the  old.  The  writer  seems  to  say  that  he  advises 
nothing  of  the  kind.  There  is  a  spiritual  element  in  that  old  history  and  old 
ceremonial ;  that  spiritual  element  is  the  real  glory  of  them.  That  is  precisely 
akin  with  the  spirit  of  the  new  dispensation,  which  really  is  the  very  heart  of 
the  old,  freed  from  its  swathing  bandages  and  its  material  limitations.  "  By 
faith  " — just  the  very  faith  he  is  urging  them  to  retain — ''  the  elders  obtained  a 
good  report,"  or  *'  had  witness  borne  to  them."  Definitions  of  faith  are  seldom 
satisfactory,  because  it  can  be  viewed  from  several  sides,  and  the  definition  may 
give  only  one  of  its  sides.  Locke  describes  faith  as  the  assent  to  any  proposition 
not  made  out  by  the  deductions  of  reason,  but  upon  the  credit  of  the  proposer. 
But  that  sees  faith  only  on  one  side,  and  is  altogether  unsatisfactory  to  the 
Christian  mind.  The  precise  idea  of  faith  in  this  chapter  may  be  seen  by  a 
consideration  of  the  similar  terms,  belief,  saving  faith,  and  trust.  The  writer 
is  certainly  not  meaning  belief,  or  the  assent  to  particular  statements  of  truth  ; 
nor  does  he  mean  "  saving  faith,"  or  that  acceptance  of  Christ  as  Saviour,  and 
that  soul -surrender  to  Him,  which  is  the  proper  beginning  of  the  Christian  life ; 
nor  can  he  be  referring  to  "  trust,"  which  is  a  personal  feeling  of  confidence  in 
Christ,  and  a  daily  renewed  attitude  of  dependence.  Neither  of  these  aspects  of 
faith  are  appropriate  to  this  occasion. 

I.  Faith  is  the  power  in  man  which  makes  real  to  him  the  unreal. — By 
unreal  is  only  to  be  understood  the  "  unseen."  Man  calls  material  things  real 
and  spiritual  things  unreal,  and  we  take  man's  standpoint.  The  deeper  truth 
which  he  is  to  grow  to  apprehend  is,  that  the  spiritual  is  the  real,  and  the 
material  is  but  as  its  shadow,  and  so  unreal.  The  mischievous  teachers  might 
urge  on  the  Jewish  Christians  that  in  leaving  Mosaism  for  Christianity  they 
were  leaving  the  real,  the  tangible,  that  which  was  known  and  proved,  for  the 
unreal,  the  vague,  the  uncertain,  the  intangible.  What  therefore  needs  to  be 
made  clear  is,  that  man  has  within  him  a  power  which  is  altogether  higher  than 
sense.  He  can  come  into  relation  with  that  which  cannot  be  seen,  cannot  be 
heard,  cannot  be  touched.  He  can  see  the  unseen ;  he  can  hear  the  unheard ; 
he  can  feel  the  unreal.  It  is  man's  power  to  live  in  the  unreal  that  is  his 
sublime  dignity.     This  lifts  him  up  ovit  of  the  animal  range,  for  the  creatures 

3G1: 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS.  chap.  xi. 


have  no  up-looking  eyes.  This  lifts  him  up  out  of  the  range  of  animal,  carnal 
man.  Faith  makes  him  a  new  creature,  another  creature,  an  altogether  higher 
creature.  That  power  in  man  which  puts  him  into  relation  with  the  spiritual 
world,  and  makes  that  unreal  world  real  to  him,  the  very  world  in  which  he 
lives,  is  the  faith  with  which  the  writer  deals  in  this  chapter.  And  it  is  strictly 
to  the  point  for  him  to  plead  that,  in  urging  the  Jewish  Christians  to  keep  in 
that  spiritual  world  to  which  they  had  been  lifted,  he  was  but  urging  them  to 
do  what  the  noblest  heroes  of  the  ages  had  done,  what  alone  accounted  for  the 
patience  of  their  achievements,  and  the  splendour  of  their  triumphs.  They 
endured  through  the  faith-power  that  was  in  them.  They  "  endured  as  seeing 
Him  who  is  invisible."  Faith  as  a  power  in  man  is  kin  to  spiritual  vision,  and 
gets  its  best  illustration  from  our  bodily  vision.  The  body  looks  out  from  the 
eyes,  diecerns  something  outside  it  which  it  regards  as  real,  and  lets  that 
something  influence  feeling  and  direct  conduct.  And  the  soul  looks  out  from 
the  eyes  of  faith,  sees  something  outside  it  which  it  regards  as  real,  which  is 
spiritual  and  eternal,  and  it  lets  that  something  influence  feeling  and  direct 
conduct.  This  is  precisely  what  is  illustrated  for  us  in  Abel,  and  Enoch,  and 
Abraham,  and  Moses.  It  is  the  power  in  man  which  Christianity  cultures, 
develops,  purifies,  ennobles,  and  guides  to  fitting  objects.  The  two  sentences, 
"  Faith  is  the  assurance  of  things  hoped  for,  the  proving  of  things  not  seen," 
are  really  one  thought  repeated  in  the  usual  Hebraic  mode.  Taking  the 
Authorised  Version,  we  may  see  that  the  "substance  of  things  hoped  for"  is 
simply  this — making  a  present,  real,  and  active  power  to  us  the  unreal.  And  the 
''  evidence  of  things  not  seen  "  is  the  making  evident  to  us — manifesting  to  us, 
so  as  to  be  practically  influential  upon  us — that  which  the  bodily  eye  fails 
to  discern.  "  Evidence  "  here  is  not  "  proof."  We  can  never  get  any  'proof  of 
spiritual  things.  They  are  "  spiritually  discerned."  We  speak  of  things  being 
"  in  evidence  "  when  they  are  presented  to  us  for  serious  consideration.  Faith 
brings  unseen  and  eternal  things  into  evidence ;  presents  them  for  our  con- 
sideration, with  a  view  to  the  right  ordering  and  shaping  of  our  conduct  and 
relations,  both  as  regards  God  and  as  regards  man.  That  then  is  the  faith  that 
is  impressively,  and  we  may  say  attractively,  illustrated  in  this  chapter.  It 
is  the  faith  that  makes  a  present  power  on  us  of  what  is  not  materially  present — 
that  makes  the  unseen  God  a  present  inspiration  to  duty,  the  unseen  Christ  a 
present  persuasion  on  feeling,  and  the  promises  of  spiritual  blessing  a  realised 
present  possession  of  the  blessing.  Faith  makes  God  real,  and  He  is  with  us 
now.  Faith  makes  righteousness  real,  and  it  becomes  our  attainment  now. 
Faith  makes  heaven  real,  and  it  is  about  us  now.  It  is  the  power  which  makes 
the  unreal  real  to  us.  It  is  the  power  which  keeps  the  unseen  related  to  the 
seen.     And  "  that  which  is  seen  is  temporal,  that  which  is  unseen  is  eternal." 

II.  Faith  is  the  power  which  does  for  the  unreal  what  reason  does  for  the 
real. — "  By  faith  we  understand."  Just  as  man  takes  the  facts  that  are 
apprehensible  by  his  senses,  examines  them,  inquires  about  them,  reasons  con- 
cerning them,  and  thus  comes  to  understand  them,  and  then  acts  upon  them,  so 
the  spiritual  man  takes  the  facts  of  the  unseen  and  eternal  world,  which  are 
apprehensible  by  his  faith,  examines  them,  inquires  into  them,  uses  his  quickened 
spiritual  faculties  about  them,  and  so  comes  to  apprehend  them,  to  understand 
them,  and  then  acts  upon  them.  Much  difficulty  is  needlessly  made  in  defining 
the  relations  of  faith  and  reason.  They  simply  belong  to  two  distinct  spheres. 
Reason  moves  in  the  sphere  of  sensible  and  material  things,  and  concerns  itself 
entirely  with  that  which  takes  forms  which  are  apprehensible  by  the  human 
senses.  Faith  moves  in  the  sphere  of  intangible  and  immaterial  things,  and 
concerns  itself  entirely  with  that  which  takes  no  form  which  the  senses  can 
apprehend.     A  man  is  not  a  mere  bundle  of  senses.     The  distinction  is  illustrated 

^    "^  365 


CHAP.  XI  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    tiEBREWS. 


by  a  reference  to  the  Creation.  Nobody  knows  anything  about  the  origin  and 
first  forms  of  material  things  by  any  evidence  that  the  senses  can  give  him. 
Nobody  saw  its  birth  ;  nobody  watched  the  unfolding  order.  The  obervations  of 
the  earth's  form  and  crust  on  which  modern  geological  studies  are  based  only 
give  rise  to  conflicting  theories,  which  change  with  each  passing  generation,  and 
are  all  untrustworthy.  The  scientific  man  knows  more  about  the  Creation 
through  his  beliefs  than  through  his  observations.  But  the  spiritual  man  knows, 
by  his  faith  in  what  God  has  revealed,  all  that  we  really  need  to  know  concern- 
ing the  material  creation.  But  observe  a  distinction.  The  writer  only  deals 
with  what  the  spiritual  man  needs  to  understand  concerning  the  Creation.  Let 
the  sense-man  go  on  inquiring  as  freely  as  he  may  please.  Our  faith  satisfies 
us ;  it  is  to  us  just  the  same  as  if  we  had  been  able  to  reason  it  all  out ;  God — 
God  alone — the  God  of  Judaism  and  of  Christianity,  made  the  worlds  ;  and  there 
was  nothing  existing  before  Him  out  of  which  He  could  make  them,  and  which 
could  possibly  set  up  a  rivalry  against  Him.  "  By  faith  we  understand  that  the 
worlds  have  been  framed  by  the  word  of  God,  so  that  what  is  seen  hath  not  been 
made  out  of  things  which  do  appear."  Unbiassed  reason  does  but  reaffirm  the 
conclusions  of  faith ;  and  he  who  has  the  faith  is  beforehand  with  the  man  of 
reason  in  his  apprehension  of  the  primary  truths  of  science  and  religion.  What 
is  thus  illustrated  in  relation  to  the  material  creation  is  further  illustrated  by 
reference  to  selected  heroes  of  the  older  Bible  history.  The  principle  for  the 
spiritually  renewed  man  that  "  through  faith  we  understand  "  is  capable  of  exten- 
sive application  in  all  the  actual  spheres  and  practical  relations  and  multiplied 
difficulties  of  life.  The  godly  men  of  old  really  lived  their  daily  life,  really  met 
and  mastered  their  cares  and  perplexities,  in  the  power  of  their  faith.  What  has 
been  done  can  be  done.  What  has  been  done  we  can  do.  1.  Look  at  Abel.  By 
faith  he  understood  what  offering,  and  what  spirit  in  his  offering,  would  gain  his 
acceptance  with  God.  By  faith  he  understood  the  primary  conditions  of  accept- 
able human  worship.  2.  Look  at  Enoch.  By  faith  he  understood  the  spirit  of 
the  earthly  life  that  would  secure  the  favour  of  God.  He  understood  how  to 
please  God.  3.  Look  at  Noah.  By  faith  he  understood  how  to  act  when 
God's  judgments  were  abroad  in  the  earth.  By  faith  he  understood  the  safety 
in  which  a  man  always  stands  who  is  actively  obedient  to  the  will  of  God. 
4.  Look  at  Abraham.  By  faith  he  understood  where  to  go,  what  to  do,  and  how 
to  order  his  household.  By  faith  he  understood  the  holy  mystery  of  the  Divine 
control  of  human  careers.  5.  Look  at  Sarah.  By  faith  she  understood  how  to 
meet  the  surprise  events  of  life.  For  surprise  indeed  it  was  to  gain  her  mother- 
hood in  her  old  age.  6.  Look  again  at  Abraham.  There  is  one  scene  of  surpass- 
ing interest  in  his  life-story.  It  is  his  being  called  to  offer  Isaac  as  a  sacrifice. 
By  faith  he  understood  something  of  the  mystery  of  Divine  discipline,  and  some- 
thing of  the  absolute  claim  of  Divine  obedience.  7.  Look  at  Isaac.  By  faith  he 
understood  that  the  interest  of  a  man  is  not  bound  up  in  this  life,  but  belongs  to 
a  future,  of  which  he  can  provide  but  a  part.  8.  Look  at  Jacob  and  Joseph. 
Both  by  faith  understood  how  the  world  triumphs  over  the  death,  and  passing 
away,  of  individuals ;  both  by  faith  understood  how  man  lives  again  in  the  fulfil- 
ment of  God's  sublime  purposes  in  their  race.  9.  Look  at  Moses.  By  faith  he 
understood  what  his  great  life-work  was  to  be.  And  knowing  what  it  was,  he 
did  it,  and  did  it  nobly.  The  triumphs  of  faith  can  be  summarised.  They  cover 
all  life — all  commonplace  life  of  duties,  all  special  calls  to  service.  Faith 
everywhere  takes  the  place  of  understanding,  and  does  for  us  all  that  understand- 
ing could  do.  Have  we  fully  entered  into  apprehension  of  this  most  practical 
relation  of  faith  to  life  ?  Even  in  the  new  spiritual  life  we  want  to  reason  out 
everything,  and  say  we  will  believe  nothing  that  we  do  not  fully  understand. 
Then  we  must  be  below  our  spiritual  level.     This  is  the  standpoint  of  spiritual 

366 


HOMILETIC  C0M3IENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  xi. 


men  :  "  By  faith  we  understand."  The  apostle  Paul  puts  his  position  as  a 
spiritual  man  quite  plainly.  "  The  life  that  I  now  live  in  the  flesh  I  live  by  the 
faith  of  the  Son  of  God."  A  striking  New  Testament  illustration  of  faith  as  a 
practical  power  on  conduct  is  found  in  the  behaviour  of  St.  Paul  during  the  great 
storm  at  sea.  *'  In  that*  desperate  crisis  one  man  retained  his  calm  and  courage. 
It  was  Paul  the  prisoner,  probably  in  physical  health  the  weakest  among  them, 
and  the  greatest  sufferer  of  them  all.  But  it  is  in  such  moments  that  the  courage 
of  the  noblest  souls  shines  with  the  purest  lustre,  and  the  soul  of  Paul  was 
inwardly  enlightened.  As  he  prayed,  in  all  the  peacefulne«s  of  a  blameless 
conscience,  it  was  revealed  to  him  that  God  would  fulfil  the  promised  destiny  which 
was  to  lead  him  to  Rome,  and  that,  with  the  preservation  of  his  own  life,  God 
would  also  grant  to  him  the  lives  of  those  unhappy  sufferers  for  whom,  all 
unworthy  as  some  of  them  soon  proved  to  be,  his  human  heart  yearned  with  pity. 
While  the  rest  were  abandoning  themselves  to  despair,  Paul  stood  forth  on  the 
deck ;  and  after  gently  reproaching  them  for  having  rejected  the  advice  which 
would  have  saved  them  from  all  that  buffeting  and  loss,  he  bade  them  cheer  up  ; 
for  though  the  ship  would  be  lost,  and  they  would  be  wrecked  on  a  certain  island, 
not  one  of  them  should  lose  his  life.  For  they  knew  that  he  was  a  prisoner  who 
had  appealed  to  Osesar ;  and  that  night  an  angel  of  the  God  whose  child  and 
servant  he  was  had  stood  by  him,  and  not  only  assured  him  that  he  should  stand 
before  Csesar,  but  also  that  God  had,  as  a  sign  of  grace,  granted  him  the  lives  of 
all  on  board."  "  Wherefore,  sirs,"  Paul  said,  "  be  of  good  cheer,  for  /  believe  God^ 
that  it  shall  be  even  as  it  was  told  me." 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND   SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Yer.  1.  Faith  is  more  than  Belief. —  died  for  us,  and  about  a  Holy  Spirit 

Faith  is  that  power  within  us  which  who  dwells  in  our  hearts.      But  still 

makes   the   things    of   another    world  more,  the  bodily  eye  not  only  is  sure 

seem  as  real  to  us  as  the  things  of  about  the  truth  of  what  it  sees,  but 

this  world — which  brings  home  to  us  also   cannot   help    seeing    the    things 

the  things  not  seen,  and  makes  them  before  it.     When  you  walk  along  the 

as  clear  and  sure  to  us  as  if  we  could  road,  you  do  not  try  to  see  everything 

see   them   with    our   very   eyes.     The  in  your  way ;  you  see  it  without  trying, 

great   work   of   faith   is    to    realise —  So  too  faith.     Faith  is  not  only  sure 

make  real   to   us — the   things  of   the  of  the  truth  and  reality  of  the  things 

world  unseen.     And  so  faith  is  some-  not  seen,   but  also  has  them  ever  in 

times  called  the  eye  of  the  soul,  because  mind,  keeps  them  ever  in  view,  as  it 

it   looks    upon    the    great    truths    of  were.     Faith  means  a  great  deal  more 

religion,    and   sees    them    as    clearly,  than    mere  belief.     It  means   making 

certainly,  and  constantly  as  the  bodily  a  thing  7'eal  to  our   souls,   having   it 

eye  looks  upon  and  sees  all  the  out-  ever  present  to  our  minds,  keeping  it 

ward   things   around  us.     The   bodily  so   clearly   before  us  that   we   cannot 

eye   has  no  doubt  that  the  things  it  help  acting  upon  it.     So  faith  is  the 

sees  are  true  and  real.     When  it  looks  root  of  good  works  and  holiness.     We 

upon    the    mountains  and   fields  and  cannot  help,  when   the   unseen   world 

trees,  it  is  quite  sure   that  they  are  seems  so   real   and  present  to  us — we 

really  there  as  it  sees  them.     And  so  cannot    help   living    for   that    unseen 

faith,    the   eye   of    the   soul,    has    no  world,   instead   of   for    the   world   we 

doubt  about  the  things  it  looks  upon.  see.       That    power    which    keeps    the 

It  is  quite  sure  that  there  is  a  God,  great  realities  of  another  world  clearly, 

and   that   God   is    ever   present,    and  constantly,  steadfastly,  before  our  souls 

knoAvs  all  we  think  and  speak  and  do ;  is    the    only    power    which    can  con- 

it  has  no  doubt  about  a  Saviour  who  quer  the   snares  and  temptations,  the 

3G7 


CHAP.    XI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


power  and  the  perils,  of  this  world. — 
W.  Walsham  How,  D.D. 

Faith  as  Assent. — Faith  is  an  assent 
unto  truths  credible  upon  the  testi- 
mony of  God  (not  on  the  reasonableness 
of  the  thing  revealed,  though  by  this 
we  may  judge  as  to  whether  it  be  what 
it  professes,  a  genuine  revelation),  de- 
livered unto  us  in  the  writings  of  the 
apostles  and  prophets.  Thus  Christ's 
ascension  is  the  cause,  and  His  absence 
the  crown,  of  our  faith  ;  because  He 
ascended  we  the  more  believe,  and 
because  we  believe  in  Him  who  hath 
ascended  our  faith  is  the  more  accepted. 
— Bishop  Pearson, 

The  Evidence  of  Things  not  seen. — 
The  evidence  that  the  "  fool "  wanted 
when  he  "  said  in  his  heart  there  is 
no  God  " ;  the  evidence  that  Pharaoh 
wanted  when  he  inquired,  *'  Who  is 
the  Lord  that  I  should  serve  Him  ? 
or  what  profit  shall  I  have  if  I  pray 
unto  Him  ?  "  the  evidence  that  Goliath 
wanted  when  he  disdained  David  "  be- 
cause he  was  but  a  youth"  ;  the 
evidence  which  Pilate  wanted  when 
he  so  scornfully  inquired,  "  What  is 
truth  ? "  the  evidence  that  Gallio 
wanted  when  "  he  cared  for  none  of 
these  things "  ;  the  evidence  that 
St.  Peter  wanted  when  he  exclaimed, 
"  Lord,  we  have  left  all  and  followed 
Thee;  what  shall  we  have  therefore?  " — 
such  evidence  had  Noah  during  one 
hundred  and  twenty  years.  Caring 
nothing  for  the  gibes  of  the  ungodly, 
he  went  on  quietly  building  his  extra- 
ordinary boat.  The  wise  man  had  it 
when  he  said,  "  Cast  thy  bread  upon 
the  waters,  and  thou  shalt  find  it  after 
many  days."  The  three  Jews  had  it 
when  they  said,  "Be  it  known  unto 
thee,  O  king,  that  we  will  not  serve 
thy  gods."  Job  had  it  when  he  said, 
"  I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth." 
Daniel  had  it  when  he  said,  *'  They 
that  be  wise  shall  shine  as  the  bright- 
ness of  the  firmament."  True  faith 
is  totally  distinct  from  sectarian  cant- 
ing, which  springs  from  ignorance  and 
conceit.      It  is   totally   distinct   from 

368 


fanatical  excitement,  which  in  the 
nature  of  things  is  a  transient  emotion, 
powerless  to  change  the  heart  and  life. 
True  faith  leads  you  on,  leads  you 
ever.  A  man  looking  for  the  evidence 
of  things  not  seen  is  a  patient,  earnest, 
careful,  constant  creature.  But  the 
practical  man  says.  Where  is  the 
evidence  ?  Illustrate  by  the  mystery 
of  Baptism,  Confirmation,  the  Lord's 
Supper.  Men  are  better  or  worse 
according  to  the  measure  of  their  faith, 
i.e.  their  power  to  realise  the  evidences 
of  things  not  seen.  Columbus  said, 
"  When  I  passed  across  the  sea  to  find 
a  land  that  men  thought  dwelt  only 
in  my  fancy,  they  scorned  me  for 
my  toil,  yet  had  I  faith  in  God,  that 
He  would  prosper  and  direct  my  pur- 
pose."— Haivthorn  Homilies. 

Faith  a  Soul-principle. — Faith  is 
that  principle,  that  exercise  of  mind 
and  soul,  which  has  for  its  object 
things  not  seen,  but  hoped  for,  and 
which,  instead  of  sinking  under  them 
as  too  ponderous,  whether  from  their 
difficulty  or  from  their  uncertainty, 
stands  firm  under  them,  supports  and 
sustains  their  pressure — in  other  words, 
is  assured  of,  confides  in,  CA.d  relies  on 
them. — Dr.  Vaitghan. 

The  Power  of  Faith  ManJs  Dignity. 
— Every  one  knows  how  much  the 
word  "  faith "  has  to  do  with  Chris- 
tianity. The  word  is,  indeed,  peculiar 
to  religion,  and  in  an  especial  manner 
peculiar  to  the  religion  of  Christ.  In 
His  revelation  to  man  God  has  taken 
hold  of  that  one  part  of  our  nature 
which  was  lying  most  neglected,  and 
yet  in  which  the  seed  of  our  highest 
perfection  is  alone  to  be  found.  Faith 
is  indeed  that  which  most  raises  us 
from  a  state  of  brute  selfishness  and 
brute  ignorance ;  and  leading  us  on 
gradually,  according  to  our  gradual 
growth,  from  one  high  object  to 
another,  ends  by  offering  to  the  mind 
of  the  Christian  the  most  perfect 
object  of  all,  even  God  Himself,  our 
Father  and  Saviour  and  Sanctifier. 
But   faith   is   also   that  part   of   our 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  xi. 


nature   in   which   the   effects    of    our  nothing  unless  we  understood  it  com- 
corruption   are   seen     most     strongly,  pletely,  we  should  never  believe  it  at 
What  does  the  text  say  faith  is  ?     It  all.     Because  we  can  believe  what  we 
is  that  feeling   or   faculty  within  us,  do  not    understand    completely^  it    has 
by  which  the  future  becomes  to  our  often  been  assumed  that  we  can  believe 
minds    greater  than  the  present,  and  what    we   do   not    understand    at   all. 
what  we   do   7iot   see    more   powerful  Language  which  we  do  not  comprehend 
to  influence  us  than  what  we  do  see.  is  for  us  an  unknown  tongue.     It  is 
When  we  are  told  of  God,  we  see  at  a  mere  sound.     Sound  is  not  the  object 
once  that  He  is  an   object  of   faith,  of   belief,  but  sense.      A  meaningless 
far   more   excellent   than   any   other,  proposition  cannot  be  believed,  for  the   ) 
and  that  it  is  when  directed  to  Him  very   simple   reason,    that   since   it   is  / 
that  the  feeling  can  be  brought  for-  meaningless,  there  is  nothing  to  believe, 
ward  to  its  full  perfection.     Faith  in  We  can  only  believe  what  is  possible. 
God   seems   to   be   perfect   in   all  the  We  cannot  believe  that  which  is  cow- 
points  required  to  perfect  it ;  it  rests  tra7^y  to   reason.     Reason   contradicts 
on  the  word  of  Him  who  is  all-good,  a    statement    when    it   shows    that    it 
all-wise,   and  all-powerful ;    it   points  never  could  be  true.     Belief  would  not 
to  objects  so  distant  that  faith  must  be    possible   unless    there   were    some    ^. 
be  strong  and  well  matured  in  order  things  which  it  is  impossible  to  believe.      j 
to   reach    them;    it    encourages    and  *^  We  can  only  believe  what  is  probable.  \    / 
terrifies   by  blessings  and   miseries  so  We  can  neither  believe  without.evidence 
far   removed   from   our   present    con-  nor  against  it.     Evidence  is  to  mentaF 
ceptions,  that  the  faith  must  be  far  vision  what  light  is  to  physical.     Of 
more    powerful   which   can    overcome  •  mental  vision  there  are  two  kinds — 
actual    temptations    by    dwelling    on  knowledge   and   belief.     The   evidence 
objects  which  our  understandings  are  ^  of  certainty  produces  knowledge ;  the    , 
as  unable  to  grasp  fully,  as  our  bodily  '  evidence  of  probability  produces  belief.  ^ 
eyes  to  see  and  to  hear  them.     This,  The   amount  of   evidence   required  to 
then,    is   religious   faith.     There   is   a  produce  belief  is  different  in  different 
peculiar  species  of  religious  faith,  called  individuals,  and  the  amount  of  evidence 
Christian  faith  :    that  is,  not   only   a  required  will  be  different  in  the  same 
faith  in  God  our  heavenly  Father,  but  individual  for  different  subjects.    Belief  1. 
a   faith   in  God  as    He  has   revealed  is  independent_^f_jKilitianA     The  pro-    ) 
Himself  to  us  in  the  New  Testament ;  fession  of  belie^f  is  not  so  limited.     We 
that  is,  in  God  the  Father  of  our  Lord  cannot  beHeve  to  order  or  at  will. — 
Jesus  Christ.     This  Christian  faith  is  Prof.  Alfred  Momerie. 
of  a  more  excellent  kind,  because  it 

shows   us  more   of   God's    perfections  A     Genuine   Act    of   Faith. — Every 

than  any  other  ;  and  from  that  view  genuine  act  of  faith  is  the  act  of  the 

becomes  even  yet  stronger,  and  more  whole  man,  not  of  his  understanding 

pure,  and  more  self- abandoning.     But  alone,  not  of  his  affections  alone,  not 

this  faith  cannot  be  understood  by  all.  of  his  will  alone,  but  of  all  three  in 

How   can   they   who   live   wholly   by  their   central,    aboriginal    unity ;    and 

sight,    who  do   not  practise   even  the  thus  faith  becomes  the  faculty  in  man 

lower  kinds  of  faith,  how  can  they  so  through    which     the    spiritual    world 

much  as  understand  the  highest  ?    (See  exercises  its  sway  over  him,  and  thereby 

Sermon  on  1  John  v.  4,  5.) — Thomas  enables  him  to  overcome  the  world  of 

Arnold,  D.D.  sin  and  death. — Hare. 

The  Psychology  of  Belief — We  can  Vers.  1,  6.  Faith  includes  Belief. — 

only  believe  what  is  intelligible,  what  we  The  terms  we  constantly  use  in  religious 

can  understand.     Not,  however,  com-  conversation  and  in  our  preaching  may 

,pletely  understand  ;  if  we  could  believe  be   compared   to   current  coin,  which 

BB  369 


CHAP.  XI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS, 


the  whole  community  have  an  interest 
in  keeping  perfectly  pure  and  of  the 
true  weight.  So  it  is  with  terms  such 
as  faith,  justification,  sa notification. 
They  are  apt,  like  coins,  to  be  clipped 
of  some  small  portion  of  their  Scriptural 
meaning ;  and  we  do  well  constantly, 
as  it  were,  to  take  them  to  the  mint 
and  compare  them,  or  rather  the 
meaning  we  have  come  to  attach  to 
them,  with  Holy  Scripture.  The  word 
translated  "  faith "  is  equivalent  to 
trust  in  a  person.  Those  who  "  come 
to  God"  are  those  who  are  on  their 
way  to  faith ;  yet  we  are  told  that 
before  they  can  have  faith  they  must 
at  least  **  believe  that  God  is,  and  that 
He  is  a  rewarder  of  those  who  diligently 
seek  Him."  Faith  is  a  Scripture  term 
which  is  used  in  a  larger  sense  than 
belief.  Every  one  who  has  faith  believes ; 
but  every  one  who  believes  has  not 
necessarily  all  that  is  comprehended  in 
the  tei'm  "  faith."  Belief  is  a  part  of 
faith,  not  the  whole.  Belief  is  an  act 
of  the  intellect.  Faith  is  that  unshaken 
trust  in  God  as  our  heavenly  Father, 
in  Christ  as  our  Saviour,  and  in  the 
Holy  Ghost  as  our  Sanctifier,  which 
is  wrought  in  the  heart  of  the  Christian 
by  the  Holy  Spirit.  We  cannot  believe 
without  being  convinced ;  if  we  are 
intellectually  convinced  that  Jesus  is 
the  Christ,  we  cannot  say  so  from  the 
heart,  except  by  the  Holy  Ghost — 
"  cannot  come  to  Christ  except  the 
Father  draw  us."  It  is  not  the  pro- 
fession of  belief  alone  that  God  requires, 
although  He  requires  this,  but  the 
acting  out  of  the  belief.  We  must  be 
careful  not  to  assert  that  there  are  no 
degrees  in  faith,  and  so  make  sad  the 
hearts  of  children  of  God,  whom  He 
has  not  made  sad. — Robert  Barclay. 

Ver.  2.  The  Inspii^ation  of  High 
Examples. — "For  by  it  the  elders 
obtained  a  good  report."  R.Y.  "  For 
therein  the  elders  had  witness  borne 
unto  them."  A  recent  review- wi iter 
on  *'  Modern  Socialism  and  Economics  " 
points  out  that  all  forms  of  society, 
aristocratic  or  democratic,  despotic  or 
republican,  have  recognised  qualitative 

370 


differences  in  their  individual  members. 
A  better  soldier  or  sailor,  inventor  or 
planter,  poet  or  singer,  soon  made  an 
impiession  on  these  societies,  and  found 
his  reward.  This  principle,  if  not 
rejected,  is  oppressed  by  socialism.  The 
mass  of  society,  and  not  the  essential 
quality  of  the  individual  members, 
occupies  the  attention,  and  stimulates 
the  inventive  plans  of  socialists.  This 
is  not  the  method  of  nature,  which 
improves  by  variation,  and  not  by 
mere  succession  and  repetition.  Pro- 
gress comes  by  diffusing  quality  through 
the  mass,  and  not  by  merely  increasing 
the  bulk  of  the  mass  ;  and  the  quality 
of  individuals,  once  attained,  becomes 
a  common  heritage.  In  no  sphere  of 
life  does  God  ever  permit  man  to  keep 
on  one  dead  level.  Everywhere  God 
sends  forth  the  advanced  man,  the 
superior  man,  that  he  may  be  the 
inspiration  to  effort  and  attainment 
to  others.  Every  superior  man  starts 
in  other  men  the  hopeful  restlessness 
of  discontent  and  ambition.  The 
natural  tendency  of  men  on  a  level  is 
to  sink  to  a  lower  level.  So  there  are 
always  among  us  best  men,  elect  men, 
who  save  humanity  by  preventing  it 
from  sinking,  and  inspiring  it  to  rise 
higher.  This  is  the  fact  in  the  moral 
and  religious  spheres,  and  Jesus  Christ 
is  the  supreme  Example  who  declares 
what  is  possible  for  humanity  and 
helps  to  the  attainment  of  it. 

Ver.  3.  Faith  and  Philosophy  dealing 
with  a  Material  World. — It  needs  to 
be  clearly  seen  that  faith  and  philo- 
sophy do  not  ask  the  same  thing 
concerning  creation.  Philosophy  asks, 
"  How  did  these  things  come  to  be  ?  " 
Faith  asks,  "  Who  brought  these 
things  into  being  and  order  ?  "  It  is 
of  the  very  essence  of  the  faculty  of 
faith  that  it  bears  relation  to  person, 
not  to  force.  This  is  plain  if  we 
remember  how  closely  associated  faith 
is  with  "  trust  "  and  with  *'  love." 

Vers.  3,  4.  Faith  and  Reason. — How 
"faith"  properly  stands  related  to 
"reason"  may  be  illustrated  by  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chaf.  xi. 


reference  to  the  Creation.  How  Abel.  Faith  cannot  be  satisfactorily 
"faith"  stands  related  to  "religion"  defined;  it  can  be  described  in  what 
may  be  illustrated  by  the  reference  to      it  does,  or  helps  us  to  do. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  4—6. 

The  Construction  of  Religion. — The  direct  association  of  Abel's  offering  with 
his  "  faith  "  gives  the  true  key  to  the  old  Scripture  narrative,  which  in  fact 
records  the  beginning  of  religion,  which,  pi'operly  regarded,  is  man's  effort  to 
meet  the  conditions  into  which  sin  has  brought  him,  and  to  recover  the  relations 
which  sin  has  disturbed.     Man  needs  worship  ;  sinful  man  needs  a  religion. 

I.  Man's  efforts  to  construct  a  religion. — The  result  of  incoming  sin  on  the 
human  family  was  not  immediate  and  absolute  loss  of  the  thought  and  know- 
ledge of  God  ;  for  Abel  and  Cain  knew  of  God,  and  recognised  God's  relation  to 
their  prosperity.  The  result  of  incoming  sin  was  disharmony  between  man's 
spirit  and  man's  body,  and  the  body  no  longer  remained,  what  it  was  designed 
to  be,  the  medium  and  servant  of  man  the  spirit.  The  body  now  claimed 
separate  and  independent  rights,  and  even  to  dominate  the  spirit.  In  Abel  we 
see  the  harmony  of  body  and  spirit ;  in  Cain,  the  disharmony.  God  does  not 
pass  by  that  first  instance  of  disharmony.  He  testifies  His  approval  of  Abel 
and  disapproval  of  Cain.  And  in  that  instance,  in  that  verdict,  God  establishes 
for  all  time  the  law  that  acceptable  worship  must  have  in  it  the  reality,  though 
it  need  not  have  the  perfection,  of  harmony  between  soul  and  body.  The 
beginning  of  the  construction  of  religion  was  bringing  an  offering  to  express 
thankfulness  and  to  ensure  the  Divine  favour.  It  is  important  to  notice  the 
difference  between  the  spirit  of  Adam  and  the  spirit  of  these  sons.  Sin  had 
brought  in  the  distinction  between  "  mine  "  and  "  thine  "  in  relation  to  God. 
Adam  saw  all  to  be  God's.  Abel  and  Cain  made  gifts,  of  what  was  theirs,  to 
God.  A  religion  is  only  wanted,  and  is  only  possible,  where  there  has  come 
about  a  breaking  of  the  harmony.  Keligions  are,  essentially,  human  en- 
deavours, more  or  less  Divinely  guided,  to  recover  lost  fellowship,  to  restore 
lost  relations. 

II.  God  indicating  what  are  the  essentials  of  a  right  religion. — It  were  a 
vain  thing  for  man  to  construct  a  religion  if  God  held  aloof,  and  was  in  no  way 
interested  in  his  effort.  If  God  concerned  Himself  with  it,  He  must  indicate 
what  features  of  man's  effort  He  approved  and  what  He  disapproved.  And 
this  is  precisely  the  significance  of  His  acceptance  and  rejection  of  these 
different,  and  differently  inspired,  offerings.  Man  made  distinct  advance  in 
the  construction  of  a  religion  when  he  knew  what  God  approved.  An  offering 
like  Abel's,  offered  in  the  spirit  of  Abel,  is  acceptable  to  Him.  Then  what  are 
the  essential  features  of  Abel's  offering,  and  wherein  lies  its  distinction  from 
Cain's.  "  Possibly  Cain  just  took  some  of  his  fruits  as  a  man  would  who 
performs  a  duty  in  which  he  is  not  very  deeply  interested.  Possibly  Abel 
selected  with  care,  chose  out  the  fattest  and  best,  as  a  man  would  who  wanted 
to  make  a  really  acceptable  gift,  one  that  would  worthily  express  his  thank- 
fulness and  love.  The  Mohammedan  legend  embodies  this  idea  in  an  exaggerated 
fi^-m.  It  says  that  Cain's  offering  was  a  sheaf  of  the  very  worst  of  his  wheat, 
but  Abel's  a  fat  lamb,  the  very  best  of  his  flock.  It  is  better,  however,  only  to 
say  that  the  light  feeling  of  the  one  and  the  intense  feeling  of  the  other  gave 
God  a  basis  for  further  discriminating  between  them.  Abel's  was  a  personally 
religious  act ;  Cain's  was  a  formal  duty  done.  Cain's  bringing  his  offering  was 
an  expression  of  natural  rehgion  ;  Abel's  was  an  expression  of  personal  piety. 
God  could  receive  both,  if  both  were  sincere,  but  the  smile  of  His  special  favour 

371 


CHAP.  XI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


must  rest  on  Abel.  The  point  of  distinction  may  even  be  stated  more  sharply. 
The  one — Cain — offered  a  gift  to  God.  The  other — Abel — offered  himself  to 
God  by  means  of  a  gift.  And  the  opportunity  was  taken  for  sealing,  once  and 
for  ever,  the  truth  that  the  only  offerings  God  can  accept  are  gifts  which  carry 
to  Him  the  givers  themselves."  "  Every  man,  then,  wanting  a  religion,  it  is 
remarkable  that  the  first  idea  men  light  upon  is  always  the  same.  The  first 
notion  of  religion  is  universally  that  which  is  seen  in  Cain  and  Abel.  Men 
bring  a  gift  to  please  the  Deity  and  secure  His  favour.  Cain  and  Abel  did  not 
merely  bring  their  offerings  as  expressions  of  their  thankfulness  for  temporal 
prosperity.  The  story  clearly  indicates  that  they  looked  for  the  Divine 
acceptance  of  themselves,  in  some  sense,  for  the  sake  of  their  gift.  Cain  was 
angry  because  he  did  not,  by  his  gift,  secure  the  Divine  favour  for  himself. 
But  no  mere  gift  can  ever  secure  God's  acceptance.  '  The  Lord  looketh  on  the 
heart.'  Abel's  gift  of  a  lamb  was,  in  itself,  no  more  acceptable  than  Cain's 
corn  and  fruits.  Abel's  humble,  earnest,  grateful,  trusting  heart  can  receive 
God's  favour.  From  Cain's  formalities  God's  favour  must  be  withheld.  Thus 
in  the  very  first  ages  of  the  world  was  forcibly  presented  the  law  which  our 
Divine  Lord  expressed  so  plainly  :  *  They  that  worship  the  Father  must  worship 
Him  in  spirit  and  in  truth.'  Not  sacrifices,  not  temples,  not  services,  not 
prayers,  not  good  deeds,  not  steadfast  morality,  not  generous  giving,  can,  of 
themselves,  ever  gain  Divine  favour.  The  Spirit- God  asks  for  spirit- worship. 
Because  man  is  a  spirit  it  is  beneath  his  dignity  to  offer,  and  it  is  beneath  the 
dignity  of  God,  the  great  Spirit,  to  accept,  other  than  spirit -worship." 

These  points  may  be  impressed.  Religion  is  not  sentiment,  and  yet  it  goes  with 
sentiment.  Religion  is  not  acts,  and  yet  it  can  express  itself  in  acts.  Religion 
is  heart -feeling ;  it  is  the  devotion  of  a  man's  self  to  God  ;  it  is  seen  in  the 
Divine  Man,  who  *'  offered  Himself  without  spot  to  God." 

(This  topic  might  also  have  been  treated  as  "  The  Power  of  Faith  in  Human 
Worship") 

Special  Study  of  Cain. — 1.  In  Cain  we  have  sin  putting  on  its  outward  evil 
forms :  heart -wrong  showing  itself  in  outward  wrong -doing — wrong  to  others, 
wrong  to  society.  The  difficulty  we  have  with  sin  is  that  it  never  will  keep  in 
the  heart -sphere ;  it  will  persist  in  coming  out  and  showing  what  a  terrible 
hea/rt-^^^\S.  it  is,  by  manifesting  in  social  relationships  what  a  terrible  life-^v'A  it 
is.  2.  In  Cain  we  also  see  the  beginning  of  contentions  about  religious  matters  ; 
and  we  may  learn  that  religious  contentions  are  always  about  the  externals  of 
religion,  never  about  the  inner  spirit  of  piety ;  about  men's  beliefs,  not  about 
their  soul-lovings  and  soul-trustings.  It  is  assumed  that  all  the  Churches  and 
all  the  sects  will  be  happy  together  in  heaven.  They  will,  but  only  on  the  deep 
ground  of  their  common  piety,  their  common  "  life  in  Christ,"  which  will  there 
take  the  place  of  religion.  Before  men  sinned  in  Eden,  and  after  they  have 
been  wholly  delivered  from  sin  in  Paradise,  worship  may  be  required,  but  not 
religion,  which  is  entirely  relative  to  man's  sinful  condition. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES, 

Ver.  4.  Posthumous  Eloquence. — The  marble,  nor  the  book  memoirs.     There 

eloquence  of  life  and  the  eloquence  after  are,  however,  special  values  attaching 

life  are  nearly  one,  the  latter  for  the  to  the  echoes  of  the  life  after  it  has 

most  part  a  prolonged  reverberation,  closed  on  earth.     1.  Speaketh  through 

The  life  may  be  still  a  living  epistle,  the   charitable  memoirs  of  men,  kin- 

not      dependent      upon     monumental  dred,    friends,   the  Church,  the  com- 


o 


72 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.  XI. 


munity — by  word,  work,  example. 
2.  Speaketh  in  testimony  and  vindica- 
tion of  the  truths,  the  cause  for  which 
the  Hfe  stood  as  an  exponent.  A  com- 
pleted argument,  the  peroration,  the 
most  forcible  part  and  the  most  lasting 
in  impression.  3.  Pre-eminently  Chris- 
tian faith  gives  posthumous  power  to 
the  life.  "  By  it  he  [Abel],  being  dead, 
yet  speaketh."  Agnosticism,  infidelity, 
pessimism,  worldliness,  selfishness,  in 
any  form  not  only  winds  up  in  despair, 
but  leaves  no  echo  that  men  care  to  listen 
to.  Christian  faith,  as  the  soul  of  the 
Christian's  life,  is  immortal  and  peren- 
nial in  influence  and  fruitfulness.  It 
reappears  in  children  and  children's 
children.  It  adds  continually  to  the 
witnesses  summoned  by  the  Church  in 
her  vindication,  adds  undying  elements 
to  the  Church's  endless  pilgrim  song. — 
J.  S.  K, 

The  Witness  of  Abel's  Faith.— The 
reference  is  not  to  any  imaginary  con- 
tinued presence  of  Abel,  nor  need  it 
be  to  the  statement  in  Gen.  iv.  10,  that 
the  voice  of  Abel's  blood  cried  from 
the  ground.  The  argument  of  the 
writer  requires  that  the  continued 
witness  of  Abel  should  be  the  witness 
of  Abel's  faith.  He  speaks  by  his  faith 
to  those  who  should  come  after  him, 
exhorting  and  encouraging  them  to 
follow  his  example.  That  example  of 
faith  remains  upon  the  holy  records, 
and  affords  admonition  and  instruction 
to  succeeding  ages. 

The  Contrast  of  Cain  and  Abel. — 
In  the  two  men,  Cain  and  Abel,  we 
have  the  types  of  the  two  classes  into 
which  the  world  has  ever  been  divided. 
In  Abel  we  have  the  soul  struggling 
for  restored  harmony,  seeking  to  gain 
its  restored  rights.  In  bringing  his 
offering  he  conquered  so  far  as  to  make 
his  bodily  gift  express  his  soul's  grati- 
tude, dependence,  and  faith.  As  he 
stood  before  God  with  his  offering,  body 
and  soul  were  in  harmony.  But  in 
Cain  the  harmony  is  wholly  wanting. 
His  body  and  soul  were  not  together. 
The  bodily  gift  indeed  was  offered,  but 


it  spoke  nothing  in  behalf  of  the  soul. 
— Age  of  Great  Patriarchs. 

Ver.  5.  Death  and  Translation. — 
Death  requires  to  be  spoken  of  with 
care  and  precision.  There  is  the 
natural  death  of  the  animal  which 
man  shares  in  so  far  as  he  too  is  an 
animal.  But  as  a  being  inbreathed 
with  the  Divine  Spirit,  and  made  a 
living  soul,  translation  from  one  bodily 
organ  to  another  must  be  thought  of 
as  the  Divine  idea  for  man,  as  was 
realised  and  illustrated  in  Enoch. 
Death  for  the  living  soul,  in  the 
animal  body,  is  the  necessity  introduced 
by  human  sin. 

Pleasing  God. — Enoch,  the  devout 
patriarch,  the  fearless  preacher,  the 
fellow-traveller  with  God,  the  trium- 
phant saint  who  did  not  see  death,  but 
took  wing  at  once  by  the  way  of 
translation  into  heaven.  A  glorious 
man,  whose  name  and  character  and 
destiny  will  live  in  human  memory 
freshly,  until  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead.  This  is  the  ground  of  all — that 
"  he  pleased  God."  He  did  this  not 
by  any  special  superhuman  experiences 
and  endeavours,  but  just  in  such  a  way 
as  we  may  all  imitate.  The  words  may 
never  have  been  uttered  to  himself  at 
all,  but  he  had  the  sense  of  the  words 
in  his  heart — the  deep  joyful  assurance 
of  God's  approbation  and  love — and 
others,  by  his  life  and  labours,  knew 
that  he  was  an  accepted  and  a  favoured 
servant  and  saint  of  God. 

I.  The  necessity  for  pleasing  God. — 
There  is  a  God  to  please,  a  living  God, 
who  takes  a  living  and  continual 
interest  in  all  human  things,  whose 
great  endeavour,  by  all  this  complicated 
world-work  that  He  carries  on,  is  to 
nourish  and  educate  human  spirits,  that 
they  may,  like  Him,  hate  the  wrong 
and  love  the  right,  and  do  it.  He  is 
pleased  always  when  the  least  cause 
for  pleasure  is  presented  to  Him.  Some 
say  that  the  attempt  to  please  God  is 
an  inferior  aim,  and  that  the  real  end 
we  ought  to  keep  in  view  is,  to  be  right 
in  everything.     But  let  a  man  try  to 

373 


CHAP.  XI. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS. 


be  right  without  any  regard  to  God, 
and  how  far  will  he  go?  God  being 
an  infinite,  absolute,  all- perfect  Being, 
holding  in  Himself  all  principles,  all 
relations,  all  truth,  order,  and  beauty, 
to  please  Him  must,  in  the  very  nature 
of  the  case,  be  to  do  right.  In  the 
epistle  to  the  Hebrews  God  is  spoken 
of  as  "  Him  with  whom  we  have  to  do." 
It  is  not  with  the  duty,  but  with  God 
in  the  duty  ;  not  with  the  care,  but 
with  the  will  of  God  in  the  care ;  not 
with  the  man,  but  with  God,  the  maker, 
ruler,  judge,  of  the  man  and  of  all  men, 
with  whom  we  have  to  do  ;  and  there- 
fore we  ought  to  please  Him. 

ir.  The  way  of  pleasing  God. — It 
is  not  difficult,  if  only  we  take  the  right 
way  of  it.  He  is  not  a  hard  master. 
I  believe  we  have  no  idea  how  simple, 
how  natural,  how  human-like  in  the 
best  sense,  is  the  pleasure  and  joy  of 
God  in  the  obedience  of  His  children. 
Repentance,  faith,  practical  obedience, 
are  the  things  which  please  Him. 
Enoch  lived  a  public  life  of  service,  and 
pleased  God  in  it.  We  may  do  so  by 
action  or  by  suffering  ;  by  public  testi- 
mony or  by  private  prayer;  in  much 
or  little ;  by  strength  or  weakness ; 
amid  applause  or  scorn,  honour  or 
shame  ;  we  may  walk  with  God  with 
a  simple,  joyful,  loving  heart. 

III.  The  results  of  pleasing  God. — 
In  this  way  we  shall  please  ourselves 
as  we  never  can  do  in  any  other.  There 
is  a  kind  of  self-satisfaction  of  which 
the  less  we  have  the  better.  But  there 
is  another  kind  of  self-satisfaction  which 
we  may  and  must  seek.  It  is  well  when 
a  man  brings  himself  up  to  the  bar  of 
his  better  self.  There  is  something  of 
God  in  a  good  man  ;  the  enlightened 
conscience  is  the  echo  of  the  Divine 
authority  and  will.  And  if  we  please 
God,  we  shall  ourselves  have  pleasure 
in  life  and  the  world.  He  can  make 
our  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  us.  In 
the  world  we  may  have  tribulation,  and 
yet  we  may  be  of  good  cheer.  Come 
what  may  in  this  life,  the  reward  in 
heaven  is  always  sure.  To  mortal  man 
the  joy  of  the  immortal  is  not  yet 
revealed  ;  but  as  the  flicker  of  light  on 

374 


the  morning  sky  is  the  pledge  of  the 
shining  sun  and  the  risen  day — as  the 
blade  above  the  soil  is  the  earnest  of 
the  waving  corn-field  and  the  plentiful 
granary — so  are  God's  first  rewards  of 
service  here  the  fore-tokens  and  the 
pre-libations  of  the  joy  of  heaven. — 
Alexander  Raleigh,  D.D. 

Pleasing  God  must  be  essentially  the 
same  thing  in  all  ages  and  everywhere. 
God  is  the  same  everywhere  and  to 
everybody — the  same  absolutely,  and 
the  same  relatively  in  adaptation  to 
their  varying  conditions. 

I.  What  is  the  condition  on  which 
man  can  please  God  ? — Simply  this— 
let  him  be  what  God  designed  he  should 
be.  None  of  us  can  be  pleased  when 
our  work  is  spoiled,  or  turns  out  to  be 
other  than  we  intended  it  to  be.  We 
are  pleased  when  our  work  proves  to 
be  what  we  wanted  it  to  be. 

II.  What  is  the  reward  of  pleasing 
God  ? — We  get  all  the  blessing — un- 
limited, unhindered — that  He  planned. 
The  Divine  expectation  of  the  creature 
involves  the  richest  blessing  of  the 
creature. 

Yers.  5,  6.  The  Power  of  Faith  on 
Human  Death. — Why  was  the  narra- 
tive of  Enoch  recorded  in  the  older 
Scriptures  ?  and  why  is  it  recalled 
to  mind  here  ?  Physical  death  then 
seemed  to  be  an  absolutely  hopeless 
thing.  Everybody  died.  It  might 
seem  to  be  the  end  of  all.  In  a  long 
and  unbroken  procession  men  passed 
away  by  death.  Men  are  in  the  hands 
of  fate.  They  may  become  careless. 
They  did  become  careless.  They  let 
loose  their  passions,  and  said,  "  Let  us 
eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we  die." 
A  world  of  dying  men  was  fast  becom- 
ing utterly  corrupt  before  God.  It  was 
necessary  to  show  that  death  was  not 
inevitable.  The  order  could  be  broken. 
Man  is  in  the  hands  of  God,  not  of  fate. 
This  life  on  earth  is  neither  the  only 
life  nor  the  true.  This,  in  the  early 
days,  could  only  be  shown  pictorially, 
by  an  incident,  by  a  fact.  It  is  shown 
in  the  freeing  of  Enoch  from  the  uni- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.  XI. 


versal  death-law,  on  the  ground  of 
faith,  and  of  the  life  which  his  faith 
inspired.  What  then  is  taught  the 
world  by  the  translation  of  Enoch  ? 

I.  The  death-penalty  on  sin  may  be 
remitted.  — It  was  once ;  it  may  be 
again.  It  is  no  absolute  law  for 
humanity,  against  which  men  may 
kick  in  vain.  In  the  first  age  it  was 
remitted.  In  the  prophetic  age  it  was 
remitted.  In  the  resurrection  of  Christ 
it  ceased  to  be  a  penalty  on  man,  and  its 
power  was  once  and  for  ever  destroyed. 
For  all  who  are  now  in  Christ  death 
is  not  death  ;  it  is  Enoch-translation. 
The  dead  in  Christ  simply  "  are  not  " ; 
God  takes  them. 

II.  There  is  another  world,  the 
spiritual  world,  into  which  man  the 
spirit  goes. — The  first  age  learned  that 
— learned  it  from  Enoch.  Does  any  man 
sum  up  his  career  thus,  "  I  am  born, 
I  grow,  I  live,  I  die,  and  that  is  all "  ; 
what  can  he  do  with  Enoch  ?  Enoch 
lives,  while  he  lives,  in  the  spiritual 
world.  Enoch  goes  into  the  spiritual 
world  ;  he  does  not  die.  Where  is  he  ? 
Where  is  Elijah?  Where  is  Christ? 
*'  God  is  not  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the 
living." 

III.  The  life  that  is  ruled  by  other- 
world  considerations  escapes  death. — 
Enoch  had  this  testimony,  "  He  pleased 
God,"  in  living  by  faith,  not  by  sight. 
Then  in  outward  and  visible  ways  he 
shall  illustrate  the  abiding  spiritual 
truth  for  the  race.  He  was  translated — 
actually  f  reed/rom  death.  All  who  live 
by  faith,  by  other-world  considerations, 
are  translated  through  death.  "  Absent 
from  the  body,  present  with  the  Lord." 

Ver.  6.  Postulates  of  Prayer. — "  For 
he  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe 
that  He  is,  and  that  He  is  a  rewarder 
of  them  that  seek  after  Him."  Com- 
ing to  God  is  coming  with  some  request ; 
it  is  prayer.     That  is  declared  to  be  an 


impossible  thing  unless  two  postulates 
are  laid  down  and  fully  admitted. 

I.  Nobody  can  pray  unless  he 
believes  that  God  is. — If  he  did  not  so 
believe,  it  would  never  enter  into  his 
head  to  pray.  And  if  a  man  professes 
to  believe  that  there  is  no  God,  and 
nevertheless  prays,  that  man  is  mani- 
festly self -deceived.  He  does  believe 
in  God.  Men  easily  deceive  themselves 
by  using  terms  such  as  force,  law,  fate, 
etc.  If  in  any  sense  they  pray  to,  or  de- 
pend on  these  things,  they  make  them 
God.  The  personality  of  God  is  the 
thing  men  resist,  but  it  is  necessary  to 
show  that  personality  in  God  is  pre- 
cisely relative  to  prayer  in  man. 

II.  Nobody  can  pray  unless  he  be- 
lieves that  God  is  the  rewarder  of 
them  that  pray. — No  one  would  attempt 
what  he  was  absolutely  sure  was  useless. 
There  must  be  hope  in  prayer.  But 
to  lay  down  as  a  fact  that  God  is  a 
rewarder  is  to  go  beyond  the  assertion 
that  He  is,  and  to  assert  that  He  has 
a  moral  character,  and  comes  into 
moral  relations  with  His  creatures.  It 
is  to  advance  from  natural  to  revealed 
religion.  Grant  these  two  postulates 
(God  is ;  God  is  a  rewarder),  and  we 
will  logically  raise  a  whole  religious 
structure  for  humanity,  which  shall 
be  in  absolute  harmony  with,  and  be 
the  manifestly  necessary  outcome  of, 
those  first  principles. 

Two  Primary  Truths. — The  two 
fundamental  truths  of  all  that  can 
properly  be  called  religion  are  here 
adverted  to.  The  first  is,  a  belief  that 
God  exists ;  the  second,  that  He  is 
the  moral  governor  of  the  universe, 
i.e.  that  He  rewards  those  who  are 
pious,  and  consequently  punishes  those 
who  are  not  so.  He  who  denies  this, 
denies  all  that  sanctions  religion,  and 
makes  it  binding  upon  the  consciences 
of  men. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses   7—12. 

Expressions  of  Faith. — The  series  of  illustrations  of  faith  is  in  some  sense 
historical ;  but  there  is  an  evident  selection  to  suit  a  definite  purpose.  Three 
persons  are  introduced  in  this  paragraph ;  and  it  is  evident  that  they  illustrate 

375 


CHAP.  XI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS. 

faith,  Or  living  in  the  power  of  the  invisible,  as  it  may  gain  expression — (1)  in 
the  calamities  of  life;  (2)  in  the  commonplaces  of  life;  (3)  in  the  surprises 
of  Hfe.  / 

I.  Faith  finding  expression  in  the  calamities  of  life. — Noah  was  placed  in 
circumstances  which  he  had  no  share  in  bringing  about,  and  over  which  he 
had  no  control.  He  had  to  suffer  for  the  sins  of  others.  And  he  had  only 
a  Divine  intimation  of  what  he  was  to  do.  He  saw  nobody  ;  perhaps  did  not 
even  hear  a  voice.  He  felt  the  direction  put  into  his  mind.  But  he  believed ; 
he  acted  upon  his  faith.  There  was  no  outward  sign  of  the  judgment  falling. 
The  long  years  must  pass  before  it  would  fall.  Nevertheless  he  went  on 
preparing  the  ark,  and  testifying  for  God,  and  for  the  coming  judgment  which 
would  express  the  Divine  condemnation.  We  are  all  placed  under  disabilities, 
and  come  into  the  strain  of  calamities,  over  which  we  have  no  control,  and  with 
which  we  are  not  directly  related.  If  there  be  in  us  the  life  of  faith,  we  accept 
God's  will  concerning  us  in  the  very  midst  of  the  disabilities,  and  simply,  cheer- 
fully do  it ;  and  in  doing  it  honour  God,  and  plead  for  righteousness  with  our 
fellow- men. 

II.  Faith  finding  expression  in  the  commonplaces  of  life. — Where  we  shall 
live,  what  shall  be  our  occupation,  where  we  shall  seek  our  friendships, 
what  shall  be  our  daily  doing,  make  up  the  commonplace  of  life.  And  it  may 
seem  as  if  that  was  precisely  the  sphere  for  a  man's  own  judgment  and  enter- 
prise. What  can  he  want  with  faith  in  these  every-day  things  ?  They  call  for 
his  decisions  and  his  skill.  That  there  is  a  noble  and  spiritual  way  of  doing  our 
commonplace  duties,  and  meeting  our  commonplace  obligations,  is  shown  to  us 
in  the  patriarch  Abraham.  He  did  not  go  where  he  wanted  to  go ;  he  went 
where  God  wanted  him  to  go.  He  did  not  do  what  he  wanted  to  do ;  he  did 
what  God  wanted  him  to  do.  He  believed  the  Divine  voice  in  his  soul,  and 
followed  it.  He  cherished  the  promise  for  his  race,  and  quietly  bore  the 
limitations  and  burdens  which  God  laid  on  the  present.  It  is  a  sweet  mystery 
of  faith  that  it  can  thus  bring  spiritual  considerations  to  bear  on  the  simplest 
relations  of  every-day  life  and  duty,  so  that  we  may  win  the  righteousness  of 
common  life.     We  can  be  the  children  of  faithful  Abraham. 

III.  Faith  finding  expression  in  the  surprises  of  life. — It  is  strange  to  find 
Sarah  selected  to  illustrate  faith,  seeing  that  a  marked  feature  of  her  story  is 
her  incredulity.  That,  however,  was  only  a  passing  weakness.  She  came  to 
share  her  husband's  faith.  She  is  selected  because  the  promise  of  God  to  her 
was  a  distinct  surprise ;  and  her  having  a  son  in  her  old  age  represents  what  we 
may  call  the  surprises  of  life,  the  things  we  do  not  think  of  or  anticipate,  or 
even  desire.  Sometimes  delightful  surprises ;  sometimes  doubtful  surprises ; 
sometimes  trying  surprises.  Faith  may  find  expression  in  them ;  it  can  find  God 
working  in  them,  and  can  try  to  meet  the  claims  of  them,  and  to  learn  the 
lessons  of  them.  They  may  seem  to  the  ordinary  human  view  puzzle-pieces 
that  fit  nowhere.  Faith  finds  their  fittings,  or  trusts  God  to  show  their  places  in 
due  time.  Faith  then  is  a  real  and  practical  power  on  daily  life.  It  is  no 
great  acquisition  for  great  occasions.  It  is  an  abiding  force,  making  real  to  us 
God,  and  His  word  and  promise ;  and  so  it  becomes  our  sufficient  help  to  bear  the 
disabilities,  do  the  duties,  and  meet  the  surprises  of  life. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.    7.    Faith    in    God^s    Word. —  action  was  the  expression  of  his  faith, 

The  basis  of  faith  is  our  recognition  and  it  was  based  upon  a  warning  that 

of  something  as  the  word  and  will  of  he  had,  which  he  recognised  to  be  a 

God  concerning  us.     Noah  acted ;  the  warning  sent   from  God,  and  bearing 

376  ... 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


'HAP.  XI. 


direct  relation  to  him.  It  is  our  re- 
cognition of  a  thing  as  the  word  of 
God,  and  the  word  of  God  to  us,  which 
brings  responsibiHty,  and  gives  exer- 
cise to  faith,  which  really  is  our 
response  to  that  word.  It  is  con- 
ceivable that  a  man  may  recognise 
something  as  the  word  of  God  which 
is  not  the  word  of  God,  or  not  meant 
for  him ;  but  the  recognition  equally 
brings  responsibility  in  that  case  ;  and 
the  man,  though  actually  wrong,  is 
right  in  so  far  as  he  acts  up  to  the  light 
as  he  apprehends  it.  It  may  be  said. 
Then  a  man  is  better  off  who  simply 
leaves  God's  words  alone,  and  makes 
no  personal  recognition  of  them.  The 
answer  is,  That  this  he  cannot  do. 
By  the  law  and  condition  of  his  very 
being,  he  is  open  and  sensitive  to  com- 
munications from  God.  He  must  deal 
with  them.  He  must  be  judged  as  a 
moral  being,  by  the  ways  in  which  he 
has  dealt  with  them.  "  Whatsoever  is 
not  of  faith  is  sin." 

Pei'sistency  in  the  Obedience  of  Faith. 
— An  act  of  faith  may  be  compara- 
tively easy.  To  maintain  a  series  of 
acts  of  faith  implies  difficulty.  To 
sustain  a  series  of  acts,  amid  changes 
and  opposition,  for  many  years — in  the 
case  of  Noah,  for  one  hundred  and 
twenty  years — implies  a  truly  sublime 
moral  triumph.  "  We  can  only  ad- 
mire the  loyalty  and  the  faith  which 
kept  him  going  quietly  on  amid  the 
jeers  and  scoffs  of  the  thoughtless 
multitudes  who  watched  his  work  and 
listened  to  his  word.  Here  is  no  com- 
mon man.  Here  is  the  surprising 
thing — the  man  stood  in  the  world's 
eye  all  through  those  years.  He  lived 
among  the  people  whom  he  warned. 
The  religion  that  is  worth  anything 
can  stand  the  strain  of  common-place, 
every-day  life  and  relations." 

Ver.  8-10.  The  Illusiveness  of  Life. 
— God  promised  Canaan  to  Abraham, 
and  yet  Abraham  never  inherited 
Canaan  :  to  the  last  he  was  a  wan- 
derer there  (see  Acts  vii.  5).  But 
Abraham  never  complained  of  being 
deceived.     He  does  not  even  seem  to 


have  expected  fulfilment.  His  faith 
appears  to  have  consisted  in  disbeliev- 
ing the  letter,  almost  as  much  as  in 
believing  the  spirit,  of  the  promise. 
So  we  get  this  principle — God's  pro- 
mises never  are  fulfilled  in  the  sense 
in  which  they  seem  to  have  been  given. 
Life  is  a  deception ;  its  anticipations, 
which  are  God's  promises  to  the  ima- 
gination, are  never  realised.  They 
who  know  life  best,  and  have  trusted 
God  most  to  fill  it  with  blessings,  are 
ever  the  first  to  say  that  life  is  a  series 
of  disappointments.  And  in  the  spirit 
of  the  text  we  have  to  say,  that  it  is  a 
wise  and  merciful  arrangement  which 
ordains  it  thus. 

I.  The  deception  of  life's  promise. 
— The  promise  to  Abraham  was  not 
delayed  ;  it  never  was  fulfilled.  Abra- 
ham died  a  stranger  and  pilgrim  in 
the  land.  In  the  later  years  of  David, 
and  earlier  years  of  Solomon,  the  pro- 
mise may  seem  to  have  been  fulfilled. 
But  Scripture  distinctly  said  of  the  old 
heroes,  "  These  all  died  in  faith,  not 
having  received  the  promises."  Those 
who  believe  that  the  Jews  will  be 
restored  to  their  native  land  expect  it 
on  the  express  ground  that  Canaan  has 
never  been  actually  and  permanently 
theirs.  And  such  is  life's  disappoint- 
ment. 1 .  Our  senses  deceive  us ;  we 
begin  life  with  delusion.  2.  Our 
natural  anticipations  deceive  us — 
natural  in  contradistinction  to  extra- 
vagant expectations.  3.  Our  expecta- 
tions, .resting  on  revelation,  deceive 
us.  The  world's  history  has  turned 
round  two  points  of  hope, — one,  the 
first;  the  other,  the  second  coming  of 
the  Messiah.  In  the  first  the  pro- 
mise of  the  letter  was  unfulfilled  ;  the 
second  has  disappointed  many  genera- 
tions. There  are  two  ways  of  consider- 
ing this  aspect  of  life, — one  is  the  way 
of  sentiment ;  the  other  is  the  way  of 
faith.  The  sentimental  way  is  trite 
enough.  Life  is  a  bubble,  a  dream, 
a  delusion,  a  phantasm.  The  saints 
accepted  the  fact,  but  they  did  not 
mournfully  morah.se  over  it,  because 
they  knew  that  the  promise  itself  had 
a  deeper  meaning. 


CHAP.  XI.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


II.  What  is  the  meaning  of  this 
delusiveness? — 1.  It  serves  to  allure 
us  on.  Life  is  an  education.  God 
leads  us  on,  through  life's  unsatisfying 
and  false  reward,  ever  educating : 
Canaan  first ;  then  the  hope  of  a 
Redeemer;  then  the  millennial  glory. 
Observe  the  beautiful  result  which 
comes  from  this  indestructible  power 
of  believing  in  spite  of  failure.  2.  This 
non-fulfilment  of  promise  fulfils  it  in  a 
deeper  way.  Life  is  not  deception,  but 
illusion.  Distinguish  between  illusion 
and  delusion.  The  reward  we  get  is 
not  the  reward  for  which  we  worked, 
but  a  deeper  one — deeper  and  more 
permanent.  The  merchant  labours  all 
his  life,  and  the  hope  which  leads  him 
on  is  perhaps  wealth.  At  sixty  years 
of  age  he  attains  wealth ;  but  is  that 
the  reward  of  sixty  years  of  toil  ?  No  ! 
a  reward  deeper  than  he  dreamed  of. 
Habits  of  perseverance,  a  character 
trained  by  industry — that  is  his  reward. 
He  was  carried  on  from  year  to  year 
by,  if  he  were  wise,  illusion ;  if  he 
were  unwise,  delusion  ;  but  he  reaped 
a  more  enduring  substance  in  himself. 
This  is  what  God  does.  His  promises 
are  true,  though  illusive — far  truer 
than  we  at  first  take  them  to  be.  We 
look  for  a  mean,  low,  sensual  happiness, 
all  the  while  He  is  leading  us  on  to  a 
spiritual  blessedness — unfathomly  deep. 
This  is  the  life  of  faith.  We  live  by 
faith,  not  by  sight.  We  do  not  preach 
that  all  is  disappointment — the  dreary 
creed  of  sentimentalism  ;  but  we  preach 
that  nothing  here  is  disappointment, 
if  rightly  understood.  God  has  no 
Canaan  for  His  own,  no  milk  and 
honey  for  the  luxury  of  the  senses  ; 
for  the  city  which  hath  foundations  is 
built  in  the  soul  of  man.  He  in  whom 
God-like  character  dwells  has  all  the 
universe  for  his  own.  If  ye  be  Christ's, 
then  are  ye  Abraham's  seed,  and  heirs 
according  to  the  promise. — F.  W. 
Robertson. 

"Ver.  8.  Following  an  Invisible  but  a 
Present  Guide. — Abraham  is  the  one 
man  of  his  age  who  stands  in  the 
sharpest  contrast  with  the  men  around 

378 


him.  His  ideas  were  different  from 
theirs.  He  saw  more  than  they  could 
see.  He  ordered  his  life  upon  con- 
siderations which  were  quite  foreign  to 
them.  Their  sphere  was  "  the  seen 
and  temporal " ;  his  sphere  was  the 
"  unseen  and  eternal."  To  them  God 
was  a  name ;  to  him  God  was  the 
only  reality.  In  Him  Abraham,  con- 
sciously and  willingly,  "lived  and 
moved  and  had  his  being."  Other 
tribes  migrated,  moving  southwards, 
upon  the  impulsion  of  natural  race  in- 
stincts. Abraham  led  his  tribe  to  the 
south-west  under  a  conscious  Divine 
leading.  He  went  where  he  knew  that 
God  would  have  him  go.  "He  went 
out,  not  knowing  whither  he  went," 
but  well  knowing  that  all  his  move- 
ments were  in  the  direction  of  the 
Divine  wisdom,  and  well  assured  that 
all  his  wants  would  be  supplied  from 
the  Divine  bounty.  Abraham  differed 
from  all  the  men  of  his  time  in  the 
keenness  of  his  sense  of  God,  and  the 
quickness  of  his  response  to  every 
revelation  of  the  will  of  God.  He  is 
the  father  of  a '  race  whose  supreme 
racial  peculiarity  is  its  sensitiveness 
to  the  presence  and  to  the  claim  of 
God.  But  it  may  be  asked.  How  could 
Abraham,  more  than  any  other  man, 
know  for  certain  that  what  he  heard 
was  really  the  voice  of  the  living  God  ? 
The  answer  may  be,  That  no  man  can 
know  anything  for  certain  that  belongs 
to  the  spiritual  spheres,  but  some  men 
are  much  more  sensitive  to  spiritual  im- 
pressions than  others ;  and  every  man 
is  responsible  for  his  beliefs,  and  for 
his  conduct  in  relation  to  his  belief. — 
Revelation  by  CJiaracter. 

Ver.  9.  Expectant  Tent- dwellers. — 
Tent-dwelling  was  a  stage  and  a 
variety  in  the  housing  of  humanity, 
but  it  was  in  no  sense  a  finality.  It 
properly  belonged  to  a  time  when  the 
various  races  were  restlessly  mo\dng  in 
search  of  permanent  settlements.  So 
there  was  hope  of  the  fixed  house  even 
in  the  movable  tent.  Man's  first 
habitations  were  the  spaces  round 
trunks  of  trees,  the  lower  leafy  branches 


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.  Xt. 


being  drawn  down  and  fastened  to  the 
ground  as  slanting  roofs.  Then  pyra- 
midal bowers  were  made,  distinct  from 
the  tree  trunks,  but  of  tree  branches  ; 
these  developed  into  and  suggested  the 
form  of  tents,  which  developed  into 
the  sloping  roofed  hut  or  house  of 
wood  or  stone. 

Ver.  10.  The  Way  to  the  Cit7j.—We 
have  here  an  object  for  faith,  and 
faith  for  the  object ;  or  we  have  the 
city  and  the  way  to  it. 

I.  The  City. — Let  us  thank  God  for 
that  word — or  these — "  a  country  "  ;  "a 
better  country,  that  is,  an  heavenly." 
How  do  these  familiar  terms  fill  up 
for  us  the  dim  and  vast  obscure  !  They 
make  a  home  for  our  wandering 
thoughts ;  they  give  an  answer  to 
our  wondering  inquiries.  (1)  The  city 
is  very  ancient ;  (2)  very  strong  and 
stable  ;  (3)  it  is  all  built  by  God.  To 
set  face  towards  this  city  is  the  noblest 
attitude  a  man  can  assume ;  to  look 
for  it  as  Abraham  did  is  the  highest 
exercise  of  faith  ;  and  to  journey  to 
it  through  all  discouragements  is  the 
supreme  wisdom,  and  will  bring  us, 
through  God's  goodness,  within  its 
everlasting  gates. 

II.  The  way  to  the  city. — It  is 
to  *'  look  for  "  it,  to  expect  it.  It  is  the 
way  of  faith.  Without  faith,  showing 
itself  by  a  life-long  looking,  we  have 
no  interest  in  the  place.  A  whole  city 
for  a  look,  only  it  must  be  the  look  of 
the  whole  soul,  continued  through  the 
whole  life,  until  the  city  appears.  There 
are  those  who  would  be  willing  enough 
to  think  themselves  into  a  celestial  city. 
But  that  is  not  the  way.  Others 
would  be  very  willing  to  buy  them- 
selves into  it.  It  cannot  be  discerned 
by  knowledge ;  it  cannot  be  won  by 
strength  or  by  merit.  The  unseen  city 
can  be  won  by  looking,  only  it  must 
be  the  whole  soul  acting  in  faith,  rising 
in  desire,  answering  to  the  word  and 
assurance  of  God  in  reference  to  the 
life  to  come. — Alexander  Raleigh,  D.D. 

The  Hope  of  Abraham. — Abraham 
is  spoken  of  as  the  "  Friend  of  God  " 


and  the  "Father  of  the  Faithful." 
Fixing  attention  on  these  two  titles  of 
nobility,  and  measuring  his  rank  by 
these,  note  that — 

I.  Abraham  was  a  wanderer,  a 
homeless  man,  a  sojourner  in  the  land 
of  promise. — And  this  not  on  account 
of  poverty,  nor  because  he  had  no  real 
estate.  (The  land  of  Canaan  was  in  a 
sense  his  own.)  Possibly  the  homeless- 
ness  of  Abraham  may  be  explained  by 
the  fact  that  the  Canaanite  was  then 
in  the  land,  and  would  not  let  him 
settle.  It  may  be  thought  that  his 
keeping  to  a  wandering  life  shows  him 
to  have  been  a  mere  barbarian.  Or 
perhaps  he  regarded  it  as  a  wrong 
thing  to  lead  a  settled  Hfe  in  towns 
and  cities.  Or  perhaps  the  nature  of 
his  property,  flocks  and  herds,  neces- 
sitated this  constant  migration  for 
food.  None  of  these  suggestions  are 
satisfactory.  He  "  looked  for,"  ex- 
pected, a  city.  Abraham  was  not 
wandering  in  search  of  a  city  upon 
earth ;  he  lived  in  quiet  expectation  of 
a  city.  It  was  the  ''  patience  of  hope  " 
that  rendered  Abraham  indifferent  to 
the  walled  cities  of  the  Canaanites 
around  him,  whose  antiquity  was  of 
ancient  days,  and  whose  defence  was 
the  munitions  of  rocks.  Nothing  so 
effectively  breeds  indifference  to  present 
objects  as  the  hope  of  better  things 
to  come.  But  what  soit  of  a  city  did 
he  look  for,  in  contempt  of  those 
around  him  ?  It  had  foundations, 
permanent  ones.  Its  builder  and 
maker  was  God.  The  foundations  of 
His  structures  are  laid  deep  in  His 
decrees,  and  the  cement  has  been 
growing  hard  from  all  eternity.  We 
call  the  city  "  heaven." 

II.  See  the  marked  resemblance 
between  Abraham's  case  and  our  own. 
— We  know  that  our  abode  on  earth 
is  only  for  a  time  ;  it  is  not  the  place 
of  our  rest.  And  of  this  we  are 
receiving  constant  admonitions.  The 
feeling  of  uneasiness,  the  sense  of 
homelessness,  is  incompatible  with 
happiness.  In  order  to  be  happy,  you 
must  have  a  home,  either  present  or  in 
prospect.     Earthly  homes,  in  reference 

379 


CHAP.  XI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS. 


to  eternity,  are  nothing  worth.  Then 
the  more  unsatisfactory  you  find  this 
world,  look  the  more  eagerly  and 
steadfastly  on  that  which  is  to  come. 
Do  not,  however,  imagine  that  mere 
expectation  is  alone  required.  There 
is  but  one  path  to  the  city,  and  that 
is  a  narrow  one.  It  is  the  path  of 
humble,  childlike  faith.  We  know 
from  the  life  of  Christ  Himself  that 
Abraham  desired  to  see  His  day,  and 
saw  it,  and  was  glad.  It  was  faith 
in  God's  mercy,  and  that  was  counted 
to  hik3i  for  righteousness.  It  was  a 
firm  belief  that  God  would  set  forth 
a  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  men,  and 
a  hearty  acceptance  of  the  pardon 
thus  provided  for  himself.  These  are 
the  footsteps  of  the  Father  of  the 
Faithful.  If,  then,  you  are  merely 
looking  forward  to  the  happiness  of 
heaven,  without  knowing  or  caring 
how  it  is  to  be  obtained,  learn  from 
the  example  of  Abraham  that  you 
must  renounce  all  sin  and  self-reliance, 
and  believe  in  Jesus  Christ  for  the 
salvation  of  your  souls,  if  you  would 
look,  with  any  well-grounded  hope, 
for  a  city  which  hath  foundations, 
whose  builder  and  maker  is  God. — 
J.  A.  Alexander^  D.D. 

Vers.  9,  10.  The  Practical  Faith  of 
Abraham. — The  record  of  Abraham's 
life  sets  before  us  a  series  of  incidents, 
but  each  is  intended  to  convince  us 
how  truly  "faith  in  God"  was  the 
mainspring  and  moving  principle  of 
his  whole  life.  The  more  prominent  of 
these  instances  are  :  (1)  his  leaving  his 
native  home  to  go  forth  as  a  wanderer 
into  a  strange  land  ;  (2)  his  sojourning 
in  that  land  hopefully,  though  he 
might  purchase  and  possess  in  it  only 
a  grave  ;  (3)  his  patience  under  the 
promise  of  an  heir  which  the  lapse  of 
long  years  found  unfulfilled  ;  (4)  his 
acceptance  of  the  Divine  will  that  the 
son  should  be  born  in  his  old  age ;  and 
(5)  his  simple  obedience  in  going  forth 
to  offer  his  son  on  Mount  Moriah. 
And  such  faith  is  the  only  basis  on 
which  a  true  religion  can  be  built ; 
it  is  the  only  centre  round  which   a 

380 


religious  creed  or  system  or  life  can 
gather.  No  religion  can  rest  securely 
upon  knowledge;  for  knowledge  can 
never  be  sure  or  perfect ;  it  can  never 
reach  beyond  the  probable.  To  pass 
out  of  the  sphere  of  faith  is  to  pass 
out  of  the  sphere  of  the  creature,  and 
make  our  claim  to  the  independent 
rights  of  the  Creator;  and  so  it  is  to 
change  the  very  conditions  of  our  being. 

Sarah  the  Princess. — Sarah  is  the 
first  woman  who  is  fully  introduced 
to  us  in  Holy  Scripture.  Eve  is  a 
kind  of  ideal  of  womanhood.  Sarah  is 
the  first  fellow-woman  who  evidently 
passed  through  the  common  human 
experiences.  The  narrative  that  deals 
with  her  is  blended  with  that  of  her 
husband.  She  was  the  companion  of 
his  life-wanderings  for  probably  a 
hundred  years.  Only  on  very  few 
occasions  do  we  find  her  acting  inde- 
pendently. But  these  cases  should  be 
carefully  noticed.  She  is  introduced 
as  a  wife.  She  stood  in  close  family 
relations  to  Abraham.  Her  name  was 
changed  from  Sarai  to  Sarah.  She 
went  with  Abraham  to  Egypt.  Ex- 
plain her  deception  to  save  her  husband. 
Eastern  kings  claimed  the  right  to 
seize  any  woman  for  their  harems. 
Then  came  the  promise  of  seed  in  her 
old  age.  Sarah  wondered  how  it  could 
be  fulfilled,  and  thought  she  must  aid 
the  fulfilment,  so  she  gave  her  maid 
to  Abraham  as  a  wife.  Tell  the  story 
of  Hagar  and  Ishmael.  The  promise 
was  renewed  to  Abraham  in  such  a 
way  that  Sarah  could  hear  it.  Notice 
Sarah's  domestic  virtues.  Estimate 
her  laugh.  Not  wholly  the  laugh  of 
incredulity.  Then  comes  the  visit  to 
Gerar,  and  a  repetition  of  the  deception 
to  save  Abraham.  This  time  Sarah 
suffered  a  severe  rebuke.  Buy  a  veil, 
and  adopt  civilised  customs.  No  longer 
expose  your  wife  thus  to  rude  gaze. 
Then  Isaac  was  born ;  and  motherly 
jealousies  awoke,  which  led  Sarah  to 
act  cruelly.  Ishmael  was  then  a  youth 
of  twelve.  His  mocking.  Sarah 
schemed  to  get  authority  over  Hagar, 
who  had  secured  wifely  rights  by  giving 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS, 


OHAP.   XI. 


birth  to  Ishmael.  Isaac's  safety  was 
ensured.  There  is  a  tradition  that 
Sarah's  death  really  came  about 
through  hearing  that  Isaac  had  been 
taken  off  to  be  sacrificed.  Her  husband 
showed  profound  grief  at  her  death, 
which  took  place  when  she  was  one 
hundred  and  twenty-seven  years  old. 

I.  Sarah's  natural  disposition. — 
We  require  to  know  this  if  we  would 
estimate  her  properly.  What  we  are 
as  Christians  very  much  depends  on 
what  we  are  as  men.  Sarah  was 
affectionate,  but  impulsive,  jealous,  and 
imperious.  In  view  of  our  natural 
dispositions,  some  of  us  must  be  thought 
of  as  remarkable  triumphs  of  grace. 

II.  Sarah's  wifeliness. — This  is  one 
of  the  New  Testament  points  in  its 
mention  of  her.  Sharing  cheerfully 
her  husband's  lot ;  accepting  and 
keeping  to  her  department ;  showing 
wifely  obedience  and  deference.  A 
good  wife  is  from  the  Lord.  The 
wifely  mission  is  a  most  noble  one. 
The  true  wife  is  Sarah's  daughter. 

III.  Sarah's  motherliness.  —  A 
mother's  joy ;  a  mother's  care  ;  a 
mother's  jealousy.  True  love  is  near 
akin  to  jealousy,  but  it  must  not  run 
into  it. 

IV.  Sarah's  godliness. — The  text 
infers  piety.  She  shared  her  husband's 
religion.  She  had  a  religion  of  her 
own.  Its  essence  was  faith.  Not  just 
faith  in  a  promise  made  to  her  ;  but 
that  nobler  thing,  faith  in  IHtyi  who 
made  her  the  promise.  This  is  the 
true  and  saving  faith — faith  in  God. 
Her  faith  was  subjected  to  severe  tests. 
Untested  faith  is  worth  but  little. 
Faith  won  out  of  conflict  and  doubt 
alone  is  worthy.  The  very  essence  of 
godliness  is  in  this  text.     What  Sarah 


was  in  Abraham's  estimation  is  shown 
in  the  pathetic  statement  concerning 
her,  "  Abraham  rose  up  from  before 
his  dead."  We  can  imagine  what  ho 
had  been  doing. 

So  in  Sarah  there  is  much  to  com- 
mend. Notice  in  conclusion  :  1 .  Her 
God— the  "faithful  Promisor."  2.  Hei^ 
faith.  "Nothing  too  hard  for  the 
*  faithful  Promisor.'  " 

Sarah. — What  is  so  often  said  of 
men  may  be  said  also  of  women  ;  they 
must  be  judged  in  the  setting  of  their 
age.  Early  Bible  women  could  not 
have  the  trained  and  restrained  char- 
acters we  expect  to  find  in  these  days. 
Sarah  the  wife  of  an  Arab  sheikh. 
Died  aged  one  hundred  and  twenty- 
seven.  Her  story  is  subordinate  to 
Abraham's.  She  only  appears  occa- 
sionally in  the  record.  Her  family 
relationship  to  Abraham,  other  than 
that  of  wife,  is  somewhat  uncertain. 

I.  See  the  good  in  Sarah. — 1.  Loving 
companionship.  Proved  by  her  hus- 
band's sorrow  at  the  time  of  her  death. 

2.  Trustful  obedience.  Seen  in  the 
times  of  perplexity  in  Egypt  and  in 
Gerar.  3.  Motherly  affection,  which 
easily  ran  into  jealousy. 

II.  See  the  frailties  in  Sarah. — 
1.  Womanly  impatience.  She  tried 
to  make  a  fulfilment  of  God's  promise 
of  a  son  somehow.  She  could  not  wait 
for  God's  time  and  way.  2.  Jealousy. 
Seen  when  Hagar  had  a  son,  and 
again   when   she   herself    had   a   son. 

3.  Incredulity.  Laughing  at  the 
Divine  assurance.  All  her  weaknesses 
belonged  to  her  womanhood.  Judged 
simply  as  a  character,  Sarah  may 
possibly  be  found  in  every  way 
estimable. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13—16. 

Living  and  Dying  in  Faith. — This  rhetorical  chapter,  reviewing  rapidly  the 
stories  of  the  other  saints,  could  not  fail  to  interest  the  Jewish  Christian  readers 
to  whom  the  epistle  was  addressed.  It  illustrates  the  fact,  that  the  great 
secret  of  the  mastery  of  life  is  faith — trust ;  and  God  is  ever  working  to  make 
that  trust  a  really  sanctifying  power.  That  indeed  is  the  key  to  all  His  dealings 
with  us.     Just  this  is  shown  in  the  example  of  the  patriarchs.     Special  atten- 

381 


CHAP.  XI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


tion  is  directed  to  Abraham.  He  started  life  under  a  promise.  But  the 
promise  was  never  fulfilled  to  Abraham  in  the  letter.  He  died  possessor  of 
only  a  grave  in  a  promised  land.  So  he  was  led  to  trust  for  the  fulfilment 
by-and-by,  and  even  to  reach  forth  to  its  fulfilment  in  spiritual  ways.  Faith 
toned  the  patriarch's  mind,  and  made  him  feel  like  a  stranger.  It  filled  him 
with  longings  for,  and  onlookings  towards,  and  even  preparations  for,  "  the 
city  which  had  foundations,  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God."  He  died,  not 
in  possession,  but  "in  faith." 

I.  God's  promises  seem,  at  first,  to  assure  earthly  good. — The  promise  made 
to  Abraham  seems  to  mean  an  actual  earth -territory,  a  national  inheritance, 
and  our  promises  have  a  very  earthly  look.  We  are  assured  that  we  shall 
"inherit  the  earth."  Treating  us  very  much  as  we  treat  our  children,  God 
gives  assurances  and  promises  which  take  shape  for  us  as  material  and  temporal 
good.  And  with  our  life  all  before  us,  that  is  what  we  seem  chiefly  to  need  and 
to  desire.  God's  Canaan  for  us  always  seems,  at  first,  to  be  some  earthly 
prosperity  and  blessing.  And  this  is  more  evidently  the  case  when  we  have 
some  definite  purpose  in  life,  some  country  that  we  mean  to  win. 

II.  Life  but  seldom  fulfils  the  promises  just  as  we  understand  them. — It 
might  be  said  that  it  never  fulfils.  The  writer  addresses  Christian  Jews,  who 
were  oppressively  feeling  how  different  Christian  life  was  proving  to  be  to  the 
picture  of  their  early  hopefulness.  Then  it  looked  so  fair,  so  bright.  It  proved 
to  be  a  scene  of  care,  and  struggle,  and  persecution,  and  peril.  And  it  is  much 
the  same  with  us.  1.  Life  seldom  is,  even  in  its  outward  circumstances,  what 
we  picture  to  ourselves  that  it  will  be.  Could  Jacob's  story  or  St.  Paul's  story 
have  been  imagined  beforehand  ?  The  fact  is,  that  God's  promises  are  general, 
and  God's  providences  work  out  the  precise  fulfilments  of  them.  God  orders  our 
place  and  our  work  very  strangely.  As  life  passes  on  we  are  even  led  to  do 
exactly  what  we  most  shrink  from  doing,  and  what  we  even  think  ourselves 
altogether  unfitted  for  doing.  We  are  brought  through  scenes  and  experiences 
which  would  have  seemed  to  us  hopelessly  overwhelming,  if  we  had  thought  of 
them  in  the  outset  of  life.  2.  Life  seldom  permits  any  great  work  to  be  accom- 
plished right  through  by  the  man  who  begins  it.  Moses  must  climb  Nebo  to 
die  before  his  life-work  was  completed  in  the  possession  of  Canaan.  Joshua  died 
before  the  whole  country  was  cleared  of  the  idolatrous  inhabitants.  David  died 
before  the  Temple  could  be  built.  There  is  even  a  sense  in  which  our  Lord's 
life  was  "cut  off,"  and  He  left  an  unfinished  work  to  be  carried  on  by  His 
apostles.  To  do  any  entire  work,  from  beginning  to  end,  seems  to  be  too  great 
an  honour  for  any  man.  Some  sow,  others  weed,  and  others  reap.  Some  die 
ere  life  is  started ;  some  live  on  long  enough  to  see  others  put  the  topstones  on 
their  work.  And  thus  the  solemn  lesson  is  taught  us,  that  God  absolutely 
needs  no  one  of  us. 

III.  By  the  seeming  failure  God  graciously  lifts  us  up  to  take  the  higher 
view  of  His  promises. — How  failure  can  open  men's  eyes  !  How  disappointment 
here,  dissatisfaction  with  life  as  we  find  it,  tends  to  lift  our  eyes  away  from 
earth,  and  makes  us  feel  that  this  is  not  our  rest !  As  one  thing  after  another 
disappoints,  we  begin  to  see  that  the  time  and  place  for  God's  fulfilment  of  His 
promises  is — yonder  and  there ;  not  here  and  now.  We  begin  to  find  out  that 
the  seemingly  earthly  look  of  the  promises  in  reahty  only  veiled  the  heavenly 
meaning  for  us — veiled  it  for  a  while,  until  we  have  grown  strong  enough  to  bear 
the  full  and  spiritual  truth  of  them.  Is  not  this  just  the  sanctifying  work  that 
advancing  life  does  for  us  all  under  God  ?  Still  we  believe — as  Abraham  did, 
right  to  the  end — these  earthly  promises  of  Canaan ;  but  we  grow  to  be  quite 
willing  that  they  should  be  fulfilled  for  others — for  our  sons  and  daughters. 
For  ourselves,  every  year  makes  us  look  away,  more  and  more,  to  the  heavenly 

382 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   XI. 


city.      It   is  quite  plain  that  the  earthly  Canaan,  of  which  we  had  dreamed 
never  will  be  ours.     We  seek  a  country. 

Conclusion. — This  is  God's  gracious  way  of  sanctifying  us  through  the  actual 
experiences  of  our  life.  lie  makes  us  feel  here  on  earth  like  strangers.  He 
enables  us  to  give  the  witness  of  strangers,  and  show  ourselves  to  be  heavenly 
citizens,  who  are  only  "  passing  through."  He  thus  helps  us  to  live  in  trust, 
and  to  die  in  trust,  and  to  find  and  feel  the  present  peace  and  power  of  a  life 
that  is  a  "  life  of  faith  on  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved  us,  and  gave  Himself  for  us. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Yer.  13.  Faith  a  Persuasion  and  a 
Power. — Faith  was  an  actual  present 
blessing  to  the  men  of  old,  though 
what  faith  led  them  to  anticipate  never 
came  to  them.  They  died  with  the 
faith,  not  with  the  possession.  And 
yet  they  really  had  held  the  possession 
all  through  their  waiting-time ;  for  it 
had  been  to  them,  and  it  had  done 
for  them,  everything  that  the  actual 
possession  could  have  done.  It  had 
comforted  them,  satisfied  them,  inspired 
them.  The  two  terms  "  persuasion  " 
and  "power"  suggest  that  our  faith 
has  a  most  gracious  influence  on  our 
mind  and  heart,  as  well  as  a  most 
powerful  influence  in  ordering  our  con- 
duct. Faith  puts  the  heart  right ;  faith 
puts  the  Hfe  right.  Faith  keeps  for  us 
the  proper  relativity  of  this  life  to  the 
life  to  come. 

Vers.  13,  14.  The  Christian  Pilgrim. 
— The  apostle  is  here  setting  forth  the 
excellencies  of  the  grace  of  faith,  by 
the  glorious  effects  and  happy  issue  of 
it  in  the  saints  of  the  Old  Testament. 
1.  What  these  saints  confessed  of  them- 
selves— that  they  were  strangers  and 
pilgrims.  2.  The  inference  drawn  hy 
the  apostle — they  sought  another  coun- 
try as  their  home. 

I.  This  life  ought  to  be  so  spent  by  us 
as  to  be  only  a  journey  or  pilgrimage 
towards  heaven. — 1.  We  ought  not  to 
rest  in  the  world  or  in  its  enjoyments,  hut 
should  desire  heaven. — A  traveller  pass- 
ing through  pleasant  places,  flowery 
meadows,  shady  groves,  only  takes  a 
transient  view  of  them  as  he  goes  along. 
His  journey's  end  is  in  his  mind.  2.  We 
ought  to  seek  heaven  hy  travelling  in  the 


way  that  leads  thither.  This  is  a  way 
of  holiness,  the  way  of  obedience  to 
God's  commands,  an  ascending  way, 
a  Christ-like  way.  3.  We  should  travel 
on  in  this  way  in  a  lahoi^ious  mamner. 
Many  mountains,  rocks,  and  rough 
plains  demand  our  strength.  4.  Our 
whole  lives  ought  to  he  spent  in  travelling 
this  road.  We  ought  to  begin  early ; 
we  ought  to  travel  with  assiduity ; 
we  ought  to  persevere.  5.  We  ought 
to  he  continually  growing  in  holiness. 
Thus  we  come  nearer  and  nearer  to 
heaven.  "  As  new-born  babes,  desire  the 
sincere  milk  of  the  word," etc.  "This 
one  thing  I  do,"  etc.  6.  All  other  con- 
cerns of  life  ought  to  he  subordinate  to 
this.  Business,  money,  temporal  enjoy- 
ments, quit  if  they  prove  a  hindrance. 

II.  Why  the  Christian's  life  is  a 
journey  or  pilgrimage.— 1.  This  world 
is  not  our  ahiding-place.  Continuance 
here  is  short.  God  never  designed  that 
this  world  should  be  our  home.  2.  The 
future  world  was  designed  to  he  our 
settled  and  everlasting  ahode.  The 
present  state  is  short  and  transitory, 
but  our  state  in  the  other  world  is 
everlasting.  2.  Heaven  is  that  place 
alone  where  our  highest  end  and  highest 
good  is  to  he  ohtained.  God  hath  made 
us  for  Himself.  God  is  the  highest  good 
of  the  reasonable  creature.  Here  we 
get  but  scattered  beams — God  is  the 
sun  ;  but  streams — God  is  the  fountain  ; 
but  drops — God  is  the  ocean. 

III.  Instruction  afforded  by  this 
consideration. — 1,  Moderation  in  our 
grief  for  the  loss  of  friends  who  have 
died  in  Christ.  Death  is  to  them  a 
great  blessing  ;  gone  to  Father's  house. 
"  I  heard  a  voice  from   heaven,"  etc. 

383 


CHAP.   XI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


(Rev.  xiv.  13).  2.  How  ill  do  they 
imp)'ove  their  lives  that  spend  them  in 
travelling  towa7'ds  hell  I  Thus  do  back- 
biters, covetous,  drunkards.  3.  Co7i- 
verted  persons  do  hut  begin  their 
worky  and  set  out  in  the  way  they  have 
to  go.  They  should  be  earnest  and 
laborious,  and  should  strive  for  grace. 

lY.  Exhortations. — 1.  How  wcyrthy 
is  heaveyi  that  your  life  should  he  loholly 
spent  as  a  journey  towards  it  I  Where 
can  you  choose  your  home  better  than 
in  heaven  ?  2.  This  is  the  way  to  have 
death  comfortable  to  us.  3.  It  will  make 
retrospect  pleasant.  4.  In  journeying 
to  heaven  we  may  have  heaven.  5.  If 
our  lives  be  not  a  journey  toioards  heaven^ 
they  will  be  a  journey  to  hell. 

Conclusion.— A  few  directions.  1. 
Labour  to  get  a  sense  of  the  vanity 
of  this  wo7'ld.  2.  Labour  to  be  much 
acquainted  with  heaven.  3.  Seek  heaven 
only  by  Jesus  Christ.  ''  I  am  the  Way, 
the  Truth,  and  the  Life."  4.  Let 
Christians  help  one  another  in  going 
this  journey.  Go  in  company,  convers- 
ing together,  assisting  one  another. 
Go  united.  This  will  ensure  a  more 
successful  travelling,  and  a  more  joyful 
meeting  at  the  Father's  house  in  glory. 
— Jonathan  Edwai^ds,  M.A. 

Vers.  13-16.  General  Lesson  of  the 
Patriarchal  Times. — The  reference  of 
these  verses  is  strictly  to  Abraham, 
Isaac,  Jacob,  and  Sarah.  In  a  sense 
the  older  men,  from  Adam,  may  be 
called  patriarchs ;  but  the  point  of 
reference  here  is  to  those  patriarchs 
who  had  a  temporary  home  in  Canaan, 
and  held  it  together  with  the  promise 
that  it  should  be  made  a  permanent 
home  for  them.  They  never  actually 
had  it  as  such  a  settled,  permanent 
home ;  but  their  faith  that  God's  word 
would  stand,  and  that  their  descend- 
ants would  have  Canaan  for  a  posses- 
sion, gave  a  practical  power  to  the 
promises,  and  enabled  them  to  bear, 
and  suffer  and  enjoy,  while  they  had 
but  the  temporary  holding. 

I.  Their  faith  brought  discontent 
with  this  life.  —The  peculiarity  of  the 
Abrahamic  race,  in  this  practical  power 

384 


of  their  faith  in  God's  word,  may  be 
shown  by  contrasting  the  Abrahamic 
as  an  Arab  tribe,  with  the  other  Arab 
tribes  around.  Usually  Arab  tribes 
have  no  ambition  to  become  settled 
nations.  And  even  if  we  recognise 
that  in  Abraham's  time  there  was 
a  general  and  Avidespread  migratory 
restlessness  among  the  Eastern  peoples, 
still  there  were  marked  differences 
between  the  instinctive  restlessness  that 
was  common,  and  the  intelligent  dis- 
content that  was  peculiar  to  the 
Abrahamic  race.  (1)  This  faith  em- 
braced the  truth  of  the  unity  of  God ; 
(2)  conceived  of  the  possibility  of  per- 
sonal relations  with  Him  ;  (3)  appre- 
hended life  as  in  the  direct  Divine  lead  ; 
(4)  and  saw  duty  as  implicit  and  unques- 
tioning obedience  of  the  Divine  will. 
Such  faith  made  satisfaction  with 
material  conditions  and  worldly  suc- 
cesses— the  things  which  met  all  the 
needs  of  the  tribes  around — impossible 
to  this  tribe.  Lift  a  man  up  to  high 
things,  and  he  must  ever  after  fail  to  be 
content  with  the  low,  as  those  who  can 
appreciate  the  art  creations  of  this 
century  are  discontented  with  the  pic- 
tures and  figures  of  the  fathers'  time. 
Touch  a  soul  with  the  true  and  worthy 
thought  of  God,  and  the  world  can  no 
longer  be  its  rest. 

II.  Their  faith  brought  content 
with  the  life  to  come. — A  man  can  be 
in  the  present,  and  yet  be  really  living 
in  the  future.  That  is  the  Christian 
state.  To  these  patriarchs  Canaan, 
which  they  knew  not,  was  better  than 
Chaldea,  which  they  knew.  To  us 
heaven  promised  is  better  than  any 
Canaan  possessed. 

Vers.  14-16.  Human  Restlessness. — 
Faith  does  not  crush  down  human 
aspirations.  It  guides  them  and  tones 
them  aright.  The  models  of  faith  are 
stated  to  have  been  restlessly  seeking 
something  that  they  had  not.  Rest- 
lessness for  humanity  is  a  Divinely 
implanted  condition ;  upon  it  depends 
the  peopUng  and  subduing  of  the  whole 
earth.  Human  restlessness  is  so  per- 
sistent that  it  cannot  be  satisfied  with 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  XL 


any  earthly  attainment.     It   may   be  remain,  whatever  may  be  the  measure 

considered:     (1)   what   various   forms  of  attainment  in  any  direction.     Man's 

human    restlessness    may    take  ;    and  good  time  is  always  coming, 
(2)    how    certainly    the    unrest     will 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  17—20. 

Faith  U7ider  Divine  Discipline. — A  special  reference  is  made  to  Abraham, 
because  in  his  case  Divine  discipline  took  an  unusual  and  extraordinary  form. 
Reference  has  already  been  made  to  the  general  features  of  his  life,  as  a 
sojourner  in  a  strange  land,  which  was  indeed  the  land  of  promise,  though  of 
it  he  only  had  a  present  possession  by  faith.  It  was  his,  because  he  was  quite 
sure  that  it  would  be  his.  He  had  the  "  substance "  of  what  he  "  hoped  for." 
But  there  was  one  most  singular  and  striking  incident  in  Abraham's  later  life, 
which  provided  too  important  an  illustration  of  one  sphere  of  faith  for  it  to  be 
passed  over.  He  who  had  been  called  to  forsake  his  early  home,  and  go  forth, 
responsive  to  Divine  leadings,  not  knowing  whither  he  went,  was  now  called 
to  give  up,  and  even  himself  to  sacrifice,  that  very  child  in  whom  all  the 
promises  of  God  and  all  the  hopes  of  Abraham  seemed  to  centre.  He  gave  up 
his  father's  home  in  faith.  Could  he  break  up  his  own  home  in  faith,  and  with 
his  own  hand  destroy  all  hope  of  a  race  in  whose  history  God's  promises  could 
be  fulfilled  ?  Perhaps  a  man's  faith  has  never  been  put  to  a  severer  test  than 
was  Abraham's  in  that  hour  of  strain.  No  wonder  that  early  legends  represent 
Sarah  as  never  recovering  from  the  shock  of  Isaac's  being  taken  away  to  be 
sacrificed,  and  from  that  time  pining  away  to  her  death.  Two  forms  of  Divine 
discipline  are  indicated  in  this  paragraph. 

I.  The  relation  of  faith — which  makes  real  the  spiritual — to  times  of 
trial.— Trials  come  into  every  man's  life  ;  but  we  have  to  consider  the  trials 
which  come  into  the  good  man's  life — the  renewed,  spiritual  man's  life.  And 
they  cannot  be  explained  in  any  ready,  offhand  way.  Two  cases — three, 
if  we  class  our  Lord  with  men — are  given  in  Holy  Scripture,  in  order  to  check 
our  satisfaction  in  general,  and  hastily  made,  and  surface  explanations.  We 
mvist  think  about  this  strange  trial  of  Abraham.  We  must  wonder  why  Job, 
"  the  perfect  man  and  upright,"  was  so  severely  afflicted.  We  stand  in  awe 
before  the  mystery  of  the  agony  of  the  cross,  and  say,  "  Why  did  the  innocent 
One  suffer  ?  "  1 .  This  is  clear — the  punishment  of  transgressions  will  not 
explain  all  the  trials  through  which  good  men  are  called  to  pass.  Job's  friends 
may  persist  in  it  that  suffering  is  always  penalty.  It  is  not.  The  trial  to 
which  Abraham  was  now  subjected  was  not  penalty  or  punishment  in  any  sense 
whatever.  No  hint  is  given  of  any  moral  or  spiritual  failure  on  the  part  of 
Abraham  which  Divine  justice  was  bound  to  recognise.  The  sufferuigs  which 
came  to  Job  were  not  penalty  or  punishment  in  any  sense  whatever.  When 
they  came  upon  Job,  he  was  a  man  standing  fully  in  the  Divine  acceptance. 
It  is  a  small,  poor,  and  vmworthy  view  that  persists  in  seeing  penalty  every- 
where. God  reproves,  in  every  age,  the  Job -friends  who  do  that  sort  of  thing. 
2.  The  idea  of  Divine  discipline  will  not  sufficiently  explain  all  the  cases  of 
trial  which  come  before  us.  We  may  take  a  comprehensive  view  of  Divine 
discipline,  and  say  that  it  includes :  ( 1 )  the  correction  of  evils  which  are  ever 
ready  to  develop  into  sin ;  and  also  (2)  the  culture  of  moral  virtues  and  graces 
into  strength  and  completeness ;  and  also  (3)  the  mastery  of  life- conditions  and 
relations  in  the  power  of  moral  principle;  but  we  have  only  got  a  little  way 
then  toward  the  understanding  of  Abraham's  trial.  On  the  face  of  the 
narrative  there  is  no  special  call  for  a  discipline  of  correction  or  of  culture. 

cc  385 


CHAP.  XL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


In  the  case  of  Job  it  is  not  God  who  finds  it  necessary  to  discipHne  Job.     It 
is  God  permitting  Job  to  be  tempted  and  tried,  when  He  knows  that  he  does  not 
need   it.     Exactly    this   brings  in  the   perplexity   and  difficulty  of  the  poem. 
There  was  no  need  for  subjecting  the  ever- acceptable  Son  to  the  discipline  of 
the  cross.     That  must  be  explained  from  some  other  point  of  view.     Christian 
men   and   women,    in    their   times   of  trial,    would   be   greatly  comforted   and 
strengthened,  if  we  would  assure  them  that  trial  need  not  be  punishment,  and 
it  need  not  be  discipline.     Faith  in  God,  in  the  unseen,  in  the  spiritual,  brings 
round  to  us  another  and  a  better  explanation.    3.  Much  of  the  trial  that  comes  to 
good  men  is  vicarious.     It  does  not  strictly  belong  to  them  ;  it  belongs  to  others. 
It  has  no  more  necessity  than  the  necessity  which  God  finds  for  witnessing  to 
some  truth,  and  using  them  as  witnesses.     The  trial  may  simply  be  the  sei'vice 
which  God  asks  us  to  render  to  our  sphere,  our  age,  or  the  world.     This  comes 
out  clearly  enough  in  the  three   cases  already  called  to  mind.     The  trial  of 
Abraham  has  taught  the  generations.     "  Ye  have  heard  of   the    patience   of 
Job."     Christ,  "  lifted'up,  draws  all  men  unto  Him."     But  what  a  faith  of  unseen 
and  eternal  things  is  involved  in  an  obedience  like  Abraham's,  unquestioning, 
prompt,  entire,  almost  cheerful — an  obedience  which  involved  so  severe  a  trial 
and   loss  !     It  was  a  triumph   indeed  of   faith  that    Abraham  could  see  God 
wanting  a  witness,  and  not  therefore  finally  intending  to  take  away   his  son. 
Faith  in  man — the  obedience  of   faith — has  never  surpassed  this :  "  Account- 
ing that  God  is  able  to  raise  up,  .even  from  the  dead  ;  from  whence  he  did  also 
in  a  parable  receive  him  back."     We  shall  never  explain  all  the  cases  of  trial 
to  which  spiritual  men  are  subjected,  nor   understand  the  sublime  heights  to 
which  the  faith  of  spiritual  men  may  reach,  until  we  fully  recognise  that  much 
of  human  suffering  is  vicarious^  as  was  that  of  our  Divine  Lord. 

II.  The  relation  of  faith  to  the  hope  of  the  future. — It  is  stranger  than 
it  seems,  that  God  should  have  ever  held  out  a  prospect  before  men  and 
generations,  and  fulfilled  His  promise,  but  seldom,  if  ever,  to  the  man  or  to  the 
generation.  Spiritual  men  live  by  faith.  Their  future  is  always  the  "  good 
time  coming."  Even  to-day  men's  faith  is  exercised  concerning  the  coming  of 
the  Son  of  man,  which  is  hardly  yet  on  the  eastern  horizon -line.  How  faith 
can  stand  related  to  the  hope  and  promise  of  the  future  is  seen  in  Isaac, 
who  "  blessed  Jacob  and  Esau  even  concerning  things  to  come."  He  lived 
under  promise  of  the  possession  of  Canaan.  He  died  almost  as  much  a  stranger 
as  his  father  had  been.  He  never  had  the  promise  fulfilled.  But  faith  held  it 
firm,  and  made  it  real.  He  confidently  passed  the  promise  on  to  his  sons. 
He  blessed  them  in  assuring  them  of  God's  blessing.  And  so  still  we  sing 
concerning  our  "  good  time  coming." 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.    17.    The    Offering   of  Isaac. —  ages  of  the  world,  when  men,  being  in 

Abraham's  offering  of  his  son  is  one  the  child-stages,  had  to  be  taught  by 

of    the    perplexing    things    of     God's  action    and    ceremonial    and    symbol, 

word,    because   it    seems  to   commend  rather     than     by     words.      Ancient 

the   immoral   thing,    murder,   in   con-  Easterns   had    thoughts   about    God's 

nection  with  God's  worship.     But  we  absolute    proprietary   rights    in    man 

too  readily  judge  the  Divine  require-  which  we  seem  to  have  lost ;  and  we 

ments    in    patriarchal    days    by    our  now  know  that  the  Accadians,  or  early 

modern  sentiments  concerning  human  inhabitants  of  Chaldea,  sacrificed  their 

sacrifice,  forgetting  that  these  should  firstborn    sons    in    times    of     special 

not  be  projected  back  into  the  earlier  trouble,  and  their  practice  the  Semitic 

386 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   XI. 


race    had,    to    some   extent    at    least, 
copied. 

I.  Abraham's  sacrifice  was  a  burnt- 
oifering. — This  kind  of  offering  was 
the  foundation  of  the  sacrificial  syytem. 
All  the  other  offerings — peace-oft'erings, 
meat-offerings,  trespass -offerings,  sin- 
offerings,  thank-offerings — were  but 
the  detailed  adaptation  of  the  burnt- 
offering  to  the  varieties  of  human  con- 
ditions and  experiences.  The  burnt- 
offering  was  presented  ages  before  the 
Mosaic  system  was  established.  Can 
we  get  to  understand  this  original, 
simplest,  and  yet  most  significant  and 
spiritually  suggestive  form  of  sacrifice? 
It  was  called  a  "  burnt-offering  "  be- 
cause the  victim  was  wholly  consumed 
by  fire,  and  so,  as  it  were,  sent  up  to 
God  on  the  wings  of  fire.  .The  victim 
must  be  selected  with  extreme  care. 
It  must  be  pure,  unblemished,  and  as 
nearly  perfect  an  animal  as  possible. 
It  was  regarded  as  a  whole,  an  entire 
and  complete  offering,  only  when  the 
life  of  the  creature  had  been  taken. 
Then,  as  a  complete  body,  and  a  whole, 
completed  life,  it  was  ready  for  offering 
to  God.  Then  it  was  laid  on  the  altar, 
and  entirely  consumed.  What  was 
the  idea  of  such  a  sacrifice,  as  it  came 
to  the  mind  of  a  devout  and  spiritual 
worshipper  ?  Can  we  at  all  enter 
into  the  thought  of  a  serious -minded 
patriarch  or  Jew  ?  It  must  have  been 
this :  he  passed  to  God  an  entire  life, 
a  pure,  clean  beast — gave  it  to  God 
wholly,  body  and  life  ;  and  by  so  doing 
he,  in  a  representative  way,  passed  to 
God  hiinself — himself  wholly,  body,  will, 
life.  He  gave  to  God  a  representative 
of  what  he  himself  wished  to  be,  what 
he  thus  solemnly  pledged  himself  that 
he  would  strive  to  become.  Or,  to  put 
the  same  thing  in  more  formal  language, 
the  burning  of  this  whole  creature 
by  fire  "  marked  it  as  an  expression 
of  perpetual  obligation  to  complete, 
sanctified  self -surrender  to  Jehovah." 
And,  therefore,  in  the  Mosaic  system, 
every  morning  and  evening  a  lamb 
was  sacrificed  as  a  burnt-offering  on 
behalf  of  the  whole  covenant  people ; 
and  the  evening  victim  was  to  be  so 


slowly  consumed  that  it  might  last  till 
the  morning — an  expressive  symbol  of 
that  continual  self-dedication  to  God 
which  is  the  duty  of  man.  In  the 
light  of  this  spiritual  idea  of  a  *'  burnt- 
offering,"  we  can  see  something  of  the 
Divine  purpose  in  this  strange  command 
given  to  Abraham,  that  he  should 
offer  as  a  sacrifice  his  only  and  beloved 
son.  Evidently  God  asked  for  an 
expression,  through  that  singular 
burnt -offering,  of  Abraham's  entire 
devotion  to  Himself.  He  desired  to 
read  the  patriarch's  very  heart  through 
an  act  of  obedience  and  devotion.  He 
purposed  to  show  the  perfect  trust  and 
loyalty  of  His  servant,  to  all  the  ages, 
by  means  of  an  unusual  burnt-offering. 
II.  Abraham's  sacrifice  anticipated 
the  Great  Burnt-ofFering. — It  was  the 
sonship  of  Isaac  made  him  an  acceptable 
offering.  His  submission  and  obedience 
were  so  different  from  the  yielding  of 
a  mere  animal,  because  it  had  a  vnll 
in  it ;  and  so  the  sacrifice  of  Isaac, 
the  son,  alone  fittingly  suggested  the 
obedient  sanctified  will  of  Jesus,  the 
Son  of  God.  "  Every  burnt-offering 
was  a  type  of  the  perfect  offering  made 
by  Christ,  on  behalf  of  the  race  of  man, 
of  His  human  nature  and  will  to  the 
will  of  the  Father."  And  this  burnt- 
offering,  Christ — the  only  begotten 
and  well-beloved  Son — is  our  burnt- 
offering,  yours  and  mine.  We  could 
not  make  Him  ours  if  we  were  not 
sure  that  God  was  well  pleased  with 
Him.  But  God  has  provided  Him  for 
us ;  so  we  stand  beside  the  strange 
Calvary  altar,  shaped  for  human  seeing 
like  a  cross,  and  see  our  sacrifice  go 
up  to  God,  with  the  confidence  that 
God  will  "  smell  a  sweet  savour,"  and 
accept  us  as  we  give  ourselves  to  Him 
in  that  burnt-offering. 

Faith  inspiring  Self-sacrifice.  — 
OlDserve  that  it  was  faith  in  God's 
word,  in  what  Abraham  intelligently 
apprehended  to  be  God's  word  to  him. 
The  demand  it  made  was  a  personal 
one,  the  full  surrender  of  a  personal 
possession.  To  a  father  it  was  the 
supreme,   the   extreme    demand.      To 

387 


CHAP.   XI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


Abraham,  because  of  peculiar  circum- 
stances associated  with  Isaac,  it  was 
truly  a  sublime  demand,  and  response 
to  it  a  model  of  self-sacrifice.  By 
showing  and  illustrating  what  a  height 
of  self-sacrifice  Abraham  reached,  it 
may  be  shown  what  an  inspiring, 
elevating,  ennobling  power  faith  was 
to  him. 

Vers.  17,  18.  The  Strain  that  Feeling 
may  put  on  Faith. — In  the  record  of 
this  incident  given  in  Gen.  xxii.  there 
is  a  very  tender  bit  of  conversation. 
The  aged  patriarch  is  journeying  on  an 
errand  which  he  can  explain  to  nobody, 
and  the  darling  of  his  life  is  the  com- 
panion of  his  journey.  We  know  the 
great  things  that  were  in  his  heart — 
he  was  taking  his  only  son,  the  heir 
of  all  he  had,  the  heir  of  all  he  hoped 
for,  to  his  death  by  his  own  fatherly 
hand.  The  youth  wondered  much  over 
the  object  of  this  sudden  and  mysterious 
journey,  until  at  last  he  could  keep 
back  his  questionings  no  longer.  There 
were  evident  signs  of  his  father's  in- 
tention to  offer  sacrifice;  he  himself 
was   carrying  the  wood  needed  for  a 


fire ;  and  his  father  had  in  his  hands 
the  bowl  with  fire  and  the  sacrificial 
knife.  But  Isaac  knew  well  that  on 
such  occasions  his  father  also  took  the 
necessary  victim  with  him;  but  this 
time  they  had  brought  no  lamb  from 
the  flock.  So  he  said,  "  My  father." 
And  Abraham  said,  "  Here  am  I,  my 
son."  And  Isaac  said,  ''  Behold  the 
fire  and  the  wood ;  but  where  is  the 
lamb  for  a  burnt-offering  ? "  And 
Abraham  said,  "  My  son,  God  will 
provide  Himself  a  lamb  for  a  burnt- 
offering."  Surely  a  wonderful  answer ! 
But  it  must  have  cut  that  father  to 
the  quick  to  speak  those  silencing, 
those  trustful  words.  In  him  faith 
triumphed  over  feeling. 

Ver.  19.  ^  Figurative  ReswTection. 
— "  Whence  he  did  also  in  a  parable 
receive  him  back."  Abraham  received 
Isaac  back,  figuratively,  from  the  dead, 
because  so  far  as  Abraham's  purpose 
and  intention  were  concerned  he  was 
dead^  "  potentially  sacrificed."  In  one 
Jewish  writer  it  is  said  that  Isaac 
was  actually  killed  and  raised  to  life 
again. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  21,  22. 

Faith  in  the  Hour  of  Death. — The  illustrations  of  the  practical  power  of  faith 
would  have  been  manifestly  incomplete  if  no  instances  had  been  given  to  show 
how  it  was  retained,  and  made  to  bring  strength  and  cheer  to  men,  in  the 
closing  and  sternest  experience  of  life.     Two  illustrations  may  suffice. 

I,  faith  for  the  family  maintained  in  the  death-hour. — This  is  illustrated  in 
the  dying  acts  and  words  of  the  patriarch  Jacob.  He  had  held  through  a 
chequered  life  a  firm  faith  in  God's  promise  concerning  his  family.  Could  the 
bodily  weariness  and  weakness  and  pain  of  the  death-time  cloud  that  faith  ? 
Could  the  solemnity  and  mystery  of  the  death- time  overstrain  the  faith  ?  Must 
a  man  lose  that  which  has  brightened  and  ennobled  his  whole  life  when  his  feet 
touch  the  waters  of  the  river  of  death  ?  Will  he  then  despair  concerning  those 
who  are  dear  to  him,  as  if  with  his  going  all  their  hopes  were  going  ?  From 
Jacob's  example  we  learn  that  faith  may  even  grow  brighter  and  stronger  in 
the  hour  and  article  of  death.  1.  Jacob  was  so  positive  about  the  future  of  his 
sons  that  he  could  even  anticipate  their  locations  and  characteristics  and  history, 
when  they  reached  Canaan,  in  his  prophetic  song  concerning  them.  2.  Jacob 
could  even  see  the  future  for  Joseph's  sons  with  such  certainty  that  he  could 
discriminate  between  them,  and  point  out  which  would  prove  the  greater.  That 
grip  of  God  for  him,  and  God  for  his  family,  which  faith  gave  Jacob,  he  held 
fast  right  up  to  and  right  through  his  death-hour.  His  God  was  the  God  of  the 
generations  to  come. 

388 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  CHAP.  XI. 


II.  Faith  for  the  nation  maintained  in  the  death-hour. — This  is  illustrated 
in  Joseph,  who  "  gave  commandment  concerning  his  bones."  The  associations 
of  Jacob's  life  made  him  think  along  family  lines.  The  associations  of  Joseph 
made  him  think  along  national  lines.  The  faith  that  saw  the  people  of  Israel 
a  settled  and  independent  nation  was  an  advanced  faith.  Did  it  stand  the 
strain  of  the  death-hour  ?  Very  possibly  Joseph,  as  a  statesman,  anticipated 
the  troubles  that  were  coming,  but  he  died  in  absolute  assurance  that  God  would 
fulfil  His  word,  make  Israel  a  nation,  and  settle  it  in  Canaan. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.    21.    Reminiscences   of  JacoUs  staff  in  his  hard-working  and  perilous 

Staff. — "  Leaning  upon  the  top  of  his  life   with    Laban.      4.    The   staff   laid 

staff."     It  would  seem  that  one  par-  aside  for  the  great  struggle  at  Peniel. 

ticular   staff   had   been   Jacob's   com-  5.  The  staff  shown  to  the  reconciled 

panion  through  many  years,  possibly  brother.       6.    The   staff    taken   down 

during    his    whole    life    of    manhood,  into   Egypt.      7.  The   staff   steadying 

Indeed,  that  staff  was  as  characteristic  trembling   and  aged  limbs.     (An  ad- 

of  Jacob  as  the  rod  was  of  Moses,  and  dress  to  children  might  be  constructed 

the  mantle  of  Elijah.     It  was  only  an  by  making  the  "  staff  "  tell  the  story 

ordinary  shepherd's  staff.     Sometimes  of  Jacob's  life.) 
such  a  staff  is  bent  into  a  crook,  but 

more  commonly  it  is  a  long,  stout,  Ver.  22.  The  Witness  of  a  Dead 
straight,  oak  stick,  often  cased  at  its  Man!s  Bones. — Joseph's  body  was  em- 
lower  end  in  iron,  to  beat  off  the  thief  balmed.  But  a  good  point  may  be 
or  wild  beast.  This  staff  to  help,  and  made  by  contrasting  the  idea  which 
the  club  to  protect,  are  the  staff  and  an  Egyptian  had  when  he  arranged 
the  rod  with  which  jGrod  comforts  His  that  his  body  should  be  embalmed, 
people  (Ps.  xxiii.  4).  (David,  when  with  the  idea  that  Joseph  had  in 
advancing  towards  Goliath,  carried  arranging  for  the  preservation  of  his 
with  him  his  shepherd's  staff.  Indeed,  bones.  The  Egyptian  tried  to  secure 
the  staff  was  inseparable  from  the  some  sort  of  immortality.  Joseph  had 
shepherd  ;  it  was  with  him  night  and  no  merely  personal  aim.  He  wanted 
day.)  Associate  Jacob's  staff  with  the  the  presence  of  his  mummy  to  be  a 
main  incidents  of  Jacob's  chequered  constant  reminder  of  God's  promises, 
and  changeful  life  :  e.g.  1.  The  staff  a  constant  testimony  to  God's  fai th- 
in the  simple  home-life.  2.  The  staff  fulness,  and  a  constant  inspiration  to 
in   his   eventful   journeying.      3.    The  loyalty  and  trust  and  hope. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  23—29. 

The  Faith  of  Moses. — These  verses  cover  and  include  all  the  references  which 
this  writer  thinks  it  necessary  to  make  to  Moses.  In  comparison  with  the 
notices  of  other  great  men  the  reference  to  Moses  is  long  and  various,  and  this 
would  be  regarded  as  befitting  by  those  who  held  Moses  in  almost  supreme 
honour.  There  are  illustrations  of  the  practical  power  of  faith  in  four  distinct 
sets  of  relations. 

I.  The  faith  that  could  be  disobedient. — Not  to  God,  but  to  man,  in  loyalty 
to  God.  Often  in  life  the  expedient  becomes  a  temptation  to  us.  The  will 
of  those  in  authority  over  us  may  conflict  with  the  will  of  God.  Then  the 
expedient  is  to  keep  straight  with  the  human  authority  and  risk  offending  God. 
In  presence  of  that  conflict  faith  gives  the  man  power   to  disobey  the  local 

389 


CHAP.  XI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS, 


authority  in  order  to  obey  the  supreme  Authority.  This  conflict  appears — 1.  In 
the  case  of  the  parents  of  Moses.  Faith  enabled  them  to  disobey  the  command 
of  the  Pharaoh,  and  scheme  to  secure  the  Hfe  of  their  child.  It  is  plain  that 
there  was  more  than  parental  love  guiding  their  conduct.  There  was  some 
inward  witness,  some  word  of  God  which  they  recognised  as  such,  indicating 
that  the  child  was  sent  for  some  Divine  mission.  Only  motherly  faith  could 
persistently,  and  heedless  of  all  peril,  carry  through  such  a  scheme  of  dis- 
obedience. 2.  In  the  case  of  Moses'  disobedience  to  his  foster-mother.  "  He 
refused  to  be  called  the  son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter."  What  but  faith  in  God's 
mission  for  him  could  have  led  to  such  a  resolve — a  resolve  which,  from  all 
human  points  of  view,  was  utterly  unreasonable !  It  costs  a  man  much  to  break 
away  from  the  destiny  that  is  arranged  for  him  ;  he  never  can  do  it  save  as 
he  believes  in  some  other  destiny  that  God  has  foi*  him.  Why  it  should  be  said 
that  Moses  "  esteemed  the  reproach  of  Christ  "  does  not  readily  appear.  What 
the  writer  had  in  mind  is  difficult  to  trace.  Perhaps  he  meant  "  the  same 
reproach  that  Christ  endured  " — the  reproach  that  comes  when  a  man  persists 
in  doing  the  will  of  God  as  he  knows  it.  That  certainly  was  the  mind  of  Moses 
at  this  time.  He  was  quite  sure  that  it  was  not  the  will  of  God  that  he  should 
become  an  Egyptian  prince,  and  his  faith  enabled  him  to  bear  the  reproach  of 
disobedience.  It  may  be  a  power  to  help  us  in  some  of  the  grave  perplexities 
of  life  to  remember  that  faith  in  God  can  be — it  has  been — an  inspiration  of 
disobedience  to  man.     Illustrate  the  martyrs. 

II.  Faith  that  can  endure. — It  is  hardly  possible  to  conceive  a  more  burdened 
and  anxious  life  than  that  which  Moses  lived.  He  had  times  of  personal  peril, 
but  they  are  of  far  less  importance  than  the  constant  strain  upon  feeling 
involved  in  leading  the  people,  and  mediating  between  them  and  God.  The 
word  "  endure "  is  admirably  chosen.  Faith  enabled  Moses  to  keep  on,  and 
push  through,  and  bear  all — faith  the  inspiration  of  "  patient  continuance  in 
well-doing." 

III.  Faith  that  can  meet  great  occasions. — Life  is  mainly  commonplace  and 
routine ;  but  every  life  has  its  surprises,  and  occasions  when  supreme  demands 
are  made  upon  it.  Such  times  came  to  Moses  at  the  burning  bush,  Mount 
Sinai,  and  when  smiting  the  rock  for  water.  Faith  helped;  lost  faith  meant 
failure.  The  writer  here  mentions  the  climax  of  the  visitation  on  Egypt,  when 
with  the  unquestioning  faith  of  an  immediate  deliverance,  Moses  made  the 
people  *'  keep  the  Passover." 

IV.  Faith  that  can  do  the  seemingly  impossible. — Moses  believed  the  word 
of  God  which  ordered  him  to  turn  out  of  the  route  toward  Canaan,  and  go 
down  by  the  shores  of  the  Ped  Sea.  It  was  a  strange  command,  wholly  beyond 
man's  comprehension.  That  way  they  could  neither  get  to  Canaan,  nor  get  to 
the  desert  of  Sinai.  Every'!,. step  put  a  wider  stretch  of  water  between  them 
and  the  land  where  they  would  be.  Faith  triumphed  unto  obedience,  and  faith 
was  vindicated  by  so  glorious  a  Divine  deliverance  as  stamped  once  and  for 
ever  the  supreme  relations  of  Jehovah  as  God  of  the  people  Israel.  That 
which  is  impossible  with  men  is  possible  with  God ;  and  possible  it  becomes  to 
man  when  he  has  such  faith  in  God  as  Moses  had. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES, 

Ver.  24.  Choice  revealing  Character,  thing  that  (1)  he  estimates  the  serious- 

— There  is  no  better  sign  of  character  ness ;    (2)    that    he    considers    before 

than   the   manner   in    which    a   man  deciding ;    (3)   that  he   is   capable   of 

makes  a  serious  decision.     It  is  some-  judging   the   value   of  considerations ; 

390 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    UEDREWS. 


CHAP.   XL 


(4)  that  he  judges  in  the  light  of  duty 
rather  than  of  pleasure,  and  of  the 
future  rather  than  the  present. 

Vers.  24-26.  The  Choice  of  Moses.— 
It  has  been  said  :  "  Biography  is  a 
feeble  struggle  with  death.  It  is  an 
attempt  to  retain  something  of  the 
man,  his  spirit  and  manner  of  think- 
ing and  feeling,  that  he  being  dead 
may  yet  speak."  In  this  temple  of 
Jewish  worthies,  whose  faith  is  recorded 
for  our  example,  Moses  occupies  a 
conspicuous  niche. 

I.  The  choice  of  Moses. — The  world 
placed  before  him  its  very  best,  and 
religion  placed  before  him  its  very 
worst;  and  between  the  best  of  the 
world  and  the  worst  of  religion  he 
was  called  upon  to  make  his  choice. 
1.  What  the  world  placed  before  him. 
(1)  Honour — that  of  being  the  son  of 
Pharaoh's  daughter.  (2)  Pleasures — 
the  pleasures  of  sin,  sensational  and 
unhealthy  mental  excitement.  Such 
pleasures  of  sin  are,  however,  only 
for  a  season  ;  and  there  are  pains  of 
sin  as  well  as  pleasures.  (3)  Wealth 
— the  treasures  of  Egypt.  The  three 
things  which  men  so  eagerly  pursue, 
any  one  of  which  is  deemed  by  the 
world  a  great  inheritance,  were  all 
placed  at  the  feet  of  Jesus.  2.  What 
religion  set  before  him.  It  came  to 
him  in  its  meekest,  saddest  guise,  and 
placed  before  him — (a)  Affliction.  If 
Moses  espoused  the  cause  of  the  people 
of  God,  he  must  be  prepared  to  share 
their  burdens  and  endure  their  trials. 
(6)  The  reproach  of  Christ  ;  or  such 
reproach  as  Christ  endured,  such  as 
always  attaches  to  spiritual  rehgion. 

II.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  we 
may  have  to  make  a  choice  as  Moses 
had. — 1.  In  relation  to  our  position  in 
life.  2.  In  relation  to  companions  and 
society.  3.  In  relation  to  the  concerns, 
and  some  of  the  minutest  acts,  of  our 
daily  life.  What  was  it  that  influenced 
Moses  in  making  his  good  choice — 
faith.  Such  a  choice  has  its  reward 
in  this  world.  "  A  mind  conscious  of 
rectitude  is  its  own  reward."  Our  re- 
ligion brings  to  us  now  its  own  reward. 


And  it  has  also  a  recompense  in  the 
world  to  come. — Absalom  Clark. 

Ver.  27.  The  "  Endurance  "  of  Faith. 
— This  verse  gives  the  key  to  the  long, 
anxious,  heroic  life  that  Moses  lived. 
"  Endured  "  is  the  proper  word.  His 
life  was  full  of  difficulties.  Circum- 
stances seemed  to  be  always  against 
him,  and  he  could  not  do  the  things 
that  he  would.  He  was  always  set 
under  limitations ;  and  out  of  the 
constant  "  bearing  "  and  "  enduring  " 
of  his  daily  life  he  came  to  be  the 
meekest,  most  self-denying,  least  per- 
sonally ambitious  of  all  men  who  have 
ever  lived.  The  secret  of  his  wonderful 
power  of  endurance  was  his  "  seeing 
the  invisible" — a  vision  which,  in  his 
earlier  days,  was  simply  the  sight  of 
the  soul-eyes  which  we  call  "  faith." 
Afterwards  it  gained  surprising  help 
through  symbols,  and  the  sound  of  a 
heavenly  voice.  But,  better  than  all 
visions,  there  was  a  heart-realisation, 
a  soul -vision,  which  kept  the  invisible 
God  ever  closely  near,  and  made  him 
regard  as  an  agony  unspeakable  the 
bare  possibility  that  God's  presence 
would  not  go  with  him.  What  can  we 
learn  from  the  secret  of  Moses  ? 

I.  Life  for  us  all  is  enduring. — 
It  is  for  all  who  feel  their  nobility, 
who  cannot  regard  life  as  man's  play- 
hour,  who  understand  that  man  is  set 
in  the  midst  of  disability,  because  the 
supreme  purpose  of  God  concerning 
him  is  his  moral  culture.  It  is  for  all 
who  feel  themselves  to  be  above  cir- 
cumstances, and  refuse  to  be  mere 
waifs  and  strays,  driven  hither  and 
thither  with  every  wind,  and  tossed. 
In  the  morning  outlook  of  life  it  seems 
to  be  all  enjoying.  Wonderful  is  the 
hopefulness  of  youth.  But  as  years 
pass  on  the  reality  proves  other  than 
our  dream.  Soon  we  have  to  say  that 
life  is  not  all  enjoying ;  it  is  enduring. 
Things  will  not  be  according  to  our 
mind.  Circumstances  are  against  us. 
Relationships  are  trying.  And  yet 
we  know  that  we  are  bigger  than  life. 
1.  Can  we  endure  the  things  that  are, 
just  as  they  exactly  are  ?     2.  Can  we 

391 


CHAP.   XI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


endure  that  which  we  ourselves  are  ? 
3.  Can  we  endure  those  precise  con- 
ditions under  which  God  deals  with  us  ? 
It  is  not,  Can  we  submit  ?  It  is,  Can 
we  endure  ?  Can  we  keep  on  through 
it  all,  holding  fast  faith,  never  faltering, 
hoping  on,  working  on,  making  love 
and  loyalty  master  all  disasters,  all 
disabilities,  and  winning  virtue  out  of 
woe.  The  endurance  of  Moses  was 
self-restraint  to  win  power  to  serve 
God  and  man. 

II.  Life  for  us  all  may  have  a 
Divine  presence. — Man,  and  God  with 
him,  is  the  great  mystery  of  the 
Creation.  This  is  the  idea  of  the 
theocracy — a  nation,  and  God  with  it. 
Prophets  spoke  with  authority,  be- 
cause they  were  men  having  God  with 
them.  Jesus  Christ  is  Emmanuel, 
God  with  us.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  God 
making  His  abode  in  man.  1.  There 
is  the  presence  of  God  2^.^ providence.  2. 
There  is  the  thought  of  God's  fatherly 
care.  3.  But  there  is  something 
higher  and  better — the  sense  of  God's 
presence,  which  is  a  special  revelation 
to  the  Christian  heart.  Do  men  say 
of  the  Christian,  ''  He  is  only  a  man  "  ? 
He  should  let  them  know,  he  should 
make  them  feel,  that  he  is  not  just  a 
man,  but  a  man  having  God  with  him 
— a  man  who  has  the  invisible  One  so 
near  that  he  can  always  see  Him. 

III.  Life  for  us  all  may  be  glorified 
by  this  Divine  presence. — 1.  It  makes 
life  very  serious.  It  is  a  solemnising 
influence.  We  have  One  with  us 
everywhere  who  is  grieved  with  wrong, 
who  wants  everything  to  bear  the 
stamp  of  the  holy.  2.  It  keeps  before 
us  high  aims  :  not  merely  human  ones, 
but  those  that  God  has  for  us,  such 
as  God  may  inspire  us  to  attain.  3.  It 
brings  a  consciousness  of  ability,  so  that 
we  say  with  St.  Paul,  "  I  can  do  all 
things  through  Him  which  strength- 
eneth  me."  4.  And  it  satisfies  us  con- 
cerning the  future.  It  is  enough ;  here 
God  is  with  us ;  then  surely  there  we 
shall  be  with  God.  This  verse  has 
been  rendered,  *'  He  was  stedfast 
towards  Him  who  is  invisible,  as  if 
seeing  Him." 

392 


The  Invisible  God. — Note — 1.  The 
God  with  whom  we  have  to  do  is  an 
invisible  God.  He  is  so  to  our  senses, 
to  the  eye  of  the  body  ;  and  this  shows 
the  folly  of  those  who  pretend  to 
make  images  of  God,  whom  no  man 
hath  seen,  nor  can  see.  2.  By  faith 
we  may  see  the  invisible  God.  We 
may  be  fully  assured  of  His  existence, 
of  His  providence,  and  of  His  gracious 
and  powerful  presence  with  us.  3.  Such 
a  sight  will  enable  believers  to  endure 
to  the  end  whatever  they  may  meet 
with  in  the  way. — Matthew  Henry. 

Seeing  the  Invisible  God. 

I.  Consider  the  invisibility  of  God. — 
This  is  one  of  the  negative  attributes  of 
God.  Unchangeableness,  unsearchable- 
ness,  irresistibleness,  invisibility,  are  all 
negative  attributes  of  God.  And  we 
require  such  negative  conceptions  to 
assist  our  idea,  of  an  absolute,  infinite, 
all -perfect  Being.  Job's  familiar 
words  really  mean  this  :  "I  cannot  in 
any  way  penetrate  the  dark  mantle  of 
His  invisibility  "  (Job  xi.  7).  See  also 
Deut.  iv.  12,  15;  1  Tim.  vi.  15,  16. 
The  same  truth  is  implied  when  our 
Saviour  teaches  that  "  God  is  a  spirit." 
We  are  perfect,  in  relative  creature 
perfection,  with  our  bodies,  not  without 
them.  But  the  perfection  of  a  creature 
must  be,  in  some  points  (and  this  is 
one  of  them),  in  direct  contrast  with 
the  perfection  of  the  Creator.  He 
is  not  seen,  because  He  is  perfect. 
Because  He  will  always  be  perfect,  He 
will  never  be  seen.  Ten  thousand 
happy  souls  do  indeed  see  His  face  day 
by  day.  But  what  soul  has  ever  seen 
His  form  ?  What  form  hath  He  to  be 
seen  ?  The  fruits  and  traces  of  His 
perfections  are  seen  in  all  His  works, 
but  He  Himself  is  seen  nowhere. 
In  saying  this  we  are  of  course 
remembering  "  God  manifest  in  the 
flesh,"  and  the  elevation  of  the  visible 
humanity  into  the  heavens  in  the 
person  of  Jesus  Christ.  But  if  it 
should  be  that  our  Lord  will  always, 
through  eternity,  retain  His  glorified 
humanity  in  heaven,  and  be  seen  in 
that,  and  beloved  and  worshipped  in 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.  XI, 


that,  the  question  still  is,  What  will 
be  seen  ?  The  spiritual  essence,  the 
infinite  power  and  presence  of  God, 
will  still  be  deep  within,  quite  beyond, 
high  above,  far  away.  What  I  can 
see  can  never  be  a  portion  to  my 
immortal  soul ;  a  spiritual  substance 
requires  a  spiritual  portion  ;  the  child- 
spirits  need  the  Father  of  spirits.  It 
is  the  grand  discovery  of  the  Scriptures, 
and  the  good  message  of  salvation,  that 
God  only  is  good  enough  for  man. 
Spirit  for  spirit — Creator  for  creature — 
the  Invisible  for  the  visible.  We  have 
never  seen  our  own  souls ;  we  shall 
never  see  their  portion. 

II.  The  seeing  of  the  invisible  God. — 
Moses  really  did  see  God  by  soul-sight, 
or,  as  we  say,  by  faith.  He  believed 
in  His  actual  presence  in  the  world, 
in  human  life,  in  human  affairs.  He 
believed  that  He  would  be  vnth  him, 
according  to  His  express  promise,  to 
cheer  his  heart,  to  guide  his  way,  and 
to  confirm  his  work  to  the  end.  He 
not  only  believed  in  God's  presence 
with  him,  but  he  relied  on  His  strength. 
God's  presence  was  to  him  an  actual 
power,  on  which  he  could  lean.  There 
is  no  use  to  us  in  this  example  of 
Moses  if  it  is  exceptional.  His  duties 
and  his  whole  career  were  high  and 
singular,  but  his  sight  of  the  invisible 
God  was  the  same  act  of  the  soul  by 


which  all  the  faithful  in  the  camp, 
however  humble,  were  sustained,  by 
which  the  faithful  in  every  age  have 
lived  and  triumphed.  And  at  this 
day  what  we  have  to  do  is  just  to 
observe  the  Presence  that  is  always 
near,  and  lean  .upon  the  arm  that 
never  faints.  Then  we  shall  "  endure." 
(1)  We  shall  endure  when  all  that  is 
visible  threatens  ;  (2)  when  all  that  is 
visible  allures',  (3)  when  everything 
visible  decays,  changes,  passes  away. — 
Alexander  Raleigh,  D.D. 

The  Christian  Way  of  seeing  God. — 
It  is  a  full  and  exhaustive  definition 
of  Christ's  salvation  >to  designate  it — 
the  Christian  way  of  seeing  God.  For 
what  is  religious  salvation  but  the 
perfect  vision  of  God,  the  perfect  re- 
storation of  man  to  God,  the  perfect 
enjoyment  by  man  of  God  ?  "  We  will 
come  to  him,  and  make  Our  abode  with 
him."  Not  a  distant  glimpse  of  God,  a 
trembling  touch,  a  casual  break  in  the 
dark  firmament  of  life ;  but  a  full, 
unclouded  manifestation,  a  Divine 
Pleroma,  the  true  Pantheism.  Not 
the  old  Oriental  Nirvana,  our  human 
personality  lost  in  Deity,  put  out  like 
a  flame  in  the  light  of  the  meridian  sun ; 
but  our  true  and  perfect  spiritual  in- 
dividuality, filled  with  the  light,  the  life, 
the  inspiration,  of  God. — H.  Allon,  D.D, 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  30,  31. 

Faith  seen  in  the  Jericho  Associations. — "  The  sacred  writer  has  lingered  over 
the  life  and  deeds  of  the  greatest  of  the  patriarchs,  and  of  Moses  the  legislator 
of  the  nation  :  two  examples  only — differing  in  kind  from  those  which  have 
preceded,  and  peculiarly  suggestive  and  important — have  been  taken  from  the 
history  of  the  people  aftei-  the  death  of  Moses.  Enough  has  now  been  said  to 
guide  all  who  are  willing  to  ^earch  the  Scriptures  for  themselves.  With  a  brief 
mention  of  names  which  would  call  up  before  the  minds  of  his  readers  achieve- 
ments almost  as  wonderful  as  those  on  which  he  has  been  dwelling,  he  passes 
from  the  elders  who  received  witness  from  God  by  their  faith,  and  speaks  in 
general  terms,  but  all  the  more  distinctly,  of  the  triumphs  which  faith  has  won." 
In  these  verses  the  practical  power  of  faith  is  seen  in  two  particulars,  the 
second  being  illustrated  in  a  case  outside  the  covenant,  showing  that  faith  in 
God  is  the  same  thing,  and  meets  with  the  same  acceptance  with  Him,  anywhere 
and  everywhere. 

I.  Faith  that  could  persist. — The  daily  march  round  the  city  of  Jericho  for 
six  days,  and  the  six  times  marching  round  on  the  seventh  day,  were  distinct 

393 


CHAP.  XI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  HEBREWS. 


testings  of  faith.  There  could  be  no  greater  test  than  this — Can  you  keep  on 
persistently  doing  an  apparently  useless,  fruitless  thing,  in  simple  confidence 
that  He  who  commanded  the  doing  is  surely  working  towards  the  realisation 
of  His  own  purpose.  Nothing  strains  us  like  having  to  keep  on  through 
failure. 

II.  Faith  that  could  inspire  devices. — We  are  not  required  to  approve  of 
the  acts  of  Hahab.  They  are  indeed  to  be  judged  in  the  light  of  the  right  and 
wrong  which  is  applicable  to  war-times.  Then  stratagem  to  preserve  life  is 
universally  recognised  as  honourable,  and  it  almost  necessarily  includes  decep- 
tion. But  we  may  see  how  practically  the  faith  she  had  in  Jehovah's  word 
influenced  Rahab.  It  made  her  inventive,  set  her  upon  schemes,  and  sustained 
her  in  carrying  through  devices. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  31.  Rahah's  Faith  and  False-  the  Chaldean  interpreters,  have  en- 
hood. — Rahab  was  guilty  of  a  false-  deavoured  to  make  Kahab  only  a 
hood ;  but  here  is  an  evidence  of  the  keeper  of  a  house  of  entertainment  for 
truth  of  the  history ;  her  moral  in-  travellers — a  gloss  in  striking  con- 
firmity  is  not  concealed  or  extenuated,  trast  with  the  simple  straightforward- 
although  she  had  been  received  into  ness  of  the  writer  of  this  book,  and 
the  family  of  God's  people,  and  was  inconsistent  with  the  apostolic  phrase- 
dwelling  in  Israel,  when  the  book  of  ology.  Kahab  had  hitherto  probably 
Joshua  was  written.  Rahab  had  been  been  but  a  common  type  of  heathen 
brought  up  among  the  idolaters,  who  morality,  but  she  was  faithful  to  the 
have  little  regard  for  truth  ;  and  she  dawning  convictions  of  a  nobler  creed, 
livedin  Jericho,  one  of  the  greatest  cities  and  hence  is  commended  by  Christ's 
of  Canaan.  It  was  not  to  be  expected  apostles  for  that  which  was  meritori- 
that,  all  at  once,  she  would  become  a  ous  in  her  conduct.  Her  protection 
lover  of  truth,  and  would  think  it  sin-  of  the  spies  has  been  stigmatised  as 
ful  to  employ  an  artifice  to  attain  a  traitorous,  and  her  concealment  of 
good  end.  Her  case  was  like  that  of  them  as  a  piece  of  lying  and  deceit, 
the  Egyptian  midwives,  who  told  a  But  as  to  the  first,  it  is  evident  that 
falsehood  to  Pharaoh  in  order  to  save  she  was  convinced  that  the  cause  of 
the  lives  of  the  male  children  of  Israel  Israel  was  that  of  the  true  God,  to 
(Exod.  i.  17,  21).  In  both  cases  God  oppose  which  would  have  been  the 
was  *'  not  extreme  to  mark  what  was  greater  sin.  And  as  to  the  deception 
done  amiss,"  but  graciously  accepted  which  she  practised,  there  is  no  need 
their  acts  of  faith  and  mercy,  although  to  defend  that  which  is  not  commended 
they  were  sullied  and  blemished  by  in  itself.  Rahab  is  not  praised  for  her 
human  infirmity  ;  and  thus  He  gently  falsehood,  but  for  her  faith  ;  although 
led  them  on  to  higher  degrees  of  virtue.  many  Christian  moralists,  besides 
— Bishop  Wordsworth.  VsAej,     would    defend     deception    in 

word   and    deed,   when    practised    (as 

Rahah's      Character.  — Some      com-  in   this    case)    to    save    life. — W.    H, 

mentators,     following    Josephus    and  Groser,  B.Sc. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  32—40. 

A  Summary  of  the  Triumphs  of  Faith. — The  list  given  abundantly  illustrates 
how  faith  may  be  shown  in  (1)  doing  ;  (2)  bearing;  and  (3)  suffering.  But  the 
faith  which  the  writer  presents  in  every  case  found  its  expression  in  the 
material  spheres,  in  outward  and  earthly  relations.  It  is  true  that  we  can 
learn   from  them,  and  be  inspired  by  them  to  show  a  similar  faith  in  thos© 

391 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   XI, 


similar  earthly  spheres  in  which  we  too  have  to  take  our  place  and  part. 
And  yet  it  must  be  seen  that  an  altogether  higher  faith — a  spiritual  faith 
bearing  relation  to  spiritual  things — is  required  of  us.  And  in  its  application 
to  us  the  persuasion  of  the  writer  is  this — If  faith  in  these  lower  ranges  gained 
for  them  such  splendid  triumphs,  what  triumphs  ought  our  higher  faith,  in  the 
higher  range,  to  gain  for  us  ?  *'  The  ancient  worthies  persevered  in  their  faith, 
although  the  Messiah  was  known  to  them  only  by  promise.  We  are  under 
greater  obligations  to  persevere ;  for  God  has  fulfilled  His  promise  respecting 
the  Messiah,  and  thus  placed  us  in  a  condition  better  adapted  to  perseverance 
than  theirs.  So  much  is  our  condition  preferable  to  theirs,  that  we  may  even 
say,  without  the  blessing  v/hich  we  enjoy,  their  happiness  could  not  be  com- 
pleted "  (ver.  40). 

I.  The  sublime  decision  of  persecuted  believers  in  primitive  times. — 
1.  The  dangers  with  which  they  were  threatened.  2.  The  determination  with 
which  they  were  sustained. 

II.  The  various  considerations  which  this  heroism  suggests. — 1.  Thankful- 
ness for  religious  liberty  afforded  to  us.  2.  Excitement ;  their  faith  and 
constancy  should  stimulate  us.     3.  Expectation. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Yer.  32.  What  to  find  in  Scripture 
and  Christian  History. — The  apostle 
having  given  us  a  classis  of  many 
eminent  believers,  whose  names  are 
mentioned,  and  the  particular  trials 
and  actings  of  their  faith  recorded, 
now  concludes  his  narrative  with  a 
more  summary  account  of  another  set 
of  believers,  where  the  particular  acts 
are  not  ascribed  to  particular  persons 
by  name,  but  left  to  be  applied  by 
those  who  are  well  acquainted  with 
the  sacred  story  ;  and,  like  a  Divine 
orator,  he  prefaces  this  part  of  his 
narrative  with  an  elegant  expostula- 
tion— "What  shall  I  say  more? 
Time  would  fail  me " :  as  if  he  had 
said,  "It  is  in  vain  to  attempt  to 
exhaust  this  subject.  Should  I  not 
restrain  my  pen,  it  would  soon  run 
beyond  the  bounds  of  an  epistle ;  and 
therefore  I  shall  but  just  mention  a 
few  more,  and  leave  you  to  enlarge 
upon  thein."  Observe — 1.  After  all  our 
researches  into  the  Scriptures,  there  is 
still  more  to  be  learned  from  them. 
2.  We  must  well  consider  in  Divine 
matters  what  we  should  say,  and  suit 
it  well  to  the  time.  3.  We  should  be 
pleased  to  think  how  great  the  number 
of  believers  was  under  the  Old  Testa- 
ment,   and    how    strong    their    faith. 


though  the  objects  thereof  were  not 
then  so  fully  revealed.  4.  And  we 
should  lament  it,  that  now,  in  gospel 
times,  when  the  rule  of  faith  is  more 
clear  and  perfect,  the  number  of 
believers  should  be  so  small,  and  their 
faith  so  weak. — Matthew  Henry. 

Yer.  35.  The  Better  Resurrection. — 
This  chapter  is  the  roll -book  of  a 
noble  army.  Human  history  records 
the  triumphs  of  knowledge  and  courage 
and  energy  ;  the  Divine  history  records 
the  triumphs  of  faith.  Among  the 
"  cloud  of  witnesses "  are  two  groups 
mentioned  in  text.  The  ancient  saints 
were  believers  in  a  resurrection  to 
eternal  life — a  better  resurrection.  One 
kind  of  resurrection  was  a  restora- 
tion to  the  life  of  this  world.  There 
is  another  and  superior  resurrection 
— to  the  life  of  the  eternal  world. 
"  Women  received  their  dead  again  by 
resurrection ;  and  others,  that  they 
might  obtain  a  better  resuiTection, 
were  tortured,  not  accepting  deliver- 
ance." 

I.  Consider  the  better  resurrection. 
— This  is  more  to  be  desired  than  the 
resurrection  of  loved  ones  to  us  here. 
1.  Think  of  the  place  of  it.  Better 
than  Bethany  or  Jerusalem — soon  to 

395 


CHAP.  XI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   HEBREWS. 


be  the  marching-ground  of  Koman 
armies.  Here  the  curse,  the  pain,  the 
disease,  the  torturing  agonies,  and  the 
depressions  which  cloud  the  soul. 
The  place  of  the  better  resurrection  is 
described,  "  There  shall  be  no  more 
curse,  no  night,  need  no  candle,"  etc. 
2.  The  company  in  the  place.  In  this 
world  our  dearest  friends  become  at 
times  more  dear  to  us.  In  that 
heavenly  world  we  shall  have  the  best 
at  their  best.  No  distrust  or  selfish- 
ness, but  deep  and  true  love.  3.  The 
essence  of  this  eternal  love.  Its  entire 
freedom  from  sin.  The  presence  of 
sin  in  our  nature  is  at  the  root  of 
every  other  evil,  and  deliverance  from 
suffering  in  heaven  is  connected  with 
perfect  deliverance  from  sin.  This  is 
an  ideal  which  it  never  entered  into 
man's  heart  to  conceive,  and  which 
the  gospel  alone  has  taught  us. 
4.  Think  also  of  the  security  of  this 
state.  The  resurrections  of  earth  were 
a  return  to  a  world  of  change  and 
death — to  part  again.  Once  to  be 
raised  to  this  world  is  twice  to  die. 
In  heaven  the  last  fight  is  over.  "  O 
thou  enemy,  destructions  are  come  to 
a  perpetual  end."  5.  The  presence 
to  which  it  introduces.  The  best  of 
these  other  resurrections  brought  their 
subjects  into  the  earthly  presence  of 
the  Son  of  God,  but  this  into  His 
heavenly  fellowship. 

II.  The  higher  faith  required  for 
this  resurrection. — 1.  It  needs  more 
of  the  patience  of  faith.  The  faith  of 
the  sisters  of  Bethany  demanded  one 
great  effort,  and  the  battle  was  gained. 
But  ours  cannot  be  so  compressed. 
"  Till  the  heavens  be  no  more."  This 
needs  patience.  The  scorn  of  un- 
believers, taunts  of  the  materialist, 
the  murmurs  of  our  hearts,  are  well- 
nigh  unbearable.  2.  The  sanctified 
imagination  of  faith.  There  is  an 
imagination  of  faith,  not  Tinbridled, 
nor  unscriptural,  which  has  formed  for 
itself  a  true  and  real  world  beyond 
death,  which  gives  substance  to  things 
hoped  for,  and  thereby  helps  to  the 
evidence  of  things  not  seen.  3.  It 
Tieeds  more   of  the  spiritual  insight  of 

396 


faith.  It  must  seek  to  live  as  seeing 
Him  who  is  invisible.  It  must  rest 
on  the  nature  of  God  Himself,  and 
the  life  He  infuses  into  the  soul. 
Christ  Himself  must  be  known  to  us 
in  His  ever- living  spiritual  power. 

III.  Some  of  the  ways  in  which 
we  may  strengthen  ourselves  in  this 
higher  faith. — 1.  The  first  thought  is 
addressed  to  the  reason.  Here  are  men 
tortured,  not  accepting  deliverance, 
that  they  might  obtain  a  better 
resurrection.  Can  you  imagine  that 
the  self-devotion  of  the  noble  army 
of  martyrs  was  founded  on  delusion? 
They  loved  truth  more  than  life. 
They  believed  in  a  better  resurrection. 
2.  To  the  heart.  "  Their  dead."  God 
intended  that  our  deepest  heart  affec- 
tions should  be  the  helpers  of  our 
highest  hopes,  and  the  instinctive 
guarantees  of  a  life  to  come.  3.  To 
our  spirit.  Certainty  comes  from 
union  with  the  dying  and  risen  and 
living  Son  of  God.  There  is  a  spring 
of  immortality  ready  to  rise  up  in 
every  heart  that  will  admit  Him  who 
is  the  true  God  and  eternal  life.  The 
martyr's  spirit  descends  upon  him 
when  the  fire  is  kindled,  and  the 
Christian's  willingness  to  depart  comes 
when  his  Master  calls. — /.  Ker^  D.D. 

Yer.  39.  What  Men  of  Faith  gain 
and  fail  to  gain. — It  is  an  absolute 
law  in  all  earthly  relations  that  gain 
and  loss  go  together.  "  There  are  no 
gains  without  pains."  To  reach  the 
higher  is  to  leave  the  lower.  If  faith 
puts  us  into  the  atmosphere  of  God,  it 
puts  us  out  of  the  atmosphere  of  th& 
world.  But  the  gain  always  more 
than  compensates  for  the  loss. 

Yer.  40.  The  Material  draws  on  to 
the  Spiritual. — The  spiritual  is  climac- 
tic ;  it  absolutely  satisfies  man.  The 
material  can  never  be  presented  under 
any  conceivable  form  that  satisfies. 
Man  would  not  be  his  spiritual  self 
if  it  did.  In  the  old  time  perfection 
was  only  reached  by  the  faith  realisa- 
tion of  the  spiritual. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.  XI. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO    CHAPTER  XL 


Ver.  1.  Teaching  what  Faith  is. — The 
Kev.  R.  Cecil  impiiuted  upon  the  mind  of 
his  little  daughter  the  true  idea  of  faith, 
by  the  following  method  :  "  She  was  play- 
ing," said  he,  "  one  day  with  a  few  beads, 
which  seemed  wonderfully  to  delight  her. 
Her  whole  soul  was  absorbed  in  her  beads. 
I  said,  '  My  dear,  you  have  some  pretty 
beads  there.'  'Yes,  papa.'  '  And  you  seem 
vastly  pleased  with  them.  Well,  now,  throw 
them  behind  the  fire.'  The  tears  started 
into  her  eyes  ;  she  looked  earnestly  at  me, 
as  if  she  ought  to  have  a  reason  for  so  cruel 
a  sacrifice.  Summoning  up  all  her  fortitude, 
her  breast  heaving  with  the  effort,  she 
dashed  them  into  the  fire.  Some  days  after, 
when  I  returned  home,  I  opened  a  treasure, 
and  set  before  her  a  bagful  of  large  beads 
and  toys  of  the  same  kind  ;  she  burst  into 
tears  with  excessive  joy.  '  These,  my  child,' 
said  I,  '  are  yours,  because  you  believed  me 
when  I  told  you  to  throw  those  paltry  beads 
behind  the  fire  ;  your  obedience  has  brought 
you  this  treasure.  But  now,  my  dear,  re- 
member as  long  as  you  live  what  faith  is. 
I  did  all  this  to  teach  you  the  meaning  of 
faith.  You  threw  your  beads  away  when 
I  bade  you,  because  you  had  faith  in  me 
that  I  never  advised  you  but  for  your  good. 
Put  the  same  confidence  in  God ;  believe 
everything  that  He  says  in  His  word. 
Whether  you  understand  Him  or  not,  have 
faith  in  Him  that  He  means  you  good." — 
Sunday  Readings. 

Walking  by  Faith. — Andrew  Fuller  was 
to  preach  before  a  ministerial  association. 
On  his  way  there,  the  roads  in  several  places 
were  flooded  by  recent  rains.  Mr.  Fuller 
came  to  one  place  where  the  water  was  very 
deep,  and,  being  a  stranger  to  its  exact 
depth,  was  unwilling  to  go  on.  A  country- 
man acquainted  with  the  water  cried  out, 
"  Go  on,  sir  !  you  are  quite  safe  !  "  Fuller 
urged  on  his  horse ;  but  the  water  soon 
touched  the  saddle,  and  he  stopped  to  think. 
"  Go  on,  sir  !  all  is  right  ! "  shouted  the 
man.  Taking  the  man  at  his  word,  Fuller 
proceeded,  and  the  text  was  suggested,  "  We 
walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight." 

Faith  and  Sight. — By  constant  sight  the 
effect  of  objects  seen  grows  less  ;  by  constant 
faith  the  effect  of  objects  believed  in  grows 
greater.  The  probable  reason  is,  that  per- 
sonal observation  does  not  admit  of  the 
influence  of  the  imagination  in  impressing 
the  facts ;  while  unseen  objects,  realised 
by  faith,  have  the  auxiliary  aid  of  the 
imagination,  not  to  exaggerate  them,  but 
to  clothe  them  with  living  colours,  and 
impress  them  upon  the  heart.  Whether 
this  is  true  or  not,  the  more  frequently  w^e 


see  the  less  we  feel  the  power  of  an  object ; 
while  the  more  frequently  we  dwell  upon 
an  object  by  faith,  the  more  we  feel  its 
power.— t/".  B.  Walker. 

Faith.—  o^tA 

My  faith,  it  is  an  oaken  staff,       - — 

The  traveller's  well-loved  aid  ; 
My  faith,  it  is  a  weapon  stout, 

The  soldier's  trusty  blade  : 
I'll  travel  on,  and  still  bestirred 
By  silent  thought  or  social  word, 
By  all  my  perils  undeterred, 

A  soldier-pilgrim  staid. 

My  faith,  it  is  an  oaken  staff, 

Oh  let  me  on  it  lean  ; 
My  faith,  it  is  a  trusty  sword, 

May  falsehood  find  it  keen  ! 
Thy  Spirit,  Lord,  to  me  impart, 
Oh  make  me  what  Thou  ever  art — 
Of  patient  and  courageous  heart, 

As  all  true  saints  have  been. 

T.  T.  Lynch. 

Ver.  4.  TJie  Living  Power  of  the  Dead, —  - 
Some  men  we  only  estimate  aright  when  ] 
they  have  passed  from  mortal  scenes.  While  / 
most  of  the  members  of  the  vegetable  king- 
dom give  out  such  odour  as  they  may  have 
power  to  give  during  life,  the  vernal  grass, 
the  woodruff,  and  others,  are  not  fragrant 
till  they  have  been  taken  away  from  their 
roots,  and  have  begun  to  get  dry.  The 
rose,  the  lilac,  the  daphne,  and  the  acacia 
pour  forth  their  perfume  as  a  part  of  their 
day's  duty.  The  woodruff,  that  holds  up 
handfuls  of  little  white  crosses  in  the 
pleasant  woods  and  shady  glens,  yields  no 
scent  till  its  life  has  ebbed — beautiful 
emblem  of  those  who  delight  us  while  they 
live  out  of  the  serene  abundance  of  their 
kindly  hearts,  but  whose  richer  value  we 
only  begin  to  know  when  they  are  gone 
away,  and  of  whose  white  souls  we  then 
say  inwardly,  "  He  being  dead  yet  speaketh." 
So  the  hay -field  that  rolls  like  sea- waves 
is  scentless  when  we  pass  it  uncut ;  we  hear 
the  measured  swish  of  the  scythe,  death 
lays  each  green  head  low,  and  odour  rises 
like  mist. — L.  H.  Grindon. 

Forgetfuhiess  of  the  Dead. — We  shall  sleep 
none  the  less  sweetly,  though  none  be  talking 
about  us  over  our  heads.  The  world  has  a 
short  memory,  and,  as  the  years  go  on,  the 
list  that  it  has  to  remember  grows  so 
crowded  that  it  is  harder  and  harder  to 
find  room  to  write  a  new  name  on  it,  or  to 
read  the  old.  The  letters  on  the  tombstones 
are  soon  erased  by  the  feet  that  tramp  across 
the  churchyard. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Missions   continued    after    Death.  —  The 

397 


CHAP.   XI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


cedar  is  most  useful  when  dead.  It  is 
most  productive  when  its  place  knows  it  no 
more.  There  is  no  timber  like  it.  Firm  in 
the  grain,  and  capable  of  the  finest  polish, 
the  tooth  of  no  insect  will  touch  it,  and 
Time  itself  can  hardly  destroy  it.  Diffusing 
a  perpetual  fragrance  through  the  chambers 
which  it  ceils,  the  worm  will  not  corrode 
the  book  which  it  protects,  nor  the  moth 
corrupt  the  garment  which  it  guards.  All 
but  immortal  itself,  it  transfuses  its  amaran- 
thine qualities  to  the  objects  around  it ;  and 
however  stately  in  the  forest,  or  brave  on 
the  mountain's  brow,  it  is  more  serviceable 
in  Solomon's  palace,  and  it  receives  an  illus- 
trious consecration  when  set  up  as  pillars  in 
the  Temple,  and  carved  into  doorposts  and 
lintels  for  the  house  of  the  Lord.  Every 
Christian  is  useful  in  his  life,  but  the  goodly 
cedars  are  most  useful  afterwards.  Joseph 
while  he  lived  saved  much  people  alive,  and 
his  own  lofty  goodness  was  an  impressive 
and  elevating  pattern  to  his  relenting  and 
admiring  brethren.  But  as  an  instance  of 
special  providence,  and  an  example  of  un- 
tarnished excellence  amidst  terrible  tempta- 
tions, Joseph  dead  has  spoken  to  more  than 
Joseph  living.  The  sweet  singer  of  Israel 
while  he  lived  taught  many  to  handle  the 
harp,  and  infected  not  a  few  with  his  thank- 
ful, adoring  spirit.  But  David  being  dead 
yet  singeth,  and  you  can  hardly  name  the 
psalm  or  hymn  or  spiritual  song  of  which 
the  lesson  was  not  learnt  from  the  son  of 
Jesse.  Paul  in  his  living  day  preached 
many  a  sermon,  and  made  many  a  convert 
to  the  faith  of  Jesus.  But  Paul  being  dead 
yet  preacheth,  and  they  were  sermons  from 
liis  sepulchre  which  converted  Luther,  and 
Zwingle,  and  most  of  our  modern  evangelists. 
And  Luther  is  dead,  but  the  Keformation 
lives.  Calvin  is  dead,  but  his  vindication 
of  God's  free  and  sovereign  grace  will  never 
die.  Knox,  Melville,  and  Henderson  are 
dead,  but  Scotland  still  retains  a  Sabbath 
and  a  Christian  peasantry,  a  Bible  in  every 
house,  and  a  school  in  every  parish.  Bunyan 
is  dead,  but  his  bright  spirit  still  walks  the 
earth  in  its  Pilgrini's  Progress.  Baxter 
is  dead,  but  souls  are  still  quickened  by 
the  Saints'  Rest  and  the  Call  to  the 
Unconverted.  Cowper  is  dead,  but  the 
*'  golden  apples  "  are  still  as  fresh  as  when 
newly  gathered  in  the  "silver  basket"  of 
the  Olney  Hymns.  Eliot  is  dead,  but  the 
missionary  enterprise  is  young.  Henry 
Marty n  is  dead,  but  who  can  count  the 
apostolic  spirits,  who,  phoenix-wise,  have 
started  from  his  funeral  pile  ?  Howard  is 
dead,  but  modern  philanthropy  is  only  com- 
mencing its  career.  Raikes  is  dead,  but  the 
Sabbath  schools  go  on.  Wilberforce  is  dead, 
but  the  negro  will  find  for  ages  a  protector 
in  his  memory. — Dr.  James  Hamilton. 

Holy  Exanq^le. — If  holy   example   is,   as 
398 


we  so  often  declare  to  each  other,  so  bene- 
ficial, then  it  must  be  counted  as  worthy 
of  mention  among  Christian  privileges  that 
we  have  now  more  holy  examples  than  the 
Christians  of  the  first  century  had.  Each 
leaf  in  ecclesiastical  history  is  illuminated 
with  the  noble  deeds,  words,  and  sufferings 
of  Christ's  people— an  illustrious  succession 
of  spectators  and  heroes.  The  Christian 
Church  is  like  a  magnificent  temple;  each 
pious  and  illustrious  man  that  enters  it 
lights  a  new  lamp  therein ;  one  after  another 
they  come,  in  solemn  yet  kingly  succession, 
each  making  the  temple  appear  more 
glorious,  and  bringing  out  its  hidden  beau- 
ties, by  the  holy  example  they  set  before  us. 
— T.  R.  Stevenson. 

Ver.  6.  Faith  in  God. — Faith  regards 
God's  word  as  more  real  than  man's  acts, 
as  not  less  real  than  a  star  in  heaven  ;  and 
believes  that  the  least  promise  that  God 
has  written  will  outlive  the  last  pyramid 
that  all  the  Pharaohs  have  ever  built.  When 
you  have  a  bank-note  in  your  hand,  you 
have  no  money,  nor  have  you  literally  books, 
and  clothes,  and  shoes,  and  bread,  and  wine, 
and  all  that  it  can  purchase;  but  you  have 
a  promise  upon  that  slip  of  paper,  as  real 
as  if  you  had  all  the  goods  that  bit  of  paper 
can  purchase.  You  do  not  lay  aside  God's 
word  as  an  obsolete,  worthless  thing,  but 
you  turn  it  into  currency,  and  treat  it  as 
if  really  fulfilled ;  for  faith  is  just  taking 
God  at  His  word,  and  believing  the  promises 
just  because  He  says  it. — Dr.  Cumming. 

A71  InfideVs  Testimony. — Dr.  Elliot,  whoi»^--  ) 
was  well  acquainted  with  Colonel  Allen, 
a  celebrated  infidel  in  America,  visited  him 
at  a  time  when  his  daughter  was  sick  and 
near  death.  He  was  introduced  to  the 
library,  where  the  colonel  read  to  him  some 
of  his  writings  with  much  self-complacency, 
and  asked,  "  Is  not  that  well  done  ?  "  While 
they  were  thus  employed,  a  messenger  en- 
tered, and  informed  Colonel  Allen  that  his 
daughter  was  dying,  and  desired  to  speak 
with  him.  He  immediately  went  to  her 
chamber,  accompanied  by  Dr.  Elliot,  who 
was  desirous  of  witnessing  the  interview. 
The  wife  of  Colonel  Allen  was  a  pious 
woman,  and  had  instructed  his  children  in 
the  principles  of  Christianity.  As  soon  as 
her  father  appeared  at  her  bedside,  she 
said  to  him,  "  I  am  about  to  die  :  shall  I 
believe  in  the  principles  you  have  taught 
me,  or  shall  I  believe  in  what  my  mother 
has  taught  me  ?  "  He  became  extremely 
agitated  ;  his  chin  quivered,  his  whole  frame 
shook  ;  and  after  waiting  a  few  moments, 
he  replied,  "  Believe  what  your  mother  has 
taught  you." 

Enoeh. — 

Hast  thou  not  seen  at  break  of  day 
One  only  star  the  east  adorning, 


IIOJIILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.    XI. 


That  never  set  or  paled  its  ray, 
But  seemed  to  sink  at  once  away 
Into  the  light  of  morning  ? 

From  it  the  sage  no  portent  drew, 
It  came  to  hght  no  meteor  fires, 
But  silver  shone  the  whole  night  through, 
On  hawthorn  hedges  steeped  in  dew, 
And  quiet  village  spires. 

Like  him  of  old  who  dwelt  beneath 

The  tents  of  patriarchal  story, 
Who  passed  without  the  touch  of  death, 
Without  dim  eye  or  failing  breath, 
At  once  into  God's  glory — 

The  patriarch  of  one  simple  spot. 

The  sire  of  sons  and  daughters  lowly, 
And  this  the  record  of  his  lot, 
"  He  walked  with  God,  and  he  was  not," 
For  the  Lord  took  him  wholly. 

C.  F.  Alexander. 

Ver.  9.  Sojourners^  on  Earth. — A  going 
away  to  America  is  only  a  journey  for  a  few 
weeks.  Even  Australia  has  become  an  object 
for  adventurous  tourists.  The  every-day  leave- 
takings  of  this  changeful  life,  be  it  in  the  iron 
age  of  railways,  or  in  the  age  of  aeronautic 
expedition  and  transit — these  sad  necessities 
of  earthly  existence  remind  us  that  this  is 
not  our  rest,  that  we  are  but  sojourners  here, 
as  in  a  strange  land.  Farewells  are  written 
everywhere,  at  home  and  abroad,  in  birth, 
in  death,  in  marriage,  on  the  black-edged 
paper  and  the  marble  tablet,  over  the  hatch- 
ment, on  the  ivy-mantled  ruin,  everywhere. 
— S.  B.  James. 

All  Things  change. — All  things  that  are, 
are  in  condition  of  perpetual  flux  and 
change.  The  cloud-rack  has  the  likeness 
of  bastions  and  towers,  but  they  are  mist, 
not  granite,  and  the  wind  is  every  moment 
sweeping  away  their  outlines,  till  the  phan- 
tom fortress  topples  into  red  ruin  while  we 
gaze.  The  tiniest  stream  eats  out  its  little 
valley,  and  rounds  the  pebble  in  its  widening 
bed  ;  rain  washes  down  the  soil,  and  frost 
cracks  the  cliffs  above.  So  silently  and 
yet  mightily  does  -|he  law  of  change  work, 
that  to  a  meditative  eye  the  solid  earth 
seems  almost  molten  and  fluid,  and  the 
everlasting  mountains  tremble  to  decay. — 
A.  Maclaren,  B.D. 

Ver.  10.  The  Celestial  City. — A  city  never 
built  with  hands,  nor  hoary  with  the  years 
of  time — a  city,  whose  inhabitants  no  census 
has  numbered — a  city,  through  whose  streets 
rush  no  tides  of  business,  nor  nodding  hearse 
creeps  slowly  with  its  burden  to  the  tomb — 
a  city,  without  griefs  or  graves,  without  sins 
or  sorrows,  without  births  or  burials,  without 
marriages  or  mournings—  a  cit}^  which  glories 
in  having  Jesus  for  its  King,  angels  for  its 
guards,  saints  for  its  citizens,  whose  walls 


are  salvation,  and  whose  gates  are  praise. — 
Guthrie. 

Ver.  13.  Faith  and  its  Fruits. — St.  Chry- 
sostom  is  wont  to  insist,  by  virtue  of  faith, 
rustic  and  mechanic  idiots  do,  in  true 
knowledge,  surpass  the  most  refined  wits, 
and  children  prove  wiser  than  old  philo- 
sophers ;  an  idiot  can  tell  us  that  which 
a  learned  infidel  does  not  know  ;  a  child 
can  assure  us  that  wherein  a  deep  philo- 
sopher is  not  resolved ;  for  ask  a  boor,  as 
a  boy  educated  in  our  religion,  who  made 
him,  he  will  tell  you  God  Almighty,  which 
is  more  than  Aristotle  or  Democritus  would 
have  told  ;  demand  of  him  why  he  was  made, 
he  will  answer  you,  to  serve  and  glorify  his 
Maker ;  and  hardly  would  Pythagoras  or 
Plato  have  replied  so  wisely.  Examine  him 
concerning  his  soul,  he  will  aver  that  it  is 
immortal,  that  it  shall  undergo  a  judgment 
after  this  life,  that  accordingly  it  shall  abide 
in  a  state  of  bliss  or  misery  everlasting — 
about  which  points  neither  Socrates  nor 
Seneca  could  assure  anything ;  inquire  of 
him  how  things  are  upheld,  how  governed 
and  ordered ;  he  presently  will  reply,  by 
the  powerful  hand  and  wise  providence  of 
God  ;  whereas,  among  philosophers,  one 
would  ascribe  all  events  to  the  current  of 
fate,  another  to  the  tides  of  fortune — one 
to  blind  influences  of  stars,  another  to  a 
confused  jumble  of  atoms.  Pose  him  about 
the  main  points  of  morality  and  duty,  and 
he  will,  in  a  few  words,  better  inform  you 
than  Cicero,  or  Epictetus,  or  Aristotle,  or 
Plutarch,  in  their  large  tracts  and  voluminous 
discourses  about  matters  of  that  nature. — 
Barrow.  , 

Bying  in  Faith. — A  clergyman  having 
occasion  to  wait  on  the  late  Princess  Char- 
lotte, was  thus  addressed  by  her :  *'  Sir, 
I  understand  you  are  a  clergyman."  "  Yes, 
madam."  "  Of  the  Church  of  England  ?  " 
"  Yes."  "  Permit  me  to  ask  your  opinion, 
sir,  what  is  it  that  can  make  a  death-bed 
easy  ? "  Mr.  W.  was  startled  at  so  serious 
a  question  from  a  young  and  blooming 
female  of  so  high  rank,  and  modestly  ex- 
pressed his  surprise  that  she  should  consult 
him,  when  she  had  access  to  many  much 
more  capable  of  answering  the  inquiry.  She 
replied  that  she  had  proposed  it  to  many, 
and  wished  to  collect  various  opinions  on 
this  important  subject.  Mr.  W.  then  felt 
it  his  duty  to  be  explicit,  and  affectionately 
recommended  to  her  the  study  of  the  Scrip- 
tures, which,  as  he  stated,  uniformly  repre- 
sent faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Chrij<t  as  the 
only  means  to  make  a  death -bed  easy. 
"  Ah !  "  said  she,  bursting  into  tears,  "  that 
is  what  my  grandfather  often  told  me  ;  but 
then  he  used  to  add,  that,  besides  reading 
the  Bible,  I  must  pray  for  the  Holy  Spirit 
to  understand  its  meaning.' 

399 


CHAP.   XI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


Strangers  and  Pilgrims. — Leighton  had 
been  used  to  say  that  if  he  were  to  choose 
a  place  to  die  in  it  should  be  an  inn,  for 
that  would  look  so  like  a  pilgrim's  going 
home,  to  whom  this  world  was  all  as  an  inn. 
It  was  his  opinion,  also,  as  we  read  in  the 
memoir  of  him  by  Aikman,  that "  the  officious 
tenderness  and  care  of  friends  was  an  en- 
tanglement to  a  dying  man,  and  that  the 
unconcerned  attendance  of  those  who  could 
be  procured  in  such  a  place  would  give  less 
disturbance."  He  had  his  wish.  At  the 
Bell  Inn,  Warwick  Lane,  Kobert  Leighton, 
in  his  seventy-fourth  year,  stranger  and 
pilgrim,  drew  his  last  breath. — Jacox. 

A  City  that  hath  Foundations. — 
Beyond  the  dark  and  stormy  bound 
That  guards  our  dull  horizon  round 

A  lovelier  landscape  swells ; 
Resplendent  seat  of  light  and  peace. 
In  thee  the  sounds  of  conflict  cease, 

And  glory  ever  dwells. 

For  thee  the  early  patriarch  sighed, 
Thy  distant  beauty  faint  descried, 

And  hailed  the  blest  abode  ; 
A  stranger  here,  he  sought  a  home 
Fixed  in  a  city  yet  to  come, 

The  city  of  his  God. 

Anon. 

Citizenship  in  Heaven. — A  Christian  man's 
true  affinities  are  with  the  things  not  seen, 
and  with  the  persons  there,  however  the 
surface  relationships  knit  him  to  the  earth. 
In  the  degree  in  which  he  is  a  Christian, 
he  is  a  stranger  here  and  a  native  of  the 
heavens.  That  great  city  is,  like  some  of 
the  capitals  of  Europe,  built  on  a  broad 
river,  with  the  mass  of  the  metropolis  on 
the  one  bank,  but  a  wide-spreading  suburb 
on  the  other.  As  the  Trastevere  is  to  Eome, 
as  Southwark  is  to  London,  so  is  earth  to 
heaven,  the  bit  of  the  city  on  the  other  side 
the  bridge. — A.  Macla/ren^  D.D. 

The  City  yet  to  come. — We  do  belong  to 
another  polity  or  order  of  things  than  that 
with  which  we  are  connected  by  the  bonds 
of  flesh  and  sense.  Our  true  affinities  are 
with  the  mother-city.  True,  we  are  here  on 
earth,  but  far  beyond  the  blue  waters  is 
another  community  of  which  we  are  truly 
members ;  and  sometimes  in  calm  weather 
we  can  see,  if  we  climb  to  a  height  above 
the  smoke  of  the  valley  where  we  dwell,  the 
faint  outline  of  the  mountains  of  that  other 
land,  lying  dreamlike  on  the  opal  waves  and 
bathed  in  sunlight. — Ihid. 

Ver.  17.  Abraham's  Faith. — The  trial  by 
faith  is  by  finding  what  we  will  do  for  God. 
To  trust  Him  when  we  have  the  securities 
in  our  own  iron  chest  is  easy,  and  not  thank- 
worthy ;  but  to  depend  on  Him  for  what  we 
cannot  see,  as  it  is  most  hard  for  man  to  do 

400 


so,  so  it  is  most  acceptable  to  God  when  done, 
for  in  that  act  we  make  confession  of  His 
Deity.  Faith  without  works  of  this  kind  is 
like  a  fish  without  water :  it  wants  the  ele- 
ment it  should  live  in.  A  building  without 
a  basis  cannot  stand ;  faith  is  the  founda- 
tion, and  every  good  action,  especially  where 
we  trust  God  without  seeing  Him,  is  a  stone 
laid. — Feltham. 

Ver.  21.  JacoVs  Blessing  of  his  Grandsons. 
— A  few  days  previous  to  his  death,  the  late 
Rev.  Dr.  Belfrage,  of  Falkirk,  hearing  his 
infant  son's  voice  in  an  adjoining  room, 
desired  that  he  should  be  brought  to  him. 
When  the  child  was  lifted  into  the  bed,  the 
dying  father  placed  his  hands  upon  fiis  head, 
and  said,  in  the  language  of  Jacob,  "  The 
God  before  whom  my  fathers  did  walk,  the 
God  who  fed  me  all  my  life  long  to  this  day, 
the  Angel  who  redeemed  me  from  all  evil, 
bless  the  lad  I "  When  the  boy  was  removed, 
he  added,  *'  Remember  and  tell  John  Henry 
of  this ;  tell  him  of  these  prayers,  and  how 
earnest  I  was  that  he  might  become  early 
acquainted  with  his  father's  God." —  White- 
cross. 

Vers.  24,  25.  Decision  of  Character. — The 
man  will  not  re-examine  his  conclusions 
with  endless  repetition,  and  he  will  not  be 
delayed  long  by  consulting  other  persons, 
after  he  has  ceased  to  consult  himself.  He 
cannot  bear  to  sit  still  among  unexecuted 
decisions  and  unattempted  projects.  We 
wait  to  hear  of  his  achievements,  and  are 
confident  we  shall  not  wait  long.  The  pos- 
sibility or  the  means  may  not  be  obvious  to 
us,  but  we  know  that  everything  will  be 
attempted,  and  that  a  spirit  of  such  deter- 
mined will  is  like  a  river,  which,  in  whatever 
manner  it  may  be  obstructed,  will  make  its 
way  somewhere.  It  must  have  cost  Csesar 
many  anxious  hours  of  deliberation  before 
he  decided  to  pass  the  Rubicon;  but  it  is 
probable  he  suffered  but  few  to  elapse  be- 
tween the  decision  and  the  execution.  And 
any  one  of  his  friends  who  should  have  been 
apprised  of  his  determination,  and  under- 
stood his  character,  would  have  smiled  con- 
temptuously to  hear  it  insinuated  that, 
though  Csesar  had  resolved,  Csesar  would  not 
dare ;  or  that  though  he  might  crojss  the 
Rubicon,  whose  opposite  bank  presented  to 
him  no  hostile  legions,  he  might  come  to 
other  rivers  which  he  would  not  cross ;  or  that 
either  rivers  or  any  other  obstacles  would 
deter  him  from  prosecuting  his  determina- 
tion from  this  ominous  commencement  to  its 
very  last  consequence, — John  Foster. 

Ver.  26.  The  Reproach  of  Christ. — A  curious 
discovery  has  been  made  in  Rome.  It  is  a 
rude  caricature  scratched  on  the  ruined  wall 
of  the  Praetorian  barracks,  representing  a 
man  worshipping  another  man  hanging  on  a 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS, 


CHAP.   XI. 


cross,  the  crucified  figure  being  drawn  with 
the  head  of  an  ass,  and  the  words  roughly 
written  beneath, "  Alexaraenos  worships  God," 
i.e.  in  effect,  "  See  what  a  god  Alexamenos 
worships !  "  Revolting  and  hideous  as  this 
caricature  is,  it  is  deeply  interesting  as  a 
specimen  of  the  ribald  jests  to  which  a 
Christian  soldier  was  exposed,  and  also  most 
valuable  as  a  proof  that  the  early  Church 
believed  in  the  Deity  of  Christ.  A  woodcut 
copy  of  this  strange  drawing  will  be  found 
in  Macduff's  St.  Paul  at  Rome,  p.  225. 
Genuine  faith  influences  us  to  deny  our- 
selves, to  renounce  the  world,  to  cherish 
holiness,  to  bear  reproach,  and  to  look  beyond 
the  present  scene  to  the  world  of  light  and 
eternal  glt)ry.  Such  an  effect  will  be  pro- 
duced, more  or  less,  on  all  who  possess  this 
Divine  grace.  The  Marquis  of  Vico,  in  Italy, 
when  he  was  come  to  years,  and  to  the 
knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ,  refused  to  be 
called  the  son  and  heir  to  a  marquis,  a  cup- 
bearer to  an  emperor,  and  nephew  to  a  pope, 
and  chose  rather  to  suffer  affliction,  perse- 
cution, banishment,  loss  of  lands,  living, 
wife,  children,  lionours,  and  preferments, 
than  to  enjoy  the  sinful  pleasures  of  Italy 
for  a  season  ;  esteeming  the  reproach  of 
Christ  greater  riches  than  all  the  honours 
of  the  most  brilliant  connection,  and  all  the 
enjoyments  of  the  most  ample  fortune ;  for 
he  had  respect  unto  the  recompense  of  the 
reward. 

The  True  Riches. — Elizabeth  Christina, 
Queen  of  Prussia,  was  speaking  one  day 
to  the  little  daughter  of  her  gardener,  and 
was  greatly  pleased  with  the  wisdom  and 
gentleness  of  the  child.  Some  time  after,  as 
the  queen  was  about  to  sit  down  with  her 
ladies  at  table,  the  child  was  brought  in, 
^nd  the  queen  ordered  her  to  sit  beside  her. 
The  queen  was  curious  to  see  what  impres- 
sion the  gold  and  silver  and  bright  orna- 
ments would  make  on  the  little  girl.  She 
looked  round  in  silence  and  astonishment; 
at  last  she  folded  her  tiny  hands,  and  said, 
with  a  clear  voice. — 

"  Jesus,  Thy  blood  and  righteousness 
My  beauty  are,  and  glorious  dress ; 
Midst  flaming  worlds  in  these  arrayed, 
With  joy  shall  I  lift  up  my  head."' 

The  ladies  were  deeply  moved.  "  Oh  the 
happy  child !  "  one  of  them  exclaimed  to 
the  queen,  "  how  high  she  is  above  us  !  " 

Ver.  34.  Forcer  of  Faith. — Julius  Palmery 
in  Queen  Mary's  days,  had  life  and  prefer- 
ment offered  him,  if  he  would  recant  his 
faith  in  Christ.  His  answer  was,  that  he 
had  resigned  his  living  in  two  places  for  the 
sake  of  the  gospel,  and  was  now  ready  to 
yield  his  life  on  account  of  Christ. —  William 
Hunter,  when  urged  by  Bonner  to  recant, 
replied,  he  could   only  be  moved   by  the 


Scriptures,  for  he  reckoned  the  things  of 
earth  but  dross  for  Christ;  and  when  the 
sheriff  offered  him  a  pardon  at  the  stake,  if 
he  would  renounce  his  faith,  he  firmly  re- 
jected it. — Antonius  Riceto,  a  Venetian,  was 
offered  his  life,  and  considerable  wealth,  if 
he  would  concede  but  a  little ;  and  when  his 
son  with  weeping  entreated  him  to  do  so,  he 
answered,  that  he  resolved  to  lose  both  chil- 
dren and  estate  for  Christ. — Tlw  Prince  of 
Conde,  at  the  massacre  of  Paris,  when  the 
king  assured  him  that  he  should  die  within 
three  days  if  he  did  not  renounce  his  religion, 
told  the  monarch  that  his  life  and  estate 
were  in  his  hand,  and  that  he  would  give  up 
both  rather  than  renounce  the  truth. — Brad- 
ford said  to  his  fellow-sufferer  at  the  stake, 
"  Be  of  good  comfort,  for  we  shall  this  night 
have  a  merry  supper  with  the  Lord." — San- 
ders, in  similar  circumstances,  said,  "Wel- 
come the  cross  of  Christ,  welcome  everlasting 
life  !  " — Elizabeth  Folks,  embracing  the  stake, 
cried,  '*  Farewell  world,  farewell  faith  and 
hope,  and  welcome  love !  " — Algerius,  an 
Italian  martyr,  thus  wrote  from  his  prison, 
a  little  before  his  death :  "  Who  would 
believe  that  in  this  dungeon  I  should  find 
a  paradise  so  pleasant ;  in  a  place  of  sorrow 
and  death,  tranquillity  and  hope  and  life ; 
where  others  weep,  I  rejoice." — Wishart, 
when  in  the  fire  which  removed  him  from 
the  world,  exclaimed,  '*  The  flame  doth  tor- 
ment my  body,  but  no  whit  abates  my  spirits." 
— In  ancient  history  there  is  a  story  told  of 
a  valiant  captain  whose  banner  was  almost 
always  first  in  the  fight,  whose  sword  was 
dreaded  by  his  enemies,  for  it  was  the  herald 
of  slaughter  and  of  victory.  His  monarch 
once  asked  to  see  the  sword.  He  took  it, 
quietly  examined  it,  and  sent  it  back  with 
this  message :  "  I  see  nothing  wonderful  in 
the  sword.  I  cannot  understand  why  any 
man  should  be  afraid  of  it."  The  captain 
sent  back  another  message :  "  Your  majesty 
has  been  pleased  to  examine  the  sword,  but  I 
did  not  send  the  arm  that  wielded  it ;  if  you 
had  examined  that,  and  the  heart  that  guided 
the  arm,  you  would  have  understood  the 
mystery."  We  look  at  men  and  see  what 
great  things  they  have  done,  and  we  cannot 
understand  it.  But  we  only  see  the  sword  ; 
we  do  not  see  God,  whose  arm  wields  it. — 
C,  H.  Spurgeon. 

Ver.  35.  Persecutions  of  the  Faithful. — 
Literally  this  reads,  "they  were  bastinadoed," 
or  beaten  to  death  with  batons  or  sticks,  a 
mode  of  punishment  still  used  in  the  East, 
and  which  is  capable  of  taking  away  the 
life  of  the  real  or  supposed  criminal,  if  it 
be  continued  for  a  long  time.  Some  have 
thought  this  refers  to  the  tortures  thus 
inflicted  upon  Eleazar  by  Antiochus,  as 
described  in  2  Mace.  vi.  Doddridge,  from 
the  fact  that  the  Greek  verb  is  used  to 
express  the  beating  of  a  drum,  argues  that  in 

DD  401 


OHAP.   XII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


this  particular  kind  of  punishment  all  the 
limbs  were  put  upon  the  stretch,  and  then 
beaten  in  such  a  way  as  to  cause  intense  pain. 

Ver.  37.  Sheepskins  and  Goatskins. — Some 
writers  see  in  this  an  allusion  to  the  prophets 
of  the  Jewish  era.  Much  of  a  prophet's  life, 
also,  was  spent  in  wandering  from  place  to 
place.  In  2  Kings  i.  8  it  is  obvious  that 
Elijah  wore  a  garment  of  undressed  hair, 
and  a  reference  to  the  clothing  of  the 
prophets  in  Zecb.  xiii.  4  indicates  that 
rough  skins  were  their  usual  dress.  We 
find  this  remark  in  Clement's  epistle  to  the 
Corinthians  :  "  Let  us  be  imitators  of  those 
who  went  about  in  sheepskins  and  goatskins, 
preaching  the  coming  of  Christ." 

Treatment  of  tlie  Prophets. — In  the  par- 
able of  the  wicked  husbandman  the  outrage 
reaches  unto  the  killing  of  some  of  the 
subordinate  messengers ;  these  are  true  to 
historical  fact,  seeing  that  not  a  few  of 
the  prophets  were  not  merely  maltreated, 
but  actually  put  to  death.  Thus,  if  we  may 
trust  Jewish  tradition,  Jeremiah  was  stoned 
by  the  exiles  in  Egypt,  Isaiah  sawn  asunder 
by  King  Manasseh ;  and  we  have  abundant 
historical  justification  of  this  description, 
showing  that  the  past  ingratitude  of  the 
Jews  is  not  painted  in  colours  too  dark  ;  of 
which  treatment  this  passage  in  the  Hebrews 
is  the  best  commentary.  The  patience  of 
God  under  these  extraordinary  provocations 
is  wonderful,  sending  as  He  does,  messenger 
after  messenger  to  win  men  to  Him. — Arch- 
bishop Trench, 

Dwellers  in  Caves. — Few  of  the  caves  of 
Western  Asia  are  now  occupied  as  permanent 
places  of  abode ;  they  are  mostly  the  resort 
of  shepherds,  who  make  them  the  stables  of 
their  flocks.  It  not  unfrequently  occurs  at 
the  present  day  that  a  people  oppressed  by 
war,  or  the  tyranny  of  their  rulers,  forsake 
the  towns  and  villages  and  take  up  their 
abode  for  a  time  in  these  wild  and  solitary 


places,  in  the  hope  of  escaping  from  their 
oppressors.  Fugitives  from  the  battle-field, 
leaders  of  armies,  and  even  princes  and  royal 
personages,  have  repeatedly,  in  modern  as  in 
ancient  times,  concealed  themselves  from 
their  pursuers  within  these  dark  recesses. 
Bandits  and  outlaws  have  also  made  these 
caverns  their  abode,  whence  they  sallied 
forth  to  commit  robbery  and  murder,  and 
in  times  of  persecution  on  account  of  reli- 
gion, men,  women,  and  even  children  have 
been  forced  to  abandon  their  homes  and 
wait  for  better  times  in  "dens  and  caves 
of  the  earth."  The  deacon  of  the  present 
Armenian  Church  of  8ivas,  in  Asia  Minor, 
was  compelled  to  leave  his  home  in  Divrik, 
for  fear  of  death  on  account  of  his  faith,  and 
abode  for  several  months  in  a  cave  in  the 
mountains,  where  he  was  secretly  furnished 
with  provisions. —  Van  Lennep. 

Ver.  39.  A  Good  Report. — As  in  the  motions 
of  the  heavens  there  is  one  common  revolu- 
tion, which  carries  the  whole  frame  daily 
unto  one  point,  from  east  to  west,  though 
each  several  sphere  hath  a  several  cross-way 
of  its  own,  wherein  some  move  swifter  and 
others  with  slower  motion — so,  though  saints 
may  have  their  several  corruptions,  and  these 
likewise  stronger  in  some  than  in  others,  yet, 
being  animated  by  one  and  the  same  Spirit, 
they  all  agree  in  a  steady  and  uniform  motion 
unto  Christ.  If  a  stone  were  placed  under 
the  concave  of  the  moon,  though  there  be 
air  and  fire  and  water  between,  yet  through 
them  all  it  would  hasten  to  its  own  place ; 
so  be  the  obstacles  never  so  many,  or  the 
conditions  never  so  various,  through  which 
a  man  must  pass,  through  terrors  and  tempta- 
tions, and  a  sea  and  wilderness,  and  fiery 
serpents,  and  sons  of  Anak  ;  yet  if  the  heart 
love  Christ  indeed,  having  obtained  a  good 
report  through  faith,  he  concludes  that 
heaven  is  his  home,  to  which  he  is  hasten- 
ing, whither  Christ  the  forerunner  is  gone 
before. — H.  G.  Salter. 


CHAPTER  XII. 
PERSUASION  TO   STEADFASTNESS. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

It  is  necessary  to  the  understanding  of  this  chapter  that  we  keep  in  mind  the  persecutions 
and  sufferings  which  were  straining  the  allegiance  of  the  Christian  Jews.  These  were 
peculiarly  distressing  at  a  time  when  they  were  also  exposed  to  the  solicitations  and 
temptations  of  the  unbelieving  Jews. 

Ver.  1.  Cloud. — Familiar  metaphor  for  a  great  multitude.  Witnesses. — Who  in  varied 
spheres  illustrate,  and  testify  to,  the  power  of  faith  to  win  spiritual  triumphs.  There  is 
possibly  in  the  mind  of  the  writer,  and  suggesting  his  figure,  the  scene  of  the  Roman  or 
Grecian  public  games,  in  which  the  combatants  are  watched  by  multitudes  of  spectators. 
Compare  1  Cor.  iv.  9.  The  idea  of  "  witnesses  "  as  those  who  cheer  by  their  testimony  is 
however  to  be  preferred.    Every  weight.— R.V.  margin,  '•  all  cumbrance."    Farrar^ "  stripping 

402 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.  chap.  xii. 


oflE  at  once  cumbrance  of  every  kind  "  :  the  word  "  weight "  was  used,  technically,  in  the 
language  of  athletes,  to  mean  "  superfluous  flesh,"  to  be  reduced  by  training,  6yKos  means 
"  swelling,"  "  weight,"  and  then,  morally,  "  pride,"  •'  inflation."  The  writer,  no  doubt,  had  in 
mind  the  special  dangers  of  the  Hebrew  Christians.  The  "  divers  and  strange  teachings," 
spoken  of  in  chap.  xiii.  9,  in  which  would  be  included  the  Judaising  practices  which  they 
were  tempted  to  observe,  will  probably  suit  the  figure  best.  Which  doth  so  easily  beset  us. 
— These  words  form  the  translation  of  a  single  Greek  word,  einrepia-raTov.  It  is  a  form  of  a 
verb  which  means  to  "  stand  round  us " ;  so  the  meaning  may  be  "  closely  clings."  The 
precise  reference  of  the  writer  is  not  to  particular  and  individual  sins,  but  to  the  sin  of 
apostasy  which  at  that  time  beset  all  Christian  Jews,  Moulton  says,  "  The  prevailing 
opinion  amongst  modern  writers  appears  to  be  that  the  word  signifies  well  (or  easily) 
surrotmdino  ;  and  that  the  writer  is  comparing  sin  with  a  garment — either  a  loosely  fitting 
garment  by  which  the  runner  becomes  entangled  and  is  tripped  up,  or  one  that  clings 
closely  to  him  and  thus  impedes  his  ease  of  movement."  But  Moulton  prefers  the  suggestion 
of  words  that  are  analogous  to  this  one,  and  that  would  lead  us  to  render  "  much  admired"; 
lit.  "  well  surrounded  by  an  admiring  crowd."  Anyway,  the  ordinary  associations  of  the 
term  "  besetting  sin  "  are  not  suitable  here.  Stuart  paraphrases  the  verse  thus :  "  Since 
so  many  illustratious  patriarchs,  prophets,  and  martyrs,  who  preceded  us,  have  exercised 
faith,  persevered  in  it,  and  obtained  the  rewards  consequent  upon  it,  let  us,  in  like  manner, 
rejecting  every  solicitation  to  renounce  our  hopes  and  our  holy  religion,  persevere  in  the 
belief,  and  in  the  duties,  which  the  gospel  requires." 

Ver,  2,  Looking. — More  precisely  "  looking  off,"  "  looking  away."  It  implies  "  the  con- 
centration of  the  wandering  gaze  in  a  single  direction,"  Author, — apxny^v  :  see  chap,  ii,  10. 
Leader,  Imitator,  Captain,  Prince,  Bringer-on.  He  who  introduced  the  new  religion. 
Finisher.— TeXetwTTji/.  The  one  who  has  Himself  reached  the  goal  for  which  we  are  striving. 
There  is  a  guarantee  in  His  having  completed  the  race  (1  Pet,  i.  9). 

Ver,  3.  Consider.— Place  your  sufferings  in  comparison  with  His.  Against  Himself. — R.V. 
renders  "  against  themselves,"  which  is  a  well-supported  reading.  Wearied. — R.V.  renders 
"  that  ye  wax  not  weary,  fainting  in  your  souls."  Stuart  renders,  "  lest,  becoming  discouraged 
in  your  minds,  ye  grow  weary." 

Ver.  4,  Unto  blood. — The  last  extremity  ;  the  surrender  of  life.  Implying  that  Christ  had 
so  resisted.  From  this  we  infer  that  there  had  been  no  actual  martyrs  among  the  Christian 
Jews  addressed  by  the  writer. 

Ver,  5. — Better  read  as  a  question,  "  Have  ye  forgotten  ?  " 

Ver.  8,  Bastards. — vodoc,  illegitimate  children,  who  cannot  be  properly  thought  of  as  God's 
spiritual  children. 

Ver.  0.  Father  of  spirits.-  See  Num,  xvi.  22,  xxvii.  16;  Zech.  xii.  1.  "  The  Creator  of  all 
spirits,  who  is  the  Giver  of  life  to  all,  who  knows  the  spirit  which  He  has  made,  and  can 
discipline  it  by  chastening." 

Ver,  12,  Lift  up  the  hands. — Lit.  "  straighten  out  the  relaxed  hands  and  the  palsied  knees" 
(Isa.  XXXV.  3). 

Ver.  15.  Eoot  of  bitterness. — See  Deut.  xxix.  18. 

Ver.  16,  Fornicator. —The  Scriptures  do  not  thus  describe  Esau.  Farrar  thinks  that  the 
writer  must  have  in  mind  tiie  Jewish  Hagadah,  in  which  Esau  is  represented  in  the  blackest 
colours,  as  a  man  utterly  sensual,  intemperate,  and  vile.  And  this  also  was  the  view  of 
Philo. 

Ver.  17.  Place  of  repentance, — In  his  father.  There  is  no  reference  to  repentance  in 
relation  to  God.  He  could  not  induce  his  father  to  change  his  mind  in  regard  to  the  matter. 
The  reference  is  entirely  to  the  transfer  of  the  rights  of  primogeniture  to  the  younger  of  the 
twins,  .lacob.  The  rest  of  the  chapter  pleads  for  watchfulness  and  steadfastness  on  the 
ground  that  everything  under  the  new  dispensation  is  of  a  milder  aspect,  and  of  a  more 
inviting,  encouraging  nature,  than  under  the  old.  For  the  references  to  Old  Testament 
Scriptures,  see  Exod.  xx.,  xxi. ;  Dent,  iv.,  v. 

Ver.  18.  Might  be  touched. — A  figure  of  speech  for  a  "  material "  thing.  "A  palpable 
and  enkindled  fire."  For  the  terrors  accompanying  the  giving  of  the  law  on  Sinai,  see 
Exod.  xix.,  XX. 

Ver.  22.  Mount  Sion. — The  spiritual  or  heavenly  mount.  Not  Jerusalem,  but  what  is 
represented  by  Jerusalem.  *'  The  mountain  and  city  of  a  living  God."  Innumerable 
company. — Lit,  "  myriads,  the  joyful  company  of  angels." 

Ver.  23.  Church  of  the  firstborn. — The  saints  from  the  older  dispensation.  Some  regard 
it  cs  meaning  the  Christian  saints  who  had  gone  to  glory ;  but  the  spiritual  association  of 
spiritual  Christian  Jews  with  spiritual  Jews  of  all  the  ages  is  prominently  before  the  writer's 
mind. 

Ver.  24,  Blood  of  sprinkling. —A  figure  taken  from  the  blood-sprinklings  of  the  old 
covenant  (Exod.  xxi  v.  8 :  see  1  Pet.  i.  2).  That  is  done  spiritually  by  Jesus  which  was 
materially  represented  in  the  old  blood-sprinklings.     See  chap.  ix.  14. 

403 


CHAP.  XII.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


Ver.  29.  Consuming  fire. — Deut.  iv.  24.  Not  intended  as  in  any  sense  a  description  of 
God,  but  "an  anthropomorphic  way  of  expressing  His  hatred  of  apostasy  and  idolatry. 
The  reference  is  made  in  order  to  show  why  we  ought  to  serve  God  with  holy  reverence  and 
fear." 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  1,  2. 

The  Inspiration  of  Noble  Examples. — The  "  cloud  of  witnesses  "  is  manifestly 
that  list  of  noble  and  heroic  men  and  women  which  has  been  given  in  chap,  xi., 
together  with  that  further  list  which  has  been  suggested  by  brief  allusion.  The 
good  men  and  true  who  have  lived,  laboured,  and  suffered  in  the  past  should 
always  appear  to  us  as  a  "  great  cloud  of  witnesses  "  :  in  their  witnessing  is  found 
(in  one  sense)  their  immortality.  Any  goodness  gained,  any  moral  triumphs 
won,  never  die,  in  the  sense  of  losing  their  moral  influence  on  humanity.  Every 
good  lifts  the  race  to  a  higher  level. 

"  Lives  of  great  men  all  remind  us 
We  may  make  our  lives  sublime, 
And,  departing,  leave  behind  us 
^  Footprints  on  the  sands  of  time." 

*'  Those  who  thus  encompass  us,  a  countless  host,  have  had  witness  borne  to  them 
through  their  faith,  and  in  turn  stand  forth  as  witnesses  to  faith,  bearing 
testimony  to  its  power  and  works.  One  and  all  they  offer  encouragement  to  us 
in  our  own  contest  of  faith."  The  picture  which  the  writer  brings  before  us 
is  that  of  the  great  public  games  of  his  day.  We  are  those  who  have  to  fight 
the  spiritual  fight,  and  to  run  the  Christian  race,  and  we  may  well  be  inspired 
to  all  holy  energy,  persistency,  and  self-restraint,  as  we  note  the  severe  discipline 
of  these  competitors,  the  intensity  of  their  struggle,  the  delight  in  their  \'ictory, 
and  the  glory  of  their  rewards.  Some,  however,  see  in  the  "  cloud  of  witnesses  " 
the  vast  crowding  mass  of  spectators  in  the  amphitheatre,  who  watch  the 
combatants  and  the  racers,  and  inspire  them  to  heroic  efforts  by  their  loud 
acclaim.  The  previous  suggestion  may  be  preferred  as  more  precisely  connecting 
this  chapter  with  the  previous  one. 

I.  The  cloud  of  witnesses. — Setting  before  us  the  long  roll  of  godly  men  who 
have  lived  through  the  ages,  there  are  two  things  we  can  see  in  them  which  may 
well  inspire  us.  1.  They  were  men  who  mastered  their  circumstances  in  loyalty 
to  God.  But  nobody  ever  yet  mastered  his  circumstances  until  he  had  mastered 
himself.  When  once  that  is  done,  the  mastery  of  circumstances  becomes  an  easy 
thing.  The  circumstances  of  our  life  never  are  "  according  to  our  mind."  They 
are  largely  created  by  wills  which  conflict  with  ours,  and  by  events  that  are 
wholly  beyond  our  control.  What  is  inspiring  in  the  Old  Testament  heroes  is 
this — they  did  not  master  their  circumstances  in  any  mere  forcing  of  their  own 
will  and  pleasure,  but  in  loyally  furthering  the  will  of  God  as  they  knew  it. 
And  that  is  the  highest  law  for  the  ruling  of  our  lives.  Circumstances  will 
eventually  master  any  man  whose  only  idea  is  to  make  his  will  rule  them. 
Circumstances  never  can  eventually  master  any  man  whose  one  idea  is,  to  make 
God's  will  rule  them.  2.  They  were  men  who  fulfilled  their  life-mission  in 
devotion  to  God.  On  an  Irish  tombstone,  erected  to  the  memory  of  a  devoted 
lady,  whose  life  was  a  service  to  the  children  and  the  poor,  is  inscribed  these 
words  :  *'  She  had  a  work  to  do,  and  she  did  it."  That  might  be  said  of  the 
Old  Testament  saints.  The  recognition  of  a  Divine  commission  ennobles  a  life. 
And  such  recognition  should  come  to  us  all.  If  God  "  calls  us  by  His  grace  into 
the  fellowship  of  His  Son,"  we  may  be  absolutely  sure  that  He  calls  us  by  His 
grace  into  some  special  form  of  work  for  His  Son,  and  endows  us  with  the  gifts 
for  the  work,  and  brings  round  to  us  the  sphere  in  which  the  work  can  be  done. 

404 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.         cfiAP.  xiL 


Every  man  that  watches  for  it  in  a  spirit  of  willingness  will  find  his  work  set 
before  him ;  and  he  may  be  inspired,  by  the  old  saints,  to  fulfil  it  in  absolute 
devotion  to  God.  He  will  be  ennobled  by  the  sense  of  having  a  trust.  What 
may  be  the  inspiring  power  of  the  Old  Testament  wrestlers  in  the  fight,  and 
runners  in  the  race,  should  also  be  felt  as  the  power  of  those  saintly  and  heroic 
souls  who  have  come  into  our  personal  knowledge.  They  are  our  inspiring 
"cloud  of  witnesses." 

II.  The  one  sublime  Witness. — "  Looking  unto  Jesus."  The  writer  seems 
to  have  designed  to  say  something  more  precise  than  appears  in  our  English 
translation.  He  seems  to  have  meant  this :  "  Look  at  that  long  roll  of  noble 
souls,  and  see  what  triumphs  they  gained  through  their  loyalty  and  devotion  to 
God  ;  but  do  not  fix  all  your  thought  on  them.  Get  all  the  inspiration  that  you 
can  from  them  ;  and  then  look  off,  look  away  from  them — look  unto  Jesus,  who, 
in  mastery  of  circumstances,  in  loyalty  to  God,  in  fulfilment  of  His  life-mission,  and 
in  devotion  to  God,  is  altogether  and  easily  their  Head,  their  Captain.  Talk  about 
the  practical  life  of  faith  which  the  old  heroes  lived  ;  here  is  a  practical  life  of 
faith  in  every  way  more  perfect,  more  complete,  more  nobly  toned,  more 
triumphant,  more  inspiring.  Here  is  the  Author,  the  Head,  the  First,  of  men 
of  faith ;  here  is  the  Finisher :  for  nobody  will  ever  live  a  nobler  life  of  faith, 
a  Hfe  that  shall  surpass  His."  Fix  attention  on  three  things  concerning  this 
absolute  model  of  faith  :  1 .  He  endured  the  cross,  despising,  mastering,  rising 
above,  the  shame.  2.  His  faith  in  the  issue  of  His  enduring  brought  Him 
present  joy.  "  For  the  joy  that  was  set  before  Him."  3.  His  persistent  and 
triumphant  faith  brought  round  to  Him  the  Divine  recognition  and  reward. 
"  And  hath  sat  down  at  the  right  hand  of  God."  There  is  this  additional 
inspiration  in  the  example  of  the  Lord  Jesus — that  we  can  apprehend  the  Divine 
future  reward  with  which  .His  life  of  faith  was  sealed.  We  cannot  pass  in 
thought  with  the  heroes  of  the  Old  Testament  into  the  life  beyond,  and  so 
estimate,  inspiringly,  their  final  rewards.  We  can  only  see  how  rewards  came 
in  their  heart-joy  in  God,  and  in  their  good  influence  in  their  generation.  But 
the  New  Testament  Scriptures  labour  to  help  us  in  the  apprehension  of  the  glory 
and  reward  which  Christ  has  won,  and  they  hold  out  before  us  the  hope  of 
gaining  that  "  crown  of  life  "  which  our  Lord  Jesus  has.  So  Jesus,  the  sublime 
witness  to  the  practical  life  of  faith,  leads  on  the  double  train  of  heroic  souls, 
from  the  old  age  and  new,  who  believed  God,  and  in  their  faith  gained  the  great 
life-victory. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES, 

Ver.    1.    Besetting    Sins. — Precision  habit,  every  man  finds  great  difficulty 

of  thinking  may   prevent   our  saying  in  living  through  the  godly  life.     In 

that  the  writer  had  in  his  mind  pre-  the  great  Christian  life-conflict,  as  in 

cisely  what   we   mean  by  *'  besetting  times  of  national  warfare,   there  are 

sins,"  but  to  take  his  words  with  our  some   battles,    and   much    continuous, 

own  associations  will  not  put  us  out  of  skirmishing,      guerilla      work.        The 

harmony  with  his  thought,  or  with  his  battle- times   are    special    temptations 

teaching.      If   a  man   speaks  harshly  and   trials.     The    continuous    warfare 

concerning  the  failings  and  infirmities  is    represented   by    the   daily   dealing 

of  other  people,  we  may  be  quite  sure  with  besetting  sins, 
that  he  either  does  not  know  himself,  I.  All   of  us   have    some    evil  dis- 

or  has  a  distorted  vision  which  allows  position,  tendency,  or  influence,  which 

him  to  see  only  what  he  wishes  to  see.  may  properly  be  called  our  "  besetting 

By    reason    of    natural    or    acquired  sin." — Usually,    because   of   its  subtle 

frailties  of  disposition,  character,  and  and  disguised  character,  it  is  difficult 

405 


CHAP.  XII.         BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   HEBREWS. 


for  us  to  find  it.  Very  often  we  are 
strangely  surprised  to  find  that  it  is 
the  very  thing  of  which  we  most 
readily  and  most  harshly  accuse 
others.  1.  Some  are  directly  related 
to  our  fallen  nature, — as  hereditary 
drunkenness,  gluttony,  and  sensuality ; 
as  that  love  of  bloody  sports  which 
was  so  dreadful  a  feature  in  Pagan 
human  nature,  and  which  reappears 
in  our  day  in  the  strange  love  of 
reading  about  murders,  and  the  fasci- 
nation of  novels  containing  sensational 
horrors.  2.  Some  result  from  defective 
moral  training,  which  has  failed  to 
deal  wisely  and  effectively  with  the 
first  signs  of  evil  in  child-life, — as 
vanity,  affectation  of  superiority, 
idleness,  procrastination,  cruelty,  etc. 
3.  Some  result  from  the  union  of  fallen 
nature  with  outward  temptation,  e.g. 
pride,  unforgivingness,  self-conceit, 
readiness  to  take  offence.  With  some 
knowledge  of  our  real  selves,  we  could 
not  fail  to  pray,  with  the  psalmist,  ^ 
*'  Cleanse  Thou  me  from  secret  faults." 

II.  Our  besetting  sins  must  exert 
a  most  injurious  influence  on  our  Chris- 
tian lives. — A  man  may  be  smitten 
down  by  a  great  temptation,  and  find 
recovering  power,  and  rise  again, 
shaking  off  the  evil,  and  becoming 
henceforth  the  better  for  the  humbling 
experience.  But  the  danger  of  our 
little  falls,  through  our  besetting  sins, 
lies  in  their  so  seldom  awaking  us,  and 
arousing  us  to  exert  our  recuperative 
energies.  Besetting  sins  wear  away, 
as  the  waters  wear  the  stones. 

III.  Besetting  sins  demand  our 
watchful  attention  and  our  persist- 
ent effort. — This  we  feel  increasingly 
with  the  growing  years.  The  experi- 
ence of  life  gradualh'"  persuades  us  that 
we  cannot  hope  to  entirely  uproot  them. 
(The  Diabolians  will  persist  in  lurk- 
ing in  some  little- known  corners  of 
Mansoul.)  What  we  can  do  we  must 
do,  and  keep  on  doing — we  can  watch 
for  and  crush  their  opportunities. 
This  we  shall  never  thoroughly  do  until 
we  can  see  our  besetment  to  be  sin. 

Looldng  off  unto  Jesus. — In  the  old 
406 


Grecian  games  it  was  necessary  to 
keep  the  eye  of  the  runner  fixed  on 
the  goal.  So  we  must  turn  our 
attention  from  everything  else  and 
fix  it  on  Christ,  if  we  would  run  well 
the  Christian  race. 

I.  Under  what  apprehensions  of 
Him   are  we  to    look   to   Christ? — 

1.  As  Saviour.  Illustrate  by  the 
figures,  "Alpha  and  Omega";  ran- 
som ;  opened  prison ;  slave  given  his 
freedom.  The  look  should  be  one  of 
gratitude.  2.  As  Master.  Illustrate 
by  figures,  captain  leading  army; 
king ;  Joshua  seeing  "  Captain  of 
host "  ;  St.  Paul  receiving  orders  from 
the  glorified  Jesus.  The  look  should 
be  one  of  obedience.  3.  Example : 
Jesus  is  the  model  of  a  man  dwelt  in 
by  the  Spirit  of  God.  Imitation  needs 
the  presence  of  a  model. 

II.  In  what  scenes  are  we  to  look 
to  Jesus  ? — 1.  Common  duty.  Christ's 
image  can  be  reflected  in  a  little  pool 
even   better    than    in    a    great    lake. 

2.  Times  of  temptation.  3.  Times  of 
difficulty.  .  Imagine  Moses  anxiously 
looking  every  morning,  the  first  thing, 
to  see  whether  the  pillar- cloud  had 
moved.  4.  Means  of  grace.  What  is 
ever  brought  to  mind  by  the  church 
steeples  pointing  upwards. 

III.  What  sort  of  looks  should 
they  be? — 1.  Trustful.  A  man  on  a 
height  looks  up,  not  down.  2.  Obe- 
dient.    The  proper  spirit  of  servants. 

3.  Loving,  as  to  our  mother  or  our 
dearest  friend.  We  shall  look  to 
Christ  the  better,  the  better  we  come 
to  know  Him.  Know  Him  worthily, 
and  we  shall  look  off  to  Him 
altogether. 

Weights  and  Sins. — There  is  a  regular 
series  of  thoughts  in  this  clause.  If 
we  would  run  well,  we  must  run 
light ;  and  if  we  would  run  light, 
we  must  look  to  Christ.  The  central 
injunction  is,  "  Let  us  run  with 
patience  "  ;  the  only  way  of  doing  that 
is  the  "  laying  aside  all  weights  and . 
sin " ;  and  the  only  way  of  laying 
aside  the  weights  and  sins  is  "  looking 
unto  Jesus."      The   "sin   which   doth 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS.         chap.  xii. 


so  .easily  beset  us"  is  sin  generically. 
All  sin  is  a  besetting  sin.  It  is  the 
characteristic  of  every  kind  of  trans- 
gression, that  it  circles  us  round  about, 
that  it  is  always  lying  in  wait  and 
lurking  for  us.  Every  "  weight "  is 
distinct  from  "sin."  We,  as  racers, 
must  throw  aside  the  garment  that 
wraps  us  round — that  is  to  say,  *'  the 
sin  that  easily  besets  us  "  ;  and  then, 
besides  that,  we  must  lay  aside  every- 
thing else  which  weights  us  for  the 
race— that  is  to  say,  certain  habits  or 
tendencies  within  us. 

I.  There  are  hindrances  which  are 
not  sins. — Sin  is  a  transgression  of 
God's  law  ;  a  '*  weight  "  is  that  which, 
allowable  in  itself,  is,  for  some  reason, 
a  hindrance  and  impediment  in  our 
running  the  heavenly  race.  Sin  is 
sin,  whosoever  does  it;  but  weights 
may  be  weights  to  me,  and  not  weights 
to  you.  What  are  these  weights  ? 
We  carry  them  about  with  us,  and  we 
are  to  put  them  away  from  ourselves. 
They  are  the  feelings  and  habits  of 
mind  by  which  we  abuse  God's  great 
gifts  and  mercies.  We  are  to  put 
away  the  dispositions  within  us  which 
make  things  temptations.  It  is  an 
awful  and  mysterious  power  that  we 
all  possess  of  perverting  the  highest 
endowments,  wfiether  of  soul  or  of 
circumstances,  which  God  has  given 
us,  into  the  occasions  for  faltering 
and  falling  back  in  the  Divine  life. 
Every  blessing,  every  gladness,  every 
possession,  external  to  us,  and  every 
faculty  and  attribute  within  us,  we 
turn  into  heavy  weights  that  drag  us 
down  to  this  low  spot  of  earth. 

II.  If  we  would  run,  we  must  lay 
these  weights  aside. — The  whole  of 
the  Christian's  course  is  a  fight.  We 
carry  with  us  a  double  nature.  Be- 
cause of  that  conflict,  it  follows  that, 
if  ever  there  is  to  be  a  positive  pro- 
gress in  the  Christian  race,  it  must  be 
accompanied  and  made  possible  by 
the  negative  process  of  casting  away 
and  losing  much  that  interferes  with  it. 
There  is  no  spiritual  life  without  dying  ; 
there  is  no  spiritual  growth  without 
putting  off   "  the  old   man   with   his 


affections  and  lusts."  How  is  this 
laying  aside  to  be  performed?  1.  By 
getting  so  strong  that  the  thing  shall 
not  be  a  weight,  though  we  carry  it. 
2.  By  taking  the  prudent  course  of 
putting  it  utterly  aside.  There  are 
many  duties  which,  by  our  own  sinful- 
ness, we  make  weights,  and  we  dare 
not,  and  we  cannot  if  we  would,  lay  them 
aside, — a  man's  calling  or  domestic 
ties.  The  duties  that  in  our  weakness 
become  impediments  and  weights  we 
must  not  leave.  There  is  a  large  field 
for  misconception  and  misappHcation  in 
the  settlement  of  the  practical  question, 
Which  of  my  weights  arise  from  cir- 
cumstances that  I  dare  not  seek  to 
alter,  and  which  of  them  from  circum- 
stances that  I  dare  not  leave  unaltered  ? 
There  is  a  large  margin  left  for  the 
play  of  honesty  of  purpose,  and  plain 
common  sense,  in  the  fitting  of  general 
maxims  to  the  shifting  and  complicated 
details  of  an  individual  life.  But  no 
laws  can  be  laid  down  to  save  us  that 
trouble. 

III.  This  laying  aside  of  every 
weight  is  only  possible  by  looking 
to  Christ. — Some  people  suppose  that 
when  they  have  laid  aside  a  weight, 
conquered  a  hindrance,  given  up  some 
bad  habit,  they  have  done  a  meritorious 
thing.  We  are,  no  doubt,  strengthened 
by  the  very  act ;  but  then  it  is  of  no 
use  at  all  except  in  so  far  as  it  makes 
us  better  fitted  for  the  positive  progress 
which  is  to  come  after  it.  The  racer 
puts  aside  his  garments  that  he  may 
i^un.  We  empty  our  hearts  that  Christ 
may  fill  them.  And  Christ  must  have 
begun  to  fill  them  before  we  can  empty 
them.  "  Looking  to  Jesus  "  is  the  only 
means  of  thorough -going,  absolute  self- 
denial.  All  other  surrender  than  that 
which  is  based  upon  love  to  Him,  and 
faith  in  Him,  is  but  surface  work,  and 
drives  the  subtle  disease  to  the  vitals. 
If  you  would  lay  aside  every  weight, 
you  must  look  to  Christ,  and  let  His 
love  flow  into  your  soul.  Then  self- 
denial  will  not  be  self-denial.  It  will 
be  blessing  and  joy,  sweet  and  easy. 
Whatever  you  give  up  for  Christ  you 
get  back    from    Christ,   better,   more 

407 


CHAP.   XII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


beautiful,  more  blessed,  hallowed  to  its 
inmost  core,  a  joy  and  a  possession  for 
ever. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Cloud  of  Witnesses. — They  are  *'a 
cloud  "  like  that  background  of  one  of 
Raffaelle's  great  pictures,  which,  at 
first  sight,  seems  only  a  bright  mist, 
and  looked  at  more  closely  is  all  full  of 
calm,  angel  faces. — Ibid. 

Vers.  1,  2.  The  Christian  Race. — 
This  passage  is,  in  the  main,  an  exhor- 
tation to  that  steadfast  pursuit  of  the 
Christian  ideal  to  which  we  are  all 
bound  by  our  upward  calling  of  God 
in  Christ  Jesus.  Nor  is  there  any 
doubt  that  its  leading  image  is  that  of 
a  race  such  as  the  athletes  of  classical 
times  used  to  run ;  possibly  the  race 
that  was  in  the  writer's  mind  was  one 
of  those  that  were  run  in  the  vast 
Roman  amphitheatres,  in  which  the 
spectators  sat  in  seats  that  rose  tier 
above  tier,  so  that  to  the  runners, 
swiftly  flashing  by,  their  white  faces 
and  many-coloured  robes  would  look 
like  an  illuminated  "  cloud "  stooping 
from  the  sky. 

I.  How  are  we  to  prepare  ourselves 
for  the  Christian  race  ? — By  "  laying  " 
or  putting  "  aside  "  ;  by  stripping  off, 
by  getting  quit  of,  "  every  weight"  or 
better,  "  all  encumbrance,"  all  that 
would  hinder  or  impede  us,  "  and  the 
sin  that  sur7'ounds  us"  or,  as  the  English 
Version  has  it,  "the  sin  that  doth  so 
easily  beset  us."  As  to  the  first  phrase, 
we  need  not  limit  ourselves  to  the  acts 
of  the  athlete,  and  what  they  may 
suggest.  *'  Every  weight,"  "  all  en- 
cumbrance," cannot  mean  less  than 
this — that  we  are  to  lay  aside  whatever 
impedes  us,  whatever  would  hamper  or 
delay  us,  from  whatever  cause,  in  what- 
ever way.  The  second  clause  is  more 
difficult.  It  seems  as  if  "  the  sin  that 
doth  so  easily  beset  us "  must  be  our 
most  besetting  sin,  the  sin  to  which 
we  are  most  inclined  by  our  personal 
make,  temperament,  habit,  and  into 
whose  hindering  and  degrading  clutches 
we  are  most  apt  to  fall.  But  the 
simple   fact   is,  that  our  eight  words, 

408 


*'  the  sin  that  doth  most  easily  beset 
us,"  are  a  translation,  or  a  paraphrase, 
of  only  three  Greek  words,  which  might 
be   translated   by  ^^the   cii'cumamhient 
sin."     What  the  writer  meant  to  con- 
vey was,  that,  in  addition  to  all  other 
encumbrances,  all  else  which  is  adverse 
to  the  Christian  Ufe,  we  must  lay  aside 
the  ruling  sin  of  the  age,  the  sin  which 
is  in  the  very  air  of  our  time,  which 
besets  or  surrounds  us  like  an  atmo- 
sphere— the  sin  which,    as    everybody 
shares  it,  we  may  half  persuade  our- 
selves is  not  a  sin  at  all,  or  is  not  a  sin 
so  deadly  that  it  need  be  very  strenu- 
ously  opposed  or  renounced.     It  is  a 
popular  sin  which  the  inspired  writer 
had  in  his  eye — probably  that  "  fear  of 
persecution "   about    which    he,    again 
and  again,  warns  his  readers.     These 
common  and  admired  sins  of  the  time, 
sins   which  we   can  readily  excuse  to 
ourselves,   which  make   men,  in  some 
sense,  think  better  of  us  and  associate 
with  us  on  easier  terms,  which  at  all 
events  gain  for  us  a  more  peaceful  and 
quiet  life,  are  among  the  most  dangerous, 
because  the  most  subtle  and  plausible, 
sins  ;  they  are  among  the  most  fatal 
hindrances    to    our    advance    in    the 
spiritual  life ;  and  the  temptations  to 
them  oifer  us  our  noblest  opportunities 
for  serving  God  and  man.     And  these 
sins  are  as  active,  as  potent,  as  fatal, 
to-day  as  they  ever  where. 

II.  If  we  ask,  How  are  we  to  run  this 
race  ?  the  answer  is,  With  "  patient 
endurance,"  with  cheerful  constancy, 
with  a  resolute  and  ever-renewed 
exertion  of  our  whole  strength,  with 
an  unflagging  and  whole-hearted  devo- 
tion which  will  shrink  from  no  trial, 
succumb  to  no  temptation. 

III.  In  running  this  race,  we  are 
encouraged  by  the  example  and  testi- 
mony of  a  great  cloud  of  witnesses. 
For  the  writer  of  this  epistle  the  cloud 
was  composed  of  the  heroic  men  and 
women  whose  famous  achievements  he 
had  summarised  in  the  previous  chapter, 
from  the  father  of  the  faithful  down- 
ward. But  in  what  sense  were  they 
witnesses  ?  Are  they  the  interested 
and  approving  spectators  of  our  exploits  ? 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS.         chap.  xil. 


Or  are  they,  rather,  witnesses  and 
martyrs  to  the  truth,  and  to  the  God  in 
whom  we  believe — witnesses  in  whose 
lives  we  may  see  our  own  experiences 
reflected,  and  from  whose  lips  we  may 
gather  consolation  and  encouragement  ? 
How  does  their  presence  help  us  ?  By 
stimulating  us  to  a  keener  emulation, 
a  braver  effort,  a  stronger  determina- 
tion to  win,  because  they  are  looking 
on ;  or  by  furnishing  us  with  guid- 
ance, counsel,  courage,  hope,  as  we 
remember  how  much  they  endured, 
what  perils  and  defects  they  sur- 
mounted, and  how  gloriously  they 
conquered  at  last,  and  how  richly  they 
were  rewarded?  If  we  must  choose 
between  these  interpretations,  we 
choose  the  latter.  But  we  need  not 
choose ;  we  may  accept  both  motives, 
in  so  far  as  they  are  good  and  helpful 
motives ;  for  all  things  are  ours,  all 
motives,  aids,  encouragements,  to  that 
strenuous  and  continuous  effort  by 
which  alone  we  can  rise  into  the  life 
eternal,  and  receive  its  crown.  There 
is  no  kind  of  reading  by  which  we  profit 
more  than  the  biographies  of  men  who 
were  genuinely  or  greatly  good.  But 
of  all  biographies  those  which  are  the 
most  helpful  to  us  are  those  which  we 
find  in  the  Bible,  when  once  we  have 
learned  that  the  men  whose  lives  are 
recorded  there  were  men  of  like  pas- 
sions with  ourselves,  and  that  their 
faults  and  sins  are  recorded  for  our 
warning  and  instruction,  not  that  we 
may  justify  them,  or  allow  ourselves 
in  them ;  for  these  biographies  were 
written  by  men  who  had  a  special  eye 
for  the  trials  of  faith  and  the  triumphs 
of  righteousness. 

IV.  If  we  ask.  How  may  we  win  ? 
how  may  we  best  assui^e  ourselves  of 
winning  this  race,  of  ultimately  obtain- 
ing that  perfect  ideal  of  character 
which  has  been  set  before  us  ? — the 
answer  is,  By  "  looking  unto  Jesus." 
In  the  imperial  games  the  goal  was 
placed  in  front  of  the  emperor's  seat. 
And  the  image  of  this  verse  seems  to 
be,  that  that  victorious  athlete  and 
champion,  Jesus  Christ,  after  having 
run  the  race  as  it  had  never  been  run 


before,  and  reached  the  goal  in  face  of 
such  opposition  and  under  the  pressure 
of  such  a  burden  as  man  never  before 
endured,  had  been  called  up  by  the 
Imperator  to  sit  on  His  right  hand, 
and  to  adjudge  the  prize  in  all  races 
that  should  be  thereafter  run.  Be- 
cause He  sits  high  above  the  goal, 
because  He  is  to  judge  the  strife,  and 
His  hand  is  to  confer  the  wreath  of 
victory,  we  are  to  look  to  Him  as  we 
run ;  nay,  as  the  Greek  verb  implies, 
looking  away  froinfi  all  others,  or  else, 
we  are  to  look  only  to  Him,  There  is 
to  be  a  deliberate  and  energetic  con- 
centration of  our  whole  power  and 
aspiration  on  Him.  We  are  to  con- 
centrate our  thoughts  on  Christ, 
because  He  is  "  the  Author  and 
Perfecter  of  faith  "—not  only  of  our 
faith,  but  of  faith.  To  this  writer 
faith  is  a  principle,  not  a  creed — not 
a  system  of  co-ordinated  beliefs,  but 
a  condition  and  adventure  of  the  soul, 
or  a  life  of  which  this  condition  is  the 
animating  and  inspiring  motive.  When 
he  speaks  of  Jesus  as  "  the  Author 
and  Perfecter "  of  this  faith,  he  may 
mean — 1.  That  even  the  great  cloud 
of  witnesses,  from  the  father  of  the 
faithful  down  to  the  last  of  his  children 
who  had  "  wrought  righteousness," 
owed  their  faith  to  Jesus  Christ,  the 
everlasting  Word,  by  whom  all  things 
were  made  and  all  men  redeemed. 
2.  That  in  Jesus  this  Divine  principle 
of  life  first  received  its  full  incarnation, 
that  in  Him  this  ideal  was  first  per- 
fectedly  realised.  3.  And  that,  if  we 
are  to  live  a  life  of  faith.  He  must 
both  originate  this  life  in  us  and 
complete  it.  How  confidently  w^e  may 
look  to  Him  for  all  the  grace  and 
help  we  need,  we  learn  from  the  next 
clause  of  the  verse  :  "  who,  for  the  joy 
set  before  Him,  endured  a  cross,  de- 
spising shame."  "  The  joy  of  the 
Saviour  was  the  salvation  of  mankind  " 
{Theodoret).  Even  the  cruel  and 
shameful  burden  of  "a  cross "  could 
not  abate  His  zeal  nor  rob  Him  of 
the  prize ;  nor  could  the  shame  of  it 
daunt  His  courage  or  turn  Him  from 
His   aim.     And   what   was  His  cross 

409 


cfiAP.  XII.         HOMILEfIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS, 


but  the  sense  and  burden  of  our  sin  ?  wrath   for  those  sins.      2.    The  spirit 

What   the   shame  which   He  despised  in    which   they  were   encountered    and 

but  our  shame  in  that,  seeing  the  very  home.  "  Endured  "  with  resignation  and 

Ideal  of  virtue  and  righteousness,  we  fortitude ;  "  despised  the  shame."     He 

did  not  recognise  it,  did  not  love  and  delights  in  the  scorching   of  the  fire, 

desire  it ;  nay,  hated  it,  and,  so  far  as  and  He  scorns  the  woe. 

we  could,  banished  it  from  the  world  ?  II.  The  prospects,  by  the  pleasur- 

He  who  endured  all  this  /or  us,  and  able  contemplation  of  which,  amidst 

frmn  us,  can  He  withhold  His  sympathy  His  humiliation  and  shame,  the  Lord 

and  aid  when,  instead  of  opposing  and  Jesus   Christ   was   animated. — 1.   The 

rejecting  Him,  we  set  out  on  the  very  ordained  mediatorial   residts  by  which 

course  He  trod,   press   forward   in  it  the  joy  of  the   Lord  Jesus  was  actu- 

under   manifold   weaknesses   and   dis-  ally    inspired.       He     was     to     enter 

couragements,    looking   steadfastly   to  through  His  sufferings  into  pre-eminent 

Him     for    guidance,    sympathy,    and  personal  elevation  and  glory.     By  His 

grace  ? — aS'.  Cox,  D.D.  humiliation    and    sufferings   He    vin- 
dicated the  government  and  character 

Plodding  through  the  Uneventful. —  of  the  Godhead,  and  secured  the  re- 
It  is  a  great  deal  easier  to  be  up  to  the  demption  and  happiness  for  unnum- 
occasion  in  some  shining  moment  of  bered  multitudes  of  mankind.  2.  The 
a  man's  life,  when  he  knows  that  a  inherent  characteristics  hy  which  the 
supreme  hour  has  come,  than  it  is  to  joy  of  the  Lord  Jesu^,  so  inspired,  was 
keep  that  high  tone  when  plodding  distinguished.  (1)  The  purity  of  His 
over  all  the  dreary  plateau  of  un-  joy.  Absolutely  unsullied.  (2)  The 
eventful,  monotonous  travel  and  dull  vastness.  Its  extent  cannot  be 
duties.  It  is  easier  to  run  fast  for  a  measured  or  fathomed.  His  joy,  like 
minute  than  to  grind  along  the  dusty  His  love,  passeth  knowledge.  (3)  The 
road  for  a  day.  We  have  all  a  few  perpetuity.  Never  fade.  (4)  The 
moments  in  life  of  hard,  glorious  dij^usiveness.  The  fulness  of  His  joy 
running  ;  but  we  have  days  and  years  sends  forth  streams  to  the  angels  and 
of  walking — the  uneventful  discharge  the  spirits  of  the  just  made  perfect, 
of  small  duties. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D.  III.     The     influence     which     the 

pleasure  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  so  excited 

Ver.  2.  The    Saviour    rejoicing     to  and  constituted,  ought  to  have  upon 

suffer  for  Mankind. — The  apostle  Paul  His  people. — 1.  They  ought    to   rejoice 

frequently  illustrates  the  position  and  with  Him  in  His  joy.     We  ought  to 

prospects  of  Christians  by  a  reference  congratulate   our  Lord   Jesus   on   the 

to  the  social   customs   existing  among  pleasure  arising  from  His  mediatorial 

the  persons  to  whom  his  writings  were  work.     Exult  with  Him,  and  for  His 

addressed.       Here    is   a   reference   to  sake.     2.  They  ought  to  accord  to  Him 

"  the  games."     Spiiitually  applied,  the  the  entire  surrender  and  devotedness  of 

Christians  addressed  are  regarded   as  their    hearts.      If    the    majesty    and 

the   spectators  ;    the   departed  saints  ;  splendour  of  His  celestial  glory  are  now 

and  the  Lord  Jesus,  once  a  successful  continually  employed  for  our  welfare, 

candidate,  and  now  the  Arbiter  at  the  is  there  not  a  solemn  and  resistless  call 

goal,    by   whom   the   reward  is  to  be  upon  our  unreserved  practical  dedica- 

adjudged  and  bestowed.  tion  to  His  will  ?      3.  They  should  hear 

I.    The    humiliation  and    suffering  their  own    afflictions  and    sm^rows    in 

to  which  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  sub-  imitation    of  His    example.      Mental 

mitted. — 1.    In  their  nature.       *'  The  resignation  and  fortitude,  and  in  holy 

cross "   signifies    death    by  crucifixion,  contempt  of  what  He  had  to  suffer — 

"  The  shame,"  of  being  deserted  by  the  thus   He   endured ;    and  here   is   our 

Father,  being  accursed  and  outcast,  of  obligation  too.      4.  They  should  hahit- 

bearing  the  guUt  of  millions,  and  the  ually  anticipate   the  period  when  they 

410 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARt:    HEBREWS.         chap.  XIL 


shall  meet  their  Redeemer  in  the  ivorld  of  fading  laurel,  but  the  incorruptible 

of  joy  where  now  He  dwells.     The  eye  crown  of  life.     Endeavour  to  partici- 

of  faith  can  detect  Him  standing  by  pate  in   the  spirit   of   this  high    and 

the  goal,   holding  out  not  the  crown  noble  feeling. — J.  Parsons. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  3—8. 

The  Strain  of  Maintaining  Christian  Profession. — These  verses  indicate  three 
sources  whence  strain  cannot  fail  to  come,  and  they  suggest  considerations  which 
may  help  the  professor  successfully  to  endure  the  strain,  whencesoever  it  may 
come. 

I.  One  source  is  the  contradiction  of  sinners. — They  that  would  live  godly 
will,  in  every  age,  suffer  some  form  of  outward  persecution.  The  persecution 
need  not  always  take  coarse  and  violent  forms  ;  in  our  times  it  takes  refined  and 
subtle  forms,  which  are  often  harder  to  bear.  Let  any  man  to-day  try  to  live 
a  really  spiritual  life,  and  teach  men  really  spiritual  truth,  lifting  off  material 
coverings,  and  bringing  to  view  spiritual  realities,  he  will  be  sure  to  meet  with 
persecutions  at  the  hands  of  those  who  are  zealous  for  the  literality  and 
materiality  of  religion.  Our  Lord  embodied  an  ever-acting  principle  when  He 
said  to  His  disciples,  "  Ye  are  not  of  the  world  ;  therefore  the  world  hateth  you." 
Put  the  earnest  young  Christian  into  the  worldly-toned  house  of  business  to-day, 
and  he  will  get  the  "  contradiction  of  sinners  against  himself,"  as  certainly  as 
did  the  Christian  men  and  women  in  the  old  Pagan  days.  The  peril  of 
persecution  from  without,  on  account  of  our  religious  opinions,  or  our  religious 
life,  must  be  duly  estimated.  What  can  bring  us  strength  to  endure  ? 
"  Consider  Him."  "  It  is  enough  for  the  disciple  that  he  be  as  his  Master." 
We  need  not  wonder  that  we  should  be  misrepresented  and  misunderstood,  for 
so  was  He.  We  need  not  wonder  even  that  our  words  should  be  resolutely  turned 
against  us,  for  so  were  His.  We  need  not  wonder  even  if  we  are  the  victims 
of  hostile  schemes  and  combinations,  for  so  was  He.  But  He  triumphed  over 
all ;  and,  in  spite  of  all,  lived  through  His  ''  godly,  righteous,  and  sober  life  "  : 
and  so  may  we.  The  principles  on  which  He  triumphed  may  be  ours.  The 
spirit  in  which  He  triumphed  may  be  ours.     We  need  not  faint. 

II.  Another  source  of  strain  is  the  weakness  of  self. — There  is  such  an 
easily  reached  limit  to  our  power  of  resistance.  We  can  try  a  little  ;  but  if  we 
do  not  immediately  succeed,  we  give  up  trying.  Our  striving  against  sin  is  at 
best  but  a  poor  thing ;  there  is  seldom  anything  heroic  about  it.  Cranmer  may 
be  weak  enough  to  yield  when  the  stake  is  right  in  view,  but  we  weakly  shrink 
back  long  before  we  reach  any  such  extremities.  To  us  it  can  be  said,  with 
a  most  pointed  application,  "  Ye  have  not  yet  resisted  unto  blood,  striving 
against  sin."  We  are  far  enough  away  from  the  martyr  spirit.  What  shall 
so  inspire  us  as  to  lift  us  into  moral  strength  for  enduring  ?  To  some  extent 
the  story  of  the  martyr  ages ;  but  chiefly  the  thought  of  Him  who  did  resist 
unto  blood — who  did  wrestle  with  sin,  and  yielded  His  life  in  the  struggle,  but 
yielded  it  only  when  the  victory  was  won.  We  must  never  wonder  if  the  demand 
upon  our  moral  strength  is  such  a  demand  as  was  made  upon  Christ's.  It  is 
inspiration  to  us  to  look  and  see  how  He  "  resisted  unto  blood." 

III.  Another  source  of  strain  is  the  discipline  of  God. — We  wish  that  to 
be  saved  was  to  be  saved  once  for  all.  And  it  is  not.  It  is  to  be  put  into  the 
school  of  God  for  discipline,  involving  chastisements,  with  a  view  to  full  sanctify- 
ing. God's  discipline  is  as  that  of  a  father  with  his  sons.  \.  There  is  love  at 
the  heart  of  it.  2.  There  is  wisdom  in  the  arranging  of  it.  3.  But  there  is  no 
hesitation  in  putting  all  needful  severities  into  it.     The  Christian  can  no  more 

411 


CHAP.  xii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS. 


expect  to  understand  the  discipline  of  God  than  the  son  can  expect  to  understand 

the  corrections  and  restraints  of  his  father.  The  son  endures  through  the 
trustfulness  of  his  love.  And  the  Christian  endures  in  the  same  way.  No 
noble  human  character  ever  yet  existed  that  had  not  come  out  of  a  school  of 
discipline ;  and  no  saintly  character  ever  yet  was  found  among  us  which  had  not 

come  out  of  the  disciplinary  school  of  God.     What  shall  help  us  to  bear  this 

form  of  strain  ?  Looking  unto  Jesus,  who,  "  though  He  were  a  Son,  learned 
obedience  by  the  things  which  He  suffered,"  while  in  God's  earthly  school  of 
discipline. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Yer.   3.    Christ^s  Eriduring   Contra-  flict.      3.    His   triumph   has   brought 

diction.  Him  a  trust  of  grace  which  He  now 

I.  What  forms  of  contradiction  dispenses  to  all  who  follow  Him  in 
Christ  was  subjected  to. — 1.  His  de-  the  same  holy  war,  and  are  subject 
sign  in  founding  a  spiritual  kingdom  now  to  a  similar  "  contradiction  of 
was  contradicted.  2.  His  spirit  and  sinners."  Whatever  then  may  be 
character  were  misunderstood  both  by  the  precise  form  which  our  difficulties 
His  own  disciples  and  by  His  enemies,  take,  as  we  endeavour  practically  to 
He  was  often  hindered,  as  at  Capernaum  live  the  Christian  life  amid  depressing 
and  Gadara,  and  above  all  at  Jerusalem.  and  opposing  circumstances,  we  are 
And  at  last  He  was  turned  out  and  distinctly  called  to  endure,  in  Christ's 
crucified.  strength,  for  Christ's  sake,  and  after 

II.  In  what  forms,  and  on  what  the  pattern  of  Christ's  example. 
principles,  did  Christ  overcome  the  con- 
tradiction?— 1.  An  amazing  patience  Ver.  4.  War  with  Sin  to  the  Death. — 
was  shown  by  Him.  He  proved  the  Read  only  with  the  imperfect  human 
power  that  lies  in  "  patient  continuance  vision,  the  "  great  cloud  of  witnesses  " 
in  well-doing."  2.  The  consciousness  are  but  men,  who  sustained  human 
of  His  Divine  mission  sustained  Him.  relationships,  fulfilled  human  duty, 
A  man  can  always  be  strong  if  in  and  suffered  human  sorrows.  Read 
his  soul  is  the  cherished  conviction  with  the  illuminations  of  the  Divine 
that  he  has  a  work  to  do.  "  A  man  Spirit,  they  are  more  than  men ; 
is  immortal  until  his  work  is  done."  they  are  spiritual  men,  carrying  on 
3.  His  faith  in  the  abiding  presence  a  spiritual  warfare,  gaining  spiritual 
of  God  with  Him  constantly  sustained  triumphs,  and  looking  for  the  eternal 
Him.  St.  Paul  in  this  sense  of  God's  rewards  of  righteousness.  And  such 
presence  comes  a  long  way  behind  our  as  they  were  we  are  or  may  be. 
Divine  Lord,  and  yet  he  could  say.  Looking  down  on  our  lives,  they  may 
"  I  can  do  all  things  through  Him  seem  to  be  wholly  human  things,  full 
who  strengtheneth  me."  of   human    cares,    human    toils,    and 

III.  How  does  Christ's  overcoming  human  associations.  But  learn  to,  look 
contradiction  become  an  encourage-  aright,  and  then,  though  our  world- 
ment  and  a  help  to  us  ? — None  of  us  sphere  may  seem  to  be  insignificant, 
can  ever  have  so  extreme  a  conflict  we  are  really  occupying  the  places  of 
as  He  had.  But  none  can  ever  have  the  old  heroes,  and  doing  the  work 
any  conflict  that  will  be  really  different  of  the  old  giants.  We  are  spiritual 
to  His.  1.  His  was  a  conquest  on  our  men,  wrestling  with  human  circum- 
behalf.  It  was  really  our  foe  He  dis-  stances,  and  forcing  them  to  yield  us 
abled.   And  it  is  a  weakened,  humbled  spiritual  strength,  spiritual  riches. 

foe  that  is  left  to  us  to  fight.     2.  He  I.  Christian  life,  in  all  its  aspects, 

presented    the    example    which    may  presents  to  us  sin  as  a  fact.— St.  Paul 

guide  us  to  wise  methods  in  our  con-  says,  as  an  unfolding  of  private  and 

412 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS.         chap.  xii. 


personal  experience  that  somewhat 
surprises  us  :  "  For  that  which  I  do 
I  know  not  :  for  not  what  I  would, 
that  do  I  practise ;  but  what  I  hate, 
that  I  do.  ...  I  find  then  the  law, 
that,  to  me  who  would  do  good,  evil 
is  present.  For  I  deHght  in  the  law 
of  God  after  the  inward  man  :  but  I 
see  a  different  law  in  my  members, 
warring  against  the  law  of  my  mind, 
and  bringing  me  into  captivity  under 
the  law  of  sin  which  is  in  my  mem- 
bers "  (Rom.  vii.  15,  21-23).  We  can 
sympathise  with  him.  It  is  the  fact, 
that  conscious  evil  is  intimately  con- 
nected with  all  the  expressions  and 
associations     of     the     Christian     life. 

1.  The  field  of  Christian  thought.  The 
conceptions,  imaginations,  desires,  of 
Christian  thinking.  Who  can  say, 
"  I  have  made  my  heart  clean,  I  am 
pure  from  my  sin  "  ?  There  is  no  side 
of  the  Christian  life  in  which  the 
subtlety  of  sin  is  so  painful  and  oppres- 
sive. Even  in  the  house  of  God  we 
cannot  keep  our  thoughts  free  from 
that  which  is  unsuitable  and  disturbing. 

2.  The  Christian's  bodily  nature.  De- 
sires, dispositions,  passions,  tempers, 
lusts,  are  closely  related  to  bodily  con- 
ditions, and  the  sincere  man  is  conscious 
that  they  are  not  always  kept  under 
hand,  subject  to  authority.  There 
are  indulgences  of  bodily  evil  which 
do  not  come  forth  to  public  view,  or 
bring  us  into  the  condemnation  of 
even  social  law.  In  even  the  outer 
relations  of  Hfe  evil  is  always  near, 
in  forms  of  omission  or  of  commission. 
There  are  falterings  in  honesty,  in 
truth,  in  long-suffering,  in  faithfulness, 
in  speech,  and  in  duty.  He  must  be 
a  very  bold  man,  and  withal  a  very 
foolish  one,  who  thinks  he  can  read 
his  life  in  the  light  of  the  spiritual  and 
holy  laws  of  God,  and  can  say,  "All 
these  have  I  kept  from  my  youth 
up."  Sin  is  not  only  an  existing  thing ; 
it  exists  in  activity  ;  it  is  ever  moving 
and  working  as  an  opposing  force. 
The  "heart  is  deceitful  above  all 
things,  and  desperately  wicked " ;  in 
it  is  a  world  of  undeveloped  evil  capa- 
city.    Out  of  the  heart  proceedeth  all 


kinds  of  evil.  It  is  not  properly  sin 
that  all  these  evil  things  should  be  in 
our  hearts.  Sin  is  really  something 
done,  something  wrong  cherished, 
something  bad  that  is  sought  after. 
The  sadness  of  sin  lies  in  this — that 
it  exists  in  activity ;  the  evils  in  our 
hearts  are  always  proceeding  forth, 
coming  out.  St.  Paul  speaks  of  the 
"  motions  of  sins  in  our  members." 
It  would  have  mattered  little  if  they 
had  kept  still.  It  was  imperilling, 
it  was  humiliating,  that,  serpent-like, 
they  writhed  and  twisted,  and  strove 
to  lift  up  the  head  and  thrust  forth 
a  deadly  sting.  He  speaks  of  evil  as 
warring  within  him.  He  had  not 
cared,  if  it  had  only  sheathed  sword, 
and  lain  still ;  but  it  was  perpetually 
harnessed,  sallying  forth,  and  watching 
for  every  opportunity  of  striking  a 
deadly  blow.  We  need  to  face  this 
fact — the  evil  in  us  is  evil  in  activity, 
in  an  activity  of  opposition  to  the 
work  of  grace  in  our  souls.  It  is  a 
masked  thief,  actively  engaged  in  steal- 
ing our  peace ;  a  masked  slanderer, 
trying  to  make  us  think  ill  of  our 
God  ;  a  masked  serpent,  watching  to 
thrust  out  a  sting,  and  fill  our  natures 
with  the  poison  of  hell ;  and  a  masked 
murderer,  who  would,  if  he  could, 
destroy  both  body  and  soul. 

II.  The  Christian  life  in  us  is  a 
Divine  force,  also  existing  in  activity, 
and  conflicting  with  sin  up  to  the 
measure  of  blood. — St.  Paul  says,  "  I 
live ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me." 
That  gives  the  true  idea  of  Christian 
life.  It  is  "  Christ  living  in  us."  It 
is  the  power  of  God  dwelling  in  us, 
so  as  to  be  the  main-spring,  the  motive- 
power,  the  controlling  principle,  of  our 
life.  As  truly  as  the  soul  possesses 
the  body  and  uses  its  faculties,  so 
truly  does  God  possess  the  soul  and 
express  Himself  in  all  the  powers  and 
workings  of  the  soul.  Evil  is  near  to 
us,  closely  associated  with  every  aspect 
of  the  religious  life  ;  but  this  new  thing, 
this  vital  force,  this  power  of  the 
Divine,  is  nearer,  is  in  closer  relations, 
is  truly  ours.  However  the  evil  may 
get  in  to  us,  it  is  still  an  outside  thing. 

413 


CHAP.  XII.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS. 


It  is  a  parasite  on  the  outside  of  the 
tree :  this  Divine  Hfe  is  the  very  sap 
which  flows  in  the  tree  itself.  The 
parasite  may  cHng  very  closely,  it  may 
even  pierce  the  bark,  but  it  can  never 
be  more  than  an  outside  thing ;  while 
every  duct  and  vessel  of  the  tree  is 
filled  with  this  flowing  life  of  God. 
Being  the  Divine  Spirit,  it  must  be 
active.  We  cannot  think  of  God  other- 
wise than  as  ever  working.  And  it 
is  active,  we  may  be  sure,  to  mould 
character,  to  settle  right  dispositions, 
to  influence  and  tone  human  relation- 
ships, to  recover  from  human  failings, 
to  battle  with  spiritual  foes.  The 
activity  of  the  Christ- life  will  be  seen 
in  opposition  to  that  evil  which  comes 
so  close,  puts  on  so  many  forms,  and 
stands  in  such  constant  antagonism  to 
everything  that  is  good  and  God-like. 
Wherever  there  is  active  evil  there  is 
an  opposing  active  good.  Wherever 
there  are  microbes  there  are  also 
phagocytes.  Every  man's  life  is  the 
scene  of  a  twofold  conflict.  Each  of 
these  represents  the  other.  In  the 
physical  sphere  there  is  a  perpetual 
struggle  between  disease  and  health, 
death  and  life.  Every  breath  of  air 
we  breathe,  every  measure  of  food  we 
eat,  has  poisonous  matter  with  it,  and 
may  breed  disease.  Our  vital  force 
is  constantly  trying  to  eliminate  the 
poison.  So  in  the  sphere  of  morals. 
In  our  spirit  is  present,  active  evil, 
only  kept  down  by  the  unceasing 
activity  of  the  new  life  in  Christ.  Our 
text  gives  the  measure  up  to  which 
God  expects  this  conflict  to  go.  "  Re- 
sisting unto  blood."  There  must  be 
this  striving  against  sin,  even  at  the 
peril  of  expending  life  itself  in  the 
striving.  As  the  martyr  stands  for 
the  truth,  and  resists  evil,  up  to  the 
very  sacrifice  of  his  life,  so  must  every 
Christian  man  expect,  and  even  desire, 
to  stand  for  purity,  for  truth,  for  God, 
resisting  all  the  forms  of  evil  that  may 
assail  him,  even  up  to  the  measure  of 
the  sacrifice  of  life  itself.  In  the  old 
days  of  chivalry,  when  tournaments 
were  held,  and  knights,  clad  in  armour, 
met   within   the   lists   to   prove   their 

414 


prowess,  and  young  squires  fought  to 
win  their  knightly  spurs,  the  struggle 
was  not  usually  for  life  :  whoever  was 
unhorsed  was  reckoned  to  be  van- 
quished. But  if  there  was  family  feud, 
and  deadly  hatred  filled  the  mind  of 
the  combatant,  he  would  go  up  and 
touch  his  foeman's  shield  with  the  point 
of  his  lance.  That  meant  war  to  the 
death.  In  that  case  there  must  be 
"  resisting  unto  blood  " — the  life  of  one 
or  the  other  of  those  combatants  must 
stream  forth  upon  those  lists.  Such 
is  the  conflict  of  evil  and  good  within 
the  Christian.  It  is  an  irreconcilable 
feud  ;  no  play  of  blunted  spears.  When 
a  man  becomes  a  Christian,  he  virtually 
goes  up  to  strike  with  the  lance -point 
the  shield  of  his  foe,  and  there  must 
be  no  putting  spear  in  rest,  no  sheath- 
ing of  the  sword,  until  the  foe  is 
vanquished,  and  the  victory  of  right- 
eousness is  won.  This  is  the  standard 
of  the  Christian  conflict ;  but  in  us 
the  conflict  too  often  falls  below  the 
standard.  God,  indeed,  does  not  often 
call  for  the  extreme  self-sacrifice. 
Within  this  limit,  how  real  is  our 
battle  with  sin  'i  How  much  has  it 
cost   us  to  resist  sin,   taking  form  as 

(1)  weaknesses  of  Christian  character  ; 

(2)  neglect  of  Christian  duties;  (3)  be- 
setting sins;  (4)  social  and  business 
errors  and  failings  ?  Unto  blood  ?  So 
far  from  our  life-struggle  reaching 
unto  blood,  there  is  a  much  smaller 
test  which  we  cannot  bear  to  have 
applied  to  us.  It  has  not  reached 
to  the  imperilling  of  a  limb.  What 
passion,  like  a  hand,  has  been  resolutely 
cut  off,  and  cast  away  ?  What  sinful 
appetite,  like  a  right  eye,  has  been 
determinedly  plucked  out,  and  cast 
away  ?  What  questionable  business 
habit  which  brought  money  in,  what 
comfortableness  which  led  to  the 
neglect  of  Christian  ordinances,  has, 
like  a  foot,  been  cut  off,  and  cast  away  ? 
Would  we  gain  the  full  victory  ?  Then 
must  we  keep  "  looking  unto  Jesus, 
the  author  and  perfecter  of  our  faith." 

Ver.  5.  Merus  Persecutions  as  God^s 
Chastenings. — "  The  chastening  of  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.    XII. 


Lord."  This  expression  might  seem  to 
be  especially  suited  to  the  distresses 
that  come  by  disease,  calamity,  failure, 
pain,  bereavement — things  in  which 
man's  action  is  not  evident,  but  God's 
providential  workings  are  very  mani- 
fest. It  is,  however,  singular  and 
suggestive  that  the  writer  has  so 
distinctly  in  mind  th^  persecutions  which 
the  Jewish  Christians  were  then  suffer- 
ing, and  the  strain  which  those  persecu- 
tions were  putting  on  their  loyalty  to 
Christ.  Even  those  persecutions  he 
would  have  them  think  of  as  God's 
chastisements — things  which  God  was 
graciously  using  for  the  carrying  out 
of  His  disciplinary  work.  Illustra- 
tion may  be  taken  from  the  nation  of 
Israel.  They  were  subject  to  oppres- 
sion and  persecution  from  many  out- 
side foes — Assyrian,  Egyptian,  Baby- 
lonian, Syrian,  Koman  ;  but  those  foes 
could  never  be  other  than  instruments 
in  the  hands  of  Jehovah,  for  the 
disciplinary  work  needed  by  His  people. 
The  manifest  human  element  in  out- 
ward persecutions  makes  it  difficult  to 
realise  the  Diviiie  element  in  them.  If 
God  is  in  them,  and  working  His  work 
by  means  of  them,  then  of  these  things 
we  may  be  sure:  1.  They  are  held 
within  strict  limitations.  2.  The 
schemes  of  men  in  arranging  them 
have  no  security  of  being  carried  out. 
3.  We  are  not  left  alone  in  the  endur- 
ing of  them.  4.  Instead  of  injuring 
us,  they  can  only  do  us  the  good  God 
has  assigned  for  them  to  do. 

Vers.  7,  8.  The  Fatherliness  of  the 
Heavenly  Father. — We  are  permitted 
to  use  our  earthly  paternal  relations 
in  the  endeavour  to  understand  the 
paternal  relations  of  God.  But  this 
is  often  a  difficulty  to  devout  souls, 
who  hesitate  to  compare  the  heavenly 
Father  with  imperfect  earthly  fathers. 
It  may  be  helpful,  therefore,  to  present 
and  to  illustrate  this  point.  There  is 
a  perfect  fatherliness  conceivable.  If 
we  could  put  together  the  many  forms 
of  fatherliness  which  have  been  pre- 
sented by  unusually  good  fathers,  we 
should  have  a  satisfactory  apprehen- 


sion of  it.  That  fatherliness  can  but 
be  incompletely  represented  in  any  one 
human  father  ;  but  that  fatherliness — 
ideal  fatherliness — is  found  in  the  rela- 
tions of  God  with  us. 

Yer.  7.  Life  an  Education. — God's 
purpose  in  placing  us  in  this  world  is 
not  chiefly  that  He  may  put  us  to  the 
proof,  but  that  He  may  educe  and 
train  our  faculties  and  gifts,  and  make 
the  best  of  us,  whatever  our  natural 
virtues  or  failures.  This  is  the  proof 
of  Scripture,  and  of  the  teachings  of 
experience.     Life  is  an  education. 

I.  God  educates  us  by  means  of 
our  physical  needs. — We  alone,  of  all 
God's  creatures,  are  sent  into  this 
world  unprovided  with  any  of  those 
things  which  are  necessary  to  the 
support  of  physical  life.  God  has  not 
made  our  task  easy.  He  does  not 
mean  that  work  shall  be  mechanical, 
but  that  it  shall  tax  our  ingenuity, 
and  bring  out  our  mental  powers  to 
the  uttermost.  Relatively,  too,  we  are 
one  of  the  weakest  of  living  beings. 
We  must  work.  That  is  the  law  of 
life.  It  strengthens  the  mind,  pro- 
duces patience,  endurance,  forethought, 
courage.  Thus  is  God  educating 
us. 

II.  God  educates  us  by  means  of 
our  mental  needs. — He  has  implanted 
in  nature  that  which  awakens  our 
curiosity,  and  He  has  implanted  in  us 
a  hunger  and  thirst  after  knowledge 
and  truth,  and  the  result  is  education. 
There  is  in  us  all  a  love  of  the  beauti- 
ful. Our  hearts  go  out  after  these 
things  in  nature.  They  have  a 
strange  power  to  make  us  think. 

III.  God  educates  us  by  the  sorrows 
and  trials  of  life. — The  lower  animals 
are  almost  exempt  from  suffering. 
"  Life  to  them  is  a  maximum  of  en- 
joyment, with  the  minimum  of  suffer- 
ing." Man  is  born  to  trouble.  All 
life  is  leavened  with  pain,  forebodings, 
vain  regrets,  unsatisfied  longings. 
Why?  Because  **God  dealeth  with 
you  as  with  sons."  "  Mystery  of 
pain."  The  saintliest  of  men  are  those 
who   have  suffered  the  most.     It  be- 

415 


CHAP.   XII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


hoved  even  the  great  Captain  of  our 
salvation  to  be  made  perfect  through 
suffering. 

lY.  God  educates  us  by  our  spirit- 
ual needs. — Our  greatest  want  is  to 
know  God.  All  feel  the  need  of  pro- 
pitiation and  reconciliation.  Just  as 
nature  satisfies  mind,  so  the  Bible 
satisfies  spiritual  needs.  1.  The  text 
throws  light  on  the  Tuystery  of  the 
present.  We  are  often  puzzled  by  the 
question,  "  What  will  become  of  the 
heathen  ?  "  If  life  is  only  a  probation, 
I  can  show  no  light ;  but  if  life  is 
an  education,  then  this  earth  is  only 


the  lowest  room  in  God's  school ;  and 
in  other  spheres  and  at  other  times 
the  education  which  circumstances 
thwarted  and  hindered  here  can  be 
carried  on  under  happier  circum- 
stances. 2.  It  throws  light  on  the 
mystery  of  the  future.  Here  is  a 
powerful  argument  for  a  future  life. 
Our  education  here  is  at  best  but  in 
its  initial  stage  when  death  removes 
us.  Our  education  here  is  only  the 
learning  of  the  alphabet.  In  our 
Father's  house  are  many  mansions, 
and  in  one  of  these  our  education  will 
be  continued. — Angus  M.  Mackay^  B.A. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  ^—11, 

Vers.  9-11.  The  Father  of  Spirits. — The  contrast  here  presented  between  our 
earthly  father  and  our  heavenly  Father,  and  the  arguments  for  the  superior 
claims  of  our  heavenly  Father,  are  based  upon  a  distinction  which  needs  to 
be  more  fully  recognised.  Our  earthly  father  is  father  of  the  body  and 
the  animal  life  that  we  have ;  our  heavenly  Father  is  Father  of  the  souls  that 
we  are.  The  natural  relations  illustrate  the  spiritual,  but  the  spiritual  are 
altogether  higher  than  the  natural. 

I.  We  recognise  authority  in  the  natural  relation  (ver.  9). — That  sense  of 
parental  authority  is  the  basis  of  moral  character.  It  associates  right  and 
wrong  with  the  will  of  a  person,  and  prepares  us  to  see  absolute  right  and 
wrong  as  the  vnll  of  God.  It  is  to  rise  into  the  higher  plane  of  being  to 
recognise  the  authority  of  God  in  the  spiritual  relation. 

II.  We  yield  to  the  natural  authority,  even  though  we  know  it  is  imperfect 
(ver.  10). — The  sense  of  fatherly  unwisdom  comes  to  the  son.  His  judgment 
does  not  go  with  his  father's.  He  is  keen  enough  to  see  that  the  father  is 
serving  his  own  ends,  rather  than  doing  the  best  for  him ;  and,  nevertheless, 
the  loyal  and  good  son  yields  to  his  father,  does  what  he  wishes,  submits  himself 
in  obedience.  How  much  more  then  should  the  submission  and  obedience  be 
offered  when  the  Father's  wisdom  and  judgment  and  motive  are  absolutely 
unquestionable,  and  the  child  knows  that  the  fatherly  dealings  are  altogether 
for  his  profit  ? 

III.  When  there  is  full  trust  in  the  natural  relation,  things  painful  can 
easily  be  borne. — This  may  be  illustrated  by  things  required  to  be  done  or 
borne  in  times  of  illness.  The  assurance  that  parental  love  aims  at  restored 
health  and  strength  enables  the  child  to  endure.  And  in  the  higher,  spiritual 
relation  we  may  be  so  sure  that  our  heavenly  Father  is  ever  working  to 
produce  the  "  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness  in  us,"  that  we  may  find  it  easy 
to  bear  chastening  which,  "for  the  present,  is  not  joyous,  but  grievous." 

Vers.  12-17.  Christian  Ways  of  helping  One  Another. — It  is  evident  that  the 
writer  had  the  passage  from  Isaiah  (chap,  xxxiii.  3)  in  mind.  Four  ways  of 
mutually  helping  under  the  Christian  strain  are  here  indicated. 

I.  By  considerateness  for  the  weak. — Lit.  *'  Straighten  out  the  relaxed  hands 
and  the  palsied  knees"  (ver.  12).  Make  one  effort  to  invigorate  the  flaccid 
muscles  which  should  be  so  tense  in  the  struggle  in  which  you  are  engaged. 

416 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.         chap.  xii. 


This,  however,  vinduly  confines  the  advice  to  the  Christian's  work  upon  hirtiself. 
It  seems  better  to  refer  the  words  to  the  way  in  which  the  strong  ones  in  a 
Church  can  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak.  In  the  Christian  chain  there 
always  are  weak  links.  They  may  be  a  peril.  They  should  be  an  anxiety. 
They  can  be  strengthened.  That  is  the  work  of  the  experienced  and  strong- 
principled. 

II.  By  personal  example. — "Make  straight  paths  for  your  feet"  (ver.  13). 
Let  those  about  you  see  you  "  walking  worthily  of  the  vocation  wherewith  you 
are  called."  Every  steadfast  Christian  is  a  power  ;  every  beautiful  Christian 
is  an  inspiration.     Integrity  helps  all  who  watch  it. 

III.  By  wise  ordering  of  relationships. — "  Follow  peace  with  all  men  " 
(ver.  14).  That  is,  shape  your  conduct,  meet  your  obligations,  and  show  a 
graciousness  in  all  the  daily  associations  of  your  life  :  they  shall  disarm  your 
foes,  and  make  peaceful  all  your  human  relations.  "  Blessed  are  the  peace- 
makers." And  those  who  follow  after  holiness  always  find  that  holiness  makes 
for  peace. 

IV.  By  anxious  watchfulness  and  resolute  dealings  with  the  beginnings  of 
evil. — "Looking  carefully"  (vers.  15-17).  The  care  concerns  things  and 
persons.  1.  Things.  "Lest  any  root  of  bitterness  springing  up  trouble  you." 
Things  include  opinions,  teachings,  attractions  of  worldly  pleasure,  neglects  of 
duty,  self-indulgences,  etc.  2.  Persons.  "  Lest  there  be  any  profane  persons." 
Persons  are  always  more  mischievous  than  things,  because  there  is  life,  and 
activity,  and  power  of  influence  in  them.  It  is  the  person  whose  word,  example, 
or  influence  is  morally  mischievous  against  whom  the  writer  inveighs. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  10.  Different  Principles  in  the  any  aggravation  of  His  sons.  And  we 
Chastenhig  of  Sons. — R.V.  "  Chastened  may  think  of  Him  as  so  concerned  for 
us  as  seemed  good  to  them."  It  is  an  the  individual  well-being  of  each  son 
indication  of  the  thoughtful  observation  as  to  adapt  the  outworking  of  His 
and  intelligent  insight  of  this  writer,  parental  principles  so  as  to  secure  the 
that  he  discerns  the  weakness  usually  "  profit,"  the  moral  and  spiritual  good, 
attaching  to  the  discipline  of  earthly  of  each.  Restlessness  of  sons  under 
parents.  It  is  the  expression  of  the  the  weak  fatherhoods  of  earth  may  be 
father's  ideas  and  wishes,  rather  than  reasonable.  The  restfulness  of  sons 
a  careful  adaptation  of  method  and  under  the  strong,  wise,  gracious  father- 
rule  to  meet  the  differing  dispositions  hood  of  God  should  be  expected, 
of  the  children.     So  often  the  family 

rules  are  applied  without  modification,  Ver.  11.  Grievous  Now,  Joyous  By- 
and  the  maintenance  of  the  parental  and-By. — It  seems  to  be  an  ever-work- 
authority  is  more  cared  for  than  the  ing  law  of  life  for  moral  beings  that 
moral  well-being  of  a  particular  child.  joy  shall  not  come  first — that  joy  shall 
It  has  also  to  be  said,  that  the  yet  always  be  a  consummation,  an  issue, 
graver  mistake  made  by  human  parents  of  something  which,  in  one  form  or 
is  punishing  when  in  a  temper,  and  another,  involves  struggle,  self-restraint, 
making  the  chastisement  represent  the  "  strain  and  stress."  Things  can  only 
wounded  personal  feeling,  rather  than  gain  moral  character  out  of  conflict, 
the  care  for  the  child's  good.  On  these  The  moral  life  is  recognising  the  good 
sides  of  parental  weakness  there  can  and  the  evil,  with  inclination  to  choose 
only  be  contrast  between  man  and  God.  the  evil,  and  judgment,  based  on  know- 
We  may  never  think  of  the  heavenly  ledge,  approving  the  good  ;  and  then 
Father  as  losing  His  self-control  under  a   conflict   resulting  in   following   the 

EE  417 


CHAP.   XII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  HEBREWS. 


judgment,  and  not  the  inclination. 
That  struggle  must  come  first ;  it  is 
always  grievous ;   but  triumph  brings 

joy. 

The  Happy  Fruit  of  Righteousness. 
— ct/oryvtKos  is  that  which  bestows 
happiness  or  produces  it.  This  corre- 
sponds with  the  writer's  design,  who 
means  to  say  that  afflictions,  rightly 
improved,  will  be  productive  of  fruit 
that  will  confer  happiness^  such  fruit 
as  righteousness  always  produces. — 
Moses  Stuart. 

The  Purpose  of  Affliction  relieves  the 
Pain  of  Affliction. — "  Man  is  born  to 
trouble  as  the  sparks  fly  upward." 
That  may  be  true  as  a  fact  of  observa- 
tion, but  we  must  never  think  it  be 
true  as  a  matter  of  Divine  appointment. 
If  we  could  clear  away  all  the  troubles 
which  men  bring  upon  themselves, 
there  would  be  very  little,  if  any,  trouble 
left  in  the  world  to  account  for.  Con- 
cerning earthly  trouble  we  may  say, 
Man  made  it,  by  disturbing  the  Divine 
order  in  His  wilfulness  ;  but  God  over- 
rules it,  takes  the  evil  thing  up  into 
His  service,  and  works  out  a  surprising 
benediction — a  benediction  that  could 
not  be  wrought  in  any  other  way — by 
means  of  it.  But  the  use  which  God 
makes  of  it  must  never  be  allowed  to 
blind  our  eyes  to  the  evil  of  it.  Trouble 
is  trouble,  though  we  may  be  lifted  up, 
by  our  confidence  in  the  fatherliness 
of  God,  to  call  it  chastisement  and 
correction.  But  though  man  is  the 
cause  of  all,  or  almost  all,  the  trouble 
under  w^hich  this  fair  earth  of  ours 
groans  continually,  we  have  the  per- 
plexing fact  to  deal  with,  that  those 
who  suffer  are  by  no  means  always 
those  who  sin  ;  and  it  is  not  easy  for 
us  to  discern  why  those  who  suffer 
need  the  chastening.  The  tower  in 
Siloam  falls  in  a  way  that  men  call 
accidental,  but  those  who  were  crushed 
to  death  were  not  sinners  above  all 
who  dwelt  in  Jerusalem.  The  Judsean 
Christians  suffered  bitter  persecutions 
at  the  hands  of  Jewish  brethren  and 
heathen  neighbours,  but  the  troubles 

418 


were  not  brought  upon  them  through 
their  evil-doing,  but  through  their 
well-doing.  See  these  things  standing 
on  the  level  with  them,  and  they  are 
hopelessly  perplexing,  and  it  is  easy 
for  us  to  say.  There  either  is  no  God, 
or  He  is  a  very  inefficient  one.  This 
kind  of  thought  has  troubled  the  people 
of  God  from  the  times  of  Job  and 
Asaph,  and  led  many  to  make  ship- 
wreck of  faith.  The  writer  of  this 
epistle  does  not  propose  to  explain  to 
the  Hebrew  Christians  the  meaning  of 
their  troubles  and  persecutions  from 
the  level.  He  tries  to  lift  them  up 
above,  so  that  they  may  look  down 
upon  them,  see  how  they  are  being 
overruled,  and  what  they  are  working 
towards.  On  the  level  you  can  only 
see  the  things  that  are  close  to  you; 
up  above  you  can  see  other  things, 
you  can  form  some  idea  of  the  relations 
of  things,  and  begin  to  trace  how  things 
work  together.  Up  above  we  can 
begin  to  discover  working  principles, 
and  Divine  purposes  and  meanings. 
But  precisely  our  difficulty  is  the  diffi- 
culty of  getting  and  keeping  up  above. 
If  we  follow  the  lead  of  the  writer  of 
this  epistle,  we  shall  find  that  the  best 
way  is  to  fill  our  minds  and  hearts  full 
of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus ;  the 
marvellous  wisdom  and  grace  of  His 
mission;  the  moral  life  that  He 
quickens ;  and  the  power  of  His  abiding 
presence  in  the  world  as  its  Redeemer, 
not  only  from  sin,  but  also  from  all 
the  woes  that  sin  has  brought  in  its 
train.  Enter  into  the  mind  of  Christ, 
and  you  will  rise  above  the  level  of 
earthly  troubles ;  and  looking  down 
upon  life  as  He  looks,  you  will  see  a 
great  moral  purpose  being  outwrought : 
the  world  is  being  kept,  and  afflictions 
are  the  moral  salt  that  is  keeping  it ; 
the  world  is  being  cleansed,  and  human 
troubles  are  the  refiner's  fires  and  the 
fuller's  soap,  that  are  doing  the  cleans- 
ing work.  Just  this  seems  to  be 
expressed  in  our  text,  which  the 
R.V.  gives  in  a  somewhat  sharper 
form  :  "All  chastening  seemeth  for 
the  present  to  be  not  joyous,  but 
grievous :    yet    afterward  it    yieldeth 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.         chap.  xii. 


peaceable  fruit  unto  them  that  have  it  were  not.     It  is  easy  to  classify  the 

been  exercised  thereby,  even  the  fruit  afflictions  that  befall  humanity.     They 

of  righteousness."     Mr.  Spurgeon  has  take  form  as  suffering,  as   sorrowing, 

a  clever  illustration  of  the  point  of  this  as  sinning.     1.  The  form  of  suffering, 

text.     There  is  a  little  plant,  small  and  Suffering,  pure  and  simple,  without  the 

stunted,  growing  under  the  shade  of  a  element  of  sin  embittering  it,  is  part  of 

broad-spreading    oak,   and    this   little  the  economy  of  nature  ;  man  only  shares 

plant  values  the  shade  that  covers  it,  it  in  common  with  the  creature,  and  we 

and  greatly  does  it  esteem  the  quiet  need  to  speak  cautiously  and  carefully 

rest   which   its    noble   friend    affords,  concerning  it  when  we  speak  of  it  as 

Once  upon  a  time  there  comes  along  evil.     It  would   be    possible   to    show 

the  woodman,  and  with  his  sharp  axe  that  even  important  animal  qualities, 

he  fells  the  oak.     The  plant  weeps  and  and  much  more  moral   qualities,    can 

cries,  "  My  shelter  is  gone,  every  rough  only  be  wrought  by  simple   suffering, 

wind   will   blow   upon   me  !  "       "  No,"  At  once  it  will  come  to  mind  that  the 

says  the  angel  of  the  flower,  "  now  will  mother liness   of   motherhood,    both   in 

the   sun   get   at    thee,    now   will   the  the  creatures  and  in  humanity,  follows 

shower  fall  on  thee  in   more  copious  upon,    and  can  only  follow  upon,  the 

abundance     than      before,     now    thy  suffering   of   the    birth-time.      Think 

stunted    form    shall    spring    up    into  closely,  and  it  will  soon   appear,  that 

loveliness,  and  thy  flower,  which  could  moral   character   can   never   be  made 

never  have  expanded  itself  to  perfection,  anywhere,  save  by  the  agency  of  suffer- 

shall  now  laugh  in  the  sunshine,  and  ing.     Of  Christ  it  is  said,  "Though  He 

men  shall  say,  How  greatly  hath  this  were  a  son,  yet  learned  He  obedience 

plant    increased,    how    glorious    hath  by  the  things  that  He  suffered."     We 

become  its  beauty  through  the  removal  must  therefore  speak  thoughtfully  and 

of    that    which    was    its    shade    and  wisely   on   this   matter.     But    this   is 

delight !  "     This  is  the  truth  now  pre-  certainly  true,  and  always  true — suffer- 

sented  to  us — the  purpose  of  aflliction  ing  is  hard  to  bear.     Personal  suffering, 

relieves  the  pain  of  aflliction.  taking  shape  as  sickness,  frailty,  pain, 

I.  Affliction  passing  over  us  is  hard  always  is.     Disease  comes  in  so  many 

to  bear. — The  heap  of  wheat  as  it  is  painful  and  repulsive  forms.     It  comes 

brought  in  from  the  fields,  and  spread  at  what  seem  such  unfitting  times.     It 

out  all  over  the  threshing-floor,  cannot  brings  in  with  it  such  a  trail  of  other 

but  feel  it  hard  when  the  heavy  thresh-  woes.     It  breaks  into  the  enterprise  of 

ing-roller,  with   its   cutting   teeth,    is  life,   disturbing    and    imperilling    our 

drawn  backward  and  forward  over  it.  business   relations.       It    often   wholly 

That  tribulum-work,  that  tribulation,  upsets  the  plan  of  our  life,  and  leaves 

cannot  be  joyous,  but  grievous.     But  us,  when  convalescent,  to  battle  again 

presently  it  appears  what    good  work  for  lost  position.     It  brings  strain  and 

has  been  done  by  the  severe  discipline  :  stress  on   those  whom   we   love   more 

the   husks  have  been  split,  and  have  than  we  love  ourselves.     Hezekiah  is 

fallen  away   from   the   grain ;  and   it  the  type  of  all  sick  folk  in  his  experi- 

only  needs  now  the  winnowing  fan  to  ence  of  the  hardness  of  his  lot :   put 

secure  the  pure  corn  for  the  food  of  aside,    in  pain  and  helplessness,  when 

man.     In  every  human  life    there    is  life's  schemes  were   just    working  out 

a  mission  for   the   threshing-roller   of  well,  but  nothing  seemed  really  accom- 

afflictive   discipline.      Human   trouble  plished.     It  was  hard  to  be  cut  off  in 

takes  on  a  great  variety  of  forms,  but  the  midst  of  his  days.     It  is  hard  to  be 

it   never  takes   any  that  are   easy  to  sick  for  a  while ;  it  is  hard  to  be  frail 

bear   at  the  time.     It   is  in  the  very  and   weak   all   life   long.      While  the 

nature   of   trouble   that    it    must    be  cloud  hangs  low  over  us,  we  can  but 

pressure,   strain,    distress.      It   would  walk  in  the  darkness,  and  feel  depressed 

not  have  its  ministry   in  character  if  by  it.     No  personal  suffering   for  the 

419 


CHAP.  XII.         HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


present    seemeth    to   be    joyous,    but  our   great   High   Priest,    that   He   is 

grievous.     It  has  to  feel  grievous  ;  it  "  touched  with  the  feehng  of  our  in- 

is   just   its   ministry  to  make  us   feel  firmities "  !     3.    The   form  of   sinning, 

burdened  and  distressed.     Do   not   be  The  bitterness  of  suffering,  to  us  moral 

surprised   that   you    find    your  frailty  beings,  lies  in  our  conviction  of  its  close 

hard  to  bear :  it  is  precisely  what  you  association  with  sin.     But   this  is   no 

ought   to   find  it  and  feel  it.     2.  The  overwhelming  distress  while   we  keep 

form  of  sorrowing.     A  very  large  por-  to   the   general  fact,   that  the  Divine 

tion  of  human  affliction  is  not  personal,  order   has   been    disturbed    by   human 

but   relative,    suffering.      It    is    such  wilfulness,  and  the  penalties  fall  upon 

affliction  as  David  knew  when  he  wailed  the    whole  race,  and,  vicariously,    fall 

over  his  ruined  son.     It  is  such  sorrow  heavy  on   some   members  of   it.     The 

as  St.  Paul  knew  when  he  feared  his  weight  of  the  woe  comes  when  we  are 

companion  would  be  taken  away,  and  distinctly  able  to  associate  personal  sin 

he  would  have  "  sorrow  upon  sorrow."  with  personal  sufferings.     What  reve- 

It  is  such  sorrow  as  our  Divine  Lord  lations  the  doctor  could  make  to  us  if 

felt  when  He  stood  by  the  tomb  of  His  he  would  be  open  and  true  in  dealing 

friend  Lazarus,  with  the  heart-broken  with  us !     We  go  with  him  round  the 

sisters   beside    Him.     It   is   the   sym-  wards  of   the  hospital,   and  he  could 

pathetic  entering  into  the  sorrows   of  say — There,  that  miserable  sufferer  is 

others  which  brings  their  burdens   to  reaping  the  drink-seed  that  he  sowed ; 

lie  on  our  hearts.     And  the  sympathy  that  w^reck  of  humanity  on  whom  you 

is  keen  according  to  our   dispositions,  can  hardly  bear  to  look  is  ending  in  un- 

There  are  some  who  can  pass  amid  the  speakable  wretchedness  a  life  of  vice, 

suffering  with  a  chilly  self-control,    a  When    that    association    of    sin    and 

calmness  that  keeps  them  from  undue  suffering  comes  close  into  our  spheres, 

distress ;  but  there  are  many  who,  in  when  our  prodigal  comes  home  to  die, 

the   quickness   and   keenness   of  their  our  wilful  girl  drags  life-ruin  upon  her- 

sympathy,  sorrow  unduly,  suffer  more  self,  then  we  have  sorrow  upon  sorrow 

than   the   actual   sufferers.       Perhaps  — sorrow  in  which  is  the  bitterness  of 

many   of  us  can  see,  in  looking  back  death.     That  sorrow  is  hardest  of  all 

over  our  lives,  that   we   have   known  to  bear.     While  passing  over  us  it  is 

more  affliction  through  sympathy  than  altogether  grievous.    And  you  will  have 

through    personal    suffering.       Maybe  found  in  your  experience,  that  it  is  very 

we  have  had  to  deal  with  great  sufferers,  hard  to  deal  with  sufferers  when  you 

or  to  come  helpfully  near  to  those  who  know  that-  they  are  sinners,  and  when 

have  been  in   overwhelming  distress  ;  the  sufferings  take  offensive  and  repul- 

and  the  strain  for  us  has  almost  been  sive  forms,  as  they  always  do  when  they 

overstrain.     And  sometimes  our  utter  come  directly  out  of  sin.     It  seems  so 

helplessness,    our    inability    to     meet  wonderful  that  our  Divine  Lord  could 

occasions,    the    misery   of    having    to  be  so  sympathetic  with    outcasts    and 

stand  by  with  folded  hands  while  the  sinners,  and  could  deal    so    graciously 

great  billows  of  woe  have  rolled  over  with   those  who   were  possessed  with 

our  beloved,    has   been   overwhelming  the  devil  of  uncleanness.     But  it  is  the 

woe  for  us.     Even  public  distress  may  Christliness   of    Christ  that  He   could 

try   us   greatly.     What  do  the  clergy  take  the  sin  with   the   suffering,    and 

feel  when  they  bury  the  bread-winners,  help  at  once  the  sinner  and  the  sufferer, 

and    the  mothers  for  whose   love  and  They  let  a  sufferer  down  through  the 

tending   the   children  will  lift  a  life-  roof,    right  in  front  of    Him.      Jesus 

long  wail  ?     Sometimes  one  is  disposed  looked  upon  him,    and   saw   a  sinner, 

to  say  that  the  burdens  of  sympathetic  But  He  did  not  therefore  despise  him. 

sorrowing    are   far    heavier   than   the  He  only  saw  the  severest  feature  of  his 

burdens  of   personal   suffering.      How  need,  the  root  of  all  the  mischief,  and  He 

much  is  suggested  when   it  is  said  of  dealt  first  with  that.     It  is  our  Ohrist- 

420 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS.        chap.  xir. 


likeness  if  we  can  bear  the  suffering 
that  comes  out  of  sin,  though  that  kind 
of  affliction  is  hardest  of  all  to  bear. 
Whatever  form  our  human  troubles 
take,  our  text — the  first  half  of  it 
— certainly  is  true  :  "  No  affliction  for 
the  present  seemeth  to  be  joyous,  but 
grievous."  While  passing  over  us  it  is 
hard  to  bear, 

II.  Affliction  passed  by  is  good  to 
remember. — The  psalmist  must  have 
felt  that  it  was  when  he  said,  "  Before 
I  was  afflicted  I  went  astray,  but  now 
will  I  keep  Thy  word."  Affliction  had 
done  something  for  him,  and  some- 
thing so  good  that  he  liked  to  think 
about  it.  It  is  well  to  remind  our- 
selves of  the  temporary  character  of 
all  human  suffering  and  affliction.  It 
is  always  "  a  light  affliction,  and  but 
for  a  moment."  It  is  always  a  cloud, 
light  or  dark,  high  or  low,  that  is 
passing  on,  and  drops  its  rains  upon 
us  as  it  passes.  We  always  have  a 
chance  of  standing  under  a  clear  sky, 
watching  our  clouds  sail  away  to  the 
west.  We  have  had  our  troubles,  but 
they  never  stayed.  They  came  and 
went.  And  when  they  were  gone  right 
past,  somehow  we  began  a  little  to 
understand  them  ;  and  the  farther 
they  receded  into  the  distance,  the 
more  clearly  we  saw  how  they — strange 
puzzle-pieces  though  they  were — fitted 
into  the  plan  of  infinite  Wisdom. 
They  bore  to  us  a  mission.  They 
carried  out  their  mission.  They  left 
us  with  the  blessing  of  their  mission. 
What  have  the  suffering  and  sorrow- 
ing times  of  our  Hves  done  for  us  ? 
Perhaps  it  would  be  wiser  not  to  try 
and  read  the  answer  by  going  over 
the  scenes  of  our  own  lives.  We  can 
never  be  quite  sure  of  being  just  to 
ourselves.'  It  is  better  to  see  what 
suffering  did  for  Jesus.  There  is  so 
much  in  that  sentence,  "  Made  perfect 
through  suffeiing."  But  we  may  also 
each  one  of  us  think  of  some  saintly 
soul  who  has  come,  like  the  silver, 
through  a  seven-times  refining.  It  is 
quite  safe  for  us  to  trace  in  them  what 
sublime  moral  and  spiritual  agencies 
these   our   human  afflictions  prove  to 


be.  We  watch  them,  and  see  "  what 
almighty  grace  can  do,"  and  then  we 
hope  that  almighty  grace  is  doing  it 
for  us.  Only  a  word  or  two  can  be 
given  to  this  point,  but  they  may 
suffice  to  guide  thought  along  helpful 
and  comforting  lines.  We  can  some- 
times see — 1.  How  afflictions  have 
loosened  the  grip  of  the  world  upon 
the  soul.  What  an  enslaving  power 
things  seen  and  temporal  have  !  What 
would  they  have  if  God  did  not  break 
in  upon  them  with  His  afflictive  dis- 
pensations? The  claims  and  rush  of 
life  keep  our  souls  looking  down  and 
around.  The  visions  and  quietness  of 
soi'row-times  lift  our  souls  up  and 
away.  The  other  life  is  far  off,  and 
the  world  is  near,  while  health  and 
energy  are  with  us.  The  other  life 
comes  near,  and  the  world-interests 
recede,  when  God  puts  us  into  desert 
places  of  sickness  and  trouble.  It  is 
said  that  we  never  really  see  the  full 
splendour  of  God's  sky  in  the  smoky 
towns.  Go  out  into  the  broad  desert 
spaces,  away  from  the  world,  and  the 
stars  fairly  glitter,  and  the  blue  is 
unspeakably  beautiful.  Can  we  not 
look  back  and  see  how  trials  that  were 
hard  to  bear  loosened  our  hold  of  life 
a  little  ?  And  what  is  the  mystery 
of  all  life  save  this — gradually  getting 
loosened  from  the  world,  and  getting 
soul-anchored  in  the  city  of  habita- 
tions, whose  builder  and  maker  is  God  ? 
It  is  good  to  remember  how  God  has 
been  loosening  our  world-grip,  and 
teaching  our  hearts  to  say,  "  This  is 
not  our  rest."  2.  We  can  see  how 
afflictions  have  tightened  our  trust  in 
God.  Have  you  held  a  child's  hand 
in  a  first  railway  journey.  It  just 
lay  quietly  in  yours,  for  the  child  felt 
all  safe  with  father ;  but  then  the 
train  rushed  screaming  into  the  dark 
tunnel,  and  the  child's  grip  tightened, 
and  held  tight  till  long  after  the  calm- 
ing sunshine  had  come  back  again. 
That  is  the  way  it  is  with  us  and  the 
Father-God.  When  the  strain-times 
of  life  come,  we  grip  His  hand  hard. 
And  after  the  strain-times  of  life  are 
passed  by,  we  love  to  remember  how 

421 


CHAP.  XII.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


onr  Father's  hand  clasped  ours  in  the 
time  of  fear,  and  thrilled  our  souls 
with  the  feeling  of  uttermost  safety. 
We  should  never  be  trusting  God  as 
we  are  trusting  Him  to-day,  if  it  were 
not  for  those  experiences  of  sorrow 
and  trouble  which  are  passed  and 
gone  long  since.  The  writer  of  this 
epistle  has  a  very  suggestive  term  for 
ihe  issues  of  Divinely  sent  afflictions. 
He  calls  them  the  "  peaceable  fruits 
of  righteousness,"  or  "  it  yieldeth  peace- 
able fruit  unto  them  that  have  been 
exercised  thereby,  even  the  fruit  of 
righteousness."  Why  does  he  call  it 
"peaceable  fruit"?  I  think  he  must 
have  had  this  in  mind  :  When  our 
life-troubles  first  come  to  us,  the 
trouble  in  the  trouble  is  the  resistance 
of  our  wills,  the  warfare  that  we  make 
over  submission  and  obedience.  But 
as  we  learn  the  Christ-lessons  of 
afflictions,  we  gain  the  Christ-mastery 
over  self-will,  and  then  gradually,  as 
afflictions  come,  there  is  little  or  no 
resistance,  little  or  no  warfare.  Our 
souls  gradually  gain  the  peace  of 
righteousness,  the  peace  of  right- 
mindedness,  that  can  quietly  say, 
facing  each  new  woe — 

"Is  this  Thy  will,  good  Lord? 
Thy  servant  weeps  no  more." 

"To  them  that  have  been  exercised 
thereby."  You  have  had  many  a 
trouble  ;  but  have  you  been  "  exercised 
thereby  "  ?  Has  your  soul-life  of  love 
and  submission  and  trust  been  exer- 
cised thereby?  Can  you  gratefully 
recognise  what  God  has  done  for  you 
through  times  of  strain  and  stress  ? 
Let  us  sit  down  beside  St.  Paul,  and 
feel  that  he  is  w^riting  for  us,  as 
truly  as  for  himself,  when  he  says — 
"  For  our  light  affliction,  which  is 
but  for  a  moment,  worketh  for  us  a 
far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight 
of  glory;  while  we  look  not  at  the 
things  which  are  seen,  but  at  the 
things  which  are  not  seen :  for 
the  things  which  are  seen  are  tem- 
poral, but  the  things  which  are  not 
seen  are  eternal." 

422 


Ver.  13.  The  Rertioval  of  Hindrances. 
— There  are  two  ways  of  ti^aining 
children,  and  two  ways  of  exerting  our 
influence  in  the  associations  of  life : 
1.  We  may  directly  mould  the  child- 
mind,  habits,  and  life  to  a  pattern 
which  we  ourselves  form.  2.  We  may 
watchfully  and  carefully  take  out  of 
the  child's  way  everything  that  would 
hinder  the  child  from  naturally  and 
healthily  developing  itself.  This  is 
the  kind  of  influence  which  can  be  so 
wisely  and  helpfully  exercised  in  the 
Church,  and  in  the  ordinary  associa- 
tions of  life. 

Ver.  14.  The  Christian'' s  Race  and 
Goal. — The  idea  running  through  this 
chapter  is  that  this  world  is  the  Chris- 
tian's training  for  heaven.  Our 
Christian  course  is  compared  to  a  race, 
which  implies  our  effort ;  not  to  a 
voyage,  in  which  we  are  borne  by  the 
effort  of  others.  The  images  employed 
in  Scripture  imply  the  most  sustained 
effort.  A  race  which  is  to  be  run  ; 
a  narrow  path  by  which  many  shall 
seek  to  enter  into  life,  and  those  only 
who  strive  shall  enter ;  a  battle  to  be 
won,  which  requires  the  whole  armour 
of  God,  and  this  we  are  invited  to  put 
on.  How  far  has  the  reception  of  the 
good  news  that  "  Christ  died  for  all " 
really  had  the  effect  of  leading  men  to 
live  "  not  unto  themselves,  but  unto 
Him  that  died  for  them  and  rose 
again  "  ?  How,  then,  are  we  to  run 
this  race  that  is  set  before  us  ?  The 
answer  is,  "  Looking  unto  Jesus."  He 
is  our  pattern.  Christian  holiness  is 
a  growing  conformity  to  the  image  of 
Christ.  He  saves  both  from  the  guilt 
and  from  the  power  of  sin — gives 
purity  as  well  as  pardon.  He  has 
brought  in  everlasting  righteousness. — 
Robert  Barclay. 

Peaceahleness  and  Purity. — The  con- 
nection between  "  peace  "  and  "  holi- 
ness "  may  profitably  be  thought  out. 
1.  Peace  as  a  state  and  condition, 
peace  as  an  atmosphere,  is  the  sur- 
rounding in  which  Christian  holiness 
can  alone  thrive.     Other  good  things 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   XII. 


may  thrive  in  time  of  war  :  holiness 
cannot.  There  is  a  bloom  on  it  which 
cannot  stay  unless  the  air  is  still. 
2.  But  there  is  a  more  precise  point 
in  the  text.  It  is  this — the  man  who 
seeks  peace,  who  "  follows  after  peace," 
is  the  man  who  will  be  sure  to  seek 
also  holiness,  and  follow  after  purity. 
Let  any  one  make  for  peace,  keep 
peace,  that  man  will  be  sure  to  make 
things  clean,  and  keep  things  clean. 
He  knows  that  the  one  thing  that 
spoils  peace  is  self-indulgence  and  sin. 

The  Peaceful  Temper. — Christianity 
and  worldly  wisdom  meet  in  conmend- 
ing  the  duty  of  this  text.  Wise 
advice  is.  Beware  of  getting  into 
quarrels  with  people.  The  reason  for 
*'  following  peace  "  which  worldly  pru- 
dence suggests  is  the  quietness  and 
happiness  of  life,  which  are  interfered 
with  by  relations  of  enmity  to  others. 
The  reason  which  religion  gives  is  the 
duty  of  brotherly  love,  of  which  the 
peaceful  disposition  is  a  part.  The 
frequency  of  the  advice  indicates  that 
there  is  some  strong  prevailing  ten- 
dency in  human  nature  to  which  it  is 
opposed.  What  can  that  tendency  be  ? 
Some  rush  into  quarrels  from  simple 
violence  and  impetuosity  of  temper, 
which  prevents  their  examining  the 
merits  of  a  case,  and  permits  them  to 
see  nothing  but  what  favours  their  own 
side.  And  there  is  the  malignant 
temper,  which  fastens  vindictively  upon 
particular  persons.  Men  of  this  char- 
acter pursue  a  grudge  unceasingly, 
and  never  forget  or  forgive.  There 
are  also  many  persons  who  can  never 
be  neutral,  or  support  a  middle  state 
of  mind.  If  they  do  not  positively  like 
others,  they  will  see  some  reason  for 
disliking  them  ;  they  will  be  irritable 
if  they  are  not  pleased  ;  they  will  be 
enemies  if  they  are  not  friends.  This 
disposition  has  the  necessary  result  of 
placing  them  in  a  kind  of  enmity 
towards  numbers  of  persons  to  whom 
there  is  not  the  slightest  real  reason 
for  feeling  it.  It  is  simply  irksome 
to  them  to  maintain  an  attitude  of 
indifference  and  neutrality.     The  rela- 


tion of  peace  towards  others  is  exactly 
that  which  the  temper  described  has 
such  a  difficulty  in  adopting.  A  state 
of  peace  is  precisely  this  middle  state 
to  which  such  objection  is  made.  It 
is  not  a  state  of  active  love  and  affec- 
tion ;  nor  is  it  a  state  that  admits  of 
any  ill-feeling  ;  but  it  lies  between  the 
two,  comprehending  all  kindly  inten- 
tions, forbidding  the  least  wish  for 
another's  injury,  avoiding,  as  much 
as  possible,  dispute  and  occasion  of 
offence,  consulting  order,  quiet,  and 
contentment,  but  not  arriving  at  more 
than  this.  Peace  implies  the  entire 
absence  of  positive  ill-will.  The 
apostle  then  says  that  this  is  our 
proper  relation  toward  all  men.  More 
than  this  applies  to  some,  but  as  much 
as  this  applies  to  all.  Be  in  fellowship 
with  all  men,  so  far  as  to  have  nothing 
wrong  in  your  relation  to  them — 
nothing  to  disunite.  Is  any  other 
principle  of  conduct  and  kind  of  temper 
indeed  fit  for  this  world  in  which  we 
live  ?  There  are  so  many  obstacles  to 
mutual  understanding  in  this  world, 
and  so  very  thin  a  veil  is  enough  to 
hide  people  from  each  other,  that  any 
other  line  is  hopeless.  Two  reasons 
have  much  to  do  in  promoting  the 
temper  to  which  we  are  referring  :  1 .  It 
is  very  irksome  to  keep  watch  over 
ourselves,  and  to  repel  the  intrusion 
of  hostile  thoughts  by  the  simple  resist- 
ance of  conscience,  when  we  are  not 
assisted  by  any  strong  current  of 
natural  feeling  in  doing  so.  2.  The 
hostile  classes  of  relation  are  evidently 
accompanied  by  their  own  pleasures  in 
many  temperaments.  There  is  a  kind 
of  interest  which  people  take  in  theii* 
own  grievances,  their  own  grudges, 
their  own  causes  of  offence  at  various 
people,  their  own  discords  and  ani- 
mosities, which  occupies  their  thought, 
it  must  candidly  be  said,  in  a  manner 
not  disagreeable  to  themselves.  They 
enjoy  these  states  of  mind  towards 
others  in  their  own  way.  It  is  with 
the  entire  knowledge  of  these  weak- 
nesses and  frailties  of  human  nature, 
and  these  elements  of  disturbance,  even 
in   minds   of    average   goodness,   that 

423 


CHAP.  XII.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


St.  Paul  said,  "  Follow  peace  with  all  sight.      (2)    Holiness   fully   seen   and 

tnen."     It  is  not  without  design  that  apprehended  is  God.     It  is  inseparable 

the  two  things  "  peace  "  and  "  holiness"  from  Him.    He  is  the  embodiment  of  it 

were     connected      together     by     the  to  us.     Like  alone  sees  like.     The  holy 

apostle.     A  life  of  enmities  is  greatly  alone  can  see  the  Holy  One.     But  as 

in    opposition    to   growth   in    holiness.  our  apprehension  of  holiness  grows,  we 

All  religious  habits  and  duties — prayer,  lift  it   more  and  more  away  into  the 

charity,  mercy — are  formed  and  matured  future.      It   seems    to    be    something 

when  the  man  is  in  a  state  of  peace  attainable    in    the    by-and-by    alone, 

with  others,  when  he  is  not  agitated  Then  there  is  the  danger  of  our  becom- 

by  small  selfish    excitements    and   in-  ing  content  with  an  imperfect  Christian 

terests,    which   divert   him  from  him-  life  now.     It  should  therefore  be  duly 

self  and   his   own   path    of  duty,  but  impressed  upon  us  that  the  Scripture 

can  think  of   himself   what  he  ought  sets  holiness  before  us  as  preseMt,  and 

to  do  and   where  he  is  going. — J.  B.  practical^    and     attainable.      Absolute 

Mozley,  D.D.  perfection   is   unattainable   anywhere, 

in  any  world,  by  a  dependent  creature ; 

Holiness   bringing   Sight   of  God. —  but   high    measures    of    holiness    are 

1.    Seeing    God    is,   to    all    Scripture  attainable    by    us,     though    we     are 

writers,  the  very  highest  conception  of  creatures — attainable,  if  we  will  live 

bliss.     Such  a  conception  attests  their  the  life  of  faith, 
superiority  to  ordinary  men.     What  a 

sublime  conception  it  is  !  It  really  Vers.  15,  16.  The  Perils  of  Churches. 
means  full,  satisfying,  up  to  capacity,  — Oar  Lord  made  it  quite  clear  that 
knowledge  of  God.  Present  knowledge  the  sincere  and  insincere  would  be 
is  not  restful ;  the  knowledge  which  blended  in  His  earthly  Church  ;  that 
comes  by  faith  is.  The  future  know-  no  strict  attempts  could  ever  be  wisely 
ledge  of  God  may  be  called  "seeing,"  made  to  separate  them;  and  that  the 
in  the  sense  of  restful,  satisfying,  sure  presence  of  the  insincere  would  have  a 
knowledge,  but  not  in  the  sense  of  disciplinary  influence  on  the  sincere, 
being  absolutely  complete.  He  must  Dr.  A.  B.  Bruce  says  :  "In  the  par- 
be  God  who  can  fully  see  God.  2.  Holi-  ables  of  the  tares  and  the  drag-net, 
ness  is,  for  all  Scripture  writers,  the  especially  in  the  former,  we  are  warned 
necessary  condition  of  bliss.  Here  that  in  the  future  history  of  the  king- 
also  is  a  conception  beyond  the  reach  dom  there  will  appear  a  revolting  and 
of  ordinary  men.  Holiness  is  an  idea  unnatural  mixture  of  good  and  bad 
wholly  limited  to  religion.  The  ordi-  men,  Christians  and  anti- Christians, 
nary  man  reaches  to  conceive  of  good-  children  of  the  heavenly  Father  and 
ness  according  to  the  standard  of  the  children  of  Satan.  .  .  .  Christ  deliber- 
Golden  Rule.  The  religious  man  ately  recommends  patience  as  the  least 
reaches  to  conceive  of  goodness  as  of  two  evils,  the  other  being  the  up- 
"  godliness,"  according  to  the  standard  rooting  of  wheat  along  with  tares  in 
of  his  spiritual  apprehension  of  God.  headlong  zeal  to  get  rid  of  the  noxious 
With  that  altogether  higher  concep-  crop  [of  tares]  ;  which  implies  a  close 
tion  all  his  life  becomes  higher- toned,  inter-relationship  between  the  two  kinds 
See  what  belongs  to  the  Scriptural  of  growths  that  may  well  seem  an 
idea  of  holiness.  (1)  Sincerity — no  additional  calamity."  St.  Paul,  in  his 
guile.  (2)  Bight -principled.  (3)  Bight-  address  to  the  elders  of  Ephesus,  pointed 
hearted.  (4)  Separated  from.  (5)  Con-  out  the  main  sources  of  peril  for  Chris- 
secrated  to.  (6)  Sanctified  and  sancti-  tian  Churches.  "  I  know  that  after 
fying ;  white  and  whitening.  3.  How  my  departing  grievous  wolves  shall 
does  holiness  become  the  condition  enter  in  among  you,  not  sparing  the 
of  seeing  God?  (1)  Holiness  is  the  flock:  and  from  among  your  own 
trained  vision  that  alone  gives  perfect  selves  shall  men  arise,  speaking  per- 

424 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.         cHap.  xiI. 


verse  things,  to  draw  away  the  disciples 
after  them."  It  is  a  point  of  import- 
ance to  see  that  the  supreme  peril 
of  any  Church  never  comes  with  its 
circumstances,  but  always  from  the 
character  and  conduct  of  its  members. 
The  Church's  foes  are  traitors  within 
the  city. 

I.  Peril  comes  from  the  inconsistent 
member. — The  man  who  is  sincere,  and 
has  the  grace  of  God ;  but  fails  to 
respond  worthily  to  the  grace  ;  fails  to 
order  his  life  by  the  grace  ;  fails  to  rise 
to  the  spiritual  level  to  which  the  grace 
would  lift  him.  The  man  who  permits 
his  life  to  be  below  the  Christ-standard. 

II.  Peril  comes  from  the  quarrel- 
some member. — That  is  the  "root  of 
bitterness  " — the  man  who  makes  dis- 
turbance, because  nothing  is  ever  to 
his  mind,  and  somebody  is  always  hurt- 
ing his  feelings.  The  quarrelsome  man 
does  the  supreme  mischief  of  introduc- 
ing the  quarrelsome  spirit. 

III.  Peril  comes  from  the  insincere 
member. — There  are  those  who  are 
in  the  Church,  but  not  of  it.  Their 
insincerity  may  be  indicated  in  their 
(1)  profanity  ;  (2)  in  their  immorality. 
There  never  can  be  any  right  sense  of 
God  when  there  is  no  cleanness,  no 
moral  self-restraint,  in  the  life. 

Ver.  16.  Selling  the  Birthright. — "So 
Esau  despised  his  birthright.'*  It  was 
done  in  a  moment ;  but  such  moments 
/  cannot  occur  except  as  the  epitome  of 
I  years.  There  is  a  giant  which  is 
^  fabled  to  rush  into  crimson  blossom 
once  only  in  a  hundred  years;  but 
even  then  all  the  hundred  years  have 
been  causing,  have  been  maturing, 
that  one  crimson  flower.  So  it  is  with 
every  great  sin.  It  is  but  the  ripened 
fruit  of  hundreds  of  little  tendencies. 
Esau's  guilty  moment  was  "but  the 
expression  and  heritage  of  all  his  past 
life.  It  was  as  a  youth  that  he  had 
sold  his  birthright;  it  was  as  a  man, 
it  was  forty  years  afterwards,  that  the 
seed  of  that  youthful  profanity  set  into 
the  bitter  fruit  of  irreparable  grief. 
It  was  forty  years  afterwards  that  he 
stood  before  his  aged  and   trembling 


father,  and  found  that  what  he  had 
sold  for  a  mess  of  pottage  was  not  only 
the  birthright,  but  the  blessing,  the 
glory,  the  dominion,  the  prosperity,  of 
years.  Then  he  read  his  boyish  sin 
under  the  terrible  glare  flung  upon  it 
by  its  consequences.  It  is  the  epitome 
of  retribution.  What  was  Esau's  ->. 
sin?  He  sold  his  birthright  because  J 
he  despised  it ;  and  he  despised  it  be-  T 
cause  it  was  not  a  thing  which  he 
could  see,  or  eat,  or  drink,  or  grasp 
with  both  hands ;  because  it  was  a 
glory  and  a  blessing  which  pertained 
not  to  the  body,  but  to  the  soul.  And 
is  this  sin  rare  ?  Is  it  not  the  very 
commonest  of  all  sins  ?  Is  it  not  dis- 
tinctly the  sin  to  which  every  one  of 
us  is  tempted  ?  And  why  ?  Because 
all  men  have  not  faith  ;  and  this  sin  is 
the  absence  of  faith,  the  opposite  of 
all  faith.  For  faith  is  the  power  to 
recognise  the  spiritual,  and  to  trample 
on  the  carnal.  Want  of  faith  often 
looks  like  the  sin  of  a  moment,  but  it 
is  the  abstract  of  a  tendency,  it  is 
the  habit  of  a  life.  It  is  that  profane^ 
self-indulgence  to  which  an  ideal  bless-  / 
ing  is  as  nothing  compared  to  a  J 
momentary  pleasure.  What  then  is 
the  birthright  that  each  one  of  us 
has  ?  It  is  the  synthesis  of  all  spiritual 
blessings.  It  is  a  body  rightly  en- 
dowed :  it  is  a  mind  thrilling  with 
bright  affinities  for  all  things  beautiful 
and  high  ;  it  is  a  spirit,  in  which  are 
folded  the  wings  which  can  soar  to 
heaven,  and  hold  communion  with  the 
Divine.  It  is  life  ;  the  innocent  bright- 
ness of  childhood,  the  spring  of  youth, 
the  force  of  manhood,  the  snowy  and 
sunlit  heights  of  age.  Do  men  keep 
their  birthright  ?  Our  birthright  is 
innocence,  hoUness,  peace  with  God, 
life,  light,  immortality.  Where  is  the 
holiness  of  the  liar,  the  schemer,  the 
blasphemer  ?  Where  is  the  innocence 
of  the  drunkard  ?  Where  the  peace 
with  God  of  the  impure  ?  Yet  there 
are  among  these  crowds  some  who 
have  not  sold  their  birthright — some 
who,  even  in  Sardis,  have  not  stained 
their  raiment ;  the  holy,  and  the  brave, 
and  the  merciful ;  the  white  souls  who 

425 


CHAP.  xn.         BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS. 


have  toiled,  and  fought  and  overcome — 
souls  "  transparent  as  crystal,  active  as 
fire,  unselfish  as  the  ministering  spirits, 
sweet  and  tender  as  grace ;  strong, 
generous,  and  enduring,  as  the  hearts 
of  martyrs."  But  how  comes  it  that 
all  are  not  such  ?  It  is  because,  for 
one  morsel  of  meat,  they  have  sold 
their  birthright.  The  one  aim  and 
object  of  all  God's  education  of  us  in 
life  is  the  cherishing,  the  preserving, 
the  securing,  of  our  birthright.  It  is 
in  youth  that  the  birthright  is  most 
often  sold.  This  should  be  the  aim  of 
every  man  who  would  make  something 
of  his  life — to  keep  his  birthright 
unimpaired,  not  to  sell  it  for  a  mess 
of  pottage,  not  to  sell  it  for  the  care- 
less hour  or  the  sensual  snare.  That 
youth  is  in  the  highest  sense  well 
educated  who  by  God's  grace  passes 
into  the  battle  of  life  strong, 
self-denying,  pure ;  scorning  mean 
pleasures,  scorning  vulgar  comforts, 
scorning  idle  uselessness;  brave  to 
meet  danger,  brave  to  defy  sin,  brave 
to  fight  in  the  cause  of  God  ;  strenuous 
to  do  and  to  do  dare ;  ready  to  spring 
to  the  front  in  every  good  cause  ;  not 
following  the  multitude  to  do  evil. 
To  be  thus  is  to  have  the  birthright  of 
a  man.  To  strengthen  the  higher,  to 
control  the  lower,  to  enlist  on  the  side 
of  the  higher  every  pure  spiritual  in- 
fluence, to  help  you  to  win  the  tranquil 
mastery  over  yourselves — this  should 
be  your  aim. 

"  One  there  is  can  curb  myself, 
Can  roll  this  strangling  load  off  me, 
Break  off  my  yoke  and  set  me  free." 

That  erne  is  Christ. — Farrar. 

Profanity  in  the  Home. — In  Scrip- 
ture there  are  few  characters  more 
profitable  for  study  than  Esau.  Here 
is  a  man  who  came  to  sin  by  birth 
into  it,  by  the  sins  of  others  as  well 
as  his  own,  by  every- day  and  sordid 
temptations,  by  carelessness,  and  the 
sudden  surprise  of  neglected  passions. 
There  is  everything  about  Esau  to 
engage  us  in  the  study  of  him.  The 
mystery  that  haunts  all  human   sin, 

426 


the  pity  that  we  feel  for  so  wronged 
and  genial  a  nature,  only  make  clear 
to  us  more  fully  the  central  want  and 
blame  of  his  life. 

I.  Esau  was  sinned  against  from  his 
birth. — His  father  and  mother  were 
responsible  for  much  of  the  character 
of  their  son.  The  marriage  of  Isaac 
and  Rebecca  began  in  a  romance,  and 
it  ended  in  the  sheerest  vulgarity,  just 
because,  with  all  its  grace  and  wonder, 
the  fear  of  God  was  not  present. 
Their  introduction  was  very  picturesque. 
The  Nemesis  of  picturesqueness  with- 
out truth  is  always  sordidness ;  the 
Nemesis  of  romance  without  religion 
is  always  vulgarity ;  and  vulgarity 
and  sordidness  are  the  prevailing  notes 
of  Isaac  and  Eebecca's  wedded  life. 
Throughout  we  see  a  divided  house — 
father  and  elder  son  upon  one  side, 
mother  and  younger  son  upon  the 
other.  Of  such  a  false  and  hasty 
mother  was  Esau  born,  and  he  had 
her  haste.  Sin,  whatever  form  it 
assumes,  always  works  itself  out,  if 
not  in  the  first  generation,  then  in 
the  next,  to  violent  ends.  The  faults 
that  spoiled  Rebecca's  character  were 
the  same  faults  that  ruined  Esau's 
life. 

II.  Esau  got  his  "  profane  "  char- 
acter at  home. — ''  Profane  "  means 
"  thoroughfare."  A  "  profane  "  char- 
acter means  an  open,  common  character, 
unhallowed,  no  guardian  angel  at  the 
door,  no  gracious  company  within,  no 
heavenly  music  pealing  through  it,  no 
fire  upon  the  altar,  but  open  to  his 
dogs  and  his  passions,  to  his  mother's 
provocations,  and  his  brother's  fatal 
wiles.  The  home  was  not  walled  in  by 
reverence  and  truth,  and  the  steadfast 
patience  of  father  and  mother. 

III.  In  the  subsequent  tragedy  we 
see  the  climax  of  minor  vices. — Two 
habits  came  to  their  fatal  head  in 
Esau's  confession  and  his  offer  to  sell 
his  birthright  (see  Gen.  xxv.  30-34). 
1.  First,  his  hunger ;  second,  exaggera- 
tion. The  physical  selfishness  of  hunger, 
stimulated  by  the  mental  selfishness 
of  thinking  and  feeling  in  an  exag- 
gerated   way    about    oneself,    sprang 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS.         chap.  xii. 


to  fatal  empire,  and  at  their  bidding 
the  dehided  man  sold  his  birthright, 
his  life,  and  his  honour.  There  are 
more  people  cheated  out  of  their 
spiritual  birthrights  by  ordinary  sel- 
fishness than  by  great  crimes.  The 
habit  of  insisting  upon  getting  our 
own  way  in  every  little  matter  distorts 
the  true  porportion  of  life  to  our 
eyes.  The  habit  of  thinking  in  an 
extravagant  way  about  oneself,  how 
often  it  cheats  us  out  of  the  great 
chances  of  life,  and  renders  us  unfit 
for  life's  noblest  callings !  Some  are 
needed  to  take  the  lead  in  Church  or 
State,  for  inspiration  in  the  crowd, 
for  God's  work ;  but  a  base  love  of 
comfort,  a  selfish  exaggertion  of  their 
impotence  or  weakness,  a  cowardly 
succumbing  to  the  sorrow  that  should 
have  been  the  flood-tide  to  carry  them 
to  triumph,  turned  them  from  their 
idea  and  their  God-given  right.  2.  7%e 
other  point  in  the  development  of  EsaiiJs 
tragedy  is  this — his  passion  made  him 
the  pyu'ey  of  the  first  designing  man  he 
came  across.  There  is  not  a  pleasure 
or  a  passion  which  to-day  tempts  any 
one,  but  there  are  men  and  women 
waiting  to  make  something  out  of  it 
for  themselves,  and  to  make  fools  of 
us.  Let  no  one  be  deluded  by  either 
of  the  two  great  temptations  to  a  life 
of  pleasure — by  the  fancy  that  you  are 
going  to  play  the  full-grown  man  in 
it,  or  by  the  fancy  that  you  are  going 
to  enjoy  a  cordiality  and  a  friendship 
that  you  will  fail  to  find  in  more  sober 
or  steady  circles. 

IV.  Let  us  get  back  to  this  word 
"profane." — It  is  the  centre  of  the 
whole  evil.  Fence  your  characters ; 
make  yourselves  not  common.  Guard 
against  little  vices.  Keep  the  virtue 
of  truth.  Jealously  guard  your  hearts 
from  the  vulgar  world ;  jealously  fill 
them  with  the  inhabitants  of  the 
world  of  holiness  and  truth.  An 
empty  mind  is  the  unsafest  and  un- 
hallowedest  thing  in  the  world. 

Y.  God  has  provided  something  more 
for  us  than  guardian  angels :  He  has 
given  us  a  Saviour.— A  Saviour 
sufiicient  for  the  world.   Let  Him  dwell 


in  your  hearts  by  faith,  and,  like 
Jacob,  you  may  be  lifted  from  your 
low  level  to  the  very  heights  of  spiritual 
character  and  genius. — Frof  G.  Adam, 
Smith. 

Ver.  17.  Lost  Opportunities. — This 
verse  is  easily  misapprehended.  It  is 
quite  misused  when  it  is  made  to  mean 
that  a  man  may  at  some  time  want  to 
repent,  and  find  repentance  impossible. 
It  is  equally  misused  when  it  is  made  to 
mean  that  a  man  may  seek  forgiveness 
from  God,  and  fail  to  gain  it.  All 
that  is  said  is,  that  Isaac,  having  given 
the  blessing,  refused  to  undo  what  he 
had  done. 

Estimating  the  Value  of  Things  Lost. 
— Wonderful  is  the  intelligence  with 
which  we  can  perceive  the  value  of 
anything  we  have  lost.  The  collector 
of  household  treasures  is  cited,  who  in 
his  daily  walks  may  see  in  a  shop- 
window  a  little  bit  of  china,  a  picture, 
an  apostle  spoon,  a  quaint  old  volume, 
which  he  intends  to  bargain  for  one 
day  when  he  shall  have  leisure  ;  so  he 
passes  it  a  hundred  times,  indifferent 
as  to  its  merits,  half  uncertain  whether 
it  is  worth  buying.  But  he  discovers 
some  day  that  it  is  gone  ;  and  then 
in  a  moment  the  doubtful  shepherdess 
becomes  the  rarest  old  china,  the  dirty- 
looking  bit  of  landscape  an  undeniable 
Crome,  the  battered  silver  spoon  an 
unquestionable  antique,  the  quaintly 
bound  book  a  choice  Elzevir.  "  The 
thing  is  lost ;  and  we  regret  it  for  all 
that  it  might  have  been,  as  well  as 
for  all  that  it  was,  and  there  are  no 
bounds  to  the  extravagance  we  would 
commit  to  regain  the  chance  of  pos- 
sessing it."  This  is  but  the  subjunctive 
or  potential  mood  of  what  is  simply 
but  largely  indicative  in  Scott's  suffi- 
ciently commonplace  couplet — 

"  Those  who  such  simple  joys  have  known 
Are  taught  to  prize   them   when   they're 
gone." 

Francis  Jacox. 

Blessings  Estimated  when  they  have 
Vanished. — Possession    drowns,   or    at 

427 


CHAP.  xn.        BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS, 


least  mightily  cools,  contentment. 
Want  teaches  us  the  worth  of  things 
more  truly.  How  sweet  a  thing  seems 
liberty  to  one  immured  in  a  dungeon ! 
How  dear  a  jewel  is  health  to  him 
who  is  in  sickness  !  I  have  known 
many  who  have  loved  their  dead 
friends  better  than  ever  they  esteemed 
them  in  their  lifetime.  .  .  .  When  we 
have  lost  a  benefit,  the  mind  has  time 
to  reflect  on  its  several  advantages, 
which  she  then  finds  to  be  many  more 
than  she  was  aware  of  while  in  pos- 
session of  it.  It  is  a  true  remark, 
that  blessings  appear  not  till  they  have 
vanished. — Owen  Feltham. 

Belated  Appreciation  of  Blessings 
Past. — Coming  home  faint  from  the 
field,  Esau,  that  cunning  hunter  and 
man  of  the  woods,  preferred  to  his 
birthright  a  meal  of  Jacob's  bread 
and  pottage  of  lentils.  Behold,  he 
was  a-hungered ;  felt  even  at  the  point 
to  die  of  hunger :  what  profit  should 
that  birthright  do  to  him  ?  Let  it  go. 
And  it  went.  Thus  Esau  despised  his 
birthright.  Time  passes  ;  and  we  see 
the  red  hunter,  even  Edom,  plying  his 
aged  father  with  savoury  meat,  that 
Isaac  may  eat  of  his  son's  venison,  and 


bless  his  elder-born,  before  he  die.  But 
the  blessing  is  forestalled.  The  subtle 
purchaser  of  the  birthright  is  the 
fraudulent  possessor  of  the  blessing. 
In  vain,  for  all  too  late,  is  Esau's  great 
and  exceeding  bitter  cry,  "  Bless  me, 
even  me  also,  O  my  father !  "  The 
blessing  is  gone,  like  the  birthright. 
For  one  morsel  of  meat  was  the  birth- 
right bartered.  And  he  who  stig- 
matises the  barterer  as  a  "profane 
person "  tells  us  that  we  know  how 
that  afterward,  when  he  would  have 
inherited  the  blessing,  he  was  rejected  ; 
for  he  found  no  place  of  repentance — 
Toirov  /Acrdvotas  :  by  some  of  our  best 
commentators  referred  to  Isaac,  who 
could  not  be  induced  to  alter  his 
decision,  though  the  disinherited  sup- 
pliant sought  it  carefully  with  tears. 
A  morsel  of  meat  was  worth  more  than 
the  birthright  till  the  birthright  was 
gone.  Gone,  the  valuation  of  it  was 
declared  with  streaming  eyes  and  an 
exceeding  bitter  cry,  with,  as  it  were, 
groanings  that  could  not  be  uttered — 
a  flood  of  unavailing  tears,  shed  all 
the  more  because  shed  in  vain.  And 
such  is  the  way  of  the  world. — Francis 
Jacox. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS    OF   THE   PARAGRAPH— Verses  18—21. 

Emblems  of  the  Older  Revelation. — The  rhetorical  character  of  this  passage  is 
very  marked,  and  it  should  be  treated  as  we  properly  treat  rhetorical  work. 
It  is  unreasonable  to  press  for  a  precise  meaning  and  a  logical  relation  in  the 
terms  of  a  rhetorical  passage.  Farrar  says  :  "  At  the  close  of  his  arguments 
and  exhortations  the  writer  condenses  the  results  of  his  epistle  into  a  climax 
of  magnificent  eloquence  and  force,  in  which  he  shows  the  transcendent  beauty 
and  supremacy  of  the  new  covenant  as  compared  with  the  terrors  and  imperfec- 
tions of  the  old."  The  point  which  comes  out  most  prominently  is,  that  the  old 
was  an  outward  and  material  religion  of  bodily  acts,  relations,  obediences,  and 
ceremonies.  Its  character  could  therefore  be  indicated  by  material  signs  :  nature- 
moods  and  nature-forces  could  be  wisely  associated  mth  the  founding  of  that 
religion,  and  the  promulgation  of  that  law.  Dr.  Geikie  recalls  to  mind  the 
sublimity  of  the  great  day  of  Sinai  :  "  At  last,  on  the  morning  of  the  third  day, 
the  peaks  of  the  mountain  were  seen  veiled  in  thick  clouds,  through  which 
lightnings  quivered  vividly  and  unintermittently,  as  if  the  vast  height  were 
aflame;  terrible  thunders  leaped  from  crag  to  crag,  and  reverberated  in 
multiplied  echoes,  like  the  sound  of  mighty  trumpets  announcing  the  approach 
of  God.  The  phenomena  of  thunder-storms  were  in  all  ages  associated  by  the 
Hebrews,  as  by  other  early  and  simple  races,  with  the  Divine  presence,  and  were 

428 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.         chap.  XII. 


its  fitting  accompaniments  when  Jehovah  now  actually  drew  nigh.     All  nature 
was  moved,  and  seemed  to  tremble  before  Him.     The  people  had  been  led  out 
by  Moses  to  see  a  spectacle  so  august,  but  its  terrors  awed  small  and  great ;  for 
as  they  gazed  the  mountain  appeared  to  smoke  like  a  furnace,  and  to  reel  on  its 
foundations.     But  if  the  sight  presented  were  august,  the  words  which  sounded 
above  the  thunders  were  still  more  so.  .  .  .  What,  in  comparison  with  a  moment 
like  this,  was  the  whole  record  of  the    Hindoo,  i Egyptian,   or   other   nations, 
however  ancient — with  all  their  wisdom,  or  their  gigantic  creations  of  temples, 
pyramids,  and  colossi  ?     The  transaction  on  Sinai  was  for  all  time,  and  for  the 
life  beyond.     It  laid  the  foundation  of  true  morality  and  human  dignity  among 
mankind.     It  was  the  birth-hour  of  a  people  differing  from  all  yet  seen.     The 
simple  but  profound  truths  of  a  spiritual  God  of  whom  no  likeness  was  to  be 
made — a  Being  who  draws  to  Himself   the  oppressed  and   wretched ;  of   the 
veneration  to  be  shown  to  parents  ;  of  chastity ;  of  the  sacredness  of  human  life 
and  of  property ;  of  truth  between  man  and  man  ;  and  of  the  necessity  of  a  clear 
conscience,  were  first  revealed  at  Sinai,  as  a  legacy  for  all  ages."     Dean  Stanley 
gives  us  even  a  deeper  impression  of  the  relation  in  which  nature  stood  to  the 
old  revelation  :  "  The  outward  scene  might  indeed  prepare  them  for  what  was 
to  come.     They  stood  in  a  vast  sanctuary,  not  made  with  hands — a  sanctuary 
where  every  outward  shape  of  life,  animal  or  vegetable,  such  as  in  Egypt  had 
attracted  their  wonder  and  admiration,  was  withdrawn.     Bare  and  unclothed, 
the  mountains  rose  around  them  ;  their  very  shapes  and  colours  were  such  as 
to  carry  their  thoughts  back  to  the  days  of  primeval  creation,  '  from  everlasting 
to  everlasting,  before  the  mountains  were  brought  forth,  or  ever  the  earth  and 
the  world  were  made.'     At  last  the  morning  broke,  and  every  eye  was  fixed  on 
the   summit  of  the  height  (^Ras  Sufsafeh).      Was  it  any  earthly  form,  was  it 
any  distinct  shape,  that  unveiled  itself  ?  .  .  .  There  were  thunders,  there  were 
lightnings,  there  was  the  voice  of  a  trumpet  exceeding  loud  ;  but  on  the  mount 
itself  there  was  a  thick  cloud — darkness,  and  clouds,  and  thick  darkness.     It 
was  '  the  secret  place  of  thunder.'     On  the  summit  of  the  mountain,  on  the 
skirts  of  the  dark  cloud  or  within  it,  was  Moses  himself  withdrawn.  .  .  .  They 
saw  not  God  ;  and  yet  they  were  to  believe  that  He  was  there.     They  were  to 
make  no  sign  or  likeness  of  God,  and  yet  they  were  to  believe  that  He  was  then 
and  always  their  one  and  only  Lord."     This  sublime  scene  the  writer  of  the 
paragraph  before  us  recalls  to  mind  ;    but  it  is  the   materiality   of  it   all   on 
which  he  dwells.      These  were  nature- emblems  of  a  ceremonial  and  outward 
religion. 

I.  A  material  mountain. — "A  mount  that  might  be  touched."  It  had 
substance.  It  was  a  real  mountain.  It  has  been  noticed  that  those  who  are 
born  and  dwell  in  mountain  districts,  though  they  feel  passionately  attached  to 
their  country,  seldom  either  intellectually  or  poetically  interest  themselves  in 
the  hills.  Those  who  visit  such  districts  receive  the  mental  and  spiritual 
impressions  which  they  are  calculated  to  produce.  And  the  Israelites  were 
visitors  to  Sinai,  to  whom  the  mountain  impressions  fully  came,  giving  thoughts 
of  the  eternity,  stability,  and  sublimity  of  Him  who  made  these  everlasting  hills 
His  throne.  How  the  mountains  waken  thought  may  be  illustrated  by  one  of 
R  Buchanan's  Coruisken  Sonnets. 

"  Ghostly  and  livid,  robed  with  shadow,  see ! 

Each  mighty  mountain  silent  on  its  throne, 

From  foot  to  scalp  one  stretch  of  livid  stone, 
Without  one  gleam  of  grass  or  greenery. 
Silent  they  take  the  immutable  decree — 

Darkness  or  sunlight  come — they  do  not  stir; 
Each  bare  brow  lifted  desolately  free, 

Keeping  the  silence  of  a  death-chamber. 

429 


CHAP.  XII.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS 


Silent  they  watch  each  other  until  doom; 

They  see  each  other's  phantoms  come  and  go, 
Yet  stir  not.     Now  the  stormj'-  hour  brings  gloom, 

Now  all  things  grow  confused  and  black  below, 
Specific  through  the  cloudy  drift  they  loom, 

And  each  accepts  his  individual  woe. 
Monarch  of  these  is  Blaabhein.     On  his  height 

The  lightning  and  the  snow  sleep  side  by  side, 
Like  snake  and  lamb  ;   he  broodeth  in  a  white 

And  wintry  consecration." 

II.  An  earthly  form. — The  awful  majesty  of  tempests  in  movmtain  districts 
is  told  by  travellers.  The  thunders  roll  from  hill  to  hill,  and  gather  force  as 
they  roll.  The  might  of  nature-powers  is  overwhelmingly  impressed  on  the 
soul,  and  man  feels  his  utter  nothingness  and  helplessness  in  their  presence. 
And  yet  Elijah  learned  in  this  very  region  of  Sinai,  that  the  fire  and  tempest 
are  but  material  forces,  and  belong  to  the  lower  ranges  of  Divine  revelation. 
Those  lower,  earthly  ranges  were  the  only  ones  which  the  Israelites  could  then 
reach.     The  time  for  the  spiritual  revelations  was  not  then  fully  come. 

III.  A  trumpet-voice. — Which  seems  to  mean  sound  without  sense.  The 
appeal  to  fear,  rather  than  to  love.  A  call  to  attention,  an  awakening  to 
concern  ;  but  the  time  was  not  fitted  for  the  utterance  of  words  which  could 
be  taken  into  thought  and  heart,  and  made  the  guide  and  rule  of  life.  At  least 
the  words  could  not  then  come  from  God  Hinjself.  His  voice  sounded  to  Israel 
but  as  the  blare  of  some  mighty  trumpet,  and  it  did  but  fill  them  with  fear. 

IV.  A  strict  injunction. — They  were  to  consider  that  mountain  so  entirely 
sacred,  that  they  must  not  permit  even  a  stray  beast  to  overpass  the  boundaries. 
The  living  symbol  of  that  sacredness  of  the  Holy  of  Holies,  where  God  dwelt, 
which  was  the  very  centre  of  their  religious  system.  All  the  emblems  suggested 
a  formal,  outward,  material  revelation  and  religion.  And  it  is  of  the  very 
essence  of  outward,  material  religion — the  religion  of  forms  and  rites  and 
ceremonies — that  it  treats  men  as  children,  and  helps  them  to  goodness  through 
fear.  A  spiritual  revelation  and  rehgion — which  comes  to  man  and  spirit 
in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit — alone  can  treat  men  as  men,  and  help  them 
to  goodness  by  principle  and  trust  and  love.  The  way  of  "  help  to  goodness 
through  fear "  is  always  called  for,  since  in  every  age  there  are  found  men 
who  are  but  children,  and  therefore  must  be  treated  as  such.  Sinai  that  may 
be  touched,  till  there  can  be  apprehension  of  Zion  that  cannot  be  touched. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES, 

Vers.  18,  19.  Siiicd  and  Zion.  the  Jewish  Church. — Here   the  writer 

I.  Christianity  is  a  spiritual,  not  goes  on  to  engage  the  professing 
a  material,  dispensation.  Hebrews     to     perseverance    in    their 

II.  Though  it  is  spiritual  in  its  Christian  course  and  conflict,  and  not 
nature,  it  employs  material  forms  as  to  relapse  into  Judaism.  He  shows 
adjuncts.  how   much  the  gospel  Church  differs 

III.  Sinai  and  Zion  are  only  marks  from  the  Jewish  Church,  and  how 
of  progress,  not  final  destinations. —  much  it  excels.  We  have  a  very 
Jesus  is  the  grand  resting- point.  particular  description  of  the  state  of 

Learn  —  (1)  that  privilege  is  the  the  Church  under  the  Mosaic  dispen- 
measure  of  responsibility ;  (2)  that  sation.  1.  It  was  a  grossly  sensible 
there  is  no  limit  to  progress  in  love  state.  Mount  Sinai,  on  which  that 
and  knowledge. — Dr.  J.  Parker.  Church-state  was   constituted,  was   a 

gross,    palpable   place.      It   was  very 

Vers.  18-21.  The  Gospel  Church  and      much  external  and  earthly.     2.  It  was 

430 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.        chap.  xii. 


a  dark  dispensation.  Upon  that  mount  Vers.  18-24.  The  Two  Mounts. — 
there  were  blackness  and  darkness ;  There,  on  the  right  hand,  are  the 
and  that  Church-state  was  covered  flowery  slopes  of  the  mount  of  bless- 
with  dark  shadows  and  types.  3.  It  ing ;  there,  on  the  left,  the  barren, 
was  a  dreadful  dispensation  ;  the  Jews  stern,  thunder-riven,  Hghtning-splin- 
could  not  bear  the  terror  of  it.  4.  It  tered  pinnacles  of  the  mount  of  cursing, 
was  a  limited  dispensation  ;  all  might  Every  clear  note  of  benediction  hath 
not  approach  to  that  mount,  but  only  its  low  minor  of  imprecation  from  the 
Moses  and  Aaron.  5.  It  was  a  very  other  side.  Between  the  two,  over- 
dangerous  dispensation.  The  mount  hung  by  the  hopes  of  the  one,  and 
burned  with  fire,  and  whatever  man  frowned  upon  and  dominated  by  the 
or  beast  touched  the  mount  must  be  threatenings  of  the  other,  is  pitched  the 
"  stoned "  or  "  thrust  through  with  a  little  camp  of  our  human  life,  and 
dart."  This  was  the  state  of  the  the  path  of  our  pilgrimage  runs  in 
Jewish  Church,  fitted  to  awe  a  stub-  the  trough  of  the  valley  between, 
born  and  hard-hearted  people,  to  set  And  yet,  might  I  not  go  a  step 
forth  the  strict  and  tremendous  justice  further,  and  say  that  above  the  parted 
of  God,  to  wean  the  people  of  God  summits  stretches  the  one  overarching 
from  that  dispensation,  and  induce  blue,  uniting  them  both,  and  their 
them  more  readily  to  embrace  the  roots  deep  down  below  the  surface 
sweet  and  gentle  economy  of  the  gospel  interlace  and  twine  together  ? —  A . 
Church,  and  adhere  to  it. — Matthew  Maclaren,  D.D. 
Henry. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  22—24. 

Emblems  of  the  Spiritual  Dispensation. — These  verses  give  the  antithesis  to  all 
this  scene  of  terror  which  accompanied  the  introduction  of  the  ancient  law. 
Worshippers,  under  the  new  dispensation,  approach  a  scene  of  a  very  different 
nature.  There  should  not  be  sought  anything  material  to  answer  to  these 
emblems  ;  the  suggestion  of  them,  and  explanation  of  them,  lie  wholly  in  the 
spiritual  range.  Dr.  Moulton  quotes  a  valuable  and  helpful  passage  from 
Delitzsch  :  "  What  it  was  to  which  Israel  in  the  time  of  the  old  covenant  drew 
nigh  we  have  now  heard.  Their  drawing  nigh  was  at  the  same  time  a  standing 
afar  off ;  the  mount  of  the  revelation  might  not  be  approached  by  them ;  the 
voice  of  God  was  too  terrible  to  be  borne  ;  and  yet  it  was  only  tangible  material 
nature  in  which  God  at  once  manifested  and  concealed  Himself.  The  true  and 
inner  communion  with  God  had  not  yet  been  revealed ;  first  must  the  law  lead 
to  the  painful  consciousness  that  sin  prevents  such  communion,  and  intensify  the 
longing  that  sin  may  be  taken  out  of  the  way.  Under  the  new  covenant,  no 
longer  is  a  tangible  mountain  the  place  of  a  Divine  revelation  made  from  afar ; 
but  heaven  is  thrown  open,  and  a  new  super-sensuous  world,  in  which  God  is 
enthroned,  is  opened  to  admit  us — opened  through  the  Mediator  of  the  new 
covenant,  accessible  in  virtue  of  His  atoning  blood."  Sinai  and  Zion  are 
contrasted  in  six  particulars,  as  emblems  of  the  respective  dispensations. 

I.  An  immaterial  mountain. — A  mountain  still,  because  Zion  as  truly  con- 
serves the  impressions  of  the  eternity,  stability,  and  sublimity  of  God.  Zion  is 
not  the  familiar  mount  at  Jerusalem.  It  is  the  name  for  the  heavenly  abode, 
the  spiritual  abode  of  God. 

II.  An  intangible  city. — The  heavenly  or  spiritual  Jerusalem.  Jerusalem 
which  is  above.  The  city  which  in  his  vision  St.  John  saw  descending  from  God. 
The  place  where  are  gathered  all  who  are  spu-itually  quickened,  whether  they  be 
alive  or,  as  we  say,  dead. 

.       _  431 


CHAP.  XII.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


III.  A  company  of  angels. — Conceived  of  as  spiritual  beings,  and  therefore 
kin  with  men  when  men  are  spiritually  quickened. 

IV.  A  Church  of  firstborn  souls. — "  To  myriads  of  angels,  and  to  a  festal 
assembly  and  Church  of  the  firstborn."  The  reference  is  meant  to  appeal 
directly  to  personal  feeling.  The  firstborn  are  those  who  first  received  Christ, 
and  eternal  life  in  Him.  They  had  passed  from  the  mortal  sphere ;  but  they 
formed  a  festal,  happy  company  in  the  spiritual  spheres.  "  Spirits  of  the  just 
made  perfect." 

Y.  A  satisfying  relation  with  God. — "  And  to  God  the  Judge  of  all."  Inti- 
mating the  absence  of  all  fear  of  the  Judge,  seeing  that  the  Judge  is  their  Saviour. 
They  can  come  unhesitatingly  to  Him. 

YI.  A  living  and  spiritual  Redeemer,  whose  work  is  a  spiritual  work  in 
souls.  There  is  no  intended  reference  to  the  Church,  or  to  any  Church  on  earth. 
"  It  is  to  the  living,  the  universal  Church  that  the  words  are  from  age  to  age 
addressed.  They  describe  the  blessed,  heavenly  fellowship  to  which  each  servant 
of  Christ  now  toiling  on  earth  is  joined  ;  when  he  has  run  the  race  set  before 
him,  he  wdll,  through  the  blood  of  sprinkling  and  through  Jesus  the  Mediator, 
reach  the  company  of  the  just  made  perfect,  and  stand  before  the  God  of  all." 
So  constantly  and  so  seriously  are  spiritual  men  being  enticed  back  to  material 
conceptions,  material  relations,  and  material  religion — as  Christian  Jews  were  to 
formal  Judaism— that  it  needs  to  be  ever  freshly  impressed  upon  us  that,  though 
the  material  will  ever  seem  to  be  the  real  so  long  as  we  continue  imprisoned  by  the 
senses,  the  spiritual  is  the  real ;  and  this  we  shall  fully  apprehend  when  we  are 
free  to  be  the  spirits  that  we  are,  and  free  to  exercise  the  spiritual  powers  that  we 
have. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Yers.  22-24.  Privileges  of  the  Chris-  It  advances  you  out  of  the  twilight, 

tian. — Kemember    the    great    tenacity  and  out  of  the  storm -clad   horizon  of 

with  which  the  Jews  held  fast  to  their  your    past    faith,    into     the    glorious 

historical  faith  ;  how,  over  and  above  illumination  of  a  more  spiritual  worship, 

pride  and  worldiiness,  there  was  what  where   all  forms   of  fear  and  ghastly 

I  might  almost  call  a  relentless  tenacity  motives   of    terror    cease,    and    w^here 

in  their  religious  convictions.     There-  companionship    and    Divine    guidance 

fore  apostles  urged  that,  in  accepting  and  infinite  blessings  await  you.     And 

Christ,  the  Jew  really  gave  up  nothing.  ye  are  actually  come  to  these  things. 

You  do  not  abandon  the  Jewish  law,  It   is    a    part    of   the   privilege  which 

the  Mosaic  economy,  when  you  accept  belongs  to  the  earthly  ministration  of 

Christ.     You   fulfil  it  more  perfectly  your     faith.       What,     then,     is     the 

than  when  you  leave  Christ  out,  and  privilege  of  the  Christian  ?     Christians 

attempt   to  follow  Moses.     And,  still  are  heirs  of  a  wonderful  inheritance, 

better,  you  lose   nothing.     Under  the  which    is    already   so    far    dispensed, 

old  dispensation  you  were  constrained,  portions   of    which   are   ministered   in 

you  were  under  bondage.     We  ask  you  advance,  in  such  a  Avay  that,  if  they 

not  to  abandon  that  in  any  such  sense  but    knew    it,    they   would   be    tran- 

as  to  be  recreant  to  its  real  spirit,  but  scendently  happy.     1.  "Ye  are   come 

to  accept  it  in  the  larger  presentation  unto  .  .   .  the  heavenly  Jerusalem " — 

which  it  has  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  God's  home.     God  takes  us  to  His  own 

•so   that   you    shall   have   a   thousand  home.     We  are  surrounded  by  it.     We 

times   more.     You   lose   nothing,    you  touch  it,  or  are  touched  by  it.     We  are 

gain  everything.     Do  not  fear  to  accept  brought  into  such  intimate  relations, 

Christ,  for  it  gives  you  all  that  you  if  we  be  true  Christians,  with  Christ 

had  before,  and  a  thousand  times  more,  or  with  God,  that,  whether  we  know  it 

432 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   HEBREWS.         chap.  xii. 


or  not,  the  kingdom  of  God  is  within  earth   has   ever  been   lost  that   was 

us   or  around  us.     2.  *'  To   an   innu-  worth  keeping. — Everything  has  been 

merable  company  of  angels."     It  is  not  gathered  and  garnered,  and  that  for 

that  when  we  die  we  shall  go  where  you  and  me.     All  the  holy  men  that 

angels  hve,   but  that  when    we  come  have  lived  in  every  age  of  the  world 

into  the  new  dispensation,  by  the  true  are   mine — every   one    of    them.     All 

spirit  of  faith,   we  then  come  to  the  the  apostles,  all  the  mart)T:"S,  all  the 

"  general   assembly."      Angelic  minis-  confessors,  all  pure  and  true  preachers 

tration  is  a  part,  not  of  the  heavenly  of  the  word,  all  kings  that  deserved  to 

state,  but  of  the  universal  condition  of  be  kings,  all  nobles  that  were  nobles 

men.     Moreover,  we  come  into  junction  of  heart  as  well  as  of  name,  all  holy 

and  relationship  with  everything  that  mothers  and  fathers,  all  great  artists, 

has  been  on  earth  worthy  of  remem-  all  great  benefactors,  all  the  persecuted 

brance,  of  enunciation,  of  celebration.  and  despised,  and  crucified  almost,  all 

All  the  great  natures  of  the  world  are  that  have  suffered  for  a  principle,  all 

ours,  if  they  have  been  saved.     "  The  that  the  dungeons  had,   and  all  that 

spirits,"  they  are  called,  "  of  just  men."  the  hospitals  had,  and  all  that  the  sea 

But  they  are  the  spirits  Tnade  'perfect  has  swallowed,  and  all  that  the  earth 

in  their   beatified  condition.      3.   "  To  has  covered — all  of  them,  though  they 

Jesus  the  Mediator  of  the  new  cove-  have  passed  through  so  many  and  such 

nant."     This  to  the  Jew  meant  nothing,  various  pains,  although  they  are  appa- 

but  to  the  disciple  meant  everything.  rently  destroyed,  are  no  more  destroyed 

What  are  fitting  applications  of  this  than  the  seed  that  the  farmer  covers 

passage  ?  under  the  clod,  that  it  may  rise  again 

I.  We  are  come  by  virtue  of  our  in  moie  glorious  luxuriance.  God  has 
Christian  life,  not  to  self-denial,  and  saved  everything  that  was  worth  saving 
to  pain,  and  to  repentance,  and  to  in  this  world. 

sorrow,  and  to  limitation. — A  man  III.  No  Christian  on  earth  need  be 
who  has  been  going  in  wrong  courses  lonely. — If  these  truths  are  not  poetical 
must  needs  pass  through  the  gate  of  truths ;  if  they  are  real  truths  ;  if  the 
repentance  and  the  baptism  of  sorrow.  air  is  full  of  administering  spirits ;  if 
But  the  popular  impression,  that  to  be  time  itself  is  but  the  Lord's  chariot, 
a  religious  man  is  to  enter  upon  a  life  and  He  rides  with  those  who  ride 
of  gloom,  is  a  false  impression.  If  a  therein ;  if  everywhere,  above  us, 
man  becomes  a  Christian,  he  is  simply  beneath  us,  and  on  every  side,  and  all 
a  man  that  has  been  in  an  abnormal  through  the  world,  good  men  are  sub- 
state,  an  out-of -joint  state ;  and  be-  stantially  united,  who  has  had  to  do 
coming  a  Christian,  is  merely  getting  more  than  lift  himself  up  into  the 
back  into  joint  with  God,  with  his  own  consciousness  of  this  essential  union  of 
spiritual  being,  with  the  universe.  He  noble  natures,  to  feel  that  he  is  not 
comes  into  nature  again — for  a  man  without  company  ? 
that  is  living  in  a  sinful  way  is  out  of  lY.  They  also  who  put  themselves 
nature — his  higher  and  truer  nature,  into  the  way  of  Christ,  and  who  sow 
Ye  are  not  come  to  tears  or  to  sorrow.  in  tears,  who  perform  obscure  duties, 
Ye  are  come  to  triumph,  to  an  illus-  and  duties  that  to  others  are  disagree- 
trious  company,  to  glorious  heraldings.  able,  who  will  not  be  reduced  by  ease 
Ye  are  come  to  convoys  and  felicities,  from  tasks  of  usefulness,  who  feel  in 
and  radiant  hopes  and  blessed  fruitions.  themselves  called  to  follow  Christ  in 
*'  May  I  not  cry  then  ?  "  Yes,  just  as  doing ^  in  labouring,  who  are  considered 
the  night  does — and  in  the  morning  it  singular  and  remarked — are  they  not 
is  dew.  True  tears  make  men  beau-  by  these  very  things  joined  to  this 
tiful.  exceeding  great  company  ? — U,    Ward 

II.  It  is  a  great  comfort,  in  the  Beecher. 
light  of  this  truth,  that  nothing  on 

F  F  433 


CHAP.  XII.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


Yev.  23.  The  General  Assembly. —  Himself,  the  all-comprehending  God, 
When  the  florist  gathers  his  seeds  in  the  fully  adequate  to  the  highest  and  most 
best  way  he  can,  and  winnows  them,  enlarged  reasonable  desires.  But  the 
giving  them  the  best  sifting  he  can,  the  contemporation  of  our  faculties  to  the 
poorest  seeds  are  carried  away  by  the  holy,  blissful  object  is  so  necessary  to 
wind  with  the  chaff,  and  he  loses  them,  our  satisfying  fruition,  that  without 
unless  he  is  a  very  acute  seedsman,  and  that  we  are  no  more  capable  thereof, 
goes  after  these  poor  seeds  to  bring  than  a  brute  of  the  festivities  of  a 
them  back  again,  that  they  may  swell  quaint  oration,  or  a  stone  of  the 
the  bulk  and  quantity  of  his  saleable  relishes  of  the  most  pleasant  meats 
material.  But  when  the  great  Gar-  and  drinks.  We  are  too  apt  to  fill 
dener  shall  save  His  seeds,  the  poorest  our  minds  with  ideas  of  a  heaven 
seed  of  the  whole,  the  most  shrunken,  made  up  of  external,  outside  glories, 
if  it  only  has  a  germ  no  bigger  than  a  forgetting  we  must  have  the  "  king- 
needle's  point  in  it,  shall  not  be  lost,  dom  of  God  within  us,"  hereafter  in 
Not  the  great,  beauteous,  plump  seeds  its  perfect^  as  well  as  here  in  its  initial, 
alone,  but  the  little  infinitesimal  seeds  state.  The  internal  perfection  of  the 
— all  these  God  has  saved,  and  He  will  spirits  of  just  men  is  thus  indicated — 
save  them  all. — H.  Ward  Beecher.  "  We  shall  be  like  Him  ;  for  we  shall 

see  Him  as  He  is " ;  it  includes  like- 

Heaven    a     State     of  Perfection. —  ness  to  God,   and  the  vision  of  Him. 

*' And  to  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  This  likeness  to  God  may  be  considered 

perfect."     The    text    expresses    what  as  preparative  for  the  vision  of  Him  ; 

the  Christian  Israelites  were  come,  and  or  the  vision  of  Him  may  be  considered 

were   tending,    to,   the   representation  as   an   argument   for   our   seeking  to 

whereof  hath  a  double  reference  :  in-  grow  like  Him.     Ultimate   perfection 

termediate — to  the  state  and  constitu-  is  virtually  contained  and  summed  up 

tion   of    the    Christian    Church;    and  in  knowledge.     1.  The  true  and  proper 

final — to     the     heavenly     state  ;    the  object  of  knowledge  must  be  whatever 

former  being  both  a  resemblance,  and  is  requisite  to  their  duty  and  felicit}^ — 

some  degree,  of  the  latter.  all  that  lies  within  their  compass,  but 

I.  The  perfection  the  spirits  of  the  especially   the    blessed    God    Himself. 

just  do  finally  arrive  to  in  their  future  2.  The  manner  of  knowing  is  not  that 

state. — Being    "made    perfect"    is  an  slight,    ineffectual,     merely     notional, 

agonistical  phrase.     To  it  the  idea  of  insipid  knowledge,  which  unregenerate 

"running   a   race"  plainly   leads    us.  minds  are   now  wont   to   have  of  the 

But   it   is   a   real,  inward,  subjective  most  evident  truths,  but  a  knowledge, 

perfection,  by  which  they  all  become  or   vision,    that   is    most   deeply    and 

most  excellent  creatures,  that  must  be  inwardly   penetrative,  efficacious,    and 

chiefly  meant.     Perfection,  in  a  moral  transforming ;    admits    a    light    which 

sense,  doth  contain  a  threefold  grada-  spreads   and  transfuses  itself  through 

tion :     1.    At     the    lowest,     sincerity.  the     whole     soul.      Accordingly,     the 

The  man  is  a  resolved   and  thorough  whole,   even  of  practical  religion    and 

Christian.     2.  An    eminent    improve-  godliness,    is   in    the    Holy    Scripture 

ment,     greater    maturity     in    Divine  expressed   by   the  knowledge   of  God. 

knowledge,    and   all    other    Christian  Likeness  to  God  certainly  ensues  upon 

virtues.     3.  The  consummate  state  of  suitable  preceding  knowledge  of  Him  ; 

the   Christian,  when  he   is  come   "  to  for    the    kind    and    nature    of    that 

the   measure   of    the    stature    of   the  knowledge   being,   as   it  ought  to  be, 

fulness  of  Christ."     The  felicity  of  the  powerful,    vigorous,    transforming    of 

future  state  depends  upon  such  perfec-  the   whole  soul,  and  the   will  ductile 

tion  of  the  subject  of  it.     Concerning  and  compliant,    agreeable  impressions 

the  object  of  felicity,  we  are  agreed  it  do   most    certainly    take    place.     But 

can  be  no  other  than  the  blessed  God  this  likeness  to  God  must  be  under" 

434 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.         chap.  xii. 


stood    with   exception    to   the    Divine  narrow  thoughts,  sincere  rehgion  and 

pecuHarities.  godHness  to  a  party,  distinguished  by 

TI.  In    what     sense    may    sincere  httle  things,  and  most  extra-essential 

Christians   be   said  to   have   already  thereto.     2.  The  spirits  of  the  just  on 

come  to  the  spirits  of  the  just  made  earth  are  in  a  great  propinquity,  and 

perfect? — 1.    In   a   relative    sense,    as  have     a    near     alHance    to     heaven, 

belonging  to  the  "  general  assembly,'  3.  The  just  in  this  world  are  of  the 

of  which  the  spirits  of  the  just  form  Church  in   heaven.     4.   Angels   must 

part.     2.    In     a     i^eal     sense;    by    a  have  kind  propensions   towards  men, 

gradual,  but  true  participation  of  the  especially    good    men,    in   this  world. 

primordia,   the    first    and   most    con-  5.  When  we  find  any  excellent  persons 

stituent  principles   and  perfections    of  in    our   world    attain    far    and    high 

the  heavenly  state.  towards  the  perfection  of  the  heavenly 

The   following    reflections    conclude  state,  it  ought  to  be  a  great  encourage - 

the  discourse :  1 .  It  ought  to  be  most  ment  to  us,  and  is   an  obligation,  to 

remote    from    us    to    confine,    in   our  aspire  to  some  like  pitch. — John  Howe. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH,— Verses  25—29. 

The  Voices  of  God. — God  has  always  found  voices  for  the  communication  of 
His  will  to  men.  They  always  carry  responsibility  to  those  who  hear  them — 
deepest  responsibility  to  those  who  not  only  hear,  but  distinctly  recognise  the 
voice  as  the  voice  of  God,  and  fully  admit  it  to  be  His.  And  this  is  precisely 
the  condition  of  the  Christian  Jews,  to  whom  this  epistle  is  addressed.  They 
had  received  Jesus  Christ  as  the  voice  of  God,  and  doing  so  had  brought  them 
into  the  most  serious  responsibilities,  which  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  shirk. 
They  admitted  the  Mosaic  dispensation  to  be  a  voice  of  God  ;  and  so  did  the 
writer.  But  they  admitted  the  voice  that  spoke  in  Jesus  Christ  to  be  a  new 
and  later  voice — the  last  message  that  had  come  direct  from  God.  It  could  not 
possibly  honour  God  for  them  to  refuse  that  later  voice,  and  fall  back  upon 
their  confidence  in  the  earlier  one.  In  order  to  reassure  them,  the  writer 
contrasts  the  two  voices,  and  argues  for  the  deeper  responsibilities  attaching 
to  the  reception  of  the  later  one. 

I.  The  voice  of  God  on  earth. — A  voice  that  could  be  heard  by  human  ears, 
that  could  be?  apprehended  and  written  down,  and  that  could  put  into  rule 
and  order  all  their  human  conduct,  duty,  and  relations.  They  came  under 
serious  responsibility  who  received  that  voice  for  the  guiding  of  their  lives ;  for 
the  voice  was  supported  by  severe  and  holy  sanctions. 

II.  The  voice  of  God  from  heaven. — A  voice  that  no  human  ear  could  hear, 
but  every  human  soul  might  hear  if  it  would.  That  voice  speaks  the  holy 
will  to  the  man's  love,  and  the  man  first  hears  with  his  soul,  and  then  writes 
the  laws  upon  his  heart.  In  figiu^es  the  writer  says  what  a  searching  thing 
the  new  voice  is.  It  shakes — tests — everything  that  is  shakeable.  It  confirms 
everything  that  is  unshakeable.  And  the  spiritual  sanctions  that  support  this 
voice  must  be  in  every  way  more  searching  and  more  awful. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.    25.    Refusing    God's    Voice. —  haunts   his    imagination,    and   shapes 

The  writer  has  finished  his  great  con-  this  solemn  warning.     The  multitude 

trast  of  Judaism  and  Christianity  as  gathered  there  had   shrunk  from  the 

typified  by  the  mounts  Sinai  and  Zion.  Divine  voice,  and   "  entreated  that  it 

But   the    scene   at    the    former    still  might   not   be    spoken    to   them   any 

435 


CHAP.  XII.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


more."  So  may  we  do,  standing  before 
the  better  mount  of  a  better  revelation. 
I.  The  solemn  possibility  of  re- 
fusal.— The  exhortation  is  addressed 
to  professing  Christians,  who  have  in 
so  far  exercised  faith  as  that,  by  it, 
they  are  "  come  to  Mount  Zion."*  The 
true  application  is  to  Christian  men. 
And  it  does  not  mean  entire  intellec- 
tual rejection  of  the  gospel  and  its 
message.  Then,  again,  it  is  to  be 
noted  that  the  i-efusal  here  spoken 
about,  and  against  which  we,  pro- 
fessing Christians,  are  thus  solemnly 
warned,  is  not  necessarily  entire 
intellectual  rejection  of  the  gospel 
and  its  message.  For  the  Israelites, 
who  made  the  original  "  refusal,"  to 
which  that  which  we  are  warned 
against  is  paralleled,  recognised  the 
voice  that  they  would  not  listen  to  as 
being  God's  voice,  and  just  because  it 
was  His  voice  wanted  to  hear  no  more 
of  it.  And  so,  although  we  may  per- 
missibly extend  the  words  before  us  to 
include  more  than  is  thereby  originally 
meant,  yet  we  must  remember  that 
the  true  and  proper  application  of 
them  is  to  the  conduct  of  men  who, 
recognising  that  God  is  speaking  to 
them,  do  not  want  to  hear  anything 
more  from  Him.  That  is  to  say,  this 
warning  brings  to  us  Christians  the 
reminder  that  it  is  possible  for  us  so 
to  tamper  with  what  we  know  to  be 
the  uttered  will  and  expressed  com- 
mandment of  God  as  that  our  conduct 
is  tantamount  to  saying,  "  Be  silent,  O 
Lord  !  and  let  me  not  hear  Thee  speak 
any  more  to  me."  The  reason  for  that 
refusal,  which  thus,  in  its  deepest 
criminality  and  darkest  sin,  can  only 
be  made  by  men  that  recognise  the 
voice  to  be  God's,  lies  just  here,  "  they 
could  not  endure  that  which  was 
commanded."  So,  then,  the  bottom 
of  the  whole  thing  is  this — ^that  it  is 
possible  for  Christian  people  so  to 
cherish  wills  and  purposes  which  they 
know  to  be  in  diametrical  and  flagrant 
contradiction  to  the  will  and  purpose 
of  God,  that  obstinately  they  prefer  to 
stick  by  their  own  desires,  and,  if  it 
may   be,   to  stifle  the  voice  of  God. 

436 


Then  remember,  too,  that  this  refusal, 
which  at  bottom  is  the  rising  up  of 
the  creature's  will,  tastes,  inclinations, 
desires,  against  the  manifest  and 
recognised  will  of  God,  may,  and  as  a 
matter  of  fact  often  does,  go  along 
with  a  great  deal  of  lip -reverence  and 
unconsciously  hypocritical  worship. 
These  men  from  whom  the  writer  is 
drawing  his  warning,  in  the  wilderness 
said,  "  Don't  let  Him  speak  !  We  are 
willing  to  obey  all  that  He  has  to 
command ;  only  let  it  come  to  us 
through  human  lips,  and  not  in  these 
tremendous  syllables  that  awe  our 
spirits."  They  thought  themselves  to 
be  perfectly  willing  to  keep  the  com- 
mandments when  they  were  given,  and 
all  that  they  wanted  was  some  little 
accommodation  to  human  weakness  in 
the  selection  of  the  medium  by  which 
the  word  was  brought.  So  we  may 
be  wrenching  ourselves  away  from  the 
voice  of  God,  because  we  uncomfortably 
feel  that  it  is  against  our  resolves,  and 
all  the  while  may  never  know  that  we 
are  unwilling  to  obey  His  command- 
ments. The  unconscious  refusal  is  the 
formidable  and  the  fatal  one.  It 
comes  by  reason,  as  I  have  said,  at 
bottom,  of  the  rising  up  of  our  own 
determinations  and  wishes  against  His 
commandments ;  but  it  is  also  due  to 
other  causes  operating  along  with  this. 
How  can  you  hear  God's  voice  if  you 
are  letting  your  own  yelping  dog- 
kennel  of  passions  speak  so  loudly  as 
they  do  ?  Will  God's  voice  be  heard 
in  a  heart  that  is  all  echoing  with 
earthly  wishes,  loudly  clamant  for 
their  gratification,  with  sensual  desires 
passionately  demanding  their  food  to 
be  flung  to  them  ?  Will  God's  voice 
be  heard  in  a  heart  where  the  j ang- 
lings of  contending  wishes  and  earthly 
inclinations  are  perpetually  loud  in 
their  brawling?  Will  it  be  heard  in 
a  heart  which  has  turned  itself  into  a 
sounding-board  for  all  the  noises  of 
the  world  and  the  voices  of  men  ?  The 
voice  of  God  is  heard  in  silence,  and 
not  amid  the  noises  of  our  own  hearts. 
And  they  who,  unconscious,  perhaps, 
of  what  they  are  doing,  open  their  ears 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   HEBREWS.         chap.  xil. 


wide  to  hear  what  they  themselves,  in  confidence,    which   on   its    sunny   side 

the  lower  parts  of  their  souls,  prescribe  looks   up   to   heaven  and  receives   its 

for    themselves   in    obedience    to   the  light,  is  that  self-distrust  which  says 

precepts  and  maxims  of  men  around  always  to  ourselves,  "  We  have  to  take 

them,  are  really  refusing  to  hear  the  heed  lest  we  refuse  Him  that  speaketh." 

voice  of  God.  If  there  is  any  need  to  dwell  on  specific 

II.  The    sleepless    vigilance  neces-  methods   by  which  this  vigilance  and 

sary   to    counteract   the   tendency   to  continual  self-distrust  may  work  out 

refusal. — "  See  that  ye  refuse  not."     A  for  us  our  security,  one  would  say — 

warning   finger   is,  as  it  were,   lifted.  By  carefully  trying  to  reverse  all  these 

Take  heed  against  the  tendencies  that  conditions   which,    as   we    have    seen, 

lie   in   yourself   and   the    temptations  lead  us  surely  to  the  refusal.     Silence 

around  you.     The  consciousness  of  the  the  passions,  the  wishes,  the  voices  of 

possibility   of   the  danger  is  half  the  your  own  wills  and  tastes  and  inclina- 

battle.       "  Blessed   is    the    man   that  tions  and  purposes.      Bring  them  all 

feareth  always,"  says  the  psalm.     "The  into  close  touch  with  Him.     Let  there 

confident  " — by    which    is    meant   the  be  no  voice  in  your  hearts  till  you  know 

presumptuous,  and  not  the  trustful —  God's  will ;  and  then  with  a  leap  let 

"goeth    on,    and   is    punished."     The  your  hearts  be  eager  to  do  it.     Keep 

timid — by   which   is    meant   the   self-  yourselves  out  of   the   babble   of   the 

distrustful — clings  to  God,  because  He  world's  voices,   and   be  accustomed  to 

knows  his  danger,  and  is  safe.     If  we  go  by  yourselves  and  let  God  speak, 

think   that   we   are   on  the   verge  of  Do  promptly,   precisely,  perfectly,   all 

falling,  we  are  nearer   standing  than  that  you  know  He  has  said.     This  is 

we  ever  are  besides.     To  lay  to  heart  the  way  to  sharpen  your  ears  for  the 

the   reality   and    the   imminence   and  more  delicate  intonations  of  His  voice, 

the  gravity  of  the  possibility  that  is  and  the  closer  manifestations  of   His 

disclosed  here  is  an  essential  part  of  will.      If   you   do  not,  the  voice  will 

the  means  for  preventing  its  becoming  hush  itself  into  silence.     Thus  bringing 

a  reality.     They  who  would  say,   "  I  your  lives  habitually  into  contact  with 

cannot    turn    away   because    I    have  God's  word,  and  testing  them  all  by  it, 

come,"  have  yet  to  learn  the  weakness  you  will  not  be  in  danger  of  "refusing 

of  their  own  hearts,  and  the  strength  Him  that  speaketh." 
of  the  world  that  draws  them  away.  III.  The  solemn  motives  by  which 

There  is  no  security  for  us  except  in  this  sleepless  vigilance  is  enforced. — 

the   continual   temper  of  rooted  self-  "  If  they  escaped  not  who  refused  Him 

distrust,  for  there  is  no  motive  that  that    spake    on   earth" — or,    perhaps, 

will   drive   us   to   the    continual   con-  "  who    on    earth    refused    Him    that 

fidence  in  which  alone  is  security,  but  spake  " — "  much    more   shall   not   we 

the  persistent  pressure  of   that  sense  escape  if  we  turn  away  from  Him  that 

that  in  ourselves  we  are  nothing,  and  speaketh  from  heaven."     The  clearness 

cannot  but  fall.     I  want  no  man  to  of   the   voice   is   the   measure   of   the 

live  in  that  selfish  and  anxious  dread  penalty  of   non-attention  to   it.     The 

"which  hath  torment,"  but  I  am  sure  voice  that  spoke  on  earth  had  earthly 

that   the   shortest   road  to  the  brave  penalties   as   the   consequence   of   dis- 

security    which    is    certain    of    never  obedience.      The    voice     that    speaks 

being  defeated  is  the  clear   and  con-  from  heaven,  by  reason  of  its  loftier 

tinual  consciousness  that  majesty,  and  of  the  clearer  vitterances 

which    are    granted     to    us    thereby, 

♦•  In  ourselves  we  nothing  can,  necessarily  involves    more    severe    and 

Full  soon  were  we  down-ridden:  r  j.  i    •  x?  v  4.      -j. 

But  for  us  fights  the  proper  Man,  ^f  ^^    ^^^^^^  ^^^^   negligence    to    it.— 

Whom  God  Himself  hath  bidden."  Anon. 

The  dark  underside  of  the  triumphant          Ver.  27.  Things  Passing  and  Things 


CHAP.  xii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


Permanent. — Outside  in  the  world  and 
within  our  own  souls  there  are  stable 
realities.  It  is  well  for  us  to  see  them 
and  to  have  them  rising  up  and  be- 
coming stronger  under  the  shock  of 
every  earthquake.  I.  Illustrate  this 
law  of  things.  IT.  Show  some  of  the 
benefits  that  result  from.  it. 

I.  To  illustrate  this  law. — 1.  The 
Jewish  dispensation  was  shaken,  hut 
the  great  realities  enclosed  in  it  re- 
main.— The  coming  of  Christ  in  the 
flesh  was  the  signal  for  the  overthrow 
of  that  venerable  and  magnificent 
system.  The  Jewish  nation  has  ceased 
to  be  the  peculiar  people  of  God,  but 
there  is  a  spiritual  Israel,  all  of  them 
priests,  to  offer  sacrifices  continually, 
in  lives  holy  and  acceptable  through 
Jesus  Christ.  2.  The  forms  of  human 
society  are  shaken,  hut  the  principles 
that  regulate  it  remain.  Christianity 
intensifies  social  struggles  by  pouring 
new  light  upon  human  rights  and 
duties,  but  great  principles  of  right 
and  freedom  assert  themselves  amid 
all  changes.  3.  Outward  systems  of 
religion  are  shaken,  hut  the  great  truths 
of  the  Church  of  Christ  remain.  Or- 
ganisations with  a  particular  human 
name,  locality,  and  administration  are 
shaken,  but  the  spiritual  children  of 
God  built  on  Jesus  Christ,  the  great 
corner-stone,  abide.  4.  The  temporal 
circttmstances  of  men  are  shaken,  hut 
the  great  possessions  of  the  soul  remain. 
In  disease,  sickness,  death,  old  age, 
faith  in  God  abides.  5.  The  material 
frame  of  man  is  shaken,  hut  the  immortal 
spirit  remains.  There  may  be  a  grow- 
ing life  within  corresponding  to  the 
growing  death  without.  6.  The  whole 
system  of  nature  is  shaken,  hut  the  new 
creation  remains.  When  the  curtain 
is  gone,  we  may  say  :  Isa.  li.  6. 

II.  Some  of  the  benefits  that  result 
from  this  law. — 1.  Finite  minds  can 
only  learn  hy  such  processes  of  hirth, 
growth,  death,  revival.  2.  Painful 
changes  are  the  consequence  of  sin,  yet 
an  aid  to  its  cure.  3.  We  learn  to 
cleave  to  the  permanent  things  as  our 
portion,  Jesus  is  the  abiding  Friend. 
4.  It  is  Christ  who  shakes  all  things^ 

43S 


hut  He  stands  unshaken.     "  To  whom 
can  we  go,"  etc. — J.  Ker,  D,D, 

Ver.  28.  Religion. — What  is  religion  ? 
Sometimes  we  hear  religion  put  in  a 
kind  of  opposition  to  theology.  "  Let 
us  have  religion,  but  not  theology." 
But  theology  is  the  indispensable  basis 
on  which  religion  rests.  The  word 
"  religion  "  is  not  used  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. It  is  found  in  three  places  in 
the  JSTew.  1.  Gal.  i.  13.  In  the 
original  the  word  rendered  "  the  Jews' 
religion  "  is  Judaism.  St.  Paul  says  he 
had  formerly  lived  and  been  forward 
"  in  Judaism."  This  word  is  like 
Christianity.  And  as  we  can  say 
"  the  Christian  religion  "  to  mean  the 
same  thing  as  Christianity,  so  our 
translators  used  "  the  Jews'  religion " 
to  mean  the  same  thing  as  Judaism. 
2.  Acts  xxvi.  5  :  "  Straitest  sect  of  our 
religion."  The  religion  here  referred 
to  means  the  whole  creed  and  worship 
of  the  Jews.  3.  Jas.  i.  26,  27  :  *'  Seem 
to  be  religious  .  .  .  this  man's  re- 
ligion. .  .  .  Pure  religion  and  un- 
defiled."  Here  religion  stands  for 
devout  habits  of  life.  The  religious 
man  was  one  who  had  the  form  of 
godliness  according  to  the  fashion  of 
his  time.  A  man  who  assumes  an 
exterior  of  religion,  St.  James  says, 
professes  that  he  desires  to  worship 
God  devoutly.  Let  him  know  that 
the  devout  worship  which  is  real,  and 
which  God  approves,  is  best  shown  in 
charity  and  unworldliness.  But  the 
most  original,  simple,  and  universal 
sense  of  the  word  is  fear  of  God.  It 
denotes  the  awe  which  instinctively 
possesses  the  human  mind  in  contem- 
plating the  supernatural.  This  awe 
or  fear  may  be  of  any  quality,  ranging 
from  the  noblest  and  most  exalting 
reverence  down  to  the  most  super- 
stitious cowardice.  An  irreligious  mind 
is  a  mind  without  this  awe.  The 
religious  sentiment  is  instinctive  or 
natural.  In  no  portion  of  humanity 
will  you  find  it  altogether  wanting. 
It  appears  in  various  shapes.  That 
which  is  most  opposite  to  it  is  thought- 
lessness or  superficiality  of  mind.    If 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.         chap   xil. 


human  beings  can  be  kept  in  a  per-  chiefly  meant  when  a  religion  is  named, 
petual  whirl  of  trivial  occupations  and  For  example,  when  we  speak  of  the 
interests,  the  very  instinct  of  religion  Christian  religion,  we  very  generally 
may  be  almost  starved.  But  wherever  mean  the  system  of  doctrines  or  the 
an  atmosphere  is  created  for  it  by  creed  supposed  to  be  held  by  Chris- 
reflection,  there  a  feeling  of  awe  is  tians  in  common.  But  when  it  has 
sure  to  be  inspired  by  the  mysteries  come  to  mean  a  system  of  doctrines, 
of  the  vmseen  world.  In  the  early  the  word  "  religion  "  has  diverged  con- 
stages  of  civilisation  it  has  always  siderably  from  its  first  and  most  proper 
been  in  a  great  measure  through  con-  sense.  Beligion  is  first  the  fear  of  God  ; 
templating  the  incidents  and  processes  secondly,  by  a  natural  extension,  the 
of  nature  that  the  fear  of  the  unseen  mode  of  worship  ;  thirdly,  the  belief  on 
powers  has  been  developed.  Some  which  the  worship  is  founded.  When 
races  have  been  more  affected  by  the  we  desire  to  be  accurate,  it  is  better 
dangerous  and  destructive  occurrences  not  to  use  the  word  "  religion  "  in  this 
of  nature ;  others  by  the  orderly  and  third  sense.  There  are  several  words 
beneficent  aspects  of  nature.  The  fact  we  may  use  instead,  such  as  "creed," 
that  religion  has  often  manifested  it-  *'  faith,"  or  "  theology."  Eeligion  rests 
self  in  hateful  and  cruel  superstitions  on  creed  or  theology.  It  is  idle  to  talk 
is  an  undeniable  and  important  one,  of  having  religion  without  a  theology, 
and  has  made  this  name  "  religion  "  If  you  urge  a  man  to  be  religious,  he 
odious  in  the  eyes  of  some.  But  we  will  want  to  know  whom  or  what  he  is 
are  really  not  bound  or  concerned  in  to  regard  with  awe,  to  whom  or  what 
any  way  to  clear  the  name  "  religion  "  he  is  to  consecrate  himself.  Illustrate 
from  these  imputations.  It  is  far  from  a  Christian  teacher  requiring  the 
better  that  we  should  honestly  admit  faith  of  a  heathen  people.  He  must 
their  truth  ;  it  is  profitable  to  remem-  teach  what  is  to  be  believed.  (See  the 
ber  them.  In  itself  religion  is  not  to  work  of  Paul  and  Barnabas  at  Lystra.) 
be  called  either  bad  or  good — that  is,  it  By  bringing  men  to  believe  in  Jesus 
may  be  the  one  as  well  as  the  other.  It  Christ  and  in  the  Father,  the  preachers 
may  be  either  a  terrible  curse,  or  an  of  Christ  undoubtedly  nourished  in 
exalting  and  purifying  and  sustaining  them  an  ever-increasing  fear  of  God. 
sentiment.  A  secondary  sense  in  It  is  impossible  to  believe  in  God,  to 
which  the  word  "  religion  "  is  often  used  think  of  Him,  and  not  to  fear  Him. 
is  that  of  customs  and  ordinances  of  But  the  fear  of  the  just  and  gracious 
worship.  These  are  the  forms  in  which  Father  emancipates,  and  does  not  en- 
religion  clothes  itself,  and  to  these  slave.  The  fear  of  the  true  God  is 
accordingly  the  name  of  religion  is  allied  with  faith  and  hope  and  love, 
naturally  given.  If  any  one  attempts  It  gives  courage,  instead  of  melting  it 
to  describe  a  religion,  he  will  find  it  away. — J.  Llewellyn  Davies,  M. A. 
impossible   to   keep    such    modes   and 

forms  of  worship  separate  from  the  Ver.  29.  The  Christianas  God  is  a 
account  of  the  being  or  beings  to  whom  Fire. — Emphasis  lies  on  the  word 
the  worship  is  paid.  So  when  a  religion  "  our."  *'  Our  God  is  a  consuming  fire." 
is  spoken  of,  the  creed  and  the  worship  The  God  of  the  Jews  was — that  must 
are  generally  combined  in  one.  The  be  granted.  The  God  of  the  Chris- 
creed  represents  what  is  believed  con-  tians  is — that  should  be  apprehended, 
cerning  the  unseen  world — concerning  The  mildness  of  Christianity  has  made 
God,  and  man's  relation  to  God.  The  it  often  to  be  misrepresented.  There 
nature  of  the  creed  always  affects  the  is  the  intensest  severity  behind  love, 
nature  of  the  worship.  People  fear  There  is  nothing  so  searching  as  love. 
God  in  a  manner  corresponding  to  what  The  sternest  person  in  the  world  is  the 
they  believe  concerning  Him.  The  good  mother.  The  passage  in  Deutero- 
creed,  therefore,  is  sometimes  what  is  nomy  shows  what  the  precise  idea  of 

439 


CHAP.  XII.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


the  passage  is — 2i  jealous  God.  Jealousy 
is  that  feeling  we  have  when  one  whom 
we  have  a  right  to  think  loves  us  turns 
from  us  to  set  his  love  on  another.  That 
human  feeling  represents  the  Divine 
feeling  towards  apostates.  Fire  is  a 
fitting  figure  to  represent  the  activity 
of  the  Christian's  God,  because  fire 
consumes  the  consumable,  and  purifies 
the  unconsumable.  God  works  in  the 
Christian  to  secure  the  end  which  is 
secured  when  fire  acts  on  metals — He 
delivers  the  Christian  from  everything 
that  would  hinder  his  being  and  be- 
coming his  best  possible. 

God  a  Consuming  Fire. — "  Fire  "  as 
a  symbol  of  the  Divine  nature  is  a 
most  happy  and  expressive  symbol. 
For  if  fire  is  the  first  thing  we  are 
taught  to  fear,  do  we  not  early  learn 
to  love  it  too  ?  Do  we  not  gladly 
gather  round  the  hearth,  and  spread 
our  hands  to  its  fostering  warmth  ? 
Is  not  "  the  hearth  "  a  familiar  syno- 
nym for  "the  home"?  Is  not  "the 
home  "  the  name  for  all  that  we  hold 
most  precious  and  dear  ?  Fire  de- 
stroys ;  but  it  destroys  the  dead  wood 
to  comfort  the  living  man.  It  only 
burns  us  when  we  handle  it  wrongly 
or  foolishly.  Fire  burns  and  destroys ; 
nevertheless,  it  is  so  much  our  friend, 
human  civilisation  and  comfort  and 
progress  depend  so  utterly  upon  it,  that 
the  wise  Greeks  had  a  fable  of  one  who 
was  man,  and  yet  more  than  man,  who, 
in  the  greatness  of  his  love  for  the 
human  race,  stole  fire  from  the  gods, 
and  was  ^content  to  endure  an  immortal 
agony  that  he  might  draw  down  this 
sovereign  good  from  heaven  to  earth. 
Fire  is  a  destructive  agent,  but  it  is 
also  a  creative,  vivifying,  conservative 
agent.  Through  the  broad^reaches  of 
geological  times  fire  gave  form  to  the 
very  earth  on  which  we  dwell.  Its 
daily  task,  its  common  work,  is  not 
destructive,  but  most  serviceable  and 
benignant.  So  when  we  find  God  com- 
pared to  a  fire,  we  have  to  remember 
(1)  that  though  fire  consumes,  it 
consumes  that  which  is  dead  in  order 
to   feed    and  nourish   the  Hving ;   (2) 

440  ,    . 


that  though  fire  burns  and  destroys, 
it  also  gives  life,  conserves  life,  supports 
life ;  and  (3)  that  while  destruction  is 
but  the  occasional  and  accidental  effect 
of  fire,  its  real  and  constant  task  is  to 
quicken  and  cherish  and  bless.  Thus 
interpreted,  fire  becomes  a  very  wel- 
come symbol  of  the  character  of  God. 
But  can  we  fairly  welcome  it,  both  as 
consuming  and  as  destroying  fire  ?  The 
love  of  God  is  no  weak,  puling  senti- 
ment, but  a  masculine,  nay,  a  Divine 
affection,  which,  for  their  good,  can 
bear  to  inflict  pain,  and  even  the  worst 
extremities  of  pain,  on  those  whom  it 
embraces.  If  when  the  fire  of  Divine 
love  kindles  upon  our  sins  and  sinful 
habits,  in  order  that  we  may  become 
pure,  we  will  not  let  them  go,  what 
can  happen  but  that  we  shall  be  burned, 
as  well  as  our  sins,  until  we  can  no 
longer  retain  them  ?  On  the  other 
hand,  if,  when  in  His  holy  love 
God  calls  us  to  pass  through  fiery 
trials,  we  willingly  cast  away  from  us 
the  besetting  sins  which  He  has  de- 
voted to  destruction,  from  which  we 
ourselves  have  often  prayed  to  be 
redeemed,  one  like  unto  the  Son  of 
God  will  walk  the  furnace  with  us  (for 
was  not  even  He  made  perfect  by  the 
things  which  He  suffered  ?),  and  we 
shall  pass  out  of  it,  not  only  unharmed, 
but  transformed  into  His  likeness. 
We  have  before  us  the  leading  passages 
of  Holy  Writ  in  which  God  is  com- 
pared to  a  devouring  or  consuming 
fire.  Read  in  their  connections,  they 
do  not  convey  harsh  or  repugnant 
suggestions.  If  we  can  say  of  fire, 
that  it  is  not  an  implacable  enemy, 
but  a  constant  and  benignant  friend ; 
that  it  never  becomes  our  enemy  till 
we  abuse  it ;  that  we  use  it  and  love 
it  far  more  than  we  fear  it;  that  it 
consumes  that  which  is  dead  to  warm 
and  serve  the  living  ;  that  it  holds  all 
things  in  being  and  in  order;  that,  if 
it  destroys,  it  also  quickens,  nourishes, 
and  preserves  ;  that  to  destroy  is  only 
its  occasional  and  accidental  work, 
while  to  vivify  and  preserve  and  nourish 
is  its  common  task, — if  we  can  say  all 
this  of  fire,  can  we  not  also  say  it  of 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.         chap   xil. 


God,  and  of  the  love  of  God  as  revealed 
in  Holy  Scripture?  Is  not  He  our 
gracious  Friend  till  we  compel  Him  to 
become  our  enemy  ?  Is  not  our  love 
toward  Him,  should  it  not  be,  more 
than  our  fear  ?  Does  not  He  seek  to 
consume  our  dead  works  and  evil  lusts 
only  that  He  may  feed  and  liberate 
and  strengthen  that  in  us  which  truly 
lives  ?  If  He  sometimes  destroys,  does 
He  not  commonly  quicken  and  nourish 
and  conserve  ?  Is  not  destruction  only 
His  strange  occasional  work,  while  His 
constant  task  from  day  to  day  is  to 
vivify  and  cherish  ?  Is  not  His  anger 
but  for  a  moment,  while  His  mercy 
endureth  for  ever  ?  What  can  be  more 
full  of  comfort  and  hope  for  us  than 
to  learn  that  at  the  centre  of  the 
universe  there  burns  a  sacred  fire  of 
Divine  love,  to  which  all  intolerable 
but  unconquerable  evils  will  be  as 
stubble  %—S,  Cox,  D.D. 

Our  God  a  Consuming  Fire. — The 
emphasis  in  this  sentence  rests  upon 
the  word  "our."  There  can  be  no 
doubt  at  all  that  the  God  of  the  Jews 
was  a  "consuming  fire."  There  need 
be  no  question  at  all  concerning  the 
further  fact,  that  the  God  of  the 
Christians  is  also  a  "  consuming  fire." 
Our  God,  the  God  revealed  and  mani- 
fested in  Jesus  Christ.  But  this  is 
not  the  familiar  thought  of  the  Chris- 
tian's God.  God  is  love.  Fatherhness, 
mildness,  pity,  gentleness,  are  the 
familiar  characteristics  of  the  Chris- 
tian's God.  And  there  is  some  grave 
danger  of  the  exaggeration  of  one- 
sidedness.  That  is  not  all  our  God. 
Behind  it  lie  all  the  solemnities  of 
Divine  righteousness,  august  majesty, 
supreme  claims,  searching  inspections, 
and  the  holiest  jealousy.  The  Chris- 
tian's God  is  to  be  served  with  thank- 
ful trust,  loving  obedience,  and  sunniest 
joy ;  but  He  is  also  to  be  served  with 
reverence  and  godly  fear ;  for  He  is 
still — nay,  He  is  more  truly  than  He 
ever  was — "a  consuming  fire."  That 
seems  to  be  the  point  of  impression 
of  the  text.  The  mildness  of  Chris- 
tianity  makes   it   Uable  to  misunder- 


standing.    And   it  needs   to  be  made 
quite  plain,   that   there  is  nothing  so 
searching,  so  severe,  so  inexorable,  as 
love.     There  is   an  awful  strength  in 
gentleness  ;  there  is  a  masterful  per- 
suasion in  pity  ;  there  are  inexorable 
demands  in  love.     We  may  remember 
the  times  when  our  father  beat  us  with 
the  cane  for  our  wicked  ways,  but  we 
recall  them  with  a  smile,  for  well  we 
know  there  was   too  much  passion  in 
them  for  them  to  have  been  effective 
vindications    of    righteousness.       But 
among  our  very  holiest  memories  are 
the  times  when  we  grieved  our  mother. 
She  did  not  punish  ;  she  did  not  say 
much  ;  but  the  distress  of  her  wounded 
love  smote  us  to  the   quick,  humbled 
us  into  the  dust ;  it  was  harder  far  to 
bear   than  those   fatherly   strokes ;  it 
was  a  "  consuming  fire  "  of  love,  and 
we   have   never   lost   the  ministry   of 
that    "  fire "    of    mother-love,    though 
long  years  have  passed  since  she  joined 
the  assembly  of  the  saints.     The  writer 
of  this  epistle  is  still  full  of  his  con- 
trasts of   the   two  dispensations.      In 
urging  the  Jewish  Christians  to  main- 
tain their  loyalty  and  faithfulness  to 
the   Christian  profession,  he   has   en- 
deavoured to  touch  Jewish  sentiment, 
and  inspire  to  noble  things,  by  reading 
over  the  long  roll  of  heroes,  who,  by 
faith,  mastered  a  thousand  difiiculties, 
and  held  fast  their  integrity.     He  has 
carefully  explained  the  deeper  mean- 
ings of  those  afflictions,  anxieties,  and 
persecutions  through  which  they  were 
passing.     They  were   the   strengthen- 
ing and  corrective  discipline  of  Divine 
chastisement.     And  in  a  most  effective 
rhetorical    contrast    he    has    pictured 
for  them  the  genius  and  tone  of  the 
two  dispensations.     The  older  having 
its  locus  in  storm -encircled  mountain- 
heights,  from  which  the  fires  flashed, 
over  which  the  darkness  brooded,  and 
around  which  the  alarming  thunder- 
voices    rolled.      The   new   having    its 
locus  in  a  spiritual  sphere  ;  in  a  mount 
that   had   no  earth-foundations;  in  a 
city  which  was  built  by  God,  ministered 
by   angels,    and   dwelt  in   by    sainted 
souls.     No  fires  flash  in  that  spiritual 

441 


CHAP.  Xil.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARlt :    HEBREWS. 


sphere;  no  thunder- voices  waken 
terror  in  the  soul.  All  is  peace  and 
love  and  service.  But  his  contrast 
might  leave  a  wrong  impression.  They 
might  presume  on  the  mildness  of  the 
new  dispensation,  and  relax  into  in- 
difference. He  would  check  that 
possibility  by  this  strong  assertion, 
''  Our  God  [too]  is  a  consuming  fire." 
His  service  too  must  be  rendered  "  with 
reverence  and  godly  fear."  We  can, 
however,  see  a  little  more  precisely 
what  was  in  his  mind ;  for  his  words 
are  a  quotation  from  the  book  of 
Deuteronomy  (chap.  iv.  24),  and  an  in- 
complete quotation.  To  complete  it  is 
to  provide  the  explanation  of  the  term 
*'  consuming  fire."  The  older  Scrip- 
ture reads,  *'  For  the  Lord  thy  God 
is  a  consuming  fire,  even  a  jealous 
God."  The  jealousy  of  God  is  ex- 
pressed in  this  fire  figure.  We  need 
search  no  further  than  this  for  its 
meaning.  The  text  reads  thus,  "  Our 
God,  even  the  Christian's  God,  is  a 
jealous  God."  But  that  is  a  term 
which  we  do  not  like  to  use  for  God. 
With  us  it  has  associations  which  seem 
to  make  it  quite  unsuitable.  And  yet 
the  Bible  has  frequent  allusions  to  the 
Divine  jealousy,  and  it  may  be  possible 
to  find  primary  meanings  in  the  term, 
and  to  afiix  careful  limitations  to  it, 
so  that  we  may  recognise  its  appro- 
priateness as,  even  in  these  times, 
applied  to  the  Christian's  God.  It  does 
seem  strange,  but  it  may  even  be 
right,  to  apply  the  term  to  Christ,  to 
"  God  manifest  in  the  flesh  "  ;  for  "  our 
God  is  a  consuming  fire,  even  a  jealous 
God."  He  can  burn  with  the  indigna- 
tion of  slighted,  wounded  love ;  and 
that  is  holy  jealousy.  Jealousy  is  that 
feeling  which  we  have  when  one  whom 
we  love,  and  who  seemed  to  love  us, 
turns  away  from  us  to  set  his  love 
upon  another.  Then  we  are  said  to 
burn  with  jealousy.  It  is  when  we 
have  a  right  to  the  love  which  is 
taken  from  us,  and  given  to  another, 
that  our  jealousy  becomes  so  intense 
and  is  so  righteous.  In  this  way  the 
word  can  be  applied  to  our  God.  He 
is  jealous  of  His  honour  and  His  rights 


when  the  love  that  belongs  to  Him  is 
given  to  another.  He  could  properly 
be  jealous  of  His  ancient  people,  who 
were  bound  to  Him  by  every  dearest 
tie,  when  they  forsook  Him,  and  set 
their  love  on  idol-gods — "  on  every 
high  hill,  and  under  every  green  tree 
wandering,  playing  the  harlot";  and 
against  them  His  jealousy  most 
righteously  burned  as  doth  an  oven. 
It  is  important  to  notice  this  dis- 
tinction— jealousy  is  natural  and  proper 
and  right  when  we  have  exclusive 
property  in  another's  love.  The  hus- 
band ought  to  be  jealous  if  his  wife 
is  unfaithful ;  a  wife  ought  to  be 
jealous  if  her  husband  is  unfaithful; 
a  king  ought  to  be  jealous  if  his 
subjects  are  disloyal,  and  set  their 
love  on  another.  It  is  only  when  we 
really  have  no  exclusive  property  in 
the  love,  but  try  to  make  out  that  we 
have,  that  our  jealousy  is  wrong  and 
unworthy.  It  is  easy  then  to  see  how 
the  term  can  be  properly  applied  to 
God,  seeing  He  has  absolute,  sovereign, 
and  unquestionable  rights  in  the  love 
of  His  creatures.  They  ought  to  love 
Him  with  all  their  heart,  and  mind, 
and  soul,  and  strength.  And  He 
ought  to  be  jealous  and  indignant 
when  they  turn  away  from  Him,  and 
set  their  love  on  another.  He  may 
well  be  to  them  as  a  consuming  fire. 
It  was  precisely  in  relation  to  idolatry 
that  God  was  called  jealous  in  the 
Old  Testament.  "  Thou  shalt  have 
none  other  gods  before  Me  .  .  .  for 
I  the  Lord  thy  God  am  a  jealous  God." 
And  it  is  to  idolatry  in  some  of  its 
later  phases  that  the  term  is  applied 
in  the  New  Testament.  Apostasy  is 
modern  idolatry  ;  and  towards  it  God 
is  a  consuming  fire.  But  here  is  a 
somewhat  strange  thing,  one  which 
needs  consideration,  and  suggests  some 
searching  applications.  Those  who 
were  addressed  in  this  epistle  were  not 
in  danger  of  leaving  Jehovah  to  wor- 
ship and  serve  idols.  They  were  in 
danger  of  leaving  the  Christian  God  to 
take  up  with  the  Jewish  God,  and  we 
are  to  understand  that  this  aroused  the 
Divine  jealousy,  and  towards  this  God 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS.        chap.  xii. 


was  a  consuming  fire.  And  yet  it  was 
the  same  God.  Yes,  it  was.  But  it  is 
the  grief  of  love  to  be  loved  only  for 
what  we  were,  not  for  what  we  are — to 
be  loved  for  what  we  were  thought  to 
be  in  the  first  hours  of  passionate 
affection,  not  for  what  we  are  in  the 
full  maturity  and  beauty  wrought 
through  the  culture  and  experience  of 
years.  A  simple  illustration  will  make 
this  quite  clear.  You  had  childish 
views  and  thoughts  of  God  :  there  was 
as  much  fear  as  there  was  wonder  in 
them  ;  but  they  were  most  imperfect, 
and  altogether  unworthy.  He  was 
really  no  more  than  a  magnified  bene- 
volent man.  If  you  now  persisted  in 
giving  up  all  those  higher,  worthier, 
more  spiritual  apprehensions  of  God, 
which  the  thousand-fold  experiences  of 
your  life,  and  the  spiritually  enlightened 
teachings  of  God's  word,  have  brought 
you ;  if  you  persisted  in  going  back 
upon  those  old  child- notions,  would  you 
not  grieve  Him,  would  you  not  make 
Him  jealous  of  your  loving  that  old 
God  better  than  Himself?  Must  He 
not  then  be  to  you  a  consuming  fire  ? 
But  that  is  precisely  what  some  of  those 
Jewish  Christians  were  doing.  And 
that  is  precisely  what  some  of  you  are 
doing.  You  are  afraid  of  the  God 
revealed  to  your  manhood,  and  falling 
back  upon  the  God  of  your  babyhood. 
You  are  leaving  the  Father  of  Jesus 
for  the  El,  the  power -God  of  your 
childhood.  You  are  wanting  all  those 
picture-teachings,  simplicities,  first 
principles,  which  properly  belong  to 
a  child's  God  ;  and  cannot  rise  into  the 
higher,  spiritual,  divine  apprehensions 
of  God  as  He  is  in  Christ,  which  are 
the  holy  satisfactions  of  cultured  man- 
hood. And  God  is  jealous  of  His  old 
self,  because  it  thus  takes  your  love 
away  from  Him  as  He  is,  and  wants 
to  be  now  to  you.  The  idolatry  of  the 
Jewish  Christians  was  not  Baal  or 
Moloch,  or  even  Jupiter  or  Yenus.  It 
was  an  old  image  of  Jehovah  which 
was  good  enough  in  its  day  ;  but  its 
day  had  long  since  passed.  They 
wanted  to  worship  that,  to  keep  on 
worshipping  that.    And  to  them  God 


was  a  consuming  fire,  even  a  jealous 
God.  But  we  seldom  think  that  we 
are  trying  God  just  as  they  did.  He 
gives  us  fuller  revelations  of  Himself. 
We  prefer  the  old  ones.  He  gives 
us  larger  apprehensions  of  truth.  We 
prefer  the  little  ones.  He  lifts  us  into 
the  pure  atmosphere  of  the  spiritual. 
We  get  down  again  as  soon  as  we  can 
into  the  thick,  murky  atmosphere  of 
the  material.  And  so  to-day  we  make 
Him  jealous,  we  compel  Him  to  become 
to  us  a  consuming  fire.  For  though 
our  fullest  love  is  due  to  Him  as  He  is, 
we  persist  in  taking  it  away  from  Him, 
and  giving  it  to  something  that  He 
was.  We  make  an  idol  of  our  child- 
hood's God,  and  worship  Him  rather 
than  the  Father  of  Jesus. 

I.  God  always  has  been  a  consuming 
fire,  jealous  of  His  supreme  claims  to 
love  for  what  He  is. — Almost  the  first 
lesson  humanity  had  to  learn  was  God's 
jealousy  of  His  outraged  honour.  His 
consuming  fire  was  upon  our  first 
parents,  who  had  given  up  the  obedience 
of  love  for  self-pleasing  ;  and  the  fire 
found  its  symbol  in  the  flaming  sword 
of  the  cherubim,  which  guarded  the  lost 
Paradise.  1.  The  God  of  the  patriarch 
was  a  consuming  fire,  even  a  jealous 
God ;  for  the  horror  of  great  darkness 
which  fell  on  Abraham,  when  the 
smoking  furnace  and  lamp  of  fire  passed 
between  the  severed  victims,  was  meant 
to  assure  him  how  exclusive  were  the 
claims  of  the  Covenant -maker.  2.  The 
God  of  Moses  was  a  "  consuming  fire, 
even  a  jealous  God  "  ;  for  the  bush  that 
burned,  and  was  not  consumed,  was  the 
sublime  assertion  of  Jehovah's  exclusive 
rights  in  the  people  of  Israel — rights 
to  burn  them  into  national  form  in  the 
fires  of  sternest  discipline.  3.  The  God 
of  the  people  of  Israel  was  a  consum- 
ing fire,  even  a  jealous  God  ;  for  His 
symbolic  presence  was  a  cloud  which 
was  silver-tinted  in  the  light  of  day, 
but  flashed  and  glowed  as  with  the 
burning  of  an  inner  fire  in  the  dark 
night-sky.  And  when  the  young  priests 
forsook  Jehovah  for  the  idols  of  their 
own  self-wills,  forth  flashed  the  fires  of 
the  Divine  jealousy,  for  their  sudden 

,     ,  443 


CHAP.  XII.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS, 


and  awful  destruction.  4.  And  the 
God  of  the  prophets  was  "  a  consuming 
fire,  even  a  jealous  God."  The  people 
had  forsaken  Jehovah,  and  in  a  spirit 
of  time-serving  had  set  their  love  on 
Phoenician  Baal  and  Astarte.  And  the 
Divine  jealousy  burned.  One  day  on 
Carmel  the  assembled  nation  on  the 
sides  of  the  hill  watched  in  breathless 
suspense  a  solitary  Jehovah  altar,  and 
a  solitary  prophet,  who  stood  calm  and 
strong  beside  it.  And  the  fire  of  God 
fell,  the  jealousy  of  God  burned,  and 
that  day  four  hundred  men,  who  had 
taken  from  Jehovah  the  love  that  was 
His  sole  and  sovereign  right,  were  con- 
sumed in  the  fire  of  the  Divine  indigna- 
tion, slain  on  Kishon's  side,  to  be  swept 
by  the  coming  rain- floods  out  to  the 
ocean's  nameless  grave.  There,  all  down 
the  story  of  the  ages  lie  the  ever- 
varying  illustrations  of  the  truth  that 
God  is  a  jealous  God.  His  glory  He 
will  never  give  to  another.  The  love 
which  is  His  sole  right  He  will  never 
share  with  another.  Against  all  phases 
and  types  of  idolatry  His  indignation 
ever  burns  as  does  an  oven. 

11.^  God  is  to-day  a  consuming  fire, 
even  a  jealous  God. — Jealous  of  His 
sole  and  sovereign  claims,  in  Christ 
Jesus,  upon  our  love.  Our  God,  the 
Christian's  God,  is  "  a  consuming  fire." 
If  it  be  so,  then  there  must  be  some 
forms  of  idolatry  by  which  nowadays 
we  can  be  enticed.  The  apostle  John 
knew  that  there  were  such  in  his  day, 
for  he  wrote,  "  Little  children,  keep 
yourselves  from  idols."  If  we  are 
Christians,  then  our  whole  soul's  love 
is  given  to  God  in  Christ,  the  Father- 
God  of  the  ever-acceptable  Son,  and 
that  love  carries  to  God  the  full  con- 
secration of  ourselves,  of  our  life.  In 
that  "  setting  of  our  love  upon  Him  " 
God  finds  His  holy  satisfactions  and 
delights.  Then  we  know  what  grieves 
Him,  wounds  Him  to  the  very  heart, 
rouses  the  holy  jealousy,  and  compels 
Him  to  be  to  us  a  consuming  fire.     It 


is  our  taking  that  love  which  is  His, 
which  is  His  sole  and  sovereign  right, 
and  giving  it  to  some  one  else,  to  some- 
thing else,  to  idol  self.  Can  it  be  that 
we  ever  do  this  ?  Can  it  be  that  God 
knows  we  are  really  idolaters  ?  Can 
it  be  that  our  heart  is  divided  ?  Have 
we  in  actual  fact  our  own  private 
idols,  and  do  they  take  our  real  heart- 
love  and  worship  ?  The  missionary 
Paton  felt  convinced  that  the  apparent 
religion  of  the  aborigines  of  Australia 
was  not  their  real  religion,  and  set 
himself  to  discover  what  it  was.  At 
last  he  found  they  had  in  secret 
smooth  stones,  kept  hidden  in  bags, 
and  in  these  their  souls  trusted.  It 
may  be  so  with  us.  We  bow  at  the 
Christian  altar,  and  keep  idols  of  our 
own  at  home.  Idols  we  make  of 
persons ;  idols  we  make  of  opinions ; 
idols  we  make  of  pleasures.  But  our 
text  has  suggested  a  kind  of  idol  which 
we  may  never  have  thought  of  before. 
The  Jewish  Christians  were  in  danger 
of  making  an  idol  of  the  old  God  they 
served  before  they  became  Christians. 
And  God  is  represented  as  being 
jealous  of  their  leaving  His  present 
self  to  worship  and  serve  His  old 
self.  Can  it  be  possible  that  we  are 
grieving  God  thus  ?  He  has  lifted  us 
up,  in  Christ  Jesus,  to  high,  spiritual, 
noble  thoughts  and  apprehensions  of 
Himself,  and  to  a  high  and  holy  circle 
of  truths  gathering  round  His  spiritual 
Fatherhood.  Alas !  it  seems  too  high 
for  us,  and  we  leave  Him  to  go  back 
upon  the  bare,  poor  idea  of  God  which 
belonged  to  our  childish  immaturity, 
and  to  the  unspiritual  days  before  our 
regeneration.  We  make  idols  of  the 
bald,  picture  settings  of  doctrinal 
truths  which  suited  our  religious  child- 
hood. It  is  as  if  the  Christian  Jews 
persisted  in  becoming  formal  Mosaic 
Jews  again.  It  is  one  form  of  the 
idolatry  into  which  Christians  fall  in 
our  days  ;  and  God  is  a  consuming  fire, 
even  a  jealous  God. 


444 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   XII. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO   CHAPTER  XII. 


Ver.  1.  Laying  Aside  our  Weights. — It  was 
on  the  confines  of  the  desert,  amid  sterile  and 
almost  inaccessible  rocks,  that  Ben  Achmet, 
the  Dervise,  led  a  life  of  austerity  and  devo- 
tion. A  cave  in  the  rocks  was  his  dwelling. 
Roots  and  fruits,  the  scanty  product  of  the 
inhospitable  region  he  inhabited,  satisfied 
his  hunger,  and  the  fountain  that  bubbled 
up  from  the  lower  part  of  a  neighbouring 
cliff  slaked  his  thirst.  He  had  formerly 
been  a  priest  in  a  magnificent  mosque,  and 
scrupulously  conducted  the  ceremonies  of 
the  Mohammedan  faith ;  but  disgusted  with 
the  hypocrisy  and  injustice  of  those  around 
him,  he  abandoned  the  mosque  and  his 
authority  as  a  priest,  betaking  himself  to 
the  desert,  to  spend  his  days  as  an  anchorite, 
in  sanctity,  self-denial,  and  devotion.  Years 
rolled  over  the  head  of  Ben  Achmet,  and 
the  fame  of  his  sanctity  spread  abroad.  In 
seasons  of  drought  he  supplied  the  traveller 
of  the  desert  with  water  from  his  little  well. 
In  times  of  pestilence  he  left  his  solitary 
abode  to  attend  the  sick  and  comfort  the 
dying  in  the  villages  that  were  scattered 
around,  and  often  did  he  stanch  the  blood 
of  the  wounded  Arab,  and  heal  him  of  his 
wounds.  His  fame  was  spread  abroad ;  his 
name  inspired  veneration  ;  and  the  plunder- 
ing Bedouin  gave  up  his  booty  at  the  com- 
mand of  Ben  Achmet,  the  Dervise.  Akaba 
was  an  Arabian  robber;  he  had  a  band  of 
lawless  men  under  his  command  ready  to 
do  his  bidding,  large  numbers  of  slaves,  and 
a  treasure  house  well  stored  with  his  ill- 
gotten  wealth.  The  sanctity  of  Ben  Achmet 
arrested  his  attention  ;  his  conscience  smote 
him  on  account  of  his  guilt,  and  he  longed 
to  be  as  famed  for  his  devotion  as  he  had 
been  for  his  crimes.  He  sought  the  abode 
of  the  Dervise,  and  told  him  his  desires. 
"  Ben  Achmet,"  said  he, "  I  have  five  hundred 
cimeters  ready  to  obey  me,  numbers  of  slaves 
at  my  command,  and  a  goodly  treasure-house 
filled  with  riches ;  tell  me  how  to  add  to 
these  the  hope  of  a  happy  immortality  ? " 
Ben  Achmet  led  him  to  a  neighbouring  cliff 
that  was  steep,  rugged,  and  high ;  and 
pointing  to  three  large  stones  that  lay  near 
together,  he  told  him  to  lift  them  from  the 
ground,  and  to  follow  him  up  the  cliff. 
Akaba,  laden  with  the  stones,  could  scarcely 
move ;  to  ascend  the  cliff  with  them  was 
impossible.  "  I  cannot  follow  thee,  Ben 
Achmet,"  said  he,  "  with  these  burdens." 
"  Then  cast  down  one  of  them,"  replied  the 
Dervise,  "and  hasten  after  me."  Akaba 
dropped  a  stone,  but  still  found  himself  too 
heavily  encumbered  to  proceed.  "  I  tell 
thee  it  is  impossible,"  cried  the  robber 
chieftain ;  "  thou  thyself  couldst  not  proceed 
a  step  with  such  a  load."  ♦*  Let  go  another 
stone,    then,"    said    Ben    Achmet.      Akaba 


readily  dropped  another  stone,  and,  with 
great  difficulty,  clambered  the  cliff  for  a 
while,  till,  exhausted  with  the  effort,  he 
again  cried  out  that  he  could  come  no 
farther.  Ben  Achmet  directed  him  to  drop 
the  last  stone  ;  and,  no  sooner  had  he  done 
this,  than  he  mounted  with  ease,  and  soon 
stood  with  his  conductor  on  the  summit  of 
the  cliff.  "Son,"  said  Ben  Achmet,  "thou 
hast  three  burdens  which  hinder  thee  in 
thy  way  to  a  better  world.  Disband  tby 
troop  of  lawless  plunderers,  set  thy  captive 
slaves  at  liberty,  and  restore  thy  ill-gotten 
wealth  to  its  owners ;  it  is  easier  for  Akaba 
to  ascend  this  cliff  with  the  stones  that  lie 
at  its  foot,  than  for  him  to  journey  onward 
to  a  better  world  with  power,  pleasure,  and 
riches  in  his  possession. " 

Tlie  Ancient  Grecian  Games. — The  great 
religious  festivals  of  Judaism  served  to 
unite  the  nation,  and  to  meet  the  longing 
for  pleasurable  excitement  which  we  find  in 
a  greater  or  less  degree  in  every  nation. 
They  help  us  also  to  realise  the  serious  and 
religious  character  of  the  Jewish  people. 
They  had  no  public  games  ;  and  only  in 
the  late  degenerate  days  of  Roman  dominion 
were  gymnasia  and  theatres  established 
among  them.  The  apostle  Paul  tarried  some 
time  in  the  city  of  Corinth,  and  founded 
there  a  large,  prosperous,  and  influential 
Christian  Church  ;  while  residing  in  that 
city,  there  can  be  no  doubt  the  great  games 
were  held  on  the  adjoining  isthmus,  which 
were  known  as  the  Isthmian  Games,  and 
celebrated  every  other  year.  We  cannot 
imagine  that  Paul  went  to  them,  for  they 
must  have  been  scenes  of  wild  rioting  and 
vice,  too  much  like  those  witnessed  now  on 
our  race-courses  ;  but  he  would  know  all 
about  them  ;  and  they  would  be  for  a  time 
quite  the  common  excitement  in  Corinth. 
Certainly,  in  Paul's  later  writings,  we  find 
many  allusions  to  these  games ;  they  seem 
to  have  seized  on  his  imagination,  and  set 
him  thinking  how  much  there  was  like  them 
in  a  Christian  course.  That  also  seemed  to 
him  a  race,  and  he  longed  "  so  to  run  that 
he  might  attain."  That  also  seemed  to  him 
a  battle ;  and  when  he  came  to  its  close,  he 
could  say,  "  I  have  fought  a  good  fight." 
The  principal  passages  in  which  figures  taken 
from  the  scenes  of  these  games  are  found, 
are:  1  Cor.  iv.  9,  ix.  24-27  ;  Phil.  iii.  13,  14  ; 

1  Thess.  ii.    19,   20;  1    Tim.   iv.   8,   vi.  12; 

2  Tim.  ii.  5,  iv.  7,  8;  Heb.  x.  32,  33,  xii. 
1,  2.  1.  The  company  of  spectators  was  ex- 
ceedingly large,  people  attending  from  all 
the  district  round ;  the  competitors  were 
urged  and  excited  by  their  shouts  and 
praises.  In  the  Roman  amphitheatres  the 
audiences    decided    whether    a    defeated 

445 


/ 


CHAP.  XII.         HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:   HEBREWS. 


gladiator  was  to  die  by  turmnrj  down  their 
thumbs.  2.  The  competitors  underwent 
previous  and  careful  traiimig,  for  at  least 
ten  months  ;  keeping  under  the  body,  bring- 
ing it  into  subjection,  and  cultivating  skill 
in  the  use  of  weapons,  or  the  art  of  running. 
3.  Very  stringent  laws  were  fixed  for  con- 
ducting the  contests,  and  they  must  be 
carried  on  in  the  prescribed  way.  A  man 
would  not  be  crowned  unless  he  strove 
lawfully.  4.  The  contests  were  divided 
into  two  classes, — the  pancratium,  consisting 
of  boxing  and  wrestling  ;  and  the  pentathlon, 
consisting  of  leaping,  running,  quoiting, 
and  hurling.  In  some  games  poetical  and 
oratorical  contests  were  introduced.  5.  The 
actual  7'ervard  was  only  a  crown  of  pine  or 
ivy  leaves ;  but  the  victor  was  set  in  high 
honour,  his  name,  and  that  of  his  father  and 
country,  were  proclaimed  by  a  herald  to  the 
vast  assembly ;  and  he  was  borne  to  his 
native  city  in  triumph.  Sometimes  a  pillar 
was  erected  on  which  the  record  of  his 
victory  was  placed.  From  the  rewards  given 
at  these  games,  the  figures  of  Rev.  iii.  12, 
etc.,  are  taken. 

Ver.  2.  Looking  unto  Jesus. — That  con- 
veys the  idea  of  rigid  shutting  out  of  other 
things  in  order  that  one  supreme  light  may 
fill  the  eye  and  gladden  the  soul.  If  you 
do  not  carefully  drop  black  curtains  round 
the  little  chamber,  and  exclude  all  side 
lights  as  well  as  all  other  objects  from  the 
field  of  vision,  there  will  be  no  clear  im- 
pression of  the  beloved  face  made  upon  the 
sensitive  plate.  It  must  be  in  the  darkness 
that  the  image  is  transferred  to  the  heart. — 
A.  Maclaren,  B.D. 

Captain  and  Perfecter  of  Faith. — In  some 
notes  on  New  Testament  passages.  Principal 
David  Brown,  in  the  Expositor,  gives  a  new 
turn  of  thought  to  the  familiar  phrase,  "  the 
Author  and  Finisher  [Perfecter,  R.V.]  of  our 
faith.'"  He  rejects  the  word  "  our,"  and 
would  translate,  "  the  Captain  and  Perfecter 
of  '  faith.' "  The  passage,  he  maintains, 
teaches,  not  that  Jesus  is  the  Author  and 
Completer  of  "our  own"  faith,  but  of  the 
"  life  of  faith."  In  other  words,  He  is  the 
model  believer.  It  is  claimed  that  the  very 
next  verse  brings  out  this  idea.  The  "  joy  " 
was  conditioned  on  the  triumph  of  faith  in 
enduring  suffering.  So  the  entire  course  of 
Christ's  temptation  is  a  test  and  victory  of 
faith.  At  the  cross  one  said,  "  He  trusted 
in  God  that  He  would  deliver  Him,"  etc. 
Thus  Christ  is  the  "  Leader  and  Conductor  " 
of  the  army  of  believers,  for  He  is  Himself 
the  most  shining  example  of  faith.  This  is 
a  fresh  light  upon  an  old  text. 

Joy  of  Christ  in  Redemption. — It  was  a  sad 
and  fearful  sight  which  that  noble-minded 
girl,  Grace  Darling,  and  her  old  father  saw, 

44a 


when  the  grey  light  began  to  make  things 
visible  across  that  stormy  sea.  The  wild, 
broken  clouds,  the  rear-guard  of  the  tempest, 
were  moving  slowly  and  as  it  were  grudgingly 
away ;  the  fierce  winds  were  sweeping  in 
gusts  across  the  sky ;  and  the  waves,  lashed 
into  foam  by  the  midnight  storm  that  had 
been  raging,  were  breaking  in  sheets  of 
spray  over  the  miserable  remnant  of  the 
crew  who  still  clung  to  the  wreck.  As  each 
breaker  poured  its  torrent  over  it,  the  girl 
and  her  father  could  see  the  numbers 
thinned,  and  one  after  another  swept  away, 
to  struggle  for  a  few  moments  in  the  boiling 
and  whirling  eddies,  and  then  "sink  like 
lead  in  the  mighty  waters."  Will  a  boat 
live  in  such  a  sea?  Can  it  be  managed? 
They  at  all  events  will  try.  Their  little 
boat  is  skilfully  pushed  off  from  the  light- 
house, and,  forced  forward  by  the  strength 
of  love,  it  is  soon  under  the  wreck,  and  filled 
with  those  who  have  lowered  themselves 
into  it.  A  little  while  and  the  deeply  laden 
boat  has  reached  the  lighthouse  and  de- 
posited its  rescued  passengers  in  safety. 
Another  effort  and  another,  and  they  are 
all  safe.  Oh,  how  did  their  generous  hearts 
glow  with  joy  when  they  looked  around  on 
those  who,  but  for  their  courage  and  skill 
and  self-devotion,  had  been  lifeless  corpses 
in  the  ocean !  How  did  their  hearts  burn 
within  them  as  they  saw  the  shivering 
sailors  cowering  over  the  fire  and  thawing 
their  almost  frozen  limbs  !  What  will  be 
His  joy  who  saw  from  His  throne  in  the 
heavens  a  shipwrecked  world  with  its 
millions  who,  but  for  Him,  must  have 
perished,  who  left  His  glory  and  with  a 
strong  hand  spoiled  the  raging  powers  of 
darkness  of  their  prey,  and  gathered  from 
the  wreck  the  mighty  remnant  1 —  Canon 
Champneys. 

Ver.  6.  The  Uses  of  Afflvotion. — Note  the 
difference  between  summer  storms  and 
winter  ones,  the  latter  rushing  over  the 
earth  with  all  their  violence ;  and  if  any 
poor  remnants  of  foliage  or  flowers  have 
lingered  behind,  these  are  swept  along  at 
one  gust,  leaving  nothing  but  desolation ; 
while  the  former  make  all  things  to  rise  as 
it  were  with  renewed  beauty, — the  types  of 
the  difference  between  the  storms  of  afflic- 
tion as  coming  upon  the  Christian  and  the 
sinner, —  Guesses  at  Truth. 

Perfect  through  Suffering. — Stars  shine 
brightest  in  the  darkest  night ;  torches  are 
better  for  beating;  grapes  come  not  to  the 
proof  till  they  come  to  the  press;  spices 
smell  best  when  bruised ;  young  trees  root 
faster  for  shaking ;  gold  looks  brighter  for 
scouring ;  juniper  smells  sweetest  in  the 
fire ;  the  palm  tree  proves  the  better  for 
pressing.  Such  is  the  condition  of  God's 
people;    they  are   most    triumphant  when 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.   XII. 


most    tempted,   most   glorious   when    most 
affiicted. — Bogatshy. 

Ver.  7.  God's  Dealing  with  Us. — Visiting  a 
person  who  was  in  deep  affliction  and  sorrow, 
Gotthold  was  told  by  the  family  that  he  was 
in  the  garden.  TLither  he  followed,  and 
found  him  employed  in  clearing  a  vine  of 
its  superfluous  leaves.  After  a  friendly 
salute,  he  inquired  what  he  was  doing.  "  I 
find,"  was  the  reply,  *'that,  owing  to  the 
abundant  rain,  this  vine  is  overgrown  with 
wood  and  leaves,  which  prevent  the  sun  from 
reaching  and  ripening  the  grapes  ;  I  am, 
therefore,  pruning  part  of  them  away,  that 
it  may  bring  its  fruit  to  maturity,"  Gotthold 
rejoined,  "And  do  you  find  that  in  this 
operation  the  vine  resists  and  opposes  you  ? 
If  not,  why  are  you  displeased  that  a  gracious 
God  should  do  to  you  what  your  vine  must 
not  be  displeased  that  you  do  to  it?  " 

The  Estimate  of  Things  lost.  — 

For  so  it  falls  out, 
That  what  we  have  we  prize  not  to  the  worth, 
Whiles  we  enjoy  it;  but  being  lacked  and 

lost. 
Why  then  we  rack  the  value ;  then  we  find 
The  virtue,  that  possession  would  not  show  us 
Whiles  it  was  ours. — Sliahespeare. 


Like  birds,   whose   beauties  languish,   half 

concealed. 
Till,  mounted  on  the  wing,  their  glossy  plumes 
Expanded,  shine  with  azure,  green,  and  gold ; 
How  blessings  brighten  as  they  take  their 

flight  1 — Young. 


Farewell !     I  did  not  know  thy  worth, 
But  thou  art  gone,  and  now  'tis  prized  : 

So  angels  walked  unknown  on  earth, 
But  when  they  flew  were  recognised. 

Thomas  Hood. 


'Tis  only  when  they  spring  to  heaven  that 

angels 
Reveal  themselves  to  you  ;  they  sit  all  day 
Beside  you,  and  lie  down  at  night  by  you, 
Who  care  not  for  their  presence,  muse   or 

sleep ; 
And  all  at  once  they  leave  you,  and  you  know 

thQTd.— Robert  Browning. 


Not  to  understand  a  treasure's  worth 
Till  time  has  stolen  away  the  slighted  good, 
Is  cause  of  half  the  poverty  we  feel, 
And  makes  the  world  the  wilderness  it  is. 

Cowper. 

Ver.  18.  Mount  Sinai. — Among  the  char- 
acteristics of  Sinai  one  must  not  be  omitted 
— the  deep  stillness,  and  consequent  rever- 
beration of  the  human  voice.  From  the 
Jiighest  point  of  Rds  Sufs^feh  to  its  lower 


peak,  a  distance  of  about  sixty  feet,  the 
page  of  a  book,  distinctly  but  not  loudly 
read,  was  perfectly  audible  ;  and  every 
remark  of  the  various  groups  of  travellers, 
descending  from  the  heights  of  the  same 
point,  rose  clearly  to  those  immediately 
above  them.  It  was  the  belief  of  the  Arabs 
who  conducted  Niebuhr,  that  they  could 
make  themselves  heard  across  the  gulf  of 
Akaba — a  belief,  doubtless,  exaggerated,  yet 
probably  originated  or  fostered  by  the  great 
distance  to  which,  in  these  regions,  the  voice 
can  actually  be  carried,  and  it  is,  probably, 
from  the  same  causes  that  so  much  attention 
has  been  excited  by  the  mysterious  noises 
which  have,  from  time  to  time,  been  heard, 
on  the  summit  of  Gebel  Mousa,  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Um-Shomer,  and  the  mountains 
of  Nakus,  or  the  Bell,  so  called  from  the 
legend  that  the  sounds  proceed  from  the  bells 
of  the  convent  enclosed  within  the  mount. 
In  this  last  instance  the  sound  is  supposed, 
to  originate  in  the  rush  of  sand  down  the 
mountain-side,  and  here,  as  elsewhere,  play- 
ing the  same  part  as  the  waters  or  snows  of 
the  North.  In  the  case  of  Gebel  Mousa, 
where  it  is  said  that  the  monks  had  originally 
settled  on  the  highest  peak,  but  were,  by 
these  strange  noises,  driven  down  to  their 
present  seat  in  the  valley,  and  in  the  case 
of  Um-Sh6mer,  where  it  was  described  to 
Burckhardt  as  like  the  sound  of  artillery,  the 
precise  cause  has  never  been  ascertained. 
But  in  all  these  instances  the  effect  must 
have  been  heightened  by  the  death-like 
silence  of  the  region,  where  the  fall  of  waters, 
even  the  trickling  of  brooks,  is  unknown. — 
Bean  Stanley. 

Roots  Uncomely  but  Useful. — The  root  of 
a  plant  is  often  a  rough  and  very  unsightly 
part.  Its  colour  is  unpleasing,  and  its  form 
ungainly,  yet  it  plays  an  all-important  part 
in  the  economy  of  the  plant's  life.  You 
may  pluck  off  the  bright  flowers  and  leaves 
one  by  one  till  all  is  stripped  bare,  and  it 
will  still  survive ;  but  the  root  is  essential 
to  its  life :  injure  or  remove  it,  and  the 
plant  perishes.  Again,  the  oxygen,  the  life- 
sustaining  element  of  the  air,  given  off  by 
the  various  members  of  the  vegetable  king- 
dom, comes  entirely  from  the  stem  and 
leaves,  the  green  parts  of  the  plant,  the 
more  beautiful  flowers  and  fruit  only  ex- 
haling poisonous  carbon.  So  it  is  with  the 
body  mystical  of  Christ,  "  the  Church  of  the 
firstborn,"  and  its  members  in  particular. 
.  .  .  Often  God  brings  a  rough,  uncouth 
Luther  to  far  more  distinction  than  a 
refined  Erasmus,  and  exalts  Bunyan  the 
tinker  above  the  most  polished  of  his 
pious  contemporaries.  The  *'  uncomely 
parts "  have  more  honour,  for  it  is  God's 
method  of  working  to  place  more  honour 
upon  them,  and  make  them  of  more  use. 
It    is   very  humbling    to    pride,   especially 

447 


CHAP.   XII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS, 


spiritual  pride,  but  it  is  His  way,  who  will 
have  "  no  flesh  to  glory  before  Him." — 
James  JVeil,  M.A. 

Ver.  23.  TIw  Church  Triimphant.— The 
Trav-ffyvpis  {paneguris)  was  a  solemn  assembly 
for  purposes  of  festal  rejoicing  .  .  .  the 
word  having  given  us  "  panegyric,"  which  is 
properly  a  set  discourse  pronounced  at  one 
of  these  great  and  festal  gatherings. 
Business  might  grow  out  of  the  fact  that 
such  multitudes  were  assembled,  since  many, 
and  for  various  reasons,  would  be  glad  to 
avail  themselves  of  the  circumstance  ;  but 
only  in  the  same  way  as  a  "fair  "  grew  out 
of  a  "  feria  "  or  "  holy-day."  Strabo  notices 
the  business-like  aspect  which  the  TravrjyvpeLs 
commonl}'^  assumed,  which  was  indeed  to 
such  an  extent  their  prominent  feature  that 
the  Romans  translated  irav-qyvpis  by  the  Latin 
mercatus,  and  this  even  when  the  Olympic 
games  were  intended.  These,  with  the 
other  solemn  games,  were  eminently,  though 
not  exclusively,  the  irav-qyvpeis  of  the  Greek 
nation.  If  we  keep  this  festal  character  of 
the  Travriyvpi.s  in  mind,  we  shall  find  a 
peculiar  fitness  in  the  employment  of  this 
word  at  Heb.  xii.  23,  where  only  in  the  New 
Testament  it  occurs.  The  apostle  is  there 
setting  forth  the  communion  of  the  Church 
militant  on  earth  with  the  Church  triumphant 
in  heaven — of  the  Church  toiling  and  suffer- 
ing here,  with  that  Church  from  which  all 
weariness  and  toil  have  for  ever  passed 
away  (Rev.  xxi.  4)  ;  and  how  could  he  better 
describe  this  last  than  as  a  irav-qyvpis,  than 
as  the  glad  and  festal  assembly  of  heaven  1 
— Trench. 

Ver.  24.  Blood  tetter  than  Abel's. — Abel 
stands  forth  before  us  as  the  first  in  a  cloud 
of  witnesses,  bearing  brave  testimony,  and 
prepared  to  seal  it  with  their  lives.  He 
died  a  martyr  for  the  truth,  the  grandly 
God-like  truth  that  God  accepteth  men 
according  to  their  faith.  All  honour  to  the 
martyr's  blood  which  speaks  so  effectually 
for  precious  truth.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
being  also  a  testifier  and  witness  for  the 
faith  of  God,  spake  better  things  than  Abel, 
because  He  had  more  to  speak,  and  spake 
from  more  intimate  acquaintance  with  God. 
He  was  a  fuller  witness  of  Divine  truth  than 
Abel  could  be,  for  He  brought  life  and 
immortality  to  light,  and  told  His  people 
clearly  of  the  Father.  Our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  had  been  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father, 
and  knew  the  Divine  secret ;  this  secret  He 
revealed  to  the  sons  of  men  in  His  ministry, 
and  then  He  sealed  it  by  His  blood. —  C.  H. 
Spurgeon. 

Blood  crying  for  Vengeance. — To  us  it 
seems  a  slight,  and  therefore  a  strange, 
commendation  of  the  blood  of  the  great 
sacrifice    to    say    it    speaks    better    things 

448 


than  vengeance.  But  to  Hebrews  who  had 
shed  their  brother's  blood  the  case  was 
widely  different.  Of  the  men  who  in  the 
madness  of  their  persecuting  zeal  had  said 
concerning  Jesus,  *'  His  blood  be  on  us, 
and  on  our  children,"  imagine  some  brought 
afterwards  to  feel  what  they  had  done ;  what 
more  natural  apprehension  in  their  awakened 
conscience  than  that  their  brother's  blood 
should  cry  for  vengeance  against  them,  as 
Abel's  blood  cried  against  his  murderer  ? 
It  has  been  so.  The  Hebrew  nation  is  a 
living  Cain.  Their  brother's  blood  crieth 
against  them.  ...  To  the  penitent  believer, 
therefore,  how  needful,  and  how  suitable, 
and  how  satisfactory,  was  the  apostle's 
assurance  !  His  death  in  their  hands  was 
indeed  the  murder,  but  by  the  hand  of  God 
it  had  been  turned  into  a  mercy. — Hugh 
McNeile,  B.D. 

Ver.  25.  Refusing  Advice. — I  once  hap- 
pened to  be  on  a  visit  to  a  great  castle 
situate  at  the  top  of  a  hill.  There  was  a 
steep  chff,  at  the  bottom  of  which  was  a 
rapid  river.  Late  one  night  there  was 
a  woman  anxious  to  get  home  from  that 
castle  in  the  midst  of  a  thunder-storm.  The 
night  was  blackness  itself  ;  the  woman  was 
asked  to  stop  till  the  storm  was  over,  but 
she  declined  ;  next  they  begged  her  to  take 
a  lantern,  that  she  might  be  able  to  keep 
upon  the  road  from  the  castle  to  her  home. 
She  said  she  did  not  require  a  lantern,  but 
could  do  very  well  without  one.  She  went. 
Perhaps  she  was  frightened  by  the  storm — 
I  know  not  the  cause — but  in  the  midst  of 
the  darkness  she  wandered  from  the  path 
and  fell  over  the  cliff.  The  next  day  that 
swollen  river  washed  to  the  shore  the  poor 
lifeless  body  of  this  foolish  woman !  How 
many  foolish  ones  are  there  who,  when  the 
light  is  offered  them,  only  say,  "  I  am  not 
afraid  ;  I  fear  not  my  end  !  "  and  how  many 
have  perished  because  they  have  refused  the 
light  of  God's  truth,  which  would  have 
guided  them  on  the  road  to  heaven  I — Bishop 
Villiers. 

Ver.  29.  Consuming  Fire. — A  traveller 
writes,  "  I  saw  a  flaming  globe  of  fire, 
magnificent  indeed,  but  too  terrible  for  the 
eye  to  rest  upon,  if  its  beams  had  been 
naked  and  exposed ;  but  it  was  suspended 
in  a  vase  of  crystal,  so  transparent,  that 
while  it  softened  the  intensity  of  its  rays, 
it  shrouded  nothing  of  its  beauty.  On  the 
contrary,  that  which  before  would  have 
been  a  mass  of  undistinguishable  light, 
now  emitted  through  the  vase  many  beauti- 
ful and  various  coloured  rays,  which  riveted 
the  beholder  with  wonder  and  astonishment." 
Such  is  God  manifested  in  Christ  and  out  of 
Christ,  He  meets  the  affrighted  sinner's  eye 
as  "  a  consuming  fire."  Like  fiery  flames 
breaking  forth  to  consume  the  adversary, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


CHAP.    XIII. 


He  is  too  terrible  for  the  apprehension.  But 
now  He  reveals  Himself  in  Christ;  His 
terrible  majesty  no  longer  affrights  us.  His 
consuming  fire,  seen  in  Christ,  is  like  the 
mild  rays  of  the  morning  sun  in  spring, 
going  forth  to  bless  the  earth  with  its  cheer- 
ful and  invigorating  beams. — H.  G.  Salter. 

Ver.  27.  Removing  Shakeahle  Things. — Let 
us  be  glad  when  "  the  things  which  can  be 
shaken  are  removed,"  like  mean  huts  built 
against  the  wall  of  some  cathedral,  masking 
and  marring  the  completeness  of  its  beauty  ; 
"  that  the  things  which  cannot  be  shaken 
may  remain,"  and  all  the  clustered  shafts, 
and  deep-arched  recesses,  and  sweet  tracery, 
may  stand  forth  freed  from  the  excrescences 
which  hid  them. — A.  Maclaren.,  D.D. 


Losing  Anchor-hold. — 1  was  looking  out 
not  long  ago  upon  a  very  stormy  sea.  The 
winds  howled,  the  troubled  waves  were  dash- 
ing themselves  into  spray  upon  the  rocks. 
Many  vessels  were  in  the  bay  ;  they  could 
not  move  for  the  hurricane,  but  could  only 
trust  to  some  anchor  in  the  sands,  and  were 
tossed  wildly  up  and  down.  In  the  night  the 
anchors  of  two  of  them  slipped  their  hold, 
and  they  were  hurled  helplessly  in  total 
wreck  upon  the  shore.  There  was  no  beauty 
or  glory  in  those  poor  ships  ;  it  is  the  beauty 
and  glory  of  a  ship  when  her  helm  is  firmly 
grasped,  and  the  obedient  wind  swells  her 
white  sails,  and  the  cleft  wave  bears  Tier 
onwards  towards  her  haven  —  "a  plume 
and  a  power."  And  so  it  is  with  man. — 
Farrar. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


VIRTUES  AND  GRACES  BEFITTING  THE   CHRISTIAN    PROFESSION. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  Brotherly  love. — (f>i\ad€\(pia,  the  mutual  love  of  Christians  as  such. 

Ver.  2.  Angels  unawares. — As  Abraham  (Gen.  xviii.  2-22)  ;  Lot  (Gen.  xix.  1.  2);  Manoah 
(Judg.  xiii.  2-14)  ;  Gideon  (Judg.  vi.  11-20). 

Ver.  3.  Also  in  the  body. — And  therefore  liable  to  similar  treatment.  "  Remember  those 
who  are  injuriously  treated,  as  it  becomes  those  who  are  themselves  still  in  the  body." 
*'  Lucian's  tract  dwells  on  the  effusive  kindness  of  Christians  to  their  brethren  who  were 
imprisoned  as  confessors." 

Ver.  8. — Read  "  Jesus  Christ  is  the  same."  "  The  unchangeableness  of  Christ  is  a  reason 
for  not  being  swept  about  by  winds  of  strange  teaching.  But  a  suggestion  has  been  made 
that  "  Jesus  Christ "  is  spoken  of  as  the  "  end  of  the  conversation  "  of  those  whose  faith 
we  are  to  follow.  The  order  of  the  Greek  is  "  yesterday  and  to-day  the  same,  and  to  the 
ages." 

Ver.  10. — This  and  the  following  verses  form  a  little  episode  of  argument  in  the  midst  of 
moral  exhortations.  Reference  is  made  to  the  feasts  which  followed  sacrifices,  in  which 
parts  of  the  animal  sacrificed  were  eaten.  "  When  the  writer  says,  that  '  Christians  have 
a  sacrifice  of  which  those  who  pay  their  service  at  the  altar  have  no  right  to  partake,'  he 
means,  that  the  benefits  procured  by  the  atoning  sacrifice  of  Christ  do  not  belong,  or  will 
not  be  granted,  to  such  as  rest  their  hopes  of  salvation  on  the  ritual  sacrifices  of  the  Jewish 
law,  i.e.  to  such  as  continue  to  be  disciples  of  Judaism,  or  turn  back  from  Christianity  to 
Judaism,  and  thus  renounce  the  blessings  procured  for  believers  by  the  death  of  Christ  " 
{Stuart). 

Ver.  11.  Burned  without  the  camp. — Lev.  xvi.  11,  14-16,  27.  Notice  that  the  writer's 
figures  are  mostly  taken  from  the  times  of  the  tabernacle,  and  of  the  wilderness  life. 

Ver.  13.  Without  the  camp. — A  figure  of  speech,  meaning,  "  Let  us  leave  the  camp,  i.e. 
the  dwellings  of  the  Jews,  or  the  profession  of  Judaism,  and  go  over  to  the  place  where 
Christians  dwell,  although  it  be  without  the  city." 

Ver.  20.  God  of  peace.— Rom.  xv.  33,  xvi.  20 ;  Phil.  iv.  9  ;  1  Thess.  v.  23  ;  2  Thess.  iii.  16. 
Translate  the  verse,  "  Who  brought  up  from  the  dead  Him,  made  through  the  blood  of  the 
everlasting  covenant,  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,  the  Lord,  even  Jesus."  Or  as  R.V. 
"  Who  brought  again  from  the  dead  the  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,  with  [by  or  in]  the 
blood  of  the  eternal  covenant,  even  our  Lord  Jesus."  See  chap.  ix.  15-18,  and  compare 
Acts  XX.  28  ;  Zech.  ix.  11.  The  meaning  appears  to  be,  that  the  great  Shepherd  is  provided 
with,  or  (so  to  speak)  carries  along  with  Him,  blood  sanctioning  a  covenant  which  is  of 
perpetual  force. 

Farra/r's  note  on  ver.  13. — Let  us  go  forth  out  of  the  city  and  camp  of  Judaism  (Rev.  xi.  8)  to 

G  G  449 


CHAP.  XIII.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


the  true  and  eternal  tabernacle  (Exod.  xxxiii.  7,  8)  where  He  now  is  (chap.  xii.  2).  Bearing  his 
reproach. — "If  ye  be  reproached,"  says  St.  Peter,  "for  the  name  of  Christ,  happy  are  ye" 
(compare  chap.  xi.  26).  As  He  was  excommunicated  and  insulted  and  made  to  bear  His  cross 
of  shame,  so  will  you  be,  and  you  must  follow  Him  out  of  the  doomed  city  (Matt.  xxiv.  2). 
It  must  be  remembered  that  the  cross,  an  object  of  execration  and  disgust  even  to  Gentiles, 
was  viewed  by  the  Jews  with  religious  horror,  since  they  regarded  every  crucified  person  as 
"  accursed  of  God  "  (Deut.  xxi.  22,  23  ;  Gal.  iii.  13).  Christians  shared  this  reproach  to 
the  fullest  extent.  The  most  polished  heathen  writers,  men  like  Tacitus,  Pliny,  Suetonius, 
spoke  of  their  faith  as  an  "  execrable,"  "  deadly,"  and  "  malefic "  superstition ;  Lucian 
alluded  to  Christ  as  the  "  impaled  sophist "  ;  and  to  many  Greeks  and  Romans  no  language 
of  scorn  seemed  too  intense,  no  cakimny  too  infamous,  to  describe  them,  and  their  mode  of 
worship.  The  Jews  spoke  of  them  as  "  Nazarenes,"  "  Epicureans,"  "  heretics,"  "followers 
of  the  thing,"  and  especially  as  "  apostates,"  "  traitors,"  and  "  renegades." 

MoiiltorCs  note  on  ver.  20. — Two  passages  of  the  prophets  have  contributed  to  the  language 
of  this  remarkable  verse.  I.  Isa.  Ixiii.  11  :  "  Where  is  He  that  brought  them  up  out  of 
the  sea  with  the  shepherds  of  His  flock?"  Here  the  shepherds  are  no  doubt  Moses  and 
Aaron  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  20) ;  the  Greek  translation,  however,  has,  "  Where  is  He  that  raised  up 
out  of  the  sea  the  shepherd  of  the  sheep  ? "  Moses,  who  led  Israel  through  the  sea,  was 
brought  up  therefrom  in  safety  to  be  the  "  shepherd "  of  his  people  Israel ;  by  the  same 
almighty  hand  the  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep  has  been  brought  up  from  among  the  dead. 
2.  Zech.  ix.  11 ;  in  other  words,  "  because  of  the  blood  which  ratified  thy  covenant  (Exod.- 
xxiv.  8)  I  have  released  thy  prisoners."  In  (i.e.  in  virtue  of)  the  blood  of  an  eternal 
covenant  God  has  raised  up  the  Lord  Jesus. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  1—6. 

The  Spi7'itual  Man^s  Earthly  Sphere. — Christianity  is  a  spiritual  life  that  can 
live  and  thrive  in  earthly  scenes  and  relations.  Two  things  concerning  it  need 
to  be  constantly  presented.  It  is  a  spiritual  religion.  It  is  a  religion  of  every- 
day, commonplace,  human  life.  And  on  each  of  these  sides  Christianity  is 
placed  in  some  peril  when  frail  human  nature  has  to  deal  with  it.  Overpress 
that  Christianity  is  the  religion  of  common  Ufe,  and  men  will  exaggerate  the 
place  and  importance  of  good  works.  Overpress  that  Christianity  is  a  spiritual 
religion,  and  men  will  soon  take  up  with  the  idea  that  evil  lies  in  matter  itself, 
and  then  will  try  to  separate  themselves  from  every- day  interests,  responsibili- 
ties, and  duties,  and  think  that  spiritual  religion  is  best  represented  by  hermits, 
monks,  and  nuns.  This  mistake  is  in  no  sense  supported  by  the  Scriptures. 
Our  Divine  Lord  is  precisely  the  example  of  a  spiritual  man  who  brought  His 
spiritual  life  into  relation  with  every-day,  earthly  scenes.  And  the  first  Christian 
teachers  insist,  most  emphatically,  that  faith  must  be  shown  in  the  life,  and 
they  who  believe  must  be  careful  to  maintain  good  works.  With  great  variety 
of  treatment,  with  much  persistency,  this  writer  has  argued  that  Christianity 
is  a  spiritual  religion.  He  will  not  close  his  letter  without  making  it  quite  clear 
that  the  spiritual  is  the  practical.  It  is  the  sanctifying  of  the  earth.  It  puts 
the  tone  into  the  commonplace.  The  best  man  of  the  world  is  the  man  of  God. 
Of  our  Divine  Lord  it  can  be  said,  "  The  highest,  holiest,  manhood  Thou." 
And  after  Him,  and  in  the  human  measures,  that  should  be  true  of  all  who 
bear  His  name.  The  plea  of  the  writer  in  the  closing  verses  of  the  previous 
chapter  is  this — Because  we  are  spiritual  members  of  a  spiritual  kingdom, 
therefore  let  us  seek  grace  whereby,  in  meeting  our  human  obligations,  and 
fitting  to  our  earthly  places,  we  may  serve  God  acceptably.  And  in  this  chapter 
he  indicates  some  of  the  earthly  spheres  in  which  our  spiritual  life  ought  to  find 
constant,  free,  and  beautiful  expression. 

I.  The  spiritual  man's  brotherly  love. — The  new  life  which  we  have  in 
Christ  Jesus  is  essentially  a  sonship.  The  quickened  soul,  "  born  again,"  finds 
itself  born  into  a  family  life,  with  relations  and  duties  to  Father,  and  to  brothers. 
And  even  the  anxiety  with  which  we  try  to  meet  our  obligations  to  our  Father 
must  not  lift  us  away  from  our  holy  concern  for  our  brothers.     "  If  we  do  not 

450 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.       chap.  xiii. 


love  our  brother  whom  we  have  seen,  how  can  we  love  God  whom  we  have  not 
seen  ?  "  But  the  duty  of  brotherly  love  may  be  approached  from  a  lower  stand- 
point than  this.  It  may,  however,  be  more  persuasive  on  us  if  we  have  not 
ourselves  reached  the  higher  spiritual  levels.  In  times  of  persecution  and 
temptation,  such  as  the  Jewish  Christian  Churches  were  passing  through,  there 
were  constant  calls  to  brotherly  helpfulness.  Some  were  deprived  of  their 
means  of  living,  on  account  of  their  profession  of  faith  in  Christ.  Brotherly 
love  could  help  them  over  times  of  strain  and  stress.  Some  were  weak  in  faith, 
and  in  grave  peril  of  yielding  to  enticement  and  persuasion.  Brotherly  love 
could  steady  the  feet  that  were  sliding,  and  restore  the  fallen  in  the  spirit  of 
meekness.  In  family  life  the  brothers  are  considerate  and  helpful  one  toward 
another.  There  is  no  jealousy.  Each  rejoices  in  the  other's  success  ;  each 
shadows  the  other  when  he  is  imperilled  ;  and  each  Ufts  the  other  when  he  falls. 
And  within  the  brotherhood  of  the  spiritual  there  should  be  the  mutual  bearing 
of  burdens,  which  is  the  sure  sign  of  brotherly  love.  The  chief  peril  of  brotherly 
love  in  a  Christian  community  is  the  sectarian  spirit,  the  dogmatism,  and 
masterfulness,  of  exclusive  and  sectarian  opinion.  Brotherly  love  needs  an 
atmosphere  of  mutual  trustfulness,  freedom  to  think,  and  freedom  to  let  one 
another  think. 

II.  The  spiritual  man's  hospitality. — This  is  a  virtue  which  takes  various 
forms  in  adaptation  to  the  social  conditions  of  different  ages  and  countries. 
Essentially  it  is  cheerful  willingness  to  give  of  our  food  and  our  shelter  to 
those  who  may  be  journeying.  Hospitality  is  temporary  help,  and  help  given 
in  the  form  of  a  supply  of  passing  bodily  needs.  It  is  seen  in  its  simplest 
form  in  tribal  life.  The  stranger  is  cheerfully  entertained,  and  pays  for  all  he 
receives  by  the  news  he  brings  or  the  pleasure  of  his  conversation.  So  long  as 
life  is  in  its  simpler  forms  hospitality  to  passers-by  can  be  freely  and  safely 
given,  as  indeed  it  is  in  many  parts  of  the  world  to-day.  Civilisation  changes 
the  forms  in  which  hospitality  can  be  offered.  Welcome  of  anybody  and  every- 
body to  our  homes  becomes  impossible ;  and  there  is  danger  of  losing  the  spirit 
of  hospitality,  or  of  keeping  it  within  such  limitations  as  allow  it  to  bear  no 
impress  of  charity.  The  hospitality  which  had  come  to  be  only  entertaining  in 
order  to  be  entertained  our  Lord  severely  condemned.  The  generous  giving  of 
our  food  and  shelter  to  those  who  are  temporarily  brought  within  our  range — as 
in  times  of  convention,  congress,  etc. — is  a  distinctly  Christian  duty,  an 
expression  of  the  life  of  the  "  spiritual  man."  The  importance  of  the  duty  to 
the  Jewish  Christian  Churches,  in  their  times  of  persecution,  will  readily  be 
understood.  Men  were  often  driven  away  from  their  town,  and  in  wandering 
to  find  work  would  be  placed  in  grave  difficulties.  They  could  not  expect  to 
receive  hospitality  from  the  bigoted  Jews ;  among  them  these  wandering 
Christians  would  only  be  scorned.  Their  hope  of  food  and  shelter  lay  only  in 
the  hospitality  of  those  who,  with  them,  named  the  Christ-name,  those  who 
shared  with  them  the  spiritual  life.  And  some  of  these  wanderers  pi-oved  to 
be  "  angels  unawares  ;  "  in  their  brief  visits  ministering  such  spiritual  blessings 
that  they  who  offered  the  hospitalities  were  more  richly  blessed  than  those  who 
received  them. 

III.  The  spiritual  man's  sympathy  with  the  persecuted. — Whenever  dis- 
abilities, afflictions,  or  persecutions  come  upon  the  Church,  they  directly  affect 
certain  individuals.  They  vicariously  bear  the  burden  for  the  whole  Church, 
and  therefore  have  special  claim  upon  the  sympathy  of  their  fellow- members. 
What  is  said  of  the  suffering  "  servant  of  the  Lord  "  in  Isaiah  is  continuously 
true — sublimely  true  of  the  Son  of  God,  but  in  measures  true  of  all  the  sons. 
We  are  too  ready  to  say  of  the  suffering  ones.  They  are  "  stricken,  smitten  of 
God,  and  afflicted."     We  do  not  see  or  feel  as  we  should  that  they  are  bearing 

451 


CHAP.  XIII.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   HEBREWS. 


our  burdens,  and  that  therefore  we  should  keep  ourselves  close  knit  with  them 
in  brotherly  sympathy.  There  were  some  in  bonds  for  Christ :  the  others 
should  feel  bound  with  them.  There  were  some  evil  entreated  for  Christ's  sake  : 
the  others  should  have  a  fellow-feeling,  and  realise  how  hard  to  bear  bodily 
suffering  may  be.  Persecution  may  be  a  thing  of  the  past ;  the  vicarious 
suffering  of  some  for  the  many  is  not.  And  the  few  sufferers  still  claim  the 
sympathy  of  the  many. 

IV.  The  spiritual  man's  sanctifying  of  human  relationships. — The  most 
prominent  of  these,  and  the  typical  ones,  are  connected  with  the  sexes,  and 
consequently  the  Scriptures  illustrate  the  general  relationships  of  human  life  by 
them.  But  it  must  also  be  added  that  Christianity,  as  a  spiritual  religion, 
distinctly  raises  the  tone  of  the  marriage  relation,  dignifies  womanhood,  and 
makes  the  natural  relations  spiritual  friendships.  The  wrong  is  best  conquered 
by  the  inspiration  of  the  right.  Find  the  full  spiritual  satisfaction  in  marriage 
friendships,  and  moral  temptations  altogether  lose  their  power  upon  us.  There 
is  nothing  active  in  us  to  which  they  can  appeal. 

V.  The  spiritual  man's  culture  of  the  spirit  of  contentment. — The  most 
enslaving  thing  to  man  is  the  love  of  money.  It  wakens  a  restlessness  and  a 
dissatisfaction  with  everything ;  it  excites  a  pushing  to  get  which  is  too  often 
not  only  a  pushing  before  others,  but  also  a  pushing  aside  of  others.  That  love 
of  money  is  altogether  out  of  place  in  the  spiritual  man.  This  does  not  say  a 
spiritual  man  may  not  find  fitting  spheres  for  his  energy,  his  activity,  his 
enterprise,  his  ambitions.  It  does  say  that  the  restlessness  and  undue  worry 
should  be  kept  down  by  a  cherished  spirit  of  contentment ;  a  restful  satisfaction 
in  the  assurance  that  God  provides,  and  never  leaves  His  people  desolate  ;  and 
when  He  does  not  permit  worldly  success  to  be  attained,  even  by  earnest  and 
persistent  endeavours,  works  some  higher  benediction  through  the  discipline  of 
disappointment.  Take  what  sphere  of  the  earthly  life  and  relation  we  may, 
there  is  room  for  illustrating  the  tone  and  character  which  the  spiritual  man 
can  put  upon  it  all.  "  Let  us  seek  grace,  whereby  we  may  offer  service  well 
pleasing  to  God  with  reverence  and  awe  :  for  our  God  " — the  God  of  the  spiritual 
Christian — "  is  a  consuming  fire." 


SUGGESTIVE    NOTES  AND    SERMON    SKETCHES. 

Ver.     1.    Brotherly    Love. — As    the  ship  to  God  carries  with  it  the  sense 

spokes   of   a   carriage-wheel  approach  of  brotherhood  with  those  who  are  also 

their  centre  they  approach  each  other ;  sons  of  God.     Brotherly  love  is — 

so,   also,    when   men   are   brought   to  I.  Based  on  a  common  birth. — This 

Jesus   Christ,  the   centre  of   life   and  is    true    of    the    human   brotherhood, 

hope,    they   are  drawn    towards    each  Nothing  can  create  the  sentiment  but 

other   in    brotherly   relationship,    and  the    idea    of     a    common    parentage, 

stand  side  by  side  journeying  to  their  A    gentleman    of    Marseilles,    named 

heavenly  home. — J.  F.  Serjeant.  Remonsat,    shortly    before    his    death, 

desired  that  his  numerous  family  might 

Sonship   involves   Brotherhood. — The  be  assembled  about  his  bed.     He  ac- 

counsel   of   the   writer  was    especially  knowledged     the     delight    which    his 

necessary,  because  times  of   peril  and  children    had   afforded    him    by   their 

persecution  tend  to  nourish  self-interest,  affection  and  attachment,  and  especi- 

and  to  separate  men  from  each  other  ally  for   the   tender  love  which    they 

in  order  to  secure  themselves  and  their  bore   to   one   another.       "  But,"    con- 

own.     Brotherly  love  is  the  first  result  tinned  he,  "  I  have  a  secret  to  disclose, 

of  Christian  faith      The  sense  of  son-  which  will-  remove   one   of   you   from 

452 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.        chap.  xiii. 


this  circle.  So  long  as  I  had  any 
hopes  of  living  I  kept  it  from  you, 
but  I  dare  not  violate  your  rights  in 
the  division  of  the  property  which  I 
leave  you.  One  of  you  is  only  an 
adopted  child — the  child  of  the  nurse 
at  whose  breast  my  own  child  died. 
Shall  I  name  that  child?"  "No, 
no,"  said  they  with  one  accord,  "  let 
us  all  continue  to  be  brothers  and 
sisters."  They  who  are  horn  of  God, 
homi  from  above,  born  of  the  Spirit, 
are  brothers  by  virtue  of  their  very 
birth — spiritual  birth. 

II.  Sustained  by  a  common  fellow- 
ship.— If  bi'otherly  love  is  to  continue, 
the  family  must  keep  together.  If 
members  are  separated  by  distance, 
they  must  be  kept  in  touch  by  letters 
and  by  gifts.  Brotherly  love  in 
Christ's  Church  is  only  maintained  on 
the  same  condition.  Those  members 
always  fail  in  this  who  are  careless 
about  keeping  up  constant  relations. 

III.  Expressed  in  a  common  service. 
— It  will  always  be  found  that  the 
most  loving  members  of  a  family  are 
those  who  are  most  watchful  of 
opportunities,  and  most  ready  to  do 
kindnesses  to  the  other  members.  And 
this  is  at  least  equally  true  of  the 
brethren  in  the  spiritual  family  of 
God. 

Ver.  2.  On  Behaviour  tovmrds 
Strangers. — A  dislike  of  strangers  is 
one  of  the  earliest  developed,  most 
permanent,  and  most  widely  diffused 
passions  of  mankind.  Thus  arises  the 
feeling  of  dislike  between  nations. 
The  antipathies  that  are  summed  up 
in  the  one  word  race  constitute  the 
chief  part  of  the  history  of  mankind. 
The  secret  dislike  of  strangers  clings 
to  humanity  even  after  civilisation  has 
conquered  its  grosser  antipathies.  It 
appears  even  under  its  religious  trans- 
formations. Let  us  set  down  a  few 
of  the  arguments  which  might  impel 
Christians  of  differing  name  to  culti- 
vate, and  earnestly  seek  for,  the 
company  of  "strangers."  1.  Com- 
munion with  devout  minds  of  ideas 
and    habits    foreign    to   our    own    is 


favourable  to  the  vigorous  develop- 
ment of  all  alike.  The  human  race 
thrives  on  intermixture  and  inter- 
marriage. Religious  bodies  which  act 
on  the  non -intercourse  principle  soon 
lose  their  vigour,  and  sink  from  arro- 
gant dogmatism  into  indifference.  2. 
Every  Christian  is  a  member  of  Christ, 
to  whom  all  good  men  are  assuredly 
dear,  and  we  should  strive  to  bring 
our  sympathies  into  accord  with  those 
which  burn  in  the  bosom  of  the  good 
Shepherd.  To  him  unity — a  real, 
social  unity  of  heart  and  life — is  the 
grand  object  of  aspiration  and  prayer. 
3.  Every  Christian  has  the  prospect 
of  being  introduced  sooner  or  later-  to 
every  other  Christian  in  existence,  on 
the  ground  of  the  most  intimate  and 
eternal  friendship — a  friendship  based 
on  a  common  relation  to  redeeming 
Love.  How  vain,  then,  the  shyness 
which  shrinks  in  this  world  from  in- 
tercourse with  those  who  must  be  our 
companions  for  ever !  It  is  the  work 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  not  only  to  reveal 
Christ  to  each  of  His  members,  but 
all  the  members  of  His  body  to  each 
other. — Edward  White. 

Ver.  3.  Interest  in  Those  under 
Disability. — The  writer  bases  an  argu- 
ment, by  which  to  urge  the  duty  of 
Christian  consideration  and  sympathy, 
on  the  fact  that  we  are  all  sharers  in 
a  common  experience.  That  experi- 
ence, however,  comes  with  special 
heaviness  on  certain  individuals,  who 
should  therefore  be  treated  as  burden- 
bearers  for  the  rest. 

Ver.  4.  Marriage. — Society  is  gener- 
ally in  a  sound  and  peaceful  state,  and 
its  individual  members  virtuous  and 
happy,  in  proportion  as  the  nature  of 
marriage  is  understood,  and  its  obliga- 
tions respected.  The  first  efforts  of 
wisdom  in  ancient  lawgivers  and  poets 
were  to  render  sacred  the  rights  and 
duties  of  wedlock.  But  in  almost 
every  age,  and  especially  in  more 
matured  states  of  society,  there  have 
not  been  wanting  persons  to  maintain, 
in  one  form  or  another,  that  passion 

453 


CHAP.  XIII.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS. 


ought  rather  to  be  destroyed  than 
controlled  ;  and  that  instead  of  aiming 
to  ingraft  refined  and  spiritual  feelings 
on  the  animal  instincts  of  our  nature, 
these  should  be  wholly  eradicated. 
Marriage,  to  many  of  this  class,  has 
seemed  but  an  unworthy  compromise 
between  the  flesh  and  the  Spirit.  An 
equal  contempt  for  marriage  appears 
to  exist  in  some  who  disgrace  our  age. 
Marriage  is  not  below,  but  above, 
them ;  it  is  too  pure,  not  too  gross, 
for  their  taste.  Proud  of  what  they 
call  liberty,  they  laugh  at  the  re- 
straints of  marriage,  while  it  can  be 
avoided,  and  submit  to  it  at  length  as 
to  a  catastrophe.  With  the  discretion 
of  a  wise  man,  and  the  authority  of  an 
inspired  man,  the  writer  draws  a  firm 
line  between  the  extremes  of  sensuality 
and  spiritual  asceticism  ;  he  denounces 
lust,  but  extols  holy  and  wedded  love. 
The  sentiment  of  the  text  appears  to 
be  at  variance  with  1  Cor.  vii.,  but 
the  sentiments,  though  different,  are 
not  contradictory.  The  advice  given 
in  Corinthians  applied  to  circumstances 
of  present  distress,  in  which  a  man 
might  wisely  limit  his  obligations. 

I.  What  things  belonging  to  the 
marriage  state  render  it  honourable, 
and  enable  it,  as  we  may  say,  to  put 
honour  on  those  who  enter  it. — 1.  Its 
institution.  The  time  when,  the  place 
where,  the  manner  in  which,  the  Being 
by  whom,  marriage  was  instituted,  all 
increase  the  honour  with  which  its 
institution  invests  it.  2.  Its  nature. 
It  is  a  union  of  two,  and  only  two, 
human  beings  ;  a  union  not  only  of 
hands  but  of  hearts,  of  soul  as  well  as 
body.  There  is  in  marriage,  when  its 
true  nature  is  realised,  a  union  of 
souls,  whose  affections  intermingle 
until  two  spirits  become  one,  and, 
by  a  mutual  consciousness,  understand 
each  other's  thoughts  and  share  each 
other's  feelings.  It  is  this  which  meets 
the  wants  of  our  intellectual  and 
moral  natures.  Marriage  is  a  per- 
manent union.  We  need  not  think 
that,  although  marriage  terminates  in 
death,  the  union  which  it  involves 
must   then  also   necessarily   close   for 

454 


ever.  We  may  cheerfully  expect  its 
renewal.  3.  Its  purposes.  (1)  The 
development  of  mind,  formation  of 
character,  promotion  of  happiness,  in 
all  who  are  married.  (2)  The  preser- 
vation and  increase  of  the  human 
species.  (3)  The  education  of  the 
young  in  successive  generations.  (4)  Its 
typical  import  also  renders  it  honour- 
able. 

II.  What  must  be  the  course  of 
those  who  would  enter  on  and  pass 
through  it,  so  as  to  do  honour  to  the 
state. — 1.  Every  step  towards  it  must 
be  taken  in  the  fear  of  God.  2.  If  we 
would  do  honour  to  marriage,  it  must 
be  solemnised  with  decency,  according 
to  the  form  prescribed  by  the  laws  of 
our  country.  3.  When  marriage  has 
been  thus  entered  on,  its  duties  must 
be  steadily  and  cheerfully  discharged. 
"  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law." 
Love,  displaying  itself  in  cheerful 
submission  on  the  part  of  the  wife, 
in  gentleness  of  authority  on  the  part 
of  the  husband,  in  soft  words,  kind 
actions,  and  delicate  attentions  on  the 
part  of  both  ;  love  which  takes  the 
love  of  Christ  to  the  Church,  and 
the  Church  to  Christ  for  its  pattern ; 
and  becomes  respectively,  in  turn,  the 
image  of  each. — Jonathan  Glyde. 

The  Honourahleness  of  Marriage. — 
Probably  this  is  an  exhortation.  "  Let 
marriage  be  held  honourable  in  all 
respects."  Scripture  never  gives  even 
the  most  incidental  sanction  to  the 
exaltation  of  celibacy  as  a  superior 
virtue,  or  to  the  disparagement  of 
marriage  as  an  inferior  state.  Celibacy 
and  marriage  stand  on  an  exactly 
equal  level  of  honour  according  as  God 
has  called  us  to  the  one  or  to  the  other 
state.  The  mediaeval  glorification  of 
monachism  sprang  partly  from  a  re- 
ligion of  exaggerated  gloom  and  terror, 
and  partly  from  a  complete  misunder- 
standing of  the  sense  applied  by  Jewish 
writers  to  the  word  "  virgins." — 
Farrar. 

Ver.  5.  The  Lawful  and  Unlawful 
Love  of  Money. — A  strict  adherence  to 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    HEBREWS.        chap,  xiil 


the  original  gives  us  a  very  simple  and 
beautiful  form  of  this  precept.  "  Let 
the  turn  (t/ootto?)  be  unsilver-loving, 
and  be  contented  with  what  comes  to 
hand,  for  He  Himself  has  said,  I  will 
never  leave  thee  ;  no,  never,  no  never 
forsake  thee."  There  are  some  of  the 
commands  of  the  New  Testament 
which,  taken  without  the  salt  of 
wisdom,  seem  to  be  poisonous,  and  to 
strike  not  merely  at  the  welfare  but 
at  the  existence  of  society.  Such  are 
the  precepts  against  the  love  of  money. 
Everybody  loves  money.  Without  it 
no  man  can  live.  It  is  a  natural  and 
necessary  instinct  which  makes  us  love 
possession.  The  love  of  getting  is  the 
basis  of  the  love  of  giving.  But  the 
*'  love  of  money  "  in  Scripture  means 
love  in  a  bad  sense,  in  the  sense  of 
covetousness.  It  may  become  greed 
and  avarice.  1.  Do  not  seek  after 
money  in  this  world  as  if  it  were  God, 
the  chief  good.  2.  Do  not  fix  upon 
any  amount  of  property  which  you 
must  obtain,  or  else  set  yourself  down 
as  in  a  state  of  destitution.  3.  Steadily 
adhere  to  God's  laws  in  the  gaining, 
and  in  the  expenditure,  of  property. 
In  nothing  is  character  more  shown 
than  in  money  matters.  A  man  who 
is  right  here  is  usually  right  every- 
where ;  a  man  who  fails  in  money 
matters  is  probably  corrupt  to  the 
core.  We  have  just  as  much  of  the 
love  of  God  as  we  have  of  the  desire 
to  submit  to  His  rule  in  our  personal 
affairs ;  and  this  is  a  test  which  will 
exclude  multitudes  from  heaven.  They 
banish  God  from  their  expenditure. — 
Edward  White. 

God  with  Us  all  the  Days. — We  can 
be  sure  of  this,  that  God  will  be  with 
us  in  all  the  days  that  lie  before  us. 
What  may  be  round  the  next  headland 
we  know  not ;  but  this  we  know,  that 
the  same  sunshine  will  make  a  broaden- 
ing path  across  the  waters  right  to 
where  we  rock  on  the  unknown  sea, 
and  the  same  unmoving  nightly  star 
will  burn  for  our  guidance.  So  we 
may  let  the  waves  and  currents  roll 
as  they  list ;  or  rather,   as   He  lists, 


and    be    little    concerned    about    the 
incidents    or   the   companions    of    our 


voyage. 


since     He     is     with     us. 


A.  Maclaren^  D.D. 

No  Leaving^  No  Forsaking. — This 
is  God's  own  word  of  promise  to  his 
people.  In  giving  it  He  has,  as  it 
were,  sworn  by  Himself,  because  He 
could  swear  by  no  greater,  pledging 
Himself  to  His  faithfulness. 
This  promise  is — 

I.  Emphatic. — "  He  hath  said'' 
II.  Ancient — "  He  hath  said." 
III.  Divine—"  He  hath  said." 
TV.  Personal — Not     "us,"       nor 

"them,"  but  "thee." 
V.  Unconditional. 
VI.  Unalterable— "Never." 

VII.  Comprehensive— "Never leave, 

never  forsake." 

VIII.  Unique. 

IX.  Has  been  tested. 
We  have  then — 1.  The  promise  of 
Divine  presence.  He  will  ever  be  with 
us  as  the  Witness  of  our  lives — the 
Comforter  of  our  hearts — our  sovereign 
Lord.  2.  Divine  assistance  for  every 
time  of  need. — A.  Griffin. 

Vers.  5,  6.  What  is  Characteristically 
Christian. — It  was  usual  for  the 
Christian  teachers  to  close  their 
epistles  with  direct  practical  applica- 
tions. Here  doing  so  is  especially 
appropriate,  because  it  was  necessary 
to  show  that  morals  and  piety  were 
substantially  the  same  in  both 
dispensations.  We  may,  however, 
properly  expect  these  things  to  be 
more  refined  in  the  new.  Absolute 
trust  in  Jehovah  was  the  attitude  of 
the  older  Jews ;  and  this  was  met 
by  the  bestowment  of  material  and 
temporal  rewards.  In  trying  to  lift 
them  into  the  spiritual  region,  it  might 
seem  to  the  Jewish  Christians  that 
their  teacher  was  unduly  negligent  of 
the  material  and  temporal.  Practical 
Christian  obligations  and  duties  had 
to  be  dealt  with  by  our  Divine  Lord — 
as  in  the  "  Sermon  on  the  Mount " ; 
and  by  His  apostles — as  in  the  close- 
of  their  epistles.     In  this  chapter  the 

455 


CHAP.  xiir.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


following  practical  things  are  dealt 
with.  The  duty  of  each  Christian  to 
his  brother- Christian.  The  practice 
of  hospitality.  The  expression  of 
personal  sympathy.  The  gaining  of 
personal  purity.  Then  there  is  summed 
up  in  the  text  the  characteristic 
Christian  tone.  Three  things  are 
characteristically  Christian. 

I.  A  manner  of  life  that  is  charac- 
teristically Christian. — Recall  the  New 
Testament  use  of  the  word  "  conversa- 
tion." Our  Christian  "  turning  about  " 
in  all  the  thousand-fold  relations  of 
life  is  to  be  "  without  covetousness  " — 
that  is,  without  a  trace  of  grasping 
or  getting  for  self.  Covetousness  was 
the  great  Jewish  sin.  This  Christ 
corrects,  by  becoming  the  supreme  aim 
of  the  soul.  When  the  end  of  conver- 
sation is  Jesus  Christ,  it  cannot  be 
getting  for  self.  For  us  covetousness 
is  self-centredness  ;  and  the  remedy  is 
Christ-centredness.  To  be  "  without 
covetousness  "  is  quite  consistent  with 
enterprise  and  ambition  in  life.  We 
may  win  the  noblest  things  if  we 
mean  to  win  in  a  Christly  way,  and 
hold  for  Christ's  honour. 

II.  A  cherished  spirit  that  is  charac- 
teristically Christian. — "  Be  content." 
Advice  easily  misunderstood.  Con- 
tentment is  very  difficult  to  a  master 
or  a  father,  but  not  at  all  difficult  for 
a  servant  or  a  son  ;  and  these  represent 
the  Christian  relations.  Contentment 
is  not  indifference,  or  listlessness, 
though  the  confusion  between  these 
very  differing  things  is  often  made. 
1.  Contentment  means  cheerfully  ac- 
cepting our  place  and  duty,  whatever 
it  may  involve.  2.  Contentment  in- 
volves fully  doing  the  duty,  when  it 
is  placed  before  us.  3.  Contentment 
is  consistent  with  prayer  for  change. 
True  prayer  is  contentment. 

III.  A  restful  assurance  that  is 
characteristically  Christian. — "  The 
Lord  is  my  Helper."  1.  We  need  covet 
nothing,  since  He  gives  all  good.  2. 
We  need  be  anxious  about  nothing, 
since  He  provides.  3.  We  need  never 
be  discontented,  since  what  He  gives 
must  be  best. 

456 


We  know  then  three  things  that 
are  characteristically  Christian :  1. 
Making  Christ  our  life-aim.  2.  Accept- 
ing what  He  provides.  3.  Resting 
our  hearts  in  the  sense  of  His  presence 
with  us. 

Never  Forsaken. — No  need  to  name 
the  Speaker — that  majestic  "  He." 
Two  speakers  and  their  two  sayings. 

I.  God's  speech  from  heaven  to  earth. 
— "I-  will  never  leave  thee."  These 
words  nowhere  occur  literally.  In 
Old  Testament.  1.  Jacob  at  Bethel 
(Gen.  xxviii.  15).  The  lonely  pilgrim, 
with  dim,  dark  f utuie  before  him  ;  we 
all  face  it  sometimes.  God  speaks  ;  the 
ladder  descends,  and  bright  in  tlie  blue 
star-depths  the  angels;  "surely  God 
is  in  this  place."  One  man,  with  that 
Companion,  always  in  the  majority. 
2.  Moses^  dying  words  to  Joshua  (Deut. 
xxxi.  7,  8).  God  ratifies  it  to  Joshua 
afterwards  (Josh.  i.  5).  The  promise  to 
a  warrior  on  the  eve  of  sore  battle. 
"  Count  the  cost,  reckon  the  enemy's 
strength,  but  count  not  your  resources 
and  forget  Me."  Brennus'  sword  in 
the  Capitol ;  Christ's  sword  flung  in  for 
us.  3.  David's  dying  words  to  Solomon 
(1  Chron.  xxviii.  20).  Blessed  are  the 
parents  who  can  so  pass  the  covenant 
promise  to  their  children.  Pilgrim, 
warrior,  builder — these  sum  up  all 
our  needs  and  all  the  promises.  Its 
highest  beauty  in  Christ's  word  (Matt, 
xxviii.  20). 

II.  Man's  answer  from  earth  to 
heaven. — "  The  Lord  is  my  Helper  ; 
I  will  not  fear"  (Ps.  cxviii.).  The 
Revised  Version  says,  "  So  that  we  do  " 
(not  may)  "  boldly  say."  We  say  we 
believe  the  promises  :  do  we  answer 
with  perfect  confidence — That  pro- 
mise I  take  for  mine  (Gal.  ii.  20), 
"  He  is  my  Helper,  so  I  shall  not 
fear  ? "  No  use  to  say  to  a  man, 
"  Do  not  be  afraid."  World  too  strong 
for  any  man  in  it ;  life  and  death  have 
tremendous  powers  to  make  cowards 
of  the  bravest.  We  would  not  be 
wise,  if  we  were  not,  except  on  one 
condition :  "  Believe,  and  fear  not." 
You  can  resolve,  "  I  will  trust "  ;  then 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.        chap.  xiil. 


surely  comes  the  triumph  and  the 
shelter  of  the  Divine  companionship. — 
A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

The  Joy  of  Memorij. — The  past 
struggles  are  joyful  in  memory,  as  the 
mountain- ranges — which  were  all  black 
rock  and  white  snow  while  we  toiled 
up  their  inhospitable  steeps — lie  purple 
in  the  mellowing  distance,  and  burn 
like  fire  as  the  sunset  strikes  their 
peaks. — Ihid, 

Contentment  based  on  Security. — The 
Revised  Version  makes  important 
changes  in  these  verses.  "  Be  ye  free 
from  the  love  of  money ;  content  with 
such  things  as  ye  have  :  for  Himself 
hath  said,  I  will  in  no  wise  fail  thee, 
neither  will  I  any  wise  forsake  thee. 
So  that  with  good  courage  we  may  say, 
The  Lord  is  my  Helper  ;  I  will  not  fear : 
what  shall  man  do  unto  me  ?  "  The 
one  thing  that  makes  restlessness  and 
anxiety  in  life  is  uncertainty.  When 
we  are  quite  sure  about  anything,  we 
either  quietly  submit,  or  we  brace  our- 
selves up  to  deal  with  it,  for  its  mitiga- 
tion or  its  removal.  If  everything  is 
uncertain,  contentment  is  impossible. 
If  there  is  anything  absolutely  certain 
and  wholly  reliable — whether  it  be  so 
to  our  faith,  or  whether  it  be  so  in 
what  we  call  "  actual  fact " — upon  it 
contentment  can  be  based.  The  writer 
of  this  epistle  reminds  his  readers  that, 
for  them,  there  is  something  absolutely 
certain  :  there  is  the  unqualified  Divine 
assurance — the  word  of  the  ever- living 
God — "  I  will  in  no  wise  fail  thee, 
neither  will  I  in  any  wise  forsake  thee." 
In  that  unquestionable  fact  there  was 
full  ground  on  which  to  build  a  life  of 
sweet  content.  What  we  have  is  secure 
to  us,  for  He  has  given  it.  What  we 
have  not  we  are  better  without,  for  He 
has  not  thought  fit  to  give  it.  What 
we  wish  for  we  may  fully  submit  to 
His  consideration  who  is  always  with 
us,  and  is  our  Helper  to  everything 
that  is  really  good.  The  writer  is 
evidently  dealing  with  that  kind  of 
restlessness  men  feel  when  they  want 
some  more  money.     It  is  so  easy  to  be 


caught  and  carried  away  by  the  love 
of  money ;  so  easy  to  think  that 
every  difficulty  and  anxiety  of  life 
would  be  mastered  if  only  we  had  more 
money  ;  and  then  it  is  so  easy  to  fret 
and  worry,  and  lose  all  contentment  of 
heart,  because  of  the  limitations  under 
which  we  are  placed.  The  passage 
therefore  has  very  pointed  application 
to  many  of  us  in  these  days.  We  shall 
find  our  own  applications  of  the 
counsels  of  this  writer,  if  we  consider — - 
I.  The  spirit  of  Christian  content- 
ment; II.  Something  which  makes 
Christian  contentment  impossible  ;  and 
III.  Something  which  provides  a  secure 
foundation  for  it. 

I.  The  spirit  of  Christian  content- 
ment.— The  apostle  Paul  tells  us,  that 
"  godliness  with  contentment  is  great 
gain  "  ;  and  it  must  be  borne  in  mind 
that  we  are  dealing,  not  with  a  common- 
place virtue,  which  can  be  urged  on 
purely  moral  grounds,  and  grounds  of 
expediency,  but  with  that  virtue  as  it 
is  purified,  ennobled,  and  inspired  by 
Christian  principle  and  the  Christian 
spirit.  We  deal  w4th  that  contentment 
which  has  "  godliness  "  at  the  heart  of 
it.  The  counsel  of  the  text  is  precisely 
addressed  to  Christian  disciples,  and  to 
them  as,  by  their  Christian  faith,  put 
into  limitations,  and  even  brought 
under  persecutions  and  sufferings.  It 
is  assumed  that  their  anxious  conditions 
are  out  of  their  own  control ;  and  it  is 
altogether  unbecoming  for  the  Chris- 
tian to  fret  at  what  cannot  be  helped. 
tie  ought  to  have  power — through  his 
life  in  Christ — to  bring  his  mind  to  his 
circumstances  ;  to  cheerfully  accept  his 
lot ;  to  make  the  best  of  it,  and  to  do 
the  best  with  it ;  to  "  endure,  as  seeing 
Him  who  is  invisible."  It  is  not  an 
easy  thing  to  speak  wisely  about  "  con- 
tentment," because  it  seems  to  oppose 
the  restlessness  of  ambition,  which  is 
the  inspiration  of  endeavour,  and  the 
secret  of  all  progress.  Man  is  a  rest- 
less, discontented  being,  by  virtue  of 
his  very  endowment  as  a  moral  being. 
He  is  always  wanting  what  he  has  not, 
always  reaching  out  his  hand  for  some- 
thing, always  pushing  into  some  dark 

457 


CHAP.  XIII.        ilOMILETIC  COMMENTARt :    HEBREWS. 


place.     And  if  he  had  not  been  thus, 
he  could  never  have  "replenished  the 
earth   and   subdued   it,"     never    have 
developed   his   civilisation,    and   never 
have  looked  on  this  life  as  the  training- 
school  of  the  eternal  Hfe.    It  may  even 
be  said,  that  man's  discontent  is  essen- 
tial to  his  highest  good,  and  that  the 
individual  and  the  nation   are  ruined 
when  they  become  contented.    A  simple 
illustration  will  suffice   to  show   this. 
The   first    inhabitants    of    the    world 
massed   themselves    in    the   plains   of 
Asia ;    and  if  they   had   been   content 
there,    the   whole   earth   would  never 
have  been  peopled  and  won.     God  filled 
them  with  restlessness  and  discontent, 
and  they  pushed  out  this  way  and  that, 
streamed  forth  over  hills  and  plains  and 
rivers,   and  so   the   whole   earth   was 
won.     Contentment  is  not  the  highest 
virtue  for  man,  and  it  is  not  even  for 
the  Christian  man.    It  may  be  the  right 
thing  at  a  particular  time,  and  under 
particular  circumstances,  but  we  must 
be  careful  not  to  talk  about  it  in  an 
exaggerated    way.       Discontent    may 
quite  as  truly  honour  God  as  content ; 
but,  given  the  condition  of  these  Jewish 
Christians,    and    it    may   properly   be 
urged  that,  for  them,  contentment  was 
the  duty  of  the  hour.    In  pressing  upon 
attention  the  claims  of  any  one  virtue, 
we  are  apt  to  forget  that  it  must  be 
developed  in  harmony  with  the  develop- 
ment   of     other    virtues.       Christian 
enterprise,    Christian    hope,    Christian 
ambition,  must  grow  harmoniously  with 
Christian   contentment.     A  man  who 
wants  nothing  is  a  poor,  weak  specimen 
of  humanity,  one  who  brings  no  honour 
to  Christ.'-^  It  is  the  man  who  wants 
desperately,  and  yet  brings   his  want 
into  obedience  to  Christ,  and  cheerfully 
accepts  His   will,    who   has   the   true 
contentment,  and  who  honours  Christ. 
In  the  "  perfect  man  "  in  Christ  there 
is  this  virtue  of  contentment ;  but  it  is 
proportionate  with  other  virtues,  and 
it  is  harmonious  with  a  noble  restless- 
ness  of   discontent,    which   keeps   the 
man  "  pressing  toward  the  mark  for 
the  prize."      And  it  may  further   be 
shown,  that  contentment  can  never  be 

458 


the  same  thing  in  every  man,  because 
it  must  always  be  relative  to  disposition, 
and  our  response  to  different  circum- 
stances. There  really  is  not  much  credit 
in  some  persons  being  contented.     The 
truth   is,    that   they  have  everything 
which  heart  can  wish  for  ;  or  else  the 
truth  is,  that  they  have  not  spirit  enough 
to  be  discontented.    Some  are  naturally 
of  a  contented  disposition,  and  there  is 
no  more  credit  in  their  being  contented 
than  in  their  being  bodily  sound.     The 
only  contentment  worth  having  is  that 
which  is  won  in  the  sore  conflict   of 
life    against    natural    disposition    and 
hindering  circumstance.     Think  of  the 
"  Mark  Tapley  "  of  fiction,   who  con- 
sidered it  was  no  "credit  to  be  jolly," 
unless  circumstances  were  overwhelm- 
ingly distressing.    A  great  many  people 
are  simply  contented  because  they  have 
no  reason  in  the  world  to  be  anything 
else ;  and  there  is  no  Christian  prin- 
ciple,  no  Christian  triumph,   in  that. 
Contentment  is  put  in  the  text  in  re- 
lation to    "  covetousness."      It   is  the 
opposite  of  a  wrong  state  of  mind  and 
heart.     It  is  not  opposed  to  the  getting 
of   money,    which    may    be    perfectly 
legitimate,  and  indeed,  for  us,  the  duty 
of  the  hour.     It  is  opposed  to  the  fret- 
fulness  which  always  comes  with  the 
love  of  money,  the  passion  for  money, 
the  craving  merely  to  possess.     That 
is  wrong,  bad,  from  every  point  of  view, 
ethical,  religious,  and  Christian.    That 
love  of  money  for  its  own  sake  is  the 
root  of  all  evil.     "  They  that  will  be 
rich  fall  into  temptation  and  a  snare, 
and  into  many  foolish  and  hurtful  lusts, 
which  drown  men  in   destruction  and 
perdition."     What  we  need  to  see  is, 
that  Christian  contentment  is  a  soul- 
mood,    which  properly  belongs  to  the 
new  life  in  Christ,  and  that  necessarily 
attends  upon  that  daily  trust,  depend- 
ence, and  obedience  which  the  Chris- 
tian is   ever   seeking  to   nourish   into 
strength.     The  life  of  faith  on  the  Son 
of  God  is  necessarily  a  life  of  soul- con- 
tent that  is  quite  consistent  with  active 
service.     As  a  soul- mood  it  enables  us 
rightly  to  appraise  what  we  have ;  helps 
us  to  submit  when  we  cannot  have  what 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.        chap.  XIIT. 


we  would ;  and  above  all  permits  of 
our  recognising  Divine,  wise  love  in  the 
provision  that  is  made  for  us,  which 
our  relations  with  God  in  Christ  assure 
us  are  arranged  in  precise  and  particu- 
lar adaptation  to  us.  The  right  spirit 
is  seen  in  a  striking  example,  taken 
from  the  life  of  our  Divine  Master.  In 
the  hour  of  His  arrest  there  was  the 
soul-mood  of  content  with  what  was  so 
evidently  the  will  of  God  concerning 
Him  just  then,  that  He  could  rebuke 
hasty  Peter,  saying,  "Thinkest  thou 
that  I  could  not  even  now  pray  to  the 
Father,  and  He  would  immediately 
send  Me  more  than  twelve  legions  of 
angels  ?  "  Contentment  is  close  kin 
with  submission.  To  the  open,  trusting 
soul  God's  will  is  revealed,  and  then  the 
fitting  response  is  a  quiet  acceptance 
of  what  must  be,  and  a  cheerful  falling 
back  to  enjoy  what  we  have.  Lest  any 
of  you  should  be  discouraged,  because 
in  you  are  high  hopes  and  ambitions, 
and  you  feel  that  it  is  hard  to  be  told 
to  let  all  go,  and  rest  content  with  your 
poor,  limited  present,  let  me  remind  you 
that,  like  unselfishness,  contentment 
begins  with  a  "  day  of  small  things." 
It  is  but  a  germ  in  the  character  and 
life  of  the  young,  who  very  properly 
aim  at  high  things,  and  mean  to  attain 
them.  But  the  germ  grows  as  life 
unfolds,  and  strain-times  and  cares 
and  limitations  nourish  it.  It  comes 
to  be  the  seci^t  of  peace — and  of  true 
power  also — in  the  cultured  Christian's 
life. 

II.  There  is  something  that  can 
make  Christian  contentmeot  impos- 
sible.— "Be  ye  free  from  the  love  of 
money."  Can  we  see  the  immediate 
application  of  these  words  ?  They 
were  addressed  to  Jews  ;  and  grasping 
for  money,  scheming  to  get  money, 
has  been  the  Jewish  characteristic 
through  the  long  ages.  It  is  the 
Bebekah -taint  in  the  blood  of  the 
Abrahamic  race.  The  Jews  addressed 
in  this  epistle  were  trade-folk,  busy 
getting  money  in  the  various  towns 
where  they  dwelt.  But  becoming 
Christian  proved  a  serious  and  often 
unexpected  hindrance  to  their  money- 


getting.  It  acted  in  two  ways.  Men 
cut  off  their  dealings  with  them  because 
of  their  faith  in  Christ.  And  they 
found  that  the  Christ-conscience  would 
not  let  them  do  the  tricky  things 
which  they  had  done.  So  their  incomes 
were  failing,  and  they  were  tempted  to 
apostatise,  and  fall  back  upon  the  old 
condition,  which  gave  them  free  scope 
for  their  money-getting.  The  writer 
of  the  epistle  appeals  to  them  to  master 
this  money-loving,  covetous  spirit ;  to 
cheerfully  accept  their  disabilities  for 
Christ's  name  sake ;  to  see  what  gra- 
cious provisions  their  Divine  Lord  was 
making  for  all  their  real  need ;  and  to 
be  content  with  such  things  as  they 
had.  It  was  a  time  of  temporary 
limitations,  such  as  does  come  in  the 
histories  of  families,  and  towns,  and 
Churches.  Such  times  come  and  pass, 
and  we  are  called  to  be  heroic  while 
they  pass  over  us.  Do  not  fret  about 
being  unable  to  get  money  ;  be  thank- 
ful for  what  you  have  got.  Bemember 
He  is  yours,  and  with  you,  who  could 
say,  "  The  silver  and  the  gold  are  Mine." 
"  Be  content  with  such  things  as  ye 
have  :  for  Himself  hath  said,  I  will  in 
no  wise  fail  thee,  neither  will  I  in  any 
wise  forsake  thee."  Think  how  the 
cherished  love  of  money  may,  in  a  time 
of  strain,  badly  influence  us,  spoil  our 
Christian  spirit.  It  may  put  us  on 
schemes  ;  and  schemes  so  inspired  are 
sure  to  be  grasping,  inconsiderate 
schemes,  that  mean  the  ensuring  of 
our  success  at  the  cost  of  our  yet  more 
suffering  fellows — schemes  with  the 
strong  self-seeking  taint  in  them. 
The  poor  motive,  the  covetous  feeling, 
will  master  good  motives,  and  close  our 
hearts  to  all  sweet  charities  and  gene- 
rosities. And  even  more  spiritually 
serious  is  the  way  in  which  the  love 
of  money  nourishes  soul- trust  in  money, 
and  that  effectually  puts  God  out  of 
our  thoughts,  and  makes  all  beautiful, 
satisfying,  happy  reliance  on  Him 
well-nigh  impossible.  Indeed,  when  our 
thoughts  are  so  fully  occupied  with 
this  getting  of  money,  and  we  find 
ourselves  put  into  limitations  here,  and 
limitations  there,  it  is  not  easy  to  keep 

459 


CHAP.  XIII.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS, 


ourselves  from  complaining  of  God,  as 
if,  in  some  sort  of  wilfulness  and  for- 
getfulness  of  due  consideration,  He 
were  dealing  with  us.  Nothing  He 
does  seems  to  us  to  be  right,  for  the 
love  of  money  always  spoils  spiritual 
vision.  Swell  money-loving  out  into 
the  spirit  of  the  miser,  and  then  ask, 
What  sort  of  a  God  is  the  miser's  God  ? 
Can  he  see  God  aright  ?  Can  he  know 
Him  as  He  is?  Would  you  care  to 
be  known  as  the  servants  of  the  miser's 
God  ?  Then  let  us  beware  lest  any 
circumstances  of  life,  or  any  negligences 
of  our  soul-culture,  allow  that  love  of 
money,  that  anxiety  about  money,  to 
begin  its  fatal  work  in  our  souls " 
*'  Mammon  "  soon  gets  to  be  our  god  ; 
and  "  ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mam- 
mon." 

III.  Something  that  makes  con- 
tentment quite  possible. — Here  again 
it  must  be  kept  in  mind  that  the  writer 
addresses  Christians,  and  endeavours 
to  meet  their  particular  case  and  con- 
dition. It  is  assumed  that  there  is  in 
them  a  due  sense  of  God,  and  of  the 
importance  of  having  God  in  gracious 
relations.  Those  in  whose  hearts  and 
lives  God  is  enthroned  alone  will  appre- 
ciate His  promise,  "  I  will  in  no  wise 
fail  thee."  Such  a  man  has  gained  a 
right  idea  of  his  several  possessions, 
and  can  put  them  in  the  right  order  of 
their  value.  What  does  he  possess? 
God.  That  stands  first.  Then  come, 
ranged  in  order,  wealth,  learning, 
family,  and  other  self-things.  The 
Christian  possesses  God,  and  in  Him 
possesses  all  things.  And  our  text 
does  but  help  him  to  feel  what  all- 
satisfying  possessions  he  has  in  having 
God.  The  Christian  having  God,  God 
dominates  him,  makes  his  ends,  as 
well  as  provides  for  his  needs.  He  is 
no  longer  his  own,  and  so  no  longer 
worries  to  secure  the  attainment  of  his 
own  ends.  But  money-getting  is  a 
man's  own  end.  It  is  never  God's  end 
for  any  man.  It  may  be  God's  means 
of  disciplining  a  man,  or  of  giving  him 
the  material  for  some  useful  service ; 
but  it  is  well  to  have  it  clearly  stated, 
that   getting   money   never   was,   and 

460 


never  will  be,  the  end  which  God  sets 
before  any  man.  God  with  us  becomes 
the  all-sufficient  basis  of  the  true 
Christian  contentment.  This  is  plain 
enough  if  we  see  what  it  involves.  "  I 
will  in  no  wise  fail  thee."  Can  He 
fulfil  so  unqualified  a  word  of  promise  ? 
May  we  fill  out  that  "  in  no  wise," 
to  the  very  uttermost  of  our  ever- 
changing  circumstances  and  needs? 
Is  God  so  present  that  He  has  the 
actual  control  of  our  life  ?  Is  it  true 
that  not  even  a  farthing  sparrow  falls 
to  the  ground  without  our  Father? 
Is  power  adapted  to  us  there  ?  and 
wisdom,  precise  to  meet  our  need,  there  ? 
Is  love,  working  in  all  ways  of  gentle- 
ness, there  ?  And  may  we  be  sure 
that  everywhere  in  our  life  God  is ; 
always  working  ;  never  failing  ;  never 
failing  to  carry  out  His  purpose,  and 
secure  our  highest  good  ?  "I  will  in  no 
wise  forsake  thee."  That  is,  I  will  not 
be  absent  at  any  time  when  I  may  be 
pressingly  needed.  The  help  is  always 
efficient,  and  the  help  is  always  at  com- 
mand. On  what  safer  basis  could 
Christian  contentment  rest  ?  But  it 
is  Divine  help  making  its  appeal  to 
faith,  not  to  sense  or  sight.  It  is  the 
contentment  of  a  living  faith. 

A  Song  of  Contentment. — John  Bun- 
yan  pictures  his  pilgrim  in  a  time  of 
sore  strain  comforted  by  hearing  a  little 
lad  singing  a  song  of  peaceful,  submis- 
sive content  :  "  He  that  is  down  need 
fear  no  fall,"  etc.  It  is  such  a  song  for 
the  soul  which  our  text  provides — a  song 
that  can  be  crooned  over  day  and  night, 
sung  over  and  over  again  when  the 
stress  of  life  is  great.  Peace,  quietness, 
content — soul-content,  may  keep  up  this 
music,  and  get  it  echoed  back  from  the 
experience  of  the  saints  of  all  the  ages 
— "  The  Lord  is  my  Helper  ;  I  will 
not  fear  :  what  can  man  do  unto  me  ?  " 
Here  is  one  echo  that  comes  from  a 
long-by  past  :  "I  have  been  young, 
and  now  am  old  ;  yet  have  I  never  seen 
the  righteous  forsaken,  nor  his  seed 
begging  bread."  Here  is  another  echo 
from  times  somewhat  nearer  to  our 
own:    *'I  am  persuaded  that  neither 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.        chap.  xiii. 


death,  nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor  princi-  of  God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our 

palities,  nor  things  present,  nor  things  Lord."     This    is   the   sure   ground   of 

to  come,  nor  powers,  nor  height,  nor  Christian   contentment:    "All   things 

depth,  nor   any  other   creature,  shall  are   yours,   and  ye   are   Christ's,   and 

be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  Christ  is  God's." 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  7,  8. 

The  Example  of  Christian  Leaders. — There  is  evident  reference  here  to  some 
well-known  persons — well-known  then,  but  wholly  unknown  to  us — who  had, 
in  a  remarkable  way,  borne  their  testimony  to  Christ,  and  endured  a  great 
fight  of  afflictions  for  His  name's  sake.  It  would  perhaps  be  helpful  to  us 
if  we  did  know  something  of  them,  but  the  story  of  Stephen  will  help  us  ; 
the  missionary  life  of  St.  Paul  will  help  us  ;  the  martyrology  of  the  early 
Church  will  help  us.  We  need  not  unduly  force  meaning  into  the  expression, 
"  them  that  had  the  rule  over  you."  Order  in  Christian  communities  is  secured 
as  order  is  secured  in  other  communities — by  the  appointment  of  officers,  and 
the  voluntary  submission  to  authority  voluntarily  entrusted  to  individuals. 
St.  Paul  says,  "  Not  that  we  have  dominion  over  your  faith."  The  dominion 
was  entirely  in  the  range  of  outward  order.  The  writer  refers  to  some  elder, 
or  bishop,  or  apostle,  or  teacher — perhaps  to  more  than  one — who  had  gained 
the  love  and  confidence  of  the  Jewish  Churches,  and  had  recently  been  taken 
from  them,  probably  to  gain  the  martyr's  crown.  He  makes  but  a  passing 
allusion  to  the  obedience  which  such  leaders  may  claim ;  he  fixes  attention 
on 'the  character — the  spiritual  character  which  they  had  borne;  upon  their 
faith,  and  upon  the  inspiration  which  Jesus  Christ  was  to  them.  The  "  issue 
of  their  life,"  their  supreme  aim,  had  been  the  glory  of  Jesus  Christ ;  yes,  of 
Jesus  Christ,  who  is  worth  glorying  in,  and  whom  we  also  should  be  glorying 
in,  and  glorifying,  seeing  that  He  is  "  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever." 
The  subject  suggested  is  the  regard  in  which  we  should  hold  the  Christian 
teachers,  who,  having  nobly  served  us,  have  passed  to  their  reward.  The  A.V. 
has,  "  whose  faith  follow."     The  P.V.  has,  "imitate  their  faith." 

I.  We  should  regard  our  teachers  for  their  work's  sake. — This  may  be 
difficult  while  the  work  is  being  done.  Tt  is  not  often  that  a  man's  work  can 
be  fairly  estimated  until  all  personal  elements  are  withdrawn,  and  it  can  be 
calmly  and  dispassionately  judged,  fitted  into  its  surroundings,  and  seen  in 
its  adaptations.  But  just  such  estimates  we  ought  to  form  in  order  to  the 
correction  and  improvement  of  our  own  service  to  Christ  and  our  generation. 
What  others  have  done  is  guidance  and  suggestion  for  us;  it  need  not  be 
the  crushing  of  our  individuality  ;  it  should  be  a  direction  of  our  individuality. 
The  (1)  method,  and  (2)  sphere,  of  their  work  may  be  imitable;  (3)  the  spirit 
of  their  work  certainly  is.  In  what  an  earnest  worker  has  done,  and  the  way 
in  which  he  has  done  it,  "  he,  being  dead,  yet  speaketh." 

II.  We  should  regard  our  teachers  for  their  life's  sake. — "  Imitate  their 
faith."  It  was  the  motive-power  of  their  lives,  and  it  ennobled  those  lives. 
We  say  that  what  Christ  was — "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  separate  from 
sinners  " — was  even  more  important  to  His  redemptive  work  than  what  He 
formally  did.  And  the  same  is  true  of  our  Christian  leaders.  What  they 
were,  in  gracious  character,  in  spiritual  power,  in  holy  life,  does  more  for  us 
than  any  things  they  actually  accomplished.  If  we  endeavour  to  realise  who 
the  persons  are  that  have  most  influenced  us,  we  shall  soon  find  that  the 
list  is  composed  almost  entirely  of  saintly  charactered  men  and  women.  We 
are  reminded  that  we  too  are  gaining  our  best  power  on  our  fellows,  not  by 
what  we  do^  but  by  what  we  are  in  the  spirit  of  the  doing. 

461 


CHAP.  XIII.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


III.  We  should  regard  our  teachers  for  their  aim's  sake. — ''Considering 
the  issue  of  their  life" — "the  end  of  their  conversation;  Jesus  Christ,  the 
same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever."  You  can  never  read  a  Christian 
teacher  or  leader's  work  aright,  save  as  you  estimate  the  measure  in  which 

Christ  was  the  inspiration  of  it.  Did  Christ  lead  to  noble  endeavour  ?  Did 
Christ  guide  to  wise  methods  ?     Did  Christ  help  to  endure  ?     Did  Christ  touch 

all  doing  and  all  relation  with  heavenly.  Divine  charity  ?  Was  it  that  one  aim 
— the  honour  of  Christ — that  ennobled  their  lives  ?  Then  we  know  what  can 
also  ennoble  ours. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND   SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  7.  Christian  Fasts  and  Festi-  the  word  of  God,  whose  course  is  now 
vals. — The  Church  contemplates  the  finished.  Though  all  your  intercourse 
observance  of  a  number  of  special  days,  with  them  is  for  the  present  cut  off, 
not  Sundays.  The  weekly  festival  do  not,  however,  forget  their  instruc- 
does  indeed  stand  out  from  among  all  tions  and  their  examples,  but  be  mind- 
the  others  as  the  most  important  and  ful  of  that  faith  which  they  taught 
most  imperative  upon  the  Church.  It  and  exercised,  and  let  it  be  your  great 
is  the  Divine  institution  of  the  Mosaic  care  to  imitate  them,  considering  the 
law  carried  into  Christianity,  and  end  of  their  conversation :  reflect  on 
changed  from  the  seventh  day  of  the  the  happy  manner  in  which  they 
week  to  the  first  by  apostolic  usage.  quitted  life,  on  that  support  which 
But  it  does  not  follow  that  our  meeting  they  found  in  their  latest  moments, 
together  to  worship  God  should  be  from  the  truths  which  they  had  taught 
confined  and  limited  to  this  weekly  you,  and  on  that  heroic  resolution  with 
festival.  Taking  our  stand  on  the  which  some  of  them  were  animated  to 
recognised  principle  of  commemorating  meet  even  martyrdom  itself  in  that 
the  Resurrection,  and  therein  the  sacred  cause  ;  and  let  the  remembrance 
blessings  and  the  glories  of  the  gospel  of  these  things  engage  you  steadfastly 
promises,  does  it  not  seem,  at  the  first  to  retain  their  faith,  and  courageously 
glance,  reasonable,  that  if  we  can,  with  to  follow  their  steps."  This  is  just  the 
due  judgment,  light  upon  any  other  spirit  of  the  apostle's  meaning.  He 
great  leading  events  connected  with  refers  more  particularly  to  his  prede- 
the  life  of  our  Redeemer,  or  with  those  cessors,  James  the  apostle,  and  pro- 
holy  men  whom  He  associated  with  bably  James  the  bishop  of  Jerusalem, 
Himself,  and  with  each  other,  to  be  both  of  whom  had  suffered  martyrdom 
the  pillars  upon  which  His  Church  was  shortly  before  ;  and  he  exhorts  them, 
to  rest,  we  should  appoint  subsidiaiy  and  through  them  the  Christian  com- 
days  for  their  commemoration  also?  munity  for  ever,  to  be  mindful  of 
The  Church  has  appointed  thirty- six  those  benefactors  under  God,  who  had 
especial  days  throughout  the  year.  laboured  in  the  teaching  of  the  word, 
Three  sorts  of  days  are  mentioned  by  and  had  sealed  their  labours  with 
the  Church  as  holy  dayg.  1.  Those  their  blood.  He  bids  them,  though 
which  relate  to  some  leading  events  their  intercourse  in  the  flesh  had  been 
connected  with  the  life  of  our  blessed  cut  off,  still  to  remember  their  instruc- 
Lord  Himself.  2.  The  commemora-  tion  and  example  in  "  the  communion  of 
tion  of  the  apostles  and  other  saints  saints."  Old  divines  are  not  backward 
of  the  Church.  3.  The  days  of  fasting  in  their  opinions  on  this  duty  of  the 
and  humiliation.  Doddridge  para-  Church.  Jeremy  Taylor  says :  "  The 
phrases  the  text  thus  :  "  Remember  memories  of  the  saints  are  precious  to 
those  dear  and  venerable  persons  who,  God,  and  therefore  they  ought  also  to 
having  formerly  presided  over  you  in  be  to  us  ;  and  such  persons  who  serve 
holy   things,    have   spoken    unto   you  God  by  holy  living,  industrious  preach- 

462 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.        chap.  xiir. 


ing,  and  religions  dying,  ought  to  have 
their  names  preserved  in  honour,  and 
God  be  glorified  in  them,  and  their 
holy  lives  and  doctrines  published  and 
imitated ;  and  we  by  so  doing  give 
testimony  to  the  article  of  the  com- 
munion of  saints."  The  learned  Hooker 
says  :  "  Touching  those  festival  days, 
which  we  now  observe,  their  number 
being  noway  felt  discommodious  to 
the  commonwealth,  and  their  grounds 
such  as  hitherto  have  been  showed, 
what  remaineth  but  to  keep  them 
throughout  all  generations  holy,  severed 
by  manifest  notes  of  difference  from 
other  times,  and  adorned  with  that 
which  most  may  betoken  true,  virtuous, 
and  celestial  joy  ?  "  "  They  are  the 
splendour  and  outward  dignity  of  our 
religion,  forcible  witnesses  of  ancient 
truth,  provocations  to  the  exercises  of 
all  piety,  shadows  of  our  endless  felicity 
in  heaven,  on  earth  everlasting  records 
and  memorials,  wherein  they  which 
cannot  be  drawn  to  hearken  unto  that 
we  teach,  may  only  by  looking  on  that 
we  do,  in  a  manner  read  whatsoever  we 
believe." — William  J.  E.  Bennett,  M.A. 

Preachers  and  Hearers. — Here  are 
given  three  tests  of  a  spiritual  leader  : 
1.  He  speaks  God's  message;  2.  He 
lives  for  heaven ;  3.  He  has  faith  in 
a  personal  Saviour.  And  there  are 
three  duties  of  the  hearer  :  1.  To  re- 
member the  messenger  for  his  mess- 
age's sake  ;  2.  To  observe  the  testi- 
mony of  his  holy  Hfe;  and — 3.  To 
imitate  his  personal  faith.  God's 
heaven-sent  leaders  deliver  a  heaven- 
given  message.  It  is  according  to  the 
written  word  (Isa.  viii.  20 ;  Jer.  xxiii. 
28).  Again,  they  speak  the  language 
of  positive  conviction,  not  negations, 
but  affirmations  (2  Cor.  i.  17-20); 
and,  again,  they  are  attended  by 
spiritual  power  (1  Cor.  ii.  1-4).  The 
word  is  God's,  the  conviction  of  a 
believer  is  behind  it,  and  the  Spirit's 
demonstration  attends  it.  Moreover, 
it  is  with  solemn  earnestness,  not 
frivolity  (see  Jer.  xxiii.  32).  The 
declaration  of  the  message  is  experi- 
mental^ for  it  is  backed  by  a  personal 


faith  in  a  personal  Saviour.  No 
unconverted  man  is  fit  to  preach  or 
teach  the  gospel.  The  master  of 
Israel  must  know  these  things  heart- 
wise.  The  centre  of  his  message  is 
Christ,  and  He  must  be  the  centre 
of  his  heart's  faith  and  love  and  hope. 
If  the  truth  is  the  ball,  and  the  mouth 
the  cannon,  the  explosive  force  behind 
the  ball  is  the  heart's  passion  for  Jesus. 
Such  faith  will  be  further  confirmed 
and  exhibited  in  a  life  which  is  under 
the  power  of  eternal  realities  and 
whose  end  is  Christ,  heaven,  and  the 
glory  of  God.  The  thought  is  pro- 
gressive. God's  leader  speaks  the 
word  for  God  ;  convinced  of  its  truth, 
he  is  led  by  it  to  a  personal  Saviour 
whom  that  word  enshrines,  and  that 
faith  remoulds  and  remodels  his  Kfe. — 
Anon. 

Considering  their  End. — "  Atten- 
tively considering  the  end  of  their 
manner  of  life,  imitate  their  faith." 
That  is,  calling  to  mind  the  peaceful 
and  happy,  possibly  even  the  trium- 
phant, death  of  those  religious  teachers 
among  you,  who  gave  you  instruction 
respecting  the  word  of  life,  imitate 
their  faith,  persevere  in  your  Christian 
profession,  as  they  did,  to  the  very 
end  of  life.  There  may  be  a  glance 
at  the  martyr- death  of  St.  Stephen. 

The  Duty  of  imitating  Departed 
Worth. 

I.  The  exhortation  itself. — 
"Whose  faith  follow."  1.  Holding 
fast  as  they  had  done,  to  the  end  of 
life,  the  word  of  the  Divine  testimony. 

2.  Cleaving  with  the  same  steadfast- 
ness of  faith  to  the  Divine  promises. 

3.  Imitating  their  faith  in  all  its 
practical  effects. 

II.  The  motive  by  which  com- 
pliance with  it  is  recommended. — 
"  Considering  the  end  of  their  con- 
versation." 1.  Contemplating  their 
state  in  dying.  2.  Considering  their 
death  as  the  final  close  of  their  earthly 
service.  3.  Looking  on  their  departure 
from  this  life  as  the  commencement  of 
a  better. — R.  Wardlaw,  D.D. 

463 


CHAP.  XIII.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


Ver.  8.  The  Unchmiging  Christ. — 
The  writer  of  this  epistle  has  been 
speaking  of  change.  The  old  covenant 
was  no  more.  The  "  many  priests " 
had  not  continued  by  reason  of  death. 
The  eleventh  chapter  is  the  record  of 
the  multitudes  who  had  gone  without 
seeing  that  for  which  they  waited. 
This  perpetual  change  was  continuing 
itself  in  the  Church.  The  Jewish 
Christians  had  seen  their  leaders  taken 
away.  It  is  as  with  a  sigh  of  weariness 
that  the  writer  closes  his  admonition 
to  remember  these,  to  call  to  mind 
their  fidelity  in  death.  Then  the  ejacu- 
lation is  uttered  by  him,  broken  and 
fragmentary,  but  the  breathing  of  a 
name  :  '*  Jesus  Christ  yesterday  and 
to-day  the  same,  and  for  ever."  All 
is  not  changeful ;  He  abides.  The 
teachers  go ;  Jesus  Christ  remains. 
You  have  other  leaders,  we  have  other 
fellow-labourers ;  but  not  another 
Lord.  So  He  rests,  so  they  may  rest ; 
Jesus  Christ  is  the  same  yesterday, 
and  to-day,  and  for  ever.  1.  A  change 
in  our  own  lives  makes  all  things  seem 
unstable.  Change,  ceaseless,  weari- 
some change,  seems  to  be  written  on 
everything.  When  this  is  specially 
brought  home  to  us,  we  feel  the  com- 
fort of  this  text.  2.  There  comes  on 
men  sometimes  a  terrible  fear  of  change. 
Those  who  know  how  terrible  the 
changes  of  life  can  be  are  startled  by 
little  things,  e.g.  the  unknown  hand- 
writing on  a  letter.  There  is  no  cure 
for  such  a  terror  of  changes,  there  is 
no  security,  no  hope,  for  man,  save 
in  Him  who  is  unchanging.  The  long- 
ing for  rest,  the  desire  for  what  is 
stable  and  unchanging — this  is  our 
deepest  want ;  it  grows  and  strengthens 
in  us  as  we  grow  older,  wiser,  better 
men.  Is  life  to  be  all  weary  and 
changing  ?  Till  we  enter  on  our  final 
rest,  is  there  no  continuance?  The 
text  speaks  of  One  who  is  even  now 
unchanging.  All  is  not  fleeting ; 
Christ  is  the  same.  Before  we  go  to 
Him,  He  has  come  to  us,  and  with  us 
He  remains,  the  longed-for  changeless 
One.  The  words  of  the  text  are  in- 
tended to  give  us  just  this  assurance. 

464 


The  secret  of  our  confidence  in  a 
changing  world  is  the  unchangeable 
Christ.  Let  time  bring  with  it  what 
it  may,  we  are  assured  of  His  fidelity. 
*'  Yesterday  "  we  found  Him  precious ; 
He  is  the  same  "  to-day,"  solacing  our 
newest  grief.  "  Yesterday  "  we  heard 
His  voice ;  His  name  was  on  the  lips 
of  those  who  spoke  to  us  the  word 
of  God.  The  teachers  are  gone,  or 
we  have  outgrown  them.  But  He  is 
still  the  same ;  the  Truth  is  with  us. 
The  deep  reality  of  life  abides  the 
same.  The  words  "  for  ever "  fall 
strangely  on  our  ears ;  the  solemn 
future  is  unknown  and  unimaginable. 
We  often  fall  back  baffled  in  our 
endeavours  to  grasp  the  mystery  of 
the  world  to  come.  But  again  the 
thought  of  the  immutable  One  bears 
us  up  out  of  the  confusion  of  changing 
things.  There  will  be  more  familiarity 
than  strangeness  there,  for  "  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day, 
and  for  ever."  He  will  not  be  un- 
known ;  He  will  be  recognised  who 
quickened,  guided,  sustained  us,  who 
was  the  steadfastness  and  identity  of 
our  passing  earthly  life.  To  those 
Christians  who  would  read  the  words 
translated  "  for  ever"  in  their  original 
form,  "  unto  the  ages,"  they  would 
have  a  further  suggestion.  They  were 
accustomed  to  look  on  God's  purpose 
in  the  universe  as  unfolding  itself  in 
a  series  of  seons  or  dispensations.  In 
the  world  to  come  there  may  be  further 
dispensations,  each  fulfilling  a  thought, 
and  all  illustrating  the  mighty  being 
of  God.  Here  are  changes,  grand, 
stupendous,  unimaginable.  But  in  the 
midst  of  all  is  seen  one  unchanging 
Christ.  Let  dispensation  follow  dis- 
pensation, and  the  seons  of  the  seons 
still  open  up,  and  broaden  out,  and 
deepen  on,  and  lengthen  themselves, 
immeasurable,  inconceivable ;  Jesus 
Christ  is  "  the  same  unto  the  ages." 
The  text  does  not  speak  of  a  thmg 
that  is  the  same,  or  even  of  a  truth 
conceived  to  be  the  same,  but  of  a 
Person  who  is  the  same.  It  is  in  our 
personal  relations  that  we  feel  the 
identity  or   the   changes   of   life.      It 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.        chap.  xiii. 


is  a  Person,  abiding  ever,  unchanging 
ever.  He  who  is  most  of  all  to  us,  the 
life  of  our  soul,  whose  love  awoke  us  to 
life's  true  value,  whose  care  gave  us 
first  to  know  how  deep  and  real  friend- 
ship may  be.  Amidst  the  flux  of 
things,  the  flow  of  events,  the  heart 
rests  on  one  unchanging  Friend. — 
A.  Mackennal,  B.A.,  D.D, 

Christ  ever  the-  Same. — It  is  difiicult 
to  trace  the  connection  of  this  verse. 
It  seems  to  be  inserted  abruptly.  The 
expression  in  ver.  7,  "the  end  of 
their  conversation,"  is  suggestive  of 
the  persecutions  and  martyrdoms  of 
God's  saints ;  and  then  we  may  regard 
the  text  as  a  comforting  assurance 
of  the  all-sufficiency  of  the  living 
Christ,  and  we  may  recall  how  the 
sight  of  Him  strengthened  Stephen, 
the  first  Christian  martyr.  This  view 
is  quite  in  harmony  with  the  spirit 
and  the  general  subject  of  this  epistle. 
The  text  is  not  so  much  suggestive 
of  the  doctrine  of  the  person  of  Christ, 
as  comforting  to  those  who  were 
almost  overborne  by  temptation  and 
trial.  What  a  present,  personal  God 
was  to  David,  that  the  present,  per- 
sonal God,  in  Christ,  was  to  the 
apostles.  If  the  element  of  the  "  ever- 
living  Christ "  were  subtracted  from 
the  gospel,  we  should  have  only  a  dead 
mass  of  doctrines  which  could  but 
corrupt  as  all  earthly  things  corrupt. 
The  text  involves  three  things,  and 
puts  Christ  in  two  contrasts. 

I.  It  involves  the  Deity  of  Christ. 
— For  it  is  the  assertion  of  His 
immutability.  His  unchangeableness. 
The  Deity  of  Christ  is  the  key-stone 
of  the  gospel-arch.  We  say  "Deity" 
because  the  term  "  Divinity  "  is  used 
by  some  to  indicate  subordination  and 
inferiority.  (Illustrate  by  Socrates' 
daimon.)  The  proof  of  the  Deity  of 
Christ  which  comes  from  the  more 
incidental  references  is  found  by  the 
devout  reader  to  be  more  satisfying 
and  impressive  than  the  proof  from 
formal  texts.  This  we  cannot  but  feel 
as  readers  of  the  New  Testament. 
The  attributes  which  exclusively  belong 


to  Deity  are  applied  to  Him.  Eternal : 
"  I  am  the  first  and  the  last  .  .  . 
am  alive  for  evermore."  Omniscient : 
"  And  Jesus  knowing  their  thoughts  " ; 
"  He  needed  not  that  any  should 
testify  of  man,  for  He  knew  what  was 
in  man."  Omnipotent :  "  All  power 
is  given  unto  Me  in  heaven  and  in 
earth."  The  meaning  of  the  sublime 
name  of  God,  the  "  I  am,"  is  given  to 
us  in  this  text. 

II.  It  involves  the  sufficiency  of 
Christ's  work  for  us.  Unchangeable 
involves  sufficiency  and  completeness. 
If  the  work  of  Christ  were  imperfect, 
it  would  need  the  change  of  alteration 
and  completion.  But  it  is  declared 
that  "  by  one  offering  He  hath  per- 
fected for  ever  them  who  are  sancti- 
fied." There  never  can  be  another 
way  of  salvation.  You  make  Christ 
to  be  a  changeable  one  if  you  indulge 
the  hope  that  He  will  save  in  any 
other  than  the  gospel-way. 

III.  It  involves  Christ's  living  and 
saving  relations  with  us.^-As  our 
"Prophet,  Priest,  and  King."  The 
unchangeableness  of  Christ  is  our  title- 
deed  to  all  the  preciousness  that  the 
saints  of  all  ages  have  found  in  Christ. 
What  He  was  to  them  yesterday.  He 
is  to  lis  to-day,  and  He  will  be  to  our 
children  to-morrow.  Then  what  has 
Christ  been  to  the  early  Church,  to 
the  persecuted,  to  the  martyr,  to  the 
sufferer  ?  Nay,  what  has  He  been 
to  us,  in  the  experience  of  our  own 
past  ? 

I Y.  The  text  puts  Christ  in  contrast 
with  our  associations. — It  sets  over 
against  each  other  the  changing  world 
and  the  unchanging  Christ.  Moore's 
verse,  "  I  never  sought  a  wild  gazelle," 
etc.,  expresses  the  feeling  of  men  in 
every  human  pursuit.  The  change- 
ableness  comes  out  of  the  presence  of 
sin,  the  consciousness  of  sin,  and  the 
struggling  for  immortality.  The  hold 
on  anything  earthly  must  be  a  shifting 
and  uncertain  hold.  They  only  hold 
firm,  and  find  what  they  hold  to  be 
firm,  who  hold  Christ. 

V.  The  text  puts  Christ  in  even 
stronger   contrast    with   ourselves. — 

H  465 


CHAP.  xiii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


If  He  is  ever  the  same,  certainly  we 
are  not,  either  in  circumstance  or  in 
feeling.  "  Though  we  believe  not,  yet 
He  abideth  faithful.  He  cannot  deny 
Himself."  Man  can  no  more  be 
satisfied  with  himself  than  with  the 
world.  The  unchangeable  One  offers 
Himself  as  the  ground  of  confidence 
to  the  changeable :  *'  Let  him  stay 
upon  his  God." 

Conclusion. — Let  meditation  take 
form  that  may  prepare  hearts  for 
partaking  of  the  Holy  Sacrament. 
Fill  up  thoughts  with  the  preciousness 
of  Christ.  Try  the  claimants  to  our 
love  by  this  test — Will  they  keep  ever 
the  same  ?  Ours  will.  The  same, 
ever  the  same,  even  through  the  last 
water- floods. 

The  Sameness  of  Jesus  Christ  through 
all  Ages. — In  every  sense  of  the  word 
Jesus  was  and  is  the  same,  both  in 
the  sense  that  His  character  was  the 
same  all  through,  and  that  it  is  un- 
changed and  unchangeable.  His  aim 
was  one ;  His  character  was  always 
the  same.  The  character  of  Jesus 
stands  up  unabashed  under  that  incon- 
ceivably great  trial  of  the  question. 
Is  it  suitable  to  the  idea  of  God  mani- 
fest in  the  flesh  ?  It  is.  There  is  no 
break  where  weakness  appears — no 
pride,  no  vanity,  no  rashness,  no  vio- 
lence, no  sentimental  weakness,  no 
levity,  no  presumption,  though  '*  think- 
ing it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with 
God."  By  an  easy  transition  we  rise 
from  this  sameness  of  Jesus  to  the 
sameness  of  His  unchangeableness 
in  glory.  Other  men  change  in  the 
different  periods  of  their  life,  and 
often  within  short  spaces  of  time.  But 
Jesus  is  the  same  everywhere  and 
always.  And  this  same  Jesus  was 
taken  up  from  us  into  heaven  un- 
changed and  unchangeable.  It  is  the 
same  Jesus  who  is  "  within  the  veil." 
And  He  is  there,  what  He  was  below, 
the  soul  of  comfort. — Edward  White. 

The  Everlasting  Name. — Ages  are  to 
roll  by  ;  nations  are  to  die,  and  nations 
are  to  rise  and  to  take  their  places ; 

466 


laws  are  to  grow  old,  and  from  new 
germs  laws  are  to  unfold ;  old  civilisa- 
tions are  to  crumble,  and  new  eras  are 
to  dawn  with  higher  culture ;  but  to 
the  end  of  time  it  will  be  seen  that  this 
Figure  stands  high  above  every  other 
in  the  history  of  man !  "A  name 
which  is  above  every  name  "  was  given 
to  Him — not  for  the  sake  of  fame,  but 
in  a  wholly  different  sense  ;  a  name  of 
power ;  a  name  of  moral  influence  ;  a 
name  that  shall  teach  men  how  to  live, 
and  what  it  is  to  be  men  in  Christ 
Jesus. — N.  Ward  Beecher, 

The  Ground  of  our  Confidence. — A 
sublime  contrast  with  things,  with 
others,  and  with  ourselves.  Two  things 
man  yearns  for — unity  and  constancy. 
This  unity  is  the  inspiration  of  know- 
ledge, which  is  trying  to  find  the  One. 
This  constancy  is  the  secret  of  man's 
interest  in  the  reign  of  law.  Can 
man  ever  get  unity  save  in  God,  or 
constancy  save  outside  his  own  sphere  ? 
Text  an  illustration  of  the  abrupt 
construction,  the  bursting  in  of  an  ex- 
clamation in  the  course  of  an  argument, 
which  is  characteristic  of  St.  Paul ;  or 
rather,  of  all  composition  rhetorically 
constructed.  "  Jesus  is  the  same,"  etc. ; 
therefore  you  who  are  followers  of 
these  "  witnesses  "  may  have  abundant 
consolation  and  strength,  in  the 
assurance  of  the  living  presence  of 
Christ.  He  is  the  same  (1)  in  His 
work  yesterday ;  (2)  in  His  grace  to- 
day ;  (3)  in  His  glory  for  ever.  The 
same  essential  purpose  has  moved  Him, 
and  moves  Him  ever.  How  this  cen- 
tral truth  comes  to  us :  1 .  Freshening 
the  story  of  our  fathers.  See  what 
Christ  was  to  them.  2.  Lifting  the 
load  of  the  present.  See  what  Christ 
is,  and  can  be,  to  us.  3.  Filling  us 
with  peace  in  view  of  the  future.  See 
what  that  future  must  have  in  it.  No 
loneliness  for  us  anywhere  in  that 
mysterious  future  ;  for  the  Christ  whom 
we  love,  and  now  have  in  dear  fellow- 
ship, is  ever  the  samie. 

Ever  the  Same. — Such  a  proclama- 
tion  of   the    personality,     uniqueness^ 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   HEBREWS.        chap.  xiii. 


eternity,  immutability,  of  the  great 
object  of  faith,  appropriately  follows 
the  mention  of  "  faith,"  and  precedes 
the  exhortation  to  simplicity  and 
stability  of  belief  and  profession. 

I.  The  essential  attributes  of  the 
Saviour's  person,  as  the  eternal  and 
unchangeable  Son  of  God. 

II.  The  Lord  Jesus,  as  unalterably 
the  same  in  the  office  He  sustains  as 
the  only  and  all-sufficient  Saviour  of 
believers. 

III.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  ever  the 
same  in  His  kind  and  compassionate 
dispositions  towards  His  people. 

IV.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  unchange- 
ably the  same  in  His  adherence  to  the 
declarations  and  requirements  of  His 
word. 

Learn — 1.  To  anticipate  the  pro- 
gressive advancement  and  final  triumph 
of  the  Christian  cause.  2.  To  rely  on 
the  fixed  terms  and  settled  arrange- 
ments of  the  gospel.  3.  How  great 
the  encouragement  which  believers 
may  draw  from  the  grace  of  their 
Redeemer,  amid  all  the  trials  and 
difficulties  of  the  Christian  course. 
4.  Whence  come  the  strongest  consola- 
tions and  supports  amid  all  the  losses 
and  vicissitudes  of  this  mortal  state. 
— Prof.  Crawfurd. 

The  Unchangi7ig  Friend. — Two  views 
have  been  taken  of  this  passage.  In 
our  English  Version  "  Jesus  Christ 
the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and 
for  ever,"  is  the  end  or  aim  of  the 
conversation  of  those  teachers  and 
martyrs  whose  example  of  constancy 
and  sacrifice  is  so  earnestly  commended. 
They  toiled  and  suffered,  inspired  by 
the  hope  that  thus  they  should  honour 
Christ.  Many,  however,  think  that 
our  text  is  better  treated  as  a  separate 
sentence — the  words  "  end  of  their 
conversation  "  completing  the  writer's 
reference  to  the  martyrs,  and  poetically 
indicating  the  heroic  deaths  by  which 
they  sealed  their  faith.  Then  our 
text  is  seen  to  be  an  instance  of  ab- 
ruptness, of  thrusting  in  a  sudden 
thought  which  comes  to  him,  which  we 
know  was  characteristic  of  the  apostle 


Paul,  and  which  is  freely  illustrated 
in  the  writings  admitted  as  written 
by  him.  We  will  take  the  verse  as 
standing  alone,  and  specially  suitable 
as  a  motto.  It  is  the  utterance  of 
a  thought  flashing  suddenly  through 
the  writer's  mind,  and  breaking  in  on 
the  subject  with  which  he  is  dealing. 
Turning  for  a  moment  from  the  ex- 
ample of  the  teachers  whose  faith  we 
are  to  follow,  this  writer  reminds  us 
that  Jesus  Christ  is  all  to  us  that  He 
has  ever  been  to  others,  nor  need  we 
fear  the  future,  for  He  will  be  to  us 
all  that  we  have  ever  found  He  is.  In 
this  way  the  sentence  stands  fully  out 
before  us,  distinct  and  clear,  as  a 
motto  on  which  to  base  the  sacra- 
mental meditations  for  a  new  year. 
Jesus  Christ  is  ever  the  same  ;  therefore 
all  you  who  are  followers  of  the  holy 
witnesses  may  have  their  consolation. 
No  one  has  any  need  to  envy  the 
apostles  their  fellowship  with  a  Re- 
deemer in  the  flesh,  since  to  him  that 
Redeemer  both  is  and  will  be  all  that 
He  ever  was.  He  ever  liveth.  His 
offices  as  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King 
are  continuous,  reaching  right  up  to 
the  for  ever  of  our  necessity.  I  am 
very  often  speaking  to  you  on  the 
subject  which  is,  of  all  others,  of 
intensest  interest  to  me,  about  which 
I  am  always  wanting  to  learn  some- 
thing more,  and  which  I  want  to 
see  from  every  possible  point  of  view — 
the  veritable  hvimanity  of  our  Lord, 
the  mystery  of  the  "  Man  Christ 
Jesus."  This  much  we  can  plainly 
see — that  taking  upon  Himself  our 
nature  makes  the  Divine  redemption 
to  be  a  moral  force  on  moral  beings. 
It  operates  in  sablimer  degrees,  but  in 
the  same  ways  as  those  in  which  men 
influence  their  fellow-men.  Jesus 
Christ  became  a  man  that  He  might 
exert  a  man's  power  on  men.  That  is 
one  side  of  truth  ;  but  we  must  see 
the  other  side.  The  full  redemption — 
including  both  the  justification  and 
the  sanctification — of  fallen,  sinful, 
morally  helpless  man  must  be  an 
immediate  and  continuous  operation 
of   Divine  power.     This   is   true — He 

467 


CHAP.  XIII.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS. 


who  saves  the  moral  being  man  must 
be  man.  But  this  also  is  true — He 
who  saves  the  morally  ruined  moral 
being  man  must  be  God  ;  and  there- 
fore the  essential  attributes  of  Deity 
are  shown  to  belong  to  Jesus  Christ, 
who  "is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day, 
and  for  ever."  That  which  this  sen- 
tence asserts  concerning  Christ  is  the 
familiar  Bible  declaration  concerning 
God.  "  His  years  have  no  end."  The 
very  striking  expression  in  the  ninetieth 
Psalm  comes  at  once  to  mind  :  "Lord, 
Thou  hast  been  our  dwelling-place  in 
all  generations.  Before  the  mountains 
were  brought  forth,  or  ever  Thou  hadst 
formed  the  earth  and  the  world,  even 
from  everlasting  to  everlasting.  Thou 
art  God."  But  this  unchangeableness 
is  an  assertion  which  we  dare  not  make 
concerning  any  things.  "  The  fashion 
of  this  world  is  ever  passing  away." 
"  The  moth  or  the  rust "  are  corrupt- 
ing everything ;  and  the  constant 
change  of  form  and  place  has  become 
so  familiar  to  us  that  something  of  its 
exceeding  painfulness  has  gone,  and 
we  only  feel  it  oppressively  when  the 
changes  take  unusual  or  severer  forms. 
The  whirl  of  time  brings  ever-chang- 
ing day  and  night,  wintry  bareness, 
spring  buddings,  summer  fulness,  and 
autumn  droppings.  Grand  cities  fall 
to  ruins ;  abbey  and  cathedral  and 
castle  stand  roofless,  all  covered  over 
with  the  creeping  ivy.  Nations  pass 
away.  The  mighty,  gallant  warships 
presently  rot  idly  away  in  the  harbours. 
All  round  the  circle  of  life  our  thought 
goes,  and  it  can  find  nothing  of  which 
it  may  say,  *'  The  same  yesterday, 
to-day,  and  for  ever."  *'  Dew,  like 
liquid  crystal,  often  bespangles  the 
garment  in  which  the  young  day 
presents  himself  rejoicing  before  us. 
But  what  so  transient,  so  visionary, 
as  the  dew  of  the  morning  ?  It  is 
the  very  type  of  instability.  It  greets 
us  silently,  with  soft  glances  from  its 
myriad  of  myriads  of  eyes.  We  hail 
it,  admire  it— we  feel  young  in  its 
presence;  but  it  is  gone,  exhaled  in 
an  hour."  It  is  an  assertion  that  we 
dare  not  make  concerning  other  persons, 

468 


Of  all  the  unutterably  painful  things 
of  human  life,  one  stands  out  as 
supreme.  It  is  the  changeableness  of 
the  friends  in  whom  we  have  trusted, 
thinking  them  to  be  true,  and  constant, 
and  faithful.  The  psalmist  finds  words 
which  many  of  us  have  wanted  in  the 
bitter  hours  of  life :  "  For  it  was  not 
an  enemy  that  reproached  me ;  then 
I  could  have  borne  it  .  .  .  but  it 
was  thou,  a  man  mine  equal,  my  com- 
panion, and  my  familiar  friend."  Who 
among  us  has  failed  to  learn,  in  life's 
stern  hours,  that  it  is  hopeless  work 
putting  our  trust  in  princes  or  in 
the  sons  of  men  ?  Who  does  not  feel 
that  he  must  lift  his  eyes  away  from  his 
fellow-men,  since  of  none  of  them  can  it 
ever  be  said  they  are  the  "same yester- 
day, to-day,  and  for  ever  "  ?  We  cannot 
even  use  such  expressions  concerning 
ourselves.  We  are  not  what  we  were 
yesterday.  Probably  not  one  particle 
of  our  body  of  to-day,  from  head  to 
foot,  inside  or  out,  is  the  same  as 
our  body  of  twenty  years  ago.  We 
do  not  think  to-day  as  we  thought 
twenty  years  ago.  Our  experiences 
are  as  changing  as  the  varieties  of 
the  daily  atmosphere  in  our  most 
changeable  climate.  Sunny  days  of 
glowing  pass  to  wintry  days  of  chill. 
Spring  breathings  that  waken  life  give 
place  to  wild  winds  that  bruise  the 
flowers  and  strip  the  branches,  and 
to  biting  frosts  that  nip  off  the 
budding  life,  and  drive  the  sap  back 
again  to  the  shelter  of  the  roots.  We 
may  find  the  image  of  the  world,  of 
men,  and  of  ourselves  as  we  lie  on 
the  smiling  river-bank  and  watch 
the  ships  go  by.  They  are  ever  pass- 
ing, passing,  some  to  their  "  harbour 
under  the  hill,"  some  out  to  the 
ocean  sailing.  A  line  against  the  sky 
as  we  watch  them  coming.  Beautiful 
with  their  " bellied  sails"  as  we  watch 
them  go  by.  A  line  on  the  far  horizon 
as  they  reach  away  out  to  the  open 
west.  On,  on  !  the  voice  sounds  day  by 
day.  Here  is  no  rest,  is  no  rest.  "  We've 
no  abiding  city  here."  Nothing  stays 
the  same.  For  earthly  things  there 
is  no  enduring.     And  yet  the  writer 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.        CHAP.  XIII. 


of  this  epistle,  fearless  of  contradiction, 
claims  this  unchangeableness  for  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  text  is  almost 
the  closing  word  of  an  epistle  which 
has  presented  with  unusual  fulness  and 
vigour  the  Divine  claims  of  Christ, 
who  is  declared  to  be  greater  than 
man,  higher  than  angels,  "  brightness 
[outshining]  of  the  Father's  glory,  and 
express  image  of  His  person."  Our 
text  is  really  an  efficient  summary  of 
the  teaching  of  the  epistle  concerning 
our  Lord.  In  no  more  vigorous  lan- 
guage could  he  set  our  Lord  forth 
as  distinct  from  things,  distinct  from 
men,  crowned  with  the  attributes 
and  bright  with  the  glories  that  belong 
alone  unto  God.  "  Yesterday,  to-day, 
and  for  ever "  is  a  Hebrew  form  of 
expression ;  and  the  addition  of  "  the 
same"  to  it  makes  it  denote  immortality, 
and  proclaim  the  personality,  unique- 
ness, eternity,  Divinity,  of  the  sole 
Object  of  our  faith.  The  doctrine  of 
the  person  of  Christ  is  the  prominent 
doctrine  of  our  times.  About  it  all 
the  battle  rages.  Think  for  a  moment 
how  that  doctrine  gradually  unfolded 
in  the  first  century.  At  first  Jesus 
was  evidently  a  man,  and  apprehended 
by  everybody  as  a  man.  He  was  the 
Nazareth  carpenter's  son  ;  and  what 
Joseph  and  His  mother  knew  about  the 
mystery  of  His  birth  nobody  else  knew. 
He  grew  up  at  Nazareth  a  man  among 
men.  Not  until  He  was  thii-ty  years 
of  age  was  there  any  open  ground  for 
suspecting  the  deep  mystery  that  sur- 
rounded Him.  Even  when  He  stood 
forth  as  a  teacher  most  people  could 
see  only  a  man.  Even  when  He  did 
mighty  works  as  a  physician  most 
people  could  only  see  an  endowed  man. 
All  through  His  life  the  highest  view 
the  majority  could  take  of  Him  was 
that  He  was  a  gifted  prophet.  If  we 
realise  the  kind  of  thought  which  the 
people  had  of  their  anticipated  Messiah, 
conceiving  that  He  would  prove  a 
grander  Judas  Maccabaeus,  a  second 
and  more  glorious  soldier- hero  for  the 
nation,  we  shall  feel  that  nothing  more 
than  a  Divinely  endowed  man  was 
expected    by    them.      Moreover,    the 


Jews  were  possessed  with  a  profound 
passion  for  the  conservation  of  one 
truth — the  truth  of  the  itnity  of  God. 
They  were  not  in  the  least  likely  to 
entertain  the  idea  that  Jesus  was  God. 
They  would  not  believe  that  the  Divine 
rights  could  be  shared  with  any  one. 
They  were  offended,  and  accused  him  of 
blasphemy,  when  our  Lord  claimed  the 
Divine  authority  to  pronounce  forgive- 
ness of  sins.  At  the  present  day  our 
Christian  setting  of  the  Trinity,  and 
our  claim  of  Deity  for  Christ,  are  the 
grave  stumbling-blocks  in  the  way  of 
the  conversion  of  the  Jews,  who  de- 
nounce us  Christians  as  worshippers  of 
many  gods  (polytheists),  on  account  of 
these  doctrines.  It  does  not  appear 
that  it  was  a  part  of  our  Lord's  mission 
to  state  in  so  many  words  what  He 
claimed  to  be.  It  was  His  duty  to 
live,  and  to  he.  The  due  impression  of 
these  would  certainly  be  made.  Pri- 
vately and  incidentally  He  did  say 
who  He  was ;  but  even  in  these  in- 
stances He  used  ambiguous  terms. 
He  left  our  world,  having  started 
mighty  wonderings  and  questionings 
in  the  minds  of  His  disciples.  They 
had  a  general  impression  of  His  life 
and  relations  which,  at  the  time,  they 
could  not  translate.  They  were  pre- 
pared for  the  apprehension  of  the 
higher  truth  in  the  illumination  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  The  impression  produced 
by  Christ's  completed  life,  death  and 
resurrection,  and  ascension  may  be 
put  into  a  single  word.  All  who  had 
to  do  with  Him  felt  that  there  was 
about  Him  a  "  beyondness,"  an  inex- 
plicable something,  a  strange  separate- 
ness.  He  was  with  them,  but  He  was 
above  them,  beyond  them,  othermse 
than  they.  It  is  a  question  whether 
any  of  those  who  knew  Christ  in  the 
flesh  ever  put  it  to  themselves  while 
He  lived— "Why,  this  is  God."  The 
impression  was  on  their  hearts,  but  it 
had  not  gained  shape  or  words.  Olivet, 
Pentecost,  and  after  Pentecost,  were 
the  revealers  of  the  meaning  which 
they  had  failed  to  find.  Two  men 
more  particularly  formulated  this  truth 
for  the  disciples.     Just  as  the  spirit, 

469 


CSAP.  XIII.        BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


the  truth,  the  principles  of  the  Refor- 
mation, were  in  the  deep  heart  of 
Germany  long  before  Luther  arose, 
and  he  only  found  for  that  Reforma- 
tion a  voice,  so  the  unuttered  feeling 
of  the  Deity  of  Christ  was  in  the  deep 
heart  of  the  early  Church,  and  the 
apostles  Paul  and  John  did  but  find  for 
it  a  voice.  The  truth  itself  was  the 
impression  left  by  our  Lord's  life  :  the 
shaping  of  the  truth  was  given  by  the 
inspired  genius  of  two  apostles.  Paul's 
representation  differs  from  John's, 
because  Paul  had  to  deal  with  idolatry 
and  superstition,  the  belief  in  inferior 
and  attendant  divinities,  and  it  was 
necessary  for  him  to  assert  the  absolute 
uniqueness  and  sole  authority  over  all 
things  which  Christ  claimed.  John 
had  to  deal  with  a  specious  philosophy, 
which  said  that  Jesus  the  man  received 
a  Divine  Spirit  at  His  baptism,  and 
this  Spirit  left  Him  a  mere  man  again 
before  His  crucifixion.  It  was  neces- 
sary therefore  for  him  to  defend  the 


reality  of  the  Incarnation.  Evan- 
gelical Christianity  then  has  one 
distinct  foundation-truth  on  which  it 
rests.  And  it  is  an  everlasting  rock. 
They  are  other  truths  which  we  hold 
to  be  essential  to  the  faith.  But  the 
one  characteristic  foundation  of  evan- 
gelic Christianity  is  the  proper  Deity 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  "  God  manifest  in 
the  flesh."  First  recognised  as  Jewish 
Messiah,  then  declared  to  be  the  Son 
of  God  with  power,  by  His  resurrection 
from  the  dead  ;  at  last,  the  fullest  and 
deepest  in  Him  is  discerned,  and  we 
ascribe  the  Divine  attribute  of  un- 
changeableness  to  Him  who  "  is  the 
same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever." 
"  Jesus  Christ  the  same  yesterday, 
to-day,  and  for  ever."  It  is  a  fact,  but 
it  should  be  much  more ;  it  should  be 
an  experience,  something  which  we  find 
out  and  feel  for  ourselves,  something 
which  we  can  only  get  by  the  study 
of  the  historical  Christ,  and  the  com- 
munion of  the  living  Christ. 


MAIN   HOMILETICS    OF    THE    PARAGRAPH.— Verses  9—17. 


The  Reproach  of  the  Spiritual. — Though  anxious  about  many  things  appertaining 
to  life  and  godliness,  the  mind  of  the  writer  readily  returns  upon  his  one  great 
anxiety.  He  cannot  close  his  letter  without  one  more  earnest  appeal  on  behalf 
of  that  spiritual  dispensation  which  was  entered  on  accepting  Jesus  as  Messiah 
and  Saviour.  Recalling  other  old  figures  with  which  the  Jewish  Christians 
were  familiar,  he  pleads  again  with  them,  not  to  be  "  carried  away  by  strange 
doctrines " ;  not  to  be  distressed  because  they  were  excommunicated  and 
reproached ;  but  to  enter  so  fully  into  their  spiritual  privileges  and  duties,  that, 
having  their  interest  wholly  engaged,  they  might  cease  to  trouble  over  the  loss 
of  old  relationships.  This  is  the  general  idea  of  the  passage,  but  it  needs  a  more 
careful  and  detailed  attention.  It  is  a  difficult  passage  if  its  language  be  treated 
apart  from  its  connections,  and  from  the  purpose  of  the  writer.  The  difficulties 
readily  pass  when  we  understand  the  anxiety  of  the  writer,  and  the  conditions 
of  those  who  were  directly  addressed.  It  appears  that  the  epistle  was  not  sent 
to  the  Jewish  Church  in  Jerusalem — that  was  under  apostolic  guidance — but  to 
the  Churches  of  Jewish  Christians  in  other  parts ;  away  from  Jerusalem,  perhaps 
through  persecutions,  perhaps  through  business  exigencies.  Then,  and  through 
all  the  ages  since  then,  the  Jews  had  an  intense,  passionate  love  for  their  holy 
city,  a  love  which  we  can  but  very  imperfectly  estimate.  It  was  a  great  strain 
on  patriotic  and  religious  feeling  to  live  away,  so  that  access  to  Jerusalem  for  the 
feast-times  was  practically  impossible.  This  feeling  for  the  city  was  matched  by 
the  Jewish  feeling  for  the  Mosaic  ceremonial,  which  was  still,  at  least  partly, 
represented  by  the  Temple  worship.  They  lived  indeed  in  the  past  rather  than 
the  present ;  and  this  writer  meets  the  cherished  feeling  of  the  more  pious  Jewhi 

470 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   HEBREWS.       chap.  xiil. 


by  referring  so  entirely  to  the  times  of  the  tabernacle,  when  the  ceremonials 
were  observed  strictly  according  to  the  Mosaic  pattern.  Jews,  in  becoming 
Christians,  in  no  sense  lost  their  patriotic  love  for  Jerusalem,  or  for  that  old 
system  of  rites  and  sacrifices  which  had  been  the  religion  of  their  fathers,  and 
their  own  religion  until  they  had  been  called  into  the  spiritual  religion  of  the 
Son  of  God.  We  must  understand  their  feelings  in  order  to  realise  how  they 
were  affected  by  the  persecutions  under  which  they  were  brought,  and  how 
severely  they  felt  the  threatenings  and  enticements  of  their  old  Judaic  friends. 
In  naming  the  name  of  Christ  they  had  been  virtually,  perhaps  actually,  put 
out  of  the  synagogues,  excommunicated,  and  no  longer  allowed  to  take  part  in 
sacrifice  and  feast.  The  Christian  teachers  never  required  them  to  break  with 
their  old  Temple  associations.  Both  our  Lord  Himself  and  His  apostles, 
throughout  their  lives,  preserved  their  Jewish  relations,  and  observed  their 
Mosaic  customs.  It  was  not  the  policy  of  early  Christianity  to  break  with 
Judaism.  In  good  time,  in  the  providence  of  God,  the  Jewish  ceremonial  would 
fall  away ;  the  system  was  decaying ;  almost  all  the  life  was  already  gone  out  of 
it ;  and  soon  the  Romans  would  put  the  final  stroke  to  it  and  bury  it  for  ever. 
But  the  Jews — the  intense,  bigoted  Jews — forced  the  separation,  and  compelled 
the  Jewish  Christians  to  take  a  definite  attitude,  and  satisfy  themselves,  if  they 
could,  with  the  spiritual  religion  which  they  had  chosen.  Those  Jewish 
Christians  had  to  endure  the  enticements  of  friends,  who  would  use  all  kinds  of 
arguments  to  induce  them  to  return  back  to  the  old  formal  religious  system  of 
their  fathers.  And,  among  other  things,  we  may  be  quite  sure  they  would 
sneer  at  the  spirituality  of  the  Christian  religion,  and  say  :  "  See,  you  have  no 
tabernacle,  no  altar,  no  sacrifice,  no  feast,  no  day  of  atonement,  no  priest.  You 
have  nothing  but  a  sentimental  notion  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  alive  ;  and  all 
that  you  and  we  really  know  is  that  He  was  crucified.  How  ridiculous  such  a 
vague  and  unsubstantial  religion  looks  beside  such  a  formal  and  stately  system 
as  Mosaism,  which  has  the  imprint  of  Divine  authority,  and  the  testimony  of 
efficiency  from  saintly  souls  through  the  long  ages  ! "  The  allurements  and 
persuasions  were  seriously  affecting  the  Christians,  and  filling  the  hearts  of  the 
Christian  teachers  with  grave  anxiety.  This  epistle  throughout  bears  on  this 
perilous  condition  of  the  Jewish  Christian  Churches.  And  the  argument  is  this 
— the  spiritual  alone  is  the  real.  We  do  not  want  to  spiritualise  those  old 
ceremonials.  We  want  to  bring  to  light  the  spiritual  things  that  were  in — 
pictured  in — those  old  ceremonies.  The  time  has  come  when  men  can  have  the 
spiritual  realities,  and  may  be  willing  to  let  the  pictures  fade  away.  Do  not 
be  unduly  moved  when  they  say  that,  because  the  religion  of  Christ  is  spiritual, 
it  can  have  no  tabernacle,  no  altar,  no  sacrifice,  no  priest.  It  has  the  spiritual 
reality  of  all  these  things  that  was  at  the  heart  of  all  the  old  formality. 
Christianity  has  a  spiritual  tabernacle,  a  spiritual  sacrifice,  a  spiritual  Priest. 
If  you  would  enter  fully  into  the  spiritual,  you  would  be  wholly  satisfied,  you 
would  find  that  you  were  lifted  up  to  a  higher  plane,  and  could  not  possibly  go 
back  to  the  *'  weak  and  beggarly  elements,"  as  St.  Paul  calls  them.  Danger 
always  lies  in  half-heartedness.  When  professing  Christians  did  not  enter  fully 
into  the  spiritual  truth  and  spiritual  privilege,  they  were  exposed  to  the  full 
force  of  temptations,  which  had  no  force  at  all  on  whole-hearted  men  and  women. 
In  the  midst  of  a  series  of  practical  counsels  concerning  the  Christian  life  and 
relationships,  the  writer  is  reminded  again  of  the  one  great  message  he  had  been 
trying  so  variously  to  present  to  them.  Ere  he  closes  his  letter  he  will  state 
his  point  once  again,  and  then  end  with  some  kindly  greetings.  His  message 
all  through  has  been,  "  Be  not  carried  away  by  divers  and  strange  teachings." 
His  plea  all  through  is — Enter  fully  into  the  spiritual  apprehension  of  that 
religion  whose  tabernacle  is  not   made  with   hands,    whose  sacrifice    is   the 

471 


CHAP.  XIII.        BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


surrender  of  an  obedient  will,  and  whose  Priest  is  the  risen,  ascended,  glorified 
Son  of  God. 

I.  The  inefficiency  of  the  merely  material  in  religion. — Because  forms  and 
ceremonies  are  found  useful,  men  easily  get  to  say  that  they  are  essential. 
The  truth  is  that,  like  fire  and  water,  they  are  good  servants,  but  bad  masters. 
The  old  Mosaic  system  had  for  a  long  time  been  a  mere  automaton,  a  machine 
that  kept  up  a  routine  working.  There  was  no  ark,  and  no  mercy-seat,  and  no 
Shekinah  glory  in  the  Holy  Place.  That  is  the  difiiculty  of  all  ritual  religion. 
It  is  good  while  the  life  is  in  it,  but  it  is  always  in  peril  of  losing  its  life,  and 
then  becoming  worse  than  worthless.  The  writer  has  already  urged  that 
formal  ceremony  could  "  not  make  the  comers  thereunto  perfect,"  as  pertaining 
to  the  conscience.  No  sacrificial  or  sacramental  system  can  ever  touch  the 
conscience.  He  reminds  of  all  the  former  teachings  when  he  says  of  the 
"  meats"  and  drinks  and  divers  washings  of  Judaism,  that  they  did  "  not  profit 
those  who  were  occupied  therewith."  Those  who  stood  up  so  valiantly  for  the 
old  Mosaic  system  had  no  real  ground  for  their  over- confidence.  The  real 
value  of  the  material  system  was  the  spiritual  truth  which  was  in  it,  and  found 
temporary  expression  by  means  of  it.  If  it  be  said  that  there  must  be  a 
material  element  in  the  religion  that  is  adapted  to  man,  still  it  must  be  anxiously 
and  persistently  urged — Keep  the  material  element  in  its  place,  and  in  strictest 
limitations.  It  has  a  strange  power  of  encroaching  ;  it  can  cover  over,  hide, 
and  even  stifle  the  spiritual.  The  material  form  of  doctrine  has  often  stifled 
spiritual  truth ;  and  the  material  form  of  services  and  sacraments  has  often 
stifled  spiritual  life.  It  cannot  be  too  constantly  urged  that  religion  becomes 
inefiicient  in  proportion  as  it  becomes  formal  and  outward,  a  matter  of  postures, 
and  garments,  and  rites,  and  services,  and  self-restraints.  On  Christianity  this 
sign  is  fixed  :  "God  is  a  spirit,  and  they  that  worship  Him  must  worship  Him 
in  spirit  and  in  truth." 

II.  The  exclusiveness  of  spiritual  religion. — To  use  a  colloquialism,  we  may 
say  that  the  writer  "  turns  the  tables  upon"  the  mischievous  Judaising  teachers. 
They  had  pleaded  ;that  the  Jewish  Christians,  even  if  they  kept  up  association 
with  Judaism,  could  have  no  real  part  or  lot  in  it.  Its  altar  was  not  for  them. 
Its  sacrifices  could  be  of  no  avail  for  them.  This  writer  says — Tell  them  that 
we  have  an  altar,  of  which  they,  who  serve  the  tabernacle,  have  no  right  to  eat. 
They  will  not  let  you  share  their  privileges,  which  lie  on  but  a  low  level.  You 
take  high  ground  with  them,  and  say — You  cannot  share  our  spiritual  privi- 
leges. Your  material- mindedness  makes  it  impossible.  The  exclusiveness  of 
spiritual  religion  is  something  which  belongs  to  the  very  nature  of  things.  The 
carnally,  materially-minded  cannot  know  them ;  they  are  spiritually  discerned. 
No  judicial  act  is  necessary ;  he  simply  cannot.  The  spiritual  man  can,  on  all 
fitting  occasions,  and  in  all  wise  ways,  use  ceremonials,  but  the  ceremonial  man 
can  do  nothing  with  the  spiritual.  He  is  necessarily  shut  out,  excluded.  He 
cannot  eat  at  this  altar.  Becoming  spiritual- minded  creates  no  stand-offness  of 
the  Pharisee,  who  says.  "  I  am  holier  than  thou."  But  the  spiritual- minded 
become  exclusive,  in  the  very  nature  of  the  case.  They  breathe  another 
atmosphere,  and  move  in  another  sphere.  They  are  exclusive,  as  Christ  was 
when  He  moved  to  and  fro  among  men. 

III.  Then  the  writer  recalls  to  mind  a  feature  of  the  old  ceremony  of  atone- 
ment, and,  after  the  Babbinical  method  of  treating  Scripture,  makes  it  illustrate 
his  point.  Instead  of  being  troubled  by  their  excommunication  from  material 
Jewish  privileges,  they  might  remember  something  very  suggestive  in  old 
covenant  ceremony.  Cast  out  were  they  ?  1.  So  were  the  bodies  of  the  animals 
who  had  given  their  life-blood  as  atonement  for  the  redemption  of  Israel ;  and 
2.  So  was  Christ,  who  gave  His  blood — His  life — a  ransom  for  many,  but  was 

472  ... 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.       chap.  Xlli. 


turned  out  of  Jerusalem,  and  crucified  outside  the  city.  Cast  out  were  they  ? 
Let  them  take  place  with  the  burnt  bodies  outside  the  camp.  They  had  given 
their  life  for  men.  They  were  turned  out  because  of  the  work  they  had  done ; 
and  there  was  high  honour  in  their  burning.  Let  them  take  place  outside 
Jerusalem — if  they  were  in  any  sense  turned  out  of  Jerusalem — with  Jesus, 
whose  body  hung  on  the  cross,  outside  the  city  wall.  He  had  given  His  life  for 
men.  He  was  turned  out  because  of  the  work  He  had  done.  And  there  was 
sublime  honour  resting  on  Him  who  died  "  without  the  camp."  The  point  of  the 
illustration  lies  in  the  bodies  of  the  beasts  being  those  beasts  whose  blood  had 
been  taken  for  the  sin-offering  of  atonement,  and  in  the  body  of  Jesus  being 
the  body  in  which  He  had  offered  to  God  the  sacrifice  of  the  obedient  will 
as  the  spiritual  atonement.  The  plea  is  full  of  most  gracious  persuasiveness  : 
"  Let  us  therefore  go  forth  unto  Him  without  the  camp,  bearing  His  reproach." 
It  is  as  if  he  had  said  :  In  Christ  you  are  giving  yourselves  to  the  salvation  of 
men ;  your  life  is  the  spiritual  life  of  men.  Do  not  hesitate  then,  if  it  comes 
to  this ;  you  are  burned  like  the  bodies  of  the  beasts ;  you  are  crucified  like  the 
body  of  your  Lord.  "  Go  forth  to  Him  without  the  camp."  Be  excommuni- 
cated, if  you  must  be.  "  Bear  His  reproach."  You  are  after  Him,  and  for 
Him,  the  saviours  of  the  world.  Your  spiritual  life  is  the  light  and  hope  of 
men.  "  Bear  His  reproach,"  the  earth-strain  of  Him  who  gave  His  life  for  us, 
and  is  the  Life  and  Light  of  men. 

IV.  The  persuasion  to  enter  fully  into  spiritual  religion. — This  teacher  saw 
clearly  enough  that  the  mistake  of  the  Jewish  Christians,  and  the  thing  which 
put  their  Christian  faith  in  peril,  was  their  temporising.  They  were  trying  to 
keep  in  with  Judaism,  and  at  the  same  time  to  keep  in  with  Christianity. 
Their  heart  was  divided.  Their  attitude  was  represented  by  the  proverbial  "  two 
stools."  And  in  pressing  them  to  go  forth  with  Christ,  outside  the  camp,  bearing 
His  reproach,  he  is  really  pressing  them  to  give  up  Judaism  altogether.  Let  go 
those  old  ties  to  a  formal  religion  ;  enter  fully  into  the  spiritual  standing  in  Christ 
Jesus;  realise  fully  your  spiritual  privileges  in  Christ  Jesus ;  use  freely  all  the 
spiritual  agencies — tabernacle,  altar,  sacrifice,  priest — provided  in  Christ  Jesus. 
Breathe  the  spiritual  atmosphere ;  feed  on  the  spiritual  food  ;  live  out  the  spiritual 
life  ;  enjoy  the  spiritual  fellowships.  You  will  find  them  so  soul-satisfying,  that  the 
reproach  which  may  come  to  you  will  seem  no  more  to  you  than  it  seemed  to 
Christ,  who,  "  for  the  spiritual  joy,  that  was  set  before  Him,  endured  the  cross  " 
— the  highest  form  of  reproach — "  despising  the  shame."  Let  us  go  forth  out- 
side all  formal  religion,  as  Christ  went  forth  out  of  formal,  material,  continuing 
Jerusalem.  Let  us  go  forth  into  the  city  to  come — the  spiritual  city,  the  new 
Jerusalem,  the  Jerusalem  that  is  above — to  the  age  which  has  been  so  long 
anticipated,  the  spiritual  age.  Say  it  out  once  for  all,  "We've  no  abiding  city 
here  " — no  abiding  material  city,  no  formal  ceremonial  religion,  centred  in  a 
tabernacle  or  in  a  city  made  with  hands.  We  seek  the  city  to  come,  the  new 
Jerusalem  that  comes  down  out  of  heaven  from  God — the  city  that  is  always 
coming  to  souls  spiritually  quickened.  An  altar  do  we  want  ?  Christ  is  our 
altar.  A  priest  do  we  want  ?  Christ  is  our  priest.  A  sacrifice  do  we  want  ? 
Christ  is  our  sacrifice.  Do  you  ask,  How  shall  we  respond  to  the  spiritual  sphere 
into  which,  with  the  quickened  and  regenerate  life,  we  enter  ?  The  answer  is 
given  us  at  once,  ''  Through  Him  then  let  us  offer  up  a  sacrifice  of  praise  " — that 
is,  a  spiritual  sacrifice — "  to  God  continually,  that  is,  the  fruit  of  our  lips,  which 
make  confession  to  His  name."  Can  he  be.  misunderstood  in  pleading  so  earnestly 
that  they  would  enter  into  spiritual  reUgion  ?  Would  they  think  that  he  urged 
them  to  go  away  from  the  world,  and  form  communities  like  the  Essenes  of 
those  times,  and  the  hermits  and  monks  of  later  times  ?  He  would  correct  the 
mistake  at  once  by  showing  them — 

473 


CHAP.  XIII        BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS. 


Y.  The  satisfying  sphere  of  earthly  activities,  relations,  and  services  which 
spiritual  religion  provides. — "  But  to  do  good  and  to  communicate  forget  not : 
for  with  such  sacrifices  God  is  well  pleased."  Never  let  us  make  the  mistake  of 
thinking  that  spiritual  religion  is  unearthly.  Our  Divine  Lord  taught  us  better 
than  this  when,  interceding  with  God  for  His  disciples,  He  said,  "  I  pray  not  that 
Thou  shouldest  take  them  out  of  the  world,  but  that  Thou  shouldest  keep  them 
from  the  evil."  What  we  have  to  affirm  persistently  is,  that  man  is  not  man  until 
he  is  spiritual  man ;  and  when  he  is  spiritual  man,  he  is  the  most  truly  human 
being,  and  the  best  fitted  to  sustain  all  earthly  responsibilities.  "  I  knew  a  man 
in  Christ."  That  man  was  most  truly  and  most  worthily  a  "  man  in  the  world." 
The  spiritual  man  is  the  Ohristly  man,  who  is  ever  going  about  doing  good,  and 
prepared  to  do  it  up  to  measures  of  self-sacrifice.  "Bearing  His  reproach."  Can 
we  put  in  a  word  what  the  reproach  of  Christ  is, — what  it  was  in  those  early 
times ;  what  it  has  been  in  every  age  since  then ;  what  it  is,  in  appropriate 
forms,  for  us  to-day  ?  It  is  the  reproach  cast  on  the  spiritual  by  the  carnal.  It 
always  will  be  cast.  1.  It  is  the  reproach  always  cast  on  those  who  persist  in 
seeking  spiritual  truth.  (Heretics,  Mystics,  Quakers.)  2.  It  is  the  reproach 
always  cast  on  those  who  persist  in  doing  spiritual  service  to  humanity.  Jesus, 
the  miraculous  Healer  and  Provider,  everybody  wants.  Jesus,  the  Life  and  Light 
of  men,  only  the  few  *'  babe-souls  "  ever  seem  to  want.  3.  It  is  the  reproach 
always  cast  on  those  who  persist  that  life,  at  its  best,  is  the  culture  of  spiritual 
character.  They  follow  Christ,  who  was  in  Himself,  in  His  character,  the 
Saviour  of  the  world.  Beproach  of  the  spiritual !  We  do  but  bear  it  with 
Christ. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Yers.  10,  15.  Our  Altar — ^^  We  have 
an  altar."  There  is  a  certain  mihtant 
emphasis  on  the  words  in  the  original, 
as  if  they  were  an  assertion  of  some- 
thing that  had  been  denied.  Who  the 
deniers  are  is  plain  enough.  They 
were  the  adherents  of  Judaism,  who 
naturally  found  Christianity  a  strange 
contrast  to  their  worship,  of  which 
altar  and  sacrifice  were  prominent 
features.  Just  as  to  heathen  nations 
the  ritual  of  Judaism,  its  empty  shrine, 
and  Temple  without  a  God,  were  a 
puzzle  and  a  scoff,  so  to  heathen  and 
Jew  the  bare,  starved  worship  of  the 
Church,  without  temple,  priest,  sacri- 
fice, or  altar,  was  a  mystery  and  a 
puzzle.  The  writer  of  this  letter  in 
these  words,  then,  in  accordance  with 
the  central  theme  of  his  whole  epistle, 
insists  that  Christianity  has  more 
truly  than  heathenism  or  Judaism 
altar  and  sacrifice.  And  he  is  not 
content  with  alleging  its  possession  of 
the  reality  of  the  altar,  but  he  goes 
further,   and  insists  upon    the  superi- 

474 


ority  even  in  that  respect  of  the 
Christian  system.  He  points  to  the 
fact  that  the  great  sin-offering  of  the 
Jewish  ritual  was  not  partaken  of  by 
the  offerers,  but  consumed  by  fire  with- 
out the  camp,  and  he  implies,  in  the 
earlier  words  of  my  text,  that  the 
Christian  sacrifice  differs  from,  and  is 
superior  to,  the  Jewish  in  this  par- 
ticular— that  on  it  the  worshippers 
feasted  and  fed.  Then,  in  the  last 
words  of  my  text,  he  touches  upon 
another  point  of  superiority,  viz.  that 
all  Christian  men  are  priests  of  this 
altar,  and  have  to  offer  upon  it  sacri- 
fices of  thanksgiving.  And  so  he  lifts 
up  the  purely  spiritual  worship  of 
Christianity  as  not  only  possessed  of 
all  which  the  gorgeous  rituals  round 
about  it  presented,  but  as  being  high 
above  them  even  in  regard  to  that 
which  seemed  their  special  prerogative. 
I.  Our  Christian  altar. — Two  ex- 
planations are  open  to  us.  One  is  that 
the  cross  is  the  altar.  But  that  seems 
to    me  too  gross   and   material,  and 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS.       chap.  xiii. 


savouring   too  much  of  the  very  error  the  whole  of  the  rest  of  the  sacrifice 
which  this  whole  epistle  is  written  to  consumed  in  a  waste  spot  without  the 
destroy,    viz.   that   the  material  is  of  camp.      And    this  contrast  is  in   the 
moment,     as    measured    against    the  writer's  mind.      We   have  a  Sacrifice 
spiritual.      The   other   explanation   is  on  which  we  feast.      That  is  to  say, 
much    to   be   preferred,    according   to  the   Christ   who   died   for  my  sins   is 
which,   if   the   altar   has   any   special  not  only  my  means  of   reconciliation 
significance,     it     means    the    Divine-  with  God,  but  His  sacrifice  and  death 
human  personality  of  Jesus  Christ,  on  are   the   sustenance    of    my   spiritual 
and  in  which   the  sacrifice  is  offered,  life.      We  live  upon  the  Chiist  that 
But  the   main  thing  to  be   laid  hold  died   for  us.      That   this  is   no   mere 
of   here   is,    as   I    take    it,    that   the  metaphor,  but  goes  penetratingly  and 
central  fact  of  Christianity  is  an  altar,  deep  down   to   the   very  basis  of   the 
on   which   lies  a  sacrifice.     If  we  are  spiritual  life,  is  attested  sufiiciently  by 
to  accept  the  significance  that  I  have  many  a   word  of   Scripture  on  which 
suggested  as   possible  for  the  emblem  I  cannot  now  dwell.     The  life  of  the 
of   my  text,  then  the  altar  expresses  Christian  is  the  indwelling  Christ.    For 
the  great   mystery  and   gospel  of  the  he  whose  heart  hath  not  received  that 
Incarnation,  and  the  sacrifice  expresses  Christ   within    him   is   dead  while  he 
the  great  mystery  and  gospel  of  the  lives,    and   has    no   possession   of  the 
passion    of    Christ's    life    and    death,  one  true  life  for  a  human  spirit,  viz. 
which  is  the  atonement  for  our  sins.  the  life  of  union  with  God.    Christ  in 
But  that    possibly   is   too  much  of  a  us   is  the   consequence   of    Christ   for 
refinement,   and   so   I   confine   myself  us  ;    and  that  Christianity  is  all  im- 
here  to  the  general  ideas  suggested —  perfect   which    does    not    grasp   with 
that   the    very    living    heart   of   the  equal   emphasis    the   thought    of    the 
gospel   is    an    altar    and    a    sacrifice.  sacrifice    on    the    cross    and    of    the 
That  idea  saturates  the  whole  New  Tes-  feast  on  the  Sacrifice. 
tament,  from  the  page  where  John  the  III.  Our  Christian  offerings  on  the 
forerunner's  proclamation  is,  "Behold  altar. — "By   Him,    therefore,    let    us 
the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  offer   the   sacrifice   of    praise    to   God 
the   sin   of    the   world,"    to   the    last  continually."      What  are  these  offer- 
triumphant     visions     in     which     the  ings  ?      Christ's    death    stands   alone, 
apocalyptic   seer   "  beheld  a  Lamb  as  incapable    of    repetition,    needing    no 
it   had   been   slain,"   the   eternal   Co-  repetition,  the  eternal,  sole,  "  sufficient 
regnant     of    the   universe,    and     the  obligation  and  satisfaction  for  the  sins 
Mediator    through    whom   the   whole  of   the  whole  world."      But  there  be 
surrounding  Church  for  ever  worships  other  kinds   of   sacrifice.      There   are 
the  Father".  sacrifices   of   thanksgiving   as  well  as 
II.  Our  feast  on    the    Sacrifice. —  of    propitiation.      And    we,    on    the 
From  this  altar,  says  the  writer,  the  footing  of  that  great  Sacrifice  to  which 
adherents  of  the  ancient  system  have  we    can   add   nothing,  and   on    which 
no   right    to   partake.      That   implies  alone   we    must  rest,   may  bring   the 
that  those  who  have  left  the  ancient  offerings     of     our     thankful     hearts, 
system  have  the  right  to  partake,  and  These  offerings  are  of  a  twofold  sort, 
do  partake.     Now  the  wiiter  is  draw-  says  the  writer.     There  are  words  of 
ing  a  contrast,  which  he  proceeds  to  praise ;  there  are  works  of  beneficence, 
elaborate,  between  the  great  sacrifice  The  service  of  man  is  sacrifice  to  God. 
on   the   Day  of   Atonement   and   the  That  is  a  deep  saying  and  reaches  far. 
sacrifice  of  Christ  on  the  cross.     The  Such  praise  and  such  beneficence  are 
former  was  not,  as  many  other  sacri-  only  possible  on  the  footing  of  Christ's 
fices  were,  partaken  of  by  priests  and  sacrifice,  for  only  on   that    footing  is 
worshippers,  but  simply  the  blood  was  our  praise  acceptable  ;  and  only  when 
brought  within  the  Holy  Place,  and  moved  by  that  infinite  mercy  and  love 

.      ,  475 


CHAP.  XIII.       EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   HEBREWS. 


shall  we  yield  ourselves  thank-offerings 
to  God.  And  thus,  brethren,  the 
whole  extent  of  the  Christian  life,  in 
its  inmost  springs,  and  in  its  outward 
manifestations,  is  covered  by  these  two 
thoughts — the  feast  on  the  Saci'ifice 
once  offered,  and  the  sacrifices  which 
we  in  our  turn  offer  on  the  altar. 
There  is  one  Christ  that  can  thus 
hallow  and  make  acceptable  our  living 
and  our  dying,  and  that  is  the  Christ 
that  has  died  for  us,  and  lives  that 
in  Him  we  may  be  priests  to  God. 
There  is  only  one  Christianity  that 
will  do  for  us  what  we  all  need,  and 
that  is  the  Christianity  whose  centre 
is  an  altar  on  which  the  Son  of  God, 
our  Passover,  is  slain  for  us. — A.  Mac- 
laren,  D.D. 

Ver.  14.  JVo  Continuing  City. — The 
truth  presented  in  tho  text  is  one  to 
which  we  at  once  give  our  consent, 
taught  by  many  a  sad  experience. 

I.  The  uncertainty  of  all  earthly 
things. — Most  persons  experience  a 
feeling  of  melancholy  when  the  prin- 
ciple of  tho  text  is  forced  on  their 
attention.  There  are  times  when,  amid 
the  changing  scenes  of  earth,  we  cast 
about  for  something  solid  and  endur- 
ing ;  but  the  more  we  search  the  more 
deeply  we  become  convinced  of  the 
uncertainty  of  all  human  relationships. 
In  vain  we  seek  for  something  that 
knows  no  change,  and  will  abide. 
The  earth  itself  teaches  its  inhabitants 
this  unsatisfying  truth.  As  it  gradu- 
ally took  form,  passing  through  its 
various  eras,  change,  unceasing  change, 
was  its  abiding  characteristic.  In  all 
its  history ;  in  its  seasons,  and  soil,  and 
scenery,  and  climate  ;  and  in  the  story 
of  man  upon  it,  is  the  same  constant 
change.  A  mother  fondles  you  as  an 
infant ;  then  through  a  long  season  of 
anxiety  and  care  she  watches  from 
childhood  into  youth,  and  from  youth 
to  manhood  ;  and  by-and-by,  in  turn, 
you  watch  her  gliding  down  the  slope 
of  life,  and  presently  follow  in  her 
steps.  A  few  years  pass,  and  it  be- 
comes evident  that  this  very  body  of 
ours  has  been  changing,  and  in  man- 

476 


hood  every  element  of  the  bodily 
constitution  has  been  renewed.  The 
same  change  marks  the  advance  of  the 
soul  from  the  first  dawn  of  intelligence 
to  the  full  development  of  mental 
vigour.  The  mind  never  can  stay  long 
unchanged,  either  in  the  condition  of 
its  mental  powers  or  its  spiritual 
faculties.  The  history  of  men  and 
the  history  of  nations  repeats  for  us 
the  same  fact.  Simple  and  natural 
was  the  mode  of  life  pursued  by  the 
patriarchs  of  old.  The  grass  sprang 
up  fresh  around  them,  and  they  fed 
their  flocks.  Then  pastures  were 
bared  and  the  wells  dried  up,  and 
they  struck  their  tents  and  wandered 
forth.  They  had  no  "  continuing  city.'* 
When  the  nomadic  life  was  over,  they 
built  settled  habitations,  and  raised 
their  families,  only  to  see  them 
scattered  far  and  wide  over  the  earth. 
Man  lays  the  foundations  of  empires ; 
slowly  and  through  many  conflicts 
the  kingdom  rises  toward  perfection 
in  constitution  and  order  and  developed 
civilisation,  at  last  to  find  the  fires  of 
discontent  imperilling  it,  and  leaving 
it  a  prey  to  some  strong  and  aggressive 
neighbour.  For  even  the  empire  has 
"  no  continuing  city."  The  language 
of  a  people  is  always  changing  forms 
and  meanings.  The  wants  of  a  nation 
may  keep  the  same,  but  the  modes 
of  supplying  them  are  ever  changing. 
The  earth  must  be  tilled  and  her  fruits 
gathered  in  ;  the  ocean  must  be  swept 
of  her  treasures,  and  land  knit  to  land 
across  her  ;  but  the  agencies  for  effect- 
ing these  ends  are  ever  varying.  The 
vesture  that  adorns  the  human  figure 
was  once  slowly  produced  by  the 
human  hand,  and  now  it  is  rushed 
into  existence  on  the  wings  of  steam. 
The  journey,  once  accomplished  with 
difficulty  and  exertion,  is  now  the 
simple  act  of  rest.  The  message  once 
communicated  at  the  quickest  by  swift 
runners  now  flashes  from  mind  to 
mind  as  does  the  lightning.  Here  we 
have  "  no  continuing  city  " ;  and  when 
we  have  passed  away,  the  marvellous 
discoveries  of  our  age  will  excite  the 
smile  of  new  generations  that  shall 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.       chap.  xiii. 


have   tamed   yet    new    and    mightier  thought   of   home,    and   onward,    still 

nature-forces     to    do     their    bidding,  onward,  he   must  go.     What   is  that 

There  is,  perhaps,  no  truth  with  which  city  which   we  seek  ?     Its   walls   rise 

we  are  more  familiar.     All  around  us  high ;    its   mansions   are    secure ;    no 

everything   is  speaking  of   decay  and  aching  heart  dwells  there ;  no  tearful 

change  ;  the  story  is  written  on    the  eye,  no  bent  and   drooping  form,  no 

wasting  rock  and  crumbling  peak,  on  withered  or  suffering  frame,  is  seeking 

the  old  tower  and  the  ivied  wall.     The  it.     "  There  shall  be  no  more  death, 

flowing  river  and  the  gurgling  stream,  neither    sorrow    nor   crying,    for    the 

the  tints  of   autumn,  and  the  falling  former  things  have  passed  away."     It 

leaves,  all  tell  it  out,  with  no  uncertain  is    that    spiritual    and    eternal    city, 

sound.  "  whose   builder  and   maker  is   God." 

II.  The  permanence  of  all  Divine  We  are  pilgrims  and  strangers  here, 

and   heavenly   things. — The   pre^dous  as  indeed  all  our  fathers  were.     But 

verses  give  admonitions  concerning  a  we  do  not  unduly   heed  the   changes 

true,  spiritual  life,  and  du-ect  us  from  of  earth,  or  unrestrainedly  weep  over 

the  change,  dissatisfaction,  and  sorrow  its  uncertainties.      We  are  travelHng 

of  our  earthly  life  to  Him  who  is  "  the  through ;    what   matters  a  little  dis- 

same   yesterday,  and  to-day,  and   for  comfort  on  the  way  !     We  are  going 

ever."     By  the   exercise   of   Christian  home — home  to  God.     He  is  our  "  city 

love,  by  charity  and  a  heart  open  to  yet    to    come."      And    He    changeth 

the  sufferings  of  those  around  us,  by  never. — A.  Thomson,  B.A. 
a   happy   contentment    and   a   simple 

trust  in  God,  and  above  all  by  having  Remindings   of   our    Mortality. — If 

our  heart  ever  reposing  on  Christ  in  any   one   has   visited    Rome,    he   will 

every  circumstance  of  joy  or  sorrow,  remember — for    none   who   have   tra- 

we  are  taught  to  live  in  this  world  as  veiled  thither  can  forget  the  scene — the 

though  we  were  not  of  it.     If  we  are  long  street  of  tombs  which  forms  one 

cherishing  this  life,  our  hearts  will  be  of  the  approaches  to  the  Eternal  City, 

gradually  lifted  up  above  this  earth.  For  miles  on  the  road  these  monuments 

and   we   shall   be   able   so   to  fix  our  erected   over    the   departed   stand   on 

affections   on   things    here   as   not   to  either  side   of  the  way,  at  brief  but 

rely  on  them  for  our  happiness.     Even  uncertain  intervals,  until  the  traveller 

before  we  have  left  our  earthly  abode  reaches  the  gate.     Exactly  thus  it  is 

the  foundations  of  our  future  habita-  with  us  on  our  pilgrimage  to  that  city 

tion  may  be  laid.     Our  lives  should  be  which  hath  foundations,  whose  builder 

pilgrimages.     Footsore  and  weary  the  and  maker  is  God ;  on  every  hand  we 

traveller  plods  homeward ;    the   clear  are  reminded  of  our  mortality,  until 

sky,  the  rich  sunset,  the  fruits  by  the  we   in  our  turn  fall  by  the  wayside, 

wayside,  the  cool  leafy  shades,  tempt  and  swell  the  number  of  the  dead. — • 

him  to  stay,  but  his  soul  is  full  of  the  Archbishop  Trench. 


MAIN  HOMILETIGS    OF    THE    PARAGRAPH.— Verses  18—23. 

Requests  for  Prayer. — "  Pray  for  us  "  is  the  frequent  and  natural  request  in 
Christian  correspondence.  See  Rom.  xv.  30;  Eph.  vi.  18;  Col.  iv.  3  ;  1  Thess. 
V.  25;  2  Thess.  iii.  1.  This  request  for  the  people's  prayers  is  characteris- 
tically Pauline,  and  must  be  taken  into  due  account  in  any  discussion  of  the 
authorship  of  the  epistle.  The  desire  to  stand  well  with  his  converts,  and 
delight  in  their  approbation,  affection,  and  trust,  were  marked  features  in 
St.  Paul's  character. 

I.  The  interest  of  Christian  teachers  in  their  people's  prayers. — An  interest 
felt  and  sustained  partly — 1.  For  the  people's  sake,  because  nothing  opens  the 

ill 


CHAP.  xiiT.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS, 


heart  to  the  teacher's  influence,  and  keeps  it  sensitive  and  receptive  to  gracious 
influences,  as  prayer  does.  And  it  should  be  both  (1)  private  and  personal,  and 
(2)  collective,  united,  and  public.  The  proper  bond  between  ministers  and 
people  is  only  maintained  by  mutual  prayer  on  each  other's  behalf.  And 
partly — 2.  For  the  teacher's  own  sake.  Because  he  needs  the  kind  of  inspiration 
to  do  the  highest  and  holiest  work  which  only  comes  to  a  man  when  he  knows 
that  others  are  praying  for  him.  There  is  a  tone  on  Christian  ministry  which 
can  only  come  as  the  response  to  intercessory  prayer. 

II.  The  sense  of  integrity  may  make  a  claim  for  prayer. — "We  have  a 
good  conscience."  Whoever  the  writer  was,  one  thing  is  evident — he  was  mis- 
understood and  misrepresented  and  mistrusted,  just  as  we  know  St.  Paul  was, 
by  the  Jewish,  and  even  to  some  extent  by  the  Jewish  Christian,  party.  Some 
separation  from  him  had  been  caused.  This  letter  was  in  some  sense  written 
to  remove  wrong  impressions,  and  make  the  standpoint  of  his  teaching  quite 
clear.  It  was  fitting  that  he  should  assure  them  of  his  full  loyalty  to  Christ 
and  to  them,  of  his  genuineness,  simplicity,  and  integrity.  He  meant  nothing 
but  their  true  spiritual  good,  and  therefore  he  might  honestly  ask  their  prayers. 
Often  we  may  be  puzzled  and  disturbed  by  the  teachings  of  the  Christian 
teacher,  but  we  can  keep  relations  so  long  as  we  are  fully  confident  of  his 
integrity.     What  he  is  may  keep  us  from  offence  at  what  he  says. 

III.  The  prayers  of  God's  people  may  influence  God's  providence  (ver.  19). 
— That  has  been  the  conviction  of  God-fearing  men  in  all  the  ages.  It  is  the 
absolute  conviction  of  loyal  and  loving  souls  to-day.  It  never  strikes  them  as 
for  one  moment  unreasonable  that  God,  who  ever  acts  upon  wise  considei-ations, 
takes  into  account  all  facts,  and  forms  good  judgments,  should  let  His  people's 
prayers  influence  His  decisions  and  His  arrangements.  To  think  prayer  could 
not  affect  God's  plans  would  be  to  assume  that  He  could  be  apprehended 
through  no  rational  or  moral  being  that  we  ever  heard  of ;  it  would  be  to  refuse 
to  recognise  any  reality  in  His  Divine  Fatherhood.  A  God  who  hears  prayer, 
but  takes  no  heed  of  it,  and  responds  in  no  way  to  it,  is  inconceivable. 

IV.  The  highest  plea  for  prayer  lies  in  the  prayerfulness  of  him  who  makes 
the  plea. — Vers.  20,  21,  declare  the  prayerfulness  of  this  writer,  and  indicate 
what  he  asks  on  the  people's  behalf.  It  is  summed  up  in  the  word  "  perfect." 
He  wants  advance,  growth,  development,  in  the  Christian  life;  for  that  he 
works,  for  that  he  prays.  He  can  say.  Pray  for  me,  for  I  am  always  praying 
for  you. 

V.  The  prayer  of  him  who  asks  for  prayer  may  be  a  model  for  those  whom 
he  asks  to  pray  for  him. — The  tone  and  substance  of  the  prayer  given  in 
vers.  20,  21,  may  be  taken  as  a  model  of  prayer.  Impress  that  the  act  of 
prayer  tends  to  put  men  in  right  relations  with  responsibility  and  with  privi- 
lege. Prayer  strengthens  to  bear  responsibility  and  sanctifies  the  enjoyment 
of  privilege. 

SUGGESTIVE    NOTES   AND    SERMON   SKETCHES. 

Ver.  18.  Conscience. — Now,  as  con-  against  a  man,  and  he  stands  self- 
science  is  nothing  else  but  the  know-  accused,  that  he  must  necessarily  be 
ledge  which  the  mind  has  within  itself,  a  guilty  man.  And,  on  the  contrary, 
and  the  judgment,  either  of  approba-  when  the  report  is  favourable  on  his 
tion  or  censure,  which  it  unavoidably  side,  and  his  heart  condemns  him  not, 
makes  upon  the  successive  actions  of  that  it  is  not  a  matter  of  trust,  as 
our  Hves,  'tis  plain,  you  will  say,  from  the  apostle  intimates,  but  a  matter 
the  very  terms  of  the  proposition,  of  certainty  and  fact,  that  the  con- 
whenever  this  inward  testimony  goes  science   is  good,   and    that    the    man 

473 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS.       chap.  xiii. 


must   be  good   also.      At    first    sight 
this  may  seem  to  be  a  true  state  of 
the  case;    and  I   make  no  doubt  but 
the  knowledge  of  right  and  wrong  is 
so  truly  impressed  upon  the  mind   of 
man   tliat,    did   no    such    thing    ever 
happen  as  that   the   conscience   of    a 
man,  by  long  habits  of  sin,  might  (as 
the  Scripture  assures   us  it  may)  in- 
sensibly become  hard,  and,    like  some 
tender   parts   of    his   body,    by   much 
stress  and  continual  hard  usage,   lose 
by  degrees   that   nice  sense  and  per- 
ception with  which  God   and   nature 
endowed  it — did  this  never  happen — 
or  was  it  certain  that  self-love  could 
never  hang   the   least    bias    upon  the 
judgment — or  that  the  little  interests 
below  could  rise  up  and   perplex  the 
faculties   of    our   upper    regions,   and 
encompass     them    about    with    clouds 
and   thick   darkness — could    no    such 
thing   as   favour   and    affection  enter 
this   sacred   court — did     Wit    disdain 
to  take  a  bribe  in  it,  or  was  ashamed 
to  show  its  face  as   an   advocate   for 
an      unwarrantable     enjoyment  —  or, 
lastly,  were  we  assured  that  Interest 
stood  always   unconcerned   whilst  the 
cause  was  hearing,  and  that  Passion 
never  got  into  the  judgment-seat,  and 
pronounced  sentence  in   the    stead  of 
Reason,   which  is  supposed  always  to 
preside  and  determine  upon  the  case — 
was  this  truly  so,  no  doubt,  then,  the 
religious   and   moral   state  of  a  man 
would    be    exactly   what    he    himself 
esteemed    it,  and  the   guilt    or    inno- 
cence of  a  man's  life  could  be  known, 
in  general,  by  no  better  measure  than 
the  degrees  of  his  own  approbation  or 
censure. — Laurence  Sterne. 

Vers.  20,  21.  The  Blood  of  the  Ever- 
lasting Covenant.  —  This  everlasting 
covenant  is  the  covenant  of  grace,  or 
the  gospel,  made  with  Christ,  as  the 
Head  and  Representative  of  all  His 
believing  people.  It  is  called  *' ever- 
lasting" in  contradistinction  to  some 
transient  outward  forms  of  it  that 
had  already  vanished,  or  were  vanish- 
ing away.  God  had  made  legal,  cere- 
monial, national  covenants,  which  were 


temporary — which  had  not  the  elements 
of  permanency.  But  this  covenant 
touches,  embraces  everything,  reaches 
up  to  God's  highest  attributes,  and 
down  to  man's  deepest  needs — over 
all  the  breadth  of  law,  and  along  all 
the  line  of  existence.  We  do  not  rest 
on  the  mere  word  "  everlasting,"  which 
sometimes  in  the  Scriptures  has  evi- 
dently a  limited  signification.  No 
great  doctrine  or  belief  should  rest 
on  a  mere  term,  unless  the  thing  is 
taught  clearly,  by  argument  or  pre- 
cept or  implication.  But  in  this  case 
we  have  the  idea  all  through  the 
Scriptures  of  absolute  and  vmlimited 
duration.  The  "  blood  of  the  ever- 
lasting covenant."  That  is  the  virtue 
of  the  death  of  Christ.  It  is  that 
grand  act  of  atonement  and  self-sacri- 
fice by  which  He  bore  the  penalty  of 
sin  for  us,  and  secured  the  gospel  as 
God's  method  in  this  woild  for  ever. 

I.  God  is  the  God  of  peace. — The 
God  who  makes  peace  where  it  has 
been  broken,  and  gives  it  where  it 
is  lost — the  God  who  makes  peace 
between  heaven  and  earth,  between 
law  and  conscience,  between  Himself 
and  sinful  men. 

II.  "  He  brought  again  from  the 
dead  our  Lord  Jesus." — He  wrought 
that  mightiest  work  that  has  ever 
been  wrought  in  this  world — the  resur- 
rection of  Christ.  Again,  "  through 
the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant." 
The  death  is  the  germinating  spring 
of  the  after-life — the  humiliation  is 
antecedent  to  and  causal  of  the  exalta- 
tion. 

III.  It  is  through  the  same  act  of 
self-sacrifice  in  death  that  He  becomes 
"  the  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep." 
''  The  good  Shepherd  giveth  His  life 
for  the  sheep."  That  was  the  mark 
and  criterion  which  He  Himself  gave 
by  which  men  might  know  Him,  and 
until  this  life  was  given  the  world 
could  not  have  assurance  that  the 
good  Shepherd  has  come.  Now  we 
come  to  the  human  side  of  the  passage, 
and  we  have  this  blood  of  the  covenant 
full  of  efiiciencies  on  this  side  also. 
1.  The  term  "perfect";  giving  us  at 

479 


CHAP.  XIII.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    HEBREWS. 


once  this  high  idea,  the  idea  of  per-  will  of  God ;  the  image  of  the  heavenly 

fection  as  a  thing  attainable  now,  by  beginning  to  shine,  the  likeness  of  the 

means  of  the  blood  and  death  of  the  Resurrection  dawning  in  the  risen  soul. 
Son   of   God.     This  perfection   is   not  Then  (1)  let  us  come  to  this  blood 

merely  a  thing  ideal  and  distant,  not  of  the  covenant,    or   to   the  death  or 

only  a  thing  to  be  hoped  for  beyond  to  the  cross  of  Christ,  for  cleansing  ; 

earth  and  time,  in  heaven  and  glory.  (2)    for     motive ;     (3)    for    speech.  — 

It   is   a  thing  to  be  striven  for  and  A.  Raleigh,  D.D. 
realised  in  measures  in  daily  hfe  and 

service— "  perfect  in  every  good  work.''  Yer.  21.  The  Believer  God's  Agent. — 

Nothing     could     be    more     practical,  We  often   speak   of  ourselves  as  only 

nothing  further  removed  from  a  barren  *'  instruments  in    God's  hands."     It  is 

idealism  and  a  visionary  spirit.     "In  our  privilege  to  think  of  ourselves,  if 

every  good  work,"  in  everything  that  we  are  truly  His  servants,  as  agents. 

benefits    man,    adorns    the   Christian  An  instrument  is  a    dumb,  senseless, 

profession,  glorifies  God  in  the  fulfil-  lifeless   thing,    which    has   no    active, 

ment  of  His  will.  intelligent   power  even    to   co-operate 

IV.  In  this  illustration  of  the  power  with  him  who   handles    and   uses  it ; 

of   the  cross  we   have  the  inworking  but  an  agent  (ago)  is  one  who   acts ; 

of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  heart  of  in   behalf   of,    and   under   control   of, 

the  man  who  is  thus  seeking  perfec-  another,   and  yet   acting  intelligently 

tion — "  working    in    you    that   which  and  individually,  as  Aaron  spoke  under 

is   well-pleasing  in   His  sight."     This  Moses'  dictation.       Even  the   ox   and 

secures   simplicity   and    spirituality —  ass  yield  a  voluntary,  intelligent  obe- 

God    working   within    by   the    Spirit,  dience,  and  are  far  above  the   plough 

Then    all    is    right  and    good.      The  they  drag,  or  the  goad  by  which  they 

water    is   cleansed    at    the   fountain,  are  urged  on.     We  are  God's  agents, 

thought  is  touched  as  it  springs,  feeling  and  He  worketh  not  only  by  us,  but 

purified  as  it  begins  to  flow,  affection  in  us,  both  to  will  and  to  work.     (See 

lifted  to  its  object,  will   bent   to  the  Greek  of  Phil.  ii.  13.) 


460 


THE     GENERAL    EPISTLE   OF 

JAMES. 


INTEODUCTION. 

This  is  known  as  one  of  the  general  or  catholic  epistles.  There  are  seven  of 
them.  They  appear  to  be  so  called  because  not  addressed  to  particular  Churches. 
But  Eusebius  seems  to  indicate  by  the  term  simply  that  they  were  in  general 
use.  The  difficulty  of  identifying  this  James  is  an  interesting  subject  of  study, 
but  is  not  suitable  for  pulpit-treatment.  All  Bible  commentaries  and  intro- 
ductions deal  with  it.  It  need  only  be  said  that  James  the  Martyr  is  hardly  in 
the  field  of  possibility.  James  the  Less,  the  son  of  Alphseus,  has  good  claims, 
but  they  scarcely  stand  severe  criticism.  Modern  opinion  is  distinctly  tending 
in  favour  of  an  identification  with  *' James  the  Lord's  brother"  (Gal.  i.  19),  who 
was  not  in  the  apostolic  band.  It  is  thought  that  the  special  appearance  of  the 
risen  Christ  to  him  (1  Cor.  xv.  7)  secured  his  personal  discipleship,  and  that  his 
strong  character  soon  brought  to  him  confidence  and  office,  the  apostles  putting 
him  in  charge  of  the  Church  at  Jerusalem.  "  For  this  position  he  was  recom- 
mended by  his  relation  to  the  Lord,  and  by  his  character  and  principles.  He 
conformed  to  the  law,  sharing  no  doubt  the  feeling  of  the  other  members  of  that 
Church,  that  the  ordinances  of  the  old  dispensation  had  not  been  done  away 
for  them,  but  were  filled  out  with  new  life  and  meaning  in  Christ." 

No  doubt  the  letter  was  written  from  Jerusalem,  and  there  is  much  to  favour 
the  view  that  it  was  the  first  Christian  epistle.  If  it  was  written  before 
St.  Paul's  epistles,  the  notion  of  antagonism  between  St.  James  and  St.  Paul  falls 
at  once  to  the  ground.  St.  James  only  addresses  those  who  were  Jews  by  birth  ; 
and  the  epistle  cannot  be  rightly  understood  unless  its  precise  adaptation  to 
the  ideas  and  feelings  of  the  Jews,  under  the  particular  circumstances  of  that 
time,  is  fully  recognised. 

There  is  no  reference  whatever  to  the  Gentiles  in  the  epistle.  The  tone  is 
practical,  almost  stern.  There  is  little  or  nothing  in  it  that  we  can  recognise 
as  doctrine.  There  are  allusions  to  our  Lord's  person — His  example,  authority, 
glory,  power,  and  coming  to  judgment.     And  the  word  of  truth  is  spoken  of  as 

II  481 


INTRODUCTION.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 

the  instrument  of  the  new  birth.  The  rule  of  Hfe  is  the  law ;  but  in  the  faith 
of  Christ  the  man  gains  a  new  power  to  keep  the  law. 

The  language  is  a  very  pure  specimen  of  Hellenistic  Greek.  The  contents  are 
not  laid  out  on  any  evident  plan.  St.  James  writes  freely  out  of  the  fulness 
of  his  heart,  touching  subjects  as  they  are  freshly  suggested  to  his  mind,  and 
returning  upon  them  when  some  new  thought  strikes  him.  In  common  with 
the  apostles,  St.  James  had  the  expectation  of  the  immediate  return  to  earth  of 
his  Divine  Lord.  He  seeks,  by  practical  counsels  and  urgent  persuasions,  to 
help  the  Judseo  Christians  to  see  the  frailties,  evils,  and  temptations  that  were 
imperilling  their  Christian  profession,  and  presses  again  and  again  upon  them 
that  faith  as  a  sentiment  is  of  no  real  value.  The  faith  that  saves  is  that  faith 
which  is  a  power  unto  righteousness,  and  finds  expression  in  multiplied  forms  of 
service  and  charity. 

"  The  first  section  treats  of  sincerity  and  patience  under  afflictions  (chap.  i. 
1-15).  The  second  declaims  against  hypocrisy  and  self-deceit  (chap.  i.  16-27). 
The  third  against  adulation  of  the  rich  and  contempt  of  the  poor,  against  false 
charity  and  spurious  faith  (chap.  ii.  1-26).  The  next  treats  of  the  duty  of 
ruling  the  tongue  and  cultivating  peace  (chap.  iii.).  To  this  succeed  warnings 
against  strife  and  evil-speaking ;  against  the  corruption  of  the  world,  pride, 
luxury,  oppression ;  against  the  attempt  to  serve  both  God  and  mammon 
(chap.  iv.).  Then  follow  warnings  against  covetousness  (chap.  v.  1-11)  ;  profane 
and  rash  oaths  (ver.  12);  exhortations  to  prayer,  especially  in  sickness  (vers. 
13-18)  ;  and  a  declaration  of  the  blessedness  of  converting  a  sinner  from  the 
error  of  his  ways  (vers.  19,  20)." 

The  dominant  thought  toning  the  epistle  is  the  masterfulness  and  quarrel- 
someness of  the  Hebrew  Christian  communities.  They  were  always  wrangling. 
St.  James  writes  in  the  hope  of  correcting  this  ew7,  and  of  checking  the  various 
evils  which  naturally  followed  in  its  train. 

James,  the  Apostle  of  the  Christian  Israelitish  Church. 

The  place  which  James  the  brother  of  the  Lord  occupies  in  the  apostolic 
Church  is  as  peculiar  as  it  is  important.  The  Scriptures  contribute  very  little 
to  the  biography  of  James,  but  what  they  do  contain  is  of  the  utmost  importance 
to  the  comprehension  of  his  person  and  calling.  He  was,  in  a  literal  sense,  the 
"  brother  of  the  Lord."  There  is  no  ground  at  all  for  identifying  him  with 
James  the  son  of  Alphseus,  one  of  the  twelve  apostles.  His  early  familiarity 
with  Jesus  was,  for  him  and  for  his  brothers,  a  stumbling-block  in  the  way  of 
believing  in  Him,  which  others  did  not  experience  who  only  saw  Jesus  in  His 
public  capacity,  as  a  prophet  mighty  in  words  and  works.  Take  away  the  lowly 
form  in  which  the  glory  of  the  Christ  is  concealed,  and  there  is  removed  from 
the  face  of  James  the  veil  which  prevented  him  from  recognising  in  his  brother 
Jesus  the  Christ  for  whom  he  longed.  This  the  Lord  knew,  and  as  soon  as  He 
had  risen  in  His  power  and  glory  He  sought  out  His  erring  brother,  and 
revealed  Himself  to  him  as  the  Christ  of  glory.  James  saw  and  believed. 
482 


ROM  I  LET IC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES,    introduction. 


He  attached  himself  immediately  to  the  circle  of  the  apostles,  and  after  the 
twelve  had  left  Jerusalem  he  took  charge  of  the  mother-congregation  there. 

To  understand  his  office  in  the  Church  at  Jerusalem,  it  is  necessary  to  inquire 
what  sort  of  relation  there  was  between  James  and  the  people  of  Israel.  In 
his  view  the  congregations  of  the  faithful  Israelites  formed  one  whole  with  the 
rest  of  Israel,  and  that  because  every  Israelite  was  destined  through  belief  in 
Christ  to  become  an  Israelite  indeed.  They  were  all  children  of  the  covenant 
and  of  the  prophets,  to  whom  all  the  promises — especially  the  promise  of  the 
Holy  Ghost — belonged.  It  was,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  those  who  believed 
in  Jesus  as  the  Christ  who  drew  closer  together,  and  distinguished  themselves 
from  their  countrymen  by  various  customs,  such  as  baptism  and  the  love-feast, 
which  was  brought  to  an  end  by  the  Lord's  Supper.  But  they  did  not  cease 
to  be  Israelites.  They  did  not  separate  themselves  from  the  rest  of  Israel. 
They  walked,  as  did  the  others,  according  to  the  law  of  Moses  ;  took  part 
in  Temple  services ;  allowed  their  children  to  be  circumcised  ;  prayed  at  the 
appointed  hours  of  the  day ;  and,  like  the  other  Israelites,  had  their  syna- 
gogues, which  seem  to  have  been  also  attended  by  their  countrymen.  James, 
as  the  head  of  the  Christian  Israelitish  community  at  Jerusalem,  knew  no 
contrast  between  the  Christian  community  in  Israel  and  the  Israelitish  people, 
except  that  in  this  community  Israel  had  reached  its  destiny,  had  become  truly 
Israel.  The  Christian  Israelitish  community  was  the  kernel  of  the  Israelitish 
people  ;  what  he  had  to  say  to  it  held  good  for  the  whole  race.  It  is  thus  that 
the  otherwise  inexplicable  fact  is  explained,  that  James  did  not  address  his 
epistle  exclusively  to  the  faithful  Israelites,  but  to  "  the  twelve  tribes  of  the 
dispersion,"  and  that  in  his  epistle  he  has  in  view  both  local  and  national 
conditions. 

The  relation  in  which  James  stood  to  Israel  necessarily  coincided  with  his 
duty  towards  the  law.  He  is  himself  conscious  of  no  other  contrast  between  his 
Christian  belief  and  the  Israelitish  law,  except  that  by  faith  in  Christ  the  law 
found  its  full  significance  for  the  first  time  in  his  inward  and  outward  life. 
Jesus  Christ  had  not  released  him  from  the  law  and  the  prophets.  What  before 
had  been  to  him  an  unreachable  ideal  was  through  faith  in  Jesus  Christ 
fulfilled  to  overflowing.  He  was  no  more  hampered  by  the  stern  demand  of  the 
law  ;  it  was  for  him  the  law  of  liberty.  Josephus  calls  James  "  the  Just,"  and 
ascribes  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  to  God's  vengeance  upon  his  martyrdom. 
The  exaggerated  reports  in  Eusebius,  borrowed  from  Hegesippus,  testify  to  the 
exactness  with  which  James  fulfilled  the  law,  and  to  the  high  esteem  in  which, 
on  that  account,  he  was  held  by  the  whole  people. 

The  question  naturally  arises,  If  this  was  the  attitude  of  James  toward  the 
law,  what  then  was  the  gospel  that  he  proclaimed  to  Israel  ?  James  had  no 
less  right  than  Paul  to  speak  of  his  gospel.  If  the  gospel  of  Paul  is  called  the 
"  gospel  of  grace,"  that  of  James  may  be  called  the  "  gospel  of  fulfilment."  James 
did  not  experience  Paul's  change  from  law  to  grace,  from  works  to  faith.  The 
only  contrast  which  he  came  to  know  through  faith  in  the  Christ  was  the 
contrast  between  promise  and  fulfilment,    between  beginning   and    completion. 

483 


INTRODUCTION.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 

James  may  be  named  the  last  prophet  of  Israel.  He  directed  his  epistle  to  the 
twelve  tribes  as  a  prophet  sent  to  them  by  Christ.  As  he  chastises  and  warns 
them,  and  threatens  them  with  the  approaching  judgment,  the  well-known  tone 
of  Israel's  prophets  is  re-echoed  in  his  words.  The  apostleship  of  James  forms 
the  counterpart  of  the  apostleship  of  Paul,  who  likewise  was  not  one  of  the 
twelve.  It  is  to  be  ascribed  not  less  to  James  than  to  Paul  that  the  efforts  of 
the  Jewish  fanatics  to  subject  the  Gentile  Christian  Church  to  the  law  of  Moses 
miscarried. 

The  whole  epistle  testifies  that  the  Christian  Israelitish  character  reached 
its  apostolic  completeness  in  James.  He  had  apparently,  as  a  son  of  Mary, 
as  a  branch  of  the  royal  stem,  an  excellent  natural  disposition.  There  is 
no  doubt  that  his  natural  gifts  contributed  to  his  rise  in  the  esteem  of  those 
even  who  did  not  believe  in  Jesus.  Unlike  Paul,  he  sustained  no  shocks  in  his 
spiritual  life.  His  inward  life  moved  with  a  quiet  and  firm  step.  He  was,  even 
before  he  found  the  Messiah  in  Jesus,  an  exemplary  Israelite.  Afterwards  he 
was,  in  his  measure,  like  Jesus,  a  living  copy  of  the  law,  which  is  righteous,  holy, 
and  good.  There  is  also  a  striking  resemblance  between  the  epistle  of  James, 
and  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  and  the  last  prophetic  words  of  Jesus.  James 
has  involuntarily  sketched  his  own  image  in  his  epistle,  as  of  a  man  whom  Cod  had 
raised  up  above  others  to  show  to  Israel  what  the  Israelite  becomes  who  enters 
into  complete  fellowship  with  the  glorified  Christ.  In  him  is  realised  the  ideal 
which  God  has  set  before  the  Israelite  :  he  is,  according  to  God's  will,  through  the 
word  of  truth,  reborn,  in  order  to  belong  to  the  firstfruits  of  God's  creatures. 
The  epistle  of  James,  as  well  by  its  style  as  by  its  contents,  bears  witness  to  the 
moral  elevation  and  the  spiritual  power  which  were  peculiar  to  him  in  a  pre- 
eminent degree  as  the  apostle  of  the  Christian  Israelitish  Church  (Prof.  N.  I. 
Hofmeyer). 

Wherever  Christianity  did  not  effect  a  complete  change  in  the  heart,  the  old 
Jewish  spirit  naturally  magnified  itself  in  the  professed  converts. 

The  Narrative  of  the  Death  of  James  given  by  Hegesippus,  and 

QUOTED   BY    EuSEBIUS. 

James  the  brother  of  the  Lord  receives  the  Church  from  the  apostles,  he 
who  was  called  the  Just  from  the  Lord's  time  even  to  our  own  ;  for  many  bore 
the  name  of  James.  This  man  was  holy  from  his  mother's  womb.  He  drank 
no  wine  nor  strong  drink,  nor  did  he  eat  anything  that  lives.  No  razor  came 
upon  his  head,  nor  did  he  anoint  himself  with  oil,  nor  use  the  bath.  He  only 
was  allowed  to  enter  into  the  Holy  Place,  for  he  wore  no  woollen,  but  linen 
garments  only.  And  he  was  wont  to  go  alone  into  the  sanctuary,  and  used  to 
be  found  prostrate  on  his  knees,  and  asking  forgiveness  of  the  people,  so  that 
his  knees  grew  hard  and  worn,  like  a  camel's,  because  he  was  ever  kneeling  and 
worshipping  God,  and  asking  forgiveness  of  the  people.  And  on  account  of  his 
exceeding  righteousness  he  was  called  the  Righteous  (or  the  Just),  and  Oblias, 
which  means  in  Greek  "  the  bulwark  of  the  people  "  and  "  righteousness,"  as  the 
484 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES,    introduction. 

prophets  show  of  him.     Some  then  of  the  seven  sects  of  the  people,  of  those 
whom  I  have  described  in   my  Memoirs,  were  wont  to  ask  him,  Who   is  the 
door  of  Jesus  ?     And  he  was  wont  to  say  that  this  was  the  Saviour.     And  of 
these  some  beHeved  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ.     But  the  sects  of  which  I  have 
spoken  did  not  beheve  either  in  the  Resurrection,  or  in  Him  who  cometh  to  give 
to  every  man  according  to  his  works.     As  many  then  as  beHeved   did  so   on 
account  of  James.     And  when  many  of  the  rulers  also  believed,  there  was  a  stir 
of  the  Jews,  and  scribes  and  Pharisees,  saying  that  the  whole  people  were  in 
danger  of  looking  for  Jesus  the  Christ.     They  came  together,  and  said  to  James  : 
"  We  entreat  thee  restrain  the  people,  for  they  have  gone  astray  to  Jesus,  as 
though  He  were  indeed  the  Christ.     We  beseech  thee  to  persuade  all  that  come 
to  the  Day  of  the  Passover  concerning  Jesus  ;  for  we  all  hearken  to  thee.     For 
all  of  us  bear  thee  witness,  and  all  the  people  also,  that  thou  art  righteous,  and 
art  no  respecter  of  persons.     Do  thou  therefore  persuade  the  multitude  not  to 
be  led  astray  concerning    Jesus ;  for  we  and  all  the  people  hearken   unto  thee. 
Stand  therefore  on  the  pinnacle  of  the  Temple,  that  thou  mayest  be  conspicuous 
aloft,  and  that  thy  words  may  easily  be  heard  by  all  the  people,  for  by  reason 
of  the  Passover  all  the  tribes  have  come  together,  and  with  them  the  Gentiles." 
So  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  before  mentioned  placed  James  on  t,he  pinnacle  of 
the  Temple,  and  they  cried  out  to  him,  and  said,  *'  0  thou  righteous  one,  to 
whom  we  are  all  bound  to  hearken,  since  the  people  are  all  gone  astray  after 
Jesus  that  was  crucified,  tell  us  what  is  the  door  of  Jesus."     And  he  answered 
with  a  loud  voice,  "Why  ask  ye  me  concerning  Jesus  the  Son  of  man  ?     He 
hath  sat  down  in  heaven  on  the  right  hand  of  the  great  Power,  and  is  about  to 
come  in  the  clouds  of  heaven."     And  when  many  were  fully  persuaded,    and 
were  glorifying  God  for  the  testimony  of  James,  and  saying,  "  Hosanna  to  the 
Son  of  David  !  "  then  again  the  same  scribes  and  Pharisees  said  one  to  another, 
"  We  did  ill  in  giving  scope  for  such  a  testimony  to  Jesus,  but  let  us  go  up  and 
cast  him  down,  that  they  may  fear  and  not  believe  him."     And  they  cried  out, 
saying,  "  Ho,  ho,  even  the  Righteous  is  gone  astray  !  "     And  they  fulfilled  the 
scripture  that  is  written  in  Isaiah,  "  Let  us  make  away  with  the  Righteous,  for  he 
is  displeasing  to  vis  ;  therefore  shall  they  eat  of  the  fruit  of  their  works."     And 
they   went  and  cast  the   righteous  one  down ;  and  they  said  one  to  another, 
"  Let  us  stone  James  the  Righteous."     And  they  began  to  stone  him  ;  for  when 
he  was  cast  down  he  did  not  die  at  once,  but  turned  and  fell  on  his  knees, 
saying,  "  O  Lord  God  our  Father,  forgive  them,  I  beseech  Thee,  for  they  know 
not  what  they  do."     And  while  they  were  thus  stoning  him,  one  of  the  priests 
of  the  sons  of  Rechab,  the  son  of  Rechabim,  of  whom  the  prophet  Jeremiah 
bears  record,  cried  out  and  said,  "  Cease  ye  ;  what  is  that  ye  are  doing  ?     The 
righteous  one  is  praying  for  you."     And  one  of  them,  who  was  a  fuller,  took 
the  club  wherewith  he  was  wont  to  beat  his  clothes,  and  smote  the  head  of  the 
righteous  one  with  it.     And  so  he  bore  his  witness.     And  they  buried  him  at 
the  place  beside  the  sanctuary,  and  his  tombstone  remaineth  by  the  sanctuary. 
He  was,  and  is,  a  true  witness,  both  to  Jews  and  Greeks,  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ. — After  Dean  Plumptre. 

485 


INTRODUCTION.     HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY :    JAM^S. 


Notes   on   Some   Difficult  Passages  in  the  Epistle. 

Chap.  i.  \0  :  And  the  rich,  in  that  he  is  made  low. — This  hiimiHation  is  not  that 
of  Christian  submission.  The  rich  unbeliever  is  meant.  The  passage  is  one  of 
severe  irony.  "  Let  the  brother  of  low  degree  glory  in  his  high  estate  ;  and  the 
rich  man — what  is  he  to  glory  in  ? — let  him  glory  in  the  only  thing  upon  which 
he  can  count  with  certainty,  viz.  his  being  brought  low ;  because  as  the  flower 
of  the  grass  he  shall  pass  away." 

Chap.  iv.  5,  6. — These  two  verses  are  very  difficult.  Three  questions  arise : 
(1)  Are  two  scriptures  quoted,  or  only  one?  (2)  Who  is  it  that  "longeth"  or 
*'  lusteth  "  ?  Is  it  God,  or  the  Holy  Spirit,  or  our  own  human  spii-it  ?  (3)  What 
is  it  that  is  longed  for  by  God  or  the  Spirit  ?  In  reply  to  ( 1 )  it  is  held  that  here 
is  a  condensation  of  several  utterances  in  the  Old  Testament.  In  respect  to  (2) 
it  is  maintained  that  the  good  sense  of  the  verb,  i.e.  *'  longeth,"  is  more  in 
harmony  with  New  Testament  usage.  The  most  satisfactory  rendering  then 
makes  the  Holy  Spirit  the  subject — "  Even  unto  jealousy  doth  the  Spirit  which 
He  made  to  dwell  in  us  yearn."  And  as  to  (3),  that  for  which  the  Spirit  yearns 
is  "  ourselves."  "  God  is  a  jealous  God,  and  the  Divine  love  is  a  jealous  love  ;  it 
brooks  no  rival.  And  when  His  Spirit  takes  up  its  abode  in  us,  it  cannot  rest 
until  it  possesses  us  wholly,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  alien  affections." 

Chap.  V.  14,  15  :  Anointing  him,  with  oil,  etc. — In  respect  to  this  debated 
passage,  the  writer  thinks  that  it  is  most  probable  that  the  purpose  intended 
for  the  oil  to  serve  was  either  to  be  the  channel  or  instrument  of  a  supernatural 
cure,  or  an  aid  to  the  sick  person's  faith.  And  the  reason  why  oil  was  selected 
was  that  it  was  believed  to  have  healing  properties.  It  is  obvious,  on  the  one 
hand,  that  James  does  not  recommend  this  oil  merely  as  medicine,  for  he  does 
not  say  that  the  oil  shall  cure,  nor  yet  that  the  oil  with  prayer  shall  do  so,  and, 
more  than  that,  the  anointing  is  to  be  done  by  the  elders,  which  would  not  be 
necessary  if  it  were  merely  medicinal.  "  On  the  other  hand,  it  seems  to  be  too 
much  to  say  that  the  anointing  had  nothing  to  do  with  bodily  healing  at  all, 
and  was  simply  a  means  of  grace  for  the  sick." 

Chap.  V.  19,  20  :  Shall  cover  a  multitude  of  sins. — Whose  sins  ?  Not  the  sins 
of  him  who  converts  the  erring  brother.  Against  this  are  two  reasons : 
(1)  Nowhere  else  in  Scripture  do  we  find  such  a  doctrine  as  that  a  man  may  cover 
his  own  sins  by  inducing  another  sinner  to  repent.  The  opposite  is  not 
obscurely  intimated,  e.g.  in  1  Cor.  ix.  27.  (2)  James  could  not  have  contem- 
plated the  possibility  of  a  Christian  undertaking  the  task  of  converting  others 
while  his  own  conscience  was  burdened  with  a  multitude  of  sins.  It  is  the  sins 
of  the  converted  sinner  that  are  covered.  The  phrase  "cover  sins"  reminds 
one  of  Ps.  xxxii.  1,  and  it  seems  to  have  been  common  among  the  Jews — From 
Dr.  A.  Plummer. 


486 


CHAPTER    I. 
COUNSELS  FOR  THE  TEMPTED  AND  TRIED. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES, 

Ver.  1.  Salutation.  James. — Greek'Id/cw/3os,  a  familiar  Jewish  name.  Two  so  named  were 
in  the  apostolic  company.  James  the  son  of  Zebedee,  and  James  the  son  of  Alphaeus. 
This  is  thought  to  be  a  third  James,  known  as  the  "  brother  of  the  Lord,"  and  identified  as 
James  the  Just,  who  in  ecclesiastical  history  is  stated  to  have  been  the  first  bishop  of  the 
Jewish  Christian  Church  at  Jerusalem.  Servant. — SoOXos.  Strictly,  "  bond-servant."  The 
term  is  similarly  used  at  the  beginning  of  their  letters  by  St.  Paul,  St.  Peter,  and  St.  Jude 
(Rom.  i.  1 ;  Tit.  i.  1 ;  2  Pet.  i.  1 ;  Jude  1).  And  of  the  Lord. — Some  would  render,  "  even 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ " ;  but  this  puts  the  Deity  of  Christ  into  a  more  dogmatic  form 
than  was  at  that  time  attained.  Twelve  tribes. — The  nation  was  still  conceived  and 
addressed  as  a  whole.  The  idea  of  the  "  lost  ten  tribes "  is  evidently  not  apostolic. 
Scattered  abroad. — iv  rg  diacrTropq. ;  "  in  the  dispersion."  Moved  by  commercial  instincts, 
the  Jews  had  found  entrance  into  every  part  of  the  then  civilised  world.  It  is  of  importance 
to  notice  that  James  addresses  only  Jewish  Christians,  and  Jews  who  were  not  Christians. 
He  takes  no  notice  whatever  of  Gentile  Christians.  This  suggests  an  early  date  for  James's 
epistle. 

Ver.  2.  Temptations. — As  so  often  in  the  New  Testament,_trials  which  take  the  form  of   i 
suffering,  and  serve  the  purposes  of  Divine  disciplineT"  "  -^ 

Ver.  3.  Trying. — Testing, proving.      "The  proof  to  which  your   faith  is  put  works  out       s. 
endurance."    Patiencei^^Tro/LioV^j' "; "  the  perseverance  which  does  not  falter  under  suffering.         | 
Christian  patience  is  much  more  than  passive  submission.  ^ 

Ver.  4.  Entire. — Lacking  no  part  essential  to  full  and  healthy  spiritual  life.  The  figure 
is  taken  from  the  animals,  some  of  whose  organs  may  be  undeveloped,  or  may  be  mutilated. 

Ver.  5.  Wisdom. — Here,  the  wisdom  of  the  book  of  Proverbs ;  practical  skill  in  the 
ordering  and  management  of  life  (Prov.  xix.  20).  Liberally. — With  single  heart,  frankly, 
freely  ;  without  searchingly  taking  account  of  our  dulness,  or  slowness,  or  limited  anxiety 
concerning  it.  God  wants  us  to  have  the  wisdom  more  than  we  ever  want  to  have  it. 
Upbraideth  not. — In  Ecclus.  xx.  15  the  "  gift  of  a  fool  "  is  thus  described :  "  He  giveth  little, 
and  upbraideth  much." 

Ver.  6.  Wavering. — Doubting  (see  Matt.  xxi.  21).  The  term  indicates  that  debating  with 
oneself  which  implies  doubt.  Wind  and  tossed. — Better,  "winds  and  blasts,"  the  latter 
term  suggesting  the  effect  of  sudden  squalls.  There  is  no  play  on  the  Greek  words,  as  in  the 
English  text — "  wavering,"  "  wave." 

Ver.  8.  Double-minded. — Connect  with  ver.  7,  "  being  a  double-minded  man."  Compare 
the  "  double  heart  "  (Heb.  "  a  heart  and  a  heart  ")  of  Ps.  xii.  2.  *'  A  man  unsteady  in  his 
opinions  is  inconstant  in  all  his  actions." 

Ver.  9.  He  is  exalted. — Or,  "  in  his  exaltation  " ;  "  in  his  high  estate."  Low  degree  does  not 
suggest  caste,  hut  j^overty  involving  humiliation. 

Ver.  10.  Made  low. — Or,  "in  his  humiliation."  These  experiences  being  especially  adapted 
to  each,  can  be  rejoiced  in  as  disciplinary. 

Ver.  11. — The  verbs  are  in  the  past  tense ;  therefore  translate,  "  The  sun  arose  with  the  burn- 
ing heat,  and  dried  up  the  grass ;  and  the  flower  thereof  fell  away,  and  the  grace  of  its  fashion 
perished  "  (Isa.  xl.  6-8). 

Ver.  12.  Is  tried, — Better,  "hath  been  approved."  56/ct/iOs  is  properly  spoken  of  money 
as  having  been  tried  and  refined.  Crown  of  life. — See  figure  in  Isa,  xxviii.  5  ;  and  compare 
2  Tim.  iv.  8  ;  1  Pet,  v.  4.     "  Crown  of  life  "  is  peculiar  to  St.  James.  ,,^^^ 

Ver.  13.  Tempted. — Here  meaning,  "enticed  to  evil."     Distinguish  between  trials  used  as^^ 
moral  discipline,  and  temptations  used  to  degrade  and  destroy  souls.     With  the  latter  the    / 
thought  of  God  must  never  be  associated  as  originator.     Confusion  arises  from  the  dual 
meaning  of  the  term  "  evil."    It  is  sometimes  "  sin  "  and  sometimes  "  calamity."     Cannot 

487 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES. 


be  tempted. — Better,  "  is  not  a  tempter  in  the  way  of  evil."  Tyndale^  '*  God  tempteth  not 
unto  evyll." 

Ver.  14.  Drawn  away. — This  is  a  better  form,  "  is  tempted  by  his  own  lust,  being  drawn 
away  by  it."  Lust,  or  unregulated  desire,  includes  passion  for  safety,  riches,  ease,  as  well 
as  sensual  pleasure.  Plum^tre  says,  "  Adversity  and  persecution  expose  men  to  the  solicita- 
tions of  their  lower  nature,  to  love  of  ease  and  safety,  no  less  than  luxury  and  prosperity. 
In  both  '  desire '  tempts  the  will  to  depart  from  what  it  knows  to  be  the  will  of  God." 

Ver.  15.  Bringeth  forth. — The  second  Greek  word  so  translated  differs  from  the  first,  and 
is  a  stronger  term.  It  suggests  the  production  of  a  monstrosity.  It  may  be  rendered 
"engendereth." 

Ver.  17.  Father  of  lights. — The  luminaries  of  heaven ;  as  symbols  of  all  kinds  of  lights, 
natural,  intellectual,  spiritual.  Shadow  of  turning. — Or  shadow  that  is  cast  by  turning. 
The  terms  "variableness"  and  "shadow  of  turning"  distinctly  refer  to  the  movements  of 
the  heavenly  bodies,  and  decide  tiie  idea  of  James  in  speaking  of  God  as  "  Father  of  lights." 

Ver.  18.  Begat. — More  lit.  "  brought  He  us  forth."  Word  of  truth.— Not  here  the  personal 
Logos,  but  the  revealed  word,  the  medium  of  the  Divine  sanctifying.  Firstfruits. —  See 
Lev.  xxiii.  10 ;  Deut.  xxvi.  2. 

Ver,  19.  Wrath. — 6py-))v\  an  abiding,  settled  habit  of  mind  with  the  purpose  of  revenge. 

Ver.  21.  Filthiness. — Not  limited  to  sensualities,  but  including  everything  that  defiles  the 
soul.  Superfluity  of  naughtiness. — "  Overflow  of  mental  wickedness,"  or  of  malice.  Or,  "  the 
remains  of  your  perversity."  See  1  Pet.  iii.  21.  Plumptre  renders,  "  excess  characterised 
by  malice."  "  The  Greek  word  had  come  to  be  associated  mainly  with  the  sins  that  have 
their  root  in  wrath  and  anger,  rather  than  with  those  that  originate  in  love  of  pleasure." 
Engrafted  word. — Implanted.  See  above  the  reference  to  the  "  word  of  truth  "  as  the 
instrument  by  which  the  new  and  better  life  was  engendered. 

Ver.  23.  Natural  face. — Lit.  "face  of  his  birth";  "the  face  he  has  by  corporeal  birth." 
76;/^(rea>s  is  used  in  distinction  from  the  notion  which  follows  of  spiritual  features.  The 
tenses  of  the  verbs  (aorist)  imply,  "  looks  at  himself  once  for  all  "  ;  "  has  taken  his  departure 
and  is  gone  " ;  "  forgets  and  thinks  of  it  no  more." 

Ver.  25.  Looketh.— 7rapa/ci/i/'as;  to  lean  aside,  to  stoop  to  look,  at  something  which 
attracts  attention ;  hence  to  look  particularly,  to  scrutinise  ;  implying  close  inquiry  after 
truth.  Perfect. — Because  regarded  as  the  consummation  of  Judaism  ;  the  law  of  Moses  was 
incomplete  in  respect  of  pardon  of  sin  and  holiness.  Law  of  liberty. — Its  characteristic  is 
its  freeing  men  from  the  bonds  which  prevent  their  being  righteous.  "  The  gospel  is  in  a 
proper  sense  the  law  of  liberty,  because  those  who  receive  it  render  a  free,  loving  obedience 
from  an  inward,  vital  principle."  Dean  Alford  says,  "  Not  in  contrast  with  a  former  law  of 
bondage,  but  as  viewed  on  the  side  of  its  being  the  law  of  the  new  life  and  birth,  with  all 
its  spontaneous  and  free  development  of  obedience." 

Ver.  26.  Seem  to  be. — Imagine  himself  to  be  religious ;  a  difficult  term,  because  its 
meanings  have  been  subject  to  change.  "  The  Greek  adjective  is  one  which  expresses  the 
outward,  ritual  side  of  religion,  answering  to  '  godliness '  as  the  inward."  Seem  to  be  a 
professor,  a  worshipper.  Bridleth  not. — Does  not  restrain,  and  wisely  rule  and  direct.  It  is 
singular  to  find  this  chosen  as  a  test  of  sincerity  in  religious  profession.  But  compare 
Matt.  xii.  87.  "  If  a  man  think  himself  a  true  worshipper  because  he  conforms  to  outward 
services,  while  he  lets  his  toogue  loose  in  untruth  or  unkindness,  or  other  unseemliness,  he 
deceives  himself  "  (Bishop  Moberly). 

Ver.  27.  Pure  religion. — Better,  "  Pure  worship  " ;  "  the  outward  aspect  of  the  devout 
life."  Undefiled. — Genuine,  sincere.  See  the  scrupulous  care  of  the  Pharisee  to  avoid 
anything  that  caused  ceremonial  defilement  (John  xviii.  28).  Visit. — The  Greek  word  implies 
more  than  "go  and  see";  it  means  "  look  after,"  "care  for."  Compare  the  teaching  of 
our  Lord  in  Matt.  xv.  20 ;  Mark  vii.  5-8. 


Synonyms  of  the  Woed  eprjcKos. 

deoae^-qs,  only  in  John  ix.  31 ;  necessarily  implies  piety  towards  gods,  or  the  God. 
evae^Tjs  may  mean  this,  but  may  also  mean  piety  in  the  fulfilment  of  human  relations ;  it 
implies  worship  or  worthsliip,  and  reverence  well  directed.  evKa^-q^,  passed  from  caution 
and  carefulness  in  human  things  to  the 'same  in  Divine  things.  Devout,  or  the  special 
Jewish  Old  Testament  phase  of  piety.  In  the  mingled  fear  and  love  which  constituted 
together  the  piety  of  man  toward  God,  the  Old  Testament  emphasises /(?<jr,  the  New  Testa- 
ment love.  evXa^Tjs  therefore  suits  the  Old  Testament  piety.  It  represents  the  scrupulous 
worshipper  making  conscience  of  omitting  anything.  In  dpiqaKos,  Lat.  religiosus,  we  have 
the  zealous  and  diligent  performer  of  the  Divine  offices  of  the  outward  service  of  God. 
6pr)(TK€la,  cultures  exterior,  predominantly  ceremonial,  external  service.  The  external  form 
or  body  of  which  evcri^eia  is  the  informing  soul. — After  Trench. 

488 


BOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:    JAMES.  cHai    i. 


MAIJ^  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verse  1. 

The  Gospel  according  to  James. — In  what  we  now  know  as  the  truths  of 
Christianity,  there  is  the  essential  and  invariable,  and  there  is  the  non-essential 
and  variable.  And  we  may  make  grave  mistake  by  unduly  contending  for  the 
merely  human  shaping  and  setting  of  truth  which,  not  being  essential  and 
invariable,  has  not  taken  precise  revelational  form.  An  essay  was  read  at  a 
ministers'  meeting  with  this  suggestive  title.  The  Minimum  of  the  Evangelical 
Faith.  The  writer  dealt  with  the  limit  of  faith  that  suffices  to  ensure  salvation. 
He  should  have  dealt  with  the  limits  of  the  evangelical  creed  behind  which  we 
must  entrench  ourselves,  as  Wellington  did  at  Torres  Vedras.  In  these  days, 
when  everything  is  searchingly  criticised,  we  are  in  danger  of  coming  to  feel 
that  everything  is  uncertain  ;  and  we  need  to  fix  for  ourselves  some  things  which 
are  unquestionable,  axiomatic,  beyond  criticism.  But  there  is  an  opposite  evil 
into  which  we  may  fall.  We  may  fit  the  evangelical  truth  into  a  creed,  and 
then  persist  that  every  point  and  item  of  our  creed-form  must  be  contended  for 
unto  the  death.  "  The  faith  once  delivered  unto  the  saints  "  should  never  be 
confused  with  the  creed  formulated  and  adopted  by  any  particular  Church.  The 
New  Testament  gives  us  the  Christian  truth  in  very  sharp,  crisp,  suggestive 
sentences.  Of  one  such  we  may  be  reminded.  "  There  is  one  God,  one  mediator 
also  between  God  and  men,  Himself  man,  Christ  Jesus,  who  gave  Himself  a 
ransom  for  all"  (1  Tim.  ii.  5,  H.Y.).  According  to  that  verse  the  Christian 
truth  contains  five  truths:  1.  The  unity  of  God.  2.  The  mediatorship  of 
Christ.  3.  The  true  humanity  of  Christ.  4.  The  self-sacrifice  of  Christ. 
5.  The  vicariousness  of  Christ's  sacrifice.  But  the  essential  truth — the  very 
gospel — is  the  place  and  power  of  the  person  Christ.  This  is  the  very  heart 
of  the  gospel.  Sincere  belief  in  Christ  brings  a  man  into  the  poiver  of  Christ. 
St.  Philip  went  down  to  Samaria  and  preached  Christ  unto  them.  And  that  was 
the  gospel.  This  comes  clearly  into  view  when  the  gospel  was  first  preached 
to  the  Jews,  as  it  was  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost.  Doctrinal  truths  about  Christ 
had  not  at  that  time  been  formulated.  There  could  be  only  the  faith  in  Christ 
which  received  Him  as  Messiah  the  Saviour.  But  that  faith  sufficed  to  altogether 
change  a  man's  life,  and  make  him  a  new  creature,  living  and  breathing  in  a  new 
atmosphere.  When  this  is  clear,  we  may  be  reminded — 1.  That  preaching  Christ 
must  have  the  individuality  of  the  preacher  stamped  upon  it.  The  two  first 
gospel  preachers  were  St.  Peter  and  St.  Stephen ;  but  how  different  were  their 
settings  and  points  of  view  !  And — 2.  That  the  individuality  of  the  preacher  is 
always  tempered  by  his  efforts  to  adapt  himself  to  his  circumstances,  and  to  his 
audiences.  St.  Paul  adapts  his  settings  of  the  one  gospel  to  meet  the  case  of 
ignorant  heathen,  cultivated  Pagan,  and  covenant  Jew.  But  will  the  essential, 
the  saving,  gospel  truth  bear  these  human  settings  and  adjustments  without 
injury  ?  The  answer  is  that  it  has  done  so  through  the  long  ages.  Translations 
of  the  New  Testament  into  the  languages  of  mankind  have  been  imperfect 
translations,  constantly  needing  revisions ;  but  the  imperfect  word  has  always 
been,  and  is  to-day,  God's  power  unto  salvation.  The  human  caskets  have 
sufficed  for  carrying  to  men  the  Divine  jewel  of  saving  truth.  Moreover,  the 
gospel  did  get  a  variety  of  settings  from  the  great  Teacher  Himself.  The 
Sermon  on  the  Mount  differs  in  a  remarkable  manner  from  the  discourses  on 
the  good  Shepherd  and  the  living  Bread.  Suppose  then  that  a  Christian 
teacher  should  keep  entirely  in  the  line  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  would  he 
preach  the  gospel  ?  There  is  one  writer  in  the  New  Testament  who  has  done 
this.  The  epistle  of  St.  James  has  no  formulated  Christian  doctrine  in  it.  It 
deals  with  life,  conduct,  relations,  duties,  temptations ;  it  is  given  by  a  "  servant 

489 


CHAP.  I.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :    JAMES. 


of  Jesus  Christ,"  who  wants  to  do  his  duty,  to  other  servants  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  who  want  to  know  and  do  their  duty.  But  is  that  the  gospel  ?  The 
one  gospel  of  Christ's  Hfe  has  gained  four  different  settings.  The  four  gospels 
are  not  alike.  St.  Peter,  St.  James,  St.  Paul,  and  St.  John  give  us  four 
epistles,  bearing  relation  to  Christian  truth,  but  they  are  not  alike.  The  gospel 
was  first  preached  to  Jews  by  St.  James.  Then  the  Gentiles  were  permitted  to 
share  with  Jews  in  gospel  privileges  under  the  lead  of  St.  Peter.  And  then  the 
gospel  was  differentiated  for  Gentiles  by  St.  Paul.  St.  James  sees  Christianity 
as  completed  Judaism,  as  providing  for  it  just  the  element  it  lacked,  and  failed 
to  meet  man's  need  because  it  lacked.  St.  Peter  sees  Christianity  as  a  reformed, 
enlarged,  and  comprehensive  Judaism,  and  never  breaks  away  from  his  Jewish 
associations.  St.  Paul  sees  Christianity  as  the  universal  human  religion,  of 
which  Judaism  was  the  inspired  and  Divinely  guided  preparation.  He  therefore 
aroused  the  jealousy  of  the  exclusive  Jews,  and  was  compelled  to  break  with 
them.  Look  carefully  at  the  gospel  according  to  St.  James,  or  at  his  setting 
of  Christianity.  His  epistle  seems  strange  to  Christian  readers  because  of  what 
it  does  not  contain.  There  is  no  doctrine  of  redemption  in  it.  He  was  possibly 
the  Lord's  brother  (1  Cor.  xv.  7  ;  Gal.  i.  19),  certainly  he  was  a  strict  Jew,  who 
kept  his  Jewish  ideas  along  with  his  belief  in  Jesus  as  Messiah,  and  along  with 
his  personal  loyalty  and  devotion  to  Him.  But  that  must  have  been  the  first 
idea  of  a  Christian.  The  Jews  were  divided  into  those  to  whom  Jesus  was  an 
impostor,  and  those  to  whom  Jesus  was  the  Messiah ;  and  St.  James  was  the 
leader  of  these  latter  Jews.  He  wrote  for  men  who  knew  themselves  as  the 
people  of  God,  and  whose  one  question  was,  What  is  righteousness  ?  and  how  is 
it  obtained  ?  The  Jew  was  familiar  with  the  answer — Righteousness  is  keeping 
the  law ;  then  keep  the  law,  and  be  righteous.  But  the  Jew  felt  that  he  had 
no  power  to  perform.  St.  James  tells  him  that  personal  faith  in  Christ  will 
bring  the  law  in  to  him.  It  will  give  him  power  unto  righteousness.  That  is 
the  gospel  according  to  St.  James.  It  is  precisely  the  setting  of  the  gospel  that 
we  want  who  have  believed.  We  want  help  toward  working  our  belief  out- 
into  our  life.  St.  James  had  not  to  deal  with  the  Jews'  standing  before  God. 
St.  Paul  had  to  deal  with  the  Gentiles'  standing.  St.  James,  as  a  Jew,  neither 
questioned  his  own  standing,  nor  theirs  to  whom  he  wrote.  So  St.  Paul's 
*'  justification  by  faith  "  did  not  come  into  his  thoughts.  St.  James  inculcates 
the  gospel  of  right  conduct  to  men  who  had  accepted  a  new  Master.  He  puts 
the  Master's  principles  and  the  Master's  spirit  alongside  their  characteristic 
Jewish  frailties.  To  him  the  gospel  is  a  holy  leaven.  It  is  the  person  Christ, 
offered  to  faith  as  the  Son  of  God  and  Saviour  of  the  world.  Put  that  faith 
into  a  man's  life,  what  will  it  do  ?  St.  James  helps  us  to  this  answer.  It  will 
give  a  man  mastery  over  his  evils.  It  will  make  all  things  new.  It  will  help 
him  to  win  righteousness.  It  will  sanctify.  And  we  need  that  setting  of  the 
gospel. 

Service  dignified  as  the  Life-service  of  the  Lord  Jesus. — Sometimes  the  writers 
of  epistles  speak  of  themselves  as  "  apostles,"  but  apostles  are  only  '*  sent 
servants."  St.  James  calls  himself— 1.  A  servant.  The  word  means  a  ''bond- 
servant "  ;  but  not  one  who  is  bound  by  force,  against  his  will,  but  one  who  has 
bound  himself,  and  made  a  loving  surrender  of  his  will,  and  finds  service  to  be 
the  truest  liberty.  Bond-service  has  always  to  be  estimated  in  view  of  him  to 
whom  we  are  bound.  If  it  be  bond-service  to  Christ,  that  service  is  perfect 
freedom.  2.  A  servant  of  two  Masters.  "Of  God,  and  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."  The  addition  "  of  God "  is  made  because  St.  James  must  make  it 
quite  clear  that,  in  asking  ser\ice  for  Christ,  he  did  not  take  Jews  away  from 
their  allegiance  to  ^he  God  of  their  fathers.     3.  A  servant  of  two  Masters  who 

490  , 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES.  chap.  I. 


are  really  one.  For  the  deeper  we  get  into  the  mystery  of  the  Divine  Being, 
the  more  satisfyingly  we  see  that  Jesus  is  but  *'  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,"  and 
that  serving  Him  is  serving  God.  4.  A  servant  to  serve  other  servants  of  the 
same  Master.  *'  Twelve  tribes  which  are  of  the  dispersion."  Jews,  who  were 
servants  of  God.  Jewish  Christians,  who  were  servants  of  God,  and  of  the 
Lord  Jesus.  The  servant  may  serve  by  direct  attentions  paid  to  the  Master 
Himself.  But  he  equally  serves  when  he  carries  out  the  Master's  ministries 
among  the  other  servants.  "  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  unto  one  of  the  least 
of  these  My  brethren,  ye  have  done  it  unto  Me."  5.  A  servant  who  serves 
both  the  Master  and  the  other  servants  cheerfully.  "  Greeting " ;  margin, 
"  wishing  joy."  Sending  greeting  means  that  the  sender  cherishes  happy, 
kindly,  hopeful  feeling,  and  is  really  glad  to  do  some  kindly  service  for  those 
to  whom  he  writes.  It  honours  Christ  for  His  servants  to  work  at  His  work 
with  upHfted  heads  and  glad  hearts. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.    1.    Relation   of  Epistle   to   the  Scattered  Abroad. — 1.  They  were  dis- 

Sermon  on  the  Mount. — No  student  of  persed  in  mercy.     For  the  diffusing  of 

the   epistle   has   failed   to   notice   the  the  light  of  revelation,  which  they  had 

sturdy   common   sense   of   the  writer,  received.     2.  They   began   now  to   be 

and  his  emphasis  on  practical  Chris-  scattered     in    wrath.       The     Jewish 

tianity.     Yet  it  has  not  always  been  nation  was  crumbling  into  parties  and 

observed   how   fully   he   represents  in  factions,    and    many    were   forced    to 

this   respect    the   teaching    of    Jesus,  leave   their   own   country,    as   having 

especially  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  now  grown  too  hot  for  them. — Matthew 

Even  his  language  is  strikingly  similar  Henry. 

to   our    Lord's.      Compare   Jas.    i.   22  m     t^-  r  ±-l    m      m  -l 

•j.1    -Mi  1.1.      '■   aA      T  1  xi  The  JJisappearance  of  the  Ten  Tribes. 

with  Matt.  vn.  24.     In  each  case  the  rr-i      i         j         .     .i      j- 

,T_       1  .    •       Till  •  ,  — ine  legend  as  to  the  disappearance 

tnouojnt   IS  clinched    by  a   picture   or        r.    ,.       .        i   -i  i  •  i      u 

fi         mi  /  1 1  1  or   the   ten   tribes,    which    has   ffiven 

parable.      I  he    use    oi    parables    and        .        ,  •  j 

^  1      1       c«.     T  ^     .1    -  rise    to    so    many    insane   dreams   as 

proverbs  by  fet.  James  suff^ests  that,  ,      ,i    .      .•,     ,.r.     ,.  .,,     ,,       -o  j 

^ . ,  1       n  1  .  *°  1      11  to   their   identmcation  with   the   Ked 

with  ail  his  common  sense,  he  had  a  t    v  r    a         •  a      i 

n  ,•     1       .     .     1  .        '  TT-  Indians   or   America,    or    our   Anfflo- 

nne  poetical  vein  m  his  nature.     His  ^  r      r  xi  c       i.\. 

.     J.         1      1      T     T  ,       1  •  baxon    loreiathers,    appears    tor    the 

imagination    lends    liveliness    to    his  />,,•         •      ii  i,ic3        a 

°.  T^      a    ri  tc  ^T     -  hrst   time   in  the   apocryphal    becond 

maxims.     Dr.  S.  Cox  says,  "He  is  a  ^  ^        /  ...    oa  An\        \     ^  u  ui 

,  ,    ^1         ,  ,  .y  '  ■      »  Lsdras  (xiu.   t5y-47),  a  book   probably 

born  poet,  thouorh  he  writes  no  poetry.  c     x..     1  i.x.  \   >  xi5    t3 

A     ,1         .        ,f.  Trt^     i<  xi  OI  about  the  same  date  as  the  Keve- 

As  there  is  nothing  more  dimcult  than  ,   , .         c  en.    t  \.          m 

.  .     .    1  p      -T  •        'J.  lation  or  fet.  John. — Flumptre. 

to  cast  stale  or  lamiliar  maxims  into  ^ 

fresh  and  attractive  forms,  St.  James  The  Ten  Tribes  not  Lost.— The  ten 

must  have  been  a   man  of   rare  and  tribes  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  though 

high   natural   gifts.     On   the    human  they  had  been  carried  into  a  more  dis- 

side,    the   poetical   trait   in   the   Lord  tant  exile  than  Judah  and  Benjamin, 

Jesus  and   in  St.  James  (regarded  as  were  thought  of,  not  as  lost  and  out 

the   Lord's   natural  brother)   may   go  of  sight,  but  as  still  sharing  the  faith 

back   to  the  mother   whose  hymn   of  and  hope  of   their  fathers.     See  also 

praise    St.    Luke    has    preserved    for  Matt.   xix.    28 ;    Acts  xxvd.    7 ;    Rev. 

us.  vii.  5-8. — Ibid. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  2—4. 

The  Ministry  of  Trial  to  Christian  Character. — It  is  necessary  to  keep  in 
mind  the  persons  who  were  directly  addressed  in  this  epistle.  They  were 
Jewish  Christians  who  were  placed  in  difficult  circumstances,  and  called  to  bear 

491 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


various  persecutions,  on  account  of  their  faith  in  Christ.  Their  troubles  were 
special  to  their  religion.  They  were  such  as  Hindoos  still  have  to  endure  when 
they  are  baptised  in  the  name  of  Christ.  The  trials  were  not  merely  the 
commonplace  afflictions  that  come  into  every  life ;  and  so  they  were  not  merely 
disciplinary  and  educative.  They  were  distinctly  influences  acting  upon  them 
as  temptations  to  apostasy  from  Christ ;  and  therefore  they  are  properly  called 
''  temptations "  :  there  was  in  them  something  of  the  element  of  incitement 
to  evil.  Distinguish  afflictions  from  temptations  ;  or  rather,  see  under  what 
conditions  afflictions  may  become  temptations.  Many  of  the  forms  in  which 
earthly  trials  come  prove  to  be  tempting  forms.  They  may  be  testings ;  they 
may  be  temptings. 

I.  Right  feeling  concerning  trials. — The  feeling  commended  here  certainly 
seems  strange.  "  Count  it  all  joy,"  nought  but  joy.  There  cannot  be  joy  in 
them ;  there  can  be  joy  in  seeing  into  them.  Is  there  any  real  ground  for 
such  joy  ?  There  is,  if  we  can  give  due  weight  to  these  considerations.  1.  No 
trial  that  ever  comes  to  us  is  either  an  accident  or  the  work  of  an  enemy.  If 
Satan  brought  calamity  to  Job,  he  was,  for  the  time  at  least,  God's  angel,  doing 
a  painful  bit  of  Divine  work.  2.  The  Christian  has  learned  never  to  connect 
his  trials  with  personal  sin.  It  is  the  conscience  of  connection  between  personal 
sin  and  personal  suffering  that  makes  the  bitterness  of  suffering.  That  bitter- 
ness the  Christian  should  never  know.  3.  Trials  assure  us  of  God's  gracious 
interest  in  our  higher,  spiritual  welfare.  A  purpose  of  grace  is  in  them.  A 
ministry  of  grace  is  in  them.  And  it  is  far  better  for  us  to  have  the  grace  than 
to  escape  the  trials  that  bring  it  to  us.  4.  Trial  cultures  all  the  finer  elements 
of  character,  and  in  that  issue  of  trial  the  Christian  may,  and  should, 
unfeignedly  rejoice.  Could  a  Christian  rightly  apprehend  what  human  life  is, 
and  leads  towards,  and  rejoice  in  having  been  freed  from  trials  ?  That  question 
may  be  asked  concerning  both  outward  and  inward  trials.  But  if  we  "  joy  in 
tribulation,"  it  can  only  be  with  the  joy  of  faith,  with  that  faith- vision  which 
can  see  within  things,  and  discern  meanings  and  issues. 

II.  Right  thoughts  concerning  trials. — "  Worketh  patience."  They  are  not 
to  be  thought  of  as  mere  things,  accidents,  calamities.  They  work.  And  their 
work  may  be  humbling,  separating,  arresting,  proving,  and  culturing  by  proving. 
They  work ;  but  never  self-willedly ;  always  under  the  immediate  presidency 
and  direction  of  our  Father-God.  And  they  never  get  beyond  His  control. 
His  mission  is  in  every  event  that  happens.  The  trials  work  out  "  peaceable 
fruits  of  righteousness." 

III.  Right  issues  of  the  work  of  trials.—"  Patience."  This  we  may  see 
as  (1)  self-mastery;  (2)  endurance;  or  (3)  the  waiting  of  expectancy;  for  in 
Christian  patience  there  is  always  active  faith.  The  energy  that  can  do  the 
work  of  the  hour,  while  we  patiently  wait.  Patience  is  not  listlessness  and 
indifference.  It  is  a  sign  that  patience,  under  trial,  is  Christianly- toned  when 
a  man  keeps  bravely  on,  carrying  his  burden  while  he  fulfils  his  duties. 

IV.  Right  anxieties  concerning  the  issues  of  trial. — "  Let  patience  have 
her  perfect  work,  that  ye  may  be  perfect  and  entire."  This  is  the  proper 
anxiety,  that  the  trial  should  fully  do  all  that  it  was  sent  to  do.  Every  plant 
that  grows  wants  to  reach  its  maturity,  wants  to  flower  and  seed.  So  does 
every  grace  in  us  ;  and  therefore  we  want  every  influence  that  bears  on  the 
maturing  to  get  its  perfect  work,  and  help  towards  the  perfect  flowering. 
Because  men  cannot  hope  to  become  "  perfect  and  entire,"  lacking  nothing,  in 
Christian  character,  without  the  ministry  upon  them  of  earthly  sufferings, 
therefore  they  may  even  respond  to  St.  James,  and  *' glory  in  tribulations 
also." 

492 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP.   I. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES, 


Vers.  2-12.  The  Ch7'istian  in  Times 
of  Sufferi7ig. 

I.  The  suffering  state  of  Christians 
in  this  world  is  represented.  1.  Im- 
plied that  troubles  and  afflictions  may 
be    the   lot    of    the    best    Christians. 

2.  These  ontward  afflictions  and 
troubles    are    temptations    to     them. 

3.  These  temptations  may  be  numer- 
ous and  various.  4.  They  are  not 
created  by  the  good  man,  nor  sinfully 
drawn  upon  himself. 

II.  The  graces  and  duties  of  a 
state  of  trial  and  affliction  are  here 
pointed  out  to  us.  1.  Joy.  2.  Faith. 
3.  Patience.  4.  Prayer.  (1)  What 
to  pray  for ;  (2)  how  to  obtain  it ; 
(3)  encoiTragement  to  seeking  ;  (4)  con- 
dition of  success ;  (5)  steadiness  of 
mind. 

III.  The  holy,  humble  temper  of 
a  Christian,  both  in  advancement 
and  debasement,  is  described. — Matthew 
Henry. 

Yer.  2.  Temptation  and  Sin. — Temp- 
tation is  not  sin.  An  old  German 
divine  says,  *'  You  cannot  prevent  the 
birds  flying  over  your  head ;  but  you 
can  prevent  them  from  making  nests 
in  your  hair."  An  old  English  Divine 
says,  "  I  cannot  help  it  if  the  devil 
comes  up  to  my  door.  I  cannot  help 
it  if  he  lifts  the  latch  and  walks  in. 
I  can  help  it  if  I  offer  him  a  chair." 

The  Manifoldn£ss  of  Human  Trials. 
— Diverse,  manifold  temptations. 
They  touch  on  all  its  sides  human 
character,  and  affect  every  form  of 
human  relation,  because  the  approach 
to  men  is  by  such  different  avenues ; 
the  needs  of  men  and  society  take  such 
a  variety  of  forms.  Yery  striking  is 
the  versatility  of  human  trial ;  the 
surprise  of  the  forms  it  can  take ;  and 
the  adaptation  of  forms  to  occasions 
which  can  sooner  or  later  be  recog- 
nised. The  angel  of  affliction  is 
marvellously  skilful  in  his  adjustments. 
The  expression  "  fall  into  "  suggests  an 


unlooked-for  concurrence  of  adverse 
circumstances.  Every  possible  trial 
to  the  child  of  God  is  a  masterpiece  of 
strategy  of  the  Captain  of  his  salvation 
for  his  good. 

Vers.  2-8.  Christian  Joy  in   Times 
of   Trial. — The     epistle    was   written 
to  correct  abuses  which   had   already 
shown  themselves  in  certain  portions  of 
the  Church.     Some  of  these  arose  from 
the  influence  of  persecution,  and  from 
the    peculiar   trials   and    temptations 
which     it     brought    along     with     it. 
Temptation     never    means     affliction 
simply,  but  in  every  case  conveys  the 
idea  of  a  moral  trial,  or  a  test  of  char- 
acter.    Had  not  popular  usage  lowered 
the  meaning  of  our  own  word  "  trial," 
as  applied  to  providential  changes,  so 
that  it  now  expresses  little  more  than 
pain  or  privation,  it  would  correspond 
exactly  to  the  Greek  term  here  used, 
and  applied  to  sufferings  or  afflictions, 
not  as  such,  or  as  mere  chastisement 
or  means  of  grace,  but  as  tests  or  touch- 
stones of  the  sufi'erer's  dispositions  and 
affections,    of   his  faith   and   patience 
and  obedience.     The  difficulty  of  com- 
plying with  the  general  injunction  of 
the   text  may  appear  to  be  enhanced 
by  the  variety  of  outward  forms  and 
circumstances  under   which  the  work 
of  providential  trial  may  be  carried  on. 
Though  it  may  be  rational  and  right 
to    rejoice    in    one    variety    of    such 
temptations,  it  does  not  follow  neces- 
sarily that  it  is  possible  or  right  in  all. 
But  the  text  has  the  term   "  divers," 
manifold,   multiform,  diversified ;  so  it 
must  be  meant  that  in  the  full  sense 
we  are  to  count  our  various  providen- 
tial  trials    "  all   joy."      As,   however, 
"  no  chastening  for  the  present  seemeth 
to  be  joyous,"  it  is  not  unreasonable  to 
suppose  that  the  joy    required  is  not 
a  joy   to  be  experienced  in  the  very 
article  or  stress  of  the  temptation,  but 
a  joy  to  be  engendered  by  a  believing, 
grateful  retrospection  of  the  trial  after 
it   is  past,  or   at  least  after  the  first 

493 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


shock   is  over,  and  the  soul  is  able  to  of  supererogation  added  to  its  necessary 

reflect  upon  it.     This  distinction  helps  elements  by  way  of  doing  more  than 

to   explain  the  paradoxical  aspect   of  man  needs  or  God  requires,  but  itself 

the    exhortation    to    rejoice    in    that  an   element  that  cannot  be  dispensed 

which   necessarily   involves    pain   and  with,     and     without     which    neither 

suffering.     Christians  may  reasonably  sufferers   nor   actors   in  God's  service 

have  joy  in  thinking  that  they  have  can    be  ''perfect  and  entire,  wanting 

suffered,  and  so  have  had  occasions  of  nothing."     And   all  this  affords  abun- 

attesting  their   fidelity,  and  patience,  dant    room    for    wise     discrimination 

and  submission  to  God's  will.     But  the  and  a   sound   discretion. — J.   Addison 

joy  is  not  merely  retrospective;  it  is  Alexander,  D.D. 
prospective  also.     '  It   is   founded    on 

knowledge  of  the  consequences  which  Temptation,  its  Meaning  and  Uses. — 

may  be  expected  from  a  certain  course  The  subject  of  temptation,  as  treated 

of  action  or  suffering.     The  trials  or  in   the   Bible,    is   more   than   a  little 

temptations  of  the  Christian    are  the  perplexing,    from    the    appearance   of 

test  or  touchstone  of  his  faith,  both  in  inconsistency  or  contradiction   in   the 

the   strict   and   comprehensive    sense.  several  statements.     In  this  chapter, 

They  put  to  the  proof  his  trust  in  God,  within    the    space    of    ten    or    twelve 

his  belief  in  what  God  says,  of  what  verses,  we  have  these  four  apparently 

God  promises.     But  in  so  doing  they  irreconcilable    statements  :    that   it  is 

afford  the  surest  test  of  his  religion,  of  to   be   counted    all  joy  when   we   fall 

his    whole  religious   character.      And  into  temptations ;   that  the  man  who 

providential  trial   or  temptation  pro-  endures   temptation    is    blessed ;    that 

duces   a    permanent   effect    upon   the  temptations  do    not  come   from  God ; 

character.     It  gei?erates  a  habit — that  and  that  they  do  come  from  our  lusts 

of  patient  endurance,  that  of  steadfast  and  passions.      Now,  how  can  that  be 

perseverance  in  the  way  of  God's  com-  joy   and   bl  essedness   which    does    not 

mandments.      For  of   patience,   as  of  come  from   God,  but  from  the  lowest 

faith,   it   may  be  said  that  it  cannot  part  of   our    nature,  left  in  a  basely 

stand  alone,  it  cannot  exist  independ-  ungoverned   condition  ?     The  difficulty 

ently   of  other  virtues,    other  graces,  is   somewhat    illumined    by   reflecting 

other    traits   of    Christian   character.  on  one  broad    feature  of  human   life 

He  who  will  not  do  God's  will  cannot  and    action.       Everything    that    falls 

endure  it  in  a  Christian  spirit.     Evan-  within   human    activity   may   be   said 

gelical  patience  presupposes,  includes,  to  have  two  sides  to  it.     On  the  one 

or  carries  with  it  evangelical  obedience  side   there  is    a  Divine  providence  in 

or  activity.     To  say  that  it  is  fostered  the   course    a    frail    thing    takes ;    on 

or  matured  by  trial  is  to  say  that  trial  the  other,    there  may  be  the  outrage 

is  an  important  means  of  grace,  and  of  all  good  sense   and   propriety.      It 

to   be   thankfully   submitted    to,    and  is   universally  impossible   in  a   single 

even  rejoiced  in,  as  a  gracious  agency  instance  to  escape  from  this  complex 

for   securing    spiritual    health.       The  position.     Take,  then,  any  temptation 

trial    of    our    faith    "worketh    out,"  that   arises    from   our    bodily   senses; 

elaborates,  and  as  it  were  laboriously  there  is  a  Divine  side  even  to  these 

cultivates,   a   habit    of    persistent  and  when  they  are  obeying  the  holy  will 

unwavering  obedience  and  submission  of   God.      And    then   they   help,    not 

to  the  will  of  God,  both  in  the  way  of  mislead,  the  soul.     But  in  man's  exer- 

doing   and    suffering.      It   is   implied  cise  of  them  there  comes  waywardness, 

that  this  Divine    v-n-o^ovri,    this  prin-  folly.     If  men  would  only  admit  this 

ciple  and  habit  of  patient  continuance  double  aspect  of  human  things,  to  the 

in  doing  and  suffering  the  will  of  God,  fulness  of  its  existence  and  influence, 

is  not  a  mere  superfluous   embellish-  it  would  lessen,  if  it  did  not  remove, 

ment  of  Christian  character,  a  work  many  difficulties.      It  would   be  seen 

494 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES,  chap.  I. 


that  temptation   muist  necessarily  fill  life  :     1.    The   paternal   care   of   God. 

human  life,  and  can  arise  at  any  and  2.  The  interpreting  light  of  the  future, 

every  point  from  the  action  of  man's  3.  And    the   stupendous   interests    of 

folly  and  error.     With  this  explana-  morality.      To   him   who  sees  in   life 

tion,   can  we  say  in   any  sense   that  no  vast  meaning   to  be  unfolded,  all 

it  is  the  will  of  God,  and  justifiably  so,  these  temptations  may  present  only  a 

that  we,   being  what  we   are,  should  tangled  web.     But  when  life  emerges 

thus  find  temptations,  with  the  risk  from   this   obscurity,  as   a  God-given 

of  being  betrayed  by  them  ?    To  answer  thing,   with  an  infinitude  of  purpose, 

this,   we   must  consider  a  little  more  with  a   moral   intensity  that  can    be 

what  man  is,  and  what  his   position  measured    only   by   a   heaven   of    in- 

and  calling  in   this  life,  possessed   of  effable  bliss  and  a  hell  of  unutterable 

these  evil  tendencies.     Were  he  inno-  gloom,    then   temptations   are   full   of 

cent  and  pure,  and  had  he  no  know-  a  sacred  intent,  come  with  the  bene- 

ledge  of  evil,  there  were  then  no  evil  diction  of  the  all-wise  and  all-loving 

tendencies.       Were    man    either     the  Father,  it  may  be  with  sacred  tears, 

creature  of  destiny,  or  a  thing  com-  to   cast   us   on    His   everlasting  arms 

pletely  pliable   to  all  surrounding  in-  of   compassion   and   strength,    and   to 

fluences,  temptation  would  seem  a  very  fill  our  hearts  with   His  pure  joy. — 

needless    hardship.      It    is    when   we  Samuel  Edger^  B.A.  {Auckland^  N.Z.). 
reflect  that  the  thought  of  man  most 

nearly  adequate  is  of  a  being  of  great  Ver.  3.  The  Trial  of  Waiting  Work, 

grandeur  of  nature,  yet  afflicted  with  — Human   trouble   never   takes   on  a 

evil  tendencies — a  being  of  unlimited  more  serious  form,  and  never  becomes 

though  undeveloped   capacities   in   all  a   severer   test,    than   when  it  makes 

directions.      The   great   meaning   and  effort  and   enterprise   impossible,  and 

use    of    temptation   is   to   reveal   the  compels   us  to  do  nothing,  and  wait, 

secret    and    unknown    depths    of    the  Estimate  (1)  the  pain  of   a  condition 

human   soul,    which   may   take   three  of   indecision ;    (2)   the  restlessness  of 

directions:    1.  Very   many   things   in  watching  ;  (3)  the  fear  that  the  waiting 

human  life,  from  the  most  startlingly  will  be  in  vain.     It  is  a  supreme  diffi- 

terrible  down  even  to  the  quite  trivial,  cult}'-  to  keep  the  heart  rightly  toned  at 

tell  us  how  very  little  any  one  knows  such  times,  and  to  keep  the  life  filled 

of  the  extent   to  which  evil   has   in-  with  right  occupations.     Difficult  to  be 

vaded  the  nature  of  man.     Who  has  duly,  but  not  unduly,  anxious.     Diffi- 

not   often   observed  in   life  a  display  cult  to  keep  trust  joined  with  prayer, 

of  perversion  that  no  one  could  have  "  Watch  and  pray."     But   it   is  pre- 

anticipated  ?     No  man  knows  himself,  cisely  in  dealing  with  these  difficulties 

and  no  other  man  knows  him,  as  to  that  our  characters  get  their  culture 

evil,   until   he    is  tried.       2.    A   more  through  temptations, 
beautiful  aspect  of   temptation  is  its 

power    to    develop    the    fortitude    of  Patience   Something    to    he    Wo7i. — 

virtue,  the  resolute  moral  earnestness  *'  Worketh  patience."     Do   not    think 

of   the  man.      To  a  being  like   man,  that   the   grace  will  come  to  its  full 

knowing  good  and  evil,  and  mysieri-  beauty  in  an  hour.     It  is  a  matter  of 

ously    allied    to    both,     there    would  culture  through  tending  and  discipline, 

appear    to    be    no    other    method    of  A   child    is    naturally   impatient.     A 

spiritual  discipline.     3.  The  full  force  worldly  man   is   naturally   impatient, 

of  these  truths  comes  out  to  view  as  A    Christian   man  is  a  man  cultured 

our  perception  becomes  quite  clear  of  unto     letting     "  patience     have     her 

the  extreme   opposite   qualities — holi-  perfect     work."     The    agencies    more 

ness     and     sin.      Three     truths     are  especially  employed  in  the  cultivation 

necessary     to     our     search     for     the  of  patience  are :  1 .  The  disappointments 

meaning  of   the   difficult  problems  of  of  life,  which   become  temptations  to 

495 


CHAP.   I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


heartlessness  and  hopelessness.    2.  The 
delays    of    life,    when    hope    deferred 
makes   the   heart  sick,  and  men   feel 
the  temptation  to  force  their  own  way, 
and  hurry  through  their  own  schemes. 
3.  The  afflictions  of  life   which  involve 
severe  pain,  or  the  nervous  restlessness 
which  seems  to  make  patience  impos- 
sible.    4.  Daily  contact   with    persons 
whose    temper    and     disposition     are 
specially    trying     to     us,     and     with 
whom  it  is  almost  impossible  to  bear. 
5.  The  little  incidents  of   life,    which 
are  too  small  to  make  demand  of  any 
great   effort  to  master  ourselves,   and 
consequently   are    done   without    self- 
restraint,  and  often  very  impatiently. 
Patience   is   the   one    virtue    that    is 
especially  cultivated  by  the  sanctifying 
of  the  common  events  and  relations  of 
life. 

The  T raise  of  Patience. — Patience  is 
the  guardian  of  faith,  the  preserver  of 
peace,  the  cherisher  of  love,  the  teacher 
of   humility.      Patience    governs    the 
flesh,  strengthens  the  spirit,  sweetens 
the  temper,  stifles  anger,  extinguishes 
envy,  subdues  pride  ;  she   bridles   the 
tongue,  restrains  the   hand,  tramples 
upon    temptations,    endures    persecu- 
tions, consummates  martyrdom.     Pa- 
tience produces  unity  in  the    Church, 
loyalty    in     the    State,    harmony    in 
families   and   societies ;    she   comforts 
the  poor,  and  moderates  the  rich ;  she 
makes  us  humble  in  prosperity,  cheer- 
ful in  adversity,  unmoved  by  calumny 
and  reproach  ;  she  teaches  us  to  forgive 
those  who  have  injured  us,  and  to  be 
the  first  in  asking  forgiveness  of  those 
whom  we  have  injured;   she    delights 
the  faithful  and  invites  the  unbeliev- 
ing ;    she     adorns    the     woman     and 
approves   the  man ;    she   is    beautiful 
in  either  sex  and  every  age.     Behold 
her  appearance  and  her  attire.     Her 
countenance  is  calm  and  serene  as  the 
face  of  heaven  unspotted  by  the  shadow 
of  a  cloud,  and  no  wrinkle  of  grief  or 
anger  is  seen  on  her  forehead.     Her 
eyes   are    as   the    eyes    of    doves   for 
meekness,    and    on    her   eyebrows   sit 
cheerfulness  and  joy.     Her  mouth  is 

496 


lovely  in  silence;  her  complexion  and 
colour  that  of  innocence  and  security ; 
while,  like  the  virgin,  the  daughter  of 
Zion,  she  shakes  her  head  at  the 
adversary,  despising  and  laughing  him 
to  scorn.  She  is  clothed  in  the  robes 
of  the  martyrs,  and  in  her  hands  she 
holds  a  sceptre  in  the  form  of  a  cross. 
She  rides  not  in  the  whirlwind  and 
stormy  tempest  of  passion,  but  her 
throne  is  the  humble  and  contrite 
heart,  and  her  kingdom  is  the  kingdom 
of  peace. — Bishop  Home. 

Patient  Bearing  is  Reasonable. — It  is 
but  reasonable  to  bear  that  accident 
patiently  which  God  sends,  since  im- 
patience does  but  entangle  us,  like  the 
fluttering  of  a  bird  in  a  net,  but  can- 
not at  all  ease  our  trouble  or  prevent 
the  accident.  It  must  be  run  through, 
and  therefore  it  were  better  that  we 
compose  ourselves  to  a  patient,  than  to 
a  troubled  and  miserable,  suffering. — 
Jeremy  Taylor. 

Yer.  4.  Perfect  and  Entire. — There 
is  both  unity  and  distinctness  in  these 
terms.  "  Perfect  "  means  that  which 
fully  attains  its  end.  "  Entire  "  means 
that  which  is  complete,  and  harmoni- 
ously and  healthily  developed,  in  all 
the  parts  or  regions  of  the  spiritual 
life.  The  two  words  are  wanted  to 
express  the  full  idea  of  a  Christian. 

Christian  Character  a  Thing  of  Quiet 
Growth. — It  is  with  the  building  up 
of  Christian  character  as  with  the 
formation  of  crystals.  In  order  that 
a  crystal  may  be  properly  and  perfectly 
formed,  at  least  three  things  are  neces- 
sary :  there  must  be  ample  time  in 
which  all  unnecessary  fluid  can  be 
dissipated,  and  the  component  parts  of 
the  crystal  come  gradually  together ; 
there  must  be  sufficient  room  for  all 
the  angles  and  planes  of  the  crystal  to 
attain  their  regular  size  ;  and  there 
must  be  the  absence  of  agitation,  so 
that  all  the  points  and  proportions  of 
the  crystal  shall  be  evenly  and  sym- 
metrically formed.  Christian  charac- 
ter, when  it  is  what  it  ought  to  be,  is 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES. 


CHAP.   I. 


more  beautiful  than  any  crystal  that 
nature's  laboratory  ever  produced ; 
and  in  order  that  it  may  reach  its 
perfectness  time  is  necessary.  It  is  a 
thing  of  quiet  growth ;  it  has  to  rise 
gradually  and  by  many  stages  into 
form  and  beauty ;  to  hurry  through 
religious  processes  will  be  to  mar  and 
spoil  the  result ;  we  must  "  let  patience 
have  her  perfect  work."  And  space 
is  as  needful  as  time.  If  we  shut 
ourselves  up  in  a  narrow  place,  if  we 
go  away  from  the  broad,  open  world, 
and  confine  ourselves  to  a  monk's 
seclusion,  to  a  hermit's  solitude,  we 
shall  be  cramped  and  restricted ;  and 
while  some  parts  of  our  character  may 
become  finely  and  delicately  developed, 
others  will  be  stunted  and  dwarfed, 
and  the  character  as  a  whole  will  be 
anything  but  perfect.  The  absence  of 
agitation,  too,  is  important.  Whatever 
may  be  going  on  upon  the  surface  of 
our  life  to  interrupt  its  tranquillity, 
deep  down  in  the  depths  of  the  spirit 
in  which  character  has  its  beginnings, 
and  from  which  it  grows,  there  must 
be  the  unruffled  calm  which  trust  in 
the  Father's  will  and  power  and 
purposes  never  fails  to  inspire ;  other- 
wise our  character  will  be  built  up 
by  fits  and  starts,  and  so  will  lack 
the  fulness  of  harmony,  symmetry, 
majesty,  which  it  ought  to  possess. — 
B.  Wilkinson. 

The  Ideal  of  Christian  Attainment. — 
*'  Perfect  and  entire,  wanting  nothing." 
Perfection  of  character  is  the  idea,  the 
aim,  to  be  kept  in  the  soul  of  the 
Christian,  there  to  work  as  a  perpetual 
inspiration  to  the  seeking  of  perfection 
in  the  life  and  conduct  and  relation- 
ships. St.  Paul  presents  the  distinc- 
tion between  full-grown  men  and 
little  children  :  the  full-grown  men 
are  the  perfect ;  they  have  reached 
the  fulness,  the  standard,  of  Christian 
manhood.  St.  John  has  a  similar  kind 
of  expression :  he  addresses  several 
classes — the  fathers,  the  young  men, 
the  little  children;  viewing  these  as 
different  stages  on  the  way  to  the 
perfect,   that    perfect   being    kept    as 


the  thought  and  aim  in  the  soul  of 
each.  The  idea  of  '*  perfect "  comes  out 
more  plainly  when  it  is  set  beside 
another  word,  ''  perfect  and  entire.^* 
A  man  "  entire "  is  one  who  has 
preserved  or  regained  a  lost  complete- 
ness ;  or  one  in  whom  no  grace  that 
ought  to  be  in  a  Christian  ma»  is 
wanting.  But  a  man  **  perfect "  is 
one  who  has  attained  his  moral  en«l, 
the  standard  according  to  which,  in 
view  of  which,  he  was  made ;  or  one 
in  whom  no  grace  that  ought  to  be  in 
a  Christian  is  found  imperfect  or  weak, 
but  all  have  reached  a  certain  ripeness 
and  maturity.  The  idea  of  absolute 
perfection  is  to  be  cherished  in  a  man's 
soul,  and  that  idea  is  to  be  sustained 
by  constant  communion  with  the  great 
model  of  human  perfection,  Christ 
Jesus,  and  a  suitable  effort  is  to  be 
made  afresh  every  day  to  work  out 
that  thought  of  the  perfect  in  the 
spirit  and  temper  and  conduct  of  the 
life.  Get  the  thought  of  perfection 
within  you,  and  let  your  whole  history 
be  the  history  of  a  struggle  after  the 
perfect  in  all  the  relations  of  life. 

The  Christ-model  of  the  Perfect  Life. 
— The  perfect — which  as  merely  a 
creation  of  our  imagination  could  exert 
little  moral  influence  upon  our  life — 
was  to  be  realised  before  the  actual 
vision  of  men,  and  amidst  our  common 
scenes,  and  so  to  become  the  very 
mightiest  moral  influence.  Christ  is 
the  ideal  perfection  realised  in  hu- 
manity. Christ  is  God's  perfect  thought 
of  what  man  should  be.  Without  the 
help  of  Christ's  perfect  life  we  could 
not  form  the  idea  of  a  perfect  man. 
It  is  a  simple  fact  that  men  never  have 
formed  such  an  idea..  In  Christ  we 
not  only  think  of,  we  see,  the  perfect. 
He  is  perfect  on  every  side :  perfect 
in  all  the  stages  of  childhood,  youth, 
manhood ;  perfect  in  all  the  spheres  of 
the  spirit,  temper,  speech,  relationship  ; 
perfect  in  all  the  claims  of  duty, 
devotion,  charity ;  perfect  in  all  the 
scenes  of  success,  loss,  suffering,  death  ; 
perfect  in  all  the  exercises  of  will, 
affection,  and  desire.     In  Him  perfec- 

KK  497 


CHAP.   I. 


HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


tion  is  proved  to  be,  and  seen  to  be, 
an  attainable  thing.  The  ideal  of  per- 
fect goodness  Christ  came  to  preach, 
and  He  could  preach  it  with  no 
consciousness  that  He  Himself  fell 
short  of  it. 

The  Perfect  Work  of  Patience. — The 
new  life  in  Christ  comes  to  persons 
having  peculiarities  of  natural  disposi- 
tion and  character.  It  has  its  work 
in  moulding,  restraining,  altering, 
developing,  and  completing  natural 
character.  It  perfects  graces  that 
may  be  existing — perhaps  only  in 
germ — in  natural  dispositions ;  and  it 
brings  them,  plants  them,  cultivates 
them,  when  they  are  lacking.  Pati- 
ence is  a  grace  ;  it  is  one  of  the  fruits 
of   the    Spirit.      It  takes  two  forms  : 

1.  It  may  be  the  state  of  our  mind 
and  feeling  as  we  go  about  our  duty. 

2.  It  may  be  the  spirit  which  tones 
our  intercourse  with  others.  What  in 
Christian  life  is  likely  to  call  patience 
into  exercise  ?     1 .  The  characters  and 


dispositions  of  those  with  whom  we 
must  associate.  Different  and  difficult 
temperaments.  Some  very  wilful  and 
trying.  2.  The  afflictions  and  trials 
of  life.  These  often  come  in  a  way 
that  disturbs  our  plans  and  tries 
our  patience.  3.  The  element  of 
the  "  future  "  in  our  redemption.  Our 
best  things  have  to  be  waited  for. 
"  If  we  hope  for  that  we  see  not,  then 
do  we  with  patience  wait  for  it." 
Note  the  relation  of  patience  to  faith 
and  hope.  Faith  strengthens  patience. 
Patience  tempers  hope.  For  examples 
of  patience  see  Job,  Simeon,  Paul,  and 
our  Divine  Lord.  The  following  things 
tend  to  support  and  nourish  patience  : 
1.  The  sense  of  God's  presence  with 
us.  2.  A  fitting  apprehension  of  the 
holy  purpose  which  God  has  in  His 
dealings  with  us.  3.  The  necessarily 
gradual  character  of  the  work  of  our 
sanctification.  4.  The  strain  involved 
in  times  of  trouble.  5.  The  exceeding 
great  and  precious  promises  of  future 
blessing. 


MAIJSr  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH. —Verses  5—8. 

C ommonplacey  practical  wisdom. — St.  James  wrote  to  persons  who  were 
placed  in  difficult  circumstances,  partly  through  their  own  national  characteristics, 
and  partly  through  the  events  that  were  transpiring  in  public  life.  The  Jews 
of  every  age,  but  peculiarly  of  that  age,  were  of  a  contentious  and  quarrelsome 
disposition,  and  this  made  them  a  troublesome  section  of  the  people  wherever 
they  settled.  It  came  indeed  to  be  pretty  generally  understood,  that  if  there 
was  a  revolt  anywhere,  the  Jews  were  mixed  up  with  it,  if  they  were  not  at  the 
bottom  of  it.  The  usual  feeling  towards  Jews  in  the  time  of  St.  James  is  fairly 
represented  by  that  towards  the  Russians  in  our  own  day.  And  the  Jews  were 
as  contentious  in  private  family  life,  and  in  their  local  synagogue  life,  as  in  their 
public  life.  St.  James  evidently  has  these  characteristic  elements  of  the  Jewish 
nature  fully  in  view.  When  the  Jew  became  a  Christian,  it  might  not  come  to 
him  at  once  that  the  Christian  tone  and  spirit,  which  should  characterise  him 
in  all  forms  of  intercourse,  was  altogether  different.  Very  easily  could  the 
faith  of  Christ  as  Messiah  be  taken  up ;  and  since  it  was  not  inconsistent  with 
attendance  at  the  Temple,  observance  of  circumcision,  and  obedience  to  the  law, 
it  might  not  strike  many  of  the  Judseo  Christians  that  it  necessitated  any  change 
of  temper,  or  toning  of  relationships.  And  then  there  were  others  who  were 
called  to  suffer  much  in  consequence  of  acknowledging  Jesus  as  the  Messiah ; 
and  they  too  were  perplexed  concerning  the  spirit  with  which  their  trials 
and  persecutions  should  be  met.  It  is  in  application  to  both  such  cases  that 
St.  James  gives  the  advice  of  this  passage,  though  the  latter  case  appears  to  be 
the  more  prominent  one.  The  wisdom  which  some  may  feel  that  they  lack  is 
^'practical  wisdom" — what  we   properly  mean   by  "common   sense,"   or  skill 

4:98 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JAMES.  chap.  i. 


in  the  wise  ordering  of  life,  and  in  estimating  and  duly  meeting  all  our  various 
obligations.  By  "  wisdom  "  St.  James  does  not  mean  "  learning,"  or  "  know- 
ledge," or  **  science."  He  was  evidently  a  great  Bible  student,  as  all  earnest  Jews 
were,  and  seems  to  have  been  especially  influenced  by  the  books  of  Proverbs 
and  Ecclesiastes,  the  later  sapiential  writings,  and  by  the  practical  writings  of 
the  prophets  ;  and  it  is  in  the  book  of  Proverbs  that  we  must  seek  for  the  sense 
in  which  he  uses  the  term  "  wisdom  "  in  his  epistle.  Bean  Stardey  points  out 
that  the  book  of  Proverbs  is  not  on  a  level  with  the  Prophets  or  the  Psalms : 
"  It  approaches  human  things  and  things  Divine  from  quite  another  side.  It 
has  even  something  of  a  worldly,  prudential  look.  It  is  the  philosophy  of 
practical  life.  It  is  the  sign  to  us  that  the  Bible  does  not  despise  common  sense 
and  discretion.  It  impresses  upon  us  in  the  most  forcible  manner  the  value  of 
intelligence  and  prudence,  and  of  a  good  education.  The  whole  strength  of  the 
Hebrew  language,  and  of  the  sacred  authority  of  the  book,  is  thrown  upon  these 
homely  truths."  It  is  planned  so  as  to  provide  the  young  man,  who  has  no  life- 
experience  to  guide  him,  with  *'  sound  knowledge  and  discretion."  It  directs 
him  amid  the  pitfalls,  difficulties,  and  duties  on  which  he  must  enter  with  the 
simplicity  of  youth  still  upon  him.  It  was  this  kind  of  practical  skill,  to  meet 
aright  the  unexpected  and  almost  overwhelming  responsibilities  of  kingship,  that 
Solomon  asked  in  his  prayer  at  the  outset  of  his  reign.  Kitto  says :  "  The 
wisdom  which  Solomon  craved  was  that  of  which  he  had  already  enough  to  be 
able  to  appreciate  the  value  of  its  increase — practical  wisdom,  sagacity,  clear- 
ness of  judgment  and  intellect  in  the  administration  of  justice,  and  in  the 
conduct  of  public  affairs."  Taking  wisdom  then  in  this  simple  and  practical 
sense,  there  is  point  in  the  counsel  of  St.  James  for  us  all.  Precisely  what 
thoughtful  and  devout  people  feel  that  they  lack,  especially  when  trials  and 
misunderstandings  seem  to  attend  their  endeavour  to  live  the  godly  life,  is  the 
practical  wisdom  that  would  enable  them  to  think  aright  of  these  trials,  and 
would  enable  them  so  to  control  themselves  under  them,  and  so  to  order  their 
conduct  in  relation  to  them,  as  to  be  patient  under  all  circumstances,  and  fully 
maintain  everywhere  the  Christian  spirit. 

I.  Practical  wisdom  for  the  ordering  of  life  is  a  common  requirement  of 
Christian  disciples. — Life  is  distinctly  a  new  thing  to  a  man  when  he  becomes 
a  Christian.  "  He  has  not  passed  that  way  heretofore."  He  has  no  experiences 
in  the  self  and  worldly  life  that  can  be  any  really  practical  help  to  him.  He 
is  in  much  the  condition  of  the  young  man  who,  with  good  principles,  but 
very  limited  and  often  unsuitable  experiences,  goes  out  into  life  to  meet  the 
surprise  of  its  varied  trials  and  temptations.  And  we  think  there  is  hope 
for  a  young  man  if,  on  thus  entering  upon  untried  scenes,  he  is  humble  enough 
to  recognise  that  he  "  lacks  wisdom."  Whether  a  man  came  over  from  Judaism 
to  Christianity  or  from  Paganism,  he  could  never  find  it  an  easy  thing  to 
adjust  himself  to  the  new  conditions  and  responsibilities.  It  may  be  questioned 
whether  even  now  any  man  finds  it  an  easy  thing  to  adjust  himself  to  the 
claims  of  a  really  earnest  religious  life.  Practically  we  all  find  out,  sooner  or 
later,  that  we  "  lack  wisdom " — precisely  the  wisdom  which  would  enable  us 
to  fit  our  Christian  conduct  and  relationships  perfectly  and  pleasantly  to  our 
Christian  principles  and  to  the  Christian  spirit.  Look  at  this  "  practical 
wisdom  "  in  some  of  its  more  evident  spheres.  1 .  The  Christian  discovers  that 
he  has  a  new  standard  for  the  7)ianageinent  of  himself.  Every  man  finds  out 
that  he  needs  wisdom  for  the  skilful  ordering  of  his  own  bodily  faculties  and 
powers,  his  mind  and  abilities,  and  his  temper  and  passions.  "  Knowing  our- 
selves "  is  the  intense  work  of  early  life ;  wisely  ordering  ourselves,  according 
to  our  knowledge  of  ourselves,  is  the  even  more  intense  work  of  early  manhood. 
But  the  Christian  has  another,  a  new,  and  a  higher  standard  of  self-manage- 

499 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


ment.  It  needs  to  be  set  before  us  much  more  forcibly  than  it  is,  that  the 
human  example  of  our  Divine  Lord  is  that  of  a  man  who,  with  practical  skill, 
ruled  and  ordered  His  own  bodily  life,  mastering  all  its  weaknesses,  and  putting 
it  always  into  wise  restraints.  It  may  very  well  be  that  we  all  feel  to  "  lack 
wisdom  "  in  this,  the  first  sphere  of  a  self-rule.  "  The  body  for  the  Lord,  and 
the  Lord  for  the  body."  2.  But  practical  wisdom  is  needed  for  ordering  the 
commonplace  and  every-day  associations  of  life.  A  man  has  to  be  distinctively 
and  unquestionably  Christian,  in  tone  and  spirit,  everywhere,  every  day,  and 
in  everything.  For  the  man  who  is  not  a  Christian  always  is  not  a  Christian 
at  all.  And  yet  what  practical  wisdom  he  needs  !  So  easily  he  can  undervalue 
the  home- sphere,  and  say,  "  It  does  not  much  matter  what  I  do  there."  So 
easily  he  can  make  a  distinct  sphere  of  business,  and  say,  "  Business  is  biisiness ; 
we  do  not  want  religion  there."  So  easily  he  can  be  carried  away  by  party 
feeling,  and  then  but  unworthily  share  in  the  witness  of  public  life.  Facing 
the  commonplace  obligations  of  home  and  business  and  society,  we  may  all  feel 
that  in  our  effort  to  find  full  and  adequate  expression  of  the  Christian  spirit 
we  all  *'  lack  wisdom."  Is  there  a  satisfied,  or  self-satisfied.  Christian  man  or 
woman  ?  It  can  only  be  that  by  them  the  claim  of  the  Christian  religion  to 
tone  and  rule  the  every-day  life  of  relations  is  not  duly  estimated.  3.  And  as 
the  unexpected  is  "  the  thing  that  happens  "  even  in  the  Christian  life,  practical 
wisdom  is  needed  for  rightly  meeting  the  anxieties,  trials,  temptations,  and 
calamities  that  come  as  surprises  in  every  life.  Of  these  St.  James  was 
thinking ;  and  it  was  concerning  the  securing  of  the  right  preparedness  for 
such  scenes,  and  the  right  response  to  such  circumstances,  that  he  wrote  to 
these  Christian  Jews.  "  Let  patience  [under  trials]  have  her  perfect  work." 
"  And  if  any  of  you  feel  that  you  lack  the  wisdom  which  would  enable  you 
so  to  order  your  Uves  as  to  win  for  patience  her  perfect  work,  then  let  him  ask 
for  the  needed  wisdom  from  God."  Surely  it  comes  home  to  us  all,  that  in  our 
effort  to  tone  our  lives  with  the  Christian  spirit,  and  to  fill  our  daily  lives  with 
the  Christian  principles,  we  do  **  lack  wisdom,"  we  do  need  practical  skill. 

II.  Practical  wisdom  for  the  ordering  of  every-day  life  and  relations  is  a 
Divine  gift. — "Let  him  ask  of  God."  Wisdom,  as  the  learning  of  the  schools, 
can  be  thought  of  as  a  purely  human  acquisition.  It  is  not  indeed  so  regarded 
by  the  Christian,  who  seeks  Divine  help  and  blessing  even  in  the  acquisition 
of  knowledge.  But  this  practical  wisdom,  which  adjusts  the  Christian  prin- 
ciples to  the  relations  of  life,  as  if  a  man  had  passed  through  an  actual 
experience,  and  had  well  learned  the  lessons  of  it,  is  distinctly  a  gift  of  God, 
a  Divine  bestowment  upon  the  humble,  open-souled,  prayerful,  obediently-toned 
man.  It  would  be  pleasant  to  philosophise  about  this,  and  to  show  that  what 
we  really  need  is  to  put  God — God  in  Christ — into  vital  relation  with  each 
scene  and  duty  and  struggle  ;  that  we  cannot  get  God  save  as  He  gives  Himself 
to  us ;  and  that  putting  Himself  into,  keeping  Himself  in,  our  lives,  is  His 
answer  to  prayer,  and  His  supply  of  wisdom.  Plato  has  a  very  striking 
sentence  on  the  importance  of  associating  God  directly  with  the  every-day 
duties  and  relations  of  life  :  "  The  best  and  noblest  action  which  a  virtuous  man 
can  perform,  and  that  which  will  most  promote  his  success  in  life,  is  to  live,  by 
vows  and  prayers,  in  continual  intercourse  with  the  gods  ;  nay,  all  who  would 
act  with  due  consideration  ought,  before  beginning  any  undertaking,  whether 
great  or  small,  to  invoke  God."  We  need  not  deny  that  practical  skill  in  the 
wise  ordering  of  our  life  of  duty  and  relations  is  mainly  gained  by  experience. 
We  grow  into  it  with  the  advancing  years.  There  is  a  familiar  saying,  with 
reference  to  our  physical  health,  that  a  "  man  is  a  fool  or  a  physician  at  forty." 
By  that  time  the  daily  experience  of  dealing  with  his  frailties  and  tendencies 
ought  to  have  made  him  understand  himself,  and  secure  a  fair  share  of  health. 

500 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES.  chap.  I. 


And  it  is  also  true  of  our  mental  and  moral  life,  though  in  these  matters  we 
have  to  bring  in  some  new  and  important  considerations.     Given  the  case  of  a 
man  who  knows  what  is  good  for  his  bodily  health,  and  the  assumption  is  that 
he  will  do  it.     But  given  the  case  of  a  man  who  knows  what  is  for  his  moral 
good,  and  there  is  no  security  at  all  that  he  will  do  it ;  there  is  indeed  every 
probability,  or  every  fear,  that  he  will  not.     Fronde  cleverly  hits  off  the  weak- 
ness of  experience,  if  we  treat  his  sentence  as  applying  to  morals.     He  says, 
*'  Experience  is  like  the  stern  lights  of  a  ship,  which  cast  their  rays  over  a  path 
which  luis  been  taken."     In  relation  to  the  moral  and  religious  ordering  of  the 
moral  and  religious  life,  we  have  to  take  into  account  the  disturbing  element 
of  the  biassed,  self- pleasing  will.     Use  experience  how  well  soever  we  may,  that 
disturbing  element  has  to  be  reckoned  with  :  and  that  makes  us  feel  that  we 
"  lack  wisdom  " ;  and  that  drives  us  to  seek  the  help  of  God,  whose  supreme 
work  is  in  and  on  man's  will.     God  strengthens  with  "  strength  in  the  soul." 
Wherein  then  lies  the  difference  between  every  man's  life  and  the  Christian 
man's   life  ?      Just   here — Every   man  is   learning  by  experience  how  to   live. 
But  his  learning  is  seriously  affected  and  biassed  by  the  uncertainty  of  his  self- 
willedness.     The  Christian  man  too  is  learning  by  experience ;  but  he  has  asked 
God  to  set,  to  steady,  to  guide,  and  to  control  his  will ;  and  consequently,  for  him, 
the  lessons  of  experience  are  in  the  Divine  sanctifying.     Feeling  his   lack   of 
wisdom,  he  asks  of  God.     God  may  not  change  any  of  the  circumstances  of  the 
man's  life  ;  but  God  does  set  him  and  keep  him  rightly  related  to  the  circum- 
stances ;  and   therefore   his   life-experience  does   its  best   for  him.     St.  James 
wrote   to   Christian   Jews.     It  was   a   good  and  hopeful  sign  that  they  were 
conscious  of  "lacking  wisdom."     From  the  Christian  point  of  view,  then  and 
now,  there  is  no  peril  like  that  of  the  man  who  is  quite  sure  that  he  can  go 
alone.     "  Let  him   that   thinketh    he  standeth    take  heed  lest  he  fall."     The 
inspiration  of  a  life  of  trustful  prayer  is  the  daily  renewed  conviction  that  we 
"  lack  wisdom."     Prayer  is  our  expression  of  the  sense  of  need. 

III.  Practical  wisdom  for  the  ordering  of  life  is  obtained  only  on  conditions. 
— "Let  him  ask  in  faith,  nothing  wavering."  Here  we  are  led  to  think  of 
distinctions  among  professing  Christians,  rather  than  of  distinctions  between  the 
worldly  and  the  Christian.  Even  when  we  ask  we  may  miss  the  response,  by 
failing  to  meet  the  arranged  conditions.  We  must  ask  for  this  daily  Divine 
help  in  faith ;  but  that  faith  required  cannot  possibly  mean  the  acceptance  of 
certain  doctrines.  Answer  to  prayer  is  never  assured  in  God's  word  on  the 
ground  of  the  correctness  of  our  intellectual  beliefs.  Faith  in  relation  to 
prayer  is  seen  by  St.  James  as  steady  single -mindedness.  The  man  of  faith  feels 
quite  sure  of  what  he  needs.  He  has  no  questioning  whatever  about  it.  He 
gives  way  to  no  uncertainties,  no  doubts.  He  knows  that  he  "  lacks  wisdom." 
He  does  not  waver  as  to  that,  and  there  is  consequently  point  and  force  in  his 
prayer.  And  faith  in  prayer  also  includes  confidence  in  Him  to  whom  the 
prayer  is  addressed.  This  is  indeed  the  very  essence  of  Christian  prayer.  To  be 
a  Christian  at  all  is  to  know  God  so  as  to  trust  Him  thoroughly.  And  this 
confidence  has  for  its  sphere  everything  pertaining  to  the  practical  life  of  godh- 
ness.  Concerning  everything  the  Christian  prays  with  submission  ;  but  it  may 
be  said  that  in  praying  about  material  things  submission  is  stronger  than 
>expectancy;  but  in  praying  about  moral  and  religious  things,  in  which  the 
Christian  man  should  be  in  full  sympathy  with  God,  expectancy  ought  to  be 
stronger  than  submission.  With  an  unquestionable  and  unhesitating  confidence 
we  may  ask  for  everything  that  pertains  to  the  holy  life.  The  positive  con- 
dition is  active  faith,  full  confidence,  assured  hope  of  gracious  response.  The 
negative  condition  is,  that  there  shall  be  no  wavering, — no  feeling  as  if  we  did 
want  wisdom,  and  then  feeling  as  if  we  did  not ;  no  disputing  with  ourselves, 

501 


CHAP.  1.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


as  if  we  could  be  sufe  about  nothing ;  no  half-heartedness  in  our  praying. 
Sometimes  the  ship,  swayed  about  on  the  waters,  is  taken  as  the  type  of 
instabihty  ;  but  St.  James  knew  that  whatever  the  appearances,  the  ship  was 
really  answering  its  helm,  and  moving  towards  the  desired  haven.  So  he  took 
his  figure  from  the  surging  waves  themselves.  For  these  have  no  control  of 
their  own  movements,  and  are  under  no  apparent  external  control.  They  surge 
this  way  or  that,  they  rise  high  or  low,  according  as  they  are  played  upon  by 
the  ever -varying  winds.  And  so  even  God  can  hardly  get  at  the  man  who 
wavers,  for  there  are  no  steady  moods  to  which  he  can  respond.  "  Let  not  that 
man  think  that  he  shall  receive  anything  of  the  Lord."  The  waverer,  the 
doubter,  the  man  who  is  always  uncertain,  is  a  proverbially  difficult  man  to 
deal  with.  He  is  never  quite  sure  what  he  wants  ;  he  never  knows  how  to  ask  ; 
and  before  you  can  get  him  what  he  asks,  he  wants  something  else.  Both  God 
and  man  are  compelled  to  give  up  the  waverers  as  hopeless  people.  "  Let  him 
ask  in  faith,  nothing  wavering.  For  he  that  wavereth  [doubteth]  is  like  the 
surge  of  the  sea  driven  by  the  wind  and  tossed.  ...  A  double-minded  man  is 
unstable  in  all  his  ways." 

Let  me  gather  up  the  points  of  St.  James's  teaching  into  a  few  brief  but 
connected  sentences.  1.  It  is  one  thing  to  lack  practical  wisdom  for  the  ordering 
of  our  lives,  and  another  thing  to  know  that  we  lack  it.  2.  It  is  one  thing  to  know 
that  we  lack,  and  quite  another  to  be  willing  to  ask  for  a  supply.  3.  It  is  one 
thing  to  be  willing  to  ask,  and  quite  another  to  ask  properly.  Of  one  thing  we 
may  be  absolutely  sure,  and  we  may  act  on  our  assurance.  If  God  makes  con- 
ditions. He  lovingly  responds  to  them.  "  He  giveth  to  all  liberally  [just  the  skill 
for  life  that  they  lack],  and  upbraideth  not." 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND   SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Yer.  5.  The  Spirit  of  GodJs  Giving,  the  thing  that  we  ask  is  desirable  for 

• — "  Giveth    to   all   liberally,  and   up-  us.    Our  heart  cannot  be  in  our  request 

braideth  not."   When  and  under  what  if  we  are   uncertain   whether   God  is 

circumstances  do  we  men  upbraid  one  willing  to  give,  or  fear  that  He  may 

another?    1.  When  we  can  recognise  upbraid   us.      Failure   of   prayer   can 

no  claim  in  the  asker.      2.  When  we  usually    be   traced   to   the    man   who 

feel  that  too  much  is  asked.     3.  When  prays.      It   may   be  that  God  cannot 

we  expect  too  much  from  the  asker.  when  He  would. 

I.  Asking  in  faith   is    asking   in 

full  trust  of  the  person  from  whom         Asking  Jrom   God.r-l^QVQ  is  some- 

we  ask. — It  need    not    be   trust  that  thing  in  answer  to  every  discouraging 

we  shall  get  precisely  what   we   ask,  turn  of  the  mind,  when  we  go  to  God, 

and  exactly  at  the  time  that  we  want  under  a  sense  of  our  own  folly  and 

to  have  it.     It  must  be  trust  that  He  weakness,  to  ask  for  wisdom.     He  to 

of  whom  we  ask  will  use  His  judgment  whom  we  are  sent,  we  are  sure,  has  it  to 

in  the  matter,  and  give,  delay,  with-  give ;  and  He  is  of  a  giving  disposition, 

hold,   or  alter  as  He  may   see   to   be  inclined  to  bestow  on  those  who  ask. 

for  the  best.  Nor  is  there  any  fear  of  His  favours 

II.  Asking  in  faith  is  setting  our  being  limited  to  some  in  this  case,  so 
heart  upon  what  we  ask. — Our  Lord  as  to  exclude  others,  or  any  humble, 
on  more  than  one  occasion  taught  petitioning  soul;  for  He  gives  to  all  men. 
that  persistency  and  importunity  were  If  you  should  say  you  want  a  great 
specially  acceptable  features  in  all  deal  of  wisdom,  a  small  portion  will  not 
petition.  We  can  never  rightly  offer  serve  your  turn,  the  apostle  affirms 
any  request  to  God  if  we  doubt  whether  He  gives  liberally  ;  and  lest  you  should 

502 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES. 


CHAP.  I. 


be  afraid  of  ^oing  to  Him  unseason- 
ably, or  being  put  to  shame  for  your 
folly,  it  is  added,  "  He  upbraideth 
not."  Ask  when  you  will,  and  as 
often  as  you  will,  you  will  meet  with 
no  upbraidings. — Matthew  Henry. 

Plato's  Idea  of  Wisdom — Perfect 
wisdom  hath  four  parts  :  viz.  wisdom, 
the  principle  of  doing  things  aright ; 
justice,  the  principle  of  doing  things 
equally  in  public  and  private;  forti- 
tude, the  principle  of  not  flying  danger, 
but  meeting  it ;  and  temperance,  the 
principle  of  subduing  desires  and  living 
moderately. 

The  "  Wisdom "  of  Christianity. — 
All  that  the  schools  of  Greece  and 
Egypt  and  the  East  had  been  saying 
for  a  course  of  ages  was.  Let  no  man 
think  that  he  lacks  wisdom,  for  he 
has  it  in  himself — or  at  most.  If  any 
man  lack  wisdom,  let  him  come  to  us. 
But  when  the  voice  of  the  evangelising 
angel,  whom  John  saw  in  his  apoca- 
lyptic vision,  became  audible,  the  schools 
were  silent,  and  the  oracles  were  dumb, 
before  that  simple  precept,  to  which 
we  attach  so  little  value,  "  If  any 
man  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God." 
But  this  asking  of  God  was  to  the 
Greeks  a  mockery.  Even  those  who 
believed  in  God  had  no  conception  of 
immediate  spiritual  intercourse  with 
God,  still  less  of  intellectual  illumi- 
nation sent  directly  from  Him.  They 
knew  what  it  was  to  work  out  wisdom 
for  themselves,  or  to  seek  for  wisdom 
at  the  hands  of  human  sages  ;  but  this 
was  a  new  idea,  "  If  any  of  you  lack 
wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God."  And 
that  not  as  a  ceremony,  but  a  means, 
a  certain  means  of  acquisition — not  of 
God  the  unknown  and  the  unapproach- 
able, but  God  the  Giver,  God  who  gives, 
who  actually  gives,  has  given,  will  give 
again,  will  give  for  ever — not  to  certain 
favoured  nations  or  castes  or  indi- 
viduals, but  to  all  men — not  to  Greeks 
or  Jews  alone,  not  to  philosophers  or 
priests  alone,  but  to  all  men,  all  who 
ask,  all  who  really  desire  it,  all  who  ask 
aright. — J,  Addison  Alexander,  D.D. 


Knowledge  and  Discretion. — Learn- 
ing falls  far  short  of  wisdom.  .  .  . 
Knowledge  is  the  treasure  of  the  mind, 
but  discretion  is  the  key  to  it,  without 
which  it  is  useless.  The  practical  part 
of  wisdom  is  the  best. — Feltham. 

Wisdom,  whence  shall  she  he  gotten  /— 
That  which  is  of  supreme  importance 
to  us,  that  which  endures  through  all 
the  changes  and  decays  of  nature, 
that  which  really  determines  our  fate 
in  life,  in  death,  and  after  death,  is 
the  character  which  has  been  framed 
and  developed  in  us  during  these  fleet- 
ing hours  of  time,  and  by  all  the 
chances  and  changes  of  this  mutable 
world.  Our  highest  wisdom,  the  one 
true  secret  of  life,  is  self-training, 
self-culture,  the  development  of  a  com- 
plete and  noble  character.  Chai-acter 
is  supremely  important  in  business 
and  in  homes;  he  whose  character  is 
well  balanced  and  well  developed,  who 
is  not  only  manly,  but  a  mature  and 
complete  man,  is  equal  to  any  con- 
ditions, and  rises  superior  to  them 
all.  Into  the  next  world,  all  we  can 
take  is  the  character  we  have  built 
up.  The  ruling  bent  of  our  character 
will  determine  our  fate.  Our  main 
task  in  the  world  is  the  formation  of 
character ;  it  is  our  highest  wisdom 
to  endeavour  after  a  character  which 
shall  be  noble  and  complete,  a  character 
which  will  fit  us  both  to  live  and 
die.  Is  the  highest  wisdom  within 
our  reach  ?  St.  James,  writing  to 
Christian  Jews  under  persecution, 
tells  them  that  patient  and  faithful 
endurance,  which  God  sent,  and  in- 
tended adversity  to  produce,  would 
gradually  work  out  in  them  that 
manly  and  noble  character  which  is 
our  highest  good.  Trials  bravely  met 
search  out  and  carry  away  faults  and 
defects  of  character,  as  the  acid  bites 
out  the  alloy  from  the  gold.  They 
make,  or  tend  to  make,  us  of  so  com- 
plete and  entire  a  manliness  that 
nothing  is  lacking  to  us.  Some,  how- 
ever, might  lack  wisdom  to  see  that 
this  is  the  highest  wisdom  ;  so  St. 
James  says,  "  If  any  of  you  lack  [this] 

503 


CHAP.   I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


wisdom,"  which  holds  the  hope  of 
becoming  perfect  in  character  above 
all  other  aims,  let  him  ask  it  of 
God,  and  it  shall  be  given  him.  He 
will  teach  and  help  you  to  put  a 
pure  and  noble  character  before  the 
happiest  outward  conditions.  He  will 
help  you  to  welcome  the  trials  by 
which  He  is  seeking  to  make  you 
steadfast,  to  brace  you  to  a  mature 
and  complete  manliness,  to  supply 
what  is  lacking  in  you,  until  you  lack 
nothing.  If  you  cannot  see  that  to 
be  His  purpose,  ask  Him  to  show  it 
to  you,  and  He  will  show  it.  If  you 
ask  Him  for  wisdom  to  see  His  pur- 
pose in  afflicting  you,  you  will  try  to 
see  it.  As  you  pray  you  grow  sincere. 
You  can  see  more  clearly  what  your 
life  has  been  given  you  for,  for  what 
high  and  noble  ends.  You  so  relate 
yourself  to  the  Father  of  lights  that 
He  is  able  to  shed  light  into  your  soul. 
If  God  is  able,  surely  He  is  willing. 
Where  God  finds  an  open  and  pre- 
pared, a  seeking  and  receptive,  heart, 
He  enters  in,  and  enters  to  make  it 
wise  and  good.  If  you  honestly  crave 
wisdom  to  make  His  will  your  will, 
to  aim  at  that  maturity  and  per- 
fection of  character  which  He  knows 
to  be  your  supreme  good.  He  will 
as  surely  give  you  that  wisdom  as 
the  sweet,  pure,  sun-warmed  air  will 
flow  into  your  room  when  you  throw 
open  your  window  to  the  day.  God 
will  never  keep  His  word  of  promise 
to  the  ear,  but  break  it  to  the  hope 
it  has  inspired.  He  is  not  of  two 
minds,  as  men  often  are.  He  gives 
because  He  loves  to  give  and  loves 
you.  You  need  not  fear  to  ask  of 
Him,  either  because  you  have  so  often 
asked  before,  or  because  you  have 
never  asked  before.  "  He  upbraideth 
not."  And  whatever  forms  trials 
may  take,  you  may  be  sure  of  this  : 
God  intends  them  for  your  good,  for 
the  discipline  and  growth  of  character 
— intends  them  to  spur  and  brace  you 
to  fortitude,  courage,  patience ;  and 
therefore  He  would  have  you  count 
them  all  joy,  since  they  will  bring 
you  joy  at  the  last  if  you  meet  them 

504  ,    , 


with  a  constant  spirit.  If  you  care 
most  for  character,  the  trials  that 
brace,  refine,  and  elevate  your  char- 
acter should  not  be  vmwelcome  to  you. 
And  if  as  yet  you  lack  the  wisdom 
which  sees  in  every  trial  a  discipline 
of  character  and  perfection,  ask  this 
wisdom  of  God  the  Giver,  and  it  shall 
be  given  you. — aS'.  Cox^  D.D, 

Who  are  the  Wise  ? — 

Who  are  the  wise  ? 
They  who  have  govern'd  with  a  self- 
control 
Each  wild  and  baneful  passion  of  the 

soul — 
Curb'd  the  strong  impulse  of  all  fierce 

desires. 
But  kept  aUve  affection's  purer  fires. 
They  who  have  pass'd  the  labyrinth  of 

life, 
Without  one  hour  of  weakness  or  of 

strife : 
Prepared  each   change  of   fortune   to 

endure. 
Humble   though    rich,   and    dignified 

though  poor. 
Skill'd  in  the  latent  movements  of  the 

heart — 
Learn'd  in  the  lore  which  nature  can 

impart ; 
Teaching  that  sweet  philosophy  aloud 
W^hich    sees    the    "  silver   lining "   of 

the  cloud ; 
Looking  for  good  in  all  beneath  the 

skies : 

These  are  the  truly  wise. 

J*rince. 

True  Prayer  and  True  Answer. — Our 
truest  prayers  are  but  the  echo  of  God's 
promises.  God's  best  answers  are  the 
echo  of  our  prayers.  As  in  two 
mirrors  set  opposite  to  each  other  the 
same  image  is  repeated  over  and  over 
again,  the  reflection  of  a  reflection,  so 
here,  within  the  prayer,  gleams  an  earlier 
promise,  within  the  answer  is  mirrored 
the  prayer. — A.  Maclaren^  D.D. 

Ver.  6.  Two  Kinds  of  Doubting. — 
Intellectual  is  not  moral  doubt.  The 
unorthodox  are  not  as  the  adulterous. 
Nevertheless,   intellectual  doubt   may 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP.   I. 


spring  from  an  evil  habit  of  carping 
criticism  and  self-opinion,  for  the 
foundation  of  which,  in  so  far  as  a 
man  himself  has  been  either  the  wilful 
or  the  careless  cause,  he  must  bear 
the  curse  of  its  results. — Ellicott's 
Commentary. 

Winds  and  Waves. — "  Like  the  surge 
of  the  sea  driven  by  the  wind  and 
tossed."  The  wind  represents  outside 
circumstances — something  distinct  from 
the  sea  itself — acting  on  the  waters. 
When  men  are  not  established  in 
principles,  and  well  exercised  in  self- 
control,  they  are  easily  swayed  to  and 
fro  by  changing  outward  circumstances. 
*'  Each  puff  of  wind  catches  hold  of 
the  water,  and  heaps  it  up  into  a 
little  hill  with  the  face  to  the  leeward ; 
then  the  crest  falls,  and  the  water 
sinks  down  into  a  trough,  as  deep 
below  the  mean  surface  as  the  hill 
was  high  above  it ;  but  the  next  column 
of  water  is  then  forced  up,  only,  how- 
ever, to  be  pulled  down  again,  and  in 
this  way  the  motion  of  the  wave  may 
be  propagated  across  a  broad  expanse 
of  water.  Let  the  breeze  freshen, 
and  the  '  little  hills  '  of  course  become 
higher ;  the  wind  now  catches  the 
particles  of  water  on  the  crest  of  the 
wave,  and  carries  them  away,  scatter- 
ing them  as  spray,  or  water  dust, 
forming  foam — '  white  horses,'  as  the 
children  call  it.  Increase  the  breeze 
to  a  gale,  and  the  spray  becomes  a 
shower  of  salt  water,  until  far  away 
sea  and  sky  seem  to  mingle,  and  the 
horizon-line  is  lost  to  our  sight. 
Again,  as  the  wind  seizes  the  top  of 
the  wave,  it  makes  it  move  faster 
than  the  lower  part,  and  we  see  it 
bend  over  in  a  curve,  whose  edge  is 
scattered  into  foam.  If  the  wind  be 
intermittent,  as  mild  breezes  usually 
are,  we  get  a  few  small  waves  running 
in,  followed  by  a  larger,  higher  one, 
which  breaks  on  the  shore." — Worsley- 
Benison. 

Vers.  7,  8.  Single-minded  and  Douhle- 
minded. — The  double-minded  man  halts 
between  belief  and  unbelief,  with  in- 


clination towards  the  latter.  The 
single-minded  man  does  not  halt  at 
all ;  but  having  a  distinct  aim  before 
him,  moves  toward  it  with  a  resolute 
and  persistent  endeavour.  *'  Let  thine 
eyes  look  right  on,  and  let  thine 
eyelids  look  straight  before  thee."  St. 
James  is  dealing  with  characteristic 
dispositions  in  prayer.  Some  give 
force  to  prayer.  Some  so  weaken 
prayer  that  it  cannot  reach  God  with 
any  persuasive  power.  There  is — 1 .  The 
single-mindedness  of  conscious  need. 
The  man  is  quite  sure  that  what  he 
asks  he  wants.  2.  The  single-minded- 
ness of  a  resolute  purpose.  What  the 
man  wants  he  sets  heart  and  effort 
upon  attaining.  3.  The  single-minded- 
ness of  faith  in  God.  As  the  Prayer- 
hearer,  who  takes  heed  to  the  expressed 
desires  of  His  people,  and  waits  to 
bless.  4.  The  single-mindedness  of  a 
loyal  submission,  which  always  goes 
with  faith  in  God.  5.  The  single- 
mindedness  of  importunity,  which 
speaks  after  the  manner  of  Jacob : 
"  I  will  not  let  Thee  go,  unless  Thou 
bless  me."  The  man  of  a  single  mind 
in  prayer  may  reasonably  expect  to 
"receive  something  of  the  Lord."  There 
is  the  double-mindedness — I.  Of  uncer- 
tainty as  to  what  is  to  be  asked.  A 
man  may  not  know  exactly  what  he 
wants,  or  may  have  no  confidence  that 
what  he  asks  is  a  good  thing.  2.  Of 
uncertainty  whether  the  matter  had 
better  be  taken  to  God,  or  managed 
by  the  man  himself.  3.  Of  uncer- 
tainty whether  God  will  take  such 
things  into  consideration.  4.  Of  un- 
certainty whether,  after  all,  prayer  is 
of  any  real  use — whether  good  and 
evil  things  do  not  come  to  us  just  the 
same  whether  we  pray  or  not.  5.  Of 
uncertainty  caused  by  never  letting  a 
decision  rest,  but  going  over  it  again 
and  again,  until  opportunity  is  lost, 
and  nothing  is  done.  The  man  of  a 
double  mind  need  not  expect  to 
"receive  anything  of  the  Lord,"  for 
the  truth  is  that,  in  his  uncertainty, 
he  never  really  asks.  The  "  unstable  " 
can  neither  "excel"  nor  "attain." 

505 


CHAP.  I.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES, 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  9—11. 

Discipline  comes  out  of  Changed  Circumstances. — It  was  a  time  in  which  there 
were  frequent  sudden  changes  in  social  and  business  circumstances.  In  a 
commercial  age  some  rapidly  acquire  riches  ;  in  an  age  of  national  unsettledness 
and  religious  persecution  some  as  rapidly  lose  their  all.  It  is  often  said  that 
"  the  hardest  thing  in  life  is  to  come  doivn  gracefully."  It  would  show  a 
worthier  estimate  of  human  nature  if  we  were  to  say,  "  The  hardest  thing  in 
life  is  to  go  up  gracefully."  Many  more  cases  of  moral  ruin  attend  the  sudden 
increase  of  riches,  and  elevation  of  station,  than  attend  the  loss  of  wealth  and 
place.  Nevertheless,  men  are  always  willing  to  stand  the  moral  risk  of  going 
up,  and  never  willing  to  choose  the  moral  blessings  that  may  attend  coming 
down.  St.  James  impresses  that  both  changes  are  moral  testings.  The  man 
who  is  low  may  look  upon  his  elevation  as  a  testing  of  his  moral  character,  out 
of  which  increased  virtue  should  come.  The  man  who  is  high  should  look  upon 
his  misfortunes  as  Divine  discipline,  having  in  it  a  mission  of  moral  blessing  for 
him.  So  he  who  goes  up  may  sincerely  rejoice  in  the  going  up,  and  he  who 
comes  down  may  rejoice  in  coming  down,  since  God  is  so  evidently  adapting 
His  gracious  discipline  to  each  one.  It  is  an  advanced  Christian  thought  to 
which  every  one  cannot  hope  to  attain. 

I.  The  caste  principle  is  found  in  all  society. — It  may  take  exaggerated 
forms  in  India,  and  exclusive  trade  forms  in  countries  such  as  China,  but  it  is 
an  essential  feature  of  the  aggregating,  nationalising,  and  civilising  of  men. 
By  various  affinities  men  are  drawn  together  into  sets,  and  find  their  spheres 
and  pleasures  in  their  sets.  Every  man  is  born  into  a  class,  and  fits  to  his 
class.  Within  his  class  he  gets  his  own  particular  level  by  his  ability  or  his 
means.  The  caste  principle  must  never  be  thought  of  as  only  evil.  It  is 
mingled  good  and  evil,  and  may  be  good  in  an  important  sense  when  the 
members  of  the  various  classes  are  swayed  by  altruistic  principles,  and  accept 
the  duty  of  serving  one  another.  Our  Lord  said,  "  Ye  have  the  poor  always 
with  you  " ;  and  He  might  also  have  said,  "  Ye  have  the  rich  also  with  you." 

II.  The  caste  conditions  of  society  are  subject  to  change. — The  rich  are 
brought  low,  and  the  poor  are  exalted.  Proof  and  illustration  are  abundant  in 
history,  and  obvious  to  experience  and  observation.  It  may  suffice  to  show 
(1)  that  the  accidents  of  life  are  constantly  changing  class  conditions  ;  (2)  the 
rewards  of  human  enterprise  are  constantly  changing  class  conditions ;  and 
(3)  Divinely  ordered  providences  are  also  constantly  changing  class  conditions. 
Poor  Joseph  becomes  rich.  Rich  Job  becomes  poor.  These  are  types  with  great 
folio  wings. 

III.  The  changed  caste  conditions  of  society  are  disciplinary  agencies. — 
And  the  discipline  comes  to  both  those  who  go  up  and  those  who  come  down, 
because  (1)  in  either  case  new  associations  have  to  be  made,  and  to  them  the 
new  life  has  to  be  fitted  ;  and  (2)  because  the  old  life  may  be  so  seriously  out 
of  harmony  with  the  new,  that  the  work  of  fitting  to  the  new  may  cost  severe 
strain.  It  may  mean  earnest  self -culture — "  cutting  off  right  hand,  plucking 
out  right  eye."  But  discipline  through  Divine  providences  has  this  consolation 
in  it — it  is  meant  to  secure  for  us  the  highest  good.  It  can  only  be  our  own 
fault  if  we  miss  that  highest  good. 

The  Crown  of  Life. — This  is  a  figure  for  the  results  accomplished  in  character, 
by  the  resolute,  persistent,  and  heroic  endeavour  to  live  wisely  and  worthily 
and  well.  Such  efforts  are  crowned  with  (1)  a  spirit  of  firm  endurance;  (2)  an 
unshakeable  steadfastness ;  (3)  a  great  tenacity  of  purpose ;  and  (4)  a  quenchless 

506 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP.   I. 


enthusiasm  for  the  right,  the  true,  the  pure,  and  the  good.  EstabHshed  and 
confirmed  principles  of  character  are  the  "crown  of  Hfe," — the  crown  which 
God  gives,  though  it  seems  to  come  in  a  natural  way ;  the  crown  which  is  His 
recognition  and  reward. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  9.  Pride  in  Disguise. — There 
is  no  praise  from  the  plain  St.  James 
for  the  pride  which  apes  humility,  nor 
for  the  affectation  which  loves  to  be 
despised. 

The  Anxiety  of  Riches. — The  rich 
man  is  in  no  sense  to  be  envied, 
i.e.  the  man  who  trusts  in  his  riches. 
He  is  a  heavily  burdened  man.  His 
anxiety  concerns — 1.  The  retention  of 
his  riches.  His  fear  is  seen  in  exag- 
gerated form  in  the  miser.  The 
rich  farmer  was  worried  to  know 
"  where  to  bestow  all  his  fruits  and 
his  goods."  The  rich  man  is  perplexed 
in  these  times  to  know  how  to  put  out 
his  money  safely,  and  has  to  be  satis- 
fied with  small  interest.  2.  The  use 
or  misuse  of  his  money.  He  may 
easily  spend  it  in  self-indulgences  that 
bring  ruin  on  himself,  body  and  soul. 
He  may  easily  neglect  to  help  others 
with  his  wealth,  and  so  bring  down  on 
himself  the  curse  of  the  poor  and  the 
judgment  of  God.  3.  The  future,  into 
which  he  can  neither  carry  his  riches, 
nor  anything  that  his  riches  have 
obtained  for  him.  In  view  of  the 
worries  that  riches  bring,  we  may 
wisely  pray  the  prayer  of  Agur,  "  Give 
me  neither  poverty  nor  riches." 

Riches  a  Natural  Acquisition. — Man 
was  born  to  be  rich,  or  inevitably 
grows  rich  by  the  use  of  his  faculties, 
by  the  union  of  thought  with  nature. 
Property  is  an  intellectual  production. 
The  game  requires  coolness,  right- 
reasoning,  promptness,  and  patience 
in  the  players.  Cultivated  labour 
drives  out  brute  labour. — Emerson. 

Vers.  9-11.  Exaltings  and  Humhlings. 

I.  The  reasons  for  the  rejoicing  of 

the    poor. — I.e.    of    the    pious    poor. 


They  are  exalted — 1.  Inwardly,  by 
the  renewal  of  their  nature.  2.  Out- 
wardly, by  dominion  over  self.  3.  In 
rank,  by  high  dignity.  4.  By  com- 
munion with  the  best  intelligences. 
5.  By  the  endowment  of  the  best 
influences.  6.  By  raising  them  above 
the  temptations  of  their  condition. 
7.  By  enabling  them  to  adorn  all  the 
relationships  of  life.  8.  By  raising 
them  to  the  most  sublime  felicity. 
9.  By  inspiring  them  with  bright 
hopes  of  immortality. 

II.  The  reasons  for  the  rejoicing' 
of  the  rich. — I.e.  of  the  pious  rich. 
1.  They  are  delivered  from  proud  self- 
exaltation.  2.  From  the  fictitiousness 
of  worldly  distinctions.  3.  They  are 
conformed  to    the   image    of    Christ. 

4.  Able   to   realise   heaven's  honours. 

5.  They  have  treasures  laid  up  for 
them  for  eternity.  6.  They  are 
weaned  from  the  world.  7.  They  are 
ascending  by  the  cross  to  eternal  bliss. 
— Dr.  J.  Burns. 

Ver.  10.  The  Emblem  of  the  Gh^ass. 
— Describe  the  peculiarities  of  the 
grass  in  hot  Eastern  lands.  1.  It 
shows  well.  2.  It  fades  suddenly — 
under  scorching  wind  and  sun.  3.  It 
is  lost  utterly — at  least  for  the  season, 
and  until  God  sends  the  re\d\^ng  rains. 

Ver.  11.  Rich  ComTnercial  Jews. — 
"In  his  ways";  B.V.  "goings." 
There  seems,  moreover,  looking  closely 
at  the  text,  a  special  fitness  in  its 
exact  words ;  for  they  mean  that  the 
rich  shall  perish  in  their  journeyings 
for  the  sake  of  gain  ;  and  to  no  people 
could  the  rebuke  apply  more  sharply 
than  to  the  Jews,  the  lenders  "  unto 
many  nations"  (Deut.  xv.  6),  the 
merchants  and  bankers  of  the  world. 

507 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES, 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH. ^Verses  12—15. 

The  Mission  of  Temptation  as  Excitement  to  Evil. — From  temptation  as  moral 
testing  St.  James  proceeds  to  deal  with  temptation  as  a  force  alluring  to  the 
sin  of  apostasy.  Temptation  as  enticement  would  seem  at  first  sight  to  be 
altogether  and  only  evil.  Yet  in  view  of  the  sinful  condition  of  man,  and  the 
redemptive  work  to  be  done  in  him,  even  temptation  in  this  sense  may  prove 
to  be  an  important  remedial  force,  and  the  man  may  be  blessed  who  comes 
into  the  power  of  it,  but  endures,  stands  fast,  effectually  resists.  The  man  gains 
a  distinct  moral  uplift  who  has  come  safely  through  such  temptations.  It  is 
the  moral  dignity  of  Christ  that  He  was  tempted,  and  did  endure.  Temptation 
to  evil  apphed  to  moral  beings  is  an  essential  condition  of  moral  culture,  and 
we  cannot  conceive  of  moral  culture  being  accomplished  in  any  other  way. 
The  untempted  have  no  virtue.  But  this  brings  up  the  question.  Whence  comes 
temptation  to  evil? 

I.  St.  James  does  not  here  declare  the  source  to  be  a  great  evil  spirit. 

He  wants  those  to  whom  he  writes  to  feel  that  the  responsibility  in  the  matter 
rests  on  themselves,  and  therefore  he  avoids  the  bare  possibility  of  their  shifting 
the  responsibiUty  on  any  Satan.  But  the  question  of  the  existence  and  work  of 
a  personal  devil  need  not  be  introduced  here,  as  St.  James  puts  it  away  from 
consideration.  Whatever  idea  of  the  power  and  authority  of  Satan  we  may 
have,  it  is  distinctly  understood  that  he  is  no  co-ordinate  power  with  God, 
as,  perhaps,  Ahriman  is  with  Ormuzd  ;  but  a  strictly  subordinate  power,  working 
within  the  Divine  restraints,  and  working  in  reality  towards  the  Divine  beneficent 
ends. 

II.  St.  James  deals  with  those  who  say  that  temptation  to  evil  comes 
from  God. — He  afiirms  that  God  is  never  the  direct  source  of  temptation.  He 
says  that  He  cannot  be,  because  He  Himself  cannot  be  tempted  with  evil,  "  At 
first  it  might  seem  as  if  this  assertion  did  not  meet  the  thought  to  which  it 
appears  to  be  an  answer  ;  but  the  latent  premiss  of  the  reasoning  seems  to  be, 
that  no  one  tempts  to  evil  who  has  not  been  first  himself  tempted  by  it."  Satan 
the  tempted  one  is  the  tempter. 

III.  St.  James  affirms  that  the  source  of  temptation  is  found  in  the  nature 
of  man,  and  the  occasion  of  temptation  in  the  circumstances  of  man. — "  He 
is  drawn  away  of  his  own  lust,  and  enticed."  Man  is  made  for  pleasure,  and  is 
entrusted  with  desires.  It  is  his  nature  to  want  what  will  please  and  gratify 
him.  In  this  of  itself  there  would  have  been  no  difficulty  ;  but  in  the  simple 
gratification  of  desires  there  would  have  been  no  character,  and  no  possible 
creation  of  character.  There  came  a  revelation  of  God's  will  to  man,  which 
required  that  he  should  put  his  desires  into  restraint.  If  he  would  not,  he 
sinned.  In  asserting  his  self-will  against  God  he  changed  desires  into  lusts ; 
put  himself  into  the  power  of  his  lusts,  which  tempted  him,  enticed  him,  drew 
him  aside  to  evil.  The  external  world  of  things,  being  set  in  relation  to  his 
bodily  nature,  became  the  occasion  of  temptation,  when,  having  lost  his  self- 
restraint,  desires  had  become  lusts. 

lY.  St.  James  assures  that  the  consequences  of  sin  as  yielding  to  temptation 
to  evil  are  inevitable. — They  come  in  the  ordinary  and  necessary  outworking  of 
moral  laws,  and  are  as  certain  as  any  results  of  the  outworking  of  natural  laws. 
Let  unrestrained  desire  do  its  woi'k,  and  it  will  bring  forth  sin.  Let  sin  do  its 
work,  and  it  will  bring  forth  death.  The  only  possible  arrest  of  the  process 
is  in  man's  own  hands — with  the  Divine  help.  It  lies  in  gaining  that  self- 
mastery  which  God  is  ever  helping  us  to  gain  by  bringing  us  through  the 
sterner  discipline  of  life. 

508  ... 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES.  chap.  I. 


Ver.  12  (R.V.).  The  Mission  of  Temptation  as  Trial. — "Blessed  is  the  man 
that  endureth  temptation  :  for  when  he  hath  been  approved,  he  shall  receive  the 
crown  of  life,  which  the  Lord  promised  to  them  that  love  Him."  It  is  plain  that 
St.  James  has  two  very  distinct,  yet  very  closely  related,  senses  in  which  he 
uses  the  word  "  temptation."  Sometimes  he  means  attraction  or  enticement  to 
sin ;  sometimes  he  means  trial,  trouble,  affliction.  How  these  two  differing 
things  came  to  be  so  closely  associated  in  his  mind  we  can  easily  understand. 
Like  the  other  writers  of  general  epistles,  he  was  anxious  about  the  influence  of 
prevailing  persecutions  on  the  faith  of  the  Jewish  Christians.  Persecutions  were 
trials  to  be  borne.  But  those  Jewish  Christians  were  proving  them  to  be 
much  more  than  trials ;  to  them  they  were  temptations,  enticing  them  away 
from  their  new-fovind  faith,  back  to  their  old  and  formal  Judaism.  How  trials 
become  temptations  may  be  illustrated  from  the  effect  produced  by  the  family 
calamities  on  Job's  wife.  She  was  altogether  upset  when  the  crowning  distress 
came,  and  her  husband  was  smitten  with  a  foul  and  humiliating  form  of  disease. 
She  was  tempted  by  trial,  and  drawn  away  from  her  submission  and  trust. 
*'  Then  said  his  wife  unto  him,  Dost  thou  still  retain  thine  integrity  ?  Curse 
God,  and  die."  "The  element  of  testing  is  recognised  as  in  every  trial  that 
comes  to  the  good  man.  But  testing  involves  temptation.  The  test  is  this — 
Will  you  resist  what  you  are  tempted  to  think  or  feel  or  do  under  these  circum- 
stances of  trial  ?  Job  was  tested  by  the  fiery  trials  through  which  he  had  to 
pass ;  but  the  testing  involved  temptation  to  "  curse  God  and  die."  We  are, 
however,  proposing  now  to  treat  St.  James's  word  "  temptation  "  as  meaning 
"  trial."  But  as  soon  as  we  begin  to  think  of  the  trials  that  come  into  our 
human  lot,  an  important  distinction  comes  into  view.  So  many  of  our  human 
troubles  we  bring  upon  ourselves ;  they  are  the  direct,  natural,  and  necessary 
outcome  of  our  dispositions,  cherished  habits,  negligences,  indulgences,  or 
wilfulnesses.  Limit  thought  to  any  small  period  of  life,  say  a  single  year,  and 
it  will  both  surprise  and  humble  us  to  observe  how  many  of  the  troubles  of 
that  period  were  manifestly  unnecessary  and  avoidable,  if  we  had  been  other 
than  we  were.  It  is  indeed  the  exceeding  bitterness  of  human  life,  to  the 
seriously  thoughtful  man,  that  he  has  brought  most  of  his  sufferings  upon 
himself.  It  is  often  set  before  us  how  true  this  is  in  relation  to  bodily  pain  and 
frailty.  So  much  of  it  is  the  natural  result  of  our  self-indulgent  habits,  in 
eating  and  drinking,  in  clothing,  in  exposures,  in  over-exertions.  It  may  also 
be  shown  in  relation  to  those  more  serious  troubles  that  come  through  misunder- 
standings with  our  fellow- men,  and  which  for  many  persons  make  up  at  least 
three-fourths  of  the  bitterness  of  life.  Every  one  of  them  might  have  been 
avoided,  if  we  had  cultured  a  better  disposition,  exercised  a  wiser  self-restraint, 
set  a  worthier  watch  upon  the  door  of  our  lips,  or  shown  a  readier  willingness  to 
seek  explanations  and  reconciliations.  We  really  have  only  ourselves  to  blame 
for  such  misunderstandings  ;  they  are  entirely  human-made  calamities  ;  they  are 
not  in  any  sense  heaven-sent  trials  ;  and  all  the  bitter  hours  we  may  have  had, 
and  all  the  unworthy  things  we  may  have  been  led  to  say  and  do,  which  make 
wretched  hours  of  woe  for  others,  are  all  the  necessary  and  natural  outworking 
of  our  own  conduct  and  our  own  spirit ;  they  are  the  woes  which  we  have  made 
for  ourselves.  But  some  of  our  troubles  we  may  fully  recognise  as  sent  by  God. 
They  come  in  circumstances  which  we  are  wholly  unable  to  control.  They  are 
not — save  in  some  very  indirect  way — related  to  our  own  weaknesses  or  wrong- 
doings. It  may  sometimes  be  very  difficult  to  distinguish  between  the  troubles 
which  we  bring  upon  ourselves  and  the  troubles  which  God  sends  ;  and  yet  the 
distinction  can  be  made,  and  is  indeed  actually  made.  Under  many  of  our 
trials  we  have  a  great  fretting  of  conscience — those  are  our  man-made  trials. 
Under  other  trials  conscience  is  quiet  and  silent — those  are  our  God-sent  trials 

509 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


The  distinction  is  clearly  seen  in  the  life  of  Abraham.  He  made  trouble  for 
himself  in  Eg^^pt  and  at  Gerar,  when  he  deceived  with  the  idea  of  saving  his 
life.  He  came  into  troubles  which  God  sent,  when  he  went  to  Moriah  to 
sacrifice  his  only  son.  What  we  need  to  see  is  that  all  the  troubles  which  we 
bring  upon  ourselves  bear  the  character  of  judgments.  They  are  always  the 
whip  that  scourges  the  wilful.  They  are  always  designed  to  arouse  to  a  sense 
of  sin.     They  are  disciplinary  and  corrective,  but  in  the  way  of  punishment,  of 

judgment.     The  troubles  which  God  sends  have  no  judgment-element  in  them 

to  teach  this  one  truth  is  the  great  message  of  the  book  of  Job.  We  need  to 
look  this  truth  full  in  the  face.  God-sent  troubles  are  not  judgments,  are  not 
punishments.  Job  was  not  punished,  Job  was  not  judged,  by  his  trials.  God- 
sent  troubles  are  Divine  testings,  and  are  cidture  rather  than  discipline.  Thoy 
are  for  the  nourishing  of  virtue,  rather  than  for  the  correction  of  fault.  And 
therefore  it  is  fitting  that  for  those  who  endure  God-sent  trials  there  should  be 
provided  gracious  and  even  abundant  rewards,  summarised  in  the  figure  of  the 
"  crown  of  life."  There  are  periods  in  the  histories  of  individuals  and  of 
Churches,  when  the  God-sent  character  of  their  troubles  is  brought  very  closely 
home  to  them  ;  as  there  are  other  periods — which  are  far  harder  to  bear — when 
the  review  of  the  immediate  past  shows  troubles,  cares,  burdens,  which  are 
manifestly  related  to  our  wrong-doing.  We  see  quite  plainly  that  we  "  sowed 
the  wind,"  and  we  had  to  "  reap  the  whirlwind  "  ;  we  followed  the  devices  and 
desires  of  our  own  hearts  ;  and  the  days  went  on  until  we  found  ourselves  deep 
in  the  bog  and  quagmire  of  the  proper  fruitage  of  our  own  doings.  Now  we 
are  purposing  to  read  the  "temptation"  of  our  text  as  "our  God-sent  trials." 
So  read^  "  Blessed  is  the  man  that  endureth  trial." 

I.  Blessed  is  the  man  who  has  some  trial  to  endure. — "  Blessed  "  is  the 

rightly  chosen  word.      There    is  an  important    difference    between    the  words 

"  happy"   and    "  blessed."      Men  are  happy,  in  a   lightsome  way,  with  what 

may  "hap"  or  "happen."     Men  are  blessed,  in  a  serious  way,  with  what  they 

can  see  God  ordains,  arranges,  or  bestows.     Happiness  is  too  light  a  thing  to 

be  the  issue  of  any  enduring  of  trial.     It  represents  but  a  seeming,  passing 

good.     Blessedness  expresses  the  very  highest  condition  man  can  reach.     It  is 

man's  most  delightful  mood  ;  it  is  man's  truest  riches.     Blessed  puts  the  print 

of  heaven  on  a  man.     And  blessedness  cannot  fail  to  be  the  issue  of  enduring 

God- sent  trial.      Would  not  our  life   upon    the  earth  be    altogether  brighter, 

better,   worthier,  without  these  God-sent   trials  ?     Why  should  we  have  such 

things  to  endure  ?     Our  hearts  often  cherish  feelings  which,  if  they  took  shape 

as  words,  would  speak  like   this.     But  in  just  this  way  you  have  heard  the 

child  wonder  over  the  meaning  of  his  school-life — the  strain  of  learning,  and 

the  correction  of  faults.      Why  cannot  we  live  through  our  human  life  without 

these  school-tasks  and  this  school-discipline  ?     The  answer  to  the  school-boy  is 

the  answer  to  us.     You  can  be  something.     If  you  are  ever  to  be  what  you 

can  be,  you  must  be  subjected  to  school-discipline.     To  the  Christian  we  must 

say — You  can  be  something.     It  is   to  the  honour   of   God  and  to  your  own 

eternal  joy  that  you  should  be  what  you  can  be.     And  the  God-sent  trials  are 

God's  ways  of  making  you  what  you  can  become.     Is  it  better  to  go  through 

life  as  a  being  scarcely  superior  to  an  animal,  which  the  man  is  who  has  never 

known  school-training  ?      And  could  it  possibly  be  better  for  the  Christian  to 

remain  all  through  his  life  just  the  saved  thing  of  his  conversion-time  ?     And 

such  he  must  remain  for  ever  if  he  does  not  come  under  the  school- training  of 

God,  taking   shape  as   heaven-sent  trials.     We  fret  under  our  own  particular 

trials,    think    them    strangely   unsuitable   for   us,    and   far   more   severe   than 

anybody  else  has  to  endure  ;  and  exactly  so,  and  quite  as  unreasonably,  does 

the  child  at  school.     Have  you  ever  sat  quietly  down  to  think  over  the  God-sent 

510 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES.  chap.  i. 


trials  of  your  lives,  and  to  ask  yourselves  which  of  them  you  could  have  donej 
very  well  without  ?  If  you  have,  you  have  surely  found  that  you  had  given 
yourself  no  easy  task.  You  looked  them  carefully  over, — diseases  that  spoiled 
life's  plans  and  left  permanent  marks  on  the  body,  in  helpless  limbs,  or  recurring 
pain,  or  local  frailties ;  disasters  which  swept  away  income,  and  compelled  you 
to  begin  life  again ;  bereavements  that  plucked  away  your  life-support,  and 
left  you  fallen,  bruised,  helpless,  almost  hopeless :  yes,  you  passed  them  all  in 
review,  and  looked  out  this  one  and  that,  quite  sure  that  they  were  unnecessary. 
But  you  examined  them  again  ;  and,  as  you  looked,  a  flood  of  Divine  light  fell 
on  them,  and  in  that  light  was  revealed  their  mission.  You  saw  the  good 
which  they  had  wrought  in  you  and  for  you,  and  you  had  to  put  them  back 
into  the  list,  close  it  up,  and  say,  "  I  would  have  had  nothing  of  the  God-sent 
trial  other  than  it  has  been,  for  He  has  made  all  things  work  together  for 
good."  Blessed  is  the  man  that  has  some  God-sent  trials  to  endure.  Life  with 
them  is  hopeful.     Life  without  God-sent  trials — who  could  wish  for  that  ? 

II.  Blessed  is  the  man  who  endures  the  trials  God  does  send  him. — That 
word  "  endure  "  reminds  us  that  God-sent  trials  are  seldom,  if  ever,  single  events 
or  incidents — they  are  processes  ;  we  have  to  keep  up  for  some  time  our  right 
relations  to  them.  Single  acts  of  submission  under  strokes  may  be  com- 
paratively easy  ;  but  the  keeping  on,  the  enduring,  is  always  so  hard.  Enduring 
is  so  much  more,  and  so  much  more  noble,  than  bearing.  It  is  not  very  much 
to  lie  down  and  let  the  trials  of  life  trample  over  you,  and  hear  without  uttering 
a  groan.  Yet  that  is  many  people's  best  idea  of  the  right  attitude  towards 
Divinely  sent  afflictions  ;  but  that  is  not, Christian  endurance.  Eastern  devotees 
can  do  that  sort  of  bearing  work  far  better  than  we  can.  In  the  ceremony  of 
the  Doseh  a  long  line  of  men  will  cast  themselves  down  on  their  faces,  and  let  the 
v/hole  procession  of  men  and  horses  trample  over  their  backs  without  a  murmur. 
No,  no,  enduring  is  nothing  like  that ;  it  is  intelligent ;  it  is  the  resolve  of  the 
will,  based  on  the  good  judgment  of  the  mind,  and  the  right  feeling  of  the 
heart.  Enduring  is  lifting  up  oneself  to  take  a  right  position  in  relation  to 
our  trials,  and  keeping  oneself  uplifted  so  long  as  the  trial  stays.  Enduring 
is  cheerful.  Enduring  never  separates  a  man  from  his  duties,  his  relations, 
and  his  services.  The  man  who  endures  goes  about  his  earthly  life  as  bravely 
and  brightly  as  ever  he  did,  with  his  great  woe  bound  fast  like  a  burden  on  his 
shoulder,  but  determined  that,  if  he  feels  it  himself,  nobody  shall  see  it,  nobody 
shall  suspect  it.  That  is  the  holy  enduring  of  God's  saints.  They  may  try  to 
make  their  brave  burden -bearing  invisible,  but  they  cannot  quite  do  it.  Lines 
in  their  faces,  pathos  in  the  tones  of  their  voices,  tell  us  all  about  it.  But  then 
we  keep  silence  too,  only  saying  in  our  souls,  "  Blessed  are  they  who  endure 
temptation." 

III.  Blessed  is  the  man  who  gains  the  crown  of  life  promised  to  them  that 
endure  under  trial. — It  is  not  certain  where  St.  James  got  his  idea  of  the 
"  crown  of  life  "  from,  or  exactly  what  he  meant  by  it.  St.  Paul  had  associa- 
tions with  the  great  Grecian  games,  and  took  his  figures  from  the  parsley  or  the 
myrtle  crowns  v/hich  decked  and  honoured  the  victors  in  the  race  or  in  the 
fight ;  but  we  cannot  be  sure  that  St.  James  had  any  such  associations.  We 
must  do  what  we  can  toward  fixing  a  meaning  for  ourselves.  Let  us  try  two. 
1.  Life  may  be  the  crown.  And  this  will  fit  into  St.  James's  teaching.  He  is 
speaking  of  the  discipline  under  which  men  are  placed.  They  are  training  for 
life^  just  as  we  say  that  the  lads  at  school  are  training  for  life.  And  when 
they  have  endured  right  through,  and  the  training  and  disciplining  work  is 
done,  they  are  crowned  with  hfe ;  the  life  for  which  they  have  been 
preparing  so  long  comes  to  them,  and  it  is  a  dignity,  a  glory,  a  joy,  as  is  a 
crown,     2.  Or  it  may  mean  that  the  life  of  enduring  they  have  lived  through 

511 


CHAP.   I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES, 


will  be  crowned,  as  the  victor  in  the  old  games  had  his  victory  shown,  and 
gloried  in,  by  placing  on  his  head  the  myrtle  crown — the  deathless  myrtle 
crown.  It  may  be  that  we  shall  prefer  this  meaning,  since  the  crown  of  life  is 
plainly  the  gracious  recognition  and  reward  that  our  Lord  will  give.  Oh  the 
thrill  of  the  old  victor  as  he  steps  forward,  with  ten  thousand  eager  eyes  fixed 
upon  him,  and  ten  thousand  voices  shouting  glad  acclaim,  towards  the  royal 
seat  of  the  mightiest  King  of  all  the  kings  there,  and  then  feels  the  King's 
own  royal  hand  placing  the  myrtle  crown  upon  his  head — the  crown  which 
declares  he  has  fought,  he  has  borne,  he  has  endured,  he  has  won !  Can  it  be 
that  the  hand  of  the  King  of  kings  will  place  the  crown  of  life  upon  our  brow  ? 
Yes,  if  we  endure — nobly  endure,  sweetly  endure,  persistently  endure — our  God- 
sent  trials.  Our  God-sent  trials  !  The  past  has  a  rich  record  of  them.  The 
future  will  surely  bring  some  more  of  them  round  to  us.  And  "  blessed  is 
the  man  that  endureth  temptation,"  if  the  temptation  take  shape  as  God-sent 
trial. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  12.  Christian  Enduring. — This 
is  the  charm  of  our  Lord's  life  on  the 
earth.  Enduring  is  the  only  word 
that  covers  and  compasses  His  story. 
It  is  fittingly  associated  with  its  close, 
when  "  He  endured  such  contradic- 
tion of  sinners  against  Himself."  It 
is  possible  to  find  "  submission"  in  the 
cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  It  is  possible 
to  find  something  grander  far  than 
submission.  It  is  possible  to  find 
"  endurance,"  the  active  doing,  not  the 
merely  passive  bearing.  For  this  is 
the  thrice  noble  spirit,  this  is  sublime 
endurance — a  man  or  a  woman  keep- 
ing on  doing  cheerfully  the  life's  work 
with  their  great  earth-burden  bound 
tightly  on  their  shoulders.  Heroes  in 
the  strife  are  they. 

Povmr  to  endure  a  Sign  of  Manli- 
ness.— If  we  would  quit  ourselves  like 
men,  let  us  be  patient  men.  It  is  not 
a  manly  thing  to  be  grumbling  con- 
tinually, as  some  people  do,  about 
this,  about  that,  abovit  almost  every- 
thing— the  weather,  the  state  of  trade, 
their  health,  their  neighbours,  and  so 
forth.  'Now  whatever  troubles  us  can 
or  cannot  be  avoided.  If  it  can  be 
avoided,  let  it  be  avoided ;  if  it  cannot, 
let  it  be  patiently  borne ;  but  let  there 
be  no  peevishness.  I  think  there  is 
something  worthy  of  respect,  and  even 
of   admiration,  in  the  idea   of  manli- 

512 


ness  entertained  by  many  uncivilised 
peoples,  that  a  man,  worth  calling  a 
man,  should  be  able  to  bear  almost 
any  amount  of  physical  torture  with- 
out a  groan.  Civilisation  has  perhaps 
rendered  that  too  hard  a  test  for  us ; 
but  we  surely  need  not  be  so  impatient 
of  suffering  as  to  mourn  and  complain 
about  trifling  annoyances. — H,  Stowell 
Brown. 

The  Crown  of  Life, — The  issue  and 
outcome  of  believing  service  and  faith- 
ful stewardship  here  on  earth  is  the 
possession  of  the  true  life,  which  stands 
in  union  with  God  ;  in  measure  so  great, 
and  in  quality  so  wondrous,  that  it 
lies  on  the  pure  locks  of  the  victors 
like  a  flashing  diadem,  all  ablaze  with 
light  in  a  hundred  jewels.  There  is 
such  a  congruity  between  righteousness 
and  the  crown  of  life,  that  it  can  be 
laid  on  none  other  head  but  that  of  a 
righteous  man ;  and  if  it  could,  all  its 
amaranthine  flowers  would  shrivel  and 
fall  when  they  touched  an  impure 
brow. — A,  Maclaren,  D.D. 

ihe  Purpose  of  Temptation. — There 
is  a  purpose  in  temptation.  It  is 
not  an  accident  of  our  history  or 
nature.  It  serves  great  moral  and 
spiritual  ends  which,  so  far  as  we 
know,  could  not  be  otherwise  attained. 
It  is  essential  to  virtue.     In  the  New 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP.   I. 


Testament  the  word  has  a  double  mean- 
ing. It  means  the  inducement  to  sin. 
It  means  the  endurance  of  suffering. 
At  root  they  are  the  same.  Suffering 
tests  the  character,  tries  the  faith,  and 
so  tempts  us  as  much  and  as  surely 
as  does  the  direct  and  immediate  solici- 
tation to  sin.  Suffering  may  tempt 
men  to  evil  just  as  certainly  as  it  may 
train  them  to  good.  St.  James  means 
by  the  word  "  life,"  not  of  course  mere 
vitality,  for  that  the  man  must  have 
had  to  be  tempted  at  all ;  nor  only 
immortality,  for  that  might  conceivably 
be  his  whether  he  *'  endured"  tempta- 
tion or  not ;  but  "  life  "  in  the  sense 
of  character — of  virtuous  and  noble 
character — which  is  the  really  vital 
thing  in  man,  and  in  which  alone  a 
man's  true  life  consists.  He  receives 
the  "  crown  of  life "  as  the  natural 
issue  and  consummation  of  his  endur- 
ance. Without  the  cross  of  tempta- 
tion no  man  can  have  the  crown  of 
life.  How  is  temptation  disciplinarj'"  ? 
In  what  way  does  it  influence  our 
spiritual  life  ?  1.  By  teaching  us  the 
bitterness  of  sin.  With  the  first  taste 
of  the  forbidden  fruit  we  taste  the 
bitterness  of  sin.  It  is  this  knowledge 
of  sin,  this  awakened  consciousness  of 
guilt,  which  lies  at  the  foundation  of 
our  Christian  character,  and  gives  to 
us  our  place  and  part  in  the  redemptive 
work  of  Christ.  2.  By  revealing  us 
unto  ourselves.  Self-knowledge  is  the 
root  of  all  virtue.  It  is  one  of  the 
secrets  of  moral  safety  and  of  spiritual 
growth.  In  our  self -ignorance  is  our 
peril.  3.  By  the  general  development 
of  the  character.  Before  their  tempta- 
tion Adam  and  Eve  were  as  children. 
They  were  children  in  their  innocence. 
After  their  temptation  the  innocence 
was  lost,  and  lost  for  ever  ;  but  in  place 
of  it  was  a  bitter  knowledge  and  a 
stern  experience,  which  were  as  distinct 
a  development  on  w^hat  they  were 
before  as  is  manhood  to  infancy. 
Temptation  brought  them  into  a  wider 
range  of  being.  By  their  fall  life  was 
altogether  changed  for  them.  Their 
feelings  ran  in  new  and  deeper 
channels ;   their  knowledge   moved  in 


larger  spheres  ;  and  the  peaceful  safety 
and  simplicity  of  Eden  were  possible 
for  them  no  more.  What  is  true  of 
Adam  and  Eve  is  true  equally  of  us. 
We  are  born  innocent.  Childhood  is 
our  Eden.  Though  innocent,  we  are 
temptable  and  frail— the  more  tempt- 
able  and  frail  because  we  are  their 
children.  We  likewise  are  tempted  to 
our  fall,  and  through  the  fall  we  learn 
exactly  what  Eve  and  Adam  learnt, 
the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil — the 
blessedness  of  obedience  to  the  will  of 
God,  the  poisonous  bitterness  of  wrong. 
And  the  wider  knowledge  admits  us 
into  wider  life,  and  instead  of  con- 
tinuing children  we  spring  up  into 
the  stature  of  women  and  of  men. 
The  gates  of  a  lost  innocence  close 
behind  us,  and  we  find  ourselves  in 
the  great  world  struggling  amid  the 
thorns.  Through  temptation  men  fall 
and  sink  into  unfathomed  depths  of 
misery  and  degradation.  It  is  true. 
But  through  temptation  also  they 
rise  into  the  image  of  Christ,  *'  who 
is  the  image  of  God."  Through  the 
test  and  trial  of  temptation  men  grow 
to  manhood — manhood  grows  to  saint- 
hood— and  sainthood  is  at  last  borne 
into  the  Divine  haven  of  the  eternal 
peace — the  peace  of  a  perfectly  harmo- 
nious and  completed  character,  every 
disturbing  and  discordant  element  of 
which  has  been  vanquished,  and  for 
ever  left  behind.  So  that  no  tempta- 
tion would  mean  no  manhood — no 
sainthood.  It  would  even  mean  no 
Christ.  For  it  was  out  of  temptation 
that  Christ  came  to  save  us,  and  it 
was  through  temptation  that  He  saved 
and  saves. — Johnson  Barker^  LL.B. 

Ver.  13.  Nature  is  God^s  Work  only. 
— Some  cannot  see  in  nature  (as  J.  S. 
Mill)  "  the  work  of  a  being  at  once 
good  and  omnipotent,"  and  prefer  to 
doubt  the  latter  quaHty  sooner  than 
the  former.  But  this  nineteenth- 
century  conclusion  is  no  advance 
beyond  the  dual  system  of  the  Per- 
sians, or  rather  of  Mani,  who  cor- 
rupted with  his  Indian  fancies  the 
faith    of   Zoroaster.      The    Manic hees 


LL 


513 


CHAP.    I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


settled  the  difficulty  better  than  our 
deists,  by  declaring  the  existence  of  a 
good  God  and  a  bad  one,  and  appealed 
to  the  daily  strife  between  virtue  and 
vice,  nay  life  and  death,  in  witness  of 
their  simple  creed. 

God  no  Tempter. — Man  does  not 
directly  say,  "  I  am  tempted  of  God  "  ; 
but  he  is  ready  sometimes  to  accuse 
Him  indirectly  by  saying — God  has 
placed  me  in  such  and  such  circum- 
stances ;  and  therefore  God  is  really 
the  author  of  the  sin  into  which  those 
circumstances  have  led  me.  And  it 
is  true  that  God  is  the  author  of 
temptation  in  the  sense  that  He 
provides  men  spheres  of  moral  disci- 
pline. God  cannot  be  thought  of  as 
enticing  any  one  to  sin.  He  did  put 
Adam,  Abraham,  etc.,  into  scenes 
that  were  disciplinary.  He  deals  with 
His  people  now  in  the  same  way.  God 
''  tempteth  not  any  man."  That  is 
true.  But  this  is  also  true,  **  God  did 
tempt  Abraham." 

Is  God  the  Authm'  of  Sin  ? — The 
wider  notion  of  temptation  includes 
the  allurements  of  desire,  as  well  as 
the  trials  of  adversity.  In  both  cases 
men  found  refuge  from  the  reproof 
of  conscience  in  a  kind  of  fatalism. 
God  had  placed  them  in  such  and 
such  circumstances  ;  therefore  He  was 
the  author  of  the  sin  to  which  those 
circumstances  had  led.  The  following 
sentence  is  from  the  son  of  Sirach : 
"  Say  not  thou.  It  is  through  the  Lord 
that  I  fell  away"  (Ecclus.  xv.  11). — 
Far7'ar. 

God  not  the  Author  of  Evil. — God 
is  made  the  author  of  evil,  either 
directly  or  indirectly.  1.  Directly. 
If  we  say,  Nothing  can  possibly  root 
it  out  of  my  mind  that  I  shall  be  right 
in  doing  what  God  does ;  and  the  more 
I  feel  my  relation  to  Him,  and  the  fact 
that  I  am  formed  in  His  image,  the 
more  right  this  will  seem  to  me. 
2.  Indirectly.  If  I  feel  that  a  certain 
thing  is  necessary  for  the  attainment 
of  a  great,  good  end,  and  secures  it, 

514 


I  cannot  help  feeling  that,  as  a  means 
to  such  an  end,  it  is  right,  and  I  should 
be  justified  in  doing  it.  3.  If  a  certain 
state  of  things  in  the  Divine  providence 
is  the  best  attainable,  I  cannot  possibly 
feel  it  to  be  wrong.  These  three  re- 
presentations are  essentially  the  same. 
A  necessary  means  to  a  good  end,  or 
the  best  attainable  condition  in  a  world 
governed  by  God,  must  be  in  harmony 
with  His  will — cannot  be  felt  to  be 
wrong.  Free-thinkers  and  others  con- 
stantly represent  evil  as  necessary, 
as  a  means  to  a  good  end,  as  in 
harmony  with  the  Divine  will.  This 
cannot  be  evil.  Then  there  is  no  such 
thing  as  evil.  Sin  is  a  mistake,  a 
fancy  of  ours,  nothing  to  God.  But 
when  you  have  made  the  thing  itself 
not  wrong,  when  you  have  quite  hidden 
its  moral  deformities  under  the  Divine 
sanction,  and  have  painted  the  most 
hideous  results  with  the  plausible 
sophistry  of  a  good  appearance  in 
results — which  is  done  when  God  is 
made  the  author  of  evil — you  have 
left  no  room  for  conscience.  There 
is  no  wrong  to  be  condemned  by  con- 
science ;  there  are  no  evil  results,  for 
all  is  working  to  a  good  end.  There 
is  no  imaginable  reason  why  a  man 
should  not  do  just  what  he  likes  best, 
at  least  so  long  as  he  can  escape  any 
threatening  law.  And  that  law  has 
surely  no  right  to  be  resisting  what 
after  all  is  good.  Thus  the  moral 
foundations  are  swept  into  complete 
ruin.  Can  that  be  true  of  which  the 
legitimate  result  is  such  ?  The  value 
of  religion  consists  in  its  purity,  and 
its  power  to  awaken  pure  sympathies 
in  the  souls  of  men.  It  is  not  the 
province  of  religion  strictly  speaking — 
nor  is  there  any  occasion  for  it — to 
give  us  the  principles  of  morality,  rules 
for  right  conduct.  To  those  who  ac- 
knowledge no  supreme  Being,  and 
therefore  no  religion  in  our  sense,  all 
these  principles  remain  precisely  the 
same  as  to  us.  They  have  their 
foundations,  eternal  and  imperishable, 
in  the  very  nature  of  man  and  the 
constitution  of  human  society.  Re- 
ligion   is   that  which    can   elicit   our 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP.   I. 


devotion  to  these  principles  by  kindling 
our  love  and  reverence  for  their  highest 
and  most  perfect  embodiment — as,  for 
example,  in  Christ.  Religion  is  iden- 
tical with  morality  in  its  principles 
and  aims,  yet  above  it,  as  moving  in  a 
higher  sphere  of  influence  and  inspiring 
power.  It  is  this  view  that  renders 
so  indisputable  our  clear  conception  of 
God  as  good  and  only  good,  involved 
in  no  evil.  If  God  were  a  sovereign 
lawgiver,  whose  commands  could 
neither  be  impugned  nor  judged,  we 
could  have  no  ground  for  denying  that 
what  we  call  evil  might  originate  with 
Him.  Here  the  bitter  conflict  of  life 
arises  very  much  from  the  confused 
mixture  of  good  and  evil,  right  and 
wrong.  But  in  all  this  the  reliance 
of  the  mind  is  on  the  profound  convic- 
tion that  there  is  One  in  whom  no 
such  confusion  exists.  One  of  the 
distinguishing  characteristics  of  the 
religion  of  the  New  Testament  is,  that 
it  marks  out  with  such  exact  precision, 
and  yet  in  such  grand  and  lofty  out- 
lines, the  right  and  the  wrong,  and 
the  principles  that  place  them  beyond 
the  possibility  of  being  confounded. — 
Samuel  Edger,  B.A. 

Yers.  13,  14.  The  Secret  of  the 
Tempter^  s  Power. — Every  man  is 
tempted,  but  every  man  is  differently 
tempted.  Temptations  take  specific 
and  individual  forms,  and  each  age 
and  class,  position  and  pursuit,  has 
temptations  of  its  own.  Every  genera- 
tion has  its  own  temptations,  since 
each  age  brings  with  it  its  own  social 
circumstances,  its  own  religious  and 
political  conditions,  and  so — its  own 
temptations.  Every  man  is  tempted 
according  to  the  class  to  which  he 
belongs,  the  generation  in  which  he 
is  born,  and  according  to  that  in- 
dividuality of  character  and  history 
which  can  be  his  alone.  But  there 
is  one  thing  in  which  they  are  all 
alike.  The  secret  of  their  power  over 
us  is  ourselves.  We  are  ready  enough 
when  we  fall  to  blame  some  one  else. 
St.  James  insists  that  the  real  re- 
sponsibility when  we  are   tempted   is 


not  in  any  tempter  :  it  is  in  ourselves. 
The  real  source  of  temptation  is  in  us. 
To  be  tempted  is  to  be  "  drawn  away," 
*' enticed" — caught  like  an  animal 
in  a  noose — lured  like  a  bird  into  a 
trap.  And  we  are  ''drawn  away" 
not  so  much  by  any  skill  or  subtlety 
of  the  tempter  as  by  the  sensuousness 
of  our  nature,  the  keenness  of  our 
appetites,  the  strength  of  our  desires, 
the  ambition  of  our  intellect,  the  in- 
firmity of  our  temper,  the  weakness 
of  our  will,  the  depth  of  our  selfishness,  # 
the  greatness  of  our  pride,  the  greedi- 
ness of  our  vanity,  the  feebleness  of 
our  faith.  The  power  of  temptation 
lies  in  some  moral  frailty  which  the 
cunning  of  the  tempter  only  brings 
into  the  light.  By  "  lust  "  St.  James 
means  desire,  longing,  appetite,  animal 
or  otherwise.  Desire  unregulated — 
inordinate — ill  controlled.  Lust  in 
its  lower  form  we  call  sensualism, 
meaning  by  that  desires  which  spring 
directly  from  the  senses,  and  have  the 
animal  instincts  for  their  immediate 
origin  and  root.  The  senses  are  the 
primary  creators  of  temptation.  What 
are  Eve  and  Adam  in  their  fall  but 
a  symbol  of  the  senses  at  their  first 
and  keenest  ?  What  was  the  history 
of  our  first-remembered  sin?  Was 
it  not  this  ? — The  strength  of  our 
sensuous  or  sensual  desires  quickened 
by  some  external  seduction  into  longing 
after  that  which  we  knew  to  be  for- 
bidden, and  which,  though  forbidden, 
we  longed  for  nevertheless.  There 
are  other  forms  of  lust — lust  of  power, 
and  lust  of  gold.  When  the  spirit 
of  ambition  becomes  the  ruling  spirit 
of  a  man,  the  tempter  has  him  in  his 
grip.  He  becomes  selfishness  incarnate. 
The  question,  "  Who  shall  be  greatest  ?  " 
is  a  question  which  has  been  the  bane  of 
the  world,  and  the  bane  of  the  Church. 
It  is  the  bane  of  every  society  into 
which  it  enters.  It  is  destructive  of 
all  peace,  of  all  charity,  of  all  brother- 
hood. It  may  be  destructive  of  every 
virtue  and  of  all  morahty.  There  is 
also  the  lust  of  gold,  the  love  of  money. 
It  is  the  spirit  of  covetousness.  It  is 
one  of  the  forms  which  the  love  of 

515 


CHAP.   I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JAMES. 


power  may  take.  There  is  no  more 
fertile  source  of  temptation  and  of  sin. 
There  are  two  ways  in  which  tempta- 
tion culminates  and  is  made  complete  : 

1.  The  sinful  impulse  is  so  strong  that 
the  man  courts  or  creates  the  circum- 
stances which  shall  gratify  it,  and  it 
is  thus  developed  into  outward  acts  of 
guilt.     The  man  tempts  the  tempter. 

2.  Against  or  irrespective  of  his  will 
the  man  is  brought  face  to  face  with 
circumstances   which    tempt   what    is 

*  temptable  in  him,  and  he  lacks  the 
presence  of  mind  or  the  strength  of 
will  necessary  for  resistance.  Un- 
sought the  tempter  meets .  him.  He 
puts  a  crafty  finger  on  an  unsuspected 
weakness,  and  in  an  instant  the  simple 
soul  is  trapped.  In  each  case  the 
strength  of  the  temptation  was  in 
the  frailty  of  the  man — natural  and 
pardonable  frailty,  if  you  will — but 
frailty,  and  sinful  frailty,  none  the 
less. — Johnson  Barker^  LL.B. 

Ver.  14.  The  Limitations  of  Satan. 
— Satan  can  merely  act  on  his  general 
knowledge  of  human  nature,  aided  by 
particular  guesses  at  the  individual 
before  him,  whom  he  would  fain  destroy. 
He  has  learned  too  well  the  deep  cor- 
ruption of  the  heart,  and  knows  what 
gaudy  bait  will  most  attract  the  longing 
and  licentious  eyes. 

The  Devil  as  an  Objective  Person. — 
There  is  no  more  reason  to  suppose 
that  God  has  created  any  such  being, 
or  that  any  such  really  exists,  than 
there  is  to  suppose  that  there  is  a  real 
being  called  the  prince  of  this  world, 
or  another  called  antichrist,  or  two 
others  called  Gog  and  Magog.  The 
devil  is  that  objective  person,  whose 
reality  is  the  sum  of  all  subjective 
seductions,  or  temptations  to  evil,  viz. 
those  of  bad  spirits,  and  those  of  the 
corrupted  soul  itself.  These  bad  spirits, 
sometimes  called  Legion,  together  with 
our  own  bad  thoughts,  are  all  gathered 
up  into  a  great  king  of  art  and  mischief, 
and  called  the  devil.  Whether  it  is 
done  by  some  instinct  of  language,  or 
some   special   guidance  of   inspiration, 

516 


in  the  use  of  language,  or  both,  we  do 
not  know :  the  latter  is  more  probable. 
But  however  it  came  to  pass,  we  can 
see  that  it  serves  a  most  important  use 
in  the  economy  of  revelation.  In  the 
process  of  recovery  to  God  men  must 
be  convinced  of  their  sins,  and  made 
thoroughly  conscious  of  their  guiltiness, 
and  this  requires  a  turning  of  their 
minds  upon  themselves  in  reflection, 
and  a  state  of  piercingly  subjective 
attention  to  their  own  ill -desert.  And 
yet  they  must  be  taken  away,  some- 
how, from  a  too  close  or  totally  sub- 
jective attention  even  to  their  sins. 
For  if  they  are  to  be  taken  away  from 
their  ill- desert  and  guiltiness,  they 
must  be  drawn  out  into  a  movement 
of  soul  in  exactly  the  opposite  direc- 
tion, viz.  in  the  direction  of  faith 
which  is  outward.  And  this  exactly 
is  what  the  grand  objective  conception 
of  the  devil  prepares  and  facilitates. 
First,  their  sin  is  all  gathered  up,  with 
its  roots  and  causes,  into  the  bad  king 
conceived  to  be  reigning  without ;  and 
then  it  is  permitted  the  penitent,  or 
the  disciple  struggling  with  his  enemy, 
to  conceive  that  Christ,  in  whom  he  is 
called  to  believe,  is  out  in  force,  to 
subdue  and  crush  the  monster. — Horace 
Bttshnell,  D.D.^ 

Ver.  15.  The  Conflict  in  the  Believer, 
— Even  in  the  heart  of  the  believer 
two  principles  of  action  are  at  work — ■ 
the  renewal  "  in  the  spirit  of  his  mind  " 
after  the  image  of  God,  and  the  sinful 
desire  which  renders  the  soul  accessible 
to  temptation. — Webster  and  Wilkinso7i. 

Milton^s  A  llegory  of  Sin  and  Death. — 
In  Milton's  marvellous  allegory  of  sin 
and  death  (Paradise  Lost,  bk.  ii.  745- 
814)  Satan  represents  intellect  and 
will  opposed  to  God,  sin  its  offspring, 
self-generated,  and  death  the  fruit  of 
the  union  of  mind  and  will  with  sin. 
In  the  incestuous  union  of  sin  and 
death  that  follows,  and  in  its  horrid 
progeny,  Milton  seems  to  have  sought 
to  shadow  forth  the  shame  and  foul- 


*  Dr.  Bushnell's  note  is  given  as  sugges- 
tive of  thought,  not  as  approved.  —Ed. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP.   I. 


ness    and   misery    in    which    even    the 
fairest  forms  of  sin  finally  issue. 

The  Allegory  of  Sin  and  Death. — In 
looking  at  the  allegory  as  a  whole  we 
note — 1.  Its  agreement  as  to  the  rela- 
tion of  sin  and  death  with  the  teaching 
of  St.  Paul  (Rom.  v.  12).  2.  Its 
resemblance  to  like  allegories  in  the 
literature  of  other  nations,  as  in  the 
well-known  choice  of  Hercules  that 
bears  the  name  of  Prodicus,  in  which 
pleasure  appears  with  the  garb  and 
allurements  of  a  harlot. — Farrar. 


A  Suggestive  Image. — The  image  well 
depicts  the  repellent  subject.  The 
small  beginning,  from  some  vain  delight 
or  worldly  lust  and  pleasure ;  next, 
from  the  vile  embrace,  as  of  a  harlot — 
sin,  growing  in  all  its  rank  luxuriance, 
until  it  bear  .and  engender,  horribly,  of 
itself,  its  deadly  child.  The  word  of 
parturition  is  frightful  in  the  sense  it 
would  convey,  as  of  some  monstrous 
deformity,  a  hideous  progeny  tenfold 
more  cursed  than  its  begetter. — E.  G. 
Punchard,  M.A. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH. —Verses  16-18. 

The  Helpfidness  of  cherishiiig  Right  Thoughts  of  God. — The  tone  of  every  life 
is  given  by  the  idea  that  is  entertained  of  God.  This  is  abundantly  illustrated 
by  comparing  the  moral  life  of  Pagans  and  heathen  with  the  gods  whom  they 
acknowledge.  But  it  may  be  also  illustrated  by  the  philosophical  misrepresen- 
tations, and  the  ignorant  caricatures,  of  the  God  of  Christianity.  In  whatever 
sense  men  make  their  own  gods,  "  they  that  made  them  are  like  unto  them." 
The  moral  conduct  never  can  rise  higher  than  the  moral  conception  of  the  deity 
worshipped.  Then  how  much  is  done  for  humanity  when  the  revelation  is  made 
of  a  holy  God  !  How  much  is  done  when  that  holiness  is  seen  to  be  a  human 
possibility,  because  realised  in  the  Divine  Man,  the  Lord  Jesus. 

I.  God  is  good,  and  the  ultimate  Source  of  all  good.—  The  apprehension  of 
this  is  the  foundation  of  morality.  We  start  with  the  affirmation  of  goodness 
in  God.  "  None  is  good  save  one,  that  is  God."  1.  Everything  that  is  good  in 
the  world  has  the  God-stamp  upon  it.  "  Every  good  gift,  and  every  pei'fect 
boon,  is  from  above."  2.  Everything  in  the  world  that  is  good  has  the 
permanent  stamp  upon  it.  Evil  is  in  its  nature  temporary.  It  needs  to  be 
changed  into  good.  Good  is  in  its  nature  permanent,  for  it  does  not  need  to 
be  changed  into  anything.  3.  Everything  in  the  world  that  is  good  is  an  active 
force,  working  at  the  removal  of  evil.  The  highest  good  that  the  good  God 
works  is  making  typically  good  people.  (1)  God  is  the  source  of  good.  (2)  God 
is  always  the  source  of  good.  (3)  But  He  is  the  source  only  of  perfect  good. 
That  perfect  good  may  be  within  our  power  of  estimating,  or  it  may  be  beyond 
it,  and  then  we  are  thrown  back  on  our  primary  conviction  of  His  essential 
goodness.  If  God  is  good,  what  He  does  must  he  good,  though  it  may  not  seem 
good. 

II.  God  is  the  Father  of  lights,  who  casts  not  shadows. — "  With  whom 
there  can  be  no  variation,  neither  shadow  that  is  cast  by  turning."  St.  James 
has  in  mind  the  movements,  and  changing  appearances,  and  uncertain  shining 
of  sun  and  moon  and  stars.  There  are  sun  shadows  cast  by  the  varying 
relative  positions  of  earth  and  sun  and  moon.  God  is  thought  of  as  Father  of 
lights,  Originator  of  all  lights,  eternal  Light,  who  abides,  never  moves  to  cast 
a  shadow.  His  agents  may  cast  shadows;  He  never  does.  For  ever  and  for 
ever  shine  forth  from  Him  unqualified  benedictions.  Men  may  turn  those 
benedictions  into  curses,  but  that  can  never  alter  the  fact  that  they  are 
benedictions.  Earthly  atmospheres  may  dim  and  defile  the  rays  of  the  sun, 
but  only  by  adding  some  evil  to  them ;  the  rays  are  still  pure,  life-giving  rays. 

517 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JAMES. 


1.  God  Himself  is  light.  2.  God  is  the  Father  (Author)  of  lights,  all  lights. 
Everything  that  is  good,  pure,  true,  right,  is  in  sonship  to  God.  And  over 
everything  that  is  good  He  has  a  fatherly  care  and  concern.  Whensoever  we 
stand  to  the  good,  we  stand  with  God.  Whensoever  we  suffer  for  the  good, 
we  suffer  with  God.  If  anything  in  life  is  perplexing,  and  we  scarcely  know 
whether  to  call  it  evil  or  good,  there  is  always  this  sufficing  test  to  apply  to 
it — does  it  prefer  the  shadow  or  the  light  ?  Everything  that  loves  the  light  is 
of  God. 

III.  God  is  the  Author  of  the  new  life  in  man,  and  that  life  is  light  like 
Himself. — Illustrate  from  the  voice,  "  Let  there  be  light,"  which  broke  up  the 
chaos  of  the  material  earth.  That  voice  speaks  life  to  dead  souls,  light  to  briijg 
order  into  the  chaos  of  fallen  human  nature.  We  are  made  "  light  in  the 
Lord."  And  some  are  so  made  that  they  might  become  "  light-bearers," 
"holding  forth  the  word  of  life."  Or  to  use  the  figure  of  ver.  18,  to  be  "a 
kind  of  firstfruits  of  His  creatures." 

Learn — 1.  That  there  is  peril  of  deception  in  regard  to  God.  2.  That  peril 
is  great  when  we  only  look  around  us.  3.  That  peril  is  great  when  we  take  up 
only  man's  view  of  God.  4.  That  peril  is  great  if,  without  help  from  Divine 
revelation,  we  try  to  read  human  history.  5.  That  peril  is  relieved  when  we 
follow  the  teachings  of  the  inspired  word.  6.  That  peril  is  for  ever  removed 
when  we  come  into  those  personal  relations  with  the  Father  of  lights,  which 
He  graciously  permits. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  16.  The  Peril  of  Deception. —  such  an  one  as  we  are.  In  the  image 
"  Be  not  deceived,  my  beloved  brethren."  of  God  was  man  created,  on  purpose 
The  particular  peril  St.  James  has  in  that  he  might  rise  from  the  know- 
mind  is  the  peril  of  being  deceived  ledge  of  himself  to  the  knowledge  of 
as   to   the  character   of   God.     Kight  God. 

thoughts  of  God  are  at  the  basis  of         III.  There    is    peril    of  deception 

right  Hving.     Wrong  thoughts  of  God  when  man  trusts  to  what  nature  can 

make  possible  lives  of   self-indulgence  teach,  and  refuses  the  help  of  revela- 

and  sin.     Therefore,  from  the  time  of  tion.     It  is  not  that  nature  witnesses 

the  first  temptation  in  Eden,  the  policy  incorrectly  ;    it    does    witness    imper- 

of  the  evil  one   has   been   to  suggest  fectly.     It  is  true  as  far  as  it  goes; 

wrong   thoughts    of    God,    to    deceive  it  is  unsatisfactory  because  it  cannot 

with    regard    to    the    character    and  go  far  enough, 
requirements  of  God.  IV.    There    is    peril    of  deception 

I.  There  is  peril  of  deception  from  when  undue  reliance  is  placed  on  the 
one-sided,  and  therefore  imperfect,  teachings  of  man. — It  is  not  merely 
teachings  about  God.  They  may  exag-  that  there  are  false  teachers  ;  there 
gerate  His  holy  severities,  or  they  are  also  sectarian  teachers,  who  force 
may  exaggerate  His  loving-kindnesses,  on  attention  particular  views  of  God 

II.  There  is  peril  of  deception  as  the  foundation  of  their  exclusive 
when  man  makes  himself  the  standard  views.  Safeguard  amid  the  perils 
of  God. — This  reproach  is  given,  of  being  deceived  concerning  the  being 
"  Thou  though  test  that  I  was  altogether  and  character  of  God  is  obtained 
such  an  one  as  thyself."  Man  must  through  maintaining — 1.  Personal  re- 
rise  from  himself  to  conceive  of  God  ;  lations  with  God ;  2.  Simple-minded 
but  he  must  never  match  God  by  confidence  in  God's  revelations  of  Him- 
himself,  or  limit  God  to  what  he  self  in  and  through  His  inspired 
l^nows  of  himself.     He  is  not  altogether  word.     No  man  needs  to  be  deceived. 

518 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP.   I. 


Any  man  will  be  easily  deceived  who 
wishes  to  be  deceived,  or  allows  him- 
self to  be  put  off  his  guard. 

Vers.  16,  17.  God  the  Only  Source  of 
All  Good. — There  is  much  evil  in  the 
world.  Why  does  God  permit  this  ? 
We  are  called  to  feel  and  maintain 
that  He  does  all  things  well,  that 
however  He  may  permit  He  does  not 
do  evil ;  but  that,  on  the  contrary, 
all  good,  and  nothing  but  good,  is  to 
be  ascribed  to  Him.  We  need  to  have 
just  views  of  this  matter,  since  for 
want  of  them  we  greatly  err. 

I.  The  true  character  of  the 
Deity. — He  is  declared  to  be  the  only 
and  the  unchanging  source  of  all  good. 
1.  He  is  the  only  source  of  all  good. 
All  light  proceeds  from  the  sun.  So 
there  is  no  "  good  and  perfect  gift  " 
but  proceeds  from  God — ( 1 )  in  nature  ; 
(2)  in  'providence ;  (3)  in  grace.  All 
works  for  the  benefit,  the  welfare,  of 
His  people.  2.  He  is  the  unchanging 
source  of  all  good.  The  sun  has  its 
changes,  annual  and  diurnal ;  but 
Jehovah,  the  Father  of  all  heavenly 
lights,  changes  not.  His  light  may 
be  intercepted  by  a  cloud,  but  He 
Himself  remains  the  same. 

II.  The  errors  we  run  into  for 
want  of  duly  adverting  to  it. — We 
err  exceedingly — 1.  In  a  way  of  self 
vindication.  *'  Let  no  man  say,  when 
he  is  tempted,  I  am  tempted  of  God. 
Every  man  is  tempted  when  he  is 
drawn  away  of  his  own  lust  and 
enticed."  James  adds,  "Do  not  err." 
Evil  is  from  ourselves,  and  good  is 
from  God.  2.  In  a  way  of  self- 
dependence.  We  are  prone  to  look 
for  some  good  in  ourselves,  instead 
of  seeking  all  good  from  God  alone. 
Satan  himself  may  as  well  look  for 
these  things  in  himself  as  we.  All 
our  springs  are  in  God.  3.  In  a  way 
of  self -applause.  We  are  no  less  prone 
to  take  to  ourselves  credit  from  what 
is  good  than  to  shift  off  from  our- 
selves blame  in  what  is  evil.  If  there 
is  any  good  in  us,  it  is  from  Christ 
that  we  have  received  it.  If  we  have 
attained     to     anything     more     than 


ordinary,  we  must  say,  "  He  that 
hath  wrought  us  for  the  self-same 
thing  is  God."  Even  if  we  equalled 
the  apostle  Paul  we  must  say,  "  By 
the  grace  of  God " ;  and  in  reference 
to  every  individual  act,  "  Not  I,  but 
the  grace  of  God." 

Application. — "Do  not  err."  Be 
aware  of  your  tendencies ;  correct 
them.  If  you  arrogate  anything  to 
yourselves,  you  will  rob  God  ;  and  in 
robbing  Him,  you  will  eventually,  and 
to  your  utter  ruin,  rob  yourselves. — 
Charles  Simeon,  M.A. 

Yer.  17.  Father  of  Lights. — God  is  the 
Father  of  all  lights — the  light  of  the 
natural  world,  the  sun,  the  moon, 
and  stars,  shining  in  the  heavens ; 
the  light  of  reason  and  conscience ; 
the  light  of  His  law ;  the  light  of 
prophecy,  shining  in  a  dark  place  \ 
the  light  of  the  gospel  shining  through- 
out the  world  ;  the  light  of  apostles, 
confessors,  martyrs,  bishops,  and  priests, 
preaching  that  gospel  to  all  nations ; 
the  light  of  the  Holy  Ghost  shining 
in  our  hearts ;  the  light  of  the 
heavenly  city  :  God  is  the  Father  of 
them  all.  He  is  the  everlasting  Father 
of  the  everlasting  Son,  who  is  the 
Light  of  the  world. — Bishop  Words- 
worth. 

Light  is  God. — To  the  turning  of 
our  planet  from  the  sun  we  owe  our 
knowledge  of  the  universe.  In  the 
symbolism  of  its  darkness  and  light 
we  have  our  sublimest  revelation  of 
God.  Light,  which  is  called  God,  and 
is  God,  issues  for  ever  from  the  infinite 
bosom  of  His  darkness.  Darkness 
and  light  are  both  alike  to  Him ; 
for  He  is  as  much  one  as  the  other. 
The  Son  of  God,  the  only  begotten 
Light,  reveals  the  "  Father  of  lights," 
as  suns  reveal  the  ether.  God  presents 
Himself  in  the  Light,  but  also  con- 
ceals Himself,  as  we  both  present 
and  hide  ourselves  in  our  garments. 
"  Thou  coverest  Thyself  with  Ught 
as  with  a  garment."  As  the  infinite 
ether  is  hidden  by  the  daylight,  even 
so  is  God  hidden  by  the  light  of  the 

519 


CHAP.   1. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


angelic  heaveDS,  which  reveals  Him. 
Therefore  all  those  who  dwell  in  the 
eternal  light  worship  the  unseen  God, 
and  live  "  as  seeing  the  invisible." 
They  know  that  light  is  but  His 
effluence.  They  worship  the  Light, 
as  God,  and  again,  with  silent  ineffable 
adoration,  they  worship  what  is  behind 
the  Light. — John  Pulsford. 

Sun  and  Cloud. — As  the  sun  is  the 
same  in  its  nature  and  influences, 
though  the  earth  and  clouds,  oft  inter- 
posing, make  it  seem  to  us  as  varying 
by  its  rising  and  setting,  and  by  its 
different  appearances,  or  entire  with- 
drawment,  when  the  change  is  not 
in  it,  so  God  is  unchangeable,  and 
our  changes  and  shadows  are  not  from 
any  mutability  or  shadowy  alterations 
in  Him,  but  from  ourselves. — Baxter. 

Shadow  of  Turning. — With  Him  is 
nothing  analogous  to  those  optical 
delusions,  those  periodical  obscurations, 
those  vicissitudes  of  seasons,  which 
attend  the  annual  and  diurnal  course 
of  the  sun.  St.  James  incidentally 
controverts  that  doctrine  of  fatalism 
in  the  Pharisees,  which  ascribed  the 
conditions  of  men  to  the  influence  of 
the  heavenly  bodies. 

Yer.  18.  Pain  and  Death  in  Nature. 
— The  very  struggles  which  all  ani- 
mated beings  make  against  pain  and 
death  show  that  pain  and  death  are 
not  a  part  of  the  proper  laws  of  their 
nature,  but  rather  a  bondage  imposed 
on  them  from  without ;  thus  every 
groan  and  fear  is  an  unconscious  pro- 
phecy of  liberation  from  the  power 
of  evil. — Dean  How  son. 

Firstfruits  of  the  Creatures. 

I.  Firstfruits  to  show  the  possibility 
of  harvest. — Suppose  that  neV^r  before 
this  year  had  the  fields  of  earth  waved 
with  the  golden  grain  ;  that  now,  for 
the  first  time,  with  measured  step  and 
waving  hand,  the  husbandman  moved 
to  and  fro  over  his  fields,  scattering 
the  precious  seeds.  How  intently  he 
would  watch  those  fields  in  the  after- 

520 


weeks  !  One  or  two  blades  force  their 
way  through  the  soil ;  they  grow 
quickly  in  one  warm,  moist  corner. 
The  ears  form  and  bud,  and  swell, 
and  ripen  early  there ;  and  the  hus- 
bandman carries  home  those  firstfruits 
as  the  assurance  that  there  can  he 
a  harvest  from  his  sowing. 

II.  Firstfruits  assure  us  of  the 
character  of  the  harvest. — Examine 
carefully  those  quickly  ripened  first- 
fruits.  You  can  judge  from  them 
what  will  be  the  quality  and  the  extent 
of  the  harvest.  The  same  blights  have 
swept  over  the  field  as  have  smitten 
those  firstfruits.  There  has  been  the 
same  soil,  the  same  culture,  the  same 
dew  and  rain  and  sunshine.  You  can 
tell  from  the  handful  of  firstfruits 
whether  the  barns  will  be  loaded  and 
the  yield  will  be  enriching.  Do  these 
firstfruits  stand  well  ?  Are  they  strong 
in  the  stalk,  full  in  the  ear,  free  from 
mildew  and  rust  ?  Then  soon  you 
shall  see  the  whole  valley  waving  in 
the  summer  breeze,  and  reflecting  the 
golden  glory  of  the  summer  sky.  You 
shall  hear  the  sharp  cutting  of  the 
reapers,  as  they  gather  in  the  precious 
grain.  Are  those  firstfruits  thin  and 
speckled,  and  small,  and  unsteady  on 
the  stalk  ?  Then  there  is  a  wail  of 
despair  in  the  soul,  for  the  harvest 
will  scarcely  repay  the  cost  of  in- 
gathering. St.  James  calls  the  first 
Jewish  Christians  the  "  firstfruits  of 
his  creatures."  There  is  a  promise 
for  the  race  in  every  unusually  good 
man ;  then  what  promise  there  must 
be  in  Christ !  ' 

Firstfruits  of  the  Human  Harvest. — 
There  are  always  some  favourable 
situations  in  a  country  where  the 
harvest  ripens  quickly.  This  is  espe- 
cially the  case  in  Palestine,  parts  of 
which  are  tropical  or  sub-tropical. 
The  interest  of  "  firstfruits "  lies  in 
their  implying  "  after-fruits."  But  to 
a  Jew,  with  the  feelings  and  associa- 
tions of  Mosaism,  a  peculiar  interest 
attached  to  "  firstfruits,"  and  by  the 
term  a  special  thing  was  understood. 
The  fruit  of  all  manner  of  trees,  for 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES.  chap.  I. 


the  first  three  years,   was   not   to   be  of  His  soul,  and  be  satisfied."     Early 

eaten,  nor  any  profit  made  of  it ;    in  Church  a   kind   of   firstfruits.       First 

the  fourth  year  it  was  to  be  holy,  and  seals   to   a   ministry.      First  converts 

used   only   to   praise  the  Lord,   being  in   a   revival.     First   decided   ones  in 

either  given  to  the  priests,  or  solemnly  a  family.       Firstfruits   are  an  assur- 

eaten  by  the  owners  before  the  Lord  ance — the  harvest   is   coming.     First- 

in   Jerusalem ;    in    the    fifth   year    it  fruits   are   an   evidence — of  what   the 

might  be  eaten,  and  made  use  of  for  harvest   will    be.       Firstfruits  are  an 

profit,   and  thenceforward  every  year.  inspiration — to  keep    on    working    for 

Explain   man's  harvest   of   the  earth  the  larger  and  fuller   return.      Close 

and  harvest  of  the  sea.     He  only  reaps  with   the   argument   of  the  apostle — 

and  gathers  in  what  God  provides  for  "  For   this   cause    I    obtained    mercy, 

him.      Then  it  is  most  befitting  that  that  in  me  a  chief  might  Jesus  Christ 

he  should  make  first  acknowledgment  shew  forth  all  His  long-suffering,  for 

to  God.     From  Cain  and  Abel   show  an   ensample  of    them    which    should 

the  natural  impulse  which  leads  man  hereafter  believe  on  Him  unto  eternal 

to  make  his  thank-offering.     A  portion  life"  (1  Tim.  i.    16).     Work  out    the 

of  the  very  blessing  God  has  given  us  answers  to  these  questions  :   Who  are 

is  the  best   thank-offering.       Explain  the  first  saved  ones  among  us  ?     What 

God's  harvest  of  the  earth.     He  "would  ought  they  to  be  to  God,  to  themselves^ 

have   all    men    to    be    saved."       The  and    to     others  ?        They     should    be 

Redeemer   shall    "  see   of    the   travail  "  proofs  "  and  "  patterns." 


MAIJV  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  19—21. 

Hindrances  to  Spiritual  Receptiveness. — In  His  parable  of  the  sower  our  Lord 
presented  to  view  some  of  the  more  usual  hindrances,  such  as  come  from 
preoccupation,  shallow-mindedness,  and  worldly  cares.  St.  James  presents  to 
view  those  which  in  a  special  manner  affected  the  Jews  of  the  Dispersion. 
Loquacity,  quarrelsomeness,  self-assertion,  love  of  mastery,  were  characteristic 
of  them  ;  and  all  of  these  spoil  receptiveness,  and  tend  to  destroy  it.  Good 
influences  can  only  enter  in  at  the  doors  which  meekness,  and  quietness,  and 
anxiety  to  learn  and  serve,  can  open.  Men's  character-conditions  usually 
suffice  to  explain  the  limitations  of  Divine  blessing  to  them.  They  have  not, 
because  they  are  not  able  to  receive.  Power  to  receive  depends  on  resolute 
dealing  with  our  personal  evils  in  character. 

I.  One  great  hindrance  is  hasty  talk. — "  Slow  to  speak."  Much  talk  is 
perilous ;  but  hasty  talk  is  more  perilous.  Much  talk  usually  goes  with  little 
thought.  Hasty  talk  goes  before  thought,  and  often  utters  what  the  thought 
would  neitlier  approve  nor  support.  Hasty  talk  is  no  less  a  hindrance  when  it 
is- pious  talk,  or  talk  about  religious  things.  There  are  no  persons  more  difficult 
to  influence  for  good  than  those  who  have  "  too  much  to  say."  Hasty  talk 
expresses  and  nourishes  self-conceit  and  self-satisfaction.  Mere  fluency  is  the 
gravest  peril  of  the  Christian  teacher. 

II.  Another  great  hindrance  is  hasty  temper. — "  Slow  to  wrath."  It  is 
difficult  for  us  to  realise  the  suddenness,  unreasonableness,  and  intensity  of 
anger  in  Eastern  countries,  and,  perhaps  we  may  say,  even  specially  among  the 
Jews.  One  writer  says  :  "  I  have  never  met  with  a  people  so  much  disposed  to 
violent  anger,  especially  from  slight  causes,  as  in  the  case  of  the  inhabitants  of 
the  East.  Men  get  angry  with  each  other,  with  their  wives  or  childi*en  or 
animals,  or  even  with  inanimate  things,  with  surprising  frequency.  The  notice- 
able points  are,  want  of  control,  and  want  of  anything  like  ordinary  proportion 
'between  the  cause  and  degree  of  the  emotion.     These  fits  of  anger,  to  any  save 

521 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


a  superior,  are  marked  by  most  expressive  demonstration."  Evidently  St.  James 
feared  that  among  the  Jewish  Christians  the  new  Christian  spirit  was  not 
recognised  as  a  force  bearing  on  the  restraint  of  this  national  characteristic. 
Still  appeal  is  often  made,  in  excuse  of  failure,  to  "  human  nature."  A  man 
will  explain  his  wrong- doing  by  his  disposition,  as  if  the  first  sphere  of  the 
Christian  sanctifying  were  not  that  very  disposition.  The  power  of  wrath  in 
man  is  a  necessary  and  noble  element  of  character.  The  expression  of  wrath  is 
often  a  sign  of  lack  of  self-restraint.  Lack  of  restraint  is  a  condition  in  which 
evil  can  work  effectively,  but  good  cannot.  Good  takes  a  man  who  is  in  restraint. 
Temper  spoils  the  work  that  good  would  do.  The  Christian  reUgion  is  a  distinct 
force  unto  self-restraint.  It  helps  to  the  possession  of  every  "  vessel  of  the 
body  in  sanctification  and  honour."  And  that  represents  a  condition  of  full 
receptivity  to  gracious  influences. 

III.  Another  great  hindrance  is  found  in  the  relics  of  old  corruptions  left 
in  us. — "  Putting  away  all  filthiness  and  overflowing  of  wickedness."  John 
Bunyan,  in  his  Holy  War^  represents  some  DiaboUans  as  left  lurking  and 
hiding  in  **  Mansoul,"  and  ever  hatching  and  plotting  mischief.  St.  Paul  speaks 
of  the  "  old  man  with  his  corruptions  "  ;  evil  habits,  unregulated  and  unsubdued 
desires  and  passions ;  injurious  friendships ;  all  that  is  involved  in  the  term 
"  the  flesh,"  as  used  by  the  apostle. 

"  The  flesh  and  sense  must  be  denied, 
Passion  and  envy,  lust  and  pride." 

TV.  A  last  hindrance  is  our  failure  duly  to  cultivate  some  sides  of  the 
Christian  character. — "  Receive  with  meekness  the  engrafted  word."  Meekness 
is  one  of  the  neglected  sides,  partly  because  we  do  not  see  how  that  can  be 
cultivated.  And  it  cannot  be  directly.  It  can  be  indirectly.  Active  graces  can 
be  nourished  b}^  direct  dealing  with  them ;  passive  graces  can  only  be  cultured 
by  attention  to  the  things  which  form  for  them  good  soil  and  atmosphere.  There 
are  speciahties  of  character  in  male  and  female ;  the  Christian  character  is 
inclusive  of  both,  and  the  Christian  never  can  gain  his  full  receptivity  unless 
both  the  characteristic  male  and  female  graces  are  duly  nourished  into  fulness  of 
strength  and  beauty. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES, 

Ver.  19.  Swift  to  Hear  rather  than  to  ciples  of  Pythagoras,  especially  if  they 

Speak. — If  we  were  as  swift  to  hear  as  were   addicted   to   talkativeness,   were 

we  are  ready  to  speak,  there  would  be  not  permitted  to  speak  in  the  presence 

less  of   wrath   and   more  of  profit  in  of  their  master,  before  they  had  been 

our  meetings.      I    remember   when  a  his  auditors  five  years. — 31.  Evans. 
Manichee  contested   with    Augustine, 

and   with  importunate  clamour  cried,  Ver.  20.  The   Besetting   Sin   of  the 

^^  Hear  me!    Hear  me/"     The  father  Jews. — The  besetting  sin  of  the  Jews^ 

modestly  replied,   "Nee  ego  te,  nee  tu  was     to     identify    their    own    anger 

me,    sed  ambo  audiamus   apostolum "  against   what  seemed  sin  and  heresy 

("  Neither  let  me  hear  thee,   nor  do  with  the  will  of  God  ;  to  think  that 

thou  hear  me,  but  let  us  both  hear  the  they  did  God  service  by  deeds  of  vio- 

apostle  "). — Manton.  lence,  and  that  they  were  thus  working 

out  His  righteousness.     The  teaching 

Talkativeness. — We     are    overhasty  of  St.  James  here  is  after  the  pattern 

to  speak — as  if  God  di(}  not  manifest  of  the  purely  ethical  books  of  the  Old 

Himself  by  our  silent  feeling,  and  make  Testament. 
His  love  felt  through  ours.     The  dis- 

522 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES. 


CHAP.   I. 


Ver.  21.  Engrafted,  and  so  within 
us. — The  gospel  woQ'd,  whose  proper 
attribute  is  to  be  engrafted  by  the 
Holy  Spirit,  so  as  to  be  livingly  in- 
corporated with  the  believer,  as  the 
fruitful  shoot  is  with  the  wild  natural 
stock  on  which  it  is  engrafted.  The 
law  came  to  man  only  from  without, 
and  admonished  him  of  his  duty.  The 
gospel  is  engrafted  inwardly,  and  so 
fulfils  the  ultimate  design  of  the  law. 
— Fausset. 

The  Eyigrafted  Ww^d.—''  Engrafted," 
or  "  implanted,"  here  has  special  refer- 
ence, as  the  Greek  shows,  to  the  object 
in  view.  The  word  is  designed  to 
fructify,  and  it  is  something  not  akin 
to  the  recipient.  An  agency  is  implied, 
and  in  this  connection  the  apostle  is 
thinking  of  ministers  as  the  planters  ; 
and  the  heavenly  doctrine  so  enters 
the  soul  and  pervades  it  as  to  become 
a  second  nature,  thoroughly  identified 
with  the  life,  even  as  the  graft  which 
has  taken  well  becomes  after  its  inser- 
tion into  the  stock  completely  one  with 


it.  And  yet  it  is  from  the  stock  it 
draws  sustenance  and  strength,  and 
becomes  a  fruit-bearer. 

Truth  received  with  Meekness. — The 
truth  is  not  to  be  received  with  a 
passive  meekness  merely.  Unless  it 
be  received  with  an  active  meekness^ 
the  engrafted  word,  that  might  have 
grown  and  converted  the  whole  tree, 
dies.  To  get  the  full  illustration  of 
this,  we  must  suppose  a  wilful  crab 
stock,  not  merely  passive,  but  endued 
with  a  power  of  self- determining 
perverseness,  to  say  to  the  gardener, 
"You  may  cut  me  and  apply  your 
graft  to  the  cutting,  but  not  one 
particle  of  my  sap  shall  ever  enter  into 
its  vessels."  The  consequence  would 
be,  inevitably,  that  the  crab  tree  would 
remain  a  crab  tree,  and  the  fruit- 
bearing  graft,  for  want  of  co-operation 
on  the  part  of  the  crab  tree,  unsus- 
tained  by  the  sap,  would  die ;  it  could 
not  grow  unless  received  with  active 
energy  by  the  crab  tree. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  22—25. 

Followiny  up  Religious  Instructions. — One  of  the  weaknesses  of  the  Hebrew 
Christian  communities  was  that  so  many  of  the  members  thought  they  were 
called  to  teach,  and  were  able  to  teach.  It  is  the  constantly  recurring  weakness 
of  the  so-called  Free  Churches,  which  encourage  their  members  to  use  their 
various  gifts  in  the  service  of  the  Church.  Persons  who  think  they  can  teach 
and  cannot  are  amongst  the  most  difficult  and  troublesome  people  to  deal  with. 
St.  James's  counsel  here  is  directly  addressed  to  such  persons.  He  politely  but 
searchingly  says,  "  You  would  make  better  hearers  than  teachers ;  and  you 
would  find  plenty  of  sphere  for  your  energy,  if  you  set  yourselves  to  do  the 
things  about  which  you  hear."  "  Be  ye  doers  of  the  word,  and  not  hearers  only, 
deluding  your  own  selves."  There  is  a  hearing  only,  which  leads  to  nothing. 
The  seed  of  truth  lies  as  on  a  hard  field-path,  exposed  to  the  birds.  There 
is  a  talking  only  about  what  is  heard,  which  is  more  than  useless,  which  is 
mischievous,  because  self -satisfying.  There  is  a  doing  of  what  we  hear  which 
is  in  every  way  valuable,  for  it  implies  thought,  care,  anxiety,  right  sense  of 
responsibility  and  duty.     Doing  prefers  silence. 

I.  Religious  knowledge  is  not  the  final  result  of  religious  instruction. — It 
is  a  proper  result,  one  to  be  distinctly  aimed  at.  But  it  may  be  made  a  final 
result  by  the  teacher  who  has  the  special  gift  of  teaching  ;  and  by  the  hearer 
who  is  mentally  strong,  naturally  critical,  or  unduly  interested  in  doctrine. 
It  needs  to  be  strongly  urged  on  public  attention  in  these  days,  that  religious 
knowledge  is  no  more  than  a  stage  on  the  way  to  the  final  result  aimed  at  by 
the  public  presentation  of  religious  truth.    F.  W.  Robertson  says,  "  I  can  conceive 

523 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JAMES. 


of  no  dying  hour  more  awful  than  that  of  the  man  who  has  striven  to  know 
rather  than  to  love,  and  finds  himself  at  last  in  a  world  of  barren  theories, 
loving  none  and  adoring  nothing." 

II.  Religious  feeling  is  not  the  final  result  of  religious  instruction. — This 
truth  appeals  to  quite  a  different  class  of  hearers — to  the  emotional  class.  There 
are  very  many  persons  who  think  they  can  never  get  a  blessing  from  public 
services  unless  their  feelings  are  moved.  And  the  claim  of  these  really  good, 
but  somewhat  weak-charactered,  people  mischievously  influences  our  public 
preachers,  who  allow  themselves  to  cultivate  the  merely  rhetorical  and  pathetic, 
and  to  imagine  that  they  have  gained  splendid  triumphs  when  they  have  subdued 
congregations  to  tears.  It  is  well  therefore  to  set  forth  the  surface  and 
temporary  character  of  religious  emotions,  and  the  temptation  to  satisfy  ourselves 
with  them,  and  even  flatter  ourselves  in  our  goodness  as  indicated  by  them. 
Many  a  Christian's  life,  if  read  searchingly,  will  be  found  very  full  of  high, 
forced,  fictitious  emotions  and  feelings,  but  very  weak  in  masteries  of  evil, 
power  of  principles,  self-sacrifices,  holy  charities,  and  good  works.  People  seem 
to  prefer  that  which  cultivates  the  sentimental. 

III.  Religious  talk  is  not  the  final  result  of  religious  instruction.— Some 
hearers  simply  reproduce  what  they  hear,  with  variations,  and  imagine  they 
have  reached  the  true  result  when  they  have  given  everybody  whom  they  can 
influence  their  idea  of  the  sermon.  And  their  talk  is  of  no  value  to  themselves, 
or  to  any  one  who  listens  to  them.  In  every  sphere  of  life  it  is  found  that  the 
talkers  are  the  helpless  people,  if  they  are  not  the  mischievous  people.  While 
they  stop  and  talk,  the  real  work  of  life  waits  undone.  True  preaching  tends 
to  stop  talk,  by  compelling  people  to  think,  and  to  inquire  what  they  can  do. 

lY.  Religious  doing  is  the  final  result  of  religious  instruction. — Our  Lord, 
as  the  great  Teacher,  constantly  enforced  this  truth  by  direct  woi'd,  e.g.  "  If 
ye  know  these  things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them  "  :  by  pictures,  "as  of  the 
good  tree  that  brings  forth  good  fruit  "  ;  and  by  parable  on  parable,  such  as 
that  of  the  "  talents."  The  apostle  constantly  urges  the  same  thing.  St.  James 
has  it  for  the  one  thing  that  he  variously  illustrates  and  impresses.  The  true 
hearer  is  "  the  doer  that  worketh  " ;  and  the  true  preacher  or  teacher  is  he  who 
can  inspire  men  unto  doing ^  lead  into  the  life  of  service. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES 

Ver.    22.  Spiritual  Parasites. — The  bound  to  use  what  he  receives  in  the 

plants  that  grow  on  the  great  trees,  common  service;  but  this  no  parasite 

and  thrive  on  the  sap  of  the  trees,  only  ever  does, 
bring  forth  their  own  fruit  unto  them- 
selves.    They   iii   no   sense    help    the  Living    the     Truth. — ^A    brief    and 

mission  of  the  trees.     Nay,  their  simple  simple  but  very  expressive  eulogy  was 

receptiveness  becomes  a  drain  of  the  pronounced  by  Martin  Luther  upon  a 

tree's  life,  and  even  effects  its  ultimate  pastor   at   Zwickaw,  in   1522,   named 

ruin.     There  be  those  in  the  fellowship  Nicholas      Hausman.       "What      we 

of  Christ's  Church  who  are  "  hearers  preach,"  said  the  reformer,  "  he  lives." 
only  "  ;  receptive  only  ;   they  take   in 

everything,  give  out  nothing,  help  in  True  Religion. — A  man's  religion  is 

nothing,    do   nothing   but    serve    and  not  a  thing  all  made  in  heaven,  and 

please     themselves.       They    are     but  then  let  down  and  shoved  unto  him. 

parasites,  but  they  may  have  a  fatally  It  is  his  own  conduct  and  life.     A  man 

mischievous  influence  on  the  Church  s  has  no  more  rehgion  than  he  acts  out 

life.     He  who  receives  is  honourably  in  his  life. — H.  Ward  Beecher, 

524 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES. 


CHAP.   I. 


An  End  in  view  fw  Hearers  of  the 
Gospel. — It  is  strange  folly  in  multi- 
tudes of  us  to  propound  no  end  in  the 
hearing  of  the  gospel.  The  merchant 
sails,  not  only  that  he  may  sail,  but  for 
traffic,  and  traffics  that  he  may  be 
rich.  The  husbandman  ploughs,  not 
only  to  keep  himself  busy,  but  in  order 
to  sow,  and  sows  that  he  may  reap 
with  advantage.  And  shall  we  do  the 
most  excellent  and  fruitful  work  fruit- 
lessly— hear  only  to  hear,  and  look  no 
further  ?  This  is  indeed  a  great  vanity, 
and  a  great  misery,  to  lose  that 
labour  which,  duly  used,  would  be  of 
all  others  most  gainful ;  and  yet  all  our 
meetings  are  full  of  this. — Leighton. 

Vers.  22-24.  Profitless  Hearing. 

I.  The  vacant  hearers. — These  are 
men  who  are  drawn  mechanically  to 
the  sanctuaiy,  and  leave  all  but  their 
bodies  elsewhere. 

II.  The  curious  hearer. — This  spirit 
brings  the  attention  to  bear  upon  a 
subject,  but  merely  to  dissect  and 
criticise  it. 

III.  The  captious  hearer. — Here 
the  attention  is  excited  only  to  be 
turned  against  the  teachings  of  religion. 
The  business  here  is  to  catch  the 
preacher  in  his  words. 

lY.  The  fashionable  hearers. — These 
welcome  the  Sabbath  so  as  to  display 
to  advantage  their  attractions. 

V.  The  speculating  hearers.^These 
are  they  whose  selfishness  leads  them 
to  make  a  pecuniary  gain  of  godliness. 
It  is  respectable  to  attend  Divine  wor- 
ship, therefore  they  go. 

VI.  The  self-forgetful  hearers. — 
Those  who  listen  to  find  out  their 
neighbours'  defects. 

VII.  The  prayerless  hearers. 

VIII.  The  unresolved  hearers. — 
J.  T.  Tucker. 

Ver.  23.  Eastern  Mirrors. — The 
mirrors  in  use  among  the  Jews,  Greeks, 
and  Romans  were  of  polished  metal ; 
and  as  these  presented  a  less  perfect 
image  than  our  modern  mirrors,  to 
see  through,  i.e.  by  means  of,  a  mirror 
had  become  among  the  later  Rabbis, 


as  well  as  with  St.  Paul,  a  proverbial 
phrase  for  man's  imperfect  knowledge 
of  Divine  things. 

Objects  that  may  he  looked  at. — St. 
James  especially  draws  attention  to 
the  character  of  the  looking,  and  the 
dependence  of  the  after-results  upon 
that  character.  But  we  may  also 
compare  the  objects  looked  at,  and 
the  results  dependent  on  looking  at 
right  and  fitting  objects.  There  is — 
1.  Looking  in  at  self.  2.  Looking 
around  on  others.  3.  Looking  out  at 
truth.  4.  Looking  up  to  God.  The 
writer  of  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
bids  us  "  look  off  " — look  away — 
"  unto  Jesus,  the  author  and  finisher 
of  our  faith." 

Characters  seen  in  the  Use  of  Mirrors. 
— Vanity  is  thus  shown.  So  is  the 
anxiety  to  please.  But  the  indiffer- 
ence which  involves  a  hurried  and 
careless  use  of  the  mirror  should  be 
recognised  as  a  moral  weakness.  A 
Christian  man  ought  to  be  the  ''  best 
possible  "  in  every  relation  of  life,  and 
in  the  use  of  every  powar  of  influence. 
Much  influence  does  come  from  his 
personal  appearance,  expression  of 
countenance,  and  manners.  A  careful 
use  of  the  mirror  may  therefore  be  a 
sign  of  right  Christian  carefulness,  and 
anxiety  to  serve  others  in  every  kind 
of  ministry.  "It  is  possible,  though 
it  can  hardly  be  insisted  on,  that  there 
is  an  emphasis  on  a  man^s  casual  way 
of  looking  at  a  mirror,  and  the  more 
careful  gaze  supposed  to  be  character- 
istic of  a  woman.^^ 

Ver.  24.  Fading  Impressions. — This 
is  described  as  an  actual  occurrence, 
seen  and  noted  by  the  writer.  There 
is  a  recognition  of  the  well-known 
face,  followed  by  instant  and  complete 
forgetfulness  ;  and  thus  is  it  often  with 
the  mirror  of  the  soul.  In  some  strik- 
ing sermon,  or  book,  a  man's  self  is 
made  manifest  to  him,  and  the  picture 
may  be  too  familiar  to  cause  aversion  ; 
but,  whether  or  no,  the  impression 
fades  from  his  mind  as  quickly  as  the 

525 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


echoes   of   the   preacher's   words.     At  to  substitute  the  mere  intellectual  grasp 

the  best  the  knowledge  was  only  super-  of   Christian   truth   for   the   practical 

ficial,     perhaps      momentary,     widely  doing  of  it.     Not  what  we  believe,  but 

different  from  that  which  comes  of  a  what  we  do,  is  our  Christianity  ;  only 

holy  walk  with  God. — E.  G.  Punchard,  the   doing   must   be   rooted   in  belief. 

M.A,  Take  this  vivid  conception  of  the  gospel 

as   a   law,    as   ^   counterpoise   to   the 
tendency   to    place   religion    in    mere 

Yer.    25..    The   Perfect  Law. — That  emotion  and  feeling.     Notice  that  this 

must  be  the  law  which  secures  to  man  law  is  a  perfect  law.     James's  idea,  I 

the  liberty  and  the  power  to  do  7'ight.  suppose,  in  that  epithet,  is  not  so  much 

And  that  liberty  and  that  power  are  pre-  the  completeness  of  the  code,  or  the 

cisely  the  things  which  man  supremely  loftiness  and  absoluteness  of  the  ideal 

needs,    seeing    that    he    finds   himself  which  is  set  forth  in  the  gospel,  as  the 

under  persuasion  and  constraint  to  do  relation  between  the  law  and  its  doer. 

wrong.  He   is   stating   the   same   thought   of 

which  the  psalmist  of  old  time  had 
The  Perfect  Lav)  and  its  Doers. — St.  caught  a  glimpse.  "  The  law  of  the 
James  is  the  preacher  of  works,  but  Lord  is  perfect,"  because  "it  converts 
of  works  which  are  the  fruit  of  faith.  •  the  soul."  That  is  to  say,  the  weak- 
T.  The  perfect  law. — In  every  part  ness  of  all  commandment — whether  it 
of  the  revelation  of  Divine  truth  con-  be  the  law  of  a  nation,  or  the  law  of 
tained  in  the  gospel  there  is  a  direct  moral  text- books,  or  the  law  of  con- 
moral  and  practical  bearing.  No  word  science,  or  of  public  opinion,  or  the  like 
of  the  New  Testament  is  given  to  us  — the  weakness  of  all  positive  statute 
only  in  order  that  we  may  know  truth,  is  that  it  stands  there,  over  against  a 
but  all  in  order  that  we  may  do  it.  No  man,  and  points  a  stony  finger  to  the 
man  can  believe  the  principles  that  stony  tables,  "  Thou  shalt ! "  "  Thou 
are  laid  down  in  the  New  Testament,  shalt  not !  "  but  stretches  out  no  hand 
and  the  truths  that  are  unveiled  there,  to  help  us  in  keeping  the  commandment, 
without  their  laying  a  masterful  grip  It  simply  enjoins,  and  so  is  weak — like 
upon  his  life,  and  influencing  all  that  the  proclamations  of  some  discrowned 
he  is.  In  the  very  central  fact  of  the  king  who  has  no  army  at  his  back  to 
gospel  there  lies  the  most  stringent  enforce  them,  and  which  flutter  as 
rule  of  life.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  pattern,  waste-paper  on  the  barn-doors,  and 
and  from  those  gentle  lips  which  say,  do  nothing  to  secure  allegiance.  But, 
"If  ye  love  Me,  keep  My  command-  says  James,  this  law  imperfect,  because 
ments,"  law  sounds  more  imperatively  it  is  more  than  law,  and  transcends 
than  from  all  the  thunder  and  trumpets  the  simple  functions  of  command.  It 
of  Sinai.  In  the  great  act  of  redemp-  not  only  tells  us  what  to  do,  but  it 
tion,  which  is  the  central  fact  of  the  gives  us  power  to  do  it ;  and  that  is 
New  Testament  revelation,  there  lies  what  men  want.  The  world  knows 
a  law  for  conduct.  God's  love  redeem-  what  it  ought  to  do  well  enough, 
ing  us  is  the  revelation  of  what  we  Thera  is  no  need  for  heaven  to  be  rent, 
ought  to  be ;  and  the  cross,  to  which  and  voices  to  come  to  tell  men  what 
we  look  as  the  refuge  from  sin  and  is  right  and  wrong ;  they  carry  an  all 
condemnation,  is  also  the  pattern  for  but  absolutely  sufficient  guide  to  that 
the  life  of  every  believer.  It  is  a  law  within  their  own  minds.  But  there  is 
just  because  it  is  a  gospel.  If  your  need  to  bring  them  something  which 
conception  of  Christianity  has  not  shall  be  more  than  commandment, 
grasped  it  as  being  a  stringent  rule  which  shall  be  both  law  and  power, 
of  life,  you  need  to  go  to  school  to  both  the  exhibition  of  duty  and  the 
St.  James.  This  thought  gives  the  gift  of  capacity  to  discharge  it.  The 
necessary  counterpoise  to  the  tendency  gospel  brings  power  because  it  brings 

526 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JAMES. 


CHAr.   I. 


life.  ''  If  there  had  been  a  law  given 
which  could  have  given  life,  verily 
1  ighteoiisness  had  been  by  the  law." 
In  the  gospel  that  desideratum  is  sup- 
plied. Here  is  the  law  which  vitalises, 
and  so  gives  power.  The  life  which 
the  gospel  brings  will  unfold  itself  after 
its  own  nature,  and  so  produce  the 
obedience  which  the  law  of  the  gospel 
requires.  Therefore,  says  James 
further,  this  perfect  law  is  freedom. 
Of  course,  liberty  is  not  exemption 
from  commandment,  but  the  harmony 
of  will  with  commandment.  Whoso- 
ever finds  that  what  is  his  duty  is  his 
delight  is  enfranchised.  We  are  set 
at  liberty  when  we  walk  within  the 
limits  of  that  gospel ;  and  they  who 
delight  to  do  the  law  are  free  in 
obedience,^ — free  from  the  tyranny  of 
their  own  lusts,  passions,  inclinations  ; 
free  from  the  domination  of  men,  and 
opinion,  and  customs,  and  habits.  All 
those  bonds  are  burnt  in  the  fiery 
furnace  of  love  into  which  they  pass, 
and  where  they  walk  transfigured  and 
at  liberty,  because  they  keep  that  law. 
Freedom  comes  from  the  reception  into 
my  heart  of  the  life  whose  motions 
coincide  with  the  commandments  of 
the  gospel.  Then  the  burden  that  I 
carry  carries  me,  and  the  limits  within 
which  I  am  confined  are  the  merciful 
fences  put  up  on  the  edge  of  the  cliff 
to  keep  the  traveller  from  falling  over, 
and  being  dashed  to  pieces  beneath. 

II.  The  doers  of  the  perfect  law. — 
James  has  a  long  prelude  before  he 
comes  to  the  doing.  Several  things  are 
required  as  preliminary.  The  first  step 
is,  *'  looketh  into  the  law."  The  word 
employed  here  is  a  very  picturesque 
and  striking  one.  Its  force  may 
be  seen  if  I  quote  to  you  the  other 
instances  of  its  occurrence  in  the  New 
Testament.  It  is  employed  in  the 
accounts  of  the  Resurrection  to  describe 
the  attitude  and  action  of  Peter,  John, 
and  Mary  as  they  "  stooped  down  and 
looked  into  "  the  empty  sepulchre.  In 
all  these  cases  the  Revised  Version 
translates  the  word  as  I  have  just 
done,  "  stooping  and  looking,"  both  acts 


being  implied  in  it.  It  is  also  employed 
by  Peter  when  he  tells  us  that  the 
*'  angels  desire  to  look  into  "  the  mys- 
teries of  redemption,  in  which  saying, 
perhaps,  ther^  may  be  some  allusion 
to  the  silent,  bending  figures  of  the 
twin  cherubim,  who,  with  folded  wih^s  '' 
and  fixed  eyes,  curved  themselves  above 
the  mercy- seat,  and  looked  down  upon 
that  mystery  of  propitiating  love. 
With  such  fixed  and  steadfast  gaze  we 
must  contemplate  the  perfect  law  of 
liberty  if  we  are  ever  to  be  doers  of 
the  same.  A  second  requirement  is, 
"  and  continueth."  The  gaze  must  be, 
not  only  concentrated,  but  constant, 
if  anything  is  to  come  of  it.  Old 
legends  tell  that  the  looker  into  a  magic 
crystal  saw  nothing  at  first,  but,  as  he 
gazed,  there  gradually  formed  them- 
selves in  the  clear  sphere  filmy  shapes, 
which  grew  firmer  and  more  distindi 
until  they  stood  plain.  The  raw  hide 
dipped  into  the  vat  with  tannin  in  it, 
and  at  once  pulled  out  again,  will  never 
be  turned  into  leather.  Many  of  you 
do  not  give  the  motives  and  principles 
of  the  gospel,  which  you  say  you  believe, 
a  chance  of  influencing  you,  because  so 
interruptedly  and  spasmodically,  and 
at  such  long  intervals,  and  for  so  few 
moments,  do  you  gaze  upon  them. 
Steadfast  and  continued  attention  is 
needful  if  we  are  to  be  "doers  of  the 
work." — Homiletic  Review. 

Practical  Exhortations. — 1.  Cultivate 
the  habit  of  contemplating  the  central 
truths  of  Christianity  as  the  condition 
of  receiving  in  vigour  and  fulness  the 
life  which  obeys  the  commandment. 
2.  Cultivate  the  habit  of  reflective 
meditation  upon  the  truths  of  the 
gospel  as  giving  you  the  pattern  of 
duty  in  a  concentrated  and  available 
form.  3.  Cultivate  the  habit  of 
meditating  on  the  truths  of  the  gospel, 
in  order  that  the  motives  of  conduct 
may  be  reinvigorated  and  strengthened. 
Make  of  all  your  creed  deed.  Let 
everything  you  believe  be  a  principle 
of  action  too  ;  your  credenda  translate 
into  agenda. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 


527 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH. —Verses  26,  27. 

Practical  Religion. — The  word  "religion"  is  used  only  by  St.  James.  But 
St.  Paul  speaks  of  "  the»  Jews'  religion  "  ;  and  we  are  accustomed  to  speak  of  a 
man's  "religion."  Evidently  St.  James  means  religion  on  its  practical  side — 
our  religion,  not  as  it  is  an  unseen  inner  life  of  thought  and  feeling,  but  as  it 
finds  expression  in  conduct  and  relations,  and  other  people  can  see  it.  We  may 
say  that  he  means  the  religion  of  the  religious — the  converted.  He  is  not  attempt- 
ing to  describe  what  the  Christian  religion  as  a  whole  is  and  demands ;  he  is 
resisting  the  tendency  of  the  times  to  make  a  sentimental  faith  everything.  St. 
James  is  often  misunderstood  because  we  separate  ver.  27  from  its  connection. 
In  ver.  26  the  case  is  presented  of  the  man  who  makes  a  show  of  religion. 
There  is  such  a  thing  as  an  ordering  of  conduct  merely  to  produce  a  good 
impression.  In  such  a  case  there  is  no  personal  discipline  of  which  the  ordered 
conduct  is  the  genuine  expression.  And  the  man  is  a  self- deceiver.  His 
outward  profession  and  show  of  religion  are  of  no  moral  value  to  him,  or  indeed 
to  any  one  else.  Then  in  ver.  27  we  are  told  what  sincere  religion  is,  as  a 
contrast  to  this.  It  also  is  ordered  conduct ;  but  not  merely  ordered  conduct. 
It  also  is  careful  and  elaborate  worship  ;  but  it  is  not  merely  elaborate  worship. 
It  is  self- discipline,  and  what  comes  out  of  that.  It  is  service  of  others,  and  the 
Christ ly  sphere  which  that  spirit  of  service  can  always  find.  These  things  are 
not  the  whole  of  religion  ;  they  only  represent  the  practical  side  of  religion. 
St.  James  does  not  intend  to  give  any  definition.  He  assumes  the  fact  as  fully 
recognised,  and  not  needing  fresh  statement,  that  religion  has  its  devotional  side. 
St.  James  deals  with  the  Christian  in  the  world,  and  taking  his  place  and 
part  in  the  world.  He  treats  of  the  Christian's  proper  relations  to  the  sins 
and  sorrows  of  the  world.  And  this  is  what  he  says — The  Christian  must  come 
helpfully  near  to  the  sorrows,  but  take  care  to  keep  clear  of  the  sins. 

I.  The  practical  religion  with  which  a  man  may  satisfy  himself. — This  is 
not  a  proper  test  of  religion,  but  it  is  the  test  which  men  persist  in  putting. 
1.  Some  try  a  practical  religion  of  austerities.  Dr.  Pusey  wrote  to  a  friend  to  send 
him  a  "discipline" — that  is,  a  self -scourging  whip  with  five  thongs  and  five  knots. 
Henry  Martyn  sought  to  humble  himself  by  walking  about  with  pebbles  in  his  shoes. 
It  is  a  mistake  to  deal  with  the  body,  the  agency  for  expressing,  instead  of  with 
the  agent  that  expresses.  2.  Some  try  a  practical  religion  of  ritual.  Distinguish 
worship,  as  natural  expression  for  the  soul^  from  ritual  as  man-made  moulds 
into  which  to  force  the  expression.  Ritual  commands  no  Divine  authority,  and 
can  have  no  inspiration  in  it.  Its  centre  is  man  himself.  Its  genius  is  good 
works,  done  for  the  sake  of  doing  them.  3.  Some  try  a  religion  of  pietism  that 
is  not  often  practical.  They  are  interested  in  excited  feelings.  They  think  they 
serve  when  they  only  feel ;  or  only  put  themselves  in  the  way  of  getting  excited 
feelings.  But  how  self-centred  emotional  religion  is  !  How  enslaving  also  it  is  ! 
Hot -house  religion  ;  and  the  plants  drawn  up  long  and  thin,  with  no  robustness  in 
them.  It  is  very  doubtful  whether  a  pietistic  religion  ever  satisfies  the  man  him- 
self for  long.     There  is  perhaps  nothing  that  tires  and  sickens  a  man  so  soon. 

II.  The  practical  religion  with  which  the  Father- God  is  well  pleased.^ 
"Pure  religion  and  undefiled."  Genuine,  sincere  religion,  with  no  secret 
self-pleasing  at  the  heart  of  it.  Pure  ;  clear  through ;  that  does  not  fear  to  be 
judged  under  the  sunlight.  Undefiled,  unstained  with  self-seeking.  It  includes  : 
1.  Kindly  interest  in,  and  care  for,  others.  What  you  do  in  society.  Religion 
must  get  beyond  the  circle  of  personal  interests.  Specific  cases  of  possible 
service  as  given  by  St.  James  are  types  of  all  kinds  of  call  to  brotherly  service. 
The  condition  of  widows  and  orphans  in  Eastern  countries  is  inexpressibly  sad. 

528 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES.  chap.  I. 


If  we  would  see  the  model  religion  in  its  practical  aspect,  we  can  find  it  in  the 
human  life  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  With  Him  worship  and  self-culture  were  always 
kept  in  their  proper  place  and  relations.  The  days  were  spent  in  going  about 
doing  good.  Earnest  Christians  are  often  troubled  because  their  busy  lives  give 
them  such  little  opportunity  for  soul-culture  ;  but  that  life  of  service  is  the  very 
best  soul- culture,  a  culture  that  advances  all  the  more  healthily  because  it  is 
not  watched.  Religion  is  "  life  for  others."  2.  Wise  dealing  with  self.  What 
you  are  in  society.  It  is  singular  that  visiting  the  needy  should  be  put  first, 
and  self-keeping  second.  We  should  have  reversed  the  order.  But  there  is  a 
reason  for  the  order  St.  James  prefers.  It  is  in  ministering  to  the  spotted  that 
we  best  keep  ourselves  from  the  spots.  Qhri&t  touched  the  leper  with  a  Ijealijog 
touch  ;  therefore  He  contracted  no  leprosy.  Nurses  and  doctors  are  remarkably 
safe  from  contagion.  Activity  against  evil  is  the  best  preservative  from  evil, 
as  is  illustrated  in  the  case  of  the  slum  sisters  of  the  Salvation  Army.  Be 
ministering  angels,  and  you  will  be  sure  to  keep  pure  as  the  angels.  Here,  too, 
in  Christ  may  be  seen  the  model  religion.  Activity  of  service  kept  him  from 
taking  stains.  The  fungus  flourishes  in  the  sopped  and  decayed  branches  of  the 
tree.  Idle  folk  are  always  bodily  or  morally  diseased  folk,  and  they  ought 
to  be.  Stain  comes  on  things  that  are  laid  by.  Church  grumblers  are  never 
Church  workers.     Keep  unspotted  by  keeping  on  serving. 

III.  The  two  things,  service  of  others  and  self-keeping,  fit  together,  and 
make  up  together  the  practical  religion  which  the  Father-God  approves.^ 
They  seem  to  be  two  distinct  departments ;  they  really  are  one.  Religion  on 
its  practical  side  is  doing  something  for  somebody,  and  that  proves  to  be  the 
secret  of  keeping  ourselves  clean.  We  must  keep  clean  as  nurses  must  who 
tend  fevered  patients.  Experience  tells  that  unlovely  things  which  get  stored 
in  the  mind  have  a  way  of  coming  up  to  view,  depressing  and  degrading  us, 
when  we  have  no  special  interests  occupying  thought  and  heart.  When  the 
soul  is  full  of  interests  there  is  no  chance  whatever  for  the  evil ;  it  is,  most 
happily,  crowded  out.  Religion  then  is  just  this — when  seen  on  its  practical 
side — keeping  ourselves  free  from  contamination  by  finding  spheres  of  Christly 
service  outside  ourselves. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES 

Ver.  26.  Men^s  Inconsistencies. — Men  ous,  disinterested,  humane,  and  friendly ; 

in  the  same  period  of  their  lives,  in  the  hear  but  the  sad  story  of  the  friendless 

same  day,  sometimes  in  the  very  same  orphans   too    credulously   trusting   all 

action,    are    utterly   inconsistent    and  their  little  substance   into  his   hands, 

irreconcilable  with  themselves.     Look  and  he  shall  appear  more  sordid,  more 

at  a  man  in  one  light,  and  he  shall  pitiless,  and  unjust,  than  the  injured 

seem   wise,    penetrating,  discreet,  and  themselves    have   bitterness   to    paint 

brave ;  behold  him  in  another  point  of  him.     Another  shall  be  charitable  to 

view,  and  you  see  a  creature  all  over  the  poor,  uncharitable  in  his  censures 

folly  and  indiscretion,  weak  and  timer-  and   opinions   of    all  the   rest   of   the 

ous  as  cowardice  and  indiscretion  can  world  besides;  temperate  in  his  appe- 

make  him.    A  man  shall  appear  gentle,  tites,  intemperate  in  his  tongue ;  shall 

courteous,  and  benevolent  to  all  man-  have  too  much  conscience  and  religion 

kind  ;  follow  him  into  his  own  house,  to  cheat  the  man  who  trusts  him,  and, 

maybe   you  see  a  tyrant,  morose   and  perhaps,    as   far    as    the    business   of 

savage  to  all  whose  happiness  depends  debtor  and  creditor  extends,  shall  be 

upon   his   kindness.      A   third   in    his  just  and  scrupulous  to  the  utmost  mite ; 

general  behaviour  is  found  to  be  gener-  yet,  in  matters  of  full  as  great  concern, 

M  M  529 


CHAP.   I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


where  he  is  to  have  the  handhng  of 
the  party's  reputation  and  good  name 
— the  dearest,  the  tenderest  property 
the  man  has — he  will  do  him  iin-e- 
parable  damage,  and  rob  him  there 
without  measure  or  pity.  And  this 
seems  to  be  that  particular  piece  of 
inconsistency  and  contradiction  which 
the  text  is  levelled  at,  in  which  the 
words  seem  so  pointed  as  if  St.  James 
had  known  more  flagrant  instances  of 
this  kind  of  delusion  than  what  had 
fallen  under  the  observation  of  any  of 
the  rest  of  the  apostles. — Laurence 
Sterne. 

Detraction  of  Others, — They  who  are 
free  from  the  grosser  sins,  and  even 
bear  the  outward  show  of  sanctity, 
will  often  exalt  themselves  by  detract- 
ing others  under  the  pretence  of  zeal, 
whilst  their  real  motive  is  love  of  evil- 
speaking . — Calvin. 

Vain  Religion. — 1.  In  a  vain  religion 
there  is  much  of  show,  and  affecting  to 
seem  religious  in  the  eyes  of  others. 
2.  There  is  much  censuring,  reviling, 
and  detracting  of  others.  3.  A  man, 
in  a  vain  religion,  deceives  his  own 
heart. 

Evil-speaking. — Of  the  many  duties 
owing  both  to  God  and  our  neighbour, 
there  are  scarce  any  men  so  bad  as  not 
to  acquit  themselves  of  some  ;  and  few 
so  good,  I  fear,  as  to  practise  all. 
Every  man  seems  willing  to  compound 
the  matter,  and  adopt  so  much  of  the 
system  as  will  least  interfere  with  his 
principle  and  ruUng  passion.  Very 
possibly  St.  James  had  grievously 
suffered,  through  being  cruelly  reviled 
and  evil  spoken  of.  All  his  labours 
in  the  gospel,  his  unaffected  and  per- 
petual solicitude  for  the  preservation 
of  his  flock,  his  watchings  and  fastings, 
his  poverty,  his  natural  simphcity  and 
innocence  of  life — all  perhaps  were  not 
enough  to  defend  him  from  this  unruly 
weapon,  so  full  of  deadly  poison;  and 
what,  in  all  hkelihood,  might  move  his 
sorrow  and  indignation  more,  some 
who    seemed    the    most     devout    and 

^30 


zealous  of  all  his  converts  were  the 
most  merciless  and  uncharitable  in 
that  respect,  having  a  form  of  godUness, 
but  full  of  bitter  envyings  and  strife. 
With  such  he  expostulates  in  the  third 
chapter.  In  our  text  St.  James  seems 
to  have  set  the  two  characters  of  a 
saint  and  a  slanderer  at  such  variance 
that  one  would  have  thought  they 
could  never  have  had  the  heart  to 
have  met  together  again.  But  there 
are  no  alliances  too  strange  for  this 
world.  There  is  nothing  so  bad  which 
will  not  admit  of  something  to  be 
said  in  its  defence.  Are  not  the  in- 
conveniences and  ill- effects  which  the 
world  feels  from  the  licentiousness  of 
this  practice,  of  slandering  and  evil- 
speaking,  sufficiently  counterbalanced 
by  the  real  influence  it  has  upon  men's 
lives  and  conduct?  If  there  was  no 
evil- speaking  in  the  world,  thousands 
would  be  encouraged  to  do  ill,  and 
would  rush  into  many  indecorums,  like 
a  horse  into  a  battle,  were  they  sure 
to  escape  the  tongues  of  men.  If  we 
take  a  general  view  of  the  world,  we 
shall  find  that  a  great  deal  of  virtue, 
at  least  of  the  outward  appearance  of 
it,  arises  from  the  terror  of  what  the 
world  will  say,  and  the  liberty  it  will 
take  upon  the  occasions  we  shall  give. 
Numbers  of  people  are  every  day  taking 
more  pains  to  be  well  spoken  of  than 
what  would  actually  enable  them  to 
live  so  as  to  deserve  it. — Laurence 
Sterne. 

The  Sin  of  Unguarded  Speech. — 
*'  Bridleth  not " ;  so  as  to  have  it  in 
full  control,  and  restrain  all  its  im- 
petuosities, and  guide  it  in  right  and 
wise  and  worthy  directions.  A  classifi- 
cation of  Christian  sins  would  have  to 
include  some  unsuspected  ones,  and 
some  imperfectly  considered  ones. 
Unguarded  speech  is  too  often  regarded 
as  a  weakness  or  frailty ;  it  is  not 
usually  estimated  to  bear  all  the  charac- 
teristics of  a  sin.  It  is  a  sin  to  which 
persons  of  a  certain  particular  disposi- 
tion are  especially  exposed  ;  but  every 
Christian  is  in  peril  of  being  taken  at 
unawares,  and  saying  what  had  mucli 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP.  I. 


better  have  been  left  unsaid.  By 
"  unguarded  speech  "  we   may   mean  : 

1.  The  worthless  and  often  mischievous 
utterances   of  a   talkative  disposition. 

2.  Speech  before  thought,  of  which 
thought  disapproves.  3.  Speech  in 
too  high  a  tone  of  voice.  A  man  so 
speaking  is  like  a  runaway  horse. 
4.  Speech  of  cherished  wrong  feeling, 
which  is  sure  to  make  our  words 
unkind  or  unjust.  5.  Speech  forgetful 
of  Christian  principles  and  the  Chris- 
tian spirit.  How  may  speech  be  wisely 
guarded  (bridled)  ?  1.  Form  the  habit 
of  speaking  seldom,  and  only  after 
thought.  2.  Accustom  yourself  to 
learn  by  reviewing  the  effects  of  speech. 

3.  Cultivate   a    quiet    tone   of   voice. 

4.  Kemember   what  is  due  to  others. 

5.  Avoid   speaking  under  excitement. 

6.  Season  speech  with  the  salt  of 
Christian  wisdom  and  charity. 

'Scripture  References  to  the  Tongue 
^nd  Speech. — Ps.  xvii.  3,  xxxiv.  1,  xxxv. 
28,  xxxix.  1,  li.  14,  lii.  2,  Ivii.  4,  Ixiv. 
3,  Ixxi.  24,  cxx.  3,  cxl.  3,  cxli.  3  ;  Prov, 
vi.  17,  X.  20,  xii.  18,  xviii.  21,  xxi. 
23  ;  Matt.  xii.  34 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  8  ;  and 
others. 


place  to  the  Christian  Bible.  2.  Con- 
sider the  antiquity  of  the  religions. 
Beformed  Parseeism  belongs  to  the 
time  of  Daniel;  Confucius  dates  551 
B.C.,  and  Mahomet  570  a.d.  ;  legends 
give  early  dates  to  the  Hindoo  and 
Egyptian  :  but  the  primary  principles 
which  have  unfolded  into  Judaism  and 
Christianity  belong  to  the  very  origin 
of  man  as  a  moral  and  responsible 
being.  3.  Take  the  relative  numbers 
of  the  adherents  of  the  rehgions  ;  and 
then  Christianity  must  take  a  low 
place,  for  the  great  human  religions 
outnumber  its  adherents  by  millions, 
though  Christianity  has  associated 
itself  with  the  most  advanced  and 
civilised  races.  4.  Or  estimate  the 
religions  by  the  elaborateness  of  their 
ceremonial ;  then  Christianity,  in  its 
most  ritualistic  forms,  can  offer  no 
rivalry  to  Hindooism.  If  these  were 
sufficient  bases  of  judgment,  it  would 
have  to  be  admitted  that  Christianity 
does  not  offer   unquestionable   advan- 


tages. 


The    text    suggests   a   better 


r. 


Ver.  27.  An  Evidence  of  the  Value'/ 
of  Christianity. — There  are  many  re- 
ligions in  the  world.  Each  makes  a 
great  claim  in  its  particular  district. 
Which  may  we  say  is  the  best  of  the 
world's  religions  ?  Which  of  them  can 
we  fully  satisfy  ourselves  with.  It  is 
easy  to  say  that  we  prefer  Christianity. 
But  then  we  were  born  into  it.  And  the 
devotees  of  other  religions  prefer  theirs 
for  precisely  the  same  reason.  Vv^e 
ought  to  have  some  better  ground  than 
this  for  our  decision,  that  Christianity 
stands  altogether  first  among  the  world- 
religions.  How  shall  we  proceed  to 
judge  the  worth  of  the  different 
religions?  1.  Compare  their  saciedj 
books.  Take  the  Persian  Zend-Avesta, 
the  books  of  Confucius,  the  Shastras 
of  India,  the  Koran  of  Mahomet,  and 
the  Bible  of  Jews  and  Christians ;  and  I 
there  is  no  test,  literary,  moral,  artistic, ' 
or  religious,  that  does  not  give  the  first  | 


term  of  judgment — the  only  safe  one. 
Pure  religion  is  practical.  The  test 
question,  by  which  every  religion 
should  submit  to  be  tried,  is  this — Does 
it  practically  work  out  into  purity 
and  charity  ?  That  test  is  fully  in 
harmony  with  the  spirit  of  our  age. 
Since  Bacon's  day  (1561)  observation 
and  experience  have  taken  the  place 
of  speculation  and  theory.  Now  we 
ask  for  verification  by  experiment. 
The  new  method  was  at  first  applied 
in  natural  science;  it  is  now  applied 
in  social,  moral,  and  religious  science. 
We  have  no  reason  to  fear  the  applica- 
tion of  the  new  method  to  Christianity. 
Let  men  judge  it  by  its  fruits.  Appeal 
may  be  made  without  hesitation — 1.  To 
the  experience  of  the  world.  The 
history  of  the  race  tells  of  no  such 
help  towards  righteousness  and  charity 
as  Christianity  and  its  antecedent, 
Judaism,  have  given.  The  world  has 
never  reached  without  it  such  high 
ideals  of  righteousness  and  charity  as 
Christianity  has  helped  man  to  reach. 
Even  the  refined  and  intellectual 
Greeks  exposed   deformed  infants  on 

531 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


Mount  Taygetus.  2.  To  the  experi- 
ence of  the  nation.  Wherever  there 
has  been  a  fine  edge  on  the  national 
conscience,  and  a  stern  loyalty  to 
principle,  and  a  pathetic  sympathy 
with  suffering,  there  we  find  the  cul- 
turing  of  Christianity.  3.  To  the 
experience  of  the  family.  Which 
owes  its  existence  and  its  preservation 
almost  entirely  to  Christianity.  It  may 
be  most  positively  affirmed  that  the 
highest  ideal  of  family  life  has  never 
been  attained  anywhere  except  under 
the  inspiration  of  Christianity.  4.  To 
the  experience  of  the  individual.  Multi- 
plied personal  testimony  can  be  given 
that  Christianity  is,  consciously,  an 
inspiration  to  righteousness  and  charity. 
If  men  will  not  listen  to  us  when  we 
argue  that  Christianity  is  true  doc- 
trinally,  they  cannot  fail  to  listen 
when  we  show  that  it  is,  and  has  been, 
the  living  force  in  humanity,  ever 
working  towards  righteousness  and 
charity.  It  has  been  urged  as  an 
objection  to  Christianity,  that  some  of 
the  world's  worst  tyrannies  have  been 
supported  by  its  name.  It  is  easy  to 
recall  crusades,  religious  wars,  per- 
secutions, dragonnades,  and  inquisi- 
tions. But  the  reply  has  been  effectively 
made  over  and  over  again — These  things 
are  not  Christianity,  but  bigots  or  bad 
men  using  Christianity  for  their  ends. 
They  are  not  the  expression  of  Chris- 
tianity ;  they  are  caricatures.  They  are 
the  outcome  of  a  temporal  Christianity 
worked  in  the  interest  of  hierarchies ; 
they  are  not  kin  with  the  spiritual 
Christianity  of  its  Founder.  They  often 
have  followed  upon  man's  attempts  to 
blend  together  religion  and  politics,  or 
rather  to  make  religion  serve  poli- 
tical ends.  Mohammedanism  conse- 
crates the  sword  and  the  battle. 
Christianity  says,  "  Put  up  thy  sword 
into  his  place."  What  a  testimony  to 
the  value  of  Christianity  England 
makes  on  her  Hospital  Sundays  !  Why, 
for  sustaining  her  national  charities, 
does  our  nation  appeal  so  directly  to 
her  professing  Christians  ?  Why  does 
not  the  appeal  go  to  the  clubs,  the 
theatre-goers,  the  attendants  on  places 

033 


of  amusement,  the  visitors  at  public 
libraries,  the  great  companies,  the 
business  men,  or  the  excursionists  ? 
Why  is  the  appeal  made  to  those  who 
distinctly  bear  the  Christian  name  ? 
The  fact  is  that  everybody  knows, 
even  the  scoffer  knows,  that  Chris- 
tianity ought  to,  and  actually  does, 
work  out  into  purity  and  charity. 
That  is  its  evidence.  That  makes  it 
the  unquestionable  first  of  religions. 

Uniting  Christian  Doing  with  Chris- 
tian Being. — And  how  high  a  contempt 
and  provocation  is  it  of  the  great  God, 
so  totally  to  pervert  the  whole  design 
of  that  revelation  He  hath  made  to  us, 
to  know  the  great  things  contained 
therein  only  for  knowing  sake,  which 
He  hath  made  that  we  might  live 
by  them  !  And  oh !  what  holy  and 
pleasant  lives  should  we  lead  in  this 
world  if  the  temper  and  complexion  of 
our  souls  did  answer  and  correspond  to 
the  things  we  know  !  The  design  of 
preaching  has  been  greatly  mistaken, 
when  it  has  been  thought  it  must  still 
acquaint  them  who  live  under  it  with 
some  new  thing.  Its  much  greater 
and  more  important  design  is,  the 
impressing  of  known  things  (but  too 
little  considered)  upon  the  hearts  of 
hearers,  that  they  may  be  delivered 
up  into  the  mould  and  form  of  the 
doctrine  taught  them,  and  may  so 
learn  Christ  as  more  and  more  to  be 
renewed  in  the  spirit  of  their  minds, 
and  put  off  the  old  man,  and  put  on 
the  new.  The  digesting  our  food  is 
what  God  now  eminently  calls  for. — 
John  Howe. 

The  Adornment  of  Religion. — Our 
religion  is  not  adorned  with  ceremonies, 
but  with  purity  and  charity. — Manton, 

Pure  and  Undefiled  Religion. — Errors 
of  the  most  fatal  kind  were  early  found 
in  the  Christian  Church.  Even  in  the 
apostle's  days  a  mere  form  and  pro 
fession  of  religion  was  deemed  sufficient. 
The  value  of  good  works  was  depre- 
ciated and  the  necessity  of  performing 
them  denied.     Against  such  errors  th^ 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JAMES. 


CHAP.   I. 


apostle  James  lifted  up  his  voice  like 
a  trumpet.  The  pure  religion  which 
God  alone  acknowledges  leads  to  the 
most  self-denying  exercises  of  love, 
and  to  a  freedom  from  all  the  world's 
corruptions. 

I.  His  description  of  true  religion. 
— He  takes  a  practical  view.  He 
speaks  not  of  principles,  although  he 
believes  in  the  necessity  of  faith ;  but 
it  must  be  a  living  and  operative  faith 
only,  which  will  save  the  soul.  He 
does  not  advert  to  the  exercise  of  our 
affections  towards  God,  but  only  to 
our  actions  towards  men. 

II.  Here  we  see  how  religion  will 
influence  us  in  reference  to— 1.  The 
world  at  large.  It  is  not  required  of 
us  to  renounce  the  world  entirely,  to 
abandon  society  altogether ;  but,  from 
its  corruptions,  pleasures,  riches,  and 
honours  to  keep  ourselves  free  even  as 
Jesus  did.  We  are  not  to  be  conformed 
to  its  sentiments  and  habits,  nor  court 
nor  desire  its  friendship.  2.  That 
part  of  it  lohich  is  destitute  and  a/fflicted. 
Love  is  the  life  and  soul  of  religion  ; 
and  as  it  will  extend  to  all  in  general, 
so  will  it  manifest  itself  particularly 
towards  those  who  are  afflicted.  Visit- 
ing the  afflicted  is  an  office  which  the 
true  Christian  will  delight  to  execute. 
Love  and  charity  are  enjoined  by 
Christ.  Men  will  applaud  this  religion  ; 
but  consider — 

III.  The  use  we  are  to  make  of  it. 
— 1.  As  a  criteinon  whereby  to  judge 
of  our  state.  "  Victory  over  the  world  " 
is  one  of  those  marks  which  are  uni- 
versally found  in  the  Lord's  people, 
and  in  no  other.  A  delight  in  all  the 
offices  of  love  to  men  for  Christ's  sake 
distinguishes  Christians  from  all  other 
persons.  Here  is  the  touchstone. 
2.  As  a  directory  whereby  to  regidate 
our  conduct.  *'  Come  out  from  the 
world,  and  be  separate."  "  Bear  ye 
one  another's  burdens."  Not  to  the 
peculiarities  of  a  sect  are  we  urged, 
but  to  "  pure  and  undefiled  religion." 
This  command  is  equally  obligatory  on 
all.  The  various  modes  of  our  obedi- 
ence will  be  judged  of  by  God  Himself, 
who  alone  knows  what  our  respective 


states  and  circumstances  require.  See 
the  compassionate  visitor  opening  the 
sources  of  consolation  which  the  gospel 
affords,  till  the  unhappy  sufferers  are 
brought  to  kiss  the  rod  that  smites 
them ;  see  him  administering  present 
relief,  and  devising  means  for  the 
future  support  of  the  family  ;  how  is 
he  received  as  an  angel  from  heaven ! 
How  the  widow's  heart  rejoices  !  "  Go 
and  do  thou  likewise."  *'  It  is  more 
blessed  to  give  than  to  receive." — 
Charles  Simeon^  M.A. 

Religion  a  Social  Concern. — By 
religion  we  understand  the  service 
which  is  due  to  the  supreme  Being, 
and  this  service  must  of  course  corre- 
spond to  His  nature  ;  so  that  our  views 
of  religion  will  be  true  or  false  in 
proportion  as  we  understand  or  mis- 
take His  Divine  character.  Religion, 
corresponding  to  His  nature,  consists 
chiefly  of  two  parts :  ( 1 )  cherishing 
those  sentiments  of  love  and  gratitude 
which  are  due  to  infinite  goodness ; 
and  (2)  actively  promoting  the  pur- 
poses of  this  goodness — that  is,  pro- 
moting our  own  and  others'  present 
and  future  welfare.  St.  James  only 
describes  the  methods  of  its  manifesta- 
tion. They  consist  in  doing  good  to 
others,  and  in  doing  good  to  ourselves. 
We  infer  that  religion  is  a  social 
principle,  intimately  united  with  social 
duty,  belonging  to  us  as  social  beings. 

1.  It  is  founded  in  our  social  nature, 
and  springs  from  our  social  relations. 

2.  Religion  is  a  social  concern,  for  it 
is  a  subject  on  which  men  have  a 
strong  tendency  to  feel  and  act  to- 
gether, and  thus  it  is  a  strong  bond 
of  union.  3.  Religion  is  a  social  and 
public  as  well  as  a  private  concern, 
because  the  common  relation  of  God  to 
all  men  is  not  merely  a  ground  of 
sympathy  and  attachment,  but  makes 
it  a  duty  to  offer  Him  public,  and  the 
most  public,  acknowledgments.  4.  Re- 
ligion is  a  social  concern,  for  it  operates 
powerfully  on  society,  contributing  in 
various  ways  to  its  stability  and  pro- 
sperity. Few  men  suspect,  perhaps  no 
man  comprehends,  the  extent  of  the 

533 


CHAP.   I. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JAMES. 


support  given  by  religion  to  every 
virtue.  1.  It  is  a  right  and  duty  in 
men  to  influence  one  another  on  the 
subject  of  rehgion.  2.  If  individuals 
are  authorised  and  bound  to  promote 
religion,  then  the  same  right  and 
obligation  appertain  to  the  community. 
A  community  is  bound  to  incorporate 
religion  into  its  public  institutions,  and 
to  secure,  if  possible,  to  all  its  citizens 
the  benefits  of  Christian  worship  and 
instruction. — W.  E.  Channing^  D.D. 

Kindness  and  Character  the  True 
Worship  of  the  Father. — A  definition 
is  that  which  traces  the  boundary  of 
a  thing,  so  as  to  separate  it  from 
all  other  things.  A  definition  must 
include  the  thing — the  whole  thing, 
and  nothing  but  the  thing  defined. 
If  this  verse  is  to  be  regarded  as 
a  definition  of  religion,  then  it  is 
both  defective  and  misleading.  Defec- 
tive, because  it  does  not  include  the 
whole  of  religion — it  shuts  out  the 
whole  spiritual  life  of  man.  Mis- 
leading, for  it  includes  things  which, 
though  invariably  accompanying  re- 
ligion, are  not  peculiar  to  religion. 
Kindness  and  purity  of  life  are  not 
plants  that  bloom  only  on  reHgious 
soil.  But  the  verse  is  not  a  definition. 
With  us  the  word  "religion"  means 
"  godliness,"  the  grand  sum-total  of 
duties  and  relations  to  God  and  man. 
To  the  translators  of  the  Bible  it 
meant  the  outward  form  of  piety, 
the  external  service  of  God.  St. 
James  presupposes  conversion,  pre- 
supposes all  that  Christ  and  Paul  say 
of  the  inner  spiritual  life.  The  matter 
discussed  in  the  text  is — How  shall 
the  Divine  life  in  the  soul  show  itself  ? 
What  shall  its  ritual  be — its  worship  ? 
It  will  not  dispense  with  old  forms 
of  worship ;  but  it  will  not  content 
itself  with  these.  The  true  Christian 
ritual  is  kindness  and  character. 
Christianity  has  love  to  God  for  its 
substance,  and  morality  for  its  ritual. 
St.  James  says  here  that  the  religious 
man  worships  God  truly  every  time  he 
does  a  kindness  to  men,  and  that  his 
unspotted  character,  like  the  holy  fire 

534 


that  burnt  unceasingly,  is  itself  a 
perpetual  pure  and  undefiled  act  of 
the  truest  worship.  We  need  to  have 
our  ideas  of  religious  service  enlarged. 

I.  Some  have  thought  that  God 
was  pleased  with  bloodshed  and 
pain ;  and  therefore  they  have  offered 
up  their  prisoners  of  war,  and  even 
their  own  children,  to  the  gods. 

II.  Others  have  thought  that  He 
would  be  pleased  if  men  were  very 
cruel  to  their  own  bodies. 

III.  Others  insist  that  God  is 
pleased  with  gorgeous  ceremony. 

IV.  Yet  others  think  to  please  Him 
with  pietism. — Sentiment,  emotion, 
and  all  other  things  that  we  present  in 
public  worship  must  be  translated  into 
some  practical  form — incarnated  in  some 
act,  and  "  go  about  doing  good."  Then 
is  God  truly  served,  and  helped,  and 
pleased.  Kindness  and  character : 
God  loves  these,  and  as  His  will  more 
and  more  permeates  humanity,  cere- 
mony, persecution,  and  sectarianism 
will  die,  and  love  to  God,  with  earth 
for  its  temple,  the  homes  of  men  for 
its  shrines,  words  of  kindness  for  its 
psalmody,  deeds  of  kindness  for  its 
offering,  a  pure  heart  for  its  holy  of 
holies,  the  smile  of  God  and  the  redemp- 
tion of  the  world  for  its  reward,  will 
take  their  place. — J.  Morgan  Gibbon. 

Religion  in  the  Details  of  Life. — 
The  difficulty  of  religion  is  the  taking 
up  of  the  cross  daily,  rather  than  the 
taking  it  up  on  some  set  occasion, 
and  under  extraordinary  circum- 
stances— the  serving  God  in  little 
things,  the  carrying  of  religious  prin- 
ciples into  all  the  minutiae  of  life,  the 
discipline  of  our  tempers,  the  regula- 
tion of  our  speech,  the  momentary 
sacrifices,  the  secret  and  unobserved 
self-denials.  Who  that  knows  any- 
thing of  the  difficulty  of  piety  does  not 
know  that  there  is  greater  danger  of 
his  failing  in  these  than  in  trials  of 
apparently  far  greater  cost  and  sterner 
endurance  ?  It  is  not  comparatively 
hard  to  put  the  armour  on  when  the 
trumpet  sounds,  but  it  is  to  keep  the 
armour  on  when  there  is  no  alarm  of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP.   t. 


battle.  The  warfare  with  our  spiritual 
enemies  is  not  a  series  of  pitched 
battles,  with  intervals  of  resting  and 
recruiting ;  it  is  rather  daily,  hourly, 
momentary  fighting.  This  is  the 
**  driving  out  little  by  little  "  to  which 
the  Almighty  promises  "  the  reward  of 
inheritance." — H.  Melvill. 

Uoispotted  from  the  World. — As  men 
and  women  grow  older  they  change. 
Of  all  the  changes  that  they  undergo 
those  of  their  moral  natures  are  the 
most  painful  to  watch.  The  boy 
changes  into  the  man,  and  there  is 
something  lost  which  never  seems  to 
come  back  again.  Presently  his  life 
no  longer  sounds  with  a  perfectly  clear 
ring,  or  shines  with  a  perfectly  white 
lustre.  He  is  no  longer  unspotted. 
When  a  grown  man  sees  this,  he  is 
sure  that  the  change  has  come  some- 
how from  the  boy  having  grown  up  to 
manhood  in  the  midst  of  his  fellow-men. 
The  manhood  has  had  to  grow  here  in 
this  great  universal  mass  of  things, 
this  total  of  many  various  influences 
which  we  call  "  the  world."  Home, 
school,  business,  society,  politics,  human 
life  in  general  in  all  its  various 
activities — out  of  this  have  come  the 
evil  forces  that  have  changed  and 
soiled  this  life.  He  has  walked  through 
mire,  and  the  filth  has  gathered  on 
his  skirts.  We  have  all  been  "  spotted 
by  the  world."  The  worst  thing  about 
all  this  staining  power  of  the  world  is 
the  way  in  which  we  come  to  think 
of  it  as  inevitable.  We  practically 
believe  that  no  man  can  keep  himself 
unspotted.  There  is  a  worse  thing 
than  this.  When  a  man  comes  not 
merely  to  tolerate  but  to  boast  of  the 
stains  that  the  world  has  flung  upon 
him.  In  view  of  all  this  we  come 
to  our  religion.  See  how  intolerant 
religion  is.  She  starts  with  what  men 
have  declared  to  be  impossible.  She 
refuses  to  bring  down  her  standards. 
She  insists  that  men  must  come  up  to 
her.  No  man  is  thoroughly  religious, 
she  declares,  unless  he  goes  through 
this  world  untainted,  as  the  sunbeam 
goes  through   the   mist.     Christianity 


could  not  sustain  itself  in  its  great 
claim  to  be  from  God  unless  it  took 
this  high  and  God- like  ground — that 
whoever  named  the  name  of  Christ 
must  depart  from  all  iniquity,  We 
go  for  our  assurance  to  the  first 
assertion  of  the  real  Christianity  in 
the  life  of  Jesus.  That  life  was 
meant  to  be  the  pattern  of  the  lives 
of  all  of  those  who  called  themselves 
His  followers.  If  He  walked  through 
the  same  muddy  streets  of  sordid  care, 
and  penetrated  the  same  murky 
atmosphere  of  passion  that  we  have 
to  go  through,  and  thence  came  out 
pure  and  unspotted  from  the  world, 
then  He  is  really  God  manifest  in  the 
flesh.  Filling  ourselves,  then,  with 
this  idea,  that  the  spotlessness  of  the 
Saviour's  life  is  the  pattern  of  the 
spotless  life  to  which  we  must  aspire, 
study  that  life.  1.  The  first  thing 
that  strikes  us  about  it  is  its  positive- 
ness.  Jesus  was  never  guarding  Him- 
self, but  always  invading  the  lives  of 
others  with  His  holiness.  He  did  not 
spend  His  life  in  trying  not  to  do 
wrong.  He  was  too  full  of  the  earnest 
love  and  longing  to  do  right — to  do 
His  Father's  will.  Many  of  our 
attempts  at  purity  fail  by  their  nega- 
tiveness.  All  merely  negative  purity 
has  something  of  the  taint  of  the 
impurity  that  it  resists.  Morality  is 
apt  to  be  conceived  as  negative. 
Religion  is  by  its  very  nature  positive. 
Religion  is  higher  than  morality,  as 
manly  virtue  is  nobler  than  childlike 
innocence.  But  is  any  such  purity  as 
Christ's,  so  positive,  so  strong,  possible 
for  us  ?  Christianity  is  a  religion  of 
the  supernatural,  and,  to  any  one  who 
is  thoroughly  in  its  power,  it  must 
bring  the  presence  of  a  live  super- 
naturalism,  and  make  that  the 
atmosphere  of  his  life.  Make  the 
Incarnation  the  one  pervading  power 
of  a  man's  life.  A  deep,  living  sense 
of  God  is  the  true  vitality  of  a  human 
soul  which  quenches  the  poisonous 
fires  of  corruption.  This,  however,  is 
not  enough  ;  Christ  must  come  nearer 
to  the  soul  than  this  before  it  can 
really  by  Him  "  escape  the  corruption 

D35 


CHAP    i. 


HOMILETtC  COMMENTARY:    JAMES. 


that  is  in  the  world."  There  must  be 
the  personal  relation  between  the  soul 
and  its  Saviour.  We  must  grasp  the 
bewildering  thought  of  a  personal  love 
for  our  single  souls.  The  soul  gives 
itself  to  Christ,  and  is  its  own  no 
longer.  He  feels  now  with  Christ's 
feeling,  and  corruption  drops  away 
from  him  as  it  drops  away  from 
Christ.  He  walks  unharmed,  because 
he  walks  in  this  new  sense  of  consecra- 
tion. That  is  the  perfect  ransom  of 
a  soul.  "When  I  am  so  thankful  to 
Christ  for  all  He  suffered  in  my  behalf 
that  I  give  up  my  life  to  Him  to  show 
Him  how  I  love  Him,  and  by  my 
dedication  to  Him  am  saved  from  the 
world's  low  slaveries  and  stains — then, 
it  seems  to  me,  my  heaven  is  begun, 
its  security  and  peace  I  have  already 
entered.  I  am  already  safe  within  its 
sheltering  walls,  and  all  my  happy, 
restful  life  takes  up  already  its  eternal 
psalm.  Already  I  have  '  washed  my 
robes  and  made  them  wliite  in  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb.'"  It  is  by  a 
Christ-like  dedication  to  the  world  that 
Christ  really  saves  us  from  the  world. 
They  say  the  doctors  and  the  nurses 
are  the  least  likely  to  catch  the 
epidemic.  If  you  have  a  friend  who 
is  dishonest  or  impure,  the  surest  way 
to  save  yourself  from  him  is  to  try  to 
save  him.  What  was  it  that  saved 
Jesus  from  the  infection  of  the  world  ? 
Was  it  not  the  same  divinity  which 
made  Him  the  Saviour  of  the  world  ? 
It  is  the  ineffable  union  of  Christ  with 
the  sinner  that  most  bears  witness  to 
Christ's  sinlessness.  We  may  be  saved 
from  the  wickedness  of  the  world  by 
our  pity  for  it.  We  shall  be  far  from 
its  contagion  the  closer  that  we  come 
to  its  needs.  We  shall  be  as  pure  as 
the  angels  the  more  completely  we 
give  ourselves  up  to  the  ministering 
angel's  work.  This  is  the  true  posi- 
tiveness  of  the  Christian's  purity,  the 
real  safety  of  the  loving  and  labouring 
life. — Phillips  Brooks. 

SiTicere  Religion  will  stand  Testing. — 
Vain  religion  is  contrasted  with  pure 
and  undejiled  religion.     Pure,  or  clear 

53G  .   , 


through.  Undefiled,  or  unstained  with 
self-seeking.  Our  supreme  danger  in 
the  religious  life  is  willingly  cherish- 
ing mixed  motives.  "  Their  heart  is 
divided."  There  is  praise  of  God  and 
praise  of  self.  "  They  feared  the  Lord, 
and  served  other  gods."  Illustrate  by 
the  architect  who  built  a  temple,  and 
put  the  king's  name  on  the  plaster 
that  would  weather  off,  and  carved 
his  own  name  deep  in  the  stone  under- 
neath. If  our  religion  is  sincere  and 
simple,  it  will  stand  testing.  Who 
puts  the  test  ?  ^  God,  even  the  Father. 
God,  the  heart-searcher.  God,  the 
Father,  who  is  the  severest  of  heart- 
searchers.     Nothing  searches  like  love. 

I.  God,  testing  our  religion,  expects 
to  find  us  "  unspotted  from  the  world." 
— Illustrate  from  the  early  Church. 
Christians  were  then  set  in  close  daily 
contact  with  heathenism,  which  tended 
to  degrade  and  corrupt  all  social  life. 
But  the  distinction  between  the  Church 
and  the  world  can  never  be  safely 
obliterated.  "  Lo\'e  not  the  world,  • 
neither  the  things  that  are  in  the 
world."  But  what  is  the  distinction 
between  these  two  ?  The  world  is  the 
se^/*- pleasing  sphere;  the  Church  is 
the  6^0(Z- pleasing  sphere.  But  here 
is  our  practical  difficulty — We  all  come 
into  personal  religion  as  men  and 
women  already  "  world -spotted "  by 
our  experiences.  Nay,  it  is  worse  than 
that — with  a  strange  tendency  to  take 
world-spots.  But  provision  is  made 
for  keeping  us.  Christ  is  our  hedge. 
The  Holy  Spirit  is  a  gracious  defensive 
power  within  us.  But  God's  grace  in 
us  must  be  responded  to  by  all  due 
keeping  of  ourselves.  We  need  not 
willingly  go  where  there  is  dirt.  We 
can  keep  our  clothes  tight  about  us, 
and  high  up,  if  we  must  be  where 
there  is  dirt.  So  many  of  the  stains 
on  our  garments  need  not  have  been 
there.  The  mystery  we  have  to  find 
out  is — How  was  it  that  Christ's  gar- 
ments would  not  take  stains  ? 

II.  God,  even  the  Father,  testing 
our  religion,  expects  to  find  us  visit- 
ing the  fatherless  and  the  widow. — 
The  specific  cases  are  put  as  types  of 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES. 


CHAP.   I. 


practical  religion.  They  are  valuable 
and  important  as  signs  in  themselves. 
They  are  more  so  if  regarded  as  types. 
Illustrate — We  keep  the  household 
crockery  clean,  not  for  show,  but  for 
use.  We  must  keep  ourselves  clean 
for  service.  Learn  what  Christian 
service  is  from  Christ.  Where  did  He 
find  spheres  ?  He  was  always  doing 
something  for  somebody.  That  is 
practical  religion.  Not  profession,  not 
feeling,  not  ritual,  though  these  are 
good  enough  in  their  places ;  but  the  in- 
ward goodness  of  the  pure  heart,  and  the 
outward  goodness  of  a  life  of  charity. 

Morality  the  Ceremonial  oj^  Chris- 
tianity.— The  outward  service  of  ancient 
religion,  the  rites,  ceremonies,  and 
ceremonial  vestments  of  the  old  law, 
had  morahty  for  their  end.  They 
were  the  letter  of  which  morality  was 
the  spirit,  the  enigma  of  which  morality 
was  the  meaning.  But  morality  itself 
is  the  service  and  ceremonial  (cidtus 
exterior,  Opiqa-Kda)  of  the  Christian 
religion. — Coleridge . 

The  Double  Sphere  of  Practical  Reli- 
gion.— Doing  in  two  spheres  properly 
follows  upon  religious  instruction. 
1 .  Doing  in  the  sphere  of  personal  cul- 
ture. 2.  Doing  in  the  sphere  of  kindly 
and  self-denying  service  to  others. 

Undefiled  Religion. — 1 .  That  in  which 
is  no  trace  of  insincerity.  2.  That 
in  which  there  is  no  strand  of  self- 
seeking.  God  in  our  religion  keeps 
it  sweet.  Self  in  our  religion  tends 
to  make  it  foul. 

Three  Interests  of  Religion. — Religion 
in  its  rise  interests  us  about  our- 
selves ;  in  its  progress,  about  our  fellow- 
creatures;  in  its  highest  stage,  about 
the  honour  of  God. — Fausset. 

Personal  Purity  and  Active  Chainty. 
— These  two   things   here    mentioned 


(visiting  the  fatherless,  etc.)  are  not 
the  sum-total  of  true  religion.  They 
are  but  samples  of  the  stock.  Here, 
as  elsewhere  in  the  Scriptures,  a  part 
or  parts  is  put  for  the  whole.  It  is 
as  if  I  described  a  Uving  man  by 
saying  that  he  breathes.  But  he  does 
many  things  else.  He  sees  and  hears, 
he  walks  and  talks,  he  thirsts  and 
hungers,  and  a  thousand  things  besides. 
Still,  unless  he  breathes,  he  is  not 
alive,  but  dead;  and  dead  is  the 
religion  which  does  not  aim  at  these 
two  things — personal  purity  and  active 
charity ;  in  other  words,  doing  good 
and  being  good. — Guthrie. 

Religion  in  its  Visible  Form. — Not 
piety,  but  the  externals  of  religion. 
@pr)(TK€La  only  means  religion  in  that 
sense  in  which  we  apply  the  word 
to  any  form  or  system  of  worship. 
Thus  we  might  speak  of  the  whole 
Mosaic  ritual  and  ceremonial  as  the 
Jewish  religion.  It  refers  to  the  out- 
ward and  visible  forms  in  which  reHgion 
embodies  itself,  not  to  the  inner  life 
of  religion  as  it  exists  in  the  soul. 
What  the  apostle  here  means  then  is — 
The  outward  form  and  ritual  in  which 
your  Christian  Ufe  is  to  be  manifested 
purely  and  acceptably  to  God  does  not 
consist  in  any  liturgical  system,  but 
in  visiting  the  fatherless  and  the 
widows  in  their  affliction,  and  in  keep- 
ing yourselves  unspotted  from  the 
world.  This  is  a  lesson  of  as  much 
importance  to  the  ritualists  of  this 
day  as  for  those  of  old,  whilst  atten- 
tion to  the  precise,  I  might  almost 
say  "  technical,"  meaning  of  the  word 
translated  "  religion "  guards  it  from 
the  perversion  of  the  legalist  and  the 
Pharisee.  A  holy  and  charitable  life 
has  taken  the  place  under  the  new 
dispensation  which,  under  the  old,  was 
held  by  sacrifices,  ablutions,  etc.  Pre- 
cisely the  same  idea  is  conveyed  in 
Rom.  xii.  1  and  Heb.  xiii.  15. 


537 


CHAP.   1. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES. 


ILLUSTRATIONS    TO    CHAPTER    I. 


Ver.  1.  The  Jews  of  the  Dispersion. — Long 
before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus, 
and  even  the  preaching  of  Christianity, 
Jewish  colonists  were  found  in  Europe  as  well 
as  Asia.  Milman  says :  "  Even  where  they 
suffered  most,  through  their  own  turbulent 
disposition  or  the  enmity  of  their  neigh- 
bours, they  sprang  again  from  the  same 
undying  stock,  however  it  might  be  hewn  by 
the  sword  or  seared  by  the  fire.  Massacre 
seemed  to  have  no  effect  in  thinning  their 
ranks,  and,  like  their  forefathers  in  Egypt, 
they  still  multiplied  under  the  most  cruel 
oppression."  While  the  Temple  stood  these 
scattered  settlements  were  colonies  of  a 
nation,  bound  together  by  varied  ties  and 
sympathies,  but  ruled  in  the  East  by  a 
Rabbi  called  the  Prince  of  the  Captivity, 
and  in  the  West  by  the  Patriarch  of 
Tiberias,  who,  curiously,  had  his  seat  in  that 
Gentile  city  of  Palestine.  The  fall  of  Jeru- 
salem, and  the  end  therewith  of  national 
existence,  rather  added  to  than  detracted 
from  the  authority  of  these  strange  govern- 
ments ;  the  latter  ceased  only  in  the  reign 
of  the  emperor  Theodosius,  while  the  former 
continued,  it  is  said,  in  the  royal  line  of 
David,  until  the  close  of  the  eleventh 
century,  after  which  the  dominion  passed 
wholly  into  the  hands  of  the  Rabbinical 
aristocracy,  from  whom  it  has  come  down 
to  the  present  day. — Ellicotfs  Commentary. 

A  Kingdom  become  a  Religion. — The  Dis- 
persion "  showed  to  both  Jew  and  Gentile 
alike  that  the  barriers  which  had  hedged 
in  and  isolated  the  hermit  nation  had 
broken  down,  and  that  what  had  ceased 
to  be  thus  isolated  had  changed  its  char- 
acter. A  kingdom  had  become  a  religion. 
What  henceforth  distinguished  the  Jews  in 
the  eyes  of  all  the  world  was  not  their 
country  or  their  government,  but  their  creed. 
'*  Through  this  they  were  henceforth  to  in- 
fluence men  as  under  the  old  conditions  was 
impossible."  "  They  themselves  also  were 
forced  to  understand  their  own  religion 
better.  When  the  keeping  of  the  letter 
of  the  law  became  an  impossibility,  they 
were  compelled  to  penetrate  into  its  spirit." 
The  universality  of  the  services  of  the  syna- 
gogue taught  the  Jew  that  God's  worship 
was  not  confined  to  Jerusalem,  and  their 
simplicity  attracted  proselytes.  Even  in 
matters  of  detail — the  lessons,  the  singing, 
the  ritual — the  services  of  the  synagogue 
prepared  for  the  services  of  the  Christian 
Church. — After  Dr.  Plummer. 

Ver.  6.  Surging  Sea  and  Placid  Lahe. — 
Trust  Christ,  and  so  thy  soul  shall  no  longer 
be  like  "  the  sea  that  cannot  rest,"  full  of 
turbulent  wishes,  full  of  passionate  desires 

538 


that  come  to  nothing,  full  of  endless  mean- 
ings, like  the  homeless  ocean  that  is  ever 
working,  and  never  flings  up  any  produce 
of  its  work  but  yeasty  foam  and  broken 
weeds  ;  but  thine  heart  shall  become  trans- 
lucent and  still,  like  some  land-locked  lake, 
where  no  winds  rave  nor  tempests  ruffle, 
and  on  its  calm  surface  there  shall  be 
mirrored  the  clear  shining  of  the  unclouded 
blue,  and  the  perpetual  light  of  the  sun  that 
never  goes  down. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Blessed  through  Humiliations. — 

Then  grudge  not  thou  the  anguish  keen 

Which  makes  thee  like  thy  Lord, 
And  learn  to  quit  with  eye  serene 

Thy  youth's  ideal  hoard. 

Thy  treasur'd  hopes  and  raptures  high — 

Unmurmuring  let  them  go, 
Nor  grieve  the  bliss  should  quickly  fly 

Which  Christ  disdained  to  know. 

Thou  shalt  have  joy  in  sadness  soon  ; 

The  pure,  calm  hope  be  thine, 
Which  brightens,  like  the  eastern  moon, 

As  day's  wild  lights  decline. 

Thus  souls,  by  nature  pitch'd  too  high, 
By  sufferings  plung'd  too  low. 

Meet  in  the  Church's  middle  sky. 
Half-way  'twixt  joy  and  woe, 

To  practise  there  the  soothing  lay 

That  sorrow  best  relieves  ; 
Thankful  for  all  God  takes  away, 

Humbled  by  all  He  gives. 

Kelle. 

The  Mission  of  the  Rich. — When  rain  from 
heaven  has  filled  a  basin  on  the  mountain- 
top,  the  reservoir  overflows,  and  so  sends 
down  a  stream  to  refresh  the  valley  below. 
It  is  for  similar  purposes  that  God  in  His 
providential  government  fills  the  cup  of 
those  who  stand  on  the  high  places  of  the 
earth,  that  they  may  distribute  the  blessing 
among  those  who  occupy  a  lower  place  in 
the  scale  of  prosperity. — Rev.  William 
Arnot. 

Ver.  12.  Enduring  Temptation. — There 
were  two  children  who  were  placed  in 
different  homes,  at  a  distance  from  the 
father  whom  they  loved.  One  child  was 
with  a  family,  every  member  of  which 
esteemed  his  father ;  his  name  was  never 
mentioned  but  with  love  and  veneration ; 
his  character  was  upheld  as  a  very  model 
of  excellence,  and  the  child's  admiration  for 
his  father  grew  with  his  years  and  strength- 
ened with  his  ripening  understanding.  Far 
different  was  the  case  with  his  brother. 
The  family  he  was  placed  with  seemed  bent 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JAMES. 


CHAP.  I. 


on  weaning  his  affection  from  his  father, 
and  undermining  the  confidence  he  reposed 
in  him.  They  seldom  indeed  ventured  upon 
open  accusation,  but  were  ever  insinuating 
doubts  as  to  his  father's  uprightness,  dis- 
cretion, or  love.  The  child  was  deepl}'  hurt 
at  these  suspicions ;  he  stifled  them  con- 
tinually ;  but  they  awoke  thoughts  of  which 
he  could  not  always  lose  at  once  the  painful 
impression.  Often  did  he  say  to  himself, 
"  Let  them  talk  as  they  will,  I  know  that  my 
father  is  good  and  wise  and  tender ;  I  know 
that  he  loves  me :  how  often  have  I  proved 
it  1  I  am  foolish  to  be  so  distressed ;  ere 
long  I  shall  see  him  face  to  face,  and  hear 
from  his  own  lips  an  explanation  of  many 
things  which  I  cannot  now  unravel :  till 
then,  suspect  and  suggest  as  they  may,  I 
will  believe  in  his  excellence  and  love  ! "  In 
due  time  the  father  sent  for  both  his 
children  to  his  own  home  ;  but  think  you 
he  welcomed  that  child  with  less  affection 
and  approval  who  would  love  on  and  trust 
him  through  base  insinuation  and  suspicion? 
See  here  a  picture  of  two  believers.  Few 
doubts  ever  assail  the  happy  faith  of  one. 
The  other  passes  through  deep  spiritual  con- 
flict, a  malignant  devil,  an  unbelieving  world, 
and  a  corrupt  heart,  are  ever  whispering 
hateful  suspicions  of  his  God.  *'  Though 
perplexed,  he  will  not  despair " ;  though 
silenced  and  confused,  he  continues  to 
follow ;  though  beaten  by  the  waves,  he 
clings  to  the  rock.  Though  his  Master  is 
slandered  and  traduced,  he  keeps  in  His 
service.  He  continues  with  Him  in  his 
temptations ;  and  in  the  day  of  God  he  too 
shall  hear,  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful 
servant  I '' — Bickersteth. 

Teini)tation  as  Trial. — Temptation  gener- 
ally signifies  no  more  than  trial — any  oppo- 
sition or  difficulty  that  may  exercise  our 
graces,  and  so  make  them  known.  In  this 
sense  God  Himself  tempts  men — that  is, 
tries  and  proves  them  ;  and  thus  He  tempted 
Abraham.  Sometimes  temptation  means 
dangerous  trials  and  enticements  to  sin, 
which  we  are  more  likely  to  sink  under  than 
to  overcome.  In  this  sense  God  tempteth 
not  any  man,  nor  will  He,  if  we  resist  such 
enticements,  "  suffer  us  to  be  tempted  above 
what  we  are  able  "  (1  Cor.  x.  13). —  Clio. 

Ver,  15.  The  Wages  of  Sin. — A  religious 
writer  gives  us  this  parable :  A  hermit 
was  conducted  by  an  angel  into  a  wood, 
where  he  saw  an  old  man  cutting  dow^n 
boughs  to  make  up  a  burden.  When  it  was 
large  he  tied  it  up  and  attempted  to  lift  it 
on  his  shoulders  and  carry  it  away,  but  find- 
ing it  very  heavy  he  laid  it  down  again,  cut 
more  wood,  and  heaped  it  on,  and  then 
tried  again  to  carry  it  off.  This  he  repeated 
several  times,  always  adding  something  to 
the  load,  after  trying  in  vain  to  raise  it  from 


the  ground.  In  the  meantime  the  hermit, 
astonished  at  the  old  man's  folly,  desired 
the  angel  to  explain  what  this  meant.  *'  You 
behold,"  said  he,  "  in  this  foolish  old  man 
an  exact  representation  of  those  who,  being 
made  sensible  of  the  burden  of  their  sin, 
resolve  to  repent,  but  soon  grow  weary,  and 
instead  of  lessening  their  burden,  increase  it 
every  day.  At  each  trial  they  find  the  task 
heavier  than  it  was  before,  and  so  put  it  off 
a  little  longer,  in  the  vain  hope  that  they 
will  by-and-by  be  more  able  to  accomplish 
it.  Thus  they  go  on  adding  to  their  burden 
until  it  grows  too  heavy  to  be  borne,  and 
then,  in  despair  of  God's  mercy,  and  with 
their  sins  unrepented  of,  they  lay  down  and 
die.  Turn  again,  my  son,  and  behold  the 
end  of  the  old  man  whom  thou  sawest  heap- 
ing up  a  load  of  boughs."  The  hermit  looked, 
and  saw  him  in  vain  attempting  to  remove 
the  pile,  which  was  now  accumulated  far 
beyond  his  strength  to  raise.  His  feeble 
limbs  totter  over  their  burden ;  the  poor 
remains  of  his  strength  were  fast  ebbing 
away ;  the  darkness  of  death  was  gathering 
around  him,  and  after  a  convulsive  and  im- 
potent attempt  to  lift  the  pile,  he  fell  down 
and  expired. 

Death  in  Sin. — The  tale  of  the  goblet  which 
the  genius  of  a  heathen  fashioned  was  true, 
and  taught  a  moral  of  which  many  a  death- 
bed furnishes  the  melancholy  illustration. 
Having  made  the  model  of  a  serpent,  he 
fixed  it  in  the  bottom  of  a  cup.  Coiled  for 
the  spring,  a  pair  of  gleaming  eyes  in  its 
head,  and  in  its  open  mouth  fangs  raised  to 
strike,  it  lay  beneath  the  ruby  wine.  Nor 
did  he  who  raised  the  golden  cup  to  quench 
his  thirst,  and  quaff  the  delicious  draught, 
suspect  what  lay  below,  till,  as  he  reached 
the  dregs,  that  dreadful  head  rose  up,  and 
glistened  before  his  eyes.  So,  when  life's 
cup  is  nearly  empted,  and  sin's  last  pleasure 
quaffed,  and  unwilling  lips  are  draining  the 
bitter  dregs,  shall  rise  the  ghastly  terrors  of 
remorse  and  death  and  judgment  upon  the 
despairing  soul.  Be  assured  a  serpent  lurks 
at  the  bottom  of  guilt's  sweetest  pleasure.— 
Dr.  Guthrie. 

Ver.  19.  Slow  to  speak,  slow  to  wrath. — In 
a  cavalry  squadron  of  the  great  German 
army  which  fought  so  bravely  at  Gravelotte, 
the  youngest  officer  was  from  Westphalia. 
He  was  an  impetuous,  hasty  young  man. 
Among  his  men  there  was  one  who  often 
excited  his  anger,  for  he  was,  as  every  one 
agreed;  a  very  stupid  recruit,  and  as  the 
lieutenant  was  hot-headed  and  quick,  so  was 
the  recruit  slow  and  awkward  in  everything. 
Constantly  was  it  said  to  the  poor  recruit, 
*'  You  can  do  nothing  right ! "  But,  how- 
ever men  may  speak  and  judge,  they  can- 
not see  into  the  inmost  heart,  and  God, 
who  knows  everything,   judges  differently 

539 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES. 


from  them,  and  knows  what  such  despised 
ones  can  and  will  accomplish.  In  the  ter- 
rible battle  of  Gravelotte  the  Westphalian 
squadron,  after  a  hitherto  victorious  struggle, 
was  at  last,  by  fresh  attacks  of  superior 
forces,  so  hardly  pressed  that  the  men  were 
separated  from  each  other.  Then  it  hap- 
pened that  our  lieutenant,  too,  parted  from 
the  rest  of  his  troop,  was  fallen  upon  by  two 
powerful  troopers,  but  by  putting  forth  all 
his  strength  he  defended  himself  against 
these,  till  his  arm  became  weary  and  his  eye 
grew  dim.  He  had  already  looked  death  in 
the  face,  and  in  his  heart  said  farewell  to 
his  loved  ones  at  home.  But  now  suddenly, 
in  furious  gallop,  a  horseman  rushes  up.  He 
had  been  halting  some  hundred  yards  off 
behind  a  wall,  and  in  a  few  moments  could 
safely  have  rejoined  his  company,  for  he 
heard  the  French  signal  given  to  retreat,  and 
the  trumpets  of  his  own  company  coming 
nearer.  But  when  he  saw  his  lieutenant  in 
danger  of  death,  with  a  firm  hand  he  grasped 
his  sword,  jumped  over  the  wall  and  dealt 
first  to  one  and  then  to  the  other  of  the 
hostile  troopers  blows  which  stretched  them 
both  upon  the  ground.  When,  after  a  few 
moments,  the  lieutenant  succeeded  in  bring- 
ing his  foaming  horse  to  a  standstill,  and 
the  soldier,  who  was  no  other  than  the  so- 
called  stupid  recruit,  was  again  firmly  in  the 
saddle,  the  latter  gazed  at  his  ofiicer  with 
beaming  eyes  and  said,  "  Have  I  done  right 
now  ?  "  But  before  the  lieutenant  could 
reply  and  say,  *'  Yes,  yes,  you  have  indeed 
done  right,"  a  bullet  whizzes  from  out  of  the 
bushes  and  pierces  the  soldier  through  the 
forehead,  so  that  he  drops  down  dying  from 
his  horse.  The  lieutenant  throws  himself 
weeping  upon  the  man,  and  calls  into  his 
ear,  "Yes,  comrade,  you  have  done  right." 
He  hears  no  more.  He  has  received  his 
sentence  from  another  Judge. 

Anger. — As  Plato,  having  taken  his  man 
in  a  great  fault,  was  of  a  sudden  exceedingly 
moved,  and  having  gotten  a  cudgel  as  though 
he  would  have  beaten  him,  notwithstanding 
desisted,  and  used  no  further  punishment, 
one  of  his  friends  standing  by  him  and 
seeing  this  thing,  demanded  of  him  why  he 
had  gotten  such  a  cudgel ;  to  whom  he  an- 
swered, that  he  had  provided  it  to  correct 
and  chastise  his  own  anger,  which  seemed 
to  rebel  against  him  and  would  no  longer  be 
ruled  by  reason  ;  in  like  manner  should  we 
do  when  we  are  troubled  with  this  passion 
of  anger,  and  get  either  a  knife  or  a  sword 
to  cut  the  throat  of  it  when  it  beginneth, 
and  is  as  it  were  in  its  infancy ;  for  we  may 
easily  at  the  first  oppose  ourselves  against 
it,  as  against  a  tyrant,  and  not  permit  it  to 
have  rule  over  us ;  but  if  we  suffer  it  to 
increase  and  to  fortify  itself,  it  will,  by 
little  and  little,  overrule  us,  and  at  length 
become  invincible. 

540 


Anger  in  the  East. — I  have  never  met  with 
a  people  so  much  disposed  to  violent  anger, 
especially  from  such  slight  causes,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  East.  I 
scarcely  met  with  a  native,  during  some 
months,  who  was  not  subject,  upon  even 
slight  provocation,  to  what  would  be  called 
with  us  unreasonable  anger.  It  is  common 
with  men  and  women,  old  and  young,  rich 
and  poor.  It  scarcely  seems  possible,  in 
many  cases  at  least,  to  heighten  or  deepen 
the  expression  of  bad  temper  by  any  new 
gesture,  or  look,  or  word,  or  tone  of  voice 
that  is  not  employed.  One  can  hardly 
imagine  the  almost  frightful  energy  with 
which  they  give  vent  to  their  fiery  and 
ungovernable  passion  in  many  cases.  Two 
men  wall  stand  facing  each  other  for  minutes, 
often  rising  to  the  highest  pitch  of  violence 
in  gesture  and  look  and  language ;  yet  they 
seldom  strike  one  another,  I  have  watched, 
for  example,  a  large  Turk  face  to  face  with 
an  equally  large  Nubian,  black  and  glossy  as 
polished  ebony,  who  acted  towards  each 
other,  for  minutes,  as  if  nothing  could  satisfy 
them  save  the  annihilation  of  one  or  both 
parties,  and  yet  the  only  personal  damage 
done  was  that  the  Nuhian  spat  in  the  face 
of  the  Turk,  and  then  walked  away  as  if  he 
had  finished  his  adversary — who  looked,  in 
his  turn,  as  if  he  had  been  beaten.  They 
seldom  proceed  to  personal  violence.  Your 
dragoman  must  quarrel  with  his  servants, 
and  these  with  one  another.  Every  village 
you  pass  you  hear  the  sound  of  quarrelling 
— generally,  so  far  as  you  can  observe,  with- 
out any  adequate  cause.  I  can  well  under- 
stand why  the  expression  "angry  without 
cause "  should  have  been  used. — National 
Sunday-school  Teacher. 

Ver.  22.  Boers  of  the  Word. — Cromwell  is  y 
said  to  have  once  entered  a  church  where  ' 
stood  gold  and  silver  figures  of  the  twelve 
apostles.  "  What  do  these  here  ? "  said  he. 
"Nothing,"  was  the  reply  of  the  priest  in 
charge,  "  Very  well,"  said  Cromwell,  "take 
them  away ;  melt  them  down,  and  send  them 
about  doing  good." 

Hearing  and  Doing. — There  is  a  story  told 
of  two  men  who,  walking  together,  found 
a  young  tree  laden  with  fruit.  They  both 
gathered,  and  satisfied  themselves  for  the 
present;  but- one  of  them  took  all  the  re- 
maining fruit,  and  carried  it  away  with  him, 
the  other  took  the  tree,  and  planted  it  in  his 
own  ground,  where  it  prospered  and  brought 
forth  fruit  every  year ;  so  that  though  the 
former  had  more  at  present,  yet  this  had 
some  when  he  had  none.  They  who  hear 
the  word,  and  have  large  memories,  and 
nothing  else,  may  carry  away  most  of  the 
word  at  present,  yet  he  that  perhaps  can 
but  remember  little,  who  carries  away  the 
tree,  plants  the  word  in  his  heart,  and  obeya 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP.   I. 


it  in  his  life,  shall  have  fruit  when  the  other 
has  none. — Old  WHter. 

Religious  Excitement  ineffective. — A  cele- 
brated preacher  of  the  seventeenth  century, 
in  a  sermon  to  a  crowded  audience,  described 
the  terrors  of  the  last  judgment  with  such 
eloquence,  pathos,  and  force  of  action, 
that  some  of  his  audience  not  only  burst 
into  tears,  but  sent  forth  piercing  cries, 
as  if  the  Judge  Himself  had  been  present, 
and  was  about  to  pass  upon  them  their  final 
sentence.  In  the  height  of  this  commotion 
the  preacher  called  upon  them  to  dry  their 
tears  and  cease  their  cries,  as  he  was  about 
to  add  something  still  more  awful  and 
astonishing  than  anything  he  had  yet  brought 
before  them.  Silence  being  obtained,  he, 
with  an  agitated  countenance  and  solemn 
voice,  addressed  them  thus  :  "  In  one  quarter 
of  an  hour  from  this  time  the  emotions 
which  you  have  just  now  exhibited  will  be 
stifled,  the  remembrance  of  the  fearful  truths 
which  excited  you  will  vanish;  you  will 
return  to  your  carnal  occupations  or  sinful 
pleasures  with  your  usual  avidity,  and  you 
will  treat  all  you  have  heard  '  as  a  tale  that 
is  told.' " 

Ver.  23.  Seeing  Ourselves. — The  wife  of  a 
drunkard  once  found  her  husband  in  a  filthy 
condition,  with  torn  clothes,  matted  hair, 
bruised  face,  asleep  in  the  kitchen,  having 
come  home  from  a  drunken  revel.  She  sent 
for  a  photographer,  and  had  a  portrait  of 
him  taken  in  all  his  wretched  appearance, 
and  placed  it  on  the  mantel  beside  another 
portrait  taken  at  the  time  of  his  marriage, 
which  showed  him  handsome  and  well- 
dressed,  as  he  had  been  in  other  days. 
When  he  became  sober  he  saw  the  two 
pictures,  and  awakened  to  a  consciousness 
of  his  condition,  from  which  he  arose  to  a 
better  life.  Now,  the  office  of  the  law  is 
not  to  save  men,  but  to  show  them  their  true 
state  as  compared  with  the  Divine  standard. 
It  is  like  a  glass,  in  which  one  seeth  "  what 
manner  of  man  he  is." 

Ver.  26.  Bridling  the  Tongue. 

I.  What  is  the  general  vice  or  fault  here 
referred  to,  or  what  disposition  in  man  is 
supposed  in  moral  reflections  and  precepts 
concerning  bridling  the  tongue  ?  The  fault 
referred  to  is  not  malice,  but  talkativeness, 
a  disposition  to  be  talking.  This  disposition 
is  a  grave  matter,  because  it  is  so  difficult 
to  hold  in  restraint.  It  does  not  necessarily 
involve  slander,  perjury,  or  even  ambitious 
vanity  ;  but  it  is  the  occasion  of  numberless 
ills  and  evils  and  vexations  of  life. 


II.  When  may  it  be  said  of  any  one,  that 
he  has  a  due  government  over  himself  in 
this  respect  ? — The  due  and  proper  use  of 
any  natural  faculty  or  power  is  to  be  judged 
of  by  the  end  or  design  for  which  it  was 
given  us.  What  then  is  the  design  of  the 
gift  of  speech  ?  Not  only  was  it  to  meet 
necessary  occasions,  but  also  to  minister 
enjoyment  and  satisfaction.  A  secondary 
use  of  speech  is  to  please,  and  to  be  enter- 
taining to  each  other  in  conversation.  As 
the  end  and  use,  so  likewise  the  abuse  of 
speech,  relates  to  the  one  or  other  of  these, 
either  to  business  or  to  conversation.  Three 
things  may  be  given  as  cautions  against 
mistakes  in  conversation:  1.  Silence; 
2.  Talking  of  indifferent  things  ;  3.  Speaking 
good  or  evil  of  others.  If  people  would 
observe  the  obvious  occasions  of  silence  ;  if 
they  would  subdue  the  inclination  to  tale- 
bearing, and  that  eager  desire  to  engage 
attention,  which  is  an  original  disease  in 
some  minds,  they  would  be  in  Uttle  danger 
of  offending  with  their  tongue,  and  would, 
in  a  moral  and  religious  sense,  have  due 
government  over  it. — Bishop  Butler. 

Ver.  27.  Blight  on  Sickly  Plants. — When 
blight  or  mildew  comes  to  a  garden,  the  plants 
that  suffer  first  and  most  are  those  which 
have  been  badly  cared  for,  and  are,  in  con- 
sequence, weak  and  sickly.  It  is  not  often 
that  hardy  and  vigorous  plants  are  attacked 
and  injured.  If  we  fail  to  use  the  means 
which  are  needful  for  sustaining  our  souls 
in  spiritual  health  and  soundness,  we  shall 
be  very  liable  to  the  blighting  influence  of 
evil.  It  is  only  by  being  careful  to  maintain 
a  vigorous  spiritual  life,  that  we  can  hope 
to  keep  ourselves  *'  unspotted  from  the 
world." — B.   Wilkinson. 

Sympathy  with  Widows. — One  of  the  late  f  * 
Dr.  Spencer's  parishioners,  in  Brooklyn,  New 
York,  met  him  hurriedly  urging  his  way 
down  the  street,  one  day;  his  lip  was  set, 
and  there  was  something  strange  in  that 
grey  eye.  '•  How  are  you  to-day,  doctor  ?  " 
he  said  pleasantly.  He  waked  as  from  a 
dream,  and  replied,  soberly,  "I  am  mad!" 
It  was  a  new  word  for  a  mild,  true-hearted 
Christian ;  but  he  waited,  and  with  a  deep 
earnest  voice  went  on  :  "I  found  a  widow 
standing  by  her  goods  thrown  in  the  street ; 
she  could  not  pay  the  month's  rent ;  the 
landlord  turned  her  out,  and  one  of  her 
children  is  going  to  die  ;  and  that  man  is 
a  member  of  the  Church !  I  told  her  to  take 
her  things  back  again.  I  am  on  my  way  to 
see  him." 


541 


CHAP.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JAMES. 


CHAPTER    II. 
SINS   OF  PARTIALITY,  ETC. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Have  not.— Better,  "hold  not."  Wehster  translates,  "Without  showing  degrees 
of  deference,  maintain  ye  your  faith."  The  Lord  of  glory.— There  are  no  words  in  the  Greek 
answering  to  "  the  Lord,"  but  the  insertion  is  necessary  in  order  to  complete  the  English 
sentence.  Some  would,  however,  give  to  the  genitive,  ttJs  bo^-qs,  only  the  qualifying  power 
of  an  adjective,  and  render  either  "glorious  faith,"  or  "faith  of  the  glory  revealed  by  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Plumptre  explains  thus  :  "  In  believing  in  Him  who  was  emphatically 
a  sharer  in  the  eternal  glory  (John  xvii.  5),  who  had  now  returned  to  that  glory,  men  ought 
to  feel  the  infinite  littleness  of  all  the  accidents  of  wealth  and  rank  that  separate  man  from 
man."  Eespect  of  persons. — Greek  is  a  plural,  "  in  respectings  of  persons  "  ;  showing  prefer- 
ences for  one  person  rather  than  another. 

Ver.  2.  Assembly.— Greek,  awaywyrj.  The  only  place  in  the  New  Testament  where  the 
Jewish  word  is  used  for  a  Christian  congregation.  In  the  Jewish  synagogue  the  people  sat 
according  to  their  rank,  and  members  of  the  same  trade  sat  together.  James  regards  this 
as  unadvisable  in  Christian  congregations.  The  word  iKKXrjala,  translated  "  Church,"  was  pre- 
ferred for  Christian  assemblies.  It  implied  that  those  attending  were  called  out  from  the 
rest  of  mankind,  and  united  by  new  and  spiritual  bonds.  Gold  ring. — Better,  "  a  man 
golden-ringed,  in  bright  apparel."  Gorgeous  apparel,  splendid  in  colour  and  ornament. 
6ray,  ver,  3.  Vile. — Dirty,  squalid,  the  sign  of  poverty,  or  of  some  mean  form  of 
occupation. 

Ver.  3.  Have  respect. — Give  special  consideration  and  attention  to.  Under  my  footstool. 
— That  is,  "  on  the  floor  at  my  feet."  "  In  practice  the  seats  most  coveted  among  the  Jews 
were  those  near  the  end  of  the  synagogue  which  looked  towards  Jerusalem,  and  at  which 
stood  the  Ark,  that  contained  the  sacred  scroll  of  the  law." 

Ver.  4.  Partial. — Same  word  as  "  waver,"  "  doubt,"  of  chap.  i.  6.  "  Are  ye  not  divided  in 
your  mind  ?  "  Part  wishing  to  be  loyal  to  Christ,  and  part  wishing  to  gain  the  favour  of  the 
well-to-do  man.  "  Have  ye  not  doubted  "  whether  in  Christ  rich  and  poor  really  are  one  ? 
Judges  of  evil  thoughts. — Better,  "  become  judges  having  evil  thoughts,  which  altogether  bias 
your  judgment."     "  Evil-thinking  judges." 

Ver.  5.  Eich. — That  is,  "to  be  rich."  The  poor  in  this  world,  or  so  far  as  this  world  is 
concerned,  are  referred  to.  A  true  estimate  of  poverty  and  riches  is  suggested.  Heirs  of 
the  kingdom. — Some  of  the  better  manuscripts  read,  "  heirs  of  the  promise." 

Ver.  6.  Despised. — Done  dishonour  to.  Their  acts  expressed  a  cherished  contempt. 
Oppress  you.-— Lord  it  over  you.  KaradwaaTevovacv,  act  the  potentate  over  you.  Draw  you. — 
Drag  you.  It  is  not  that  a  particular  rich  member  does  this,  but  that  he  belongs  to  a  class 
that  does  it. 

Ver.  7.  They.— The  rich  class,  largely  composed  of  Sadducees.  Ye  are  called. — Or, 
"  which  was  called  over  you  [at  baptism]  "  (Matt,  xxviii.  19). 

Ver.  9.  Commit  sin. — Alford,  "  It  is  sin  that  ye  are  working."    Convinced. — Convicted  by. 

Ver.  10. — Omit  word  "  point "  ;  insert  "  precept "  or  "  commandment."  Because  the  law  is 
only  the  various  application  of  one  essential  principle. 

Ver.  13. — Render,  "  For  the  judgment  shall  be  merciless  to  him  that  wrought  not  mercy." 
Rejoiceth  against. — Or,  "  triumphs  over."  Shakespeare  has,  "  When  mercy  seasons  justice  "  ; 
"  The  quality  of  mercy  is  not  strained,"  etc. 

Ver.  14.  Say. — Or,  "  make  profession."  The  man  may  really  have  the  faith,  but  it  cannot 
be  an  effective  faith  if  it  finds  no  expression  in  actions.  "  Faith,  without  acts  of  faith,  is 
but  a  dream,"  Works.— Simply  "  actions."  Not  meritorious  works.  Can  faith. — Not  faith 
generally,  but  his  particular  faith — the  faith  which  proves  itself  to  be  mere  sentiment. 

Ver.  16.  Be  ye  warmed  and  filled. — The  verb  is  either  imperative,  "  Get  yourself  warmed 
and  filled,"  or  indicative,  "  Ye  are  warming  and  filling  yourselves."  Plumptre  prefers  the 
indicative  form.  "  V/hat  greater  mockery  than  to  be  taunted  with  texts  and  godly  precepts, 
the  usual  outcome  of  a  spurious  and  cheap  benevolence  I  " 

Ver.  18. — This  is  the  language  not  of  an  objector,  but  of  one  whose  views  James  approves. 
Without. — That  is,  "  apart  from,"  "  distinct  from."  The  suggestion  is  that  the  two  things 
cannot  either  wisely,  or  rightly,  be  separated. 

Ver.  19.  Tremble.— Shudder. 

Ver.  20.  Vain  man.—  Empty-headed  ;  a  term  of  contempt :  see  Matt.  v.  22. 

Ver.  22.  Made  perfect. — Or,  "  a  complete,  and  therefore  acceptable,  thing," 

542 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES. 


CHAP.   H. 


Ver.  23.  Imputed.-"  Was  accounted  as  equivalent  to  righteousness."    His  willineness  to 
do  joined  with  the  effort  to  do,  was  reckoned  as  if  the  thiug  was  actually  donr^ 

Ver'  If  SLr'T^'T.™"'  '''  "y  *J«.''<='!  which.indicate  faith  to  be  a  reahty,  and  alive. 
act'J.ating  principle'"  *"'  ""'^  °'  """^  meffeot.ve ;  mere  helpless  sentiment  not  moving, 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OP  THE  PARAGRAPH. —  Verses  1-9. 

Right  and  Wrong  Respect  of  Persom.-lt  has  well  been  said  of  St.  James  that 
he  manifests  a  straightforward  good  sense  which  scatters  at  a  stroke  the 
precepts  of  hypocrisy  and  the  illusions  of  religious  conceit.  He  assails  the 
characteristic  faults  of  the  Jewish  mind;  the  religious  arrogance,  presumption, 
and  laxity  ;  the  asperity  of  mutual  crimination,  and  the  readiness  to  assume 
an  intolerant  jurisdiction  over  other  men's  conduct  and  opinions."  How  Uttle 
practical  influence  a  merely  ritual  religion,  a  religion  of  professions  and  senti- 
ments, might  be  was  shown  m  the  assemblies  of  the  Jewish  Christians  Class 
distinctions  were  unduly  recognised;  the  rich  worshippers  were  flattered,  and 
the  poor  neglected  or  insulted.  In  a  Christian  community  there  should  be  the 
equality  of  a  common  Divme  hfe,  for  that  life  a  rich  man  can  have  in  no  fuller 
and  no  healthier  measures  than  a  poor  man  can  have.  By  the  term  "resnect 
of  persons  we  understand,  showing  special  favour  to  some,  not  on  the  basis  of 
good  judgment,  or  from  a  desire  to  do  right,  but  on  the  ground  of  personal 
favour  or  to  gain  some  personal  advantage.  It  is  therefore  again  and  again 
urted  fbl^*  f  r     ■•^^P''«*.«f  Persons  with  God",  it  is  a|ain  and  a|ain 

urged  that  "respect  of  persons"  is  a  grievous  sin  in  judges  and  magistrftes. 

when  >      r-^    pf -l*^^*  '*  ''''  """"^  ""worthy  and  most  mischievous  spirit, 
when  It  gets  into  Christian  commumties.     But  it  is  important  that  we  should 
recognise  a  right      respect  of  persons  "  as  well  as  a  wrong.     So  long  as  there 
are  varieties  of  station  varieties  of  relationship,  and  varieties  of  ability  among 
human  beings,  there  will  be  spheres  for  a  proper  respect  of  persons.     The  child 
ought   to   respect   his   parent;    the   servant  ought    to   respect   his   lord-    the 
workman  ought  to  respect  his  master ;    the  poor  ought  to  respect  the  'rich  ■ 
the   citizen   ought    to   respect   his   governors.      But  then   it   is   equally  true' 
though  less  recognised,  that  the  parent  ought  to   respect  the  child,  the  lord 
the  servant,  the  master  the  workman,  the  rich  the  poor,  and  the  governor  the 
f^^T  ^^■^'^  iu'*  ^1  this  mutual  respect  that  the  social  system  of  China 
tailed      It  IS  in  this  that  the  social  system  of  Christianity  claims  universal 
acceptance.     In  China  five  relations  are  recognised,  but  in  each  case  exclusive 
attention  is  given  to  the  claims  of  the  superior  on  the  inferior;  the  inferior  is 
not  conceived  as  having  any  rights  against  the  superior.      The  five  relations 
are :  sovereign  and  minister ;  father   and  son ;  husband  and  wife ;  elder  and 
younger   brothers ;  and   friends.      Christianity  must  not  be   thought   of  as  a 
force  interfering  with  social  relationships,  and  affecting  those  si.'ns  of  mutual 
respect  which  materially  help  to  preserve  the  order  of  society,     ft  does  give  a 
man  such  self-respect  as  will  keep  him  from  adulation  or  flattery  of  anybody 
and  from  servihty  in  his  deahngs  with  anybody.     St.  James,  however,  is  not 
dealing  with  general  social  relations;  he  is  writing  to  Judieo  Christians  con- 
cerning what  IS  befitting  for  them  in  their  specially  Christian  relationships. 
Ihey  are  brought  into  fellowship  on  conditions  which   altogether  override  all 
social  distmctions.    Neither  intellect,  nor  wealth,  nor  manners"  nor  clothes  give  a 
man   special  claim  or  place  in  a  Christian  community.      Spiritual  hfe  alone 
gives  a  man  a  place,  and  spiritual  gifts  alone  give  a  man  a  position.     Within 
Christian  communities  persons  are  respected  for  their  piety  and  ministry.     The 
Uuke  of  Wellington  was  right  when,  kneehng  beside  a  poorly  clad  villager  at 

§43 


CHAP.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


the  communion-rail,  he  quietly  reproved  the  verger  who  wanted  to  remove  the 
poor  man,  by  saying,  "  Let  him  alone  ;  we  are  all  equal  here." 

I.  Respect  of  persons  is  wrong  when  it  puts  circumstances  before  character. 

— When  it  shows  deference  to  a  man  for  what  he  has  rather  than  for  what 
he  is.  It  is  the  common  and  every- day  estimate  that  we  make  of  men.  The 
workman  judges  a  man  by  his  ability  to  find  him  work.  The  business  man 
values  men  by  their  purchasing  power.  The  poor  are  unduly  impressed  by 
fine  clothes.  Women  are  constantly  in  danger  of  estimating  others  by  their 
appearances.  It  is  not  possible,  nor  would  it  be  right,  to  change  altogether  the 
relationships  of  the  week  on  the  Sunday.  We  should  not  expect  men  to  be 
otherwise  toward  each  other  at  Christian  worship  than  they  are  towards  each 
other  in  daily  business.  St.  James  proposes  no  such  unreasonable  thing.  The 
proper  respect  due  to  one  another  is  as  necessary  in  the  house  of  God  as 
anywhere  else.  Servility  is  very  different  from  respect.  The  assumption  of 
St.  James  is  that  the  man  with  the  gold  ring,  dressed  in  fine  clothing, 
is  wanting  to  make  an  impression,  to  proclaim  his  superiority ;  and  what 
St.  James  reproves  is  the  failure  to  deal  with  such  a  man  according  to  Christian 
principles.  Christians  ought  never  to  be  carried  away  by  outward  appearances, 
by  circumstances  of  wealth,  by  chance  of  getting  personal  advantages  from  the 
well-to-do.  And  yet  what  striking  illustrations  of  the  evil  St.  James  denounces 
can  be  found  in  the  pew  system  of  our  modern  churches,  especially  where  the 
support  of  worship  is  directly  dependent  on  the  gifts  of  the  people.  The  man 
who  can  pay  is  everywhere  thought  more  of  than  the  man  who  can  pray.  Up 
,to  quite  recent  times  there  were  separate,  and  specially  hard  and  uncomfortable, 
seats  for  the  poor  in  many  churches  and  chapels.  They  had  to  sit  in  a  low 
place.  St.  James  calls  this  sort  of  thing  wrong,  because  :  (1)  it  reveals  bad, 
self-seeking  dispositions  in  those  who  show  such  servility — "  they  are  partial, 
and  judges  of  evil  thoughts  " ;  (2)  it  shows  that  they  formed  no  true  estimate 
of  character,  for  these  showy  rich  men  were  just  the  very  men  likely  to  become 
their  oppressors  and  persecutors  ;  and  (3)  the  treatment  of  the  poor,  contrasted 
with  this  treatment  of  the  rich,  convicted  them  of  sin  against  the  foundation 
law  of  the  second  table — "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  Such 
servility  always  shows  low  conditions  of  spiritual  life  ;  for  when  we  go  past  our 
own  circumstances  to  concern  ourselves  with  our  own  characters,  we  are  pretty 
sure  to  be  keen  to  recognise  cultured  character  in  others,  and  to  be  indifferent 
to  mere  show  of  circumstance. 

II.  Respect  of  persons  is  right  when  it  puts  character  above  circumstances. 
— When  it  shows  deference  to  a  man  for  what  he  is  rather  than  for  what  he 
has  (see  ver.  5).  That  may  make  us  attentive  and  obliging  to  poor  people  as 
well  as  rich.  Nay,  it  is  quite  possible  that  we  may  find  more  call  to  attention 
to  the  poor  than  to  the  rich.  For  it  is  the  compensation  of  those  in  lowly 
estate  that  they  have  less  to  hinder  the  progress  of  soul  culture,  and  so  often 
reach  heights  of  Christian  attainment,  and  Christian  power  of  service,  that  are 
altogether  beyond  the  rich.  But  servility  to  the  pious  poor  would  be  as 
mischievous  as  servility  to  the  showy  rich.  Let  respect  be  given  wherever  it 
is  due.  But  do  not  be  carried  away  by  appearances.  "  The  Lord  looketh  not 
on  the  outward  appearance.  The  Lord  looketh  on  the  heart."  And  so  should 
we  who  are  taught  of  Christ  and  bear  the  Christian  name. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Yer.  \.  Worship  of  the  Modem  Golden  scripture;  but  their  excess  and  gross 
Calf. — True  reverence  and  submission  extreme,  the  preference  for  vulgar 
are    in    no   way   condemned    by   this      wealth,  the  adulation  of  success,  the 

544 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP.   II. 


worship,  in  short,  of  some  new  golden 
calf.  Respecting  persons  is  a  sin  of  the 
rich,  who  despise  the  poor  ;  of  judges, 
who  are  influenced  in  their  decision  by 
the  status  of  prisoners  ;  and  of  the  poor, 
who  are  constantly  tempted  to  time- 
serving. 

No  Classes  within  Christian  Churches. 
— Right  relations  of  classes  in  society 
involve  mutual  respect.  But  Chris- 
tianity recognises  no  classes.  It  brings 
men  into  the  unity  of  a  common  new  life. 
There  are  no  classes  in  the  children  of 
one  family.  The  redeemed  are  restored 
sons  in  the  family  of  God.  Christianity 
makes  new  relationships  on  the- basis 
of  the  new  family  life.  It  keeps  its 
"  respect "  for  cultured  and  sanctified 
character,  rather  than  for  external 
conditions. 

Ver.  2.  The  Weakness  of  the  Early 
Church. — We  must  not  judge  the  early 
Christian  Church  too  harshly.  The 
appearance  of  a  stranger  in  costly 
apparel,  with  a  gold  ring,  however 
common  a  mark  simply  of  wealth  in 
later  times,  would  in  those  days  cause 
a  far  greater  and  more  painful  surprise 
in  an  obscure  and  probably  timorous 
assemblage  of  Christians  than  at  this 
distant  period  we  are  willing  to  believe. 
The  time  of  persecution  had  already 
commenced,  and  upon  his  testimony 
how  many  issues  might  depend ! 
Anxious  to  propitiate  the  favour  of 
the  great  man,  we  can  easily  imagine 
that  every  consistent  courtesy  would 
be  offered  to  him.  The  prominently 
jewelled  ring,  itself  an  insignium  of 
the  equestrian  and  senatorial  order, 
would  instantly  announce  the  rank  of 
the  visitor.  Many  of  these  rings  are 
preserved  in  the  national  and  Conti- 
nental collections ;  they  are  solid, 
tapering,  and  of  massive  gold,  with  a 
large  jewel,  often  an  onyx  or  jasper 
cameo  on  the  face.  Some  of  these 
specimens  weigh  nearly  an  ounce.  The 
gems  are  often  engraved  with  magical 
devices,  as  charms  of  talismanic  power, 
or  valedictory  inscriptions  for  the 
wearer.        Others,      Hke      Hannibal's 


famous  ring,  contain  a  secret  recess,  in 
his  instance  filled  with  poison.  Such 
ornaments  were  both  cumbersome  and 
costly,  so  much  so  that  a  Roman  writer 
ridicules  an  enervated  fop  by  stating 
that, — 

"  Charged  with  light  summer  rings,   his 
fingers  sweat, 
Unable  to  sustain  a  gem  of  weight." 

Ver.  4.  The  Sin  of  Partiality. — In 
the  common  intercourse  of  life  it  can- 
not but  be  that  men  have  preferences 
for  one  person  over  another.  This, 
indeed,  is  the  basis  of  the  selections  on 
which  human  relationships  rest.  We 
come  into  life  unions  because  of  our 
partialities.  The  sin  of  partiality  is 
determined  by  (1)  the  occasion,  (2) 
the  way  in  which  it  finds  expression. 
Class  partialities  are  wrong.  Sect 
partialities  are  wrong.  Partialities  are 
always  wrong  when  they  lead  us  to 
do  injustice,  by  giving  to  one  what 
is  due  to  another,  or  by  withholding 
from  any  what  is  his  due.  Within 
the  Christian  Church,  where  all  should 
stand  in  the  equality  of  brotherhood 
in  Christ,  partiality  must  always  be 
a  source  of  bickerings,  jealousies,  and 
heart-burnings. 

The  World's  Standard. — The  world 
must  always  measure  by  its  own  stan- 
dard, and  consider  poverty  a  curse, 
just  as  it  looks  on  pain  and  trouble  as 
evil.  The  peril  of  organised  Chris- 
tianity is  unduly  estimating  those  who 
can  pay. 

Yer.  5.  Poverty  and  Piety. — "  There 
are  no  gains  without  pains,  and  no 
pains  without  gains."  Our  Lord  taught 
that,  relative  to  the  religious  life,  the 
rich  were  placed  at  some  very  grave 
disadvantages.  It  is  but  the  truth 
involved  in  this  teaching,  that  those 
who  are  poor  in  this  world  are  at 
advantage  in  relation  to  the  reUgious 
life.  It  must,  however,  be  kept  in 
mind  that  the  cares  of  the  poor,  their 
painful  efforts  to  obtain  a  livelihood, 
and  the  lack  of  cultured  intelligence, 
provide    serious   hindrances    to   piety. 

NN  545 


CHAP.   II. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


There  is  not  much  to  choose  between 
poor  and  rich  in  respect  of  occupation 
and  worldly  care,  but  the  kind  of 
occupations  of  the  rich  are  more 
inimical  to  the  religious  life  and  spirit 
than  those  of  the  poor.  They  tend 
to  nourish  self-reliance  and  self- 
satisfaction,  and  so  draw  men's  minds 
and  hearts  away  from  God.  True 
religion — the  religion  of  Christ — pro- 
poses to  culture  into  perfection  man's 
whole  nature,  but  it  linds  one  side  of 
man's  nature  specially  neglected,  and 
it  puts  its  strongest  force  into  it. 
The  passive  graces  (characteristic  of 
woman)  flourish  in  the  soil  of  depend- 
ence ;  and  that  is  the  habitual  atti- 
tude of  the  poor.  True,  the  strain  of 
poverty  often  makes  men  bitter  and 
hard ;  but  where  there  is  the  religious 
sense,  the  poor  have  always  been  found 
noble  examples  of  piety,  spirituality, 
and  service.  "  Blessed  are  the  poor," 
when  poverty  of  circumstance  is  joined 
with  "  poverty  of  spirit,"  that  keeps 
the  soul  open  and  receptive. 

Powerful  Men  from  the  Ranks  of  the 
Poor. — Moses  was  the  son  of  a  poor 
Levite ;  Gideon  was  a  thresher ;  David 
was  a  shepherd-boy ;  Amos  was  a 
herdsman;  the  Apostles  were  "ignorant 
and  unlearned."  The  reformer  Zwingle 
emerged  from  a  shepherd's  hut  among 
the  Alps,  Melancthon,  the  great 
theologian  of  the  Reformation,  was  a 
workman  in  an  armourer's  shop. 
Martin  Luther  was  the  child  of  a 
poor  miner.  Carey,  who  originated 
the  plan  of  translating  the  Bible  into 
the  language  of  the  millions  of 
Hindostan,  was  a  shoemaker  in 
Northampton.  Dr.  Morrison,  who 
translated  the  Bible  into  the  Chinese 
language,  was  a  last-maker  in  New- 
castle. Dr.  Milne  was  a  herd-boy  in 
Aberdeenshire.  Dr.  Adam  Clarke 
was  the  child  of  Irish  cottars.  John 
Foster  was  a  weaver.  Andrew  Fuller 
was  a  farm -servant.  William  Jay  of 
Bath  was  a  stonemason. 

Vers.  6,  7.  Good  and  Bad  among  the 
Rich. — The  denunciations  of  the  rich 

546 


by  our  Lord  and  by  His  disciples  may 
be  seriously  misunderstood  and  mis- 
used. They  are  when  they  are  em- 
ployed to  support  class  enmities,  and 
to  excite  prejudices  against  the  rich, 
and  to  hinder  them  from  accepting 
the  religious  life.  The  conditions  of 
society  in  the  time  of  our  Lord  need 
to  be  fully  understood  and  wisely 
estimated.  Then  the  rich  were  self- 
satisfied  Pharisees  or  cynical  Sad- 
ducees,  and  one  of  the  grave  disabilities 
of  the  age  arose  from  the  arrogance, 
masterfulness,  and  injustice  of  the  rich. 
But  even  then  there  were  good  and  bad 
among  the  rich.  There  was  a  Barnabas 
as  well  as  a  Dives,  a  Joseph  of  Ari- 
mathsea  as  well  as  a  Herod.  Let  severe 
reproaches  come  upon  those  who  are 
rich  and  bad.  Let  the  Divine  ac- 
ceptance and  human  respect  come  to 
all  those  who  are  rich  and  good. 

I.  The  bad  among  the  rich  are  not 
those  who  have  riches  or  acquire 
riches,  but  those  who  trust  in  riches. 
— There  are  many  persons  who  are 
born  into  the  possession  of  wealth. 
From  no  point  of  view  can  this  be 
regarded  as  any  reproach  to  them. 
It  simply  makes  the  set  of  human 
conditions  which  are  to  provide  the 
discipline  of  their  lives.  Character 
has  to  be  won  under  these  conditions, 
call  them  conditions  of  privilege,  or 
of  disability,  as  we  may  please.  There 
are  many  who  acquire  wealth  by  their 
genius,  perseverance,  or  by  fortunate 
circumstances.  They  need  not  be 
envied  ;  character  has  been  made  or 
spoiled  in  the  getting  of  the  riches ; 
and  now  the  great  question  is — -How 
do  they  stand  related  to  the  riches 
they  have  acquired  ?  Our  Lord  repeated 
His  saying  so  as  to  make  His  reference 
quite  clear — "  How  hardly  shall  they 
that  trust  in  riches  enter  the  kingdom  !  " 
It  is  the  trusting  in,  not  the  having, 
that  always  has  made,  and  still  makes, 
the  bad  rich  man. 

II.  The  bad  among  the  rich  are  not 
those  who  are  rich,  but  those  who 
will  be,  are  determined  to  be,  rich. 
— When  a  man  forces  his  way  to  get 
riches   (1)   he   can   have   no  spirit  of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP.   II. 


humility  and  submission  before  God  ; 
(2)  he  is  very  likely  to  do  shameful 
wrong  to  his  fellow- men  ;  and  (3)  he 
is  sure  to  "fall  into  temptation  and 
a  snare,  and  into  many  foolish  and 
hurtful  lusts."  There  is  such  a  thing 
as  being  *'  rich  "  toward  God. 

Ver.  8.  The  Law  of  Human  Rela- 
tions.— Very  remarkable  is  the  insight 
which  our  Divine  Lord  showed  in 
dealing  with  the  revealed  law  of  God. 
He  went  behind  all  formal  commands  to 
the  essential  principle.  Love  God,  and 
you  will  do  everything  right,  because 
love  will  be  the  constraint  of  obedience. 
There  really  is  no  need  of  a  second 
law.  One  is  only  stated  in  accom- 
modation to  human  weakness.  Loving 
our  neighbour  as  ourselves  is  involved 
in  loving  God  with  all  our  heart.  We 
must  love  whosoever  God  loves.  We 
cannot  help  loving  those  who  stand  in 
the  same  relation  to  God  as  we  do. 
Observe,  however,  that  the  claim  of 
the  Divine  relation  is  not  precisely  the 
same  as  the  human  relation.  We  are 
not  to  love  God  as  ourselves.  We  are 
not  to  love  our  neighbour  with  all  our 
mind  and  soul.  God  stands  absolutely 
first  and  alone.  Our  relation  to  Him 
is  unique,  and  all-inclusive.  A  whole 
devotion  of  the  whole  self  to  God  is 
consistent  with  all  due  service  of  others. 
But  what  we  give  to  God  may  be 
shared  with  none.  His  sacrifice  is  a 
whole  hurnt-offering.  There  is  a  care- 
ful limitation  in  the  command,  "  Thou 
shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thy  self. ^^ 
It  is  not  "  as  you  love  God."  It  is  "  as 
you  love  yourself'^  But  "  yourself " 
comes  after  God,  and  can  stand  in  no 
rivalry  with  Him.  We  must  love  our- 
selves consistently  with  supreme  love 
to  God.  We  must  love  our  neighbour 
consistently  with  supreme  love  to  God. 
There  is  a  certain  subtlety  in  St. 
James's  reference  to  this  law.  He 
hints  that  our  love  to  self  sets  us  con- 
tinually upon  efforts  to  serve  self  ;  and 
if  we  love  our  neighbour  as  we  love 
ourselves,  that  love  will  continually  set 
us  upon  efforts  to  serve  them.  True 
love  is   always,    and   everywhere,  the 


inspiration  of  service.  Show  how  this 
"  royal  law  "  seeks  to  get  applications 
in  the  family,  business,  social,  and 
church  spheres.  We  can  never  meet 
aright  our  obligations  to  our  neighbour 
until  we  can  be  said  to  love  him  so 
as  to  take  a  personal  interest  in  his 
well-being. 

Vers.  8-10.  The  Royal  Law. — After 
rebuking  partiality,  St.  James  goes  on 
to  lay  down  the  rule  of  the  believer's 
duty  to  his  fellow-men.  In  the  few 
words  of  this  most  comprehensive  law, 
we  have  the  essence  of  the  second  table 
of  the  Decalogue.  The  Christian's  duty 
is  to  cherish  towards  every  man  a  true 
kindliness.  '*  As  thyself ;  "  as  much  in 
degree  would  be  impossible;  but  as 
really,  as  constantly,  as  persistently  in 
spite  of  ill-deserving.  We  do  not 
exactly  love  ourselves,  but  we  care  for 
ourselves,  we  sympathise  with  our- 
selves ;  and  without  the  smallest  senti- 
mentalism,  in  the  homeliest  reality,  we 
might  do  the  like  toward  our  fellow- 
men.  And  to  do  this  is,  in  the  full 
Scriptural  meaning,  to  love  our  neigh- 
bour as  ourself.  The  law  which  bids 
us  do  so  seems  all  our  duty  to  our 
brethren  in  humanity ;  for  once  the 
genuine  principle  of  unselfish  kindli- 
ness is  implanted  in  us  by  God's  Spirit, 
that  principle  will  prompt  every  right 
deed,  and  permit  no  wrong  deed.  Pre- 
judice rather  than  selfishness  is  the 
main  obstacle  within  ourselves  to  the 
due  keeping  of  the  royal  law — at  least 
in  the  case  of  really  worthy  people. 
There  are  not  many  who  are  at  all 
worthy  to  be  called  Christian  people 
who  find  it  in  the  least  difficult  to  feel 
kindly  towards  any  mortal  creature 
when  they  really  come  to  know  him 
tolerably  well.  St.  James  goes  on  to 
point  out  a  too  common  way  in  which 
this  law  is  broken.  "If  ye  have  respect 
to  persons,  ye  commit  sin."  This  was 
the  besetting  sin  of  the  people  he  had 
in  his  mind,  and  was  writing  to.  It  is 
transgression,  plainly  enough,  whether 
the  person  unduly  respected  be  one- 
self or  another.  Meeting  the  possible 
objection    that    "respect    of    persons, 

547 


CHAP.  II.  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


though  not  quite  right,  is  no  great  ing  kindliness,  not  to  be  discouraged  or 
matter,"  St.  James  says,  that  anything  soured,  not  to  be  wearied  out,  is  that 
wrong  is  a  great  matter ;  doing  wrong,  which  is  implanted  by  God's  blessed 
you  break  God's  law ;  and  if  you  break  Spirit,  and  which  takes  note  of  men 
God's  law  on  one  point,  it  will  not  not  merely  as  the  objects  whose  suffer- 
avail  you  to  plead  that  you  keep  it  ings  remind  of  our  own,  but  as  beings 
on  twenty;  you  are  a  law-breaker,  a  on  whom  a  common  Father  has  con- 
transgressor,  and  you  must  rank  as  ferred  a  common  immortality,  and 
such  and  take  the  consequences.  Far  towards  whom  a  common  Saviour  has 
from  being  a  paradox,  it  is  almost  a  felt  a  common  love.  Ordinary  people 
truism.  Every  man  punished  for  a  will  never  attain  what  is  in  the  least 
breach  of  human  law  is  held  a  law-  like  loving  our  neighbour  as  ourselves, 
breaker,  a  criminal,  just  for  the  one  unless  by  the  abounding  grace  of  God's 
crime  he  has  done.  The  law  is  a  whole ;  blessed  Spirit.  It  is  possible  by  God's 
you  break  it  by  breaking  any  one  grace  to  cultivate  and  keep  a  frame  so 
of  its  innumerable  provisions.  Dwell  sweet  and  kindly,  as  that  you  shall  be 
upon  the  vital  and  central  matter  of  sources  of  blessing  and  help  to  those 
that  kindly  principle  within  us  which  around  you,  as  you  go  on  your  pilgrim- 
will  be  the  spring  of  all  duty  to  our  age  way.  There  are  excellent  gifts, 
fellow-men.  Nothing  worth  is  that  but  there  is  a  most  excellent.  There 
kindliness  which  dwells  in  a  mere  soft  are  mighty  graces,  but  there  is  a 
heart  and  a  super- sensitive  nervous  mightiest.  A  kind  heart,  a  sweet 
system.  Nothing  worth  is  that  so-  temper,  is  the  very  best  thing  the 
called  Christian  love  which  ends  in  Holy  Ghost  can  give  to  mortal  man 
tears,  and  reaches  not  to  stout,  day-  or  woman.  Tt  is  the  thing  that  is 
light  work.  Nothing  worth  is  that  likest  God.  It  is  "  the  mind  which 
philanthropy  which  results  from  mere  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus  " — the  very 
physical  feeling.     Sound,  equable,  last-  same. — A.  K.  H.  B. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  10-13. 

The  Law  of  Liberty. — That  is  the  name  for  the  law  under  which  the  Christian 
is  placed ;  the  law  by  which  the  Christian  regulates  all  his  life,  conduct,  and 
relations.  One  of  the  old  divines  puts  it  in  the  following  quaint  way  :  "I  hear 
it  said  that  a  Christian  may  do  what  he  likes.  And  so  he  may.  Only  a  Chris- 
tian is  a  man  with  afresh  set  oflikes.^^  The  law  of  liberty  can  only  be  given  to 
those  who  can  be  entrusted  with  it.  It  is  a  familiar  point  of  apostolic  teaching, 
that  the  formal  law  of  Judaism  proved  ineffectual  to  the  production  of  righteous- 
ness. St.  James  presents  this  truth  in  one  form  here.  That  old  law  so  held 
together  that  the  breaking  of  one  part  of  it  involved  the  penalty  of  the  whole. 
The  breaker  was  a  transgressor,  and  as  such  must  be  dealt  with.  For  the 
moment  St.  James  takes  the  strictly  Jewish  standpoint.  He  wanted  to  deal 
with  men  who  prided  themselves  on  keeping  the  greater  and  more  evident  laws 
— as  the  young  rich  ruler  did — but  thought  that  very  little  importance  attached 
to  breaking  it  in  its  smaller  provisions,  or  in  matters  that  did  not  very  manifestly 
disturb  social  order.  They  would  wholly  shrink  back  from  "  killing "  or 
*'  adultery,"  but  they  were  quite  indifferent  to  "  despising  the  poor,"  which,  indeed, 
was  hardly  associated  with  that  searching  law,  *'  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour 
as  thyself."  But  that  really  is  the  very  essence  of  the  second  table  of  the 
Mosaic  law,  and  therefore  in  breaking  that  law  they  broke  it  all.  But  St.  James 
would  have  them  understand  that,  as  Christians,  they  were  under  a  new  law,  one 
that  was  at  once  more  searching  and  more  inspiring,  one  that  concerned  itself 
about  both  the  great  and   the  little  in  Christian  life  and  conduct.     If   they 

548 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JAMES. 


CHAP.  ir. 


responded  to  the  call  of  that  law  in  merciful  consideration  of  one  another  and 
kindly  treatment  of  one  another,  they  need  be  under  no  fear  of  judgment. 
Under  the  "  law  of  liberty,"  "  mercy  rejoices  over  judgment." 

I.  The  **  law  of  liberty  "  frees  from  the  bondage  of  the  older  law. — Because 
men  were  not  able  to  go  alone,  not  able  to  guide  their  moral  or  social  life  of 
themselves,  therefore  a  formal  law  was  given,  stating  precisely  what  they  should 
do,  and  what  they  should  not.  It  was  a  book  of  rules  for  their  guidance  in  all 
relationships.  But  when  a  man  wants  to  do  the  good  and  the  right,  he  can 
put  his  book  of  rules  on  the  shelf.  That  book  is  just  as  valuable  as  ever  it 
was,  only  it  does  not  now  concern  him,  he  does  not  need  it ;  the  new  life 
in  him  can  find  all  good  and  befitting  expressions.  The  Christian  has  no  evil 
word  to  say  of  the  old  law.  "  The  law  is  holy,  and  the  commandment  holy, 
and  just,  and  good."  Only  he  does  not  need  it ;  because  the  very  essence  of  it — 
love  to  God  and  his  neighbour — is  in  him. 

II.  The  "  law  of  liberty  "  allows  him  to  be  a  **  law  unto  himself." — When 
can  a  man  be  a  law  unto  himself?  When  he  is  a  man.  It  is  the  very  mission 
of  Christianity  to  make  men  ;  to  nourish  that  self-restraint  which  ensures  that 
no  bodily  passion  and  no  external  temptation  shall  prove  overwhelming.  A 
child  cannot  be  a  law  unto  himself.  A  youth  can,  only  with  important  limita- 
tions. A  man  ought  to  be  able  to  rule  himself.  A  man  in  Christ  Jesus  ought, 
and  can.  He  is  free ;  but  free  unto  holiness,  free  to  do  right.  Christ  was  a 
*'  law  unto  Himself." 

III.  The  "  law  of  liberty "  permits  a  man  to  bind  himself  to  Christ. — The 
free  man  need  not  be  without  attachments,  without  examples,  without  guidance, 
without  a  master.  He  is  free  in  this  sense — that  he  allows  no  one,  and  nothing, 
to  put  bonds  on  him.  But  he  is  free  to  put  bonds  on  himself  ;  and  when  he 
does  so,  he  never  thinks  of  them  as  bonds,  he  never  calls  them  bonds.  He  is 
free  to  bind  himself  to  Christ,  but  His  service  is  perfect  freedom.  It  were  not 
freedom  if  the  man  were  not  free  to  choose  his  friend  or  his  master. 

IV.  The  <'  law  of  liberty  "  enables  a  man  to  use  the  old  law  when  he  pleases. 
■ — If  he  is  free  to  put  it  away  on  the  shelf,  he  is  free  also  to  take  it  down.  In 
the  free  endeavour  to  adjust  his  life  and  relations,  he  may  often  find  in  the 
old  law  good  counsel  and  guidance.  He  discovers  its  practical  and  experimental 
value,  but  has  no  such  sense  of  its  constraint  as  properly  came  upon  the  Jew. 
St.  James  intimates  that  if  men  order  their  conduct,  as  Christians,  according  to 
the  "  law  of  liberty,"  they  will  never  be  servile  to  the  rich  and  never  despise  the 
poor.     Mercy  will  be  sure  to  tone  all  their  judgments. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  10.  Offending  in  One  Point. — 
A  law  is  the  expression  of  the  mean- 
ing of  the  law-making  power.  The 
constitution  of  the  United  States  is 
the  declaration  of  the  method  by 
which  the  law-making  power — the 
people  of  the  United  States — intends 
to  govern.  A  law  will  be  right  and 
beneficent  in  the  proportion  of  the 
moral  elevation  of  the  power  pro- 
mulgating the  law.  A  bad  king, 
other  things  being  equal,  will  pro- 
mulgate   bad    laws.      A    community 


debased  in  moral  tone  will  establish 
for  itself  correspondingly  deteriorated 
laws.  On  the  other  hand,  a  supremely 
good  governing  power  will  express 
itself  by  law  supremely  good.  God  is 
the  governor  of  the  universe,  and 
God  is  the  supremely  good ;  therefore 
the  law  which  He  has  promulgated 
must  be  the  expression  of  a  nature 
infinitely  good,  and  so  must  itself  be 
infinitely  good.  This  infinitely  good 
law  of  God  is  stated  for  us, — in  man's 
moral  constitution  ;  in  the  Ten  Com- 

549 


CHAP.   II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


mandments ;    in    the  condensed    uni- 
versal formula  for  right  living  by  the 
Lord    Jesus,     "  Thou    shalt    love    the 
Lord  thy  God  with   all  thy  soul  and 
strength  and  mind,  and  thy  neighbour 
as  thyself  "  ;  still  further,  this  law  of 
God  is  taken  out  of  a  merely  cold  and 
mechanical   and   dead  statement,  and 
set   before   us   and   illustrated  in  the 
living     person     Jesus     Christ.        Our 
scripture  declares  that  though  a  man 
keep  the  whole  of  this  law,   and  yet 
offend   in   one   point,  he   is  guilty  of 
all.      Why  ?      Because,    first,    of    the 
essential    unity    of    the    Divine    Lord. 
The   law  of   God  is   not  made  up  of 
parts    dissimilar    in    authority.      You 
are  under  no  less   obligation   to   love 
your   neighbour   as   youiself   than   to 
love  God  with  your  whole  being.     The 
sanctions  sustaining  either  part  of  the 
law  are  just  the   same.     The  law  of 
God    is    the    expression    of    the    one 
nature   of   God.     Each    particular   of 
the  law   is   equally   holy   with   every 
other,    and   equally    good   with    every 
other,  and  equally  authoritative  with 
every  other.     "  For  He  that  said.  Do 
not  commit  adultery,  said  also.  Do  not 
kill.    Now  if  thou  commit  no  adultery, 
yet   if   thou   kill,    thou   art  become  a 
transgressor  of  the  law."     The  law  of 
God  is  a   complete   circle.     It  makes 
little  difference  whether  you  break  into 
the  circle  at  what  you  call  the  top  or 
bottom   or   on   either    side ;    if   it   be 
fractured  anywhere,  it  is  broken.  Here 
is  some  most  precious   statue,  perfect 
save  that  it  is  broken  as  to  its  least 
finger.     Is  the  statue  whole  ?     Is  the 
unity  of  its  beauty   unimpaired  ?     Is 
it   not  henceforth  for  ever  a    broken 
thing?     In   some   true   sense   do   not 
features  and  feet  and  limbs  and  hands 
share  in  the  damaged  unity  ?     Is  it  not 
really   true   that  that    broken  finger, 
offending    though    only    in    that    one 
point  against  the  law  of  wholeness,  is 
yet  guilty  of  breaking  the  entire  law 
of    wholeness  ?      That    perfect   statue 
is  the  law  of  God.     God's  law  possesses 
in   itself   the  majestic   unity   of   per- 
fection.    It   is  the   expression  of   the 
one  perfect  nature  of  Jehovah.     Each 

550 


least  particular  of  it  is  essential  to  the 
unity  and  completeness  of  the  whole. 
And  if  you  break  it  in  one  particular, 
you  for  ever  damage  that  law's  one- 
ness, and  do,  in  a  most  true  sense,  break 
it  all,  and  so  are  guilty  of  it  all.  Pro- 
foundly true  are  these  words  of  Milton  : 
"  If  the  law  allow  sin,  it  enters  into 
a  kind  of  covenant  with  sin  ;  and  if  it 
do,  there  is  not  a  greater  sinner  in  the 
world  than  the  law  itself."  Because, 
second,  that  disposition  which  would 
break  one  point  would,  other  things 
being  equal,  break  any  other  point. 
"  He  who  would,  for  sound  religious 
reasons,  keep  one  precept,  would,  from 
the  same  conscientious  motive,  abstain 
from  breaking  all  the  rest ;  and,  on 
the  other  hand,  he  who  would  not 
for  any  religious  reasons  abstain  from 
breaking  one,  has  nothing  within 
himself  which  would  restrain  him  from 
breaking  all  the  rest."  Because,  third, 
the  sin  in  one  point  inevitably  spreads 
into  sin  in  other  points.  As  a  fire  that 
breaks  out  in  one  place,  but  soon  con- 
sumes the  whole  dwelling. — Anon. 

God's  Law  is  a  Whole. — As  a  chain 
is  snapped  by  failure  of  the  weakest 
link,  so  the  whole  law,  in  its  harmony 
and  completeness  as  beheld  by  God, 
is  broken  by  one  offence  of  one  man ; 
and  the  penalty  falls,  of  its  own 
natural  weight  and  incidence,  on  the 
culprit. 

I.  The  requirement. — Keep  the 
whole  law. 

II.  The  failure. — Stumble  at  one 
point. 

III.  The  Divine  reading  of  the 
failure. — It  is  virtually  breaking  all 
the  laws,  for  it  is  breaking  the  thing — 
the  law.  The  man  who  fails  stands 
before  God,  not  for  a  particular  offence, 
but  for  breaking  the  law.  This,  how- 
ever, must  not  be  so  presented  as  to 
lead  men  to  assume  that  God  recognises 
no  degrees  of  criminality.  What  has 
to  be  impressed  is  the  large  moral 
significance  of  apparently  insignificant 
moral  offences. — Anon. 

A  Law  of  Liberty. — That  is,  a  law 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES.  cHAP.  II. 


which  secures  a  man  freedom  for  right-  to  the  witness  of  his  lips.     It  is  not 

eousness ;  and  consequently  comes  down  without   special  significance   that   the 

severely  on  a  man  when  that  freedom  word    "  conversation "   is  used   in   the 

is  abused.  New  Testament.     It  means  the  whole 

turning  about  of  our  relations,  but  it 

Ver.  1 2.  The  Dual-sphere  of  Relations,  evidently  includes  the  element  of  speech. 
— "  So  speak  ye,  and  so  do."     A  man 

finds  expression  for  what  is  in  him  by  Yer.  13.  The  Relativity  of  Mercy  and 

speech  and  by  action.     He  is  known  Judgment. — The  psalmist  puts   mercy 

by  his  fruits  in  conduct ;  but  it  is  also  and  judgment  together  in  a  way  that 

true  that  he  is  known   by  his  fruits  is   somewhat   surprising  :  "Also  unto 

in  conversation.      A  man  comes  into  Thee,  O  Lord,    belongeth   mercy,    for 

association  with  others  and  influences  Thou  renderest  to  every  man  according 

others  by  the  substance  and  tone  of  to  his  work."     It  is  as  if  he  had  said 

his  talk  and   by  the  example   of   his  of   God,    "His  mercy  is   judgment"; 

actions.    But  the  importance  of  a  man's  "His  judgment  is  mercy."     It  would 

conduct-sphere  is  often  exa^'gerated.    It  be  no  real  mercy  if  God  did  not  judge 

is  when  it  is  said  that  "  three-fourths  and  punish  His  creatures.     It  would 

of   life   is    conduct."     It  is  when   the  be  no  judgment  of  the  Divine  Father 

speech -sphere   is   not    adequately  and  of  men  if  mercy  were  not  at  the  very 

harmoniously  estimated  along  with  the  heart  of  it.     St.  James  here  suggests 

conduct-sphere.  that — 1.    Usually    mercy    and    judg- 

I.  A  man's  speech  judged  by  the  ment  go  together,  hand  in  hand. 
law  of  liberty. — The  law  of  liberty  2.  Occasions  may  occur  which  require 
is  that  law  of  liberty  which  orders  a  judgment  to  go  first,  and  mercy  keep 
man's  life  when  he  wants  to  do  right.  in  the  background.  The  special  case 
A  man  becomes  free  of  law,  and  a  law  referred  to  is  that  of  the  man  who  has 
unto  himself,  when  the  love  of  right-  showed  no  mercy  to  his  fellow- man  ; 
eousness  is  fully  established  in  him.  a  case  illustrated  by  our  Lord's  parable 
But  this  law  of  liberty  becomes,  in  the  of  the  unforgiving  servant.  "  Blessed 
use  of  the  man  himself  concerning  are  the  merciful,  for  they  shall  obtain 
himself,  the  sternest  and  most  search-  mercy."  3.  Occasions  may  arise  in 
ing  law.  It  ensures  such  speech,  such  which  mercy  stands  forth  to  do  her 
conversation,  as  becometh  the  gospel  work,  and  judgment  must  lag  behind, 
of  Christ.  We  can  think  of  cases  in  which  the 

II.  A  man's  conduct  judged  by  the  mercifulness  and  charity  of  a  man 
law  of  liberty. — Apply  the  explanation  may  put  an  arresting  hand  on  judg- 
of  the  law  of  liberty,  given  above,  to  ment  and  "  hide  a  multitude  of  sins, 
the  sphere  of  man's  actions  and  rela-  — R.  T. 

tions.     When  a  man  is  right-minded, 

and  attempts  to  rule  his  ow^n  conduct,  Mercy  rejoiceth  against  Judgment. — 

there  is  a  guarantee  of  righteousness.  Mercy  is  dear  to  God,  and  intercedes 

This  truth  is  set  forth  in  his  character-  for  the  sinner,  and  breaks  his  chains, 

istic  way  by  the  apostle  John,  when  and     dissipates     the     darkness,     and 

he  says  of  the  man  ruled  by  the  law  quenches  the  fires  of  hell,  and  destroys 

of  liberty,   the  love  of   righteousness,  the  worm,  and  rescues  fi-om  the  gnash- 

"  He  cannot  sin,  because  he  is  born  of  ing   of   teeth.      To   her   the   gates   of 

God."    But  the  application  of  Christian  heaven  are  opened.     She  is  the  queen  of 

principles  to  the  sphere  of  conduct  is  virtues,  and  makes  men  like  to  God,  for 

much  more  constantly  dealt  with  than  it  is  written,  "  Be  ye  merciful,  as  your 

their  appHcation  in  the  sphere  of  con-  Father  also  is  merciful "  (Luke  vi.  36). 

versation.       And    many    an    earnest  She  has  silver  wings  like  the  dove,  and 

Christian  spoils  the  witness  of  his  life  feathers  of  gold,  and  soars  aloft,  and 

because  he   does   not  pay  due   regard  is  clothed  with  Divine  glory,  and  stands 

551 


CHAP.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


by  the  throne  of  God  ;  when  we  are  her   wings.      God    loves  mercy   more 

in  danger  of  being  condemned,  she  rises  than   sacrifice   (Matt.    ix.    1 3). — John 

up   and  pleads  for  us,  and  covers  us  Chrysostom. 
with   her   defence,  and   enfolds  us  in 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  14—20. 

Sentimentality  is  not  Religion. — In  every  age  the  difficulty  has  had  to  be  dealt 
with,  of  confusing  profession  with  piety,  and  sentiment  with  religion,  and  talk 
with  service.  The  difficulty  especially  associates  with  Christianity,  which  is 
essentially  a  spiritual  religion  ;  has  no  sphere  if  it  does  not  get  a  soul-sphere ; 
but  when  it  has  gained  the  soul-sphere,  persists  in  gaining  the  body-sphere  also. 
In  the  early  Church  there  were  the  deceived  and  the  self- deceived — those  who 
took  up  with  religion  from  interested  motives,  and  those  who  had  very  unworthy 
notions  of  what  religion  is  and  requires.  Some  were  carried  into  the  Christian 
profession  on  passing  waves  of  emotion,  and  when  the  excitement  died  down 
they  were  surprised  to  find  in  what  responsibilities  they  were  involved.  Some 
were  intellectually  convinced  of  Christ's  claims,  but  did  not  come  into  the  moral 
influence  of  personal  relations  of  love  and  trust.  Intellectual  belief  is  not 
bound  to  bear  fruit  of  godly  living  ;  personal  faith  is.  The  trust  which  binds  to 
Christ  binds  to  the  vservice  of  Christ.  The  faith  which  saves,  and  the  works 
which  serve,  are  linked  indissolubly  together.  These  are  the  truths  St.  James 
presents  in  this  paragraph  in  his  practical,  pointed,  and  illustrative  style.  Two 
words  will  give  the  contrast  which  St.  James  so  forcibly  presents.  Saying, 
showing.  Saying  that  we  have  faith.  Showing  that  we  have  faith.  Both  are 
right.  Profession  may  be  the  duty  of  the  hour  as  truly  as  charity.  But  there 
is  this  marked  difference  between  the  two.  Showing  can  stand  alone,  but  saying 
cannot.  A  man  who  shows  his  faith  by  his  works  need  not  make  profession,  for 
the  works  will  make  all  the  profession  that  is  needed.  But  the  man  who  shows 
his  faith  only  by  his  profession  will  find  the  profession  is  altogether  a  worthless 
thing  to  himself  and  to  others,  unless  it  is  followed  up  by  answering  works  of 
charity  and  service.  Of  the  Pharisee  class  our  Lord  said,  "  They  say  and  do^ 
not  "  ;  and  in  those  words  may  be  found  the  keenest  and  most  severe  reproach. 

I.  Saying  that  we  have  faith,  or  resting  in  profession  and  sentiment. — This 
is  a  special  peril  at  times,  under  particular  sectarian  conditions,  and  to  peculiar 
natural  dispositions.  Such  times  are  times  of  revival  ;  such  conditions  are 
demands  of  special  beliefs  ;  such  dispositions  are  prevailingly  emotional.  There 
are  insincere  and  time-serving  forms  of  making  religious  profession ;  but  we 
need  only  take  sincere  forms  with  which  men  are  self-deluded.  St.  James 
wants  us  clearly  to  see  that  merely  saying  we  have  faith  cannot  save.  It  has 
no  necessary  saving  influence  in  the  life  ;  it  has  no  moral  power.  This  has  been 
embodied  in  the  familiar  saying,  "  Hell  is  paved  with  good  intentions  " ;  which 
were  ineffective  things,  and  could  not  save  the  man  from  going  to  hell.  There- 
fore it  is  constantly  pressed  on  attention  that  the  faith  which  saves  is  not 
intellectual  belief,  of  which  we  can  make  a  profession,  but  heart-trust,  which 
brings  us  into  personal  relations  with  Christ,  and  compels  service  to  Him  in  the 
service  of  his.  As  professors  we  are  always  in  danger  of  living  a  sentimental 
rather  than  a  practical  Christian  Hfe.  The  danger  seems  expressed  in  our 
common  modes  of  speech.  We  say  we  make  a  profession  of  religion.  Would 
it  not  be  better,  less  exposed  to  misunderstanding  and  mistake,  if  we  were  to 
say  we  have  begun,  and  are  trying  to  live,  a  Christian  life  ?  We  may  easily 
become  satisfied  with  making  a  profession ;  we  can  never  be  satisfied  if  our 
effort  is  to  live  a  godly,  righteous,  and  sober  life.     The  danger  of  sentimentality 

552 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES.  chap.  ii. 


starts  with  iis  in  the  very  beginning  of  our  reHgious  history.  The  great  force 
of  influence  brought  to  bear  on  us  then  tends  to  nourish  feeling.  Very  little 
effort  is  made  to  urge  on  us  the  doing  of  duty,  and  the  acceptance  of  a  life  of 
charities  and  sacrifices.  And  a  serious  estimate  of  many  advanced  Christian 
lives  brings  to  light  the  mastery  of  this  evil.  To  many  the  searching  Spirit  of 
Christ  may  have  to  say,  ''  Thou  hast  a  name  that  thou  livest,  and  art  dead." 
The  fact  is  that  people  prefer  that  which  cultivates  the  sentimental,  increases 
mere  knowledge,  or  pleases  with  the  delicacies  of  high  feeling  ;  they  are  often 
offended  when,  with  plainness  and  point,  the  claims  of  the  Spirit  ©f  Christ  are 
shown  bearing  upon  temper,  and  home,  and  indulgences,  and  business,  and 
charity.  But  profession  of  faith,  if  it  stand  alone,  if  that  is  all  a  man  has,  does 
not  save,  and  cannot.  Our  Lord  stamped  the  helplessness  of  mere  saying  in 
His  severe  reproach,  "  Many  shall  say  unto  Me  in  that  day.  Lord,  Lord,  did 
we  not  prophesy  by  Thy  name  ?  and  by  Thy  name  cast  out  devils  ?  and  by  Thy 
name  do  many  mighty  works  ?  And  then  will  I  profess  unto  them,  I  never 
knew  you  :  depart  from  Me,  ye  that  work  iniquity  "  (Matt.  vii.  22). 

II.  Showing  that  we  have  faith. — Or  expressing  faith  in  service.  St.  James 
gives  a  definite  case  in  illustration.  A  distressed  Christian  brother,  needing 
actual  food  and  clothing,  comes  to  the  man  who  says  he  has  faith,  and  expects 
his  saying  so  to  suffice.  The  man  lives  in  the  region  of  excellent  sentiment  and 
pious  talk.  And  he  gives  plenty  of  these  things  to  his  distressed  brother ;  but 
no  clothes  and  no  food.  Now  what  good  could  that  do  either  to  the  professor 
or  to  the  distressed  brother  ?  It  did  not  nourish  the  professor's  faith  only  to 
talk ;  and  it  did  not  help  the  poor  man  in  his  need  to  listen  to  talk.  It  would 
have  shown  the  man's  faith — and  showing  is  speaking  loudly  and  effectively — 
if  he  had  given  some  clothes  and  some  food.  Ministry,  charity,  the  life  of 
service — this  is  the  true  profession,  the  proper  showing  forth  of  godliness.  Think 
of  Dorcas,  and  the  crowd  that  gathered  about  her  house,  mourning  for  her,  and 
showing  the  garments  she  had  made  for  them.  That  crowd  wept  for  her 
because  of  what  she  had  done.  Think  of  those  holy  women  who  ministered  of 
their  substance  to  Christ,  and  were  honoured  by  Him  for  what  they  had  done. 
Nay,  think  above  all  of  Christ  Himself,  over  whose  whole  Hfe  shines  the  glory 
of  something  done  to  relieve,  and  comfort,  and  raise,  and  save  His  fellow-men. 
"  He  went  about  doing  good,"  showing  how  much  more  "  blessed  it  is  to  give 
than  to  receive "  ;  and  "  leaving  us  an  example,  that  we  should  follow  His 
steps  " — this  example,  not  talking  about  his  faith,  and  satisfying  Himself  with 
talk,  but  showing  His  faith  by  works  of  loving  charity  and  devoted  service. 
There  may  be  :  (1)  faith  without  works  ;  (2)  works  without  faith  ;  (3)  faith  seen 
in  works;  and  (4)  works  culturing  faith.  Isolated  faith  is  a  helpless  (dead) 
thing.  There  are  three  possible  stages  of  faith  :  (1)  faith  spoken  with  the 
lips  ;  (2)  faith  seen  in  the  life  ;  (3)  faith  felt  in  the  deeds  which  carry  the 
persuasion  of  it  to  others. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  14.  Eaith  as  Trust,  and  Works  proper   or   moral    sense,  but   not   the 

as  Charity. — According  to  St.  James,  higher,  or  "  forensic,"  as  we  now  call 

faith  was  moral  conviction,  trust,  and  it. — After  De  Wette  and  Alford. 
truth,  and  yet  such  a  theoretical  belief 

only  that  it  might  be  held  by  devils.  Religion   is  Devotion    and   Duty. — 

Works  are  not  those  of  the  law,  but  The  Church  of  every   age  is   warned 

an  active  life  of  practical  morality  and  against  the  delusive  notion  that  it  is 

well-doing.     Justification  is  used  in  a  enough    for    men    to    have    religious 

553 


CHAP.   II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


emotions,  to  talk  religious  language, 
to  have  religious  knowledge,  and  to 
profess  religious  belief,  without  the 
habitual  practice  of  religious  duties, 
and  the  daily  devotion  of  a  religious  life. 
— EUicott's  Commentary. 

St.  James  no  Antagonist  of  St.  Paul. 
— Lightfoot  says,  "It  becomes  a  ques- 
tion whether  St.  James's  protest  against 
relying  on  faith  alone  has  any  refer- 
ence, dirfect  or  indirect,  to  Bt.  Paul's 
language  and  teaching ;  whether,  in 
fact,  it  is  not  aimed  against  an  entirely 
different  type  of  religious  feeUng, 
against  the  Pharisaic  spirit  which 
rested  satisfied  with  a  barren  orthodoxy, 
fruitless  in  works  of  charity." 

True  Faith. — True  faith  rests  not  in 
great  and  good  desires,  but  acts  and 
executes  accordingly.  It  will  be  long 
enough  ere  the  gale  of  good  wishes 
carry  us  to  heaven. — Bishop  Hall. 

Yers.  15,  16.  Feeling  without  Action. 
— We  pity  the  wretchedness  and  shun 
the  wretched ;  we  utter  sentiments 
just,  honourable,  refined,  lofty;  but 
somehow,  when  a  truth  presents  itself 
in  the  shape  of  a  duty,  we  are  unable 
to  perform  it.  And  so  such  characters 
become  by  degrees  like  the  artificial 
pleasure-grounds  of  bad  taste,  in  which 
the  waterfall  does  not  fall,  and  the 
grotto  offers  only  the  refreshment  of 
an  imaginary  shade,  and  the  green  hill 
does  not  strike  the  skies,  and  the  tree 
does  not  grow.  Their  lives  are  a 
sugared  crust  of  sweetness,  trembling 
over  black  depths  of  hollowness  ;  more 
truly  still,  "  whited  sepulchres,"  fair) 
without  to  look  upon,  "  within  full  of/ 
all  uncleanness." — F.  W.  Robertson. 

The  Lesson  of  Commonplace  Charity. 
— St.  James's  illustration  is  decidedly 
commonplace,"  but  it  has  its  power, 
suggestiveness,  and  pointed  application 
in  that  very  fact.  Men  could  have 
found  excuses,  and  shifted  off  from 
themselves  the  application  of  St. 
James's  truth,  if  he  had  found  some 
unusual  or  peculiar  case.     The  skill  of 

554 


a  Christian  teacher  is  often  shown  in 
the  fresh  adaptations  of  commonplace 
truths  or  illustrations.  The  common- 
place appeals  to  the  universal  con- 
science. How  very  usual  is  the  case 
of  a  fellow-creature  needing  clothes 
and  food.  How  often  is  the  good 
word  that  costs  nothing,  and  does  no- 
thing, made  to  stand  in  place  of  the 
good  deed  which  costs  something,  and 
does  much.  1.  The  good  word  may  be 
good,  but  not  timely.  2.  The  good 
word  is  but  mockery  when  it  stands 
by  itself.  Many  a  poor  beggar  who 
wants  a  crust  has  been  mocked  with  a 
sermon.  3.  The  good  word  is  accept- 
able and  useful  when  it  goes  along  with, 
or  follows  after,  the  kindly  deed. 
The  lesson  of  commonplace  charity  is, 
that  it  is  always  better  to  help  the 
distressed  with  our  hands  than  with 
our  lips.  The  lips  may  do  good  service 
when  they  back  up  what  the  hands  do. 
Do  not  say  to  the  cold  and  naked,  "  Be 
ye  warmed "  :  warm  them,  and  save 
your  talking  to  them  until  they  are 
warmed.  All  our  good  works  should 
be  instinct  with  the  same  principle. 
Do  first,  and  let  good  speech  be  the 
fair  companion  of  good  deeds. 

Ver.  17.  Faith  and  Works. — Sup- 
pose I  say,  "  A  tree  cannot  be  struck 
without  thunder " ;  that  is  true,  for 
there  is  never  destructive  lightning 
without  thunder.  But  again,  if  I  say, 
"  The  tree  was  struck  by  lightning 
without  thunder,"  that  is  true  too,  if  I 
mean  that  the  lightning  alone  struck 
it  without  the  thunder  striking  it. 
Yet  read  the  two  assertions  together, 
and  they  seem  contradictory.  So,  in 
the  same  way,  St.  Paul  says,  "  Faith 
justifies  without  works  " — that  is,  faith 
alone  is  that  which  justifies  us,  not 
works.  But  St.  James  says,  "  Not  a 
faith  which  is  without  works."  There 
will  be  works  with  faith,  as  there  is 
thunder  with  lightning  ;  but  just  as  it 
is  not  the  thunder  but  the  lightning, 
the  lightning  without  the  thunder, 
that  strikes  the  tree,  so  it  is  not  the 
works  which  justify.  Put  it  in  one 
sentence — Faith  alone  justifies^  hut  not 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP.   II. 


-"J 


Lightning 


the  faiih^whioh  is  alone. 
alone  strikes,  but  not  the  lightning 
which  is  alone  without  thunder  ;  for 
that  is  only  summer  lightning,  and 
harmless. — F.   W.  Robertson. 

Faith  as  a  Cipher. — Faith  is  like  a 
cipher  in  arithmetic,  which,  no  matter 
how  often  it  is  repeated,  represents 
nothing  "being  alone,"  but  when  added 
to  the  units  it  gives  them  value.  So 
faith  and  works. — Bayot. 

Faith  and  its  Fruits. — Faith  must  be 
known  by  its  fruits.  When  a  mighty 
cliff  is  to  be  shattered  by  gunpowder, 
a  small  chamber  is  prepared  in  the 
interior,  and  filled  with  the  powder, 
then  a  wire  connected  with  an  electric 
battery  is  carried  in.  At  the  appointed 
signal  the  spectators  watch  the  cliff, 
and  if  they  see  no  movement  they 
know  the  messenger  that  flashed  along 
the  wire  has  not  been  received.  If 
it  had  been,  the  cliff  would  have 
heaved,  and  fallen  into  the  sea. 

The  Word  '"'•  Bead''^  as  applied  to 
"  Things." — It  has  been  shown  by 
Professor  Drimimond  that  things  are 
properly  said  to  be  dead  when  they 
fail  to  "respond  to  their  environment." 
Then  we  have  to  find  what  is  the 
particular  environment  of  faith  :  then 
we  can  test  faith,  and  see  if  it  is  living, 
and  if  it  is  living  by  an  all-round  and 
complete  response  to  its  environment. 

Vers.  17,  18.  Faith  a  Sentiment  and 
Faith  a  Poioer. — St.  James  has  really 
but  one  topic.  It  may  be  expressed 
in  this  way — Godliness  is  practical. 
It  is  the  spirit  that  tones,  and  gives 
good  character  to,  all  human  life  and 
relations.  This  is  true  of  all  godliness  ; 
it  is  pre-eminently  true  of  the  Christian 
godliness.  The  old  Jew  repeated  hi$ 
profession  of  faith — "  Hear,  O  Israel^ 
the  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord" — day 
by  day,  until  it  became  a  meaningless^ 
routine,  and  he  could  keep  on  saying 
it,  and  even  pride  himself  in  keeping 
on,  while  well-nigh  everything  in  his 
life   and   conduct     and   relations   was 


inconsistent  with  the  due  fear  of  God, 
and  with  a  fitting  sense  of  the  brother- 
hood of  man  ;  subversive  of  the  first 
principles  of  religion  and  justice  and 
charity.  The  condition  was  well  re- 
presented by  the  Pharisees  of  our 
Lord's  day,  who  came  under  His 
severest  denunciations,  because  they 
prided  themselves  upon  their  faith, 
but  kept  it  clear  of  all  influence  upon 
their  works.  They  said,  but  did  not  : 
were  always  ready  to  show  their 
faith.,  to  talk  about  it,  to  boast  about 
it ;  but  they  dared  not,  and  did  not 
wish  to,  show  their  works ;  and  they 
needed  to  have  themselves  shown  up 
to  themselves  by  the  searching  and 
revealing  words  of  Christ.  Judaism 
did  not  contemplate  any  such  divorce 
of  faith  and  works.  Indeed,  the 
Mosaic  system  provided  against  any 
such  possibility  by  its  elaborate  system 
of  works — duties,  ceremonies,  relations, 
obligations — in  and  through  which  the 
faith  of  the  Jew  might  find  expression. 
Jewish  ritual  was  valuable  with  faith, 
but  worthless  and  mischievous  without 
it.  The  faith  that  did  nothing  was 
nothing.  St.  James  writes  to  Jews 
who  had  come  to  accept  Jesus  as 
Messiah  and  Saviour — to  Jews  whose 
new  formula  of  faith  was,  "  I  believe 
in  one  God,  and  in  Jesus  Christ  whom 
He  hath  sent "  :  and  a  very  good 
creed  to  believe  that  was.  But  the 
peril  attached  to  it  was  that  which 
attached  to  the  old  Jewish  creed,  and 
indeed  to  all  creeds.  It  was  of  no 
value  by  itself,  and  yet  men  were 
always  tempted  to  satisfy  themselves 
with  it  alone.  A  man's  faith  is  a 
living  thing,  and  all  living  things 
want  to  do  something  ;  they  want  to 
work ;  and  they  are  known  by  their 
works.  We  do  not  call  a  thing  ahve 
that  does  nothing ;  and  faith,  if  it 
have  not  works,  is  dead  in  itself.  St. 
James  does  but  announce  a  universal 
fact  and  principle,  one  that  is  as  true 
to-day  as  yesterday.  A  faith  that 
could  do  nothing — poor,  weak,  worth- 
less thing — never  saved  anybody  yet. 
Doing  nothing,  it  could  not  do  that. 
A  faith  that  can  do  nothing  neither 

555 


CHAP.  II. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


God  nor  man  can  take  any  notice  of. 
It  is  a  bubble,  and  bursts  with  a 
touch.  St.  Paul  scorns  the  vain  thing 
as  much  as  St.  James  ;  and  our  Divine 
Lord  and  Master  scorns  it  even  more 
than  they.  He  sees  men  repeating 
their  "  Shema"  (their  "  apostles'  creed") 
day  by  day,  and  He  says,  "By  their 
fruits  ye  shall  know  them."  The 
matter  vitally  concerns  us,  and  it  may 
be  shown  that — 1.  These  are  two  dis- 
tinct things — faith  and  works.  2.  They 
can  be  separated,  so  that  man  may 
have  one  and  not  the  other.  3.  When 
separated,  faith  becomes  a  sentiment, 
and  works  become  a  snare.  4.  When 
united,  faith  becomes  a  power  of  life 
in  works,  and  works  become  a  nourish- 
ment of  the  power  in  faith. 

I.  These  are  two  distinct  things — 
faith  and  works. — Faith  is  a  mood  of 
the  mind.  Works  are  activities  of 
the  body.  Works  are  things  done  ; 
faith  is  the  soul  that  should  be  in  the 
doing.  Faith  puts  the  man  into  the 
sphere  of  the  unseen.  Works  keep 
the  man  in  the  sphere  of  the  seen. 
Faith  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as  the 
intellectual  apprehension  of  certain 
propositions ;  then  we  call  it  belief, 
but  it  may  not  mean  our  apprehension, 
it  may  only  mean  our  acceptance  of 
something  on  the  basis  of  an  authority 
that  we  recognise,  and  to  which  we 
submit.  No  "works"  are  necessary 
to  "  belief  "  ;  and  no  moral  redemption 
was  ever  wrought  by  the  mere  belief 
of  anything.  "  Saving  faith  "  is  more 
than  "  belief."  Faith  is  personal  trust 
in  a  person,  who  is  felt  to  be  worthy 
of  the  trust.  It  is  heart-reliance. 
To  that  trust  the  belief  that  is  an 
intellectual  apprehension  may,  and 
does,  powerfully  help ;  but  it  is  the 
trust  that  saves,  not  the  belief.  It 
has  been  pointed  out,  by  Godet  and 
others,  that  the  faith  of  St.  James  is 
really  not  the  same  thing  as  the 
justifying  faith  of  St.  Paul.  And  if 
this  is  clearly  apprehended,  all  thought 
of  contradiction  between  the  teachings 
of  St.  James  and  St.  Paul  is  made 
impossible.  Godet  says  :  "  The  faith 
of   which    St.    James   affirms   that   it 

556 


does  not  justify  is  quite  of  a  different 
kind  from  that  of  which  St.  Paul 
affirms  that  it  suffices  for  justification. 
They  differ  with  respect  to  their  object 
and  their  nature.  When  St.  Paul 
teaches  justification  by  faith,  he  means 
faith  in  the  redemption  accomplished 
by  Jesus  Christ ;  or  at  least — when  he 
is  dealing  with  Old  Testament  per- 
sonages— faith  in  the  graciovis  promises 
of  Jehovah,  of  which  this  redemption 
was  the  fulfilment"  (we  should  have 
preferred  to  say,  faith  in  Jesus  Christ 
Himself,  in  whom  is  the  redemptive 
power) ;  "  whereas  the  faith  which 
St.  James  declares  to  be  insufficient 
for  salvation  means  simply — he  says 
so  himself,  chap.  ii.  19 — that  l^elief 
in  the  one  only  God  which  distin- 
guished the  Jews  from  the  heathen." 
The  fact  is,  that  St.  James  had  in 
mind  the  theory  of  salvation  by  faith 
in  the  unity  of  God  which  Pharisaic 
Jews  so  tenaciously  held.  Justin 
Martyr  says  to  Tryphon,  the  Jew, 
"  As  for  you  Jews,  you  affirm  that 
even  when  you  are  sinners,  yet  if  you 
know  God,  He  will  not  impute  to  you 
your  sins."  And  in  a  Judaistic  docu- 
ment of  the  second  century  it  is  said, 
"  A  monotheistic  soul  has  this  privilege 
above  that  of  an  idolater — that  even 
when  it  has  lived  in  sin  it  cannot 
perish."  It  is  clear  that  St.  James 
means  by  faith  "  belief  "  ;  and  belief 
in  one  particular  thing — belief  with 
which  men  satisfied  themselves,  to  the 
neglect  of  all  other  sacred  obligations. 
Is  that  sort  of  faith  of  any  more 
service  now  than  it  was  then  ?  St. 
James  is  right.  Such  "  faith,  if  it 
have  not  works,  is  dead  in  itself." 
"Works"  are  distinct  from  "faith"; 
but  here  again  St.  James  and  St.  Paul 
mean  two  different  things  by  the  term. 
St.  Paul  writes  concerning  works  that 
precede  faith,  and  represent  a  man's 
own  endeavour  to  secure  a  ground  on 
which  to  claim  salvation.  "  Works," 
in  that  sense,  are  clearly  antagonistic 
to  faith ;  and  the  apostle  properly 
urges  that  all  such  works  must  be 
put  away  before  a  saving  faith  can 
even   become   a   possibility.      But   St. 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :    JAMES.  chap.  ii. 


James  has  not  "  works "  in  any  such  if    alone.       Works     cannot    save,     if 

sense  before  his  mind  at  all.     He  was  alone.     That  sort  of  faith  saves  which 

thinking    only    of    the    works    which  can  be  called  a  works-faith ,  a  faith  that 

should  come  after  faith — should  be  the  is  living  enough,    real   enough,    to  do 

sign  of  faith,  the  proof  of  faith,  and  something,  something  good  and  some- 

the  proper  culture  of  faith.     St.Jaii.es  thing     kind.       How    is   it    with    us? 

is  precisely  in  the  same  range  as  St.  Have    we   faith  ?      Is   it   delightfully 

Paul    when    the    apostle    urges    that  orthodox,  so  that  we  are  quite  proud  of 

" they  which  have  believed  God  should  it?     We   do   well.       "The  devils  also 

be   careful   to  maintain  good  works."  believe,"  and  do  something  more  than 

Works  instead  of  faith  will  save   no  believe — they    "tremble."     St.    James 

man.       Works    expressing   faith,    and  rises  into  scornfulness.     *'  If  a  man  say 

showing  it  to  be  real,  living,  will  save  he  hath  faith,  but  have  not  works,  can 

any   man,    because    the   faith   in   the  that  faith  save  him  ?     If  a  brother  or 

works  is  the  required  Divine  condition  sister  be  naked,  and  in  lack  of  daily 

of  salvation  on  man's  side.  food,   and  one  of  you  say  unto  them, 

II.  These    two    things — faith    and  Go    in    peace,    be    ye     warmed    and 

works — can  be  separated,  so   that  a  filled ;  and  yet  he  give  them  not  the 

man  may  have  the  one  and  not  the  things  needful  to  the  body ;  what  doth 

other. — We     all    know     and     esteem  it  profit  ? "     Have  we  only  works  ?     I 

highly     the     men    and    women    who  do   not   mean   any   manufacturing   of 

abound  in  good  works,  fill  their  lives  self-righteousness   by  strict   obedience 

with  active  charities,  and  serve  their  to   law — that   is  a  Pauline   idea,  and 

generation  with  self-sacrificing  services  does  not  come  to  St.  James's  mind  here, 

and    generosities,    and   yet    make    no  Are   we  full  of  the  "  milk  of  human 

profession    or     pretence     of     religion.  kindness " ;     ever     ready     to     serve  ; 

And  do  we  not  also  know  many  who  inventive  in  charities  ;  a  father  to  the 

have   only  faith,    a  helpless,  workless  poor ;    the   helper   of  the   widows ;    a 

faith — who  can  fight  for  their  particu-  Dorcas    in   generous   though tfulness  ? 

lar  setting  or  little  piece  of  truth,  and  If  it  all  be  without  faith,  if  it  have  no 

feel  sure  of  the  special  favour  of  God  inspiration  in  our   love   to   the    Lord 

because  their  belief  is  right,  but  never  Jesus,  which  love  carries  to  Him  our 

"  lift  up  hands  that  hang  down,  never  trust,  what  doth  it  profit  ?     Can  works 

strengthen   feeble  knees,"  never  com-  save?     He  is  deluded  who  thinks  so. 

fort    sorrowing    hearts,   but   can    only  They  will  be  appraised  at  their  w^orth. 

press    their    beliefs,    as   the    absolute  They  are,  and  they  will  be,  rewarded 

grounds   of   salvation,  even  upon   the  according   to   the  Divine    estimate   of 

dying  ?     A  man  who  has  nothing  but  their  merit ;  but  they  never  saved  a 

his  faith,  and  prides  himself  in  that,  man  from  his  siTis  yet.     They  bear  no 

separates  himself  from  humanity,  and  relation  to  saving  a  man  from  his  sbis, 

from    Jesus     Christ,  the    brother    of  That  comes  through  a  Divine  Saviour  ; 

humanity,  and  may  be  classed  among  and  that  comes  to  a  man  by  the  faith 

the  unloveliest  of  the  unlovely,  going  which  links  him  to  the  Saviour,  and 

about  judging  his  fellows  by  his  own  brings    to    him    all  the   saving   power 

poor  mental  standard.     But  the  fact  that  is  in  Him.     Works  do  not  save, 

that  the  two  things,   which   are  knit  Faith  saves,  when  it  is  such  faith  as 

and  welded  together  in  the  purpose  of  is  real  enough,  vigorous  enough,  to  do 

Gody  can  be  separated  by  the  wilful-  something,  to  express  itself  in  works, 

ness  and  the   false  teachings  of  men.  Dead  faith  cannot  save  ;  living  faith 

so  that  one  of  us  may  have  the  faith,  can  ;    it   is   the  living  link   with  the 

and  another  of  us  ma}''  have  the  works,  living  Saviour. 

is  full  of  the  most  serious  import  to         III.  When  separated,  faith  becomes 

us  all.     Because  neither  of  these,  by  a    sentiment,   and    works    become   a 

itself  can  save  us.     Faith  cannot  save,  snare. — If  faith  is  checked  from  follow- 

557 


CHAP.   II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


ing  out  its  natural  impulses,  it  turns 
back  upon  itself,    and    having    no  air 
and  no  exercise  gets  thin,  and  ready  to 
vanish  away;    or  else   it   exaggerates 
to  itself  its  own  importance,  and  walks 
about     its      "  little     garden      walled 
around  "    with   an  uplifted  head  that 
may  be  Pharisaic,  but  certainly  is  not 
Christ ly.       Sentimentality    is    morally 
mischievous.     It  exhausts  the  religious 
capacity.     It  takes  the  place  of  service. 
Cherishing  excellent  but  fruitless  senti- 
ments, many  a  man  has  gone  on  into 
the  awful  awakening  of  the  after  life 
unsaved.     For  sentiment  never  saved 
a  soul  from  sin  yet,  and  it  is  certain 
that  it  never  will.     And  if  a  man  stops 
with  his  proprieties  and  charities,  and 
satisfies  himself   with  his  good  works, 
he  puts  him  self  into  temptation  and  a 
snare.     He  silences  the  inward  voice — 
with  which  comes  the  Divine  voice — 
convicting  of  sin  that  needs  a  Saviour. 
He  lets  good  works  stop  his  ears,  and 
so  not  a  sound  of  the  Saviour's  gracious 
call  to  the  weary  and  heavy  laden  can 
come  in  to  him.     Snared  and  held,  it 
is  nothing    to    him    that    "Jesus    of 
Nazareth  passes   by."     Is   that  snare 
round  you  ?     Is  your  soul  facing  the 
great   laws  of  God,  and  complacently 
saying,   "All  these  have  I  kept  from 
my  youth  up.     What   lack   I    yet  ? " 
Listen  :  those  kind  things  ^ou  do  are 
all  very  well  in  their  way,  but  there  is 
a  stain  on  your  soul.     What  are  you 
going   to  do    with    that  ?     You    want 
Him — you  want  to  believe  in  Him — 
who  alone  can  cleanse  the  stain  away. 
lY.  When    united,    faith  becomes 
a  power  of  life  in  works,  and  works 
become  a  nourishment  of  the  power  in 
faith. — Works  have  their  value  in  the 
motives  that  inspire  them.     Many  do 
kind  things  simply  because  they  have 
kind     dispositions.       Many     do     kind 
things  because  they  are  overpressed  by 
the  sense  of  duty.     And  many  do  kind 
things  because  they  feel   the  inspira- 
tion of  noble  examples ;    but  none   of 
these  can  ever  lift  our  good  works  into 
the  highest  plane.     They  must  have  a 
higher  motive  than  any  of  these  :  the 
"constraining     love     of     Christ,"    on 

558 


whom  the  faith  is  savingly  fixed. 
Saving  faith  is  life  and  inspiration 
for  all  good  works.  All  is  done  well, 
when  done  for  Jesus'  sake.  And  the 
life  of  holy  service  and  charity  nourishes 
the  faith.  By  use ;  for  it  is  wanted 
for  every  good  deed ;  but  even  more, 
because  whoever  spends  himself  in 
ministry,  as  the  Lord  Jesus  did,  sets 
himself  upon  constant  renewals  of 
spiritual  strength,  even  as  the  Lord 
Jesus  did.  You  cannot  unite  St.  Paul's 
"  works  "  with  "  faith  "  ;  you  must  put 
"  works,"  as  grounds  of  claim,  alto- 
gether away.  But  you  ca7i  unite  St. 
James's  "  works  "  with  "  faith,"  and 
you  must  do  so  ;  for  it  is  only  the  faith 
that  can  do  something,  and  does  do 
something,  that  saves  the  soul  from 
death, 

Yer.  19.  "  7Ae  Loi'd  our  God  is  one 
Lordr — A  similar  utterance  of  faith 
is  held  to  be  the  test  of  the  true  be- 
liever in  Islam,  when  the  two  inquir- 
ing angels  put  their  awful  questions  to 
the  departed  soul.  But  the  idea  is 
much  more  ancient,  for  a  similar  con- 
fession was  required  of  the  just  before 
Osiris,  the  lord  of  the  Egyptian 
heaven. 

The  Faith  of  Devils. — St.  James's 
expression,  "the  devils  [daemons]  also 
believe  and  tremble  [shudder],"  at  once 
recalls  to  mind  our  Lord's  treatment 
of  the  devil -possessed  sufferers,  and 
the  spirits  of  evil  that  possessed  them. 
One  case  is  especially  to  the  point, 
and  illustrative  of  this  sentence. 
"  There  was  in  their  synagogue  a  man 
with  an  unclean  spirit :  and  he  cried 
out,  saying.  Let  us  alone ;  what  have 
we  to  do  with  Thee,  Thou  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  ?  art  Thou  come  to  destroy 
us  ?  I  know  Thee  who  Thou  art,  the 
Holy  One  of  God."  There  is  the  faith 
in  Christ  of  devils ;  and  there  is  the 
shuddering  fear  which  faith  brings  to 
them.  St.  James  is  not  intending  to 
argue  that  devils  can  believe.  Given 
adequate  grounds  for  any  statement, 
and  rational  intelligences  are  bound  to 
believe  it,  and  prove  themselves  wholly 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP.    II. 


unworthy  of  the  trust  of  rational  in-  do   something.     True,  what  they  do  is 

telHgence  if  they  do  not.     Devils  must  not  much  good  to  themselves  or  any- 

believe,  just  as  angels  and  men  must.  body  else,  but  still  it  is  doing.     They 

What  St.  James  urges  is  that  the  faith  shudder.    St.  James  seems  reproachfully 

of  devils  in  Christ  is  a  practical  faith.  to  suggest,  that  very  much  of  so-called 

There  is  almost  a  touch  of  humour  in  Christian   faith  spends  itself  in  senti- 

his   reference   to   them.      Their   faith  ment ;    does   nothing ;    does   not   even 

does  not  abide  alone ;  it  does  not  spend  shudder. 
itself  in  profession ;  it  impels  them  to 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  21—24. 

The  Imputation  of  Righteousness. — St.  James's  point  in  this  paragraph  seems 
to  be  this — Abraham  did  not  gain  the  righteousness  of  an  actual  obedience 
of  God's  will.  He  did  not  actually  carry  through  the  Divine  command,  and 
sacrifice  his  son  on  the  altar.  But  he  did  fully  purpose  obedience ;  he  did 
make  every  effoi't  to  carry  his  obedient  purpose  through.  He  was  stopped, 
not  by  any  change  in  his  purpose,  but  by  a  new  revelation  of  the  Divine  will ; 
and  it  was  therefore  perfectly  right  that  the  intention  and  effort  should  be 
recognised  as  the  righteousness  which  would  have  accrued  to  him  if  the  sacrifice 
had  been  carried  through.  What  St.  James  suggests  is  this — Would  it  have 
been  reckoned  as  righteousness  if  Abraham  had  only  thought  about  obeying, 
only  talked  about  obeying,  only  resolved  to  obey,  and  had  made  no  effort  ?  It 
was  that  "  rising  up  early  in  the  morning,  saddling  his  ass,  cleaving  the  wood, 
carrying  the  fire  and  knife,  journeying  to  Moriah,  laying  the  wood  in  order, 
binding  Isaac,  laying  him  on  the  altar,  and  raising  the  knife  to  slay  his  son  " — 
proving  the  reality  of  his  faith,  which  was  counted  to  him  for  righteousness. 
And  here  is  a  truth  full  of  encouragement  for  us.  Constantly  we  find  that 
we  cannot  accomplish  what  we  plan.  Again  and  again  we  have  to  mourn 
that  "  our  purposes  are  broken  off."  Abraham  was  not  permitted  to  do  what 
he  would.  David  was  not  permitted  to  carry  through  that  which  was  in  his 
heart.  But  incomplete  works,  which  are  incomplete  through  orderings  of 
Divine  Providence,  not  through  our  moral  weakness,  suffice  to  show  God  the 
reality,  the  activity,  of  our  faith,  and  can  be  the  basis  on  which  righteousness 
is  imputed  to  us.  To  prove  faith  obedience  is  necessary,  but  the  obedience  may 
be  providentially  stopped.  The  active  effort  to  obey  suffices  ;  the  precise  result 
is  unimportant.  In  Abraham  there  was  faith  in  God's  command  ;  but  it  was 
only  known  and  shown  by  the  works  of  obedience  which  he  so  resolutely 
endeavoured  to  perform. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  22.  Perfect,  or  All-round,  Faith. 
— A  thing  is  perfect  when  all  its 
capacities  are  healthily  developed,  and 
are  finding  healthy  exercise.  Physical 
training  aims  to  secure  a  perfect  body, 
by  nourishing  into  harmonious  efficiency 
every  organ,  every  seuvSe,  every  power. 
Faith  may  be  thought  of  as  having 
its  capacities,  spheres,  relations,  possi- 
bilities, of  service.  1.  It  has  the  sphere 
of  the   mental  and    moral  life  of  the 


individual,  and  needs  to  get  its  full 
influence  there.  2.  It  has  its  sphere 
of  the  relationship  with  God,  and  it 
needs  to  make  full  response  to  all  the 
claims  of  God.  3.  It  has  its  sphere 
in  its  earth  surroundings,  with  their 
variovis  relationships  and  calls  for 
influence ;  and  it  must  be  exercised 
into  a  wise  efficiency  of  service  in  all 
that  sphere.  Perfect  faith  is  all- 
round,  efiicient  faith,  fully  responding 

559 


CHAP.   II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JAMES. 


in  the  faith  spheres  of  self,  God,  and 
others. 

Ver.  23.  El  Khalil,  the  Friend  oj 
God.  —  Ahalil- Allah,  the  *'  friend  of 
God,"  is  the  fuller  form  of  Abraham's 
title.  In  many  ways  it  has  a  peculiar 
significance.  The  ancestor  of  the  chosen 
people  is  not,  as  in  the  legends  of 
Greece  and  Kome,  or  even  of  Germany, 
a  god,  or  a  demi-god,  or  the  son  of  a 
god  ;  he  is  a  mere  man.  The  interval 
between  the  human  and  Divine  is 
never  confounded.  Close  as  are  the 
communications  with  Deity,  yet  the 
Divine  essence  is  always  veiled,  the  man 
is  never  absorbed  into  it.  Abraham 
is  *'  the  friend,"  but  he  is  nothing 
more.  He  is  nothing  more,  but  he 
is  nothing  less.  He  is  "the  friend 
of  God."  The  title  includes  a  double 
meaning.  He  is  "beloved  of  God." 
In  him  was  exemplified  the  funda- 
mental truth  of  all  religion, — that  God 
has  not  deserted  the  world ;  that  His 
work  is  carried  on  by  His  chosen 
instruments ;  that  good  men  are  not 
only  His  creatures  and  His  servants, 
but  His  friends.  And  not  only  was 
Abraham  beloved  by  God,  but  God 
was  "  beloved  by  him  " ;  not  only  was 
God  the  friend  of  Abraham,  but 
Abraham  was  the  "friend  of  God." 
To  expand  this  truth  is  to  see  what 
was  the  religion,  the  communion  with 
the  Supreme,  which  raised  Abraham 
above  his  fellow- men. — Bean  Stanley. 

Vers.  21,  22,  24.  Faith  and  Works. 
— The  truths  revealed  by  the  gospel 
are  not  merely  verbal  statements,  but 
great  facts  concerning  the  spiritual 
world,  which  exist  quite  independently 
of  the  words  by  which  they  are  related 
to  us  in  the  New  Testament.  And 
the  same  spiritual  truths  are  presented 
to  us  in  Holy  Scripture  from  different 
points  of  view.  This  is  especially  the 
case  with  the  relation  between  the 
faith  and  works  of  a  Christian,  as  set 
forth  by  St.  Paul  and  St.  James.  If 
we  dwell  merely  on  the  words  they 
use,  we  may  think  they  contradict 
each   other.      If    we    seek  for    their 

560 


whole  scope  and  meaning,  we  shall 
find  that  they  are  only  treating  the 
same  subject  from  different  points  of 
view.  Probably  the  epistle  of  St. 
James  was  written  before  that  to 
the  Romans.  St.  Paul  tells  us  that 
pardon  of  our  past  sins  and  reconcilia- 
tion to  God  are  not  earned  by  any 
works  done  in  order  to  merit  them. 
"  To  him  that  worketh  is  the  reward 
not  reckoned  of  grace,  but  of  debt "  ; 
but  the  pardon  of  our  past  sins  is 
the  gift  of  God — it  is  simply  an  act 
of  "  grace,"  or  free  mercy  on  the  part 
of  God  towards  sinful  men.  St.  James 
tells  us  that  Abraham,  in  the  hour 
of  trial,  when  he  had  offered  up  Isaac, 
was  justified  by  his  works  also,  or  by 
the  evidence  which  his  works  gave  to 
angels  and  to  men  of  the  reality  of 
his  faith  in  God.  St.  James  never 
says  that  Abraham  was  not  justified 
by  faith.  He  uses  the  word  "  works  " 
in  a  sense  wholly  distinct  from  that 
of  St.  Paul.  When  St.  James  speaks 
of  a  man  being  "justified  by  works," 
he  means  works  which  are  the  result 
of  loving  faith — works  which  are 
wrought  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ  in 
His  faithful  followers,  works  which 
evidence  their  faith  and  are  ever 
tending  to  perfect  it.  St.  Paul  means 
by  "  works "  the  doing  of  certain  out- 
ward things  in  order  to  purchase  sal- 
vation. He  speaks  not  of  works 
wrought  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  of 
the  "  works  of  the  flesh,"  and  directs 
us  to  seek  that  great  inward  change 
which  is  the  gift  of  God. — Robert 
Barclay. 

Ver.  24.  Justification  by  Works. — Of 
all  questions  the  first  and  greatest  is, 
"  How  shall  a  man  be  just  before 
God  ?  "  Many  differences  of  opinion. 
Text  a  deduction  from  a  preceding 
argument.  We  should  carefully  ex- 
amine the  argument. 

I.  The  apostle's  argument.— 1. 
Whence  did  it  arise  ?  He  was  re- 
proving an  evil  in  the  early  Church — 
the  showing  partiality  to  the  richer 
members,  oppressing  and  holding  in 
contempt  the   poorer    (ver.    1).     Thia 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES. 


CHAP.   II. 


gives  a  clue  to  the  whole.  Hold  not 
the  true  faith  in  so  erroneous  and 
unworthy  a  manner.  2.  Trace  the 
steps  of  his  argument.  This  partiality 
is  contrary  to  the  law  and  the  gospel. 
He  appeals  to  the  whole  Church.  No 
person  can  be  saved  so  holding  the 
faith  of  Christ.  How  vain  pretences  to 
love  would  be  if  it  were  as  inoperative 
as  this  faith  !  (vers.  15,  16).  He  con- 
firms these  assertions  by  an  appeal  to 
the  Scriptures  themselves.  Whatever 
degrees  of  faith  people  might  pretend 
to,  they  can  never  be  accepted  by  God 
unless  their  faith  works  by  love. 
II.  The  conclusion  drawn  from  it. — 

1.  The.  future  judgment  will  proceed  on 
grounds  of  perfect  equity.  God  dis- 
penses rewards  and  punishments  not 
on  arbitrary  but  strictly  equitable 
grounds.  God  will  judge  men  not  by 
their  faith,  which  He  alone  can  see, 
but  by  their  works,  which  all  can  see. 

2.  Faith  is  of  no  value  unless  attested 
by  works.  Faith  at  first  sees  Christ 
as  Saviour  from  guilt  and  condemna- 
tion. It  does  not  rest  there ;  it  lays 
hold  on  Him  for  sanctification,  and  for 
righteousness. 

A  common  objection. — St.  PauVs 
sentiments  and  declarations  on  this 
subject  are  directly  opposed  to  those  of 
St.  James.  St.  Paul  is  proving  that 
a  man  is  not  to  seek  salvation  by  any 


righteousness  of  his  own,  but  simply 
by  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ; 
whereas  St.  James  is  proving  that  a 
man  who  professes  to  have  faith  in 
Christ  must  show  forth  his  faith  by 
his  works.  St.  Paul  endeavours  to 
convince  the  self-justiciary ;  St.  James 
the  Antinomian.  St.  Paul — works  are 
nothing  without  faith  ;  St.  James — 
faith  is  nothing  without  works. 

A  few  words — 1.  Of  caution.  (1)  Do 
not  separate  faith  and  works.  If  your 
faith  be  strong  enough  to  remove 
mountains,  yet  if  it  work  not  by  love, 
it  is  but  "  sounding  brass  and  tinkling 
cymbal."  (2)  Do  not  confound  the  two. 
You  must  lay  Christ  as  your  founda- 
tion first,  and  afterward  raise  on  Him 
the  superstructure  of  good  works. 
Faith  will  honour  Christ  as  the  onl}? 
Saviour  of  mankind,  and  works  will 
honour  Him  as  Lord  and  Master. 
2.  Of  encouragement.  All  difiiculties 
in  the  subject  vanish  before  a  broken 
and  contrite  heart ;  not  all  verbal 
difiiculties,  perhaps,  but  all  doubts  on 
the  main  subject.  No  righteousness 
but  that  of  Christ  can  ever  avail  for 
our  acceptance  before  God  ;  and  holi- 
ness is  no  less  necessary  for  our  final 
enjoyment  of  His  favours.  He  will 
not  "despise  the  contrite  heart." — 
Charles  Simeon,  M.A. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  25,  26. 

Justification  by  Works. — The  common  misconception  of  Poman  Catholic 
doctrine  prevents  our  properly  understanding  the  teaching  of  St.  James. 
Justification  by  works  is  usually  understood  to  mean  justification  by  the  strict 
and  precise  observance  of  prescribed  religious  duties.  St.  James  has  in  mind 
acts  of  kindness,  charity,  and  service,  as  the  signs  and  expressions  of  faith  in 
God.  Pahab  is  no  illustration  of  doing  religious  duties.  She  is  the  illustration \ 
of  doing  kindly  service.  She  did  a  brave  thing,  and  a  wise  thing,  and  a 
charitable  thing,  in  hiding  the  spies,  and  getting  them  away  safely,  and  she 
did  this  because  she  believed  in  God,  and  believed  that  these  men  were  carry- 
ing out  a  mission  from  God.  But  should  we  have  heard  anything  about 
Pahab's  faith,  if  that  faith  had  done  nothing — nothing  but  talk  pious  things  ? 
Her  works  proved  her  faith.  She  was  accepted  (justified)  on  the  ground  of 
her  faith ;  but  it  was  because  that  faith  was  real  enough,  vital  enough,  healthy 
enough,  to  do  something.  She  was  accepted  for  her  works,  because  the  soul  of  ' 
faith  was  in  them. 

I.  Some  works  can  never  justify  any  man. — Works  done  in  order  to  form 
a  basis  of  merit — these  cannot  justify,  because  they  never  can  be  so  worthy 

0  0  561 


CHAP.   II. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


or  so  perfect  as  to  claim  Divine  acceptance.  They  may  take  different  forms : 
good  conduct ;  strained  feeling ;  pious  deeds.  The  hopelessness  of  them  for 
justifying  a  man  lies  in  a  man's  making  his  own  terms  of  acceptance  with 
God,  and  failing  to  get  up  to  his  own  terms.  If  we  are  to  claim  justification, 
we  must  have  an  unquestionable  ground  of  claim ;  and  this  man  can  never 
have,  since  he  carries  his  moral  imperfection  into  everything  he  does. 

II.  Some  works  will  always  justify  a  man. — Such  works  as  Abraham's  and 
as  Kahab's — works  which  were  the  simple,  natural,  and  proper  expression 
of  a  right  state  of  mind  and  heart,  and  had  no  thought  of  merit  in  them, 
or  thought  of  claim.  Abraham  did  not  aim,  in  trying  to  offer  his  son,  to  build 
up  a  merit.  Rahab  did  not,  in  ministering  to  God's  servants,  try  to  build  up 
a  merit.  God  accepted  both — accepted  the  state  of  mind  and  heart  of  both, 
accepted  the  soul  of  faith  with  its  body  of  works,  which  together  made  a  ''  living 
sacrifice." 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES 


Yer.  25.  Rahab  read  by  her  Motives. 
— Did  we  fix  attention  on  her  manner 
of  life,  we  should  have  to  express 
severe  condemnation.  Did  we  fix 
attention  on  her  actions  in  secreting 
the  spies,  and  securing  their  safe 
departure,  we  could  only  give  her 
very  qualified  praise,  for  it  implied  a 
failure  in  loyalty  to  her  own  country 
and  people.  But  when  we  read  her 
heart  and  her  motive,  the  whole 
estimate  of  her  life  and  conduct  are 
changed.  Faith  in  God  may  over- 
ride loyalty  to  country.  But  she 
might  have  had  her  faith,  and  no  one 
been  the  better  for  it,  not  even  she 
herself,  if  it  had  not  been  a  practical 
faith,  and  used  its  opportunity.  She 
was  justified  in  acting  as  she  did, 
because  she  believed  what  she  did. 
But  her  faith  would  only  have  been  as 
the  faith  of  many  around  her,  a  faith 
which  was  more  fear  than  faith,  if 
she  had  not  acted.  Read  her  in  the 
light  of  her  motives,  and  Rahab 
illustrates  the  truth  that  faith  is 
justified  by  its  works. 

A  Worhs-faith. — What  may  be 
called  a  "  works- faith  "  is  illustrated 
in  Rahab.  Divide  thus:  1.  The  faith 
she  had.  2.  The  interests  her  faith 
opposed.  3.  The  opportunity  that 
came  for  testing  her  faith.  4.  The 
triumph  of  her  faith.  5.  The  proof 
that  it  was  accepted.  6.  The  reward 
of  faith  which  could  work.     Point  out 

562 


that  disabihties  and  disadvantages  of 
outward  circumstances  need  not  prevent 
faith,  though  they  must  make  struggle 
for  it. 

Ver.  26.  J.  Truth  that  can  he  turned 
Two  Ways. — "  Faith  without  works  is 
dead."  That  is  the  truth  on  which 
St.  James  insists  here.  But  the  con- 
verse is  equally  true — works  without 
faith  are  also  dead.  They  are  wholly 
ineffective  for  the  justification  of  a 
man.  Works  are  but  routine,  out- 
ward, material.  Faith  is  but  a  senti- 
ment, or  a  response  of  the  human 
intellect  to  proofs.  Neither  works  by 
themselves  nor  faith  by  itself  can 
ever  accomplish  anything  in  relation 
to  a  man's  justification  and  salvation. 
Put  the  two  things  together.  Let 
faith  put  the  man  into  the  works,  let 
the  works  verify  the  fact  that  the 
man  is  in  the  faith,  then  you  have 
the  living,  the  real  faith,  which  is  the 
condition  of  salvation  on  the  human 
side.  A  man's  body  is  a  helpless  thing 
save  as  quickened  by  the  indwelling 
spirit.  A  man's  spirit  is  out  of  all 
possible  relations  until  it  can  get  into 
them  through  the  agency  of  a  body. 

1.  Body    is    notliing    without    spiiit. 

2.  Spirit   is    nothing    without    body. 

3.  The  two  in  relation  make  a  living 
being.  4.  Faith  is  nothing  without 
works.  5.  Works  are  nothing  with- 
out faith.  6.  The  two  in  relation 
make  the  ground  of  man's  justification. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP.   II. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO   CHAPTER  11. 


Vers.  2-4.  A  Brahm\m!s  Reproof. — The  other 
instance  in  which  I  had  the  pleasure  to  meet 
this  most  interesting  man  (Rammohun  Roy) 
was  at  breakfast  in  my  own  house.  On  that 
occasion  I  invited  men  of  various  religious 
opinions  to  meet  him,  and  there  were  about 
thirty  persons  present.  The  conversation 
was  very  lively  and  well  sustained.  The 
Brahmin  exhibited  wonderful  shrewdness. 
"Ah,"  he  said,  "you  say  that  you  are  all 
one  in  Christ,  all  brethren,  and  equal  in 
Him.  Well,  you  go  to  the  cathedral  at 
Calcutta  ;  there  you  see  a  grand  chair  of 
crimson  velvet  and  gold — that  is  for  the 
Governor-General  of  India;  then  there  are 
other  chairs  of  crimson  and  gold — they  are 
for  the  members  of  council ;  and  then  there 
are  seats  lined  with  crimson — they  are  for 
the  merchants,  etc. ;  then  there  are  the  bare 
benches  for  the  common  people  and  the 
poor  ;  yet  you  say  we  are  all  one  in  Christ ; 
but  if  the  poor  man  whose  seat  is  there,  on 
that  bare  bench,  if  he  go  and  sit  down  on 
the  crimson  velvet  chair  of  the  Governor- 
General,  they  will  break  his  head  !  yet  you 
are  all  one  in  Christ !  "  Some  one  was  about 
to  expound  this  matter  to  the  Brahmin,  and 
explain  the  impropriety  of  any  one  taking 
the  seat  of  the  representative  of  majesty. 
But  the  thing  was  too  good  for  our  Quaker 
friend,  James  Cropper,  quietly  to  let  it  go. 
He  so  thoroughly  sympathised  with  the 
Brahmin's  view  of  the  matter,  that  he  could 
not  refrain  from  interposing.  "  Nay,  nay," 
he  cried,  "  thou  must  not  seek  to  put  aside 
the  force  of  our  friend's  remark."  So  the 
Brahmin  and  our  friend  James  had  the 
matter  entirely  to  themselves. — Dr.  Raffles. 

Ver.  5.  Gain  in  Poverty — Trees  struck  by 
lAghtning. — When  some  giant  tree  is  struck 
by  the  lightning's  flash  and  scorched  to 
death,  its  shattered  trunk  and  torn  boughs 
have  not  been  destroyed  by  the  action  of 
fire  from  without.  The  tree,  it  is  true,  has 
been  subjected  to  the  direct  action  of  the 
most  intense  heat — a  heat  proportioned  to 
the  terrible  brilliancy  of  the  electric  illu- 
mination, which  we  call  lightning.  But  the 
action  of  this  heat  is  rendered  fatal  by  the 
condition  of  the  tree  itself.  The  dismember- 
ment of  its  body  and  branches,  which  extends 
to  every  part,  results  from  the  sudden  con- 
version into  steam  of  all  the  moisture  it 
contains  in  sap  and  wood.  The  instant 
expansion  that  thus  takes  place  by  the  power 
of  the  generated  steam  rends  the  tree  to 
pieces,  just  as  under  very  similar  circum- 
stances it  would  burst  even  a  vessel  of 
wrought  iron.  Thus  the  giant  of  the  forest 
falls  a  victim  to  its  rich  and  flourishing  con- 
dition.   The  greener  and  fairer  the  tree,  the 


more  its  vein-like  tissues  swell  with  those 
nourishing  juices  that  build  up  a  life  which 
has  the  promise  of  hun(ireds  of  years,  the 
more  inevitable  and  crushing  its  ruin.  It 
is  not  otherwise  with  human  greatness  and 
prosperity.  While  misfortune's  stroke  finds 
less  upon  which  to  feed  in  the  case  of  the 
poor  and  lowly,  whose  \ery  poverty  is  in  this 
respect  a  protection,  its  effects  are  far  more 
deadly  on  those  with  whom  all  is  flourishing. 
Lazarus  in  his  want  is  far  less  exposed  to 
the  shocks  of  trial  tban  Dives  in  his  wealth. 
The  humble  fishermen  of  Galilee  could, 
humanly  speaking,  better  face  the  loss  of 
their  all  than  could  the  rich  and  amiable 
young  man,  who  indeed  desired  an  interest 
in  Christ,  but  felt  that  his  fortunes  were  too 
splendid  to  be  sacrificed  even  for  heaven — 
"  for  he  had  great  possessions."  It  is  one 
of  the  chief  and  peculiar  glories  of  the  philo- 
sophy of  the  gospel  that  it  teaches  us  not 
only  the  dignity  but  also  the  gain  of  poverty, 
thus  extracting  its  double  sting.  "  Hath  not 
God  chosen  the  poor  of  this  world  rich  in 
faith,  and  heirs  of  the  kingdom  which  He 
hath  promised  to  them  that  love  Him  ? " 
Deeper  and  more  real  than  we  are  some- 
times apt  to  suppose  is  the  meaning  of  the 
Master's  words  when,  speaking  of  a  state  of 
which  He  had  actual  experience.  He  said, 
"  Blessed  be  ye  poor."—  James  Neil,  M.A. 

Ver.  10.  Offending  in  One,  Guilty  in  All. — 
The  Rev.  Mr.  Leupolt,  of  ludia,  found  some 
difficulty  in  getting  the  idea  contained  in 
the  above  verse  impressed  upon  the  minds 
of  the  natives.  Argument  was  resorted  to, 
but  without  avail.  "  Never,"  says  he,  "  could 
I  make  the  common  people  understand  me 
without  a  parable."  In  this  parable  he 
described  a  scene  on  the  Gauges.  "  The  day 
was  dismal;  the  wind  roared,  the  thunder 
pealed,  the  lightning  was  vivid,  the  waves 
of  the  Ganges  rapid  ;  the  infuriated  elements 
threatened  destruction  to  every  vessel  on  its 
waters ;  no  boat  could  outlive  the  storm  for 
any  length  of  time.  But  see  ! — what  is  that  ? 
It  is  a  boat  in  distress,  filled  with  people, 
rapidly  hurried  along  by  the  waves.  Between 
the  peals  of  thunder  the  shrieks  of  the  people 
are  heard.  They  fear  the  rocks  on  the  shore, 
to  which  the  current  is  driving  them.  What 
can  be  done  for  them  ?  Could  they  but  be 
drawn  into  the  creek,  they  would  be  safe. 
Those  on  the  shore  look  anxiously  around, 
and  discover  a  chain  near  them.  A  man 
instantly  fastens  a  stone  to  a  rope,  binds 
the  other  end  to  the  chain,  and  flings  the 
stone  into  the  boat.  The  rope  is  caught. 
The  people  eagerly  lay  hold  on  the  chain, 
while  those  on  shore  begin  to  draw  them, 
amid    the    raging    elements,    towards    the 

563 


CHAP.   II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


creek.  They  already  rejoice  at  the  pro- 
spect of  deliverance  ;•  but  when  they  are 
within  a  few  yards  of  the  land  one  link  of 
the  chain  breaks.  I  do  not  say  ten  links, 
but  07ie  link,  in  the  middle  of  the  chain. 
What  shall  these  distressed  people  do  now  ? 
8hall  they  still  cling  to  the  unbroken  liuks  ? 
*  No,  no  ! '  says  one  of  my  hearers,  '  over- 
board with  the  chain,  or  it  will  sink  them 
sooner.'  '  What,  then,  shall  they  do  ? '  '  Cast 
themselves  upon  the  mercy  of  God,'  exclaimed 
another.  *  True,'  I  replied ;  '  if  one  com- 
mandment be  broken,  it  is  as  though  all  of 
them  were  broken.  We  cannot  be  saved  by 
them ;  we  must  trust  in  the  mercy  of  God, 
and  lay  hold  on  the  almighty  hand  of  Christ, 
which  is  stretched  out  to  save  us.'  I  have 
frequently  used  this  parable,  and  always 
found  it  to  answer." 

Vers.  15,  16.  Practical  Prayer  and  Be- 
nevolence.— In  the  vicinity  of   B lived 

a  poor  but  industrious  man,  depending  for 
support  upon  his  daily  labour.  His  wife  fell 
sick,  and  not  being  able  to  hire  a  nurse,  he 
was  obliged  to  confine  himself  to  the  sick- 
bed and  the  family.  His  means  of  support 
being  tlius  cut  off,  he  soon  found  himself  in 
need.  Having  a  wealthy  neighbour  near, 
he  determined  to  go  and  ask  for  two  bushels 
of  wheat,  with  a  promise  to  pay  as  soon  as 
his  wife  became  so  much  better  that  he  could 
leave  her  and  return  to  his  work.  Accord- 
ingly he  took  his  bag,  went  to  his  neighbour's, 
and  arrived  while  the  family  were  at  morning 
prayers.  As  he  sat  on  the  doorstone,  he 
heard  the  man  pray  very  earnestly  that  God 
would  clothe  the  naked,  feed  the  hungry, 
relieve  the  distressed,  and  comfort  all  that 
mourn.  The  prayer  concluded,  the  poor 
man  stepped  in  and  made  known  his  business, 
promising  to  pay  with  the  avails  of  his  first 
labours.  The  farmer  was  very  sorry  he 
could  not  accommodate  him,  for  he  had 
promised  to  lend  a  large  sum  of  money,  and 
had   depended  upon  his  wheat  to  make  it 

out ;  but  he  presumed  neighbour would 

let  him  have  it.  With  a  tearful  eye  and  a 
sad  heart  the  poor  man  turned  away.  As 
soon  as  he  left  the  house,  the  farmer's  little 
son  stepped  up  and  said,  "  Father,  did  you 
not  pray  that  God  would  clothe  the  naked, 
feed  the  hungry,  relieve  the  distressed, 
and  comfort  mourners  ?  "  "  Yes  ;  why  1  " 
"  Because  if  I  had  your  wheat  I  would  answer 
that  prayer."  It  is  needless  to  add  that 
the  Christian  father  called  back  his  suffer- 
ing neighbour,  and  gave  him  as  much  as  he 
needed. 

Give  to  Mm  that  needeth. — We  read  of 
King  Oswald,  that  as  he  sat  at  table,  when 
a  fair  silver  dish,  full  of  regal  delicacies, 
was  set  before  him,  and  he  ready  to  fall  to, 
hearing  from  his  almoner  that  there  were 


great  store  of  poor  at  his  gates,  piteously 
crying  out  for  some  relief,  did  not  fill  them 
with  words,  as,  "  God  help  them  !  "  "  God 
relieve  them  !  "  "  God  comfort  them  1 "  but 
commanded  his  steward  presently  to  take 
the  dish  off  the  table  and  distribute  the 
meat,  then  beat  the  dish  all  in  pieces  and 
cast  it  among  them. — Holdswortli. 

Ver.  17.  True  Faith  acts. — True  faith  rests 
not  in  great  and  good  desires,  but  acts  and 
executes  accordingly.  It  will  be  long  enough 
ere  the  gale  of  good  wishes  carry  us  to 
hediyen.— Bishop  Hall. 

Works  evidence  Faith. — Works  are  the 
evidence  of  faith.  There  is  both  light  and 
heat  in  the  candle ;  but  put  out  the  candle, 
and  both  are  gone,  one  remains  not  with- 
out the  other.  As  the  pure  fair  orb 
which  borrows  radiance  from  the  sun 
sheds  heavenly  light  upon  a  world  that  lies 
in  darkness,  so  do  the  Christian's  virtues 
shine.  But  as  that  beauteous  planet,  if 
ever  it  come  between  the  world  and  its  true 
source  of  light,  darkens  instead  of  brightens, 
throws  on  the  earth  below  a  shadow,  not  a 
beam,  so  what  we  most  admire  in  man 
proves  but  a  fatal  snare,  if  it  obscure  the 
glory  of  the  cross,  the  need  of  free  salvation. 
—A.  L.  0.  E. 

Oars  pulled  together. — Two  gentlemen 
were  one  day  crossing  the  river  in  a  ferry- 
boat. A  dispute  about  faith  and  works 
arose,— one  saying  that  good  works  were  of 
small  importance,  and  that  faith  was  every- 
thing ;  the  other  asserting  the  contrary. 
Not  being  able  to  convince  each  other,  the 
ferry-man,  an  enlightened  Christian,  asked 
permission  to  give  his  opinion.  Consent 
being  granted,  he  said,  "  I  hold  in  my 
hands  two  oars.  That  in  my  right  hand  I 
call  "faith";  the  other,  in  my  left,  "works." 
Now,  gentlemen,  please  to  observe,  I  pull 
the  oar  of  faith,  and  pull  that  alone.  See  ! 
the  boat  goes  round  and  round,  and  the  boat 
makes  no  progress.  I  do  the  same  with  the 
oar  of  works,  and  with  a  precisely  similar 
result,  no  advance.  Mark !  I  pull  both 
together,  we  go  on  apace,  and  in  a  very  few 
minutes  we  shall  be  at  our  landing-place. 
So,  in  my  humble  opinion,"  he  added,  "  faith 
without  works,  or  works  without  faith,  will 
not  suffice.  Let  there  be  both,  and  the 
haven  of  eternal  rest  is  sure  to  be  reached." 
As  the  flower  is  before  the  fruit,  so  is  faith 
before  good  works.  Faith  is  the  parent  of 
works,  and  the  children  will  bear  a  resem- 
blance to  the  parent.  It  is  not  enough  that 
the  inward  works  of  a  clock  are  well  con- 
structed, and  also  the  dial-plate  and  hands  ; 
the  one  must  act  on  the  other,  the  works 
must  regulate  the  movement  of  the  hands. — 
Archbishop  Whately. 


564 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :   JAMES.  chap.  in. 


CHAPTER  Til. 

OUR   SINS   OF   SPEECH. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Masters.— Teachers.  In  the  sixteenth  century  "  master  "  meant  "  schoolmaster." 
Do  not  get  into  the  way  of  being  teachers.  Do  not  set  yourselves  up  as  teachers 
(Matt,  xxiii.  8-10).  The  title  of  Doctor  of  the  Law  was  highly  coveted  among  the  Jews. 
Greater  condemnation,  judgment,  than  those  who  are  not  judged  by  the  standard  for 
teachers.  To  assert  ourselves  as  teachers  is  to  bring  upon  ourselves  the  responsibilities  of 
teachers. 

Ver.  2.  Offend. — Or,  "stumble."  Perfect  man. — In  the  sense  of  holding  himself  in  complete 
moral  restraint.  Control  of  speech  is  named,  not  as  in  itself  constituting  perfection,  but 
as  a  crucial  test  indicating  whether  the  man  has  or  has  not  attained  unto  it. 

Ver.  3.  Behold.— Better,  ei  5^,  "  if  now." 

Ver.  4.  Governor. — Read,  "  the  impulse  of  the  steersman  willeth,  or  may  wish." 

Ver.  5.  A  matter. — Better,  *•  a  forest."  The  picture  presented  is  of  the  wrapping  of  some 
vast  forest  in  a  flame  by  the  falling  of  a  single  spark.  Philo  uses  the  same  figure  :  *'  As 
the  smallest  spark  will,  if  duly  fanned,  kindle  a  vast  pyre,  so  is  the  least  element  of  virtue 
capable  of  growth  till  the  whole  nature  of  the  man  glows  with  a  new  warmth  and 
brightness." 

Ver.  6.  Course  of  nature.— Wheel  of  birth ;  R.V.  margin,  "  whole  sphere  of  life."  The 
wheel  of  life  which  begins  rolling  at  birth,  and  continues  rolling  until  death.  "  From  the 
beginning  of  life  till  its  close,  the  tongue  is  an  ever-present  inflammatory  element  of  evil." 
Hell. —  Gehenna  ;  the  place  of  torment,  as  distinguished  from  Hades,  the  abode  of  the  dead, 
or  the  unseen  world. 

Ver.  7.  Serpents.— Or,  more  generally,  "creeping  things."  '' Kmd  of  beasts"  would  be 
better  "  nature  of  beasts  "  ;  then  "  mankind  "  would  read  "  by  the  nature  of  man."  Every 
nature  is  continually  tamed,  and  is  kept  in  a  state  of  subjection  by  the  human  race. 

Ver.  8.  Unruly  evil.— d^ardcrxeroj',  irrestrainable.  Alex,  and  Vafiean  maimsicripts  read 
d,KVLr6.ara.Tov,  a  restless,  inconstant  evil.     Prefer  "  uncontrollable."    Deadly. — Death-bringing. 

Ver.  10.  So  to  be. — "  These  things  ought  not  to  occur  in  this  way." 

Ver.  11.  Send  forth.- Or,  "spout  out." 

Ver.  12. — The  better  manuscripts  render  thus,  "  Neither  can  a  salt  [spring]  yield  sweet 
water." 

Ver.  13.  Good  conversation. —Or,  his  "good  life";  "good  conduct."  The  usual  New 
Testament  idea  of  "  conversation." 

Ver.  14.  Strife. — Prefer  "rivalry." 

Ver.  15.  Sensual. — Or,  "animal." 

Ver.  17.  Gentle. — Lit.  "  forbearing."  Intreated. — Persuaded.  Partiality. — Chap.  ii.  4  ; 
R.V.  "  variance  " ;  without  doubtfulness,  vacillation,  which  leads  to  wrangling. 

Ver.  18.  Sown  in  peace. — So  as  to  consist  in  peace.  "  Every  good  deed  is  a  fruit 
produced  by  the  good  seed  sown  in  good  soil  ;  and  every  such  deed  is  in  its  turn  the  seed 
of  a  future  fruit  like  in  kind."  "  True  wisdom  will  go  on  to  sow  the  fruits  of  righteousness 
in  peace,  and  thus,  if  it  may  be,  to  make  peace  in  the  world.  And  that  which  is  sown  in 
peace  will  produce  a  harvest  of  joys.  Let  others  reap  the  fruits  of  contentions,  and  all 
the  advantages  they  can  propose  to  themselves  by  them ;  but  let  us  go  on  peaceably  to  sow 
the  seeds  of  righteousness,  and  we  may  depend  upon  it  our  labour  will  not  be  lost " 
{Matthew  Henry). 

The  Course  of  Nature. 

Bean  Plumptre's  Note  on  Ver.  6. — These  words  have  no  parallel  in  any  Greek  author. 
Literally,  we  might  render,  the  "  wheel  of  nature,  or  of  birth/'  as  in  chap.  i.  23  we  have 
"  the  face  of  nature,"  for  the  "  natural  face,"  that  with  which  we  are  born.  The  best 
interpretation  is  that  which  sees  in  the  phrase  a  figure  for  "  the  whole  of  life  from  birth," 
the  wheel  which  then  begins  to  roll  on  its  course,  and  continues  rolling  until  death.  The 
comparison  of  life  to  a  race,  or  course  of  some  kind,  has  been  familiar  to  the  poetry  of  all 
ages;  and  in  a  Latin  poet,  Silius  Italicus  (vi.  120),  we  have  a  phrase  almost  identical  with 
St.  James's : 

"  So,  by  the  law  of  God,  through  chance  and  change, 
The  wheel  of  life  rolls  down  the  steep  descent," 

:)65 


CfiAP.  III.  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :   JAMES. 


As  an  alternative  explanation,  it  is  possible  that  there  may  be  a  reference  to  the  potter's 
wheel  (Jer.  xviii.  3;  Ecclus.  xxxviii.  29,  where  the  wcrd  "wheel  "  is  used).  On  this  view  the 
tongue  would  be  represented  as  the  flame  that  by  its  untempered  heat  mars  the  vessel  in 
the  hands  of  the  potter.  The  frequent  parallelisms  between  St.  James  and  the  Wisdom  of 
the  Son  of  Sirach  are,  as  far  as  they  go,  in  favour  of  this  view.  A  third  view,  that  the 
words  have  the  same  kind  of  meaning  as  orhis  terrarum,  and  mean,  as  in  the  English 
Version,  the  whole  order  or  course  of  nature,  i.e.  of  human  history  in  the  world  at  large, 
has,  it  is  believed,  less  to  recommend  it. 

MAIN  HO  MILE  TICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  1—4. 

Masterfulness  in  Speech. — Our  Lord  in  His  teaching  reproved  the  pride  of 
the  Kabbis,  or  teachers,  of  his  time :  "  They  love  the  chief  seats  in  the 
synagogues,  and  the  salutations  in  the  market-places,  and  to  be  called  of  men, 
Rabbi."  And  He  gives  the  counsel  which  St.  James  does  but  repeat  in  this 
passage  :  "But  be  not  ye  [My  disciples]  called  Rabbi ;  for  one  is  your  teacher, 
and  all  ye  are  brethren."  In  the  tabernacle  and  temple  services  everything 
was  kept  in  the  control  of  the  priesthood.  There  was  no  attempt  at  public 
religious  instruction.  When  the  school  of  the  prophets  was  founded,  authorised 
and  systematic  religious  instruction  may  be  said  to  have  begun.  These  ti-ained 
prophets  went  to  and  fro  through  the  country  using  every  opportunity  for 
teaching  the  Scriptures,  and  the  will  of  God  as  revealed  in  them,  to  the  people. 
After  the  return  from  the  Captivity  synagogues  were  founded,  and  the  services 
held  in  them  included  both  worship  and  instruction.  Persons  held  in  good 
esteem,  or  claiming  to  be  Rabbis,  were  at  liberty  to  give  expositions  or 
exhortations,  and  in  this  practice  is  found  the  beginning  of  the  modern  sermon, 
as  a  part  of  Christian  worship.  But  while  there  was  much  that  was  valuable 
and  helpful  in  this  custom,  it  opened  the  way  to  a  possible  serious  evil.  It 
proved  difficult  to  keep  unsuitable  persons  from  giving  these  exhortations,  and 
difficult  to  put  the  exhortations  into  any  wise  limitations.  In  every  age,  and 
in  every  society,  there  are  men  who  love  to  hear  themselves  talk,  and  who 
push  themselves  in  at  every  opportunity.  In  every  age,  and  in  every  society, 
there  are  men  who  love  to  be  masters,  who  must  lord  it  over  others.  And 
they  are  often  by  no  means  the  best  persons  for  the  positions  they  force 
themselves  into.  The  masterful  men  and  the  talkers  were  a  grave  anxiety  in 
the  synagogue  life  of  the  Jews.  And  when  synagogues  of  Christian  Jews  were 
established,  the  same  evil  cropped  up ;  it  even  became  more  serious  because 
Christianity  encouraged  the  use  of  special  gifts  for  mutual  edification.  St. 
James  dealt  with  a  serious  and  growing  evil,  when  he  thus  warned  the  Jewish 
Christian  disciples  against  too  readily  setting  up  to  be  "masters,"  or  "teachers." 
In  the  Christian  Church,  as  in  the  Jewish,  there  was  the  peril  of  self-appointed 
Rabbiship.  The  idea  that  he  can  teach  often  comes  to  a  Christian  disciple 
as  a  temptation  from  the  evil  one,  which  needs  to  be  steadily  resisted. 

I.  The  disposition  to  put  everybody  else  right. — This  is  not  the  spirit  of 
the  real  teacher,  but  it  is  the  spirit  of  the  would-be  teacher,  whose  masterfulness 
finds  expression  in  that  desire  to  teach.  It  is  a  characteristic  of  natural 
disposition,  and  is  close  kin  with  the  energy  that  overmasters  difficulties.  But 
it  is  a  perilous  characteristic,  and  needs  to  be  early  placed  in  forcible  restraints, 
and  afterwards  kept  in  wise  control  by  the  man  himself.  Unrestrained  it 
makes  a  man  positive,  heedless  of  the  opinions  of  others,  and  unlovely  in  his 
relations  with  others.  It  may  even  make  him  a  heresy-monger,  keen  to 
observe  any  failures  from  the  standard  of  what  he  happens  to  think  to  be 
truth.  Morally  the  disposition  to  set  everybody  else  right  is  altogether 
reprehensible  :  it  involves  an  assumption  of  superiority  which  is  essentially 
un-Christian.     The  man  who  appoints  himself  as  teacher,  whether  other  people 

566 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES.  chap.  in. 


recognise  his  teaching  gifts  or  not,  "  thinks  of  himself  more  highly  than  he 
ought  to  think  " ;  and  consequently  does  himself  as  much  moral  mischief  as  he 
does  others.  St.  James  puts  one  thing  upon  the  consideration  of  those  who  are 
so  ready  to  make  themselves  teachers.  They  seriously  increase  their  personal 
responsibility.  The  judgment  of  a  teacher  must  necessarily  be  a  more  searching 
and  severe  thing  than  the  judgment  of  a  private  Christian.  Instead  of  wantiTig 
to  be  a  teacher,  the  gifted  teacher  always  shrinks  back  from  the  responsibility, 
saying,  "  Who  is  sufficient  for  these  things  ?  "  (2  Cor.  ii.  6).  "  The  test  of  all 
ministry  must  come  at  last  in  the  day  of  trial,  and  fiery  inquisition  of  God." 

II.  The  need  every  man  has  for  putting  himself  right. — The  true  teacher 
feels  how  much  he  has  to  learn  ;  the  would-be  teacher  feels  how  much  he  knows. 
Humility  is  the  pervading  spirit  of  the  true  teacher ;  self-confidence  is  the 
spirit  of  the  man  who  thinks  he  can  teach.  He  is  confident  of  being  himself 
right,  and  is  not  in  the  least  likely  to  admit,  with  St.  James,  that  "in  many 
things  we  offend  all."  Our  Lord  taught,  in  a  similar  way,  that  the  man  who 
could  easily  find  "  motes "  in  his  brother's  eyes  was  most  likely  to  have  a 
*'  beam  "  in  his  own,  and  he  had  better  see  to  his  own  "  beam "  before  he 
presumed  to  attend  to  other  peoples'  "  motes."  All  men  have  work  enough 
in  the  disciplining  of  their  own  characters ;  and  if  a  man  has  a  masterful 
disposition,  let  him  exercise  it  well  on  his  own  faults  and  frailties.  He  would 
do  well  to  exercise  that  masterful  disposition  in  getting  his  own  masterfulness 
into  good  control.  We  all  offend  in  some  things  :  so  we  all  need  to  teach  and 
train  ourselves. 

III.  The  control  of  ourselves  should  come  before  attempting  to  control 
others. — If  the  would-be  teacher  means  to  gain  control  of  his  entire  sel-f,  he 
will  have  to  begin  with  his  tongue.  If  he  is  like  a  masterful  horse,  he  will 
have  to  put  a  bit  in  his  mouth.  If  he  is  like  a  wayward,  tossed-about  ship, 
he  will  have  to  put  on  a  rudder,  and  take  care  to  hold  it  firm,  and  move  it 
wisely.  If  such  a  man  "  offend  not  in  word,"  he  is  a  "  perfect  man,"  in  this 
sense,  that  he  is  able  also  to  "  bridle  the  whole  body."  Who  cannot  recognise 
the  practical  wisdom  of  St.  James's  counsel  ?  Who  has  not  earnestly  said  to 
himself,  "  If  I  could  only  master  my  speech,  I  could  easily  master  myself "  ? 
Men  talk  when  they  have  nothing  to  say.  Men  talk  before  they  think.  Men 
talk  without  criticising  what  they  are  going  to  say.  And  therefore  they 
constantly  "  offend  in  word."  "  The  work  of  ruling  this  one  rebel  [the  tongue] 
is  so  great,  that  a  much  less  corresponding  effort  will  keep  the  other  powers  in 
subjection."  "  Control  of  speech  is  named,  not  as  in  itself  constituting  perfection, 
but  as  a  crucial  test  indicating  whether  the  man  has,  or  has  not,  attained  unto 
it."  The  true  spirit  of  the  teacher,  whom  God  calls  forth  to  teach,  may  be 
partly  seen  in  Moses,  and  more  fully  seen  in  Jeremiah.  With  something  like 
unworthy  hesitation  Moses  exclaimed,  "  O  my  Lord,  I  am  not  eloquent,  neither 
heretofore,  nor  since  Thou  hast  spoken  unto  Thy  servant ;  but  I  am  slow  of 
speech  and  of  a  slow  tongue."  With  the  shrinking  back  of  a  sincere  humility, 
Jeremiah  said,  "Ah!  Lord  God,  behold  I  cannot  speak;  for  I  am  a  child." 
The  man  who  thinks  he  can  God  does  not  use.  In  his  case  it  is  all  the  man  ; 
there  is  no  room  for  God.  The  man  who  fears  he  cannot  God  will  use,  because 
He  can  make  His  strength  perfect  in  the  man's  weakness. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Yer.  2.  Control  of  Speech  a  Sign  of  governance  of  our  speech,  according  to 

Character. — "  If  any  stumbleth  not  in  duty   and  reason,  is   a  high   instance 

word,   the   same    is   a    perfect   man."  and  a  special  argument  of  a  thoroughly 

Isaac    Barrow    says,     "A     constant  sincere  and  solid  goodness,"     There  are 

567 


ct?AP.  m.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JAMES. 


remarkable  differences  in  natural  dis-  difficulties,  in  the  same  way — that  is, 

position,    which  make   the   control  of  by   using  a  small  power  so  as  to  get 

speech  much  easier  for  some  men  than  the  operation  of  a  power  greater  than 

for  others.     And,  indeed,  sometimes  a  his  own.     We  have  no  power  to  handle 

naturally  silent  disposition  is  the  real  ships  at  sea  by  their  bulk.     The  soul 

explanation   of    what   seems    to    be  a  is  a  magnitude  more  massive  than  any 

man's  self-control.     And  it  also  needs  ship,  and  the  storms  it  encounters  are 

to  be  considered,  that  undue  freedom  wilder  than  those  of  the  sea.     And  yet 

of    speech   is   allied    to  certain  weak-  there  are  small  helms  given  to  us,  by 

nesses  of  character.     The  self-assertive  which  we  are  able  always  to  steer  it 

man  U  usually  a  great  talker.     So  is  triumphantly  on,  to  just  the  good  we 

the  conceited  man  ;  so  is  the  ambitious  seek,    and   the   highest    we   can   even 

man  ;  so  is  the  man  who  has  been  a  conceive.     It  is  assumed  that  we  have 

spoilt  child.     In  public  life  the  great  no    ability    in    ourselves,    more    than 

talker  often  succeeds  in  making  himself  simply  to  turn  ourselves  into  the  track 

important.     Character   means   that  a  of  another  more  sufficient  power,  and 

man  has  got  all  the  forces  of  his  being  so  to  have  it  upon  us.     Helms  do  not 

into   moderate    limitations,    and   har-  impel  ships.     Ours  is  only  a  steering 

monious   and    mutual   relations.     His  power,  though  it  is  a  very  great  power 

work  in  his  speech  gains  prominence,  at  that.     For  when  we  so  use  it  as  to 

because  it  is  most  difficult,  but    most  hold  ourselves  fairly  to  God's  operation, 

influential  when  accomplished.  as  we  hold  a  ship  to  the  winds,  that  is 

sufficient,  that  will  do  everything. 
The  Sense  of  Infirmity  in  Every  turning  even  our  impossibilities  them- 
Ma7i.—^^  For  in  many  things  we  all  selves  into  victory.  Glance  at  the 
stumble."  This  should  prevent  our  analogies  of  our  physical  experience, 
showing  any  superiority,  or  master-  Great,  overwhelmingly  great,  as  the 
fulness,  in  our  dealing  with  others.  forces  and  weights  of  nature  are,  what 
"Were  we  to  think  more  of  our  own  do  we  accomplish  more  easily  than  to 
mistakes  and  offences,  we  should  be  turn  about  their  whole  body  and  bring 
less  apt  to  judge  other  people.  While  them  into  manageable  service  ?  Doing 
we  are  severe  against  what  we  count  it  always  by  some  adjustment,  or  mode 
offensive  in  others,  we  do  not  consider  of  address,  which  acknowledges  their 
how  much  there  is  in  us  which  is  superior  force.  (Winds,  waters,  gun- 
justly  offensive  to  them.  Self- just ifiers  powder,  steam,  electricity,  etc.)  Pre- 
are  commonly  self- deceivers.  We  are  pared  by  such  analogies,  our  dependence, 
all  guilty  before  God;  and  those  who  in  the  matter  of  religion,  ought  to 
vaunt  it  over  the  frailties  and  infirmi-  create  no  speculative  difficulties ;  but 
ties  of  others  little  think  how  many  we  have  as  much  difficulty  as  ever  in 
things  they  offend  in  themselves.  making  that  practical  adjustment  of 
Nay,  perhaps,  their  magisterial  deport-  ourselves  to  God,  which  is  necessary 
ment,  and  censorious  tongues,  may  in  any  and  every  true  act  of  depend- 
prove  worse  than  any  faults  they  ence.  Some  take  it  upon  themselves 
condemn  in  others.  Let  us  learn  to  be  to  do,  by  their  own  force,  all  they 
severe  in  judging  ourselves,  but  charit-  are  responsible  for.  But  we  have 
able  in  our  judgments  of  other  no  capacity,  under  the  natural  laws 
people." — Matthew  Henry.  of  the  soul,  as  a  self-governing  crea- 
ture, to  govern  successfully  anything, 
Ver.  4.  Christian  A  hility. — Dropping  except  indirectly,  that  is  by  a  process 
the  particular  reference  to  the  tongue,  of  steering.  We  can  steer  the  mind 
or  the  power  of  the  tongue,  take  the  off  from  its  grudges,  ambitions,  bad 
text  as  illustrating  the  fact,  that  thoughts,  by  getting  it  occupied  with 
man  turns  about  everything,  handles  good  and  pure  objects  that  work  a 
all  heaviest  bulks,  masters  all  hardest  diversion.     If  we  could  wholly  govern 

568  ,   , 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP    III. 


ourselves,  our  self-government  would 
not  be  the  state  of  religion,  or  bring 
us  any  one  of  its  blessed  incidents. 
The  soul,  as  a  religious  creature,  is 
put  in  alliance,  by  a  fixed  necessity  of 
its  nature,  with  God.  Having  broken 
this  bond  in  its  sin,  it  comes  back  in 
religion  to  become  what  it  inwardly 
longs  for — restored  to  God,  filled  with 
God's  inspirations,  made  conscious  of 
God.  And  this  is  its  regeneration. 
All  "  impossibilities  "  we  can  easily  and 
surely  master,  by  only  bringing  our- 
selves into  the  range  of  God's  opera- 
tions. The  helm-power  only  is  ours  ; 
the  executive  is  God's.  What  is 
wanted  is  the  using  of  our  small  helms 
so  as  to  make  our  appeal  to  God's 
operation.  And  there  must  be  a 
clearing  of  a  thousand  particular  and 
even  smallest  things  that  will  steer  off 
the  soul  from  God — a  clearing  of  the 
helm  for  free  action.  The  faith  which 
is  the  condition  of  salvation  is  simply 
trusting  ourselves  over  to  God,  and  so 
bringing  ourselves  into  the  range  of 
His  Divine  operation.  The  reason 
why  so  many  fail  is,  that  they  under- 
take to  do  the  work  themselves, 
heaving  away  spasmodically  to  lift 
themselves  over  the  unknown  crisis  by 
main  strength — as  if  seizing  the  ship 
by  its  mast,  or  the  main  bulk  of  its 
body,  they  were  going  to  push  it 
on  through  the  voyage  themselves ! 
Whereas  it  is  the  work  of  God,  and  not 
in  any  other  sense  their  own,  than 
that,  coming  in  to  God  by  a  total  trust 
in  Him,  they  are  to  have  it  in  God's 
working.  In  a  similar  way  many 
miscarriages  occur  after  conversion. 
Nothing  was  necessary  to  prevent 
them,  but  simply  to  carry  a  steady 
helm  in  life's  duties.  Many  disciples 
fnll  out  of  course  by  actually  steering 
themselves  out  of  God's  operation. 
And  there  is  danger  that  the  man  who 
is  tending  the  small  helm  of  duty  with 
great  exactness  may  become  painfully 
legal  in  it — a  precisionist,  a  Pharisee. 
The  word  "  operation "  may  be  taken 
as  referring  only  to  the  omnipotent 
working  of  His  will  or  spiritual  force. 
But  there  is  a  power  of  God  which  is 


not  His  omnipotence,  and  has  a  wholly 
different  mode  of  working ;  I  mean 
His  moral  power — that  of  His  beauty, 
goodness,  gentleness,  truth,  purity, 
suffering,  compassion,  in  one  word.  His 
character.  In  this  kind  of  power  He 
works,  not  by  what  He  wills,  but  by 
what  He  is.  What  is  wanted,  there- 
fore, in  the  regeneration  of  souls,  and 
their  advancement  toward  perfection 
afterward,  is  to  be  somehow  put  in  the 
range  of  this  higher  power  and  kept 
there.  And  here  exactly  is  the  sublime 
art  and  glory  of  the  new  Divine 
economy  in  Christ.  For  He  is  such, 
and  so  related  to  our  want,  that  our 
mind  gets  a  way  open  through  Him 
to  God's  Divine  beauty  and  greatness, 
so  that  we  may  bring  our  heart  up 
iuto  the  transforming,  moulding 
efficacy  of  these,  which  we  most 
especially  need.  This  exactly  is  Chris- 
tianity— that  Christ  in  humaiiity  is 
God  humanised.  Divine  feeling  and 
perfection  let  down  into  the  modes  of 
finite  sentiment  and  apprehension.  In 
His  human  person,  and  the  revelation 
of  His  cross.  He  is  the  door,  the 
interpreter  to  our  hearts,  of  God  Him- 
self— so  the  moral  power  of  God  upon 
our  hearts.  Christ,  as  the  Son  of 
man,  is  that  small  helm  put  in  the 
hand,  so  to  speak,  of  our  affections,  to 
bring  us  in  to  God's  most  interior 
beauty  and  perfection,  and  to  put  us 
in  the  power  of  His  infinite,  unseen 
character ;  thus  to  be  moulded  by  it 
and  fashioned  to  conformity  with  it. — 
Horace  Bushnell,  D.D. 

Ships  and  Rudders. — The  ships  that 
were  "so  great "  in  former  days  were, 
in  fact,  scarcely  more  than  cock-boats, 
or  small  coasters,  scraping  round  the 
shores  of  the  inland  seas;  whereas, 
now,  what  we  call  the  great  ships  are 
big  enough  to  store  in  their  hold  a 
whole  armed  fleet  of  the  ancient  time, 
vessels  and  men  together  ;  and  these 
huge  bulks  strike  out  into  the  broad 
oceans,  defying  the  storms,  yet  still 
turned  about  as  before,  whithersoever 
the  helmsman  will.  There  he  stands 
at  his  post,  a  single  man,  scarcely  more 

569 


CHAP.  IIL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


than    a    fly   that   has  lighted   on  the  gauging  the  motion  of   his  wheel,  he 

immense  bulk  of  the  vessel,  having  a  steers  along  its  steady  track  the  moun- 

small  city  of  people  and  their  goods  in  tain  mass  of  the  ship,  turning  it  always 

the  world  of  timber  under  him,  and  to  its  course,  even  as  he  would  an  arrow 

perhaps  with  only  one  hand,  turning  to  its  mark. — Horace  Bushnell^  D.D. 
gently   his   lever   of    wood,    or   nicely 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  TEE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  5—12. 

The  Agency  of  the  Tongue  for  Good  and  Evil. — The  tongue,  as  a  bodily  organ, 
has  no  moral  quality,  good  or  bad.  It  is  the  organ  of  speech,  and  does  but  help 
to  express  thought  and  feeling  in  language,  by  means  of  which  one  man  may 
influence  another.  The  language-power  is  man's  dignity  and  man's  peril.  So 
truly  is  it  the  expression  of  a  man  for  apprehension  by  other  men,  that  it  can 
be  said,  "  By  thy  words  thou  shalt  be  justified,  and  by  thy  words  thou  shalt 
be  condemned."  In  this  paragraph  St.  James  reminds  us  in  what  different 
spheres  the  tongue  works,  and  what  different  things,  good  and  bad,  it  can  do. 
Evidently  it  is  so  supremely  important  an  agency  in  our  lives,  that  every  effort 
should  be  made  to  have  it,  and  to  keep  it,  in  full  control.  '*  The  tongue  is  the 
best  part  of  man,  and  also  his  worst ;  with  good  government  none  is  more  useful ; 
and  without  it,  none  more  mischievous." 

I.  The  tongue  is  man's  agency  for  boasting. — "  And  boasteth  great  things  " ; 
or,  "  vaunts  great  words  which  bring  about  great  acts  of  mischief."  Boasting 
is  the  expression  of  pride  and  self-conceit ;  and  it  implies  that  a  man  fails 
to  see  things  as  they  really  are,  but  swells  them  out  by  his  imagination,  so  that 
they  may  increase  his  self-importance.  The  boaster  (1)  injures  himself  by  his 
boasting,  for  it  is  a  habit  that  grows  by  exercise  ;  (2)  does  mischief  to  others, 
because  undue  praise  of  self  always  tries  to  gain  support  in  the  disparagement 
of  other  people — and  men  are  always  injured  when  they  are  compelled  to  take 
up  false  impressions ;  (3)  dishonours  God,  who  "  desireth  truth  in  the  inward 
parts,"  and  cannot  allow  His  work  in  a  man  to  be  exaggerated,  misrepresented, 
and  therefore  misjudged.  Boasting  is  one  of  the  surest  signs  of  moral  weakness, 
Those  who  give  way  to  it  are  altogether  untrustworthy  in  the  relations  of  life. 
No  one  feels  safe  in  having  dealings  with  them. 

II.  The  tongue  is  man's  agency  for  inciting  to  moral  evil. — *'The  tongue 
is  a  fire."  A  spark  of  fire  which,  if  only  it  fall  in  fitting  place,  will  do  fearfully 
destructive  work.  1.  The  unclean  word  may  burn  up  innocence  in  other  souls. 
2.  The  slanderous  word  may  burn  up  the  reputations  of  other  people.  3.  The 
critical  word  may  burn  up  trustfulness  in  other  people.  4.  The  doubtful  word 
may  burn  up  honesty  in  other  people.  A  word  spoken,  or  heard,  in  early  life 
may  work  as  a  deadly  poison  through  a  whole  life.  The  serpent  in  Eden  incited 
Eve  to  disobey  with  his  words.  "  Every  idle  [mischievous]  word  that  man 
shall  speak,  he  shall  give  account  thereof  in  the  day  of  judgment." 

III.  The  tongue  is  man's  agency  for  doing  wild  and  wicked  things. — "A 
world  of  iniquity  among  our  members."  With  this  should  be  taken  the  untam- 
ableness  of  the  tongue.  It  is  a  wild  animal,  that  even  at  its  best,  and  in  the 
best  men,  is  but  imperfectly  brought  into  control.  "  Three  temptations  to 
*  smite  with  the  tongue '  are  specially  powerful  for  evil,  viz.  as  a  relief  from 
passion,  as  a  gratification  of  spite,  as  revenge  for  wrong.  The  first  is  experienced 
by  hot-tempered  folk  ;  the  second  yielded  to  by  the  malicious  ;  the  third  welcomed 
by  the  otherwise  weak  and  defenceless ;  and  all  of  us  at  times  are  in  each  of 
these  divisions."  See  the  prayer  of  the  Catechism,  that  we  may  be  kept. from 
"  evil-speaking,  lying,  and  slandering."      ''  The  tongue  is  an  unruly  [restlessj 

570 


HOMILETIC  C0M3IENTARY :    JAMES.  chap.  lir. 


evil,  full  of  deadly  poison."     What  evil  is  wrought  by  the  slanderer,  traducer, 
liar,  foul-mouthed,  and  blasphemer  ! 
IV.  The  tongue  is  man's  agency  for  both  blessing  and  cursing. — It  is  not 

St.  James's  immediate  purpose  to  show  how  much  good  can  be  accomplished  by 
the  tongue,  when  it  is  in  fitting  Christian  control.  He  is  dealing  with  the 
unrestrained  tongue,  as  that  is  suggested  by  the  free  talk  of  the  would-be 
teachers.  He  is  showing  what  lengths  the  evil  may  run  to  when  the  curb 
is  taken  off.  Here  he  is  showing  what  contrasted  things  it  can  do.  It  can 
"  bless  God,"  and  at  the  very  same  time  "  curse  men."  What  a  strange  and 
unreasonable  thing  that  appears  to  be !  How  impossible  it  should  be  to 
Christian  disciples,  whose  fountain  has  been  cleansed,  whose  will  is  renewed, 
and  who  ought  to  have  only  pure,  loving,  worthy  things  for  which  they  want 
the  tongue  to  be  their  agency.  Ver.  11  is  probably  "a  vivid  picture  of  the 
mineral  springs  abounding  in  the  Jordan  Valley,  near  the  Dead  Sea ;  with 
which  might  be  contrasted  the  clear  and  sparkling  rivulets  of  the  north,  fed 
by  the  snows  of  Lebanon.  Nature  had  no  confusion  in  her  plans  ;  and  thus 
to  pour  out  cursing  and  blessing  from  the  same  lips  were  unnatural  indeed." 
Get  the  control  which  makes  the  tongue  utter  blessing,  and  it  will  cease  to 
curse.  Fail  to  get  the  control,  and  let  the  tongue  curse ;  it  will  then  very  soon 
cease  to  be  able  to  bless. 


SUGGESTIVE   NOTES   AND   SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Vers.    5,    6.     The    Tongue. — In   the  slandering   one    another  i      How   can 

development  of  Christian  truth  a  pecu-  the  superstructure   of   love  and  faith 

liar  office  was  assigned  to  the  apostle  be  built,  when  the   very   foundations 

James.     It  was  given   to  St.  Paul  to  of    human    character — justice,   mercy, 

proclaim  Christianity  as  the  spiritual  truth — have  not  been  laid  ? 

law  of  liberty,  and  to  exhibit  faith  as  I.    The    licence   of    the    tongue. — 

the  most  active   principle  within  the  1.  The  first  licence  given  to  the  tongue 

breast  of  man.     It  was  St.  John's  to  is  slander.     It  is  compared  to  poison, 

say   that   the   deepest   quality  in  the  The   deadliest   poisons    are   those    for 

bosom  of  Deity  is  love,  and  to  assert  which  no  test  is  known.     In  the  drop 

that  the  life  of   God  in   man  is  love.  of  venom  which  distils  from  the  sting 

It  was  the  office  of  St.  James  to  assert  of  the  smallest  insect,  or  the  spikes  of 

the  necessity  of  moral  rectitude  :    his  the   nettle-leaf,   there   is  concentrated 

very  name  marked  him  out  peculiarly  the  quintessence  of  a  poison  so  subtle 

for   this   office ;    he  was   emphatically  that  the  microscope  cannot  distinguish 

called  "  the  Just "  ;  integrity  was  his  it,   and    yet    so   virulent   that    it    can 

peculiar  characteristic.     A  man  singu-  inflame   the   blood,  irritate  the  whole 

larly  honest,  earnest,    real.      Accord-  constitution,  and  convert  day  and  night 

ingly,  if  you  read  through  his  whole  into   restless  misery.     In   St.   James's 

epistle,  you  will  find  it  is,   from  first  day,  as  now,  idle  men  and  women  went 

to  last,  one   continued  vindication    of  about   from  house  to  house,  dropping 

the  first  principles  of  morality  against  slander  as  they  went,  and  yet  you  could 

the  semblances  of  religion.     This  is  the  not  take  up  that  slander  and  detect  the 

mind  breathing  through  it  all  :  all  this  falsehood  there.     2.  The  second  licence 

talk  about  religion,  and  spirituality —  given  to  the  tongue  is  in  the  way  of 

words,  words,  words — nay,  let  us  have  persecution  :      "  therewith     curse    we 

realities.     How   can    we  speak  of  the  men."     Even  in  St.  James's  day  that 

gospel,    when   the    first   principles    of  spirit  had  begun.    Christians  persecuted 

morality  are    forgotten  ?   when  Chris-  Christians.     From  that  day  it  has  con- 

tians    are    excusing    themselves,    and  tinued,  through  long  centuries,  up  to 

571 


CHAP.   III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES. 


the  present  time.  Persecution  is  that 
which  affixes  penalties  upon  views  held, 
instead  of  upon  life  led. 

II.    The   guilt    of  this    licence. — 

1.  The  first  evil  consequence  is  the 
harm  that  a  man  does  himself. 
Calumny  effects  a  dissipation  of  spirit- 
ual energy.  Few  men  suspect  how 
much  mere  talk  fritters  away  spiritual 
energy — that  which  should  be  spent 
in  action  spends  itself  in  words.  In 
these  days  of  loud  profession,  and  bitter, 
fluent  condemnation,  it  is  well  for  us 
to  learn  the  Divine  force   of   silence. 

2.  The  next  feature  in  the  guilt  of 
calumny  is  its  uncontrollable  character. 
"  The  tongue  can  no  man  tame."  You 
cannot  arrest  a  calumnious  tongue ; 
you  cannot  arrest  the  calumny  itself. 
Neither  can  you  stop  the  consequences 
of  a  slander.  It  is  like  the  Greek  fire 
used  in  ancient  warfare,  which  burned 
unquenched  beneath  the  water  ;  or  like 
the  weeds  which,  when  you  have  ex- 
tirpated them  in  one  place,  are  sprout- 
ing forth  vigorously  in  another  spot. 

3.  The  third  element  of  guilt  lies  in 
the  unnaturalness  of  the  calumny. 
"  My  brethren,  these  things  ought  not 
so  to  be  "  ;  ought  not — that  is,  they  are 
unnatural.  The  truest  definition  of 
evil  is  that  which  represents  it  as  some- 
thing contrary  to  nature ;  evil  is  evil, 
because  it  is  unnatural.  The  teaching 
of  Christ  was  the  recall  of  man  to 
nature.  Christianity  is  the  regenera- 
tion of  our  whole  nature,  not  the 
destruction  of  one  atom  of  it.  The 
office  of  the  tongue  is  to  bless.  Slander 
is  guilty,   because  it  contradicts   this. 

4.  The  fourth  point  of  guilt  is  the 
diabolical  character  of  slander.  The 
tongue  is  "set  on  fire  of  hell."  This 
is  no  mere  strong  expression  ;  it  con- 
tains deep  and  emphatic  meaning. 
Slander  is  diabolical.  "  Devil,"  in  the 
original,  means  traducer  or  slanderer. 
Beware  of  that  habit  which  becomes 
the  slanderer's  life,  of  magnifying  every 
speck  of  evil  and  closing  the  eye  to 
goodness — till  at  last  men  arrive  at  the 
state  in  which  generous,  universal  love 
(which  is  heaven)  becomes  impossible, 
and  a  suspicious,  universal  hate  takes 

572 


possession  of  the  heart,  and  that  is  hell. 
Love  is  the  only  remedy  for  slander. — 
F.  W.  Robertson. 

Yer.  6.  The  Evils  of  the  Tongue. — 
Amongst  the  most  important  of  all 
subjects  must  be  reckoned  the  govern- 
ment of  the  tongue.  The  consideration 
of  it  is  well  calculated  to  convince  the 
profane,  pluck  off  the  mask  from  the 
hypocrites,  humble  the  sincere,  and  to 
edify  every  description  of  persons.  In 
these  words  we  have  given  us  such 
a  description  of  the  tongue,  as,  if  it 
had  proceeded  from  any  other  than 
an  inspired  writer,  would  have  been 
deemed  a  libel  upon  human  nature. 

I.  The  true  character  of  the  human 
tongue. — 1.  It  is  a  fire.  Fire,  in  its 
original  formation,  was  intended  for 
the  good  of  man ;  if  subordinate,  it  is 
highly  beneficial,  but  its  tendency  is  to 
consume  and  to  destroy.  So  with  the 
tongue.  Even  the  smallest  spark  is 
capable  of  producing  such  incalculable 
mischief  as  may  be  beyond  the  power  of 
man  to  repair.  So  a  single  motion  of 
the  tongue  may  irritate  and  inflame 
a  man,  and  change  him  instantly  into 
a  savage  beast  and  an  incarnate  devil. 
2.  It  is  a  world  of  iniquity.  There  is 
not  any  sin  which  does  not  stand  in 
the  nearest  connection  with  the  tongue, 
and  employ  it  in  its  service.  Search 
the  long  catalogue  of  sins  against  God, 
against  our  neigh  hour,  against  ourselves, 
and  there  will  not  be  found  one  that 
has  not  the  tongue  as  its  principal  ally. 

II.  Its  effects. — 1.  Defiling.  Sin  in 
the  heart  defiles  the  soul ;  when  uttered 
by  the  lips,  "  it  defileth  the  whole 
body."  Utterance  gives  solidity  and 
permanency  to  that  which  before 
existed  in  idea.  Though  all  communi- 
cations are  not  equally  polluting,  yet 
there  is  a  stain  left,  which  nothing  but 
the  Redeemer's  blood  can  ever  wash 
away.  2.  Destruction.  Look  at  in- 
dividuals ;  what  malignant  passions  it 
has  kindled  in  them  !  Yisit  families ; 
what  animosities  and  inextinguishable 
feuds  !  Survey  churches,  nations  ;  it 
has  kindled  flames  of  war,  and  spread 
desolation, 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP.    III. 


III.  The  reason  of  its  producing 
these  effects. — 1.  It  is  ^^  set  on  fire  of 
helir  Satan  is  the  source  and  author 
of  all  the  evils  that  proceed  from  the 
tongue.  The  wickedness  of  the  heart 
may  account  for  much ;  but  if  the 
flames  were  not  fanned  by  Satanic 
agency,  they  would  not  rage  with  such 
an  irresistible  force,  and  to  such  a 
boundless  extent.  1.  How  great  must 
he  the  evils  of  the  hitman  heart.  If  God 
should  leave  us  without  restraint,  there 
is  not  one  of  us  but  would  proclaim 
all  the  evil  of  his  heart,  as  much  as 
the  most  loathsome  sensualist  or  most 
daring  blasphemer.  2.  Hoio  "much  do 
we  need  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spii'it. 
It  is  absolutely  impossible  for  man  to 
tame  this  vinruly  member.  The  Holy 
Spirit  will  help  our  infirmities.  Christ 
will  give  us  His  Spirit  if  we  call  upon 
Him.  3.  How  careful  should  we  he  of 
every  word  we  utter.  Immense  injury 
may  we  do  by  one  unguarded  word. 
We  may  take  away  a  character  which 
we  can  never  restore,  or  inflict  a  wound 
we  can  never  heal.  We  must  account 
for  every  idle  word.  Let  our  tongue 
be  as  choice  silver,  or  a  tree  of  life,  to 
enrich  and  comfort  the  Lord's  people. 
Let  our  "  speech  be  always  with  grace 
seasoned  with  salt,"  for  God's  honour 
and  man's  good. — G.  Simeon,  M.A. 

The  Sins  of  the  Tongue. 

I.  Among  the  many  sins  of  the 
tongue  are  idle  words.  "  Avoid  foolish 
talking."  A  wise  man  *'  sets  a  watch 
on  the  door  of  his  lips  "  even  when  he 
utters  a  pleasantry. 

II.  Malicious  words  are  cousins  in 
sin  to  idle  words.  Kind  words  are  the 
oil  that  lubricates  every-day  inter- 
course. There  v/as  an  ancient  male- 
diction that  the  tongue  of  the  slanderer 
should  be  cut  out.  A  slanderer  is  a 
public  enemy. 

III.  A  filthy  imagination  comes  out 
on  the  tongue. 

IV.  There  is  profane  swearing. 
This  is  the  most  gratuitous  and  inex- 
cusable of  sins.  The  man  who  swears 
turns  speech  into  a  curse^  and  before 


his  time  rehearses  the  dialect  of  hell. — 
Theodore  L.  Cuyler. 

Defiling  Power  of  the  Tongue. — There 
is  a  great  pollution  and  defilement  in 
sins  of  the  tongue.  Defiling  passions 
are  kindled,  vented,  and  cherished  by 
this  unruly  member.  And  the  whole 
body  is  often  drawn  into  sin  and  guilt 
by  the  tongue.  The  snares  into  which 
men  are  sometimes  led  by  the  tongue 
are  insufferable  to  themselves  and  de- 
structive of  others.  The  affau-s  of  man- 
kind and  of  societies  are  often  thrown 
into  confusion,  and  all  is  set  aflame, 
by  the  tongues  of  men.  There  is  no 
age  of  the  world,  nor  any  condition 
of  life,  private  or  public,  but  will  afford 
examples  of  this.  Where  the  tongue 
is  guided  and  wrought  upon  by  a  fire 
from  heaven,  there  it  kindleth  good 
thoughts,  holy  affections,  and  ardent 
devotions.  But  when  it  is  set  on  fire 
of  hell,  as  in  all  undue  heats  it  is, 
there  it  is  mischievous,  producing  rage 
and  hatred,  and  those  things  which 
serve  the  purposes  of  the  devil.  As 
therefore  you  would  dread  fires  and 
flames,  you  should  dread  contentions, 
revilings,  slanders,  lies,  and  everything 
that  would  kindle  the  fire  of  wrath  in 
your  own  spirit,  or  in  the  spirit  of 
others. — Matthew  Henry. 

Ver.  8.  The  Taming  of  the  Tongue. — 
Here  is  a  single  position,  guarded  with 
a  double  reason.  The  position  is — "  No 
man  can  tame  the  tongue."  The 
reasons  :  L  It  is  unruly.  2.  It  is  full 
of  deadly  poison.  Each  reason  hath  a 
terrible  second.  The  evil  hath  for  its 
second  "unruliness  "  ;  the  poisonfulness 
hath  "  deadly."  The  fort  is  so  barricaded 
that  it  is  hard  scaling  it ;  the  refrac- 
tory rebel  so  guarded  with  evil  and 
poison,  so  warded  with  unruly  and 
deadly,  as  if  it  were  with  giants  in  an 
enchanted  tower,  as  they  fabulate,  that 
no  man  can  tame  it. 

I.  The  nature  of  the  thing  to  be 
tamed. — The  tongue,  which  is  (1)  a 
member ;  and  (2)  an  excellent,  neces- 
sary, little,  and  singular  member. 

II.  The  difficulty  of  accomplishing 

573 


CHAP.   III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


this  work  of  taming. — A  threefold 
instruction  for  the  use  of  the  tongue  is 
insinuated  to  us.  1.  Let  us  not  dare 
to  pull  up  God's  mounds  ;  nor  like  wild 
beasts,  break  through  the  circular 
limits  wherein  He  hath  cooped  us. 
"  Weigh  thy  words  in  a  balance,  and 
make  a  door  and  bar  for  thy  mouth." 
Let  thy  words  be  few,  true,  weighty, 
that  thou  mayest  not  speak  much, 
not  falsely,  not  vainly.  Kemember 
the  bounds.  2.  Since  God  hath  made 
the  tongue  one,  have  not  thou  a  tongue 
and  a  tongue.  Some  are  double- 
tongued,  as  they  are  double-hearted. 
The  slanderer,  the  flatterer,  the  swearer, 
the  talebearer,  are  monstrous  men ;  as 
misshapen  sfcigmatics  as  if  they  had 
two  tongues  and  but  one  eye,  two 
heads  and  but  one  foot.  3.  Do  not 
put  all  strength  into  the  tongue,  to  the 
weakening  and  enervation  of  the  other 
parts.  He  that  made  the  tongue  can 
tame  the  tongue.  He  that  gave  man 
a  tongue  to  speak  can  give  him  a 
tongue  to  speak  well.  Let  us  move 
our  tongue  to  intreat  help  for  our 
tongues  ;  and,  according  to  their  office, 
let  us  set  them  on  work  to  speak  for 
themselves.  We  must  not  be  idle 
ourselves;  the  difficulty  must  spur  us 
to  more  earnest  contention.  Look  how 
far  the  heart  is  good ;  so  far  the 
tongue.  If  the  heart  believe,  the 
tongue  will  confess ;  if  the  heart  be 
meek,  the  tongue  will  be  gentle ;  if 
the  heart  be  angry,  the  tongue  will  be 
bitter.  The  tongue  is  but  the  hand 
without  to  show  how  the  clock  goes 
within.  A  vain  tongue  discovers  a 
vain  heart.  "  The  heart  of  fools  is  in 
tiheir  mouth  ;  but  the  mouth  of  the 
wise  is  in  their  heart." — Thomas 
Adams. 

Ver.  10.  The  Discipline  of  the  Tongue 
from  the  Christian  Standpoint. — "  My 
brethren,  these  things  ought  not  so  to 
be."  The  Christian  regards  his  body, 
and  the  various  relations  with  men 
into  which  his  body  enables  him  to 
come,  as  the  agency  and  the  sphere 
in  which  his  renewed  and  regenerated 
self  is  to  find  and  exercise  its  ministry. 

574 


His  idea  for  himself  he  gains  through 
a  proper  apprehension  of  the  human 
Christ.  Christ  was  a  Spirit,  but  that 
Spirit  could  only  work  through  the 
agency  of  a  human  body,  and  in  those 
spheres  which  the  human  body  enabled 
him  to  occupy.  It  was  therefore 
essential  that  Christ  should  have  His 
body — every  part  and  force  of  His 
body — under  perfect  control,  and  at 
perfect  command.  His  experience 
would  not  really  be  like  ours  if  He  had 
that  command  as  a  result  of  something 
other  than  self- discipline.  The  delay 
of  His  ministry  until  He  was  thirty 
years  old  suggests  that,  even  in  His 
case,  prolonged  self -culture  was  neces- 
sary, in  order  to  gain  practical  com- 
mand of  all  His  bodily  powers  and 
forces.  If  we  can  realise  this,  and 
carefully  keep  away  the  idea  that  He 
had  a  sinful  nature,  we  shall  find 
ourselves  drawn  nearer  to  One,  who 
was  ''in  all  points  tempted  like  as  we 
are,"  for  we  shall  see  that  His  powers 
of  silence,  restrained  speech,  wise 
speech,  were  as  truly  (on  the  human 
side)  the  results  of  self- discipline,  and 
self- culture,  as  the  same  speech- mastery 
is  in  our  case.  It  will  then  come  to 
us  that  we  have  in  our  Divine- human 
Lord  the  model  of  that  control  of  our 
tongue,  of  that  mastery  of  our  speech- 
power,  which  we  recognise  as  the  first 
Christian  demand  made  on  us,  and  the 
last  to  wliich  we  succeed  in  worthily 
responding.  The  impossibility  of  gain- 
ing that  self  command,  which  so  often 
oppresses  us,  is  relieved  when  we  can 
see  that  one  man  has  fully  gained  it, 
and  that,  as  a  man.  He  gained  it  in 
the  same  way  that  we  must,  by  the 
self- discipline  of  years,  in  the  inspira- 
tion and  leading  of  the  indwelling 
Spirit. 

Vers.  11,  12.  The  Lesson  of  the 
Fountain  and  the  Fig. — These  illustra- 
tions impress  the  inconsistency  of 
Christians  using  their  tongues  for 
unworthy  ministries.  With  a  clean 
soul  can  only  go  clean  uses  of  the 
power  of  speech.  The  thought  is 
similar  to  that  so  abruptly,  and  almost 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES.  chap.  hi. 


startlingly,    expressed    by    St.    John,  or  unloving  speech  from  a   Christian 

The   Christian  man   "  cannot  sin,  be-  professor.      You    are   sure  that  there 

cause   he   is    born  of  God."     Sin  and  is  something  wrong  if  you   do.     This 

the    divine    Hfe    in    souls  cannot   con-  consideration  suggests  the  appeal  which 

ceivably    go    together.      A    fountain  St.  James  would  make.     The  fountain, 

pours   forth   only   what   is    consistent  in  the  case  of  the  Christian,  had  long 

with  itself.      If  its  store  of  water  is  been  polluted,  and  the  streams  flowing 

in  any  sense  impregnated,  you  cannot  from  it  had  long  been  foul,  so  that  the 

expect  to  draw  sweet  water  from  it.  very  channels  and  pipes  had   become 

If   the   stores   are   sweet,  you  cannot  impregnated    with    evil,    and    defiled 

expect   to   find   foul   streams   pouring  even  fresh  water  that  flowed  through 

forth,  and  it  would  be  a  surprise  and  them.      In  the  case  of  the  Christian 

an  offence  if  you  did.     A  wild  fig  tree  the  fountain-head  had   been  cleansed 

properly  enough  bears  wild  figs ;  but  and    sweetened,    so    that    what    was 

if  the  branch  is  grafted  into  the  good  ready  to   flow   forth   was   pure ;    but 

fig,    and   receives    its    good    life,   you  there   remained   the   difficulty   of    the 

properly  expect  that  it  will  bear  only  foul    channels    and   pipes.      And   the 

good   figs.      It   should   be    thus   with  work    of    daily    Christian    living    is 

Christians.      What    a    man's    speech  the  cleansing  of  the  old  channels  and 

should    be    is    not    here    considered;  pipes,    so   that   the   cleansed  fountain 

what  a  Christian  man's  speech  should  may  pour  forth  the  streams  that,  un- 

be  is  presented  to  our  view.     And  it  tainted  and  wholly  sweet,  shall  flow  into 

must  be  consistent  with  himself,  the  all  the  associations  of  the  life — sweet 

fitting    expression    of    his    new    life.  even  flowing  from  the  tongue  which 

You   do   not   expect  to  hear   unclean  had  so  long  been  the  instrument  of  evil. 


MAIN  ROMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13—18. 

Practical  Wisdom  seen  in  the  Spirit  of  a  Life. — Two  things  need  to  be  kept 
in  mind  if  the  point  of  teaching  in  this  passage  is  to  be  apprehended.  1.  St. 
James  began  his  epistle  by  dwelling  on  the  importance  of  wisdom.  He  meant 
that  sort  of  practical  wisdom  for  the  ordering  and  guiding  of  life  and  relations 
which  comes  to  a  man  tjtrough  (1)  waiting  upon  God  in  believing  prayer,  and 
(2)  through  sanctified  personal  observations  and  experiences.  2.  St.  James 
recognises  that  these  would-be  teachers,  who  set  up  for  themselves  in  the  Jewish 
Christian  Churches,  claimed  a  superiority  of  wisdom  and  knowledge,  and  based 
their  claim  to  teach  on  this  claim  to  superior  wisdom.  The  claim  was  founded 
on  self-assurance  ;  there  was  no  characteristic  Christian  humility  in  it.  And 
self-assertive  work  was  doing  the  practical  mischief  in  the  Churches  which  it 
always  does.  It  could  be  known  by  the  bad  fruits  that  it  was  bringing  forth. 
There  is  something  very  like  satire  in  the  contrast  between  the  false  wisdom  and 
the  true  .in  this  passage.  The  man  truly  wise  never  is  found  pushing  himself 
into  the  place  of  teacher — he  has  to  he  found  out ;  and  he  will  be  known  by  the 
character  of  his  ordinary  conversation,  and  by  the  skill  with  which  he  orders  all 
his  conduct,  and  tones  all  his  relationships. 

I.  What  will  indicate  the  wise  man  ? — How  may  we  recognise  him  ?  What 
tests  shall  we  apply  to  him  ?  Here  is  a  man  who  claims  to  be  w4se  for  the 
practical  management  of  life,  and  possessed  with  altogether  superior  intellectual 
knowledge.  How  shall  we  satisfy  ourselves  concerning  his  claim  ?  1.  It  is  a 
ground  of  suspicion  if  he  pushes  himself  forward  as  a  teacher.  True  wisdom 
always  has  humility  for  its  companion.  The  man  who  thinks  himself  to  be 
something,  generally  is  nothing.  Men  find  out  the  true  teachers  ;  very  seldom 
do  they  find  themselves  out.     The  true  teacher  teaches  because  he  cannot  help 

575 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


it,  and  often  does  not  know  that  he  can  teach.  The  man  who  pushes  himself 
into  the  teaching-place  will  usually  be  found  more  interested  in  self -aggrandise- 
ment than  in  teaching.  2.  It  is  suspicious  if  the  supposed  wise  man  is  more 
anxious  about  putting  other  people's  lives  straight  than  about  putting  his  own. 
Let  a  man  be  really  wise,  and  the  responsibility  of  the  trust  of  his  own  life  is 
sure  to  weigh  heavily  upon  him  ;  and  he  will  be  anxious  about  his  own 
"  conversation,"  his  own  turning  about  in  the  relations  of  life,  his  own  good 
conduct.  Let  a  man  assume  wisdom  for  self-seeking  ends,  and  he  will  usually 
be  found  indifferent  to  his  own  conduct  and  relations  ;  attention  to  these  things 
will  in  no  way  serve  his  purpose.  3.  It  is  more  than  suspicious  if  there  is  to 
be  seen  no  sign  of  "  meekness."  Meekness,  in  the  Scriptures,  is  not  precisely 
the  same  thing  as  "  humility."  It  is  the  opposite  of  ''  self-assertiveness."  The 
meek  man  never  pushes  himself  to  the  front.  He  trusts  to  value,  not  to 
show ;  to  what  he  is,  not  to  what  he  can  make  himself  out  to  he.  But  precisely 
what  these  would-be  teachers  in  the  Churches,  whom  St.  James  reproves,  lacked, 
was  this  meekness  in  their  so-called  wisdom.  From  this  ver.  13  the  importance 
of  personal  character  and  holy  example  in  all  Christian  teachers  may  be  earnestly 
presented.  Holy  living  must  ensure  confidence  in  him  who  teaches,  and  wing 
the  arrows  of  his  good  words. 

II.  What  will  indicate  the  unwise  man?— The  results  of  his  personal  in- 
fluence and  of  his  teaching.  His  pushing  will  create  envying.  The  places  into 
which  he  gets  other  people  will  be  sure  to  think  that  they  ought  to  have. 
Hence  will  come  strife,  contentions,  disputes,  rivalries,  srchemes  for  injuring  one 
another,  and  every  evil  work.  James  and  John  wanted  to  push  into  the  chief 
places  in  the  coming  kingdom,  and  they  upset  the  kindly  relations  of  the 
apostolic  company,  introducing  envying  and  strife.  And  that  which  is  true  of 
the  unwise  man's  personal  influence  will  also  be  true  of  his  teaching.  It  will 
upset  the  kindly  relations  of  the  people.  It  will  be  inconsiderate.  It  will  be 
peculiar.  It  will  exaggerate  the  teacher's  own  ideas.  It  will  fail  to  keep  the 
harmony  and  proportion  of  Christian  truth  ;  and  so  it  will  cause  heart-burnings, 
jealousies,  envyings,  hatred,  strife.  It  is  the  secret  of  sectarianism.  One  is  for 
Paul,  and  separates  himself  to  Paul.  One  is  for  Apollos,  and  separates  himself 
to  Apollos.  One  is  for  Cephas,  and  separates  himself  to  Cephas.  And  so 
sectarianism  creeps  in,  and  in  Christ's  Church  there  is  confusion  and  every  evil 
work. 

III.  What  will  indicate  the  Christianly  wise  man?  (ver.  17). — This  verse 
seems  distinctly  to  lift  us  into  a  higher  plane.  St.  James  appears  now  to  be 
thinking  of  the  true  Christian  teacher,  in  whom  is  both  the  spirit  and  the 
wisdom  of  the  "  great  Teacher " ;  the  man  who  is  not  inspired  to  teach  by  a 
self-seeking,  self-satisfied,  and  self-reliant  spirit,  but  by  the  wisdom  and  the 
grace  that  come  down  from  above ;  the  man  who  is  wise  through  the  gifts  and 
teachings  of  the  Holy  Spirit;  the  man  who  is  an  "epistle  of  Christ."  St. 
James  does  not  describe  the  true  Christian  teacher ;  he  says  that  you  can  always 
know  him  by  the  tone  which  is  on  all  the  results  of  his  personal  influence  and 
Christian  work.  The  terms  he  uses  express  two  things  :  righteousness,  peace- 
ableness.  The  Christian  teacher  stands  firm  to  that  which  is  right,  just,  pure. 
He  shows  no  partiality,  favours  no  one  to  serve  his  own  end,  is  "  without 
hypocrisy "  ;  he  always  is  what  he  seems  to  be,  and  so  can  be  fully  trusted. 
And  he  is  peaceable ;  never  makes  difficulties,  always  smoothes  them ;  is  ac- 
cessible to  all,  pitiful  to  the  erring,  gentle  to  the  weak,  and  inventive  in  forms 
of  service  to  others.  The  atmosphere  in  which  alone  the  Christian  can  work  is 
the  atmosphere  of  peace.  Spiritual  life  can  never  be  cultured  by  any  Christian 
teaching  where  self-assertive  men  are  creating  envying  and  strife,  confusion 
and  every  evil  work.     Three  go  together — wisdom,  humility,  and  peaceableness, 

m 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP.   III. 


IV.  What  will  be  the  moral  power  of  the  Christianly  wise  man?  (ver.  18). — 
He  who  makes  peace  wherever  he  goes,  sows  peace ;  and  when  the  seeds  of  peace 
come  to  their  fruitage,  that  fruitage  is  found  to  be  "  righteousness."  And  that 
is  the  supreme  end  of  Christ's  work ;  and  the  supreme  end  of  all  the  work  whicli 
Christ's  servants  do  for  Him.  Heaven  is  come  when  of  humanity  it  can  l^e 
said,  "  The  people  are  all  righteous."  Out  of  the  seeds  of  the  wise  Christian 
teaching,  that  makes  for  peace,  that  universal  righteousness  alone  can  come. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  1 2.  Wisdom  seen  in  Wise  Speech. 
— "  Let  him  show  out  of  a  good  con- 
versation his  works."  While  it  may 
be  admitted  that  St.  James  uses  the 
term  "  conversation "  in  the  general 
sense  of  "  conduct,"  it  may  also  be 
recognised  that  he  had  in  mind  the 
sins  of  the  tongue,  and  the  mischievous 
talking  and  teaching  of  those  who 
pushed  themselves  into  places  of  autho- 
rity in  the  Christian  Churches.  We 
may  therefore  take  St.  James  to  sug- 
gest that  a  man  can  always  be  known 
by  his  talk.  Illustrate  from  different 
kinds  of  men :  the  unclean-minded 
man  ;  the  vain  man ;  the  hypocrite ; 
the  shallow  -  minded  man  ;  the 
foreigner ;  the  learned  man ;  the 
humorous  man ;  the  depressed  man  ; 
etc.  The  same  must  be  true  of  the 
Christian  man.  1.  What  should  be  the 
characteristic  conversation  of  a  Chris- 
tian man  ?  2.  How  can  he  secure  that 
the  right  character  shall  always  rest 
upon  his  conversation  ?  To  answer  with 
St.  James  we  may  say — It  depends 
upon  his  keeping  the  "  meekness  of 
wisdom."  Several  shades  of  meaning 
attach  to  the  term  "  meekness,"  and 
in  each  of  them  we  may  notice  a  close 
connection  with  wisdom,  that  is,  with 
the  practical  wisdom  which  enables  a 
man  to  order  his  life  aright,  gaining 
a  restraint  over  himself,  and  over  his 
circumstances,  which  is  at  once  repre- 
sented and  illustrated  by  the  control 
he  gains  over  his  speech.  1.  Meek- 
ness may  mean  humility,  the  spirit  of 
the  man  who  has  come  to  estimate 
himself  aright.  But  that  right  esti- 
mate is  the  work  of  wisdom^  which 
guides  judgment  and  presents  the 
Divine   standard.      A   man    is   never 


humble  until  he  is  wise  enough  to  look 
at  himself  in  the  light  of  God  and 
God's  claims.  2.  Meekness  may  mean 
modesty,  the  spirit  that  does  not  push, 
that  will  not  assert  itself.  And  this 
never  comes  to  a  man  save  out  of  the 
practical  wisdom  that  reads  Hfe  aright, 
and  knows  that  in  the  long-run  God 
always  proves  to  be  on  the  side  of  the 
man  who  is  good,  not  on  the  side  of 
the  man  who  asserts  that  he  is. 
3.  Meekness  may  mean  receptiveness, 
the  disposition  which  keeps  a  man 
open  to  ever  fresh  supphes  of  Divine 
grace  and  strength.  And  only  pi-ac- 
tical  wisdom  brings  home  to  a  man  that 
sense  of  insufficiency  which  prepares 
him  to  receive  ever  fresh  Divine  help. 

Vers.  14-16.  The  Secret  Source  of 
Strife. — Self  is  pushing  to  the  front 
somewhere.  That  will  always  be  found 
the  source  of  strife  in  families,  churches, 
society,  nations.  Somebody  wants 
something  for  himself.  His  getting  it 
is  against  the  interests  of  others. 
Nevertheless,  he  is  determined  to  get  it. 

Ver.  15.  A  Threefold  Description 
of  False  Wisdom  :  "  Earthly,  Sensual 
\^Animal\  Devilish  [Demoniacal]." — 
Each  word  is  full  of  meaning.  1.  The 
counterfeit  wisdom  is  "  earthly  "  in  its 
nature  and  origin,  as  contrasted  with 
that  which  cometh  from  above  (Phil.  iii. 
19).  2.  It  is  "sensual."  The  word  is 
used  by  classical  writers  for  that  which 
belongs  to  the  "  soul,"  as  contrasted 
with  the  "  body."  This  rested  on  the 
twofold  division^of  man's  nature.  The 
psychology  of  the  New  Testament, 
however,  assumes  generally  the  three- 
fold division  of  body,  soul,  and  spirit, 

pp  577 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


the  second  element  answering  to  the  beginnings  of  strife,  to  the  needs  of 
animal,  emotional  life,  and  the  third  others,  to  insincerity,  to  everything 
being  that  which  includes  reason  and  unsympathetic,  and  to  a  proper  re- 
will,  the  capacity  for  immortality  and  sponse,  in  good  fruits,  to  the  grace  of 
for  knowing  God.  Hence  the  adjective  which  the  Christian  feels  himself  to  be 
formed  from  "soul"  acquired  a  lower  the  monument.  "Confound  not  wis- 
meaning,  almost  the  very  opposite  of  dom  vnth  erudition.  They  may  be 
that  which  it  once  had,  and  expresses  connected,  and  should  accompany  one 
man's  state  as  left  to  lower  impulses  another ;  but  they  are  not  always  so, 
without  the  control  of  the  spirit.  What  and  perhaps  only  in  a  few  instances. 
St.  James  says  of  the  false  wisdom  is,  Confound  not  wisdom  with  a  sullen, 
that  it  belongs  to  the  lower,  not  the  morose  character,  with  a  gravity  fright- 
higher,  element  in  man's  nature.  It  ful  to  all  mirth  and  pleasure,  with  a 
does  not  come  from  the  Spirit  of  God,  life  consisting  entirely  in  rigid  absti- 
and  therefore  is  not  spiritual.  3.  In  nence  and  perpetual  mortification. 
"  devilish  "  we  have  a  yet  darker  con-  Confound  not  wisdom  with  singularity 
demnation.  Our  English  use  of  the  in  the  bad  sense  of  the  term,  according 
same  word  "  devil,"  for  two  Greek  to  which  it  is  an  endeavour  to  attract 
words,  StajSoXos  and  Sat/xoVtov,  tends,  notice,  and  to  distinguish  oneself 
however,  to  obscure  St.  James's  mean-  from  others,  not  so  much  in  important 
ing.  The  epithet  does  not  state  that  and  essential  matters,  as  in  insignifi- 
the  false  wisdom  which  he  condemns  cant  trifles  relative  to  externals, 
came  from  the  devil,  or  was  like  his  Confound  not  wisdom  with  under- 
nature,  but  that  it  was  demon-like,  as  standing  and  sagacity.  They  come, 
partaking  of  the  nature  of  "demons"  indeed,  the  nearest  to  it,  are  more  or 
or  "  unclean  spirits,"  who,  as  in  the  less  implied  in  it,  and  belong  in  some 
gospels,  are  represented  as  possess-  measure  to  it;  however,  they  are  not 
ing  the  souls  of  men  and  reducing  wisdom  itself." — Zollikofer. 
them  to  the  level  of  madness.     Such, 

St.    James     says,     is     the    character  Ver.    18.    Righteousness    and    Peace 

of  the  spurious  wisdom  of  the  "many  always  go    together. — "The    work    of 

masters  "  of  ver.   1.     Met  together  in  righteousness  shall  be  peace,  and  the 

debate,  wrangling,   cursing,   swearing,  effect  of   righteousness   quietness   and 

one  would  take  them  for  an  assembly  assurance  for  ever."     "  E-ighteousness 

of    demoniacs.      Their    disputes   were  and   peace   have   kissed   each    other." 

marked  by  the  ferocity,  the  egotism,  "  Then  had  thy  peace  been  as  a  river, 

the  boasting,  the  mahgnant  cunning  and  thy  righteousness  as  the  waves  of 

of  the  insane. — Dean  Plwmptre.  the  sea."    Righteousness  always  works 

towards  peace.     Peace  provides  a  seed- 

Ver.  17.  Practical  Christian  Wisdom,  bed    in   which    righteousness   can    be 

— If  a  man  has   it,   no  doubt  it  will  sown.     Find  either  one  of  these  any- 

find  its  first  sphere  in  the  management  where,    and   you   will   find   the   other 

of  his  own  body,  mind,  temper,  pas-  close  by.     If  everybody  simply  wanted 

sions,  etc.     But  it  will  be  sure  also  to  the  right,  and  worked  for   the  right, 

find  its  sphere  in  the  relationships  and  there  could  be  no  wars  of  nations,  no 

associations  of  life.     It  will  direct  all  contentions  of  society,  no  ruptures  in 

his  dealings  with  others,  and  give  them  families.      The     absolute     right    may 

a  peculiarly  gracious  character.    What  sometimes   seem   to   be   unattainable ; 

will  be  the   leading    features  of   that  but    the    Christian    right    is    always 

character  ?      Will  they,  as  St.  James  within    our   reach,    and    that    is   the 

gives  them,  go  into  the  word  "  sensitive-  interest  of  my  brother  and  my  neigh- 

ness "    (not  touchiness,  nor   the  mere  hour   rather   than   my   own.     In  the 

weakness  of  a  nervous  disposition)  ? —  triumph  of  the  Christian  right  comes 

sensitive   to    the    clean,   to   the    very  the  world's  eternal  peace. 

578 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP.   III. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  III 


Ver.  6.  Mischief  done  by  the  Slanderous 
Tongue. — A  man  who,  for  a  moment's  gossip- 
ing gratification,  drops  an  idle  word  affect- 
ing a  neighbour's  character,  resembles  that 
Scotchman  who,  from  partiality  to  the  flora 
of  his  native  land,  sowed  a  little  thistle- 
down in  the  British  colony  where  he  had 
raised  his  tabernacle,  and  where  that  nuisance 
to  agriculturists  had  been  unknown  up  to 
that  time.  It  grew  and  flourished ;  and 
breezes — like  the  active  wind  of  talk,  that 
soon  propagates  a  slander — carried  .  the 
winged  seeds  hither  and  thither,  to  found 
for  their  obnoxious  species  thousands  of  new 
homes. — F.  W.  Robertson. 

The  Consequences  of  Slander. — Never  can 
you  stop  the  consequences  of  a  slander.  You 
may  publicly  prove  its  falsehood,  you  may 
sift  every  atom,  explain  and  annihilate  it, 
and  yet,  years  after  you  had  thought  that 
all  had  been  disposed  of  for  ever,  the  men- 
tion of  a  name  wakes  up  associations  in 
the  mind  of  some  one  who  heard  the 
calumny,  but  never  heard  or  never  attended 
to  the  refutation,  or  who  has  only  a  vague 
and  confused  recollection  of  the  whole, 
and  he  asks  the  question  doubtfully,  "  But 
were  there  not  some  suspicious  circum- 
stances connected  with  him  ? "  It  is  like  the 
Greek  fire  used  in  ancient  warfare,  which 
burnt  unquenched  beneath  the  water,  or  like 
the  weeds  which  when  you  have  extirpated 
them  in  one  place  are  sprouting  forth  vigor- 
ously in  another  spot,  at  the  distance  of 
many  hundred  yards  ;  or  to  use  the  metaphor 
of  St.  James  himself,  it  is  like  the  wheel 
which  catches  fire  as  it  goes,  and  burns  with 
a  fiercer  conflagration  as  its  own  speed  in- 
creases ;  "  it  sets  on  fire  the  whole  course  of 
nature"  (lit.  "  the  wheel  of  nature  ").  You 
may  tame  the  wild  beast ;  the  conflagration 
of  the  American  forest  will  cease  when  all 
the  timber  and  all  the  dry  underwood  is 
consumed;  but  you  cannot  arrest  the  pro- 
gress of  that  cruel  word  which  you  uttered 
carelessly  yesterday  or  this  morning. 

Mischief  of  a  Bitter  Word. — A  bitter 
word  dropped  from  our  lips  against  a  brother 
is  like  a  pistol  fired  amongst  mountains. 
The  sharp  report  is  caught  up  and  inten- 
sified and  echoed  by  rocks  and  caves,  till 
it  emulates  the  thunder.  So  a  thought- 
less, unkind  word  in  passing  from  mouth  to 
mouth  receives  progressive  exaggerations, 
and,  snowball-like,  increases  as  it  rolls. 
Gossip-mongers  are  persons  who  tear  the 
bandages  from  social  wounds,  and  prevent 
their  healing ;  they  are  persons  who  bring 
flint  and  steel,  and  acid  and  alkali  together, 
and  are  justly  chargeable  with  all  the  fire 


and  ebullition.  A  whisper- word  of  slander 
is  like  that  fox  with  a  fireVjrand  tied  to  its 
tail  that  Samson  sent  among  the  standing 
corn  of  the  Philistines.  It  brings  destruc- 
tion into  wide  areas  of  peace  and  love. 
Evil-speaking  is  like  a  freezing  wind,  that 
seals  up  the  sparkling  waters  and  tender 
juices  of  flowers,  and  binds  up  the  hearts  of 
men  in  uncharitableness  and  bitterness  of 
spirit,  as  the  earth  is  bound  up  in  the  grip 
of  winter,  when 

"  The  bitter  blast  of  north  and  east 
Makes  daggers  at  the  sharpened  eaves." 

Ver.  6.  The  "  Coicrse  of  Nature."— The 
Greek  word  translated  "  course  "  is  derived 
from  a  verb  signifying  "  to  run,"  and  accord- 
ing to  the  way  the  accent  is  placed,  it  is 
read  either  a  wheel  or  a  course.  In  the  verse 
the  former  sense  is  preferable,  as  expressing 
the  constant  recurrence  of  similar  events  in 
this  life ;  so  the  old  Greek  poet  (Anacreon) 
puts  it :  "  Like  a  chariot-wheel  our  life  rolls 
on."  And  Isidorus  writes,  *'  Time  like  a 
wheel  rolls  round  upon  itself."  But  the 
allusion  of  James  has  also  been  applied  to 
the  unceasing  succession  of  men  born  one 
after  another,  as  if  he  had  said,  "  The  tongue 
has  been  the  means  of  plaguing  our  ancestors ; 
it  still  plagues  us,  and  will  hereafter  plague 
our  descendants."  Plutarch  uses  the  simile, 
the  "stream  of  nature,"  referring  to  the  suc- 
cessive generations  of  men ;  and  Simplicius 
speaks  of  "the  unceasing  circle  of  nature, 
wherein  there  is  a  constant  production  of 
some  things  by  the  decay  of  others."  The 
best  critics  seem  to  consider  that  the  apostle 
has  mankind  in  view  in  this  clause  of  the 
verse. — Parkhurst. 

Ver.  8.  The  Tongue. — "  Some  men  have  a 
tongue  as  rough  as  a  cat's,  and  biting  as  an 
adder's."  "  The  tongue  was  intended  for  an 
organ  of  the  Divine  praise  ;  but  the  devil 
often  plays  upon  it,  and  then  it  sounds  like 
the  screech-owl."  "  Let  your  language  be 
restrained  within  its  proper  channels ;  if  a 
river  swells  over  its  bank,  it  leaves  only  dirt 
and  filthiness  behind."  "  The  evil-speaker 
or  whisperer  is  accuser,  witness,  judge,  and 
executioner  of  the  innocent."  "  In  the 
temple  at  Smyrna  there  were  looking-glasses 
which  represented  the  best  face  as  crooked 
and  ugly ;  so  is  every  false  tongue."  "  It  is 
a  fountain  both  of  bitter  waters  and  of 
pleasant ;  it  sends  forth  blessing  and  curs 
ing ;  it  praises  God  and  rails  at  men ;  it  is 
sometimes  set  on  fire,  and  then  it  puts  whole 
cities  in  combustion  ;  it  is  unruly,  and  no 
more  to  be  restrained  than  the  breath  of  the 
tempest ;  it  is  volatile  and  fugitive  ;  reason 
should  go  before  it,  and  when  it  does  not 

579 


CHAP.   III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


repentance  comes  after  it."  ♦*  There  are 
some  persons  so  full  of  nothings,  that,  like 
the  strait  sea  of  Pontus,  they  perpetually 
empty  themselves  by  their  mouths,  making 
every  company  or  single  person  they  fasten 
on  to  be  their  Propontis.''  "  The  talking 
man  makes  himself  artificially  deaf,  being 
like  a  man  in  the  steeple  when  the  bells 
ring."  "  Great  knowledge,  if  it  be  without 
vanity,  is  the  most  severe  bridle  of  the 
tongue.  For  so  have  I  heard  that  all  the 
noises  and  pratings  of  the  pool,  the  croaking 
of  frogs  and  toads,  is  hushed  and  appeased 
upon  the  instant  of  bringing  upon  them  the 
light  of  a  candle  or  torch.  Every  beam  of 
reason  and  ray  of  knowledge  checks  the 
dissolutions  of  the  tongue."  When  it  breaks 
out  in  trivialities  and  vanities,  these  "  are 
like  flies  and  gnats  upon  the  margin  of  a 
pool ;  they  do  not  sting  like  an  asp  or  bite 
deep  as  a  bear,  yet  they  can  vex  a  man  into 
a  fever  of  impatience,  and  make  him  in- 
capable of  rest  and  counsel." 

Ver.  10.  Eastern  Swearing  and  Offensive 
Language. — Oaths  may  be  classified  as  of 
two  kinds — in  one  the  name  of  God  is  used, 
in  the  other  that  of  some  other  object ;  in 
both  cases  for  the  same  purpose.  Though 
it  is  common  for  people  in  the  East  at  the 
present  day  to  use  the  name  of  God  in  their 
oaths,  yet  they  more  frequently  swear  by 
something  else — as  by  some  person  or  them- 
selves, or  some  part  of  themselves,  as  the 
head  or  hand,  or  by  some  animal  or  in- 
animate thing.  Nothing  is  more  common 
than  the  use  of  such  oaths.  They  not  only 
employ  them  to  confirm  what  they  say,  but 
to  add,  as  it  seems,  strength  to  their  expres- 
sions. (See  Matt.  xxvi.  74.)  But  beyond 
,  this  they  employ  them  with  no  purpose 
whatever — even  the  most  solemn  forms — in 
speaking  to  their  animals,  or  in  soliloquising, 
until,  to  those  who  can  understand  the  lan- 
guage they  speak,  nothing  is  more  wearisome 
or  painful.  They  use  them  in  all  companies, 
and  on  all  occasions — both  men  and  women, 
old  and  young.  There  seems  to  be  among 
them  an  utter  perversion  of  conscience  as  to 
the  moral  intent  or  obligation  of  an  oath. 
Aside  from  the  positive  sin  of  thus  employing 
an  oath,  this  deadness  of  conscience  is  the  worst 
feature,  as  it  is  one  of  the  worst  results  of  this 
thoughtlessly  sinful  practice.  Surely  the  com- 
mand of  the  Saviour  to  "  swear  not  at  all"  has 
unusual  pertinence  and  force  in  the  presence 
of  a  custom  at  once  so  common  and  wicked. 
Again,  the  use  of  obscene  and  offensively 
bad  language  has  a  development  among  the 
Orientals  wholly  unknown  to  us.  This  also 
pervades  all  classes  in  the  community,  and 
is  employed  by  both  sexes.  I  was  informed 
by  persons  long  resident  in  the  East  that 
the  use  of  obscene,  vile  language  passes 
any  ordinary  conception  among  any  cooler- 
blooded  Western  people.     I  am  sure  I  have 

580 


never  heard  such  torrents  of  verbal  abuse 
anywhere  else  as  in  some  parts  of  Egypt  or 
Turkey  or  Palestine.  We  were  pursued  with 
the  vilest  epithets,  for  example,  at  Hebron, 
or  in  the  streets  of  Shechem,  or  of  Endor,  or 
in  some  of  the  villages  in  Bashan,  east  of 
the  Jordan.  In  speaking  to  each  other, 
especially  when  angry,  they  not  only  heap 
abuse  on  one  another,  but  on  every  member 
of  their  respective  families — wife,  children, 
father,  mother,  living  or  dead,  present,  past, 
and  to  come ;  and  beyond  this  on  their  reli- 
gion, in  terms  often  so  aggravatingly  bad  as 
that  even  a  dragoman  will  refuse  to  repeat 
it.  It  is  in  reference  to  this  almost  universal 
practice  the  Saviour  speaks  when  He  says  : 
"  Whosoever  shall  say  to  his  brother  Raca, 
shall  be  in  danger  of  the  council ;  but  who- 
soever shall  say,  Thou  fool,  shall  be  in  danger 
of  hell  fire  "  (Matt.  v.  22). 

Ver.  12.  Grafting  the  Olive  on  the  Fig  Tree. 
— The  metaphor  here  used  is  one  which  the 
Koman  gardeners,  who  were  fond  of  horti- 
cultural paradoxes,  endeavoured  to  realise, 
and,  according  to  an  old  naturalist,  Columella 
was  the  first  who  attempted  to  unite  by 
inoculation  or  inarching  trees  of  so  opposite 
a  character  as  the  fig  and  olive.  The  sub- 
joined statement  by  Pliny  is  interesting  as 
bearing  upon  this  subject :  "  After  that  the 
fig  tree  hath  gotten  some  strength,  and  is 
grown  to  a  sufficient  highness  to  bear  a 
graft,  the  branch  or  bough  of  the  olive  being 
well  cleansed  and  made  neat,  and  the  head 
end  thereof  thwited  {sic)  and  shaped  sharp, 
howbeit  not  yet  cut  from  the  mother  stock, 
must  be  set  fast  in  the  shank  of  the  fig  tree, 
where  it  must  be  kept  well  and  surely  tied 
with  bands.  For  the  space  of  three  years  it 
is  suffered  to  grow  indifferently  between  two 
mothers,  or  rather,  by  the  means  thereof 
two  mother  stocks  are  grown  and  united 
together;  but  in  the  fourth  year  it  is  cut 
wholly  from  the  own  mother,  and  is  become 
altogether  an  adopted  child  to  the  fig  tree 
wherein  it  is  incorporate.  A  pretty  device,  I 
assure  you,  to  make  a  fig  tree  bear  olives, 
the  secret  whereof  is  not  known  to  every 
man"  {Pliny,  lib.  xvii.,  cap.  19).— IT.  R.  C. 

Ver.  13.  The  Pomer  of  Temptation  lessens 
as  Life  advances. — The  precious  sago-palm, 
when  young  and  tender,  is  covered  with 
strong  sharp  thorns,  which  effectually  guard 
it  from  injury  by  wild  animals.  As  soon, 
however,  as  the  tree,  shooting  on  high,  grows 
strong,  and  is  no  longer  a  tempting  morsel 
to  wild  hogs  and  other  animals,  the  thorns 
fall  off.  It  is  very  often  thus  with  young 
Christians.  They  frequently  display  an 
asperity  and  sharpness  in  their  treatment 
of  the  ungodly  that  answers  something  in 
their  case  to  the  thorns  of  the  sago-palm. 
There  is  a  use  in  this.  They  are  inexperienced 
in  the  Christian  life,  and  especially  are  liable 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES.  chap.  iv. 


by  reason  of  their  youth  to  be  snared  and  by  pride  with  advancing  years  has  been 
enticed  by  the  world's  blandishments.  This  tutored  to  "  wise  meekness  "  by  long  and 
very  roughness  and  angularity  is  a  great  invaluable  discipline.  Now  that  they  are 
preservative  in  erecting  around  them,  as  it  not  in  so  much  danger  from  the  world  as 
were,  a  bristling  fence,  and  cutting  them  ofE  formerly  the  thorns  fall  off.  There  is  a 
from  contact  with  dangerous  foes.  But  as  similar  train  of  thought  to  be  met  with  in 
faith  and  love  grow,  as  experience  is  gained,  tiie  poet  Southey's  verses  on  the  "  Holly." 
and  they  become  established  in  grace,  their  This  tree  somewhat  resembles  the  sago-palm 
life,  tliough  not  a  whit  less  faithful,  becomes  in  that  its  lower  leaves  only  are  armed  with 
less  severe  and  forbidding.  The  power  of  thorns,  while  those  which  rise  out  of  reach 
many  temptations  which  especially  beset  the  are  quite  smooth.  Unlike  our  palm,  how- 
young  as  the  pilgrim's  path  is  further  pur-  ever,  these  thorns  on  the  leaves  near  the 
sued  becomes  necessarily  lessened  with  the  ground  never  fall  off  with  age,  but  continue 
lessening  heat  of  the  calmer  pulse  of  age.  to  the  \2i^t.— James  Neil,  M.A. 
The  head  that  once  may  have  been  turned 


CHAPTER  IV. 
THE    LOWER    AND    THE    HIGHER    LIFE. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Lusts. — Pleasures,  but  viewed  on  their  evil  side.  Desires  that  are  ill  regulated. 
Compare  1  Pet.  ii.  11 ;  Rom.  vii.  23.  Evidently  James  was  much  distressed  by  the  strife 
of  parties,  and  the  personal  quarrellings,  in  the  Jewish  communities.  Disputing  was  a 
besetting  sin  of  the  Jewish  race.  Members. — Organs  of  sense  and  action.  "  The  conflict 
within,  in  which  the  evil  passion  gets  the  mastery,  causes  a  predisposition  to  contention, 
and  produces  aggression  on  the  well-being  and  property  of  others  "  (  Webster'). 

Ver.  2.  Desire  to  have. — Covet.  Ask  not. — They  grasped  at  things  themselves,  and  did 
not  wait  on  God  for  them,  or  ask  His  guidance  and  help  in  the  endeavour  to  obtain  them. 

Ver.  3.  Consume  it. — "  Spend  it  in  the  midst  of  your  [selfish]  pleasures."  To  pray  for 
that  which  is  but  to  satisfy  our  lower,  baser  nature  can  never  be  CJiristia7i  prayer. 

Ver.  4. — Omit  the  word  "adulterers."  The  term  is  probably  used  metaphorically,  to 
describe  idolatry  and  apostasy  from  the  worship  of  Jehovah.  But  sins  of  sensuality  in  the 
Christian  Church  caused  much  anxiety  to  the  apostles.  Conipare  Matt.  xii.  39.  Plmuptre 
explains  the  feminine  form  thus,  "  In  this  subserviency  to  pleasures  8t.  James  sees  that 
which,  though  united  with  crimes  of  violence,  is  yet  essentially  effeminate."  Will  be. — 
Willeth  to  be ;  wisheth  to  be.     Is  the  enemy. — "  Makes  himself  the." 

Ver.  5. — The  precise  rendering  is  doubtful.  There  is  no  passage  either  in  the  Canonical 
or  Apocryphal  Scriptures  that  is  here  referred  to.  The  Revised  Version  gives  in  the  text, 
*'  Doth  the  spirit  which  He  made  to  dwell  in  us  long  unto  envying  ?  But  He  giveth  more 
grace."  And  in  the  margin  two  renderings :  "  The  spirit  which  He  made  to  dwell  in 
us  He  yearneth  for  even  unto  jealousy "  ;  "  That  spirit  which  He  made  to  dwell  in  us 
yearneth  for  lis  even  unto  jealous  envy."  In  Ellicott's  Commentary  Punchard  gives 
two  possible  renderings  :  "  Suppose  ye  that  the  Scripture  saith  in  vain,  The  [Holy]  Spirit 
that  dwelleth  in  us  jealously  regards  us  as  His  own  ? "  "  Suppose  ye  that  the  Scripture 
speaketh  in  vain?  Doth  the  Spirit,  which  took  up  His  abode  in  you,  lust  to  envy?" 
Fausset  suggests,  "  Does  the  [Holy]  Spirit  that  God  hath  placed  in  us  lust  to  [towards] 
envy?"  (viz.  as  ye  do  in  your  worldly  "wars  and  fightings").  -4.//b;'<^  makes  "to  envy" 
mean  "jealously":  "The  Spirit  jealously  desires  us  for  His  own."  Plumptre  suggests, 
"  The  Spirit  which  He  implanted  yearns  tenderly  over  us."  Enviously  may  be  used  in  a  good 
sense.  "  The  strongest  human  affection  shows  itself  in  a  jealousy  which  is  scarcely 
distinguishable  from  envy.  We  grudge  the  transfer  to  another  of  the  affection  which  we 
claim  as  ours." 

Ver.  6.  Giveth  more  grace. — The  ordered  thought  of  this  and  the  previous  verse  has  been 
given  thus  :  "  God  loves  us  with  a  feeling  analogous  to  the  strongest  form  of  jealousy,  or 
even  envy,  but  that  jealousy  does  not  lead  Him, as  it  leads  men,  to  be  grudging  in  His  gifts  ; 
rather  does  He  bestow,  as  its  result,  a  greater  measure  of  His  grace  than  before,  or  than 
He  would  do,  were  His  attitude  towards  us  one  of  strict  unimpassioned  justice."  R.V. 
margin,  "  greater,"  i.e.  than  if  He  did  not  desire  us  jealously. 

Ver,  7.  The  devil. — This  is  one  of  the  texts  used  as  proof  of  the  personality  of  the  devil. 
Illustrate  by  Matt.  iv.  1-11. 

581 


CHAP.  IV.  tlOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


Ver.  10.  Lift  you  up.— Exalt  (Isa.  Ivii.  15). 

Ver.  11.  Speak  not  evil.— Backbite  (Rom.  i.  30 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  20).  Omit  "and"  before 
"  judgeth." 

Ver.  12. — Read,  "  There  is  one  lawgiver  and  judge." 

Ver.  13.  Such  a  city. — "  This  city  "  ;  the  one  the  speaker  is  supposed  to  have  in  mind. 

Ver.  14.  What  shall  be. — "  What  your  life  shall  be  on  the  morrow."  Vanisheth  away. — 
Alford,  "vanisheth  as  it  appeared." 

Ver.  15.  Ought  to  say. — Lit.  "  instead  of  saying.'' 

Ver.  16.  Boastings. — Same  word  as  translated  "pride  of  life"  in  1  John  ii.  16.  The 
undue  self-confidence  of  the  ungodly.  "  Ye  glory  in  your  braggings."  Aristotle  defines 
the  term  as  indicating  the  character  of  the  man  who  lays  claim  to  what  will  bring  him 
credit,  when  the  claim  is  altogether  false  or  grossly  exaggerated. 

Ver.  17.  Doeth  it  not. — "  Inconsistency  is  of  the  very  essence  of  sin."  "  Supposing  him 
not  to  do  it."  Illustrate  by  Pollok's  figure  of  the  sentence  ever  in  the  vision  of  lost  souls — 
"  Ye  knew  your  duty,  and  ye  did  it  not." 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—4. 

The  Secret  Causes  of  Social  Contentions. — St.  James  closes  the  previous  chapter 
with  a  description  of  the  characteristic  features  of  practical  religious  wisdom, 
the  spirit  which  alone  can  enable  a  man  to  shape  his  conduct  and  order  his 
relationships  aright.  It  is  "  first  pure,  then  peaceable,  gentle,  easy  to  be 
intreated."  And  he  adds  that  "  the  fruit  of  righteousness  is  sown  in  peace  for 
them  that  make  peace."  But  when  he  turns  from  things  as  they  should  be  to 
things  as  they  are,  he  becomes  sadly  distressed  and  anxious.  Contentions, 
heart-burnings,  enmities,  sectarian  rivalries,  distinguished  the  Hebrew  Chris- 
tian communities  to  whom  he  wrote.  Men  were  struggling  for  pre-eminence  as 
teachers,  each  with  his  doctrine  and  interpretation.  Thence  came  wranglings 
and  debates,  in  which  men  easily  lost  their  temper  and  self-control.  St.  James 
is  very  severe  on  the  wranglers,  intimating  that  their  spirit  was  unworthy  of 
regenerate  persons.  They  could  be  thinking  only  of  gratifying  their  lower 
natures.  By  "  wars  "  here  we  are  not  to  understand  the  conflicts  of  nations, 
but  protracted,  violent,  widespread,  social  contentions  and  disputes  ;  the  conflicts 
caused  by  sectarian  rivalries  and  disputatious  characters.  We  can  form  some 
idea  of  the  condition  of  the  Hebrew  Christian  Churches  by  remembering  what 
commotions  were  made  in  the  Churches  St.  Paul  founded  by  the  visits  of  the 
bigoted  Jewish  teachers.  The  element  of  contention  is  one  in  which  the 
Christian  spirit  cannot  flourish  ;  and  the  mischief  of  it  may  clearly  be  seen  in 
the  roots  out  of  which  it  usually  springs,  and  by  which  it  is  sustained.  Accord- 
ing to  St.  James,  the  secret  causes  of  failing  to  gain  and  keep  the  spirit  of  peace 
in  Christian  communities  are  three:  (1)  selfish  desires;  (2)  selfish  efforts; 
(3)  selfish  prayers. 

I.  One  secret  of  contention  is  our  selfish  desires. — "  Whence  come  wars  and 
whence  come  fightings  among  you  ?  come  they  not  hence,  even  of  your  pleasures 
that  war  in  your  members  ?  "  The  Revised  Version  makes  a  useful  alteration 
in  putting  "pleasures"  in  place  of  "lusts,"  because  the  word  "lusts"  has 
come  to  have  almost  exclusive  reference  to  sensual  passions,  and  St.  James 
intended  to  include  all  forms  of  self -pleasing.  St.  Peter  writes  of  the  "  fleshly 
lusts  which  war  against  the  soul."  And  St.  Paul  saw  "  another  law  "  in  his 
members,  "  warring  against  the  law  of  his  mind,  and  bringing  him  into  captivity 
to  the  law  of  sin  which  was  in  his  members."  And  our  Divine  Lord  taught 
that  "  out  of  the  heart  come  forth  evil  thoughts,  murders,  adulteries,  fornica- 
tions, thefts,  false  v^dtness,  railings :  these  are  the  things  which  defile  the  man." 
It  is  not  wrong  to  have  desires.  It  is  wrong  not  to  have  them  in  proper  control. 
Man  is  a  being  of  desires.  In  the  restlessness  of  his  wantings  lies  the  possibility 
of  his  improvements.     But  we  need  to  distinguish  carefully  between  the  natura^l 

582 


HOMtLETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES.  chap.  iv. 


desires  which,  when  duly  met,  bring  to  men  healthy,  satisfying,  and  educating 
pleasures,  and  those  unnatural,  morbid,  exaggerated  desires  which  follow  upon 
men's  loss  of  self-restraint  through  giving  way  to  self- willedn ess  and  sin.  But 
St.  James  only  hints  at  these  general  considerations.  In  relation  to  quarrel - 
lings,  contentions,  and  wars,  he  points  out  that  it  is  not  so  much  the  unre- 
strainedness  of  the  desires,  as  the  selfishness  of  the  desires,  that  is  the  root  and 
cause  of  evil.  The  very  essence  of  Christianity  is  seen  in  its  Founder,  who 
never,  in  any  sense,  got,  or  tried  to  get,  anything  for  Himself  :  who  "was  rich, 
yet  for  our  sakes  became  poor  "  ;  who  "  gave  His  life  a  ransom  for  us  "  ;  "  who 
thought  it  not  a  thing  to  be  held  fast,  the  being  equal  with  God ;  but  emptied 
Himself,  and  made  Himself  of  no  reputation,  that  He  might  serve  and  save 
others."  Or  to  express  it  in  the  forms  of  our  text,  His  desires  were  wholly 
unselfish,  and  so  never  did  cause  contentions,  and  never  could.  No  matter 
where  you  may  find  disputings  and  conflicts — in  families,  businesses,  society, 
churches,  or  nations — you  will  almost  always  discover  that  somebody  wants 
something  altogether  for  himself,  and  persists  in  pressing  his  want  against  the 
interests  of  everybody  else.  That  spirit  may  be  met  and  rebuked  from  the 
merely  moral  and  social  standpoints ;  but  we  meet  and  rebuke  it  from 
the  Christian  standpoint.  It  is  essentially  un-Christian — altogether  unworthy 
of  any  one  who  bears  the  Christ-name.  It  is  well,  however,  for  us  to  clearly 
understand  that  becoming  a  Christian  never  crushes  down  a  man's  desires, 
unless  they  are  postively  wrong.  It  turns  them  into  a  new  direction,  but  keeps, 
and  even  augments,  their  force.  This  consideration  comes  in  to  tone  all  personal 
wishes — "  Will  my  gaining  these  things  Hmit  or  hinder  or  injure  any  one  else  ? 
It  is  more  important  that  others  should  be  helped  and  cheered  and  blessed 
than  that  I  should  be."  When  that  unselfish  spirit  is  upon  all  our  longings  and 
desires,  it  is  absolutely  certain  that  we  shall  not  be  in  any  sphere  of  fife  the 
cause  of  contention  and  conflict.  When  even  our  natural  and  proper  desires, 
even  for  personal  pleasure,  are  put  into  the  holy  restraints  of  a  Christ- like 
unselfishness,  we  become  peacemakers  wherever  we  go.  Or  as  St.  James  puts 
it,  so  long  as  there  is  a  war  of  desires  within  us,  we  shall  be  a  cause  of  war  in 
the  spheres  around  us.  Subdue  the  warfare  within  us,  bring  the  desires  into 
the  obedience  of  Christ,  tone  them  with  the  spirit  of  Christ,  and  they  may  not 
only  shut  the  doors  of  the  temple  of  Janus,  they  may  wall  them  up  for  ever. 
The  world's  peace  will  have  come. 

II.  Another  secret  of  contention  is  our  selfish  efforts. — Not  only  the  wants 
are  selfish,  but  there  is  a  wrong  and  self- trusting  character  about  the  ways 
in  which  we  seek  to  supply  the  wants.  There  is  a  self-reliant  pushing  and 
striving  and  overriding  or  driving  aside  of  others  which  is  a  most  fruitful 
source  of  bickerings'and  disputes.  When  a  man  wants  something,  means  to  get 
it  by  his  own  efforts,  and  to  master  everybody  and  everything  that  stands  in 
his  way,  he  is  sure  to  make  commotion  and  heart-burning  wherever  he  goes. 
St.  James  expresses  this  selfish  effort  of  men  to  force  through  their  inordinate, 
unrestrained,  and  self-interested  desires  in  very  strong  language.  "  Ye  lust, 
and  have  not :  ye  kill,  and  covet  [are  jealous],  and  cannot  obtain  :  ye  fight  and 
war ;  ye  have  not,  because  ye  ask  not."  "  When  desire  becomes  the  master- 
passion  of  a  man's  soul,  it  hurries  him  on  to  crimes  from  which  he  would  at 
first  have  shrunk,"  as  may  be  illustrated  in  the  cases  of  David,  Judas  Iscariot, 
and  Ananias  with  Sapphira.  In  saying,  "  Ye  kill,"  St.  James  may  mean  only, 
"  Ye  would  even  go  so  far  as  that  to  gain  your  ends."  And  we  can  but  be 
reminded  how  true  it  is  that  in  the  zeal  of  the  sectarian  bigot  and  the  heresy- 
monger  (persons  whom  St.  James  has  in  mind)  reputations  have  often  been 
killed,  lives  embittered,  and  worse  than  death  endured.  Dean  PluTnptre  says, 
"  There  seems,  at  first,  something  almost  incredible  in  the  thought,  that  the 

583 


CHAP.  IV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JAMES. 


believers  to  whom  St.  James  wrote  could  be  guilty  of  such  crimes ;  but  Jewish 
society  was  at  that  time  rife  with  atrocities  of  like  nature,  and  men,  nominally 
disciples  of  Christ,  might  then,  as  in  later  times,  sink  to  its  level."  According 
to  tradition,  St.  James  himself  fell  a  victim  to  the  passions  he  thus  assails, 
probably  at  the  hands  of  a  zealot  mob.  Readers  of  Josephus  are  familiar  with 
the  bands  of  zealots  and  sicarii,  who  were  prominent  in  the  tumults  preceding 
the  final  siege  of  Jerusalem.  Endeavouring  to  gain  the  application  of  St. 
James's  teaching  to  those  who  live  in  quieter  times,  yet  are  in  peril  of  the  same 
temptations,  we  may  see  that  he  reproves  our  striving  to  get  what  we  want  in 
our  own  self-strength,  without  any  reference  of  the  matter  to  God,  and  without 
dependence  for  help  upon  God.  He  pictures  the  man  of  unrestrained  desires 
pushing  about,  and  pushing  other  people  about,  but  failing  to  gain  what  he 
wants.  "  Ye  have  not,  because  ye  ask  not."  Striving  as  earnest  endeavour 
is  quite  right.  We  ought  to  do  what  we  do  "  with  both  hands  earnestly." 
But  it  must  not  be  self-reliant  striving,  if  we  mean  it  to  be  Christian.  It  must 
be  energy,  enterprise,  perseverance,  resoluteness  after  prayer,  and  in  the  spirit 
of  prayer,  which  keeps  us  dependent  on  God,  and  within  His  holy  restrainings 
and  inspirings. 

III.  Yet  another  secret  of  contention  is  our  selfish  prayers. — "  Ye  ask,  and 
receive  not,  because  ye  ask  amiss,  that  ye  may  spend  it  in  your  pleasures." 
A  self-centred  purpose  spoils  prayer.  We  may  ask  for  things  that  we  need, 
but  we  may  not  ask  for  the  supply  of  our  mere  self-indulgences.  The  desire 
must  be  right,  and  in  right  restraint,  if  we  present  it  in  prayer  at  all.  The 
desire  must  be  right  in  a  wide  and  not  in  a  narrow,  selfish  sense,  if  God  is  to 
answer  it  at  all. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES   AND   SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.   1.   The   Soldiers  of  the  DeviVs  its    continued    existence.      The   earth 

Army. — The    desires   of   various   sorts  holds  not  a  more  abandoned  monster 

of  pleasures  are,   like  soldiers  of  the  than  the  sovereign  who,  entrusted  with 

devil's  army,   posted  and  picketed  all  the  dearest  interests  of  a  people,  com- 

over  us,  in  the  hope  of  winning  our  mits  them  to  the  dreadful  hazards  of 

members,  and  so  ourselves,  back  to  his  war,  that  he  may  extend  his  prostituted 

allegiance,   which  we  have  renounced  power,    and    fill    the    earth    with    his 

in  our  baptism. — Bishop  Moherly.  worthless  name.     Therefore  we  should 

teach  true  sentiments  as  to  the  honour 

The  Sources  of  War. — One  great  of  kings  and  the  glory  of  nations. — 
source  of  war  is  the  love  of  excitement,  W.  E.  Channing,  D.I). 
of  emotion,  of  strong  interests.  Illus- 
trate from  ilove  of  the  chase.  Another  The  Christian  View  of  Public  War. — 
is  the  passion  for  superiority,  for  The  text  does  not  directly  refer  to 
triumph,  for  power.  There  is  a  pre-  national  wars,  but  to  the  conflicts  and 
dominance  of  this  passion  in  rulers.  contentions  that  arise  among  Chris- 
Another  ts  admiration  of  the  brilliant  tians  and  in  Christian  Churches.  Yet 
qualities  displayed  in  war.  This  pre-  it  expresses  a  principle  whiclf is  operat- 
vents  our  receiving  a  due  impression  ing  in  every  sphere — the  small  spheres 
of  its  crimes  and  miseries.  Another  of  the  individual,  the  family,  the 
is  false  patriotism.  And  another  is  Church,  and  the  larger  sphere  of  nations, 
the  impressions  we  receive  in  early  life.  War  can  never  on  both  ,sides  be  right. 
The  community  possesses  indisputable  In  the  terrible  scenes  of  war  we  may 
right  to  resort  co  war  of  defence,  when  see  the  workings  of  human  lust,  and 
all  other  means  have  failed  for  securing  thereby  learn  to  trace  aright  the  evil 

584 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JAMES. 


CHAP.    IV. 


workings  of  lust  everywhere.  War 
usually  is  the  expression  of  one  man's 
sin.  It  is  the  truly  awful  result  of 
some  human  lust,  some  self-pleasing, 
some  self- aggrandisement.  A  fuller 
discernment  of  the  causes  out  of  which 
all  wars  and  fightings  spring  prepares 
the  way  for  the  working  of  the  Chris- 
tian spirit,  which,  dethroning  lust,  and 
enthroning  God,  and  in  Him  goodness, 
moral  excellence,  and  brotherhood, 
hastens  on  the  time  when  nations  shall 
learn  war  no  more.  It  is  important 
that  there  should  be  given  to  men 
vivid,  forcible  illustrations  of  the  fear- 
ful majesty  of  power  lying  in  human 
sin.  God  writes  the  evil  of  sin  in 
famine,  earthquake,  disease,  and  death. 
But  it  seems  as  though  man  would  not 
read  God's  writing  ;  so  he  writes  for 
himself  in  soldiers'  blood,  and  widows' 
wail,  and  orphans'  tear,  and  wasted 
lands,  and  rifled  treasuries,  and  ruined 
commerce,  and  trodden  harvests,  and 
broken  hearts,  the  evil  of  sin.  Let 
those  who  watch  man  writing  read 
correctly,  and  learn  the  abominableness 
of  human  lust  and  sin,  and  hail  the 
coming  of  Him  who  kills  sin  at  its 
root — kills  the  lust — and  kills  with  it 
every  leaf  and  flower  and  fruit  of  war 
— social,  ecclesiastical,  national — and 
reigns  at  last  as  *'  Prince  of  peace." 

Vers.  1,  2.  The  Boot-cause  of  War. — 
St.  James  wrote  his  epistle  during  those 
years  of  national  decline  and  social 
anarchy  that  immediately  preceded  the 
final  destruction  of  the  Holy  City. 
There  was  much  sectarian  strife,  bitter 
party  feeling,  and  there  was  even  mur- 
derous violence,  and  the  spirit  of  the 
times  seems  to  have  seriously  affected 
the  Christian  communities.  Internal 
conflicts  and  sectarian  rivalries  seri- 
ously threatened  the  integrity  of  the 
Jewish  nation.  Self-seeking  and  per- 
sonal strife  were  imperilling  the 
Christian  Churches.  The  first  bishop 
of  Jerusalem  puts  his  hand  to  the  work 
of  staying  this  strife.  He  arrests  the 
men  that  love  and  seek  war,  and  bids 
them  think — bids  them  see  the  essential 
evil  of  war — all  kinds  of  war — in  the 


vileness  of  the  root  out  of  which  it  all 
springs.  He  lifts  off  and  puts  away 
at  once  all  the  false  glamour  of  war ; 
he  does  not  even  stop  to  impress  his 
readers  with  details  of  the  shuddering 
horrors  of  battle-fields  and  soldiers' 
hospitals  ;  he  goes  right  to  the  very 
heart  of  the  matter ;  compels  us  to  see 
the  root-wrong,  the  lusting,  the  covet- 
ing, out  of  which  all  contention,  all 
war,  comes.  A  great  modern  writer 
says  :  *'  That  man,  born  of  woman, 
bound  by  ties  of  brotherhood  to  man, 
and  commanded  by  an  inward  law  and 
the  voice  of  God  to  love  and  to  do 
good,  should,  through  selfishness,  pride, 
revenge,  inflict  these  agonies,  shed 
these  torrents  of  blood — here  is  an  evil 
which  combines  with  exquisite  suffer- 
ing, fiendish  guilt.  All  other  evils 
fade  before  it." 

I.  The  root-principle  of  war  stated. 
— It  is  lusting.  It  is  covetousness. 
It  is  the  desire — the  violent,  unre- 
strained desire — to  have  for  self.  It 
is  the  exclusion  of  all  love  for,  all 
thought  of,  or  care  concerning,  others. 
It  is  the  determination  to  get,  whoever 
may  have  to  suffer  through  our  getting  ; 
to  push  roughly  aside  all  who  stand  in 
the  way  of  our  acquisition.  It  is  the 
wilful  forgetfulness  that  other  people 
have  their  rights  as  well  as  we.  Surely 
all  this  spirit  is  of  the  earth,  earthy. 
It  is  the  foul  blossoming  of  human 
corruption.  All  such  lustings  are  of 
their  father  the  devil.  His  stamp  is 
on  them  all.  St.  James  strikes  right 
home,  past  all  men's  delusions  and 
excuses,  to  the  inmost  source  of  all 
contentions  and  bickerings  and  wars. 
He  is  true  if  his  principle  be  applied 
to  family  life.  What  broke  up  Isaac's 
home,  in  the  olden  days,  and  set 
brothers  at  enmity,  but  Jacob's  desire 
to  have  for  self  ?  What  broke  up 
David's  family  life  but  the  envy  of  his 
sons  ?  Try  all  cases  of  family  warfare 
that  have  come  within  your  observa- 
tion. Down  at  the  bottom  there  is 
always  found  to  lie  somebody's  grasping 
for  self.  He  is  true  if  his  principle 
be  applied  to  Church  life.  These  bad 
contentions     that    distress     Churches 

585 


CHAP.   IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES. 


always  follow  upon  some  one's  pressing 
his  own  will,  his  own  interests,  his  own 
party,  before  the  general  well-being. 
Nobody  ever  fights  in  a  Christian 
Church  who  really  wants  to  obtain  the 
greatest  good  for  the  whole.  It  is 
always  a  class,  a  section,  or  an  indi- 
vidual, seeking  its  own  things.  What 
makes  business  life  so  full  of  struggle 
in  our  day?  The  same  thing — the 
desire  to  have.  Aggravation  at  the 
prosperity  of  another,  if  in  any  sense 
it  can  be  supposed  to  cross  and  check 
our  own. 

II.  The  root-principle  of  war  is 
absolutely  opposed  to  the  root-prin- 
ciple of  Christianity. — The  one  prin- 
ciple is — Lusting  to  possess ;  the 
other  principle  is — Longing  to  give 
away.  And  you  can  never  make  these 
two  principles  dwell  together  in  peace. 
The  one  is — Get  for  self,  no  matter 
w^ho  goes  down  through  the  getting  ; 
the  other  is — "  Look  not  every  man 
on  his  own  things,  but  every  man  also 
on  the  things  of  others."  Which  is 
the  corrupt  and  devilish  principle  ? 
Which  is  radiant  with  the  sweet  light 
of  God,  and  Christ,  and  heaven,  and 
peace  ?  The  unselfish,  Christ-like  care 
for  others  carries  its  healing  balm,  its 
peace- preserving  virtues,  into  every 
family,  stilling  all  tumult,  knitting 
heart  to  heart,  and  life  to  life,  until 
the  earth-home  bears  a  suggestion  of 
the  many-mansioned  home  above, 
where  all  is  peace,  because  each  serves 
the  other.  It  is  the  care  for  the 
whole  that  settles  the  stormy  strife  of 
Churches,  and  ensures  that  atmosphere 
of  peace  in  which  alone  noble  Christian 
work  can  ever  be  done. 

Yer.  3.  Our  Failures  in  Prayer. — 
E/.V.  "  Ye  ask,  and  receive  not,  be- 
cause ye  ask  amiss,  that  ye  may  spend 
it  in  your  pleasures."  St.  James  gives, 
sharply  and  suggestively,  the  explana- 
tion of  much  that  is  lacking  in  Chris- 
tian life.  We  fail  to  obtain  so  many 
things  that  we  ask  for.  We  fret  over 
the  lack ;  but  we  often  fail  to  see  the 
reasons  for  the  lack,  and  fail  to  see 
that  the  reasons  may  lie  altogether  in 

586 


ourselves.  Even  when  we  do  not  err 
by  failing  to  ask,  we  may  err,  and 
make  such  answer  as  we  wish  to 
obtain  impossible,  by  asking  amiss. 
What  then  may  possibly  be  wrong 
about  even  our  Christian  prayers, 
which  may  suffice  to  explain  our 
failure  to  receive  Divine  benedictions  ? 
L  They  are  wrong  if  offered  in  the 
mere  routine  of  habit.  We  have  prayed 
morning  and  night  ever  since  we 
prayed  at  our  mother's  knee,  and 
we  may  have  come  to  utter  a  mere 
formula  ;  to  go  through  a  routine  of 
words  which  mean  nothing  in  parti- 
cular, and  which  there  is  no  particular 
reason  for  God  to  take  notice  of.  The 
daily  prayer  habit  is  not  indeed  with- 
out a  value  of  its  own  ;  but  it  has  no 
precise  value  as  request  that  calls  for 
Divine  attention.  All  it  wants,  and 
all  it  asks,  from  God  is  just  a  smile  as 
He  passes.  When  daily  prayer  is  at 
its  best,  it  is  little  more  than  a  daily 
committing  of  ourselves  to  the  Divine 
keeping  and  care.  But  if  it  ceased  to 
be  a  mere  routine  of  habit,  if  it  came 
to  be  a  reality  of  supplication  and 
intercession,  might  we  not  get  free  of 
one  form  of  "asking  amiss,"  and  find 
that,  asking  aright,  we  received,  and 
life  became  altogether  fuller  of  precise 
daily  Divine  benedictions  ?  2.  They  are 
wrong  if  offered  insincerely.  Prayers 
are  always  made  worthless  and  in- 
effective, when  there  is  self-conscious- 
ness in  them  ;  when  our  real  aim  is 
to  make  a  show  of  our  piety,  or  to 
be  seen  of  men.  Our  Lord  severely 
reproved  all  prayer  that  had  in  it  the 
characteristic  Pharisaic  taint.  When 
a  man  prays  in  order  to  show  his  piety, 
that  is  what  God  hears  him  pray,  and 
not  the  things  he  seems  to  ask  for; 
and  the  ansAver  to  his  prayer  is  only 
this — praise  and  reward  for  his  show 
of  piety ;  and  God  never  can  give  that, 
so  the  insincere  man  "  asks  and  receives 
not,  because  he  asks  amiss."  Beware 
then  of  all  "  beautiful  prayers " ! 
Beware  of  your  own  "  beautiful 
prayers " ;  for  they  only  mean  that 
you  want  God  to  praise  you,  and  it 
would  be  no  blessing  to  you  if  He  did. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP.   IV. 


Beware  of  other  people's  beautiful 
prayers ;  for  they  only  mean  that  they 
want  you  and  God  together  to  praise 
and  admire  them.  And  they  who  pray 
them,  and  you  who  hear  them,  are 
best  blessed  when,  asking  in  that  style, 
you  i-eceive  not.  3.  They  are  wrong 
if  offered  conventionally.  This  is  very 
different  from  insincerely.  There  is 
grave  danger  of  our  asking  for  things 
so  often  that  we  cease  to  put  any  mind 
into  the  asking.  They  become  the 
proper  things  to  say,  so  they  are  said, 
but  have  no  practical  inspiring  power 
in  them ;  they  have  become  no  more 
than  pious  sentiments  conventionally 
uttered.  Mark  Guy  Pearse,  in  his 
Davbl  Qitorm^  puts  this  peril  of  our 
praying  in  such  a  crisp  and  suggestive 
way,  that  the  passage  may  be  given 
by  way  of  illustration.  Quaint  Dan'l 
Quorm  is  represented  as  saying  :  "I 
happened  once  to  be  stayin'  with  a 
gentleman — a  long  way  from  here — 
a  very  religious  kind  of  a  man  he  was, 
and  in  the  mornin'  he  began  the  day 
with  a  long  family  prayer  that  we 
might  be  kep'  from  sin,  and  might 
have  a  Christ- like  spirit,  and  the  '  mind 
that  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus,'  and 
that  we  might  have  the  love  of  God 
shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  given  unto  us.  A  beautiful 
prayer  it  was,  and  thinks  I,  What  a 
good  kind  of  man  you  must  be  !  But 
about  an  hour  after  I  happened  to  be 
comin'  along  the  farm,  and  I  heard 
him  hollerin',  and  scoldin',  and  goin' 
on,  findin'  fault  with  everybody  and 
everythin'.  And  when  I  came  into 
the  house  with  'en  he  began  again. 
Nothing  was  right,  and  he  was  so 
impatient  and  so  quick-tempered. 
*  'Tis  very  provokin'  to  be  annoyed  in 
this  way,  Dan'l.  I  don't  know  what 
servants  .in  these  days  be  good  for  but 
to  worry  and  vex  one,  with  their  idle, 
slovenly  ways,'  I  didn't  say  no- 
thing for  a  minute  or  two.  And  then 
I  says,  *  You  must  be  very  much 
disappointed,  sir.'  '  How  so,  Dan'l  ? 
Disappointed  ?  '  *  I  thought  you  were 
expecting  to  receive  a  very  valuable 
present  this  morning,  sir,  and  T  see  it 


hasn't  come.'  *  Present,  Dan'l';  and 
he  scratched  his  head,  as  much  as  to 
say,  '  Whatever  can  the  man  be  talkin* 
about  ? '  *  I  certainly  heard  you 
speakin'  of  it,  sir,'  I  says,  quite  coolly. 
*  Heard  me  speak  of  a  valuable 
present.  Why,  Dan'l,  you  must  be 
dreamin'.  I've  never  thought  of  such 
a  thing.'  '  Perhaps  not,  sir ;  but 
you've  talked  about  it ;  and  I  hoped  it 
would  come  whilst  I  was  here,  for  I 
should  dearly  like  to  see  it.'  He  was 
gettin'  angry  with  me  now,  so  I 
thought  I  would  explain.  *  You  know, 
sir,  this  mornin'  you  prayed  for  a 
Christ-like  spirit,  and  the  mind  that 
was  in  Jesus,  and  the  love  of  God  shed 
abroad  in  your  heart.'  '  Oh,  that's 
what  you  mean,  is  it ! '  And  he  spoke 
as  if  that  weren't  anything  at  all. 
'  Now,  sir,  wouldn't  you  rather  be 
surprised  if  your  prayer  was  to  be 
answered  ?  If  you  were  to  feel  a  nice, 
gentle,  lovin'  kind  of  a  spirit  comin' 
down  upon  you,  all  patient  and  for- 
givin'  and  kind?  Why,  sir,  wouldn't 
you  come  to  be  quite  frightened  like ; 
and  you'd  come  in,  and  sit  down  all 
in  a  faint,  and  reckon  you  must  be 
a -goin'  to  die,  because  you  felt  so 
heavenly-minded  ? '  He  didn't  like 
it  very  much,"  said  Dan'l,  "but  I 
delivered  my  testimony,  and  learnt  a 
lesson  for  myself  too.  We  should  stare 
very  often  if  the  Lord  was  to  answer 
our  prayers."  4.  Our  prayers  are  also 
wrong  if  they  are  offered  with  ulterior 
aims.  St.  James  was  evidently  think- 
ing of  cases  in  which  men  asked  for 
what  was  very  necessary  in  the  en- 
deavour to  live  the  Christian  life,  meet 
the  Christian  obligations,  and  render 
the  Christian  service ;  but  they  did 
not  intend  to  use  what  they  might 
gain  in  answer  in  these  spheres.  They 
purposed  to  spend  it  on  their  own 
pleasures.  The  great  Heart-Searcher, 
to  whom  our  prayers  are  addressed, 
is  in  no  way  deceived,  and  makes  no 
mistakes.  We  cannot  have  from  Him 
what  we  intend  to  use  for  other  things 
than  those  we  ask  them  for.  The 
prodigal  son  asked  for  his  portion,  and 
the  father  supposed  he  was  going  to 

587 


CHAP.   IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


set  up  in  business  for  himself.  That 
prodigal  had  an  ulterior  aim ;  he 
meant  to  see  a  bit  of  life,  and  enjoy 
himself  in  the  indulgence  of  his  youth- 
ful passions  ;  and  his  prayer  to  his 
father  had  better  not  have  been 
answered.  God  never  answers,  save 
in  judgment,  the  prayer  of  a  divided 
purpose.  5.  It  is  but  dealing  with  a 
familiar  point,  which  gains  full  treat- 
ment elsewhere,  to  add  that  prayer  is 
wrong  if  offered  without  attendant 
watching  for  the  answers.  Nothing 
could  be  more  humiliating  to  a  Chris- 
tian man  than  for  him  to  be  shown 
the  record  of  the  many  petitions  that 
he  had  offered,  of  which  he  had 
thought  no  more  after  they  were 
offered.  He  does  not  know  whether 
God  answered  them  or  not ;  he  never 
took  the  trouble  to  notice.  Yery 
possibly  he  has  had  many  and  many 
a  blessing  in  his  life,  which  he  never 
thought  of  as  being  what  it  really  was, 
a  gracious  answer  to  his  prayers.  We 
have  not.  We  wish  we  had.  But 
why  do  we  lack  ?  Why  do  we  fail  to 
obtain  the  temporal  and  spiritual 
blessings  that  would  be  the  enrichment 
of  our  lives  ?  It  is  all  explained.  St. 
James  says  that  two  things  will 
sufficiently  explain  it  all.  "  We  ask 
not " ;  or  else,  "  We  ask  amiss."  If 
the  lack  and  failure  are  explained,  the 
remedy  is  suggested  in  the  explanation. 
It  also  is  twofold.  Pray  ;  and  pray 
aright.  "  For  every  one  that  asketh 
receiveth  ;  and  he  that  seeketh  findeth  ; 
and  to  him  that  knocketh  it  shall  be 
opened." 

Ver.  4.  The  Marriage  Figure  of 
Unfaithfulness  to  God. — The  prophetical 
books  make  constant  use  of  the  marri- 
age figure.  The  nation  of  Israel  is 
thought  of  as  bound  to  Jehovah  with 
bonds  as  close  as  those  with  which  a 
wife  is  bound  to  her  husband.  The 
bond  is  so  suitable  to  represent  the 
union  of  the  nation  with  Jehovah,  be- 


cause it  rests  upon  mutual  affection  ; 
upon  the  love  of  the  husband  for  the 
wife  as  well  as  that  of  the  wife  for 
the  husband.  In  the  East  there  is  an 
almost  exaggerated  jealousy  charac- 
teristic of  husbands,  which  is  illustrated 
in  the  case  of  an  Eastern  merchant 
who,  on  return  after  a  six  months' 
absence  from  home,  offered  public 
thanksgivings  because  his  wife  had 
never  once  left  the  house  while  he  was 
away. 

I.  The  tie  binding  the  soul  to  God 
is  like  that  binding  wife  to  husband. 
— It  implies  a  gracious  selection  and 
calling  on  the  part  of  God.  A  loving 
response  on  the  part  of  the  soul. 
Mutual  pledges  taken ;  a  lifelong 
covenant  entered  into.  A  tie  which 
should  become  closer  day  by  day  as 
each  discovers  the  worth  and  goodness 
of  the  other. 

II.  The  peril  of  breaking  the  tie 
binding  the  soul  to  God  is  like  the 
peril  of  breaking  the  tie  binding  the 
wife  to  the  husband. — It  is  the  attrac- 
tion of  some  other  love.  In  the  case  of 
man  and  woman,  either  may  be  drawn 
aside  into  heart,  or  life,  unfaithfulness. 
We  can  only  think  of  man  as  possibly 
unfaithful  to  God ;  never  of  God  as 
unfaithful  to  man.  The  world  is  the 
comprehensive  term  that  gathers  up 
the  things  that  draw  men  away  from 
God.  And  we  can  think  of  the  various 
forms  in  which  the  world  presents  its 
attractions.  Friendship,  implying  the 
going  out  of  our  heart  to  the  world,  is 
enmity  with  God,  just  as  when  a  wife 
takes  up  with  another  love  her  own 
husband  becomes  distasteful  to  her. 

III.  The  consequences  of  breaking 
the  tie  binding  us  to  God  are  like  the 
consequences  of  breaking  the  tie  bind- 
ing the  wife  to  the  husband. — The 
husband  is  dishonoured.  The  home  is 
broken  up.  The  wife  is  ruined.  There 
are  natural  penalties  that  fall  on  the 
unfaithful ;  and  the  just  judgments  of 
God  are  added  to  the  natural  penalties. 


588 


/       /     ' 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES.  chap.  iv. 


MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  5—10. 

Self-humbling  a  Secret  of  Right  Living. — Self-assurance  nourishes  all  sorts 
of  evil  in  us,  and  gives  its  chance  to  every  kind  of  temptation  that  assails  us. 
Take  off  our  allegiance  from  God,  fix  it  on  self,  and  in  St.  James's  language  we 
become  spiritual  adulterers  and  adulteresses.  (The  prophet  Hosea  uses  similar 
figures  :  see  chap,  ii.)  Then  if  that  over-magnifying  of  the  self  is  the  cause  of 
wrong  relations  with  God,  and  wrong  relations  with  our  fellow-men,  clearly  what 
is  necessary,  and  what  for  ourselves  may  be  the  duty  of  the  hour,  is  humbling 
the  self,  "  mortifying  our  members  which  are  upon  the  earth  "  ;  or  as  St.  Peter 
puts  it,  "  Humbling  ourselves  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God,  that  He  may  exalt 
us  in  due  time." 

I.  Humbling  self  may  be  our  present  duty. — In  a  general  sense  it  is  the 
Christian's  duty  at  all  times ;  but  it  also  becomes  a  special  duty  at  particular 
times  and  seasons,  such  as  (1)  accession  of  power  to  our  bodily  passions  ;  (2) 
opportunity  of  self- aggrandisement ;  (3)  prevailing  sentiments  unduly  exalting 
man  ;  (4)  influence  of  public  teachings  that  tend  to  nourish  man's  pride ; 
(5)  circumstances  specially  exciting  unworthy  and  perilous  feelings.  It  is  said 
that  "  a  man's  self  is  his  greatest  enemy."  He  who  has  conquered  himself 
need  fear  no  other  foe.  But  this  humbling  the  self  is  precisely  the  duty  which 
men  shrink  from  recognising,  and  which,  when  they  recognise,  they  fail  to  fulfil. 
Even  those  who  call  themselves  Christians  are  often  singularly  weak  in  this 
respect.  Getting  the  self  to  take  and  keep  its  right  place  has  never  come  to 
them  as  a  first  demand  made  by  Him  whom  they  call  Lord  and  Master. 

II.  In  humbling  self  we  have  a  most  serious  work  to  do. — St.  James  gives 
us  some  idea  of  the  things  which  it  may  involve,  and  so  impresses  its  seriousness. 
1.  It  may  require  a  resolute  mastery  of  our  wills,  a  forcible  compelling  our- 
selves to  yield  to  God's  ordering  of  life  for  us.  That  seems  to  be  suggested  by 
the  expression,  "  Be  subject  therefore  unto  God."  2.  It  may  include  deter- 
minedly putting  aside  self-interests  in  order  to  secure  time  for  communion  with 
God  and  soul-culture.  This  seems  to  be  indicated  in  the  counsel,  "Draw  nigh 
to  God."  3.  It  is  almost  certain  to  require  some  resolute  dealing  with  our 
conduct  in  life.  There  may  be  self-seeking  things  in  the  actual  doing  which 
must  at  once  be  given  up,  or  changed  in  their  characters.  This  seems  to 
be  suggested  by  the  strong  demand,  "  Cleanse  your  hands,  ye  sinners."  And — 
4.  It  may  very  possibly  be  necessary  to  secure  outward  and"  bodily  helps  to  self- 
humbling,  self-mortification.  Because  men  have  gone  to  extremes  of  abusing 
themselves  in  misdirected  efforts  to  secure  self-abasement,  we  need  not  fear  to 
look  at  the  reasonable  and  practical  demand  of  St.  James.  Through  the  body, 
and  well-ordered  discipline  of  the  body,  we  can  get  at,  and  wisely  influence,  the 
self  of  passion  and  lust  and  temper  and  habit.  If  we  are  to  purify  our  hearts 
from  their  self-trustings,  it  may  greatly  help  us  to  "  be  afiiicted,  and  mourn,  and 
weep  ;  to  let  our  laughter  be  turned  to  mourning,  and  our  joy  to  heaviness." 

III.  In  humbling  self  we  have  a  great  foe  to  resist. — It  is  as  if  there  was  a 
spirit  in  this  self.  As  if  it  was  not  ourself  that  we  had  to  fight,  but  a  separate 
and  outward  foe.  Whatever  view  may  be  taken  of  the  personality  of  the  evil 
spirit,  the  evil  self  is  personified,  thought  of  as  active,  and  as  a  foe  to  be  resisted. 
Compare  St.  Paul's  expression,  "  the  motions  of  sins  in  our  members."  The  devil 
may  also  be  taken  as  personifying  all  those  conditions  and  relationships  of  life 
which  appeal  to,  influence,  and  strengthen  the  self.  Then  St.  James's  advice, 
*'  Resist  the  devil,"  will  be  seen  to  mean  this — Do  not  mistake  by  assuming  that 
the  struggle  with  self  is  to  be  carried  on  only  in  the  range  of  feeling  and  thought, 
the  sphere  of  the  inner  life.     There  is  also  an  outward  sphere,  a  conflict  with 

569 


CHAP.    IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES. 


forces  of  evil  that  are  ever  at  work  strengthening  the  self.     He  then  who  would 
humble  himself  must  fight  against  "  principalities  and  powers." 

IV.  In  humbling  self  we  have  a  great  Helper  to  rely  on. — "  But  He  giveth 
more  grace."  *'  He  will  draw  nigh  to  you.  "  He  shall  exalt  you."  The  idea  is 
this — You  are  trying  to  exalt  yourselves  in  your  self-confidence.  Better  "  humble 
yourselves,"  and  let  God  exalt  you,  make  you  stand,  in  the  strength  of  His  grace. 
He  can.  He  does.  He  will.  What  you  win  in  God's  exalting  you  is  altogether 
better  than  anything  you  can  win  by  exalting  the  self. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  5.  Thinking  Enviously. — "  Doth 
the  spirit  which  He  made  to  dwell  in 
us  long  unto  envying  ? "  There  is  a 
remarkable  difference  in  the  rendering 
of  this  passage  given  in  the  H.V. 
margin — "  The  spirit  which  He  made 
to  dwell  in  us  He  yearneth  for  even 
unto  jealous  envy."  This  rendering 
connects  the  passage  with  the  previous 
reference  to  the  marriage  tie.  The 
two  ideas  suggested  by  the  different 
renderings  are :  1.  There  is  grave 
danger  to  the  soul  when  it  longs  for 
worldly  pleasures  even  unto  envying 
those  who  are  allowed  to  enjoy  them. 
2.  God,  regarding  the  soul  of  man  as 
bound  to  Him  with  the  closest  ties, 
is  profoundly  jealous  of  the  relation — 
"yearneth  for  us  even  unto  jealous 
envy,"  lest  any  one,  or  anything, 
should  take  our  love  from  Him. 
For  the  Old  Testament  figures,  see 
Jer.  iii.  1-11;  Ezek.  xvi. ;  Hos.  ii.  3. 
The  spi7'it  is  the  spirit  in  man,  not  the 
Holy  Spirit. 

Ver.  6.  Grace  unto  Sufficiency. — 
"  But  He  giveth  more  grace  " — greater 
grace.  Dea7i  Plumptre  brings  out 
effectively  the  point  of  this  sentence  : 
"  Following  the  explanation  already 
given,  the  sequence  of  thought  seems 
to  run  thus :  God  loves  us  with  a 
feeling  analogous  to  the  strongest  form 
of  jealousy,  or  even  envy,  but  that 
jealousy  does  not  lead  Him,  as  it  leads 
men,  to  be  grudging  in  His  gifts ; 
rather  does  He  bestow,  as  its  result, 
a  greater  measure  of  His  grace  than 
before,  or  than  He  would  do,  were  His 
attitude  towards  us  one  of  strict,  im- 
passioned justice."     The   term  ''  more 

590 


grace  "  suggests  how  inexhaustible  the 
stores  of  grace  are,  so  that  we  never 
can  lack  any  good  thing.  There  is 
always  more  available.  And  it  further 
suggests  that  no  limitations  are  put 
upon  the  supply  of  the  grace  by  God. 
He  never  wearies  of  giving.  He  is 
always  ready  to  bestow  more ;  "to 
make  all  grace  abound  unto  all 
sufficiency." 

Humility. 

I.  Humility  has  been  well  termed 
"  the  cradle  of  all  other  graces." — 

In  humility  they  are  born.  All 
attainment  has  been  achieved  by 
the  acknowledgment  that  we  have  not 
yet  attained.  The  sense  of  need  is 
the  mother  of  discovery.  Nothing  is 
so  barren  as  self-satisfaction.  Our 
Lord's  teaching  is  full  of  the  need  of 
humility.  In  various  terms  He  insists 
upon  it,  as  the  elementary  stage  in 
the  life  of  Christian  experience.  God 
giveth  grace  to  the  humble,  because 
the  humble  are  a  receptacle  for  His 
presence. 

II.  Some  considerations  which 
ought  to  excite  humility. — 1.  The 
fact  that  we  are  God's  creatures,  that  all 
we  possess  is  from.  Him,  and  held  by 
us  only  for  a  tim,e. — Biches,  intellect, 
bodily  strength,  social  status,  are  God's 
gifts.  May  be  soon  taken  from  us. 
Only  benefit  us  if  rightly  used. 
2.  The  fact  that  we  are  sinful.  What- 
soever good  qualities  we  may  possess, 
by  the  bounty  of  God,  are  more  than 
counterbalanced  by  the  evil  which  is 
our  own.  3.  The  exceeding  foolishness 
of  pride,  and  the  serious  consequences 
which  may  result  from  it.     How  often, 


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP.    IV. 


because  of  some  fancied  slight,  or 
severe  remark,  will  people  nurture  in 
their  hearts  feelings  which  must  even- 
tually cut  them  off  from  intercourse 
with  God. 

III.  The  more  prevalent  forms  of 
sin  which  are  opposed  to  humility  are 
— \.  A  refusal  to  accept  a  rebuke  when 
we  are  perfectly  conscious  that  we  have 
deserved  it.  If  honestly  seeking  to 
grow  in  grace,  we  ought  to  welcome 
rebuke  if  it  has  the  effect  of  checking 
some  fault  of  which  we  are  guilty. 
2.  Exaggerated  estimate  of  our  own 
powers.  This  is  seen  in  the  scornful 
look,  the  contemptuous  expression,  the 
constant  talking  about  oneself,  in 
the  apparent  belief  in  the  infallibility 
of  one's  own  opinion.  How  does  God 
view  such  pride?  3.  A  habit  of  judg- 
ing the  character  and  conduct  of  others. 
The  secret  motive  of  this  habit  is  a 
craving  after  praise  and  flattery.  It 
hinders  spiritual  progress. 

lY.  In  cultivating  humility  beware 
of  false  humility  and  undue  self- 
depreciation. — It  is  not  humility  to 
profess  not  to  be  what  we  are,  or  not 
to  possess  that  which  we  know  that 
we  do  possess.  Humility  does  not 
consist  in  refusing  to  acknowledge  that 
we  have  talents,  but  in  refusing  to 
boast  of  such  talents  as  if  they  were 
self-derived. 

Y.  Consider  the  blessings  which 
accompany  humility. — 1.  Through 
humility  comes  exaltation,  real  and 
abiding — exaltation  by  the  mighty 
hand  of  God.  "In  due  time."  The 
depth  of  our  Lord's  humiliation  was 
the  measure  of  the  height  to  which  He 
was  exalted.  2.  It  is  through  humility 
that  we  find  strength  in  God.  "  Cast- 
ing all  care  upon  Him."  3.  If 
humility  be  the  cradle  of  the  gixices,  it 
is  also  their  preservation.  The  more 
we  grow  in  grace,  the  more  humble  we 
shall  become,  because  the  more  we 
shall  feel  that  all  things  are  of  God. 

YI.  As  a  practical  lesson  learn  to 
be  humble. — Receive  with  cheerful- 
ness and  readiness,  even  if  not  with 
joy,  the  humiliations  which  come  to 
you  in  every-day  hfe.     Cease  to  resent 


injuries,  to  stand  upon  your  rights,  to 
obtrude  yourself.  Let  the  cross  unite 
you  to  the  Crucified. — Canon  Vernon 
Uuiton. 

Yer.  7.  The  Foe,  the  Fight,  and  the 
Flight. — "  Resist  the  devil,  and  he  will 
flee  from  you."  The  soul  is  a  citadel 
which  no  enemy  can  storm,  a  stronghold 
which  cannot  be  entered  but  by  its 
own  consent.  Through  the  tremen- 
dous power  of  volition  it  can  waive 
even  incarnate  Deity  from  its  thres- 
hold, and  spurn  the  salvation  which  He 
brings.  Christian  life  is  a  contest,  a 
fight. 

I.  The  foe.— ''The  devil."  My 
conception  of  the  devil  is  a  great,  un- 
conscienced  intellect  under  the  sway 
of  a  moral  nature  thoroughly  unholy. 
He  was  once  an  archangel,  but  fell, 
and  from  the  beginning  has  been  the 
deadly  foe  of  our  race.  1.  He  is  a 
personal  foe.  We  must  not  allow  the 
audacious  cavillings  of  scepticism  to 
neutralise  the  solemn  asseverations  of 
inspiration  upon  this  point.  The 
devil  "  tempted "  Jesus  Christ ;  the 
devil  "  entered  into  "  Judas  ;  the  devil 
"  desired  to  have "  Peter ;  the  devil 
*'  hindered "  Paul.  Not  only  Jesus 
Christ  and  His  apostles,  but  all  the 
noble  and  heroic  spirits  of  the  past, 
who  have  done  most  to  elevate  and 
bless  the  world,  have  been  firm  believers 
in  the  personality  of  the  devil.  And 
it  is  a  singular  fact  that  the  Churches 
which  most  firmly  believe  and  teach 
that  doctrine  are  not  only  the  most 
prosperous  and  aggressive,  but  the 
only  ones  that  are  doing  anything 
worth  speaking  of  for  the  evangelisa- 
tion of  the  world.  The  fact  is,  you 
cannot  run  a  gospel  Church  without 
a  devil,  and  the  bad  place  to  which  the 
old  fellow  belongs.  Show  me  a  man 
who  does  not  believe  in  the  devil,  and 
I  will  show  you  a  man  who  has  but 
little  knowledge  of  God  so  far  as  sav- 
ing faith  and  the  blessings  of  salvation 
are  concerned.  2.  He  is  a  powerful 
foe.  Indicated  in  Scripture :  ( 1 )  By 
his  names.  He  is  called  "  Apollyon," 
"  Prince  of  this  world,"  "  Beelzebub," 

591 


CHAP.   IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JAMES. 


"  Prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,"  "  God 
of  this  world."  (2)  By  the  creatures 
used  to  represent  him.  The  serpent, 
whose  deadly  fangs  poison,  and  whose 
dreadful  coil  means  death.  The  roar- 
ing lion,  the  terror  and  king  of  the 
forest.  The  old  dragon,  which,  to  the 
Oriental  mind,  was  an  incarnation 
of      almost      superhuman      strength. 

(3)  By  the  toorks  attributed  to  him. 
He  early  accomplished  the  moral  ruin 
of  the  race,  brought  death  into  the 
world  with  all  our  woe,  bound  man 
helplessly  to  his  degrading  service, 
blotting  out  every  ray  of  light  and 
hope  of  self -recovery.  He  is  the  arch- 
rebel  in  God's  kingdom — the  leader  of 
the  hosts  of   sin,    in  earth   and  hell. 

(4)  By  the  Divine  intervention  which 
was  necessary  to  break  his  power  and 
rescue  man  from  his  grasp,  etc.  His 
power  is  all  the  more  dreadful  and 
dangerous  because  of  His  vast  experi- 
ence. He  is  an  old  foe.  He  was  here 
before  man  came,  and  here,  perhaps, 
because  he  saw  him  coming.  His 
malice  and  deception.  He  secretes  the 
sorrow  and  fetters  he  carries  for  his 
victims  under  the  winsome  drapery  of 
some  pleasure  or  profit.  He  uses 
"wiles,"  "depths,"  "darts,"  "snares," 
"all  deceivableness  of  unrighteous- 
ness," frequently  putting  on  the  dis- 
sembling gloss  of  an  angel  of  light. 

II.  The  fight.—"  Resist  the  devil." 
You  may  plead  with  man,  you  may 
"  reason "  with  God,  but  you  must 
"resist  the  devil."  Jesus  Christ,  our 
elder  Brother,  has  fought  and  conquered 
this  foe ;  and  in  clearing  the  way  for 
our  fight,  Jesus  tells  him,  "  Thus  far 
shalt  thou  go,  and  no  farther."  "  No 
farther."  That  is,  "  those  that  fight 
under  My  banner  shall  whip  you  too." 
But  in  order  to  triumph  in  this  great 
conflict,  we  must  fight  according  to 
the  prize  rules  of  our  great  Captain. 
1.  Negative.  Quit  the  enemy's  service. 
The  fight  cannot  even  begin  until  you 
reach  this  point.  2.  Positive.  Enlist 
in  GodJs  service.  God's  vetei-ans  are 
all  volunteers.  No  conscript  ever  drew 
blood  on  this  foe;  nor  was  any  man 
ever  scolded  into  this  fight,  or  thrown 

592 


into  it  on  the  horns  of  a  dilemma.  The 
pressure  of  consciousness  and  environ- 
ment through  Divine  grace  must  make 
us  willing.  3.  Preparative.  "  Fut  on 
the  whole  armour  of  God^  God's  veter- 
ans not  only  enlist,  they  also  get  ready 
for  battle.  Spiritual  cripples  are  never 
pitted  against  this  foe.  All  who  face 
him  stand  and  dress  for  the  fight. 
"  Put  on."  "  And  having  done  all  " 
(that  is,  completely  routed  the  foe,  they 
are  not  even  weary  enough  to  sit  down, 
but  prefer),  "  to  stand."  They  are 
"  more  than  conquerors." 

III.  The  flight.— He  will  flee  from 
you.  1.  When  will  he  "y?ee  "  .?  When 
he  sees  you  ready  for  battle  2ivAfull  of 
fight.  The  devil  laughs  in  his  sleeve 
when  he  sees  the  livery  of  heaven  on  a 
coward,  or  on  a  person  who  professes 
to  "  resist "  him,  but  who  at  heart  is 
in  sympathy  with  him  and  his  work. 
But  nothing  so  completely  routs  him 
as  heroic  resistance.  "  He  will  flee 
from  you."  Attack  a  courageous  foe, 
and  "he  will  flee  "  at  you,  not  "from 
you."  Herein  is  seen  the  -devil's 
cowardice.  Only  cowards  run.  Manly 
resistance  routs  the  old  deceiver  so 
quickly  that  he  is  obliged  to  drop  some 
of  the  fetters  wherewith  he  had  hoped 
to  bind  his  victim,  until  finally  in  his 
approaches  he  will  leave  his  fetters 
behind  ;  and  though  he  may  stTll  con- 
tinue to  annoy  us,  he  will  have  Uttle 
hope  of  bringing  usinto  serious  bondage. 
2.  How  often  will  he  "  flee  "  ?  Every 
time  he  is  manfully  "  resisted."  He 
knows  we  are  creatures  of  varying 
moods,  and  that  his  defeat  to-day  may 
end  in  ours  to-morrow.  The  promise, 
"  He  mil  flee,"  has  two  glorious  mean- 
ings :  1.  Temporary  flight.  "  He  will 
flee,"  to  return  again,  to  annoy,  vex, 
trouble.  But  in  spite  of  his  return  the 
Christian  may  still  retain  the  victory, 
and  every  time  force  him  to  "  flee." 
2.  Eternal  flight.  This  takes  place  in 
the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  and, 
blessed  be  God  !  involves  a  double  flight. 
The  enemy  will  "  flee  "  from  the  depart- 
ing spirit  as  a  hopeless  case,  and  the 
emancipated  soul  shall  soar  and  mount 
upward  to  the  society  of  the  redeemed 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES.  chap.  iv. 


and  the  mansions  of  the  blessed, "  and  III.  In  the  practice  of  obedience, 

so   shall   ever   be   with   the    Lord." —  — When    the    soul    has    received   the 

Thomas  Kelly,  D.D.  blessing    of   acceptance   with   God    in 

Christ,  it  also  receives  into  itself  the 
Ver.  8.  On  the  Reality  of  Man's  principle  of  a  loving  and  healthful 
Intercourse  icith  his  Maker. — There  is  obedience  which  brings  it  into  con- 
one  sense  in  which  God  cannot  draw  scions  union  with  the  Most  High. — 
more  "  nigh  "  to  any  man  than  He  is  Edward  White. 
already.  The  fact  of  the  omnipre- 
sence of  Deity  lies  at  the  foundation  Ver.  10.  Humility  before  God. — 
of  all  religion.  It  is  impossible  to  The  expression  used  here,  and  also  in 
express  by  language  the  closeness  of  1  Pet.  v.  6,  is  "  Humble  yourselves," 
the  relation  existing  between  the  and  not  merely  **  Be  humble."  It  is 
Creator  and  the  creation.  His  power  in  harmony  with  the  passage  that 
gives  energy  to  every  cause,  to  every  the  meaning  should  be — Deal  reso- 
force.  Yet  how  remarkable  is  the  lutely  with  yourselves,  so  as  to  keep 
unbroken  silence  in  which  God  the  down  all  risings  of  pride  and  self- 
Lord  dwells  among  men.  In  the  sphere  confidence.  The  suggestion  is — Be 
of  sense  there  is  no  personal  revela-  watchful  and  determined  in  all  neces- 
tion — not  to  the  wicked,  not  even  to  sary  self-discipline.  But  it  is  the 
the  good.  Neither  in  the  world,  nor  resolute  effort  to  keep  ourselves  in 
in  the  sanctuary,  nor  in  solitude  is  right  attitudes  before  God,  and  right 
the  silence  ever  broken  to  the  sup-  relations  with  Him,  which  secures  a 
pliant.  How  then  can  we  *'draw  humiUty  which  is  not  humiliation,  and 
nigh  to  God,"  so  that  He  will  "  draw  which  puts  us  into  right  relations  with 
nigh  to  us "  ?                                 •  our  fellow-men.     "  Humble  yourselves 

I.  In  the  study  and  belief  of  His  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord."  Two  things 
revelation. — 1.  The  condition  of  God's  may  be  illustrated  and  enforced  : 
spiritual  action  in  the  souls  of  men  is  1 .  The  effect  of  an  attitude  of  humility 
honest  attention  to  truth.  The  causes  hefore  God  on  our  daily  life.  Humility 
which  render  it  difficult  to  attend  before  men  too  easily  degenerates  into 
earnestly  to  the  study  of  the  word  weakness.  It  may  became  such 
of  God  are  such  as,  earthly  interests,  humility  as  is  caricatured  in  Uriah 
the  cares  of  business,  love  of  pleasure,  Heep.  But  humihty  before  God  is 
love  of  excitement,  pleasures  of  the  found  to  put  a  gracious  tone  upon 
imagination,  idle  reading,  moral  re-  the  relationships  of  life.  It  prevents 
pulsion.  Much  of  God's  providence  our  manifesting  the  restlessness  and 
has  for  its  object  to  produce  the  self-assertion  which  so  greatly  disturb 
attention  necessary  for  salvation.  ordinary  relations.  It  gives  us  a 
2.  To  bring  the  mind  into  earnest  principle  for  life -guidance ;  it  keeps 
contact  with  those  writings  which  near  vis  the  sense  of  a  Presence ;  and 
express  His  mind  is  to  "  draw  nigh  to  it  provides  us  with  a  consciousness 
God."  It  is  not,  however,  essential  of  a  strength  and  efficiency,  which 
to  master  the  whole  breadth  of  the  make  us  master  of  circumstances, 
revelation  in  order  to  attain  the  The  humble  man  before  God  is  the 
assurance  that  in  the  Bible  we  are  strong,  wise  man  before  life's  duties 
conversing  with  the  living  God.  and     claims.        2.     The     influence    oj 

II.  In  prayer  and  thanksgiving. —  humility  before  God  in  securing  Divine 
God  can  communicate  without  words.  benedictions.  "He  shall  exalt  you,"* 
A  quiet  secrecy  marks  God's  revelations  It  is  not  merely  that  God  rewards 
to  men.  He  diffuses  over  the  soul  a  the  trustfulness  of  humility  with 
spiritual  sense  of  His  presence.  There  actual  blessings ;  it  is  also  that  to 
is  no  intercourse  so  real  as  that  of  the  humble  soul  God  gives  Himself 
mind  with  mind,  and  heart  with  heart,  and  the  man  is  no  longer  mere  man, 

QQ  593 


CHAP.  IV. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES. 


but  exalted  to  be,  what  Christ  was 
(yet  within  human  hmitations),  man 
and  God  with  him. 

God^s  Ways  with  Humble  Souls. — 
God  protects  the  humble  and  delivers 
him ;  He  loves  and  consoles  him  ;  He      Thomas  a  Kempis. 


inclines  Himself  towards  the  humble 
man,  He  bestows  on  him  exceeding 
grace,  and  after  his  humiliation  he 
lifts  him  up  to  glory ;  He  reveals  His 
secrets  to  the  humble,  and  sweetly 
draws   and   leads   him   to   Himself. — 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  11,  12. 

Criticising  Persons. — Again  and  again  we  are  reminded  how  thoroughly 
St.  James  was  imbued  with  the  spirit  and  the  teachings  of  our  Lord's  Sermon 
on  the  Mount.  This  paragraph  presents  a  fresh  instance.  It  is  an  evident 
echo  of  our  Lord's  familiar  words,  "Judge  not,  that  ye  be  not  judged.  For 
with  what  judgment  ye  judge,  ye  shall  be  judged;  and  with  what  measure  ye 
mete,  it  shall  be  measured  unto  you."  St.  James  does  not,  however,  take  precisely 
the  same  point  of  view.  To  him  the  habit  of  thinking  and  speaking  evil  of 
brethren  is  a  sign  of  triumphant  self-conceit,  which  sets  a  man  above  everybody 
else,  and  even  above  the  law. 

I.  Criticism  is  a  power  of  human  nature  with  a  mission  of  blessing. — If 
everybody  was  merely  receptive,  the  world  would  make  no  progress,  and  evil 
would  have  unchecked  facilities.  There  must  be  those  among  us  who  can  see 
the  other  side,  take  things  to  pieces,  discover  and  show  up  faults.  They  may 
not  be  pleasant  people;  but  they  are  most  necessary  ones.  Art,  science,  and 
religion  would  fare  ill  without  them. 

II.  Criticism  can  be  exercised  rightly  about  things,  and  about  the  actions 
of  persons. — We  can  criticise  a  picture,  a  statue,  an  animal.  And  we  may 
criticise  the  actions  of  corporate  bodies,  societies,  churches,  nations.  It  may  even 
come  to  be  our  immediate  duty  to  criticise  the  actions  of  individuals,  and  to  say 
stern  and  severe  things  about  them.  And  when  it  is  our  duty,  we  may  not, 
under  any  plea,  hesitate  to  say  the  seemingly  evil  things  that  have  to  be  said. 

III.  Criticism  must  be  put  into  the  strictest  limitations  when  it  is  exercised 
about  persons. — And  especially  about  fellow- Christians,  over  whose  reputations 
w^e  ought  ever  to  be  most  jealous.  The  distinction  between  criticising  the  actions 
of  persons  and  criticising  persons  is  not  usually  set  forth.  It  may  be  right  to 
say,  "  The  man  has  done  a  wrong  thing  ";  but  we  have  no  right  to  say,  "The 
man  is  a  bad  man."  It  is  that  evil-speaking  of  persons  that  both  our  Lord  and 
St.  James  reprove.  Judging  persons  is  God's  reserved  and  exclusive  right.  It 
is  breaking  the  law  to  exercise  a  power  which  we  are  forbidden  to  exercise. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Yer.  11.  The  Mischief  wrought  by 
Evil- speaking. — "Speak  not  one  against 
another,  brethren."  One  of  the  most 
painful  signs  of  human  depravity  is 
the  almost  universal  disposition  to 
think  evil  and  to  speak  evil  of  others. 
There  is  indeed  something  worse  than 
that — we  actually  find  pleasure  in 
thinking  and  speaking  the  evil.  It  is 
often  a  most  humbhng  self -revelation 

594 


to  find  ourselves  actually  pleased  at 
hearing  something  to  the  detriment  of 
another.  The  bad  spirit  in  us  is  sadly 
nourished  by  the  daily  reading  in  the 
newspapers  of  men's  wrong- doings. 
Our  minds  are  degraded  by  being 
constantly  filled  with  stories  of  the 
vices  and  crimes  of  men.  We  become 
interested  in  evil  rather  than  in  good. 
I,  Mischief  is  wrought   by   evil- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES.  chap.  iv. 


speaking    in    the    evil-speaker. — Our  away.     Nobody  wants  the  disagreeable 
Lord  put  this  among  the  things  that  man,  for  he  sees  good  in  nobody, 
coming  out  of  a  man  defile  the  man.  II.    Mischief  is   wrought    by  evil- 
It  is  always  a  moral  mischief  to  allow      speaking  for  those  evil  spoken  of. 

an  evil  disposition  to  gain  expression.  Here  the  way  in  which  the  ill  word 

It    strengthens    itself    by    expression.  starts  reports  that  grow  into  ruinous 

What  we  have  to  do  with  all  sinful  slanders  needs  to  be  considered.     But 

motions  in  our  members,  and  all  evil  this  is  very  familiar.     It  is  fresher  to 

tendencies,  is  to  stifle  and  silence  them.  trace  the  mischief  done  to  the  heart 

This  is  emphatically  the  case  with  the  of  the  man  who  is  spoken  evil  of.     If 

disposition  to  see  evil  in  our  brother,  the    evil   is    true,    reporting    it    only 

and  to  speak  of   the  evil.     It  is  far  hardens  the  man,  and  puts  hindrances 

better  to  say  nothing  about  our  brother  in   the  way  of  his  recovery.     If   the 

if  we  cannot  say  something  good.    The  evil  is  untrue,  the  man  is  embittered 

habit  of   seeing  and  dwelling  on  the  by  the  sense  of   injury  done  to  him, 

evil  so  grows  on  a  man  that  by-and-by  and  broken  off   from    helpful   human 

he  gets  a  jaundiced   vision,  and   can  fellowships.      It   may   be   added   that 

see  nothing    but   the   evil ;    and   then  too  often  an  evil  report  has  actually 

he  finds  his  spirit  soured,  and  his  power  ruined  a  man's  life-prospects, 
of   enjoying   human  friendship   taken 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13—17. 

Self-confidence  in  Our  Life -'plans. — St.  James  has  still  in  mind  the  same  wrong 
mood  of  self-reliance  and  self-assertion.  It  is  altogether  unbecoming  to  those 
who  have  professed  to  make  full  surrender  of  their  hearts  and  wills  and  lives 
to  Christ.  Its  evil  influence  is  seen  in  the  relations  and  associations  of  Chris- 
tians. This  St.  James  has  already  shown.  Now  he  shows  that  it  will  make  the 
Christian  professor  look  wrongly  at  his  own  life,  take  it  out  of  the  hand  of  God, 
and  try  to  manage  it  himself.  It  leads  him  to  say  what  he  will  do,  and  what  he 
will  not  do,  without  any  acts  of  loving  dependence  upon  God — without  any 
thought  that  his  "  times  are  altogether  in  God's  hands,"  and  that  he  has 
no  "  to-morrow  "  until  God  gives  it  to  him,  and  then  he  must  call  it  "  to-day." 
St.  James's  teaching  recalls  to  mind  our  Lord's  parable  of  the  rich  fool,  who 
made  his  plans  for  many  a  year,  and  died  the  very  night  after  he  had  made 
his  resolves  (Luke  xii.  16). 

I.  Human  life  is  in  a  sense  in  human  control. — ^'The  earth  hath  He  given 
to  the  sons  of  men."  Every  man  has  a  right  to  anticipate  that  he  will  live 
through  to  old  age  ;  and  every  man  ought  to  look  upon  the  life  given  to  him  as 
the  scene  on  which  he  is  to  put  his  impress,  and  in  which  he  is  to  show  his  energy, 
ministering  to  his  generation.  Every  man  ought  to  have  (1)  a  consciousness  of 
power  ;  (2)  a  noble  aim  ;  (3)  a  well -formed  plan  ;  and  (4)  a  persistent  energy  in 
carrying  through  his  plan.  Life  is,  to  every  man,  very  much  what  he  chooses 
to  make  of  it.  It  is  true  that  he  is  surrounded  by  forces  that  are  wholly  beyond 
his  control,  and  that  keep  him  in  limitations  ;  but  it  is  also  true  that  he  is 
entrusted  with  forces,  which  he  is  able  to  control  and  use  in  order  to  carry  through 
plans  and  purposes  which  he  may  form.  To  each  individual  whom  God  sets  forth 
in  His  world,  He  repeats  the  command  given  to  the  first  man  whom  He  made  — 
"  Be  fruitful,  and  multiply,  and  replenish  the  earth,  and  subdue  it  :  and  have 
dominion  over  the  fish  of  the  sea,  and  over  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  over  every 
living  thing  that  moveth  upon  the  earth."  It  does  not  honour  God  to  detract  from 
the  dignity  and  independence  of  the  creature  that  He  was  pleased  to  make  in  His 
own  image.     And  we  may  be  sure  that  all  advanced  truths  of  revelation  are 

595 


CHAP.  IV.  HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY :   JAMES. 


perfectly  consistent  with  the  primary  truths  of  nature.  To  a  great  extent,  then, 
human  life  is  in  human  control.  A  man  may  properly  think  over  and  decide 
what  he  shall  do  with  it,  where  he  shall  bestow  all  his  fruits  and  his  goods.  The 
business  man  is  doing  quite  right  when  he  anticipates  the  markets,  and  plans  his 
productions  accordingly — when  he  says  to  himself,  "  To-day  or  to-morrow  we  will 
go  into  this  city,  and  spend  a  year  there,  and  trade,  and  get  gain."  The  thing 
planned  is  not  wrong.  The  spirit  of  the  planning  may  be  altogether  wrong. 
And  it  is  the  self-seeking,  self-confident  spirit  in  the  planning  with  which 
St.  James  alone  has  to  deal  in  this  passage. 

II.  Human  life  is,  in  a  sense,  not  in  human  control. — There  is  an  overruling 
plan  for  every  life  which  God  makes,  and  holds  as  His  own  secret,  so  that  it  shall 
not,  unnecessarily,  interfere  with  man's  free  experiment.  It  includes  the  length, 
the  spheres,  the  bodily  and  mental  powers,  the  circumstances,  and  the  issues. 
Every  life  that  has  ever  been  lived  was  a  Divinely  shaped  "puzzle-piece,"  and 
fitted  in  precisely  to  its  place  in  the  making  of  the  great  picture  of  humanity. 
All  true  life  has  a  Divine  plan,  does  God's  work,  and  submits  to  His  leading.  As 
D7'.  Bushnell  so  skilfully  puts  it,  "  God  has  a  definite  life-plan  for  every  human 
person,  girding  him,  visibly  or  invisibly,  for  some  exact  thing,  which  it  will  be 
the  true  significance  and  glory  of  his  life  to  have  accomplished."  "  There  is  a 
definite  and  proper  end,  or  issue,  for  every  man's  existence, — an  end  which,  to  the 
heart  of  God,  is  the  good  intended  for  him,  or  for  which  he  was  intended ;  that 
which  he  is  privileged  to  become,  called  to  become,  ought  to  become ;  that  which 
God  will  assist  him  to  become,  and  which  he  cannot  miss,  save  by  his  own  fault. 
Every  human  soul  has  a  complete  and  perfect  plan  cherished  for  it  in  the  heart 
of  God — a  Divine  biography  marked  out,  which  it  enters  into  life  to  live.  This 
life,  rightly  unfolded,  will  be  a  complete  and  beautiful  whole,  an  experience  led 
on  by  God  and  unfolded  by  His  secret  nurture,  as  the  trees  and  the  flowers, 
by  the  secret  nurture  of  the  world ;  a  drama  cast  in  the  mould  of  a  perfect  art, 
with  no  part  wanting  ;  a  Divine  study  for  the  man  himself,  and  for  others ;  a 
study  that  shall  for  ever  unfold,  in  wondrous  beauty,  the  love  and  faithfulness 
of  God ;  great  in  its  conception,  great  in  the  Divine  skill  with  which  it  is 
shaped ;  above  all,  great  in  the  momentous  and  glorious  issues  it  prepares." 
How  human  life  can  thus  be,  in  a  sense,  within  our  own  control,  and,  in  a  sense, 
altogether  beyond  our  control,  we  may  learn  from  family  life.  Parents  fashion 
life-plans  for  their  children,  and  move  steadily  towards  their  outworking, 
overcoming,  within  the  limits  of  their  power,  all  hindrances  that  come  in  their 
way.  But  under  the  parental  control  the  children  move  to  and  fro  quite 
freely,  working  out  their  own  little  plans,  so  mysteriously  influenced  by  the 
parents  that  their  little  plans  all  bear  towards  the  working  out  of  the  parents' 
great  ones.  Lives  go  wrong  when  strong  wilfulness  in  children  forces  their 
plan  against  the  parental.  So  long  as  man  keeps  the  child-spirit  towards  God, 
he  is  fully  content  that  thus  his  life  should  be,  and  yet  should  not  be,  in  his 
own  control. 

"There's  a  divinity  that  shapes  our  ends, 
Rough-hew  them  how  we  will." 

III.  Human  life  is  in  the  Divine  controL — "  It  is  not  in  man  that  walketh 
to  direct  his  steps."  " I  girded  thee,  though  thou  hast  not  known  Me."  "For 
that  ye  ought  to  say.  If  the  Lord  will,  we  shall  both  live,  and  do  this  or  that." 
St.  James  puts  this  truth  into  one  particular :  the  uncertainty  of  the  length  of 
life  to  man  ;  the  control  of  the  length  of  life  which  God  Jias.  There  is  always 
this  reminder  of  God  whenever  man  tries  to  plan  the  future.  He  cannot  be 
sure  that  he  will  live  to  carry  out  his  plan.  "  Thou  fool,  this  night  thy  soul  is 
required  of  thee."  Let  any  man  sit  down  to  make  a  plan  for  to-morrow,  for 
next  year,  and  there  must  come  into  his  soul  this  reminder  of  the  Divine  control 

596 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JAMES.  chap.  iv. 


over  our    "morrows."      "What  is   your   life?      For   ye   are   a   vapour,   that 
appeareth  for  a  little  time,  and  then  vanisheth  away." 

"  To-morrow,  Lord,  is  Thine, 

Lodged  in  Thy  sovereign  hand ; 
And  if  its  san  arise  and  shine, 
It  shines  by  Thy  command." 

IV.  Within  Divine  control  life  is  within  human  control. — And  this  is  the 
precise  attitude  and  relation  in  which  the  Christian  stands.  The  Divine  control 
he  is  fully  assured  of,  and  in  it  he  greatly  rejoices.  But  it  in  no  way  interferes 
with  his  sense  of  personal  responsibility,  with  his  energy  and  enterprise.  He 
plans,  as  other  men  plan  ;  he  looks  forward,  as  other  men  look  forward ;  he 
works  toward  an  aim,  as  other  men  work  toward  an  aim.  But  there  is  a 
cherished  mood  of  humility,  submission,  and  dependence  in  him  which  the  worldly 
man  knows  nothing  of.  When  that  mood  finds  expression  in  words,  it  says,  "  If 
the  Lord  will,  we  shall  both  live  and  do  this  or  that."  What  is  wrong  is  (1)  the 
vauntings  of  self-confidence,  as  if  we  had  full  control  of  our  lives,  which  we 
have  not ;  and,  on  the  other  hand  (2)  the  fatalism — whatever  pietistic  form  it 
may  take — which  leads  us  to  think  or  to  say  we  have  no  control  of  our 
lives,  and  therefore  it  is  of  no  use  to  plan,  or  to  anticipate  and  provide  for  the 
future.  True  religion  ennobles  a  man's  manliness — it  never  enfeebles  or  crushes 
it.  In  everything  that  is  manly  the  Christian's  sense  of  God  should  make  him 
more  manly.  And  it  is  manly  and  Christian  to  grip  life  with  a  strong  hand. 
Life  is  entrusted  to  us  that  we  may  spend  it  in  working  out  GocCs  plan,  through 
working  out  our  own  ;  and  "  man  is  immortal  till  his  work  is  done."  "  Find  out 
the  plan  of  God  in  your  generation,  and  then  beware  lest  you  cross  that  plan,  or 
fail  to  find  your  own  place  in  it  "  {^Prince  Albert).  "  Our  work  is  but  a  segment 
in  the  great  sphere  of  God's  eternal  work  ;  and  if  we  have  eyes  to  see,  we  may 
read  in  that  portion  of  His  work  which  belongs  to  us  our  name  and  the  date  of 
the  present  year  "  {Pastor  Monod). 


SUGGESTIVE    NOTES   AND    SERMON   SKETCHES. 

Yer.   13.  Over- confidence  a   Sign   of  life"  is    often   the    response    to    self- 

Selfishness. — "We     will."      The    man  willed  energy. 

says  "I   will"  who  is  determined  to  I.  The   over-confident  man   chiefly 

get  for  himself     It  is  that  getting  for  thinks  about  himself.— He  would  never 

self  which  puts  all  the  strength  into  be  over-confident  if  he  did  not.     It  is 

the  "I  will."     Notice  how  differently  just   that  circling  of  all  his  interests 

men  speak  when  the  matter  concerns  about  himself,   just  that  self-satisfac- 

some    one  else.     If  they  are  '  asked  to  tion,    which    makes   him  so  confident. 

do    a   kind   deed,    how   cautious   they  The  man  may  be  best  seen  in  the  boy. 

become,  what  quahfications   they  put  The    boasting,    bragging    boy   is   self- 

upon   their  promises :   they   will    try ;  centred,      conceited,     always     talking 

they   will    see  if   they    can   find    the  about  liimself,  and  telling  what  he  is 

means     and    opportunity  ;    but    there  going  to  do.     And  such  a  boy  is  usually 

never  is  the  "  We  will "  of  self -centred-  left  alone  by  his    comrades,   to  enjoy 

ness.     It  is  true  that  there  must   be  the  self  of  which  he  makes  so  much. 

more   strength   and    energy   put  into  II.  The  over-confident  man  chiefly 

our  own  concerns,  and  it  is  the  excess  plans     for     himself.— The     particular 

of  confidence,  not  the  confidence  within  impulse   to    undue    confidence   is   self- 

wise    limitations,     which    St.     James  interest.     This   man   is   going  to  buy 

reproves.     What  is  called  ''success  in  and  sell  and  get  gain  for  himself,  and 


CHAP.  IV.  E03IILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JAMES. 


that   accounts  for  the   determination,  fall — who    is    satisfied   if    he    is    fed, 

the  decided  resolve,  the  "I  will."     See  and  clothed,  and  gets  a  little  pocket- 

what    other    considerations    come    in  money   for   his   self-indulgences?     Do 

when   a  man    plans  for   others.     The  you  call  that  a  man  made  in  the  image 

best  for  them  puts  limitations  on  his  of  God  ?     There  are  very  many  around 

positiveness.     He  knows  what  he  would  us  who  are  in  that  way  simply  drifting 

like,  but  he  is  not  so  sure  what  they  down  into  eternity.     They  need  to  be 

would  like.     And  he  is  strangely  alive  shaken   and    aroused.     They   need   to 

to  hindrances  and  difficulties  when  he  be  told  that  they  have  a  future.     The 

plans  for  others,  which  he  never  allows  uncertainty  of  life  is  not  the  supreme 

to   disturb    him   when    he    plans    for  thing  for  them  to  take  into  account, 

himself.  They  need  to  say  to  themselves,  and 

III.  The    over-confident    man    does  in  a  very  resolute  way,  ''  I  have  got 

not   take   God  into  his   thought. — To  to  live,  and  I  must  plan  to  make  the 

do  so  at  once  puts  limits  on  self-will ;  very  best  of  my   life."     Let   no   man 

because  if  God  is  taken  into  account,  think  it  is  pious  to  imagine  that  he  is 

our  will  must  be  ever  kept  in  harmony  going  to  die,  and  then  let  the  imagina- 

with  His  will.  tion  relax  his  moral  muscles,  and  make 

his  hands  hang  down.     It  is  the  duty 

Plan-making.— With,   that  absolute  of  every  man  to  make  plans,  to  cover 

confiderce   in    every    truth    that   was  his  life  with  plans — to    use  his  judg- 

true,  though  it  might  seem  to  conflict  ment  and  his  business  ability,  and  so 

with   some    other    truth,    which    was  to  make  the  best  of  both  worlds,  but 

characteristic   of    the   great    Teacher,  first  of  this.     If  a  man  has  not  done 

He  both   commended  and  condemned  nobly  and  well  with  the  trust  of  this 

"  forethought."     Wise  attention  to  the  life  which  God  has  committed  to  him, 

responsibilities    of     the     future,     and  how  can  he  expect,  or  how  can  he  be 

careful     preparation    to     meet    them  fitted  for,  the  higher  trusts  of  the  life 

worthily,  our  Lord  commended,  when  to  come  ? 

He  spoke  of  the  king  taking  serious  II.  The  revelation  of  men's  char- 
counsel  as  to  his  ability  to  meet  the  acters  in  their  plan-making. — When 
advancing  enemy,  Worryful  restless-  imagination  overmasters  judgment,  a 
ness  and  fear,  that  people  the  future  man's  plans  are  but  baseless,  dreamy, 
with  nothing  but  ghostly  shapes  of  hopeless  "  castles  in  the  air."  When  a 
disaster  and  woe.  He  condemned  in  man  has  gained  but  little  self-restraint 
His  paradoxical  way,  by  bidding  His  or  skill  in  self- management,  he  plans 
disciples  even  "  take  no  thought  for  so  foolishly,  and  has  so  little  power  to 
the  morrow."  carry    out  his  plans,  that  he  is  con- 

I.  The    duty    of    making    plans. —  stantly  making  plans,  each  new  one  as 

We  cannot  be   intelligent   and  moral  practically  hopeless  as  those  he  made 

beings   without   recognising   the   duty  before.     When  a  man  is  over-confident 

of   making   plans.     It   is   essential   to  of  himself,  his  plans  are  so  absurdly 

developed  manhood  that  it  should  have  big   that   no   giant   could    ever   carry 

an  aim  in  life.     A  man,  to  be  a  mah,  them   through.     Men   can   always   be 

must    have    something    to    live   for —  searched  through  and  through,  if  you 

something  that  he  means  to  attain,  or  can  only  get  them  to   tell   you  their 

means  to  win.     If  he  has,  he  cannot  idea  and  hope  for  the  future.     Reli- 

but  order  and  shape  his  life  so  as  to  gion,  because  it  tones  and  harmonises 

secure  his  aim  ;  and  that  is  making  a  all  a  man's   faculties,  and  because  it 

plan.     The    duty  is  seen  if  we  realise  cultures  the  noblest  elements  of  human 

what   the  human  life  is  that  has  no  character,  helps  a  man  to  make  sober, 

plan.     What   sort   of   a  man   is  that  wise,    reasonable,    and   workable    life- 

who    never    makes    any — who    never  plans.     Religion   does    not   crush   the 

sees  beyond  the  place  of  his  next  foot-  ambition  that  aims  at  high  things.    It 

598 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES. 


CHAP.    IV. 


inspires  to  really  higher  things  than 
the  man  of  the  world  can  imagine, 
but  it  delivers  from  the  self-interest 
and  self-seeking  and  self-confidence 
which  make  the  ambition  seek  un- 
reasonable things,  unworthy  things, 
and  things  that  can  only  be  attained 
at  the  disadvantage  and  suffering  of 
others.  It  is  a  matter  worth  taking 
into  serious  account  that  we  are  all 
disclosed  to  men,  and  to  God,  by  the 
plans  we  have  made  for  our  lives. 

III.  The  cherished  spirit  that 
ought  to  be  behind  all  plan-making. 
—St.  James  tells  us  what  that  spirit 
should  be.  He  does  not  mean  that 
always  and  everywhere  we  should  be 
qualifying  our  speech  by  inserting  the 
sentence,  "  If  the  Lord  will."  The 
man  he  introduces  is  making  his  plans 
by  himself,  he  is  talking  them  over  to 
himself  ;  he  is  not  telling  other  people 
about  them.  He  speaks  thus  in  his 
heart;  and  "  as  a  man  thinketh  in  his 
heart,  so  he  is."  And  the  advice  given 
is  for  the  same  private  sphere.  When 
a  man  is  making  his  plans,  he  should 
be  saying  to  himself,  "  If  the  Lord 
will."  This  should  represent  the 
spirit  that  he  cherishes — the  spirit 
which  gives  character  and  tone  to  all 
his  schemes.  Is  such  a  spirit  in  any 
sense  at  all  unmanly?  Nay,  it  is 
essential  to  truest  manliness,  if  man  is 
a  creature,  if  man  is  a  son,  if  man 
is  a  servant.  To  take  life  master- 
fully into  our  own  hands,  and  say, 
*'  It  shall  be  just  as  I  wish,"  is  not  to 
be  a  man  at  all ;  it  is  to  make  claim  to 
be  an  independent  being — a  god — which 
man  is  not.  But  that  spirit  which 
ought  to  be  behind  all  our  plan- 
making  is  not  easy  to  gain  or  easy  to 
maintain.  It  has  its  rootage  in  right 
relations  with  God.  It  gains  its 
support  in  our  constantly  keeping  up 
those  right  relations. 

IV.  The  influence  of  that  spirit  on 
the  outworking  and  the  issue  of  our 
life-plans. — When  a  man's  self-will  is 
in  his  plans,  he  will  put  forth  a 
tremendous  energy,  and  resolutely 
persevere.  Does  not  the  spirit  of 
dependence  on  God  pluck  away  a  man's 


energy,  and  make  hLs  efforts  fitful  and 
uncertain  ?  Such  a  question  may  be 
asked,  and  with  some  reasonableness, 
for  Christians  are  sometimes  very 
inefficient  in  the  business  of  life,  and 
in  its  battle.  "The  children  of  this 
world  are  in  their  generation  wiser 
than  the  children  of  light."  But  this 
is  a  matter  of  weakness  of  natural 
disposition,  and  is  not  to  be  charged 
to  the  influence  of  Christian  principle. 
What  is  true  is,  that  the  cherished 
spirit  of  dependence  at  once  inspires 
energy  and  tones  it.  It  does  give  a 
man  a  calmness  and  a  self-restraint 
which  qualify  the  intensities  and 
extravagances  of  human  energy;  but 
it  knits  the  whole  forces  of  a  man's 
nature  together  in  such  a  way  as  to 
give  the  man  the  highest  power  for  the 
life-struggle. 

Vers.  13-15.  Negative  and  Positive 
Christian  Duties. — The  instruction  here 
lies  before  us  in  a  twofold  form — the 
persuasive  and  the  hortatory,  the  nega- 
tive and  the  positive,  what  we  are  not 
to  think  and  feel  and  do,  and  what  we 
are  to  think  and  feel  and  do.  1.  Here 
is  dissuasion  from  presumption — from 
thoughtless,  reckless  confidence  in  the 
immediate  future,  in  the  year  that  is 
thought  about,  and  in  the  self  that 
is  to  make  it  so  and  so.  The  whole 
spirit  of  the  persons  here  instructed 
and  warned  is  full  of  presumptuous- 
ness,  inconsiderateness,  headstrong  wil- 
fulness. It  is  as  if  they  had  absolute 
control  over  events,  over  other  men,, 
over  themselves,  almost  over  God.  It 
is  not  the  self  ihut  is  objected  to,  but 
the  self  alone — the  self  self- poised,  self- 
nourished,  self-directed,  self-sustained : 
let  it  have  direction  from  heaven,  and 
inspiration  of  God,  and  secret  nourish- 
ment from  the  fountain  of  His  all- 
sufficiency,  and  the  se//*is  then  the  best 
thing  in  the  world.  2.  The  spirit  here 
condemned  is  a  spirit  of  icorldliness. 
What  is  worldliness  ?  It  is  buying  and 
selling  and  getting  gain,  and  spending 
the  strength  of  life  and  its  years  in 
that.  But  it  is  not  tlie  act ;  it  is  the 
motive  in  the  act,  the  principle  that 

699 


CHAP.   IV. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES. 


rules  it,  the  end  that  is  sought  by  it, 
that  makes  it  evil.  To  be  unworldly 
is  to  be  unsordid,  unslippery,  unselfish. 
It  is  to  be  honest,  true,  tender,  generous, 
spiritual,  devout.  Look  now  at  the 
positive  side.  1.  A  distinct  realisa- 
tion and  acknowledgment  of  God.  "  If 
the  Lord  will,"  we  ought  to  say — then 
of  course  there  is  a  Lord  God  to  will, 
and  work,  direct,  watch,  and  keep. 
2.  The  Lord  has  a  will  in  everything 
that  enters  into  a  man's  life.  There  is 
no  difficulty  in  understanding  the  will 
of  God  in  the  greatest  things  ;  there  is 
in  the  smaller  and  seemingly  unim- 
portant things.  What  are  we  to  do  ? 
Acknowledge  God;  ascertain  His  will 
concerning  yourself,  as  far  as  you  can ; 
walk  in  the  light  of  it,  do  it  faithfully, 
and  all  else  will  unfold.  Keep  and  culti- 
vate the  spirit  of  devoutness,  of  depend- 
ence, of  submissiveness,  of  obedience,  of 
godliness. — Alexander  Raleigh^  D.D. 

Ver.  14.  ''What  is  your  life?"— 
Various  answers  are  given  to  this  ques- 
tion by  men  according  to  their  disposi- 
tion, experience,  state  of  mind  at  the 
time,  and  degree  of  faith.  The  Bible 
images  and  conceptions  of  life  are 
"sleep,"  "flood,"  "grass,"  "tale  told," 
"  flower,"  "  vapour."  The  materialist, 
the  philosopher,  Voltaire,  man  who  has 
lost  and  wept,  man  who  has  sinned 
deeply,  and  the  Christian,  would  each 
give  a  different  answer  to  this  question. 
Our  views  of  life  change  with  changing 
time.  Two  mistakes__are_jQ£tfin  made  : 
»the  one  in  making  too  much  of  life, 
as  if  it  were  everything ;  the  other  in 
making  too  little  of  life,  as  if  it  were 
nothing. 

I.  Some  considerations  which  make 
us  think  that  life  is  small  and  mean. 
— 1.  Common  and  valueless  thing,  he- 
cause  it  seems  to  exist  in  such  quantities. 
Valuable  things  are  rare.  Look  at 
multitudes  in  great  cities,  in  China — 
the  infant  mortality  which  seems  to 
imply  that  life  is  a  very  cheap  thing. 
2.  Its  shortness.  Things  that  do  not 
last  long  are  not  regarded  as  worth 
much.  Life  is  done  before  almost  any- 
thing  is   completed.      3.    The  way  it 

600  ,     .    . 


deceives  m.en.  Its  appearances  and 
promises  are  fallacious.  An  illusion, 
if  not  a  delusion.  The  whole  of  life 
seems  to  be  constructed  on  the  principle 
of  luring  men  on  by  the  hope  of  one 
thing,  and  then  giving  them  either 
nothing  or  something  else.  4.  For  the 
great  mass  of  people  life  escapes  being 
an  illusion  only  because  it  is  so  complete 
a  drudgery.  ,  They  wear  harness  almost 
without  intermission.  They  are  in  the 
track,  and  round  they  must  go.  5.  If 
life  were  of  value,  surely  men  would 
have  found  out  by  this  time  that  it  is 
so.  Yes ;  but  life  is  allowed  to  slip 
through  the  impassive  hands  of  men. 

II.  Some  considerations  which  com- 
pel us  to  feel  that  life  is  great. — To 
triflers  only  is  life  a  trifle.  1.  Life  is 
great  in  its  moral  significance.  Even 
the  confusion  of  his  nature,  his  self- 
contradiction,  his  waywardness,  his 
resolute  set  towards  evil,  do  not  take 
from  the  greatness  of  the  nature  and 
the  significance  of  the  life.  2.  Can 
human  life  be  small  v)hen  God  once  passed 
through  it  ?  A  thing  is  sacred  by  its 
associations.  The  Almighty  once  wore 
this  human  life  as  a  garment.  3.  Think 
of  the  Holy  Ghost's  mission.  A  really 
Divine  personal  force  in  the  place  of 
human  life  transfigured;  it  gives  in- 
finite meaning.  4.  Life  is  much  to  me, 
because  it  is  mine.  The  only  thing  that 
is.  My  section  cut  out  of  the  mass  of 
ages.  My  handwriting  on  the  huge 
scroll  of  time.  My  probation.  This 
makes  it  of  supreme  value  to  me. 
5.  Life  is  great  when  we  realise  that  it 
is  passed  on  the  edge  of  eternity.  We 
have  now  all  the  significance  that  be- 
longs to  the  spiritual  and  everlasting 
sphere,  because  we  are,  even  now,  all 
our  life  touching  it.  Surely  this  makes 
life  an  awful  thing.  "  We  should  not 
always  be  thinking  of  death."  It  de- 
pends entirely  how  we  think  of  it.  We 
should  think  of  it,  not  to  unman  us, 
but  to  force  us  to  be  real.  The  sense 
of  the  possible  nearness  of  death  should 
make  us  collected  and  awed.  What  is 
my  life  ?  What  do  I  wish  it  to  be  ? 
Is  Christ  in  it  ?  is  God  in  it  ?  is  hope 
in  it?     Is  there  eternal  power  in  it? 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES. 


CHAP.   IV. 


It  is  a  vapour,  a  cloud.  But  there 
are  different  kinds  of  clouds.  Let 
our  life  not  be  like  those  clouds  which 
are  chilled  and  fall  to  earth,  but  like 
those  which  soar  upwards  in  the  glory 
of  the  everlasting  sun. — John  F. 
Ewing,  31. A. 

An  Emblem  of  the  Uncertainty  of  lAfe. 
— "  For  ye  are  a  vapour."  The  point 
of  the  illustration  lies  in  the  transient 
character  of  vapour,  steam,  or  mist — 
the  breath  of  the  mouth,  the  smoke 
from  the  chimney,  the  steam  from  the 
engine.  It  is  palpable,  but  only  for 
a  while,  and  even  while  it  is  with  us  it 
is  going,  and  soon  it  is  gone.  Uncer- 
tain in  its  going,  for  it  is  entirely 
dependent  on  the  state  of  the  atmo- 
sphere around.  Life  is  like  a  vapour. 
It  is  here ;  but  you  cannot  imprison 
and  keep  it.  It  is  going  even  while  it 
is  here,  and  its  time  of  going  depends 
on  so  many  things  over  which  we  have 
no  control.  If  a  man  duly  estimates 
the  transient  and  uncertain  character 
of  human  life,  he  cannot  presume  on 
any  future,  and  make  any  absolute 
decisions  as  to  what  he  will  do  and 
what  he  will  not.  For  the  figure  see 
Job  vii.  7  ;  Ps.  cii.  3  ;  Wisd.  v.  9-16. 

Life  a  Vapour. — We  are  not  sure  of 
life  itself,  since  it  is  but  as  a  vapour, 
something  in  appearance,  but  nothing 
solid  or  certain  ;  it  is  easily  scattered 
and  gone.  We  can  fix  the  hour  and 
minute  of  the  sun's  rising  and  setting 
to-morrow,  but  we  cannot  fix  the  cer- 
tain time  of  a  vapour's  being  scattered. 
Such  is  our  life  :  "it  appear  but  for 
a  little  time,  and  then  vanisheth 
away  "  ;  it  vanisheth  as  to  this  world, 
but  there  is  a  life  that  will  continue 
in  the  other  world  ;  and  since  this  life 
is  so  uncertain,  it  concerns  us  all  to 
prepare  and  lay  up  in  store  for  that 
to  come. — Mattheiv  Henry. 

Human  Life  transitory. 

I.  How  men  make  the  mistake  of 
regarding  their  life  as  something  solid 
and  stable. — 1.  They  calculate  upon 
the  certain  continuance  of  their 
strength.     2.  They   reckon   on  an  in- 


definite prolonging  of  life.  They  think 
the  next  life  will  much  resemble  this. 

II.  The  fact  that  human  life  is  but 
a  vapour. — 1.  The  uncertainty  of  life. 
2.  The  universal  certainty  of  death. 

III.  How  we  may  rectify  these 
errors    in    ourselves. — We    should — 

1.  Understand  the  reality  of  the  case. 

2.  Become   entirely   reconciled   to    it. 

3.  Accommodate  all  our  views,  feelings, 
and  plans  to  it. — Br.  Kirk. 

Lessons  from  Mist  or  Vapour. 

I.  Our  first  lesson  is  drawn  from 
the  ephemeral  nature  of  vapour. 

'*  Like  mist  on  the  mountain,  like  waves  of 
of  the  sea, 
So  quickly  the  years  of  our  pilgrimage 
flee." 

The  time  allotted  to  us  here  is  none 
too  long  to  fulfil  the  duties  assigned 
us,  and  make  preparation  for  the  life 
which  Ues  beyond.  It  is  strange,  in- 
deed, that  men  should  be  so  careless  of 
the  fact,  even  while  they  are  profoundly 
convinced  that  there  is  a  future  for  the 
soul,  and  that  beyond  the  mists  of  this 
life  there  shall  open  an  eternal  day.  It 
is  not  strange  that  those  who  are  over- 
whelmed with  the  cares  and  pressing 
engagements  and  hard  conflicts  of  this 
life  should  at  times  permit  these  things 
to  dim  their  views  of  God,  of  coming 
judgment,  and  the  heaven  of  the  re- 
deemed. But  certain  it  is  that  the 
fact  of  these  obscuring  earth-born  mists 
does  not  blot  out  the  more  substantial 
facts  of  God  and  eternity.  This  life 
hides  heaven,  but  it  comes  out  again 
with  the  vanishing  mist.  The  vapour 
vanishes,  but  the  day  remains.  Let 
us  so  live  that  we  shall  remain  mthin 
the  precincts  of  eternal  day.  It  is  the 
duty  of  man  to  tliink  of  his  life  in  this 
its  larger  outlook.  Our  life  is  a  \'apour, 
but  there  are  possibilities  within  it  of 
which  we  never  yet  have  dreamed. 

II.  The  mist  teaches  that  our  brief 
life  should  be  a  life  of  blessing.  The 
mist  is  one  of  the  nutritive  forces  of 
nature.  Our  life  may  be  a  vapour  in 
the  benevolent  phase  of  the  figure  of 
the  text.     Life  is  brief,  but  it  may  be 

001 


CfiAt».  IV. 


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES. 


a  benediction.  And  God  is  best  glori- 
fied by  an  honest  endeavour  on  the 
part  of  every  man  to  bring  and  keep 
a  blessing  within  the  world. 

III.  Our  third  lesson  comes  to  us 
from  the  obedience  of  the  mist  to  the 
will  and  law  of  the  Creator.  See 
Job  xxxvii.  27,  28  ;  Ps.  cxxxv.  7, 
cxlviii.  7,  8.  We  may  well  be  shamed 
into  our  duty  by  the  obedience  to 
Divine  law  which  is  stamped  every- 
where upon  the  creatures  of  inanima.te 
nature.  From  cloud,  rain,  and  dew, 
from  vapour  of  water,  from  mist,  we 
expect,  always  expect,  expect  without 
deviation,  qualification,  or  delay,  most 
implicit  discharge  of  the  functions 
which  the  almighty  Creator  has  im- 
posed upon  them.  They  never  fail  the 
hand  that  made  them.  They  never  go 
counter  to  the  will  whose  force  set  them 
originally  in  play. 

lY.  Our  last  lesson  comes  from  the 
use  of  mist  as  a  symbol  of  judgment 
upon  the  wicked.  See  Acts  xiii.  11  ; 
2  Pet.  ii.  17.  In  the  one  of  these 
cases  the  judgment  appears  to  have 
been  a  physical,  in  the  other  a  spiritual 
one.  The  figurative  expression  "  mist " 
is  an  apt  symbol  of  that  soul  out  of 
whose  horizon  the  vision  of  the  Sun 
of  righteousness  with  healing  in  His 
wings  has  been  permitted  to  drop  away. 
If  it  be  but  a  momentary  mist — "a 
vapour  that  appeareth  for  a  little 
while  " — even  thus  it  is  sad  enough,  for 
a  life  without  the  presence  of  Christ  to 
brighten  and  bless  it  must  be  a  hopeless 
one.  The  rejection  of  Christ,  the  doubt 
of  unbelief,  is  a  mist  of  darkness  which 
can  only  deepen  the  misery  of  man's 
estate.  It  brings  to  him  in  this  life 
restlessness,  hopelessness,  and  despair. 
Let  us  devoutly  hope  that  upon  none 
of  us  shall  this  mist  of  darkness  settle 
in  the  coming  eternity.  It  is  some- 
times the  case  in  Christian  experience 
that  there  comes  a  glimpse  of  the 
horror  of  this  mist  of  darkness  in  the 
form  of  spiritual  fears  and  doubts. 
These  do  not  cover  the  fundamental 
points  of  faith,  but  simply  obscure  the 
individual's  hope  as  to  his  own  interest 
in  these  great  facts.     Such  may  take 

603 


this  comfort.  Mists  love  the  lowlands. 
Forsake  the  lowlands  of  unbelief.  Go 
higher  !  on  wings  of  faith  mount  nearer 
to  the  throne,  nearer  to  that  hill  whose 
healing  cross  is  the  central  point  of 
human  hopes.  As  you  draw  near  in 
reverent  trust,  there  shall  fall  for  you 
the  light  that,  if  it  do  not  disperse  all 
mists  in  this  weary  and  wicked  world 
of  ours,  shall  at  least  Hft  your  spirit 
out  of  them,  and  give  you  that  sun- 
shine which  God  appoints  for  His  own. 
~H.  C.  McCook,  D.D. 

Yer.  15.  The  Saying,  '' If  God  will." 
^^  Deo  Volente." — In  the  same  way  as 
Jews,  with  an  over -literaln ess,  put 
little  boxes,  containing  the  woi'ds  of 
the  law,  on  their  foreheads  and  on 
their  arms,  so  have  Christians,  with 
an  over-literalness,  put  D.v.  into  their 
writings,  and  even  into  bills  of  services 
and  meetings.  No  such  formal  obedi- 
ence of  St.  James's  injunction  is  either 
necessary  or  expected.  And  that  over- 
literalness  is  in  peril  of  nourishing  a 
hypocritical  or  a  pietistic  sensational- 
ism. Too  often  it  comes  to  represent 
the  "  Stand  by,  I  am  holier  than  thou  " 
kind  of  feeling,  which  most  seriously 
injures  our  Christian  relations.  The 
spirit  of  dependence  on  God,  and  of 
entire  submission  to  His  will,  is  a 
spirit  which  must  be  cherished,  but 
which,  if  cherished,  will  find  its  fitting 
expression  in  the  tone  and  temper  of 
all  our  words  and  intercourse,  and 
never  need  gain  any  forced  and  precise 
utterance  in  a  mere  sentence.  When 
it  is  the  mood  of  the  soul,  all  who 
have  to  do  with  us  feel  it ;  and  that  is 
better  for  them  than  merely  hearing 
it ;  and  certainly  far  better  for  us. 

Acknowledging  God's  Will. — The  Jews 
began  nothing  without  an  if  God  or 
if  THE  NAME  (meaning  God)  will.  And 
it  was  a  saying  of  Ben  Syra,  a  dis- 
tinguished Jew,  "  Let  a  man  never 
say  he  will  do  anything  before  he  says, 
'If  God  will.'"  So  Cyrus,  king  of 
Persia,  when,  under  the  pretence  of 
hunting,  he  designed  an  expedition 
into    Armenia,    upon    which    a    hare 


HOMILETtC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP.    IV. 


started  and  was  seized  by  an  eagle, 
said  to  his  friend.s,  *'This  will  be  a 
good  or  prosperous  hunting  to  us,  if 
God  will.^^  So  Socrates  says,  "  But  I 
will  do  this,  and  come  unto  thee  to- 
morrow, if  God  will "  (Xenophon's 
Cy7'opedia,  lib.  ii.,  cap.  25 ;  Plato  in 
Alcibiade,  p.  135).  And  it  is  reported 
of  the  Turks  that  they  submit  every- 
thing to  the  Divine  will,  as  the  success 
of  war,  or  a  journey,  or  anything  of 
the  least  moment  they  desire  to  be 
done ;  and  never  promise  themselves 
or  others  anything  but  under  this 
condition,  Inshallah^  that  is,  "  If  God 
will." — Ingram  Cohhin,  M.A. 

Ver.  17.  The  Responsibility  of  Know- 
ledge.— It  is  a  noble  saying  of  Lotze, 
*'  We  do  not  honour  God  by  elaborating 
proofs  of  His  existence."  We  are  still 
elaborating  the  proofs.  Preaching  is 
apologetic  rather  than  declarative. 
The  best  way  of  honouring  Jesus  Christ 
is  to  believe  His  word,  trust  His  grace, 
mark  the  triumphs  of  His  saving  power, 
and,  for  ourselves,  to  act  on  the  facts 
we  know.  The  text  has  two  things — 
an  exhortation  and  a  statement. 

I.  The  exhortation. — Act  on  vjhat 
you  know.  We  all  know  more  than 
we  live  up  to.  We  see  Christianity 
very  much  more  clearly  in  our  intelli- 
gence than  others  witness  it  in  our 
lives.  We  understand  Jesus  Christ 
better  than  we  live  Him.  Our  practice 
lags  lumberingly  behind  our  knowledge. 
Conscience  is  always  ahead  of  conduct ; 
knowing,  of  doing.  In  almost  no  respect 
do  we  practise,  in  morals,  all  we  know. 
Now  it  is  remarkable  that,  notwith- 
standing this  state  of  things,  our  efforts 
are  bent  on  increasing  our  knowledge 
rather  than  on  improving  our  conduct. 
Men  want  to  know  all  about  Chris- 
tianity before  practising  the  A  B  c's.  I 
find  myself  seeking  to  expound  Chris- 
tianity to  your  intelligence,  when,  just 
now,  the  far  more  urgent  matter  is  to 
get  the  elements  of  Christianity,  which 
all  understand,  into  your  conduct.  It 
is  just  so  that  the  wide  discrepancy 
between  our  knowledge  and  our  practice 
has  obtained.     We  have  pushed,  and 


are  still  pushing,  our  knowledge  of 
Christian  teaching  at  the  expense  of 
our  practice  of  Christian  teaching.  It 
is  far  more  important  to  a  well-rounded 
character  to  blot  out  this  discrepancy 
than  to  push  our  intellectual  compre- 
hension of  Jesus.  The  greater  need  is 
to  practise,  to  act  on  what  we  know, 
not  to  know  more.  Besides,  our  present 
course  ignores  two  important  facts : 
(1)  The  very  end  of  knowledge  is  to  be 
enacted ;  and  (2)  to  practise  what  we 
know  is  the  very  best  way  of  extending 
our  knowledge.  He  *'that  willeth  to 
do  ,  ,  ,  shall  under  standi  Those  people 
who  insist  on  understanding  all  of 
Christian  teaching  before  practising 
any  of  it  never  understand  any  of  it 
profoundly.  Jesus  said  His  teaching 
had  to  be  lived  before  it  could  fully 
certify  itself.  The  exhortation  of  the 
text  is  a  ringing  one,  and  comes  to  our 
time  with  peculiar  aptness  and  force 
— Act  on  what  you  know!  It  is  an 
exhortation  to  Churches,  as  well  as  to 
individuals,  and  to  the  Church  at  large. 
Churches  are  still  busy  at  work  purging 
and  elaborating  and  refining  their 
creeds.  Thus  is  Christianity  of  the 
head  continually  refined,  while  Chris- 
tianity of  the  heart  and  conduct  re- 
mains, on  an  average,  below  par.  The 
demand  of  the  hour  upon  the  Church 
is.  Bring  up  the  rear ;  bring  conduct 
up  to  conscience,  practice  up  to  pro- 
fession ;  bring  deeds  up  to  knowledge. 
It  is  safe  to  say  that  if  the  Church 
should  devote  a  generation  to  the  effort 
to  bring  its  life  up  to  present  state- 
ments of  belief  and  knowledge,  we  might 
bring  in  the  millennium. 

II.  There  is  here  not  only  the  ex- 
hortation. Act  on  what  you  know — 
but  the  statement,  If  you  do  not,  it 
is  sin.  Knowledge  entails  immediate 
responsibility,  failure  to  meet  which 
is  sin.  A  man  whose  conduct  falls 
short  of  his  knowledge  of  what  is  right 
is  a  sinner.  So  a  Church.  To  defer 
the  doing  of  what  we  know  of  Chris- 
tian teaching — a  right  thing — Ls  to  do 
a  wrong  thing ;  and,  moreover,  our 
omissions  of  known  duty  unfit  us  more 
and  more  for  new  duties — indeed,  for 

603 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES. 


all  duties :  the  movements  of  the  soul 
are  clogged  by  disuse.  "  Ignorance  of 
the  law  excuseth  no  man."  The  text 
refers  only  to  those  who  know  to  do 
good,  but  who  do  it  not.  These  are 
sinners,  whether  they  are  unsaved  and 
neglect  the  salvation  of  which  they 
are  well  informed,  or  Christians  whose 
profession  is  one  thing  and  whose 
practice  is  another,  or  Churches  who 
spend  their  time  expelling  heretics 
while  the  poor  and  vicious  and  godless 
surge  past  their  doors  unpitied  and 
unsought. — E.  M.  Poteat. 


Knowing  with  Doing. — In  the  Beau- 
tiful Legend  there  is  a  strife  between 
the  call  of  duty  to  give  out  a  dole  of 
bread  to  the  hungry,  and  the  tempta- 
tion to  linger  in  religious  ecstasy  over 
a  vision  of  C^hrist.  But  the  true  brother 
knew  "to  do  good,"  and  did  it;  and, 
returning  at  the  end  of  his  work,  found 
his  cell  full  of  the  radiant  presence  of 
the  Lord,  and  heard  the  words  of 
gracious  approval — 

"  Hadst  thou  stayed,  I  must  have  fled." 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO   CHAPTER  IV. 


Ver.  7.  Temptation. — When  the  devil 
tempts  a  man  to  commit  any  wickedness, 
he  does,  as  it  were,  lay  a  long  train  of  sins  ; 
and  if  the  first  temptation  take,  they  give 
fire  one  to  another.  Let  us,  then,  resist 
the  beginning  of  sin  ;  because  then  we  have 
the  most  power,  and  sin  hath  the  least. — 
Tillotson. 

Two  Great  Proverbs. — There  are  two 
great  proverbs,  one  among  the  Turks,  and 
the  other  among  the  Spaniards,  both  of 
which  contain  much  that  is  true.  "  A  busy 
man  is  troubled  with  but  one  devil;  but 
the  idle  man  with  a  thousand."  "  Men  are 
usually  tempted  by  the  devil ;  but  the  idle 
man  positively  tempts  the  devil."  How 
much  corrupting  company,  how  many 
temptations  to  do  wrong,  how  many  seasons 
of  danger  to  your  character,  and  danger  to 
the  peace  of  your  friends,  may  you  escape 
by  regarding  the  admonition,  "  Resist  the 
devil,  and  he  shall  flee  from  you." 

Vers.    14,    15. — Providence   acknowledged. 


— With  all  our  wish  to  inquire  into  the 
future,  a  thoughtful  mind  will  not  fail  to 
acknowledge  the  wisdom  and  love  of  God 
in  keeping  it  back  from  us.  "  What  little 
child,"  says  the  author  of  Recreations  of 
a  Country  Parson,  in  an  essay  on  the  "  Art 
of  Putting  Things "—"  what  little  child 
would  have  heart  to  begin  the  alphabet,  if, 
before  he  did  so,  ycu  put  clearly  before  him 
all  the  school  and  college  work  of  which  it 
is  the  beginning?  The  poor  little  thing 
would  knock  up  at  once,  wearied  out  by 
your  want  of  skill  in  putting  things.  And 
so  it  is  that  Providence,  kindly  and  gradually 
putting  things,  wiles  us  onward,  still  keeping 
hope  and  heart  through  the  trials  and  cares 
of  life.  Ah  !  if  we  had  had  it  put  to  us  at 
the  outset  how  much  we  should  have  to  go 
through  to  reach  even  our  present  stage  of 
life,  we  should  have  been  ready  to  think  it 
the  best  plan  to  sit  down  and  die  at  once ; 
but,  in  compassion  for  human  weakness,  the 
great  Director  and  Shower  of  events  practises 
the  art  of  putting  things." 


CHAPTER  V. 
RULES  FOR  DAILY  CONDUCT. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL   NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Rich  men. — Always  in  Scripture,  the  men  who  are  proud  of  their  riches,  centred 
in  their  riches,  and  are  nothing  but  rich.  The  good  man,  who  happens  to  have  the  trust 
of  wealth,  and  is  trying  to  use  it  faithfully,  should  not  be  thought  of  as  addressed  in 
Scripture  reproofs.  Howl. — Only  used  here  in  tha  New  Testament,  but  found  in  Isa.  xiii.  6, 
xiv.  31,  XV.  3  ;  "  weep  with  howling,"  a  desperate  form  of  distress.  Illustrate  by  the  woes 
that  came  on  the  rich  in  connection  with  the  siege  of  Jerusalem.  Shall  come. — Better, 
•'are  now  actually  coming." 

Ver.  3.  Cankered. — Rusted;  used  generally  of  the  tarnish  that  comes  over  all  metals 

604 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES.  chap.  v. 


exposed  to  the  action  of  the  air.  Witness  against  you. — "  For  a  witness  to  you  "  not 
testimony  against,  but  warning  lest.  For  the  last. — Better,  "  in  the  last."  Evidently  in 
mind  is  the  speedy  fulfilment  of  our  Lord's  predictions. 

Ver,  4.  Of  the  Lord  of  sabaoth. — Kvplov  2a^aci^.  Lord  of  hosts,  especially  characteristic 
name  found  in  Malachi. 

Ver.  5.  Lived  in  pleasure. — Better,  •'  ye  lived  luxuriously  and  spent  wantonly."    As  in. 

Better,  "  in."  "  The  '  rich  men '  of  Judaea,  in  their  pampered  luxury,  were  but  fattening 
themselves,  all  unconscious  of  their  doom,  as  beasts  are  fattened  for  the  slaughter " 
(^Pluviptre). 

Ver.  6.  The  just.— Not  specifically  "  the  Just  One,"  but  generally  "pious,  righteous  men." 

Ver.  7.  Margin,  "  suffer  with  long  patience."  St.  James  inculcates  a  systematic  course  of 
action.  Early  and  latter  rain. — IJarly  rain  fell  from  October  to  February,  latter  from 
March  to  end  of  April. 

Ver.  9.  Grudge  not. — A  caution  against  an  impatient,  querulous  temper.  "  Complain  not." 
"  Groan  not." 

Ver.  11.  Endure. — Some  prefer  "  endured."  Pitiful. —Large-hearted  ;  tender-hearted.  The 
word  used,  iroXvawXayxvos,  is  peculiar,  and  it  is  thought  may  have  been  coined  by  St.  James. 

Ver.  13.  Merry.— Of  good  cheer,  gladsome  at  heart.  Psalm. — The  word  suggests  a 
composition  fitted  to  an  accompaniment  of  music. 

Ver.  14.  Call  for. — Summon  to  him.  Elders.— Officers  usual  in  synagogues,  and  probably 
also  found  in  the  Jewish  Christian  congregations.  Not  priests,  or  even  ministers. 
Anointing  him  with  oil. — Clearly  not  as  a  religious  ceremony,  but  as  an  agency  for  the 
recovery  of  health.  It  is  also  suggested  that  the  use  of  oil  in  the  toilet  was  a  recognised 
sign  of  recovery  to  health.  Compare  our  Lord's  saying  to  the  maiden  Arise  /  as  if  she  was 
actually  restored  to  life  and  health. 

Ver.  15.  Prayer  of  faith. — The  only  kind  of  prayer  that  ever  is  acceptable  to  God : 
chap.  i.  6.  The  prayer  that  is  answered  in  the  restoration  of  a  sick  member  in  no  way  difiEers 
from  the  prayers  for  ordinary  blessings.  Christian  prayer  is  "  the  prayer  of  faith."  Sins.  — 
Here  specially  thought  of  as  the  immediate  cause  of  his  sickness.  The  sin  of  a  Christian 
man,  which  has  brought  on  him  a  penalty  of  suffering.  Not  all  his  sins,  or  the  sins  of  any 
sick  man.     The  reference  of  the  text  is  strictly  limited. 

Ver.  16.  Faults. — Referring  to  the  immediate  case  of  which  St.  James  is  treating.  Tlie 
occasions  of  sickness  are  often  faults  rather  than  wilful  sins ;  the  word  used  would  be 
better  rendered,  "transgressions."  One  to  another. — On  the  assumption  that  "all  ye  are 
brethren,"  pledged  to  mutual  helpfulness.  By  mutual  confidence  in  one  another  we  learn 
how,  appropriately,  to  pray  for  each  other.  Availeth  much. — As  the  term  "effectual 
fervent "  is  given  in  the  participle  ivefyyov/nivrj  (working),  it  is  suggested  to  render,  "  A 
righteous  man's  supplication  is  of  great  weight  in  its  working." 

Ver.  17.  Prayed  earnestly. — Margin,  "  prayed  in  his  prayer." 

Ver.  19.  Err. — Or,  "  be  led  astray."    Convert. — Turn  him  round,  and  bring  him  back. 

Ver.  20.  Hide  a  multitude  of  sins. — Compare  LXX,  on  Prov.  x.  12 :  "  Friendship  covers 
all  those  that  are  not  contentious."  See  1  Pet.  iv.  8.  It  is  clear  that  the  sins  St.  James 
has  in  mind  are  those  of  the  object  of  the  action,  not  of  the  agent. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—6. 

Rich  Men  that  are  Only  Rich. — This  passage  seems  to  have  the  character  of 
an  "  aside  "  or  "  parenthesis."  It  is  difficult  to  conceive  that  persons  of  siicli 
character,  worthy  of  such  severe  condemnation,  could  have  been  members  of  the 
Jewish  Christian  Churches.  It  is  more  reasonable  to  think  that  St.  James 
sends  this  severe  message  to  such  as  were  persecuting  the  members  of  the 
Churches,  and  riding  over  them  in  the  masterfulness  of  their  pride,  and  that  he 
designed  to  comfort  the  persecuted  and  distressed  by  the  assurance  that  God 
was  surely  dealing  with  their  persecutors,  and  that  there  could  be  no  reason  for 
envj^ing  their  lot.  The  message  is  but  an  echo  of  our  Lord's  saying,  "  Woe  unto 
you  that  are  rich  !  for  ye  have  received  your  consolation  "  (Luke  vi.  24).  It  is 
important  to  make  a  careful  distinction  between  persons  who  are  rich  and 
persons  who  are  only  rich.  It  is  not  wrong  to  be  rich.  It  is  not  necessarily  a 
hindrance  to  Christian  life  to  be  rich.  A  man  may  just  as  sincerely  and 
acceptably  lay  his  riches  upon  the  altar  of  service  as  anything  else  that  he  has. 
But  it  is  wrong  to  be  a  rich  man  and  nothing  else.     It  is  wrong  when  that  is 

605 


CHAP.  V.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


all  you  can  say  about  the  man.  It  is  woful  wrong  when  you  are  compelled  to 
say  that  he  is  a  bad  rich  man.  This  message  should  not  be  taken  as  sent  to  all 
rich  men — only  to  such  rich  men  as  St.  James  describes.  This  distinction  and 
qualification  needs  to 'be  kept  in  mind  in  treating  all  the  New  Testament 
references  to  rich  men.  With  some  care  the  circumstances  of  the  rich  Jews, 
in  the  time  immediately  preceding  the  final  fall  of  Jerusalem,  should  be 
presented. 

I.  Riches  with  troubles. — In  the  best  of  times  to  increase  riches  is  to  increase 
anxieties  and  troubles ;  and  when  hard  times  come,  their  strain  is  always  felt 
most  severely  by  the  rich.     For  one  thing,  as  riches  increase,  wants  are  multi- 
plied, indulgences  become  necessities,  and  there  is  so  much  to  give  up,  when 
banks  break,  ships  founder,  and  speculations  fail.     The  poor  may  feel  the  strain 
of  troublous  times  first,  but  they  do  not  feel  it  worst.     It  is  but  a  little  step 
fi'om  their  usual  limitations  down  into  poverty;  but  it  is  a  big  step  from  the 
mansion  to  the  workhouse.     St.  James  sees,  in  the  swiftly  advancing  miseries 
that  were  coming  on  the  Jewish  nation,  the  just  judgment  of  God  on  men  who 
were  rich,  and  nothing  else  ;  at  least,  nothing  else  that  was  good.      If  a  man  is 
only  rich,  he  can  lose  everything  in  a  time  of  national  calamity.      If  a  man 
has  character,  and  is  rich  in  that  way,  all  the  woes  of  the  world    cannot  take 
his  riches  away.     Ward  Beecher  says  :  "  No  man  can  tell  whether    he  is  rich  or 
poor  by  turning  to  his  ledger.     It  is  the  heart  that  makes  a  man    rich.     He  is 
rich  or  poor  according  to  what  he  is,  not  according  to  what  he  has."      We  envy 
the  rich  ;  but  perhaps  we  should  not  if  we  clearly  saw  that  we  must  take  riches 
with  trouble.     That  truth  may  be  borne  in  upon  us  by  watching  the  faces  of 
the  carriage-folk  in  Hyde  Park.     It  is  a  most  rare  thing  to  see  a  sunny  face  in 
middle-aged  man  or  woman ;  discontent,  weariness,  envy,  bad  temper,  well-nigh 
everywhere,  so  plainly  revealing  that,  for  them  with  all  their  riches,  life  is  a 
failure  and  a  bore.    If  it  is  thus  when  a  country  is  peaceful  and  plenty  abounds, 
what  must  be  the  troubles  of  the  rich  when  Koman  armies  encircle  the  city, 
and  drought  and  famine  and  pestilence  stalk  around  ?     Kiches  can  do  so  little 
to  alleviate  misery  then  ;  and  a  gaunt,  famished  crowd  have  no  respect  for  any, 
but  grasp  and  steal  wherever  they  can.     Bishop  Wordsworth  vigorously  para- 
phrases   vers.    2,    3  :    "  Your   wealth    is    mouldering    in    corruption,    and   your 
garments,  stored  up  in  vain  superfluity,  are  become  moth-eaten  :  although  they 
may  still  glitter  brightly  in  your  eyes,  and  may  dazzle  men  by  their  brilliance, 
yet  they  are  in  fact  already  cankered ;  they  are  loathsome  in  God's  sight ;  the 
Divine  anger  has  breathed  upon  them  and   blighted  them  ;  they  are  already 
withered  and  blasted."     When  the  rich  man  has  character,  then  only  is  he 
prepared  for  the  trouble-times  of  life ;  then  only  has  he  the  "  treasure  in  heaven, 
which  neither  moth  nor  rust  doth  corrupt." 

II.  Riches  with  injustice. — "  Behold,  the  hire  of  the  labourers  who  mowed 
your  fields,  which  is  of  you  kept  back  by  fraud,  crieth."  It  is  making  wholly 
wrong  use  of  this  passage  to  compel  it  to  support  modern  socialistic  schemes, 
which  are  based  on  the  false  assumption,  that  all  employers  of  labour  deal 
unfairly  with  their  labourers.  It  would  be  as  true  to  say  that  all  labourers 
deal  unfairly  with  their  employers;  and  that  is  manifestly  false.  There  are 
cases.  Deal  with  the  cases;  but  do  not  attempt  to  base  a  general  law  upon 
isolated  cases.  Oppressing  the  hireling  in  his  wages  was,  however,  a  character- 
istic Jewish  sin.  "  The  grasping  avarice  that  characterised  the  latter  days  of 
Judaism  showed  itself  in  this  form  of  oppression  among  others."  And  it  should 
be  recognised  that  the  possession  of  riches  easily  becomes,  or  supports,  a  tempta- 
tion to  deal  unjustly  with  the  poor.  Injustice  may  take  form  as  (1)  failure  to 
consider  their  due  claims;  (2)  reserve  of  the  payments  due  to  them  through 
indifference  or   wilfulness;  (3)  inattention    to   the    things   necessary  to   their 

606 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES.  chap.  v. 


physical,  sanitary,  and  moral  well-being.  Happy  is  that  man  in  the  possession 
of  riches  who,  having  a  sensitive  conscience,  finds  it  brings  him  no  accusations 
of  injustice. 

III.  Riches  with  self-indulgence. — "Ye  have  lived  delicately  on  the  earth, 
and  taken  your  pleasure ;  ye  have  nourished  your  hearts  in  a  day  of  slaughter." 
The  sentence  is  a  severe  one,  and  forcibly  presents  to  us  the  self-centredness  of  the 
rich,  pampering  his  appetite — every  sort  of  appetite — clothing  in  scarlet  and 
fine  linen,  and  faring  sumptuously  every  day,  like  Dives.  St.  James,  with  the 
licence  of  poetic  imagination,  pictures  them  dressing  themselves  for  death, 
fattening  themselves  for  the  day  of  slaughter.  This  self-indulgence  is  the 
supreme  peril  of  the  rich.  They  have  no  call  to  the  exercise  of  self-restraint, 
and  every  moral  fibre  becomes  relaxed.  Self-indulgent  people  easily  do  wrong 
things. 

IV.  Eiches  with  violence. — "  Ye  have  condemned,  ye  have  killed  the  right- 
eous otie"  Not  Christ.  St.  James  is  speaking  in  a  poetic  vein,  and  giving  point 
to  his  accusation  by  compelling  them  to  think  of  some  one  case.  Reference  is 
directly  to  some  cases  of  persecution,  in  connection  with  the  Jewish  Christian 
Church,  which  had  aroused  St.  James's  indignation.  Of  this  all  may  be  assured 
who  suffer  wrong  in  any  way  from  the  masterfulness  and  injustice  of  unprin- 
cipled rich  men — "  Their  cry  enters  into  the  ears  of  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth." 
*'  He  is  the  avenger  of  all  such." 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Vers.  1-3.  The  Poverty  of  Riches. —  wealth.     It  is   thus  we   estimate   the 

It  is  impoitant  to  recognise  that  the  differing  values  of  gold  and  silver  and 

rich  man   denounced   in    Scripture   is  copper.     A   thing   is   reckoned   of   no 

never  the  man  who  merely  has  posses-  value   if   it   has   in  it  no   purchasing 

sions.     They  may  come  to  him  by  the  power. 

accident  of   birth,   or   as  the    natural  I.  What     can     riches    buy? — Only 

result   of   business    ability.     There    is  what  belongs  to  the  range  of  material 

nothing    wrong,    or    necessarily   mis-  good.      We   need   not   think   of    that 

chievous,  in  possession ;  and  wealth  is  material  good  as  in  any  narrow  limi- 

just  as  truly  a  trust  from  God,  to  be  tations.       It      includes     all     pleasant 

used  in  helpful  ministries,  as   is  any  things  meeting  bodily  needs  and  bodily 

personal  talent.     But,  like  everything  desires;   but  it  includes  also  all  that 

else  frail  man  deals  with,  riches  may  be  ministers  to  mind,  to  artistic  feeling, 

misused.    They  may  come  to  be  trusted  to     society     interests,    and     even     to 

in  ;  they  may  take  the  soul's  confidence  spiritual    necessities.       The   rich    man 

from  God.      They  may  spoil  a   man's  has  at  command  whatsoever   of   good 

relations  with  his  fellow -man.      They  the  material  woi'ld  can    supply ;    and 

may     seriously    deteriorate    a     man's  getting  it  for  himself,  he  cannot  help 

personal  character.     The  peril  of  riches  getting  it  for  others  to  share  with  him. 

lies  in  their  persuasion  of  the  man  to  If  man  were  only  of  the  earth  earthy, 

trust  in  them,  and  in  their  attraction  riches  might  secure  supply  of  all  his 

of  the  man  to  seek  them  at  any  cost  need. 

or  sacrifice.     "They  that  loill  he  rich  II.  What   cannot   riches   buy? — It 

fall    into    temptation    and    a    snare."  has  no  purchasing  power  in  any  of  the 

Because  riches    so   easily  entice,    per-  imTuaterial    worlds.       It    cannot    buy 

suade,   and  tempt,  it  is   necessary   to  love.      It   cannot    secure   the   noblest 

point  out  what  a  side  of  poverty  there  form  of  human  service — the  service  of 

is  even  to  great  riches.    Its  purchasing  love.     Love  is  only  bought  with  love, 

power  is  the  real  test  of  the  value  of  No  coin  was  ever  yet  paid  for  it.    True 

607 


CHAP.   V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


of  the  love  of  man  to  man.  Sublimely 
true  of  the  love  of  God  to  man.  It  is 
bought  "  without  money  and  without 
price." 

Yer.  4.  Loyalty  to  Workpeople. — 
There  are  peculiarities  in  Eastern 
workpeople  which  partly  explain  the 
need  for  such  advice  as  this.  Eastern 
workpeople  have  no  such  personal 
independence  as  characterises  even  the 
labourers  of  our  Western  lands.  They 
are  more  correctly  associated  with  our 
idea  of  slaves.  They  have  the  spirit- 
less character,  the  unintelligent  sub- 
mission, the  disposition  to  shirk 
burdens,  which  we  connect  with  our 
notion  of  slaves.  In  Eastern  countries 
no  kind  of  servant  or  workman  can 
be  trusted  alone  without  direct 
personal  supervision.  Overseers  are 
always  appointed,  to  keep  them  at 
their  duty.  As  a  natural  consequence, 
masters  readily  become  severe  and 
tyrannical,  inditf  erent  to  the  labourers' 
well-being,  and  practically  out  of  all 
sympathy  with  them.  Moses  had  to 
legislate  for  their  protection  (Lev.  xix. 
13).  Prophets  had  to  denounce  the 
sin  of  oppressing  the  labourer  (Jer. 
xxii.  13;  Mai.  iii.  5).  "The  grasping 
avarice  that  characterised  the  latter 
days  of  Judaism  showed  itself  in  this 
form  of  oppression."  Christianity  in- 
directly improves  the  position  and 
relations  of  workpeople.  It  does  not 
directly  interfere  with  social  conditions. 
Its  principle  is  distinctly  stated  in  the 
apostolic  decision,  "  Let  every  man 
wherein  he  is  called,  therein  abide  with 
God."  It  affects  workpeople  by  im- 
proving them,  and  by  altering  the 
sentiments  of  their  masters  concerning 
them.  A  worldly  master  sees  in  his 
workpeople  only  persons  with  whose 
help  he  is  to  make  money.  A  Chris- 
tian master  sees  in  his  workpeople 
persons  for  whose  all-round  well-being 
he  is  responsible.  There  are  some 
senses  in  which  they  cannot  help 
themselves.  Yet  in  those  things  their 
truest  well-being  is  bound  up.  Loyalty 
to  Christ  means  loyalty  to  them ;  and 
this  brings  upon  the  Christian  a  burden 

608 


of  responsibility  to  them.  Let  the 
Christian  master  feel  his  loyalty  to 
those  who  serve  him,  and  cherish  a 
right  spirit  towards  them  ;  these  will  be 
sure  to  inspire  right  and  wise  and 
kindly  deeds.  How  far  the  individual 
sense  of  loyalty  and  responsibility  is 
Ukely  to  be  destroyed  by  modern 
strikes,  combinations,  social,  or  rather 
socialistic,  movements,  must  be  left 
open  to  individual  decision. 

Ver.  5.  The  Moral  Mischief  of  liviThg 
delicately. — It  greatly  surprises  us 
that  such  intensely  severe  reproofs 
could  be  needed  for  persons  in  the 
actual  membership  of  the  early  Chris- 
tian Church.  The  K.Y.  renders  this 
passage,  '*  Ye  have  lived  delicately  on 
the  earth,  and  taken  your  pleasure." 
We  might  render,  "Ye  lived  luxuri- 
ously, and  spent  wantonly."  In  this 
is  severely  reproved  the  misuse  of  the 
riches  possessed.  And  riches  are 
always  misused  when  they  are  made 
to  pamper  bodily  appetite.  The  word 
"  delicately  "  is  suggestive  as  reminding 
us  that  luxurious  and  wanton  living 
as  readily  takes  refined  and  artistic 
as  coarse  and  animal  forms.  The 
point  which  may  be  worked  out  is 
that,  no  matter  what  may  be  the 
station,  culture,  or  resources  at  com- 
mand of  the  Christian  professor,  he 
is  under  absolute  obligation  to  Christ 
to  hold  himself  under  all  due  self- 
restraint,  and  to  put  all  his  relations 
into  wise  and  careful  limitations.  His 
"  moderation  is  to  be  known  unto  all 
men."  This  means  a  moral  bracing 
himself  up,  to  secure  control  of  him- 
self, and  control  of  his  circumstances ; 
and  with  that  control  the  man  is  safe 
amid  temptations.  But  any  form  of 
self-indulgence  unbraces  a  man,  loosens 
and  weakens  the  moral  fibre.  And 
when  a  man  loses  his  power  of  self- 
restraint  and  self-rule  in  some  one 
thing,  he  can  never  be  certain  of 
holding  his  power  of  self-restraint  in 
any  other.  And,  moreover,  he  has 
opened  one  "  gate  of  the  city  of  Man- 
soul  "  to  the  enemy,  and  the  city  is  no 
longer  safe.     It  is  usually  on  the  side 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES.  chap.  v. 


of  some  bodily  indulgence  that  Chris-  a   variety  of  directions,  when  he  bids 

tian  professors  begin   to   fail.     Moral  us    "  keep  the   vessel  of  our  body  in 

mischief  comes  with  indulgence  at  the  sanctification   and    honour."     In   rela- 

table,  or   in    drink  ;    sometimes    there  tion  to  delicacy  of  eating  and  drinking, 

is  a  relaxation  which  allows  a  man  to  it  should  be  better  known  than  it  is, 

be  carried  away  by  worldly  pleasures  that  highly  cooked   and   spiced  foods 

or  sensual    attractions — the   "  lust    of  bear     mischievously    on     the    animal 

the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  or  the  feelings  which  are  so  closely  associated 

pride  of  life."      The  apostle  gives  the  with  the  moral  life, 
advice,  which  we  may  msely  apply  in 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  7—11. 

Our  Duty  in  the  Waiting -times  of  Life. — Throughout  his  epistle  St.  James 
keeps  before  him  the  suffering  and  distressed  condition  of  the  Jewish  Christians. 
There  was  grave  fear  lest  they  should  be  led  to  give  up  their  faith  in  Christ ; 
but  there  was  even  a  greater  fear  lest  they  should  come  to  reproach  one  another, 
and  so  spoil  their  life  of  kindly  relations,  and  deteriorate  their  own  Christian 
characters.  The  times  called  for  the  spirit  of  endurance.  The  call  of  the  hour 
was  to  waiting- work.  In  every  sphere  of  life  and  relationship,  in  those  days, 
the  Christians  were  called  to  quiet  waiting.  There  was  so  little  that  they  could 
do.  They  had  no  power  of  control  over  the  social  and  national  movements  of 
the  age.  Their  strength  was  to  sit  still,  holding  their  own  with  a  quiet  persist- 
ency. Their  endurance  was  their  witness  to  theii'  age.  But  that  waiting  ,is 
the  hardest  thing  ever  given  to  man  to  do  ;  and  it  is  a  great  help  to  him  in  the 
doing  if  he  can  have  the  inspiration  of  an  ideal,  if  he  can  have  some  great 
waiting  in  mind  to  which  he  may  be  constantly  lifting  himself,  and  in  the  great 
effort  making  all  lesser  efforts  at  waiting  come  easier.  The  typical  waiting  then 
was  for  the  "  coming  of  the  Lord."  The  typical  waiting  still  is  for  the  "  coming 
of  the  Lord."  It  was  not  realised  then  as  men  imagined  it,  but  it  was  realised. 
It  is  not  realised  now  as  men  imagine  it,  but  it  is  realised.  This  is  the  mission 
of  that  expectation  of  the  Lord's  coming  which  so  many  devout  souls  still 
cherish  :  it  inspires  endurance ;  it  nourishes  the  spirit  of  quiet  bearing  of 
present  ills  ;  it  enables  a  man  to  be  patient  amid  the  cares  and  disappointments 
of  the  earthly  life  ;  it  uplifts  with  the  cheer  of  a  high  hope.  No  doubt  our 
Lord's  great  discourse  on  the  "  last  things,"  which  is  recorded  in  Matt,  xxiv., 
led  to  a  general  belief  of  His  speedy  return  in  human  form,  but  with  heavenly 
powers,  to  rectify  those  abuses  and  disorders  of  society,  which  pressed  so  heavily 
upon  His  disciples.  It  was  only  the/orm  of  His  coming  that  was  misconceivCil. 
It  is  only  ih^form  of  His  coming  that  is  still  misconceived.  He  did  come  to 
waiting  souls.  He  does  come  to  waiting  souls.  He  came  in  providences. 
He  came  in  spiritual  manifestations.  He  came  as  the  relieving  angel  "  Israfil." 
It  was,  and  it  is,  the  support  of  our  waiting  moods  that  His  disciples  kee[) 
quite  sure  that  He  is  always  Jits^  itpon  coming  to  help  them.  That  leads  them 
on,  enabling  them  cheerfully  to  bear  their  burdens  day  by  day.  And  it  is 
but  the  Christian  translation  of  the  feeling  that  has  been  cherished  by  God's 
saints  in  all  the  ages.  It  expressed  itself  in  this  way  in  the  older  times — 
"  Thou  art  my  help  and  my  deliverer  ;  make  no  tarrying,  O  my  God."  And  in 
this  way  in  the  newer  times — "  Come,  Lord  Jesus  ;  come  quickly." 

I.  What  are  the  duties  of  Christians  during  their  waiting  times  ? — St.  James 
does  not  deal  wdth  all  the  duties — only  wdth  such  as  were  relative  to  the  needs 
of  those  to  whom  he  wrote.  1.  They  ought  to  keep  from  restlessiwss.  That 
is  the   idea  of  "  patience "  as  here   commended.     The   restlessness  that   keeps 

SR  609 


CHAP.  V.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES. 


going  to  the  door,  or  looking  out  at  the  window,  and  so  takes  men  off  from 
the  duty  of  the  hour.  We  cannot  do  our  work  well  while  we  keep  a  restless 
state  of  mind.  If  we  are  expecting  an  arrival  at  our  home,  but  are  uncertain 
of  the  precise  time,  it  altogether  spoils  our  work  for  the  day;  it  compels  us 
to  do  nothing,  if  we  suffer  ourselves  to  become  restless  and  anxious.  In  this 
way  our  hope  of  Christ's  coming  may  become  morally  mischievous.  It  will, 
if  it  makes  us  restless  and  dissatisfied.  We  shall  undervalue  our  present  work, 
and  think  lightly  of  our  present  responsibilities;  and  instead  of  spending  our 
strength  in  service,  we  shall  spend  it  in  worrying  and  restless  watchings.  Our 
Lord  pointed  out  this  danger,  when  He  taught  that  the  servant  who  expected 
his  master's  home-coming  watched  best  by  quietly  waiting,  fully  occupied  at 
his  servant-duties,  and  actually  found  at  work  when  the  master  entered  the 
house.  Restlessness  never  becomes  a  Christian  virtue  by  disguising  itself  in 
pietistic  forms.  *'Be  patient  unto  [in  respect  of]  the  coming  of  the  Lord." 
2.  St.  James  points  out  another  duty  of  the  hour.  They  should  keep  from 
douhtiiig.  Restlessness  might  make  them  neglect  their  work  ;  but  doubting 
would  altogether  change  the  character  of  their  work.  It  would  soon  cease 
to  be  work  for  Christ,  and  come  to  be  work  for  self.  If  the  servant  began 
to  say  within  himself,  "  My  lord  delayeth  his  coming " ;  if  he  said  to  himself, 
doubtingly,  "  He  will  not  come  soon,  and  I  question  whether  he  means  to  come 
at  all,"  that  servant  would  soon  begin  to  lose  all  wise  restraint  of  himself,  and 
"  to  eat  and  drink  with  the  drunken."  St.  James  bids  the  Jewish  Christians 
who  were  tried  by  the  seeming  delay  of  their  deliverance  from  present  evils, 
"stablish,"  or  "strengthen,"  their  hearts.  If  we  gave  the  advice  in  these  days 
we  should  say,  "  Don't  lose  heart,"  "  Don't  give  way  to  doubts  and  fears," 
"  Buttress  your  hearts  against  all  temptations  to  doubt,"  "  Nourish  your  souls 
into  such  spiritual  strength  that  you  can  throw  off  from  you  all  poison 
atmospheres  of  doubt."  Hearts  are  stablished  and  strengthened,  not  by  trying 
to  force  a  way  into  the  mysteries  of  God's  doing  or  delaying,  but  by  meditating 
on  what  God  has  done,  by  realising  what  God  is,  and  by  inquiring,  with  a  full 
purpose  of  obedience,  into  what  God  would  have  done  by  us.  Three  things 
are  always  at  hand  for  the  mastery  of  temptations  to  doubt :  (1)  the  revelation 
of  God,  which  contains  the  "  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises  "  ;  (2)  com- 
munion with  God,  which  brings  personal  satisfactions  to  the  soul;  and 
(3)  active  ser\dce,  which  takes  a  man  off  from  perilous  broodings.  Those  who 
dwell  unduly  on  the  "  coming  of  the  Lord "  are  especially  liable  to  doubt, 
if  they  are  active-minded  ;  for  they  are  compelled  to  recognise  that  He  never 
has  come,  never  does  come,  and  never  will  come  just  as  men  have  expected 
Him  to.  Those  who  wait  must  not  only  wait  quietly ;  they  must  wait  hope- 
fully. Our  time  is  alway  ready.  He  who  is  coming  will  come ;  He  does  not 
really  tarry.  3.  St.  James  further  points  out  the  duty  of  keeping  kindly 
relations  with  one  another  while  we  wait.  "  Grudge  not  one  against  another." 
*'  Murmur  not,  brethren,  one  against  another."  So  easily,  in  their  waiting- 
times,  even  Christians  can  get  to  wranglings  and  mutual  reproaches.  One 
man  has  his  explanation  of  the  Lord's  delay.  Others  are  not  able  to  accept 
his  explanation.  One  man  is  sure  that  he  can  fix  the  day  and  the  hour  of  the 
coming.  Others  remind  him  that  he  has  fixed  it  before,  and  the  time  has 
gone  by  ;  and  he  becomes  angry  at  the  reminder.  It  may  be  comparatively 
easy  for  an  individual  Christian  to  wait  patiently ;  it  is  always  very  hard  for  a 
number  of  Christians  to  wait  patiently  together.  A  Christian  man  is  seriously 
strained  and  tested  in  the  time  when  he  can  do  nothing.  A  Christian  Church 
gets  into  all  sorts  of  contentions,  misunderstandings,  mutual  reproaches, 
bickerings,  and  jealousies,  when  it  is  doing  nothing,  when  it  is  waiting  for 
some  "  coming  of  the  Lord."     An  inactive  Church  will  often  have  a  good  deal 

610 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:     JAMES,  chap.  v. 


of  pietistic  talk ;  but  that  may  only  be  an  insincere  covering  over  of  rankling 
enmities,  mischievous  murmurings,  and  mutual  grudgings.  It  is  like  the 
servant  that  our  Lord  pictures  who,  because  he  did  not  keep  on  with  his  work, 
began  to  '*  beat  his  fellow-servants."  That  was  the  mistake  that  was  made 
by  the  early  Jewish  Christian  Churches.  They  had  taken  up  this  notion,  that 
Christ  was  coming  at  once  in  some  outward  way,  to  redress  all  their  wrongs, 
overwhelm  all  their  enemies,  and  enrich  them  with  all  benedictions  ;  and  in  tlie 
excitement  of  this  sentiment,  they  had  become  restless,  they  were  neglecting 
their  work,  and  they  were  quarrelling  among  themselves.  *'  Every  doctrine 
is  known  by  its  fruits "  ;  and  the  doctrine  of  the  "  second  coming,"  as  men 
usually  hold  it  and  teach  it,  is  certainly  not  commended  by  its  fruits.  There 
is  a  ti'ue  doctrine  of  the  "  second  coming,"  but  the  unduly  occupied  ear  of 
Christ's  Church  is  not  now  open  to  receive  it.  There  are  waiting-times  in  all 
our  lives.  There  have  been  ;  there  will  be.  St.  James's  advice  may  be  fitted 
precisely  to  our  waiting-times.  Keep  from  restlessness.  "Be  patient."  Keep 
from  doubting.  "  Stablish  your  hearts."  Keep  from  envying.  *'  Grudge  not 
one  against  another." 

II.  What  are  the  helps  to  the  fulfilment  of  duty,  in  their  waiting-times, 
which  are  at  the  command  of  Christians  ? — 1.  They  may  keep  the  inspiration  of 
good  examples.  For  other  people  have  had  to  wait,  and  have  waited  well.  Nay, 
looking  around  them,  Christians  may  learn  from  the  spheres  of  business  and 
social  life ;  and  turning  over  the  pages  of  their  Scriptures  they  may  find  inspir- 
ing instances  of  heroic  endurance.  (1)  There  is  the  yearly  example  of  the 
husbandman.  "  He  waiteth  for  the  precious  fruit  of  the  earth,  being  patient 
over  it,  until  it  receive  the  early  and  latter  rain."  The  husbandman  worketh. 
If  he  does  not  plough  and  clean  and  smooth  his  soil,  and  cast  in  the  living  seeds 
in  their  season,  he  will  have  no  waiting-work  to  do,  and  nothing  to  wait  for.  It 
is  not  sufficiently  impressed  upon  us  in  moral  and  spiritual  spheres  that  only 
icorkers  can  be  waiters.  If  a  man  has  not  worked,  what  has  he  to  wait  for, 
what  has  he  to  wait  about  ?  In  all  true  waiting  there  is  expectancy ;  but 
expectancy  must  be  based  upon  something.  The  husbandman  bases  it  upon  his 
work.  Waiting  that  has  no  work  behind  it,  and  no  work  in  it,  is  dreamy  senti- 
ment, and  is  no  good  to  anybody.  The  husbandman  has  to  wait,  and  work 
while  he  waits,  for  the  fruitage  of  his  sowing.  The  fields  must  be  guarded, 
tended,  nourished,  while  the  crops  are  growing.  But  the  results  of  his  work  get 
beyond  him.  He  finds  himself  in  the  midst  of  forces  that  he  cannot  control  ; 
and  no  efforts  of  his  can  possibly  hurry  on  the  results.  During  the  months  of 
growing,  what  a  life  of  waiting-faith  every  farmer  has  to  live  !  And  what  a 
lesson  of  the  patience  of  faith  comes  to  us  as  we  walk  the  fields,  and  see  the 
crops  so  slowly,  but  so  surely,  growing  unto  harvest !  Our  Christian  work  starts 
influences  which  get  altogether  beyond  our  control.  We  work  for  issues  ;  and 
want  them  to  come  immediately,  and  they  will  not.  We  work  in  the  upbuilding 
of  character,  but  character  grows  and  unfolds  very  slowly ;  and  we  can  no  more 
hurry  on  our  results  than  can  the  farmer.  God  takes  all  good  work  into  His 
keeping,  and  makes  His  rains  and  His  sunshine  nourish  the  growing  crops,  which 
will  be  reaped  to  the  unspeakable  joy  of  the  worker  some  day.  The  husband- 
man may  have  much  anxiety,  and  much  trial  of  faith  and  patience,  while  he 
waits.  Everything  depended,  in  those  older  days,  on  the  "  early  "  winter  rains 
and  the  "  latter  "  spring  rains  ;  and  sometimes  they  failed  altogether,  or  they 
were  insufficient,  or  they  were  excessive.  The  cold  seasons  kept  the  crops  back. 
Wild  storms  just  before  harvest  laid  the  heavy-headed  stalks;  prevailing  damp 
made  the  grains  sprout ;  prolonged  drought  burned  up  the  grass,  and  dried  up  the 
seeds  of  the  root-crops  as  they  lay  in  the  ground.  Many  and  many  a  morning 
during  the  growing  months  the  farmer  wakes  and  listens  anxiously  for  the  sound 

Oil 


CHAP.  V.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


of  rain,  pulls  the  blind  aside,  and  nourishes  or  crushes  his  hope  for  the  day. 
It  is  hard  indeed  for  him  to  see  all  the  fruitage  of  his  toil  being  hopelessly  ruined, 
and  to  know  that  his  harvest  can  only  be  a  "  day  of  grief  and  desperate  sorrow." 
True,  the  issues  are  not  often  as  the  fears.  Nature — God  in  nature — has  a 
wonderful  recovering  power.  Constantly  we  find  we  have  to  reap  the  harvest  of 
God's  mercy  ^  instead  of  the  harvest  of  our  fears.  Are  not  Christian  waiting- times 
anxious  times  ?  Parents  work  in  their  boys  for  noble  manhood ;  and  the 
day  comes  when  the  boy  must  go  out  into  life,  and  battle  for  himself  amidst 
manifold  evils  ;  must  soul-thrive  amid  stormy  winds  and  pelting  rains  of  tempta- 
tion, and  it  may  be  amid  blazing  suns  of  success.  How  can  we  measure  the 
parental  anxiety  ?  See  how  every  letter  from  the  boy  is  scanned  !  how  mother 
reads  what  father  cannot  see  !  how  the  tone  of  the  letter  is  appraised  !  All  those 
years  of  unfolding  while  out  of  parental  control  bring  their  grave  anxieties ; 
and,  full  of  fears,  those  parents  often  say  to  one  another — What  will  the 
harvest  be  ?  It  is  but  the  type  of  all  the  waiting-times  of  Christian  workers. 
It  is  part  of  our  discipline  that  they  shall  be  full  of  grave  anxieties ;  and 
if  we  are  full  of  concern  about  the  issues  of  our  work,  we  may  realise 
how  concerned  God  is  about  ws,  wanting  the  very  anxieties  of  our  waiting- 
times  to  be  sanctified  to  us.  But  the  husbandman  keeps  the  cheer  of  the  certain 
result  while  he  waits.  There  stands  the  word;  the  years  have  rolled  into 
centuries,  and  the  centuries  have  heaped  up  one  upon  another,  but  the  word  has 
never  been  belied — "  While  the  earth  remaineth  .  .  .  seedtime  and  harvest  shall 
not  fail."  Get  the  barns  ready,  though  the  cold  chills,  the  heavy  rains,  or  the 
untempered  sunshine  do  come  upon  the  growing  crops.  Get  the  barns  ready ; 
they  will  be  filled,  as  they  always  have  been.  Earth  never  rolled  through  one  of 
its  years,  without  its  people  singing  unto  God  their  song  of  harvest  home.  Must 
we  wait  ?  Is  it  hard  to  wait  ?  Does  our  Lord  seem  to  delay  His  coming  ?  We 
too  ma}''  keep  the  cheer  in  our  souls  while  we  wait.  He  has  promised.  We 
grip  His  word  so  tight  that  the  surge  of  life's  storm-tossed  sea  can  never  loosen 
our  hold.  He  has  said,  '*If  I  go  and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I  will  come 
again,  and  receive  you  unto  Myself,  that  where  I  am,  ye  may  be  also."  (2)  There 
is  the  example  of  the  saints  of  the  older  days.  "  Take,  brethren,  for  an 
example  of  suffering  and  of  patience,  the  prophets  who  spoke  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord."  It  is  not  possible  now  to  do  any  more  than  let  the  great  "  cloud  of 
witnesses  "  pass  before  us,  in  a  seemingly  endless  panorama  ;  and  then  say,  after 
the  eloquent  writer  of  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  when  he  had  set  lefore  us  the 
long  list  of  those  who  had  "endured,  as  seeing  Him  who  is  invisible"  :  "  Time 
would  fail  me  if  I  tell  of  Gideon,  Barak,  Samson,  Jephthah  ;  of  David  and 
Samuel  and  the  prophets  :  who  through  faith  subdued  kingdoms,  wrought 
righteousness,  obtained  promises,  stopped  the  mouths  of  lions,  quenched  the 
power  of  fire,  escaped  the  edge  of  the  sword,  from  weakness  were  made  strong, 
waxed  mighty  in  war,  turned  to  flight  armies  of  aliens."  They  had  their  anxious 
waiting -times,  but  they  waited  well ;  and  they  came  through  to  victory  and  their 
Lord's  "  well  done,  good  and  faithful.'.'  And  (3)  there  is  the  familiar  example  of 
Job.  "  Ye  have  heard  of  the  patience  of  Job."  He  could  wait  for  God,  and 
wait  on  God.  And  while  he  waited,  Job  sang  in  his  soul,  and  cheered  his  soul 
with  the  singing,  of  such  things  as  the  psalmist  puts  into  poetic  words,  "  Clouds 
and  darkness  are  round  about  Him,  justice  and  judgment  are  the  habitation  of  His 
throne  "  ;  "I  wait  for  the  Lord  ;  my  soul  doth  wait,  and  in  His  word  do  I  hope." 
2.  They  may  keep  the  confidence  that  God  has  His  gracious  purpose  in  every  call 
to  endure.  The  "  end  of  the  Lord" — and  He  always  has  an  "  end  " — will  be  sure 
to  justify  the  means.  We  may  never  think  of  God  as  acting  on  impulse.  He 
has  a  distinct  aim,  a  purpose  of  infinite  wisdom  and  goodness,  towards  which 
He  moves  with  infinite  adaptations  of  His  means.     St.  James  assures  us  that 

612 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES.  ciiap.  v. 


He  is  "  large-hearted,"  "  tender-hearted."  He  can  deal  graciously  with  all  the 
weaknesses  that  we  may  show — all  the  failures  from  duty — in  our  waiting-times. 
He  will  not  let  them  hinder  the  carrying  through  of  His  purpose.  They  shall 
never  spoil  His  harvest.  Wait ;  wait  on  ;  wait  worthily.  Be  patient.  Keep 
confidence.  Look  up,  even  if  there  be  clouds  in  the  sky.  Hold  fast  by  the  God 
of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  though  His  way  may  seem  to  you  to  be  "  in  the  sea, 
and  His  path  in  the  great  waters."  Wait  on.  Work  while  you  wait.  "  Blessed 
are  those  servants  whom  the  Lord  when  He  cometh  shall  find  so  doing :  verily 
I  say  unto  you,  that  He  shall  gird  Himself ;  and  make  them  sit  down  to  meat, 
and  shall  come  and  serve  them.  And  if  He  shall  come  in  the  second  watch,  and 
if  in  the  third,  and  find  them  so,  blessed  are  those  servants.  ...  Be  ye  also 
ready  :  for  in  an  hour  that  ye  think  not  the  Son  of  man  cometh." 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.   7.  The  Coming  of  the  Lord. —  formal   and   material   manner.     Then 

"  Be  patient  therefore,  brethren,  until  there  is  nothing  in  the  historic  record 

the  coming  [margin,  presence^  of  the  of   those    times    which    can,    by   any 

Lord."     Ver.  8  :  "  For  the  coming  of  possibility,  be  identified  as  our  Lord's 

the  Lord  is  at  hand."     It  is  perfectly  coming,  save  the  Roman  destruction  of 

clear    that    all    the    early    Christian  Jerusalem,    and   final   breaking  up  of 

teachers  had   the  distinct  expectation  the  Jewish  national  and  ecclesiastical 

of   something,   which   they   agreed   to  systems.     The  answer  may  be — No,  He 

call  "  the  coming  of  the  Lord."     It  is  did  not  come  as  apostles  expected,  and 

also  certain  that  they  looked  upon  this  has  not  so  come  even  yet.     Then  it  is 

coming  as  the  fulfilment  of  the  Lord's  impossible    to  prevent   the  reasonable 

own    promises,    both    in    the    "  upper  suggestion   of   devout   souls,  that   the 

room "  and  at  His  ascension.     But  it  apostles    may    have     misapprehended 

is   by   no    means  clear   what    it   was  His  meaning,  both  as  to  the  manner, 

that  they   expected.      It    may   indeed  and   as  to  the  time,   of   His  coming, 

now  be  quite  impossible  to  recover  tJteir  And  it  is  quite  open  to  devout  souls  to 

precise  thought,  because  very  different  suggest,   that   if   our    Lord   had  been 

thoughts   have   grown    up   round   the  understood  spiritually,  it   would  have 

expression  "  the  coming  of  the  Lord "  been    seen    that    He    did    fulfil    His 

in  the   course  of   the   Christian  ages.  promise,    and   does   fulfil  it ;  but    our 

It  very  materially  helps  us  toward  the  mistaken  apprehensions  have  prevented 

apprehension  of  the  apostolic  idea,  if  our  recognising  the  fulfilment, 
we  get  an  answer  to  this  question — 

Did  Christ  come  to  the  early  Church,  Ver.  10.  Examples  of  Christian  En- 

in   the  manner,  and  at  the  time,  the  durance. — "  Take,     brethren,    for    an 

apostles   expected    He   would  ?     It   is  example  of  suffering  and  of  patience, 

quite  clear  that  they  understood  their  the  prophets  who  spake  in  the  name 

Lord  to  mean  that  He  would  come  in  of  the  Lord."     It  is  questioned  whether 

some   material  and  visible  manifesta-  only  the  ancient  prophets  are  referred 

tion,  and  that  He  would  come  before  to,  or  whether  the  term  is  intended  to 

the  apostolic  age  closed.     The  question  include  the  persecuted   and  martyred 

requires     the     answer    Yes    or     No,  teachers   of   the   Christian   age.     But 

and  it  can  be  satisfied  with  no  other  even   if   we   assume    that    St.    James 

answer ;    it    will    have    no    qualified  thought   only   of    the    Old  Testament 

answer  that  merely  turns  it  aside  or  prophets,   there  is  no  reason  why  we 

puts  it  from  consideration.    The  answer  should     hesitate    to     include    all,    in 

may   be — Yes,    He    did   come   in   the  prominent   and  oflicial   positions,  who 

apostolic  age,  and  He  did  come  in  a  present  the  example  of  suffering  and 

613 


CHAP.   V. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES. 


patience.  And  our  life  is  encircled 
with  such  examples.  History  is  full 
of  them.  Imaginative  literature  is 
constantly  creating  fresh  types  of 
heroic  sufferers.  The  actual  experi- 
ence of  our  lives  brings  us  into  fellow- 
ship with  those  who  are  tiiumphantly 
bearing  the  burdens  of  lifelong  pain 
or  loss  or  disability. 

I.  Examples  of  endurance  are  con- 
stantly presented  to  us. — Apart  alto- 
gether from  religious  motives  and 
helps,  there  is  a  heroic  endurance  in 
humanity.  A  power  to  bear ;  and 
even  to  bear  for  others,  which  ennobles 
man.  There  is  never  any  occasion  for 
trying  to  debase  humanity  in  order  to 
exalt  religion.  It  may  be  necessary  to 
do  that  in  order  to  lay  suitable  foun- 
dations for  a  religious  creed ;  but  not 
to  maintain  revealed  and  spiritual 
religion.  We  can  fully  admire  the 
moral  greatness  of  man's  endurance 
and  patience,  while  we  recognise  his 
lost  standing  relations  with  God. 

II.  Examples  of  Christian  endur- 
ance have  a  particular  influence  upon 
us. — Because  they  indicate  the  inspira- 
tion of  the  very  highest  motive  upon 
which  men  can  act.  And  they  con- 
vince us  that  there  can  be  a  Divine 
presence  with  man,  and  a  Divine 
power  on  man,  which  can  raise  him 
altogether  beyond  anything  that  of 
himself  he  could  attain.  Suffering 
patience  with  the  supreme  motive  of 
doing  and  bearing  God's  holy  will  is 
an  attainment  which  is  wholly  im- 
possible save  with  an  indwelling 
inspiration  of  God. 

Yer.  1 1 .  The  End  of  the  Lord  reveals 
Him. — It  has  often  been  pointed  out 
that  the  final  reward  and  restoration 
of  Job  is  given  after  the  ''poetical 
justice"  with  which  we  are  familiar 
in  works  of  imagination.  In  actual 
history  or  biography  we  do  not  meet 
with  such  exact  restorations.  In  a 
book   which   is   the   illustration   of    a 


great  principle,  by  the  use  of  a  his- 
torical figure,  and  conversations  in 
dramatic  form,  such  an  ending  is  be- 
fitting, and  its  precision  of  detail  need 
not  be  overpressed. 

I.  The  Lord  always  has  an  end. — 
It  is  this  conviction  which  gives  a  man 
such  satisfaction  when  he  sees  that 
his  anxieties  have  come  from  God. 
Troubles  that  are  manifestly  of  our 
own  making  are  our  supreme  anxiety, 
because  we  can  only  think  of  God  as 
overruling  them.  They  are  not  His 
mind ;  He  has  to  come  into  them  in 
a  gracious  kind  of  interfering  way. 
Job's  troubles  were  not  brought  on 
by  his  own  wrong- doing ;  they  were 
distinctly  disciplinary  troubles  sent  by 
God.  God  never  afflicts  willingly.  God 
never  smites  in  any  "  acts  of  sove- 
reignty." There  is  a  distinct  purpose 
in  every  Divine  act,  in  every  Divine 
permission.  He  has  an  end  towards 
which  He  is  ever  working.  If  we  are 
in  His  chastisement,  it  is  for  our  profit. 

II.  The  Lord's  end  is  seldom  under- 
stood by  the  Lord's  way.— That  need 
be  no  surprise  to  us  if  we  are  familiar 
with  the  complicated  machinery  in- 
volv^ed  in  our  manufactures.  Take  the 
process  by  which  sheep's  wool  is  turned 
into  clothing ;  or  what  seems  but 
rubbish  becomes  white  paper.  The 
tearings,  and  burnings,  and  boilings, 
and  rollings  can  neither  be  understood 
separately,  nor  in  their  connections ; 
and  yet  we  can  believe  that  each 
strange  thing  helps  to  accompHsh  the 
end  which  has  been,  all  along,  held 
in  view.  God's  ways  cannot  but  seem 
strange,  and  we  had  better  not  try 
to  imagine  the  end  by  the  help  of  the 
means. 

III.  The  Lord's  end  is  always  in 
harmony  with  Himself. — It  is  a  wisely 
ordered  end,  for  He  is  infinitely  wise. 
It  is  an  end  of  infinite  blessing — 
adapted  to  us,  satisfying  to  us — for 
He  is  love. 


614 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES.  chap.  v. 


MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.—Verses  12,  13. 

Christian  Conduct  fitting  Occasions. — St.  James  closes  his  epistle  with  good 
advice,  and  indication  of  what  is  befitting  conduct  in  the  various  relations  of  life. 
A  positive  tone  of  teaching  properly  concludes  an  epistle  that  is  so  full  of 
warning  and  rebuke,  and  even  denunciation.  Teachings  directed  against  evils 
and  abuses  are  as  necessary  now  as  they  ever  were,  but  they  should  never 
constitute  the  whole  of  teaching ;  they  should  never  be  allowed  to  stand  alone, 
and  carry  a  complete  impression  of  Christianity.  They  should  be  qualified  with 
teachings  of  positive  duty,  and  commendations  of  the  right  spii-it  to  cherish. 
Christian  teaching  may  be  represented  by  the  two  related  sentences — "Abhor 
that  which  is  evil,  cleave  to  that  which  is  good."  The  advice  of  this  passage 
is  precisely  adapted  to  the  circumstances  and  temptations  of  Jewish  Christians 
in  those  days.  (The  advice  in  reference  to  the  sick  is  treated  as  a  separate 
section,  because  it  introduces  controversial  matter.) 

I.  There  should  be  the  ring  of  truth  in  all  ordinary  conversation. "  Swear 

not."  Our  Lord's  teaching  in  Matt.  v.  33-37  comes  at  once  to  mind.  Swearing 
is  the  expression  of  lost  self-control  under  the  impulse  of  temper.  Takino-  oaths 
or  supporting  what  one  has  to  say  with  an  oath,  implies  mutual  suspicion  and 
untrustfulness.  St.  James  has  not  in  mind  that  use  of  foul  and  blasphemous 
language  which  we  now  understand  by  swearing.  Kor  does  he  refer  to  the 
taking  of  legal  oaths,  which  imply  no  loss  of  temper,  and  no  purpose  to  injure 
a  brother,  but  nevertheless  are,  from  the  Christian  point  of  Aiew,  concessions 
to  the  weakness  of  human  nature,  recognitions  of  the  fact  that  the  naked  word 
of  sinful  man  is  not  to  be  trusted.  St.  James  urges  that  there  should  be  such 
a  ring  of  truth  in  all  the  common  conversation  of  a  Christian,  that  it  should 
never  be  felt  necessary  to  buttress  it  with  an  oath.  A  truthful  man  is  grieved 
when  his  simple  word  is  not  taken.  And  the  Christian  should  be  a  truthful 
man.  His  word  should  be  absolutely  and  always  reliable  ;  and  to  this  end  the 
Christian  should  cultivate  discretion  and  self-restraint.  In  perplexing,  anxious, 
persecuting  times,  there  is  peculiar  call  for  wisdom  of  speech.  Truthful  con- 
versation is  a  good  sign  of  piety. 

II.  There  should  be  the  relief  of  prayer  in  times  of  suffering. — "Is  any 
among  you  suffering  ?  let  him  pray."  The  idea  is  that  if  the  sufferer  broods 
over  his  woes,  or  talks  over  his  woes,  he  is  sure  to  get  more  and  more  depressed 
under  them.  The  Christian  way  of  relief  is  carrying  the  burden  to  God  in 
prayer.  1.  It  is  cherishing  the  spirit  of  prayer,  which  is  the  spirit  of  submis- 
sion and  dependence.  2.  It  is  getting  the  relief  of  acts  of  prayer,  in  which  the 
Divine  sympathy  and  help  are  sought.  Even  the  severely  suffering  may  find 
help  in  ejaculatory  prayers.  St.  Augustine  calls  these  "  arrows  of  the  Lord's 
deliverance,  shot  out  with  a  sudden  quickness." 

III.  There  should  be  the  song  of  praise  in  times  of  rejoicing  and  success. — 
The  advice  was,  and  is,  especially  needed,  because  there  is  always  grave  danger 
that  times  of  rejoicing  may  be  times  of  excitement,  and  so  of  unrestrainedness, 
that  may  bring  disgrace  on  the  Christian  name.  Thei-e  are  natural  ways  of 
expressing  gladness.  At  such  times  we  want  to  sing.  Then  let  the  Christian 
be  careful  what  song  he  sings.  Let  it  have  the  ring  of  a  psalm.  Let  it  be  such 
a  thanksgiving  as  turns  his  heart  to  God,  and  fills  his  thoughts  with  God. 
This  need  not  be  exaggerated  into  meaning  that  we  may,  in  our  joy-times,  sing 
nothing  but  Bible  psalms.  St.  James  means  this — Take  care,  in  your  times 
of  excitement  and  merry-making,  that  yon  do  not  lose  self-restraint,  and 
dishonour  your  Christian  profession.  Bring  God  near,  and  keep  God  near, 
in  your  joy-times.     It  is  counsel  that  is  always  timely.     Festivals  of  all  rehgions 

615 


CHAP.   V. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES. 


have  their  moral  perils ;  and  merry-making  times  call  for  the  kindly  caution, 
"  Is  any  cheerful  ?  let  him  sing  praise."  The  point  of  impression  is  this — In 
all  the  various  circumstances  and  moods  of  Christian  life,  there  is  a  spirit  and 
a  conduct  that  are  befitting.  Let  every  professing  Christian  keep  that  spirit, 
and  act  along  that  line. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  12.  The  Truth-tone  in  Common 
Talk. — F.  W.  Robertson  concludes  his 
sermon  on  "  Freedom  by  the  Truth " 
with  the  two  following  inferences : 
1.  To  cultivate  the  love  of  truth.  I 
do  not  mean  veracity — that  is  another 
thing.  Veracity  is  the  correspondence 
between  a  proposition  and  a  man's 
belief.  Truth  is  the  correspondence 
of  the  proposition  with  fact.  The  love  of 
truth  is  the  love  of  realities — the  deter- 
mination to  rest  upon  facts,  and  not 
upon  semblances.  Take  an  illustration 
of  the  way  in  which  the  habit  of  culti- 
vating truth  is  got.  Two  boys  see  a 
misshapen,  hideous  thing  in  the  dark. 
One  goes  up  to  the  cause  of  his  terror, 
examines  it,  learns  what  it  is ;  he 
knows  the  truth,  and  the  truth  has 
made  him  free.  The  other  leaves  it  in 
mystery  and  unexplained  vagueness, 
and  is  a  slave  for  life  to  superstitious 
and  indefinite  terrors.  Base  the  heart 
on  facts.  2.  See  what  a  Christian  is. 
Our  society  is  divided  into  two  classes  : 
those  who  are  daring,  inquisitive,  but 
restrained  by  no  reverence,  and  kept 
back  by  little  religion ;  those  who 
may  be  called  religious — but,  with  all 
their  excellences,  we  cannot  help  feel- 
ing that  the  elements  of  their  character 
are  feminine  rather  than  masculine, 
and  that  they  have  no  grasp  or  manly 
breadth,  that  their  hold  is  on  feeling 
rather  than  on  truth.  See  what  a 
Christian  is,  drawn  by  the  hand  of 
Christ.  He  is  a  man  on  whose  clear 
and  open  brow  God  has  set  the  stamp 
of  truth ;  one  whose  very  eye  beams 
bright  with  honour  ;  in  whose  very  look 
and  bearing  you  may  see  freedom, 
manliness,  veracity ;  a  brave  man — a 
noble  man — frank,  generous,  true, 
with,  it  may  be,  many  faults  ;  whose 
freedom   may   take   the   form   of   im- 

616 


petuosity  or  rashness,  but  the  form  of 
meanness  never. 

Yea  and  Nay. — Our  Lord  taught  us 
that  the  conversation  of  a  sincere 
man  can  always  be  a  simple  Yea  and 
Nay.  He  never  needs  to  bolster  up 
any  statement  he  may  make  with 
oaths  and  asseverations.  There  is  a 
tone  in  the  Yea  and  Nay  which  carries 
conviction.  We  are  made  suspicious 
whenever  a  man  feels  he  must  support 
a  statement  with  oaths.  If  a  Chris- 
tian is  uncertain,  he  does  not  speak 
positively.  If  he  is  sure,  he  is  satisfied 
with  simply  stating  what  he  knows. 
He  is  true  to  himself,  and  true  to  his 
Master,  and  therefore  true  to  his  fellow- 
man.     "  In  conversation  be  sincere." 

Ver.  13.  Prayer  in  Afflictive  Circum- 
stances.— There  is  a  distinction  indicated 
by  St.  James  which  is  not  usually  recog- 
nised. In  ver.  1 3  he  says,  *  *  Is  any  among 
you  afflicted?"  In  ver.  14  he  says, 
"  Is  any  sick  among  you  ?  "  We  are 
wont  to  regard  "  sickness  "  and  *'  afflic- 
tion "  as  the  same  thing,  and  so  we 
miss  the  precision  of  application.  In 
both  cases  St.  James  recommends 
prayer ;  but  for  affliction  he  recom- 
mends personal  prayer — for  sickness, 
intercessory  and  sympathetic  prayer. 
By  "  sickness "  we  understand  the 
troubles  which  come  as  bodily  disease, 
weakness,  peril.  This  attracts  public 
attention,  calls  for  sympathy,  and  can 
be  relieved  by  united,  believing,  inter- 
cessory prayer.  By  "  affliction  "  we 
understand  those  distresses  which  come 
from  trying  and  perplexing  circum- 
stances; and  these  are  often  strictly 
private  matters,  and  must  be  kept 
private.  We  can  ask  no  elders  or 
Church  to  pray  for  us,  or  with  us.    All 


n OUTLET IC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES.  chap.  v. 


we  can  do,  and  the  thing  we  should  cause  the  matter  of  it  is  so  deep  and 

do,  is  take  such  "  afflictions  "  freely  to  mysterious,  from  the  fact  that  a  grand 

God  in  private  prayer.  harmonic,     soul-interpreting     law     of 

music  pervades  all  the  objects  of  the 
Life's  Gladness  and  its  Outlet.— Row  material    creation,    and    that    things 
closely  our  spiritual  nature,  as  creatures  without    Hfe,    all   metals,    and   woods, 
of  feehng,  is  related  to  the  element  of  and  valleys,  and  mountains,  and  waters, 
sound,  wanting  this  in  its  distinctions  for  are  tempered  with  distinctions  of  sound, 
a  language,  as  truly  as  it  wants  the  and  toned  to  be  a  language  to  the  feel- 
language  of  words  for  intellectual  dis-  ing  of  the  heart.     It  is  as  if  God  had 
course.^    Even   as  the  poets,   who   are  made  the  world  about  us  to  be  a  grand 
nature  s  best  oracles,  sing, —  organ  of  music,  so   that  our  feelings 
"  Music !     Oh,  how  faint,  how  weak,  might  have  play  in  it,  as  our  under- 
Language  fades  before  thy  spell  1  standing  has  in  the  light  of   the  sun 

^fc^?h^  ^^f^l  ^ZIT^^'   ,         117"      and  the  outward  colours  and  forms  of 
Whenthoucanstbreathehersoulsowell?         ,^.  m,  •    i-i  •      .i 

things.  .  .   .  Ihere  is  hid  m  the  secret 

Accordingly,  as  we  are  wont  to  argue  temper  and  substance  of  all  matter  a 

the  invisible  things  of  God,  even  His  silent  music,  that  only  waits  to  sound, 

eternal  power  and  Godhead,  from  the  and  become  a  voice  of  utterance  to  the 

things  that  are  seen,  finding  them  all  otherwise  unutterable   feeling   of   our 

images  of  thought  and  vehicles  of  in-  heart — a  voice,  if  we  will  have  it,  of 

telligeuce,  so  we  have  an  argument  for  love  and  worship  to  the  God  of  all. — 

God  more  impressive,  in  one  view,  be-  Horace  Bushnell^  D.D. 

MAIN  ROM  I LE  TICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  14—16. 

Christian  Treatment  of  the  Sick. — The  subject  treated  in  this  passage  is  made 
difficult  by  our  ignorance  of  the  customs  of  society,  and  especially  of  rehgious 
society,  in  the  time  of  St.  James.  Our  customs  so  materially  differ  from  those 
with  which  he  was  familiar.  It  is  also  made  difficult  by  the  development  of 
two  doctrines  in  the  Christian  Church,  both  of  which — though  they  stand  in 
marked  contrast — are  made  to  rest  upon,  and  draw  their  support  from,  this 
passage:  the  "extreme  unction"  of  Catholics,  and  the  "faith-healing"  of 
sentimental  Protestants. 

I.  Examine  what  the  passage  does  really  say. — One  ever-recurring  point 
of  St.  James's  teaching  is,  that  faith  is  an  active  thing.  It  cannot  rest.  It 
must  do  something.  The  activity  of  faith  covers  the  whole  life,  and  concerns 
itself  with  every  place  and  relation.  This  passage  is  found  among  practical 
directions  for  the  guidance  of  Christian  faith  in  its  activity.  What  should  be 
done  by,  and  for,  the  afflicted,  the  merry,  the  sick?  Observe  that,  just  as 
the  afflicted  man,  and  the  happy  man,  are  expected  to  act  for  themselves,  so 
the  sick  man  is  expected  to  act  for  himself.  "  Let  him  call  for  the  elders  of  the 
Church."  This  is  important,  because  it  indicates  that  the  man  had  gained 
the  spiritual  blessing  intended  to  be  wrought  by  his  sickness,  and  was  in  a  fit 
state  of  mind  to  receive  a  gracious  healing,  as  an  act  of  Divine  favour.  Compare 
the  expression,  "  perceiving  that  he  had  faith  to  be  healed."  The  elder's  were 
not  preachers,  not  missionaries,  not  apostles,  not  priests.  They  are  represented 
by  the  elders  of  the  Jewish  synagogues,  and  are  to  be  regarded  simply  as  agents 
of  the  Christian  Church  ;  they  are  the  Christian  Church  acting  ;  and  have 
neither  power  nor  authority  save  as  standing  for  the  Church.  It  should  be 
carefully  observed  that  the  sick  man  was  not  to  call  for  some  one  of  the  elders, 
but  for  the  elders  as  a  body.  If  there  were  three,  then  all  three ;  if  ten,  then 
all  ten.  These  men  were  to  pray  over  him,  when  they  had  anointed  him  with 
oil.     That  is,  they  were  to  pray  with  such  a  faith  that  he  would  be  rastored, 

Gi7 


CHAP.  V.  HOMILETtC  COMMENTARY:   JAMES. 


as  could  show  itself  in  dealing  with  him  as  if  he  actually  were  already  restored. 
From  what  is  known  of  anointing  customs  in  daily  life,  one  thing  comes  out 
quite  clearly.  Every  one,  when  in  health,  used  oil  more  or  less  in  the  daily 
toilet.  But  oil  was  never  used  when  a  person  was  laid  aside  in  sickness.  His 
return  to  the  use  of  oil  was  a  sign  of  his  return  to  health.  A  very  natural 
and  simple  explanation  of  this  difficult  and  much  misused  passage  can  therefore 
be  given.  Anointing  the  body  with  oil  was  the  sign  of  hecdth.  Those  who 
were  sick  might  not  be  anointed ;  nor  those  passing  through  a  time  of  mourning. 
The  ancient  customs  in  relation  to  anointing  may  be  illustrated  by  our  customs 
in  relation  to  shaving  the  beard.  The  sick  man  will  neither  trouble  himself, 
nor  be  troubled,  about  shaving ;  but  as  soon  as  he  begins  to  recover  he  will 
return  to  his  old  and  cleanly  habits.  So  the  ancients  would  neglect  daily 
anointing  during  sickness,  and  their  return  to  their  old  ways  was  a  sure  sign 
that  they  were  recovering.  When  St.  James  therefore  gives  these  directions 
for  the  elders,  what  he  really  means  may  be  put  in  this  way — "  By  a  sign  which 
will  show  the  sick  brother  your  faith  help  his  faith.  Pray  for  him  in  such 
perfect  faith  that  you  can  even  anticipate  the  healing,  and  act  toward  him  as 
if  he  were  already  restored."  The  elders  were  to  help  the  sick  man  to  rise, 
wash,  and  anoint,  and  act  just  as  if  he  were  in  health  again. 

II.  What  things  in  the  passage  require  special  consideration? — The  age 
of  miracles  had  not  then  passed,  if  it  ever  has  passed.  1.  Note  the  uncon- 
ditional character  of  the  promise,  "  Shall  save  him  that  is  sick."  It  is  not 
really  without  conditions.  See  the  demand  for  faith,  and  for  certain  defined 
acts  expressing  faith,  and  proving  the  obedience  of  faith.  Rules  should  be 
stated  without  their  exceptions ;  but  all  rules  have  such.  Compare  our  Lord's 
strong  sentences  about  prayer.  2.  Consider  the  meaning  of  the  anointing  with 
oil.  Whether  before  or  after  prayer,  the  anointing  is  to  be  understood  as  a 
strictly  simultaneous  act.  Two  ideas  have  been  suggested  :  (1)  The  anointing 
may  have  been  a  medicinal  healing.  Oil  was  regarded  as  a  curative  agent. 
(2)  The  anointing  may  have  been  sacramental — a  help  towards  realising  the 
action  of  Divine  grace.  Sight  and  feeling  may  be  helps  toward  the  apprehension 
of  spiritual  things.  Compare  our  Lord's  touching  those  whom  He  healed,  or 
making  clay  to  put  on  the  eyes  of  the  man  whose  sight  He  restored.  3.  Observe 
the  sense  in  which  forgiveness  is  blended  with  recovery.  St.  James  does  not 
assume  that  every  case  of  sickness  is  a  case  of  sin.  But  he  says,  if  you  do  meet 
with  a  case  in  which  the  sickness  connects  with  personal  sin,  in  that  case  the 
faith  which  heals  the  body  brings  also  forgiveness  of  the  sin.  (1)  Sin  regarded 
as  scandal  to  the  Church.  In  such  a  case  the  man  must  be  penitent,  or  he 
would  not  send  for  the  elders  of  the  Church.  (2)  Sin  as  before  God.  Always 
conceived  as  the  source  of  human  disease.  Compare  our  Lord  saying  to  the 
woman,  "  Go,  and  sin  no  more." 

III.  Removing  the  local  and  temporary,  what  may  we  learn  from  the 
passage  for  our  own  times? — 1.  The  duty  of  showing  sympathy  with  the  sick. 
Example  of  Christ.  Consider  sickness  from  the  Christian  point  of  view.  Issue 
of  self-will  resisting  the  Divine  order.  Divine  chastisement.  Corrective 
discipline.  2.  The  duty  of  using  means  for  the  recovery  of  the  sick.  Oil  was 
curative  agency.  The  elders  were  to  use  means.  Anointing  here  means  rubbing 
the  body,  not  pouring  it  on  the  head  as  a  symbol  of  dedication — rubbing  the 
affected  parts,  as  for  rheumatism.  Symbol  of  all  healing  agents.  Show  how 
science  now  takes  the  place  of  miracle.  3.  The  importance  of  recognising  the 
power  of  the  "  prayer  of  faith."  This  was  needed  for  miracle.  How  much  more 
is  it  needed  for  science !  Prayer-power,  faith-power,  are  especially  needed  if 
the  spiritual  ends,  for  which  all  sickness — certainly  all  Christian  sickness — is 
sent,  are  to  be  reached. 

618 


HOMILETIC     COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP.   V. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND   SERMON  SKETCHES, 


Ver.  14.  Signs  of  Healing. — Here 
unction  was  evidently  an  outward  sign, 
similar  to  that  used  by  our  Savioui*, 
when  He  made  clay,  and  put  it  to  the 
blind  man's  eyes.  It  was  connected 
with  the  miraculous  power  of  healing. 
The  sign  by  which  a  healing  work  is 
indicated  is  not  the  healing,  or  even  a 
necessary  part  of  the  healing.  Our 
Lord  could  have  completed  the  recovery 
of  the  sight  without  any  putting  clay 
on  the  eyes,  and  could  have  healed  the 
leper  without  any  touch.  The  signs 
were  precisely  intended  either  to  im- 
press the  person  healed,  and  direct  his 
close  attention  to  his  Healer,  or  else  to 
arouse  the  interest  of  bystanders,  and 
compel  them  to  think  of  the  power  and 
claims  of  Him  who  could  thus  heal. 
If  the  distinction  between  the  sign  and 
the  healing  is  fully  recognised,  and 
the  sign  is  regarded  as  an  addition  to 
the  healing  for  the  sake  of  securing  its 
proper  moral  influence,  the  anointing 
with  oil  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  can 
be  very  simply  explained.  It  was  a 
ceremony,  not  a  healing  agency,  and 
in  no  way  essential  to  the  cure.  It 
may  be  freely  admitted  that  oil  is 
sometimes  used  in  the  East — and,  for 
that  matter,  in  the  West  too— as  a 
medical  agent.  But  it  is  not  sufficiently 
recognised  that  the  act  St.  James 
enjoins  is  not  a  rubbing  over  of  the 
body,  or  even  of  affected  parts  of  the 
body,  but  the  symbolical  act  of  anoint- 
ing, with  which  the  Jews  were  familiar. 
It  is  most  simple  to  understand 
St.  James  as  requiring  the  pouring  of 
oil  on  the  man's  head,  as  a  symbolic 
act,  a  sign  of  the  Divine  grace  unto 
healing  which  would  come  down  upon 
the  sick  man.  Such  a  symbolic  act 
would  have  a  direct  influence  on  those 
who  prayed  for  the  healing,  fixing  their 
thoughts  on  the  power  and  grace  of 
God  whose  ministry  of  healing  they 
sought ;  and  having  an  equally  direct 
influence  on  the  sufferer  ;  making  him 
look  with  believing  expectancy  for  the 
recovering  grace  which  the  anointing 


oil  symbolised.  In  this  way  the  sign 
of  healing,  accompanying  the  prayer 
for  heaUng,  was  a  direct  help  to  the 
nourishment  of  that  faith  on  which 
the  coming  of  the  healing  grace  must 
ever  depend. 

Ver.  16.  The  Healthy  Confessional. 
— "  Confess  therefore  your  sins  one  to 
another."  It  appeal's  to  be  assumed  by 
St.  James,  that  sicknesses  and  diseases 
are  often  the  natural  and  direct  con- 
sequences, not  only  of  sin,  but  of  the 
actual  sin  of  the  person  who  suffers. 
And  he  seems  to  admit  that  tliis 
may  even  be  true  of  members  of  the 
Church.  By  omissions,  negligences, 
imprudences,  and  even  self-indulgence 
and  wilfulness,  those  within  the  Church 
may  bring  sickness  and  suffering  upon 
themselves.  There  is  then  assumed  a 
moral  condition  of  sickness,  as  well  as 
a  physical.  And  the  spirit  of  brotherly 
love  in  the  Church  secures  as  sincere — 
and  a  more  anxious — interest  in  the 
state  of  the  brother's  soul  as  in  the 
state  of  his  body.  What  the  Church 
could  do  for  the  body  has  been  dealt 
with.  No  inquiries  were  necessary, 
and  no  confessions  were  required,  for 
the  condition  of  the  patient  was  evident 
enough.  But  what  the  Church  could 
do  for  the  man's  soul-condition  was  not 
manifest,  for  it  must  depend  on  what 
the  condition  of  the  man's  soul  was, 
and  that  could  only  be  found  out  by 
inquiry.  The  man  must  confess  to  his 
brethren  if  he  would  have  their  help 
towards  the  restoration  of  inward 
health.  We  cannot  pray  for  one 
another's  spiritual  conditions  unless  we 
know  what  those  conditions  are,  and 
we  can  only  know  any  man  as  he  is 
pleased  to  reveal  himself  to  us.  This 
is  what  St.  James  means  by  "  confess- 
ing our  sins  one  to  another."  By  no 
scheming  can  confessing  to  one  another 
be  made  to  mean  confessing  to  an 
official  who  has  authority  to  absolve 
from  the  sin,  or  to  remit  the  penalty. 
The  brethren  can  neither  heal  the  body 

619 


CHAP.  V.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JAMES. 


nor   the  soul,   but   they   can   use   the  of  the  soul,  when  the  man  himself  tells 

power  of  believing  prayer  about  both  them  his  trouble,  his  sin,  or  his  need, 

the    body   and   the    soul.       They   can  Confessions  that  simply  throw  us  on 

see  with  their  eyes  what  to  pray  for  the  sympathy  and  helpful  love  of  our 

on  behalf  of  the  body  ;  but  they  can  brethren  and   sisters   in  Christ  Jesus 

only  know  what  to  pray  for  on  behalf  ai'e,  in  every  way,  healthy  confessions. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  17,  18. 

Prayer  affecting  Natural  Law. — The  statement  is  made,  in  support  of  the  advice 
to  '■'•  pray  for  one  another,"  that  "  the  supplication  of  a  righteous  man  availeth 
much  in  its  working."  This  is  a  strong  statement.  It  is  supported  by  a  well- 
known  but  very  striking  instance  of  effectual  prayer,  which  even  influenced  the 
course  of  nature.  Elijah  prayed,  and  the  order  of  the  rains  was  changed. 
Elijah  prayed  again,  and  the  order  of  the  rains  was  restored. 

I.  It  may  be  fully  recognised  that  all  events  in  nature  follow  ordered 
laws. — But  these  things  have  to  be  taken  into  account  :  1.  Laws  are  constantly 
qualifying  laws  and  changing  results.  2.  The  natural  laws  which  man  has 
traced  may  not  be  the  entire  circle  of  natural  laws.  The  qualifying  power 
of  unknown  laws  (which  we  therefore  call  "  supernatural ")  may  be  the  real 
explanation  of  phenomena.  We  have  no  right  to  say  that  a  thing  cannot  be 
until  we  have  mastered  all  the  possible  co-workings  of  all  natural  laws,  known 
to  us  and  unknown.     No  man  has  a  right  to  deny  miracle. 

II.  It  must  be  recognised  that  He  who  fixed  the  laws  keeps  control  over  the 
relative  working  of  the  laws. — If  God  could  make  the  relative  conditions  and 
the  rules  ordering  the  relations,  it  is  inconceivable  that  He  did  not  reserve  His 
right  of  interference.  He  made  the  conditions  for  the  accomplishment  of  His 
purpose  ;  He  must  be  able  to  bring  His  will  to  bear  on  the  adjustment  of  the 
working  of  rules  that  necessarily  cross  and  qualify  one  another. 

III.  If  then  God  is  a  being  with  will,  that  will  must  be  subject  to  influence. 
— Man's  prayer  may  be  one  of  the  influences  affecting  it.  Our  prayer  may  be  an 
element  in  the  formation  of  Divine  judgments  and  decisions ;  and  so  may,  not 
directly,  but  indirectly,  affect  the  order  of  nature,  and  the  relative  working  of 
natural  laws.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  Christian  prayer  is  never  more 
than  the  submission  of  our  need  and  wish  to  the  consideration  of  the  Divine 
Father. 


SUGGESTIVE   NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Vers.     17,     18.     Elijah's     Effectual  of  Israel."     Acts  i.  and  ii.  also  illus- 

Prayer. — The   necessity    of  prayer    in  tration  of  the  same  principle.     Christ 

order  that  the  blessing  come.     Prayer  is  had  promised  the  descent  of  the  Spirit, 

the  cause  intermediate  which  compels  but  the  disciples  must  pray  for   His 

the  blessing  down.     This  interlinking  enduement.      Apply  this  principle   to 

and  efficient  place  of  prayer,  between  prayer    about    personal    need,  to   the 

the  Divine  promise  and  the  actualisa-  coming   of  a  revival,   etc.,    etc.     This 

tion  of  that  promise,  is  very  significant  effectual    prayer   of    Elijah's    was    a 

and  wonderful.     God  had  promised  the  prayer  of  faith.     He   had    for   argu- 

rain,    but   Elijah    must  pray  for  the  ment     in     prayer     the      unequivocal 

rain.       Ezek.  xxvi.    another   illustra-  Divine  promise,  "  I  will  send  rain  upon 

tion  of  the   same  principle  :    "I  will  the   earth."     TJpon    this   promise   his 

yet  for  this  be  inquii'ed  of  by  the  house  faith    laid  hold,  and   this   weapon  of 

620 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP.    V. 


promise   he    wielded   valiantly   in   his 
audience  with  Deity.     You  can  almost 
hear  him  pressing  the  promise  as  you 
read  of  him  lying  prone  there  on  Mount 
Carmel.     This   is  the  prayer  of  faith, 
and   so  the  effectual  prayer — a  prayer 
which  takes  God   at   His   word,   and 
then  reverently  but  really  holds  Him 
to  it.      We    do   not  need   to   stretch 
and   strain  in  a  spasmodic  attempt  at 
more  faith.     The  ground  for  faith  is 
the  Divine  word.      That  is  something 
upon    which   we  can    lay   hold.     And 
the   prayer  of  faith   is   simply  this — 
that  when  we   pray  we  fully  believe 
that  God  will  be  true  to  all  that  He 
has  promised.     "  If  ye  abide   in    Me, 
and  My  words  abide  in  you,^^  etc.     This 
effectual    prayer     of    Elijah's    was    a 
prayer  out  of  a  consecrated  heart.     The 
effectual  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous 
man   availeth    much.      James   brings 
forth    Elijah    as  a    specimen   of   such 
a  righteous   man.     One   thing   Elijah 
was   intent  on  ;    to  one  thing  all  his 
powers  were  consecrated — the   Divine 
service.     He  was  a  man  given  up  to 
God,    and   so,   in    the    highest   sense, 
righteous.     The  test  of  his  consecrated 
righteousness   is  his  obedience.     Mark 
Elijah's  exact  obedience  to  the  Divine 
commands  in  the  whole  Old  Testament 
story.    This  effectual  prayer  of  Elijah's 
was   specific    prayer.       It    was   for    a 
definite   thing.      We   pray   too   much 
generally,      not     enough     specifically. 
This  effectual  prayer  of  Elijah's  was 
untiring   prayer.      Though    the   cloud 
did    not  immediately  appear,    he  kept 
on  praying.     This  effectual  prayer  of 
Elijah's  was  expectant  prayer.     Notice 
in  the  story  how  many  times  he  sent 
his  servant.     He  was  on  the-  look-out 
for  answer. — Anon. 

■Elijah's  waiting  on  his  Prayer. — 
■  St.  James  suggests  an  historical  illus- 
tration of  the  power  that  lies  in 
fervent  and  believing  prayer.  The 
Jews  had  a  great  admiration  for  the 
prophet  Elijah,  and  were  never  tired 
of  hearing  of  his  doings.  They  lived 
in  constant  expectation  of  his  reappear- 
ing as  the  precursor  of  Messiah.    James 


finds  in  his  story  impressive  illustration 
of   the  power  of  prayer ;  but  we  have 
no    record   of    Elijah's  acts  of   prayer 
when   he  would    have  the  rains    kept 
away.     His   prayer   for   the   rains   to 
return  is  a  part  of  the  grandest  day  in 
his  career.     The  witnessing  fire  of  God 
had  descended  upon  Elijah's  sacrifice  ; 
and  at  the  sight  a  sudden  shout  had 
risen    from  the  vast  watching   crowd, 
"  Jehovah,    He  is  the  God  !    Jehovah, 
He  is  the  God  !  "     So  intense  was  the 
excitement,    and   so   absolute,  for  the 
moment,    was   the    authority   of    the 
Jehovah -prophet,    that    only    a   word 
was  needed  to  make  that  crowd    seize 
the    four   hundred  false    prophets    of 
discomfited  Baal,  hurry  them  down  to 
the   stream   of   the  Kishon,  and  slay 
them  there,  that  their  bodies  might  be 
swept  out  to  sea  on  the  coming  floods. 
But  the  day's  work  was  not  then  com- 
plete.    The  return  of  the  rain- showers 
upon  the  thirsty   earth  was   virtually 
pledged  in  this  return  of  the  nation  to 
Jehovah  ;  and  he  who  had  prayed  for 
the  fire,  and  knew  that  he  was  praying 
according  to  the  will  of  God,  and  had 
been   graciously  answered,  must  pray 
again  for  the  rain,  pray  with  the  assur- 
ance  that   sending   the  rain  was   the 
will  of  God,  and  he  must  wait  upon  his 
prayer  with  the  confident  expectancy 
of  hope.     But  the   sight  is  a  strange 
and  a  striking  one.     Elijah  now  goes 
away   from   the   crowd  and  from   the 
king,  finds  a  sheltered  spot  under  the 
crest  of  the  hill,  and  there  he  might 
have    been    seen,     crouching    on    the 
ground,  his  head  bent  upon  his  knees, 
and  his  cloak  thrown  over  his  head,  as 
if  to  hide  everything  away  that  might 
disturb     his      intense      supplications, 
absorbed   in    prayer    until    the    youth 
sent  to  look  out  from  the  highest  point 
could  tell  of  a  little  cloud  rising  on  the 
western  edge  of  the  sea.     Then  Elijah 
knew  that  the  "  effectual  fervent  prayer 
of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much." 

Prayer  availing  in  its  Working. — 
"  The  supplication  of  a  righteous  man 
availeth  much  in  its  working."  These 
familiar  words  are  somewhat  puzzling 

621 


CHAP.  V.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


when  careful  thought  is  dh-ected  to  hended,  it  would  give  us  a  new  joy 
them.  To  speak  of  effectual  prayer  in  prayer,  and  the  consciousness  of 
that  avails  is  an  evident  repetition,  possessing  a  tool,  an  instrument,  a 
and  unnecessary.  If  it  is  effectual^  force,  which  we  might  more  worthily 
it  does  avail.  And  the  combination  use  for  God  and  for  men.  We  might 
''  effectual  fervent  "  is  unusual.  It  more  constantly  set  prayer  upon  doing 
seems  to  be  two  words,  and  to  de-  its  work,  its  own  precise,  appropriate, 
scribe  prayer  as  both  effectual  and  and  gracious  work. 
fervent ;  but  there  is  only  one  word  I.  We  are  in  the  presence  of  a 
in  the  original,  and  it  neither  means  general  truth,  which  has  a  wide 
''effectual"  nor  "fervent,"  nor  both  application. — It  always  has  been  true, 
terms  as  combined.  The  word  means  it  always  must  be  true,  in  the  very 
"  working,"  and  St.  James  speaks  of  nature  of  things,  that  the  prayer  of  a 
the  "  working  prayer  of  a  righteous  righteous  man  availeth  much  in  its 
man  "  as  "  availing  much."  The  Revised  working.  It  would  not  be  true  to 
Version  gives  a  precise  rendering  of  say  that  all  prayer  works  ;  for  unless 
his  meaning  thus — "The  supplication  the  man  who  prays  is  a  "righteous" 
of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much  in  man,  he  provides  conditions  that 
its  working."  Then  the  appropriate-  prevent  his  prayer  from  working, 
ness  of  the  illustration  from  Elijah  Prayer  is  not  its  effective  self,  save  as 
comes  at  once  into  view.  Elijah's  it  is  the  prayer  of  the  righteous,  right- 
prayer  did  something  in  its  working.  minded,  man.  The  man  who  is  not 
It  held  the  rain  off ;  it  brought  the  right-minded  can  only  pray  the  prayer 
rain  back,  again.  It  will  be  seen  that  of  fear,  or  of  brag,  or  of  demand  ;  and 
this  working  power  of  prayer  is  pre-  no  such  prayers  can  avail  with  God, 
cisely  what  St.  James  is  speaking  about  or  work  blessing  for  the  man  himself, 
in  these  closing  words  of  his  epistle.  "Is  or  for  others.  1.  A  right-minded 
any  afflicted  ?  let  him  pray,"  for  prayer  man's  prayers  work  as  a  persuasion 
can  wo7^k  him  both  strength  to  bear,  upon  God.  We  need  not  hesitate  to 
and  wisdom  to  guide  him  through,  his  recognise  that  God  permits  Himself 
difficulties.  "  The  prayer  of  faith  "  to  be  influenced  by  the  considerations 
can  work  a  blessing  for  the  sick.  It  which  His  people  present  in  their 
"  shall  save  the  sick."  Whatever  may  be  prayers.  If  we  stand  hard  and  fast 
the  faults  and  failings  spoiling  Christian  by  notions  of  Divine  absoluteness  and 
fellowship,  "  pray  for  one  another,"  for  sovereignty,  all  idea  of  God's  being 
prayer  can  work  wondrous  healings  open  to  persuasions  must  be  abandoned  ; 
of  broken  relations  ;  the  supplications  and  we  must  look  for  the  value  of 
even  of  one  good  man  in  a  Church  can  prayer  in  its  gracious  influence  only  on 
avail  much  in  its  working.  We  may  us,  and  on  those  around  us.  But,  if 
well  be  thankful  to  the  Revisers  for  we  sit  at  the  feet  of  Christ,  and  learn 
giving  us  so  important  and  so  suggest-  of  Him  to  cry,  "  Abba,  Father,"  and 
ive  a  change.  It  brings  before  us  see  in  God  the  infinite  of  our  finite 
quite  a  fresh  view  of  prayer.  We  had  fatherhood,  then  we  shall  readily 
hardly  thought  of  it  as,  in  its  very  apprehend  how  He  can  be  interested 
nature,  a  thing  that  works.  We  know  in  the  wishes  as  well  as  in  the  wants 
that  it  brings  down  to  us  Divine  of  His  children.  Our  prayer  availing 
blessings.  We  know  that  it  has  a  much  in  its  working  on  God !  The 
gracious  influence  upon  the  man  who  thought  is  almost  overwhelming ;  but 
prays.  But  prayer  as  really  an  active  it  must  not  be  dismissed.  The  picture- 
force,  as  having  in  it  an  actual  power  teaching  of  it  is  Jacob's  prevailing  at 
of  working — prayer  as  a  kind  of  holy  Peniel.  And  nothing  could  make 
leaven,  moving,  influencing,  wherever  it  prayer  more  serious,  nothing  could 
goes — has  hardly  come  into  our  thought,  make  us  more  cautious,  reverent. 
If  it  did,  and  could  be  worthily  appre-  anxious,  than  to  feel  that  our  prayers 

G22 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JAMES. 


CHAP.   V. 


are  to  work  on  God,  our  Father,  and 
to  avail  with  God  in  their  working. 
Our  prayers  will  work  with  God 
according  to  their  contents,  and  accord- 
ing to  their  character.  The  working 
may  be  very  different  to  our  expecta- 
tions. There  may  even  be  cross - 
workings,  as  in  the  early  praying  of 
St.  Augustine,  "  Lord,  convert  me, 
but  not  yet."  God's  dealings  with 
humanity,  with  any  race,  any  nation, 
any  church,  any  generation,  any 
family,  can  never  lae  read  aright  unless 
due  account  is  taken  of  all  that 
followed  the  influences  and  persuasions 
of  the  prayers  of  righteous  men.  The 
prophet  represents  God  as  refusing  at 
a  particular  time  what  He  usually 
admits — the  influence  and  persuasion 
of  human  intercessions.  **  Though 
Moses  and  Samuel  stood  before  Me, 
yet  My  mind  could  not  be  towards  this 
people"  (Jer.  xv.  1).  To  the  right- 
eous man  is  entrusted  a  prayer- power 
with  God.  Our  prayers  work  by 
making  material  for  His  judgments 
and  decisions.  2.  A  right-minded 
man's  prayers  work  in  a  way  of 
sanctifying  himself.  It  is  a  familiar 
thought  that  prayer  proves  a  blessing 
to  the  man  who  prays ;  and  F.  W. 
Robertson,  of  Brighton,  gives  this 
particular  efficacy  of  prayer  a  great 
prominence.  He  says  :  "  All  prayer  is 
to  change  the  will  human  into  sub- 
mission to  the  will  Divine.  That 
prayer  which  does  not  succeed  in 
moderating  our  wish,  in  changing  the 
passionate  desire  into  still  submission, 
the  anxious,  tumultuous  expectation 
into  silent  surrender,  is  no  true  prayer, 
and  proves  that  we  have  not  the  spirit 
of  true  prayer.  That  life  is  most  holy 
in  which  there  is  least  of  petition  and 
desire,  and  most  of  waiting  upon  God — 
that  in  which  petition  most  often 
passes  into  thanksgiving."  Perhaps 
w^e  have  been  accustomed  to  think 
chiefly  of  the  spiritual  grace  which 
comes  to  us  in  answer  to  prayer. 
*'  Every  good  gift  and  every  perfect 
gift,"  for  the  spiritual  life,  "  cometh 
down  from  the  Father  of  lights,"  and 
cometh   in   response  to  the   openness, 


receptiveness,  indicated  in  our  prayers. 
But  it  gives  a  freshness  to  the  familiar 
thought,  if  we  regard  our  prayers  as 
positively  exerting  an  active  power 
upon  ourselves.  Every  time  we  pray 
we  set  a  force  to  work,  which  will 
work  upon  ourselves.  Our  prayers 
are  some  of  the  workmen  who  are 
busy  at  the  building  and  decorating  of 
the  spiritual  house  that  we  are — that 
we  are  raising.  Our  prayers  are 
positive  forces  in  the  culture  of  the 
spiritual  character — active  influences 
affecting  the  tone  and  temper  of  our 
daily  conduct.  We  begin  the  day 
with  prayer  ;  then  that  prayer  is 
actually  to  be  at  work  all  through  the 
day,  and  availing  much  in  its  working. 
Arrest  life  for  a  moment  during  the 
day,  and  you  may  trace  its  working 
in  temper,  tone,  habit,  spirit.  It  is 
at  work  to  secure  and  establish  the 
better  self,  a  Christ-like  self.  Pray  in 
connection  with  special  difficulties  and 
anxieties ;  the  prayer  will  work,  not 
merely  in  bringing  Divine  light  and 
guidance,  but  also  in  fitting  us  to  deal 
with  the  difficulties,  in  lifting  us  above 
the  anxieties.  Pray  in  relation  to  the 
Christian  work  you  undertake,  and 
the  prayer  works  the  furbishing  of 
your  sword,  the  spiritual  ability  for 
the  service.  We  think  too  much  of 
the  getting  by  prayer.  We  need  to 
think  much  more  of  the  doing  of 
prayer.  In  all  our  lives  we  want  the 
activity  and  energy  of  the  prayer- 
power,  and  so  may  wisely  be  "  praying 
without  ceasing,"  that  we  may  be 
wholly  sanctified.  3.  A  right-minded 
man's  prayers  work  by  exerting  a 
moral  influence  on  others.  Here  again 
we  are  wont  to  think  chiefly  of  the 
good  things  for  others  that  can  be 
obtained  in  answer  to  the  good  man's 
prayers.  And  we  may  easily  miss  the 
answering  truth,  that  the  prayers 
themselves  work  good  things.  The 
point  of  distinction  is  at  once  seen  if 
we  think  of  family  life.  With  a  holy 
persistency,  for  long  years,  the  father 
supplicates  both  general  and  special 
blessings  for  his  family  as  he  gathers 
them    round    the   family    altar;    and, 

623 


CHAP.  V.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


in  answer,    heavenly   benedictions,    in  enmities,  what  should  be  done  ?     How 

gracious    abundance    and    adaptation,  would  the    Spirit  of   Christ  lead   the 

do  descend,  and  the  family  is  blessed  members    to   act  ?      St.    James    says, 

by    the   prayer -answering   God.     But  "  Confess  therefore  your   sins   one   to 

is  that  all  ?     Is  that  indeed  the  best  ?  another  " ;  be  willing  to  acknowledge 

Perhaps  when  we  can  estimate  things  it   if   you   have    done   wrong    or  felt 

aright,    we   shall    see,    that  what  the  wrong ;  "  and  pray  one  for  another " : 

prayers  actually  did  in  their  working  that  is  the  very  best  way  to  heal  up 

were    the    truest    and     best    answers  breaches,  to  restore  pleasant  relations, 

the  prayers   received.     Those   prayers  and  to  cure  the  faulty  one  of  his  faults, 

worked  the  healing  of  many  a  family  It  is  in  this  precise  connection   that 

division;      those      prayers     quickened  St.  James  says,   *'The  prayer  of  the 

many  a  nobler  resolve ;  those  prayers  righteous  man   availeth   much   in  its 

kept  hearts  together  in  an  ever-helpful  working."     Nothing  heals  the  broken 

unity ;  those  prayers   saved   from    sin  relations  of  Christ's  disciples  like  prayer 

over   and   over    again.     They   availed  together.     And    the   more   spiritually 

much  in  their  working.     Why,  some  of  minded    members   of    a    Church,   the 

us  can  say  that  the  family  prayers  of  "righteous    ones,"    have    this    special 

our  early  home  life  have  never  ceased  power — they  can  deal  effectively  with 

to  work   their   gracious  work   on   us,  faults,    failings,    inconsistencies,    mia- 

and  are  even  doing  their  work  to-day.  understandings,  by  their  prayer  which 

What   is   so  evidently  true  of  family  avails   much   in   its  working.     When 

prayer     is    true     of     all     prayer — of  faults,      involving     misunderstanding, 

private  intercessory    prayer,  of  public  remain,  depend  upon  it  there  has  been 

prayer,  of  special  prayer  in  relation  to  no  prayer  for  one  another  which  avails 

Christian  ministry  and  service.     It  is  much.     This  subject  has  its  yet  more 

a  power  for  good.     It  does  influence,  special     application     for     us     to-day. 

inspire,  direct,  bless.     Pray,   and  you  Throughout  the  world,  wherever  care 

set  moving  a  force  that  blesses  others.  is   being   taken    of    the    children    for 

Will  this  help  to  put  a  new  interest  Christ's  sake,  the  minds  of  Christian 

into  our  prayer  ;  to  make  us  feel  afresh  workers  are  being  occupied  with  the 

the  responsibility  of  our  power  to  pray ;  power  of   prayer,   and   the   hearts   of 

and  to  renew  our  faith  in  prayer,  as,  in  Christian  workers  are  being  united  in 

a  double  sense,  God's  way  of  securing  the  acts  of  prayer.     The  tens  of  thou- 

spiritual  blessings  ?     Shall  we  estimate  sands  are  meeting  in  spirit  and  sending 

again  our  use  of  this  prayer- power  ?  up  a  great  cry  for  a  blessing  on  the 

II.    We  are   in  the  presence  of  a  Sunday  schools.     And  God's  reviving 

specific  truth,  with  a  limited  applica-  grace  will  come  as  an  answer  to  the 

tion. — St.   James   is   speaking   of   one  cry.      But    there    is   something   more 

particular   matter    in    our    text,    and  for   us   to  think  of.     The  prayers  of 

urging  on  the  attention  of  disciples  the  to-day   will    be   a   new  power   set   to 

working  power  of  prayer  in  relation  to  work,  and  will  be  working  to  secure 

it.     Sins  of  frailty,  faults,  and  failings  the   very   things   which  they  will  be 

are   sure   to   appear   in    Church    life.  asking  to  be  sent  from  God.     Think 

Men  and  women  never  do  dwell  to-  of  it ;  the  prayers  of  to-day,  if  prayers 

gether  in  any  life  associations  without  of  the  right- hearted  and  believing,  will 

dilhculties,  misunderstandings,  complex  be  availing  much  in  their  working  on 

circumstances  arising,  and  they  gener-  the   children,    will   be   availing  much 

ally     come     from     somebody's   faults^  in  their  working  on  the  parents  and 

somebody's  faihng  from  the  Christian  teachers,    will    be    availing    much    in 

charity,    or    purity,    or    duty.     Given  their  working  on  the  Church,  will  be 

then  a  case  of  failure  and  inconsistency,  availing  much  in  their  working  on  the 

something  that  disturbs  relations,  and  world.      Prayer   as    an   actual   moral 

might  easily  bring  in  contentions  and  and  spiritual  force !     Have  we  rightly 

624 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP.   V. 


thought  of  that  ?  Is  that  force  active, 
strong,  vigorous,  avaihng — in  our  per- 
sonal religious  life,  in  our  family  life, 
in  our  Sunday-school-  life,  in  our 
Church  life  ?  The  hymnist  seems  to 
have  had  this  thought  of  prayer  when 
he  wrote, — 

"  Restraining  prayer,  we  cease  to  fight ; 
Prayer  makes  the  Christian  armour  bright." 


Restraining  prayer ! 


Binding  fast  the 


worker  !  Is  there  any  sense  in  which 
we  have  been  doing  that?  Then  let 
this  day  of  universal  and  united 
pi-ayer  be  the  day  for  loosening  the 
bonds,  and  letting  it  go  free  to  do  its 
gracious  work.  Give  prayer  full  li})erty 
to  do  its  work.  Pray  for  one  another, 
for  the  "supplication  of  a  righteous 
man  availeth  much  in  its  working." 
How  much  it  may  avail,  let  us  fully 
prove. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S   OF   THE   PARAGRAPH. —Verses  19,  20. 

The  Redeeming  Work  of  the  Redeemer's  Servants. — The  closing  word  of  the 
epistle  is  especially  interesting.  St.  James  seems  for  a  moment  to  stop,  to 
think  over  what  he  has  been  writing.  He  has  had  in  mind  many  failures 
from  the  Christian  spirit  and  relations.  He  has  thought  of  many  who,  in  various 
ways,  have  "  erred  from  the  truth."  What  shall  be  his  last  word  of  counsel  to 
the  Churches  ?  What  should  it  be  but  this  ? — Don't  let  what  I  have  been  saying 
breed  enmities  among  you.  Don't  let  it  separate  you  one  from  another.  Don't 
let  it  make  you  suspicious  of  one  another.  Don't  let  it  put  you  upon  searching 
out  your  heretics,  either  in  belief  or  practice.  Let  it  bring  you  closer  together 
in  pitiful  and  sympathetic  brotherliness.  And  if  there  is  any  one  w^ho  makes 
you  anxious,  who  seems  to  be  going  wrong  in  faith  or  conduct,  set  your  heart 
upon  his  conversion,  getting  him  turned  round,  and  turned  back  to  thoughts  and 
ways  of  righteousness.  Working  for  his  conversion  will  keep  you  near  to  him 
in  sympathy  and  love  ;  and  if  you  succeed,  you  will  save  a  soul  from  death  ; 
when  he  is  recovered,  the  sins  of  his  lapsed  time  can  be  fully  forgiven  ;  and  you 
will  have  the  joy  of  knowing  that  you  have  been  the  means  of  "  hiding  a  multi- 
tude of  sins." 

I.  There  is  a  redeeming  work  to  be  done  within  Christ's  Church. — St.  James 
is  not  writing  about  the  conversion  of  outside  sinners.  There  are  weak  Chris- 
tians, who  slide  from  righteousness  in  their  weakness.  There  are  wilful 
Christians,  who  break  out  of  bounds  in  their  wilfulness.  There  are  always 
some  in  a  Christian  Church  who  need  to  be  recovered  and  redeemed ;  and  in  the 
anxiety  for  the  conversion  of  the  world,  it  is  quite  possible  for  us  to  neglect 
the  conversion  of  the  failing,  lapsing  members  of  the  Church.  Servants  of  the 
Redeemer  should  expect  to  find  redeeming  work  in  every  sphere  in  which  they 
move.  We  can  always  find  some  Christian  brother  who  needs  to  be  converted 
from  the  error  of  his  ways.  To  redeeming  work  within  Christ's  Church  attention 
needs  to  be  more  fully  directed. 

II.  There  is  a  redeeming  power  within  Christ's  Church. — The  members  of  a 
Church  ought  to  have  a  most  unusual  and  peculiar  influence  one  upon  another. 
That  influence  may  properly  be  called  redemptive.  It  is  the  continuance  of  the 
work  and  influence  of  the  Church's  head  and  Lord.  It  should  be  a  power 
checking  lapses  in  their  beginning,  guarding  against  persuasions  of  evil,  and 
restoring  the  fallen.  It  should  be  an  influence  securing  soul-health  in  the 
community,  which  is  the  best  perservation  against  scepticism,  heresy,  or  vmfaith- 
fulness.  Very  seldom  is  the  Church's  redeeming  power  upon  itself  considered  ; 
and  this  may  explain  why  inconsistency  is  so  often  permitted  to  grow  into 
apostasy.  We  ought  to  convert  one  another — within  the  Christian  brotherhood — 
from  the  error  of  any  ways  into  which  we  may  have  fallen. 

III.  The  exercise  of  the   redeeming  power  is  a  blessing  to  him  who  exer- 

ss  625 


CHAP.   V 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


cises  it,  as  well  as  to  him  on  whom  it  is  exercised. — ''  In  the  very  act 
of  seeking  to  convert  one  for  whom  we  care,  we  must  turn  to  God  ourselves,  and 
in  covering  the  past  sins  of  another  our  own  also  are  covered.  In  such  an  act 
love  reaches  its  highest  point,  and  that  love  includes  the  faith  in  God  which  is 
the  condition  of  forgiveness."  1.  A  blessing  to  him  who  tries  to  convert  another, 
because  it  (1)  clears  his  own  vision  of  truth;  (2)  makes  him  anxious  about 
his  own  example ;  and  (3)  brings  to  him  the  sense  of  Divine  sympathy  and 
approval.  2.  A  blessing  to  him  on  whom  it  is  exercised.  (1)  It  saves  a  soul 
from  death.  For  if  the  man  is  in  sin,  this  will  be  true  for  him — "  sin,  when  it  is 
finished,  bringeth  forth  death."  And  (2)  "  It  shall  hide  a  multitude  of  sins." 
Because  when  one  of  His  people  is  heart-restored  to  His  allegiance,  God  can,  and 
does,  cast  all  his  sins  behind  His  back ;  they  are  hidden,  as  the  harlots  and 
riotous  living  of  the  younger  son  were  all  hidden  from  the  home  view,  when  the 
father  had  a  penitent  and  restored  boy  back  at  his  table  again.  St.  Paul  teaches 
the  same  duty  of  Church  members  to  one  another,  when  he  says,  "  If  any  of  you 
be  overtaken  in  a  fault,  ye  which  are  spiritual,  restore  such  an  one  in  the  spirit 
of  meekness." 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND   SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Vers.   19,  20.  Heresy. 

I.  These  words  imply  the  possi- 
bility of  a  truth-possessor  becoming  a 
truth-loser. — Men  may  "  err  from  the 
truth  "  through — 1.  A  daring,  specula- 
tive turn  of  thought.  2.  Want  of 
sympathy  in  their  intellectual  difficul- 
ties.    3.  Intellectual  pride. 

II.  The  principle  of  mutual  over- 
sight in  spiritual  life  is  here  recog- 
nised.— In  him  who  would  convert  the 
sinner,  there  must  be — 1.  Intense 
sympathy  with  Christ  in  the  love  of 
souls.  2.  A  thorough  acquaintance 
with  the  heart's  deceitfulness.  3.  An 
intelligent  reverence  for  the  established 
truths  of  religion. 

III.  The  text  teaches  that  the 
salvation  of  the  soul  is  the  sublimest 
of  moral  triumphs. — It  is  so  because 
— 1.  Christ  deemed  it  worthy  of  His 
incarnation  and  sacrifice.  2.  The 
mission  of  God's  Spirit  is  thus  ful- 
filled. 3.  The  sum  of  moral  goodness 
is  augmented. — Dr.  J.  Parker, 


Ver.  20.  Hiding  Sin. — This  is  con- 
version— to   turn    a    sinner   from  the 


error  of  his  ways,  and  not  to  turn  him 
from  one  party  to  another,  or  merely 
from  one  notion  and  way  of  thinking 
to  another.  He  who  thus  converteth 
a  sinner  from  the  error  of  his  ways 
shall  save  a  soul  from  death.  And  by 
such  conversion  of  heart  and  life  a 
multitude  of  sins  shall  be  hid.  A 
most  comfortable  passage  of  Scripture 
is  this.  We  learn  hence  that  though 
our  sins  are  many,  even  a  multitude, 
yet  they  may  be  hid  or  pardoned  ;  and 
that  when  sin  is  turned  from  or 
forsaken,  it  shall  be  hid,  never  to 
appear  in  judgment  against  us.  Let 
people  contrive  to  cover  or  excuse  their 
sin  as  they  will,  there  is  no  way 
effectually  and  finally  to  hide  it  but 
by  forsaking  it.  Some  make  the  sense 
of  this  text  to  be,  that  conversion  shall 
prevent  a  multitude  of  sins ;  and  it 
is  a  truth  beyond  dispute  that  many 
sins  are  prevented  in  the  person  con- 
verted, many  also  may  be  prevented  in 
others  that  he  may  have  an  influence 
upon,  or  may  converse  with. — Matthew 
Henry. 


ILLUSTRATIONS   TO   CHAPTER    V. 


Ver.  14.  The  Use  of  Oil  for  anointing 
Podies. — The  use  of  oil  in  anointing  the 
body  appears  to  have  been  general  in  ancient 
times  among  all  the  nations  dwelling  around 

626 


the  Mediterranean.  Allusions  to  this  use 
abound  in  ancient  authors.  The  heroes  of 
Homer  are  described  by  him  as  restoring 
their  weary  limbs  after  a  battle  by  frictions 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES. 


CHAP.   V. 


of  oil.  This  was  Alexander's  practice.  It 
was  Pompej's  daily  practice  also,  as  well  as 
that  of  all  the  wealthy  Romans.  We  find 
this  custom  alluded  to  in  the  Scriptures  both 
of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.  It  is  men- 
tioned as  forming  an  habitual  part  of  the 
toilet  on  special  occasions  (Ruth  iii.  3; 
2  Sam.  xii.  20;  Mic.  vi.  15);  not  to  be  in- 
dulged in  in  case  of  mourning  (2  Sam.  xiv. 
2  ;  Dan.  x.  2,  3).  The  head  was  anointed  in 
connection  with  the  recurring  daily  ablution, 
as  mentioned  in  Matt.  vi.  17.  Egyptian 
monuments  represent  servants  anointing 
guests  on  their  arrival  at  their  entertainer's 
house  ;  and  alabaster  vases  still  exist  which 
retain  traces  of  the  ointment  they  once  con- 
tained. This  was  adopted  from  the  Egyp- 
tians by  the  Jews,  and  the  settlement  of 
many  of  these  people  at  Alexandria  served 
to  maintain  Egyptian  customs  among  them. 
This  practice  has  disappeared  in  modern 
times,  on  account  of  the  conquest  of  these 
lands  by  foreign  nations.  The  hair  is  now 
anointed,  but  mostly  by  the  women,  since  the 
men  have  the  head  shaved.  The  wrestlers, 
called  by  the  Turks  Pekhliwaiis,  anoint  them- 
selves with  oil  before  wrestling,  as  did  the 
ancients  preparatory  to  similar  athletic  exer- 
cises, in  order  to  render  their  bodies  more 
slippery  under  the  grasp  of  their  antagonists. 
The  custom  of  anointing  the  body  is  still 
prevalent  among  some  nations  of  Africa. — 
Van  Lennep. 

Church  Customs  of  anointing  with  Oil. — 
Anointing  with  oil  was  a  part  of  the  cere- 
monial of  the  Jewish  law,  which  has  been 
introduced  into  the  Roman  as  well  as  the 
Oriental  Churches.  It  is  prepared  by  these 
according  to  the  rule  prescribed  by  Moses, 
and  is  with  them  no  inconsiderable  source 
of  revenue.  The  "  extreme  unction  "  practised 
by  the  Roman  Church  is  defended  by  a  misin- 
terpretation of  this  text ;  for  extreme  unction 
is  never  applied  until  it  is  considered  certain 
that  the  patient  is  about  to  die,  whereas 
the  words  of  St.  James,  as  well  as  those  in 
Mark  vi.  13,  connect  anointing  the  sick  with 
recovery.  We  do  not  consider  that  in  these 
cases  oil  was  used  either  as  a  means  or  a 
symbol ;  the  anointing  was  simply  an  exer- 
cise of  faith  similar  to  Peter  and  John's 
saying  to  the  lame  man  at  the  gate  of  the 
Temple  called  Beautiful,  "  Rise  up,  and 
walk."  The  elders  of  the  Church,  after 
praying  for  the  sick  man,  were  to  treat  him 
as  though  he  were  recovered.  They  were  to 
help  him  rise  from  his  bed,  wash,  anoint 
his  head,  and  dress,  and  rejoice  with  him  in 
view  of  the  healing  mercies  of  God. — Ibid, 

Vers.  15,  16.  Answers  to  Prayer. — About 
thirty  years  ago,  a  beloved  friend  and  fellow- 
labourer  was  taken  alarmingly  ill,  and  his 
constitution  being  delicate,  it  was  feared 
that  he  would  not  be  able  to  resist  so  violent 


an    attack.     He   was   a   man    most    highly 
esteemed  both   by  teachers   and   children  ; 
indeed,  I  never  knew  a  man  more  generally 
beloved.     Kind   and    gentle   in   his   deport- 
ment, superior  in  natural  and  acquired  talent, 
and  zealously  devoted  to  the  interests  of  the 
young,  he  was  formed  both  by  nature  and 
grace  to  be  a  teacher  of  the  very  first  order. 
His   sudden   indisposition    spread   a  gloom 
over  many   hearts,   and   prayer   was    made 
without  ceasing  unto  God  for  him.     Several 
friends  agreed   to   engage   in   this  exercise 
every   morning  at   eleven  o'clock,  and   the 
result    was   waited    for   with    the    greatest 
anxiety.     The  next  Sabbath  came,  and  this 
faithful    servant    of   Christ   to    all    human 
appearance  was  fast  approaching  the  gates 
of  death  ;  a  few  hours  it  was  thought  would 
terminate   his   useful   career.      But   though 
cast  down,  his  friends  were  not  in  despair. 
A  special  prayer-meeting  was  appointed  to 
be  held  in  the  evening  on  his  behalf,  which 
was  attended  by  not  less  than  between  two 
and  three  hundred  persons,  and  never  did 
Christians    appear   to    be    more    united   in 
purpose,  more  earnest   in  desire,  and  more 
interested  in  the  one  important  object  for 
which  they  were  assembled,  than  were  the 
friends  on  that  occasion.     It  was  in  truth  a 
solemn  season.     Every  soul  seemed  dissolved 
in  tenderness,  and  every  eye  melted  to  tears ; 
while  the  language  of  each  heart  appeared 
to  be,  "  I  am  distressed  for  thee,  my  brother 
Jonathan."     For  my  own  part  I  felt  so  over- 
come by  the  intense  sympathy  and  earnest- 
ness  displayed,  that   I  was   glad   to   retire 
from  the  meeting  unobserved,  that  I  might 
"  commune  with  my  own  heart,  and  be  still." 
The  next  day  was  with  me  a  day  of  much 
anxiety ;  but  in  the  evening  1  was  greatly 
relieved  by  the  information  that  the  disorder 
of  my  friend  had  taken  a  sudden  and  favour- 
able  change  at  the  very  hour  appointed  for 
prayer ;   affording  a  striking  illustration  of 
the   faithfulness   of    the   promise,   "  Before 
they  call  I  will  answer,  and  while  they  are 
yet  speaking  I  will  hear."     From  that  hour 
the  suiferer  began  slowly  to  amend,  until  he 
was  again   restored   to   health,  and  to  the 
duties  from  which  he  had  for  a  season  been 
]aid  aside.     But  the  most  extraordinary  part 
of  the   story  remains   to   be   told.    At  the 
meeting  referred  to,  an  aged  teacher,  a  man 
remarkable  for  the  strength  and  simplicity 
of  his  faith,  was  called  upon  to  pray.     Whilst 
pleading  with  God  on  behalf  of  his  friend, 
Hezekiah's    sickness    and    recovery    came 
forcibly  to  his   mind,  and  he   prayed   that 
God  would   be  pleased,  as  in  the  case  of 
Israel's  king,  to  add   fifteen  years  to  the 
valuable  life  of  his  afflicted  brother.     Time 
rolled  on,  carrying  many  who  had  engaged 
in  this  interesting  service  to  the  ocean  of 
eternity,  and  with  them  the  venerable  man 
who  had  offered  this  singular  prayer.      He 
whose  life  had  been  given  at  his  petition 

627 


CHAP    V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JAMES, 


wept  over  his  remains,  crying,  "  Alas,  my 
brother !  "  and  followed  him  to  the  open 
tomb.  Years  again  passed  away,  and  the 
circumstance  of  the  fifteen  years  was  for- 
gotten by  most,  but  not  b}'^  him  to  whom  it 
particularly  referred.  He  treasured  it  up  in 
his  memory,  until  old  age,  with  its  accom- 
panying infirmities,  came  stealing  upon  him. 
One  day,  when  remarking  upon  it  to  his 
family,  he  said,  "  That  prayer  has  been 
signally  answered,  for  this  very  week  the 
fifteen  years  have  expired."  In  the  evening 
the  worn-out  pilgrim  retired  to  his  rest ; 
but  oh,  how  sweet,  how  peaceful  was  that 
rest !  it  was  the  rest  that  remaineth  for  the 
people  of  God.  When  the  sun  again  visited 
our  hemisphere,  his  happy  spirit  had  departed 
to  partake  of  pleasures  which  longevity  can- 
not diminish,  and  eternity  itself  can  never 
exhaust. — Cranjield. 

Ver.  16.  Luther's  PrayeT.—'-'-  Just  as  a 
shoemaker  makes  a  shoe,  and  a  tailor  a 
coat,"  said  Luther,  "  so  also  ought  the 
Christian  to  pray.  The  Christian's  trade  is 
praying.  And  the  prayer  of  the  Church 
works  great  miracles.  In  our  days  it  has 
raised  from  the  dead  three  persons,  viz. 
myself,  my  wife  Catherine,  and  Melanctbon, 
who  was  nigh  unto  death  at  Weimar." 
Luther,  having  spoken  thus,  he  lifted  up  his 
eyes  towards  heaven,  praying,  "  Lord  God, 
Thou  hast  spoken  through  the  mouth  of  Thy. 
servant  David  (Ps.  cxlvii.  8,  9).  Why  wilt 
Thou  not  give  us  rain  now,  for  which  so 
long  we  have  cried  and  prayed  ?  Well,  then, 
if  no  rain.  Thou  art  able  to  give  us  some- 
thing better — a  peaceable  and  quiet  life, 
peace  and  harmony.  Now,  we  have  prayed 
so  much,  prayed  so  often,  and  our  prayers 
not  being  granterl,  dear  Father,  the  wicked 
will  say,  Christ,  Thy  beloved  Son,  had  told 
a  falsehood,  saying  (John  xvi.  23),  Thus 
they  will  give  both  Thee  and  Thy  Son  the 
lie.  I  know  that  we  sincerely  cry  to  Thee 
and  with  yearning.  Why,  then,  dost  Thou 
not  hear  us  ? "  In  the  very  same  night 
following  there  fell  a  very  refreshing  and 
productive  rain. 

Ver.  17,  18.  Rain  in  Answer  to  Prayer. — 
An  interesting  coincidence  in  connection 
with  this  reference  to  Elijah's  history 
presents  itself  in  the  narrative  given  in 
Josephus  (Ant.,  XVIII.  viii.  6)  of  the  troubles 
caused  by  Caligula's  insane  attempt  to  set 
up  his  statue  in  the  Temple  at  Jerusalem. 
Petronius,  the  then  governor  of  Judaea,  was 
moved  by  the  passionate  entreaties  of  the 
people,  and  supported  the  efforts  made  by 
Agrippa  I.,  who  remained  in  Rome,  to  turn 
the  emperor  from  his  purpose.  It  was 
one  of  the  years  of  drought  that  brought 
about  the  great  famine  foretold  by  Agabus 
(4cts  xi.  28).     No  rain  had  fallen  for  many 


weeks,  and  the  people— Christians,  we  may 
well  believe,  as  well  as  Jews,  though 
Josephus  of  course  makes  no  mention  of 
the  former — were  "  instant  in  prayer,"  calling 
upon  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  to  send  rain 
upon  the  earth.  Suddenly  rain  fell  in  a 
plenteous  shower  from  an  almost  cloudless 
sky.  The  earth  was  refreshed,  and  the 
pressing  danger  averted.  Petronius,  Josephus 
relates,  was  much  moved  by  this  manifesta- 
tion, this  Epiphany,  of  the  Divine  power, 
and  looked  upon  it  partly  as  an  answer  to 
the  prayers  of  the  people,  partly  as  the 
reward  of  the  equity  which  he  had  shown 
in  dealing  with  them.  According  to  the 
date  which,  on  independent  grounds,  has 
been  assigned  to  St.  James's  epistle,  the 
event  referred  to  must  have  happened  but 
a  few  months  before  or  but  a  few  months 
after  it.  If  before,  he  may  well  have  had 
it  in  his  thoughts.  If  after,  il  may  well 
have  been  in  part  the  effect  of  his  teaching. 
Students  of  Church  history  will  remember 
tl.e  strikingly  parallel  instance  of  the  prayers 
of  the  soldiers  of  the  Thundering  Legion 
in  the  expedition  of  Marcus  Aurelius  against 
the  Marcomanni  (Euseb.,  Hist.,  \.  5;  Tertul., 
Ajjol.,  c.  5). — Dean  Flumptre. 

Vers.  19,  20.  On"  Co7iversion  leads  to 
Many. — The  conversion  of  a  soul  to  God 
may  issue  in  the  conversion  of  scores  more, 
and  perhaps  in  the  planting  of  various 
Christian  Churches.  It  is  impossible  to 
calculate  where  the  blessing  may  terminate. 
The  visit  of  a  travelling  pedlar  to  the  door 
of  Richard  Baxter's  father  led  to  the  purchase 
of  a  little  book ;  that  little  book  led  to  the 
conversion  of  Richard  Baxter.  Baxter  wrote 
the  Sainfs  Rest,  which  was  blessed  to  the 
conversion  of  Philip  Doddridge.  Doddridge 
penned  the  Rise  and  Progress  of  Religion, 
and  that  led  to  the  conversion  of  Wilberforce. 
Wilberforce's  Practical  Yiem  was  the 
means  of  the  conversion  of  Dr.  Chalmers 
and  Legh  Richmond,  How  much  good 
Chalmers  did  by  his  exalted  genius,  his 
burning  piety,  his  sterling  writings,  it  is 
impossible  for  any  man  to  estimate;  and 
I  think  we  may  safely  say  that  the 
Dairyman's  Bauglitcr,  and  other  works  of 
Legh  Richmond,  have  been  honoured  by 
God  to  the  salvation  of  thousands. 


Ver.  20.  Thank  God  for  the  many  instances 
in  which  one  glowing  soul,  all  aflame  with 
love  to  God,  has  sufficed  to  kindle  a  whole 
heap  of  dead  matter,  and  send  it  leaping 
skyward  in  ruddy  brightness.  Alas !  for 
the  many  instances  in  which  the  wet,  green 
wood  has  been  too  strong  for  the  little  spark, 
and  has  not  only  obstinately  resisted,  but 
has  ignominiously  quenched  its  ineffectual 
fire. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 


628 


INDEX. 


[Note  :  H.  =  Homily  ;  N.  =  Note ;  I   ==  Illustration  ] 


Abel  and  Cain,  contrast  of,  N.  373 
Abel's,  blood  better  than,  I.  448 

faith,  witness  of,  N.  373 
Ability,  Christian,  N.  568 
Abiabam,  hope  of,  H.  379  ;  I.  400 
Absent,    anxiety    fur    spiritual    welfare    of; 

H.  56 
Acknowledging  God's  will,  N.  602 
Acquisition,  natural,  riches  a,  N.  507 
Act  of  faith,  genuine,  N.  369 
Acts,  true  faith,  1.  564 
Action,  feeling  without,  N.  554 
Active  charity  and  personal  purity,  N.  537 
Activity,   persistent   Divine,   Providence  as, 

N.  137 
Admission,  free,  to  holiest,  H.  345 
Admonished  by  past,  N.  355 
Adornment  of  religion,  N.  532 

woman's  true,  H.  21 
Advanced  teachers,  hindrance  to,  H.  220 
Advent,     Eedeemer's,     grand     purpose     of, 

H.  11 
Advice,  refusing,  I.  448 
Affections,  human,  raised  not  destroyed  by 

gospel,  H.  50 
Affliction,     purpose     of,    relieves    pain    of 
affliction,  H.  418 
use  of,  I.  446 
Afflictive  circumstances,  prater  in,  N.  616 
Afresh,  crucifying  Son  of  God,  N.  230 
Age    and    capacity,    soul-food    adapted    to. 
N.  221 
•every,    God's    rest    for    His    people    in, 
H.  192 
Ages,  sameness  of  Jesus  Christ  through  all, 

N.  466 
Agency  of  Divine  Son  in  nature,  N.  144 

of  tongue  for  good  and  evil,  H.  570 
Agent,  believer  God's,  N,  480 
Aimless  talk,  vice  of,  H.  92 
All  good,  God  only  source  of,  H.  519 
rcten,  Christ  Saviour  of,  H.  34 

to  be  saved,  God  would  have,  H.  20 
salvation  for,  H.  19 
things  change,  I.  399 

Christ  made  like  us  in,  H.  169 


All-round  or  perfect  faith,  N.  559 
Allegory  of  sin  and  death,  N.  516,  517 
Altar,  our,  H.  474 

touching,  I.  253 
Anchor  of  hope,  H.  246 
Anchor- figure  for  Christian  hope,  N.  251 
Anchor-hold,  losing,  I.  449 

soul's,  N.  251 
Anchor-symbol  in  Catacombs,  I.  254 
Ancient  failures,  warning  of,  H.  183 

Grecian  games,  I.  445 
Angel  and  Son,  essential  difference  between, 
N.  137 

every  man's,  I.  147 
Angels,    infinite    superiority    of    Jesus    to, 
N.  158 

material,  H.  and  N.  143 

ministry  of,  I.  146,  147 

of  the  grass,  I.  147 

sight  of,  I.  146 

two  kinds  of,  I.  146 

worship  of,  N.  140 
Angel-helper,  I.  147 
Angel-service,  I.  147 

in  doing  God's  will,  N.  137 
Angel-succour,  I.  148 
Anger,  I.  540 

in  East,  I.  540 
Anointing  bodies,  use  of  oil  for,  I.  626 
Answer,  true  prayer  and  true,  N.  504 
Answers  to  prayer,  I.  627,  628 
Antagonist  of  Paul,  James  no,  N.  554 
Antitypical  sacrifice,  Christ's,  H.  339 
Anxiety  for  spiritual  welfare  of  absent,  H.  56 

of  riches,  N.  507 
Apostasy  is  perdition,  N.  353 

peril  and  prevention  of,  H.  225 
Apostle  and  High  Priest,  Christ  our,  H.  178 
Apostolic  gospel,  H.  67 

greeting,  H.  5,  56 

salutation,  H.  89 
Appearing,  Christ's  second,  N.  321 
Appreciation,    belated,    of    blessings    past, 

N.  428 
Ark,  contents  of,  N.  298 
Ascension,  the.  N.  319 

629 


INDEX. 


Asking  from  God,  N.  502 

Assembly,  general,  N.  434 

Assent,  faith  as,  N.  368 

Asseveration,  swearing  as,  H.  245 

Assurance,  full,  hope  elevated  into,  N.  236 

Athletics  and  religion,  H.  32 

Atonement,  N.  331 

Atoning  sacrifice,  only  one,  N.  354 

Attainment,  Christian,  ideal  of,  N.  497 

Attributes,  moral  and  spiritual,  revelation  of, 

N.  137 
Author  of  sin,  is  God  ?  N.  514 
Authority,  man's,  in  creation,  N.  160 

of  law,  H.  100 
Avarice,  insatiable,  H.  46 

Bad  and  good  men,  H.  41 

consciousness  taken  away,  H.  32iJ 

unbelief  and  good,  N.  188 
Battle  of  life,  H.  48 
Bearing,  patient,  is  reasonable,  N.  496 
Beginnings,  perilous,  I.  191 
"  Begotten,"  figurative  use  of  term,  N.  140 
Behaviour  towards  strangers,  N.  453 
Being  and  doing,  uniting  Christian,  N.  532 
Belated  appreciation  of  blessings  past,  N.  428 
Belief,  faith  includes,  N.  369 
is  more  than,  N.  367 

psychology  of,  N.  369 
Believer,  conflict  in,  N.  516 

God's  agent,  N.  480 
Benevolence,  consistency  of,  with  providing 
for  our  own,  H.  39 

practical  prayer  and,  I.  564 
Besetting  sin  of  Jews,  N,  522' 

sins,  H.  405 
Better  resurrection,  H.  395 

sacrifice  is  Christ  Himself,  N.  318 

spiritual  is  every  way,  N.  286 
Bible,   importance   of   early   instruction    in, 
H.  77 

use  of,  in  Christian  life,  H.  76 
Birthright,  selling,  N.  425 
Bishop,  Christian,  qualifications  of,  H.  90 

New  Testament,  qualifications  of,  H.  23 
Bitter  cup,  H.  161 

word,  mischief  of,  I.  579 
Blended  hopes  and  fears,  H.  234 
Blessed  God,  glorious  gospel  of,  H.  10,  11 

through  humiliations,  I.  538 
Blessedness,  future,  expectation  of,  H.  357 
Blessings  coming  through  suffering,  I.  172 

estimated    when    they    have    vanished, 
N.  427 
Blight  on  sicklv  plants,  I.  541 
Blood  as  type,  N.  314 

better  than  Abel's,  I.  448 

crying  for  vengeance,  I.  448 

is  life,  N.  313 

of  covenant,  H.  311 

of  everlasting  covenant,  H.  479 

sprinkled,  condition  of,  N.  301 

taking  the,  N.  314 
Blood-shedding,  no  remission  save  by,  N.  314, 

315 
Body  of  Christ  a  tabernacle,  N.  347 

G30 


Bodies,  use  of  oil  for  anointing,  I.  626 
Boldness  at  throne  of  grace,  N.  210 
Bondage,  lifelong,  fear  of  death  a,  N.  168 
Bones,  witness  of  dead  man's,  N.  389 
Brahmin's  reproof,  I,  563 
Brave  defender  of  faith,  H.  84 
Bridling  tongue,  H.  541 
Brightness  or  effulgence,  I.  145 
Brotherhood,  sonship  involves,  H.  452 
Brotherly  love,  N.  452 
Builder,  house  and  its,  N.  183 
Burning  over  the  ground,  I.  252 

the  earth,  N.  160 

the  ground,  uses  of,  I.  252 

Cain  and  Abel,  contrast  of,  N.  373 

special  study  of,  N.  372- 
Calf,  golden,  worship  of  modern,  N.  544 
Call,  solemn,  to  fidelity,  H.  48 
Calling,  heavenly,  N.  178     ' 
Capacitv    and    age,   soul-food    adapted    to, 

N.  221 
Captain  and  Perfecter  of  faith,  I.  446 

of  our  salvation,  I.  172 
Catacombs,  anchor-symbol  in,  I.  254 
Catechism,  Jewish-Christian,  N.  228 
Caves,  dwellers  in,  I.  402 
Celestial  city,  I.  399 
Ceremonial    of    Christianity,   morality    the, 

N.  537 
Ceremonies,  conscience  of  sins  after,  N.  331 
Champion  for  truth,  H.  80 
Change,  all  things,  I.  399 

no,  in  Christ's  priestly  relations  conceiv- 
able, N.  272 
Changed  circumstances,  discipline  comes  out 

of,  H.  506 
Character    and    doctrine,    comparative    in- 
fluence of,  H.  36 

and  kindness  the  true  worship  of  Father, 
H.  534 

Christ's,  Divine  charm  of,  H.  279 

Christian,  a  thing  of  quiet  growth,  N.  496 

choice  revealing,  N.  390 

control  of  speech  a  sign  of,  N.  567 

decision  of,  I.  400 

good  man's,  negative  side  of,  H.  90 
positive  side  of,  H.  91 
Characters  seen  in  use  of  mirrors,  N.  525 
Characteristically      Christian,      what      is  ? 

H.  455 
Characteristics  of  early  revelations,  N.  128 

of  false  teachers,  H.  74 

of  genuine  teacher,  H.  75 
Charge,  difiicult  pastoral,  H.  6 
Charity,  active,  and  personal  purity,  N.  537 

Christian,  genuine  sources  of,  H.  8 

commonplace,  lesson  of,  N.  554 

works  as,  and  faith  as  trust,  N.  553 
Charm,  Divine,  of  Christ's  character,  H.  279 
Chastenings,  God's,  men's  persecutions   as, 
N.  414 

of  sons,  difficult  principles  in,  N.  417 
Cherubim  as  guardians,  N.  299 

as  representative  worshippers,  N,  299 

offices  of,  N.  299 


INDEX. 


Cherubim,  suggestion  of  the,  N.  298 
Chief  of  sinners,  H.  13 
Choice  of  Moses,  H.  391 

revealing  character,  N.  390 
Christ  above  Moses,  H.  174 

and   Moses,    relativity   of,  to   their   dis- 
pensations, N.  183 

as  purger  of  sins,  N.  135 

as  separate  from  world,  H.  277 

as  Surety  of  covenant,  N.  271 

bearing  sins  of  transgressors,  H.  320 

body  of,  a  tabernacle,  N.  347 

came  to  do,  will  of  God  which,  N.  339 

consider,  H.  177 

cross  of,  H.  162 

crucifying,  nowadays,  N.  231 

denial  of,  H.  68 

drifting  from,  N.  151 

enthroned  Servant,  H.  284 

ever  the  same,  H.  465,  466 

Himself,  better  sacrifice  is,  N.  318 

Jesus,  man,  H.  20 

joy  of,  in  redemption,  I.  446 

made  like  us  in  all  things,  H.  169 

our  Apostle  and  High  Priest,  H.  178 

perfect,  N.  219 

as  applied  to,  I.  172 
manhood  of,  H.  166 

principal  thing  concerning,  H.  282 

putting,  to  shame,  N.  231 

reproach  of,  I.  400 

Saviour  of  all  men,  H.  34 

sympathy  of,  H.  209 

taking  sanctuary  with,  H.  247 

the  Friend,  H.  166 

the  living,  rest  of  trusting,  I.  211 

the  Son,  H.  131 

true  minister  of,  H.  31,  32 

unchanging,  N.  464 
Christ's  antitypical  sacrifice,  H.  339 

character,  Divine  charm  of,  H.  279 

coming,  love,  preparation  for,  H.  81 

death,  moral  necessity  for,  N,  164 

enduring  contradiction,  H,  412 

incarnation,  H.  142 

manhood,  temptableness  of,  N.  158 

own  references  to   the  will  He  obeyed, 
N.  339 

priestly    relations,   no    change    in,   con- 
ceivable, N.  272 

second  appearing,  N.  321 
,  spiritual  offering,  N.  286 

sympathy  with  infirm,  H.  208 

victory  over  Satan,  I.  172 

voluntary  sin-bearing,  N.  316 
Cbrist-help,  God  is  apprehended  with,  N.  136 
Christ-model  of  perfect  life,  N,  497 
Christian  ability,  N,  568 

and  Scripture  history,  what   to  find  in, 
N.  395 

attainment,  ideal  of,  N.  497 

being  and  doing,  uniting,  N,  532 

bishop,  qualifications  of,  H.  90 

character  a  thing  of  quiet  growth,  N.  496 
ministry  of  trial  to,  H.  491 

charity,  genuine  sources  of,  H.  8 


Christian  Church,  tithes  in  the,  I.  280 

Churches,  no  classes  within,  N.  545 

conduct  fitting  occasions,  H.  615 

contentment,  cultivation  of,  H.  45 

dispensation,  end  of,  H.'73 

doctrine,  permanence  of,  H.  65 

duties,  negative  and  positive,  N.  599 

endurance,  examples  of,  H.  613 

enduring,  N.  512 

entreaty,  H.  113 

excellence,  distinguished,  H.  108 

faith,  science  in  its  relation  to,  H.  52 

fasts  and  festivals,  N.  462 

first  principles,  H.  227 

grace,  hope  as,  N.  260 

greeting,  H.  90 

home,  H.  89 

hope,  anchor  figure  for,  N,  251 

in  Church,  H.  26 

in  heaven,  H.  61 

in  times  of  suffering,  H.  493 

joy  in  times  of  trial,  N.  493 

leaders,  example  of,  H.  461 
life,  phases  of,  H.  66 
use  of  Bible  in,  H.  76 

loneliness,  H.  83 

love,  H.  109 

unselfishness  of,  H.  112 

patience,  H.  356 

pilgrim,  H.  383 

privileges  of,  H.  432 

profession,  strain  of  maintaining,  H.  411 

race,  H.  408 

reproof,  H.  92 

salutation,  H.  108,  114 

solution  of  social  problems,  H.  Ill 

standpoint,    discipline    of   tongue  from, 
N.  574 

teacher,  H.  98 

and  slave,  H.  Ill 
hopefulness  of,  N.  235 

teachers,  signs  of  unskilfulness  in,  H.  221 

treatment  of  sigk,  H.  617 

truth,  higher,  lost  interest  in,  N.  222 

view  of  public  war,  N.  584 

way  of  seeing  God,  N.  393 

ways  of  helping  one  another,  H.  416 

what  is  characteristically  ?  H.  455 
Christian's  course,  conflict,  and  crown,  H.  81 

God  is  a  fire,  N.  439,  440 

prevailing  spirit  of  mind,  H.  58 

race  and  goal,  N.  422 
Christians  must  forsake  evil,  H.  71 
Christianity  and  civil  powers,  H.  100 

and  Judaism,  one  God  of,  N.  127 

and  old  age,  H.  94 

and  servitude,  H.  42 

and  slavery,  H.  96 

and  the  young,  H.  95 

essence  of,  N.  216 

evidence  of  value  of,  N.  531 

of  old  age,  H.  110 

wisdom  of,  X.  503 
Church,  Christian  in,  H.  26 
tithes  in  the,  1.  280 

customs  of  anointing  with  oil,  I.  627 

631 


INDEX. 


Church,  dignity  and  stability  of,  H.  25 

early  Christian,  widows  and,  H.  38 

government,  rules  for,  H.  40 

house  of  God,  H.  26 

officers,  H.  25,  90 

order,  H.  90 

purity  and  security  of,  H.  70 

triumphant,  I.  448 
Churches,     Christian,     no     classes    within, 
N.  545 

perils  of,  H.  424 
Church-life,  place  of  woman  in,  H.  20 
Circumstances,   changed,    discipline    comes 

out  of,  H.  506 
Citizenship  in  heaven,  I.  400 
City,  celestial,  I.  399 

no  continuing,  H.  476 

that  hath  foundations,  I.  400 

way  to,  H.  379 

yet  to  come,  I.  400 
Civil  powers,  Christianity  and,  H,  100 
Claim,  Divine,  our  gift  and  the,  H.  58 
Classes    within     Christian     Churches,     no, 

N.  545 
Classical  covenant  customs,  I.  323 
Closing  salutation,  H.  104 
Cloud  and  sun,  N.  520 

of  witnesses,  N.  408 
Coming,  Christ's,  love  preparation  for,  H.  81 

of  Lord,  N.  613 
Common  talk,  truth-tone  in,  N.  616 
Commonplace  charity,  lesson  of,  N.  554 

practical  wisdom,  H.  498 
Comparative    influence    of     character    and 

doctrine,  H.  36 
Compassion  of  priest,  N.  216 
Complete  salvation,  living  Saviour  therefore, 

H.  277 
Concerns,  personal,  good  man's,  H.  104 
Condition  of  sprinkled  blood,  N.  301 
Conditions  of  success  in  prayer,  H.  20 
Conduct,  Christian,  fitting  occasions,  H.  615 
Confessional,  healthy,  N.  619 
Confidence,  ground  of  our,  N.  466 
Conflict,  course,  and  crown,  Christian's,  H.  81 

in  believer,  N.  516 
Conscience,  N.  478 

corrupt,  H.  9 

force  of,  I.  212 

good,  faith  and,  H.  15 

o£  sins  after  ceremonies,  N.  331 

seared,  H.  30 

under  old  covenant,  N,  303 
Consciousness,  bad,  taken  away,  H,  328 
Consecrating  Saviour  and  consecrated  people, 

H.  98 
Consequences  of  slander,  I.  579 
Consider  Christ,  H.  177 
Considerateness  of  new  covenant,  N.  289 
Consideration  and  provocation,  mutual,  H.347 
Considering  their  end,  N.  463 
Consistency  of  benevolence    with  providing 

for  our  own,  H.  39 
Construction  of  religion,  H.  371 
Consuming  fire,  God  a,  N.  440 ;  H.  441 ;  I.  448 
Contentions,  social,  secret  causes  of,  H.  582 

632 


Contentment  based  on  security,  H.  457 

Christian,  cultivation  of,  H.  45,  46 

song  of,  N.  460 
Contents  of  ark,  N.  298 
Continuing  city,  no,  H.  476 

safety  in,  H.  189 
Contradiction,  Christ's  enduring,  H.  412 
Contrast  between  servant  and  Son,  N.  134 

of  Cain  and  Abel,  N.  373 

of  created  and  uncreated,  I.  146 
Control  of  speech  a  sign  of  character,  N.  567 
Cimtumacious  spirit,  H.  103 
Conversion,  one,  leads  to  many,  I.  628 
Coral  reef,  drawn  on  to,  N.  151 
Corrupt  conscience,  H.  9 
Counsel,  God's,  immutability  of,  impressed 

upon  His  people,  N.  245 
Counsels,  concluding,  H.  104 
Course,  conflict,  and  crown,  Christian's,  H.  81 

of  nature,  N.  565;  I.  579 
Covenant,  blood  of,  H.  311 

Christ  as  Surety  of,  N.  271 

customs,  Eastern,  I.  323 

everlasting,  blood  of,  H.  479 

God's,  ratification  of,  N.  310 

new,  considerateness  of,  N.  289 
God's  side  in,  N.  288 
spirituality  of,  H.  287 

old,  conscience  under,  N.  303 

Scottish  League  and,  I.  323 
Cowardice,  moral,  folly  of,  H.  60 
Created  and  Uncreated,  contrast  of,  I.  146 
Creation,  man's  authority  in,  N.  160 
Creatures,  firstfruits  of,  H.  520 
Criticising  persons,  H.  594 
Cross  of  Christ,  H.  162 
Crown,  course,  and  conflict.  Christian's,  H.  81 

of  life,  H.  506 ;  N.  512 
Crucifying  Son  of  God  afresh,  N.  230 
Cultivation  of  Christian  contentment,  H.  45 
Cup,  bitter,  H.  161 
Custody  of  gospel,  H.  66 
Customs,  Church,  of  anointing  with  oil,  I.  627 

Eastern  covenant,  I.  323 
Cycles  of  miracles,  L  172 

Danger,  faith  out  of,  H.  61 

of  riches,  H.  47 
Dangers  and  duties  of  women,  H.  95 
Dark  picture,  relief  of,  N.  189 
David's  Son  and  Lord,  N.  140 
Day  approaching,  N.  351 
Days,  God  with  us  all  the,  N.  455 

last,  N.  133 
Deacons,  New  Testament,  qualifications  of, 

H.  24 
Dead,  as  applied  to  things,  N.  555 

forgetfulness  of,  I.  397 

living  power  of,  I.  397 

man's  bones,  witness  of,  N.  389 
Dealing,  God's,  with  us,  I.  447 
Death  and  pain  in  nature,  N.  520 

and  sin,  allegory  of,  N.  516,  517 

and  translation,  N.  373 

Christ's,  moral  necessity  for,  N.  164 

defeated,  H.  60 


INDEX. 


Death,  faithful  minister  in  presence  of,  H.  80 

Divine  selection  for  service,  N.  128 

fear  of,  a  lifelong  bondage,  N.  168 

Son,  agency  of,  in  nature,  N.  144 

for  remission,  H.  313 

earthly  mission  of,  H.  122 

hour  of,  faith  in,  H.  388 

representative  Manhood  of,  H.  157 

human,  power  of  faith  on,  H.  374 

Spirit,  Philo's,  I.  322 

in  sin,  I.  539 

things,  first  tastings  of,  N.  229 

missions  continued  after,  T.  397 

Thought-reader,  H.  205 

redemption  through,  N.  310 

Divine-human  High  Priest,  H.  206 

war  with  sin  to,  H.  412 

model  of  prayer,  N.  217 

Deatli-law  for  humanity,  N.  319 

Doctrine  and  character,  comparative  influence 

Debt,  undischargeable,  H.  113 

of,  H.  36 

Deceitfulness  of  sin,  N.  189 

Christian,  permanence  of,  H.  65 

Deception,  peril  of,  H.  518 

false,  H.  29 

Decision  of  character,  I.  400 

Doers  of  Word,  I.  540 

Defection  of  Demas,  H.  82,  83 

perfect  law  and  its,  H.  526 

Defender,  brave,  of  faith,  H.  84 

Doing,  hearing  and,  I.  540 

Defilement,  moral,  H.  92 

knowing  with,  N.  604 

Defiling  power  of  tongue,  N.  573 

Double  meaning  of  "  repentance,"  N.  22 

Degrees,  rabbinical,  of  revelation,  N.  130 

sphere  of  practical  religion,  H.  537 

Delicately,  living,  moral  mischief  of,  N.  608 

Double-edged  knife,  I.  212 

Delinquent  slave,  plea  for,  H.  109 

Double-minded  and  single-minded,  N.  505 

Deliverance,  Divine,  H.  85 

Doubting,  two  kinds  of,  N.  504 

Demas,  defection  of,  H.  82,  83 

Drawing  laack,  N.  358 

Denial  of  Christ,  H.  68 

Drawn  on  to  coral  reefs,  N.  151 

Deo  volente,  N.  602 

Drifting,  N.  151 

Departed  worth,  duty  of  imitating,  H.  463 

from  Christ,  N.  151 

Details  of  life,  religion  in,  N.  534 

from  truth,  N.  151 

Detraction  of  others,  N.  530 

Dual  sphere  of  relations,  H.  551 

Devil  as  an  objective  person,  N.  516 

Duty  and  devotion,  religion  is,  N.  553 

personality  of,  H.  167 

of  gospel  teacher,  H.  71 

Devil's  armv,  soldiers  of,  N.  584 

of  house  of  God,  H.  350 

Devils,  faith  of,  N.  558 

of  imitating  departed  worth,  H,  463 

Devotion  and  duty,  religion  is,  N.  553 

our,  in  waiting-times  of  life,  H.  609 

Different  principles  in   chastening  of  sons. 

rests  on  privilege,  H.  343 

N.  417 

universal,  prayer  a,  H.  16 

Difficult  pastoral  charge,  H.  6 

Duties  and  dangers  of  women,  H.  95 

Dignity  and  stability  of  Church,  H.  25 

and  temptations  of  old  men,  H.  95 

man's,  power  of  faith,  N.  368 

Christian,  negative  and  positive,  N.  599 

Directory,  preacher's,  H.  95 

ministerial,  H.  36 

Disability,  interest  in  those  under,  N.  453 

of  servants,  H.  43,  97 

Disappearance  of  ten  tribes,  N.  491 

Dwellers  in  caves,  I.  402 

Discernment,  moral,  exercising,  N.  221 

Dying  in  faith,  I.  399 

Discipline   comes   out   of   changed   circum- 

living and,  H.  381 

stances,  H.  506 

Divine,  faith  under,  H.  385 

Eaely  Christian  Church,  widows  and,  H.  38 

military,  H.  67 

Church,  weakness  of,  N.  545 

of    tongue    from    Christian    standpoint. 

instruction  in  Bible,  importance  of,  11.  77 

N.  574 

revelations,  characteristics  of,  N.  128 

Discretion  and  knowledge,  N.  503 

Earth,  burning  the,  N.  160 

Disguise,  pride  in,  N.  507 

sojourners  on,  I.  399 

Dispensation,  Christian,  end  of,  H,  73 

Earthly  mission  of  Divine  Son,  H.  122 

spiritual,  emblems  of,  H.  431 

sphere,  spiritual  man's,  H.  450 

Dispensations,  relativity  of  Christ  and  Moses 

East,  anger  in,  I.  540 

to  their,  N.  183 

Eastern  covenant  customs,  I.  323 

Dispersion,  Jews  of,  I.  538 

mirrors,  N,  525 

Distinguished  Christian  excellence,  H.  108 

swearing  and  offensive  language,  I.  580 

Divers  washings,  N.  303 

Education,  life  an,  H.  415 

Divine    activity.   Providence   as    persistent, 

world's,  revelations  in,  N.  130 

N.  137 

Effectual  prayer,  Elijah's,  N.  620 

charm  of  Christ's  character,  H.  279 

Efficiency,  imperfect,  of  Jewish  sacrifices. 

claim,  our  gift  and  the,  H.  58 

N.  328 

deliverance,  H.  85 

Effulgence  of  glory,  N.  134 

discipline,  faith  under,  H.  385 

or  brightness,  I.  145 

gifts,  responsibility  of,  H.  57 

Elijah's  effectual  prayer,  N.  620,  621 

humility,  religion  of,  N.  339 

Eloquence,  posthumous.  N.  372 

revelations,  N.  127 

Emblem  of  grass,  H.  507 

633 


INDEX 


Emblem  of  uncertainty  of  life,  N,  601 
Emblems  of  older  revelation,  H,  428 

of  spiritual  dispensation,  H.  431 
End,  considering  their,  N.  463 

in  view  for  hearers  of  gospel,  N.  525 

of  Christian  dispensation,  H.  73 

of  Lord  reveals  Him,  H.  614 
Endless  life,  N.  266 

power  of  an,  H.  264 
Endurance,  Christian,  examples  of,  H.  613 

of  faith,  H.  391 
Enduring,  Christian,  N.  512 

temptation,  I,  538 
Engrafted,  and  so  within  us,  N.  523 

Word,  N.  523 
Enoch,  I.  398 

Enthroned  Servant  Christ,  H.  284 
Entire,  perfect  and,  N.  496 
Entrails,  examining  the,  I.  212 
Entrance  into  God's  rest,  H.  202 
Entreaty,  Christian,  H.  113 
Enviously,  thinking,  N,  590 
Epistle  of  James,  relation  of,  to  Sermon  on 

the  Mount,  N.  491 
Epitome  of  gospel,  H.  27 
Escape,  how?  I.  172 

Escaping,  no,  if  there  is  neglecting",  N.  151 
Essence  of  Christianity,  N.  216 
Essential  difference  between  Son  and  angel, 
N.  137 

idea  of  a  prophet,  IS!,  128 

truth,  H.  13 
Estimating    value  of    things  lost,   N.    427 ; 

I.  447 
Eternal  glory,  salvation  with,  H.  68 

life,  H.  48 

salvation,  N.  219 

Saviour,  H.  273 
Eulogy  of  gospel,  noble,  H.  10 
Evangelical  revelation,  perfection  of,  N.  132 
Everlasting  covenant,  blood  of,  H.  479 

Name,  N.  466 
Everything  to  its  sphere,  N.  331 
Evidence  of  things  not  seen,  N.  368 

of  value  of  Christianity,  N.  531 
Evil  and  good,  agency  of  tongue  for,  H.  570 

Christians  must  forsake,  H.  71 

God  not  author  of,  N.  514 
Evils  of  tongue,  H.  572 
Evil-speaking,  N.  530 

mischief  wrought  by,  H.  594 
Exaltings  and  humblings,  H.  507 
Examining  the  entrails,  I.  212 
Example,  good,  power  of,  H.  34 

holy,  I.  398 

of  Christian  leaders,  H.  461 
Examples,    high,    inspiration    of,    N.    370  ; 
H.  404 

of  Christian  endurance,  H,  613 
Excellence,  Christian,  distinguished,  H.  108 
Excitement,  religious,  ineffective,  I.  541 

to  evil,  mission  of  temptation  as,  H,  508 
Exercising  moral  discernment,  N.  221 
Exhaustion  of  power  of  renewal,  N.  229 
Exhortations,  practical,  H.  527 

solemn,  on  vital  themes,  H.  68 

634 


Expectant  tent-dwellers,  N.  378 
Expectation  of  future  blessedness,  H.  357 
Expectations  of  love,  H.  114 
Experience,     human,    help    of    our    Lord's, 
L  213 

inspiration  of,  H.  354 

secret  of  moral  power,  H.  171 
Expressions  of  faith,  H.  375 

Fading  impressions,  N.  525 
Failures,  ancient,  warning  of,  H.  183 

in  prayer,  our,  N.  586 
Faith  a  persuasion  and  power,  N.  383 

a  soul-principle,  N.  368 

acts,  true,  I.  564 

and  falsehood,  Rahab's,  N.  394 

and  good  conscience,  H.  15 

and  its  fruits,  I.  399  ;  N.  555 

and    philosophy   dealing   with    material 
world,  N.  370 

and  reason,  H.  364  ;  N.  370 

and  sight,  I.  397 

and  works,  N.  554,  560 

as  a  cipher,  N.  555 

■as  assent,  N.  368 

as  sentiment  and  as  power,  H.  555 

as  trust  and  works  as  charity,  N.  553 

brave  defender  of,  H.  84 

Captain  and  Perfecter  of,  I.  446 

Christian,  science  in  its  relation  to,  H.  52 

endurance  of,  H.  391 

expressions  of,  H.  375 

genuine  act  of,  N.  369 

good  fight  of,  H.  48 

I  have  kept  the,  H.  81 

in  God,  I.  398 

in  God's  Word,  N.  376 

in  hour  of  death,  H.  388 

includes  belief,  N.  369 

inspiring  self-sacrifice,  N.  387 

is  more  than  belief,  N.  367 

living  and  dying  in,  H.  381 

mixed  with,  H.  196 

of  devils,  N.  558 

of  Moses,  H.  389 

out  of  danger,  H.  61 

perfect  or  all-round,  N.  559 

persistency  in  obedience  of,  N.  377 

power  of,  I.  401 

man's  dignity,  N.  368 
on  human  death,  H.  374 

seen  in  Jericho  associations,  H.  393 

strain  that  feeling  may  put  on,  N.  388 

summary  of  triun.phs  of,  H.  394 

teaching  what,  is,  I.  397 

under  Divine  discipline,  H.  385 

walking  by,  L  397 

what  men  of,  gain  and  fail  to  gain,  N.  396 

works  evidence,  I.  564 
Faithful  minister  in  presence  of  death,  H.  80 

persecutions  of,  I.  401 
Faithfulness  is  independent  of  nature  of  our 
trust,  H.  182 

required  in  the  usual,  N.  301 
Falling  from  grace,  N.  354 
False  doctrine,  H.  29 


INDEX, 


False  teachers,  characteristics  of,  H.  74 

Fruit  of  righteousness,  happy,  N.  418 

vagaries  of,  H.  43 

Fruits,  faith  and  its,  I.  399 ;  N.  555 

wisdom,  threefold  description  of,  N.  577 

Function,    important,    of    gospel    ministry. 

Falsehood,  Kahab's  faith  and,  N.  394 

H.  69 

Family  government,  H.  24 

of  Law,  H.  9 

responsibilities,  H.  39 

Future  blessedness,  expectation  of,  H.  357 

Fasts  and  festivals.  Christian,  N.  462 

Father,  heavenly,  fatherliness  of,  N.  415 

Gain,  highest,  godliness,  H.  45 

of  lights,  N.  519 

in  poverty,  I.  563 

of  spirits,  H.  416 

Games,  ancient  Grecian,  I.  445 

true  worship  of  the,  kindness  and  charac- 

Gazing-stock, I.  362 

ter,  H.  534 

General  assembly,  N,  434 

Fatherhood  apprehended  through   Sonship, 

Genuine  act  of  faith,  N.  369 

N.  140 

sources  of  Christian  charity,  H.  8 

Fatherliness  of  heavenly  Father,  N.  415 

tabernacle,  H.  283 

Fear  of  death  a  lifelong  bondage,  N.  168 

teacher,  characteristics  of,  H.  75 

of  judgment,  I.  362 

Gift,  our,  and  the  Divine  claim,  H.  58 

Fears  and  hopes,  blended,  H.  234 

Gifts  and  sacrifices,  N.  285 

Feeling,  strain  that,  may  put  on  faith,  N.  388 

Divine,  responsibility  of,  H.  57 

without  action,  N.  554 

of  God,  H.  31 

Fellow-man,   salvation    by   a,   objection   to. 

spiritual,  witnessing  to  salvation,  H.  156 

N.  159 

Give  to  him  that  needeth,  I.  564 

Festivals  and  fasts,  Christian,  N.  462 

Gladness,  life's,  and  its  outlet,  N.  617 

Fidelity,  solemn  call  to,  H.  4.S 

Glorious  gospel  of  blessed  God,  H.  10 

Fig  and  fountain,  lesson  of,  N.  574 

Glory,  effulgence  of,  N.  134 

tree,  grafting  olive  on,  I.  580 

eternal,  salvation  with,  H.  68 

Fight,  foe,  and  flight,  H.  591 

of  God,  H.  49 

of  faith,  good,  H.  48 

Goal,  Christian's  race  and,  N.  422 

Figurative  resurrection,  N.  388 

Goatskins  and  sheepskins,  I.  402 

use  of  term  "  begotten,"  N.  140 

God,  H.  131 

Figures,  psalmist's,  N.  143 

asking  from,  N.  502 

Final  revelation,  sonship  as,  N.  133 

blessed,  glorious  gospel  of,  H.  10,  11 

Fire,  Christian's  God  is  a,  N.  439, 440 ;  H.  441 ; 

Christian  way  of  seeing,  N.  393 

I.  448 

Christian's,  is  a  fire,  N.  439,  440 ;  H.  441 

First  and  second  sacrifices,  N.  341 

ever  the  same,  I.  146 

God,  H.  125 

faith  in,  I.  398 

principles,  Christian,  H.  227 

first,  H.  125 

seventh-day  rest,  N.  197 

for  a  while  no  open  way  to,  N.  303 

tastings  of  Divine  things,  N.  229 

foundation  of,  H.  71 

Firstfruits  of  creatures,  H.  520 

friend  of,  N.  560 

of  human  harvest,  N.  520 

gifts  of,  H.  31 

Fit  for  Master's  service,  H.  71 

glory  of,  H.  49 

Fitness,  moral,  for  special  work,  H.  13 

helpfulness  of  cherishing  right  thoughts 

of  High  Priest,  H.  216 

of,  H.  517 

Flesh,  veil  of,  N.  346 

house  of.  Church,  H.  26 

Flight,  foe,  fight  and,  H.  591 

duty  of,  H.  350 

Foe,  fight,  and  flight,  H.  591 

humility  before,  H.  593 

Following  invisible  but  present  Guide,  N.  378 

immutable  promises  of,  N,  246 

up  religious  instructions,  H.  523 

in  nature,  I.  190 

Folly  of  moral  cowardice,  H.  60 

in  relations,  N,  129 

Force  of  conscience,  I.  212 

is  apprehended  with  Christ-help,  N.  136 

Forerunner,  Jesus  as  our,  N.  251 

is,  author  of  sin  ?  N.  514 

Forgetfulness  of  dead,  I.  397 

light  is,  N.  519 

Form  of  godliness  without  power,  H.  74 

long-suffering  of,  Paul  a  pattern  of,  H.  13 

of  sound  words,  H.  62 

no  tempter,  N.  514 

Forms  of  prayer  in  public  worship,  H.  18 

one,  of  Judaism  and  Cliristianit)^  N.  127 

Forsaken,  never,  H.  456 

only  source  of  all  good,  H.  519 

Forsaking,  no,  no  leaving,  H.  455 

oracles  of.  Scriptures  as,  N.  220 

Foundation  of  God,  H.  71 

pleasing,  H.  373,  374 

Foundations,  city  that  hath,  I.  400 

service  of,  distinguished  honour  of,  H.  11 

Fountain  and  fig,  lesson  of,  N.  574 

sight  of,  holiness  bringing,  N.  424 

Free  admission  to  holiest,  H,  345 

sitting  at  right  hand  of,  N.  135,  136 

Friend,  Christ  the,  H.  166 

suffer,  can  ?  N.  187 

of  God,  N.  560 

the  Hater  of  sin,  N.  354 

sympathetic,  H.  57 

unfaithfulness     to,    marriage-figure     of. 

unchanging,  N.  467 

H.  588 

635 


INDEX. 


God,  voices  of,  H.  435 

what,  expects  from  us,  and  what  He  does 
for  us,  H.  98 
•     will  of,  which  Christ  came  to  do,  N.  339 

with  us  all  the  days,  N.  455 

would  have  all  men  to  be  saved,  H.  20 
God's  agent,  believer,  N.  480 

chastenings,  men's  persecutions  as,  N.  414 

counsel,  immutability  of,  impressed  upon 
His  people,  N.  245 

covenant,  ratification  of,  N.  810 

dealing  with  us,  I.  447 

giving.  Spirit  of,  H.  502 

Law  is  a  whole,  H.  550 

observations  and  remembrances,  N.  235 

rest,  entrance  into,  H.  202 

for  His  people  in  every  age,  H.  192 

side  in  new  covenant,  H.  288 

waiting-time,  issae  of,  H.  245 

ways  with  humble  souls,  N.  594 

will,  acknowledging,  N.  602 

angel-service  in  doing,  N.  137 

Word,  faith  in,  N.  376 

work  only,  nature  is,  N.  513 
Godliness,  form  of,  without  power,  H.  74 

highest  gain,  H.  45 

mystery  of,  H.  28 

profitableness  of,  H.  34 

truth  which  is  after,  H.  89 
Golden  calf,  modern,  worship  of,  N.  544 
Good  and  bad  men,  H.  41 

and  evil,  agency  of  tongue  for,  H.  570 

conscience,  faith  and,  H.  15 

example,  power  of,  H.  34 

fight  of  faith,  H.  48 

man  in  trouble,  H.  62 

man's  character,  negative  side  of,  H.  90 
positive  side  of,  H.  91 
personal  concerns,  H.  104 

minister  of  Jesus  Christ,  H.  32 

report,  I.  402 

thing,  religion  a,  H.  62 

things  may  become  ineffective,  N.  268 

unbelief  and  bad,  N.  188 

warfare,  H.  15 

works',  H.  50,  102 
Goodness,  persecution  of,  H.  76 
Gospel  a  sacred  trust,  H.  51 

according  to  Jamas,  H.  489 

apostolic,  H.  67 

Church  and  Jewish  Church,  H.  430 

custody  of,  H.  66 

epitome  of,  H.  27 

grand  moral  aim  of,  H.  7 

hearers  of,  end  in  view  for,  N.  525 

hero,  H.  85 

human  affections    raised,  not  destroyed 
by,  H.  50 

in  Old  Testament,  H.  124 

ministry,  important  function  of,  H.  69 

noble  eulogy  of,  H,  10 

of  blessed  God,   glorious,  H,  10 

of  grace,  H.  97 

of  truth,  H.  89 

provision   in,  to  secure  morality  and  pro- 
mote holiness,  H.  44 

636 


Gospel  revelation,  H.  90 

teacher,  duty  of,  H.  71 

transforming  power  of,  H.  101 

truth  of,  H.  49 
Government,  Church,  rules  for,  H.  40 

family,  H.  24 
Governors  and  kings,  prayer  for,  H.  18 
Grace,  Christian,  hope  as,  N,  250 

falling  from,  N.  354 

gospel  of,  H.  97 

how  far,  may  be  entailed,  H.  57 

throne  of,  boldness  at,  N.  210 

unto  sufficiency,  N.  590 
Grafting  olive  on  fig  tree,  I.  580 
Grand  moral  aim  of  gospel,  H.  7 
Grandsons,  Jacob's  blessing  of  his,  I.  400 
Grass,  angels  of  the,  I.  147 

emblem  of,  H.  507 
Great     salvation     because    great     Saviour, 
N.   151 

things,  three,  H.  149 
Greater  tabernacle,  N.  305 
Greatest,  from  least  to,  I.  291 
Greatness  of  Melchizedek,  H.  260 
Grecian  games,  ancient,  I.  445 
Greeting,  apostolic,  H.  5,  56 

Christian,  H.  90 
Grievous  now,  joyous  by-and-by,  N.  417 
Ground,  burning  over  the,  I.  25 i 

of  our  confidence,  N.  466 
Growth,  spiritual,  H.  32 
Guardians,  cherubim  as,  N.  299 
Guide,     invisible     but     present,     following, 

N.  378 
Guilty  in  all,  offending  in  one,  I.  563 

Habits,  power  of,  I.  190 

H/.nd-guidance  and  heart-guidance,  H.  286 

Happiness,  self-sacrifice  the  way  to,  H.  342 

Happy  fruit  of  righteousness,  N.  418 

Hardships  of  ministerial  life,  H.  59 

Harvest,  human  fiistfruits  of,  N.  520 

Hater  of  sin,  God  the,  N.  354 

Healing,  signs  of,  N.  619 

Healthy  confessional,  N.  619 

Hearers  of  gospel,  end  in  view  for,  N.  525 

preachers  and,  N.  463 
Hearing  and  doing,  I.  540 

profitless,  H.  525 

unprofitable,  causes  of,  H.  195 
Heart,  man's  power  over  his  own,  H.  198 

purity    of,    leading    to    purity    of    life, 
H.93 
Heart -guidance  and  hand-guidance,  H.  286 
Heaven  a  place  of  universal  ministry,  I.  147 

a  state  of  perfection,  H.  434 

Christian  in,  H.  61 

citizenship  in,  I.  400 

itself,  N.  318 
Heavenly  calling,  N.  178 

Father,  fatherliness  of,  N.  415 

rest,  H.  203 
Hebrews,  Epistle  to — 

authorship,  N.  115 

contents,  N.  117 
Help  of  our  Lord's  human  experience,  I.  213 


INDEX. 


Helper  of  tempted,  N.  170 

Helpfulness  of  cherishing  right  thoughts  of 

God,  H.  517 
Helping  one    another,   Christian    ways    of, 

H.  416 
Heresy,  H.  626 
Hero,  go!?pel,  H.  85 
Hiding  sin,  N.  626 

High    examples,    inspiration    of,    N.    370 ; 
H.  404 
Priest  and  Apostle,  Christ  our,  H.  178 
Divine,  H.  206 
duties  of,  N.  176 
fitness  of,  N.  216 
great,  safety  through,  N.  208 
of  spiritual  things,  H.  304 
Higher    Christian    truth,    lost    interest    in, 

N.  222 
Highest  gain,  godliness,  H.  45 
Himself,  offering  of,  H.  307 
Hindrance  to  advanced  teachers,  H.  220 
Hindrances,  removal  of,  N.  422 

to  spiritual  receptiveness,  H.  521 
Hints  to  preachers,  some,  H.  103 
Historical     and     symbolical     Melcbizedek, 

H.  257 
History,  Scripture   and   Christian,   what  to 

find  in,  N.  395 
Holding  fast  our  profession,  H.  208,  347 
Holiest,  free  admission  to,  H.  345 
Holiness  bringing  sight  of  God,  N.  424 

provision   in   gospel   to   secure    morality 
and  promote,  H.  44 
Holy  example,  I.  398 

Ghost  in  Old  Testament,  H.  184 
of  holies,  types  in,  N.  298 
place,  ministry  in  the,  N.  297 
types  in  the,  N.  297 
Home,  Christian,  H.  39 
piety  at,  H.  39 
profanity  in,  H.  426 
Honour,   distinguished,   of   service   of   God, 

H.  11 
Honourableness  of  marriage,  N.  454 
Hope,  anchor  of,  H.  246 

as  Christian  grace,  N.  250 
Christian,  anchor  figure  for,  N.  251 
elevated  into  full  assurance,  N.  236 
law  replaced  by,  N.  269 
of  Abraham,  H.  379 
Hopes  and  fears,  blended,  H.  234 
Hopefulness  of  Christian  teacher,  N.  235 
Hour  of  death,  faith  in,  H.  388 
House  and  its  Builder,  N.  183 
of  God,  Church,  H.  26 
duty  of,  H.  350 
Human  affections  raised,  not  destroyed,  by 
gospel,  H.  50 
death,  power  of  faith  on,  H.  374 
experience,  help  of  our  Lord's,  I.  213 
harvest,  firstfruits  of,  N.  520 
life,  sacrifice  in  the  living  of  a,  H.  333 

transitory,  H.  601 
means  useful  to  inspired  persons,  H.  83 
relations,  law  of,  N.  547 
restlessness,  N,  381 


Human  trials,  manifoldness  of,  N.  493 
Humanity,  death-law  for,  N.  319 
Humble  souls,  God's  ways  with,  N.  591 
Humblings  and  exaltings,  H.  507 
Humiliations,  blessed  through,  I.  538 
Humility,  H.  590 

before  God,  H.  593 

Divine,  religion  of,  N.  339 
Hypocrisy,  judgment  of,  H.  93 

Ideal  of  Christian  attainment,  N.  497 
If  God  will— the  saying,  N.  602 
Illusiveness  of  life,  H.  377 
Image  and  shadow  of  sacrifice,  H.  326 

suggestive,  N.  517 
Immortality,  H.  61 
Immutability  of    God's    counsel   impressed 

upon  His  people,  N.  245 
Immutable  promises  of  God,  N.  246 

things,  two,  H.  243 
Imperfect    efficiency   of    Jewish    sacrifices, 

N.  .328 
Importance   of   early  instruction   in    Bible, 

H.  77 
Important  function  of  gospel  ministry,  H.  69. 
Imposition,  religion  an,  and  religion  a  willing 

service,  N.  304 
Impossible,  morally,  N.  228 
Impressions,  fading,  N.  525 
Imputation  of  righteousness,  H.  559 
Incarnation,  Christ's,  H.  142 
Inconsistencies,  men's,  N.  529 
Indissoluble  life,  N.  266 
Individual  life,  providence  in,  H.  112 
Ineffective,  good  things  may  become,  N.  268 
Infidel    scheme,    deficient    and    dangerous 

nature  of,  H.-80 
Infidel's  testimony,  I.  398 
Infirm,  Christ's  sympathy  with,  H.  208 
Infirmity,  sense  of,  in  every  man,  N.  568 
Influence,    comparative,    of    character   and 
■  doctrine,  H.  36 
moral,  of  leader,  I.  190 
Insatiable  avarice,  H.  46 
Inspiration,  H.  78 

and  utility  of  Scriptures,  H.  77 
of  experience,  H.  354 
of  high  examples,  N.  370  ;  H.  404 
Inspired   persons,  human   means  useful   to, 

H.  83 
Instructions,  religious,  following  up,  H.  523 
Insuflicient,  repentance,  N.  314 
Insult  of  neglecting  religion,  I.  171 
Integrity,  personal,  H.  76 
Intercession,  I.  280 

sympathetic,  N.  170 
Intercourse,  man's,  reality  of,  with  his  Maker, 

H.  593 
Interest  in  those  under  disability,  N.  453 
lost,  in  higher  Christian  truth,  N.  222 
Interests  of  religion,  three,  N.  537 
Invisible     but     present     Guide,     following, 

N.  378 
God,  seeing,  H.  392 
Isaac,  offering  of,  H.  386 
Issue  of  God's  waiting-time,  H.  245 

637 


INDEX. 


Jacob's  blessing  of  his  grandsons,  I.  400 

staff,  reminiscences  of,  H.  389 
James,  Epistle  of — 

James,    apostle    of    Christian-Israelitish 
Church,  N.  482 

narrative  of  death  of  James,  N.  484 

notes  on  some  difficult  passages,  N.  486 
James,  gospel  according  to,  H.  489 

no  antagonist  of  Paul,  N.  554 
Jericho  associations,  faith  in,  H.  393 
Jesus  as  our  Forerunner,  N.  251 

Christ,  good  minister  of,  H.  32 

sameness  of,  through  all  ages,  N.  466 

looking  off  unto,  H,  406  ;  I.  446 

manhood  crowned  in,  H.  160 

to  angels,  infinite  superiority  of,  N.  158 
Jewel,  patience  likened  to,  I.  362 
Jewish  Church  and  gospel  Church,  H.  430 

glorifying  of  Moses,  N.  176 

sacrifices,  imperfect  efficiency  of,  N.  328 
Jewish-Christian  Catechism,  N.  228 
Jews,  besetting  sin  of,  N.  522 

of  dispersion,  I.  538 

rich  commercial,  N.  507 
Joy,  Christian,  in  times  of  trial,  N.  493 

of  Christ  in  redemption,  I.  446 

of  memory,  N.  457 
Joyous  by-and-by,  grievous  now,  N.  417 
Judaism    and    Christianity,    one    God    of, 

N.  127 
Judgment  and  mercv,  relativity  of,  N.  551 

fear  of,  I.  362 

of  hypocrisy,  H.  93 

of  wilful,  H.  352 
Justification  by  works,  H.  560,  561 

Keeping  on,  shrinking  back  and,  H.  358 
Kindness  and   character   the    true   worship 
of  Father,  H.  534 
stimulating  power  of,  H.  114 
King,  man  a,  N.  159 
Kings  and  governors,  prayer  for,  H.  18 
Kingdom,  become  a  religion,  I.  538 

Son's,  is  spiritual,  N.  143 
Knife,  double-edged,  1.  212 
Knowing  with  doing,  N.  604 
Knowledge  and  discretion,  N.  503 

responsibility  of,  H.  603 
Koran,  swearing  by  laying  hands  on   the, 
I.  253 

Last  days,  N.  133 

words,  martyr's,  H.  85 
Law,  authority  of,  H.  100 

function  of,  H.  9 

God's,  is  a  whole,  H.  550 

lawful  use  of,  H.  10 

natural,  prayer  affecting,  H.  620 

of  human  relations,  N.  547 

of  liberty,  H.  548  ;  N.  550 

perfect,  and  its  doers,  H.  526 

replaced  by  hope,  N.  269 

royal,  N.  547 
Lawful  and  unlawful  love  of  money,  N.  454 

use  of  law,  H.  10 
Laying  aside  our  weights,  1.  445 

638 


Leader,  moral  influence  of,  I.  190 
Leaders,  Christian,  example  of,  H.  461 
League  and  Covenant,  Scottish,  I.  323 
Learning  obedience,  I.  223 

obedience  of  sonship,  H.  217 
Least,  from,  to  greatest,  I,  291 
Leaves  teaching  patience,  I.  362 
Leaving  first  principles,  N.  228 

no,  no  forsaking,  H.  455 
Lesson,  general,  of  patriarchal  times,  H.  384 

of  commonplace  charity,  N.  554 

of  fountain  and  fig,  N.  574 
Lessons  from  mist  or  vapour,  H.  601 
Let  slip,  N.  151 

Liberty,  law  of,  H.  548  ;  N.  550 
Life  a  vapour,  N.  601 

advances,  power  of  temptation  lessens  as, 
I.  580 

an  education,  H.  415 

battle  of,  H.  48 

blood  is,  N.  313 

crown  of,  H.  506  ;  N.  512 

emblem  of  uncertainty  of,  N.  601 

eternal,  H.  48 

given  for  life,  I.  172 

human,  sacrifice  in  the  living  of  a,  H.  333 

illusiveness  of,  H.  377 

ministerial,  H.  41 

power  of  an  endless,  H,  264 

purity   of,    purity  of    heart   leading    to, 
H.  93 

spirit   of  a,   practical   wisdom    seen   in, 
H.  575 

that  now  is,  H.  33 

what  is  your  ?  H.  600 

which  is  to  come,  H.  33 
Life's  gladness  and  its  outlet,  N.  617 
Lifelong  bondage,  fear  of  death  a,  N.  168 
Life-plans,  self-confidence  in  our,  H.  595 
Life-service  of  Lord  Jesus,  service  dignified 

as,  H.  490 
Light  and  power,  pulpit  a,  H.  24 

is  God,  N.  519 
Lights,  Father  of,  N.  519 
Lightning,  trees  struck  by,  I.  563 
Limitations  of  Satan,  N.  516 

of  symbolical,  H.  299 
Limited  supremacy  of  man,  K.  159 
Lives  of  saints,  N.  242 
Living  and  dying  in  faith,  H,  381 

power  of  dead,  I,  397 

right,  self-humbling  a  secret  of,  H.  589 

sacrifice,  N.  331 

Saviour,    therefore    complete    salvation, 
H.  277 

truth,  N.  524 

way,  new  and,  N.  347 

Word,  searching  power  of,  H.  204 
Logos,  testing-power  of,  N.  206 
Loneliness,  Christian,  H.  83 
Long-suffering  of  God,  Paul   a   pattern  of, 

H.  13 
Looking  off  unto  Jesus,  H.  406  ;  I.  446 
Lord  and  Son,  David's,  N.  140 

coming  of,  N.  613 

end  of,  reveals  Him,  H.  614 


INDEX. 


Lord  Jesus,  service  dignified  as  life-service 

Military  discipline,  H.  67 

of,  H.  490 

Milton's  allegory  of  sin  and  death,  N.  516 

our  God  is  one  Lord,  N.  558 

Mind,  spirit  of,  Christ's  prevailing,  H.  58 

Lord's  human  experience,  help  of  our,  I.  213 

Minister,   faithful,    in    presence    of    death, 

Losing  anchor-hold,  I.  449 

H.  80 

Lost,  estimating  value  of  things,   N.    427 ; 

of  Christ,  true,  H.  31,  32 

I.  447 

Ministerial  duties,  H.  36 

interest  in  higher  Christian  truth,  N.  222 

life,  H.  41 

opportunities,  N.  427 

hardships  of,  H.  59 

Love,  brotherly,  N.  452 

responsibility,  H.  31,  35 

Christian,  H.  109 

Ministrant  spirits,  I.  147 

expectations  of,  H.  114 

Ministry,    gospel,    important    function    of, 

of  money,  H.  47 

H.  69 

lawful  and  unlawful,  N.  454 

in  the  holy  place,  N.  297 

preparation  for  Christ's  coming,  H.  81 

of  angels,  L  146,  147 

Loyalty  to  work-people,  N.  608 

-of  trial  to  Christian  character,  H.  491 

Luther's  prayer,  I.  628 

universal,  heaven  a  place  of,  I.  147 

Miracles,  cycles  of,  I.  172 

Maker,  reality  of  man's  intercourse  with  his, 

mission  of,  temporary,  I.  172 

H.  598 

Mirrors,  Eastern,  N.  525 

Man  a  king,  N.  159 

Mischief  done  by  slanderous  tongue,  I.  579 

Christ  Jesus,  H.  20 

moral,  of  living  delicately,  N.  608 

limited  supremacy  of,  N.  159 

of  bitter  word,  I.  579 

sense  of  infirmity  in  every,  N.  568 

of  reckless  speech,  H.  91 

Man's  authority  in  creation,  N.  160 

wrought  by  evil-speaking,  H.  594 

dignity,  power  of  faith,  N.  368 

Mission,  earthly,  of  Divine  Son,  H.  122 

intercourse,   reality  of,  with  his   Maker, 

of  miracles,  temporary,  1.  172 

H.  593 

of  preacher,  sublime,  H.  79 

power  over  his  own  heart,  H.  198 

of  rich,  I.  538 

Manhood,  Christ's,  temptableness  of,  N.  158 

of  symbolical,  H.  295 

crowned  in  Jesus,  H.  160 

of    temptation    as    excitement    to    evil, 

of  Christ,  perfect,  H.  166 

H.  508 

representative,  of  Divine  Son,  H.  157 

as  trial,  H.  509 

Manifoldness  of  human  trials,  N.  493 

outward  and  temporary,  N.  198 

Mankind,    Saviour   rejoicing  to    suffer    for, 

Missions  continued  after  death,  I.  397 

H.  410 

Mist  or  vapour,  lessons  from,  H.  (JOl 

Manliness,  sign  of,  power  to  endure,  N.  512 

Mixed  with  faith,  H.  196 

Many,  one  conversion  leads  to,  I.  628 

Model  of  prayer.  Divine-human,  N.  217 

Marriage,  H.  453 

preacher,  H.  72 

honourableness  of,  N.  454 

Modern  golden  calf,  worship  of,  N,  544 

Marriage-figure   of    unfaithfulness   to   God, 

Modesty,  womanly,  H.  21 

H.  588 

Money,  lawful  and  unlawful  love  of,  N.  454 

Martyr's  last  words,  H.  85 

love  of,  H.  47 

Masterfulness  in  speech,  H.  566 

Monotheism  and  purity,  N,  129 

Master's  service,  fit  for,  H,  71 

Moral  aim  of  gospel,  grand,  H.  7 

Material  angels,  H.  and  N.  143 

and    spiritual    attributes,   revelation   of. 

draws  on  to  spiritual,  N.  396 

N.  137 

world,  faith  and  philosophy  dealing  with. 

cowardice,  follv  of,  H.  60 

N.  370 

defilement,  H.  92 

Meaning  and  uses  of  temptation,  N.  494 

discernment,  exercising,  N.  221 

Mediator,  the  one,  two  terms  for,  H.  177 

fitness  for  special  work,  H.  13 

Meditation,  H.  36 

influence  of  leader,  I.  190 

Meekness,  truth  received  with,  N.  523 

mischief  of  living  delicately,  N.  608 

Melchizedek,  greatness  of,  H.  260 

necessity  for  Christ's  death,  N.  164 

historical  and  symbolical,  H.  257 

power,  experience  secret  of,  H.  171 

figure  of,  N.  258 

state  beyond  persuasion,  N.  232 

order  of,  H.  267  ;  N.  252 

Moral-building,  H.  7 

successor  to,  N.  259 

Morality,  provision  in  gospel  to  recover,  and 

Memory,  joy  of,  N.  457 

promote  holiness,  H.  44 

Men  of  faith,  what,  gain  and  fail  to  gain, 

the  ceremonial  of  Christianity,  N.  537 

N.  396 

Morally  impossible,  N.  228 

powerful,  from  ranks  of  poor,  N.  546 

Mortality,  remindings  of  our,  N.  477 

Men's  inconsistencies,  N.  529 

Moses  and  Christ,  relativity  of,  to  their  dis- 

persecutions as  God's  chastenings,  N.  414 

pensations,  N.  183 

Mercy  and  judgment,  relativity  of,  N.  551 

choice  of,  H.  391 

Messenger  and  priest,  N.  176 

Christ  above,  H.  174 

639 


INDEX. 


Moses,  faith  of,  H.  389 

Jewish  glorifying  of,  N.  176 
Motives,  Rahab  read  by  her,  N.  562 
Mounts,  two,  N.  431 

Mutual  consideration  and  provocation,  H.  347 
Mystery  of  godliness,  H.  28 

Name,  everlasting,  N.  466 

Natural  acquisition,  riches  a,  N.  507 

law,  prayer  affecting,  H.  620 
Nature,  agency  of  Divine  8on  in,  N.  144 

course  of,  N.  565  ;  I.  579 

God  in,  I.  190 

is  God's  work  onl}^  N,  513 

pain  and  death  in,  N.  520 
Nay  and  yea,  N.  616 

Necessity,  moral,  for  Christ's  death,  N.  164 
Negative    and     positive    Christian     duties, 
N.  599 

side  of  good  man's  character,  H.  90 
Neglecting,  no  escaping  if  there  is,  N.  151 

perils  of  simply,  I.  171 
Never  forsaken,  H.  456 
New  and  living  way,  N.  347 

covenant,  considerateness  of,  N.  289 
spirituality  of,  H.  287 

old  and,  N.  309 

Testament     deacons,     qualifications     of, 
H.  24 
bishop,  qualifications  of,  H.  23 
No  other  sacrifice,  N.  353,  354 
Noble  eulogy  of  gospel,  H.  10 

examples,  inspiration  of,  H.  404 
Nowadays,  crucifying  Christ,  N.  231 

Oars  pulled  together,  I.  564 
Oath—"  By  the  life  of  Pharaoh,"  I.  253 
Oaths,  three  kinds  of,  or  swearing,  I.  252 
Obedience,  learning,  I.  223 

of  faith,  persistency,  N.  377 

of  sonship,  learning,  H  217 

submission  and,  H.  338 
Obedient  will,  sacrifice  of  an,  N.  338 
Objection    to    salvation    by    a    fellow-man, 

N.  159 
Objective  person,  devil  as  an,  N.  516 
Objects  that  may  be  looked  at,  N.  525 
Observations     and     remembrances,      God's, 

N.  235 
Occasional  revelations,  I.  145 
Occasions,  Christian  conduct  fitting,  H.  615 
Offending  in  one,  guilty  in  all,  I.  563 

in  one  point,  N,  549 
Offensive   language,   Eastern  swearing  and, 

I.  580 
Offering,  Christ's  spiritual,  N.  286 

of  Himself,  H.  307 

of  Isaac,  H.  386 
Officers,  Church,  H.  25,  90 
Offices  of  cherubim,  N.  299 
Oil,    Church    customs    of    anointing    with, 
I.  627 

use  of,  for  anointing  bodies,  I.  626 
Old  age,  Christianity  and,  H.  94 
Christianity  of,  H.  110 

and  new,  N.  309 

640 


Old  and  young  of  both  sexes,  pastor's  treat- 
ment of,  H.  37 
covenant,  conscience  under,  N.  303 
men,  temptations  and  duties  of,  H.  96 
Testament,  Holy  Ghost  in,  H,  184 
gospel  in,  H.  124 

Older    order    of    priesthood,    reversion    to, 
H.  267 
revelation,  emblems  of,  H.  428 

Olive  on  fig  tree,  grafting,  I.  580 

One   another.    Christian   ways    of    helping, 
H.  416 
atoning  sacrifice,  only,  N.  354 
conversion  leads  to  many,  1.  628 
God  of  Judaism  and  Christianity,  N.  127 
Mediator,  two  terms  for  the,  H.  177 
point,  offending  in,  N.  549 
sacrifice  suffices,  N.  279 
spiritual  sacrifice  is  enough,  H.  317 

Onesimus,  plea  for,  H,  110 

Onesiphorus,  H.  63 

Open  way  to  God,  for  a  while  no,  N.  303 

Opportunities,  lost,  N.  427 

Opposition  to  truth,  H.  75,  83 

Oracles  of  God,  Scriptures  as,  N.  220 

Order  of  Melchizedek,  H.  267  ;  N.  252 

Orders,  two  priestly,  H.  261 

Ordination  sermon,  H.  36 

Our  altar,  H.  474 

Ourselves,  seeing,  I.  541 

Outlet,  life's  gladness  and  its,  N.  617 

Outward  and  temporary  mission,  N.  198 

Overcome  by  temptation,  tempted  but  not, 
N.  209 

Over-confidence  sign  of  selfishness,  H.  597 

Pain  and  death  in  nature,  N.  520 

of  affliction,  purpose  of  affliction  relieves, 
H.  418 
Parasites,  spiritual,  N.  524 
Partiality,  sin  of,  N.  545 
Passing,    things,    and     things    permanent, 

H.  437 
Past,  admonished  by,  N.  355 
Pastor  and  people,  H.  348 
Pastor's  treatment  of  old  and  young  of  both 

sexes,  H.  37 
Pastoral  charge,  difficult,  H.  6 
Patience,  H.  48 

Christian,  H.  356 

leaves  teaching,  I.  362 

likened  to  jewel,  I.  362 

need  of,  N.  356 

perfect  work  of,  N.  498 

praise  of,  N.  496 

promises  call  for,  N.  356 

something  to  be  won,  N.  495 

work  of,  I.  362 
Patriarchal  times,  general  lesson  of,  H.  384 
Paul  a  pattern  of  long-suffering  of  God,  H.  13 

and  Onesimus,  H.  110 

James  no  antagonist  of,  N.  554 
Paul's  prayer  for  Onesiphorus,  H.  63 
Peace  and  righteousness  alwavs  go  together, 

N.  578 
Peaceableness  and  purity,  N.  423 


INDEX. 


Peaceful  temper,  N.  423 
People,    consecrated,    consecrating    Saviour 
and,  H.  98 

pastor  and,  H.  348 
Perdition,  apostasy  is,  N.  353 
Perfect  and  entire,  N.  496 

as  applied  to  Christ,  I.  172 

Christ,  N.  219 

law  and  its  doers,  H.  52G 

life,  Christ-model  of,  N.  497 

manhood  of  Christ,  H.  1G6 

or  all-round  faith,  N.  559 

through  suffering,  H.  164 ;  I.  446 

work  of  patience,  N.  498 
Perfecter  and  Captain  of  faith,  I.  446 
Perfection  as  complete  meeting  of  require- 
ments, N.  263 

heaven  a  state  of,  H.  434 

of  evangelical  revelation,  N.  132 
Performances,  promises  prove   larger  than, 

through  man's  weaknesses,  N.  196 
Peril  and  prevention  of  apostasy,  H.  225 

of  deception,  H.  518 

of  keeping  to  religious  simplicities,  N.  227 

of  slothfulncss,  H.  236 
Perils  of  Churches,  H.  424 

of  simply  neglecting,  I.  171 
Perilous  beginnings,  I.  191 
Permanence  of  Christian  doctrine,  H.  65 
Permanent  things,  things  passing  and,  H.  437 
Persecution  of  goodness,  H.  76 
Persecutions,   men's,   as   God's   chastenings, 
H.  414 

of  faithful,  I.  401 
Persistency  in  obedience  of  faith,  N.  377 
Personal  concerns,  good  man's,  H.  104 

integrity,  H.  76 

personal  purity  and  active  charity,  N.  537 
Personality  of  devil,  H.  167 
Persons,  criticising,  H.  594 

respect  of,  right  and  wrong,  H.  543 
Persuasion  and  power,  faith  a,  N.  383 

moral  state  beyond,  N.  232 
Perverting  power  of  trivialities,  H.  92 
"  Pharaoh,  by  the  life  of,"— oath,  I.  253 
Phases  of  Christian  life,  H.  66 
Philemon,  Epistle  of  Paul  to — 

to  whom  written,  N.  105 

occasion  and  style  of  letter,  N.  105 

outline,  N.  106 
Philo's  Divine  Spirit,  I.  322 
Philosophy  and  faith  dealing  with  material 

world,  N.  370 
Physical  suffering,  H.  162 
Picture,  dark,  relief  of,  N.  189 
Piety  and  poverty,  N.  545 

at  home,  H.  39 
Pilgrim,  Christian,  H.  383 
Pilgrims,  strangers  and,  I.  400 
Place,  put  yourself  in  his,  H.  113 
Placid  lake  and  surging  sea,  I.  538 
Plan-making,  H.  598 
Plants,  sickly,  blight  on,  I.  541 
Plato's  idea  of  wisdom,  N.  503 
Plea  for  delinquent  slave,  H.  109 

for  Onesimus,  H.  110 


Pleasing  God,  H.  373,  374 

Plodding  through  the  uneventful,  N.  410 

Poor,  powerful  men  from  ranks  of,  N.  546 

Positive    and     negative     Christian     duties, 
N.  599 
side  of  good  man's  character,  H.  91 

J'ossession,  our  only — to-day,  N.  189 

Posthumous  eloquence,  N.  372 

Postulate,  theological,  N.  124 

Postulates  of  prayer,  H.  375 

Poverty  and  piety,  N.  545 
gain  in,  I.  563 
of  riches,  H.  607 

Power  and  light,  pulpit  a,  H.  24 
and  persuasion,  faith  a,  N.  3S3 
faith  as  sentiment  and  as,  H.  555 
form  of  godliness  without,  H.  74 
man's,  over  his  own  heart,  H.  198 
of  an  endless  life,  H.  264 
of  faith,  I.  401 

man's  dignity,  N.  368 
on  human  death,  H.  374 
of  good  example,  H,  34 
of  habits,  I.  190 

of  renewal,  exhaustion  of,  N.  229 
of  spiritual  sacrifice,  H.  341,  342 
of  temptation   lessens  as  life  advances, 

1.580 
of  truth,  H.  96 

searching,  of  living  Word,  H.  204 
tempter's,  secret  of,  N.  515 
to  endure  sign  of  manliness,  N.  512 

Powerful  men  from  ranks  of  poor,  N.  546 

Practical  exhortations,  H.  527 

faith  of  Abraham,  N.  380;  I.  400 
prayer  and  benevolence,  I.  564 

'      religion,  H.  528 

double  sphere  of,  H.  537 
wisdom,  commonplace,  H.  498 

seen    in    spirit    of  a    life,   H.    575  *, 
N.  578 

Praise  of  patience,  N.  496 

Prayer  a  universal  duty,  H.  16 
affecting  natural  law,  H.  620 
and  benevolence,  practical,  J.  564 
and  thanksgiving,  H.  109 
answers  to,  I.  627,  628 
availing  in  its  working,  H.  621 
Divine-human  model  of,  N.  217 
Elijah's  effectual,  N.  620,  621 
for  kings  and  governors,  H.  18 
forms  of,  in  public  worship,  H.  18 
in  afflictive  circumstances,  N.  616 
Luther's,  I.  628 
our  failures  in,  N.  586 
Paul's,  for  Onesiphorus,  H.  63 
postulates  of,  H.  375 
requests  for,  H.  477 
success  in,  conditions  of,  H.  20 
true,  and  true  answer,  N.  504 

Preacher,  model,  H,  72 

sublime  mission  of,  H.  79 
successful,  characteristics  of,  H.  91 

Preacher's  directory,  H.  95 

Preachers  and  hearers,  N.  463 
some  bints  to,  H.  103 

T  T  641 


INDEX. 


Preaching  of  word,  H,  90 
Tresent     Guide,    following    invisible    but, 
N.  378 

the,  H.  197 
Prevention,  peril  and,  of  apostasy,  H.  225 
Pride  in  disguise,  N.  507 
Priest,  compassion  of,  N.  216 

messenger  and,  N.  176 
Priesthood,  qualifications  of,  H.  214 

reversion  to  older  order  of,  H.  267 
Priestly  orders,  two,  H.  261 

reconciliations,  N.  167 

relations,  no  change  in  Christ's,  conceiv- 
able, N.  272 

Saviour,  our,  H.  270 
Primary  truths,  two,  N.  375 
Princess,  Sarah  the,  H.  381 
Principal  thing  concerning  Christ,  H.  282 
Principles,  Christian  first,  H.  227 

different,  in  chastening  of  sons,  N.  417 
Privilege,  duty  rests  on,  H.  343 
Privileges  of  Christian,  H.  432 

responding  to  our,  H.  152 
Problems,     social.     Christian     solution     of, 

H.  Ill 
Procrastination,  1.  211 
Profanity  in  home,  H.  426 
Profession,  Christian,  strain  of  maintaining. 
H.  411 

holding  fast  our,  H.  208,  347 
Profitableness  of  godliness,  H.  34 
Profitless  hearing,  H.  525 
Programme  of  salvation,  H.  101 
Promises  call  for  patience,  N.  356 

of  God,  immutable,  N.  246 

prove  larger  than  performances  through 
man's  weaknesses,  N.  196 
Prophet,  essential  idea  of  a,  N.  128 
Prophets,  treatment  of,  I.  402 
Propitiation  by  sacrifice,  I.  322 
Proverbs,  two  great,  I.  604 
Providence  acknowledged,  I.  604 

as  persistent  Divine  activity,  N.  137 

in  individual  life,  H.  112 
Providing  for  our   own,   consistency  of  be- 
nevolence with,  H.  39 
Provision  in  gospel  to  secure  morality  and 

promote  holiness,  H,  44 
Provocation,     mutual     consideration     and, 

H.  317 
Psalm  cii.,  quotation  from,  N.  144 
Psalmist's  figures,  N.  143        ^ 
Psychology  of  behef,  N.  369 
Public  war.  Christian  view  of,  N.  584 

worship,  forms  of  prayer  in,  H.  18 
Pulpit  a  light  and  power,  H.  24 
Pure  and  undefiled  religion,  H.  532 
Purger  of  sins,  Christ  as,  N.  135 
Purging  work,  Son's,  N,  137 
Purity,  H.  93 

and  security  of  Church,  H.  70 

monotheism  and,  N.  129 

of  heart  leading  to  purity  of  life,  H.  93 

peaceableness  and,  N.  422 

personal,  and  active  charity,  N.  537 
Purpose,  grand,  of  Kedeemer's  advent,  H.  11 

642 


Purpose  of  affliction  relieves  pain  of  affliction, 
H.  418 
of  temptation,  N.  512 
Pursuit  of  true  riches,  H.  47 
Put  yourself  in  his  place,  H.  113 
Putting  Christ  to  shame,  N.  231 

Qualifications  of  Christian  bishop,  TI.  90 
of  New  Testament  bishop,  H.  23 

deacons,  H.  24 
of  priesthood,  H.  214 
Quiet  growth.   Christian  character  a   thing 
of,  N.  496 

Rabmnical  degrees  of  revelation,  N.  130 
Place  and  goal,  Christian's,  N.  422 

Christian,  H.  408 
Rahab  read  by  her  motives,  N.  562 
Rahab's  character,  N.  394 

faith  and  falsehood,  N.  394 
Rain  in  answer  to  prayer,  I.  628 
Ratification  of  God's  covenant,  N.  310 
Reality  of  man's  intercourse  with  his  Maker, 

H.593 
Reason,  faith  and,  H.  364  ;  N.  370 
Reasonable,  patient  bearing  is,  N.  496 
Receptiveness,     spiritual,     hindrances     to, 

H.  521 
Reckless  speech,  mischief  of,  H.  91 
Reconciliation,  priestly,  N.  169 
Redeemed  me,  He,  I.  280 
Redeemer's  Advent,  grand  purpose  of,  H.  11 

servants,  redeeming  work  of,  H.  625 
Redeeming   work   of    Kedeemer's    servants, 

H.  625 
Redamption,  joy  of  Christ  in,  I.  446 

through  death,  N.  310 

universality  of,  H.  18 
Reefs,  coral,  drawn  on  to,  N.  15 
Refuge,  true,  I.  253 
Refusing  advice,  I.  448 

God's  voice,  H.  435 
Relations,  dual  sphere  of,  H.  551 

God  in,  N.  129 

human,  law  of,  N.  547 
Relativity   of    Christ    and   Moses    to    their 
dispensations,  N.  183 

of  mercy  and  judgment,  N.  551 

of  religion  of  shadows,  N.  32 
Relief  of  dark  picture,  N.  189 
Rehgion,  N.  438 

a  good  thing,  H.  62 

a  social  concern,  H.  533 

adornment  of,  N.  532 

an   imposition,   and    religion    a    willing; 
service,  N.  304 

athletics  and,  H.  32 

construction  of,  H.  371 

in  details  of  life,  N.  534 

in  its  visible  form,  N.  537 

insult  of  neglecting,  I.  171 

is  devotion  and  duty,  N.  553 

kingdom  become  a,  I.  538 

of  Divine  humility,  N.  339 

of  shadows,  relativity  of,  N.  328 

practical,  H.  528 


INDEX, 


Religion,  practical,  double  sphere  of,  H.  537 
pure  and  undefiled,  H.  532  ;  N.  537 
sentimentality  is  not,  H,  652 
sincere,  will  stand  testing,  H.  536 
three  interests  of,  N.  537 
true,  N.  524 
vain,  N.  530 
Religious  excitement  ineffective,  I.  541 

instructions,  following  up,  H.  523 

simplicities,  peril  of  keeping  to,  N.  227 
Remedy,  sin  beyond,  H.  232 
Remembrances,    God's     observations     and, 

N.  235 
Remindings  of  our  mortality,  N.  477 
Reminiscences  of  Jacob's  staff,  H.  389 
Remission  and  bloodshedding,  N.  314,  315 

death  for,  H.  313 

of  sins,  I.  362 
Removal  of  hindrances,  N.  422 
Removing  shakeable  things,  I.  449 
Renewal,  power  of,  exhaustion  of,  N.  229 
"  Repentance,"  double  meaning  of,  N.  228 

insufficient,  N.  314 
Report,  good,  I.  402 

Representative    manhood     of    Divine    Son, 
H.  157 

worshippers,  cherubim  as,  N.  299 
peproach  of  Christ,  I.  400 

of  spiritual,  H.  470 
Reproof,  Brahmin's,  I.  563 

Christian,  H.  92 
Requests  for  prayer,  H,  477 
Requirements,  perfection  as  complete  meet- 
ing of,  y.  263 
Respect    of     persons,     right     and    wrong, 

H.  543 
Responding  to  our  privileges,  H.  152 
Responsibility,  ministerial,  H.  13,  35 

of  Divine  gifts,  H.  57 

of  knowledge,  H.  603 

vicarious,  H.  113 
Responsibilities,  family,  H.  39 
Responsiveness,  reward  of,  N.  233 
Rest  after  toil,  I.  211 

first  seventh-day,  N.  197 

God's,  entrance  into,  H.  202 

for  His  people  in  every  age,  H.  192 

heavenly,  H.  203 

of  sonship,  H.  194 

of  trusting  the  living  Christ,  I.  211 

two  words  for,  N.  202 
Restitution,  H.  112 
Restlessness,  human,  N.  384 
Resurrection,  better,  H.  395 

figurative,  N.  388 
Revelation  by  Son,  N.  133 

evangelical,  perfection  of,  N.  132 

gospel,  H.  90 

of  moral  and  spiritual  attributes,  N.  137 

older,  emblems  of,  H.  428 

rabbinical  degrees  of,  N.  130 
Revelations,  Divine,  N.  127 

early,  characteristics  of,  N.  128 

in  world's  education,  N.  130 

occasional,  I.  145 
Reversion  to  older  order  of  priesthood,  H.  267 


Reward  of  responsiveness,  N.  233 
Rich  commercial  Jews,  N.  507 

good  and  bad  among,  H.  546 

men  that  are  only  rich,  H.  605 

mission  of,  I.  538 
Riches,  a  natural  acquisition,  N.  507 

anxiety  of,  N.  507 

danger  of,  H.  47 

poverty  of,  H.  607 

true,  I.  401 

pursuit  of,  H.  47 
use  of,  H.  49 
Right  and  wrong  respect  of  persons,  H.  543 

hand  of  God,  sitting  at,  N.  135,  136 

living,  self -humbling  a  secret  of,  H.  589 

thoughts  of  God,  helpfulness  of  cherish- 
ing, H.  517 
Righteousness  and  peace  always  go  together, 
N.  578 

happy  fruit  of,  N.  418 

imputation  of,  H.  559 
Root-cause  of  war,  H.  585 
Roots  uncomely  but  useful,  I.  447 
Royal  law,  N,  547 
Rudders,  ships  and,  N.  569 
Rules  for  Church  government,  H.  40 

Sacred  trust,  gospel  a,  H.  51 
Sacrifice,  I.  223 

Christ's  antitypical,  H.  339 

in  the  living  of  a  human  life,  H.  333 

living,  N.  331 

no  other,  N.  353,  354 

of  an  obedient  will,  N.  338 

one  spiritual,  is  enough,  H.  317 
suffices,  N.  279 

only  one  atoning,  N.  354 

propitiation  by,  I.  322 

shadow  and  image  of,  H.  326 

spiritual,  power  of,   H.  341,  342 

true,  N.  290 
Sacrifices  and  gifts,  N.  285 

first  and  second,  N.  341 

Jewish,  imperfect  efficiency  of,  N.  328 
Safety  in  continuing,  H.  189 

through  great  High  Priest,  N.  208 
Saints,  lives  of,  N.  242 
Salutation,  apostolic,  H.  89 

Christian,  H.  108,  114 

closing,  H.  104 
Salvation   by   a  fellow-man,    objection    to, 
N.  159 

Captain  of  our,  I.  172 

complete,  living  Saviour  therefore,  H.  277 

eternal,  N.  219 

for  all,  H.  19 

great,  because  great  Saviour,  N.  151 

programme  of,  H.  101 

source  of,  H.  102 

spiritual  gifts  witnessing  to,  H.  156 

universal  offer  of,  H.  98 

uttermost,  H.  271,  274 

with  eternal  glory,  H.  68 
Same,  Christ  ever  the,  H.  465,  466 
Sameness  of  Jesus  Christ  through  all  ages, 
N.  466 

643 


INDEX. 


Sanctifying    power    of    spiritual    sacrifice, 

N.  342 
Sanctuary  with  Christ,  taking,  H.  247 
Sarah  the  princess,  H.  381 
Satan,  Christ's  victory  over,  I.  172 

limitations  of,  N.  516 
Saviour,  consecrating,  and  consecrated  people, 
H.  98 
eternal,  H.  273 

great  salvation,  because  great,  N.  151 
living,     therefore     complete     salvation, 

H.  277 
of  all  men,  Christ,  H.  34 
our  priestly,  H.  270 
rejoicing  to  suffer  for  mankind,  H.  410 
Scattered  abroad,  N,  491 
Scheme,    infidel,    deficient    and    dangerous 

nature  of,  H,  80 
Science  in  its  relation   to  Christian  faith, 

H.  52 
Scottish  League  and  Covenant,  I.  323 
Scripture  and  Christian  historv,  what  to  find 
in,  N,  395 
references  to  tongue  and  speech,  N.  531 
Scriptures  as  oracles  of  God,  N.  220 

inspiration  and  utility  of,  H.  77 
Searching  power  of  living  Word,  H.  204 
Seared  conscience,  H.  30 
Second  appearing,  Christ's,  N.  321 

first  and,  sacrifices,  N.  341 
Secret  causes  of  social  contentions,  H.  582 
of  moral  power,  experience,  H.  171 
of  right  living,  self-humbling  a,  H.  589 
of  tempter's  power,  N.  515 
source  of  strife,  N.  577 
Security  and  purity  of  Church,  H.  70 

contentment  based  on,  H.  457 
Seeing  invisible  God,  H.  392 

ourselves,  I.  541 
Sentimentality  is  not  religion,  H.  552 
Selection,  Divine,  for  service,  N.  128 
Self-confidence  in  our  life-plans,  H.  595 
Self-humbling    a    secret     of    right    living, 

H.  589 
Selfishness,  over-confidence  sign  of,  H.  597 
Self-love,  H.  74 
Self-sacrifice,  faith  inspiring,  N.  387 

the  way  to  happiness,  H.  342 
Selling  birthright,  N.  425 
Sense  of  infirmity  in  every  man,  N.  568 
Sentiment  and  as  power,  faith  as,  H.  555 
Separate  from  world,  Christ  as,  H.  277 
Sermon  on  the  Mount,  relation  of  Epistle  of 

James  to,  N.  491 
Servant  and  Son,  contrast  between,  N.  134 
Christ,  enthroned,  H.  284 
service  of,  and  service  of  Son,  H.  138 
Servants,  duties  of,  H.  43,  97 

Redeemer's,  redeeming  work  of,  H.  625 
Service  dignified    as    life-service    of    Lord 
Jesus,  H.  490 
Divine  selection  for,  N.  128 
Master's,  fit  for,  H.  71 
of  God,  distinguished  honour  of,  H.  11 
of  servant,  and  service  of  Son,  H.  138 
Servitude,  Christianity  and,  H.  42 

644 


Seventh-day  rest,  first,  N.  197 
Sexes,  old  and  young  of  both,  pastor's  treat- 
ment of,  H.  37 
Shadow  and  image  of  sacrifice,  H.  326 

of  turning,  N.  520 
Shadows,  relativity  of  religion  of,  N.  328 
Shakeable  things,  removing,  I.  449 
Shame,  putting  Christ  to,  N.  231 
Sheepskins  and  goatskins,  I.  402 
Ships  and  rudders,  N.  569 
Shipwreck,  spiritual,  I.  211 
Shrinking  back  and  keeping  on,  H.  358 
Sick,  Christian  treatment  of,  H.  617 
Sickly  plants,  blight  on,  1.  541 
Sight,  faith  and,  1.  397 
of  angels,  I.  146 

of  God,  holiness  bringing,  N.  424 
Signs  of  healing,  N.  619 
Simplicities,  religious,  peril  of  keeping  to, 

N.  227 
Sin  and  death,  allegory  of,  N.  516,  517 
and  temptation,  I.  493 
and  trespass,  N.  314 
besetting,  of  Jews,  N.  522 
beyond  remedy,  H,  232 
death  in,  L  539 
deceitfulness  of,  N.  189 
God  the  Hater  of,  N.  354 
hiding,  N.  626 
is  God  author  of  ?  N.  514 
of  partiality,  N.  545 
wages  of,  I.  539 
war  with,  to  death,  H.  412 
Sins  and  weights,  H.  406 
besetting,  H.  405 

conscience  of,  after  ceremonies,  N.  331 
no  other  sacrifice  for  some,  N.  354 
of  tongue,  H.  573 

of  transgressors,  Christ  bearing,  H.  320 
purger  of,  Christ  as,  N.  135 
remission  of,  I.  362 
Sin-bearing,  Christ's  voluntary,  N.  316 
Sinai  and  Zion,  H.  430 

Mount,  I.  447 
Sincere  religion  will  stand  testing,  H.  536 
Single-minded  and  double-minded,  N.  505 
Sinners,  chief  of,  H.  13 
Sinning  wilfully,  N.  353 
Sitting  at  right  hand  of  God,  N.  135 
Slander,  consequences  of,  I.  579 
Slanderous      tongue,      mischief     done     by, 

I.  579 
Slave,  Christian  teacher  and,  H.  Ill 

delinquent,  plea  for,  H.  109 
Slavery,  Christianity  and,  H.  96 
Slothfulness,  peril  of,  H.  236,  237 
Slow  to  speak,  slow  to  wrath,  I.  539 
Sober-mindedness,  H,  96 
Social  concern,  religion  a,  H.  533 

contentions,  secret  causes  of,  H.  582 
problems.  Christian  solution  of,  H.  Ill 
Sojourners  on  earth,  I.  399 
Soldiers  of  devil's  army,  N.  584 
Solemn  call  to  fidelity,  H.  48 

exhortations  on  vital  themes,  H.  68 
Son  a  spoken  Word,  H.  132 


INDEX. 


ISon  and  angel,  essential  difference  between, 
N.  137 

and  Lord,  David's,  N.  140 

and  servant,  contrast  between,  N.  134 

Christ  the,  H.  131 

Divine,  agency  of,  in  nature,  N.  144 
representative  manhood  of,  H.  157 

of  God,  crucifying,  afresh,  N.  230 

revelation  by,  N.  133 

service  of,  and  service  of  servant,  H.  138 
Son's  kingdom  is  spiritual,  N.  143 

purging  work,  N.  137 
Sons,  different  principles  in  chastening  of, 

N.  417 
Sonship  as  final  revelation,  N.  1 33 

Fatherhood  apprehended  through,  N.  140 

involves  brotherhood,  H.  452 

lea*rning  obedience  of,  H.  217 
'  rest  of,  H.  194 
Song  of  contentment,  N.  460 
Soul,  truth  and,  H,  61 
Soul's  anchor-hold,  N.  251 

humble,  God's  ways  with,  N.  594 
Soul-food    adapted    to    age    and   capacity, 

N.  221 
Soul-principle,  faith  a,  N.  368 
Soul-rest  for  to-day,  H.  198 
Sound  words,  form  of,  H.  62 
Source  of  all  good,  God  only,  H.  519 

of  salvation,  H.  102 

of  strife,  secret,  N.  577 
Sources  of  Christian  charity,  genuine,  H.  8 

of  war,  N.  584 
Special  work,  moral  fitness  for,  H.  13 
Speech  and  tongue.  Scripture  references  to, 
N.  531 

control  of,  a  sign  of  character,  N.  567 

masterfulness  in,  H.  566 

reckless,  mischief  of,  H.  91 

unguarded,  sin  of,  N.  530 

wise,  wisdom  seen  in,  N.  577 
Sphere,  earthly,  spiritual  man's,  H.  450 

everything  to  its,  N.  331 
Spirit,  contumacious,  H.  103 

of  a  life,  practical  wisdom  seen  in,  H.  575 

of  God's  giving,  H.  502 

of  mind.  Christian's  prevailing,  H.  58 
Spirits,  Father  of,  H.  416 

ministrant,  I.  147 
Spiritual  and  moral  attributes,  revelation  of, 
N.  137 

dispensation,  emblems  of,  H.  431 

gifts  witnessing  to  salvation,  H.  156 

growth,  H.  32 

is  every  way  better,  N.  286 

man's  earthly  sphere,  H.  450 

material  draws  on  to,  N.  396 

offering,  Christ's,  N.  286 

parasites,  N.  524 

receptiveness,  hindrances  to,  H.  521 

reproach  of,  H.  470 

sacrifice,  one,  is  enough,  H.  317 
power  of,  H.  341,  342 

shipwreck,  I.  211 

Son's  kingdom  is,  N.  143 

things,  High  Priest  of,  H.  304 


Spiritual    welfare    of    absent,    anxiety    for, 

H.  56 
Spirituality  of  new  covenant,  H,  287 
Sprinkled  blood,  condition  of,  N.  301 
Stability  and  dignity  of  Church,  H.  25 
Standard,  world's,  N.  545 
Stimulating  power  of  kindness,  H.  114 
Strain  of  maintaining  Christian  profession, 
H.  411 

that  feeling  may  put  on  faith,  N.  388 
Strangers  and  pilgrims,  I.  400 

behaviour  towards,  N.  453 
Strife,  secret  source  of,  N.  577 
Study,  special,  of  Cain,  N.  372 
Sublime  mission  of  preacher,  H.  79 
Submission  and  obedience,  H.  338 
Success  in  prayer,  conditions  of,  H.  20 
Successful  preacher,  characteristics  of,  H.  91 
Successor  to  Melchizedek,  N.  259 
Suffer,  can  God  ?  N.  187 
Suffering,  blessings  coming  through,  I.  172 

Christian  in  times  of,  H.  493 

for  truth,  H.  81 

perfect  through,  H.  164 ;  I.  446 

physical,  H.  162 
Sufficiency,  grace  unto,  N.  590 
Suggestion  of  the  cherubim,  N.  298 
Suggestive  image,  N.  517 
Summary  of  triumphs  of  faith,  H.  394 
Sun  and  cloud,  N.  520 
Superiority    of    Jesus    to    angels,    infinite, 

N.  158 
Supremacy  of  man,  limited,  N.  159 
Surety  of  covenant,  Christ  as,  N.  271 
Surging  sea  and  placid  lake,  I.  538 
Swearing  as  asseveration,  H.  245 

by  laying  hands  on  the  Koran,  I.  253 

Eastern,  and  offensive  language,  I.  580 

lawfully,  I.  253 

three  kinds  of  oaths,  or,  I.  252 
Swift  to  hear  rather  than  to  speak,  I.  522 
Symbolical     and     historical     Melchizedek, 
H.  257 

limitations  of,  H.  299 

mission  of,  H.  295 
Sympathetic  friend,  H.  57 

intercession,  N.  170 
Sympathy,  Christ's,  with  infirm,  H.  208 

with  widows,  I.  541 

Tabernacle,  body  of  Christ  a,  N.  347 

genuine,  H.  283 

greater,  N.  305 
Talk,  aimless,  vice  of,  H.  92 

common  truth-tone  in,  N.  616 

useless,  H.  70 
Talkativeness,  N.  522 
Taming  of  tongue,  N.  573 
Tastings,  first,  of  Divine  things,  N.  229 
Teacher,  Christian,  H.  98 
and  slave,  H.  Ill 
hopefulness  of,  N.  235 

genuine,  characteristics  of,  H.  75 

gospel,  duty  of,  H.  71 
Teachers,  advanced,  hindrance  to,  H.  220 

Christian,  signs  of  unskilfulness  in,  H.  221 

645 


INDEX. 


Teachers,  false,  characteristics  of,  H   74 

vagaries  of,  H.  43 
Teaching  what  faith  is,  I.  397 
Temper,  peaceful,  N.  423 
Temporary  and  outward  mission,  N.  198 

mission  of  miracles,  I.  172 
Temptableness  of  Christ's  manhood,  N,  158 
Temptation,  I.  604 

and  sin,  I.  493 

as  trial,  I.  539 

enduring,  I.  538 

its  meaning  and  uses,  N.  494 

mission  of,  as  excitement  to  evil,  H.  508 
as  trial,  H.  509 

power  of,  lessens  as  life  advances,  I.  580 

purpose  of,  N.  512 
Temptations  and  duties  of  old  men,  H.  95 
Tempted,  Helper  of,  N.  170 

not  overcome  by  temptation,  N.  209 
Tempter,  God  no,  N.  514 
Tempter's  power,  secret  of,  N.  515 
Ten  tribes,  disappearance  of,  N.  491 

not  lost,  N.  491 
Tent-dwellers,  expectant,  N.  378 
Testimony,  infidel's,  I.  398 
Testing,  sincere  religion  will  stand,  H.  536 
Testing-power  of  Logos,  N.  206 
Thanksgiving  and  prayer,  H.  109 
Theological  postulate,  N.  124 
Things  passing  and  things  permanent,  H.  437 
Thinking  enviously,  N.  590 
Thought-reader,  Divine,  H,  205 
Thoughts,    right,    of    God,     helpfulness    of 

cherishing,  H.  517 
Three  great  things,  H.  149 

interests  of  religion,  N.  537 

kinds  of  oaths,  or  swearing,  I.  252 
Threefold  description  of  false  wisdom,  N,  577 
QpqaKO'i,  synonyms  of  word,  N.  488 
Throne  of  grace,  boldness  at,  N.  210 
Times  of  suffering,  Christian  in,  H.  493 
Timothy,  First  Epistle  to — 

author,  N.  1 

date  of  Epistle,  N,  1 

contents,  N.  2 
Timothy,  Second  Epistle  to — 

date  of  Epistle,  N.  53 

object,  N.  53 

outline,  H.  53 
Tithes  in  the  Christian  Church,  I.  280 
Titus,  Epistle  to — 

Titus,  N.  87 

outline  of  Epistle,  N.  87 
To-day — our  only  possession,  N.  189 

soul-rest  for,  H,  198 
Toil,  rest  after,  I.  211 
Tongue,  H.  571 ;  I.  579 

agency  of,  for  good  and  evil,  H.  570 

and    speech,      Scripture    references    to, 
N.  531 

bridling,  H.   541 

defiling  power  of,  N.  573 

discipline   of,  from  Christian  standpoint, 
N.  574 

evils  of,  H.  572 

sins  of,  H.  573 

646 


Tongue,  taming  of,  H.  573 
Touching  altar,  1.  253 
Transforming  power  of  gospel,  H.  101 
Transgressors,  Christ  bearing  sins  of,  H.  320 
Transitory,  human  life,  H.  601 
Translation,  death  and,  N.  373 
Treatment  of  sick.  Christian,  H.  617 
Trespass  and  sin,  N.  314 
Trial,   ministry   of,   to   Christian  character, 
H.  491 

mission  of  temptation  as,  H.  509 

of  waiting  work,  N.  495 

temptation  as,  I.  589 

times  of,  Christian  joy  in,  N.  493 
Trials,  human,  manifoldness  of,  N.  493 
Tribes,  ten,  not  lost,  N.  491 
Treatment  of  prophets,  I.  402 
Trees  struck  by  lightning,  I.  563 
Trouble,  good  man  in,  H.  62 
Triumphant,  Church,  I.  448 
Triumphs  of  faith,  summary  of,  H.  394 
Trivialities,  perverting  power  of,  H.  92 
True  adornment,  woman's,  H.  21 

faith  acts,  I.  564 

minister  of  Christ,  H.  31 

prayer  and  true  answer,  N.  504 

Refuge,  I.  253 

religion,  N.  524 

rest,  I.  211 

riches,  I.  401 

pursuit  of,  H.  47 

sacrifice,  N.  290 

use  of  riches,  H.  49 
Trust,  faith  as,  and  works  as  charity,  N.  553 

nature  of  our  faithfulness  is  independent 
of,  H.  182 

sacred,  gospel  a,  H.  51 
Trusting  the  living  Christ,  rest  of,  I.  211 
Truth  and  soul,  H.  61 

champion  for,  H.  80 

drifting  from,  N.  151 

essential,  H.  13 

gospel  of,  H.  89 

living,  N,  524 

of  gospel,  H.  49 

opposition  to,  H.  75,  83 

power  of,  H.  96 

received  with  meekness,  N.  523 

suffering  for,  H.  81 

that  can  be  turned  two  ways,  N.  562 

which  is  after  godliness,  H.  89 
Truths,  two  primary,  N.  375 
Truth-tone  in  common  talk,  N.  616 
Turning,  shadow  of,  N.  520 
Two  great  proverbs,  I.  604 

immutable  things,  H.  243 

kinds  of  angels,  I.  146 
of  doubting,  N.  504 

mounts,  N.  431 

priestly  orders,  H.  261 

primary  truths,  N.  375 

terms  for  the  one  Mediator,  H.  177 

ways,  truth  that  can  be  turned,  N.  562 

words  for  rest,  N.  202 
Type,  blood  as,  N.  314 
Types  in  holy  of  holies,  N.  298 


INDEX. 


Types  in  holy  place,  N.  297  , 
Typology  of  the  veils,  N.  297 

Unbelief,  good  and  bad,  N.  188 
Uncertainty  of  life,  emblem  of,  N.  601 
Unchanging  Christ,  N.  464 

Friend,  N.  467 
Uncomely  but  useful,  roots,  I.  447 
Uncreated  and  created,  contrast  of,  I,  146 
Undefiled    and    pure    religion,     H.     532 ; 

N.  537 
Undischargeable  debt,  H.  113 
Uneventful,  plodding  through  the,  N.  410 
Unfailing  years,  his,  N.  145 
Unfaithfulness  to  God,  marriage-figure  of, 

H.  588 
Unguarded  speech,  sin  of,  N.  530 
Universal  duty,  prayer  a,  H.  16 

ministry,  heaven  a  place  of,  I.  147 

offer  of  salvation,  H.  98 
Universality  of  redemption,  H.  18 
Unlawful  and  lawful  love  of  money,  N.  454 
Unprofitable  hearing,  causes  of,  H.  195 
Unselfishness  of  Christian  love,  H.  112 
Unskilf ulness,  signs  of,  in  Christian  teachers, 

H.  221 
Unspotted  from  world,  N.  535 
Use  of  affliction,  I.  446 

of  Bible  in  Christian  life,  H.  76 

of  riches,  true,  H.  49 

of  veils,  N.  298 
Uses  and  meaning  of  temptation,  N,  494 

of  burning  the  ground,  I.  252 
Used  to  it,  so,  I.  190 
Useful,  roots  uncomely  but,  I.  447 
Useless  talk,  H.  70 

Usual,  faithfulness  required  in  the,  N.  301 
Utility  and  inspiration  of  Scriptures,  H.  77 
Uttermost  salvation,  H.  271,  274 

Vagaries  of  false  teachers,  H.  43 

Vain  religion,  N.  530 

Value  of  Christianity,  evidence  of,  N.  531 

of  things  lost,  estimating,  N.  427  ;  1.  447 
Vanished,   blessings   estimated   when    they 

have,  N.  427 
Vapour,  life  a,  N.  601 

or  mist,  lessons  from,  H.  601 
Veil  of  flesh,  N.  346 
Veils,  typology  of  the,  N.  297 

use  of,  N.  298 
Vengeance,  N.  354 

blood  crying  for,  I.  448 
Vicarious  responsibility,  H.  113 
Vice  of  aimless  talk,  H.  92 
"Victory  over  Satan,  Christ's,  I.  172 
Virgil  on  burning  the  ground,  I,  252 
Visible  form,  religion  in  its,  N.  537 
Vital  themes,  solemn  exhortations  on,  H.  68 
Voices  of  God,  H.  435 
Voluntary  sin-bearing,  Christ's,  N.  316 

Wages  of  sin,  I.  539 
Waiting-time,  God's,  issue  of,  H.  245 
Waiting-times  of  life,  our  duty  in,  H.  609 
Waiting  work,  trial  of,  N.  495 


Walking  by  faith,  I.  397 
War,  public.  Christian  view  of,  N.  584 
root-cause  of,  H.  5H5 
sources  of,  N.  584 
with  sin  to  death,  H.  412 
Warfare,  good,  H.  15 
Warning  of  ancient  failures,  H.  183 
Washings,  divers,  N.  303 
Waves  and  winds,  N.  505 
Way,  new  and  living,  N.  347 
to  city,  H.  379 

to  God,  for  a  while  no  open,  N.  303 
Weakness  of  early  Church,  N.  545 
Weaknesses,   man's,   promises    prove   larger 

than  performances  through,  N.   196 
Weights  and  sins,  H.  406 

laving  aside  our,  I.  445 
What  is  your  Hfe  ?  H.  600 
Who  are  the  wise  ?  N.  504 
Whole,  God's  Law  is  a,  H.  550 
Widowhood,  young,  H.  40 
Widows  and  early  Christian  Church,  H.  38 

sympathy  with,  I.  541 
Wilful,  judgment  of,  H.  352 
Wilfully,  sinning,  N.  353 
Will  He  obeved,  Christ's  own  references  to 
the,  N.  339 

obedient,  sacrifice  of  an,  N,  338 

of  God  which  Christ  came  to  do,  N.  339 
Willing  service,  religion  a,  and  religion  an 

imposition,  N.  304 
Winds  and  waves,  N.  505 
Wisdom,  commonplace  practical,  H.  498 

false,  threefold  description  of,  N.  577 

of  Christianity,  N.  503 

Plato's  idea  of,  N.  503 

practical,  seen  in  spirit  of  a  life,  H.  575 ; 
N.  578 

seen  in  wise  speech,  N.  577 

whence  shall  she  be  gotten  ?  N.  503 
Wise  speech,  wisdom  seen  in,  N.  577 

who  are  the  1  N.  504 
Witness  of  Abel's  faith,  N.  373 

of  dead  man's  bones,  N.  389 
Witnesses,  cloud  of,  N.  408 
Woman  in  Church-life,  place  of,  H.  20 
Woman's  true  adornment,  H.  21 
Womanly  modesty,  H.  21 
Women,  dangers  and  duties  of,  H.  95 
Word,  doers  of,  I.  540 

engrafted,  N.  523 

God's,  faith  in,  N.  376 

living,  searching  power  of,  H.  204 

preaching  of,  H.  90 

spoken,  Son  a,  H.  132 
Words  for  rest,  two,  N.  202 

martyr's  last,  H,  85 

sound,  form  of,  H.  62 
Work  of  patience,  I.  362 

perfect,  of  patience,  N.  498 

special,  moral  fitness  for,  H.  13 

waiting,  trial  of,  N.  495 
Works  as  charity  and  faith  as  trust,  N.  553 

evidence  faith,  I.  564 

faith  and,  N.  554,  560 

good,  H.  50,  102 

647 


INDEX. 


Works,  justification  by,  H.  560,  561 

Worshippers,   representative,    cherubim    as, 

Work-people,  loyalty  to,  N.  608  . 

N.  299 

Works-faith,  a,  N.  562 

Worth,  departed,  duty  of  imitating,  H.  463 

Working,  prayer  availing  in  its,  H.  621 

Wrong  and  right  respect  of  persons,  H.  543 

World,  Christ  as  separate  from,  H.  277 

unspotted  from,  N.  535 

Yea  and  nay,  N.  616 

World's  education,  revelations  in,  N.  130 

Years,  his  unfailing,  N.  145 

standard,  N.  545 

Young  and  old  of  both  sexes,  pastor's  treat- 

Worship of  angels,  N.  140 

ment  of,  H.  37 

of  Father,   kindness  and  character   the 

Christianity  and  the,  H.  95 

true,  H.  534 

widovi^hood,  H.  40 

of  modern  golden  calf,  N.  544 

public,  forms  of  prayer  in,  H.  18 

ZiON  and  Sinai,  H.  430 

HOMILIES   FOR   SPECIAL   OCCASIONS. 

Church  Seasons:  Lent,  Heb.  iv,  15,  16  ;  vi.  12  ;  xii.  1  ;  11  ;  29  ;  Jas.  i.  12-15  ;  iv.  6  ;  7  ;  11. 

Good  Friday,  Heb.  ii.  10  ;  iv.  14-16  ;  ix.  22  ;  28  ;  x.  10.     Whit  Sunday,  Heb.  iii.  7. 
Holy  Communion :  Heb.  xiii.  10,  15. 

Missions  to  Heathen:  1  Tim.  ii.  4-8.     Bible  Society,  2  Tim.  iii.  14-17  ;  Heb.  iv.  12,  13 ;  v.  12. 
Evarigelistic  Services  :  1  Tim.  i.  11  ;  15  ;  ii.  4  ;  iv.  10 ;  Titus  iii.  2,  3  ;  4-7 ;  5  ;  Heb.  ii.  1-4  ; 

vii.  23-28. 
Special:  Ordination,  1  Tim.  i.  3,  4  ;  iii.  1-7;  8-13  ;  iv.   13-16  ;  v.  17-22  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  23-26  ;  iv. 

1-8  ;  6-8 ;  Titus  i.  5-9  ;  ii.  1  ;  iii.  9 ;   15  ;  Heb.  v.  1-10 ;  x.  24.     Workers,  1  Tim.  i.  18-20 ; 

iii.  8-13  ;  iv.  6,  7  ;  2  Tim.  iii.  10-13  ;  Titus  i.  6;  Heb.  iii.  14  ;  x.  24  ;  Jas.  i.  27  ;  v.  19, 

20.     Harvest,  Jas.  v.  7-11.     Young,  Titus  ii.  4-8.     Parents,  1  Tim.  v.  4,  8,  16  ;  Heb.  xii. 

16.     Aged,    Titus  ii.    1-3  ;  Philem.    9.      Young    Men,    1    Tim.    iv.    8-11  ;    Heb.    xii.   7. 

Soldiers,  2  Tim.  ii.  3,  4  ;  Jas.  iv.  1,  2.     Scientific  men,  1  Tim.  vi.  20,  21  ;  Heb.  xi.  1-3; 

Jas.  iv.  17 ;  v.  17,  18.     Purity,  Titus  i.  15.     Worship,  1  Tim.  ii.  1-3  ;  Heb.  x.  25.     Death, 

2  Tim.  i.  8,  10 ;  Heb.  xi.  5,  6  ;  xiii.  7  ;  14  ;  Jas.  iv.  14. 


G48 


BRIGHAM  YOUNG  UNIVERSITY 


3  1197  21020  8192 


^il  library  items  are 


Date  Due 

^"bjecno  recall  at 


^ny  time. 


Brigham  Y„u„g  u^,^^.  ^ 


