HAROLD  B,  LE£  LIBRARY 
h'hwvO.UTAH 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2011  with  funding  from 
Brigham  Young  University 


http://www.archive.org/details/preacherscomplet29newy 


THE  PREACHER'S   COMMENTARY 


ON 


GALATTANS,  EPHESIANS, 
PHILIPPIANS,   COLOSSIAJSTS, 


AND 


I.  and  II.  THESSALONIANS 


HAROLD  B,  LEE  LIBRARY 
BRK3HAM  YOUNG  UNIVERSITY  THE 

PROVO,  UTAH 


jjwacjyers  Complete  Jamiletical 

COMMENTARY 


ON"    THE 


NEW    TESTAMENT 

fON  AN  ORIGINAL  PLAN) 

\i\  Critical  atttr  <feplattat0rg  %%it%t  Jnirias,  #r.,  #c 


BY 


VARIOUS  AUTHORS 


i|3eto  gorfe 

FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
London  and  Toronto 
1896 


2<? 


HOMILETICAL  COMMENTARY 


ON   THE 


EPISTLES  OF  ST.  PAUL  THE  APOSTLE 


TO  THE 


GALATIANS,  EPHESIANS,  PHILIPPIANS, 

'      COLOSSIANS, 


AND 


I.  and  II.  THESSALONIANS 


BY 

REV.   GEORGE   BARLOW 

AUTHOR  OF   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARIES  ON  I.    AND  II.    KINGS,    PSALMS,    LAMENTATIONS, 

AND  EZEKIEL 


Printed  in  the  U.S.A. 


j]2eto  fforfe 

FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 

London  and  Toronto 

1896 


THE 

PREACHER'S  HOMILETICAL  COMMENTARY. 


GALATIANS. 


INTKODUCTION. 

Character  of  the  Galatians. — These  people  were  of  Celtic  descent.  They  were 
the  relics  of  a  Gaulish  invasion  which  swept  over  South-eastern  Europe  in  the 
early  part  of  the  third  century  before  Christ  and  poured  into  Asia  Minor.  Here 
the  Celtic  tribes  maintained  themselves  in  independence  under  their  native 
princes,  until  a  hundred  years  later  they  were  subdued  by  the  Romans.  Their 
country  now  formed  a  province  of  the  empire.  They  had  retained  much  of  their 
ancient  language  and  manners ;  at  the  same  time  they  readily  acquired  Greek 
culture,  and  were  superior  to  their  neighbours  in  intelligence.  Jews  had  settled 
among  them  in  considerable  numbers,  and  had  prepared  the  way  of  the  gospel  • 
it  was  through  their  influence  that  the  Judaistic  agitation  took  so  strong  a  hold 
of  the  Galatian  Churches.  The  epistle  implies  that  its  readers  generally  were 
acquainted  with  the  Old  Testament  and  with  Hebrew  history,  and  that  they 
took  a  lively  interest  in  the  affairs  of  the  Churches  of  Jerusalem  and  Antioch. 
None  of  the  New  Testament  Churches  possesses  a  more  strongly  marked  character. 
They  exhibit  the  well-known  traits  of  the  Celtic  nature.  They  were  generous, 
impulsive,  vehement  in  feeling  and  language ;  but  vain,  fickle,  and  quarrelsome. 
Csesar  wrote :  "  The  infirmity  of  the  Gauls  is  that  they  are  fickle  in  their 
resolves,  fond  of  change,  and  not  to  be  trusted  "  ;  and  by  Thierry  they  are 
characterised  thus  :  "  Frank,  impetuous,  impressible,  eminently  intelligent,  but 
at  the  same  time  extremely  changeable,  inconstant,  fond  of  show,  perpetually 
quarrelling,  the  fruit  of  excessive  vanity."     Eight  of  the  fifteen  works  of  the 

B  1 


introduction.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 

flesh  enumerated  in  chap.  v.  20,  21  are  sins  of  strife.  They  could  hardly 
be  restrained  from  "  biting  and  devouring  one  another"  (v.  15).  Like 
their  kinsmen  at  this  time  in  the  west  of  Europe,  they  were  prone  to  revellings 
and  drunkenness.  They  had  probably  a  natural  bent  toward  a  scenic  and 
ritualistic  type  of  religion,  which  made  the  spirituality  of  the  gospel  pall  upon 
their  taste  and  gave  to  the  teaching  of  the  Judaisers  its  fatal  bewitchment. 

The  authorship  of  the  epistle. — That  it  was  written  by  St.  Paul  has  never 
been  seriously  doubted.  His  authorship  is  upheld  by  the  unanimous  testimony 
of  the  ancient  Church.  Allusions  and  indirect  citations  are  found  in  the  writings 
of  the  apostolic  Fathers — Clement,  Ignatius,  Poly  carp,  and  Justin  Martyr,  or 
whoever  wrote  the  Oratio  ad  Grcecos.  The  internal  evidence  of  Pauline  author- 
ship is  conclusive  by  allusions  to  the  history  and  by  the  self -portrayal  of  the 
writer's  character.  No  forger  ever  made  an  imitation  in  which  were  so  many 
secret  threads  of  similarity,  which  bore  such  a  stamp  of  originality,  or  in  which 
the  character,  the  passion,  the  mode  of  thought  and  reasoning,  were  so  naturally 
represented.  The  apostle's  mental  characteristics  are  indelibly  impressed  on  the 
letter. 

The  time  of  writing  the  epistle. — Lightfoot,  in  disagreement  from  most 
earlier  interpreters,  maintained  that  this  epistle  was  written  between  2  Corinthians 
and  Romans — that  is,  during  the  latter  part  of  Paul's  journey  in  Macedonia,  or 
the  earlier  part  of  his  sojourn  at  Corinth,  towards  the  close  of  the  year  57  or 
58  a.d.  Dr.  Beet  comes  to  the  same  conclusion.  There  is  nothing  in  the  letter 
itself  to  fix  definitely  either  the  place  or  time  of  its  composition.  From  chap, 
i.  9,  iv.  13,  v.  3  we  gather  that  St.  Paul  had  now  been  in  Galatia  twice;  the 
epistle  was  therefore  subsequent  to  the  journey  which  he  took  across  Asia  Minor 
in  setting  out  on  his  third  missionary  tour  (Acts  xviii.  22 — xix.  1).  All  students 
are  agreed  that  it  belongs  to  the  period  of  the  legalist  controversy  and  to  the 
second  group  of  the  epistles.  On  every  account  one  is  inclined  to  refer  the  letter  to 
the  last  rather  than  to  an  earlier  period  of  the  third  missionary  tour.  Comparison 
with  the  other  epistles  of  the  group  raises  this  probability  almost  to  a  certainty, 
and  enables  us  to  fix  the  date  and  occasion  of  this  letter  with  confidence. 

The  purpose  and  analysis  of  the  epistle. — It  is  intensely  polemical.  It  is  a 
controversial  pamphlet  rather  than  an  ordinary  letter.  The  matter  of  dispute  is 
twofold  :  1.  Paul's  apostleship  ;  and  2.  The  nature  of  the  gospel  and  the  sufficiency 
of  faith  in  Christ  for  full  salvation.  This  gives  the  order  of  the  first  two  and 
main  parts  of  the  epistle.  A  third  section  is  added  of  a  moral  and  hortatory 
nature.     The  contents  of  the  epistle  may  be  thus  analysed : — 

I.  Introductory  address. — 1.  The  apostolic  salutation  (i.  1-5).  2.  The 
Galatians'  defection  (i.  6-10). 

II.  Personal  apologia:  an  autobiographical  retrospect. — The  apostle's 
teaching  derived  from  God  and  not  man,  as  proved  by  the  circumstances  of : 
1.  His  education  (i.  13,  14).     2.  His  conversion  (i.  15-17).     3.  His  intercourse 

2 

y  T I 

BRIGHAM  YOL  Y 

PROVO,  UTAH 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS.    introduction. 

with  the  other  apostles  (i.  18-24,  ii.  1-10).  4.  His  conduct  in  the  controversy 
with  Peter  at  Antioch  (ii.  11-14).  The  subject  of  which  controversy  was  the 
supersession  of  the  law  by  Christ  (ii.  15-21). 

III.  Dogmatic  apologia  :  inferiority  of  Judaism,  or  Legal  Christianity,  to 
the  doctrine  of  faith. — 1.  The  Galatians  bewitched  into  retrogression  from  a 
spiritual  system  into  a  carnal  system  (iii.  1-5).  2.  Abraham  himself  a  witness  to 
the  efficacy  of  faith  (iii.  6-9).  3.  Faith  in  Christ  alone  removes  the  curse  which 
the  law  entails  (iii.  10-14).  4.  The  validity  of  the  promise  unaffected  by  the  law 
(iii.  15-18).  5.  Special  pedagogic  function  of  the  law  (iii.  19-29).  6.  The  law 
a  state  of  tutelage  (iv.  1-7).  7.  Meanness  and  barrenness  of  mere  ritualism 
(iv.  8-11).  8.  The  past  zeal  of  the  Galatians  contrasted  with  their  present 
coldness  (iv.  12-20).     9.  The  allegory  of  Isaac  and  Ishmael  (iv.  21-31). 

IV.  Hortatory  application  of  the  foregoing. — 1.  Christian  liberty  excludes 
Judaism  (v.  1-6).  2.  The  Judaising  intruders  (v.  7-12).  3.  Liberty  not  licence, 
but  love  (v.  13-15).  4.  The  works  of  the  flesh  and  of  the  Spirit  (v.  16-26). 
5.  The  duty  of  sympathy  (vi.  1-5).     6.  The  duty  of  liberality  (vi.  6-10). 

V.  Autograph  conclusion. — 1.  The  Judaisers'  motive  (vi.  12,  13).  2.  The 
apostle's  motive  (vi.  14,  15).  3.  His  parting  benediction  and  claim  to  be  freed 
from  further  annoyance  (vi.  16-18).    (Findlay  and  Sanday.) 


CHAPTER  I. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Paul,  an  apostle. — He  pats  his  own  name  and  apostleship  prominent,  because  his 
apostolic  commission  needs  to  be  vindicated  against  deniers  of  it.  Not  of,  or  from,  men,  but 
by,  or  from,  Jesus  Christ  and  God  the  Father.  The  divine  source  of  his  apostleship  is 
emphatically  stated,  as  also  the  infallible  authority  for  the  gospel  he  taught. 

Ver.  6.  I  marvel  that  ye  are  so  soon  removed. — So  quickly  removed ;  not  so  soon  after 
your  conversion,  or  soon  after  I  left  you,  but  so  soon  after  the  temptation  came ;  so  readily  j 
and  with  such  little  persuasion  (cf.  v.  7-9).      It    is   the   fickleness    of  the  Galatians  the 
apostle  deplores.     An  early  backsliding,  such  as  the  contrary  view  assumes,  would  not  have 
been  matter  of  so  great  wonder  as  if  it  had  taken  place  later. 

Vers.  8,  9.  Any  other  gospel. — The  apostle  is  here  asserting  the  oneness,  the  integrity  of 
his  gospel.  It  will  not  brook  a  rival.  It  will  not  suffer  any  foreign  admixture.  Let  him  be 
accursed. — Devoted  to  the  punishment  his  audacity  merits.  Iu  its  spiritual  application  the 
word  denotes  the  state  of  one  who  is  alienated  from  God  by  sin. 

Ver.  11.  Not  after  man. — Not  according  to  man;  not  influenced  by  mere  human  con- 
siderations, as  it  would  be  if  it  were  of  human  origin. 

Ver.  12.  But  by  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ. —Probably  this  took  place  during  the  three 
years,  in  part  of  which  the  apostle  sojourned  in  Arabia  (vers.  17,  18),  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
scene  of  the  giving  of  the  law :  a  fit  place  for  such  a  revelation  of  the  gospel  of  grace 
which  supersedes  the  ceremonial  law.  Though  he  had  received  no  instruction  from  the 
apostles,  but  from  the  Holy  Ghost,  yet  when  he  met  them  his  gospel  exactly  agreed  with 
theirs. 

Ver.  14.  Exceedingly  zealous  of  the  traditions  of  my  fathers. — St.  Paul  seems  to  have 
belonged  to  the  extreme  party  of  the  Pharisees  (Acts  xxii.  3,  xxiii.  7,  xxvi.  5 ;  Phil.  iii.  5,  6), 
whose  pride  it  was  to  call  themselves  "zealots  of  the  law,  zealots  of  God."  A  portion  of 
these  extreme  partisans,  forming  into  a  separate  sect  under  Judas  of  Galilee,  took  the  name 
of  zealots  par  excellence,  and  distinguished  themselves  by  their  furious  opposition  to  the 
Romans. 

Ver.  16.  To  reveal  His  Son  in  me  that  I  might  preach  Him. — The  revealing  of  His  Son  by 
me  to  the  Gentiles  was  impossible,  unless  He  had  first  revealed  His  Son  in  me  ;  at  first  on 
my  conversion,  but  especially  at  the  subsequent  revelation  from  Jesus  Christ  (ver.  12), 
whereby  I  learnt  the  gospel's  independence  of  the  Mosaic  law. 

Ver.  24.  They  glorified  God  in  me. — He  does  not  say,  adds  Chrysostom,  they  marvelled  at 
me,  they  praised  me,  they  were  struck  with  admiration  of  me,  but  he  attributes  all  to  grace. 
They  glorified  God  in  me.  How  different,  he  implies  to  the  Galatians,  their  spirit  from 
yours. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—5. 

Apostolic  Credentials. 

I.  That  apostolic  credentials  claim  distinctively  divine  authority. — "  Paul, 
an  apostle,  not  of  men,  neither  by  man,  but  by  Jesus  Christ  and  God  the  Father  " 
(ver.  1).  It  must  have  been  a  painful  moment  when  Paul  first  became  aware 
that  spurious  teachers  questioned  the  validity  of  his  apostolic  call,  and  a  still 
more  painful  disappointment  when  he  discovered  his  Galatian  converts  so  readily 
gave  credence  to  those  who  maligned  him.     His  fears  were  roused,  not  so  much 

5 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


for  his  personal  reputation  as  for  the  injury  to  the  religious  life  of  his  converts 
if  they  cherished  suspicions  as  to  the  divine  character  of  the  truth  they  had  been 
taught.  The  mischief  must  be  dealt  with  at  once.  He  boldly  and  emphatically 
declared  that  his  commission  was  direct  from  God,  and  bore  the  same  divine 
stamp  as  that  of  the  other  apostles,  whose  authority  even  the  false  teachers  had 
not  the  temerity  to  deny.  It  has  ever  been  the  role  of  the  subtle  adversary  of 
man  to  strive  to  eliminate  the  divine  element  from  the  truth  and  drag  it  down 
to  a  common  human  level.  Truth  then  loses  its  stability,  begins  to  move  in  a 
flux  of  confused  human  opinions,  and  the  soul  is  plunged  into  bewilderment  and 
doubt.  Whatever  tends  to  vitiate  the  truth  brings  peril  to  the  peace  and 
upward  progress  of  the  soul.  The  power  of  the  teacher  increases  with  an  ever- 
deepening  conviction  of  the  divine  authority  of  his  message. 

II.  That  apostolic  credentials  recognise  the  oneness  of  the  Christian  brother- 
hood.— "  And  all  the  brethren  which  are  with  me "  (ver.  2).  Here  is  the 
indication  that  St.  Paul  was  not  unduly  solicitous  about  his  personal  reputation. 
While  insisting  upon  the  unquestioned  divine  source  of  his  apostleship,  he  does 
not  arrogate  a  haughty  superiority  over  his  brethren.  He  is  one  with  them  in 
Christ,  in  the  belief  of  and  fidelity  to  the  truth,  in  the  arduous  labours  of  pioneer 
work,  in  building  up  and  consolidating  the  Church,  and  unites  them  with  himself 
in  his  Christian  greeting.  It  is  the  sublime  aim  of  the  gospel  to  promote  uni- 
versal bi'otherhood  by  bringing  men  into  spiritual  union  with  Christ,  the  Elder 
Brother.  Christ  is  the  unifying  force  of  redeemed  humanity.  Ecclesiastical 
ranks  are  largely  human  expedients,  necessary  for  maintaining  order  and 
discipline.  The  great  Head  of  the  Church  has  promulgated  the  unchallengeable 
law  of  religious  'equality  :  "  One  is  your  Master,  even  Christ,  and  all  ye  are 
brethren  "  (Matt,  xxiii.  8). 

III.  That  apostolic  credentials  justify  the  use  of  a  sublime  and  comprehensive 
greeting. — "  Grace  be  to  you  and  peace,"  etc.  (ver.  3).  A  greeting  like  this 
from,  some  lips  would  be  fulsome,  or  at  the  best  mere  exaggerated  politeness. 
But  coming  from  one  who  was  in  constant  communion  with  the  Source  of  the 
blessings  desired,  and  from  which  Source  he  received  his  call  to  the  apostleship,  it 
is  at  once  dignified,  large-hearted,  and  genuine.  Grace  and  peace  are  inclusive  of 
the  best  blessings  Heaven  can  bestow  or  man  receive.  They  are  divine  in  their 
origin  and  nature — "  from  God  the  Father  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Grace 
is  the  spontaneous  outflow  of  divine  love  in  the  redemption  of  the  race,  and  is 
the  more  precious  because  unmerited ;  and  peace  is  the  conscious  experience  of 
that  grace  in  the  believing  soul — peace  from  outward  dissension  and  inward 
fret,  peace  of  conscience,  peace  with  God  and  man.  The  blessings  the  apostle 
desires  God  is  ever  eager  to  bestow.  "  Filling  up  our  time  with  and  for  God  is 
the  way,"  said  David  Brainerd,  "  to  rise  up  and  lie  down  in  peace.  I  longed 
that  my  life  might  be  filled  up  with  fervency  and  activity  in  the  things  of  God. 
Oh  the  peace,  composure,  and  God -like  serenity  of  such  a  frame  !  Heaven  must 
differ  from  this  only  in  degree,  not  in  kind." 

IV.  That  apostolic  credentials  are  evident  in  the  clear  statement  of  the 
great  principles  of  the  gospel  salvation. — "  Who  gave  Himself  for  our  sins, 
that  He  might  deliver  us,"  etc.  (vers.  4,  5).  In  these  words  we  have  a  suggestive 
epitome  of  the  whole  gospel.  Man  is  delivered  from  sin  and  from  the  present 
evil  age  by  the  self-sacrifice  of  Jesus ;  and  this  method  is  "  according  to  the  will 
of  God,"  and  brings  unceasing  glory  to  His  name.  This  is  the  gospel  in  a 
nutshell,  and  involves  all  the  grand  principles  of  redemption  the  apostle  was 
commissioned  to  declare,  and  which  he  develops  more  clearly  in  the  course  of 
this  epistle.  Deliverance  is  divinely  provided,  irrespective  of  human  effort  or 
merit.  The  Galatians  in  seeking  to  return  to  legal  bondage  ignored  the  root 
principles  of  the  gospel  and  imperilled  their  salvation.     The  apostle  vindicated 

6 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


CHAP.  I. 


the  credentials  of  his  high  office  by  faithful  remonstrance  and  plain  authoritative 
statement  of  the  truth  divinely  revealed  to  him.  It  is  a  mark  of  high  intellectual 
power  to  make  the  greatest  truths  clear  to  the  humblest  mind.  Christian 
teaching  has  all  the  more  weight  when  associated  with  irreproachable  moral 
character. 

Lessons. — 1.  God  should  be  gratefidly  recognised  as  the  Giver  of  all  good.  2.  The 
special  endowments  of  one  are  for  the  benefit  of  all.  3.  It  is  a  solemn  responsibility 
to  be  entrusted  with  the  preaching  of  the  gospel. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  1.  The  Power  of  the  Gospel. — 
1.  Free  grace  doth  often  light  upon 
the  most  unworthy,  not  only  by  giving 
salvation  to  themselves,  but  making 
them  instrumental  for  the  kingdom  of 
Christ  and  bringing  about  the  salva- 
tion of  others.  2.  Faithful  and  called 
ministers  of  Christ  are  to  be  so  far 
from  cowardly  ceding,  or  heartless 
fainting  under  the  bold,  bitter,  and 
unjust  aspersions  of  those  who  question 
their  calling,  and  thereby  weaken  their 
authority  and  render  the  truth  of  their 
doctrine  doubtsome,  that  they  ought 
the  more  to  avow  their  calling  against 
all  who  question  it.  3.  The  office  of 
an  apostle  had  this  peculiar  to  itself, 
that  the  designation  was  not  mediately 
by  the  election  and  suffrages  of  men, 
as  in  the  calling  of  ordinary  office- 
bearers, but  immediately  from  God,  so 
that  the  function  of  the  apostles  ceased 
with  them,  and  did  not  pass  by  succes- 
sion to  a  pope  or  any  other.  4.  The 
false  apostles,  that  they  might  shake 
the  truth  preached  by  Paul  and  estab- 
lish their  own  contrary  error,  alleged 
that  he  was  no  lawful  apostle.  This 
Paul  refutes  by  showing  he  was  called 
by  Christ  after  He  was  raised  from 
the  dead  and  bad  taken  possession  of 
His  kingdom,  so  that  his  calling  had 
at  least  no  less  dignity  and  glory  in  it 
than  if  he  had  been  called  by  Christ 
when  He  was  on  earth. — Fergusson. 

Ver.  2.  The  Church  a  Witness. — 
1.  The  more  they  are  whom  God 
maketh  use  of  to  hold  out  the  beauty 
of  truth  that  we  may  embrace  and 
follow  it,  or  the  deformity  and  danger 
of  error  that  we  may  fly  from  and  hate 
(it,  we  are  the  more  to  take  heed  how 


we  reject  or  embrace  what  is  pressed 
upon  us,  as  there  will  be  the  more  to 
bear  witness  of  our  guilt  and  subscribe 
to  the  equity  of  God's  judgment  if  we 
obey  not.  2.  We  are  not  so  to  stumble 
at  the  many  sinful  failings  which  may 
be  in  Churches,  as  to  unchurch  them, 
by  denying  them  to  be  a  Church,  or  to 
separate  from  them,  if  their  error  be 
not  contrary  to  fundamental  truths, 
or  if  they  err  from  human  frailty,  and 
not  obstinately  and  avowedly. — Ibid. 

Ver.  3.  Christian  Salutation. — 
1.  God's  gracious  favour  and  goodwill 
is  to  be  sought  by  us  in  the  first  place, 
whether  for  ourselves  or  others,  that 
being  a  discriminating  mercy  betwixt 
the  godly  and  the  wicked.  *2.  Peace 
is  to  be  sought  after  grace,  and  not  to 
be  expected  before  it.  Peace  without 
grace  is  no  peace.  There  can  be  no 
peace  with  God  or  His  creatures,  nor 
sanctified  prosperity,  except  through 
Jesus  Christ  we  lay  hold  on  God's 
favour  and  grace.  3.  Grace  and  peace 
we  cannot  acquire  by  our  own  industry 
or  pains.  They  come  from  God,  are  to 
be  sought  from  Him,  and  His  blessing 
is  more  to  be  depended  on  than  our 
own  wisdom  or  diligence.  4.  They  to 
whom  grace  and  peace  belong  are  such 
as  acknowledge  Christ  to  be  their  Lord 
to  command  and  rule  them,  and  yield 
subjection  to  Him  in  their  heart  and 
life. — Ibid. 

Grace  and  Peace. 
I.  Grace  is  not  any  gift  in  man, 
but  is  God's  and  in  God.  It  signifies 
His  gracious  favour  and  goodwill, 
whereby  He  is  well  pleased  with  us  in 
Christ. 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


II.  Peace  is  a  gift  not  in  God,  but 
in  us.  1.  Peace  of  conscience — a 
quietness  and  tranquillity  of  mind 
arising  from  a  sense  of  reconciliation 
with  God.  2.  Peace  with  the  creatures 
— with  angels,  with  the  godly,  with  our 
enemies.  3.  Prosperity  and  good  success. 

III.  Whereas  Paul  begins  his 
prayer  with  grace  we  learn  that 
grace  in  God  is  the  cause  of  all  good 
things  in  us. 

IV.  The  chief  things  to  be  sought 
after  are  the  favour  of  God  in  Christ 
and  the  peace  of  a  good  conscience. 

Y.  As  grace  and  peace  are  joined 
we  learn  that  peace  without  grace  is 
no  peace. — Perkins. 

Vers.  4,  5.  The  Unselfishness  of  Jesus. 

I.  Prompting  self-surrender. — "  Who 
gave  Himself." 

II.  His  self-surrender  was  an  un- 
merited and  unlooked-for  expiation. — 
"  For  our  sins." 

III.  Creates  the  hope  and  possibility 
of  immediate  salvation. — "That  He 
might  deliver  us  from  this  present  evil 
world." 

IV.  Was  a  suggestive  revelation  of 
the  divine  character. — "  According  to 
the  will  of  God  and  our  Father." 

V.  Should  evoke  the  spirit  of 
grateful  praise. — "  To  whom  be  glory 
for  ever  and  ever.     Amen." 

Ver.  4.  Christ  our  Sacrifice. 

I.  Whereas  Christ  is  the  giver 
of  Himself  it  follows  that  His  death 
and  sacrifice  were  voluntary. 

II.  Therefore  all  merit  and  satis- 
faction for  sin  are  reduced  to  the 
person  of  Christ,  and  there  are  no 
human  satisfactions  for  sin,  nor 
meritorious  works  done  by  us. 

III.  Christ  our  sacrifice  works  love 
in  us. — We  must  in  mind  and  medi- 
tation come  to  the  cross  of  Christ. 
1.    The   consideration   of   His   endless 


pains  for  our  sins  must  breed  in  us 
a  godly  sorrow.  If  He  sorrowed  for 
them,  much  more  must  we.  2.  This 
knowledge  is  the  beginning  of  amend- 
ment of  life.  3.  Is  the  foundation  of 
comfort  in  them  that  truly  turn  to 
Christ. 

IV.  Christ  gave  Himself  that  He 
might  deliver  us  from  this  evil  world. 
— 1.  We  must  be  grieved  at  the 
wickedness  of  the  world.  2.  We  must 
not  fashion  ourselves  to  the  wicked 
lives  of  the  men  of  this  world.  3.  See- 
ing we  are  taken  out  of  this  world, 
our  dwelling  must  be  in  heaven. — 
Perkins. 

The  Gift  of  Christ. 

I.  The  gift.— "  He  gave  Himself." 
Regard  Christ :  1.  As  the  object  of 
every  prophecy.  2.  The  substance  of 
every  type  and  shadow.  3.  The  subject 
of  every  promise.  4.  He  was  qualified 
for  the  work  of  redemption.  Divine, 
human,  spotless. 

II.  Christ's  marvellous  act. — "He 
gave  Himself  for  our  sins."  1.  To 
what  He  gave  Himself.  To  all  the 
privations  and  sorrows  of  human  life, 
to  obscurity  and  indigence,  to  scorn 
and  infamy,  to  pain  and  anguish,  to 
an  ignominious  and  painful  death. 
2.  The  purpose  for  which  He  gave 
Himself.  To  deliver  us  from  sin's 
curse,  defilement,  dominion,  and  from 
the  effects  of  sin  in  this  world  and  in 
eternity. 

III.  The  design  of  Christ's  offering 
— "  That  He  might  deliver  us  from  the 
present  evil  world."  From  its  evil 
practices,  its  spirit,  from  attachment  to 
it,  and  from  the  condemnation  to  which 
it  will  be  subjected. 

IV.  Christ's  offering  was  according 
to  the  will  of  God. — 1.  It  was  the  will 
of  God  we  should  be  saved.  2.  Christ 
was  the  appointed  agent.  3.  The  sacri- 
fice of  Christ  was  voluntary. — Helps. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  6—9. 

The  One  Gospel. 

I.  Is  an  introduction  into  the  grace  of  Christ. — "  I  marvel  that  ye  are  so 
soon  removed  from  Him  that  called  you  into  the  grace  of  Christ "  (ver.  6).     The 

8 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


CHAP.  I. 


true  gospel  is  the  emphatic  call  of  God  to  man  to  participate  and  revel  in  the 
grace  of  Christ  as  the  element  and  the  only  means  by  which  his  salvation 
can  be  secured.  The  grace  of  Christ,  with  its  persuasive  gentleness  and  vast 
redemptive  resources,  is  in  vivid  contrast  to  the  grim  formalism  and  impossible 
demands  of  the  yoke  of  bondage  into  which  the  Galatians  were  being  so  foolishly 
seduced.  There  is  only  one  gospel  that  can  introduce  the  soul  into  the  midst 
of  saving  influences  and  bring  it  into  contact  with  the  living  Christ.  This  one 
fact  differentiates  the  gospel  from  all  mere  human  methods,  and  gives  it  a  unique 
character  as  the  only  remedial  agency  in  dealing  with  human  sin  and  sorrow. 

II.  The  perversion  of  the  one  gospel  is  not  a  gospel. — "  Unto  another  gospel 
which  is  not  another  "  (vers.  6,  7). 

1.  It  is  a  caricature  of  the  true  gospel. — "And  would  pervert  the  gospel  of 
Christ "  (ver.  7).  The  perversion  is  not  in  the  one  gospel,  which  is  impossible 
of  perversion  (for  truth  is  an  incorruptible  unity),  but  in  the  mind  of  the  false 
teacher.  He  distorts  and  misrepresents  the  true  gospel  by  importing  into  it 
his  own  corrupt  philosophy,  as  the  wolf  did  with  Baron  Munchausen's  horse. 
Beginning  at  the  tail,  it  ate  its  way  into  the  body  of  the  horse,  until  the  baron 
drove  the  wolf  home  harnessed  in  the  skin  of  the  horse.  The  gospel  has  suffered 
more  from  the  subtle  infusion  of  human  errors  than  from  the  open  opposition 
of  its  most  violent  enemies. 

2.  It  occasions  distraction  of  mind. — "  There  be  some  that  trouble  you  "  (ver.  7). 
A  perverted  gospel  works  the  greatest  havoc  among  young  converts.  They  are 
assailed  before  they  reach  the  stage  of  matured  stability.  Their  half -formed 
conceptions  of  truth  are  confused  with  specious  ideas,  attractive  by  their  novelty, 
and  mischief  is  wrought  which  in  many  cases  is  a  lifelong  injury.  The  spirit 
that  aims  at  polluting  a  young  beginner  in  the  way  of  righteousness  is  worse 
than  reckless ;  it  is  diabolical. 

III.  The  propagator  of  a  perverted  gospel  incurs  an  awful  malediction. — 
"  But  though  we,  or  an  angel  from  heaven,  preach  any  other  gospel,  ...  let  him 
be  accursed"  (vers.  8,  9).  Let  him  be  devoted  to  destruction,  as  one  hateful 
to  God  and  an  enemy  of  the  truth.  The  word  denotes  the  condition  of  one 
alienated  from  God  by  persistent  sin.  He  not  only  rejects  the  truth  himself, 
but  deliberately  plots  the  ruin  of  others.  He  reaps  the  fruit  of  his  own  sowing. 
It  is  impossible  to  do  wrong  without  suffering.  The  greater  the  wrong-doing, 
the  more  signal  is  the  consequent  punishment.  All  perversions  of  truth  are 
fruitful  in  moral  disasters.     It  is  a  mad,  suicidal  act  for  man  to  fight  against  God. 

Lessons. — 1.  There  can  be  but  one  true  and  infallible  gospel.  2.  The  best  hum.an 
method  for  moral  reformation  is  but  a  caricature  of  the  true.  3.  The  false  teacher 
will  not  escape  punishment. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  6,  7.  Remonstrance  vnth 
Revolters  against  the  Gospel. 

I.  The  apostle  reproves  with  meek- 
ness and  tenderness  of  heart. 

II.  He  frames  his  reproof  with  great 
wariness  and  circumspection. — He 
says  not,  ye  of  yourselves  do  remove  to 
another  gospel,  but  ye  are  removed. 
He  blames  them  but  in  part,  and  lays 
the  principal  blame  on  others. 

III.  The  revolt  was  a  departure 
from  the  calling  to  the  grace  of  Christ. 


— 1.  They  were  soon  carried  away.  This 
shows  the  lightness  and  inconstancy  of 
man's  nature,  especially  in  religion. 
The  multitude  of  people  are  like  wax, 
and  are  fit  to  take  the  stamp  and 
impression  of  any  religion ;  and  it  is 
the  law  of  the  land  that  makes  the 
most  embrace  the  gospel,  and  not 
conscience.  2.  That  wre  may  con- 
stantly persevere  in  the  profession  of 
the  true  faith  we  must  receive  the 
gospel  simply  for  itself.     3.  We  must 

9 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


be  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  our  minds 
and  suffer  no  by -corners  in  our  hearts. 
4.  We  must  not  only  be  hearers  but 
doers  of  the  word  in  the  principal  duties 
to  be  practised. 

IV.  The  Galatians  revolt  to  another 
gospel,  compounded  of  Christ  and  the 
works  of  the  law. — Here  we  see  the 
curious  niceness  and  daintiness  of  man's 
nature  that  cannot  be  content  with  the 
good  things  of  God  unless  they  be 
framed  to  our  minds.  If  they  please  us 
for  a  time,  they  do  not  please  us  long, 
but  we  must  have  new  things.  The 
apostle  shows  that,  though  it  be  another 
gospel  in  the  estimation  of  the  false 
teachers,  it  is  not  another,  but  a 
subversion  of  the  gospel  of  Christ. 
There  is  but  one  gospel,  one  in  number, 
and  no  more.  There  is  but  one  way 
of  salvation  by  Christ,  whereby  all  are 
to  be  saved  from  the  beginning  of  the 
world  to  the  end. 

V.  The  apostle  charges  the  authors 
of  this  revolt  with  two  crimes. — 
1.  They  trouble  the  Galatians,  not 
only  because  they  make  divisions,  but 
because  they  trouble  their  consciences 
settled  in  the  gospel  of  Christ.  2.  They 
overthrow  the  gospel  of  Christ.  They 
did  not  teach  a  doctrine  flat  contrary. 
They  maintained  the  gospel  in  word, 
and  put  an  addition  to  it  of  their  own 
out  of  the  law — salvation  by  works. 
They  perverted  and  turned  upside- 
down  the  gospel  of  Christ. — Perkins. 

The  Perversion  of  Truth — 

I.  Supplants  the  gospel  with  a 
valueless  imitation. — "  Another  gospel 
which  is  not  another." 

II.  Is  contrary  to  the  divine  pur- 
pose.— "  From  Him  that  called  you 
into  the  grace  of  Christ." 

III.  Creates  a  gulf  between  the 
soul  and  God. — "I  marvel  that  ye 
are  so  soon  removed  from  Him." 

IV.  Unsettles  the  faith  of  new 
converts. — "  There  be  some  that 
trouble  you  and  would  pervert  the 
gospel  of  Christ." 

Ver.  6.  Disappointed  Hopes  in 
Christian  Work. — 1.  It  is  the  duty  of 

10 


Christian  ministers,  not  only  to  hold 
out  the  pure  truth  of  the  gospel,  but  to 
defend  it  by  convincing  gainsayers  and 
reproving  solidly  those  who  are  carried 
away  with  contrary  errors.  2.  Minis- 
ters in  all  their  reproofs  are  to  use 
much  wariness  and  circumspection,  not 
omitting  any  circumstance  which  may 
justly  extenuate  the  sin  or  furnish 
ground  of  hope  of  amendment.  Here- 
by the  bitter  potion  of  a  medicinal 
reproof  is  much  sweetened  and  the 
guilty  patient  allured  to  the  more 
thorough  receiving  of  it.  3.  The  most 
quick-sighted  may  be  deceived  and  dis- 
appointed in  their  expectation  of  good 
things  from  some  eminent  professors, 
and  so  may  readily  fall  short  of  their 
hope.  4.  As  the  dangerous  con- 
sequences which  follow  upon  error 
ought  to  be  presented  unto  people  that 
they  may  fly  from  it,  so  there  are 
some  errors  in  doctrine  which  do  no 
less  separate  from  God  than  profanity 
of  life  doth,  of  which  errors  this  is  one 
— the  maintaining  of  justification  by 
works.  5.  It  is  ordinary  for  seducers 
to  usher  in  their  errors  by  some  excel- 
lent designations,  as  of  new  lights,  a 
more  pure  gospel  way,  and  what  not, 
as  here  they  designate  their  error 
by  the  name  of  another  gospel. — 
Fergusson. 

Ver.  7.  The  Inviolable  Unity  of  the 
Gospel. — 1.  There  is  but  one  gospel, 
one  in  number  and  no  more,  and  but 
one  way  to  salvation,  which  is  by 
faith.  2.  The  effect  of  error  is  to 
trouble  the  Church's  peace ;  peace 
among  themselves,  the  patrons  of 
error  being  zealous  of  nothing  so  much 
as  to  gain  many  followers,  to  attain 
which  they  scruple  not  to  make  woeful 
rents  and  deplorable  schisms  ;  inward 
peace  of  conscience,  while  some  are 
perplexed  and  anxious  what  to  choose 
and  refuse  until  they  question  all 
truth,  and  others  to  embrace  error  for 
truth  and  so  ground  their  peace  on  an 
unsure  foundation.  3.  The  doctrine 
which  maintains  that  justification  is 
partly  by  Christ  and  partly  by  the 
merit  of  good  works   is  a  perverting 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS.  chap.  I. 


and  total  overturning  of  the  gospel,  in  conviction  has  to  do  with  facts.      It 

so  far  as  it  contradicts  the  main  scope  pertains   to   no   favourite   theory,    no 

of  the  gospel,  which  is  to  exalt  Christ  abstract  science,  but  occurrences  which 

as  our    complete    Saviour,    Mediator,  he  had  proved  by  sensible  observation 

and  Ransom,  and  not  in  part  only. —  and  perfect    consciousness.      Wonders 

Fergusson.  had  teemed  around  him ;  but  his  own 

transformation  was    the   most   signal 

Ver.  8.  The  Inviolability  of  Chris-  wonder  of  all.     Nothing  without  him 

tianity.  could  equal  what  he  discerned  within. 

I.  The  import  and  construction  of  2.  As  we  estimate  the  measure  and 
the  gospel  cannot  be  vague  and  in-  force  of  his  convictions,  inquire  what 
determinate. — The  character  of  the  weight  and  credibility  should  be  allowed 
gospel  was  alleged  to  be  its  truth,  them.  Put  his  conduct  to  any  rack, 
This  was,  to  the  sophists  of  that  era,  his  design  to  any  analysis,  and  then 
a  strange  and  novel  pretension.  To  determine  whether  we  are  not  safe 
require  faith  to  a  testimony  only  so  where  he  is  undaunted,  whether  we 
far  as  conformable  to  fact,  only  so  far  may  not  decide  for  that  on  which  he 
as  supported  by  evidence,  appeared  to  perils  all,  whether  the  anathema  which 
them  a  startling  affectation.  In  the  he  dares  pronounce  does  not  throw 
fixed  character  we  recognise  the  true  around  us  the  safeguard  of  a  divine 
perfection   of   the   gospel.      It  is   the  benediction. 

same  through  all  ages,  not  changing  to  III.  Its  efficacy  cannot  be  denied. — 

every  touch  and  varying  beneath  every  It  was  not  called  into  operation  until 

eye,  but  unfolding  the   same  features  numberless  expedients  of  man  had  been 

and  producing  the  same  effects.    Unless  frustrated.     Philosophy,  rhetoric,  art, 

there   was   this   invariableness  in  the  were  joined  to  superstitions,  radicated 

Christian    system,    if    a    fixed    deter-  into  all  habits  and  vices  of  mankind, 

mination  of  its  purport  is  impossible,  we  The  very  ruins  which  survive  the  fall 

should  be  at  a  loss  in  what  manner  to  of    polytheism — the     frieze    with    its 

follow  the  con  duct  and  imbibe  the  spirit  mythological  tale,  the  column  yet  soar- 

of  the  early  Christians.     Those  lights  ing  with  inimitable  majesty,  the  statue 

and  examples  of  the  Church  would  only  breathing  an  air  of  divinity — recall  the 

ensnare  us  into  a  mien   and  attitude  fascinations  which  it  once  might  boast 

ridiculous    as   profane.       It   would  be  and  of  the  auxiliaries  it  could  command, 

the  dwarf  attempting  to  bare  a  giant's  Yet  these  were  but  the  decorations  of 

arm,  a  wayfaring  man   aspiring  to  a  selfishness  most  indecently  avowed,  of 

prophet's  vision.     The  truth  as  it  is  in  licentiousness  most  brutally  incontinent, 

Jesus  is  contained  in  that  word  which  of  war  the  most  wantonly  bloody,  of 

is  the  truth  itself  j  there  it  is  laid  up  slavery  the  most    barbarously  oppres- 

as   in  a   casket  and  hallowed  as  in  a  sive.    And  Christianity  subverted  these 

shrine.      No  change  can  pass  upon  it.  foundations  of  iniquity  ;  and  yet  so  all- 

It  bears  the  character  of  its  first  per-  penetrating  is  its  energy,  that  it   did 

fection.     Like  the  manna  and  the  rod  not  so  much  smite  them  as  that  they 

in  the  recess  of  the  Ark,  it  is  the  in-  sank  away  before  it.     It  reaches  the 

corruptible  bread  of  heaven,  it  is  the  human   will   and  renews   the   human 

ever-livinginstrument  of  might,  without  heart.    And  a  thousand  blessings  which 

an  altered  form  or  superseded  virtue.  may  at  first  appear  derived  from   an 

II.  Its  divine  origin  and  authority  independent  source  are  really  poured 
cannot  be  controverted. — The  history  forth  from  this. 

of  Saul  of  Tarsus  has  often  been  cited  IV.  The  authority  and  force  of  the 

with  happy  success  in  confirmation  of  present  dispensation  of  divine   truth 

Christianity.     1.   What  must  have  been  cannot  be  superseded. — It  is  final.     In 

the  strength  and  satisfaction  of  convic-  it  He  hath  spoken  whose  voice  shall  be 

tion  entertained  by  the  writer  !     The  heard  no  more  until  it  "  shake  not  the 

11 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


earth  only  but  also  heaven."  No  other 
sensible  manifestation  can  be  given, 
the  doctrine  is  not  to  be  simplified,  the 
ritual  is  not  to  be  defined  to  any- 
further  extent,  nothing  more  will  be 
vouchsafed  to  augment  its  blessings  or 
ratify  its  credentials.  We  possess  the 
true  light,  the  perfect  gift,  the  brightest 
illumination,  the  costliest  boon.  Such 
a  dispensation,  constituted  to  be  co- 
existent with  all  future  time,  must 
resist  every  view  which  would  impress 
a  new  form  or  foist  a  strange  nature 
upon  it. 

Y.  No  circumstance  or  agency  can 
endanger  the  existence  and  stability 
of  the  Christian  revelation. — When 
the  security  of  the  gospel  is  to  be  most 
confidently  predicted  and  most  strongly 
ascertained,  supernatural  power  is 
restrained — a  curse  encloses  it  round 
about,  a  "  flaming  sword  turning  every 
way  guards  this  tree  of  life."  It  shall 
endure  coevally  with  man.  Feeble  are 
our  present  thoughts,  confused  our 
perceptions  ;  we  see  everything  as  from 
behind  a  cloud  and  in  a  disproportion. 
Our  convictions  are  more  like  conjec- 
tures and  our  speculations  dreams. 
But  we  shall  soon  emerge  from  this 
state  of  crude  fancies  and  immature 
ideas.  Worthy  sentiments  and  feelings 
will  fill  up  our  souls.  Each  view  shall 
be  as  a  ray  of  light  striking  its  object, 
and  each  song  the  very  echo  of  its 
theme.  Then  shall  we  adequately 
understand  why  apostles  kindled  into 
indignation  and  shook  with  horror  at 
the  idea  of  "  another  gospel,"  and  why 
even  angels  themselves  must  have  been 
accursed  had  it  been  possible  for  them 
to  have  divulged  it. — B.  W.  Hamilton. 

A  Supernatural  Revelation. — There 
can  be  no  doubt  whatever,  as  a  matter 
of  historic  fact,  that  the  apostle  Paul 
claimed  to  have  received  direct  revela- 
tion from  heaven.  He  is  so  certain 
of  that  revelation  that  he  warns  the 
Galatians  against  being  enticed  by 
any  apparent  evidence  to  doubt  it. 
It  would  Le  impossible  to  express  a 
stronger,  a  more  deliberate,  and  a  more 
solemn  conviction  that  he  had  received  a 

12 


supernatural  communication  of  the  will 
of  God. — Dr.  Wace,  Bampton  Lectures. 

The  Best  Authority  to  be  obeyed. — A 
dispute  having  arisen  on  some  question 
of  ecclesiastical  discipline  and  ritual, 
King  Oswi  summoned  in  664  a  great 
council  at  Whitby.  The  one  set  of  dis- 
putants appealed  to  the  authority  of 
Columba,  the  other  to  that  of  St.  Peter 
"  You  own,"  cried  the  puzzkd  king  to 
Colinan,  "  that  Christ  gave  to  Peter  the 
keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  :  has 
He  given  such  power  to  Columba  1 " 
The  bishop  could  but  answer,  No. 
"  Then  1  will  obey  the  porter  of 
heaven,"  said  Oswi,  "  lest  when  I  reach 
its  gates  he  who  has  the  keys  in  his 
keeping  turn  his  back  on  me,  and  there 
be  none  to  open." 

Latitudinarianism.  — Referring  to 
Erasmus's  temporising  policy  in  the 
Reformation,  Froude  says  :  "  The  ques- 
tion of  questions  is,  what  all  this 
latitudinarian  philosophising,  this  cul- 
tivated epicurean  gracefulness,  would 
have  come  to  if  left  to  itself,  or  rather, 
what  was  the  effect  which  it  was  in- 
evitably producing  ?  If  you  wish  to 
remove  an  old  building  without  bring- 
ing it  in  ruin  about  your  ears,  you 
must  begin  at  the  top,  remove  the 
stones  gradually  downwards,  and  touch 
the  foundation  last.  But  latitudina- 
rianism loosens  the  elementary  prin- 
ciples of  theology.  It  destroys  the 
premises  on  which  the  system  rests.  It 
would  beg  the  question  to  say  that  this 
would  in  itself  have  been  undesirable  ; 
but  the  practical  effect  of  it,  as  the 
world  then  stood,  would  have  been  only 
to  m^ike  the  educated  into  infidels,  and 
to  leave  the  multitude  to  a  convenient 
but  debasing  superstition." 

Yer.  9.  The  True  Gospel  to  be  preached 
and  believed. 

I.  The  repetition  of  these  words  by 
Paul  signify  that  he  had  not  spoken 
rashly  but  advisedly,  whatsoever  he 
had  said  before. 

II.  That  the  point  delivered  is  an 
infallible  truth  of  God. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


CHAP.  I. 


III.  That  we  may  observe  and 
remember  what  he  had  said  as  the 
foundation  of  our  religion — that  the 
doctrine  of  the  apostles  is  the  only- 
infallible  truth  of  God,  against  which 
we  may  not  listen  to  Fathers,  Councils, 
or  to  the  very  angels  of  God. 

IV.  They  are  accursed  who  teach 
otherwise    than    the    Galatians    had 


received. — As  Paul  preached  the  gospel 
of  Christ,  so  the  Galatians  received  it. 
The  great  fault  of  our  times  is  that 
whereas  the  gospel  is  preached  it  is 
not  accordingly  received.  Many  have 
no  care  to  know  it ;  and  they  who 
know  it  give  not  unto  it  the  assent  of 
faith,  but  only  hold  it  in  opinion. — 
Perkins. 


MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  10—12. 

The  Superhuman  Origin  of  the  Gospel. 

I.  The  gospel  is  not  constructed  on  human  principles. — "  But  I  certify  you, 
brethren,  that  the  gospel  which  was  preached  of  me  is  not  after  man  "  (ver.  11). 
Its  character  is  such  as  the  human  mind  would  never  have  conceived.  When 
it  was  first  proclaimed  it  was  the  puzzle  of  the  religious  and  the  ridicule  of  the 
learned — "  unto  the  Jews  a  stumbling-block,  and  unto  the  Greeks  foolishness." 
It  is  wholly  opposed  to  the  drift  of  human  tendencies.  Its  supreme  aim  is  to 
effect  a  complete  transformation  of  human  nature.  Not  to  destroy  that  nature, 
but  to  renew,  elevate,  and  sublimate  it.  By  its  principle  of  self-sacrificing  love, 
its  insistence  of  the  essential  oneness  of  the  race,  its  methods  in  dealing  with  the 
world's  evils,  its  lofty  morality,  and  its  uncompromising  claims  of  superiority  the 
gospel  transcends  all  the  efforts  of  human  ingenuity.  Augustine,  the  father  of 
Western  theology  in  the  fifth  century,  divided  the  human  race  into  two  classes 
— the  one  who  lived  according  to  man  and  the  other  who  lived  according  to 
God.  The  gospel  is  the  only  revelation  that  teaches  men  how  to  live  according 
to  God. 

II.  The  gospel  does  not  pander  to  human  tastes. — "  For  do  I  now  persuade 
men,  or  God  1  or  do  I  seek  to  please  men  %  for  if  I  yet  pleased  men,  I  should 
not  be  the  servant  of  Christ"  (ver.  10).  The  adversaries  of  the  apostle  insinuated 
that  he  was  a  trimmer,  observing  the  law  among  the  Jews  and  yet  persuading 
the  Gentiles  to  renounce  it ;  becoming  all  things  to  all  men  that  he  might  form 
a  party  of  his  own.  Such  an  insinuation  was  based  on  an  utter  misconception 
of  the  gospel.  So  far  from  flattering,  Paul  preached  a  gospel  that  humbled 
men,  demanding  repentance  and  reform.  It  often  came  in  collision  with  popular 
tastes  and  opinions ;  and  though  the  apostle  was  a  man  of  broad  views  and 
sympathies,  he  was  ever  the  faithful  and  uncompromising  servant  of  Christ. 
Public  opinion  may  be  hugely  mistaken,  and  there  is  danger  of  over-estimating 
its  importance.  It  is  the  lofty  function  of  the  preacher  to  create  a  healthy 
public  opinion  and  Christianise  it,  and  he  can  do  this  only  by  a  scrupulous  and 
constant  representation  of  the  mind  of  Christ,  his  divine  Master.  The  wise 
Phocion  was  so  sensible  how  dangerous  it  was  to  be  touched  with  what  the 
multitude  approved  that  upon  a  general  acclamation  made  when  he  was  making 
an  oration  he  turned  to  an  intelligent  friend  and  asked  in  a  surprised  manner, 
"What  slip  have  I  made?"  George  Macdonald  once  said,  "When  one  has 
learned  to  seek  the  honour  that  cometh  from  God  only,  he  will  take  the  with- 
holding of  the  honour  that  pometh  by  man  very  lightly  indeed." 

III.  The  gospel  has  a  distinctly  superhuman  origin. — "  For  I  neither  received 
it  of  man,  neither  was  I  taught  it,  but  by  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  " 
(ver.  12).  Paul's  reception  of  the  gospel  was  not  only  a  revelation  of  Christ  to 
him,  but  at  the  same  time  a  revelation  of  Christ  in  him.  The  human  vehicle 
was   spiritually  prepared   for   the  reception  and  understanding  of  the  divine 

13 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


message  ;  and  this  moral  transformation  not  only  convinced  him  of  the  super- 
human character  of  the  gospel,  but  also  empowered  him  with  authority  to 
declare  it.  The  gospel  carries  with  it  the  self -evidencing  force  of  its  divine 
origin  in  its  effect  upon  both  preacher  and  hearer.  It  is  still  an  enigma  to  the 
mere  intellectual  student;  only  as  it  is  received  into  the  inmost  soul,  by  the 
aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  its  true  nature  apprehended  and  enjoyed. 

Lessons. — 1.  Man  everywhere  is  in  dire  need  of  the  gospel.  2.  The  human 
mind  is  incapable  of  constructing  a  saving  gospel.  3.  The  gospel  is  inefficacious 
till  it  is  received  as  a  divine  gift. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 


Ver.  10.  Fidelity  in  the  Ministry. 

I.  The  proper  nature  of  the  ministry 
is  not  the  word  or  doctrine  of  man 
but  of  God. — Ministers  are  taught  to 
handle  their  doctrine  with  modesty 
and  humility,  without  ostentation,  with 
reverence,  and  with  a  consideration  of 
the  majesty  of  God,  whose  doctrine  it 
is  they  utteT\ 

II.  The  dispensing  of  the  word  must 
not  be  for  the  pleasing  of  men  but  God. 
— Ministers  must  not  apply  and  fashion 
their  doctrine  to  the  affections,  humours, 
and  dispositions  of  men,  but  keep  a 
good  conscience  and  do  their  office. 

III.  If  we  seek  to  please  men  we 
cannot  be  the  servants  of  God. — He 
that  would  be  a  faithful  minister  of 
the  gospel  must  deny  the  pride  of  his 
heart,  be  emptied  of  ambition,  and  set 
himself  wholly  to  seek  the  glory  of 
God  in  his  calling. — Perkins. 

The  Servant  of  Christ. 

I.  There  is  nothing  dishonourable 
in  the  idea  of  a  servant  absolutely 
considered. — On  the  contrary,  there 
may  be  much  in  it  that  is  noble 
and  venerable.  Nothing  can  be  more 
contemptible  than  an  affectation  of 
independence  which  resents  or  is 
ashamed  of  a  servant's  name.  And 
many  who  despise  servants  should  be 
told  that  they  themselves  are  so 
worthless  that  nobody  would  think  of 
honouring  them  with  hiring  them  for 
service.  It  was  Christ's  honour  that 
His  Father  so  employed  Him  for  the 
work  of  our  salvation,  and  said,  "  Be- 
hold My  Servant,  whom  I  have  chosen  " ; 
and  the  highest  honour  of  the  preachers 
of   the   gospel    is   that   they   are   the 

14 


ministers,  that  is,  the  servants,  both 
of  Christ  and  His  Church.  There  are 
cases,  no  doubt,  in  which  servitude  is 
degrading.  The  master  may  be  in- 
famous ;  though  even  then  the  servant's 
condition  is  not  dishonourable,  unless 
he  be  employed  in  infamous  work. 
Many  servants  have  wrought  out  most 
honourable  names  for  themselves  in 
doing  good  work  under  bad  masters. 
Matthew  Henry  has  said  well  that 
there  is  nothing  mean  but  sin,  aud 
with  such  meanness  and  dishonour  is 
every  man  affected  who  is  not  a  servant 
of  Christ.  There  is  for  us  all  the 
choice  of  only  two  conditions;  there 
is  not  a  third  and  neutral  one.  The 
alternative  is  a  servant  of  the  Son  of 
God  or  a  slave  of  sin.  It  may  not  be 
of  sin  in  its  most  hideous  forms,  in 
the  form  in  which  it  tyrannises  over 
the  drunkard,  the  lewd  man,  or  the 
ambitious,  but  even  in  its  milder  and 
less  offensive  form,  when  it  may  reign 
only  with  the  power  which  it  exercises 
over  the  worshipper  of  wealth  or  of 
human  applause ;  still,  it  is  a  degrading 
vassalage.  Let  no  worldly  man,  then, 
affect  to  pity  or  scorn  the  disciple  of 
the  gospel  as  being  one  whom  super- 
stition enslaves,  though  it  were 
admitted  to  be  a  slavery ;  he  himself 
labours  under  one  infinitely  more 
oppressive  and  degrading.  Whose 
appears  the  greater  liberty  and  the 
least  oppression,  his  who  is  governed 
by  the  salutary  laws  of  the  gospel, 
or  his  who  is  the  sport  and  victim  of 
his  own  ignoranco  and  passions,  or 
of  the  opinion  of  the  world,  to  which, 
at  the  expense  of  the  violation  of  his 
own  conscience,  he  feels  himself  com- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


CHAP.  I 


pelled  ignominiously  to  submit  1  The 
question  needs  not  an  answer.  There 
is  everything  honourable  in  the  one 
service,  everything  dishonourable  in  the 
other.  Only  that  man  is  truly  a  free 
man  who  is  a  servant  of  Christ. 

II,  The  servant  of  Christ. — Others 
profess  that  they  are  servants  of  God  ; 
the  Christian  replies  that  he  is  a 
servant  of  Christ.  There  is  perhaps 
nothing  by  which  his  faith  is  more 
distinctly  characterised  than  this. 
"  Is  he  not,  then,  a  servant  of  God  1 " 
some  one  may  ask,  either  in  the  spirit 
of  a  scorning  objector  or  in  that  of 
an  astonished  inquirer  who  is  as  yet 
ignorant  of  the  beautiful  mystery  of 
Christian  salvation.  When  others 
profess  that  they  are  the  servants  of 
God,  and  when  the  Christian  replies 
that  he  is  a  servant  of  Christ,  does  it 
signify  that  he  is  not  a  servant  of  the 
eternal  Father  ?  Such  is  the  question  ; 
and  our  reply  is,  that  in  serving 
Christ  he  approves  himself  not  only 
the  best  servant  of  God,  but  the  only 
one  whose  service  is  genuine.  In 
serving  Christ  he  serves  God,  because 
God  has  so  appointed  and  ordained. 
He  has  ordained  that  we  be  the  ser- 
vants of  His  Son  ;  and  if  we  serve  not 
His  Son,  then  we  resist  His  ordination, 
so  that  we  serve  neither  His  Son  nor 
Himself. 

III.  The  Christian  is  Christ's  ser- 
vant, not  by  hire,  but  by  purchase. — 
This  is  a  circumstance  which  claims 
our  most  thoughtful  consideration. 
In  the  case  of  a  servant  who  is  hired 
there  is  a  limitation  of  the  master's 
right,  by  the  terms  of  the  agreement, 
in  respect  of  the  kind  and  amount  of 
labour  to  be  exacted.  There  is  also 
a  definite  term,  at  the  expiry  of  which 
the  right  of  service  ceases,  and  the 
remuneration  of  the  service  is  exigible 
by  law.  There  is  a  vast  difterence  in 
the  case  of  a  purchased  servant,  or,  as 
otherwise  expressed,  a  slave.  He  is 
his  master's  property,  to  be  treated 
entirely  according  to  his  master's 
discretion.  There  is  no  limitation 
either  to  the  amount  or  nature  of  the 
work  which  he  may  exact.     The  period 


of  service  is  for  life,  and  no  remunera- 
tion can  be  claimed  for  the  labour, 
howsoever  heavy  and  protracted.  Our 
servant-condition  in  relation  to  Christ 
is  of  this  character  :  He  does  not  hire 
us,  but  has  purchased  us — purchased 
us  by  His  blood,  and  made  us  His 
property,  to  be  used  according  to  His 
sovereign  will.  But  this  is  far  from 
being  all.  Our  gracious  Master  often 
sinks,  as  it  were,  the  consideration  of 
His  past  services — of  His  humiliation, 
His  privation,  His  wounds  and  agony 
by  which  he  saved  us  from  punishment 
and  woe — and  reasons  and  deals  with 
us  as  if  we  were  hired  servants  and 
could  merit  something  at  His  hand, 
animating  us  in  our  work  by  exhibit- 
ing to  our  hope  that  crown  of  glory 
which  He  will  confer  on  all  who  are 
faithful  unto  death.  Blessed  servitude 
— the  servitude  of  the  Christian  ! 
Servitude  of  peace  !  Servitude  of 
honour  !  Servitude  of  liberty  !  Servi- 
tude of  victory  and  everlasting  glory  ! 

1.  The  Christian,  as  a  servant,  submits 
his  mind  to  the  authority  of  Christ — 
submits  it  to  Him  in  respect  of  his 
opinions  ;  at  the  utterance  of  His  word 
renounces  its  own  judgments  and 
prejudices,  and  turns  away  from  the 
teaching  of  the  world's  philosophy  and 
priesthood  in  scorn,  saying,  "  You  have 
no  part  in  me.  Christ  is  the  Lord  of 
my  conscience ;  I  will  listen  to  Him," 

2.  As  the  servant  of  Christ,  the 
Christian  subjects  his  body  to  His  con- 
trol and  regulation  in  the  gratifying  of 
its  appetites,  and  in  providing  for  its 
comfort  and  adornment ;  h's  lips  in 
what  they  speak ;  his  hands  in  what 
they  do ;  his  ears  in  what  they  listen 
to  ;  his  eyes  in  what  they  read  and 
look  at;  ard  his  feet  in  all  their 
journeyings  and  movements.  3.  As 
the  servant  of  Christ,  he  regulates  his 

family  according  to  his  Master's  mind 
and  law.  4.  As  a  servant  of  Christ, 
he  conducts  his  business  according  to 
Christ's  law,  with  the  strictest  honesty, 
and  for  Christ's  end,  distributing  his 
profits  in  a  proportion — I  shall  say 
a  large  proportion ;  nay,  I  shall  say 
a  very  large  proportion — to  the  mainte- 

15 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


nance  and  education  of  his  family,  and 
some  provision  of  an  inheritance  for 
them,  and  even  a  considerable  propor- 
tion for  the  gratification  of  his  own 
tastes.  Is  not  that  a  largo  allowance 
for  a  slave  ?  But  oh,  some  of  you  ! 
you  seize  on  all — wickedly  appropriate 
all  to  yourselves,  or  part,  and  that 
with  a  grudge,  a  murmur,  and  a  scowl, 
with  but  the  smallest  fraction  to  the 
Master's  poor  and  the  Master's  Church  ! 
Slaves  indeed  !  Slaves  of  Avarice  and 
his  daughter,  Cruelty !  5.  As  a 
servant  of  Christ,  the  country  of  the 
Christian  is  Christ's,  to  be  regulated, 
so  far  as  his  influence  and  vote  may 
extend,  by  Christ's  rule,  for  Christ's 
ends. —  W.  Anderson,  LL.D. 

Vers.  11,  12.  The  Gospel  and  the  Call 
to  preach  it. 

I.  It  is  necessary  that  men  should 
be  assured  and  certified  that  the  doc- 
trine of  the  gospel  and  the  Scripture 
is  not  of  man  but  of  God. — That  the 
Scripture  is  the  word  of  God  there  are 
two  testimonies.  1.  One  is  the  evidence 
of  God's  Spirit  imprinted  and  expressed 
in  the  Scriptures,  and  this  is  an  ex- 
cellence of  the  word  of  God  above  all 
words  and  writings  of  men  and  angels. 
2.  The  second  testimony  is  from  the 
prophets  and  apostles,  who  were 
ambassadors  of  God  extraordinarily  to 
represent  His  authority  unto  His 
Church,  and  the  penmen  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  to  set  down  the  true  and  proper 
word  of  God. 

II.  It  is  necessary  that  men  should 
be  assured  in  their  consciences  that 
the  calling  and  authority  of  their 
teachers  are  of  God. — To  call  men  to  the 
ministry  and  dispensation  of  the  gospel 
belongs  to  Christ,  who  alone  giveth 
the  power,  the  will,  the  deed  ;  and  the 
Church  can  do  no  more  than  testify, 
publish,  and  declare  whom  God 
calleth. 

III.  The  gospel  which  Paul 
preached  was  not  human — he  did  not 
receive  it,  neither  was  he  taught  it 
by  man ;  and  preached  it  not  by 
human  but  by  divine  authority. 
1.  Christ  is  the  great  prophet  and  doctor 

16 


of  the  Church.  His  office  is  :  (1)  To 
manifest  and  reveal  the  will  of  the 
Father  touching  the  redemption  of  man- 
kind. (2)  To  institute  the  ministry  of 
the  word  and  to  call  and  send  minis- 
ters. (3),  To  teach  the  heart  within  by 
illuminating  the  mind  and  by  working 
a  faith  of  the  doctrine  taught. 
2.  There  are  two  ways  whereby  Christ 
teaches  those  who  are  to  be  teachers. 
(1)  By  immediate  revelation.  (2)  By 
ordinary  instruction  in  schools  by  the 
means  and  ministry  of  men. 

IV.  They  who  are  to  be  teachers 
must  first  be  taught,  and  they  must 
teach  that  which  they  have  first 
learned  themselves.  They  are  first  to 
be  taught,  and  that  by  men  where 
revelation  is  wanting.  This  is  the 
foundation  of  the  schools  of  the 
prophets.  All  men  should  pray  that 
God  would  prosper  and  bless  all  schools 
of  learning  where  this  kind  of  teaching 
is  in  use. — Perkins. 

The  Gospel  a  Divine  Revelation. 

I.  It  is  not  constructed  by  human 
ingenuity. — "The  gospel  which  was 
preached  of  me  is  not  after  man " 
(ver.  11). 

II.  It  derives  no  authority  from 
man. — "  For  I  neither  received  it  of 
man"  (ver.  12). 

III.  It  is  not  acquired  by  mere 
mental  culture. — "  Neither  was  I 
taught  it." 

,  IV.  It  is  a  direct  and  special 
revelation  from  heaven. — "  But  by  the 
revelation  of  Jesus  Christ." 

Apostolic  Assurance  of  the  Super- 
natural Character  of  the  Gospel. — 1.  It 
is  the  custom  of  the  adversaries  of  the 
truth,  when  they  have  nothing  to  say 
in  reason  against  the  doctrine  itself,  to 
cast  reproach  on  those  who  preach  it, 
and  to  question  their  call  and  authority 
to  preach,  that  so  they  may  indirectly 
at  least  reflect  upon  the  doctrine. 
2.  As  none  may  take  upon  him  to 
dispense  the  word  of  God  publicly 
unto  others  without  a  call  from  God, 
so  there  are  several  sorts  of  callings : 
one  of  men  and  ordinary  when  God 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


CHAP.  T. 


calls  by  the  voices  and  consent  of  men  ; 
another  of  God  and  extraordinary,  the 
call  of  the  Church  not  intervening. 
3.  It  is  required  of  an  apostle  to  have 
the  infallible  knowledge  of  the  truth 
of  the  gospel,  and  this  not  wholly  by 
the  help  of  human  means,  as  we  learn 
at  schools  and  by  private  study,  but 
mainly  by  immediate  inspiration  from 


the  Spirit  of  God.  Paul  shows  that  the 
gospel  was  not  taught  him  of  man  ;  and 
this  he  saith,  not  to  depress  human 
learning,  but  that  he  may  obviate 
the  calumny  of  his  adversaries  who 
alleged  he  had  the  knowledge  of  the 
gospel  by  ordinary  instruction  from 
men  only,  and  so  was  no  apostle. — - 
Fergusson. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13,  14. 

A  Zealous  Ritualist — 

I.  Is  conspicuous  for  his  adherence  to  religious  formalities. — "For  ye 
have  heard  of  my  conversation  in  time  past  in  the  Jews'  religion"  (ver.  13) 
— of  my  manner  of  life  formerly  in  Judaism.  Saul  of  Tarsus  was  a  full- 
blown ritualist,  and  a  master-leader  in  the  art,  setting  the  pattern  to  all  his 
contemporaries.  He  did  not  play  at  forms  and  ceremonies.  Their  observance 
was  to  him  a  matter  of  life  and  death.  An  intense  nature  like  his  could  do 
nothing  by  halves.  The  listlessness  and  pictorial  parade  of  modern  ritualism  he 
would  have  denounced  with  withering  scorn.  Religious  formality  has  for  some 
minds  an  irresistible  fascination.  It  appeals  to  the  instinct  of  worship  which  is 
latent  in  all,  and  to  the  love  of  sestheticism  which  is  shared  by  most  in  varying 
degrees.  The  votary  deludes  himself  into  the  belief  that  signs  and  symbols 
represent  certain  great  truths ;  but  the  truths  soon  fade  away  into  the  back- 
ground, and  he  is  in  turn  deluded  in  regarding  the  outward  ceremonies  as  every- 
thing. Formality  is  the  tendency  of  the  mind  to  rest  in  the  mere  externals  of 
religion  to  the  neglect  of  the  inner  life  of  religion  itself.  It  is  the  folly  of 
valuing  a  tree  for  its  bark  instead  of  its  goodly  timber,  of  choosing  a  book  for  its 
ornate  binding  irrespective  of  its  literary  genius,  of  admiring  the  finished 
architecture  of  a  building  regardless  of  its  accommodation  or  the  character  of 
its  inmates.  "  There  are  two  ways  of  destroying  Christianity,"  says  D'Aubigne  ; 
"  one  is  to  deny  it,  the  other  is  to  displace  it."  Formality  seeks  to  displace  it. 
Ritualism  may  be  of  use  in  the  infantile  stage,  either  of  the  world  or  the 
individual.  It  is  a  reversion  to  the  petrifaction  of  ancient  crudities.  A  robust 
and  growing  spiritual  manhood  is  superior  to  its  aids. 

II.  Violently  opposes  the  representatives  of  genuine  piety. — "  How  that 
beyond  measure  I  persecuted  the  Church  of  God,  and  wasted  it "  (ver.  13). 
Animated  by  extravagant  zeal  for  the  religion  of  his  forefathers,  the  bigoted 
Pharisee  became  the  deadliest  enemy  of  the  Church  of  Christ  in  its  infant  days. 
Indifferent  to  personal  peril  or  to  the  feelings  of  the  oppressed,  he  prosecuted 
his  work  of  destruction  with  savage  energy.  He  was  a  type  of  the  Jewish 
fanatics  who  afterwards  thirsted  and  plotted  for  his  life,  and  the  forerunner  of 
the  cruel  zealots  of  the  Inquisition  and  the  Star  Chamber  in  later  times.  The 
curse  of  ritualism  is  excessive  intolerance.  Blinded  and  puffed  up  with  its 
un  vvarrantable  assumptions,  it  loses  sight  of  the  essential  elements  of  true 
religion.  It  sees  nothing  good  in  any  other  system  but  its  own,  and  employs  all 
methods  that  it  dare,  to  compel  universal  conformity.  It  admits  no  rival.  It 
alone  is  right ;  everything  else  is  wrong,  and  all  kinds  of  means  are  justifiable 
in  crushing  the  heresy  that  presumes  to  deny  its  supreme  claims.  "  Christ  and 
Ritualism,"  says  Horatius  Bonar,  "  are  opposed  to  each  other,  as  light  is  to 
darkness 
Christ  or  Christ  will  banish  ritualism." 


The  cross  and  the  crucifix  cannot  agree.     Either  ritualism  will  banish 


17 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


III.  Is  distinguished  by  his  ardent  study  and  defence  of  traditional  re- 
ligionism.— "  And  profited  in  the  Jews'  religion  above  many  my  equals  in  mine  own 
nation,  being  more  exceedingly  zealous  of  the  traditions  of  my  fathers  "  (ver.  14). 
The  apostle  had  studied  the  Mosaic  law  under  the  ablest  tutors  of  his  day.  He 
knew  Judaism  by  heart,  and  won  a  distinguished  reputation  for  learning  and  for 
his  strict  adherence  to  the  minutest  details  of  traditional  legalism.  He  was  one 
of  the  ablest  champions  of  the  Mosaic  system.  The  zealous  ritualist  spends  his 
days  and  nights  in  studying,  not  the  word  of  God,  but  the  sayings  of  men  and 
the  rules  of  the  Church  handed  down  by  the  traditions  of  past  generations. 
Divine  revelation  is  ignored,  and  human  authority  unduly  exalted.  His  studies 
are  misdirected,  and  his  zeal  misspent.  He  is  wasting  his  energy  in  defending  a 
lifeless  organism.  No  man  can  honestly  and  prayerfully  study  God's  word  and 
catch  its  meaning,  and  remain  a  mere  ritualist. 

Lessons. — 1.  Ritualism  is  the  worship  of  external  forms.     2.  It  breeds  a  spirit  of 
intolerance  and  persecution.     3.  It  supplants  true  religion. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  13,  14.  Mistaken  Zeal —  outward  state  be  so  far  decayed  as  to 

I.  May  create  a  reputation  for  cease  to  be,  yet  the  Lord  may  so  far 
religious  devotion. — "Ye  have  heard  give  way  to  the  rage  of  persecutors 
of  my  conversation  in  time  past  in  that  the  outward  face  and  beauty  of 
the  Jews'  religion  "  (ver.  13).  the  Church  may  be  totally  marred,  the 

II.  Breeds  the  spirit  of  violent  members  partly  killed,  partly  scattered, 
persecution. — "  How  that  beyond  the  public  ordinances  suppressed,  and 
measure  I  persecuted  the  Church  of  the  public  assemblies  interrupted. 
God,  and  wasted  it"  (ver.  13).  4.  The  life  and  way  of  some  engaged 

III.  Makes  one  ambitious  for  in  a  false  religion  may  be  so  blameless 
superiority.  — "  Profited  .  .  .  above  and,  according  to  the  dictates  of  their 
many  my  equals,  .  .  .  being  more  deluded  conscience,  so  strict,  as  that  it 
exceedingly  zealous  of  the  traditions  of  may  be  a  copy  unto  those  who  profess 
my  fathers"  (ver.  14).  the   true   religion    and   a    reproof   for 

IV.  Is  neither  good  nor  wise.  their  palpable  negligence.     5.  As  our 

V.  Stores  up  a  retrospect  of  bitter  affections  of  love,  joy,  hatred,  anger, 
and  humiliating  regret.  and   grief   are   by   nature   so   corrupt 

that  even  the  choicest  of  them,  if  not 
Review  of  a  Misspent  Life. — 1.  A  brought  in  subjection  to  the  word  by 
sincere  convert  will  not  shun  to  make  the  Spirit,  will  lay  forth  themselves 
confession  of  his  wicked  life,  not  upon  forbidden  and  unlawful  objects, 
omitting  anything  which  may  tend  to  so  our  zeal  and  fervency  of  spirit  will 
a  just  aggravation  of  it,  not  in  a  bend  itself  more  toward  the  main- 
boasting  manner,  but  that  the  freedom  tenance  of  error  than  of  truth.  Error 
of  God's  grace  may  be  commended,  is  the  birth  of  our  own  invention ;  so 
2.  That  the  Scriptures  were  indited  by  is  not  truth. — Fergusson. 
the  Spirit  of  Gocl,  and  the  penmen  not 

actuated  with  human  policy,  appears  True  and  False  Zeal. 

from  this,  with  other  evidences  in  the         I.  Zeal    is  a    certain   fervency   of 

Scripture  itself,   that    they   concealed  spirit  arising  out  of  a  mixture  of  love 

not  their  own  faults,  but  blazed  them  and  anger,   causing  men  earnestly  to 

to  the   world   when  the   glory  of  God  maintain   the  worship  of  God  and  all 

did  so  require.     3.  Though  the  Church  things  pertaining  thereto,  and  moving 

of  God,  as  to  the  inward  estate,  cannot  them  to  grief  and  anger  when  God  is 

be    utterly    wasted,    neither    can   the  in  any  way  dishonoured, 

18 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS.  chap.  i. 


II.  Paul  was  zealous  for  the  out-  addict  and  set  ourselves  earnestly  to 
ward  observance  of  the  law  and  for  maintain  the  truth  of  the  gospel. 
Pharisaical  unwritten  traditions.  2.  We   are   to  be   angry   in    ourselves 

III.  He  himself  condemns  his  zeal  and  grieved  when  God  is  dishonoured 
because  it  was  against  the  word,  and  and  His  word  disobeyed.  3.  We  are 
tended  to  maintain  unwritten  traditions,  not  to  give  liberty  to  the  best  of  our 
and  justification  by  the  works  of  the  natural  affections  as  to  zeal,  but 
law,  out  of  Christ.  What  Paul  did  in  mortify  and  rule  them  by  the  word. — 
his  religion  we  are  to  do  in  the  pro-  Perkins. 

ftesion  of  the  gospel.     1.  We  are  to 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  15—19. 

The  Imperative  Claims  of  a  Divine  Commission — 

I.  Are  independent  of  personal  merit.— "But  when  it  pleased  God,  who 
separated  me  from  my  mother's  womb,  and  called  me  by  His  grace"  (ver.  15). 
From  the  beginning  the  apostle  was  divinely  destined  to  fulfil  his  high  vocation. 
His  Hebrew  birth  and  Hellenistic  culture  combined  to  prepare  him  for  his 
future  work.  When  he  developed  into  a  hot  persecutor  of  the  Christian  faith 
he  seemed  far  away  from  his  life-mission.  But  a  change  took  place,  and  it  soon 
became  apparent  that,  not  on  the  ground  of  any  merit  of  his  own,  but  because 
it  pleased  God,  the  training  from  his  birth  was  the  best  possible  preparation  for 
his  lofty  calling.  We  cannot  see  far  into  the  future,  or  forecast  the  issue  of  our 
own  plans  or  of  those  we  form  for  others. 

"  There  is  a  divinity  that  shapes  our  ends, 
Rough  hew  thern  as  we  may." 

The  divine  element  in  our  lives  becomes  more  evident  as  we  faithfully  do  the 
duty  imposed  on  us.  Joseph  recognised  this  when  he  declared  to  his  brethren, 
"  It  was  not  you  that  sent  me  hither,  but  God  "  (Gen.  xlv.  8). 

II.  Are  based  on  an  unmistakably  divine  revelation. — "  To  reveal  His 
Son  in  me,  that  I  might  preach  Him  among  the  heathen"  (ver.  16).  The 
dazzling  appearance  of  Christ  before  his  eyes,  and  the  summons  of  His  voice 
addressed  to  Saul's  bodily  ears,  formed  the  special  mode  in  which  it  pleased  God 
to  call  him  to  the  apostleship.  But  there  was  also  the  inward  revelation  of 
Christ  to  his  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  was  this  which  wrought  in  him  the 
great  spiritual  change,  and  inspired  him  to  be  a  witness  for  Christ  to  the 
Gentiles.  His  Judaic  prejudices  were  swept  away,  and  he  became  the  champion 
of  a  universal  gospel.  The  same  revelation  that  made  Paul  a  Christian  made 
him  the  apostle  of  mankind.  The  true  preacher  carries  within  his  own  spiritually 
renovated  nature         evidence  and  authority  of  his  divine  commission. 

"This  is  what  makes  him  the  crowd- drawing  preacher, 
There's  a  background  of  God  to  each  hard-working  feature ; 
Every  word  that  he  speaks  has  been  fierily  furnaced 
In  a  blast  of  a  life  which  has  struggled  in  earnest." 

III.  Are  superior  to  the  functions  of  human  counsel. — "  I  conferred  not 
with  flesh  and  blood :  neither  went  I  up  to  Jerusalem  to  them  which  were  apostles 
before  me"  (vers.  16,  17).  The  counsel  of  the  wise  and  good  is  valuable,  and 
ordinarily  should  be  diligently  sought  and  thoughtfully  pondered.  But  when 
God  calls,  the  commission  is  beyond  either  the  advice  or  the  opposition  of  men. 
Paul  had  reached  a  stage  into  which  no  human  authority-  could  lift  him,  and 
from  which  it  could  not  dislodge  him.  He  might  legitimately  confer  with  others 
as  to  methods  of  work,  but  his  call  to  work  was  imposed  upon  him  by  a  power 
to   which   all   human    counsellors   and    ecclesiastical    magnates    must   submit. 

19 


chap.  i.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


Channing  once  said  :  "  The  teacher  to  whom  are  committed  the  infinite  realities 
of  the  spiritual  world,  the  sanctions  of  eternity,  the  powers  of  the  life  to  come, 
has  instruments  to  work  with  which  turn  to  feebleness  all  other  means  of 
influence." 

IV.  Stimulate  to  active  service. — "  But  I  went  into  Arabia,  and  re- 
turned again  unto  Damascus"  (ver.  17).  Immediately  after  his  conversion 
the  history  tells  us,  "Straightway  he  preached  Christ  in  the  synagogues" 
(Acts  ix.  20).  In  Arabia,  a  country  of  the  Gentiles,  he  doubtless  preached  the 
gospel,  as  he  did  before  and  after  at  Damascus,  and  thus  demonstrated  the 
independence  of  his  apostolic  commission.  A  call  to  preach  demands  immediate 
response,  and  impels  to  earnest  and  faithful  endeavour.  It  is  said  that 
Whitefield's  zealous  spirit  exhausted  all  its  energies  in  preaching,  and  his  full 
dedication  to  God  was  honoured  by  unbounded  success.  The  effect  produced  by 
his  sermons  was  indescribable,  arising  in  a  great  degree  from  the  most  perfect 
forgetf ulness  of  self  during  the  solemn  moment  of  declaring  the  salvation  that 
is  in  Christ  Jesus.  His  evident  sincerity  impressed  every  hearer,  and  is  said  to 
have  forcibly  struck  Lord  Chesterfield  when  he  heard  him  at  Lady  Huntingdon's. 
The  preacher,  as  the  ambassador  for  Cbrist,  is  eager  to  declare  His  message,  and 
anxious  it  should  be  understood  and  obeyed. 

V.  Are  recognised  by  the  highest  ecclesiastical  authority. — "Then  after 
three  years  I  went  up  to  Jerusalem  to  see  Peter,  and  .  .  .  James  the  Lord's 
brother"  (vers.  18,  19).  The  claims  of  Paul  to  the  apostleship,  evidenced  by 
such  supernatural  signs  and  such  solid  Christian  work  and  patient  suffering, 
were  at  length  acknowledged  by  the  chief  leaders  of  the  mother  Church  in 
Jerusalem.  Good  work  advertises  itself,  and  sooner  or  later  compels  recognition. 
What  an  eventful  meeting  of  the  first  gospel  pioneers,  and  how  momentous  the 
influence  of  such  an  interview  and  consultation  !  Though  the  call  of  God  is 
unacknowledged,  ridiculed,  and  opposed,  its  duties  must  be  faithfully  discharged. 
The  day  of  ample  reward  will  come. 

Lessons. — 1.  God  only  can  make  the  true  preacher.  2.  A  call  to  preach  involves 
suffering  and  toil.  3.  The  fruit  of  diligent  and  faithful  work  will  certainly 
appear. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.    15-17.    The    Conversion    and  of  the  gospel,  to  repent  and  believe  in 

Vocation  of  St.  Paul.  Christ.    (2)  Offering  to  him  the  promise 

I.  The  causes  of  St.  Paul's  con-  of  remission  of  sins  and  life  everlasting 
version. — 1.  The  good  pleasure  of  when  he  believed.  3.  By  a  real  and 
God.  2.  His  separation  from  the  lively  teaching  when  God  made  Paul 
womb,  which  is  an  act  of  God's  in  his  heart  answer  the  calling.  Minis- 
counsel  whereby  He  sets  men  apart  ters  of  Christ  must  learn  Christ  as 
to  be    members  of    Christ  and    to   be  Paul  learned  Him. 

His  servants  in  this  or  that  office.  III.  The  end  of  Paul's  conversion. 
3.  His  vocation  by  grace — the  accom-  — To  preach  Christ  among  the  Gentiles, 
plishment  of  both  the  former  in  the  1.  Christ  is  the  substance  or  subject- 
time  which  God  had  appointed.  matter   of   the   whole   Bible.       2.    To 

II.  The  manner  of  his  vocation. —  preach  Christ  is  :  (1)  To  teach  the 
"To  reveal  His  Son  in  me."  1.  By  doctrine  of  the  incarnation  of  Christ, 
preparation.  God  humbled  and  sub-  and  His  offices  as  King,  Prophet,  and 
dued  the  pride  and  stubbornness  of  his  Priest.  (2)  That  faith  is  an  instru- 
heart  and  made  him  tractable  and  ment  to  apprehend  and  apply  Christ, 
teachable.  2.  By  instruction.  (1)  Pro-  (3)  To  certify  and  reveal  to  every 
pounding  unto  him  the  commandment  nearer  that  it  is  the  will  of  God  to 

20 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


CHAP.  1. 


save  him  by  Christ  if  he  will  receive 
Him.  (4)  That  he  is  to  apply  Christ 
with  His  benefits  to  himself  in  parti- 
cular.    3.  To  preach  to  the  Gentiles  : 

(1)  Because  the  prophecies  of  the  call- 
ing of  the  Gentiles  must  be  fulfilled. 

(2)  Because  the  division  between  the 
Jews  and  Gentiles  is  abolished.     / 

IV.  Paul's  obedience  to  the  calling 
of  God  (vers.  16,  17).— 1.  God's  word, 
preached  or  written,  does  not  depend 
on  the  authority  of  any  man — no,  not 
on  the  authority  of  the  apostles  them- 
selves. 2.  There  is  no  consultation  or 
deliberation  to  be  used  at  any  time 
touching  the  holding  or  not  holding 
of  our  religion.  3.  Our  obedience  to 
God  must  be  without  consultation. 
We  must  first  try  what  is  the  will  of 
God,  and  then  absolutely  put  it  into 
execution,  leaving  the  issue  to  God. 
4.  Paul  goes  into  Arabia  and  Damascus, 
and  becomes  a  teacher  to  his  professed 
enemies. — Perkins. 

Vers.  15,  16.  Conversion  as  illus- 
trated by  that  of  St.  Paul. — In  the 
case  of  St.  Paul  there  are  many 
circumstances  not  paralleled  in  the 
general  experience  of  Christians;  but 
in  its  essential  features,  in  the  views 
with  which  it  was  accompanied  and 
the  effects  it  produced,  it  was  exactly 
the  same  as  every  one  must  experience 
before  he  can  enter  into  the  kingdom 
of  God. 

I.  Its  causes. — 1.  Paul  was  chosen 
by  God  before  his  birth  to  be  a  vessel 
of  honour.  "It  pleased  God,  who 
separated  me  from  my  mother's 
womb."  Are  not  all  genuine  Chris- 
tians addressed  as  "  elect  of  God  "  or 
chosen  of  God,  through  sanctification 
of  the  Spirit,  unto  obedience  and  the 
sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ?  Why  should  not  the  real 
Christian  give  scope  to  those  emotions 
of  gratitude  which  such  reflections 
will  inspire?  2.  The  more  immediate 
cause  was  the  call  of  divine  grace. 
"  And  called  me  by  His  grace."  There 
is  a  general  call  in  the  gospel  addressed 
to  all  men  indiscriminately.  There  is, 
in   every  instance  of   real  conversion, 


another  and  inward  call,  by  which  the 
Spirit  applies  the  general  truth  of  the 
gospel  to  the  heart.  By  this  interior 
call  Christ  apprehends,  lays  hold  on 
the  soul,  stops  it  in  its  impenitent  pro- 
gress, and  causes  it  to  hear  His  voice. 

II.  The  means  by  which  conversion 
is  effected. — "  To  reveal  His  Son  in 
me."  The  principal  method  which  the 
Spirit  adopts  in  subduing  the  htart 
of  a  sinner  is  a  spiritual  discovery  of 
Christ.  There  is  an  outward  revela- 
tion of  Christ — in  the  Scriptures  ;  and 
an  internal,  of  which  the  understand- 
ing and  the  heart  are  the  seat.  1.  The 
Spirit  reveals  the  greatness  and  dignity 
of  Christ.  2.  The  transcendent  beauty 
and  glory  of  Christ.  3.  The  suitable- 
ness, fulness,  and  sufficiency  of  Christ 
to  supply  all  our  wants  and  relieve  all 
our  miseries. 

III.  The  effect  of  conversion  on 
St.  Paul. — "  Immediately  I  conferred 
not  with  flesh  and  blood."  He  set  him- 
self without  hesitation  or  demur  to 
discharge  the  duties  of  his  heavenly 
vocation.  1.  His  compliance  with  the 
will  of  Christ  was  immediate.  2.  Uni- 
versal and  impartial.  3.  Constant  and 
persevering. — Robert  Hall. 

Ver.  16.  The  Qualification  of  the 
True  Minister — 

I.  Begins  in  an  unmistakable  reve- 
lation of  Christ  to  his  own  soul. — 
"  To  reveal  His  Son  in  me." 

II.  Urges  him  to  declare  the  gospel 
to  the  most  needy. — "  That  I  might 
preach  Him  among  the  heathen." 

III.  Raises  him  above  the  necessity 
of  mere  human  authority. — "  Immedi- 
ately I  conferred  not  with  flesh  and 
blood." 

Ver.  17.  The  Divine  Call  to  the 
Apostleship.  —  1.  That  extraordinary 
way  whereby  the  Lord  made  known 
His  mind  to  the  penmen  of  Scripture 
was  so  infallible  in  itself  and  so  evident 
to  those  to  whom  it  came  to  be  no 
delusion  that  they  were  above  all 
doubt,  and  needed  not  to  advise  with 
the  best  of  men  in  order  to  their 
confirmation    about  the    reality  of  it. 

21 


chap.  i.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


2.  The  Lord  maketh  sometimes  the  first  ledged.  —  1.  That  nothing  of  Peter's 
piece  of  public  service  as  hazardous,  un-  supposed  supremacy  over  Paul  and  the 
couth,  and  unsuccessful  as  any  wherein  rest  of  the  apostles  can  be  gathered 
He  employs  them  afterwards,  that  His  from  this  place  appears  from  this, 
ministers  may  be  taught  to  depend  that  Paul  went  first  to  his  work  before 
more  on  God's  blessing  than  on  human  he  came  to  Peter,  and  that  his  business 
probabilities,  and  that  they  may  give  with  Peter  was  not  to  receive  ordination 
proof  of  their  obedience.  Thus  it  was  from  him  or  to  evidence  his  subjection 
with  Moses  (Exod.  ii.  10),  and  Jere-  to  him,  but  from  respect  and  reverence 
miah  (i.  19).  3.  The  apostles  were  not  to  give  him  a  friendly  visit.  2.  It 
fixed  to  any  certain  charge,  as  ordinary  ought  to  be  the  endeavour  of  Christ's 
ministers  are.  Their  charge  was  the  ministers  to  entertain  love  and  familiar- 
whole  world.  They  went  from  place  ity  one  with  another,  as  also  to  make 
to  place  as  the  necessities  of  people  their  doing  so  evident  to  others,  it  being 
required,  or  as  God  by  His  providence  most  unseemly  for  those  who  preach 
and  Spirit  directed. — Fergusson.  the  gospel  of  peace  to  others  to  live 

t7        10     r>  ^.  .         „  ±.  in  discord  among  themselves.     3.   As 

Ver.   18.   Retirement   a   Reparation         .   .  ,  5         t-x  x  x 

,       rrr    i       cl-t  j.    •  i.        a     i_-  ministers  may  and  ought  to  meet  some- 

tor     Work. — "  1     went    into     Arabia,  ,.  ,,'     ,         ?,  ,       , 

J     t       i  •.  .  ,     -n,  »  times  together,  to  evidence  and  enter- 

and  returned  again  unto   Damascus.  ,    •  .      i    \  j  j  j 

-.      A  a,     , .  &     ,      . ,      r       . ,        ,  .  tain    mutual    love    and    concord,    and 

1.  Affording  opportunity  lor  thought  ,  -     ,,    ,  ■.     .  ,. 

i      m  it-  ft    rv-        i  •  £  because    ot    that    mutual    inspection 

and  self-testing.     2.  Gives  leisure  lor         ,  .  ,      .,  ,  ,  ,  r  e 

,     ■,  -ip.  i  a       o  ,  which    they   ought     to    have   one   or 

study  and    forming   plans    lor    luture  ,,  xtT  •  x-  ^  a 

t         o   t       rx       xi  i    i       £  another,     so     their     meetings,    ought 

service.     3.  Is  olten  the  prelude  ol  a  ..,      \     ,_  r  ,    &         rP 

i  ,  r  neither  to   be   so   Irequent  nor   ol   so 

busy  and  prosperous  career.  -,  ,  •  ?,    ,    x1    .     n    ^ 

J  r      r  long  continuance  as  that  their  nocks 

Vers.  18,  19.  The  Divine  C all  acknow-      suffer  prejudice. — Fergusson. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  20—24. 

God  glorified  in  His  Servant — 

I.  By  the  undoubted  truthfulness  of  his  statements. — "  ISTow  the  things  which 
I  write  unto  you,  behold,  before  God,  I  lie  not "  (ver.  20).  The  assertions  of  the 
apostle  flatly  contradicted  the  allegations  of  his  enemies.  They  insinuated  that 
Paul  was  but  a  messenger  of  the  authorities  of  the  Church  at  Jerusalem,  and 
that  all  he  knew  of  the  gospel  had  been  learned  from  the  twelve.  So  far  from 
this  being  the  case  it  is  evident  that  for  several  years  he  had  been  preaching  the 
gospel,  and  had  not  seen  any  of  the  twelve,  except  Peter  and  James,  and  that 
only  for  a  fortnight  at  Jerusalem  about  three  years  after  his  conversion.  "  In 
the  present  case,"  remarks  Professor  Jowett,  "  it  is  a  matter  of  life  and  death  to 
the  apostle  to  prove  his  independence  of  the  twelve."  Having  said  all  he  can  to 
substantiate  his  point,  he  concludes  by  a  solemn  appeal  to  God  as  to  his  veracity : 
"  Behold,  before  God,  I  lie  not."  The  apostle  never  makes  an  appeal  like  this 
lightly,  but  only  in  support  of  a  vital  truth  he  is  specially  anxious  to  enforce 
(Rom.  ix.  1  ;  2  Cor.  i.  17,  18,  23;  1  Thess.  ii.  5). 

"  When  fiction  rises  pleasing  to  the  eye, 
Men  will  believe,  because  they  love  the  lie ; 
But  truth  herself,  if  clouded  with  a  frown, 
Must  have  some  solemn  proof  to  pass  her  down." 

Churchill. 

The  vigorous  and  faithful  maintenance  of  the  truth  brings  glory  to  God. 

II.  By  his  evangelistic  activity. — "  Afterwards  I  came  into  the  regions  of 
Syria  and  Cilicia  "  (ver.  21).  During  this  tour  very  probably  the  Churches  were 
founded,    referred   to   in   Acts   xv.    23,    41.      "A    man's   work,"   says   George 

22 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS.  chap.  i. 


Macdonalcl,  "  does  not  fall  upon  him  by  chance,  but  it  is  given  him  to  do  j  and 
everything  well  done  belongs  to  God's  kingdom,  and  everything  ill  done  to  the 
kingdom  of  darkness."  God  is  the  sublime  end  of  all  human  activity,  and  our 
powers  can  never  be  more  nobly  employed  than  in  expounding  His  will,  unfolding 
His  gracious  character,  advancing  the  interests  of  His  kingdom,  and  striving 
to  promote  His  glory  among  the  children  of  men.  Man  is  never  so  great,  so 
luminous,  so  grand  as  when  he  is  doing  work  for  God  with  the  light  and  help  of 
God  ;  and  all  such  work  is  a  revelation  of  the  character  and  purposes  of  God 
open  to  the  eyes  of  all  who  will  see. 

III.  By  the  reputation  of  his  changed  life. — "  And  was  unknown  by  face 
unto  the  Churches:  .  .  .  they  had  heard  only,  That  he  which  persecuted  us  in  times 
past  now  preached  the  faith  which  once  he  destroyed "  (vers.  22,  23).  The 
conversion  of  Saul  of  Tarsus  was  one  of  the  most  striking  events  in  the  early 
history  of  the  Church.  It  was  a  marvel  to  all  who  had  known  his  previous  life. 
It  was  an  unanswerable  testimony  to  the  power  of  the  gospel,  and  an  argument 
that  has  been  used  in  all  ages  to  illustrate  the  possibility  of  the  salvation  of 
the  worst  of  sinners.  It  is  said  the  Duke  of  Burgundy  was  born  terrible.  He 
would  indulge  in  such  paroxysms  of  rage  that  those  who  were  standing  by  would 
tremble  for  his  life.  He  was  hard-hearted,  passionate,  incapable  of  bearing  the 
least  opposition  to  his  wishes,  fond  of  gambling,  violent  hunting,  the  gratifica- 
tions of  the  table,  abandoned  to  his  pleasures,  barbarous,  and  born  to  cruelty. 
With  this  was  united  a  genius  of  the  most  extraordinary  kind  ;  quickness  of 
humour,  depth  and  justice  of  thought,  versatility  and  acuteness  of  mind.  The 
prodigy  was,  that  in  a  short  space  of  time  the  grace  of  God  made  him  a  new 
man.  He  became  a  prince,  affable,  gentle,  moderate,  patient,  modest,  humble, 
austere  only  to  himself,  attentive  to  his  duties,  and  sensible  of  their  extent.  If 
we  could  lay  a  hand  on  the  fly-wheel  of  the  Scotch  express,  running  fifty  or 
sixty  miles  an  hour,  and  stop  it,  we  should  perform  an  astounding  miracle. 
But  this  is  what  God  does  in  His  miracles  of  conversion.  He  laid  His  mighty 
hand  on  the  fly-wheel  of  Paul's  life,  and  not  only  stopped  its  mad  career,  but 
turned  it  right  round  in  the  opposite  direction.  The  persecutor  becomes  a 
preacher. 

IV.  By  the  recognition  of  His  divine  call. — "  And  they  glorified  God  in  me  " 
(ver.  24).  The  attempt  to  disparage  the  authority  of  Paul  was  the  work  of 
a  few  malcontents,  who  sought  to  ruin  his  influence  in  order  to  extend  their 
own.  The  Churches  of  Jerusalem  and  Judea,  though  many  of  them  had  not 
seen  the  apostle,  acknowledged  and  praised  God  for  the  divine  work  done  in  him 
and  by  him.  A  few  false  teachers  may  work  much  mischief,  but  they  cannot 
overturn  the  work  of  God,  nor  prevent  its  full  recognition.  The  faithful  servant 
may  safely  leave  his  reputation  in  the  hands  of  God.  It  lifts  humanity,  especially 
Christianised  humanity,  into  special  dignity,  when  it  is  discovered  that  God  is 
glorified  in  man. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  gospel  elevates  man  by  transforming  him.  2.  The  conscientious 
worker  has  God  on  his  side.     3.   God  is  glorified  by  obedient  toil. 

GERM  NOTES   ON  THE    VERSES. 

Yer.  20.  Self-conscious  Truth. — l.The  credit  from  some,  and  will  beget  trust 

choicest    servants    of    Christ   may   be  to  itself  from  others,  and  for  the  rest 

looked  upon  as  liars  and  unworthy  to  it  will  seal  up  their  condemnation  and 

be  trusted,  even  by  those  to  whom  they  make  them  inexcusable.     2.  It  is  not 

are  sent,  and  yet  they  must  not  give  unlawful    for    Christians   to   take   an 

over  to  preach  as  knowing  that  the  oath,  providing  it  be  with  these  condi- 

word  spoken  by  them  doth   still  get  tions  :     (1)  That  the  thing  we  swear 

23 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


be  truth.  (2)  That  there  be  weighty 
reasons  for  taking  an  oath.  (3)  That 
we  swear  only  by  the  name  of  God, 
and  not  by  the  creatures,  seeing  none 
but  God  can  bear  witness  to  the  secrets 
of  the  heart. — Fergusson. 

Vers.  21-24.  The  Self-evidencing  Proof 
of  a  divinely  commissioned  Messenger. — 
1.  Seen  in  disinterested  labours  and 
travels  (vers.  21,  22).  2.  Seen  in  a 
remarkable  change  of  character  and 
conduct  (ver.  23).  3.  Seen  in  that  the 
glory  of  his  work  is  ascribed  to  God 
(ver.  24). 

Practical  Proofs  of  Apostleship. 

I.  Paul  went  from  Jerusalem  into 
Syria  and  Cilicia. — 1.  Because  he  was 
ordained  specially  to  be  the  apostle  of 
the  Gentiles.  2.  Because  Cilicia  was 
his  own  country,  and  his  love  to  his 
country  was  great.  If  any  apostle 
above  the  rest  be  the  pastor  and  uni- 
versal bishop  of  the  Church  over  the 
whole  world,  it  is  Paul  and  not  Peter. 

II.  Paul  was  known  to  the  Chris- 
tian Jews  only  by  hearsay,  because  it 
is  the  office  of  an  apostle  not  to  build 
on  the  foundation  of  another  or  to 
succeed  any  man  in  his  labour,  but  to 
plant  and  found  the  Church  of  the 
New  Testament. 

III.  Seeing  the  intent  of  the  devil 
and  wicked  men  is  to  destroy  the  faith, 
we  must  have  a  special  care  of  our 
faith. — 1.  We  must  look  that  our  faith 
be  a  true  faith.  2.  We  must  keep  and 
lock  up  our  faith  in  some  safe  and  sure 
place — in  the  storehouse  or  treasury  of 
a  good  conscience.  3.  Our  care  must 
be  to  increase  in  faith  that  our  hearts 
may  be  rooted  and  grounded  in  the  love 
of  God. 

IV.  Our  duty  is  to  sanctify  and 
glorify  the  name  of  God  in  every 
work   of  His. — Neglect   in    glorifying 


and   praising   God   is   a   great    sin. — 
Perkins. 

Ver.  24.  God  glorified  in  Good  Men. 
— We  are  taught  to  honour  God  in 
man  and  man  in  God.  We  are  taught 
to  avoid,  on  the  one  hand,  all  creature 
idolatry,  and,  on  the  other,  that  cynical 
severity,  or  ungrateful  indifference  to 
the  Author  of  all  good  in  man,  which 
undervalues  or  neglects  the  excellencies 
which  ought  to  be  held  up  to  admira- 
tion that  they  may  be  imitated  by 
ourselves  and  others.  Each  of  these 
extremes  robs  God  of  His  just  revenue 
of  grateful  praise.  In  what  does 
creature  idolatry  consist  but  in  honour- 
ing and  trusting  in  the  natural  and 
acquired  excellencies  of  creatures  to  the 
exclusion  of  God?  But  is  there  then 
no  wisdom,  no  might,  no  excellence,  in 
man  1  As  it  were  absurd  to  deny  this, 
it  would  be  affectation  to  pretend  to 
overlook  it.  Admire  and  deny  not  this 
wisdom,  acknowledge  this  efficiency, 
and  affect  not  to  lower  its  estimate ; 
only  glorify  God  who  worketh  all  in 
all.  If  He  has  chosen  any  of  them  to 
be  more  eminently  His  instruments  for 
the  furtherance  of  His  purposes  of 
mercy  to  mankind,  He  does  it  by  virtue 
of  His  sovereignty.  If  he  continues 
their  useful  lives,  whilst  you  have  their 
light  rejoice  in  the  light  and  glorify 
Him  from  whom  it  comes  as  its 
original  and  source;  and  when  He 
choos?s  to  quench  these  stars  of  His 
right  hand  in  the  darkness  of  death, 
still  glorify  Him.  As  to  us,  this  is  to 
remind  us  of  our  dependence  on  Him, 
who  appointed  their  orbit  and  invested 
them  with  their  different  degrees  of 
glory;  and  as  to  them,  though  their 
lustre  fades  from  these  visible  skies, 
it  is  that  it  may  be  rekindled  in 
superior  glory  in  the  kingdom  of  their 
Father. — R.  Watson. 


24 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS.  chap.  ii. 


CHAPTER   II. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Then  fourteen  years  after. — From  Paul's  conversion  inclusive.  I  went  a?am  to 
Jerusalem. — The  same  visit  referred  to  in  Acts  xv.,  when  the  council  of  the  apostles  and 
Church  decided  that  Gentile  Christians  need  not  be  circumcised. 

Ver.  2.  I  went  up  by  revelation. — Quite  consistent  with  the  fact  that  he  was  sent  as  a 
deputy  from  the  Church  at  Antioch  (Acts  xv.  2).  The  revelation  suggested  to  him  that  this 
deputation  was  the  wisest  course.  Communicated  privately  to  them  which  were  of  reputa- 
tion.— It  was  necessary  that  the  Jerusalem  apostles  should  know  beforehand  that  the  gospel 
Paul  preached  to  the  Gentiles  was  the  same  as  theirs,  and  had  received  divine  confirmation 
in  the  results  it  wrought  on  the  Gentile  converts. 

Ver.  3.  Neither  Titus  [not  even  Titus],  being  a  Greek,  was  compelled  to  be  circumcised. — 
The  apostles,  constrained  by  the  firmness  of  Paul  and  Barnabas,  did  not  compel  or  insist  on 
his  being  circumcised.  Thus  they  virtually  sanctioned  Paul's  course  among  the  Gentiles, 
and  admitted  his  independence  as  an  apostle.  To  have  insisted  on  Jewish  usages  for  Gentile 
converts  would  have  been  to  make  them  essential  parts  of  Christianity. 

Ver.  4.  False  brethren  unawares  [in  an  underhand  manner]  brought  in  privily  to  spy 
out. — As  foes  in  the  guise  of  friends,  wishing  to  destroy  and  rob  us  of  our  liberty— from  the 
yoke  of  the  ceremonial  law. 

Ver.  5.  To  whom  we  gave  place  by  subjection  not  for  an  hour. — We  would  willingly  have 
yielded  for  love,  if  no  principle  was  at  issue,  but  not  in  the  way  of  subjection.  Truth 
precise,  unaccommodating,  abandons  nothing  that  belongs  to  itself,  admits  nothing  that  is 
inconsistent  with  it  (Bengel). 

Ver.  6.  They  in  conference  added  nothing  to  me. — As  I  did  not  by  conference  impart  to 
them  aught  at  my  conversion,  so  they  now  did  not  impart  aught  additional  to  me  above 
what  I  already  knew.     Another  evidence  of  the  independence  of  his  apostleship. 

Ver.  9.  They  gave  to  me  and  Barnabas  the  right  hands  of  fellowship. — Recognising  me  as 
a  colleague  in  the  apostleship,  and  that  the  gospel  I  preached  to  the  Gentiles  by  special 
revelation  was  the  same  as  theirs. 

Ver.  10.  Remember  the  poor. — Of  the  Jewish  Christians  in  Judea  then  distressed.  Paul's 
past  care  for  their  poor  prompted  this  request.  His  subsequent  zeal  in  the  same  cause  was 
the  answer  to  their  appeal  (Acts  xi.  29,  30 ;  Eom.  xv.  26,  27  ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  3  ;  2  Cor.  ix.  1  ; 
Acts  xxiv.  17). 

Ver.  11.  When  Peter  was  come  to  Antioch  I  withstood  him  to  the  face. — The  strongest 
proof  of  the  independence  of  his  apostleship  in  relation  to  the  other  apostles,  and  an  un- 
answerable argument  against  the  Romish  dogma  of  the  supremacy  of  St.  Peter. 

Ver.  13.  The  other  Jews  dissembled  likewise  with  him. — The  question  was  not  whether 
Gentiles  were  admissible  to  the  Christian  covenant  without  becoming  circumcised,  'but 
whether  the  Gentile  Christians  were  to  be  admitted  to  social  intercourse  with  the  Jewish 
Christians  without  conforming  to  the  Jewish  institution.  It  was  not  a  question  of  liberty 
and  of  bearing  with  others'  infirmities,  but  one  affecting  the  essence  of  the  gospel,  whether 
the  Gentiles  are  to  be  virtually  compelled  to  live  as  do  the  Jews  in  order  to  be  justified. 

Ver.  14.  Walked  not  uprightly  according  to  the  truth  of  the  gospel. — Which  teaches  that 
justification  by  legal  works  and  observances  is  inconsistent  with  redemption  by  Christ. 
Paul  alone  here  maintained  the  truth  against  Judaism,  as  afterwards  against  heathenism 
(2  Tim.  iv.  16,  17). 

Ver.  17.  Is  therefore  Christ  the  minister  of  sin?— Thus  to  be  justified  by  Christ  it  was 
necessary  to  sink  to  the  level  of  Gentiles — to  become  sinners,  in  fact.  But  are  we  not  thus 
making  Christ  a  minister  of  sin  ?  Away  with  the  profane  thought !  No ;  the  guilt  is  not  in 
abandoning  the  law,  but  in  seeking  it  again  when  abandoned.  Thus,  and  thus  alone,  we 
convict  ourselves  of  transgression  (Lightfoot). 

Ver.  19.  I  through  the  law  am  dead  to  the  law. — By  believing  union  to  Christ  in  His 
death  we,  being  considered  dead  with  Him.  are  severed  from  the  law's  past  power  over  us. 

Ver.  21.  If  righteousness  come  by  the  law,  then  Christ  is  dead  in  vain.— Died  needlessly, 
without  just  cause.  Christ's  having  died  shows  that  the  law  has  no  power  to  justify  us,  for 
if  the  law  can  justify  or  make  us  righteous,  the  death  of  Christ  is  superfluous. 


25 


chap.  ii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—9. 

Confirmatory  Proofs  of  a  Divine  Call — 

I.  Seen  in  a  prudent  consultation  with  the  acknowledged  leaders  of  the 
Church  (vers.  1,  2). — The  men  of  reputation  referred  to  in  these  verses  are  not 
so  called  by  way  of  irony,  but  because  of  their  recognised  authority  in  the 
mother  Church.  Paul  was  not  summoned  to  Jerusalem,  but  divinely  directed  to 
take  the  journey.  Neither  his  teaching  nor  his  office  was  called  in  question,  nor 
did  he  fear  the  most  searching  inquiry  into  his  commission.  Conscious  of  his 
divine  call,  he  claimed  equality  of  status  with  the  rest  of  the  apostles,  and 
explained  to  them  and  to  the  Church  the  principles  and  methods  of  the  gospel  he 
preached.  He  had  nothing  to  fear,  whatever  might  be  the  judgment  of  the 
Church  leaders  in  Jerusalem.  He  expected  from  them  nothing  but  sympathy 
and  encouragement  in  his  work,  and  he  hailed  with  joy  the  opportunity  of 
sharing  the  counsel  of  men  as  interested  as  himself  in  the  success  of  the  gospel. 
With  his  God-given  convictions  and  views,  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  meet  the 
apostles  on  any  other  ground  than  that  of  perfect  equality. 

II.  Seen  in  a  prompt  and  stern  refusal  to  compromise  principle  (vers.  3-5). — 
The  object  of  Paul's  visit  to  Jerusalem  was  to  discuss  a  vital  principle  of  the  gospel 
— the  right  of  the  Gentiles  to  the  privileges  of  the  gospel  without  observing  the 
works  of  the  Jewish  law.  A  misunderstanding  at  that  critical  moment  might 
have  imperilled  the  liberty  of  the  gospel.  The  presence  of  Barnabas  and  Titus 
was  significant — the  one  a  pure  Jew,  a  man  of  gentle  disposition  and  generous 
impulse  ;  and  the  other  a  Gentile  convert,  representing  the  world  of  the  un- 
circumcised.  It  is  to  the  credit  of  the  Church  leaders  at  Jerusalem  that,  with 
their  strong  Jewish  prejudices,  they  admitted  that  the  legal  rite  of  circumcision 
must  not  be  imposed  on  Gentile  converts.  They  were  so  convinced  that  this  was 
the  will  of  God,  and  that  He  had  already  sanctioned  this  as  an  essential  feature 
of  the  gospel,  that  they  dared  do  no  other.  An  attempt  was  made,  not  by  the 
apostles,  but  by  certain  "  false  brethren,"  to  insist  that  Titus  should  be  circum- 
cised ;  but  this  was  promptly  and  stoutly  opposed.  A  concession  on  this  point 
would  have  been  fatal  to  the  universality  of  the  gospel — the  whole  Gentile 
world  would  have  been  trammelled  with  the  bondage  of  legal  ceremonies.  It 
was  then  that  the  great  battle  of  Christian  liberty  was  fought  and  won.  The 
victory  was  another  testimony  of  the  validity  and  power  of  the  divine  commission 
with  which  Paul  was  entrusted. 

III.  Seen  in  the  inability  of  the  wisest  leaders  to  add  anything  to  the 
divine  authority. — "But  of  these  who  seemed  to  be  somewhat  ...  in  conference 
added  nothing  to  me"  (ver.  6).  When  Paul  was  called  to  the  apostleship  he 
"  conferred  not  with  flesh  and  blood  " ;  now  he  affirms  that  flesh  and  blood  did 
not  confer  anything  on  him.  In  conference  and  debate  with  the  chiefs  of  the 
Church  he  showed  himself  their  equal,  and  on  the  great  essentials  of  the  gospel 
he  was  in  perfect  agreement  with  them.  Though  Paul  is  too  modest  to  say  it, 
so  far  from  his  learning  anything  from  them,  they  were  more  likely  to  learn 
something  from  him,  especially  as  to  the  wider  scope  of  the  gospel.  "  In  doctrine 
Paul  holds  the  primacy  in  the  band  of  the  apostles.  While  all  were  inspired  by 
the  Spirit  of  Christ,  the  Gentile  apostle  was  in  many  ways  a  more  richly 
furnished  man  than  any  of  the  rest.  The  Paulinism  of  Peter's  first  epistle  goes 
to  show  that  the  debt  was  on  the  other  side.  Their  earlier  privileges  and  price- 
less store  of  recollections  of  all  that  Jesus  did  and  taught  were  matched  on 
Paul's  side  by  a  penetrating  logic,  a  breadth  and  force  of  intellect  applied  to  the 
facts  of  revelation,  and  a  burning  intensity  of  spirit  which  in  their  combination 
was  unique.     The  Pauline  teaching,  as  it  appears  in  the  New  Testament,  bears 

26 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS.  chap.il 


in  the  highest  degree  the  marks  of  original  genius,  the  stamp  of  a  mind  whose 
inspiration  is  its  own  "  (Findlay). 

IV.  Seen  in  winning  the  recognition  of  a  special  mission  and  of  equality  in 
the  apostleship. — "  They  saw  that  the  gospel  of  the  uncircumcision  was  com- 
mitted unto  me,  .  .  .  and  perceived  the  grace  that  was  given  unto  me,"  etc. 
(vers.  7-9).  Paul  won  the  confidence  and  admiration  of  his  fellow-apostles.  They 
listened  with  candour  and  ever-deepening  interest  to  his  explanations,  and, 
whatever  might  have  been  their  prejudices,  they  frankly  acknowledged  his 
divine  commission.  What  a  memorable  day  was  that  when  James,  Peter,  John, 
and  Paul  met  face  to  face  !  "  Amongst  them  they  have  virtually  made  the  New 
Testament  and  the  Christian  Church.  They  represent  the  four  sides  of  the  one 
foundation  of  the  City  of  God.  Of  the  evangelists,  Matthew  holds  affinity  with 
James ;  Mark  with  Peter  ;  and  Luke  with  Paul/  James  clings  to  the  past,  and 
embodies* the  transition  from  Mosaism  to  Christianity.  Peter  is  the  man  of  the 
present,  quick  in  thought  and  action,  eager,  buoyant,  susceptible.  Paul  holds 
the  future  in  his  grasp  and  schools  the  unborn  nations.  John  gathers  present, 
past,  and  future  into  one,  lifting  us  into  the  region  of  eternal  life  and  love." 

Lessons. — A    divine  call — 1.  Confers  the  necessary  qualifications  to  carry  out 
its  mission.     2.  Demands  courage  and  fidelity.     3.  Compels  public  recognition. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  1,  2.  Truth  its  Own  Evidence.  of  the  other  apostles  to  the  doctrines 

— 1.    Though    the   minister   of    Jesus  preached  by  him,  lest  by  the  calumnies 

Christ    is    not    to    depend    upon    the  of  his  adversaries  his  preaching  should 

approbation  of    others    for   confirma-  be  useless. — Fergusson. 
tion   of   his   doctrine,    as   if    he    were 

uncertain    before    their    testimony   is  Vers.  3-5.  The  Power  of  Truth. 

added,  yet  he  is  not  to  be  so  self-willed  I.    Superior  to  ceremonial  observ- 

as    to   misregard   what    others    judge  ances  (ver.  3). 

or  think,  but  ought  to  demit  himself  II.  Detects  and  exposes  the  wiliest 

so  far  as  to  give  a   friendly  account  tactics  of  false  teachers  (ver.  4). 

of  the  doctrine,  that  mistakes  arising  III.  Is  uncompromising  in  its  atti- 

from  misinformation  may  be  removed  tude  towards  the  subtlest  errors  (ver.  5). 
and   the    joint    consent    of    others    to 

the  truth  obtained.     2.    As  there  are  Vers.  4,  5.  False  Brethren  and  their 

always   some  in   the    Church   of   God  Treatment. 

who  have  deservedly  more  reputation  I.    The   Church   of  God  on    earth, 

than    others,    so    Christian    prudence  even  at  the  best,  hath  wicked  men 

will  teach  a   man  to  be  so  far  from  and  hypocrites  in  it. 

striving    against    such    that    he    will  II.  They  who  teach  Christ,  joining 

endeavour,   by   giving   due   respect   to  some   other   thing  with  Him   in   the 

them,  to  receive  approbation  from  such,  cause  of  salvation,  are  said  to  creep 

that  he   may  be  in   a  better  capacity  in,  because  in  appearance  they  main- 

to    do   good    to    others.       3.    Nothing  tain    Christ ;    yet    because    they    add 

marreth  the  success  of  the  gospel  more  something     to     Christ,    they    neither 

than  difference  of  judgments  and  strifes  enter  nor  continue  in  the  true  Church 

and  debates  among  eminent  preachers,  with  any  good  warrant  from  God. 

many  resolving  to  believe  nothing  till  III.  No  man  can  set  down  the  precise 

preachers  agree  among  themselves,  and  time  when  errors  had  their  beginning, 

many  stumbling-blocks  are  cast  before  for  the  authors  thereof  enter  in  secretly, 

people    by   the    venting    of    passions,  not  observed  of  men. 

jealousies,    animosities,    and    revenge.  IV.     The     false    brethren    urged 

Paul  endeavoured  to  get  the  consent  circumcision    to    bring   the    converts 

27 


chap.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


into    bondage. — They   that    be    of    a  Ver.  5.  Fidelity  to  Truth. — 1.  Though 

corporation    stand  for   their   liberties.  much    may    be    done    for    composing 

What  a  shame  it  is  that  men  should  Church  differences  by  using  meekness 

love  bondage,  and  neglect  the  spiritual  and   forbearance   towards    those    who 

liberty  which  they  have  by  Christ.  oppose  themselves,  yet  we  are  not  for 

V.  The  false  brethren  urged  the  peace'  sake  to  quit  the  least  part  of 
apostles  to  use  circumcision  but  once  ;  truth.  Thus  Paul,  who  for  lawful 
but  they  would  not  yield  so  much  as  ceding  became  all  things  to  all  men, 
once,because  their  act  would  have  tended  would  not  give  place  by  way  of  sub- 
to  the  prejudice  of  Christian  liberty  jection,  so  as  to  yield  the  cause  to 
in  all  places.  Julian,  sitting  in  a  the  adversaries  j  neither  would  he  do 
chair  of  state,  gave  gold  to  his  soldiers  anything,  in  its  own  nature  indifferent, 
one  by  one,  commanding  them  to  cast  that  would  be  an  evidence  of  yielding, 
frankincense  so  much  as  a  grain  into  2.  A  minister,  when  called  to  confess 
the  fire  that  lay  upon  a  heathenish  and  avow  truth,  hath  not  only  his  own 
altar.  Christian  soldiers  refused  to  do  peace  with  God  and  keeping  of  a  good 
it,  and  they  which  had  not  refused  conscience  to  look  to,  but  also  the 
afterwards  recalled  their  act  and  condition  of  his  flock,  who  will  be 
willingly  suffered  death.  We  are  shaken  or  confirmed  in  the  truth  by 
not  to  yield  the  least  part  of  the  his  faint  or  bold  and  faithful  confession, 
truth  of  the  gospel.  This  truth  is  3.  It  is  not  enough  that  people  have  the 
more  precious  than  the  whole  world  name  of  the  gospel  among  them  or  some 
beside.  There  is  no  halting  between  truths  mixed  with  errors ;  but  all,  and 
two  religions.  especially  ministers,  should  endeavour 

VI.  The  apostles  gave  no  place  by  to  have  the  gospel  in  purity  and  in- 
way  of  subjection. — They  willingly  tegrity,  free  from  any  mixture  of  con- 
suffered    their    doctrine    to    be   tried,  trary  errors. — Fergasson. 

yet  they  were  not  bound  to  subjection. 

We    are  to  give  place    by  meek    and  The  Truth  not  to  be  yielded. — Shortly 

patient    bearing    of    that    which    we  after  James  I.  came  to  the  throne  of 

cannot  mend,  but  we  are  not  to  give  England   he    set   up   a    claim    to    all 

place  by  subjection.  the  small  estates  in  Cumberland  and 

VII.  If  circumcision  be  made  a  Westmorland,  on  the  plea  that  the 
necessary  cause  of  salvation,  the  Statesmen  were  merely  the  tenants  of 
truth  of  the  gospel  does  not  con-  the  Crown.  The  Statesmen  met,  to 
tinue,  and  falsehood  comes  in  the  the  number  of  two  thousand,  at 
room. — Perkins.  Ratten    Heath,   between   Kendal   and 

Staveley,    where    they    came    to    the 

Yer.    4.    A    Spy. — Captain   Turner  resolution  that  "  they  had  won  their 

Ashby   was    a   young    officer   in    the  lands   by   the   sword,   and   were    able 

Confederate    army,    the    idol    of    the  to   hold   them  by  the   same."      After 

troops    for    his    general   bravery,    but  that    meeting   no   further    claim    was 

especially  for  his  cleverness  in  gather-  made  to  their  estates  on  the  part  of 

ing  information   of   the   enemy.      On  the  Crown, 
one  occasion  he  dressed  himself  in  a 

farmer's   suit   of    homespun   that    he  Yers.  6-9.   Recognition  of  a  Special 

borrowed,    and    hired    a   plough-horse  Missio?i. 

to    personate    a    rustic    horse-doctor.  I.   By  men  of  reputation  who  con- 

With    his    saddlebags    full    of    some  fessed  their  inability  to  augment  its 

remedy   for    spavin    or    ringbone,    he  authority  (ver.  G). 

went  to  Chambersburg,  and  returned  II.    Acknowledging  that  the  com- 

in  the  night  with  an  immense  ailbunt  mission   was   distinctly  divine  (vers. 

of  information.      His  career  was  one  7,  8). 

full  of  romantic  episode.  III.     Confirmed   by    cordially   ad- 

28 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


CHAP.  II. 


mitting  the  messenger  into  the  fellow- 
ship of  highest  service  (ver.  9). 

Vers.  8,  9.  Divine  Blessing  the  Highest 
Sanctionqf  Ministerial  Authority. — 1 .  It 
is  not  the  pains  of  ministers,  or  any 
virtue  in  the  word  preached,  from 
whence  success  flows,  but  from  the 
effectual  working  of  the  Spirit.  Paul 
ascribed  the  success  both  of  his  own 
and  Peter's  ministry  to  this.  2.  Whom 
God  doth  call  to  any  employment,  and 
chiefly  whom  He  calls  to  the  ministry, 
He  fitteth  with  gifts  and  abilities 
suitable  thereto.  James,  Cephas,  and 
John  did  not  acknowledge  Paul  to 
be  an  apostle  called  by  God,  but 
on  perceiving  that  grace  and  gifts, 
ordinary  and  extraordinary,  were 
bestowed  upon  him.  3.  We  ought 
not  to  withhold  our  approbation, 
especially  when  it  is  craved,  from 
that  which  by  evident  signs  and 
reasons  we  perceive  to  be  approved 
of  God,  though  the  giving  of  our 
approbation  may  disoblige  those  who 
pretend  much  friendship  towards  us. 
— Fergusson. 


The  Efficacy  of  the  Christian  Ministry. 

I.  That  grace  or  power  to  re- 
generate is  not  included  in  the  word 
preached,  as  virtue  to  heal  in  a 
medicine.  To  regenerate  is  the  proper 
work  of  God. 

II.  That  grace  is  not  inseparably 
annexed  and  tied  to  the  word  preached, 
for  to  some  it  is  the  savour  of  death 
unto  death. 

III.  The  preaching  of  the  word  is 
an  external  instrument  of  faith  and 
regeneration,  and  the  proper  effect  of 
it  is  to  declare  or  signify. 

IV.  The  apostles  at  Jerusalem 
acknowledged  Paul  to  be  an  apostle, 
because  he  had  the  gifts  of  an  apostle, 
and  because  his  ministry  was  powerful 
among  the  Gentiles. 

V.  As  all  ministers  in  their  places 
are  pillars,  they  are  hereby  admonished 
to  be  constant  in  the  truth  against  all 
enemies  whatsoever. 

VI.  As  ministers  are  pillars,  we  are 
taught  to  cleave  to  them  and  their 
ministry  at  all  times — in  life  and 
death. — Perkins. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verse  10. 

Christianity  and  Poverty. 

1.  Christianity  has  ever  been  the  friend  of  the  poor. — 1.  The  poor  who  are 
made  so  by  accepting  Christianity.  Accepting  Christ  often  means  the  loss  of 
friends,  of  status,  of  fortune.  The  discovery  of  this  result  among  the  first 
Christians  might  have  much  to  do  in  the  formation  of  a  common  fund.  There 
are  many  Jews  and  heathen  to-day  who  are  convinced  of  the  truth  of  Christianity, 
but  hesitate  to  make  a  public  avowal  of  their  belief  because  of  the  apparent 
impossibility  of  gaining  a  livelihood  and  the  certainty  of  social  ostracism. 
Christian  missionaries  are  not  in  a  position  to  guarantee  their  support,  nor  do 
they  wish  to  encourage,  a  system  that  might  easily  degenerate  into  wholesale 
bribery.  There  are  converts  who  run  all  risks  and  deliberately  accept  Christ 
and  poverty.  All  such  the  Christian  Church,  often  at  great  sacrifice,  does  its 
best  to  befriend. 

2.  The  poor  who  are  made  so  by  unavoidable  calamity. — Judea  was  devastated 
by  famine  in  the  reign  of  Claudius  Caesar,  and  the  apostles  promptly  organised 
relief  for  the  sufferers  in  the  Jewish  Churches  (Acts  xi.  27-30).  Christianity  has 
ever  been  ready  to  help  the  distressed  and  unfortunate.  The  hospitals,  alms- 
houses, and  other  benevolent  institutions  that  abound  are  substantial  monuments 
of  the  practical  benevolence  of  the  Christian  Church.  Christianity  is  the  best 
friend  of  the  people. 

II.  Christianity  inculcates  a  zealous  and  unselfish  charity. — "  Only  they 
would  that  we  should  remember  the  poor  ;  the  same  I  also  was  forward  [zealous] 
to  do."    Paul  had  already  rendered  noble  service  in  this  direction,  and  was  prompted 

29 


chap.  ii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


by  the  spirit  of  the  gospel  to  continue  to  do  so.  He  was  zealous  in  good  works, 
though  he  stoutly  denied  any  merit  in  them  to  justify  the  sinner.  His  first 
concern  was  to  help  the  Jewish  poor,  though  many  of  them  impugned  his 
apostolic  authority  and  strove  to  ruin  his  influence.  As  champion  of  the 
Gentiles  he  employed  the  wealth  of  his  converts  in  supplying  the  needs  of  his 
famishing  Jewish  brethren.  Christian  charity  is  superior  to  the  jealousies  of 
sects  and  parties,  and  even  to  personal  insult  and  wrong.  Behind  the  hand  of 
the  generous  alms-giver  is  the  heart  of  love. 

III.  Christianity  elevates  and  enriches  the  poor. — It  enjoins  tempeiance, 
industry,  honesty,  and  perseverance — the  practice  of  which  has  raised  many  from 
poverty  to  wealth.  The  man  who  has  prospered  should  never  forget  the  claims 
of  the  poor.  It  is  said  that  a  certain  man  dreamed  that  the  Saviour  appeared 
to  him  and  upbraided  him  with  giving  so  little  to  His  cause.  The  man  replied, 
"  I  can't  afford  it."  "  Very  well,"  said  the  Saviour;  "let  it  be  so.  But  do  you 
remember,  that  when  that  business  panic  happened,  how  you  prayed  to  Me  to 
keep  you  out  of  difficulties  1  And  I  heard  your  prayer  and  tided  you  over  the 
trouble.  And  do  you  remember  ako,  when  your  little  child  was  sick,  how  you 
prayed  that  her  life  might  be  spared,  and  again  I  heard  your  prayer  and 
restored  her  ?  But  now  let  it  be  an  understanding  between  us  that  henceforth 
when  you  are  in  trouble  I  do  nothing  for  you,  seeing  you  can't  afford  to  help 
Me."  The  man's  conscience  was  touched,  and  he  exclaimed,  "  Lord,  take  what 
I  have  ;  it  is  Thine." 

Lessons. — 1.  Christianity  is  the  source  of  the  highest  philanthropy.  2.  Is  the 
unfailing  hope  and  comfort  of  the  poor.  3.  Has  achieved  its  greatest  triumphs 
among  the  poor. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Yer.  10.  Remember  the  Poor.  must    first    be    restored,    and    things 

I.  The  Church   of   Jerusalem   was      uncertain  after. 

in  extreme   poverty. — 1.  Because  the  IV.  It  is  not  enough  for  us  to  give 

poorer      sort     received      the     gospel.  good  words  and  to  wish  well,  but  we 

2.  Because  the  richer  were  deprived  of  must  in  our  places  and  calling  do  our 

their  riches  for  their  profession  of  the  endeavour  that  relief  may  be  sealed 

name  of  Christ.  to 'our  poor. — 1.  The  charge  was  great 

II.  It  is  the  office  of  pastors  and  to  maintain  the  altar  of  the  Lord  in 
teachers, -not  only  to  preach  and  dis-  the  Old  Testament;  the  poor  come 
pense  the  word,  but  also  to  have  care  in  the  room  of  the  altar.  2.  The 
of  the  poor.  poor  represent   the  person  of   Christ. 

III.  Satisfaction,  recompense,  and  3.  Compassion  in  us  is  a  pledge  or  an 
restitution  are  the  way  to  life  by  the  impression  of  the  mercy  that  is  in  God 
appointment  of  God. — 1.  He  must  towards  us,  and  by  it  we  may  know  or 
restore  who  is  the  cause  of  any  wrong  feel  in  ourselves  that  mercy  belongs 
or  loss  to  others  and  all  that  are  unto  us.  The  observing  of  the  corn- 
accessory.  2.  Restitution  is  to  be  mandment  of  relief  is  the  enriching  of 
made   to   him   that   is    wronged    and  us  all. — Perkins. 

bears    the   loss   if   he   be    known  and 

alive ;  if  he  be  dead,  to   his  heirs ;  if  Christian  Duty  to  the  Poor. — 1 .  It  is 

all  be  dead,  to  the  poor.     3.  The  things  frequently  the  lot  of   those   who    are 

to  be  restored  are  those  which  are  of  rich  in  grace  to  be  poor  in  the  things 

us  unjustly  received  or  detained,  either  of  the   present   life,  and   driven   into 

known  to   us  or  unknown.     4.  As  to  such  straits  as  to  be  forced  to  live  upon 

the  order  of  restitution,  things  certain  some    charitable   supply   from  others, 

30 


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


CHAP.  II. 


God  seeing  it  convenient  hereby  to 
wean  them  from  worldly  contentments 
that  heaven  may  be  more  longed  after 
and     more     sweet     when    it     comes. 

2.  Though  those  who  are  our  own 
poor,  within  the  bounds  where  we  live, 
are  chiefly  to  be  relieved  by  us,  yet  in 
cases  of  extremity  the  poor  who  live 
remote  from  us  are  also  to  be  supplied. 

3.  Ministers  ought  to  press  upon  the 
people,  not  only  duties  which  are  easy 
and  cost  them  nought,  but  also  those 
that  are  burdensome  and  expensive, 
especially  that  they  would  willingly 
give  of  those  things  they  enjoy  for  the 
supply  of  others  who  want. — Fergusson. 

The  Poor  Representative  of  Christ. — 
One  evening  at  supper,  when  one  of 
the  boys  had  said  the  grace,  "  Come, 
Lord  Jesus,  be  our  Guest,  and  bless 
what  Thou  hast  provided,"  a  little 
fellow  looked  up  and  said,  "  Do  tell 
me  why  the  Lord  Jesus  never  comes. 
We  ask  Him  every  day  to  sit  with  us, 
and  He  never  comes  !  "  "  Dear  child, 
only  believe,  and  you  may  be  sure  He 
will  come,  for  He  does  not  despise  our 
invitation."  "  I  shall  set  a  seat,"  said 
the  little  fellow,  and  just  then  there 
was  a  knock  at  the  door.  A  poor 
frozen  apprentice  entered,  begging  a 
night's  lodging.  He  was  made  welcome, 
the  chair  stood  empty  for  him,  every 
child  wanted  him  to  have  his  plate, 
and  one  was  lamenting  that  his  bed 
was  too  small  for  the  stranger,  who 


was  quite  touched  by  such  uncommon 
attentions.  The  little  one  had  been 
thinking  hard  all  the  time.  "  Jesus 
could  not  come,  and  so  He  sent  this 
poor  man  in  His  place  :  is  that  it  ?  " 
"  Yes,  dear  child;  that  is  just  it.  Every 
piece  of  bread  and  every  drink  of  water 
that  we  give  to  the  poor,  or  the  sick, 
or  the  prisoners  for  Jesus'  sake,  we 
give  to  Him." — Memoir  of  John  Folk. 

Rememhrance  of  the  Poor  recom- 
mended. 

I.  The  nature  of  the  assertion. — 

1.  Remember   the  work  of  the  poor. 

2.  The      deprivations     of     the     poor. 

3.  Our  remembrance  of  the  poor  should 
be  founded  on  a  personal  acquaintance 
with  their  circumstances.  "  Indeed, 
sir,"  said  a  person  of  large  property, 
"  I  am  a  very  compassionate  man  ;  but 
to  tell  you  the  truth,  I  do  not  know 
any  person  in  want."  He  kept  aloof 
from  the  poor. 

II.  Obligations  to  comply  with  the 
recommendation. — 1.  The  dictates  of 
humanity  require  it.  2.  The  demands 
of   duty.       3.  The   rights    of    justice. 

4.  The  claims  of  interest. 

III.  Answer  objections. — Such  as  : 
1.  My  circumstances  are  impoverished 
and  I  have  nothing  to  spare.  2.  Charity 
must  begin  at  home.  3.  I  have  a 
right  to  do  what  I  will  with  my  own. 
4.  The  poor  do  not  deserve  to  be 
remembered.  — Beta. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  11—21. 

A  Fearless  Defence  of  Fundamental  Truth — 

I.  Does  not  hesitate  to  impeach  a  distinguished  Church  dignitary  of  incon- 
sistency.— "  But  when  Peter  was  come  to  Antioch,  I  withstood  him  to  the  face, 
because  he  was  to  be  blamed,"  etc.  (vers.  11-14).  Peter  had  been  accustomed  to 
mingle  with  the  Gentile  converts  on  the  ground  of  perfect  social  equality. 
Influenced  by  the  fierce  bigots  of  legalism,  who  insinuated  that  the  circumcised 
occupied  a  superior  status  to  the  uncircumcised,  he  withdrew  from  the  social 
circle  of  the  Gentiles  and  confined  himself  to  that  of  his  Jewish  brethren.  The 
pliability  of  his  impulsive  nature  led  him  into  this  as  into  other  mistakes.  To 
create  a  social  distinction  between  Jew  and  Gentile  was  to  undermine  the  gospel. 
Paul  saw  at  a  glance  the  threatened  peril,  and  it  needed  all  his  tact  and  courage 
to  confront  it.  Though  it  meant  a  public  impeachment  of  the  sincerity  and  con- 
sistency of  one  of  the  most  venerated  apostles,  the  champion  of  the  Gentiles  did 

31 


chap.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


not  hesitate.  Alone,  even  Barnabas  having  for  the  time  being  deserted  him,  he 
stood  up  boldly  for  the  truth  of  the  gospel. 

II.  Is  the  opportunity  for  an  authoritative  restatement  of  the  truth  im- 
perilled (vers.  15-18). — In  these  verses  the  apostle  again  sets  forth  the  funda- 
mental doctrine  of  justification  by  faith,  without  the  works  of  the  law.  The 
Judaisers  contended  that  to  renounce  legal  righteousness  was  in  effect  to  promote 
sin — to  make  Christ  the  minister  of  sin  (ver.  17).  Paul  retorts  the  charge  on 
those  who  made  it,  and  showed  that  they  promote  sin  who  set  up  legal  righteous- 
ness again  (ver.  18).  The  reproach  of  the  Judaisers  was  in  reality  the  same 
that  is  urged  against  evangelical  doctrine  still — that  it  is  immoral,  placing  the 
virtuous  and  vicious  in  the  common  category  of  sinners  (Eindlay).  "  The  com- 
plaint was  this,"  says  Calvin, — "  Has  Christ  therefore  come  to  take  away  from 
us  the  righteousness  of  the  law,  to  make  us  polluted  who  were  holy  1  Kay,  Paul 
says — he  repels  the  blasphemy  with  detestation.  For  Christ  did  not  introduce 
sin,  but  revealed  it.  He  did  not  rob  them  of  righteousness,  but  of  the  false  show 
thereof." 

III.  Is  made  more  impressive  by  showing  the  effect  of  the  truth  on  personal 
experience  (vers.  19-21). — In  these  words  the  apostle  indicates  that  his  own 
deliverance  from  the  law  was  effected  by  being  dead  to  the  law — being  crucified 
with  Christ ;  and  that  his  own  spiritual  life  was  originated  and  sustained  by  a 
living  faith  in  a  loving  and  self-sacrificing  Christ.  "  Legalism  is  fatal  to  the 
spiritual  life  in  man.  Whilst  it  clouds  the  divine  character,  it  dwarfs  and 
petrifies  the  human.  What  becomes  of  the  sublime  mystery  of  the  life  hid  with 
Christ  in  God,  if  its  existence  is  made  contingent  on  circumcision  and  ritual  per- 
formance ?  To  men  who  put  meat  and  drink  on  a  level  with  righteousness  and 
peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  in  their  intercourse  with  fellow-Christians 
set  points  of  ceremony  above  justice,  mercy,  and  faith,  the  very  idea  of  a  spiritual 
kingdom  of  God  is  wanting.  The  religion  of  Jesus  and  of  Paul  regenerates 
the  heart,  and  from  that  centre  regulates  and  hallows  the  whole  ongoing  of  life. 
Legalism  guards  the  mouth,  the  hands,  the  senses,  and  imagines  that  through 
these  it  can  drill  the  man  into  the  divine  order.  The  latter  theory  makes 
religion  a  mechanical  system ;  the  former  conceives  it  as  an  inward,  brganic  life." 

Lessons. — 1.  The  leaven  of  error  is  not  easily  suppressed.  2.  True  religion  has 
never  lacked  a  race  of  brave  defenders.  3.  Experimental  religion  is  the  best 
guarantee  of  its  permanence. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  11-13.  Christian  Consistency —  II.  An    example   of    boldness   and 

I.  May  be  spoilt  by  yielding  to  an  liberty  in  reproving  sin. — 1.  This 
unworthy  fear  (ver.  12).  liberty  in  reproving  is  not  the  fruit  of 

II.  Should  be  strictly  maintained  a  bold  and  rash  disposition,  but  is  the 
for  the  sake  of  others  (ver.  13).  fruit  of  God's  Spirit,  and  is  so  to  be 

III.  Should  be  defended  with  in-  acknowledged.  2.  This  liberty  is  to  be 
trepid  courage  (ver.  11).  ordered  by  a  sound  mind  whereby  we 

are  able  to  give  a  good  account  of  our 

Ver.  11.  An  Astute  Defender  of  the  reproofs,    both    for    the    matter    and 

Faith.  manner  of  them.     3.  Our  admonitions 

I.  Here   we   have   an    example    of  must  be  seasoned  and  tempered  with 

true  virtue,  in  St.  Paul  resisting  evil  love. 

to  the  utmost  of  His  power.  In  like  III.  An  example  of  an  ingenuous 
manner  must  every  one  of  us  resist  and  honest  mind. — When  Paul  sees 
evil,  first  in  himself  and  then  in  them  Peter  he  reproves  him  to  the  face.  Con- 
that  appertain  to  him,  trary  to  this  is  the  common  practice  in 

32 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


CHAP.  II. 


backbiting,  whispering,  and  tale-bear- 
ing, whereby  it  comes  to  pass  that 
when  a  man  is  in  fault  every  man 
knows  it  save  he  who  is  in  fault.  We 
see  that  excellent  men,  even  the  chief 
apostles,  are  subject  to  err  and  be 
deceived. — Perkins. 

Vers.  12,  13.  The  Power  of  Example. 
— 1.  So  weak  and  inconstant  are  the 
best  of  men  that,  being  left  to  them- 
selves, the  least  blast  qf  temptation 
will  make  them  break  off  the  course 
of  doing  well  in  the  very  midst,  and, 
without  respect  either  to  conscience  or 
credit,  openly  desert  it.  2.  To  separ- 
ate from  a  true  Church  and  break  off 
communion  with  its  members  cannot 
be  attempted  without  sin,  not  though 
we  eschew  the  offence  and  stumbling 
of  many.  3.  Of  so  great  force  is  the 
bad  example  of  men,  eminent,  gracious, 
and  learned,  that  not  only  the  weak 
and  infirm,  but  even  those  who  are 
strong  and  richly  endowed  with  both 
grace  and  parts,  will  sometimes  be 
corrupted  by  it.  It  is  usual  for  us 
.  unawares  to  esteem  such  as  more  than 
men,  and  being  once  so  far  engaged  in 
our  esteem  of  them  we  do  not  so 
narrowly  examine  their  actions  as  we 
do  those  of  other  men.  4.  An 
inundation  of  evil  examples,  though 
held  forth  by  private  Christians, 
is  so  impetuous  and  of  such  force  to 
carry  others  along  with  it,  that  even 
the  very  best  of  men  can  hardly  stand 
against  it. — Eergusson. 

An  Erring  Apostle. 

I.  Peter's    sin    was    simulation. — 

Among  the  Gentiles  at  Antioch  he 
used  Christian  liberty  in  eating  things 
forbidden  by  the  ceremonial  law  ;  yet 
after  the  coming  of  certain  Jews  from 
Jerusalem,  he  separates  himself  from 
the  Gentiles,  and  plays  the  Jew  among 
the  Jews.  This  act  of  Peter  was  not 
a  sin  in  itself,  but  the  circumstances 
made  it  a  sin  1.  He  not  only 
abstained  from  meats  forbidden  by  the 
ceremonial  law,  but  withdrew  himself 
from  the  Gentiles  and  kept  company 
apart  with  the  Jews.    2.  He  abstained 


not  among  the  Jews  at  Jerusalem,  but 
at  Antioch  among  the  Gentiles,  where 
a  little  before  he  had  openly  done  the 
contrary,   using  his  Christian  liberty. 

3.  He  used  this  abstinence  when 
certain  Jews  came  from  Jerusalem  to 
search  out  the  liberty  of  the  Gentiles. 

4.  While  Peter  seeks  to  avoid  the 
small  offence  of  some  Jews,  he  incurs 
a  greater   offence    of  all  the  Gentiles. 

5.  This  act  of  Peter  tended  to  the 
overthrowing  of  Paul's  ministry  and 
the  suppressing  of  the  truth  of  the 
gospel. 

II.  The  cause  of  Peter's  sin  was 
fear  of  offending  the  Jews. — It  was  a 
sin  because  he  feared  man  more  than 
God.  It  was  a  sin,  not  of  malice,  but 
infirmity.  A  sin  of  infirmity  is  when 
there  is  a  purpose  in  the  heart  not  to 
sin,  and  yet  for  all  this  the  sin  is  com- 
mitted, by  reason  the  will  is  over- 
carried  by  temptation,  or  by  violence 
of  affection  as  by  fear,  anger,  lust. 

III.  The  effect  of  Peter's  sin.— 
He  drew  the  Jews  and  Barnabas  to 
the  like  dissimulation.  Here  we  see 
the  contagion  of  an  evil  example. 
1.  Ministers  of  the  word  must  join 
with  good  doctrine  the  example  of  a 
good  life.  2.  Practice  in  the  ministry 
is  a  part  of  the  teaching.  3.  All 
superiors  are  warned  to  go  before  their 
inferiors  by  good  example.  4.  The 
consent  of  many  together  is  not  a 
note  of  truth.  Peter,  Barnabas,  and 
the  Jews,  all  together  are  deceived  ; 
Paul  alone  has  the  truth.  Ponormi- 
tane  said,  "A  layman  bringing 
Scripture  is  to  be  preferred  before  a 
whole  council."  Paphnutius  alone  had 
the  truth,  and  the  whole  council  of 
Nice  inclined  to  error. — Perkins. 

Vers.  14-16.  Justification  by  Faith, 
not  by  Works. — 1.  Though  private 
sins,  which  have  not  broken  forth  to 
a  public  scandal,  are  to  be  rebuked 
in  private,  public  sins  are  to  receive 
public  rebukes,  that  public  scandal 
may  be  removed,  and  others  scared 
from  taking  encouragement  to  do  the 
like  (ver.  14).  2.  Though  the  binding 
power    of    the    ceremonial     law    was 

)  33 


chap.  ii.  HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


abrogated  at  Christ's  death,  and  the 
practice  in  some  things  left  as  a  thing 
lawful  and  in  itself  indifferent,  yet 
the  observance,  even  for  that  time, 
was  dispensed  with  more  for  the  Jews' 
sake,  and  was  more  tolerable  in  them 
who  were  born  and  educated  under 
that  yoke,  than  in  the  Gentiles,  to 
whom  that  law  was  never  given, 
and  so  were  to  observe  it,  or  any  part 
of  it,  only  in  case  of  scandalising  the 
weak  Jews  by  their  neglecting  of  it 
(ver.  14).  3.  Though  every  man  by 
nature  is  a  child  of  wrath  and  enemy 
to  God,  yet  those  born  within  the 
visible  Church  have  a  right  to  Church 
privileges  and  to  enjoy  the  external 
means  of  grace  and  salvation  (ver.  15). 
4.  The  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith 
and  not  by  works  was  early  opposed, 
and  no  doctrine  so  much  opposed, 
because  no  truth  is  more  necessary  to 
be  kept  pure,  as  if  it  be  kept  pure 
several  other  truths  are  kept  pure  also, 
and  if  it  fall  other  truths  fall  with  it 
(ver.   1 6 ). — Fergusson. 

Ver.  16.  Justification  by  Faith. 

I.  Man  is  justified  by  the  mere 
mercy  of  God. — And  there  is  excluded 
by  justification  all  merit  of  congruity, 
all  meritorious  works  of  preparation 
wrought  by  us,  all  co-operation  of 
man's  will  with  God's  grace  in  the 
effecting  of  our  justification. 

II.  Man  is  justified  by  the  mere 
merit  of  Christ. — That  is,  by  the 
meritorious  obedience  which  He 
wrought  in  Himself,  and  not  by  any- 
thing wrought  by  Him  in  us. 

III.  A  sinner  is  justified  by  mere 
faith. — That  is,  nothing  within  us 
concurs  as  a  cause  of  our  justification 
but  faith,  and  nothing  apprehends 
Christ's  obedience  for  our  justification 
but  faith.  This  will  more  easily  appear 
if  we  compare  faith,  hope,  and  love. 
Faith  is  like  a  hand  that  opens  itself 
to  receive  a  gift,  and  so  is  neither  love 
nor  hope.  Love  is  also  a  hand,  but 
yet  a  hand  that  gives  out,  communi- 
cates, and  distributes.  For  as  faith 
receives  Christ  into  our  hearts,  so  love 
opens  the  heart  and  pours  out  praise 

34 


and  thanks  to  God  and  all  manner  of 
goodness  to  men.  Hope  is  no  hand, 
but  an  eye  that  wistfully  looks  and 
waits  for  the  good  things  faith  believes. 
Therefore  it  is  the  only  property  of 
faith  to  clasp  and  lay  hold  of  Christ 
and  His  benefits. 

IV.  The  practice  of  them  that  are 
justified  is  to  believe. — To  put  their 
trust  in  Christ.  1.  Faith  and  practice 
must  reign  in  the  heart  and  have  all 
at  command.  We  must  not  go  by 
sense,  feeling,  reason,  but  shut  our 
eyes  and  let  faith  keep  our  hearts 
close  to  the  promise  of  God.  Faith 
must  overrule  and  command  nature 
and  the  strongest  affections  thereof. 
2.  When  we  know  not  what  to  do  by 
reason  of  the  greatness  of  our  distress, 
we  must  fix  our  hearts  on  Christ  with 
separation,  as  he  that  climbs  up  a 
ladder  or  some  steep  place  the  higher 
he  goes  the  faster  he  holds. — Perkins. 

Vers.  17,  18.  False  Methods  of 
Salvation — 

I.  To  seek  justification  in  any  other 
way  than  through  Christ. — ■"  If,  while 
we  seek  to  be  justified  by  Christ,  we 
ourselves  are  found  sinners  "  (ver.  17). 

II.  Reflect  unjustly  on  the  character 
of  the  only  Saviour. — "  Is  therefore 
Christ  the  minister  of  sin  ?  God 
forbid"  (ver.  17). 

III.  Aggravate  our  sin  by  restoring 
in  practice  what  we  have  abandoned 
in  theory. — "  For  if  I  build  again  the 
things  which  I  destroyed,  I  make 
myself  a  transgressor"  (ver.  18). 

Ver.  19.  The  Christian  Dead  to  the 
Law. 

I.  The  state  in  which  the  apostle 
describes  himself  to  be. — "  I  am  dead 
to  the  law."  Not  the  moral  law  of 
God.  Every  rational  creature  in  the 
universe  is  under  its  dominion,  the 
believer  as  well  as  others.  .  He  must 
escape  from  existence  before  he  can 
escape  from  the  law  of  God.  The 
apostle  means  he  is  dead  to  it  as  a 
covenant  between  God  and  himself. 
There  still  stands  the  law  before  him 
in  all  its  primitive  authority,  purity, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


CHAP.  II. 


and  majesty  ;  he  honours  it  and  strives 
to  obey  it,  and  often  rejoices  in  the 
thought  that  the  time  will  come 
when  he  shall  have  his  soul  in  a  state 
of  perfect  conformity  to  it,  but  this  is 
all.  Its  life-giving,  death-bringing 
powers  are  utterly  at  an  end,  and  he 
knows  they  are  at  an  end.  He  is  dead 
to  all  hope  from  the  law,  dead  to  all 
expectation  of  heaven  or  of  salvation 
from  it.  He  builds  no  more  hope  on 
his  obedience  to  it  than  as  though  the 
law  had  ceased  to  exist,  and  no  more 
fear  has  he  of  condemnation  from  it. 
The  believer,  dead  to  the  legal  covenant, 
rests  from  it.  The  connection  between 
him  and  it  is  over,  and  with  it  are  over 
the  feelings  within  him,  the  painful, 
perturbing,  apprehensive,  slavish  feel- 
ings arising  out  of  it. 

II.  The  means  whereby  the  apostle 
has  been  brought  into  the  state  he 
describes. — "  I  through  the  law  am 
dead  to  the  law."  Suppose  a  man 
anxious  to  pass  from  one  country  to 
another,  from  a  dangerous  and  wretched 
country  to  a  safe  and  happy  one. 
Directly  in  his  road  stands  a  mountain 
which  he  cannot  pass  over,  and  which 
he  at  first  imagines  he  can  without 
much  difficulty  climb.  He  tries,  but 
scarcely  has  he  begun  to  breast  it 
when  a  precipice  stops  him.  He 
descends  and  tries  again  in  another 
direction.  There  another  precipice  or 
some  other  obstacle  arrests  his  course ; 
and  still  ever  as  he  begins  his  ascent 
he  is  baffled,  and  the  little  way  he 
contrives  to  mount  serves  only  to  show 
him  more  and  more  of  the  prodigious 
height  of  the  mountain,  and  its  stern, 
rugged,  impassable  character.  At  last, 
wearied  and  worn,  heart -sick  with 
labour  and  disappointment,  and 
thoroughly  convinced  that  no  efforts 
of  his  can  carry  him  over,  he  lies  down 
at  the  mountain's  foot  in  utter  despair, 
longing  still  to  be  on  the  other  side, 
but  making  not  another  movement  to 
get  there.  Now  ask  him  as  he  lies 
exhausted  on  the  ground  what  has 
occasioned  his  torpor  and  despair ;  he 
will  say  that  mountain  itself :  its 
situation  between  him  and  the  land  of 


his  desires,  and  its  inaccessible  heights 
and  magnitude.  So  stands  the  law  of 
God  between  the  Christian  and  the 
land  he  longs  for.  The  impossibility 
of  making  our  way  to  God  by  means 
of  the  law  arises  from  the  extent  of  its 
requirements,  and  the  unbending,  in- 
exorable character  of  its  denunciations. 
We  can  do  nothing  but  die  to  it,  sink 
down  before  this  broad,  high,  terrific 
mountain  in  utter  despair.  While 
through  the  law  the  believer  dies  to  all 
hope  from  the  law,  through  the  cross 
of  Christ  he  also  dies  to  all  apprehen- 
sion from  it. 

III.  The  design  of  this  deadness  to 
the  law  in  the  Christian's  soul. — 
"  That  I  might  live  unto  God."  This 
living  unto  God  dethrones  self,  discovers 
to  the  man  the  base,  degrading  idol  to 
which  he  has  been  bowing  down,  makes 
him  ashamed  of  the  worship  he  has 
paid  it,  and  places  on  the  throne  of  his 
heart  his  Saviour  and  his  God.  His 
renunciation  of  his  self-righteousness 
has  gradually  brought  on  other  re- 
nunciations of  self.  The  law  driving 
him  to  Christ  has  been  the  means  of 
driving  him  out  of  self  altogether.  It 
has  brought  him  into  the  sphere  of  the 
gospel  and  among  those  soul-stirring 
principles,  feelings,  and  aspirations 
connected  with  the  gospel.  There  is 
no  greater  mistake  than  to  imagine 
that  the  gospel  has  destroyed  the  law 
or  loosened  in  any  degree  its  hold  on 
men.  The  gospel  rests  on  the  law. 
But  for  the  law  and  its  unbending, 
unchangeable,  eternal  character  the 
gospel  had  not  existed,  for  it  would  not 
have  been  needed.  Dead  to  the  law 
and  alive  unto  God  are  two  things 
that  go  together  ;  the  one  springs  out 
of  the  other.  The  more  completely  we 
die  to  the  law  as  a  covenant,  the  more 
fully,  freely,  and  happily  shall  we  live 
unto  God. — G.  Bradley. 

Dead  to  the  Law  by  the  Law. 

I.  The  person  justified  is  dead  to 
the  law. — Here  the  law  is  compared 
to  a  hard  and  cruel  master,  and  we 
to  slaves  or  bondmen,  who  so  long  as 
they  are  alive  are  under  the  dominion 

35 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS 


and  at  the  command  of  their  masters ; 
yet  when  they  are  dead  they  are  free 
from  that  bondage,  and  their  masters 
have  no  more  to  do  with  them.  To  be 
dead  to  the  law  is  to  be  free  from  the 
dominion  of  the  law.  1.  In  respect  of 
the  accusing  and  damnatory  sentence 
of  the  law.  2.  In  respect  of  the 
power  of  the  law.  3.  In  respect  of 
the  rigour  of  the  law,  exacting  most 
perfect  obedience  for  our  justification. 
4.  In  respect  of  the  obligation  of  the 
conscience  to  the  observance  of  cere- 
monies. 

II.  The  justified  person  is  dead  to 
the  law  by  the  law. — By  the  law  of 
Moses  I  am  dead  to  the  law  of  Moses 
The  law  accuses,  terrifies,  and  condemns 
us,  and  therefore  occasions  us  to  flee 
unto  Christ  who  is  the  cause  that  we 
die  unto  the  law.  As  the  needle  goes 
before  and  draws  in  the  thread  which 
sews  the  cloth,  so  the  law  goes  before 
and  makes  a  way  that  grace  may 
follow  after  and  take  place  in  the 
heart. 

III.  The  end  of  our  death  to  the 
law  is  that  we  may  live  to  God. — We 
live  to  God  wisely  in  respect  of  our- 
selves, godly  in  respect  to  God,  justly 
in  respect  to  men.  That  we  may  live 
godly  we  must:  1.  Bring  ourselves 
into  the  presence  of  the  invisible  God, 
and  set  all  we  do  in  His  sight  and 
presence.  2.  We  must  take  knowledge 
of  the  will  of  God  in  all  things.  3.  In 
all  we  do  and  suffer  we  must  depend 
on  God  for  success  and  deliverance. 
4.  In  all  things  we  must  give  thanks 
and  praise  to  God. — Perkins. 

Ver.  20.  The  Believer  crucified  with 
Christ,  and  Christ  living  in  the  Believer. 

I.  The  believer  is  conformed  to  the 
death  of  Christ. — 1.  The  nature  of 
this  crucifixion.  It  is  figurative,  not 
literal ;  yet  real,  and  not  chimerical. 
It  not  only  signifies  suffering  and 
dying  to  sin,  but  also  to  effect  this  by 
the  efficacy  of  Christ's  cross.  2.  The 
objects  to  which  the  Christian  is 
crucified,  and  the  principles  which 
thereby  expire :  (1)  The  law  con- 
sidered   as   a   means    of    justification. 

36 


(2)  The  world — its  applause,  treasures, 
gratification.  (3)  Self.  3.  The  suffer- 
ings which  accompany  this  cruci- 
fixion. Severe  conviction  and  mortifi- 
cation. The  complete  surrender  of 
heart  is  attended  with  many  pangs. 
The  continuance  of  the  struggle  is 
grievous. 

II.  The  believer  participates  in  the 
life  of  Christ. — 1.  The  principle  of  the 
life — Christ  living  in  the  soul.  2.  The 
evidences  of  this  life — holy  tempers, 
spiritual  conversation,  benevolent  ac- 
tions. 3.  The  instrument  by  which 
this  life  is  introduced  and  maintained 
in  the  soul — faith. 

Lessons. — 1.  This  subject  furnishes  a 
test  to  try  the  reality  of  our  religion 
and  the  measure  of  our  attainments. 
2.  Exposes  the  delusion  of  Pharisees, 
hypocrites,  and  antinomians.  3.  Exhibits 
the  dignity,  felicity,  and  exalted  hopes 
of  the  real  believer. — Delta. 

The  Religious  Life  of  the  Apostle — 

I.  Was  characterised  from  the 
beginning  by  promptitude  of  action. 

II.  Was  marked  by  a  constant 
solicitude  for  his  own  personal  salva- 
tion. 

III.  Was  eminent  for  its  spirit  of 
devotion. 

IV.  Was  one  of  high  fellowship 
with  the  divine. 

Y.  Had  its  foundation  and  power 
in  a  living  faith  in  Christ. 

Truths  to  live  on. — Some  one  has 
said,  "  Give  me  a  great  truth  that  I 
may  live  on  it."  And  the  preacher 
may  well  say,  "  Give  me  a  great  truth 
that  I  may  preach  it."  There  are 
many  great  truths  in  this  verse.  And 
yet  how  simply  are  they  put  !  The 
first  great  truth  taught  in  this  verse  is 
the  oneness  between  Christ  and  those 
who  believe  in  Him.  What  St.  Paul 
means  is  this,  that  having  died  with 
Christ  on  the  crossy  he  has  in  Christ 
paid  the  penalty  of  sin,  is  therefore 
free  from  its  guilt,  and  it  is  no  longer 
his  old  self  that  lives  and  rules,  but 
Christ  lives  in  him.  And  is  not  this 
the  Christ  I  want  ?    Not  only  a  Christ 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY.    GALATIANS.  chap.  it. 


to  copy,  not  a  Christ  outside  me,  but 
a  Christ  living  and  reigning  within. 
The  believer  lives  by  faith,  and  faith 
lives  on  the  promises,  for  faith  is  a 
loving  trust.  The  presence  or  absence 
of  faith  rules  the  whole  destiny  of 
every  man.  The  man  who  believes 
will  live  one  way.  The  unbeliever  will 
live  in  another  way.  If  you  have  this 
simple  trust  in  Christ,  you  may  appro- 
priate the  last  clause  of  the  verse, 
"  He  loved  me,  and  gave  Himself  for 
me."  When  did  that  love  begin  ? 
Never.  When  will  that  love  end  1 
Never. 

"  Every  human  tie  may  perish, 

Friend  to  friend  ungrateful  prove, 
Mothers  cease  their  own  to  cherish, 
Heaven  and  earth  at  last  remove  ; 

But  no  changes 
Can  attend  the  Saviour's  love." 

For  those  Christ  loves  He  will  under- 
take altogether.  He  gives  them  His 
peace,  His  joy,  His  smile,  His  arm, 
His  hand,  His  home.  For  He  gave 
Himself.  There  are  all  treasures  in 
Him,  Strength  for  every  need,  wis- 
dom for  every  question,  comfort  for 
every  sorrow,  healing  for  every  wound, 
provision  for  every  day.  "  For  me," 
so  insignificant,  unworthy,  so  bad ;  for 
me,  whose  iniquities  have  darkened  the 
blue  heavens ;  for  me,  a  slave  of  sin. 

"  Why  was  I  made  to  hear  Thy  voice 
And  enter  while  there's  room, 
While  thousands  made  a  wretched  choice, 

And  rather  starve  than  come  ?    . 
'Twas  the  same  love  that  spread  the  feast, 

That  gently  forced  me  in, 
Else  I  had  still  refused  to  taste, 
And  perished  in  my  sin." 

— F.  Harper,  M.A. 

The  Love  of  the  Son  of  God  to  Men. 

I.  The  existence  of  this  amazing 
affection. — Let  not  the  strangeness  of 
the  love  stagger  us  into  doubt  or  dis- 
belief, but  let  us  receive  and  rest  in 
the  revealed  fact.  Viewed  from  the 
side  of  the  divine,  it  is  affection  from 
a  superior  towards  those  vastly  inferior. 
Viewed  from  the  side  of  the  human 
beings  beloved,  it  is  an  affection 
altogether  undeserved.  The  contrast 
between  His  dignity  and  our  demerit 


is  the  background  on  which  His  love 
stands  out  conspicuously. 

II.  The  proof  of  affection  He  gave. 
— Not  left  to  assertion  or  speculation, 
but  proved  by  a  public  act.  What  He 
did  expresses  what  He  felt.  He  showed 
it  openly  by  self  denial  and  self -sur- 
render. He  gave  not  His  substance 
or  possessions,  not  another  being,  but 
to  procure  our  salvation  and  express 
His  love  He  delivered  up  His  own 
person. 

III.  The  personality  or  individu- 
ality of  the  affection. — He  died  for 
all  and  for  each.  His  love  to  each 
human  being  might  be  inferred  from 
that  to  the  whole  race,  but  it  is 
affirmed  directly.  Each  singly  had  a 
distinct  place  in  His  loving  death. 
Each  was  a  unit  before  Him,  and  had 
a  personal  interest  in  His  affection. — 
W.  Smiley,  B.A. 

The  Life  of  Faith. 

1.  The  life  which  the  apostle  lived 
in  the  flesh. — 1.  His  whole  life  was  a 
life  of  religious  decision.  He  made 
his  choice  and  never  faltered  in  it. 
He  saw  what  he  had  to  do,  and  he 
began  to  do  it  at  once.  He  allowed 
no  parley  with  the  enemy.  Nor  was 
this  resolution  fleeting ;  it  continued 
through  life. 

2.  His  life  was  marked  by  a  solemn 
regard  and  care  for  his  own  personal 
salvation. — There  are  two  sources  of 
religious  danger  of  which  we  are  not 
always  sufficiently  aware — zeal  for 
doctrinal  truth,  and  active  employment 
in  promoting  the  spread  of  truth. 
How  possible  it  is  that,  through  the 
treachery  of  our  hearts,  even  these 
may  be  allowed  insensibly  to  sap  the 
very  foundations  of  that  solemn  fear, 
as  to  our  own  selves,  which  ought  to 
influence  us  !  Remember  that  truth 
is  not  the  substance  of  salvation,  but 
its  instrument.  Water  others,  but 
neglect  not  your  own  vineyard. 

3.  His  life  was  truly  a  life  of  devotion. 
— His  was  a  life  of  prayer.  Philosophy 
asks  for  a  reason  for  the  efficacy  of 
prayer,  and,  waiting  for  an  answer, 
never  prays  at  all.      Religion   hears 

37 


citAP.  n.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


that  God  will  be  inquired  of  by  us, 
thankfully  bends  the  knee,  touches  the 
golden  sceptre,  and  bears  away  the 
blessing.  We  always  want ;  we  must 
always  pray.  And  wish  we  for  a 
model  of  high  aspiration  in  prayer  % 
Let  the  apostle  elevate  and  expand  our 
languid  desires. 

4.  His  life  was  one  of  heavenhj- 
mindedness. — He  lived  indeed  in  the 
flesh,  but  his  life  was  in  heaven. 
Heavenly-mindedness  is  the  result  of 
three  things — an  assurance  of  present 
acceptance  with  God,  habitual  inter- 
course with  Him  through  His  Son,  and 
the  extinction  of  the  worldly  spirit. 
Our  fears  and  aversions  result  from 
principles  directly  opposite. 

5.  His  life  was  one  of  cheerful  sub- 
mission to  providential  appointments. 
— His  was  no  life  of  envied  ease.  In 
every  city  bonds  and  afflictions  awaited 
him.  These  dispensations  operated  on 
a  tender  and  delicate  mind,  for  in  him 
were  united  great  energy  and  great 
tenderness.  Yet  this  man,  hunted  like 
a  beast  of  prey,  always  preserves  and 
exhibits  a  contented  cheerfulness. 
There  was  no  sorrow  for  himself,  none 
allowed  to  others  for  him.  The  prin- 
ciple itself  reason  could  not  furnish ; 
but  when  furnished  it  is  seen  to  be 
most  reasonable. 

6.  His  life  was  one  of  laborious  use- 
fulness.— He  lived  not  to  himself,  but 
to  Christ  Jesus  his  Lord,  in  the  pro- 
motion of  His  will  in  the  moral  benefit 
and  eternal  salvation  of  men.  This 
was  the  life  he  lived  in  the  flesh,  even 
to  spread  the  light  and  influence  of  the 
gospel  to  all. 

II.  The  principle  and  source  of  his 
life. — 1.  It  is  Christian  faith.  Its 
object,  the  Son  of  God.  It  receives 
His  words  as  true,  and  regards  Him  as 
an  atoning  sacrifice.  "  He  gave  Him- 
self for  me." 

2.  In  its  nature  it  is  confiding 
and  appropriating. — How  does  faith 
connect  itself  with  the  results  stated  1 

(1)  It  regenerates  as  well  as  justifies. 

(2)  It  produces  vital  union  with 
Christ.  (3)  It  is  habitual  in  its  exer- 
cise.    (4)  It  is  realising.     It  gives  a 

38 


spiritual  apprehension  of  invisible  and 
eternal  realities. — R.  Watson. 

Self-abolished  and  Replaced. — Caroline 
Herschel,  the  sister  of  the  great 
astronomer,  was  through  all  her  life 
the  most  attached  servant  of  her 
brother.  She  called  herself  "  a  mere 
tool,  which  my  brother  had  the  trouble 
of  sharpening."  She  learned  the  details 
of  observing  with  such  success  that  she 
independently  discovered  eight  comets. 
Her  devotion  was  most  complete. 
Wherever  her  brother  was  concerned 
she  abolished  self  and  replaced  her 
nature  with  his.  Having  no  taste  for 
astronomy,  her  work  at  first  was  dis- 
tasteful to  her  ;  but  she  conquered  this, 
and  lived  to  help  his  work  and  fame. 

Ver.  21.  The  Perils  of  False  Teaching. 

I.  It  seeks  to  base  personal  right- 
eousness on  an  effete  legalism. — "If 
righteousness  come  by  the  law." 

II.  It  defeats  the  gracious  purposes 
of  God. — "  I  do  not  frustrate  the  grace 
of  God." 

III.  It  renders  the  sacrifice  of 
Christ  nugatory. — "Then  Christ  is 
dead  in  vain." 

Frustrating  Divine  Grace. — 1.  The 
joining  of  works  with  faith  in  the 
matter  of  justification  is  a  total  exclud- 
ing of  God's  free  grace  and  favour 
from  any  hand  in  the  work.  Grace 
admits-  of  no  partner.  If  grace  does 
not  all,  it  does  nothing ;  if  anything  be 
added,  that  addition  makes  grace  to 
be  no  grace.  2.  That  the  apostle  doth 
exclude  in  this  dispute  from  having 
any  influence  in  justification  the 
works,  not  only  of  the  ceremonial  but 
also  of  the  moral  law,  appears  from 
this — that  he  opposes  the  merit  of 
Christ's  death  to  all  merit  of  our  own, 
whether  by  obedience  to  the  one  law  or 
the  other.  3.  If  there  had  been  any 
other  way  possible  by  which  the  salva- 
tion of  sinners  could  have  been  brought 
about  but  by  the  death  of  Christ,  then 
Christ  would  not  have  died.  To  sup- 
pose Christ  died  in  vain  or  without 
cause  is  an  absurdity.     If  justification 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS.         chap.  m. 


could  have  been  attained  by  works  or  II.  The  apostle   answers  the  objec- 

any  other  means,  then  His  death  had  tion  that  if  a  sinner  is  justified  only 

been  in  vain,  and  it  were  an  absurd  by  faith  in  Christ  then  we  abolish  the 

thing  to  suppose  He  would  have  died  grace  of  God. — He  shows   that  if  we 

in  that  case. — Fergusson.                   .  be  justified  by  our  own  fulfilment  of 

the  law  then  Christ  died  in  vain    to 

Justification  by  Works  makes  Void  the  fulfil  the  law  for  us. 

Grace  of  God.  III.  We  have  here  a  notable  ground 

I.  Grace  must  stand    wholly   and  of  true  religion. — That  the  death  of 

entirely  in  itself. — God's  grace  cannot  Christ   is    made   void   if   anything    be 

stand  with  man's  merit.     Grace  is  no  joined  with  it  in  the  work  of  our  justi- 

grace  unless  it  be  freely  given  every  fication  as  a  means   to   satisfy   God's 

way.     Grace  and  works  of  grace  in  the  justice  and  to  merit  the  favour  of  God. 

causing   of  justification  can   no  more  Therefore  the  doctrine  of  justification 

stand  together  than  fire  and  water.  by  works  is  a  manifest  error. — Perkins. 


CHAPTER  III. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Who  hath  bewitched  you  ? — Fascinated  you,  as  if  overlooked  by  the  evil  eye,  so  that 
your  brain  is  confused.  The  Galatians  were  reputed  to  possess  acute  intellects  :  the  apostle 
marvelled  the  more  at  their  defection.  That  ye  should  not  obey  the  truth. — Omitted  in  E.  V. 
Before  whose  eyes  Jesus  Christ  hath  been  evidently  set  forth,  crucified. — In  preaching,  a 
vivid  portraiture  of  Christ  crucified  has  been  set  before  you  as  if  depicted  in  graphic 
characters  impossible  to  mistake. 

Ver.  3.  Having  begun  in  the  Spirit,  are  ye  now  made  perfect  by  the  flesh  ?— What  monstrous 
folly  is  this  I  Will  you  so  violate  the  divine  order  of  progress?  The  flesh  maybe  easily 
mistaken  for  the  Spirit,  even  by  those  who  have  made  progress,  unless  they  continue  to 
maintain  a  pure  faith  (BengeV). 

Ver.  4.  Have  ye  suffered  so  many  things  in  vain  % — Since  ye  might  have  avoided  them  by 
professing  Judaism.     Will  ye  lose  the  reward  promised  for  all  suffering  ? 

Ver.  5.  He  that  worketh  miracles  among  you. — In  you,  at  your  conversion  and  since. 

Ver.  6.  Even  as  Abraham  believed  God. — Where  justification  is  there  the  Spirit  is,  so  that 
if  the  former  comes  by  faith  the  latter  must  also. 

Ver.  8.  Preached  before  the  gospel  unto  Abraham. — Thus  the  gospel  in  its  essential  germ 
is  older  than  the  law,  though  the  full  development  of  the  former  is  subsequent  to  the  latter. 
The  promise  to  Abraham  was  an  anticipation  of  the  gospel,  not  only  as  announcing  the 
Messiah,  but  also  as  involving  the  doctrine  of  righteousness  by  faith. 

Ver.  10.  As  many  as  are  of  the  works  of  the  law  are  under  the  curse. — This  the  Scripture 
itself  declares.  It  utters  an  anathema  against  all  who  fail  to  fulfil  every  single  ordinance 
contained  in  the  book  of  the  law  (Deut.  xxvii.  26). 

Ver.  13.  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse. — Bought  us  off  from  our  bondage  and 
from  the  curse  under  which  all  lie  who  trust  to  the  law.  The  ransom  price  He  paid  was 
His  own  precious  blood  (1  Pet.  i.  18,  19).  Cursed  is  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree. — 
Christ's  bearing  the  particular  curse  of  hanging  on  the  tree  is  a  sample  of  the  general  curse 
which  He  representatively  bore.  Not  that  the  Jews  put  to  death  malefactors  by  hanging, 
but  after  having  put  them  to  death  otherwise,  in  order  to  brand  them  with  peculiar 
ignominy,  they  hung  the  bodies  on  a  tree,  and  such  malefactors  were  accursed  by  the  law. 
The  Jews  in  contempt  called  Him  the  hanged  one.  Hung  between  heaven  and  earth  as 
though  unworthy  of  either. 

Ver.  17.  The  covenant,  that  was  confirmed  before  of  God  in  Christ,  the  law  cannot  disannul. 
— From  the  recognised  inviolability  of  a  human  covenant  (ver.  15),  the  apostle  argues  the 
impossibility  of  violating  the  divine  covenant.     The  law  cannot  set  aside  the  promise. 

Ver.  19.  Wherefore  then  serveth  the  law?— As  it  is  of  no  avail  for  justification,  is  it 
either  useless  or  contrary  to  the  covenant  of  God  ?    It  was  added  because  of  transgressions. 

39 


i 


chap.  in.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


— To  bring  out  into  clearer  view  the  transgressions  of^the  law  ;  to  make  men  more  fully 
conscious  of  their  sins,  by  being  perceived  as  transgressions  of  the  law,  and  so  make  them 
long  for  the  promised  Saviour.  It  was  ordained  by  angels  in  the  hand  of  a  Mediator. — As 
instrumental  enactors  of  the  law.  In  the  giving  of  the  law  the  angels  were  representatives 
of  God ;  Moses,  as  mediator,  represented  the  people. 

Ver.  20.  Now  a  Mediator  is  not  a  mediator  of  one,  bnt  God  is  one. — The  very  idea  of 
mediation  supposes  two  persons  at  least,  between  whom  the  mediation  is  carried  on.  The 
law  then  is  of  the  nature  of  a  contract  between  two  parties — God  on  the  one  hand,  and  the 
Jewish  people  on  the  other.  It  is  only  valid  so  long  as  both  parties  fulfil  the  terms  of  the 
contract.  It  is  therefore  contingent  and  not  absolute.  Unlike  the  law,  the  promise  is 
absolute  and  unconditional.  It  depends  on  the  sole  decree  of  God.  There  are  not  two 
contracting  parties.  There  is  nothing  of  the  nature  of  a  stipulation.  The  Giver  is  every- 
thing, the  recipient  nothing  (Lightfoot). 

Ver.  22.  The  Scriptnre  hath  concluded  all  under  sin. — The  written  letter  was  needed  so 
as  permanently  to  convict  man  of  disobedience  to  God's  command.  He  is  shut  up  under 
condemnation  as  in  a  prison. 

Ver.  24.  The  law  was  our  schoolmaster  to  bring  us  unto  Christ. — As  a  tutor,  checking  our 
sinful  propensities,  making  the  consciousness  of  the  sinful  principle  more  vivid,  and  showing 
the  need  of  forgiveness  and  freedom  from  the  bondage  of  sin. 

Ver.  26.  Ye  are  all  the  children  of  God. — No  longer  children  requiring  a  tutor,  but  sons 
emancipated  and  walking  at  liberty. 

Ver.  28.  Ye  are  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus. — No  class  privileged  above  another,  as  the  Jews 
under  the  law  had  been  above  the  Gentiles.  Difference  of  sex  makes  no  difference  in 
Christian  privileges.     But  under  the  law  the  male  sex  had  great  privileges. 

Ver.  29.  If  ye  be  Christ's,  then  are  ye  Abraham's  seed  and  heirs. — Christ  is  Abraham's 
seed,  and  all  who  are  baptised  into  Christ,  put  on  Christ  (ver.  27),  and  are  one  in  Christ 
(ver.  28),  are  children  entitled  to  the  inheritance  of  promise. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—5. 

The  Deceptive  Glamour  of  Error — 

I.  Diverts  the  gaze  of  the  soul  from  the  most  suggestive  truth. — "Before 

whose  eyes  Jesus  Christ  hath  been  evidently  set  forth,  crucified  "  (ver.  1).  The 
cross  of  Christ  was  the  great  theme  of  Paul's  preaching.  He  depicted  it  in  such 
vivid  colours,  and  dwelt  on  every  detail  of  the  story  with  such  intense  earnest- 
ness and  loving  emphasis,  that  the  Galatians  were  arrested,  excited,  charmed. 
They  were  smitten  with  a  sense  of  sin.  They  seemed  to  be  actors  in  the  scene, 
as  if  their  own  hands  had  driven  in  the  nails  that  pierced  the  sacred  Victim. 
They  were  bowed  with  shame  and  humiliation,  and  in  an  agony  of  repentance 
they  cast  themselves  before  the  Crucified  and  took  Him  for  their  Christ  and 
King.  While  they  looked  to  Jesus  they  were  secure,  but  when  they  listened  to 
the  deceptive  voice  of  error  their  gaze  was  diverted  and  the  deep  significance  of 
the  cross  became  obscured.  Then  backsliding  began.  Like  mariners  losing 
sight  of  their  guiding  star,  they  drifted  into  strange  waters.  The  cross  is  the 
central  force  of  Christianity ;  when  it  fades  from  view  Christianity  declines. 
"  As  the  sun  draws  the  vapours  of  the  sea,  and  then  paints  a  rainbow  on  them, 
so  Christ  draws  men  and  then  glorifies  them.  His  attraction  is  like  that  of  the 
sun.  It  is  magnetic  too,  like  that  of  the  magnet  to  the  pole.  It  is  not  simply 
the  Christ  that  is  the  magnet ;  it  is  the  crucified  Christ.  It  is  not  Christ  without 
the  cross,  nor  the  cross  without  Christ ;  it  is  both  of  them  together." 

II.  Confuses  the  mind  as  to  the  nature  and  value  of  spiritual  agencies. — 
1.  Concerning  the  method  of  their  first  reception. — "  Received  ye  the  Spirit  by  the 
works  of  the  law,  or  by  the  hearing  of  faith  ?  "  (ve*r.  2).  Making  it  appear  that 
spiritual  blessings  were  acquired  by  outward  observance  rather  than  by  inward 
contemplation  and  faith.  Confusing  the  true  method  of  moral  regeneration,  it 
arrests  all  growth  and  advancement  in  the  spiritual  life.  It  throws  back  the 
soul  on  the  weary  round  of  toilsome  and  hopeless  human  effort. 

2.  Concerning  the  purpose  for  which  they  were  given. — "  Having  begun  in  the. 
Spirit,  are  ye  now  made  perfect  by  the  flesh  ? "  (ver.  3).     It  was  a  reversal  of 

40 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS.         chap.  HI. 

the  divine  order.  Having  begun  in  the  Spirit,  so  they  must  continue,  or  they 
would  be  undone.  It  was  absurd  to  look  for  perfection  in  the  flesh,  especially 
when  they  had  discovered  its  helplessness  and  misery.  Pharisaic  ordinances  could 
do  nothing  to  consummate  the  work  of  faith  and  love  ;  Moses  could  not  lead 
them  higher  than  Christ ;  circumcision  could  never  effect  what  the  Holy  Ghost 
failed  to  do.     Spiritual  results  can  be  brought  about  only  by  spiritual  agencies. 

3.  Rendering  suffering  on  behalf  of  the  truth  meaningless. — "Have  ye  suffered 
so  many  things  in  vain?  "  (ver.  4).  The  Galatians  on  their  conversion  were 
exposed  to  the  fiercest  persecution  from  the  Jews  and  from  their  own  country- 
men incited  by  the  Jews.  No  one  could  come  out  of  heathen  society  and  espouse 
the  cause  of  Christ  in  those  days,  nor  can  he  do  so  to-day,  without  making 
himself  a  mark  for  ridicule  and  violence,  without  the  rupture  of  family  and 
public  ties,  and  many  painful  sacrifices.  But  if  the  truth  may  be  so  easily 
abandoned,  all  early  struggles  against  opposition  and  all  the  educative  influence 
and  promised  reward  of  suffering  must  go  for  nothing.  It  is  disappointing  and 
disastrous  when  a  youthful  zeal  for  religion  degenerates  in  maturer  life  into 
apathy  and  worldliness,  when  the  great  principles  of  right  and  liberty,  for  which 
our  fathers  fought  and  suffered,  are  treated  by  their  descendants  with  supine 
indifference. 

III.  Creates  misconceptions  as  to  the  divine  method  of  ministering  spiritual 
blessing. — "He  that  ministereth  to  you  the  Spirit,  and  worketh  miracles,  doeth  he 
it  by  the  works  of  the  law,  or  by  the  hearing  of  faith  1 "  (ver.  5).  One  of  the  most 
subtle  effects  of  error  is  to  suspend  the  mind  in  a  state  of  hesitation  and  doubt. 
It  is  a  dangerous  mood.  Confidence  in  the  truth  is  shaken,  and  for  the  moment 
the  soul  has  nothing  stable  on  which  to  lay  hold.  It  is  the  opportunity  for  the 
enemy,  and  damage  is  done  which  even  a  subsequent  return  to  the  truth  does 
not  wholly  efface.  Paul  saw  the  peril  of  his  converts,  and  he  suggests  this  test — 
the  Spirit  of  God  had  put  His  seal  on  the  apostle's  preaching  and  on  the  faith  of 
his  hearers.  Did  any  such  manifestation  accompany  the  preaching  of  the  legalists  1 
He  takes  his  stand  on  the  indubitable  evidence  of  the  work  of  the  Spirit.  It 
is  the  only  safe  ground  for  the  champion  of  experimental  Christianity  (1  Cor. 
ii.  14,  15). 

Lessons. — 1.  Every  error  is  the  distortion  of  some  truth.  2.  The  cross  is  the 
central  truth  of  Christianity.     3.  The  highest  truths  are  spiritually  discerned. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Yer.   1.  Faithful    Reproof. — 1.    The  to    believe   that    to    be    truth    which 

minister  when   he   is  called   to   insist  is  not.       3.    Though   Christ   and  His 

upon  the  clearing  up  of  truth,  whether  sufferings  are  to  be  vividly  represented 

positively  by  showing  what  is  revealed  and  pictured  by  the  plain  and  powerful 

in     Scripture     or    controversially    by  preaching  of  the  gospel,  yet  it  does  not 

refuting  errors,  should  mix  his  discourse  follow  they  are  to  be  artificially  painted 

with  exhortation  and  reproof,  to  excite  with  colours  on    stone  or    timber   for 

and    quicken     the    affections     of     his  religious  use.     The  graven  image  is  a 

hearers.      2.    False   teachers,   who  by  teacher     of    lies      (Hab.     ii.      18). — 

fair    words    deceive    the    simple,    are  Fergusson. 
spiritual  sorcerers,  and  error  is  spiritual 

witchcraft.     As  sorcerers  by  deluding  The  Folly  of  Disobedience. 

the  senses  make  people  apprehend  that  I.  We  are  wise  in  matters  of  the 

they  see  what  they  see  not,  so  false  world,  but  in  matters  concerning  the 

teachers,  by  casting  a  mist  of  seem-  kingdom  of   heaven   the   most  of  us 

ing  reason   before  the  understanding,  are  fools,  besotted  and  bewitched  with 

delude  it,  and  make  the  deluded  person  worldly  cares  and  pleasures,   without 

41 


chap.  in.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


sense  in  matters  of  religion  ;  like  a 
piece  of  wax  without  form,  fit  to  take 
the  form  and  print  of  any  religion. 

II.  The  truth  here  mentioned  is  the 
heavenly  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  so 
called  because  it  is  absolute  truth 
without  error,  and  because  it  is  a 
most  worthy  truth — the  truth  accord- 
ing to  godliness. 

III.  The  office  of  the  minister  is 
to  set  forth  Christ  crucified. — 1.  The 
ministry  of  the  word  must  be  plain, 
perspicuous,  and  evident,  as  if  the 
doctrine  were  pictured  and  painted  out 
before  the  eyes  of  men.  2.  It  must 
be  powerful  and  lively  in  operation, 
and  as  it  were  crucifying  Christ  within 
us  and  causing  us  to  feel  the  virtue  of 
His  passion.  The  word  preached  must 
pierce  into  the  heart  like  a  two-edged 
sword.  3.  The  effectual  and  powerful 
preaching  of  the  word  stands  in  three 
things  :  (1)  True  and  proper  interpre- 
tation of  the  Scripture.  (2)  Savoury 
and  wholesome  doctrine  gathered  out 
of  the  Scriptures  truly  expounded. 
(3)  The  application  of  the  said  doctrine, 
either  to  the  information  of  the 
judgment  or  the  reformation  of  the 
life. 

IV.  The  duty  of  all  believers  is  to 
behold  Christ  crucified. — And  we  must 
behold  Him  by  the  eye  of  faith,  which 
makes  us  both  see  Him  and  feel  Him, 
as  it  were,  crucified  in  us.  1.  By 
beholding  Christ  crucified  we  see  our 
misery  and  wickedness.  2."  This  sight 
brings  us  true  and  lively  comfort. 
3.  This  sight  of  Christ  makes  a 
wonderful  change  in  us.  The  chameleon 
takes  the  colours  of  the  things  it  sees 
and  that  are  near  to  it ;  and  the  be- 
lieving heart  takes  to  it  the  disposition 
and  mind  that  was  in  Christ. — Perkins. 

Attractiveness  of  Worth. — In  the  Paris 
Salon  some  few  years  ago  there  was  a 
bust  of  the  painter  Baudry  by  Paul 
Dubois,  one  of  the  greatest  modern 
sculptors.  Mr.  Edmund  Gosse  was 
sitting  to  contemplate  this  bust  when 
an  American  gentleman  strolled  by, 
caught  sight  of  it,  and  after  hovering 
round  it  for  some  time  came  and  sat 

42 


by  his  side  and  watched  it.  Presently 
he  turned  to  Mr.  Gosse  inquiring  if  he 
could  tell  him  whose  it  was,  and 
whether  it  was  thought  much  of, 
adding  with  a  charming  modesty,  "  I 
don't  know  anything  about  art ;  but 
I  found  that  I  could  not  get  past  that 
head."  Would  that  we  could  so  set 
forth  Christ  that  His  word  might  be 
fulfilled,  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,  will  draw 
all  men  unto  Me  "  ! 

Vers.  2-5.  Searching  Questions — 
1.  As  to  the  mode  of  receiving  the 
Spirit  (ver.  2).  2.  As  to  the  folly  of 
expecting  advancement  by  substituting 
an  inferior  for  a  superior  force  (ver.  3). 
3.  As  to  the  uselessness  of  suffering 
(ver.  4).  4.  As  to  the  exercise  of 
spiritual  and  miraculous  power  (ver.  5). 

Ver.   4.  Suffering  for  the    Truth. — 

1.  They  may  suffer  many  things  for 
truth  who  afterwards  fall  from  it.  As 
the  example  of  others,  particular 
interest  and  general  applause  will 
make  even  hypocrites  suffer  much,  so 
continued  suffering  will  make  even  the 
godly  faint  for  a  time.  The  best,  being 
left  to  themselves,  in  an  hour  of 
temptation,  will  turn  their  back  upon 
truth,  so  that  no  profession,  no  ex- 
perience or  remembrance  of  the  joy 
and  sweetness  found  in  the  way  of 
truth,  nor  their  former  sufferings  for 
it,    will    make    them     adhere    to    it. 

2.  Whatever  have  been  the  sufferings 
for  truth,  they  are  all  in  vain,  lost  and 
to  no  purpose,  if  the  party  make 
defection  from  and  turn  his  back  upon 
the  truth.  3.  Though  those  who  have 
suffered  much  for  the  truth  should 
afterwards  fall  from  it,  we  are  to  keep 
charity  towards  them,  hoping  God  will 
give  them  repentance  and  reclaim 
them.  All  our  sharpness  towards  them 
ought  to  be  wisely  tempered,  by  ex- 
pressing the  charitable  thoughts  we 
have  of  them. — Fergusson. 

The  Uses  of  Suffering. — 1.  They  serve 
for  trial  of  men,  that  it  may  appear 
what  is  hidden  in  their  hearts. 
2.  They    serve  for   the   correction    of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  GALATIANS.  chap.  hi. 


things    amiss    in    us.       3.    They    serve  working   of    miracles    that    the    truth 

as  documents  and  warnings  to  others,  of    the    doctrine   might    be   confirmed, 

especially  in  public  persons.     4.  They  which  being  once  sufficiently  done,  there 

are  marks  of  adoption,  if  we  be  content  is  no  further  use  for  miracles.     2.  So 

to  obey  God  in  them.     5.  They  are  the  strong   and  prevalent   is  the   spirit  of 

trodden  and  beaten  way  to  the  king-  error,  and  so  weak  the  best  in  them- 

dom  of  heaven. — Perkins.  selves    to    resist    it,    that     for     love 

to  error  they  will  quit  truth,  though 

Ver.  5.  Miracles  confirmatory  of  the  confirmed  and    sealed   by    the   saving 

Truth. — 1.  The  Lord  accompanied  the  fruits  of  God's  Spirit  in  their  hearts. — 

first  preaching  of  the  gospel  with  the  Fergusson. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  6—9. 

The  Abrahamic  Gospel — 

I.  Recognised  the  principle  that  righteousness  is  only  by  faith. — "  Abraham 
believed  God,  and  it  was  accounted  to  him  for  righteousness"  (ver.  6).  The 
promise  to  Abraham  contained  the  germ  of  the  gospel,  and  was  the  only  gospel 
known  to  pre-Christian  times.  Though  dimly  apprehending  its  vast  import, 
Abraham  trusted  in  God's  Messianic  promise,  and  his  unfaltering  faith,  often 
severely  tried,  was  in  the  judgment  of  the  gracious  God  imputed  to  him  as 
rectitude.  "  In  this  mode  of  salvation  there  was  after  all  nothing  new.  The 
righteousness  of  faith  is  more  ancient  than  legalism.  It  is  as  old  as  Abraham. 
In  the  hoary  patriarchal  days  as  now,  in  the  time  of  promise  as  of  fulfilment, 
faith  is  the  root  of  religion  ;  grace  invites,  righteousness  waits  upon  the  hearing 
of  faith." 

II.  Was  universal  in '  its  spiritual  provisions. — "  The  Scripture,  foreseeing 
that  God  would  justify  the  heathen  through  faith,  preached  before  the  gospel 
unto  Abraham,  saying,  In  thee  shall  all  nations  be  blessed  "  (ver.  8).  Twice  is 
Abraham  designated  "  the  friend  of  God."  The  Arabs  still  call  him  the  friend. 
His  image  has  impressed  itself  with  singular  force  on  the  Oriental  mind.  He  is 
the  noblest  figure  of  the  Old  Testament,  surpassing  Isaac  in  force,  Jacob  in 
purity,  and  both  in  dignity  of  character.  His  religion  exhibits  a  heroic  strength 
and  firmness,  but  at  the  same  time  a  large-hearted,  genial  humanity,  an  eleva- 
tion and  serenity  of  mind,  to  which  the  temper  of  those  who  boasted  themselves 
his  children  was  utterly  opposed.  Father  of  the  Jewish  race,  Abraham  was  no 
Jew.  He  stands  before  us  in  the  morning  light  of  revelation  a  simple,  noble, 
archaic  type  of  man,  true  father  of  many  nations.  And  his  faith  was  the  secret 
of  the  greatness  which  has  commanded  for  him  the  reverence  of  four  thousand 
years.  His  trust  in  God  made  him  worthy  to  receive  so  immense  a  trust  for  the 
future  of  mankind  (Findlay). 

III.  Shares  its  privilege  and  blessing  with  all  who  believe. — "They  which 
are  of  faith,  the  same  are  the  children  of  .  .  .  are  blessed  with  faithful  Abraham  " 
(vers.  7,  9).  With  Abraham's  faith  the  Gentiles  inherit  his  blessing.  They 
were  not  simply  blessed  in  him,  through  his  faith  which  received  and  handed 
down  the  blessing,  but  blessed  with  him.  Their  righteousness  rests  on  the  same 
principle  as  his.  Heading  the  story  of  Abraham,  we  witness  the  bright  dawn  of 
faith,  its  springtime  of  promise  and  of  hope.  These  morning  hours  passed  away ; 
and  the  sacred  history  shuts  us  in  to  the  hard  school  of  Mosaism,  with  its 
isolation,  its  mechanical  routine  and  ritual  drapery,  its  yoke  of  legal  exaction  ever 
growing  more  burdensome.  Of  all  this  the  Church  of  Christ  was  to  know 
nothing.  It  was  called  to  enter  into  the  labours^f  the  legal  centuries  without 
the  need  of  sharing  their  burdens.  In  the  "  Father  of  the  Faithful  "  and  the 
"  Friend  of  God  "  Gentile  believers  were  to  see  their  exemplar,  to  find  the  warrant 

43 


chap.  in.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


for  that  sufficiency  and  freedom  of  faith  of  which  the  natural  children  of  Abraham 
unjustly  strove  to  rob  them  (Findlay). 

Lessons. — 1.  The  gospel  has  an  honourable  antiquity.     2.  Righteousness  is  the 
practical  side  of  true  religion.     3.  Faith  is  the  way  to  righteousness. 


GERM  NOTES  OJST  THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  6-9.  Righteousness  through 
Faith. 

I.  The  divine  method  of  blessing  in 
past  ages  (ver.  6). 

II.  Modern  believers  are  spiritual 
successors  of  the  most  eminent  ex- 
amples of  faith  in  ancient  times 
(ver.    7). 

III.  The  unchanging  gospel  taught 
in  Holy  Scripture  (ver.  8). 

IV.  Ensures  the  enjoyment  of 
promised  blessings  (ver.  9). 

Vers.  6,  7.  Imitators  of  Abraham 's 
Faith. 

I.  We  must  have  knowledge  of  the 
main  and  principal  promise  touching 
the  blessing  of  God  in  Christ,  and  all 
other  promises  depending  on  the 
principal ;  and  we  must  know  the 
^cope  and  tenor  of  them  that  we  be 
not  deceived. 

II.  We  must  with  Abraham  believe 
the  truth  and  power  of  God  in  the 
accomplishment  of  the  said  promises, 
or  in  the  working  of  our  vocation, 
j  ustifieation,  sanctification,  glorification. 

III.  We  must  by  faith  obey  God 
in  all  things,  shutting  our  eyes  and 
suffering  ourselves  to  be  led  blindfold, 
as  it  were,  by  the  word  of  God.  Thus 
did  Abraham  in  all  things,  even  in 
actions  against  nature.  But  this 
practice  is  rare  among  us.  For  there 
are  three  things  which  prevail  among 
us — the  love  of  worldly  honour,  the 
love  of  pleasure,  and  the  love  of  riches ; 
and  where  these  bear  sway  there  faith 
takes  no  place. — Perkins. 

Vers.  8,  9.  All  Natioiis  blessed  in 
AJyraham. — 1.  The  covenant  of  grace 
with  Abraham  extended  not  only  to 
his  carnal  seed,  but  to  all  believers, 
even  among  the  Gentiles.  2.  The 
blessings  promised  to  Abraham  were 
not  only   temporal,  but  heavenly  and 

44 


spiritual :  the  temporal  were  often  in- 
culcated on  the  ancient  Church,  not  as 
if  they  were  all  or  the  main  blessings 
of  the  covenant,  but  as  they  were 
shadows  of  things  heavenly.  3.  The 
promise  to  Abraham  contained  the 
sum  of  the  gospel — the  glad  tidings 
of  all  spiritual  blessings,  and  that  the 
Gentiles  should  have  access,  in  the 
days  of  the  gospel,  to  these  blessings. 
The  gospel  is  therefore  no  new  doctrine, 
but  the  same  in  substance  with  that 
taught  to  Abraham  and  to  the  Church 
under  the  Old  Testament.  4.  Eminent 
privileges  bestowed  on  particular 
persons  do  not  exempt  them  from 
walking  to  heaven  in  the  common 
pathway  with  others.  Abraham,  the 
father  of  believers,  in  whom  all  nations 
were  blessed,  enjoyed  the  blessing,  not 
because  of  his  own  merit,  but  freely 
and  by  faith  as  well  as  others. — 
Fergusson. 

The  Abrahamic  Gospel  intended  for 
All. 

I.  The  nation  of  the  Jews  shall  be 
called  and  converted  to  the  partici- 
pation of  this  blessing. — When  and 
how,  God  knows ;  but  it  shall  be  done 
before  the  end  of  the  world.  If  all 
nations  be  called,  then  the  Jews. 

II.  That  which  was  foretold  to 
Abraham  is  verified  in  our  eyes. — 
This  nation  and  many  other  nations 
are  at  this  day  blessed  in  the  seed  of 
Abraham.  1.  Give  to  God  thanks  and 
praise  that  we  are  born  in  these  days. 
2.  We  must  amend  and  turn  to  God 
that  we  may  now  be  partakers  of  the 
promised  blessing.  3.  We  must  bless 
all,  do  good  to  all,  and  hurt  to  none. 

III.  All  men  who  are  of  Abraham's 
faith  shall  be  partakers  of  the  same 
blessing  with  him. — God  respects  not 
the  greatness  of  our  faith  so  much  as 
the  truth  of  it. — Perkins, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS.         chap.  ill. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  10—14. 

The  Conflict  between  the  Law  and  Faith. 

I.  The  law  condemns  the  least  violation  of  its  enactments. — "  Cursed  is 
everyone  that continueth  not  in  all  things  ...  in  the  law  to  do  them  "  (ver.  10). 
The  law  is  a  unity ;  to  violate  a  part  is  to  violate  the  whole.  It  is  like  a  perfect 
bell,  every  stroke  resounds  through  every  atom  of  the  metal.  If  the  bell  is 
fractured  in  the  least  degree,  the  dissonance  is  evident  in  every  part.  Law  is 
so  all-pervasive  and  so  perfect  that  to  break  one  law  is  to  be  guilty  of  all.  It 
is  intolerant  of  all  imperfection,  and  makes  no  provision  to  prevent  or  repair 
imperfection  except  by  a  rigid  obedience  to  every  statute.  If  obedience  could 
be  perfect  from  this  moment  onwards,  the  past  disobedience  would  not  be 
condoned  ;  we  should  be  still  liable  to  its  penalties,  still  be  under  the  curse. 
To  pledge  ourselves  to  unsinning  obedience  is  to  pledge  ourselves  to  the  impossible. 
All  our  efforts  to  obey  law — to  conform  our  life  to  the  law  of  righteousness,  the 
purity  and  beauty  of  which  we  perceive  even  while  in  a  state  of  lawless  unnature 
— are  futile.  It  is  like  running  alongside  a  parallel  pathway  into  which  we  are 
perpetually  trying  to  turn  ourselves,  but  all  in  vain.  We  cannot  escape  the 
condemnation  of  the  disobedient. 

II.  The  law  cannot  justify  man. — "  But  that  no  man  is  justified  by  the  law 
in  the  sight  of  God,  it  is  evident :  for,  The  just  shall  live  by  faith  "  (ver.  11).  The 
law  reveals  our  sin  and  our  utter  helplessness  to  rid  ourselves  of  its  misery. 
The  law  forces  out  the  disease  that  is  spreading  under  the  skin.  Such  is  its  task. 
But  healing  it  does  not  bring.  "  The  law,"  says  Luther,  "  is  that  which  lays 
down  what  man  is  to  do ;  the  gospel  reveals  whence  man  is  to  obtain  help. 
When  I  place  myself  in  the  hands  of  the  physician,  one  branch  of  art  says  where 
the  disease  lies,  another  what  course  to  take  to  get  quit  of  it.  So  here.  The  law 
discovers  our  disease,  the  gospel  supplies  the  remedy."  We  become  aware  in 
critical  moments  that  our  evil  desires  are  more  powerful  than  the  prohibition 
of  law,  and  are  in  truth  first  stirred  up  thoroughly  by  the  prohibition.  And 
this  disposition  of  our  heart  is  the  decisive  point  for  the  question,  Whether  then 
the  holy  law,  the  holy,  just,  and  good  commandment  makes  us  holy,  just,  and 
good  men  ?     The  answer  to  this  is,  and  remains  a  most  decided,  No. 

III.  The  law  ignores  faith. — "  The  law  is  not  of  faith :  but,  The  man  that 
doeth  them  shall  live  in  them  "  (ver.  12).  Its  dictum  is  do,  not  believe  ;  it  takes 
no  account  of  faith.  To  grant  righteousness  to  faith  is  to  deny  it  to  legal  works. 
The  two  ways  have  different  starting-points,  as  they  lead  to  opposite  goals.  From 
faith  one  marches  through  God's  righteousness  to  blessing  ;  fiom  works,  through 
self -righteousness,  to  the  curse.  In  short,  the  legalist  tries  to  make  God  believe 
in  him.  Abraham  and  Paul  are  content  to  believe  in  God.  Paul  puts  the 
calm,  grand  image  of  Father  Abraham  before  us  for  our  pattern,  in  contrast 
with  the  narrow,  painful,  bitter  spirit  of  Jewish  legalism,  inwardly  self -condemned. 

IV.  The  law,  the  great  barrier  to  man's  justification,  is  done  away  in  Christ. — 
"Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law"  (ver.  13).  Christ  brought 
us  out  of  the  curse  of  the  law  by  Himself  voluntarily  undergoing  its  penalty 
and  submitting  to  the  utmost  indignity  it  imposed — hanging  on  a  tree.  It  was 
this  crowning  scandal  that  shocked  the  Jewish  pride  and  made  the  cross  an 
offence  to  them.  Once  crucified,  the  name  of  Jesus  would  surely  perish  from 
the  lips  of  men ;  no  Jew  would  hereafter  dare  to  profess  faith  in  Him.  This 
was  God's  method  of  rescue  ;  and  all  the  terrors  and  penalties  of  law  disappear, 
being  absorbed  in  the  cross  of  Christ.  His  redemption  was  offered  to  the  Jew 
first.  But  not  to  the  Jew  alone,  nor  as  a  Jew.  The  time  of  release  had  come 
for  all  men.  Abraham's  blessing,  long  withheld,  was  now  to  be  imparted,  as  it 
Jiad  been  promised,  to  all  the  tribes  of  the  earth.     In  the  removal  of  the  legal 

45 


chap.  in.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


curse,  God  comes  near  to  men  as  in  the  ancient  days.  In  Christ  Jesus  crucified, 
risen,  reigning,  a  new  world  comes  into  being,  which  restores  and  surpasses 
the  promise  of  the  old. 

V.  Faith  ends  the  conflict  with  law  by  imparting  to  man  a  superior 
spiritual  force. — "  That  we  might  receive  the  promise  of  the  Spirit  through 
faith"  (ver.  14).  Faith  is  a  spiritual  faculty,  and  its  exercise  is  made  possible 
by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  law  of  works  is  superseded  by  the 
higher  law  of  the  Spirit.  It  is  in  the  human  soul  that  law  has  its  widest  sweep 
and  accomplishes  its  highest  results.  The  soul  can  never  rise  higher  in  its 
experience  and  efforts  than  the  law  by  which  it  is  governed.  The  law  of  sin  has 
debased  and  limited  the  soul,  and  only  as  it  is  united  by  faith  to  Christ  and 
responds  to  the  lofty  calls  of  His  law  will  it  break  away  from  the  corruption 
and  restraints  of  the  law  of  sin  and  rise  to  the  highest  perfection  of  holiness. 
"In  every  law,"  says  F.  W.  Robertson,  "  there  is  a  spirit,  in  every  maxim  a 
principle ;  and  the  law  and  the  maxim  are  laid  down  for  the  sake  of  conserving 
the  spirit  and  the  principle  which  they  enshrine.  Man  is  severed  from  submission 
to  the  maxim  because  he  has  got  allegiance  to  the  principle.  He  is  free  from 
the  rule  and  the  law  because  he  has  got  the  spirit  written  in  his  heart." 

Lessons. — 1.  It  is  hopeless  to  attain  righteousness  by  law.  2.  Faith  in  Christ 
is  the  only  and  universal  way  of  obedience.     3.  The  law  is  disarmed  by  obeying  it. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.    10-12.    The    Inexorability   of  Ver.  12.  The  Difference  between  the 

Law.  Law  and  the  Gospel. 

I.  The  law  renders  no  help  in  I.  The  law  promises  life  to  him 
fulfilling  its  requirements,  but  curses  who  performs  perfect  obedience,  and 
the  incompetent  (ver.  10).  that     for     his    works.       The     gospel 

II.  The  law,  though  strictly  ob-  promises  life  to  him  who  doeth  nothing 
served,  is  powerless  to  justify  in  the  cause  of  his  salvation,  but  only 
(ver.  11).  believes   in    Christ;    and   it   promises 

III.  The  law  does  not  admit  of  salvation  to  him  who  believeth,  yet 
faith ;  it  offers  life  only  to  the  doer  not  for  his  faith  or  for  any  works  else, 
(ver.  12).  but  for  the  merit  of  Christ.      The  law 

then  requires  doing  to  salvation,  and 

Ver.   11.  Man  is  justified  by  Faith  the  gospel  believing  and  nothing  else. 
cdone. — One  day  wishing  to  obtain  an         II.  The  law   does   not   teach   true 

indulgence  promised  by  the  Pope  to  all  repentance,  neither  is  it  any  cause'  of 

who  should  ascend  on  their  knees  what  it,  but  only  an  occasion.      The  gospel 

is   called    Pilate's   Staircase,   the   poor  only    prescribes    repentance    and    the 

Saxon     monk,    Luther,    was    humbly  practice  of  it,  yet  only  as  it  is  a  fruit 

creeping    up    those     steps    when     he  of  our  faith  and  as  it  is  the  way  to 

thought  he  heard  a  voice  of  thunder  salvation. 

crying  from  the  bottom  of  his  heart,  III.  The  law  requires  faith  in  God, 

as  at  Wittenberg  and  Bologna,  "  The  which  is  to  put  our  affiance  in  Him. 

just  shall  live  by  faith  !  "     He  rises  in  The   gospel    requires    faith    in    Christ, 

amazement,  he  shudders  at  himself,  he  the  Mediator  God-man ;  and  this  faith 

is  ashamed  of  seeing  to  what  a  depth  the  law  never  knew, 
superstition    had    plunged    him.     He  IV.  The    promises    of    the    gospel 

flies  from  the  scene  of  his  folly.     It  are  not  made  to  the  work,  but  to  the 

was   in   these    words   God   then    said,  worker ;  and  to  the  worker  not  for  his 

"  Let  there    be  light,   and   there  was  work,  but  for  Christ's  sake,  according 

light." — UAubigne.  to  his  work, 

46 


H'OMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS.         chap.  hi. 


V.  The  gospel  considers  not  faith  brought  blessing  to  all  nations. — 
as  a  virtue  or  work,  but  as  an  "  That  the  blessing  of  Abraham  might 
instrument,  or  hand,  to  apprehend  come  on  the  Gentiles  through  Jesus 
Christ.     Faith  does  not  cause  or  pro-  Christ"  (ver.  14). 

cure  our  salvation,  but  as  the  beggar's  III.  The  spiritual  results  of  re- 
hand  it  receives  it,  being  wholly  demption  are  realised  only  by  faith. 
wrought  and  given  of  God.  — "  That  we  might  receive  the  promise 

VI.  This  distinction  of  the  law  and  of  the  Spirit  through  faith  "  (ver.  14). 
the  gospel  must  be  observed  carefully, 

as  the  two  have  been  often  confounded.  Ver.  13.  The  Curse  and  Sentence  of 

It  has  been  erroneously  stated  that  the  the  Law  lies  on  record  against  sinners, 

law   of    Moses,    written   in    tables   of  it    puts   in   its    demand    against    our 

stone,  is  the  law ;   the   same   law  of  acquittance,    and    lays   an    obligation 

Moses,  written  in  the  hearts  of  men  upon  us  unto  punishment.     God  will 

by   the    Holy   Ghost,    is    the    gospel.  not  reject  nor  destroy  His  law.    Unless 

But  I  say  again  that  the  law  written  it  be  answered,  there  is  no  acceptance 

in  our  hearts  is  still  the  law  of  Moses.  for  sinners.     Christ  answered  the  curse 

This  oversight  in  mistaking  the  dis-  of  the  law  when  He  was  made  a  curse 

tinction  of  the  law  and  the  gospel  is  for    us,    and    so    became,    as    to    the 

and  has  been  the  ruin  of  the  gospel. —  obedience  of  the  law,  the  end  of  the 

Perkins.  law   for   righteousness   to   them    that 

believe.     And  as  to  the  penalty  that 

Vers.    13,    14.  Redemption   and    its  it  threatened,  He  bore  it,  removed  it, 

Issues.  '  and  took  it  out  of  the  way.     So  hath 

I.  Redemption  was  eifected  by  He  made  way  for  forgiveness  through 
Christ  enduring  the  penalty  of  vio-  the  very  heart  of  the  law  ;  it  hath  not 
lated  law  (ver.  13).  one  word  to  speak  against  the  pardon 

II.  Redemption     by     Christ     has  of  these  who  believe. — John  Owen. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH. —Verses  15—18. 

The  Divine  Covenant  of  Promise — 

I.  Is  less  susceptible  of  violation  than  any  human  covenant.— "  Though 
it  be  but  a  man's  covenant,  yet  if  it  be  confirmed  [approved],  no  man 
disannulleth,  or  addeth  thereto"  (ver.  15).  Common  equity  demands  that 
a  contract  made  between  man  and  man  is  thoroughly  binding,  and  should 
be  rigidly  observed ;  and  the  civil  law  lends  all  its  force  to  maintain  the 
integrity  of  its  clauses.  How  much  more  certain  it  is  that  the  divine  covenant 
shall  be  faithfully  upheld.  If  it  is  likely  that  a  human  covenant  will  not  be 
interfered  with,  it  is  less  likely  the  divine  covenant  will  be  changed.  Yet  even 
a  human  covenant  may  fail ;  the  divine  covenant  never.  It  is  based  on  the 
divine  word  which  cannot  fail,  and  its  validity  is  pledged  by  the  incorruptibility 
of  the  divine  character  (Mai.  hi.  6). 

II.  Is  explicit  in  denning  the  channel  of  its  fulfilment. — '•  Now  to  Abraham 
and  his  seed  were  the  promises  made;  ...  to  thy  seed,  which  is  Christ  "  (ver.  16). 
The  promise  is  in  the  plural  because  the  same  promise  was  often  repeated 
(Gen.  xii.  3,  7,  xv.  5,  18,  xvii.  7,  xxii.  18),  and  because  it  involved  many  things 
— earthly  blessings  to  the  literal  children  of  Abraham  in  Canaan,  and  spiritual 
and  heavenly  blessings  to  his  spiritual  children  ;  and  both  promised  to  Christ — 
the  Seed  and  representative  Head  of  the  literal  and  spiritual  Israel  alike. 
Therefore  the  promise  that  in  him  "  all  families  of  the  earth  shall  be  blessed  " 
joins  in  this  one  Seed — Christ — Jew  and  Gentile,  as  fellow-heirs  on  the  same 
terms  of  acceptability — by  grace  through  faith  ;  not  to  some  by  promise,  to  others 
by  the  law,  but  to  all  alike,  circumcised  and  uncircumcised,  constituting  but  one 

47 


chap.  in.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


seed  in  Christ.  The  law,  on  the  other  hand,  contemplates  the  Jews  and  Gentiles 
as  distinct  seeds.  God  makes  a  covenant,  but  it  is  one  of  promise  ;  whereas  the 
law  is  a  covenant  of  works.  God  makes  His  covenant  of  promise  with  the  one 
Seed — Christ — and  embraces  others  only  as  they  are  identified  with  and  repre- 
sented by  Him  (Fausset). 

III.  Cannot  be  set  aside  by  the  law  which  was  a  subsequent  revelation. — 
"The  covenant,  .  .  .  the  law,  which  was  four  hundred  and  thirty  years  after,  cannot 
disannul  "  (ver.  1 7).  The  promise  to  Abraham  was  a  prior  settlement,  and  must 
take  precedence,  not  only  in  time  but  also  in  authority,  of  the  Mosaic  law.  It 
was  a  bold  stroke  of  the  apostle  to  thus  shatter  the  supremacy  of  Mosaism ;  but 
the  appeal  to  antiquity  was  an  argument  the  most  prejudiced  Jew  was  bound  to 
respect.  "  The  law  of  Moses  has  its  rights ;  it  must  be  taken  into  account  as 
well  as  the  promise  to  Abraham.  True ;  but  it  has  no  power  to  cancel  or  restrict 
the  promise,  older  by  four  centuries  and  a  half.  The  later  must  be  adjusted  to 
the  earlier  dispensation,  the  law  interpreted  by  the  promise.  God  has  not  made 
two  testaments — the  one  solemnly  committed  to  the  faith  and  hope  of  mankind, 
only  to  be  retracted  and  substituted  by  something  of  a  different  stamp.  He 
could  not  thus  stultify  Himself.  And  we  must  not  apply  the  Mosaic  enactments, 
addressed  to  a  single  people,  in  such  a  way  as  to  neutralise  the  original  provisions 
made  for  the  race  at  large.  Our  human  instincts  of  good  faith,  our  reverence 
for  public  compacts  and  established  rights,  forbid  our  allowing  the  law  of  Moses 
to  trench  upon  the  inheritance  assured  to  mankind  in  the  covenant  of  Abraham  " 
(Findlay).  / 

IV.  Imposed  no  conditions  of  legal  obedience. — "  If  the  inheritance  be  of  the 
law,  it  is  no  more  of  promise ;  but  God  gave  it  to  Abraham  by  promise  "  (ver.  18). 
The  law  is  a  system  of  conditions — so  much  advantage  to  be  gained  by  so  much 
work  done.  This  is  all  very  well  as  a  general  principle.  But  the  promise  of 
God  is  based  on  a  very  different  ground.  It  is  an  act  of  free,  sovereign  grace, 
engaging  to  confer  certain  blessings  without  demanding  anything  more  from  the 
recipient  than  faith,  which  is  just  the  will  to  receive.  The  law  imposes  obliga- 
tions man  is  incompetent  to  meet.  The  promise  offers  blessings  all  men  need 
and  all  may  accept.  It  simply  asks  the  acceptance  of  the  blessings  by  a  submis- 
sive and  trustful  heart.  The  demands  of  the  law  are  met  and  the  provisions  of 
the  covenant  of  promise  enjoyed  by  an  act  of  faith. 

Lessons. — 1.  God  has  a  sovereign  right  to  give  or  withhold  blessing.  2.  The 
divine  covenant  of  promise  is  incapable  of  violation.  3.  Faith  in  God  is  the 
simplest  and  sublimest  method  of  obedience. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  15-18.  Tfie  Promise  a  Covenant  munion  that  is  between  Christ  and  us. 

confirmed.  Christ  died  upon  the  cross,  not  as  a 

I.  The  promises  made  to  Abraham  private  person,  but  as  a  public  person 

are  first  made  to  Christ,  and  then  in  representing  His  people.    All  died  in 

Christ  to  all  that  believe  in  Him. —  Him,   and   with   Him;    in   the   same 

1.  Learn  the  difference  of  the  promises  manner  they  must  rise  with  Him  to 
of  the  law  and  the  gospel.  The  life.  3.  Here  is  comfort  against  the 
promises  of  the  law  are  directed  and  consideration  of  our  un worthiness, 
made  to  the  person  of  every  man  There  is  dignity  and  worthiness  sufli- 
particularly ;  the  promises  of  the  gospel  cient  in  Him.  Our  salvation  stands  in 
are  first  directed  and  made  to  Christ,  this,  not  that  we  know  and  apprehend 
and  then  by  consequent  to  them  that  Him,  but  that  He  knows  and 
are   by   faith   ingrafted    into    Christ,  apprehends  us  first  of  all. 

2.  We  learn  to  acknowledge  the  com-  II.  The  promise  made  to  Abraham 

48 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


CHAP.  III. 


was  a  covenant  confirmed  by  oath. — 

Abraham  in  the  first  making  and  in 
the  confirmation  thereof  must  be  con- 
sidered as  a  public  person  representing 
all  the  faithful.  Here  we  see  God's 
goodness.  We  are  bound  simply  to 
believe  His  bare  word ;  yet  in  regard 
of  our  weakness  He  ratifies  His  promise 
by  oath,  that  there  might  be  no  occasion 
of  unbelief.  What  can  we  more  require 
of  Him  1 

III.  If  the  promise  might  be  dis- 
annulled, the  law  could  not  do  it. — 
1.  The  promise,  or  covenant,  was  made 
with  Abraham,  arid  continued  by  God 
four  hundred  and  thirty  years  before 
the  law  was  given.  2.  If  the  law 
abolish  the  promise,  then  the  inherit- 
ance must  come  by  the  law.  But  that 
cannot  be.  If  the  inheritance  of 
eternal  life  be  by  the  law,  it  is  no 
more  by  the  promise.  But  it  is  by 
the  promise,  because  God  gave  it  unto 
Abraham  freely  by  promise  ;  therefore 
it  comes  not  by  the  law.  This  giving 
was  no  private  but  a  public  donation. 
That  which    was   given    to   Abraham 

all  that   should 
Perkins. 


was  in  him  given  to 
believe  as  he  did.- 


Yers.    15-17. 
Covenants. 


Divine   and    Human 


I.  A  covenant,  as  between  man  and 
man,  is  honourably  binding  (ver.  15). 

II.  The  divine  covenant  made  to 
Abraham  ensures  the  fulfilment  of 
promises  to  all  who  believe  as  Abraham 
did  (ver.  16). 

III.  The  law  cannot  abrogate  the 
divine  covenant  of  promise  (ver.  17). 

Ver.  18.  Law  and  Promise. — 1.  So 
subtle  is  the  spirit  of  error  that  it  will 
seem  to  cede  somewhat  to  truth,  intend- 
ing to  prejudice  the  truth  more  than 
if  it  had  ceded  nothing.  The  opposers 
of  justification  by  faith  did  sometimes 
give  faith  some  place  in  justification, 
and  pleaded  for  a  joint  influence  of 
works  and  faith,  of  law  and  promise. 
2.  The  state  of  grace  here  and  glory 
hereafter  is  the  inheritance  of  the 
Lord's  people,  of  which  the  land  of 
Canaan  was  a  type.  There  are  only 
two  ways  of  attaining  a  right  to  this 
inheritance — one  by  law,  the  other  by 
promise.  3.  There  can  be  no  mixture 
of  these  two,  so  that  a  right  to  heaven 
should  be  obtained  partly  by  the  merit 
of  works  and  partly  by  faith  in  the 
promise.  The  only  way  of  attaining 
it  is  by  God's  free  gift,  without  the 
merit  of  works. — Fergusson. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  19,  20. 


The  Inferiority  of  the  Law. 

I.  It  did  not  justify  but  condemn  the  sinner  by  revealing  his  sin. — "  It  was 

added  because  of  transgressions"  (ver.  19).  Law  has  no  remedial  efficacy.  It 
reveals  and  emphasises  the  fact  of  sin.  It  has  no  terror  while  it  is  obeyed. 
When  it  is  violated  then  it  thunders,  and  with  pitiless  severity  terrifies  the 
conscience  and  inflicts  unsparing  punishment.  There  is  no  strain  of  mercy  in 
its  voice,  or  in  the  inflexibility  of  its  methods.  It  surrenders  the  condemned  to 
an  anguish  from  which  it  offers  no  means  of  escape.  It  is  said  that,  after  the 
murder  of  Darnley,  some  of  the  wretches  who  were  concerned  in  it  were  found 
wandering  about  the  streets  of  Edinburgh  crying  penitently  and  lamentably  for 
vengeance  on  those  who  had  caused  them  to  shed  innocent  blood. 

II.  It  was  temporary  in  its  operation. — "  Till  the  seed  should  come  to  whom 
the  promise  was  made"  (ver.  19).  The  work  of  the  law  was  preparatory  and 
educative.     Centuries  rolled  away  and  the  promised  Seed  was  long  in  coming, 


and  it  seemed  as  if  the  world  must   remain   for  ever  under  the  tutelage  of  the 
All  the  time  the  law  was  doing  its  work. 


law. 


God  was  long  in  fulfilling  His 
promise  because  man  was  so  slow  to  learn.  When  Christ,  the  promised  Seed, 
appeared,  the  law  was  superseded.     Its  work  was  done.     The  preparatory  gave 

E  49 


chap.  in.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


place  to  the  permanent ;  the  reign  of  law  was  displaced  by  the  reign  of  grace. 
The  claims  of  the  law  were  discharged  once  for  all. 

III.  Its  revelation  was  through  intermediaries. — "  It  was  ordained  by  angels 
in  the  hand  of  a  Mediator"  (ver.  19).  In  the  Jewish  estimation  the  administra- 
tion of  the  law  by  angels  enhanced  its  splendour,  and  the  pomp  and  ceremony 
with  which  Moses  made  known  the  will  and  character  of  Jehovah  added  to  the 
impressiveness  and  superiority  of  the  law.  In  the  Christian  view  these  very 
methods  were  evidences  of  defect  and  inferiority.  The  revelations  of  God  by 
the  law  were  veiled  and  intermediate;  the  revelation  by  grace  is  direct  and 
immediate.  Under  the  law  God  was  a  distant  and  obscured  personality,  and  the 
people  unfit  to  enter  His  sacred  presence ;  by  the  gospel  God  is  brought  near  to 
man,  and  permitted  to  bask  in  the  radiance  of  His  revealed  glory,  without  the 
intervention  of  a  human  mediator.  The  law,  with  its  elaborate  ceremonial  and 
multiplied  exactions,  is  a  barrier  between  the  soul  and  God. 

IV.  It  was  contingent,  not  absolute,  in  its  primal  terms. — "  Now  a  Mediator  is 
not  a  mediator  of  one,  but  God  is  one  "  (ver.  20).  Where  a  mediator  is  necessary 
unity  is  wanting — not  simply  in  a  numerical  but  in  a  moral  sense,  as  matter  of 
feeling  and  of  aim.  There  are  separate  interests,  discordant  views,  to  be  consulted. 
This  was  true  of  Mosaism.  It  was  not  the  absolute  religion.  The  theocratic 
legislation  of  the  Pentateuch  is  lacking  in  the  unity  and  consistency  of  a  perfect 
revelation.  Its  disclosures  of  God  were  refracted  in  a  manifest  degree  by  the 
atmosphere  through  which  they  passed.  In  the  promise  God  spoke  immediately 
and  for  Himself.  The  man  of  Abraham's  faith  sees  God  in  His  unity.  The 
legalist  gets  his  religion  at  second-hand,  mixed  with  undivine  elements.  He  pro- 
jects on  the  divine  image  confusing  shadows  of  human  imperfection  (Findlay). 

Lessons. — 1.  The  law  is  powerless  to  remove  the  sin  it  exposes.  2.  The  law  had 
the  defect  of  all  preparatory  dispensations.  3.  The  law  imposes  conditions  it  does 
not  help  to  fulfil. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  19,20.  The  Law  is  for  Trans-  delivered  by  angels.      2.    We   are   to 

gressors.  fear  to  break  the  least  commandment, 

I.  We  are  taught  to  examine  and  because  the  angels  observe  the  keepers 
search  our  hearts  by  the  law  of  God.  and  breakers  of  it,  and  are  ready  to 
— 1.  When  any  sin  is  forbidden  in  any  witness  against  them  that  offend, 
commandment  of  the  law,  under  it  all  3.  If  thou  offend  and  break  the  law, 
sins  of  the  same  kind  are  forbidden,  repent  with  speed,  for  that  is  the 
all  causes  of  them  and  all  occasions.  desired  joy  of  angels.  4.  If  thou  sin 
2.  A  commandment  negative  includes  and  repent  not,  look  for  shame  and 
the  affirmative,  and  binds  us  not  only  confusion  before  God  and  His  angels, 
to  abstain  from  evil,  but  also  to  do  III.  God,  the  Author  and  Source  of 
the  contrary  good.  3.  Every  com-  law,  is  one. — 1.  He  is  unchangeable, 
mandment  must  be  understood  with  a  2.  His  unchangeableness  the  foundation 
curse  annexed  to  it,  though  the  curse  of  our  comfort.  3.  We  should  be 
be  not  expressed.  4.  We  must  especially  unchangeable  in  faith,  hope,  love,  good 
examine  ourselves  by  the  first  and  last  counsels,  honest  promises,  and  in  the 
commandments.  The  first  forbids  the  maintenance  of  true  religion. — Perkins. 
first   motions   of    our    hearts    against 

God,    and    the    last   forbids   the   first  Ver.  19.  The  Use  of  the  Law. 

motions  of  our  hearts  against  our  neigh-  I.  It  is  a  standard  to  measure  our 

bour.  defects. 

II.  The  law  of  God  to  be  reverenced.  II.  It  is  a  sword  to  pierce  our  con- 
— 1.    Because     it    was    ordained     or  science. 

50 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS.  chap.  hi. 

III.  It  is  a  seal  to  certify  that  we  company,  and  pray  J or  their  repentance. 

are  in  the  way  of  grace. — Tholuck.  — Iota. 

No  Trust  in  Legal  Prescriptions. —  Ver.  20.  The  Unity  of  God  and  His 
St.  Paul,  with  the  sledge-hammer  force  Purpose  regarding  Man. — 1.  The 
of  his  direct  and  impassioned  dialectics,  covenant  with  Adam  in  his  innocency 
shattered  all  possibility  of  trusting  in  was  immediate,  no  mediator  interven- 
legal  prescriptions,  and  demonstrated  ing  to  make  them  one ;  there  was  no 
that  the  law  was  no  longer  obligatory  disagreement  betwixt  them  because  of 
on  Gentiles.  He  had  shown  that  the  sin.  2.  No  man  can  attain  heaven,  or 
distinction  between  clean  and  unclean  reap  any  advantage,  except  he  be 
meats  was  to  the  enlightened  conscience  perfectly  holy.  God  made  no  covenant 
a  matter  of  indifference,  that  circum-  of  works  with  men  on  Mount  Sinai, 
cision  was  nothing  better  than  a  nor  could  they  have  reaped  benefit 
physical  mutilation,  that  ceremonialism  from  such  a  covenant  as  they  were 
was  a  yoke  with  which  the  free,  con-  a  sinful  people,  standing  in  need  of 
verted  Gentile  had  nothing  to  do,  that  a  midsman  betwixt  God  and  them, 
we  are  saved  by  faith  and  not  by  3.  The  Lord  in  all  His  dispensations  is 
works,  that  the  law  was  a  dispensation  always  one,  and  like  to  Himself  with- 
of  wrath  and  menace  introduced  for  out  shadow  of  turning.  If  any  plead 
the  sake  of  transgressions,  that  so  far  a  right  to  heaven  by  the  merit  of  their 
from  being,  as  all  the  Rabbis  asserted,  works,  Gt)d  will  abate  nothing  of  what 
the  one  thing  on  account  of  which  the  He-  did  once  prescribe  and  require  of 
universe  had  been  created,  the  Mosaic  man  in  the  covenant  of  works. — 
code  only  possessed  a  transitory,  Fergusson. 
subordinate,  and  intermediate  charac- 
ter, coming  in,  as  it  were  in  a  secondary  An  Effectual  Mediator. — Edward  III., 
way,  between  the  promise  to  Abraham  after  defeating  Philip  of  Fiance  at 
and  the  fulfilment  of  that  promise  in  Cregy,  laid  siege  to  Calais,  which,  after 
the  gospel  of  Christ. — Dean  Farrar.  an  obstinate  resistance  of  a  year,  was 

taken.     He  offered  to  spare  the  lives 

The  Use  of  the  Law  under  the  Gospel,  of   the  inhabitants  on  condition  that 

I.  The  law  never  was  intended  to  six  of  their  principal  citizens  should  be 
supersede  the  gospel  as  a  means  of  life,  delivered    up    to    him,    with    halters 

II.  The  most  perfect  edition  of  the  round  their  necks,  to  be  immediately 
gospel,  so  far  from  having  abolished  executed.      When   these    terms   were 
the  least  tittle  of  the  moral  law,  has  announced  the  rulers  of  the  town  came 
established  it.  together,    and   the  question  was   pro- 
Ill.  The    use    of  the   law. — 1.    To  posed,  "Who  will  offer  himself  as  an 

constitute  probation.      2.    The  law  is  atonement   for   the   city?      Who   will 

our  schoolmaster  to  bring  us  to  Christ.  imitate  Christ  who  gave  Himself  for 

3.  The  law  serves  to  give  beauty  and  the  salvation  of  men  1  "     The  number 

symmetry  to  the  hidden  man  of  the  was  soon  made  up.     On  reaching  the 

heart.     4.  To  vindicate  the  conduct  of  English  camp   they  were  received   by 

our  Judge  in  dooming  the  impenitent  the    soldiers    of    Edward    with    every 

to  eternal  death.  mark  of  commiseration.   They  appeared 

Lessons. — 1.      Since    the    law   as   a  before   the    king.       "  Are    these    the 

covenant    has    been    superseded    by    a  principal   inhabitants  of   Calais  % "    he 

covenant  better    adapted    to    our  guilty  inquired    sternly.       "Of    Fiance,    my 

and  helpless  circumstances,  let  us  make  lord,"   they   replied.     "  Lead  them   to 

a  proper   use   of  the   mercy,    acquaint  execution."       At     this    moment     the 

ourselves  with  its  demands,  and  abound  queen  arrived.     She  was  informed  of 

in  the  holiness  it  enjoins.       2.    Mark  the  punishment  about  to  be  inflicted 

those  who  set  aside  the  law,  shun  their  on  the  six  victims.      She  hastened  to 

51 


chap.  in.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


the  king  and  pleaded  for  their  pardon.  as  captives  to  the  Father,  and  feel  that 

At  first   he  sternly  refused,  but   her  we  are  condemned  and  lost,  we  have 

earnestness   conquered,  and   the   king  an  effectual   Mediator  who  stays    the 

yielded.     When  we  submit  our  hearts  hand  of  justice. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses   21—25. 

The  True  Use  of  the  Lam — 

I.  Was  not  intended  to  bestow  spiritual  life. — "  If  there  had  been  a  law 
given  which  could  have  given  life,  verily  righteousness  should  have  been  by  the 
law"  (ver.  21).  The  law  was  not  against  the  promises.  It  was  a  divine 
method  in  dealing  with  man,  and  one  divine  method  never  conflicts  with  another. 
It  was  intended  to  mediate  between  the  promise  and  its  fulfilment.  It  is  not 
the  enemy  but  the  minister  of  grace.  It  did  not  profess  to  bestow  spiritual  life  ; 
but  in  its  sacrifices  and  oblations  pointed  to  the  coming  Christ  who  is  "  the  end 
of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  belie veth  "  (Rom.  x.  4). 

II.  Was  to  reveal  the  universal  domination  of  sin. — "The  Scripture  hath 
concluded  all  under  sin  "  (ver.  22).  The  Bible  from  the  beginning  and  through- 
out its  course,  in  its  unvarying  teaching,  makes  the  world  one  vast  prison-house, 
with  the  law  for  gaoler,  and  mankind  held  fast  in  chains  of  sin,  condemned, 
and  waiting  for  the  punishment  of  death.  Its  perpetual  refrain  is,  "  All  have 
sinned  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God."  Its  impeachment  covers  the  whole 
realm  of  human  life,  thought,  and  desire.  "Every  human  life,"  says  Martensen, 
"  that  has  not  yet  become  a  partaker  of  redemption  is  a  life  under  the  law,  in 
opposition  to  the  life  under  grace.  The  law  hovers  over  his  life  as  an  unfulfilled 
requirement ;  and,  in  the  depth  of  his  own  being,  remains  as  an  indismissible 
but  unsatisfied  and  unexpiated  claim  on  him,  which  characterises  such  a  human 
existence  as  sinful  and  guilt-laden." 

III.  Was  to  teach  the  absolute  necessity  of  faith  in  order  to  escape  its 
condemnation. — "  But  before  faith  came,  we  were  kept  under  the  law,  shut  up 
unto  the  faith  which  should  afterwards  be  revealed  "  (ver.  23).  The  law  was 
all  the  while  standing  guard  over  its  subjects,  watching  and  checking  every 
attempt  to  escape,  but  intending  to  hand  them  over  in  due  time  to  the  charge 
of  faith.  The  law  posts  its  ordinances,  like  so  many  sentinels,  round  the 
prisoner's  cell.  The  cordon  is  complete.  He  tries  again  and  again  to  break 
out  J  the  iron  circle  will  not  yield.  But  deliverance  will  yet  be  his.  The  day  of 
faith  approaches.  It  dawned  long  ago  in  Abraham's  promise.  Even  now  its 
light  shines  into  his  dungeon,  and  he  hears  the  word  of  Jesus,  "  Thy  sins  are 
forgiven  thee ;  go  in  peace."  Law,  the  stern  gaoler,  has  after  all  been  a  good 
friend  if  it  has  reserved  him  for  this.  It  prevents  the  sinner  escaping  to  a 
futile  and  illusive  freedom  (Eindlay). 

IV.  Was  to  act  as  a  moral  tutor  to  train  us  to  the  maturity  and  higher 
freedom  of  a  personal  faith  in  Christ. — '•'  Wherefore  the  law  was  our  schoolmaster 
to  bring  us  unto  Christ,"  etc.  (vers.  24,  25).  The  schoolmaster,  or  pedagogue, 
among  the  Greeks  meant  a  faithful  servant  entrusted  with  the  care  of  the  boy 
from  childhood,  to  keep  him  from  evil,  physical  and  moral,  and  accompany  him 
to  his  amusements  and  studies.  "  If  then  the  law  is  a  pedagogue,"  says 
Chrysostom,  "it  is  not  hostile  to  grace,  but  its  fellow- worker  ;  but  should  it 
continue  to  hold  us  fast  when  grace  has  come,  then  it  would  be  hostile." 
Judaism  was  an  education  for  Christianity.  It  trained  the  childhood  of  the 
race.  It  humbled  and  distressed  the  soul  with  the  consciousness  of  sin.  It 
revealed  the  utter  inadequacy  of  all  its  provisions  to  justify.  It  brought  the 
despairing  soul  to  Christ,  and  showed  that  the  true  way  to  righteousness  was  by 
personal  faith  in  Him. 

52 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS.         chap.  hi. 


Lessons. — 1.  Law  is  the  revealer  of  sin.  2.  Law  demands  universal  righteous- 
ness.    3.  Law  is  a  training  for  faith. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  21,  22.  The  Law  not  contrary  to  them  out  of  it.  2.  With  all  the  light 
the  Divine  Promise. — 1 .  It  is  the  way  of  of  the  Scriptures  shining  around  us, 
some  to  make  one  Scripture  contradict  with  the  law  of  God  ever  sounding  in 
another,  yet  their  bold  allegations  will  our  ears,  and  the  life  of  Christ  set  con- 
be  found  always  false,  and  truth  to  be  tinually  before  us,  how  prone  are  we 
ever  most  consonant  and  never  con-  to  forget  our  sinfulness,  to  turn  away 
trary  to  itself.  2.  So  exact  and  full  from  the  thought  of  it,  to  fancy  we 
is  the  righteousness  required  in  order  are  as  good  as  we  need  be,  and  that, 
to  life,  and  so  far  short  do  all  man-  though  we  might  certainly  be  better, 
kind  come  of  it,  that  no  works  of  our  yet  it  does  not  matter  much  !  How 
own,  done  in  obedience  to  the  law,  apt  are  we  still  to  forget  that  we  are 
can  amount  to  that  righteousness.  concluded  under  sin,  to  forget  that  we 
3.  Though  all  men  by  nature  be  under  are  shut  up  in  a  prison  !  Although 
sin,  it  is  a  matter  of  no  small  difficulty  the  souls  of  so  many  millions  are  lying 
to  convince  any  man  of  it.  The  work  around  us,  bloated  with  the  poison  of 
of  the  law,  accusing,  convincing,  or  sin,  how  tardily  do  we  acknowledge 
condemning  the  sinner,  is  compared  to  that  the  poison  by  which  they  perished 
the  work  of  a  judge  detaining  a  male-  must  also  be  deadly  to  us  !  3.  Suppose 
factor  in  prison  which  is  not  effectuated  you  were  to  be  carried  before  an 
but  with  force  and  violence.  4.  The  earthly  court  of  justice,  and  that  one 
law  by  its  threatenings  prepares  and  sweeping  accusation  were  to  be  brought 
necessitates  the  soul  to  embrace  against  you ;  suppose  you  were  found 
salvation  by  faith  in  the  Christ  re-  guilty,  and  the  excuse  you  set  up  were 
vealed  in  the  promise.  — Fergusson.  the  complete  proof  of  your  guilt, — what 

would     follow  ?       The     judge     would 

Yer.  22.   The  Great  Prison ;  or,  All  straightway  pass  sentence  upon  you, 

concluded    under  Sin. — 1.  Satan   does  and  you  would  be  condemned  to  suffer 

indeed  draw  and  drive  men  into  sin —  punishment  according  to  the  measure 

this  is  the  accursed  work  of  his  restless,  of   your    offence.     And   must  we   not 

Sabbathless  life  ;  and  when  he  has  got  expect  that  the  course  of  things  should 

them   there   he   binds  them  fast,  and  be  the  very  same  when  you  are  carried 

will  not  let  them  flee  from  his  toils,  before   a   heavenly    court   of    justice? 

He  builds  a  high  wall  of  sin  all  round  4.  When  a  man's  eyes  are  opened  to 

them  so  that  they  shall  not  look  over  see  the  prison  in  which  he  is  shut  up, 

it  into  the   goodly  land  beyond,    and  to  see  and  feel  the  chains  that  are  fast 

here  he  shuts  them  up  together,  sinner  bound  round  his  soul  and  have  eaten 

with   sinner,    a   never-ending   ghastly  into  it ;  when  he  has  learnt  to  see  and 

multitude,   that  they  may   encourage  know   that    the    pleasures,    whatever 

and  pamper  each  other  in  wickedness,  they  may  be,  of  sin  are  only,  like  the 

and   that    no    example,    no    voice    of  flesh-pots  of  Egypt,  intoxicating  drugs, 

holiness,   may  ever  reach  and  startle  given   to   him    to   deprive   him  of   all 

them.     But    God   never   drove,  never  sense   of   his  captivity, — then  will  he 

drew,  any  man  into  sin.     He  is  calling  long  for  a  deliverer,  rejoice  on  hearing 

us  to  come  out  from  the  deadly  land,  of    his    approach,    hail   him   when  he 

from  the  loathsome,  plague-breathing  comes  in  view,  and  follow  him  whither  - 

dungeon.     So  when  the  Scripture  con-  soever   he   may   lead.     As   unbelief  is 

eludes,   or  shuts  all  men   up  together  the  one  great  universal  sin,  in  which 

under  sin,  it  is  not  by  driving  them  all  mankind  are  concluded,  as  it  is  only 

into  sin,  but  for  the  sake  of   calling  from  having  let  slip  our  faith  in  God 

53 


chap.  III.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


that  we  have  yielded  our  hearts  to  the 
temptations  of  the  world  and  given 
ourselves  up  to  its  idolatries,  so  it  is 
only  through  faith  that  we  can  be 
brought  back  to  God — that  wTe  can 
receive  the  promise  given  to  those  who 
believe. — J.  C.  Hare. 

Yer.  23.  "Shut  up  unto  the  faith" 
The  Reasonableness  of  Faith. — The  mode 
of  conception  is  military.  The  law  is 
made  to  act  the  part  of  a  sentry, 
guarding  every  avenue  but  one,  and 
that  one  leads  those,  who  are  compelled 
to  take  it,  to  the  faith  of  the  gospel. 
Out  of  the  leading  varieties  of  taste 
and  sentiment  which  obtain  in  the 
present  age  we  may  collect  something 
which  may  be  turned  into  an  instru- 
ment of  conviction  for  reclaiming  men 
from  their  delusions  and  shutting  them 
up  to  the  faith. 

I.  There  is  the  school  of  natural 
religion. — It  is  founded  on  the  com- 
petency of  the  human  mind  to  know 
God  by  the  exercise  of  its  own  faculties, 
to  clothe  Him  in  the  attributes  of  its 
own  demonstration,  to  serve  Him  by  a 
worship  and  a  law  of  its  own  discovery, 
and  to  assign  to  Him  a  mode  of  pro- 
cedure in  the  administration  of  this 
vast  universe  upon  the  strength  and 
plausibility  of  its  own  theories.  They 
recognise  the  judicial  government  of 
God  over  moral  and  accountable 
creatures.  They  hold  there  is  a  law. 
One  step  more,  and  they  are  fairly 
shut  up  to  the  faith.  That  law  has 
been  violated. 

II.  There  is  the  school  of  classical 
morality. — It  differs  from  the  former 
school  in  one  leading  particular.  It 
does  not  carry  in  its  speculations  so 
distinct  and  positive  a  reference  to  the 
Supreme  Being.  Our  duties  to  God 
are  viewed  as  a  species  of  moral  accom- 
plishment, the  effect  of  which  is  to 
exalt  and  embellish  the  individual. 
We  ask  them  to  look  at  man  as  he  is, 
and  compare  him  with  man  as  they 
would  have  him  to  be.  If  they  find 
that  he  falls  miserably  short  of  their 
ideal  standard  of  excellence,  what  is 
this   but  making  a  principle  of  their 

H 


own  the  instrument  of  shutting  them 
up  unto  the  faith  of  the  gospel,  or  at 
least  shutting  them  up  unto  one  Jof 
the  most  peculiar  of  its  doctrines,  the 
depravity  of  our  nature,  or  the  dismal 
ravage  which  the  power  of  sin  has 
made  upon  the  moral  constitution  of 
the  species  ?  This  depravity  the  gospel 
proposes  to  do  away. 

III.  There  is  the  school  of  fine 
feeling  and  poetical  sentiment. — It 
differs  from  the  school  of  morality  in 
this — the  one  makes  virtue  its  idol 
because  of  its  rectitude,  the  other 
makes  virtue  its  idol  because  of  its 
beauty,  and  the  process  of  reasoning 
by  which  they  are  shut  up  unto  the 
faith  is  the  same  in  both.  However 
much  we  may  love  perfection  and 
aspire  after  it,  yet  there  is  some  want, 
some  disease,  in  the  constitution  of 
man  which  prevents  his  attainment  of 
it,  that  there  is  a  feebleness  of  principle 
about  him,  that  the  energy  of  his 
practice  does  not  correspond  to  the 
fair  promises  of  his  fancy,  and  how- 
ever much  he  may  delight  in  an  ideal 
scene  of  virtue  and  moral  excellence, 
there  is  some  lurking  malignity  in  his 
constitution  which,  without  the  opera- 
tion of  that  mighty  power  revealed  to 
us  in  the  gospel,  makes  it  vain  to  wish 
and  hopeless  to  aspire  after  it. — 
Dr.  Thomas  Chalmers. 

Yers.  24,  25.  The  Law  our  School- 
master.— There  was  a  time  when  God 
put  His  world  under  a  schoolmaster; 
then  it  would  have  been  preposterous 
to  apply  faith.  There  is  a  time 
when  a  larger  spirit  has  come,  and 
then  it  would  be  going  back  to  use 
law. 

I.  The  uses  of  restraint  in  the 
heart's  education. — 1.  The  first  use  of 
law  is  to  restrain  from  open  violence.  It 
is  necessary  for  those  who  feel  the  incli- 
nation to  evil,  and  so  long  as  the  incli- 
nation remains  so  far  must  a  man  be 
under  law.  Imagine  a  governor  amidst 
a  population  of  convicts  trusting  to  high 
principle.  Imagine  a  parent  having 
no  fixed  hours,  no  law  in  his  household, 
no  punishment  for  evil.      There  is  a 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS.         chap.  in. 


morbid   feeling   against    punishment ; 
but  it  is  God's  method. 

2.  The  second  use  of  restraint  is  to 
show  the  inward  force  of  evil. — A  steam- 
engine  at  work  in  a  manufactory  is  so 
quiet  and  gentle  that  a  child  might 
put  it  back.  But  interpose  a  bar  of 
iron  many  inches  thick,  and  it  cuts 
through  as  if  it  were  so  much  leather. 
Introduce  a  human  limb — it  whirls 
round,  and  the  form  of  man  is  in  one 
moment  a  bleeding,  mangled,  shapeless 
mass.  It  is  restraint  that  manifests 
this  unsuspected  power.  In  the  same 
way  law  discovers  the  strength  of  evil 
in  our  hearts. 

3.  The  third  use  is  to  form  habits  of 
obedience. — In  that  profession  which  is 
specially  one  of  obedience  — the  military 
profession — you  cannot  mistake  the 
imparted  type  of  character.  Im- 
mediate, prompt  obedience,  no  ques- 
tioning "  why  ?  "  Hence  comes  their 
decision  of  character.  Hence,  too, 
their  happiness.  Would  you  have 
your  child  happy,  decided,  manly? 
Teach  him  to  obey.  It  is  an  error  to 
teach  a  child  to  act  on  reason,  or 
to  expect  reasons  why  a  command  is 
given.  Better  it  is  that  he  should 
obey  a  mistaken  order  than  be  taught 
to  see  that  it  is  mistaken.  A  parent 
must  be  master  in  his  own  house. 

4.  The  fowth  use  is  to  form  habits 
of  faith. — As  Judaism  was  a  system 
calculated  to  nurture  habits  of 
obedience,  so  was  it  one  which 
nourished  the  temper  of  faith.  All 
education  begins  with  faith.  The 
child  does  not  know  the  use  of  the 
alphabet,  but  he  trusts.  The  boy 
beginning  mathematics  takes  on  trust 
what  he  sees  no  use  in.  The  child  has 
to  take  parental  wisdom  for  granted. 
Happy  the  child  that  goes  on  believing 
that  nothing  is  wiser,  better,  greater, 
than  his  father !  Blessed  spirit  of 
confiding  trust  which  is  to  be  trans- 
ferred to  God. 

II.  The  time  when  restraint  may 
be  laid  aside. — 1 .  When  self-command  is 
obtained.  Some  of  us  surely  there  are 
who  have  got  beyond  childish  meanness : 
we  could  not  be  mean  j  restraint  is  no 


longer  needed;  we  are  beyond  the 
schoolmaster.  Some  of  us  there  are 
who  have  no  inclination  to  intem- 
perance ;  childish  excess  in  eating  and 
drinking  exists  no  longer.  Some  of  us 
there  are  who  no  longer  love  indolence. 
We  have  advanced  beyond  it.  The 
law  may  be  taken  away,  for  we  are 
free  from  law.  True  Christian  liberty 
is  this — self-command,  to  have  been 
brought  to  Christ,  to  do  right  and  love 
right,  without  a  law  of  compulsion  to 
school  into  doing  it. 

2.  When  the  state  of  justification  by 
faith  has  been  attained. — There  are  two 
states  of  justification — by  the  law  and 
by  faith.  Justification  by  the  law 
implies  a  scrupulous  and  accurate  per- 
formance of  minute  acts  of  obedience 
in  every  particular ;  justification  by 
faith  is  acceptance  with  God,  not 
because  a  man  is  perfect,  but  because 
he  does  all  in  a  trusting,  large, 
generous  spirit,  actuated  by  a  desire  to 
please  God.  In  Christianity  there  are 
few  or  no  definite  laws — all  men  are 
left  to  themselves. 

3.  Restraint  must  be  laid  aside  when 
the  time  of  faith  has  come,  whether  faith 
itself  have  come  or  not. — It  is  so  in 
academical  education.  We  may  have 
attained  the  full  intellectual  compre- 
hension of  the  gospel,  but  religious 
goodness  has  not  kept  pace  with  it, 
and  the  man  wakes  to  conviction  that 
the  gospel  is  a  name  and  the  powers  of 
the  world  to  come  are  not  in  him.  You 
cannot  put  him  to  school  again.  Fear 
will  not  produce  goodness.  Forms  will 
not  give  reverence.  System  will  not 
confer  freedom.  Therefore  the  work  of 
childhood  and  youth  must  be  done 
while  we  are  young,  when  the  education 
is  not  too  late. — F.  W.  Robertson. 

Ver.  24.  The  Law  preparing  for 
Christ. 

I.  The  law  led  men  to  Christ  by 
foreshadowing  Him. — This  was  true  of 
the  ceremonial  part  of  it.  The  cere- 
monies meant  more  than  the  general 
duty  of  offering  to  God  praise  and 
sacrifice,  since  this  might  have  been 
secured  by  much  simpler  rites.     What 

55 


chap,  in;        H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


was  the  meaning  of  the  solemn  and 
touching  observance  of  the  Jewish  day 
of  atonement?  We  know  that  what 
passed  in  that  old  earthly  sanctuary 
was  from  first  to  last  a  shadow  of  the 
majestic  self -oblation  of  the  true  High 
Priest  of  Christendom,  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord  and  Saviour.  Each  ceremony 
was  felt  to  have  some  meaning  beyond 
the  time  then  present,  and  so  it 
fostered  an  expectant  habit  of  mind ; 
and  as  the  ages  passed  these  expecta- 
tions thus  created  converged  more 
and  more  towards  a  coming  Messiah, 
and  in  a  subordinate  but  real  way 
the  ceremonial  law  did  its  part  in 
leading  the  nation  to  the  sehool  of 
Christ. 

II.  By  creating  in  man's  conscience 
a  sense  of  want  which  Christ  alone 
could  relieve. — This  was  the  work  of 
the  moral  law,  of  every  moral  precept 
in  the  books  of  Moses,  but  especially  of 
those  most  sacred  and  authoritative 
precepts  which  we  know  as  the  ten 
commandments.  So  far  from  furnish- 
ing man  with  a  real  righteousness,  so 
far  from  making  him  such  as  he  should 
be,  correspondent  to  the  true  ideal  of 
his  nature,  the  law  only  inflicted  on 
every  conscience  that  was  not  fatally 
benumbed  a  depressing  and  over- 
whelming conviction  that  righteousness, 
at  least  in  the  way  of  legal  obedience, 
was  a  thing  impossible.  And  this 
conviction  of  itself  prepared  men  for  a 
righteousness  which  should  be  not  the 
product  of  human  efforts,  but  a  gift 
from  heaven — a  righteousness  to  be 
attained  by  the  adhesion  of  faith  to 
the  perfect  moral  Being,  Jesus  Christ, 
so  that  the  believer's  life  becomes  in- 
corporate with  His. 

III.  By  putting  men  under  a  discip- 
line which  trained  them  for  Christ. — 
What  is  the  divine  plan  for  training, 
whether  men  or  nations?  Is  it  not 
this — to  begin  with  rule  and  to  end 
with  principle,  to  begin  with  law  and 
to  end  with  faith,  to  begin  with  Moses 
and  to  end  with  Christ  ?  God  began 
with  rule.  He  gave  the  Mosaic  law, 
and  the  moral  parts  of  that  law  being 
also  laws  of  God's  own  essential  nature 

56 


could  not  possibly  be  abrogated ;  but 
as  rules  of  life  the  ten  commandments 
were  only  a  preparation  for  something 
beyond  them.  In  the  Christian  reve- 
lation God  says,  "  Believe  on  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  When  you  have  done 
this,  and  He  on  His  part  has  by  His 
Spirit  infused  into  you  His  divine  life 
so  that  you  are  one  with  Him,  you  will 
not  depend  any  longer  mainly  upon 
rules  of  conduct.  Justification  by 
faith  is  so  far  from  being  moral 
anarchy  that  it  is  the  absorption  of 
rule  into  the  higher  life  of  principle. 
In  the  experience  of  the  soul  faith 
corresponds  to  the  empire  of  principle 
in  the  growth  of  individual  character 
and  in  the  development  of  national 
life,  while  the  law  answers  to  that 
elementary  stage  in  which  outward 
rules  are  not  yet  absorbed  into  principle. 
— H.  P.  Liddon. 

The  Law  a  Schoolmaster. 

I.  The  Jewish  religion  brought  men 
to  Christ  by  the  light,  the  constraining 
force,  of  prophecy. — First  a  human 
deliverance  of  some  kind,  then  a  per- 
sonal Saviour,  is  announced.  He  was 
exactly  what  prophecy  had  foretold. 
He  Himself  appealed  to  prophecy  as 
warranting  His  claims. 

II.  By  that  ceremonial  law  which 
formed  so  important  a  part  of  it. — 
The  Jewish  ceremonial  pointed  to 
Christ  and  His  redemptive  work  from 
first  to  last.  The  epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  was  written  to  show  this — 
that  the  ceremonial  law  was  far  from 
being  a  final  and  complete  rule  of  life 
and  worship,  did  but  prefigure  blessings 
that  were  to  follow  it,  that  it  was  a 
tutor  to  lead  men  to  the  school  of 
Christ. 

III.  By  creating  a  sense  of  moral 
need  that  Christ  alone  could  satisfy. — 
The  moral  law — God's  essential,  inde- 
structible moral  nature  in  its  relation 
to  human  life,  thrown  for  practical 
purposes  into  the  form  of  command- 
ments— is  essentially,  necessarily  be- 
yond criticism ;  but  when  given  to 
sinful  man  it  does,  but  without  grace, 
discover  a  want  which  it  cannot  satisfy. 


'HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS.         chap.  in. 


It   enhanced  the  acting  sense   of   un-  The  Progress  of  Revelation. 

pardoned  sin  before  a  holy  God.     It  I.  The  law    was    our   schoolmaster 

convinced  man  of  his  moral  weakness,  as  giving  precepts  in  which  principles 

as  well  as  of  his  guilt,  of  his  inability  were    involved     but     not     expressly 

without   the    strengthening    grace   of  taught. 

Christ  ever  to  obey  it.  II.  As  teaching  inadequate  and  not 

Lessons. — 1.   We  see  a  test  of  all  reli-  perfect  duties — a  part  instead  of  the 

gious  privileges  or  gifts  :  Do  they  or  do  whole,  which  was  to  develop  into  the 

they  not  lead  soids  to  Christ  ?     2.   Ob-  whole.     Examples — the    institution  of 

serve  the  religious  use  of  all  law — to  teach  the  Temple  worship  ;  the  observance  of 

man  to  know  his  weakness  and  to  throw  the  Sabbath  ;  the  third  commandment. 

himself  on  a  higher  power  for  pardon  Lessons. — 1.    Revelation    is     educa- 

and  strength.      3.   We  see  the  exceeding  tion.       2.     Revelation    is    progressive, 

preciousness     of     Christ's    gospel — the  3.  The  training  of  the  character  in  God's 

matchless  value  of  that  faith  which  lives  revelation  has  always  preceded  the  illu- 

in  the  heart  of  the  Church  of  God. — H.  P.  mination      of     the     intellect. — F.      W. 

Liddon.  Robertson. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  26—29. 

The  Dignity  of  Sonship  with  God — 

I.  Enjoyed  by  all  who  believe  in  Christ. — "  For  ye  are  all  the  children  of 
God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (ver.  26).  Faith  in  Christ  emancipates  the  soul 
from  the  trammels  and  inferior  status  of  the  tutorial  training,  and  lifts  it  to  the 
higher  and  more  perfect  relationship  of  a  free  son  of  God.  The  believer  is  no 
longer  a  pupil,  subject  to  the  surveillance  and  restrictions  of  the  pedagogue  ;  but 
a  son,  enjoying  immediate  and  constant  intercourse  with  the  Father  and  all  the 
privileges  and  dignities  of  a  wider  freedom.  The  higher  relation  excludes  the 
lower ;  an  advance  has  been  made  that  leaves  the  old  life  for  ever  behind.  The 
life  now  entered  upon  is  a  life  of  faith,  which  is  a  superior  and  totally  different 
order  of  things  from  the  suppressive  domination  of  the  law. 

II.  Is  to  be  invested  with  the  character  of  Christ. — "  For  as  many  as  have 
been  baptised  into  Christ  have  put  on  Christ "  (ver.  27).  For  if  Christ  is  Son  of 
God,  and  thou  hast  put  on  Him,  having  the  Son  in  thyself  and  being  made  like 
to  Him,  thou  wast  brought  into  one  kindred  and  one  form  of  being  with  Him 
(Chrysostom).  To  be  baptised  into  Christ  is  not  the  mere  mechanical  observance 
of  the  rite  of  baptism  ;  the  rite  is  the  recognition  and  public  avowal  of  the  exer- 
cise of  faith  in  Christ.  In  the  Pauline  vocabulary  baptised  is  synonymous  with 
believing.  Faith  invests  the  soul  with  Christ,  and  joyfully  appropriates  the 
estate  and  endowments  of  the  filial  relationship.  Baptism  by  its  very  form — the 
normal  and  most  expressive  form  of  primitive  baptism,  the  descent  into  and  rising 
from  the  symbolic  waters — pictured  the  soul's  death  with  Christ,  its  burial  and 
its  resurrection  in  Him,  its  separation  from  the  life  of  sin,  and  entrance  upon  the 
new  career  of  a  regenerated  child  of  God  (Rom.  vi.  3-14). 

III.  Implies  such  a  complete  union  with  Christ  as  to  abolish  all  secondary  dis^ 
tinctions. — "  For  there  is  neither  Jew  nor  Greek,  bond  nor  free,  male  nor  female  ; 
for  ye  are  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus "  (ver.  28).  All  distinctions  of  nationality, 
social  status,  and  sex — necessary  as  they  may  be  in  the  worldly  life — disappear  in 
the  blending  of  human  souls  in  the  loftier  relationship  of  sons  of  God.  The 
gospel  is  universal  in  its  range  and  provisions,  and  raises  all  who  believe  in  Christ 
io  a  higher  level  than  man  could  ever  reach  under  the  Mosaic  regimen.  To  add 
circumcision  to  faith  would  be  not  to  rise  but  to  sink  from  the  state  of  sons  to 
that  of  serfs.     Christ  is  the  central  bond  of  unity  to  the  whole  human  race ; 

57 


chap.  in.        MOMILETiC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


faith  in  Him  is  the  realisation  by  the  individual  of  the  honours  and  raptures  of 
that  unity. 

IV.  Is  to  be  entitled  to  the  inheritance  of  joint  heirship  with  Christ. — "  If  ye  be 
Christ's,  then  are  ye  . . .  heirs  according  to  the  promise  "  (ver.  29).  In  Christ  the 
lineal  descent  from  David  becomes  extinct.  He  died  without  posterity.  But  He 
lives  and  reigns  over  a  vaster  territory  than  David  ever  knew  ;  and  all  who  are 
of  His  spiritual  seed,  Jew  or  Gentile,  share  with  Him  the  splendours  of  the 
inheritance  provided  by  the  Father.  Here  the  soul  reaches  its  supreme  glory 
and  joy.  In  Worcester  Cathedral  there  is  a  slab  with  just  one  doleful  word  on 
it  as  a  record  of  the  dead  buried  beneath.  That  word  is  Miserrimus.  No  name, 
no  date ;  nothing  more  of  the  dead  than  just  this  one  word  to  say  he  who  lay 
there  was  or  is  most  miserable.  Surely  he  had  missed  the  way  home  to  the 
Father's  house  and  the  Father's  love,  else  why  this  sad  record  ?  But  in  the 
Catacombs  at  Borne  there  is  one  stone  recently  found  inscribed  with  the  single 
word  Felicissima.  No  name,  no  date  again,  but  a  word  to  express  that  the  dead 
Christian  sister  was  most  happy.  Most  happy ;  why  ?  Because  she  had  found 
the  Father's  house  and  love,  and  that  peace  which  the  storms  of  life,  the  perse- 
cutions of  a  hostile  world,  and  the  light  afflictions  of  time  could  neither  give  nor 
take  away. 

Lessons. — 1.  Faith  confers  higher  privileges  than  the  law.  2.  Faith  in  Christ 
admits  the  soul  into  sonship  with  God.  3.  The  sons  of  God  share  in  the  fulness  of 
the  Christly  inheritance. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  26-29.  Baptism. 

I.  The  doctrine  of  Rome. — Christ's 
merits  are  instrumentally  applied  by 
baptism ;  original  sin  is  removed  by 
a  change  of  nature ;  a  new  character 
is  imparted  to  the  soul ;  a  germinal 
principle  or  seed  of  life  is  miraculously 
given  ;  and  all  this  in  virtue,  not  of 
any  condition  in  the  recipient,  nor  of 
any  condition  except  that  of  the  due 
performance  of  the  rite.  The  ob- 
jections to  this  doctrine  are:  1.  It 
assures  baptism  to  be  not  the  testimony 
to  a  fact,  but  the  fact  itself.  Baptism 
proclaims  the  child  of  God ;  the 
Bomanist  says  it  creates  him.  2.  It 
is  materialism  of  the  grossest  kind. 
3.  It  makes  Christian  life  a  struggle 
for  something  that  is  lost,  instead 
of  a  progress  to  something  that  lies 
before. 

II.  The  doctrine  of  modern  Cal- 
vinism.— Baptism  admits  all  into  the 
visible  Church,  but  into  the  invisible 
Church  only  a  special  few.  The  real 
benefit  of  baptism  only  belongs  to  the 
elect.  With  respect  to  others,  to 
predicate  of  them  regeneration  in  the 
highest  sense  is  at  best  an  ecclesiastical 

58 


fiction,  said  in  the  judgment  of  charity. 

You   are   not   God's    child   until    you 

consciously.       On    this 

1.  This    judgment     of 

at    the    baptismal  font. 

is    identical     with     the 

this     respect — that    it 


become  such 
we  remark : 
charity  ends 
2.  This  view 
Roman 


one    m 
creates  the  fact  instead  of  testifying  to  it. 
3.  Is  pernicious  in  its    results   in  the 
matter  of  education. 

III.  The  doctrine  of  the  Bible,  - 
Man  is  God's  child,  and  the  sin  of  the 
man  consists  in  perpetually  living  as  if 
it  were  false.  To  be  a  son  of  God  is 
one  thing ;  to  know  that  you  are  and 
call  Him  Father  is  another.  Baptism 
authoritatively  reveals  and  pledges  to 
the  individual  that  which  is  true  of  the 
race.  1.  This  view  prevents  exclusive- 
ness  and  spiritual  pride.  2.  Protests 
against  the  notion  of  our  being  separate 
units  in  the  divine  life.  3.  Sanctifies 
materialism. — F.  W.  Robertson. 

Ver.  26.  The  Children  of  God. 

I.  We  are  all  children. 
II.  We  are  all  children  of  God. 
III.  We  are   all   children  of  God 
through  faith, 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS.         chap.  ill. 


IV.  We  are  all  children  of  God 
in  Christ  Jesus. — Dr.  Beet. 

God's  Children. 

I.  If  thou  be  God's  child,  surely 
He  will  provide  all  things  necessary 
for  soul  and  body. — Our  care  must  be 
to  do  the  duty  that  belongs  to  us ; 
when  this  is  done  our  care  is  ended. 
They  who  drown  themselves  in  worldly 
cares  live  like  fatherless  children. 

II.  In  that  we  are  children  we 
have  liberty  to  come  into  the  presence 
of  God. 

III.  Nothing  shall  hurt  those  who 
are  the  children  of  God. 

IV.  Walk  worthy  of  your  profession 
and  calling. — Be  not  vassals  of  sin 
and  Satan  ;  carry  yourselves  as  King's 
sons. 

V.  Our  care  must  be  to  resemble 
Christ. 

VI.  We  must  have  a  desire  and 
love  to  the  word  of  God  that  we  may 
grow  by  it. 

VII.  We  must  have  afflictions,  if 
we  be  God's  children,  for  He  corrects 
all  His  children. — Perkins. 

Vers.  27,  28.  The  Christly  Char- 
acter— 

I.  Acquired  by  a  spiritual  union 
with  Christ. — "  Baptised  into  Christ." 

II.  Is  a  complete  investiture  with 
Christ. — "  Have  put  on  Christ." 

III.  Is  a  union  with  Christ  that 
absorbs  all  conventional  distinctions 
(ver.  28). 

Ver.  27.  Profession  without  Hypoc- 
risy.— Hypocrisy  is  professing  without 
practising.  Men  profess  without  feeling 
and  doing,  or  are  hypocrites  in  nothing 
so  much  as  in  their  prayers.  Let  a 
man  set  his  heart  upon  learning  to 
pray  and  strive  to  learn,  and  no 
failures  he  may  continue  to  make  in 
his  manner  of  praying  are  sufficient  to 
cast  him  from  God's  favour.  Let  him 
but  be  in  earnest,  striving  to  master 
his  thoughts  and  to  be  serious,  and  all 
the  guilt  of  his  incidental  failings  will 
be  washed  away  in  his  Lord's  blood. 
We  profess  to  be  saints,  to  be  guided 


by  the  highest  principles,  and  to  be 
ruled  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  We  have 
long  ago  promised  to  believe  and  obey. 
It  is  true  we  cannot  do  these  things 
aright — nay,  even  with  God's  help 
we  fall  short  of  duty.  Nevertheless 
we  must  not  cease  to  profess.  There 
is  nothing  so  distressing  to  a  true 
Christian  as  to  have  to  prove  himself 
such  to  others,  both  as  being  conscious 
of  his  own  numberless  failings  and 
from  his  dislike  of  display.  Christ  has 
anticipated  the  difficulties  of  his 
modesty.  He  does  not  allow  such  a 
one  to  speak  for  himself  ;  He  speaks 
for  him.  Let  us  endeavour  to  enter 
more  and  more  fully  into  the  meaning 
of  our  own  prayers  and  professions  ; 
let  us  humble  ourselves  for  the  very 
little  we  do  and  the  poor  advance  we 
make ;  let  us  avoid  unnecessary  display 
of  religion.  Thus  we  shall,  through 
God's  grace,  form  within  us  the 
glorious  mind  of  Christ. — Newman. 

Teachings  of  Baptism. 

I.  Our  baptism  must  put  us  in 
mind  that  we  are  admitted  and  re- 
ceived into  the  family  of  God. 

II.  Our  baptism  in  the  name  of 
the  Trinity  must  teach  us  to  know 
and  acknowledge  God  aright. 

III.  Our  baptism  must  be  unto  us 
a  storehouse  of  comfort  in  time  of 
need. 

IV.  Baptism  is  a  putting  on  of 
Christ. — Alluding  to  the  custom  of 
those  who  were  baptised  in  the 
apostle's  days  putting  off  their  gar- 
ments when  they  were  baptised,  and 
putting  on  new  garments  after  baptism. 

1.  In  that  we  are  to  put  on  Christ  we 
are  reminded  of  our  moral  nakedness. 

2.  To  have  a  special  care  of  the 
trimming  and  garnishing  of  our  souls. 

3.  Though  we  be  clothed  with  Christ 
in  baptism,  we  must  further  desire  to 
be  clothed  upon — clad  with  immor- 
tality.— Perkins. 

Ver.  28.  All  are  One  in  Christ. 
T.  People   of  all   nations,  all  con- 
ditions, and  all  sexes. 

II.  They  who  are  of  great  birth  and 

59 


chap.  iv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIAN&. 


high  condition  must  be  put  in  mind 
not  to  be  high-minded,  nor  despise 
them  of  low  degree,  for  all  are  one  in 
Christ. 

III.  All  believers  must  be  of  one 
heart  and  mind. 

IV.  We  learn  not  to  hate  any 
man,  but  do  good  to  all. — Men  turn 
their  swords  and  spears  into  mattocks 
and  scythes,  because  they  are  one  with 
Christ  by  the  bond  of  one  Spirit. — 
Perkins. 

Ver.  29.  The  Promise  of  Grace. — The 
specific  form  of  the  whole  gospel  is 
promise,  which  God  gives  in  the  word 
and  causes  to  be  preached.  The  last 
period  of  the  world  is  the  reign  of 
grace.  Grace  reigns  in  the  world  only 
as  promise.  Grace  has  nothing  to  do 
with  law  and  requisition  of  law ;  there- 
fore the  word  of  that  grace  can  be  no 
other  than  a  word  of  promise.  The 
promise  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  is  the 


word  of  the  new  covenant.  The 
difference  between  the  gospel  of  the 
old  covenant  and  that  of  the  new  rests 
alone  on  the  transcendently  greater 
glory  of  its  promise. — Harless. 

Heirs  according  to  the  Promise. 

I.  The  basest  person,  if  he  believes 
in  Christ,  is  in  the  place  of  Abraham, 
and  succeeds  him  in  the  inheritance 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

II.  Believers  must  be  content  in 
this  world  with  any  estate  God  may 
lay  upon  them,  for  they  are  heirs 
with  Abraham  of  heaven  and  earth. 

III.  They  that  believe  in  Christ 
must  moderate  their  worldly  cares 
and  not  live  as  drudges  of  the  world, 
for  they  are  heirs  of  God,  and  are 
entitled  to  all  good  things  promised 
in  the  covenant. 

IV.  Our  special  care  must  be  for 
heaven. — The  city  of  God  is  thy  por- 
tion, or  child's  part. — Perkins. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 


V  r.  1.  The  heir,  as  long  as  he  is  a  child. — An  infant,  one  under  age.  Differeth  nothing 
from  a  servant. — A  slave.  He  is  not  at  his  own  disposal.  He  could  not  perform  any  act  but 
through  his  legal  representative. 

Ver.  2.  Under  tutors  and  governors. — Controllers  of  his  person  and  property. 

Ver.  3.  Under  the  elements  of  the  world.— The  rudimentary  religious  teaching  of  a  non- 
religious  character.     The  elementary  lessons  of  outward  things. 

Ver.  4.  God  sent  forth  His  Son. — Sent  forth  out  of  heaven  from  Himself.  Implies  the 
pre-existence  of  the  Son.  Made  of  a  woman. — Made  to  be  born  of  a  woman.  Indicating  a 
special  interposition  of  God  in  His  birth  as  man.  Made  under  the  law. — By  His  Father's 
appointment  and  His  own  free  will,  subject  to  the  law,  to  keep  it  all,  ceremonial  and 
moral,  for  us,  as  the  Representative  Man,  and  to  suffer  and  exhaust  the  full  penalty  of  our 
violation  of  it. 

Ver.  5.  The  adoption  of  sons. — Receive  as  something  destined  or  due.  Herein  God  makes 
of  sons  of  men  sons  of  God,  inasmuch  as  God  made  of  the  Son  of  God  the  Son  of  man 
{Augustine). 

Ver.  6.  Abba,  Father. — Abba  is  the  Chaldee  for  father.  The  early  use  of  it  illustrates 
what  Paul  has  been  saying  (iii.  28)  of  the  unity  resulting  from  the  gospel ;  for  Abba,  Father, 
unites  Hebrew  and  Greek  on  one  lip,  making  the  petitioner  at  once  a  Jew  and  a  Gentile. 

Ver.  9.  How  turn  ye  again  [anew]  ? — Making  a  new  beginning  in  religion,  lapsing  from 
Christianity  just  in  as  far  as  they  embrace  legalism.  To  the  weak  and  beggarly  elements. 
— Weak  is  contrasted  with  power  as  to  effects,  and  beggarly  with  affluence  in  respect  of 
gifts.  The  disparaging  expression  is  applied  ;  not  to  the  ritualistic  externalism  of  heathen 
religions,  but  rather  to  that  God-given  system  of  ritualistic  ordinances  which  had  served  the 
Church  in  her  infancy.  That  which  was  appropriate  food  for  a  babe  or  sick  man  is  feeble 
and  poor  for  a  grown  man  in  full  health. 

60 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS.         chap.  iv. 


Ver.  12.  Be  as  I  am,  for  I  am  as  ye  are. — Paul  had  become  as  a  Gentile,  though  he  was 
once  a  passionate  Jew.  Their  natural  leanings  towards  Judaism  they  ought  to  sacrifice  as 
well  as  he. 

Ver.  13.  Ye  know  how  through  infirmity  of  flesh  I  preached. — The  weakness  may  have 
been  general  debility,  resulting  from  great  anxieties  and  toils.  It  has  been  supposed  that 
Paul  was  feeble-eyed,  or  blear-eyed  (Acts  xxii.  6),  and  that  this  special  weakness  had  been 
aggravated  at  the  time  now  in  question. 

Ver.  17.  They  zealously  affect  you,  but  not  well. — They  keenly  court  you,  but  not  honour- 
ably. They  would  exclude  you — from  everything  and  every  one  whose  influence  would  tend 
to  bring  the  Galatians  back  to  loyalty  to  the  gospel. 

Ver.  20.  I  desire  to  be  present  with  you,  and  to  change  my  voice.— To  speak  not  with  the 
stern  tones  of  warning,  but  with  tender  entreaties.  I  stand  in  doubt  of  you.— I  am  sorely 
perplexed,  nonplussed,  bewildered,  as  if  not  knowing  how  to  proceed. 

Ver.  24.  Which  things  are  an  allegory. — Under  the  things  spoken  of — the  two  sons,  with 
their  contrast  of  parentage  and  position — there  lies  a  spiritual  meauing. 

Ver.  25.  Jerusalem  which  now  is,  and  is  in  bondage  with  her  children. — Judaism  as 
rejecting  the  light  and  liberty  of  the  new  dispensation. 

Ver.  26.  But  Jerusalem  which  is  above  is  free. — Is  the  spiritual  reality  which,  veiled  under 
the  old  dispensation,  is  comparatively  unveiled  in  the  dispensation  of  grace,  and  destined 
to  be  fully  and  finally  manifested  in  the  reign  of  glory.  Christians  are  very  different  in 
standing  to  slave-born  slaves. 

Ver.  27.  The  desolate  hath  many  more  children  than  she  which  hath  an  husband. — The 
special  purpose  of  the  quotation  appears  to  be  to  show  that  the  idea  of  a  countless  Church, 
including  Gentiles  as  well  as  Jews,  springing  out  of  spiritual  nothingness,  was  apprehended 
under  the  Old  Testament  as  destined  for  realisation  under  the  New. 

Ver.  30.  Cast  out  the  bondwoman  and  her  son. — Even  house-room  to  Judaism  is  not  mattei 
of  right,  but  only  by  sufferance,  and  tuat  so  long  and  so  far  as  it  leaves  the  gospel  undis- 
turbed in  full  possession. 

MAIN  HOMILETIC  S  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—7. 

The  Nonage  of  the  Pre-Christian  World. 

I.  Mankind  in  pre-Christian  times  was  like  the  heir  in  his  minority. — 1.  In 

a  state  of  temporary  servitude,  though  having  great  expectations.  "  The  heir 
differeth  nothing  from  a  servant,  though  he  be  lord  of  all ;  but  is  under  tutors 
and  governors"  (vers.  1,  2).  Under  the  Old  Testament  the  bond -servant  had  this 
in  common  with  a  son,  that  he  was  a  recognised  member  of  the  family  ;  and  the 
son  had  this  in  common  with  the  slave,  that  he  was  in  servitude,  but  with  this 
difference,  the  servitude  of  the  son  was  evanescent,  that  of  the  slave  was 
permanent.  The  heirship  is  by  right  of  birth,  but  possession  and  enjoyment 
can  be  reached  only  by  passing  through  servitude  and  attaining  majority.  The 
minor  is  in  the  hands  of  guardians  who  care  for  his  person  and  mental  training, 
and  of  stewards  who  manage  his  estate.  So  the  world,  though  possessing  the 
promise  of  great  blessing,  was  held  for  ages  in  the  servitude  of  the  law. 

2.  Subject  to  the  restraint  of  external  ordinances. — "  Were  in  bondage  under 
the  elements  of  the  world "  (ver.  3).  The  commandments  and  ordinances 
imposed  by  the  law  belonged  to  an  early  and  elementary  period.  In  their 
infantile  externalism  they  stand  contrasted  with  the  analogous  things  of  the 
new  dispensation,  in  which  the  believer  is  a  grown  man  who  casts  away  childish 
things.  The  Mosaic  system  watched  over  and  guarded  the  infancy  of  the  world. 
It  exacted  a  rigid  obedience  to  its  mandates,  and  in  doing  so  trained  mankind  to 
see  and  feel  the  need  and  appreciate  the  rich  inheritance  of  the  covenant  of 
grace.  Mosaism  rendered  invaluable  service  to  Christianity.  It  safe-guarded 
the  writings  that  contained  promises  of  future  blessings,  and  educated  the  race 
throughout  the  period  of  its  nonage. 

II.  The  matured  sonship  of  mankind  is  accomplished  through  redemption. — 
1.  The  Redeemer  is  divinely  provided  and  of  the  highest  dignity.  "  God  sent 
forth  His  Son  "  (ver.  4).  The  mystical  Germans  speak  of  Christ  as  the  ideal  Son 
of  man,  the  foretype  of  humanity  ;  and  there  is  a  sense  in  which  mankind  was 

61 


chap.  iv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


created  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  is  "  the  image  of  God,  the  firstborn  of  every 
creature."  But  the  apostle  refers  here  to  a  loftier  dignity  belonging  to  Christ. 
He  came  in  the  character  of  God's  Son,  bringing  His  sonship  with  Him.  The 
Word,  who  became  flesh,  was  with  God,  was  God,  in  the  beginning.  The  divine 
Son  of  God  was  sent  forth  into  the  world  by  the  all-loving  Father  to  be  the 
Redeemer  of  mankind  and  to  put  an  end  to  the  world's  servitude. 

2.  The  Redeemer  assumes  the  nature  and  condition  of  those  He  redeems. — "  Made 
of  a  woman,  made  under  the  law,  to  redeem  them  that  were  under  the  law  " 
(vers.  4,  5).  Christ  was  born  of  woman  as  other  men  are,  and,  like  them,  was 
at  first  a  weak  and  dependent  babe.  His  child-life  has  for  ever  beautified  and 
consecrated  child-nature.  He  was  born  under  law — not  the  law  as  a  mere  Jew, 
which  would  have  limited  His  redeeming  work  to  the  Jewish  nation,  but  under 
law  in  its  widest  application.  He  submitted  not  only  to  the  general  moral 
demands  of  the  divine  law  for  men,  but  to  all  the  duties  and  proprieties  incident 
to  His  position  as  a  man,  even  to  those  ritual  ordinances  which  His  coming  was 
to  abolish.  The  purpose  of  His  being  sent  was  "  to  redeem  them  that  were  under 
the  law  " — to  buy  them  out  of  their  bondage.  He  voluntarily  entered  into  the 
condition  of  the  enslaved  that  He  might  emancipate  them. 

3.  The  sonship  acquired  through  redemption  is  not  by  merit  or  legal  right,  but  by 
adoption. — "  That  we  might  receive  the  adoption  of  sons  "  (ver.  5).  The  sonship  is 
by  grace,  not  of  nature.  Man  lost  his  sonship  by  sin ;  by  grace  he  gets  it  back 
again.  Adoption  we  do  not  get  back ;  we  simply  receive  it.  It  is  an  act  of  God's 
free  grace. 

III.  The  attainment  of  sonship  is  a  conscious  reality. — 1.  Made  evident  by 
the  Spirit  of  God  witnessing  in  us  and  crying  to  Him  as  to  a  Father.  "  Because 
ye  are  sons,  God  hath  sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  His  Son  into  your  hearts,  crying, 
Abba,  Father  "  (ver.  6).  God  sent  forth  His  Son  into  the  world  of  men  :  He 
sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  His  Son  into  their  individual  hearts.  The  filial 
consciousness  was  born  within  them,  supernaturally  inspired.  When  they 
believed  in  Christ,  when  they  saw  in  Him  the  Son  of  God,  their  Redeemer,  they 
were  stirred  with  a  new  ecstatic  impulse ;  a  divine  glow  of  love  and  joy  kindled 
in  their  breasts ;  a  voice  not  their  own  spoke  to  their  spirit ;  their  soul  leaped 
forth  upon  their  lips,  crying  to  God,  "  Father,  Father  ! "  They  were  children  of 
God,  and  knew  it. 

2.  Confirmed  by  the  heirship  that  results  from  the  divine  adoption. — "If  a  son, 
then  an  heir  of  God  through  Christ"  (ver.  7).  The  nonage,  the  period  of 
servitude  and  subjection,  is  passed.  It  gives  place  to  the  unrivalled  privilege 
of  a  maturer  spiritual  manhood,  and  the  heirship  to  an  inheritance  of  indescrib- 
able and  imperishable  blessedness. 

Lessons. —  1.  The  law  held  the  world  in  bondage.  2.  The  gospel  is  a  message  of 
liberty  by  redemption.     3.  Redemption  by  Christ  confers  distinguished  privileges. 

GERM  NOTES  ON   THE    VERSES. 

Vers.   4,  5.  Christ's  Mission  for  the  in  His  most  essential  prerogatives  and 

Adoption  of  Sons  in  the  Fulness  of  Time.  perfections,    He  is   here  styled,    "  His 

I.  The  mission  of  Jesus  Christ  and  Son."     He  was  "  made  of  a  woman." 

the  manner  in  which  He  manifested  The  circumstances  of  His  incarnation 

Himself. — "  God  sent  forth  His  Son."  placed   Him  at   an  immeasurable  dis- 

These  words  present  the  great  fact  of  tance  from  all  other  parts  of  the  human 

Christ's  mission  from  the  Father  and  race.     He  was  the  immediate  produc- 

His   appearance    in    the   world.      To  tion  of  God,  by  His  divine  power  He 

denote    the    inexpressible    dignity    of  was  conceived  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 

Jesus,  as  being  one  with   the  Father  thereby  completely  exempted  from  the 

62 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS.         chap.  IV. 


taint  of  original  sin.  He  was  the  holy 
thing  born  of  a  virgin.  He  was  by 
constitution  placed  in  the  same  state 
as  our  first  parents.  He  underwent  a 
similar  but  severer  trial,  and  main- 
tained His  innocence  against  all  the 
assaults  of  Satan.  He  was  "made 
under  the  law " ;  whereas  all  other 
creatures  are  under  it  by  the  very 
terms  of  their  existence,  by  the  condi- 
tion of  their  nature.  He  was  made 
under  the  ceremonial  law,  under  the 
moral  law,  under  the  mediatorial  law. 

II.  The  design  of  Christ's  mission. — 
"  To  redeem."  He  came  not  merely  to 
exemplify  a  rule  of  life,  but  to  satisfy 
its  violation ;  not  to  explain  the  statutes 
of  heaven,  but  to  pay  the  penalty 
arising  from  the  curse  announced 
against  their  transgression.  He  came 
essentially  to  change  the  moral  situation 
of  mankind.  Christ  has  added  to  our 
original  brightness ;  He  has  not  only 
redeemed  us  from  the  first  transgression, 
but  accumulated  blessings  which  man, 
even  in  innocence,  could  never  have 
obtained. 

III.  The  fitness  of  the  season  at 
which  Christ  was  manifested. — "The 
fulness  of  time."  1.  It  was  the  period 
foretold  by  the  prophets.  Hence  the 
general   expectation    of    His    coming. 

2.  It  was  a  period  of  advancement  in 
politics,  legislation,  science  and  arts, 
and  manners ;    an  age  of  scepticism. 

3.  It  was  a  period  of  toleration.  The 
epoch  will  arrive  when  this  world  shall 
be  thought  of  as  nothing  but  as  it 
furnished  a  stage  for  the  manifestation 
of  the  Son  of  God. — Robert  Hall. 

Yer.  4.  The  Fulness  of  the  Time. — 
Christ  comes  when  a  course  of  pre- 
paration, conducted  through  previous 
ages,  was  at  last  complete.  He  was 
not  the  creation  of  His  own  or  any 
preceding  age.  What  is  true  of  all 
other  great  men,  who  are  no  more 
than  great  men,  is  not  true  of  Him. 
They  receive  from  their  age  as  much 
as  they  give  it ;  they  embody  and 
reflect  its  spirit.  Christ  really  owed 
nothing  to  the  time  or  the  country 
which  welcomed  His  advent. 


I.  The  world  was  prepared  politi- 
cally for  Christ's  work. — There  was 
a  common  language — the  Greek ;  a 
common  government — the  Eoman. 

II.  There  was  a  preparation  in  the 
convictions  of  mankind. — The  epoch  of 
religious  experiments  had  been  closed 
in  an  epoch  of  despair. 

III.  There  was  a  preparation  in  the 
moral  experience  of  mankind. — The 
dreadful  picture  of  the  pagan  world 
which  St.  Paul  draws  at  the  close  of 
the  first  chapter  of  his  epistle  to  the 
Romans  is  not  a  darker  picture  than 
that  of  pagan  writers — of  moralists 
like  Seneca,  of  satirists  like  Juvenal, 
of  historians  like  Tacitus ;  and  yet 
enough  survived  of  moral  truth  in  the 
human  conscience  to  condemn  average 
pagan  practice.  It  led  them  to  yearn 
for  a  deliverer,  although  their  aspira- 
tions were  indefinite  enough.  This 
widespread  corruption,  this  longing  for 
better  things,  marked  the  close  of  the 
epoch  of  moral  experiments. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  earthly  life  of  Christ 
stood  in  a  totally  different  relation  to- 
wards moral  truth  from  that  of  every 
other  man.  2.  It  was  a  life  at  harmony 
with  itself  and  a  revelation  of  higher 
truth.  3.  His  incarnation  delivers  us 
from  false  views  of  the  world  and  of  life, 
from  base  and  desponding  views  of  our 
human  nature,  and  from  bondage. — 
H.  P.  Liddon. 

Christ  Obedient  to  the  Law. 

I.  This  obedience  was  not  a  matter 
of  course,  following  upon  His  incarna- 
tion. He  might  have  lived  and  died, 
had  it  been  consistent  with  His  high 
purpose,  in  sinless  purity,  without  ex- 
pressly undertaking  as  He  did  openly 
to  fulfil  the  law.  It  was  a  voluntary 
act,  becoming  and  fit  for  the  great 
work  He  had  in  hand. 

II.  This  obedience  was  not  only  an 
integral  but  also  a  necessary  part  of 
His  work  of  redemption. — Had  this 
not  been  so,  redemption  would  have 
been  incomplete.  Not  only  God's  un- 
written law  in  the  conscience,  but 
God's  written  law  in  the  tables  of 
stone,  must  be  completely  satisfied.     It 

63 


chap.  iv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


being  shown,  by  both  Gentile  and  Jew, 
that  neither  by  nature  nor  by  revealed 
light  was  man  capable  of  pleasing  God, 
all  men  were  left  simply  and  solely 
dependent  on  His  free  and  unmerited 
grace.  All  cases  of  guilt  must  be 
covered,  all  situations  of  disobedience 
taken  up  and  borne  and  carried  trium- 
phantly out  into  perfection  and  ac- 
cordance with  the  Father's  will,  by  the 
Son  of  God  in  our  flesh. 

III.  This  obedience  for  man  was  to 
be  not  only  complete,  so  that  Christ 
should  stand  in  the  root  of  our  nature 
as  the  accepted  man,  but  was  to  be 
our  pattern,  that  as  He  was  holy  so 
we  might  be  holy  also. 

IV.  This  obedience  arose  from  the 
requirements  of  His  office  connected 
with  the  law. — He  was  the  end  of  the 
law.  It  all  pointed  to  Him.  Its 
types  and  ceremonies  all  found  fulfil- 
ment in  His  person  and  work.  All 
has  been  fulfilled.  All  looked  forward 
to  One  that  was  to  come — to  one  who 
has  come,  and  in  His  own  person  has 
superseded  that  law  by  exhausting  its 
requirements,  has  glorified  that  law 
by  filling  out  and  animating  with 
spiritual  life  its  waste  and  barren 
places.  So  that  God  has  not  changed, 
nor  has  His  purpose  wavered,  nor  are 
His  people  resting  on  other  than  their 
old  foundation. — Dean  Alford. 

Ver.  5.  Tinder  the  Law — 

I.  As  the  rule  of  life. — Thus  angels 
are  under  the  law,  Adam  was  before 
his  fall,  and  the  saints  in  heaven  are 
so  now.  None  yield  more  subjection 
to  the  law  than  they,  and  this  subjec- 
tion is  their  liberty. 

II.  As  a  grievous  yoke  which  none 
can  bear. — 1.  It  bound  the  Church  of 
the  Old  Testament  to  the  observance 
of  many  and  costly  ceremonies.  2.  It 
binds  every  offender  to  everlasting  death. 
3.  It  is  a  yoke  as  it  increases  sin  and  is 
the  strength  of  it.  The  wicked  nature 
of  man  is  the  more  to  do  a  thing  the 
more  he  is  forbidden. — Perkins. 

Adoption. 

I.    In    what    adoption    consists. — 

1.  The  points  of  resemblance  between 


natural  and  spiritual  adoption.  (1)  We 
cease  to  have  our  former  name,  and 
are  designated  after  the  name  of  God. 
(2)  We  change  our  abode.  Once  in 
the  world,  now  in  the  Church  and 
family  of  God.  (3)  We  change  our 
costume.  Conform  to  the  family 
dress  :  garments  of  salvation.  2.  The 
points  of  difference  between  natural 
and  spiritual  adoption.  (1)  Natural 
adoption  was  to  supply  a  family  defect. 
God  had  hosts  of  children.  (2)  Natural 
adoption  was  only  of  sons.  No  dis- 
tinction in  God's  adoption.  (3)  In 
natural  adoption  there  was  only  a 
change  of  condition.  God  makes  His 
children  partakers  of  His  own  nature. 

(4)  In  natural  adoption  only  one  was 
adopted,   but   God  adopts   multitudes. 

(5)  In  natural  adoption  only  tem- 
poral advantages  were  derived,  but  in 
spiritual  the  blessings  are  eternal. 

II.  Signs  of  adoption. — 1.  Internal 
signs.  Described  in  iv.  6  ;  Rom.  viii. 
14-16.  2.  External  signs.  (1)  Lan- 
guage ;  (2)  Profession ;  (3)  Obedience. 

II  I.  Privileges  of  adoption. — 1.  De- 
liverance from  the  miseries  of  our 
natural  state.  2.  Investiture  into 
all  the  benefits  of  Christ's  family. 
3.  A  title  to  the  celestial  inheritance. 

Learn — 1.  The  importance  of  the  bless- 
ing. 2.  Seek  the  good  of  God's  family. 
3.  Invite  strangers  to  become  sons  and 
heirs  of  God. — Sketches. 

Adoption  and  its  Claims. — Among 
the  American  Indians  when  a  captive 
was  saved  to  be  adopted  in  the  place 
of  some  chieftain  who  had  fallen,  his 
allegiance  and  his  identity  were  looked 
upon  as  changed.  If  he  left  a  wife 
and  children  behind  him,  they  were  to 
be  forgotten  and  blotted  from  memory. 
He  stood  in  the  place  of  the  dead 
warrior,  assumed  his  responsibilities, 
was  supposed  to  cherish  those  whom 
he  had  cherished  and  hate  those  whom 
he  had  hated ;  in  fact,  he  was  supposed 
to  stand  in  the  same  relation  of  con- 
sanguinity to  the  tribe. — Bancroft. 

Vers.  6,  7.  Evidences  of  Sonship. 
I.  The  presence  of  the  Spirit  in  the 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS.         chap.  IV. 


heart. — 1.  The  beginning  of  our  new- 
birth  is  in  the  heart,  when  a  new  light 
is  put  into  the  mind,  a  new  and 
heavenly  disposition  into  the  will  and 
affection.  2.  The  principal  part  of 
our  renovation  is  in  the  heart  where 
the  Spirit  abides.  3.  The  beginning 
and  principal  part  of  God's  worship 
is  in  the  heart.  4.  Keep  watch  and 
ward  about  thy  heart,  that  it  may  be 
a  fit  place  of  entertainment  for  the 
Spirit,  who  is  an  Ambassador  sent 
from  God  to  thee. 

II.  The  work  of  the  Spirit.— 1.  Be- 
stowing conviction  that  the  Scriptures 
are  the  word  of  God.  2.  Submission 
to   God    and   a   desire   to   obey    Him. 

3.  The  testimony  of  the  Spirit — a 
divine  manner  of  reasoning  framed  in 
the  mind — that  we  are  God's  children. 

4.  Peace  of  conscience,  joy,  and  affiance 
in  God. 

III.  The  desires  of  the  heart 
directed  towards  God. — 1.  Our  cries 
are  to  be  directed  to  God  with  rever- 
ence. 2.  With  submission  to  His  will. 
3.  With  importunity  and  constancy. 
— Perkins. 

The  Character  and  Privileges  of  the 
Children  of  God. 

1.  The  distinguishing  character- 
istic of  the  children  of  God. — 1.  It 
is  a  spirit  of  filial  confidence  as 
opposed  to  servile  fear.  No  unpar- 
doned sinner  has  a  sufficient  ground 
of  confidence  in  God.  Till  assured  that 
God  loves  him,  he  knows  not  how  God 
may  treat  him  at  any  particular  time. 
But  we  cannot  believe  that  God  loves 
us  and  at  the  same  time  doubt  His 
mercy.  He  that  heartily  reposes 
on  God's  favour  cannot  dread  His 
vengeance. 

2.  This  filial  spirit  is  one  of  holy 
love  as  opposed  to  the  bondage  of 
sin. — The  love  of  God  is  a  powerful 
element  well  calculated  to  change  the 
whole  of  our  inner  man.  It  gives  a 
new  bias  to  our  wayward  affections  and 
a  healthful  vigour  to  every  good  desire. 

3.  The  filial  spirit  is  one  of  ready 
obedience  as  opposed  to  the  gloomy 
spirit  of  servitude. — The  service  of  a 


slave  is  unwilling,  extorted,  unsatis- 
factory ;  the  obedience  of  a  child  is 
ready,  loving,  energetic.  Love  is  self- 
denying,  soul-absorbing,  devoted. 

II.  Some  of  the  distinguishing 
privileges  of  the  children  of  God. — 
1.  The  child  of  God  has  a  part  in  the 
Father's  love  and  care.  2.  Has  a  filial 
resemblance     to    the    heavenly    Father. 

3.  Cliildren  of  God  have  the  privileges 
of  family  communion  and  fellowship. 

4.  Have  a  share  in  the  family  provisions. 

5.  Have  a  title  to  the  future  inheritance. 
— Robert  M.  Macbrair. 

Ver.  7.  God's  Offspring. — 1.  This  is 
the  state  of  all  poor  heathen,  whether 
in  England  or  foreign  countries  :  they 
are  children,  ignorant  and  unable  to 
take  care  of  themselves,  because  they 
do  not  know  what  they  are.  Paul 
tells  them  they  are  God's  offspring, 
though  they  know  it  not.  He  does 
not  mean  that  we  are  not  God's 
children  till  we  find  out  that  we  are 
God's  children.  You  were  God's  heirs 
all  along,  although  you  differed  nothing 
from  slaves ;  for  as  long  as  you  were 
in  heathen  ignorance  and  foolishness 
God  had  to  treat  you  as  His  slaves, 
not  as  His  children.  They  thought 
that  God  did  not  love  them,  that  they 
must  buy  His  favours.  They  thought 
religion  meant  a  plan  for  making  God 
love  them.  2.  Then  appeared  the  love 
of  God  in  Jesus  Christ,  who  told  men 
of  their  heavenly  Father.  He  preached 
to  them  the  good  news  of  the  kingdom 
of  God,  that  God  had  not  forgotten 
them,  did  not  hate  them,  would  freely 
forgive  them  all  that  was  past ;  and 
why  1  Because  He  was  their  Father, 
and  loved  them  so  that  He  spared  not 
His  only  begotten  Son.  And  now  God 
looks  at  us  in  the  light  of  Jesus  Christ. 
He  does  not  wish  us  to  remain  merely 
His  child,  under  tutors  and  governors, 
forced  to  do  what  is  right  outwardly 
and  whether  it  likes  or  not.  God 
wishes  each  of  us  to  become  His  son, 
His  grown-up  and  reasonable  son. 
3.  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  despise 
the  mercies  of  the  living  God,  and 
when  you  are  called  to  be  His   sons 

65 


chap.  iv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


to  fall  back  under  the  terrors  of  His  His  sons,  heirs  of  God  and  joint-heirs 
law  in  slavish  fear  and  a  guilty  con-  of  Christ.  What  an  inheritance  of 
science  and  remorse  which  cannot  glory  and  bliss  that  must  be  which 
repent.  He  has  told  you  to  call  Him  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself  is  to 
your  Father ;  and  if  you  speak  to  Him  inherit  with  us — an  inheritance  of  all 
in  any  other  way,  you  insult  Him  and  that  is  wise,  loving,  noble,  holy,  peace- 
trample  underfoot  the  riches  of  His  ful,  all  that  can  make  us  happy  and  like 
grace.     You  are  not  God's  slaves,  but  God  Himself. — C.  Kingsley. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  8—11. 

Legalism  a  Relapse. 

I.  Legalism  is  no  advance  on  heathenism. — "  When  ye  knew  not  God,  ye  did 
service  unto  them  which  by  nature  are  no  gods  "  (ver.  8).  Paganism  was  an 
elaborate  system  of  formalism.  The  instinct  of  worship  led  men  to  sacrifice  to 
imaginary  deities — gods  which  were  no  gods.  Ignorant  of  the  true  God,  they 
multiplied  deities  of  their  own.  The  Galatian  pagans  created  a  strange  Pantheon. 
There  were  their  old,  weird  Celtic  deities  before  whom  our  British  forefathers 
trembled.  On  this  ancestral  faith  had  been  superimposed  the  frantic  rites  of  the 
Phrygian  mother  Cebele,  with  her  mutilated  priests,  and  the  more  genial  and 
humanistic  cultus  of  the  Greek  Olympian  gods.  The  oppressive  rites  of  legalism 
were  little  better  than  the  heathen  ritual.  Religion  degenerated  into  a  meaning- 
less formality.  Dickens  describes  how  in  Genoa  he  once  witnessed  a  great  festa 
on  the  hill  behind  the  house,  when  the  people  alternately  danced  under  tents  in 
the  open  air  and  rushed  to  say  a  prayer  or  two  in  an  adjoining  church  bright 
with  red  and  gold  and  blue  and  silver — so  many  minutes  of  dancing  and  of 
praying  in  regular  turns  of  each. 

II.  Legalism,  to  converted  heathen,  is  a  disastrous  relapse. — "  After  ye  have 
known  God,  how  turn  ye  again  to  the  weak  and  beggarly  elements  ? .  .  .  Ye  observe 
days  and  months  and  times  and  years"  (vers.  9,  10).  The  heathen  in  their 
blindness  and  ignorance  might  be  excused,  and  ritualism,  even  to  the  Jews  before 
the  coming  of  the  Messiah,  might  be  well  enough ;  but  for  Christians,  who  had 
received  ampler  knowledge  and  been  illumined  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  return  to 
the  weak  and  beggarly  elements,  was  irrational,  monstrous  !  Having  tasted  the 
sweets  of  liberty,  what  folly  to  submit  again  to  slavery  !  having  reached  spiritual 
manhood,  how  childish  to  degenerate  !  Legalism  destroys  the  life  of  religion, 
and  leaves  only  a  mass  of  petrified  forms.  In  his  Stones  of  Venice,  Buskin 
says  :  "  There  is  no  religion  in  any  work  of  Titian's ;  there  is  not  even  the  smallest 
evidence  of  religious  temper  or  sympathies  either  in  himself  or  those  for  whom  he 
painted.  His  larger  sacred  themes  are  merely  for  the  exhibition  of  pictorial 
rhetoric— composition  and  colour.  His  minor  works  are  generally  made  sub- 
ordinate to  purposes  of  portraiture.  The  Madonna  in  the  Frari  church  is  a  mere 
lay  figure,  introduced  to  form  a  link  of  connection  between  the  portraits  of 
various  members  of  the  Pesaro  family  who  surround  her.  Bellini  was  brought 
up  in  faith ;  Titian  in  formalism.  Between  the  years  of  their  births  the  vital 
religion  of  Venice  had  expired." 

III.  A  relapse  to  legalism  is  an  occasion  of  alarm  to  the  earnest  Christian 
teacher. — "  I  am  afraid  of  you,  lest  I  have  bestowed  upon  you  labour  in  vain  " 
(ver.  11).  The  apostle  knew  something  of  the  fickleness  of  the  Galatians  and  of 
the  weakness  of  human  nature,  but  was  hardly  prepared  for  such  a  collapse  of 
the  work  which  he  had  built  up  with  so  much  anxiety  and  care.  He  saw,  more 
clearly  than  they,  the  peril  of  his  converts,  and  the  prospect  of  their  further 
defection   filled  him  with  alarm  and  grief.     It  meant  the  loss  of  advantages 

66 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS.         chap.  iv. 


gained,  of  precious  blessings  enjoyed,  of  peace,  of  character,  of  influence  for  good. 
It  is  a  painful  moment  when  the  anxious  Christian  worker  has  to  mourn  over 
failure  in  any  degree. 

Lessons. — 1.  Legalism  suppresses  all  religious  growth.     2.  Is  a  constant  danger 

to  the  holiest.     3.  Shows  the  necessity  for  earnest  vigilance  and  prayer. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.    8-11.  The  Dilemma  of  Turn-  vain  in  respect  of  men  is  not  so  oefore 

coats.  God. — Perkins. 

1.  Their  first  condition  was  one  of 

ignorance. — 1.  Ignorance  of  God.  Vers.  8,  9.  Ignorance  of  God  a  Spirit- 
(1)  The  light  of  nature  is  imperfect,  ual  Bondage. — 1.  However  nature's 
because  we  know  by  it  only  some  few  light  may  serve  to  make  known  there 
and  general  things  of  God.  (2)  It  is  is  a  God  and  that  He  ought  to  be 
weak,  because  it  serves  only  to  cut  off  served,  it  is  nothing  else  but  ignorance, 
excuse,  and  is  not  sufficient  to  direct  us  as  it  leaves  us  destitute  of  the  know- 
in  the  worship  of  God.  (3)  It  is  a  ledge  of  God  in  Christ,  without  which 
great  and  grievous  sin.  there   is  no    salvation.     2.     Men   are 

2.  Idolatry. — (1)  When  that  which  is  naturally  inclined  to  feign  some  repre- 
not  God  is  placed  and  worshipped  in  the  sentation  of  the  Godhead  by  things 
room  of  the  true  God.  (2)  When  men  which  incur  in  the  outward  senses, 
acknowledge  the  true  God,  but  do  not  from  which  they  easily  advance  to  give 
conceive  Him  as  He  will  be  conceived,  divine  worship  unto  those  images  and 
and  as  He  has  revealed  Himself.  representations.  3.  Though  the  Levi- 
(3)  What  a  man  loves  most,  cares  for  tical  ceremonies  were  once  to  be 
most,  and  delights  in  most,  that  is  his  religiously  observed  as  a  part  of  divine 
God.  Where  the  heart  is,  there  is  thy  worship  leading  to  Christ,  yet  when 
God.  the  false  teachers  did  urge  them  as  a 

II.  Their  changed  condition  is  the  part  of  necessary  commanded  worship, 
knowledge  of  God  in  Christ. — 1.  This  or  as  a  part  of  their  righteousness 
is  a  special  knowledge  whereby  we  must  before  God,  the  apostle  is  bold  to  give 
acknowledge  God  to  be  our  God  in  them  the  name  of  "  weak  and  beggarly 
Christ.  2.  This  knowledge  must  be  elements."  4.  People  may  advance 
not  confused,  but  distinct.  (1)  We  very  far  in  the  way  of  Christianity, 
must  acknowledge  God  in  respect  of  and  yet  make  a  foul  retreat  afterwards 
His  presence  in  all  places.  (2)  In  in  the  course  of  defection  and  apostasy, 
respect   of   His  particular    providence  — Fergusson. 

over  us.     (3)  In  respect  of  His  will  in 

all    things    to   be    done   and  suffered.  Vers.  9,10.  God 's  Sabbatic  Law  ante- 

3.   This  knowledge  must  be  an  effectual  dated  the  Mosaic  Law. — And  whatever 

and   lively   knowledge,  working  in   us  of  legal  bondage  had  been  linked  with 

new  affections,  and  inclinations.  the  observance  of  the  Jewish  Sabbath 

III.  Their  revolt  is  an  abandon-  was  eliminated  together  with  the 
ment  of  salvation. — It  is  an  exchange  change  to  the  first  day  of  the  week, 
of  knowledge  for  ignorance,  of  the  This  at  once  removes  the  Lord's  Day 
substance  for  the  shadow,  of  reality  from  the  category  of  days,  and  also 
for  emptiness — a  return  to  weak  and  of  weak  and  beggarly  elements.  The 
beggarly  elements.  It  is  the  sub-  mode  of  observance  is  learned  from  the 
stitution  of  ceremonies  for  genuine  Lord's  words,  "  The  Sabbath  was  made 
worship.  for  man,  and  not  man  for  the  Sabbath," 

IV.  The  conduct  of  turn-coats  is  an  which  at  the  same  time  imply,  when 
occasion  of  ministerial  disappointment  rightly  understood,  the  perpetual 
and  alarm  (ver.  11). — Work  that  is  in  necessity  for  a  Sabbath. — Large. 

67 


chap.  iv.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


Ver.      11.      Ministerial     Anxiety —  consistency  of  character  and  conduct. 

1.  Prompts   to   earnest  efforts  in  im-  3.  Is  grieved  with  the  least  indications 
parting  the    highest   spiritual   truths.  of  religious  failure. 

2.  Looks  for  corresponding  results  in 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  12—20. 

The  Pleadings  of  an  Anxious  Teacher  with  his  Pupils  in  Peril. 

1.  He  reminds  them  of  the  enthusiastic  attachment  of  former  days. — 1.  Urges 
them  to  exercise  the  same  freedom  as  he  himself  claimed.  "  Be  as  I  am  ;  for  I  am 
as  ye  are"  (ver.  12).  Though  himself  a  Jew,  Paul  had  assumed  no  airs  of 
superiority,  and  did  not  separate  himself  from  his  Gentile  brethren  ;  he  became 
as  one  of  them.  He  asks  them  to  exercise  a  similar  liberty ;  and  lest  they  should 
fear  he  would  have  a  grudge  against  them  because  of  their  relapse,  he  hastens 
to  assure  them,  "  Ye  have  not  injured  [wronged]  me  at  all "  (ver.  12). 

2.  Recalls  their  extravagant  expression  of  admiration  on  their  first  reception  of 
his  teaching. — "  Ye  know  how  through  infirmity  I  preached  at  the  first.  My 
temptation  ye  despised  not ;  but  received  me  as  an  angel  of  God.  .  .  .  Ye  would 
have  plucked  out  your  own  eyes,  and  have  given  them  to  me"  (vers.  13,  14,  15). 
His  physical  weakness,  which  might  have  moved  the  contempt  of  others,  elicited 
the  sympathy  of  the  warm-hearted  Galatians.  They  listened  with  eagerness  and 
wonder  to  the  gospel  he  preached.  The  man,  with  his  humiliating  infirmity, 
was  lost  in  the  charm  of  his  message.  They  were  thankful  that,  though  his 
sickness  was  the  reason  of  his  being  detained  among  them,  it  was  the  opportunity 
of  their  hearing  the  gospel.  Had  he  been  an  angel  from  heaven,  or  Jesus  Christ 
Himself,  they  could  not  have  welcomed  him  more  rapturously.  They  would  have 
made  any  sacrifice  to  assure  him  of  their  regard  and  affection. 

3.  Shows  he  was  not  less  their  friend  because  he  rebuked  them. — "  Am  I  therefore 
become  your  enemy,  because  I  tell  you  the  truth?"  (ver.  16).  And  now  they 
rush,  with  Gallic-like  fickleness,  to  the  opposite  extreme.  Because  he  attacks 
the  new  fancies  with  which  they  have  become  enamoured,  and  probes  them  with 
some  wholesome  and  unwelcome  truths,  they  imagine  he  has  become  their  enemy. 
Not  so ;  he  is  but  using  the  privilege  of  a  true  and  faithful  friend. 

II.  He  warns  them  against  the  seductive  tactics  of  false  teachers. — 1.  Their 
zealous  flattery  was  full  of  danger.  "They  zealously  affect  you,  but  not  well ; 
they  would  exclude  you"  (ver.  17).  They  are  courting  you,  these  present  suitors 
for  your  regard,  dishonourably ;  they  want  to  shut  us  out  and  have  you  to  them- 
selves, that  you  may  pay  court  to  them.  They  pretend  to  be  zealous  for  your 
interests  ;  but  it  is  their  own  they  seek.  They  would  exclude  you  from  all  oppor- 
tunities of  salvation — yea,  from  Christ  Himself.  The  flatterer  should  be  always 
suspected.  The  turning  away  from  sound  doctrine  goes  hand  in  hand  with  a 
predilection  for  such  teachers  as  tickle  the  car,  while  they  teach  only  such  things 
as  correspond  to  the  sinful  inclinations  of  the  hearers. 

2.  Though  genuine  zeal  is  commendable. — "  It  is  good  to  be  zealously  affected 
always  in  a  good  thing  "  (ver.  18).  Christian  zeal  must  be  seen  not  only  to 
correspond  and  to  be  adapted  to  the  intellect,  but  must  also  be  in  harmony 
with  the  highest  and  profoundest  sentiments  of  our  nature.  It  must  not  be 
exhibited  in  the  dry,  pedantic  divisions  of  a  scholastic  theology;  nor  must  it 
be  set  forth  and  tricked  out  in  the  light  drapery  of  an  artificial  rhetoric,  in 
prettiness  of  style,  in  measured  sentences,  with  an  insipid  floridness,  and  in  the 
form  of  elegantly  feeble  essays.  No ;  it  must  come  from  the  soul  in  the  language 
of  earnest  conviction  and  strong  feeling. 

III.  He  pleads  with  the  tender  solicitude  of  a  spiritual  parent. — "  My  little 
children,  of  whom  I  travail  in  birth  again,  ...  I  desire  to  be  present  with  you,  and 

68 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS.         chap.  iv. 


to  change  my  voice;  for  I  stand  in  doubt  of  you"  (vers.  19,  20).  As  a  mother, 
fearful  of  losing  the  affection  of  her  children  for  whom  she  has  suffered  so  much, 
the  apostle  appeals  to  his  converts  in  tones  of  pathetic  persuasion.  His  heart  is 
wrung  with  anguish  as  he  sees  the  peril  of  his  spiritual  children,  and  he  breaks 
out  into  tender  and  impassioned  entreaty.  And  yet  he  is  perplexed  by  the  atti- 
tude they  have  taken,  and  as  if  uncertain  of  the  result  of  his  earnest  expostula- 
tions.    The  preacher  has  to  learn  to  be  patient  as  well  as  zealous. 

Lessons. — 1.  Strong  emotions  and  warm  affections  are  no  guarantee  for  the  per- 
manence of  religious  life.  2.  How  prone  are  those  who  have  put  themselves  in  the 
wrong  to  fix  the  blame  on  others.  3.  Men  of  the  Galatian  type  are  the  natural  prey 
of  self-seeking  agitators. 


GERM  NOTES   ON  THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  12.  Christian  Brotherhood. — 
Here  is  :  1 .  A  loving  compellation — 
"  Brethren."  2.  A  submissive  address 
by  way  of  comprecation — "  I  beseech 
you."  3.  A  request  most  reasonable — 
"  Be  ye  as  I  am  ;  for  I  am  as  ye  are." 
4.  A  wise  and  prudent  preoccupation 
or  prevention  which  removes  all  ob- 
structions and  forestalls  those  jealous- 
ies, those  surmises  and  groundless 
suspicions,  which  are  the  bane  of 
charity  and  the  greatest  enemies  to 
peace.  "  Ye  have  not  injured  me  at 
all." 

1.  Nature  herself  hath  made  all 
men  brethren. — 1.  This  may  serve  to 
condemn  all  those  ivho  look  upon  men 
under  other  consideration  than  as  men, 
or  view  them  in  any  other  shape  than 
as  brethren.  And  the  very  name  of 
man  and  of  brother  should  be  an 
amulet  for  all  mankind  against  the 
venom  of  iniquity  and  injustice. 

2.  By  this  light  of  nature  we  may 
condemn  ourselves  when  any  bitterness 
towards  our  brother  riseth  in  our  hearts, 
and  allay  or  rather  root  it  out  as 
inhuman  and  unnatural.  None  can 
dishonour  us  more  than  ourselves  do, 
when  one  man  hath  trodden  down 
another  as  the  clay  in  the  streets, 
when  we  think  ourselves  great  men  by 
making  our  brethren  little,  when  we 
contemn  and  despise,  hate  and  perse- 
cute them. 

II.  Brethren  as  Christians  profess- 
ing the  same  faith. — There  is  such  a 
brotherhood  that  neither  error  nor  sin 
nor  injury  can  break  and  dissolve  it. 


1.  Men  may  err  and  yet  be  brethren. 
— We  may  be  divided  in  opinion  and 
yet  united  in  charity.  Consider  the  diffi- 
culty of  finding  out  truth  in  all  things 
and  avoiding  error,  that  our  brother 
may  err  rather  from  want  of  light 
than  out  of  malice  and  wilfully,  and 
conceive  it  possible  we  may  err  as 
foully  as  others. 

2.  Men  may  sin  and  yet  be  brethren. 
— Charity,  because  she  may  err,  nay, 
because  she  must  err,  looks  upon  every 
Christian  as  a  brother.  If  he  err,  she 
is  a  guide  to  him  ;  if  he  sin,  she  is  a 
physician  ;  if  he  fall,  she  strives  to  lift 
him  up,  being  a  light  to  the  blind  and 
a  staff  to  the  weak. 

3.  Men  may  injure  each  other  and 
yet  be  brethren. — Socrates,  being  over- 
come in  judgment,  professed  he  had  no 
reason  to  be  angry  with  his  enemies 
unless  it  were  for  this,  that  they  con- 
ceived and  believed  they  had  hurt  him. 
Indeed,  no  injury  can  be  done  by  a 
brother  to  a  brother.  The  injury  is 
properly  done  to  God,  who  reserves  all 
power  of  revenge  to  Himself.  "  If  a 
brother  strike  us,"  said  Chrysostom, 
"  kiss  his  hand  ;  if  he  would  destroy  us, 
our  revenge  should  be  to  save  him." 
Nazianzen  said  to  the  young  man  who 
was  suborned  to  kill  him,  "  Christ 
forgive  thee,  who  hath  also  forgiven 
me  and  died  to  save  me." 

Lessons. — 1 .  Brotherly  love  is  pleasant 
and  delightful.  2.  Profitable  and  ad- 
vantageous. 3.  So  necessary  that  it  had 
been  better  for  us  never  to  have  been  than 
not  to  love  the  brethren. — A.  Farindon. 

69 


"     chap.  iv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


Vers.  13-15.  Love  for  the  Preacher — 

I.  Notwithstanding  the  physical  in- 
firmity of  the  messenger  (ver.  13). 

II.  Generates  the  loftiest  esteem 
for  his  character  and  abilities 
(ver.  14). 

III.  Is  often  expressed  in  ex- 
aggerated terms  (ver.  15). 

Ver.  14.  The  Authority  of  the  Messen- 
ger of  God. 

I.  He  is  to  be  heard  even  as  Christ 
Himself,  because  in  preaching  he  is  the 
mouth  of  God. 

II.  Here  we  see  the  goodness  of  God, 
who  does  not  speak  to  us  in  His 
majesty,  but  appoints  men  in  His 
stead,  who  are  His  ambassadors. 

III.  There  must  be  fidelity  in 
teachers. — They  stand  in  the  stead  of 
Christ,  and  must  deliver  only  that 
which  they  know  to  be  the  will  of 
Christ.* 

IV.  They  must  have  especial  care 
of  holiness  of  life. 

V.  The  people  are  to  hear  their 
teachers  with  reverence,  as  if  they 
would  hear  the  angels  or  Christ  Him- 
self. 

VI.  The  comfort  of  the  ministry  is 
as  sure  as  if  an  angel  came  down  from 
heaven,  or  Christ  Himself,  to  comfort 
us. — Perkins. 

Ver.  16.  The  Right  Mode  of  giving 
and  receiving  Reproof. — Should  it  be 
esteemed  the  part  of  a  friend  faithfully 
to  tell  men  the  truth  ?  and  should  the 
suppression  of  truth  and  the  substi- 
tution of  its  opposite  be  held  to  mark 
the  character  of  an  enemy?  How 
often  has  the  amicable  state  of  feeling 
been  broken  up  by  telling  the  truth, 
even  when  done  in  a  proper  spirit  and 
manner  ! 

I.  What  would  you  wish  your 
friend  to  be? — 1.  Sincere.  2.  That  he 
should  take  a  very  general  interest  in 
my  welfare  and  be  desirous  to  promote 
it.  3.  A  person  of  clear,  sound,  discrimi- 
nating judgment,  and  with  a  decided 
preference  in  all  things.  4.  That  he 
should  not  be  a  man  full  of  self-com- 
placency, a  self -idolater,  but  observant 

70 


and  severe  towards  his  own  errors  and 
defects.  5.  A  man  who  would  include 
me  expressly  in  his  petitions,  prajung 
that  I  may  be  delivered  from  those 
evils  which  he  perceives  in  me,  and 
God  far  more  clearly.  6.  Such  that, 
as  the  last  result  of  my  communi- 
cations with  him,  a  great  deal  of  what 
may  be  defective  and  wrong  in  me 
shall  have  been  disciplined  away. 

II.  Why  do  we  regard  a  friend  as 
an  enemy  because  he  tells  us  the 
truth? — 1,  Because  plain  truth,  by 
whatever  voice,  must  say  many  things 
that  are  displeasing.  2.  Because 
there  is  a  want  of  the  real  earnest 
desire  to  be  in  all  things  set  right. 
3.  Because  there  is  pride,  reacting 
against  a  fellow-mortal  and  fellow- 
sinner.  4.  Because  there  is  not  seldom 
a  real  difference  of  judgment  on  the 
matters  in  question.  5.  Because  there 
is  an  unfavourable  opinion  or  surmise 
as  to  the  motives  of  the  teller  of 
truth. 

III.  How  should  reproof  be  adminis- 
tered?— 1.  Those  who  do  this  should 
well  exercise  themselves  to  understand 
what  they  speak  of.  2.  It  should  be 
the  instructor's  aim  that  the  authority 
may  be  conveyed  in  the  truth  itself, 
and  not  seem  to  be  assumed  by  him  as 
the  speaker  of  it.  3.  He  should  watch 
to  select  favourable  times  and  occa- 
sions. 

IV.  How  should  reproof  be  re- 
ceived?— 1.  By  cultivating  a  dispo- 
sition of  mind  which  earnestly  desires 
the  truth,  in  whatever  manner  it  may 
come  to  us.  2.  There  have  been 
instances  in  which  a  friend,  silent 
when  he  should  have  spoken,  has  him- 
self afterwards  received  the  reproof  for 
not  having  done  so  from  the  person 
whom  he  declined  to  admonish.  3.  If 
there  be  those  so  painfully  and  irritably 
susceptible  as  to  be  unwilling  to  hear 
corrective  truth  from  others,  how 
strong  is  the  obligation  that  they 
should  look  so  much  the  more  severely 
to  themselves. — John  Foster. 

Ver.  18.  Zeal. 

I.  Various  kinds  of  zeal. — 1.  There 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


CHAP.  IV. 


is  a  zeal  of  God  which  is  not  according 
to  knowledge.  2.  There  is  a  mistaken 
zeal  for  the  glory  of  God.  (1)  When 
that  is  opposed  which  is  right,  under  a 
false  notion  of  its  being  contrary  to 
the  glory  of  God.  (2)  When  ways  and 
methods  improper  are  taken  to  defend 
and  promote  the  glory  of  God. 
(3)  There  is  a  superstitious  zeal,  such 
as  was  in  Baal's  worshippers,  who  cut 
themselves  with  knives  and  lancets ; 
particularly  in  the  Athenians,  who 
were  wholly  given  to  idolatry ;  and 
the  Jews,  who  were  zealous  of  the 
traditions  of  the  fathers.  (4)  There  is 
a  persecuting  zeal,  under  a  pretence 
of  the  glory  of  God.  (5)  There  is  a 
hypocritical  zeal  for  God,  as  in  the 
Pharisees,  who  made  a  show  of  great 
zeal  for  piety,  by  their  long  prayers, 
when  they  only  sought  to  destroy 
widows'  nouses  by  that  means. 
(6)  There  is  a  contentious  zeal,  which 
often  gives  great  trouble  to  Christian 
communities.  (7)  True  zeal  is  no 
other  than  a  fervent,  ardent  love  to 
God  and  Christ,  and  a  warm  concern 
for  their  honour  and  glory. 

II.  The  objects  of  zeal.— 1.  The 
object  of  it  is  God.  The  worship  of 
God,  who  must  be  known,  or  He  cannot 
be  worshipped  aright.  2.  The  cause 
of  Christ  is  another  object  of  zeal. 
The  gospel  of  Christ ;  great  reason 
there  is  to  be  zealous  for  that,  since 
it  is  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God. 
3.  The  ordinances  of  Christ,  which 
every  true  Christian  should  be  zealous 
for,  that  they  be  kept  as  they  were 
first  delivered,  without  any  innovation 
or  corruption.  4.  The  discipline  of 
Christ's  house  should  be  the  object  of 
our  zeal.  5.  True  zeal  is  concerned  in 
all  the  duties  of  religion  and  shows 
itself  in  them. 

III.  Motives  exciting  to  the  exer- 
cise of  true  zeal. — 1.  The  example  of 
Christ.  2.  True  zeal  answers  a 
principal  end  of  the  redemption  of 
Christ.  3.  It  is  good,  the  apostle  says, 
to  be  zealously  affected  in  and  for  that 
which  is  good.  4.  A  lukewarm 
temper,  which  is  the  opposite  to  zeal, 
seems  not  consistent  with  true  religion, 


which  has  always  life  and  heat  in  it. 
5.  The  zeal  of  persons  shown  in  a  false 
way  should  stimulate  the  professors  of 
the  true  religion  to  show  at  least  an 
equal  zeal. — Pulpit  Assistant. 

Christian  Zeal — 

I.  Implies  unwavering  steadfast- 
ness of  purpose. 

II.  Universal  and  hearty  obedience 
to  God's  commands  in  all  things,  small 
as  well  as  great. 

III.  Supreme  devotion  of  heart  and 
life  to  Christ. 

IV.  Should  be  exercised  in  a  good 
thing. — True  zeal  seeks  benevolent 
ends  by  lawful  means,  else  it  is 
fanaticism.  It  seeks  practical  ends  by 
wise  means,  else  it  is  enthusiasm. 
Zeal  should  be  shown  in  active  and 
useful  devotion  to  the  cause  of  religion, 
rather  than  in  excitement  and  warm 
devotional  exercise. 

V.  Should  be  uniform,  not  periodi- 
cal.— It  should  not  depend  upon  the 
fluctuations  of  feeling,  but  should  act 
upon  principle.  Periodical  fervours 
are  deceitful,  dangerous,  injurious, 
dishonourable  to  religion.  They  are 
commonly  a  proof  of  superficial  piety, 
or  of  none  at  all. — Stephen  Olin. 

Godly  Zeal  and  its  Counterfeits. 

I.  Let  us  distinguish  between  mere 
natural  zeal  and  spiritual  ardour. — 
1.  There  is  a  zeal  of  sympathy  which  is 
awakened  by  the  zeal  of  others  with 
whom  we  associate.  It  is  only  that  of 
the  soldier  who,  though  himself  a  coward, 
is  urged  on  to  battle  by  the  example  of 
those  around  him.  2.  There  is  constitu- 
tional zeal,  a  warmth,  an  ardour,  which 
enters  into  all  we  say  or  do,  which  per- 
vades all  our  actions  and  animates  all 
our  services.  Thisis  not  strictly  religious 
but  animal  excitement,  and  is  no  more 
allied  to  our  soul-life  than  our  arms 
or  our  feet.  3.  There  is  a  zeal  which 
is  merely  sentimental.  It  throws  a 
romantic  glamour  over  our  objects ; 
but  its  exercises  are  too  occasional,  too 
random,  to  produce  much  effect. 
4.  There  is  a  zeal  of  affectation  like 
that  of  Jehu  (2  Kings  x.    16).     This 

71 


chap.  iv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


is  religious  foppery  and  hypocritical 
vanity.  5.  Christian  zeal  is  a  fair 
demonstration  of  what  is  felt  within. 
It  seeks  not  the  eye  of  man,  but  acts 
under  the  conviction  of  God's  omni- 
science. 

II.  Consider  the  objects  to  which 
Christian  zeal  should  be  directed. — 
This  "good  thing"  may  be  taken  as 
including  all  true  religion,  and  embrac- 
ing :  1.  The  promotion  of  God's  glory. 

2.  The  extension  of  Christ's  kingdom. 

3.  The  salvation  of  men.  4.  The  con- 
version of  the  world. 

III.  The  good  that  results  from  the 
exercise  of  Christian  zeal  to  the 
persons  that  possess  it. — 1.  It  renders 
them  more  Christ-like.  2.  It  furthers 
the  divine  designs  in  the  most  effective 
way.  3.  We  become  worthy  followers 
of  the  great  heroes  of  faith  in  the  past 
ages. — The  Preacher 's  Magazine. 

True  Christian  Zeal. 

1.  The  Christian  convert  is  zealously 
affected  in  a  good  thing. — 1.  All  the 

teachings  of  Christianity  are  good. 
They  enlighten,  guide,  and  sanctify. 
They  are  peculiar,  harmonious,  infal- 
lible, divine.  Their  morality  is  sublime, 
their  spirit  heavenly,  their  effect 
glorious. 

2.  The  influence  of  Christianity  is 
good. — It  has  created  the  sweet 
charities  of  national  and  domestic 
life,  sanctified  advancing  civilisation, 
softened  the  fierceness  of  war,  stimu- 
lated science,  prompted  justice  and 
liberty.     Sceptics  have  admitted  this. 

3.  All  that  Christianity  acco?nplishes 
for  man  is  good. — It  saves  him  from 
sin,  from  the  stings  of  guilt,  from  the 
eternal  consequences  of  wrong-doing. 

II.  The  zeal  of  the  Christian  con- 
vert is  to  be  steady  and  continuous. — 
There  should  be  no  diminution  nor 
fluctuation  in  our  zeal.  1.  Because  no 
reason  can  be  assigned  why  we  should 
not  be  as  zealous  at  any  after-hour  as  at 
the  hour  of  our  conversion.  2.  Because 
it  is  only  by  steady  and  continuous  zeal 
that  a  proper  measure  of  Christian 
influence  can  be  exerted.  3.  Because 
only    by  steady    and   continuous    zeal 

72 


can    Christian  character    be    matured. 

4.  Because   only    thus  can    success  in 
Christian      enterprises      be      attained. 

5.  Because  steady  and  continuous  zeal 
ivill  alone  bring  divine  approval. 

III.  The  zeal  of  the  Christian 
convert  is  not  to  be  unduly  influenced 
by  the  presence  of  others.— While  Paul 
was  with  the  Churches  in  Galatia 
they  were  zealous,  but  after  his 
departure  their  zeal  ceased.  To  lose 
our  zeal  because  we  have  lost  the 
influence  of  another  is  to  show : 
1.  That  we  never  possessed  true  Christian 
motives.  2.  That  our  supposed  attach- 
ment to  Christ  and  His  cause  was  de- 
lusive. 3.  That  our  zeal  had  merely 
been  an  effort  to  please  men,  not  God. — 
The  Lay  Preacher. 

Ver.  19.  The  Christmas  of  the  Soul. 
— The  apostle  refers  to  the  spiritual 
birth.  The  soul  then  rises  into  a 
consciousness  of  its  infinite  importance ; 
its  thoughts,  sympathies,  and  purposes 
become  Christ-like,  and  Christ  is 
manifested  in  the  life.  The  soul-birth 
were  impossible  if  Christ  had  not  been 
born  in  Bethlehem.  That  was  an 
era  in  the  world's  history,  this  in  the 
individual  life  ;  that  was  brought  about 
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  this  is  effected  by 
the  same  divine  Agent ;  that  was 
followed  by  the  antagonism  of  the 
world,  this  is  succeeded  by  the  opposi- 
tion of  evil,  both  within  and  without ; 
that  was  the  manifestation  of  God  in 
the  flesh,  this  is  the  renewing  of  man's 
nature  in  the  image  of  God  ;  that  came 
to  pass  without  man's  choice,  this 
requires  man's  seeking.  Has  this 
spiritual  birth  taken  place  in  you? 
If  so,  you  have  a  right  to  the  enjoy- 
ment of  a  happy  Christmas.  Keep  the 
feast  as  a  new  man  in  Christ  Jesus. — 
Homiletic  Monthly. 

Ver.    20.  A  Preacher's   Perplexity — 

I.  Occasioned  by  the  defection  of  his 
converts. — "  I  stand  in  doubt  of  you." 

II.  As  to  what  method  he  should 
adopt  to  restore  them. — "And  to 
change  my  voice." 

III.  Increased  by  the  difficulty  of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  R  Y :    GALA  TIANS.         chap.  iv. 


effecting  a  personal  interview. — "  I  principles    of    the    gospel.      5.     Who 

desire  to  be  present  with  you  now.,,  neglect  the  ordinances  of  God's  house. 

6.  Who   neglect   devotional    exercises. 

"  /  stand  in  doubt  of  you."     Doubt-  7.  Who  co-operate  not  with  the  Church 

ful  Christians.  to  advance  the  kingdom  of  Christ  in 

I.  Persons  whose  religion  is  the  world. 
liable  to  suspicion. — 1.  Those  who  II.  The  improvement  to  be  made  of 
have  long  attended  the  means  of  the  subject. — 1.  Should  lead  to  self- 
grace,  and  are  very  defective  in  examination.  2.  Shows  the  loss  and 
knowledge.  2.  Who  possess  much  danger  of  persons  so  characterised, 
knowledge,  and  are  puffed  up  with  it.  3.  Should  lead  to  repentance  and  faith. 
3.  Who  contend  for  doctrinal  religion  4.  While  exercising  a  godly  jealousy 
rather  than  for  that  which  is  practical  over  others,  let  Christians  watch  with 
and  experimental.  4.  Who  waver  in  greater  jealousy  over  themselves. — 
their  attachment  to  the  fundamental  Helps. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  21—31. 

The  History  of  Hagar  and  Sarah  allegorical  of  the  Law  and  the  Gospel. 

1.  The  two  women  represented  two  different  covenants. — 1.  Hagar  represented 
Sinai,  typical  of  the  law  with  its  slavish  exactions  and  terrible  threatenings  (vers. 
22,  25).  Sinai  spoke  of  bondage  and  terror.  It  was  a  true  symbol  of  the  working 
of  the  law  of  Moses,  exhibited  in  the  present  condition  of  Judaism.  And  round 
the  base  of  Sinai  Hagar's  wild  sons  had  found  their  dwelling.  Jerusalem  was  no 
longer  the  mother  of  freemen.  Her  sons  chafed  under  the  Roman  yoke.  They 
were  loaded  with  self-inflicted  burdens.  The  spirit  of  the  nation  was  that  of 
rebellious,  discontented  slaves.  They  were  Ishmaelite  sons  of  Abraham,  with 
none  of  the  nobleness,  the  reverence,  the  calm  and  elevated  faith  of  their  father. 
In  the  Judaism  of  the  apostle's  day  the  Sinaitic  dispensation,  uncontrolled  by  the 
higher  patriarchal  and  prophetic  faith,  had  worked  out  its  natural  result.  It 
gendered  to  bondage.  A  system  of  repression  and  routine,  it  had  produced  men 
punctual  in  tithes  of  mint  and  anise,  but  without  justice,  mercy,  or  faith;  vaunting 
their  liberty  while  they  were  servants  of  corruption.  The  Pharisee  was  the 
typical  product  of  law  apart  from  grace.  Under  the  garb  of  a  freeman  he 
carried  the  soul  of  a  slave. 

2.  Sarah  represented  Jerusalem,  typical  of  the  gospel  with  its  higher  freedom  and 
larger  spiritual  fruitfulness  (vers.  26-28). — Paul  has  escaped  from  the  prison  of 
legalism,  from  the  confines  of  Sinai ;  he  has  left  behind  the  perishing  earthly 
Jerusalem,  and  with  it  the  bitterness  and  gloom  of  his  Pharisaic  days.  He  is  a 
citizen  of  the  heavenly  Zion,  breathing  the  air  of  a  divine  freedom.  The  yoke  is 
broken  from  the  neck  of  the  Church  of  God ;  the  desolation  is  gone  from  her 
heart.  Robbed  of  all  outward  means,  mocked  and  thrust  out  as  she  is  by  Israel 
after  the  flesh,  her  rejection  is  a  release,  an  emancipation.  Conscious  of  the 
spirit  of  sonship  and  freedom,  looking  out  on  the  boundless  conquests  lying 
before  her  in  the  Gentile  world,  the  Church  of  the  new  covenant  glories  in 
her  tribulations.  In  Paul  is  fulfilled  the  joy  of  prophet  and  psalmist,  who  sang 
in  former  days  of  gloom  concerning  Israel's  enlargement  and  world-wide 
victories  (Eindlay). 

II.  The  antagonism  of  their  descendants  represented  the  violent  and 
incessant  opposition  of  the  law  to  the  gospel. — "  As  he  that  was  born  after  the 
flesh  persecuted  him  that  was  born  after  the  Spirit,  even  so  it  is  now.  .  .  .  Cast 
out  the  bondwoman  and  her  son"  (vers.  29,  30).  Sooner  or  later  the  slave-boy 
was  bound  to  go.  He  has  no  proper  birthright,  no  permanent  footing  in  the  house. 
One  day  he  exceeds  his  licence,  he  makes  himself  intolerable ;  he  must  be  gone. 

73 


chap.  IV.         H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


The  Israelitish  people  showed  more  than  Ishmael's  jealousy  toward  the  infant 
Church  of  the  Spirit.  No  weapon  of  violence  or  calumny  was  too  base  to  be 
used  against  it.  Year  by  year  they  became  more  hardened  against  spiritual 
truth,  more  malignant  towards  Christianity,  and  more  furious  and  fanatical  ii\ 
their  hatred  towards  their  civil  rulers.  Ishmael  was  in  the  way  of  Isaac's  safety 
and  prosperity  (Ibid.). 

III.  The  gospel  bestows  a  richer  inheritance  than  the  law. — "  The  son  of  the 
bondwoman  shall  not  be  heir  with  the  son  of  the  f  reewoman.  .  .  .  We  are  children 
of  the  free"  (vers.  30,  31).  The  two  systems  were  irreconcilable.  The  law  and 
the  gospel  cannot  coexist  and  inherit  together ;  the  law  must  disappear  before 
the  gospel.  The  higher  absorbs  the  lower.  The  Church  of  the  future,  the 
spiritual  seed  of  Abraham  gathered  out  of  all  nations,  has  no  part  in  legalism. 
It  embraces  blessings  of  which  Mosaism  had  no  conception — "  an  inheritance 
incorruptible,  and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away." 

Lessons. — 1.  The  law  and  the  gospel  differ  fundamentally  2.  The  law  imposes 
intolerable  burdens.  3.  The  gospel  abrogates  the  law  by  providing  a  higher  spiritual 
obedience. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.    21-31.      Legal  Bondage    and  seeking  salvation  by  works  of  law,  from 

Spiritual  Freedom  contrasted —  the  guilt  of  sin,  from  its  dominion. 

I.  In  their  inception  and  develop-  II.  The  filial  sentiment  with  which 
ment  (vers.  21-27).  we  ought  to  regard   the   Church  of 

II.  In  their  ceaseless  antagonism  Christ. — She  is  "  the  mother  of  us  all." 
(ver.  29).  The   general  idea  is,    that  if   we   are 

III.  In  their  inevitable  results  indeed  spiritual,  under  God,  we  owe 
(vers.  28,  30,31).  all   to  the  Church.     To  her   God  has 

committed    the    preservation     of   His 
Ver.  21.  A  Lesson  from  the  Law —  truth.      In     stormy     times    she      has 

I.  Addressed  to  those  eager  for  its  sheltered  her  lamps  in  the  recesses  of 
subjection. — "  Ye  that  desire  to  be  the  sanctuary,  and  in  happier  times 
under  the  law."  has  placed  them  on  high  to  guide  and 

II.  Is  suggestive  of  solemn  warn-  save.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  in  the 
ing.  Church.       To     her     you     owe     your 

III.  Should  be  seriously  pondered,  hallowed  fellowships.  In  the  Church 
— "  Tell  me,  do  ye  not  hear  the  law  1  "       it  is  that  God  manifests  Himself. 

III.   The    animating    anticipations 

Ver.  26.  Jerusalem  Above.  we  are  thus   taught  to    form   of  the 

I.  The  Church  of  Christ  as  she  exists  Church    as    glorified.— Turn    to    the 

in    the    present   world. — "Jerusalem,  description   given  in    Revelation    xxi. 

above  and  free."  1.    Mark   the    wall  great   and    high — 

1.  Above ;  that  is,  seen  in  connection  denoting  the  perfect,  impregnable 
with  God  and  the  scenes  of  the  heavenly  security  of  those  who  dwell  there. 
world. — (1)  Her  Head  is  from  above.  2.  At  the  gates  are  angels — still  ushering 
(2)  If  we  take  the  Church  as  a  whole,  in  the  heirs  of  salvation,  and  disdaining 
though  she  is  in  part  on  earth,  the  not  to  be  porters  to  this  glorious  city, 
greater  number  of  her  members  are  in  3.  Mark  the  foundations,  garnished 
heaven.  (3)  Our  Jerusalem  is  above  with  all  manner  of  precious  stones — 
because  her  members  all  fix  their  affec-  implying  permanency.  4.  Mark  the 
tions  there  and  thither  tend  as  the  circumstance  that  in  the  twelve 
great  end  of  their  profession.  foundations   are    inscribed    the   names 

2.  Jerusalem  above  is  free,  and  so  of  the  twelve  apostles — the  whole 
are  her  children. — From  the  bondage  of  being    the  result    of    their    doctrine. 

74 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


CHAP.  IV. 


5.  The  whole  city  is  a  temple  all  filled 
with  the  presence  and  glory  of  God. 
No  holiest  of  all  is  there  where  every 
part  is  most  holy.  All  are  filled, 
sanctified,  beatified,  by  the  fully  mani-  . 
fested  presence  of  God.  He  is  all  in 
all ;  all  things  in  and  to  all. — Richard 
Watson. 

Jerusalem  a  Type  of  the  Universal 
Church. 

I.  God  chose  Jerusalem  above  all 
other  places  to  dwell  in.  The  Church 
catholic  is  the  company  chosen  to  be 
the  particular  people  of  God. 

II.  Jerusalem  is  a  city  compact  in 
itself  by  reason  of  the  bond  of  love 
and  order  among  the  citizens.  In  like 
sort  the  members  of  the  Church 
catholic  are  linked  together  by  the 
bond  of  one  Spirit. 

III.  In  Jerusalem  was  the  sanc- 
tuary, a  place  of  God's  presence,  where 
the  promise  of  the  seed  of  the  woman 
was  preserved  till  the  coming  of  the 
Messias.  Now  the  Church  catholic 
is  in  the  room  of  the  sanctuary,  in  it 
we  must  seek  the  presence  of  God  and 
the  word  of  life. 

IV.  In  Jerusalem  was  the  throne  of 
David.  In  the  Church  catholic  is  the 
throne  or  sceptre  of  Christ. 

V.  The  commendation  of  a  city,  as 
Jerusalem,  is  the  subjection  and 
obedience  of  the  citizens.  In  the 
Church  catholic  all  believers  are  citi- 
zens, and  they  yield  voluntary  obedience 
and  subjection  to  Christ  their  King. 

VI.  As  in  Jerusalem  the  names  of 
the  citizens  were  enrolled  in  a  register, 
so  the  names  of  all  the  members  of 
the  Church  catholic  are  enrolled  in  the 
Book  of  Life. 

VII.  The  Church  catholic  is  said  to 
be  above  :  1 .  In  respect  of  her  begin- 
ning. 2.  Because  she  dwells  by  faith 
ill  heaven  with  Christ. — Perkins. 

Ver.  28.  Believers  Children  of  Promise. 

I.  The  character. — 1.  Believers  are 
the  children  of  promise  by  regeneration. 
2.  By  spiritual  nourishment.  3.  In  re- 
spect of  education.  4.  With  respect  to 
assimilation,  likeness,  and  conformity. 


II.  State  the  comparison. — 1.  Isaac 

was  the  child  of  Abraham,  not  by 
natural  power.  Believers  are  children 
of  Abraham  by  virtue  of  promise.  2. 
Isaac  was  the  fruit  of  prayer,  as  well 
as  the  child  of  promise.  3.  Isaac's 
birth  was  the  joy  of  his  parents.  Even 
so  with  reference  to  believers.  4.  Laac 
was  born  not  after  the  flesh,  but  by 
the  promise  ;  not  of  the  bondwoman, 
but  of  the  free.  So  believers  are  not 
under  the  law.  5.  Isaac  was  no  sooner 
born  but  he  was  mocked  by  Ishmael ; 
so  it  is  now.  6.  Isaac  was  the  heir 
by  promise,  though  thus  persecuted. 
Even  so  believers. 

III.  How  the  promise  hath  such 
virtue  for  begetting  children  to  God. — 

1.  As  it  is  the  discovery  of  divine  love. 

2.  The  object  of  faith.  3.  The  ground 
of  hope.  4.  The  seed  of  regenera- 
tion. 5.  The  communication  of  grace. 
6.  The  chariot  of  the  Spirit. 

Inferences. — 1.  If  believers  are 
children  of  promise,  then  boasting  is 
excluded.      2.  Then    salvation    is  free. 

3.  The  happiness  and  dignity  of  be- 
lievers— they  are  the  children  of  God. 
— Pulpit  Assistant. 

Ver.  29.  On  Persecution. 
I.  That  no  privilege  of  the  Church 
can  exempt  her  from  persecution. — 

1.  From  the  consideration  of  the  quality 
of  the  persons  here  upon  the  stage,  the  one 
persecuting,  the  other  suffering.  (1)  The 
persecuting — "  born  after  the  flesh." 
Like  Hannibal,  they  can  part  with 
anything  but  war  and  contention ;  they 
can  be  without  their  native  country, 
but  not  without  an  enemy.  These 
whet  the  sword,  these  make  the  furnace 
of  persecution  seven  times  hotter  than 
it  would  be.  The  flesh  is  the  treasury 
whence  these  winds  blow  that  rage  and 
beat  down  all  before  them.  (2)  The 
suffering — "born  after  the  Spirit." 
Having  no  security,  no  policy,  no 
eloquence,  no  strength,  but  that  which 
lieth  in  his  innocency  and  truth,  which 
he  carrieth  about  as  a  cure,  but  it  is 
looked  upon  as  a  persecution  by  those 
who  will  not  be  healed.  "  For  he  must 
appear,"  said  Seneca,  M  as  a  fool  that 

75 


CHAP.  V. 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


he  may  be  wise,  as  weak  that  he  may- 
be strong,  as  base  and  vile  that  he  may 
be  more  honourable."  If  thou  be  an 
Isaac,  thou  shalt  find  an  Ishmael. 

2.  From  the  nature  and  constitution 
of  the  Church  which  in  this  ivorld  is 
ever  militant. — Persecution  is  the 
honour,  the  prosperity,  the  flourishing 
condition,  of  the  Church.  When  her 
branches  were  lopped  off  she  spread 
the  more,  when  her  members  were 
dispersed  there  were  more  gathered 
to  her,  when  they  were  driven  about 
the  world  they  carried  that  sweet- 
smelling  savour  about  them  which 
drew  in  multitudes  to  follow  them. 

3.  From  the  'providence  and  wisdom 
of  God  who  put  this  enmity  between  these 
two  seeds. — God's  method  is  best.  That 
is  method  and  order  with  Him  which 
we  take  to  be  confusion,  and  that  which 
we  call  persecution  is  His  art,  His  way 
of  making  saints.  In  Abraham's  family 
Ishmael  mocketh  and  persecuteth 
Isaac,  in  the  world  the  synagogue 
persecuteth  the  Church,  and  in  the 
Church  one  Christian  persecuteth 
another.  It  was  so,  it  is  so,  and  it 
will  be  so  to  the  end  of  the  world. 

II.  The  lessons  of  persecution.  — 
1 .  The  persecution  of  the  Church  should 
not  create  surprise.  2.  Not  to  regard 
the  Church  and  the  world  as  alike. 
3.  Build  ourselves  up  in  faith  so  as  to 
be  prepared  for  the  fiery  trial.  4.  Love 
the  truth  you  profess.  5.  Be  renewed  in 
spirit. — A.  Farindon. 


Ver.  30.  Cast  out  the  Bondwoman 
and  her  Son. — To  cast  out  is  an  act  of 
violence,  and  the  true  Church  ever- 
more hath  the  suffering  part.  How 
shall  the  Church  cast  out  those  of  her 
own  house  and  family?  1.  By  the 
vehemency  of  our  prayers  that  God 
would  either  melt  their  hearts  or 
shorten  their  hands,  either  bring  them 
into  the  right  way,  or  strike  off  their 
chariot  wheels.  2.  By  our  patience 
and  longsuffering.  3.  By  our  innocency 
of  life  and  sincerity  of  conversation. 
4.  By  casting  our  burden  upon  the 
Lord. — Ibid. 

The  Fate  of  Unbelievers. 

I.  All  hypocrites,  mockers  of  the 
grace  of  God,  shall  be  cast  forth  of 
God's  family,  though  for  a  time  they 
bear  a  sway  therein.  This  is  the 
sentence  of  God.  Let  us  therefore 
repent  of  our  mocking,  and  become 
lovers  of  the  grace  of  God. 

II.  The  persecution  of  the  people  of 
God  shall  not  be  perpetual,  for  the 
persecuting  bondwoman  and  her  son 
must  be  cast  out. 

III.  All  justiciary  people  and 
persons  that  look  to  be  saved  and 
justified  before  God  by  the  law,  either 
in  whole  or  in  part,  are  cast  out  of 
the  Church  of  God,  and  have  no 
part  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  The 
casting  out  of  Hagar  and  Ishmael  is 
a  figure  of  the  rejection  of  all  such. — 
Perkins. 


CHAPTER  V. 


CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  Stand  fast  in. — Stand  up  to,  make  your  stand  for.  The  liberty  wherewith  Christ  has 
made  us  free. — As  Christ  has  given  you  this  liberty  you  are  bound  to  stand  fast  in  it.  Be  not 
entangled.— Implicated  in  a  way  which  involves  violence  to  true  spontaneous  life.  The  yoke 
of  bondage. — Contrasted  with  the  yoke  of  Christ,  which  is  compatible  with  the  fullest  spiritual 
freedom. 

Ver.  2.  If  ye  be  circumcised. — Not  simply  as  a  national  rite,  but  as  a  symbol  of  Judaism  and 
legalism  in  general ;  as  necessary  to  justification.  Christ  shall  profit  you  nothing. — The 
gospel  of  grace  is  at  an  end.  He  who  is  circumcised  is  so  fearing  the  law,  and  he  who  fears 
disbelieves  the  power  of  grace,  and  he  who  disbelieves  can  profit  nothing  by  that  grace  which 
he  disbelieves  (  Chrysostom), 

76 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS.  chap.  v. 


Ver.  5.  Wait  for  the  hope  of  righteousness. — Righteousness,  in  the  sense  of  justification,  is 
already  attained,  but  the  consummation  of  it  in  future  perfection  is  the  object  of  hope  to  be 
waited  for. 

Ver.  6.  Faith  which  worketh  by  love. — Effectually  worketh,  exhibits  its  energy  by  love, 
and  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law. 

Ver.  9.  A  little  leaven. — Of  false  doctrine,  a  small  amount  of  evil  influence. 

Ver.  10.  He  that  troubleth  you. — The  leaven  traced  to  personal  agency  ;  whoever  plays  the 
troubler.     Shall  bear  his  judgment. — Due  and  inevitable  condemnation  from  God. 

Ver.  11.  Then  is  the  offence  of  the  cross  ceased. — The  offence,  the  stumbling-block,  to  the 
Jew  which  roused  his  anger  was  not  the  shame  of  Messiah  crucified,  but  the  proclamation  of 
free  salvation  to  all,  exclusive  of  the  righteousness  of  human  works. 

Ver.  12.  I  would  they  were  cut  off  which  trouble  you. — Self-mutilated,  an  imprecation  more 
strongly  expressed  in  chap.  i.  8,  9.  Christian  teachers  used  language  in  addressing  Christians 
in  the  then  heathen  world  that  would  be  regarded  as  intolerable  in  modern  Christendom, 
purified  and  exalted  by  Christ  through  their  teachings. 

Ver.  13.  Use  not  liberty  for  an  occasion  to  the  flesh.— Do  not  give  the  flesh  the  handle  or 
pretext  for  its  indulgence,  which  it  eagerly  seeks  for.  By  love  serve  one  another. — If  ye 
must  be  in  bondage,  be  servants  to  one  another  in  love. 

Ver.  15.  If  ye  bite  and  devour  one  another,  .  .  .  consumed. — Figures  taken  from  the  rage  of 
beasts  of  prey.  The  biting  of  controversy  naturally  runs  into  the  devouring  of  controversial 
mood  waxing  fierce  with  indulgence.  And  the  controversialists,  each  snapping  at  and  gnawing 
his  antagonist,  forget  the  tendency  is  to  consume  the  Christian  cause.  Strength  of  soul, 
health  of  body,  character,  and  resources  are  all  consumed  by  broils. 

Ver.  18.  If  ye  be  led  by  the  Spirit,  ye  are  not  under  the  law. — Under  no  irksome  restraint. 
To  him  who  loves,  law  is  not  irksome  bondage  but  delightful  direction.  Active  spiritual  life 
is  a  safeguard  against  lawless  affection. 

Ver.  19.  The  works  of  the  flesh. — 1.  Sensual  vices — "adultery  [omitted  in  the  oldest  MSS.], 
fornication,  uncleanness,  lasciviousness."  2.  Theological  vices — "  idolatry,  witchcraft." 
3.  Malevolent  vices — "hatred,  variance,  emulations,  wrath,  strife,  seditions,  heresies, envyings, 
murders."     4.    Vices  of  excess — "  drunkenness,  revellings." 

Ver.  22.  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit. — The  singular  fruit,  as  compared  with  the  plural  works, 
suggests  that  the  effect  of  the  Spirit's  inworking  is  one  harmonious  whole,  while  carnality 
tends  to  multitudinousness,  distraction,  chaos.  We  are  not  to  look  for  a  rigorous  logical 
classification  in  either  catalogue.  Generally,  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  may  be  arranged  as  : 
I.  Inward  graces — "love,  joy,  peace."  II.  Graces  towards  man — "  longsuffering,  gentleness, 
goodness,  faith."    III.  A  more  generic  form  of inward  graces— "  meekness,  temperance." 

Ver.  23.  Against  such  there  is  no  law. — So  far  from  being  against  love,  law  commands  it. 

Ver.  24.  Have  crucified  the  flesh. — Not  human  nature,  but  depraved  human  nature.  With 
the  affections  and  lusts. — Affections  refer  to  the  general  frame  of  mind  ;  the  lusts  to  special 
proclivities  or  habits. 

Ver.  26.  Not  be  desirous  of  vainglory,  provoking  [challenging],  envying  one  another. — Vain- 
gloriousness  provokes  contention ;  contention  produces  envy. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verse  1. 

Christian  Liberty — 

I.  Should  be  valued  considering  how  it  was  obtained. — "  The  liberty  where, 
with  Christ  hath  made  us  free."  It  is  a  liberty  purchased  at  a  great  cost. 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  became  incarnated,  suffered  in  a  degree  unparalleled 
and  incomprehensible,  and  died  the  shameful  and  ignoble  death  of  the  crucified 
to  win  back  the  liberty  man  had  forfeited  by  voluntary  sin.  The  redemption  of 
man  was  hopeless  from  himself,  and  but  for  the  intervention  of  a  competent 
Redeemer  he  was  involved  in  utter  and  irretrievable  bondage.  Civil  liberty, 
though  the  inalienable  right  of  every  man,  has  been  secured  as  the  result 
of  great  struggle  and  suffering.  "With  a  great  sum,"  said  the  Roman  captain 
to  Paul,  "  obtained  I  this  freedom  ; "  and  many  since  his  day  have  had  to  pay 
dearly  for  the  common  rights  of  citizenship.  But  Christian  liberty  should  be 
valued  as  the  choicest  privilege,  remembering  it  was  purchased  by  the  suffering 
Christ,  and  that  it  has  been  defended  through  the  ages  by  a  noble  army  of 
martyrs. 

II.  Should  remind  us  of  the  oppression  from  which  it  delivers. — "  And  be 

77 


chap.  v.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


not  entangled  again  with  the  yoke  of  bondage."  The  Galatians  had  been  bond- 
men, enslaved  by  the  worship  of  false  and  vile  deities.  If  they  rush  into  the 
snare  of  the  legalists,  they  will  be  bondmen  again,  and  their  bondage  will  be 
the  more  oppressive  now  they  have  tasted  the  joys  of  freedom.  Disobedience 
involves  us  in  many  entanglements.  It  is  among  the  most  potent  of  the  energies 
of  sin  that  it  leads  astray  by  blinding  and  blinds  by  leading  astray ;  that  the 
soul,  like  the  strong  champion  of  Israel,  must  have  its  eyes  put  out,  when  it 
would  be  bound  with  fetters  of  brass  and  condemned  to  grind  in  the  prison- 
house  (Judg.  xvi.  21).  Redemption  from  the  slavery  of  sin  should  fill  the 
heart  with  gratitude.  A  wealthy  and  kind  Englishman  once  bought  a  poor 
negro  for  twenty  pieces  of  gold.  He  presented  him  with  a  sum  of  money  that 
he  might  buy  a  piece  of  land  and  furnish  himself  a  home.  "  Am  I  really  free  1 
May  I  go  whither  I  will  ?  "  cried  the  negro  in  the  joy  of  his  heart.  "  Well,  let 
me  be  your  slave,  massa  ;  you  have  redeemed  me,  and  I  owe  all  to  you."  The 
gentleman  took  him  into  his  service,  and  he  never  had  a  more  faithful  servant. 
How  much  more  eagerly  should  we  do  homage  and  service  to  the  divine  Master, 
who  Himself  has  made  us  free  ! 

III.  Should  be  rigorously  maintained. — "  Stand  fast  therefore."  The  price 
of  freedom  is  incessant  vigilance ;  once  gained  it  is  a  prize  never  to  be  lost,  and 
no  effort  or  sacrifice  should  be  grudged  in  its  defence.  "  As  far  as  I  am  a 
Christian,"  said  Channing,  "  I  am  free.  My  religion  lays  on  me  not  one  chain. 
It  does  not  hem  me  round  with  a  mechanical  ritual,  does  not  enjoin  forms, 
attitudes,  and  hours  of  prayer,  does  not  descend  to  details  of  dress  and  food,  does 
not  put  on  me  one  outward  badge.  It  teaches  us  to  do  good,  but  leaves  us  to 
devise  for  ourselves  the  means  by  which  we  may  best  serve  mankind."  The 
spirit  of  Christian  liberty  is  eternal.  Jerusalem  and  Rome  may  strive  to  imprison 
it.  They  might  as  well  seek  to  bind  the  winds  of  heaven.  Its  seat  is  the  throne 
of  Christ.  It  lives  by  the  breath  of  His  Spirit.  Not  to  be  courageous  and 
faithful  in  its  defence  is  disloyalty  to  Christ  and  treachery  to  our  fellow -men. 

Lessons. — 1.  Christ  is  the  true  Emancipator  of  men.  2.  Christi.  n  liberty  does 
not  violate  but  honours  the  law  of  love.  3.  Liberty  is  best  preserved  by  being 
consistently  exercised. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSE. 

Ver.    1.    Freedom  from    Bondage. —  liberty  be  much   desired,   so  ignorant 

1.  Every  man  by  nature  is  a  bond-  are  we  of  the  worth  of  freedom  from 
slave,  being  under  the  bondage  of  sin.  spiritual  bondage  that  we  can  hardly 
The  Jews  were  under  bondage  to  the  be  excited  to  seek  after  it,  or  made  to 
ceremonial  law,  involving  great  trouble,  stand  to  it  when  attained,  but  are  in 
pain  in  the  flesh,    and  great   expense.  daily  hazard  of  preferring  our  former 

2.  Jesus  Christ  by  His  obedience  and  bondage  to  our  present  liberty. — 
death    has     purchased    freedom     and      Fergusson. 

liberty    to    His     Church — liberty    not 

to  do  evil,  nor  from    the  yoke  of  new  Bondage  and  Liberty. 

obedience,    nor    from     the    cross,   nor  I.  We  are  in  bondage  under  sin. 

from    that    obedience     and    reverence  II.  We  are  subject  to  punishment. 

which  inferiors  owe  to    superiors  ;  but  — Implying :  1.  Bondage  under  Satan, 

from  the  dominion    of  sin,  the  tyranny  who  keeps  unrepentant  sinners  in  his 

of    Satan,    the      curse    and    irritating  snare.       2.    Bondage    under    an    evil 

power  of   the  law,  and  from  subjecting  conscience,  which  sits  in  the  heart  as 

our   consciences  to  the  rites,  doctrines,  accuser  and  judge,  and  lies  like  a  wild 

ceremonies,    and   laws   of    men   in   the  beast  at  a  man's  door  ready  to  pluck 

matter    of   worship.      3.    Though  civil  out  his  throat.     3.  Bondage  under  the 

78 


H0MILE1IC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS.  chap.  v. 


wrath   of    God   and    fear    of    eternal  to  come  to  God  and  in  prayer  to  be 

death.  heard.     (4)  To  enter  heaven. 

III.  We  are  in  bondage  to  the  V.  Christ  is  the  great  Liberator. — 
ceremonial  law. — To  feel  this  bondage  He  procured  this  liberty  :  1.  By  the 
is  a  step  out  of  it ;  not  to  feel  it  is  to  merit  of  His  death.  The  price  paid 
be  plunged  into  it.  — His  precious   blood — shows  the  ex- 

IV.  We  have  spiritual  liberty  by  cellence  of  the  blessing,  and  that  it 
the  grace  of  God. — 1.  Christian  liberty  should  be  esteemed.  2.  By  the  efficacy 
is  a  deliverance  from  misery.  (1)  From  of  His  Spirit — assuring  us  of  our 
the  curse  of  the  law  for  the  breach  adoption,  and  abating  the  strength 
thereof.      (2)    From  the  obligation  of  and  power  of  sin. 

the  law  whereby  it  binds  us  to  perfect  VI.  We  are  to  hold  fast  our  liberty 

righteousness    in    our    own     persons.  in   the    day   of    trial.—  1.    We    must 

(3)     From     the     observance     of     the  labour   that   religion   be   not   only  in 

ceremonial  law  of  Moses.      (4)  From  mind  and  memory,  but  rooted  in  the 

the    tyranny    and    dominion    of    sin.  heart.       2.    We    must    join  with    our 

2.    Christian    liberty    is    freedom    in  religion  the  soundness  of  a  good  con- 

good   things.      (1)    In   the   voluntary  science.       3.    We   must   pray   for    all 

service  of  God.      (2)    In  the  free  use  things  needful. — Perkins. 
of  all  the  creatures  of  God.    (3)  Liberty 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  2—6. 

Christianity  Superior  to  External  Rites. 

I.  External  rites  demand  universal  obedience. — "  Every  man  that  is  circum- 
cised is  a  debtor  to  do  the  whole  law  "  (ver.  3).  The  Galatians  were  in  a  state 
of  dangerous  suspense.  They  were  on  the  brink  of  a  great  peril.  Another  step 
and  they  would  be  down  the  precipice.  That  step  was  circumcision.  Seeing  the 
imminence  of  the  danger  the  apostle  becomes  more  earnest  and  emphatic  in  his 
remonstrance.  He  warns  them  that  circumcision,  though  a  matter  of  indifference 
as  an  external  rite,  would  in  their  case  involve  an  obligation  to  keep  the  whole 
law.  This  he  has  shown  is  an  impossibility.  They  would  submit  themselves 
to  a  yoke  they  were  unable  to  bear,  and  from  whose  galling  tyranny  they  would 
be  unable  to  extricate  themselves.  Knowing  this,  surely  they  would  not  be  so 
foolish  as,  deliberately  and  with  open  eyes,  to  commit  such  an  act  of  moral  suicide. 
There  must  be  a  strange  infatuation  in  ritualistic  observances  that  tempts  man 
to  undertake  obligations  he  is  powerless  to  perform,  utterly  heedless  of  the  most 
explicit  and  faithful  warnings. 

II.  Dependence  on  external  rites  is  an  open  rejection  of  Christ. — "  Christ 
shall  profit  you  nothing ;  ...  is  become  of  no  effect  unto  you  ;  ye  are  fallen  from 
grace  "  (vers.  2,  4).  Here  the  result  of  a  defection  from  the  gospel  is  placed  in 
the  most  alarming  aspect,  and  should  give  pause  to  the  wildest  fanatic.  It  is 
the  forfeiture  of  all  Christian  privileges,  it  is  a  complete  rejection  of  Christ,  it  is 
a  loss  of  all  the  blessings  won  by  faith,  it  is  a  fall  into  the  gulf  of  despair  and 
ruin.  It  cannot  be  too  plainly  understood,  nor  too  frequently  iterated,  that 
excessive  devotion  to  external  rights  means  the  decline  and  extinction  of  true 
religion.  Ritualism  supplants  Jesus  Christ.  "  It  is  evident  that  the  disciples 
of  the  Church  of  Rome  wish  to  lead  us  from  confession  and  absolution  to 
the  doctrine  of  transubstantiation,  thence  to  the  worship  of  images,  and 
thence  to  all  the  abuses  which  at  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century  and  at  the 
beginning  of  the  sixteenth  excited  the  anger  and  scorn  of  Luther,  Calvin, 
Zwinglius,  and  others.  The  primary  faith  of  the  Reformers  is  in  the  words 
of  Christ.  The  primary  faith  of  the  ritualists  is  in  Aristotle.  If  the  British 
nation  is  wise,  it  will  not  allow  the  Roman  Church  with  its  infallible  head,  or  the 

79 


chap.  v.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


ritualists  with  their  mimic  ornaments,  or  those  who  are  deaf  to  the  teachings 
of  Socrates  and  Cicero,  of  Bacon  and  Newton,  to  deprive  them  of  the  inestimable 
blessings  of  the  gospel." 

III.  Christianity  as  a  spiritual  force  is  superior  to  external  rites. — 1.  It 
bases  the  hope  of  righteousness  on  faith.  "For  we  through  the  Spirit  wait  for 
the  hope  of  righteousness  by  faith "  (ver.  5).  Look  on  this  picture  and  on 
that.  Yonder  are  the  Galatians,  all  in  tumult  about  the  legalistic  proposals, 
debating  which  of  the  Hebrew  feasts  they  shall  celebrate  and  with  what  rites, 
absorbed  in  the  details  of  Mosaic  ceremony,  all  but  persuaded  to  be  circumcised 
and  to  settle  their  scruples  out  of  hand  by  a  blind  submission  to  the  law. 
And  here  on  the  other  side  is  Paul  with  the  Church  of  the  Spirit,  walking 
in  the  righteousness  of  faith  and  the  communion  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  joyfully 
awaiting  the  Saviour's  final  coming  and  the  hope  that  is  laid  up  in  heaven.  How 
vexed,  how  burdened,  how  narrow  and  puerile  is  the  one  condition ;  how  large, 
lofty,  and  secure  the  other  !  Faith  has  its  great  ventures  ;  it  has  also  its  seasons 
of  endurance,  its  moods  of  quiet  expectancy,  its  unweariable  patience.  It  can 
wait  as  well  as  work  (Findlay). 

2.  Faith  is  a  spiritual  exercise  revealing  itself  in  active  love. — "  Faith  worketh 
by  love "  (ver.  6).  In  ver.  5  we  have  the  statics  of  the  religion  of  Christ ;  in 
ver.  6  its  dynamics.  Love  is  the  working  energy  of  faith.  "  Love  gives  faith 
hands  and  feet ;  hope  lends  it  wings.  Love  is  the  fire  at  its  heart,  the  life-blood 
coursing  in  its  veins;  hope  the  light  that  gleams  and  dances  in  its  eyes."  In 
the  presence  of  an  active  spiritual  Christianity,  animated  by  love  to  Christ  and 
to  men,  ritualism  diminishes  into  insignificance.  "  In  Jesus  Christ  neither 
circumcision  availeth  anything  nor  un circumcision  "  (ver.  6).  The  Jew  is  no 
better  or  worse  a  Christian  because  he  is  circumcised  ;  the  Gentile  no  worse  or 
better  because  he  is  not.  Love,  which  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law,  is  the  essence 
of  Christianity,  and  gives  it  the  superiority  over  all  external  rites. 

Lessons. — 1.  Externalism  in  religion  imposes  intolerable  burdens.  2.  To  prefer 
external  rites  is  an  insult  to  Christ.  3.  The  superiority  of  Christianity  is  its 
spiritual  character. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  2-4.    Christianity  nullified  by  hope  of  heaven  upon  it.     2.  To  impose 

Legalism.  the  tie  of  a  command  on  anything  as 

I.  To  accept  legalism  is  to  reject  a  necessary  part  of  divine  worship 
Christ  (vers.  2,  4).  wherein  the  word  has  left  us  free,  or 

II.  Legalism  demands  universal  to  subject  ourselves  to  such  command, 
obedience  to  its  enactments  (ver.  3).  is   a   receding   from   and   betrayal   of 

III.  Legalism  is  a  disastrous  aban-  Christian  liberty.  3.  The  sum  of  a 
donment  of  Christianity. — "  Ye  are  Christian's  task  is  faith ;  but  it  is 
fallen  from  grace  "  (ver.  4).  always  accompanied  with  the  grace  of 

love.     Though  faith  and  love  are  con- 

Yers.  5,  6.  Righteousness  attained  by  joined,  faith,  in  the  order  of  nature, 

Active  Faith. —  1.  No  personal  righteous-  has  the  precedency. — Fergusson. 
ness  entitles  us  to  the  blessed  hope  of 

the  heavenly  inheritance,  but  only  the  Yer.  6.  Religion  is  Faith  ivorking  by 

righteousness    of    Christ   apprehended  Love. 

by  faith.      It  is  only  the  efficacious  I.  External  and   bodily  privileges 

teaching   of    God's   Spirit    which   can  are   of   no   use   and   moment  in  the 

sufficiently  instruct  us  in  the  knowledge  kingdom  of  Christ. — 1.    We  are  not 

of  this  righteousness  and  make  us  with  to    esteem    men's    religion    by    their 

security   and    confidence   venture   our  riches  and  external  dignities.     2.  We 

80 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


CHAP.  V. 


are  to  moderate  our  affections  in 
respect  of  all  outward  things,  neither 
sorrowing  too  much  for  them  nor 
joying  too  much  in  them. 

II.  Faith  is  of  great  use  and  accept- 
ance in  the  kingdom  of  Christ. — 
1.  We  must  labour  to  conceive  faith 
aright  in  our  hearts,  by  the  use  of  the 
right  means — the  word,  prayer,  and 
sacraments,     and     in     and     by     the 


exercises  of  spiritual  invocation  and 
repentance,  2.  Faith  in  Christ  must 
reign  and  bear  sway  in  our  hearts  and 
have  command  over  reason,  will,  affec- 
tion, lust.  3.  It  is  to  be  bewailed  that 
the  common  faith  of  our  day  is  but  a 
ceremonial  faith. 

III.  True  faith  works  by  love. — 
Faith  is  the  cause  of  love,  and  love  is 
the  fruit  of  faith. — Perkins. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  7—12. 

Disturber  of  the  Faith — 

I.  Checks  the  prosperous  career  of  the  most  ardent  Christian. — "  Ye  did  run 

well ;  who  did  hinder  you  that  ye  should  not  obey  the  truth  ] "  (ver.  7).  The 
Galatians  were  charmed  with  the  truth  as  it  fell  from  the  lips  of  the  apostle ; 
it  was  to  them  a  new  revelation ;  they  eagerly  embraced  it,  it  changed  their 
lives,  and  they  strove  to  conform  their  conduct  to  its  high  moral  teachings. 
The  apostle  was  delighted  with  the  result,  and  commended  their  Christian 
enthusiasm.  They  were  running  finely.  But  the  intrusion  of  false  teaching 
changed  all  this.  Their  progress  was  arrested,  their  faith  was  disturbed,  they 
wavered  in  their  allegiance,  and  were  in  danger  of  losing  all  the  advantages  they 
had  gained.  The  influence  of  false  doctrine  is  always  baneful,  especially  so  to 
new  beginners,  in  whom  the  principles  of  truth  have  not  become  firmly  rooted. 
The  loss  of  truth,  like  inability  to  believe,  may  be  traced  back  to  an  unhealthy 
corruption  of  the  mind.  The  great  danger  of  unsound  doctrine  lies  in  this,  that, 
like  a  cancer,  it  rankles  because  it  finds  in  the  diseased  condition  of  the  religious 
life  ever  fresh  nourishment. 

II.  Is  opposed  to  the  divine  method  of  justification. — "This  persuasion 
cometh  not  of  Him  that  calleth  you  "  (ver.  8).  The  disturber  of  the  Galatians 
taught  a  human  method  of  salvation — a  salvation  by  the  works  of  the  law.  This 
was  diametrically  opposed  to  the  divine  calling,  which  is  an  invitation  to  the 
whole  race  to  seek  salvation  by  faith.  The  persuasion  to  which  the  Galatians 
were  yielding  was  certainly  not  of  God.  It  was  a  surrender  to  the  enemy.  All 
error  is  a  wild  fighting  against  God,  an  attempt  to  undermine  the  foundations 
that  God  has  fixed  for  man's  safety  and  happiness. 

III.  Suggests  errors  that  are  contagious  in  their  evil  influence. — "  A  little 
(eaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump  "  (ver.  9).  A  proverbial  expression  the  meaning 
of  which  is  at  once  obvious.  A  small  infusion  of  false  doctrine,  or  the  evil 
influence  of  one  bad  person,  corrupts  the  purity  of  the  gospel.  It  is  a  fact  well 
known  in  the  history  of  science  and  philosophy  that  men,  gifted  by  nature  with 
singular  intelligence,  have  broached  the  grossest  errors  and  even  sought  to 
undermine  the  grand  primitive  truths  on  which  human  virtue,  dignity,  and  hope 
depend.  The  mind  that  is  always  open  to  search  into  error  is  itself  in  error, 
or  at  least  unstable  (1  Cor.  xv.  33  ;  Eccles.  ix.  18). 

IV.  Shall  not  escape  chastisement  whatever  his  rank  or  pretensions. — 
1.  Either  by  direct  divine  judgment.  "  He  that  troubleth  you  shall  bear  his 
judgment,  whosoever  he  be  "  (ver.  10).  The  reference  here  may  be  to  some  one 
prominent  among  the  seducers,  or  to  any  one  who  plays  the  troubler.  God  will 
not  only  defend  His  own  truth,  but  will  certainly  punish  the  man  who  from 
wicked  motives  seeks  to  corrupt  the  truth  or  to  impair  the  faith  of  those  who 
have  embraced  it.  The  seducer  not  only  deceives  himself,  but  shall  suffer 
judgment  for  his  self-deception  and  the  injury  he  has  done  to  others. 

g  81 


CHAP.  V.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALAITANS. 


2.  Or  by  excision  from  the  Church. — "  I  would  they  were  even  cut  off  which 
trouble  you"  (ver.  12).  An  extravagant  expression,  as  if  the  apostle  said,  Would 
that  the  Judaising  troublers  would  mutilate  themselves,  as  was  the  custom  with 
certain  heathen  priests  in  some  of  their  religious  rites.  The  phrase  indicates  the 
angry  contempt  of  the  apostle  for  the  legalistic  policy,  and  that  the  troublers 
richly  deserved  to  be  excluded  from  the  Church  and  all  its  privileges.  The 
patience  of  the  Gentile  champion  was  exhausted,  and  found  relief  for  the  moment 
in  mocking  invective. 

V.  Does  not  destroy  the  hope  and  faith  of  the  true  teacher. — 1.  He  retains 
confidence  in  the  fidelity  of  those  who  have  been  temporarily  disturbed.  "  I  have 
confidence  in  you  through  the  Lord,  that  ye  will  be  none  otherwise  minded " 
(ver.  10).  Notwithstanding  the  insidious  leaven,  the  apostle  cherishes  the 
assurance  that  his  converts  will  after  all  prove  leal  and  true  at  heart.  He 
has  faithfully  chided  them  for  their  defection,  but  his  anger  is  directed,  not 
towards  them,  but  towards  those  who  have  injured  them.  He  is  persuaded  the 
Galatians  will,  with  God's  help,  resume  the  interrupted  race  they  were  running 
so  well. 

2.  His  sufferings  testify  that  his  own  teaching  is  unchanged. — "  If  I  preach 
circumcision,  why  do  I  yet  suffer  persecution  ?  Then  is  the  offence  of  the  cross 
ceased"  (ver.  11).  The  rancour  and  hostility  of  the  legalists  would  have  been 
disarmed,  if  Paul  advocated  their  doctrine,  and  the  scandalous  "  offence  of  the 
cross  " — so  intolerable  to  Jewish  pride — would  have  been  done  away.  But  the 
cross  was  the  grand  vital  theme  of  all  his  teaching,  that  in  which  he  most 
ardently  gloried,  and  for  which  he  was  prepared  to  endure  all  possible  suffering. 
The  value  of  truth  to  a  man  is  what  he  is  willing  to  suffer  for  it. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  man  who  perverts  the  truth  is  an  enemy  to  his  kind.  2.  The 
false  teacher  ensures  his  own  condemnation.  3.  Truth  becomes  more  precious  the 
more  we  suffer  for  it. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.    7-10.  How    Perfection   is   at-  back.     There  are  two  causes  for  this : 

tained. — Everything    in   the    universe  (1)  Blindness  of  mind.    (2)  Our  unbelief 

comes   to  its  perfection   by  drill   and  in  the  article  of  life  everlasting.     3.  We 

marching— the   seed,    the    insect,    the  must  neither  look  to  the  right  nor  the 

animal,   the  man,   the   spiritual   man.  left    hand,    or    to    things    behind,   but 

God  created  man  at  the  lowest  point,  press  forward  to  the  prize  of  eternal 

and  put  him  in  a  world  where  almost  life.     4.  We  must  not  be  moved  with 

nothing  would  be   done  for  him,  and  the  speeches  of  men  which  are  given  of 

almost  everything  should  tempt  him  to  us,  for  or  against.     They  are  lookers 

do  for  himself. — Beecher.  on,    and    must    have    their    speeches. 

Our  care  must  be  not  to  heed  them, 

Ver.  7.  The  Christian  Life  a  Race.  but  look  to  our  course. 

I.  Christians    are    runners  in  the  II.  Christians    must    not    only  be 

race    of    God. — 1.  They    must    make  runners,  but  run  well. — This  is  done 

haste  without  delay  to  keep  the  com-  by  believing  and  obeying,  having  faith 

mandments  of  God.    It  is  a  great  fault  and  a  good  conscience.     These  are  the 

for  youth  and  others  to  defer  amend-  two  feet  by  which  we  run.     We  have 

ment  till  old  age,  or  till  the  last  and  one  good  foot — our  religion — which  is 

deadly  sickness.     That  is  the  time  to  sound  and  good  ;  but  we  halt  on  the 

end   our   running,   and   not    to  begin.  other  foot.    Our  care  to  keep  conscience 

2.   We  are  to  increase  and  profit  in  all  is  not  suitable  to  our  religion.     Three 

good  duties.     We  in  this  age  do  other-  things  cause  a  lameness  in  this  foot : 

wise.     Either  we  stand  at  a  stay  or  go  the  lust  of  the  eye — covetousness,  the 

82 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


CHAP.  V. 


lust   of   the   flesh,    and    the   pride   of 
life. 

III.  Christians  must  run  the  race 
from  the  beginning  to  the  end. — 
1.  We  must  cherish  a  love  and  fervent 
desire  of  eternal  life,  and  by  this  means 
be  drawn  through  all  miseries  and 
overpass  them  to  the  end.  2.  We 
must  maintain  a  constant  and  daily- 
purpose  of  not  sinning. — Perkins. 

Bad  Companions. — "  Bad  company," 
wrote  Augustine,  "  is  like  a  nail  driven 
into  a  post,  which,  after  the  first  or 
second  blow,  may  be  drawn  out  with 
very  little  difficulty ;  but  being  once 
driven  up  to  the  head,  the  pincers 
cannot  take  hold  to  draw  it  out,  which 
can  only  be  done  by  the  destruction  of 
the  wood."  Of  course  it  is  useless  to 
define  bad  company.  Men  and  women, 
boys  and  girls,  feel  instinctively  when 
they  have  fallen  in  with  dangerous 
associates ;  if  they  choose  to  remain 
amongst  them  they  are  lost.  So  in  the 
high  tides,  barks  of  light  draught  will 
float  over  Goodwin  quicksands;  in 
summer  at  low  tide  the  venturous  boys 
and  young  people  will  play  cricket 
thereon  ;  but  neither  can  remain  long 
in  the  neighbourhood.  The  time  comes 
when  the  sands  are  covered  with  but  a 
thin  surface  of  water,  and  beneath  is 
the  shifting,  loose,  wet  earth,  more 
dangerous  and  treacherous  than  spring- 
tide ice  •  and  then  it  is  that  to  touch  is 
to  be  drawn  in,  and  to  be  drawn  in  is 
death.  So  is  it  with  bad  company. — 
The  Gentle  Life. 

Cowardly  Retreat. — General  Grant 
relates  that  just  as  he  was  hoping  to 
hear  a  report  of  a  brilliant  movement 
and  victory  of  General  Sigel,  he  re- 
ceived an  announcement  from  General 
Halleck  to  this  effect :  "  Sigel  is  in 
full  retreat  on  Strasburg ;  he  will  do 
nothing  but  run  ;  never  did  anything 
else."  The  enemy  had  intercepted  him, 
handled  him  roughly,  and  he  fled. 

Yers.  8-10.  The  Disintegrating  Force 
of  Error. — 1.  Whatever  persuasion 
cometh  not  of  God,  and  is  not  grounded 


on  the  word  of  truth,  is  not  to  be 
valued,  but  looked  upon  as  a  delusion 
(ver.  8).  2.  The  Church  of  Christ, 
and  every  particular  member  thereof, 
ought  carefully  to  resist  the  first 
beginnings  of  sin,  for  the  least  of 
errors  and  the  smallest  number  of 
seduced  persons  are  here  compared  to 
leaven,  a  little  quantity  of  which 
secretly  insinuates  itself  and  insensibly 
conveys  its  sourness  to  the  whole  lump 
(ver.  9).  3.  The  minister  is  not  to 
despair  of  the  recovery  of  those  who 
oppose  themselves,  but  ought  in  charity 
to  hope  the  best  of  all  men,  so  long  as 
they  are  curable ;  and  to  show  how 
dangerous  their  error  was  by  denounc- 
ing God's  judgment  against  their 
prime  seducers  (ver.  10).  4.  So  just 
is  God,  He  will  suffer  no  impenitent 
transgressor,  however  subtle,  to  escape 
His  search,  or  pass  free  from  the ,  dint 
of  His  avenging  stroke,  whoever  he 
be  for  parts,  power,  or  estimation. — 
Fergusson. 

Yer.  9.  Reform  of  Bad  Manners. 

I.  We  must  resist  and  withstand 
every  particular  sin. — One  sin  is  able 
to  defile  the  whole  life  of  man.  One 
fly  is  sufficient  to  mar  a  whole  box  of 
sweet  ointment.  One  offence  in  our 
first  parents  brought  corruption  on 
them  and  all  mankind ;  yea,  on  heaven 
and  earth. 

II.  We  must  endeavour  to  the 
utmost  to  cut  off  every  bad  example 
in  the  societies  of  men. — One  bad 
example  is  sufficient  to  corrupt  a  whole 
family,  a  town,  a  country.  A  wicked 
example,  being  suffered,  spreads  abroad 
and  does  much  hurt. 

III.  We  are  to  withstand  and  cut 
off  the  first  beginnings  and  occasions 
of  sin. — We  say  of  arrant  thieves  they 
begin  to  practise  their  wickedness  in 
pins  and  points.  For  this  cause, 
idleness,  excessive  eating,  drinking  and 
swilling,  riot,  and  vanity  in  apparel 
are  to  be  suppressed  in  every  society  as 
the  breeder  of  many  vices. — Perkins. 

Yer.  1 1 .  The  Perversion  of  Apostolic 
Preaching. — There  are  two  attempts  or 

83 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


resolves  in  constant  operation  as  to  the 
cross.  One  is  man's,  to  accommodate 
to  human  liking  and  taste  ;  the  second 
is  God's,  to  raise  human  liking  and 
taste  to  it. 

I.  The  aim  of  man. — The  following 
may  be  named  as  the  principal  excep- 
tions taken  to  the  cross  by  those  who 
rejected  it : — 

1.  It  was  an  improbable  medium  of 
revelation. —  Man  can  talk  loudly  how 
God  should  manifest  Himself.  Shall 
the  cross  be  the  oracle  by  which  He 
will  speak  His  deepest  counsels  to  our 
race? 

2.  It  was  a  stigma  on  this  religion 
which  set  it  in  disadvantageous  contrast 
with  every  other. — It  was  unheard  of 
that  the  vilest  of  all  deaths  should 
give  its  absolute  character  to  a  religion, 
and  that  this  religion  of  the  cross 
should  triumph  over  all. 

3.  It  ims  a  violent  disappointment  of 
a  general  hope. — There  was  a  desire  of 
all  nations.  And  was  all  that  the 
earliest  lay  rehearsed,  all  that  the 
highest  wisdom  enounced,  only  to  be 
wrought  out  in  the  shameful  cross  1 

4.  It  was  a  humiliating  test. — Am- 
bition, selfishness,  insincerity,  licen- 
tiousness, ferocity,  pride,  felt  that  it 
was  encircled  with  an  atmosphere  in 
which  they  were  instantly  interrupted 
and  condemned.  Man  is  desirous  of 
doing  this  away  as  a  wrongful  and 
unnecessary  impression.  He  would 
make  the  offence  of  the  cross  to  cease  : 
(1)  By  fixing  it  upon  some  extrinsic 
authority.  (2)  By  torturing  it  into 
coalition  with  foreign  principles.  (3) 
By  transforming  the  character  of  its 
religious  instructions.  (4)  By  applying 
it  to  inappropriate  uses.  (5)  By 
excluding  its  proper  connections. 

II.  The  procedure  of  God. — 1.  It  is 
necessary,  if  we  would  receive  the  proper 
influence  of  the  cross,  that  we  be  pre- 
pared to  hail  it  as  a  distinct  revelation. 
Science  and  the  original  ethics  of 
our  nature  do  not  fall  within  the 
distinct  province  of  what  a  revelation 
intends.  Its  strict  purpose,  its  proper 
idea,  is  to  make  known  that  which  is 
not    known  and  which    could  not  be 

84 


otherwise  known.  Not  more  directly 
did  the  elemental  light  proceed  from 
God  who  called  it  out  of  darkness  than 
did  the  making  known  to  man  of 
redemption  by  the  blood  of  the  cross. 

2.  When  we  rightly  appreciate  the 
cross,  we  recognise  it  as  the  instrument 
of  redemption. — This  was  the  mode  of 
death  indicated  by  prophecy.  The 
cross  stands  for  that  death  ;  but  it  is 
an  idle,  unworthy  superstition  that 
this  mode  of  death  wrought  the  stu- 
pendous end.  It  is  only  an  accessory. 
We  must  look  further  into  the  mystery. 
"  He  His  own  self  bore  our  sins  in  His 
own  body  on  the  tree."  It  is  that 
awful  identity,  that  mysterious  action, 
which  expiates,  and  not  the  rood. 

3.  When  our  mind  approves  this 
method  of  salvation,  it  finds  in  the  cross 
the  principle  of  sanctification. — A  new 
element  of  thought,  a  new  complexion 
of  motive,  enter  the  soul  when  the 
Holy  Spirit  shows  to  it  the  things  of 
Christ.  We  are  new  creatures.  We 
reverse  all  our  aims  and  desires.  We 
are  called  unto  holiness.  (1)  Mark 
the  process.  We  had  hitherto  abided 
in  death.  But  now  we  are  quickened 
with  Him.  (2)  Mark  the  necessity. 
Until  we  be  brought  nigh  to  it,  until 
we  take  hold  of  it,  the  doctrine  of  the 
crucified  Saviour  is  an  unintelligible 
and  uninteresting  thing.  (3)  Mark 
the  effect.  There  is  a  suddenly,  though 
a  most  intelligently,  developed  charm. 
It  is  the  infinite  of  attraction.  All 
concentrates  on  it.  It  absorbs  the 
tenderness  and  the  majesty  of  the 
universe.  It  is  full  of  glory.  Our 
heart  has  now  yielded  to  it,  is  drawn, 
is  held,  coheres,  coalesces,  is  itself 
impregnated  by  the  sacred  effluence. 
The  offence  of  the  cross  has  ceased. — 
R.  W.  Hamilton. 

Ver.  12.  Church  Censure. — The  spirit 
of  error  may  so  far  prevail  among  a 
people  that  discipline  can  hardly  attain 
its  end — the  shaming  of  the  person 
censured,  and  the  preservation  of  the 
Church  from  being  leavened.  In 
which  case  the  servants  of  God  should 
proceed  with  slow  pace,  and  in  all  lenity 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS.  chap.  v. 


and  wisdom,  and  should  rather  doc-  II.  The  doctrine  of  the  apostles  is 

trinally  declare  the  censures  deserved  of    infallible    certainty,    because    the 

than  actually  inflict  the  censure  itself.  oppugners  of  it  are  plagued  with  the 

just  judgment  of  God. 

Judgment  on   the  Troublers  of   the  III.  Our  duty  is   to  pray  for  the 

Church.  good  estate  of  the  Church  of  God,  and 

I.  God   watches   over    His   Church  for  the  kingdoms  where  the  Church  is 

with  a  special  providence.  planted. — Perkins. 


MAIN  EOMILETICS   OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses   13—18. 

Love  the  Highest  Law  of  Christian  Liberty. 

I.  Love  preserves  liberty  from  degenerating  into  licence. — "  Only  use  not 
liberty  for  an  occasion  to  the  flesh"  (ver.  13).  Christian  liberty  is  a  great  boon, 
but  it  is  also  a  solemn  responsibility.  It  is  hard  to  win,  and  is  worth  the  most 
gigantic  struggle ;  but  the  moment  it  is  abused  it  is  lost.  Men  clamour  for 
liberty  when  they  mean  licence — licence  to  indulge  their  unholy  passions,  un- 
checked by  the  restraints  of  law.  Christian  liberty  is  not  the  liberty  of  the 
flesh,  but  of  the  Spirit,  and  love  is  the  master -principle  that  governs  and  defines 
all  its  exercises. 

"  He  is  the  freeman  whom  the  truth  makes  free, 
And  all  are  slaves  besides." 

We  know  no  truth,  no  privilege,  no  power,  no  blessing,  no  right,  which  is  not 
abused.  But  is  liberty  to  be  denied  to  men  because  they  often  turn  it  into 
licentiousness  ?  There  are  two  freedoms — the  false,  where  a  man  is  free  to  do 
what  he  likes  ;  the  true,  where  a  man  is  free  to  do  what  he  ought.  Love  is  the 
safeguard  of  the  highest  liberty. 

II.  Love  is  obedience  to  the  highest  law. — "  For  all  the  law  is  fulfilled  in 
one  word,  even  in  this,  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself"  (ver.  14). 
"  By  love  serve  one  another"  (ver.  13).  We  may  be  as  orthodox  as  Athanasius 
and  as  scrupulous  as  Jerome,  we  may  be  daily  and  ostentatiously  building  to 
God  seven  altars  and  offering  a  bullock  and  a  ram  on  every  altar,  and  yet  be  as 
sounding  brass  and  as  a  clanging  cymbal,  if  our  life  shows  only  the  leaves  of 
profession  without  the  golden  fruit  of  action.  If  love  shows  not  itself  by  deeds 
of  love,  then  let  us  not  deceive  ourselves.  God  is  not  mocked  ;  our  Christianity 
is  heathenism,  and  our  religion  a  delusion  and  a  sham.  Love  makes  obedience 
delightful,  esteems  it  bondage  to  be  prevented,  liberty  to  be  allowed  to  serve. 

"  Serene  will  be  our  days  and  bright, 
And  happy  will  our  nature  be, 
When  love  is  an  unerring  light, 
And  joy  its  own  security." 

Wordsworth. 

III.  Love  prevents  the  mutual  destructiveness  of  a  contentious  spirit. — "  But 

if  ye  bite  and  devour  one  another,  take  heed  that  ye  be  not  consumed  one  of 
another"  (ver.  15).  The  condition  of  the  Galatians  at  this  time  was  very 
different  from  the  ideal  Paul  set  before  them.  The  quick,  warm  temperament 
of  the  Gauls  was  roused  by  the  Judaistic  controversy,  and  their  natural  com- 
bativeness  was  excited.  It  was  easy  to  pick  a  quarrel  with  them  at  any  time, 
and  they  were  eloquent  in  vituperation  and  invective.  The  "  biting  "  describes 
the  wounding  and  exasperating  effect  of  the  manner  in  which  their  contentions 
were  carried  on ;  "  devour  "  warns  them  of  its  destructiveness.  If  this  state  of 
things  continued,  the  Churches  of  Galatia  would  cease  to  exist.  Their  liberty 
would  end  in  complete  disintegration.     Love  is  the  remedy  propounded  for  all 

85 


chap.  v.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


ills — the  love  of  Christ,  leadirg  to  the  love  of  each  other.  Love  not  only  cures 
quarrels,  but  prevents  them. 

IY.  Love  by  obeying  the  law  of  the  Spirit  gains  the  victory  in  the  feud 
between  the  flesh  and  the  Spirit. — "  Walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  ye  shall  not  fulfil 
the  lust  of  the  flesh  :  .  .  .  these  are  contrary  the  one  to  the  other  "  (vers.  16, 17). 
The  flesh  and  the  Spirit  are  rivals,  and  by  their  natures  must  be  opposed  to  and 
strive  with  each  other.  The  strong  man  is  dispossessed  by  a  stronger  than  he — 
the  Spirit.  The  master  must  rule  the  slave.  "  This  soul  of  mine  must  rule 
this  body  of  mine,"  said  John  Foster,  "  or  quit  it."  The  life  of  a  Christian  is 
lived  in  a  higher  sphere,  and  governed  by  a  higher  law — walking  in  the  Spirit. 
Christianity  says,  Be  a  man,  not  a  brute.  Not  do  as  many  fleshly  things  as  you 
can,  but  do  as  many  spiritual  things  as  you  can.  All  prohibitions  are  negative. 
You  can't  kill  an  appetite  by  starvation.  You  may  kill  the  flesh  by  living  in  the 
higher  region  of  the  Spirit;  not  merely  by  ceasing  to  live  in  sin,  but  by  loving 
Christ.  The  more  we  live  the  spiritual  life,  the  more  sin  becomes  impossible. 
Conquest  over  the  sensual  is  gained,  not  by  repression,  but  by  the  freer,  purer 
life  of  love. 

Y.  Love  emancipates  from  the  trammels  of  the  law.—"  If  ye  be  led  by  the 
Spirit,  ye  are  not  under  the  law  "  (ver.  18).  The  Spirit  of  love  does  not  abolish 
the  law,  but  renders  it  harmless  by  fulfilling  all  its  requirements,  without  being 
compelled  to  it  by  its  stern  commands.  Law  does  not  help  the  soul  to  obey  its 
behests,  but  it  has  nothing  to  say,  nothing  to  threaten,  when  those  behests  are 
obeyed.  To  be  under  the  law  is  to  be  under  sin  ;  but  yielding  to  the  influence 
of  the  Spirit,  and  living  according  to  His  law,  the  soul  is  free  from  sin  and  from 
the  condemnation  of  the  law.  Freedom  from  sin,  and  freedom  from  the 
trammels  of  the  Mosaic  law — these  two  liberties  are  virtually  one.  Love  is 
the  great  emancipator  from  all  moral  tyrannies. 

Lessons. — 1.  Love  is  in  harmony  with  the  holiest  law.  2.  Love  silences  all 
contention.     3.   Love  honours  law  by  obeying  it. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Yers.  13,  14.   The  Service  of  Love —  when    they    turn    recreation    into    an 

I.  Is  the  noblest  exercise  of  Chris-  occupation.  2.  When  men  exceed  in 
tian  liberty  (ver.  13).  .eating  and  drinking.     3.  They  offend 

II.  Preserves  Christian  liberty  from  who,  being  mean  persons  and  living  by 
degenerating  into  selfish  indulgence  trades,  yet  for  diet  and  apparel  are  as 
(ver.  13).  great  gentlemen  and  gentlewomen. 

III.  Is  the  fulfilment  of  the  highest  III.  Liberty  is  abused  when  the 
law  (ver.  14).  blessings  of  God  are  made  instruments 

and  flags  and  banners  to  display  our 

Yer.    13.    The    Abuse    of  Christian  riot,  vanity,  ostentation,  and  pride.— It 

Liberty.  is  the  fashion  of    men    to   take    unto 

I.  To  use  it  as  an  occasion  of  themselves  a  toleration  of  sinning. 
fleshly  and  carnal  liberty. — When  men  Some  presume  on  the  patience  of  God, 
make  more  things  indifferent  than  God  others  on  the  election  of  grace,  and 
ever  made.  Thus  all  abuses  of  meat,  others  on  the  mercy  of  God.  A  certain 
drink,  apparel,  rioting,  gaming,  dicing,  dweller  in  Cambridge  made  away  with 
and  carding  are  excused  by  the  names  himself.  In  his  bosom  was  found  a 
of  things  indifferent.  writing  to  this   effect :    that    God  did 

II.  Our  liberty  is  abused  by  an  show  mercy  on  great  and  desperate 
immoderate  use  of  the  gifts  of  God. —  sinners,  and  therefore  he  hoped  for 
1.  Many  gentlemen  and  others  offend  mercy  though  he  hanged  himself.     Of 

86 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS.         chap.  v. 


this  mind  are  many  ignorant  persons, 
who  persevere  in  their  sins,  yet  persuade 
themselves  of  mercy. — Perkins. 

The  Bight  Use  of  Christian  Liberty. 

I.  We  ourselves  must  be  renewed 
and  sanctified. — The  person  must  first 
please  God  before  the  action  can  please 
Him. 

II.  Besides  the  lawful  use  of  the 
creatures  we  must  have  a  spiritual 
and  holy  use  of  them. — 1.  The  creatures 
of  God  must  be  sanctified  by  the  word 
and  prayer.  2.  We  must  be  circumspect 
lest  we  sin  in  the  use  of  the  creatures. 
In  these  days  there  is  no  feasting  or 
rejoicing  unless  all  memory  of  God  be 
buried,  for  that  is  said  to  breed  melan- 
choly. 3.  We  must  use  the  gifts  of 
God  with  thanksgiving.  4.  We  must 
suffer  ourselves  to  be  limited  and 
moderate  in  the  use  of  our  liberty. 
5.  Our  liberty  must  be  used  for  right 
ends — the  glory  of  God,  the  preserva- 
tion of  nature,  and  the  good  of  our 
neighbour. 

III.  We  must  give  no  occasion  of 
sinning  by  means  of  Christian  liberty. 
— Ibid. 

Ver.  14.  The  Law  fulfilled  in  Love  to 
Others. 

I.  The  end  of  man's  life  is  to  serve 
God  in  serving  others. 

II.  True  godliness  is  to  love  and 
serve  God  in  serving  man.— To  live  out 
of  all  society  of  men,  though  it  be  in 
prayer  and  fasting  in  monkish  fashion, 
is  no  state  of  perfection,  but  mere 
superstition.  That  is  true  and  perfect 
love  of  God  that  is  showed  in  duties 
of  love  and  in  the  edification  of  our 
neighbour.  It  is  not  enough  for  thee 
to  be  holy  in  church  ;  thou  mayest  be 
a  saint  in  church  and  a  devil  at  home. 
— Ibid. 

Regard  for  a  Neighbour's  Rights. — 
Speaking  of  the  early  American  prairie 
settlements  a  modern  historian  says  : 
"  Theft  was  almost  unknown.  The 
pioneers  brought  with  them  the  same 
rigid  notions  of  honesty  which  they 
had  previously  maintained.  A  man  in 
Mancoupin   county    left    his   waggon 


loaded  with  corn  stuck  in  the  prairie 
mud  for  two  weeks  near  a  frequented 
road.  When  he  returned  he  found 
some  of  his  corn  gone,  but  there  was 
money  enough  tied  in  the  sacks  to  pay 
for  what  was  taken." 

Ver.  15.  Church  Quarrels. — 1.  When 
schism  in  a  Church  is  not  only  main- 
tained on  the  one  hand  with  passion, 
strife,  reproaches,  and  real  injuries, 
but  also  impugned  on  the  other  hand, 
not  so  much  with  the  sword  of  the 
Spirit  as  with  the  same  fleshly  means, 
then  is  it  the  forerunner  and  procuring 
cause  of  desolation  and  ruin  to  both 
parties  and  to  the  whole  Church. 
2.  As  it  is  a  matter  of  great  difficulty 
to  make  men  of  credit  and  parts,  being 
once  engaged  in  contentious  debates,  to 
foresee  the  consequence  of  their  doing 
so  further  than  the  hoped-for  victory 
against  the  contrary  party,  so  it  were 
no  small  wisdom,  before  folk  meddle 
with  strife,  seriously  to  consider  what 
woeful  effects  may  follow  to  the  Church 
of  God. — Fergusson. 

Ver.  16.-  The  Positiveness  of  the  Divine 
Life. 

I.  There  are  two  ways  of  dealing 
with  every  vice. — One  is  to  set  to 
work  directly  to  destroy  the  vice ;  that 
is  the  negative  way.  The  other  is  to 
bring  in  as  overwhelmingly  as  possible 
the  opposite  virtue,  and  so  to  crowd 
and  stifle  and  drown  out  the  vice  ;  that 
is  the  positive  way.  Everywhere  the 
negative  and  positive  methods  of  treat- 
ment stand  over  against  each  other, 
and  men  choose  between  them.  A 
Church  is  full  of  errors  and  foolish 
practices.  It  is  possible  to  attack 
those  follies  outright,  showing  conclu- 
sively how  foolish  they  are  ;  or  it  is 
possible,  and  it  is  surely  better,  to  wake 
up  the  true  spiritual  life  in  that  Church 
which  shall  itself  shed  those  follies  and 
cast  them  out,  or  at  least  rob  them  of 
their  worst  harmf  ulness.  The  applica- 
tion of  the  same  principle  is  seen  in 
matters  of  taste,  matters  of  reform,  and 
in  matters  of  opinion. 

II.  In  St.  Paul  and  in  all  the  New 

87 


CHAP   V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


Testament  there  is  nothing  more  beau- 
tiful than  the  clear,  open,  broad  way 
in  which  the  positive  culture  of 
human  character  is  adopted  and  em- 
ployed.— We  can  conceive  of  a  God 
standing  over  His  moral  creatures,  and, 
whenever  they  did  anything  wrong, 
putting  a  heavy  hand  on  the  malignant 
manifestation  and  stifling  it,  and  so  at 
last  bringing  them  to  a  tight,  narrow, 
timid  goodness — the  God  of  repression. 
The  God  of  the  New  Testament  is  not 
that.  We  can  conceive  of  another 
God  who  shall  lavish  and  pour  upon 
His  children  the  chances  and  tempta- 
tions to  be  good  ;  in  every  way  shall 
make  them  see  the  beauty  of  goodness ; 
shall  so  make  life  identical  with  good- 
ness that  every  moment  spent  in 
wickedness  shall  seem  a  waste,  almost 
a  death  ;  shall  so  open  His  Fatherhood 
and  make  it  real  to  them  that  the 
spontaneousness  of  the  Father's  holi- 
ness is  re-echoed  in  the  child  ;  not  the 
God  of  restraint,  but  the  God  whose 
symbols  are  the  sun,  the  light,  the 
friend,  the  fire — everything  that  is 
stimulating,  everything  that  fosters, 
encourages,  and  helps.  When  we  read 
in  the  New  Testament,  lo,  that  is  the 
God  whose  story  is  written  there,  the 
God  whose  glory  we  see  in  the  face  of 
Jesus  Christ.  The  distinction  is  every- 
where. Not  merely  by  trying  not 
to  sin,  but  by  entering  further  and 
further  into  the  new  life  in  which, 
when  it  is  completed,  sin  becomes 
impossible ;  not  by  merely  weeding  out 
wickedness,  but  by  a  new  and  super- 
natural cultivation  of  holiness,  does 
the  saint  of  the  New  Testament  walk 
on  the  ever-ascendiDg  pathway  of 
growing  Christliness  and  come  at  last 
perfectly  to  Christ. 

III.  This  character  of  the  New 
Testament  must  be  at  bottom  in  con- 
formity with  human  nature.  —  The 
Bible  and  its  Christianity  are  not  in 
contradiction  against  the  nature  of  the 
man  they  try  to  save.  They  are  at 
war  with  his  corruptions,  and,  in  his 
own  interest,  they  are  for  ever  labour- 
ing to  assert  and  re-establish  his  true 
self.     Man's  heart  is  always  rebelling 

88 


against  repression  as  a  continuous  and 
regular  thing.  There  is  a  great  human 
sense  that  not  suppression  but  expres- 
sion is  the  true  life.  It  is  the  self- 
indulgence  of  the  highest  and  not  the 
self -surrender  of  the  lowest  that  is  the 
great  end  of  the  gospel.  The  self- 
sacrifice  of  the  Christian  is  always 
an  echo  of  the  self-sacrifice  of  Christ. 
Nothing  can  be  more  unlike  the  re- 
pressive theories  of  virtue  in  their 
methods  and  results  than  the  way  in 
which  Christ  lived  His  positive  life,  full 
of  force  and  salvation.  The  way  to 
get  oat  of  self-love  is  to  love  God. 
"  Walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  ye  shall 
not  fulfil  the  lust  of  the  flesh." — 
Phillips  Brooks. 

The  Flesh  and  the  Spirit. 

I.  When  St.  Paul  talks  of  man's, 
flesh  he  means  by  it  man's  body,  man's 
heart  and  brain,  and  all  his  bodily 
appetites  and  powers — what  we  call 
a  man's  constitution,  the  animal  part 
of  man.  Man  is  an  animal  with  an 
immortal  spirit  in  it,  and  this  spirit 
can  feel  more  than  pleasure  and  pain ; 
it  can  feel  trust,  hope,  peace,  love, 
purity,  nobleness,  independence,  and, 
above  all,  it  can  feel  right  and  wrong. 
There  is  the  infinite  difference  between 
an  animal  and  man,  between  our  flesh 
and  our  spirit ;  an  animal  has  no  sense 
of  right  and  wrong. 

II.  There  has  been  many  a  man  in 
this  life  who  had  every  fleshly  enjoy- 
ment which  this  world  can  give,  and 
yet  whose  spirit  was  in  hell  all  the 
while,  and  who  knew  it ;  hating  and 
despising  himself  for  a  mean,  selfish 
villain,  while  all  the  world  round  was 
bowing  down  to  him  and  envying  him 
as  the  luckiest  of  men.  A  man's  flesh 
can  take  no  pleasure  in  spiritual  things, 
while  man's  spirit  of  itself  can  take  no 
pleasure  in  fleshly  things.  Wickedness, 
like  righteousness,  is  a  spiritual  thing. 
If  a  man  sins,  his  body  is  not  in  fault ; 
it  is  his  spirit,  his  weak,  perverse  will, 
which  will  sooner  listen  to  what  his 
flesh  tells  him  is  pleasant  than  to  what 
God  tells  him  is  right.  This  is  the 
secret  of  the  battle  of  life. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS.  chap.  v. 


III.    Because   you   are    all    fallen  actions  than   nature  can,  causing  us 

creatures   there   must  go   on  in  you  to  do  them  in  faith.     (2)  To  do  our 

this  sore  lifelong  battle  between  your  actions  in  a  new  manner,  in  obedience 

spirit    and    your     flesh — your     spirit  to  the  word.     (3)  Makes  us  put  a  new 

trying   to   be  master   and  guide,  and  end   to   our    actions — to    intend    and 

your  flesh  rebelling  and  trying  to  con-  desire   to   honour   God.      2.   We   must 

quer  your  spirit  and  make  you  a  mere  become  spiritual  men.     Must  do  things 

animal,  like  a  fox  in  cunning,  a  pea-  lawful  in  a  spiritual  manner.     3.   We 

cock   in    vanity,   or  a    hog   in    greedy  must  not  judge  any  man's  estate  before 

sloth.     It  is  your  sin  and  your  shame  God  by  any  one  or  some  few  actions, 

if  your  spirit  does  not  conquer  your  good  or  bad,  but  by  his  walking,    by 

flesh,  for   God   has   promised  to   help  the  course  of  his  life. — Perkins. 
your  spirit.     Ask  Him,  and  His  Spirit 

will  fill   you  with   pure,  noble   hopes,  Yer.  1 7.  The  Strife  of  the  Flesh  and 

with  calm,    clear  thoughts,  and  with  Spirit. 

deep,  unselfish  love  to  God  and  man ;  I.  Man,  under  the  influence  of  cor- 

and   instead   of   being   the    miserable  ruption,  is  called  flesh. — He  may  be 

slave  of  your  own  passions,  and  of  the  said  to  be  a  spiritual  being  because  he 

opinions  of  your  neighbours,  you  will  is  possessed  of  an  immortal  spirit ;  but 

find  that  where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  the   term    flesh   seems   to    be   awfully 

is  there  is  liberty,  true  freedom,  not  appropriate,  because  he  is  wholly  and 

only  from  your  neighbours'  sins,  but,  exclusively    under    the    dominion     of 

what  is  far  better,  freedom  from  your  matter.      In   the   text  it  implies   the 

own. — C.  Kingsley.  evil  principle  that  inhabits  the  bosom 

of  man.     It  is  the  mighty  autocrat  of 

Walking  in  the  Spirit.  humanity   in    the   wreck  of  the  Fall. 

I.  The  Spirit  is  a  divine  nature,  Sin  is  such  a  mighty  monster  that 
quality,  or  condition  whereby  we  are  none  can  bind  him  in  fetters  of  iron 
made  conformable  to  Christ. — 1.  It  is  and  imprison  Him  but  God  Himself. 
a  rich  and  liberal  grace  of  God.  It  In  the  operation  of  weaving,  different 
contains  the  seeds  of  all  virtues.  2.  Its  materials  cross  each  other  in  the  warp 
largeness.  The  Spirit  is  in  all  the  and  woof  in  order  to  make  one  whole, 
powers  of  them  who  are  regenerate  in  and  this  is  the  case  with  the  family  of 
mind,  conscience,  will,  affections,  and  heaven  here  below.  Sin  and  grace  are 
in  the  sensual  appetite.  3.  Its  sin-  perpetually  crossing  each  other. 
cerity.  The  grace  of  God  is  without  II.  The  spiritual  offspring  which  is 
falsehood  or  guile.  4.  Its  excellency,  born  of  God  is  called  the  new  man. — 
The  spirit  of  grace  in  Christians  is  It  is  the  junior  offspring,  the  junior 
more  excellent  than  the  grace  of  crea-  disposition,  the  offspring  of  the  second 
tion,  in  respect  of  the  beginning  Adam.  Corruption  has  its  root  only 
thereof,  and  in  respect  of  constancy,  in  humanity.  Not  so  with  grace. 
5.  Its  liveliness,  whereby  the  Spirit  is  This  springs  alone  from  God.  The  new 
effectual  in  operation.  (1)  The  Spirit  man  lives  in  him  ;  his  head  is  above 
works   in    and    by   the  word   of  God.  the  skies,  his  feet  lower  than  hell ;  and 

(2)  Works  by  degrees,  to  make  us  feel  the  reason  why  he  is  destined  to  be 
our  need  of  Christ,  and  to  kindle  in  us  conqueror  is  that  he  fights  in  and  under 
a   desire  for   reconciliation   with   God.  the  inspiration  of  Heaven. 

(3)  Works  to  write  the  law  in  our  III.  These  two  principles  are  in  a 
hearts.  state   of  ceaseless   warfare,  ever   op- 

II.  Walking  in  the  Spirit  is  to  order  posed  to  each  other. — They  are  like 
our  lives  according  to  the  direction  two  armies,  sometimes  encamped,  at 
and  motion  of  the  Spirit. — 1.  The  others  engaged  in  terrible  conflict; 
Spirit  renews  our  nature.  (1)  Makes  but,  whether  apparently  engaged  or 
us    put   a   further   beginning   to   our  not,  each  seeks  the  destruction  of  the 

89 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


other  perpetually.  They  are  and  must 
be  ever  opposed,  till  one  fall ;  one  must 
perish  and  the  other  live  eternally. 
Where  there  is  no  conflict  there  can  be 
no  grace. 

IV.  Consider  the  wisdom  and  valour 
evinced  by  this  new  principle. — It  is 
illumined  by  the  Spirit  and  by  the 
truth  of  God.  The  sun  does  not  give 
me  an  eye.  God  alone  can  confer  this 
organ ;  yet  it  is  equally  true  my  eye 
must  attain  its  full  vigour  ia  the  light 
of  the  sun :  so  the  external  means  are 
necessary  to  teach  us  what  God  is,  and 
to  develop  all  the  principles  of  the  new 
man,  to  clothe  it  with  the  panoply  of 
Deity,  and  to  lead  it  on  from  battle  to 
battle,  and  from  victory  to  victory,  till 
the  last  battle  is  eventually  fought, 
the  last  victory  won,  and  the  fruits 
of  triumph  enjoyed  for  ever. — William 
Howels. 

Ver.  18.  The  Leading  of  the  Spirit. — 
1.  The  new  man  performs  the  office 
of  guide  to  the  godly  in  all  actions 
truly  spiritual.  (1)  As  it  is  ruled  by 
the  word,  which  is  the  external  light 
and  lantern  to  direct  our  steps. 
(2)  The  work  of  grace  itself  is  the 
internal  light  whereby  the  regenerate 
man  spiritually  understands  the  things 
of  God.  (3)  The  same  work  of  grace 
being  actuated  by  the  continual  supply 
of  exciting  grace  from  the  Spirit  is  a 
strengthening  guide  to  all  spiritual 
actions.  2.  The  natural  man  is  so 
much  a  slave  to  his  sinful  lusts  that 


the  things  appointed  by  God  to  curb 
and  make  them  weaker  are  so  far  from 
bringing  this  about  that  his  lusts  are 
thereby  enraged  and  made  more  violent. 
The  rigidity  of  the  law,  which  tends  to 
restrain  sin,  is  turned  by  the  unre- 
generate  man  into  an  occasion  for 
fulfilling  his  lusts. — Fergusson. 

The  Guidance  of  the  Spirit. 

I.  Preservation,  whereby  the  Holy 
Ghost  maintains  the  gift  of  regenera- 
tion in  them  that  are  regenerate. 

II.  Co-operation,  whereby  the  will 
of  God,  as  the  first  cause,  works  to- 
gether with  the  regenerate  will  of  man, 
as  the  second  cause.  Without  this  co- 
operation man's  will  brings  forth  no 
good  action  ;  no  more  than  the  tree 
which  is  apt  to  bring  forth  fruit  yields 
fruit  indeed  till  it  have  the  co-operation 
of  the  sun,  and  that  in  the  proper  season 
of  the  year. 

III.  Direction,  whereby  the  Spirit  of 
God  ordereth  and  establisheth  the  mind, 
will,  and  affections  in  good  duties. 

IV.  Excitation,  whereby  the  Spirit 
stirs  and  still  moves  the  will  and  mind 
after  they  are  regenerate,  because  the 
grace  of  God  is  hindered  and  oppressed 
by  the  flesh. 

V.  Privilege  of  believers  not  to  be 
subject  to  the  ceremonial  law. — "  Ye 
are  not  under  the  law."  Not  under 
the  law  respecting  its  curse  and  con- 
demnation, though  we  are  all  under 
law,  as  it  is  the  rule  of  good  life. — 
Perkins. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  19—21. 

The  Works  of  the  Flesh— 

I.  Are  offensively  obtrusive. — "Now  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  manifest" 
(ver.  19).  Sin,  though  at  first  committed  in  secret,  will  by-and-by  work  to  the 
surface  and  advertise  itself  with  shameless  publicity.  The  rulers  of  the  civilised 
world  in  the  first  century  of  the  Christian  era,  such  as  Tiberius,  Caligula,  Nero, 
Domitian,  are  the  execration  of  history  as  monsters  of  vice  and  cruelty.  Their 
enormities  would  have  been  impossible  if  the  people  they  governed  had  not  been 
equally  corrupt.  It  is  the  nature  of  evil  to  develop  a  terrible  energy  the  more  it 
is  indulged,  and  its  works  are  apparent  in  every  possible  form  of  wickedness. 
"  Every  man  blameth  the  devil  for  his  sins ;  but  the  great  devil,  the  house-devil 
of  every  man  that  eateth  and  lieth  in  every  man's  bosom,  is  that  idol  which 
killeth  all— himself." 

90 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS.  chap.  v. 


II.  Furnish  a  revolting  catalogue. — The  sins  enumerated  may  be  grouped 
into  four  classes  : — 

1.  Sensual  passions. — "  Adultery  [omitted  in  the  oldest  MBS.],  fornication, 
uncleanness,  lasciviousness "  (ver.  19).  Fornication  was  practically  universal. 
Few  were  found,  even  among  severe  moralists,  to  condemn  it.  It  is  a  prostitution 
of  the  physical  nature  which  Jesus  Christ  wore  and  still  wears,  which  He  claims 
for  the  temple  of  His  Spirit,  and  will  raise  from  the  dead  to  share  His 
immortality.  Uncleanness  is  the  general  quality  of  licentiousness,  and  includes 
whatever  is  contaminating  in  word  or  look,  in  gesture  or  in  dress,  in  thought  or 
sentiment.  Lasciviousness  is  uncleanness  open  and  shameless.  It  is  the  final 
loathsome  analysis  of  the  works  of  the  flesh. 

2.  Unlawful  dealing  in  things  spiritual. — "  Idolatry,  witchcraft  [sorcery]  " 
(ver.  20).  Idolatry  and  sensuality  have  always  been  closely  related.  Some  of 
the  most  popular  pagan  systems  were  purveyors  of  lust,  and  lent  to  it  the 
sanctions  of  religion.  When  man  loses  the  true  conception  of  God  he  becomes 
degraded.  Sorcery  is  closely  allied  to  idolatry.  A  low,  naturalistic  notion  of  the 
divine  lends  itself  to  immoral  purposes.  Men  try  to  operate  upon  it  by  material 
causes,  and  to  make  it  a  partner  in  evil.  Magical  charms  are  made  the  instru- 
ments of  unholy  indulgence. 

3.  Violations  of  brotherly  love. — "  Hatred  [enmities],  variance  [strife],  emula- 
tions [jealousies],  wrath  [ragings],  strife  [factions],  seditions  [divisions],  heresies 
[keen  controversial  partisanship],  envyings,  murders"  (vers.  20,  21).  A  horrible 
progeny  of  evils  having  their  source  in  a  fruitful  hotbed  of  unreasoning  hatred, 
each  vice  preying  upon  and  feeding  the  other.  Settled  rancour  is  the  worst  form 
of  contentiousness.  It  nurses  its  revenge,  waiting,  like  Shylock,  for  the  time 
when  it  shall  "  feed  fat  its  ancient  grudge." 

4.  Intemperate  excesses. — "Drunkenness,  revellings,  and  such  like"  (ver.  21). 
These  are  the  vices  of  a  barbarous  people.  Our  Teutonic  and  Celtic  forefathers 
were  alike  prone  to  this  kind  of  excess.  The  Greeks  were  a  comparatively  sober 
people.  The  Romans  were  more  notorious  for  gluttony  than  for  hard  drinking. 
The  practice  of  seeking  pleasure  in  intoxication  is  a  remnant  of  savagery  which 
exists  to  a  shameful  extent  in  our  own  country.  '  With  Europe  turned  into  one 
vast  camp,  and  its  nations  groaning  audibly  under  the  weight  of  their  armaments, 
with  hordes  of  degrading  women  infesting  the  streets  of  its  cities,  with  discontent 
and  social  hatred  smouldering  throughout  its  industrial  populations,  we  have 
small  reason  to  boast  of  the  triumphs  of  modern  civilisation.  Better  circum- 
stances do  not  make  better  men  (Findlay). 

III.  Exclude  the  sinner  from  the  kingdom  of  God. — "  Tfcey  which  do  such 
things  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God"  (ver.  21).  How  poor  life  seems 
outside  that  kingdom  !  How  beautiful  and  glorious  inside  its  gates  !  If  I  tried 
to  tell  you  how  Christ  brings  us  there,  I  should  repeat  to  you  once  more  the  old 
familiar  story.  He  comes  and  lives  and  dies  for  us.  He  touches  us  with 
gratitude.  He  sets  before  our  softened  lives  His  life.  He  makes  us  see  the 
beauty  of  holiness  and  the  strength  of  the  spiritual  life  in  Him.  He  transfers 
His  life  to  us  through  the  open  channel  of  faith,  and  so  we  come  to  live  as  He 
lives,  by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God.  How  old  the 
story  is,  but  how  endlessly  fresh  and  true  to  Him  whose  own  career  it  describes 
(Phillips  Brooks).  Exclusion  from  the  kingdom  of  God  is  man's  own  act ;  it  is 
self -exclusion.     He  will  not  enter  in  ;  he  loves  darkness  rather  than  light. 

Lessons. — 1.  Sin  is  an  active  principle  whose  works  are  perniciously  evident. 
2.  Sin  is  the  primal  cause  of  every  possible  vice.  3.  Sin  persisted  in  involves 
moral  ruin. 


91 


chap.  v.  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.     19-21.    Biblical    Account     of  fornication,    uncleanness,    wantonness. 

Sin. — A  mournful  catalogue  of  words,  1.   We  must  stock  up  the  root  of  these 

based  on  a  great  variety  of  images,  is  things,  mortify  the  passion  of  concupi- 

employed  in  Scripture  to  describe  the  scence.     2.  All  occasions  of  these  sins 

state  of  sinfulness  which  man  inherits  must  be  cut  off,  two  especially,  idleness 

from  his    birth.     Sometimes    it  is    set  and  the  pampering  of  the  body.     3.  All 

forth  as  the  missing  of  a  mark  or  aim ;  signs  of  these  vices  must  be  avoided,  any 

sometimes  as    the   transgressing   of  a  speech  or  action  that  may  give  suspicion 

line — the  word  occurs   seven  times  in  of  incontinent  disposition,  as  light  talk, 

the    New    Testament,   and    is    twice  wanton    behaviour,    curiousness     and 

applied  to  Adam's  fall  (Rom.  v.  14;  excess     in     trimming     of     the    body, 

1  Tim.    ii.     14) ;    sometimes    as    dis-  suspected  company. 

obedience  to  a  voice,  i.e.  to  hear  care-  II.  Sins  against  religion. — Idolatry, 

lessly,  to  take  no  heed  of — the  word  witchcraft,  heresies. 

occurs   three     times    (Rom.     v.    19;  III.  Sins  against  charity. — Enmity, 

2  Cor.  x.   6 ;  Heb.  ii.   2) ;    sometimes  debate,  emulations,  anger,  contention, 
as  ignorance  of  what  we  ought  to  have  seditions. 

done  (Heb.    ix.    7) ;    sometimes  as  a  IV.     Sins     against    temperance. — 

defect  or  discomfiture — to  be  worsted,  Drunkenness,  gluttony.     1.    We  may 

because,   as  Gerhard  says,   "  A  sinner  use   meat    and    drink    not    only    for 

yields  to,  is  worsted  by,  the  temptations  necessity,  but  also  for  delight.    2.  That 

of  the  flesh  and  of  Satan  "  ;  sometimes  measure  of  meat  and  drink  which  in 

as  a  debt  (Matt.  vi.  12)  ;  sometimes  as  our   experience  makes  us  lit  both  in 

disobedience  to  law  —  the  word  occurs  body  and  mind  for  the  service  of  God 

fourteen  times  in  the  New  Testament,  and  the  duties  of  our  calling  is  con- 

andis  generally  translated  by  "iniquity."  venient  and  lawful.     To  be  given  to 

The  last  figure  is  employed  in  the  most  drinking  and  to  love  to  sit  by  the  cup, 

general  definition  of  sin  given  in  the  when  there  is  no  drunkenness,  is  a  sin. 

New  Testament — sin  is  the  transgres-  Drunkenness:  (1)  Destroys   the  body. 

sion  of  the  law  (1  John  iii.  4). — Trench  (2)  Hurts  the  mind.     (3)  Vile  imagi- 

and  Maclear.  nations  and  affections  that  are  in  men 

when  they  are  drunk  remain  in  them 

The  Works  of  the  Flesh.  whe.n  they  are  sober,  so    being  sober 

I.  Sins  against  chastity. — Adultery,  they  are  drunk  in  affection. — Perkins. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  22—26. 

The  Fruit  of  the  Spirit — 

I.  Is  evident  in  manifold  Christian  virtues. — 1.  Virtues  describing  a  general 
state  of  heart.  "The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace"  (ver.  22).  Love  is 
foremost  of  the  group  of  Christian  graces,  and  gives  a  nameless  charm  to  all  the 
rest,  for  there  is  an  element  of  love  in  all  true  goodness.  Love  derives  its  power 
from  being  in  the  first  place  love  to  God.  When  the  soul  centres  its  affection 
in  God  through  Christ  all  its  outgoings  are  influenced  and  regulated  accord- 
ingly. Joy  is  the  product  of  love.  A  philosophy  or  religion  which  has  no 
room  for  the  joy  and  pleasure  of  man  is  as  little  conversant  with  >the  wants  of 
man  as  with  the  will  of  God.  "  Joy  in  the  Lord  quickens  and  elevates,  while  it 
cleanses  all  other  emotions.  It  gives  a  new  glow  to  life.  It  sheds  a  diviner 
meaning,  a  brighter  aspect,  over  the  common  face  of  earth  and  sky.  Joy  is 
the  beaming  countenance,  the  elastic  step,  the  singing  voice,  of  Christian  good- 
ness." Peace  is  the  holy  calm  breathed  into  the  soul  by  a  pardoning  God.  It 
is  the  gift  of  Christ,  giving  rest  to  the  soul  in  the  midst  of  external  agitations. 

92 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS.  chap.  v. 


"  It  is  a  settled  quiet  of  the  heart,  a  deep,  brooding  mystery  that  '  passeth  all 
understanding,'  the  stillness  of  eternity  entering  the  spirit,  the  Sabbath  of  God. 
It  is  the  calm,  unruffled  brow,  the  poised  and  even  temper  which  Christian 
goodness  wears." 

2.  Virtues  exercised  in  the  Christian's  intercourse  with  his  neighbour. — "  Long- 
suffering,  gentleness,  goodness."  Charity  suffereth  long.  The  heart  at  peace 
with  God  has  patience  with  men.  Longsuffering  is  the  patient  magnanimity  of 
Christian  goodness,  the  broad  shoulders  on  which  it  "  beareth  all  things." 
Gentleness  (or  kindness,  as  the  word  is  more  frequently  and  better  rendered) 
resembles  longsuffering  in  finding  its  chief  objects  in  the  evil  and  unthankful. 
But  while  the  latter  is  passive  and  self-contained,  kindness  is  an  active,  busy 
virtue.  It  is  the  thoughtful  insight,  the  delicate  tact,  the  gentle  ministering 
hand  of  charity.  Linked  with  kindness  comes  goodness,  which  is  its  other  self, 
differing  from  it  as  only  twin  sisters  may,  each  fairer  for  the  beauty  of  the 
other.  Goodness  is  perhaps  more  affluent,  more  catholic  in  its  bounty  ;  kindness 
more  delicate  and  discriminating.  Goodness  is  the  honest,  generous  face,  the 
open  hand  of  charity  (Findlay). 

3.  Virtues  indicating  the  principles  which  regulate  the  Christian's  life. — u  Faith 
[honesty,  trustworthiness],  meekness,  temperance"  (vers.  22,  23).  The  faith  that 
unites  man  to  God  in  turn  joins  man  to  his  fellows.  Faith  in  the  divine  Father- 
hood becomes  trust  in  the  human  brotherhood.  He  who  doubts  every  one  is 
even  more  deceived  than  the  man  who  blindly  confides  in  every  one.  Trustful- 
ness is  the  warm,  firm  clasp  of  friendship,  the  generous  and  loyal  homage  which 
goodness  ever  pays  to  goodness.  Meekness  is  the  other  side  of  faith.  It  is  not 
tameness  and  want  of  spirit ;  it  comports  with  the  highest  courage  and  activity, 
and  is  a  qualification  for  public  leadership.  It  is  the  content  and  quiet  mien, 
the  willing  self-effacement,  that  is  the  mark  of  Christ-like  goodness.  Temper- 
ance, or  self-control,  is  the  third  of  Plato's  cardinal  virtues.  Temperance  is  a 
practised  mastery  of  self.  It  covers  the  whole  range  of  moral  discipline,  and 
concerns  every  sense  and  passion  of  our  nature.  It  is  the  guarded  step,  the  sober, 
measured  walk  in  which  Christian  goodness  keeps  the  way  of  life,  and  makes 
straight  paths  for  stumbling  and  straying  feet  (Ibid.). 

II.  Violates  no  law. — "  Against  such  there  is  no  law "  (ver.  23  ;  comp.  ver. 
18).  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love;  and  the  law,  so  far  from  being  against 
love,  commands  it  (ver.  14).  The  practice  of  love  and  all  its  works  is  the  ful- 
filling of  the  law  and  disarms  it  of  all  terror.  The  expression,  "  Against  such 
there  is  no  law,"  so  far  from  being  more  than  superfluous,  as  Hofmann  asserts, 
is  intended  to  make  evident  how  it  is  that,  by  virtue  of  this,  their  moral  frame, 
those  who  are  led  by  the  Spirit  are  not  subject  to  the  Mosaic  law.  For  whoso- 
ever is  so  constituted  that  a  law  is  not  against  him,  over  such  a  one  the  law 
has  no  power. 

III.  Indicates  the  reality  of  a  great  spiritual  change. — 1.  The  old  self -hood 
is  crucified.  "  They  that  are  Christ's  have  crucified  the  flesh  "  (ver.  24).  This 
well  expresses  how  sin  must,  little  by  little,  be  disabled  and  slain,  for  the  crucified 
man  did  not  die  at  once.  He  was  first  made  fast  with  nails  to  the  cross,  and  then 
kept  there,  till  through  hunger  and  thirst  and  loss  of  blood  he  became  weaker  and 
weaker,  and  finally  died.  We  are  to  be  executioners,  dealing  cruelly  with  the 
body  of  sin  which  caused  the  acting  of  all  cruelties  on  the  body  of  Christ. 

2.  A  new  law  now  regulates  the  life. — "  If  we  live  in  the  Spirit,  let  us  also 
walk  in  the  Spirit  "  (ver.  25).  The  life  is  governed,  not  by  the  law  of  the  flesh, 
but  of  the  Spirit.  The  electrician  can  demagnetise  and  remagnetise  a  bar  of 
iron,  but  the  biologist  cannot  devitalise  a  plant  or  an  animal  and  revivify  it 
again.  Spiritual  life  is  not  a  visit  from  a  force,  but  a  resident  tenant  in  the  soul. 
The  Spirit  who  created  the  life  within  sustains  it  and  directs  all  its  outgoings. 

93 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


3.  Everything  provocative  of  strife  and  envy  is  carefully  avoided. — "  Let  us 
not  be  desirous  of  vainglory,  provoking  one  another,  envying  one  another " 
(ver.  26).  Vaingloriousness  was  a  weakness  of  the  Galatic  temperament ;  and  is 
not  unknown  in  modern  Christian  life.  Superiority,  or  fancied  superiority,  in 
talents  or  status  is  apt  to  proudly  display  itself.  It  is  indeed  a  pitiable  exhibi- 
tion when  even  spiritual  gifts  are  made  matter  of  ostentation,  exciting  the 
jealousy  of  inferior  brethren,  and  creating  discontent  and  envy.  The  cultivation 
of  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  the  best  remedy  against  all  bitterness  and  strife. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  a  suggestive  contrast  to  the  works  of  the 
flesh.  2.  Consistency  of  life  is  the  test  of  genuine  religion.  3.  The  operations  of 
the  Spirit  are  in  harmony  with  the  highest  law. 


GERM  NOTES   ON  THE    VERSES. 


Yers.  22,  23.  The  Fruit  of  the 
Spirit. 

I.  Love. — 1.  The  love  of  God. 
(1)  Shown  in  a  desire  of  fellowship 
with  God.  (2)  To  love  the  word  of 
God  above  all  earthly  treasure,  and  to 
tread  our  own  will  underfoot.  (3)  The 
love  of  them  that  love  God  and  Christ. 

2.  The  love  of  our  neighbour.  This  is 
love  indeed,  to  show  love  and  to  do 
good  to  them  that  wrong  and  abuse 
us. 

II.  Joy. — 1.  To  rejoice  in  the  true 
acknowledgment  of  God.  2.  To  rejoice 
in     the    work    of    our    regeneration. 

3.  To  rejoice  in  the  hope  of  eternal 
glory. 

III.  Peace. — To  maintain  peace  and 
concord  :  1.  Neither  take  offence  nor 
give  offence.  2.  Seek  to  edify  one 
another ;  either  do  good  or  take  good. 

IV.  Longsuffering. — To  moderate 
our  anger  and  desire  of  revenge  when 
many  and  great  wrongs  are  done  us. 
Set  and  sow  this  plant  in  the  furrows 
of  your  heart,  and  consider :  1 .  The 
goodness  of  God,  who  forgives  more  to 
us  than  we  can  forgive.  2.  It  is  the 
duty  of  love  to  suffer  and  forbear. 
3.  It  is  a  point  of  injustice  to  revenge 
ourselves,  for  then  we  take  to  our- 
selves the  honour  of  God,  and  against 
all  equity — we  are  the  parties  and 
judge  and  witness  and  all.  4.  We  are 
often  ignorant  of  the  mind  of  men  in 
their  actions,  and  of  the  true  circum- 
stances thereof,  and  so  may  easily  be 
deceived. 

V.  Gentleness. — Right  courtesy   is 

94 


with  an  honest  heart  to  bless  when  we' 
are  wronged. 

YI.  Goodness. — The  virtue  whereby 
we  communicate  to  others  good  things, 
for  their  good  and  benefit. 

VII.  Faith. — Faith  towards  man, 
which  means :  1.  To  speak  the  truth 
from  the  heart.  2.  To  be  faithful  and 
just  in  the  keeping  of  our  honest 
promise  and  word.  This  faith  a  rare 
virtue  in  these  days.  The  common 
fashion  of  them  that  live  by  bargaining 
is  to  use  glorying,  facing,  soothing, 
lying,  dissembling,  and  all  manner  of 
shifts.  They  that  deal  with  chapmen 
shall  hardly  know  what  is  truth,  they 
have  so  many  words  and  so  many 
shifts. 

VIII.  Meekness. — The  same  in 
effect  with  longsuffering.  The  differ- 
ence is  that  meekness  is  more  general, 
and  longsuffering  the  highest  degree  of 
meekness. 

IX.  Temperance. — The  moderation 
of  lust  and  appetite  in  the  use  of  the 
gifts  and  creatures  of  God.  1.  We 
must  use  moderation  in  meats  and 
drinks.  That  measure  of  meat  and 
drink  which  serves  to  refresh  nature 
and  make  us  fit  for  the  service  of  God 
and  man  is  allowed  us  of  God  and  no 
more.  2.  We  must  use  moderation 
in  the  getting  of  goods.  3.  In  the 
spending  of  our  goods — contrary  to  the 
fashion  of  many  who  spend  their 
substance  in  feasting  and  company,  and 
keep  their  wives  and  children  bare  at 
home.  4.  In  our  apparel.  To  apparel 
ourselves  according  to  our  sex,  accord- 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


CHAP.  V. 


ing  to  the  received  fashion  of  our 
country,  according  to  our  place  and 
degree,  and  according  to  our  ability. 

X.  Against  such  virtues  there  is  no 
law. — 1.  No  law  to  condemn.  2.  No 
law  to  compel  obedience.  Spiritual 
men  freely  obey  God,  as  if  there  were 
no  law  ;  they  are  a  voluntary  and  free 
people,  serving  God  without  restraint. 
— Perkins. 

Ver.  22.  Love  an  Attendant  of  Regene- 
ration.—  1.  Love  is  a  delight  in  happi- 
ness. 2.  Is  universal.  3.  Is  just. 
4.  Is  disinterested.  5.  Is  an  active 
principle.  6.  Is  the  only  voluntary 
cause  of  happiness.  7.  Is  the  only 
equitable  spirit  towards  God  and  our 
fellow-creatures.  8.  Is  the  only  dis- 
position which  can  be  approved  or 
loved  by  God. — Dr.  D wight. 

The  Powers  of  Love. — If  these  be  the 
fruit  of  the  Spirit,  they  cannot  be  mere 
matters  of  temperament.  When  philo- 
sophy gives  an  account  of  the  human 
soul  it  can  find  only  constitutional 
propensities  and  voluntary  acquisitions. 
When  we  interrogate  Christianity  we 
are  told  besides  of  communicated 
sanctities,  states  of  mind  which  in- 
heritance cannot  give  or  resolution 
command,  which  need  some  touch  of 
God  to  wake  them  up,  which  are  above 
us  and  yet  ours,  and  seem  to  lie  on  the 
borderland  of  communion  between  the 
finite  and  the  infinite  Spirit. 

I.  There  is  humane  love,  which  con- 
stitutes the  humblest  and  most  fre- 
quent form  of  unselfish  feeling.  It 
finds  its  objects  among  the  miserable, 
and  attaches  itself  to  them  in  propor- 
tion to  their  woes.  In  human  pity 
there  is  a  strange  combination  of  re- 
pulsion and  attraction,  which  it  is  the 
paradox  of  philosophy  to  state,  and 
the  mercy  of  God  to  ordain ;  it  cannot 
endure  the  sight  of  wretchedness,  and 
yet  can  never  leave  it.  But  there  is  a 
work  ordained  for  us  which  this  im- 
pulse will  not  suffice  to  do.  Fastening 
itself  on  suffering  alone,  it  sees  nothing 
else.  Yet  beneath  the  smooth  and 
glossy  surface  of  easy  life  there  may 


hide  itself  many  an  inward  disease 
which  the  mere  glance  of  pity  does  not 
discern.  Flourishing  iniquity  that 
gives  no  seeming  pain  it  lets  alone ; 
invisible  corruption  may  spread  with- 
out arrest. 

II.  There  is  imaginative  or  aesthetic 
love,  which  attaches  itself  to  objects 
in  proportion  as  they  are  beautiful, 
kindles  the  enthusiasm  of  art,  and 
completes  itself  in  the  worship  of 
genius.  Yet  is  this  affection  very 
barren  until  thrown  into  the  midst  of 
others  to  harmonise  and  glorify  them. 
No  reciprocal  sympathy  is  requisite  to 
this  sentiment ;  that  which  is  admired 
as  beautiful  does  not  admire  in  return. 
And  above  all  there  is  a  direct  ten- 
dency to  turn  with  indifference  or  even 
merciless  repugnance  from  what  is  un- 
lovely. 

III.  There  is  moral  love,  which  has 
reference  to  persons  only,  not  to  things, 
which  attaches  itself  to  them  in  pro- 
portion as  they  are  good,  judges  them 
by  the  standard  of  an  internal  law, 
and  expresses  itself  in  tones,  not  of 
tenderness  as  in  pity,  or  of  admiration 
as  in  the  trance  of  beauty,  but  of  grave 
and  earnest  approval.  Even  this 
moral  love  is  not  without  imperfections. 
Its  characteristic  sentiment  of  appro- 
bation has  always  in  it  a  certain 
patronising  air  not  welcome  to  the 
mercy  of  a  true  heart,  and  more  like 
the  rigour  of  a  Zeno  than  the  grace  of 
Christ. 

IY.  There  is  a  divine  love,  directed 
first  upon  God  Himself,  and  thence 
drawn  into  the  likeness  of  His  own 
love,  and  going  forth  upon  other 
natures  in  proportion  to  their  worth 
and  claims.  This  is  the  crowning  and 
calming  term  of  all  prior  affections, 
presupposing  them,  and  lifting  them 
up  from  clashing  and  unrest  to  har- 
mony and  peace.  The  humane,  the 
beautiful,  the  right,  remain  only 
scattered  elements  of  good  till  they  are 
gathered  into  the  divine  and  blended 
into  one  by  the  combining  love  of  God. 
— Dr.  Martineau. 

Love  the  Perfection  of  Character. — The 

95 


CHAP.  V. 


E0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


fruit  of  the  true  vine  has  been  analysed, 
and  in  the  best  specimens  nine  in- 
gredients are  found.  In  poor  samples 
there  is  a  deficiency  of  one  or  other 
of  these  elements.  A  dry  and  diminu- 
tive sort  is  lacking  in  peace  and  joy. 
A  tart  kind,  which  sets  the  teeth  on 
edge,  owes  its  austerity  to  its  scanty 
infusion  of  gentleness,  goodness,  and 
meekness.  There  is  a  watery,  deli- 
quescent sort  which,  for  the  want  of 
longsuffering,  is  not  easily  preserved  ; 
and  there  is  a,  flat  variety  which, 
having  no  body  of  faith  or  temperance, 
answers  few  useful  purposes.  Love 
is  the  essential  principle  which  is  in 
no  case  entirely  absent,  and  by  the 
glistening  fulness  and  rich  aroma 
which  its  plentiful  presence  creates 
you  can  recognise  the  freshest  and 
most  generous  clusters,  whilst  the 
predominance  of  some  other  element 
gives  to  each  its  distinguishing  flavour, 
and  marks  the  growth  of  Eshcol, 
Sibmah,  or  Lebanon. — Dr.  James 
Hamilton. 

The  Power  of  Meekness  and  Affection. 
— Once  in  Holland  a  person  of  high 
rank  invited  Tersteegen  to  be  his 
guest.  This  individual  imagined  him- 
self to  have  attained  to  a  state  of 
peculiar  inward  peace,  and  took 
occasion  during  dinner  to  criticise 
Tersteegen  for  being  too  active,  and 
for  not  sufficiently  knowing  the  ground 
on  which  he  wrought.  Tersteegen 
attended  meekly  and  silently  to  all 
that  was  said  ;  and  when  dinner  was 
over  he  offered  up  a  fervent  prayer  in 
which  he  commended  his  host  to  the 
Lord  in  terms  of  such  affection  and 
compassion  that  this  great  and  warm- 
tempered  man  was  so  much  struck 
and  affected  by  it  that  his  feelings 
overpowered  him,  and  he  fell  upon  the 
neck  of  his  guest  and  begged  his 
forgiveness. 

Who  are  the  Meek? — A  missionary 
in  Jamaica  was  once  questioning  the 
little  black  boys  on  the  meaning  of 
Matt.  v.  5,  and  asked,  "  Who  are  the 
meek  1 "       A   boy   answered,    "  Those 

96 


who     give    soft     answers     to     rough 
questions." 

The  Grace  of  Gentleness. 

I.  It  is  not  a  gift,  but  a  grace. — It  is 
not  a  natural  demeanour,  amiable  and 
courteous,  a  soft,  feminine  compliance, 
but  a  grace  of  the  Spirit  which  takes  into 
it  the  strength  of  the  divine.  You  may 
have  the  instinct  of  delicacy,  a  natural 
tenderness  and  affability,  yet  not  have 
this  grace  of  the  Spirit  which  impels 
you  for  Christ's  sake  to  deal  gently 
and  save  men.  It  is  the  underlying 
motive  which  determines  whether  grace 
or  nature  reigns.  How  is  it  when 
your  ideas  and  methods  of  doing  good 
are  thwarted?  Moses  seems  to  have 
in  Zipporah  what  Socrates  had  in 
Xantippe,  yet  her  abuse  had  no  more 
abiding  effect  on  him  than  the  spray 
which  angry  waves  toss  against  the 
rock.  Calvin  hearing  of  Luther's  ire 
said,  "  Let  him  hate  me  and  call  me 
a  devil  a  thousand  times;  I  will  love 
him  and  call  him  a  precious  servant 
of  God." 

II.  The  cultivation  of  this  grace 
will  cost  you  many  a  struggle. — You 
are  to  get  the  better  of  your  temper 
on  your  knees.  No  minstrel  as  in  the 
case  of  Saul  can  do  the  work.  We 
must  forgive  in  our  heart  those  who 
offend  us. 

III.  The  grace  of  gentleness  is  a 
queen  with  a  train  of  virtues. — It 
ennobles  our  whole  nature.  An 
English  nobleman  could  not  be  bound 
to  keep  the  peace,  for  it  was  supposed 
that  peace  always  kept  him.  So  we 
should  suppose  that  every  professed 
Christian  would  have  this  grace  ;  but 
if  you  should  put  your  ear  to  the  door 
of  some  Christian  homes,  it  would  be 
like  listening  to  a  volcano.  If  you 
did  not  behold  a  sulphurous  flame 
bursting  out,  you  might  hear  a  con- 
tinual grumbling.  A  man  said  to  me 
once,  "  When  I  see  Mr.  So-and-so  my 
passion  is  bigger  than  myself,  and  I 
long  to  make  him  feel  it."  The  Spirit 
of  Christ  leads  us  to  pray  for  those 
who  despitefully  use  us.  Only  as  His 
temper  prevails  in  us  shall  we  be  able 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


CHAP.  V. 


to    illustrate    the    beauty    of    divine 
greatness.  — Homiletic  Monthly. 

Constant  Joy. — Father  Taylor,  the 
Boston  sailor-preacher,  when  going 
out  to  make  a  call,  said  to  his  host 
on  the  doorstep,  "Laugh  till  I  get 
back." 

Ver.  24.  Crucifying  the  Flesh. 

I.  What  is  meant  by  being  Christ's. 
— It  is  to  accept  of  and  have  an  in- 
terest in  Christ  in  His  prophetic,  kingly, 
and  sacerdotal  offices.  By  His  pro- 
phetic office  we  come  to  know  His  will; 
by  His  kingly  office,  ruling  and  govern- 
ing us,  we  come  to  yield  obedience  to 
that  will ;  and  by  His  sacerdotal  or 
priestly  office  we  come  to  receive 
the  fruit  of  that  obedience  in  our 
justification. 

II.  What  is  meant  by  the  flesh. — 
The  whole  entire  body  of  sin  and  cor- 
ruption ;  that  inbred  proneness  in  our 
nature  to  all  evil,  expressed  by  con- 
cupiscence. 1.  It  is  called  flesh  because 
of  its  situation  and  place,  which  is  prin- 
cipally in  the  flesh.  2.  Because  of  its 
close,  inseparable  nearness  to  fh°-  soul. 
3.  Because  of  its  dearness  to  us.  Sin 
is  our  darling,  our  Delilah,  the  queen- 
regent  of  our  affections  ;  it  fills  all  our 
thoughts,  engrosses  our  desires,  and 
challenges  the  service  of  all  our  actions. 
This  reveals:  (1)  The  deplorable  state 
of  fallen  man.  (2)  The  great  difficulty 
of  the  duty  of  mortification.  (3)  The 
mean  and  sordid  employment  of  every 
sinner — he  serves  the  flesh. 

III.  What  is  imported  by  the  cruci- 
fixion of  the  flesh. — 1.  The  death  of  it. 
He  that  will  crucify  his  sin  must  pur- 
sue it  to  the  very  death.  2.  A  violent 
death.  Sin  never  dies  of  age.  The 
conquest  need  be  glorious,  for  it  will 
be  found  by  sharp  experience  that  the 
combat  will  be  dangerous.  3.  A  painful, 
bitter,  and  vexatious  death.  4.  A  shame- 
ful and  cursed  death. 

IY.  The  duty  of  crucifying  the  flesh. 
— 1 .  A  constant  and  pertinacious  deny- 
ing it  in  all  its  cravings  for  satisfaction. 
2.  Encounter  it  by  actions  of  the  opposite 
virtue. — Robert  South. 


Ver.  25.  Life  and  Walk  in  the  Spirit. 
— Life  relates  to  what  is  inward,  walk 
to  what  is  outward. 

I.  To  live  in  the  Spirit— 1.  The 
Spirit  begins  the  life  of  God  in  the  soul. 

2.  The  Spirit  gives  new  desires  and 
changes  all  the  motives  of  life.  3.  The 
Spirit  lives  in  us. 

II.  To  walk  in  tho  Spirit.— 1.  The 
walk  will  follow  from  the  life,  for  every 
kind  of  life  is  after  its  own  kind  and 
development.  2.  Every  outward  mani- 
festation will  correspond  to  the  inward 
principle  of  life,  and  will  be  marked 
by    love    to    God   and   love   to    man. 

3.  Reputation  will  correspond  to  char- 
acter and  conduct  to  life. 

III.  To  be  led  by  the  Spirit.— 1.  The 
Christian's  life  is  a  growth,  his  walk  a 
progress ;  but  he  is  led  and  guided  by 
the  Spirit.  2.  No  new  revelation  is 
made  by  the  Spirit.  He  leads  and 
guides  by  what  is  written  in  the 
word. 

IV.  Learn  our  relations  to  the  Spirit. 
— 1.  We  live  under  the  Spirit's  dispen- 
sation. 2.  He  is  the  Spirit  of  God, 
and  so  of  life,  truth,  and  authority. 
3.  He  is  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  so 
unites  us  to  Him.  4.  If  we  live  by 
the  Spirit,  let  conversation  and  conduct 
be  answerable  thereunto. — Homiletic 
Monthly. 

Walking  in  the  Spirit. — 

I.  Is  to  savour  the  things  of  the 
Spirit. — To  subject  a  man's  soul  to  the 
law  of  God  in  all  the  faculties  and 
powers  of  the  soul.  The  things  re- 
vealed in  the  law  are  the  things  of  the 
Spirit,  which  Spirit  must  at  no  hand 
be  severed  from  the  word. 

II.  To  walk  in  the  path  of  righteous- 
ness without  offence  to  God  or  man. 

III.  To  walk  not  stragglingly,  but 
orderly  by  rule,  by  line  and  measure. 
— To  order  ourselves  according  to  the 
rule  and  line  of  the  word  of  God.  The 
life  of  a  man  will  discover  to  the  world 
what  he  is. — Perkins. 

Ver.  26.    Vaingloriousness. 
I.    The    exciting    cause    of   many 
quarrels. 

97 


CHAP.  VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


II.  A  source  of  envy  and  disappoint- 
ment. 

III.  Unbecoming  the  dignity  and 
aims  of  the  Christian  life. 

The  Vice  of  Vainglory  and  its  Cure. 

I.  Vainglory  is  a  branch  of  pride, 

wherein  men  principally  refer  all  their 
studies,  counsels,  endeavours,  and  gifts 
to  the  honouring  and  advancing  of 
themselves.  They  who  have  received 
good  gifts  of  God  are  often  most  vain- 
glorious. Whereas  all  other  vjces  feed 
upon  that  which  is  evil,  this  vice  of 
vainglory  feeds  upon  good  things.  A 
man  will  sometimes  be  proud  even  be- 
cause he  is  not  proud. 

II.  The  cure  of  vainglory. — 1.  Medi- 
tation. (1)  God  resisteth  all  proud 
persons  and  gives  grace  to  the  humble, 
because  the  vainglorious  man,  seeking 
himself  and  not  God,  robs  God  of  His 
honour.  (2)  It  is  the  work  of  the  devil 
to  puff  up  the  mind  with  self-liking 
and  conceit,  that  thereby  he  may  work 


man's  perdition.  (3)  There  is  no  reli- 
gion in  that  heart  that  is  wholly  bent 
to  seek  the  praise  of  men.  The  man 
who  desires  to  be  talked  of  and  ad- 
mired by  others  gives  notice  to  the 
world  that  his  heart  is  not  sound  in 
the  sight  of  God.  2.  Practice.  (1)  En- 
deavour to  acknowledge  the  great 
majesty  of  God,  and  our  own  baseness 
before  Him.  (2)  We  ought  to  ascribe 
all  good  things  we  have  or  can  do  to 
God  alone,  and  nothing  to  ourselves. 
(3)  In  all  actions  and  duties  of  religion 
we  must  first  endeavour  to  approve 
ourselves  to  God,  and  the  next  place  is 
to  be  given  to  man.  (4)  When  we  are 
reviled  we  must  rest  content ;  when  we 
are  praised  take  heed.  Temptations 
on  the  right  hand  are  far  more  danger- 
ous than  those  on  the  left.  (5)  Men 
who  are  ambitious,  if  they  be  crossed, 
grow  contentious ;  if  they  prosper,  they 
are  envied  by  others.  Abhor  and 
detest  vainglory ;  seek  to  preserve  and 
maintain  love. — Perkins. 


CHAPTER   VI. 


CRITICAL   AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  Overtaken  in  a  fault.  — Be  caught  red-handed  in  any  transgression,  the  result  of 
some  sudden  and  overpowering  gust  of  evil  impulse.  Restore  such  an  one. — The  same  word 
used  of  a  dislocated  limb  reduced  to  its  place.  Such  is  the  tenderness  with  which  we 
should  treat  a  fallen  member  in  restoring  him  to  a  better  state.  In  the  spirit  of  meekness. — 
Meekness  is  that  temper  of  spirit  towards  God  whereby  we  accept  His  dealings  without 
disputing ;  then  towards  men  whereby  we  endure  meekly  their  provocations,  and  do  not 
withdraw  ourselves  from  the  burdens  which  their  sins  impose  upon  us  (Trench). 

Ver.  2.  Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens.— The  word  is  "  weights,"  something  exceeding  the 
strength  of  those  under  them.  "  One  another's  "  is  strongly  emphatic.  It  is  a  powerful 
stroke,  as  with  an  axe  in  the  hand  of  a  giant,  at  censoriousness  or  vainglorious  egotism. 
We  are  not  to  think  of  self,  but  of  one  another.  To  bear  the  burden  of  an  erring  brother  is 
truly  Christ-like.  And  so  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ. — If  you  must  needs  observe  a  law,  let  it  be 
the  law  of  Christ. 

Ver.  3.  He  deceiveth  himself. — He  is  misled  by  the  vapours  of  his  own  vanity,  he  is 
self-deceived. 

Ver.  4.  Rejoicing  in  himself  alone,  and  not  in  another. — In  that  his  own  work  stands  the 
test  after  severe  examination,  and  not  that  he  is  superior  to  another. 

Ver.  6.  Communicate  unto  him  that  teacheth  in  all  good  things. — Go  shares  with  him  in 
the  good  things  of  this  life.  While  each  bears  his  own  burden  he  must  think  of  others, 
especially  in  ministering  out  of  his  earthly  goods  to  the  wants  of  his  spiritual  teacher 
(see  2  Cor.  xi.  7,  11  ;  Phil.  iv.  10 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  6,  9  ;  1  Tim.  v.  17,  18). 

Ver.  7.  God  is  not  mocked. — The  verb  means  to  sneer  with  the  nostrils  drawn  up  in  con- 
tempt.    Excuses  for  illiberality  may  seem  valid  before  men,  but  are  not  so  before  God. 

Ver.  8.  He  that  soweth  to  his  flesh. — Unto  his  own  flesh,  which  is  devoted  to  selfishness. 

98 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS.         chap.  vi. 


Shall  reap  corruption. — Destruction,  which  is  not  an  arbitrary  punishment  of  fleshly- 
mindedness,  but  is  its  natural  fruit ;  the  corrupt  flesh  producing  corruption,  which  is  another 
word  for  destruction.     Corruption  is  the  fault,  and  corruption  the  punishment. 

Ver.  9.  Let  us  not  be  weary  :  we  shall  reap,  if  we  faint  not. — "  Weary  "  refers  to  the  will ; 
11  faint "  to  relaxation  of  the  powers.  No  one  should  faint,  as  in  an  earthly  harvest 
sometimes  happens. 

Ver.  11.  Ye  see  how  large  a  letter  I  have  written  with  mine  own  hand. — At  this  point  the 
apostle  takes  the  pen  from  his  amanuensis,  and  writes  the  concluding  paragraph  with  his 
own  hand.  Owing  to  the  weakness  of  his  eyesight  he  wrote  in  large  letters.  He  thus  gives 
emphasis  to  the  importance  of  the  subjects  discussed  in  the  epistle. 

Ver.  12.  Lest  they  should  suffer  persecution  for  the  cross  of  Christ.— They  would  escape 
the  bitterness  of  the  Jews  against  Christianity  and  the  offence  of  the  cross,  by  making  the 
Mosaic  law  a  necessary  preliminary. 

Ver.  13.  For  neither  they  themselves  keep  the  law. — So  far  are  they  from  being  sincere 
that  they  arbitrarily  select  circumcision  out  of  the  whole  law,  as  though  observing  it  would 
stand  instead  of  their  non-observance  of  the  rest  of  the  law.  That  they  may  glory  in  your 
flesh. — That  they  may  vaunt  your  submission  to  the  carnal  rite,  and  so  gain  credit  with  the 
Jews  for  proselytising. 

Ver.  14.  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the  cross. — The  great  object  of  shame  to 
them,  and  to  all  carnal  men,  is  the  great  object  of  glorying  to  me.  By  whom  the  world  is 
crucified  unto  me. — By  His  cross,  the  worst  of  deaths,  Christ  has  destroyed  all  kinds  of  death. 
Legal  and  fleshly  ordinances  are  merely  outward  and  elements  of  the  world.  To  be  crucified 
to  the  world  is  to  be  free  from  worldliness,  and  all  that  makes  men  slaves  to  creature 
fascinations. 

Ver.  15.  But  a  new  creature. — All  external  distinctions  are  nothing.  The  cross  is  the 
only  theme  worthy  of  glorying  in,  as  it  brings  about  a  new  spiritual  creation. 

Ver.  16.  As  many  as  walk  according  to  this  rule.— Of  life:  a  straight  rule  to  detect 
crookedness.  Upon  the  Israel  of  God. — Not  the  Israel  after  the  flesb,  but  the  spiritual  seed 
of  Tsrael  by  faith. 

Ver.  17.  I  bear  in  my  body  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus. — The  Judalsing  teachers  gloried 
in  the  circumcision  marks  in  the  flesh  of  their  followers  ;  St.  Paul  in  the  scars  or  brands  of 
suffering  for  Christ  in  his  own  body — the  badge  of  an  honourable  servitude. 

Ver.  18.  Brethren. — After  much  rebuke  and  monition,  he  bids  them  farewell  with  the 
loving  expression  of  brotherhood  as  his  last  parting  word,  as  if  Greatheart  had  meant  to 
say,  "  After  all,  my  last  word  is,  I  love  you,  I  love  you." 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—5. 

Mutual  Sympathy  in  Burden-bearing. 

1.  That  sympathy  towards  the  erring  is  a  test  of  spiritual-mindedness. — 

1.  Shown  in  the  tenderness  with  which  the  erring  should  be  treated.  "If  a  man  be 
overtaken  in  a  fault,  ye  which  are  spiritual  restore  such  an  one  in  the  spirit  of 
meekness"  l[ver.  1).  ""Worldly  and  self-seeking  men  are  often  severe  on  a 
neighbour's  fault.  They  are  more  likely  to  aggravate  than  heal  the  wound,  to 
push  the  weak  man  down  when  he  tries  to  rise  than  to  help  him  to  his  feet. 
The  spiritual,  moved  by  genuine  compassion,  should  regard  it  as  their  duty  to  set 
right  a  lapsed  brother,  to  bring  him  back  as  soon  and  safely  as  may  be  to  the 
fold  of  Christ.  To  reprove  without  pride  or  acrimony,  to  stoop  to  the  fallen 
without  the  air  of  condescension,  requires  the  spirit  of  meekness  in  a  singular 
degree. 

2.  Reflecting  that  the  most  virtuous  may  some  day  be  in  need  of  similar  con- 
sideration.— "Considering  thyself,  lest  thou  also  be  tempted  "  (ver.  1).  The 
disaster  befalling  one  reveals  the  common  peril ;  it  is  a  signal  for  every  member 
of  the  Church  to  take  heed  to  himself.  The  scrutiny  .which  it  calls  for  belongs  to 
each  man's  private  conscience.  The  faithfulness  and  integrity  required  in  those 
who  approach  the  wrong-doer  with  a  view  to  his  recovery  must  be  chastened  by 
personal  solicitude.  The  fall  of  a  Christian  brother  should  be  in  any  case  the 
occasion  of  heart-searching  and  profound  humiliation.  Feelings  of  indifference 
towards  him,  much  more  of  contempt,  will  prove  the  prelude  of  a  worse  over- 
throw for  ourselves. 

99 


chap.  vi.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


II.  That  sympathy  in  burden-bearing  is  in  harmony  with  the  highest  law. — 
"  Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens,  and  so  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ "  (ver.  2).  As 
much  as  to  say,  If  ye  will  bear  burdens,  bear  one  another's  burden ;  if  ye  will 
observe  law,  observe  the  highest  law — the  law  of  love.  There  is  nothing  more 
Christ-like  than  to  bear  the  burden  of  a  brother's  trespass.  Christ  bore  burdens 
which  to  us  would  have  been  intolerable  and  overwhelming.  The  heaviest 
burden  becomes  supportable  when  shared  with  loving  sympathy.  Kindness 
towards  the  needy  and  helpless  is  work  done  to  Christ.  There  is  a  poetic  legend 
among  the  Anglian  kings  that  Count  Fulc  the  Good,  journeying  along  Loire-side 
towards  Tours,  saw,  just  as  the  towers  of  St.  Martin's  rose  before  him  in  the 
distance,  a  leper  full  of  sores  who  put  by  his  offer  of  alms  and  desired  to  be  borne 
to  the  sacred  city.  Amidst  the  jibes  of  his  courtiers,  the  good  count  lifted  him 
in  his  arms  and  carried  him  along  bank  and  bridge.  As  they  entered  the  town 
the  leper  vanished  from  their  sight,  and  men  told  how  Fulc  had  borne  an  angel 
unawares !  Mutual  burden -bearing  is  the  practical  proof  of  the  unity  and 
solidarity  of  the  Christian  brotherhood. 

III.  That  no  man  can  afford  to  he  independent  of  human  sympathy. — 
1.  Fancied  superiority  to  sympathy  is  self-deception.  "  If  a  man  think  himself 
to  be  something  when  he  is  nothing,  he  deceiveth  himself"  (ver.  3).  Others 
will  see  how  little  his  affected  eminence  is  worth.  Some  will  humour  his  vanity, 
many  will  ridicule  or  pity  it,  few  will  be  deceived  by  it.  Real  knowledge  is 
humble  ;  it  knows  its  nothingness.  Socrates,  when  the  oracle  pronounced  him  the 
wisest  man  in  Greece,  at  last  discovered  that  the  response  was  right,  inasmuch  as 
he  alone  was  aware  that  he  knew  nothing,  while  other  men  were  confident  of  their 
knowledge.  It  is  in  humility  and  dependence,  in  self -forgetting,  that  true  wisdom 
begins.  Who  are  we,  although  the  most  refined  or  highest  in  place,  that  we 
should  despise  plain,  uncultured  members  of  the  Church,  those  who  bear  lif /s 
heavier  burdens  and  amongst  whom  our  Saviour  spent  His  days  on  earth,  and 
treat  them  as  unfit  for  our  company,  unworthy  of  fellowship  with  us  in  Christ? 
(Findlay).  The  most  exalted  and  gifted  is  never  lifted  above  the  need  of  fellow- 
sympathy. 

2.  A  searching  examination  into  our  conduct  will  reveal  how  little  cause  there  is 
for  boasting  a  fancied  superiority. — "  But  let  every  man  prove  his  own  work,  and 
then  shall  he  have  rejoicing  in  himself  alone,  and  not  in  another  "  (ver.  4).  As 
if  the  apostle  said  :  M  Let  each  man  try  his  own  work.  Judge  yourselves  instead 
of  judging  one  another.  Mind  your  own  duty  rather  than  your  neighbours' 
faults.  Do  not  think  of  your  worth  or  talents  in  comparison  with  theirs,  but  see 
to  it  that  your  work  is  right."  The  question  for  each  of  us  is  not,  What  do 
others  fail  to  do  %  but,  What  am  I  myself  really  doing  ?  What  will  my  life's 
work  amount  to  when  measured  by  that  which  God  expects  from  me  ?  The 
petty  comparisons  which  feed  our  vanity  and  our  class-prejudices  are  of  no  avail 
at  the  bar  of  God.  If  we  study  our  brother's  work,  it  should  be  with  a  view  of 
enabling  him  to  do  it  better,  or  to  learn  to  improve  our  own  by  his  example ;  not 
in  order  to  find  excuses  for  ourselves  in  his  shortcomings.  If  our  work  abide  the 
test,  we  shall  have  glorying  in  ourselves  alone,  not  in  regard  to  our  neighbour. 
Not  his  flaws  and  failures,  but  my  own  honest  work,  will  be  the  ground  of  my 
satisfaction  (Ibid.). 

IV.  That  individual  responsibility  is  universal. — "For  every  man  shall  bear 
his  own  burden  [load]  "  (ver.  5).  No  man  can  rid  himself  of  his  life-load  ;  he  must 
carry  it  up  to  the  judgment -seat  of  Christ,  where  he  will  get  his  final  discharge. 
Daniel  Webster  was  present  one  day  at  a  dinner-party  given  at  Astor  House  by 
some  New  York  friends,  and  in  order  to  draw  him  out  one  of  the  company  put 
to  him  the  following  question,  "  Will  you  please  tell  us,  Mr.  Webster,  what  was 
the   most   important  thought  that  ever  occupied  your  mind  ? "      Mr.  Webster 

100 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS.        chap.  VI 


merely  raised  his  head,  and  passing  his  hand  slowly  over  his  forehead,  said,  "  Is 
there  any  one  here  who  doesn't  know  me  1 "  "  No,  sir,"  was  the  reply  ;  "  we  all 
know  you,  and  are  your  friends."  "  Then,"  said  he,  looking  over  the  table,  "  the 
most  important  thought  that  ever  occupied  my  mind  was  that  of  my  individual 
responsibility  to  God  "  ;  and  he  spoke  on  the  subject  for  twenty  minutes.  The 
higher  sense  we  have  of  our  own  responsibility  the  more  considerate  we  are 
in  judging  others  and  the  more  we  sympathise  with  them  in  their  struggles  and 
trials.  Jfesop  says  a  man  carries  two  bags  over  his  shoulder,  the  one  with  his 
own  sins  hanging  behind,  that  with  his  neighbour's  sins  in  front. 

Lessons. — 1.  Sympathy  is  a  Christ-like  grace.      2.  Sympathy  for  the  erring 
does  not  tolerate  wrong.     3.  Practical  help  is  the  test  of  genuine  sympathy. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  1.  The  Sins  of  Others.  avail   unless   each  of  us,  in  the  post 

I.  The  follies  and  misconduct  of  where  God  has  placed  him,  acts  upon 
others  are  the  choice  subjects  of  con-  those  around  him,  and  brings  them  all 
versation  in  every  stage  of  society;  individually  under  that  influence  of 
and  if  we  take  slander  out  of  these  love  which  nothing  can  either  equal  or 
conversations,  we  rob  them  of  their  replace.  Have  you  never  asked  your- 
keenest  fascination.  I  have  felt  it,  self  with  terror  if  you  have  not  lost 
that  fearful  joy  which  the  discovery  of  some  soul  ?  Do  you  know  if,  among 
others'  faults  produces  ;  and  then  I  all  those  unfortunate  beings  whom  God 
found  nothing  at  all  extravagant  in  will  cast  from  His  presence  at  the  last 
the  strongest  expressions  by  which  the  day,  more  than  one  will  not  sorrowfully 
Scriptures  depict  the  depth  of  our  fall  turn  towards  you  and  say,  "It  is 
and  the  depravity  of  our  heart.  thou,  it  is  thou  that  hast  lost  me  "  ? — 

II.  One  of  our  brethren  has  lapsed :  Eugene  Bersier. 
but  you  who  condemn  him,  have  you 

never    erred?       Do    you     know     his  Vers.  1,  2.  Christian  Reformation. 

history  ?      Did   he  know    what    you  I.  A  thief  is  the  man  who  uses,  in 

know  yourself  1    The  fall  of  a  brother  order  to   keep  up   appearances,  that 

should  call  forth  a  painful  self-exami-  which  does  not  justly  belong  to  him, 

nation  and  a  sincere  humiliation  before  whether  that  appearance  be  kept  up 

God.  by    actually    robbing    his    neighbour's 

III.  Real  and  profound  compassion  pocket,  or  by  delaying  the  payment  of 
should  be  felt  for  the.  brother  whom  his  just  debts,  or  by  stinting  God  and 
sin  has  overtaken.  But  sympathy  man  of  their  dues  in  any  way.  Such 
alone  will  not  suffice.  There  is  a  a  one  has,  for  keeping  up  appearances, 
sympathy  which  is  mere  weakness.  every  advantage  up  to  a  certain  point, 
Our  mission  lays  upon  us  the  duty  of  and  that  point  is  the  moment  of  de- 
restoration.  This  is  a  delicate  and  tection.  After  that,  all  is  changed, 
sublime  work,  for  it  is  the  work  of  The  detected  thief  is  the  most  miserable 
God,  but  the  work  of  God  destined  to  of  men.  Two  ways  only  are  open  to 
be  accomplished  by  man.  Do  the  work  him  by  which  he  can  endure  life  or 
of  Jesus  Christ  in  the  spirit  of  Jesus  carry  on  hope.  One  of  these  is  to 
Christ.  You  must  have  for  your  declare  war  against  society,  and  be- 
fallen brethren  a  love  without  weak-  come  an  open  instead  of  a  secret 
ness  and  a  holiness  without  pride.  offender ;  the  other  is  to  begin  anew, 
We  cannot  raise  them  en  masse,  and  by  and  strive  to  build  up  a  fresh  repu- 
I  know  not  what  a  collective  action  tation  under  more  favourable  auspices, 
which  would  exempt  us  from  individual  it  may  be  by  shrewder  and  deeper 
love  and  sacrifice.     All  will  be  of  no  deceit,    or   it   may  be   in   the  way  of 

101 


CHAP.  VI. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


genuine  repentance  and  amendment. 
It  is  hard  to  say  whether  of  these  two 
is  the  more  difficult  or  hopeless. 

II.  Were  we  all  true  men,  safe  in 
our  own  consciences,  fearless  of  detec- 
tion in  any  point  ourselves,  we  should 
be  ever  ready  to  help  up  an  erring 
brother  or  sister;  but  it  is  just  be- 
cause we  are  afraid  of  our  own  weak 
and  unsound  points  that  we  are  so 
reluctant  ever  to  let  a  tarnished  char- 
acter again  brighten  itself.  It  is 
hardly  possible  to  over-estimate  the  vast 
conspiracy  which  is  arranged  against 
the  delinquent's  effort  to  be  reinstated 
in  the  favour  of  his  fellow-men. 

III.  It  would  be  by  no  means  unin- 
structive  to  inquire  how  far  these 
feelings  have  influenced  us  in  our 
views  and  practice  with  regard  to  the 
punishment  of  crime.  The  last  thing 
we  believe  in  is  reformation.  You 
may  view  this  as  a  judicial  consequence 
of  guilt.  Terrible  as  may  be  the  fears 
of  a  conscience  dreading  detection,  far 
more  difficulty,  far  more  anguish,  far 
bitterer  self-reproach,  is  in  store  for  the 
penitent  struggling  to  regain  peace 
and  the  fair  name  which  he  has  lost. 
He  carries  the  past  evermore,  as  it 
were,  branded  on  his  brOw,  for  men  to 
see  and  avoid. 

IV.  While  we  rejoice  and  are  grate- 
ful to  God  for  His  mercy  to  us,  we 
should  at  the  same  time  tremble  at 
our  own  unworthiness,  and  ever  bear 
in  mind  our  personal  liability  to  fall 
into  sin.  In  such  a  spirit  should  we 
set  about  the  blessed  work  of  restora- 
tion, ever  looking  on  the  fallen  as  our 
brethren,  going  to  meet  them  across 
the  gulf  which  human  Pharisaism  has 
placed  between  them  and  us,  the  unde- 
tected ;  as  common  children  of  that 
God  whose  grace  is  able  to  raise  them 
up  again,  bearing  their  burdens  in- 
stead of  disclaiming  them  and  letting 
them  sink  under  their  weight,  and  so 
fulfilling  the  law  of  Christ. — Dean 
A  If  or  d. 

The  Restoration  of  the  Erring. 
I.  The  Christian  view  of  other  men's 
sins. — 1.  The  apostle  looks  upon  sin  as 

102  » 


if  it  might  be  sometimes  the  result  of  a 
surprise.  2.  As  that  which  has  left  a 
burden  on  the  erring  spirit.  (1)  One 
burden  laid  on  fault  is  that  chain  of  en- 
tanglement which  seems  to  drag  down  to 
fresh  sins.  (2)  The  burden  of  the  heart  , 
weighing  on  itself.  (3)  The  burden 
of  a  secret,  leading  a  man  to  tell  the 
tale  of  his  crimes  as  under  the  person- 
ality of  another,  as  in  the  old  fable  of 
him  who  breathed  his  weighty  secret 
to  the  reeds ;  to  get  relief  in  profuse 
and  general  acknowledgment  of  guilt ; 
evidenced  in  the  commonness  of  the 
longing  for  confession.  (4)  The  burden 
of  an  intuitive  consciousness  of  the 
hidden  sins  of  others'  hearts. 

II.  The  Christian  power  of  restora- 
tion.— 1.  Restoration  is  possible. 
2.  By  sympathy.  3.  By  forgiveness. 
4.  In  the  spirit  of  meekness.  5.  The 
motive  urging  to  attempt  restoration. — 
"  Considering  thyself,"  etc. — F.  W. 
Robertson. 

Brotherly  Reproof. — 1.  A  man  must 
so  reprove  his  brother  as  that  it  may 
be  most  for  the  advancement  of  God's 
glory,  best  for  winning  him  to  God, 
and  least  to  the  defaming  of  him 
abroad.  He  must  pray  that  God 
would  guide  his  tongue  and  move  the 
other's  heart.  We  may  not  traduce 
him  to  others,  either  before  or  after 
our  reproof.  2.  Every  reproof  must 
be  grounded  on  a  certainty  of  know- 
ledge of  the  fault  committed.  3.  It 
is  very  requisite  the  reprover  be  not 
tainted  with  the  like  fault  he  reproves 
in  another.  4.  The  vinegar  of  shaip 
reprehension  must  be  allayed  and 
tempered  with  the  oil  of  gentle  ex- 
hortation. The  word  "  restore  "  signifies 
to  set  a  bone  that  is  broken.  We  are 
to  deal  with  a  man  who  has  fallen  and 
by  his  fall  disjoined  some  member  of 
the  new  man  as  the  surgeon  does  with 
an  arm  or  leg  that  is  broken  or  out  of 
joint — handle  it  tenderly  and  gently, 
so  as  to  cause  least  pain.  5.  Every 
reproof  must  be  fitted  to  the  quality 
and  condition  of  him  we  reprove  and 
to  the  nature  of  the  offence.  6.  Must 
be  administered  in  fit  time  when  we 


HOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY :   GALATIANS.         chap.  vt. 


may  do  the  most  good.  7.  Secret  sins 
known  to  thee  or  to  a  few  must  be 
reproved  secretly.  8.  We  must  be 
careful  to  observe  the  order  set  down 
by  our  Saviour  (Matt,  xviii.  15). — 
Perkins. 

Vers.  2,  5.  Our  Twofold  Burdens. — 
1.  The  burden  which  every  man  must 
bear  for  himself  is  the  burden  of  his 
own  sins,  and  from  this  burden  no 
man  can  relieve  him.  2.  If  a  man  be 
overtaken  in  a  fault,  we  are  to  bear 
his  burden  by  trying  to  restore  him. 

3.  We  are  to  do  this  in  the  spirit  of 
meekness,  bending  patiently  under  the 
burden  which  his  fault  may  cast  on  us. 
This  spirit  toward  those  who  commit 
faults  is  wholly  at  variance  with  the 
natural  man's  way  of  acting,  speaking, 
and  thinking.  We  are  to  love  our 
friends  in  spite  of  their  faults,  to  treat 
them  kindly,  cheerfully,  graciously,  in 
spite   of  the  pain    they  may  give  us. 

4.  Our  Saviour  has  given  us  an  example 
of  what  we  should  wish  and  strive  to 
be  and  do.  The  law  of  Christ  is  the 
law  of  love. — J.  C.  Hare. 

Ver.  2.  Bear  One  Another's  Burdens. 
— The  law  of  Christ  was  lovingkind- 
ness.  His  business  was  benevolence. 
If  we  would  resemble  Him, — 

1.  We  must  raise  up  the  fallen. — 
This  was  hardly  ever  attempted  till 
Christ  set  the  pattern.  People  went 
wrong,  and  the  world  let  them  go ;  they 
broke  the  laws,  and  the  magistrate 
punished ;  they  became  a  scandal,  and 
society  cast  them  out — out  of  the 
synagogue,  out  of  the  city,  out  of  the 
world.  But  with  a  moral  tone  in- 
finitely higher  Christ  taught  a  more 
excellent  way. 

2.  We  must  bear  the  infirmities  of  the 
weak. — Very  tiresome  is  a  continual 
touchiness  in  a  neighbour,  or  the 
perpetual  recurrence  of  the  same 
faults  in  a  pupil  or  child.  But  if  by 
self-restraint  and  right  treatment  God 
should  enable  you  to  cure  those  faults, 
from  how  much  shame  and  sorrow  do 
you  rescue  them,  from  how  much 
suffering  yourself. 


3.  We  must  bear  one  another's  trials. 
— With  one  is  the  burden  of  poverty ; 
with  another  it  is  pain  or  failing 
strength,  the  extinction  of  a  great 
hope,  or  the  loss  of  some  precious 
faculty.  A  little  thing  will  sometimes 
ease  the  pressure.  In  a  country  road 
you  have  seen  the  weary  beast  with 
foaming  flank  straining  onward  with 
the  overladen  cart  and  ready  to  give 
in,  when  the  kindly  waggoner  called 
a  halt,  and  propping  up  the  shaft  with 
a  slim  rod  or  stake  from  the  hedgerow, 
he  patted  and  praised  the  willing 
creature,  till  after  a  little  rest  they 
were  ready  to  resume  the  rough  track 
together.  Many  a  time  a  small  prop 
is  quite  sufficient. 

4.  By  thus  bearing  others  burdens 
you  will  lighten  your  own. — Rogers  the 
poet  has  preserved  a  story  told  him 
by  a  Piedmontese  nobleman.  "  I  was 
weary  of  life,  and  after  a  melancholy 
day  was  hurrying  along  the  street  to 
the  river,  when  I  felt  a  sudden  check. 
I  turned,  and  beheld  a  little  boy  who 
had  caught  the  skirt  of  my  cloak  in  his 
anxiety  to  solicit  my  notice.  His  look 
and  manner  were  irresistible.  Not  less 
so  was  the  lesson  I  learnt.  '  There  are 
six  of  us,  and  we  are  dying  for  want  of 
food.'  '  Why  should  I  not,'  said  I  to 
myself,  'relieve  this  wretched  family? 
I  have  the  means,  and  it  will  not 
delay  me  many  minutes.'  The  scene  of 
misery  he  conducted  me  to  I  cannot 
describe.  I  threw  them  my  purse, 
and  their  burst  of  gratitude  overcame 
me.  It  filled  my  eyes;  it  went  as  a 
cordial  to  my  heart.  '  I  will  call  again 
to-morrow,'  I  cried.  Pool  that  I  was 
to  think  of  leaving  a  world  where  such 
pleasure  was  to  be  had,  and  so  cheaply." 
There  is  many  a  load  which  only  grows 
less  by  giving  a  lift  to  another.  A 
dim  gospel  makes  a  cold  Christian ; 
a  distant  Saviour  makes  a  halting, 
hesitating  disciple.  —  Dr.  James 
Hamilton. 

Ver.  2.   Christian  Generosity. 

I.  The  duty  enjoined. — 1.  It  may 
apply  to  a  weight  of  labour  or  bodily 
toil.      2.    To    a    weight    of    personal 

103 


chap.  vi.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS, 
I 


affliction.     3.    To   a   weight   of  provi-  upon  the  hindermost.     Thus  in  God's 

d3ntial     losses     and    embarrassments,  providence    Luther    and     Melancthon 

4.  To  a  weight  of  guilt.     5.  Of  temp-  were  happily  joined  together.    Melanc- 
tation.     6.  Of  infirmities.  thon  tempered  the   heat   and  zeal  of 

II.  The  enforcing  motive. — 1.   The  Luther  with  his  mildness,  being  as  oil 

apostle's  requirement  is  worthy  of  the  to  his   vinegar ;   and    Luther,    on    the 

character  of  Christ,  as  it  is  a  law  of  other    side,    did    warm    his    coldness, 

equity.      2.    It  is  congenial  with  the  being  as  fire  to  his  frozenness. — Ralph 

Spirit   of  Christ.      3.  It  is   agreeable  Cudworth. 
to   the   example  of   Christ.      4.    It  is 
deducible  from  the  precepts  of  Christ.         Association  (A  Benefit  Club  Sermon). — 

5.  It  has  the  approbation  of  Christ. —  1.  This  plan  of  bearing  one  another's 
Sketches.  burdens   is   not   only   good   in  benefit 

clubs — it  is  good  in  families,  in 
Bearing  One  Another's  Burdens. — The  parishes,  in  nations,  in  the  Church 
metaphor  is  taken  from  travellers  who  of  God.  What  is  there  bearing  on 
used  to  ease  one  another  by  carrying  this  matter  of  prudence  that  makes 
one  another's  burdens,  wholly  or  in  one  of  the  greatest  differences  between 
part,  so  that  they  may  more  cheerfully  a  man  and  a  brute  beast  1  Many 
and  speedily  go  on  in  their  journey,  beasts  have  forethought :  the  sleep- 
As  in  architecture  all  stones  are  not  mouse  hoards  up  acorns  against  the 
fit  to  be  laid  in  every  place  of  the  winter,  the  fox  will  hide  the  game  he 
building,  but  some  below  and  others  cannot  eat.  The  difference  between 
above  the  wall,  so  that  the  whole  man  and  beast  is,  that  the  beast  has 
building  may  be  firm  and  compact  in  forethought  only  for  himself,  but  the 
itself  ;  so  in  the  Church  those  who  are  man  has  forethought  for  others  also. 
strong  must  support  the  weak.  The  2.  Just  the  same  with  nations.  If  the 
Italians  have  a  proverb — Hard  with  king  and  nobles  give  their  whole  minds 
hard  never  makes  a  good  wall,  by  to  making  good  laws,  and  seeing 
which  is  signified  that  stones  cobbled  justice  done  to  all,  and  workmen  fairly 
up  one  upon  another  without  mortar  to  paid,  and  if  the  poor  in  their  turn  are 
combine  them  make  but  a  tottering  loyal  and  ready  to  fight  and  work  for 
wall  that  may  be  easily  shaken ;  but  if  their  king  and  their  nobles,  then  will 
there  be  mortar  betwixt  them  yielding  not  that  country  be  a  happy  and  a 
to  the  hardness  of  the  stones,  it  makes  great  country  1  3.  Just  the  ><-ame  way 
the  whole  like  a  solid  continued  body,  with  Christ's  Church,  the  company  of 
strong  and  stable,  able  to  endure  the  true  Christian  men.  If  the  people 
shock  of  the  ram  or  the  shot  of  the  love  and  help  each  other,  and  obey 
cannon.  So  that  society,  where  all  are  their  ministers  and  pray  for  them,  and 
as  stiff  as  stones  which  will  not  yield  a  if  the  ministers  labour  earnestly  after 
hair  one  to  another,  cannot  be  firm  the  souls  and  bodies  of  their  people, 
and  durable.  But  where  men  are  of  and  Christ  in  heaven  helps  both 
a  yielding  nature  society  is  compact,  minister  and  people  with  His  Spirit 
because  one  bears  the  infirmities  of  and  His  providence  and  protection,  if 
another.  Therefore  the  strong  are  to  all  in  the  whole  Church  bear  each 
support  the  weak,  and  the  weak  the  other's  burdens,  then  Christ's  Church 
strong  ;  as  in  the  arch  of  a  building  will  stand,  and  the  gates  of  hell  will  not 
one  stone  bears  mutually,  though  not  prevail  against  it. — Charles  Kingsley. 
equally,  the  burden  of  the  rest ;  or  as 

harts  swimming  over  a  great  water  do  Burden-bearing. 

ease  one  another  in  laying  their  heads  I.  Different     kinds    of    burdens. — 

one   upon    the   back   of   another — the  1.  Those  that  are  necessary.     2.    Those 

foremost,  having  none  to  support  him,  that  are  superfluous.     3.  Those  that  are 

changing  his  place  and  resting  his  head  imaginary. 

104 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIAtfS.        chap.  VI. 


II.  What  shall  we  do  with  them  ?— 
1.  Reduce  their  number  to  the  limits  of 
necessity.  2.  Some  of  these  we  are  ex- 
pected to  carry  ourselves.  3.  Some  we 
may  expect  our  friends  to  help  us  to 
carry.  4.  We  may  take  them  all  to  the 
Lord  that  He  may  either  remove  them  or 
sustain  us  under  them. 

Lessons. — 1.  With  grace  burdens 
are  removed  or  lightened.  2.  In  what 
ivay  can  we  best  help  others  with  their 
burdens  ?  "  Thou  lightenest  thy  load 
by  lightening  his."  3.  Let  our  burdens 
be  reduced  to  light  running  order. — 
Homiletic  Monthly. 

Practical  Christian  Sympathy. 

I.  Consider  the  burdens  you  can  bear 
for  others. — All  have  to  bear  burdens. 
Some  man  can  only  bear  for  himself. 
Others  he  can  be  helped  to  bear,  such 
as  the  burden  of  carnal  tendency, 
persecution,  anxiety  over  loved  ones, 
affliction  that  is  not  punishment. 

II.  Consider  how  we  may  bear  the 
burdens  of  others. — 1.  We  can  bear 
them  on  our  hearts  in  prayer.  2.  We 
can  lighten  the  burden  by  friendly  help. 
3.  We  can  by  the  strength  of  our 
sympathies  come  under  the  burdens  of 
others. 

III.  Bearing  the  burdens  of  others 
is  the  chief  way  by  which  we  can 
fulfil  the  law  of  Christ.— Kothing  will 
give  us  such  a  resemblance  to  Him. 
He  lived  solely  for  others*  He  came 
voluntarily  under  the  burden  of  man's 
miseries,  sacrificing  Himself  for  the 
race. 

IV.  Consider  the  importance  of 
obeying  this  injunction. — 1.  For  our 
own  sakes.  2.  For  the  good  of  others. 
3.  For  the  prosperity  of  the  Church. — 
The  Lay  Preacher. 

Ver.  5.  Burden-bearing. 

I.  There  is  the  burden  of  personal 
responsibility. — This  comes  out  in  the 
formation  of  character. 

II.  There  is  the  burden  of  toil. — 
Among  the  steep  precipitous  mountains 
of  Thibet  the  traveller  meets  long  pro- 
cessions of  hungry,  ill-clad  Chinamen, 
carrying  enormous  loads  of  tea.    There 


they  go,  climb,  climbing  day  after  day 
up  the  rough  sides  of  the  mountains, 
each  with  his  great  burden  on  his  back, 
eyes  fixed  on  the  ground,  all  silent, 
stepping  slowly,  and  leaning  on  great 
iron-pointed  sticks,  till  the  leader  of 
the  gang  gives  the  signal  for  a  halt, 
and,  after  standing  a  few  minutes,  the 
heavy  load  again  falls  on  the  back  and 
head,  the  body  is  again  bent  towards 
the  ground,  and  the  caravan  is  once 
more  in  motion.  You  do  not  wonder 
that,  with  a  task  so  monotonous,  these 
poor  drudges  should  acquire  a  dreary, 
stupid  look,  little  better  than  beasts  of 
burden  ;  and  you  feel  sorry  for  those  in 
whose  lives  there  is  a  large  amount 
of  the  like  irksome  and  exhausting 
routine.  Yet  there  are  many  who,  in 
order  to  earn  their  daily  bread,  must 
go  through  a  similar  task. 

III.  There  is  the  burden  of  sorrow. 
— Soirow  dwells  beneath  a  king's 
robes  as  much  as  beneath  a  peasant's 
cloak  j  the  star  of  the  noble,  the 
warrior's  corslet,  the  courtier's  silken 
vesture,  cannot  shut  it  out.  That  rural 
home  is  such  a  picture  of  peace  we 
cannot  believe  that  care  or  tears  are 
there.  That  noble  castle  amidst 
ancient  trees  is  surely  lifted  up  in  its 
calm  grandeur  above  sighs  and  sadness. 
Alas  !  it  is  not  so.  Man  is  the  tenant 
of  both,  and  wherever  man  dwells 
sorrow  is  sure  to  be  with  him. 

IV.  There  is  one  burden  which  it  is 
wrong  to  bear. — It  is  a  sin  and  a 
shame  to  you  if  you  are  still  plodding 
along  under  the  burden  of  unpardoned 
transgression.  The  load  of  guilt,  the 
feeling  that  our  sin  is  too  great  for  the 
blood  of  Christ  to  expiate,  or  the  grace 
of  God  to  pardon— this  burden  it  is 
wrong  to  bear. — Dr.  James  Hamilton. 

Bearing  our  Burdens  Alone. 

I.  The  loneliness  of  each  one  of  us. — 

One  of  the  tendencies  of  these  bustling 
times  is  to  make  us  forget  that  we  are 
single  beings,  detached  souls.  Each 
great  star  flung  out  like  an  atom  of 
gold  dust  into  space  may  seem  lost 
amid  the  hundred  of  millions  of 
mightier   worlds   that   surround ;    and 

105 


chap.  vi.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


yet  no;  it  rolls  on,  grave  in  itself, 
careering  in  its  own  orbit,  while  its 
sister-stars  sweep  round  on  every  side. 
We  stand  cut  off  from  one  another.  We 
are  to  stave  up  side  by  side  our  own 
destiny,  we  are  to  be  alone  with  our 
burdens,  not  lost  in  the  forest  of 
human  lives. 

II.  Look  at  some  of  the  forms  of 
this  burden.— 1.  There  is  the  burden  of 
being   itself.     2.   The   burden    of  duty. 

3.  The  burden  of  imperfection  and  sin. 

4.  The  burden  of  sorrow.  5.  The 
burden  of  dying  alone.  6.  If  a  man  is 
lost,  he  is  lost  alone;  if  saved,  he  is  saved 
alone. — The  Lay  Preacher. 

Every  Man  has  his  Own  Burden. 

I.  No  man  can  pay  a  ransom  for  his 
brother,  or  redeem  his  soul  from  death, 
or  satisfy  the  justice  of  God  for  his  sin, 
seeing  that  every  man  by  the  tenor  of 
the  law  is  to  bear  his  own  burden, 
and  by  the  gospel  none  can  be  our 
surety  but  Christ. 

II.  We  see  the  nature  of  sin  that  is 
a  burden  to  the  soul. — It  is  heavier 


than  the  gravel  of  the  earth  and  the 
sand  of  the  sea. 

III.  We  are  not  to  wonder  that  sin 
being  so  heavy  a  burden  should  be 
made  so  light  a  matter  by  carnal  men, 
for  it  is  a  spiritual  burden. 

IV.  The  more  a  man  fears  the  bur- 
den of  his  sins  the  greater  measure  of 
grace  and  spiritual  life  he  has,  and  the 
less  he  feels  it  the  more  is  he  to  suspect 
himself. 

V.  The  greatest  part  of  the  world 
are  dead  in  their  sins  in  that  they  have 
no  sense  of  feeling  of  this  heavy  burden. 

VI.  We  are  to  take  heed  of  every 
sin,  for  there  is  no  sin  so  small  but 
hath  its  weight. — Many  small  sins 
will  as  easily  condemn  as  a  few  great. 
Like  as  sands,  though  small  in  quantity, 
yet  being  many  in  number,  will  as  soon 
sink  the  ship  as  if  it  were  laden  with 
the  greatest  burden. 

VII.  Feeling  the  weight  and  burden 
of  our  sins,  we  are  to  labour  to  be 
disburdened;  and  this  is  done  by 
repentance  towards  God  and  faith  in 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. — Perkins. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC  S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  6—10. 

Moral  Solving  and  Reaping. 

I.  Beneficence  by  the  taught  towards  the  teacher  is  sowing  good  seed. 

— "  Let  him  that  is  taught  in  the  word  communicate  unto  him  that  teacheth  in 
all  good  things  "  (ver.  6).  The  good  things  referred  to,  though  not  confined 
to  temporal  good,  do  certainly  mean  that.  While  every  man  must  bear 
his  own  burden,  he  must  also  help  to  bear  the  burden  of  his  brother. 
Especially  must  the  taught  go  shares  with  his  spiritual  teacher  in  all 
things  necessary.  But  beneficence  shown  towards  the  minister  in  temporalities 
is  the  least,  and  with  many  the  easiest,  part  of  the  duty.  Teacher  and  taught 
should  mutually  co-operate  with  each  other  in  Christian  work,  and  share  with 
each  other  in  spiritual  blessings.  The  true  minister  of  the  gospel  is  more  con- 
cerned in  eliciting  the  co-operation  and  sympathy  of  the  members  of  his  Church 
than  in  securing  their  temporal  support.  If  he  faithfully  ministers  to  them  in 
spiritual  things,  they  should  be  eager  to  minister  unto  him  of  their  worldly 
substance,  and  to  aid  him  in  promoting  the  work  of  God.  Every  good  deed,  done 
in  the  spirit  of  love  and  self-sacrifice,  is  sowing  good  seed. 

II.  By  the  operation  of  unchanging  divine  law  the  reaping  will  correspond 
to  the  kind  of  seed  sown  and  the  nature  of  the  soil  into  which  it  is  cast. — "  Be 
not  deceived ;  God  is  not  mocked  :  for  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  be  also 
reap.  For  he  that  soweth  to  his  flesh,"  etc.  (vers.  7,  8).  Men  may  wrong  each 
other,  but  they  cannot  cheat  God.  To  expect  God  to  sow  His  bounties  upon 
them,  and  not  to  let  Him  reap  their  gratitude  and  service,  is  mockery.  But  it  is 
not  God  they  deceive  ;  they  deceive  themselves.  For  at  last  every  one  shall  reap 
as  he  sows.    The  use  made  of  our  seed-time  determines  exactly,  and  with  a  moral 

106 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


CHAP.  VI. 


certainty  greater  even  than  that  which  rules  in  the  natural  field,  what  kind  of 
fruitage  our  immortality  will  render.  Eternity  for  us  will  be  the  multiplied,! 
consummate  outcome  of  the  good  or  evil  of  the  present  life.  Hell  is  just  sin  \ 
ripe — rotten  ripe.  Heaven  is  the  fruitage  of  righteousness.  "  He  that  soweth 
to  his  own  flesh  reaps  corruption  " — the  moral  decay  and  dissolution  of  the  man's 
being.  This  is  the  natural  retributive  effect  of  his  carnality.  The  selfish  man 
gravitates  downward  into  the  sensual  man ;  the  sensual  man  downward  into  the 
bottomless  pit.  "  He  that  soweth  to  the  Spirit  reaps  life  everlasting."  The 
sequence  is  inevitable.  Like  breeds  its  like.  Life  springs  of  life,  and  death 
eternal  is  the  culmination  of  the  soul's  present  death  to  God  and  goodness.  The 
future  glory  of  the  saints  is  at  once  a  divine  reward  and  a  necessary  development 
of  their  present  faithfulness  {Findlay,  passim). 

III.  Sowing  the  seed  of  good  deeds  should  be  prosecuted  with  unwearied 
perseverance. — 1.  Because  the  harvest  is  sure  to  follow.  "  Let  us  not  be  weary 
in  well-doing  :  for  in  due  season  we  shall  reap,  if  we  faint  not  "  (ver.  9).  Here  is 
encouragement  for  the  wearied,  baffled  worker.  We  have  all  our  moments  of 
despondency  and  disappointment,  and  are  apt  to  imagine  our  labours  are  futile 
and  all  our  painstaking  useless.  Not  so.  We  are  confounding  the  harvest  with 
the  seed-time.  "  In  due  season  " — in  God's  time,  which  is  the  best  time — "  we 
shall  reap,  if  we  faint  not."  Our  heavenly  harvest  lies  in  every  earnest  and 
faithful  deed,  as  the  oak  with  its  centuries  of  growth  and  all  its  summer  glory 
sleeps  in  the  acorn-cup,  as  the  golden  harvest  slumbers  in  the  seeds  under  their 
covering  of  wintry  snow. 

2.  Because  the  opportunity  of  doing  good  is  ever  present. — "  As  we  have 
opportunity  let  us  do  good  unto  all  men,  especially  unto  them  who  are  of  the 
household  of  faith  "  (ver.  10).  The  whole  of  life  is  our  opportunity,  and  every 
day  brings  its  special  work.  Opportunity  is  never  to  seek ;  it  is  ever  present. 
There  is  not  a  moment  without  a  duty.  While  we  are  looking  for  a  more 
convenient  opportunity  we  lose  the  one  that  is  nearest  to  us.  As  members  of 
the  household  of  faith  there  is  ever  work  enough  to  do — work  that  fits  us  to 
do  good  on  a  wider  scale — "  unto  all  men."  True  zeal  for  the  Church  broadens 
rather  than  narrows  our  charities.  Household  affection  is  the  nursery,  not  the 
rival,  of  love  to  our  fatherland  and  to  humanity. 

Lessons. — 1.  Our  present  life  is  the  seed-time  of  an  eternal  harvest.  2.  The 
quality  of  the  future  harvest  depends  entirely  on  the  present  sowing.  3.  God 
Himself  is  the  Lord  of  the  moral  harvest. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 


Ver.  6.  Pastors  and  People. 

I.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  people  to 
give  their  pastors  not  only  counten- 
ance but  maintenance. 

II.  It  is  the  law  of  nations,  and  a 
conclusion  grounded  on  common  equity, 
that  those  who  spend  themselves,  as  a 
candle,  to  give  light  to  others  and  for 
the  common  good  of  all,  should  be 
maintained  of  the  common  stock  by 
all. 

III.  Every  calling  is  able  to  main- 
tain them  that  live  therein,  therefore 
we  may  not  think  that  the  ministry, 
the  highest  calling,  should  be  so  base 


or  barren  as  that  it  cannot  maintain 
them  that  attend  thereupon. 

IV.  Ministers  are  the  Lord's  soldiers, 
captains,  and  standard-bearers,  and 
therefore  are  not  to  go  a  warfare  at 
their  own  cost. 

V.  Ministers  are  to  give  themselves 
wholly  to  the  building  of  the  Church 
and  to  the  fighting  of  the  Lord's  battles. 
Therefore  they  are  to  have  their  pay 
that  they  may  attend  upon  their  call- 
ing without  distraction. 

VI.  It  is  the  ordinance  of  God  that 
they  which  preach  the  gospel  should 
live  of  the  gospel. — Ministers    should 

107 


chap.  vi.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


be   liberally    provided    for,   yet    with  hearts  are  open,  and  that  in  impartial 

moderation,    that    they   draw   not   all  and  discriminating  arbitration  He  will 

men's   wealth    into  their  purses.     He  render  to  every  man  according  to  his 

that   would   live    of   the  gospel   must  deeds.     It  is  sad  to  be  deceived  in  a 

teach  the  gospel.     A  benefit  requires  friend,  in  our  estimate  of  health,  in 

a  duty,  and  diligence  in  that  duty. —  our  computation  of  property ;    but  a 

Perkins.  mistake  about  the  state  of  the  soul — a 

veil  folded  about  the  heart  so  that  it 

Ministerial  Maintenance. — 1.  Seeing  cannot  see  its  own  helplessness  and 
Christ's  ministers  are  to  bestow  them-  peril — this  is  a  state  of  which  thought 
selves  wholly  in  the  work  of  the  shudders  to  conceive,  and  to  describe 
ministry  and  not  to  be  entangled  with  whose  portentousness  language  has  no 
the  affairs  of  this  life,  therefore  the  words  that  are  sufficiently  appalling, 
people  of  God,  among  whom  they  spend  There  can  be  no  peril  more  imminent 
their  strength,  are  bound  by  common  than  yours.  The  headlong  rider 
equity  to  give  them  worldly  mainten-  through  the  darkness  before  whom  the 
ance,  that  they  may  be  neither  diverted  dizzy  precipice  yawns  ;  the  heedless 
from  nor  discouraged  in  their  work  of  traveller  for  whom  in  the  bosky  wood- 
watching  over  souls.  2.  This  mainten-  land  the  bandits  lie  in  ambush,  or 
ance,  though  it  should  be  moderate  upon  whom  from  the  jungle's  density 
and  such  as  may  not  through  abun-  the  tiger  waits  to  spring  ;  the  man  who, 
dance  occasion  pride,  luxury,  and  pro-  gazing  faintly  upward,  meets  the  cruel 
digality,  yet  should  be  liberal  and  eye  and  lifted  hand  and  flashing  steel 
creditable,  such  as  may  not  only  supply  of  his  remorseless  enemy ;  they  of  whose 
pinching  necessities,  but  also  that  they  condition  you  can  only  poorly  image, 
may  have  wherewith  to  supply  the  who  in  far  dungeons  and  beneath  the 
necessities  of  the  indigent,  to  educate  torture  of  a  tyrant's  cruelty  groan  for 
their  children  so  as  they  may  sustain  a  sight  of  friend  or  glimpse  of  day ;  all 
themselves  and  be  profitable  members  around  whom  perils  thicken  hopelessly, 
both  of  Church  and  commonwealth.  and  to  whom,  with  feet  laden  with  the 
3.  The  Church's  maintenance  is  only  tidings  of  evil,  the  messengers  of 
due  unto  such  ministers  as  have  abili-  disaster  come, — how  they  move  your 
ties  to  preach,  and  are  faithful  and  sympathy,  how  you  shudder  as  you 
diligent  labourers  in  the  word.  Those  dwell  upon  their  danger,  how  you  would 
who  are  unfit  or  unwilling  to  preach  fain  stir  yourselves  into  brave  efforts 
should  be  removed  from  their  charge,  for  their  rescue  or  their  warning ! 
and  not  suffered  to  eat  up  the  Church's  Brethren,  your  own  danger  is  more 
maintenance,  feeding  themselves  and  nearly  encompassing  and  is  more 
starving  the  souls  of  people  committed  infinitely  terrible, 
to  their  charge. — Fergusson.  II.    The    import    of  the    apostle's 

statement. — We     have     largely     the 

Vers.    7-9.    Deceived    Sowers   to   the  making  or   the  marring   of   our   own 

Flesh,  future — that      in    the     thoughts     we 

I.  The  solemnity  of  the  apostle's  harbour,  in  the  words  we  speak  and 
warning. — He  seems  to  intimate  that  in  the  silent  deeds  which,  beaded  on 
such  is  the  audacious  wickedness  of  the  Time's  string,  are  told  by  some  record- 
human  heart,  that  it  has  within  it  so  ing  angel  as  the  story  of  our  lives  from 
many  latent  mazes  of  iniquity,  that  year  to  year,  we  shape  our  character  and 
they  might  be  self-deceived  either  as  to  therefore  our  destiny  for  ever.  There 
their  apprehensions  of  that  which  was  are  three  special  sowers  to  the  flesh — 
right  before  God,  or  as  to  their  own  the  proud,  the  covetous,  the  ungodly. 
actual  condition  in  His  sight;  and  he  Theyare  all  spiritual  sins — sins  of  which 
tells  them  God  is  not  mocked  by  this  human  law  takes  no  cognisance,  and 
pretended   service,   that    to    Him    all  to  which  codes  of  earthly  jurisprudence 

108 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


CHAP.  VI. 


affix  no  scathing  penalty.  There  is  the 
greater  need,  therefore,  that  these 
spiritual  sins  should  be  disclosed  in  all 
their  enormity  and  shown  [in  their 
exceeding  sinfulness  and  in  their  dis- 
astrous wages,  in  order  that  men  may 
be  left  without  excuse  if  they  persist 
wilfully  to  believe  a  lie. — W.  M.  Punshon. 

Vers.  7,  8.  The  Double  Harvest. 

I.  Our  present  life  is  a  moral  trial 
for  another  to  come. — On  till  dt  ath  is 
our  seed -so  wing ;  after  death  is  the 
sure  and  universal  harvest.  On  till 
death  is  our  moral  trial ;  after  death 
is  the  life  of  judicial  retribution,  alike 
for  the  just  and  the  unjust. 

II.  Human  life  has  one  or  the  other 
of  two  great  characters,  and  will  issue 
in  one  or  the  other  of  two  great 
results. — 1.  They  sow  to  the  flesh  who 
live  under  the  influence  of  their  natural 
inclinations  and  desires,  pleasing  only 
themselves  and  despising  or  neglecting 
the  holy  will  of  God.  They  live  to  the 
Spirit  the  whole  current  of  whose 
being  has  been  supernaturally  reversed 
under  the  grace  of  the  gospel.  2.  The 
sowers  to  the  Spirit  live.  And  this 
true  and  proper  life  of  man,  in  its 
maturity  and  full  perfection,  is  the 
great  and  glorious  reward  which,  by 
divine  appointment,  shall  eventually 
crown  the  labours  of  the  sowers  to  the 
Spirit.  The  sowers  to  the  flesh  sow 
seed  which  brings  forth  death.  Even 
now  their  life  is  death  in  rudiment, 
and  in  the  end  they  must  reap  it  in 
its  full  and  eternal  development.  De- 
graded existence,  miserable  existence, 
everlastingly  degraded  and  miserable 
existence. 

II.  We  are  liable  to  delusions  with 
respect  to  these  great  verities.— All 
history  and  experience  teem  with  illus- 
trations of  the  spiritual  spells  and 
juggleries  which  men,  prompted  by  the 
invisible  potentate  of  evil,  practise  upon 
themselves,  that  so  they  may  reduce  to 
their  convictions  the  sinfulness  of  sin, 
and  may  tone  the  booming  of  the  great 
bell  of  Scripture  menace  down  to  the 
gentle  whisper  of  an  amiable  repri- 
mand.—/. D.  Geden. 


On  the  Difference  between  sowing  to 
the  Flesh  and  to  the  Spirit. 

I.  The  man  who  soweth  to  his 
flesh. — It  is  to  spend  our  lives  in 
doing  these  works  of  the  flesh — to  lay 
out  our  time,  our  thoughts,  and  our 
care  in  gratifying  the  vain,  sensual, 
and  selfish  inclinations  which  the  evil 
state  of  the  heart  naturally  and  con- 
tinually puts  forth.  Broken  health, 
loathsome  diseases,  ruined  fortunes, 
disappointed  wishes,  soured  tempers, 
infamy,  and  shame  are  among  those 
things  which  usually  come  from  walk- 
ing after  the  flesh. 

II.  The  man  who  soweth  to  the 
Spirit. — It  is  to  live  under  the  guidance 
of  God's  Holy  Spirit,  and  in  every  part 
of  our  conduct  to  bring  forth  the  fruits 
of  the  Spirit.  He  enjoys  even  at 
present  the  fruit  of  his  labour  :  inward 
peace  and  joy,  and  a  hope  full  of  im- 
mortality.— Edivard  Cooper. 

The  Principle  of  the  Spiritual  Harvest. 

I.  The  principle  is  this,  "  God  is  not 
mocked  :  for  whatsoever  a  man  soweth, 
that  shall  he  also  reap." — There  are 
two  kinds  of  good  possible  to  men — one 
enjoyed  by  our  animal  being,  the  other 
felt  and  appreciated  by  our  spirits. 
Reap  what  you  have  sown.  If  you 
sow  the  wind,  do  not  complain  if  your 
harvest  is  the  whirlwind.  If  you  sow 
to  the  Spirit,  be  content  with  a  spiritual 
reward,  invisible,  within,  more  life  and 
higher  life. 

II.  The  two  branches  of  the  appli- 
cation of  this  principle. — 1.  Sowing  to 
the  flesh  includes  those  who  live  in 
open  riot.  2.  Those  who  live  in  re- 
spectable worldliness.  3.  Sowing  to 
the  Spirit,  the  harvest  is  life  eternal. 
4.  The~.  reward  is  not  arbitrary  but 
natural.  The  thing  reaped  is  the  very 
thing  sown,  multiplied  a  hundredfold. 
You  have  sown  a  seed  of  life,  you  reap 
life  everlasting. — F.  W.  Robertson. 


Ver.  7.  Sowing  and  Reaping  in  their 
bearing  on  the  Formation  of  Individual 
Character. — There  are  three  plots  in 
which  every  man  is  perpetually  engaged 
in  sowing  and  reaping — in  the  plot  of 

109 


?*•  n 


CHAP.  VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


his  thoughts,  in  the  plot  of  his  words, 
and  in  the  plot  of  his  deeds.  And 
there  is  a  storehouse  into  which  the 
harvests  from  these  three  plots  are  being 
secretly  but  unmistakably  garnered — 
the  storehouse  of  individual  character. 
The  moral  condition  of  the  man 
to-day  is  the  inevitable  result  of  his 
thoughts,  words,  and  deeds ;  his  self- 
hood is  rich  or  poor  according  to  his 
sowing  and  reaping  in  these  respective 
fields. 

1.  Whatsoever  a  man  sows  in 
thought  that  will  he  also  reap  in  the 
formation,  tone,  and  tendency  of  his 
intellectual  and  moral  nature. — 
1.  Vain  thoughts.  If  we  indolently 
sport  with  vain  and  foolish  thoughts, 
they  will  inevitably  produce  a  crop  of 
the  same  kind.  The  mind  will  be 
garnished  with  flimsy  and  unprofitable 
fancies,  inflated  with  a  too  conscious 
self-importance,  and  the  outcome  is 
heard  in  "the  loud  laugh  that  pro- 
claims the  vacant  mind,"  and  seen  in 
the  pompous  swagger  of  the  intellec- 
tual fop  (Prov.  xiii.  16;  Ps.  xciv.  11). 

2.  Proud  thoughts. — The  man  domi- 
nated by  pride  is  the  most  pitiable  of 
objects.  His  pride  of  birth  will  not 
bear  investigation  into  three  genera- 
tions, his  pride  of  social  status  is 
snubbed  in  a  way  that  leaves  a  wound 
that  never  heals,  his  pride  of  wealth 
smitten  down  by  an  unexpected  turn 
of  the  ever-revolving  wheel  of  fortune, 
and  his  pride  of  life  withered  by  the 
passing  breath  of  the  great  Destroyer. 
But  he  reaps  what  he  sowed.  He 
sowed  the  dragon's  teeth  of  proud  and 
boastful  thoughts,  and  the  monster  grew 
up  and  devoured  him  (Prov.  xvi.  18). 

3.  Thoughts  of  sinful  pleasure. — If 
we  allow  the  mind  to  dream  of  pleasures 
that  are  forbidden,  the  bloom  of  inno- 
cence is  rubbed  off  never  to  be  again 
replaced,  the  conscience  is  outraged 
till  its  voice  is  muffled  and  but  feebly 
heard,  one  vile  thought  indulged  breeds 
another  that  is  viler  still,  and  the  moral 
atmosphere  of  the  soul  is  poisoned. 
What  he  sows  he  reaps. 

4.  Good  thoughts. — The  mind  that 
aims  at  the  loftiest  style  of  thought, 

110 


declining  to  tolerate  the  presence  of  a 
debasing  sentiment,  that  keeps  in  check 
the  wild  and  savage  brood  of  evil 
thoughts  ever  seeking  to  overrun  and 
defile  the  mind,  that  cultivates  a  chaste 
imagination  and  cherishes  the  exalted 
and  unselfish  charity  that  "thinketh 
no  evil" — reaps  the  result  in  an  ac- 
cession of  intellectual  vigour,  in  the 
creation  of  a  nobler  standard  by  which 
to  judge  of  men  and  things,  in  the 
unbounded  raptures  of  a  refined  and 
fertile  imagination,  and  in  the  increase 
of  power  for  doing  the  highest  kind 
of  work  for  God  and  humanity. 

II.  Whatsoever  a  man  sows  in 
words  that  shall  he  also  reap. — 
1.  Bitter  and  rancorous  words.  If  a 
man  studies  how  much  of  spiteful  venom 
he  can  pack  into  a  single  sentence, 
how  he  can  most  skilfully  whet  and 
sharpen  the  edge  of  his  words  so  as 
to  make  the  deepest  wound  and  raise 
the  most  violent  storm  of  irritation 
and  ill-feeling,  unalterable  as  the 
course  of  nature  the  harvest  is  sure  to 
come.  "  Our  unkind  words  come  home 
to  roost."  The  man  offensive  with  his 
tongue  is  the  devil's  bellows  with  which 
he  blows  up  the  sparks  of  contention 
and  strife,  and  showers  of  the  fiery 
embers  are  sure  to  fall  back  upon  him- 
self to  scathe  and  destroy. 

2.  False  words. — If  wo  deliberately 
and  maliciously  concoct  a  lie,  and  utter 
the  same  with  whispered  humbleness 
and  hypocritical  commiseration,  as 
sure  as  there  is  justice  in  the  heavens, 
the  lie  will  come  back  with  terrific 
recompense  upon  the  head  of  the 
originator. 

3.  Kind  and  loving  words. — If  we 
speak  in  the  kindest  spirit  of  others, 
especially  in  their  absence,  if  we  stand 
up  for  a  friend  unjustly  maligned  and 
defend  him  with  dignity  and  faithful- 
ness, if  we  study  to  avoid  words  which 
cannot  but  grieve  and  irritate,  then  as 
we  have  sown  so  shall  we  reap — reap 
the  tranquil  satisfaction  of  conscious 
inoffensiveness,  and,  best  of  all,  the 
divine  approval.  "  Heaven  in  sun- 
shine will  requite  the  kind." 

III.  Whatsoever   a   man  sows   in 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


CHAP.  VI. 


deeds   that    shall    he    also    reap. — 

1.  Cruel  deeds.  If  we  take  a  savage 
delight  in  torturing  beast  or  bird  or 
insect,  if  we  plot  how  we  can  inflict 
the  most  exquisite  pain  on  our  fellow- 
man,  if  we  make  sport  of  the  anguish 
and  distress  of  others  which  we  make 
no  effort  to  relieve,  we  shall  inevitably 
reap  the  harvest — reap  it  in  the  em- 
bruting  and  degradation  of  our  finer 
sensibilities,  reap  it  in  the  tempest  of 
rebellion  and  retaliation  which  those  we 
outraged  will  launch  upon  us. 

2.  Selfish  deeds. — If  we  live  for  our 
own  selfish  gratification,  indifferent  to 
the  rights  and  woes  of  others ;  if  we 
surrender  ourselves  to  a  covetous  spirit, 
living  poor  that  we  may  die  rich — as 
we  sow  we  reap.  The  thing  we  lived 
to  enjoy  ceases  to  gratify,  and  our 
noblest  sentiments  are  buried  amid  the 
rubbish  of  our  own  sordidness. 

3.  Generous  and  noble  deeds. — If  we 
aim  at  the  elevation  of  ourselves  and 
others,  if  we  seek  to  act  on  the  highest 
level  of  righteousness  and  truth,  if  we 
are  diligent,  unwearied,  and  persistent 
in  well-doing,  then  in  due  season  we 
shall  reap  the  harvest — reap  it  in  a 
heightened  and  expansive  nobility  of 
character,  in  an  intensified  influence 
and  enlarged  capacity  for  doing  good, 
and  in  the  eternal  enrichment  of  the 
divine  plaudit,  "  Well  done." 

Be  not  Deceived. — This  phrase  occurs 
several  times  as  preface  to  warning, 
seeming  to  indicate  thus  that  the 
subject  of  the  warning  is  one  about 
which  we  are  specially  liable  to  decep- 
tion, and  upon  examination  we  find 
that  observation  justifies  the  pre- 
sumption. We  are  thus  guarded 
against  any  deception  as  to  the  follow- 
ing important  practical  truths  : — 

I.  The  contaminating  influence  of 
evil  associations  (1  Cor.  xv.  33). 

II.  The  personal  responsibility  of 
each  for  his  own  sin  (J as.  i.  16). 

III.  Entrance  into  heaven  con- 
ditioned on  character  (1  Cor.  vi.  9). 

IV.  Human  destiny,  once  settled, 
irreversible  (Gal.  vi.  1).— British  and 
Foreign  Evangelical  Review. 


Ver.  8.  Sowing  to  the  Spirit. 

I.  The  natural  man  has  no  desire 
for  immortality. — He  has  not  been 
seized  with  the  earnest  and  real  wish 
for  a  future  life ;  but  he  is  entirely 
bound  by  this  world  in  all  his  thoughts, 
aims,  and  wishes  :  he  identifies  life  and 
existence  altogether  with  this  world, 
and  life  out  of  this  world  is  a  mere 
name  to  him.  He  is  shut  up  within  the 
walls  of  the  flesh  and  wit  Lin  the  circle 
of  its  own  present  aims  and  projects. 

II.  The  spiritual  man  has  a  strong- 
desire  for  immortality,  and  it  is  the 
beginning  and  foundation  of  the 
religious  life  he  leads  here.  Every 
field  of  action  becomes  unimportant 
and  insignificant  compared  with  the 
simply  doing  good  things,  because  in 
that  simple  exercise  of  goodness  lies 
the  preparation  for  eternity. 

III.  The  natural  and  spiritual  man 
are  divided  from  each  other  by  these 
distinctions — one  has  the  desire  for 
everlasting  life,  the  other  has  not. 
The  success  of  the  one  perishes  with  the 
corruptible  life  to  which  it  belongs  ; 
the  success  of  the  other  endures  for  all 
ages  in  the  world  to  come. — J.  B. 
Mozley. 

The  Law  of  Retribution. 

I.  We  see  the  justice  of  God — His 
bounty  and  severity. — His  bounty  in 
i  ecompensing  men  above  their  deserts ; 
His  severity  in  punishing  sinners 
according  to  their  deserts. 

II.  This  doctrine,  that  we  shall 
drink  such  as  we  brew,  reap  such  as 
we  sow,  and  that  men  have  degrees  of 
felicity  or  misery  answerable  to  their 
works,  will  make  us  more  careful  to 
avoid  sin. 

III.  It  serves  as  a  comfort  against 
inequality  ;  whereas  the  \\  icked  flourish 
and  the  godly  live  in  contempt,  the 
time  shall  come  when  every  one  shall 
reap  even  as  he  has  sown. 

IV.  It  crosses  the  conceit  of  those 
who  promise  to  themselves  an  im- 
punity from  sin  and  immunity*  from 
all  the  judgments  of  God,  notwith- 
standing they  go  on  in  their  bad 
practices. — Perkins. 

Ill 


CHAP.  VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS. 


Yer.  9.  Against  Weariness  in  Well- 
doing.—  1.  There  is  the  prevailing 
temper  of  our  nature,  the  love  of  ease 
— horror  of  hard  labour.  2.  The  re- 
luctance and  aversion  are  greater 
when  the  labour  is  enjoined  by  ex- 
traneous authority — the  imperative 
will  of  a  foreign  power.  3.  In  the 
service  of  God  there  is  a  good  deal 
that    does    not    seem    for     ourselves. 

4.  There  is  a  principle  of  false  humility 
— what  signifies  the  little  I  can  do  ? 

5.  The  complaint  of  deficient  co-opera- 
tion. 6.  In  the  cause  of  God  the 
object  and  effect  of  well-doing  are 
much  less  palpable  than  in  some  other 
provinces  of  action.  7.  Yet  the  duty 
expressly  prescribed  is  an  absolute 
thing,  independently  of  what  men  can 
foresee  of  its  results.  8.  There  is  the 
consciousness  and  pleasure  of  pleasing 
God.  9.  What  relief  has  man  gained 
by  yielding  to  the  weariness1?  10.  Our 
grave  accountableness  is  for  making  a 
diligent,  patient,  persevering  use  of  the 
means  God  has  actually  given  us. — 
J.  Foster. 

Apathy  one  of  our  Trials. — 1.  Be- 
cause, as  in  everything  else,  so  in  our 
spiritual  growth,  we  are  inevitably  dis- 
appointed in  much  of  our  expectations. 
2.  The  temptation  to  weariness  is  no 
sign  at  all  that  the  man  so  tempted  is 
not  a  true  servant  of  God,  though  this 
very  often  is  the  first  thought  that 
enters  the  mind.  It  is  no  sin  to  feel 
weary  ;  the  sin  is  to  be  weary — that  is, 
to  let  the  feeling  have  its  way  and  rule 
our  conduct.  3.  We  expect  a  kind  of 
fulness  of  satisfaction  in  God's  service 
which  we  do  not  get  nearly  so  soon  as 
we  fancy  that  we  shall.  4.  You  are 
quite  mistaken  in  your  belief  that 
former  prayers  and  former  resolutions 
have  been  in  vain  and  have  produced 
no  fruit  because  no  fruit  is  visible. 
5.  In  due  season  we  shall  find  that  it 
has  been  worth  while  to  persevere  in 
trying  to  serve  Christ. — Dr.  Temple. 

Well-doing. 

I.  Contrasted  with  fruitless  pro- 
fession.— It  is  possible  to  have  a  clear 

112 


notion  of  Christian  truth  and  to  talk 
well,  and  yet  be  idle  and  useless. 

II.  Contrasted  with  mistaken  stan- 
dards.— It  is  easy  to  do  as  others  are 
doing ;  but  are  they  doing  well  ? 
Practice  must  be  guided  by  holy  pre- 
cepts. 

III.  Contrasted  with  wrong  motives. 
— Many  are  careful  to  do  what  is 
literally  the  right  thing,  but  they  do 
it  with  base  motives.  The  correct 
motives  are — love  (2  Cor.  v.  14), 
gratitude  (Ps.  cxvi.  12),  compassion 
(2  Cor.  v.  11),  desire  to  imitate 
Christ.  All  well-doing  is  humble  and 
self-renouncing. — The  Lay  Preacher. 

11  Reap  if  we  faint  not." — The  image 
is  agricultural. 

I.  Points  of  resemblance. — 1.  The 
material  harvest  is  of  two  kinds — 
weeds  and  golden  grain.  2.  The 
spiritual  harvest  is  of  two  kinds — cor- 
ruption and  everlasting  life.  3.  A 
combination  of  agencies.  (1)  For  the 
material  harvest  seed,  soil,  and  ele- 
ments work  with  the  efforts  of  the 
farmer.  (2)  For  the  spiritual  harvest 
the  seed  of  the  word  and  the  power  of 
God  must  co-operate  with  man's  agency. 
4.  As  to  difficulties.  (1)  The  season 
may  be  too  wet,  too  dry,  or  too  hot, 
or  an  army  of  insects  may  attack 
the  growing  grain.  (2)  The  foes  of 
the  spiritual  harvest  are  the  world, 
the  flesh,  and  the  devil. 

II.  Points  of  contrast. — 1.  The 
material  harvest  is  annual,  the  spiritual 
eternal.  2.  There  are  seasons  so  un- 
favourable that  all  the  efforts  of  the 
farmer  prove  in  vain ;  the  spiritual 
harvest  will  never  fail.  3.  The  drouth 
of  one  year  may  be  made  good  by  next 
year's  abundance,  but  eternity  cannot 
compensate  for  what  was  lost  in  time. 

III.  Encouragements.  —  1.  "Our 
labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord." 
2.  "In  due  season  we  shall  reap,  if 
we  faint  not."  3.  The  harvest  will 
be  glorious  and  eternal. — Homiletic 
Monthly. 

Yer.  10.   On  doing  Good. 

I.  It  is  our  duty  to  do  good. — This 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS.         chap.  vi. 


duty  is  enforced  both  by  the  words  and 
example  of  Christ.  Christianity  not 
only  requires  its  adherents  to  abstain 
from  evil,  but  it  demands  their  active 
service. 

II.  In  doing  good  man  attains  to 
true  nobility  of  character. — The  char- 
acters in  history  that  exert  the  greatest 
fascination  over  us  are  not  those  of 
eminent  statesmen  or  scientists,  but 
those  who  have  been  distinguished  for 
their  philanthropy.  We  see  in  them  a 
moral  dignity  that  is  unique.  What 
reversals  in  human  estimates  of  char- 
acter will  take  place  when  the  divine 
standard  of  greatness  is  appealed  to  ! 

III.  In  doing  good  we  find  true 
happiness. — God  has  so  constituted  us 
that  the  exercise  of  our  malevolent 
passions  is  productive  of  inward  dis- 
satisfaction, while  the  exercise  of 
benevolent  affections  is  attended  with 
the  greatest  joy.  There  is  real  luxury 
in  doing  good. — Preacher's  Magazine. 

The  Opportunity  of  Beneficence. 

I.  What  a  precious  thing  is  oppor- 
tunity.— People  talk  about  making 
time  for  this  or  that  purpose.  The 
time  is  really  made  for  us,  only  we  are 
too  idle  or  too  careless  to  use  it  for  the 
proper  end.  Opportunities  of  useful- 
ness are  of  frequent  occurrence ;  they 
are  wont  to  come  and  go  with  rapidity. 
They  must  be  seized  as  you  would  lay 
hold  of  a  passing  friend  in  the  street. 

II.  The  whole  of  life  is  an  oppor- 
tunity.— There  is  such  a  thing  as  a 
useful  life,  a  true  life,  a  noble  life, 
though  all  lives  must  needs  contain  a 
multitude  of  neglected  opportunities. 
As  a  series  of  opportunities  its 
record  is  woefully  imperfect.  As 
one  opportunity  it  is  not  utterly  un- 
worthy of  the  example  of  Christ.  Let 
us  have  a  thread  of  right  intention 
running  through  life.  Let  us  have  an 
active  purpose  of  benevolence — a  con- 
stant design  of  love.  The  continuous 
opportunity  of  life  must  be  utilised,  if 
the  particular  opportunities  of  life  are 
to  be  turned  to  the  best  account. 

III.  The  field  of  beneficence  is  very 
wide. — Wherever  men  are  found  it  is 


possible  for  us  to  do  them  good.  We 
touch  only  a  few  persons,  but  each  of 
these  is  in  contact  with  others.  To  do 
great  things  with  great  powers  is  easy 
enough;  but  things  so  done  may  be 
undone  so.  The  glory  of  Christianity 
has  always  been  that  it  does  great 
things  with  small  powers,  or  powers 
that  men  think  small ;  and  the  results 
of  its  work  remain.  Good  work  done 
by  many  hands  is  better  than  the 
extended  philanthropy  of  an  indi- 
vidual ;  for  what  is  this  but  the  effort 
of  one  man  to  make  amends  for  the 
neglect  of  a  thousand  ? 

IV.  Though  all  men  have  a  claim 
on  our  Christian  benevolence  some  are 
entitled  to  a  special  share. — A  man 
does  not  become  a  better  citizen  when 
he  spurns  his  own  family  and  neglects 
his  duties  at  home.  On  the  contrary, 
the  noblest  philanthropist  is  the  most 
affectionate  of  fathers  and  husbands, 
and  he  who  loves  most  widely  in  the 
world  loves  most  intensely  in  his  own 
house.  So  it  will  be  with  us  in  our 
Christian  charity.  We  shall  begin 
with  those  who  are  called  by  the 
common  name  and  worship  the  com- 
mon Lord,  and  from  these  we  shall  go 
on,  with  our  energy  not  exhausted  but 
rather  refreshed,  to  the  great  mass  of 
mankind. — Edward  C.  Lefroy. 

Doing  Good. 

I.  We  must  do  good  with  that  only 
which  is  our  own. — We  may  not  cut 
a  large  and  liberal  shive  off  another 
man's  loaf ;  we  may  not  steal  from 
one  to  give  to  another,  or  deal  unjustly 
with  some  that  we  may  be  merciful  to 
others. 

II.  We  must  do  good  with  cheerful- 
ness and  alacrity. — What  more  free 
than  gift ;  therefore  we  may  not  play 
the  hucksteis  in  doing  good,  for  that 
blemishes  the  excellency  of  the  gift. 

III.  We  must  so  do  good  as  that 
we  do  not  disable  ourselves  for  ever 
doing  good. — So  begin  to  do  good  as 
that  we  may  continue. 

IV.  We  must  do  all  the  good  we 
can  within  the  compass  of  our  calling, 
and  hinder  all  the  evil. 

113 


chap.  vi.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS. 


V.   We    must    do    good    to    all. —  profession  and  the  reward  we  look  for 

1.    From  the  grounds  of  love  and  bene-  require  us  to  do  this, 
ficence.     2.  God  is  good  and  bountiful  VI.  There  is  no  possibility  of  doing 

to  all.     3.  Do  good  to  others  as  we  good    to     others    after    this    life. — 

would  they  should  do  to  us.     4.  Our  Perkins. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses    11—13. 

Apostolic  Exposure  of  False  Teachers. 

I.  The  apostle  gives  special  emphasis  to  his  warning  by  concluding  his 
epistle  in  his  own  handwriting. — "  Ye  see  how  large  a  letter  I  have  written 
unto  you  with  mine  own  hand "  (ver.  11).  The  apostle  usually  dictated  his 
epistles  to  an  amanuensis,  except  the  concluding  salutation,  which  he  wrote 
himself  by  way  of  authentication.  At  this  point  of  the  epistle  to  the  Galatians 
he  appears  to  have  taken  the  pen  from  the  hand  of  the  amanuensis,  and  with 
his  own  hand  written  the  concluding  sentences  in  clear,  bold  characters,  thus 
giving  the  utmost  possible  emphasis  and  solemnity  to  his  words.  They  are  a 
postscript,  or  epilogue,  to  the  epistle,  rehearsing  with  incisive  brevity  the  burden 
of  all  that  it  was  in  the  apostle's  heart  to  say  to  these  troubled  and  shaken 
Galatians.  He  wishes  to  reimpress  upon  his  emotional  readers  the  warnings  he 
had  already  expressed  against  the  false  teachers,  to  assure  them  of  his  intense 
regard  for  their  welfare,  and  to  lay  additional  stress  upon  the  peril  of  their 
hesitating  attitude.  The  more  apparent  and  imminent  the  danger,  the  louder 
and  more  earnest  is  the  warning  expressed. 

II.  It  is  shown  that  the  policy  of  the  false  teachers  was  to  avoid  the  suffering 
connected  with  the  ignominy  of  the  cross  of  Christ. — "  They  constrain  you  to  be 
circumcised,  only  lest  they  should  suffer  persecution  for  the  cross  of  Christ " 
(ver.  12).  The  false  teachers  were  really  cowards,  though  this  accusation  they 
would  be  the  first  indignantly  to  resent.  They  wanted  to  mix  up  the  old  faith 
with  the  new,  to  entangle  the  new  Christian  converts  with  Mosaic  observances. 
If  they  succeeded  in  persuading  the  Gentile  Christians  to  be  circumcised,  they 
would  propitiate  the  anger  of  their  Israelite  kindred,  and  dispose  them  to  regard 
the  new  doctrine  more  favourably.  They  would,  with  heartless  recklessness,  rob 
the  believer  of  all  his  privileges  in  Christ  in  order  to  make  a  shield  for  themselves 
against  the  enmity  of  their  kinsmen.  Cowards  at  heart,  they  were  more  afraid 
of  persecution  than  eager  to  know  and  propagate  the  truth.  If  a  man  will  be  a 
Christian,  he  cannot  avoid  the  cross ;  and  to  attempt  to  avoid  it  will  not  release 
from  suffering.  It  is  a  craven  fear  indeed  that  refuses  to  espouse  the  truth 
because  it  may  bring  pain.  "  No  servant  of  Christ,"  says  Augustine,  "  is  without 
affliction.  If  you  expect  to  be  free  from  persecution,  you  have  not  yet  so  much 
as  begun  to  be  a  Christian." 

III.  The  insincerity  of  the  false  teachers  was  apparent  in  their  not  keeping 
the  law  themselves,  but  in  boasting  of  the  number  of  their  converts  to  its 
external  observance. — "  For  neither  they  themselves  who  are  circumcised  keep 
the  law  ;  but  desire  to  have  you  circumcised,  that  they  may  glory  in  your  flesh  " 
(ver.  13).  The  Judaists  were  not  only  cowardly,  but  insincere.  It  was  not  the 
glory  of  the  law  they  were  concerned  about,  but  their  own  success.  If  they 
had  tried  to  concert  the  heathen,  however  imperfect  might  be  their  creed,  they 
would  have  merited  some  respect ;  but,  like  some  religious  troublers  to-day,  they 
selected  for  their  prey  those  who  were  already  converted.  They  practised  their 
wiles  on  the  inexperience  of  young  believers,  as  they  expected  to  gather  from  that 
class  the  greater  number  of  proselytes  of  whom  to  make  their  boast.  "  Their 
policy  was  dishonourable  both  in  spirit  and  in  aim.  They  were  false  to  Christ 
in  whom   they  professed  to  believe,   and  to  the  law  which  they  pretended  to 

114 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS.         chap.  vi. 


keep.  They  were  facing  both  ways,  studying  the  safest  not  the  truest  course, 
anxious  in  truth  to  be  friends  at  once  with  the  world  and  Christ.  Their 
conduct  has  found  many  imitators,  in  men  who  make  godliness  a  way  of  gain, 
whose  religious  course  is  dictated  by  considerations  of  worldly  self-interest. 
Business  patronage,  professional  advancement,  a  tempting  family  alliance,  the 
entree  into  some  select  and  envied  circle — such  are  the  things  for  which  creeds 
are  bartered,  for  which  men  put  their  souls  and  the  souls  of  their  children 
knowingly  in  peril." 

Lessons. — 1.  The  false  teacher  maybe  the  occasion  of  much  mischief  and  spiritual 
loss.  2.  He  succumbs  in  the  presence  of  suffering.  3.  He  is  more  anxious  for 
public  success  than  for  the  spread  of  the  truth. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  12.  The  Odium  of  the  Cross  of 
Christ. 

I.  The  history  of  the  cross. — It  is  a 
history  of  sin  on  our  part,  and  of  suffer- 
ing on  the  part  of  Christ.  What  a 
change  has  been  produced  in  the  moral 
aspect  of  the  universe  by  the  preaching 
of  the  cross  ! 

II.  The  odium  connected  with  the 
cross. — There  is  odium  and  suffering 
connected  with  the  cross  still ;  in  some 
shape  we  shall  suffer  persecution  for  it. 
If  we  will  lead  a  holy  life,  then  suffer- 
ing, persecution,  reproach,  hatred  and 
ill-will,  sarcasm,  wit,  ridicule,  and 
obloquy  will  be  cast  upon  us.  It  was 
said  by  one,  when  several  were  expelled 
from  one  of  our  universities,  that  "  if 
some  are  expelled  for  having  too  much 
religion,  it  is  high  time  to  begin  to 
inquire  whether  there  are  not  some 
who  have  too  little."  If  we  speak  of 
the  reproach  of  the  cross,  what  should 
that  reproach  be  ?  Not  that  you  have 
too  much  religion,  but  that  you  have  too 
little,  and  that  many  o£  you  have  none 
at  all. 

III.  As  to  those  who  suffer  persecu- 
tion for  the  cross,  it  is  the  greatest 
possible  honour  to  be  laughed  at,  mocked, 
and  insulted  for  the  sake  of  the  Saviour. 


If  the  spirit  of  the  martyrs  influenced 
us,  there  would  be  no  shunning  of  per- 
secution on  account  of  the  cross,  but 
suffering  would  be  welcomed  with  joy. 
— The  Pulpit. 

Christianity  and  Persecution. 

I.  We  should  suspect  ourselves  that 
our  hearts  are  not  sound,  nor  our 
practice  sincere,  when  all  men  speak 
well  of  us. 

II.  We  must  not  be  discouraged 
though  there  be  never  so  many  that 
make  opposition,  or  so  mighty  that 
raise  persecution  against  us. 

III.  That  we  think  it  not  strange 
when  we  find  affliction  or  meet  with 
persecution.  The  gospel  and  persecu- 
tion go  hand  in  hand,  or  follow  one 
another  inseparably. — Perkins. 

Ver.  13.  Empty  Boasting — 

I.  When  professed  teachers  do  not 
practise  the  virtues  they  enforce  on 
others. 

II.  When  zeal  for  the  observance  of 
outward  rites  disguises  the  lack  of 
personal  godliness. 

III.  When  success  is  sought  simply 
to  be  able  to  boast  of  success. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  14,  15. 

Glorying  in  the  Cross — 

I.  Because  of  the  great  truths  it  reveals. — "  But  God  forbid  that  I  should 
glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  (ver.  14).  "  The  cross  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  "  is  a  comprehensive  phrase  signifying  the  whole  redeeming 
work  of  Christ — the  salvation  effected  for  the  race  by  His  crucifixion  and  death 

115 


chap.  vi.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  GALATIANS. 


upon  the  cross.  The  problem  how  God  can  forgive  sin  without  any  breach  in 
His  moral  government,  or  dimming  the  lustre  of  His  perfections,  is  solved  in  the 
cross.  God  is  great  in  Sinai.  The  thunders  precede  Him,  the  lightnings  attend 
Him,  the  earth  trembles,  the  mountains  fall  in  fragments.  But  there  is  a 
greater  God  than  this.  On  Calvary,  nailed  to  a  cross,  wounded,  thirsting,  dying, 
He  cries,  "  Father,  forgive  them  ;  they  know  not  what  they  do  !  "  Great  is  the 
religion  of  power,  but  greater  is  the  religion  of  love.  Great  is  the  religion  of 
implacable  justice,  but  greater  is  the  religion  of  pardoning  mercy.  The  cross 
was  the  master-theme  of  the  apostle's  preaching  and  the  chief  and  exclusive 
subject  of  his  glorying. 

II.  Because  of  its  contrast  to  effete  ceremonialism. — "  For  in  Christ  Jesus 
neither  circumcision  availeth  anything,  nor  uncircumcision  "  (ver.  15).  To  the 
Jew  circumcision  was  everything.  By  the  cress  Judaism,  as  a  means  of 
salvation,  is  utterly  abolished.  Uncircumcision  includes  all  Gentile  heathenism. 
Before  the  cross  all  heathen  religions  must  perish.  The  Gentile  cultus  was  never 
intended  to  supplant  Jewish  customs ;  both  are  excluded  as  unavailing  in 
human  salvation.  The  devotees  of  form  and  ceremony  are  apt  to  develop  into 
bigotry  and  pride ;  the  foes  of  ritualism  are  in  danger  of  making  a  religion  of 
their  opposition ;  and  both  parties  indulge  in  recriminations  that  are  foreign  to 
the  spirit  of  Christianity.  "Thus  I  trample  on  the  pride  of  Plato,"  said  the 
cynic,  as  he  trod  on  the  philosopher's  sumptuous  carpets  ;  and  Plato  justly 
retorted,  "  You  do  it  with  greater  pride."  Ceremonialism  is  effete,  and  is  not 
worth  contending  about.  It  is  nothing  ;  Christ  is  everything,  ard  the  cross  the 
ouly  subject  worthy  of  the  Christian's  boast. 

III.  Because  of  the  moral  change  it  effects. — "  But  a  new  creature  " — a  new 
creation  (ver.  15).  In  the  place  of  a  dead  ceremonialism  the  gospel  plants  a 
new  moral  creation.  It  creates  a  new  type  of  character.  The  faith  of  the  cross 
claims  to  have  produced  not  a  new  style  of  ritual,  a  new  system  of  government, 
but  new  men.  The  Christian  is  the  "  new  creature  "  which  it  begets.  The  cross 
has  originated  a  new  civilisation,  and  is  a  conspicuous  symbol  in  the  finest  works 
of  art.  Buskin,  describing  the  artistic  glories  of  the  Church  of  St.  Mark  in 
Venice,  says :  "  Here  are  all  the  successions  of  crowded  imagery  showing  the 
passions  and  pleasures  of  human  life  symbolised  together,  and  the  mystery  of  its 
redemption :  for  the  maze  of  interwoven  lines  and  changeful  pictures  lead 
always  at  last  to  the  cross,  lifted  and  carved  in  every  place  and  upon  every 
stone,  sometimes  with  the  serpent  of  eternity  wrapped  round  it,  sometimes  with 
doves  beneath  its  arms  and  sweet  herbage  growing  forth  from  its  feet ;  but  con- 
spicuous most  of  all  on  the  great  lood  that  crosses  the  church  before  the  altar, 
raised  in  bright  blazonry  against  the  shadow  of  the  apse.  It  is  the  cross  that  is 
first  seen  and  always  burning  in  the  centre  of  the  temple,  and  every  dome  and 
hollow  of  its  roof  has  the  figure  of  Christ  in  the  utmost  height  of  it,  raised  in 
power,  or  returning  in  judgment."  The  true  power  of  the  cross  is  not  artistic 
or  literary  or  political,  but  moral.  It  is  a  spiritually  transforming  force  that 
penetrates  and  guides  every  form  of  human  progress. 

IV.  Because  of  personal  identification  with  its  triumph  over  the  world. — 
"  By  whom  the  world  is  crucified  unto  me,  and  I  unto  the  voild"  (ver.  14). 
As  the  world  of  feverish  pleasure,  of  legal  ordinances,  was  conquered  by  the 
cross,  so  the  faith  of  the  apostle  in  the  crucified  One  gave  him  the  victory  over 
the  world,  so  that  it  lost  all  power  to  charm  or  intimidate.  The  world  of  evil  is 
doomed,  and  the  power  of  the  cross  is  working  out  its  ultimate  defeat.  I  have 
seen  a  curious  photograph  °f  what  purports  to  be  a  portrait  of  the  Saviour  in  the 
days  of  His  flesh,  and  which  by  a  subtle  manipulation  of  the  artist  has  a  double 
representation.  When  you  first  look  upon  the  picture  you  see  the  closed  eyes  of 
the  Sufferer,  and  the  face  wears  a  pained  and  wearied  expression  ;  but  as  you 

116 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS.        chap.  vi. 


gaze  intently  the  closed  eyes  seem  to  gently  open  and  beam  upon  you  with  the 
light  of  loving  recognition.  So  as  you  gaze  upon  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  it  seems  to  you  the  symbol  of  suffering  and  defeat,  but  as  you  keep  your 
eyes  steadily  fixed  upon  it  the  cross  gradually  assumes  the  glory  of  a  glittering 
crown,  incorruptible,  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  cross  is  the  suggestive  summary  of  saving  truth.  2.  The 
cross  is  the  potent  instrument  of  the  highest  moral  conquests.  3.  The  cross  is  the 
loftiest  theme  of  the  believer's  glorying. 


GERM  NOTES   ON  THE   VERSES. 


Ver.  14.  Christ  Crucified. 

I.  By  Christ  crucified  we  have 
reconciliation  with  God,  remission  of 
sins,  and  acceptance  to  eternal  life. 

II.  We  have  the  peace  of  God, 
peace  with  men,  with  ourselves;  with 
the  creatures. 

III.  We  recover  the  right  and  title 
which  we  had  in  creation  to  all  the 
creatures  and  blessings  of  God. 

IY.  All  afflictions  cease  to  be 
curses  and  punishments,  and  become 
either  trials  or  corrections. 

Y .  Those  who  can  truly  glory  in  the 
cross  are  dead  to  the  world  and  the 
world  to  them. 

VI.  We  are  taught  to  carry  our- 
selves in  the  world  as  crucified  and 
dead  men,  not  to  love,  but  to  renounce 
and  forsake  it. — Perkins. 

Glorying  in  the  Cross  of  Christ. 

I.  We  glory  in  the  doctrine  of  the 
cross — the  justification  of  guilty  men 
through  a  propitiatory  sacrifice — be- 
cause of  its  antiquity. — It  was  taught 
by  patriarchs  and  prophets,  the  law  of 
sacrifice  was  its  grand  hieroglyphical 
record,  the  first  sacrifices  were  its  types, 
the  first  awakened  sinner  with  his 
load  of  guilt  fell  upon  this  rock  and 
was  supported,  and  by  the  sacrifice  of 
Christ  shall  the  last  sinner  saved  be 
raised  to  glory. 

II.  Because  it  forms  an  important 
part  of  the  revelation  of  the  New 
Testament. 

III.  As  affording  the  only  sure 
.ground  of  confidence  to  a  penitent 
sinner. 

IY.  Because  of  its  moral  effects. — 
Not    only  in    tho    superstitions    and 


idolatries  it  has  destroyed,  the  bar- 
barous nations  it  has  civilised,  the 
cruel  customs  it  has  abrogated,  and  the 
kindly  influence  it  has  shed  upon  the 
laws  and  manners  of  nations;  but  in 
its  moral  effect  on  individuals,  pro- 
ducing the  most  ardent  love  to  God 
and  kindling  benevolence  towards  all. 
— Richard  Watson. 


The  True  Glory  of  the  Christian. 

I.  The  disposition  of  mind  denoted 
by  the  expressions — "  The  world  is 
crucified  unto  me;  I  am  crucified  to 
the  world." — 1.  The  nature  of  it — a 
total  rupture  with  the  world.  2.  The 
gradations  of  which  it  admits.  Dead- 
ness  to  avarice  and  pride — in  respect 
of  exertion  and  actual  progress — in 
respect  of  hope  and  fervour.  3.  The 
difficulty,  the  bitterness,  of  making  a 
sacrifice  so  painful. 

II.  In  such  a  disposition  true  glory 
consists. — Comparison  between  the 
hero  of  this  world  and  the  Christian 
hero.  The  hero  derives  his  glory  from 
the  greatness  of  the  master  he  serves, 
from  the  dignity  of  the  persons  who 
have  preceded  him  in  the  same  honour- 
able career,  from  the  brilliancy  of  his 
achievements,  from  the  acclamations 
his  exploits  excite.  How  much  more 
the  Christian  hero  ! 

III.  The  cross  of  Christ  alone  can 
inspire  us  with  these  sentiments. — If 
we  consider  it  in  relation  to  the 
atrocious  guilt  of  those  who  despise  it, 
in  relation  to  the  proofs  there  displayed 
of  Christ's  love,  in  the  proofs  it  supplies 
of  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  and  in  re- 
lation to  the  glory  that  shall  follow. — 
Saurin. 

117 


CHAP.  VI. 


HOMILETIC  LCOMMENTARY  : 


GALATIANS. 


The  Cross  a  Burden  or  a  Glory. 

I.  There  is  the  constant,  ordinary 
discipline  of  human  life. — Life  when 
it  is  earnest  contains  more  or  less  of 
suffering.  There  is  a  battle  of  good 
and  evil,  and  these  special  miseries 
are  the  bruises  of  the  blows  that  fill 
the  air,  sometimes  seeming  to  fall  at 
random  and  perplexing  our  reason, 
because  we  cannot  rise  to  such  height 
of  vision  as  to  take  in  the  whole  field 
at  once. 

II.  There  is  the  wretchedness  of 
feeling  self-condemned. — Law  alone  is 
a  cross.  Man  needs  another  cross — not 
Simon's,  but  Paul's.  He  took  it  up, 
and  it  grew  light  in  his  hands.  He 
welcomed  it,  and  it  glowed  with  lustre, 
as  if  it  were  framed  of  the  sunbeams 
of  heaven. 

III.  The  same  spiritual  contrast, 
the  same  principle  of  difference  be- 
tween compulsory  and  voluntary 
service,  opens  to  us  two  interpretations 
of  the  suffering  of  the  Saviour  Him- 
self.— Neither  the  cross  of  Simon  nor 
the  cross  of  Paul  was  both  literally  and 
actually  the  cross  of  Christ.  Its  charm 
was  that  it  was  chosen.  Its  power 
was  that  it  was  free.  The  cross  be- 
comes glorious  when  the  Son  of  God 
takes  it  up ;  there  is  goodness  enough 
in  Him  to  exalt  it.  It  was  the  symbol 
of  that  sacrifice  where  self  was  for 
ever  crucified  for  love. — F.  D.  Hunt- 
ington. 

The  Cross — 
I.  The  sinner's  refuge. 
II.  The  sinner's  remedy. 
III.  The  sinner's  life. 

The  Glory  of  the  Cross. 

I.  The  cross  was  the  emblem  of 
death. 

II.  Christ  was  not  only  a  dead 
Saviour,  but  a  condemned  Saviour. 

III.  A  disgraced  Saviour,  because 
the  cross  was  a  disgraceful  kind  of 
punishment. 

IV.  Paul  gloried  in  the  cross  be- 
cause it  is  an  exhibition  of  the  righ- 
teousness of  God. 

V.  Because  it  proclaims  His  love. 

m 


VI.  The  contemplation  of  Christ's 
cross  helps  us  to  conquer  the  world. — 
Neivman  Hall. 

Glorying  in  the  Cross. 

I.  The  subjects  in  which  the  apostle 
gloried. — 1.  He  might  have  gloried  in 
his  distinguished  ancestry.  2.  In  his 
polished  education.  3.  In  the  morality 
of  his  former  life.  4.  In  his  extraordin- 
ary call  to  the  apostleship.  5.  In  his 
high  ecclesiastical  position.  6.  He  did 
not  glory  in  the  literal  cross.  7.  Nor  in 
the  metaphorical  cross.  8.  But  in  the 
metonymical  cross  (1  Cor.  i.  17; 
Col.  i.  20). 

II.  The  characteristics  of  the 
apostle's  glorying. — 1.  His  glorying 
was  not  merely  verbal,  but  practical. 
2.  Not  sectarian,  but  Christian  and 
catholic.  3.  Not  temporary,  but  per- 
manent. 

III.  The  reasons  of  the  apostle's 
glorying. — 1.  Here  he  saw  a  grander 
display  of  the  divine  character  and 
perfections  than  elsewhere.  2.  This 
was  the  scene  of  the  most  glorious 
victory  ever  witnessed.  3.  It  was  the 
centre  of  all  God's  dispensations. 
4.  The  cross  was  the  most  powerful 
incentive  to  true  morality.  5.  Hence 
flowed  all  the  blessings  of  the  gospel 
economy.  6.  Here  was  made  an 
atonement  equal  to  the  needs  of  our 
fallen  world. 

Lessons. — 1.  Let  us  here  see  the  purity 
of  the  moral  law  and  the  heinousness  of 
sin.  2.  Let  the  sinner  come  to  the  cross 
for  pardon,  purity,  peace,  and  joy. — 
W.  Antliff. 

Glorying  in  the  Cross. 

I.  Paul's  enthusiasm  as  expressed 
in  the  exclamation  of  the  text. 

II.  One  main  source  of  his  zeal  lay 
in  the  subject  of  his  enthusiasm. — 

1.  The  cross  is  a  fit  subject  for  glory  as 
symbolising  an  infinite,  boundless  truth. 

2.  Because     it    is    an    eternal    fact. 

3.  Because  it  is  the  ground  of  man's 
justification  and  the  symbol  of  his  re- 
demption. 

III.  Look  at  the  result— crucifixion 
to  the  world. — The  true  solution  of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATIANS.        chap.  vi. 


the  Christian's  relationship  to  the  world 
lies  in  the  fact  that  it  is  a  separation 
not  in  space  but  in  spirit. — J.  Hutchi- 
son, in  " Scottish  Pulpit" 

Yer.  15.  Scriptural  View  of  True 
Religion. 

I.  What  true  religion  is  not. — 1.  It 
is  not  circumcision  nor  uncircumcision. 
2.  It  is  not  an  outward  thing.  (1)  You 
are  not  religious  because  you  have  been 
baptised.  (2)  Because  you  are  called 
a  Christian,  and  have  been  born  of 
Christian  parents.  (3)  Because  you 
frequent  the  Church,  attend  the  Lord's 
Supper,  and  are  regular  at  your  de- 
votions. 

II.  What  true  religion  is.— 1.  It  is 
not  an  outward  but  an  inward  thing. 
It  is  not  a  new  name,  but  a  new  nature. 
A  new  weation  describes  a  great  change 
in  man.  2.  The  greatness  of  this 
change  shows  also  the  power  by  which 
it  is  wrought.  Creation  is  a  divine 
work.  3.  The  rite  of  circumcision 
taught  the  necessity  of  the  change. 
Though  it  was  a  seal  of  the  righteous- 
ness of  faith,  it  was  also  a  sign  of  the 
inward  renewal  and  purification  of  the 
heart.  Baptism  in  the  Christian 
Church  teaches  the  same  truth.  The 
texts  of  Scripture  which  set  forth  the 
evil  nature  of  man  set  forth  the 
necessity  of  this  great  change. — 
Edward  Cooper. 

The  New  Creature. — The  new  creature 
is  the  only  thing  acceptable  to  God. 
It  is  the  renovation  of  the  whole  man, 
both  in  the  spirit  of  our  minds  and  in 


the  affections  of  our  heart.  Neither 
the  substance  nor  the  faculties  of  the 
soul  are  lost  by  the  Fall,  but  only  the 
qualities  of  the  faculties,  as  when  an 
instrument  is  out  of  tune  the  fault  is 
not  in  the  substance  of  the  instrument, 
nor  in  the  sound,  but  in  the  dispro- 
portion or  jar  in  the  sound ;  therefore 
the  qualities  only  are  renewed  by 
grace.  These  qualities  are  either  in 
the  understanding  or  the  will  and 
affections.  The  quality  in  the  under- 
standing is  knowledge ;  in  the  will  and 
affections  they  are  righteousness  and 
holiness,  both  which  are  in  truth  and 
sincerity.  Holiness  performs  all  the 
duties  of  piety,  righteousness  the  duties 
of  humanity,  truth  seasoning  both  the 
former  with  sincerity. — Ralph  Cud- 
worth. 

The  Necessity  of  a  New  Nature. — 
The  raven  perched  on  the  rock  where 
she  whets  her  bloody  beak,  and  with 
greedy  eye  watches  the  death-struggles 
of  an  unhappy  lamb,  cannot  tune  her 
croaking  voice  to  the  mellow  music  of 
a  thrush ;  and  since  it  is  out  of  the 
abundance  of  the  heart  that  the  mouth 
speaketh,  how  could  a  sinner  take  up 
the  strain  and  sing  the  song  of  saints  ? 
— Guthrie. 

The  New  Birth  begins  our  True  Life. 
— A  stranger  passing  through  a 
churchyard  saw  these  words  written 
on  a  tombstone :  "  Here  lies  an  old 
man  seven  years  old."  He  had  been 
a  true  Christian  only  for  that  length 
of  time. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  16—18. 

A  Dignified  and  Touching  Farewell — ■ 

I.  Supplicates  the  best  blessings  on  the  truly  righteous. — "  As  many 
as  walk  according  to  this  rule,  peace  be  on  them,  and  mercy,  and  upon  the 
Israel  of  God"  (ver.  16).  Jewish  discipline  and  pagan  culture  are  for  ever 
discredited  by  the  new  creation  of  moral  virtue.  The  rule  of  the  renewed 
inward  life  supersedes  the  works  of  the  condemned  flesh.  On  all  who  seek 
to  regulate  their  lives  according  to  this  rule  the  apostle  invokes  the  peace 
and  mercy  of  God.  "  Peace  is  followed  by  the  mercy  which  guards  and 
restores  it.  Mercy  heals  backslidings  and  multiplies  pardons.  Sho  loves  to 
frind  up  a  broken  heart  or  a  rent  and  distracted  Church.      For  the  betrayers  of 

119 


chap.  vi.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    GALATlANS. 


the  cross  he  has  stern  indignation  and  alarms  of  judgment.  Towards  his 
children  in  the  faith  nothing  but  peace  and  mercy  remains  in  his  heart.  As  an 
evening  calm  shuts  in  a  tempestuous  day,  so  this  blessing  concludes  the  epistle 
so  full  of  strife  and  agitation.  We  catch  in  it  once  more  the  chime  of  the  old 
benediction,  which  through  all  storm  and  peril  ever  rings  in  ears  attuned  to  its 
note  :  "  Peace  shall  be  upon  Israel  "  (Ps.  cxxv.  5). 

II.  Pleads  the  brand  of  suffering  for  loyalty  to  Christ  as  conclusive  proof  of 
authority. — "  From  henceforth  let  no  man  trouble  me :  for  I  bear  in  my  body 
the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus  "  (ver.  17).  The  apostle  has  sufficiently  vindicated 
his  authority  by  facts  and  arguments,  and  he  would  effectually  silence  all 
quibbles  on  this  subject  by  triumphantly  pointing  to  the  marks  of  suffering  on 
his  own  body  received  in  his  Master's  service.  These  marks  he  carried  wherever 
he  went,  like  the  standard-bearer  of  an  army  who  proudly  wears  his  scars.  No 
man  would  have  suffered  as  Paul  did  unless  he  was  convinced  of  the  importance 
of  the  truth  he  had  received  and  of  his  supernatural  call  to  declare  the  same. 
Suffering  is  the  test  of  devotion  and  fidelity.  For  a  picture  of  the  harassed, 
battered,  famished  sufferer  in  the  cause  of  Christ  and  His  gospel  read  2  Cor.  | 
iv.  8-10,  xi.  23-28.  Marks  of  suffering  are  more  eloquent  than  words.  The 
highest  eminence  of  moral  perfection  and  influence  cannot  be  reached  without 
much  suffering.  It  is  a  callous  nature  indeed  that  is  not  touched  with  the  sight 
of  suffering  heroically  endured.  The  calm  bravery  of  the  early  Christians  under 
the  most  fiendish  persecution  won  many  a  convert  to  the  truth. 

III.  Concludes  with  an  affectionate  benediction. — "Brethren,  the  grace  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  your  spirit.  Amen"  (ver.  18).  Placing  the 
word  "  brethren "  at  the  end  of  the  sentence,  as  in  the  Greek,  suggests  that, 
after  much  rebuke  and  admonition,  the  apostle  bids  his  readers  farewell  with  the 
warm-hearted  expression  of  brotherhood.  Notwithstanding  fickleness  on  their 
part,  his  love  towards  them  remains  unchanged.  He  prays  that  the  grace  of 
Christ,  the  distinctive  and  comprehensive  blessing  of  the  new  covenant,  may 
continue  to  rest  upon  them  and  work  its  renewing  and  sanctifying  power  upon 
their  spirit,  the  place  where  alone  it  can  accomplish  its  most  signal  triumphs. 
Forgiveness  for  their  defection  and  confidence  in  their  restoration  to  the  highest 
Christian  privileges  and  enjoyment,  are  the  last  thoughts  of  the  anxious 
apostle.  Between  them  and  moral  bankruptcy  is  the  prayerful  solicitude  of  a 
good  man. 

Lessons. — 1.  When  argument  is  exhausted  prayer  is  the  last  resource.  2.  Prayer 
links  divine  blessing  with  human  entreaty.  3.  Last  words  have  about  them  a 
solemn  and  a#ecting  efficacy. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Ver.  16.  The  True   Israel  of  God —  2.  The  facts — Paul's    historic    experi- 

I.  Are  those  who  personally  enjoy  ences(l  Cor.  iv.  9-15  ;  2  Cor.  xi.  23-30). 
the  inward  righteousness  that  conies  3.  The  challenge — "  Let  no  man  trouble 
through  faith.  me." 

II.  Who  live  consistently  with  their  II.  The  suggestion  the  picture 
spiritual  profession  and  the  truth  they  makes. — 1.  He  who  follows  the  Lord 
have  embraced.  Jesus  must   expect   some  will  try  to 

III.  Enjoy  the  divine  benedictions  trouble  him.  2.  He  whose  marks  are 
of  mercy  and  peace.  most  conspicuous  will  be  troubled  the 

least.     3.  He  who  has  marks  may  take 

Yer.  17.  Marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  comfort    in    knowing   how   much   his 

I.  The  word- picture  here  presented.      Master  paid  for  him.     4.  He  who  is 

— 1.  The  figure — slave-brands,  o-riyixara.      owned  may  remember  that  his  Master 

120 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    GALATIANS.         chap.  vi. 


owns  and  recognises  the  marks  also. 
5.  He  that  has  no  marks  is  either  a 
better  or  a  poorer  Christian  than  the 
apostle  Paul.  6.  Satan  outwits  him- 
self when  he  gives  a  believer  more 
marks.  7.  A  sure  day  is  coming  when 
the  marks  will  be  honourable,  for  the 
body  of  humiliation  will  be  like  the 
glorious  body  of  Christ. — Homiletic 
Monthly. 

Marked  Men. 

1.  Ill-marked  men. — Think  of  the 
marks  left  on  men  by  sickness,  in- 
temperance, impurity,  crime,  sin  of 
any  kind.  Evil  will  always  leave  its 
mark. 

II.  Well-marked  men. — 1.  Christian 
marks — the  marks  of  Christ.  Paul 
was  the  slave  of  Christ.  Some  of  his 
marks  for  Christ  were  litejaJ,  as  the 
weals  caused  by  the  rods  of  the  Roman 
Caesars,  the  red  lines  caused  by  scourg- 
ing in  Jewish  synagogues,  the  scars 
caused  by  repeated  stonings.  The  marks 
of  the  Christian  are  mainly  spiritual 
— marked  by  trustfulness,  gentleness, 
purity,  unselfishness. 

2.  Distinct  'marks. — Marked  that  he 
may  be  recognised.  If  you  have  the 
marks  of  Jesus,  confess  and  obey  Him. 

3.  Deep  marks. — Branded  on  the  body, 
not  lines  that  can  easily  be  removed, 
but  going  down  to  the  flesh.  Our 
Christian  life  is  often  feeble  because 
it  is  not  deep. 

4.  Personal  marks. — The  marks  of 
Jesus  of  no  avail  unless  you  possess 
them.  No  man  can  really  trouble  you 
if  you  bear  branded  on  your  body  the 
marks  of  Jesus. — Local  Preacher's 
Treasury. 

Suffering  for  Jesus. 

I.  The  scars  of  the  saints  for  the 
maintenance  of  the  truth  are  the 
sufferings,  wounds,  and  marks  of 
Christ  Himself,  seeing  they  are  the 
wounds  of  the  members  of  that  body 
whereof  He  is  the  Head. 


II.  They  convince  the  persecutors 
that  they  are  the  servants  of  Christ 
who  suffer  thus  for  righteousness' 
sake. 

III.  If  men  be  constant  in  their 
profession — in  faith  and  obedience  — 
the  marks  of  their  suffering  are 
banners  of  victory.  —No  man  ought  to 
be  ashamed  of  them,  no  more  than 
soldiers  of  their  wounds  and  scars,  but 
rather  in  a  holy  manner  to  glory  of 
them.  Constantino  the  Great  kissed 
the  holes  of  the  eyes  of  certain  bishops 
who  had  them  put  out  for  their  con- 
stant profession  of  the  faith  of  Christ, 
reverencing  the  virtue  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  which  shined  in  them.  1.  By 
suffering  bodily  afflictions  we  are  made 
conformable  to  Christ.  2.  They  teach 
us  to  have  sympathy  with  the  miseries 
of  our  brethren.  3.  Our  patient  en- 
during of  affliction  is  an  example  to 
others  and  a  means  of  confirming  them 
in  the  truth.  4.  They  serve  to  scour 
us  from  the  rust  of  sin. — Perkins. 

Ver.  18.  Concluding  Benediction. 

I.  The  apostle  invokes  the  grace  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ — 1.  Because  He 
is  the  fountain  of  it.  2.  Because  He 
is  the  conduit  or  pipe  by  which  it  is 
conveyed  to  us. 

II.  Christ  is  called  our  Lord — 1.  By 
right  of  creation.  2.  Of  inheritance. 
3.  Of  redemption.  4.  Of  conquest. 
5.  Of  contract  and  marriage. 

III.  Observe  the  emphasis  with 
which  the  apostle  concludes  the 
epistle. — 1.  Opposing  Christ,  the  Lord 
of  the  house,  to  Moses,  who  was  but 
a  servant.  2.  The  grace  of  Christ  to 
inherent  justice  and  merit  of   works. 

3.  The  spirit  in  which  he  would  have 
grace  to  be  seated,  to  the  flesh  in  which 
the   false   teachers   gloried    so    much. 

4.  Brotherly  unity  one  with  another 
— implied  in  the  word  "  brethren  " — to 
the  proud  and  lordly  carriage  of  the 
false  teachers. — Ibid. 


121 


THE 

EPISTLE  TO  THE  EPHESIANS 


INTRODUCTION. 

Readers  to  whom  the  epistle  was  sent. — In  the  two  most  ancient  copies  of  the 
Scriptures  which  we  possess — dating  from  the  fourth  century  of  our  era — the 
words  in  our  A.V.  (i.  1),  "at  Ephesus"  are  missing;  and  Basil  the  Great,  who 
lived  in  the  fourth  century,  says  he  had  seen  copies  which,  "  ancient "  even  at  that 
early  date,  spoke  of  the  readers  as  "  those  who  are,  and  the  faithful  in  Christ 
Jesus"  When  it  is  observed,  however,  that  Basil  still  says  in  that  passage  the 
apostle  is  "  writing  to  the  Ephesians,"  in  all  honesty  we  must  admit  another 
interpretation  of  his  words  to  be  possible. 

Add  to  these  early  witnesses  that  Ephesus  is  not  named  in  the  text  the 
further  fact  that,  though  St.  Paul  had  lived  and  laboured  between  two  and  three 
years  in  Ephesus,  there  is  absolutely  no  mention  of  any  name  of  those  with 
whom  he  had  been  associated,  and  what  on  the  assumption  of  the  Ephesian 
destination  of  the  epistle  is  stranger  still,  no  reference  to  the  work,  unless  we 
may  be  allowed  to  regard  the  "  sealing  with  the  Holy  Spirit  of  promise  "  as  a 
reminiscence  of  Acts  xix.  1-7. 

We  must  not  make  too  much,  however,  of  this  absence  of  personal  greetings. 
Tychicus  can  do,  vivd  voce,  all  that  needs  to  be  done  in  that  way.  St.  Paul  had 
been  "  received  as  an  angel  of  God,  or  even  as  Christ  Jesus,"  by  Galatians,  not 
one  of  whom  is  mentioned  in  the  letter  sent  to  the  Galatians. 

Certain  expressions  in  the  body  of  the  letter  are  strange  if  the  Ephesian 
Christians  were  the  first  readers  of  it.  In  i.  15  the  apostle  says,  "  After  I  heard 
of  your  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus."  One  asks,  "  Did  not  the  faith  which  l  cometh 
by  hearing  '  result  from  Paul's  preaching  in  Ephesus  ?  Then  how  can  he  speak 
of  hearing  of  it  ?  "  It  may  be  answered,  "  Does  not  Paul  say  to  Philemon,  '  Thou 
owest  unto  me  thine  own  self  '  (ver.  19),  and  yet  says  (ver.  5)  that,  hearing  of  his 
love  and  faith,  he  thanks  God  1 "  Moreover,  has  any  one  quite  demonstrated  the 
impossibility  of  this  faith  being  the  continuity  of  that  which  began  with  the 
abjuration  of   magic   in  a   costly   offering  of  fifty  thousand  pieces  of  silver? 

123 


introduction.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS. 

(Acts  xix.   17-20).       "Faith"  may  take   the  form  of   fidelity  as  easily  as  of 
credence. 

Again,  in  iii.  2  Paul,  at  the  word  "  Gentiles,"  enters  into  a  digression  about 
his  specific  commission  as  their  apostle.  Just  as  to  the  Galatian  Church  he 
expatiates  on  the  special  grace  bestowed  by  God  and  recognised  by  the  "  pillars  " 
of  the  Church,  so  here  he  magnifies  his  office,  and  his  words  here  no  more  prove 
that  he  had  never  seen  his  readers  than  the  section  of  Galatians  (ii.  6-9)  proves 
that  he  did  not  know  the  Galatians.  Even  supposing  they  did,  it  surely  would 
not  be  an  astonishing  thing  that  in  the  ever-shifting  population  of  a  seaport 
many  may  have  joined  the  Church  since  St.  Paul  was  in  Ephesus.  That  this  was 
the  place  to  which  St.  Paul  sent  his  messenger  with  the  letter  before  us  cannot 
be  demonstratively  shown ;  but  we  feel  something  like  conviction  by  considering : 
(a)  That  the  preponderant  evidence  of  the  MSS.  says  "  Ephesus  " ;  (b)  that  the 
versions  are  unanimous  as  an  echo  of  the  MSS.  ;  (c)  that  the  entire  ancient 
Church  has  spoken  of  the  epistle  as  "  to  the  Ephesians,"  Marcion's  voice  being 
the  only  exception ;  (d)  the  improbability  of  St.  Paul  writing  "  to  the  saints 
which  are  "  without  adding  the  name  of  some  place  ;  (e)  "  Ephesus  "  more  easily 
meets  internal  difficulties  than  any  other  place.  This,  in  substance,  is  Bishop 
Ellicott's  view.  Still,  we  cannot  regard  it  as  impossible  that  "  Ephesus "  may 
comprise  many  Churches  in  the  vicinity,  and  therefore  regard  the  letter  as  really 
encyclical,  even  though  it  were  proved  that  St.  Paul  wrote  "  to  the  saints  at 
Ephesus." 

Analysis  of  the  epistle. 

i.      1,2.     Salutation.     Joy  and  well-being  to  those  in  Christ. 

3 — 14.  Hymn  of  praise  to  the  Father,  who  worked  out  in  Christ  His 
pre-temporal  designs  of  beneficence,  and  gave  pledge  of  the 
yet  more  glorious  consummation  of  His  divine  will  in  the 
bestowal  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
15 — 23.  Thanksgiving  of  the  apostle  pver  their  fidelity,  and  his  prayer 
for  their  complete  illumination  in  the  incorporation  of  the 
Gentiles  in  the  mystical  body  of  Christ,  "  the  Head." 

ii.  1 — 10.  The  power  that  delivered  Christ  from  bodily  corruption  in  the 
tomb  saved  His  members  out  of  the  corruption  of  fleshly 
lusts,  thus  silencing  every  human  boast  and  magnifying  the 
divine  grace. 
11 — 22.  Wholesome  reminder  of  their  former  distance  from  Christ  as 
contrasted  with  present  union  with  Him,  and  union  with  the 
Jews  in  Him,  being  led  to  the  Father  with  them. 

iii.    1 — 13.     Paul's  familiar   statement   of   the   origin  of   his  apostolate  as 
specially  commissioned — "  ambassador  extraordinary  "  to  the 
Gentiles. 
14 — 19.     Prayer  that  by  "power  and  faith  and  love"  they  may  grasp 
"  the  mystery,"  and  become  brimful  of  love  divine, 
20,  21.     Doxology  to  the  doctrinal  half  of  the  epistle, 
124 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS.    introduction. 

iv.      1 — 16.     Exhortation  to  a  practical  observation  of  this  doctrinal  unity  by 
the  thought  that  every  member  of  Christ  is  necessary  in  its 
full  development  to  the  perfection  of  the  body  of  which  Christ 
is  the  Head. 
17 — 24.     Casting  off  the  old  and  putting  on  the  new  man. 
25 — v.  21.     Exhortation  to  conduct  in  harmony  with  the  new  nature. 

v.  22 — vi.  9.     Relative  duties  of  wives  and  husbands,  children  and  parents, 
servants  and  masters. 

vi.   10 — 18.     The  Christian  panoply. 

19,  20.     Apostle's  request  for  prayers. 
21,  22.     Personalia. 

23,  24.     A  twin  doxology,  reversing  the  order  of  the  salutation — "  Peace 
and  grace." 

Genuineness  of  the  epistle. — Dr.  Ellicott  sums  up  the  matter  briefly  by  saying^ 
"  There  is  no  just  ground  on  which  to  dispute  the  genuineness."  Arguments 
based  on  certain  expressions  in  the  body  of  the  letter  have  been  speciously 
urged  against  its  genuineness  by  De  Wette  and  others ;  and  Holzmann  has 
"  learnedly  maintained  that  the  epistle  is  only  the  expansion  of  a  short  letter  to 
the  Colossians  by  some  writer  about  the  close  of  the  first  century  "  (Godet). 

"  We  have,  on  the  one  hand,  subjective  arguments,  not  unmixed  with  arro- 
gance, but  devoid  of  sound  historical  basis;  on  the  other  hand,  unusually 
convincing  counter-investigations  and  the  unvarying  testimony  of  the  ancient 
Church."  Adverse  arguments  have  been  answered  so  satisfactorily  and  sometimes 
so  crushingly  as  to  leave  no  room  for  doubt.  Those  who  cannot  read  the  epistle 
without  being  moved  by  the  peculiar  loftiness,  by  the  grandeur  of  conception, 
by  the  profound  insight,  by  the  eucharistic  inspiration  they  recognise  in  it,  will 
require  strong  evidence  to  persuade  them  that  it  was  written  by  some  other 
man  who  wished  it  to  pass  as  St.  Paul's. 

The  practical  design  of  the  epistle. — The  object  is  to  set  forth  the  ground, 
course,  aim,  and  end  of  the  Church  of  the  faithful  in  Christ.  The  Ephesians 
are  a  sample  of  the  Church  universal.  The  key  to  the  epistle  may  be  found  in 
the  opening  sentence  (ver.  3).  Fixing  his  eyes  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the 
apostle  opens  his  mind  to  the  blessings  which  radiate  forth  from  Him,  and  from 
the  Father  through  Him,  upon  the  whole  world.  The  mind  of  God  towards  men 
unveiled  in  Christ,  the  relation  of  men  towards  God  exhibited  in  Christ,  the 
present  spiritual  connection  of  men  with  Christ,  the  hopes  of  which  Christ  is  the 
ground  and  assurance,  the  laws  imposed  by  the  life  of  Christ  upon  human  life — 
these  are  the  blessings  for  which  he  gives  thanks.  Christ  embracing  humanity 
in  Himself  is  the  subject  of  the  epistle.  St.  Paul  tells  with  strict  faithfulness 
what  he  has  read  and  seen  in  Christ ;  Christ  fills  the  whole  sphere  of  his  mind. 


125 


CHAPTER  I. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  To  the  saints. — Dismiss  the  commonly  accepted  meaning.  Not  men  who  by  hard 
and  rigorous  methods  have  reached  the*heights  where  but  few  abide,  but  those  who,  as  the 
elect  of  God,  are  separated  from  everything  unholy  and  kept  for  God's  peculiar  possession 
(1  Pet.  ii.  9).  And  faithful. — Sometimes  the  word  may  mean  "  believers,"  sometimes  "trust- 
worthy." "  The  use  of  the  adjective  for  the  Christian  brotherhood  cannot  be  assigned  rigidly 
either  to  the  one  meaning  or  the  other.  Its  very  comprehensiveness  was  in  itself  a  valuable 
lesson  "  (Lightfoot). 

Ver.  2.  Grace  .  .  .  and  peace. — The  light-hearted  Greek  salutation  was,  "  Rejoice  " ;  the 
more  sober  Hebrew — our  Lord's  own — was,  "  Peace  be  to  you."     Here  both  unite. 

Ver.  3.  Blessed  be  the  God  and  Father. — The  Hebrew  form  for  "  hallowing  the  Name  "  was, 
"  The  Holy  One,  blessed  be  He."  The  Prayer  Book  version  of  Psalm  c.  gives, "  Speak  good  of 
His  name."  Who  blessed  us.— When  old  Isaac  pronounces  the  blessing  uttered  on  Jacob 
unwittingly  to  be  irreversible,  he  depends  on  God  for  the  carrying  out  of  his  dying  blessing  : 
the  divine  blessing  makes  .whilst  pronouncing  blest.  In  the  heavenly  places. — Lit.  "in  the 
heavenlies  " — so,  as  A. V.  margin  says,  either  places  or  things.  Perhaps  the  local  signification 
is  best ;  "relating  to  heaven,  and  meant  to  draw  us  thither  "  (Blomjield). 

Ver.  4.  Even  as  He  chose  us  in  Him. — Whatever  be  the  manifestation  of  the  divine 
goodness,  it  is  "  in  Christ  "  that  it  is  made.  "  This  sentence  traces  back  the  state  of  grace 
and  Christian  piety  to  the  eternal  and  independent  electing  love  of  God"  (Cremer).  There 
is  always  the  connotation  of  some  not  chosen.  Before  the  foundation  of  the  world. — St.  Paul, 
like  E^aias,  "is  very  bold."  His  Master  had  only  said  "  from,"  not  "  before,"  the  foundation 
(Matt.  xxv.  34),  reserving  the  "  before"  for  the  dim  eternity  in  which  He  was  the  sharer, 
with  the  eternal  Spirit,  of  the  Father's  love  (John  xvii.  24).  Without  blemish  (R.V.),  or, 
in  one  word,  "  immaculate."  A  sacrificial  term  generally  ;  used  by  St.  Peter  (1  Pet.  i.  19)  to 
describe  that  "  Lamb  of  God  who  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  This  word  serves  to 
guard  "  holy,"  just  before  it ;  a  separated  (holy)  people  must  also  be  a  spotless  people. 

Ver.  5.  Having  predestinated  us. — By  pointing  as  the  R.V.  margin  does,  we  get  Love 
divine  as  the  basis  on  which  our  foreordination  rests.  "  There  is  no  respect  of  persons  with 
God,"  and  no  arriere  pensee  in  the  invitation,  "  All  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden."  Unto 
adoption  as  sons. — The  end,  as  regards  man.  Perhaps  St.  Johns  word  goes  more  deeply  into 
the  heart  of  the  mystery,  "That  we  should  be  called  the  children  of  God" — '■'■horn  of  God." 
Through  Jesus  Christ.  — Mediator  of  this  and  every  implied  blessing.  According  to  the  good 
pleasure  of  His  will. — The  word  for  "  good  pleasure "  characterises  the  will  as  one  whose 
intent  is  something  good ;  the  unhampered  working  of  the  will  lies  in  the  expression  too. 
The  measure  of  human  privilege  in  the  adoption  is  according  to  the  divine  Graciousness. 

Ver,  6.  To  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  His  grace. — The  ultimate  end,  "that  God  may  be  all 
in  all."  Wherein  He  hath  made  us  accepted  in  the  Beloved. — The  change  in  the  R.V., 
considerable  as  it  seems,  turns  on  the  rendering  of  one  word,  the  meaning  in  the  New 
Testament  being  "  to  bestow  favour."  Compare  Luke  i.  28  and  the  A.V.  marginal  alterna- 
tive "much-graced."  Chrysostom's  beautiful  interpretation  must  not  be  lightly  rejected,  "to 
make  love-worthy  " — just  as  if  one  were  to  make  a  sick  ^r  famished  man  into  a  beautiful 
youth,  so  has  God  made  our  soul  beautiful  and  love-woi  thy  for  the  angels  and  all  saints  and 
for  Himself. 

Ver.  7.  In  whom  we  have  redemption. — Release  in  consideration  of  a  ransom  paid — 
"  deliverance  effected  through  the  death  of  Christ  from  the  retributive  wrath  of  a  holy  God 
and  the  merited  penalty  of  sin"  (Grimm).  Through  His  blood. — St.  Paul  quite  agrees  with 
the  author  of  Hebrews  (ix.  22)  that,  apart  from  the  pouring  out  of  blood,  the  putting  away  of 
sin  cannot  be  brought  about.  The  forgiveness  of  our  trespasses. — Another  way  of  stating  in 
what  the  redemption  consists.  Notice  the  "  forgiveness  "  as  compared  with  the  "  passing 
over  "  (Rom.  iii.  25,  R.V.).     The  one  is  the  remission  of  punishment ;  the  other  the  omission 

126 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS.  chap.  i. 


to  punish  sin  that  has  been  observed,  "  leaving  it  open  in  the  future  either  entirely  to  remit 
or  else  adequately  to  punish  them  as  may  seem  good  to  Him  "  (Trench). 

Ver.  8.  In  all  wisdom  and  prudence. — "  Wisdom  embraces  the  collective  activity  of  the 
mind  as  directed  to  divine  aims  to  be  achieved  by  moral  means.  Prudence  is  the  insight  of 
practical  reason  regulating  the  dispositions"  (Meyer). 

Ver.  9.  The  mystery  of  His  will.—"  Mystery  "  is  here  to  be  taken  not  so  much  as  a  thing 
which  baffles  the  intellect  as  the  slow  utterance  of  a  long-kept  secret,  which  "the  fulness  of 
time  "  brings  to  birth. 

Ver.  10.  The  fulness  of  times. — The  word  for  "  times  "  denotes  "  time  as  brings  forth  its 
several  births."  It  is  the  "flood  "in  the  "  tide  of  affairs."  To  sum  up  all  things. — "To 
bring  together  again  for  Himself  all  things  and  all  beings  (hitherto  disunited  by  sin)  into 
one  combined  state  of  fellowship  in  Christ,  the  universal  bond"  (Grimm).  "It  is  the 
mystery  of  God's  will  to  gather  all  together  for  Himself  in  Christ,  to  bring  all  to  a  unity,  to 
put  an  end  to  the  world's  discord  wrought  by  sin,  and  to  re-establish  the  original  state  of 
mutual  dependence  in  fellowship  with  God  "  ( Cremer).  The  things  which  are  in  heaven 
and  which  are  on  earth. 

"  The  blood  that  did  for  us  atone 
Conferred  on  them  some  gift  unknown." 

Ver.  11.  In  whom  also  we  have  obtained  an  inheritance. — R.V.  "  were  made  a  heritage^ 
"  The  Lord's  portion  is  His  people,  Jacob  is  the  lot  of  His  inheritance,"  sang  dying  Moses. 
The  verbal  paradox  between  A.V.  and  R.V.  is  reconciled  in  fact.  "  All  are  yours,  and  ye  are 
Christ's  "  (1  Cor.  iii.  22,  23).  "  Before  the  Parousia  an  ideal  possession,  thereafter  a  real 
one  "  (Meyer).  After  the  counsel  of  His  own  will. — "  The  '  counsel '  preceding  the  resolve, 
the  'will'  urging  on  to  action"  (Cremer). 

Ver.  12.  That  we  should  be  to  the  praise. — R.V.  "to  the  end  that  we  shot/Id  be."  "  Causa 
finalis  of  the  predestination  to  the  Messianic  lot "  (Meyer).  "  We  "  in  antithesis  to  "  you  " 
in  ver.  13 — We  Jewish— you  Gentile  Christians. 

Ver.  13.  In  whom  ye  also,  etc. — The  word  "trusted,"  supplied  by  A.V.,  is  dropped  by 
R.V.  It  seems  best  to  regard  the  words  after  "  ye  also  "  as  one  of  the  frequent  breaks 
in  the  flow  of  the  apostle's  language,  the  second  "  ye  "  taking  up  the  first.  "  In  whom  ye 
were  sealed."  "  The  order  of  conversion  was :  hearing,  faith,  baptism,  reception  of  the 
Spirit"  {Meyer).  Ye  were  sealed. — "  This  sealing  is  the  indubitable  guarantee  of  the  future 
Messianic  salvation  received  in  one's  own  consciousness  "  (Meyer). 

Ver.  14.  Who  is  the  earnest. — The  guarantee.  The  word  represented  by  "  earnest "  was 
derived  from  the  Phoenician  merchants,  and  meant  money  which  in  purchases  is  given  as  a 
pledge  that  the  full  amount  will  be  subsequently  paid  (Grimm).  The  word  is  found  in  the 
Hebrew  of  Gen.  xxxviii.  17,  18,  and  means  "  pledge."  F.  W.  Robertson  makes  a  distinction 
between  "pledge  "  and  "  earnest"— the  grapes  of  Eshcol  were  an  "  earnest"  of  Canaan.  He 
who  receives  the  Holy  Spirit  partakes  the  powers  of  the  age  to  come  (Heb.  vi.  4,  5).  Until 
the  redemption. — The  final  consummation  of  the  redemption  effected  by  the  atonement  of 
Christ.  The  "  until ''  is  faulty,  the  "  earnest "  being  "  something  towards  "  the  redemption. 
Of  the  purchased  possession. — R.V.  "  of  God's  own  possession."  "  The  whole  body  of  Christians, 
the  true  people  of  God  acquired  by  God  as  His  property  by  means  of  the  redeeming  work 
of  Christ"  (Meyer). 

Vers.  15,  16. — St.  Paul  is  always  ready  to  give  a  prompt  acknowledgment  of  all  that  is 
best  in  his  readers  and  to  pray  for  something  better.  Cease  not  to  give  thanks. — My  thanks- 
giving knows  no  end. 

Ver.  17.  That  the  God  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. — The  connection  or  unity  of  the  Father 
and  the  Son  is  the  basis  of  the  plea  for  those  who  are  in  the  Son.  Christ  said,  "I  ascend 
unto  My  Father  and  your  Father,  to  My  God  and  your  God  "  (John  xx.  17).  The  Father 
of  glory. — Compare  the  phrases,  "  the  Father  of  mercies  "  (2  Cor.  i.  3),  "  the  Father  of  lights  ' 
(Jas.  i.  17),  "  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  glory "  (Jas.  ii.  1).  The  spirit  of  wisdom  and 
revelation. — The  wisdom  which  is  from  above  is  the  heritage  of  all  the  redeemed  in  Christ 
(1  John  iv.  20) ;  but  this  day-spring,  which  gladdens  the  eyes  of  the  heart,  grows  to  mid-day 
splendour  by  successive  apocalypses.  In  the  knowledge. — The  word  means  a  complete 
knowledge.     It  is  a  word  characteristic  of  the  four  epistles  of  the  first  Roman  captivity. 

Vers.  18,  19.  The  eyes  of  your  understanding  being  enlightened  ...  to  us-ward.  who 
believe. — Three  pictures  for  heaven-illumined  eyes:  1.  The  hope  of  His  calling.— Meyer 
says  "  the  hope  "  is  not  here  (nor  anywhere)  the  res  sperata,  "the  object  on  which  hope 
fastens,  but  the  great  and  glorious  hope  which  God  gives  " — a  statement  too  sweeping  for 
other  scholars,  though  here  they  agree  that  it  is  the  faculty  of  hope  "  which  encourages  and 
animates."  2.  The  riches  of  the  glory  of  His  inheritance  in  the  saints. — "  What  a  copious 
and  grand  accumulation,  mirroring,  as  it  were,  the  weightiness  of  the  thing  itself  !  "  (Meyer). 
''Riches  of  the  glory"  must  not  be  watered  down  into  "  glorious  riches."  3.  The  exceed- 
ing greatness  of  His  power  to  us-ward, — The  amazing  and  wholly  unexpected  working  of 

127 


chap.  i.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EPHESIANS 


the  same  Hand  that  wrought  our  first  deliverance :  the  Power  that  smites  the  oppressor  with 
dismay  opens  the  path  through  the  sea  (see  Isa.  xl.  10,.  11).  According  to  the  working  of 
His  mighty  power. — This  may  be  regarded  as  a  specimen  of  the  divine  power,  the  norm  or 
standard  by  which  we  may  gain  an  idea  of  the  "  exceeding  greatness  "  of  it — that  from  the 
tomb  of  His  humiliation  Christ  was  raised  by  that  power  to  an  unrivalled  dignity  in  God's 
throne.  The  R.V.  gives  "working  of  the  strength  of  His  might" :  "working" — "the  active 
exertion  of  power"  {Meyer)  ;  "  strength" — might  expressing  itself  in  overcoming  resistance, 
ruling,  etc. ;  "might" — strength  in  itself  as  inward  power. 

Ver.  20.  Set  Him  at  His  own  right  hand. — "  Dexter  Dei  ubique  est."  We  cannot  dogmatise 
about  the  relations  to  space  which  a  glorified  body  holds.  The  transcendent  glory  of  God  in 
that  body  links  God  to  man,  the  humanity  in  the  glory  gives  man  his  claim  in  God.  "  The 
true  commentary  on  the  phrase  is  Mark  xvi.  19,  ■  He  was  received  up  into  heaven,  and  sat 
on  the  right  hand  of  God  ' "  (Meyer). 

Ver.  21.  Far  above  all  principality,  and  power,  and  might,  and  dominion. — R.V.  "  Rule, 
and  authority,  and  power,  and  dominion."  "  To  be  understood  of  the  good  angels,  since  the 
apostle  is  not  speaking  of  the  victory  of  Christ  over  opposing  powers,  but  of  His  exaltation 
above  the  existing  powers  of  heaven"  (Meyer).  "Powers  and  dominions,  deities  of 
heaven,"  as  Milton  calls  them,  ranged  here,  perhaps,  in  a  descending  order.  And  every 
name  that  is  named. — "God  hath  highly  exalted  Him,  and  given  Him  a  name  which  is  above 
every  name."  "  Let  any  name  be  uttered,  whatever  it  is,  Christ  is  above  it,  is  more  exalted 
than  that  which  the  name  affirms  "  (Meyer).  Not  only  in  this  world. — "  This  age."  "No  other 
name  under  heaven  given  among  men."  But  also  in  that  which  is  to  come — There 
Zechariah's  word  will  have  its  fullest  application.  "  The  Lord  shall  be  King  over  all  the 
earth  ;  there  shall  be  one  Lord,  and  His  name  one" 

Ver.  22.  And  hath  put  all  things  under  His  feet.  —Compare  1  Cor.  xv.  27. 

"  Strong  Son  of  God,  immortal  Love,  .  .  . 
Thou  roadest  Death  ;  and  lo  Thy  foot 
Is  on  the  skull  which  Thou  hast  made." 

In  Memoriam. 

Ver.  23.  The  fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in  all.—"  The  Church,  viz.,  is  the  Christ-filed, 
i.e.  that  which  is  filled  by  Him  in  so  far  as  Christ  penetrates  the  whole  body  and  produces 
Christian  life  "  (Meyer).  "  The  brimmed  receptacle  of  Him  who  filleth  all  things  with  all 
things  "  (Farrar).  "  Among  the  Gnostics  the  supersensible  world  is  called  the  Pleroma, 
the  fulness  or  filled,  in  opposition  to  '  the  empty,'  the  world  of  the  senses  "  (Meyer). 

MAIN  HOMILETIC 1S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  1,  2. 

Apostolic  Salutation. 

I.  He  declares  the  divine  source  of  his  authority. — "  Paul,  an  apostle  of  Jesus 
Christ  by  the  will  of  God"  (ver.  1).  The  faithful  ambassador  scans  his  commis- 
sion with  the  utmost  care,  and  is  solicitous  to  clearly  understand  the  will  of  his 
Sovereign.  If  he  examines  his  own  fitness  for  the  office,  it  is  only  to  be  humbled 
under  a  sense  of  unworthiness,  and  to  express  surprise  that  he  should  be  chosen 
to  such  a  dignity  and  be  entrusted  with  such  powers.  His  supreme  ambition  is 
to  sink  his  own  personal  predilections  in  the  earnest  discharge  of  his  duty.  Paul 
does  not  dilate  on  his  own  mental  capabilities  or  spiritual  endowments.  He 
accepts  his  appointment  to  the  apostleship  as  coming  directly  from  the  hand  of 
God,  and  recognises  the  divine  will  as  the  source  of  righteousness  and  of  all  power 
to  do  good.  This  lofty  conception  of  his  call  gave  him  unfaltering  confidence  in 
the  truth  he  had  to  declare,  inspired  him  with  an  ever-glowing  zeal,  rendered 
him  immovable  in  the  midst  of  defection  and  opposition,  and  willing  to  obliterate 
himself,  so  that  the  gospel  committed  to  him  might  be  triumphant.  The  true 
minister,  in  the  onerous  task  of  dealing  with  human  doubt  and  sin,  feels  the  need 
of  all  the  strength  and  prestige  conferred  by  the  conscious  possession  of  divine 
authority.  He  seeks  not  to  advance  his  own  interests  or  impose  his  own 
theories,  but  to  interpret  the  mind  of  God  to  man  and  persuade  to  submission 
and  obedience.  The  power  that  makes  for  righteousness  has  its  root  in  the 
divine  will. 

II.  He  designates  the  sacred  character  of  those  he  salutes. — "  To  the  saints 

128 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS.  chap.  I. 


which  are  at  Ephesus,  and  to  the  faithful  in  Christ  Jesus "  (ver.  1).  The 
Ephesian  saints  were  made  so  by  their  faith  in  Christ  Jesus.  They  were  not 
saints  because  Paul  called  them  so.  Sanctity  is  not  the  result  of  human  volition, 
nor  can  it  be  created  by  a  college  of  cardinals.  "  Many  saints  have  been 
canonised  who  ought  to  have  been  cannonaded."  Sanctity  is  the  gift  of  God, 
and  is  bestowed  on  those  who  believe  in  Christ  Jesus  and  maintain  their 
allegiance  by  continued  faith  in  him.  They  are  holy  so  long  as  they  are  faithful. 
The  saints  of  God  !  "  Think,"  says  Farrar,  "  of  the  long  line  of  heroes  of  faith 
in  the  olden  times  :  of  the  patriarchs — Enoch  the  blameless,  Noah  the  faithful, 
Abraham  the  friend  of  God ;  of  the  sweet  and  meditative  Isaac,  the  afflicted  and 
wrestling  Jacob;  of  Moses,  the  meekest  of  men;  of  brave  judges,  glorious 
prophets,  patriotic  warriors,  toiling  apostles ;  of  the  many  martyrs  who  would 
rather  die  than  lie  ;  of  the  hermits  who  fled  from  the  guilt  and  turmoil  of  life 
into  the  solitude  of  the  wilderness ;  of  the  missionaries — St.  Paul,  Columban, 
Benedict,  Boniface,  Francis  Xavier,  Schwartz,  Eliot,  Henry  Martyn,  Coleridge, 
Pa  tteson  ;  of  the  reformers  who  cleared  the  world  of  lies,  like  Savonarola,  Huss, 
1  ther,  Zwingli,  Wesley,  Whitefield  ;  of  wise  rulers,  like  Alfred,  Louis,  Washing- 
ton, and  Garfield  ;  of  the  writers  of  holy  books,  like  Thomas-a-Kempis,  Baxter, 
Bunyan,  Samuel  Butherford,  Jeremy  Taylor ;  of  the  slayers  of  monstrous  abuses, 
like  Howard  and  Wilberforce ;  of  good  bishops,  like  Hugo  of  Avalon,  Fenelon, 
and  Berkeley ;  of  good  pastors,  like  Oberlin,  Fletcher  of  Madeley,  Adolphe 
Monod,  and  Felix  NefT;  of  all  true  poets,  whether  sweet  and  holy,  like  George 
Herbert,  Cowper,  Keble,  and  Longfellow,  or  grand  and  mighty,  like  Dante  and 
Milton.  These  are  but  few  of  the  many  who  have  reflected  the  glory  of  their 
Master  Christ,  and  who  walk  with  Him  in  white  robes,  for  they  are  worthy." 

III.  He  supplicates  the  bestowal  of  the  highest  blessings. — "  Grace  be  to  you, 
and  peace  "  (ver.  2).  Grace  and  peace  have  a  divine  source.  Grace  is  the  rich 
outflow  of  God's  goodness,  made  available  for  man  through  the  redeeming  work 
of  Christ.  There  is  sometimes  the  thought  that  grace  implies  God's  passing  by 
sin.  But  no,  quite  the  contrary ;  grace  supposes  sin  to  be  so  horribly  bad  a  thing 
that  God  cannot  tolerate  it.  Were  it  in  the  power  of  man,  after  being  un- 
righteous and  evil,  to  patch  up  his  ways  and  mend  himself  so  as  to  stand  before 
God,  there  would  then  be  no  need  of  grace.  The  very  fact  of  the  Lord's  being 
gracious  shows  sin  to  be  so  evil  a  thing  that  man,  being  a  sinner,  is  utterly 
ruined  and  hopeless,  and  nothing  but  free  grace  can  meet  his  case.  This  grace 
God  is  continually  supplying.  Grace,  like  manna,  will  rot  if  kept  overnight. 
"  Wind  up  thy  soul,"  says  George  Herbert,  "  as  thou  dost  thy  watch  at  night." 
Leave  no  arrears  from  day  to  day.  Give  us  this  day's  food ;  forgive  us  this  day's 
sins.  Peace  is  first  peace  with  God,  with  whom  the  soul  was  at  enmity ;  then 
peace  of  conscience,  troubled  on  account  of  repeated  sins,  and  peace  with  all  men. 
All  our  best  wishes  for  the  welfare  of  others  are  included  in  the  all-comprehensive 
blessings  of  grace  and  peace. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  will  of  God  is  the  highest  authority  for  Christian  service. 
2.  The  saintly  character  is  the  outgrowth  of  a  practical  faith.  3.  Grace  and  peace 
describe  the  rich  heritage  of  the  believer. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers.  1,  2.  Paul's  Introduction  to  from  the  influence  and  example  of 
the  Epistle. — The  design  of  this  epistle  unbelieving  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and  to 
is  more  fully  to  instruct  the  Ephesians  inculcate  upon  them  the  importance  of 
in  the  nature  of  that  gospel  they  had  a  conversation  becoming  their  faith 
received,  to  guard  them  against  certain  and  profession.  It  contains  the  sub- 
errors   to   which    they   were    exposed  stance  of  the  gospel. 

k  129 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS. 


I.  Paul  here  calls  himself  an 
apostle  of  Jesus  Christ. — The  word 
"  apostle  "  signifies  a  messenger  sent  on 
some  particular  business.  Jesus  Christ 
is  called  an  Apostle  because  He  was 
sent  of  God  to  instruct  and  redeem 
mankind.  Paul  and  others  are 
called  apostles  because  they  were  sent 
of  Christ  to  teach  the  doctrines  they 
had  received  from  Him.  To  confirm 
this  commission,  as  well  as  to  give  their 
ministry  success,  Christ,  according  to 
His  promise,  wrought  with  them  and 
established  their  words  with  signs 
following. 

1.  Paul  was  an  apostle  by  the  will 
of  God. — He  received  not  his  call  or 
commission  from  man ;  nor  was  he,  as 
Matthias  was,  chosen  to  his  apostleship 
by  men ;  but  he  was  called  by  Jesus 
Christ,  who  in  person  appeared  to  him 
for  this  end  that  He  might  send  him 
among  the  Gentiles,  and  by  God  the 
Father,  who  revealed  His  Son  in  him, 
and  chose  him  that  he  should  know 
His  will  and  be  a  witness  of  the  truth 
unto  all  men. 

2.  He  was  called  of  God  by  revelation. 
— It  was  not  a  secret  revelation  known 
only  to  himself,  like  the  revelation  on 
which  enthusiasts  and  impostors  ground 
their  pretensions,  but  a  revelation  made 
in  the  most  open  and  public  manner, 
attended  with  a  voice  from  heaven  and 
a  light  which  outshone  the  sun  at 
noonday,  and  exhibited  in  the  midst  of 
a  number  of  people  to  whom  he  could 
appeal  as  witnesses  of  the  extra- 
ordinary scene.  The  great  business  of 
Paul  and  the  other  apostles  was  to 
diffuse  the  knowledge  of  the  gospel 
and  plant  Churches  in  various  parts  of 
the  world. 

II.  Paul  directs  this  epistle  to  the 
saints    and     faithful. — The    phrases 


denote  they  had  been  called  out  of  the 
world  and  separated  from  others  that 
they  might  be  a  peculiar  people  unto 
God.  The  religion  we  profess  contains 
the  highest  motives  to  purity  of  heart 
and  life.  If,  content  with  a  verbal 
profession  of  and  external  compliance 
with  this  religion,  we  regard  iniquity 
in  our  hearts,  we  are  guilty  of  the 
vilest  prevarication,  and  our  religion, 
instead  of  saving  us,  will  but  plunge 
us  the  deeper  into  infamy  and  misery. 
That  which  is  the  visible  ought  to  be 
the  real  character  of  Christians. 

III.  The  apostle  expresses  his  fer- 
vent desire  that  these  Ephesians  may 
receive  the  glorious  blessings  offered 
in  the  gospel. — 1.  Grace.  Pardon  is 
grace,  for  it  is  the  remission  of  a 
deserved  punishment.  Eternal  life  is 
grace,  for  it  is  a  happiness  of  which  we 
are  utterly  unworthy.  The  influences 
of  the  divine  Spirit  are  grace,  for  they 
are  first  granted  without  any  good 
disposition  on  our  part  to  invite  them, 
they  are  continued  even  after  repeated 
oppositions,  they  prepare  us  for  that 
world  of  glory  for  which  we  never 
should  qualify  ourselves. 

2.  Peace. — By  this  we  understand 
that  peace  of  mind  which  arises  from 
a  persuasion  of  our  interest  in  the 
favour  of  God.  Our  peace  with  God  is 
immediately  connected  with  our  faith 
in  Christ.  Our  peace  of  mind  is  con- 
nected with  our  knowledge  of  the 
sincerity  of  our  faith.  "  If  our  heart 
condemn  us  not,  we  have  confidence 
toward  God."  The  way  to  enjoy  peace 
is  to  increase  in  all  holy  dispositions 
and  to  abound  in  every  good  work.  If 
the  apostle  wished  grace  and  peace  to 
Christians,  surely  they  should  feel 
some  solicitude  to  enjoy  them. — 
J.  Lathrop,  D.D. 


MAIN   HOMILETICS    OF    THE    PARAGRAPH.— Verses  3—14. 

Praise  for  the  Work  of  the  Trinity  in  the  Gospel  of  Grace. 

These  verses  are  an  outburst  of  descriptive  eloquence  that  even  the  ample 
resources  of  the  Greek  language  seem  too  meagre  to  adequately  express.  The 
grandeur  and  variety  of  ideas,  and  the  necessary  vagueness  of  the  phrases  by 
which  those  ideas  are  conveyed  in  this  paragraph,  create  a  difficulty  in  putting 
the  subject  into  a  practical  homiletic  form.     It  may  help  us  if  we  regard  the 

130 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS.  chap.  i. 


passage  as  an  outpouring  of  praise  for  the  work  of  the  Trinity  in  the  gospel 
of  grace,  the  part  of  each  person  in  the  Trinity  being  distinctly  recognised  as 
contributing  to  the  unity  of  the  whole. 

1.  The  gospel  of  grace  originated  in  the  love  of  the  Father. — 1.  He  hath 
chosen  us  to  holiness.  ' '  Blessed  be  the  God  and  Father  .  .  .  who  hath  chosen  us 
.  .  .  that  we  should  be  holy  and  without  blame  before  Him  in  love  "  (vers.  3,  4). 
The  love  of  God  the  Father  gave  Christ  to  the  world,  and  in  Him  the  human 
race  is  dowered  with  "  all  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  places."  The  blessings 
from  heaven  link  us  to  heaven,  and  will  by-and-by  bring  us  to  heaven,  where 
those  blessings  will  be  enjoyed  in  unrestricted  fulness.  Before  time  began,  in 
the  free  play  of  His  infinite  love,  God  the  Father,  foreseeing  the  sin  and  misery 
that  would  come  to  pass,  resolved  to  save  man,  and  to  save  him  in  His  own 
way  and  for  His  own  purpose.  Man  was  to  be  saved  in  Christ,  and  by  believingly 
receiving  Christ ;  and  his  salvation  was  not  to  free  him  from  moral  obligation, 
but  to  plant  in  Him  principles  of  holiness  by  which  he  could  live  a  blameless 
life  before  God.  He  chose  us  for  Himself  that  we  might  love  Him,  and  find 
our  satisfaction  in  the  perpetual  discovery  of  His  great  love  to  us.  The  true 
progression  of  the  Christian  life  is  a  growth  of  the  ever- widening  knowledge  of 
the  love  of  God.     Love  is  the  essence  and  the  crown  of  holiness. 

2.  He  hath  ordained  us  to  sonship. — "  Having  predestinated  us  unto  the 
adoption  of  children  by  Christ  Jesus  Himself"  (ver.  5).  The  sonship  is  not  by 
natural  right  of  inheritance,  but  by  adoption.  It  is  an  act  of  divine  grace, 
undeserved  and  unexpected.  It  is  said  that,  after  the  battle  of  Auste-rlitz, 
Napoleon  adopted  the  children  of  the  soldiers  who  had  fallen.  They  were 
supported  and  educated  by  the  State,  and,  as  belonging  to  the  family  of  the 
emperor,  were  allowed  to  attach  the  name  of  Napoleon  to  their  own.  This  was 
not  the  adoption  of  love,  but  as  a  i  ecognition  of  service  rendered  by  their  fathers. 
None  can  adopt  into  the  family  of  God  but  God  Himself,  and  it  is  an  act  on  His 
part  of  pure,  unmerited  love.  He  raises  us  to  the  highest  dignity,  and  endows 
us  with  unspeakable  privileges,  when  He  makes  us  His  children  ;  and  our  lives 
should  be  in  harmony  with  so  distinguished  a  relationship. 

3.  He  hath  accepted  us  in  Christ. — "  Wherein  He  hath  made  us  accepted 
in  the  Beloved "  (ver.  6).  Christ,  the  beloved  One,  is  the  special  object  of 
the  Father's  love,  and  all  who  are  united  to  Christ  by  faith  become  sharers  in 
the  love  with  which  the  divine  Father  regards  His  Son.  It  is  only  in  and 
through  Christ  that  we  are  admitted  into  the  divine  family.  God  loves  us  in 
Christ,  and  the  more  so  because  we  love  Christ.  We  are  accepted  to  a  life  of 
holiness  and  a  service  of  love.  Christ  is  the  pattern  of  our  sonship  and  the 
means  of  our  adoption.  The  love  of  God  to  the  race  finds  an  outlet  through  the 
person  and  gracious  intervention  of  His  Son. 

II.  The  gospel  of  grace  was  wrought  out  by  the  sufferings  of  the  Son. — 
1.  In  Him  ive  have  forgiveness  of  sins.  "  In  whom  we  have  redemption  through 
His  blood,  the  forgiveness  of  sins "  (ver.  7).  How  little  do  we  realise  the 
greatness  and  blessedness  of  the  pardon  of  sin  !  It  may  seem  difficult  to  explain 
how  the  forgiveness  of  sins  is  connected  with  the  sufferings  and  death  of  Christ ; 
but  there  is  no  fact  in  the  New  Testament  writings  more  clearly  revealed  or 
more  emphatically  repeated  than  this.  "  The  death  of  Christ  was  an  act  of 
submission  on  behalf  of  mankind  to  the  justice  of  the  penalties  of  violating  the 
eternal  law  of  righteousness — an  act  in  which  our  own  submission  not  only 
received  a  transcendent  expression,  but  was  really  and  vitally  included  ;  it  was 
an  act  which  secured  the  destruction  of  sin  in  all  who,  through  faith,  are 
restored  to  union  with  Christ ;  it  was  an  act  in  which  there  was  a  revelation 
of  the  righteousness  of  God  which  must  otherwise  have  been  revealed  in  the 
infliction  of  the  penalty  of  sin  on  the  human  race.     Instead  of  inflicting  suffering 

131 


CHAP.  I.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS. 


God  has  elected  to  endure  it,  that  those  who  repent  of  sin  may  receive  forgiveness, 
and  may  inherit  eternal  glory.  It  was  greater  to  endure  suffering  than  to 
inflict  it "  {Dale).     The  forgiveness  is  free,  full,  and  complete. 

2.  In  Him  we  have  the  revelation  of  the  mystery  of  the  divine  will. — "  Wherein 
He  hath  abounded  toward  us  in  all  wisdom  and  prudence ;  having  made  known 
to  us  the  mystery  of  His  will "  (vers.  8,  9).  The  will  of  God  is  to  advance  the 
ultimate  glorious  destiny  of  the  whole  creation.  This  sublime  purpose  was  for 
ages  an  unrevealed  mystery,  unknown  to  the  prophets,  psalmists,  and  saints 
of  earlier  times.  In  the  depths  of  the  divine  counsels  this  purpose  was  to  be 
carried  out  by  Christ,  and  it  is  revealed  only  through  and  in  Him.  The 
believer  in  Christ  discovers  in  Him,  not  only  his  own  blessedness,  but  also  the 
ultimate  glory  of  all  who  are  savingly  united  to  the  great  Redeemer.  The 
abounding  grace  of  God  bestows  wisdom  to  apprehend  a  larger  knowledge  of 
the  ways  and  will  of  God,  and  prudence  to  practically  apply  that  knowledge 
in  the  conduct  of  life. 

3.  In  Him  we  enjoy  the  unity  and  grandeur  of  the  heavenly  inheritance. — 
"  That  in  the  dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  times  He  might  gather  together  in 
one  all  things  in  Christ,  ...  in  whom  also  we  have  obtained  an  inheritance,  .  .  . 
that  we  should  be  to  the  praise  of  His  glory"  (vers.  10-12).  The  fulness  of  times 
must  refer  to  the  gospel  age  and  the  glorious  ages  to  follow,  in  which  the 
accomplishment  of  the  divine  purpose  will  become  more  apparent.  That  purpose 
is  to  heal  up  the  estrangement  of  man  from  God,  and  to  restore  moral  harmony 
to  the  universe,  which  has  been  disordered  by  the  introduction  of  sin.  The  great 
agent  in  the  unifying  and  harmonising  of  all  things  is  Christ,  who  is  the  centre 
and  circumference  of  all.  The  angels  who  never  sinned,  and  the  saints  who  are 
made  such  by  redeeming  mercy,  will  share  together  the  inheritance  of  bliss 
provided  by  the  suffering  and  triumphant  Christ.  "  Our  final  glory  will  consist, 
not  in  the  restoration  of  the  solitary  soul  to  solitary  communion  with  God,  but 
in  the  fellowship  of  all  the  blessed  with  the  blessedness  of  the  universe  as  well  as 
with  the  blessedness  of  God." 

III.  The  gospel  of  grace  is  confirmed  and  realised  by  the  operation  of  the 
Holy  Spirit. — 1.  By  Him  we  hear  and  understand  the  word  of  truth.  "  In  whom 
ye  also  trusted,  after  that  ye  heard  the  word  of  truth,  the  gospel  of  your  salvation" 
(ver.  13).  The  gospel  is  emphatically  the  word  of  truth;  it  is  reliable  history, 
not  romance — a  revelation  of  truths  essential  to  salvation.  It  is  the  function 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  illuminate  the  mind  by  the  instrumentality  of  the  truth, 
to  apply  the  word  to  the  conscience,  and  to  regenerate  the  heart.  He  takes  of 
the  things  of  Christ  and  shows  them  unto  us,  and  the  vision  leads  on  to  a  spiritual 
transformation. 

2.  By  Him  we  are  sealed  as  an  earnest  of  possessing  the  full  inheritance  of 
blessing. — "  Ye  were  sealed  with  that  Holy  Spirit  of  promise,  which  is  the 
earnest  of  our  inheritance"  (vers.  13,  14).  The  work  of  the  Spirit  broke  down 
all  class  distinctions.  The  Jewish  Christians  discovered  that  the  exclusive 
privileges  of  their  race  had  passed  away.  All  believers  in  Christ  Jesus,  whether 
Jew  or  Gentile,  received  the  assurance  of  the  Spirit  that  all  the  prerogatives  and 
blessings  of  God's  eternal  kingdom  were  theirs.  The  seal  of  the  Spirit  is  the 
divine  attestation  to  the  believing  soul  of  its  admission  into  the  favour  of  God, 
and  the  guarantee  of  ultimately  entering  into  the  full  possession  and  enjoyment 
of  the  heavenly  inheritance. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  gospel  of  grace  is  the  harmonious  work  of  the  blessed  Trinity. 
2.  The  grace  of  the  gospel  is  realised  by  faith.  3.  Praise  for  the  gift  of  the  gospel 
should  be  continually  offered  to  the  Triune  God. 


132 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  I. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE    VERSES. 


Vers.  3-6.  The  Doctrine  of  Predestina- 
tion.— Neither  Calvinism  nor  Arminian- 
ism  has  solved  the  problem  presented 
in  this  chapter.  Like  difficulties  meet 
us  in  God's  providential  dealings — ay, 
in  the  workings  of  His  natural  laws ; 
for,  as  a  brilliant  author  has  said, 
"  Nature  is  a  terrible  Calvinist." — 
Lange. 

Election. — It  is  above  logic  and 
philosophy  and  even  technical  theology, 
even  as  on  many,  and  these,  the  most 
important  subjects,  the  heart  is  a  better 
teacher  than  the  head.  In  these  matters 
I  am  so  fearful  that  I  dare  not  speak 
further — yea,  almost  none  otherwise 
than  the  text  does,  as  it  were,  lead  me 
by  the  hand. — Ridley. 

Mystery  of  election. — Those  who  are 
willing  are  always  the  elect ;  those  who 
will  not  are  not  elected.  Many  men 
are  wrapped  up  in  the  doctrines  of 
election  and  predestination;  but  that 
is  the  height  of  impertinence.  They 
are  truths  belonging  to  God  alone;  and 
if  you  are  perplexed  by  them,  it  is  only 
because  you  trouble  yourself  about 
things  which  do  not  concern  you.  You 
only  need  to  know  that  God  sustains 
you  with  all  His  might  in  the  winning 
of  your  salvation,  if  you  will  only 
rightly  use  His  help.  Whoever  doubts 
this  is  like  a  crew  of  a  boat  working 
with  all  their  might  against  the  tide 
and  yet  going  back  hour  after  hour ; 
then  they  notice  that  the  tide  turns, 
while  at  the  same  time  the  wind 
springs  up  and  fills  their  sails.  The 
coxswain  cries,  "  Pull  away,  boys ! 
wind  and  tide  favour  you  !  "  But  they 
answer,  "What  can  we  do  with  the 
oars  ?  don't  the  wind  and  tide  take  away 
our  free  agency  ?  " — H.  W.  Beecher. 

Ver.  3.  Spiritual  Blessings. 

I.  They  are  accommodated  to  our 
spiritual  wants  and  desires,  they  come 
down  from  heaven,  prepare  us  for 
heaven,  and  will  be  completed  in  our 
admission  to  heaven. — The  influences 


of  the  Spirit  are  heavenly  gifts,  the 
renovation  of  the  heart  by  a  divine 
operation  is  wisdom  from  above,  the 
renewed  Christian  is  born  from  above 
and  becomes  a  spiritual  man,  the  state 
of  immortality  Christ  has  purchased 
for  believers  is  an  inheritance  reserved 
for  them  in  heaven,  in  the  resurrection 
they  will  be  clothed  with  a  house  from 
heaven,  with  spiritual  and  heavenly 
bodies,  and  they  will  sit  together  in 
heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus. 

II.  The  blessings  granted  to  the 
Ephesians  are  tendered  to  us. — He 
offers  us  the  honours  and  felicities  of 
adoption  and  the  remission  of  all  our 
sins  through  the  atonement  of  His 
Son.  He  has  proposed  for  our  accept- 
ance an  inheritance  incorruptible  in  the 
heavens.  We  have  happier  advantages 
to  become  acquainted  with  the  doctrines 
and  precepts  of  the  gospel  than  the 
primitive  Christians  could  enjoy.  If 
they  were  bound  to  give  thanks  for 
their  privileges,  how  criminal  must  be 
ingratitude  under  ours  !  We  must  one 
day  answer  before  God  for  all  the 
spiritual  blessings  He  has  sent  us. — 
Lathrop. 

Vers.  4-6.  The  Nature,  Source,  and 
Purpose  of  Spiritual  Blessings. 

I.  God  chose  and  predestinated  these 
Ephesian  Christians  before  the  founda- 
tion of  the  world. — We  must  not  so 
conceive  of  God's  election  and  the  in- 
fluence of  His  grace  as  to  set  aside  our 
free  agency  and  final  accountableness  ; 
nor  must  we  so  explain  away  God's 
sovereignty  and  grace  as  to  exalt  man 
to  a  state  of  independence.  Now,  so 
far  as  the  grace  of  God  in  the  salvation 
of  sinners  is  absolute  and  unconditional, 
election  or  predestination  is  so,  and  no 
farther.  If  we  consider  election  as  it 
respects  the  final  bestowment  of  salva- 
tion, it  is  plainly  conditional.  To 
imagine  that  God  chooses  some  to 
eternal  life  without  regard  to  their 
faith  and  holiness  is  to  suppose  that 
some  are  saved  without  these  qualifica- 
tions or  saved  contrary  to  His  purpose. 

133 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS. 


God  hath  chosen  us  to  salvation  through 
sanctification  of  the  Spirit  and  belief 
of  the  truth. 

II.  Consider  the  spiritual  qualifica- 
tions to  which  the  Ephesians  were 
chosen. — "To  be  holy  and  without  blame 
before  Him  in  love  "  (ver.  4).  Holiness 
consists  in  the  conformity  of  the  soul 
to  the  divine  nature  and  will,  and  is 
opposed  to  all  moral  evil.  Love  is  a 
most  essential  part  of  the  character  of 
the  saint.  Charity  out  of  a  pure  heart 
is  the  end  of  the  commandment.  With- 
out charity  all  our  pretensions  to  gospel 
holiness  are  vain. 

III.  Consider  the  adoption  to  which 
believers  are  predestinated  (ver.  5). — 
Our  sonship  is  not  our  native  right, 
but  the  effect  of  God's  gracious  adop- 
tion. 1.  It  implies  a  state  of  freedom  in 
opposition  to  bondage.  Believers  are 
free  as  being  delivered  from  the  bond- 
age of  sin,  and  as  having  near  access 
to  God  and  intimate  communion  with 
Him.  Children  are  usually  admitted 
to  that  familiar  intercourse  which  is 
denied  to  servants.  2.  Adoption  brings 
us  lender  the  peculiar  care  of  God's  provi- 
dence. 3.  Includes  a  title  to  a  glorious 
resurrection  from  the  dead  and  to  an 
eternal  inheritance  in  the  heavens.  If 
believers  are  the  children  of  God,  then 
their  temper  must  be  a  childlike  temper, 
a  temper  corresponding  to  their  rela- 
tion, condition,  and  character. 

IV.  That  all  spiritual  blessings  are 
derived  to  us  through  Christ  (vers. 
5,6). 

Y.  The  reason  of  God's  choosing  be- 
lievers in  Christ  and  predestinating 
them  to  adoption  is  the  good  pleasure 
of  His  will  (ver.  5). — If  we  admit  we 
are  sinful,  fallen  creatures,  unworthy 
of  God's  favour  and  insufficient  for  our 
own  redemption,  then  our  salvation 
must  ultimately  be  resolved  into  God's 
good  pleasure.  There  is  no  other 
source  from  which  it  can  be  derived. 
If  death  is  our  desert,  our  deliverance 
must  be  by  grace. 

VI.  The  great  purpose  for  which 
God  has  chosen  and  called  us  is  the 
praise  of  the  glory  of  His  grace 
(ver.   6). — God  has  made  this  display 

134 


of  His  grace  that  unworthy  creatures 
might  apply  to  Him  for  salvation. 
We  are  to  praise  the  glory  of  God's 
grace  by  a  cheerful  compliance  ,  with 
the  precepts  and  thankful  acceptance 
of  the  blessings  of  the  gospel,  by  a  holy 
life,  and  by  encouraging  others  to 
accept  that  grace.  Believers  will,  in  a 
more  perfect  manner,  show  forth  the 
praise  of  God's  glorious  grace  in  the 
future  world. — Lathrop. 

Vers.  5,  6.  The  Glory  of  Divine 
Grace — 

I.  Is  the  sublime  outcome  of  the 
divine  will. — "  According  to  His  will " 
(ver.  5). 

II.  Is  a  signal  display  of  joyous 
benevolence. — "  According  to  the  good 
pleasure  of  His  will "  (ver.  5). 

III.  Demands  profound  and  grateful 
recognition. — "To  the  praise  of  the 
glory  of  His  grace  "  (ver.  6). 

Ver.  5.  The  Adoption  of  Children  by 
Jesus  Christ. — Explain  the  nature  of 
the  privilege. 

I.  Its  greatness. — 1.  From-  the  Being 
by  whom  it  is  conferred.  2.  From  the 
price     at    which     it     was     procured. 

3.  From  the  inheritance  which  it  con- 
veys. 4.  From  the  manner  in  which 
it  is  bestowed.     The  new  birth. 

II.  Its  benefits.— 1.  The  spirit  of 
adoption.  2.  Divine  care  and  protec- 
tion.    3.  Divine  pity  and  compassion. 

4.  Overruling  all  trials  for  spiritual 
good. 

III.  The  evidences  of  its  possession. 
— 1.  The  image  of  God.  2.  The  love 
of  God.     3.  The  love  of  the  brethren. 

IV.  Its  appropriate  duties. — The 
children  of  God  ought — 1.  To  walk 
worthy  of  their  high  vocation.  2.  To 
be  subject  to  their  Father's  will  both  in 
doing  and  in  suffering.  3.  To  be  mind- 
ful of  what  they  owe  to  their  spiritual 
kindred.  4.  To  long  for  their  heavenly 
home. — G.  Brooks. 

Ver.  6.   The  Adopting  Love  of  God. 

I.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the 
Beloved  of  the  Father. — From  eternity 
during   the  preparatory  dispensation 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS.  chap.  i. 


in   the   days   of  His   flesh ;  now ;  for  to  the  riches,  the  exceeding,  the  un- 

ever.     An  ineffable  love.  searchable  riches  of  grace. 

IT.  The  Father's  love  of  believers  is  V.  In  this   dispensation   of  mercy 

on  account  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. —  God  has  abounded  to  us  in  all  wisdom 

He  accepts  them  for  the  sake  of  Christ  and  prudence. — The  most  glorious  dis- 

as  united  to  Christ.     Acceptance  dis-  play  of  God's  wisdom  is  in  the  work  of 

tinct  from  pardon.  our  redemption.     Here  the  perfections 

III.  The  Father's  acceptance  of  of  God  appear  in  the  brightest  lustre 
believers  is  an  act  of  sovereign  grace,  and  most  beautiful  harmony.  In  this 
— Irrespective  of  their  merit.  Neither  dispensation  there  is  a  door  of  hope 
the  necessity  of  the  atonement  nor  the  opened  to  the  most  unworthy,  believers 
obligation  of  faith  is  inconsistent  with  have  the  greatest  possible  security,  and 
acceptance  by  grace.  it  holds  forth  the  most  awful  terrors 

IV.  The  Father's  acceptance  of  be-  against  sin  and  the  most  powerful 
lievers  for  the  sake  of  Christ  promotes  motives  to  obedience. — Lathrop. 

His  own  glory. — His  glory  is  the  end 

of  all  things.     Implore  all  to  seek  ac-  Ver.  7.  Pardon  an  Act  of  Sovereign 

ceptance  with  God  through  Christ. —  Grace. — This  free  and  gracious  pleasure 

G,  Brooks.  of  God  or  purpose  of  His  will  to  act 

towards  sinners  according  to  His  own 

Vers.     7,     8.     Redemption     through  abundant   goodness   is   another   thing 

Christ.  that   influences   forgiveness.       Pardon 

I.  The  subjects  of  this  redemption,  flows  immediately  from  a  sovereign  act 
— Redemption,  though  offered  without  of  free  grace.  This  free  purpose  of 
distinction  to  all  who  hear  the  gospel,  God's  will  and  grace  for  the  pardoning 
is  actually  bestowed  only  on  those  who  of  sinners  is  that  which  is  principally 
repent  of  their  sins  and  believe  on  the  intended  when  we  say,  "  There  is 
Saviour.  forgiveness  with  Him  "  ;  that  is,  He  is 

II.  The  nature  of  this  redemption. —  pleased  to  forgive,  and  so  to  do  is  agree - 
There  is  a  twofold  redemption^-the  able  to  His  nature.  ISTow  the  mystery 
redemption  of  the  soul  from  the  guilt  of  this  grace  is  deep  ;  it  is  eternal,  and 
of  sin  by  pardon,  and  the  redemption  therefore  incomprehensible.  Few  there 
of  the  body  from  the  power  of  the  are  whose  hearts  are  raised  to  a  con- 
grave  by  the  resurrection.  The  former  templation  of  it.  Men  rest  and  con- 
of  these  is  intended.  But  these  two  tent  themselves  in  a  general  notion 
privileges  are  connected.  The  remis-  of  mercy  which  will  not  be  advantageous 
sion  of  sin,  which  is  a  release  from  our  to  their  souls.  Freed  they  would  be 
obligation  to  punishment,  is  accom-  from  punishment ;  but  what  it  is  to  be 
panied  with  a  title  to  eternal  life.  forgiven   they  inquire   not.     So  what 

III.  The  way  and  manner  in  which  they  know  of  it  they  come  easily  by,  but 
believers  become  partakers  of  this  will  find  in  the  issue  it  will  stand  them 
privilege. — Through  the  blood  of  Christ,  in  little  stead.  But  these  fountains  of 
The  death  of  Christ  is  the  ground  of  God's  actings  are  revealed  that  they 
our  hope.  Jesus  Christ,  through  whose  may  be  the  fountains  of  our  comforts, 
blood   we   obtain    forgiveness,   is    the  — John  Owen. 

Beloved.      This    character    of    Christ 

shows  the   excellence  of  His  sacrifice  Ver.  8.  The  Harmony  of  Christianity 

and  displays  the  grace  of  God  in  giving  in  its  Personal  Influence. 

Him  for  us.  I.  The  wisdom  and  prudence  of  the 

IV.  Observe  the  foundation  from  gospel  are  manifested  by  showing  with 
which  our  redemption  flows. — "  The  equal  distinctness  the  divine  justice 
riches  of  His  grace."  Every  blessing  and  mercy. — Justice  does  not  arrest 
bestowed  on  sinners  is  by  grace  ;  but  the  hand  of  mercy ;  mercy  does  not 
the  blessing  of  forgiveness  is  according  restrain  the   hand   of   justice.      They 

135 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


speak  with  a  united  voice,  they  com- 
mand with  a  united  authority,  they 
shine  with  a  united  glory.  Neither 
excels.  The  one  does  not  overbear  the 
other.  Their  common  splendour  is  like 
the  neutral  tint,  the  effulgent  colourless- 
ness of  the  undecom posed  ray. 

II.  By  exhibiting  the  incarnate 
Son  as  alike  the  object  of  love  and 
adoration. 

III.  By  insisting  most  uniformly 
on  divine  grace  and  human  responsi- 
bility. 

IV.  By  the  proposal  of  the  freest 
terms  of  acceptance  and  the  enforce- 
ment of  the  most  universal  practice  of 
obedience. 

Y.  By  inspiring  the  most  elevated 
joy  in  connection  with  the  deepest 
self- abhorrence. 

VI.  By  displaying  the  different  con- 
duct pursued  by  the  Deity  towards 
sin  and  the  sinner. 

VII.  By  combining  the  genuine 
humility  of  the  gospel  with  our  dignity 
as  creatures  and  our  conscientiousness 
as  saints. 

VIII.  By  causing  all  supernatural 
influence  to  operate  through  our 
rational  powers  and  by  intelligent 
means. 

IX.  By  resting  our  evidence  of 
safety  and  spiritual  welfare  upon 
personal  virtues. 

X.  By  supplying  the  absence  of 
enslaving  fear  with  salutary  caution. 

XI.  The  actual  existence  of  our  de- 
praved nature  and  the  work  of  sancti- 
fication  in  us  pressing  forward  to  its 
maturity  tend  to  that  regulated  tem- 
perament of  mind  which  we  urge. 

XII.  Certain  views  of  personal  con- 
duct are  so  coupled  in  the  gospel  with 
the  noblest  views  of  grace  that  any 
improper  warping  of  our  minds  is 
counteracted. 

XIII.  While  the  distinctive  bless- 
ings and  honours  of  the  Christian 
might  tend  to  elate  him,  he  is  affected 
by  the  most  opposite  motives. 

XIV.  God  abounds  in  this  wisdom 
and  prudence  towards  us  by  most 
strongly  abstracting  us  from  the 
things  of  earth  and  yet  giving  us  the 

136 


deepest  interest  in  its  relations  and 
engagements. — All  the  truths  of  revela- 
tion are  only  parts  of  one  system,  but 
their  effects  upon  the  believing  mind 
are  common  and  interchangeable. 
There  is  no  extraneous,  no  irreconcilable, 
no  confusing  element  in  Christianity. 
It  is  of  One  ;  it  is  one.  And  if  we  be 
Christians,  our  experience  will  be  the 
counterpart  of  it.  As  it  works  out 
from  apparent  shocks  and  collisions  its 
perfect  unity,  so  shall  our  experience 
be  wrought  in  the  same  way.  In  obey- 
ing from  our  hearts  its  form,  whatever 
of  its  influence  may  seem  to  interfere 
with  each  other,  they  will  all  be  found 
to  establish  our  heart ;  as  the  opposing 
currents  often  swell  the  tide  and  more 
proudly  waft  the  noble  bark  it  carries, 
as  the  counterbalancing  forces  of  the 
firmament  bear  the  star  onward  in  its 
unquivering  poise  and  un  deviating 
revolution. — JR.  W.  Hamilton. 

Vers.  9-12.  The  Mystery  of  the  Gospel. 

1.  The  sovereign  grace  of  God  in 
making  known  to  us  the  mystery 
of  His  will. — 1.  The  gospel  is  called 
the  mystery  of  God's  will,  the  mystery 
which  from  the  beginning  was  hid 
in  God,  and  the  unsearchable  riches 
of  Christ.  Not  that  these  phrases 
represent  the  gospel  as  obscure  and 
unintelligible,  but  that  the  gospel 
scheme  was  undiscoverable  by  the 
efforts  and  researches  of  human  reason, 
and  could  be  made  known  to  men 
only  by  the  light  of  divine  revela- 
tion. There  are  many  things  in  the 
gospel  which  are  and  will  remain  in- 
comprehensible to  human  reason  ;  but 
though  we  cannot  fully  comprehend 
them,  we  may  sufficiently  understand 
them. 

2.  God  has  made  known  to  us  His  will 
"  according  to  the  good  pleasure  which  He 
purposed  in  Himself" — Though  the 
reason  of  His  administration  is  not 
made  known  to  us,  yet  all  His  pur- 
poses are  directed  by  consummate 
wisdom.  He  is  Sovereign  in  the  distri- 
bution of  His  favours  ;  His  goodness  to 
us  is  no  wrong  to  the  heathen. 

II.  The  purpose  of  God  in  making 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  T. 


known  to  us  the  mystery  of  His  will 

(ver.  10). — 1.  The  gospel  is  called  "  the 
dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  times."  It 
was  introduced  at  the  time  exactly 
ordained  in  the  purpose,  and  expressly 
predicted  in  the  word  of  God,  and  in 
this  sense  may  be  called  "  the  dispensa- 
tion of  the  fulness  of  times." 

2.  One  end  of  this  dispensation  was 
that  God  "  might  gather  together  in  one 
all  things  in  Christ"  (ver.  10). — To  form 
one  body  in  Christ,  to  collect  one 
Church,  one  great  kingdom  under  Him. 

3.  The  gospel  is  intended  to  unite  in 
Christ  all  things  both  which  are  in  heaven 
and  which  are  in  earth. — The  Church  of 
Christ  consists  of  the  whole  family  in 
heaven  and  earth.  Here  is  a  powerful 
argument  for  Christian  love  and  for 
Christian  candour. 

III.  In  Him  we  have  obtained  an 
inheritance  that  we  should  be  to  the 
praise  of  His  glory  who  first  trusted 
in  Christ. — The  believing  Jews  were 
the  first  who  trusted  in  Christ.  They, 
with  the  believing  Gentiles,  were  made 
heirs  of  God,  not  only  to  the  privileges 
of  His  Church  on  earth,  but  to  an  in- 
heritance also  in  the  heavens.  As 
they  had  first  obtained  an  inheritance 
and  first  trusted  in  Christ,  so  they 
should  be  first  to  the  praise  of  God's 
g]  ory .  — La  throp. 

Ver.  10.  Christ  and  Creation. — If  the 
divine  purpose  of  salvation  was  regula- 
tive for  the  creation  of  the  world,  then 
must  salvation  as  well  as  creation  be 
grounded  on  the  original  Mediator. 
But  that  all  creation  should  be  thus 
grounded  in  Him  includes  a  twofold 
idea — that  not  only  were  all  things 
created  by  Him,  but  also  for  Him,  who 
is  to  bring  to  completion  both  the 
saving  purpose  of  God  as  also  the 
whole  development  of  the  world  which 
tends  towards  the  realisation  of  the 
purpose  of  God.  And  because  the 
world  has  not  yet  reached  this  goal, 
then  all  things  have  progressively  their 
existence  in  Him  ;  and  it  cannot  fail, 
because  the  goal  of  the  world  estab- 
lished in  Him  must  be  realised.  But 
how  this  goal  of  the  world  is  conceived 


of,  this  verse  shows,  when  it  is  men- 
tioned as  the  final  goal  of  the  institu- 
tion of  God's  grace  that  all  things  may 
be  gathered  in  Christ  as  in  a  centre. 
He  has  been  appointed  to  be  this 
central  point  of  the  universe,  as  the 
universe  was  create  din  Him;  but  here 
it  is  pointed  out  that  He  must  again 
become  so,  because  a  dislocation  in  the 
original  constitution  of  the  world  has 
taken  place  by  sin,  whose  removal 
again  the  dispensation  of  grace  must 
have  in  view.  The  goal  of  the  world 
is  no  longer  regarded  as  the  perfected 
kingdom  of  God,  in  which  the  absolute, 
universal  Lordship  of  God  is  realised, 
in  contrast  to  the  earthly,  mediatorial 
Lordship  of  Christ,  which  the  latter 
gives  back  to  the  Father,  and  that  the 
exaltation  of  Christ  is  extended  over 
everything  which  has  a  name  both  in 
this  world  and  in  the  future.  One 
cannot  think  of  the  goal  of  the  world 
without  Him  in  whom  even  creation 
has  its  root. — Weiss. 

Vers.  11, 12.  Christ  the  Inheritance  of 
the  Saints. — 1.  Christ  the  Mediator  is 
that  person  in  whom  believers  have 
this  heavenly  inheritance,  as  they  have 
all  their  other  spiritual  blessings  lead- 
ing to  heaven  in  Him.  Every  believer 
hath  already  obtained  this  glorious 
inheritance,  though  not  in  complete 
personal  possession.  2.  As  God  is  an 
absolute  worker,  sovereign  Lord  of  all 
His  actions,  His  will  being  His  only 
rule,  so  His  will  is  always  joined  with 
and  founded  upon  the  light  of  counsel 
and  wisdom,  and  therefore  He  can  will 
nothing  but  what  is  equitable  and  just. 
3.  It  is  no  small  privilege  for  any  to 
be  trusters  in  Christ  before  others. 
It  is  a  matter  of  their  commenda- 
tion ;  it  glorifies  God  in  so  far  as  their 
example  and  experience  may  prove  an 
encouraging  motive  to  others.  It 
carries  several  advantages ;  the  sooner 
a  man  closes  with  Christ,  the  work  will 
be  done  more  easily,  he  is  the  sooner 
freed  from  sin,  the  sooner  capacitated 
to  do  more  service  to  God,  and  his  con- 
cernments are  the  sooner  out  of  hazard. 
— Fergusson. 

137 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


Ver.  13.  The  Gospel  of  your  Salva- 
tion. 

I.  The  import  of  the  salvation  pro- 
claimed in  the  gospel. — It  is  deliver- 
ance from  all  the  evils  that  have  been 
brought  on  us  by  the  Fall.  1.  From 
ignorance,  not  of  science,  but  of  God. 
2.  From  guilt,  or  the  penalty  which  the 
law  inflicts.  3.  From  the  power  of  sin, 
of  which  we  are  slaves.  4.  From  the 
sorrows  and  calamities  of  life,  which 
it  does  not  remove,  but  alleviate  and 
transform.  5.  From  the  power  and 
fear  of  death.  6.  From  everlasting 
perdition. 

II.  The  persons  to  whom  this  view 
of  the  gospel  is  specially  applicable. 
— 1.  To  the  unconverted.  It  teaches 
them  what  they  are.  2.  To  the 
awakened.  It  teaches  them  what 
they  need.  3.  To  believers.  It 
awakens  their  gratitude,  it  reproves 
their  lukewarmness,  it  stimulates  their 
charity. 

III.  The  reflections  to  which  this 
view  of  the  gospel  gives  rise. — How 
precious  in  our  estimation  should  be — 

(1)  the  gospel,  (2)  the  Saviour,  (3)  the 
Saviour's  work,  (4)  the  Saviour's  or- 
dinances, (5)  the  Saviour's  servants 
and  people,  (6)  the  Saviour's  second 
coming. — G.  Brooks. 

The  Truth  and  Divinity  of  the 
Christian  Religion. 

I.  It  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that 
God  should  at  some  time  or  season 
fully  and  clearly  reveal  unto  men  the 
truth  concerning  Himself  and  concern- 
ing them  as  He  and  they  stand  related 
to  each  other,  concerning  His  nature 
and  will,  concerning  our  state  and 
duty. — Argued  from  (1)  His  goodness, 

(2)  His  wisdom,  (3)  His  justice,  (4)  His 
divine  majesty. 

II.  That  no  other  revelation  of  that 
kind  and  importance  has  been  made, 
which  can  with  good  probability  pre- 
tend to  have  thus  proceeded  from  God, 
so  as  by  Him  to  have  been  designed 
for  a  general,  perpetual,  complete 
instruction  and  obligation  of  mankind. 
— 1.  Paganism  did  not  proceed  from 
divine    revelation,     but    from   human 

138 


invention  or  diabolical  suggestion. 
All  the  pagan  religions  vanished,  to- 
gether with  the  countenance  of  secular 
authority  and  power  sustaining  them. 

2.  Mohammedanism     an     imposture. 

3.  Judaism  was  defective.  (1)  This 
revelation  was  not  general — not 
directed,  nor  intended  to  instruct  and 
oblige  mankind.  (2)  As  this  revelation 
was  particular,  so  was  it  also  partial — 
as  God  did  not  by  it  speak  His  mind  to 
all,  so  did  He  not  therein  speak  oub  all 
His  mind.  (3)  It  was  not  designed  for 
perpetual  obligation  and  use. 

Conclusion. — No  other  religion, 
except  Christianity,  which  has  been 
or  is  in  being,  can  reasonably  pretend 
to  have  proceeded  from  God  as  a 
universal,  complete,  and  final  declara- 
tion of  His  mind  and  will  to  mankind. — 
Barrow. 

Vers.  13,  14.  The  Assurance  of  the 
Christian  Inheritance. — By  the  first  act 
of  faith  the  whole  tendencies  of  man's 
life  are  reversed.  Until  then  the 
present  has  been  his  world  and  the 
earth  his  place  of  rest ;  then,  by  the 
inspiration  of  the  cross,  a  spiritual 
world  dawns  upon  his  view,  that  ever- 
lasting region  becomes  his  home,  and 
life  assumes  the  character  of  a  pilgrim- 
age. We  need  to  have  the  deep 
assurance  of  the  immortal  kingdom  in 
order  to  live  an  earnest  life  in  a  world 
like  this. 

I.  The  nature  of  the  assurance. — 
The  voices  of  promises  in  the  Christian's 
soul — the  longings,  aspirations,  hopes, 
rising  from  the  Spirit  of  God  within  us 
— are  more  than  promises ;  they  are 
earnests,  i.e.  most  certain  assurances 
of  the  inheritance  to  come.  This  in- 
heritance of  spiritual  life  consists  of 
three  great  elements — love,  power, 
blessedness. 

II.  The  necessity  of  the  assurance. 
— The  inheritance  is  given,  but  not 
reached.  Between  the  gift  and  its 
attainment  there  lies  a  long  path  of 
conflict  in  which  the  old  struggle 
between  the  flesh  and  the  Spirit  reveals 
itself  in  three  forms  :  1 .  Sense  against 
the  soul ;    2.  The  present  against  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  I. 


future;  3.  Steadfast  work  against 
the  roving  propensities  of  the  heart. — 
E.  L.  Hull. 

The  Holy  Spirit  and  the  Earnest  of  the 
Inheritance. 

I.  The  character  of  the  inheritance. 
—The  teaching  of  the  passage  is  that 
heaven  is  likest  the  selectest  moments 
of  devotion  that  a  Christian  has  on 
earth.  Heaven  is  the  perfecting  of  the 
life  of  the  Spirit  begun  here,  and  the 
loftiest  attainments  of  that  life  here 
are  but  the  beginnings  and  infantile 
movements  of  immature  beings. 

II.  The  grounds  of  certainty  that 
we  shall  ultimately  possess  the  fulness 
of  the  inheritance. — The  true  ground 
of  certainty  lies  in  this,  that  you  have 
the  Spirit  in  your  heart,  operating  His 
own  likeness  and  moulding  you,  sealing 
you,  after  His  own  stamp  and  image. 
1.  The  very  fact  of  such  a  relation 
between  man  and  God  is  itself  the  great 
assurance  of  immortality  and  everlast- 
ing life.  2.  The  characteristics  that 
are  produced  by  this  Holy  Spirit's  in- 
dwelling, both  in  the  perfectness  and 
imperfection,  are  the  great  guarantee 
of  the  inheritance  being  ours.  3.  The 
Holy  Spirit  in  a  man's  heart  makes 
him  desire  and  believe  in  the  inherit- 
ance.— A.  Maclaren. 

The  Faith  of  the  Early  Christians. 

I.  The  object  of  their  faith.— The 
word  of  truth  and  the  gospel  of  salva- 
tion. It  is  the  word  of  truth.  It 
contains  all  that  truth  which  concerns 
our  present  duty  and  our  future  glory. 
It  comes  attended  with  demonstrations 
of  its  own  divinity.  It  is  the  gospel  of 
our  salvation.  It  discovers  to  us  our 
ruined,  helpless  condition,  the  mercy  of 
God  to  give  us  salvation,  the  way  in 
which  it  is  procured  for  us,  the  terms 
on  which  we  may  become  interested  in 
it,  the  evidences  by  which  our  title  to 
it  must  be  ascertained,  and  the  glory 
and  happiness  it  comprehends. 

II.  The  forwardness  and  yet  the 
reasonableness  of  their  faith. — They 
trusted  in  Christ  after  they  heard  the 
word.      They    acted    as    honest    and 


rational  men  :  they  did  not  trust  before 
they  heard  it,  nor  refused  to  trust  after 
they  heard  it.  They  did  not  take  the 
gospel  on  the  credit  of  other  men  with- 
out examination  ;  nor  did  they  reject 
it  when  they  had  an  opportunity  to 
examine  it  for  themselves.  Their  faith 
stood  not  in  the  wisdom  of  men,  but  in 
the  power  of  God. 

III.  The  happy  consequence  of 
their  faith. — They  were  "  sealed  with 
the  Spirit  of  promise,  which  is  the 
earnest  of  our  inheritance."  They 
became  partakers  of  such  a  divine 
influence  as  sanctified  them  to  a  meet- 
ness  for  heaven,  and  thus  evidenced 
their  title  to  it. 

1.  The  sealing  of  the  Spirit. — Sealing 
literally  signifies  the  impression  of  the 
image  or  likeness  of  one  thing  upon 
another.  A  seal  impressed  on  wax 
leaves  there  its  own  image.  Instruc- 
tion is  said  to  be  sealed  when  it  is  so 
impressed  on  the  heart  as  to  have  an 
abiding  influence.  So  the  sealing  of 
believers  is  their  receiving  on  their 
hearts  the  divine  image  and  character 
by  the  sanctifying  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  The  word  of  truth  is  here 
considered  as  the  seal,  the  believing 
heart  as  the  subject,  the  Holy  Spirit 
as  the  agent  or  sealer,  and  the  effect 
produced  as  a  divine  likeness.  By 
a  like  metaphor  Christians  are  repre- 
sented as  cast  in  the  mould  of  the 
gospel.  The  same  idea  is  conveyed  by 
the  metaphor  of  writing  the  word  on 
the  heart. 

2.  The  earnest  of  the  Spirit. — The 
Spirit,  having  sealed  believers  or 
sanctified  them  after  God's  image,  be- 
comes an  earnest  of  their  inheritance. 
The  firstfruits  were  pledges  of  the 
ensuing  harvest ;  earnest-money  in  a 
contract  is  a  pledge  of  the  fulfilment 
of  it.  So  the  graces  and  comforts  of 
religion  are  to  Christians  the  anticipa- 
tions and  foretastes  of  the  happiness 
which  awaits  them  in  heaven.  (1)  The 
virtues  of  the  Christian  temper,  which 
are  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  are  to 
believers  an  earnest  of  their  inherit- 
ance because  they  are  in  part  a  fulfil- 
ment of  the  promise  which  conveys  the 

139 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


inheritance.  (2)  They  are  an  earnest 
as  they  are  preparatives  for  it.  (3)  The 
sealing  and  sanctifying  influence  of  the 
Spirit  is  especially  called  an  earnest  of 
the  inheritance  because  it  is  a  part  of 
the  inheritance  given  beforehand.  It 
is  the  earnest  till  the  redemption  of 
the  purchased  possession.  When  we 
actually  possess  the  inheritance  the 
earnest  will  be  no  longer  needed. 


Lessons. — 1.  All  the  operations  of  the 
Spirit  on  the  minds  of  men  are  of  a 
holy  nature  and  tendency.  2.  We  are 
strongly  encouraged  to  apply  to  God  for 
the  needful  influences  of  His  grace 
3.  We  can  have  no  conclusive  evidence  of 
a  title  to  heaven  without  the  experience 
of  a  holy  temper.  4.  Christians  are 
under  indispensable  obligations  to  uni- 
versal holiness. — Lathrop. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH. —Verses  15—18. 

Prayer  for  Higher  Spiritual  Knowledge — 

I.  Thankfully  acknowledges  the  grace  already  possessed  (vers.  15,  16). — The 
possession  of  some  grace  prompts  the  prayer  for  more.  The  apostle  recognises 
the  faith  of  the  Ephesians  in  the  person  and  work  of  Christ  and  the  love  they 
displayed  towards  the  saints.  Knowing  the  source  of  that  grace  and  that  the 
supply  was  unlimited,  he  thanks  G-od  and  is  encouraged  to  pray  for  its  increase. 
How  slow  we  are  to  see  the  good  in  others  and  to  thank  Gocl  for  any  good  found 
in  ourselves  !  Ingratitude  dulls  our  sensibilities  and  chills  the  breath  of  prayer. 
If  we  were  more  thankful,  we  should  be  more  prayerful.  The  way  to  excite 
gratitude  is  to  interest  ourselves  in  the  highest  welfare  of  others. 

II.  Invokes  the  impartation  of  additional  spiritual  insight  (vers.  17,  18). — 
The  apostle  prays,  not  for  temporal  good  or  for  prosperity  in  outward  things,  or 
even  for  the  cessation  of  trouble  and  persecution,  but  for  an  accession  of  mental 
and  spiritual  blessings.  He  prays  for  the  opening  of  the  eye  of  the  mind  that 
the  vision  of  spiritual  realities  may  be  more  clear  and  reliable,  and  that  the  soul 
may  be  possessed  with  a  fuller  knowledge  of  Christ.  The  highest  wisdom  is 
gained  by  a  more  accurate  conception  of  Him  "  in  whom  are  hid  all  the  treasures 
of  wisdom  and  knowledge."  Sin  enters  the  heart  through  the  avenue  of  the  senses 
and  passions,  grace  through  a  spiritually  enlightened  understanding.  Pride, 
prejudice,  and  error  are  expelled  from  the  mind  not  so  much  by  the  repression  of 
evil  tendencies  as  by  the  entrance  and  maintenance  of  superior  moral  truths. 
The  revelation  of  the  Spirit  in  the  word  will  not  suffice,  unless  the  light  of  the 
same  Spirit  shines  through  every  faculty  and  power  of  the  inquiring  soul. 
"  Man's  knowledge  is  not  perfect  within  the  domain  of  creation,  still  less  can  he 
know  the  things  of  the  invisible  world.  Only  by  living  in  a  sphere  does  he  gather 
knowledge  of  what  is  found  there :  knowledge  comes  from  experience  of  occurrences. 
Without  a  disposition  of  the  heart  the  sense  of  the  understanding  is  not  enlarged 
and  sharpened.  Sensible,  mental,  spiritual  knowledge  refers  to  life  spheres  in 
which  he  who  knows  must  move.  Only  the  believing,  loving,  longing  one  knows 
and  grows  in  knowledge  unto  knowledge."  We  need,  therefore,  continually  to 
pray  for  the  Spirit  of  wisdom — a  keener  spiritual  insight. 

III.  Unveils  the  grandeur  of  the  divine  inheritance  in  believers. — "  That  ye 
may  know  what  is  the  hope  of  His  calling,  and  what  the  riches  of  the  glory  of 
His  inheritance  in  the  saints"  (ver.  18).  The  increase  of  spiritual  knowledge  is 
an  ever-widening  revelation  of  the  value  and  splendour  of  divine  blessings  already 
possessed  and  in  prospect  of  possession.  Faith  enjoys  the  inheritance  now,  and 
hope  anticipates  an  ampler  revelation  and  richer  experience  of  its  unspeakable 
blessedness.  The  phrase  "  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  His  inheritance  "  indicates 
how  utterly  inadequate  human  language  is  to  describe  its  boundless  spiritual 
wealth.  It  is  an  inheritance  implying  union  to  Him  who  only  hath  immortality 
and  is  eternal.     Rust  cannot  corrupt  it,  nor  decay  consume,  nor  death  destroy. 

140 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  I. 


We  have  not  only  an  inheritance  in  Christ,  but  He  has  also  an  inheritance  in  us. 
He  finds  more  in  us  than  we  find  ourselves,  and  we  should  never  know  it  was  there 
but  for  the  revelation  of  Himself  within  us. 

Lessons. — 1.  Prayer  and  thanksgiving  go  together.  2.  The  soul  needs  a  daily 
revelation  of  truth.  3.  The  highest  spiritual  truths  are  made  known  to  the  soul  that 
prays. 


GERM  NOTES   ON  THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  15-18.  Clearer  Discernment  in 
Divine  Things  desired. 

I.  The  things  for  which  the  apostle 
commends  the  Ephesians. — Their  faith 
in  Jesus  and  love  to  the  saints  (ver.  1 5). 
1.  Faith  is  such  a  sensible,  realising 
belief  of  the  gospel  in  its  general  truth 
and  in  its  particular  doctrines  and 
precepts  as  gives  it  a  practical  influence 
on  the  heart  and  life  ;  it  looks  up  to 
God  through  Christ ;  it  is  made  perfect 
by  works.  2.  Faith  is  accompanied 
with  love.  Viewing  and  applying  the 
examples  and  doctrines  of  the  gospel, 
it  purifies  the  soul  unto  unfeigned  love 
of  the  brethren.  The  gospel  requires 
us  to  love  all  men,  sinners  as  well  as 
saints,  enemies  as  well  as  friends.  If 
we  love  God  for  His  moral  perfections, 
we  shall  love  the  saints  as  far  as  they 
appear  to  have  these  divine  qualities 
wrought  into  their  temper.  Our  love 
is  not  to  be  confined  to  a  party,  to 
those  who  live  in  the  same  city  and 
worship  in  the  same  sanctuary,  but 
embraces  all. 

II.  Paul  expresses  his  great  thank- 
fulness to  God  for  the  success  of  the 
gospel. — "  I  cease  not  to  give  thanks  " 
(ver.  16).  He  rejoiced  in  the  honour 
which  redounded  to  the  crucified  Jesus. 
He  rejoiced  to  think  how  many  were 
rescued  from  the  power  of  Satan,  and 
in  the  consequences  which  might  ensue 
to  others.  If  the  prevalence  of  religion 
is  matter  of  thankfulness,  we  should 
spare  no  pains  to  give  it  success. 

III.  He  prays  for  the  future  success 
of  the  gospel  (ver.  16). — The  best 
Christians  have  need  to  make  continual 
improvement.  Paul  was  no  less 
constant  in  his  prayers  than  in  his 
labours  for  the  spiritual  interest  of 
mankind.  He  knew  that  the  success 
of  all  his  labours  depended  on  God's 


blessing  ;  he  therefore  added  to  them 
his  fervent  prayers.  When  ministers 
and  people  strive  together  in  their 
prayers,  there  is  reason  to  hope  for 
God's  blessing  on  both. 

IV.  He  prayed  for  spiritual  en- 
lightenment (vers.  17,  18). — That  they 
may  seek  wisdom  from  God  to  under- 
stand the  revelation  He  has  given, 
and  such  an  illumination  of  mind  as 
to  discern  the  nature  and  excellence  of 
the  things  contained  in  this  reve^tion. 
Christians  must  not  content  themselves 
with  their  present  knowledge,  but 
aspire  to  all  riches  of  the  full  assur- 
ance of  understanding. 

V.  He  prayed  for  power  to  appre- 
ciate Christian  privileges  (ver.  18). — 
To  know  the  hope  of  the  divine 
calling,  the  possibility  and  assurance  of 
attaining  the  heavenly  kingdom.  To 
know  what  a  rich  and  glorious  inherit- 
ance God  has  prepared  for  and 
promised  to  the  saints.  Though  we 
cannot  comprehend  its  dimensions  nor 
compute  its  value,  yet  when  we  con- 
sider the  grace  of  the  Being  who 
conveys  it,  the  riches  of  the  price 
which  brought  it,  and  the  divine 
preparation  by  which  the  heirs  are 
formed  to  enjoy  it,  we  must  conceive  it 
to  be  unspeakably  glorious. — Lathrop. 

The  Apprehension  of  Spiritual  Bless- 
ings. 

I.  Further  spiritual  blessings  are  to 
be  apprehended  by  the  saints,  there- 
fore their  condition  is  a  relative  one. 
— The  Ephesians  had  already  received 
spiritual  blessings  (vers.  11-15).  How 
much  more  is  here.  The  possessed 
bears  some  proportion  to  what  is  to  be 
received.  Without  this  relative  view 
the  estimate  is  vague  and  erroneous. 
The  further   gifts  consist  specially  in 

141 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


the  clearer  sight  and  the  more  certain 
and  enlarged  experience  of  what  they 
already  saw  and  possessed.  "  Him," 
"  His  calling,"  "  His  inheritance," 
"  His  mighty  power  " — these  were  to 
be  theirs  in  a  degree  of  exceeding 
greatness  and  glory. 

II.  Unless  saints  apprehend  bless- 
ings now  attainable,  they  live  below 
their  privilege. — "  If  thou  knewest 
the  gift  of  God,  thou  wouldest  have 
asked  of  Him."  Without  some  know- 
ledge there  is  neither  faith  nor  desire. 
With  these  unveilings  the  heart  is 
deeply  moved  with  the  sense  of  obliga- 
tion to  possess,  it  is  attracted  and  filled 
with  desire  and  animation.  Otherwise, 
with  an  ignorant  satisfaction,  the 
condition  must  remain  relatively  lean 
and  impoverished. 

III.  The  spiritual  apprehension  of 
these  blessings  is  the  gift  of  God. — 
This  is  needed  because  of  their  divine 
nature.  As  we  cannot  properly  see 
what  the  sun  has  called  into  life  and 
beauty  without  his  light,  so  these 
blessings  are  truly  seen  only  in  the 
light  of  the  San  of  Righteousness. 
Through  the  Redeemer  the  Spirit  is 
given.  He  gives  the  Spirit  to  enlighten 
both  the  object  and  the  eye,  to 
"testify,"  to  "show,"  to  "glorify,"  to 
reveal,  "  that  we  might  know  the 
things  that  are  freely  given  to  us  of 
God."  Thus  these  blessings  are  seen, 
not  distantly  and  dimly,  but  in  their 
nearness  and  unveiled  glory,  whilst  He 
creates  in  the  heart  corresponding 
sympathy,  desire,  and  assurance. 
Nothing  can  compensate  for  this  gift — 
no  mere  intelligence,  no  reflection  upon 
past  experience,  no  mere  help  from 
others. 

IV.  This  gift  is  bestowed  in  answer 
to  prayer. — This  particular  bestowment 
comes  under  the  promise  of  the  Spirit 
to  believing  prayer.  This  is  a  gift. 
Gifts  are  asked  for,  not  made  ours  in 
any  other 'way.  This  gift  is  awaiting 
and  challenging  prayer,  importunate 
prayer.  That  an  ever-deepening  desire 
for  these  spiritual  gifts  may  be  ours,  let 
us  often  ask — What  truths  are  given  to 
me,   which,  if  the  eyes  of  my  under- 

142 


standing  were  enlightened,  would  now 
exert  the  most  positive  influence  over 
me,  lifting  me  into  the  clearer  light  of 
God's  relations,  thus  empowering  me 
to  live  above  the  standard  of  natural 
strength,  and  so  to  fulfil  His  present 
designs  1  Think  of  the  alternative. — 
J.  Holmes. 

Vers.  15,  16.  True  Religion  self- 
revealing — 

I.  In  its  moral  results. — "  Faith  and 
love  "  (ver.  15). 

II.  Is  evident  to  others. — "  I  heard 
of  your  faith"  (ver.   15). 

III.  Is  the  occasion  of  constant 
thanksgiving. — "  Cease  not  to  give 
thanks  for  you"  (ver.  16). 

IV.  Calls  forth  a  spirit  of  prayer. 
— "  Making  mention  of  you  in  my 
prayers  "  (ver.  1 6). 

Vers.  17, 18.  Spiritual  Enlightenment. 
— 1.  The  wisdom  which  Christians  are 
to  seek  is  not  that  carnal  wisdom  which 
is  emnity  to  God,  nor  natural  wisdom 
or  knowledge  of  the  hidden  mysteries 
of  nature,  nor  the  wisdom  of  divine 
mysteries,  which  is  only  a  gift  and 
floweth  from  a  common  influence  of 
the  Spirit,  but  that  whereof  the  Spirit 
of  God  by  His  special  operation  and 
influence  is  author  and  worker,  and  is 
more  than  a  gift,  even  the  grace  of 
wisdom,  which  is  not  acquired  by  our 
own  industry,  but  cometh  from  above. 
2.  It  is  not  sufficient  for  attaining  this 
grace  of  wisdom  that  the  truths  be 
plainly  revealed  by  the  Spirit  in 
Scripture.  There  must  be  the  removal 
of  natural  darkness  from  our  under- 
standings that  we  may  be  enabled  to 
take  up  that  which  is  revealed,  as  in 
beholding  colours  by  the  outward  sense 
there  must  be  not  only  an  outward 
light  to  make  the  object  conspicuous, 
but  also  the  faculty  of  seeing  in  the 
eye.  A  blind  man  cannot  see  at  noon- 
day, nor  the  sharpest-sighted  at  mid- 
night. 3.  Though  those  excellent 
things  which  are  not  yet  possessed,  but 
only  hoped  for,  are  known  in  part,  yet 
so  excellent  are  they  in  themselves, 
and  remote  from  our  knowledge,  and 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS.  chap,  l 


so  much  are  we  taken  up  with  trifles  communicated  to  us  through  Him,  in 

and  childish  toys,  that  even  believers  whom  we  have  received  the   adoption 

who  have  their  thoughts  most  exercised  of  children  and  are  made  heirs  and  co- 

about     them    are    in     a    great    part  heirs  with  Christ.     5.  It  is  a  glorious 

ignorant  of  them.     4.    As  the  things  inheritance,  there  being  nothing  there 

hoped  for  and  really  to  be  enjoyed  in  but  what  is  glorious.     The  sight  shall 

the  other  life  are  of  the  nature  of  an  be   glorious,   for  we  shall  see  God  as 

inheritance  not    purchased  by  us  but  we   are   seen,  the   place  glorious,  the 

freely  bestowed  upon  us,   so  they  are  company  glorious,  our  souls  and  bodies 

properly  Christ's  inheritance,  who  has  shall     be    glorious,    and   our    exercise 

proper  right  to  it  as  the  natural  Son  glorious,  giving  glory  to  God  for  ever 

of    God   and   by  virtue   of    His    own  and  ever. — Fergusson. 
purchase ;    but   the   right  we  have  is 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH,— Verses  19—23. 

The  Church  Complete  in  Christ. 

1.  The  Church  is  the  creation  of  divine  power  (ver.  19). — The  Church  does 
not  consist  in  massive  architecture  or  ornate  decorations,  not  in  ecclesiastical 
organisations  and  councils.  It  is  not  the  offspring  of  the  most  elaborately  con- 
structed creed.  It  is  not  confined  within  the  limits  of  the  most  expansive 
ecclesiastical  epithet.  It  is  a  divine,  spiritual  creation.  It  consists  of  souls 
redeemed  by  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus,  clinging  to  Him  for  pardon,  peace,  and 
righteousness,  and  created  in  Him,  by  "  the  working  of  the  mighty  power  "  of  the 
divine  Spirit,  for  good  works,  and  therefore  continually  striving  to  disseminate 
the  good  they  have  themselves  received.  The  apostolic  idea  of  the  Church  was 
coloured  by  the  leading  characteristic  of  the  man.  To  St.  Peter  it  was  the 
Church  as  influenced  by  law — the  confessing  Church ;  to  St.  Paul  it  was  the 
Church  influenced  by  the  freedom  of  faith — the  witnessing  Church  ;  to  St.  John 
it  was  the  Church  as  filled  with  the  ideality  of  faith — working  and  keeping  joyful 
holiday,  the  adorned  Bride  (Rev.  xix.  7,  8).  The  Church  is  a  constant  revela- 
tion of  "  the  exceeding  greatness  of  His  power"  who  first  originated  it  and 
sustains  its  ever- widening  growth. 

II.  The  divine  power  that  creates  the  Church  instals  Christ  as  the  supreme 
authority. — 1.  This  power  raised  Christ  from  the  deepest  humiliation  to  the  highest 
dignity  (vers.  20,  21).  It  raised  Him  from  the  cross  to  the  throne,  from  the 
domain  of  the  dead  to  the  life  and  everlasting  glory  of  the  heavenly  world. 
"  God  ascended  with  jubilation,  and  the  Lord  with  the  sound  of  the  trumpet. 
Certainly,  if  when  He  brought  His  only  begotten  Son  into  the  world  He  said, 
1  Let  all  the  angels  worship  Him ' ;  much  more,  now  that  He  ascends  on  high  and 
hath  led  captivity  captive,  hath  He  given  Him  a  name  above  all  names,  that  at 
the  name  of  Jesus  all  knees  should  bow.  And  if  the  holy  angels  did  so  carol  at 
His  birth  in  the  very  entrance  into  that  estate  of  humiliation  and  infirmity, 
with  what  triumph  they  receive  Him  now  returning  from  the  perfect  achieve- 
ment of  man's  redemption  !  And  if,  when  His  type  had  vanquished  Goliath  and 
carried  the  head  into  Jerusalem,  the  damsels  came  forth  to  meet  him  with  dances 
and  timbrels,  how  shall  we  think  those  angelic  spirits  triumph  in  meeting  the 
great  Conqueror  of  hell  and  death  !  How  did  they  sing,  '  Lift  up  your  heads, 
O  ye  gates  ;  and  be  ye  lift  up,  ye  everlasting  doors ;  and  the  King  of  glory  shall 
come  in  '  !  " 

2.  This  power  invests  Christ  with  supreme  rule  and  authority  (ver.  22).  On 
the  night  when  Christ  was  born  what  a  difference  was  there  in  all  outward 
marks  of  distinction  between  the  child  of  the  Hebrew  mother  as  He  lay  in  His 

143 


chap.  i.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


lowly  cradle,  and  the  Augustus  Caesar,  whose  edict  brought  Mary  to  Bethlehem, 
as  he  reposed  in  his  imperial  palace.  And  throughout  the  lifetime  of  the  two 
there  was  but  little  to  lessen  that  distinction.  The  name  of  the  one  was  known 
and  honoured  over  the  whole  civilised  globe,  the  name  of  the  Other  scarce  heard 
of  beyond  the  narrow  bounds  of  Judea.  How  stands  it  now  1  The  throne  of 
the  Caesars,  the  throne  of  mere  human  authority  and  power,  has  perished.  But 
the  empire  of  Jesus,  the  empire  of  pure,  undying,  self-sacrificing  love,  will  never 
perish  ;  its  sway  over  the  consciences  and  hearts  of  men,  as  the  world  grows 
older,  becomes  ever  wider  and  stronger  (Hanna).  The  rule  of  Christ  will  last 
till  all  enemies  are  subdued,  and  obedience  to  Him  becomes  a  reverential  and 
joyous  experience. 

III.  The  Church  is  complete  as  it  is  endowed  with  the  divine  fulness  of  Christ 
(ver.  23). — The  Church  to-day  seems  broken  into  fragments,  torn  by  divisions 
and  strife;  but  by-and-by  it  will  blend  in  a  glorious  unity.  Take  a  mass  of 
quicksilver,  let  it  fall  on  the  floor,  and  it  will  split  into  a  vast  number  of  distinct 
globules ;  gather  them  up,  and  put  them  together  again,  and  they  will  coalesce 
into  one  body  as  before.  Thus  God's  people  below  are  sometimes  divided  into 
various  parties,  though  they  are  all  in  fact  members  of  one  and  the  same  mystic 
body.  But  when  taken  up  from  the  world  and  put  together  in  heaven  they  will 
constitute  one  glorious,  undivided  Church  for  ever  and  ever.  The  completeness 
of  the  Church  is  not  the  aggregation  of  all  the  virtues  of  the  saints  blended  in 
beauteous  and  harmonious  unity,  but  the  glory  of  the  divine  fulness  that 
pervades  every  part. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  Church  as  a  divine  creation  is  a  revelation  of  Christ  2.  The 
Church  is  composed  of  those  who  are  created  anew  in  Christ  Jesus.  3.  Christ  is 
everything  to  His  Church. 


GERM  NOTES   ON    THE    VERSES. 

Vers.     19-23.     The      Dignity     and  He  is  exalted  not  only  as  Baler,  but  also 

Dominion  of  Christ.  as  Intercessor. 

I.  The  first  step  in  Christ's  exalta-  III.  The  exaltation  of  Christ  is 
tion  was  the  resurrection  from  the  supreme. — His  kingdom  extends  to  all 
dead. — This  miracle  is  an  incontestable  creatures  in  heaven,  earth,  and  under 
evidence  of  the  truth  of  the  Christian  the  earth.  The  government  of  the 
religion,  and  an  evidence  of  the  great  natural  world  is  in  His  hands,  as  well 
doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of  the  as  the  government  of  the  Church.  He 
body  and  a  future  life,  and  of  the  has  dominion  over  devils.  His  last 
efficacy  of  Christ's  blood  to  expiate  and  most  glorious  act  is  the  judgment 
the  guilt  of  our  sins.     If  we  believe  of  the  world. 

that   Jesus   died   and   rose   again,  we  IV;  The  end  for  which  Christ  exer- 

must  believe  that  the  same    mighty  cises  His  high  and  extensive  dominion 

power  which  wrought  in  Him  can  also  (vers.  22,  23). — All  His  government  is 

work  in  us  to  raise  us  from  the  dead.  managed  in  reference  to  the  good  of 

II.  The  next  step  is  His  ascension  the  Church.  See  how  criminal  and 
to  heaven  and  session  at  God's  right  dangerous  it  is  to  oppose  the  interest 
hand  (ver.  20).  The  right  hand  is  the  of  the  Church.  If  the  Church  is 
place  of  honour  and  respect,  and  de-  Christ's  body,  let  us  honour  it,  study  to 
notes  superior  dignity.  Christ  sitting  preserve  unity  in  it,  labour  for  its 
at  God's  right  hand  signifies  He  has  edification  and  comfort.  Let  us  honour 
ceased  from  His  labours  and  sufferings  and  reverence  our  Head,  and  never 
and  entered  into  a  state  of  repose  and  presumptuously  lift  up  ourselves  against 
joy,  and  imports  authority  and  power.  the  Church. — Lathrop. 

144 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  I. 


Ver.  19.  The  Power  of  God  in  Con- 
version.— 1.  The  power  God  exercises 
in  converting  and  carrying  on  the 
work  of  grace  to  glory  is  not  only 
great,  but  exceeds  all  power  that  might 
impede  that  work,  so  that  there  is  no 
power  in  the  devil,  the  world,  sin,  or 
death  which  this  power  does  not  over- 
come, nor  any  im  potency  in  believers 
which  this  greatness  of  power  will  not 
help  and  strengthen.  There  is  no 
more  pregnant  proof  of  God's  omnipo- 
tent power  than  in  converting  sinners 
from  sin  to  holiness.  2.  This  mighty 
power  of  God  extends  to  all  times.  It 
works  in  the  first  conversion  of  be- 
lievers, preserves  them  in  a  state  of 
grace,  actuating  their  graces  that  they 
may  grow,  and  continues  till  their 
graces  are  perfected.  3.  The  experi- 
mental knowledge  of  God's  way  of 
working  is  to  be  carefully  sought  after, 
to  make  us  thankful  for  His  gracious 
working  in  us,  in  order  that  our  know- 
ledge of  God  may  be  increased  and  our 
faith  and  hope  in  Him  strengthened. — 
Fergusson. 

Ver.  20.  The  Future  Life. 

I.  Our  virtuous  friends  at  death  go 
to  Jesus  Christ. — Here  is  one  great  fact 
in  regard  to  futurity.  The  good  on 
leaving  us  here  meet  their  Saviour, 
and  this  view  alone  assures  us  of  their 
unutterable  happiness.  The  joys  of 
centuries  will  be  crowded  into  that 
meeting.  This  is  not  fiction.  It  is 
truth  founded  on  the  essential  laws  of 
the  mind.  Their  intercourse  with  Jesus 
Christ  will  be  of  the  most  affectionate 
and  ennobling  character.  They  are 
brought  to  a  new  comprehension  of 
His  mind  and  to  a  new  reception  of  His 
Spirit.  They  will  become  joint  workers 
— active,  efficient  ministers — in  accom- 
plishing His  great  work  of  spreading 
virtue  and  happiness.  They  retain 
the  deepest  interest  in  this  world. 
They  love  human  nature  as  never 
before,  and  human  friends  are  prized 
as  above  all  price. 

II.  Our  virtuous  friends  go  not  to 
Jesus  only,  but  to  the  great  and  blessed 
society  which  is  gathered  round  Him. 


— The  redeemed  from  all  regions  of 
earth.  They  meet  peculiar  congratula- 
tions from  friends  who  had  gone  before 
them  to  that  better  world,  and  espe- 
cially from  all  who  had  in  any  way 
given  aids  to  their  virtue.  If  we  have 
ever  known  the  enjoyments  of  friend- 
ship, of  entire  confidence,  of  co-operation 
in  honourable  and  successful  labours 
with  those  we  love,  we  can  comprehend 
something  of  the  felicity  of  a  world 
where  souls,  refined  from  selfishness, 
open  as  the  day,  thirsting  for  new 
truth  and  virtue,  endowed  with  new 
power  of  enjoying  the  beauty  and 
grandeur  of  the  universe,  allied  in  the 
noblest  works  of  benevolence,  and  con- 
tinually discovering  new  mysteries  of 
the  Creator's  power  and  goodness, 
communicate  themselves  to  one  another 
with  the  freedom  of  perfect  love. 
They  enter  on  a  state  of  action,  life, 
and  effort.  Still  more,  they  go  to  God. 
They  see  Him  with  a  new  light  in  all 
His  works.  They  see  Him  face  to 
face,  by  immediate  communion.  These 
new  relations  of  the  ascended  spirit  to 
the  universal  Father,  how  near,  how 
tender,  how  strong,  how  exalting ! 
Heaven  is  a  glorious  reality.  Its 
attraction  should  be  felt  perpetually. 
They  who  are  safely  gathered  there 
say  to  us,  Come  and  join  us  in  our 
everlasting  blessedness  ! — Channing. 

Vers.  21,  22.  The  Supremacy  of 
Jesus — 

I.  Acquired  by  His  resurrection 
power. 

II.  Places  Him  above  the  highest 
created  intelligences  and  potentates. 

III.  Is  expressed  in  a  name  that 
surpasses  in  dignity  and  greatness 
that  which  has  ever  been  or  can  be 
celebrated  in  earth  or  heaven. 

IV.  Gives  Him  absolute  control  over 
all  worlds. — "  And  hath  put  all  things 
under  His  feet "  (ver.  22). 

Vers.  22,  23.  Christ  the  Head  of  the    # 
Church. 

I.  The  Church  depends  on  Him  foi 
life,  guidance,  activity,  and  develop- 
ment.— "  Which  is  His  body  "  (ver.  23). 

145 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


II.  He  governs  all  things  in  the 
interest  of  His  Church. — "And  gave 
Him  to  be  the  Head  over  all  things  to 
the  Church  "  (ver.  22). 

III.  The  Church  is  a  revelation  of 
the  greatness  and  glory  of  Christ. — 
"  The  fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in 
all "  (ver.  23). 

Ver.  22.  The  Headship  of  Christ. 

I.  The  extent    of  His  headship. — 

1.  Over  all  worlds.     2.  Over  the  whole 
human  race.     3.  Over  the  Church. 

II.  The  subserviency  of  its  admini- 
stration to  the  interests  of  His  Church. 
— 1.  For  the  edification  of  His 
Church.  2.  For  its  defence.  3.  For 
its  increase. 

III.  Its    grounds. — 1.    His   merit. 

2.  His   qualifications.     Whom   do   ye 
serve? — G.  Brooks. 

The  Headship  of  Christ. — The  verse 
consists  of  two  statements  : — 

I.  That  Christ  is  Head  over  all 
things. — The  Father  hath  given  Christ 
to  be  Head  over  all  things.  1.  Ori- 
ginally involved  in  a  covenant  or 
agreement    between    the   Father   and 


the  Son.     2.  Now  a  matter  of  history. 

3.  The  path  of  Christ  to  the  media- 
torial throne  capable  of  being  traced. 

4.  He  there  laid  deep  the  foundations. 

5.  The  whole  universe  is  under  His 
sway — heaven,  earth,  hell,  all  worlds, 
all  elements.  6.  He  is  qualified  for 
such  dominion  —  divine  attributes, 
angelic  spirits,  believers,  the  devil  and 
wicked  men,  the  Holy  Spirit. 

II.  That  Christ  is  Head  over  all 
things  to  the  Church. — Christ  sits 
upon  the  throne  in  the  same  character 
in  which  He  trod  the  earth  and  hung 
upon  the  cross.     1.  It  is  as  Mediator. 

2.  The  same  ends  which  He  contem- 
plated. It  was  for  the  Church  He 
clothed     Himself     in     human     form. 

3.  He  gives  a  peculiar  character  to 
the  entire  divine  government.  He 
Christianises  it.  4.  He  employs  all 
His  attributes,  resources,  creatures. 

Lessons. — 1.  Redemption  is  a  wide 
and  extended  plan,  not  so  easily  accom- 
plished, not  so  limited.  2.  All  creatures 
and  dominions  should  do  Christ  homage. 

3.  The  Church  is  secure  from  real  danger. 

4.  Believers  may  well  glory  in  Christ  as 
their  Head. — Stewart. 


CHAPTER  II. 


CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  And  you  did  He  quicken. — The  italics  in  A.V.  and  R.V.  show  a  broken  con- 
struction of  St.  Paul's  meaning,  the  verb  being  supplied  from  ver.  5,  where  the  broken  thread 
is  taken  up  again.  Dead  in  trespasses  and  sins. — "Dead  through,"  etc.  (R.V.).  "What 
did  they  die  of  ?  "  it  might  be  asked ;  and  the  apostle  answers,  "  Of  trespasses  and  sins " 
(so  Alford).  "The  word  for  trespasses  is  one  of  a  mournfully  numerous  group  of  words" 
(Trench).  It  has  sometimes  the  milder  meaning  of  "  faults,"  "  mitigating  circumstances  " 
being  considered.  It  makes  special  reference  "  to  the  subjective  passivity  and  suffering  of 
him  who  misses  or  falls  short  of  the  enjoined  command"  (fCremer).  Meyer  denies  any  ureal 
distinction  between  the  words  for  '  trespasses  '  and  '  sins.'  They  denote  the  same  thing  as  a 
'  fall '  and  a  '  missing.'" 

Ver.  2. — "Shadows,"  says  Meyer,  "before  the  light  which  arises  in  ver.  4."  Wherein  in 
time  past  ye  walked. — It  is  a  sombre  picture — men  walking  about  "to  find  themselves  dis- 
honourable graves"  in  the  "valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,"  knowing  not  whither  they 
go  because  the  darkness — the  gloom  of  spiritual  death — "hath  blinded  their  eyes" 
(1  John  ii.  11).  According  to  the  course  of  this  world. — Well  translated  by  our  modern 
" zeit-geist,"  or  "spirit  of  the  age."  The  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air.— However  con- 
temptuous St.  Paul  may  be  of  the  creations  of  the  Gnostic  fancy,  he  never  dreams  of  saying 
there  is  nothing  existent  unless  it  can  be  seen  and  felt.  The  dark  realm  and  its  ruler  are 
not  myths  to  the  apostle. 

146 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS.         chap.  n. 


Ver.  3.  Among"  whom  also  we  all  had  our  conversation. — St.  Paul  does  not  glorify 
himself  at  the  expense  of  his  readers'  past  life.  True  his  had  not  been  a  life  swayed  by 
animal  delights  (Acts  xxvi.  5),  but  it  had  been  marked  by  implacable  enmity  to  the  Son  of 
God.  And  were  by  nature  children  of  wrath. — "For  the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from 
heaven  against  all  ungodliness  and  unrighteousness  of  men,  .  .  .  whether  it  be  Jewish  or 
Gentile." 

Ver.  4.  But  God,  who  is  rich  in  mercy. — "  Unto  all  that  call  upon  Him"  (Rom.  x.  12). 
M  He  hath  shut  up  all  into  disobedience,  that  He  might  have  mercy  upon  all "  (Rom.  xi.  32). 
For  His  great  love  wherewith  He  loved  us. — "  A  combination  only  used  wThen  the  notion 
of  the  verb  is  to  be  extended  "  (  Winer). 

Ver.  5.  Even  when  we  were  dead  in  sins. — The  phrase  which  closes  ver.  3,  difficult  as  it 
is  must  receive  an  interpretation  in  harmony  with  this  statement.  It  is  the  very  marrow  of 
the  gospel  that,  "while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly."  That  the  wrath 
of  God  is  real  we  know,  but  "  God  is  love."  By  grace  ye  are  saved.  — "  Grace  "  is  as  truly 
characteristic  of  St.  Paul's  writing  as  his  autograph  signature  ;  it,  too,  is  the  token  ("  sign- 
manual  ")  in  every  epistle  (2  Thess.  iii.  \1;  18). 
Ver.  6.  In  heavenly  places. — As  in  i.  3. 

Ver.  7.  The  exceeding  riches  of  His  grace. — The  wealth  of  mercy  mentioned  in  ver.  4 
more  fully  stated.  Grace  is  condescension  to  an  inferior  or  kindness  to  the  undeserving. 
In  kindness  toward  us. — "  Kindness  "  here  represents  in  the  original  "  a  beautiful  word, 
as  it  is  the  expression  of  a  beautiful  grace  "  {Trench).  It  is  that  "  fruit  of  the  Spirit " 
(Gal.  v.  22)  called  "  gentleness  "  in  the  A.  V.,  but  which  would  be  better  named  "  benignity." 
Ver.  8.  For  by  grace  are  ye  saved  through  faith. — "  '  By  grace '  expresses  the  motive, 
*  through  faith  '  the  subjective  means  "  {Winer).     The  emphasis  is  on  "  by  grace." 

Ver.  9.  Not  of  works,  lest  any  man  should  boast. — The  more  beautiful  the  works 
achieved  the  more  natural  it  is  for  a  man  to  feel  his  wTorks  to  be  meritorious.  One  can 
understand  that  a  man  jealous  for  the  honour  of  God,  like  Calvin,  should  speak  of  the 
excellencies  of  those  out  of  Christ  as  "  splendid  vices,"  even  though  we  prefer  another 
explanation  of  them. 

Ver.  10.  For  we  are  His  workmanship. — We  get  our  word  "poem"  from  that  which  we 
here  translate  workmanship,  lit.  "  something  made."  Every  Christian  belongs  to  those  of 
whom  God  says,  "  This  people  have  I  formed  for  Myself,  that  they  should  show  forth  My 
praise"  (Isa.  xliii.  21).  The  archetype  of  all  our  goodness  lies  in  the  divine  thought,  as  the 
slow  uprising  of  a  stately  cathedral  is  the  embodiment  of  the  conception  of  the  architect's 
brain. 

Ver.  11.  Wherefore  remember,  that  ye,  etc.— All  that  follows  in  the  verse  serves  to 
define  the  "  ye,"  the  verb  following  in  ver.  12  after  the  repeated  "ye" — " ye  were  without 
Christ."  "  Called  Uncircumcision  .  .  .  called  the  Circumcision."  As  much  rancour  lies  in 
these  words  as  generally  is  carried  by  terms  of  arrogance  on  the  part  of  those  only  nominally 
religious,  and  the  scornful  epithets  flung  in  return.  They  can  be  matched  by  our  modern 
use  of  "  The  world  "  and  "  Other- worldliness." 

Ver.  12.  Without  Christ. — Not  so  much  "  not  in  possession  of  Christ "  as  "  outside 
Christ,"  or,  as  R.V.,  "  separate  from  Christ."  The  true  commentary  is  John  xv.  4,  5.  The 
branch  "  severed  from  "  the  trunk  by  knife  or  storm  bears  no  fruit  thenceforth ;  disciples 
"apart  from  Christ  can  do  nothing."  Being  aliens  from  the  commonwealth. — What 
memories  might  start  at  this  word !  Did  St.  Paul  think  of  the  separation  from  the  Jewish 
Fynagogue  in  Ephesus  or  of  the  fanatical  outburst  created  in  Jerusalem  when  "  the  Jews 
from  Asia"  saw  Trophimus  the  Ephesian  in  company  with  the  apostle?  To  such  Jews  the 
Gentiles  were  nothing  but  massa perditionis.  Like  vers.  2,  3,  this  is  a  reminder  of  the  dark 
past,  the  misery  of  which  did  not  consist  in  a  Jewish  taunt  so  much  as  in  a  life  of  heathenish 
vices.  Having  no  hope,  and  without  God  in  the  worldj — To  be  godless — not  sure  that 
there  is  any  God — this  is  to  take  the  "  master-light  of  all  our  seeing "  from  us ;  to  live 
regardless  of  Him,  or  wishing  there  were  no  God — "  that  way  madness  lies."  To  be  "  God- 
forsaken "  with  a  house  full  of  idols — that  is  the  irony  of  idolatrous  heathenism. 

Ver.  13.  Ye  who  sometimes  were  far  off  are  made  nigh. — The  Gentile  may  sing  his  hymn 
in  Jewish  words :  "  Doubtless  Thou  art  our  Father,  though  Abraham  be  ignorant  of  us, 
and  Israel  acknowledge  us  not :  Thou,  O  Lord,  art  our  Father,  our  Eedeemer ;  from  ever- 
lasting is  Thy  name."  "  Lo-ammi"  ("  not  My  people  ")  is  no  longer  their  name  (Hos.  ii.  23 ; 
Rom.  ix.  24,  25). 

Ver.  14.  For  He  is  our  peace,  who  hath  made  both  one. — "  Not  the  Peacemaker  merely, 
for  indeed  at  His  own  great  cost  He  procured  peace,  and  is  Himself  the  bond  of  union  of 
both"  (Jew  and  Gentile).  The  middle  wall  of  partition. — M.  Ganneau,  the  discoverer  of 
the  Moabite  Stone,  found  built  into  the  wall  of  a  ruined  Moslem  convent  a  stone,  believed 
to  be  from  the  Temple,  with  this  inscription  :  "  No  stranger-born  (non-Jew)  may  enter 
within  the  circuit  of  the  barrier  and  enclosure  that  is  around  the  sacred  court ;  and  whoever 
shall  be  caught  [intruding]  there,  upon  himself  be  the  blame  of  the  death  that  will  con- 

147 


chap.  ii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


sequently  follow."  Josephus  describes  this  fence  and  its  warning  inscription  (Wars  of  the 
Jews,  Bk.  V.,  cb.  v.,  §  2).  It  is  rather  the  spirit  of  exclusiveness  which  Christ  threw  down. 
The  stone  wall  Titus  threw  down  and  made  all  a  common  field,  afterwards. 

Ver.  15.  Having  abolished  in  His  flesh  the  enmity. — The  enmity  of  Jew  and  Gentile  ;  the 
abolition  of  their  enmity  to  God  is  mentioned  later.  "  First  be  reconciled  to  thy  brother, 
and  then  come  and  offer  thy  gift,"  for  reconciliation  to  God.  The  law  of  commandments 
contained  in  ordinances. — The  slave  whose  duty  it  was  to  take  the  child  to  his  teacher 
might  say,  "  Don't  do  that."  St.  Paul  does  not  regard  the  function  of  the  law  as  more  than 
that  (Gal.  iii.  23-25).  One  new  man. — Trench,  in  an  admirable  section,  distinguishes 
between  the  new  in  time  (reeens)  and  the  new  in  quality  (novum).  The  word  here  means 
new  in  quality,  "  as  set  over  against  that  which  has  seen  service,  the  outworn."  "  It  is  not 
an  amalgam  of  Jew  and  Gentile  "  (Meyer). 

Ver.  IB.  That  He  might  reconcile  both  unto  God.— The  word  "  reconcile  "  implies  "  a 
restitution  to  a  state  from  which  they  had  fallen,  or  which  was  potentially  theirs,  or  for 
which  they  were  destined"  (Lightfoot,  Col.  i.  20).  The  cross  having  slain  the  enmity. — 
Gentile  authority  and  Jewish  malevolence  met  in  the  sentence  to  that  painful  death  ;  and 
both  Gentile  and  Jew,  acknowledging  the  Bon  of  God,  shall  cease  their  strife,  and  love  as 
brethren. 

Ver.  17.  Came  and  preached  peace. — By  means  of  His  messengers,  as  St.  Paul  tells  the 
Galatians  that  Christ  was  "  evidently  set  forth  crucified  amongst  them."  To  you  afar  off, 
and  to  them  that  were  nigh. — Isaiah's  phrase  (lvii.  19).  The  Christ  uplifted  "out  of  the 
earth  "  draws  all  men  to  Him. 

Ver.  18.  For  through  Him  we  both  have  access.— St.  Paul's  way  of  proclaiming  His 
Master's  saying,  "  I  am  the  door :  by  Me  if  any  man  enter  in  he  shall  be  saved  "  ;  including 
the  other  equally  precious,  "  I  am  the  way:  no  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  Me." 
"  Access  "  here  means  "  introduction." 

Ver.  19.  So  then. — Inference  of  vers.  14-18.  Strangers  and  foreigners. — By  the  latter 
word  is  meant  those  who  temporarily  abide  in  a  place,  but  are  without  the  privileges  of 
it.  There  is  a  verb  "  to  parish  "  in  certain  parts  of  England  which  shows  how  a  word  can 
entirely  reverse  its  original  meaning.  It  not  only  means  "  to  adjoin,"  but  "  to  belong  to." 
Fellow-citizens  with  the  saints. — Enjoying  all  civic  liberties,  and  able  to  say,  "  This  is 
my  own,  my  native  land,"  when  he  finds  "  Mount  Zion  and  the  city  of  the  living  God  " 
(cf.  Heb.  xi.  13,  14).  And  of  the  household  of  God. — The  association  grows  more  intimate. 
The  words  might  possibly  mean  "  domestics  of  God  "  (Rev.  xxii.  3,  4) ;  but  when  we  think  of 
the  "  Father's  house  "  we  must  interpret  "  of  the  family  circle  of  God." 

Ver.  20.  Being  built  upon  the  foundation.  —From  the  figure  of  a  household  St.  Paul 
passes  easily  to  the  structure,  based  on  "  the  Church's  One  Foundation."  The  chief  corner- 
stone.— "  The  historic  Christ,  to  whom  all  Christian  belief  and  life  have  reference,  as  necessarily 
conditions  through  Himself  the  existence  and  endurance  of  each  Christian  commonwealth, 
as  the  existence  and  steadiness  of  a  building  are  dependent  on  the  indispensable  corner- 
stone, which  upholds  the  whole  structure"  (Meyer).  The  difference  between  our  passage 
and  1  Cor.  iii.  11  is  one  of  figure  only. 

Ver.  21.  All  the  building.— R.V.  "each  several  building."  Fitly-framed-together.— One 
word  in  the  original,  found  again  only  in  iv.   16  in  this  form. 

Ver.  22.  For  a  habitation— The  word  so  translated  is  found  again  only  in  Rev.  xviii.  2, 
a  sharp  contrast  to  this  verse. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS    OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—3. 

The  Children  of  Wrath  — 

I.  Are  spiritually  dead — "  Who  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins"  (ver.  1). 
The  only  life  of  which  they  are  conscious,  and  in  which  all  their  activities  are 
displayed,  is  a  life  of  sin.  They  have  no  conception  of  a  higher  life.  They  are 
capable  of  a  higher  life,  and  know  it  not.  The  spiritual,  the  higher  form  of  life, 
is  entombed  and  buried  under  a  mass  of  sin.  It  is  inert,  dead,  in  process  of 
corruption.  Dante  refers  to  such  as,  "  These  wretched  ones  who  never  were 
alive  ;  I  ne'er  forsooth  could  have  believed  it  true,  that  death  had  slain  such 
myriads  of  mankind."  Sin  first  benumbs,  then  paralyses,  and  finally  slays  our 
spiritual  sensibilities.  The  soul  dead  to  God  shall  not  be  insensible  to  the  reality 
of  the  divine  wrath. 

II.  Are  under  the  spell  of  an  unseen  evil  power  (ver.  2). — "  The  children  of 
disobedience"  are  those  who  are  withholding  their  allegiance  from  the  Lord 

US 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS.  chap.  ii. 


Jesus  Christ,  all  those  who  are  unconverted;  not  mere  gross  sinners  and  open 
profligates,  but  such  persons  as  are  strangers  to  the  spiritual  life,  although  they 
may  have  many  excellencies  of  nature  and  disposition.  The  apostle  plainly 
asserts  that  before  he  was  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  Christ  he  was  under  the 
influence  of  the  "  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air."  This  is  a  startling  statement. 
It  is  more  startling  still  if  we  consider  what  sort  of  man  Paul  was  before  his 
conversion — how  excellent,  how  earnest,  how  devoted  to  the  external  duties  of  a 
religious  life.  But  startling  as  it  is,  it  is  the  apostle  who  makes  it  of  himself ; 
and  the  inference  is  unavoidable,  that  all  that  mass  of  persons  who  are  out  of 
Christ  and  who  are  not  partakers  of  His  resurrection  life,  who  have  given  their 
hearts  to  the  world  and  not  to  the  Saviour,  are  just  the  captives  of  Satan, 
and,  without  knowing  it,  are  doing  his  lusts  and  accomplishing  his  will.  The 
disease  is  not  less  deadly  because  it  eats  out  the  life  without  inflicting  pain. 
The  pestilence  is  not  the  less  awful  because  it  comes  without  giving  notice  of 
its  presence,  borne  on  the  balmy  breezes  of  the  bright,  cloudless,  summer  eve. 
The  vampire  does  not  do  its  work  the  less  effectually  because  it  fans  its  victim 
with  its  perfumed  wings  into  an  unconscious  slumber  whilst  it  drains  away  his 
life-blood  and  leaves  him  a  corpse.  And  Satan  is  not  the  less  real  or  the  less 
destructive  because  he  works  his  fatal  work  upon  our  souls  without  our  even 
being  conscious  of  his  approach. 

III.  Are  prompted  to  sin  by  the  instincts  of  a  depraved  nature  (ver.  3). — 
There  is  the  twofold  province  of  a  man's  being,  by  the  lower  of  which  he  is  allied 
to  the  brute  creation,  and  by  the  higher  to  the  angels,  both  being  under  the 
dominion  of  sin.  There  is  the  corrupt  body  of  flesh,  and  in  a  higher  sense  there 
is  the  fleshly  mind.  Every  unregenerate  person  lives  more  or  less  in  one  or  the 
other  of  these  provinces — either  in  the  sphere  of  fleshly  lusts  or  in  the  sphere  of 
the  fleshly  mind.  Either  he  lives  simply  an  animal  life,  and  is  in  consequence  a 
fleshly  man,  whose  life  consists  only  in  fulfilling  the  desires  of  his  lower  nature  ; 
or  he  lives  in  the  higher  province  of  the  mind,  but  it  is  nevertheless  the  mind  in 
darkness,  in  uncertainty,  in  doubt — mind  and  heart  alike  alienated  from  God 
through  the  unbelief  which  is  in  them.  It  would  not  do  to  argue  from  this  that 
our  passions  are  our  sins.  Sin  is  not  in  appetite,  but  lies  in  the  insubordination 
of  appetite.  There  is  need  of  a  curbing  and  governing  will,  and  our  discipline 
consists  in  subjugating  the  lower  to  the  higher.  A  due  balance  between  the  two 
regions  must  be  preserved,  and  it  is  when  passion  becomes  master  and  the  lower 
invades  the  province  of  the  higher,  when  the  subordinate  becomes  insubordinate, 
that  appetite  and  passion  become  sin.  The  flesh  is  the  great  rival  of  the  Spirit, 
for  it  asserts  that  dominion  over  a  man  which  the  Holy  Spirit  alone  ought  to 
occupy,  and  these  two  are  constantly  opposed  to  each  other.  The  depravity 
within,  working  in  the  thoughts  of  the  mind  and  the  passions  of  the  flesh,  prompts 
to  a  course  of  disobedience  and  sin. 

IV.  Are  exposed  to  condemnation. — "  And  were  by  nature  the  children  of 
wrath,  even  as  others."  "  The  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven  against  all 
unrighteousness  and  ungodliness  of  men."  The  apostle  shows  that  even  the  Jews, 
who  boasted  of  their  birth  from  Abraham,  were  by  natural  birth  equally  children 
of  wrath,  as  the  Gentiles  whom  the  Jews  despised  on  account  of  their  birth  from 
idolaters.  The  phrase  "children  of  wrath"  is  a  Hebraism,  meaning  we  are 
objects  of  God's  wrath  from  childhood,  in  our  natural  state,  as  being  born  in  sin, 
which  God  hates.  Wrath  abides  on  all  who  disobey  the  gospel  in  faith  and 
practice. 

Lessons. — 1.  Sin  when  it  is  finished  bringeth  forth  death.  2.  Your  adversary 
the  devil  walketh  about  seeking  whom  he  may  devour.  3.  Because  there  is  wrath, 
beware  ! 

H9 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


GERM  NOTES   ON  THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  1.  A  State  of  Sin  a  State  of 
Death. 

I.  There  are  some  respects  in  which 
the  death  of  the  soul  does  not  resemble 
the  death  of  the  body. — 1.  It  does  not 
involve  the  extinction  of  faculties  and 
affections.  The  dead  body  moves  not, 
nor  feels,  nor  acts.  The  dead  soul  still 
thinks  and  feels  and  wills.  2.  It  does 
not  exempt  from  responsibility.  The 
dead  soul  is  commanded  to  repent  and 
believe  and  obey.  3.  It  is  not  in- 
capable of  restoration  on  earth.  The 
spiritually  dead  may  become  spiritually 
alive  here. 

II.  There  are  some  respects  in  which 
the  death  of  the  soul  does  resemble 
the  death  of  the  body. — 1.  In  its  cause. 
Sin.  2.  In  its  extent.  All  men  with- 
out exception.  3.  In  its  consequences. 
The  dead  are  utterly  insensible,  they 
fulfil  none  of  the  functions  or  duties  of 
the  living,  they  can  be  reanimated  only 
by  divine  power.  Address:  (1)  Those 
who  are  spiritually  dead.  (2)  Those 
who  have  reason  to  believe  that  they 
are  spiritually  alive. — G.  Brooks. 

Vers.  1-3.  The  State  of  Men  without 
the  Gospel. 

I.  The  moral  state  of  wicked  men 
resembles  a  state  of  natural   death 

(ver.  1). — From  the  metaphor  used  in 
the  text  we  are  not  to  conclude  that  all 
sinners  are  alike,  for  though  all  are  in 
a  sense  dead  some  are  under  a  greater 
death  than  others.  The  metaphor  is 
usually  applied  to  sinners  of  the  most 
vicious  character.  When  we  speak  of 
human  nature  as  totally  depraved  we 
mean  only  a  total  destitution  of  real 
holiness,  not  the  highest  possible  degree 
of  vitiosity.  In  order  to  denominate 
one  a  sinner  it  is  not  necessary  that  he 
should  be  as  bad  as  possible.  Though 
natural  death  does  not,  yet  spiritual 
death  does,  admit  of  degrees.  Evil  men 
wax  worse  and  worse,  add  sin  to  sin,  and 
treasure  up  wrath  against  the  day  of 
wrath. 

I.  Sinners  may  be  said  to  be  dead  in 
respect  of  their  stupidity. — We  read  of 

150 


some  who  are  past  feeling,  whose  con- 
science is  seared,  who  have  eyes  which 
see  not,  ears  which  hear  not,  and  a 
heart  which  is  waxed  gross.  Their 
hearts  are  like  a  mortified  limb  which 
feels  no  pain  under  the  scarifying 
knife. 

2.  They  are  represented  as  tvanting 
spiritual  se?ises.  —  They  savour  the 
things  of  the  world,  not  the  things 
which  are  of  God.  They  indeed  love 
the  effects  of  God's  goodness  to  them, 
but  they  delight  not  in  His  character 
as  a  holy,  just,  and  faithful  Being. 
They  may  feel  a  natural  pleasure  in 
certain  mechanical  emotions  of  the 
passions  excited  by  objects  presented  to 
the  sight,  or  by  sounds  which  strike 
the  ear,  as  the  artificial  tears  from  the 
image  of  the  Virgin  Mary  will  melt 
down  an  assembly  of  Catholics,  or  as 
a  concert  of  musical  instruments  will 
rapture  the  hearers ;  but  they  relish 
not  the  word  and  ordinances  of  God, 
considered  as  means  of  holiness  and  as 
designed  to  convince  them  of  their  sins 
and  bring  them  to  repentance.  If  the 
word  dispensed  comes  home  to  their 
conscience,  they  are  offended.  They 
lose  the  music  of  the  pleasant  song,  and 
talk  against  it  by  the  walls  and  in  the 
doors  of  their  houses. 

3.  They  resemble  the  dead  in  the  want 
of  vital  warmth. — If  they  have  any 
fervour  in  religion,  it  is  about  the  forms 
and  externals  of  it,  or  about  some 
favourite  sentiments  which  they  find 
adapted  to  soothe  their  consciences,  not 
about  those  things  in  which  the  power 
of  religion  consists.  As  death  deforms  - 
the  body,  so  sin  destroys  the  beauty  of 
the  soul.  It  darkens  the  reason,  per- 
verts the  judgment,  and  disorders  the 
affections.  To  be  carnally-minded  is 
death. 

4.  They  may  be  denominated  dead  as 
they  are  worthy  of  and  exposed  to  punish- 
ment.— This  is  called  death  because  it 
is  the  separation  of  the  soul  from  God 
and  heaven,  from  happiness  and  hope, 
from  all  good  and  unto  all  evil.  This 
is  a  death  which  awaits  the  impenitent. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS.         chap.  ii. 


II.  There  is  in  ungodly  men  a 
general  disposition  to  follow  the  way 
of  the  world. — "  According  to  the 
course  of  this  world  "  (ver.  2).  They, 
like  dead  carcasses,  swam  down  the 
stream  of  common  custom,  and  were 
carried  away  with  the  general  current 
of  vice  and  corruption. 

1.  Most  men  have  a  general  idea  that 
religion  is  of  some  importance. — Few 
can  wholly  suppress  it,  or  reason  them- 
selves out  of  it.  But  what  religion  is 
and  wherein  it  consists  they  seldom 
inquire,  and  never  examine  with  any 
degree  of  attention.  Such  opinions  as 
flatter  their  ungodly  lusts,  or  pacify 
their  guilty  consciences,  they  warmly 
embrace.  That  scheme  of  doctrine 
which  will  make  converts  without 
exacting  reformation,  and  give  assur- 
ance without  putting  them  to  much 
trouble,  they  highly  approve.  The 
path  which  will  lead  men  to  heaven 
with  little  self-denial  they  readily 
pursue. 

2.  There  are  many  who  blindly  follow 
the  examples  of  the  world. — Whether 
such  a  practice  is  right  or  wrong  they 
take  little  pains  to  examine.  It  is 
enough  that  they  see  many  who  adopt 
it.  They  would  rather  incur  the 
censure  of  their  own  minds  and  the 
displeasure  of  their  God  than  stand 
distinguished  by  a  singularity  in  virtue. 

III.  They  are  under  the  influence  of 
evil  spirits. — "  According  to  the  prince 
of  the  power  of  the  air,  the  spirit  that 
worketh  in  the  children  of  disobedience  " 
(ver.  2).  The  number  of  evil  spirits  is 
very  great,  but  there  is  one  distinguished 
from  the  rest,  and  called  the  devil, 
Satan,  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the 
air.  The  manner  in  which  he  works 
in  the  minds  of  men  is  by  gaining 
access  to  their  passions  and  lusts,  which 
he  inflames  by  suggesting  evil  thoughts 
or  by  painting  images  on  the  fancy. 
It  was  by  the  avarice  of  Judas  and 
Ananias  that  he  entered  into  them  and 
filled  their  hearts. 

IV.  The  wickedness  of  men  consists 
not  merely  in  their  evil  works,  but  in 
the  corrupt  dispositions  which  prompt 
them  to  those  works. — "The  lusts  of 


our  flesh,  fulfilling  the  desires  of  the 
flesh  and  of  the  mind  "  (ver.  3).  The 
lusts  of  the  flesh  are  the  vices  of 
sensuality,  as  intemperance,  unclean- 
ness,  debauchery,  and  excess  of  riot. 
The  desires  of  the  fleshly  mind  are  the 
lusts  which  arise  from  the  corruption  of 
the  mind  in  its  connection  with  flesh, 
as  pride,  malice,  envy,  wrath,  hatred, 
ambition,  and  covetousness.  Though  no 
man  indulges  every  vice,  yet  every  un- 
regenerate  man  obeys  the  carnal  mind. 

Y.  The  indulgence  of  carnal  lusts 
and  passions  brings  on  men  the  wrath 
of  God. — "  The  children  of  wrath  " 
(ver.  3).  A  mind  sunk  in  carnality 
is  iucapable  of  rational  felicity  ;  it  is 
miserable  in  itself  and  from  its  own 
corruption  and  perverseness.  If  man 
subjects  his  nature  to  the  lusts  and 
passions,  the  order  of  nature  is  inverted, 
the  law  of  creation  violated,  and  the 
Creator  dishonoured  and  offended. 

Lessons. — 1.  If  you  have  not  aban- 
doned yourselves  to  the  grossest  forms  of 
vice,  it  is  because  you  have  been  placed 
under  superior  light  and  enjoyed  a 
happier  education  than  the  heathen. 
2.  Though  you  may  not  have  indulged 
all  the  lusts  and  vices  which  others  have 
done,  yet  if  you  are  children  of  dis- 
obedience you  can  no  'more  be  saved 
without  renovation  of  heart  and  repent- 
ance of  sin  than  they  can. — Lathrop. 

Ver.  3.  The  State  of  Nature. 

I.  If  by  human  nature  you  mean 
nature  as  seen  in  this  man  or  that,  then 
unquestionably  nature  is  evil — indivi- 
dual nature,  personal  nature,  is  contrary 
to  God's  will.  But  if  by  human  nature 
you  mean  nature  as  God  made  it,  as  it 
has  been  once  in  one  man  of  our  species 
and  only  one,  and  as  by  God's  grace  it 
shall  be  again  ;  if  you  mean  nature  as  it 
is  according  to  the  idea  of  the  Creator 
as  shown  in  Jesus  Christ,  as  it  is  in  the 
eyes  of  God  imputed  not  as  it  is  but  as 
it  shall  be, — then  that  nature  is  a  noble 
thing,  a  thing  divine ;  for  the  life  of  the 
Redeemer  Himself,  what  was  it  but 
the  one  true  exhibition  of  our  human 
nature  ? 

II.  Paul  says  that  by  nature  we 

151 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


fulfil  the  desires  of  the  flesh  and  of  the 
mind. — I  pray  you  to  observe  that  it  is 
the  second  and  not  in  the  first  sense 
that  he  here  speaks  of  nature.  The 
desires  of  the  flesh  mean  the  appetites  ; 
those  of  the  mind  mean  the  passions : 
to  fulfil  the  desires  of  the  flesh  is  to 
live  the  life  of  the  swine  ;  to  fulfil  those 
of  the  mind  is  to  live  the  life  of  the 
devil.  But  this  is  the  partiality,  not 
the  entireness,  of  human  nature. 
Where  is  the  conscience,  where  the 
spirit  with  which  we  have  communion 
with  God  ?  To  live  to  the  flesh  and  to 
the  mind  is  not  to  live  to  the  nature 
that  God  gave  us.  We  can  no  more 
call  that  living  to  our  nature  than  we 
can  say  that  a  watch  going  by  the 
mere  force  of  the  main-spring  without 
a  regulator  is  fulfilling  the  nature  of  a 
watch.  To  fulfil  the  desires  of  the 
flesh  and  of  the  mind  is  no  more  to 
fulfil  the  nature  which  God  has  given 
us  than  the  soil  fulfils  its  nature 
when  it  brings  forth  thorns  and  briars. 
St.  Paul,  in  the  epistle  to  the  Komans, 
draws  a  distinction  between  himself 
and  his  false  nature  :  "  It  is  not  I,  but 
sin  that  dwelleth  in  me."  Sin  is  the 
dominion  of  a  false  nature ;  it  is  a 
usurped  dominion. 

III.  The  next  thing  that  Paul  tells 
us  is  that  by  nature  we  are  children  of 
wrath. — In  the  state  of  nature  we  are 
in  the  way  to  bear  the  wrath  of  God. 
Yet  God  is  not  wrath  ;  He  is  infinite 
love.  The  eternal  severity  of  His  nature 
does  not  feel  our  passions,  He  remains 
for  ever  calm ;  yet  such  is  our  nature 
that  we  must  think  of  Him  as  wrath 
as  well  as  love  :  to  us  love  itself  becomes 
wrath  when  we  are  in  a  state  of  sin. 
God  must  hate  sin  and  be  for  ever  sin's 
enemy.  If  we  sin  He  must  be  against 
us :  in  sinning  we  identify  ourselves 
with  evil,  therefore  we  must  endure  the 
consuming  fire.  So  long  as  there  is 
evil,  so  long  will  there  be  penalty. 
Sin,  live  according  to  the  lusts  of  the 
flesh,  and  you  will  become  the  children 
of  God's  wrath ;  live  after  the  spirit, 
the  higher  nature  that  is  in  you,  and 
then  the  law  hath  hold  on  you  no 
longer. — F.  W.  Robertson. 

152 


The   Worst  oj  Evils. 

I.  By  nature  all  are  the  children 
of  wrath.  —  1 .  Because  we  want 
that  original  righteousness  in  which 
we  were  created  and  which  is  re- 
quired to  the  purity  and  perfection 
of  our  nature.  2.  Because  all 
the  parts  and  powers  of  our  soul 
and  body  are  depraved  with  original 
corruption.  Our  understandings  are 
so  bad  that  they  understand  not  their 
own  badness,  our  wills  which  are  the 
queens  of  our  souls  become  the  vassals 
of  sin,  our  memories  like  jet  good  only 
to  draw  straws  and  treasure  up  trifles 
of  no  moment,  our  consciences  through 
errors  in  our  understandings  sometimes 
accusing  us  when  we  are  innocent, 
sometimes  acquitting  us  when  we  are 
guilty,  our  affections  all  disaffected  and 
out  of  order.  3.  Some  may  expect 
that  as  the  master  of  the  feast  said  to 
him  that  wanted  the  wedding  garment, 
"Friend,  how  earnest  thou  in  hither1?"  so 
I  should  demand  of  original  sin,  "  Foe, 
and  worst  of  foes,  how  earnest  thou  in 
hither,  and  by  what  invisible  leaks  didst 
thou  soak  into  our  souls  ? "  But  I 
desire,  if  it  be  possible,  to  present  you 
this  day  a  rose  without  prickles,  to 
declare  plain  and  positive  doctrine 
without  thorny  disputes  or  curious 
speculations,  lest,  as  Abraham's  ram 
was  caught  in  the  thicket,  so  I  embroil 
you  and  myself  in  difficult  controver- 
sies. Let  us  not  busy  our  brains  so 
much  to  know  how  original  sin  came 
into  us,  as  labour  in  our  heart  to  know 
how  it  should  be  got  out  of  us.  But 
the  worst  is,  most  men  are  sick  of  the 
rickets  in  the  soul,  their  heads  swell  to 
a  vast  proportion,  puffed  up  with  the 
emptiness  of  airy  speculations,  whilst 
their  legs  and  lower  parts  do  waste 
and  consume,  their  practical  parts 
decay,  none  more  lazy  to  serve  God  in. 
their  lives  and  conversations. 

II.  Ye  parents  to  children,  see  how,, 
though  against  your  wills,  ye  have 
propagated  this  wrath -deserving  on 
your  children  unto  your  children  ;  you 
are  bound,  both  in  honour  and  honesty, 
civility  and  Christianity,  to  pluck  them 
out  of  this  pit.     1.  This  you  may  do 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS.  chap.  ii. 


by  embracing  the  speediest  opportunity  ward,  and  makes  us  cross  in  our  prac- 

to   fasten   the   sacrament   of   baptism  tice    what     God     commands    in    His 

upon  them.      2.  Let   them    not    want  precepts.     Thus  every  day  we  sin,  and 

good  prayers,  which  if  steeped  in  tears  sorrow  after  our  sin,  and  sin  after  our 

will   grow   the  better,  good   precepts,  sorrow.      The   wind    of    God's    Spirit 

good  precedents,  and  show  thy  child  in  bloweth  us  one  way,  and  the  tide  of 

thyself  what  he  should  follow,  in  others  our    corruption    hurrieth    us    another, 

what  he  should  shun  and  avoid.     3.  In  These    things    he    that   seeth   not   in 

the  low  countries,  where  their  houses  himself  is  sottish,  blind  ;  he  that  seeth 

lie  buried  in  the  ground,  the  laying  of  and  confeFseth  not  is  damnably  proud  ; 

the  foundation  is  counted  as  much  as  he  that  confesseth   and  bewaileth  not 

the  rest  of  the  foundation  ;  so  half  our  is   desperately   profane;    he   that    be- 

badness  lies  secret  and  unseen,  consist-  waileth  and  fighteth  not  against  it  is 

ing    in    original    corruption,    whereof  unprofitably   pensive :    but  he  that  in 

too  few  take    notice.      Witches,  they  some  weak  manner  doeth  all  these  is 

say,  say  the  Lord's  Prayer  backward ;  a    saint  in   reversion   here,   and  shall 

but   concupiscence,    this    witch  in  our  be    one   in    possession    hereafter. — T. 

soul,  says  all  the  commandments  back-  Fuller. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  4—9. 

Salvation  an  Act  of  Divine  Grace. 

I.  Springing  from  the  benevolence  of  God  (vers.  4,  7). — A  good  old  saint  once 
said,  "  There  is  nothing  that  affects  me  more  profoundly,  or  more  quickly  melts  my 
heart,  than  to  reflect  on  the  goodness  of  God.  It  is  so  vast,  so  deep,  so  amazing, 
so  unlike  and  beyond  the  most  perfect  human  disposition,  that  my  soul  is  over- 
whelmed." The  apostle  seems  to  have  been  similarly  affected  as  he  contemplated 
the  divine  beneficence,  as  the  phrases  he  here  employs  indicate.  He  calls  it  "  the 
great  love  wherewith  He  loved  us."  God  is  "  rich  in  mercy  " — in  irrepressible, 
unmerited  compassion  (ver.  4).  Language  is  too  poor  to  express  all  he  sees  and 
feels,  and  he  takes  refuge  in  the  ambiguous  yet  suggestive  expression,  "  The 
exceeding  riches  of  His  grace  in  His  kindness  toward  us  through  Jesus  Christ " 
(ver.  7) — hinting  at  the  sublime  benignity  of  the  divine  nature  longing  to  express 
itself  through  the  noblest  medium  possible.  By  his  rebellion  and  deliberate  sin 
man  had  forfeited  all  claim  to  the  divine  favour,  and  his  restoration  to  that 
favour,  impossible  of  attainment  by  any  efforts  of  his  own,  was  an  act  of  sheer 
divine  goodness.  Its  spontaneity  breaks  in  as  a  sweet  surprise  upon  the  sinning 
race.  The  most  vicious  and  abandoned  are  included  in  its  gracious  provisions, 
and  all  men  are  taught  that  their  salvation,  if  accomplished  at  all,  must  be  as  an 
act  of  free  and  undeserved  grace. 

II.  Salvation  has  its  life  and  fellowship  in  Christ  (vers.  5,  6).— God  has  given 
us  as  unquestioned  a  resurrection  from  the  death  of  sin  as  the  body  of  Christ  had 
from  the  grave,  and  the  same  divine  power  achieved  both  the  one  and  the  other. 
The  spiritual  life  of  both  Jew  and  Gentile  has  its  origin  in  Christ,  and  the  axe  is 
thus  laid  to  the  very  root  of  spiritual  pride  and  all  glorying  in  ourselves.  We 
are  raised  by  His  resurrection  power  to  sit  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus. 
This  we  do  already  by  our  spiritual  fellowship  with  Him,  and  by  anticipation  we 
share  the  blessedness  which  we  shall  more  fully  enjoy  by  our  union  with  Him  in 
the  heavenly  world.  The  spiritual  resurrection  of  the  soul  must  precede,  and 
will  be  the  inviolable  guarantee  of  the  future  glorious  resurrection  of  the  body. 
As  the  great  Head  of  the  Church  is  already  in  the  heavenlies,  so  ultimately  all 
the  members  that  make  up  the  body  shall  be  gathered  there.  We  are  already 
seated  there  in  Him  as  our  Head,  which  is  the  ground  of  our  hope ;  and  we  shall 
be  hereafter  seated  there  by  Him,  as  the  conferring  cause,  when  hope  shall  be 

153 


chap.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


swallowed  up  in  fruition.     Our  life  and  fellowship  in  Christ  are  susceptible  of 
indefinite  expansion  and  enjoyment  in  the  progressive  evolutions  of  the  future. 

III.  Faith,  the  instrument  of  salvation,  is  the  gift  of  divine  grace  (ver.  8). — 
The  question  whether  faith  or  salvation  is  the  gift  of  God  is  decided  by  the 
majority  of  critics  in  favour  of  the  former.  This  agrees  with  the  obvious  argu- 
ment of  the  apostle,  that  salvation  is  so  absolutely  an  act  of  divine  grace  that 
the  power  to  realise  it  individually  is  also  a  free  gift.  Grace,  without  any  respect 
to  human  worthiness,  confers  the  glorious  gift.  Faith,  with  an  empty  hand  and 
without  any  pretence  to  personal  desert,  receives  the  heavenly  blessing.  Without 
the  grace  or  power  to  believe,  no  man  ever  did  or  can  believe  ;  but  with  that 
power  the  act  of  faith  is  a  man's  own.  God  never  believes  for  any  man,  no  more 
than  He  repents  for  him.  The  penitent,  through  this  grace  enabling  him, 
believes  for  himself ;  nor  does  he  believe  necessarily  or  impulsively  when  he  has 
that  power.  The  power  to  believe  may  be  present  long  before  it  is  exercised, 
else  why  the  solemn  warnings  which  we  meet  everywhere  in  the  word  of  God  and 
threatenings  against  those  who  do  not  believe  ?  This  is  the  true  state  of  the  case  : 
God  gives  the  power,  man  uses  the  power  thus  given,  and  brings  glory  to  God. 
Without  the  power  no  man  can  believe  ;  with  it  any  man  may. 

IV.  Salvation,  being  unmeritorious,  excludes  all  human  boasting. — "  Not  of 
works,  lest  any  man  should  boast "  (ver.  9).  Neither  salvation  nor  the  faith 
that  brings  it  is  the  result  of  human  ingenuity  and  effort.  The  grand  moral 
results  brought  about  by  saving  faith  are  so  extraordinary,  and  so  high  above  the 
plane  of  the  loftiest  and  most  gigantic  human  endeavours,  that  if  man  could 
produce  them  by  his  own  unaided  powers  he  would  have  cause  indeed  for  the  most 
extravagant  boasting,  and  he  would  be  in  danger  of  generating  a  pride  which  in 
its  uncontrollable  excess  would  work  his  irretrievable  ruin.  The  least  shadow  of 
a  ground  for  pride  is  however  excluded.  God  protects  both  Himself  and  man  by 
the  freeness  and  simplicity  of  the  offer  of  salvation.  It  is  the  complaint  of 
intellectual  pride  that  the  reception  of  the  gospel  is  impossible  because  it 
demands  a  humiliation  and  self-emptying  that  degrade  and  shackle  intellectual 
freedom.  Such  an  objection  is  a  libel  on  the  gospel.  It  humbles  in  order  to 
exalt ;  it  binds  its  claims  upon  us  to  lift  us  to  a  higher  freedom.  So  completely 
is  salvation  a  divine  act,  that  the  man  who  refuses  to  accept  it  on  God's  terms 
must  perish.     There  is  no  other  way. 

Y.  The  glory  of  divine  grace  in  salvation  will  be  increasingly  demonstrated 
in  the  future. — "  That  in  the  ages  to  come  He  might  show  the  exceeding  riches 
of  His  grace  "  (ver.  7).  The  most  valuable  function  of  history  is  not  that  which 
deals  with  the  rise  and  fall  of  empires,  the  brutal  ravages  of  war,  the  biographies 
of  kings,  statesmen,  and  philosophers,  but  that  which  treats  upon  the  social  and 
moral  condition  of  the  people  and  the  influence  of  religion  in  the  development 
of  individual  and  national  character.  The  true  history  of  the  world  is  the  history 
of  God's  dealings  with  it.  The  ages  of  the  past  have  been  a  revelation  of  God ; 
the  ages  to  come  will  be  an  enlargement  of  that  revelation,  and  its  most  con- 
spicuous feature  will  be  an  ever  new  development  of  the  riches  of  divine  grace  in 
the  redemption  of  the  human  race.  In  all  successive  ages  of  the  world  we  are 
authorised  to  declare  that  sinners  shall  be  saved  only  as  they  repent  of  their  sins 
and  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Lessons. — Salvation — 1.  Is  a  revelation  of  what  God  does  for  man.  2.  Is 
absolutely  necessary  for  each.     3.  Should  be  earnestly  sought  by  all. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE   VERSES. 

Vers.  4-7.  The  Great  Change  effected  I.  The  happy  change  which  the 
in  Man  by  the  Gospel.  gospel   made  in    the  Ephesians. — A 

154 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  II. 


change    not    peculiar    to    them,    but 
common  to  all  sincere  believers. 

1.  God  hath  quickened  us. — Made  us 
alive  with  Christ.  (1)  True  Christians 
are  alive ;  they  have  spiritual  senses 
and  appetites.  (2)  Spiritual  motions. 
(3)  Spiritual  pleasures.  (4)  Spiritual 
powers.  The  spiritual  life  comes 
through  Christ,  and  is  conformed  to 
Him. 

2.  God  hath  raised  us  up  together 
with  Christ  (ver.  6). — His  resurrection 
is  a  proof  and  pattern  of  that  of 
believers. 

3.  God  hath  made  us  to  sit  together  in 
heavenly  places  in  Christ. — His  entrance 
into  heaven  is  a  proof  of  the  final 
salvation  of  believers.  He  sits  there 
for  them,  to  take  care  of  their  interests, 
and  in  due  time  will  bring  them  to  sit 
where  He  is. 

II.  Contemplate  the  mercy  of  God 
in  this  great  change. — "  God,  who  is 
rich  in  mercy  "  (ver.  4).  The  mercies 
of  God  are  rich  in  extent,  in  number, 
in  respect  of  constancy,  in  variety,  in 
value.  "  The  great  love  wherewith 
He  loved  us."  He  first  loved  us.  His 
love  shines  brighter  when  we  consider 
what  a  being  He  is.  He  is  infinitely 
above  us.  He  is  self-sufficient.  The 
gospel  gives  us  the  most  exalted  concep- 
tions of  God's  character. 

III.  The  general  purpose  of  God's 
particular  mercy  to  the  Ephesians 
(ver.  7). — God's  mercy  in  reclaiming 
one  transgressor  may  operate  to  the 
salvation  of  thousands  in  ages  to  come. 
The  gospel  dispensation  was  intended 
to  serve  some  useful  purposes  among 
other  intelligences.  Not  only  God's 
gracious  dispensation  to  fallen  men, 
but  also  His  righteous  severity  toward 
irreclaimable  offenders,  is  designed  for 
extensive  beneficial  influence. — Lathrop. 

Vers.  4,  5.  The  State  of  Grace. 

1.  Salvation  originates  in  the  love  of 
God. 

2.  That  it   consists  in  emancipation 
from   evil. — "  Quickened    us    together 

with  Christ ;  "  that  is,  gave  life.  The 
love  and  mercy  of  God  were  shown  in 
this — not  that  He  saved  from  penalty, 


but  from  sin.  What  we  want  is  life, 
more  life,  spiritual  life,  to  know  in  all 
things  the  truth  of  God  and  to  speak 
it,  to  feel  in  all  things  the  will  of  God 
and  do  it. 

3.  The  next  word  to  explain  is  grace. 
— It  stands  opposed  to  nature  and  to 
law.  Whenever  nature  means  the 
dominion  of  our  lower  appetites,  then 
nature  stands  opposed  to  grace.  Grace 
stands  opposed  to  law.  All  that  law 
can  do  is  to  manifest  sin,  just  as  the 
dam  thrown  across  the  river  shows  its 
strength ;  law  can  arrest  sometimes 
the  commission  of  sin,  but  never  the 
inward  principle.  Therefore  God  has 
provided  another  remedy,  "  Sin  shall 
not  have  dominion  over  you,"  because 
ye  are  under  grace. 

4.  Paul  states  salvation  here  as  a  fact. 
— "  By  grace  ye  are  saved."  There  are 
two  systems.  The  one  begins  with 
nature,  the  other  with  grace  :  the  one 
treats  all  Christians  as  if  they  .were 
the  children  of  the  devil,  and  tells  them 
that  they  may  perhaps  become  the 
children  of  God ;  the  other  declares 
that  the  incarnation  of  Christ  is  a  fact, 
a  universal  fact,  proclaiming  that  all 
the  world  are  called  to  be  the  children 
of  the  Most  High.  Let  us  believe  in 
grace  instead  of  beginning  with  nature. 
— F.  W.  Robertson. 


Yers.  4-6.  The  Believer  exalted  to- 
gether with  Jesus  Christ. 

I.  The  believer  is  assured  he  is 
raised  up  with  Christ  by  the  proofs 
which  assure  him  of  the  exaltation  of 
Christ. — These  proofs,  irresistible  as 
they  are,  do  not  produce  impressions 
so  lively  as  they  ought.  1.  From  the 
abuse  of  a  distinction  between  mathe- 
matical evidence  and  moral  evidence. 
2.  Because  the  mind  is  under  the  in- 
fluence of  a  prejudice,  unworthy  of  a 
real  philosopher,  that  moral  evidence 
changes  its  nature  according  to  the 
nature  of  the  things  to  which  it  is 
applied.  3.  Because  the  necessary  dis- 
crimination has  not  been  employed  in 
the  selection  of  those  proofs  on  which 
some  have  pretended  to  establish  it. 
4.  Because  we  are  too  deeply  affected 

155 


CHAP.  II. 


B0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


by  our  inability  to  resolve  certain 
questions  which  the  enemies  of  religion 
are  accustomed  to  put  on  some  cir- 
cumstances   relative    to    that    event. 

5.  Because  we  suffer  ourselves  to  be 
intimidated  more  than  we  ought  by 
the  comparison  instituted  between  them 
and  certain  popular  rumours  which  have 
no  better  support  than  the  caprice  of 
the    persons     who     propagate    them. 

6.  Because  they  are  not  sufficiently 
known. 

II.  The  means  supplied  to  satisfy 
the  believer  that  he  is  fulfilling  the 
conditions  under  which  he  may 
promise  himself  that  he  shall  become 
a  partaker  of  Christ's  exaltation.— 
Though  this  knowledge  be  difficult,  it 
is  by  no  means  impossible  of  attain- 
ment. He  employs  two  methods 
principally  to  arrive  at  it :  1 .  He 
studies  his  own  heart ;  2.  He  shrinks 
not  from  the  inspection  of  the  eyes  of 
others. 

III.  The  believer  is  raised  up  with 
Christ  by  the  foretastes  which  he 
enjoys  on  earth  of  his  participation  in 
the  exaltation  of  Christ. — This  experi- 
ence is  realised  by  the  believer. 
1.  When  shutting  the  door  of  his  closet 
and  excluding  the  world  from  his  heart, 
he  is  admitted  to  communion  and 
fellowship  with  Deity  in  retirement 
and  silence.  2.  When  Providence 
calls  him  to  undergo  some  severe  trial. 

3.  When  he  has  been  enabled  to  make 
some    noble    and    generous    sacrifice. 

4.  When  celebrating  the  sacred  mys- 
teries of  redeeming  love.  5.  Finally, 
in  the  hour  of  conflict  with  the  king  of 
terrors. — Saurin. 

Ver.  5.  Justification  by  Faith. 

I.  We  hold  that  we  are  justified  by 
faith,  that  is,  by  believing,  and  that 
unless  we  are  justified  we  cannot  be 
saved.  Of  all  men  whoever  believed 
this,  those  who  gave  us  the  Church 
catechism  believed  it  most  strongly. 
Believing  really  what  they  taught,  they 
believed  that  children  were  justified. 
For  if  a  child  is  not  justified  in  being  a 
member  of  Christ,  a  child  of  God,  and 
an  inheritor  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 

156 


what  is  he  justified  in  being  ?  They 
knew  that  the  children  could  only  keep 
in  this  just,  right,  and  proper  state  by 
trusting  in  God  and  looking  up  to  Him 
daily  in  faith  and  love  and  obedience. 

II.  These  old  reformers  were 
practical  men  and  took  the  practical 
way. — They  knew  the  old  proverb, 
"  A  man  need  not  be  a  builder  to  live 
in  a  house."  At  least  they  acted  on 
it ;  and  instead  of  trying  to  make  the 
children  understand  what  faith  was 
made  up  of,  they  tried  to  make  them 
live  in  faith  itself.  Instead  of  puzzling 
and  fretting  the  children's  minds  with 
any  of  the  controversies  then  going  on 
between  Papists  and  Protestants,  or 
afterwards  between  Calvinists  and 
Arminians,  they  taught  the  children 
simply  about  God,  who  He  was,  and 
what  He  had  done  for  them  and  all 
mankind,  that  so  they  might  learn  to 
love  Him,  look  up  to  Him  in  faith,  and 
trust  utterly  to  Him,  and  so  remain 
justified  and  right,  saved  and  safe  for 
ever.  By  doing  which  they  showed 
that  they  knew  more  about  faith  and 
about  God  than  if  they  had  written 
books  on  books  of  doctrinal  arguments. 

III.  The  Church  catechism,  where 
it  is  really  and  honestly  taught,  gives 
the  children  an  honest,  frank,  sober, 
English  temper  of  mind  which  no 
other  training  I  have  seen  gives.— I 
warn  you  frankly  that,  if  you  expect  to 
make  the  average  of  English  children 
good  children  on  any  other  ground 
than  the  Church  catechism  takes,  you 
will  fail.  If  it  be  not  enough  for  your 
children  to  know  all  the  articles  of  the 
Apostles'  Creed,  and  on  the  strength 
thereof  to  trust  God  utterly  and  so  be 
justified  and  saved,  then  they  must  go 
elsewhere,  for  I  have  nothing  more  to 
offer  them,  and  trust  in  God  that  I 
never  shall  have. — G.  Kingsley. 

Ver.  8.  Salvation  by  Faith. 

I.  What  faith  it  is  through  which 
we  are  saved. — 1.  It  is  not  barely  the 
faith  of  a  heathen.  2.  Nor  is  it  the 
faith  of  a  devil,  though  this  goes  much 
further  than  that  of  a  heathen.  3.  It 
is  not  barely  that  the  apostles  had 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  II. 


while  Christ  was  yet  upon  earth.  4.  In 
general  it  is  faith  in  Christ  :  Christ 
and  God  through  Christ  are  the  proper 
objects  of  it.  5.  It  is  not  only  an 
assent  to  the  whole  gospel  of  Christ, 
but  also  a  full  reliance  on  the  blood  of 
Christ,  a  trust  in  the  merits  of  His 
life,  death,  and  resurrection,  a  re- 
cumbency upon  Him  as  our  atonement 
and  our  life,  as  given  for  us  and  living 
in  us,  and  in  consequence  hereof,  a 
closing  with  Him  and  cleaving  to  Him 
as  our  wisdom,  righteousness,  sancti- 
fication,  and  redemption,  or,  in  one 
word,  our  salvation. 

II.  What  is  the  salvation  which  is 
through  faith? — 1.  It  is  a  present 
salvation.      2.    A   salvation   from  sin. 

3.  From    the    guilt    of    all    past    sin. 

4.  From  fear.  5.  From  the  power  of 
sin.  6.  A  salvation  often  expressed 
in  the  word  "justification,"  which  taken 
in  the  largest  sense  implies  a  deliver- 
ance from  guilt  and  punishment  by  the 
atonement  of  Christ  actually  applied 
to  the  soul  of  the  sinner  now  believing 
on  Him,  and  a  deliverance  from  the 
power  of  sin,  through  Christ  formed  in 
his  heart. 

III.  The  importance  of  the  doctrine. 
— Never  was  the  maintaining  this 
doctrine  more  seasonable  than  it  is  at 
this  day.  Nothing  but  this  can  effectu- 
ally prevent  the  increase  of  the  Romish 
delusion  among  us.  It  is  endless  to 
attack  one  by  one  all  the  errors  of  that 
Church.  But  salvation  by  faith  strikes 
at  the  root,  and  all  fall  at  once  where 
this  is  established. — Wesley. 

Vers.  8,  9.  Our  Salvation  is  of 
Grace. 

I.  Consider  how  we  are  saved 
through  faith.— 1.  Without  faith  we 
cannot  be  saved.  2.  All  who  have  faith 
will  be  saved. 

II.  What  place  and  influence  works 
have  in  our  salvation. — 1.  In  what 
sense  our  salvation  is  not  of  works. 
(1)  We  are  not  saved  by  works  con- 
sidered as  a  fulfilment  of  the  original 


law  of  nature.  (2)  We  are  not  saved 
by  virtue  of  any  works  done  before 
faith  in  Christ,  for  none  of  these  are 
properly  good.  2.  There  is  a  sense  in 
which  good  works  are  of  absolute 
necessity  to  salvation.  (1)  They  are 
necessary  as  being  radically  included 
in  that  faith  by  which  we  are  saved. 
(2)  A  temper  disposing  us  to  good 
works  is  a  necessary  qualification  for 
heaven.  (3)  Works  are  necessary  as 
evidences  of  our  faith  in  Christ  and  of 
our  title  to  heaven.  (4)  Good  works 
essentially  belong  to  religion.  (5)  Works 
are  necessary  to  adorn  our  professions 
and  honour  our  religion  before  men. 
(6)  By  them  we  are  to  be  judged  in 
the  great  day  of  the  Lord. 

III.  The  necessity  of  works  does  not 
diminish  the  grace  of  God  in  our 
salvation  nor  afford  us  any  pretence 
for  boasting. — 1.  Humility  essentially 
belongs  to  the  Christian  temper.  2.  The 
mighty  preparation  God  has  made  for 
our  recovery  teaches  that  the  human 
race  is  of  great  importance  in  the  scale 
of  rational  beings  and  in  the  scheme 
of  God's  universal  government.  3.  It 
infinitely  concerns  us  to  comply  with 
the  proposals  of  the  gospel.  4.  Let  no 
man  flatter  himself  that  he  is  in  a  state 
of  salvation  as  long  as  he  lives  in  the 
neglect  of  good  works.  5.  Let  us  be 
careful  that  we  mistake  not  the  nature 
of  good  works. — Lathrop. 

Ver.  8.  True  Justifying  Faith  is  not 
of  Ourselves. — It  is  through  grace  that 
we  believe  in  the  grace  of  God.  God's 
grace  and  love,  the  source ;  faith,  the 
instrument ;  both  His  gift.  The  origin 
of  our  coming  to  Christ  is  of  God. 
Justifying  faith,  not  human  assent, 
but  a  powerful,  vivifying  thing  which 
immediately  works  a  change  in  the 
man  and  makes  him  a  new  creature, 
and  leads  him  to  an  entirely  new  and 
altered  mode  of  life  and  conduct. 
Hence  justifying  faith  is  a  divine 
work. 


157 


chap.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verse  10. 

The  Christian  Life  a  Divine  Creation. 

I.  The  true  Christian  a  specimen  of  the  divine  handiwork. — "  We  are  His 

workmanship."  So  far  is  man  from  being  the  author  of  his  own  salvation,  or 
from  procuring  salvation  for  the  sake  of  any  works  of  his  own,  that  not  only  was 
his  first  creation  as  a  man  the  work  of  God,  but  his  new  spiritual  creation  is 
wholly  the  result  of  divine  power.  Man,  in  the  marvellous  mechanism  of  his 
body,  and  in  his  unique  mental  and  spiritual  endowments,  is  the  noblest  work 
of  God.  He  is  the  lord  and  high  priest  of  nature,  and  has  such  dominion  over 
it  as  to  be  able  to  combine  and  utilise  its  forces.  But  the  creation  of  the  new 
spiritual  man  in  Christ  Jesus  is  a  far  grander  work,  and  a  more  perfect  and 
exalted  specimen  of  the  divine  handiwork.  It  is  a  nearer  approach  to  a  more 
perfect  image  of  the  divine  character  and  perfections.  As  the  best  work  of 
the  most  gifted  genius  is  a  reflection  of  his  loftiest  powers,  so  the  new  spiritual 
creation  is  a  fuller  revelation  of  the  infinite  resources  of  the  divine  Worker. 

II.  The  Christian  life  is  eminently  practical. — "  Created  in  Christ  Jesus  for 
good  works  "  (H.V.).  The  apostle  never  calls  the  works  of  the  law  good  works. 
We  are  not  saved  by,  but  created  unto,  good  works.  Works  do  not  justify,  but 
the  justified  man  works,  and  thus  demonstrates  the  reality  of  his  new  creation. 
"  I  should  have  thought  mowers  very  idle  people,"  said  John  Newton,  "  but  they 
work  while  they  whet  the  scythe.  Now  devotedness  to  God,  whether  it  mows 
or  whets  the  scythe,  still  goes  on  with  the  work.  A  Christian  should  never 
plead  spirituality  for  being  a  sloven  ;  if  he  be  but  a  shoe-cleaner,  he  should  be 
the  best  in  the  parish." 

III.  The  opportunities  and  motives  for  Christian  usefulness  are  divinely  pro- 
vided.— "  Which  God  hath  before  ordained  that  we  should  walk  in  them." 
Every  man  has  his  daily  work  of  body  or  mind  appointed  him.  There  is  not 
a  moment  without  a  duty.  Each  one  has  a  vineyard  ;  let  him  see  that  he  till 
it,  and  not  say,  "  No  man  hath  hired  us."  "  The  situation,"  says  Carlyle, 
"  that  has  not  its  duty,  its  ideal,  was  never  yet  occupied  by  man.  Yes,  here  in 
this  poor,  miserable,  hampered,  despicable  Actual  wherein  thou  even  now 
standest,  here  or  nowhere  is  thy  ideal.  Work  it  out  therefrom,  and  working, 
believe,  live,  and  be  free."  There  is  no  romance  in  a  minister's  proposing  and 
hoping  to  forward  a  great  moral  revolution  on  the  earth,  for  the  religion  he  is 
appointed  to  preach  was  intended  and  is  adapted  to  work  deeply  and  widely  and 
to  change  the  face  of  society.  Christianity  was  not  ushered  into  the  world  with 
such  a  stupendous  preparation,  it  was  not  foreshown  through  so  many  ages  by 
enraptured  prophets,  it  was  not  proclaimed  so  joyfully  through  the  songs  of 
angels,  it  was  not  preached  by  such  holy  lips  and  sealed  by  such  precious  blood, 
to  be  only  a  pageant,  a  form,  a  sound,  a.  show.  Oh  no  !  It  has  come  from 
heaven,  with  heaven's  life  and  power — come  to  make  all  things  new,  to  make 
the  wilderness  glad,  and  the  desert  blossom  as  the  rose,  to  break  the  stony 
heart,  to  set  free  the  guilt-burdened  and  earth-bound  spirit,  and  to  present  it 
faultless  before  God's  glory  with  exceeding  joy. 

Lessons. — 1.  Christianity  is  not  <%  creed,  but  a  life.  2.  The  Christian  life  has  a 
manifest  divine  origin.  3.  The  Christian  life  must  be  practically  developed  in 
harmony  with  the  divine  mind. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSE. 

Ver.  10.  Interruptions  in  our  Work,  which  a  Christian  does  his  work  will 
and  the  Way  to  deal  with  Them. — In  be  his  sensitiveness  to  interruptions, 
proportion    to    the    seriousness    with      and  this  sensitiveness  is  apt  to  disturb 

158 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  II. 


his  peace.  The  remedy  is  a  closer  study 
of  the  mind  that  was  in  Christ,  as 
that  mind  transpires  in  His  recorded 
conduct.  The  point  in  the  life  of  our 
Lord  is  the  apparent  want  of  what 
may  be  called  method  or  plan.  His 
good  works  were  not  in  pursuance  of 
some  scheme  laid  down  by  Himself, 
but  such  as  entered  into  God's  scheme 
for  Him,  such  as  the  Father  had 
prepared  for  Him  to  walk  in. 

I.  Notice  His  discourses  both  in 
their  occasions  and  their  contexture. 
— 1.  His  discourses  often  take  their 
rise  from  some  object  which  is  thrown 
across  His  path  in  nature,  from  some 
occurrence  which  takes  place  under  His 
eyes,  or  from  some  question  which  is 
put  to  Him.  2.  The  contexture  of 
His  discourses  are  not  systematic  in 
the  usual  sense  of  the  word.  There  is 
the  intellectual  method,  and  the  method 
of  a  full  mind  and  loving  heart.  The 
only  plan  observable  in  our  Lord's  dis- 
courses is  that  of  a  loving  heart  pouring 
itself  out  as  occasion  serves  for  the 
edification  of  mankind. 

II.  Study  the  life  of  Christ.— The 
absence  of  mere  human  plan,  or  rather 
strict  faithfulness  to  the  plan  of  God 
as  hourly  developed  by  the  movements 
of  His  providence,  characterises  the 
life  of  our  Lord  even  more  than  His  dis- 
courses. Illustrated  from  Matthew  ix. 
God  has  a  plan  of  life  for  each  one  of 
us,  and  occasions  of  doing  or  receiving 
good  are  mapped  out  for  each  in  His 
eternal  counsels.  Little  incidents,  as 
well  as  great  crises  of  life,  are  under 
the  control  of  God's  providence.  Events 
have  a  voice  for  us  if  we  will  listen  to  it. 
Let  us  view  our  interruptions  as  part 
of  God's  plan  for  us.  We  may  receive 
good,  even  when  we  cannot  do  good. 
It  is  self-will   which  weds  us  to  our 


own  plans  and  makes  us  resent  inter- 
ference with  them.  In  the  providence 
of  God  there  seems  to  be  entanglements, 
perplexities,  interruptions,  confusions, 
contradictions,  without  end;  but  you 
may  be  sure  there  is  one  ruling  thought, 
one  master-design,  to  which  all  these 
are  subordinate.  Be  not  clamorous  for 
another  or  more  dignified  character 
than  that  which  is  allotted  to  you.  Be 
it  your  sole  aim  to  conspire  with  the 
Author,  and  to  subserve  His  grand  and 
wise  conception.  Thus  shall  you  find 
peace  in  submitting  yourself  to  the 
wisdom  which  is  of  God. — E.  M.  Goul- 
burn. 

The  New  Spiritual  Creation. — God 
has  kindled  in  us  a  new  spiritual  life  by 
baptism  and  the  influence  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  connected  therewith.  He  has 
laid  the  foundation  of  recreating  ns 
into  His  image.  He  has  made  us 
other  men  in  a  far  more  essential  sense 
than  it  was  once  said  to  Saul—"  Thou 
shalt  be  turned  into  another  man." 
What  is  the  principal  fruit  and  end  of 
this  new  creation?  A  living  hope. 
Its  object  is  not  only  our  future  resur- 
rection, but  the  whole  plenitude  of  the 
salvation  still  to  be  revealed  by  Jesus 
Christ,  even  until  the  new  heavens 
and  the  new  earth  shall  appear.  Birth 
implies  life ;  so  is  it  with  the  hope  of 
believers,  which  is  the  very  opposite  of 
the  vain,  lost,  and  powerless  hope  of  the 
worldly-minded.  It  is  powerful,  and 
quickens  the  heart  by  comforting, 
strengthening,  and  encouraging  it,  by 
making  it  joyous  and  cheerful  in  God. 
Its  quickening  influence  enters  even 
into  our  physical  life.  Hope  is  not 
only  the  fulfilment  of  the  new  life 
created  in  regeneration,  but  also  the 
innermost  kernel  of  the  same. — Weiss. 


MAIN   HOMILETICS    OF    THE    PARAGRAPH.— Verses  11,  12. 

The  Forlorn  State  of  the  Gentile  World. 

I.  Outcast. — "  Gentiles,  .  .  .  called  Uncircumcision  by  that  which  is  called  the 
Circumcision"  (ver.  11).  The  circumcised  Jew  regarded  himself  as  a  special 
favourite  of  Heaven,  and  superior  to  all  other  men.  He  hardly  felt  himself  a 
member  of  the  human  family.  He  was  accustomed  to  speak  of  himself  as  chosen 
of  God,  and  as  holy  and  clean  ;  whilst  the  Gentiles  were  treated  as  sinners,  dogs, 

159 


chap.il  H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS. 


polluted,  unclean,  outcast,  and  God-abandoned.  Between  Jew  and  Gentile  there 
was  constant  hatred  and  antagonism,  as  there  is  now  between  the  Church  and 
the  world.  On  the  one  hand,  the  old  religion,  with  its  time-honoured  teachings, 
its  ancient  traditions,  the  Church  of  the  Fathers,  the  guardian  of  revelation, 
the  depositary  of  the  faith,  the  staunchness  that  tends  to  degenerate  into 
bigotry — here  is  the  Jew.  On  the  other  hand,  the  intellectual  searchings,  the 
political  aspirations  and  mechanical  contrivings — science,  art,  literature,  commerce, 
sociology,  the  liberty  which  threatens  to  luxuriate  into  licence — here  is  the 
Gentile.  Ever  and  again  the  old  feud  breaks  out.  Ever  and  again  there  is  a 
crack  and  a  rent.  The  gulf  widens,  and  disruption  is  threatened.  The  majority 
is  outside  the  circle  of  the  Church. 

II.  Christless. — "  That  at  that  time  ye  were  without  Christ."  The  promises 
of  a  coming  Deliverer  were  made  to  the  Jews,  and  they  were  slow  to  see  that 
any  other  people  had  any  right  to  the  blessings  of  the  Messiah,  or  that  it  was 
their  duty  to  instruct  the  world  concerning  Him.  They  drew  a  hard  line  between 
the  sons  of  Abraham  and  the  dogs  of  Greeks.  They  erected  a  middle  wall  of 
partition,  thrusting  out  the  Gentiles  into  the  outer  court.  Christ  has  broken 
down  the  barrier.  On  the  area  thus  cleared  He  has  erected  a  larger,  loftier, 
holier  temple,  a  universal  brotherhood  which  acknowledges  no  preferences  and 
knows  no  distinctions.  In  Christ  Jesus  now  there  is  neither  Jew  nor  Greek,  but 
Christ  is  all  and  in  all — a  vivid  contrast  to  the  Christlessness  of  a  former  age. 

III.  Hopeless. — "  Being  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  and  strangers 
from  the  covenants  of  promise,  having  no  hope"  (ver.  12).  Where  there  is  no 
promise  there  is  no  hope.  Cut  off  from  any  knowledge  of  the  promises  revealed 
to  the  Jews,  the  Gentiles  were  sinking  into  despair. 

IV.  Godless. — "  Without  God  in  the  world."  With  numberless  deities  the 
Gentiles  had  no  God.  They  had  everything  else,  but  this  one  thing  they  lacked 
— knowledge  of  God  their  Father ;  and  without  this  all  their  magnificent  gifts 
could  not  satisfy,  could  not  save,  them.  Culture  and  civilisation,  arts  and 
commerce,  institutions  and  laws,  no  nation  can  afford  to  undervalue  these ;  but 
not  only  do  all  these  things  soon  fade,  but  the  people  themselves  fall  into 
corruption  and  decay,  if  the  Breath  of  Life  is  wanting.  As  with  nations,  so  is  it 
with  individuals.  Man  cannot  with  impunity  ignore  or  deny  the  Father  of  earth 
and  heaven. 

Lessons. — 1.  Man  left  to  himself  inevitably  degenerates.  2.  When  man 
abandons  God  his  case  is  desperate,  3.  The  rescue  of  man  from  utter  ruin  is  an 
act  of  divine  mercy. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  11,  12.  The  Condition  of  the  II.  Reminds  them  of  the  contempt 

Ephesians   before  their  Conversion  de-  with   which    they  had   been    treated 

scriptive  of  the  State  of  Sinners  under  by  the  Jews. — The  Jews,    instead   of 

the  Gospel.  improving  the  distinction  of  their  cir- 

I.  They  were  in  time  past  Gentiles  cumcision  to  gratitude  and  obedience, 

in   the   flesh. — He    admonishes    them  perverted  it  to  pride,  self -confidence,  and 

not    to    forget    the    dismal    state    of  contempt  of  mankind.     They  not  only 

heathenism    out    of    which    they   had  excluded  other  nations  from  the  benefit 

been  called,  and  often  to  reflect  upon  of  religious  communion,  but  even  denied 

it,  that  they  might   ever  maintain   a  them  the  common  offices  of  humanity, 

sense  of  their  un worthiness  and  awaken  One  of  their  greatest  objections  to  the 

thankful  and  admiring  apprehensions  gospel  was  that  it  offered  salvation  to 

of  that  grace   which  had  wrought  in  the  Gentiles, 

them  so  glorious  a  change.  III.    They  were  without  Christ. — 

160 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  II. 


To  the  Jews  were  chiefly  confined  the 
discoveries  which  God  made  of  a 
Saviour  to  come.  From  them  in  their 
captivities  and  dispersions  the  Gentiles 
obtained  the  knowledge  they  had  of 
this  glorious  Person.  This  knowledge 
was  imperfect,  mixed  with  error  and 
uncertainty,  and  at  best  extended 
only  to  a  few.  The  Gentiles,  con- 
templating the  Messiah  as  a  temporal 
prince,  regarded  His  appearance  as  a 
calamity  rather  than  a  blessing. 

IV.  They  were  aliens  from  the 
commonwealth  of  Israel. — To  the  forms 
of  worship  instituted  in  the  Mosaic  law 
none  was  admitted  but  Jews  and 
such  as  were  proselyted  to  the  Jewish 
religion.  All  uncircumcised  heathens 
were  excluded  as  aliens. 

V.  They  were  strangers  from  the 
covenants  of  promise. — The  discovery 
of  the  covenants  of  promise  until  the 
Saviour  came  was  almost  wholly  con- 
fined to  the  Jews.  How  unhappy  was 
the  condition  of  the  Gentile  world  in 
the  dark,  benighted  ages  which  pre- 
ceded the  gospel ! 

VI.  They  had  no  clear  hope  of 
a  future  existence. — Many  of  them 
scarcely  believed  or  thought  of  a  life 
beyond  this.  They  had  no  appre- 
hension, hardly  the  idea  of  a  restora- 
tion of  the  body.  Those  who  believed 
in  a  future  state  had  but  obscure  and 
some  of  them  very  absurd  conceptions 
of  it.  Still  more  ignorant  were  they 
of  the  qualifications  necessary  for 
happiness  after  death. 

VII.  They  were  atheists  in  a  world 
in  which  God  was  manifest. — The 
heathens  generally  had  some  appre- 
hension of  a  Deity;  but  they  were 
without  a  knowledge  of  the  one  true 
God  and  without  a  just  idea  of  His 
character.  There  are  more  atheists 
in  the  world  than  profess  themselves 
such.  Many  who  profess  to  know  God 
in  works  deny  Him. — Lathrop. 

Ver.  12.  Hopeless  and  Godless. — The 

»  soul  that   has   no  God   has   no  hope. 

The  character  of  the  God  we  love  and 

worship  will  determine  the  character 

of  our  hope.     1.  The  heathen  religion 


M 


was  the  seeking  religion.  Their  search 
arose  out  of  a  deeply  felt  want.  They 
felt  the  need  of  something  they  did 
not  possess ;  and  the  finest  intellects 
the  world  has  ever  known  bravely  and 
anxiously  devoted  all  their  colossal 
powers  to  the  task  of  fathoming  the 
mysteries  of  life.  The  hope  of  dis- 
covery buoyed  them  up  and  urged 
them  onwards;  but  their  united  en- 
deavours brought  them  only  to  the 
borderland  of  the  unseen  and  the 
unknown,  where  they  caught  but 
glimmerings  of  a  truth  that  ever  re- 
ceded into  the  great  beyond.  "  The 
world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God," 
and  therefore  had  no  hope.  2.  The 
Hebrew  religion  was  the  hoping  re- 
ligion. Favoured  with  a  revelation 
of  the  only  true  God,  their  hope 
expanded  with  every  advancing  step 
of  the  progressive  revelation.  Their 
hope  was  based  on  faith,  as  all  true 
hope  must  be — faith  in  the  promises 
of  God.  They  had  the  promise  of  a 
Deliverer  whose  wisdom  should  excel 
that  of  Moses  and  Solomon,  and  whose 
power  should  surpass  that  of  Joshua 
and  of  his  heroic  successors  in  the 
most  brilliant  period  of  their  military 
career ;  and,  through  the  centuries  of 
prosperity  and  decline,  of  scattering 
and  captivity,  and  amid  unparalleled 
sufferings  which  would  have  extin- 
guished any  other  nation,  hope  fastened 
and  fed  upon  the  promises  till  the  true 
Messiah  came,  whom  St.  Paul  justly 
described  as  "  the  Hope  of  Israel,  the 
Hope  of  the  promise  made  of  God  unto 
our  fathers."  3.  The  Christian  religion 
is  the  complement  and  perfection  of  all 
previously  existing  systems  ;  it  is  the 
grand  realisation  of  what  the  heathen 
sought  and  the  Hebrew  hoped  for.  It 
is  in  Jesus  we  have  the  clearest,  fullest, 
and  most  authoritative  revelation  of 
God,  and  it  is  in  Him,  and  in  Him 
alone,  that  the  loftiest  hope  of  man 
finds  its  restful  and  all-sufficient  reali- 
sation. The  apostle  Paul  refers  to 
Jesus  specifically  as  our  Hope — "  Our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  is  our  Hope  " 
(1  Tim.  i.  1).  4.  In  the  light  of 
this  great  and  indubitable   truth  the 

161 


chap.  ii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


words  of  our  text  may  be  clearly  and  the  most  delicate  tracery  and  shimmer- 
unmistakably  interpreted,  and  they  ing  and  flashing  with  the  resplendent 
assume  a  terrible  significance.  To  be  glory  of  God.  (5)  Hope  is  the  balloon 
without  Christ  is  to  be  without  God  and  of  the  soul,  soaring  majestically  into 
without  hope.  (1)  Hope  is  not  simply  the  heavens,  scanning  scenes  of  beauty 
expectation.  We  expect  many  things  and  grandeur  never  beheld  by  our 
we  do  not  hope  for.  In  the  natural  earth-bound  senses,  and  faithfully  re- 
course of  things  we  expect  difficulties,  porting  to  the  soul  the  state  of  affairs 
we  expect  opposition  and  misrepre-  in  the  skies ;  but  it  is  a  captive  balloon, 
sentation — "  black  wounding  calumny  and  the  connecting  cords  are  firmly 
the  whitest  virtue  strikes  " — we  expect  held  in  the  hand  of  faith.  The  loftiest 
affliction  and  suffering,  we  expect  the  flights  and  the  swing  of  what  might 
infirmities  and  disabilities  of  age ;  but  seem  the  most  eccentric  gyrations  of 
we  are  none  of  us  so  fond  of  trouble  hope  are  held  in  check  by  the  friendly, 
for  trouble's  sake  as  to  hope  for  any  of  the  sympathetic,  but  unswerving  grasp 
these  things.  (2)  Hope  is  not  simply  of  faith.  "  My  dear  Hope,"  Faith 
desire.  Our  desires  are  as  thick  and  says,  "  it  is  very  nice  for  you  to  be 
plentiful  as  apple  blossoms,  few  of  up  there,  basking  in  the  cloudless  sun- 
which  ever  ripen  into  the  fruit  they  shine  and  drinking  in  the  melody  of 
promise.  We  desire  uninterrupted  the  ascending  lark  as  it  ripples  up  the 
health,  we  desire  wealth — the  most  heights ;  and  I  like  you  to  be  there, 
dangerous  and  disappointing  of  all  I  could  never  get  there  myself;  and 
human  wishes — we  desire  pleasure,  you  tell  me  of  things  I  should  never 
success  in  life,  and  the  realisation  of  otherwise  know,  and  they  do  me  good, 
the  most  ambitious  dreams;  but  we  But,  remember,  I  cannot  let  you  go. 
have  no  reasonable  ground  for  hoping  We  are  linked  together  in  the  sacred 
that  all  our  desires  will  ever  be  bonds  of  a  holy  wedlock.  We  are 
attained.  (3)  Hope  is  the  expectation  necessary  to  each  other,  and  cannot 
of  the  desirable,  and  it  must  have  a  do  without  each  other.  If  you  were 
foundation  on  which  the  expectation  to  break  away  from  me,  you  would 
rests  and  an  object  to  which  the  desire  vanish  like  vapour  into  space,  and  I 
can  rise.  The  foundation  of  hope  is  should  be  left  forlorn  and  powerless" 
Christ,  and  the  object  of  hope  is  to  And  Hope  replies :  "  I  know  it,  my 
live  with  Him  in  eternal  glory.  To  dear  Faith.  Divorce  would  be  fatal 
be  without  hope  and  without  God  does  to  us  both,  and  our  union  is  too 
not  mean  that  hope  and  God  do  not  sweet  and  precious  ever  to  dream  of 
exist.  The  world  is  full  of  both ;  they  separation.  I  live  in  these  upper 
are  among  you,  they  surround  you,  the  regions  purely  for  your  sake.  Yow 
very  air  vibrates  with  the  ever-active  know  I  have  cheered  you  up  many 
presence  of  these  grand  realities ;  but  a  time  and  will  do  so  again.  My  joy 
they  are  as  though  they  did  not  exist  is  to  brighten  your  life  of  toil  and 
for  you  unless  you  know  and  feel  they  conflict  down  there.  When  the  soul 
do  exist  within  you.  (4)  Hope  pre-  has  done  with  you  it  will  have  done 
supposes  faith ;  they  cannot  exist  apart.  with  me,  and  when  my  work  is  finished 
Faith  discovers  "  the  only  foundation  I  shall  be  content  to  die."  Thus  faith 
which  is  laid,  which  is  Christ  Jesus,"  and  hope  are  essentially  united,  and 
fastens  the  soul  to  and  settles  it  on  both  are  wedded  together  by  the  soul's 
this  foundation,  and  faith  and  hope  living  union  with  Christ.  (6)  A  false 
rouse  all  the  activities  of  the  soul  to  hope  is  really  no  hope.  It  rests  on  no 
build  on  this  foundation  a  superstruc-  solid  foundation ;  it  is  not  justified  by 
ture  which  shall  grow  in  solidity,  in  sound  reason.  It  is  but  the  blue  light 
symmetry,  and  in  beauty,  until  it  of  a  frantic  conjecture  generated  amid 
becomes  a  perfect  marvel  of  moral  the  restless  tumults  of  a  soul  in  the 
architecture,    richly  ornamented   with  last  stages  of  despair.     At  the  best  a 

162 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  II. 


false  hope  is  but  a  beautiful  dream 
spun  from  the  gossamer  threads  of  a 
busy  and  excited  fancy,  a  dream  of 
what  vje  wish  might  be,  and,  like  all 
other  dreams  having  no  substantial 
basis,  it  dissolves  into  space  under  the 
first  touch  of  reality.  A  false  hope 
lures  its  victims  on  to  destruction,  as 
the  flickering  lights  of  the  marsh  gases 
seduce  the  belated  traveller  into  the 
dismal  swamps  from  which  there  is  no 
release. 

A  State  of  Sin  a  State  of  Ungodliness. 
— 1.  Men  do  not  recognise  the  existence 
of  God.  2.  They  do  not  acknowledge 
His  moral  government.  3.  They  do 
not  seek  His  favour  as  their  chief 
good.  4.  They  do  not  delight  in  His 
communion.  5.  They  do  not  antici- 
pate their  final  reckoning  with  Him. 
6.  They  do  not  accept  His  own  dis- 
closures concerning  the  attributes  of 
His  nature  and  the  principles  of  His 
administration. — G.  Brooks. 

Man  without  God. — He  is  like  a  ship 
tossed  about  on  a  stormy  sea  without 
chart  or  compass.  The  ship  drifts  as 
the  waves  carry  it.  The  night  is  dark. 
The  pilot  knows  not  which  way  to 
steer.  He  may  be  close  to  rocks  and 
quicksands.  Perhaps  a  flash  of  light- 
ning falls  on  a  rock,  or  he  hears  the 
waves  breaking  over  it.  But  how 
shall  he  escape,  or  how  prepare  to 
meet  the  danger  %  Shall  he  trust  in 
providence  ?  What  providence  has  he 
to  trust  in  1  Poor  man  !  He  is  without 
God.  Shall  he  throw  out  an  anchor  1 
But  he  has  no  anchor.  He  wants  the 
best  and  only  safe  anchor,  hope — the 
anchor  of  the  soul.  Such  is  the  state 
of  man  when  he  is  far  off,  without  a 
God  to  trust  in,  without  hope  to  com- 
fort and  support  him.  But  give  the 
man  a  true  and  lively  faith  in  Christ, 
tell  him  of  a  merciful  and  loving  Father 
who  careth  for  us  and  would  have  us 
cast  all  our  care  upon  Him,  show  him 
that  hope  which  is  firm  to  the  end, 
and  straightway  you  make  a  happy 
man  of  him.  You  give  him  a  course 
to  steer,  a  chart  and  compass  to  guide 


him,  an  anchor  which  will  enable  him 
to  withstand  the  buffeting  of  every 
storm.  You  insure  him  against  ship- 
wreck, and  you  assure  him  of  a  blessed 
haven  where  at  length  he  will  arrive 
and  be  at  rest. — A.  W.  Hare. 

Practical  Atheism. — If  it  had  been 
without  friends,  without  shelter,  with- 
out food,  that  would  have  made  a 
gloomy  sound  ;  but  without  God  ! 
That  there  should  be  men  who  can 
survey  the  creation  with  a  scientific 
enlargement  of  intelligence  and  then 
say  there  is  no  God  is  one  of  the 
most  hideous  phenomena  in  the  world. 

I.  The  text  is  applicable  to  those 
who  have  no  solenn  recognition  of 
God's  all-disposing  government  and 
providence — who  have  no  thought 
of  the  course  of  things  but  just  as 
going  on,  going  on  some  way  or  other, 
just  as  it  can  be ;  to  whom  it  appears 
abandoned  to  a  strife  and  competi- 
tion of  various  mortal  powers,  or  sur- 
rendered to  something  they  call  general 
laws,  and  these  blended  with  chance. 

II.  Is  a  description  of  all  those 
who  are  forming  or  pursuing  their 
scheme  of  life  and  happiness  inde- 
pendent of  Him. — They  do  not  consult 
His  counsel  or  will  as  to  what  that 
scheme  should  be  in  its  ends  or  means. 
His  favour,  His  blessing  are  not  abso- 
lutely indispensable.  We  can  be  happy 
leaving  Him  out  of  the  account. 

III.  Is  a  description  of  those  who 
have  but  a  slight  sense  of  universal 
accountableness  to  God  as  the  supreme 
authority — who  have  not  a  conscience 
constantly  looking  and  listening  to 
Him  and  testifying  for  Him.  This 
insensibility  of  accountableness  exists 
almost  entire — a  stupefaction  of  con- 
science— in  very  many  minds.  In 
others  there  is  a  disturbed  yet  in- 
efficacious feeling.  To  be  thus  with 
God  is  in  the  most  emphatical  sense  to 
be  without  Him — without  Him  as  a 
friend,  approver,  and  patron.  Each 
thought  of  Him  tells  the  soul  who  it 
is  that  it  is  without,  and  who  it  is  that 
in  a  very  fearful  sense  it  never  can  be 
without. 

163 


chap.  ii.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS. 


IV.  The  description  belongs  to  that  professing  to  retain  God  in  their 
state  of  mind  in  which  there  is  no  thoughts,  frame  the  religion  in  which 
communion  with  Him  maintained  or  they  are  to  acknowledge  Him  accord- 
even  sought  with  cordial  aspiration,  ing  to  their  own  speculation  and  fancy. 
How  lamentable  to  be  thus  without  — Will  the  Almighty  acknowledge  your 
God  !  Consider  it  in  one  single  view  feigned  God  for  Himself,  and  admit 
only,  that  of  the  loneliness  of  a  human  your  religion  as  equivalent  to  that 
soul  in  this  destitution.  which  He  has  declared  and  defined  ? 

Y.    A   description    of  the   state   of  If  He  should  not,  you  are  without  God 

mind  in  which  there  is  no  habitual  in  the  world.      Let  us  implore  Him 

anticipation    of   the    great    event  of  not  to  permit  our  spirits  to  be  detached 

going  at  length  into  the  presence  of  from   Him,   abandoned,   exposed,  and 

God ;    in   which    there    is   an    absence  lost ;  not  to  let  them  be  trying  to  feed 

of  the  thought  of  being  with  Him  in  their  immortal  fires  on  transitory  sus- 

another  world,  of  being  with  Him  in  tenance,    but    to    attract    them,    exalt 

judgment,   and    whether    to    be   with  them,  and  hold  them  in  His  communion 

Him  for  ever.  for  ever. — John  Foster. 

VI.    A   description  of  those  who, 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses    13—18. 

Christ  the  Great  Peacemaker. 

I.  His  mission  on  earth  was  one  of  peace. — "  And  came  and  preached  peace 
to  you  which  were  afar  off,  and  to  them  that  were  nigh  "  (ver.  17).  His  advent 
was  heralded  by  the  angelic  song,  "  Peace  on  earth,  and  goodwill  toward  men." 
The  world  is  racked  with  moral  discord ;  He  is  constantly  striving  to  introduce 
the  music  of  a  heavenly  harmony.  It  is  distracted  with  war ;  He  is  propagating 
principles  that  will  by-and-by  make  war  impossible.  The  work  of  the  peace- 
maker is  Christ -like.  .  Shenkyn,  one  of  whose  anomalies  was  that  with  all  his 
burning  passions  he  was  a  notorious  peacemaker,  and  had  means  of  pouring  oil 
upon  troubled  waters,  once  upon  a  time  was  deputed  to  try  his  well-known 
skill  upon  a  Church  whose  strife  of  tongues  had  become  quite  notorious.  He 
reluctantly  complied,  and  attended  a  meeting  which  soon  proved  to  his  satisfac- 
tion that  the  people  were  possessed  by  a  demon  that  could  not  easily  be  expelled. 
The  peacemaker  got  up,  staff  in  hand,  paced  the  little  chapel,  and  with  his  spirit 
deeply  moved,  cried  out,  "Lord,  is  this  Thy  spouse?"  Faster  and  faster  he 
walked,  thumping  his  huge  stick  on  the  floor,  and  still  crying  out,  "  Lord,  is  this 
Thy  spouse  ?  Slay  her  !  "  Then  there  came,  as  it  were  from  another,  a  response, 
"  No,  I  will  not."  "  Sell  her,  then  ! "  "  No,  I  will  not."  "  Deny  her,  then  !  " 
Still  the  answer  came,  "  I  will  not."  Then  he  lifted  up  his  voice,  saying,  "  I  have 
bought  her  with  My  precious  blood  ;  how  can  I  give  her  up  ?  How  can  I  forsake 
her  1 "  The  strife  had  now  ceased,  and  the  people  looked  on  with  amazement, 
crying  out  for  pardon. 

II.  He  made  peace  between  man  and  man. — "  For  He  is  our  peace,  who  hath 
made  both  one  j  ...  to  make  in  Himself  of  twain  one  new  man,  go  making  peace  " 
(vers.  14,  15).  The  hostility  of  Jew  and  Gentile  was  conquered;  the  new 
spritual  nature  created  in  both  formed  a  bond  of  brotherhood  and  harmony. 
The  Jew  no  longer  despised  the  Gentile ;  the  Gentile  no  longer  hated  and  perse- 
cuted the  Jew.  Where  the  Christian  spirit  predominates  personal  quarrels  are 
speedily  adjusted. 

III.  He  made  peace  between  man  and  God. — "  That  He  might  reconcile  both 
unto  God  in  one  body  by  the  cross  "  (ver.  16).  The  enmity  of  man  against  God 
is  disarmed  and  conquered  by  the  voluntary  suffering  of  Jesus  in  man's  stead, 
and  by  His  thus  opening  up  the  way  of  reconciliation  of  man  with  God.     God 

164 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS.         chap.  II. 


can  now  be  just,  and  the  justifier  of  him  that  believeth  in  Jesus.  The  violated 
law  is  now  atoned  for,  and  the  violater  may  obtain  forgiveness  and  regain  the 
forfeited  favour  of  the  offended  God.     There  is  peace  only  through  forgiveness. 

IV.  His  death  removed  the  great  barrier  to  peace. — This  paragraph  is  very 
rich  and  suggestive  in  the  phrases  used  to  explain  this  blessed  result :  "  Ye  are 
made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ  "  (ver.  13).  "  By  the  cross,  having  slain  the 
enmity  thereby  "  (ver.  16).  "  Hath  broken  down  the  middle  wall  of  partition, 
having  abolished  in  His  flesh  the  enmity"  (vers.  14,  15).  It  is  not  the  calm, 
silent,  featureless,  helpless,  forceless  peace  of  death,  but  a  living,  active,  aggressive, 
ever-conquering  peace.  The  death  was  the  result  of  agonising  struggle  and 
intense  suffering,  and  the  peace  purchased  is  a  powerfully  operating  influence  in 
the  believing  soul. 

"  A  peace  is  of  the  nature  of  a  conquest ; 
For  there  both  parties  nobly  are  subdued, 
And  neither  party  losers." 

Shakespeare. 

V.  True  peace  is  realised  only  in  Christ. — "  But  now  in  Christ  Jesus  ye  who 
sometimes  were  far  off  are  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ "  (ver.  13).  "  For  He 
is*  our  peace  "  (ver.  14).  "  For  through  Him  we  both  have  access  by  one  Spirit  unto 
the  Father"  (ver.  18).  "Christ  takes  us  by  the  hand,  and  eads  us  to  the 
Father."  Men  seek  peace  in  the  excitements  of  worldly  pleasures,  or  in  the 
pursuit  of  ambitious  aims,  but  in  vain.  They  only  stimulate  the  malady  they 
seek  to  cure.  Christ  is  the  restful  centre  of  the  universe,  and  the  sin-tossed 
soul  gains  peace  only  as  it  converges  towards  Him.  The  efforts  of  men  to  find 
rest  independent  of  Christ  only  reveal  their  need  of  Him,  and  it  is  a  mercy  when 
this  revelation  and  consciousness  of  need  does  not  come  too  late. 

Lessons. — 1.  Sin  is  the  instigator  of  quarrels  and  strife.  2.  Only  as  sin  is 
conquered  does  peace  become  possible.     3.  Christ  introduces  peace  by  abolishing  sin. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers.  13-18.  Nearness  to  God.  favour   as  our  happiness,  His  service 

I.  They     were     brought    into    the  as  our  employment,  His  word  as  our 
Church  of  God,  and  admitted  to  equal  guide,   His  ordinances  as  our  refresh 
privileges  with  His  ancient  people  the  ment,  His  house  as  the  gate  of  heaven, 
Jews.  and    heaven  as  our    eternal    home. — 

II.  They  were  brought  near  to  God      Lathrop. 
as  they  were  admitted  to  enjoy  the 

gospel,  which    is    a    dispensation    of  Ver.  13.   Our  State  by  Nature  and  by 

grace  and  peace.  Grace. 

III.  They  were  brought  near  to  God  I.  Our  state  by  nature. — The 
by  the  renovation  of  their  souls  after  distance  from  God  here  spoken  of  is 
His  image.  not  a  local  distance,  neither  is  it  that 

IV.  This  nearness  to  God  implies  a  which  separates  us  from  Him  as  an 
state  of  peace  with  Him.  infinite  Being.     1.  It  is  legal.     Ban- 

V.  Another  circumstance  of  the  ished  by  a  righteous  sentence  and  by 
nearness  is  access  to  God  in  prayer.       a   sense    of    guilt  and    unworthiness. 

VI.  Another  is  the  presence  of  His  2.  It  is  moral.  Estrangement.  Absence 
Holy  Spirit. — Let  us  be  afraid  of  every-  of  sympathy.  Want  of  harmony, 
thing  that  tends  to  draw  us  away  from  3.  In  both  these  respects  it  is  ever- 
God,  and  love  everything  which  brings  widening.  4.  It  is  miserable  and 
us  nearer  to  Him.     Let  us  seek  Him  dangerous. 

with  our  whole  heart,  preserve  daily  II.  Our   state    by    grace. — 1.    The 

communion    with    Him,    choose    His      legal    barriers    are    removed    by    the 

165 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


blood  of  Christ  shed  on  the  cross. 
2.  The  moral  alienation  is  removed  by 
the  blood  of  Christ  as  applied  to  the 
believer  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  3.  The 
nearness  to  God  thus  effected  is  a 
valuable  privilege.  It  includes  re- 
conciliation, friendship,  communion. 
Sinner,  apply  now  to  be  made  nigh. 
Believer,  remember  thy  obligations. — 
G.  Brooks. 

Vers.  14,  15.  Death  a  Peacemaker. — 
The  struggle  between  the  Northern 
and  Southern  States  of  America  closed 
for  ever  at  the  funeral  of  General 
Grant.  The  armies  of  rebellion 
surrendered  twenty  years  before ; 
but  the  solemn  and  memorable  pageant 
at  the  tomb  of  the  great  Union  soldier, 
where  the  leading  generals  of  the 
living  Union  and  of  the  dead  Con- 
federacy stood  shoulder  to  shoulder 
and  mingled  their  tears  in  a  common 
grief — this  historical  event  marked 
the  absolute  conclusion  of  sectional 
animosity  in  America. 

Ver.  16.  The  Poiver  of  the  Gospel  to 
dissolve  the  Enmity  of  the  Human 
Heart  against  God.—l.  The  goodness 
of  God  destroys  the  enmity  of  the 
human  mind.  When  every  other 
argument  fails,  this,  if  perceived  by 
the  eye  of  faith,  finds  its  powerful  and 
persuasive  way  through  every  barrier 
of  resistance.  Try  to  approach  the 
heart  of  man  by  the  instruments  of 
terror  and  of  authority,  and  it  will 
disdainfully  repel  you.  There  is  not 
one  of  you  skilled  in  the  management 
of  human  nature  who  does  not  per- 
ceive that,  though  this  may  be  a  way 
of  working  on  the  other  principles  of 
our  constitution — of  working  on  the 
fears  of  man,  or  on  his  sense  of 
interest — this  is  not  the  way  of  gaining 
by  a  single  hair-breadth  on  the  attach- 
ments of  his  heart.  Such  a  way  may 
force,  or  it  may  terrify,  but  it  never, 
never  can  endear ;  and  after  all  the 
threatening  array  of  such  an  influence 
as  this  is  brought  to  bear  upon  man, 
there  is  not  one  particle  of  service  it 
can  extort  from  him  but  what  is  all 

166 


rendered  in  the  spirit  of  a  painful  and 
reluctant  bondage.  Now  this  is  not 
the  service  which  prepares  for  heaven. 
This  is  not  the  service  which  assimi- 
lates men  to  angels.  This  is  not  the 
obedience  of  those  glorified  spirits, 
whose  every  affection  harmonises  with 
their  every  performance,  and  the  very 
essence  of  whose  piety  consists  of 
delight  in  God  and  the  love  they  bear 
to  Him.  To  bring  up  man  to  such  an 
obedience  as  this,  his  heart  behoved 
to  be  approached  in  a  peculiar  way ; 
and  no  such  way  is  to  be  found  but 
within  the  limits  of  the  Christian 
revelation.  There  alone  you  see  God, 
without  injury  to  His  other  attributes, 
plying  the  heart  of  man  with  tl^e 
irresistible  argument  of  kindness. 
There  alone  do  you  see  the  great  Lord 
of  heaven  and  of  earth,  setting  Himself 
forth  to  the  most  worthless  and  the 
most  wandering  of  His  children — 
putting  forth  His  own  hand  to  the 
work  of  healing  the  breach  which  sin 
had  made  between  them — telling  them 
that  His  word  could  not  be  mocked, 
and  His  justice  could  not  be  defied 
and  trampled  on,  and  that  it  was 
not  possible  for  His  perfections  to 
receive  the  slightest  taint  in  the  eyes 
of  the  creation  He  had  thrown  around 
them ;  but  that  all  this  was  provided 
for,  and  not  a  single  creature  within 
the  compass  of  the  universe  He 
had  formed  could  now  say  that  for- 
giveness to  man  was  degrading  to  the 
authority  of  God,  and  that  by  the  very 
act  of  atonement,  which  poured  a 
glory  over  all  the  high  attributes  of 
His  character,  His  mercy  might  now 
burst  forth  without  limit  and  without 
control  upon  a  guilty  world,  and  the 
broad  flag  of  invitation  be  unfurled  in 
the  sight  of  all  its  families.  2.  Let 
the  sinner,  then,  look  to  God  through 
the  medium  of  such  a  revelation,  and 
the  sight  which  meets  him  there  may 
well  tame  the  obstinacy  of  that  heart 
which  had  wrapped  itself  up  in  im- 
penetrable hardness  against  the  force 
of  every  other  consideration.  Now 
that  the  storm  of  the  Almighty's 
wrath  has  been  discharged  upon  Him 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  II. 


who  bore  the  burden  of  the  world's 
atonement,  He  has  turned  His  throne 
of  glory  into  a  throne  of  grace,  and 
cleared  away  from  the  pavilion  of  His 
residence  all  the  darkness  which  en- 
compassed it.  The  God  who  dwelleth 
there  is  God  in  Christ ;  and  the  voice 
He  sends  from  it  to  this  dark  and 
rebellious  province  of  His  mighty 
empire  is  a  voice  of  the  most  beseeching 
tenderness.  Goodwill  to  men  is  the 
announcement  with  which  His  messen- 
gers come  fraught  to  a  guilty  world ; 
and,  since  the  moment  in  which  it 
burst  upon  mortal  ears  from  the 
peaceful  canopy  of  heaven,  may  the 
ministers  of  salvation  take  it  up,  and 
go  round  with  it  among  all  the  tribes 
and  individuals  of  the  species.  Such 
is  the  real  aspect  of  God  towards  you. 
He  cannot  bear  that  His  alienated 
children  should  be  finally  and  ever- 
lastingly away  from  Him.  He  feels 
for  y<>u  all  the  longing  of  a  parent 
bereaved  of  his  offspring.  To  woo  you 
back  again  unto  Himself  He  scatters 
among  you  the  largest  and  the  most 
liberal  assurances,  and  with  a  tone  of 
imploring  tenderness  does  He  say  to 
one  and  all  of  you,  "  Turn  ye,  turn  ye ; 
why  will  ye  die  ?  "  He  has  no  pleasure 
in  your  death.  He  does  not  wish  to 
glorify  Himself  by  the  destruction  of 
any  one  of  you.  "  Look  to  Me,  all  ye 
ends  of  the  earth,  and  be  saved,"  is 
the  wide  and  generous  announcement 
by  which  He  would  recall,  from  the 
outermost  limits  of  His  sinful  creation, 
the  most  worthless  and  polluted  of 
those  who  have  wandered  away  from 
Him.  3.  Now  give  us  a  man  who 
perceives,  with  the  eye  of  his  mind,  the 
reality  of  all  this,  and  you  give  us  a 
man  in  possession  of  the  principle  of 
faith.  Give  us  a  man  in  possession 
of  this  faith  ;  and  his  heart,  shielded 
as  it  were  against  the  terrors  of  a 
menacing  Deity,  is  softened  and  sub- 
dued, and  resigns  its  every  affection  at 
the  moving  spectacle  of  a  beseeching 
Deity;  and  thus  it  is  that  faith 
manifests  the  attribute  which  the 
Bible  assigns  to  it,  of  working  by  love. 
Give  us  a  man  in  possession  of  this 


love  ;  and,  animated  as  he  is  with  the 
living  principle  of  that  obedience, 
where  the  willing  and  delighted  con- 
sent of  the  inner  man  goes  along  with 
the  performance  of  the  outer  man,  his 
love  manifests  the  attribute  which  the 
Bible  assigns  to  it  when  it  says,  "  This 
is  the  love  of  God,  that  ye  keep  His 
commandments."  And  thus  it  is, 
amid  the  fruitfulness  of  every  other 
expedient,  when  power  threatened  to 
crush  the  heart  which  it  could  not 
soften — when  authority  lifted  its 
voice,  and  laid  on  man  an  enactment  of 
love  which  it  could  not  carry — when 
terror  shot  its  arrows,  and  they  dropped 
ineffectual  from  that  citadel  of  the 
human  affections,  which  stood  proof 
against  the  impression  of  every  one  of 
them — when  wrath  mustered  up  its 
appalling  severities,  and  filled  that 
bosom  with  despair  which  it  could  not 
fill  with  the  warmth  of  a  confiding 
attachment — then  the  kindness  of  an 
inviting  God  was  brought  to  bear  on 
the  heart  of  man,  and  got  an  opening 
through  all  its  mysterious  avenues. 
Goodness  did  what  the  nakedness  of 
power  could  not  do.  It  found  its  way 
through  all  intricacies  of  the  human 
constitution,  and  there,  depositing  the 
right  principle  of  repentance,  did  it 
establish  the  alone  effectual  security 
for  the  right  purposes  and  the  right 
fruits  of  repentance. — Dr.  T.  Chalmers. 

Ver.  18.  The  Privilege  of  Access  to  the 
Father. — In  the  Temple  service  of  the 
Jews  all  did  not  enjoy  equal  privileges. 
The  court  of  the  Gentiles  was  outside 
that  of  the  Jews  and  separated  from 
it  by  "a  marble  screen  or  enclosure 
three  cubits  in  height,  beautifully 
ornamented  with  carving,  but  bearing 
inscriptions,  in  Greek  and  Roman 
characters,  forbidding  any  Gentile  to 
pass  within  its  boundary."  Such 
restricted  access  to  God  the  new  dis- 
pensation was  designed  to  abolish. 
The  middle  wall  of  partition  is  now 
broken  down,  and  through  Christ  we, 
both  Jews  and  Gentiles — all  mankind 
— have  equal  access  by  one  Spirit  unto 
the  Father.     Observe  : — 

167 


chap.  ii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  *  EPHESIANS. 


I.  The  privilege  of  access  unto  the 
Father. — That  God  is  the  proper  object 
of  worship  is  implied  in  our  text,  and 
more  explicitly  declared  in  other  por- 
tions of  the  sacred  writings.  Accord- 
ing to  the  nature  of  the  blessings 
desired,  prayer  may  be  addressed  to 
any  one  of  the  three  Persons  in  the  God- 
head ;  but  the  Bible  teaches  that  prayer 
generally  is  to  be  presented  to  the 
Father  through  Christ  and  by  the  Holy 
Spirit.  And  so  appropriate  are  the 
offices  of  the  Persons  in  the  Trinity 
that  we  cannot  speak  otherwise.  We 
cannot  say  that  through  the  Spirit  and 
by  the  Father  we  have  access  to  Christ, 
or  through  the  Father  and  by  Christ 
we  have  access  to  the  Spirit.  We 
must  observe  the  apostle's  order — 
through  Christ  and  by  the  Spirit  we 
have  access  to  the  Father.  Access 
unto  the  Father  implies  : — 

1 .  His  sympathy  with  us.  — God  is  our 
Creator  and  Sovereign,  but  His  au- 
thority is  not  harsh  or  arbitrary.  He 
does  not  even  deal  with  us  according  to 
the  stern  dictates  of  un tempered  justice. 
On  the  contrary,  in  love  and  sympathy 
He  has  for  our  benefit  made  His  throne 
accessible.  He  will  listen  to  our 
penitential  confessions,  our  vows  of 
obedience,  our  statements  of  want. 
He  has  sympathy  with  us. 

2.  His  ability  to  help  us. — That  access 
is  permitted  to  us,  taken  in  connection 
with  God's  perfections,  prove  this.  He 
raises  no  hope  to  disappoint,  does  not 
encourage  that  He  may  repel,  but  per- 
mits access  that  He  may  help  and  bless. 

3.  His  permission  to  speak  freely. — 
There  is  nothing  contracted  in  God's 
method  of  blessing.  We  are  intro- 
duced to  His  presence  not  to  stand 
dumb  before  Him,  nor-  to  speak  under 
the  influence  of  slavish  fear.  We 
have  such  liberty  as  those  enjoy  who 
are  introduced  to  the  presence  of  a 
prince  by  a  distinguished  favourite, 
or  such  freedom  as  children  have  in 
addressing  a  father.  We  are  brought 
into  the  presence  of  our  King  by  His 
own  Son  ;  to  our  heavenly  Father  by 
Christ,  our  elder  Brother.  The  results 
of   this    access    to    ourselves :     1.    It 

168 


teaches  dependence ;  2.  Excites  grati- 
tude ;  3.  Produces  comfort ;  4.  Pro- 
motes growth  in  grace. 

II.  The  medium  of  access. — Under 
the  law  the  high  priest  was  the 
mediator  through  whom  the  people 
drew  near  to  God.  He  went  into  the 
"  holiest  of  all,  once  every  year,  not 
without  blood,  which  he  offered  for 
himself,  and  for  the  errors  of  the 
people"  (Heb.  ix.  7).  Under  the  new 
covenant  "  boldness  to  enter  into  the 
holiest "  is  "  by  the  blood  of  Jesus " 
(Heb.  x.  19).  But  as  the  mediation  of 
the  Jewish  high  priest,  though  "  done 
away  in  Christ,"  was  typical,  it  may 
serve  to  teach  us  how  we  are  to  come 
to  God.  He  sprinkled  the  blood  of  the 
sin-offering  on  the  mercy-seat,  and 
burnt  incense  within  the  veil  (Lev. 
xvi.),  thus  symbolising  the  sacrifice 
and  intercession  of  Christ. 

1.  We,  then,  have  access  to  God  through 
Christ  as  a  sacrifice. — "  Without  shed- 
ding of  blood  is  no  remission  "  (Heb. 
ix.  22).  But,  "  that,  while  we  were  yet 
sinners,  Christ  died  for  us,"  we  could 
never,  as  suppliants,  have  found  accept- 
ance with  God. 

2.  Through  Christ  as  an  intercessor. — 
"But  this  man,"  etc.  (Heb.  x.  12).  A 
disciple  in  temptation  cries  for  de- 
liverance from  evil,  and  Christ  prays, 
"  Holy  Father,  keep  through  Thine  own 
name  those  whom  Thou  hast  given  Me  " 
(John  xvii.  11).  A  dying  saint  asks  for 
"  an  entrance  into  the  heavenly  king- 
dom," and  Christ  pleads,  "  Father,  I  will 
that  they  also,  whom  Thou  hast  given 
Me,  be  with  Me  where  I  am  "  (John 
xvii.  24).  None  need  deem  himself  too 
unworthy  to  call  on  God  who  comes 
to  Him  through  Christ's  sacrifice  and 
intercession. 

III.  The  assistance  afforded  by  the 
Holy  Spirit. — As  we  have  access  unto 
the  Father  through  Christ  pleading  for 
us,  so  we  have  access  unto  the  Father 
by  the  Spirit  pleading  in  us. 

1.  The  Spirit  kindles  holy  desire.—- -It 
is  the  work  of  the  Spirit  to  draw  off 
the  hearts  of  men  from  the  world  and 
raise  them  to  God  in  prayer.  As  in 
playing  on   a    musical   instrument  no 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPBESIANS. 


CHAP.  II. 


■*■ 


string  sounds  untouched,  so  without 
this  influence  of  the  Spirit  man  would 
never  look  heavenward,  or  his  heart 
fill  with  desire  toward  God. 

2.  Prompts  to  immediate  application. 
. — Blessings  are  often  desired  but  feebly. 
The  Spirit  rebukes  this  hesitancy,  and 
urges  on  to  immediate  application. 

3.  Aids  in  that  application. — "  With- 
out the  Spirit  we  know  not  what  we 
should  pray  for"  (Rom.  viii.  26).  Our 
thoughts  wander,  our  affections  chill,  the 
fervour  of  our  importunity  flags,  unless 
the  Spirit  "  helpeth  our  infirmities." 

Reflections. — 1.  Those  who  do  not 
enjoy  this  privilege  are  highly  culpable. 
2.  Those  who  do  enjoy  this  privilege 
are  indeed  happy. — The  Lay  Preacher. 

Access  to'  God,  revealing  the  Trinity 
in  Unity. 

I.  The  end  of  human  salvation  is 
access  to  the  Father. — That  is  the  first 
truth  of  our  religion — that  the  source 
of  all  is  meant  to  be  the  end  of  all, 
that   as    we   all   came    forth   from    a 
divine  Creator,  so""  it  is  into   divinity 
that  we  are  to  return  and  to  find  our 
final  rest  and  satisfaction,  not  in  our- 
selves, not  in  one  another,  but  in  the 
omnipotence,  the  omniscience,  the  per- 
fectness,  and  the  love  of   God.     Now 
we  are  very  apt  to  take  it  for  granted 
that,    however   we  may   differ   in  our 
definitions  and  our  belief  of  the  deity 
of  the  Son  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  we 
are  all  at  one,  there  can  be  and  there 
is  no  hesitation,  about  the  deity  of  the 
Father.     God  is  divine.      God  is  God. 
And   no   doubt    we  do   all   assent   in 
words  to  such  a  belief;  but  when  we 
think  what   we    mean   by   that  word 
"  God  "  ;    when  we  remember  what  we 
mean  by  "  Father,"  namely,  the  first 
source  and  the  final  satisfaction  of  a 
dependent  nature ;  and  then  when  we 
look  around  and  see  such  multitudes 
of   people   living  as  if  there  were  no 
higher   source   for    their    being   than 
accident  and  no  higher  satisfaction  for 
their    being    than    selfishness,    do   we 
not  feel  that  there  is  need  of  a  con- 
tinual and  most  earnest  preaching  by 
word  and  act,    from   every  pulpit   of 


influence  to  which  we  can  mount,  of 
the  divinity  of  the  Father.  The 
divinity  of  the  Father  needs  assertion 
first  of  all.  Let  men  once  feel  it,  and 
then  nature  and  their  own  hearts  will 
come  in  with  their  sweet  and  solemn 
confirmations  of  it.  But  nature  and 
the  human  heart  do  not  teach  it  of 
themselves.  The  truest  teaching  of  it 
must  come  from  souls  that  are  always 
going  in  and  out  before  the  divine 
Fatherhood  themselves.  By  the  sight 
of  such  souls  others  must  come  to  seek 
the  satisfaction  that  comes  only  from  a 
divine  end  of  life — must  come  to  crave 
access  to  the  Father.  So  we  believe, 
and  so  we  tempt  other  men  to  believe, 
in  God  the  Father. 

II.  And  now  pass  to  the  divinity  of 
the  method. — "  Through  Jesus  Christ." 
Man  is  separated  from  God.  That 
fact,  testified  to  by  broken  associations, 
by  alienated  affections,  by  conflicting 
wills,  stands  written  in  the  whole 
history  of  our  race.  And  equally  clear 
is  it  to  him  who  reads  the  gospels,  and 
enters  into  sympathy  with  their  won- 
derful Person,  that  in  Him,  in  Jesus 
of  Nazareth,  appeared  the  Mediator 
by  whom  was  to  be  the  Atonement. 
His  was  the  life  and  nature  which, 
standing  between  the  Godhood  and  the 
manhood,  was  to  bridge  the  gulf  and 
make  the  firm  bright  road  over  which 
blessing  and  prayer  might  pass  and 
repass  with  confident  golden  feet  for 
ever.  And  then  the  question  is — and 
when  we  ask  it  thus  it  becomes  so 
much  more  than  a  dry  problem  of 
theology ;  it  is  a  question  for  live, 
anxious  men  to  ask  with  faces  full  of 
eagerness — Out  of  which  nature  came 
that  Mediator  %  Out  of  which  side  of 
the  chasm  sprang  the  bridge  leaping 
forth  toward  the  other  ?  Evidently  on 
both  sides  that  bridge  is  bedded  deep 
and  clings  with  a  tenacity  which  shows 
how  it  belongs  there.  He  is  both 
human  and  divine.  But  from  which 
side  did  the  bridge  spring?  It  is  the 
most  precious  part  of  our  belief  that  it 
was  with  God  that  the  activity  began. 
It  is  the  very  soul  of  the  gospel,  as  I 
read  it,  that  the  Father's  heart,  sitting 

169 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


above  us  in  His  holiness,  yearned  for 
us  as  we  lay  down  here  in  our  sin. 
And  when  there  was  no  man  to  make 
an  intercession,  He  sent  His  Son  to 
tell  us  of  His  love,  to  live  with  us,  to 
die  for  us,  to  lay  His  life  like  a  strong 
bridge  out  from  the  divine  side  of 
existence,  over  which  we  might  walk 
fearfully  but  safely,  but  into  the 
divinity  where  we  belonged.  Through 
Him  we  have  access  to  the  Father. 
As  the  end  was  divine,  so  the  method  is 
divine.  As  it  is  to  God  that  we  come, 
so  it  is  God  who  brings  us  there.  I 
can  think  nothing  else  without  dis- 
honouring the  tireless,  quenchless  love 
of  God. 

III.  The  power  of  the  act  of  man's 
salvation  is  the  Holy  Spirit. — 
"  Through  Christ  Jesus  we  both  have 
access  by  one  Spirit  unto  the  Father." 
What  do  we  mean  by  the  Holy  Spirit 
being  the  power  of  salvation  ?  I  think 
we  are  often  deluded  and  misled  by 
carrying  out  too  far  some  of  the  figura- 
tive forms  in  which  the  Bible  and  the 
religious  experience  of  men  express  the 
saving  of  the  soul.  For  instance, 
salvation  is  described  as  the  lifting 
of  the  soul  out  of  a  pit  and  putting 
it  upon  a  pinnacle,  or  on  a  safe  high 
platform  of  grace.  The  figure  is  strong 
and  clear.  Nothing  can  overstate  the 
utter  dependence  of  the  soul  on  God 
for  its  deliverance ;  but  if  we  let  the 
figure  leave  in  our  minds  an  impression 
of  the  human  soul  as  a  dead,  passive 
thing,  to  be  lifted  from  uha  place  to  the 
other  like  a  torpid  log  that  makes  no 
effort  of  its  own  either  for  co-operation 
or  resistance,  then  the  figure  has  misled 
us.  The  soul  is  a  live  thing.  Every- 
thing that  is  done  with  it  must  be 
done  in  and  through  its  own  essential 
life.  If  a  soul  is  saved,  it  must  be 
by  the  salvation,  the  sanctification,  of 
its  essential  life;  if  a  soul  is  lost,  it 
must  be  by  perdition  of  its  life,  by  the 
degradation  of  its  affections  and  desires 
and  hopes.  Let  there  be  nothing 
merely  mechanical  in  the  conception  of 
the  way  God  treats  these  souls  of  ours. 
He  works  upon  them  in  the  vitality  of 
thought,  passion,  and  will  that  He  put 

170 


into  them.  And  so  when  a  soul  comes 
to  the  Father  through  the  Saviour,  its 
whole  essential  vitality  moves  in  the 
act.  When  this  experience  is  reached, 
then  see  what  Godhood  the  soul  has 
come  to  recognise  in  the  world.  First, 
there  is  the  creative  Deity  from  which 
it  sprang,  and  to  which  it  is  struggling 
to  return — "  the  divine  End,  God  the 
Father."  Then  there  is  the  incarnate 
Deity,  which  makes  that  return  possible 
by  the  exhibition  of  God's  love — the 
divine  Power  of  salvation,  God  the 
Holy  Spirit.  To  the  Father,  through 
the  Son,  by  the  Spirit.  This  appears 
to  be  the  truth  of  the  Deity  as  it 
relates  to  us.  I  say  again,  "as  it 
relates  to  us."  What  it  may  be  in 
itself ;  how  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit 
meet  in  the  perfect  Godhood ;  what 
infinite  truth  more  there  may,  there 
must,  be  in  that  Godhood,  no  man  can 
dare  to  guess.  But,  to  us,  God  is  the 
end,  the  method,  and  the  power  of  sal- 
vation ;  so  He  is  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Spirit.  It  is  in  the  perfect  harmony 
of  these  sacred  personalities  that  the 
precious  unity  of  the  Deity  consists.  I 
look  at  the  theologies,  and  so  often  it 
seems  as  if  the  harmony  of  Father, 
Son,  and  Spirit  has  been  lost,  both  by 
those  that  own  and  by  those  that 
disown  the  Trinity.  One  theology 
makes  the  Father  hard  and  cruel, 
longing  as  it  were  for  man's  punish- 
ment, extorting  from  the  Son  the  last 
drops  of  life-blocd  which  man's  sin  had 
incurred  as  penalty.  Another  theology 
makes  the  Son  merely  one  of  the 
multitude  of  sinning  men,  with  some- 
what bolder  aspirations  laying  hold  on 
a  forgiveness  which  God  might  give 
but  which  no  mortal  might  assume. 
Still  another  theology  can  find  no  God 
in  the  human  heart  at  all ;  merely  a 
fermentation  of  human  naturo  is  this 
desire  after  goodness,  this  reaching  out 
towards  Divinity.  The  end  is  not 
worthy  of  the  method.  I  do  not  want 
to  come  to  such  a  Father  as  some  of 
the  theologians  have  painted.  Or  the 
method  is  not  worthy  of  the  end.  No 
man  could  come  to  the  perfect  God 
through   such    a   Jesus  as   some  men 


HOMILETIC  i  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIA NS.  chap,  ii. 


have  described.  Or  the  power  is  too 
weak  for  both  ;  and  all  that  Christ  has 
done  lies  useless,  and  all  the  Father's 
welcome  waits  in  vain  for  the  soul  that 
has  in  it  no  Holy  Ghost.  But  let  each 
be  real  and  each  be  worthy  of  the 
others,  and  the  salvation  is  complete. 
But  each  cannot  be  worthy  of  the 
others  unless  each  is  perfect.  But 
each  cannot  be  perfect  unless  each  is 
divine;  that  is,  our  faith  is  in  the 
Trinity — three  Persons  and  one  God. — 
Philips  Brooks. 

The  Christian  Law  of  Prayer — 

I.  To  the  Father. — 1.  How  honour- 
able !  Right  of  entry  to  an  earthly 
sovereign.  2.  How  delightful !  Our 
pleasures  may  be  graduated  according 
to  the  part  of  our  nature  in  which 
they  have  their  rise.  The  pleasures 
of  devotion  are  the  highest  taste  for 
devotion.  3.  How  profitable  !  God  is 
able  to  bestow  all  temporal  and 
spiritual  blessings.  4.  How  solemn  ! 
The  intercourse  of  our  spirit  with  the 
Father  of  our  spirits.  Heart  to 
heart. 

II.  Through  the  Son. — 1.  Through 
His  atonement.     Legal  barriers  to  our 


access  must  be  removed.  Have  been 
removed  by  the  death  of  Christ  as  a 
satisfaction  to  divine  Justice.  He  has 
demolished  the  wall,  He  has  constructed 
a  bridge  across  the  chasm,  He  has  laid 
down  His  own  body  as  the  medium  of 
approach.  2.  Through  His  intercession. 
It  perpetuates  His  sacrifice.  The 
Jewish  high  priest  entering  the  holy  of 
holies  on  the  Great  Hay  of  Atonement. 
Amyntas,  mother  of  Coriolanus ; 
Philippa  after  the  siege  of  Calais. 

III.  By  the  Spirit. — 1.  He  teaches 
us  what  are  our  wants.  For  the 
most  part  we  are  likely  to  be  aware 
of  our  temporal  wants.  In  spiritual 
things  the  greater  our  need  the  less 
our  sense  of  need.  2.  He  makes  us 
willing  to  ask  the  supply  of  our  wants. 
Aversion  to  beg.  Aversion  to  lay  bare 
the  symptoms  of  humiliating  disease. 
3.  He  gives  us  power  to  spread  our 
wants  before  God.  One  person  em- 
ployed to  write  a  letter  or  a  petition 
for  another.  4.  He  inspires  us  with 
confidence  to  plead  with  importunity 
and  faith.  Confidence  in  the  Father, 
in  the  Son,  in  the  power  of  prayer. — 
G.  Brooks. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  19—22. 

The  Church  the  Temple  of  God. 

1.  Enjoying  special  privileges.—  1.  A  saintly  citizenship.  "  No  more  strangers 
and  foreigners,  but  fellow -citizens  with  the  saints"  (ver.  19).  The  apostle  has 
spoken  of  the  separation  and  enmity  existing  between  Jew  and  Gentile.  The 
Jew,  trained  to  believe  in  the  one  invisible  and  only  true  God,  who  could  not  be 
imagined  by  any  material  form,  learned  to  look  with  hatred  and  contempt  on  the 
outcast,  lawless  Gentile,  with  his  idol  deities  in  every  valley  and  on  every  hill ; 
and  the  intellectual  Gentile  looked  with  philosophic  pride  on  the  stern  land  of 
the  Hebrew  and  in  philosophic  scorn  on  his  strange,  exclusive  loneliness.  They 
were  not  only  at  enmity  with  each  other,  but  both  were  at  enmity  with  God. 
Now  the  writer  is  showing  that  by  the  provisions  of  the  gospel  both  Greek  and 
Jew  are  united  as  citizens  of  one  divine  kingdom.  They  enjoy  the  same 
privileges,  and  are  in  actual  fellowship  with  prophets  and  apostles  ar  d  all  holy 
souls  in  all  ages,  and  are  sanctified  subjects  of  a  kingdom  that  can  never  be 
moved. 

2.  A  family  life. — "  And  of  the  household  of  God"  (ver.  19).  The  Church  is 
a  family  having  one  Father  in  God,  one  Brother  in  Christ,  one  life  in  the  Spirit, 
and  one  home  in  heaven.  As  in  earthly  families,  there  are  diversities  of 
character,  tastes,  gifts,  tendencies,  and  manifestations,  but  all  the  members  of  the 
heavenly  household  are  bound  together  by  the  one  common  bond  of  love  to  God 
and  to  each  other. 

171 


chap.  II.  H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


II.  Resting  on  a  sure  foundation  (ver.  20). — The  materials  composing  the 
foundation  of  the  Church  are  living  stones — teachers  and  confessors  of  the  truth, 
"  apostles  and  prophets  "  ;  but  Christ,  as  the  one  foundation,  is  the  "  chief  corner- 
stone." The  foundation  of  the  Church  is  not  so  much  in  the  witnesses  of  the 
truth  as  in  the  truth  itself,  and  in  propagating  which  truth  the  first  teachers 
and  confessors  sacrificed  their  all.  The  truth  which  produced  and  sustained  the 
martyrs  is  itself  immovable.  The  apostles  and  prophets — teachers  in  the 
apostolic  times — laid  the  first  course  in  the  foundation  of  the  Church,  and  were 
careful  to  recognise  and  build  only  one  foundation,  united  and  held  together  by 
the  one  corner-stone — Christ  Jesus.  They  fixed  the  pattern  and  standard  of 
Christian  doctrine  and  practice.  The  Christian  Church  is  sure  because  the 
foundation  is  deep  and  broad,  and  can  never  be  removed  and  replaced  by  any 
human  structure. 

III.  Ever  rising  to  a  higher  perfection  (ver.  21). — The  image  is  that  of  an 
extensive  pile  of  buildings,  such  as  the  ancient  temples  commonly  were,  in  pro- 
cess of  construction  at  different  points  over  a  wide  area.  The  builders  work  in 
concert  upon  a  common  plan.  The  several  parts  of  the  work  are  adjusted  to 
each  other,  and  the  various  operations  in  process  are  so  harmonised  that  the 
entire  construction  preserves  the  unity  of  the  architect's  design.  Such  an  edifice 
was  the  apostolic  Church — one  but  of  many  parts — in  its  diverse  gifts  and 
multiplied  activities  animated  by  one  Spirit  and  directed  towards  one  divine 
purpose  (Findlay).  Since  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  when  three  thousand  living 
stones  were  laid  on  the  foundation,  the  Church  has  been  growing  in  symmetry, 
beauty,  and  vastness,  and  it  is  constantly  advancing  towards  perfection.  The 
building,  though  apparently  disjoined  and  working  in  separate  parts,  is  growing 
into  a  final  unity. 

IV.  Made  by  the  Spirit  His  glorious  dwelling-place  (ver.  22). — The  Holy 
Spirit  is  the  supreme  Builder  as  He  is  the  supreme  Witness  to  Jesus  Christ 
(John  xv.  26,  27).  The  words  "  in  the  Spirit "  denote  not  the  mode  of  God's 
habitation — that  is  self-evident — but  the  agency  engaged  in  building  this  new 
house  of  God.  With  one  chief  corner-stone  to  rest  upon,  and  one  Spirit  to 
inspire  and  control  them,  the  apostles  and  prophets  laid  their  foundation,  and  the 
Church  was  builded  together  for  a  habitation  of  God.  Hence  its  unity.  But  for 
this  sovereign  influence  the  primitive  founders  of  Christianity,  like  later  Church 
leaders,  would  have  fallen  into  fatal  discord  (Findlay).  The  Church  is  a  spiritual 
organisation,  pervaded  and  made  vital  and  progressive  by  the  presence  and  opera- 
tion of  the  Spirit  of  God.  An  organ  is  composed  of  several  instruments — the 
choir,  the  swell,  the  pedal,  the  great ;  and  many  stops — the  diapason,  the  flute, 
the  trumpet ;  and  yet  it  is  one.  And  the  Church  of  God  is  one.  One  Spirit — 
one  breath  of  wind  turned  on  by  one  living  Hand — makes  all  the  organ  vocal. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  Church  is  the  depositary  of  great  religious  privileges.  2.  God 
dwells  in  the  Church  by  dwelling  in  the  heart  of  every  member  of  it.  3.  The  Church 
provides  every  facility  for  worship  and  service. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.    19-22.  The  Church  of  God  a  no  more  subsist  than  a  civil  community 

Spiritual  Building.  or  a    household.       2.    In     a    city    or 

I.  The      apostle       represents      the  household  all  the  members  have  a  mutual 

Church  of  God  under  the  figure  of  a  relation    and   partake   in  the  common 

city  and  a  household. — 1.    A    Church  privileges;  and  though  they  are  placed 

must    resemble    a   family    or    city    in  in    different   stations    and    conditions, 

respect  of  order  and  government ;    for  they     must    all     contribute     to    the 

without   these  a  religious  society  can  general  happiness.      3.  In  a  city  and 

172 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  II. 


also  in  a  family  there  is  a  common 
interest.  4.  In  a  well-ordered  city  or 
household  there  will  be  peace  and  unity  ; 
so  there  ought  to  be  in  a  Christian 
Church. 

II.  The  manner  in  which  the  Church 
is  founded. — The  mediation  of  Christ 
is  the  foundation  of  our  faith  and  hope. 
The  apostles  and  prophets  are  a  foun- 
dation only  as  they  describe  and 
exhibit  to  us  the  doctrines  and  works, 
the  atonement  and  intercession,  of  the 
Redeemer.  In  Him  all  the  doctrines 
of  the  apostles  and  prophets  meet  and 
unite,  as  the  stones  in  the  foundation 
are  fixed  and  bound  together  by  the 
corner-stone. 

III.  The  Church  must  be  united 
with  and  framed  into  the  foundation. 
— Thus  it  may  stand  secure.  Christ  is 
the  chief  corner-stone  in  which  all  the 
building  is  framed.  That  only  is  true 
faith  in  Christ  which  regards  Him  as 
the  foundation  of  our  present  hope  and 
final  acceptance. 

IV.  As  the  Church  must  rest  on  the 
foundation,  so  the  several  parts  of  it 
must  be  framed  and  inserted  into  each 
other. — As  it  is  faith  which  fixes  the 
saints  on  Christ  the  foundation,  so  it  is 
love  which  binds  them  together  among 
themselves.  If  we  would  preserve  the 
beauty,  strength,  and  dignity  of  the 
spiritual  house,  we  must  be  watchful  to 
repair  breaches  as  soon  as  they  appear, 
and  to  remove  those  materials  which 
are  become  too  corrupt  to  be  repaired, 
lest  they  communicate  their  own  cor- 
ruption to  sounder  parts. 

V.  The  Church  is  to  grow  into  a 
holy  temple  for  God  through  the  Spirit. 
— We  must  not  content  ourselves  with 
having  built  on  the  true  foundation, 
but  must  bring  the  structure  to  a  more 
finished  and  beautiful  condition.  The 
Church  may  grow  and  make  increase 
both  by  the  progress  of  its  present 
members  in  knowledge  and  holiness 
and  by  the  addition  of  new  members 
who  become  fellow-workers  in  the 
spiritual  building.  God  dwells  in  His 
Church,  not  only  by  His  word  and 
ordinances,  but  also  by  the  influence  of 
His  Spirit  which  He  affords  to  assist 


His  people  in  the  duties  of  His  worship 
and  to  open  their  hearts  for  the  recep- 
tion of  His  word. — Lathrop. 

Yer.  19.  Christian  Prayer  a  Witness 
of  Christian  Citizenship. 

I.  The  foundation  of  the  citizenship 
of  the  Christian. — In  access  to  the 
Father — in  the  power  of  approaching 
Him  in  full,  free,  trustful  prayer. 

1.  Christian  prayer  is  the  approach 
of  the  individual  soul  to  God  as  its 
Father. — Until  a  man  utterly  believes 
in  Christ  he  can  never  pray  aright. 
There  are  veils  around  the  unbelieving 
spirit  which  hinder  this  free,  confiding 
approach.  The  touch  of  God  startles 
memories,  rouses  ghosts  of  the  past 
in  the  soul's  secret  chambers ;  they 
flutter  fearfully  in  the  strange  divine 
light,  and  the  man  shudders  and  dare 
not  pray.  A  man  bathed  in  the  life 
of  God  in  prayer  feels  he  is  no  more 
a  stranger  and  a  foreigner,  but  has 
entered  into  God's  kingdom,  for  God  is 
his  Father. 

2.  That  prayer  of  the  individual  soul 
must  lead  to  the  united  worship  of  God's 
Church. — We  cannot  always  pray  alone. 
The  men  who  stand  most  aloof  from 
social  worship  are  not  the  men  who 
manifest  the  highest  spiritual  life. 
Our  highest  prayers  are  our  most 
universal.  I  do  not  say  we  don't  feel 
their  individuality,  we  do — but  in  and 
through  their  universality. 

II.  The  nature  of  Christian  citizen- 
ship.— 1.  Prayer  a  witness  to  our  fellow- 
ship with  the  Church  of  all  time.  Realis- 
ing the  Fatherhood  of  Gcd  in  the  holy 
converse  of  prayer,  we  are  nearer  men. 
Our  selfishness,  our  narrow,  isolating 
peculiarities  begin  to  fade.  In  our 
highest  prayers  we  realise  common 
wants. 

2.  Prayer  a  witness  to  our  fellowship 
with  the  Church  of  eternity. — All 
emotions  of  eternity  catch  the  tone  of 
prayer.  Sometimes  in  the  evening, 
when  the  sounds  of  the  world  are  still 
and  the  sense  of  eternity  breaks  in 
upon  us,  is  not  that  feeling  a  prayer  ? 
We  know  that  we  are  right,  that  in 
worship   we   have   taken    no    earthly 

173 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


posture,  but  an  attitude  from  higher 
regions. 

Lessons. — 1.  Live  as  members  of 
the  kingdom.  2.  Expect  the  signs  of 
citizenship — the  crown  of  thorns,  the 
cross.  3.  Live  in  hope  of  the  final  in- 
gathering.— E.  L.  Hull. 

The  Communion  of  Saints. 

I.  Society  becomes  possible  only 
through  religion. — Men  might  be 
gregarious,  without  it,  but  not  social. 
Instinct  which  unites  them  in  detail 
prevents  their  wider  combination. 
Intellect  affords  light  to  show  the 
elements  of  union,  but  no  heat  to  give 
them  crystalline  form.  Self-will  is 
prevailingly  a  repulsive  power,  and  often 
disintegrates  the  most  solid  of  human 
masses.  Some  sense  of  a  divine 
Presence,  some  consciousness  of  a  higher 
law,  some  pressure  of  a  solemn  neces- 
sity, will  be  found  to  have  preceded 
the  organisation  of  every  human  com- 
munity and  to  have  gone  out  and 
perished  before  its  death. 

II.  Worship  exhibits  its  uniting 
principle  under  the  simplest  form,  in 
the  sympathies  it  diffuses  among  the 
members  of  the  same  religious 
assembly. — There  is,  however,  no 
necessary  fellowship,  as  of  saints,  in 
the  mere  assembling  of  ourselves 
together ;  but  only  in  the  true  and 
simple  spirit  of  worship.  Where  a 
pure  devotion  really  exists,  the  fellow- 
ship it  produces  spreads  far  beyond 
the  separate  circle  of  each  Christian 
assembly.  Surely  it  is  a  glorious 
thing  to  call  up,  while  we  worship,  the 
wide  image  of  Christendom  this  day. 
Could  we  be  lifted  up  above  this  sphere 
and  look  down  as  it  rolls  beneath  this 
day's  sun,  and  catch  its  murmurs  as 
they  rise,  should  we  not  behold  land 
after  land  turned  into  a  Christian 
shrine  ?  In  how  many  tongues,  by 
what  various  voices,  with  what  measure- 
less intensity  of  love,  is  the  name  of 
Christ  breathed  forth  to-day  ! 

III.  But  our  worship  here  brings  us 
into  yet  nobler  connections. — It  unites 
us  by  a  chain  of  closest  sympathy 
with   past  generations.      In  our  helps 

174 


to  faith  and  devotion  we  avail  ourselves 
of  the  thought  and  piety  of  many 
extinct  ages.  Do  not  we,  the  living, 
take  up  in  adoration  and  prayer  the 
thoughts  of  the  dead  and  find  them 
divinely  true?  What  an  impressive 
testimony  is  this  to  the  sameness  of  our 
nature  through  every  age  and  the 
immortal  perseverance  of  its  holier 
affections  ! 

IV.  And  soon  we  too  shall  drop  the 
note  of  earthly  aspiration  and  join 
that  upper  anthem  of  diviner  love. — 
The  communion  of  saints  brings  us  to 
their  conflict  first,  their  blessings  after- 
wards. Those  who  will  not  with  much 
patience  strive  with  the  evil  can  have 
no  de  ar  fellowship  with  the  good ;  we 
must  weep  their  tears  ere  we  can  win 
their  peace. — Martineau. 

Characteristics  of  Believers. 

T.  Believers  are  here  described  as 
having  been  strangers  and  foreigners. 
— 1.  There  are  relative  expressions, 
meaning  that  natural  men  are 
strangers  to  the  household  of  God  and 
foreigners  as  respects  the  city  of  Zion. 
2.  Consider  the  natural  man  with 
reference  to  the  city  of  Zion,  and  the 
truth  of  this  representation  will  appear. 

(1)  He  is  a  stranger  and  foreigner — 
(a)  By  a  sentence  of  exile  (Gen.  hi.). 
(6)  By  birth  (Gen.  v.  3  ;  John  iii.  6). 

(2)  He  is  proved  to  be  a  stranger  and 
foreigner — (a)  By  features  (Gal.  v. 
19-21).  (b)  By  manners  (1  Pet.  iv.  3). 
(c)  By  language.  As  such  he  is 
under  another  ruler  (Eph.  ii.  2),  he 
is  at  war  (Gal.  iv.  29).  3.  Though 
"  strangers  and  foreigners  "  in  relation 
to  Zion,  yet  men  are  naturalised  in 
another  country.  4.  This  does  not 
imply  living  beyond  the  pale  of  the 
visible  Church.  The  Parable  of  the 
Tares.  An  alien  to  the  saints  and  a 
stranger  to  God  may  be  in  the  visible 
Church.  5.  That  there  are  "  strangers 
and  foreigners  "  in  the  Church  seems 
a  calamity.  (1)  They  are  thereby  de- 
ceived. (2)  They  injure  Christians. 
(3)  They  betray  Christ. 

II.  Believers  are  described  as  being 
fellow-citizens     with     the     saints. — 


HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  II. 


1.  They  are  citizens.  (1)  Their  sen- 
tence of  exile  is  cancelled  (ver.  13). 
(2)  They  are  naturalised  by  birth 
(John  iii.  5).  (3)  They  are  reconciled 
to  God  and  believers.  (4)  They  are 
under  Zion's  government.  2.  They 
are  "  fellow-citizens   with  the   saints." 

(1)  They      have      intercourse — holy. 

(2)  They  are  united  by  mutual  love. 

(3)  They      have      reciprocal      duties. 

(4)  They  have  common  rights  and 
privileges.  (5)  They  have  common 
honour  and  reputation.  (6)  They 
have  common  prosperity  and  adversity. 

(7)  They      have      common      enemies. 

(8)  They  have  common  defence  and 
safety.  (9)  They  have  a  common 
history.  3.  As  a  congregation  we  are 
professedly  a  section  of  this  peculiar 
and  spiritual  community.  (1)  Do  we 
seek  each  other's  welfare  1  (2)  Is  our 
intercourse  the  communion  of  saints  1 
(3)  Are  we  careful  of  each  others 
reputation  ?  4.  Are  we  as  a  congre- 
gation isolating  ourselves  from  each 
other?  Are  we  " fellow-citizens  with 
the  saints  "  %     5.  The  city  is  above. 

III.  Believers  are  here  described 
as  belonging  to  the  household  of  God. 
—  1.  Believers  as  citizens  are  God's 
subjects.  2.  As  belonging  to  God's 
household  they  are  His  children. 
3.  As  in  God's  household — (1)  They 
are  like  Him.  (2)  They  are  near  to 
Him.  (3)  They  see  His  face.  (4)  They 
enjoy  His  fellowship.  (5)  They  are 
provided  for  by  Him.  (6)  They  are 
under  His  protection.  (7)  They  serve 
Him.  (8)  They  worship  Him — His 
house  is  a  temple.  4.  These  are  very 
tangible  privileges,  and  belong  to  this 
present  life.  5.  Many  may  suppose 
that  they  are  "  fellow- citizens  with  the 
saints "  whose  experience  does  not 
prove  that  they  are  "  of  the  household 
of  God."  6.  For  this  "household" 
God  has  "  a  house  not  made  with 
hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens." — 
Stewart. 

Vers.  20,  21.  The  Church  a  Divine 
Edifice. — 1.  Though    God    Himself   be 


the  principal  Author  and  Builder  of  this 
spiritual  edifice,  yet  He  employs  His 
called  ministers  and  servants  as  in- 
struments, among  whom  He  made 
special  use  of  the  prophets  and  apostles 
for  laying  the  foundation  in  so  far  as 
they  first  did  reveal  and  preach  Jesus 
Christ,  and  commit  to  writings  such 
truths  concerning  Him  as  are  neces- 
sary for  salvation,  while  other  minis- 
ters are  employed  in  preaching  Christ 
to  build  up  the  elect  on  the  foundation 
laid  by  them.  2.  There  is  a  sweet  har- 
mony and  full  agreement  between  the 
doctrines  and  writings  of  the  prophets 
and  apostles  in  holding  forth  Christ  for 
a  foundation  and  rock  of  salvation,  the 
latter  having  taught  and  written 
nothing  but  what  was  prefigured  in 
types  and  foretold  in  prophecies  by  the 
former.  3.  As  growth  in  grace  is  a  privi- 
lege which  appertains  to  all  parts  of 
this  spiritual  building  who  are  yet  on 
earth,  so  this  growth  of  theirs  flows 
from  their  union  and  communion  with 
Christ ;  and  the  more  their  union  is 
improved  by  daily  extracting  renewed 
influence  from  Him,  they  cannot  choose 
but  thrive  the  better  in  spiritual 
growt  h. —  Fergusson. 

Ver.  22.  The  Church  the  Habitation 
of  God. — 1.  Jesus  Christ  differs  from  the 
foundation  of  other  buildings  in  this, 
that  every  particular  believer  is  not 
only  laid  upon  Him  and  supported  by 
Him  as  in  material  buildings,  but  they 
are  also  indented  in  Him,  and  hid,  as 
it  were,  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock  by  sav- 
ing faith.  2.  As  all  believers,  however 
far  soever  removed  by  distance,  are  yet 
more  strictly  tied  and  joined  together, 
so  by  taking  band  with  Christ  the 
foundation,  they  are  fastened  one  to 
another  as  the  stones  of  a  building. 
3.  So  inseparable  is  the  union  among 
the  persons  of  the  Trinity  that  the 
presence  and  indwelling  of  One  is 
sufficient  to  prove  the  indwelling  of  all ; 
for  believers  are  a  habitation  to  God 
the  Father  and  Son,  because  the  Spirit 
dwells  in  and  sanctifies  them. — Ibid. 


175 


chap.  in.         H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 

CHAPTER  III. 
CRITICAL  AND   EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  The'prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ  may  be  regarded  as  "  the  prisoner  whom  the  Lord  has 
bound  "  (so  Winer  and  Meyer),  or  as  "  a  prisoner  belonging  to  Christ,"  or  again  as  "  the 
prisoner  for  Christ's  sake."  The  indignity  of  an  ambassador  being  "  thrown  into  irons  "  is 
lost  in  the  feeling  of  being,  even  though  bound,  the  representative  of  such  a  Lord. 

Ver.  2.  If  ye  have  heard. — We  have  the  same  form  of  expression  at  iv.  21 — "assuming, 
that  is,  that  ye  heard  "  (cf.  Col.  i.  23).  Of  the  grace.— The  favour  which  God  conferred 
on  me  in  appointing  me  your  apostle.  The  divine  "  Taskmaster  "  (to  use  Milton's  expression) 
confers  honour  upon  us  when  He  sets  us  to  work.  "  He  is  not  served  by  men's  hands  as 
though  He  needed  anything  "  (Acts  xvii.  25). 

Ver.  3.  How  that  by  revelation. — The  familiar  disavowal  of  any  other  source  than  the 
will  of  God  (cf.  Gal.  i.  12). 

Ver.  4.  Ye  may  understand  my  knowledge. — You  may,  as  the  public  reader  proceeds  to 
read  my  letter,  discern  my  insight  of  the  mystery. 

Ver.  5.  Which  in  other  ages. — R.V.  "  other  generations."  Might  possibly  refer  to  those 
dim  ages  of  the  past  national  history  when  the  Gentiles  were  thought  of  only  as  left  to 
"  uncovenanted  mercies."  We  must  note  the  word  for  "  other" — it  means  a  "different  kind." 
Was  not  made  known  ...  as  it  is  now  revealed. — If  any  distinction  is  to  be  observed,  we 
may  say  the  "  revelation  "  is  one  of  the  ways  of  "  making  known  "  (see  ver.  3)  the  intuitional. 
Unto  His  holy  apostles  and  prophets. — "  If  all  saints  were  holy  a  fortiori  the  apostles " 
{Bishop  A lexander). 

Ver.  6.  Fellow-heirs  .  .  .  the  same  body  .  .  .  partakers. — "  The  A.V.  loses  a  point  of 
similarity  in  the  three  Gentile  privileges  by  not  expressing  the  force  of  the  Greek  com- 
pounds by  the  same  English  word.  Lit.  '  heirs  together,'  '  incorporated  together,'  '  sharers 
together,'  not  heirs  after,  but  together  with,  the  Jews ;  not  attached  to  the  Hebrew  body, 
but  incorporated  into  it  together  with  the  element  that  previously  constituted  it ;  not 
receivers  of  the  promise  after  others  had  \  been  satisfied,  but  partakers  of  it  together  with 
them  "  (Bishop  Alexander").  "  Co-heirs,  and  concorporate,  and  comparticipant.  The  strange 
English  words  may  perhaps  correspond  to  the  strange  Greek  words  which  St.  Paul  invented 
to  express  this  newly  revealed  mystery  in  the  strongest  form,  as  though  no  words  could  be 
too  strong  to  express  his  conception  of  the  reunion  in  Christ  of  those  who  apart  from  Him 
are  separate  and  divided"  (Farrar). 

Ver.  7.  Whereof  I  was  made  a  minister. — A  deacon,  a  runner  of  errands.  A  lowly  word, 
which  reminds  us  of  his  own  self-estimate — "  not  worthy  to  be  called  an  apostle"— and  pre- 
pares us  for  the  strange  expression  in  ver.  8. 

Ver.  8.  Less  than  the  least  of  all  saints. — "Is  though  we  said, '  Leaster  than  all  Chris- 
tians'"  (Bishop  Alexander).  "The  greatest  sinner,  the  greatest  saint,  are  equidistant 
from  the  goal  where  the  mind  rests  in  satisfaction  with  itself.  With  the  growth  in  goodness 
grows  the  sense  of  sin.  One  law  fulfilled  shows  a  thousand  neglected  "  (Mozley,  quoted  by 
Farrar).  The  unsearchable  riches.— "The  untrackable  wealth"  (Farrar),  iaexplicable  by 
creaturely  intelligences,  unspeakable  therefore  by  human  tongues. 

Ver.  9.  And  to  make  all  men  see. — He  says  to  the  Galatians  (iii.  1),  "Christ  was  placarded 
before  you  " — so  here  he  wants  men  to  see  for  themselves. 

Ver.  10.  To  the  intent  that  now  .  .  .  might  be  known  by  the  Church  the  manifold 
wisdom  of  God. —The  Church  as  it  expands  from  a  "little  iflock"  to  a  "multitude  which  no 
man  can  number"  is  to  declare  the  multiform  wisdom  of  God,  ever  fertile  in  new  modes  of 
operation.  "  Manifold  "  represents  a  word  used  to  describe  a  floral  wreath  as  consisting  of 
"  variegated  "  flowers. 

Ver.  12.  In  whom  we  have  boldness. — Originally  meaning  as  regards  speech.  In  Christ 
the  reconciled  child  of  God  has  the  right  of  speaking  to  God  without  reserve.  The  same 
word  is  translated  "  confidence  "  in  1  John  v.  14,  A.V. :  "  It  is  the  free,  joyful  mood  of  those 
reconciled  to  God  "  (Meyer).  And  access. — As  in  ii.  13.  With  confidence. — Hardly  as  equal 
to  assurance— certainly  never  self-assurance,  but  in  quiet  leaning  on  the  arm  of  Christ. 

Ver.  13.  I  desire  that  ye  faint  not  at  my  tribulations. — Compare  2  Cor.  iv.  1-16,  where 
the  same  word  is  used.  As  an  agonised  sufferer,  heroically  suppressing  every  sign  of  pain, 
begs  those  who  wait  on  him  not  to  give  way  to  grief ;  as  Socrates,  having  quaffed  the  poison, 
rallies  his  friends,  who  have  broken  out  into  uncontrollable  weeping,  with  the  words,  "  What 
are  you  doing,  my  friends  1  What  1  such  fine  men  as  you  are  1  Oh,  where  is  virtue  ?  "  ;  so 
(with  a  possible  reminiscence  of  Acts  xx.  36-38)  St.  Paul  begs  his  readers  not  to  lose  heart. 

176 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS.         chap.  ill. 


Ver.  15.  The  whole  family. — R.V. "  every  family."  The  word  for  "family  "  is  only  found  in 
the  New  Testament  in  St.  Luke  ii.  4  and  Acts  iii.  25  ;  in  one  translated  "  lineage,"  in  the  other 
"  kindreds  "  in  A.V. ;  consistently  as  "  family  "  by  R.V.  Chrysostom,  and  others  who  followed 
him,  have  surely  a  special  claim  to  be  heard.  They  translate  it  "  races."  Bishop  Alexander 
contends  for  the  A.V.  translation,  "the  whole."  He  says,  "A  special  force  and  signification 
in  the  expression  make  this  translation  necessary  "  (cf.  ii.  19). 

Ver.  16.  The  riches  of  His  glory. — "  The  whole  glorious  perfection  of  God."  To  be 
strengthened  with  might. — There  may  be  a  verbal  connection  with  the  "  fainting"  of  ver.  13, 
but  the  thought  goes  far  out  beyond  that.  In  the  inner  man. — We  are  reminded  again  of 
the  text  quoted  above  (2  Cor.  iv.  16).  A  mode  of  expression  derived  from  the  Platonic  school, 
not  necessarily  presupposing  any  acquaintance  with  that  system  of  philosophy. 

Ver.  17.  That  Christ  may  dwell  in  your  hearts  by  faith. — The  condition  of  this,  declared 
by  Christ  Himself,  is  that  a  man  should  keep  the  word  of  Christ.  Being  rooted  and 
grounded. — A  double  metaphor — of  a  tree  that  has  struck  its  roots  deep  into  the  crevices  of 
the  rock,  and  of  a  building  with  a  foundation  of  bed-rock.  "  Every  one  that  loveth  is  born 
of  God  and  knoweth  God  "  (1  John  iv.  7).  Love  conditions  knowledge  of  things  divine 
(see  ver.  18). 

Ver.  18.  May  be  able. — Perfectly  able.  With  all  saints. — The  highest  and  most  precious 
knowledge  Paul  can  desire  only  as  a  common  possession  of  all  Christians.  What  is  the 
breadth,  and  length,  and  depth,  and  height. — "  The  deeply  affected  mind  with  its  poetico- 
imaginative  intuition  looks  upon  the  metaphysical  magnitude  as  a  physical,  mathematical 
one.  Every  special  attempt  at  interpretation  is  unpsychological,  and  only  gives  scope  to 
that  caprice  which  profanes  by  dissecting  the  outpouring  of  enthusiasm"  {Meyer). 

Ver.  19.  And  to  know  the  love  of  Christ,  which  passeth  knowledge.  — "  An  adequate 
knowledge  of  the  love  of  Christ  transcends  human  capacity,  but  the  relative  knowledge  of  the 
same  opens  up  in  a  higher  degree  the  more  the  heart  io  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  Christ, 
and  thereby  is  strengthened  in  loving.  This  knowledge  is  not  discursive,  but  based  in  the 
consciousness  of  experience  "  {Meyer'). 

Ver.  20.  Now  unto  Him  that  is  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly. — After  his  prayer 
proper  is  ended  the  full  heart  of  the  apostle  swells  out  into  a  solemn  doxology  The  frequent 
and  bold  compound  expressions  of  St.  Paul  {Farrar  says  twenty  of  the  New  Testament 
twenty-eight  with  inrtp  are  St.  Paul's)  spring  from  the  endeavours  adequately  to 
express  his  energetic  thought.  According  to  the  power  that  worketh  in  us.—"  The  measure 
of  a  man "  or  "  of  an  angel "  is  insufficient  here.  Things  are  not  achieved  by  creaturely 
mensuration  where  God  works  (cf.  i.  19-23). 

Ver.  21.  To  Him  be  the  glory. — "  The  honour  due  to  His  name."  By  Christ  Jesus. — 
He  that  "  climbeth  up  some  other  way "  with  his  offering  courts  his  own  destruction. 
Throughout  all  ages,  world  without  end.—  R.V.  "  Unto  all  generations,  for  ever  and  ever." 
A  good  specimen  of  the  "  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  .  .  .  understand "  as 
regarded  under  the  aspect  of  time.  It  carries  our  thoughts  along  the  vista  of  the  future,  till 
time  melts  into  eternity. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.—Verses  1—6. 

An  Enlarged  Gospel — 

I.  Declaring  the  admission  of  the  Gentiles  on  the  same  footing  as  the  Jews  to 
its  highest  privileges  (ver.  6). — It  came  as  a  surprise  to  the  world  of  the 
apostle's  day  that  the  gospel  he  preached  offered  its  blessings  on  equal  terms  to 
Jew  and  Gentile.  The  Jew,  accustomed  to  be  the  sole  repository  of  divine  revela- 
tion, was  staggered  at  the  discovery  that  heaven  extended  its  favours  to  the 
outcast,  heathenish  Gentile ;  and  the  Gentile,  proudly  trusting  to  his  own 
intellectual  activity  in  the  search  after  truth,  greeted  with  wonder  the  ampler 
and  loftier  revelations  of  the  new  evangel.  It  seemed  too  good  to  be  true.  A 
new  era  was  dawning,  and  men  were  dazzled  and  bewildered  with  the  splendour 
of  the  vision.  It  is  now  authoritatively  declared  that,  on  the  simple  conditions 
of  penitence  and  faith,  the  Gentile  world  is  incorporated  into  the  body  of  Christ. 
So  far  from  being  excluded  from  the  divine  favour,  the  believing  Gentiles  are 
reckoned  as  "  fellow-heirs,  arid  of  the  same  body  and  partakers  of  the  promise  in 
Christ  by  the  gospel";  and  the  marvel  is  increased  by  the  discovery  that  this 
astounding  privilege  is  no  new  thought  in  the  divine  mind,  but  was  an  essential 
part  of  the  purpose  concerning  the  race  that  had  been  developing  in  the  slow 

N  177 


chap.  in.         HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS. 


march  of  the  ages.  The  Hebrew  Scriptures  with  their  records  of  extraordinary 
theoph anies,  the  saintly  characters  of  Old  Testament  times,  the  Messianic 
revelations  and  the  wealth  of  spiritual  blessing  which  the  isolated  Jew  had 
selfishly  appropriated  to  himself,  are  the  heaven-given  privileges  of  universal 
man. 

II.  Was  wrapped  in  mystery  for  ages. — "  Which  in  other  ages  was  not  made 
known  unto  the  sons  of  men  "  (ver.  5).  The  mystery  all  centres  in  Christ.  The 
revelation  of  Messiah  as  the  hope  and  salvation  of  the  race  was  dimly  and  slowly 
unveiled  in  progressive  stages.  "  It  is  the  glory  of  God  to  conceal  a  thing." 
Some  of  His  grandest  movements  are  veiled  in  mystery  till  the  right  moment 
comes,  when  the  obscurity  vanishes  and  the  vastness  and  beauty  of  the  completed 
work  elicit  our  admiration  and  praise.  We  are  familiar  with  this  process  in 
the  natural  world  and  in  the  progress  of  human  history.  The  fruits  of  the  earth 
do  not  reach  maturity  at  a  bound.  Slowly  and  in  secret  the  bud  is  rounded, 
then  comes  the  delicately  tinted  blossom,  and  afterwards  the  tempting,  mellow 
fruit.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  growth  of  human  character.  It  reaches 
the  higher  grades  of  mental  and  moral  excellence  by  slow  and  silent  stages,  and 
advances  in  the  ratio  of  the  fidelity  and  energy  with  which  the  man  carries  out 
the  great  plan  of  his  life-career.  So  the  revelation  of  the  gospel  mystery  has 
been  gradual  and  progressive.  The  purpose  itself  is  incapable  of  progress — it 
has  been  fixed  from  eternity ;  but  it  has  been  made  known  to  the  world  in 
portions  suited  to  each  succeeding  period  of  its  history.  The  law  shadowed  forth 
that  purpose  with  more  fulness  than  any  previous  dispensation,  and  the  prophets 
went  beyond  the  law,  occupying  a  middle  place  between  it  and  the  gospel,  while 
the  gospel  in  its  fuller  revelation  has  gone  as  far  beyond  the  prophets  as  they 
went  beyond  the  law.  Thus  we  see  that  God  "  who  appears  deliberate  in  all  His 
operations  "  has  unfolded  His  great  purpose  to  save  the  race  by  slow  and  suc- 
cessive stages.     The  mystery  of  yesterday  is  the  sunlit  epiphany  of  to-day. 

III.  Was  specially  revealed  by  the  Spirit.— "How  that  by  revelation  He 
made  known  unto  me  the  mystery  "  (ver.  3).  "  As  it  is  now  revealed  unto  His  holy 
apostles  and  prophets  by  the  Spirit"  (ver.  5).  Notwithstanding  the  gradual 
dis  -losura  of  the  mystery  of  the  gospel,  its  full  significance  could  not  have  been 
caught,  without  supernatural  help.  Mere  flux  of  time  adds  nothing  to  our 
knowledge  ;  nor  can  the  most  active  intelligence  decipher  the  spiritual  meaning 
of  truth.  The  Spirit  of  God,  operating  on  the  alert  and  awakened  mind  of  the 
apostle,  revealed  to  him  the  glory  and  power  of  Christ — the  hidden  mystery  of 
ages — and  opened  to  him  the  far-reaching  provisions  of  the  enlarged  gospel  of  which 
Christ  is  the  inexhaustible  theme.  There  is  still  much  mystery  in  the  gospel 
that  remains  to  be  fathomed — the  problem  of  the  atonement,  the  origin  of  sin, 
the  future  destiny  and  eternal  state  of  human  souls,  and  the  revelation  of  Christ 
and  His  Church  to  present-day  social  and  economic  questions  in  their  bearing  on 
human  development  and  the  future  prosperity  of  the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth. 
We  are  in  duly  need  of  the  light  and  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

IV.  Was  entrusted  to  man  as  a  stewardship  of  divine  grace.— "The  dis- 
pensation of  the  grace  of  God  which  is  given  me  to  you- ward "  (ver.  2).  The 
mystery  of  the  gospel  was  revealed  to  Paul  that  he  might  dispense  its  benefits  to 
others.  Former  generations  had  received  light  from  heaven  ;  but  not  sufficiently 
appreciating  it,  or  wishing  to  keep  it  within  too  narrow  a  sphere,  it  grew  dim 
and  went  out.  Where  it  fell  on  prepared  hearts  it  was  used  for  the  illumination 
and  blessing  of  others.  Paul  was  divinely  prepared  for  the  revelation;  he 
received  it  in  trust  for  others ;  he  saw  the  boundless  provisions  of  the  gospel,  and 
became  a  powerful  advocate  of  its  universal  claims.  Every  minister  is  a  steward 
of  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  it  is  his  joy  to  minister  to  others 
whatever  of  insight  into  truth  and  grace  of  experience  the  divine  Spirit  may 

178 


E0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:    EPRESIANS.         chap.  hi. 


entrust  to  him.     The  gospel  is  an  ever-enlarging  gospel  to  the  soul  lit  up  and 
informed  by  the  revealing  Spirit. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  gospel  is  an  advance  on  all  previous  revelations.  2.  It  is  the 
grandest  revelation  of  saving  truth.  3.  It  can  be  known  and  enjoyed  only  by  the 
Spirit. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 


Vers.  1-21.  Riches  of  Christ. — Many 
make  Christianity  something  local, 
temporary,  and  thus  degrade  it.  Christ 
is  inexhaustible  for  mind  and  heart ; 
we  find  all  in  Him.  Let  us  never 
make  of  this  rich  Christ  a  poor  one. 
What  Christ  has  instituted  must  be 
something  transcendent,  and  not  so 
common  that  every  intellect  can  discover 
it. — Heubner. 

Vers.  1-6.  The  Calling  of  the  Gentiles. 

I.  Paul  calls  himself  a  prisoner  of 
Christ  for  the  Gentiles. — The  liberality 
of  his  sentiments  towards  them  and 
the  boldness  with  which  he  asserted 
their  title  to  equal  privileges  with  Jews 
were  the  principal  reasons  why  the 
latter  persecuted  him  with  such  vio- 
lence, and  caused  him  to  be  sent  a 
prisoner  to  Rome.  The  spring  of  this 
bitter  enmity  in  the  Jews  was  their 
spiritual  pride  and  worldly  affection. 
Liberality  of  sentiment  essentially  be- 
longs to  true  religion.  Bigotry,  hatred, 
and  envy  among  Christians  debase 
their  character  and  scandalise  their 
profession.  We  should  entertain  ex- 
alted thoughts  of  the  divine  Goodness. 
Such  thoughts  enlarge  the  mind  and 
liberalise  the  feelings. 

II.  The  gospel  is  called  a  dispensa- 
tion of  the  grace  of  God. — It  is  a  dis- 
covery of  that  method  which  the  wisdom 
of  God  has  chosen  for  dispensing  His 
grace  and  mercy  toward  fallen  men. 
It  is  called  the  gospel  of  God  as  it 
originated  in  His  pleasure ;  and  the 
gospel  of  Christ  as  He  is  the  immediate 
author  of  it,  and  His  doctrines  and 
works,  His  life  and  death,  His  resur- 
rection and  ascension,  and  the  blessings 
procured  by  Him  are  the  subjects  on 
which  it  principally  treats.  The  grace 
which  the  gospel  offers  is  pardon  and 
glory.     Under  such  a  dispensation  how 


inexcusable  are  the  impenitent,  and 
how  amazing  will  be  the  punishment 
of  those  who  finally  perish  in  their 
guilt ! 

III.  This  dispensation  was  com- 
mitted to  the  apostle  for  the  benefit 
of  mankind. — It  was  a  trust  committed 
to  him  by  the  will  of  God,  not  a  power 
arrogated  by  his  own  presumption. 
He  did  not  rely  on  a  secret,  internal 
call  as  what  alone  would  warrant  him 
to  commence  as  a  preacher.  He  care- 
fully conformed  to  the  order  which 
Christ  has  instituted  in  His  Church. 
He  instructed  Timothy  and  Titus  to  do 
likewise.  Ministers  are  not  to  found 
their  warrant  to  preach  on  any  imme- 
diate revelation.  If  they  should  pre- 
tend to  this,  it  would  be  no  warrant 
for  them  to  assume  it,  unless  they  can 
by  miracles  prove  to  the  world  the 
reality  of  the  pretended  revelation. 

IV.  The  knowledge  of  the  gospel 
was  communicated  to  Paul  by  revela- 
tion.— God  did  not,  at  the  expense  of 
inspiration,  teach  the  apostles  those 
things  which  they  knew  or  might  know 
by  other  means.  But  where  actual 
knowledge  and  the  means  of  obtaining 
it  were  wanting,  there  inspiration 
supplied  the  defect.  It  is  not  necessary 
for  us  to  know  the  nature  of  this 
inspiration,  or  the  manner  in  which 
the  apostles  were  assured  of  its  divinity. 
If  we  believe  there  is  an  infinite  and 
all-perfect  Spirit,  who  pervades  uni- 
versal nature,  we  must  believe  He  can 
reveal  His  will  to  men  by  such  an 
immediate  influence  as  shall  carry  its 
own  evidence  and  leave  no  possible 
doubt  of  its  reality.  If  we  deny  the 
possibility  of  a  certain  inspiration  from 
God,  we  deny  that  power  to  Him  which 
we  ourselves  possess,  for  we  can  speak 
to  men  in  such  a  manner  that  they 
shall  certainly  know  we  speak  to  them 

179 


CHAP.  III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


and  perfectly  understand  our  meaning. 
— Lathrop. 

Vers.  4,  6.  The  Knowledge  of  Christ 
intended  for  All. — It  is  significant 
that  the  inscription  on  the  cross  was 
written  in  Hebrew,  Greek,  and  Latin. 
1.  Hebrew,  the  language  of  religion,  of 
the  revelation  concerning  the  one  true 
God.  2.  Greek,  the  language  of  litera- 
ture, of  arts  and  culture,  the  best 
medium  in  which  to  transmit  the 
literature  of  the  New  Testament,  as 
Hebrew  was  for  that  of  the  Old.  It 
might  be  designated  as  the  human 
language.  3.  Latin,  the  language  of 
the  conquerors  and  masters  of  the 
world — also  of  the  Roman  Empire,  as 
that  kingdom  of  worldly  aggrandise- 
ment and  power,  falsehood  and  wrong, 
in  opposition  to  the  kingdom  of  God 
destined  to  uproot  and  replace  it.  The 
Roman  soldiers  stationed  throughout 
Europe  became  useful  factors  in  the 
spread  of  the  gospel.  Note  also  the 
synoptic  gospels  of  1 .  Matthew — Hebrew 
in  thought  and  diction,  written  to 
convince  Jews.  2.  Mark — Latin  in 
thought,  and  written  for  the  Roman 
mind.  3.  Luke — Greek  in  thought 
and  style,  written  for  Gentiles. 

Vers.  4,  5.  God  known  in  Christ. — 
After  the  death  of  Pascal  there  was 
found  in  the  lining  of  his  coat  a  parch- 
ment which  he  never  parted  from,  in 
order  to  keep  in  his  memory  a  certain 


epoch  in  his  life.  It  contained  these 
words  :  "  Certainty — joy — the  God  of 
Jesus  Christ,  not  of  the  philosophers 
and  savants.  Oh  that  I  may  never 
be  separated  from  Him  !  "  The  ex- 
planation of  this  is,  that  on  one  memor- 
able night,  during  a  holy  watching,  he 
had  met,  not  merely  the  Machinist  of 
the  universe,  the  God  who  is  but  the 
substance  or  the  law  of  the  world,  but 
the  God  who  wills  and  creates  the 
happiness  of  His  children. 

Vers.  5,  6.  The  Comprehensiveness  of 
the  Gospel.— \.  God's  purpose  to  call 
the  Gentiles  was  not  altogether  un- 
known to  the  ancient  Church  ;  but  it 
was  not  so  clearly  revealed  under  the 
Old    Testament   as   under    the    New. 

2.  Though  God  might  easily  com- 
municate the  knowledge  of  Himself 
unto  all  immediately  and  without  the 
help  of  second  means,  yet  He  hath 
chosen  so  to  communicate  His  mind  to 
some  few  only  who  have,  at  His  ap- 
pointment, set  down  in  sacred  writ  what 
they  immediately  received,  by  which 
means  the  knowledge  of  God  may,  in 
an  ordinary  way,  be  conveyed  to  others. 

3.  It  is  a  great  and  glorious  privi- 
lege to  be  a  part  of  that  mystical  body 
of  which  Christ  is  Head,  because  of  the 
strict  union  such  have  with  Christ  and 
with  all  believers  in  Christ,  and  because 
of  their  interest  in  all  the  privileges  of 
that  body  and  in  the  gifts  and  graces 
of  every  member  of  it. — Fergusson. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses   7—9. 

An  Exalted  Ministerial  Commission — 

I.  To  distribute  the  unbounded  wealth  of  the  gospel. — "  Unto  me  ...  is  this 
grace  given,  that  I  should  preach  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ "  (ver.  8). 
In  calling  the  gospel  "  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ "  the  apostle  signifies 
that  Christ,  the  whole  truth  about  Him  and  centred  in  Him,  is  the  theme  of  his 
preaching,  and  that  in  Christ  he  finds  a  mine  of  inexhaustible  wealth,  a  treasure 
of  truth  which  cannot  be  told.  He  speaks  as  one  who  has  searched — searched 
so  long,  so  far,  as  to  have  had  produced  on  his  mind  the  impression  of  unsearch- 
ableness.  His  whole  style  of  writing  in  this  chapter  is  that  of  a  man  overwhelmed 
with  a  sense  of  the  infinite  grace  of  God  revealed  in  Christ.  The  expression  "un- 
searchable riches,"  while  conveying  the  same  impression  of  infinitude  as  the  words 
"breadth,"  "length,"  "height,"  "depth,"  suggests  a  different  idea — that  of  amine 
of  precious  metal,  rather  than  that  of  a  vast  continent  of  great  length  and  breadth 
with  high  mountains  and  deep  valleys  spread  over  its  surface.     Paul  speaks  as 

180 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS.         chap.  in. 


a  man  digging  in  a  recently  discovered  gold-field,  who  finds  particles  of  the 
precious  metal  in  such  abundance  that  he  cannot  refrain  from  exclaiming  ever 
and  anon,  "  What  an  inexhaustible  supply  of  gold  is  here  !  "  He  speaks  further 
as  one  who  feels  it  his  special  business  to  let  all  the  world  know  of  this  gold- 
field,  and  invite  all  to  come  and  get  a  share  of  its  wealth  (A.  B.  Brace). 

II.  To  reveal  to  men  the  secret  mind  of  God. — 1.  The  gospel  was  for  long  hidden 
alone  in  God.  "  Which  from  the  beginning  of  the  world  hath  been  hid  rn  God  " 
(ver.  9).  It  was  a  mystery  hid  in  God,  not  from  God.  The  idea  of  the 
universality  of  the  gospel,  though  veiled  for  ages  by  the  limitations  of  the 
divine  dealings  with  the  Jewish  people,  was  never  absent  from  the  mind  of 
God.  Down  through  the  rolling  years  one  eternal  purpose  runs,  and  now  and 
then  the  most  gifted  of  the  Hebrew  seers  caught  a  glimpse  of  its  ever- widening 
range.  This  great  secret  of  the  ages  was  revealed  to  Paul  in  such  clearness 
and  fulness  that  he  regarded  it  as  the  one  purpose  of  his  life — his  heaven-sent 
commission — to  make  it  known  to  his  fellow-men,  of  whatever  nationality. 

2.  The  purpose  of  the  creation  of  all  things  by  Christ  urns  also  a  part  of  the  divine 
mystery. — "  Who  created  all  things  by  Jesus  Christ "  (ver.  9).  The  statement 
of  this  fact — thrown  in  by  way  of  parenthesis — links  the  whole  created  things 
with  the  development  of  the  divine  purpose,  and  asserts  the  absolute  sovereignty 
of  Jesus  over  all  worlds.  In  some  way  yet  to  be  more  fully  explained  as  the 
divine  purpose  ripens  all  created  beings  are  to  be  advantaged  by  the  sublime 
redemptive  work  unfolded  in  the  gospel.  "  For  He  hath  created  all  things,  and 
by  Him  all  things  consist." 

3.  The  mystery  was  revealed  to  one  for  the  benefit  of  all. — "  And  to  make  all 
men  see  what  is  the  fellowship  [the  stewardship]  of  the  mystery  "  (ver.  9).  It 
was  well  for  us  and  the  race  that  the  revelation  and  commission  were  committed 
to  one  who  by  training  and  gifts  was  so  well  qualified  to  explain  and  propagate 
the  grand  divine  idea.  The  barriers  of  Jewish  prejudice  in  Paul  were  swept 
away  by  the  vastness  and  universality  of  the  message.  He  saw  it  included  his 
Hebrew  brethren — and  to  them  the  gospel  was  first  preached — but  he  saw  also 
it  included  all  in  its  comprehensive  sweep.  Paul  was  not  alone  among  the 
apostles  in  comprehending  the  breadth  of  the  gospel ;  but  he  was  foremost  and 
most  resolute  and  unbending  in  battling  for  the  right  of  the  Gentiles  to  be 
admitted  to  all  its  blessed  privileges.  He  thought  out  the  gospel  for  himself, 
and  he  became  the  fearless  and  astute  champion  of  the  sinning  race.  What 
is  accepted  as  a  commonplace  to-day  was  not  won  without  argument,  suffering, 
and  struggle. 

III.  Bestowed  as  an  act  of  divine  grace. — 1.  As  an  act  oj  divine  grace  it 
was  confirmed  by  the  conscious  possession  of  divine  power.  "  Given  unto  me  by 
the  effectual  working  of  His  power "  (ver.  7).  Paul  himself  experienced  the 
transforming  power  of  the  gospel.  He  was  deeply  convinced  of  its  truth,  he 
believed  and  embraced  its  provisions,  he  accepted  Christ  as  the  living  core 
of  the  gospel,  and  he  was  thrilled  with  the  divine  power  that  wrought  in  him 
a  great  moral  change.  He  spoke  not  only  with  the  force  and  authority  of 
clearly  apprehended  truth,  but  with  the  unfaltering  certitude  of  personal 
experience.  He  was  henceforth  the  willing  agent  of  the  divine  power  working 
within  him. 

2.  As  an  act  of  divine  grace  his  commission  overwhelmed  him  with  a  sense  of 
personal  unworthiness. — "Unto  me,  who  am  less  than  the  least  of  all  saints,  is  this 
grace  given  "  (ver.  8).  The  immense  favour  humbles  him  to  the  dust.  That  Saul, 
the  Pharisee  and  the  persecutor,  the  most  unworthy  and  unlikely  of  men,  should 
be  the  chosen  vessel  to  bear  Christ's  riches  to  the  Gentile  worid,  how  shall  he 
sufficiently  give  thanks  for  this !  how  express  his  wonder  at  the  unfathomable 
wisdom  and  goodness  that  the  choice  displays  in  the  mind  of  God  !     But  we  can 

181 


CHAP.  III. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS. 


see  that  this  choice  was  precisely  the  fittest.  A  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews, 
steeped  in  Jewish  traditions  and  glorying  in  his  sacred  ancestry,  none  knew 
better  than  the  apostle  Paul  how  rich  were  the  treasures  stored  in  the  house 
of  Abraham  that  he  had  to  make  over  to  the  Gentiles.  A  true  son  of  that 
house,  he  was  the  fittest  to  lead  in  the  aliens,  to  show  them  its  precious  things, 
and  make  them  at  home  within  its  walls  (Eindlay). 

Lessons. — 1.   The  minister  of  the  gospel  has  a  solemn  responsibility.     2.  Should 
be  faithful  and  earnest  in  his  work.     3.  Should  guard  against  temptations  to  pride. 


GERM  NOTES   ON  THE    VERSES. 


Ver.     7.    A    God-made    Minister. — 

1.  It  is  not  sufficient  warrant  for  any 
to  meddle  with  the  ministerial  office 
that  he  hath  competent  gifts,  except 
he  have  also  ministerial  power  and 
authority  conveyed  to  him,  either 
immediately  by  God,  as  it  was  in  the 
calling  of  the  apostles,  or  mediately 
according  to  that  order  which  God 
has  established  in  His  Church,  as 
in   the  calling  of  ordinary  ministers. 

2.  As  it  is  required  to  make  a  man 
a  minister  that  he  be  endued  with 
competent  abilities  and  gifts  for  that 
employment,  so  it  is  no  less  requisite 
that  God  concur  with  him.  God 
giveth  not  to  all  one  and  the  same 
gift,  or  in  the  same  measure,  but  to 
some  a  greater,  to  others  a  less,  as  He 
hath  more  or  less  to  do  with   them. 

3.  So  great  and  many  are  the 
difficulties  of  ministers  before  they 
attain  to  freedom  and  boldness  in 
exercising  their  ministerial  gift  that 
no  less  is  required  than  the  power  of 
God,  working  effectually  with  a  kind 
of  pith  and  energy.  A  minister  will 
be  always  ready  to  acknowledge  his 
gifts  as  from  God  and  His  powerful 
working  in  him,  and  not  to  his  own 
dignity,  diligence,  or  parts. — Fergusson. 

Vers.  8,  9.  The  Apostle's  View  of  his 
Ministry. 

I.  Consider  what  a  humble  opinion 
the  apostle  had  of  himself. — "  Who 
am  less  than  the  least  of  all  saints." 
In  his  abilities  and  gifts  he  was  not  a 
whit  behind  the  chiefest  apostles,  and 
in  sufferings  he  was  more  frequent  and 
in  labours  more  abundant  than  they 
all.     But  in  respect  of  worthiness  he 

182 


esteemed  them  his  superiors  ;  for  they 
had  not,  like  him,  persecuted  the 
Church,  and  they  were  in  Christ  and 
became  apostles  before  him.  Good 
Christians  in  honour  prefer  one  another. 
True  religion  will  produce  self -abasing 
thoughts.  The  true  convert  forgets  not 
his  former  character.  He  reflects 
often  on  his  past  guilty  life,  that  he  may 
be  more  humble  in  himself,  more  thank- 
ful, more  watchful,  more  diligent. 

II.  The  apostle  expresses  his  ad- 
miring apprehensions  of  God's  grace 
in  calling  him  to  the  ministry. — To 
the  same  grace  which  had  called  him 
he  ascribes  all  his  furniture  for  the 
ministry  and  all  his  success.  However 
contemptible  some  render  themselves 
in  the  gospel  ministry,  the  office  itself 
is  honourable. 

III.  The  apostle's  elevated  senti- 
ments concerning  the  gospel. — He  calls 
it  "  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ." 
The  blessings  of  the  gospel,  being 
purchased  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  are 
called  His  riches.  They  are  called 
riches  on  account  of  their  excellency, 
fulness,  and  variety.  They  are  undis- 
coverable  by  human  reason,  and  made 
known  only  by  revelation.  They  were 
but  imperfectly  made  known  in  the 
prophetic  revelation.  They  are  of 
inestimable  value. 

IV.  Consider  the  grand  and 
enlarged  conceptions  the  apostle 
entertained  of  the  design  and  im- 
portance of  his  ministry  (ver.  9). — 
It  was  to  open  to  mankind  that  mighty 
scheme  which  the  wisdom  of  God  had 
formed,  and  which  His  goodness  had 
for  ages  been  carrying  into  execution, 
for  the  redemption  of  our  fallen  race. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS.         chap.  ill. 


His   ministry   was    designed    for    the  preparations  for  putting  him  to  death, 

benefit,  not  of  men  only,  but  of  angels  his  memory  would  go  back  thirty  years, 

too  (ver.  10). — Lathrop.  and  he  would  remember  how  he  him- 
self had  stood  by  and  consented  to  the 

Ver.  8.  Christian  Humility  illustrated  death  of  the  holy  martyr  Stephen,  and 

in  the  Character  of  Paul.  he  would  feel  himself  thereby  the  more 

I.  The  apostle  remembered  his  past  strengthened  to  endure  what  the  Lord 

sins. — Wherever  there  is  a  quickened  was  now  pleased  to  lay  upon  him. 

conscience,  it  will  prompt  the  possessor  II.  The   apostle  mourned  over  the 

to  think  of  his  past  sins,  and  this  even  sin  yet  cleaving  to  him. — He  had  not 

when   he   has   reason  to  believe  that  only  a  recollection  of  past  sin,  he  had 

they  have  been  forgiven.     The  apostle  a  sense  of  present  sin.     This  sense  of 

continued  to  remember  the  natural  and  indwelling  sin  is  one  of   the  elements 

deeply  seated  pride  and  self-righteous-  that  conduce  to  the  onward  progress  of 

ness  which  he  had  so  long  cherished.  the  believer.     Why  is  it  that  so  many 

Allusion  is  made  in  every  one  of  his  professing     Christians,    ay,    and     too 

public  apologies  and  in  a  number  of  his  many  true  Christians,  are  not  advanc- 

epistles  to  the  circumstance  of  his  once  ing  in  the  spiritual  life  ;  are  the  same 

having  been  an  enemy  of  the  cross  of  this  week  as  they  were  the  previous 

Christ  and  a  persecutor.     It  is  for  the  week  ;  the  same  this  year  as  they  were 

benefit  of  the  believer  to  remember  his  the  last  year ;  and  to  all  appearance, 

past   sinfulness.      The   recollection   of  and  unless  God    arouse  them,  will  be 

his  infirmities  may  enable  him  to  guard  the  same  the  next  week  or  next  year 

against   their   recurrence.      Our   sins,  as  they  are  this1?     It  is  because  they 

even  when  past  and  forgiven,  are  apt  are  contented  with  themselves  and  with 

to  leave  a  prejudicial  influence  behind,  their  condition,   they  have  reached  a 

Our  sins  are  like  wounds,  which  even  state   of   self-complacency,   they   have 

when  cured  and  closed  are  apt  to  leave  "  settled  upon  their  lees,"  and  they  do 

a  scar  behind.     It  is  most  meet  and  not  wish  to  be  disturbed  by  so  much  as 

becoming,  and  in  every  respect  for  his  an  allusion  to  their  sin.     Very  different 

own  profit  and  the  advantage  of  the  was     the     temper     of     the     apostle. 

Church  and  world,  that  the  sinner,  and  Conscious  of  the  sin  that  still  adhered 

more  particularly  the  man  whose  former  to  him,  he  longed  to  have  it  completely 

life  has  been  known,  should  walk  humbly  exterminated,  and  sought  the  heavenly 

before  God  and  his  fellow-men  all  the  aid  which  might  enable  him  to  reach 

days  of  his  life.     Nor  let  it  be  forgotten  that     after     which     he     was    always 

that  the  remembrance  of  past  sin  is  striving — "  unto  a  perfect  man,   unto 

one  of  the  motives  impelling  the  Chris-  the   measure    of    the   stature   of    the 

tian  to  be  "  zealously  affected  in  every  fulness  of  Christ." 

good  thing."    The  remembrance  of  the  III.  The  apostle  acknowledged  God 

injury   he   had    done   to   the   Church  to  be  the  Author  of  all  the  gifts  and 

stimulated  him   to   make  greater  en-  graces    possessed    by   him. — Paul   on 

deavours  to  benefit  it.     The  persecution  more  than  one  occasion  found  it  neces- 

which  he  had  inflicted  on  others  made  sary  to  speak  of  his  gifts.     And  when  he 

him   more   steadfast    in    bearing   the  follows  this  train  of  reflection,  he  arrests 

sufferings  to  which  he  was  now  exposed,  himself  to  explain  that  his  faults  are 

According  to  the  account  handed  down  his  own,  and  to  ascribe  the  glory  of  his 

from  the  early  Church,  the  apostle  had  gifts  to  God.     There  may  be  circum- 

to  suffer  a  violent  death  in  the  reign  stances  requiring  us  to  speak  of  our 

of  Nero,  when  Christians  were  covered  attainments  in  the  spiritual  life  j  but 

with  pitch  and  burned  as  torches,  or  there  can  be  no  excuse  for  our  thinking 


clothed  with  the  skins  of  wild  beasts  of  them  or  alluding  to  them  in  a  spirit 
and  dogs  let  loose  upon  them.  We  can  of  complacency.  Of  all  pride,  spiritual 
conceive  that  as  he  saw  the  terrible      pride  is  the  most  hateful,  and  the  most 

183 


chap.  in.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS. 


lamentably  inconsistent.  How  often 
does  it  happen  that,  when  persons  are 
suddenly  elevated  to  places  of  honour, 
they  see  nothing  but  their  own  merits, 
their  own  talent,  their  own  skill  or 
good  management.  Elevation  of  rank 
thus  leads  in  too  many  cases  to  an 
increase  of  pride  and  vanity.  This  is 
painfully  illustrated  in  the  history  of 
Saul,  the  son  of  Kish.  Setting  out  in 
search  of  his  father's  asses,  he  received 
before  he  returned  a  kingdom  for  the 
discharge  of  the  offices  of  which  he  had 
many  qualifications.  But  his  rise  seems 
to  have  fostered  the  morbid  vanity  of 
his  mind ;  and  when  this  was  not  fed 
by  constant  incense,  when  the  Israelites 
cried  ;  "  Saul  hath  slain  his  thousands, 
and  David  his  tens  of  thousands,"  it 
led  to  envy  and  revenge,  which  goaded 
him  on  to  deeds  of  utter  infatuation. 
How  different  with  Saul  of  Tarsus  ! 
At  every  step  of  his  elevation  in  the 
Church  he  saw  the  finger  of  God,  and 
was  the  more  impressed  with  his  own 
unworthiness. 

IV.  The  apostle  took  a  high  standard 
of  excellence :  he  took  as  his  model  the 
law  of  God  and  the  character  of  Jesus. 
— All  actual  excellence,  whether 
earthly  or  spiritual,  has  been  attained 
by  the  mind  keeping  before  it  and 
dwelling  upon  the  ideas  of  the  great, 
the  good,  the  beautiful,  the  grand,  the 
perfect.  The  tradesman  and  mechanic 
reach  the  highest  eminence  by  never 
allowing  themselves  to  rest  till  they 
can  produce  the  most  finished  specimens 
of  their  particular  craft.  The  painter 
and  sculptor  travel  to  distant  lands 
that  they  may  see  and  as  it  were  fill 
their  eye  and  mind  with  the  sight  of 
the  most  beautiful  models  of  their  arts. 
Poets  have  had  their  yet  undiscovered 
genius  awakened  into  life  as  they  con- 
templated some  of  the  grandest  of 
nature's  scenes  ;  or  as  they  listened  to 
the  strains  of  other  poets  the  spirit  of 
inspiration  has  descended  upon  them, 
as  the  spirit  of  inspiration  descended 
on  Elisha  while  the  minstrel  played 
before  him.  The  soldier's  spirit  has 
been  aroused  even  more  by  the  stirring 
sound  of  the  war-trumpet  than  by  the 

184 


record  of  the  courage  and  heroism  of 
other  warriors.  The  fervour  of  one 
patriot  has  been  created  as  he  listened 
to  the  burning  words  of  another  patriot ; 
and  many  a  martyr's  zeal  has  been 
kindled  at  the  funeral  pile  of  other 
martyrs.  In  this  way  fathers  have 
handed  down  their  virtues  to  their 
children,  and  those  who  could  leave 
their  offspring  no  other  have  in  their 
example  left  them  the  very  richest 
legacy ;  and  the  deeds  of  those  who 
perform  great  achievements  have  lived 
far  longer  than  those  who  do  them,  and 
have  gone  down  from  one  generation 
to  another.  Now  the  believer  has  such 
a  model  set  before  him  in  the  character 
of  Jesus,  which  as  it  were  embodies  the 
law  and  exhibits  it  in  the  most  attrac- 
tive and  encouraging  light.  We  may 
copy  others  in  some  things  ;  we  should 
copy  Christ  in  all. — Dr.  J.  McCosh. 

Ver.  8.   Paul's  Humility. 

I.  In  what  it  consisted. — 1.  In  the  un- 
reserved submission  of  his  reason  to  the 
authority  of  revelation.  He  was  a  great 
thinker,  and  he  was  a  great  scholar. 
2.  In  the  unwavering  reliance  of  his 
heart  on  Christ  for  the  salvation  of  his 
soul.  Self-righteous  by  constitution 
and  education.  3.  In  ascribing  to  God 
alone  the  glory  of  all  that  he  was  and 
of  all  that  he  did.  He  could  not  but 
be  conscious  how  far  he  stood  above 
the  ordinary  in  point  of  Christian 
excellence  and  supernatural  gifts  and 
ministerial  usefulness.  He  never  took 
any  part  of  the  praise  to  himself  : 
"  Yet  not  I,  but  the  grace  of  God  which 
was  with  me."  4.  In  cherishing  a  sense 
of  his  unworthiness  and  guilt :  "Sinners, 
of  whom  I  am  chief."  5.  In  forming 
a  lowly  estimate  of  his  own  compara- 
tive standing  :  "  Less  than  the  least  of 
all  saints." 

II.  How  it  was  cultivated. — 
1.  By  frequent  meditation  on  the 
holiness  of  God.  2.  By  looking 
away  from  self  to  Christ.  3.  By 
gratitude  to  God  and  to  Christ 
for  an  interest  in  the  blessings  of 
redemption.  4.  By  a  due  apprecia- 
tion  of  the   importance   of   humility. 


B0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS.         chap.  hi. 


It  is  ornamental,  but  it  is  also  useful. 
It  lies  at  the  very  root  of  all  the  graces 
of  the  Christian  character. — G.  Brooks. 

Humility  a  Growth. — The  progress 
which  St.  Paul  made  in  humility  has 
often  been  given  by  comparing  three 
expressions  in  his  epistles  with  the 
supposed  dates  when  they  were  written  : 
"Not  meet  to  be  called  an  apostle" 
(1  Cor.  xv.  9):  a.d.  59);  "Less  than 
the  least  of  all  saints  "  (Eph.  iii.  8  : 
a.d.  64) ;  "  Sinners,  of  whom  I  am 
chief"  (1  Tim.  i.  15:  a.d.  65). 

The  Unsearchable  Riches  of  Christ. — 
The  riches  of  Christ's  divinity  are  un- 
searchable, the  riches  of  His  condescen- 
sion are  unsearchable,  the  riches  of  His 
tenderness  are  unsearchable,  the  riches 
of  His  redeeming  love  are  unsearchable, 
the  riches  of  His  intercession  are 
unsearchable,  the  riches  of  His  faith- 
fulness are  unsearchable,  and  the 
riches  of  His  supporting  grace  are 
unsearchable.  These  riches  will  never 
be  expressed,  even  to  all  eternity. 
No  !  not  by  the  noble  army  of  martyrs, 
nor  the  glorious  company  of  the 
apostles,  nor  the  goodly  fellowship  of 
the  prophets,  nor  the  general  assembly 
and  Church  of  the  first-born,  nor  the 
innumerable  company  of  angels,  nor 
the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect, 
nor  by  all  the  ransomed  throng  of 
heaven.  It  will  form  their  most 
ecstatic  employment  in  heaven.  Join, 
all  ye  happy  throng — join,  holy  Abel 
and  Enoch,  upright  Job,  perfect  Noah, 
souls  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob, 
grand  souls  of  Moses,  Samuel,  and 
Elijah,  pardoned  David  and  Manasseh, 
soul  of  Isaiah  the  prophet.  Join,  all 
ye  whose  souls  under  the  altar  cry, 
"  How  long,  O  Lord,  wilt  Thou  not 
avenge  our  blood  upon  the  earth  1 " 
Join,  holy  Stephen  and  Polycarp,  holy 
Latimer,  Ridley,  Hooper,  Rowland 
Taylor,  and  Anne  Askew.  Join,  brave 
Wicklif,  gallant  Luther,  stern  John 
Knox,  sweet  John  Bunyan,  and  praying 
George  Fox.  Join,  pious  Doddridge  and 
tuneful  Watts,  noble  George  White- 
field,  holy  Fletcher,  exhaustless  John 


Wesley,  dauntless  Rowland  Hill,  and 
grand  though  lowly  Robert  Hall.  Ye 
sweetest  trebles  of  the  eternal  choir, 
ye  million  million  babes  who  died  with- 
out actual  sin,  join  all  your  notes  of 
praise  !  Pull  out  every  stop  of  the 
grand  organ  of  heaven,  from  the  deep 
swell  diapason  to  the  lofty  flute  and 
cornet  !  Gabriel,  strike  the  loftiest 
note  of  thy  harp  of  gold.  And  let  all 
the  host  of  heaven,  angels  and  men, 
begin  the  grand  anthem,  "  Worthy  is 
the  Lamb."  And  let  the  eternal  Amen 
peal  and  roll  and  reverberate  through 
all  the  arches  of  heaven  !  But  never 
through  all  eternity  shall  the  gathered, 
host  be  able  fully  to  express  the  un- 
searchable riches  of  Christ. — Thomas 
Cooper. 

Ver.  9.  The  Fellowship  of  the  Mystery. 

I.  It  is  a  mystery  it  should  be  so 
long  hid ;  a  mystery,  because  when  it 
was  plainly  revealed  it  was  not  under- 
stood by  those  to  whom  it  was  mani- 
fested ;  a  mystery,  for  God  was  pleased 
to  raise  up  a  special  apostle  to  explain 
and  reveal,  to  make  an  epiphany  of 
this  great  truth — the  will  of  God  that 
all  men  should  be  saved,  that  His 
gospel  should  be  universally  known, 
should  be  open  to  all  for  acceptance. 

II.  Our  share  and  fellowship  in  the 
work  of  the  gospel  is  to  make  all  men 
see  their  interest  in  it,  to  make  them 
understand  its  true  catholicity,  to  make 
all  men  see  that  it  is  from  the  first  the 
will  of  God  that  the  Gentiles  should  be 
fellow-heirs.  By  the  Church  is  to  be 
made  known  the  manifold  wisdom  of 
God.  Every  member  of  the  Church  is 
to  have  his  or  her  part  in  doing  this 
work.  We  are  all  to  take  part  in 
it  by  our  lives,  our  conversation,  our 
example,  our  good  works  and  words. 
By  availing  ourselves  of  opportunities 
we  are  to  help  to  make  known  this 
manifold  wisdom  of  God. 

III.  Think  for  a  moment  what  is  the 
state  of  those  men  who  do  not  know 
what  is  their  fellowship  with  this 
mystery. — I  am  not  speaking  of  the 
entirely  ignorant.  Even  religious  people 
do  not  half  understand  or  apppreciate 

185 


chap.  in.         BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS. 


the  deep   meaning   of   such  words  as  fellowship  of  the  mystery  that  we  have 

these.     Christianity  means  expansion,  received  and  that  has  been  made  known 

comprehension  ;    it   embraces   all,  and  to  us.     We  must  be  a  light  that  cannot 

all  men   must   see  in  it  what  is  the  be  hid  — Bishop  Claughton. 

MAIN  H0M1LETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  10—13. 

The  Manifold,  Wisdom  of  God — 

1.  Seen  in  the  development  of  a  long -cherished  plan. — 1.  This  plan  was 
carried  out  by  Christ.  "  According  to  the  eternal  purpose  which  He  purposed 
in  Christ"  (ver.  11).  The  plan  is  here  called  the  "eternal  purpose,"  and  that 
purpose  was  the  redemption  of  man,  and  the  personage  selected  for  its  accom- 
plishment was  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  This  was  the  unchanging  theme  of  "  the 
gospel  of  which  the  apostle  was  made  a  minister,"  this  the  divinely  freighted 
argosy  of  "  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ,"  the  veiled  and  sacred  repository 
of  all  heavenly  mysteries.  The  plan  is  significantly  called  the  "  manifold 
wisdom  of  God  " — as  manifold  as  mysterious,  for  there  is  variety  in  the  mystery 
and  mystery  in  every  part  of  the  variety.  The  wisdom  is  seen,  not  so  much  in 
one  act  as  in  the  masterly  combination  of  a  multitude  of  acts,  all  marshalled 
and  disposed  with  consummate  skill  to  the  attainment  of  one  grand  end  ;  just  as 
the  light  that  fills  and  irradiates  the  valley,  penetrating  every  nook  and  crevice 
and  clothing  every  object  with  beauty,  is  produced,  not  by  a  solitary  ray,  but  by 
manifold  rays  poured  from  the  central  sun,  and  all  uniting  in  one  harmonious 
illumination.  The  crowning  wisdom  of  the  plan  was  in  God  appointing  His 
only  Son  as  the  agent  in  carrying  it  out.  He,  the  sinless  One,  must  suffer  for 
sin  ;  the  Innocent  die  for  the  guilty,  and  by  dying  conquer  sin.  Only  thus 
could  the  righteous  claims  of  the  violated  law  be  fully  satisfied,  the  offence  of  the 
sinning  one  condoned,  the  authority  of  the  divine  government  maintained,  and 
the  character  of  the  Holy  One  vindicated  to  the  whole  universe. 

2.  That  the  plan  has  been  accomplished  is  evident  from  the  attitude  assumed 
towards  man  and,  towards  God  by  believers  (ver.  13). — As  regards  the  attitude  of 
the  believer  towards  man,  he  has  now  "  boldness  "  in  declaring  the  whole  truth, 
and  towards  God  he  has  "  access  with  confidence  by  the  faith  of  Him  " — he  has 
confidential  fellowship  with  God.  Both  these  experiences  are  the  result  of  the 
redeeming  plan,  and  would  have  been  impossible  without  it. 

II.  Seen  in  the  indifference  to  suffering  its  revelations  inspire. — "  I  desire 
that  ye  faint  not  [do  not  lose  heart]  at  my  tribulations  for  you,  which  is  your 
glory  "  (ver.  13).  Paul  had  no  anxiety  for  himself.  He  almost  playfully  alludes 
to  his  imprisoned  state  :  "  The  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ  for  you  Gentiles  "  (ver.  1). 
His  soul  was  too  full  of  heavenly  visions  and  of  the  practical  bearing  of  the 
gospel  on  the  destiny  of  the  race  to  be  harassed  about  his  personal  suffering. 
When  he  thought  about  it  at  all  it  was  to  rejoice  in  the  honour  of  being  allowed 
to  suffer  for  such  a  cause,  and  in  the  opportunities  afforded  of  spreading  the 
gospel  in  quarters  that  might  otherwise  have  been  closed  to  him.  But  the 
Church  feared  for  their  champion's  life,  and  was  troubled  about  his  prolonged 
sufferings  and  imprisonment.  The  apostle  assures  his  friends  there  was  more 
reason  for  joyous  boasting  than  for  pity  and  dread.  The  sufferings  and  mis- 
fortunes of  the  Church  have  been  overruled  in  promoting  her  enlargement. 
The  flames  of  the  martyrs  have  illumined  the  truth,  and  the  captivity  of  its 
professors  has  prepared  the  throne  of  its  universal  empire.  Personal  religion  has 
grown  stronger  by  opposition  and  suffering,  and  the  Church  has  multiplied  by 
the  very  means  which  were  intended  to  destroy  her. 

III.  Seen  in  making  the  Church  of  the  redeemed  the  means  of  instructing 
the  heavenly  intelligences  (ver.  10). — These  lofty  beings,  with  their  vast  know- 

186 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS.         chap.  lit. 


ledge  and  gigantic  powers,  learn  something  from  the  divine  treatment  of  sinful, 
rebellious  men.  They  gain  new  light,  fresher  and  more  expansive  views,  regard- 
ing the  character  and  perfections  of  God  ;  and  perhaps  the  chief  point  on  which 
their  angelic  knowledge  will  be  increased  is  in  the  glorious  revelations  the  gospel 
unfolds  of  the  infinite  love  of  God.  The  Church  on  earth,  with  all  its  contradic- 
tions and  imperfections,  presents  a  magnificent  picture  of  self-denial,  devotion, 
and  praise  ;  but  this  is  only  a  faint  representation  of  the  splendour  of  the 
Church  above  in  its  more  completed  state.  The  Church  above  is  society 
organised  ;  the  Church  below  is  society  organising.  The  heavenly  intelligences 
are  watching  both  processes,  and  their  wondering  adoration  is  being  continually 
excited  as  they  observe  the  building  up  and  ever-advancing  completion  of  the 
redeemed  community.  If  there  is  one  thing  more  than  another  that  amazes 
"  the  principalities  and  powers  " — amazes  them  more  than  the  manifold  wisdom 
of  God  unfolded  to  them  by  the  Church — it  must  surely  be  the  apathy  and 
indifference  of  men  on  earth  to  their  redemptive  blessings  ! — that  so  much  has 
been  done  to  make  man  wise,  and  he  remains  willingly  and  contentedly  ignorant ; 
that  God  has  been  so  prodigal  of  His  wealth,  and  man  is  so  slow  to  appreciate 
and  seize  the  proffered  enrichment;  that  God  offers  the  abundant  bread  of 
eternal  life,  and  man  prefers  to  starve  in  lean  and  comfortless  poverty,  and 
grumbles  against  heaven  that  he  is  so  poor;  that  salvation  is  pressed  on  his 
acceptance,  and  man  persists  in  perishing  ;  that  "  heaven  lies  about  him  in  his 
infancy,"  and  the  celestial  gate  opens  before  him  in  every  subsequent  stage  of 
life,  and  yet  man  resists  the  alluring  glory,  and  stumbles  at  last  into  the 
bottomless  chasm  of  eternal  darkness. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  wisdom  of  God  is  continually  presenting  new  illustrations  of 
its  manifoldness.  2.  The  most  signal  display  of  divine  wisdom  is  seen  in  the 
redemption  of  the  race.  3.  The  future  history  of  the  Church  wHl  reveal  new 
features  in  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Ver.  10.  The   Manifold    Wisdom    of  1.  By  the  gift  of  His  Son.     2.  As  a 

God —  subsidiary  means,  by  the  institution  of 

I.  Seen  in  the  gradual  unfolding  of  preaching,  and  by  selecting  men,  and 
His  great  purpose  to  save  the  human  not  angels,  as  instruments  in  spreading 
race. — 1.  This  process  suited  the  reve-  the  knowledge  of  gospel  redemption, 
lation  to  men's  nature  and  condition  as  III.  Seen  in  using  the  Church  of 
finite  and  sinful  beings.  Had  the  reve-  the  redeemed  as  an  object-lesson  in 
lation  been  more  rapid  and  brilliant  it  teaching  the  heavenly  intelligences. — 
could  not  have  been  so  readily  appre-  The  Church  teaches  the  angels :  1.  By 
ciated,  nor  could  men  have  dared  to  its  composition.  2.  By  its  marvellous 
hope  they  had  any  share  in  it.  It  was  history.  3.  By  its  glorious  completion, 
adapted  to  the  infantile  state  of  the  Learn. — 1.  The  dignity  and  glory 
Church  and  the  world  when  the  mind  of  the  Church.  2.  Let  it  be  your  all- 
is  most  powerfully  affected  by  sensible  important  concern  to  become  a  member 
objects.     2.  This  method  was  a  training  of  this  spiritual  community. 

for  appreciating  the  fuller  discoveries 

of  the  divine  will.      It   has  been  an  Vers.  11-13.  Access  to  God. 

education  and  discipline,  has  provoked  I.  We  have  access. — The  word  sig- 

inquiry,  and  encouraged  full  submission  nines   an    approach    to   some    object, 

to  the  will  of  God  and  faith  in  His  Here   it  intends  a   near  approach   to 

wisdom  and  power.  God   in   worship,    or   such  a  state   of 

II.  Seen  in  the  means  He  employed  peace  with  God  as  allows  a  freedom  of 
to  carry  out  His  saving  purpose. —  intercourse.     It  is  a  familiar  expres- 

187 


chap.  m. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


sion  suited  to  convey  the  idea  of  great 
condescension  on  God's  part  and  high 
privilege  on  ours. 

II.  We  have  boldness  of  access. — 
The  word  signifies  a  freedom  of  speak- 
ing in  opposition  to  that  restraint 
which  we  feel  when  in  the  presence  of 
one  we  dread  and  in  whose  gocdness 
we  can  place  no  confidence.  It  ex- 
presses the  fulness  of  that  liberty  which 
under  the  gospel  all  Christians  enjoy 
of  drawing  near  to  God,  and  that 
freedom  of  spirit  with  which  we  should 
come  to  God.  The  disposition  of  our 
hearts  should  correspond  with  the 
liberal  and  gracious  dispensation  under 
which  we  are  placed.  We  should  come 
to  God  with  a  spirit  of  love,  in  opposi- 
tion to  servile  fear.  This  boldness 
imports  frequency  in  our  approaches 
to  God.  Slaves,  under  fear,  stand  at 
a  distance.  Children,  invited  by  the 
goodness  of  a  father,  come  often  into 
his  presence. 

III.  We  have  access  with  confidence. 
— This  confidence  is  elsewhere  called  a 
better  hope  and  the  full  assurance  of 
faith.  It  is  opposed  to  doubting  and 
distrust.  Confidence  in  prayer  is  a 
full  reliance  on  God ;  but  this  may  be 
accompanied  with  a  humble  diffidence 
of  ourselves. 

IV.  All  our  hope  of  success  in  prayer 
must  rest  upon  the  mediation  of  Christ 
(ver.  12). — In  His  name  we  are  to 
come  before  God ;  and  in  the  virtue  of 
His  atonement  and  intercession  we  may 
hope  for  acceptance. 

V.  Access  to  God  a  refuge  in  trouble 
(ver.  13). — Fearing  lest  his  sufferings 
in  the  cause  of  the  gospel  should  dis- 
hearten his  converts,  the  apostle  sets 
before  them  a  view  of  their  security 
under  the  protection  of  divine  grace. 
Dangers  were  before  them  ;  but  what 
had  they  to  fear  who  had  boldness  of 
access  to  God  ?  It  was  one  of  the 
glories  of  their  religion  that  He  who 
preached  it  was  not  ashamed  to  suffer 
for  it. 

Lessons. — 1.  In  the  apostle  Paul  ive 
have  a  noble  example  of  benevolence. 
2.  New  converts  should  be  assisted  and 
encouraged.     3.  Our  best  support  under 

188 


trouble  is  boldness  of  access  to  God. 
4.  Let  the  grace  and  condescension  of 
God  encourage  us  to  come  often  into  His 
presence. — Lathrop. 

Yer.  12.  Access  to  God  in  Prayer.-  - 
Prayer  is  to  be  exercised  with  the 
greatest  caution  and  exactness,  being 
the  most  solemn  intercourse  earth  can 
have  with  heaven.  The  distance 
between  God  and  us,  so  great  by 
nature  and  yet  greater  by  sin,  makes 
it  fearful  to  address  Him ;  but  Christ 
has  smoothed  a  way,  and  we  are 
commanded  to  come  with  a  good  heart, 
not  only  in  respect  of  innocence,  but 
also  of  confidence. 

I.  There  is  a  certain  boldness  and 
confidence  very  well  becoming  our 
humblest  addresses  to  God. — It  is  the 
very  language  of  prayer  to  treat  God 
as  our  Father.  The  nature  of  this 
confidence  is  not  so  easily  set  forth  by 
positive  description  as  by  the  opposition 
it  bears  to  its  extremes.     It  is  opposed  : 

1.  To  desperation  and  horror  of 
conscience.  2.  To  doubtings  and 
groundless  scrupulosities.  3.  To  rash- 
ness and  precipitation.  4.  To  impu- 
dence. 

II.  The  foundation  of  this  confidence 
is  laid  in  the  mediation  of  Christ 

III.  The  reason  why  Christ's  media- 
tion ought  to  minister  such  confidence 
to  us. — His  incomparable  fitness  for 
the  performance  of  that  work.  Con- 
sidering Him:  1.  In  respect  to  God, 
with  whom  He  has  to  mediate.  God 
sustains  a  double  capacity  of  Father 
and  Judge.  Christ  appears  not  only 
as  an  Advocate,  but  as  a  Surety,  paying 
down   the   utmost   justice    can    exact. 

2.  In  reference  to  men  for  whom  He 
mediates.  He  is  a  friend,  brother, 
surety,  lord  or  master.  3.  In  respect 
to  Himself.  (1)  He  is  perfectly 
acquainted  with  all  our  wants  and 
necessities.  (2)  He  is  heartily  sensible 
of  and  concerned  about  them.  (3)  He 
is  best  able  to  express  and  &et  them 
before  the  Father. 

IV.  Whether  there  is  any  other 
ground  that  may  rationally  embolden 
us  in  our  addresses  to  Him.— If  there 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  III. 


is,  it  must  be  either  :  1.  Something 
within  us  as  the  merit  of  our  good 
actions.  But  this  cannot  be — (1)  be- 
cause none  can  merit  but  by  doing 
something  absolutely  by  his  own  power 
for  the  advantage  of  him  from  whom 
he  merits ;  (2)  because  to  merit  is  to 
do  something  over  and  above  what  is 
due.  2.  Something  without  us.  This 
must  be  the  help  and  intercession  either 
of  angels  or  saints.  Angels  cannot 
mediate  for  us — (1)  because  it  is  im- 
possible for  them  to  know  and  perfectly 
discern  the  thoughts  ;  (2)  because  no 
angel  can  know  at  once  all  the  prayers 
that  are  even  uttered  in  words  through- 
out the  world.  These  arguments  are 
still  more  forcible  against  the  inter- 
cession of  saints.  The  invocation  of 
saints  supposed  to  arise  :  1.  From  the 
solemn  meetings  used  by  the  primitive 
Christians  at  the  saints'  sepulchres,  and 
there  celebrating  the  memory  of  their 
martyrdom.  2.  From  those  seeds  of 
the  Platonic  philosophy  that  so  much 
leavened  many  of  the  primitive 
Christians.  3.  From  the  people  being 
bred  in  idolatry.  But  the  primitive 
fathers  held  no  such  thing ;  and  the 
Council  of  Trent,  that  pretended  to 
determine  the  case,  put  the  world  off 


with  an  ambiguity.  Christ  is  the  only 
true  way. — R.  South. 

Ver.  13.  Courage  under  Suffering. — 

1.  Affliction  and  tribulation  for  the 
gospel  is  a  trial  not  only  to  those 
under  it,  but  to  others  who  look  on, 
and  are  in  no  less  hazard  to  be  thereby 
brangled  (made  to  disagree)  in  their 
confidence,  blunted  in  their  zeal,  and 
rendered  remiss  in  their  forwardness, 
than  the  person  himself  who  suffers. 

2.  A  faithful  minister  suffering  for 
truth  will  not  be  so  solicitous  for  his 
own  outward  estate  as  for  the  Church 
and  people  of  God,  lest  they  be  turned 
aside,  or  made  to  faint  by  reason  of 
his  sufferings.  This  may  guard  from 
discouragement  when  we  consider  the 
excellent  worth  of  truth,  and  how  those 
who  suffer  for  it  have  not  cast  them- 
selves without  necessity  upon  their 
sufferings,  but  were  necessitated  to 
meet  them  in  the  way  of  their  calling. 

3.  So  honourable  is  it  to  suffer  for 
Christ  and  truth  that  not  only  the 
persons  who  suffer  are  honoured,  but 
also  all  such  as  have  interest  in  them, 
who  should  not  faint,  but  rather  glory 
in  them  and  take  encouragement  from 
them .  — Fergusson. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses   14—21. 

A  Sublime  and  Comprehensive  Prayer — 

I.  For  spiritual  strengthening  (ver.  16). — The  first  necessity  of  the  new 
convert  is  strength.  The  change  from  the  former  life  is  so  new  and  strange. 
The  spiritual  faculties  are  but  recently  called  into  exercise  ;  and  though  they  are 
thrilled  with  the  vigour  of  youth,  they  possess  the  inherent  weakness  and  are 
exposed  to  the  temptations  of  youth.  Their  newly  acquired  strength  is  at  once 
their  glory  and  their  danger — their  glory  in  giving  them  the  capacity  and  impulse 
for  the  highest  kind  of  work;  their  danger  because  they  are  tempted  to  rely 
upon  their  own  conscious  power  rather  than  upon  the  grace  of  God  within  them, 
which  is  the  source  of  their  best  strength.  If  that  strength  is  once  undermined 
or  eaten  away,  it  can  never  be  replaced.  The  strength  of  youth,  physical  or 
spiritual,  belongs  only  to  the  period  of  youth ;  if  lost  in  youth,  it  can  never  be 
regained  in  maturer  life.  Whatever  strength  we  may  gain  in  after-years  will 
never  be  what  it  might  have  been  if  we  had  never  lost  the  strength  of  our  first 
love.  The  apostle  here  prays  that  his  converts  may  be  invigorated  with  a  manful 
courage,  the  moral  strength  to  meet  dangers  and  to  battle  with  difficulties  without 
quailing. 

1.  This  spiritual  strengthening  is  achieved  by  the  indwelling  Christ  welcomed  and 
retained  in  the  heart  by  faith. — "  That  Christ  may  dwell  in  your  hearts  by  faith  " 
(ver.  17).     The  source  of  this  strength  is  not  in  us;  we  cannot  evoke  it  by  any 

189 


chap.  in.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS. 


voluntary  effort  of  our  own.  It  is  a  divine  power  working  in  us  (ver.  20).  It 
is  the  Christ  within  us  making  Himself  felt  in  our  otherwise  enfeebled  powers. 
We  are  invested  with  the  strength  of  Christ  by  our  faith  in  Christ ;  and  increase 
of  strength  comes  with  increase  of  faith.  The  faith  that  receives  Christ  into  the 
heart  must  be  constantly  exercised  to  keep  Him  there,  and  to  derive  inspiration 
and  help  from  Him  in  attaining  spiritual  growth  and  in  doing  useful  work. 

2.  This  spiritual  strengthening  is  cherished  by  an  accession  of  Christian  love. — 
"  That  ye,  being  rooted  and  grounded  in  love"  (ver.  17).  The  double  metaphor 
gives  emphasis  to  the  idea — "  rooted,"  a  tree  ;  "  grounded  "  a  building.  When 
Christ  is  planted  and  settled  in  our  hearts,  love  is  shed  abroad  there,  and  becomes 
the  genial  soil  in  which  our  graces  grow,  and  the  basis  of  all  our  thought  and 
action.  Love  is  strength,  the  most  reliable,  sustaining,  and  victorious  kind  of 
strength. 

II.  For  a  clearer  comprehension  of  the  immeasurable  love  of  Christ  (vers.  18, 19). 
— Here  the  prayer  rises  in  sublimity  and  comprehensiveness.  The  apostle  prays 
that  we  may  know  the  unknowable — "know  the  love  of  Christ,  which  passeth 
knowledge."  There  is  nothing  so  fascinating  as  the  love  of  Christ,  ever  leading 
us  on  by  fresh  revelations,  and  ever  leaving  the  impression  that  there  are 
unfathomable  depths  and  inaccessible  heights  yet  to  be  discovered.  "  Oh  that 
Christ  would,"  exclaimed  the  saintly  Rutherford,  "  arrest  and  comprise  my  love 
and  my  heart  for  all.  I  am  a  bankrupt  who  have  no  more  free  goods  in  the 
world  for  Christ,  save  that  it  is  both  the  whole  heritage  I  have,  and  all  my  move- 
ables besides.  Lord,  give  the  thirsty  manna  drink.  Oh  to  be  over  ears  in  the 
well !  Oh  to  be  swimming  over  head  and  ears  in  Christ's  love  !  I  would  not 
have  Christ's  love  entering  in  me,  but  I  would  enter  into  it,  and  be  swallowed  up 
of  that  love.  But  I  see  not  myself  here,  for  I  fear  I  make  more  of  His  love  than 
of  Himself,  whereas  He  Himself  is  far  beyond  and  much  better  than  His  love. 
Oh,  if  I  had  my  sinful  arms  filled  with  that  lovely  one  Christ  S  Blessed  be  my 
rich  Lord  Jesus,  who  sendeth  not  away  beggars  from  His  house  with  an  empty 
dish.  He  fillet h  the  vessel  of  such  as  will  come  and  seek.  We  might  beg 
ourselves  rich,  if  we  were  wise,  if  we  would  but  hold  out  our  withered  hands  to 
Christ,  and  learn  to  seek,  ask,  and  knock."  The  highest  conceptions  of  the  love 
of  Christ  are  realised  by  the  soul  that  prays. 

III.  For  the  attainment  of  the  most  complete  endowment  of  the  divine 
fulness. — "  That  ye  might  be  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God  "  (ver.  19).  The 
prayer  asks  that  man  may  gain  the  sum-total  of  God's  gifts,  be  filled  in  every 
capacity  of  his  nature  with  the  whole  plenitude  (the  7r\^po)fxa)  of  God.  To  reach 
this  glorious  result,  we  need,  indeed,  special  spiritual  strengthening.  New  wine 
bursts  old  bottles;  and  a  large  and  sudden  inflow  of  divine  grace  would  be 
disastrous  to  the  soul  unprepared  to  receive  it.  What  is  wanted  is  strength — 
strength  of  the  highest  and  purest  kind.  Muscular  strength — a  magnificent 
healthy  physique — is  a  great  gift ;  but  it  is  one  of  our  lowest  endowments,  and 
its  abuse  sinks  us  to  a  worse  than  brutish  sensuality.  Intellectual  strength  is  a 
still  higher  gift,  and  if  rightly  used  will  lift  us  into  a  loftier  world  of  wonders,  of 
beauty,  of  purity  and  joy  ;  but  if  abused  will  drag  us  down  to  the  base  level  of 
the  vapouring,  scoffing  sceptic,  whose  attempts  to  glorify  error  are  instigated  by 
a  savage  but  utterly  powerless  hatred  of  truth.  Spiritual  strength  is  the  highest 
gift  of  all.  It  is  the  motive-power  that  gives  movement  and  direction  to  thought 
and  action.  Without  it  man  is  the  plaything  and  victim  of  unrestrained  passions. 
A  short  time  ago  I  inspected  one  of  the  finest  ocean-going  steamships,  a 
marvellous  combination  of  strength  and  elegance.  Everything  seemed  as 
perfect  as  engineering  science  could  make  it.  But  there  was  something  wanting ; 
it  was  a  fatal  defect.  The  giant  shaft  and  powerful  screw,  the  triple  expansion 
cylinders,  the  cranks,  pistons,  and  wheels  were  all  there,  but  the  noble  vessel  was 

190 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS.         chap.  hi. 


useless,  heaving  helplessly  on  the  rolling  tide.  The  fires  were  out,  and  the  active 
driving-power  was  lacking.  What  steam  is  to  that  great  floating  mass  of  compli- 
cated mechanism,  giving  it  life,  movement,  direction,  purpose — that  spiritual 
strength  is  to  our  mental  and  physical  organism.  To  receive  the  fulness  of 
indwelling  Deity  the  soul  must  be  strengthened  with  spiritual  strength.  We 
cannot  pray  too  earnestly  for  this. 

IV.  Uttered  with  a  reverential  recognition  of  the  great  Giver  of  all  blessing. 
— 1.  Beginning  with  the  submissive  awe  of  a  humble  suppliant.  "For  this  cause 
I  bow  my  knees  unto  the  Father,"  etc.  (vers.  14, 15).  The  apostle  is  overwhelmed 
with  the  contemplation  of  the  rich  blessings  stored  up  for  man  in  Christ  Jesus, 
and  prostrates  himself  with  lowly  homage  in  the  conscious  presence  of  the  great 
Donor  of  all  spiritual  good.  Nothing  humbles  us  more  than  a  sight  of  the 
blessings  possible  of  attainment  by  the  greatest  sinner. 

2.  Ending  with  an  outburst  of  triumphant  praise  (vers.  20,  21). — Praise  soars 
higher  than  prayer.  Man's  desires  will  never  overtake  God's  bounty.  When 
the  apostle  desires  that  God's  praise  may  resound  in  the  Church  "  throughout  all 
ages,"  he  no  longer  supposes  that  the  mystery  of  God  may  be  finished  speedily  as 
men  count  years.  The  history  of  mankind  stretches  before  his  gaze  into  its  dim 
futurity.  The  successive  generations  gather  themselves  into  that  consummate  age 
of  the  kingdom  of  God,  the  grand  cycle  in  which  all  the  ages  are  contained. 
With  its  completion  time  itself  is  no  more.  Its  swelling  current,  laden  with  the 
tribute  of  all  the  worlds  and  all  their  histories,  reaches  the  eternal  ocean.  The 
end  comes  ;  God  is  all  in  all.  At  this  furthest  horizon  of  thought,  Christ  and 
His  own  are  seen  together  rendering  to  God  unceasing  glory  (Findlay). 

Lessons. — 1.  Prayer  is  the  cry  of  conscious  need.  2.  Increases  in  importunity 
as  it  is  strengthened  by  faith.  3.  Finds  its  sublimest  themes  in  the  culture  of  the 
spiritual  life. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Yers.  14,  15.  The  Christian  Church  dissolution.       Society   passes   on,    and 

a  Family.  guilds  and  corporations  die ;  principles 

I.  The  definition  here  given  of  the  are  established,   and   leagues    become 

Christian  Church. — 1.  A  society  founded  dissolved  ;  tastes  change,  and  then  the 

upon  natural  affinities — u  a  family."    A  association   or  society   breaks   up   and 

family  is  built  on  affinities  which  are  comes  to  nothing.     It  is  upon  another 

natural,  not  artificial ;  it  is  not  a  com-  principle  altogether   that    that  which 

bination,    but   a  society.      In  ancient  we  call  a  family,   or  true   society,    is 

times  an    association  of  interest  com-  formed.     It  is  not  built  upon  similarity 

bined  men  in  one  guild  or  corporation  of  taste  nor   identity  of  opinion,   but 

for  protecting  the  common  persons  in  upon  affinities  of  nature.     You  do  not 

that  corporation  from  oppression.     In  choose  who  shall  be  your  brother ;  you 

modern  times  identity  of  political  creed  cannot    exclude  your  mother  or  your 

or  opinion  has  bound  men  together  in  sister ;  it  does  not  depend  upon  choice 

one  league  in  order  to  establish  those  or    arbitrary    opinion    at    all,    but   is 

political  principles  which  appeared  to  founded   upon  the    eternal    nature    of 

them    of    importance.       Similarity   of  things.     And  precisely  in  the  same  way 

taste  has  united  men  together  in  what  is  the  Christian  Church  formed — upon 

is  calkd  an  association,  or  a  society,  in  natural  affinity,  and  not  upon  artificial 

order  by  this   means   to  attain   more  combination. 

completely  the  ends  of  that  science  to  2.   The  Church  of  Christ  is  a  whole 

which  they   had   devoted    themselves,  made  up  of  manifold  diversities. — We 

But,  as  these  have    been  raised   arti-  are  told  here  it  is  "  the  whole  family," 

ficially,    so   their   end    is,   inevitably,  taking  into  it  the  great  and  good  of 

191 


CHAP.  III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


ages  past  now  in  heaven,  and  also  the 
struggling,  the  humble,  and  the  weak 
now  existing  upon  earth.  Here,  again, 
the  analogy  holds  good  between  the 
Church  and  the  family.  Never  more 
than  in  the  family  is  the  true  entirety 
of  our  nature  seen.  Observe  how  all 
the  diversities  of  human  condition  and 
character  manifest  themselves  in  the 
family.  First  of  all,  there  are  the 
two  opposite  pales  of  masculine  and 
feminine,  which  contain  within  them 
the  entire  of  our  humanity ;  which 
together,  not  separately,  make  up  the 
whole  of  man.  Then  there  are  the 
diversities  in  the  degrees  and  kinds 
of  affection.  For,  when  we  speak  of 
family  affection,  we  must  remember 
that  it  is  made  up  of  many  diversities. 
There  is  nothing  more  different  than 
the  love  which  the  sister  bears  to- 
wards the  brother,  compared  with  that 
which  the  brother  bears  towards  the 
sister.  The  affection  which  a  man 
bears  towards  his  father  is  quite  distinct 
from  that  which  he  feels  towards  his 
mother  ;  it  is  something  quite  different 
towards  his  sister ;  totally  diverse, 
again,  towards  his  brother.  And  then 
there  are  diversities  of  character.  First, 
the  mature  wisdom  and  stern  integrity 
of  the  father,  then  the  exuberant  ten- 
derness of  the  mother.  And  then 
one  is  brave  and  enthusiastic,  another 
thoughtful,  and  another  tender.  One 
is  remarkable  for  being  full  of  rich 
humour ;  another  is  sad,  mournful,  even 
melancholy.  Again,,  besides  these, 
there  are  diversities  of  condition  in 
life.  First,  there  is  the  heir,  sustain- 
ing the  name  and  honour  of  the  family ; 
then  perchance  the  soldier,  in  whose 
career  all  the  anxiety  and  solicitude  of 
the  family  is  centred  ;  then  the  man 
of  business,  to  whom  they  look  up, 
trusting  his  advice,  expecting  his 
counsel ;  lastly,  perhaps,  there  is  the 
invalid,  from  the  very  cradle  trembling 
between  life  and  death,  drawing  out 
all  the  sympathies  and  anxieties  of 
each  member  of  the  family,  and  so 
uniting  them  all  more  closely,  from 
their  having  one  common  point  of 
sympathy  and  solicitude.      Now,  you 

192 


will  observe  that  these  are  not  acci- 
dental, but  absolutely  essential  to  the 
idea  of  a  family  ;  for  so  far  as  any  one 
of  them  is  lost,  so  far  the  family  is 
incomplete.  And  precisely  in  the 
same  way  all  these  diversities  of  char- 
acter and  condition  are  necessary  to 
constitute  and  complete  the  idea  of  a 
Christian  Church. 

3.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  a  society 
which  is  for  ever  shifting  its  locality  and 
altering  its  forms. — It  is  the  whole 
Church,  "  the  whole  family  in  heaven 
and  earth."  So,  then,  those  who  were 
on  earth  and  are  now  in  heaven  are 
members  of  the  same  family  still.  Those 
who  had  their  home  here,  now  have  it 
there.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  a  society 
ever  altering  and  changing  its  external 
forms.  "  The  whole  family  " — the 
Church  of  the  patriarchs  and  of  ages 
before  them ;  and  yet  the  same  family. 
Remember,  I  pray  you,  the  diversities 
of  form  through  which,  in  so  many 
ages  and  generations,  this  Church  has 
passed.  Consider  the  difference  there 
was  between  the  patriarchal  Church  of 
the  time  of  Abraham  and  Isaac  and 
its  condition  under  David ;  or  the 
difference  between  the  Church  so  exist- 
ing and  its  state  in  the  days  of  the 
apostles  and  the  marvellous  difference 
between  that  and  the  same  Church 
four  or  five  centuries  later  ;  or,  once 
again,  the  difference  between  that, 
externally  one,  and  the  Church  as  it 
exists  in  the  present  day,  broken  into 
so  many  fragments.  Yet,  diversified 
as  these  states  may  be,  they  are  not 
more  so  than  the  various  stages  of  a 
family. 

II.  Consider  the  name  by  which 
this  Church  is  named. — "Our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,"  the  apostle  says,  of 
whom  "  the  whole  family  in  heaven 
and  earth  is  named." 

1.  First,  the  recognition  of  a  common 
father. — That  is  the  sacred  truth  pro- 
claimed by  the  Epiphany.  God  revealed 
in  Christ — not  the  Father  of  the  Jew 
only,  but  also  of  the  Gentile.  The  Father 
of  a  whole  family.  Not  the  partial 
Father,  loving  one  alone — the  elder — 
but  the  younger  son  besides ;  the  outcast 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  III. 


prodigal  who  had  spent  his  living  with 
harlots  and  sinners,  but  the  child  still, 
and  the  child  of  a  Father's  love. 

2.  The  recognition  of  a  common 
humanity. — He  from  whom  the  Church 
is  named  took  upon  Him  not  the  nature 
merely  of  the  noble,  of  kings,  or  of 
the  intellectual  philosopher,  but  of  the 
beggar,  the  slave,  the  outcast,  the 
infidel,  the  sinner,  and  the  nature  of 
every  one  struggling  in  various  ways. 

3.  The  Church  of  Christ  proceeds  out 
of  and  rests  upon  the  belief  in  a 
common  Sacrifice. — F.  W.  Robertson. 

The  Family  in  Heaven  and  Earth. — 
With  the  boldness  of  a  true  and  in- 
spired nature  the  apostle  Paul  speaks 
with  incidental  ease  of  one  family  dis- 
tributed between  heaven  and  earth. 
There  is,  it  seems,  domesticity  that 
cannot  be  absorbed  by  the  interval 
between  two  spheres  of  being — a  love 
that  cannot  be  lost  amidst  the  im- 
mensity, but  finds  the  surest  track 
across  the  void — a  home  affinity  that 
penetrates  the  skies,  and  enters  as  the 
morning  or  evening  guest.  And  it  is 
Jesus  of  Nazareth  who  has  effected 
this ;  has  entered  under  the  same 
household  name,  and  formed  into  the 
same  class,  the  dwellers  above  and 
those  beneath.  Spirits  there,  and 
spirits  here,  are  gathered  by  Him  into 
one  group ;  and  where  before  was 
saddest  exile,  He  has  made  a  blest 
fraternity. 

I.  Members  of  the  same  home  cannot 
dwell  together,  without  either  the 
memory  or  the  expectation  of  some 
mutual  and  mortal  farewell. — All  we 
who  dwell  in  this  visible  scene  can 
think  of  kindred  souls  that  have 
vanished  from  us  into  the  invisible. 
These,  in  the  first  place,  does  Jesus 
keep  dwelling  near  our  hearts ;  making 
still  one  family  of  those  in  heaven  and 
those  on  earth.  This  He  would  do,  if 
by  no  other  means,  by  the  prospect  He 
has  opened,  of  actual  restoration.  And 
since  the  grave  can  bury  no  affection 
now,  but  only  the  mortal  and  familiar 
shape  of  their  object,  death  has  changed 
its   whole  aspect  and  relation   to   us ; 


and  we  may  regard  it,  not  with  passion- 
ate hate,  but  with  quiet  reverence. 
It  is  a  divine  message  from  above,  not 
an  invasion  from  the  abyss  beneath ; 
not  the  fiendish  hand  of  darkness 
thrust  up  to  clutch  our  gladness 
enviously  away,  but  a  rainbow  gleam 
that  descends  through  Jesus,  without 
which  we  should  not  know  the  various 
beauties  that  are  woven  into  the  pure 
light  of  life.  Once  let  the  Christian 
promise  be  taken  to  the  heart,  and  as 
we  walk  through  the  solemn  forest  of 
our  existence,  every  leaf  of  love  that 
falls,  while  it  proclaims  the  winter 
near,  lets  in  another  patch  of  God's 
sunshine  to  paint  the  glade  beneath 
our  feet  and  give  a  glory  to  the 
grass.  Tell  me  that  I  shall  stand  face 
to  face  with  the  sainted  dead ;  and, 
whenever  it  may  be,  shall  I  not  desire 
to  be  ready,  and  to  meet  them  with 
clear  eye  and  spirit  unabashed  ?  Such 
and  so  much  encouragement  would 
Christianity  give  to  the  faithful  con- 
versation of  all  true  affections,  if  it 
only  assured  us  of  some  distant  and 
undefinable  restoration.  But  it  appears 
to  me  to  assure  us  of  much  more  than 
this ;  to  discountenance  the  idea  of 
any,  even  the  most  temporary,  extinc- 
tion of  life  in  the  grave ;  and  to  sanction 
our  faith  in  the  absolute  immortality 
of  the  mind.  Rightly  understood,  it 
teaches  not  only  that  the  departed  will 
live,  but  that  they  do  live,  and  indeed 
have  never  died,  but  simply  vanished 
and  passed  away. 

II.  But  it  is  not  merely  the  members 
of  the  same  literal  home  that  Christ 
unites  in  one,  whether  in  earth  or 
heaven.  He  makes  the  good  of  every 
age  into  a  glorious  family  of  the 
children  of  God ;  and  inspires  them 
with  a  fellow-feeling,  whatever  the 
department  of  service  which  they  fill. 
Keeping  us  ever  in  the  mental  presence 
of  the  divinest  wisdom  and  in  venera- 
tion of  a  perfect  goodness,  it  accustoms 
us  to  the  aspect  of  every  grace  that 
can  adorn  and  consecrate,  our  nature ; 
trains  our  perceptions  instantly  to 
recognise  its  influence  or  to  feel  its 
want.     It  looks  with  an  eye   of   full 

193 


chap.  in.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


and  clear  affection  over  the  wide  circle 
of  human  excellence.  Such  hope  tends 
to  give  us  a  prompt  and  large  con- 
geniality with  them;  to  cherish  the 
healthful  affections  which  are  domestic 
in  every  place  and  obsolete  in  no  time ; 
to  prepare  us  for  entering  any  new 
scene,  and  joining  any  new  society 
where  goodness,  truth,  and  beauty 
dwell. — Martineau. 

The  Christian  Brotherhood  of  Man. 
— The  brotherhood  of  man  has  been 
the  dream  of  old  philosophers,  and  its 
attainment  the  endeavour  of  modern 
reformers.  Man  can  only  reach  his 
highest  life  when  he  forms  part  of  a 
society  bound  together  by  common 
sympathies  and  common  aims,  for  by 
a  great  law  of  our  nature  it  is  true 
that  he  who  lives  utterly  apart  from 
his  fellows  must  lose  all  true  nobleness 
in  selfish  degradation.  There  is  no  real 
progress  for  the  individual  but  through 
social  sympathy.  There  is  no  strong 
and  enduring  aspiration  but  in  the 
fellowship  of  aspiring  souls.  That 
conviction  which  men  have  so  strongly 
felt  and  so  vainly  endeavoured  to 
realise  is  perpetually  asserted  in  the 
Book  of  God. 

1.  The  brotherhood  of  man  in  Christ. 
— 1.  The  Christian  brotherhood  is  a 
unity  of  spirit  under  a  diversity  of 
form.  Thus  with  the  Church  of  the 
first  century.  At  first  it  was  one  band 
of  brotherhood ;  but  as  it  grew  and 
individual  thought  expanded  and  ex- 
perience deepened  there  arose  infinite 
diversities.  The  more  men  think  and 
the  more  they  grow,  the  more  will  they 
differ. 

2.  There  are  spiritual  ties  in  action 
which  in  Christ  bind  man  to  man. — 
Paul's  words  imply  a  threefold  unity. 
1.  The  fellowship  of  devotion  to  a 
common  Father.  2.  The  fellowship 
with  Christ  our  common  Brother. 
3.  That  fellowship  is  unbroken  by  the 
change  of  worlds. 

II.  Results  of  realising  this  fact  of 
brotherhood. — 1.  Earnestness  of  life. 

2.  Power  and  grandeur  of  hope. — 
Some    complain   that   their    ideas  of 

194 


heaven  are  vague  and  ineffective. 
Only  realise  the  brotherhood  of  man, 
and  then  the  hope  of  the  future  will 
become  a  power  in  life. — E.  L.  Hull. 

The  One  Family. — 1.  Believers  on 
earth  and  saints  and  angels  in  heaven 
spring  from  the  same  common  parent. 
2.  Are  governed  by  the  same  general 
laws.  3.  Share  in  the  same  pleasures 
and  enjoyments.  4.  Have  the  same 
general  temper,  the  same  distinguish- 
ing complexion.  5.  Have  one  common 
interest.  6.  Look  to,  rely  upon,  and 
are  guided  by  the  same  Head.  7.  Are 
all  objects  of  God's  love.  8.  At  the 
last  day  will  meet  in  God's  presence, 
be  openly  acknowledged  as  His  children, 
and  admitted  to  dwell  in  His  house  for 
ever. 

Lessons. — 1.  If  we  estimate  the 
dignity  of  men  from  the  families  with 
which  they  are  connected,  how  honour- 
able is  the  believer !  2.  We  see  our 
obligations  to  mutual  condescension, 
peaceableness,  and  love.  3.  Let  those 
who  are  not  of  this  family  be  solicitous 
to  obtain  a  place  in  it. — Lathrop. 

Vers.  16-19.  P aid's  Prayer  for  the 
Ephesians. 

I.  For  spiritual  strength. — It  was 
not  bodily  strength,  civil  power,  or 
worldly  distinction ;  it  was  the  grace 
of  fortitude  and  patience. 

II.  For  an  indwelling  Christ. — As 
we  become  united  to  Christ  by  faith, 
so  by  faith  He  dwells  in  our  hearts. 

III.  For  establishment  in  love. — 
True  love  is  rooted  in  the  heart.  It 
is  a  spiritual  affection  towards  Christ. 
Its  fruits  are  love  to  men,  imitation 
of  Christ's  example,  obedience  to  His 
commands,  zeal  for  His  honour,  and 
diligence  in  His  service. 

IV.  For  increase  of  knowledge  in 
the  love  of  Christ. — The  love  of  Christ 
passeth  all  known  examples  of  love. 
This  love  passeth  our  comprehension  in 
respect  of  its  breadth  or  extent,  its 
length,  its  depth,  as  the  benefits  it  has 
procured  exceed  all  human  estimate. 
Though  the  love  of  Christ  passeth 
knowledge,  there  is  a  sense  in  which  it 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  III. 


is  known  to  the  saints.  They  have  an 
experimental  knowledge,  an  influential 
knowledge,  an  assimilating  knowledge 
of  the  love  of  Christ. 

V.  For  the  fulness  of  God.— That 
they  may  have  such  a  supply  of  divine 
influence  as  would  cause  them  to 
abound  in  knowledge,  faith,  love,  and 
all  virtues  and  good  works. — Lathrop. 

Ver.  19.  The  Love  of  Christ. 

I.  The  love  of  Christ  passeth  know- 
ledge.— 1.  He  Himself  furnishes  an 
illustrative  instance  when  He  says, 
"  For  scarcely  for  a  righteous  man 
will  one  die " — a  merely  just  and 
righteous  man  would  be  admired  ;  but 
he  would  not  so  take  hold  of  the  heart 
of  another  to  produce  a  willingness  to 
die  for  him  ; — "  yet  peradventure,"  in 
some  rare  case,  "  for  a  good  man," 
a  man  of  benevolence,  adorned  with 
the  softer  virtues  and  abounding  in 
the  distribution  of  his  favours — for 
such  a  one  "  some  would  even  dare 
to  die  "  ;  some  one,  overcoming  even 
the  love  of  life  in  the  fulness  of  his 
gratitude,  might  venture  to  give  his 
own  life  to  preserve  that  of  such  a 
one.  But  we  were  neither  just  nor 
good ;  we  were  sinners,  and  "  God 
commendeth  His  love  toward  us,  in 
that  while  we  were  yet  sinners  Christ 
died  for  us."  Passes  it  not,  then,  all 
knowledge,  all  reasonable  conception 
and  probability,  that  this  fallen  nature 
should  be  so  sympathised  with  that 
these  flagrant  rebellions  should  excite, 
not  an  inexorable  anger,  but  pity  and 
love  ?  And  such  love  that  our  Saviour 
— looking  not  so  much  on  man  as 
offending,  but  as  His  creature,  and  as 
His  creature  still  capable  of  restora- 
tion— should  melt  in  compassion  and 
die  to  effect  his  redemption ;  this  is 
indeed  love  "that  passeth  knowledge." 
2.  The  manner  in  which  this  love  is 
manifested  carries  the  principle  beyond 
all  conception  and  expression. — It  was 
love  to  the  death.  It  was  death  for 
sinners,  death  in  their  stead;  death, 
that  the  penal  claims  of  law,  and  that 
law  the  unchangeable,  unrelaxable  law 
of  God,  might  be  fully  satisfied.     The 


redemption  price  was  fixed  by  a  spotless 
justice,  and  the  love  of  Christ  to  the 
sinner  was  to  be  tested  by  the  vastness 
of  the  claims  to  be  made  upon  Him. 
But  the  wages  of  sin  is  death  ;  and 
His  love  shrank  not  from  the  full  and 
awful  satisfaction  required.  It  was 
death  in  our  stead.  Then  it  must  be 
attended  with  anxious  forebodings.  Of 
what  mysteries  have  I  suggested  the 
recollection  to  you  1  Can  you  compre- 
hend them  %  That  feeling  with  which 
He  spoke  of  the  baptism  of  blood  ? 
That  last  mysterious  agony?  That 
complaint  of  being  forsaken  of  God  ? 
You  feel  you  cannot.  They  transcend 
all  your  thought ;  and  the  love  which 
made  Him  stoop  to  them  is  therefore 
love  "  which  passeth  knowledge." 

3.  The  love  of  Christ  passeth  know- 
ledge if  we  consider  it  as  illustrated  by 
that  care  for  us  which  signalises  His 
administration. 

4.  The  subject  is  further  illustrated 
by  the  nature  of  the  blessings  which 
result  to  men  from  the  love  of  Christ. 
— We  usually  estimate  the  strength  of 
love  by  the  blessings  it  conveys  or,  at 
any  rate,  would  convey.  And  if  the 
benefits  be  beyond  all  estimate,  neither 
can  we  measure  the  love. 

5.  The  love  of  Christ  passeth  know- 
ledge because  it  is  the  love  of  an 
infinite  nature.  Love  rises  with  the 
other  qualities  and  perfections  of  the 
being  in  whom  it  is  found.  Among 
animals  the  social  attachments  are 
slight,  and  the  instinctive  affection 
dies  away  when  its  purposes  are 
answered.  In  man  love  arises  with 
his  intellect.  In  him  it  is  often  only 
limited  by  his  nature,  and  when 
rightly  directed  shall  be  eternal.  Many 
that  love  on  earth  shall  doubtless  love 
for  ever.  Were  Christ  merely  a  man  His 
love  could  not  pass  knowledge.  What 
man  has  felt  man  can  conceive.  Love 
can  be  measured  by  the  nature  which 
exercises  it.  But  this  love  passeth  all 
knowledge  but  that  of  the  divine  nature, 
because  itself  is  divine.  Christ  is  God, 
and  he  who  would  fully  know  His  love 
must  be  able  to  span  immensity  and  to 
grasp  the  Infinite  Himself. 

195 


chap.  in.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS. 


II  But  while  it  is  true  that  the 
love  of  Christ  passeth  all  knowledge, 
it  is  equally  true  that  it  is  to  be 
known  by  us. — To  know  the  love  of 
Christ  is :  1.  To  recognise  it  in  its 
various  forms  and  expressions  in  our 
constant  meditations.  And  where  shall 
we  turn  and  not  be  met  by  this,  to  us, 
most  important  subject  ?  How  delight- 
ful an  occupation,  to  track  all  the 
streams  of  mercy  up  to  their  source. 
We  are  surrounded  by  the  proof  of 
the  love  of  Christ.  Let  us  see  to  it 
that  the  blinding  veil  be  not  on  our 
heart,  that  our  eyes  be  not  holden 
that  we  should  not  know  Him.  We 
are  called  to  know  the  love  of  Christ. 
Let  us  accustom  ourselves  to  reflect 
upon  it,  to  see  it  in  its  various  forms 
and  results  ;  and  then  shall  our  medita- 
tion of  Him  be  sweet.  2.  To  know 
the  love  of  Christ  is  to  perceive  it  in 
its  adaptation  to  our  own  personal 
condition.  3.  To  know  the  love  of 
Christ  is  to  experience  it  in  its  prac- 
tical results.  He  offers  you  pardon, 
and  the  offer  is  a  proof  and  manifesta- 
tion of  His  love ;  but  properly  to  know 
it  pardon  itself  must  be  accepted  and 
embraced.  This  is  to  know  His  love. 
Seek  it,  and  you  must  find  it.  Rest 
without  it,  and  you  are  but  "  as 
sounding  brass  and  a  tinkling  cymbal." 
4.  To  know  the  love  of  Christ  we  must 
put  forth  those  efforts  through  which 
that  love  is  appointed  to  express  itself 
in  our  daily  experience. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  rejection  of  love, 
especially  of  redeeming  love,  involves  the 
deepest  guilt.  2.  Remember  that  the 
grace  is  common  to  you  all. — R.  Watson. 

The  Unknown  and  Known  Love  of 
Ch?*ist. 

I.  There  are  some  respects  in  which 
the  love  of  Christ  passeth  our  know- 
ledge.— 1.  In  its  objects  ;  so  unworthy 
and  degraded.  2.  In  its  sufferings; 
love  to  the  death.  3.  In  its  care.  4.  In 
its  blessings.  5.  In  its  degree.  It  is 
the  love  of  an  infinite  nature. 

II.  There  are  some  respects  in 
which  the  love  of  Christ  may  be 
known. — 1.    Our  views  of  it  may  be 

196 


clearer  and  more  consistent.  2.  Our 
views  of  it  may  be  more  confidential 
and  appropriating.  3.  Our  views  of 
it  may  be  more  impressive  and  more 
influential. — G.  Brooks. 

The  Transcendent  Love  of  Christ. 

I.  This  representation  must  be 
confirmed. — 1.     This    love    is    divine. 

2.  Consider  the  objects  it  embraced. 

3.  The  means  by  which  it  manifested 
itself.     4.  The  blessings  it  secured. 

II.  The  perception  the  Christian 
may  acquire  of  this  love,  notwith- 
standing its  divine  infinitude. — 1.  It 
is  the  great  interpreting  principle 
which  he  applies  to  all  the  tremendous 
facts  of  redemption.  2.  The  sacred 
element  and  incentive  of  all  piety — 
the  theme  of  contemplation,  the  ground 
of  confidence,  the  motive  of  obedience. 
3.  The  impulse  and  model  of  all  bene- 
volence and  zeal. 

III.  Conclusions  from  a  review  of 
the  subject. — 1.  It  is  only  natural 
to  expect  a  transcendent  character  in 
Christianity.  2.  No  better  test  exists 
of  what  is  genuine  Christianity  than 
the  level  of  the  views  which  it  exhibits 
concerning  the  person  and  work  of 
Christ  and  the  tone  of  the  affections 
which  it  encourages  towards  Him. 
3.  There  is  much  of  implicit  as  well 
as  declarative  evidence  in  support  of 
the  Saviour's  supreme  divinity.  4.  How 
necessary  is  it  that  we  should  live 
habitually  under  the  influence  of  this 
transcendent  love. — R.  W.  Hamilton. 

Vers.  20,  21.  A  Devout  Doxology. 

I.  The  acknowledgment  the  apostle 
makes  of  God's  all-sufficiency. — 1.  God 

often  does  for  men  those  favours  which 
they  never  thought  of  asking  for  them- 
selves. 2.  God  answers  prayers  in 
ways  we  think  not  of.  3.  The  mercies 
God  is  pleased  to  grant  often  produce 
consequences  far  beyond  what  we  asked 
or  thought.  4.  The  worth  of  the 
blessings  we  ask  and  God  bestows 
infinitely  exceeds  all  our  thought. 

II.  The  ascription  of  glory  the 
apostle  makes  to  this  all-sufficient 
God.— 1.    God  is   glorified  by  the  in- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  IV. 


crease  of  His  Church.  2.  God  is 
glorified  in  the  Church  when  a  devout 
regard  is  paid  to  the  ordinances  He 
has  instituted.  3.  By  the  observance  of 
good  order  in  the  Church,  and  by  the 
decent  attendance  of  the  members  on 
their  respective  duties.  4.  That  God 
may  be  glorified  there  must  be  peace 
and  unity  in  the  Church. — Lathrop. 

God's  Infinite  Liberality. 

I.  The  object  of  this  doxology. — 
The  God  of  all  grace.  Whatever  we 
think  we  ask.  No  limit  to  our  asking 
but  our  thinking.  God  gives  beyond  our 
thinking.  Here,  take  all  this  !  Ah, 
poor  thing,  that  transcends  thine  asking 
and  even  thy  thinking,  but  take  it. 
If  it  transcend  all  communicated  power 
of  mind,  I  say,  "  I  thank  Thee,  my 
God,  for  it.  I  know  it  is  exceeding 
good,  but  I  cannot  understand  it. 
Keep  it  among  Thy  treasures.  My 
blessedness  rests  not  in  my  intellect, 
but  in  Thy  favour.  Eemember  Thou 
hast  given  it  me.  It  may  come  I 
shall  be  able  to  understand  it  better 
and  appreciate  it  more."  I  shall  never 
have  asked  too  much,  I  shall  never 
have  thought  too  much,  till  I  have 
asked  beyond  God's  ability,  till  I  have 
thought  beyond  God's  ability.  That 
ability  is  not  a  bare  abstraction  of  the 
omnipotence   of    God,    but   it    is    the 


omnipotence  of  God  as  working  in 
the  Church  and  in  the  people  of  God. 
He  is  not  omnipotent  in  heaven,  and 
impotent  in  thee,  or  partially  powerful 
in  thee. 

II.  The  doxology  itself  (ver.  21). 
— All  should  glorify  God,  but  all  will 
not.  In  the  Church  alone  will  God 
get  glory.  It  is  as  the  name  of  Christ 
is  glorified  in  us  that  we  are  glorified 
in  Him.  It  is  when  the  glory  that 
God  reflects  on  the  creature  is  by  the 
creature  ascribed  as  due  only  to  God 
when  He  is  glorified  as  the  Author 
of  it,  transcendent ly  and  infinitely 
glorious,  it  is  then  that  the  glory 
rests.  When  it  is  appropriated  it  is 
lost,  but  it  is  possessed  when  it  is 
tossed  back  and  fro  between  God  and 
the  creature.  When  the  creature 
gives  it  to  God,  God  of  His  rich  grace 
sends  it  back  in  greater  measure ;  but 
the  humble  creature,  emulous  of  God's 
glory,  sends  it  all  back  again  to  Him, 
and  as  it  reciprocates  so  it  increases. 
God  gives  not  to  end  by  enriching  us 
— that  is  an  immediate  end  ;  but  the 
ultimate  end  is  that  He  may  be  glori- 
fied. Be  ashamed  to  get  little — get  all 
things.  Get  out  of  your  poverty,  not 
by  fancying  you  are  rich,  but  by  coming 
and  getting.  The  more  you  get  always 
give  glory,  and  come  and  ask  and 
receive. — Dr.  John  Duncan. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  Walk  worthy  of  the  vocation. — They  had  been  called  to  life  in  the  Spirit,  and  they 
roust  also  "walk  in  the  Spirit." 

Ver.  2.  With  all  lowliness. — The  Christian — H  born  from  above  " — is  to  exhibit  a  trait  of 
character  which  the  "  high-born  "  Greek  despised,  and  which  Heine  in  modern  times  called 
"  a  hound's  virtue."  "  The  pride  that  apes  humility "  steals  in  under  Chrysostom's 
description  of  this  "  lowliness."  He  says,  "  It  is  a  making  of  ourselves  small  when  we  are 
great."  And  meekness. — "  A  grace  in  advance  of  '  lowliness,'  not  as  more  precious  than  it, 
but  as  presupposing  it,  and  as  being  unable  to  exist  without  it  "  {Trench).  With  long- 
suffering. — The  exact  opposite  of  our  "  short-tempered " — e.g.  "  Is  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
straitened  ?  "  means  "  Has  the  Lord  become  irritable  ?  "  (Mic.  ii.  7).  The  word  suggests  to 
men  by  nature  irascible  that  "  slowness  to  wrath  "  recommended  by  St.  James.     Forbearing 

197 


chap.  iv.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


one  another  in  love. — The  brother  who  is  tempted  to  anger  is  not  to  look  down  from  the 
height  of  a  lofty  pride  on  those  who  try  his  patience,  but  in  compassionate  love,  remembering 
his  own  frailty,  must  "  suffer  long  and  be  kind." 

Ver.  3.  Endeavouring  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace. — It  is  no  easy- 
going indifference  that  is  inculcated;  they  will  have  to  "exert  themselves,"  "  give  diligence  " 
(R.V.),  before  that  peace  obtains  which  is  the  harmonious  and  frictionless  working  of  each 
part  of  the  machine. 

Vers.  4-6.  One  body  .  .  .  and  in  you  all. — "  Seven  elements  of  unity  St.  Paul  enumerates. 
.  ,  .  They  form  a  chain  stretching  from  the  Church  on  earth  to  the  throne  and  being  of 
the  universal  Father  in  heaven  "  (Findlay). 

Ver.  7.  But  unto  every  one  of  us  is  given  grace. — The  distributing  Spirit  (1  Cor.  xii.  11) 
leaves  no  humblest  member  of  the  body  of  Christ  without  his  endowment. 

Ver.  8.  Wherefore  He  saith. — What  follows  is  a  quotation  of  Ps.  lxviii.  18  "  with  free 
alteration"  {Meyer),  adapting  the  return  of  the  hero-king  to  his  own  city  to  that  most 
magnificent  of  all  triumphs — over  Hades  and  Death — achieved  by  Him  "  who  was  dead  and 
is  alive  for  evermore."  "  Being  by  the  right  hand  of  God  exalted  He  hath  poured  forth  this  " 
abundance,  as  a  conqueror  scatters  bis  largess. 

Vers.  9,  10.  Now  that  He  ascended  .  .  .  that  He  might  fill  all  things. — The  exaltation, 
in  His  case,  presupposed  the  humiliation.  From  the  throne  of  the  universe — "the  glory 
which  He  had  with  the  Father  " — to  the  profoundest  depths  where  any  poor  lost  piece  of 
humanity  that  is  redeemable  can  be  found,  and  thence  again  to  the  throne  He  relinquished. 
The  same  also. — Exalted,  to  be  confidingly  and  adoringly  loved  ;  humbled,  to  be  worshipped 
no  less  as  "  the  Son  of  man  who  is  in  heaven." 

Ver.  11.  And  He  gave  some  to  be,  etc. — "Christ  gave  the  persons,  and  the  community 
gave  to  them  the  service  "  (Meyer).  Apostles  .  .  .  prophets  .  .  .  evangelists. — We  can- 
not accept  the  order  as  significant  of  rank.  It  would  grace  an  angel  to  be  the  "  evan- 
gelist" of  such  a  salvation.  As  apostles  they  went  forth  "sent"  by  their  Master  to  men 
in  their  need  ;  as  prophets  they  "  spoke  out "  what  He  had  taught  them ;  as  evangelists 
they  were  the  messengers  of  good  tidings.  They  were  apostles  that  they  might  be  evange- 
lists (Matt.  x.  5-7),  "going  about  heralding"  the  kingdom  and  gathering  men  into  it. 
Pastors  and  teachers. — Shepherds  and  instructors  of  those  gathered  together  by  men  of 
another  order.  These  are  the  true  "  bishops,"  whatever  "  other  name "  they  bear 
(1  Pet.  v.  1-4). 

Ver.  12.  For  the  perfecting  of  the  saints. — "  Saints,"  whilst  a  title  of  the  highest  honour, 
is  often  expressive  of  the  ideal  rather  than  the  real  life  of  those  who  bear  it ;  the 
"  perfecting  "  is  the  rendering  into  actual  life  of  what  is  implied  in  the  term  of  honour. 
For  the  work  of  the  ministry.— R.V.  "  into  the  work."  If  the  end  of  all  Christ's  gifts  so  far 
as  "the  saints  "are  concerned  is  their  perfect  equipment,  so  far  as  His  messengers  are 
concerned  they  go  forth- unto  service  first,  honour  afterwards.  For  the  edifying  of  the  body 
of  Christ. — Practically  the  same  as  the  foregoing,  but  with  an  ultimate  reference  to  Christ. 
The  double  figure  of  a  building  and  of  a  body  is  familiar  to  our  own  speech,  as  when  we 
speak  of  "  building  up  a  strong  frame." 

Ver.  13.  Till  we  all  come. — Suggestive  of  standing  opposite  to  something  towards  which 
we  have  been  toiling.  Can  one  think,  without  a  tremor  of  joy,  of  the  moment  when  he  will 
find  himself  in  perfect  correspondence  with  the  divine  Archetype  ?  In  the  unity  of  the 
faith. — The  world,  has  seen  many  attempts  to  bring  about  uniformity  of  creed,  after  the 
manner  of  Procrustes,  by  stretching  or  chopping.  "  The  unity  of  the  faith  "  is  a  very 
different  thing,  and  much  to  be  desired.  The  knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God. — Lit.  the 
complete  knowledge.  Unto  a  full-grown  man. — As  above  intimated,  a  child  does  not  become 
a  man  by  means  of  the  rack.  The  significance  of  the  word  "  man  "  here  is  as  great  as  when 
we  bid  some  one  who  has  lost  his  self-respect  to  "  be  a  man." 

Ver.  14.  That  we  henceforth  be  no  more  children. — In  what  respects  his  readers  are  not  to 
be  children  the  apostle  makes  plain,  viz.  in  helplessness  and  credulity.  Tossed  to  and  fro. — 
With  no  more  power  of  resistance  than  a  cork  on  the  waves.  By  the  sleight  of  men  and  cunning 
craftiness. — As  some  poor  simpleton,  who  thinks  himself  capable,  falls  a  victim  to  card- 
sharpers,  so  unstable  souls  fall  victims  to  those  who  say  with  Falstaff,  "  If  the  young  dace  be 
a  bite  for  the  old  pike,  I  see  no  reason  in  the  law  of  nature  but  I  may  snap  at  him." 

Ver.  15.  But  speaking  the  truth  in  love. — If  it  be  possible  to  make  the  medicine 
palatable  without  destroying  its  efficacy— to  capsule  the  bitter  pill — its  chances  are  so  much 
the  greater  of  doing  good.  The  A.V.  margin  gives  "  being  sincere,"  and  the  R.V.  "  dealing 
truly,"  the  different  renderings  indicating  the  difficulty  of  finding  an  English  equivalent. 
May  grow  up  into  Him  in  all  things,  which  is  the  Head,  even  Christ. — The  embodied 
Truth  of  God,  who  could  say  without  blasphemy,  "  I  am—  not  simply  I  teach — the  Truth." 

Ver.  16.  Fitly  joined  together  and  compacted.— R.V.  "fitly  framed  and  knit  together." 
Bengel  suggests  that  the  first  expression  means  the  fitting  together,  and  the  second  the 
fastening  together.     Meyer,  denying  this,  says  the  distinction  is  that  the  former  corresponds 

198 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS.         chap.  iv. 


to  the  figure,  the  latter  to  the  tiling  represented.  The  grammar,  like  the  physiology,  of  this 
verse  is  difficult.  Are  we  to  read,  "  The  whole  body  .  .  .  maketh  increase  of  the  body  "  ? 
Apparently  we  must,  for  the  body  "  builds  itself  up  in  love." 

Ver.  17.  That  ye  henceforth  walk  not  as  other  Gentiles  walk. — In  this  and  the  two 
following  verses  we  have  again  the  lurid  picture  of  ii.  2,  3  :  "  in  the  vanity  of  their  mind." 

"  The  creature  is  their  sole  delight, 
Their  happiness  the  things  of  earth." 

Ver.  18.  Having  the  understanding  darkened. — Remembering  our  Lord's  saying  about  the 
single  eye  and  the  fully  illuminated  body  we  might  say,  "  If  the  understanding — by  which 
all  light  should  come — be  darkened,  ■  how  great  is  that  darkness ' ! "  Because  of  the 
blindness. — R.V.  "  hardness."  The  word  describes  the  hard  skin  formed  by  constant 
rubbing,  as  the  horny  hand  of  a  blacksmith. 

Ver.  19.  Who  being  past  feeling. — Having  lost  the  "  ache  "  which  should  always  attend  a 
violation  of  law.  An  ancient  commentator  uses  the  now  familiar  word  "  anaesthetes"  to 
explain  the  phrase.  Have  given  themselves  over. — "  Given "  represents  a  word  which 
often  connotes  an  act  of  treason— and  "themselves"  is  emphatic — "the  most  tremendous 
sacrifice  ever  laid  on  the  altar  of  sin  "  {Beet).  To  lasciviousness. — "  St.  Paul  stamps  upon  it 
the  burning  word  dcreXyeia  like  a  brand  on  the  harlot's  brow"  (Findlay).  To  work  all 
uncleanness  with  greediness. — R.V.  margin,  "  to  make  a  trade  of  all  uncleanness  with 
covetousness.'  Their  "  sin  's  not  accidental,  but  a  trade  " ;  and  a  trade  at  which  they  work 
with  a  "  desire  of  having  more." 

Ver.  20.  No  not  so. — As  differently  as  possible.  The  same  mode  of  speech  which  led  St.  Paul 
to  say  to  the  Galatians,  "  Shall  I  praise  you  ?  .  .  .  I  praise  you  not " — i.e.  "  I  blame  you 
highly." 

Ver.  21.  If  so  be  that  ye  have  heard  Him. — The  emphasis  is  on  "  Him  " — "  assuming, 
that  is,  that  it  is  He,  and  no  other." 

Ver.  22.  That  ye  put  off  concerning  the  former  conversation.— It  is  no  "philosophy  of 
clothes  "  inculcated  here.  It  is  a  deliverance  from  "  the  body  of  death,"  like  stripping 
oneself  of  his  very  integument.  Conversation. — R.V.  "  manner  of  life."  Which  is 
corrupt. — R.V.  much  more  strikingly — "waxeth  corrupt."  St.  Paul's  figure  elsewhere  is 
appropriate — "  like  a  gangrene  eating  into  the  flesh." 

Vers.  23,  24.  The  stripping  off  being  complete,  and  the  innermost  core  of  the  man  being 
renewed,  the  investiture  may  begin.  The  "habit"  laid  aside  is  never  to  be  resumed,  and  the 
new  robes,  "  ever  white,"  are  not  to  be  soiled.  Righteousness  and  true  holiness. — R.V. 
"  Righteousness  and  holiness  of  truth."     See  the  "  dealing  truly  "  of  ver.  15,  R.V.  margin. 

Ver.  25.  Putting  away  lying. — Findlay  holds  to  it  that  "the  lie,  the  falsehood,  is 
objective  and  concrete ;  not  lying,  or  falsehood  as  a  subjective  act,  habit,  or  quality." 
Members  one  of  anothor. — Let  there  be  "  no  schism  in  the  body." 

\  er.  26.  Let  not  the  sun  go  down  on  your  wrath. — The  word  for  "  wrath  "  is  not  the 
usual  one.  It  almost  seems  as  if  the  compound  form  had  reference  to  the  matter  "  alongside 
which  "  wrath  was  evoked.  If  "  curfew  "  could  ring  out  the  fires  of  wrath  at  sundown,  we 
might  welcome  the  knell.  Meyer  quotes  the  Pythagorean  custom  of  making  up  a  quarrel  by 
the  parties  "  shaking  hands  "  before  sunset. 

Ver.  28.  Let  him  that  stole  steal  no  more. — Though  we  have  not  here  the  word  for 
"brigand,"  we  may  think  that  the  thieving  had  not  always  been  without  violence.  That  he 
may  have  to  give. — Not  the  profits  of  wickedness,  but  "  the  good  "  results  of  his  own  labour, 
and  may  give  it  to  the  needy  "  with  cheerfulness  "  (Rom.  xii.  8),  with  a  "  hilarity  "  beyond 
that  of  "  those  who  divide  the  spoil  "  (Isa.  ix.  3). 

Ver.  29.  Let  no  corrupt  communication. — R.V.  "  speech."  Putrid  speech  can  never  come 
forth  from  any  but  a  bad  person,  "  for  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth 
speaketh."  But  that  which  is  good  to  the  use  of  edifying. — The  word  in  season  "  fitly 
spoken  "  has  an  aesthetic  charm  (Prov.  xxv.  11),  but  it  was  more  necessary  to  teach  these 
loquacious  Asiatics  the  utilitarian  end  of  having  a  human  tongue.  "  It  is  the  mere  talk, 
whether  frivolous  or  pompous — spoken  from  the  pulpit  or  the  easy-chair  — the  incontinence 
of  tongue,  the  flux  of  senseless,  graceless,  unprofitable  utterance  that  St.  Paul  desires  to 
arrest"  (Findlay). 

Ver.  30.  Grieve  not. — "  Do  not  make  Him  sorrow."  A  strong  figure  like  that  which  says 
that  God  was  sorry  that  He  had  made  man  (Gen.  vi.  6).  Whereby  ye  are  sealed. — Cf.  i.  13. 
"  In  whom  ye  were  pealed  "  (R.V.) 

Ver.  31.  Let  all  bitterness. — I.e.  "  of  speech."  "  Sarcasm  I  now  see  to  be,  in  general,  the 
language  of  tue  devil,"  said  one  liberally  endowed  with  it.  The  satirist  Hipponax — a  native 
of  Ephesus — was  called  "  the  bitter."  Su'-h  a  man  as  ••  speaks  poniards,"  and  whose  "every 
word  stabs,"  may  be  brilliant  and  a  formidable  opponent ;  he  will  never  be  loved.  Wrath 
and  anger. — The  former  is  the  fuming  anger,  "  the  intoxication  of  the  soul,"  as  St.  Basil  calLs 
it;  the  latter  is  the  state  after  the  paroxysm  is  over,  cherishing  hatred  and  planning  revenge. 
Clamour  and  railing. — "  Clamour  "  is  the  loud  outcry  so  familiar  in  an  Eastern  concourse  of 

199 


chap.  iv.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


excited  people  (Acts  xxiii.  9),  like  that  hubbub  in  Ephesus  when  for  two  hours  the  populace 
yelled,  "  Great  is  Diana  of  the  Ephesians  "  (Acts  xix.  28).  "  Railing,"  blasphemy— speech  that 
is  calculated  to  do  injury.  Malice. — "  Badness."  "  This  last  term  is  separated  from  the  others 
as  generic  and  inclusive  "  (Beet). 

Ver.  32.  Be  ye  kind. — The  word  is  found  in  Christ's  invitation  to  the  weary — "  My  yoke  is 
easy."  It  is  characteristic  of  the  Father  that  "He  is  kind  to  the  unthankful."  The  man 
who  drinks  wine  that  is  new  and  harsh  says,  "  The  old  is  good  "  (mellow).  Tenderhearted. 
— Soon  touched  by  the  weakness  of  others.  Forgiving  ...  as  God  .  .  .  forgave  you. — 
The  motive  and  measure  of  our  forgiveness  of  injuries  is  the  divine  forgiveness  shown  to 
"  all  that  debt  "  of  our  wrong-doing  (Matt,  xviii.  32). 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—3. 

The  Dignity  of  the  Christian  Life — 

1.  Imposes  the  obligation  to  act  in  harmony  with  its  lofty  aims. — "  Walk 
worthy  of  the  vocation  wherewith  ye  are  called  "  (ver.  1).  There  is  the  practical, 
stimulative  influence  of  a  high  ideal.  The  Spirit  within  us  has  not  only  changed 
our  nature  and  cleansed  our  spiritual  vision,  but  He  has  lifted  our  horizon, 
formed  within  us  distinct  outlines  of  the  Christian  ideal  after  which  we  are  to 
labour,  and  furnished  us  with  the  moral  forces  with  which  we  are  to  attain  the 
beauty  and  unity  of  a  perfect  spiritual  character.  We  who  are  created  in  God's 
image  and  restored  in  Christ  and  made  partakers  of  the  divine  nature  in  Him, 
are  bound  by  the  conditions  of  our  creation  and  redemption  to  endeavour  to  be 
like  Him  here  that  we  may  have  the  fruition  of  His  glorious  Godhead  hereafter. 
The  true  Christian  cannot  stoop  to  any  meanness  either  in  thought  or  action. 
He  is  dignified  without  being  proud. 

II.  Involves  the  practice  of  self-suppression. — 1.  In  a  just  estimate  of 
ourselves.  "  With  all  lowliness  and  meekness."  In  endeavouring  to  balance 
the  value  and  use  of  our  powers  and  faculties,  and  in  measuring  the  degree  and 
volume  of  our  influence,  we  must  observe  humility — not  a  cringing,  cowardly 
spirit  which  would  deter  us  from  the  right  for  fear  of  doing  wrong,  but  an 
elevated  sense  of  right  with  courage  to  perform  it,  and  with  humility  to  acknow- 
ledge and  confess  when  we  are  in  the  wrong.  It  does  not  mean  the  craven 
surrender  of  our  honest  convictions  and  carefully  formed  judgment.  We  may 
efface  ourselves,  but  not  the  truth  within  us.  An  Italian  bishop  being  asked  the 
secret  of  his  habitual  humility  and  patience,  replied,  "  It  consists  in  nothing 
more  than  in  making  good  use  of  my  eyes.  In  whatever  state  I  am,  I  first  of 
all  look  up  to  heaven  and  remember  that  my  principal  business  here  is  to  get 
there.  I  then  look  down  to  earth  and  call  to  mind  the  space  I  shall  shortly 
occupy  in  it.  I  then  look  abroad  into  the  world  and  observe  what  multitudes 
there  are  who  in  all  respects  have  more  cause  to  be  unhappy  than  myself.  Thus 
I  learn  where  true  happiness  is  placed,  where  all  our  cares  must  end,  and  how 
very  little  reason  I  have  to  repine  or  complain." 

2.  In  a  loving  forbearance  towards  each  other. — "  With  longsuffering,  forbearing 
one  another  in  love  "  (ver.  2).  The  meek  man  may  be  severe  with  himself,  and 
his  constant  habit  of  self-suppression  may  render  him  somewhat  impatient  with 
the  unreasonable  outbreaks  of  temper  in  others.  Meekness  must  be  balanced 
and  moderated  with  patience,  and  both  virtues  exercised  in  the  all-pervading 
element  of  love.  Love  softens  every  harshness,  tones  down  asperity,  and  welds 
together  the  Christian  character  in  a  firm  but  not  too  rigid  a  unity.  "  Bind 
thyself  to  thy  brother,"  said  Chrysostom.  "  Those  who  are  bound  together  in 
love  bear  all  burdens  lightly.  Bind  thyself  to  him  and  him  to  thee.  Both  are 
in  thy  power  ;  for  whomsoever  I  will,  I  may  easily  make  my  friend." 

III.  Demands  an  earnest  striving  after  a  peaceful  spiritual  unity. — 
"  Endeavouring  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace  "  (ver.  3). 

200 


EOMILETIC   COMMENTARY  i    EPHESIANS.         chap.  IV. 


peaCe — "  a  silken  cord  binding  into  one  the  members  of  the  Church  ;  the 
encompassing  element  of  the  unity  of  the  Spirit "  (Beet).  The  apostle  re- 
peatedly and  solemnly  inculcates  unity  and  peace  on  all  the  Churches,  warns 
them  against  contentions  and  divisions,  and  kindles  into  righteous  indignation 
against  all  those  insidious  and  false  teachers  who,  under  the  pretence  of  advo- 
cating a  higher-  piety,  really  disturb  and  rend  the  Church  of  Christ.  On  what 
an  enormous  scale  are  preparations  made  for  war  !  We  should  not  be  less 
diligent  and  elaborate  in  taking  every  precaution  in  promoting  and  maintaining 
peaee. 

Lessons. — 1.  True  humility  is  always  dignified.  2.  Personal  happiness  is  not 
the  highest  aim  of  the  Christian  life.  3.  The  noblest  virtues  of  the  Christian 
character  are  not  attained  without  earnest  endeavour.     ' 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.     1-3.    True     Church     Life. —  know  we  have  been  with  Jesus,  and 

1.  The  word  "walk"  is  of  a  very  exten-  have  learned  of  Him  to  be  lowly  in 
sive  signification.  It  includes  all  our  heart.  5.  And  being  taught  of  Him 
inward  and  outward  motions,  all  our  who  teacheth  as  never  man  taught,  to 
thoughts,  words,  and  actions.  It  takes  be  meek  as  well  as  lowly  in  heart, 
in,  not  only  everything  we  do,  but  This  implies  not  only  a  power  over 
everything  we  either  speak  or  think.  anger,  but  over  all  violent,  turbulent 

2.  We  are  called  to  walk,  first,  "  with  passions.  It  implies  the  having  all 
all  lowliness,"  to  have  the  mind  in  us  our  passions  in  due  proportion ;  none 
which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus ;  not  to  of  them  either  too  strong  or  too  weak, 
think  of  ourselves  more  highly  than  but  all  duly  balanced  with  each  other, 
we  ought  to  think;  to  be  little,  and  all  subordinate  to  reason,  and  reason 
poor,  and  mean,  and  vile  in  our  own  directed  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  6.  Walk 
eyes  ;  to  know  ourselves  as  also  we  are  with  all  "  longsuffering."  This  is  nearly 
known  by  Him  to  whom  all  hearts  are  related  to  meekness,  but  implies  some- 
opened  ;  to  be  deeply  sensible  of  our  thing  more.  It  carries  on  the  victory 
own  unworthiness.  Who  can  be  duly  already  gained  over  all  your  turbulent 
sensible  how  much  remains  in  him  of  passions,  notwithstanding  all  the 
his  natural  enmity  to  God,  or  how  far  powers  of  darkness,  all  the  assaults  of 
he  is  still  alienated  from  God  by  the  evil  men  or  evil  spirits.  It  is  patiently 
ignorance  that  is  in  him  1  3.  Yea,  triumphant  over  all  opposition,  and 
suppose  God  has  now  thoroughly  unmoved  though  all  the  waves  and 
cleansed  our  heart,  and  scattered  the  storms  thereof  go  over  you.  7.  The 
last  remains  of  sin;  yet  how  can  we  be  "  forbearing  one  another  in  love  " 
sensible  enough  of  our  own  helpless-  seems  to  mean,  not  only  the  not  resent- 
ness,  our  utter  inability  to  all  good,  ing  anything,  and  the  not  avenging 
unless  we  are  every  hour,  yea,  every  yourselves ;  not  only  the  not  injuring, 
moment,  endued  with  power  from  on  hurting,  or  grieving  each  other,  either 
high  1  4.  When  our  inmost  soul  is  by  word  or  deed,  but  also  the  bearing 
thoroughly  tinctured  therewith,  it  one  another's  burdens,  yea,  and  lessen- 
remains  that  we  "  be  clothed  with  ing  them  by  every  means  in  our  power, 
humility."  The  word  used  by  St.  Peter  It  implies  the  sympathising  with  them 
seems  to  imply  that  we  be  covered  in  their  sorrows,  afflictions,  and  in- 
with  it  as  with  a  surtout ;  that  we  be  firmities ;  the  bearing  them  up  when, 
all  humility,  both  within  and  without ;  without  our  help,  they  would  be  liable 
tincturing  all  we  think,  speak,  and  to  sink  under  their  burdens.  8.  Lastly, 
do.  Let  all  our  actions  spring  from  the  true  members  of  the  Church  of 
this  fountain ;  let  all  our  words  Christ  "  endeavour,"  with  all  possible 
breathe  this  spirit ;  that  all  men  may  diligence,  with  all  care  and  pains,  with 

201 


CHAP.  IV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


unwearied  patience,  to  "  keep  the  unity 
of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace,"  to 
preserve  inviolate  the  same  spirit  of 
lowliness  and  meekness,  of  longsuffer- 
ing,  mutual  forbearance,  and  love; 
and  all  these  cemented  and  knit 
together  by  that  sacred  tie — the  peace 
of  God  filling  the  heart.  Thus  only 
can  we  be  and  continue  living  members 
of  that  Church  which  is  the  body  of 
Christ.  9.  Does  it  not  clearly  appear 
from  this  whole  account  why,  in  the 
ancient  creed  commonly  called  the 
Apostles',  we  term  it  the  universal  or 
catholic  Church,  "  the  holy  catholic 
Church  "  1  The  Church  is  called  holy, 
because  it  is  holy,  because  every  mem- 
ber thereof  is  holy,  though  in  different 
degrees,  as  He  that  called  them  is 
holy.  How  clear  this  is !  If  the 
Church,  as  to  the  very  essence  of  it,  is 
a  body  of  believers,  no  man  that  is  not 
a  Christian  believer  can  be  a  member 
of  it.  If  this  whole  body  be  animated 
by  one  Spirit,  and  endued  with  one 
faith,  and  one  hope  of  their  calling,  then 
he  who  has  not  that  Spirit  and  faith 
and  hope  is  no  member  of  this  body. 
It  follows,  that  not  only  no  common 
swearer,  no  Sabbath-breaker,  no, drunk- 
ard, no  whoremonger,  no  thief,  no  liar, 
none  that  lives  in  any  outward  sin,  but 
none  that  is  under  the  power  of  anger 
or  pride,  no  lover  of  the  world — in  a 
word,  none  that  is  dead  to  God — can  be 
a  member  of  His  Church. — Wesley. 

Brotherly  Love  in  Action. 

I.  Walk  in  lowliness. — Humble 
thoughts  of  ourselves,  of  our  own 
knowledge,  goodness,  and  importance 
are  necessary  to  Christian  peace  and 
union.  We  shall  not  despise  our 
brethren  for  their  want  of  the  internal 
gifts  or  external  advantages  we  enjoy. 
We  shall  not  lean  to  our  own  under- 
standing ;  but,  conscious  of  our  liability 
to  err,  we  shall  be  attentive  to  in- 
struction and  reproof,  open  to  con- 
viction, ready  to  retract  our  errors  and 
confess  our  faults. 

II.  Walk  in  meekness — in  a  prudent 
restraint  and  government  of  the 
passions.     We  shall  not  be  easily  pro- 

202 


voked,  our  resentments  will  not  be 
sudden,  without  cause  or  without 
bounds.  If  a  variance  happens,  we 
shall  stand  ready  to  be  reconciled.  We 
shall  be  cautious  not  to  give,  and  slow 
to  take  offence.  In  matters  of  religion 
our  zeal  will  be  tempered  with 
charity. 

III.  To  our  meekness  we  must  add 
longsuffering  and  forbearance.— These* 
terms  express  the  patient  and  exalted 
exercise  of  meekness  rather  than 
virtues  distinct  from  it.  We  are  not 
only  to  be  meek,  but  longsuffering  in 
our  meekness ;  not  only  to  restrain 
anger  under  ordinary  offences,  but  to 
suppress  malice  and  forbear  revenge 
under  the  most  provoking  injuries. 

IV.  We  must  endeavour  to  keep 
the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of 
peace. — Not  unity  of  opinion — this  is 
not  possible,  nor  reasonable  to  be  ex- 
pected, in  the  present  state  of  mankind ; 
but  unity  of  spirit,  of  heart  and 
affection,  disposing  us  to  preserve  the 
bond  of  peace  and  maintain  all  the 
duties  of  Christian  fellowship,  what- 
ever differences  of  sentiment  take 
place.  To  the  same  purpose  are  the 
apostle's  exhortations  to  all  the 
Churches,  and  especially  to  those  in 
which  diversity  of  opinion  concerning 
ceremonial  usages  threatened  their 
external  peace. — Lathrop. 

Ver.  3.  Peace  the  Bond  of  Unity. 

I.  There  is  a  union  of  the  visible 
Church  and  the  members  thereof 
among  themselves,  and  this  is  twofold : 
the  one  necessary  to  the  being  of  a 
Church  and  being  of  a  Church  member, 
so  that  a  Church  cannot  be  a  Church 
nor  a  man  a  member  without  it,  the 
tie  of  which  is  God's  covenant  with 
the  visible  Church,  and  the  Church's 
laying  hold  of  it ;  the  other  necessary 
to  the  well-being  of  the  Church,  which 
is  entertained  by  unity  in  judgment,  in 
heart  and  affection,  by  concurrences 
in  purposes  and  actings. 

II.  Neither  fair  pretences  for  peace 
and  union  in  the  Church,  not  seconded 
but  contradicted  by  practice,  nor  yet 
careless  endeavours  easily  broken  by 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  IV. 


difficulties,  will  God  accept  as  the 
duty  required  for  preserving  or  re- 
storing unity. — There  is  no  less  called 
for  than  the  utmost  of  our  serious 
endeavours  for  that  end,  so  that  we 
not  only  eschew  what  may  give  cause 
of  rending,  but  also  be  not  easily  pro- 
voked when  it  is  given  by  others,  and 
when  a  rent  is  made  spare  no  pains 
for  having  it  removed,  and  weary  not 
under  small  appearances  of  success. 


III.  Whatever  differences  may  fall 
out  among  the  members  of  the  Church 
they  are  not  to  break  the  bond  of 
peaceable  walking  one  with  another  by 
factious  sidings,  but  ought  to  study 
unanimous  and  joint  practice  in  those 
things  wherein  there  is  agreement  ; 
and  where  this  peaceable  deportment 
is,  it  tends  to  preserve  what  remains  of 
spiritual  unity  and  to  regain  what  is 
already  lost. — Fergusson. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  4—6. 

The  Sevenfold  Unity  of  the  Church  reflected  in  the  Trinity  of  Divine  Persons. 
I.  One  Spirit  (ver.  4),  the  animating  Principle  of  the  one  body  (ver.  4) — the 
Church ;  the  Source  of  its  life  and  ever-watchful  Guardian  of  the  Church's  unity  ; 
the  Inspirer  of  the  one  hope,  "  Even  as  ye  are  called  in  one  hope  of  your 
calling  "  (ver.  4).  Where  the  Spirit  of  Christ  dwells  as  a  vitalising,  formative 
principle,  He  finds  or  makes  for  Himself  a  body.  Let  no  man  say,  "I  have  the 
spirit  of  religion,  I  can  dispense  with  forms,  I  need  no  fellowship  with  men,  I 
prefer  to  walk  with  God."  God  will  not  walk  with  men  who  do  not  care  to  walk 
with  His  people.  The  oneness  of  communion  amongst  the  people  of  Christ  is 
governed  by  a  unity  of  aim.  The  old  pagan  world  fell  to  pieces  because  it  was 
without  hope;  its  golden  age  was  in  the  past.  No  society  can  endure  that 
lives  upon  its  memories,  or  that  contents  itself  with  cherishing  its  privileges. 
Nothing  holds  men  together  like  work  and  hope.  Christianity  holds  out  a 
splendid  crown  of  life.  It  promises  our  complete  restoration  to  the  image 
of  God,  the  redemption  of  the  body  with  the  spirit  from  death,  and  our  entrance 
upon  an  eternal  fellowship  with  Christ  in  heaven.  The  Christian  hope 
supplies  to  men  more  truly  and  constantly  than  Nature  in  her  most  exalted 
forms 

"  The  anchor  of  their  purest  thoughts,  the  nurse, 

The  guide,  the  guardian  of  their  heart,  and  soul 

Of  all  their  moral  being." 

The  hope  of  our  calling  is  a  hope  for  mankind,  nay,  for  the  entire  universe.  We 
labour  for  the  regeneration  of  humanity.  We  look  for  the  actual  ingathering  into 
one  in  Christ  of  all  things  in  all  worlds,  as  they  are  already  gathered  in  God's 
eternal  plan.  If  it  were  merely  a  personal  salvation  that  we  had  to  seek, 
Christian  communion  might  appear  to  be  an  optional  thing  and  the  Church 
no  more  than  a  society  for  mutual  spiritual  benefit.  But  seen  in  this  larger 
light,  Church  membership  is  of  the  essence  of  our  calling  (Findlay). 

II.  One  Lord  (ver.  5),  or  Master,  whom  we  are  called  to  serve.  A  con- 
sentaneous and  harmonious  obedience  to  His  mandates  blends  His  servants  into 
one  compact  unity.  One  faith  (ver.  5),  one  body  of  inviolable  truth,  one  code  of 
divine  commands,  one  gospel  of  promise,  presenting  one  object  of  faith.  One 
baptism  (ver.  5),  one  gateway  of  entrance  into  the  company  of  believers  forming 
the  one  Church,  one  initiatory  right  common  to  all.  Christians  may  differ  as  to 
the  mode  of  baptism  and  the  age  at  which  it  should  be  administered,  but 
all  agree  it  is  an  institution  of  Christ,  a  sign  of  spiritual  renewal,  and  a  pledge 
of  the  righteousness  that  comes  by  faith.  Wherever  the  sacraments  are  duly 
observed,  there  the  supremacy  of  Christ's  rule  is  recognised,  and  this  rule  is  the 
basis  on  which  future  unity  must  be  built. 

III.  One  God,   the  supreme  and  final   unity,  who  is  "  the  Father  of  all," 

203 


CHAP.  IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


who  is  above  all,  and  through  all,  and  in  you  all  (ver.  6).  Above  all — 
He  reigns  supreme  over  all  His  people  (Rom.  ix.  5).  Through  all — informing, 
inspiring,  stimulating,  and  using  them  as  instruments  to  work  out  His 
purposes  (Rom.  xi.  36).  In  all — dwelling  in  and  filling  their  hearts  and  the 
ever- widening  circle  of  their  experience.  "  The  absolute  sovereignty  of  the 
divine  Mind  over  the  universe,"  said  Channing,  "  is  the  only  foundation  of  hope 
for  the  triumph  of  the  human  mind  over  matter,  over  physical  influences,  over 
imperfection  and  death."  With  what  a  grand  simplicity  the  Christian  conception 
of  the  one  God  and  Father  rose  above  the  vulgar  pantheon,  the  swarm  of 
motley  deities — some  gay  and  wanton,  some  dark  and  cruel,  some  of  supposed 
beneficence,  all  infected  with  human  passion  and  baseness — which  filled  the 
imagination  of  the  Grseco- Asiatic  pagans.  What  rest  there  was  for  the  mind, 
what  peace  and  freedom  for  the  spirit,  in  turning  from  such  deities  to  the  God 
and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ !  This  was  the  very  God  whom  the  logic 
of  Greek  thought  and  the  practical  instincts  of  Roman  law  and  empire  blindly 
sought.  Through  ages  He  had  revealed  Himself  to  the  people  of  Israel,  who 
were  now  dispersed  amongst  the  nations  to  bear  His  light.  At  last  He 
declared  His  full  name  and  purpose  to  the  world  in  Jesus  Christ.  So  the  gods 
many  and  lords  many  have  had  their  day.  By  His  manifestation  the  idols  are 
utterly  abolished.  The  proclamation  of  one  God  and  Father  signifies  the  gather- 
ing of  men  into  one  family  of  God.  The  one  religion  supplies  the  basis  for  one 
life  in  all  the  world.  God  is  over  all,  gathering  all  worlds  and  beings  under  the 
shadow  of  His  beneficent  dominion.  He  is  through  all  and  in  all ;  an  omni- 
presence of  love,  righteousness,  and  wisdom,  actuating  the  powers  of  nature  and 
of  grace,  inhabiting  the  Church  and  the  heart  of  men  (Findlay). 

Lessons. — 1.  In  the  moral  as  in  the  material  world  there  is  diversity  in  unity 
and  unity  in  diversity.  2.  All  phases  of  good  find  their  consummation  in  an  im- 
perishable unity.     3.  To  disturb  the  balance  of  unity  is  a  great  evil. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  4-6.  The  Unity  of  the  Church. 

I.  There  is  one  body. — The  Church 
is  a  body  of  which  Christ  is  the  Head, 
and  believers  are  the  members.  Though 
Christians  are  formed  into  distinct 
societies,  they  constitute  but  one  body. 
They  are  united  to  the  Head  by  faith 
and  to  their  fellow-members  by  love. 

II.  There  is  one  Spirit. — As  all 
members  of  the  natural  body  are 
animated  by  one  soul,  so  all  the 
members  of  Christ's  body  are  sanctified, 
strengthened,  and  led  by  the  same 
Spirit.  Since  there  is  one  Spirit  which 
dwells  in  all  Christians,  all  contention, 
bitterness,  and  envy,  all  animosity, 
division,  and  separation  in  the  Church 
are  offences  against  the  Holy  Spirit. 

III.  There  is  one  hope  of  our  calling. 
— We  are  all  called  by  the  same  word, 
our  hope  is  grounded  on  the  same 
promises,  the  object  of  our  hope  is  the 
same  immortal  life. 

204 


IV.  There  is  one  Lord. — Christ  is 
Lord  of  all  by  the  same  right.  He  has 
bought  us  with  a  high  price,  redeemed 
us  by  His  own  blood.  There  is  no 
respect  of  persons  with  him.  We  are 
called  to  the  same  service,  are  under 
the  same  laws,  and  must  appear  at  the 
same  judgment. 

V.  There  is  one  faith. — The  same 
gospel  is  the  rule  of  our  faith,  and  this 
all  Christians  profess  to  receive.  The 
faith  of  all  true  Christians  is  essentially 
the  same.  The  object  of  it  is  the  word 
of  God,  the  nature  of  it  is  receiving  the 
love  of  the  truth,  the  effect  of  it  is  to 
purify  the  heart. 

VI.  There  is  one  baptism. — We  are 
all  baptised  in  the  name  of  Christ,  and 
He  is  not  divided.  May  differ  as  to  the 
age  at  which  persons  become  the  sub- 
jects of  baptism  and  the  manner  of 
administration,  but  regarding  the  design 
of  it  we  are  one.     Baptism  intended 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  IV. 


not    to   divide,   but   unite   the   whole 
Christian  world. 

VII.  There  is  one  God  and  Father. 
— The »  Father  of  the  whole  creation, 
but  in  a  more  eminent  sense  the  Father 
of  Christians.  He  is  above  all.  He 
reigns  supreme.  He  is  through  all. 
His  essence  pervades  our  frame,  His 
eyes  search  and  try  our  souls,  His  influ- 
ence preserves  our  spirits.  He  is  in  all. 
In  all  true  Christians  by  His  Spirit. 
They  are  the  temple  of  God,  and  His 
Spirit  dwelleth  in  them. — Lathrop. 

Ver.  4.  The  Oneness  of  the  Church. — 
1.  All  the  members  of  the  Church 
being  one  body  is  a  strong  argument 
enforcing  the  duty  of  keeping  peace 
and  unity ;  it  being  no  less  absurd  for 
Christians  to  bite  and  devour  one 
another  than  if  the  members  of  the 
selfsame  natural  body  should  tear  and 
destroy  one  another.  2.  As  those  in 
nature  are  in  a  hopeless  state,  having 
no  right  to  heaven  and  happiness,  so 
the  gospel  doth  open  to  the  person  called 
a  large  door  of  well-grounded  hope, 
that,  whatever  be  his  misery  here,  he 
shall  be  perfectly  blessed  in  the  full 
enjoyment  of  God  for  ever  hereafter. 
3.  The  joint  aiming  of  the  saints  at 
one  mark  should  make  them  of  one 
mind  and  heart,  seeing  there  is  that  in 
glory  which  will  suffice  all.  Their  seek- 
ing of  one  thing  need  be  no  occasion  of 
strife  'and  emulation,  but  rather  of 
unity,  for  why  should  they  strive 
together  who  not  only  are  brethren 
but  also  heirs  together  of  the  grace  of 
life  and  shall  one  day  reign  together 
in  glory  1 — Fergusson. 

One  Body  and  One  Spirit. 

I.  The  unity  or  oneness  of  the  Church 
as  set  forth  by  the  unity  or  oneness  of 
the  body. — One  life  animates  the  whole. 
The  parts  mutually  subserve  one 
another,  while  the  head  thinks  and 
the  heart  beats  for  all.  There  is  a 
certain  harmony  existing  between  all 
the  members;  they  constitute  a  sym- 
metry among  themselves,  so  that  one 
could  not  be  taken  away  without  de- 
stroying   the    perfection    of    all     the 


others,  more  or  less  marring  the  grace 
and  beauty  of  the  whole  frame.  So 
the  Church  is  one — one  mystical  body 
— having  one  author,  God ;  one  Head, 
which  is  Christ ;  and  one  informing 
Spirit,  the  Holy  Ghost ;  one  country 
towards  which  all  its  members  are 
travelling,  heaven  ;  one  code  of  instruc- 
tions to  guide  them  thither,  the  word 
of  God ;  one  and  the  same  band  of 
enemies  seeking  to  bar  their  passage, 
the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil. 
Despite  all  miserable  divisions,  wher- 
ever there  is  a  man  with  true  love  to 
God  and  man,  any  true  affiance  on 
Christ,  any  true  obedience  to  the  Spirit 
and  His  leadings,  there  exists  a  member 
of  this  mystical  body. 

II.  As  in  the  human  body  there  is 
unity,  so  there  is  also  variety,  diver- 
sity, multiplicity. — This  is  true  of  the 
Church  of  Christ.  Its  different  mem- 
bers have  different  functions  and  offices, 
and  in  performing  these  the  Church 
makes  equable  and  harmonious  growth. 

Lessons. — 1.  As  members  of  the  same 
body,  let  us  not  separate  from  brethren 
in  Christ.  2.  If  we  are  members  one  of 
another,  many  are  the  debts  as  such  we 
owe  the  one  to  the  other.  (1)  We  owe  one 
another  truth.  (2)  Love  one  to  another. 
(3)  Honour  one  to  another. — R.  C. 
Trench. 

Ver.  5.  One  Lord. 

I.  Christ  is  our  Lord  according  to 
every  notion  and  acceptation  of  the 
word  "  Lord." — He  is  our  Prince  and 
Governor,  we  are  His  subjects  and 
vassals ;  He  is  our  Master,  and  we  are 
His  servants ;  He  is  our  Owner,  or  the 
Possessor  and  Proprietary  of  us  ;  He 
is  our  Preceptor  or  Teacher  ;  that  is, 
the  Lord  of  our  understanding,  wLich 
is  subject  to  the  belief  of  His  dictates  ; 
and  the  Lord  of  our  practice,  which  is 
to  be  directed  by  His  precepts.  He  is 
therefore  also  our  Captain  and  Leader, 
whose  orders  we  must  observe,  whose 
conduct  we  should  follow,  whose  pattern 
we  are  to  regard  and  imitate  in  all 
things. 

II.  Christ  is  also  our  Lord  according 
to  every  capacity  or  respect  of  nature 

205 


chap.  IV.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


or  office  that  we  can  consider  apper- 
taining to  Him. — 1.  He  is  our  Lord 
as  by  nature  the  Son  of  God,  partaking 
of  the  divine  essence    and  perfection. 

2.  He  is  our  Lord  as  man,  by  the 
voluntary  appointment  and  free  dona- 
tion of  God  His  Father ;  in  regard 
to  the  excellency  of  His  Person,  and 
to   the   merit    of    His    performances. 

3.  He  also,  considered  as  God  and  man 
united  in  one  Person,  is  plainly  our 
Lord.  4.  If  we  are  to  consider  Him 
as  Jesus,  our  Saviour,  that  notion  doth 
involve  acts  of  dominion,  and  thence 
resulteth  a  title  thereto.  Nothing  more 
becomes  a  Lord  than  to  protect  and 
save ;  none  better  deserves  the  right 
and  the  name  of  a  Lord  than  a  Saviour. 
5.  Likewise,  if  He  be  considered  as  the 
Christ,  that  especially  implieth  Him 
anointed  and  consecrated  to  sovereign 
dominion,  as  King  of  the  Church. 

III.  Survey  the  several  grounds 
upon  which  dominion  may  be  built, 
•and  we  shall  see  that  upon  all  accounts 
He  is  our  Lord. — 1.  An  uncontrollable 
power  and  ability  to  govern  is  one 
certain  ground  of  dominion.  2.  To 
make,  to  preserve,  to  provide  and 
dispense  maintenance,  are  also  clear 
grounds  of  dominion.  3.  He  hath  ac- 
quired us  by  free  donation  from  God 
His  Father.  4.  He  hath  acquired  us 
by  just  right  of  conquest,  having  sub- 
dued those  enemies  unto  whom  (partly 
by  their  fraud  and  violence,  partly 
from  our  own  will  and  consent)  we  did 
live  enslaved  and  addicted.  5.  He 
hath  also  further  acquired  us  to  Him- 
self by  purchase,  having  by  a  great 
price  bought  us,  ransomed  us  out  of 
sad  captivity,  and  redeemed  us  from 
grievous  punishment  due  to  us.  6.  He 
likewise  acquired  a  lordship  over  us  by 
desert,  and  as  a  reward  from  God, 
suitable  to  His  performances  of  obedi- 
ence and  patience,  highly  satisfactory 
and  acceptable  to  God.  7.  He  hath 
acquired  a  good  right  and  title  to 
dominion  over  us  as  our  continual  most 
munificent  benefactor.  8.  Our  Saviour 
Jesus  is  not  only  our  Lord  by  nature 
and  by  acquisition  in  so  many  ways 
(by  various  performances,  deserts,  and 

206 


obligations  put  on  us),  but  He  is  also 
so  by  our  own  deeds,  by  most  free  and 
voluntary,  most  formal  and  solemn, 
and  therefore  most  obligatory  acts  of 
ours.  (1)  If  we  are  truly  persuaded 
that  Christ  is  our  Lord  and  Master, 
we  must  then  see  ourselves  obliged 
humbly  to  submit  unto  and  carefully 
to  observe  His  will,  to  attend  unto  and 
to  obey  His  law,  with  all  readiness  and 
diligence.  (2)  If  Christ  be  our  Lord, 
then  are  we  not  our  own  lords  or  our 
own  men  ;  we  are  not  at  liberty,  or 
at  our  own  disposal,  as  to  our  own 
persons  or  our  actions.  (3)  If  Christ 
be  our  Lord  (absolutely  and  entirely 
such),  then  can  we  have  no  other  lords 
whatever  in  opposition  to  Him,  or  in 
competition  with  Him,  or  otherwise 
any  way  than  in  subordination  ar.d 
subserviency  to  Him.  (4)  If  Christ  be 
our  Lord,  we  are  thereby  disobliged, 
yea,  we  are  indeed  prohibited,  from 
pleasing  or  humouring  men,  so  as  to 
obey  any  command,  to  comply  with 
any  desire,  or  to  follow  any  custom  of 
theirs,  which  is  repugnant  to  the  will 
or  precept  of  Christ.  (5)  Finally,  for 
our  satisfaction  and  encouragement, 
we  may  consider  that  the  service  of 
Christ  is  rather  indeed  a  great  freedom 
than  a  service. — Barrow. 

Ver.  6.  God  the  Father. 

I.  God  is  the  universal  Father.— 
1.  God  is  the  Father  of  all  things,  or 
of  us  as  creatures,  as  the  efficient  Cause 
and  Creator  of  them  all.  2.  The  Father 
of  intellectual  beings.  He  is  styled 
the  Father  of  spirits ;  the  angels,  in 
way  of  excellency,  are  called  the  sons 
of  God.  3.  The  Father  in  a  more 
especial  manner  of  mankind.  4.  The 
Father  of  all  good  men,  such  a  relation 
being  built  upon  higher  grounds ;  for 
as  good  they  have  another  original 
from  Him,  virtue  springs  in  their 
hearts  from  a  heavenly  seed,  that 
emendation  and  perfection  of  nature 
is  produced  by  His  grace  enlighten- 
ing and  quickening  them;  they  are 
images  of  Him,  resembling  Him  in 
judgment  and  disposition  of  mind,  in 
will     and     purpose,    in     action    and 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  IV. 


behaviour,  which  resemblances  argue 
them  to  be  sons  of  God  and  constitute 
them  such. 

II.  The  uses  of  this  truth. — 1.  It 
may  teach  us  what  reverence,  honour, 
and  observance  are  due  from  us  to  God, 
in  equity  and  justice,  according  to 
ingenuity  and  gratitude.  2.  This  con- 
sideration may  instruct  and  admonish  us 
what  we  should  be  and  how  we  should 
behave  ourselves,  for  if  we  be  God's 
children  it  becometh  us,  and  we  are 
obliged  in  our  disposition  and  de- 
meanour to  resemble,  to  imitate  Him. 
It  is  natural  and  proper  for  children  to 
resemble  their  parents  in  their  com- 
plexion and  countenance,  to  imitate 
them  in   their   actions   and   carriage. 

3.  This  consideration  may  raise  us  to 
a  just  regard,  esteem,  and  valuation  of 
ourselves ;  may  inspire  noble  thoughts 
and  breed  generous  inclinations  in  us  ; 
may  withdraw  us  from  mean,  base, 
and  unworthy  designs  or  practices; 
may  excite  and  encourage  us  to  hand- 
some, brave,  worthy  resolutions  and 
undertakings  suitable  to  the  dignity 
of  our  nature,  the  nobleness  of  our 
descent,  the  eminence  of  so  high  a 
relation,  of  so  near  an  alliance  to  God. 

4.  This  consideration  is  a  motive  to 
humility,  apt  to  depress  vain  conceit 
and  confidence  in  ourselves.  If  we  are 
God's  children,  so  as  to  have  received 
our  beings,  all  our  powers  and  abilities, 
all  our  goods  and  wealth,  both  inter- 


nal and  external,  both  natural  and 
spiritual,  from  His  free  disposal,  so  as 
be  continually  preserved  and  main- 
tained by  His  providence  to  depend 
for  all  our  subsistence  upon  His  care 
and  bounty,  what  reason  can  we  have 
to  assume  or  ascribe  anything  to  our- 
selves %  5.  This  consideration  shows 
us  the  reason  we  have  to  submit 
entirely  to  the  providence  of  God  with 
contentedness  and  acquiescence  in  every 
condition.  6.  Obligeth  us  to  be  patient 
and  cheerful  in  the  sorest  a  mictions, 
as  deeming  them  to  come  from  a 
paternal  hand,  inflicted  with  great 
affection  and  compassion,  designed  for 
and  tending  to  our  good.  7.  Shows 
the  reason  we  have  to  obey  those  pre- 
cepts which  enjoin  us  to  rely  on  God's 
providence.  8.  Serves  to  breed  and 
cherish  our  faith,  to  raise  our  hope,  to 
quicken  our  devotion.  For  whom  shall 
we  confide  in  if  not  in  such  a  Father  % 
From  whom  can  we  expect  good  if  not 
from  Him  ?  To  whom  can  we  have 
recourse  so  freely  and  cheerfully  on 
any  occasion  if  not  to  Him  %  9.  Con- 
sidering this  point  will  direct  and 
prompt  us  how  to  behave  ourselves 
towards  all  God's  creatures  according  to 
their  respective  natures  and  capacities. 
If  God  be  the  Father  of  all  things, 
they  are  all  thence  in  some  sort  our 
brethren,  and  so  may  claim  from  us 
a  fraternal  affection  and  demeanour 
answerable  thereto. — Barrow. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC '$   OF  THE   PARAGRAPH— Verses   7—12. 

The  Gifts  of  Christ  to  His  Church — 

I.  That  each  member  of  the  Church  possesses  some  gift  from  Christ. — "  Unto 
every  one  of  us  is  given  grace  according  to  the  measure  of  the  gift  of  Christ " 
(ver.  7).  All  are  not  alike  talented,  but  each  one  has  some  gift  of  grace.  Evei;y 
gift  is  not  from  earth,  but  from  heaven  ;  not  from  man,  but  from  Christ.  Look 
not  down,  then,  as  swine  to  the  acorns  they  find  lying  there,  and  never  once  up  to 
the  tree  they  come  from.  Look  up  ;  the  very  frame  of  our  body  bears  that  way. 
It  is  nature's  check  to  the  body.  "  Graces  are  what  a  man  is ;  but  enumerate 
his  gifts  and  you  will  know  what  he  has.  He  is  loving,  he  has  eloquence,  or 
medical  skill,  or  legal  knowledge,  or  the  gift  of  acquiring  languages,  or  that  of 
healing.  You  have  only  to  cut  out  his  tongue,  or  to  impair  his  memory,  and  the 
gift  is  gone.  But  you  must  destroy  his  very  being,  change  him  into  another 
man,  obliterate  his  identity,  before  he  ceases  to  be  a  loving  man.  Therefore  you 
may  contemplate  the  gift  separate  from  the  man ;  you  may  admire  it  and  despise 

207 


chap.  iv.         HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS. 


him.  But  you  cannot  contemplate  the  grace  separate  from  the  man  "  (F.  W. 
Robertson). 

"  If  facts  allure  thee,  think  how  Bacon  shined, 
The  wisest,  brightest,  meanest  of  mankind." 

Pope. 

The  humblest  member  of  the  Church  of  Christ  is  not  without  his  gift.  The 
grace  of  the  gospel  elevates  and  sanctifies  all  his  powers  and  opportunities,  and 
turns  them  into  noblest  uses. 

II.  That  the  gifts  of  Christ  to  His  Church  are  distributed  with  the  lavish 
generosity  of  a  conqueror  returning  from  tho  field  of  victory  (vers.  8-10). — We 
have  read  of  the  profuse  gifts  of  victorious  warriors : — of  Gonsalvo,  the  great 
Spanish  captain,  whose  unselfish  prodigality  was  proverbial.  "  Never  stint  your 
hand,"  he  was  accustomed  to  say ;  "  there  is  no  way  of  enjoying  one's  property  like 
giving  it  away  " ; — of  Alexander  the  Great,  who  on  one  occasion  gave  a  blank 
draft  to  one  of  his  generals  with  liberty  to  fill  in  any  amount  he  chose.  When 
the  treasurer,  surprised  at  tho  enormous  sum  inserted,  asked  his  imperial  master 
if  there  was  not  some  mistake,  he  answered  :  "  No ;  pay  it,  pay  it :  the  man 
honours  me  by  assuming  the  inexhaustible  resources  of  my  empire " ; — of 
Belisarius,  whose  victories  were  always  followed  by  liberal  and  extravagant 
largesses.  "  By  the  union  of  liberality  and  justice,"  writes  Gibbon,  "he  acquired 
the  love  of  his  soldiers,  without  alienating  the  affections  of  the  people.  The  sick 
and  wounded  were  relieved  with  medicines  and  money,  and  still  more  efficaciously 
by  the  healing  visits  and  smiles  of  their  commander.  The  loss  of  a  weapon  or 
a  horse  was  instantly  repaired,  and  each  deed  of  valour  was  rewarded  by  the  rich 
and  honourable  gifts  of  a  bracelet  or  a  collar,  which  were  rendered  more  precious 
by  the  judgment  of  Belisarius.  He  was  endeared  to  the  husbandmen  by  the 
peace  and  plenty  which  they  enjoyed  under  the  shadow  of  his  standard.  Instead  of 
being  injured,  the  country  was  enriched  by  the  march  of  the  Boman  armies ;  and 
such  was  the  rigid  discipline  of  their  camp  that  not  an  apple  was  gathered  from 
the  tree,  not  a  path  could  be  traced  in  the  fields  of  corn.  Victory  by  sea  and 
land  attended  his  arms.  He  subdued  Africa,  Italy,  and  the  adjacent  islands,  led 
away  captives  the  successors  of  Genseric  and  Theodoric,  filled  Constantinople 
with  the  spoils  of  their  palaces,  and  in  the  space  of  six  years  recovered  half  the 
provinces  of  the  Western  empire  "  ; — and  of  Aurelian,  whose  triumphant  entry  into 
Borne  after  his  victories  in  the  East  was  the  longest,  most  brilliant,  and  imposing 
of  any  recorded  in  the  annals  of  the  empire,  and  was  signalised  by  rich  donations 
to  the  army  and  the  people ;  the  Capitol  and  every  other  temple  glittered  with  the 
offerings  of  his  ostentatious  piety,  and  the  temple  of  the  sun  alone  received  above 
fifteen  thousand  pounds  of  gold.  But  who  can  measure  the  munificence  of  the 
ascended  Saviour,  the  divine  Conqueror,  who,  as  the  fruit  of  His  unparalleled 
victory,  has  scattered  His  gifts  among  men,  to  enrich  them  for  ever  1  He  gives 
not  grudgingly  and  sparingly,  but  after  the  measure  of  His  own  great  nature. 
He  gives  not  for  display  but  for  blessing,  and  His  smallest  gift  out-values  the 
most  lavish  donation  of  the  richest  earthly  benefactor. 

III.  That  the  gifts  of  Christ  qualify  men  for  special  work  in  His  Church 
(ver.  11). — The  "apostles,  prophets,  evangelists"  linked  Church  to  Church  and 
served  the  entire  body ;  the  "  pastors  and  teachers "  had  charge  of  local  and 
congregational  affairs.  The  apostles,  with  the  prophets,  were  the  founders  of  the 
Church.  Their  distinctive  functions  ceased  when  the  foundation  was  laid  and 
the  deposit  of  revealed  truth  was  complete.  The  evangelistic  and  pastoral 
callings  remain ;  and  out  of  them  have  sprung  all  the  variety  of  Christian 
ministries  since  exercised.  Evangelists,  with  apostles  or  missionaries,  bring 
new  souls  to  Christ  and  carry  His  message  into  new  lands.  Pastors  and 
teachers  follow  in  their  train,  tending  the   ingathered  sheep,   and  labouring 

208 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPIIESIANS.         chap.  I  v. 


to  make  each  flock  that  they  shepherd,  and  every  single  man,  perfect  in 
Christ  Jesus. 

IV.  That  the  gifts  of  Christ  furnish  the  full  moral  equipment  of  the  members 
of  His  Church  (ver.  12). — Christ's  gifts  of  great  and  good  men  in  every  age  have 
been  bestowed  for  a  thoroughly  practical  purpose — "  the  perfecting  of  the  saints, 
the  work  of  the  ministry,  the  edifying  of  the  body  of  Christ."  No  one  man  has 
all  the  gifts  requisite  for  the  full  development  of  the  Church ;  but  it  is  the 
privilege  and  honour  of  each  worker  to  use  his  special  gift  for  the  general  good. 
The  combination  of  gifts,  faithfully  and  diligently  employed,  effects  the  desired 
end.  The  Church  must  be  built  up,  and  this  can  be  done  only  by  the  harmonious 
use  of  the  gifts  of  Christ,  not  by  mere  human  expedients.  "  We  may  have 
eloquent  preaching,  crowded  churches,  magnificent  music,  and  all  the  superficial 
appearance  of  a  great  religious  movement,  whilst  the  vaunted  revival  is  only  a 
poor  galvanised  thing,  a  corpse  twitching  with  a  strange  mimicry  of  life,  but 
possessed  of  none  of  its  vital  energy  and  power."  Gifts  are  dangerous  without 
the  grace  and  wisdom  to  use  them.  Many  a  brilliant  genius  has  gone  down  into 
oblivion  by  the  reckless  abuse  of  his  gifts.  Christ  endows  His  people  with  gifts 
that  they  may  use  them  for  the  increase  and  upbuilding  of  His  Church,  and 
they  must  be  exercised  in  harmony  with  the  rules  and  purpose  of  the  divine 
Architect.  "  Except  the  Lord  build  the  house,  they  labour  in  vain  that 
build  it." 

Lessons. — 1.  Christ's  estimate  of  His  Church  is  seen  in  the  spiritual  riches  He 
has  lavished  upon  it.  2.  The  gifts  of  each  member  of  the  Church  are  for  the  benefit 
of  all.     3.  The  gifts  of  Christ  to  His  Church  are  the  offerings  of  a  boundless  love. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Ver.  7.  The  Gospel  according  to  Mark.  obtained  a  currency  of  this  opinion  in 
— The  writers  of  the  four  gospels  com-  the  Western  Church.  But  in  point  of 
pleted  their  work  not  for  the  sake  of  fact,  although  St.  Mark  has  more  in 
making  a  literary  reputation  for  them-  common  with  St.  Matthew  than  with 
selves,  or  of  adding  to  the  literary  any  other  evangelist,  he  is  far  from 
masterpieces  of  the  world,  but  for  the  being  a  mere  epitomist  of  the  first 
spiritual  benefit  of  the  Christian  Church.  gospel.  He  narrates  at  least  three  in  - 
Christ  our  Lord  sitting  in  the  heavens,  dependent  incidents  which  St.  Matthew 
seeing  exactly  what  was  wanted  in  the  does  not  notice.  He  has  characteristics 
apostolic  Churches,  and  in  the  Church  which  are  altogether  his  own. 
of  all  time,  seeing  what  was  wanted  in  I.  St.  Mark  is  remarkable  for  his 
the  evangelists  themselves  if  they  were  great  attention  to  subordinate  details, 
to  supply  the  Church's  wants,  measured  — He  supplies  many  particulars  which 
out  His  gifts  to  the  evangelists.  Ac-  evangelists  who  write  more  at  length 
cordingly,  to  each  evangelist  He  gave  altogether  omit.  From  him,  for  in- 
that  special  gift  which  was  needed  in  stance,  we  learn  the  name  of  Jairus, 
order  to  do  his  particular  work.  What  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue,  and  of 
was  the  grace  that  was  given  to  St.  Bartimseus,  the  blind  man  healed  by 
Mark  ?  It  has  been  said  that  St.  our  Lord.  From  him  we  learn  how 
Mark's  gospel  has  no  special  character,  Simon  of  Cyrene  was  related  to  well- 
that  it  is  the  least  original  of  the  known  Christians  of  the  next  genera- 
four,  that  it  is  insipid,  that  it  might  tion — Alexander  and  Rufus.  He  it  is 
have  been  dispensed  with  without  loss  who  tells  us  that  the  woman  of  Canaan 
to  the  harmony  of  the  evangelical  narra-  whose  petition  our  Lord  so  indulgently 
tive.  Even  St.  Augustine  has  spoken  received  was  a  Syrophenician,  and  that 
of  it  as  an  epitome  of  St.  Matthew ;  our  Lord  was  popularly  spoken  of  as 
and  his  deservedly  great  authority  has  the  carpenter.     He  is  careful  to  point 

P  209 


chap.  iv.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


out  more  minutely  than  do  others  the 
scenes  in  which  our  Lord  took  part  on 
four  occasions.  He  describes  particu- 
larly our  Lord's  look.  He  notes  the 
express  affections  of  our  Lord's  human 
soul,  His  love  for  the  rich  young  man, 
His  anger  with  the  Pharisee,  His 
pity  for  the  leper,  His  groaning  in 
spirit  on  two  separate  occasions.  And 
here  we  have  something  more  than  a 
literary  peculiarity — than  a  style  of 
writing  which  corresponds  to  those 
pre-Raphaelite  artists  who  render  every 
leaf  and  every  blade  of  grass  with 
scrupulous  accuracy.  I  say  that  we 
are  here  face  to  face  with  a  moral  and 
spiritual  excellence  which  forms  part 
of  the  special  grace  given  to  St.  Mark. 
Close  attention  to  details  in  any  work- 
man means  a  recognition  of  the  sacred- 
ness  of  fact.  Where  details  are  lost 
sight  of,  or  blurred  over,  in  the  attempt 
to  produce  a  large,  general,  indistinct 
effect,  there  is  always  a  risk  of  in- 
difference to  the  realities  of  truth. 
The  very  least  fact  is  sacred,  whatever 
be  its  relative  importance  to  other 
facts.  But  in  a  life  like  that  of  our 
Lord,  everything  is  necessarily  glowing 
with  interest,  however  trivial  it  might 
appear  to  be  in  any  other  connection. 
This  care  for  details  is  thus  the  ex- 
pression of  a  great  grace — reverence  for 
truth,  reverence  for  every  fragment  of 
truth  that  touched  the  human  life  of 
the  Son  of  God. 

II.  St.  Mark  is  remarkable  for  the 
absence  of  a  clearly  discernible  pur- 
pose in  his  gospel,  over  and  above 
that  of  furnishing  a  narrative  of  our 
Lord's  conflict  with  sin  and  evil  during 
His  life  as  man  upon  the  earth.  The 
three  other  evangelists  have  each  of 
them  a  manifest  purpose  in  writing 
of  this  kind.  St.  Matthew  wishes  to 
show  to  the  Jews  that  our  Lord  is  the 
Messiah  of  the  Jewish  prophecy.  St. 
Luke  would  teach  the  Gentile  Churches 
that  He  is  the  Redeemer  whose  saving 
power  may  be  claimed  through  faith 
by  the  whole  race  of  men.  St.  John 
is,  throughout,  bent  upon  showing  that 
He  speaks  and  acts  while  in  the  flesh 
as  the  eternal  Word  or  Son  of  God,  who 

210 


has  been  made  flesh  and  was  dwelling 
among  us.  And  it  has  been  said  that 
St.  Mark's  narrative  is  an  expansion  of 
those  words  of  Peter — that  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  "  went  about  doing  good, 
and  healing  all  that  were  oppressed  of 
the  devil,  for  God  was  with  Him." 
Probably  this  is  true ;  but  then  these 
words  describe  not  a  purpose  beyond 
the  narrative,  but  the  substance  of  the 
narrative  itself.  St.  Mark  simply 
records  a  sacred  life  as  he  had  learned 
it  from  the  lips  of  Peter,  not  for  any 
purpose  beyond  the  narrative  itself ;  but 
whatever  it  might  prove  beyond  itself,  it 
was  to  a  believing  Christian  unspeak- 
ably precious. 

III.  A  few  words  in  conclusion. — 
"  Unto  every  one  of  us  is  given  grace 
according  to  the  measure  of  the  gift 
of  Christ."  As  no  two  human  souls 
exactly  resemble  each  other,  so  no  two 
souls  are  endowed  in  an  exactly  similar 
way.  And  for  the  difference  of  en- 
dowment let  us  be  sure  there  is  always 
a  reason  in  the  divine  Mind,  for  each 
soul  in  every  generation  has  its  ap- 
pointed work  to  do,  without  itself  as 
within  itself  ;  and  it  is  endowed  with 
exactly  the  grace,  whether  of  mind  or 
heart,  which  will  best  enable  it  to  do 
that  particular  work.  Some  may  think 
that  they  have  received  little  or  nothing 
— some  gift  so  small  as  to  be  scarcely 
appreciable.  The  probability  is  that 
they  have  not  yet  considered  what  God 
has  done  for  them.  They  have  spent 
their  time  in  thinking  of  what  He  has 
withheld,  instead  of  thinking  of  what 
He  has  given ;  of  what  they  might  have 
been,  instead  of  what  they  are.  Cer- 
tainly the  grace  which  our  Lord  gave 
to  St.  Paul  when  he  wrote  his  great 
epistle  to  the  Romans  was  immensely 
greater  than  that  which  He  gave  to 
Tertius,  the  poor  amanuensis,  who  took 
it  down  from  the  apostle's  dictation, 
and  who  inserts  a  greeting  from  him- 
self just  at  the  end  of  the  document. 
And  yet  Tertius,  too,  had  his  part  in 
the  work — a  humble  but  a  very  real 
part,  according  to  the  measure  of  the 
gift  of  Christ.  He  did  not  say,  "  Be- 
cause I  am  not  the  eye  I  am  not  of 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:  EPHESIANS.         chap,  i v. 


the  body."  He  made  the  most  of  the 
grace  which  was  certainly  his.  And 
others  may  think,  rightly  or  wrongly, 
that  unto  them  very  great  graces  have 
been  given  according  to  the  gift  of 
Christ,  that  they  are  the  hands  or  the 
eyes  of  the  holy  body,  the  men  who 
do  its  work,  or  the  men  who  discern 
the  truths  which  support  its  life.  Well, 
if  it  be  so,  this  is  a  reason,  not  for  con- 
fident satisfaction,  but  for  anxiety. 
Such  gifts  as  these  are  edge  tools ; 
they  may  easily  prove  the  ruin  of  their 
possessors.  For  all  such  gifts  an 
account  must  one  day  most  assuredly 
be  rendered ;  and  if  self  has  appro- 
priated that  which  belongs  to  God  or 
to  His  Church,  it  cannot  but  entail 
misery  on  the  possessor.  If  a  man  has 
wealth,  or  ability,  or  station  ;  much 
more  if  he  has  cultivated  intelligence 
and  generous  impulses ;  most  of  all  if 
his  heart  has  been  fired  by  the  love 
of  God,  and  the  unseen  is  to  him  a 
serious  reality,  and  he  has  hopes  and 
motives  which  really  transcend  the 
frontiers  of  the  world  of  sense,  then, 
assuredly,  his  safety  lies  in  remember- 
ing that  he  is  a  trustee  who  will  one 
day  have  to  present  his  account  at  the 
great  audit,  when  the  eminence  of  his 
gifts  will  be  the  exact  measure  of  his 
responsibility.  Eighteen  centuries  have 
passed  since  St.  Mark  went  to  reign 
somewhere  beneath  his  Master's  throne 
whose  life  he  had  described  ;  but  he  has 
left  us  the  result  of  his  choicest  gift — - 
he  has  left  us  his  gospel.  What  has  it 
— what  have  the  three  gospels — hitherto 
done  for  each  of  us  ?  It  is  recorded 
that  John  Butler,  an  excellent  Church 
of  England  layman  of  the  last  genera- 
tion, stated  on  his  death-bed  that  on 
looking  back  on  his  life  the  one  thing 
he  most  regretted  was  that  he  had  not 
given  more  time  to  the  careful  study 
of  the  life  of  our  Lord  in  the  four 
evangelists.  Probably  he  has  not 
been  alone  in  that  regret ;  and  if  the 
truth  were  told,  many  of  us  would 
have  to  confess  that  we  spend  much 
more  thought  and  time  upon  the  daily 
papers,  which  describe  the  follies  and 
errors  of  the  world,  than  on  the  records 


of  that  life  which  was  given  for  the 
world's  redemption.  The  festival  of  an 
evangelist  ought  to  suggest  a  practical 
resolution  that,  so  far  as  we  are  con- 
cerned, the  grace  which  he  received, 
according  to  the  measure  of  the  gift  of 
Christ,  shall  not,  please  God,  be  lost. 
Ten  minutes  a  day  seriously  spent  on 
our  knees,  with  the  gospel  in  our 
hands,  will  do  more  to  quicken  faith, 
love,  reverence,  spiritual  and  moral 
insight  and  power,  than  we  can  easily 
think. ^—H.  P.  Liddon. 

Vers.  9,  10.  The  contrasted  Humilia- 
tion and  Exaltation  of  Christ. 

I.  The  circumstances  of  the  Saviour's 
depression  from  His  original  state. — 
We  say  that  a  person  stoops,  that  he 
bends,  that  he  sinks.  Moral  corre- 
spondencies to  these  actions  are  under- 
stood. They  are  condescensions. 
Immanuel  is  the  name  of  our  Saviour 
when  born  into  our  world  and  dwell- 
ing in  it — God  with  us.  A  local 
residence  is  thus  described.  And  we 
are  informed  of  the  degree  which  marks 
His  coming  down  from  heaven,  of  the 
manner  in  which  He  came  into  the 
world — He  descended  into  the  lower 
parts  of  the  earth.  What  lowliness  is 
this  !  Similar  terms  are  employed  in 
other  portions  of  the  inspired  volume  ; 
by  collating  them  with  those  of  the 
text  we  shall  most  satisfactorily  deter- 
mine its  sense. 

1.  The  incarnation  of  Christ  may  be 
thus  expressed. — To  what  did  He  not 
submit  ?  By  what  was  He  not 
buffeted  ?  What  insult  did  not  disfigure 
His  brow  ?  What  shade  did  not  cloud 
His  countenance  ?  What  deep  waters 
did  not  go  over  His  soul  ?  His  was 
humanity  in  its  severest  pressures  and 
humblest  forms. 

2.  This  form  of  language  may  denote 
the  death  of  Christ. — It  is  the  ordinary 
phrase  of  the  Old  Testament  :  "  They 
shall  go  into  the  lower  parts  of  the 
earth  :  Thou  hast  laid  me  in  the  lowest 
pit,  in  darkness,  in  the  deeps."  Does 
it  not  seem  strange  that  His  soul  should 
be  commended  hence  who  had  often 
bound  death  to  His  bidding  and  sum- 

211 


CHAP.  IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS. 


moned  from  the  grave  its  prey  1  He 
is  brought  low  to  the  dust  of  death. 
The  erect  figure  is  prostrated.  The 
instinctive  life  is  arrested.  That 
mysterious  frame — related  to  the  infinite 
and  the  divine  temple  of  all  greatness, 
shrine  of  all  sanctity — that  "  Holy 
Thing  "  sleeps  in  death. 

3.  This  style  may  be  intended  to  inti- 
mate that  burial  to  which  He  yielded. — 
"  Lest  I  become  like  them  that  go 
down  into  the  pit."  "  So  must  the 
Son  of  man  be  in  the  heart  of  the 
earth."  He  has  made  His  grave  with 
the  wicked,  and  with  the  rich  in  His 
death  !  He  is  put  away  into  darkness. 
He  is  held  of  death  in  its  gloomy 
chambers.  He  is  as  a  victim  and  a 
prey.     It  is  a  prison-keep. 

4.  The  separation  of  the  Redeemer's 
body  and  spirit  may  be  described  in 
these  words. — We  mark  in  this  de- 
parture of  His  soul  the  simple  require- 
ment of  death.  It  could  not  be  re- 
tained. It  descended  into  the  lower 
parts  of  the  earth.  This  is  the  reverse 
of  resurrection  and  heavenward  flight. 
It  was  humiliation.  These  are  the 
gradations  of  His  descent.  These  are 
the  "  lower  parts  of  the  earth "  to 
which  He  declined.  This  is  His  com- 
ing forth  from  the  Father  !  This  is 
His  coming  down  from  heaven  !  This 
is  His  coming  into  the  world  !  His 
measureless  surrender  of  claims  !  His 
inconceivable  renunciation  of  honours  ! 
Stooping  to  inferior  and  still  inferior 
levels  of  ignominy  !  Plunging  to  deeper 
and  still  deeper  abysses  of  shame  ! 

II.  The  glory  of  His  subsequent 
exaltation. — 1.  It  is  in  itself  an  absolute 
expression  of  love. 

2.  It  justifies  an  expectation  of  sur- 
passing benefits. 

3.  The  act  regulates  and  secures  its 
own  efficiency. 

4.  This  act  is  to  be  regarded  as  of 
incomparable  worth  and  excellence. — 
The  mission  of  Christ  contemplated  the 
highest  principles  which  can  direct  the 
divine  conduct.  He  came  to  vindicate 
that  character  which  to  conceive  aright 
is  the  happiness  of  all  creatures — to 
uphold   and  avenge   that    law   which 

212 


cannot  be  infringed  without  an  utter 
loss  of  good  and  overthrow  of  order — to 
atone  for  sin  whose  slight  and  impunity 
would  have  been  the  allowance  of  in- 
finite mischiefs  and  evils — to  bring  in 
an  everlasting  righteousness  adequate 
to  the  justification  of  the  most  guilty, 
and  of  the  most  multiplied  objects  who 
needed  it — leaving  it  for  ever  proved 
that  no  rule  nor  sanction  of  God's  moral 
government  can  be  violated  without 
a  necessary  and  meet  resentment  ! 
His  ascension  was  a  radiant  triumph. 
Scarcely  is  it  more  described  than  His 
resurrection.  We  catch  but  a  few 
notes  of  the  resounding  acclaim,  we 
mark  but  a  lew  fleeces  of  the  glory- 
cloud,  we  recognise  but  a  few  attendants 
of  the  angel-train.  With  that  laconic 
force  which  characterises  holy  writ,  it 
is  simply  recorded,  "  Who  is  gone  into 
heaven." 

III.  The  reciprocal  influence  of  these 
respective  facts. — "  The  same  "  was 
He  who  bowed  Himself  to  these  in- 
dignities and  who  seized  these  rewards. 
And  this  identity  is  of  the  greatest 
value.  Not  only  do  we  hail  Him  in 
His  reinstatement  in  original  dignities, 
but  in  the  augmentation  of  His  glories. 
Deity  was  never  so  beheld  before. 
There  is  a  combination  and  a  form 
of  the  divine  perfections  entirely  new. 
We  repine  that  He  is  not  here.  We 
forget  that  it  is  expedient  that  He 
should  go  away.  Heaven  alone  pro- 
vides scope  for  His  undertakings  and 
channel  for  His  influences.  There 
must  He  abide  until  the  restitution 
of  all  things.  But  nothing  of  His 
sympathy  or  His  grace  do  we  forego. — 
R.  W.  Hamilton. 

Vers.  9,  10.  The  Ascension  and  its 
Results. 

I.  With  respect  to  the  new  heavens 
and  the  new  earth,  what  may  we 
not  infer  from  the  ascension  of  Christ 
in  full  integrity  of  His  nature  above 
all  heavens  with  respect  to  the 
conversion  and  transformation  and  en- 
nobling of  this  material  ? — The  nature 
and  history  of  His  person  revealed  the 
relations  clearly  between  heaven  and 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS.         chap.  IV. 


earth,  between  God  and  man,  between 
the  material  and  the  spiritual.  We 
cannot  for  a  moment  look  upon  the 
transformation  and  exaltation  of 
Christ's  nature  as  an  isolated  fact 
dissociated  from  the  restitution  and 
exaltation  of  all  things  spoken  of  in 
His  word.  The  nature  with  which 
He  rose  from  the  dead  and  ascended 
into  heaven  was  the  same  nature  in 
which  He  was  crucified,  though  glorified 
and  swallowed  up  of  life.  Must  we 
not  say,  then,  that  the  body  which 
ascended  in  relation  to  the  body  which 
was  crucified  and  laid  in  the  grave  may 
illustrate  the  re  ation  of  the  present 
heavens  and  the  new  earth  ?  And,  in 
accordance  with  this  idea,  are  there 
not  every  way  most  wonderful  changes 
and  transformations  of  which  the 
ascension  of  Christ's  body  seems  to  be 
the  fulfilment  and  crown  and  also  the 
firstfruits  ?  The  flower  from  its  im- 
prisoned bud,  the  insect  from  its  grovel- 
ling form,  light  out  of  darkness,  elec- 
tricity from  ponderable  ekments,  the 
strange  affinities  of  matter  striving  to 
bieak  forth  from  their  captivity,  the 
unerring  instincts  of  animal  life  heM, 
as  it  were,  in  bondage — all  seem  to 
point  with  prophetic  finger  to  a  future 
deliverance  and  ennobled  state  and 
condition  whilst  meekly  waiting,  but 
with  earnest  expectation,  with  the 
whole  creation  for  the  deliverance  and 
glorious  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God. 
The  gospel  therefore  contains  a  gospel 
for  nature  as  well  as  for  man — the 
prediction  of  the  day  when  the  strife  of 
elements  shall  cease,  when  the  powers 
of  darkness  shall  be  swallowed  up  of 
life,  when  the  lion  shall  lie  down  with 
the  lamb,  when  the  tares  shall  no 
longer  grow  with  the  wheat,  when 
creation,  now  so  weary,  shall  lift  up 
her  head  and  rejoice  in  the  redemption 
for  which  she  now  groans  and  travails, 
II.  If  we  cannot  dissociate  the 
history  of  Jesus  from  the  history  of 
the  earth,  much  less  can  it  be  dis- 
sociated from  the  history  of  mankind. 
— He  is  humanity,  root  and  crown. 
Humanity  exists  nowhere  else  but  in 
Him.     No    aggregate  of    men  make 


humanity,  nor  can  personality  be 
ascribed  to  humanity  except  in  Him. 
Individual  men  may  have  a  personal- 
ity, but  humanity  is  only  an  idea  except 
it  exists  in  Him  who  is  its  root  and 
crown  ;  and  it  is  in  this  sense  that  He  is 
spoken  of,  and  that  He  speaks  of  Him- 
self as,  the  Son  of  man.  In  His  ascen- 
sion, therefore,  which  carries  as  a 
necessary  presupposition  all  the  facts 
of  His  history,  mankind  is  delivered 
from  its  curse  and  from  bondage. 
Identity  of  nature  and  reciprocity  of 
choice  now  constitute  the  most  intimate 
union  and  most  blessed  fellowship  of 
which  we  are  conscious,  and  it  is  the 
fair  offshoot,  the  true  type  of  that 
which  is  to  be  the  highest,  to  which  He 
is  exalted  above  all  heavens,  from 
which  height  He  has  promised  to  gather- 
together  our  common  humanity.  In 
such  and  for  such  a  relation  He  is 
exalted  to  the  throne  of  universal 
dominion  as  the  Bridegroom  of  man- 
kind, to  be  the  Head  over  all  things  to 
His  Church,  which  is  His  body,  the 
fulness  of  Him  which  filleth  all  in  all. 

III.  What  may  we  not  learn  from 
the  fact  of  Christ's  ascension — not 
merely  with  respect  to  the  new  heavens 
and  the  new  earth,  not  merely  with 
respect  to  mankind  and  its  history,  but 
with  respect  to  the  government  and 
providence  of  earth  %  If  all  nature  is 
gathered  up  and  represented  in  human 
nature,  and  if  all  human  nature  is 
gathered  up  and  represented  in  the 
Son  of  man,  and  if  the  Son  of  man 
resteth  and  sitteth  upon  the  throne  of 
universal  dominion,  then,  my  brethren, 
the  conclusion  is  as  direct  as  it  is  clear, 
that  all  things  must  be  working 
together  in  the  interests  of  His  king- 
dom and  of  His  Church,  that  all 
things  have  but  one  purpose  and  one 
end  to  which  the  whole  creation  moves. 
We  may  say  with  Herbert  : 

"  For  us  the  winds  do  blow, 
The   earth   does  rest,  heavens  move,  and 

fountains  flow ; 
Nothing  we  see  but  means  our  good — 
Tis  our  delight  or  has  our  treasure. 
The  whole  is  either  cupboard  of  our  food 
Or  cabinet  of  pleasure." 

These  lines  contain  as  deep  a  philosophy 

213 


CHAP.  IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


as  they  do  good  poetry.  "  All  things 
unto  our  flesh  are  kind  in  their  descent 
and  being."  As  they  descend  to  us 
they  bless  our  lower  nature,  but  as  we 
follow  them  in  their  ascent  they  bless 
our  minds.  And  in  history  are  there 
not  changes  similar  to  and  commen- 
surate with  those  which  we  have  seen 
in  nature,  and  all  subordinated  to  one 
end  ?  Mighty  nations  and  kingdoms 
have  arisen  and  passed  away,  and 
passed  away,  we  might  add,  in  the 
greatness  of  their  might.  What  strange 
development,  as  it  has  well  been  asked, 
is  it  that  the  power  of  the  world  should 
rise  to  a  great  height  of  glory,  and,  not 
able  to  sustain  it,  pass  away  1  Because 
they  knew  not  God — because  they 
were  prejudicial  to  the  interests  of 
man.  The  present  state  and  prospects 
of  the  world  are  but  the  results  of  all 
its  past  history,  of  the  action  and 
reaction,  the  strife  and  ceaseless  con- 
flict, which  have  been  going  on  from  the 
first — the  strife  and  ceaseless  conflict 
between  the  spirit  of  man's  revolt 
in  all  the  forms  of  will -worship  and 
idolatrous  power,  and  the  returning 
spirit  of  allegiance  towards  God  and 
His  kingdom  of  life  and  love.  On  the 
one  hand,  therefore,  we  have  a  series 
of  rapid  and  mighty  developments  of 
the  very  power  which  destroyed  them 
when  at  the  very  height  of  their  glory  ; 
on  the  other  hand,  we  have  the  con- 
tinuous and  silent  growth  and  expan- 
sion of  the  same  ideas — all -conquering 
ideas  and  all-conquering  beliefs  person- 
ally embodied  from  the  first  in  men 
confessing  their  allegiance  to  God. — 
Dr.  Pulsford. 

Ver.  10.  The  Humiliation  and  Exal- 
tation of  Christ. 

I.  Christ's  humiliation. — Implied 
in  the  words,  "  He  that  descended." 
These  words  bear  the  same  sense 
with  those  in  Ps.  cxxxix.  15,  and 
may  be  properly  taken  for  Christ's 
incarnation  and  conception  in  the 
womb  of  the  Virgin — 1.  Because  other 
expositions  may  be  shown  to  be  un- 
natural, forced,  or  impertinent,  and 
there  is  no  other  besides  this  assign- 

214 


able.  2.  Since  Paul  here  uses  David's 
words  it  is  most  probable  he  used  them 
in  David's  sense.  3.  The  words  descend- 
ing and  ascending  are  so  put  together 
in  the  text  that  they  seem  to  intend  a 
summary  of  Christ's  whole  transaction 
in  man's  redemption,  begun  in  His 
conception  and  consummated  in  His 
ascension. 

II.  Christ's  glorious  advancement 
and  exaltation. — "  He  ascended  far 
above  all  heavens  "  to  the  most  eminent 
place  of  dignity  and  glory  in  the 
highest  heaven. 

III.  The  qualification  and  state  of 
Christ's  person  in  reference  to  both 
conditions. — He  was  the  same,  showing 
the  unity  of  the  two  natures  in  the 
same  person. 

IV.  The  end  of  Christ's  ascension. 
— "  That  He  might  fill  all  things."  All 
things  may  refer — 1.  To  the  Scripture 
prophecies  and  predictions.  2.  To  the 
Church  as  He  might  fill  that  with  His 
gifts  and  graces.  3.  To  all  things  in 
the  world.  This  latter  interpretation 
preferred.  He  may  be  said  to  fill  all 
things — 1.  By  the  omnipresence  of 
His  nature  and  universal  diffusion  of 
His  Godhead.  2.  By  the  universal 
rule  and  government  of  all  things 
committed  to  Him  as  Mediator  upon 
His  ascension. — South. 

Vers.  11,12.  The  Work  of  the  Ministry. 

I.  It  is  evident  that  public  teachers 
in  the  Church  are  to  be  a  distinct  order 
of  men. — Christ  has  given  some  pastors 
and  teachers.  None  has  a  right 
publicly  to  teach  in  the  Church  but 
those  who  are  called,  sent,  authorised 
to  the  work  in  the  gospel  way.  All 
Christians  are  to  exhort,  reprove,  and 
comfort  one  another  as  there  is  occasion  ; 
but  public  teaching  in  the  Church 
belongs  peculiarly  to  some — to  those 
who  are  given  to  be  pastors  and 
teachers. 

II.  Public  teachers  are  here  called 
Christ's  gifts. — "  He  gave  some  pastors 
and  teachers."  The  first  apostles  were 
commissioned  immediately  by  Christ. 
They  who  were  thus  commissioned  of 
Heaven   to  preach    the    gospel   were 


SOMILETIC  COMMENT  ART:   EPHESIANS.         chap.  IV. 


authorised   to   ordain    others.     Christ  were   evangelists   who   went   forth  to 

gave  pastors  and  teachers,  not  only  to  preach    the   gospel   where   Christ  had 

preach  His  gospel,  but  to  train  up  and  not  been  named,  so  there  were  pastors 

prepare  holy  men  for  the  same  work.  and  teachers  who  had  the  immediate 

III.  Ministers  are  to  be  men  endued  care  of  Churches  already  established. 
with  gifts  suitable  to  the  work  to         IV.  The  great  object  of  the  ministry 

which  they  are    called.— As  in  the  is  the  building  up  of  the  Church  of 

early  days  of  the  gospel  public  teachers  Christ. — The  ministry  is  intended  for 

were  called  to  extraordinary  services,  the  improvement  of   saints,  as  well  as 

so  they  were  endued  with  extraordin-  for   the   conversion    of    sinners.     The 

ary  gifts ;    but  these  gifts  were  only  apostle  mentions  also  the  unity  of  the 

for    a    season.       As   the   business   of  knowledge  of    Christ.     We  must   not 

a  minister  is  to  teach  men  the  things  rest  in  attainments  already  made,  but 

which  Christ  has  commanded  in   the  continually  aspire  to  the  character  of 

Scriptures,     so     it    is     necessary    he  a  perfect  man,  to  the  measure  of  the 

himself  should   be  fully  instructed  in  stature   of   the    fulness    of    Christ. — 

them.      In   the   early  days,  as  there  Lathrop. 

MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13—16. 

True  Christian  Manhood — 

1.  Attained  by  the  unity  of  an  intelligent  faith  in  Christ. — 1.  This  faith  must 
be  based  on  knowledge.  "  Till  we  all  come  in  the  unity  of  the  faith,  and  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God"  (ver.  13).  A  faith,  so  called,  not  based  on 
knowledge  is  fanaticism.  True  faith  is  the  result  of  conviction — a,  profound 
consciousness  of  the  truth.  Many  reach  this  stage.  They  have  heard  the 
evidence,  examined  it,  and  are  clearly  persuaded  of  its  truth  ;  but  they  never  get 
beyond  that.  They  are  like  the  neap  tide  that  comes  rolling  in  as  if  it  would 
sweep  everything  before  it ;  but  when  it  arrives  at  a  certain  point,  it  stops,  and 
with  all  the  ocean  at  its  back  it  never  passes  the  mark  where  it  is  accustomed 
to  pause.  It  is  well  to  get  to  the  neap-tide  mark  of  conviction  ;  but  there  is  no 
salvation  till  the  soul  is  carried  by  the  full  spring  tide  of  conviction  into  a 
voluntary  and  complete  surrender  to  Christ.  It  is  weak,  it  is  cowardly,  when 
convinced  of  the  right,  not  to  do  it  promptly  and  heartily.  Faith  acquires  its 
full-rounded  unity  when  it  is  exercised,  not  on  any  abstract  truth,  but  on  a 
person  who  is  the  living  embodiment  of  all  truth.  The  final  object  of  faith  is 
"  the  Son  of  God,"  and  any  truth  is  valuable  only  as  it  helps  us  to  Him.  Christ 
has  Himself  revealed  the  truth  essential  to  be  believed  in  order  to  salvation  :  He 
is  Himself  that  truth. 

2.  Perfect  manhood  is  a  complete  Christ-likeness. — "  Unto  a  perfect  man,  unto 
the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ  "  (ver.  13).  Man  is  so  great 
that  he  is  perpetually  striving  after  a  loftier  ideal ;  nothing  that  has  limits  can 
satisfy  him.  M  It  is  because  there  is  an  infinite  in  Him  which  with  all  his 
cunning  he  cannot  quite  bury  under  the  finite.  Will  the  whole  finance 
ministers  and  upholsterers  and  confectioners  of  modern  Europe  undertake  in 
joint-stock  company  to  make  one  shoeblack  happy  1  They  cannot  accomplish 
it  above  an  hour  or  two ;  for  the  shoeblack  also  has  a  soul  quite  other  than 
his  stomach,  and  would  require,  if  you  consider  it  for  his  permanent  satisfaction 
and  saturation,  simply  this  allotment,  no  more  and  no  less — God's  infinite 
universe  altogether  to  himself,  therein  to  enjoy  infinitely  and  fill  every  wish  as 
fast  as  it  arose.  Try  him  with  half  a  universe  of  an  omnipotence,  he  sets  to 
quarrelling  with  the  proprietor  of  the  other  half  and  declares  himself  the  most 
maltreated  of  men  "  (Carlyle).  True  manhood  does  not  consist  in  the  develop- 
ment of  a  fine  physique,  or  of  a  brilliant  mentality,  or  in  the  pursuit  of  heroic 

215 


chap.  iv.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS. 


ambitions.  It  lies  in  the  nobleness  of  the  soul  at  peace  with  God,  seeking  in 
all  things  to  please  Him,  and  to  possess  and  exhibit  the  mind  of  Christ.  The 
pagan  hero  is  the  warrior,  the  ruler,  the  poet,  the  philosopher  ;  the  Christian 
hero  is  the  Christ-like  man.  The  supreme  type  of  manhood  is  Christ-likeness. 
The  ideal  is  conceived  by  faith,  and  the  actual  is  attained  only  by  the  exercise 
of  the  same  grace. 

II.  Superior  to  the  childish  vacillation  induced  by  deceptive  teaching 
(ver.  14). — The  false  teachers  played  with  truth,  as  men  play  with  dice,  with  the 
reckless  indifference  of  gamblers,  and  they  and  their  victims  were  swayed  to 
and  fro,  with  ruin  for  the  ultimate  goal.  Like  a  rudderless  ship  they  were 
tossed  about  at  the  caprice  of  every  current,  with  the  inevitable  result  of 
wreckage  among  the  rocks  and  quicksands.  Professing  a  zeal  for  truth,  they 
deceived  themselves  and  others  by  ever  changing  their  point  of  view,  and  craftily 
avoiding  the  practical  bearing  of  truth  in  its  aims  to  change  the  heart  and 
reform  the  life.  The  moment  the  application  of  truth  pressing  upon  the  con- 
science made  them  uncomfortable,  they  tacked  about  and  sailed  off  under  another 
issue.  As  the  restless  seaweed,  waving  to  and  fro  in  the  ever-changing  tide,  can 
never  grow  to  the  dignity  of  a  tree,  so  those  who  are  swayed  by  every  changing 
phase  of  error  can  never  grow  up  to  the  strength  and  stability  of  true  Christian 
manhood.  We  can  sympathise  with  the  doubts  and  perplexities  of  an  earnest 
seeker  after  truth ;  but  our  sympathy  changes  into  impatience  when  we  discover 
that  the  seeker  is  more  in  search  of  novelty  than  truth,  of  variety  rather  than 
certainty.  To  be  for  ever  in  doubt  is  to  be  in  the  fickle  stage  of  mental  and 
moral  infancy.     It  is  the  worst  phase  of  childishness. 

III.  Is  a  continual  growth  in  the  truth  and  love  of  Christ  (vers.  15,  16). — It 
is  the  high  distinction  of  man  that  he  is  susceptible  of  almost  unlimited  growth 
in  mental  and  moral  attainments.  One  of  the  greatest  distances  between 
animalism  and  man  is  seen  in  the  unbridged  gulf  of  progress.  The  animal 
remains  where  he  was,  but  man  has  been  progressing  in  every  department  of  life 
from  the  very  first.  There  is  between  them  all  the  breadth  of  history.  The 
animal  builds  its  nest  as  it  ever  did,  the  ant  by  the  same  marvellous  instinct 
constructs  its  geometrical  cells  now  as  at  the  first;  but  man  is  a  genius — he 
creates.  His  first  rude  efforts  in  shaping  his  dwellings  have  gone  on  pro- 
gressing and  improving  until  we  have  the  architectural  development  of  to-day. 
In  every  kind  of  art  it  is  the  same — rude  flint  knives,  lance  heads,  needles, 
were  his  first  weapons  and  implements ;  to  them  succeeded  bronze,  and  then 
iron — each  marking  stages  in  that  history  of  progress  up  to  the  beautiful  cutlery, 
stores,  and  arsenals  of  the  present  day.  The  animal  roars  or  chatters  to-day  as 
it  has  done  all  along.  It  has  made  no  progress  towards  intelligent  speech — 
a  rubicon  the  animal  will  never  cross.  But  man,  who  began  with  one  speech, 
and  a  very  limited  vocabulary  of  words,  has  developed  speech  into  the  great 
languages  of  ancient  and  modern  literature.  A  wider  gulf  than  this  is  hardly 
conceivable.  But  the  moral  growth  of  man  is  more  remarkable.  The  era  of 
the  gospel  is  a  revelation  of  the  power  of  love.  With  the  ancients  a  mere 
sentiment,  Christianity  teaches  that  love  is  the  essence  of  religion ;  and  that 
nature  is  the  manliest  and  noblest  that  advances  in  the  knowledge  of  divine 
truth  and  in  the  self-sacrificing  love  of  Christ.  The  whole  fabric  of  the 
Christian  character  is  built  up  in  the  ever-increasing  exercise  of  Christ-like  love. 

Lessons. — Christian  manhood  is — 1.  Acquired  by  an  intelligent  faith  in  Christ. 
2.  Developed  by  an  imitation  of  Christ.    3.  Maintained  and  strengthened  by  constant 
fidelity  to  Christ. 


j&lS 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPMESIANS.         chap.  iv. 


GERM  NOTES   ON  TEE    VERSES. 

Vers.  13-16.  The  Growth  of  the  Church.  accessible  reality,  as  the  basis  of  life 

I.  The  goal  of  the  Church's  life  and  law.  Faith  and  knowledge  of  the 
(ver.  13). — The  mark  at  which  the  Son  of  God  it  banishes  as  dreams  of  our 
Church  is  to  arrive  is  set  forth  in  a  two-  childhood.  This  materialistic  philo- 
fold  way — in  its  collective  and  its  indi-  sophy  gathers  to  a  head  the  unbelief  of 
vidual  aspects.  We  must  all  unitedly  the  century.  It  is  the  living  antagonist 
attain  the  oneness  of  the  faith  and  the  of  divine  revelation. 

knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God  ;  and  we  III.  The  means  and  conditions  of 
must  attain,  each  of  us,  a  perfect  man-  its  growth  (vers.  15,  16). — To  the  craft 
hood,  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  of  false  teachers  St.  Paul  would  have 
fulness  of  Christ.  All  our  defects  are,  his  Churches  oppose  the  weapons  only 
at  the  bottom,  deficiencies  of  faith.  of  truth  and  love.  Sincere  believers, 
We  fail  to  apprehend  and  appropriate  heartily  devoted  to  Christ,  will  not  fall 
the  fulness  of  God  in  Christ.  The  into  fatal  error.  A  healthy  life  in- 
goal  of  the  regenerate  life  is  never  stinctively  repels  disease.  Next  to  the 
absolutely  won ;  it  is  hid  with  Christ  moral  condition  lies  the  spiritual  con- 
in  God.  But  there  is  to  be  a  constant  dition  of  advancement — the  full  recog- 
approximation  to  it,  both  in  the  indi-  nition  of  the  supremacy  and  sufficiency 
vidual  believer  and  in  the  body  of  of  Christ.  He  is  the  perfect  ideal  for 
Christ's  people.  And  a  time  is  coming  each,  the  common  source  of  life  and 
when  that  goal  will  be  practically  progress  for  all.  He  is  the  Head  of  the 
attained,  so  far  as  earthly  conditions  Church  and  the  heart  of  the  world, 
allow.  The  Church  after  long  strife  Another  practical  condition  of  Church 
will  be  reunited,  after  long  trial  will  growth  is  organisation — "  all  the  body 
be  perfected.  Then  this  world  will  have  fitly  framed  and  knit  together."  A 
had  its  use,  and  will  give  place  to  the  building  or  a  machine  is  fitted  together 
new  heavens  and  earth.  by  the  adjustment  of  its  parts.    A  body 

II.  The  malady  which  arrests  its  needs,  besides  this  mechanical  construc- 
development  (ver.  14). — The  childish-  tion,  a  pervasive  life,  a  sympathetic 
ness  of  so  many  Christian  believers  force,  knitting  it  together.  And  so  it 
exposed  them  to  the  seductions  of  error,  is  in  love  that  this  body  of  the  Church 
and  ready  to  be  driven  this  way  and  builds  up  itself.  The  perfect  Christian 
that  by  the  evil  influences  active  in  the  and  the  perfect  Church  are  taking 
world  of  thought  around  them.  So  shape  at  once.  Each  of  them  requires 
long  as  the  Church  contains  a  number  the  other  for  its  due  realisation.  The 
of  unstable  souls,  so  long  she  will  primary  condition  of  Church  health 
remain  subject  to  strife  and  corruption,  and  progress  is  that  there  shall  be  an 
At  every  crisis  in  human  thought  there  unobstructed  flow  of  the  life  of  grace 
emerges  some  prevailing  method  of  from  point  to  point  through  the  tissues 
truth,  or  of  error,  the  resultant  of  and  substance  of  the  entire  frame. — 
current   tendencies,    which   unites  the  Findlay. 

suffrages  of  a  large  body  of  thinkers, 

and  claims  to  embody  the  spirit  of  the  Vers.  13-15.  Christian  Manhood. 
age.  Such  a  method  of  error  our  own  I.  Christian  manhood  is  a  growth. 
age  has  produced  as  the  outcome  of  the  — 1 .  A  growth  having  its  inception 
anti-Christian  speculation  of  modern  in  the  simple  fact  of  becoming  a 
times,  in  the  doctrines  current  under  Christian.  This  is  a  decided  advance 
the  names  of  Positivism,  Secularism,  or  upon  the  most  moral  and  cultivated 
Agnosticism.  Modern  Agnosticism  re-  state  otherwise  attainable.  It  involves 
moves  God  farther  from  us,  beyond  the  the  quickening  into  a  new  life  which  is 
reach  of  thought,  and  leaves  us  with  to  grow.  2.  A  growth  marking  a  con- 
material  nature  as  the  one  positive  and  tinual  advancement  till  we  all  come  in 

217 


chap.  iv.         H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


the  unity — the  respect  in  which  one 
grows — the  union,  conjunction  of  faith 
and  of  knowledge.  3.  A  growth  re- 
sulting from  culture  under  divinely 
appointed  agencies.  The  most  splendid 
growth,  other  things  being  equal,  is  the 
result  of  the  highest  culture.  The 
highest  culture  is  possible  only  through 
the  most  rigid  conformity  to  the  laws 
of  development  and  the  appliance  of 
the  best  agencies.  4.  A  growth  the 
standard  of  whose  completeness  is  the 
fulness  of  Christ.  The  stature — the 
adultness,  the  full-grown  manhood  of 
Christ — is  the  standard  of  growth, 
whose  attainment  is  the  Christian's 
noblest  zeal. 

II.  The  elements  of  Christian  man- 
hood.— 1.  Largeness — in  the  Christian's 
views  of  truth,  of  man's  need,  of 
Christ's  work,  of  schemes  and  plans 
for  its  greater  furtherance. 

2.  Dignity. — That  deep,  inwrought 
sense  of  the  true  worth  and  greatness 
of  his  nature,  as  a  renewed  man,  and 
of  his  position  as  a  child  of  God 
and  joint-heir  with  Christ.  Christian 
ethics  are  the  best  ethics ;  highest, 
purest,  noblest,  safest.  He  lives  by 
these  naturally  who  has  a  well- 
developed  Christian  manhood. 

3.  C  ourageousness  and  strength. — 
Courage  makes  a  man  put  forth  his 
best  strength,  while  strength  enables 
courage  to  achieve  its  best  deeds. 

III.  The  outworking  of  Christian 
manhood. — It  gives : — 

1.  Steadfastness. — No  more  children. 
£To  more  carried  about — borne  round 
and  round  as  in  the  swiftly  whirling  eddy 
of  the  sea — by  every  wind  of  doctrine. 

2.  Sincerity. — "  Speaking  the  truth 
in  love  "  refers  both  to  the  sincerity  of 
life  and  our  relation  to  the  truth. 

3.  A  further  growth. — As  the  full- 
grown  tree,  leaves  and  blossoms  and 
bears  ;  as  fruit,  after  it  is  full-grown, 
mellows,  matures,  sweetens :  ripening 
as  wheat  for  the  garner. — J.  M.  Frost. 

Vers.  14-16.  Christian  Maturity. 

I.  The  negative  part  of  this  de- 
scription.— 1.  Christians  must  not 
remain   children. — In  humility,  meek- 

218 


ness,  and  teachableness,  let  them  be 
children ;  but  in  understanding,  con- 
stancy, and  fortitude  they  should  be 
men.  Children  have  but  little  know- 
ledge and  a  weak  judgment.  They 
believe  hastily  and  act  implicitly.  They 
are  governed  by  passion  more  than 
reason,  by  feeling  more  than  judgment. 

2.  The  apostle  cautions  that  we  be 
not  tossed  to  and  fro  like  a  ship  rolling 
on  the  waves. — The  man  without  prin- 
ciple, knowledge,  and  judgment  is  at 
the  mercy  of  every  rude  gust.  He  is 
driven  in  any  direction,  as  the  wind 
happens  to  blow.  He  makes  no  port, 
but  is  every  moment  in  danger  of 
shipwreck. 

3.  We  must  not  be  carried  about  with 
every  wind  of  doctrine. — False  doctrines, 
like  winds,  are  blustering  and  unsteady. 
They  blow  from  no  certain  point,  but 
in  all  directions,  and  frequently  shift 
their  course.  The  light  and  chaffy 
Christian,  the  hypocritical  and  un- 
principled professor,  is  easily  carried 
about  by  divers  and  strange  doctrines. 
He  shifts  his  course  and  changes .  his 
direction,  as  the  wind  of  popular 
opinion  happens   to  drive. 

4.  We  are  in  danger  from  the  cunning 
craftiness  of  men. — True  ministers  use 
plainness  of  speech,  and  by  manifesta- 
tion of  the  truth  commend  themselves 
to  the  consciences  of  men.  Corrupt 
teachers  use  sleight  and  craft,  that 
they  may  ensnare  the  simple,  decoy 
the  unsuspecting,  and  thus  make 
proselytes  to  their  party.  They  pre- 
tend to  superior  sanctity.  They  are 
watchful  to  take  advantage  of  an 
unhappy  circumstance  in  a  Church. 
They  unsettle  men's  minds  from  the 
established  order  of  the  gospel,  and 
prejudice  them  against  the  regular 
maintenance  of  the  ministry,  repre 
senting  all  order  in  Churches  as  tyranny 
and  all  stated  provision  for  the  ministry 
as  oppression.  They  promise  men 
liberty,  but  are  themselves  the  servants 
of  corruption. 

II.  The  positive  part.  —  1.  The 
mature  Christian  must  speak  the  truth 
in  love.  Be  sincere  in  love.  We 
should  acquire  a  good  doctrinal  know- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS.         chap.  I  v. 


ledge  of   the   truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  has  thus  far  given  loose  to  his  vanity 

We  should  be  well  established  in  the  and  thinks  himself  significant  enough 

truth.     We  should  see  that  our  hearts  to  be  head  of  a  sect,  then  he  begins 

are  conformed  to  the  truth.     We  must  first   to   whisper   out    his    choice   dis- 

walk  in  the  truth.  coveries  to  a  few  admirers  and  confi- 

2.    We  must  grow  up  in  all  things  dants,  who  will  be  sure  to  flatter  him 

into  Christ. — A  partial  religion  is  not  in  it ;  and  next  to  tell  aloud  to  all  the 

that   which  the  gospel   teaches.      We  world  how  great  a  secret  he  had  found 

must  have  respect  to  the  whole  char-  out,  with  the  inestimable  value  of  it. 

acter  of  Christ,  to  the  whole  compass  And  now  at  length  comes  in  the  use  of 

of  duty,  to  every  known  doctrine  and  sleight  and  cunning  craftiness  and  all 

precept  of  Scripture.     All  the  graces  imaginable  artifices  :   first  to  find  out 

of   the   gospel    unite    in    forming    the  proper  agents  to  commend  and  cry  up 

Christian's  temper.     They  all  operate  the  conceit,  next  to  spread  it  in  the 

in  harmony.     His  religion  is  one  con-  most  artful  manner  among  the  simple 

tinued,  uniform,  consistent  work.  and  least  suspecting,  and  after  that  to 

III.  How  Christian  maturity  is  form  interests  and  make  parties ;  and 
attained. — From  the  growth  of  the  so,  if  possible,  to  have  a  public  sanction 
human  body  the  apostle  borrows  a  set  to  it  or  a  majority  at  least  con- 
similitude  to  illustrate  the  spiritual  tending  for  it.  Love  of  fame  and 
growth  of  the  Christian  Church.  It  glory  is  a  very  strong  passion,  and 
is  as  absurd  to  expect  growth  in  know-  operates  marvellously  in  persons  of  a 
ledge  and  holiness  without  the  means  warm  complexion.  2.  Observe  how 
instituted  for  the  edifying  of  the  body  avarice  or  love  of  profit  may  sometimes 
of  Christ  as  it  would  be  to  expect  the  do  the  same  thing.  There  is  a  gain  to 
growth  of  a  natural  body  without  be  made  in  some  junctures  by  per- 
supplies  of  food.  verting  the   truth    and   deceiving  the 

Lessons. — 1.    There  is  no   Christian  populace.     Men  who  are  not  worthy 

growth  where  lore  is  wanting.     2.  Chris-  to  teach  in  the  Church,  or  who  have 

tians  are   bound   to  seek   the  peace  in  been   set  aside   for  their  insufficiency 

order  to  the  edification  of  the  Church.  or    immorality,    may   bring    up    new 

— Lathrop.  doctrines    and    draw    disciples    after 

them,  for  the  sake  of  protection  and 

Ver.  14.  The  Case  of  Deceivers  and  maintenance  or  for  filthy  lucre.     With 

Deceived  considered.  such  the  vending  of  false  doctrine  is 

I.  Consider  the  case  of  deceivers  or  a  trade  and  preaching  a  merchandise. 
seducers  such  as  by  their  sleight  and  Thus  has  avarice  been  the  mother  of 
cunning  craftiness  lie  in  wait  to  heresies  and  has  brought  many  de- 
deceive. — The  particular  motives  by  ceivers  into  the  Church  of  Christ ;  but 
which  men  may  be  led  to  beguile  they  have  contrived  generally  to  give 
others  are  reducible  to  three — pride,  some  plausible  turn  and  colour  to  their 
avarice,  and  voluptuousness  :  love  of  inventions  through  their  "sleight"  and 
honour,  or  profit,  or  pleasure.  1.  There  "cunning  craftiness,"  in  order  to  de- 
is  often  a  great  deal  of  pride  and  ceive  the  hearts  of  the  simple  and  to 
vanity  in  starting  old  notions  and  beguile  unwary  and  unstable  souls, 
broaching  new  doctrines.  It  is  pre-  3.  One  motive  more — voluptuousness, 
tending  to  be  wiser  than  the  rest  of  or  love  of  pleasure.  As  religious  re- 
the  world,  and  is  thought  to  be  an  straints  set  not  easy  upon  flesh  and 
argument  of  uncommon  sagacity.  Upon  blood,  but  bear  hard  upon  corrupt 
this  footing  some  are  perpetually  in  nature,  so  men  of  corrupt  minds  will 
quest  of  new  discoveries.  Nothing  be  ever  labouring  to  invent  and  publish 
pleases  them,  if  they  have  not  the  smooth  and  softening  doctrines,  such 
honour  of  inventing  it  or  of  receiving  as  may  either  qualify  the  strictness  of 
it  in  their  times.     When  once  a  man  the  gospel  rule  or  sap  the  belief  of  a 

219 


chap.  iv.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS. 


future  reckoning.  Many  ancient  here- 
tics had  such  views  as  these  in  the 
first  broaching  of  their  heresies.  Their 
design  was  to  take  off  the  awe  and 
dread  of  a  future  judgment,  and  thereby 
to  open  a  door  to  all  licentiousness  of 
life  and  dissoluteness  of  manners. 

II.  Consider  the  case  of  the  deceived 
who  suffer  themselves  to  be  "  tossed 
to  and  fro  with  every  wind  of  doctrine." 
— They  are  supposed  to  be  ignorantly, 
and  in  a  manner  blindly,  led  on  by 
others,  otherwise  they  would  be  rather 
confederates  and  confidants  in  managing 
the  deceit,  and  so  would  be  more  de- 
ceivers than  deceived.  1.  Now  as  to 
those  who  are  so  ignorantly  imposed 
upon.  They  are  more  or  less  to  blame, 
according  as  their  ignorance  is  more  or 
less  blamable  ;  and  that,  again,  will  be 
more  or  less  blamable,  according  as 
it  is  more  or  less  affected  or  wilful. 
There  are,  I  think,  three  cases  which 
will  take  in  all  sorts  of  men  who  suffer 
themselves  to  be  deceived  in  things  of 
this  kind.  The  first  is  of  those  who 
have  no  opportunity,  no  moral  possi- 
bility of  informing  themselves  better ; 
the  second  is  of  those  who  might  inform 
themselves  better,  but  do  not ;  the 
third  of  those  who  might  also  be  better 
informed,  but  will  not.  If  they  be 
"  like  children  tossed  to  and  fro  with 
every  wind  of  doctrine,"  yet  if 
they  are  really  children  in  under- 
standing and  are  overborne  by  others 
in  such  a  way  as  is  morally  irresistible 
considering  their  circumstances,  Chen 
it  seems  to  be  their  misfortune  to  be 
so  imposed  upon  rather  than  their 
fault,  and  so  is  not  imputable.  2.  A 
second  case  is  of  those  who  may  inform 
themselves  better  but  neglect  to  do  it. 
I  suppose  it  to  be  merely  neglect  in 
them,  not  design.  Perhaps  they  have 
little  or  no  leisure  for  inquiries ;  they 
are  taken  up  with  worldly  cares  and 
business.  They  have  a  very  great 
esteem  and  value  for  the  man  who  so 
misleads  them,  and  they  know  no 
better,  but  swallow  everything  he  says 
without  considering ;  or  they  are  not 
aware  of  any  ill  consequences  of  the 
doctrine,  see  or  suspect  no  harm  in  it. 

220 


They  are  much  to  blame  in  this  affair, 
because  God  has  given  them  the  faculty 
of  reason,  which  ought  not  to  be  thus 
left  to  lie  dormant  and  useless.  Men 
who  can  be  sharp  enough  in  secular 
affairs  to  prevent  being  imposed  upon 
may  and  ought  to  have  some  guard 
upon  themselves  with  respect  also  to 
their  spiritual  concernments.  3.  There 
is  yet  a  third  sort  of  men,  worse  than 
the  former,  who  suffer  themselves  to 
be  deceived  and  might  know  better, 
but  will  not ;  that  is  to  say,  their 
ignorance  is  affected  and  wilful,  they 
"  love  darkness  rather  than  light 
because  their  deeds  are  evil."  These 
are  such  as  readily  run  in  with  "  every 
wind  of  doctrine  "  which  hits  their  taste 
and  chimes  in  with  their  favourite 
inclinations.  They  admit  the  doctrine 
because  they  like  it,  and  they  easily 
believe  it  true  because  they  would 
have  it  so.  It  is  with  this  kind  of 
men  that  deceivers  prevail  most  and 
make  their  harvest. 

III.  Some  advices  proper  to  prevent 
our  falling  in  with  either. — The  best 
preservative  in  this  case  is  an  honest 
and  good  heart,  well  disposed  towards 
truth  and  godliness,  having  no  by-ends 
to  serve,  no  favourite  lust  or  passion 
to  indulge.  If  any  man  is  but  willing 
to  know  and  to  do  God's  command- 
ments, he  will  easily  discern  in  most 
cases  whether  a  doctrine  be  of  God  or 
whether  it  be  of  men.  The  evidences 
of  the  true  religion  and  of  its  main 
doctrines  are  so  bright  and  strong  when 
carefully  attended  to,  that  common 
sense  and  reason  are  sufficient  to  lead 
us,  when  there  is  no  bias  to  mislead  us. 
For  several  years  last  past  rude  and 
bold  attacks  have  been  made  against 
the  important  doctrines  of  Christianity 
and  against  all  revealed  religion,  and 
this  is  what  they  are  still  carrying  on 
with  exquisite  subtlety  and  craftiness 
many  ways  and  with  a  great  deal  of 
fruitless  pains  and  labour.  For  I  may 
have  leave  to  suppose  that  no  man  can 
in  this  case  be  deceived  who  has  not 
first  a  desire  to  be  so,  and  is  not  the 
dupe  and  bubble  to.  his  own  lust  and 
vices. — Dr.  Waterland, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS.         chap.  iv. 


Ver.  15.  Speaking  the  Truth  in  Love' 
— 1.  A  different  thing  from  the  irritat- 
ing candour  of  the  professed  friend. 
2.  Implies  an  experimental  know- 
ledge of  the  truth  and  its  spiritual 
mission.  3.  Is  the  most  effectual  way 
of  winning  a  hearing  and  gaining 
adherents.  4.  A  method  conspicu- 
ously exemplified  in  the  teaching  of 
Christ. 

Growth  into  Christ  in  Love  and 
Truth. 

I.  The  standard  of  Christian  excel- 
lence— Christ's  headship.  —  1.  The 
prominent  notion  suggested  is  His 
rank  in  the  universe.  He  rules  as  God 
in  creation.  But  evidently  the  apostle 
does  not  mean  this  in  the  text.  We 
are  to  grow  into  Him  as  Head.  Growth 
into  Christ's  Godhead  is  impossible. 
God-like  we  may,  God  we  cannot  even 
by  truth  and  love,  become.  2.  He  is 
the  Head  as  being  the  Source  of 
spiritual  life.  This  is  implied  in 
metaphor.  The  highest  life-powers — 
sensation,  feeling,  thought — come  from 
the  brain.  To  one  who  has  read  the 
history  of  those  times,  there  is  an 
emphatic  truth  in  Christ's  being  the 
life  of  the  world.  The  world  was 
like  a  raft  becalmed  in  the  tropics — 
some  of  its  freight  dead  and  baking  in 
the  sun,  some  sucking  as  if  for  moisture 
from  dried  casks,  and  some  sadly,  faintly 
looking  for  a  sail.  Christ's  coming  to 
that  world  was  as  life  to  the  dead, 
imparting  new  impulse  to  human  heart 
and  human  nature.  It  was  like  rain 
and  wind  coining  to  that  bark — once 
more  it  cuts  the  sea,  guided  by  a 
living  hand.  So  also  with  each  man 
who  drinks  Christ's  Spirit.  He  becomes 
a  living  character.  Not  sustained  on 
dogmas  or  taken -up  opinions,  but  alive 
with  Christ.  3.  He  is  Head  as  chief  of 
the  human  race.  Never  had  the  world 
seen,  never  again  will  it  see,  such  a 
character.  Humanity  found  in  Him 
a  genial  soil,  and  realised  God's 
idea  of  what  man  was  meant  to 
be.  He  is  chief.  Nothing  comes  near 
Him. 
II.  Progress  towards  the  standard 


of  Christian  excellence. — "We  grow 
up  into  Him  in  all  things. 

1.  Growth  in  likeness  to  Him. — The 
human  soul  was  formed  for  growth,  and 
that  growth  is  infinite.  The  acorn 
grows  into  the  oak,  the  child  into  the 
philosopher.  And  at  death  the  soul  is 
not  declining  ;  it  is  as  vigorous  as  ever. 
Hence  nothing  but  an  infinite  standard 
will  measure  the  growth  of  the  soul  of 
man. 

2.  Growth  in  comprehension  of  Him. 
— Christ  is  not  comprehensible  at  first. 
Words  cannot  express  the  awe  with 
which  a  man  contemplates  that  char- 
acter when  it  is  understood.  This  is 
the  true  heroic,  this  the  only  God-like, 
this  the  real  divine.  From  all  types 
of  human  excellence  I  have  made  my 
choice  for  life  and  death — Christ. 

III.  The  approved  means  of  growth 
the  mode  of  progress. — "  Speaking  the 
truth  in  love."  Truth  and  love — and 
these  joined.  To  "  grow  into  Christ  " 
we  must  have  both  traits  of  character. 
Would  you  be  like  Christ  %  Cultivate 
love  of  beauty  and  tenderness.  His  soul 
was  alive  to  beauty.  He  noted  the 
rising  and  the  setting  sun,  the  waving 
corn,  the  lily  of  the  field.  His  was 
love  which  insult  could  not  ruffle  nor 
ribaldry  embitter,  and  which  only 
grew  sweeter  and  sweeter.  Would  you 
be  like  Christ  %  Be  true  !  He  never 
swerved.  He  was  a  martyr  to  truth. 
Would  He  soften  down  truth  for  the 
young  man  whom  He  loved,  or  make  it 
palatable  ?  No;  not  for  friendship,  not 
for  love,  nor  for  all  the  lovely  things 
this  world  has  to  show.  "  One  thing 
thou  lackest :  sell  all  that  thou  hast, 
and  distribute  unto  the  poor,  and 
thou  shalt  have  treasure  in  heaven  : 
and  come,  follow  Me."  That  was 
"  speaking  the  truth  in  love."  There 
is  no  good  to  be  got  out  from  Christ, 
except  by  being  made  like  Him.  There 
is  no  pardon,  no  blessing,  separate  from 
inward  improvement.  Sanctity  *  of 
character  alone  blesses.  Each  man  is 
his  own  hell  and  his  own  heaven. 
God  Himself  cannot  bless  you  unless 
He  gives  you  His  own  character. — 
F.  W.  Robertson. 


chap.  IV.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


Ver.  16.  The  Law  of  Mutual  Depend- 
ence. 

I.  This  text  admonishes  us  of  the 
manifold  instruments  and  agencies  on 
whose  concurrence  and  harmonious 
action  the  prosperity  and  the  perfec- 
tion of  the  Christian  Church  depend. — 
It  likens  the  Church  to  that  most 
complicated,  admirable  machine,  the 
human  body,  which  only  produces  its 
proper  results,  the  preservation  and 
comfort  of  human  life,  by  the  healthful 
tone  and  right  performance  of  its 
various  powers  and  functions.  We 
live,  and  are  at  ease,  in  virtue  of  the 
sound  condition  and  regular  operation 
of  all  the  multitude  of  parts  and  organs 
which  compose  our  corporeal  frame. 
Should  the  heart  refuse  to  circulate 
the  blood,  and  to  diffuse  through  all 
the  various  channels  of  inter-communi- 
cation with  the  members  of  the  body 
its  life-sustaining  pulses,  death  ensues 
in  a  moment. 

II.  The  same  law  of  mutual  depend- 
ence reigns  in  improved  civilised 
society. — In  man,  social  as  well  as 
individual,  the  body  politic  and 
social  must  prosper,  or  its  members 
suffer.  The  individual  too  cannot 
suffer  without  inflicting,  by  so  much, 
an  injury  on  the  community.  The 
ruler  and  the  subject,  the  capitalist 
and  the  operative,  the  merchant,  the 
farmer,  the  scholar  and  the  artisan, 
the  manufacturer  and  the  sailor, 
perform  functions  alike  indispensable 
to  the  great  result  aimed  at  or  desired 
by  all  communities.  They  are  mutually 
dependent,  are  indissolubly  united  in 
interest  by  ties  not  always  visible,  but 
yet  real  and  essential  to  the  well-being 
of  all  parties. 

II  [.  I  hasten  to  apply  my  subject 
to  the  Church,  where  the  text  finds 
illustration  yet  more  pertinent  and 
affecting.    The  Church  is  a  community, 


organised,    with    special    ends    to    be 
accomplished,      and    endowed       with 
special    capabilities    and    adaptations, 
yet   having   many    points    of     resem- 
blance  to  human   society   in  general. 
All     the     members     and      all      the 
officers    of  the  Church  are  appointed 
and  honoured  of  God  to  be  co-workers 
with  Himself,  co-agents  with  the  Holy 
Ghost,  in  the  edification  of  the  body  of 
Christ.     The  pastor,    not   less   in   the 
study,  when  he  gathers  things  new  and 
old  from  holy  books  and  common,  than 
in   the   pulpit,     or    in    breaking    the 
bread  of  the  sacrament  at  the  altar, 
or  in  the  sick-chamber — all    the   sub- 
ordinate lay  ministries  devoted  to  godly 
counsel,  to  faithful  admonition,  or  to 
the   management   and  conversation  of 
the  material  interests  of  the  Church — 
the   pious    mother   nurturing    up  her 
children  in  God's  love — the  sufferer  on  a 
bed  of  languishing,  giving  forth  blessed 
examples  of  patience    and  resignation 
and  faith — the  teacher  of  the  Sabbath 
school — they  who,  in  the  Spirit,  lift  up 
our   joyous    songs    of     praise    in    the 
sanctuary — all  who  pray  in   the  closet 
or    in    the     congregation,     are,     and 
should   be  deemed,  essential    parts    of 
that  good,  great  system  through  whose 
wondrous,  harmonious  working  God  is 
pleased    to   renew   and   sanctify   souls 
and  train  them  up  to  be  heirs  of  glory. 
Who,  in  this  great  co-partnership  for 
honouring  Christ,    has  any  ground  of 
complaint  ? — the  foot,  that  it  is  not  the 
head  ?  the  eye,  that  it  is  too  feeble  to 
do  the  functions  of  the  brawny  arm  ? 
the  ears,  that  they  cannot  do  the  office 
of   locomotion?     Every  part   is  indis- 
pensable.    None  can  say  which  is  most 
important  in  God's  plan  ;  and  achieve- 
ments, ascribed  hastily  to  the  eloquence 
of  the  preacher,  often  stand  credited  in 
the  record  kept  above  to  the  prayer  of 
faith. — Dr.  Olin. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  17—24. 

A  Thorough  Moral  Transformation — 

I.  Contrasted  with  a  former  life  of  sin. — 1.  A  state  of  self -induced  mental 
darkness.  "  Having  the  understanding  darkened,  .  .  .  because  of  the  blindness  of 
their  heart  "  (ver.  18).     Infidelity  is  more  a  moral  than  a  mental  obliquity.    The 

222 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS.      .   chap.  iv. 


mind  is  darkened  because  the  heart  is  bad.  Men  do  not  see  the  truth  because 
they  do  not  want  to  see  it.  The  light  that  would  lead  to  righteousness  and  to 
God  is  persistently  shut  out. 

2.  A  state  of  moral  insensibility  that  abandoned  the  soul  to  the  reckless  commission 
of  all  kinds  of  sin. — "  Who  being  past  feeling  have  given  themselves  over  .  .  . 
to  work  all  uncleanness  with  greediness  "  (ver.  19).  Sin  is  made  difficult  to  the 
beginner.  The  barriers  set  up  by  a  tender  conscience,  the  warnings  of  nature, 
the  teachings  of  providence,  the  light  of  revelation,  the  living  examples  of  the 
good,  have  all  to  be  broken  down.  Early  transgressions  are  arrested  by  the 
remorse  they  occasion ;  but  gradually  the  safeguards  are  neglected  and  despised, 
until  the  habit  is  acquired  of  sinning  for  the  love  of  sin.  A  spirit  of  recklessness 
ensues,  the  reins  are  relaxed  and  then  thrown  upon  the  neck  of  the  passions,  and 
the  soul  is  abandoned  to  the  indulgence  of  all  kinds  of  iniquity. 

u  We  are  not  worst  at  once.     The  course  of  evil 
•    Is  of  such  slight  source  an  infant's  hand 
Might  close  its  breach  with  clay ; 
But  let  the  stream  get  deeper,  and  we  strive  in  vain 
To  stem  the  headlong  torrent." 

3.  A  state  that  rendered  all  mental  activities  worthless. — l'  Walk  not  as  other 
Gentiles  walk,  in  the  vanity  of  their  mind"  (ver.  17).  The  art  of  right  think- 
ing was  lost.  For  the  man  that  will  not  think,  think  clearly  and  justly,  the 
calamities  and  the  raptures  of  life,  the  blessing  and  the  curse,  have  no  mean- 
ing. They  evoke  neither  gratitude  nor  fear.  The  beauties  of  nature,  as  they 
sparkle  in  the  stars,  or  shine  in  the  flowers,  or  gleam  in  the  coloured  radiance  of 
the  firmament,  are  unheeded.  The  voice  of  God  that  speaks  in  the  events  of 
daily  life  has  no  lesson  for  him.  The  senses,  which  are  intended  as  the  avenues  of 
light  and  teaching  to  the  soul,  are  dulled  by  inaction,  clogged  by  supine  indiffer- 
ence, and  polluted  and  damaged  by  inveterate  sin.  When  the  reason  is  poisoned 
at  its  source,  all  its  deductions  are  aimless  and  worthless. 

II.  Effected  by  the  personal  knowledge  of  the  truth  in  Christ. — "  But  ye  have 
not  so  learned  Christ,  ...  as  the  truth  is  in  Jesus"  (vers.  20,  21).  The  gospel 
has  introduced  to  the  world  the  principles  of  a  great  moral  change.  It  announces 
Christ  as  the  light  of  the  world — a  light  that  shines  through  all  the  realms  of 
human  life.  The  diseased  reason  is  restored  to  health,  the  intellectual  faculties 
have  now  a  theme  worthy  of  their  noblest  exercise,  and  are  made  stronger  and 
more  reliable  by  being  employed  on  such  a  theme,  and  the  moral  nature  is  lifted 
into  a  purer  region  of  thought  and  experience.  The  world  is  to  be  transformed 
by  the  moral  transformation  of  the  individual,  and  that  transformation  is  effected 
only  by  the  truth  and  a  personal  faith  in  Christ. 

III.  Involves  the  renunciation  of  the  corrupting  elements  of  the  former  life. — 
"  That  ye  put  off.  .  .  the  old  man,  which  is  corrupt  "  (ver.  22).  The  inward  change 
is  evidenced  by  the  outward  life.  The  old  man  dies,  being  conquered  by  the  new. 
Corruption  and  decay  marked  every  feature  of  the  old  Gentile  life.  It  was  gan- 
grened with  vice.  It  was  a  life  of  fleshly  pleasure,  and  could  end  in  only  one  way 
— in  disappointment  and  misery.  The  new  moral  order  inaugurated  by  the  gospel 
of  Christ  effected  a  revolution  in  human  affairs,  and  the  corrupting  elements  of 
the  old  order  must  be  weeded  out  and  put  away.  An  excellent  man  in  London 
kept  an  institution  near  the  Seven  Dials  at  his  own  expense.  He  spent  his 
nights  in  bringing  the  homeless  boys  from  the  streets  into  it.  When  they  came 
in  he  photographed  them,  and  then  they  were  washed,  clothed,  and  educated. 
When  he  sent  one  out,  having  taught  him  a  trade,  he  photographed  him  again. 
The  change  was  marvellous,  and  was  a  constant  reminder  of  what  had  been  done 
for  him.  The  change  effected  in  us  by  the  grace  of  God  not  only  contrasts  with 
our  former  life,  but  should  teach  us  to  hate  and  put  away  its  corrupting  sins. 

223 


chap.  iv.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


IV.  Evidenced  in  investing  the  soul  with  the  new  life  divinely  created  and 
constantly  receiving  progressive  renewal  by  the  Spirit  (vers.  23,  24). — It  is  a 
continual  rejuvenation  the  apostle  describes ;  the  verb  is  present  in  tense,  and 
the  newness  implied  is  that  of  recency  and  youth,  newness  in  point  of  age.  But 
the  new  man  to  be  put  on  is  of  a  new  kind  and  order.  It  is  put  on  when  the 
Christian  way  of  life  is  adopted,  when  we  enter  personally  into  the  new  humanity 
founded  in  Christ.  Thus  two  distinct  conceptions  of  the  life  of  faith  are  placed 
before  our  minds.  It  consists,  on  the  one  hand,  of  a  quickening  constantly 
renewed  in  the  springs  of  our  individual  thought  and  will ;  and  it  is  at  the  same 
time  the  assumption  of  another  nature,  the  investiture  of  the  soul  with  the 
divine  character  and  form  of  its  being.  The  inward  reception  of  Christ's  Spirit  is 
attended  by  the  outward  assumption  of  His  character  as  our  calling  amongst 
men.  The  man  of  the  coming  times  will  not  be  atheistic  or  agnostic  ;  he  will  be 
devout :  not  practising  the  world's  ethics  with  the  Christian's  creed ;  he  will  be 
upright  and  generous,  manly  and  God-like  (Findlay). 

Lessons. — 1.  Religion  is  a  corriplete  renewal  of  the  soul.  2.  The  soul  is  renewed  by 
the  instrumentality  of  the  truth.  3.  The  renewal  of  the  soul  is  the  renewal  of  the 
outward  life. 


GERM  NOTES   ON  THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  17,  19.  The  Gentile  Life— a 
Warning. 

I.  The  Gentiles  walked  in  the 
vanity  of  their  minds.  —  The  false 
deities  the  Gentiles  worshipped  are 
called  vanities.  The  prevalence  of 
idolatry  is  a  melancholy  proof  of  the 
depravity  of  human  nature.  Atheism 
and  idolatry  proceed  not  from  the  want 
of  sufficient  evidence  that  there  is 
one  eternal,  all-perfect  Being,  but  from 
that  corruption  of  heart  which  blinds 
the  understanding  and  perverts  the 
judgment. 

II.  The  heathens  were  darkened  in 
their  understanding. — Not  in  respect 
of  natural  things,  for  in  useful  arts 
and  liberal  sciences  many  of  them 
greatly  excelled  ■  but  in  respect  of 
moral  truth  and  obligation.  Their 
darkness  was  owing,  not  solely  to  the 
want  of  revelation,  but  to  the  want  of 
an  honest  and  good  heart.  Religion 
consists  not  merely  in  a  knowledge  of 
and  assent  to  divine  truths,  but  in 
such  conformity  of  heart  to  their 
nature  and  design,  and  in  such  a  view 
of  their  reality  and  importance  as  will 
bring  the  whole  man  under  their 
government. 

III.  They  were  alienated  from  the 
life  of  God.  —  They  walked  according 
to  the  course  of  the  world,  not  accord - 

224 


ing  to  the  will  of  God.  Their  alienation 
was  through  ignorance.  Particular 
wrong  actions  may  be  excused  on 
the  ground  of  unavoidable  ignorance. 
This  ignorance  had  its  foundation  in 
the  obstinacy  and  perverseness  of  the 
mind.  Such  a  kind  of  ignorance,  being 
in  itself  criminal,  will  not  excuse  the 
sins  which  follow  from  it. 

IV.  They  were  become  past  feeling. 
— This  is  elsewhere  expressed  by  a 
conscience  seared  with  a  hot  iron.  By 
a  course  of  iniquity  the  sinner  acquires 
strong  habits  of  vice.  As  vicious 
habits  gain  strength,  fear,  shame,  and 
remorse  abate.  Repeated  violations  of 
conscience  blunt  its  sensibility  and 
break  its  power. 

V.  They  gave  themselves  over  to 
lasciviousness. — If  we  break  over  the 
restraints  the  gospel  lays  upon  us, 
and  mock  the  terrors  it  holds  up  to 
our  view,  we  not  only  discover  a  great 
vitiosity  of  mind,  but  run  to  greater 
lengths  in  the  practice  of  iniquity.  As 
water,  when  it  has  broken  through  its 
mounds,  rushes  on  with  more  im- 
petuous force  than  the  natural  stream, 
so  the  corruptions  of  the  human  heart, 
when  they  have  borne  down  the 
restraints  of  religion,  press  forward 
with  more  violent  rapidity,  and  make 
more  awful    devastation   in    the   soul 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS.         chap.  iv. 


than  where  these  restraints  had  never 
been  known. 

Reflections. — 1.  How  extremely  dan- 
gerous it  is  to  continue  in  sin  under 
the  gospel.  2.  You  have  need  to  guard 
against  the  beginnings  of  sin.  3.  Chris- 
tians must  be  watchful  lest  they  be  led 
away  by  the  influence  of  corrupt 
example.  4.  Religion  lies  much  in  the 
temper  of  the  mind. — Lathrop. 

Vers.  17,  18.  The  Life  of  God. 

I.  There  is  but  one  righteousness, 
the  life  of  God ;  there  is  but  one  sin, 
and  that  is  being  alienated  from  the 
life  of  God. — One  man  may  commit 
different  sorts  of  sins  from  another — 
one  may  lie,  another  may  steal ;  one 
may  be  proud,  another  may  be 
covetous;  but  all  these  different  sins 
come  from  the  same  root  of  sin,  they 
are  all  flowers  off  the  same  plant. 
And  St.  Paul  tells  us  what  that  one 
root  of  sin,  what  that  same  devil's 
plant,  is,  which  produces  all  sin  in 
Christian  heathen.  It  is  that  we  are 
every  one  of  us  worse  than  we  ought 
to  be,  worse  than  we  know  how  to  be, 
and,  strangest  of  all,  worse  than  we 
wish  or  like  to  be.  Just  as  far  as  we 
are  like  the  heathen  of  old,  we  shall 
be  worse  than  we  know  how  to  be. 
For  we  are  all  ready  enough  to  turn 
heathens  again,  at  any  moment.  They 
were  alienated  from  the  life  of  God — 
that  is,  they  became  strangers  to  God's 
life ;  they  forgot  what  God's  life  and 
character  was  like  ;  or  if  they  even  did 
awake  a  moment,  and  recollect  dimly 
what  God  was  like,  they  hated  that 
thought.  They  hated  to  think  that 
God  was  what  He  was,  and  shut  their 
eyes  and  stopped  their  ears  as  fast  as 
possible.  And  what  happened  to  them 
in  the  meantime?  What  was  the 
fruit  of  their  wilfully  forgetting  what 
God's  life  was  ?  St.  Paul  tells  us  that 
they  fell  into  the  most  horrible  sins — 
sins  too  dreadful  and  shameful  to 
be  spoken  of  ;  and  that  their  common 
life,  even  when  they  did  not  run  into 
such  fearful  evils,  was  profligate, 
fierce,  and  miserable.  And  yet  St. 
Paul  tells  us  all  the  while  they  knew 


the  judgment  of  God,  that  those  who 
do  such  things  are  worthy  of  death. 

II.  These  men  saw  that  man  ought 
to  be  like  God ;  they  saw  that  God 
was  righteous  and  good;  and  they 
saw,  therefore,  that  unrighteousness 
and  sin  must  end  in  ruin  and  ever- 
lasting misery. — So  much  God  had 
taught  them,  but  not  much  more ;  but 
to  St.  Paul  He  had  taught  more. 
Those  wise  and  righteous  heathen 
could  show  their  sinful  neighbours  that 
sin  was  death,  and  that  God  was 
righteous;  but  they  could  not  tell 
them  how  to  rise  out  of  the  death  of 
sin  into  God's  life  of  righteousness. 
They  could  preach  the  terrors  of  the 
law,  but  they  did  not  know  the  good 
news  of  the  gospel,  and  therefore  they 
did  not  succeed ;  they  did  not  convert 
their  neighbours  to  God.  Then  came 
St.  Paul  and  preached  to  the  very 
same  people,  and  he  did  convert 
them  to  God  ;  for  he  had  good  news 
for  them,  of  things  which  prophets  and 
kings  had  desired  to  see,  and  had  not 
seen  themselves,  and  to  hear,  and  had 
not  heard  them.  And  so  God,  and  the 
life  of  God,  was  manifested  in  the  flesh 
and  reasonable  soul  of  a  man ;  and 
from  that  time  there  is  no  doubt  what 
the  life  of  God  is,  for  the  life  of  God 
is  the  life  of  Christ.  There  is  no 
doubt  now  what  God  is  like,  for  God  is 
like  Jesus  Christ. 

III.  Now  what  is  the  everlasting 
life  of  God,  which  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  lived  perfectly,  and  which  He 
can  and  will  make  every  one  of  us 
live,  in  proportion  as  we  give  up  cur 
hearts  and  wills  to  Him,  and  ask  Him 
to  take  charge  of  us  and  shape  us 
and  teach  us  1  And  God  is  perfect  love, 
because  He  is  perfect  righteousness ; 
for  His  love  and  His  justice  are  not  two 
different  things,  two  different  parts  of 
God,  as  some  say,  who  fancy  that 
God's  justice  had  to  be  satisfied  in  one 
way  and  His  love  in  another,  and  talk 
of  God  as  if  His  justice  fought  against 
His  love,  and  desired  the  death  of  a 
sinner,  and  then  His  love  fought 
against  His  justice,  and  desired  to  save 
a  sinner.      The  old  heathen    did  not 

225 


CHAP.  IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


like  such  a  life,  therefore  they  did 
not  like  to  retain  God  in  their  know- 
ledge. They  knew  that  man  ought  to 
be  like  God ;  and  St.  Paul  says  they 
ought  to  have  known  what  God  was 
like — that  He  was  love;  for  St.  Paul 
told  them  He  left  not  Himself  without 
witness,  in  that  He  sent  rain  and 
fruitful  seasons,  filling  their  hearts 
with  food  and  gladness.  That  was,  in 
St.  Paul's  eyes,  God's  plainest  witness 
of  Himself — the  sign  that  God  was 
love,  making  His  sun  shine  on  the  just 
and  on  the  unjust,  and  good  to  the 
unthankful  and  the  evil — in  one  word, 
perfect,  because  He  is  perfect  love. 
But  they  preferred  to  be  selfish, 
covetous,  envious,  revengeful,  delight- 
ing to  indulge  themselves  in  filthy 
pleasures,  to  oppress  and  defraud  each 
other. 

IV.  God  is  love. — As  I  told  you 
just  now,  the  heathen  of  old  might 
have  known  that,  if  they  chose  to 
open  their  eyes  and  see.  But  they 
would  not  see.  They  were  dark,  cruel, 
and  unloving,  and  therefore  they 
fancied  that  God  was  dark,  cruel,  and 
unloving  also.  They  did  not  love  love, 
and  therefore  they  did  not  love  God, 
for  God  is  love.  And  therefore  they 
did  not  love  each  other,  but  lived  in 
hatred  and  suspicion  and  selfishness 
and  darkness.  They  were  but  heathen. 
But  if  even  they  ought  to  have  known 
that  God  was  love,  how  much  more 
we  ?  For  we  know  of  a  deed  of  God's 
love,  such  as  those  poor  heathen  never 
dreamed  of.  And  then,  if  we  have 
God  abiding  with  us,  and  filling  us 
with  His  eternal  life,  what  more  do  we 
need  for  life,  or  death,  or  eternity,  or 
eternities  of  eternities  ?  For  we  shall 
live  in  and  with  and  by  God,  who  can 
never  die  or  change,  an  everlasting 
life  of  love. — C.  Kingsley. 

Ver.  19.  Past  Feeling.— 1.  Though 
original  sin  has  seized  upon  the  whole 
soul,  yet  the  Lord  has  kept  so  much 
knowledge  of  Himself  and  of  right 
and  wrong  in  the  understanding  of 
men  as  they  may  know  when  they 
sin,  and  so  much  of  conscience  as  to 

226 


accuse  or  excuse  according  to  the  nature 
of  the  fact,  whereupon  follows  grief 
or  joy  in  their  affections.  Wicked  men 
may  arrive  at  such  a  height  of  sin 
as  to  have  no  sense  of  sin,  no  grief, 
nor  check,  nor  challenge  from  con- 
science from  it.  2.  A  watchful  con- 
science doing  its  duty  is  the  strongest 
restraint  from  sin ;  and  where  that 
is  not,  all  other  restraints  will  serve 
for  little  purpose.  For  a  man  to  be 
given  over  to  lasciviousness  without 
check  or  challenge  argues  a  great 
height  of  impiety.  3.  As  upon  sense- 
less stupidity  of  conscience  there  follows 
an  unsatiableness  in  sinning,  especially 
in  the  sin  of  uncleanness,  so  when  a 
man  comes  to  this,  he  is  then  arrived 
at  the  greatest  height  of  sin  unto 
which  the  heathens,  destitute  of  the 
knowledge  of  God,  ever  attained. — 
Fergusson. 

Vers.  20-24.  Putting  off  the  Old 
Nature  and  putting  on  the  New. 

I.  The  change  here  spoken  of  is 
radically  seated  in  the  mind. — These 
terms  do  not  import  the  creation  of 
new  powers  and  faculties,  but  the 
introduction  of  new  tempers  and 
qualities.  The  renovation  enlightens 
the  eyes  of  the  understanding,  and 
gives  new  apprehensions  of  divine 
things.  It  purifies  the  affections  and 
directs  them  to  their  proper  objects. 
There  are  new  purposes  and  resolu- 
tions. 

II.  He  who  is  renewed  puts  off  the 
old  man. — The  new  spirit  is  opposite 
to  sin  and  strives  against  it.  The 
Christian  mortifies  the  affections  and 
lusts  of  the  flesh  because  he  has  found 
them  deceitful.  He  in  deliberate  and 
hearty  purpose  renounces  all  sin.  He 
abstains  from  the  appearance  of  evil. 

III.  He  puts  on  the  new  man. — As 
the  former  signifies  a  corrupt  temper 
and  conversation,  so  the  latter  must 
intend  a  holy  and  virtuous  disposition 
and  character.  The  new  man  is  re- 
newed in  righteousness  and  true 
holiness.  He  not  only  ceases  to  do 
evil,  but  learns  to  do  well. 

IY.  The    pattern     according     to 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  IV. 


which  the  new  man  is  formed  is  the 
image  of  God. — The  likeness  must 
be  understood  with  limitations.  The 
image  of  God  in  us  bears  no  resem- 
blance to  the  perfections  in  the  divine 
nature,  such  as  immensity,  immuta- 
bility, and  independence.  There  are 
some  essential  properties  of  the  new 
man  to  which  there  is  nothing 
analogous  in  the  deity.  Reverence, 
obedience,  trust,  and  resignation  are 
excellencies  m"  rational  creatures ;  but 
cannot  be  ascribed  to  the  Creator.  In 
those  moral  perfections  in  which  the 
new  man  is  made  like  God  there  is 
only  a  faint  resemblance,  not  an 
equality.  The  new  man  resembles  God 
in  mercy  and  goodness,  in  holiness,  in 
truth. 

Y.  This  great  change  is  effected  by 
the  gospel. — It  was  the  consequence  of 
their  having  learned  Christ.  The  first 
production  and  improvement  of  this 
change  is  the  work  of  divine  grace, 
and  the  Spirit  of  God  works  on  the 
soul  by  means  of  the  word.  To  this 
change  the  use  of  means  and  the  grace 
of  God  are  both  necessary. 

VI.  The  change  is  great. — Let  none 
imagine  he  is  a  subject  of  this 
change  merely  because  he  entertains 
some  new  sentiments,  feels  transient 
emotions,  or  has  renounced  some  of 
his  former  guilty  practices.  The  real 
nature  and  essence  of  conversion  is  the 
same  in  all. — Lathrop. 

Religious  Affections  are  attended  with 
a  Change  of  Nature. 

I.  What  is  conversion? — 1.  A  change 
of  nature.  2.  A  permanent  change. 
3.  A  universal  change.  4.  A  union  of 
God's  Spirit  with  the  faculties  of  the 
soul.  5.  Christ  by  His  grace  savingly 
lives  in  the  soul. 

II.  Its  connection  with  sanctifica- 
tion. — 1.  All  the  affections  and  dis- 
coveries subsequent  to  the  first  con- 
version are  transforming.  2.  This 
transformation  of  nature  is  continuous 
until  the  end  of  life,  when  it  is  brought 
to  perfection  in  glory. 

III.  Reflections. — 1.  Allowance  must 
be    made    for    the    natural    temper. 


2.  Affections  which  have  no  abiding 
effect  are  not  spiritual  and  gracious. 

3.  In  some  way  it  will  be  evident,  even 
to  others,  that  the  true  disciple  has 
been  with  Jesus. — Lewis  0.  Thompson. 

Ver.  23.  The  Christian  Spirit,  a  New 
Spirit. 

I.  There  are  some  changes  in  men 
which  come  not  up  to  the  renewed 
spirit,  and  yet  are  too  often  rested  in. 
— 1.  The  assuming  of  a  new  name  and 
profession  is  a  very  different  thing 
from  a  saving  change  in  the  temper  of 
the  mind.  We  may  be  of  any  pro- 
fession, and  yet  be  unrenewed.  People 
value  themselves  upon  wearing  the 
Christian  name,  instead  of  that  of 
Pagan,  or  Jew,  or  Mahometan ;  or 
upon  being  styled  Papists  or  Protest- 
ants; or  upon  their  attaching  them- 
selves to  one  or  another  noted  party, 
into  which  these  are  subdivided,  and 
upon  such  a  new  appellation  they  are 
too  ready  to  imagine  that  they  are 
new  men :  whereas  we  may  go  the 
round  of  all  professions,  and  still  have 
the  old  nature  remaining  in  full  force. 
2.  A  bare  restraint  upon  the  corrupt 
spirit  and  temper  will  not  come  up 
to  this  renovation,  though  the  one  may 
sometimes  be  mistaken  for  the  other. 
The  light  of  nature  may  possess  con- 
science against  many  evils,  or  a  sober 
education  lay  such  a  bridle  upon  the 
corrupt  inclination  as  will  keep  it  in 
for  a  season,  the  fear  of  punishment 
or  of  shame  and  reproach  may  suppress 
the  outward  criminal  act,  while  the 
heart  is  full  of  ravening  and  wickedness. 
Therefore,  though  it  is  a  plain  sign  of 
an  unrenewed  mind  if  a  man  live  in 
any  course  of  gross  sin,  yet  it  is  not 
safe  to  conclude  merely  from  restraints 
that  a  man  is  truly  renewed.  3.  A 
partial  change  in  the  temper  itself  will 
not  amount  to  such  a  renovation  as 
makes  a  true  Christian.  Indeed,  in 
one  sense  the  change  is  but  partial  in 
any  in  this  life ;  there  will  be  remains 
of  disorder  in  all  the  powers  of  the 
soul,  so  as  to  exclude  a  pretence  to 
absolute  perfection.  It  is  not  enough 
to  have  the   mind   filled   with   sound 

227 


CHAP.  IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS. 


knowledge  and  useful  notions,  nor 
barely  to  give  a  dead  assent  to  the 
doctrines  of  the  gospel,  unless  we 
believe  with  the  heart,  and  the  will  and 
affections  be  brought  under  the  power 
of  those  truths  j  and  even  here  there 
may  be  some  alternation,  and  yet  a 
man  not  be  renewed.  Nor  is  it 
sufficient  that  we  should  find  ourselves 
disposed  to  some  parts  of  goodness, 
while  our  hearts  are  utterly  averse  to 
others  which  are  equally  plain.  And 
therefore,  though  we  should  be  of  a 
courteous,  peaceable,  and  kind  temper 
towards  men;  though  we  should  be 
inclined  to  practise  justice,  liberality, 
truth,  and  honesty  in  our  transactions 
with  them,  and  to  temperance  and 
chastity  in  our  personal  conduct ; 
though  these  are  excellent  branches  of 
the  Christian  spirit ;  yet  if  there  be 
not  a  right  temper  towards  God  also, 
if  the  fear  and  love  of  God  are  not  the 
ruling  principles  of  the  soul,  there  is  an 
essential  defect  in  the  Christian  spirit. 
II.  A  particular  view  of  this  renova- 
tion in  some  principal  acts  of  the  mind. 
— 1.  The  mind  comes  to  have  different 
apprehensions  of  things,  such  as  it 
had  not  before.  The  new  creation 
begins  with  light,  as  the  old  is  repre- 
sented to  do.  Light  bearing  in,  and 
the  mind  being  fixed  in  attention,  man 
discerns  the  great  corruption  of  his 
heart,  and  the  badness  of  the  principles 
and  ends  which  governed  him  in  the 
appearances  of  goodness,  upon  which 
he  valued  himself  before.  And  so  the 
excellency  and  suitableness  of  Christ, 
in  all  His  offices,  and  the  necessity  of 
real,  inward  holiness,  appear  in  quite 
another  manner  to  his  soul  than 
hitherto.  2.  The  practical  judgment 
is  altered.  This  light,  shining  with 
clearness  and  strength  into  the  mind, 
unsettles  and  changes  the  whole 
practical  judgment  by  which  a  man 
suffered  himself  to  be  governed  before 
in  the  matters  of  his  soul.  He  judges 
those  truths  of  religion  to  be  real 
which  once  had  no  more  force  with 
him  than  doubtful  conclusions,  and 
accordingly  he  cannot  satisfy  himself 
any   longer   barely   not   to    disbelieve 

228 


them,  but  gives  a  firm  and  lively 
assent  to  them.  3.  A  new  turn  is 
given  to  the  reasoning  faculty,  and  a 
new  use  made  of  it.  When  the  word 
of  God  is  mighty  it  casts  down 
imaginations  ;  so  we  render  the  original 
word  (2  Cor.  x.  5).  It  properly 
signifies  "  reasonings."  Not  that  the 
faculty  itself  is  altered,  or  that  when 
men  begin  to  be  religious  they  lay 
aside  reasoning  :  then  in  truth  they 
act  with  the  highest  reason;  they 
reason  most  justly  and  most  worthy  of 
their  natures.  But  now  the  wrong 
bias,  which  was  upon  the  reasoning 
faculty  from  old  prejudices  and  head- 
strong inclinations,  is  in  a  good  measure 
taken  off ;  so  that  instead  of  its  being 
pressed  at  all  adventures  into  the 
service  of  sin,  it  is  employed  a  better 
way,  and  concludes  with  more  truth 
and  impartiality.  4.  There  is  an 
alteration  in  a  man's  governing  aim, 
or  chief  end.  This  is  like  the  centre, 
to  which  all  inferior  aims  and  particular 
pursuits  tend.  The  original  end  of  a 
reasonable  creature  must  be  to  enjoy 
the  favour  of  God  as  his  supreme 
happiness,  to  be  acceptable  and  pleasing 
to  him.  By  the  disposition  of  depraved 
nature  we  are  gone  off  from  this  centre, 
and  have  changed  our  bias,  from  God 
to  created  good,  to  the  pleasing  of  the 
flesh,  to  the  gratification  of  our  own 
humour,  or  to  the  obtaining  of  some 
present  satisfaction,  according  to  the 
prevailing  dictate  of  fancy  or  appetite. 
This  makes  the  greatest  turn  that  can 
be  in  the  spirit  of  the  mind ;  all  must 
be  out  of  course  till  this  be  set  right. 
Now  it  is  the  most  essential  part  of  the 
new  nature  to  bring  a  sinner  in  this 
respect  to  himself,  that  is,  to  bring  him 
back  to  God.  All  the  light  he  receives, 
all  the  rectification  of  his  judgment, 
is  in  order  to  this  ;  and  when  this  is 
well  settled,  everything  else,  which 
was  out  of  course  before,  will  return 
to  its  right  channel.  5.  There  is 
hereupon  a  new  determination  to  such 
a  course  of  acting  as  will  most 
effectually  secure  this  end.  As  long 
as  this  world  is  the  chief  good  which  a 
man  has  in  view,  he  contrives  the  best 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHES1ANS.         chap.  IV. 


ways  he  can  think  of  to  promote  his  thing  that  renders  his  interests  in  God 

particular  ends  in  it.     But  when  the  doubtful  or  brings  his  covenant -rela- 

favour    of    God    comes    to    have   the  tion  into  question ;    and  nothing  sets 

principal    share    in    his     esteem,     he  the  springs  of  godly  sorrow  flowing  so 

carefully  examines  and  heartily  consents  much    as    the    consciousness    of    guilt, 

to  the  prescribed  terms  of  making  that  or  of  any  unworthy  behaviour  to  God. 
sure.     Now  he  is  desirous  to  be  found  Lessons. — 1.  Let  us  seriously  examine 

in    Christ    upon    any    terms.      6.  The  our  own  minds,  vihether  we  can  discern 

exercise  of  the  affections  becomes  very  such  an  alteration  made  in  our  spirit. 

different.      A    change    will   appear   in  2.  If  we  must  answer  in  the  .negative, 

this     respect,    through    the    different  or  have  just  ground  to  fear  it,  yet  let  us 

turns  of  his  condition  as  well  as  in  the  not  despair  of  a  change  still,  but  apply 

prevailing  tenor  of  his  practice.    While  ourselves  speedily  in  the  appointed  way 

a  man  is  a  stranger  to  God  and  blind  to  seek  after  it.     3.  Let  the  best  retain 

to  the  interests  of  his  soul,  he  is  little  a  sense  of  the  imperfection  of  the  new 

concerned  how  matters  lie  between  God  nature  in  them,  and  of  their  obligation 

and  him.     But  a  sinner  come  to  him-  still    to   cultivate   it,    till   it   arrive   at 

self  is  most  tenderly  concerned  at  any-  perfection. — Dr.  Evans. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PAR  AGRA  PH. —Verses  25—32. 

Christian  Principles  applied  to  Common  Life. 

Let  us  put  these  principles  into  the  form  of  concrete  precepts. 

I.  Be  truthful. — "  Putting  away  lying,  speak  every  man  truth,  .  .  .  for  we  are 
members  one  of  another  "  (ver.  25).  Society  is  so  closely  welded  together  and 
interdependent  that  the  evil  effects  of  a  falsehood  not  only  damage  others  but 
rebound  ultimately  towards  the  man  who  uttered  it.  A  lie  is  a  breach  of 
promise ;  for  whosoever  seriously  addresses  his  discourse  to  another  tacitly 
promises  to  speak  the  truth,  because  he  knows  the  truth  is  expected.  Truth 
never  was  indebted  to  a  lie.  "  In  the  records  of  all  human  affairs,"  writes  Froude, 
"  it  cannot  be  too  often  insisted  on  that  two  kinds  of  truths  run  for  ever  side  by 
side,  or  rather  crossing  in  and  out  with  each  other  form  the  warp  and  woof  of 
the  coloured  web  we  call  history:  the  one  the  literal  and  eternal  truths  correspond- 
ing to  the  eternal  and  as  yet  undiscovered  laws  of  fact ;  the  other  the  truths  of 
feeling  and  thought,  which  embody  themselves  either  in  distorted  pictures  of 
outward  things  or  in  some  entirely  new  creation — sometimes  moulding  and 
shaping  history  ;  sometimes  taking  the  form  of  heroic  biography,  tradition,  or 
popular  legend." 

II.  Avoid  sinful  anger. — "  Be  ye  angry,  and  sin  not :  .  .  .  neither  give  place  to 
the  devil  "  (vers.  26,  27).  Anger  is  not  forbidden.  A  nature  ardent  for  truth  and 
justice  burns  with  indignation  against  cruelty  and  wrong.  But  it  is  a  dangerous 
passion  even  for  the  best  of  men,  and  is  apt  to  exceed  the  limits  of  prudence  and 
affection.  I  To  nurse  our  wrath  and  brood  over  our  imagined  wrongs  is  to  give 
place  to  the  devil,  who  is  ever  near  to  blow  up  the  dying  embers  of  our  anger. 
Plutarch  tells  us  it  was  an  ancient  rule  of  the  Pythagoreans  that,  if  at  any  time 
they  happened  to  be  provoked  by  anger  to  abusive  language,  before  the  sun  set 
they  would  take  each  other's  hands,  and  embracing  make  up  their  quarrel.  The 
Christian  must  not  be  behind  the  pagan  in  placability  and  forgiveness. 

III.  Be  honest. — "  Let  him  that  stole  steal  no  more  :  but  rather  let  him 
labour "  (ver.  28).  Laziness  is  a  fruitful  source  of  dishonesty,  and  is  itself 
dishonest.  There  are  sensitive  natures  to  whom  it  is  very  difficult  to  be  dishonest. 
In  Abraham  Lincoln's  youthful  days  he  was  a  storekeeper's  clerk.  Once,  after 
he  had  sold  a  woman  a  little  bill  of  goods  and  received  the  money,  he  found  on 

229 


chap.  IV.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


looking  over  the  account  again  that  she  had  given  him  six  and  a  quarter  cents 
too  much.  The  money  burned  in  his  hands  until  he  had  locked  the  shop  and; 
started  on  a  walk  of  several  miles  in  the  night  to  make  restitution  before  lie 
slept.  On  another  occasion,  after  weighing  and  delivering  a  pound  of  tea,  he 
found  a  small  weight  upon  the  scales.  He  immediately  weighed  out  the 
quantity  of  tea  of  which  he  had  innocently  defrauded  the  customer,  and  went  in 
search  for  her,  his  sensitive  conscience  not  permitting  any  delay.  The  thief  is 
not  reformed  and  made  an  industrious  worker  by  simply  showing  him  the 
advantages  of  honesty.  The  apostle  appeals  to  a  higher  motive — sympathy  for 
the  needy — "  That  he  may  have  to  give  to  him  that  needeth."  Let  the  spirit 
of  love  *and  brotherhood  be  aroused,  and  the  indolent  becomes  diligent,  the 
pilferer  honest. 

IV.  Be  circumspect  in  speech. — "  Let  no  corrupt  communication  proceed  out 
of  your  mouth "  (ver.  29).  The  possession  of  a  human  tongue  is  an  immense 
responsibility.  Infinite  good  or  mischief  lies  in  its  power.  The  apostle  does  not 
simply  forbid  injurious  words  ;  he  puts  an  embargo  on  all  that  is  not  positively 
useful.  Not  that  he  requires  all  Christian  speech  to  be  grave  and  serious.  It  is 
the  mere  talk,  whether  frivolous  or  pompous — spoken  from  the  pulpit  or  the 
easy-chair — the  incontinence  of  tongue,  the  flux  of  senseless,  graceless,  unprofit- 
able utterance,  that  he  desires  to  arrest  (Findlay). 

V.  Grieve  not  the  Holy  Spirit  (ver.  30). — Perhaps  in  nothing  do  we  grieve 
the  Spirit  more  than  by  foolish  and  unprofitable  speech,  or  by  listening  willingly 
and  without  protest  to  idle  gossip  and  uncharitable  backbiting.  His  sealing  of 
our  hearts  becomes  fainter,  and  our  spiritual  life  declines,  as  we  become  indiscreet 
and  vain  in  speech. 

YI.  Guard  against  a  malicious  disposition. — "  Let  all  bitterness,  wrath, 
anger,  clamour,  and  evil  speaking  be  put  away,  with  all  malice"  (ver.  31). 
Malice  is  badness  of  disposition,  the  aptness  to  envy  and  hatred,  which  apart 
from  any  special  occasion  is  always  ready  to  break  out  in  bitterness  and  wrath. 
Bitterness  is  malice  sharpened  to  a  point  and  directed  against  the  exasperating 
object.  Wrath  and  anger  are  synonymous,  the  former  being  the  passionate 
outburst  of  resentment  in  rage,  the  latter  the  settled  indignation  of  the  aggrieved 
soul.  Clamour  and  railing  give  audible  expression  to  these  and  their  kindred 
tempers.  Clamour  is  the  loud  self-assertion  of  the  angry  man  who  will  make 
every  one  hear  his  grievance ;  while  the  railer  carries  the  war  of  the  tongue  into 
his  enemy's  camp  and  vents  his  displeasure  in  abuse  and  insult.  Never  to  return 
evil  for  evil  and  railing  for  railing,  but  contrariwise  blessing — this  is  one  of  the  ' 
lessons  most  difficult  to  flesh  and  blood  (Findlay). 

VII.  Cherish  a  forgiving  spirit. — "Be  ye  kind,  .  .  .  forgiving  one  another,  even 
as  God  hath  forgiven  you"  (ver.  32).  It  is  man -like  to  resent  an  injury;  it  is 
Christ-like  to  forgive  it.  It  is  a  triumph  of  divine  grace  when  the  man  who  has 
suffered  the  injury  is  the  most  eager  to  effect  a  reconciliation.  Dean  Hook  relates 
he  was  once  asked  to  see  a  gentleman  who  had  ill-treated  him.  Found  him  very 
thin  and  ill.  Told  me  that  he  was  conscious  that  his  feelings  and  conduct  had 
not  been  towards  me  what  they  ought  to  have  been  for  years.  I  told  him  that 
whenever  there  was  a  quarrel  there  were  sure  to  be  faults  on  both  sides,  and 
that  there  must  be  no  question  as  to  the  more  or  less,  but  the  forgiveness  must 
be  mutual.  I  kissed  his  hand,  and  we  wept  and  prayed  together.  O  God,  have 
mercy  on  him  and  me  for  Jesu's  sake  !  I  have  had  a  taste  of  heaven  where 
part  of  our  joy  will  surely  consist  in  our  reconciliations. 

Lessons. — 1.  Religion  governs  the  whole  man.  2.  True  religion  is  intensely 
practical.     3.  Religion  gives  a  nameless  charm  to  the  commonest  duties. 


230 


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS.         chap.  iv. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  25.    Truth  between   Man  and 
Man. 

I.  The  duty  of  veracity  here  re- 
commended.— 1.  Truth  is  to  be  observed 
in  common  conversation.  People  have 
more  special  need,  in  some  respects,  to 
be  admonished  of  their  obligations 
inviolably  to  maintain  truth  here  ;  for 
many  are  more  ready  to  allow  them- 
selves to  transgress  in  what  they 
account  trivial  instances  than  upon 
solemn  occasions;  and  yet  by  such 
beginnings  way  is  made  for  the  dis- 
regard of  truth,  in  the  most  considerable 
matters,  in  process  of  time.  2.  Truth 
should  be  maintained  in  bearing 
testimony.  A  conscientious  regard  to 
truth  will  engage  us  to  be  very  careful 
that  we  spread  nothing  to  the  lessening 
or  reproach  of  our  neighbour,  of  which 
we  have  not  good  assurance ;  that  we 
publish  not  a  defamation  upon  hearsay, 
nor  take  up,  without  sufficient  grounds, 
"  a  report  against  our  neighbour."  If 
we  are  called  to  give  public  testimony 
between  man  and  man,  a  sincere  respect 
to  truth  will  engage  us  to  a  careful  re- 
collection, before  we  give  our  testimony, 
as  to  what  we  can  say  upon  the  matter. 
It  will  dispose  to  lay  aside  affection  on 
one  hand  and  prejudice  on  the  other, 
and  impartially  to  relate  the  true  state 
of  things  as  far  as  we  can  bear  witness 
to  them,  nakedly  to  represent  facts 
as  they  have  come  within  our  notice. 
3.  Truth  must  be  exercised  in  our 
promises  and  engagements,  and  veracity 
requires  two  things  in  relation  to  them : 
(1)  That  we  really  intend  to  perform 
them  when  they  are  made  ;  (2)  That 
we  are  careful  of  performance  after 
they  are  made. 

II.  The  reason  the  apostle  gives  for 
the  inviolable  maintenance  of  truth: 
because  we  are  members  one  of  another. 
— 1.  This  argument  is  applicable  to 
mankind  in  general.  We  are  members 
one  of  another,  as  we  partake  of  the 
same  human  nature,  and  in  that  respect 
are  upon  a  level.  We  are  members  of 
society  in  common,  entitled  to  the 
same  rights,  claims,  and  expectations 


one  from  another  as  men,  and  are 
mutually  helpful  and  subservient  as 
the  members  of  the  body  are  to  each 
other ;  and  the  principal  link  that 
holds  us  together  is  mutual  confidence, 
founded  upon  the  hope  of  common 
fidelity.  Now,  lying  makes  void  and 
useless  the  great  instrument  of  society, 
the  faculty  of  speech  or  writing.  The 
power  of  speech  was  given  us  by  our 
Creator,  and  the  art  of  writing,  since 
found  out,  on  purpose  that  we  might 
be  able  so  to  convey  our  sense  to  others, 
that  they  may  discern  it,  where  we 
pretend  to  express  it,  just  as  if  they 
were  so  far  privy  to  what  passed  in 
our  minds.  And  unless  truth  be 
inviolably  observed  in  everything,  the 
bonds  of  human  society  cannot  fail  to 
be  weakened.  2.  This  argument  may 
be  particularly  applicable  to  Christians. 
We  are  members  one  of  another  in  a 
more  distinguishing  sense,  as  we  belong 
to  the  body  of  Christ.  And  this  lays 
additional  engagements  upon  all  the 
visible  members  of  that  body  to  put 
away  lying  and  to  speak  the  truth 
one  to  the  other, — in  conformity  to 
the  common  Father,  to  whom  we  belong, 
who  is  eminently  styled  "  a  God  of 
truth " ;  in  conformity  to  our  head 
the  Lord  Jesus,  there  should  be  a  strict 
observation  of  truth  among  Christians ; 
in  conformity  to  the  Spirit  that 
animates  us,  who  is  eminently  described 
by  this  attribute,  "  the  Spirit  of  truth." 
Inferences. — 1.  This  is  one  rem  ark- 
able  evidence  how  much  Christianity  is 
calculated  for  the  benefit  of  mankind 
and  the  good  of  society  at  present,  as 
well  as  for  our  everlasting  welfare,  in 
that  it  so  strictly  enjoins  and  enforces 
the  exacted  regard  to  truth.  2.  We 
see  thence  upon  how  good  reason 
the  Christian  religion  strictly  foibids 
common  swearing.  3.  All  that  name 
the  name  of  Christ  are  concerned  to 
see  that  they  comply  with  the  exhorta- 
tion. 4.  Christians  should  do  all  they 
can  to  promote  truth  among  others, 
both  for  the  honour  of  God,  and  the 
spiritual   and    eternal    good    of    their 

231 


chap.  IV.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


neighbours,   and  the  general   interest 
of  society. — Jeremiah  Seed. 

The  Sin  of  Falsehood. 

I.  There  are  cases  in  which  one  may 
speak  that  which  is  not  true  and  yet 
not  be  chargeable  with  lying,  for  he 
may  have  no  intention  to  deceive. 

II.  The  grossest  kind  of  lying,  or 
speaking  a  known  falsehood  under 
the  awful  solemnity  of  an  oath. — Men 
violate  truth  when  they  affix  to  words 
an  arbitrary  meaning  or  make  in  their 
own  minds  certain  secret  reservations 
with  a  design  to  disguise  facts  and 
deceive  the  hearers.  When  we  express 
doubtful  matters  in  terms  and  with 
an  air  of  assurance,  we  may  materially 
injure  as  well  as  grossly  deceive  our 
neighbour.  Men  are  guilty  of  malicious 
falsehood  when  they  repeat  with 
romantic  additions  and  fictitious 
embellishments  the  stories  they  have 
heard  of  a  neighbour  that  they  may 
excite  against  him  severer  ridicule  or 
cast  on  his  character  a  darker  stain. 
Men  may  utter  a  falsehood  by  the 
tone  of  their  voice,  while  their  words 
are  literally  true. 

III.  We  are  bound  to  speak  truth 
in  our  common  and  familiar  conversa- 
tion.— We  must  speak  truth  in  our 
commerce  with  one  another.  In  giving 
public  testimony  we  must  be  careful 
to  say  nothing  but  truth,  and  conceal 
no  part  of  the  truth.  We  must  adhere 
to  truth  when  we  speak  of  men's  actions 
or  characters.  We  must  observe  truth 
in  our  promises. 

IV.  A  regard  to  truth  is  a  necessary 
part  of  the  Christian  character. — De- 
ceitfulness  is  contrary,  not  only  to  the 
express  commands  of  the  gospel,  but  to 
the  dictates  of  natural  conscience. 

Y.  The  argument  the  apostle  urges 
for  the  maintenance  of  truth. — "  We 
are  members  one  of  another."  As  men 
we  are  members  one  of  another.  As 
Christians  we  are  children  of  the  same 
God,  the  God  of  truth  ;  we  are  disciples 
of  the  same  Lord,  the  faithful  and  true 
Witness.  If  we  walk  in  guile  and 
deceit,  if  we  practise  vile  arts  of  dis- 
honesty, we  contradict  our  human  and 

232 


our  Christian  character.  We  see  the 
danger  of  profane  language,  as  it  leads 
to  the  grossest  kind  of  falsehood,  even 
to  perjury  in  public  testimony.  We 
see  how  dangerous  it  is  to  practise 
those  diversions  which  are  attended 
with  temptations  to  fraud. — Lathrop. 

College  Life.     "  For  we  are  members 
one  of  another." 

I.  It   is    for  us  who   govern  and 
teach  to  remember  how  great  is  our 
responsibility  in  those  respects. — We 
are  not  merely  instructors  but  educators 
of  youth.     The  question  of  what  books 
we   use  or  what  vehicles  of  teaching 
we    employ    sinks    into    insignificance 
compared  with  the  question  what  end 
it  is  we  design  in  our  teaching.     Are 
we   prepared   to   abdicate   our   higher 
functions    of    educators   and    to    sink 
down  to   the   lower  one  of   teachers  1 
Must  we  not,  if  we  are  true  to  our 
calling,  strive  to  instil  into  you  that 
manliness  which  springs  from  the  fear 
of  God,  that  truthfulness  which  is  seen 
in  the  frank  look  and  unshrinking  eye, 
that  obedience  which  is  rendered  in  no 
spirit  of  servility  as  unto  the  Lord  and 
not    as    unto    men,    that   self-mastery 
which  is  the  foundation  of  all  wisdom 
and  all  power  1     If  the  soul  is  of  more 
value   than    the    body,  if    the   life  to 
come  is  of  more  importance  than  the 
life  that  now  is,  if  the  knowledge  of 
God  and  His  Christ  is  infinitely  more 
precious  than  all  the  knowledge  of  this 
world  and  all  the  distinction  to  which 
it  leads — then  there  can  be  no  question 
that     education     is    infinitely     before 
instruction,  that  principles  are  higher 
than    knowledge,    that    knowledge   is 
only  of    value  in    proportion  as  it    is 
pervaded  and  sanctified  by  the  Spirit 
of  Christ.    But  precept  without  example 
is   powerless.      A  man   whose   life   is 
pure  and  high  may  not  open  his  lips, 
yet  his  very  silence  shall  be  eloquent 
for  God.     Day  by  day  a  virtue  is  going 
out  of  him ;  day  by  day  he  is  giving 
strength  to  one  who  is  wrestling  with 
doubt  or  temptation  ;  day  by  day  he  is 
a  beacon  to  those  who  are  tossed  on 
the  waves  of  irresolution  and  uncer- 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS.         chap.  IV. 


tainty.     The  teacher,  if  he  is  to  produce  — See  that  you  subdue  your  lusts  and 

a   powerful   moral   effect,  if   he  is  to  rule    your    spirits.       Arm    yourselves 

mould  character,  if  he  is  to  leave  an  with  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  which  is 

impress  upon  the  minds  and  hearts  of  the  word  of  God.     Take  time  to  con- 

those  whom  he  teaches,  must  be  what  sider  whether  any  motive  suggested  in 

he  teaches,  must  live  what  he  incul-  favour  of   sin  is  so   powerful   as   the 

cates.  arguments  the  Scriptures  offer  against 

II.  And  now  I  would  place  before  it.     Our  greatest  danger  is  from  our- 

you  your  duties. — 1.    Keep  distinctly  selves. — Lathrop. 
before  you  the  end  and  aim  of  your 

coming  here — the  ministry  of  Christ's  Ver.  26.  Anger  and  Meekness. 

Church.      2.    You  are  members  of  a  I.  In   what   cases   our  anger  may 

community.      You  are   all   united   to  be    innocently   indulged. — 1.  On    the 

one  another.      You  have  all  common  approach    of    any   injurious    aggressor 

pursuits,      common      ends,      common  threatening  our  destruction,  or  using 

interests.     You  may  all  help  greatly  any  act  of  violence  that  may  endanger 

to   make    or    to   mar    the    lives   and  our    safety.      2.  How    far    soever    the 

characters     of      those     with     whom  harsh  gratings  of  anger  may  seem  to 

you   are   in   such  constant  and   daily  be  removed  from  the  soft  motions  of 

intercourse.       Let    this    consideration  benevolence,  yet   these   sometimes,   as 

have  its  full   weight  with  you.      Be  oil  does  to  steel,  give  an  edge  to  our 

but   true   to    yourselves,    and    to   the  resentment ;   where   it  will   be   found 

God  who  has  called  you  to  the  know-  not  only  innocent  and  excusable,  but 

ledge  of  Himself  and  His  Son  Jesus  even  commendable  and  generous.     As 

Christ,  and  by  you  this  college  shall  in   the   natural   system   of   the  world 

grow  and  prosper.     If  principles  and  there    are    some     repelling    qualities, 

aims  such  as  those  I  have  endeavoured  which   yet   must   conspire  to  aid   the 

to  indicate  prevail  in  a  college,  there  grand   power   of   attraction  ;    so   even 

will  be  a  real  and  substantial  harmony  those  passions  which,  considered  in  a 

between  those  who  govern  and  those  simple  view,   have  but  an   unfriendly 

who  are  governed.     Let  us  strive  one  and  unsociable  aspect,  are  yet,  in  their 

and  all,  teachers  and  taught,  to  make  general     comprehension,     aiding     and 

this  our  college  a  college  of  which  none  assisting    to    preserve    inviolable    the 

can     be     ashamed. — J.     J.      Stewart  bonds  of  the  great  community.    3.  Our 

Perowne    (preached   on   the  forty-sixth  anger  is  apt  to  kindle  at  the  appre- 

anniversary    of    St.    David's     College,  hension  of  a  slight   or  an  affiont,  a 

Lampeter).  contempt  or  reproach  thrown  upon  us ; 

on  which  occasions,  if  the  apprehension 

Vers.  26,  27.  Sinful  Anger.  be  well  grounded,  our  resentment,  to  a 

I.  These  words  are  not  an  injunction  certain  degree,  must  be  allowed  to  be 
to  be  angry,  but  a  caution  not  to  sin  excusable,  and  so  not  sinful.  Our 
when  we  are  angry. — As  there  is  in  our  tameness  in  these  instances  would 
nature  a  principle  of  resentment  against  be  construed  into  stupidity,  and  be 
injury,  so  there  is  in  us  a  virtuous  treated  as  such  by  the  pert  and 
temper,  a  holy  displeasure  against  petulant.  4.  We  may  not  only  be 
moral  evil.  angry  without  sinning  in  the  instances 

II.  Anger  is  sinful  when  it  rises  alleged,  as  we  sometimes  may  sin  in 
without  cause. — Rash  anger  is  sinful.  not  being  angry.  God,  who  designed 
Anger  is  sinful  when  it  breaks  out  human  society,  designed  the  good  of  it; 
into  indecent,  reviling,  and  reproachful  and  that  good  to  be  promoted  by  every 
language  ;  when  it  prompts  to  designs  individual  to  the  utmost  of  his  power, 
or  acts  of  revenge ;  when  it  settles  Hereby  there  is  tacitly  committed  to 
into  malice.  every  man  a  kind  of  trust  and  guar- 

III.  Neither  give  place  to  the  devil,  dianship  of  virtue,  whose  rights 

233 


chap.  IV.         HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


obliged  to  support  and  maintain  in 
proportion  to  his  abilities ;  not  only  by 
example,  by  advice  and  exhortation, 
but  even  by  reproof  and  resentment, 
suitable  to  the  circumstances  of  the 
offender  and  the  offence. 

II.  When  our  anger  becomes   in- 
temperate and  unlawful. — 1.  When  it 
breaks   out   into    outrageous    actions ; 
for   then,    like    a    boisterous    wind,    it 
quite  puts  out  that  light  which  should 
guide  our  feet  in  the  way  of  peace ;  it 
dethrones  our  reason,  and  suspends  its 
exercise.    An  extravagance  of  this  kind 
is  the  more  dangerous,  and   therefore 
the  more  sinful,  because,  though  the 
impulse  of  passion  should   meet  with 
no   opposition    to    inflame    it — which, 
however,   is   generally   the   case — yet, 
when  it  has  worked  the  blood  into  so 
violent  a  ferment,  it  is  apt  of  itself  to 
redouble   its  force.     And   no   one  can 
tell    what    fury,    wound    up    to    the 
highest  pitch,  may  produce.     2.  Anger 
becomes  unlawful  when  it  vents  itself 
in    unseemly   and    reviling    language. 
It  were  to  be  wished  that  those  who 
have  such  a  peculiar  delicacy  of  feeling 
when  they  are  affronted  would  abstain 
from  all  appearance   of  an   affrontive 
and  disrespectful  behaviour  to  others ; 
that  they  who  are  so  quick  to  receive 
would  be  as  slow  to  give  an  affront. 
On  the  contrary,  it  often  happens  that 
they  only  feel  for  themselves  ;  they  are 
not  the  least  sensible  of  the  indignities 
offered  to  others.     How  frequently  do 
those  who  are  highly  enraged  pass  a 
general  and  undistinguishing   censure 
upon  a  man's  character  1     3.  We  are 
not  always  to  judge  of  the  sinfulness 
of  anger  from  the  open  and  undignified 
appearance  of  it,  either  in  our  words 
or  actions;  it  may   be  concealed  and 
treasured  up  in  our  thoughts,  and  yet 
retain  as  much  malignity  as  when  it 
immediately  breaks  out  and  discovers 
itself  in  contumelious  language  or  acts 
of  violence.     For  by  brooding  in  the 
mind  it  becomes  the  parent  of  a  very 
untoward    issue,    malice,    and    hatred. 
Malice  is  a  cool  and  deliberate  resent- 
ment ;  but  sometimes  more  keen  and 
malevolent   than   that  which   is   rash 

234 


and  precipitate.  It  is  like  a  massive 
stone,  slowly  raised,  but  threatening 
the  greater  danger  to  him  on  whom  it 
shall  fall.  Anger  is  yet  sinful  when 
encouraged  in  our  thoughts  to  the 
degree  of  hatred. 

III.  Consider  its  opposite  virtue, 
meekness. — Meekness  is,  as  Aristotle 
long  ago  defined  it,  a  due  mean  between 
tameness  and  stupidity  on  the  one 
hand,  and  rage  and  fury  on  the  other. 
It  is  not  absolute  freedom  from  passion, 
but  such  a  command  over  it  as  to 
prevent  our  being  transported  beyond 
the  bounds  of  humanity  and  good 
sense.  It  is  this  virtue  which,  if  it 
does  not  give  a  man  such  a  glaring 
and  shining  figure  as  some  other  good 
qualities,  yet  constitutes  the  most 
lovely,  beautiful,  and  agreeable  char- 
acter, and  gains  unenvied  praise. 
1.  A  meek  man  will  have  sense 
enough  to  know  when  he  is  injured, 
and  spirit  enough  to  resent  it ;  but 
then  he  will  consider  whether  he  can 
do  more  good  by  openly  resenting  the 
offence  and  punishing  the  offender 
than  by  overlooking  it  and  passing  it 
by.  2.  A  man  of  a  meek  temper  will 
distinguish  between  a  man's  general 
standing  sentiments  when  he  is  per- 
fectly calm  and  undisturbed  and  his 
occasional  sentiments  when  his  spirits 
are  ruffled  and  overheated.  3.  A 
meek  man  will  never  be  angry  with  a 
person  for  telling  him  what  he  imagines 
to  be  a  fault  in  him,  provided  it  be 
done  in  a  private  manner,  and  the 
advice  be  conveyed  in  the  most  palat- 
able vehicle.  4.  A  man  of  a  meek 
spirit  is  glad  to  be  reconciled  to  the 
person  who  has  offended  or  injured 
him,  and  therefore  is  ready  to  hearken 
to  all  overtures  of  accommodation. 
A  meek  man  will  show  such  an  in- 
clination and  readiness  to  forgive  the 
offences  of  others  as  if  he  had  perpetual 
need  of  the  same  indulgence,  but  will 
so  carefully  avoid  giving  the  least 
offence  as  if  it  might  be  thought  she 
would  forgive  nobody. 

Lessons. — 1.  Let  us  endeavour  to 
acquire  a  greatness  of  mind  :  by  this  I 
do  not  mean  arrogance,  for  that  be- 


H0M1LETTC  COMMENTARY:    EPRESIANS.         chap.  IV. 


speaks  a  little  mind — a  mind  that  can 
reflect  on  nothing  within  itself  that 
looks  great  except  arrogance ;  but  a 
true  greatness  of  mind  arises  from 
a  true  judgment  of  things,  and  a  noble 
ascendency  of  the  soul  inclining  us 
to  act  above  what  is  barely  our  duty. 
It  is  rising  to  the  sublime  in  virtue. 
This  will  create  a  reverence  for  our- 
selves, and  will  set  us  as  far  above  the 
mean  gratification  of  giving  any  real 
occasion  of  passion  to  others,  as  of 
being  susceptible  of  it  when  an  occasion 
may  be  given  to  us.  2.  One  of  the 
ancients  said  that  he  had  gained  one 
advantage  from  philosophy :  that  it 
had  brought  him  to  wonder  at  nothing. 
But  it  looks  as  if  we,  the  generality  of 
us,  were  strangers  in  the  world  ;  we 
are  ever  expressing  our  surprise  and 
wonder  at  everything  ;  and  thus  sur- 
prise prepares  the  way  for  passion. 
We  wonder  that  we  should  meet  with 
such  a  behaviour,  such  a  treatment, 
such  an  affront ;  whereas  the  greatest 
wonder  is  that  we  should  wonder  at  it. 
3.  Nothing  can  have  so  prevalent  a 
power  to  still  all  the  undue  agitations 
of  passion  so  apt  to  arise  from  the 
various  connections  we  have  with  the 
prejudices  and  passions  of  others, 
nothing  so  fit  to  induce  a  smooth  and 
easy  flow  of  temper,  as  a  frequent 
application  to  the  throne  of  grace,  to 
beseech  Him,  who  is  the  Gcd  of  Peace, 
that  His  peace  may  rule  in  our  hearts, 
that  it  may  be  the  fixed  and  predomi- 
nant principle  there. — Jeremiah  Seed. 

Ver.  28.  ^4  Warning  against  Theft. 

I.  Here  is  a  general  prohibition  of 
theft. — This  supposes  distinct  rights 
and  separate  properties.  Stealing  is 
taking  and  carrying  away  another's 
goods  in  a  secret  manner  and  without 
his  consent.  The  prohibition  relates 
to  every  unfair,  indirect,  dishonest 
way  by  which  one  may  transfer  to 
himself  the  property  of  another. 

IT,  This  prohibition  of  theft  is  a 
virtual  injunction  of  labour. — If  a 
man  may  not  live  at  the  expense  of 
others,  he  must  live  at  his  own ;  and  if 
he  has  not  the  means  of  subsistence,  he 


must  labour  to  acquire  them.  No 
man  has  a  right  to  live  on  charity  so 
long  as  he  can  live  by  labour.  The 
obligation  to  labour  is  not  confined  to 
the  poor;  it  extends  to  all  according 
to  their  several  capacities. 

III.  Every  man  must  choose  for 
himself  an  honest  calling,  and  must 
work  that  which  is  good.— A  work  in 
which  a  man  makes  gain  by  the  ex-] 
pense  and  enriches  himself  by  the  loss 
of  others  is  theft  embellished  and 
refined.  Gaming,  when  it  is  used  as 
an  art  to  get  money,  is  criminal, 
because  it  is  unprofitable,  and  what 
one  gains  by  it  another  must  lose. 

IV.  In  all  our  labours  we  should 
have  regard  to  the  good  of  others. — 
The  man  who  is  poor  should  aim  to 
mend  his  circumstances  and  to  provide 
not  only  for  his  immediate  support  but 
for  his  future  necessities.  The  con- 
dition which  subjects  us  to  labour  does 
not  exempt  us  from  obligations  to 
beneficence.  Wo  must  confine  our- 
selves within  our  own  proper  sphere, 
for  here  we  can  do  more  good  than 
elsewhere.  In  all  our  works,  secular 
or  spiritual,  charity  must  direct  us. 
Love  is  an  essential  principle  in  religion, 
and  as  essential  in  one  man  as  another. 
— Lathrop. 

St.  Paul's  Exaltation  of  Labour. 
I.  St.  Paul  often  recurs  to  the  plain 
and  quiet  work  of  humble  life. — He 

enforces  not  only  the  duty  of  it,  but 
how  high  the  duty  ranks  ;  and  if  it  is 
well  done,  how  it  raises  those  who  do  it. 
Having  worked  with  his  own  hands,  he 
appreciated  the  sterling  test  of  honest 
attention  to  work.  He  knew  what 
temptations  there  were  to  relax  and  to 
give  in  to  the  sense  of  tediousness  day 
by  day  and  hour  by  hour.  St.  Paul, 
who  honours  the  industry  of  a  slave, 
will  not  allow  it  to  be  dishonoured  by 
the  slave  himself  thinking  himself 
superior  to  it,  and  discourages  all  high 
flights  which  set  him  at  enmity  with 
his  work  and  draw  him  away  from  the 
sterling  Christian  yoke  of  humble 
labour  to  which  he  has  been  called  in 
God's  providence. 

235 


CHAP.  IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS 


II.  At  the  same  time  the  apostle 
does  not  honour  all  industry;  far  from 
it.  He  always  reprobates  the  covetous, 
money-getting  spirit.  He  admires  in- 
dustry, but  it  must  be  industry  which 
is  consecrated  by  the  motive ;  and  the 
motive  which  he  requires  for  it  is  that 
of  duty — when  a  man  fulfils  in  the 
fear  of  God  the  task  which  is  allotted 
to  him.  Men  form  their  religious 
standard  by  two  distinct  tests  :  one  the 
law  of  conscience  and  obedience  to  God, 
the  other  what  is  striking  to  man. 
St.  Paul's  standard  is  seen  in  his 
sympathy  with  the  work  of  the  ruler 
of  a  household,  with  the  work  of  a 
father  or  mother  of  a  family,  the 
work  of  hospitality  and  attention  to 
strangers,  the  work  of  common  trades 
and  callings,  the  work  even  of  the 
slave  in  doing  his  assigned  daily  tasks. 

III.  We  see  the  spirit  of  this  great 
apostle — how  it  embraced  the  whole 
appointed  lot  of  man,  from  his  highest 
to  his  most  humble  field  of  employ- 
ment. He  rejected  nothing  as  mean 
or  low  that  came  by  God's  appointment; 
all  was  good,  all  was  excellent,  all  was 
appropriate  that  He  had  commanded. 
The  heathen  valued  all  labour  by 
which  men  became  eloquent,  or  became 
able  soldiers  or  statesmen ;  but  they 
had  not  the  slightest  respect  for  the 
ordinary  work  of  mankind.  They 
thought  this  world  made  for  the  rich. 
How  different  is  St.  Paul's  view !  No 
work  allotted  to  man  is  servile  work  in 
his  eyes,  because  he  has  an  insight  into 
what  faithful  labour  is — what  strength 
of  conscience  it  requires,  what  resist- 
ance to  temptations  and  snares  it 
demands.  The  word  of  God  conse- 
crates the  ordinary  work  of  man — it 
converts  it  into  every  one's  trial,  and  as 
his  special  trial  his  special  access  to  a 
reward  also. — J.  B.  Mozley. 

Ver.    29.     The    Government    of    the 
Tongue. 

I.  The  apostle  cautions  us  against 
all  loose  and  licentious  language. 

II.  Enticing  language  is  forbidden. 

III.  Corrupt  communication  includes 
all  kinds  of  vain  discourse ;  all  such 

236 


language  as  offends  Christian  sobriety, 
seriousness,  and  gravity,  savours  of 
profaneness  and  impiety,  or  borders  on 
obscenity  and  lewdness. 

IV.  Instruction  is  useful  to  edifying. 

V.  Reproof  conducted  with  prudence 
is  useful  to  edifying. 

VI.  Exhortation  is  good  for  the  use 
of  edifying. 

VII.  Christians  may  edify  one  an- 
other by  communicating  things  they 
have  experienced  in  the  course  of  the 
religious  life. 

VIII.  Conversing  on  religious  sub- 
jects in  general  is  good  for  the  use  of 
edifying. — Lathrop. 

Ver.  30.  The  Benefit  conferred  by  the 
Spirit  on  Believers.  ^^vK 

I.  That  believers  are  sealed  by  the 
Spirit  implies  that  they  are  recognised 
and  set  apart  and  in  a  peculiar  sense 
the  divine  property. — 1.  A  seal  is  often 
a  distinguishing  mark  or  token  by 
which  a  claim  to  property  may  be 
shown  and  established  (Rev.  iii.  2,  3). 
2.  That  believers  are  thus  sealed 
proves  that  they  are  His  in  a  peculiar 
manner.  3.  The  sense  in  which  they 
are  His  is  clearly  brought  out 
(1  Cor.  iii.  23).  They  are  Christ's 
by  gift,  by  purchase,  by  conquest,  by 
surrender.  Christ  is  God's,  and  His 
people  in  Him.  4.  They  who  are 
sealed  are  thus  a  peculiar  people, 
separated  to  God's  worship,  service, 
and  glory.  5.  Have  you  recognised 
practically  that  you  are  God's  ? 

II.  That  believers  are  sealed  implies 
that  attempts  will  be  made  to  alienate 
them  from  God's  possession. — 1.  A 
mark  or  token  is  affixed  to  that  which  is 
in  danger  of  being  taken  away.  2.  We 
are  distinctly  taught  that  believers  are 
exposed  to  efforts  to  separate  them  from 
God  (John  x.  7-10,  27-29).  3.  The 
activity  of  the  wicked  one  seems  in  a 
great   measure   directed  to  this  point. 

4.  The  doctrine  of  the  perseverance  of 
the  saints  does  not  lead  him  to  indolence. 

5.  Your  safety  is  not  merely  to  get 
into  the  place  of  safety,  but  to  continue 
there. 

III.  That    believers    are     sealed 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS.         chap.  iv. 


implies  that  they  have  received  the 
impress  of  the  divine  Image. — 1.  The 

sealing  is  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  whose 
office  it  is  to  regenerate  and  sanctify. 
2.  The  seal  is  that  which  distinguishes 
the  believer  from  the  unbeliever,  and 
the  true  distinguishing  mark  is  re- 
generation. 3.  We  therefore  conclude 
that  the  seal  has  engraven  on  it  the 
image  of  God,  which  it  leaves.  4.  The 
confidence  of  no  one  should  outrun  his 
sanctification.  5.  Can  you  discern 
the  outline  of  the  image  I  There  are 
counterfeits. 

IY.  That  believers  are  sealed  implies 
that,  though  associated  and  mixed  up 
with  others,  they  are  not  confounded 
with  them. — 1.  A  distinguishing  mark 
is  necessary  when  things  which  are 
again  to  be  separated  and  classified  are 
mingled  with  each  other.  2.  The  seal 
leads  to  recognition.  Hence  the  believer 
is  known  by  himself,  fellow-believers, 
the  world,  the  devil,  angels,  Christ, 
the  Father.  3.  This  recognition  takes 
place  in  time,  at  the  judgment,  in 
eternity. 

Y.  That  believers  are  sealed  implies 
that  God  will  visit  the  earth  with  dis- 
tinguishing judgments. — In  proof  and 
illustration  (Ezek.  ix. ;  Rev.  vii.,  ix.). 
The  Passover.  The  destruction  of 
Jerusalem.  Now.  The  judgment  day. 
Are  you  prepared  for  such  a  season  1 

YI.  That  believers  are  sealed  im- 
plies that  they  are  in  a  state  of  reser- 
vation.— A  seal  is  a  pledge,  a  signature. 
An  engagement  presently  fulfilled  needs 
no  pledge. — Stewart. 

The  Office  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the 
Danger  of  grieving  Him. 

I.  His  office  is  to  seal  us  unto  the 
day  of  redemption. — That  day  in  which 
the  people  of  God  will  be  put  into 
complete  possession  of  the  blessings 
purchased  for  them  by  Christ.  To 
seal  us  to  this  day  is  to  prepare  us  and 
to  set  us  apart  from  it,  to  fix  such 
a  mark  on  us  as  in  that  day  shall  dis- 
tinguish us  from  others  and  make  it 
fully  appear  to  whom  we  belong.  When 
a  man  sets  his  seal  to  a  paper,  he  there- 
by declares  his  approbation  of  it  and 


acknowledges  it  to  be  his  own  deed. 
Those  who  bear  the  seal  of  the  Spirit 
will  be  approved  by  Christ  and  ac- 
knowledged for  His  own  in  the  day  of 
resurrection.  A  seal  stamps  its  own 
image  on  the  wax.  The  Spirit  stamps 
on  the  soul  the  image  of  Himself.  This 
seal  is  said  to  be  the  earnest  of  our 
inheritance.  An  earnest  is  a  pledge 
of  something  to  be  bestowed  and  en- 
joyed hereafter — a  part  of  it  is  already 
bestowed  to  assure  us  that  in  due  time 
we  shall  receive  the  whole. 

II.  He  is  not  to  be  grieved. — 1. 
Beware  of  doing  anything  which  your 
conscience,  enlightened  by  the  word  of 
God,  forbids  you  to  do.  2.  Beware  of 
running  into  temptation.  3.  Beware 
of  indulging  fleshly  lusts.  4.  Beware 
of  practising  deceit  and  falsehood. 
5.  Beware  of  profaning  the  Lord's 
Day.  6.  Beware  of  cherishing  evil 
and  malignant  tempers. — E.  Cooper. 

On  Grieving  the  Holy  Spirit. 

I.  Our  duty  is  to  render  to  the 
Holy  Spirit  cheerful  and  universal 
obedience. 

II.  The  Spirit  is  the  great  Sanctifier. 

III.  We  must  co-operate  diligently 
in  the  production  of  the  fruits  of  the 
Spirit. 

IY.  Our  danger  is  in  quenching  the 
Spirit. — Our  light  grows  dim,  and  we 
gradually  adopt  evil  habits.  We 
neither  see  nor  heed  spiritual  dangers. 
Religious  sensibilities  are  blunted. 
How  far  any  of  us  have  gone  in  re- 
sisting the  Spirit  God  alone  knows. 
Many  who  resist  great  light  and  strong 
impressions  seem  never  to  feel  again. — 
Olin. 

Grieving  the  Spirit. 

I.  Indifference  and  carelessness  in 
religion  is  opposition  to  the  grace  of  God. 

II.  Spiritual  pride  grieves  the 
divine  Spirit. 

III.  The  Spirit  is  grieved  when  we 
neglect  the  means  appointed  for  ob- 
taining His  influence. 

IY.  Opposition  to  the  strivings  of 
the  Spirit  is  another  way  in  which  He 
is  often  grieved. 

237 


chap.  iv.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


V.  There  are  particular  sins  which 
are  opposite  to  the  work  of  the  Spirit. 
Impurity,  intemperance,  dissipation, 
and  all  the  vices  of  sensuality.  The 
indulgence  of  malignant  passions  grieves 
the  Spirit.  Contentions  among  Chris- 
tians are  opposite  to  the  Spirit.  Men 
grieve  the  Spirit  when  they  ascribe  to 
Him  those  motions  and  actions  which 
are  contrary  to  His  nature.  If  they 
blindly  follow  every  impulse  of  a  heated 
imagination,  every  suggestion  of  the 
common  deceiver,  every  motion  of  their 
own  vanity  and  pride,  they  profane 
and  blaspheme  His  sacred  name. — 
Lathrop. 

Grieve  not  the  Spirit. — But  where- 
with can  we  so  grieve  Him  ?  Alas !  that 
one  must  rather  ask,  Wherein  may  he 
not  ?  I  fear  that  one  of  the  things 
which  will  most  amaze  us  when  we  open 
our  eyes  upon  eternity  will  be  the  multi- 
tude of  our  own  rudenesses  to  divine 
grace,  that  is,  to  God  the  Holy  Ghost 
whose  motions  grace  is.  Oh,  let  not 
that  His  seal  upon  you,  the  gift  of  His 
Spirit,  mark  you  as  a  deserter  !  O 
Holy  Creator  Spirit,  come  down  once 
more  into  our  souls  in  Thine  own 
thrilling  fire  of  life  and  light  and  heat, 
kindling  our  senses  with  Thy  light, 
our  hearts  with  Thy  love  !  wash  away 
our  stains,  bedew  our  dryness,  heal  our 
wounds,  bend  our  stubbornness,  guide 
our  wanderings,  that  Thou,  being  the 
inmate  of  our  hearts,  the  instructor  of 
our  reason,  the  strength  of  our  will, 
we  may  see  by  Thy  light  whom  as  yet 
we  see  not  and  know  Him  who  passeth 
knowledge,  and  through  God  may  love 
God  now  as  wayfarers,  and,  in  the  day 
of  perfect  redemption,  in  the  beatific 
vision  of  our  God  ! — E.  B.  Pusey. 

The  Sealing  of  the  Spirit. — 1.  The 
seal  is  used  in  conveying  and  assuring 
to  any  person  a  title  to  his  estate,  in 
delivering  which  a  part  is  put  into  the 
hands  of  the  new  proprietor.  We  are 
sealed  as  an  assurance  of  our  title  to 
our  inheritance  until  the  redemption  of 
the  purchased  possession.  2.  In  seal- 
ing  any    person,    the    contra-part   of 

238 


the  seal  is  impressed  on  that  which  is 
sealed.  We  are  thus  sealed  by  the 
Spirit,  stamped  with  the  image  of 
God.  3.  Sealing  is  used  for  preserva- 
tion. It  is  by  this  we  are  to  be 
preserved  until  that  day.  By  grieving 
the  Spirit  we  break  this  seal. — E.  Hare. 

Yers.  31,  32.  Vices  to  be  renounced 
and  Virtues  to  be  cherished. 

I.  Put  away  all  bitterness. — All 
such  passions,  behaviour,  and  language 
as  are  disgusting  and  offensive  to 
others,  wound  their  tender  feelings, 
and  embitter  their  spirits.  No  temper 
is  more  inconsistent  with  the  felicity  of 
social  life  than  peevishness. 

II.  Put  away  wrath  and  anger. — 
The  former  signifies  heat  of  temper,  the 
latter  this  heat  wrought  into  a  flame. 
Though  anger,  as  a  sense  and  feeling 
of  the  wrongs  done  us,  is  innocent 
and  natural,  all  the  irregular  and 
excessive  operations  of  it  are  sinful 
and  dangerous. 

III.  Put  away  all  malice. — This  is 
a  degree  of  passion  beyond  simple 
anger.  It  is  a  fixed,  settled  hatred, 
accompanied  with  a  disposition  to  re- 
venge. It  is  anger  resting  in  the 
bosom  and  studying  to  do  mischief. 
Malice  is  a  temper  which  every  one 
condemns  in  others,  but  few  discern  in 
themselves. 

IV.  Put  away  all  clamour  and  evil 
speaking. — Clamour  is  noisy,  complain- 
ing, and  contentious  language  in  op- 
position to  that  which  is  soft,  gentle, 
and  courteous.  Never  believe,  much 
less  propagate  an  ill  report,  of  your 
neighbour  without  good  evidence  of  its 
truth.  Never  speak  evil  of  a  man 
when  your  speaking  may  probably  do 
much  hurt,  but  cannot  possibly  do  any 
good. 

V.  Christians  are  to  be  kind  one  to 
another. — Such  kindness  as  renders  us 
useful.  Kindness  wishes  well  to  all 
men,  prays  for  their  happiness,  and 
studies  to  promote  their  interest.  It 
will  reprove  vice  and  lend  its  aid  to 
promote  knowledge  and  virtue. 

VI.  Christians  should  be  tender- 
hearted.— They  should  not  be  guided 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS.         chap.  iv. 


by  a  blind,  instinctive  pity;  but  by 
habitual  goodness  of  heart,  cultivated 
with  reason,  improved  by  religion,  and 
operating  with  discretion.  W  hile  they 
commiserate  all  who  appear  to  be  in 
affliction,  they  should  regard  among 
them  the  difference  of  characters  and 
circumstances. 

VII.  We  are  to  forgive  one  another. 
— Forgiveness  does  not  oblige  us  tamely 
to  submit  to  every  insult  and  silently 
bear  every  injury.  To  those  who  have 
injured  us  we  should  maintain  good- 
will and  exercise  forbearance.  God's 
forgiveness  of  our  sins  is  urged  as  a 
motive  to  mutual  forgiveness.  "  Even 
as  God  for  Christ's  sake  hath  forgiven 
you."  He  who  forgives  not  an  offend- 
ing brother  will  not  be  forgiven  of  his 
heavenly  Father. — Lathrop. 

Malice  incompatible  with  the  Christian 
Character. 

I.  That  we  may  be  convinced  of  the 
hatefulness  of  a  malignant  temper  look 
to  the  source  whence  it  proceeds. — 
From  the  bitterness  of  the  fountain  we 
may  judge  of  the  character  of  the 
water  which  it  sends  forth.  From  the 
corruptness  of  the  tree  we  may  esti- 
mate the  character  of  the  fruit.  The 
author  of  malice  is  the  devil. 

II.  Let  us  after  the  same  manner 
proceed  to  appreciate  the  loveliness  of 
the  opposite  quality,  the  quality  of 
mercy  and  lovingkindness,  by  a  refer- 
ence to  its  Author.  Malice  is  gratified 
by  murder.  In  God  we  live  and  move 
and  have  our  being.  Malice  is  envious. 
God  giveth  us  richly  all  things  to  enjoy. 
Malice  is  false  and  calumnious.  God 
sent  His  Son  into  the  world  to  give 
light  to  them  that  sit  in  darkness. 
Malice  is  resentful  and  vindictive,  im- 
patient of  offence,  and  intemperate  in 
requiring  satisfaction.     God  is  love. 

III.  Let  us  turn  for  a  further  motive 
to  the  character  and  conduct  of  the 
Son  of  God. — He  has  given  us  an  ex- 
ample of  the  most  profound  humility, 
a  temper  in  which  malice  has  no  portion, 
and  which  cannot  exist  independently 
of  lovingkindness  and  tenderness  of 
heart. 


IV.  To  the  example  of  our  blessed 
Redeemer  let  us  add  His  command- 
ments; and  there  arises  another  forcible 
motive  to  put  away  all  malice  and  to 
be  kind  one  to  another. — "  A  new 
commandment  I  give  unto  you,  that 
ye  love  one  another." 

V.  If  we  would  avoid  a  malicious 
and  cultivate  a  charitable  temper,  we 
must  renounce  the  devil  and  all  his 
works. — We  must  triumph  over  those 
passions  which  he  plants  and  pro- 
pagates in  the  heart  of  man. — R. 
Mant. 

Ver.  32.  Errors  respecting  Forgive- 
ness of  Sin. 

I.  That  forgiveness  of  sin  is  unneces- 
sary.— Every  sin  is  punished  on  the 
spot.  This  natural  punishment  is  felt 
as  long  as  the  sin  is  indulged,  and  it 
ceases  as  soon  as  the  sin  is  abandoned. 
This  error  may  be  exposed  by  a  refer- 
ence to  the  philosophy  of  human  nature, 
to  experience,  and  to  Scripture. 

II.  That  forgiveness  of  sin  is  im- 
possible.— The  consequences  of  every 
sin  stretch  out  into  infinity,  and  they 
cannot  be  annihilated  without  a  super- 
natural interposition ;  but  it  would 
derogate  from  the  supremacy  of  law  to 
allow  that  a  miracle  is  possible.  The 
possibility  of  miracle  is  contrary  neither 
to  intuition  nor  to  experience.  A  super- 
natural Being  is  the  author  of  a  super- 
natural system :  creation,  incarnation, 
the  Bible,  spiritual  influence. 

III.  That  forgiveness  of  sin  might 
be  dispensed  without  an  atonement. — 
"  If  a  man  suffer  insult  or  injury  from 
his  fellow-man,  he  ought  to  forgive 
him  freely ;  why  should  not  God  ?  " 
Because  He  is  God,  and  not  man.  He 
is  the  moral  Governor  of  the  universe, 
and  must  consult  for  the  majesty  of 
His  law  and  the  interests  of  His  re- 
sponsible creatures.  Forgiveness  with- 
out atonement  would  not  satisfy  the 
conscience  of  the  awakened  sinner. 

IV.  That  forgiveness  of  sin  will  not 
be  bestowed  till  the  day  of  judgment. — 
Pardon  through  Christ  is  immediate. 
It  is  enjoyed  as  soon  as  we  believe. 

V.  That  forgiveness  of  sin  as  freely 

239 


chap.  IV.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS. 


offered  in  the  gospel   is  inimical   to  brought  him  into  peace.     This  in  fact 

morality. — "  Pay  a  workman  before  he  is  salvation  :  to  be  with  Christ  in  all 

begins  his  work,  and  he  will  be  indolent ;  the    travail    of    His   forgiveness.     As 

pay  him  when  he  has  finished  his  work,  Christ  was  simply  fulfilling  the  right  in 

and  he  will  be  diligent."     Not  if  he  His  blessed  ways  of  forgiveness,  so  we 

were  an  honest  man,  and  no  one  is  for-  may  conceive  that  He  is  simply   ful- 

given  who  is  not  sanctified.     A  sense  filling  the   eternal  love.     For  what  is 

of   unpardoned   guilt   is   the   greatest  right  coincides  with  love,  and  love  with 

hindrance  to   obedience.     A   sense   of  what  is  right. 

redeeming    love    the    most     powerful  IV.  When   a    true     Christian    goes 

incentive. — G.  Brooks.  after  his  adversary  in  such  a  temper 

as  he  ought — tender,    assiduous,  prov- 

Christian  Forgiveness.  ing   himself   in  his   love    by  the  most 

I.  The  reality  of  forgiveness,  or  the  faithful  sacrifices — he  is  not  like  to 
grace  of  a  forgiving  spirit  in  ns,  lies  stay  by  his  enmity  long.  As  the  heat 
not  so  much  in  our  ability  to  let  go  or  of  a  warm  day  will  make  even  a  wilful 
to  be  persuaded  to  let  go  the  remem-  man  take  off  his  overcoat,  so  the  silent 
brance  of  our  injuries,  as  in  what  we  melting  of  forgiveness  at  the  heart  will 
are  able  to  do,  what  volunteer  sacri-  compel  it,  even  before  it  is  aware,  to 
fices  to  make,  what  painstaking  to  let  the  grudges  go.  A  really  good  man 
undergo,  that  we  may  get  our  adversary  may  have  enemies  all  his  life  long, 
softened  to  want  or  gently  accept  our  even  as  Christ  had,  and  the  real  blame 
forgiveness.  may  be  chargeable  not  against  him,  but 

II.  In  all  that  you  distinguish  of  a  against  them. 

nobler  and  diviner  life,  in  Christ's  bear-  V.  Have   then   Christian    brethren 

ing  of  His  enemies  and  their  sins,  He  under   Christ's   own    gospel     nothing 

is   simply  showing   what  belongs  in  better  left  than  to  take  themselves 

righteousness  to  every  moral  nature  out  of    sight  of  each  other  just  to 

from  the  uncreated  Lord  down  to  the  get  rid  of  forgiveness,  going  to  carry 

humblest   created    intelligence.     For-  the  rankling   with  them,   live  in   the 

giveness,  this  same    Christly  forgive-  bitterness,    die     in     the    grudges     of 

ness,  belongs  to  all — to  you,  to  me,  to  their  untamable   passion  ?      What    is 

every  lowest  mortal  that  bears  God's  our   gospel   but    a   reconciling    power 

image.  even  for  sin  itself,  and  what  is  it  good 

III.  Christ  wants  you  to  be  with  for,  if  it  cannot  reconcile?  No,  there 
Him  in  His  own  forgiveness.  He  is  a  better  way.  Christ  laid  it  on  them 
wants  such  a  feeling  struggling  in  your  by  His  own  dear  passion  when  He  gave 
bosom  that  you  cannot  bear  to  have  Himself  for  them,  by  His  bloody  sweat, 
an  adversary,  cannot  rest  from  your  His  pierced  hands,  and  open  side,  to  go 
prayers  and  sacrifices  and  the  lifelong  about  the  matter  of  forgiving  one  an- 
suit  of  your  concern,  till  you  have  other  even  as  He  went  about  forgiving 
gained  him  away  from  his  wrong  and  them. — Bushnell. 


240 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS.  chap.  v. 


CHAPTER  V. 
CRITICAL   AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Followers  of  God. — R.V.  imitators.  St.  Paul  gathers  up  all  duties  into  one 
expression,  "  imitation  of  God,"  and  urges  them  on  his  readers  by  a  reminder  of  their  high 
birth  laying  them  under  obligation,  and  rendering  their  copying  easier. 

Ver.  2.  Walk  in  love. — "  Love  must  fulfil  all  righteousness ;  it  must  suffer  law  to  mark  out 
its  path  of  obedience,  or  it  remains  an  effusive,  ineffectual  sentiment,  helpless  to  bless  and 
save." 

Ver.  3.  Let  it  not  be  once  named. — After  the  things  themselves  are  dead  let  their  names 
never  be  heard. 

Ver.  4.  Nor  jesting. — "  Chastened  insolence,"  as  Aristotle's  description  of  it  has  been 
happily  rendered.  "  Graceless  grace  "  [of  style],  as  Chrysostom  called  it.  It  is  the  oozing 
out  of  the  essential  badness  of  a  man  for  whom  polish  and  a  versatile  nature  have  done  all 
they  can. 

Vers.  5,  6.  Because  of  these  things  cometh  the  wrath  of  God,  etc. — Look  down  beneath  the 
pleasing  manners  to  the  nature.  If  such  terms  as  are  used  in  ver.  5  describe  the  man,  he  is 
simply  one  of  Disobedience's  children,  and  all  his  versatility  will  not  avert  the  descending 
wrath  of  God. 

Ver.  7.  Be  not  ye  therefore  partakers  with  them. — Do  not  wish  to  share  the  frivolity  and 
impiety  of  their  life,  as  you  would  shun  the  wrath  that  inevitably  awaits  it.  How  could 
they  so  partake  and  continue  to  be  what  iii.  6  calls  them  1 

Ver.  8.  Ye  were  ...  ye  are  .  .  .  be. — The  lesson  must  be  learnt,  and  therefore  reiteration 
is  necessary. 

Ver.  9.  For  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  in  all  goodness  and  righteousness  and  truth. — Neither 
here  nor  at  Gal.  v.  22  does  St.  Paul  intend  a  complete  list  of  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit. 
St.  John's  tree  of  life  bore  "  twelve  manner  of  fruits."  All  Christian  morality  lies  in  the 
good,  the  right,  and  the  true. 

Ver.  10.  Proving  what  is  acceptable  unto  the  Lord. — Each  is  to  be  an  assayer — rejecting 
all  base  alloys.  Nothing  must  be  accepted  because  it  looks  like  an  angel  of  light — "  the 
spirits"  must  be  put  to  the  proof  (1  John  iv.  1). 

Ver.  11.  Rather  reprove  them. — It  maybe  with  a  voice  as  firm  as  the  Baptist's  ;  it  maybe 
by  gentle  and^yet  unflinching  "  showing  up  "  of  certain  proceedings  (cf.  St.  John  iii.  20). 
"This  chastening  reproof  is  an  oral  one,"  says  Meyer. 

Ver.  12.  It  is  a  shame  even  to  speak  of.— Though  the  only  sign  of  their  shame  having 
touched  them  is  that  they  seek  the  cover  of  secrecy,  and  our  own  cheeks  burn  as  we  speak 
of  what  they  do,  we  must  convict. 

Ver.  13.  Made  manifest  by  the  light. — Whatever  the  light  falls  upon  is  no  longer  of  the 
darkness,  but  belongs  to  the  light.  Shame  is  one  of  the  influences  by  which  the  light 
conquers  a  soul  from  darkness. 

Ver.  14.  Wherefore  He  saith. — What  follows  is  "a  free  paraphrase  from  the  Old  Testament 
formed  by  weaving  together  Messianic  passages — belonging  to  such  a  hymn  as  might  be  sung 
at  baptisms  in  the  Pauline  Churches  "  (Fmdlay).  The  thought  is  that  of  the  change  from 
darkness  to  light — a  change  produced  by  the  opening  of  the  eyes  to  the  light  shining  in  the 
face  of  Jesus  Christ. 

Ver.  15.  See  then  that  ye  walk  circumspectly. — R.V.  "  Look  then  carefully  how  ye  walk." 
The  way  of  life  must  be  one  of  exactitude  ;  and  that  it  may  be  so  the  steps  must  not  be 
haphazard,  bnt  carefully  taken. 

Ver.  16.  Redeeming  the  time. — R.V.  margin,  "  buying  up  the  opportunity."  Seizing  the 
crucial  moment  as  eagerly  as  men  bid  for  a  desirable  article  at  an  auction  sale.  Because 
the  days  are  evil. — A  man  in  Paul's  circumstances  and  with  his  consuming  earnestness  of 
spirit  may  be  forgiven  if  he  does  not  see  everything  rose-coloured. 

Ver.  18.  Be  not  drunk  with  wine,  wherein  is  excess. — The  word  for  "excess"  is  found 
again  in  Tit.  i.  6  as  "  riot,"  and  in  1  Pet.  iv.  4.  In  all  three  texts  the  warning  against 
intoxication  is  near  the  word.     In  Luke  xv.  13  we  have  the  adverbial  form — "riotously." 

Ver.  19.  Psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs. — When  the  spirit  is  elevated  so  that 
ordinary  prose  conversation  is  inadequate  to  express  the  feelings  let  it  find  vent  in  sacred 
music.  St.  James's  advice  to  the  "  merry  "  heart  is,  "  Sing  psalms."  The  "  psalm  "  is  properly 
a  song  with  accompaniment  of  a  stringed  instrument  ;  "  a  '  hymn  "  must  always  be  more  or 
less  of  a  Magnificat,  a  direct  address  of  praise  and  glory  to  God."     "  Spiiitual  songs"  were 

R  241 


chap.  v.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS. 


"  such  as  were  composed  by  spiritual  men  and  moved  in  the  sphere  of  spiritual  things  " 
(Trench).  Ivo  spiritual  excitement,  however  highly  wrought,  can  be  injurious  that  flows 
between  the  banks  of  thanksgiving  and  mutual  submission  in  tiie  fear  of  God. 

Ver.  20.  Giving  thanks  always  for  all  things. — If  one  who  speaks  as  a  philosopher  merely 
can  praise  the  "  sweet  uses  of  adversity  "  and  discern  the  "  soul  of  goodness  in  tilings  evil," 
how  much  more  should  one  believing  Rom.  viii.  28  ! 

Ver.  21.  Submitting  yourselves  one  to  another. — In  another  Church  the  endeavour  to  take 
precedence  of  each  other  had  produced  what  a  stranger  might  have  taken  for  a  madhouse 
(1  Cor.  xiv.  23).  St.  Paul's  word  for  "  submitting  "  means  "  ranging  yourselves  beneath," 
and  finds  its  illustration  in  our  Lord's  words,  "  Go  and  sit  down  in  the  lowest  place " 
(Luke  xiv.  10). 

Ver.  22.  Submit  yourselves. — Same  word  as  in  previous  verse  ;  neither  here  nor  there  does 
it  involve  any  loss  of  self-respect.  The  wife's  tribute  to  her  husband's  worth  is  submission 
— the  grace  of  childhood  to  both  parents  equally  is  obedience. 

Ver.  23.  Christ  is  the  head  of  the  Church. — Defending  her  at  His  own  peril  ("  If  ye  seek  Me, 
let  these  go  tbeir  way  ")  ;  serving  her  in  utmost  forgetfulness  of  self  ("  I  am  amongst  you  as 
he  that  serveth  '')  ;  "  Giving  Himself  up  for  her." 

Ver.  25.  Husbands,  love  your  wives. — This  will  prevent  the  submission  of  the  wife  from 
ever  becoming  degrading — as  submission  to  a  tyrant  must  be. 

Ver.  20.  That  He  might  sanctify  and  cleanse.— There  is  no  "and"  between  "sanctify" 
and  "cleanse"  in  what  St.  Paul  wrote.  "Sanctify  it,  having  cleansed  it"  (R.V.).  "I 
sanctify  Myself,  that  they  also  may  be  sanctified"  (John  xvii.  19). 

Ver.  27.  Spoc  or  wrinkle. — "  Spot,"  a  visible  blemish,  used  in  the  plural,  figuratively,  in 
2  Pet.  ii.  13,  of  men  who  disfigure  Christian  assemblies.  "Wrinkle  " — "a  wrinkled  bride"  is 
an  incongruity,  just  as  the  mourning  which  produces  wrinkles  is  out  of  place  in  the  bride- 
chamber  (Matt.  ix.  15). 

Ver.  28.  .As  their  own  bodies. — Not  "as  they  love  their  own  bodies"  merely,  but  "as 
being  their  own."     See  ver.  31,  "one  flash." 

Ver.  31.  For  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave  his  father  and  mother,  and  shall  be  joined  unto  his 
wife. — We  must  regard  these  words,  not  as  a  continuation  of  Adam's  in  Gen.  ii.  23,  but  as 
the  words  of  the  narrator,  who  regards  what  our  first  father  said  as  a  mystical  hint  of  the 
origin  of  marriage. 

Ver.  32.  This  is  a  great  mystery. — The  meaning  of  which  is  known  only  to  the  initiated. 
Something  having  a  significance  beyond  what  appears  on  the  surface.  But  I  speak. — The 
"  I "  is  emphatic  :  "  I  give  my  interpretation."  My  chief  interest  in  this  mysterv  is  as  it 
relates  to  Christ  and  to  the  Church. 

Ver.  33.  Nevertheless. — "  I  pursue  the  matter  no  further  " ;  and  though  this  mystical  turn 
is  given  to  the  words,  still  in  actual  life  let  the  husband  love  (ver.  25)  and  the  wife  show 
reverence  (ver.  22).  Let  all  the  married  among  you  apply  the  mystery  to  their  own  case,  so 
tnat  the  husband  may  love  the  wife  and  the  wife  fear  the  husband.  % 

MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1,  2. 

The  Life  of  Love — 

I.  Is  an  imitating  of  the  divine  life. — "  Be  followers  of  God :  .  .  .  walk  in  love  " 
(vers.  1,  2).  Though  God  is  infinitely  beyond  us,  and  lifted  above  all  heights, 
we  are  to  aspire  towards  Him.  When  we  contemplate  His  glorious  perfections 
we  are  more  deeply  conscious  of  our  limitations  and  sins,  bend  before  Him  in 
lowly  awe,  and  seem  to  despair  of  ever  being  able  to  approach  to  anything  within 
ourselves  that  can  be  like  Him.  Nevertheless  God  is  the  pattern  of  all  excel- 
lence, and  we  can  attain  excellence  ourselves  only  by  imitating  Him.  The  ideal 
character  is  ever  above  and  beyond  the  seeker,  growing  more  beautiful,  but 
seeming  as  distant  as  ever.  The  life  of  God  is  the  life  of  love — love  is  the 
essence  of  His  nature  and  the  crowning  glory  of  all  His  perfections.  The  chief 
way  in  which  He  is  imitable  by  us  is  in  that  direction  :  to  love  God  is  to  be  like 
Him.  Our  life,  in  all  its  impulses,  outgoings,  and  accomplishments,  must  be 
suffused  and  penetrated  with  love.  As  the  soul  opens  to  the  inflow  of  God's  love 
and  is  filled  with  it,  it  becomes  like  God.  Loving  God  is  allowing  God  to  love  us. 
The  love  of  God  is  the  most  transcendent  revelation  of  the  gospel.  In  Paris  a 
little  girl  seven  years  old  was  observed  to  read  the  New  Testament  continually. 
Being  asked  what  pleasure  she  found  in  doing  so,  she  said,  "  It  makes  me  wise, 

242 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS.  chap.  v. 


and  teaches  how  to  love  God."  She  had  been  reading  the  history  of  Martha  and 
Mary.  "  What  is  the  one  thing  needful  1  "  asked  her  friend.  "  It  is  the  love  of 
God,"  she  earnestly  replied. 

II.  Is  befitting  the  relation  in  which  the  believer  is  divinely  regarded. — 
"  Followers  of  God,  as  dear  children"  (ver.  1).  God  is  our  Father,  and  He  loves 
us.  That  is  enough  ;  but  how  much  is  implied  in  that,  who  can  tell  ?  To 
realise  the  divine  Fatherhood  is  to  become  acquainted  with  the  love  of  God. 
When  we  discover  we  are  dear  to  Him  our  hearts  melt,  our  rebellion  is  conquered, 
we  seek  His  forgiveness,  we  revel  in  His  favour,  we  exult  in  His  service.  When 
we  discover  He  has  always  loved  us  we  are  overwhelmed.  A  mother,  whose 
daughter  had  behaved  badly  and  at  length  ran  away  from  home,  thought  of  a 
singular  plan  to  find  the  wanderer  and  bring  her  back.  She  had  her  own 
portrait  fixed  on  a  large  handbill  and  posted  on  the  walls  of  the  town  where  she 
supposed  her  daughter  was  concealed.  The  portrait,  without  name,  had  these 
words  printed  underneath  :  "  I  love  thee  always."  Crowds  stopped  before  the 
strange  handbill,  trying  to  guess  its  meaning.  Days  elapsed,  when  a  young  girl 
at  last  passed  by,  and  lifted  her  eyes  to  the  singular  placard.  She  understood  : 
this  was  a  message  for  her.  Her  mother  loved  her — pardoned  her.  Those  words 
transformed  her.  Never  had  she  felt  her  sin  and  ingratitude  so  deeply.  She 
was  unworthy  of  such  love.  She  set  out  for  home,  and  crossing  the  threshold 
was  soon  in  her  mother's  arms.  "  My  child  !  "  cried  the  mother,  as  she  pressed 
her  repentant  daughter  to  her  heart,  "  I  have  never  ceased  to  love  thee  !  " 

III.  Is  a  love  of  Christ-like  sacrifice. — "  As  Christ  also  hath  loved  us,  and 
hath  given  Himself  for  us  "  (ver.  2).  The  offering  of  Christ  as  a  sacrifice  for 
the  sins  of  men  was  acceptable  to  God,  and  came  up  before  Him  as  a  sweet- 
smelling  savour,  because  it  was  the  offering  and  sacrifice  of  love.  The  life  of 
love  is  the  life  of  obedience  ;  it  is  eager  to  serve,  and  it  shrinks  not  from  suffering. 
Nothing  can  be  love  to  God  which  does  not  shape  itself  into  obedience.  We 
remember  the  anecdote  of  the  Roman  commander  who  forbade  an  engagement 
with  the  enemy,  and  the  first  transgressor  against  whose  prohibition  was  his  own 
son.  He  accepted  the  challenge  of  the  leader  of  the  other  host,  met,  slew,  spoiled 
him,  and  then  with  triumphant  feeling  carried  the  spoils  to  his  father's  tent. 
But  the  Roman  father  refused  to  recognise  the  instinct  which  prompted  this  as 
deserving  of  the  name  of  love.  Disobedience  contradicted  it  and  deserved  death. 
Weak  sentiment — what  was  it  worth  ?  It  was  the  dictate  of  ambition  and  self- 
will  overriding  obedience  and  discipline  ;  it  was  not  love.  A  self-sacrificing  life 
is  prompted,  sustained,  and  ennobled  by  love.  The  trials  which  love  cheerfully 
undergoes  in  its  ministry  of  love  to  others  and  in  obedience  to  the  will  of  God 
are  often  transformed  into  blessings.  There  is  a  legend  that  Nimrod  took 
Abraham  and  cast  him  into  a  furnace  of  fire  because  he  would  not  worship  idols ; 
but  God  changed  the  coals  into  a  bed  of  roses.  So  it  will  ever  be.  The  obedience 
that  leads  to  the  furnace  of  fire  will  find  in  the  end  that  it  is  a  bed  of  roses.  The 
life  of  loving  sacrifice  will  issue  in  eternal  blessedness. 

Lessons. — The  life  of  love  is — 1.  The  highest  life.  2.  The  happiest  life.  3.  The 
life  most  fruitful  in  usefulness  to  others. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  1,  2.    St.    Paul's    Doctrine    of  stincts  and  the  laws  imposed  on  us  in 

Christian  Ethics.  the  long  struggle  for  existence,  behind 

I.  The   fundamental    truth    of  the  those  imperatives   of  practical  reason, 

Fatherhood  of  God. — Man's  life  has  its  involved  in  the  structure  of  our  intelli- 

law,  for  it  has  its  source  in  the  nature  gence,  is  the  presence  and  active  will 

of  the  Eternal.     Behind  our  race  in-  of  Almighty  God  our  heavenly  Father. 

243 


chap.  v.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


Intuitional  morals  bear  witness  to  the  realised  there  embraces  all  the  kindreds 
God  of  creation,  experimental  morals  of  the  earth.  The  incarnation  of 
to  the  God  of  providence  and  history.  Christ  knits  all  flesh  into  one  redeemed 
The  divine  Fatherhood  is  the  keystone  family.  The  continents  and  races  of 
of  the  arch  in  which  they  meet.  The  mankind  are  members  one  of  another, 
command  to  be  imitators  cf  God  makes  with  Jesus  Christ  for  Head. 
personality  the  sovereign  element  in  III.  Another  ruling  idea  lying  at 
life.  If  consciousness  is  a  finite  and  the  basis  of  Christian  ethics  is  St.  Paul's 
passing  phenomenon,  if  God  be  but  a  conception  of  man's  future  destiny. — 
name  for  the  sum  of  the  impersonal  There  is  disclosed  a  world  beyond  the 
laws  that  regulate  the  universe,  for  the  world,  a  life  growing  out  of  life,  an 
"  stream  of  tendency  "  in  the  worlds,  eternal  and  invisible  kingdom  of  whose 
Father  and  love  are  meaningless  terms  possession  the  Spirit  that  lives  in 
applied  to  the  Supreme,  and  religion  Christian  men  is  the  earnest  and  first- 
dissolves  into  an  impalpable  mist,  fruits.  Human  reason  had  guessed 
Love,  thought,  will  in  us  raise  our  and  hope  had  dreamed  of  the  soul's 
being  above  the  realm  of  the  imper-  immortality.  Christianity  gives  this 
sonal ;  and  these  faculties  point  us  hope  certainty,  and  adds  to  it  the 
upward  to  Him  from  whom  they  came,  assurance  of  the  resurrection  of  the 
the  Father  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh.  body.  Man's  entire  nature  is  thus 
It  is  not  the  loss  of  strength  for  human  redeemed.  Our  bodily  dress  is  one  with 
service  nor  the  dying  out  of  joy  which  the  spirit  that  it  unfolds.  We  shall 
unbelief  entails  that  is  its  chief  calamity,  lay  it  aside  only  to  resume  it — trans- 
The  sun  in  the  soul's  heaven  is  put  figured,  but  with  a  form  and  impress 
out.  The  personal  relationship  to  the  continuous  with  its  present  being. 
Supreme  which  gave  dignity  and  worth  IV.  The  atonement  of  the  cross 
to  our  individual  being,  which  imparted  stamps  its  own  character  and  spirit  on 
sacredness  and  enduring  power  to  all  the  entire  ethics  of  Christianity. — The 
other  ties,  is  destroyed.  The  heart  is  Fatherhood  of  God,  the  unity  and  soli- 
orphaned,  the  temple  of  the  Spirit  darity  of  mankind,  the  issues  of  eternal 
desolate.  The  mainspring  of  life  is  life  or  death  awaiting  us  in  the  unseen 
broken.  world — all  the  great  factors  andfunda- 
II.  The  solidarity  of  mankind  in  mentals  of  revealed  religion  gather 
Christ  furnishes  the  apostle  with  a  about  the  cross  of  Christ ;  they  lend 
powerful  lever  for  raising  the  ethical  to  it  their  august  significance,  and  gain 
standard  of  his  readers.  The  thought  from  it  new  import  and  impressiveness. 
that  we  are  "  members  one  of  another "  The  fact  that  Christ  "gave  Himself 
forbids  deceit.  Self  is  so  merged  in  for  us  an  offering  and  a  sacrifice  to 
the  community  that  in  dealing  censure  God  "  throws  an  awful  light  upon  the 
or  forgiveness  to  an  offending  brother  nature  of  human  transgression.  All 
the  Christian  man  feels  as  though  he  that  inspired  men  had  taught,  that 
were  dealing  with  himself — as  though  good  men  had  believed  and  felt,  and 
it  were'the  hand  that  forgave  the  foot  penitent  men  confessed  in  regard  to 
for  tripping,  or  the  ear  that  pardoned  the  evil  of  human  sin,  is  more  than 
some  blunder  of  the  eye.  The  Christ  verified  by  the  sacrifice  which  the  Holy 
loved  and  gave  ;  for  love  that  does  not  One  of  God  has  undergone  in  order  to 
give,  that  prompts  to  no  effort  and  put  it  away.  What  tears  of  contrition, 
puts  itself  to  no  sacrifice,  is  but  a  luxury  what  cleansing  fires  of  hate  against  our 
of  the  heart — useless  and  even  selfish,  own  sins,  what  scorn  of  their  baseness, 
The  Church  is  the  centre  of  humanity,  what  stern  resolves  against  them,  are 
The  love  born  and  nourished  in  the  awakened  by  the  sight  of  the  cross  of 
household  of  faith  goes  out  into  the  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  !  The  sacrifice 
world  with  a  universal  mission.  The  of  Christ  demands  from  us  devotion 
solidarity   of   moral   interests   that  is  to  Christ  Himself.     Our  first  duty  as 

244 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  V. 


Christians  is  to  love  Christ,  to  serve 
and  follow  Christ.  There  is  no  conflict 
between  the  claims  of  Christ  and  those  of 
philanthropy,  between  the  needs  of  His 
worship  and  the  needs  of  the  destitute 
and  suffering  in  our  streets.  Every  new 
subject  won  to  the  kingdom  of  Christ 
is  another  helper  won  for  His  poor. 
Every  act  of  love  rendered  to  Him 
deepens  the  channel  of  sympathy  by 
which  relief  and  blessing  come  to 
sorrowful  humanity. — Findlay. 

Christ's  Sacrifice  of  Himself  explained, 
and  Man's  Duty  to  offer  Spiritual 
Sacrifice  inferred  and  recommended. 

1.  Our  Lord's  unexampled  sacrifice. 
— 1.  The  priest.  As  a  prophet  or  an 
apostle  properly  is  an  ambassador  from 
God  to  treat  with  men,  so  a  priest  is 
an  agent  or  solicitor  in  behalf  of  men 
to  treat  with  God. 

2.  The  sacrifice. — Our  Lord  was  both 
offering  and  sacrifice.  Every  sacrifice  is 
an  offering  to  God,  but  every  offering  to 
God  is  not  a  sacrifice.  Perfect  innocence 
and  consummate  virtue,  both  in  doing 
and  suffering,  were  not  only  the  flower 
and  perfection  but  the  very  form  and 
essence  of  our  Lord's  sacrifice.  These 
were  the  sacrifice  of  sweet  odour,  ac- 
ceptable to  Him  who  alone  could  judge 
perfectly  of  the  infinite  worth  and 
merit  of  it. 

3.  The  altar. — From  the  third 
century  to  this  time  the  cross  whereon 
our  Lord  suffered  has  been  called  the 
altar.  There  is  another  altar,  a 
spiritual  altar — the  eternal  Spirit,  the 
divine  nature  of  our  Lord.  The 
sacrifice  of  our  Lord  is  an  undoubted 
Scripture  truth  ;  but  as  to  a  proper 
altar  for  that  sacrifice,  it  is  a  more 
disputable  point,  about  which  wise  and 
good  men  may  be  allowed  to  judge  as 
they  see  cause. 

4.  The  divine  Lawgiver. — To  whom 
the  sacrifice  was  made,  and  by  whom 
it  was  graciously  accepted.  God  the 
Father  is  Lawgiver-in-chief,  and  to 
Him  our  Lord  paid  the  price  of  our 
redemption.  Thus  the  glory  of  God 
and  the  felicity  of  man  are  both  served 
in  this  dispensation. 


II.  Our  own  sacrifice  of  ourselves. 

— As  Christ  gave  Himself  for  us,  so 
we  ought  to  give  up  ourselves  to  God 
in  all  holy  obedience,  and  particularly 
in  the  offices  of  love  towards  our 
brethren,  as  these  are  the  most  ac- 
ceptable sacrifices  we  can  offer  to  God. 
"We  cannot  do  greater  honour  to  our 
Lord's  sacrifice  than  by  thus  copying 
it  in  the  best  manner  we  are  able — a 
sacrifice  of  love  to  God  and  love  to  our 
neighbours. — Waterland. 

The  Imitation  of  God. — No  argument 
is  so  frequently  urged  as  the  example 
of  Christ  to  persuade  us  to  mutual 
love,  because  none  is  so  well  adapted 
to  influence  the  mind  of  a  Christian. 
God's  approbation  of  Christian  charity 
is  expressed  in  the  same  terms  as  His 
acceptance  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ ; 
for  charity  to  our  fellow-Christians, 
flowing  from  a  sense  of  Christ's  dying 
love,  is  a  virtue  of  distinguished  excel- 
lence. As  the  death  of  Christ  is  called 
"a sacrifice  for  a  sweet-smelling  savour," 
so  Christian  charity  is  called  "  an  odour 
of  a  sweet  smell,  a  sacrifice  acceptable, 
well-pleasing  to  God."  Let  it  be  our 
care  to  follow  Christ  in  His  goodness 
and  love,  and  to  learn  of  Him  humility, 
condescension,  mercy,  and  forgiveness. 
Religion  is  an  imitation  of  the  moral 
character  of  God,  brought  down  to 
human  view  and  familiarised  to  human 
apprehension  in  the  life  of  Christ. 
The  sacrifice  of  Christ  is  of  great  use, 
not  only  as  an  atonement  for  guilt,  but 
also  as  an  example  of  love. — Lathrop. 

Ver.  1.  The  Duty  and  Object  of  a 
Christian's  Imitation. 

I.  The  duty  enjoined. — 1.  Remove  the 
hindrances  to  imitation.  (1)  Spiritual 
pride  and  self-conceit.  (2)  This  self- 
conceit  works  in  us  a  prejudiced  opinion, 
and  makes  us  undervalue  and  detract 
from  the  worth  of  our  brother. 
(3)  Spiritual  drowsiness.  2.  Observe 
the  rules  of  imitation.  (1)  We  must  not 
take  our  pattern  upon  trust;  no,  not 
St.  Paul  himself.  He  brings  it  in  indeed 
as  a  duty — "  Be  ye  followers  of  me  w; 
but  he  adds  this  direction,  "  as  I  am  of 

245 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPMESIANS. 


Christ  "  (1  Cor.  xi.  1).  "  For  in  imita- 
tion, besides  the  persons,  there  is  also 
to  be  considered,"  saith  Quintilian, 
11  what  it  is  we  must  imitate  in  the 
persons.  We  must  no  further  follow 
them  than  they  follow  the  rules  of 
art."  "  Some  there  were,"  said  Seneca, 
"  who  imitated  nothing  but  that  which 
was  bad  in  the  best."  It  is  so  in  our 
Christian  profession :  wo  must  view, 
and  try,  and  understand  what  we  are 
to  imitate.  We  mus.t  not  make  use  of 
all  eyes,  but  of  those  only  which  look 
upon  the  Lord.  (2)  That  we  strive  to 
imitate  the  best.  Saith  Pliny  :  "  It  is 
great  folly  not  to  propose  always  the 
best  pattern " ;  and  saith  Seneca, 
"  Choose  a  Cato,"  a  prime,  eminent 
man,  by  whose  authority  thy  secret 
thoughts  may  be  more  holy,  the  very 
memory  of  whom  may  compose  thy 
manners ;  whom  not  only  to  see,  but 
to  think  of,  will  be  a  help  to  the 
reformation  of  thy  life.  Dost  thou 
live  with  any  in  whom  the  good  gifts 
and  graces  of  God  are  shining  and 
resplendent,  who  are  strict  and  exact, 
and  so  retain  the  precepts  of  God  in 
memory  that  they  forget  them  not 
in  their  works  ?  Give  me  the  instruc- 
tive examples  of  these  good  men  ;  let 
them  always  be  before  my  eyes;  let 
them  be  a  second  rule  by  which  I  may 
correct  my  life  and  manners ;  let  me 
not  lose  this  help,  which  God  hath 
granted  me,  of  imitation. 

II,  The  object  of  imitation. — We 
must  make  God  the  rule  of  goodness  in 
all  our  actions :  we  must  be  just,  to 
observe  the  law  ;  valiant,  to  keep  down 
our  passions ;  temperate,  to  conform 
our  wills  to  the  rule  of  reason;  and 
wise,  to  our  salvation.  But  there  is 
no  virtue  which  makes  us  more  re- 
semble God  than  this  which  the  apostle 
here  exhorts  the  Ephesians  to ;  and 
that  is  mercy.  For  although  all 
virtues  are  in  the  highest  degree,  nay, 
above  all  degrees,  most  perfect  in 
Him  ;  yet,  in  respect  of  His  creatures, 
none  is  so  resplendent  as  mercy.  Mercy 
is  the  queen  and  empress  of  God's 
virtues  ;  it  is  the  bond  and  knot  which 
unites  heaven  and  earth,  that  by  which 

240 


we  hold  all  our  titles — our  title  to  be 
men,  our  title  to  the  name  of  Christian, 
our  title  to  the  profession  of  Chris- 
tianity, our  title  to  earth,  our  title  to 
heaven.  1.  As  God  forgiveth  us,  so 
we  must  forgive  our  enemies.  2.  As 
we  must  forgive,  so  God's  mercy  must 
bo  the  motive  :  we  must  do  it  "  out 
of  a  desire  to  imitate  God."  3.  We 
must  conform  our  imitation  to  the 
Pattern.  He  with  one  act  of  mercy 
wipes  out  all  scores ;  so  must  we. 
When  He  forgives  our  sins,  He  is  said 
to  cast  them  behind  Him,  never  to 
think  of  them,  so  to  forget  them  as  if 
they  never  had  been ;  so  must  we. 
He  doth  it  too  without  respect  of 
persons ;  and  so  we  ought  to  do.  We 
must  forgive  all,  for  ever ;  and  so  far 
must  we  be  from  respect  of  persons 
that  we  must  acknowledge  no  title 
but  that  of  Christian. — Farindon. 

Likeness  to  God. 

I.  Likeness  to  God  belongs  to  man's 
higher  or  spiritual  nature. — It  has  its 
foundation  in  the  original  and  essential 
capacities  of  the  mind.  In  proportion 
as  these  are  unfolded  by  right  and 
vigorous  exertion,  it  is  extended  and 
brightened.  In  proportion  as  these  lie 
dormant  it  is  obscured.  Likeness  to 
God  is  the  supreme  gift.  He  can 
communicate  nothing  so  precious, 
glorious,  blessed  as  Himself.  To  hold 
intellectual  and  moral  affinity  with 
the  supreme  Being,  to  partake  His 
Spirit,  U&he  His  children  by  derivations 
of  kindred  excellence,  to  bear  a  growing 
conformity  to  the  perfection  which  we 
adore — this  is  a  felicity  which  obscures 
and  annihilates  all  other  good.  It  is 
only  in  proportion  to  this  likeness  that 
we  can  enjoy  either  God  or  the  universe. 
To  understand  a  great  and  gcod  being 
we  must  have  the  seeds  of  the  same 
excellence. 

II.  That  man  has  a  kindred  nature 
with  God,  and  may  bear  most  important 
and  ennobling  relations  to  Him,  seems 
to  me  to  be  established  by  a  striking 
proof.  Whence  do  we  derive  our 
knowledge  of  the  attributes  and  per- 
fections which  constitute  the  supreme 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS. 


chap.  v. 


Being  ?  I  answer,  We  derive  them  from 
our  own  souls.  The  divine  attributes 
are  first  developed  in  ourselves,  and 
thence  transferred  to  our  Creator. 
The  idea  of  God,  sublime  and  awful  as 
it  is,  is  the  idea  of  our  own  spiritual 
nature,  purified  and  enlarged  to  in- 
finity. It  is  the  resemblance  of  a 
parent  to  a  child,  the  likeness  of  -a 
kindred  nature. 

III.  God  is  made  known  to  us  as 
a  Father. — And  what  is  it  to  be  a 
father  ?  It  is  to  communicate  one's 
own  nature,  to  give  life  to  kindred 
beings ;  and  the  highest  function  of 
a  father  is  to  educate  the  mind  of  the 
child,  and  to  impart  to  it  what  is 
noblest  and  happiest  in  his  own  mind. 
God  is  our  Father,  not  merely  because 
He  created  us,  or  because  He  gives  us 
enjoyment ;  for  He  created  the  flower 
and  the  insect,  yet  we  call  Him  not 
their  Father.  This  bond  is  a  spiritual 
one.  This  name  belongs  to  God,  be- 
cause He  frames  spirits  like  Himself, 
and  delights  to  give  them  what  is  most 
glorious  and  blessed  in  His  own  nature. 
Accordingly  Christianity  is  said  with 
special  propriety  to  reveal  God  as  the 
Father,  because  it  reveals  Him  as 
sending  His  Son  to  cleanse  the  mind 
from  every  stain,  and  to  replenish  it 
for  ever  with  the  spirit  and  moral 
attributes  of  its  Author. 

IV.  The  promise  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
is  among  the  most  precious  aids  of 
influences  which  God  imparts.  It  is  a 
divine  assistance  adapted  to  our  moral 
freedom,  an  aid  which  silently  mingles 
and  conspires  with  all  other  helps  and 
means  of  goodness,  and  by  which  we 
are  strengthened  to  understand  and 
apply  the  resources  derived  from  our 
munificent  Creator.  This  aid  we  cannot 
prize  too  much,  or  pray  for  too 
earnestly. — Charming. 

Ver.  2.  "And  walk  in  love."  The 
Nature,  Properties,  and  Acts  of 
Charity. 

I.  The  nature  of  charity. — 1.  Loving 
our  neighbour  implies  we  value  and 
esteem  him.  2.  Implies  a  sincere  and 
earnest  desire  for  his  welfare  and  good 


of  all  kinds  in  due  proportion.  3.  A 
complacence  or  delightful  satisfaction 
in  the  good  of  our  neighbour.  4.  Con- 
dolence  and  commiseration  in  the  evils 
befalling  him. 

II.  Properties  of  charity. — 1.  Love 
appropriates  its  object  in  apprehension 
and  affection,  embracing  it,  possessing 
and  enjoying  it  as  its  own.  2.  It 
desires  reciprocal  affection.  3.  Dis- 
poses to  please  our  neighbour,  not  only 
by  inoffensive  but  by  an  obliging 
demeanour.  4.  Makes  a  man  deny 
himself — despising  all  selfish  regards — 
for  the  benefit  of  his  neighbour.  5.  To 
be  condescending  and  willing  to  per- 
form the  meanest  offices  needful  or 
useful  to  his  friend. 

III.  Acts  of  charity. — 1.  To  forbear 
anger  on  provocation.  2.  To  remit 
offences,  suppressing  revenge.  3.  To 
maintain  concord  and  peace.  4.  To 
be  candid  in  opinion  and  mild  in 
censure.  5.  Abstain  from  doing  any- 
thing which  may  occasion  our  neighbour 
to  commit  sin,  or  disaffect  him  towards 
religion,  or  discourage  him  in  the 
practice  of  duty. — Barrow. 

The  Sacrifice  of  Christ. 

1.  A  divine  person  was  absolutely 
necessary. — 1.  He  who  atones  wMst  be 
in  possession  of  infinite  worth.  Nothing 
less  than  the  glory  of  infinity  and 
eternity  can  atone  for  transgression. 
The  individual  must  also  be  possessed 
of  humanity  for  this  obvious  reason  : 
that  man  hath  transgressed,  and  man 
must  atone.  In  the  person  of  the 
Messiah  we  behold  everything  God 
could  possibly  desire.  A  divine  person, 
comprising  Deity  and  humanity  in 
himself,  atones  for  sin. 

2.  It  was  absolutely  necessary  that  the 
individual  who  atoned  should  be  wholly 
at  his  own  disposal. — Now,  no  finite 
being  is  at  his  own  disposal ;  no  finite 
being  can  say,  I  will  do  as  I  please  ; 
but  Messiah  speaks  of  Himself  in 
language  that  finite  being  could  not 
adopt  without  insulting  God.  The 
doctrine  of  the  Trinity  is  opposed  ;  but 
when  we  peruse  Scripture  we  shall  find 
the  absolute  necessity  of  a  plurality  of 

247 


chap,  v,  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


persons.     A  divine  person  to  present  a  its  terrors.     Messiah  is  punished,  that 

sacrifice ;  and  if   so,  a  divine  person  to  the  transgressor  may  live  for  ever, 

receive  that  sacrifice.  III.  God's  pleasure  in  the  sacrifice 

II.  Christ's  love  in  giving  Himself. —  of   His    Son. — 1.     God    is    infinitely 

And  here  we  behold  the  love  of  God  in  delighted  with  His  Son,  as  He  is  one  in 

all  its  glory.      Christ   hath  saved  us,  essence  with  Him.     The  pious  Baptist 

and  given  Himself  for  us.     Here  we  gives  his  disciples  a  volume  of  divinity 

behold  the  love  of  Christ ;  the  love  of  in  a  few  words.     He  traces  everything 

a  divine   person  embracing  God,    em-  to  its  source.     "  The  Father  loveth  the 

bracing  the  law  of  God,  and  embracing  Son."     Surely,  then,   we  must  antici- 

the  sinner  in  all  his  shame.     Two  of  pate  God's  pleasure  in  everything  the 

the  attributes  of  this  love  never  un-  Saviour  does.     2.  The  resxirrection  and 

folded      their     glories     before.       The  ascension  of  Christ  prove  God's  accep- 

intenseness  and  the  holiness  of  it  were  tance  of  the  sacrifice.     3.  The  success 

never  before  manifested.     Behold  God  of  the  gospel  another  proof. 

as    well    as    man,    a     divine    person  Lessons. — 1.  See  the  evil  and  danger 

suffering  for  us.     Here  for  once,  and  of  unbelief     2.  All  spiritual  good  comes 

once  only,    behold   the  sovereignty  of  from  God;  all  spiritual  evil  flows  from 

God  in  all  its  glory,  in  all  its  lowliness,  the  creature.      3.    Learn   the   work   of 

connected  with  the  justice  of  God  in  all  faith — to  accept  Christ. — Howels. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S   OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  3—14. 

The  Children  of  Darkness  and  of  Light. 

I.  The  children  of  darkness  are  known  by  their  deeds  (vers.  3-5). — A 
loathsome  and  unsightly  list  !  Sin  marks  its  victims.  Deeds  done  in  darkness 
do  not  escape  detection  and  exposure.  The  revolting  sins  of  the  heathen  reveal 
the  depth  of  wickedness  to  which  man  may  sink  when  he  abandons  God  and  is 
abandoned  of  God.  Every  single  sin,  voluntarily  indulged,  weakens  the  power 
of  self-control,  and  there  is  no  deed  of  darkness  a  reckless  sinner  may  not  commit. 
Sensuality  is  a  devil-fish — a  vampire  of  the  sea — preying  upon  and  devouring 
the  best  powers  of  mind  and  body. 

1.  Their  deeds  exclude  them  from  the  inheritance  of  the  good. — They  have  no 
"  inheritance  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ  and  of  God  "  (ver.  5).  The  children  of 
darkness  can  have  no  company  and  no  place  wTith  the  children  of  light ;  the  two 
cannot  co-exist  or  blend  together.  The  sinner  excludes  himself,  and  unfits 
himself  for  fellowship  with  the  good.  Their  purity  is  a  constant  reproof  of  his 
vileness ;  he  shrinks  from  their  society,  and  hates  them  because  they  are  so  good. 
We  may  well  be  on  our  guard  against  sins  that  shut  us  out  of  the  kingdom  of 
grace  on  earth,  and  out  of  heaven  hereafter. 

2.  Their  deeds  expose  them  to  the  divine  wrath. — "  Because  of  these  things 
cometh  the  wrath  of  God  upon  the  children  of  disobedience "  (ver.  6).  The 
wrath  of  God  is  already  upon  them  (Bom.  i.  18),  and  shall  remain  so  long  as  they 
are  disobedient.  Deeds  such  as  theirs  carry  their  own  punishment ;  but  there  is 
also  the  righteous  vengeance  of  God  to  reckon  with.  For  sin  God  can  have 
nothing  but  wrath ;  but  yet  that  is  mercifully  restrained  to  afford  every 
opportunity  for  repentance.  The  Boman  magistrates,  when  they  gave  sentence 
upon  any  one  to  be  scourged,  had  a  bundle  of  rods  tied  hard  with  many  knots  laid 
before  them.  The  reason  was  this  :  whilst  the  beadle  was  untying  the  knots, 
which  he  was  to  do  by  order  and  not  in  any  other  or  sudden  way,  the  magistrates 
might  see  the  deportment  and  carriage  of  the  delinquent,  whether  he  was  sorry 
for  his  fault  and  showed  any  hope  of  amendment,  that  then  they  might  recall  his 
sentence  or  mitigate  his  punishment ;  otherwise  he  was  corrected  so  much  the 

248 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS.  chap.  V. 


more  severely.     Thus  God  in  the  punishment  of  sinners.     How  patient  is  He  ! 
How  loth  to  strike  !     How  slow  to  anger  ! 

II.  The  children  of  light  are  divinely  illumined. — 1.  They  were  once  in 
darkness.  "  Ye  were  sometimes  darkness  "  (ver.  8).  Their  present  condition  as 
children  of  the  light  should  remind  them  by  contrast  of  their  former  state,  and 
should  excite  their  gratitude  to  God  for  the  change  He  had  wrought  in  them. 
They  were  not  to  be  deceived  by  specious  arguments  (ver.  6)  that  they  could 
return  to  their  old  sins  and  yet  retain  their  new  inheritance.  To  go  back  to  the 
old  life  is  to  go  back  to  darkness. 

2.  Their  possession  of  divine  light  is  evident. — "But  now  are  ye  light  in  the 
Lord.  .  .  .  For  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  [the  fruit  of  light]  is  in  all  goodness  and  righ- 
teousness and  truth  "  (vers.  8,  9).  True  virtue  is  of  the  light  and  cannot  be  hid. 
Genuine  religion  manifests  itself  in  goodness  of  heart,  in  righteousness  of  life, 
and  in  truthfulness  of  character  and  speech — in  a  holy  reality  that  is  both 
experienced  and  expressed.  On  Herder's  grave  at  Weimar  there  was  placed  by 
royal  authority  a  cast-iron  tablet  with  the  words,  "  Light,  Love,  Life."  The 
life  illumined  by  the  Spirit  is  its  own  bright  witness. 

3.  Their  conduct  aims  at  discovering  what  is  acceptable  to  God. — "  Walk  as  children 
of  the  light,  .  .  .  proving  what  is  acceptable  unto  the  Lord"  (vers.  8,  10).  Their 
outward  life  must  be  in  harmony  with  the  new  nature  they  have  received.  They 
were  adopted  as  children  of  the  light,  and  they  must  think,  speak,  and  act  in  the 
light  and  with  the  light  they  had  received.  The  light  will  show  what  it  is  that 
God  approves ;  and  striving  in  all  things  to  please  Him  our  light  will  increase. 
We  may  sometimes  be  mistaken,  but  we  shall  get  light  from  our  mistakes,  as  well 
as  from  our  success,  as  to  the  will  of  God.  Life  is  a  trial,  and  our  conduct  will 
be  the  test  as  to  how  we  are  using  the  light  God  has  given  us.  The  light  we 
shed  will  be  a  help  and  guide  to  others.  There  is  a  kind  of  diamond  which,  if 
exposed  for  some  minutes  to  the  light  of  the  sun  and  then  taken  into  a  dark 
room,  will  emit  light  for  some  time.  The  marvellous  property  of  retaining  light 
and  thereby  becoming  the  source  of  light  on  a  small  scale  shows  how  analogous 
to  light  its  very  nature  must  be.  Those  who  touched  the  Saviour  became  sources 
of  virtue  to  others.  As  Moses'  face  shone  when  he  came  from  the  mount,  so 
converse  with  spiritual  things  makes  Christians  the  light  whioh  shines  in  the 
dark  places  of  the  earth.     "  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men." 

III.  The  children  of  light  cannot  participate  in  deeds  of  darkness. — 1.  They 
are  to  shun  them.  "  Be  not  ye  partakers  with  them  .  .  .  Have  no  fellowship  with 
the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness  "  (vers.  7,  11).  We  may  not  actually  commit 
certain  sins  ;  but  if  we  tolerate  or  encourage  them,  we  are  partakers  with  the 
transgressors.  The  safest  place  is  that  which  is  farthest  from  evil.  It  is  a 
perilous  experiment  to  try  how  near  we  can  approach  and  how  far  dally  with 
sin  without  committing  ourselves.  The  easiest  way  to  resist  temptation  is  to  run 
away.  It  is  beneath  the  dignity  of  the  children  of  light  to  patronise  or  trifle 
with  sin. 

2.  They  are  not  even  to  speak  of  them. — "  It  is  a  shame  even  to  speak  of  those 
things"  (ver.  12).  There  are  some  subjects  about  which  silence  is  not  only  the 
highest  prudence  but  a  sacred  duty.  The  foolish  talking  and  jesting  of  ver.  4 
belonged  to  the  period  when  they  were  the  children  of  darkness.  Sparkling 
humour  refreshes  ;  the  ribald  jest  pollutes.  The  best  way  to  forget  sayings  that 
suggest  evil  is  never  to  speak  of  them. 

3.  They  are  to  expose  them  by  bringing  the  light  of  truth  to  bear  upon  them. — 
"But  rather  reprove  them.  .  .  .  All  things  that  are  reproved  are  made  manifest  by 
the  light,"  etc.  (vers.  11,  13,  14).  Silent  absence  or  abstinence  is  not  enough. 
Where  sin  is  open  to  rebuke  it  should  at  all  hazards  be  rebuked.  On  the  other 
hand,  St.  Paul  does  not  warrant  Christians  in  prying  into  the  hidden  sins  of  the 

249 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS. 


world  around  them  and  playing  the  moral  detective.  Publicity  is  not  a  remedy 
for  all  evils,  but  a  great  aggravation  of  some,  and  the  surest  means  of  dissemi- 
nating them.  It  is  a  shame — a  disgrace  to  our  common  nature,  and  a  grievous 
peril  to  the  young  and  innocent — to  fill  the  public  prints  with  the  nauseous 
details  of  crime,  and  to  taint  the  air  with  its  putridities.  The  fruit  of  the  light 
convicts  the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness.  The  light  of  the  gospel  disclosed  and 
then  dispelled  the  darkness  of  the  former  time.  So  will  it  be  with  the  night  cf 
sin  that  is  spread  over  the  world.  The  light  which  shines  upon  sin-laden  and 
sorrowful  hearts  shines  on  them  to  change  them  into  its  own  nature.  The 
manifested  is  light ;  in  other  words,  if  men  can  be  made  to  see  the  true  nature 
of  their  sin,  they  will  forsake  it.  If  the  light  can  but  penetrate  their  conscience, 
it  will  save  them.  "  Wherefore  He  saith,  Awake  thou  that  sleepest."  With  this 
song  on  her  lips  the  Church  went  forth,  clad  in  the  armour  of  light,  strong  in 
the  joy  of  salvation ;  and  darkness  and  the  works  of  darkness  fled  before  her 
(Findlay). 

Lessons. — The  children  of  darkness  and  of  light  differ — 1.   In  their  conduct. 
2.  In  their  spirit  and  aims.     3.  In  the  ivay  in  which  they  are  divinely  regarded. 


GERM  NOTES   ON  TEE    VERSES. 


Vers.  3-6.  Christian  Sobriety  incid- 
cated. 

1.  The  vices  condemned. — 1.  Im- 
purity. Fornication  is  sometimes  used 
in  Scripture  to  comprehend  the  grosser 
forms  of  uncleanness,  as  incest,  adul- 
tery, and  prostitution  ;  but  in  common 
speech  it  is  appropriated  to  intimacy 
between  unmarried  persons.  If  acts 
of  uncleanness  are  criminal,  so  are 
impure  thoughts  and  desires.  The 
gospel  forbids  •  filthy  communication, 
which  indicates  a  vicious  disposition 
and  corrupts  others.  Christians  must 
abstain  from  everything  that  tends  to 
suggest  wanton  ideas,  to  excite  impure 
desire,  and  to  strengthen  the  power  of 
temptation. 

2.  Covet misness.  —  An  immoderate 
desire  of  riches. 

3.  Foolish  talking  and  jesting. — The 
gospel  is  not  so  rigid  and  aifstere  as  to 
debar  us  from  innocent  pleasures  and 
harmless  amusements.  Jesting  is  not 
foolish  when  used  to  expose  the  absurd- 
ity of  error  and  the  folly  of  vice.  The 
apostle  condemns  lewd  and  obscene 
jesting,  profane  jesting,  and  reviling 
and  defamatory  jesting.  Evil-speaking 
never  wounds  so  deeply  nor  infuses  in 
the  wound  such  fatal  poison  as  when 
it  is  sharpened  by  wit  and  urged  home 
by  ridicule. 

250 


II.    The    arguments     subjoined.— 

1.  Impurity,  covetousness,  and  foolish 
talking     are     unbecoming    in    saints. 

2.  Foolish  talking  and  jesting  are  not 
convenient,  as  the  heathen  imagined 
them  to  be,  but  are  criminal  in  their 
nature   and   fatal   in    their    tendency. 

3.  The  indulgence  of  these  sins  is 
inconsistent   with   a   title   to    heaven. 

4.  These  sins  not  only  exclude  from 
heaven,  but  bring  upon  the  sinners  the 
wrath  of  God. — Lathrop. 

Ver.  4.  Against  Foolish  Talking  and 
jesting. 

I.  In  what  foolish  talking  and 
jesting  may  be  allowed. — 1.  Face- 
tiousness  is  not  unreasonable  which 
ministers  harmless  delight  to  conversa- 
tion. 2.  When  it  exposes  things  base 
and  evil.  3.  When  it  is  a  defence 
against  unjust  reproach.  4.  When  it 
may  be  used  so  as  not  to  defile  the 
mind  of  the  speaker  or  do  wrong  to 
the  hearer. 

II.  In  what  it  should  be  condemned. 
— 1.  All  profane  jesting  or  speaking 
loosely  about  holy  things.  2.  Abusive 
and  scurrilous  jesting  which  tends  to 
damage  our  neighbour.  3.  It  is  very 
culpable  to  be  facetious  in  obscene  and 
smutty  matters.  4.  To  affect  to  value 
this   way  of  speaking   in   comparison 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS.  chap.  v. 


to     the     serious    and     plain   way    of  sturdiest  and  most  unrelenting  of  her 

speaking.     5.  All  vainglorious   osten-  votaries.     He  in  his  turn  strengthens 

tation.       6.    When     it     impairs    the  the  conspiracy  that  is  formed  against 

habitual  seriousness  that  becomes  the  the  morals  of  a  new  generation,  and 

Christian. — Barrow.  all  the   ingenuous   delicacies  of  other 

days  are  obliterated.     He  contracts  a 

Ver.  6.  The  Dissipation  of  Large  Cities.  temperament  of  knowing,  hackneyed, 

I.  The  origin  of  a  life  of  dissipation,  unfeeling  depravity,  and  thus  the 
— Young  men  on  their  entrance  into  mischief  is  transmitted  from  one  year 
the  business  of  the  world  have  not  been  to  another,  and  keeps  up  the  guilty 
enough  fortified  against  its  seducing  history  of  every  place  of  crowded 
influences  by  their  previous  education  population. 

at  home.     Ye  parents  who,  in  placing  III.  The  effects  of  a  life  of  dissipa- 

your  children  on  some  road  to  gainful  tion. — We  speak  not  at  present  of  the 

employment,  have  placed  them  without  coming  death  and  of  the  coming  judg- 

a  sigh   in  the  midst  of  depravity,  so  ment,  but  of  the  change  which  takes 

near  and  so  surrounding  that  without  place  on  many  a  votary  of  licentious- 

a  miracle  they  must  perish,  you  have  ness  when  he  becomes  what  the  world 

done  an  act  of  idolatry  to  the  god  of  calls  a  reformed  man.     He  bids  adieu 

this  world,  you  have  commanded  your  to    the    pursuits    and    profligacies   of 

household  after  you  to  worship  him  as  youth,  not  because  he  has  repented  of 

the  great  divinity  of   their   lives,  and  them,    but    because   he    has    outlived 

you  have  caused  your  children  to  make  them.     It  is  a  common  and  easy  tran- 

their  approaches  to  his  presence,  and  in  sition  to  pass  from  one  kind  of  dis- 

so  doing  to  pass  through  the  fire  of  such  obedience  to  another  ;  but  it  is  not  so 

temptations  as  have  destroyed  them.  easy  to  give  up  that  rebelliousness  of 

II.  The  progress  of  a  life  of  dissipa-  heart  which  lies  at  the  root  of  all 
tion. — The  vast  majority  of  our  young,  disobedience.  The  man  has  withdrawn 
on  their  way  to  manhood,  are  initiated  from  the  scenes  of  dissipation,  and  has 
into  all  the  practices  and  describe  the  betaken  himself  to  another  way ;  but 
full  career  of  dissipation.  Those  who  it  is  his  own  way.  He  may  bid  adieu 
have  imbibed  from  their  fathers  the  to  profligacy  in  his  own  person,  but  he 
spirit  of  this  world's  morality  are  not  lifts  up  the  light  of  his  countenance  on 
sensibly  arrested  in  this  career,  either  the  profligacy  of  others.  He  gives  it 
by  the  opposition  of  their  friends  or  the  whole  weight  and  authority  of  his 
by  the  voice  of  their  own  conscience.  connivance.  Oh  for  an  arm  of  strength 
Those  who  have  imbibed  an  opposite  to  demolish  this  firm  and  far-spread 
spirit,  and  have  brought  it  into  com-  compact  of  iniquity,  and  for  the  power 
petition  with  an  evil  world,  and  have  of  some  such  piercing  and  prophetic 
at  length  yielded  with  many  a  sigh  and  voice  as  might  convince  our  reformed 
many  a  struggle,  are  troubled  with  men  of  the  baleful  influence  they  cast 
the  upbraidings  of  conscience.  The  behind  them  on  the  morals  of  the 
youthful  votary  of  pleasure  determines  succeeding  generation  !  What  is  the 
to  be  more  guarded  ;  but  the  entangle-  likeliest  way  of  setting  up  a  barrier 
ments  of  companionship  have  got  hold  against  this  desolating  torrent  of  cor- 
of  him,  the  inveteracy  of  habit  tyran-  ruption?  The  mischief  will  never  be 
nises  over  all  his  purposes,  the  stated  combatted  effectually  by  any  expedient 
opportunity  again  comes  round,  and  separate  from  the  growth  and  the 
the  loud  laugh  of  his  partners  chases  transmission  of  personal  Christianity 
all  his  despondency  away.  The  in-  throughout  the  land. — T.  Chalmers. 
fatuation     gathers    upon    him    every 

month,   a   hardening  process  goes  on,  Vers.  7-12.  Fellowship  in  Wickedness 

the  deceitfulness  of  sin  grows  apace,  and  its  Condemnation. 

and  he  at  length  becomes  one  of  the  I.    Illustrate    this    fellowship    in 

251 


CHAP.  V. 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS. 


wickedness. — 1.  Not  to  oppose,  in 
many  cases,  is  to  embolden  trans- 
gressors, and  to  be  partakers  with 
them.  2.  We  have  more  direct  fellow- 
ship with  the  wicked  when  we  en- 
courage them  by  our  example.  3.  They 
who  incite  and  provoke  others  to  evil 
works    have     fellowship    with    them. 

4.  They  who  explicitly  consent  to  and 
actually  join  with  sinners  in  their  evil 
works     have    fellowship    with    them. 

5.  To  comfort  and  uphold  sinners  in 
their  wickedness  is  to  have  fellowship 
with  them.  6.  There  are  some  who 
rejoice  in  iniquity  when  they  have 
lent  no  hand  to  accomplish  it. 

II.  Apply  the  arguments  the  apostle 
urges  against  it. — 1.  One  argument  is 
taken  from  the  superior  light  which 
Christians  enjoy.  2.  Another  is  taken 
from  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
of  which  believers  are  the  subjects. 
3.  The  works  of  darkness  are  un- 
fruitful. 4.  This  is  a  shameful  fellow- 
ship. 5.  If  we  have  fellowship  with 
sinners  in  their  works,  we  must  share 
with  them  in  their  punishment. — 
Lathrop. 

Yer.  8.  Light  in  Darkness. — I  was 
in  a  .darkened  room  that  I  might 
observe  the  effect  produced  by  the  use 
of  what  is  called  luminous  paint.  A 
neat  card  on  which  the  words  "  Trust 
in  the  Lord  "  were  printed  rested  upon 
the  bookcase  and  shone  out  clearly  in 
the  darkness.  The  effect  startled  me. 
How  remarkable  that  if  from  any 
cause  the  light  of  sun  or  day  failed  to 
rest  upon  the  card  its  luminousness 
gradually  declined,  but  returned  when 
the  sun's  action  infused  fresh  light ! 
Truly  we  also,  if  hidden  from  the  face 
of  our  Lord,  cease  to  shine.  "  Are  ye 
light  in  the  Lord  ?  walk  as  children  of 
light."— II.  Varleij. 

Yer.  9.  Fruit  of  the  Spirit. — As 
oftentimes  when  walking  in  a  wood 
near  sunset,  though  the  sun  himself  be 
hid  by  the  height  and  bushiness  of  the 
trees  around,  yet  we  know  that  he  is 
still  above  the  horizon  from  seeing  his 
beams    in   the   open  glades  before  us 

252 


illuminating  a  thousand  leaves,  the 
several  brightnesses  of  which  are  so 
many  evidences  of  his  presence.  Thus 
it  is  with  the  Holy  Spirit :  He  works 
in  secret,  but  His  work  is  manifest  in 
the  lives  of  all  true  Christians.  Lamps 
so  heavenly  must  have  been  lit  from 
on  high. — J.  C.  Hare. 

Yer.  10.  The  Rule  of  Christian  Con- 
duct.— 1.  We  cannot  conform  ourselves 
to  what  is  acceptable  to  the  Lord  and 
walk  as  children  of  light  except  we 
make  serious  search  into  the  rule  of 
duty  revealed  in  the  word  and  do  our 
utmost  to  come  up  to  that  rule.  We 
walk  not  acceptably  when  we  do  things 
rashly  without  deliberation,  or  doubt- 
ingly  after  deliberation,  nor  when  the 
thing  done  is  in  itself  right,  but  we  do 
it  not  from  that  ground,  but  to  gratify 
ourselves.  2.  It  is  not  sufficient  to 
make  this  inquiry  in  order  to  some 
few  and  weighty  actions,  but  in  order 
to  all,  whether  greater  or  less,  whether 
advantage  or  loss  may  follow  our  con- 
forming to  the  rule.  3.  The  finding 
out  of  what  is  acceptable  to  the  Lord, 
especially  in  some  intricate  cases,  is 
not  easily  attained.  There  must  be  an 
accurate  search,  together  with  an  exer- 
cising ourselves  in  those  things  we 
already  know  to  be  acceptable,  that  so 
we  may  experimentally  know  them  to 
be  such,  and  get  our  knowledge  bettered 
in  those  things  of  which  we  are  ignorant. 
— Fergusson. 

Yers.  11,  12.   Works  of  Darkness. — 

1.  Though  we  are  not  in  all  cases  to 
abstain  from  the  fellowship  of  wicked 
men,  but  may  converse  with  them  as 
we  are  bound  by  necessity,  or  by  any 
civil,  religious,  or  natural  bond,  yet 
no  tie  of  that  kind  can  warrant  us 
to  partake   with   thrm   in   their  sins. 

2.  Though  the  command  to  reprove 
the  sins  of  others  is  an  affirmative 
precept,  and  not  binding  at  all  times 
and  in  all  cases,  yet  not  reproving 
when  occasion  offers  is  a  partaking 
with  them  in  their  sins.  3.  There 
should  be  such  a  holy  bashfulness  in 
Christians  as  to  think  shame  to  utter 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  V. 


in  speech,  at  least  without  detestation, 
those  things  godless  sinners  are  not 
ashamed  to  practise.  Ministers  in 
their  public  preachings  should  be 
modest  and  sparing  in  deciphering 
filthy  sins,  lest  they  teach  others  how 
to  commit  the  sin  they  reprove. 
4.  When  men  do  not  seek  the  veil  of 
secrecy  to  cover  their  sins,  but  glory  in 
their  shame,  they  are  more  corrupt  than 
the  grossest  of  pagans. — Fergusson. 

Vers.  13,  14.  Slumbering  Souls  and 
their  Awakening. 

I.  The  character  of  the  persons  ad- 
dressed.— They  are  in  a  state  of  sleep. 
1.  If  you  allow  yourselves  in  the 
practice  of  known  wickedness,  your 
conscience  is  asleep.  2.  If  you  live  in 
the  customary  neglect  of  self-examina- 
tion, you  are  in  a  state  of  slumber. 
3.  If  you  have  never  been  in  any 
degree  affected  with  a  sense  of  your 
guilt  and  your  dependence  on  the 
mercy  of  God  in  Christ,  you  are  among 
those  who  are  asleep.  4.  If  you  have 
no  conflicts  with  sin  and  temptation, 
you  are  in  a  state  of  slumber.  5.  The 
prevalence  of  a  sensual  and  carnal  dis- 
position is  a  sign  of  spiritual  death. 
6.  Stupidity  under  the  warnings  of 
God's  word  and  providence  indicates 
such  a  state  of  soul  as  the  Scripture 
compares  to  sleep.  7.  The  soul  in 
which  the  temper  of  the  gospel  is 
formed  hungers  and  thirsts  after  righ- 
teousness, desires  spiritual  growth,  and 
reaches  after  perfection. 

II.  The  awakening  call. — 1.  This 
awakening  must  suppose  and  imply  a 
conviction  of.  your  sin  and  a  sense  of 
your  danger.  2.  This  awaking  from 
sleep  and  arising  from  the  dead 
imply  a  real  repentance  of  sin  and 
turning  to  God.  3.  They  who  have 
awoke  from  their  sleep  and  risen  from 
the  dead  will  experience  the  properties 
and  maintain  the  exercises  of  a  holy 
and  spiritual  life. 

III.  The  encouragement  to  attend  to 
the  awakening  call. — "  Christ  shall 
give  thee  light."  1.  This  may  be 
understood  as  a  promise  of  pardon  and 
eternal  life  on  your  repentance.    2.  The 


words  import  God's  gracious  attention 
to  awakened  souls  when  they  frame 
their  doings  to  turn  to  Him. — Lathrop. 

Ver.  13.  The  Light  of  God. 

I.  Light  comes  from  God. — God  is 

light,  and  He  wishes  to  give  light  to 
His  children.  u  Whatsoever  doth  make 
manifest  is  light " — that  which  is  made 
manifest  is  light.  There  has  been  a 
steady  progress  in  the  mind  of  the 
Christian  race,  and  this  progress  has 
been  in  the  direction  of  light.  Has  it 
not  been  so  in  our  notions  of  God? — 
a  gradual  discovery  that  when  God  is 
manifested,  behold,  God  is  light,  and  in 
Him  is  no  darkness  at  all — a  gradual 
vindication  of  His  character  from  those 
dark  and  horrid  notions  of  the  Deity 
which  were  borrowed  from  the  pagans 
and  the  Jewish  rabbis — a  gradual 
return  to  the  perfect  good  news  of  a 
good  God  which  was  preached  by 
St.  John  and  by  St.  Paul.  The  day 
shall  come  when  all  shall  be  light  in 
the  Lord — when  all  mankind  shall 
know  God  from  the  least  unto  the 
greatest,  and,  lifting  up  free  foreheads 
to  Him  who  made  them  and  redeemed 
them  by  His  Son,  shall  in  spirit  and 
in  truth  worship  the  Father. 

II.  In  the  case  of  our  fellow-men 
whatsoever  is  made  manifest  is  light. — 
How  easy  it  was  to  have  dark  thoughts 
about  our  fellow-men  simply  because 
we  did  not  know  them, — easy  to  con- 
demn the  negro  to  perpetual  slavery, 
when  we  knew  nothing  of  him  but  his 
black  face ;  or  to  hang  by  hundreds 
the  ragged  street  boys,  while  we 
disdained  to  inquire  into  the  circum- 
stances which  had  degraded  them  ;  or 
to  treat  madmen  as  wild  beasts,  instead 
of  taming  them  by  wise  and  gentle 
sympathy.  But  with  a  closer  know- 
ledge of  our  fellow-creatures  has  come 
toleration,  pity,  sympathy.  Man,  in 
proportion  as  he  becomes  manifest  to 
man,  is  seen,  in  spite  of  all  defects  and 
sins,  to  be  hallowed  with  a  light  from 
God  who  made  him. 

III.  It  has  been  equally  so  in  the 
case  of  the  physical  world. — Nature, 
being  made  manifest,  is  light.     Science 

253 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS. 


has  taught  men  to  admire  where  they 
used  to  dread,  to  rule  where  they  used 
to  obey,  to  employ  for  harmless  uses 
what  they  were  once  afraid  to  touch, 
and  where  they  once  saw  only  fiends  to 
see  the  orderly  and  beneficent  laws 
of  the  All-good  and  Almighty  God. 
Everywhere,  as  the  work  of  nature  is 
unfolded  to  our  eyes,  we  see  beauty, 
order,  mutual  use,  the  offspring 
of  perfect  love  as  well  as  perfect 
wisdom.  Let  us  teach  these  things  to 
our  children.  Tell  them  to  go  to  the 
light  and  see  their  heavenly  Father's 
works  manifested,  and  know  that  they 
are,  as  He  is,  Light. — C.  King  shy. 

Ver.  14.  Moral  Stupidity.  —  How 
many  scarcely  think  of  God  from  day  to 
day  !  It  cannot  therefore  be  uncharit- 
able to  consider  the  mass  of  the  people, 
compared  with  the  wakefulness  their 
infinite  interests  require,  as  sunk  in  a 
profound  slumber.  Unless  this  slumber 
is  soon  broken  they  must  sleep  the  sleep 
of  eternal  death. 

I.  Search  for  the  cause  of  this 
stupidity. — The  proximate  cause  may 
be  comprehended  in  these  two  words — 
ignorance  and  unbelief.  The  remote 
cause  is  opposition  to  God  and  truth. 
Were  not  the  heart  opposed,  no  man 
with  the  Bible  in  his  hand  could  remain 
ignorant  of  truths  which  claim  to  have 
so  important  a  bearing  on  his  eternal 
destiny.  Fortified  by  sevenfold  ignor- 
ance, men  can  no  more  be  awakened 
to  contemplate  their  condition  with 
alarm  than  the  pagans  of  the  wilder- 
ness. It  is  perfectly  in  character  for 
them  to  slumber.  But  there  are  men 
who  are  respectable  for  their  know- 
ledge of  Christian  truth  who  yet  are 
asleep.  The  cause  with  them  is  un- 
belief— the  want  of  a  realising  sense. 
Their  understanding  assents  to  the 
awful  verities  of  religion,  but  they  do 
not  realisingly  believe  them. 

II.  Apply  some  arguments  to  remove 
the  evil. — Consider  that  these  awful 
truths  are  as  much  realities  as  though 
you  were  now  overwhelmed  with  a 
sense  of  their  importance.  Neither 
the  ignorance  nor  the  unbelief  of  man 

254 


can  change  eternal  truth.  God  is  as 
holy,  as  awful  in  majesty,  He  is  as 
much  your  Creator,  Preserver,  and 
Master,  He  as  much  holds  your  desti- 
nies in  His  hands,  as  though  you  were 
now  lying  at  His  feet  beseeching  Him 
not  to  cast  you  down  to  hell.  What 
would  it  avail  if  all  the  people  should 
disbelieve  that  the  sun  will  ever  rise 
again,  or  that  spring-time  and  harvest 
will  ever  return  1  Can  the  soldier 
annihilate  the  enemy  by  marching  up 
to  the  battery  with  his  eyes  and  ears 
closed  1  You  have  the  same  means 
with  others  :  why  should  you  remain 
ignorant  while  they  are  informed  ?  If 
your  knowledge  is  competent  and  it  is 
unbelief  that  excludes  conviction,  then 
call  into  action  the  powers  of  a  rational 
soul  and  cast  yourselves  for  help  on 
God.  If  you  ever  mean  to  awake, 
awake  now.  The  longer  you  sleep  the 
sounder  you  sleep.  The  longer  you 
live  without  religion  the  less  likely  that 
you  will  ever  possess  it.  You  are 
sleeping  in  the  presence  of  an  offended 
God.  In  His  hands  you  lie,  and  if  He 
but  turn  them  you  slide  to  rise  no 
more. — E.  D.  Griffin. 

The  Call  of  the  Gospel  to  Sinners. 

I.  The  state  in  which  the  gospel 
finds  mankind. — A  state  of  sleep  and 
of  death. 

1.  It  is  a  state  of  insensibility  and 
unconcern  with  respect  to  the  concerns 
of  another  world. — Busied  about  trifles, 
men  overlook  the  great  concerns  of 
eternity.  Having  their  minds  dark- 
ened, they  see  no  world  but  the  present, 
they  live  as  if  they  were  to  live  here 
for  ever.  And  if  at  any  time  this  false 
peace  is  shaken,  they  try  all  means  to 
prevent  it  from  being  destroyed,  and 
to  lull  themselves  again  to  rest. 

2.  How  indisposed  and  unwilling  men 
are  to  set  about  the  work  of  true  religion. 
— Nothing  but  this  religion  of  which 
men  are  so  ignorant,  about  which  they 
care  so  little,  against  which  they  have 
conceived  such  a  dislike,  can  in  the  end 
deliver  them  from  everlasting  shame, 
sorrow,  and  punishment.  Here  is  their 
extreme  misery  and  danger.     They  are 


'EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  V. 


unconcerned  about  an  object  which  of 
all  others  ought  to  concern  them  most, 
and  are  set  against  the  only  remedy 
which  can  be  of  any  real  service  to 
them.  They  are  every  moment  liable 
to  fall  into  utter  perdition ;  but  they 
are  not  aware  of  their  danger,  and 
reject  the  only  hand  which  is  stretched 
out  to  save  them. 

II.  The  duty  the  gospel  calls  on 
them  to  discharge. — To  awake  out  of 
sleep  and  ari^e  from  the  dead.  1.  Their 
duty  is  to  consider  their  state  and  danger. 

2.  To  break  off  their  sins  by  repentance. 

3.  To  seek  the  knowledge  and  favour  of 
God. 

III.  The  encouragement  the  gospel 
affords. — 1.  Christ  will  give  thee  know- 
ledge. He  will  enlighten  thy  darkened 
mind,  He  will  teach  thee  by  His  good 
Spirit,  and  will  effectually  lead  thee 
into  all  saving  truth. 

2.  Christ  will  give  thee  peace. — What- 
ever peace  thou  may  est  have  arising 
from  not  knowing  and  not  feeling  that 
thou  art  a  sinner  and  daily  exposed 
to  the  wrath  of  God,  the  peace  which 
Christ  offers  thee  is  a  peace  which  will 
arise  from  a  consciousness  that  thy  sins 
are  forgiven,  and  that,  although  thou 
art  a  sinner,  thou  art  yet  reconciled  to 
God. 

3.  Christ  will  give  thee  holiness. — 
Holiness  is  our  meetness  for  heaven. 
It  is  that  state  and  disposition  of  heart 
which  alone  can  fit  us  for  seeing  and 
serving  God. — E.  Cooper. 

A  Summons  to  Spiritual  Light. 

I.  A  lamentable  moral  condition. — 

Sleep  implies  a  state  of  inactivity  and 
security.  Men  are  busily  employed 
about  their  worldly  concerns ;  but  a 
lamentable  supineness  prevails  with 
respect  to  spiritual  things.  The  gener- 
ality do  not  apprehend  their  souls  to 
be  in  any  danger — death,  judgment, 
heaven,  and  hell  do  not  seem  worthy 
their  notice.  God's  threatenings 
against  them  are  denounced  without 
effect — they  are  like  Jonah,  sleeping 
in  the  midst  of  a  storm.  Death  includes 
the  ideas  of  impotence  and  corruption. 
An   inanimate    body   cannot   perform 


any  of  the  functions  of  life.  It 
has  within  itself  the  seeds  and  the 
principles  of  corruption.  The  soul 
also,  till  quickened  from  the  dead,  is  in 
a  state  of  impotence,  it  is  incapable  of 
spiritual  action  or  discernment.  Yet, 
notwithstanding  this  state  appears  so 
desperate,  we  must  address  to  every  one 
that  is  under  it  the  command,  "Awake." 
Your  inactivity  and  security  involve 
you  in  the  deepest  guilt :  your  corruption 
of  heart  and  life  provokes  the  majesty 
of  God.  Nor  is  your  impotence  any 
excuse  for  your  disobedience.  They 
who  exert  their  feeble  powers  may 
expect  divine  assistance.  To  convince 
us  that  none  shall  fail  who  use  the 
appointed  means  God  enforces  His 
command  with 

II.  A  promise. — Sleep  and  death 
are  states  of  intell<  ctual  darkness  : 
hence  light  is  promised  to  those  who 
obey  the  divine  mandate.  Light  in 
Scripture  imparts  knowledge  (Isa.  viii. 
20),  holiness  (1  John  i.  7),  comfort  (Ps. 
xcvii.  11),  and  glory  (Col.  i.  12).  And 
all  these  blessings  shall  they  receive 
from  Christ,  the  fountain  of  light 
(Mai.  iv.  2 ;  John  i.  9). 

Lessons. — 1.  Let  each  one  consider 
the  command  addressed  to  himself — 
"  Awake  thou."  2.  Let  all  our  powers 
be  called  into  action.  3.  In  exerting 
ourselves  let  us  expect  the  promised  aid. 
— Theological  Sketch  Book. 

The  Gospel  Call  and  Promise. 

I.  Many  of  mankind  are  in  a  state 
of  deadly  sleep. — In  sleep  the  animal 
spirits  retire  to  their  source,  the  nerves 
are  collapsed  or  embraced  ;  and  as  the 
nerves  are  the  medium  of  sensation 
and  motion,  the  whole  system  is  in  a 
state  of  insensibility  and  inactivity. 
How  exactly  resembling  this  is  your 
spiritual  state. 

1.  You  are  insensible. — Your  eyes 
and  ears  are  closed ;  and  you  have  no 
proper  sense  of  pleasure  or  of  pain. 

2.  You  are  in  a  state  of  security. — 
You  have  no  fear  of  evil,  no  appre- 
hension of  danger,  and  consequently  no 
concern  for  your  safety. 

3.  You  are  in  a  state  of  inactivity. — 

255 


chap.  V.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


You     are    not    inquiring,    labouring,  •  of  the  objects  by  which  you  are  deluded, 

wrestling.      When  the  body  is  locked  2.  Struggle  to  shake  off  the  dull  slumber 

in  slumber,  thought  roves  at  random  which  weighs  you  down.     3.  Consider 

and   produces  gay   dreams  of    fancied  your  "misery  and  danger.     4.  Rouse  all 

happiness.     Thus  many  are  dreaming  that  is  within  you  to  activity.     God  calls 

their  lives  away.    (1)  In  this  sleep  many  you — (1)  By  the  language  of  His  law. 

are  as  void  of  sense  and  motion  as  if  they  (2)  By  the  severe  dispensations  of  His 

were  actually  dead.      (15)  In   common  providence.       (3)   By  the  strivings   of 

sleep  a  person  after  due  repose  spon-  His  Spirit.     (4)  By  the  voice  of  the 

taneously  awakes,  renewed  in  vigour,  gospel. 

But  from  this  sleep,  unless  God  should  III.  God  will  give  light  to  all  who 

awake  you,  you  will  never  awake  till  awake  at  His  call. — It  is  tie  peculiar 

the  heavens  be  no  more.      (3)  It  is  a  property    of   light    to    make    manifest 

sleep  unto  death.     Like  one  who  has  (ver.  13).     Christ  will  give  you  light, 

taken    a    large    quantity    of    opium,  1.  He  shall  make  manifest  to  yourself 

unless    you    are    awakened    by    some  your    character    and    your    situation, 

external  cause,  you  will  insensibly  sink  2.   You  shall  behold  the  light  of  life, 

into  the  second  death,  the  death  which  3.  He  shall  reveal  to  you  the  God  of 

never  dies.  pardoning   love.       4.     He  shall   chase 

II.  God  is  using  means  to  awaken  the  darkness  of  sin  from  your  soul,  and 

them. — While   you   are    asleep,    light,  you  shall  walk  in  the  light  of  holiness, 

however  bright  and  clear,  shines  upon  5.    He    shall    put    an   end    to    your 

you  in  vain.     Till  warning  has  waked  mourning. 

attention,  instruction  and  illumination  Learn. — 1.     The     deceitfuhiess    and 

will  be  lost  upon  you.      1.  God  calls  you  destructive  character  of  sin.      2.    How 

to  awake  from  your  dreams  of  fancied  fully  God  provides  for  your  salvation. 

happiness,  and  reflect  upon  the  vanity  3.  Hear  the  voice  of  God. — E.  Hare. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  15—18. 

Christian  Wisdom — 

I.  Cautiously  regulates  the  outward  life. — "  See  that  ye  walk  circumspectly, 
not  as  fools,  but  as  wise"  (ver.  15).  The  Christian  needs  not  only  spiritual 
fervour  and  enthusiasm,  but  also  prudence — sanctified  common  sense.  It  is 
possible  to  do  a  right  thing  in  a  wrong  way,  or  in  such  a  way  as  to  cause  more 
mischief  than  benefit.  There  is  a  severity  of  virtue  that  repels,  and  rouses 
resentment ;  and  there  is  a  parade  of  Christian  liberty  that  shocks  the  sensitive. 
The  truth  lies  between  two  extremes,  and  Christian  wisdom  is  seen  in  maintaining 
the  truth  and  avoiding  extremes.  "  I  wrisdom  dwell  with  prudence."  Mr. 
Edward  Eveiett  Hale  is  generally  credited  as  the  author  of  the  following  motto 
for  Christian  workers : 

"  Look  up,  and  not  down ; 
Look  out,  and  not  in  ; 
Look  forward,  and  not  back  ; 
Lend  a  hand." 

Success  in  soul-winning  is  only  given  to  skill,  earnestness,  sympathy,  perseverance, 
tact.  Men  are  saved,  not  in  masses,  but  by  careful  study  and  well-directed 
effort.  It  is  said  that  such  is  the  eccentric  flight  of  the  snipe  when  they  rise  from 
the  earth  that  it  completely  puzzles  the  sportsman,  and  some  who  are  capital 
shots  at  other  birds  are  utterly  baffled  here.  Eccentricity  seems  to  be  their 
special  quality,  and  this  can  only  be  mastered  by  incessant  practice  with  the 
gun.  But  the  eccentricity  of  souls  is  beyond  this,  and  he  had  need  be  a  very 
spiritual  Nimrod — a  mighty  hunter  before  the  Lord — who  would  capture  them 
for  Christ.     "  He  that  winneth  souls  is  wise," 

2jG 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS.  chap.  v. 


II.  Teaches  how  to  make  the  best  use  of  present  opportunity. — 1.  Observing 
the  value  of  time  amid  the  prevalence  of  evil.  "  Redeeming  the  time,  because  the 
days  are  evil"  (ver.  16).  Time  is  a  section  cut  out  of  the  great  circle  of  eternity, 
and  defines  for  us  the  limits  in  which  the  work  of  life  must  be  done.  It  is  a 
precious  gift  bestowed  by  the  beneficent  hand  of  God — a  gift  involving  grave 
responsibility ;  and  we  must  render  a  strict  account  of  the  use  we  make  of  every 
swing  of  the  pendulum.  It  is  doled  out  to  us  in  minute  fragments.  One  single 
year  is  made  up  of  31,536,000  seconds.  Every  tick  of  the  clock  records  the 
ever-lessening  opportunities  of  life.  Time  is  in  perpetual  motion.  Like  a  strong, 
ever- flowing  river,  it  is  bearing  away  everything  into  the  boundless  ocean  of 
eternity.  We  never  know  the  value  of  time  till  we  know  the  value  of  the 
fragments  into  which  it  is  broken  up.  To  make  the  most  of  a  single  hour  we 
must  make  the  most  of  every  minute  of  which  it  is  composed.  The  most 
dangerous  moments  of  a  man's  life  are  those  when  time  hangs  heavily  on  his 
hands.  He  who  has  nothing  to  do  but  kill  time  is  in  danger  of  being  killed 
himself.  It  is  a  miracle  of  divine  goodness  if  he  is  preserved  from  serious  folly, 
or  something  worse  ;  and  such  miracles  rarely  occur.  The  man  who  has  learnt 
the  value  of  time  can  learn  any  lesson  this  world  may  have  to  teach  him.  Time 
is  the  opportunity  for  the  exercise  of  Christian  wisdom,  and  should  be  the  more 
sedulously  used  "when  the  days  are  evil" — when  evil  is  in  power.  Oh  for  wisdom 
to  number  our  days,  to  grasp  the  meaning  of  present  opportunity  !  Here  come 
the  moments  that  can  never  be  had  again ;  some  few  may  yet  be  filled  with 
imperishable  good.     Let  us  apply  our  hearts — all  our  powers — unto  wisdom. 

2.  Having  the  good  sense  to  recognise  the  divine  will. — "  Wherefore  be  ye  not 
unwise,  but  understanding  what  the  will  of  the  Lord  is"  (ver.  17).  We  must 
read  and  interpret  the  signs  of  the  times  in  the  light  of  God's  purpose.  A  close 
and  deep  study  of  the  divine  mind  will  reveal  to  us  the  significance  of  the 
passing  opportunity,  and  aid  us  in  making  the  wisest  use  of  it.  Our  biggest 
schemes  are  doomed  to  failure  if  they  are  not  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  God. 
The  noblest  tasks  are  reserved  for  those  who  have  the  keenest  spiritual  insight 
and  are  most  in  harmony  with  the  divine  purpose. 

III.  Avoids  the  folly  and  waste  of  intemperance. — "  Be  not  drunk  with 
wine,  wherein  is  excess"  (ver.  18).  The  Asian  Christians  were  a  social,  light- 
hearted  people,  fond  of  convivial  feasts.  Wine  was  their  danger  ;  and  even  in 
t#ie  celebration  of  the  Lord's  Supper  they  ran  into  excess,  and  degraded  the  holy 

.  ordinance.  There  were  doubtless  converted  drunkards  among  them ;  and  the 
warning  of  the  text  was  specially  needed.  Intemperance  is  not  only  a  folly  and 
a  waste;  it  is  a  degradation  and  a  sin.  It  is  the  excessive  indulgence  of  a  craving 
that  at  bottom  may  be  in  itself  good,  if  wisely  regulated — a  craving  for  an  intenser 
life.  "  One  finds  traces,"  says  Monod,  "  of  the  primitive  greatness  of  our  nature 
even  in  its  most  deplorable  errors.  Just  as  impurity  proceeds  at  the  bottom  from 
an  abuse  of  the  craving  for  love,  so  drunkenness  betrays  a  certain  demand  for 
ardour  and  enthusiasm  which  in  itself  is  natural  and  even  noble.  Man  loves 
to  feel  himself  alive ;  he  would  fain  live  twice  his  life  at  once ;  and  he  would 
rather  draw  excitement  from  horrible  things  than  have  no  excitement  at  all." 
When  the  physicians  told  Theotimus  that  except  he  abstained  from  drunkenness 
and  licentiousness  he  would  lose  his  eyes,  his  heart  was  so  wedded  to  his  sins 
that  he  answered,  "  Then  farewell,  sweet  light." 

IV.  Seeks  to  be  under  the  complete  control  of  the  divine  Spirit. — "  But 
be  filled  with  the  Spirit  "  (ver.  18).  The  excitement  of  drunkenness  must  be 
supplanted  by  a  holier  and  more  elevating  stimulus :  the  cup  that  intoxicates 
exchanged  for  the  new  wine°of  the  Spirit.  The  general  adoption  of  this  principle 
will  be  the  grandest  triumph  of  temperance.  The  cure  of  drunkenness  will  not 
be  accomplished  simply  by  the  removal  of  temptation,  unless  a  relish  for  higher 

s  257 


chap.  v.  HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS. 


things  is  created  and  springs  of  holier  pleasure  are  opened  in  the  hearts  of  men. 
A  lower  impulse  is  conquered  and  expelled  by  the  introduction  of  a  higher. 
Anachonis,  the  philosopher,  being  asked  by  what  means  a  man  might  best  guard 
against  the  vice  of  drunkenness,  answered,  "  By  bearing  constantly  in  his  view 
the  loathsome,  indecent  behaviour  of  such  as  are  intoxicated."  Upon  this 
principle  was  founded  the  custom  of  the  Lacedaemonians  of  exposing  their 
drunken  slaves  to  their  children,  who  by  that  means  conceived  an  early  aversion 
to  a  vice  which  makes  men  appear  so  monstrous  and  irrational.  There  is  no 
excess  in  drinking  copious  draughts  of  the  Spirit.  Christian  wisdom  opens  the 
soul  to  the  ever-flowing  tide  of  His  influence,  and  strives  to  be  animated  and 
filled  with  His  all-controlling  power. 

Lessons. — 1.  Wisdom  is  the  best  use  of  knowledge.  2.  Christianity  opens  the 
purest  souixes  of  knowledge.  3.  M  Get  wisdom,  and  with  all  thy  getting  get  under- 
standing." 

GERM  NOTES  OF  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  15-17.   Walking  circumspectly.  apostle   urges   the   duty. — "The  days 

1.  The  duty  recommended. — 1.  Walk  are  evil."  The  argument  was  not 
circumspectly  that  you  may  keep  within  peculiar  to  those  early  times,  but  is 
the  line  of  your  duty.  Your  course  pertinent  to  all  times.  1.  The  days 
often  lies  in  a  medium  between  two  are  evil  because  the  Christian  finds 
extremes.  If  from  this  course  you  in  himself  much  disorder  and  corrup- 
deviate,  you  step  into  the  territory  of  tion.  2.  The  days  are  evil  as  he  is 
vice.  Be  circumspect  that  you  may  exposed  to  various  afflictions.  3.  There 
not  mistake  your  duty.  Be  watchful  are  many  adversaries.  4.  Iniquity 
that  you  may  retain  a  sense  of  virtue  abounds. — Lathrop. 

and  rectitude.     Be  attentive  that  you 

may  conform   to  the  Spirit  of   God's  Ver.  15.  The  Wise  Conduct  of  Life. 

commands.  — 1.  The  more  light  and  knowledge  a 

2.  Walk  circumspectly  that  you  may  man  receives  from  God  he  ought  to 
escape  the  snares  in  your  way. — Often  take  the  more  diligent  heed  that  in  all 
look  forward  to  descry  your  dangers.  things  he  practises  according  to  his 
Attend  to  your  particular  situation  light.  2.  Those  only  are  most  fit  to 
and  condition  in  life.  Often  review  reprove  sin  in  others  who  walk  most 
your  past  life,  and  reflect  on  former  circumspectly  and  live  so  as  they 
temptations.  Be  circumspect  that  cannot  be  justly  blamed  themselves, 
you  may  detect  your  enemies  when  Even  the  righteous  walking  of  such 
they  approach  you  in  disguise.  Never  is  a  forcible  reproof  of  sin  in  others, 
neglect  your  duty  under  pretence  of  though  they  speak  nothing.  3.  As 
shunning  a  temptation.  those    are    only  truly   wise   in    God's 

3.  Walk  circumspectly  that  you  may  account  who  labour  to  walk  most 
wisely  comport  with  the  aspects  of  exactly  by  the  rule  of  God's  word,  so 
Providence.  where  this  sanctified  wisdom  is  it  will 

4.  Be  circumspect  that  you  may  do  render  itself  evident  by  making  the 
every  duty  in  its  time  and  place. —  person  endowed  with  it  walk  circum- 
Attend  on  the  daily  worship  of  God  in  spectly.  4.  The  less  circumspect  and 
your  families  and  closets.  Be  kind  exact  men  be  in  walking  by  the  rule  of 
and  beneficent  to  the  poor.  Neglect  God's  word  the  greater  fools  they  are 
not  the  care  of  your  body.     Attend  on  in  God's  esteem. — Fergusson. 

the  instituted  ordinances  of  the  gospel. 

5.  Walk  circumspectly  that  your  good  Yer.  16.  Redeeming  the  Time. — To 
may  not  be  evil  spoken  of.                              redeem  time  is  to  regain  what  is  lost 

IT.  The    argument    by  which  the     and  to  save  what  is  left. 

258 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  V. 


I.  Enter  on  your  work  speedily. — 

Do  you  ask  what  is  your  work  ?  It  is 
time  you  knew.  Consult  God's  word; 
that  will  tell  you. 

II.  Attend  to  your  work  with  dili- 
gence.— A  sense  of  past  slothfulness 
must  excite  you  to  severer  industry. 
Be  not  only  fervent  but  steady  in  your 
work. 

III.  Guard  against  the  things  which 
rob  you  of  your  time. — An  indolent 
habit  is  inconsistent  with  laudable 
actions.  A  versatile  humour  is  active, 
but  wants  patience.  An  excessive 
fondness  for  company  and  amusement 
is  the  cause  of  much  waste  of  time. 

IY.  Do  every  work  in  its  season. — 
Youth  is  the  most  promising  season. 
The  time  of  health  is  more  favourable 
than  a  time  of  sickness.  There  are 
seasons  friendly  to  particular  duties. 
In  doing  works  of  charity  observe 
opportunities. 

Y.  Wisely  divide  your  time  among 
your  various  duties. — Lathrop. 

The  Redemption  of  Time. 

1.  The  subject  of  the  exhortation. — 

1.  Time  sometimes  signifies  the  whole 
duration  assigned  to  the  present  world. 

2.  The  period  of  human  life. — The 
time  we  occupy  in  the  present  state  is 
that  which  God  allots  for  our  personal 
probation  and  trial.  All  God's  dis- 
pensations in  respect  to  us  refer  to 
this  period  and  have  their  limits  fixed 
by  it. 

3.  Time  means  season  or  opportunity. 
— In  this  sense  the  apostle  uses  it  here. 
We  are  to  redeem  all  the  opportunity 
God  bestows  on  us  for  getting  and 
doing  good,  for  acquainting  ourselves 
with  Him  and  being  at  peace. 

II.  The  duty  enjoined  on  us. — 
"  Redeeming  the  time  " — the  oppor- 
tunity. 

1.  We  redeem  time  by  consideration. 

2.  When  we  turn  everything  we  have 
to  do,  in  the  common  concerns  of  life, 
into  a  religious  channel. 

3.  By  living  in  a  devotional  spirit. 
— (1)  This  will  cast  out  everything 
trifling,  much  more  everything  sinful, 
from  our  leisure  hours.     (2)  Its  pre- 


servation and  exercise  are  perfectly 
compatible  with  the  affairs  of  life. 

4.  The  principal  way  by  which  time 
is  to  be  redeemed  is  not  merely  by 
making  efforts  to  promote  our  final 
blessedness,  but  by  actually  securing 
our  present  salvation. 

III.  The  motives  by  which  the 
exhortation  is  enforced. — "  Because 
the  days  are  evil." 

1.  The  days  are  evil  in  a  general 
sense. — This  age,  as  well  as  the  age  of 
the  apostles,  is  a  wicked  one. 

2.  Because  they  are  days  of  distress. 

3.  The  days  are  evil  individually. — 
In  the  sense  of  affliction  to  a  number 
of  individuals. 

4.  It  is  an  evil  day  that  we  are  ever 
exposed  to  enemies  and  temptations. 

5.  Every  day  opportunities  of  im- 
provement are  wasted  is  an  evil  day. 

6.  The  time  will  come  when,  as  to 
many  unhappy  spirits,  the  opportunity 
of  salvation  will  be  lost  for  ever. — 
R.  Watson. 

The  Redemption  of  Time. — The  more 
the  days  are  beset  by  things  that 
grievously  invade  them,  disturb  them, 
waste  them,  the  more  careful  and 
zealous  should  we  be  to  save  and 
improve  all  that  we  can.  To  this 
end — 

I.  It  is  of  the  highest  importance 
that  time  should  be  a  reality  in  our 
perception  and  estimate;  that  we 
should  verify  it  as  an  actual  some- 
thing, like  a  substance  to  which  we 
can  attach  a  positive  value,  and  see  it 
as  wasting  or  as  improved  as  palpably 
as  the  contents  of  a  granary  or  as  the 
precious  metals.  The  unfortunate  case 
with  us  is,  that  time  is  apprehended 
but  like  air,  or  rather  like  empty 
space,  so  that  in  wasting  it  we  do  not 
see  that  we  are  destroying  or  misusing 
a  reality.  Time  is  equivalent  to  what 
could  be  done  or  gained  in  it. 

II.  Keep  established  in  the  mind, 
and  often  present  to  view,  certain 
important  purposes  or  objects  that 
absolutely  must  be  attained. — For 
example  :  that  there  is  some  consider- 
able discipline  and  improvement  of  the 

25a 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


mind,  some  attainment  of  divine  know- 
ledge, some  measure  of  the  practice  of 
religious  exercises,  and  there  is  the  one 
thing  needful  in  its  whole  compre- 
hensive magnitude. 

III.  That  time  be  regarded  in  an 
inseparable  connection  with  eternity 
is  the  grand  principle  for  redeeming 
it ;  to  feel  solemnly  that  it  is  really  for 
eternity,  and  has  all  the  importance  of 
this  sublime  and  awful  relation.  It 
might  be  a  striking  and  alarming 
reflection  suggested  to  a  man  who  has 
wasted  his  time — now  the  time  has 
gone  backward  into  the  irrevocable 
past,  but  the  effect  of  it,  from  the 
quality  you  have  given  it,  is  gone 
forward  into  eternity,  and  since  you 
are  going  thither,  how  will  you  meet 
and  feel  the  effect  there  ? 

IV.  Nothing  short  of  the  redemp- 
tion of  the  soul  is  the  true  and 
effectual  redemption  of  time. — And 
this  object  gives  the  supreme  rule  for 
tbe  redeeming  of  time.  How  melan- 
choly to  have  made  so  admirable  a  use 
of  time  for  all  purposes  but  the  supreme 
one  ! — John  Foster. 

Vers.  17,  18.  Sensual  and  Spiritual 
Excitement. — There  is  the  antithesis 
between  drunkenness  and  spiritual 
fulness.  The  propriety  of  this  opposi- 
tion lies  in  the  intensity  of  feeling 
produced  in  both  cases.  There  is 
one  intensity  of  feeling  produced  by 
stimulating  the  senses,  another  by 
vivifying  the  spiritual  life  within.  The 
one  commences  with  impulses  from 
without,  the  other  is  guarded  by 
forces  from  within.  Here,  then,  is 
the  similarity  and  here  the  dissimi- 
larity which  constitutes  the  propriety 
of  the  contrast.  One  is  ruin,  the 
other  salvation.  One  degrades,  the 
other  exalts. 

I.  The  effects  are  similar. — On  the 
day  of  Pentecost,  when  'he  first jinflu- 
ences  of  the  Spirit  descended  on  the 
early  Church,  the  effects  resembled 
intoxication.  It  is  this  very  resem- 
blance which  deceives  the  drunkard ; 
he  is  led  on  by  his  feelings  as  well  as 
by  his  imagination.     Another  point  of 

260 


resemblance  is  the  necessity  of  intense 
feeling.  We  have  fulness — it  may  be 
produced  by  outward  stimulus  or  by 
an  inpouring  of  the  Spirit.  The 
proper  and  natural  outlet  for  this 
feeling  is  the  life  of  the  Spirit.  What 
is  religion  but  fuller  life  1 

II.  The  dissimilarity  or  contrast  in 
St.  Paul's  idea. — The  one  fulness  begins 
from  without,  the  other  from  within. 
The  one  proceeds  from  the  flesh,  and 
then  influences  the  emotions ;  the  other 
reverses  this  order.  Stimulants  like 
wine  inflame  the  senses,  and.  through 
them  set  the  imaginations  and  feelings 
on  fire;  and  the  law  of  our  spiritual 
being  is,  that  that  which  begins  with 
the  flesh  sensualises  the  spirit ;  whereas 
that  which  commences  in  the  region  of 
the  spirit  spiritualises  the  senses,  in 
which  it  subsequently  stirs  emotion. 
That  which  begins  in  the  heart  ennobles 
the  whole  animal  being ;  but  that  which 
begins  in  the  inferior  departments  of 
our  being  is  the  most  entire  degradation 
and  sensualising  of  the  soul.  The 
other  point  of  difference  is  one  of 
effect.  Fulness  of  the  Spirit  calms  ; 
fulness  produced  by  excitement  .satiates 
and  exhausts.  The  crime  of  sense  is 
avenged  by  sense  which  wears  with 
time — the  terrific  punishment  attached 
to  the  habitual  indulgence  of  the°senses 
is  that  the  incitements  to  enjoyment 
increase  in  proportion  as  the  power  of 
enjoyment  fades.  We  want  the  Spirit 
of  the  life  of  Christ,  simple,  natural, 
with  power  to  calm  and  soothe  the 
feelings  which  it  rouses ;  the  fulness  of 
the  Spirit  which  can  never  intoxicate! 
— F.  W.  Robertson. 

Christian  Mirth  versus  Drunken 
Mirth. — Carnal  men  seek  the  joys  of 
life  in  revelry,  but  Christians  must 
seek  them  in  a  higher  inspiration 
— that  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  whose 
fulness  is  the  source  of  the  blithest 
and  most  joyous  life. 

I.  The  mirth  begotten  of  wine  is 
the  mother  of  all  kinds  of  profligacy. 

II.  The  mirth  begotten  of  wine 
destroys  men  body  and  soul. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  V. 


III.  The  fulness  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
produces  a  truly  blithe  and  merry 
life. — In  this  life,  with  its  many  causes 
of  depression,  men  need  exhilaration, 
and  the  text  points  us  to  the  only 
place  where  it  is  to  be  found  without 
any  alloy. — G.  A.  Bennetts,  B.A. 

What  is  your  Heart  filed  with  ? 

I.  The  heart  of  man  must  be  full 
of  something. 

II.  Those  who  are  full  of  wine 
cannot  be  filled  with  the  Spirit. 

III.  Those  who  are  filled  with  the 
Spirit  will  not  be  full  of  wine. 

IV.  The  joy  that  is  kindled  by 
fulness  of  wine  is  degrading  while  it 
lasts,  and  will  soon  expire. 

V.  The  joy  that  is  kindled  by  the 
fulness  of  the  Spirit  makes  us  like 
the  angels,  and  it  will  never  end. — 
Lay  Preacher. 

The  Vice  of  Drunkenness. 

I.  The  nature  and  extent  of  the  sin. 
— The  use  of  meat  and  drink  is  to 
support  and  comfort  the  body.  What- 
ever is  more  than  these  is  excess.  The 
highest  degree  of  intemperance  is  such 
an  indulgence  as  suspends  the  exercise 
of  the  mental  and  bodily  powers.  If 
by  the  indulgence  of  your  appetite  you 
unfit  your  body  for  the  service  of  your 
mind,  or  your  mind  for  the  service  of 
God,  so  waste  your  substance  as  to 
defraud  your  family  of  a  maintenance 
or  your  creditors  of  their  dues,  become 
enslaved  to  a  sensual  habit  and  fasci- 
nated to  dissolute  company,  stupefy 
your  conscience,  extinguish  the  senti- 
ments of  honour  and  banish  the 
thoughts  of  futurity,  you  are  charge- 
able with  criminal  excess. 

II.  The  guilt  and  danger  which 
attend  the  vice. — 1.  It  is  an  ungrateful 
abuse  of  God's  bounty.  2  It  divests  the 
man  of  his  native  dignity  and  sinks 
him  below  the  brutal  herds.  3.  Is  in- 
jurious to  the  body  as  well  as  mind. 
4.  Consumes  men's  substance.  5.  Wastes 
a  maris  conscience  as  well  as  his  sub- 
stance. 6.  Intemperance  generates  other 
vices — impure  lustings,  angry  passions. 


profane  language,  insolent  manners, 
obstinacy  of  heart,  and  contempt  of 
reproof.  7.  Has  most  lamentable  effects 
on  families.  8.  The  Scripture  abounds 
in  solemn  warnings  against  this  sin. 
9.  This  sin  must  be  renounced,  or  the 
end  of  it  will  be  death. — Lathrop. 

Being  filled  with  the  Spirit. — 1.  It 
supposes  a  sufficiency  and  fulness  in 
the  Spirit  and  His  influences  every 
way  to  fill  our  souls,  to  supply  all 
our  spiritual  wants,  and  to  help  our 
infirmities.  2.  It  imports  an  actual 
participation  of  His  influences  and 
fruits  in  a  large  and  plentiful  measure. 
(1)  As  men  come  to  have  every  power 
and  faculty  of  their  souls  more  subject 
to  the  Spirit's  authority  and  under  the 
influence  proper  to  it.  (2)  As  they 
grow  to  experience  His  operations  in 
all  the  several  kinds  of  them.  (3)  As 
His  agency  comes  to  be  more  stated 
and  constant  in  them.  (4)  As  His 
grace  becomes  more  mighty  and  opera- 
tive in  them,  so  as  actually  to  produce 
its  proper  and  genuine  effects.  (5)  As 
they  taste  such  a  sweetness  and  delight 
in  the  measure  of  participation  attained 
that  they  reach  forward  with  greater 
ardour  toward  perfection.  3.  That 
every  one  should  esteem  the  fulness  of 
the  Spirit  a  desirable  thing.  (1)  It 
puts  us  into  a  fit  posture  of  mind  for 
daily  communion  with  God.  (2)  Would 
settle  our  minds  in  the  truest  pleasure 
and  peace.  4.  That  we  should  look 
upon  it  as  an  attainable  good.  ( 1 )  From 
the  Spirit's  own  gracious  benignity 
and  His  declared  inclination  to  fill  our 
souls.  (2)  From  the  purchase  and 
intercession  of  Christ.  (3)  From  the 
nature  of  the  Spirit's  work  in  con- 
sequence of  redemption.  (4)  From  the 
gospel  being  described  as  the  ministra- 
tion of  the  Spirit.  (5)  From  the 
declarations  of  God  concerning  the 
Spirit.  (6)  From  the  instances  of 
His  grace  already  made  in  others. 
(7)  From  the  beginnings  of  His  saving 
grace  in  themselves,  good  men  may 
conclude  the  greatest  heights  attain- 
able by  them,  if  they  be  not  wanting 
to  themselves. — John  Evans. 

261 


CHAP.  v.  HOMILEflC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


On  being  Jilted  with  the  Spirit —  His    influence    and    subject    to    His 

I.  Implies  that  the  Spirit  has  been  control. 

largely  given  to  the  Church.  V.  Is  to  be  the  instrument  of  ful- 

II.  That  as  God  has  given  the  Spirit  filling  His  mission  on  earth, 
largely  so  He  has  been  abundantly         VI.   Is  to  have   God  as  the  only 
received.  portion  of  the  soul.— 1.  The  Spirit  is 

III.  Is  to  be  possessed  by  His  graces  God  on  the  earth.     2.  To  be  filled  with 
in  all  their  variety.  the  Spirit  is  to  be  fully  occupied  with 

IV.  Is    to    be    wholly  guided    by  God. — Stewart. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.-Verses  19—21. 

Spiritual  Enjoyment. — 

I.  Expressed  in  heartfelt  praise  to  God. — "Speaking  .  .  .  in  spiritual  songs,  sing- 
ing and  making  melody  in  your  heart  to  the  Lord  "  (ver.  19).  Men  filled  with  wine 
seek  their  enjoyment  in  singing  bacchanalian  odes  and  songs ;  but  the  men  of 
the  Spirit  find  a  higher  and  more  satisfying  joy  in  chanting  psalms  and  hymns  of 
praise  to  God.  The  holiest  excitement  seeks  expression  in  music  and  song.  In 
the  praise  meetings  of  the  Ephesians  we  have  the  beginnings  of  Christian 
psalmody.  The  psalms  of  the  Old  Testament  were  sung,  accompanied  by  musical 
instruments.  "  Singing  and  making  melody  "  means  singing  and  playing,  voice 
and  instrument  blending  in  joyous  strains  of  praise.  Then  would  follow  hymns 
expressing  the  great  ideas  of  the  gospel.  Regarding  the  early  Christians,  Pliny 
wrote  :  "  They  are  wont  on  a  fixed  day  to  meet  before  daylight — to  avoid  per- 
secution— and  to  recite  a  hymn  among  themselves  by  turns  to  Christ,  as  being 
God."  There  might  not  be  much  artistic  taste  in  the  music,  either  of  voice  or 
instrument ;  but  the  sincerity  of  the  heart  was  the  true  harmony.  The  contrast 
of  the  verse  is  between  the  heathen  and  the  Christian  practice.  Let  your  songs 
be  not  the  drinking  songs  of  heathen  feasts,  but  psalms  and  hymns  ;  and  their 
accompaniment,  not  the  music  of  the  lyre,  but  the  melody  of  the  heart.  Is  any 
merry,  let  him  sing,  not  light  and  frivolous  songs,  breathing  questionable 
morality,  but  psalms.     The  glad  heart  is  eager  first  to  acknowledge  God. 

II.  Largely  consists  in  thanksgiving. — "  Giving  thanks  always  for  all  things 
unto  God"  (ver.  20).  God  is  the  active  Source  of  all  blessings  in  creation, 
providence,  and  grace,  and  should  be  constantly  acknowledged  in  grateful 
adoration.  The  thankful  heart  is  the  happiest ;  and  it  is  the  happy  who  sing. 
Thanksgiving  is  the  predominating  element  in  praise;  and  praise  is  the  essence 
of  true  worship.  Prayer  is  not  the  essence  of  worship,  though  it  is  an  important 
help.  Prayer  becomes  worship  when  it  merges  into  praise.  The  reading  and 
exposition  of  God's  word  are  not  worship.  Preaching  accomplishes  one  of  its 
loftiest  functions  when  it  incites  to  praise.  Music  is  not  worship ;  but  it  may 
become  a  valuable  accessory.  Christianity  has  taken  hold  of  music  and  con- 
secrated and  elevated  it  to  the  highest  uses  of  worship.  It  has  produced  the 
greatest  musicians  and  the  grandest  music.  All  true  music  is  the  outward  and 
melodious  expression  of  our  dearest  and  most  sacred  thoughts  and  feelings.  The 
musical  artist  touches  what  is  deepest  and  best  in  us.  Nature  has  no  false 
notes.  When  we  praise  God  aright,  worship  becomes  an  act  of  the  highest 
intelligence,  calling  forth  and  exercising  our  noblest  powers.  We  are  to  sing 
with  the  Spirit,  and  we  are  to  sing  with  the  understanding  also.  Worship  is 
acceptable  to  God  as  it  is  the  joyous  expression  of  the  soul,  brimming  over  with 
thankfulness  and  reverence.  We  are  then  brought  under  the  spiritually  trans- 
forming power  of  the  Being  we  worship ;  the  worshipper  becomes  like  the  object 
worshipped. 

262 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPRESIANS. 


CHAP.  V. 


III.  Soberly  recognises  the  relation  in  which  we  stand  to  each  other  and  to 
Christ. — "  Submitting  yourselves  one  to  another  in  the  fear  of  God"  (ver.  21). 
In  the  fear  of  Christ — so  read  all  the  old  MSS.  and  authorities.  The  believer 
passes  from  under  the  bondage  of  the  law  to  be  the  servant  of  Christ,  which 
through  the  instinct  of  love  to  Him  is  really  to  be  the  Lord's  freeman,  for  he  is 
under  the  law  to  Christ.  Thus  reverential  fear  of  displeasing  Him  is  the  motive 
for  discharging  our  relative  duties  as  Christians.  The  Church  should  be  a 
pattern  and  an  example  of  harmony  and  peace,  and  this  can  only  be  by  the 
members  submitting  themselves  one  to  another  "  in  the  fear  of  Christ."  The 
man  with  the  most  distinguished  gifts  must  not  be  above  submitting  himself  to 
the  judgment  and  will  of  his  fellow-members.  Preacher,  organist,  choir,  and 
congregation  must  vie  with  each  other  in  harmonious-  rivalry  in  the  service 
and  worship  of  God. 

Lessons. — 1.  Spiritual  enjoyment  is  not  dependent  on  fictitious  excitement. 
2.  Expresses  itself  in  holiest  song.     3.  Is  unselfish. 


GERM    NOTES    ON   THE    VERSES. 


Yer.   19.  Singing  in  the  Worship  of 
God. 

I.  The  singing  of  psalms  is  here 
enjoined  as  a  sacred  branch  of  social 
worship. — We  are  to  glorify  God  in 
our  bodies  and  in  our  spirits.  To  Him 
we  are  to  consecrate  the  use  of  all  our 
powers.  And  there  is  the  same  reason 
why  the  musical  as  any  other  faculty 
should  be  employed  in  His  service. 
Praise  is  the  most  excellent  part  of 
divine  worship. 

II.  The  matter  or  subject  of  our 
singing  — In  psalms,  hymns,  and 
spiritual  songs.  By  psalms  is  intended 
that  collection  of  sacred  poems  which 
passes  under  this  name  and  is  one  of 
the  canonical  books  of  Scripture.  By 
hymns  may  be  designed  other  poetical 
compositions  of  Scripture  as  the  songs 
of  Moses,  Hannah,  Zechariah,  Simeon, 
and  others.  By  spiritual  songs  may  be 
meant  those  pious  and  devout  songs 
which  in  that  age  were  composed  by 
prophets  and  holy  men  in  the  Church 
under  the  immediate  influence  of  the 
Spirit.  The  matter  we  sing  should  be 
accommodated  to  the  occasion  of  the 
worship.  If  in  the  days  of  David  it 
was  thought  necessary  that  on  extra- 
ordinary occasions  a  new  song  should 
be  sung,  surely  now  we  may  sing  some 
new  songs  on  the  glorious  occasion  of 
the  gospel. 

III.  We  are  to  sing,  making 
melody. — The   use   of   music  in  social 


worship  is  to  assist  and  enliven  the 
devotion  of  the  heart.  When  music  is 
performed  with  melody  of  sound,  exact- 
ness of  time,  and  harmony  of  voices,  it 
greatly  contributes  to  this  end.  Sing- 
ing cannot  be  performed  to  edification 
and  comfort  without  skill.  The  singers 
in  the  Jewish  Temple  were  carefully 
instructed,  and  this  branch  of  worship 
conducted  with  great  order  and 
solemnity. 

IV.  In  singing  we  must  make 
melody  in  our  hearts  to  the  Lord. — 
Singing  as  a  part  of  religious  worship 
must  be  directed  to  God.  We  sing  in 
obedience  to  His  command,  with  a 
sense  of  His  presence,  with  hearts 
disposed  for  His  service,  with  affections 
corresponding  to  the  matter  of  the 
psalm.  The  man  who  can  hear  holy 
anthems  sung  to  the  universal  Parent, 
with  voices  sweetly  mingling  and 
harmonising  together,  and  not  feel 
himself  softened  into  benevolence  and 
love  and  moulded  into  condescension 
and  peace,  must  have  a  soul  rugged  as 
the  rocks  and  stubborn  as  an  oak. 

Lessons. — 1.  If  singing  is  an  insti- 
tuted part  of  divine  woi^ship,  all  should 
take  a  share  in  it.  2.  Every  one  ac- 
cording to  his  ability  is  bound  to 
promote  the  psalmody  of  the  Church. 
3.  Psalmody  as  a  branch  of  divine 
worship  should  be  regarded,  not  as  a 
theatrical  exhibition,  but  as  a  religious 
solemnity. — Lathrop. 

263 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


Ver.  20.  The  Duty  of  Thanhs- 
giving. 

I.  The  duty  to  which  we  are 
exhorted. — I.  Implies  a  right  appre- 
hension and  considerate  attention  to 
benefits  conferred.  2.  Requires  a 
faithful  retention  of  benefits  in  memory 
and  frequent  reflections  on  them. 
3.  A  due  esteem  and  valuation  of 
benefits.  4.  That  benefits  be  received 
with  a  willing  mind,  a  hearty  sense,  a 
vehement  affection.  5.  Always  at- 
tended with  the  esteem,  veneration,  and 
love  of  the  benefactor. 

II.  The  time  allotted  to  the  perform- 
ance of  the  duty. — "  Always."  1.  Here- 
by is  required  a  frequent  performance 
thereof.  2.  Appointing  and  punctually 
observing  convenient  times  for  the 
purpose.  3.  A  vigilant  attendance  on 
the  duty  such  as  men  bestow  on  their 
employments.  4.  Implies  a  ready  dis- 
position to  give  thanks  ever  permanent 
in  us.  5.  That  we  embrace  every 
opportunity  of  actually  expressing  our 
thankfulness. 

III.  The  matter  of  this  duty. — 
"For  all  things."  1.  We  are  to  give 
thanks  not  only  for  great  but  the  least 
favours  of  God.  2.  Not  only  for  new 
and  present  benefits,  but  for  all  we 
have  formerly  or  may  hereafter  receive. 
3.  Not  only  for  pleasant  occurrences 
of  providence,  but  also  those  which  are 
adverse.  4.  Not  only  for  temporal  but 
for  spiritual  and  eternal  blessings. — 
Barrow. 


Thanksgiving. 

I.  The  duty  here  enjoined  is  to  give 
thanks. 

II.  Consider  the  character  of  that 
Being  to  whom  our  thanks  must  be 
supremely  directed. — "  To  God,  even 
the  Father." 

III.  We  are  required  to  give  thanks 
always  to  God. 

IV.  The  matters  for  which  we  are 
to  give  thanks. — "  For  all  things." 

V.  Consider  the  medium  of  our 
access  to  God  in  this  duty. — "  In  the 
narre  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." — 
Lathrop. 

Ver.  21.  Mutual  Submission. 

I.  A  degree  of  submission  is  due  to 
superiors. — Superiors  in  age,  in  know- 
ledge and  wisdom,  in  authority. 
Honour  a  virtuous  character  wherever 
you  see  it. 

II.  Mutual  submission  as  it  respects 
equals. — All  men  have  the  same 
immutable  right  to  an  equitable  treat- 
ment from  all  with  whom  they  have 
intercourse.  Mutual  subjection  ought 
to  be  seen  in  families. 

III.  There  is  a  submission  due  to 
those  who  on  some  accounts  may 
be  deemed  inferiors. — Superiors  owe 
respect  to  those  below  them.  They 
should  be  easy  of  access,  gentle  in 
language,  and  condescending  in  deport- 
ment. 

IV.  This  mutual  submission  ought  to 
appear  in  Christian  Churches. — Ibid. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  22—33. 

Duties  of  Wives  and  Husbands. 

I.  The  duty  of  the  wife  is  submission  to  her  husband. — "  Wives  submit  your- 
selves unto  your  own  husbands." 

1.  A  submission  defined  by  religious  obligation. — "As  unto  the  Lord"  (ver.  22). 
This  submission  implies  no  inferiority.  Husband  and  wife  are  equal  before  God, 
and  each  is  separately  responsible  to  Him.  The  husband  cannot  love  and  serve 
God  for  the  wife,  nor  the  wife  for  the  husband  ;  each  stands  related  to  Him  as  a 
distinct  personality,  with  distinct  duties  and  responsibilities  for  each.  God  has 
the  first  claim  upon  them  both,  and  their  relation  and  duties  to  each  other  must 
be  in  harmony  with  that  supreme  claim.  The  submission  demanded  is  not  the 
subjection  of  an  inferior  to  a  superior,  but  the  voluntary,  sympathetic  obedience 
that  can  be  gracefully  and  appropriately  rendered  only  by  an  equal  to  an  equal. 
"It  is  here  that  Christianity,  in  contrast  with  paganism  and  notably  with 
Mahometanism,  raises   the  weaker  sex   to. honour.      In   soul   and   destiny   it 

264 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS.  chap.  V. 


declares  the  woman  to  be  man,  endowed  with  all  rights  and  powers  inherent  in 
humanity.  It  is  one  of  the  glories  of  our  faith  that  it  has  enfranchised  our 
sisters,  and  raises  them  in  spiritual  calling  to  the  full  level  of  their  brothers  and 
husbands." 

2.  A  submission  recognising  the  headship  of  the  husband. — (1)  Analogous  to 
the  headship  of  Christ  to  His  Church.  "  For  the  husband  is  the  head  of  the 
wife,  even  as  Christ  is  the  head  of  the  Church  "  (ver.  23).  (2)  Unlike  that 
headship  inasmuch  as  Christ  is  not  only  the  head  but  also  the  Saviour  of  the 
Church.  "  And  He  is  the  Saviour  of  the  body  "  (ver.  23).  As  the  Saviour  His 
headship  is  unrivalled  and  must  be  acknowledged  by  every  member  alike.  The 
wife  must  not  think  too  much  of  her  husband :  there  is  One  who  is  superior  to 
him,  and  who  must  be  all  in  all  to  them  both. 

3.  A  submission  after  the  pattern  of  that  of  the  Church  to  Christ. — "  As  the 
Church  is  subject  to  Christ,  so  let  the  wives  be  to  their  own  husbands  in  every- 
thing" (ver.  24;  cf.  ver.  33).  Religion  sanctifies  all  relationships  and  makes  duty 
a  joy.  As  the  wife  obeys  Christ  in  spiritual  things,  so  she  will  obey  her 
husband  in  all  things  righteous.  Mary,  wife  of  Prince  William  of  Orange  and 
the  heir-apparent  to  the  English  throne,  was  asked  what  her  husband  the  prince 
should  be  if  she  became  queen.  She  called  in  her  husband  and  promised  him 
he  should  always  bear  rule ;  and  asked  only  that  he  would  obey  the  command, 
"  Husbands,  love  your  wives,"  as  she  should  do  that,  "  Wives,  be  obedient 
to  your  husbands  in  all  things." 

II.  The  duty  of  the  husband  is  to  love  his  wife. — 1.  A  love  that  seeks  to  pro- 
mote the  highest  spiritual  interests  of  the  wife  (vers.  25-29).  It  must  be  a  Christ- 
like, self-sacrificing,  all-devoted  love.  It  is  greatly  within  the  power  of  the 
husband  to  help  or  hinder  the  spiritual  life  of  the  wife.  The  man  is  apt  to 
become  so  self-absorbed  and  forgetful  that  he  needs  reminding  of  his  duty  to  love 
and  cherish  the  one  who  should  be  dearer  to  him  than  any  other.  Assured  of 
the  reality  and  unselfishness  of  her  husband's  love,  there  is  no  sacrifice  she  will 
hesitate  to  make,  nor  will  she  spare  any  effort  to  attain  the  Christ-likeness  of 
character  to  which  he  may  wish  to  lead  her.  "  One  with  Christ.  This  is  the 
ideal  Christian  state.  We  have  a  faint  reflection  of  this  in  that  which  should  be 
the  ideal  condition  of  husband  and  wife.  They  are  no  longer  twain  but  one 
flesh.  They  are  to  be  as  nearly  as  possible  one  person.  Their  thoughts,  their 
interests,  their  hopes,  their  aims  are  one.  Marriage  was  given  that  it  might  be 
a  representation  of  the  spiritual  union  between  Christ  and  His  Church.  The 
union  of  each  separate  soul  with  Christ  is  a  fragment  of  His  union  with  the 
whole  Church,  and  must  partake  of  the  same  character.  He  that  is  joined  to  the 
Lord  is  one  spirit  with  Him." 

2.  A  love  arising  from  the  intimacy  and  sacredness  of  the  marriage  bond 
(vers.  30-32). — Marriage  is  a  union  for  life  between  one  man  and  one  woman ; 
consequently  bigamy,  polygamy,  and  voluntary  divorce  are  all  inconsistent  with 
its  nature.  It  must  be  entered  into  freely  and  cordially  by  the  parties,  with  the 
conviction  that  one  is  suited  to  the  other,  and  to  take  the  positions  involved  in  the 
natural  and  scriptural  view  of  the  relation.  "  Marriage,"  said  Jeremy  Taylor,  "  is 
a  school  and  exercise  of  virtue.  Here  is  the  proper  sense  of  piety  and  patience,  of 
the  duty  of  parents,  and  the  charity  of  relatives ;  here  kindness  is  spread  abroad 
and  love  is  united  and  made  firm  as  a  centre.  Marriage  is  the  nursery  of  heaven, 
hath  in  it  the  labours  of  love  and  the  delicacies  of  friendship,  the  blessing  of 
society  and  the  union  of  hands  and  hearts.  Like  the  useful  bee,  marriage  builds 
a  house,  unites  into  societies  and  republics,  exercises  many  virtues,  promotes  the 
interest  of  mankind,  and  is  that  state  of  good  things  to  which  God  has  designed 
the  present  constitution  of  the  world." 

3.  A   love  strengthened  by  the  observance   of  mutual  duties  (ver.  33). — Love 

265 


chap.  v.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS. 


manifested  begets  love,  and  strengthens  with  exercise.  The  loving  reverence  of 
the  wife  follows  on  the  frank  and  genuine  love  of  the  husband.  This  was  an 
epitaph  in  a  churchyard  inscribed  by  a  husband  after  sixty  years  of  married  life ; 
"  She  always  made  home  happy."  The  Christian  conception  of  love  and  marriage 
began  a  new  era  in  the  world,  and  has  exalted  woman  to  her  true  place. 

Lessons.— 1.  Marriage  is  not  to  be  lightly  entered  into.    2.  Is  dignified  as  a  symbol 
of  the  union  between  Christ  and  His  Church.      3.  Binds  the  contracting  parties  to 
fidelity  in  observing  the  most  sacred  vows. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers.  22-33.   Wives  and  Husbands.  depends   on   nothing   more    than   the 

I.  There  are  duties  which  are  com-  union  of  the  heads.  For  how  can  they 
mon  to  both  the  correlates. — The  unite  in  prayers  and  praises  who  unite 
husband  and  wife  are  in  some  respects  in  nothing  else. — Lathrop. 

equals.      As   they  are  one   and  have 

one   common   interest   they   ought   to  Vers.  23-32.    Christ  and  His  Bride. 

act  with  an  undivided  concern  for  the  I.   Christ's     love     to     the    Church 

happiness   of   the   family.      They  are  (vers.    25-27).       We   must   value  and 

alike  bound  to  mutual  fidelity  and  a  joyfully  assert  our  individual  part  in 

chaste  conversation.     They  are  under  the  redeeming  love  of  the  Son  of  God  ; 

equal  obligations  to  study  each  other's  but  we  must  equally  admit  the  sovereign 

peace  and  comfort.  rights  of  the  Church  in  the  Redeemer's 

II.  There  are  some  duties  particu-  passion.  There  is  in  some  an  absorp- 
larly  incumbent  on  the  wife. — These  tion  in  the  work  of  grace  within  their 
the  apostle  expresses  by  the  terms  sub-  own  hearts,  an  individualistic  salvation- 
mission,  reverence,  obedience,  and  sub-  seeking  that  like  all  selfishness  defeats 
jection.  Since  the  Church  is  subject  its  end,  for  it  narrows  and  impover- 
to  Christ,  the  woman  ought  to  be  ishes  the  inner  life  thus  .sedulously 
subject  to  her  husband,  who,  by  Christ's  cherished.  The  Church  does  not  exist 
authority,  is  constituted  her  head.  A  simply  for  the  benefit  of  individual 
family  should  resemble  a  Church  in  souls  ;  it  is  an  eternal  institution,  with 
union,  peace,  and  subordination.  The  an  affiance  to  Christ,  a  calling  and 
honour  and  interest  of  religion  require  destiny  of  its  own ;  within  that 
that  wives,  by  a  cheerful  subordination,  universal  sphere  our  personal  destiny 
co-operate  with  their  husbands  in  all  holds  its  particular  place.  The  Christ 
the  important  concerns  of  the  house-  is  worthy  -and  she  must  be  made 
hold,  and  in  the  nurture,  education,  worthy.  From  eternity  He  set  His 
and  government  of  the  dependent  love  upon  her;  on  the  cross  He  won 
members.  her   back  from   her    infidelity   at   the 

III.  There  are  duties  particularly  price  of  His  blood.  Through  the  ages 
incumbent  on  the  husband  towards  his  He  has  been  wooing  her  to  Himself, 
wife. — These  the  apostle  expresses  by  and  schooling  her  in  wise  and  mani- 
the  word  "  love,"  which  here  stands  op-  fold  ways  that  she  may  be  fit  for 
posed  to  sharpness  and  severity.  One  her  heavenly  calling.  Through  what 
argument  for  this  love  is  the  example  cleansing  fires,  through  what  baptisms, 
of  Christ  in  His  love  and  devotion  to  even  of  blood,  she  has  still  to  pass  ere 
the  Church.  Another  reason  is,  the  the  consummation  is  reached,  He  only 
intimacy  of  the  relationship — "  Whoso  knows  who  loved  her  and  gave  Himself 
loveth  his  wife  loveth  himself."  Where  for  her.  He  will  spare  to  His  Church 
the  spirit  of  religion  reigns  in  both,  the  nothing,  either  of  bounty  or  of  trial, 
union  will  be  easy  and  their  joint  that  her  perfection  needs, 
government  in  the  family  have  efficacy.  II.  Christ's  authority  over  the 
The   maintenance   of    family  religion  Church  (vers.  23,  24). — The  Churh    is 

266 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPBESIANS. 


CHAP,   ft 


no  democracy,  any  more  than  she  is  an 
aristocracy  or  a  sacerdotal  absolutism  : 
she  is  a  Christocracy.  The  people  are 
not  rulers  in  the  house  of  God ;  they 
are  the  ruled,  laity  and  ministers  alike. 
We  acknowledge  this  in  theory ;  but 
our  language  and  spirit  would  often- 
times be  other  than  they  are,  if  we 
were  penetrated  with  the  sense  of  the 
continual  presence  and  majesty  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  in  our  assemblies.  The 
Church's  protection  from  human 
tyranny,  from  schemes  of  ambition, 
from  the  intrusion  of  political  methods 
and  designs,  lies  in  her  sense  of  the 
splendour  and  reality  of  Christ's 
dominion  and  of  her  own  eternal  life 
in  Him. 

III.  The  mystery  of  the  Church's 
origin  in  Christ  (vers.  30-32). — God 
chose  us  in  Christ  before  the  world's 
foundation.  We  were  created  in  the 
Son  of  God's  love  antecedently  to  our 
redemption  by  Him.  Christ  recovers 
through  the  cross  that  which  pertains 
inherently  to  Him,  which  belonged  to 
Him  by  nature,  and  is  as  a  part  of 
Himself.  The  derivation  of  Eve  from 
the  body  of  Adam,  as  that  is  affirmed 
in  the  mysterious  words  of  Genesis,  is 
analogous  to  the  derivation  of  the 
Church  from  Christ.  The  latter  re- 
lationship existed  in  its  ideal,  and  as 
conceived  in  the  purpose  of  God,  prior 
to  the  appearance  of  the  human  race. 
In  St.  Paul's  theory,  the  origin  of  the 
woman  in  man,  which  forms  the  basis 
of  marriage  in  Scripture,  looked 
farther  back  to  the  origin  of  humanity 
in  Christ  Himself.  In  some  mystical 
but  real  sense  marriage  is  a  reunion, 
the  reincorporation  of  what  had  been 
sundered.  Seeking  his  other  self,  the 
complement  of  his  nature,  the  man 
breaks  the  ties  of  birth  and  founds  a 
new  home.  So  the  inspired  author  of 
the  passage  in  Genesis  (ii.  21-24) 
explains  the  origin  of  marriage,  and 
the  instinct  which  draws  the  bride- 
groom to  his  bride.  But  our  apostle 
sees  within  this  declaration  a  deeper 
truth,  kept  secret  from  the  foundation 
of  the  world.  When  he  speaks  of  this 
great  mystery,  he  means  thereby  not 


marriage  itself,  hxti  the  saying  of  Adam, 
about  it.  This  text  was  a  standing 
problem  to  the  Jewish  interpreters. 
"  But  for  my  part/'  says  the  apostle, 
"I  refer  it  to  Christ  and  to  the 
Church."  St.  Paul,  who  has  so  often 
before  drawn  the  parallel  between 
Adam  and  Christ,  by  the  light  of  this 
analogy  perceives  a  new  and  rich 
meaning  in  the  old  dark  sentence.  It 
helps  him  to  see  how  believers  in 
Christ,  forming  collectively  His  body, 
are  not  only  grafted  into  Him,  but 
were  derived  from  Him  and  formed  in 
the  very  mould  of  His  nature.  In  our 
union  through  grace  and  faith  with 
Christ  crucified  we  realise  again  the 
original  design  of  our  being.  Christ 
has  purchased  by  His  blood  no  new  or 
foreign  bride,  but  her  who  was  His 
from  eternity — the  child  who  had 
wandered  from  the  Father's  house,  the 
betrothed  who  had  left  her  Lord  and 
spouse. — Findlay. 

Yers.  25-33.  The  Christian  Law  of 
Marriage — 

I.  Demands  self-sacrificing  love. 

II.  Recognises  the  sacredness  of 
the  union  between  the  contracting 
parties. 

III.  Is  ennobled  in  being  a  type 
of  the  union  between  Christ  and  the 
Church. 

IV.  Involves  mutual  fidelity  on  the 
part  of  both  husband  and  wife. 

Vers.  25-27.  Christ's  Love  for  the 
Church. 

I.  Christ's  love  of  His  Church. — 
It  was — 1.  Ancient.  2.  Self -moved. 
3.  Active.     4.  Effective. 

II.  Christ's  sacrifice  of  Himself  as 
an  exhibition  of  His  love. — 1.  Him- 
self. His  life.  What  a  life  !  2.  As  a 
sacrifice.  The  essence  of  it  is  vicarious 
suffering.  3.  To  all  the  suffering 
which  justice  demanded. 

III.  Christ's  more  immediate  object 
in  what  He  has  done. — 1.  Sanctifica- 
tion.  As  essential  as  pardon.  2.  By 
the  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Signified   by   the    washing   of   water. 

267 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


3.  Through  the  instrumentality  of  the 
word. 

IV.  Christ's  ultimate  aim. — 1.  To 
present  His  Church  to  Himself.  A 
nuptial  figure.  2.  Free  from  all  im- 
perfections. 3.  Adorned  with  all 
excellencies.  (1)  Our  obligations  to 
Christ.  (2)  The  real  value  of  holiness. 
(3)  The  high  destiny  of  believers. — 
G.  Bi'ooks. 

The  Future  Glory  of  the  Church. 

I.  The  future  state  of  the  Church. 
— In  describing  the  future  condition  of 
the  Church,  the  apostle  has  evidently 
in  his  mind  two  previous  states  :  her 
original  state  when  lying  dead  in  tres- 
passes and  sins,  and  her  subsequent 
earthly  state  when  separated  from  the 
mass  of  the  ungodly  and  partially 
redeemed.  We  have  the  people  of 
Christ  before  us  in  three  distinct  points 
of  view : — 

1.  As  wholly  defiled. — Speaking  of 
"  sanctifying  and  cleansing "  the 
Church  intimates  her  complete  defile- 
ment. 

2.  As  in  some  measure  cleansed. — 
Though  sanctified  and  cleansed,  we 
read  of  spots  still  left  on  the  Church. 

3.  As  altogether  pure. — Faultless  in 
God's  presence  and  estimation. 

II.  The  causes  to  which  this  state 
is  to  be  ascribed. — 1.  The  love  of 
Christ.  2.  Love  revealed  in  sacrifice  as 
another   step    towards     final    purity. 

3.  The  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (ver.  26). 

4.  The  word  of  God  (ver.  26).  A 
right  understanding  of  its  testimony 
and  a  heartfelt  belief  in  its  truth. 

III.  The  great  end  for  which  all 
these  means  of  holiness  are  brought 
into  operation. — "That  He  might 
present  it  to  Himself  a  glorious 
Church"  (ver.  27).  The  likeness  of 
God  will  be  put  on  her,  the  image  of 
God  shine  in  her  ;  that  attribute  of 
divinity — holiness — which  is  the  per- 
fection of  divinity  will  be  her  crown. 
— C.  Bradley. 

The  Divine  Ideal  of  the  Church. 
I.  We  have  an  array  of  stupendous 
facts  concerning  the  Church. — 1.  The 

268 


divine  prevision.  Before  the  eternal 
Son  of  God  could  give  Himself  for  the 
Church,  He  must  have  had  it  in  His 
mind.  2.  The  Redeemer's  actual  love  for 
the  Church.  3.  The  Redeemer's  amazing 
self-sacrifice  on  behalf  of  the  Church. 
4.  That  the  Redeemer  has  a  very  definite 
purpose  concerning  His  Church. 

II.  The  distinguishing  marks  or 
signs  of  the  members  of  the  Church. — 
They  are  personal  and  experimental. 
1.  The  casting  out  of  natural  im- 
purities. Improvement  is  not  enough. 
Nothing  but  a  thorough  re-creation 
can  effect  what  is  required.  2.  The 
instrument  of  this  change  is  the  truth. 
3.  This  change,  this  introduction  into  the 
Church,  is  a  thing  complete  in  itself 
becomes  historical,  and  ought  never  to 
need  repeating.  4.  The  way  is  open 
for  the  appearance  of  the  other  personal 
and  experimental  sign  —  sanctification 
(ver.  26).  5.  Christ's  idea  of  the 
Church  given  in  these  verses  is  not 
abstract,  impracticable,  and  untrue  to 
the  possibilities  of  ordinary  human 
nature. 

III.  Here  we  catch  a  glimpse  of 
the  future  and  eternal  glory  of  the 
Church. — How  stupendous  an  event  it 
will  be  when,  at  the  consummation  of 
all  things,  the  whole  Church  will  be 
presented  to  the  Lord  Jesus  !  What 
can  secure  Church  membership? 
Neither  early  training,  nor  baptism, 
nor  the  holding  of  an  orthodox  creed, 
nor  association  with  a  religious  and 
devout  assembly,  nor  the  filling  of 
ecclesiastical  office,  nor  even  intelligent 
approach  to  the  table  of  the  Lord. 
Such  things  are  means  to  an  end. 
That  end  is  true  membership  in  the 
Church  of  Christ.  And  that  member- 
ship is  attained  and  secured  by  divine 
renewal  of  the  heart,  and  by  that 
conformity  to  the  mind  of  Christ  which 
is  expressive  of  the  new  life.  The  true 
unity  of  the  Church  of  Christ  is  that 
spiritual  oneness  which  has  its  expres- 
sion in  identity  of  Christian  life. — 
W.  Hudson. 

Ver.    25.  A    Noble    Self-sacrifice. — 
Caius  Gracchus,  who  was  the  idol  of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  V. 


the  Roman  people,  having  carried  his 
regard  for  the  lower  orders  so  far  as  to 
draw  upon  himself  the  resentment  of 
the  nobility,  an  open  rupture  ensued ; 
and    the    two    extremities    of    Rome 
resembled    two    camps — Opimius    the 
consul  on  one  side,  and  Gracchus  and 
his   friend  Fulvius  on  the   other.     A 
battle    ensued    in    which    the   consul, 
meeting  with  more  vigorous  resistance 
than     he     expected,     proclaimed     an 
amnesty  for  all  those  who  should  lay 
down  their  arms,  and  at  the  same  time 
promised    to    pay   for   the    heads    of 
Gracchus    and    Fulvius    their   weight 
in  gold.     This   proclamation  had  the 
desired  effect.     The  populace  deserted 
their  leaders,  Fulvius  was  taken  and 
beheaded,  and  Gracchus,  at  the  advice 
of   his   two   friends,    Licinius   Crassus 
and  Pomponius,  determined  to  flee  the 
city,  and  reached  the  bridge  Sublicius, 
where  his  enemies,  who  pursued  him 
close,  would  have  overtaken  and  seized 
him  if  his  two  friends  had  not  opposed 
their  fury ;  but  they  saw  the  danger 
he  was  in  and  determined  to  save  his 
life  at  the  expense  of  their  own.     They 
defended    the   bridge   against   all   the 
consular  troops  till  Gracchus  was  out 
of  their  reach ;    but  at   length,  being 
overpowered  by  numbers,  and  covered 
with  wounds,  they  both  expired  on  the 
bridge  they  had  so  valiantly  defended. 
— Biblical  Treasury. 

Ver.   30.  Members    of  the   Body   of 
Christ. 
I.  The    doctrine.— The    apostle    is 


speaking  of  believers  only  ;  of  believers 
as  believing;  of  all  believers.  His 
language  implies  : — 

1.  Union. — Real,  intimate,  indis- 
soluble. 

2.  Dependence. — Of  the  members  on 
the  heart.  Of  the  members  on  the 
head. 

3.  Sympathy. — Sincere,  entire,  un- 
interrupted. Value  of  human  sym- 
pathy. Its  rarity.  Its  necessary 
imperfection.  The  superiority  of 
Christ's. 

II.  The  duty. — 1.  Love.  A  special 
affection  arising  out  of  a  special  rela- 
tion. 

2.  Reverence. — There  should  be  no 
unholy  familiarity. 

3.  Obedience. — Responsive  to  His 
will  as  a  part  of  Himself. — G.  Brooks. 

Ver.  33.  The  Sanctity  of  Home  Life. — 
The  Christian  home  is  the  corner-stone 
of  modern  civilisation — the  best  fruit 
Christianity  has  yielded  the  earth. 
The  Anglo-Saxon  home  is  the  crown- 
ing glory  of  the  race.  Contrast  it  with 
French  home  life,  or  the  miserable 
home  life  in  Utah  !  National  self- 
preservation  demands  a  vigorous  up- 
rooting of  Mormon  polygamy  and 
Western  divorce  lawlessness.  That 
which  is  punished  as  a  crime  in  the 
best  and  purest  Christian  lands  must 
be  punished  as  a  crime  wherever  it 
is  found.  Garfield  kissing  his  mother 
and  his  wife  at  his  Inauguration  was 
a  sweet  revelation  of  holy  family  life. 
— Homiletic  Monthly. 


269 


chap.  vi.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


CHAPTER  VI. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Children,  obey. — Until  the  days  of  discretion  arrive  this  is  the  grace  of  childhood. 
If  through  obedience  the  child  errs,  the  responsibility  of  that  is  with  those  who  commanded. 
It  is  only  a  "  surrendered  soul "  that  can  sing : 

11 1  would  be  treated  as  a  child, 
And  guided  where  I  go." 

Ver.  2.  Honour  thy  father  and  mother. — As  long  as  they  are  so. 

Ver.  3.  That  it  may  be  well  with  thee. — If  ever  "  that  it  may  be  "  could  mean  "  and  so  it 
shall  be,"  we  should  strenuously  plead  for  that  meaning  here.  For  it  would  be  a  pitiable 
thing  indeed  to  find  a  man  showing  filial  piety  as  a  profitable  course. 

Ver.  4.  Nurture  and  admonition. — The  former  word  is  more  general  than  the  latter,  includ- 
ing everything  that  goes  to  the  instruction  of  the  child.  "  Admonition  "  is  reproof,  either  of 
word  or  punishment,  or  yet  again,  warning. 

Ver.  5.  Servants,  be  obedient. — R.V.  margin,  "  bond-servants."  There  was  One  who  had 
"  become  obedient  even  unto  death,"  having  taken  "  the  form  of  a  bond-servant " 
(Phil.  ii.  7).  With  fear  and  trembling. — "  With  that  zeal  which  is  ever  keenly  apprehensive 
of  not  doing  enough  "  {Meyer).  The  same  phrase  is  used  of  the  way  in  which  our  personal 
salvation  is  to  be  worked  out  (Phil.  ii.  12). 

Ver.  6.  Not  with  eyeservice. — A  word  used  only  by  St.  Paul.  The  thing  it  describes  is 
easily  recognised  to-day. 

Ver.  7.  With  good  will  doing  service. — If  a  philosopher-slave  like  Epictetus  could  rise 
superior  to  his  condition,  surely  Christianity  could  do  as  much  for  the  humblest  believer. 

Ver.  8.  Knowing  that  whatsoever  good  .  .  .  bond  or  free. 

"  This  is  the  famous  stone 
That  turneth  all  to  gold, 
For  that  which  God  doth  touch  and  own 
Cannot  for  less  be  told." 

George  Herbert. 

Ver.  9.  Do  the  same  things  unto  them. — The  utmost  application  of  the  "  golden  rule." 
Forbearing  threatening  "  may  either  mean  abating  or  giving  up." 

Ver.  10.  Be  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  His  might. — In  i.  19  the  phrase 
"  power  of  His  might "  is  reversed.     See  note  there. 

Ver.  11.  The  whole  armour. — "The  panoply."  "  A  complete  suit  of  armour."  The  wiles  of 
the  devil. — A  craftily  designed  plan  of  attack. 

Ver.  12.  For  we  wrestle. — We  need  not  suppose  a  transference  of  the  metaphor.  It  may 
describe  the  band-to-hand  fight  in  which  equally  matched  opponents  refuse  to  back  an 
inch.  Not  against  flesh  and  blood.— With  "vulnerable  crests"  {Macbeth).  When  ghostly 
combatants  appear,  unassailable,  and  with  powers  of  injury  against  which  we  are  helpless, 
we  may  well  say  : 

"  Take  any  shape  but  that,  and  my  firm  nerves 
Shall  never  tremble." 

Ver.  13.  In  the  evil  day. — Compare  v.  16.  A  day  of  great  peril.  And  having  done  all,  to 
stand. — "  When  the  hurly-burly  's  done  "  to  find  oneself  unvanquished. 

Ver.  14.  Stand  therefore. — The  words  ring  short  and  sharp  as  a  bugle-call.  Loins  girt 
about  with  truth. — "  To  speak  of  a  well -equipped  warrior  without  a  girdle  is  a  contradictio  in 
adjecto,  for  it  was  just  the  girdle  which  produced  the  free  bearing  and  movement  and  the 
necessary  attitude  of  the  warrior  "  (Meyer).  tl  Truth  is  a  subjective  conception  correspond- 
ing with  the  eternal  realities  "  (Beet).  Breastplate  of  righteousness. — "  As  the  actual  warrior 
has  protected  the  breast  when  he  has  laced  the  corslet  over  his  chest,  so  with  you  righteous- 
ness .  .  .  renders  your  breast  (heart  and  will)  inaccessible  to  the  hostile  influence  of  the 
demons"  (Meyer). 

"  He  is  but  naked  though  locked  up  in  steel 
Whose  conscience  with  injustice  is  corrupted." 

Ver.  15.  Feet  shod.— Ensuring  agility  and  a  firm  foothold.  Preparation  of  the  gospel  of 
peace.—"  Preparation  "  might  perhaps  give  way  to  "  preparedness."    St.  Paul  does  not  mind 

270 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS.         chap.  vi. 


a  paradox.  "What  hast  thou  to  do  with  peace?"  said  one  soldier  to  another;  but  the 
herald  was  a  soldier  too. 

Ver.  16.  Above  all,  taking  the  shield. — Large  enough  to  block  the  entrance  to  a  doorway 
— being  about  four  feet  by  two  and  a  half.  The  lighter  missiles  were  harmless  against  a 
roof  of  these  shields  over-lapped.  They  were  of  wood,  thickly  coated  with  leather.  Quench 
the  fiery  darts. — "  Arrows  tipped  with  inflammable  material,  and  shot  off  after  having  been 
kindled"  (Meyer). 

Ver.  17.  Take  the  helmet  of  salvation. — For  the  large  shield  might  leave  the  head  exposed 
to  the  archer's  aim.  The  sword  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  word  of  God. — How  effectual  in 
fence  and  thrust  it  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Captain  of  our  salvation,  the  "  world-ruler  "  had 
experienced. 

Ver.  18.  Praying  always  with  all  prayer  and  supplication  in  the  Spirit. — Here  we  have 
the  recognition  of  a  directing  Superior.  The  true  soldier  fights  under  the  direction  of  his 
apxyyds.     The  "sounds  of  strife  "  are  dying  away  in  this  verse. 

Ver.  20.  An  ambassador  in  bonds. — R.V.  "  in  chains."  Sustaining  the  honour  of  Christ 
under  personal  indignity.  That  I  may  speak  boldly. — It  needed  not  only  the  apostle's  own, 
but  his  readers'  prayers  to  enable  him  to  speak  freely  within  stroke  of  the  "  lion's  paw " 
(2  Tim.  iv.  17). 

Ver.  21.  Tychicus,  a  beloved  brother  and  faithful  minister. — If  all  servants  were  "  brethren  " 
first,  the  troubles  of  our  modern  commercial  life  would  be  few. 

Ver.  23.  Peace,  love,  and  faith. — A  worthy  triad,  and  the  greatest  of  these  is  love. 

Ver.  24.  Grace  be  with  all  them  that  love  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity. — Paul's  favourite 
word  "grace"  comes  in  as  "epilogue" — as  it  was  "prologue"  (i.  2).  Sincerity  means 
incorruptly — to  love  in  a  spirit  corruption  cannot  touch. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—4. 

Duties  of  Children  and  Parents. 

1.  The  duty  of  children  to  parents  is  to  obey. — 1.  This  obedience  has  the  divine 
sanction.  "  In  the  Lord"  (ver.  1).  Both  the  command  and  the  obedience  must 
be  in  harmony  with  the  relation  in  which  both  parents  and  children  stand 
towards  God.  The  parent  who  has  not  himself  learnt  to  respect  and  obey  the 
law  of  God  is  ill  prepared  for  the  grave  responsibilities  of  family  government. 
Natural  affection  and  the  instincts  of  common  sense  will  guide  the  parents  in  the 
ordinary  affairs  of  home-life,  and  the  sense  of  dependence  and  respect  should 
induce  instinctive  obedience  in  the  child.  No  parent  has  any  right  to  enforce  an 
obedience  which  is  not  in  harmony  with  the  supreme  claims  of  God.  The  child 
who  submits  to  the  will  of  his  parents  is  taught  at  the  same  time  to  obey  the 
higher  law  of  God.  If  he  defies  parental  authority  and  persists  in  disobedience, 
he  is  sure  to  be  treated  in  the  same  way  if  he  ever  has  children  of  his  own.  To 
be  able  to  govern  we  must  first  learn  to  obey. 

2.  This  obedience  is  in  harmony  with  natural  order  and  the  eterncd  principles  of 
justice. — "  For  this  is  right  "  (ver.  1).  Obedience  is  the  law  of  the  universe,  and 
without  it  everything  would  rush  into  anarchy  and  chaos.  Law  is  so  all- 
pervasive  as  to  cover  every  department  and  relationship  of  life,  and  its  breach  in 
any  sphere  carries  with  it  its  own  punishment.  Disobedience  is  not  only  a  wrong 
to  the  person  who  commits  it,  but  it  is  an  injustice  to  somebody  else.  Obedience 
to  parents  in  things  lawful  is  no  hardship.  It  is  becoming  and  commendable 
because  it  is  right.  It  is  the  perversity  of  our  nature  when  it  becomes  difficult 
to  do  right.  Disobedience  is  a  wilful  divergence  from  the  straight  line  of 
rectitude,  and  is  the  essence  of  all  sin. 

3.  This  obedience  ensures  the  divine  blessing  (vers.  2,  3). — It  is  our  duty  to 
obey  irrespective  of  any  advantage  to  be  secured.  The  loyal  heart  looks,  not 
to  the  reward,  but  to  the  duty.  It  is  no  merit  to  do  what  it  is  our  duty  to  do. 
Yet  such  is  the  condescension  and  goodness  of  God  that  He  attaches  a  special 
blessing  to  every  act  of  unselfish  obedience.  Filial  obedience  should  not  be 
dilatory  and  reluctant,  but  prompt,  cheerful,  self-denying,  and  uniform. 
Obedience  is  the  path  of  safety.     A  pointsmjy^jn,,.~PT,"««ifl  w».«  at  the  junction 

271 


chap.  vi.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


of  two  lines  of  railway,  lever  in  hand,  for  a  train  that  was  signalled.  The 
engine  was  within  a  few  seconds  of  reaching  the  embankment  when  the  man, 
turning  his  head,  perceived  his  little  boy  playing  between  the  rails  on  which  the 
train  was  running.  He  stuck  to  his  lever,  but  shouted  to  the  child,  "  Lie  down  ! 
lie  down  !  "  The  train  passed,  and  the  father  rushed  forward  to  pick  up  what 
he  feared  would  be  the  mangled  body  of  his  child ;  but  what  was  his  joy  to  find 
the  boy  had  at  once  obeyed  his  order,  had  lain  down,  and  the  train  passed  over 
him  without  injuring  him.  His  prompt  obedience  saved  his  life.  Dutiful 
children  secure  the  blessing  of  God.  Filial  obedience  practised  in  the  Christian 
home  forms  habits  of  promptitude,  self-control,  and  self-respect  which  are 
important  conditions  of  success  and  prosperity. 

II.  The  duty  of  parents  to  children  is  to  exercise  discipline. — 1.  Not  by 
enforcing  commands  that  tend  to  irritate.    "Ye  fathers,  provoke  not  your  children 
to  wrath  "  (ver.  4).     Children  are  a  sacred  trust  and  solemn  responsibility  ;  not 
to  be  weakly  fondled  or  foolishly  spoilt,  but  to  be  wisely,  kindly,  and  strictly 
disciplined  into  obedience  and  duty.     The  Chinese  have  a  proverb,  when  a  son 
is  born  into  a  family  a  bow  and  arrow  are  hung  before  the  gate.      In  Eastern 
books  sons  are  spoken  of  as  arrows  of  their  fathers.    "  As  arrows  are  in  the  hand 
of  a  mighty  man,  so  are  children  of  the  youth  "  (Ps.  cxxvii.  4).     As  the  bowman 
straightens  and  polishes  his  arrow,  gives  it  a  sharp  and  solid  point,  and  wings  it 
with  feathers,  so  parents  must  train  and  equip  their  children  that  they  may  go 
straight  to  the  point  of  duty  and  hit  the  mark.    The  arrows  that  are  not  prepared 
and  directed  when  in  the  hand  may,  when  they  are  gone  abroad  into  the  world, 
and  all  parental  training  is  too  late,  prove  arrows  in  the  heart  that  will  rankle 
with  unspeakable  pain.     The  training  of  children  is  also  a  training  of  the  parent. 
Many  a  hint  is  unconsciously  given  as  to  "  training  up  a  parent  in  the   way  he 
should  go."     While  there  should  be  firm  discipline,  there  should  not  be  ex- 
asperating and  tantalising  severity.     Rousing  a  child's  anger  is  not  the  best  way 
of  subduing  it.     A  sullen  submission  gained,  by  provoking  and  then  crushing  an 
angry  opposition,  is  rendered  with  a  sense  of  injustice  and  wrong  that  will  breed 
future  mischief.     ]Vlonod  says  :  "  Correction  and  instruction  should  proceed  from 
the  Lord,  and  be  directecl  by  the  Spirit  of  tbe  Lord  in  such  a  way  that  it  is  not 
so  much  the  father  who  corrects  his  children  and  teaches  them,  as  the  Lord 
through  him."     The  father  who  chastises  in  wrath  provokes  the  child  to  wrath 
and  rebellion. 

2.  But  by  judicious  religious  culture. — "  But  bring  them  up  in  the  nurture  and 
admonition  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  4).  Children  are  the  glifts  of  God  to  be  trained 
for  God.  They  are  susceptible  of  genuine  religious  experience,  and  are  often 
nearer  the  truth  than  grown-up  people.  Christ  recognised  the  spiritual  faculty 
in  children,  and  gave  them  a  conspicuous  place  in  His  kingdom.  When  He 
wished  to  show  the  type  of  true  greatness,  He  did  not  point  to  stars  or  mountains 
or  earthly  dignities,  but  "  called  a  little  child  unto  Him  and  set  him  in  the 
midst "  (Matt,  xviii.  2-4).  Children  are  capable  of  useful  religious  service,  and 
in  many  ways  may  be  little  missionaries  for  Christ.  Dr.  W.  L.  Breckenridge 
once  said  to  his  mother  :  "  Mother,  I  think  you  ruled  us  with  too  rigid  a  rod  in 
our  boyhood.  It  would  have  been  better  had  you  used  gentler  methods."  The 
old  lady  straightened  up  and  said :  "  Well,  William,  when  you  have  raised  up 
three  as  good  preachers  as  I  have  then  you  can  talk."  The  smaller  magnets 
have  proportionately  much  the  greater  power,  and  children  have  a  remarkable 
spiritual  force  with  which  the  Christian  parent  has  to  deal. 

Lessons. — 1.  Parental  discipline  should  be  in  harmony  with  the  law  of  God. 
2.  The  rigour  of  parental  discipline  should  be  tempered  with  love.  3.  Respect  and 
obedience  to  parents  will  be  divinely  rewarded, 

272 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  VI. 


GERM  NOTES   ON  THE   VERSES. 


Vers.    1-4.     The   Mutual   Duties  of 
Children  and  Parents. 

I.  Children  are  to  obey  and  honour 
their  parents. — 1.  Children  owe  to  their 
parents  an  inward  affection  and  regard. 
Their  obedience  should  flow  from  love, 
gratitude,  and  esteem.  The  love 
parents  bear  to  their  children  entitles 
them  to  reciprocal  affection.  2.  They 
are  to  honour  their  parents  by  external 
tokens  of  respect.  3.  They  are  to  obey 
the  just  commands  of  their  parents. 
4.  They  are  to  receive  with  decent  and 
humble  regard  the  instructions,  counsels, 
and  reproofs  of  their  parents.  5.  They 
should  remunerate  the  favours  received 
from  their  parents.  6.  They  are  en- 
couraged in  their  obedience  by  the  divine 
premise. 

II.  The  duties  of  parents  to  children. 
— 1.  To  instruct  their  children  in  the 
doctrines  and  duties  of  religion.  2.  To 
endeavour  by  arguments,  exhortations, 
and  reproofs  to  form  their  lives  according 
to  those  instructions.  3.  To  regulate 
the  diversions  of  their  children.  4.  To 
maintain  the  woi*ship  of  God  in  their 
houses.  5.  To  let  their  conversation  be 
exemplary.  6.  To  train  up  their  chil- 
dren with  diligence  in  some  honest  busi- 
ness. 7.  To  commend  their  children  to 
God  and  the  word  of  His  grace. — 
Lathrop. 

Vers.  1,  2.  Obedience. — The  dutiful 
obedience  of  children  is  declared  by 
God  in  the  fifth  commandment  to  be 
the  foundation  of  all  social  happiness 
and  of  every  social  virtue. 

I.  The  behaviour  of  a  child  to  its 
parents  is  no  such  trifle  as  too  many 
perverse  children  and  too  many  foolish 
parents  are  prone  to  fancy  it. — How 
often  we  hear  mothers  saying,  "  It  is 
only  the  poor  child's  way  ;  it  is  a  little 
pettish  and  fractious  at  times,  but  it 
means  no  harm  by  it.  To  be  sure  it  does 
not  mind  me  quite  so  well  as  it  ought 
to  do ;  but  children  will  be  children." 
So  the  child  goes  on  uncorrected,  and 
grows  up  disobedient  and  undutiful — 


with  habits  and  dispositions  so  evil 
that  God  has  classed  them  with  the 
very  worst  crimes,  with  false  swearing, 
theft,  adultery,  and  even  murder.  If 
undutifulness  in  children  had  been  a 
mere  trifle,  would  God  have  put  it  into 
this  black  list  ? 

II.  Observe  the  reasonableness  and 
justice  of  the  duty  of  children  to  obey 
their  parents. — The   child   is  helpless 
and  entirely  dependent  on  its  parents' 
care    and    kindness.      So    strong    and 
lasting  is  a  mother's  love  that,  while 
other  animals  drive  their  young  away 
as  soon   as  they  can  feed  themselves, 
the   love   of   human   parents  descends 
and  prolongs  itself   even  to  their  off- 
spring's   offspring.       Think    of    their 
fears,  their    wishes,  their  prayers  for 
your  souls'  welfare.     Your  love  to  them 
should  be  dutiful  love,  showing  itself 
in  acts  of  gentleness,  respect,  and  kind- 
ness, and  in  the  strictest  and  readiest 
obedience.     Children  are  bound  to  obey, 
not  from  constiaint,  nor  from  fear  of 
blows,  but  readily,  willingly,  cheerfully. 
The  obedience  paid  for  fear  of  stripes 
is  the  obedience  of  a  mule,  not  of  a 
son.     What    can    a    child    know   save 
what  its  parents  teach  it  ?     Its  parents 
for  a  time  stand  in  the  place  of  God' 
to  it ;  as  such,  it  must  believe  them 
and    obey    them.       You    may    be   the 
better  for  their  experience,  you   may 
profit    by    their    warnings,    you    may 
learn  from  their  lessons. 

III.  Observe  the  use  and  benefit  of 
obedience  in  forming  the  character  of 
the  child. —  It  is  in  the  school  of  home, 
amid-  the  little  hardships,  restraints, 
crosses,  and  disappointments  which 
every  child  must  needs  meet  with,  that 
the  great  lesson  of  obedience  is  best 
learnt.  There  is  a  root  of  self-will  born 
in  every  man,  and  out  of  this  root 
grow  two  evil  and  misshapen  stems — 
pride  and  disobedience.  You  may  as 
well  expect  water  to  burn  and  fire  to 
wet,  you  may  as  well  expect  a  barren 
common  that  has  never  been  ploughed 
and  sown  to  produce  a  crop  of   wheat, 

T  273 


chap.  vi.         HOAITLETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


as  that  a  child,   which  has   gone   on  Ver.  4.  A   Father's  Charge. 

year  after  year  in  pride,  self-wiil,  and  I.  The  duties  parents  owe  to  their 

disobedience  to  its  parents,  will  readily  children. — 1.    Children   are   weak   and 

or    easily  tear  off   its   habits    and   its  helpless  and  totally  incapable  of  caring 

nature,  to  walk  humbly  and  obediently  for  themselves — hence   arises   the   first 

before  God.     We  must  cultivate  obedi-  duty  which  parents  owe  them,  that  of 

ence  in  the  child  that  it  may  outgrow,  feeding    and   clothing    them.      2.   Are 

overtop,  and   stifle,   or    at    least    keep  ignorant  and  without  understanding — 

under,  the  evil  stem   of   disobedience.  hence  they  should  not  only  be  led  but 

We    must    cultivate  humility  in  him,  taught.     3.  Are  unruly,  and  therefore 

that    it    may  keep    under  the  evil  of  must  be  governed.     4.  Are  prone  to  evil, 

pride.     We  must  train   and  accustom  and  therefore  must  be  restrained. 

him   to  habits  of    steady  self-denial,  II.    The    obligations    parents    are 

which  our  Lord  has  recommended  to  us  under  to  practise  these  duties. — 1.  They 

as  the   best  yokes  for  our  headstrong  should  do  it  for  their  own  sakes.     2.  For 

and  else  unmanageable  self-will.    Thus  their  children's  sake.      3.  For  society's 

the    fifth    commandment  is  a  kind  of  sake.     4.  For  God's  sake. 

practical    school    where    the    child,    in  Learn. — 1.    The  practicability   of  a 

obeying  its  parents,  learns  to  obey  all  religious  education.     2.  How  awful  is 

to  whom   it   owes   obedience. — A.    W.  the  responsibility  of  parents — of  fathers 

Hare.  especially. — Sketches. 

MAIN   HOMILETICS   OF   THE    PARAGRAPH.— Verses  5—9. 

9 

The  Duties  of  Servants  and  Masters. 

1.  The  duty  of  the  servant  to  the  master  is  to  obey. — 1.  This  obedience  is  to 
be  rendered  with  conscientious  solicitude.  "  With  fear  and  trembling,  in  single- 
ness of  your  heart ;  .  .  .  nob  with  eyeservice,  as  menpleasers  "  (vers.  5,  6). 
There  must  be  a  genuine  care  for  our  work  "  Be  obedient,  with  fear  and 
trembling."  The  fear  enjoined  is  no  dread  of  human  displeasure,  of  the  master's 
whip  or  tongue.  It  is  the  same  fear  and  trembling  with  which  we  are  bidd  n  to 
work  out  our  own  salvation  (Phil.  ii.  12).  The  inward  work  of  the  soul's  salvation 
and  the  outward  work  of  the  busy  hands  labouring  in  the  mine,  or  at  the  loom,  or 
in  the  lowliest  domestic  duties — all  alike  are  to  be  performed  under  a  solemn  re- 
sponsibility to  God  and  in  the  presence  of  Christ,  the  Lord  of  nature  and  of  men. 
No  man,  whether  he  be  a  minister  of  state  or  a  stable  groom,  will  dare  to  do 
heedless  work  who  lives  and  acts  in  that  august  Presence.  The  sense  of  Christ's 
Lordship  ensures  honesty  in  work.  "  Not  with  eyeservice,  as  menpleasers." 
It  is  the  common  fault  and  temptation  of  servants  in  all  degrees  to  observe  the 
master's  eye,  and  to  work  busily  or  slackly  as  they  are  watched  or  not.  Such 
workmen  act  as  they  do  because  they  look  to  men  and  not  to  God.  Their  work 
is  without  conscience  and  self-respect.  Let  us  all  adopt  St.  Paul's  maxim ;  it 
will  be  an  immense  economy.  What  armies  of  overlookers  and  inspectors  we 
shall  be  able  to  dismiss  when  every  servant  works  as  well  behind  his  master's 
back  as  to  his  face,  when  every  manufacturer  and  shopkeeper  puts  himself  in  the 
purchaser's  place  and  deals  as  he  would  have  others  deal  with  him  (Findlay). 

2.  This  obedience  should  be  cheerful  and  hearty  as  rendered  unto  a  higher  than 
an  earthly  master. — "  As  unto  Christ ;  .  .  .  doing  the  will  of  God  from  the  heart ; 
with  good  will  doing  service,  as  to  the  Lord,  and  not  to  men"  (vers.  5-7). 
Obedience  should  be  not  only  careful  and  honest,  but  hearty.  The  heart  is  the 
source  of  our  greatest  power.  Nothing  can  be  translated  into  an  act  that  has 
not  first  been  conceived  and  set  in  motion  by  the  heart.  As  the  stroke  of  the 
piston  sets  in  motion  the  most  complicated  machinery  and  produces  certain 
results,  so  the  throb  of  the  heart  brings  all  our  activities  into  play  and  gives 

274 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS.         chap.  vi. 


direction  and  character  to  our  work.  The  worth  of  our  work  as  a  whole  will  be 
decided  by  the  heartiness  we  throw  into  every  single  duty.  Workmanship  counts 
for  much.  I  have  read  of  a  chain,  weighing  two  ounces,  costing  .£170,  being 
163,000  times  more  than  the  value  of  the  original  bit  of  iron  from  which  it  was 
made.  The  work  of  the  artist  made  all  the  difference ;  he  put  into  it  his  best 
self,  his  heart,  his  genius.  So  in  the  works  of  the  divine  Creator.  The 
symmetry,  the  beauty,  the  perfect  balance  and  shining  magnificence  of  the 
world  are  the  result  of  the  patient  work  and  hearty  enthusiasm  with  which  the 
great  Architect  has  put  together  and  finished  the  most  minute  parts  of  the 
planet. 

3.  Genuine  obedience  is  always  rewarded. — "  Whatsoever  good  thing  any  man 
dceth,  the  same  shall  he  receive  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  8).  Even  in  this  world  con- 
scientious work  is  not  without  reward.  "  In  all  labour  there  is  profit.  The 
diligent  hand  maketh  rich."  A  stationer  settling  a  large  account  with  a  paper- 
manufacturer,  said :  "  I  owe  all  my  success  in  business  to  you ;  but  let  me  ask 
you  how  a  man  of  your  caution  came  to  give  credit  so  readily  to  a  beginner  of 
my  slender  means  1 "  "Because,"  said  the  paper-maker,  "at  whatever  hour  in 
the  morning  I  passed  to  my  business,  I  always  observed  you  at  yours  with  your 
coat  off."  Work  gives  character,  and  is  the  pathway  to  success  and  wealth. 
But  in  the  world  to  come,  when  servant  and  master  stand  before  the  bar  of 
Christ,  reward  will  be  equitably  meted  out  according  to  the  work  of  each. 

II.  The  duty  of  the  master  is  to  act  towards  his  servant  on  the  same  prin- 
ciples as  obedience  to  himself  is  regulated. — "  And,  ye  masters,  do  the  same 
things  unto  them  "  (ver.  9).  The  master  is  to  put  himself  in  the  place  cf  his 
servant,  and  act  towards  him  as  he  would  desire  to  be  treated  if  their  positions 
were  reversed.  It  is  a  practical  application  of  the  great  rule,  "  Whatsoever  ye 
would  that  men  should  do  unto  you,  do  ye  even  so  to  them  " — a  rule  we  are  in 
danger  of  interpreting  on  one  side  only :  our  own  side. 

1.  To  avoid  irritating  severity. — "  Forbearing  threatening  "  (ver.  9).  The 
slave  in  early  times  was  treated  as  scarcely  human,  and  was  ruled  by  the  fear  of 
punishment.  Christianity  in  the  beginning  did  not  interfere  with  domestic 
slavery  ;  but  it  introduced  principles  which,  wherever,  adopted  utterly  abolished 
slavery.  The  Christian  master  cannot  act  on  the  policy  of  cruelty,  but  treats  his 
servants  with  justice  and  kindness. 

2.  To  remember  that  both  are  servants  of  a  higher  and  impartial  Master. — 
"  Knowing  that  your  Master  also  is  in  heaven  ;  neither  is  there  respect  of 
persons  with  Him  "  (ver.  9).  A  party  of  friends  setting  out  together  upon  a 
journey  soon  find  it  to  be  the  best  for  all  sides  that  while  they  are  upon 
the  road  one  of  the  company  should  wait  upon  the  rest,  another  ride 
forward  to  seek  out  lodging  and  entertainment,  a  third  carry  the  portman- 
teau, a  fourth  take  charge  of  the  horses,  a  fifth  bear  the  purse,  conduct, 
and  direct  the  route;  not  forgetting,  however,  that  as  they  were  equal 
and  independent  when  they  set  out,  so  they  are  all  to  return  to  a  level 
again  at  their  journey's  end.  The  same  regard  and  respect,  the  same 
forbearance,  lenity,  and  reserve  in  using  their  service,  the  same  mildness  in 
delivering  commands,  the  same  study  to  make  their  journey  comfortable  and 
pleasant  which  he  whose  lot  it  was  to  direct  the  rest  would  in  common  decency 
think  himself  bound  to  observe  towards  them,  ought  we  to  show  to  those  who, 
in  the  casting  of  the  parts  of  human  society,  happen  to  be  placed  within  our 
power  or  to  depend  upon  us  (Paley).  Master  and  man  must  give  an  account  to 
Him  who  will  judge  every  act  according  to  its  merit. 

Lessons. — 1.  Masters  and  servants  are  amenable  to  divine  law.  2.  Neither 
master  nor  servant  gains  any  advantage  by  tactics  that  violate  divine  law.  3.  Where 
the  Christian  spirit  predominates  trade  disputes  will  soon  be  satisfactorily  settled, 

275 


CHAP.  VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  5-9.  The  Duties  of  Servants  and 
Masters. 

I.  The  duties  of  servants. — 1.  To  be 

obedient  to  their  masters.  This  must  be 
understood  with  the  same  limitation  as 
all  other  commands  enjoining  relative 
duties.  We  are  to  obey  God  rather 
than  men.  Servants  no  further  obey 
their  masters  according  to  the  will  of 
God  than  they  make  His  will  the  rule 
and  measure  of  their  obedience  to  their 
masters.  2.  Servants  owe  their  masters 
reverence  as  well  as  obedience.  3.  There 
is  an  honour,  as  well  as  fear,  due 
to  their  masters.  4.  Cheerfulness  in 
their  obedience  is  recommended  by  the 
apostle.  5.  Diligence  of  faithfulness  is 
another  duty  which  they  owe  to  their 
masters.  6.  They  are  to  be  patient  and 
submissive,  though  they  meet  with 
usage  more  severe  than  they  think 
reasonable,  not  breaking  their  own 
obligations,  or  deserting  their  master's 
service  for  trivial  causes,  but  bearing 
his  smaller  indiscretions  without  com- 
plaint, and  in  cases  of  real  injury 
seeking  relief  in  a  prudent  manner 
and  by  lawful  means.  7.  In  all  their 
service  they  should  act  with  an  aim  to 
please  God  and  to  obtain  His  approba- 
tion. 

II.  The  duties  of  masters  to  their 
servants. — 1.  Their  government  is  to  be 
mild  and  prudent,  not  passionate  and 
severe.  2.  With  respect  to  apprentices, 
the  contract  binds  the  master  not  only 
to  give  them  comfortable  support,  but  to 
instruct  them  in  his  busiiiess  and  pro- 
fession. 3.  With  respect  to  labourers, 
justice  obliges  us  to  give  them  the  stipu- 
lated ivages  when  they  have  faithfully 
performed  the  promised  service.  4.  With 
inspect  to  all  servants,  equity  requires 
that  we  treat  them  with  humanity  and 


kindness,  and  contribute  all  proper 
assistance  to  render  them  useful, 
virtuous,  and  happy. — Lathrop. 

Vers.  6-8. — Christian  Servitude. — 
1.  To  propose  to  ourselves  the  pleasing 
of  men  as  our  great  design  is  inconsis- 
tent with  the  work  of  grace  in  the 
heart  and  with  that  subjection  we 
owe  to  Christ.  The  meanest  service 
is  service  done  to  Christ,  and  will 
be  accepted  by  Him  as  such.  2.  So 
in  grate  is  man,  and  so  slow  to  reward 
those  from  whom  he  receives  favour, 
that  a  man  can  never  heartily  do 
service  to  the  most  of  men,  except  he 
look  to  God,  whom  to  serve  in  the 
meanest  employment  is  a  reward  in 
itself.  3.  The  Lord  in  dispensing  re- 
wards looks  not  to  the  external  beauty, 
splendour,  or  greatness  of  the  work, 
but  to  the  honesty  and  sincerity  of  it. 
— Eergusson. 

Ver.  9.  Masters  accountable  to  God. — 
1.  There  is  no  power  among  men  so 
absolute — not  that  of  kings  and  supreme 
rulers — but  implies  an  obligation, 
through  virtue  of  God's  ordinance, 
on  those  invested  with  it  to  make 
conscience  of  duties  towards  their  in- 
feriors and  subjects.  2.  As  it  is  usual 
for  powers  on  earth  sinfully  to  oversee 
and  not  to  punish  the  cruel  and  unjust 
dealings  of  masters  towards  servants, 
so  those  sins  most  connived  at  by  men 
are  most  severely  taken  notice  of  by 
God.  3.  It  is  too  ordinary  for  men  in 
place  and  authority  to  carry  themselves 
as  if  they  had  none  above  them  to  be 
accountable  to,  or  to  dream  that  the 
Lord  will  not  take  such  strict  account 
of  them  as  of  their  underlings  and 
servants. — Ibid. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  10—12. 

The  Christian  Warfare — 

I.  Can  be  fought  only  with  divine  help. — "  Be  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the 
power  of  His  might "  (ver.  10).  The  apostle  has  dwelt  like  one  enraptured  on  the 
sublime  constitution  and  glorious  destiny  of  the  Church ;  now  he  deals  with 

276 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS.         chap.  vl. 


the  formidable  foes  with  which  the  Church  will  have  to  contend.  He  sees  the 
evil  forces  gathering,  and  hears  the  clash  of  arms  among  the  approaching 
enemies.  He  warns  believers  that  unaided  they  will  be  powerless  in  the  strife 
and  must  suffer  defeat.  They  are  secure  and  will  be  victorious  only  as  they 
make  the  strength  of  God  their  own.  The  strength  of  the  general,  in  other 
hosts,  lies  in  his  troops ;  he  flies,  as  a  great  commander  once  said,  upon  their 
wings ;  if  their  feathers  be  clipped,  their  power  broken,  he  is  lost.  But  in  the 
Christian  army  the  strength  of  every  saint  lies  in  the  Lord  of  hosts.  God  can 
overcome  His  enemies  without  their  hands ;  but  they  cannot  even  defend  them- 
selves without  His  arm.  Man  is  impotent  without  the  strength  of  God.  If  the 
ship,  launched,  rigged,  and  with  her  sails  spread,  cannot  stir  till  the  wind  fills 
them,  much  less  can  the  timber  in  the  carpenter's  yard  hew  and  frame  itself 
into  a  ship.     Power  to  contend  with  the  spiritual  foes  must  come  from  God. 

II.  Involves  a  fierce  conflict  with  the  powers  of  evil. — 1.  A  conflict,  not  with 
men,  but  with  unseen  spiritual  enemies.  "  We  wrestle  not  against  flesh  and  blood, 
but  against  principalities"  (ver.  12).  The  apostle  brings  out  in  bold  relief  the 
terrible  foes  they  are  summoned  to  encounter.  (1)  As  to  their  position.  They 
are  no  subalterns,  but  foes  of  mighty  rank,  the  nobility  and  chieftains  of  the 
spirit-world.  (2)  Their  office.  Their  domain  is  this  darkness  in  which  they 
exercise  imperial  sway.  (3)  Their  essence.  They  are  not  encumbered  with  an 
animal  frame,  but  are  spirits.  (4)  Their  character.  They  are  evil — their  appetite 
for  evil  only  exceeds  their  capacity  for  producing  it  (Eadie).  The  Church  is 
engaged  in  a  double  conflict — of  the  flesh  and  of  the  spirit.  We  are  assailed 
with  the  temptations  of  the  world  of  sense,  and  with  seductions  of  error  that 
attack  us  in  the  world  of  mind  ;  and  in  both  spheres  we  have  to  contend  with 
the  subtle  influences  set  in  motion  by  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world. 
Our  foes  invade  "  the  high  places "  of  our  faith  and  hope,  and  would  rob  us  of 
our  heaven. 

2.  A  conflict  with  unseen  spiritual  enemies  led  by  an  astute  and  subtle  com- 
mander.— "That  ye  may  be  able  to  withstand  against  the  wiles  of  the  devil" 
(ver.  11).  The  New  Testament  assumes  the  personality  of  Satan.  This  belief 
runs  counter  to  modern  thought,  governed  as  it  is  by  the  tendency  to  depersonalise 
existence.  The  conception  of  evil  spirits  given  us  in  the  Bible  is  treated  as  an 
obsolete  superstition  ;  and  the  name  of  the  evil  one  with  multitudes  serves  only 
to  point  a  profane  or  careless  jest.  To  Jesus  Christ,  Satan  was  no  figure  of 
speech,  but  a  thinking  and  active  being,  of  whose  presence  and  influence  He 
saw  tokens  everywhere  in  this  evil  world.  Satan's  empire  is  ruled  with  a  settled 
policy,  and  his  warfare  carried  on  with  a  system  of  strategy  which  takes  ad- 
vantage of  every  opening  for  attack.  The  manifold  combinations  of  error,  the 
various  arts  of  seduction  and  temptation,  the  ten  thousand  forms  of  the  deceit  of 
unrighteousness  constitute  "  the  wiles  of  the  devil."  Satan  is  no  longer  the  God 
of  this  world  since  Christianity  rose  to  its  ascendant.  The  manifestations  of 
demonism  are,  at  least  in  Christian  lands,  vastly  less  conspicuous  than  in  the 
first  age  of  the  Church.  But  they  are  more  bold  than  wise  who  deny  their 
existence,  and  who  profess  to  explain  all  occult  phenomena  and  phrenetic  moral 
aberrations  by  physical  causes  (Findlay). 

III.  Is  victorious  only  as  the  warrior  is  armed  with  the  divine  panoply. — 
"  Put  on  the  whole  armour  of  God  "  (ver.  11).  They  who  put  on  Christ  are  well 
clothed;  they  are  armed  from  head  to  foot,  and  are  proof  against  the  darts  of 
the  devil.  The  Christless  man  is  defenceless ;  his  own  understanding  and  gifts 
do  not  sufficiently  arm  him.  The  soldier  comes  into  the  field  with  no  arms  but 
what  his  general  commands  :  it  is  not  left  to  every  one's  fancy  to  bring  what 
weapons  he  pleases ;  this  would  breed  confusion.  So  the  Christian  soldier  must  put 
on  the  armour  God  provides,  and  be  completely  clothed  with  it.    To  leave  one  part 

277 


chap.  vi.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


unguarded  will  bring  disaster.  In  one  of  the  famous  battles  between  the  English 
and  French,  that  which  lost  France  the  day  was  a  shower  of  English  arrows  which 
so  galled  the  horses  that  they  became  unmanageable,  put  the  whole  army  into 

disorder,  and  trod  down  their  own  men.  So  if  there  be  the  least  loophole  in  our 

armour  the  wily  adversary  will  quickly  discover  it  and  shoot  through  his  fiery 
darts  which  will  effect  confusion  and  defeat. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  Christian  life  is  a  conflict  between  good  and  evil.  2.  God  is 
always  on  the  side  of  the  good.  3.  The  Christian  warrior  must  fight  with  weapons 
divinely  provided. 

GERM  NOTES   ON  THE   VERSES. 

Yers.    10-12.    A    Call   to   Christian  most  successfully    carry  on   their   de- 

Fortitude.  signs  in  the  dark.     "When  the  gospel 

I.  Here  is  an  exhortation  to  Chris-  began  to  shine,  Satan  began  to  fall, 
tian   fortitude. — "  Be    strong  in    the  Among  those  who  reject  the  gospel  he 
Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  His  might."  lecovers  his  full  dominion. — Lathrop. 
It  is  not  bodily  but  mental   strength 

which  is  here  intended.     True  fortitude  Vers.  11, 12.  The  Christian  Warfare. 

or  courage  is  a   temper   of   mind   by  I.  Consider   the   danger   to    which 

which  we  steadily  follow  the  calls  of  we  are  exposed. — As  in  other  cases  so 

duty,  without  being  deterred  by  danger  it  is  in  this  :  our  greatest  danger  lies 

or  diverted  by  difficulty.    It  is  a  virtue  in  not  feeling  our  danger,  and  so  not 

founded  in  a  regard  to  God  and  sup-  being  prepared  to  meet  it. 

ported  by  faith  in  Him.      It  is   cool  1.    View  the  enemy  we  have  to  contend 

and  deliberate,  not  rash  and  impetuous ;  with. — He   is  one   who    bears   an   in- 

it  is  kind  and  compassionate,  not  cruel  veterate  hatred  against  us,  and  seeks 

and    revengeful ;     it    is     steady     and  nothing  less  than  our  destruction  or 

patient,  not  fickle  and  inconstant ;  it  eternal  overthrow.  .  .  .  He  hates  us  as 

continues  in  well-doing,  persuaded  that  God's  creatures,  but  especially  as  those 

its  labour  is  not  in  vain.  who  have  been  rescued  from  his  power 

II.  A  warning  against  the  enemies  and  taken  up  arms  against  him ; 
to  be  opposed. — The  apostle  mentions  nothing  now  will  satisfy  him  but  our 
two  sorts  of  enemies.  eternal    ruin.  ...  It   is   therefore    a 

1.  The  first  he  calls  flesh  and  blood. —  struggle  of  life  for  life;  if  we  do  not 
The  motions  of  our  animal  nature.  overcome  him,  he  will  overcome  us.  It 
The  phrase  may  further  intend  those  is  in  vain  to  think  of  being  neuter,  or 
sensible   objects    which  are   suited   to  making  peace  with  him. 

gratify  fleshly  desires  ;  or  it  may  intend  2.  He  is  mightier  than  we  are  ;  and 

mankind,   who  are  partakers  of  flesh  unless  we  have  help  from  above,  we 

and  blood.  are  no  match  for  him.  .  .  .  We  know 

2.  The  other  ktnd  of  enemies  with  but  little  of  the  power  of  wicked  spirits, 
whom  vie  are  to  contend  are  evil  spirits.  abstractly  considered  ;  but  viewed 
^-These  spirits  are  enemies  to  man-  as  the  god  of  this  world,  Satan  has  all 
kind.  Their  number  is  great,  and  the  its  temptations  in  alliance  with  him. 
terms  used  denote  a  subordination  3.  He  is  an  artful  enemy .  .  .  .  We  are 
among  them.  They  are  not  divided  told  of  the  "  wiles  of  the  devil,"  hiding 
against  themselves,  but  act  in  concert  his  designs,  and  falling  upon  us  when 
under  the  direction  of  one  leading  we  least  expect  it.  We  are  in  his  net 
spirit,  who  is  called  the  devil  and  before  we  are  aware,  and  when  Provi- 
Satan.  They  have  great  power  over  dence  seems  to  smile  upon  us  (Deut. 
such  as  submit  to  their  dominion,  viii.  12).  ...  He  studies  our  pro- 
Their  chief  influence  is  over  the  pensities,  and  suits  his  temptations  to 
ignorant     and    superstitious.       They  them  (Eph.  iv.  14). 

278 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS.         chap.  vr. 


4.  He  is  invisible.  ...  If  be  were 
"  flesh  and  blood,"  like  ourselves,  we 
migbt  beware  ;  but  his  influence  is  like 
the  mighty  pestilence,  which  walks  in 
darkness.  .  .  .  When  least  suspected, 
danger  is  nigh. 

5.  He  is  near  us,  as  it  were,  within 
our  gates.  The  safety  of  a  nation 
menaced  by  an  enemy  often  depends 
on  his  being  kept  at  a  distance,  by 
walls  or  seas,  or  fortresses  of  defence. 
But  here  it  is  supposed  that  the  enemy 
has  entered  into  our  borders,  and  that 
we  have  no  other  resource  left  but  to 
struggle  as  it  were  for  life.  .  .  . 

6.  What  is  still  worse,  he  has  a  strong 
party  within  us. 

7.  On  the  issue  of  this  warfare  de- 
pend all  our  hopes. — If  we  "  stand  " 
not  in  this,  our  loss  when  defeated  can 
never  be  retrieved. 

II.  The  armour  provided  for  us. — 
1.  In  general,  this  armour  is  the  grace 
of  the  gospel  believed  and  trusted  in. 
In  common  warfare  it  is  usual  for  the 
commanders  to  persuade  their  enemies 
to  think  highly  of  their  strength  ;  but 
in  this  it  is  quite  the  reverse.  We 
must  go  as  Israel  was  always  taught  to 
do,  as  having  no  might  of  our  own, 
but  deriving  all  our  strength  from  the 
Lord. 

2.  It  is  described  as  a  whole  or  perfect 
armour. — Sufficient  to  defend  us  in 
every  part.  ..."  Truth  "  is  the  girdle 
to  strengthen  us  ;  "  righteousness "  a 
breastplate  ;  the  "  gospel  "  of  peace  as 
shoes,  by  which  we  shall  be  able  to 
trample  upon  the  lion  and  the  adder, 
the  young  lion  and  the  dragon  ;  "  faith  " 
is  a  shield ;  "  salvation,"  or  the  hope 
of  eternal  life,  a  helmet.  .  .  .  All  this 
armour  is  to  be  drawn  from  the  truths 
of  the  everlasting  gospel. 

3.  The  use  to  be  made  of  it  is,  that 
we  may  be  able  to  "  withstand,"  and  to 
face  the  enemy.  There  is  no  armour 
for  the  back ;  he  that  fleeth  is  wholly 
defenceless,  and  must  inevitably  fall. 

III.  The  necessity  of  putting  on  this 
armour. — Armour  is  of  no  avail,  unless 
it  be  used.  The  application  of  the 
gospel  is  that  which  proves  our 
security. 


IV.  The  inducement  to  put  on  this 
armour. — "  That  we  may  be  able  to 
stand  against  the  wiles  of  the  devil " 
(ver.  11)..  Many  neglecting  this  armour 
have  been  foiled  in  the  day  of  battle. 
— Theological  sketch  Book. 

Ver.  11.  The  Wiles  of  the  Devil 
I.  Some  of  those  artifices  by  which 
the  devil  entices  men  to  sin. — 1.  He 

often  presents  to  man  the  pleasing  ad- 
vantages of  sin,  while  its  judicial  con- 
sequences are  kept  in  the  background. 
Sin  is  often  presented  to  man  under 
the  form  of  virtue  or  religion.  The 
names  of  sins  are  changed  in  order 
that  their  natures  may  seem  changed. 
Sin  is  thus  recommended  to  the  more 
tender  conscience.  The  vileness  and 
criminality  of  sin  are  often  extenuated 
to  man  by  plausible  excuses.  They 
need  an  apology — youth,  old  age, 
strong  temptation,  a  desire  to  please, 
to  prevent  loss  of  place,  provision  for 
a  family,  etc.  The  inconsistencies  of 
the  acknowledged  people  of  God  are 
often  pleaded  as  an  apology  for  sin. 
The  falls  of  God's  people  have  been 
recorded  for  good ;  but  the  record  has 
been  perverted  to  evil.  A  legitimate 
use  of  the  record  is  to  prevent  despair 
on  the  part  of  God's  people  who  have 
fallen.  But,  by  Satan,  the  beacon  has 
been  converted  into  a  decoy. 

2.  The  sinner  is  often  freed  from  his 
difficulties  in  sinning  by  false  views 
of  God's  character  and  of  the  design  of 
Christ's  work. — God  is  regarded  as  a 
Being  of  mere  mercy.  Christ  is  thought 
of  as  saving  from  sin's  consequences, 
rather  than  from  sin  itself.  The 
individual  is  often  persuaded  to  expose 
himself  to  temptation,  under  the  im- 
pression that  he  will  resist  it. 

II.  Some  of  the  artifices  by  which 
he  entices  men  from  the  performance 
of  positive  duty. —  1.  Many  are  re- 
strained from  duties  by  a  consideration 
of  their  hardness  in  themselves  (Matt. 
x  31-39).  2.  Many  are  persuaded  to 
let  duty  alone,  on  account  of  the  sacri- 
fices which  a  performance  of  it  involves. 
3.  Argument  against  a  full  devoted- 
ness  to  the  service  of  God  may  sometimes, 

279 


Chap.  vi.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS. 


be  drawn  jrom  the  fewness  and  mean- 
ness of  those  who  are  engaged  in  it 
(John  vii.  48).  4.  An  argument  against 
the  necessity  of  duty  is  drawn  from  the 
doctrines  of  grace  (Rom.  vi.  2,  3 ;  Jas. 
ii.  17).  5.  The  worth  and  value  of  all 
performances  are  taken  away  by  the  trust 
in  them  for  righteousness  to  which  Satan 
prompts  the  heart. — Stewart. 

Ver.    12.  The   Invisible   Enemies  of 
Man. 

I.  Spiritual  forces  are  much  greater, 
much  more  efficient,  much  more  for- 
midable than  any  mere  material  forces. 
— A  strong  will  is  a  more  formidable 
thing  than  the  most  highly  developed 
muscle.  An  idea  which  appeals  to  the 
intelligence  and  heart  of  the  multitude 
is  likely  to  do  more  work  and  to  wield 
a  greater  sway  in  the  end  than  any 
number  of  batteries  and  parks  of 
artillery.  It  is  in  the  encounter,  not 
of  brute  force  with  conscience  and  with 
thought,  but  in  the  encounter  of  ideas 
with  ideas,  in  the  encounter  of  wills 
with  wills,  that  the  destiny  of  the 
world  is  ultimately  decided.  St.  Paul 
knew  that  the  Church  had  to  contend 
with  the  thought  and  the  reason  of 
paganism  much  more  truly  than  with 
its  proconsuls  and  its  legions;  and  as 
he  wrote  to  the  Ephesians,  he  did  not 
mean  merely  human  principalities  and 
powers,  since  he  contrasts  the  beings 
of  whom  he  is  speaking  with  mere  flesh 
and  blood. 

II.  Behind  all  that  met  the  eye  in 
daily  life  the  apostle  discovered  another 
world  that  did  not  meet  the  eye. — 
He  discerned  other  forms  hovering, 
guiding,  marshalling,  arranging,  in- 
spiring that  which  met  the.  eye.  "  Do 
not  let  us  deceive  ourselves,"  he  cries, 
"as  if  we  had  only  to  encounter  so 
many  social  or  political  forces,  so  many 
human  minds  and  wills,  so  many  human 
errors,  human  prejudices,  human  tra- 
ditions, human  passions  ;  our  real 
enemies  are  not  human,  they  lie  in 
ambush  behind  the  manifold  activities 
of  man  ;  they  are  really  superset suous. 
Two  great  departments  of  moral  life 
among  men  are  watched  over,  each  one 

280  *     ^^ 


of  them  beyond  the  sphere  of  human 
life,  by  beings  of  greater  power,  greater 
intelligence,  greater  intensity  of  purpose 
than  man   in    the   world    of    spirits. 
These  spiritual  beings,  good  and  evil, 
act    upon    humanity    as    clearly,    as 
certainly,    and    as  constantly  as  man 
himself  acts  upon  the  lower  creatures 
around.     It  is  not  any  mere  disposition, 
inseparable    from    the    conditions    of 
human  thought,  to  personify,   to  ex- 
ternalise  passion,    which    has  peopled 
the   imagination  of  Christendom  with 
demons.      It  is  within  ourselves  that 
we  meet  now,  as  the  first  Christians 
met,  the  onset  of  the  principalities  and 
powers.      It   is   in  resisting   them,   in 
driving  from  us  in  the  name  of  Christ 
the  spirits  of  untruthfulness,  of  sloth, 
of  anger,  and  of  impure  desire,  that  we 
really  contribute  our  little  share  to  the 
issue  of  the  great  battle  that  rages  still." 
III.  To  love  truth  and  righteousness 
is  to  hate  their  contraries. — Hatred  of 
evil   is    distinct    from    any    hatred    of 
those  who  do  evil,  and  who  are  objects 
of  sincere  sorrow,  and  have  claims  on 
Christian  charity.     The  easy  tolerance 
of  moral  evil  is  one  of  the  most  alarm- 
ing features  of  our   day.     Only  when 
the  struggle  with  evil  is   a  matter  of 
personal  experience  do  we  hate  it,  and 
enter  even  remotely  into  the  apostle's 
stern  language  about  its  agents  and  its 
champions. — H.  P.  Liddon. 

The  Enemies  of  Believers. 

I.  The  enemies  referred  to  are  here 
described  as  numerous. — 1.  They  are 
here  spoken  of  in  the  plural  number,  as 
they  are  also  in  other  passages  :  "  The 
angels  which  kept  not  their  first 
estate,"  "  The  devil  and  his  angels." 
The  names  here  employed  are  collective, 
and  imply  numbers.  We  read  of  a 
single  person  being  possessed  with 
many  devils.  2.  Hence  the  whole  world 
has  been  filled  with  their  worship  and 
studded  with  their  temples.  3.  Hence 
the  strength  of  the  temptations  with 
which  each  one  is  tried.  4.  Hence  the 
intensity  of  human  wickedness.  5.  Hence 
the  need  of  watchfulness. 

II.  The  enemies  here  spoken  of  are 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  VI. 


represented  as  being  in  a  kind  of 
subordination  the  one  to  the  other — 
there  are  "principalities." — 1.  There 
may  be  remains  among  them  of  that 
diversity  of  rank  which  originally  existed. 

2.  It  may  be  a  submission  called  for  by 
difference  of  intellectual  and  innate  power. 

3.  It  may  be  made  conducive  to  the  more 
successful  waging  of  the  ivar  in  which 
they  are  engaged — giving  unity  of  aim, 
of  plan,  of  co-operation.  They  leave  no 
point  neglected ;  turn  all  their  strength 
to  account.     All  unity  is  not  of  God. 

III.  The  enemies  here  described 
are  singly  and  as  detached  mighty 
for  evil. — They  are  "powers."  1.  Power 
intellectual.  2.  Potver  physical.  3.  Power 
directed.     4.   Collective  power. 

IV.  The  apostle  characterises  these 
adversaries  as  the  rulers  of  the  dark- 
ness of  this  world. —  1.  Here  a  limita- 
tion of  Satan's  dominion  is  expressed. 
"  Rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world  " 
• — of  the  hiding  and  blinding  errors 
which  abound — of  those  deceived  and 
misled.  2.  It  is  as  the  prince  of  dark- 
ness that  he  contends,  using  falsehood 
arid  the  wicked  as  his  instruments. 

V.  The  enemies  are  spiritual  in 
their  nature. — 1.  They  are  intelligent 
and  crafty.  2.  Invisible.  3.  Active 
and  unwearied. 

VI.  They    are    wicked    spirits. — 

1.  They     are     in     themselves     wicked. 

2.  They    woidd    make    others    wicked. 

3.  They  employ  the  most  wicked  means. 
Lessons. — 1.   Watch.      2.    Pray.      3. 

Resist.     4.  Stand  fast. — Stewart. 


Evil  Angels. 

I.  The  nature  and  properties  of  evil 
angels. — 1.  Their  original  properties 
were  the  same  as  those  of  the  holy  angels. 

2.  We  do  not  know  either  the  occasion 
of  their  apostasy  or  vjhat  effect  it 
immediately     produced      upon      them. 

3.  From  the  time  they  shook  off  their 
allegiance  to  God,  they  shook  off  all 
goodness,  and  contracted  those  tempers 
which  are  most  hateful  to  Him  and 
most  opposite  to  His  nature.  4.  In  the 
prosecution  of  their  infernal  designs 
they  are  diligent  in  the  highest  degree. 

5.  They  do  not  wander  at  large,  but 
are  all  united  under  one  common 
head. 

II.  The  employment  of  evil  angels. 
—  1.  They  are,  as  far  as  God  permits, 
the  governors  of  the  world.  2.  Satan 
and  all  his  angels  are  continually 
warring  against  us,  and  watching  over 
every  child  of  man.  3.  By  them  the 
foolish  hearts  of  those  who  know  not 
God  are  darkened.  4.  They  hinder 
every  good  word  and  work.  5.  There 
is  no  evil  done,  spoke,  or  thought 
without     the    assistance    of    the    devil. 

6.  Such  is  the  malice  of  the  wicked 
one  that  he  will  torment  whom  he  cannot 
destroy.  In  all  these  instances  we  say 
"  the  devil,"  as  if  there  was  only  one, 
because  these  spirits,  innumerable  as 
they  are,  all  act  in  concert,  and 
because  we  know  not  whether  one  or 
more  are  concerned  in  this  or  that 
work  of  darkness. — Wesley. 


MAIN  H0MILET1CS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13—17. 

The  Christian  Warrior  equipped. 

I.  He  is  clothed  from  head  to  foot  with  defensive  armour. — 1.  The  girdle  of 
truth.  "Stand,  therefore,  having  your  loins  girt  about  with  truth"  (ver.  14). 
The  military  girdle  was  the  belt  or  cincture  with  which  the  warrior  braced  him- 
self round  the  waist,  to  tighten  and  keep  every  part  of  his  armour  in  its  true 
place,  that  there  might  not  be  anything  loose  and  trailing  about  him  to  encumber 
his  movements.  Everything  about  him  must  be  tense  and  firm,  that  he  may  be 
prepared  to  receive  the  attack  of  the  enemy,  however  suddenly  and  powerfully 
made,  and  to  act  with  decision  and  concentrated  energy.  So  the  Christian 
warrior  must  be  strengthened  and  sustained  with  the  girdle  of  truth.  The  truth 
of  the  gospel  must  be  known  and  conscientiously  embraced,  so  that  we  may  detect 
the  numerous  foes  that  error  is  constantly  letting  loose  upon  us,  and  be  able  to 
attack  and  conquer  them.     To  cast  away  our  girdle  is  to  incapacitate  ourselves 

281 


chap.  vi.         HOMILETlC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS. 


for  the  combat,  and  to  expose  ourselves  to  wounds  and  defeat.  Conscious 
integrity  inspires  the  spiritual  warrior  with  confidence  and  bravery.  "  Let  this 
be  my  brazen  wall,  that  no  man  can  reproach  me  with  a  crime,  and  that  I  am 
conscious  of  my  own  integrity."  On  the  truth  we  take  our  stand,  and  by  the 
truth  we  stand.  If  we  keep  the  truth,  the  truth  will  keep  us,  and  we  shall  not 
be  "  tossed  to  and  fro  and  carried  about  with  every  wind  of  doctrine."  "  The 
luxury  of  agnosticism,  the  languors  of  doubt,  the  vague  sympathies  and  hesitant 
eclecticism  in  which  delicate  and  cultured  minds  are  apt  to  indulge ;  the  lofty 
critical  attitude  as  of  some  intellectual  god  sitting  above  the  strife  of  creeds, 
which  others  find  congenial — these  are  conditions  of  mind  unfit  for  the  soldier  of 
Christ  Jesus.  He  must  have  sure  knowledge,  definite  and  decided  purposes — a 
soul  girdled  with  truth." 

2.  The  breastplate  of  righteousness. — "  And  having  on  the  breastplate  of  righ- 
teousness "  (ver.  14).  The  military  breastplate  or  cuirass  was  the  chief  piece  of 
defensive  armour.  It  consisted  of  two  parts  or  wings :  one  covered  the  whole 
region  of  the  thorax  and  protected  the  vital  organs  of  the  body,  and  the  other 
covered  the  back  as  far  down  as  the  front  part  extended.  As  the  breastplate 
guarded  the  vital  functions  contained  within  the  region  of  the  thorax,  so  righ- 
teousness— the  life  of  God  in  the  soul  of  man — defends  everything  on  which  the 
spiritual  existence  and  triumph  of  the  Christian  warrior  depend.  Righteousness 
— conscious  integrity  of  character — is  an  impenetrable  mail  from  which  the 
missiles  of  the  enemy  fall  pointless.  Rectitude  of  life  is  an  invulnerable  defence 
against  the  most  furious  attacks  of  calumny  and  oppression  :  it  is  an  immovable 
rock  that  breaks  up  the  dark  billows  of  opposition  into  clouds  of  helpless  spray. 

3.  The  greaves,  or  feet-guards. — "Your  feet  shod  with  the  preparation  of  the 
gospel  of  peace  "  (ver.  15).  The  military  greaves  or  brazen  boots  covered  the 
shin  or  front  of  the  leg.  A  kind  of  solen  was  often  used  which  covered  the  sole 
and  laced  about  the  instep,  preventing  the  foot  from  being  wounded  by  thorns  or 
rugged  ways,  and  giving  firmness  and  security  to  the  foothold.  Thus  shod,  the 
warrior  would  take  his  stand  with  safety,  or  move  with  alertness  over  all  sorts 
of  ground.  Being  "  shod  with  the  preparation  of  the  gospel  of  peace  "  indicates 
that  the  Christian  soldier  is  ever  ready  to  move  with  expedition  and  willingness 
in  publishing  the  good  tidings  of  peace.  The  Israelites  were  commanded  to  eat 
the  passover  with  their  feet  shod  to  show  that  they  were  ready  for  their  journey. 
Christ  commanded  His  messengers  to  be  shod  with  sandals,  that  they  might  be 
ready  to  go  and  proclaim  the  gospel  wherever  they  were  sent,  The  Christian 
warrior  is  on  his  way  through  a  strange  and  hostile  country,  and  should  be  every 
moment  not  only  prepared  to  proceed,  but  be  every  moment  in  actual  progress, 
proclaiming  peace  on  his  way  to  the  land  of  eternal  peace.  Progress  in  truth  is 
made  by  being  firmly  established  in  its  principles  ;  every  advancing  step  is  taken 
with  confidence  and  with  the  air  of  one  who  is  assured  of  the  ground  on  which 
he  is  treading.  The  gospel  of  peace  establishes  peace  between  God  and  man,  and 
proclaims  goodwill  and  peace  to  the  universe.  "  The  objection  that  the  apostle 
is  addressing  the  faithful  at  large  who  are  not  all  of  them  called  to  preach  the 
gospel  is  mistaken.  Every  believer  should  be  prepared  to  witness  for  Christ  so 
often  as  opportunity  affords  and  needs  a  readiness  thereto.  The  knowledge  of 
Christ's  peace  qualifies  him  to  convey  its  message.  He  brings  it  with  him  into 
the  strife  of  the  world.  And  it  is  the  consciousness  that  he  possesses  himself 
such  peace,  and  has  it  to  communicate  to  others,  which  enables  him  to  walk 
firmly  and  with  sure  step  in  the  way  of  faith  "  ( Von  Hofmann).  We  preserve 
the  truth  by  spreading  it ;  and  the  best  defence  against  the  enemies  of  the  truth 
is  to  persuade  them  to  accept  the  gospel  of  peace.  The  Christian  warrior  is  not 
a  fighter,  but  a  peacemaker. 

4.  The  shield  of  faith. — "Above  all,  taking  the  shield  of  faith,  wherewith  ye 

282 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS.         chap.  vi. 


shall  be  able  to  quench  all  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked"  (ver.  16).  The  shield 
signified  is  not  the  small  round  buckler  or  targe  of  the  light -armed  man,  but  the 
oblong,  doorlike  shield,  measuring  four  feet  by  two  and  a  half,  and  curved  to 
the  shape  of  the  body,  that  the  Greek  hoplite  and  the  Roman  legionary  carried. 
Joined  together,  these  large  shields  formed  a  wall,  behind  which  a  body  of  troops 
could  hide  themselves  from  the  rain  of  the  enemy's  missiles.  These  military 
shields  were  made  of  wood,  covered  on  the  outside  with  thick  leather,  which  not 
only  deadened  the  shock  of  the  missile,  but  protected  the  frame  of  the  shield  from 
the  fire-tipped  darts  used  in  the  artillery  of  the  ancients.  So  faith  is  the  shield 
of  the  Christian  soldier,  defending  him  from  the  fierce  attacks  of  the  foe,  from 
within  and  without.  By  "  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked  "  the  apostle  may  allude 
to  the  darts  called  falarica,  which  were  headed  with  lead,  in  or  about  which  some 
combustible  stuff  was  placed  that  took  fire  in  the  passage  of  the  arrow  through 
the  air,  and  often  burnt  up  the  enemies'  ships  and  engines,  or  stuck  in  the  shields 
and  set  them  on  fire.  The  shield  of  faith  cannot  be  pierced  or  destroyed  by  the 
fiercest  fires  of  hatred  or  malice.  The  arrows  of  the  wicked,  flaming  with  cruelty, 
are  caught  on  this  shield,  blunted,  and  extinguished. 

5.  The  helmet  of  salvation. — "  And  take  the  helmet  of  salvation  "  (ver.  17).  The 
helmet  was  the  armour  for  the  head,  was  of  various  forms,  and  embossed  with  a 
great  variety  of  figures.  On  the  top  of  the  helmet  was  the  crest  or  ridge,  adorned 
with  several  emblematic  figures,  either  for  ornament  or  to  strike  terror.  The 
apostle  may  refer  to  a  helmet  which  had  an  emblematic  representation  of  hope 
— that  the  person  who  wore  it  should  be  safe,  should  be  prosperous  in  all  his 
engagements,  and  escape  unhurt  from  battle.  So  the  hope  of  conquering  every 
adversary,  and  surmounting  every  difficulty  by  the  salvation  of  the  gospel,  is  a 
helmet  that  protects  the  head,  and  is  of  such  impenetrable  texture  as  the  blow  of 
the  battle-axe  cannot  cleave.  The  hope  of  continual  safety  and  protection,  built 
on  the  promises  of  the  gospel,  protects  the  understanding  from  being  confused 
by  the  subtle  attacks  of  Satan  or  the  sophisms  of  unbelief.  Salvation  guards 
the  whole  man,  the  head  and  heart,  and  is  both  helmet  and  shield. 

II.  He  is  armed  with  an  all-potent  offensive  weapon. — "  And  the  sword  of 
the  Spirit,  which  is  the  word  of  God  "  (ver.  17).  The  military  swords  were 
of  various  sizes,  and  in  the  earliest  times  were  made  of  brass.  The  swords  of 
Homer's  heroes  were  all  of  this  metal.  Great  dexterity  was  acquired  in  the  use 
of  the  sword,  and  an  expert  swordsman  was  an  antagonist  greatly  dreaded.  The 
word  of  God  is  the  offensive  weapon  wielded  by  the  Christian  combatant.  It  is 
called  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  because  it  comes  from  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  receives 
its  fulfilment  in  the  soul  through  the  operations  of  the  Spirit,  who  alone  can 
teach  its  potent  use.  Facility  in  quoting  the  word  in  times  of  temptation  and 
trial  enables  the  spiritual  warrior  to  cut  in  pieces  the  snares  of  the  adversary. 
The  shield  of  faith  and  the  sword  of  the  Spirit  are  the  principal  armour  of  the 
soul.  The  enemies  of  the  cross  of  Christ  fall  humiliated  and  defeated  under  the 
powerful  strokes  of  the  Spirit's  sword.  There  are  times  when  the  Christian 
soldier  must  not  only  stand  on  the  defensive,  but  must  lead  the  attack  with 
unflinching  bravery  on  the  forces  of  evil.  He  is  safe  only  by  slaying  the 
enemy. 

III.  He  is  fully  prepared  to  resist  and  conquer  his  terrible  opponents. — 
"  Wherefore  take  unto  you  the  whole  armour  of  God,  that  ye  may  be  able  to 
withstand  in  the  evil  day,  and  having  done  all,  to  stand"  (ver.  13).  Stand  is  the 
spiritual  battle-cry.  Being  armed,  defend  your  liberties,  maintain  your  rights, 
discomfort  your  spiritual  foes,  hold  your  ground  against  them,  never  put  off  your 
armour,  but  be  ever  standing  ready  to  repel  any  new  attack.  The  defence  is 
necessary,  for  the  evil  day  is  at  hand,  is  already  dawning.  The  early  Church  had 
its  evil  day  of  persecution  and  defection,  and  the  Church  of  to-day  is  threatened 

283 


chap.  vi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHE8IANS. 


by  an  evil  day  of  subtlest  error.     The  unwary  and  supine  will  go  down  before 
the  forces  of  evil,  and  only  the  brave  and  steadfast  will  survive. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  Christian  armour  is  invulnerable.  2.  The  Christian  warrior 
must  attack  as  well  as  defend.  3.  The  Christian  warrior  can  conquer  only  as  he 
uses  the  armour  provided. 

GERM  NOTES   ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  13-17.  The  Christian's  Armour.  what  was  it  but  the  emblem  of  that 

— St.  Paul  lay  in  prison  at  Rome,  bound  word  of  God  which  wins  such  victories 

with   a   chain  to  the  Roman  trooper  on     the     battle-fields     of     conscience, 

who  watched  him  day  and  night.     He  because  it  pierces,  even  to  the  dividing 

employed  his  prison  hours  in  writing.  asunder  of  soul  and  spirit  and  of  the 

It  was  very  natural  that  his  language,  joints  and  marrow,  and  is  a  discerner 

like  his  thoughts,   should  be  coloured  of    the   thoughts   and   intents    of   the 

here  and  there  by  the  objects  around  heart,    and    is   the   power   of    God    to 

him  ;  and  we  find  that  whilst  writing  salvation  to  every  one  that  believeth  ? 

this  circular  epistle  to  the  Ephesians  Thus  girded,  thus  clad,  thus  shod,  thus 

his  eye  had  actually  been  resting  on  guarded,  thus  covered,  thus  armed,  the 

the  soldier  to  whom  he  was  chained.  Christian  might   well   meet   his   foes. 

In  the  outfit  of  the  Roman  legionary  He  was  indeed  more  than  a  match  for 

he  saw  the  symbol  of  the  supernatural  them,   and  might  calmly  await  their 

dress  which  befits  the  Christian.     The  onset. — H.  P.  Liddon. 
ornamented   girdle   or    balteus,    bound 

around  the  loins,  to  which  the  sword  The  Whole  Armour  of  God. 
was  commonly  attached,  seemed  to  the  I.  Truth. — "  Having  your  loins  girt 
apostle  to  recall  the  inward  practical  about  with  truth."  By  truth  is  in- 
acknowledgment  of  truth,  which  is  the  tended  sincerity  in  our  Christian  pro- 
first  necessity  in  the  Christian  charac-  fession,  or  a  firm  belief  of  and  full 
ter.  The  metal  breastplate  suggests  consent  to  the  gospel  of  Christ.  A 
the  moral  rectitude  or  righteousness  rational  conviction  of  its  truth,  joined 
which  enables  a  man  to  confront  the  with  a  sense  of  its  importance,  is  our 
world.  The  strong  military  sandals  best  security  against  apostasy  in  the 
spoke  of  the  readiness  to  march  in  the  evil  day. 

cause  of  that  gospel  whose  sum  and  II.  Righteousness. — "And     having 

substance  was  not  war,  but  .spiritual  on    the  breastplate  of  righteousness." 

even  more  than  social  peace.  And  then  A  holy  and  inoffensive  life  will  prevent 

the  large  oblong,  oval,  wooden   shield,  many  injuries.     It  will  command  the 

clothed  with  hides,  covering  well-nigh  reverence  of  bad  and  the  compassion  of 

the  whole  body  of  the  bearer,  reminded  good  men.     It  will  obtain  the  protec- 

him  of  Christian  faith,  upon  which  the  tion    of     God's     providence    and    the 

temptations  of    the  evil  one,   like  the  supports  of  His   grace.     It  will  pre- 

ancient   arrows,   tipped   as  they  often  serve  peace  and  serenity  of  conscience 

were     with    inflammable     substances,  under  the  reproaches  of  a  malignant 

would  light  harmlessly  and  lose  their  world. 

deadly  point ;    and  then   the  soldier's  III.  Peace. — ",  Your  feet  shod  with 

helmet,  pointing  upwards  to  the  skies,  the  preparation  of  the  gospel  of  peace." 

was  a  natural  figure  of  Christian  hope  This  peaceable  disposition  is  a  prepa- 

directed  towards  a  higher   and  better  ration   for  the  trials  of  an  evil  day, 

world  ;  and  then  the  sword  at  his  side,  and  an  excellent  defence  against  the 

by  which  he  won  safety  and  victory  in  asperities  of  our  Christian  path.     This 

the  day  of  battle,  and  which  you  will  will  go  on   before  us    to   smooth   the 

observe  is  the  one  aggressive  weapon  rough  passages  of  life,  or  attend  us  to 

mentioned  in  this  whole  catalogue —  guard  our  feet  against  the  sticks  and 

284 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  VI. 


traps  which  our  enemies  cast  in  our 
way.  Possessed  of  this  disposition  we 
shall  give  no  offence  and  provoke  no 
injuries  by  an  insolent,  overbearing 
behaviour. 

TV.  Faith. — "  Above  all,  taking  the 
shield  of  faith."  Faith  is  a  grace  of 
universal  influence.  It  is  the  basis  of 
all  Christian  graces.  It  is  the  ground- 
work of  all  religion  in  the  heart. 
Faith  is  a  more  effectual  defence 
agaiDst  the  temptations  of  Satan  and 
the  world  than  the  shields  of  the 
mighty  against  the  darts  and  spears 
of  their  enemies. 

V.  Hope. — "  And  take  the  helmet 
of  salvation."  The  hope  of  salvation. 
God  brings  salvation.  We  appropriate 
it  by  hope.  We  must  fight  the  good 
fight  of  faith  in  hope  that  the  Captain 
of  salvation  will  support  us  in  the 
conflict  and  lead  us  to  victory. 

VI.  Knowledge. — "The  sword  of 
the  Spirit,  which  is  the  word  of  God." 
The  divine  word  is  called  the  sword 
of  the  Spirit  because  it  is  rendered 
effectual  by  the  Spirit  in  slaying  the 
fleshly  lusts  and  repelling  the  outward 
temptations  which  war  against  the 
soul. 

Reflections. —  1.  We  see  of  what  im- 
portance it  is  that  we  have  the  power  of 
religion  in  our  hearts.  2.  It  concerns 
us  to  live  much  in  the  exercise  of  faith. 
3.  Let  us  exercise  our  courage  according 
to  the  various  exigencies  of  the  Christian 
life* — Lathrop. 

The  Duty  of  Believers  in  the  Evil  Day. 

1.  The  time  to  which  the  exhortation 
refers — the  evil  day. — 1.  By  the  evil 
day  we  are  clearly  to  understand  the 
season  of  temptation.  When  "  we 
wrestle." 

2.  This  evil  day  may  be  understood  of 
life  itself. — "  Few  and  evil  have  been 
the  days  of  my  pilgrimage."  Man  is 
tempted  till  his  death. 

3.  The  evil  day  may  refer  to  seasons 
during  which  temptation  is  peculiarly 
strong. — With  our  first  parents  whilst 
they  listened  to  Satan.  With  Christ 
in  the  wilderness — near  death  (John 
xiv.  30). 


4.  Of  such  seasons  we  have  many 
examples  in  Scripture. — The  lives  of 
Noah,  Abraham,  Moses,  Job,  Lot, 
Samson,  David,  Asa,  Hezekiah,  Peter, 
Demas. 

5.  Such  seasons  each  believer  can  mark 
in  his  history. — They  are  generally 
turning-points.  They  are  attended  by 
every  variety  of  outward  circumstances, 
prosperity,  adversity,  society,  solitude, 
health,  sickness. 

6.  With  the  wicked  such  days  are 
evil. — Days  of  suffering,  of  danger, 
of  backsliding,  of  apostasy,  of  dis- 
honour to  Christ,  and  triumph  to  the 
world  and  to  all  the  enemies  of 
Christ. 

7.  This  season  of  temptation  is  short. — 
A  day.     We  should  not  grow  weary. 

8.  Though  it  be  short  it  is  important. — 
The  day  of  battle  is  generally  most 
important  in  its  results.  So  in  spiritual 
warfare.    The  temptation  in  Eden,  etc. 

II.  The  duty  which  falls  to  be  per- 
formed in  the  evil  day. — 1.  To  with- 
stand. (1)  This  has  reference  to  Satan 
as  an  assailant.  (2)  It  binds  us  to 
resistance,  i.e.,  to  perform  the  duty 
from  which  Satan  dissuades,  to  lefuse 
the  sin  which  he  recommends,  to  hold 
fast  that  which  we  r  ave,  and  to  reject 
that  which  he  offers  in  exchange 
(Rev.  iii.  2). 

2.  To  proceed  from  the  defensive  to 
the  offensive. — "Having  done  all,"  or 
"  conquered  all."  (1)  The  believer,  as 
"  the  good  soldier  of  Christ,"  is,  like  his 
Master,  to  be  an  assailant.  (2)  By 
attacking,  Satan  discovers  himself ; 
and  the  believer,  having  resisted,  may 
gain  an  advantage.  When  his  strong- 
hold in  the  heart  is  found  out,  it  may 
be  pulled  down.  Is  it  pride  1  (2  Cor. 
x.  4,  5).  (3)  Satan  can  be  contended 
against  only  by  carrying  on  an  offensive 
warfare — in  the  heart,  in  the  world. 
The  Romans  could  be  conquered  only 
in  Italy. 

3.  That  having  resisted  and  conquered, 
we  still  stand. — (1)  Though  repulsed, 
Satan  is  not  slain,  his  resources  are 
not  exhausted,  "his  wrath"  continues. 
(2)  We  must  therefore  "  stand  "  after 
victory.    Our  armour  must  be  kept  on. 

285 


chap.  vi.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS. 


We  must  be  vigilant.  We  must  be  in 
an  attitude  for  the  fight. 

III.  The  preparation  necessary  to 
the  performance  of  the  peculiar  duties 
of  the  evil  day. — 1.  The  evil  day  is  a 
day  of  war,  and  hence  its  duties  and 
the  kind  of  preparation  called  for. 

2.  There  are  three  things  to  be  noticed 
in  the  account  of  the  believers  prepara- 
tion.— (1)  He  must  be  armed— divine 
grace.  An  unarmed  soldier  a  contra- 
diction ;  he  is  useless  for  duty,  exposed 
to  death.  (2)  He  must  be  completely 
armed.  For  defence  and  for  offence. 
(3)  His  armour  must  be  that  tl  of 
God."  Human  virtues  will  not  do. 
Human  energies  will  not  do. — Stewart. 

Ver.  14.  The  Girdle  of  Truth. 

I.  Honesty  and  truthfulness  of  char- 
acter.— Love  of  truth  as  being  from 
God,  hatred  of  lies  as  being  from  the 
devil — this  is  a  primary  condition  of 
being  strong  in  the  Lord.  Nothing 
can  be  more  injurious  to  the  character 
of  the  Christian  religion  than  the  sus- 
picion that  it  shuns  examination,  that 
its  claims  are  in  antagonism  with 
demonstrated  truth.  There  is  a  kind 
of  false  liberalism  concerning  religious 
truth.  It  is  easy  for  a  man  to  fancy 
his  loins  are  girt  about  with  truth 
when  the  fact  is  they  are  girt  about 
with  indifference ;  and  a  person  so 
armed  may  assume  an  attitude  of  im- 
partiality with  regard  to  religious 
questions  because  he  cares  nothing 
concerning  the  issue;  and  sometimes 
it  seems  to  be  assumed  that  a  writer 
possesses  a  virtue,  compensating  for  all 
vices,  if  he  is  apparently  free  from  all 
bias  either  for  or  against  revealed 
truth.  The  true  path  is  taken  by  him 
who,  strong  in  his  own  faith  and  love, 
fears  no  honest  investigation,  and 
shrinks  from  adopting  in  matters  of 
religion  any  tone  of  thought  or  line  of 
argument  which  he  cannot  justify  upon 
the  broadest  grounds  of  calm  judgment 
and  sober  reason. 

II.  But  the  words  of  the  apostle 
refer  not  only  to  truthfulness,  but  to 
truth  itself,  to  that  which  we  know 
to  be  true. — It  would  be  unworthy  of 

286 


an  apostle  if  he  should  include  under 
the  title  of  truth,  necessary  for  the 
protection  of  a  Christian  champion,  all 
human  knowledge  which  is  rightly  so 
called.  Do  not  consider  that  the  pro- 
gress you  make  in  human  knowledge 
lies  beside  your  path  as  Christians. 
As  members  of  Christ,  as  His  soldiers 
and  servants,  take  a  nobler  view  of 
your  work  than  that.  Christ  has  taken 
the  elements  of  this  world  and  sancti- 
fied them  for  Himself  ;  there  is  nothing 
really  secular  but  what  is  evil,  and  all 
that  is  not  evil  ought  to  be  used  on  the 
side  of  truth. 

III.  The  apostle  has  in  mind  that 
definite  form  of  revealed  truth  which 
in  Scripture  is  described  as  emphatic- 
ally the  truth. — The  great  doctrine  of 
godliness,  the  incarnation  of  the  eternal 
Son,  and  all  those  truths  which  flow 
from  this  one  mysterious  spring.  While 
there  is  no  antagonism  between  Scrip- 
tural and  human  knowledge,  there  is 
a  wide  difference  between  the  sources 
from  which  they  are  derived,  the  evi- 
dences by  which  they  are  established, 
and  the  conditions  of  their  being  rightly 
apprehended.  Whereas  other  know- 
ledge is  the  slow  accumulation  of  the 
experience  of  ages,  and  the  result  of 
the  guesses  and  labours  of  gifted  men, 
and  is  consequently  an  ever-growing 
and  changing  body  of  truth,  Christian 
truth  admits  of  no  change  and  no 
growth.  It  admits  of  application  to 
new  circumstances ;  it  admits  too  of 
growth,  between  the  limits  of  a  mustard 
seed  and  a  full-grown  tree,  in  its  subjec- 
tive apprehension  by  each  believing 
heart ;  but  objectively  it  knows  neither 
diminution  nor  expansion,  it  is  ever  one 
and  indivisible,  because  it  resolves  itself 
ultimately  into  the  one  great  mys- 
terious fact,  the  manifestation  of  God 
in  human  flesh.  JSTo  amount  of  argu- 
ment wrould  ever  turn  religious  belief 
into  religious  life,  if  the  articles  of  the 
creed  did  not  attest  their  divinity  by 
filling  up  the  void  of  the  human  heart 
and  by  their  constraining  influence  on 
human  conduct ;  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  no  religion  could  maintain  its 
ground    and  command   the   assent   of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  VI. 


thinking  men,  unless  its  historical 
claims  and  its  objective  truth  would 
stand  the  test  of  the  severest  scrutiny. 
The  truth  of  Christ  rests  upon  both 
grounds  ;  and  because  this  is  so  we  are 
bound  to  gird  it  about  our  loins  as  our 
only  sure  support  in  our  conflict  with 
the  spiritual  wickedness  of  this  world, 
our  support  in  the  hour  of  death,  our 
support  in  the  day  of  judgment. — 
Harvey  Goodwin. 

Truth  the  Girdle  of  the  Christian. 

1.  The  particular  grace  which  is 
here  mentioned — truth. — 1.  By  this 
exhortation  we  might  understand  that 
we  must  in  all  things  act  according  to 
truth  or  what  is  truth.  This  implies 
the  knowledge  of  truth,  the  yielding 
up  of  ourselves  to  truth,  so  as  to 
embody  it. 

2.  By  the  truth  we  may  understand 
sincerity. — Being  in  appearance  what 
we  are  in  reality,  seeming  to  follow 
what  we  do  follow,  expressing  the  real 
thoughts  and  feelings  of  the  heart. 
This  sincerity  is  displayed  towards 
God,  towards  our  fellow-men,  and 
towards  ourselves. 

II.  The  uses  or  purposes  of  truth  in 
the  Chris  ian  life :  it  is  a  girdle. — By 
comparing  truth  to  a  girdle  the  apostle 
suggests  the  purposes  which  it  serves  : 
1.  The  ancient  girdle  ivas  meant  to  give 
firmness  and  strength.  2.  To  fit  for 
activity,  by  binding  up  the  loose,  flowing 
garments.  3.  To  the  girdle  arms  were 
attached.  — Stewart. 

Ver.  15.  The  Gospel  of  Peace. 

1.  The  nature  of  this  peace. — 1.  It  is 
peace  with  God. — A  mutual  reconcilia- 
tion following  a  mutual  estrangement. 

2.  It  is  peace  with  ourselves. — This 
includes  both  the  silencing  of  the 
accusations  of  conscience  and  the 
restoration  of  the  internal  harmony 
of  our  nature. 


3.  It  is  peace  with  our  fellow-men. — ■ 
Between  nations  and  classes,  and 
families  and  individuals. 

4.  It  is  peace  with  our  fellow- 
Christians. 

II.  The  relation  of  the  gospel  to  this 
peace. — 1 .  In  the  gospel  it  is  proclaimed. 

2.  In  the  gospel  its  grounds  are  unfolded. 

3.  By  the  belief  of  the  gospel  it  is  con- 
veyed.—G.  Brooks. 

Ver.  17.  The  Bible  the  Sword  of  the 
Spirit. 

1.  The  Bible  is  a  sword. — 1.  like  a 
sword,  it  is  of  no  use  till  it  is  unsheathed. 
The  Bible  must  not  lie  idle  in  the  library 
or  in  the  intellect.     Must  be  used. 

2.  Like  a  sword,  when  it  is  unsheathed 
it  cuts  deeply. — Makes  deep  gashes  in 
the  heart  and  conscience. 

3.  Like  a  sword,  it  is  a  weapon  of 
defence  as  well  as  of  offence. — "  It  is 
written." 

II.  The  Bible  is  the  sword  of  the 
Spirit. —  1.  Because  He  inspired  it. 
Those  whom  we  call  the  sacred  writers 
were  its  penmen  ;  He  alone  was  its 
Author. 

2.  Because  He  interprets  it.  —  Its 
Author  is  also  its  interpreter.  Wherever 
it  is  carried  He  is.  and  in  answer  to 
the  prayer  of  faith  He  expounds  its 
true  meaning  as  far  as  saving  truth  is 
concerned. 

3.  Because  He  wields  it  as  the  instru- 
ment of  His  victories. — Refer  to  some  of 
the  remarkable  revivals,  to  individual 
conversions. 

III.  Our  duty  with  regard  to  the 
Bible  as  the  sword  of  the  Spirit. — 
1.  Take  it  and  study  it.  Sword 
exercise. 

2.  Take  it  and  bind  it  to  your  heart. 
— Delight  in  it. 

3.  Take  it  and  employ  it  vigorously 
till  your  life's  end. — "  His  sword  was 
in  His  hand."  "  There  is  none  like 
it:'— Ibid. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  18—20. 

The  Programme  of  Prayer. 

I.  Prayer  should  be  constant  and  varied  in  its  methods. — "  Praying  always  i 
with  all  prayer  and  supplication"  (ver.  18).     The  Christian  warrior  is  armed 

287 


chap.  vi.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


from  head  to  foot  with  the  girdle,  the  breastplate,  the  greaves,  the  shield,  the 
helmet,  and  the  sword ;  no  weapon  of  defence  or  offence  is  wanting  ;  it  would 
seem  as  if  nothing  was  needed  to  complete  the  equipment.  The  one  essential 
now  is  the  spirit  and  coui  age  to  fight,  to  use  the  spiritual  weapons  with  dexterity 
and  effect ;  and  the  power  to  do  this  is  secured  by  prayer.  Prayer  should  be 
constant ;  the  soul  should  be  ever  in  a  praying  mood ;  and  supplication,  earnest 
entreaty,  should  be  used  in  the  special  emergencies  that  occur  in  the  battle  of  life. 
"  Praying  always  with  all  prayer  "  :  all  kinds  and  methods  of  prayer  should  be 
employed — prayer  in  public  aided  by  the  sympathy  and  inspiration  of  numbers, 
in  private  when  alone  with  God,  in  the  family,  in  the  whirl  of  business,  in  the 
stress  of  battle,  in  the  intervals  of  recreation,  in  the  heart  without  a  voice  and 
with  the  voice  from  the  heart.  The  earnest  and  needy  soul  will  find  its  own 
way  of  keeping  up  a  prayerful  intercourse  with  God.  "  Some  there  are,"  said 
Wesley,  "  who  use  only  mental  prayer  or  ejaculations,  and  think  they  are  in  a 
state  of  grace  and  use  a  way  of  worship  far  superior  to  any  other  ;  but  such  only 
fancy  themselves  to  be  above  what  is  really  above  them,. it  requiring  far  more 
grace  to  be  enabled  to  pour  out  a  fervent  and  continued  prayer  than  to  offer  up 
mental  aspirations." 

"  Warrior,  that  from  battle  won, 
Breathest  now  at  set  of  sun ; 
Woman,  o'er  the  lowly  slain, 
Weeping  on  his  burial  plain  ! 
Ye  that  triumph,  ye  that  sigh, 
Kindred  by  one  holy  tie : 
Heaven's  first  star  alike  ye  see — 
Lift  the  heart  and  bend  the  knee." 

Iicmans. 

II.  Prayer  is  prompted  and  sustained  by  the  divine  Spirit. — "  Praying  .  . . 
in  the  Spirit "  (ver.  18).  The  Spirit  is  the  author  and  element  of  the  believer's  life 
in  Christ.  It  is  He  who  gives  the  grace  and  power  to  pray ;  He  helps  our 
infirmities,  and  intercedes  for  us  and  in  us.  Prayer  is  one  of  the  highest 
exercises  of  the  soul,  and  achieves  its  loftiest  triumphs  under  the  inspiration  and 
help  of  the  Spirit.  He  suggests  topics  for  prayer,  proper  times  and  seasons, 
imparts  urgency  and  perseverance  hi  supplication,  and  He  alone  makes  prayer 
effectual. 

III.  Prayer  should  be  accompanied  with  persevering  vigilance. — "  Watching 
[keeping  awake]  thereunto  with  all  perseverance  and  supplication"  (ver.  18). 
We  must  not  only  watch  and  pray,  but  watch  while  we  pray.  Watch  against 
wandering  thoughts,  against  meaningless  and  insincere  petitions,  against  the 
seductive  suggestions  of  the  tempter,  and  against  the  tendency  to  trust  in  our 
prayers  or  in  our  earnestness  rather  than  in  God,  whose  help  we  supplicate. 
"  With  all  perseverance  "  means  a  sustained,  unsleeping,  and  unresting  vigilance. 
The  word  implies  stretching  out  the  neck  and  looking  about  in  order  to  discern 
an  enemy  at  a  distance.  Without  watchfulness  prayer  and  all  the  spiritual 
armour  will  be  unavailing.  The  best-appointed  army,  over-confident  in  its 
strength,  has  suffer  el  inglorious  defeat  by  neglecting  to  watch.  The  wakeful 
and  earnest  suppliant  must  persist  in  prayer,  undaunted  by  opposition  and 
unwearied  by  delay. 

IV.  Prayer  should  be  offered  on  behalf  of  the  Church  in  general. — "For  all 
saints  "  (ver.  18).  Prayer  that  in  its  nature  is  generous  and  comprehensive  is 
apt  to  become  selfish  and  narrowed  down  into  despicable  limits.  The  man  prays 
best  for  himself  wbo  prays  most  earnestly  for  others.  "  Prayer  for  ourselves 
must  broaden  out  into  a  catholic  intercession  for  all  the  servants  of  our  Master, 
for  all  the  children  of  the  household  of  faith.  By  the  bands  of  prayer  we  are 
knit  together — a  vast  multitude  of  saints  throughout  the  earth,  unknown  by  face 

288 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS.         chap.  vi. 


or  name  to  our  fellows,  but  one  in  the  love  of  Christ  and  in  our  heavenly  calling 
and  all  engaged  in  the  same  perilous  conflict.  All  the  saints  were  interested  in 
the  faith  of  the  Asian  believers  ;  they  were  called  with  '  all  the  saints '  to  share 
in  the  comprehension  of  the  immense  designs  of  God's  kingdom.  The  dangers 
and  temptations  of  the  Church  are  equally  far-reaching ;  they  have  a  common 
origin  and  character  in  all  Christian  communities.  Let  our  prayers  at  least  be 
catholic.  At  the  throne  of  grace,  let  us  forget  our  sectarian  divisions.  Having 
access  in  one  Spirit  to  the  Father,  let  us  realise  in  His  presence  our  communion 
with  all  His  children  "  {Findlay). 

"  The  saints  in  prayer  appear  as  one, 
In  word  and  deed  and  mind ; 
While  with  the  Father  and  the  Son 
Sweet  fellowship  they  find. 

"  Nor  prayer  on  earth  is  made  alone — 
The  Holy  Spirit  pleads  ; 
And  Jesus  on  the  eternal  throne 
For  sinners  intercedes." 

J.  Montgomery. 

V.  Prayer  should  be  definite  and  special  in  its  petitions. — 1.  For  the  preacher 
of  the  gospel  in  unfavourable  circumstances.  "  And  for  me  ...  an  ambassador  in 
bonds  "  (vers.  19,  20).  An  ambassador,  being  the  representative  of  his  king,  his 
person  was  in  all  civilised  countries  held  sacred,  and  it  was  regarded  as  the 
greatest  indignity  and  breach  of  faith  to  imprison  or  injure  him.  Contrary  to 
the  rights  of  nations,  this  ambassador  of  the  King  of  heaven  was  put  in  chains. 
Even  Paul,  with  all  his  magnificent  endowments,  felt  the  need  for  the  prayers  of 
God's  people  and  craved  for  them.  The  fortunes  of  the  gospel  were  bound  up 
with  his  life,  and  he  was  now  suffering  for  his  courageous  defence  of  the  truth. 
It  was  of  immense  importance  to  the  early  Church  that  he  should  be  true  and 
faithful  in  this  crisis,  and  he  asks  for  the  prayers  of  God's  people  that  he  may  be 
sustained  and  the  gospel  victorious.  Here  was  a  definite  and  special  theme  for 
prayer.  Occasions  of  great  peril  evoke  the  spirit  of  earnest  supplication.  It  is 
an  aid  to  devotion  to  have  some  one  to  specially  pray  for. 

2.  For  courage  and  facility  in  unfolding  the  mystery  of  the  gospel  he  feels  con- 
strained to  declare. — "  That  utterance  may  be  given  unto  me,  that  I  may  .  .  .  make 
known  the  mystery  of  the  gospel,  .  .  .  that  therein  I  may  speak  boldly,  as  I  ought 
to  speak  [as  I  must  needs  speak] "  (vers.  19,  20).  The  apostolic  prisoner  was  more 
concerned  about  his  message  than  his  own  fate.  He  hailed  the  occasion  of  His 
defence  before  the  civil  authorities  as  an  opportunity  for  unfolding  and  enforcing 
the  gospel,  for  preaching  which  he  was  now  in  chains.  He  feels  the  gravity  of 
the  crisis,  and  he  is  nervously  anxious  to  do  justice  to  his  grand  theme.  Clear 
as  was  his  insight  and  firm  as  was  his  grasp  of  the  leading  truths  of  the  gospel, 
he  invokes  the  prayers  of  the  Ephesian  saints  that  God  may  give  him  liberty  and 
power  in  their  exposition,  and  that  he  may  win  converts  to  the  truth  from  the 
midst  of  his  enemies.  The  pulpit  will  become  a  greater  power  if  the  people  of 
God  pray  fervently  and  unitedly  for  the  ambassadors  of  Christ.  Prayer  is  more 
potent  in  winning  souls  than  the  logic  and  eloquence  of  the  preacher. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  topics  for  prayer  are  abundant  and  ever  present.  2.  Prayer 
nerves  the  soul  with  divine  power.     3.  Earnest  and  believing  prayer  will  prevail. 

GERM   NOTES    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  18-20.  Praying  with  all  Prayer,      rational  mind    will    see  it,    and    so 

I.  The  apostle  supposes  our  obliga-     important  that  every  pious  heart  will 

tion  to  prayer  to  be  so  plain  that  every     feel    it. — Our    obligation     to    prayer 

u  289 


CHAP.  VI. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EPHES1ANS. 


naturally  results  from  our  weakness 
and  dependence  and  God's  all-suffi- 
ciency and  goodness.  Desires  directed 
to  Him  are  prayers.  To  clothe  our 
desires  in  language  is  not  essential. 
God  hears  the  desire  of  the  humble. 
There  is  the  same  reason  for  daily 
prayer  as  for  daily  labour.  Prayer  is 
a  means  of  enlivening  our  pious  senti- 
ments and  exciting  us  to  the  practice 
of  duty  and  thus  preparing  us  for 
divine  favours. 

II.  Prayer  is  of  several  kinds. — 
Social  and  secret,  public  and  domestic, 
stated  and  occasional ;  and  consists  of 
several  parts — confession,  supplication, 
intercession,  and  thanksgiving.  The 
apostle  points  out  no  part  or  kind  of 
prayer  in  distinction  from  all  others, 
but  exhorts  in  general  to  pray  with  all 
prayer. 

III.  The  manner  in  which  our 
prayers  should  be  offered. — The  spirit 
and  temper  of  the  heart  in  our  prayers 
is  the  main  thing  necessary  to  qualify 
them  for  God's  acceptance.  The  first 
thing  necessary  in  prayer  is  faith. 
Our  desires  must  be  good  and  reason- 
able. Attention  of  mind,  collection  of 
thought,  and  warmth  of  affection  are 
qualifications  required  in  prayer.  Our 
prayers  must  be  accompanied  with 
justice  to  men.  Charity  is  an  essen- 
tial qualification  in  prayer.  Our 
prayers  must  be  joined  with  a  sense  of 
and  sorrow  for  sin,  and  submission  to 
the  divine  will.  We  are  to  continue 
in  prayer,  and  watch  thereunto  with 
all  perseverance. 

IV.  The  apostle  here  teaches  the 
duty  of  intercession  for  others. — If 
God  is  good  to  others  as  well  as  to 
us,  there  is  the  same  ground  on  which 
to  offer  our  social  intercessions  as  our 
personal  petitions.  We  are  commanded 
to  pray  for  all  men,  and  especially  for 
all  saints ;  this  is  to  pray  for  the 
general  virtue  and  happiness  of  the 
human  race  in  this  and  all  succeeding 
ages.  Christians  ought  to  pray  for 
their  minister.  There  was  something 
special  in  Paul's  case — he  was  an 
ambassador  in  bonds. 

V.  The    apostle    points    out   the 

290 


manner  in  which  he  aimed  and  all 
ministers  ought  to  preach  the  gospel. — 

The  apostle  desired  to  make  known  the 
mystery  of  the  gospel,  and  to  speak 
boldly.  In  a  minister  boldness  is 
necessary  ;  not  that  impudent  boldness 
which  assumes  an  unmerited  superi- 
ority, but  that  pious  fortitude  that 
dares  to  utter  the  important  things  of 
religion  without  reserve  and  without 
fear  of  personal  inconvenience.  He 
must  persevere  in  the  faithful  execu- 
tion of  his  office,  whatever  discourage- 
ments may  arise  from  the  opposition  of 
the  world,  the  frowns  of  the  great,  the 
contempt  of  the  proud,  the  want  of 
concurrence,  or  the  smallness  of  his 
success. — Lathrop. 

Ver.  18.  Praying  in  the  Spirit. 

I.  The  time.— "  Always."  1.  The 
frequent  practice  of  prayer.  2.  The  con- 
stant cultivation  of  the  spirit  of  prayer. 

II.  The  manner.—"  With  all 
prayer  and  supplication."  1.  The 
prayer  of  the  closet.  Secret.  2.  The 
prayer  of  the  family.  Domestic.  3.  The 
prayer  of  the  social  circle.  United. 
4.  The  prayer  of  the  sanctv,ary. 
Public. 

III.  The  matter. — "  With  all  prayer 
and  supplication." — 1.  There  are  thanks- 
givings to  be  rendered.  2.  There  are 
confessions  to  be  made.  3.  There  are 
petitions  to  be  offered.  4.  There  are 
intercessions  to  be  presented. 

IV.  Spirituality.— "  In  the  Spirit." 
1.  With  our  own  heart. — Not  formal 
or  mechanical.  2.  In  dependence  on 
the  aid  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

V.  The  continuance. — "  With  all 
perseverance."  1.  In  the  general  habit. 
Prayer  never  to  be  given  up.  2.  In 
special  objects.     No  fainting  in  prayer. 

VI.  The  intercession. — "And  sup- 
plication for  all  saints."  1.  For  the 
whole  Church.  2.  For  any  part  of  the 
Church   that  is  in   danger  of  distress. 

3.  For  our  own  section  of  the  Church. 

4.  For  our  Christian  friends. — G. 
Brooks. 

The  Duty  of  Prayer. — Prayer  is  the 
communion  of  the  soul  with  God,  and 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS. 


CHAP.  VI. 


the  casting  of  itself  upon  Him  for  help 
and  guidance. 

I.  God  has  implanted  prayer  as  an 
instinct  in  the  hearts  of  men. — In 
times  of  danger  the  soul  instinctively 
cries  out  for  God  or  some  unseen  power 
to  interpose  and  save. 

II.  God  desires  that  men  should 
pray  regularly  and  constantly. — 
Blessings  are  promised  in  answer  to 
prayer  which  the  soul  can  obtain  in 
no  other  way. 

III.  God  commands  men  to  pray. — 
To  abound  in  prayer  and  to  pray  with- 
out weariness  and  fainting. 

IV.  God  teaches  how  to  pray  and 
what  to  pray  for. — The  Spirit  helps 
our  infirmities. 

V.  There  is  no  religious  life  apart 
from  prayer. — The  Bible  saints  were 
men  of  prayer.  At  the  very  beginning 
of  human  history  men  began  to  call 
upon  God.  And  in  the  visions  of 
heaven  which  St.  John  has  recorded, 
when  the  Lamb  had  taken  the  book  to 
open  its  seals,  the  twenty-four  elders 
fell  down  before  Him,  "  having  every 
one  of  them  harps  and  golden  phials 
full  of  odours,  which  are  the  prayers  of 
the  saints,  and  they  sang  a  new  song." 
Prayer  leads  to  praise. 

VI.  How  can  we  make  the  duty  a 
privilege  and  the  privilege  a  plea- 
sure ? — If  Christ  was  comforted  and 
strengthened  by  prayer,  can  we  as 
Christians  live  without  it  1  Is  not  a 
prayerless  Christian  in  danger  of  being 
no  Christian  at  all? — Homiletic  Monthly. 

Vers.  19,  20.  A  Picture  of  Moral 
Bravery. 

I.  An  ambassador  charged  with  a 
message  of  world-wide  significance 
and  importance. — "  To  make  known 
the  mystery  of  the  gospel"  (ver.  19). 

II.  An  ambassador,  contrary  to  the 
law  of  nations,  imprisoned  because  of 
his  message. — "For  which  I  am  an 
ambassador  in  bonds  "  (ver.  20). 

III.  An  ambassador  irresistibly 
constrained  to  declare  the  message 
for  which  he  suffers. — "  That  therein 
I  may  speak  boldly  as  I  ought  to 
speak  "  (ver.  20). 


IV.  An  ambassador  imploring,  not 
the  sanction  of  civil  authorities,  but  the 
prayers  of  God's  people  that  he  may 
be  emboldened  to  discharge  his  high 
commission. — "  And  for  me,  that  utter- 
ance may  be  given  unto  me,  that  I  may 
open  my  mouth  boldly"  (ver.  19). 

Ver.  19.  The  Gospel  a  Mystery. 

1.  Because  it  is  known  only  by 
divine  revelation. — Such  a  secret  it  is 
that  the  wit  of  man  could  never  have 
found  out.  As  none  but  God  could  lay 
the  plot,  so  none  but  Himself  could 
make  it  known. 

II.  Because  when  revealed  its 
truths  exceed  the  grasp  of  human 
understanding. — They  are  to  the  eye 
of  our  reason  as  the  sun  to  the  eye  of 
our  body,  that  dazzles  and  overpowers. 
They  disdain  to  be  discussed  and  tried 
by  human  reason  that  there  are  three 
subsistences  in  the  Godhead  and  but 
one  divine  essence.  We  believe,  be- 
cause they  are  revealed.  God  and  man 
united  in  Christ's  person  is  undeniably 
demonstrable  from  the  gospel,  but  the 
cordage  of  our  understanding  is  too 
short  to  fathom  this  great  deep. 
"  Would'st  thou  see  a  reason,"  said 
Augustine,  "for  all  that  God  says? 
Look  into  thine  own  understanding, 
and  thou  wilt  find  a  reason  why  thou 
seest  not  a  reason." 

III.  The  gospel  is  a  mystery  in 
regard  of  the  kind  of  knowledge  the 
saints  themselves  have  of  it. — 1.  Their 
knowledge  is  but  in  pai't,  and  imperfect. 
— The  most  of  what  they  know  is  the 
least  of  what  they  do  not  know.  The 
gospel  is  a  rich  piece  of  arras  rolled  up  : 
this  God  has  been  unfolding  ever  since 
the  first  promise  was  made  to  Adam, 
opening  it  every  age  wider  than  the 
other. 

2.  It  is  mysterious  and  dark. — 
Gospel  truths  are  not  known  in  their 
native  beauty  and  glory,  but  in 
shadows.  Oar  apprehension  of  things 
are  manly  compared  with  those  under 
the  law,  but  childish  compared  with 
the  knowledge  of  glorified  saints. 

IV.  The  gospel  is  a  mystery  in 
regard  to  the  rare  and  strange  effects 

291 


chap.  vi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS. 


it  has  upon  the  godly. — It  enables 
them  to  believe  strange  mysteries — to 
believe  that  which  they  understand 
not,  and  hope  for  that  which  they  do 
not  see.  It  enables  them  to  do  as 
strange  things  as  they  believe — to  live 
by  another's  spirit,  to  act  from 
another's  strength,  to  live  by  another's 
will,  and  aim  at  another's  glory.  It 
makes  them  so  meek  and  gentle  that  a 
child  may  lead  them  to  anything  good, 
yet  so  stout  that  fire  and  faggot  shall 
not  fright  them  into  sin.  They  are 
taught  that  all  things  are  theirs,  yet 
they  dare  not  take  a  penny,  a  pin, 
from  the  wicked  by  force  and  rapine. 
They  can  pray  for  life,  and  at  the 
same  time  desire  to  die. — Gurnall. 

Ver.  20.  Boldness  a  Duty  in  a 
Minister. 

I.  The  nature  of  the  boldness  desired. 
— 1.  To  speak  all  he  has  in  command 
from  God  to  deliver.  2.  To  speak  with 
liberty  and  freedom  of  spirit,  without 
fear  or  bondage  to  any.  Speaking 
openly  and  plainly. 

II.  Boldness  to  be  shown  in  preach- 
ing the  gospel. — 1.  In  asse7-ting  the 
truth  of  the  gospel.  2.  In  reproving 
sin  and  denouncing  judgment  against 
impenitent  sinners. 

III.  The  kind  of  boldness  a 
minister  should  cultivate. — 1.  A  con- 
vincing boldness.  2.  A  meek  boldness. 
3.  A  zealous  boldness. 


IV.  The  means  of  procuring  minis- 
terial boldness. — 1.  A  holy  fear  of  God. 
2.  Castle  thyself  within  the  power  and 
promise  of  God  for  assistance  and  pro- 
tection. 3.  Keep  a  clear  conscience. 
4.  Consider  that  which  thou  most  fearest 
is  best  prevented  by  freedom  and  boldness 
in  thy  ministry.  5.  Consider  how  bold 
Christ  was  in  His  ministry.  What 
greater  incentive  to  valour  can  the 
soldier  have  than  to  see  his  general 
stand  with  undaunted  courage  where 
the  bullets  fly  thickest !  Such  valiant 
captains  do  not  breed  white-livered 
soldiers.  It  is  impossible  we  should  be 
dastardly,  if  instructed  by  Him  and 
actuated  by  His  Spirit. — Ibid. 

Ver  20.  The  Gospel  Ambassador. 

I.  The  dignity  of  his  office. — Seen  : 
1.  In  the  majesty  of  the  Prince  from 
whom  he  comes.  2.  In  the  greatness  of 
the  Person  whose  place  he  supplies.  3.  In 
the  excellency  of  the  message  he  brings. 

II.  How  the  duty  of  his  office  should 
be  discharged. — 1.  Stain  not  the 
dignity  of  thy  office  by  any  base,  un- 
worthy practices.  2.  Keep  close  to  thy 
instructions.  3.  Think  it  not  enough 
that  thou  deliverest  thy  message  from 
God,  but  show  a  zeal  for  thy  Master 
whose  cause  thou  negotiatest.  4.  Let  not 
any  person  or  thing  in  the  world  bribe 
or  scare  thee  from  a  jaithful  discharge  of 
thy  trust.  5.  Be  kind  to  and  tenderly 
careful  of  thy  fellow-subjects. — Ibid. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  21,  22 

A  Trusted  Messenger — 

I.  Commended  for  his  acknowledged  Christian  character. — "  Tychicus,  a 
beloved  brother  and  faithful  minister  in  the  Lord  "  (ver.  21).  These  are  high 
and  honourable  designations,  and  indicate  the  genuine  esteem  in  which  he 
was  held  by  the  apostle.  He  had  become  endeared  to  Paul  by  the  many 
valuable  services  he  had  rendered  to  him,  and  by  the  marked  fidelity  of  his 
ministerial  work.  He  appears  to  have  joined  St.  Paul's  staff,  and  remained  with 
him  from  the  time  he  accompanied  him  to  Jerusalem  in  the  year  59.  He  was 
sent  to  Ephesus  to  relieve  Timothy  when  Paul  desired  the  presence  of  the  latter 
at  Rome.  He  was  well  known  to  the  Asian  Church,  and  every  way  qualified  to 
discharge  the  mission  with  which  he  was  entrusted.  He  was  "the  beloved 
brother  "  in  his  relation  to  the  Church  in  general,  and  the  "  faithful  minister 
in  the  Lord  "  in  his  special  relation  to  the  apostle.  It  is  better  to  be  loved  than 
to  be  simply  popular.  Genuine  piety  forms  character,  and  commands  the 
confidence  and  respect  of  all  lovers  of  the  trutn. 

292 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPHESIANS.         chap.  VI. 


II.  Entrusted  with  personal  details  of  special  interest. — "  Whom  I  have  sent 
unto  you  for  the  same  purpose,  that  ye  might  know  our  affairs  "  (ver.  22).  There 
were  probably  some  details  about  St.  Paul's  imprisonment  that  could  be  com- 
municated better  in  person  than  by  letter,  and  certain  allusions  in  the  letter  that 
could  be  more  fully  explained  in  a  personal  interview.  Every  item  about  Paul 
was  of  intense  interest  to  the  Asian  Churches.  Many  of  the  members  had  been 
brought  to  Christ  through  his  instrumentality.  They  were  alarmed  as  to  his 
fate  and  as  to  the  future  of  the  gospel.  They  were  anxious  to  know  if  there 
was  any  prospect  of  his  release  and  of  his  return  to  his  missionary  labours. 
Tychicus,  enjoying  the  full  confidence  of  the  apostle  and  the  affection  of  the 
people,  was  just  the  man  to  give  them  the  information  they  so  eagerly  desired, 
and  would  be  cordially  welcomed  everywhere.  The  trusted  messenger  of  a  great 
and  good  man  is  regarded  for  the  time  being  with  the  reverence  and  respect 
cherished  towards  the  man  he  represents  and  of  whose  affairs  he  is  empowered 
to  speak. 

III.  Competent  to  minister  encouragement. — "  That  he  might  comfort  your 
hearts  "  (ver.  22).  Tychicus  was  not  only  a  newsman  and  letter-carrier,  but 
also  a  minister  of  Christ.  He  knew  how  to  present  his  message  so  as  to  allay 
the  fears  of  his  hearers,  to  comfort  their  hearts,  and  to  encourage  their  faith  in 
the  power  and  triumph  of  the  gospel,  notwithstanding  the  sufferings  of  its 
preachers.  The  gospel  is  full  of  consolation,  and  it  should  be  the  constant  aim 
of  the  minister  to  make  it  known  and  apply  it  to  the  circumstances  of  his  people. 
A  diligent  rastor  in  his  visitations  comes  in  contact  with  much  suffering  and 
sorrow,  and  has  many  opportunities  of  administering  the  balm  of  gospel  comfort. 
Great  tact  and  sympathy  are  necessary,  especially  in  visiting  the  sick.  Referring 
to  this,  a  godly  and  experienced  minister  said,  "  Tenderness  is  essential.  Enter 
the  chamber  gently.  Tread  noiselessly.  Get  near  to  the  sufferer.  Speak  as 
softly  as  may  be.  Remember  his  nerves ;  noise  is  often  torture.  Sympathise 
with  his  weakness,  restlessness,  and  pain.  True  you  are  not  come  to  minister  to 
his  body ;  but  enter  into  his  sufferings  and  symptoms.  Ask  what  his  doctor  has 
said.  Avoid  a  professional,  official,  conventional  air.  The  case  may  be  too 
grave  for  cheerful  words ;  but  if  otherwise,  let  your  face  carry  a  little  sunshine 
into  the  sick-room.  Avoid  fussiness.  Go  with  a  brother's  heart.  Be  brief — 
brief  in  your  talk,  brief  in  your  readings,  brief  in  your  prayers — your  whole  visit 
brief.  Take  up  one  point.  A  sick  man's  brain  is  soon  overtasked,  his  nerves 
soon  jar,  his  strength  soon  fails.  Let  your  good-bye  be  *  God  bless  you.'  Let 
your  last  look  be  one  of  tenderness  and  love.  Whatever  you  are  in  the  pulpit, 
Barnabas,  not  Boanerges,  is  your  pattern  by  the  sick-bed."  It  is  the  privilege 
and  mission  of  every  minister  and  believer  to  be  a  messenger  of  comfort 
and  strength  to  those  in  trouble.  We  shall  be  remembered  for  our  kindness 
when  many  of  our  sermons  are  forgotten. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  character  of  the  good  is  self-evident.  2.  A  good  man  should 
be  trusted  and  honoured.  3.  The  value  of  a  good  man  is  recognised  in  times  of 
stress  and  difficulty. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers.  21,  22.  Apostolical  Care  for  the  their  endeavours  for  the  common  edifi- 

Church.  cation  and  comfort.      The  Church  of 

I.  Paul  was  careful  to  keep  up  an  Christ  is  one.      We  should  seek  the 

intercourse  and  communion  with  the  counsel  of  sister  Churches  under  our 

Churches  of  Christ. — There  ought  to  difficulties,  and  be  ready  when  requested 

be  fellowship  and  correspondence  among  to    afford    them    our    counsel    under 

the  Churches.     They  should  all  unite  theirs. 

293 


CHAP.  VI.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EPHESIANS. 


II.  Paul  was  solicitous  that  the 
Christians  among  whom  he  had 
preached  should  know  of  his  con- 
dition and  doings. — He  was  a  prisoner, 
but  suffered  not  his  time  to  pass  in 
restless  impatience  or  useless  indolence. 
He  received  all  who  came  to  him  and 
preached  to  them  the  kingdom  of  God. 
He  instructed  his  fellow-prisoners.  He 
spent  much  of  his  time  in  prayer. 
Several  of  his  epistles  were  written 
when  he  was  in  bonds.  Paul's  example 
teaches  us  that  we  should  do  good  in 
every  condition. 

III.  When  Paul  sends  Tychicus  he 
gives  him  written  testimonials  that 
he  might  be  received  in  the  character 
of  a  minister. — This  precaution  was 
taken  that  the  Churches  might  not  be 
imposed  upon  by  ignorant  pretenders 
or  artful  deceivers.  The  Church  is  a 
regular,  organised  community.  We 
are  to  receive  none  as  ambassadors 
of  Christ  but  those  who  come  to  us 
according  to  the  order  He  has  settled. 
Ministers  ought  to  act  in  concert  and 
unite  their  labours  in  building  up 
the  kingdom  of  Christ.  Tychicus 
co-operated  with  Paul. 

IV.  Fidelity  is  an  essential  part  of 
the  ministerial  character. — Paul  calls 
Tychicus  "  a  faithful  minister."  Such 
a  minister  undertakes  his  work  with 
pure  intentions  and  abides  in  it  with 
constancy,  even  though  he  may  meet 
with  worldly  discouragements.     Tychi- 


cus was  sent  to  comfort  the  Ephesians 
under  their  grief  for  Paul's  imprison- 
ment, and  to  guard  them  against  any 
discouraging  apprehensions.  Ministers 
are  to  strengthen  new  converts  and 
young  professors  to  constancy  and  per- 
severance in  religion  by  laying  before 
them  the  comforting  and  animating 
motives  of  the  gospel. — Lathrop. 

A  Faithful  Minister. — 1.  It  concerns 
Christians  to  inform  themselves  of  the 
life  and  way  of  eminent  men  in  the 
Church,  and  chiefly  of  those  who  have 
been  sufferers  for  truth,  that  they  may 
be  incited  to  sympathise  with  them,  to 
follow  their  example,  and  bless  the 
Lord  on  their  behalf.  2.  It  is  in  a 
singular  manner  required  of  a  minister 
that  he  be  faithful — diligent  in  his 
work,  sincere  in  his  aims  and  en- 
deavours, neither  adding  nor  paring 
what  God  has  committed  unto  him 
to  speak.  3.  We  should  labour  so 
to  inform  ourselves  of  the  case  and 
carriage  of  others  and  how  it  goes 
with  the  affairs  of  Christ's  kingdom 
elsewhere  as  to  draw  spiritual  edifi- 
cation thence.  4.  To  know  God's 
gracious  providence  towards  His  suffer- 
ing servants,  together  with  their  un- 
daunted courage  under  sufferings  and 
the  use  God  makes  of  their  sufferings 
to  advance  His  truth,  is  sufficient 
ground  of  comfort  and  encouragement 
to  God's  people. — Fergusson. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  23,  24. 

A  Suggestive  Benediction — 

I.  Recognises  the  divine  source  of  all  blessing. — "  From  God  the  Father  and 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  (ver.  23).  All  our  blessings  are  divine,  and  flow  from 
the  inexhaustible  fountain  of  the  divine  beneficence.  "  God  the  Father,"  in  the 
eternal  counsels  of  His  wisdom  and  love,  "  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  who 
through  the  eternal  Spirit  offered  Himself  as  an  atonement  for  human  sin — the 
glorious  Trinity  of  Persons  in  the  Godhead — contribute  from  their  combined 
perfections  the  spiritual  good  that  enriches  every  believing  soul.  "  The  God  of 
Christians,"  says  Pascal,  "  is  not  barely  the  Author  of  geometrical  truths,  or  of 
the  order  of  the  elements — this  is  the  divinity  of  the  heathen ;  nor  barely  the 
providential  Disposer  of  the  lives  and  fortunes  of  men,  so  as  to  crown  His 
worshippers  with  a  happy  series  of  years — this  is  the  portion  of  the  Jews.  But 
the  God  of  Abraham  and  of  Jacob,  the  God  of  Christians,  is  a  God  of  love  and 
of  consolation ;  a  God  who  fills  the  heart  and  the  soul  where  He  resides ;  a  God 

294 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS.         chap.  vi. 


who  gives  them  a  deep  and  inward  feeling  of  their  own  misery  and  of  His  infinite 
mercy,  unites  Himself  to  their  spirit,  replenishes  it  with  humility  and  joy,  with 
affiance  and  love,  and  renders  them  incapable  of  any  end  but  Himself."  The 
religious  character  of  the  Lancashire  people  was  illustrated  by  an  incident  that 
happened  towards  the  close  of  the  cotton  famine.  The  mills  in  one  village  had 
been  stopped  for  months,  and  the  first  waggon -load  of  cotton  that  arrived  seemed 
to  them  like  the  olive  branch  that  told  of  the  abating  waters  of  the  deluge.  The 
waggon  was  met  by  the  women,  who  hysterically  laughed  and  cried  and  hugged 
the  cotton  bales  as  if  they  were  dear  old  friends,  and  then  ended  by  singing  that 
grand  old  hymn,  "  Praise  Gocl,  from  whom  all  blessings  flow." 

II.  Implores  specific  blessings  upon  Christian  brethren. — "  Peace  be  to  the 
brethren,  and  love  with  faith  "  (ver.  23).  Where  there  is  no  love  there  is  no 
peace,  and  peace  and  love  without  faith  are  capricious  and  worthless.  Love  is 
the  strength  of  the  forbearance  and  self-suppression  so  essential  to  the  main- 
tenance of  peace.  As  faith  grows  and  intensifies  it  opens  up  new  channels  in 
which  love  can  flow.  We  are  to  contend  for  the  faith,  not  that  peace  may  be 
disturbed,  but  that  it  may  rest  on  a  firmer  and  more  permanent  basis.  What 
greater  boon  can  we  desiderate  for  our  brethren  than  that  they  may  abound  in 
"  peace  and  love  with  faith  "  ? 

III.  Greets  with  expansive  generosity  all  genuine  lovers  of  Christ. — "  Grace 
be  with  all  them  that  love  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity.  Amen  "  (ver.  24). 
The  overflow  of  divine  grace  submerges  the  barriers  of  sects  and  effaces  the 
distinctions  of  a  selfish  and  pretentious  bigotry.  Sincere  love  to  Christ  opens 
the  heart  to  the  richest  endowments  of  grace,  and  blends  all  hearts  that  glow 
with  a  kindred  affection.  If  we  love  Christ,  we  love  one  another,  we  love  His  work, 
His  word,  and  are  eager  to  obey  Him  in  all  things  He  commands.  We  may  not 
agree  in  a  uniformity  of  creeds,  but  we  reach  a  higher  union  when  our  hearts 
are  mingled  in  the  capacious  alembic  of  a  Christ-like  love.  The  benediction  of 
grace  to  all  who  love  Jesus  is  answered  and  confirmed  by  an  appropriate  Amen. 
"  Amen  "  under  the  law  was  answered  to  the  curses,  but  not  to  the  blessings 
(Deut.  xxvii.  15-26).  Every  particular  curse  must  have  an  "  Amen."  But  in  the 
next  chapter,  where  the  blessings  follow,  there  is  no  "  Amen  "  affixed  to  them 
(Deut.  xxviii.  2-12).  But  it  is  otherwise  in  the  gospel.  To  the  blessings  there 
is  an  "  Amen,"  but  not  to  the  curses.  If  any  man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
(1  Cor.  xvi.  22) — a  fearful  curse;  but  there  is  no  "  Amen"  to  that.  "Grace  be 
with  all  them  that  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity  "  :  there  is  an  "  Amen  " 
to  that. 

Lessons. — 1.  Christianity  is  freighted  with  blessings  for  the  race.  2.  It  has 
special  blessings  for  present  need.  3.  It  points  men  to  God  as  the  true  source  of  all 
blessing. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Ver.  23.  Elements  of  Religious  Com- 
fort.— The  apostle  prays  that,  with 
faith,   there  may  be  peace   and  love. 

I.  Faith  captivates  the  soul  into 
obedience  to  the  gospel  by  giving 
efficacy  to  its  precepts,  examples,  and 
doctrines.  Where  faith  operates,  love 
will  appear,  and  peace  will  follow. 

II.  Love  produces  peace. — 1.  Inward 
peace.     It    extinguishes   malice,  envy, 


hatred,  wrath,  revenge,  every  unfriendly 
passion. 

2.  Social  peace. — Christians  will  be 
careful  not  to  give  offence,  either  by 
real  injuries  or  unnecessary  differences. 
They  will  be  slow  to  take  offence. 

III.  Love  brings  religious  comfort. 
— Love  is  comfortable  in  its  immediate 
feelings  and  in  its  pacific  influence.  It 
brings  comfort   to   the   soul   as   it   is 

295 


chap.  vi.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EPBESIANS. 

i 


an  evidence  of  godly  sincerity.  If  we 
would  enjoy  the  comfort,  we  must  main- 
tain the  comfort  of  religion. — Lathrop. 

Ver.  24.  The  Christian's  Truest  Test 
and  Excellence. — Other  things  may  be 
required  to  complete  the  character  of 
the  Christian ;  but  without  love  to 
Christ  there  can  be  no  Christian  at  all. 
It  is  the  master-spirit  which  must 
animate  and  enliven  the  whole  com- 
bination ;  and  in  whomsoever  this 
spirit  prevails  we  are  entitled  and 
enjoined  to  welcome  that  person  as 
a  disciple. 

I.  Consider  the  love  of  Christ  as  a 
duty  we  owe  to  Himself. — 1.  Bring  to 
your  remembrance  His  personal  excel- 
lences. 2.  Consider  the  great  and 
glorious  object  of  all  He  did  and  endured 
— the  everlasting  happiness  of  human 
souls. 

II.  Consider  the  love  of  Christ  as  a 
principle  which  works  in  ourselves. — 

1.  It  does  not  destroy  natural  affections, 
but  teaches  us  to  fix  them  on  proper 
objects  and  to  give  a  right  direction  to 
their  fullest  energies.  2.  A  due  sense  of 
the  Saviour's  love  makes  us  feel  at  once 
that  He  merits  all  our  best  affections  in 
return.  3.  It  gives  delight  in  meditat- 
ing on  the  precepts  and  promises  .  of 
God's  word.  4.  It  helps  in  all  the 
duties  we  owe  to  our  fellow-creatures. 
5.  It  animates  the  soul  in  the  hour  of 
death  and  the  prospect  of  eternity. — J. 
Brewster. 

Loving  Christ  in  Sincerity. 

I.  On  what  account  Christ  is  en- 
titled to  our  love. — 1.  He  is  a  divine 
person.  2.  He  was  manifest  in  the  flesh. 
In  the  man  Christ  Jesus  appeared  every 
virtuous  quality  which  can  dignify  and 
adorn  human  nature.  3.  His  media- 
torial offices  entitle  Him  to  our  love. 
4.  He  is  an  object  of  our  love  because 
of  His  kindness  to  us. 

II.  An  essential  qualification  of  love 
to  Christ  is  sincerity. — 1.  Our  love  to 
Christ   must    be    real,    not    pretended. 

2.  Must  be  universal.  It  must  respect 
His  whole  character.  3.  Sincere  love  to 
Christ  is  supreme.     It  gives  Him  the 

296 


preference  to  all  earthly  interest  and 
connections.  4.  It  is  persevering.  5.  It 
is  active. 

III.  How  sincere  love  to  Christ  will 
discover  itself. — 1.  It  will  make  us 
careful  to  please  Him.  2.  Will  be  ac- 
companied with  humility.  3.  We  shall 
be  fond  of  imitating  Him.  4.  We  shall 
promote  His  interest  and  oppose  His 
enemies.  5.  We  shall  do  good  to  His 
needy  brethren  and  friends. 

IV.  The  benediction  connected  with 
this  temper. — It  is  called  grace.  It 
comprehends  all  the  blessings  the 
gospel  reveals  and  promises.  1 .  Justi- 
fication before  God.  2.  The  presence  of 
the  divine  Spirit.  3.  Free  access  to 
the  throne  of  grace.  4.  The  gift  of  a 
happy  immortality. — Lathrop. 

Love  to  Christ. — What  is  it  that  con- 
stitutes Christ's  claim  to  love  and  re- 
spect ?  What  is  it  that  is  to  be  loved 
in  Christ  1  Why  are  we  to  hold  Him 
dear?  There  is  but  one  ground  for 
virtuous  affection  in  the  universe,  but 
one  object  worthy  of  cherished  and  en- 
during love  in  heaven  and  in  earth, 
and  that  is — moral  goodness.  My 
principle  applies  to  all  beings,  to  the 
Creator  as  well  as  to  His  creatures. 
The  claim  of  God  to  the  love  of  His 
rational  offspring  rests  on  the  rectitude 
and  benevolence  of  His  will.  It  is  the 
moral  beauty  and  grandeur  of  His 
character  to  which  alone  we  are  bound 
to  pay  homage.  The  only  power  which 
can  and  ought  to  be  loved  is  a  beneficent 
and  righteous  power.  The  ground  of 
love  to  Christ  is,  His  spotless  purity, 
His  moral  perfection,  His  unrivalled 
goodness.  It  is  the  spirit  of  His  re* 
ligion,  which  is  the  Spirit  of  God, 
dwelling  in  Him  without  measure.  Of 
consequence,  to  love  Christ  is  to  love 
the  perfection  of  virtue,  of  righteous- 
ness, of  benevolence  ;  and  the  great 
excellence  of  this  love  is,  that  by 
cherishing  it  we  imbibe,  we  strengthen 
in  our  own  souls  the  most  illustrious 
virtue,  and  through  Jesus  become  like 
God.  I  call  you  to  love  Jesus  that 
you  may  bring  yourselves  into  contact 
and  communion   with   perfect   virtue, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EPHESIANS.         chap.  VI. 


and  may  become  what  you  love.  I 
know  no  sincere,  enduring  good  but  the 
moral  excellence  which  shines  forth  in 
Jesus  Christ. — Charming. 

The  Apostolic  Benediction. 

I.  The  subjects  of  the  benediction. 
— "  All  them  that  love  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  in  sincerity." 

1.  The  object  of  their  love. — "  The 
Lord  Jesus  Christ." 

2.  The  character  of  their  love. — They 
love  in  sincerity.  This  proved  by  the 
effects  it  produces.  (1)  Love  to  God's 
word.  (2)  Prompt  obedience  to  Christ's 
precepts.  (3)  Brotherly  love.  (4)  Zeal 
for  God's  house. 


II.  The  nature  of  the  benediction. — 

1.  The  prayer  embraces  the  communica- 
tion of  divine  grace.  2.  All  Christians 
need  the  grace  of  God.  (1)  In  all  trials 
peculiar  to  the  age  in  which  they 
live.  (2)  In  time  of  temptation  and 
spiritual  darkness.  (3)  In  the  dis- 
charge of  Christian  duties.  (4)  To 
sanctify,  refine,  and  make  them  meet 
for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in 
light. 

Lessons. — 1 .  Imitate  the  catholicity  of 
the  apostle.  2.  Sectarian  bigotry  and 
hostility  should  cease.  3.  How  perilous 
the  state  of  those  who  love  not  Christ. — 
Pulpit  Themes. 


297 


THE 

EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS. 


INTRODUCTION. 

Philippi  and  the  Philippians. — It  was  a  moment  fraught  with  very  far-reaching 
issues  when  at  Alexandria  Troas  St.  Paul  seemed  to  see,  in  a  night -vision,  a  man 
standing  on  the  beach  over  the  head  of  the  ^Egean  Sea  eagerly  calling  for  help, 
as  a  herald  might  summon  a  general  to  the  relief  of  a  hard-pressed  garrison. 

There  may  be  cold  psychological  explanations  of  the  vision  which  leave  little 

scope  for  any  divine  call  to  evangelise  them  of  Macedonia ;  but  the  event  proved 

the  indication  of  the  will  of  God  in  the  visionary  call.     In  the  prompt  and 

undoubting  obedience  of  St.  Paul  and  his  co-workers  our  own  continent  first 

received  the  glad  tidings  of  great  joy.     Gliding  out  of  the  harbour  of  Troas,  their 

little  vessel  ran  before  the  wind  as  far  as  the  island  of  Samothracia,  and  next 

day,  rounding  the  island  of  Thasos,  dropped  anchor  at  Neapolis,  the  port  of 

Philippi.     But  Philippi  itself  is  still  three  leagues  distant,  on  the  other  side  of 

a  mountain  range,  over  which  the  great  highway  between  the  two  continents 

passes.     Following  this  great  road — the  Via  Egnatia — the  colony  founded  by 

Caesar  Augustus,  and  named  Colonia  Augusta  Julia  Philippensis,  was  the  first 

city  reached.     The  place  had  been  recognised  by  Philip  of  Macedon  as  a  gateway 

to  be  watched  and  strongly  guarded,  and  when  St.  Paul  visited  it  he  found  it 

bearing  all  the  marks  of  a  strong  military  centre — a  sort  of  ganglion  in  the  great 

system  of  which  Rome  was  the  brain.     To  remember  this  is  to  receive  light  on 

certain  expressions  in  the  epistle;   for  even  though   "not   many   mighty   are 

called,"  they  may  serve  to  illustrate  a  service  whose  weapons  are  "  not  carnal  but 

spiritual." 

If  we  follow  the  E..V.  in  Acts  xvi.  13 — we  suppose  there  was  a  place  of 
prayer — the  inference  is  that  the  Jews  were  not  numerous  in  Philippi,  and  that 
it  was  only  by  a  knowledge  of  the  ancestral  custom  which  led  them  to  place  their 
oratory  by  the  water-side  that  St.  Paul  discovered  the  obscure  company.  Even 
when  discovered  there  is  no  evidence  of  that  virulent  Judaism  which  so  greatly 

299 


introduction.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    PHILIPPIANS. 

embittered  the  apostle's  life  and  frustrated  his  missionary  endeavours;  and  it 
may  be  that  its  absence  explains  the  cordial  relations  between  the  Philippians 
and  St.  Paul 

Bishop  Lightfoot  notes  the  heterogeneous  character  of  the  first  converts  at 
Philippi.  As  to  race,  an  Asiatic,  a  Greek,  and  a  Roman.  As  to  everyday  life, 
the  first  is  engaged  in  an  important  and  lucrative  branch  of  traffic ;  the  second 
is  employed  to  trade  on  the  credulity  of  the  ignorant ;  the  third  is  an  under- 
official  of  the  government.  As  to  religious  training,  one  represents  the  specula- 
tive mystic  temper  of  Oriental  devotion ;  the  second  a  low  form  of  an  artistic 
and  imaginative  religion ;  whilst  the  third  represents  a  type  of  worship  essentially 
political  in  tone. 

It  is  noteworthy  and  prophetic  that  women  should  be  so  closely  connected  with 
the  introduction  or  the  gospel  to  Europe;  and  this  may  account  for  the  fact 
that  in  Philippi  whole  families  were  gathered  into  the  fold  of  the  Church. 

Thus  humbly  began  the  work  of  the  evangelisation  of  a  new  continent,  amidst 
brutal  bodily  assaults  and  indignities  heaped  upon  its  heralds.  Here  commenced, 
some  ten  years  before  the  date  of  our  epistle,  a  friendship,  unbroken  through 
those  years,  with  Timothy,  a  youth  of  exemplary  ability  and  piety. 

Place  and  time  of  writing  the  epistle. — Though  Caesarea  has  found  favour 
with  some  scholars  as  the  place  from  which  the  epistle  originated,  by  far  the 
greater  number  accept  Rome.  Indeed,  we  may  almost  say  we  are  shut  up  to 
this  by  ancient  and  modern  opinions.  Even  though  we  may  admit  that  the 
subscription  of  the  epistle  in  the  A.V.,  as  in  general,  is  not  worthy  of  any 
special  consideration  as  being  authoritative,  yet  it  agrees  in  this  case  with  the 
preponderant  opinion. 

It  is  the  most  natural  interpretation  of  the  expression  in  iv.  32,  "  they  of 
Caesar's  household,"  which  is  decisive  of  Rome.  The  phrase  in  i.  13,  "  throughout 
the  whole  praetorian  guard  "  (R.V.),  is  not  absolutely  conclusive  for  Rome,  for 
the  word  "  praetorium  "  is  used  of  Herod's  palace  at  Caesarea,  and  "  is  the  stand- 
ing appellation  for  the  palaces  of  the  chief  governors  of  provinces"  (Meyer). 
Still,  as  Lightfoot  argues,  to  apply  it  to  Caesarea  in  this  case  does  not  suit  the 
context. 

As  to  the  time  of  writing,  there  is  nothing  like  the  same  consent  of  opinion. 
But  the  difference  of  opinion  is  limited  to  the  confinement  of  the  apostle  at  Rome 
(on  which  see  Acts  xxviii.  30).  The  discussion  is  as  to  whether  it  was  early  or 
late  in  that  two  years'  captivity  that  the  letter  was  written. 

For  the  later  date  the  arguments  are :  1.  That  it  must  have  taken  some  con- 
siderable time  before  St.  Paul's  religion  could  be  so  widely  known  as  this  letter 
indicates  it  was.  2.  That  Luke  and  Aristarchus  are  not  mentioned  here,  as  in 
Colossians  and  Philemon,  the  inference  being  that  they  had  left  the  apostle. 
3.  That  the  communications  between  Rome  and  Philippi  would  necessitate  a 
considerable  interval  after  St.  Paul's  arrival  in  Rome.  4.  That  the  tone  of  the 
apostle  agrees  better  with  a  prolonged  captivity. 

Amongst  English  scholars,  Ellicott,  Alford,  and  others  favour  the  later  date 
On  the  other  side  are  Lightfoot  and  Beet. 
300 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   PHILIPPIANS.    introduction. 

Occasion  and  contents  of  the  epistle. — Godet  remarks  that,  as  Philemon 
shows  us  the  apostle's  way  of  requesting  a  favour,  Philippians  is  a  specimen  of 
how  he  returned  thanks.  The  Church  which  was  the  "  crown  and  joy  "  of  the 
apostle  had  sent  into  his  captivity  a  token  of  their  loving  remembrance  by  the 
hand  of  Epaphroditus.  The  messenger  had  been  overtaken  by  alarming  illness, 
and  after  hearing  that  his  friends  in  Philippi  were  anxious  about  him,  he  was 
*  despatched  homewards  bearing  the  apostle's  expressions  of  gratitude — not  so 
much  for  the  money  gift  as  the  genuine  attachment  which  prompted  it. 

No  epistle  is  so  truly  a  letter,  of  all  we  have  from  St.  Paul's  pen,  as  this  to  the 
Philippians.  The  arrangement  is  less  formal ;  we  miss  the  chains  of  reasoning  and 
quotation  from  the  Old  Testament.  As  Meyer  says :  "  Not  one  [of  his  epistles]  is 
so  eminently  an  epistle  of  the  feelings,  an  outburst  of  the  moment,  springing  from 
the  deepest  inward  need  of  loving  fellowship  amidst  outward  abandonment  and 
tribulation ;  a  model,  withal,  of  the  union  of  tender  love  and  at  times  an  almost 
elegiac  impress  of  courageous  resignation  in  the  prospect  of  death,  with  high 
apostolic  dignity  and  unbroken  holy  joy,  hope,  and  victory  over  the  world." 
A  brief  synopsis  of  the  letter  may  be  shown  thus  : — 

i.    1 — 11.     Greeting  of,  thanksgiving,  and  prayer  for  the  Philippians. 
12 — 26.     Personal  affairs  of  the  apostle  (so  ii.  19-30). 
i.  27 — ii.  1 — 11.     Exhortation  to  humility  after  the  supreme  Example. 

iii.    1 — 21.     Warning  against  the  vain  work-righteousness  of  Judaism. 
iv.      1 — 9.     Exhortations  to  unity,  to  Christian  joy,  and  Christian  graces. 
10 — 19.     Renewed  thanksgiving  for  the  generosity  shown, 
20 — 23.     Doxology  and  salutations. 


301 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    PHILIPPIANS. 


CHAPTER  I. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Paul  and  Timothy,  the  servants  of  Jesus  Christ. — There  is  no  necessity  for  Paul  to 
mention  his  apostolate,  inasmuch  as  the  Philippians  had  never  even  thought  of  calling  it  in 
question.  "  Paul  an  apostle  and  Timothy  a  servant "  was  a  distinction  too  invidious  for  Paul 
to  make.  There  is  a  fine  aroma  of  courtesy  in  what  is  not  said  as  well  as  in  what  is  said 
here.  Bishops  and  deacons. — "It  is  incredible  that  St.  Paul  should  recognise  only  the 
bishops  and  deacons  (if  '  presbyters '  were  a  different  order  from  '  bishops ').  It  seems 
therefore  to  follow  of  necessity  that  the  '  bishops  '  were  identical  with  the  '  presbyters  ' " 
(Lightfoot). 

Ver.  3.  I  thank  my  God. — The  keynote  of  the  whole  epistle.  As  the  apostle's  strains  of 
praise  had  been  heard  by  the  prisoners  in  the  Philippian  gaol,  so  now  from  another  captivity 
the  Church  hears  a  song  of  sweet  contentment.  "  My  God."  The  personal  appropriation 
and  the  quiet  contentment  of  the  apostle  both  speak  in  this  emphatic  phrase. 

Ver.  4.  Always  in  every  prayer  of  mine  for  you  all. — Notice  the  comprehensive  "always," 
"  every,"  "  all,"  indicating  special  attachment  to  the  Philippians.  With  joy. — The  sum  of 
the  epistle  is,  "  I  rejoice.  .  .  .  Eejoice  ye."  "  He  recalls  to  our  minds  the  runner  who  at  the 
supreme  moment  of  Grecian  history  brought  to  Athens  the  news  of  Marathon.  Worn, 
panting,  exhausted  with  the  effort  to  be  the  herald  of  deliverance,  he  sank  in  death  on  the 
threshold  of  the  first  house  which  he  reached  with  the  tidings  of  victory,  and  sighed  forth 
his  gallant  soul  in  one  great  sob,  almost  in  the  very  same  words  as  those  used  by  the  apostle, 
'  Eejoice  ye  ;  we  rejoice'  "  (Farrar,  after  Lightfoot). 

Ver.  5.  "Fellowship  here  denotes  co-operation  in  the  widest  sense,  their  participation 
with  the  apostle,  whether  in  sympathy  or  in  suffering,  or  in  active  labour,  or  in  any  other 
way.  At  the  same  time,  their  almsgiving  was  a  signal  instance  of  this  co-operation,  and 
seems  to  have  been  foremost  in  the  apostle's  mind"  {Lightfoot).  He  which  hath  begun  a 
good  work  in  you  will  perform  it. — "  The  observation  of  the  ebb  and  flow  of  the  tide  for  so 
many  days  and  months  and  ages  together,  as  it  has  been  observed  by  mankind,  gives  us  a 
full  assurance  that  it  will  ebb  and  flow  again  to-morrow"  {Bishop  Butler).  Another  sort  of 
assurance  comes  in  here.  It  is  an  offence  to  every  worthy  thought  of  God  that  He  should 
begin  and  not  be  able  to  finish  (Isa.  xxvi.  12). 

Ver.  7.  Meet  for  me  to  think  this. — "  To  form  this  opinion."  That  the  apostle  cherished  a 
warm  affection  for  these  Philippians  would  have  been,  if  alone,  a  very  flimsy,  foundation 
for  hopes  so  substantial.  Was  not  Judas  cherished  in  a  warmer  heart  than  Paul's  ?  But 
their  sympathy  and  active  co-operation  made  such  an  opinion  not  a  pious  hope,  but  a 
reasonable  likelihood.  Defence  and  confirmation. — The  "  defence"  (atrokoyla)  is  the  clearing 
away  of  objections — the  preparation  of  the  ground;  the  "confirmation"  is  the  positive 
settlement  on  the  ground  so  prepared.  "  The  two  together  will  thus  comprise  all  modes  of 
preaching  and  extending  the  truth "  (Lightfoot).  Partakers  of  my  grace. — The  grace 
whether  of  preaching  or  of  suffering  for  the  gospel.  See  ver.  29,  where  "  given  "  requires  the 
addition  "as  a  favour."     "You  are  privileged  ...  to  suffer." 

Ver.  8.  God  is  my  record. — As  in  Rom.  i.  9.  When  we  feel  language  too  weak  to  bear  our 
impassioned  feeling,  it  may  be  well  to  remember  the  "  Yea,  yea"  of  the  Master  rather  than 
copy  this  oath.  In  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ. — R.V.  "  in  the  tender  mercies."  This  is  quite  an 
Eastern  form  of  expression.  Among  the  Malays  a  term  of  endearment  is  "my  liver";  we 
choose  the  heart  as  the  seat  of  the  affections.     For  the  figure,  cf.  Gal.  ii.  20. 

Ver.  9.  In  knowledge  and  in  all  judgment. — "  Perfect  knowledge  (as  in  Eph.  i.  17,  iv.  13) 
and  universal  discernment."  "  The  one  deals  with  general  principles,  the  other  is  concerned 
with  practical  applications  "  (Lightfoot). 

Ver.  10.  That  ye  may  approve  things  that  are  excellent. — St.  Paul  would  have  his  dear 
Philippians  to  be  connoisseurs  of  whatever  is  morally  and  spiritually  excellent.  That  ye 
may  be  sincere.—  Bearing  a  close  scrutiny,  in  the  strongest  light,  or  according  to  another 
derivation  of  the  word,  perhaps  more  true  if  less  beautiful,  made  pure  by  sifting.  And  with- 
out offence. — Might  be  either  "  without  stumbling,"  as  Acts  xxiv.  16,  or  "  not  causing  offence. 
Lightfoot  prefers  the  former,  Meyer  the  latter.     Beet  unites  the  two. 

302 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    PHILIPPIANS.         chap.  i. 


Ver.  11.  Fruits  of  righteousness.—"  A  harvest  of  righteousness."  Which  are  through  Jesus 
Christ. — A  more  precise  definition  of  "  fruits." 

Ver.  12.  The  things  which  happened  unto  me. — Precisely  the  same  phrase  as  in  Eph.  vi.  21 ; 
is  translated  "  my  affairs  "  (so  Col.  iv.  7).  These  circumstances  were  such  as  naturally  would 
fill  the  friends  of  the  apostle  with  concern  for  him  personally.  As  to  the  effect  on  the 
spread  of  the  gospel — ever  St.  Paul's  chief  solicitude — they  had  been  apprehensive.  Rather 
unto  the  furtherance. — Not  to  the  hindrance,  as  to  your  fears  seemed  likely.  It  is  the  same 
triumphant  note  which  rises,  in  a  later  imprisonment,  above  personal  indignity  and  suffering. 
"  I  may  be  bound,  the  message  I  bear  is  at  liberty  "  (2  Tim.  ii.  9). 

Ver.  13.  Bonds  in  Christ  are  manifest. — R.V.  "  bonds  became  manifest  in  Christ."  It  is 
not  simply  as  a  private  prisoner  that  he  is  bound  ;  it  is  matter  of  public  note  that  he  is  bound 
for  Christ's  sake.  In  all  the  palace.— R.V.  text,  "  throughout  the  whole  praetorian  guard." 
R.V.  margin,  "in  the  whole  praetorium."  "  The  best  supported  meaning  of  'praetorium'  is — 
the  soldiers  composing  the  imperial  regiments"  {Lightfoot).  "  The  barracks  of  the  imperial 
body-guard  "  to  whose  "colonel"  Paul  was  given  in  charge  on  his  arrival  in  Rome  (Acts  xxviii. 
16)  "  {Meyer).  "  As  the  soldiers  would  relieve  guard  in  constant  succession,  the  praetorians  one 
by  one  were  brought  into  communication  with  '  the  prisoner  of  Jesus  Christ ' "  {Lightfoot'). 
In  all  other  places. — The  italicised  places  of  the  A.V.  text  must  be  dropped  ;  the  margin  is 
better.     A  loose  way  of  saying  "  to  others  besides  the  military." 

Ver.  14.  Confident  by  my  bonds. — The  bonds  might  have  been  thought  to  be  sufficient  to 
intimidate  the  brethren ;  but  the  policy  of  stamping  out  has  oftener  resulted  in  spreading 
the  gospel. 

Ver.  15.  Some  indeed  preach  Christ  even  of  envy  and  strife. — Not  some  of  the  brethren 
emboldened  by  the  apostle's  chain,  perhaps,  although  one  sees  no  reason  why  the  Judaisers 
would  not,  with  redoubled  energy,  spread  their  views  when  he  whom  they  so  violently 
opposed  was  for  the  time  being  silenced,  as  they  imagined.  "  Of  envy."  Lightfoot  refers  to 
the  saying  of  the  comic  poet  Philemon  with  its  play  on  the  word,  "  Thou  teachest  me  many 
things  ungrudgingly  because  of  a  grudge  "  (on  account  of  envy).  The  glaring  inconsistency 
of  preaching  a  gospel  of  goodwill  from  such  a  motive  as  envy,  the  worst  form  of  ill-will, 
must  be  closely  observed  here. 

Vers.  16,  17. — These  verses  are  transposed  in  R.V. ;  the  order  of  the  A.V.  is  against  decisive 
testimony  {Meyer). 

Ver.  16.  To  add  affliction  to  my  bonds. — "  To  make  my  chains  gall  me,"  Lightfoot  strikingly 
translates.  One  can  almost  imagine  St.  Paul  starting  up,  and  straining  at  the  wrist  of  the 
soldier  to  whom  he  was  chained,  as  he  hears  of  the  intrigues  of  a  party  whose  one  object  it 
was  to  impose  an  effete  ritual  on  men  called  to  liberty  in  Christ. 

Ver.  17.  For  the  defence  of  the  gospel. — Many  a  man  in  the  apostle's  place  would  have 
found  himself  absorbed  by  the  question  how  best  to  make  a  good  defence  of  himself. 

Ver.  18.  Whether  in  pretence,  or  in  truth,  Christ  is  preached. — St.  Paul  evidently  thinks 
the  imperfect  knowledge  of  Christ  preferable  to  heathen  ignorance  of  Him.  The  truth  is 
mighty  enough  to  take  care  of  itself,  without  any  hand  that  shakes  with  nervous  apprehen- 
sion to  steady  its  ark.  St.  Paul  is  beforehand  with  our  method  of  keeping  a  subject  before 
the  notice  of  the  public.  The  policy  of  "  never  mentioning  "  was  what  St.  Paul  regarded  as 
fatal. 

Ver.  19.  This  shall  turn  to  my  salvation. — "  Salvation  in  the  highest  sense.  These  trials 
will  develop  the  spiritual  life  in  the  apostle,  will  be  a  pathway  to  the  glories  of  heaven ' 
{Lightfoot).  Meyer  prefers  to  render  "  will  be  salutary  for  me,  without  any  more  precise 
modal  definition."  Supply  of  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ. — "  The  Spirit  of  Jesus  is  both  the  giver 
and  the  gift  "  {Lightfoot). 

Ver.  20.  Earnest  expectation. — Same  word  again  in  Rom.  viii.  19  (not  again  in  New  Testa- 
ment). "  It  is  the  waiting  expectation  that  continues  on  the  strain  till  the  goal  is  attained  " 
{Meyer).  The  intensive  in  the  compound  word  implies  abstraction  from  other  things  through 
intentness  on  one.  Put  to  shame. — As  a  man  might  be  who  felt  his  cause  not  worth  pleading, 
or  as  one  overawed  by  an  august  presence.  With  all  boldness,  i.e.  of  speech.  A  man  over- 
powered by  shame  loses  the  power  of  speech  (see  Matt.  xxii.  12). 

Ver.  21.  For  to  me  to  live  is  Christ. — The  word  of  emphasis  is  to  me,  whatever  it  may  be  to 
others.  If  this  be  not  the  finest  specimen  of  a  surrendered  soul,  one  may  seek  long  for  that 
which  excels  it.  That  life  should  be  intolerable,  nay  inconceivable,  except  as  the  ego  merges 
into  Christ's  ;  this  is  the  sanest  and  most  blessed  unio  mystica  (Gal.  ii.  20).  And  to  die  is 
gain. — It  is  the  purely  personal  view — ''  to  me  " — which  the  apostle  has  before  him.  "  The 
spirit  that  denies  "  says,  that  when  all  that  a  man  hath  has  been  bartered  for  life,  he  will 
think  himself  gainer.  "  More  life  and  fuller"  is  what  St.  Paul  sees  through  the  sombre  corridor. 
It  is  not  simply  the  oblivious  repose  where  "  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling  "  that  he  yearns 
for.    Nor  is  it  a  philosophical  Nirvana. 

"  For  who  to  dumb  forgetfulness  a  prey 
This  pleasing,  anxious  being  e'er  resigned  ?  " 

303 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   PHILIPPIANS. 


Ver.  22.  But  if  I  live  in  the  flesh,  this  isthe  fruit  of  my  labour  (see  K.V.).— "  The  grammar 
of  the  passage  reflects  the  conflict  of  feeling  in  the  apostle's  mind.  He  is  tossed  to  and  fro 
between  the  desire  to  labour  for  Christ  in  life  and  the  desire  to  be  united  with  Christ  by 
death.     The  abrupt  and  disjointed  sentences  express  this  hesitation  "  (IAghtfoof).    • 

Ver.  23.  I  am  in  a  strait  betwixt  two. — I  am  laid  hold  of  by  two  forces  drawing  in  opposite 
directions.  "  Desire  "  draws  me  away  from  earth ;  your  "  necessity  "  would  keep  me  in  it.  As  in 
the  old  mythology  everything  bowed  before  Necessity  (avayicr}),  so  here  the  apostle's  desire 
is  held  in  check  by  the  needs  of  his  converts.  To  depart. — As  a  ship  weighs  anchor  and 
glides  out  with  set  sails,  or  as  a  tent  is  struck  by  the  Arabs  as  they  noiselessly  steal  away. 
To  be  with  Christ. — St.  Paul  regards  the  soul,  whilst  in  the  body,  as  a  "  settler  "  in  a  land  of 
which  he  is  not  a  native,  an  "  emigrant  "  from  other  shores.  But  he  would  rather  emigrate  from 
the  land  of  his  sojourn  and  settle  with  the  Lord  (2  Cor.  v.  6,  8).  "  We  come  from  God  who  is 
our  home."  "  As  soon  as  I  shall  have  taken  the  poison  I  shall  stay  no  longer  with  you,  but 
shall  part  from  hence,  and  go  to  enjoy  the  felicity  of  the  blessed  "  (Socrates  to  Crito).  Which 
is  far  better. — R.V.  "  very  far."  How  far  from  uncertainty  is  the  eager  estimate  of  the  life 
with  Christ !  It  is  one  thing  to  extol  the  superiority  of  life  away  from  the  flesh  in  a 
Christian  hymn,  whilst  health  is  robust ;  it  is  quite  a  different  matter  to  covet  it  with  the 
sword  of  martyrdom  hanging  over  one's  head. 

Ver.  25.  I  know  that  I  shall  abide. — Not  a  prophetic  inspiration,  but  a  personal  conviction 
(Acts  xx.  25). 

Ver.  27.  Your  conversation. — R.V.  "manner  of  life."  Margin,  "behave  as  citizens." 
Perform  your  duties  as  citizens.  St.  Paul  in  Philippi,  by  the  assertion  of  his  Roman  citizen- 
ship, had  brought  the  prsetors  to  their  knees  (Acts  xvi.  37,  38),  and  is  addressing  men  who 
could  fully  appreciate  the  honour  of  the  jus  Italicum  conferred  by  Cnesar  Augustus  on  their 
city.  He  would  have  them  be  mindful  of  their  place  in  the  kingdom  which  "  cometh  not 
with  observation."  Whether  I  come  and  see  you,  or  else  be  absent,  I  may  hear. — The  question 
arises  whether  St.  Paul  meant  to  say  if  he  visited  them,  they  themselves  would  inform  him 
of  the  condition  of  the  Church  ;  or  whether  he  meant  he  would  see  for  himself  if  he  went, 
and  if  not  at  least  he  would  hear.  As  he  is  actually  distant,  the  idea  of  hearing  is  upper- 
most, and  so  we  have  "  I  may  hear"  where  we  might  have  expected  "  I  shall  learn." 

Ver.  28.  In  nothing  terrified. — The  phrase  is  a  continuation  of  the  idea  of  the  amphitheatre 
in  ver.  27  ("  striving  together  ").  We  must,  it  seems,  recognise  a  double  metaphor — behav- 
ing in  the  arena,  before  antagonists  and  spectators,  like  a  horse  that  takes  fright  and  bolts. 
The  warning  against  such  unworthy  conduct  might  be  rendered — 

"  In  the  world's  broad  field  of  battle, 
In  the  bivouac  of  life, 
Be  not  like  dumb  driven  cattle,  i , 
Be  a  hero  in  the  strife." 

Which  is  to  them  an  evident  token  of  perdition. — When  once  they  have  discovered  that  all 
their  artifices  have  not  the  least  power  to  alarm  you,  will  not  this  be  a  clear  indication  that 
they  fight  on  behalf  of  a  failing  cause  1  But  to  you  of  salvation,  and  that  of  God. — The 
Christian  gladiator  does  not  anxiously  await  the  signal  of  life  or  death  from  the  fickle 
crowd.  The  great  President  of  the  contest  Himself  has  given  him  a  sure  token  of  deliver- 
ance (IAghtfoot). 

Ver.  29.  It  is  given  in  the  behalf  of  Christ. — God  has  granted  you  the  high  privilege  of 
suffering  for  Christ ;  this  is  the  surest  sign  that  He  looks  upon  you  with  favour  (Ibid.).  The 
veterans  in  Philippi  would  understand  well  enough  that  a  position  involving  personal  danger 
might  be  a  mark  of  favour  from  the  prefect  to  the  private  soldier. 

MAIN   HOMILETICS   OF   THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1,  2. 

Christian  Greeting — 

I.  Addressed  to  a  fully  organised  Church. — "  To  all  the  saints  in  Christ  Jesus 
which  are  at  Philippi,  with  the  bishops  and  deacons"  (ver.  1).  Christianity, 
which  began  with  the  quiet  meetings  in  the  humble  Jewish  proseucha,  or  oratory, 
by  the  river-side,  had  so  far  spread  in  Philippi  as  to  settle  down  into  a  stable  and 
permanent  Church  organisation.  This  is  the  first  instance  in  which  bishops  and 
deacons  are  mentioned,  and  specially  addressed  in  the  apostolic  salutation.  The 
former  are  sometimes  called  elders,  presbyters,  rulers,  or  presidents,  and  were 
empowered  to  take  the  oversight  of  the  whole  Church,  to  instruct,  exhort,  and 
rule  the  members  ;  the  latter  were  chosen  to  take  care  of  the  poor,  and  to 
manage  the  finances  of  the  Church.     The  bishops  attended  to  the  internal,  the 

304 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    PHILIPPIANS.  chap.  I. 


deacons  to  the  external  affairs  of  the  Christian  community.  The  title  presbyter 
implied  the  rank,  the  bishop  the  duties  of  the  office.  As  the  apostles  by  their 
frequent  absence  were  unable  to  take  the  personal  oversight  of  the  Churches  they 
founded,  they  appointed  officeis  in  each  Church.  As  the  Churches  multiplied, 
and  the  Church-life  developed,  the  organisation  became  more  compact  and  complete. 
It  is  noticeable  in  this  instance  that  the  apostle  addresses  the  whole  Church 
more  than  its  presiding  ministers.  It  should  be  ever  remembered  that  the 
minister  exists  for  the  Church,  not  the  Church  for  the  minister.  The  clergy  are 
not  the  Church,  but,  under  God,  the  servants  and  religious  guides  of  the  people. 
The  Christian  Church  is  the  glory  and  stability  of  a  nation.     When  at  Brussels 

Lord  Chesterfield  was  invited  by  Voltaire  to  sup  with  him  and  Madame  C . 

The  conversation  happening  to  turn  upon  the  affairs  of  England,  "  I  think,  my 

lord,"  said  Madame  C ,  "  that  the  Parliament  of  England  consists  of  five  or 

six  hundred  of  the  best-informed  men  of  the  kingdom  V  "  True,  ma  dame,  they 
are  generally  supposed  to  be  so."  "  What,  then,  can  be  the  reason  they  tolerate 
so  great  an  absurdity  as  the  Christian  religion  1 "  "I  suppose,  madame,"  replied 
his  lordship,  "  it  is  because  they  have  not  been  able  to  substitute  anything  better 
in  its  stead ;  when  they  can,  I  do  not  doubt  but  in  their  wisdom  they  will  readily 
adopt  it." 

II.  Valued  as  emanating  from  distinguished  Christian  pioneers. — "  Paul  and 
Timothy,  the  servants  of  Jesus  Christ  "  (ver.  1).  The  significance  and  worth  of  a 
salutation  depend  upon  the  character  and  reputation  of  those  from  whom  it  comes. 
Paul  was  honoured  by  the  Philippians  as  their  father  in  the  gospel,  and  as  one 
who  had  won  a  high  distinction  by  his  conspicuous  abilities  and  labours  in  other 
spheres ;  and  Timothy  was  well  known  to  them  as  a  devoted  minister  and  fellow- 
helper  of  the  apostle.  Words  coming  from  such  a  source  would  be  gratefully 
welcomed  and  fondly  cherished.  Paul  does  not  give  prominence  to  his  apostle- 
ship,  as  in  the  inscriptions  to  other  epistles.  The  Philippians  had  already 
sufficient  proof  of  his  apostolic  authority  and  power.  Paul  and  his  colleagues 
were  reverenced  as  "the  servants  of  Jesus  Christ."  They  acknowledged 
subjection,  not  to  man,  but  to  Christ ;  they  lived  to  advance  His  interests  and 
honour,  and  found  their  highest  joy  in  His  service,  though  attended  with  haid 
toil,  unreasoning  persecution,  and'unparalleled  suffering.  The  Baptist  Missionary 
Society  adopted  for  its  motto  a  device  found  upon  an  ancient  medal  representing 
a  bullock  standing  between  a  plough  and  an  altar,  with  the  inscription,  "  Ready 
for  either,  for  toil  or  for  sacrifice."  The  service  of  Christ  is  a  life  of  self-sacrifice ; 
but  that  is  the  pathway  of  duty,  of  blessing,  of  reward,  of  glory. 

III.  Invokes  the  bestowment  of  great  blessings. — "  Grace  be  unto  you,  and 
peace "  (ver.  2).  Grace  and  peace  are  divine  gifts,  proceeding  from  "  God  the 
Father,"  as  the  original  and  active  Source  of  all  blessings,  and  from  "  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ "  who  is  now  exalted  to  the  right  hand  of  the  divine  majesty  to 
bestow  those  blessings  upon  His  people.  Grace,  the  unmerited  favour  of  God, 
is  the  exhaustless  fountain  of  all  other  blessings,  and  includes  the  ever-flowing 
stream  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  influences ;  peace,  the  result  of  grace,  is  the  tran- 
quillity and  joy  of  heart  realised  on  reconciliation  with  God.  The  very  form  of 
this  salutation  implies  the  union  of  Jew,  Greek,  and  Gentile.  The  Greek  saluta- 
tion was  "  joy,"  akin  to  the  word  for  grace.  The  Roman  was  "health,"  the  inter- 
mediate term  between  grace  and  peace.  The  Hebrew  was  "  peace,"  including  both 
temporal  and  spiritual  prosperity.  The  great  mission  of  the  gospel  is  to  spread 
peace  on  earth,  peace  with  men,  following  on  peace  with  God.  The  believer 
enjoys  peace  even  in  the  midst  of  trial  and  suffering.  One  of  the  martyrs, 
exposed  to  public  derision  in  an  iron  cage,  is  reported  to  have  said  to  a  bystander, 
who  expressed  surprise  at  the  cheerfulness  he  manifested,  "  You  can  see  these 
bars,  but  you  cannot  hear  the  music  in  my  conscience." 

x  305 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    PHILIPPIANS. 


Lessons. — 1.  Religion  teaches  the  truest  courtesy.  2.  The  unselfish  heart  wishes 
well  to  all.  3.  That  greeting  is  the  most  genuine  that  recognises  the  claims  of 
God. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers.  1,2.  The  Apostolic  Greeting. —  grades, — Lydia,   the     oriental    trader, 

1.  Unity  and  concord  amongst  ministers  the  Grecian  female  slave  and  sooth- 
in  giving  joint  testimony  to  the  same  sayer,  the  Roman  keeper  of  the  prison, 
truths  add  weight  to  what  they  preach.  Christ  has  demolished  all  barriers  to 
Preachers  are  in  a  special  manner  the  the  exercise  of  divine  mercy, 
servants  of  Christ  as  being  wholly  and  III.  The  duty  and  privilege  of 
perpetually  dedicated   to  His   service.  Christian  parents  to  consecrate  their 

2.  As  to  make  a  man  internally  and  children  and  home  to  Christ  (Acts  xvi. 
spiritually  holy  it  is  necessary  he  be       15,  33,  34,  40). 

in  Christ  by  faith,  so  to  make   him  IV.  Civic  distinctions  subordinated 

externally  holy  requires  a  visible  and  to  Christ  will  further  the  gospel  and 

external  union  with  Christ  in  profess-  adorn    the    Christian    name. — Paul's 

ing  truths   relating  to   Him.     3.  The  Roman  citizenship  gained  his  freedom 

dignity  of  a  minister  or  of  any  Church  and  silenced   his  enemies.     His  chain 

officer  does  not  exempt  him  from  the  connects   the    history   of    Rome    and 

necessity   of    being   taught,    exhorted,  Philippi.      The   Christian's   spirit  can 

reproved,    and    comforted.     4.    God's  defy  the  inner  prison  to  suppress  its 

grace  is  the  fountain  from  which  peace  praise  or  prayer  (Acts  xvi.  25). 
with    God,   with   our   own  conscience, 

and  all  sanctified  prosperity  and  peace  Ver.    2.    God    our    Father. — Christ 

among  ourselves  do  flow.     In  seeking  aimed  at  raising  men  from  the  bondage 

things  from  God  we  look  to  Him,  not  of  mere  servants  into  the  freedom  of 

as  standing  disaffected  to  us  and  at  a  sons.     He  taught  that  God  our  Father 

distance,  but  as  our  Father. — Eergusson.  was  henceforth  to  be — 

I.  The   sole    Model    of  perfection. 

Ver.    1.    The  Commencement   of  the  (Matt.  vi.  48). 

Gospel  at  Philippi.  II.     The    sole  Rewarder  of  alms- 

I.  To  secure  the  widest  diffusion  of  giving  (Matt.  vi.  4). 

the  gospel  great  centres  should  be  the  III.   The    sole    Hearer   of  prayer 

first  places  chosen  for  the  concentra-  (Matt.  vi.  6). 

tion  of  its  forces.  IV.  The  sole  Observer  of  fastings 

II.  The  gospel  of  universal  adapta-  (Matt.  vi.  18). 

tion  has  a  world-wide  mission. — The  V.  The  sole  Provider  of  daily 
first  three  converts  embraced  different  wants  (Matt.  vi.  26-33).  —  Lay 
nationalities,        employments,       social      Preacher. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  3—8. 

Eulogy  of  Christian  Excellence — 

I.  Prompted  by  pleasant  memories  of  faithful  co-operation  in  Christian 
work. — "  I  thank  my  God  upon  every  remembrance  of  you,  .  .  .  for  your  fellowship 
in  the  gospel  from  the  first  day  until  now,  .  .  .  inasmuch  as  both  in  my  bonds,  and 
in  the  defence  and  confirmation  of  the  gospel,  ye  all  are  partakers  of  my  grace  " 
(vers.  3,  5,  7).  The  apostle  remembers  with  joy  the  way  in  which  the  Philippians 
first  received  the  gospel,  the  effect  it  produced  upon  their  lives,  the  eagerness 
with  which  they  entered  into  his  plans  for  its  wider  propagation,  the  liberality, 
though  not  themselves  a  rich  people,  they  showed  to  their  needy  brethren  in 
other  Churches,  the  affectionate  attachment  they  displayed  towards  himself,  the 

306 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    PHILIPPIANS.         chap.  i. 


help  they  afforded  him  when  in  imprisonment,  and  the  many  ways  in  which 
they  cheerfully  co-operated  with  him  in  the  defence  and  establishment  of  the 
truth.  They  had  laboured,  suffered,  triumphed,  and  rejoiced  together.  The 
apostle's  eulogy  of  their  character  was  not  flattery,  but  sober  and  just  commenda- 
tion of  tried  and  sterling  excellencies.  Our  happiest  memories — memories  that 
become  more  vivid  as  life  advances — are  of  those  days  in  which  we  laboured 
most  earnestly  in  the  service  of  God. 

II.  Springs  from  a  loving  appreciation  and  tender  Christian  solicitude. — 
"  Even  as  it  is  meet  for  me  to  think  thus  of  you  all,  because  I  have  you  in  my 
heart.  .  .  .  For  God  is  my  record,  how  greatly  I  long  after  you  all  in  the  bowels  of 
Jesus  Christ "  (vers.  7,  8).  There  was  something  about  the  Philippians  that 
captivated  the  heart  of  the  apostle.  He  loved  them  because  they  loved  his 
Master,  and  because  they  sought  to  spread  the  gospel  he  preached.  Love  begets 
love,  and  there  is  no  power  in  uniting  hearts  like  the  love  of  Christ.  The  love  of 
the  apostle  was  manifested  in  a  yearning  desire  for  their  advancement  in  personal 
godliness.  "  All  real  spiritual  love,"  says  Alford,  "  is  but  a  portion  of  Christ's 
love  which  yearns  in  all  who  are  united  to  Him."  Christian  love  is  not  mere 
self-indulgence  of  a  pleasant  feeling ;  its  unselfishness  is  evident  in  seeking  to 
advance  the  highest  spiritual  interests  of  the  person  loved.  It  is  something  more- 
than  a  refined  and  noble  sentiment.  The  finest  feeling  may  be  very  superficial. 
Some  friends  were  drinking  tea  one  evening  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Mackenzie,  the 
author  of  The  Man  of  Feeling,  and  waited  for  some  time  for  his  arrival.  At 
length  he  came  in  heated  and  excited,  and  exclaimed,  "  What  a  glorious  evening 
I  have  had  ! "  They  thought  he  spoke  of  the  weather,  which  was  singularly 
beautiful ;  but  he  went  on  to  detail  the  intense  enjoyment  he  had  had  in 
witnessing  a  cock-fight.  Mrs.  Mackenzie  listened  some  time  in  silence;  then, 
looking  up  in  his  face,  she  remarked  in  her  gentle  voice,  "Oh,  Harry,  Harry, 
your  feeling  is  all  on  paper  ! " 

III.  Strengthened  by  the  assurance  of  increasing  Christian  devotion. — 
"Being  confident  of  this  very  thing,  that  He  which  hath  begun  a  good  work  in 
you  will  perform  it  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ "  (ver.  6).  Even  man,  fickle  as 
he  is,  does  not  begin  work  at  random  and  without  purpose ;  some  time  or  other 
he  hopes  to  finish  it.  But  God,  who  begins  the  work  of  the  new  spiritual  creation 
in  the  soul,  is  constantly  striving  to  finish  it,  until  it  shall  be  presented  perfect 
at  the  day  of  Christ.  The  apostle  had  no  doubt  about  the  divine  working,  and 
he  rejoiced  in  the  evidence  he  had  that  his  converts  were  increasing  in  spiritual 
fervour  and  devotion.  Faithfulness  to  God  strengthens  fidelity  in  every  duty  of 
life.  On  board  the  flag-ship  of  a  celebrated  commander  a  complaint  was  made 
by  the  captain  against  a  number  of  the  crew  for  disturbing  the  ship's  company 
by  frequent  noises.  The  admiral  ordered  an  inquiry  to  be  made.  The  accusa- 
tion was  that  these  men  were  Methodists,  and  that  when  their  watch  was  below 
they  were  in  the  constant  habit  of  reading  the  Bible  to  each  other  aloud,  of 
frequently  joining  in  social  prayer  and  singing  of  psalms  and  hymns.  After  the 
statement  had  been  proved,  the  admiral  asked,  "What  is  the  general  conduct  of 
these  men  on  deck — orderly  or  disobedient,  cleanly  or  the  contrary  1 "  "  Always 
orderly,  obedient,  and  cleanly,"  was  the  reply  "  When  the  watch  is  called,  do 
they  linger,  or  are  they  ready  1 "  "  Always  ready  at  the  first  call."  "  You  have 
seen  these  men  in  battle,  sir ;  do  they  stand  to  their  guns  or  shrink  1 "  "  They 
are  the  most  intrepid  men  in  the  ship,  my  lord,  and  will  die  at  their  post." 
"Let  them  alone,  then,"  was  the  decisive  answer  of  this  magnanimous  com- 
mander; "  if  Methodists  are  such  men,  I  wish  that  all  my  crew  were  Methodists." 

IV.  Expressed  in  thanksgiving  and  joyous  prayer. — "  I  thank  my  God  .  .  . 
always  in  every  prayer  of  mine  for  you  all,  making  request  with  joy  "  (vers.  3,  4). 
Joy  is  the  characteristic  feature  in  this  epistle,  as  love  is  in  that  to  the  Ephesians. 

307 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   PHILIPPIANS. 


Love  and  joy  are  the  two  firstfruits  of  the  Spirit.  Joy  gives  especial  animation 
to  prayers.  It  marked  the  apostle's  high  opinion  of  them,  that  there  was  almost 
everything  in  them  to  give  him  joy,  and  almost  nothing  to  give  him  pain 
(Fausset).  The  labour  of  prayer  is  sure,  if  persisted  in,  to  merge  into  the  joy  of 
prayer.  Prayer  is  a  blessing  to  others  as  well  as  to  ourselves.  The  father  of 
Sir  Philip  Sydney  enjoined  upon  his  son,  when  he  went  to  school,  never  to 
neglect  thoughtful  prayer.  It  was  golden  advice,  and  doubtless  his  faithful 
obedience  to  the  precept  helped  to  make  Philip  Sydney  the  peerless  flower  of 
knighthood,  and  the  stainless  man  that  he  was — a  man  for  whom,  months  after 
his  death,  every  gentleman  in  England  wore  mourning. 

Lessons. — 1.  Christian  excellence  is  a  reflection  of  the  character  oj  Christ. 
2.  Christian  excellence  is  acquired  by  praying  and  working.  3.  Genuine  Christianity 
is  its  own  best  eulogy. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 


Ver.  3.  Happy  Memories. 

I.  Those  that  are  prompted  by  the 
Spirit  of  God. 

II.  Those  that  recall  the  past  joy  of 
harvest. 

III.  Those  that  still  link  us  in 
association  with  distant  but  kindred 
spirits. 

IV.  Those  that  evoke  perennial 
gratitude  to  God. 

V.  Those  that  enrich  our  own  moral 
worth. — Lay  Preacher. 

Vers.  4,  5.  Fellowship  in  the  Gospel. 

I.  Christian  ministers  have  a  claim 
to  maintenance  from  the  people. 

II.  Fellowship  is  making  another  a 
fellow-partaker  of  what  belongs  to  us. 

III.  The  apostle  Paul  while  claim- 
ing his  privilege  was  cautious  in  using 
it. 

IV.  The  voluntary  system  has  ad- 
vantages, but  greater  disadvantages. — 
Archbishop  Whately. 

Yer.  4.  "  Making  request  with  joy." 
Pure  Joy — 

I.  Springs  from  divine  communica- 
tions. 

II.  Succeeds  a  previous  sorrow. 

III.  Is  superior  to  human  surround- 
ings. 

IV.  Is  sustained  by  answered  prayer. 
: — Lay  Preacher. 

Ver.  5.  True  Gospel  Fellowship. 
I.  Lives  which  adorn  it. 
II.  Hearts  which  beat  for  it. 

308 


III.  Lips  which  testify  for  it. 

IV.  Hands  which  work  for  it. 
V.  Gifts  which  extend  it. — Ibid. 

Ver.  6.  Grounds  of  Confidence  in  the 
Believer's  Salvation. 

I.  That  the  Philippians  persevered 
in  the  midst  of  great  difficulties,  op- 
position, and  persecution. 

II.  That  their  persevering  fellow- 
ship in  the  gospel  had  been  charac- 
terised by  great  purity  and  consistency 
of  Christian  life. 

III.  That  they  gave  evidences  of 
zeal  for  the  propagation  of  religion 
and  of  liberality  in  contributing  of 
their  worldly  substance  to  this  end. 

Lessons. — 1.  This  doctrine  affords 
comfort  and  hope  to  struggling  Chris- 
tians. 2.  The  grounds  of  assurance 
forbid  presumptuous  confidence  and 
stimulate  to  watchfulness  and  effort. — 
Hmiiletic  Monthly. 

The  Perseverance  of  the  Saints. 

I.  I  shall  adduce  some  of  the  prin- 
cipal arguments  in  support  of  the 
doctrine  of  the  perseverance  of  the 
saints. — 1.  The  decree  of  election. 
2.  The  merit  of  Christ's  sufferings  and 
death.  3.  The  intercession  of  Christ. 
4.  The  promises  of  God.  5.  The  con- 
stitution of  the  covenant  of  grace. 
6.  The  statements  of  Scripture  in  re- 
gard to  the  constant  indwelling  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  in  all  believers. 

II.  I  shall  consider  some  of  the  most 
plausible  objections  which  have  been 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   PHIL1PPIANS.         chap.  I. 


urged  against  this  doctrine. — 1.  That 
some  of  the  most  eminent  saints  have 
fallen  into  very  grievous  sins.  They 
did  not  fall  totally  and  finally.  2.  That 
many  who  were  long  regarded  as  true 
Christians  do  in  point  of  fa^t  finally 
apostatise.  They  never  were  true  Chris- 
tians. 3.  That  there  are  in  Scripture 
many  earnest  exhortations  to  watchful- 
ness, and  many  awful  warnings  against 


apostasy.  God  works  by  means  and 
motives.  4.  That  believers  being  as- 
sured of  their  ultimate  recovery  will 
be  encouraged  to  sin.  The  perse- 
verance of  the  saints  is  perseverance 
in  holiness.  (1)  Has  a  good  work 
begun  in  you?  (2)  If  so,  remember 
that  while  the  perseverance  of  the 
saints  is  promised  as  a  privilege,  it  is 
also  enjoined  as  a  duty. — G.  Brooks. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  9—11. 

A  Prayer  for  Christian  Love — 

I.  That  it  may  be  regulated  by  knowledge  and  discretion. — "And  this  I 
pray,  that  your  love  may  abound  ...  in  knowledge  and  in  all  judgment  "  (ver.  9). 

1.  So  as  to  test  what  is  best.  —  "  That  ye  may  approve  things  that  are  excellent" 
(ver.  10) — test  things  that  differ.  Two  faculties  of  the  mind  are  to  be  brought 
into  exercise — knowledge,  the  acquisitive  faculty ;  and  judgment,  the  perceptive 
faculty.  Love  is  not  a  wild,  ignorant  enthusiasm,  but  the  warm  affection  of 
a  heart,  guided  by  extensive  and  accurate  knowledge,  and  by  a  clear,  spiritual 
perception.     From  a  number  of  good  things  we  select  and  utilise  the  best. 

2.  So  as  to  maintain  a  blameless  life. — "  That  ye  may  be  sincere  and  without 
offence  till  the  day  of  Christ  "  (ver.  10).  Be  so  transparent  in  heart  and  life  as 
neither  to  give  nor  take  offence,  and  when  examined  in  the  light  of  the  day  of 
Christ  to  be  adjudged  blameless.  To  live  a  useful  and  holy  life  we  must  both  think 
and  feel  aright.  Love  wi  1  ever  prompt  us  to  the  holiest  conduct  and  to  the  best 
work.  "  I  once  asked  a  distinguished  artist,"  said  Boree,  "  what  place  he  gave 
to  labour  in  art.  '  Labour  is  the  beginning,  the  middle,  and  the  end  of  art,' 
was  the  answer.  I  turned  to  another  and  inquired,  l  What  do  you  consider  as 
the  great  force  in  art  ? '  *  Love,'  was  the  reply.  In  these  two  answers  I  found 
but  one  truth." 

II.  That  it  may  stimulate  the  growth  of  a  high  Christian  character. — 1.  A 
high  Christian  character  is  the  outcome  of  righteous  principles.  "  Being  filled  with 
the  fruits — the  fruit — of  righteousness."  All  Christian  virtues  are  from  the  one 
common  root  of  the  Spirit.  It  is  He  who  plants  them  in  the  heart,  fosters  their 
growth,  brings  them  to  perfection,  and  fills  the  soul  with  them  as  the  trees 
are  laden  with  ripened  fruit.  The  apostle  prays  for  more  love,  because  love 
impels  us  to  act  righteously  in  all  things,  even  in  the  minor  affairs  of  life.  "  Just 
as  the  quality  of  life,"  says  Maclaren,  "  may  be  as  perfect  in  the  minutest 
animalcuke,  of  which  there  may  be  millions  in  a  cubic  inch  and  generations  may 
die  in  an  hour — just  as  perfect  in  the  smallest  insect  as  in  behemoth,  biggest 
born  of  earth,  so  righteousness  may  be  as  completely  embodied,  as  perfectly  set 
forth,  as  fully  operative  in  the  tiniest  action  that  I  can  do,  as  in  the  largest  that 
an  immortal  spirit  can  be  set  to  perform.  The  circle  that  is  in  a  gnat's  eye  is  as 
true  a  circle  as  the  one  that  holds  within  its  sweep  all  the  stars,  and  the  sphere 
that  a  dewdrop  makes  is  as  perfect  a  sphere  as  that  of  the  world.  All  duties 
are  the  same  which  are  done  from  the  same  motives ;  all  actions  which  are  not 
so  done  are  all  alike  sins." 

2.  A  high  Christian  character  honours  God. — "  Which  are  by  Jesus  Christ,  unto 
the  glory  and  praise  of  God"  (ver.  11).  The  righteousness  which  exalts  man 
honours  God.  It  is  a  practical  manifestation  of  the  grace  communicated  through 
Jesus  Christ,  and  adorns  the  doctrine  which  is  according  to  godliness.     There  are 

309 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   PHILIPPIANS. 


those  who  live  soberly  and  righteously  in  this  present  world ;  but  what  about 
their  duty  to  God  ?  God  is  not  in  all  their  thoughts.  That  there  has  been  no 
acceptance  into  their  lives  of  Christ — without  which  acceptance  God  is  a  stranger 
to  us  and  we  strangers  to  God,  no  consecration  to  Christ,  no  referring  to  His 
will,  no  love  to  His  person,  and  no  zeal  for  His  glory — of  all  this  they  are 
perfectly  aware.  And  the  thought  of  their  heart  is,  that  the  omission  is  of  no 
great  consequence,  and  so  long  as  they  live  soberly  and  righteously,  it  matters 
little  or  nothing  whether  they  do  or  do  not  live  godly.  The  power  lacking  is 
that  for  which  the  apostle  prays — the  power  of  love,  whole-hearted  love  to 
Christ. 

III.  That  it  may  be  enjoyed  in  ever-increasing  measure. — "  And  this  I  pray, 
that  your  love  may  abound  yet  more  and  more  "  (ver.  9).  Some  time  ago  the 
public  mind  was  filled  with  uneasiness  in  expectation  of  a  high  tide  which  was 
to  visit  our  shores,  and  which  it  was  feared  would  work  great  mischief.  As  the 
time  drew  near,  the  anxiety  increased.  At  length  the  tide  flowed  in,  rose  to  its 
highest  point,  and  then  retired,  bearing  with  it  the  fears  that  had  agitated  the 
public  mind.  Why  this  alarm  ?  Because  all  know  the  unmanageable,  destructive 
power  of  water,  when  it  once  bursts  its  bounds.  Love,  unlike  water,  the  more 
it  abounds  and  overflows  the  greater  the  benefits  it  bestows.  There  is  no  fear 
that  we  shall  love  God  too  much  ;  it  is  our  shame  and  loss  that  we  love  Him  so 
little.     Love  chafes  against  all  limitations. 

Lessons, — 1.  Love  is  the  essence  of  Christianity.  2.  Love  should  govern  every 
part  of  the  Christian  life.     3.  Love  may  be  augmented  by  earnest  prayer. 

GERM  NOTES   ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  9,  10.  The  Apostle 's  Prayer  for  Knowledge,    the    faculty    to    acquire 

Abounding  Love —  information  ;  judgment,  the  faculty  to 

I.  In  its  application  to   the    affec-  discern  its  value  and  use  :  the  one  leads 

tions. — "  That  your  love  may  abound  to  the  sources  of  truth  and  appropriates 

yet  more  and  more  "  (ver.  9).  its  stores,   the  other  selects  and  uses 

1.  Love  to  God. — (1)  Because  of  the  what  is  acquired.  These  two  faculties 
supreme  excellence  of  His  character.  necessary — 1.  Ln  judging  revealed 
(2)  Because  of  His  generous  interpo-  truth.  2.  In  judging  Christian  ex- 
sition  in  the  work  of  human  redemp-  perience.  3.  In  selecting  what  is  best 
tion.     (3)  Because  of  the  benefits  He  in  all  truths. 

is  constantly  bestowing.  III.  In  its  application  to  the  con- 

2.  Love  to  one  another. — Love  pro-  duct. — "  That  ye  may  be  sincere  and 
motes  brotherly  unity — oneness  of  without  offence  till  the  day  of  Christ  " 
feeling,    of    aim,    of    effort.        Unity  (ver.  10). 

promotes  strength.     To  strength  in  its  1.    An     inward      state. —  Sincerity, 

combined  action  victory  is  given.  transparency  of  character. 

3.  Love  to  the  unsaved. — The  law  of  2.  An  outward  walk. — Inoffensive- 
Moses  insisted,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  ness  of  conduct.  Not  designedly 
neighbour "  ;  to  which  the  Pharisees  giving  offence ;  sacrificing  everything 
made  this  addition,  "Thou  shalt  love  but  principle  rather  than  grieve  or 
thy  neighbour,  and  hate  thine  enemy."  mislead  a  weak  brother. 

Christ  interprets  the  law  of  love  in  the  3.  Perseverance  in  an  upright  life. — 

command,  "  I  say  unto  you,  Love  your  "  Till  the  day  of  Christ."     This  is  the 

enemies."  scorner's  day ;  the  good  are  hated  and 

II.  In    its    application   to   the   in-  despised;    but  the    day  of  Christ  is 

tellect. — "  In    knowledge    and    in    all  coming,  and  will  rectify  all  wrongs.    A 

judgment ;  that  ye  may  approve  things  day   of   blessing   and   honour    to   the 

that     are     excellent "    (vers.    9,    10).  good,  of  confusion  and  punishment  to 

310 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   PHILIPPIANS.         chap.  i. 


the  wicked  ;  of  approval  to  the  one,  of 
condemnation  to  the  other. 

Ver.  9.  "  And  this  I  pray."  Definite- 
ness  in  Prayer — 

I.  Implies  a  deep  consciousness  of 
an  intelligently  apprehended  need. 

II.  Becoming,  when  an  intelligent 
being  addresses  tho  divine  Intelli- 
gence. 

III.  Essential  from  the  very  nature 
of  prayer. 

IV.  Affords  a  fixed  ground  from  the 
exercise  of  faith. 

Y.  Emboldens  supplication. 
VI.    Inspires    hope  of   a    definite 
response. — Lay  Preacher. 

Ver.  10.  "  That  ye  may  approve 
things  that  are  excellent."  Spiritual 
Discrimination — 

I.  Demands  the  exercise  of  the  most 
intelligent  and  sensitive  charity. 

II.  Commands  a  wide  field  of  effort 
— the  bad,  the  good,  the  better,  the 
best — in  character,  life,  doctrine, 
practice,  enjoyment,  attainment. 

III.  Implies  the  admission  and  use 
of  a  noble  liberty  of  thought,  judg- 
ment, and  action. 

IV.  Involves  a  weighty  and  far- 
reaching  responsibility. 

V.  Is  essential  to  a  pure  and  blame- 
less life. — Ibid. 

"That  ye  may  be  sincere."  The 
Value  of  Sincerity  in  Youth. 

There  is  a  false  sincerity  which  is  a 
compound  of  ignorance  and  obstinacy. 
The  heathen  may  be  devout  and  sincere 
in  his  idolatry,  but  he  is  a  heathen  still. 
The  Mahometan  may  be  devout  and 
sincere  in  his  worship  of  the  one  God, 
but  he  rejects  the  Christ  who  is  the 
source  and  substance  of  all  true  re- 
ligion. The  sceptic  may  be  devout  and 
earnest  in  his  investigation  of  the  facts 
of  the  universe ;  but  he  ignores  the 
great  moral  truths  on  which  he 
stumbles  in  the  course  of  his  inquiries, 
and  refuses  to  accept  and  be  influenced 
by  them.  There  is  no  craze  of  the 
wildest  fanatic  that  may  not  be  adopted 
as  an  article  of  faith,  if  apparent  sin- 


cerity is  to  be  the  test  of  its  genuine- 
ness. The  fact  is,  a  man  may  be 
sincere,  but  grossly  mistaken.  A 
sincere  heart  is  that  through  which 
the  light  of  God  shines,  unimpeded  by 
duplicity  and  sin,  and  is  a  condition 
of  heart  obtained  only  by  living  much 
in  the  presence  and  the  light  of  God. 

I.  Be  sincere  in  the  search  after 
truth. — Truth  must  be  sought  for  its 
own  sake,  and  is  revealed  only  to  the 
humble  and  sincere  seeker.  It  is  of 
supreme  importance  to  you  to  find  the 
truth.  Truth  has  but  one  direction 
and  one  goal — it  terminates  in  the 
radiant  presence  of  a  living  personality. 
When  you  come  into  the  presence  of 
truth,  you  come  into  the  presence  of 
God.  Truth  has  a  living  embodiment 
in  Christ  Jesus.  If  you  desire  a  solu- 
tion of  the  perplexing  riddles  of  life,  if 
you  would  understand  the  principles  on 
which  God  governs  the  universe,  if  you 
wish  to  dissipate  the  doubts  that 
becloud  and  harass  the  mind,  if  you 
desire  rest  and  peace  of  conscience,  and 
to  obtain  strength  and  inspiration  to 
live  a  happy,  useful,  and  noble  life — 
then  seek  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  ; 
and  if  you  are  really  sincere,  you  shall 
not  seek  in  vain. 

II.  Be  sincere  in  your  social  inter- 
course with  one  another. — 1.  In  your 
friendships.     2.  In  your  promises. 

III.  Be  sincere  in  the  service  of 
God. 

IV.  Be  sincere  in  the  cultivation  of 
your  own  personal  piety. 

Christian  Rectitude — 

I.  Consists  in  internal  sincerity. — 
1.  This  involves  a  concentratedness  of 
heart  upon  one  object.  2.  A  thorough- 
ness of  life's  uniformity  to  that  one  object. 
3.  An  unostentatious  but  manifest 
integrity.  4.  The  completeness  of  that 
manifestation  should  be  proportionate  to 
the  brightness  of  the  testing  light. 

II.  Consists  in  external  blameless- 
ness. — 1.  Without  being  found  guilty 
of  offence.  2.  Without  giving  offence. 
3.    Without  taking  offence. 

III.  Consists  in  a  present  state  of 
life,  with  a  glorious  future  destina- 

311 


chap.  I.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   PHILIPPIANS. 


tion. — "  That    ye     may     be     without  praise  of  God  in  the  scheme  of  redemp- 

offence  till  the  day  of  Christ."     1 .  Then  tion.     2.  In  the  subjects  of  redemption, 

life  shall  be  judged.     2.  Life   shall  be  Lessons. — 1.     This     subject     should 

made   manifest.      3.   Rectitude   of  life  stimulate  our  desires.     2.  Promote  our 

shall  be  approved.     4.  Rectitude  of  life  devotion.     3.  Inspire  us  with  praise. — 

shall  be  rewarded. — Lay  Preacher.  Theological  Sketch  Book. 

Ver.  1 1 .  Fruits  of  Righteousness.  Spiritual  A  ttainment. 

1.  The  nature  of  righteousness. —  I.  Righteousness  of  heart  precedes 
1 .  Sometimes    the    term    refers  to    the  righteousness  of  life. 

iivine  Being,  and  signifies  the  purity  of  II.    Righteousness  of  heart  is  self- 

His  nature  and  the  perfection  of  His  disseminating. — 1.  Its  fruit  is  living, 

works.     2.   Here    it   signifies    personal  2.  Of  harmonious  unity.    3.  Luxuriant, 

holiness.  III.  Righteousness  of  heart  is  the 

II.  The  fruits  of  righteousness. —  only  thing  that  can  fill  the  capacities 
1.   Christian  righteousness  is  productive  of  man. 

of  gracious  fruits.     These   fruits    are  IV.  Fulness  of  righteousness  is  all 

internal  in  the  heart,  and  external  in  divine. — 1.    In  its  source.       2.  In  its 

the  life.  medium  of  communication.     "  By  Jesus 

2.  The  fruits  of  righteousness  are  Christ."  3.  In  its  end.  "Unto  the  glory 
abundant  and  progressive. — "  Being  and  praise  of  God."  Glory  before  men  : 
filled  with  the  fruits."  praise  among  men. — Lay  Preacher. 

III.  The  Author  of  righteousness. 

— "  Which     are     by     Jesus     Christ."  Divine  Culture. 

1.  Righteousness  is  purchased  by  Christ  I.  The  field. — The  loving  heart. 

as  our  Redeemer.     2.  Is  derived  from  II.  The  seed. — Righteousness. 

Him  as  our  Saviour.  III.  The  fruit. — Abundant. 

IV.  The  results  of  righteousness. —  IV.  The  husbandman. — Jesus  Christ. 
"  Unto  the  glory  and  praise  of  God."  V.  The  end. — The  glory  and  praise 
1.  Righteousness    is   to   the  glory   and  of  God. — Ibid. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  12—18. 

The  Gospel  Irrepressible — 

1.  Notwithstanding  the  circumscribed  opportunities  of  its  agents. — 1.  Their 
sufferings  for  the  gospel  call  attention  to  its  claims/  '  The  things  which  happened 
unto  me  have  fallen  out  rather  into  the  furtherance  of  the  gospel  ;  so  that 
my  bonds  in  Christ  are  manifest  in  all  the  palace,  and  in  all  other  places  " 
(vers.  12,  13).  It  might  seem  to  the  Philippians  that  the  imprisonment  of 
Paul  would  be  unfavourable  to  the  gospel  and  prevent  its  spread.  He  shows 
there  was  no  ground  for  that  fear  ;  but  that  the  gospel  was  becoming  known  in 
quarters  which,  but  for  his  imprisonment,  it  was  not  likely  to  gain  access.  The 
palace  referred  to  was  the  praetorium,  or  barrack  of  the  praetorian  guards 
attached  to  the  palace  of  Nero  on  the  Palatine  Hill  in  Rome.  The  regular 
changes  of  guards  was  constantly  furnishing  new  auditors  for  the  irrepressible 
preacher,  and  he  did  not  fail  to  zealously  improve  his  opportunities.  Thus  the 
gospel,  which  the  malice  and  bigotry  of  the  Jews  sought  to  suppress,  found 
its  way  into  Caesar's  household,  and  ultimately  captured  the  Roman  empire 
for  Christ.  The  persecutions  of  the  gospel  have  been  the  best  helpers  of  its 
success. 

2.  Their  sufferings  for  the  gospel  stimulate  the  zeal  of  its  propagators. — "  Many 
of  the  brethren, . .  .  waxing  confident  by  my  bonds,  are  much  more  bold  to  speak 
the  word  without  fear  "  (ver.  14\  The  fortitude  of  the  apostle  in  suffering,  and  his 

312 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   PHILIPPIANS.         chap.  I. 


unwearied  efforts  to  preach  the  gospel,  increased  the  courage  of  his  fellow-helpers 
in  the  same  good  work.  The  sufferings  of  the  gospel  pioneers  contributed  to  the 
spread  and  triumph  of  the  truth.  The  blood  of  Scotland's  proto-martyr,  the 
noble  Patrick  Hamilton,  and  the  memory  of  his  dying  prayer,  "  How  long,  O 
Lord,  shall  darkness  cover  this  realm  ? "  fomented  the  young  Reformation  life 
over  a  comparatively  silent  germinating  period  of  more  than  twenty  years. 
Knox,  and  with  him  Scotland,  kindled  at  the  pile  of  George  Wishart.  Andrew 
Melville  caught  the  falling  mantle  of  Knox.  When  Richard  Cameron  fell  at 
Aird's  Moss — as  if  in  answer  to  his  own  prayers  as  the  action  began,  "  Lord, 
spare  the  green  and  take  the  ripe  ! " — all  the  more  strenuously  strove  Cargill, 
till  he  too,  in  the  following  year,  sealed  the  truth  with  his  blood.  And  more 
followed,  and  yet  more,  through  that  last  and  worst  decade  of  the  pitiless 
storm  known  as,  by  emphasis,  the  killing  time.  Through  those  terrible  years 
Peden  dragged  out  a  living  death,  and  as  he  thought  of  Cameron,  now  at  rest, 
often  exclaimed,  "  Oh  to  be  with  Ritchie  ! "  Young  Renwick  too  caught  up 
the  torn  flag,  nobly  saying,  "  They  are  but  standard-bearers  who  have  fallen ; 
the  Master  lives."  Thus  one  after  another  on  blood-stained  scaffold,  or  on  blood- 
soaked  field,  fell  the  precious  seed-grain,  to  rise  in  harvests  manifold,  till  just  at 
the  darkest  hour  before  the  dawn  of  Renwick's  martyrdom  closed  the  red  roll 
in  1G88 — the  year  of  the  revolution — and  the  seed  so  long  sown  in  tears  was 
reaped  in  joy. 

II.  It  is  preached  from  a  variety  of  motives. — 1.  Some  preach  the  gospel 
from  the  love  of  controversy.  "  Some  indeed  preach  Christ  of  envy  and  strife 
...  of  contention,  not  sincerely,  supposing  to  add  affliction  to  my  bonds  "  (vers. 
15,  16).  The  Judaising  teachers,  taking  advantage  of  the  absence  of  the  apostle, 
sought  to  propagate  their  erroneous  theories  of  the  gospel,  and  to  annoy  the 
apostle  by  depreciating  his  authority  and  his  preaching.  They  aimed  not  so 
much  at  winning  souls  for  Christ,  as  at  exalting  themselves  and  gaining  credence 
to  their  corrupt  opinions.  They  argued  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  the  King  of 
Israel,  hoping  thereby  to  exasperate  the  Roman  government  against  Paul,  who 
preached  the  same  truth,  though  in  a  different  sense,  and  to  cause  increased 
pain  to  the  apostle  by  insisting  upon  the  obligation  of  obedience  to  the  law  in 
order  to  salvation.  Yet  in  opposing  the  gospel  they  stated  some  of  its  leading 
t  truths,  if  only  to  refute  them.  Controversy  is  often  a  waste  of  strength.  They 
are  small,  insignificant  beings  who  quarrel  oftenest.  There's  a  magnificent 
\>breed  of  cattle  in_the  Yale  of  Clwvd,  the  most  beautiful  vale  in  Wales.  They 
C  have  scarcely  any  horns,  but  abundance  of  meat ;  yet  if  you  ascend  the  hills  on 
every  side,  there  on  the  heights  you  find  a  breed  which  grows  scarcely  anything  \ 
but  horns,  and  from  morning  to  night  all  you  hear  is  the  constant  din  of  clashing  \ 
weapons.  So  there  are  many  Christians  who  live  on  the  heights,  the  cold  and 
barren  heights  of  controversy.  Everything  they  eat  grows  into  horns,  the 
strength  of  which  they  are  constantly  testing. 

2.  Some  preach  the  gospel  from  the  highest  regard  for  its  lofty  message. — "  Some 
also  of  goodwill  ...  of  love,  knowing  that  I  am  set  [appointed  of  God]  for  the 
defence  of  the  gospel"  (vers.  15,  17).  An  intense  love  of  jbhe  gospel  and  of  the 
Christ  of  the  gospel  is  the  best  preparation  for"  preaching  it.  Preaching  to  be 
effectual  must  be  as  various  as  nature.  The  sun  warms  at  the  same  moment 
that  it  enlightens ;  and  unless  religious  truth  be  addressed  at  once  to  the  reason 
and  to  the  affections,  unless  it  kindles  while  it  guides,  it  is  a  useless  splendour, 
it  leaves  the  heart  barren,  it  produces  no  fruits  of  godliness.  Preaching  should 
help  us  to  a  higher  life.  A  man  once  heard  an  affecting  sermon,  and  while  \ 
j  highly  commending  it  was  asked  what  he  remembered  of  it.  "  Truly,"  he 
(  replied,  "  I  remember  nothing  at  all ;  but  it  made  me  resolve  to  live  better,  and 
by  God's  grace  I  will." 

,    .  .  313 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   PHILIPPIANS. 


III.  The  propagation  of  the  gospel  by  any  means  is  matter  of  fervent  joy. — 

"  What  then?  notwithstanding,  .  .  .  Christ  is  preached  ;  and  I  therein  do  rejoice, 
yea,  and  will  rejoice"  (ver.  18).  The  false  teachers  gloated  over  Paul's  mis- 
fortune, and  thought  to  trouble  him  by  their  way  of  presenting  the  gospel. 
But  the  proclamation  of  Christ,  however  done,  roused  attention,  and  could  not 
but  be  of  service.  The  apostle  rejoiced  in  the  good  result  of  their  bad  intentions. 
The  success  of  the  gospel  in  any  place  and  by  any  means,  when  that  success  is 
real,  is  always  a  cause  of  rejoicing  to  the  good. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  gospel  has  a  message  for  all  classes.  2.  Its  faithful  proclama- 
tion involves  difficulty  and  suffering.  3.  Its  interests  are  often  promoted  from 
mixed  motives. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers.  12-14.  Christian  Boldness.  Ver.  12.  The  Development  of  Events 

I.  Distinguish    Christian    boldness      in  a  Consecrated  Life — 

from  its    counterfeits,  and  set  forth         I.  Is  the  work  of   an  over-ruling 

some  of  its  leading  attributes. — There  Providence. 

is  a  false  and  hurtful  boldness  arising  II.  Produces   startling  results,  dis- 

from — 1.  Ignorance.       2.  A  badjudg-  appointing  alike  to  the  hopes  of  tho 

ment.       3.  Native  rashness.      4.    The  enemy  and  the  fears  of  friends. 
pride  of  courage  which  scorns  to  fear         III.  Whatever  may  be  its  starting- 

the  face  of  man.     5.  Mere  natural  re-  point  attains    its  end  in  the  further- 

solution.     6.  A  wilful  obstinacy .     7.  A  ance  of  the  gospel. 
domineering  spirit.    The  boldness  which  IV.  Illustrates   how    moral  princi- 

God  approves  must  be  chiefly  drawn  pies  when   tried  in  suffering  become 

from  other  sources  and  possess  higher  mightier  forces  in  the  world's  evangeli- 

and  more  ethereal  attributes.       1.  It  sation. 

must    be    bottomed   on   holy   love — love  V.  A     pledge    that     fellowship    of 

to  God  and  love  to  man.     2.  It  must  suffering  with  Christ  shall  be  followed 

be  humble.     3.  Must    be   delicate   and  by     a    fellowship     of     glory. — Lay 

regardful  of  all  the  rules  of  decorum.  Preacher. 

4.  Mast  be  wise,  discreet,  and  prudent. 

5.  Must     be    faithful.       6.  Must    be  Ver.  13.  Moral  Influence, 
grounded  not  merely  on  self-denial  and  I.  Paul's    moral    influence    exerted 
submission  to  the  will  of  God,  but  on  a  mighty  power  under  the  most  dis- 
humble  confidence  in  Him.  advantageous       circumstances  —  in 

II.  Some  motives  to  rouse  us  to  this  bonds. 

holy  and  elevated  frame    and  to    a  II.  With   a    very    limited    oppor- 

corresponding    course    of    conduct. —  tunity — one  soldier  daily. 

1.  This  Christian  heroism  is  absolutely  III.  Upon     a    class   of    mind    and 

necessary   to   clear  up  the   evidences  of  heart  not  easily  impressed — the  guard 

our  own  piety.     2.   Without  rising  up  which  had  charge  of  him. 

to  this  heroic  and  active  zeal  we  cannot  IV.  Throughout     the       city — not- 

be  faithful  to  God  and  our  generation.  withstanding  the  restraints  of  his  own 

3.  Estimate  the  importance  of  this  duty  hired  house. 

by  considering  what  would  be  the  effect  V.  Reaching    the   further  field   by 

if  all  professing  Christians  were   thus  first    fully    cultivating     the    one    at 

intrepid    and  faithful.      4.  In    many  hand. — Ibid. 

instances  fear   is  altogether  groundless, 

and  is  the  mere  suggestion  of  indolence.  Ver.    14.  The    Ministry    of    Paul's 

5.  For   want    of  faithful   admonition  Bonds. 

and  entreaty  many  may  have  perished.  I.  It     was    loyal     to    his     Roman 

— E.  D.  Griffin.  citizenship  (Acts  xxvi.  31,  32). 

314 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    PHILIPPIANS.         chap.  L 


II.  Christ-like,  it  was  silent  amid 
provocation,  self-sacrificing,  persuasive. 

III.  It  was  fruitful  in  the  further- 
ance of  the  gospel. — 1.  By  preaching 
it  under  the   shadow  of  Nero's  palace. 

2.  By  intensifying  the  love  of  it  and 
zeal  for  it  in  the  hearts  of  the  brethren. 

IV.  It  illustrates  how  Christ  can  erect 
a  pulpit  for  Himself  in  the  very  camp 
of  the  enemy,  and  put  a  voice  for  His 
glory  even  into  chains. — Lay  Preacher. 

"Ver.  15.  A  Spurious  Ministry. 

I.  The  elements  formative  of  it. — 

1.  An  imperfect  apprehension  of  Christ's 
mission.  2.  A  total  absence  of  Christ's 
spirit.  3.  Thought  and  sympathy 
narrowed  by  early  prejudice  and  pre- 
conceived ideas.  4.  Christ  made  sub- 
servient to  the  doctrines,  ritual,  and 
history  of  a>  system. 

II.  The  results  inseparable  from  it. 
— 1.  The  cross  degraded  into  a  rallying 
point  for  party  strife.  2.  The  basest 
spirit  indulged  under  the  pretence  of 
fulfilling  a  sacred  office.  (1)  Envy — 
displeasure  at  another's  good.  (2)  Strife 
— selfish  rivalry  which  seeks  to  gain 
the       good     belonging      to     another. 

3.  Christ  preached  merely  to  advance  a 
party.  4.  Zeal  for  propagating  a  creed 
greater  than  to  save  a  lost  world. — Ibid. 

Ver.  16.  The  Germ  of  a  Spurious 
Ministry — 

I.  May  exist  in  those  who  zealously 
preach  Christ. 


II.  Consists  in  a  moral  contradic- 
tion between  the  heart  of  the  preacher 
and  the  theme  of  his  discourse — con- 
tentiousness and  Christ. 

III.  Produces  impurity  of  motive 
in  Christian  work — "  not  sincerely." 

IV.  Biases  the  judgment  to  expect 
results  which  are  never  realised — 
"  supposing." 

V.  Inspires  aims  which  are  un- 
christian— "  to  add  afflictions  to  my 
bonds." 

Ver.  17.  The  Real  and  the  Counterfeit 
in  the  Christian  Ministry. 

1.  They  correspond.— 1.  Both  adopt 
the  Christian  name.  2.  Both  utter  the 
same  shibboleth.  3.  Both  active  in 
preaching   Christ. 

II.  They  diner. — 1.  In  heart.  Con- 
tention rules  the  one;  love  reigns  in 
the  other. 

2.  In  spirit. — Envy  and  strife  moves 
the  one ;  goodwill  actuates  the  other. 

3.  In  source  of  strength. — Love  of 
party  animates  the  one ;  waxing  con- 
fident in  the  Lord  emboldens  the 
other. 

4.  In  aim. — That  of  the  one  is  to 
advance,  it  may  be,  a  lifeless  Church  ; 
that  of  the  other  to  propel  the  gospel 
of  Christ. 

5.  In  the  depth  and  accuracy  of  con- 
viction.— The  one  "  supposing  to  add 
affliction  to  my  bonds " ;  the  other 
"  knowing  that  I  am  set  for  the  defence 
of  the  gospel." — Lay  Preacher. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS    OF  THE    PARAGRAPH.— Verses  19—26. 

The  Noble  Attitude  of  a  Sufferer  for  the  Truth. 

I.  The  hostility  of  false  brethren  tends  to  the  enlargement  of  the  truth,  what- 
ever may  be  the  fate  of  the  sufferer. — 1.  He  is  assured  of  personal  blessing  from 
the  Spirit  through  prayer.  "  For  I  know  that  this  shall  turn  to  my  salvation 
through  your  prayer,  and  the  supply  of  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ"  (ver.  19). 
The  apostle  already  sees  how  his  troubles  and  suffering  may  develop  his  own 
spiritual  life  and  be  a  pathway  to  the  glories  of  heaven.  By  the  prayers  of 
God's  people  he  looks  for  an  abundant  supply  of  the  Spirit,  by  whose  agency  his 
salvation  will  be  perfected.  The  enemies  of  the  good  man  cannot  rob  him  of  his 
interest  in  Christ,  and  suffering  only  adds  new  lustre  to  every  Christian  grace. 
The  Port  Royalist  exclaimed,  "  Let  us  labour  and  suffer  ;  we  have  all  eternity  to 
rest  in."  Paul,  who,  fighting  with  wild  beasts,  was  a  spectacle  to  angels  and 
men,  could  reckon  that  "  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  not  worthy  to  be 
compared  with  the  glory  that  shall  be  revealed  in  us." 

315 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   PHILIPPIANS. 


2.  The  greatness  of  Christ  is  set  forth  by  the  courage  given  to  the  sufferer,  though 
uncertain  of  what  awaits  him. — "According  to  my  earnest  expectation  and  my 
hope,  that  in  nothing  I  shall  be  ashamed,  but  .  .  .  Christ  shall  be  magnified  in  my 
body,  whether  it  be  by  life,  or  by  death  "  (ver.  20).  With  the  earnest  expecta- 
tion and  hope  of  future  glory,  the  apostle  had  no  need  to  be  ashamed  of  his 
work  for  God  or  of  God's  work  in  him ;  but  he  regarded  his  sufferings,  not  as 
a  setting  forth  of  his  own  goodness,  but  of  the  glory  of  Jesus,  who  gave  him 
strength  and  fortitude  to  endure.  It  is  in  tribulation  that  the  grace  of  Christ 
is  most  conspicuous.  The  Redeemer  was  perfected  through  suffering  ;  so  are 
Pis  followers. 

II.  The  alternative  of  life  or  death  presents  a  problem  the  sufferer  is  unable 
to  solve. — "  What  I  shall  choose  I  wot  not.  For  I  am  in  a  strait  betwixt  two  " 
(vers.  22,  23). 

1.  Life  has  great  attractions. — (1)  Christ  may  be  further  exalted.  "  For 
to  me  to  live  is  Christ"  (ver.  21).  Life  is  an  opportunity  for  setting 
forth  Christ,  and  this  is  done  by  carefully  copying  His  example.  "  As  I  stood 
beside  one  of  the  wonderful  Aubusson  tapestries,"  says  Eugene  Stock,  "  I 
said  to  the  gentleman  in  charge,  'How  is  this  done?'  He  showed  me  a  small 
loom  with  a  partly  finished  web  upon  it,  and  said  that  the  weaver  stands  behind 
his  work,  with  his  materials  by  his  side,  and  above  him  the  picture  he  is  to  copy, 
exactly  thread  for  thread  and  colour  for  colour.  He  cannot  vary  a  thread  or  a 
shade  without  marring  his  picture."  It  is  a  glorious  thing  for  us  to  have  a  perfect 
life  for  example  by  which  to  form  our  lives.  And  we  cannot  vary  a  hair-breadth 
from  that  example  without  injuring  our  lives.  (2)  More  results  of  Christian 
work  may  be  gathered.  "  But  if  I  live  in  the  flesh,  this  is^the  fruit  of  my  labour  " 
(ver.  22).  The  best  use  of  life  is  to  employ  it  in  working  for  God.  Work  done 
for  Him  will  remain  when  the  worker  is  forgotten.  In  ministerial  work  we  may 
garner  the  most  precious  fruits.  (3)  Help  may  be  afforded  to  others.  "  Never- 
theless to  abide  in  the  flesh  is  more  needful  for  you  "  (ver.  24).  Paul  was  the 
pioneer  and  founder  of  Christianity  among  the  Gentiles,  and  the  young  Churches 
looked  to  him  for  leadership  and  counsel.  It  seemed  every  way  desirable  that 
for  their  sakes  his  life  should  be  continued.  No  one  felt  this  more  keenly  than 
himself,  though  he  was  assured  that  if  that  life  was  prematurely  terminated  the 
cause  of  the  gospel  was  safe  in  the  hands  of  God. 

2.  Death  admits  to  superior  advantages. — "  To  die  is  gain"  (ver.  21).  Even  by 
his  death  Christ  would  be  glorified,  and  the  apostle  admitted  not  to  shame  or  loss, 
as  his  enemies  supposed,  but  to  a  state  of  blessed  reward. 

"  Sorrow  vanquished,  labour  ended, 
Jordan  past." 

11  Why  should  I  fear  death  ?  "  said  Sir  Henry  Vane,  as  he  awaited  his  execution; 
"  I  find  it  rather  shrinks  from  me  than  I  from  it." 

,     "  Death  wounds  to  heal ;  I  sink,  I  rise,  I  reign  ; 
Spring  from  my  fetters,  fasten  in  the  skies, 
Where  blooming  Eden  withers  in  my  sight. 
Death  gives  us  more  than  we  in  Eden  lost." 

Young. 

III.  The  undaunted  sufferer  is  confident  of  continued  opportunities  of 
advancing  the  joy  of  believers  in  the  truth. — "  And  having  this  confidence,  I 
know  that  I  shall  abide  and  continue  with  you  all  for  your  furtherance  and  joy 
of  faith,  that  your  rejoicing  may  be  more  abundant  "  (vers.  25,  26).  This  assur- 
ance was  verified  by  the  apostle's  return  to  Philippi  on  his  release  from  his  first 
captivity.  "  Man  is  immortal  till  his  work  is  done."  Life  is  short,  and  every 
moment  of  its  duration  should  be  spent  for  God  and  the  good  of  others.  Shall 
we  repine  at  our  trials  which  are  but  for  a  moment  1     "  We  are  nearing  home 

316 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    PHILIPPIANS. 


CHAP.  I. 


day  by  day,"  wrote  General  Gordon.  "  No  dark  river,  but  divided  waters  are 
before  us,  and  then  let  the  world  take  its  portion.  Dust  it  is,  and  dust  we  will 
leave  it.  It  is  a  long,  weary  journey,  but  we  are  well  on  the  way  of  it.  The 
yearly  milestones  quickly  slip  by,  and  as  our  days  so  will  our  strength  be.  The 
sand  is  flowing  out  of  the  glass,  day  and  night,  night  and  day ;  shake  it  not. 
You  have  a  work  to  do  here,  to  suffer  even  as  Christ  suffered." 

Lessons. — 1.  The  highest  virtues  are  not  gained  without  suffering.  2.  Suffering 
for  the  truth  strengthens  our  attachment  to  it.  3.  Suffering  for  the  truth  is  often 
a  means  of  spreading  it. 


GERM  NOTES   ON  THE    VERSE  b. 


Ver.  20.  Christ  the  Christian's  Life. 

I.  Christ  was  the  recognised  Source 
of  the  apostle's  life. 

II.  Christ  was  the  supreme  Object 
of  the  apostle's  contemplation. 

III.  The  glory  of  Christ  was  the 
great  end  of  the  apostle's  endeavours. 
— H.  Simon. 

Yer.  21.  The  Christian's  Life  and 
Death. 

1.  The  Christian's  life. — 1.  It  is  a  life 
in  Christ.  (1)  Begun  in  regeneration. 
(2)  Realised  by  faith.  (3)  Sustained 
and  increased  by  divine  knowledge. 

2.  It  is  a  life  for  Christ.— (I)  The 
example     of     Christ    is     its      model. 

(2)  The   will   of   Christ   is   its    laws. 

(3)  The  glory  of  Christ  is  its  end. 

II.  The  Christian's  death.— 1.  The 
Christian's  death  is  a  gain  by  being 
deprived  of  something.  (1)  Deprived 
of  the  sinful  body.  (2)  Freed  from 
temptation.       (3)  From    his   enemies. 

(4)  From  suffering.     (5)  From  death. 
2.  The  Christian's  death  is  a  gain  by 

acquiring  something. — (1)  Accelerated 
liberty  to  worship  God.  (2)  The  ulti- 
mate addition  of  the  glorified  body 
with  its  exalted  form  and  powers. 
(3)  The  blessed  reunion  and  fellowship 
with  departed  friends.  (4)  The  pre- 
sence and  companionship  of  Christ  for 
ever. 

Christian  Life  and  Death. 

I.  The  apostle's  language  exhibits 
the  proper  scope  and  character  of  all 
truly  Christian  life. — The  end  and 
substance  of  the  Christian  life  is 
Christ. 


II.  What  Christian  death  is  and 
how  it  ought  to  be  regarded. — Death 
is  not  simply  altered  life.  It  is  life 
elevated  and  ennobled.  It  is  gain 
compared  with  life  in  the  flesh.  Death 
raises  the  saint  to  be  with  Christ. 

III.  The  text  puts  Christian  life 
and  death  before  us  regarded  as  an 
alternative. — Whether  life  be  more 
or  less  desirable,  less  or  more 
desired,  it  should  be  spent  under 
the  strong  and  penetrating  assurance 
that  to  die  is  gain.  Be  death  ever  so 
desirable,  it  is  our  own  fault  if  the 
happiness  of  life  does  not  more  than 
counterbalance  the  trial  of  it. — J.  D. 
Geden. 


"  For  to  me  to  live 
thusiasm  for  Christ. 


is  Christ."    En- 


I.   Enthusiasm 
home-life. 


for    Christ  in  the 


"  The  highest  duties  oft  are  found 
Lying  upon  the  lowest  ground  ; 
In  hidden  and  unnoticed  ways, 
In  household  work  on  common  days, 
Whate'er  is  done  for  God  alone 
Thy  God  acceptable  will  own." 

II.  Enthusiasm  for  Christ  in  public 
life. 

"  Trust  no  future,  howe'er  pleasant, 
Let  the  dead  past  bury  its  dead  ; 
Act,  act  in  the  living  present, 
Heart  within  and  God  o'erhead." 

III.  Enthusiasm     for    Christ     in 
Church  life. 

"  Come,  labour  on, 
No  time  for  rest  till  glows  the  western  sky, 
While  the  long  shadows  o'er  our  pathway  lie, 
And  a  glad  sound  comes  with  the  setting  sun, 
Servants,  well  done  !  " 

J.  M.  Forson. 
317 


chap.  I.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   PHILIPPIANS. 


The  Christian's  estimate  of  living  and 
dying. 

I.  The  Christian's  estimate  of  living 
should  he  a  life  in  Christ. — 1.  A  life 
of  which  Christ  is  the  Source.  2.  A  life 
of  which  Christ  is  the  Sustainer.  3.  A 
life  of  which  Christ  is  the  Sphere. 

II.  The  Christian's  estimate  of  living 
should  he  a  life  for  Christ. — 1.  A  life 
spent  in  labouring  for  Him  alone. 
2.  A  life  of  continued  suffering  for 
Him.  3.  A  life  of  daring  everything 
for  Him. 

III.  The  Christian's  estimate  of 
dying  should  he   that  it   is   gain. — 

1.  Because   death    leads    to    closer   and 
more  uninterrupted  union  with  Christ. 

2.  Because  death  lands  the  true  believer 
in  absolute  security. 

Lessons. — 1 .  Insome  sense  the  utterance 
of  the  apostle  is  true  of  every  Christian. 
2.  In  its  full  sense  it  is  only  true  of  pre- 
eminent Christians.  3.  The  more  it  is 
true  of  any,  the  happier  and  more 
useful  Christians  they  are. — Homiletic 
Quarterly. 

The  Believer's  Portion  in  both  Worlds. 

I.  The  believer's  life. — 1.  Is  origi- 
nated by  Christ.  2.  Is  sustained  by 
Christ.  3.  Is  spent  to  the  glory  of 
Christ. 

II.  The  believer's  end. — 1.  The  gain 
of  sorrows  escaped.  2.  The  gain  of  joys 
secured. 

Lessons. — 1.  Improve  life.  2.  Pre- 
pare for  death. — C.  Clayton,  M.A. 

Vers.  23,  24.  Willing  to  wait,  but 
ready  to  go. 

1.  The  two  desires. — 1.  To  depart 
and   be  with   Christ.     (1)  The   exodus 


from  this  life  by  dissolution  of  the  body 
— "  to  depart."  (2)  Christ's  presence  the 
immediate  portion  of  His  people  when 
their  life  on  earth  is  done — "  to  be 
with  Christ." 

2.  To  abide  in  the  flesh. — It  is  a 
natural  and  lawful  desire.  The  love 
of  life — it  is  not  necessary,  it  is  not 
lawful  to  destroy  it.  Let  it  alone  to 
the  last.  The  way  to  deal  with  it  is 
not  to  tear  it  violently  out,  so  as  to 
have,  or  say  that  you  have,  no  desire 
to  remain ;  but  to  get,  through  the 
grace  of  the  Spirit,  such  a  blessed 
hope  of  Christ's  presence  as  will 
gradually  balance  and  at  last  over- 
balance the  love  of  life,  and  make  it 
at  the  appointed  time  come  easily  and 
gently  away. 

II.  A  Christian  balanced  evenly 
between  these  two  desires. — "  I  am 
in  a  strait  betwixt  two."  The  desire 
to  be  with  Christ  does  not  make  life 
unhappy,  because  it  is  balanced  by  the 
pleasure  of  working  for  Christ  in  the 
world;  the  desire  to  work  for  Christ 
in  the  world  does  not  make  the 
approach  of  dissolution  painful,  because 
it  is  balanced  by  the  expectation  of 
being  soon,  of  being  ever  with  the  Lord. 

III.  Practical  Lessons. — 1.  This 
one  text  is  sufficient  to  destroy  the  whole 
fabric  of  Romish  prayer  to  departed 
saints.  2.  The  chief  use  of  a  Christian 
in  the  world  is  to  do  good.  3.  You 
cannot  be  effectively  useful  to  those  who 
are  in  need  on  earth  unless  you  hold 
by  faith  and  hope  to  Christ  on  high. 
4.  Living  hope  of  going  to  be  with 
Christ  is  the  only  anodyne  which  has 
power  to  neutralise  the  pain  of  parting 
with  those  dear  to  us. — W.  Arnot. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  27—30. 

Exhortation  to  Christian  Bravery. 

I.  To  act  as  becometh  Christian  citizens. — "  Only  let  your  conversation  be  as 
becometh  the  gospel  of  Christ"  (ver.  27).  Whether  the  apostle  is  able  to  visit 
them  again  or  not,  he  exhorts  the  Philippians  to  attend  diligently  to  present 
duties,  and  act  in  all  things  with  the  dignity  and  fidelity  becoming  members  of; 
the  heavenly  commonwealth.  The  Christian  finding  himself  living  for  a  time  in 
this  world  as  in  a  dark  place,  where  other  gods  are  worshipped,  where  men  sell 
themselves  for  gain,  where  he  is  tempted  to  do  as  others  do,  and  is  asked  to 
coquette  with  the  world,  to  mind  earthly  things,  should  at  once  take  his  stand 

318 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    PHILIPPIANS.         chap.  I. 


and  say :  "I  cannot ;  I  am  a  citizen  of  heaven,  my  affections  are  set  on  things 
above ;  I  cannot  come  down  to  your  level,  I  have  come  out  from  the  world  and 
may  not  touch  the  unclean  thing;  I  have  formed  other  tastes,  have  other 
pleasures ;  other  rules  regulate  my  conduct ;  I  cannot  live  as  you  live,  nor  do  as 
you  do." 

1.  Be  united  in  spiritual  steadfastness. — "  That  ye  stand  fast  in  one  spirit" 
(ver.  27).  The  Spirit  inspires  the  highest  courage,  and  helps  all  who  partake  of 
His  influence  to  stand  fast  in  their  integrity.  "  For  God  hath  given  us  not  the 
spirit  of  fear,  but  of  power  and  of  love  and  of  a  sound  mind." 

2.  Earnestly  and  unitedly  maintain  the  faith. — "  With  one  mind  striving 
together  for  the  faith  of  the  gospel  "  (ver.  27).  With  one  soul,  penetrated  by 
the  same  Spirit,  unitedly  strive  to  maintain  the  gospel  in  its  purity,  as  it  was 
committed  unto  them.  Every  true  believer  should  be  a  valiant  champion  for 
the  truth.  Men  who  have  no  settled  faith  are  like  these  birds  that  frequent  the 
Golden  Horn,  and  are  to  be  seen  from  Constantinople,  of  which  it  is  said  they  are 
always  on  the  wing  and  never  rest.  No  one  ever  saw  them  alight  on  the  water 
or  on  the  land  ;  they  are  for  ever  poised  in  mid -air.  The  natives  call  them  lost 
souls,  seeking  rest  and  finding  none.  To  lose  our  hold  of  the  gospel  is  to  be 
doomed  to  unrest  and  misery.  To  attempt  to  stand  alone  is  to  court  defeat. 
Union  is  strength. 

3.  Remember  the  interest  of  your  religious  teachers  in  your  endeavours. — "That 
whether  1  come  and  see  you,  or  else  be  absent,  I  may  hear  of  your  affairs  " 
(ver.  27).  The  anxious  minister  is  ever  deeply  concerned  in  the  welfare  of  his 
people.  He  rejoices  in  their  faithfulness  and  progress;  he  mourns  over  their 
laxity  and  defeat;  he  encourages  them  in  their  labours  and  struggles  in  the 
spread  of  the  truth.  Our  defection  from  the  gospel  is  not  only  a  loss  to  ourselves, 
but  a  disappointment  and  sorrow  to  others. 

II.  To  act  with  fearlessness  in  the  midst  of  opposition. — "  And  in  nothing 
terrified  by  your  adversaries  "  (ver.  28).  Opposition  should  nerve  to  more  resolute 
resistance.  The  enemies  of  the  good  are  the  enemies  of  God,  and  the  good  man, 
with  God  on  his  side,  need  not  fear  either  their  numbers  or  their  ferocity.  One 
of  their  ancient  kings  said,  "  The  Lacedaemonians  seldom  inquire  the  number  of 
their  enemies,  but  the  place  where  they  could  be  found."  When  a  certain 
captain  rushed  in  haste  to  his  general  and  said,  "  The  enemy  is  coming  in  such 
vast  numbers,  it  will  be  useless  to  resist,"  the  general  replied,  "  Our  duty  is  not 
to  count  our  enemies,  but  to  conquer  them."     And  conquer  them  they  did. 

1 ,  This  fearlessness  a  proof  of  the  inevitable  punishment  of  their  opponents. — 
"  Which  is  to  them  an  evident  token  of  perdition "  (ver.  28).  In  contending 
hopelessly  against  you  they  are  only  rushing  on  to  their  own  destruction.  Your 
bravery  in  the  contest,  and  their  own  consciousness  of  the  weakness  of  their  own 
cause,  will  strike  terror  into  their  hearts,  so  that  they  will  be  easily  routed. 

2.  This  fearlessness  a  proof  of  the  salvation  of  the  steadfast. — "  But  to  you  of 
salvation,  and  that  of  God  "  (ver.  28).  God  who  gives  courage  to  the  steadfast 
and  helps  them  in  the  conflict,  ensures  to  them  the  victory.  We  are  not  saved 
because  we  are  brave  for  God  and  truth,  but  the  courageous  soul  will  not  fail  of 
salvation. 

III.  To  accept  suffering  for  the  truth  as  a  privilege  and  a  discipline. — 1.  It 
is  suffering  for  Christ.  "For  unto  you  it  is  given  in  the  behalf  of  Christ,  not 
only  to  believe  on  Him,  but  also  to  suffer  for  His  sake  "  (ver.  29).  Suffering  is 
no  evidence  of  the  divine  displeasure,  but  is  often  a  signal  proof  of  the  divine 
regard.  There  is  no  virtue  in  the  mere  endurance  of  suffering,  but  in  the 
Christ-like  spirit  with  which  it  is  borne.  There  lived  in  a  village  near  Burnley 
a  girl  who  was  persecuted  in  her  own  home  because  she  was  a  Christian. 
She  struggled  on  bravely,  seeking  strength  from  God,  and  rejoicing  that  she  was 

319 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   PHILIPPIANS. 


a  partaker  of  Christ's  sufferings.  The  struggle  was  too  much  for  her ;  but  He 
willed  it  so,  and  at  length  her  sufferings  were  ended.  When  they  came  to  take 
off  the  clothes  from  her  poor  dead  body,  they  found  a  piece  of  paper  sewn  inside 
her  dress,  and  on  it  was  written,  "  He  opened  not  His  mouth." 

2.  It  is  suffering  which  the  best  of  men  have  endured. — "  Having  the  same 
conflict  which  ye  saw  in  me,  and  now  hear  to  be  in  me  "  (ver.  30).  Suffering 
for  the  truth  links  us  with  Paul  and  his  contemporaries,  and  with  the  noble 
army  of  martyrs  in  all  ages.  Christ  has  taught  us  how  to  suffer,  and  for  His 
sake  we  can  bear  pain  and  calumny  without  complaining  and  without  retalia- 
tion. Mrs.  Sherwood  relates  that,  pained  at  seeing  Henry  Martyn  completely 
prostrate  by  his  tormentor,  Sabat,  the  apostate,  she  exclaimed,  "Why  subject 
yourself  to  all  this  ?  Rid  yourself  of  this  Sabat  at  once."  He  replied,  "  Not 
if  his  spirit  was  ten  times  more  acrimonious  and  exasperating."  Then  smiling 
in  his  gentle,  winning  manner,  he  pointed  upwards  and  whispered  in  low  and 
earnest  tones,  "  For  Him  !  " 

Lessons. — 1.  The  Christian  spirit  inspires  the  loftiest  heroism.  2.  To  strive 
to  be  good  excites  the  opposition  of  the  wicked.  3.  One  true  Christian  hero  is  an 
encouragement  to  many. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  27.  Christian  Consistency.  requires    it.      5.     Our   final    salvation 

I.  The  apostle  pleaded  for  a  con-  requires  it. 

sistent    Christian     Church. — 1.     The  Lessons. — 1.    How  excellent    is    the 

Christian  life  must  be  characterised  by  Christian   religion.       2.    How  illiberal 

truthfulness.       2.     By    love.      3.     By  and  unreasonable  is  the  conduct  of  those 

purity.  who  censure   Christianity  on  account  of 

II.  The  apostle  pleaded  for  a  united  the  unworthy  actions  of  its  inconsistent 
Christian  Church. — 1.  This  union  was  professors. — R.  Treffry. 

necessary  to  resist  their  common  adver-  ^  Ef(xU  of  ^  Q       {            ^ 

saries.      2.  To  develop  their    Christian  ,            .       . .   '                r       * 

gmril    m/YaK*  beaded  f!te   a  "  *■  ^nstrate  the  exhortation  of  the 

zealous    Christian    Church  -  1     This  aPostle-— L  The  H0SPel  °f  Christ  is  ° 

aC(UUUo       V'ill  JLi5  blclll        VUILL  Oil. J- .        J- ivLo  ,                 7  •    7                                        7                       7 

>  i  J          J  rJ  f            hi     h'          "Tl  system  w Inch  assumes  and  proceeds  upon 

p.1IPl1       J       ,  „       n    m  '  -l  the    incalculable     value     of    the     soul. 

faith  of  the  gospel.         2.  To  be  exer-  0    1JTr .  ,                       -,  ,     r '     .7     7 

.     ,                 &    r  2.   Which  assumes  and  depicts  the  danger 

cised     in     a      commendable      manner.  7        .,.     /..t           i        j           -j 

,,  n,  .  .       .       ,,       „      -r  m  rrr     77  and  quilt  of  the  soul,  and  provides  a 

"  Striving  together. — J.T.Woodhouse.  7        /•       •/     •          -,-  \         f     *-       * 

&      &  flan  jor   its   immediate   restoration  to 

,-.          Tin       -j.  th>e  divine  favour.      3.  Is  a  system  of 

Evangelical  Consistency.  Uar  and  aVithm.imim  trutL     4.  7g 

I.  What    that    conduct    is  which  *              of     rfWs_     5>    of  moraU_ 
hecomes  the  gospel.-l.  It  must  be  the  6   fa wnilfeJal  charit 

genuine    result   of  gospel   dispositions.  tf    ^    sonrces    Qf    ^    apwtle's 

2    It  must   be   maintained  under  the  ^^.-l.  He  desired  the  Philippians 

influence  of  gospel  principles  and  m  the  ^  fg  ^  from  a           d  fc  fhe  hmour 

use  of  gospel  ordinances.      3    It  must  ,  ^           ,  (md  .fe  ^^     %  Qut  of 

resemble  gospel  patterns.     4    It  must  be  £         »dfor  the  Philippians  themselves, 

conformable  to  gospel  precepts.  Z.  From    a    regard    to     the     Gentiles. 

II.  What  obligations  are  we  under  p                ^      Mmself  Ms  (mn 

to   maintain    this    conduct.-l.    God  nd  Us  own  joy.-T.  Binney. 

requires  us  to  conduct  ourselves  according  * 

to  the  gospel.     2.  Consistency   requires  Vers.  28,29.  Conflict  and  Suffering. — 

it.     3.   Our  personal   comfort  requires  1.    Faith    in    Christ   must   go   before 

it.       4.    Our   connection    with    society  suffering  for  Christ,  so  that  to  suffer 

320 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   PHILIPPIANS.         chap,  il 


for  Him  is  of  greater  importance,  and  ings   are   for    Christ's   sake — for    His 

in  some  respects  more  honourable,  than  truth.      3.    Christian    courage    under 

simply   to   believe   in    Him.     2.  Then  suffering  will  not  be  kept  up  without 

are  sufferings  truly  Christian  and  an  conflict.      4.    In    suffering    for   truth 

evidence   of    salvation,   when    as    the  nothing  befalls  us  but  what  is  common 

sufferer  is  first  a  believer,  so  his  suffer-  to  men. — Fergusson. 


CHAPTER  II. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Consolation  in  Christ. — Exhortation  would  be  better,  inasmuch  as  consolation 
anticipates  the  comfort  of  the  next  phrase.  Comfort  of  love. — Encouragement  which  love 
gives.  Fellowship  of  the  Spirit. — "  Participation  in  the  Spirit."  Meyer's  remark  is,  "  This  is 
to  be  explained  of  the  Holy  Spirit."  Beet  intimates  a  widening  of  the  idea — "  brotherliness 
prompted  by  the  Holy  Spirit."  Bowels  and  mercies. — On  the  former  term  see  i.  8.  The  word 
for  mercies  denotes  the  yearning  of  the  heart,  though,  it  may  be,  there  is  no  ability  to  help. 

Ver.  2.  Fulfil  ye  my  joy. — "  Fill  up  "  my  cup  of  joy.  See  i.  4.  Likeminded. — "  General 
harmony,  .  .  .  identity  of  sentiment "  {Meyer).  On  this  verse,  with  its  accumulations,  Chrysos- 
tom  exclaims,  "  Bless  me  !  how  often  he  says  the  same  thing  !  " 

Ver.  3.  Let  nothing  be  done  through  strife  or  vainglory. — The  verb  is  suppressed  in  the 
Greek,  a  construction  more  natural  and  more  forcible  than  to  connect  the  nothing  with  the 
preceding  clause.  "  Partisanship  and  pomposity."  For  the  ruin  of  how  many  Churches  are 
this  pair  responsible  !  In  lowliness  of  mind. — A  rare  flower,  scattering  its  fragrance  unseen. 
"  It  was  one  great  result  of  the  life  of  Christ  (on  which  St.  Paul  dwells  here)  to  raise  humility 
to  its  proper  level ;  and,  if  not  fresh  coined  for  this  purpose,  the  word  (for  •  lowliness  of 
mind ')  now  first  became  current  through  the  influence  of  Christian  ethics  "  {Lightfoot). 

Ver.  5.  Let  this  mind  be  in  you. — The  apostle's  word  reminds  us  that  he  had  already 
counselled  his  readers  to  be  likeminded  amongst  themselves.  "  Each  to  each,  and  all  to 
Christ,"  this  verse  seems  to  say.  What  follows — to  ver.  11 — is  the  very  marrow  of  the 
gospel. 

Ver.  6.  Who,  being  in  the  form  of  God. — R.V.  margin,  "  being  originally."  Form  here  im- 
plies not  the  external  accidents,  but  the  essential  attributes.  Similar  to  this,  but  not  so 
decisive,  are  the  expressions  used  elsewhere  of  the  divinity  of  the  Son  (2  Cor.  iv.  4 ; 
Col.  i.  15  ;  Heb.  i.  3).  Similar  is  the  term  "  The  Word."  Thought  it  not  robbery.—"  Did  not 
deem  His  being  on  an  equality  with  God  a  thing  to  be  seized  on — and  retained  as  a  prize  " 
{Ellicott).  "  Yet  did  not  regard  it  as  a  prize,  a  treasure  to  be  clutched  and  retained  at  all 
hazards  "  (Lightfoot).  This  interpretation  of  the  two  eminent  bishops  is  accepted  by  the 
R.V.,  the  Speaker's  Commentary,  and  is  the  common  and  indeed  almost  universal  interpre- 
tation of  the  Greek  Fathers  {Lightfoot,  flatly  contradicted  by  Beet).  Meyer  (followed  by 
Beet),  Cremer  and  Hofmann  contend  for  the  active  meaning — "  robbing."  To  be  equal  with 
God. — The  Jews  considered  Christ's  peculiar  claim  of  Sonship  as  a  "making  Himself  equal 
with  God  "  (John  v.  18). 

Ver.  7.  But  made  Himself  of  no  reputation. — E.V.  "emptied  Himself."  The  emphasis  is 
upon  Himself.  In  contrast  to  the  idea  lying  in "  robbery  " — that  of  emptying  the  treasures  of 
some  one  else — it  was  Himself  whom  He  made  bare.  And  took  upon  Him  the  form  of  a  ser- 
vant.— By  taking  the  form  of  a  slave.  Note  the  antitheses  in  these  verses  (6,  7),  "  being  in 
the  form  of  God,"  "took  the  form  of  a  servant,"  "equality  with  God,"  "  emptied  Himself." 
And  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  men. — Lit.  "  becoming  in  similitude  of  men."  The  word 
"  likeness"  (A.V.  margin,  "  habit ")  differs  from  "  form  "  and  " fashion."  There  is,  of  course, 
no  support  for  the  Docetic  teaching  that  Christ  was  only  seemingly  a  man. 

Ver.  8.  In  fashion. — The  entire  outwardly  perceptible  mode  and  form.  Men  saw  in  Christ 
a  human  form,  bearing,  language,  action,  mode  of  life,  wants  and  their  satisfaction,  in 
general,  the  state  and  relations  of  a  human  being  so  that  He  was  recognised  "  as  a  man  " 
{Meyer).  "  Form  "  (in  vers.  6,  7)  is  that  which  is  intrinsic  and  essential.  "  Fashion  "  is  that 
which  is  outward  and  accidental.  Became  obedient  unto  death. — Does  not  mean  that  He 
humbled  Himself  so  as  to  become  a  cringing  slave  to  the  King  of  Terrors ;  but  that  His 
obedience  to  God  went  to  the  uttermost  limit — as  far  as  death — even  the  death  of  the  cross. 

y  321 


chap.  II.         EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    PHILIPPIANS. 


That  is,  the  death  of  the  accursed,  the  death  reserved  for  malefactors.     Jewish  hatred  still 
speaks  of  Christ  as,  "  The  man  who  was  hung." 

Ver.  9.  Highly  exalted — A  word  much  stronger  than  those,  e.g., in  the  Acts,  which  describe 
the  raising  np  of  the  murdered  Lord  of  life.  We  trace  the  descent  step  by  step  to  the  last 
rung  of  the  ladder ;  by  one  stupendous  act  (Rom.  i.  4)  God  graced  His  Son  with  unique 
honour  and  dignity  (Eph.  i.  21). 

Ver.  10.  That  at  the  name  of  Jesus. — Not  at  the  mention  of  the  name  Jesus,  but  in  the 
name  of  Jesus.  For  illustration  of  the  phrase  see  Christ's  own  words,  "in  My  name" 
(John  xiv.  13, 14,  etc.).  Every  knee  should  bow. — The  outward  symbol  of  an  inward  submission 
or  recognition  of  superiority.  By  what  language  could  the  apostle  express  the  exaltation 
above  creaturely  needs  if  not  by  this  ?  If  used  of  a  creature,  it  would  be  blasphemous.  The 
jealous  God  does  not  allow  bowing  down  in  worship  to  any  but  Himself.  As  Pliny  said, 
Quasi  Deo. 

Ver.  11.  Should  confess. — "  Proclaim  with  thanksgiving  "  (Lightfoot).  It  is  the  word  which 
describes  the  frank  admission  [of  wrong,  Matt.  iii.  6].  That  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord. — The 
emphasis  is  on  "  Lord."  The  specific  Christian  profession  of  faith  is  "  Jesus  is  Lord"  ;  its 
opposite,  '•  Anathema  Jesus  "  (1  Cor.  xii.  3  and  Rom.  x.  9). 

Ver.  12.  Ye  have  always  obeyed. — Obedience  describes  the  attitude  of  the  mind  of  these 
Philippians  in  presence  of  the  commanding  truths  of  the  gospel :  "  Obedience  "  or  "  obedience 
of  faith  "  is  found  several  times  in  the  epistle  to  the  Romans  ;  and  in  2  Cor.  vii.  15  stands  in 
close  connection  with  "  fear  and  trembling,"  as  here.  Fear  and  trembling. — Such  an  appre- 
hensive desire  to  be  right  with  God  as  is  figured  by  bodily  tremor. 

Ver.  13.  For  it  is  God  which  worketh  in  you. — This  sentence  removes  all  merit  from  the 
most  punctilious  diligence,  whilst  it  as  effectually  takes  away  the  paralysing  fear  of  failure 
to  which  "  workers  together  with  God  "  need  never  give  place. 

Ver.  14.  Do  all  things  without  murmurings. — Without  mutterings,  as  men  who  in  cowardice 
dare  not  speak  plainly  what  they  think.  We  must  consider  the  warning  as  against  God  on 
account  of  what  He  imposed  on  them  both  to  do  and  to  suffer.  And  disputings. — The  word 
goes  much  deeper  than  the  restricted  meaning  of  "  disputings."  It  seems  here  to  mean  with- 
out first  entering  upon  scrupulous  considerings  as  to  whether  you  are  under  any  obligation 
thereto,  whether  it  is  not  too  difficult,  whether  prudent,  and  the  like  {Meyer'). 

Ver.  15.  That  ye  may  be  blameless. — Sons  of  God  they  are  already  ;  they  are  now  to  become 
worthy  sons.  In  the  word  "  blameless"  we  have  the  idea  of  a  character  in  which  no  grace  is 
defective  (Heb.  viii.  7  is  a  good  illustration.  If  the  first  covenant  had  been  faultless,  a  second 
would  have  been  superfluous).  And  harmless. — Christ's  own  counsel.  "Be  harmless  as 
doves."  Lit.  the  word  means  unmixed,  unadulterated,  and  figuratively,  artless.  Of  sophistries 
and  the  deep  things  of  Satan  he  would  rather  they  were  in  happy  ignorance  (Matt.  x.  16 ; 
Rom.  xvi.  19).  Without  rebuke. — Vulgate,  "  immaculatum."  The  word  is  originally  a  sacri- 
fiical  term.  It  describes  the  victim  in  which  the  keen  inquisitorial  eye  of  the  official  inspector 
has  found  no  fault.  So  (1  Pet.  i.  19)  of  the  Lamb  of  God,  in  the  whiteness  of  spotless  innocency . 
Crooked  and  perverse  generation. — St.  Peter  uses  the  former  word  in  his  indictment  of  the 
men  of  his  own  day  (Acts  ii.  40),  and  to  describe  cross-tempered  masters  (1  Pet.  ii.  18).  The 
Rabbins  take  the  term  "  perverse  "  as  used  in  Eccles.  vii.  13  (LXX.)  to  denote  those  bodily 
deformed.  Here,  as  in  our  Lord's  use  (Matt.  xvii.  17),  of  a  moral  nature  all  warped  and  knotted. 
Ye  shine  as  lights  in  the  world. — R.V.  "ye  are  seen."  A  metaphor  from  the  heavenly 
luminaries  (Gen.  i.  14,  16;  Matt.  v.  14). 

Ver.  16.  Holding  forth  the  word  of  life. — "  If  we  are  to  look  for  any  metaphor  it  would  most 
naturally  be  that  of  offering  food  or  wine"  {Lightfoot).  Why  it  should  be  at  all  events  wholly 
•unconnected  with  the  preceding  image  in  "lights  in  the  world"  one  does  not  quite  see. 
There  is  nothing  objectionable  in  the  thought  of  a  star  holding  forth  its  beam  to  the  mariner, 
or  the  benighted  wayfarer,  and  it  has  the  advantage  of  continuity  of  the  metaphor  in  the 
verse  previous.  That  I  may  rejoice  in  the  day  of  Christ. — As  good  news  of  his  convert's 
fidelity  was  like  a  new  lease  of  life  to  the  worn  apostle  (1  Thess.  iii.  8),  so  his  sweetest  hope 
was  to  be  able  to  stand  before  his  Lord  with  his  children  by  his  side.  Have  not  run  .  .  . 
laboured. — Athletic  terms  familiar  to  St.  Paul's  readers. 

Ver.  17.  If  I  be  offered  upon  the  sacrifice. — R.V.  margin,  "poured  out  as  a  drink-offering." 
Whether  the  reference  is  to  the  cup  of  wine  poured  over  the  heathen  sacrifice  or  the  drink- 
offering  of  the  Jewish  is  doubted,  and  is  of  little  consequence,  since  in  either  case  his  mean- 
ing would  be  clear  enough.     And  service. — Priestly  function  (Luke  i.  23). 

Ver.  20.  No  man  likeminded. — A.V.  margin,  "  so  dear  unto  me,"  evidently  because  the  same 
word  is  used  in  Ps.  lv.  13.  "Likeminded"  with  whom?  "With  me,"  says  Meyer,  that  is, 
"  having  the  same  tender  feeling  towards  you  as  I  have."  Who  will  naturally  care. — Not  of 
necessity,  nor  grudgingly. 

Ver.  21.  All  seek  their  own. — Interpret  how  we  will,  this  is  a  bitter  sentence.  We  are  apt 
to  be  severe  on  those  who  have  other  engagements  when  we  feel  our  need  of  friends. 

Ver.  22.  Ye  know  the  proof. — The  character  that   shows  itself  under  strain  or  testing 

322 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   PHILIPPIANS.         chap.  II. 


(Acts  xvi.  1  and  xvii.  14,  xix.  22,  xx.  3,  4).  As  a  son  with  the  father.—  R.V.  "as  a  child 
serveth."  The  older  man  and  the  younger  had  slaved  for  the  gospel ;  as  for  some  dear  object 
of  desire  a  father  and  his  son  may  be  seen  at  work  together. 

Ver.  24.  I  trust  in  the  Lord  that  I  also  myself  shall  come  shortly. — The  apostle,  in  personal 
matters,  is  on  the  same  footing  with  the  most  obscure  Christian.  When  his  friends  forsake 
him  he  must  bear  it  with  what  fortitude  he  can.  When  darkness  surrounds  him  he  mutt 
wait  God's  time — no  prophecy  lifts  the  veil. 

Ver.  .25.  Epaphroditus. — Brother,  work-mate,  comrade-in-arms,  Church-messenger,  and 
serving-man.  What  a  designation  !  St.  Paul  thinks  him  worthy  of  all  the  honour  (ver.  29) 
that  the  Church  can  give,  and  he  himself  immortalises  him  by  this  unusual  estimate  of  his 
personal  character  and  work. 

Ver.  26.  Was  full  of  heaviness. — The  same  word  is  used  of  our  Lord  when  in  Gethsemane — 
"  He  began  to  be  very  heavy."  Its  etymology  is  an  open  question.  Grimm,  following 
Buttmann,  says  it  means  "  the  uncomfortable  feeling  of  one  who  is  not  at  home."  If  this, 
the  almost  universally  accepted  derivation  be  the  correct  one,  it  is  a  beautiful  idyll  we  have 
presented  to  us.  A  convalescent,  far  from  home,  as  his  strength  returns  feels  the  pangs  of 
home-sickness  strengthen  and  eagerly  returns  to  dispel  the  misgivings  of  those  made  anxious 
by  tidings  of  his  critical  illness. 

Ver.  27.  Nigh  unto  death. — Or  as  we  say  colloquially,  "  next  door  to  death."  God  had 
mercy  on  him. — St.  Paul  speaks  after  the  manner  of  men,  as  we  could  not  have  dared  to  say 
anything  else  if  Epaphroditus  had  died.  The  cry  of  woe  so  often  heard  by  Christ  was  "  have 
mercy."  Sorrow  upon  sorrow. — "  He  does  not  parade  the  apathy  of  the  Stoics,  as  though  he 
were  iron  and  far  removed  from  human  affections"  (Calvin). 

"  When  sorrows  come  they  come  not  single  spies, 
'But  in  battalions." 

Ver.  28.  The  more  carefully. — R.V.  "  diligently."  "  With  increased  eagerness"  (Liglitfoot). 
How  difficult  it  must  have  been  for  St.  Paul  to  relinquish  the  company  of  so  worthy  a  man  we 
do  not  realise  ;  but  he  who  gives  up  is  worthy  of  the  friend  he  gives  up,  for  neither  of  them  is 
consulting  his  own  wishes.  "  Love  seeketh  not  her  own."  What  a  contrast  to  sordid 
Hedonism — old  or  new  !  Ye  may  rejoice,  and  that  I  may  he  the  less  sorrowful. — A  variation 
on  the  theme  of  the  letter — the  sum  of  which  is,  as  Bengel  says,  "  I  rejoice ;  rejoice  ye." 
What  an  exquisitely  chosen  form  of  expression  !  "  A  prior  sorrow  will  still  remain  unre- 
moved,"  says  Lightf oot ;  "  but  if  he  cannot  go  so  far  as  to  say  he  will  rejoice,  the  alleviat/ion 
of  the  loss  of  such  a  friend's  society  is  the  fact  that  they  have  him  again." 

Ver.  29.  Hold  such  in  honour. — Learn  to  know  the  value  of  such — "  grapple  them  to  thy  soul 
with  hooks  of  steel." 

Ver.  30.  For  the  work  of  Christ. — What  noble  self-oblivion  the  apostle  manifests!  He 
thinks  more  of  the  cause  dear  to  his  heart  than  of  his  own  comfort  or  even  life.  Not  regard- 
ing his  life. — R.V.  "  hazarding  his  life."  There  is  the  difference  of  a  single  letter  in  the  long 
word  of  the  R.V.  The  word  of  the  R.V.  means  "having  gambled  with  his  life."  Just  as  to- 
day a  visitor  to  Rome  in  the  autumn  must  run  the  risk  of  malarial  fever,  so  Epaphroditus, 
for  the  work  of  Christ,  had  faced  that,  and  other  dangers  as  great,  probably.  The  A.V.  would 
mean  "as  far  as  his  life  was  concerned  he  followed  an  ill-advised  course  of  action."  To 
supply  your  lack  of  service  toward  me. — Does  not  mean  that  they  had  been  remiss  in  their 
attention.     They  did  not  lack  the  will,  but  the  opportunity. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—4. 

Christian  Unity  an  Occasion  of  Joy. 

I.  Christian  unity  is  a  striving  after  the  Spirit  of  Christ. — "  That  ye  be 
likeminded  "  (ver.  2). 

1.  Manifested  in  loving  consolation  to  those  in  distress. — "  If  there  be  therefore 
any  consolation  in  Christ,  if  any  comfort  of  love"  (ver.  1).  If  the  pagan 
expressed  unity  by  those  who  dwelt  in  one  village  and  drank  of  one  fountain, 
how  much  more  real  is  the  union  of  those  who  drink  of  the  same  Spirit  and 
practise  the  lovingkindness  of  the  one  Christ.  A  striking  evidence  of  the 
unity  of  Christianity  is  seen  in  its  sympathy  everywhere  for  the  poor,  the  sick, 
and  the  unfortunate.     It  is  Christ-like  to  comfort  and  help  the  distressed. 

2.  Manifested  in  spiritual  fellowship. — "  If  any  fellowship  of  the  Spirit " 
(ver.  1).  Christians  are  one  by  their  communion  together,  flowing  from  their 
joint  participation  in  the  same  Spirit.     The  union  of  hearts  is  more  real  and 

323 


chap.  II.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    PHILIPPIANS. 


stable  than  the  external  union  expressed  by  creeds  and  contracts.     The  Spirit  is 
the  unifying  power  of  Christendom. 

3.  Manifested  in  compassion  for  the  suffering. — "  If  any  bowels  and  mercies" 
(ver.  1).  Christianity  is  a  mission  to  the  suffering.  Before  the  Christian  era 
there  were  no  hospitals  and  infirmaries,  no  care  for  the  afflicted  poor.  Unselfish 
benevolence  was  almost  unknown.  Nothing  is  more  remarkable  than  the  spirit 
of  tender  compassion  that  Christianity  has  breathed  into  social  and  national 
life. 

II.  Christianity  is  opposed  to  a  spirit  of  faction  and  empty  boasting. — "  Let 
nothing  be  done  through  strife  or  vainglory  "  (ver.  3).  The  message  of  the 
gospel  is  one  of  peace  and  goodwill  to  all  men.  It  is  foreign  to  its  spirit  to 
exalt  the  interests  of  party  or  of  self ;  it  seeks  to  promote  a  universal  and  all- 
pervasive  charity.  The  Germans  have  a  legend  connected  with  the  terrific  battle 
of  Chalons  between  the  Visigoths  and  the  Romans  against  Attila.  The  bloody 
work  of  the  sword  was  done,  the  plain  was  strewn  with  heaps  of  the  slain ;  but 
for  three  nights  following — so  ran  the  story — the  spirits  of  the  slain  hovered  over 
the  scene  and  continued  the  strife  in  the  air.  The  like  has  been  done  again  and 
again  in  the  party  strifes  and  controversies  of  the  Church.  Unity  is  impossible 
where  contention  and  vanity  have  sway. 

III.  Christian  unity  is  strengthened  by  the  maintenance  of  a  humble  spirit. 
— 1.  In  comparing  oneself  with  others.  "In  lowliness  of  mind  let  each  esteem 
other  better  than  themselves  "  (ver.  3).  The  man  who  walks  humbly  with  God, 
realising  his  complete  dependence  on  Him,  will  not  unduly  exalt  himself,  and 
will  highly  esteem  others,  as  knowing  that  they  are  equally  with  himself 
dependent  on  God  for  their  abilities.  Instead  of  fixing  your  eyes  on  those  points 
in  which  you  may  excel,  fix  them  on  those  in  which  your  neighbour  excels  you  : 
to  do  this  is  true  humility.  The  excellencies  of  others  are  better  known  than 
their  defects,  and  our  own  defects  are  better  known  to  ourselves  than  to  others. 
A  sense  of  personal  short-coming  will  keep  us  humble.  Humility  is  a  special 
product  of  Christianity.  The  whole  Roman  language,  with  all  t*he  improvements 
of  the  Augustan  age,  does  not  afford  so  much  as  a  name  for  humility ;  nor  was 
one  found  in  all  the  copious  language  of  the  Greeks,  till  it  was  made  by  the  great 
apostle. 

2.  In  considering  other  people's  interests  as  well  as  your  own. — "  Look  not  every 
man  on  his  own  things,  but  every  man  also  on  the  things  of  others "  (ver.  4) 
The  truly  humble  are  thoroughly  disinterested.  The  work  of  the  meek  and 
lowly  Jesus  is  the  loftiest  example  of  disinterestedness.  He  looked  to  the  things 
of  others  rather  than  to  His  own.  In  unselfishly  seeking  the  good  of  others  we 
promote  our  own.  When  Augustine  was  asked,  "  What  is  the  first  thing  in 
religion  ? "  he  answered,  "  Humility."  "  What  is  the  second  ?  "  "  Humility." 
"  And  what  is  the  third  ?  "  "  Humility."  Speaking  of  pride,  Augustine  truly 
said,  "  That  which  first  overcame  man  is  the  last  thing  he  overcomes."  Humility 
is  a  strong  bond  of  Christian  unity. 

IV.  Christian  unity  is  an  occasion  of  great  joy. — "  Fulfil  ye  my  joy"  (ver.  2). 
The  weak  spot  in  the  disposition  of  the  Philippians  was  a  tendency  to  quarrel- 
someness ;  hence  he  insists  upon  unity.  They  had  given  him  joy  in  the  other 
Christian  excellencies  they  possessed ;  he  asks  them  to  complete  his  joy  in 
cherishing  the  grace  of  unity.  "  Behold,"  exclaimed  tho  rejoicing  Psalmist,  as  he 
contemplated  the  union  of  the  Jewish  tribes,  "  how  good  and  how  pleasant  a  thing 
it  is  for  brethren  to  dwell  together  in  unity."  The  bundle  of  arrows  cannot  be 
broken  while  it  remains  a  bundle.  Tacitus,  an  ancient  Latin  historian,  says  of 
the  Germans,  what  sceptics  and  others  find  true  of  Christians,  "  Whilst  fighting 
separately,  all  are  conquered  together."  The  strength  of  the  Christian  Church 
lies  in  its  consolidation. 

324 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   PHILIPPIANS.        chap.  ii. 


Lessons. — 1.  Christian  unity  is  of  supreme  importance.  2.  Is  absolutely 
necessary  to  represent  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  3.  Is  the  cause  of  much  joy  to  the  anxious 
minister. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE    VERSES. 


Vers.  1,2.  Unity  and  Concord  in  the 
Church. — 1.  As  unity  and  concord  is 
necessary  in  itself  and  at  all  times,  so 
is  it  most  necessary  in  suffering  times  : 
the  enjoyment  of  Christ's  presence,  the 
reaping  of  any  spiritual  advantage  by 
the  communion  and  love  of  the  saints, 
fellowship  with  God  through  the  opera- 
tion of  the  Spirit,  depend  upon  it. 
2.  The  success  of  the  gospel  will  be 
matter  of  joy  to  a  public-spirited 
Christian,  even  in  the  midst  of  his  own 
crosses  and  sufferings.  3.  That  unity 
and  concord  among  the  Churches  may 
be  solid  and  lasting,  there  should  be 
unity  of  will  and  affections*,  of  designs 
and  endeavours,  and  in  opinion  and 
matters  of  judgment. — Fergusson. 

Ver.  3.  Humility  an  Antidote  to 
Contention. — 1.  The  lust  of  vainglory, 
whereby  a  man  pursues  more  after  the 
applause  of  men  than  to  be  approved 
of  God,  is  the  mother  of  contention  and 
strife,  and  unfriendly  to  union  and 
peace.  2.  The  grace  of  humility  does 
not  consist  in  an  affected  strain  of 
words  and  gestures,  but,  being  seated 
in  the  heart,  makes  a  man  think 
meanly  of  himself  and  of  anything 
that  is  his.  3.  So  conscious  should  we  be 
of  our  own  infirmities,  so  modest  in  the 
esteem  of  our  own  graces  and  virtues, 


so  prone  to  charity,  that  we  ought  to 
esteem  any  other,  for  what  we  know  of 
him,  to  be  better  than  ourselves. — 
Ibid. 

Ver.  4.  Looking  on  the  Things  of 
Others. 

I.  One  school  in  which  we  learn  the 
lesson  of  unselfishness  is  the  home 
circle. 

II.  Another  way  in  which  God 
teaches  us  the  same  lesson  is  through 
the  experience  we  gain  in  the  inter- 
course of  daily  work. — We  divide  men 
into  the  selfish  and  the  unselfish — those 
who  work  for  self  and  think  of  self, 
and  those  whose  labours  are  for  other 
men. 

III.  We  are  taught  to  consider 
other  men  by  th  perplexities  and 
confusion  which  arise  when  we  think 
only  of  ourselves. — The  modern  philo- 
sophy is  true  so  far  when  it  says  that 
man  is  nothing  in  himself,  but  only  a 
bundle  of  relations,  the  meeting-point 
of  many  influences.  Those  who  fix 
their  attention  upon  the  meeting-point 
forget  what  makes  the  man.  Probably 
there  is  no  more  confused  or  miserable 
man  than  the  self -analyst. — A.  R. 
MacEwen. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  5—8. 

The  Humiliation  of  Christ  a  Pattern  of  Supreme  Unselfishness. 

I.  The  humiliation  of  Christ  was  no  violation  of  His  divine  essence. — 
"  Who,  being  in  the  form  of  God,  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God" 
(ver.  6).  Thought  it  not  a  prey  to  be  seized  upon.  As  He  was  in  Himself  truly 
and  properly  God,  it  could  be  no  object  of  desire  or  ambition  to  claim  equality 
with  God.  Being  God  He  could  not  undeify  Himself.  His  divinity  remained 
with  Him  through  the  whole  course  of  His  self-imposed  humiliation.  It  was 
this  that  constituted  both  the  mystery  and  the  greatness  of  the  humiliation. 

II.  The  humiliation  of  Christ  was  a  voluntary  incarnation  in  human  form. — 
"  But  made  Himself  of  no  reputation,  and  took  upon  Him  the  form  of  a  servant, 
ana  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  men  "  (ver.  7).     He  emptied  Himself,  not  of  His 

325 


chap.  II.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    PHILIPPIANS. 


divinity — that  was  impossible — but  of  the  outward  and  self- manifesting  glories 
of  the  Godhead.  He  took  the  form  of  a  servant  by  being  made  in  the  likeness 
of  man.  He  remained  full  of  divinity,  yet  He  bore  Himself  as  if  He  were 
empty.  A  native  preacher  among  the  Oneidas,  addressing  his  fellow-converts, 
said  :  "  What  are  the  views  you  form  of  the  character  of  Jesus  ?  You  will 
answer,  perhaps,  that  He  was  a  man  of  singular  benevolence.  You  will  tell  me 
that  He  proved  this  to  be  His  character  by  the  nature  of  the  miracles  He 
wrought.  He  created  bread  to  feed  thousands  who  were  ready  to  perish.  He 
raised  to  life  the  son  of  a  poor  woman  who  was  a  widow,  and  to  whom  his 
labours  were  necessary  for  her  support  in  old  age.  Are  these  then  your  only 
views  of  the  Saviour  1  I  will  tell  you  they  are  lame.  When  Jesus  came  into 
the  world  He  threw  His  blanket  around  Him,  but  the  God  was  within." 

III.  The  humiliation  of  Christ  reached  its  climax  in  a  career  of  obedience 
even  unto  death. — "  He  humbled  Himself,  and  became  obedient  unto  death, 
even  the  death  of  the  cross  "  (ver.  8).  He  fulfilled  all  the  demands  of  law  and 
of  God.  He  shrank  not  from  death — death  in  its  most  shameful  and  ignoble 
form,  the  death  of  the  cross.  He  was  numbered  with  the  transgressors — not 
an  honourable  death,  but  like  the  degrading  execution  of  criminals.  He  went 
to  the  realm  of  the  dead  and  revolutionised  it.  Hitherto  death  had  reigned 
supreme,  an  unbroken  power.  The  prison-house  of  the  dead  was  fast  locked. 
None  returned.  Now  One  comes  there  who  has  the  keys  of  Hades  and  of  death. 
He  opens  the  door  and  sets  the  captives  free.  "  Meekness  in  suffering,  prayer  for 
His  murderers,  a  faithful  resignation  of  His  soul  into  the  hands  of  His  heavenly 
Father,  the  sun  eclipsed,  the  heavens  darkened,  the  earth  trembling,  the  graves 
open,  the  rocks  rent,  the  veil  of  the  Temple  torn — who  could  say  less  than  this, 
1  Truly,  this  was  the  Son  of  God '  ?  He  suffers  patiently  ;  this  is  through  the 
power  of  grace ;  many  good  men  have  done  so  through  His  enabling.  The  frame 
of  nature  suffers  with  Him ;  this  is  proper  to  the  God  of  Nature,  the  Son  of 
God  "  (Bishop  Hall). 

IV.  The  humiliation  of  Christ  is  an  example  of  unselfishness  to  all  His 
followers. — "  Let  this  mind  be  in  you,  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (ver.  5). 
The  apostle  does  not  put  forth  himself  as  an  example,  but  Christ.  Christ  gave 
His  all  for  us,  and  we  should  give  our  all  to  Him,  and  our  best  service  for  the 
good  of  others.  No  one  can  follow  Christ  until  he  has  first  found  Christ.  Some 
try  to  imitate  Christ  before  they  have  savingly  found  Him.  To  look  at  Christ 
as  our  Example  only,  and  not  as  our  Redeemer,  is  not  to  see  Him  as  He  is. 
Without  faith  in  Christ  as  our  Redeemer  we  cannot  really  follow  His  example. 
Without  the  grace  of  Christ  there  can  be  no  imitation  of  Christ.  A  little  girl 
once  presented  to  a  celebrated  statesman  a  small  bouquet  of  ordinary  flowers, 
the  only  one  she  could  procure  at  the  season.  He  inquired  why  she  gave  him 
the  bouquet.  "  Because  I  love  you,"  the  child  answered.  "  Do  you  bring  any 
little  gifts  to  Jesus  1 "  he  asked.     "  Oh,"  said  the  child,  "  I  give  myself  to  Him." 

Lessons. — 1.  The  unselfish  are  always  humble.  2.  The  humble  are  patient 
in  doing  and,  suffering.     3.  Humility  is  the  pathway  of  exaltation. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  5-8.  The  Incarnate  Deity.  ensigns  of  divine  nature  and  govern- 

I.  That    Christ    did    not   seek   to  ment. 

retain  an  appearance  of  divine  glory  III.  He  entered  upon  a  course  of 

and  co-equality.  responsible  subordination. 

II.  He   divested    Himself  actually  IV.  He  united  Himself  to  human 
of  His    appropriate    and   descriptive  nature  by  a  perfect  incarnation. 

326 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    PHILIPPIANS.         chap.  ii. 


V.  He  stooped  to  the  most  ex- 
treme depression  of  state. 

VI.  He  reduced  Himself  to  the 
necessity  of  death. 

VII.  He  yielded  to  death  in  a 
peculiar  form. 

Lessons. — 1.  How  admirable  is  the 
expedient  of  the  Redeemer's  incarnation  ! 
2.  What  a  sublime  example  does  the 
conduct  of  the  Saviour  afford. — R.  W. 
Hamilton. 

Ver.  5.  The  Christian  Temper  the 
Same  Mind  which  was  in  Christ. 

I.  Some  things  in  which  we  cannot 
consider  Christ  as  an  example. — All 
those  graces  in  us  which  suppose  our 
guilt  and  fallen  state  could  not  be 
exemplified  to  us  by  our  Saviour. 

II.  Some  things  related  of  Christ 
we  must  not  pretend  to  imitate. — 
What  He  did  under  the  character  of 
Messiah  was  peculiar  to  Himself,  and 
not  designed  to  put  us  on  doing  like- 
wise. 

III.  Why  Christians  should  copy 
the  mind  and  temper  of  Christ. — 
1.  It  was  the  design  of  God  to  set  His 
Son  before  us  as  the  model  of  the  Chris- 
tian temper.  2.  He  was  a  pattern 
admirably  fitted  to  be  proposed  to  our 
imitation.  (1)  He  was  an  example  in 
our  own  nature.  (2)  His  circumstances 
and  conduct  in  our  nature  adapted 
His  example  to  the  most  general  use. 
(3)  His  example  was  perfect,  so  that  it 
has  the  force  of  a  rule.  3.  The  relations 
in  which  we  stand  to  Christ  and  the 
concern  we  have  with  Him  lay  us 
under  the  strongest  engagements  to  en- 
deavour a  resemblance.  He  is  our 
friend,  our  Lord  and  Master,  our  Head, 
our  Judge,  the  model  of  our  final 
happiness. 

Lessons.  —  1.  Christianity  in  its 
main  design  is  a  practical  thing.  2.  We 
see  the  advantages  we  have  by  the  gospel 
beyond  any  other  dispensation  for  true 
goodness.  3.  How  inexcusable  must 
they  be  who  are  not  recovered  to  a  god- 
like temper  and  conversation  by  this  most 
excellent  dispensation !  4.  With  what 
care  and  attention  should  v)e  study  the 
life  of  Christ! — J.  Evans,  D.D. 


Christ  our  Pattern. 
I.  The  mind  of  Christ  was  a  pure 
mind. 

II.  A  self-sacrificing  mind. 

III.  A  lowly  mind. 

IV.  A  forbearing  mind. 
V.  A  constant  mind. 

VI.  A  prayerful  mind. —  Preacher's 
Magazine. 

Vers.  6,  7.  Christ  the  Redeemer. — 
This  which  the  Son  of  God  did  and 
underwent  is  the  one  fact  of  heaven 
and  earth,  with  which  none  in  creation, 
none  in  history,  none  in  your  own 
personal  being,  can  for  a  moment  be 
compared,  but  in  the  presence  and  in 
the  light  of  which  all  these  ought  to  be 
contemplated  and  concluded — that  it 
is  the  great  object  of  faith  and  prac- 
tice. Of  faith — for  upon  the  personal 
and  hearty  reception  of  it  as  the 
foundation  of  your  life  before  God, 
that  life  itself,  and  all  its  prospects, 
depend ;  of  practice — for  high  above 
all  other  examples,  shining  over  and 
blessing  while  it  surpasses  them,  is 
this  mighty  example  of  the  Son  of 
God.  Oh,  brethren,  how  the  selfish  man 
and  the  selfish  woman  and  the  selfish 
family  ought  to  depart  from  such  a 
theme  as  this,  downcast  for  very 
shame,  and  abased  at  their  unlikeness 
to  the  pattern  which  they  profess  to  be 
imitating  !  Oh  that  this  question  might 
be  fixed  and  rankle  like  a  dart  in  their 
bosoms,  even  till  it  will  take  no  answer 
but  the  surrender  of  the  life  to  Him, 
and,  by  the  daily  grace  of  His  Spirit, 
living  as  He  lived  ! — Alford. 

Ver.   8.   Christ's  Crucifixion — 

I.  As  an  historical  fact. — It  is  quite 
certain. 

II.  As  displaying  in  its  circum- 
stances every  variety  of  human 
character. 

III.  As    accompanied  by    striking 
prodigies. —  The    darkened    sun,    the 
quaking  earth,  the  cleft  rocks,  the  rent, 
veil,  the  opened  graves. 

IV.  As  furnishing  an  illustrious 
example  of  the  passive  virtues  — 
Taught  us  how  to  suffer  and  to  die. 

327 


CHAP.  II.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    PHILIPPIANS. 


V.  As  being  the  brightest  mani-  prophet,  as  a  martyr,  as  an  example  ? 
festation  of  self-denying  and  self-  Yes;  but  chiefly  as  a  sacrifice  for 
devoting  love.  sin. 

VI.  As  constituting  the  sole  meri-  VII.  As  producing  the  most  wonder  - 
torious  cause  of  human  salvation. —  ful  moral  transformations.  —  On  in- 
Who  is*  the  sufferer  ?  The  Son  of  dividuals,  on  communities,  and  on 
God.      Why  does  He    suffer  ?     As  a  Christendom. — G.  Brooks. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  9—11. 

The  Exaltation  of  Christ — 

I.  Was  a  divine  act. — "  Wherefore  God    also  hath   highly  exalted   Him " 
ver.    9).     As  a  recognition   of  the  humiliation  and  obedience  of  Christ,  God 

exalted  Him  to  the  throne  of  mediatorial  sovereignty.  As  Bengel  puts  it, 
"  Christ  emptied  Christ ;  God  exalted  Christ  as  man  to  equality  with  God  " 
(Compare  Ps.  viii.  5;  6,  ex.  1,  7  ;  Matt,  xxviii.  18;  Luke  xxiv.  26  ;  John  v.  27, 
x.  17  ;  Rom.  xiv.  9 ;  Eph.  i.  20-22 ;  Heb.  ii.  9). 

II.  Was  the  acquisition  of  a  name  of  pre-eminent  dignity  and  significance. — 
"  And  given  Him  a  name  which  is  above  every  name,  that  at  the  name  of 
Jesus"  (vers.  9,  10).  Jesus  is  the  same  as  Joshua,  or  Jehoshua,  only  framed  to 
the  Greek  pronunciation  and  termination.  Joshua,  who  brought  the  hosts  of 
Israel  into  the  rest  of  Canaan,  was  originally  called  Hoshea,  but  it  was  changed 
into  Joshua  or  Jehoshua,  by  an  addition  of  the  first  syllable  in  the  divine  name 
Jehovah,  perhaps  to  intimate  that  not  Joshua  of  himself,  but  Jehovah  by  him, 
would  complete  the  deliverance  and  rest  of  Israel.  The  name  Jesus  means 
Jehovah  -Saviour ?  or  Jehovah- Salvation,  and  Jesus  is  so  called  because  He  saves 
His  people  from  their  sins.  The  name  cannot  be  given  to  any  other  being  ;  it 
belongs  solely  and  absolutely  to  the  one  Jesus.  "  Here  we  should  probably  look," 
says  Lightfoot,  "to  a  common  Hebrew  sense  of  name,  not  meaning  a  definite 
appellation,  but  denoting  office,  rank,  dignity.  In  this  case  the  use  of  the  name 
of  God  in  the  Old  Testament  to  denote  the  divine  Presence  or  the  divine  Majesty, 
more  especially  as  the  object  of  adoration  and  praise,  will  suggest  the  true 
meaning ;  since  the  context  dwells  on  the  honour  and  worship  henceforth  offered 
to  Him  on  whom  the  name  has  been  conferred.  To  praise  the  name,  to  bless  the 
name,  to  fear  the  name  of  God,  are  frequent  expressions  in  the  Old  Testament." 
The  name  of  Jesus  marks  the  pre-eminence  of  Jesus — it  is  the  "  name  above 
every  name."  That  name  wields  the  mightiest  power  in  the  world  to-day.  A 
modern  writer  of  reputation  has  said :  "  There  is  a  wave — I  believe  it  is  only 
a  wave — passing  over  the  cultivated  thought  of  Europe  at  present,  which  will 
make  short  work  of  all  belief  in  a  God  that  does  not  grip  fast  to  Jesus  Christ. 
As  far  as  I  can  read  the  signs  of  the  times  and  the  tendency  of  modern  thinking, 
it  is  this — either  an  absolute  silence,  a  heaven  stretching  above  us,  blue  and  clear 
and  cold,  and  far  away  and  dumb  ;  or  else  a  Christ  that  speaks — He  or  none. 
The  theism  that  has  shaken  itself  loose  from  Him  will  be  crushed,  I  am  sure,  in 
the  encounter  with  the  agnosticism  and  materialism  of  this  day."  The  name  of 
the  exalted  Jesus  is  the  salvation  of  the  world  in  more  senses  than  one. 

III.  Entitles  him  to  universal  homage. — "  Every  knee  shall  bow  .  .  .  and  every 
tongue  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord"  (vers.  10,  11).  Beings  above,  below, 
and  on  the  earth  shall  acknowledge  the  supremacy  and  deity  of  Jesus,  and  unite 
in  a  universal  and  consentaneous  act  of  praise  and  worship  of  His  divine 
majesty.  On  the  door  of  the  old  mosque  in  Damascus,  once  a  Christian  church, 
but  now  ranked  among  the  holiest  of  the  Mahometan  sanctuaries,  are  inscribed 
these  remarkable  words  :  "  Thy  kingdom,  O  Christ,  is  an  everlasting  kingdom, 
and  thy  dominion  endureth  throughout  all  generations."     For  more  than  twelve 

328 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    PHILIPPIANS.         chap,  tt 


hundred  years  the  inscription  has  remained  unimpaired  by  time  and  undisturbed 
by  man.  What  is  it  waiting  for  ?  Already  a  Christian  Church  has  been  founded 
in  that  ancient  city,  and  the  gospel  is  preached  there  every  Sabbath.  The 
world's  submission  to  Jesus  is  drawing  near. 

Lessons. — The  name  of  Jesus — 1.  Is  unique  in  its  reputation.  2.  In  its 
moral  influence  among  the  nations.  3.  In  its  saving  power.  4.  In  the  homage 
paid  to  it. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Yers.  9-11.  The  Name  of  Jesus :  its         We  learn  a  lesson   of  humility. — 

Exaltation  and  Power.  1.  Because  Christ  humbled  Himself  for 

I.  The  Saviour's  exaltation  (ver.  9).  us.  2.  We  should  humble  ourselves  on 
— He  was  exalted  by  His  resurrection  account  of  past  sins.  3.  Humility 
from   the    dead,    His    ascension    into  leads  to  exaltation. 

heaven,    and   His   glorious   session  at 

tho  right   hand   of   God,   whence   He  Christ  Worthy  of  Universal  Homage. 

now  discharges  the  high  functions  of  — 1.  The  Lord  Christ,  having  abased 

Prophet,  Priest,  and  King.  Himself     for     our     redemption,     was 

II.  The  Saviour's  name. — "  That  exalted  by  the  Father  to  the  highest 
at  the  name  of  Jesus"  (ver.  10).  pitch  of  glory.  2.  The  name  which 
Jehovah,  the  Saviour.  is   above    every   name    is    said    to   be 

1.  The  supreme  eminence  of  the  given  to  Christ,  because  His  divine 
name. — "  A  name  which  is  above  every  majesty,  before  hid,  was  now  mani- 
name."  tested  and  the  human  nature  so  highly 

2.  Pre-eminent  because  no  other  being  honoured  that  that  person  who  is  man 
could  receive  the  title.  is  true  God,  and  is  to  be  acknowledged 

3.  Pre-eminent  because  there  is  no  as  such.  3.  However  small  a  part  of 
other  name  that  has  the  mysterious  virtue  the  world  acknowledge  Christ  to  be 
of  saving  as  this.  the  Lord,  Jlis  glory  will  grow  till  all 

III.  The  power  of  the  Saviour's  reasonable  creatures  in  heaven,  earth, 
name.- — 1.  In  saving  the  sinner.  2.  In  and  hell  subject  themselves  to  Him, 
commanding  the  homage  and  worship  of  and  the  giving  of  divine  honour  to 
all,  and  in  eliciting  the  universal  acknow-  Him  does  in  no  way  impair  the  glory 
ledgment  of  His  deity  (vers.  10,  11).  of  God  the  Father. — Fergusson. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH— Verses  12,  13. 

Salvation — GodJs  Work  and  Maris  Care. 

I.  Salvation  is  a  personal  blessing, — "Your  own  salvation"  (ver.  12).  If 
Christ  died  for  all,  then  He  died  for  me  and  I  may  be  saved.  It  matters  little  if 
others  are  being  saved  unless  I  am  saved  myself.  It  is  impossible  to  be  genuinely 
interested  in  the  salvation  of  others  unless  we  are  saved  ourselves.  Salvation 
deals  with  the  individual;  it  gathers  its  trophies  one  by  one.  "I  have  read  of 
some  seas,"  writes  Bunyan,  "  so  pure  and  clear  that  a  man  may  see  the  bottom, 
though  they  be  forty  feet  deep.  I  know  this  river  is  a  deep  river,  but  it  is  not  said 
that  we  can  see  no  bottom."  The  comparison  implies  that  a  man  with  good  eyes 
may  see  the  bottom.  So,  then,  we  shall  look  down  through  these  crystal  streams 
and  see  what  be  at  the  bottom  of  all.  The  bottom  of  all  is  that  we  might  be 
saved.  "  These  things  I  say,"  saith  Christ,  "  that  ye  might  be  saved."  What  a 
good,  sound  bottom  is  here  !  This  salvation  admits  man  to  a  wealth  of  blessings 
impossible  to  estimate.  Salvation  should  therefore  be  sought  by  every  man 
earnestly,  believingly,  promptly. 

329 


chap.  II.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    PHILIPPIANS. 


II.  Salvation  needs  constant  personal  care. — u  Work  out  your  own  salvation 
with  fear  and  trembling  "  (ver.  12). 

1.  The  Christian  worker  is  surrounded  with  spiritual  perils. — The  apostle  has 
referred  to  these  perils  in  warning  the  Philippians  against  pride,  selfishness, 
faction,  and  vain  boasting  (vers.  3,  4).  To  secure  his  salvation  the  believer  must 
not  only  work,  but  work  with  circumspection,  with  vigilance,  with  fear  and 
trembling.  "  God  does  not  give  the  flower  and  the  fruit  of  salvation,  but  the 
seed,  the  sunshine,  and  the  rain.  He  does  not  give  houses,  nor  yet  beams  and 
squared  stones,  but  trees,  rocks,  and  limestone,  and  says,  '  Now  build  thyself  a 
house.'  Regard  not  God's  work  within  thee  as  an  anchor  to  hold  thy  bark  firmly 
to  the  shore,  but  as  a  sail  which  shall  carry  it  to  its  port.  Fear  thy  depression 
and  faint -heartedness,  but  take  courage  at  thy  humility  before  God  "  (Lange). 

2.  Personal  care  the  more  necessary  when  deprived  of  the  oversight  of  a  loved 
teacher. — "  Wherefore,  my  beloved,  as  ye  have  always  obeyed,  not  as  in  my 
presence  only,  but  now  much  more  in  my  absence"  (ver.  12).  The  Philippians 
had  shown  a  spirit  of  ready  obedience  both  to  the  apostle  and  to  God,  and  they 
are  urged  to  increased  diligence.  The  apostle's  "absence  did  not  make  the 
obligation  less  imperative,  but  it  demanded  more  earnestness  and  vigilance  from 
them  in  the  discharge  of  the  duty.  His  voice  and  person  were  a  guide  and 
stimulant  and  excited  them  to  assiduous  labour,  so  that  his  presence  among 
them  wrought  like  a  charm.  And  now  that  he  was  not  with  them,  and  they 
were  left  to  themselves,  they  were  so  much  the  more  to  double  their  diligence 
and  work  out  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling — with  distrust  of  themselves, 
earnest  solicitude  in  every  duty,  humble  reliance  on  divine  aid,  with  the  abiding 
consciousness  that  after  all  they  come  far  short  of  meeting  obligation  "  (Eadie). 

III.  Salvation  is  a  divine  work. — 1.  God  is  pleased  to  work  in  us  to  create  a 
right  disposition. — "It  is  God  that  worketh  in  you  to  will  ...  of  His  good  pleasure" 
(ver.  13).  The  desire  for  salvation  and  the  disposition  and  will  to  seek  it  come 
from  God.  As  the  sun  warms  the  earth  and  helps  the  flower  to  grow  and  bloom, 
so  the  Spirit  of  God  warms  the  heart  and  calls  forth  the  growth  and  blossom  of 
Christian  graces.  God  does  not  take  out  mental  and  moral  apparati  and  put 
in  a  new  set,  like  the  works  of  a  clock ;  but  He  encourages  us  to  use  the  powers 
already  within  and  breathes  upon  us  the  vitalising  influence  of  His  Spirit,  so 
that  we  produce  results  in  harmony  with  His  will. 

2.  God  is  pleased  to  work  in  us  to  confer  the  moral  ability  to  work. — "God  worketh 
in  you  ...  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure"  (ver.  13).  Some  men  have  ability  to  do 
great  things,  but  have  not  the  disposition ;  others  may  have  the  disposition,  but 
not  the  ability.  In  the  work  of  our  salvation  God  gives  both  the  disposition 
and  the  power.  Because  God  works  in  us  we  may  work  ;  because  He  works  in 
us  we  must  work  out  our  own  salvation.  The  means  of  salvation  are  within 
our  reach ;  it  is  our  part  to  use  them.  How  does  the  miner  get  out  of  the  pit  ? 
There  is  a  string  at  the  bottom ;  he  pulls  it ;  a  bell  at  the  top  rings ;  a  rope, 
worked  by  a  steam-engine,  is  let  down,  and  in  this  way  he  ascends  to  the  top. 
A  man  gets  down  into  the  pit  of  trouble ;  he  cannot  get  up  himself ;  he  must 
ring  the  bell  of  prayer ;  God  will  hear  it  and  send  down  the  rope  that  is  to  lift 
him  out.  Man  can  do  nothing  without  God,  and  God  will  do  nothing  without 
the  willing  co-operation  of  man. 

Lessons. — 1.  Salvation  is  possible  for  every  man.  2.  Salvation  may  be  secured 
by  man  yielding  to  the  divine  influences  working  within  him.  3.  If  man  is  not 
saved,  it  is  his  own  fault. 


330 


HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY:    PHILIPPIANS.         chap.  ii. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 


Yers.  12,  13.  Divine  and  Human 
Co-operation  in  Maris  Salvation. 

I.  The  salvation  to  be  wrought  out. 
— Salvation  simply  means  deliverance. 
It  may  be  either  temporal  or  spiritual, 
or  both.  The  process  of  salvation  is  to 
be  continuous. 

IT.  In  the  work  of  our  salvation 
divine  and  human  co-operation  is 
necessary. — Illustrated  in  the  pro- 
ducts of  nature,  in  works  of  art  and 
skill.  1.  God  works  in  us  by  the  light 
of  His  truth.  2.  By  appealing  to  us 
with  the  influence  of  powerful  motives. 
3.  Works  in  us  by  the  influences  of  His 
Spirit. 

III.  Seek  to  ascertain  to  what 
extent  we  are  indebted  for  our 
personal  salvation  to  God  working  in 
US. — Our  salvation  from  first  to  last  is 
from  God  ;  that  we  are  saved  by  grace, 
yet  not  so  as  to  destroy  our  own  effort. 
He  produces  in  us  the  will  and  power. 
We  are  to  exercise  the  will  and  power 
by  repenting,  believing,  and  living  a 
life  of  holiness. 

IV.  Why  we  are  to  work  out  our  own 
salvation  with  fear  atd  trembling. — 
Because  of  the  possibility  of  our  unfaith- 
fulness. May  be  too  sure  of  salvation, 
and  too  doubtful. — J.  C.  Symons. 

The  Active  Exertion  of  Man  in  work- 
ing out  his  Salvation  harmonises  with 
the  Free  Grace  of  God  as  being  the  Sole 
Author  of  it. — There  are  two  facts  con- 
nected with  the  deliverance  of  the 
Israelites  out  of  Egypt — their  preserva- 
tion in  the  wilderness,  and  their  settle- 
ment in  the  land  of  Canaan — to  which 
I  wouM  solicit  your  attention. 

I.  That  all  was  done  for  them  by 
God,  and  is  to  be  ascribed  solely,  from 
first  to  last,  to  His  almighty  power 
and  grace. — 1.  The  means  by  which 
the  establishment  of  the  Israelites  in 
the  promised  land  was  effected  were 
evidently  beyond  the  reach  of  human 
agency.  2.  Even  in  those  particular 
cases  in  which  the  active  exertions  of 
the   Israelites   were   employed   as  the 


means  of  their  deliverance  or  success 
the  whole  is  ascribed  to  God.  (1)  He 
gave  them  courage  to  fight  against 
their  enemies ;  (2)  He  gave  them 
success  by  sending  terror  into  the 
hearts  of  their  enemies. 

II.  That  although  God  thus  did 
everything  for  them,  He  did  it  in 
such  a  way  as  to  bring  every  power  of 
their  minds  and  bodies  into  exercise, 
and  to  render  their  own  activity  abso- 
lutely necessary  to  their  preservation 
and  success. — Illustrated  in  the 
passage  of  the  Red  Sea,  and  in  the 
first  battle  of  the  Israelites  with 
the  Amalekites  (Exod.  xvii.  8). 

Lessons. — 1.  As  the  deliverance  of 
the  Israelites  and  their  establishment  in 
Canaan  was  wholly  of  God,  so  the  salva- 
tion of  every  sinner  is  to  be  ascribed 
solely  and  entirely  to  His  mercy  and 
power.  2.  As  God  required  the  Israelites 
to  be  active,  watchful,  diligent,  ardent, 
.and  strenuous  in  their  exertions  to  over- 
come difficulties  and  to  defeat  their 
enemies,  so  He  requires  His  people  to 
make  their  calling  and  election  sure,  to 
work  out  their  salvation  with  fear  and 
trembling. — Although  God  does  all  for 
us  in  the  matter  of  our  salvation, 
yet  He  places  us  in  situations  where 
we  must  exert  ourselves  or  perish. — 
Anonymous. 

The  Co-operation  of  Human  and 
Divine  Agency  in  our  Salvation. 

I.  This  co-operation  of  divine  and 
human  energies  has  place  in  all  the 
most  important  facts  and  pursuits  that 
make  up  the  history  of  man. — 1.  It 
is  true  of  the  commencement  of  our 
being.  2.  Our  growth  and  education 
are  the  result  of  the  same  joint  agency. 
3.  This  fundamental  law  reigns  over 
all  the  works  of  man. 

II.  What  does  God  accomplish  and 
what  does  He  demand  of  us  in  the 
joint  working  out  of  our  salvation  1 — 
1 .  God  works  in  us  by  the  light  of  His 
truth.  2.  By  the  power  of  motives. 
3.  By  the  energy  of  His  Spirit. 

331 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   PHILIPPIANS. 


III.  What  is  the  intent  and  object 
of  these  divine  operations  ? — 1.  They 
are  not  designed  to  transform  the  char- 
acter as,  when  after  conversion,  they  are 
■media  of  sanctification.  2.  Human 
co-operation  is  the  indispensable  condition 
of  progress.  3.  Will  and  do.  These 
describe  the  duty  of  the  unconverted 
man. — S.  Olin,  D.D. 


Man's  Work  and  GooVs  Work. 

I.  This  salvation  is  begun  when  we 
believe  in  Christ,  but  it  requires  to  be 
worked  out. 

II.  The  fact  that  God  works  in  us 
renders  our  working  possible. 

III.  The  fact  that  God  works  in  us 
should  make  us  fear  and  tremble. — 
R.  Abercrombie,  M.A. 


MAIN  HOMILET1CS   OF   THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  14—18. 

The  Lustre  of  a  Blameless  Life — 

I.  Suppresses  all  murmuring  and  doubt  as  unworthy  of  the  children  of  God. 
— "  Do  all  things  without  murmurings  and  disputings  :  that  ye  may  be  blameless 
and  harmless,  the  sons  of  God  without  rebuke"  (vers.  14,  15).  As  the  sons  of 
God,  distinguished  by  so  high  and  holy  a  calling,  believers  should  be  blameless 
and  pure.  Their  spiritual  integrity  should  lift  them  above  the  cause  of  blame. 
To  be  pure  and  blameless  they  must  not  yield  to  the  spirit  of  dissatisfaction  and 
doubt.  "  No  matter  what  may  tend  to  excite  this  spirit,  it  must  not  be  indulged, 
whether  the  temptation  to  it  be  the  divine  command,  the  nature  of  the  duty,  the 
self-denial  it  involves,  or  the  opposition  occasionally  encountered.  There  was 
neither  grudge  nor  reluctance  with  Him  whose  example  is  described  in  the 
preceding  verses,  no  murmur  at  the  depth  of  His  condescension,  or  doubt  as  to 
the  amount  or  severity  of  the  sufferings  which  for  others  He  so  willingly  endured  " 
(Eadie). 

II.  Sheds  a  guiding  light  in  the  midst  of  a  dark  world. — a  In  the  midst  of  a 
crooked  and  perverse  nation,  among  whom  ye  shine  as  lights  in  the  world ;  hold- 
ing forth  the  word  of  life"  (vers.  15,  16).  The  Philippians  were  to  be  a  light 
and  guide  to  their  fellow-citizens,  a  people  made  up  of  Jew  and  pagan,  moved 
by  tortuous  and  perverse  impulses.  Nothing  would  please  them  :  give  them  one 
argument,  they  cry  for  another ;  tell  them  of  the  simplicity  of  the  gospel,  they 
prefer  you  should  dwell  on  its  mysteries ;  speak  of  its  power,  they  ask  you  to 
expound  its  charity.  The  children  of  God  are  to  society  everywhere  what  the 
heavenly  luminaries  are  to  the  world — they  are  to  diffuse  light,  and  guide  the 
way  to  a  better  life.  The  star  which  led  the  wise  men  to  Christ,  the  pillar  of 
lire  which  led.  the  children  of  Israel  into  Canaan,  did  not  only  shine,  but  went 
before  them.  Believers  shine  by  the  light  of  the  word  which  they  hold  forth, 
and  that  light  is  the  guide  to  others.  Virtue  should  shine  in  cities,  not  in 
solitudes.  .The  Christian's  duty  is  here  among  men  ;  and  the  nearer  he  draws  to 
his  fellow-men,  so  that  his  religion  be  real  and  true,  the  more  good  he  is  likely 
to  do  them.  On  the  north  coast  of  Cornwall  and  Devon  is  a  lighthouse,  which 
first  of  all  was  placed  high  upon  the  cliffs,  where  the  mists  and  fogs  often  obscured 
and  hid  its  brightness  from  the  passing  mariner  in  hours  of  the  sorest  need.  So 
they  took  it  down  and  built  it  afresh  on  the  rock  out  at  sea,  amid  the  waves  of 
that  dangerous  coast,  there  to  shine  where  it  was  most  necessary. 

III.  Supplies  a  prolific  theme  of  ministerial  joy. — 1.  A  joy  complete  when  his 
work  is  finally  appraised.  "  That  I  may  rejoice  in  the  day  of  Christ,  that  I  have 
not  run  in  vain,  neither  laboured  in  vain  "  (ver.  16).  The  apostle  had  run  with 
the  eagerness  of  a  racer  in  the  Isthmian  games — the  prizes  he  sought,  the  souls  of 
men ;  he  had  laboured  with  strenuous  and  persevering  diligence — the  wages  he 
sought,  the  souls  of  men ;  and  now  looking  by  anticipation  at  the  results  of  his 
apostolic  toil,  in  the  light  of  the  great  day  of  Christ,  his  greatest  joy  will  be 
that  his  efforts  have  not   been   in  vain.     His   joy   then   will   be,    not   in  the 

332 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    PHILIPPIANS.         chap.  ii. 


number  and  wealth  of  the  Churches  he  founded,  but  in  the  spiritual  pro- 
gress and  advancement  of  the  members.  The  results  of  work  for  Christ  are 
often  in  this  world  obscured  and  confused ;  but  in  the  day  of  Christ  all  will  be 
clear  and  the  work  seen  in  all  its  beauty  and  dimensions.  The  joy  of  success  is 
often  checkered  and  interrupted  in  this  life  ;  but  yonder  the  joy  will  be  complete 
and  full.     We  shall  share  the  joy  of  the  conquering  Christ. 

2.  A  joy  not  diminished  though  life  is  prematurely  sacrificed. — "  Yea,  and  if  I 
be  offered  upon  the  sacrifice  and  service  of  your  faith,  I  joy,  and  rejoice  with  you 
all"  (ver.  17).  The  apostle's  image  is  that  of  an  altar,  on  which  the  faith  of 
the  Philippians  is  laid  by  him  as  priest,  while  his  own  blood  is  being  poured  out 
as  the  usual  drink-offering  or  libation.  In  the  near  prospect  of  martyrdom  he 
has  no  gloomy  anticipations.  Death  will  not  terminate  his  joy,  but  accelerate  it, 
as  it  will  admit  him  to  realms  where  all  is  calm  and  joy  and  peace.  Such  is  the 
triumph  of  the  Christian  spirit ;  it  can  rejoice  in  tribulation  and  in  the  very 
presence  of  death. 

3.  A  joy  in  which  his  converts  may  share. — "  For  the  same  cause  also  do  ye  joy, 
and  rejoice  with  me"  (ver.  18).  So  far  from  being  dispirited  by  the  prospect  of 
his  martyrdom,  the  apostle  calls  upon  them  to  share  his  joy  on  account  of  the 
success  of  the  gospel.  How  often  in  the  changeful  experiences  of  life  are  joy  and 
sorrow  mingled  together.  "  Joy  lives  in  the  midst  of  the  sorrow ;  the  sorrow 
springs  from  the  same  root  as  the  gladness.  The  two  do  not  clash  against  each 
.other,  or  reduce  the  emotion  to  a  neutral  indifference,  but  they  blend  into  one 
another,  just  as  in  the  Arctic  regions,  deep  down  beneath  the  cold  snow  with  its 
white  desolation  and  its  barren  death,  you  shall  find  the  budding  of  the  early 
spring  flowers  and  the  fresh  green  grass ;  just  as  some  kinds  of  fire  burn  below 
the  water ;  just  as  in  the  midst  of  the  barren  and  undrinkable  sea  there  may  be 
welling  up  some  little  fountain  of  fresh  water  that  comes  from  a  deeper  depth 
than  the  great  ocean  around  it  and  pours  its  sweet  streams  along  the  surface  of 
the  salt  waste  "  (Maclaren). 

Lessons. — 1.  A  blameless  life  is  the  product  of  the  grace  of  God.  2.  Is  a  rebuke 
to  the  wavering  and  inconsistent.  3.  Evokes  the  congratulations  of  the  good  in  both 
worlds. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  15, 16.  Christians  Examples  to  Yer.  16.  The  Word  of  Life :  a  Living 

the    World. — 1.     Divisions    and    strife  Ministry  and  a  Living  Church. 
grieve  the    Spirit  and   darken   those  I.    To   apprehend   the   life   of  the 

evidences   of   sonship   which  believers  Church  we  must  apprehend   the  life 

in    a    calm   and   peaceful   temper    of  of  its  Head. 

spirit  used  to  see  most  clearly.  2.  We  II.  A  living  ministry. — 1.  Requires 
stop  the  mouths  of  enemies  when  our  confidence  in  the  office  and  work  itself. 
conversation  is  such  as  may  discover  2.  Distinctness  of  purpose.  3.  A  quick 
to  others  their  failings,  and  point  out  and  profound  sense  of  the  nature  and 
that,  good  way  wherein  they  ought  to  dignity  of  the  soul.  4.  One  that 
walk.  3.  Suitable  practice  joined  with  preaches  more  than  moral  decency  : 
profession  puts  such  a  majesty  and  preaches  piety,  regeneration,  and  faith, 
splendour  on  truth  that  every  Chris-  5.  Must  not  be  afraid  to  assert  what 
tian  is  to  profane  men  as  the  sun  and  passes  its  own  reason. 
moon  are  in  the  firmament.  4.  The  III.  A  living  Church. — 1.  A  safe- 
glory  put  on  gracious  souls  at  the  guard  against  dogmatism.  2.  Formalism. 
day  of  judgment  will  add  to  the  3.  Partisanship.  4.  Is  a  body  whose 
glory  and  joy  of  faithful  ministers. —  life  is  the  life  of  Christ  in  the  soul. — 
Fergusson.  F.  D.  Huntington,  D.D. 

333 


chap.  ii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    PHILIPPIANS. 


Vers.  16-18.  The  Joy  of  Ministerial  work. — "  Yea,    and    if    I    be   offered 

Success —  upon  the  sacrifice  and  service  of  your 

I.  Sustained  by  the  assurance  of  faith,  I  joy,  and  rejoice  with  you 
the  final    approval    of   his  heavenly  all"  (ver.  17). 

Master. — "  That  I  may  rejoice  in  the         III.  Shared  by  those  who  profit  by 

day  of  Christ  "  (ver.  16).  his    ministry. — "For  the  same  cause 

II.  Cheerfully  sacrifices  life  itself  also  do  ye  joy,  and  rejoice  with  me" 
in  the  successful  prosecution  of  his  (ver.  18). 

MAIN  HOMILETICS    OF   THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses   19—24. 

A  Projected  Christian  Mission — 

1.  Prompted  by  anxiety  to  promote  the  spiritual  welfare  of  the  Church. — 
"  But  I  trust  in  the  Lord  Jesus  to  send  Timotheus  shortly  unto  you,  that  I  also 
may  be  of  good  comfort,  when  I  know  your  state  "  (ver.  19).  We  have  already 
gathered,  from  our  study  of  this  epistle  thus  far,  that  the  apostle  was  solicitous 
about  the  spiritual  state  of  the  Philippian  Church  ;  and  this  visit  of  Timothy  was 
preparatory  to  his  own  coming  to  see  them.  He  turns  from  the  sadder  side  of 
his  own  likely  martyrdom  to  the  more  hopeful  prospect  of  once  more  being  in 
their  midst.  The  true  minister  of  Christ  can  never  forget  his  people,  whether 
present  among  them  or  absent  ■  and  his  principal  anxiety  is  to  know  that  they 
are  growing  in  grace  and  Christian  usefulness.  He  seeks  to  keep  in  touch  with 
them  by  letters  or  personal  messengers,  and  the  theme  of  his  communications 
will  be  based  on  their  mutual  interest  in  the  cause  of  Christ.  His  movements 
and  wishes  concerning  them  are  all  based  on  the  will  of  Christ. 

II.  Committed  to  a  trustworthy  messenger. — 1.  A  messenger  in  genuine 
sympathy  with  the  anxiety  of  the  sender.  "  For  I  have  no  man  likeminded,  who 
will  naturally  care  for  your  state  "  (ver.  20).  Timothy  is  of  such  a  nature,  has 
a  soul  so  like  my  own,  that  when  he  comes  among  you  he  will  manifest  a  true 
regard  for  your  best  interests.  This  choice  evangelist  was  a  native  of  Lycaonia, 
in  the  centre  of  Asia  Minor.  Faithfully  and  lovingly  taught  by  his  mother,  a 
pious  Jewess,  to  long  and  look  for  the  Messiah  promised  to  the  fathers,  he  was 
led,  on  Paul's  first  visit  to  these  regions,  to  recognise  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth  the 
great  Deliverer  and  to  accept  Him  as  his  Saviour.  On  the  apostle's  second 
visit,  four  or  five  years  afterwards,  finding  Timothy  highly  commended  by  the 
Christians  of  the  district,  he  took  him  as  his  companion,  to  give  such  aid  in 
missionary  work  as  a  young  man  could,  and  to  be  trained  for  full  efficiency  as  a 
preacher  of  the  cross.  From  that  time  onward  we  find  him  in  constant  connec- 
tion with  the  apostle,  either  as  his  companion  or  as  carrying  on  some  special 
ministerial  work  which  Paul  had  entrusted  to  him.  His  close  fellowship  with  the 
apostle  gave  him  opportunites  of  becoming  familiar  with  the  great  reading 
themes  of  the  gospel,  and  with  the  high  aims  and  motives  with  which  his 
teacher  was  constantly  animated. 

2.  A  messenger  free  from  a  self-seeking  spirit. — "  For  all  seek  their  own,  not 
the  things  which  are  Jesus  Christ's"  (ver.  21).  Among  the  other  members  of 
the  Church  likely  to  be  entrusted  with  such  a  mission  there  was  no  one  like 
Timothy — so  devoted,  so  whole-hearted,  so  unselfish.  The  early  Church  was  not 
less  free  from  imperfections  than  the  modern  Church  ;  the  self-seeking  spirit  is 
as  permanent  as  human  nature.  When  a  certain  bishop  was  asked  by  an 
acquaintance  what  was  the  best  body  of  divinity,  he  did  not  scruple  to  answer, 
"That  which  can  help  a  man  to  keep  a  coach  and  six  horses." 

3.  A  messenger  whose  fidelity  .has  been  tested. — "  But  ye  know  the  proof  of  him, 
that,  as  a  son  with  the  father,  he  hath  served  with  me  in  the  gospel "  (ver.  22). 
Paul  does  not  say  that  Timothy  served  him — though  that  was  true — but  served 

331      . 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    PHILIPPIANS.         chap.  ii. 


with  him  in  the  gospel,  showing  filial  affection  and  willing  obedience.  The 
simplicity  and  unselfishness,  the  mellow  Christian  wisdom,  the  patience  and 
gentleness  of  the  apostle,  fitted  in  with  a  charming  meekness,  unselfishness,  and 
affectionateness  in  his  young  friend.  The  apostle  watched  with  joy  the  maturing 
grace  of  his  beloved  companion  and  fellow -labourer  ;  and  Timothy  was  thankful 
to  God  for  giving  him  such  a  friend.  The  courage  and  fidelity  of  the  young 
evangelist  had  been  tried  in  times  of  difficulty,  and  of  this  the  apostle  and  the 
Philippians  had  had  many  proofs.  The  Church  was  therefore  ready  to  welcome 
him  with  confidence  and  respect.  The  minister  should  be  faithful  to  the  gospel 
at  all  times.  Oliver  Millard,  an  earnest  and  popular  preacher  of  the  reign  of 
Louis  XI.,  attacked  the  vices  of  the  court  in  his  sermons,  and  did  not  spare  the 
king  himself,  who,  taking  offence,  sent  the  priest  word  that  if  he  did  not  change 
his  tone  he  would  have  him  thrown  into  the  Seine.  "  The  king,"  replied  Oliver, 
"  is  the  master  to  do  what  he  pleases ;  but  tell  him  that  I  shall  reach  paradise 
by  water  sooner  than  he  will  by  post-horse?."  This  bold  answer  at  once  amused 
and  intimidated  the  king,  for  he  let  the  preacher  continue  to  preach  as  he  pleased 
and  what  he  pleased. 

III.  To  be  followed  by  a  hoped-for  personal  visit. — "  Him  therefore  I  hope 
to  send  presently,  so  soon  as  I  shall  see  how  it  will  go  with  me.  But  I  trust  in 
the  Lord  that  I  also  myself  shall  come  shortly  "  (vers.  23,  24).  Until  his  own  fate 
is  determined,  the  apostle  seems  desirous  to  keep  Timothy  with  him  ;  but  as  soon 
as  he  learned  the  issue,  he  would  despatch  his  trusty  messenger  to  Philippi,  and 
cherished  the  hope  of  coming  himself.  Whatever  the  result  may  be,  martyrdom 
or  liberty,  the  apostle  calmly  and  firmly  trusts  in  the  Lord. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  good  are  ever  devising  plans  for  the  benefit  of  others.  2.  An 
earnest  spirit  inspires  others  to  holy  toil.  3.  The  best  virtues  are  strengthened  by 
Christian  work. 


GERM  NOTES   ON  THE    VERSES. 

Yers.   19-24.  Ministerial  Anxiety  for  Yer.  21.  The  Life  of  Christ  the  only 

the    Welfare   of   the    Church. — 1.    The  True  Idea  of  Self-devotion. — A  refined 

crosses  and   comforts  of   a   Christian,  selfishness   is    one    of    the    worst   an- 

endued  with  a  truly  public  spirit,  depend  tagonists  of  the  Church  of  Christ, 

not  so  much  upon  those  things  which  I.  It  may  consist  with  all  the  Church 

concern  himself,  as  those  which  are  of  requires  as  a  condition  to  communion 

public  concern  to  Jesus  Christ  and  His  in  her  fullest  privileges. 

Church.      2.  A  minister  imitates  the  II.  But  it  extinguishes  all  that  ever 

apostles  in  watching  over  their  flock  produced  any  great  work  in  Christ's 

when  the  state  of  souls  is  the  object  of  service. 

his  care,  and  when  the  care  arises,  not  III.  The  secret  of  that  stupendous 

from  constraint,  but  from  love  to  the  self  devotion  which  saints  in  all  ages 

party  cared  for.     3.  Our  own  things  have  manifested  is — they  set  up  th9 

and  the  things  of  Christ  are  often  in  life  of  Christ  before  them, 

two  contrary  balances.     4.  The  calling  IY.  The  customs  of  life  and  all  the 

of    the    ministry    is    a    service,    and  current  maxims  and  unwritten  laws  of 

ministers  are  servants   of   Christ,  for  society  maintain  so  tyrannous  a  hold 

the  Church,  and  not  lords  over  their  even  over  good  minds  that  high  and 

faith. — Eergusson.  generous    tempers    are    chilled    into 

inaction. — H.  E.  Manning. 


335 


chap.  II.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   PHILIPPIANS. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF   THE  PARAGRAPH.— -Verses  25—30. 

A  Devoted  Christian  Minister — 

I.  A  valued  associate  of  good  men. — "  Epaphroditus,  my  brother,  and  com- 
panion in  labour,  and  fellow-soldier,  but  your  messenger,  and  he  that  ministered 
to  my  wants  "  (ver.  25).  Epaphroditus  had  been  sent  by  the  Philippian  Church 
with  a  gift  to  Paul,  and,  pending  the  proposed  visit  of  himself  or  Timothy,  he 
employs  him  as  his  messenger.  The  commendation  of  Epaphroditus  indicates 
the  apostle's  high  estimate  of  the  character  of  the  man — a  Christian  brother, 
a  colleague  in  toil,  a  fellow-soldier  in  scenes  of  danger  and  conflict.  The  work 
of  the  Christian  minister  brings  him  into  contact  with  the  noblest  spirits  of  the 
times. 

II.  Full  of  sympathy  for  the  anxieties  of  his  people. — "  For  he  longed  after 
you  all,  and  was  full  of  heaviness,  because  that  ye  had  heard  that  he  had  been 
sick  "  (ver.  26).  It  may  be  that  Epaphroditus  was  the  more  anxious  to  return 
to  his  people  lest  the  rumour  of  his  sickness  should  have  disastrous  consequences 
on  the  state  of  his  Church,  that  some  parties  between  whom  he  had  mediated 
should  take  advantage  of  his  prostration  and  fall  again  into  animosity,  or  it  may 
be  that  he  might  dispel  the  distress  and  sorrow  of  his  people  on  his  own  account. 
This  longing  to  see  his  people  reveals  a  womanly  tenderness  that  some  men  might 
call  weakness.  Paul  did  not  so  regard  it.  He  knew  the  manly  robustness  of 
spirit,  the  decision,  energy,  and  devotedness  that  had  made  Epaphroditus  his 
honoured  companion  in  labour  and  fellow-soldier;  and  to  him  the  element  of 
softness  and  sweetness  brought  out  in  the  languor  of  the  recovery  exhibited  a 
new  charm.  "  The  best  men  often  show  a  union  of  opposite  virtues ;  for  example, 
Epaphroditus.  The  finest  delicacy  of  soul  which,  if  alone,  might  seem  excessive 
and  effeminate,  allies  itself  to  a  manly  courage,  which  sets  at  naught  life  itself. 
The  deepest  love  of  the  Church  does  not  exclude  a  most  faithful  attachment  to 
its  great  apostle,  nor  anxiety  for  the  present  moment  forbid  sympathy  for  a 
distant  community.  One  may  reverence  and  acknowledge  superior  men,  and  yet 
give  all  the  glory  to  God  alone  ;  may  be  anxious  for  his  own  soul,  and  yet  give 
himself  to  the  welfare  of  the  Church  and  the  common  service  of  its  membership  " 
(Lange). 

III.  Exposed  himself  to  great  risk  in  the  eager  discharge  of  duty. — "  For 
indeed  he  was  sick  nigh  unto  death  :  but  God  had  mercy  on  him  ;  .  .  .  I  sent  him 
therefore  .  .  .  that  when  ye  see  him  again  ye  may  rejoice,  and  that  I  may  be  the 
less  sorrowful"  (vers.  27,  28).  The  sickness  of  Epaphroditus  was  probably 
brought  on  by  the  risks  and  exposures  of  his  journey  from  Philippi  to  Home.  It 
was  no  easy  task  for  a  Christian,  one  of  a  sect  everywhere  spoken  against,  hated 
and  oppressed,  having  no  protection  from  either  Jewish  or  Roman  rule,  to  under- 
take such  a  mission,  carrying  aid  to  a  man  in  prison,  who  was  bitterly  hated  by 
many,  and  over  whose  approaching  execution  they  were  gloating  with  a  fiendish 
satisfaction.  But  Epaphroditus  braved  all  the  privations  and  sufferings  of  the 
perilous  enterprise,  and  would  not  hesitate  to  acknowledge  publicly  before  the 
world  that  the  prisoner  he  sought  to  help  was  his  friend.  Paul  fully  understood 
all  the  perils  of  the  adventure  and  that  it  had  nearly  cost  a  valuable  life ;  he 
thus  specially  acknowledges  the  mercy  of  God  both  to  himself  and  the  Philippians 
and  the  mitigation  of  their  mutual  sorrow  in  the  recovery  of  Epaphroditus. 
"  Life,  especially  the  life  of  a  faithful  servant  of  Christ,  possesses  great  value. 
For  such  a  life  we  ought  to  pray ;  and  it  is  an  act  of  God's  grace  when  it  is 
preserved  to  the  Church  "  (Heubner).  "  It  is  a  fine  thing,"  wrote  Sailer,  "  if  you 
can  say  a  man  lived  and  never  lifted  a  stone  against  his  neighbour ;  but  it  is  a 
finer  far  if  you  can  say  also  he  took  out  of  the  path  the  stones  that  would  have 
caught  his  neighbour's  feet.     So  did  Feneberg,  and  this  his  doing  was  his  life." 

336 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   PHILIPPIANS.         chap.  II. 


IV.  Highly  commended  for  his  character  and  work's  sake. — "  Receive  him 
therefore  in  the  Lord  with  all  gladness ;  and  hold  such  in  reputation :  because  for 
the  work  of  Christ  he  was  nigh  unto  death,  not  regarding  his  life,  to  supply  your 
lack  of  service  toward  me  "  (vers.  29,  30).  Words  of  highest  eulogy,  coming  from 
such  a  source,  and  uttered  under  such  circumstances.  How  tender,  unreserved 
and  unselfish  are  the  apostle's  commendations  of  Timothy  and  Epaphroditus,  and 
how  large  and  loving  the  heart  from  which  they  came  !  Even  with  these 
friends,  so  dear  and  needful  to  him,  the  aged  servant  of  Christ,  worn  with  labour 
and  suffering,  is  willing,  for  the  work  of  Christ,  to  part,  and  to  be  left  alone. 
And.  this  man  was  notorious,  a  few  years  before,  as  Saul  the  persecutor.  What 
wrought  the  change  ?  The  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God.  The  faithful, 
conscientious,  self-denying  minister  of  the  word  cannot  fail  to  win  the  esteem 
and  love  of  his  people. 

Lessons. — 1.  A  Christian  minister  has  many  opportunities  of  usefulness, 
2.  Should  cultivate  a  generous  and  sympathetic  nature.  3.  Should  be  faithful  in 
all  things. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers.  25-28.  Anxieties  of  Ministerial  wards,  so  the  grief  which  the  Philippians 

Life. — 1.  Ministerial  employment  is  a  had  because  of  their  pastor's  sickness 

painful,   laborious  work,  and  faithful  and   apprehended  death  ended  in  joy 

ministers  who  are  standard-bearers  or  when  they  saw  him  in  health  again. — 

sentinels,  and  march  in  the  front,  be-  Fergusson. 
fore  the  Lord's  people,  have  a  peculiar 

battle    of    their   own   for    truth    and  Vers.   29,     30.    Heroic    Devotion    to 

piety.      The    Lord    sometimes   suffers  Christ — 

His   servants    to    fall  into    desperate  I.  Is  wholly  absorbed  in  the  work 

dangers,  that  His  mercy  may  be  the  of  Christ. 

more     seen     in     their     delivery.       3.  II.  Bisks  life  in  serving  the  cause 

Courage    under    sufferings   for  Christ,  of  God. 

and    rejoicing   in    God,    may    consist  III.    Should    be   held    in    highest 

with   moderate  sorrow  and  heaviness.  esteem. 

4.  The  weights  and  griefs  of  the  godly  IV.   Should    be    joyfully    acknow- 

do  prove  an  occasion  of  rejoicing  after-  ledged  in  whomsoever  manifested. 


3  .  337 


chap.  in.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   PHILIPPIANS. 


CHAPTER  III. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Finally. — Lit.  "  as  to  the  rest."  The  apostle  had  intended  to  bring  his  letter  to 
a  close,  but  something  of  which  we  have  no  information  leads  him  to  warn  his  readers 
against  Judaizers  and  their  methods.  He  resumes  his  farewell  at  iv.  8,  yet  lingers  there. 
To  write  the  same  things. — Whatever  they  may  have  been,  they  concerned  the  security  of 
his  readers.  His  hand  had  so  often  written  up  in  bold  letters  the  Cave  canem  to  warn  his 
unsuspecting  children,  that  we  may  be  allowed  to  think  that  is  what  he  means  to  do  again. 

Ver.  2.  Beware  of  dogs. — Who  would  "  turn  again  and  rend  you."  If  the  term  is  a  retort 
on  "  Gentile  dogs,"  and  looks  like  "  railing  for  railing,"  we  may  explain  it  by  the  directness 
of  the  metaphor.  Dogs  and  Judaizers  have  this  in  common — that  they  tear  flesh.  The 
savage  delight  of  having  inflicted  a  wound  is  shown  in  Gal.  vi.  13.  Beware  of  the  concision. — 
A  bitter  play  on  the  name  by  which  the  Jews  thought  themselves  distinguished  (Eph.  ii.  11). 
St.  Paul  changes  the  prefix,  and  stigmatises  them  as  "  the  mutilation  party."  Lightf  oot  gives 
illustrations  of  this  toying  with  words,  e.g.,  in  the  complaint  of  an  ambassador  that  he  had 
been  sent,  not  to  Spain,  but  to  Pain. 

Ver.  3.  For  we  are  the  circumcision. — How  completely  Paul  had  sloughed  his  Rabbinic 
literalism  this  verse  clearly  shows  (Rom.  ii.  28,  29).  Which  worship  God  in  the  Spirit. — 
See  our  Lord's  words  to  the  woman  of  Samaria,  prophetic  of  the  day  when  worship  shall  be 
set  free  from  its  trammels  and  cerements  (John  iv.  23,  24). 

Ver.  4.  Though  I  might  also  have  confidence  in  the  flesh. — They  will  never  be  able  to  say 
he  "  speaks  evil  of  that  which  he  knows  not."  "  If  there  is  any  profit  in  that  direction,"  he 
might  say,  "  I  will  set  my  foot  as  far  as  who  goes  farthest."     An  argumentwm  ad  hominem. 

Ver.  5.  Circumcised  the  eighth  day. — Beginning  with  this  he  works  his  way,  through  this 
and  the  following  verses,  to  the  climax  of  the  straitest  sect.  The  items  of  this  verse  have  to 
do  with  the  birth  and  education  of  the  apostle. 

Ver.  6.  Concerning  zeal. — "  An  expression  of  intense  irony,  condemning  while  he  seems  to 
exalt  his  former  self  "  (Lightf oof).  Righteousness  which  is  in  the  law. — Legal  righteousness. 
Exact  attention  to  all  its  manifold  commands  and  prohibitions. 

Ver.  7.  What  things  were  gain. — The  various  points  in  which  I  had  considered  myself 
fortunate,  giving  me  an  advantage  over  others.  Those  I  counted  loss  for  Christ. — The  tense 
of  the  verb  "  counted  "  denotes  an  action  the  result  of  which  continues.  It  leaves  no  place 
for  after-regrets,  like  those  of  the  woman  who  stopped  to  look  back  on  Sodom.  St.  Paul 
counts  his  Judaism,  with  its  emoluments,  well  lost.  "  Having  found  one  pearl  of  great  price, 
he  went  and  sold  all  that  he  had  and  bought  it "  (Matt.  xiii.  46). 

Ver.  8.  Yea,  doubtless,  and  I  count,  etc. — A  more  explicit  statement  of  the  abiding  satis- 
faction with  the  chosen  lot.  "I  still  do  count."  All  things. — Whatever  they  may  be — not 
simply  those  named  above.  For  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus. — "  The 
eminent  quality  of  a  possession  attained  is  the  ground  for  estimating  other  possessions 
according  to  their  relation  to  that  one  "  (Meyer).  For  whom  I  have  suffered  the  loss  of  all 
things. — The  words  "  gain "  and  "  loss  "  are  the  same  in  these  verses  as  in  our  Lord's 
memorable  saying,  "  What  doth  it  profit  a  man  if  he  gain  the  whole  world  and  forfeit  his 
life  ?  "  (Mark  viii.  36).  And  do  count  them  but  dung. — So  R. V.  text,  "  refuse,"  margin.  If 
we  accept  the  meaning  "  that  which  is  thrown  to  the  dogs,"  we  have  an  apt  interpretation, 
but  we  need  to  guard  against  attributing  to  the  apostle  subtleties  of  expression  born  in  a 
lexicographer's  brain. 

Ver  9.  Through  the  faith  of  Christ.— Better  without  the  article  as  R.V.  Faith  is  the 
medium  by  which  righteousness  comes.  The  righteousness  which  is  of  God. — Which  originates 
from  God  as  the  fount  of  all  righteousness.  By  faith. — R.V.  margin,  "upon";  that  is,  resting 
upon  faith  as  its  condition  ;  above  it  was  the  medium. 

Ver.  10.  The  power  of  His  resurrection. — The  wide-reaching  and  conquering  force  and 
efficacy  which  render  death  inert  (2  Tim.  i.  10)  and  draw  "the  sting  of  death"  (1  Cor.  xv.). 
And  the  fellowship  of  His  sufferings. — The  apostle  has  no  desire  to  go  by  any  other  way  to 
his  glory  than  that  by  which  his  Lord  went— per  crvcem  ad  lucem.  Being  made  comformable 
unto  His  death. — R.V.  "  becoming  conformed."  The  original  is  one  word  where  we  have 
three,  "  being  made  conformable,"  taking  that  lowly  guise  which  will  agree  with  the  bearing 
of  Him  who  "  took  the  form  of  a  servant."  "  The  agony  of  Gethsemane,  not  less  than  the 
agony  of  Calvary,  will  be  reproduced,  however  faintly,  in  the  faithful  servant  of  Christ." 
(Lightfoof). 

338 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   PHILIPPIANS.        chap.     hi. 


Ver.  11.  If  by  any  means  I  might  attain. — How  little  is  there  here  of  the  spirit  of  those 
who  profess  themselves  "as  sure  of  heaven  as  though  they  were  there."  Meyer  thinks  the 
expression  excludes  moral  security,  but  not  the  certitudo  salutis  in  itself.  Unto  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  dead. — By  a  very  slight  change  "from  the  dead"  instead  of  "  of  the  dead  "  the 
R.V.  indicates  rather  too  feebly  the  only  use  of  the  term  in  the  New  Testament.  "  From 
amongst"  would  have  been  more  likely  to  arrest  attention.  Whilst  Meyer  says  the  compound 
word  for  resurrection  in  no  way  differs  from  the  ordinary  one,  Ligbtfoot  thinks  the  form  of 
expression  implies  and  the  context  requires  the  meaning  "  the  final  resurrection  of  the 
righteous  to  a  new  and  glorified  life." 

Ver.  12.  Not  as  though  I  had  already  attained. — The  word  for  "attained"  may  possibly 
refer  to  the  turning-point  in  St.  Paul's  history,  and  so  the  phrase  would  mean,  "  not  as  though 
by  my  conversion  I  did  at  once  attain."  This  interpretation,  which  is  Bishop  Lightfoot's, 
is  challenged  by  Dr.  Beet.  It  seems  preferable,  on  other  than  grammatical  grounds,  because 
the  following  phrase,  if  we  refer  the  former  to  conversion,  is  an  advance  of  thought.  Either 
were  already  perfect. — Describing  a  present  state  which  is  the  consequence  of  past  processes. 
He  has  not  reached  the  condition  where  nothing  else  can  be  added.  He  is  most  blessed 
who,  as  he  mounts  ever  higher,  sees  perfection,  like  Abraham's  mount  of  sacrifice,  "  afar  off." 

Ver.  13.  Brethren,  I  count  not  myself  to  have  apprehended. — Some  think  a  reference  to 
the  opinion  of  others  lies  in  the  words  ;  but  St.  Paul  seems  to  be  denying  of  himself  what 
others  asserted  (in  various  ways)  of  themselves.  But  this  one  thing  I  do. — Lit.  "  but  one 
thing  "  ;  the  words  "  I  do  "  in  A.V.  and  R.V.  are  a  supplement.  Meyer  thinks  it  better  to 
supply  "think."  It  does  not  seem  necessary  to  supply  anything.  "  One  thing  "  the  apostle 
never  loses  sight  of  ;  all  the  threads  of  life  are  gathered  up  into  it.  Forgetting  the  things 
that  are  behind. — The  thought  of  how  much  of  the  course  has  been  covered,  and  how  it  was 
done,  sinks  in  the  consideration  of  what  has  yet  to  be  achieved.  And  reaching  forth. — "  Like 
one  of  those  eager  charioteers  ...  of  the  Circus  Maximus  .  .  .  leaning  forward  in  his  flying 
car,  bending  over  the  shaken  rein  and  the  goaded  steed  "  {Favrar).  St.  Paul  usually  employs 
the  figure  of  the  foot-race  ;  and  "  the  not  looking  back,  which  showed  a  right  temper  in  a 
runner,  would  be  fatal  to  the  charioteer"  (Lightfoof). 

Ver.  14.  I  press  toward  the  mark. — "  I  hasten  towards  the  gaol  "  where  the  adjudicators 
stand.  For  the  prize  of  the  high  calling. — If  the  "  hollow  wraith  of  dying  fame  "  could  lead 
the  athletes  to  put  forth  almost  superhuman  effort,  how  much  more  worthy  was  "  the 
amaranthine  crown  of  glory"  (1  Pet.  v.  4). 

Ver.  15.  As  many  as  be  perfect. — No  longer  novices,  but  having  been  initiated  fully  into 
the  most  secret  mysteries  of  the  faith — "that  Christian  maturity  in  which  one  is  no  longer 
a  babe  in  Christ."  The  reproachful  irony  which  some  detect  hardly  comports  with  the 
general  tone  of  the  letter. 

Ver.  16.  Let  us  walk  by  the  same  rule. — That  which  had  been  to  them  the  means  of  such 
distinct  progress  had  thus  approved  itself  as  the  safe  and  prudent  course  to  follow. 

Ver.  1 7.  Followers  together  of  me. — He  does  not,  as  some  ungracious  pastors  do,  show  the 
steep  road  to  perfection  whilst  himself  staying  at  the  wicket-gate.  Like  the  good  Shepherd 
he  leadeth  his  sheep. 

Ver.  18.  For  many  walk  .  .  .  the  enemies  of  the  cross  of  Christ. — Christians  in  name 
only,  whose  loose  interpretations  of  the  perfect  law  of  liberty  make  it  possible  to  live  an 
animal  life.  The  cross  of  Christ,  symbol  of  His  self-renunciation,  should  be  the  place  of 
execution  for  all  fleshly  desires  of  His  followers ;  and,  instead  of  that,  these  men  over  whom 
an  apostle  laments  have  made  it  an  opportunity  of  sensual  gratification.  They  say,  "  We 
cannot  help  Him  ;  He  does  not  need  our  help  ;  it  is  of  little  consequence  how  we  live." 

Ver.  19.  Whose  end  is  destruction. — Beet  argues  from  this  that  Universalism  cannot  be 
true.  It  must  be  admitted  that  St.  Paul  is  speaking  of  sins  of  the  body,  and  perhaps  is 
thinking  of  the  ruinous  effects  of  fleshly  indulgence.  Whose  god  is  their  belly. — Against  the 
dominion  of  appetite  all  the  teachers  of  mankind  are  at  one.  All  agree  in  repudiating  the 
doctrine  of  the  savage  : 

"  I  bow  to  ne'er  a  god  except  myself 
And  to  my  Belly,  first  of  deities." 

Seeley. 

"The  self-indulgence  which  wounds  the  tender  conscience  and  turns  liberty  into  licence  is  here 
condemned  "  (Light/not).  Whose  glory  is  in  their  shame. — Their  natures  are  so  utterly  per- 
verted that  they  count  that  which  is  their  degradation  as  matter  for  pride.  Like  the  man 
whom  our  Lord  describes,  such  men  not  only  "  fear  not  God,  nor  regard  man,"  but  can  lightly 
vaunt  the  fact.  Who  mind  earthly  things. — The  peculiar  form  of  expression  is  noteworthy. 
At  these  men,  "  of  the  earth,  earthy,"  the  apostle  stands  looking  in  amazement.  His 
expression  reminds  us  of  St.  James  :  "  Let  not  that  man  think  that  he  shall  receive  anything 
of  the  Lord  ;  a  doubleminded  man,  unstable  in  all  his  ways  "  (so  the  R.V.). 

Ver.  20.  For  our  conversation  is  in  heaven. — "  Our  "  is  emphatic,  contrasting  with  the 
"  earthly  things  "  just  named,     "  Conversation  "  is  that  to  which  we  most  readily  turn,  as 


339 


chap.  in.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    PHILIPPIANS. 


the  needle  trembles  to  the  pole.  Our  hearts  are  with  our  treasure,  and  that  is  far  away  from 
earthly  things.  "  They  that  say  such  things  declare  plainly  that  they  seek  a  city ;  "  it  is  the 
soul's  "  Heimweh"  the  yearning  for  the  homeland.  We  must  not  understand  the  words  to 
mean  "  Our  mode  of  speech  is  like  that  in  heaven,"  nor  "  Oar  habit  of  life  is  heavenly." 
The  word  for  "  conversation  "  means  "  the  commonwealth,"  "the  general  assembly  and  Church 
of  the  firstborn  who  are  enrolled  in  heaven"  (Heb.  xii.  23).  From  whence  also  we  look  for 
the  Saviour. — From  that  heaven,  "whither  the  Forerunner  is  for  us  entered,"  "  He  shall 
come  in  like  manner."  Meanwhile  we  stand  in  readiness  to  receive  Him.  The  word  for 
"  look  for  "  (R.V.  "  wait  for  ")  graphically  depicts  the  attitude  of  waiting. 

Ver.  21.  Who  shall  change  our  vile  body.— E.V.  much  better,  "Who  shall  fashion  anew  the 
body  of  our  humiliation."  We  are  not  to  consider  the  body  as  the  cause  of  sin,  as  something 
outside  the  redemption  wrought  by  Christ,  "  the  Saviour  of  the  body."  The  fashioning  anew 
will  not  lose  any  essential  part  of  the  body.  As  the  colours  in  a  kaleidoscope  change  form 
at  each  movement,  but  are  yet  always  the  same,  so  in  the  change  of  the  body  there  will  be 
"  transition  but  no  absolute  solution  of  continuity."  The  body  of  our  humiliation  is  the  frail 
tenement  in  which  the  exile  spirit  sojourns  (2  Cor.  v.  1-8)  ;  it  is  the  soon-wearied  companion 
of  an  eager  spirit  (Matt.  xxvi.  41);  it  "returns  to  the  dust  as  it  was  "  (Eccles.  xii.  7).  That 
it  may  be  fashioned  like  unto  His  glorious  body. — R.V.  "  that  it  may  be  conformed  to  the 
body  of  His  glory,"  as  contrasted  with  the  body  of  His  humiliation  (Phil.  ii.  8),  the  body  in 
which  He  tabernacled  amongst  us  (John  i.  14).  The  power  whereby  He  is  able  to  subdue 
all  things. — He  has  power,  not  only  to  raise  and  glorify  the  body,  but  to  subdue  and 
renovate  all  things. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS    OF   THE    PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—3. 

The  False  and  the  True  in  Religion. 

I.  The  false  in  religion  evident  in  the  character  of  its  advocates. — "  Beware 
of  dogs,  beware  of  evil  workers,  beware  of  the  concision"  (ver.  2).  "  Dogs  "  was 
an  epithet  expressive  of  great  contempt,  and  indicative  of  impurity  and  profanity. 
It  was  a  term  applied  to  the  Judaizers,  or,  as  Chrysostoai  calls  them,  "  base  and 
contemptible  Jews,  greedy  of  filthy  lucre  and  fond  of  power,  who,  desiring  to 
draw  away  numbers  of  believers,  preached  at  the  same  time  both  Christianity 
and  Judaism,  corrupting  the  gospel."  They  were  "  evil  workers  "  causing  much 
spiritual  mischief.  They  were  of  "  the  concision  " — mere  cutters  or  slashers  of 
the  flesh.  "The  same  men  are  described  in  each  clause  as  impure  and  profane, 
as  working  spiritual  mischief,  and  as  taken  up  with  a  puerile  faith  in  flesh- 
cutting.  In  the  first  clause  you  have  their  character,  in  the  second  their  conduct, 
and  in  the  third  their  destructive  creed.  Men  who  insisted  on  circumcision  as 
essential  to  salvation  made  the  rite  ridiculous — Judaized  ere  they  Christianised. 
To  circumcise  a  Gentile  was  not  only  to  subject  him  to  a  rite  which  God  never 
intended  for  him,  but  it  was  to  invest  him  with  a  false  character.  Circumcision 
to  him  was  a  forgery,  and  he  carried  a  lie  in  his  person.  Not  a  Jew,  and  yet 
marked  as  one,  having  the  token  without  the  lineage,  the  seal  of  descent  and 
not  a  drop  of  Abraham's  blood  in  his  veins.  To  hinge  salvation,  especially  in 
the  case  of  a  Gentile,  on  circumcision  was  such  a  spurious  proselytism,  such  a 
total  misappreciation  of  the  Jewish  covenant,  such  a  miserable  subversion  of  the 
liberty  of  the  gospel,  such  a  perverse  and  superstitious  reliance  on  a  manual  rite, 
that  its  advocates  might  well  be  caricatured  and  branded  as  the  concision  " 
(Eadie).  The  false  in  religion  stands  exposed  and  condemned  by  the  character 
and  methods  of  its  propagators. 

II.  The  true  in  religion  has  definite  characteristics. — 1.  In  the  spirituality 
of  its  worship.  "  For  we  are  the  circumcision,  which  worship  God  in  the  Spirit  " 
(ver.  3).  There  is  a  great  difference  between  the  derisive  use  of  the  term 
"  concision  "  and  the  use  of  the  circumcision  in  this  verse.  There  is  a  Christian 
circumcision,  which  is  a  "putting  off  the  body  of  the  sins  of  the  flesh  "  ;  and  this 
is  not  a  manual  but  a  spiritual  act.  All  that  the  old  circumcision  typified  the 
Christian  enjoys.  "  The  spiritual  offspring  of  Abraham  have  nobler  gifts  by  far 
than  his  natural  seed — blessing  not  wrapped  up  in  civil  franchise,  or  dependent 

340 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   PHILIPPIANS.        chap.  in. 


upon  time,  or  restricted  to  territory."  The  Christian  has  learnt  that  true 
religion  consists,  not  in  forms  and  ceremonies  and  temporal  privileges,  but  in  a 
right  state  of  heart  towards  God,  in  a  loftier  worship,  and  a  more  intense 
spiritual  life. 

2.  In  making  Christ  the  basis  of  confident  exultation. — "  Finally,  my  brethren, 
rejoice  in  the  Lord  .  .  .  rejoice  in  Christ  Jesus"  (vers.  1,  3).  Christ,  and  Christ 
only,  is  the  Christian's  plea,  and  the  joyous  theme  of  his  unending  song :  Christ, 
the  divine,  all-glorious  Son  of  God.  Theodosius,  in  the  fourth  century,  at  one 
time  so  far  favoured  the  Arians  as  to  let  them  open  their  places  of  worship  and 
labour  to  undermine  the  divinity  of  Christ.  Soon  after  this  he  made  his  son 
Arcadius,  a  youth  of  sixteen,  an  equal  partner  with  him  in  his  throne  ;  and  the 
noblemen  and  bishops  were  invited  to  come  on  an  appointed  day  to  congratulate 
him.  Among  the  number  was  Amphilocus,  a  famous  old  bishop  who  had  bitterly 
suffered  in  the  Arian  persecution.  He  made  a  very  handsome  address  to  the 
emperor,  and  was  about  to  take  his  leave,  when  Theodosius  exclaimed  :  "  What, 
do  you  take  no  notice  of  my  son  ?  Do  you  not  know  that  I  have  made  him 
partner  with  me  in  the  empire  ? "  Upon  this  the  good  old  bishop  went  up  to 
young  Arcadius,  and,  putting  his  hand  upon  his  head,  said,  "  The  Lord  bless  thee, 
my  son."  The  emperor,  roused  into  rage  by  this  apparent  neglect,  exclaimed : 
"  What,  is  this  all  the  respect  you  pay  to  a  prince  that  I  have  made  of  equal 
dignity  with  myself  ? "  Upon  this  the  bishop,  with  the  grandeur  of  an  angel  and 
the  zeal  of  an  apostle,  looking  the  emperor  full  in  the  face,  indignantly  said  : 
"  Sire,  do  you  so  highly  resent  my  apparent  neglect  of  jour  son  because  I  do  not 
give  him  equal  honours  with  yourself !  And  what  must  the  eternal  God  think 
of  you  who  have  given  leave  to  have  His  co-equal  and  co-eternal  Son  degraded  in 
His  proper  divinity  in  every  part  of  your  empire  ?  " 

3.  In  distrusting  the  supposed  virtue  of  outward  rites. — "And  have  no  confidence 
in  the  flesh  "  (ver.  3).  No  confidence  in  the  supposed  good  conferred  by  externals. 
Birth  and  lineage,  family,  tribe,  and  nationality  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  moral 
character  determined  by  them  on  the  other,  Paul  reckons  together  as  excellencies 
and  gifts  of  the  same  kind,  and  holds  them  in  slight  esteem  compared  with  what 
he  has  in  Christ.  The  morality  of  men  belongs  to  the  province  of  the  natural 
life  ;  it  depends  on  birth,  family,  position,  culture,  time,  and  circumstances,  and 
gives  reason,  as  does  every  favour,  for  humble  thankfulness,  but  not  for  proud 
boasting.  Such,  as  contrasted  with  the  concision,  is  the  circumcision ;  the 
children  of  believing  Abraham  and  blessed  with  him ;  serving  God  by  His  Spirit 
in  a  higher  and  more  elastic  worship  ;  glorying  in  Him  who  has  won  such 
privileges  and  blessings  for  them,  and  having  no  trust  in  any  externals  or 
formalities  on  which  the  Judaizer  laid  such  stress  as  securing  salvation  or  as 
bringing  it  within  an  available  reach  (Lange,  Eadie). 

III.  Against  the  false  in  religion  it  is  necessary  to  faithfully  warn. — 
"Beware  .  .  .  beware  .  .  .  beware!"  (ver.  2).  Like  three  peals  of  a  trumpet  giving 
a  certain  blast  do  the  three  clauses  sound,  and  the  repetition  reveals  the  intense 
anxiety  and  earnestness  of  the  alarmed  apostle.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  minister 
to  warn  his  people  of  whatever  endangers  their  spiritual  life  and  eternal  welfare. 
News  came  to  a  certain  town,  once  and  again,  that  the  enemy  was  approaching ; 
but  he  did  not  then  approach.  Hereupon  in  anger  the  inhabitants  enacted  a 
law  that  no  man  on  pain  of  death  should  bring  again  such  rumours  as  the  news 
of  an  enemy.  Not  long  after  the  enemy  came  indeed,  and  besieged,  assaulted, 
and  sacked  the  town,  of  the  ruins  of  which  nothing  remained  but  this  proverbial 
epitaph — "  Here  once  stood  a  town  that  was  destroyed  by  silence." 

Lessons. — 1.   Genuine   religion   is   self-evident.      2.  Falseness   in   the   garb   of 
religion  works  serious  mischief.     3.  True  religion  demands  constant  watchfulness. 

341 


CHAP.  in.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   PHILIPPIANS. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Ver.  1.  Safeguards  against  Error. —  II.  Because   of   their   wicked    and 

1.    To   rejoice  in   Christ — to   be   con-  destructive  policy. — "Beware    of  evil 

stantly  and  with   delight  making   re-  workers." 

course   to    Him — is    a    choice    guard  III.  Because  their  zeal  is   wholly 

against    any    error    contrary    to    the  misdirected  and  injurious. — "  Beware 

truths    relating    to    Him.      2.    Often  of  the  concision." 
repeating      and      inculcating      truths 

that   are   most   for   edification     ought  Ver.  3.  Spiritual  Circumcision — 

neither  to  be  burdensome  to  a  minister  I.    Is    an    inward    and     conscious 

nor   yet   wearied   of    by    the    people,  spiritual   change. — "  For   we  are  the 

3.    Temptations  to  error   are   covered  circumcision." 

over  with   such  pious  pretences  and  II.  While  reverently  using  outward 

lovely  baits  that  there  is  need  of  many  forms     of    worship    is     superior    to 

guards      and      frequent     warnings. —  them. — "Which  worship   God   in    the 

Fergusson.  Spirit." 

III.  Finds  its  joy  in  living  union 

Ver.  2.  Emphatic  Warnings  against  with  Christ. — "  And  rejoice  in  Christ 

False  Teachers —  Jesus." 

I.  Because  of  their  snarling  methods  IV.  Repudiates  all  ordinances  that 

and    insatiable    greed. — "  Beware   of  divert  from   Christ. — "  And  have  no 

dogs."  confidence  in  the  flesh." 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  4—8. 

External  Religionism  incomparable  with  the  True  Knowledge  of  Christ. 

I.  The  highest  example  of  external  religionism  affords  no  ground  for  con- 
fident boasting  (vers.  4-6). — External  religionism  had  its  most  complete  embodi- 
ment in  Paul.  He  was  its  most  zealous  devotee,  its  ablest  champion.  These  verses 
describe  the  best  eulogy  that  can  be  given  of  the  observer  of  external  rites.  By 
birth,  lineage,  training,  ability,  consistency  of  character,  and  sincerity  of  aim, 
Paul  was  an  ideal  Jew,  a  model  all  his  countrymen  might  aspire  to  copy.  If 
there  was  ground  for  boasting,  no  one  had  a  greater  right  than  he.  He  needed 
no  Christ,  no  Saviour ;  he  was  well  able  to  look  after  himself.  But  one  day  the 
discovery  came  that  all  this  glorying  was  vain ;  instead  of  gaining  salvation  he 
was  farther  from  it  than  ever,  and  in  danger  of  losing  everything.  Religious 
progress  is  often  more  apparent  than  real.  When  Captain  Parry  and  his  party 
were  in  search  of  the  North  Pole,  after  travelling  several  days  with  sledges  over 
a  vast  field  of  ice,  on  taking  a  careful  observation  of  the  pole-star,  the  painful 
discovery  was  made  that,  while  they  wero  apparently  advancing  towards  the  pole, 
the  ice-field  on  which  they  were  travelling  was  drifting  to  the  south,  and  bringing 
them  nearer  to  the  verge,  not  of  the  pole,  but  of  destruction. 

II.  The  supposed  gains  of  external  religionism  are  for  Christ's  sake  esteemed 
as  loss. — "  But  what  things  were  gain  to  me,  those  I  counted  loss  for  Christ " 
(ver.  7).  Not  losses,  compared  with  the  plural  of  gains ;  but  all  the  supposed 
gains  are  treated  as  one  great  loss,  and  this  after  the  most  careful  scrutiny  and 
calculation.  "  I  counted  loss."  The  swelling  sum  of  fancied  virtues,  painfully 
gathered  and  fondly  and  proudly  contemplated,  vanishes  into  nothing  at  one 
stroke  of  the  discriminating  pen.  All  that  was  prized  as  valuable,  and  as  the 
all  of  personal  possession,  is  regarded  as  dross,  because  of  Christ.  They  did  not 
help  him  to  win  Christ,  but  to  lose  Him  ;  the  more  he  gained  in  self- righteous- 
ness the  more  he  lost  of  Christ.  It  was  not  only  profitless,  but  productive  of 
positive  loss. 

342 


&OMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    PHILIPPIANS.        chap.  Hi. 


III.  The  surpassing  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  renders  external 
religionism  utterly  worthless. — "  I  count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  excellency  of 
the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord ;  .  .  .  and  do  count  them  but  dung  [refuse], 
that  I  may  win  Christ "  (ver.  8).  The  gains  were  :  circumcision  performed 
without  any  deviation  from  legal  time  or  method ;  membership  in  the  house  of 
Israel,  and  connection  with  one  of  its  most  honoured  tribes  ;  descent  from  a  long 
line  of  pure-blood  ancestry  ;  adherence  to  a  sect  whose  prominent  distinction  was 
the  observance  of  the  old  statutes  ;  earnest  and  uncompromising  hostility  to  a 
community  accused  of  undermining  the  authority  of  the  Mosaic  code,  and  a  merit 
based  on  blameless  obedience  to  the  law.  These  once  gloried  and  confided  in 
were  counted  as  a  loss,  for  the  sake  of  a  superior  gain  in  the  excellency  of  the 
knowledge  of  Christ.  He  was  no  loser  by  the  loss  he  had  willingly  made,  for  the 
object  of  knowledge  was  the  divine  Saviour.  Is  it  not  super-eminent  knowledge 
to  know  Him  as  the  Christ ;  to  know  Him  as  Jesus,  not  because  He  wears  our 
nature,  but  because  we  feel  His  human  heart  throbbing  in  unison  with  ours 
under  trial  and  sorrow ;  to  know  Him  as  Lord,  not  simply  because  He  wears  a 
crown  and  wields  a  sceptre,  but  because  we  bow  to  His  loving  rule  and  gather 
the  spoils  of  the  victory  which  He  has  won  and  secured  1  The  apostle  made  a  just 
calculation,  for  neither  ritualism,  nor  Israelitism,  nor  Pharisaism^  nor  zealotism, 
nor  legalism  could  bring  him  those  blessings  with  which  the  knowledge  of  Christ 
was  connected ;  nay,  until  they  were  held  as  loss  this  gain  of  gains  could  not  be 
acquired  (Eadie).  As  with  the  two  scales  of  a  balance,  writes  Rieger,  when 
one  rises  the  other  falls,  and  what  I  add  to  one  diminishes  the  relative  weight  of 
the  other ;  so  as  one  adds  to  himself  he  takes  away  from  the  pre-eminence  which 
the  knowledge  of  Christ  should  have.  What  he  concedes  to  Christ  makes  him 
willing  to  abase  himself,  to  resign  all  confidence  in  His  own  works.  Therefore 
the  sharp  expressions,  "  to  count  as  loss,  as  dung,"  become  in  experience  not 
too  severe ;  for  to  reject  the  grace  of  Christ,  to  regard  the  great  plan  of  God  in 
sending  His  Son  as  fruitless,  were  indeed  far  more  terrible. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  highest  kind  and  supreme  end  of  all  knowledge  is  the  knowledge 
of  Christ  2.  True  religion  is  the  spiritual  knowledge  of  Christ.  3.  Religion 
without  Christ  is  an  empty  form. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.    4-7.    Formalism     tested    and  all  those  notions  and  respects  wherein 

found  wanting  the  gospel  principally  discovers  Him. 

I.  The  best  that  formalism  can  do  II.  Appropriating — Christ  Jesus  my 
for  man,  in  religious  lineage,  reputa-  Lord. 

tion,  zeal,  and  strictest  outward  ob-  III.  Effectual. — Has     a     powerful 

servances,   has   been    experimentally  efficacy  both  upon  heart  and  life,  both 

exemplified  (vers.  5,  6).  upon  judgment,  affection,  and  practice. 

II.  The  most  distinguished  cham-  IV.  Fiducial. — It  brings  the  soul  to 
pion  of  formalism  has  confessed  its  rest  upon  Christ  and  His  righteousness 
utter  inadequacy  to  satisfy  the  soul  alone  for  pardon,  acceptance,  salvation, 
(ver.  4).  V.  Useful. — He  that  has  it  studies 

III.  The  highest  advantages  of  to  improve  Christ,  to  make  use  of  Him 
formalism  are  worthless  compared  with  for  those  blessed  and  glorious  purposes 
Christ  (ver.  7).  for  which  he  knows  Christ  is  given. 

VI.  Christ  Himself  is  most  excel- 

Ver.  8.  The  Excellent  Knowledge  of  lent. — 1.  There  is  nothing  in  Him  but 

Christ —  what  is  excellent.     2.  All  excellencies 

I.  Is  extensive. — Apprehends  Him  in  in  the  creatures  are  eminently  to  be 

343 


chap.  in.        EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    PHILIPPIANS. 


found  in  Christ.     3.  All  these  excel-  His    redemption    is    excellent  know- 

lencies  are  in  Him  in  a  more  excellent  ledge. 

manner ;  perfectly,  without  any  shadow  III.  The  comparative  worthlessness 

of 'imperfection  ;  infinitely,  without  any  of  all    else. — 1 .     Wealth.     2.    Worldly 

bounds   or   limits  ;    eternally  and  un-  honour.     3.  Human  learning.     4.  Mere 

changeably,   they  ebb  not,  they  wane  morality. 

not,  they  are  always  there  in  the  full, 

they  alter  not,  they  decay  not.    4.  Not  The  Excellency  of  the  Knowledge  of 

only  all  that  are  in  the  creatures,  but  Christ. 

innumerable   more    excellencies    than  I.  Its  pre-eminent  excellence  is  to  be 

are  in  all  the  creatures  together,  are  found  in  its  certainty. — Proved  by — 

in  Christ  alone.  1.  Prophecy.  2.  Miracles.  3.  Experience. 

VI.  Those  that  have  attained  the  II.  In  its  majesty  and  grandeur, 

excellent  knowledge  of  Christ  will  not  III.  In  its  suitableness  and  adapta- 

think  much  to  lose  all  things  to  gain  tion. 

Christ. — 1.    All  outward   enjoyments  IV.  In  its  comprehensiveness. 

and   earthly  possessions.     2.  Personal  V.    The    knowledge    of    Christ    is 

righteousness  as  a  means  of  justifica-  sanctifying. — R.  Watson. 
tion. — David  Clarkson. 

Christ  the  Only  Gain. 

The  Excellency  of  the  Knowledge  of  I.  To  count  Him  gain. 

Christ.  II.  To  covet  and  seek  Him  as  gain. 

I.  To  know  Christ  in  the  divinity  of  III.  To  appropriate  Him  as  gain. 
His  person  is  excellent  knowledge.  IV.  To  enjoy  TTim  as  gain. — R.  S. 

II.  To  know  Christ  in  the  glory  of  Candlish. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  9—11. 

Features  of  the  Believers  Life  in  Christ. 

I.  The  believer's  lifo  has  its  home  and  stronghold  in  Christ. — "  And  be  found 
in  Him "  (ver.  9).  Once  lost,  now  found :  found  by  Christ ;  found  in  Him  by 
others.  Once  homeless,  now  safely  sheltered.  One  day  Charles  Wesley  was 
sitting  by  an  open  window  looking  over  the  bright  and  beautiful  fields  in  summer- 
time. Presently  a  little  bird,  flitting  about  in  the  sunshine,  attracted  his 
attention.  Just  then  a  hawk  came  swooping  down  towards  the  little  bird.  The 
frightened  thing  was  darting  here  and  there,  trying  to  find  some  place  of  refuge. 
In  the  bright  sunny  air,  in  the  leafy  trees  or  green  fields,  there  was  no  hiding- 
place  from  the  fierce  grasp  of  the  hawk.  But  seeing  the  open  window  and  a 
man  sitting  by  it,  the  bird,  in  its  extreme  terror,  flew  towards  it,  and  with 
a  beating  heart  and  quivering  wing  found  refuge  in  Wesley's  bosom.  He 
sheltered  it  from  the  threatening  danger,  and  saved  it  from  a  cruel  death. 
Wesley  was  at  that  time  suffering  from  severe  trials,  and  was  feeling  the  need 
of  a  refuge  as  much  as  the  trembling  bird  that  nestled  safely  in  his  bosom.  So 
he  took  up  his  pen  and  wrote  the  well-known  hymn — 

"  Jesu,  Lover  of  my  soul, 
Let  me  to  Thy  bosom  fly." 

To  be  found  in  Christ  means  more  than  mere  shelter,  more  than  external  fellow- 
ship. It  means  a  union  as  close  and  vital  and  abiding  as  between  the  members 
of  the  body  and  the  head ;  a  union  effected  by  the  Spirit,  and  being  the  very 
Spirit  of  Christ  dwelling  in  us. 

II.  The  believer's  life  consists  of  righteousness,  not  self -acquired,  but 
divinely  inspired  through  faith. — "Not  having  mine  own  righteousness,  but 
that  which  is  through  the  faith  of  Christ "  (ver.  9).  The  apostle  now  touches 
upon  a  theme — justification  by  faith — which  he  has  argued  out  with  a  clearness 

344 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   PHILIPPIANS.        chap.  hi. 


and  fulness  unequalled  by  any  other  New  Testament  writer.  The  righteousness 
which  was  his  own  was  out  of  the  law,  or  originated  by  the  law,  and  was 
acquired  by  his  own  effort ;  but  the  righteousness  which  he  finds  in  Christ  is  not 
his  own,  but  God's,  and  is  acquired,  not  by  his  own  merits  or  efforts,  but  by  faith 
in  Christ.  "  This  righteousness,  divine  in  its  origin,  awful  in  its  medium,  and 
fraught  with  such  results,  was  the  essential  element  of  Paul's  religion,  and  the 
distinctive  tenet  of  his  theology."  When  a  friend  happening  to  say  to  the  Rev. 
John  Brown,  of  Haddington,  "  I  suppose  you  make  not  your  labours  for  the 
good  of  the  Church  the  ground  of  your  comfort,"  he,  with  uncommon  earnestness, 
replied,  "  No,  no,  no  !  it  is  the  finished  righteousness  of  Christ  which  is  the  only 
foundation  of  my  hope  *  I  have  no  more  dependence  on  my  labours  than  on  my 
sins.  I  rather  reckon  it  a  wonder  of  mercy  that  God  took  any  of  my  labours 
of  my  hand.  Righteousness  belongeth  unto  Him,  but  unto  me  shame  and 
confusion  of  face." 

III.  The  believer's  life  is  the  creation  of  divine  power. — It  is  a  life  com- 
municated by  the  exercise  of  the  divine  power  that  raised  Christ  from  the  dead. 
"That  I  may  know  Him,  and  the  power  of  His  resurrection"  (ver.  10).  The 
power  exerted  by  Christ's  resurrection  is  exerted  in  raising  the  divine  life  in  the 
believing  soul,  and  raising  it  to  still  higher  developments  of  power  and  enjoy- 
ment. The  aspirations  of  the  soul  after  Christ  are  aspirations  to  know  more 
and  more  the  power  of  His  resurrection. 

2.  It  is  a  life  that  will  be  consummated  by  the  ultimate  resurrection  of  the  body. — 
"  If  by  any  means  I  might  attain  unto  the  resurrection  of  the  dead"  (ver.  11). 
Towards  this  consummation  the  apostle  yearns  with  intense  desire.  All  his 
hopes,  all  his  soul  longed  for,  seem  gathered  up  in  this :  perfect  freedom  for  ever 
from  sin  and  sorrow  ;  knowledge  of  Christ  up  to  the  fullest  measure  of  his 
capacity  of  knowledge  j  perfect  experimental  acquaintance  with  the  power  of 
His  resurrection,  through  perfect  fellowship  of  life  with  Him ;  the  ineffable  and 
everlasting  blessedness  of  being  with  Him  and  like  Him  ;  to  rise  out  of  the 
ashes  of  the  tomb  and  assume  the  glorious  body  of  the  resurrection.  We  can 
never  forget  a  corridor  in  the  Vatican  Museum,  exhibiting  on  the  one  side 
epitaphs  and  emblems  of  departed  heathens  and  their  gods,  and  on  the  other 
side  mementoes  of  departed  Christians.  Face  to  face  they  stand,  engaged,  as  it 
were,  in  conflict,  the  two  armies  clinging  to  their  respective  standards ;  hope 
against  despair — death  swallowed  up  in  victory.  Opposite  to  lions  seizing  on 
horses,  emblems  of  destruction,  are  charming  sculptures  of  the  good  Shepherd 
bearing  home  the  lost  lamb — a  sign  of  salvation. 

IV.  The  believer's  life  is  in  sympathetic  fellowship  with  the  suffering  Christ  — 
"And  to  know  the  fellowship  of  His  sufferings"  (ver.  10).  The  sufferings  of 
Christ  are  not  ended — they  are  prolonged  in  the  sufferings  of  His  people — and 
of  these  the  apostle  desired  to  know  the  fellowship.  He  longed  so  to  suffer,  for 
such  fellowship  gave  him  assimilation  to  his  Lord,  as  he  drank  of  His  cup  and 
was  baptised  with  His  baptism.  It  brought  him  into  communion  with  Christ, 
purer,  closer,  and  tenderer  than  simple  service  for  Him  could  have  achieved. 
It  gave  him  such  solace  as  Christ  Himself  enjoyed.  To  suffer  together  creates 
a  dearer  fellow-feeling  than  to  labour  together.  Christ  indeed  cannot  be 
known  unless  there  be  this  fellowship  in  His  sufferings  (Eadie).  An  intimate 
friend  of  Handel's  called  upon  him  just  as  he  was  in  the  middle  of  setting  the 
words  to  music,  "  He  was  despised,"  and  found  the  great  composer  sobbing  with 
tears,  so  greatly  had  this  passage  and  the  rest  of  his  morning's  work  affected  the 
master. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  soul  finds  its  highest  life  in  Christ.  2.  Life  in  Christ  is 
secured  by  the  co-operation  of  man's  faith  with  Divine  power.  3.  To  live  in 
Christ  is  to  share  the  fruits  of  His  mysterious  passion, 

345 


chap.  ill.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   PHILIPPIANS. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  10.  Knowledge  of  the  Power  of 
Christ's  Resurrection. 

I.  To  know  Christ  includes  a  clearly 
defined  conception  and  familiar  ac- 
quaintance with  the  special  charac- 
teristics and  unrivalled  excellencies 
of  His  person. 

II.  To  know  the  power  of  His  resur- 
rection.— 1.  As  it  is  a  public  and  uni- 
versal vindication  of  the  proper  dignity 
of  His  person.  2.  As  it  seals  the  doom 
of  human  sin.  3.  As  it  ensures  the 
destruction  of  pain  and  death,  and  pro- 
vides for  the  perpetuation  of  the  be- 
liever in  a  state  of  immortal  felicity. 

The  Power  of  Christ's  Resurrection — 

I.  As  a  miracle  attesting  His  divine 
mission. 

II.  As  an  evidence  of  His  divinity. 
— Resurrection  does  not  always  prove 
divinity,  but  in  these  circumstances 
(Rom.  i.  3,  4). 

III.  As  an  indication  of  the  accept- 
ance of  His  sacrifice. 

IV.  As  an  incentive  to  the  pursuit 
of  holiness. — Risen  with  Christ ;  risen 
in  Him,  sharing  His  life. 

V.  As  an  instrument  of  social 
amelioration. — The  gospel  has  civilised 
where  it  has  not  Christianised,  has 
repressed  and  refined  where  it  has  not 
renewed  or  regenerated. 

VI.  As  a  pledge  and  preassurance 
of  the  glorious  resurrection  of  His 
people. — G.  Brooks. 

The  Fellowship  of  Christ's  Sufferings. 

I.  We  have  fellowship  with  Christ 
in  His  sufferings  in  the  pain  caused 
by  coming  in  contact  with  sin. 

II.  In  having  our  motives  misin- 
terpreted and  our  conduct  misjudged. 

III.  In  the  purifying  influence  of 
suffering. 

Ver.  11.  The  Resurrection  of  the 
Dead  as  an  Object  to  aim  at. 

I.  The  object  which  Paul  contem- 
plated.— 1.  The  resurrection  as  the  proof 


of  final  escape  from  all  evil.  2.  The 
resurrection  as  the  occasion  of  public 
recognition  by  the  Saviour-Judge.  3. 
The  resurrection  as  the  pledge  of  eternal 
happiness  in  heaven. 

II.  His  desire  for  that  object. — It 
supplies — 1.  A  high  appreciation  of  its 
value.  2.  A  deep  sense  of  its  difficulty. 
3.  A  persuasion  that  it  may  be  attained 
in  various  degrees.  4.  A  submission  to 
all  the  divine  arrangements  in  reference 
to  it. — G.  Brooks. 

The  Resurrection  of  the  Just. 

I.  What  is  that  entire  satisfaction 
and  climax  for  which  we  are  to  long 
and  labour  ? 

II.  What  are  the  scriptural  repre- 
sentations of  its  accompaniments  and 
consequences? — 1.  The  power  of  re- 
cognising all  those  whom  they  have  known 
in  holy  fellowship  on  earth.  2.  The 
resemblance  of  our  nature  to  Christ. 
3.  High  honour  is  destined  for 
Christians. 

III.  What  are  the  determinations 
by  which  it  is  to  be  won? — 1.  The 
relation  which  the  present  happy  spirit- 
ualism of  deceased  saints  bears  to  the 
resurrection.  2.  The  representation  of 
the  intermediate  state.  It  is  a  relic  and 
disadvantageous  condition  of  death, 
though  of  death  as  far  as  possible 
mitigated.  It  shall  be  overthrown, 
not  only  as  a  state,  but  as  a  separate 
power,  in  the  destruction  of  death. — 
R.  W.  Hamilton. 

The  A  ttainment  of  the  Resurrection. 

I.  Paul's  aim. — "  The  resurrection 
of  the  dead."  1.  The  risen  Christ  is  the 
pledge  of  a  risen  life  for  man.  2.  The 
rising  of  Christ  is  a  power  to  elevate  life. 
3.  Hence  arises  the  gradual  attainment 
of  the  resurrection. 

II.  Paul's  endeavour. — "  If  by  any 
means."  The  necessity  for  this  agonis- 
ing endeavour  arises  from — 1.  The 
difficulty  of  accomplishing  it.  2.  The 
glory  of  its  attainment. — E.  L.  Hull. 


346 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   PHILIPPIANS.        chap.  hi. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  12—16. 

The  Highest  Type  of  Christian  Experience. 

I.  The  highest  type  of  Christian  experience  is  divinely  outlined  in  Christ. — 
"  That  for  which  also  I  am  apprehended  of  Christ  Jesus  "  (ver.  12).  "  The  prize 
of  the  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (ver.  14).  The  prize  is  not  definitely 
described,  but  God  through  the  gospel  calls  upon  the  soul  to  take  hold  of  some 
great,  dimly  portrayed  good,  some  rich  spiritual  blessing,  some  fulness  and 
splendour  of  character  to  be  secured  by  a  fuller  knowledge  of  Christ.  If  we 
say  the  prize  is  heaven  or  the  kingdom  of  God,  what  is  the  heavenly  kingdom 
but  the  fulness  of  Christ  ?  Though  not  explained  in  detail,  the  prize  is  sufficiently 
outlined  in  Christ,  by  the  master-hand  of  the  divine  Artist,  as  to  make  it  an 
object  of  intense  longing  and  strenuous  effort  to  possess.  The  soul  yearns  to 
attain  a  moral  and  spiritual  perfection  found  only  in  Christ,  and  which  the 
unending  development  of  the  beauties  of  His  character  are  constantly  disclosing 
in  ever-growing  splendour,  and  which  closer  union  with  Him  alone  can  seize  and 
appropriate. 

II.  The  effort  to  attain  the  highest  type  of  Christian  experience  is  stimulated 
by  conscious  defect. — "  Not  as  though  I  had  already  attained,  either  were 
already  perfect:  but  I  follow  after,  if  that  I  may  apprehend"  (ver.  12).  The 
more  clearly  the  apostle  saw  his  privilege  in  Christ,  the  more  conscious  was  he 
of  his  shortcomings.  There  is  no  progress  possible  to  the  man  who  does  not  see 
and  mourn  over  his  defects.  "  The  soul  of  all  improvement  is  the  improvement 
of  the  soul ; "  and  it  is  only  a  keen  sense  of  need  that  stimulates  the  soul  to 
continuous  and  repeated  efforts.  The  ideal  is  ever  ahead  of  the  actual,  revealing 
its  defects  and  exciting  to  fresh  and  more  earnest  endeavours. 

III.  The  highest  type  of  Christian  experience  is  attained  only  by  strenuous 
and  continuous  effort. — "But  this  one  thing  I  do,  ...  I  press  toward  the  mark" 
(vers.  13,  14).  The  racer,  fixing  his  oye  upon  the  goal,  leans  forward,  and 
turning  his  back  upon  things  behind,  presses  with  all  speed  towards  the  prize  he 
covets.  If  he  turns  aside,  he  misses  the  mark  and  loses  the  garland.  The  great 
prizes  of  life  are  gained  only  by  persevering  labour.  However  prodigious  may 
be  the  gifts  of  genius  they  can  only  bo  developed  and  brought  to  perfection  by 
toil  and  study.  Think  of  Michael  Angelo  working  for  a  week  without  taking  off 
his  clothes,  of  Handel  hollowing  every  key  of  his  harpsichord  like  a  spoon  by 
incessant  practice,  and  of  the  sculptor  polishing  his  statue  with  unwearied 
repetitions  because  he  said  "the  image  in  my  head  is  not  yet  in  my  hands."  The 
prize  of  the  Christian  race — the  crown  of  eternal  life  and  blessedness — is  worthy 
of  the  most  laborious  and  self-denying  efforts.  When  at  times  the  heart  grows 
weary  in  the  struggle,  a  glimpse  of  the  diadem  of  beauty  obtained  by  faith  revives 
the  flagging  energies. 

IV.  Those  who  do  not  see  -the  obligation  of  striving  after  the  highest  type 
of  Christian  experience  shall  be  aided  with  divine  light. — "  If  in  anything  ye 
be  otherwise  minded,  God  shall  reveal  even  this  unto  you  "  (ver.  15).  The 
difference  of  view  was  not  some  wilful  and  wicked  conception,  or  some  wretched 
prejudice  adhered  to  with  inveterate  or  malignant  obstinacy.  It  was  rather 
some  truth  not  fully  seen  in  all  its  bearings,  some  principle  not  so  perceived  as 
to  be  carried  out  in  all  its  details  and  consequences,  some  department  of  duty 
which  they  might  apprehend  rather  than  appreciate,  or  some  state  of  mind 
which  they  might  admire  in  the  apostle,  but  did  not  really  covet  for  themselves. 
The  apostle  throws  his  own  teaching  into  the  shade,  and  ascribes  the  coming 
enlightenment  to  God  (Eadie).  The  man  who  is  honestly  in  pursuit  of  the  highest 
good,  though  led  away  for  a  time  by  erroneous  views,  shall  not  lack  the  light  he 
sincerely  seeks.     The  light  which  will  help  him  most  must  be  light  from  God. 

347 


chap.  Hi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   PHILIPPIANS. 


V.  All  progress  towards  the  highest  Christian  experience  must  be  on  the 
lines  of  real  progress  already  made. — "  Whereto  we  have  already  attained,  let 
us  walk  by  the  same  rule,  let  us  mind  the  same  thing"  (ver.  16).  Every 
victory  over  self  and  sin  is  a  stepping-stone  to  further  triumphs.  The  struggle 
of  to-day  will  be  the  victory  of  to-morrow.  Our  most  helpful  lessons  are 
gathered  from  our  failures.  Our  present  blessings  were  obtained  through  faith 
and  labour ;  our  next  must  be  gained  in  the  same  way.  God  will  give  more 
light  to  the  man  who  rightfully  uses  what  he  has.  "When  the  morning  bursts 
suddenly  on  one  awakened  out  of  sleep,  it  dazzles  and  pains  him  ;  but  to  him 
who,  on  his  journey,  has  blessed  the  dawn  and  walked  by  its  glimmer,  the  solar 
radiance  brings  with  it  a  gradual  and  cheering  influence." 

Lessons. — 1.  Christ  is  the  sum  and  pattern  of  the  highest  good.  2.  Progi*ess 
in  religious  experience  is  a  growing  likeness  to  Christ.  3.  The  soul  retains  its 
highest  enjoyment  and  power  only  in  Christ. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  12.  The  Happy  Day  and  its 
Sequel. 

I.  St.  Paul  did  not  forget  the  cir- 
cumstances of  his  arrest  by  Jesus. 

II.  St.  Paul's  remembrance  of  his 
arrest  led  to  a  practical  inquiry  as  to 
its  purpose. 

III.  The  purpose  of  his  arrest  by 
Christ  Jesus  is  before  and  not  behind 
him,  even  in  his  old  age. 

I V.  What  is  the  mark  to  which  he 
presses  onward? — 1.  A  perfect  likeness 
to  Christ.  2.  A  perfect  service.  3.  The 
reward  in  heaven. — W.  Hawkins. 


past  pleasures,  past  sins,  past  labours, 
past  attainments.  The  past  must 
have  dwelt  in  his  memory,  but  it  did 
not  satisfy  him.  "  Onward  "  was  his 
motto,  and  every  day  he  began  his 
race  afresh. 

3.  Untiring  activity. — He  had  the 
goal  ever  in  his  eye ;  he  often 
measured  the  distance  between  him 
and  the  goal ;  he  stretched  every  nerve 
to  reach  the  goal.  (1)  Do  we  re- 
semble Paul  in  his  aim?  (2)  Do  we 
resemble  Paul  in  his  efforts.  —  G. 
Brooks. 


Vers.  13,  14.  Pressing  toward  the 
Mark. 

1.  The  apostle's  sense  of  his  own 
shortcomings. — 1.  It  argued  a  high 
estimate  of  a  Christian's  duty.  Per- 
fection is  his  aim,  although  not  his 
attainment. 

2.  It  argued  a  humble  estimate  of 
himself. — Though  the  most  eminent 
Christian  on  earth,  he  was  fully  con- 
scious of  his  own  imperfection. 

II.  The  apostle's  method  of  Chris- 
tian progress.— 1.  The  concentration  of 
his  energies.  Many  things  he  did,  and 
he  did  them  wholly.  But  he  made 
them  all  subservient  to  his  one  idea, 
which  thus  unified  them  all.  Decision 
of  character. 

2.  Oblivion  of  the  past. — A  wonder- 
ful past  was  his,  but  he  forgot  it, 
except  as  it  might  supply  a  stimulus 
to   his   further  advances — past  times, 

348 


Aim  High — 

I.  In  pursuit  of  moral  excellence. 
II.  Intellectual  character. 
III.  Active  usefulness. 
Lessons. — 1.    God  Himself  has  com- 
manded it.     2.  Society  expects  it  of  you. 
3.  The  age  in  which  you  live  demands 
it.—E.  D.  Griffin. 

Vers.  15,  16.  The  Temper  to  be  culti- 
vated by  Christians  of  Different  Denomi- 
nations toward  each  other. 

I.  Those  who  adhere  to  this  rule. — 

1.  Seek    and    cultivate    their     society. 

2.  Use  means   to  promote    the    mutual 
improvement   of  these  persons    and   of 
ourselves.     3.  Do  all  we  can  to  render 
our  mutual  reciprocal  union  more  perfect 
and  our  usefulness  more  extensive. 

II.  Those  who  differ  from  us  in 
matters  cf  great  importance. — 1.  Give 
consideration  to  the  way  in  which  their 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    PHILIPPIANS.        chap.  hi. 


religious  characters  have  been  formed,  matters  of  smaller  moment. — 1.  Show 
2.  Pay  regard  to  the  difficulties  and  them  sincere  and  honest  respect  and 
misap prehensions  which  lie  in  the  use  kindness.  2.  Cultivate  friendly  inter- 
of  words.  3.  Reflect  what  would  course  with  them  as  far  as  they  are  dis- 
probably  have  been  the  effects  upon  our  posed  to  reciprocate  such  intercourse, 
minds  had  we  been  placed  in  their  cir-  3.  Show  that  we  esteem  the  essential 
cumstances.  4.  Act  towards  them  with  principle  of  the  gospel  more  than  con- 
justice  and  kindness.  troversial  precise ness  and  ecclesiastical 
III,  Those  who  differ  from  us  in  form. — J.  P.  Smith. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  17—19. 

Good  and  Bad  Examples. 

I.  A  good  example  should  be  attentively  studied. — "  Mark  them  which  walk 
so  as  ye  have  us  for  an  ensaniple  "  (ver.  17).  We  cannot  imitate  what  we  do  not 
see  and  know.  It  will  help  us  to  be  good  if  we  carefully  watch  and  meditate  on 
the  conduct  of  the  truly  good.  The  best  example  of  uprightness  and  consistency 
is  worthy  of  the  most  painstaking  study.  "  Wherever  they  found  the  life  of  the 
apostle  imitated  and  displayed  the  Philippians  were  to  mark  it  and  make  it  their 
pattern.  Any  excellence  which  they  thus  discovered  they  might  by  God's  grace 
attain  to.  It  was  not  some  distant  spectacle  they  were  to  gaze  at  and  admire, 
but  an  embodiment  of  earnest  faith,  walking  on  the  same  platform  with  them, 
and  speaking,  acting,  praying,  suffering,  and  weeping  among  them.  What  had 
been  possible  to  others  was  surely  not  impossible  to  them  "  (Eadie).  A  Polish 
prince  was  accustomed  to  carry  the  picture  of  his  father  always  in  his  bosom, 
and  on  particular  occasions  used  to  take  it  out  and  view  it,  saying,  "  Let  me  do 
nothing  unbecoming  so  excellent  a  father." 

II.  A  good  example  should  be  faithfully  imitated. — "  Brethren,  be  followers 
together  of  me"  (ver.  17).  Paul  had  studied  profoundly  the  character  of 
Christ,  and  was  earnestly  striving  to  follow  Him.  He  therefore  exhorts  the 
Philippians  to  imitate  him  as  he  sought  to  imitate  Christ ;  or  rather,  as  Bengel 
puts  it,  he  invites  them  to  be  "  fellow-imitators  of  Christ."  To  imitate  Christ  is 
not  copying  Him  in  every  particular.  We  cannot  follow  Him  as  Saviour, 
Mediator,  Redeemer.  What  is  meant  is,  that  we  are  to  do  our  work  in  the 
Spirit  of  Christ,  as  He  would  do  it.  He  who  follows  Christ  never  misses  the 
right  way,  and  is  always  led  on  to  victory.  When  in  the  Mexican  war  the  troops 
were  wavering,  a  general  rose  in  his  stirrups  and  dashed  into  the  enemies'  lines, 
shouting,  "  Men,  follow  me !  "  They,  inspired  by  his  courageous  example, 
dashed  on  after  him  and  gained  the  victory.  What  men  want  to  rally  them  for 
God  is  an  example  to  lead  them. 

III.  A  bad  example  is  in  antagonism  to  the  highest  truth. — "  Many  walk,  of 
whom  I  have  told  you,  .  .  .  they  are  the  enemies  of  the  cross  of  Christ  "  (ver.  18). 
Professed  friends,   dubious  in    their  attachment  and  promises,   are  enemies  of 
Christ,  and  of  the  great  movement  in  human  redemption  represented  by  His  \ 
cross.     While  professing  to  maintain  the  doctrines  of  the  cross,  by  their  wicked   ) 
lives  they  are  depreciating  them. 

I.  A  bad  example  is  set  by  those  who  concentrate  their  chief  thought  on  the 
material. — "  Who  mind  earthly  things"  (ver.  19).  The  world  has  many  attrac- 
tions, but  it  has  also  many  dangers.  To  be  wholly  absorbed  in  its  pursuits 
weans  the  soul  from  God  and  holiness  and  heaven.  Gosse  tells  us,  in  his. 
Romance  of  Natural  History,  of  certain  animals  which  inhabit  the  coral  reefs. 
So  long  as  they  keep  the  passage  to  the  surface  clear  they  are  safe ;  but,  this 
neglected,  the  animal  finds  the  coral  has  grown  around  it  and  enclosed  it  in  a 
living  tomb.     And  so  it  is  with  the  life  of  the  soul  on  earth.     The  world  is 

349 


chap.  ill.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   PHILIPPIANS. 


around  us  everywhere  ;  the  danger  is  when  we  allow  it  to  grow  between  our  souls 
and  God. 

2.  A  bad  example  is  set  by  those  who  are  supremely  controlled  by  their  sensual 
appetites. — "Whose  God  is  their  belly"  (ver.  19).  The  desires  of  the  flesh 
invite  to  self-indulgence — to  gluttony,  revelling,  drunkenness ;  to  gaudiness, 
extravagance,  and  immodesty  of  dress ;  to  impurity  of  speech  and  conduct.  A 
sensual  man  looks  as  if  lust  had  drawn  her  foul  fingers  over  his  features  and 
wiped  out  the  man.  The  philosopher  Antisthenes,  who  had  a  contempt  for  all 
sensual  enjoyment,  used  to  say,  "  I  would  rather  be  mad  than  sensual." 

3.  A  bad  example  is  set  by  those  who  gloat  in  their  degradation. — "  Whose  glory 
is  in  their  shame"  (ver.  19).  Man  has  reached  the  lowest  depth  of  vice  when 
he  boasts  in  what  is  really  his  shame.  The  last  rag  of  modesty  is  thrown  aside. 
"  These  enemies  of  the  cross  were  not  hypocrites,  but  open  and  avowed  sensualists, 
conscious  of  no  inconsistency,  but  rather  justifying  their  vices,  and  thus  perverting 
the  gospel  formally  for  such  detestable  conduct." 

4.  The  end  of  a  bad  example  is  ruin. — "  Whose  end  is  destruction  "  (ver.  19). 
Evil  is  the  broad  way  that  leadeth  to  destruction.  Sin  must  be  inevitably 
punished ;  it  works  its  own  fate — "  sin  when  it  is  finished  bringeth  forth  death." 
Judge  Buller,  speaking  to  a  young  gentleman  of  sixteen,  cautioned  him  against 
being  led  astray  by  the  example  or  persuasion  of  others,  and  said,  "  If  I  had 
listened  to  the  advice  of  some  of  those  who  called  themselves  my  friends,  when 
I  was  young,  instead  of  being  a  judge  of  the  King's  Bench,  I  should  have  died 
long  ago  a  prisoner  in  the  King's  prison." 

IV.  Professed  members  of  the  Church  who  set  a  bad  example  are  the  occasion 
of  constant  solicitude  and  sorrow  to  the  truly  good. — "  For  many  walk,  of 
whom  I  have  told  you  often,  and  now  tell  you  even  weeping"  (ver.  18).  Even 
when  denouncing  the  worst  sins,  the  apostle  does  it,  not  with  harshness  and 
imperious  superiority,  but  with  the  greatest  tenderness  and  grief.  The  anxious 
minister  may  well  weep  over  the  folly  and  delusion  of  half-hearted  adherents, 
over  their  false  and  distorted  conceptions  of  the  gospel,  over  the  reproach 
brought  against  the  truth  by  their  inconsistent  and  licentious  lives,  and  over 
their  lamentable  end.  The  conduct  of  sinners  is  more  a  matter  of  heart-breaking 
sorrow  than  of  wrathful  indignation. 

Lessons. — 1.  Example  is  more  potent  than  precept.  2.  A  bad  example  should 
be  carefully  shunned.     3.  A  good  example  should  be  diligently  imitated. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  17.  Imitation  of  the  Good —  I.  Deny  the  efficacy  and  purpose  of 

I.  Possible  only  where  there  is  a     Christ's  sufferings. 

sympathetic  resemblance  to  and  ad-  II.  Are  incompetent  to  appreciate 

miration  of  the  character  sought  to  be  the  spiritual  significance  of  the  cross, 

copied. — "  Brethren."  — "  Who  mind  earthly  things." 

II.  Is  easier  when  joined  with  those  III.  Are  the  victims  of  sensuality, 
who  have  similar  aims. — "  Be  followers  — "  Whose  god  is  their  belly." 
together  of  me."  IV.  Are  degraded  beyond  all  bounds 

III.  Is  aided  by  careful  observation  of  modesty. — "  Whose  glory  is  in  their 
and  study. — "  Mark  them."  shame." 

IV.  Every  good  man  is  an  example  V.  Will  be  inevitably  punished. — 
for  others  to  imitate. — "  So  as  ye  have  "  Whose  end  is  destruction." 

us  for  an  ensample."  VI.  Are  the  cause  of  much  grief  to 

those  who  must  constantly  expose  them. 
Vers.      18,      19.     Enemies     of    the      — "  Of  whom  I  have  told  you  often,  and 
Cross —  now  tell  you  even  weeping." 

350 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    PHILIPPIANS.        chap.  hi. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  20,  21. 

Christian  Citizenship — 

1.  Has  its  centre  of  life  and  privileges  in  heaven. — "  For  our  conversation 
[citizenship]  is  in  heaven  "  (ver.  20).  To  show  the  contrast  between  the  earthly 
things  which  absorb  the  thought  of  the  worldly,  and  the  things  of  heaven,  the 
apostle  proceeds  to  indicate  that  the  life  of  the  believer,  even  on  earth,  is 
associated  with  the  privileges  and  blessings  of  the  heavenly  commonwealth,  of 
which  he  is  a  member.  In  this  world  the  Christian  is  but  a  stranger — living 
in  temporary  exile.  His  city,  his  home,  is  in  heaven.  Longing  to  enter  into 
possession  of  all  the  privileges  of  the  heavenly  franchise,  earthly  things  have  no 
attraction  for  him,  and  he  seeks  to  act  in  harmony  with  his  high  destiny 

II.  Is  assured  of  the  deliverance  of  its  members  from  the  perils  and  hard- 
ships of  earth. — "  From  whence  also  we  look  for  the  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ "  (ver.  20).  The  apostle  characterises  Jesus  as  Saviour,  or  as  expected 
in  the  character  of  Saviour,  and  thus  suggests  an  awful  contrast,  in  point  of 
destiny,  between  himself  and  those  like-minded  with  him,  and  the  party  repro- 
bated by  him  in  the  two  preceding  verses.  Their  end  is  destruction,  but  ours  is 
salvation  ;  to  the  one  He  descends  as  Judge,  but  to  us  as  Saviour.  If  there  be 
such  visible  difference  in  present  character,  there  is  a  more  awful  contrast  in 
ultimate  destiny — the  two  poles  of  humanity — everlasting  punishment ;  eternal 
life  (Eadie).  The  great  Deliverer  will  emancipate  us  from  the  thraldom,  suffering, 
and  sorrow  of  the  present  world,  and  complete  in  its  fulness  the  salvation  which 
is  now  in  process. 

III.  Has  the  confident  hope  of  future  dignity  and  blessedness. — 1.  The  body 
of  humiliation  shall  be  transformed  into  the  likeness  of  Christ's  glorified  body. 
"  Who  shall  change  our  vile  body,  that  it  may  be  fashioned  like  unto  His 
glorious  body"  (ver.  21).  The  body  of  our  humiliation  connects  us  with  the  soil, 
out  of  which  it  was  formed,  and  by  the  products  of  which  it  is  supported,  on 
which  it  walks,  and  into  which  it  falls  at  death.  It  keeps  us  in  constant  physical 
connection  with  earth,  whatever  be  the  progress  of  the  spirit  towards  its  high 
destiny — its  commonwealth  in  heaven.  It  limits  intellectual  power  and  develop- 
ment, impedes  spiritual  growth  and  enjoyment,  and  is  soon  fatigued  with  the 
soul's  activity.  In  it  are  the  seeds  of  disease  and  pain,  from  functional  disorder 
and  Organic  malady.  It  is  an  animal  nature  which,  in  spite  of  a  careful  and 
vigilant  government,  is  prone  to  rebellious  outbreaks.  But  this  body  is  reserved 
to  a  high  destiny  :  it  shall  be  like  Christ's  heavenly  body.  The  brightness  of 
heaven  does  not  oppress  Him,  neither  shall  it  dazzle  us.  Our  humanity  dies 
indeed,  and  is  decomposed ;  but  when  He  appears,  it  shall  be  raised  and 
beautified.  These  bodies  shall  cease  to  be  animal  without  ceasing  to  be  human 
bodies,  and  they  shall  become  spiritual  bodies — etherealised  vehicles  for  the  pure 
spirit  that  shall  be  lodged  within  them  (Eadie,  passim). 

2.  This  transformation  shall  be  effected  by  the  divine  power  that  controls  the 
universe. — "  According  to  the  working  whereby  He  is  able  even  to  subdue  all 
things  unto  Himself"  (ver.  21).  While  omniscience  is  the  actual  possession  or 
exercise  of  all  knowledge,  omnipotence  is  universal  ability,  which  may  or  may 
not  yet  have  put  forth  all  its  energies,  for  what  is  possible  to  it  may  not  have 
been  effected  by  it.  But  Christ  shall  put  forth  His  power,  as  we  know  from 
other  sources,  and  death  itself  shall  be  swallowed  up  in  victory — that  which  has 
swallowed  up  all  humanity  shall  be  surrounded  by  a  wider  vortex  and  be  itself 
engulfed.  This  body  of  Our  humiliation  has  some  surviving  element,  or  some 
indissoluble  link,  which  warrants  the  notion  and  shall  secure  the  consciousness 
of  identity,  in  whatever  that  identity  may  consist  (Eadie).  If  man's  art  and 
device  can  produce  so  pure  and  white  a  fabric  as  paper  from  filthy  rags,  what 

351 


chap.  in.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   PHILIPPIANS. 


shall  hinder  God  by  His  mighty  power  to  raise  the  vile  body  from  the  grave  and 
refine  and  fashion  it  like  unto  the  glorious  body  of  Christ  %  "  Not  a  resurrec- 
tion," says  Neander,  "as  a  restoration  merely  of  the  same  earthly  body  in  the 
same  earthly  form  ;  but  a  glorious  transformation,  proceeding  from  the  divine, 
the  all-subduing  power  of  Christ ;  so  that  believers,  free  from  all  the  defects  of 
the  earthly  existence,  released  from  all  its  barriers,  may  reflect  the  full  image 
of  the  heavenly  Christ  in  their  whole  glorified  personality,  in  the  soul  pervaded 
by  the  divine  life  and  its  now  perfectly  assimilated  glorified  organ." 

Lessons. — 1.  The  Christian  citizen  is  but  a  sojourner  on  earth.  2.  His  conduct 
on  earth  is  regulated  by  a  heavenly  life.  3.  He  looks  for  his  highest  honours 
and  enjoyments  in  the  future. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 


Ver.  20.   Christian  Citizenship. 

I.  The  heavenly  citizenship  of 
Christians. —  1.  The  city  to  which  they 
belong  —  heaven.  2.  When  are  true 
Christians  made  citizens  of  this  heavenly 
state  ?  When  they  are  pardoned. 
3.  What  are  the  privileges  connected 
with  this  state  of  relation  to  the  heavenly 
city  t  (1)  Freedom.  (2)  Admits  to 
honourable  employment  and  office. 
(3)  Fellowship  and  communion  with 
the  whole  body  of  Israel.  4.  A  right  to 
the  common  property — the  inheritance 
of  the  saints  in  light. 

II.  The  conduct  manifested  by  true 
Christians,  and  corresponding  with 
their  privilege. — 1.  Holiness.  2.  Boast 
of  the  institutions  of  the  heavenly  city. 
3.  Are  bold  and  courageous.  4.  It  will 
be  seen  in  our  spirit.  5.  Our  affections 
are  in  heaven. — R.  Watson. 

Yer.  21.  The  Resurrection  of  the 
Human  Body. 

I.  We  must  be  reminded  of  our 
sinful  condition. — I.  Our  body  is  called 
a  body  of  humiliation,  because  it,  as 
well  as  the  spirit,   is    the  seat  of  sin. 

2.  If  we  consider  the  immense  labour 
necessary    to    provide  for     its     wants. 

3.  If  ive  consider  it  as  a  clog  to  our 
devotion.  4.  It  must  be  still  further 
humbled  by  death. 

II.  The  transformation  of  this 
humbled  body. — 1.  There  can  be  no 
deformity.  2.  The  excessive  care  neces- 
sary for  the  support  of  the  body  shall 
exist  no  more.  3.  It  shall  be  an  assis- 
tant and  no  longer  a  hindrance  to  the 
operations  of  the  deathless  spirit. 

352 


III.  The  means  by  which  the  trans- 
formation will  be  effected. — The  power 
of  God  answers  all  objections,  removes 
all  difficulties. 

Lessons. — 1.  It  becomes  us  to  aspire  to 
as  much  of  the  glory  of  the  future  state 
as  can  be  attained.  2.  This  subject 
affords  encouragement  to  us  on  the  loss 
of  our  friends.  3.  Ought  to  fortify  our 
minds  against  the  fear  of  death. — ibid. 

The  Glorious  Destiny  of  the  Human 
Body. — If  we  are  in  Christ,  He  will 
gather  up  what  is  left,  He  will  trans- 
figure it  with  the  splendour  of  a  new 
life,  He  will  change  our  body  of  humilia- 
tion that  it  may  be  fashioned  like  unto 
the  body  of  His  glory.  Sown  in  the 
very  extreme  of  physical  weakness,  it 
will  be  raised  in  a  strictly  superhuman 
power ;  sown  a  natural  body  controlled 
on  every  side  by  physical  law,  it  will 
be  a  true  body  still,  but  a  body  that 
belongs  to  the  sphere  of  spirit.  Most 
difficult  indeed  it  is  even  to  the  imagina- 
tion to  understand  how  this  poor  body, 
our  companion  for  so  many  years — part 
of  our  very  selves — is  to  be  first 
wrenched  from  us  at  death  and  then 
restored  to  us  if  we  will,  transfigured 
by  the  majestic  glory  of  the  Son  of 
God.  Little  can  we  understand  this 
inaccessibility  to  disease,  the  radiant 
beauty,  the  superiority  to  material 
obstacles  in  moving  through  space,  the 
spirituality,  in  short,  which  awaits 
without  destroying  it. 

"  Heavy  and  dull  this  frame  of  limbs  and  heart. 
Whether  slow  creeping  on  cold  earth,  or 
borne 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   PHILIPPIANS.        chap.  iv. 


On  lofty  steed 

Or  loftier  prow,  we  dart 

O'er  wave  or  field, 

Yet  breezes  laugh  to  scorn 

Our  puny  speed, 

And  birds,  and  clouds  in  heaven, 

And  fish  like  living  shafts  that  pierce  the 

main, 
And  stars  that  shoot  through  freezing  air 

at  even. 
Who  would  not  follow,  might  he  break  his 

chain  ? 
And  thou  shalt  break  it  soon. 
The  grovelling  worm 


Shall  find  his  wings,  and  soar  as  fast  and 
free 

As  his  transfigured  Lord,  with  lightning 
form 

And  snowy  vest.  Such  grace  He  won  for 
thee 

When  from  the  grave  He  sprang  at  dawn 
of  morn, 

And  led,  through  boundless  air,  thy  con- 
quering road, 

Leaving  a  glorious  track  where  saints  new- 
born 

Might  fearless  follow  to  their  blest  abode." 
—H.  P.  Liddon. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  Brethren  beloved  and  longed  for,  .  .  .  beloved. — By  these  caressing  titles,  which, 
however,  are  not  words  of  flattery  but  of  sincere  love,  he  works  his  way  into  their  hearts. 
The  "  beloved  "  repeated  at  the  close  of  the  verse  is  like  the  clinging  embrace  of  affection. 
My  joy. — The  most  delectable  joy  of  St.  John  was  to  hear  that  his  children  walked  in  truth. 
So  St.  Paul  says  of  his  Philippian  converts,  as  he  had  said  of  their  neighbours  of  the 
Thessalonian  Church,  that  they  are  his  joy.  And  crown. — "  The  word  must  be  carefully 
distinguished  from  '  diadem.'  It  means  a  chaplet  or  wreath,  and  the  idea  it  conveys  may 
be  either  (1)  victory,  or  (2)  merriment,  as  the  wreath  was  worn  equally  by  the  conqueror 
and  by  the  holiday-maker"  (Lightfoot). 

Ver.  3.  And  I  entreat  thee  also,  true  yokefellow. — It  is  doubtful  whom  the  apostle  ad- 
dresses. On  the  whole,  however,  it  seems  most  probable  that  Epaphroditus,  the  bearer  of  the 
epistle,  is  intended  (so  Lightfoot,  following  Hofmann).  Meyer  says :  "  Laying  aside  arbitrari- 
ness and  seeing  that  the  address  is  surrounded  by  proper  names,  we  can  only  find  in  the  word 
for  '  yokefellow '  a  proper  name,  .  .  .  genuine  Syzygus,  i.e.  thou  who  art  in  reality  and 
substantially  that  which  thy  name  expresses :  "fellow-in-yolie,  fellow-labourer."  Whose 
names  are  in  the  book  of  life. — St.  Paul  had  before  said  the  polity  of  the  Christians  was  a 
heavenly  one.  Here  he  says  there  is  a  "  burgess  list "  from  which  no  name  of  a  true  citizen 
is  ever  by  accident  omitted — though  by  any  chance  he  might  have  omitted  to  mention  his 
co-workers  in  his  epistle. 

Ver.  4.  Rejoice  in  the  Lord. — R.V.  margin,  "  Farewell."  The  word  is  neither  "  farewell " 
alone,  nor  "rejoice"  alone  (Lightfoot).  That  the  A.V.  and  R.V.  texts  are  justified  in  so 
translating  seems  clear  from  the  "  always  "  which  follows. 

Ver.  5.  Let  your  moderation  be  known. — This  moderation  or  forbearance  is  the  very 
opposite  of  the  spirit  which  will  "  cavil  on  the  ninth  part  of  a  hair  "  in  the  way  of  asserting 
personal  rights. 

Ver.  6.  Be  careful  for  nothing. — R.V.  "  in  nothing  be  anxious."  The  word  suggests  the 
idea  of  a  poor  distraught  mind  on  which  concerns  have  fastened  themselves,  which  drag, 
one  in  one  direction,  another  in  the  opposite.  Well  says  Bengel,  "  Care  and  prayer  are 
more  opposed  than  water  and  fire."  In  all  things,  prayer — in  nothing,  care.  By  prayer. — 
The  general  idea  of  an  expression  of  dependence.  Supplication.  —The  specific  request — the 
word  hinting  too  at  the  attitude  of  the  petitioner,  e.g.  clasping  the  feet  of  the  person  from 
whom  the  favour  is  asked.  With  thanksgiving. — The  preservative  against  any  possible 
defiance  which  might  otherwise  find  its  way  into  the  tone  of  the  prayer,  or  on  the  other 
hand  against  a  despair  which  creeps  over  those  who  think  God  "  bears  long  "  and  forgets 
to  answer. 

Ver.  7.  And  the  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all  understanding. — If  we  say  the  peace 
of  God  is  so  profound  that  the  human  mind  cannot  comprehend  it,  no  doubt  that  is  an 
admissible  interpretation  of  these  words  ;  but  it  seems  better  far  to  say,  the  peace  of  God 
excels  all  that  the  mere  reason  of  man  can  do.  The  vovs,  the  highest  faculty  of  man  as  such, 
intended  to  be  the  guide  of  life,  oftener  brings  anxiety  than  a  calm  heart.     Shall  keep  your 


A  A 


353 


chap.  iv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    PHILIPPIANS. 


hearts. — As  a  watchman  keeps  a  city.  Lightfoot  says  we  have  a  verbal  paradox,  for  "  to 
keep  "  is  a  warrior's  duty ;  God's  peace  shall  stand  sentry,  shall  keep  guard  over  your  hearts. 
And  minds. — R.V.  much  better,  "  and  thoughts,"  for  it  is  not  the  mind  which  thinks,  but  the 
products  of  thinking  which  the  word  indicates.  The  sentry  questions  all  suspicious  characters 
(cf.  Prov.  iv.  23,  and  Matt.  xv.  19). 

Ver.  8.  Whatsoever  things  are  true. — The  apostle  recognises  the  ability  of  the  renewed 
mind  to  discern  truth  under  any  guise.  "  Ye  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One  and  know 
all  things"  (1  John  ii.  20).  Honest. — A.V.  margin,  "venerable."  R.V.  text,  "honourable." 
R.V.  margin,  "  reverend. "  This  variety  shows  the  difficulty  of  finding  an  exact  equivalent  for 
the  word  of  St.  Paul,  in  which  the  sense  of  gravity  and  dignity,  and  of  these  as  inviting 
reverence,  is  combined.  Just. — Answering  to  that  which  is  normally  right  (Cremer).  Pure. — 
As  there  is  no  impurity  like  fleshly  impurity,  defiling  body  and  spirit,  so  the  word  "  pure  " 
expresses  freedom  from  these  (Trench).  It  denotes  chastity  in  every  part  of  life  (Calvin). 
Lovely. — Christian  morality  as  that  which  is  ethically  beautiful  is  pre-eminently  worthy  to  be 
loved.  "  Nihil  est  amabilius  virtute,"  says  Cicero.  Of  good  reporc. — R.V.  margin,  "  gracious." 
Lightfoot  says  "fair-speaking"  and.  so  "winning,  attractive."  Meyer  says,  "that  which, 
when  named,  sounds  significant  of  happiness,  e.g.  brave,  honest,  honourable."  If  there  be 
any  virtue. — The  New  Testament  is  frugal  of  the  word  which  is  in  such  constant  use  in  the 
heathen  moralists.  If  they  sought  to  make  man  self-confident,  it  seeks  to  shatter  that  con- 
fidence. The  noblest  manliness  is  godliness.  Think  on  these  things. — They  are  things  to 
be  reckoned  with  by  every  man  sooner  or  later — occupy  the  thoughts  with  them  now. 

Ver.  9.  Those  things  .  .  .  do. — Here  speaks  the  same  man,  with  a  mind  conscious  of  its  own 
rectitude,  who  could  say,  "  I  have  lived,  in  all  good  conscience  before  God  unto  this  day." 
He  had  not  only  "allured"  his  Philippian  converts  "to  brighter  worlds,"  but  had  "  led  the 
way."  The  God  of  peace  shall  be  with  you. — Note  the  phrase  in  connection  with  "  the  peace 
of  God  shall  mount  guard  "  (ver.  7). 

Ver.  10.  Hath  flourished  again. — R.V.  "  ye  have  revived  your  thought  for  me."  The 
active  generosity  of  the  Philippians  towards  St.  Paul  had  never  died,  any  more  than  a  tree 
does  when  it  sheds  its  leaves  and  stands  bare  all  through  the  winter.  The  winter  of  their 
disability  was  past,  and  the  return  of  the  sun  of  prosperity  made  the  kindly  remembrance  of 
the  apostle  sprout  into  a  generous  gift  to  him. 

Ver.  11.  Not  that  I  speak,  etc.  "  Do  not  mistake  me ;  I  am  not  moved  thus  by  the  good  of 
my  own  need."  The  apostle  does  not  leave  it  possible  for  one  to  say  with  the  melancholy 
Jaques,  "  When  a  man  thanks  me  heartily,  methinks  I  have  given  him  a  penny  and  he 
renders  me  the  beggarly  thanks."  I  have  learned  .  .  .  to  be  content. — "  Self-sufficiency,"  said 
Socrates,  "is  nature's  wealth."  St.  Paul  is  only  self-sufficient  so  far  as  Christ  dwells  in  him 
and  assures  him,  "  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee  "  (cf.  Heb.  xiii.  5). 

Ver.  12.  I  know  how  to  be  abased. — To  be  "in  reduced  circumstances."  I  know  how  to 
abound.— To  be  in  affluence.  By  this  it  does  not  appear  that  St.  Paul  meant,  "  I  have  chewed 
the  bitter  cud  of  penury,  and  tasted  the  sweets  of  prosperity."  Many  a  man  has  had  to  do 
that — everything  lies  in  how  it  is  done.  It  is  as  much  beneath  the  Christian  philosopher  to 
make  a  wry  face  at  the  one,  as  to  clap  the  hands  in  childish  glee  at  the  other.  I 
am  instructed,  etc.  Lit.  "  I  have  been  initiated."  The  pass-word  is  in  the  apostle's 
possession — no  novice  is  he.  To  be  full  and  to  be  hungry. — As  if  we  said  "  to  pasture  and  to 
pine."  It  is  the  psalmist's  "  green  pastures  and  still  waters.  .  .  .  The  valley  of  the  shadow 
of  death." 

Ver.  13.  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  which  strengtheneth  me. — A  fresh  general 
statement  of  the  self-sufficiency  of  ver.  11.  "  In  the  grand  brevity  how  marked  is  the 
assurance,  and  at  the  same  time  humility  "  (Meyer). 

Ver.  15.  No  Church  communicated  with  me. — The  lofty  independence  of  the  apostle  had 
not  unbent  to  any  other  Church  as  to  this.  There  are  men  from  whom  one  could  never 
receive  a  gift  without  sacrifice  of  self-respect.     St.  Paul  was  not  the  man  to  be  patronised. 

Ver.  18.  An  odour  of  a  sweet  smell,  a  sacrifice  acceptable,  well  pleasing  to  God. — The 
last  word  transfers  their  deed  to  another  sphere  entirely.  "Ye  did  it  unto  Me,"  says 
Christ. 

Ver.  19.  My  God  shall  supply  all  your  need.— Did  I  say,  "  I  am  filled  "  ?  (ver.  18).  I  can 
make  you  no  return,  but  my  God  will.  He  will  fulfil  every  need  of  yours.  According  to 
His  riches  in  glory. — According  to  the  abundant  power  and  glorious  omnipotence  whereby  as 
Lord  of  heaven  and  earth  He  can  bestow  what  He  will. 

Ver.  22.  The  saints  ...  of  Caesar's  household.— This  expression  does  not  oblige  us  to  think 
that  any  relatives  of  Caesar  had  embraced  Christianity.  It  comprises  all  who  in  any  way  were 
connected  with  the  imperial  service. 

Ver.  23.  Be  with  you  all.— The  oldest  MSS.  read,  "  Be  with  your  spirit." 


354 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   PHILIPPIANS.       chap.  iv. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verse  1. 

A  Plea  for  Steadfastness — 

I.  After  the  pattern  of  those  worthy  of  imitation. — "  So  stand  fast  in  the 
Lord."  Having  pointed  out  the  dignity  of  Christian  citizenship  and  the  exalted 
conduct  befitting  those  possessing  its  privileges,  the  apostle  exhorts  them  to 
steadfastness  in  imitating  those  who,  through  evil  and  good  report  and  in  the 
midst  of  opposition  and  suffering,  had  bravely  maintained  their  loyalty  to  Christ. 
"  So  stand  fast " — be  sincere  and  earnest  in  devotion  to  God,  as  they  were ; 
be  faithful  and  unflinching,  as  they  were ;  triumph  over  the  world,  the  flesh,  and 
the  devil,  as  they  did.  "  Behold,  we  count  them  worthy  who  endure  ;  "  and  the 
same  distinction  of  character  is  attainable  by  every  follower  of  Christ,  attainable 
by  patient  continuance  in  well-doing.  The  ideal  of  a  steadfast  character  is 
embodied  in  the  Lord,  who  was  Himself  a  supreme  example  of  unfaltering 
obedience  and  love.  Follow  Him ;  being  united  to  Him  by  faith,  deriving 
continual  inspiration  and  strength  from  His  Spirit,  stand  fast  in  Him.  Riding 
up  to  a  regiment  that  was  hard  pressed  at  Waterloo,  the  Duke  of  Wellington 
cried  to  the  men,  "  Stand  fast,  Ninety-fifth  !  What  will  they  say  in  England  ?  " 
History  records  how  successfully  the  appeal  was  obeyed.  Stand  fast,  Christians  ! 
What  will  they  say  in  the  heavenly  city  to  which  you  belong,  and  for  whose 
interests  you  are  fighting  ?  William  of  Orange  said  he  learnt  a  word  while 
crossing  the  English  Channel  which  he  would  never  forget.  When  in  a  great 
storm  the  captain  was  all  night  crying  out  to  the  man  at  the  helm,  "  Steady  ! 
steady  !  steady  ! " 

II.  Addressed  to  those  who  have  given  evidence  of  willingness  to  be 
instructed. — "  My  joy  and  crown."  The  Philippians  who  had  embraced  the 
gospel  he  preached,  and  whose  lives  had  been  changed  by  its  power,  were  the  joy 
and  crown  of  the  devoted  apostle.  The  crown  was  not  the  diadem  of  royalty, 
but  the  garland  of  victory.  He  has  in  his  mind  the  famous  athletic  games  of 
the  Greeks,  which  in  the  diligent  training  and  the  strenuous  effort  to  gain  the 
laurel  coronet,  and  the  intensity  of  joy  felt  by  the  victors,  were  a  significant 
illustration  of  the  Christian  life,  whether  as  regards  the  spiritual  progress  of  the 
believer  himself,  or  his  work  for  the  salvation  of  others.  He  believed  the  Lord 
would  place  around  his  brow  an  imperishable  garland  of  honour,  of  which  each 
soul  that  had  been  quickened,  comforted,  and  strengthened  by  Him  would  be  a 
spray  or  leaf.  In  Nero's  prison,  aged,  worn  with  trouble,  manacled,  uncertain 
of  life,  he  rejoiced  in  being  a  successful  minister  of  Christ — a  conqueror  wreathed 
with  amaranth.  The  emperor  in  his  palace  was  in  heart  weary  and  wretched  ; 
the  prisoner  was  restful  and  happy,  invested  with  a  glory  that  should  shine  on 
undimmed,  when  the  glitter  of  Nero's  power  and  grandeur  should  vanish  as  a 
dream.  The  satisfaction  enjoyed  by  those  who  first  led  us  to  Christ  and  who 
have  helped  us  in  our  spiritual  struggles,  is  another  reason  for  continued  stead- 
fastness and  fidelity. 

III.  Urged  with  affectionate  solicitude. — "  My  brethren  dearly  beloved  and 
longed  for,  .  .  .  my  dearly  beloved."  The  terms  employed  are  the  outflow  of  a 
jubilant  spirit,  and  are  full  of  tender  endearment  and  loving  appreciation.  Love 
delights  to  exaggerate ;  yet  there  is  no  exaggeration  here.  The  Philippians 
were  to  the  apostle  "  brethren  beloved — dearly  beloved  " — children  of  the  same 
spiritual  Father,  members  of  the  one  family  of  God,  united  together  in  a  happy 
Christian  brotherhood.  He  recalls  the  first  introduction  of  the  gospel  into 
Philippi,  the  preaching  of  the  word,  the  impressions  made,  the  converts  won,  the 
formation  of  the  Church,  and  its  growth  and  prosperity,  amid  labours  and 
suffering.  Attachments  were  then  formed  that  deepened  and  strengthened  with 
the  years.     Christian  friendships  call  forth  the  finest  feelings  of  the  soul,  and 

355 


chap.  iv.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   PHILIPPIANS. 


form  a  strong  bond  of  union  in  the  love  of  a  common  Saviour.  Christ  will  have 
no  forced  selection  of  men,  no  soldiers  by  compulsion,  no  timorous  slaves,  but 
children,  brethren,  friends. 

Lessons. — 1.  Steadfastness  is  a  test  of  genuine  devotedness.  2.  Instability  is  a 
loss  of  advantages  often  won  at  great  cost.  3.  They  who  endure  will  finally 
conquer. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  2,    3. 

Glimpses  of  Life  in  the  Early  Church. 

I.  The  early  planting  of  the  gospel  involved  arduous  and  united  toil. — 

"  Which  laboured  with  me  in  the  gospel "  (ver.  3).  Prodigious  as'  were  the 
labours  of  Paul,  he  could  never  have  accomplished  the  work  he  did  but  for 
the  willing  co-operation  of  others.  There  is  great  art  in  evoking  the  sympathy 
and  help  of  those  who  can  help  forward  the  work  of  God.  Christian  work  finds 
scope  for  all  kinds  of  talents  and  agencies.  Pioneer  work  is  rough  work  and 
tests  all  our  powers  and  resources.  The  difficulties  of  the  work  unite  its  propa- 
gators in  heart  and  hand.  There  is  little  good  done  without  strenuous  labour, 
though  the  results  of  our  toil  are  not  always  immediately  apparent.  Dr.  Judson 
laboured  diligently  for  six  years  in  Burmah  before  he  baptised  a  convert.  At 
the  end  of  three  years  he  was  asked  what  evidence  he  had  of  ultimate  success. 
He  replied,  "  As  much  as  there  is  a  God  who  will  fulfil  all  His  promises."  A 
hundred  churches  and  thousands  of  converts  already  answer  his  faith. 

II.  The  names  of  gospel  pioneers  are  not  forgotten. — "  With  Clement  also, 
and  with  other  my  fellow-labourers,  whose  names  are  in  the  book  of  life  "  (ver.  3). 
Some  of  these  names  are  recorded  in  the  pages  of  history  and  handed  down  to 
our  day ;  the  rest,  though  unknown  on  earth,  are  registered  in  the  imperishable 
pages  of  "  the  book  of  life."  Clement,  though  unknown  to  fame  and  unidenti- 
fied with  any  other  of  the  same  name  mentioned  in  history,  is  referred  to  here 
as  recognising  the  apostle's  cordial  recollection  of  his  valuable  work.  But  the 
unknown  on  earth  are  not  forgotten  in  heaven.  The  work  we  do  for  God  will 
live  for  ever.  When  Columbus  was  homeward  bound  after  his  brilliant  discovery 
of  a  new  world  he  was  overtaken  by  a  terrific  storm.  In  his  indescribable  agony 
that  not  only  his  life  and  that  of  his  crew,  but  his  magnificent  discovery  must 
all  go  down  and  be  lost  in  the  abyss,  and  that,  too,  not  far  from  land,  he 
committed  to  the  deep  hurried  entries  of  that  discovery  sealed  up  in  bottles,  in 
the  hope  that  some  day  they  might  reach  land.  We  need  not  be  unduly  anxious 
about  either  our  work  or  our  fame  ;  God  will  take  care  of  both. 

III.  From  the  earliest  times  women  have  rendered  valuable  help  in  the 
propagation  of  the  gospel. — "Euodias,  Syntyche,  .  .  .  women  which  laboured  with 
me  in  the  gospel "  (vers.  2,  3).  In  the  Temple  worship  the  Jewish  women  were 
fenced  off  in  a  court  by  themselves.  The  woman  occupied  an  inferior  religious 
position  in  Rabbinical  teaching.  It  was  a  shock  to  public  feeling  to  see  a  rabbi 
talking  to  a  female.  Even  the  disciples  were  surprised  that  their  Master  should 
be  found  conversing  with  a  woman  on  the  brink  of  the  Samaritan  well.  Jesus 
Christ  broke  down  this  middle  wall  of  partition  as  He  had  broken  down  the 
other.  Here,  again,  He  made  both  one.  If  in  Christ  there  is  no  distinction  of 
Jew  and  Gentile,  neither  is  there  of  male  or  female.  Women  were  His  faithful 
and  constant  attendants ;  women  were  the  favoured  witnesses  of  His  resurrection ; 
women  were  among  the  most  helpful  fellow- workers  of  the  apostles.  There  was 
an  organised  ministry  of  women  deaconesses  and  widows  in  the  Apostolic  Church. 
11  What  women  those  Christians  have,"  exclaimed  the  heathen  rhetorician,  on 
learning  about  Anthusa,  the  mother  of  Chrysostom.  Anthusa  at  the  early  age 
of  twenty  lost  her  husband,  and  thenceforward  devoted  herself  wholly  to  the 

356 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:   PHILIPPIANS.       chap.  IV. 


education  of  her  son,  refusing  all  offers  of  further  marriage.  Her  intelligence 
and  piety  moulded  the  boy's  character  and  shaped  the  destiny  of  the  man,  who 
in  his  subsequent  eminence  never  forgot  what  he  owed  to  maternal  influence. 
It  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  we  owe  those  rich  homilies  of  Ohrysostom,  of 
which  interpreters  of  Scripture  still  make  great  use,  to  the  mind  and  heart  of 
Anthusa. 

IV.  We  learn  the  apostolic  method  of  reconciling  two  eminent  women  in 
serious  disagreement. — 1.  He  addresses  to  each  an  earnest  and  pointed  exhortation 
to  unity.  "  I  beseech  Euodias,  and  beseech  Syntyche,  that  they  be  of  the  same 
mind  in  the  Lord  "  (ver.  2).  He  repeats  the  entreaty  to  show  that  he  placed  the 
like  obligation  on  each  of  them.  He  does  not  exhort  the  one  to  be  reconciled  to 
the  other,  for  they  might  have  doubted  who  should  take  the  initiative,  and  they 
might  wonder,  from  the  position  of  their  names  and  construction  of  the  sentence, 
to  which  of  them  the  apostle  attached  the  more  blame.  But  he  exhorts  them 
both,  the  one  and  the  other,  to  think  the  same  thing — not  only  to  come  to  a 
mutual  understanding,  but  to  preserve  it.  The  cause  of  quarrel  might  be  some 
unworthy  question  about  priority  or  privilege,  even  in  the  prosecution  of  the 
good  work — vainglory  leading  to  strife.  It  does  not  seem  to  have  been  any 
difference  in  creed  or  practice  (Eadie). 

2.  He  recognises  their  devoted  and  impartial  labours. — "  Those  women  which 
laboured  with  me  in  the  gospel "  (ver.  3).  Their  work  does  not  appear  to  have 
been  done  from  personal  friendship,  as  is  often  the  case ;  they  treated  all  and 
helped  all  alike.  They  were  deeply  interested  in  the  spread  of  the  gospel  and  the 
increase  of  the  Church,  and  toiled  with  such  self-sacrificing  devotion  as  to  elicit 
the  special  commendation  of  the  apostle. 

3.  He  entreated  that  help  might  be  rendered  them  in  the  adjustment  of  their  quarrel. 
— "  And  I  intreat  thee  also,  true  yokefellow,  help  those  women  "  (ver.  3).  A 
third  party  is  appealed  to,  to  interpose  his  good  offices — an  evidence  that  Paul 
regarded  the  harmony  of  these  two  women  a  matter  of  no  small  importance. 
Mediation  between  two  persons  at  variance  is  delicate  and  difficult  work,  but  if 
judiciously  done  may  help  to  a  reconciliation.  Women  were  the  first  to  receive 
the  gospel  at  Philippi,  and  from  the  first  used  their  influence  and  opportunities 
in  commending  it  to  their  sex.  The  unseemly  misunderstanding  between  these 
two  women  whose  labours  had  been  so  blessed  made  it  the  more  necessary  that 
something  should  be  done  to  heal  the  breach. 

Lessons. — 1.  Pioneer  work  has  special  hardships  and  temptations.  2.  The  best 
of  women  may  quarrel.  3.  It  is  the  wise  policy  of  the  Christian  statesman  to 
compose  and  strive  to  prevent  discord  and  disunion. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 


Ver.  2.  Feminine  Disagreement — 

I.  May  occasion  much  mischief  in  a 
Church. 

II.  All  the  more  dangerous  where 
the  parties  are  eminent  in  gifts  and 
labours  (ver.  3). 

III.  Reconciled  when  truly  possess- 
ing one  mind  in  Christ.—  "Be  of  the 
same  mind  in  the  Lord." 

IV.  The  most  earnest  entreaty 
should  be  employed  to  rectify. — "  I  be- 
seech Euodias,  and  beseech  Syntyche." 


Ver.  3.  Names  in  the  Book. 

1.  Some  observations. — 1.    It  is  a 

great  thing  to  have  a  name  in  the  New 
Testament. — Think  of  the  roll-call  in 
Bom.  xvi.  and  Heb.  xi. 

2.  It  is  a  great  thing  now  to  have  a 
name  in  the  family  Bible,  for  that 
generally  signifies  Christian  training 
and  parental  prayers. 

3.  It  is  a  great  thing  to  have  a  name 
upon  the  pages  of  a  church  register. — 
How  affecting  are  these  old  manuals, 

357 


chap.  iv.       H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY;    PHILIPPIANS. 


with    their    lists    of    pious    men   and  securely  in  the  Lamb's  Book  of  Life  ? 

women,  many   of   whom  have  passed  3.    To    backsliders :   are  you  going   to 

into  the  skies.           .  return  to  your  name,  or  do  you  want 

4.    It  is  the  greatest  thing  of  all  to  it  to  come  back  to  you  ?    4.  To  Christian 

have  a   name   in  the   Lamb's  Book  of  workers :    how  many  names   have  you 

Life. — Beyond  all  fame  (Matt.  xi.  11).  helped  to  write  in  the  Book  of  Life? 

Beyond  all  power  (Luke  x.  20).  5.   Is  there  any  cheer  in  thinking  how 

II.     Some    questions. — 1.     In    how  our  names  will  sound  when  the  books 

many  books  is  your  name  written  now  ?  are   opened   in   the   white   light    of  the 

2.  How  can  a  human  name  be  written  throne  ? — Homiletic  Monthly. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verse  4. 

Christian  Joy — 

I.  Is  in  the  Lord. — "  Rejoice  in  the  Lord."  The  joy  of  the  Christian  is  \ 
not  in  his  own  achievements,  still  less  is  it  in  himself  or  in  his  own  ex-  ! 
periences.  A  glance  at  ourselves  and  the  imperfections  of  our  work  for  God 
fills  us  with  shame  and  sadness.  Pure,  lasting  joy  is  found  nowhere  but  "  in  the 
Lord."  When  Mohler,  the  eminent  Roman  Catholic  symbolist,  asserted  that 
"  in  the  neighbourhood  of  a  man  who,  without  any  restriction,  declared  himself 
sure  of  his  salvation,  he  should  be  in  a  high  degree  uneasy,  and  that  he  could  not 
repel  the  thought  that  there  was  something  diabolical  beneath  this,"  he  only 
afforded  a  deep  glance  into  the  comfortlessness  of  a  heart  which  seeks  the  ultimate 
ground  of  its  hope  in  self-righteousness,  and  in  making  assurance  of  salvation  to 
depend  on  attainment  in  holiness  instead  of  in  simple  faith  in  Christ.  The 
friends  of  Haller  congratulated  him  on  the  honour  of  having  received  a  visit  in 
kis  last  hours  from  the  emperor  Joseph  II.  ;  but  the  dying  man  simply  answered, 
"  Bejoice  that  your  names  are  written  in  heaven."  The  more  we  realise  Christ, 
not  as  a  dim  abstraction  or  a  mere  historic  personage,  but  as  a  living  and  loving 
personal  reality,  the  more  truly  can  we  rejoice  in  Him. 

II.  Is  constant. — "  Always."  Christian  joy  is  not  a  capricious  sentiment,  a 
fitful  rapture,  but  a  steady,  uniform,  and  continued  emotion.  The  direction  of 
the  apostle  to  rejoice  always  sounds  like  a  paradox.  How  can  we  continually 
rejoice  when  we  are  continually  in  the  midst  of  sin,  suffering,  and  sorrow  ? 
Still,  when  we  think  of  the  change  divine  grace  has  wrought  in  us,  when  we 
think  of  the  ample  provisions  of  the  gospel  every  moment  available  to  us,  when 
we  contemplate  the  bright  prospects  before  us  which  even  present  distresses 
cannot  dim,  and  when  we  remember  the  infinite  ability  of  our  Lord  to  accom- 
plish all  He  has  promised  us,  our  joy  may  well  be  perennial.  Airay,  the  earliest 
English  expositor  of  this  epistle,  has  well  said,  "  When  Satan,  that  old  dragon, 
casts  out  many  flouds  of  persecutions  against  us ;  when  wicked  men  cruelly, 
disdainfully,  and  despitefully  speake  against  us ;  when  lying,  slandering,  and 
deceitful  mouthes  are  opened  upon  us;  when  we  are  mocked  and  jested  at 
and  had  in  derision  of  all  them  that  are  about  us ;  when  we  are  afflicted, 
tormented,  and  made  the  world's  wonder ;  when  the  sorrowes  of  death  compasse 
us  and  the  flouds  of  wickednesse  make  us  afraid,  and  the  paines  of  >hell  come  even 
unto  our  soule ;  what  is  it  that  holds  up  our  heads  that  we  sinke  not,  how  is  it 
that  we  stand  either  not  shaken,  or,  if  shaken,  yet  not  cast  downe  ?  Is  it  not 
by  our  rejoycing  which  we  have  in  Christ  Jesus  1 " 

III.  Is  recommended  by  experience. — "  And  again  I  say  rejoice."  Paul 
recommended  what  he  himself  enjoyed.  If  he,  in  the  midst  of  disappointment, 
imprisonment,  and  suffering,  would  rejoice  and  did  rejoice,  so  may  others.  It 
might  be  that,  as  he  wrote  these  words,  a  temporary  depression  crept  over  him, 
as  he  thought  of  himself  as  a  prisoner  in  the  immediate  prospect  of  a  cruel  death. 

358 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    PHILIPPIANS.        chap.  IV, 


It  was  but  a  passing  feeling.  In  a  moment  divine  grace  triumphed,  and  with 
heightened  elation  and  emphasis  he  repeated,  "  And  again  I  will  say,  rejoice." 
We  have  already  remarked  that  joy  is  the  predominating  feature  of  this  epistle, 

and  to  the  last  the  apostle  maintains  the  exalted  strain. 

Lessons. — 1.  Great  joy  is  found  .in  working  for  God.     2.  Joy  is  found  not  so 

much  in  the  work  as  in  the  Lord.  3.  It  is  the  Christian's  privilege  to  rejoice 
always. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSE. 

Ver.  4.  Rejoicing  in  the  Lord.  reasonable,  for  :   1.  God  is  always  the 

I.  The  text  involves  the  fact  that  same.  2.  The  believer's  relation  to  Him 
believers  may  and  should  rejoice. —  is  unalterable.  3.  The  way  to  God  is 
1.  The  world  holds  that  believers  have  always  open.  4.  The  mind  may  always 
no  enjoyment.  2.  There  are  believers  keep  before  it  the  views  which  cause  joy 
who  all  but  teach  this ;  for  (1)  they  use  — by  the  indwelling  Spirit. 

not  the  language  of  joy  themselves;  IV.  The  manner. in  which  the  com- 

(2)     they    discourage    it     in     others,  mandment  of  the  text  is  pressed  teaches 

3.  But  that  believers  may  and  should  us  the  importance  of  the  duty  it  incul- 
rejoice  is  evident  for — (1)  joy  is  com-  cates. — I ts  importance  is  manifest,  for  : 
manded  as  a  duty  ;  (2)  it  is  mentioned  1.  It  is  the  mainspring  of  worship  and 
as  a  fruit  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  (3)  it  is  obedience.  2.  It  prevents  a  return  to 
a  feature  of  the  Christian,  portrayed  sinful  pleasures.  3.  It  renders  us 
in   the    Scriptures    (Acts   ii.    46,    47).  superior  to  temporal  suffering — fits  for 

4.  The  spiritually -minded,  if  not  warped  enduring  for  Jesus  Christ.     4.  It  pre- 
by   some    defective    system   of  doctrine,  sents    to    the  world  (1)  True   religion.4 
rejoice.     5.  Joy  is  quite  consistent  with  (2)  Connected  with  enjoyment. 

those  states  of  mind  which  are  thought  V.  The  manner  in  which  the  com- 

to  be  inconsistent  with  it.     "  Sorrowful,  mandment  of  the  text  is    expressed 

yet  always  rejoicing."     6.  Joy    is  the  implies  that  there  are  obstacles  in  the 

natural  result  of  peace  with  God.  way  of  obedience. — What  are  some  of 

II.  The  text  exhibits  the  nature  of  the  obstacles?  1.  A  habit,  natural  and 
the  joy  peculiar  to  the  believer. — He  strong,  of  drawing  our  satisfaction  from 
rejoices  "  in  the  Lord."  1.  The  world  the  creature.  2.  Not  keeping  ua  con- 
rejoices  in  the  creature  and  shuts  out  science  void  of  offence  towards  God  and 
God.  2.  The  believer  rejoices  only  in  man."  3.  JS  ot  having  the  heart  in  a 
God.  3.  This  joy  has  several  elements.  state  to  have  sympathy  with  God's  char- 
(1)  The  believer  rejoices  that  God  is —  acter.  4.  Not  proportioning  aright  the 
"I  am."  (2)  He  rejoices  that  He  is  amount  of  attention  given  to  self  and 
what  He  is.  (3)  He  rejoices  in  the  Christ.  5.  Not  making  sure  of  our 
manifestations  of  His  glory,  which  He  interest  in  Christ. —  Stewart. 

has   made   in   His   word,    works,    and 

ways.       (4)    He   rejoices   in   his   own  Joy  in  the  Lord — 

relation  to  Him  in  Christ — "  boasting  I.  Is  intellectual. 

himself  in  God."     (5)  He   rejoices   in  II.  Moral. 

the  hope  of  the  glory  of  God.    4.  Every  III.  Spiritual. 

element  of  pure  and    elevated    pleasure  Lessons. — 1.  Our  power  oj  rejoicing 

is  found  in  His  joy.   5.  It  is  fellowship  in  the  Lord  is  a  fair  test  of  our  moral 

with  God  Himself  in  His  joy.  and  spiritual  condition.     2.  Is  a  Chris- 

III.  The   text    renders   it   binding"  tian's  main  support  under  the  trials  of 
upon  the  believer  at  all  times  to  seek  life.     3.  Is  one  of  the  great  motive  forces 
this    privilege    and   to    cherish    this  of  the  Christian  life. — H.  P.  Liddon. 
feeling — "  always." — This  command  is 

359 


chap.  iv.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTAlfc:    PHIL1PPIANS. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verse  5. 

Christian  Equity — 

I.  Does  not  exact  all  the  claims  of  legal  justice. — "  Let  your  moderation 
[forbearance]  be  known."  Human  laws,  however  carefully  devised,  may  some- 
times, if  rigidly  enforced,  act  unjustly  and  cruelly.  We  should  guide  ourselves  at 
all  times  by  the  broad  principles  of  equity  in  the  sight  of  God.  We  should  not 
urge  our  own  rights  to  the  uttermost,  but  be  willing  to  waive  a  part,  and  thus 
rectify  the  injustice  of  justice.  "The  archetype  of  this  grace  is  God,  who 
presses  not  the  strictness  of  His  law  against  us  as  we  deserve,  though  having 
exacted  the  fullest  payment  for  us  from  our  divine  Surety  "  (Eausset).  It  is  not 
gentleness  as  an  innate  feeling,  but  as  the  result  of  self-restraint.  It  does  not 
insist  on  what  is  its  due,  it  does  not  stand  on  etiquette  or  right,  but  it  descends 
and  complies.  It  is  opposed  to  that  rigor  which  never  bends  nor  deviates,  and 
which,  as  it  gives  the  last  farthing,  uniformly  exacts  it.  It  is  not  facile 
pliability — a  reed  in  the  breeze — but  that  generous  and.  indulgent  feeling  that 
knows  what  is  its  right,  but  recedes  from  it ;  is  conscious  of  what  is  merited,  but 
does  not  contend  for  strict  proportion.  It  is  that  grace  which  was  defective  in 
one  or  other,  or  both,  of  the  women  who  are  charged  by  the  apostle  to  be  of  one 
mind  in  the  Lord.  For,  slow  to  take  offence,  it  is  swift  to  forgive  it.  Let  a 
misunderstanding  arise,  and  no  false  delicacy  will  prevent  it  from  taking  the 
first  step  towards  reconciliation  or  adjustment  of  opinion  (Eadie). 

II.  Should  be  evident  in  dealing  with  all  classes. — "  Be  known  unto  all 
men."  We  are  to  practise  forbearance,  not  only  towards  our  Christian  brethren, 
but  towards  the  world,  even  towards  the  enemies  of  the  gospel.  It  is  a  rebuke 
to  the  Christian  spirit  to  be  austere,  unbending,  and  scrupulously  exacting.  If 
we  are  always  rejoicing  in  the  Lord,  we  cannot  cherish  hard  feelings  towards 
any.  The  Christian  should  be  notorious  for  gentleness  and  forbearance  ;  all  with 
whom  we  come  in  contact  should  be  made  to  know  it  and  feel  it.  We  should  be 
prepared  for  yielding  up  what  may  be  our  own  rights,  and  to  endure  wrong 
rather  than  dishonour  Christ,  or  give  a  false  representation  of  the  heavenly  life 
which  He  exemplified  and  recommended,  and  which  is  becoming  in  all  his  pro- 
fessed followers.  "  This  gentleness  manifests  itself  at  one  time  as  equanimity 
and  patience  under  all  circumstances,  among  all  men  and  in  manifold  ex- 
periences; at  another  as  integrity  in""business  relations  ;  as  justice,  forbearance, 
and  goodness  in  exercising  power  ;  as  impartiality  and  mercy  in  judging ;  as 
noble  yielding,  joyful  giving,  and  patient  enduring  and  forgiving  "  (Passavant). 

III.  Should  be  practised  as  conscious  of  the  near  advent  of  Christ. — "  The 
Lord  is  at  hand."  The  earl}7  Church  had  a  vivid  sense  of  the  immediateness  of 
the  second  coming  of  Christ,  and  were  taught  to  do  and  bear  everything  as  in 
His  sight.  We  lose  much  in  spiritual  power,  and  in  the  realisation  of  eternal 
things,  when  we  consign  that  advent  to  the  remote  and  indistinct  future. 
After  all,  the  second  coming  of  Christ,  and  not  our  own  death,  is  the  goal  on 
which  our  eye  should  be  fixed,  as  the  period  which  will  furnish  us  with  the  true 
and  final  value  of  our  life-work.  In  the  first  ages  it  would  have  been  deemed  a 
kind  of  apostasy  not  to  have  sighed  after  the  day  of  the  Lord.  The  coming  of 
the  Lord  is  a  motive  to  show  moderation  and  clemency  towards  all  men,  even 
towards  our  enemies,  for  the  great  Judge  is  near,  who  will  rectify  all  inequalities 
and  redress  all  wrongs. 

Lessons. — 1.  Equity  is  superior  to  legal  enactments.  2.  It  is  a  sorry  spectacle 
when  Christians  appeal  to  the  civil  courts  to  settle  their  differences.  3.  The  Christian 
spirit  is  the  highest  equity. 

360 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:   PHILIPPJANS.       chap.  iv. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  6,  7. 

The  Cure  of  Care. 

I.  That  all  anxious  care  is  needless. — uBe  careful  for  nothing"  (ver.  6).  It 
is  not  forethought  that  is  here  condemned,  but  anxious,  distracting  care.  Care 
is  a  kill-joy,  and  is  the  great  enemy  of  Christian  peace.  The  future  is  not  ours ; 
why  be  anxious  about  it  ?  The  past  is  done  with,  and  regrets  about  it  are 
unavailing.  The  future  is  provided  for,  for  God,  the  great  Provider,  is  ahead  of 
every  step  we  take  towards  that  future.  The  ancient  custom  of  distracting  a 
criminal  by  tying  him  to  the  wheels  of  two  chariots  which  were  then  driven  in 
opposite  directions  well  illustrates  how  cares  may  be  allowed  to  distract  the  mind. 
We  put  ourselves  on  the  rack  when  we  ought  to  cast  our  care  on  God,  not  in 
part,  nor  occasionally,  but  in  all  things  and  at  all  times.  Care  depreciates  the 
value  of  all  our  past  blessings,  and  dims  our  vision  of  the  blessings  we  now 
actually  possess.  After  the  great  military  victories  of  Marlborough  in  1704,  he 
one  day  said :  "  I  have  for  these  last  ten  days  been  so  troubled  by  the  many 
disappointments  I  have  had,  that  I  think  if  it  were  possible  to  vex  me  so 
for  a  fortnight  longer,  it  would  make  an  end  of  me.  In  short,  I  am  weary  of 
my  life." 

II.  That  all  anxious  care  should  be  taken  to  God  in  thankful  prayer. — 
"  But  in  everything  by  prayer  and  supplication  with  thanksgiving  let  your 
requests  be  made  known  unto  God "  (ver.  6).  The  best  system  of  heathen 
philosophy  regarded  equability  of  mind,  undisturbed  alike  by  the  troubles  and 
allurements  of  the  world,  as  the  most  perfect  state  of  the  soul ;  but  it  did  not 
provide  any  adequate  motive  for  attaining  this  desirable  equipoise.  It  could 
only  state  the  theory  and  insist  on  its  importance  ;  but  refractory  human  nature 
had  its  own  way,  in  spite  of  philosophy.  The  apostle  supplies  in  these  words  a 
nobler  and  more  workable  philosophy.  He  not  only  exhorts  us  to  tranquillity  of 
mind,  but  shows  us  how  it  may  be  attained  and  kept.  In  all  kinds  of  anxieties, 
and  especially  in  the  struggles  of  religious  doubt,  prayer  is  the  truest  philosophy. 
Our  difficulties  vanish  when  we  take  them  to  God. 

"  By  caring  and  by  fretting, 
By  agony  and  fear, 
There  is  of  God  no  getting ; 
But  prayer  He  will  hear." 

We  should  cast  our  care  on  God  because  He  is  our  Father.  A  father's  office  is 
to  provide  for  his  family.  It  is  out  of  place  for  a  child  to  be  anxiously  making 
provision  for  emergencies — asking  where  to-morrow's  food  and  clothing  are  to 
come  from,  and  how  the  bills  are  to  be  paid.  We  should  rebuke  such  precocity, 
and  send  the  child  to  school  or  to  play,  and  leave  all  such  matters  to  the 
ordained  caretaker.  The  birds  of  the  air  are  taken  care  of ;  so  shall  we  be, 
even  though  our  faith  is  small.  "  Our  prayers  run  along  one  road,  and  God's 
answers  by  another,  and  by-and-by  they  meet.  God  answers  all  true  prayer, 
either  in  kind  or  in  kindness  "  (Judson). 

III.  That  the  peace  of  God  in  the  heart  will  effectually  banish  all  care. — 
"  And  the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  understanding  shall  keep  your  hearts 
and  minds  through  Christ  Jesus  "  (ver.  7).  The  enemies  of  peace  are  :  melancholy, 
to  which  the  apostle  opposed  joy  in  the  Lord  (ver.  4) ;  want  of  self-restraint  or 
intemperance  of  feeling  or  conduct,  to  which  he  opposes  moderation  (ver.  5) ; 
care  and  anxiety,  or  unthankfulness  and  unbelief,  to  which  he  opposes  grateful 
and  earnest  prayer  (ver.  6) ;  the  final  result  is  peace  (ver.  7).  The  peace  that 
God  gives  "  passeth  understanding  " ;  it  is  deep,  precious,  immeasurable.  God 
alone  fully  understands  the  grandeur  of  His  own  gift.     It  is  an  impenetrable 

361 


chap.  iv.       H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:    PRILIPPIANS. 


shield  to  the  believing  soul ;  it  guards  the  fortress  in  peace  though  the  shafts 
of  care  are  constantly  hurled  against  it. 

Lessons. — 1.  Our  sins  breed  our  cares.     2.  God  is  ever  willing  to  take  up  the 
burden  of  our  cares.     3.   Only  as  we  commit  our  cares  to  God  have  we  peace. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 


Vers.  6,  7.  The  Remedy  for  Worldly 
Care. 

I.  A  caution  or  warning. — "  Be 
careful  for  nothing." 

1.  This  does  not  respect  duty. — We 
must  have  a  care  for  our  Lord's  interests. 

2.  But  having  performed  duty,  we 
are  not  to  be  careful  as  to  consequences. — 

(1)  Because  unnecessary.    Christ  cares. 

(2)  Because  useless.  It  cannot  ward 
off  the  evil.  The  evil  only  in  imagina- 
tion. The  evil  often  a  good.  Itself 
the  greatest  evil. 

3.  Because  positively  sinful. — (1)  It 
breaks  a  commandment.  (2)  It  sets 
aside  promises.  (3)  It  undervalues 
experience.  (4)  It  distrusts  God's 
wisdom  and  goodness.  (5)  It  is  re- 
bellion against  God's  arrangements. 
(6)  It  is  an  intrusion  into  God's 
province. 

4.  Because  hurtful  and  injurious. — 
(1)  It  often  deters  from  duty.  (2)  It 
destroys  the  comforts  of  duty. 

II.  Counsel  or  advice  as  to  the 
manner  in  which  the  evil  is  to  be 
avoided. — "  But  in  everything  by 
prayer  and  supplication."  1.  The  cor- 
rection is  not  a  needless  and  reckless 
indifference.  2.  The  emphatic  word 
here  is  "  everything?  This  describes 
the  range  of  prayer.  This  precept  is 
generally  neglected.  3.  The  per- 
formance of  this  duty  would  correct 
carefulness.  It  places  everything 
under  God's  government,  and  leaves 
it  there.  It  leads  to  a  study  of  the 
divine  will  in  secular  affairs.  Our 
prospects  and  plans  are  thus  tested. 
It  gives  to  every  event  the  character 
of  an  answer  to  prayer — evil  as  well 
as  good.  Prayer,  i.e.  direct  entreaty  or 
petition.  Supplication,  i.e.  deprecation. 
Thanksgiving  for  all  past  and  present. 

III.  A  promise  as  to  the  result  of 
following  this  counsel  or  advice. — "And 
the  peace  of   God,   which  passeth   all 

362 


understanding,  shall  keep  your  hearts 
and  minds." 

1.  The  mind  and  the  heart  are  the  seat 
of  care. — The  mind  calculates,  imagines. 
The  heart  feels  fear,  grief,  despair. 

2.  The  mind  and  heart  are  made 
the  seat  of  peace. — "  The  peace  of  God, 
which  passeth  all  understanding,  shall 
keep  your  hearts  and  minds  through 
Jesus  Christ."  The  peace  which  God 
has  flows  from  unity,  from  omnipo- 
tence. This  is  the  peace  of  God,  be- 
cause He  gives  it. 

3.  This  peace  comes  through  Jesus 
Christ. — He  produces  the  unity.  He 
encircles  with  omnipotence. — Stewart. 

Vers.  6,  7.  Anxious  Care. 

I.  The  evil  to  be  avoided. — 1.  Care 
is  excessive  when  it  is  inconsistent  with 
peace  and  quietness.  2.  When  it  in- 
duces loss  of  temper.  3.  When  it  makes 
us  distrustful  of  Providence.  4.  When 
it  hurries  us  into  any  improper  course  of 
conduct.  (1)  Anxiety  is  useless.  (2)  Is 
positively  injurious.  (3)  Exerts  a 
mischievous  influence  on  others.  (4)  Is 
criminal. 

II.  The  proper  course  to  be  pur- 
sued.— 1.  Prayer.  2.  Supplication. 
3.  Thanksgiving. 

III.  The  happiness  to  be  enjoyed. — 
"  The  peace  of  God,  which  passeth 
understanding,  shall  keep  your  hearts 
and  minds  through  Jesus  Christ." — 
Dr.  Robt.  Newton. 

Ver.  6.  Subjects  of  Prayer. 

I.  For  temporal  blessings. — 1.  Our 
health.  Value  of  health.  Dependence  on 
God.  2.  Our  studies.  Not  to  super- 
sede diligence.  Communicates  a  right 
impulse.  Secures  a  right  direction. 
3.  Our  undertakings.  Agricultural, 
commercial. 

II.  For  spiritual  blessings. — 1.  For 
pardon.     Of  our  daily  sins  in  thought, 


H0MILE1IC  COMMENTARY:    PHILIPPIANS.       chap.  iv. 


word,    and    deed.      Of    all    our    sins.  beggars.     Without  thanksgiving  what 

2.  Far    holiness    in    heart    and    life,  we     call     prayer     is     presumption. — 
Regeneration,  faith,  love,  hope,  meek-  Homiletic  Monthly. 

ness,     zeal,      resignation,     obedience. 

3.  For  usefulness  and  happiness.  Yer.  7.    The  Peace  of  God  keeping  the 

III.  For  the  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Heart. 

Spirit. — 1.    On  ourselves.     2.    On  our  I.  The   nature    of  this    defending 

relatives    and    friends.        3.     On    the  principle. — It   has    as    its    basis    for- 

Church.     4.   On  the  world.  givnig  mercy. 

IV.  For  the  spread  of  the  gospel. —  II.  Its  author. — "  The  peace  of 
1.  For  the  multiplication  of  the  necessary  God."  It  is  called  His  peace,  because 
means.  2.  For  the  removal  of  obstacles.  that  work  of  mercy  on  which  it  rests 
3.  For  the  success  of  labourers.  4.  For  is  His  work,  and  He  Himself  com- 
the  conversion  of  sinners. — G.  Brooks.  municates  the  peace. 

III.    Its     property. — "Passeth    all 

Trite  Prayer.  understanding."       1.  The    under sland- 

I.  True  prayer  is  specific  as  well  as  ing  of  such  as  are  strangers  to  it. 
earnest. — Nothing  is  too  little  to  be  2.  They  who  enjoy  it  the  most  cannot 
made  the  subject  of  prayer.     The  very  fully  comprehend  it. 

act  of  confidence  is  pleasing  to  God  and  IV.  Its  effects. — "Shall  keep  your 

tranquillising  to  the  suppliant.     God  is  hearts  and  minds."     1.   In  temptation 

not  only  willing  to  hear  the  details,  but  it  secures  the   heart   by   satisfying   the 

He  desires  that  we  should  tell  Him.  heart.     2.  It  keeps  the  heart  in  affliction. 

II.  True  prayer  consists  of  con-  3.  It  keeps  the  mind  by  settling  the 
fession,  supplication,  and  thanksgiving,  judgment,  and  keeping  doubts  and  errors 
— We   are   to   confess   our    sins,    ask  out  of  the  mind. 

forgiveness,  and  do  it  with  gratitude  V.     Its     source     and    the    instru- 

and    thankfulness.       God     will    not  mentality    by     which    it     works. — 

answer   the    requests    of    unthankful  "  Through  Christ  Jesus." — G.  Bradley. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF   THE   PARAGRAPH— Verses  8,  9. 

The  Science  of  Christian  Ethics — 

I.  Demands  the  study  of  every  genuine  virtue. — "  Whatsoever  things  are 
true,  honest,  just,  pure,  lovely,  of  good  report, .  .  .  think  on  these  things  "  (ver.  8). 
In  regard  to  what  is  honourable,  just,  pure,  lovely,  and  of  good  report,  there  is 
a  true  and  a  false  standard,  and  for  this  reason  the  apostle  here  places  the  true 
at  the  beginning,  that  when  the  following  exhortations  are  presented,  this  fact 
which  our  experience  so  often  discloses  may  at  once  occur  to  the  Christian,  and 
he  may  be  led  to  examine  himself  and  see  whether  he  also  is  everywhere  seeking 
for  the  true  (Schleiermacher).  Genuine  virtue  has  its  root  in  genuine  religion. 
The  modern  school  of  ethics,  which  professes  to  teaches  morality  as  something  apart 
from  spiritual  Christianity,  is  a  return  to  the  exploded  theories  of  pagan  moralists, 
an  attempt  to  dress  up  pre-Christian  philosophy  in  a  nineteenth -century  garb. 
The  morality  that  is  lovely  and  of  good  report  is  Christian  morality — the 
practical,  livable  ethics  of  the  New  Testament.  The  ethical  terms  used  in  this 
verse  are  closely  united.  The  true,  the  becoming,  the  right,  and  the  pure  are 
elements  of  virtue  or  moral  excellence,  and  when  exhibited  in  practical  life  are 
lovely  and  worthy  of  all  praise.  The  charm  of  the  Christian  character  is  not 
the  cultivation  of  one  virtue  that  overshadows  all  the  rest,  but  the  harmonious 
blending  of  all  the  virtues  in  the  unity  of  the  Christian  life.  Christian  ethics 
should  be  earnestly  studied,  not  as  matters  of  mere  speculation,  but  because  of 
their  supreme  importance  and  utility  in  the  moral  conduct  of  every-day  life. 

363 


chap.  iv.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   PH1LITPIANS. 


II.  Requires  the  translation  of  high  moral  principles  into  practical  life. — 

"  Those  things  which  ye  have  both  learned,  and  received,  and  heard,  and  seen  in  me, 
do  "  (ver.  9).  It  is  one  thing  to  ponder,  admire,  and  applaud  morality  j  it  is  another 
thing  to  practise  it.  The  apostle  not  only  taught  Christian  ethics,  but  practised 
them,  and  could  point  to  his  own  example  as  worthy  of  imitation  ;  it  was  not,  "  Do 
as  I  say,"  but,  "Do  as  I  do."  Christian  morality  is  of  little  value  as  a  mere  creed 
of  ethics  ;  its  true  power  is  seen  in  changing,  elevating,  and  refining  the  life.  We 
have  all  to  lament  there  is  such  a  wide  chasm  between  theory  and  practice. 
Theory  may  be  learned  in  a  brief  period ;  practice  is  the  work  of  a  lifetime. 
The  theory  of  music  may  be  rapidly  apprehended,  but  the  mastery  of  any  one 
instrument,  such  as  the  violin  or  organ,  demands  patient  and  incessant  practice. 
It  means  detail-work,  plod,  perseverance,  genius.  So  is  it  with  every  virtue 
of  Christian  ethics.  Theory  and  practice  should  go  together ;  the  one  helps  the 
other  ;  practice  more  clearly  defines  theory,  and  theory  more  fully  apprehended 
stimulates  practice.  It  is  the  practice  of  Christian  morality  that  preaches  to 
the  world  a  gospel  that  it  cannot  fail  to  understand  and  that  is  doing  so  much 
to  renovate  it.  Lord  Bolingbroke,  an  avowed  infidel,  declared  :  "  No  religion 
ever  appeared  in  the  world  whose  tendency  was  so  much  directed  to  promote  the 
peace  and  happiness  of  mankind  as  the  Christian  religion.  The  gospel  of  Christ 
is  one  continued  lesson  of  the  strictest  morality,  of  justice,  benevolence,  and 
universal  charity.  Supposing  Christianity  to  be  a  human  invention,  it  is  the 
most  amiable  and  successful  invention  that  ever  was  imposed  on  mankind  for 
their  good." 

III.  Links  practical  morality  with  the  promise  of  divine  blessing. — "  And 
the  God  of  peace  shall  be  with  you  "  (ver.  9).  The  upright  man — the  man  who 
is  striving  to  shape  and  mould  his  life  on  the  ethics  of  the  New  Testament — 
shall  not  only  enjoy  peace,  the  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all  understanding,  but 
the  God  of  peace  shall  be  with  him  and  in  him.  True  religion,  in  healthy 
activity,  gives,  and  can  alone  give,  a  restfulness  of  spirit  such  as  the  troubles 
of  life  are  impotent  to  disturb.  The  two  vital  elements  of  true  religion  are 
communion  with  God  and  the  diligent  cultivation  of  practical  holiness — con- 
formity to  the  will  of  God  in  all  things.  Pray  and  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  the 
Spirit,  and  the  God  of  peace  shall  be  with  you,  preserving  you  from  unrest  and 
harm.  The  peace  of  God  is  also  an  active  principle,  gentle  and  noiseless  in  its 
activity,  which  will  help  the  soul  to  grow  in  ethical  symmetry  and  beauty. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  gospel  is  the  foundation  of  the  highest  ethics.  2.  No  system  of 
morality  is  trustworthy  that  does  not  lead  to  holy  practice.  3.  God  helps  the  man 
ivho  is  honestly  striving  to  live  up  to  his  light. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  8.  Mercantile-  Virtues  without 
Christianity. 

I.  What  a  man  of  mercantile  honour 
has. — He  has  an  attribute  of  character 
which  is  in  itself  pure,  lovely,  honour- 
able, and  of  good  report.  He  has  a 
natural  principle  of  integrity,  and  under 
its  impulse  he  may  be  carried  forward 
to  such  fine  exhibitions  of  himself  as 
are  worthy  of  all  admiration.  It  is 
very  noble  when  the  simple  utterance 
of  his  word  carries  as  much  security 
along  with  it,  as  if  he  had  accompanied 

364 


that  utterance  by  the  signatures,  the 
securities,  and'  the  legal  obligations 
which  are  required  of  other  men.  All 
the  glories  of  British  policy  and  British 
valour  are  far  eclipsed  by  the  moral 
splendour  which  British  faith  has 
thrown  over  the  name  and  the  charac- 
ter of  our  nation.  There  is  no  denying 
the  extended  prevalence  of  a  principle 
of  integrity  in  the  commercial  world. 

II.  What  a  man  of  mercantile  honour 
has  not. — He  may  not  have  one  duteous 
feeling  of  reverence  which  points  up- 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY :   PHILIPPIANS.        chap.  iv. 


ward  to  God.     He  may  not  have  one  lost  sight  of  the  interests  of  his  own 

wish  or  one  anticipation  which  points  soul. 

forward  to  eternity.  He  may  not  have  III.  By  his  devotional  habits. — One 
any  sense  of  dependence  on  the  Being  would  rather  be  the  author  of  his  prayers 
who  sustains  him,  and  who  gave  him  than  of  his  sermons.  The  difference 
his  very  principle  of  honour  as  part  of  between  his  prayers  as  a  Pharisee  and 
that  interior  furniture  which  He  .has  as  a  Christian.  The  subject,  the  spirit, 
put  into  his  bosom.  He  is  a  man  of  the  style  of  his  prayers  as  a  Christian, 
integrity,  and  yet  he  is  a  man  of  un-  Be  careful.  Be  not  soon  shaken  in 
godliness.  This  natural  virtue,  when  mind  or  troubled  by  speculations  about 
disjoined  from  a  sense  of  God,  is  of  no  the  philosophy  of  prayer, 
religious  estimation  whatever  ;  nor  will  IV.  By  his  spirituality  and  heavenly- 
it  lead  to  any  religious  blessing,  either  mindedness. — He  did  not  show  any 
in  time  or  in  eternity. — T.  Chalmers.  interest  in  the  class  of  worldly  objects 

that    might    have    been    expected    to 

Yer.    9.    Paul    as   an    Example    to  interest  a  man  of  his  order  of  mind. 

Believers.  He  was  absorbed  in  "spiritual  things." 

I.  He  was  distinguished  by  his  de-  The  second  coming  of  Christ  had  a 
cision  of  character  in  all  that  relates  prominent  place  in  his  thoughts. 
to  religion. — Constitutionally  ardent ;  "  That  day."  Cultivate  a  habitual 
zealous  as  a  Pharisee.  From  the  day  superiority  to  the  things  of  time  and 
of  his  conversion  he  never  faltered,  sense.  Seek  the  things  that  are  above, 
notwithstanding  his  privations,  his  V.  By  his  patient  submission  to  the 
dangers,  his  sufferings.     Be  decided.  dispensations  of  divine  providence. — 

II.  By  his  care  about  the  culture  of  Rare  amount  of  suffering.  Strong 
the  divine  life  in  his  own  soul. — The  feeling,  unmurmuring  submission, 
student  may  desire  to  know  the  truth  Patient,  meek,  contented.  All  from 
rather  than  to  feel  its  power.  The  Christian  principle.  Be  resigned, 
preacher  may  be  more  solicitous  VI.  By  his  laborious  usefulness. — 
about  the  power  of  the  truth  over  Sketch  his  career.  Be  useful. — G. 
others  than  over  himself.     He  never  Brooks. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  10—14. 

The  Joy  of  a  Good  Man  in  Extremity — 

I.  Stimulated  by  the  practical  evidence  of  the  growth  in  his  converts  of 
Christian  thoughtfulness. — "  Your  care  of  me  hath  flourished  again;  wherein  ye 
were  also  careful,  but  ye  lacked  opportunity  "  (ver.  10).  The  Philippians  were  a 
hospitable  people,  as  was  shown  both  by  Lydia  and  the  gaoler,  who  insisted  on 
the  privilege  of  ministering  to  the  wants  of  the  apostles  in  the  beginning  of  their 
ministry  at  Philippi.  The  Church  in  that  city  had  already  sent  a  liberal  con- 
tribution to  the  apostle  to  help  him  in  his  missionary  work  ;  and  he  now  rejoices 
over  another  practical  evidence  of  their  generous  thoughtfulness  in  the  timely 
help  they  had  sent  him  by  the  hands  of  Epaphroditus.  Paul  and  his  mission 
were  much  in  their  thoughts,  and  they  were  often  devising  how  they  might  minister 
to  his  wants  and  further  the  work  of  the  gospel.  They  were  eager  to  help  him 
more  frequently,  but  lacked  opportunity.  They  valued  the  gospel  so  as  to  be 
willing  to  pay  for  it.  It  is  a  gratifying  and  unmistakable  proof  of  religious 
growth  when  we  are  anxious  to  contribute  of  our  means,  according  to  our  ability, 
for  the  spread  of  the  gospel.  Liberality  in  money-giving  is  a  crucial  test  of 
genuine  godliness.  When  the  commission  of  excise  wrote  Wesley,  "  We  cannot 
doubt  you  have  plate  for  which  you  have  hitherto  neglected  to  make  an  entry,"  his 
laconic  reply  was,  "I  have  two  silver  teaspoons  at  London,  and  two  at  Bristol; 

365 


chap.  iv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    PHILIPPIANS. 


this  is  all  the  plate  which  I  have  at  present,  and  I  shall  not  buy  any  more  at 
present  while  so  many  around  me  want  bread."  It  is  estimated  that  he  gave 
away  more  than  £30,000. 

II.  Maintained  by  having  mastered  the  secret  of  Christian  contentment. — 
1.  A  contentment  gained  by  actual  experience  of  the  ups  and  downs  of  life.  "Not 
that  I  speak  in  respect  of  want :  for  I  have  learned,  in  whatsoever  state  I  am,  there- 
with to  be  content.  I  know  both  how  to  be  abased,  and  I  know  how  to  abound ; 
everywhere  and  in  all  things  I  am  instructed  both  to  be  full  and  to  be  hungry, 
both  to  abound  and  to  suffer  need"  (vers.  11,  12).  The  checkered  and  eventful 
life  of  the  apostle  had  taught  him  many  lessons,  and  not  the  least  useful  and 
important  was  the  art  of  contentment.  A  man  with  his  varied  experience  is 
not  easily  inconvenienced  by  fluctuating  fortunes.  Contentment  is  gained,  not 
by  the  abundance  of  what  we  possess,  but  by  discovering  how  much  we  can  do 
without.  "  That  which  we  miscall  poverty  is  indeed  nature,"  writes  Jeremy 
Taylor ;  "  and  its  proportions  are  the  just  measures  of  a  man,  and  the  best 
instruments  of  content.  But  when  we  create  needs  that  God  or  nature  never 
made,  we  have  erected  to  ourselves  an  infinite  stock  of  trouble  that  can  have 
no  period."  Most  desires  are  first  aroused  by  comparison  with  others. 
Sempronius  complained  of  want  of  clothes  and  was  much  troubled  for  a 
new  suit,  being  ashamed  to  appear  in  the  theatre  with  his  gown  a  little  thread- 
bare ;  but  when  he  got  it,  and  gave  his  old  clothes  to  Codrus,  the  poor  man 
was  ravished  with  joy  and  went  and  gave  God  thanks  for  his  new  purchase ; 
and  Codrus  was  made  richly  fine  and  cheerfully  warm  by  that  which  Sempronius 
was  ashamed  to  wear  ;  and  yet  their  natural  needs  were  both  alike. 

2.  A  contentment  inspired  by  divine  strength. — "  I  can  do  all  things  through 
Christ  which  strengtheneth  me"  (ver.  13).  The  apostle's  contentment  was  not 
self-sufficiency,  but  self-sufficingness ;  and  this  was  acquired,  not  only  by  the 
experiences  of  life,  but  the  help  of  divine  grace.  He  could  conceive  no  circum- 
stances in  which  that  grace  was  not  sufficient.  His  contented  mind  he  regarded 
as  a  gift  of  God.  "  I  have  learnt  from  Thee,  O  God,"  writes  Augustine,  "  to 
distinguish  between  the  gift  and  the  fruit.  The  gift  is  the  thing  itself,  which  is 
given  by  one  who  supplies  what  is  needed,  as  money  or  raiment ;  but  the  fruit 
is  the  good  and  well-ordered  will  of  the  giver.  It  is  a  gift  to  receive  a  prophet 
and  to  give  a  cup  of  cold  water  ;  but  it  is  fruit  to  do  those  acts  in  the  name  of  a 
prophet  and  in  the  name  of  a  disciple.  The  raven  brought  a  gift  to  Elias  when 
it  brought  him  bread  and  flesh,  but  the  widow  fruit,  because  she  fed  him  as  a 
man  of  God." 

III.  Gratefully  commends  the  generosity  of  those  who  alleviate  his  extremity. 
— "  Notwithstanding  ye  have  well  done,  that  ye  did  communicate  with  my  afflic- 
tion "  (ver.  14).  Though  the  apostle  had  learned  contentment  in  every 
situation,  and  his  mind  could  accommodate  itself  to  every  change  of  circumstances; 
though  he  had  fresh  and  inexhaustible  sources  of  consolation  within  himself,  and 
had  been  so  disciplined  as  to  acquire'  the  mastery  over  his  external  condition  and 
to  achieve  anything  in  Christ ;  yet  he  felt  thankful  for  the  sympathy  of  the 
Philippian  Church,  and  praised  them  for  it.  His  humanity  was  not  absorbed 
in  his  apostleship,  and  his  heart,  though  self-sufficed,  was  deeply  moved  by  such 
tokens  of  affection.  Though  he  was  contented,  he  yet  felt  there  was  affliction — 
loss  of  liberty,  jealous  surveillance,  inability  to  fulfil  the  great  end  of  his 
apostolic  mission.  This  sympathy  on  the  part  of  the  Philippians  with  the 
suffering  representative  of  Christ  and  His  cause  is  the  very  trait  of  character 
which  the  Judge  selects  for  eulogy  at  last  (Matt.  xxv.  35)  (Eadie). 

IV.  Has  a  divine  source. — "  But  I  rejoiced  in  the  Lord  greatly  "  (ver.  10). 
He  regarded  the  gift  as  coming  from  the  Lord,  and  his  joy  in  its  reception  was 
from  the  same  source.     He  rejoiced  the  more  in  this  practical  evidence  of  the 

366 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   PHILIPPIANS.       chap.  iv. 


love  and  gratitude  of  his  converts.    Every  kindness  shown  to  us  by  others,  when 
it  is  recognised  as  coming  from  God,  will  augment  our  joy  in  Him. 

Lessons. — 1.  God  does  not  forget  His  servants  in  distress.     2.  A  contented  spirit 
is  a  fruit  of  divine  grace.     3.  It  is  a  joy  to  be  remembered  by  those  we  love. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Yer.  10.  Practical  Christian  Benevo- 
lence— 

I.  Is  quick  to  see  the  needs  of 
God's  servants  and  of  the  cause  in 
which  they  faithfully  labour. 

II.  Eagerly  watches  every  oppor- 
tunity for  supplying  those  needs. 

III.  Is  a  matter  of  exalted  joy  to 
those  who  fully  appreciate  both  the 
supply  and  the  motive  that  prompted  it. 

Yers.  11,  12.  Tendency  of  Christian 
Principles  to  produce  True  Contentment. 

I.  Christianity  takes  away  the 
natural  causes  of  discontent. — 1.  Pride. 
2.   Self-preference.     3.   Covetousness. 

II.  Christianity  furnishes  powerful 
motives  for  the  exercise  of  a  contented 
mind. — 1.  The  disciples  of  Christ  are 
under  the  strongest  obligations  to  walk 
in  the  footsteps  of  their  divine  Master. 
2.  True  Christians  o,re  firmly  convinced 
that  their  lot  is  chosen  for  them  by  their 
blessed  Lord  and  Master.  3.  It  is  chosen 
for  them  in  infinite  love  and  mercy  to 
their  souls. — E.  Cooper. 

Yer.  11.  Contentment. 

I.  That  a  man  be  content  with  his 
own  estate  without  coveting  that 
which  is  another's. 

II.  That  a  man  be  content  with  his 
present  estate. — 1.  Because  that  only 
is  properly  his  own.  2.  All  looking 
beyond  that  disquiets  the  mind.  3.  The 
present  is  ever  best. 

III.  That  a  man  be  content  with 
any  estate. 

IY.  The  art  of  contentment — 1.  Is 
not  learned  from  nature.  2.  Or  out- 
ward things.  3.  But  is  taught  us  by 
God's  Spirit.  4.  By  His  promises. 
5.  By  the  rod  of  discipline.  6.  Pro- 
ficiency in  contentment  gained — (1)  By 
despising  unjust  gain.  (2)  By  moder- 
ating worldly  desires  and  care.  (3)  By 
carefully    using    and    charitably    dis- 


pensing what  we  have.  (4)  By  bear- 
ing want  and  loss  with  patience. — R. 
Sanderson. 

Christian  Contentment. 

I.  What  it  is. — 1.  That  our  desires 
of  worldly  good  are  low  and  moderate. 
2.  That  in  all  our  views  of  bettering 
our  worldly  condition  we  indulge  not 
immoderate  cares.  3.  That  whatever 
our  present  condition  be,  we  cheerfully 
submit  to  the  providence  of  God  in  it. 
4.  That  we  are  so  easy  with  our  own 
lot  as  not  to  envy  others  who  may  be  in 
more  prosperous  circumstances.  5.  That 
we  will  not  use  any  unlawful  means  to 
better  our  present  condition.  6.  That 
we  make  the  best  of  our  condition  what- 
ever it  be. 

II.  How    it    may    be    learned. — 

1.  Christianity  sets  in  view  the  most 
solid  principles  of  contentment  and  the 
strongest  motives  to  it.  2.  Furnishes 
us  with  the  brightest  patterns  of  content- 
ment to  enforce  its  precepts  and  prevent 
our  despair  of  attaining  it. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  present  state  should 
be   considered  as   a   state   of  learning. 

2.  More  depends  on  our  spirits  than 
upon  our  outward  condition  in  order  to 
contentment.  3.  Labour  to  have  our 
minds  so  formed  that  they  may  be  content 
and  tolerably  easy  in  any  state  of  life. 

Yer.  13.  The  Source  of  the  Christian's 
Power. 

I.  The  extent  of  a  Christian's 
ability. — 1.  He  is  able  to  discharge 
every  duty.  2.  He  is  able  to  endure 
every  trial.  3.  He  is  able  to  brave 
every  suffering.  4.  He  is  able  to  over- 
come every  temptation. 

II.  The  source  of  the  Christian's 
ability. — 1.  Christ  strengthens  us  by 
His  teachings.  2.  Christ  strengthens  us 
by  His  example.  3.  Christ  strengthens 
us  by  the  moral  influence  of  His  death 

367 


chap.  iv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   PHILIPPIANS. 


as  a  sacrifice  for  our  sin.  4.  Christ  the  prayer  of  faith,  the  influences  of  the 
strengthens  us  by  uniting  us  to  Him-  Holy  Spirit.  Christ  is  the  fountain 
self,  and  bestowing  on  us,  in  answer  to      of  spiritual  strength. — G.  Brooks. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  15—19. 

A  Generous  Church — 

1.  Spontaneously  contributing  to  the  earliest  efforts  in  the  propagation  of  the 
gospel. — 1.  Its  generosity  conspicuous  by  its  solitary  example.  "  No  Church 
communicated  with  me  as  concerning  giving  and  receiving,  but  ye  only" 
(ver.  15).  In  the  account  between  us,  the  giving  was  on  your  part,  the 
receiving  on  mine.  The  Philippians  had  followed  Paul  with  their  bounty  when 
he  left  Macedonia  and  came  to  Corinth.  We  are  not  to  wait  for  others  in  a 
good  work,  saying,  "  I  will  do  so  when  others  do  it."  We  must  go  forward 
though  alone  (Fausset).  Their  liberality  followed  him  on  distant  missionary 
tours,  and  when  no  longer  in  their  own  province.  One  single  example  of 
generosity  is  an  inspiration  and  a  hint  to  others.  Any  Church  will  wither  into 
narrowing  dimensions  when  it  confines  its  benefactions  to  itself. 

2.  Its  generosity  was  repeated. — "  For  even  in  Thessalonica  ye  sent  once  and 
again  unto  my  necessity"  (ver.  16).  Even  in  Thessalonica,  still  in  their  own 
province  and  not  far  from  Philippi,  they  more  than  once  contributed  to  his  help, 
and  thus  rendered  him  less  dependent  on  those  among  whom  he  was  breaking  new 
ground.  Help  in  time  of  need  is  a  pleasant  memory  ;  and  the  apostle  delights 
in  reminding  the  Philippians  of  their  timely  and  thoughtful  generosity. 
Repeated  kindnesses  should  increase  our  gratitude. 

II.  The  gifts  of  a  generous  Church  are  appreciated  as  indicating  growth  in 
practical  religion. — "  Not  because  I  desire  a  gift :  but  I  desire  fruit  that  may 
abound  to  your  account"  (ver.  17).  It  is  not  the  gift  he  covets,  but  that  rich 
spiritual  blessing  which  the  gift  secures  to  its  donors.  The  apostle  wished  them 
to  reap  the  growing  spiritual  interest  of  their  generous  expenditure.  Not  for 
his  own  sake  but  theirs  does  he  desire  the  gift.  He  knew  that  the  state  of  mind 
which  devised  and  contributed  such  a  gift  was  blessed  in  itself,  that  it  must 
attract  divine  blessing,  for  it  indicated  the  depth  and  amount  of  spiritual  good 
which  the  apostle  had  done  to  them,  and  for  which  they  thus  expressed  their 
gratitude ;  and  it  showed  their  sympathy  with  the  cause  of  Christ,  when  they 
had  sought  to  enable  their  spiritual  founder  in  former  days  to  give  his  whole 
time,  without  distraction  or  physical  exhaustion,  to  the  work  of  his  apostleship. 
This  was  a  spiritual  condition  which  could  not  but  meet  with  the  divine  appro- 
bation and  secure  the  divine  reward  (Eadie). 

III.  The  gifts  of  a  generous  Church  are  accepted  as  a  sacrifice  well  pleasing 
to  God. — "  Having  received  of  Epaphroditus  the  things  which  were  sent 
from  you,  an  odour  of  a  sweet  smell,  a  sacrifice  acceptable,  well-pleasing  to 
God  "  (ver.  18).  It  was  a  gift  in  which  God  delighted,  fragrant  as  the  sweet- 
smelling  incense  which  burned  in  the  censer.  It  was  felt  that  God  is 
supreme  Benefactor  and  that  all  possessions  are  His  gracious  gift,  that 
these  have  an  end  beyond  the  mere  personal  enjoyment  of  them,  that  they 
may  and  ought  to  be  employed  in  God's  service,  and  that  the  spirit  of  such 
employment  is  the  entire  dedication  of  these  to  Him.  The  money,  while  con- 
tributed to  the  apostle,  was  offered  to  God.  They  discharged  a  spiritual 
function  in  doing  a  secular  act — "  the  altar  sanctified  the  gift "  (Ibid.).  Giving 
to  the  cause  of  Christ  is  worship,  acceptable  and  well-pleasing  to  God.  It 
belongs  to  the  same  class  of  acts  as  the  presentation  of  sacrifices  under  the  old 
economy,  which  was  the  central  act  of  worship.  For  the  proper  use  of  no  talent 
is  self-denial  more  needed  than  for  that  of  money. 

368 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   PHILIPPIANS.       chap.  iv. 


IV.  The  gifts  of  a  generous  Church  will  be  recompensed  with  abundant 
spiritual  blessing. — "  But  my  God  shall  supply  all  your  need  according  to  His 
riches  in  glory  by  Christ  Jesusa"  (ver.  19).  The  money  we  give  to  God's  cause 
is  well  invested,  and  will  yield  a  rich  return  :  spiritual  blessing  in  return  for 
material  gifts  ;  this  is  beyond  the  power  of  arithmetic  to  compute.  This  was 
no  rash  and  unwarrantable  promise  on  the  part  of  Paul.  He  knew  something 
of  the  riches  of  the  divine  generosity,  and  was  justified  in  assuring  his  kind 
benefactors  of  God's  perfect  supply  of  every  want  of  body  and  soul,  bestowed  not 
grudgingly  but  with  royal  beneficence. 

Lessons. — 1.     Gratitude  for    blessings    received    should    prompt    generosity. 

2.  Money  is  never  more  wisely  employed  than  in  forwarding  the  cause  of  God. 

3.  Our  gifts  to  God  are  handsomely  rewarded. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  15,  16.  Christian  Generosity —  II.  God's   wealth. — Its  abundance; 

I.  Indicates  a  genuine  interest  in     its  excellence. 

the  work  of  God   and  love    for   its         III.  The  supply  the  apostle  antici- 
ministers.  pates  for  this   necessity  out  of  this 

II.  Is  especially  valuable  in  prose-      wealth. 

cuting  pioneer  mission  work.  Learn. — 1.     Contentment  with    our 

III.  Should  not  be  conspicuous  by  present  lot.  2.  Confidence  for  the 
one    solitary    example,    but   be    con-     future. — C.  Bradley. 

tinuous  and  commensurate  with  the 

pressing  needs  of  the  work  of  God.  Our  Need  and  our  Supply. 

1.  Examine  the  scope  of  the  promise. 

Vers.    17,   18.  Liberality  a  Fruit  of  — There  is  danger  of  fanaticism  in  the 

the  Christian  Life.  interpretation  of  truth.     God  promises 

I.  It  is  not  a  gift,  but  the  discharge  to  supply  our  need,  but  not  to  gratify 
of  a  just  claim.  our  wishes  or  whims.     Some  of  us  God 

II.  Paul  did  not  desire  a  gift  only  sees  cannot  bear  wealth,  and  so  it  is 
to  benefit  himself,  because  he  wanted  not  given  us ;  but  as  our  day  is  so  is 
nothing.  our  strength. 

III.  Liberality  is  a  fruit  of  the  II.  The  supply. — The  supply  is  not 
Christian  life  by  discharging  a  debt  according  to  our  deserts,  but  according 
to  which  we  stood  engaged.  to  the  riches  of  His  glory.    The  resources 

IV.  Liberality  is  an  advantage  in  of  the  Trinity  are  drawn  upon.  His 
the  exercise  of  our  patience  before  the  wealth  is  unbounded.  He  is  not  a 
day  of  trial  come  upon  us.  cistern,  but  a  fountain. 

V.  As  God  will  punish  the  neglect         III.     The    Medium. — This    supply 
of  this  duty,  so  if  we  perform  it  He      comes  through  Christ.     We  can  claim 
will  count  Himself  in  debt  to   US. —      it    in     no     other    name.       But    God 
Farindon.  ordains  means  and  puts  us  under  con- 
ditions.    As  in  agriculture,  so  here,  we 

Ver.  1 9.  Man's  Need  supplied  from  are  to  work  in  harmony  with  God's 
God's  Riches.  established  methods  if  we  would  secure 

I.  Look  at  man's  necessity.  fruits. — Homiletic  Monthly. 

MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  20—23. 

Last  Words. 

I.  A  glowing  ascription  of  praise  to  the  divine  Giver  of  every  blessing. — 

"  Now  unto  God  and  our  Father  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen  "  (ver.  20). 
To  God,  even  our  Father,  the  kind  and  liberal  Supplier  of  every  want  to  every 

B  B  369 


chap.  IV.       EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   PHILIPPIANS. 


child,  be  eternal  glory  ascribed.  The  ascription  of  praise  is  the  language  of 
spiritual  instinct  which  cannot  be  repressed.  Let  the  child  realise  its  relation 
to  the  Father  who  feeds  it,  clothes  it,  and  keeps  it  in  life,  who  enlightens  and 
guides  it,  pardons  and  purifies  it,  strengthens  and  upholds  it,  and  all  this  in 
Christ  Jesus,  and  it  cannot  but  in  its  glowing  consciousness  cry  out,  "  Now  to 
God  and  our  Father  be  the  glory  for  ever."  The  "  Amen  "  is  a  fitting  conclusion. 
As  the  lips  shut  themselves,  the  heart  surveys  again  the  facts  and  the  grounds 
of  praise,  and  adds,  "  So  be  it"  (Eadie). 

II.  Christian  salutations. — "  Salute  every  saint  in  Christ  Jesus.  All  the 
saints  salute  you,  chiefly  they  that  are  of  Caesar's  household"  (vers.  21,  22). 
Salutations  are  tokens  of  personal  interest  and  living  fellowship  which  should 
not  be  lightly  esteemed.  The  apostolic  salutations  teach  that  the  Christian 
religion  does  not  make  men  unfriendly  and  stubborn,  but  courteous  and  friendly 
(Lange).  The  reference  to  the  saints  in  Caesar's  household  may  mean  either 
kinsfolk  of  Nero  or  servants  in  the  palace.  It  is  improbable  that  so  many  near 
relatives  of  the  emperor  should  have  yielded  themselves  to  Christ  as  to  be  desig- 
nated by  this  phrase,  and  it  is  not  likely  to  suppose  that  a  combination  of  these 
two  classes  would  be  grouped  under  the  one  head.  In  all  likelihood  the  reference 
is  to  servants  holding  more  or  less  important  positions  in  the  imperial  household 
— some,  no  doubt,  slaves ;  and  it  is  a  suggestive  testimony  to  the  unwearied 
diligence  and  influence  of  the  apostle  in  using  every  opportunity  to  make  known 
the  saving  grace  of  the  gospel.  To  explain  to  any  the  reason  for  his  imprison- 
ment was  an  occasion  for  preaching  Christ.  "0  Home,  Rome!"  exclaims 
Starke,  "  how  greatly  hast  thou  changed  !  Formerly  thou  hadst  true  saints 
even  in  the  household  of  a  pagan  and  tyrannical  emperor ;  but  now  hast  thou 
false  saints,  especially  in  and  around  the  so-called  chair  of  Peter  and  at  the  court 
of  his  supposed  successor." 

III.  Final  benediction. — "  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  all. 
Amen  "  (ver.  23).  The  oldest  MSS.  read,  "  Be  with  your  spirit."  It  is  im- 
portant that  the  grace  of  God  should  be  not  only  around  us,  but  with  us  and 
in  us.  The  benediction  is  a  prayer  that  the  divine  favour  may  be  conferred  upon 
them,  enriching  the  noblest  elements  of  their  nature  with  choicest  blessings, 
making  them  to  grow  in  spiritual  wisdom,  beauty,  and  felicity,  that  grace  may 
ultimately  merge  into  glory. 

Lessons. — 1.  Praise  should  be  offered  to  God  in  all  things.  2.  The  Christian 
spirit  is  full  of  kindly  courtesy.  3.  It  is  a  comprehensive  prayer  that  invokes  the 
blessing  of  divine  grace. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  20.  Eternal  Praise  should  be  II.  Awakens  and  strengthens  mutual 
offered  unto  God —  sympathy  and  help  in  the  Christian  life. 

I.  For  mercies  enjoyed  in  the  past.         III.  Should  be  exercised  by  Chris- 

II.  For  mercies  which  as  our  Father     tians  of  all  ranks  and  conditions. 
He  "holds  for  us  and  bestows  on  us  in 

the  present.  "Ver.  23.  The  Grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 

III.  That  the  glory  of  His  character     Christ— 

may  become  increasingly  conspicuous  I.  Is  the  sum  of  all  we  can  need  for 

in  His  works  of  creation,  providence,  ourselves  or  desire  for  others. 

and  grace.  II.  Is  a  revelation  of  His  own  char- 
acter and  of  His  regard  for  us. 

Vers.  21,  22.  Christian  Courtesy —  III.  May  besought  with  the  utmost 

I,  Elevates  and  sanctifies  the  ameni-  confidence  and  enjoyed  in  ever-increas- 

ties  of  social  life.  ing  measure, 

370 


THE 

EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS 


INTRODUCTION. 

Colossae  and  its  people. — In  Asia  Minor,  a  few  days'  journey  to  the  east  of 
Ephesus,  is  a  district  which  for  natural  beauty,  as  described  by  many  travellers, 
is  hardly  to  be  surpassed.  At  the  foot  of  Mount  Cadmus — now  known  as  Baba 
Dagh,  or  "  the  Father  of  Mountains  " — near  the  stream  of  the  Lycus,  a  tributary 
of  the  Maeander,  stood  the  town  of  Colossae.  Within  a  day's  journey  stood 
Hierapolis  and  Laodicea,  the  latter  the  home  of  a  Church  in  later  years  where 
a  poor,  half-hearted  religion  was  a  constant  offence  to  God.  Owing  to  its  political 
significance,  it  quite  eclipsed  Colossae,  as  Hierapolis  also  did,  owing  to  its  natural 
advantages  as  a  health-resort  or  watering-place.  Though  at  one  time  Colossae 
was  a  flourishing  town,  where  the  vast  forces  of  Xerxes  or  those  of  Cyrus  could 
halt,  in  this  century  it  was  only  with  difficulty  and  some  uncertainty  that  its 
exact  site  was  discovered.  Chonos  (so  called  from  the  funnel-shaped  holes  into 
which  the  river  drops)  is  its  modern  substitute,  though  from  two  to  three  miles 
south  of  the  site  of  Colossae. 

The  inhabitants  of  Colossae  were  largely  of  Phrygian  derivation,  highly  reli- 
gious, if  dread  of  the  supernatural  in  every  form  constitutes  religion,  but  ready 
to  yield  themselves  up  to  the  wildest  orgies  and  the  most  degradingly  sensual 
types  of  worship.  But  there  were  also  many  Jews  in  the  town,  as  we  learn  not 
only  from  the  indications  in  this  letter,  but  from  other  sources.  It  was  not  the 
only  occasion  in  history  when  travelled  Jews  had  learnt  to  blend  with  their 
ancestral  religion  the  philosophical  or  theosophical  opinions  of  the  neighbourhood 
where  they  had  settled.  The  result  was  an  amalgam  very  hard  to  catalogue. 
The  Hellenism  of  these  Phrygian  Jews  did  as  littlo  for  them  as  in  later  days  it 
did  for  Heine,  the  German  Jew.  So,  because  its  results  were  pernicious,  the 
uncompromising  opponent  of  Pharisaic  dead  works  and  herald  of  one  God  set 
himself  to  make  known  to  the  Colossians  the  sufficiency  of  Christian  doctrine 
without  admixture  of  heathen  wisdom  (ii.  8,  9)  or  the  administration  of  Jewish 
rites  (ii.  11). 

371 


introduction.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS. 

Occasion,  aim,  time,  and  place  of  composition. — Epaphras,  a  member  of  the 
Colossian  Church,  and  to  whom  the  whole  neighbourhood  was  indebted  as 
the  bringer  of  gospel  tidings,  had  given  St.  Paul  an  account  of  the  state  of  the 
Church  to  which  he  ministered,  with  intimations  of  the  perils  threatening  it. 
This  it  was  which  led  the  apostle  to  send  Tychicus  with  this  letter.  The 
runaway  slave  Onesimus  accompanied  him,  sent  back  to  Philemon  his  master 
in  Colossse  by  St.  Paul. 

The  aim  of  the  apostle  in  writing  the  letter  was  chiefly  to  warn  the  Colossians 
against  the  specious  errors  of  certain  teachers  who  had  tried  to  unite  Christianity 
with  Judaism,  and  these  to  theosophical  notions.  The  results  of  this  blend  could 
only  be  regarded  with  a  pitiful  smile.  It  was  pernicious,  and,  with  all  its 
semblance  of  humility,  immoral.  Its  main  offence  to  the  apostle  was  that  it 
dishonoured  his  Lord,  "  who  is  the  image  of  the  invisible  God,  the  firstborn  of 
all  creation." 

Lightfoot  thinks  this  letter,  with  those  to  Ephesus  and  Philemon,  was  sent  by 
Tychicus  "  towards  the  close  of  the  apostle's  captivity  in  Rome,  about  the  year 
63."  Meyer,  who  contends  that  it  was  sent,  not  from  Rome,  but  from  Csesarea, 
thinks  60  or  61  was  the  date.  The  ancient  tradition  was  that  the  letter  emanated 
from  a  Roman  prison,  and  the  reasons  given  against  this  are  too  slender  to  set 
it  aside  in  favour  of  Csesarea. 


Style  of  the  epistle. — "  The  style  of  the  epistle  is  somewhat  laboured.  It 
lacks  the  spontaneity,  the  fire,  the  passion,  the  tender  emotion  which  mark  most 
of  St..  Paul's  letters.  The  reason  for  this  is  twofold.  It  is  partly  because  he  is 
addressing  strangers,  the  members  of  Churches  which  he  had  not  directly  founded, 
and  to  whom  his  expressions  did  not  flow  forth  from  the  same  full  spring  of 
intimate  affection.  It  is  still  more  because  he  is  refuting  errors  with  which  he 
was  not  familiar,  and  which  he  had  not  witnessed  in  their  direct  workings.  .  .  . 
When  he  was  a  little  more  familiar  with  the  theme  (in  writing  Ephesians)  he 
writes  with  more  fervency  and  ease.  ...  In  the  close  similarity  between  these 
two,  and  yet  in  the  strongly  marked  individuality  of  each,  we  have  one  of  the 
most  indisputable  proofs  of  the  genuineness  of  both.  ...  If  Colossians  has  less 
of  the  attractive  personal  element  and  the  winning  pathos  of  other  letters  of 
St.  Paul,  it  is  still  living,  terse,  solid,  manly,  vigorous  ;  and  brief  though  it  be, 
it  still,  as  Calvin  says,  contains  the  nucleus  of  the  gospel "  (Farrar). 

Outline  of  the  epistle. 

Introduction,     i.  1,   2,    greeting.     3 — 8,   thanksgiving.     9 — 14,    prayer   and 
supplication  with  thanksgiving, 
i.  15—23.     Main  theme  of  the  epistle.     Christ's  personal  supremacy  and 
the  universal  efficacy  of  His  mediatorial  work. 
24 — 29.     The  apostle's  personal  explanation  of  his  motive  in  addressing 
them, 
ii.       1 — 7.     His  interest  in  the  highest  welfare  of  Christians  unknown  to 
him. 
372 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS.    introduction. 

8 — 15.     Warning  against  a  philosophy  born  of  earth,  able  only  to  deal 
externally    with    outbursts   of    sin    as   contrasted   with    the 
complete     putting     away     of     it     by     Christ's    death    and 
resurrection. 
16 — 23.     A   protest  against  the   attempt  to  foist    precepts   and   prohibi- 
tions on  those  who  in  Christ  have  passed  beyond   the   stage 
of  legalism. 
iii.  1 — 17.     The    sufficiency,    for   conduct,    of   living    consistently   with   the 
life  hid  with  Christ  in  God,   which  is  fatal,  as  it  grows,  to 
every  form  and  manifestation  of  the  old  and  corrupt  life. 
18—22.     Duties  of  wives  (18),  husbands  (19),  children  (20),  fathers  (21), 
servants  (22). 
Motives,  incentives,  and  deterrents  in  service. 
Duties  of  masters,  and  motive  of  conduct. 
Sundry  exhortations,  commendations,  and  greetings. 

The  letter  concludes  with  the  apostle's  autograph  signature, 
a  touching  reference  to  his  "  bonds,"  and  a  benediction. 


23- 

-25. 

iv. 

1. 

2- 

-18. 

373 


chap.  1.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSI 'ANS. 


CHAPTER  I. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Paul,  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ  by  the  will  of  God. — Here,  as  in  the  Ephesian 
epistle,  St.  Paul  traces  his  apostolate  to  the  will  of  God.  It  does  not  seem  as  if  any  reason 
could  be  given  why  in  these  two  epistles  he  uses  the  phrase  and  omits  it  in  the  Philippians. 
Timotheus  our  brother. — If  Philemon,  who  was  a  Colossian  Christian,  had  met  St.  Paul  at 
Ephesus,  probably  he  had  seen  Timothy,  too,  and  would  no  doubt  say  to  the  Church  how  the 
apostle  valued  him  (Phil.  ii.  19). 

Ver.  2.  To  the  saints  and  faithful  brethren. — We  may  observe  that  such  a  phrase  is 
characteristic  of  St.  Paul's  later  epistles  ;  in  the  earlier  it  was  "  to  the  Church."  It  seems 
better  thus  to  translate  than  to  give  the  meaning  "to  the  holy  and  believing  brethren"  (see 
on  Eph.  i.  1).  Grace  .  .  .  and  peace,  from  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. — Not 
"  grace  "  from  the  Father  and  "  peace  "  from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  usual  benediction 
shows — "The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus."  "Whatsoever  the  Father  doeth,  these  also  doeth 
the  Son"  (John  v.  19). 

Ver.  3.  We  give  thanks  to  God. — The  apostle  here,  as  usual,  gives  credit  for  all  that  is 
worthy  in  his  readers,  though  the  tidings  from  Colossae  had  been  disquieting. 

Ver.  4.  Having  heard  of  your  faith. — This  last  word  might  possibly  mean  "  fidelity,"  the 
steadiness  of  an  unwavering  loyalty.  But  it  is  better  to  take  it  as  the  act  of  personal  trust. 
Love  to  all  the  saints. — This  was  the  distinguishing  trait  of  all  Christians — love  one  for 
another  (John  xiii.  35).  How  often  have  we  heard  the  irony,  "  How  these  Christians  love 
one  another  !  "  We  are  not  warranted  in  withholding  love  until  men  are  paragons  of  spiritual 
perfection — all  in  Christ  are  "  saints." 

Ver.  5.  For  the  hope. — This  word  completes  the  triad,  though  the  order  is  changed,  and 
hope  here  is  the  object — the  thing  hoped  for.  Laid  up  for  you  in  heaven. — It  is  the  same 
word  in  Luke  xix.  20,  "laid  up  in  a  napkin  " ;  in  2  Tim.  iv.  8,  "  henceforth  there  is  laid  up"  ; 
and  in  Heb.  ix.  27,  "  it  is  appointed  unto  [laid  up  for]  men  once  to  die."  The  word  of  the 
truth  of  the  gospel. — Not  to  be  interpreted  into  "  the  truly  evangelic  word."  There  is  an 
imposing  sound  in  the  phrase  meant  to  agree  with  the  thing  denoted. 

Ver.  6.  In  all  the  world. — A  hyperbolic  expression,  by  which  the  apostle  at  the  world's 
centre,  Rome,  seems  to  say  the  messengers  of  the  gospel,  go  forth  to  the  utmost  bounds  of 
the  empire.  The  faith  you  have  received  is  no  local  cult,  nor  is  it  an  ephemeral  excitement. 
And  bringeth  forth  fruit. — The  R.V.  adds  to  "  bearing  fruit,"  "and  increasing."  It  is  not  a 
gospel  that  is  decadent,  on  which  a  few  fruits  may  be  found,  but  with  too  evident  traces  that 
soon  fruitfulness  will  be  past. 

Ver.  7.  As  ye  learned  of  Epaphras. — Short  for  Epaphroditus,  but  not  he  of  Phil.  ii.  25. 
He  is  one  of  the  Colossians  ;  beyond  that  and  his  prayerful  zeal  for  them  we  know  nothing 
of  the  only  one  whom  St.  Paul  calls  "  a  fellow-servant." 

Ver.  9.  Do  not  cease  to  pray  for  you,  and  to  desire. — R.V.  "  pray  and  make  request." 
The  general  notion  comes  first,  then  the  particulars ;  so  in  Mark  xi.  24.  In  the  Lord's 
Prayer  there  are  several  "  petitions "  or  "  requests."  Knowledge. — Here  represents  the 
advanced  knowledge  of  the  initiated.  "  Spiritual  understanding  "  is  the  use  in  the  realm  of 
things  spiritual  of  the  faculty  which,  as  employed  in  physical  research,  makes  the  difference 
between  the  man  of  scientific  method  and  the  empiric.  Compare  the  union  of  "  wisdom " 
and  "  spiritual  understanding  "  with  our  Lord's  words,  "  Thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the 
wise  and  prudent. 

Ver.  10.  Walk  worthy. — "  The  end  of  all  knowledge,  the  apostle  would  say,  is  conduct " 

(Lightfoot).     The  previous  verse  taken  with  this  gives  the  "  theory  and  practice  "  of  religion. 

TJnto  all  pleasing. — With  the  end  ever  before  you  of  being  approved  by  God.     For  the  same 

combination,  see  1  Thess.  iv.  1.     Being  fruitful  .  .  .  and  increasing. — Like  the  gospel  itself 

see  ver.  6). 

Ver.  11.  Strengthened  with  all  might  according  to  His  glorious  power,— Lit.  "  with  all 

374 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS.  chap.  I. 


power  made  powerful, "  etc.  The  two  words  representing  "  might "  and  "  power  "  have  become 
familiar  in  "dynamite"  and  the  termination  of  "auto-crat  ";  the  one  indicates  stored-up  energy, 
the  other  victorious  or  ruling  force.  Patience  and  longsuffering. — The  first  word  indicates 
the  attitude  of  an  unfainting  mind  when  things  go  wrong  ;  the  second  the  quiet  endurance 
under  irritation  from  others,  the  being  "  not  soon  angry." 

Ver.  12.  Made  us  meet. — Duly  qualified  us,  gave  us  competence.  Just  as  a  man  needs 
to  be  a  qualified  practitioner  of  medicine  or  the  law,  so  these  Colossians  are  recognised  as  fit 
and  proper  persons  for  participation  in  the  kingdom  of  light. 

Ver.  13.  Who  hath  delivered  us  from  the  power  of  darkness. — The  metaphor  commenced  in 
the  previous  verse  is  carried  on  here.  The  settlement  in  the  land  flowing  with  milk  and 
honey  is  preceded  by  deliverance  with  a  high  hand  from  the  house  of  bondage — the  land  of 
thick  darkness.  And  hath  translated  us. — The  same  word  by  which  the  Jewish  historian 
describes  the  carrying  over  of  the  Israelites  to  Assyria  by  Tiglath-Pileser.  The  apostle 
regards  the  deliverance,  so  far  as  the  Deliverer  is  concerned,  as  a  thing  accomplished.  His 
dear  Son. — The  A.V.  margin  has  become  the  K.V.  text,  "  The  Son  of  His  love."  We  do  not 
again  find  this  expression  ;  but  as  there  is  "  no  darkness  at  all "  in  God,  who  "  is  love,"  so 
His  Son,  into  whose  kingdom  we  come,  reveals  the  love  of  the  Father. 

Ver.  14.  In  whom  we  nave  redemption. — A  release  effected  in  consideration  of  a  ransom. 
See  on  the  verse  Eph.  i.  7.     The  forgiveness  of  our  sins — lit.  "  the  dismissal  of  our  sins." 

Ver.  15.  Who  is  the  image  of  the  invisible  God.— In  2  Cor.  iv.  4  St.  Paul  had  so  named 
Christ.  "  Beyond  the  very  obvious  notion  of  likeness,  the  word  for  image  involves  the  idea 
of  representation  and  manifestation"  (Lightfoot).  Man  is  said  to  be  the  image  of  God 
(1  Cor.  xi.  7),  and  to  have  been  created  in  the  image  of  God,  as  an  image  on  a  coin  may 
represent  Caesar,  even  though  unrecognisable  almost.  Christ  is  "  the  very  image  "  (Heb.  i.  3) 
of  God,  able  to  say,  "  He  that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father."  Firstborn  of  every 
creature. — "Not  that  He  is  included  as  part  of  the  creation,  but  that  the  relation  of  the 
whole  creation  to  Him  is  determined  by  the  fact  that  H.  is  the  '  firstborn  of  all  creation  ' 
(R.V.),  so  that  without  Him  creation  could  not  be"  (Cremer).  The  main  ideas  involved  in 
the  word  are  (1)  priority  to  all  creation  ;  (2)  sovereignty  over  all  creation  (Light/not). 

Ver.  16.  Thrones,  or  dominions,  or  principalities,  or  powers. — That  Paul  believed  in  a 
heavenly  hierarchy  can  scarcely  be  doubted ;  but  this  letter  shows  that  in  Colossse  it  had 
become  an  elaborate  superstition. 

Ver.  18.  And  He  is  the  head  of  the  body,  the  Church. — As  He  held  priority  of  all  creation, 
so  also  His  is  the  name  above  every  name  in  the  new  creation.  The  firstborn  from  the  dead. 
— The  cardinal  point  of  the  apostle's  faith. 

Ver.  19.  For  it  pleased  the  Father  that  in  Him  should  all  fulness  dwell.— The  great 
question  on  this  verse  is — seeing  that  "the  Father  "  has  been  added— what  is  the  nominative 
to  the  word  rendered  "  it  pleased"  ?  At  least  three  are  possible :  (1)  "the  Father,"  as  A.V., 
R.V.,  and  many  commentators  ;  (2)  "all  the  fulness,"  etc.;  and  (3)  "the  Son  was  pleased." 
Lightfoot  urges  that,  as  (2)  would  be  an  anachronism,  and  (3)  a  hopeless  confusion  of  the 
theology,  "  the  Father  was  well  pleased  "  seems  to  be  the  best  rendering. 

Ver.  20.  To  reconcile  all  things  unto  Himself. — The  word  "  reconcile  "  is  meant  to  indicate 
the  restoration  of  a  lost  friendship ;  the  re-establishment  of  peaceful  relations.  It  is  a  good 
specimen  of  the  care  with  which  St.  Paul's  advanced  expressions  are  selected. 

Ver.  21.  You,  that  were  sometime  alienated. — Does  not  mean,  of  course,  occasionally 
alienated,  but  as  the  K.V.  gives  it,  "  being  in  time  past  alienated  " — up  to  the  time  of  the 
reconciliation  always  estranged.  Enemies  in  your  mind  by  wicked  works. — The  most 
interesting  question  here  is  whether  God  is  reconciled  to  the  sinner  or  only  ihe  sinner  to 
God.  Is  "  enemies"  to  mean  "hostile"  or  "  hateful  "  ?  Lightfoot  says,  "It  is  the  mind  of 
man,  not  the  mind  of  God,  which  must  undergo  a  change  that  a  reunion  may  be  effected." 

Ver.  22.  In  the  body  of  His  flesh  through  death. — When  a  teacher  has  to  be  explicit  it  may 
seem  to  those  familiar  with  the  subject  as  if  he  were  verbose  or  tautological.  So  here  the 
body  is  no  phantasm,  but  fleshly  and  mortal.  To  present  you  holy. — They  were  professedly 
holy  "  saints  "  (ver.  2),  and  the  final  purpose  of  their  reconciliation  is  reproachless  saintship 
(on  this  word,  and  "unblamable,"  see  Eph.  i.  4).  Unreprovable  in  His  sight.— It  is  a  lofty 
eminence  to  which  the  holy  apostle  invites  us  to  look  in  this  word.  The  light  in  which  we 
walk — fierce  indeed  towards  sin — reveals  no  evil,  so  that  the  most  captious  critic  has  no 
objection  (Tit.  ii.  8). 

Ver.  23.  Grounded  and  settled,  and  not  moved  away. — In  that  land  of  volcanic  agency 
the  readers  would  perceive  only  too  readily  the  graphic  force  of  this  metaphor.  Where  stone 
buildings  tumbled  over  like  a  house  of  cards,  the  figure  of  a  faith,  proof  against  all  shocks, 
was  effective  (see  Heb.  xii.  28).  Every  creature  under  heaven. — The  same  rhetorical  form  of 
expression  as  in  ver.  6,  affirming  the  universal  fitness  of  the  gospel  as  well  as  its  wide  dis- 
semination. Whereof  I  Paul  am  made  a  minister. — Wonder  that  increases  and  unceasing 
gratitude  are  in  these  words — that  the  persecutor  should  serve  the  faith  he  once  destroyed. 

Ver.  24.  Fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ.— R.V.  "and  fill  up  on 

375 


chap.  I.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS. 


my  part  that  which  is  lacking."  How  we  seem  to  hear  through  these  words  the  cry  of  the 
Head  of  the  Church,  "  Why  persecutest  thou  Me  ? "  And  now  the  persecutor  shares  the  pain 
of  Christ  and  those  to  whom  it  is  granted  as  a  favour  to  suffer  for  His  sake  (Phil.  i.  29). 

Vers.  25-27.     See  notes  on  Eph.  iii.  7  ff . 

Ver.  28.  Whom  we  preach. — What  a  glorious  comprehensiveness  there  is  in  preaching  Him 
in.  whom  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  !  Here  is  nothing  narrow.  Warning  every 
man. — R.V.  "admonishing."  It  is  a  direction  of  the  reflective  faculty — a  reproof  adminis- 
tered with  intent  to  amend  the  conduct.  It  corresponds  to  "  Kepent  ye  !  "  And  teaching 
every  man. — The  positive  side  of  which  the  warning  is  the  negative.  It  is  not  enough  to 
tell  a  man  he  is  wrong — the  right  must  be  indicated ;  so  the  heralds  of  the  gospel  followed  up 
"Repent  ye "  with  "  Believe  the  gospel."  Note  the  repeated  "  every  man."  Exclusiveness 
which  shuts  the  door  in  the  face  of  any  "  weak  brother  for  whom  Christ  died  "  is  utterly 
strange  to  the  teaching  of  St.  Paul.  That  we  may  present  every  man  perfect  in  Christ  Jesus. 
— St.  Paul,  and  every  true  successor,  labours  for  this  end  ;  and,  as  ver.  22  shows,  in  so  doing 
ail  are  "workers  together  with  God."  We  have  the  idea  of  presentation  elsewhere  in 
St.  Paul,  as  where  he  speaks  of  presenting  his  converts  as  a  chaste  virgin  to  Christ.  The 
risk  of  offering  a  tainted  animal  for  sacrifice  is  as  nothing  in  comparison  of  offering  a 
hypocrite  as  a  trophy  of  the  gospel. 

Ver.  29.  I  also  labour. — The  word  implies  strenuous  effort.  "  The  racer  who  takes  care  to 
slack  his  speed  whenever  he  is  in  danger  of  breaking  into  a  perspiration  will  not  win  the 
prize "  (Maclaren).  Striving. — Lit.  "  agonising,"  as  in  Luke  xiii.  24.  Like  a  stripped 
gymnast,  every  encumbrance  cast  off.  The  same  word  in  1  Tim.  vi.  12.  "  Fight  the  good 
fight." 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF   VERSE  1. 

Apostolic  Salutation. 

In  this  verse  we  have  a  description  of  the  office  and  character  of  the  persons 
from  whom  the  salutation  emanates. 

I.  An  exalted  and  important  office. — "Paul,  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ." 
An  apostle  is  one  sent.  Paul  was  commissioned  to  declare  the  grandest  truths  — 
truths  destined  to  illumine  and  upraise  mankind.  His  sphere  was  the  world, 
his  audience  the  generations  of  every  age.  The  work  of  the  apostle  lives  to-day 
— its  vigour  is  perennial.  His  was  no  empty,  unmeaning  title.  It  involved 
incredible  thought,  overburdening  care,  incessant  toil,  unparalleled  suffering. 
It  was  an  office  created  by  the  circumstances  of  the  time.  That  period  was  the 
beginning  of  a  gigantic  campaign  against  the  consolidated  errors  and  sins  of 
ages.  An  (ordinary  officer  can  keep  and  govern  a  garrison ;  but  it  requires  a 
gifted  general  to  marshal  and  direct  the  militant  host  in  the  daring  manoeuvres 
of  war.    In  the  divine  government  of  the  world  the  occasion  calls  forth  the  man. 

II.  The  authority  that  designates  and  qualifies. — "  By  the  will  of  God."  The 
will  of  God  is  the  great  originating  and  dynamic  moral  force  of  the  universe. 
That  will  raised  Paul  to  the  apostleship,  and  invested  him  with  all  essential 
qualifications.  The  miraculous  incidents  of  the  journey  to  Damascus  (Acts  ix.) 
formed  a  crisis  in  his  career.  The  startling  discovery  as  to  the  character  of  the 
Being  he  had  madly  opposed  evoked  the  utterance  of  a  changed  and  willing 
heart  :  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  1 "  That  was  the  sublime 
moment  of  his  sending.  In  undertaking  the  highest  work  for  God,  it  is  not 
enough  that  we  possess  learning,  gifts,  piety,  unless  with  all  there  be  a  con- 
sciously divine  commission.  There  are  crises  when  we  can  gain  fresh  inspiration 
for  the  exigencies  of  the  work  only  by  falling  back  on  the  clearest  call  and 
appointment  of  the  divine  will. 

III.  A  familiar  Christian  relationship. — "Timotheus,  our  brother."  Paul 
was  the  means  of  Timothy's  conversion ;  and  in  another  place  he  calls  him  his 
"  own  son  in  the  faith."  Here  he  recognises  him  on  the  more  equal  footing  of  a 
brother.  Christianity  is  a  brotherhood.  Not  a  low,  debasing  communism  that 
drags  down  all  to  its  own  common  level,  but  a  holy  confederacy  in  which  men 
of  all  ranks,  ages,  and  talents  unite.     The  equality  of  Christian  brotherhood  is 

376 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.  chap.  i. 


based  on  a  moral  and  spiritual  foundation.  The  minister  whose  reputation  is 
won  and  position  assured  loses  nothing  by  honouring  his  younger  brethren. 

IV.  Union  of  sympathy  and  desire. — "  Paul  .  .  .  and  Timothy."  The  greatest 
intimacy  existed  between  the  two,  notwithstanding  the  disparity  in  rank  and 
abilities.  There  were  qualities  in  Timothy  that  elicited  the  admiration  and 
love  of  the  great  apostle.  They  were  constant  companions  in  travel ;  and 
Timothy  was  often  a  source  of  comfort  to  Paul  in  captivity.  They  had  a 
common  sympathy  in  the  propagation  of  the  gospel,  and  with  the  changing 
fortunes  of  the  newly  founded  Churches,  and  joined  in  prayer  for  their  welfare. 
The  union  of  Timothy  with  himself  also  strengthened  the  testimony  of  the 
apostle  regarding  the  supernatural  character  of  the  truths  declared. 

Lessons. — Christian  salutation — 1.  Takes  its  value  from  the  character  of  the 
sender.  2.  Should  be  pervaded  with  genuine  sympathy.  3.  Implies  a  mutual 
interest  in  the  success  of  Christian  work. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF   VERSE  2. 

Apostolic  Estimate  of  Christian  Character. 

I.  Suggestive  phases  of  Christian  character. — "  Saints  and  faithful  brethren 
in  Christ  which  are  at  Colossse." 

1.  Saints. — This  implies  union  with  God  and  a  personal  participation  in  His 
righteousness.  This  is  the  root  of  the  saintly  life.  Faith  in  Christ  is  the  point 
and  means  of  junction.  Canonisation  cannot  make  a  saint.  Must  be  saintly 
experience  to  produce  saintly  conduct.  A  holy  reputation  excites  to  action 
consistent  with  itself.  Nehemiah  refused  to  hide  from  threatened  assassination 
as  an  act  beneath  his  well-known  character  for  high  integrity  and  bravery 
(Neh.  vi.  11). 

2.  Faithful  brethren  which  are  at  Colossce. — Implies  union  with  each  other. 
They  embraced  a  common  faith,  and  held  steadfastly  together  amid  the 
agitations  of  false  teachers  and  the  defections  of  the  wavering.  Christianity 
blends  the  strangest  elements.  It  is  a  foe  to  all  national  enmities  and 
prejudices.  Paul,  a  Jew,  Timothy,  a  Grecian,  and  the  Colossians,  a  mixture  of 
several  races,  are  here  united  in  a  holy  and  faithful  brotherhood.  "  Here  the 
Gentile  met  the  Jew  whom  he  had  been  accustomed  to  regard  as  an  enemy  of 
the  human  race ;  the  Roman  met  the  lying  Greek  sophist,  the  Syrian  slave,  the 
gladiator  born  beside  the  Danube.  In  brotherhood  they  met,  the  natural  birth 
and  kindred  of  each  forgotten,  the  baptism  alone  remembered  in  which  they  had 
been  born  again  to  God  and  to  each  other  "  (Ecce  Homo). 

3.  The  sublime  origin  of  the  Christian  character. — "In  Christ."  Character  is 
the  development  and  crystallisation  of  a  life.  The  character  of  the  blossom  and 
fruit  is  decided  by  the  vital  energy  in  the  tree.  Christ  is  the  unfathomable 
fount  of  all  spiritual  life;  the  ideal  pattern  and  formative  force  of  a  perfect 
character.     He  is  the  centre  and  bond  of  all  true  brotherhood. 

II.  The  salutation  supplicates  the  bestowment  of  highest  divine  blessings. — 
1.  Grace.  A  term  of  vast  significance,  inclusive  of  all  the  blessings  that  can 
flow  from  the  superabundant  and  free  favour  of  God.  Grace  is  the  source  of 
all  temporal  good — life,  health,  preservation,  success,  felicity ;  and  of  all 
spiritual  benefactions — pardon,  soul-rest,  guidance,  strength,  deliverance,  purity, 
final  triumph.     The  generosity  of  God  is  illimitable. 

2.  Peace. — Grace  expresses  the  spirit  and  fulness  in  which  divine  manifes- 
tations come  to  us ;  peace  the  result  they  accomplish  in  us.  Peace  with  God. 
Sin  has  thrown  human  nature  into  a  state  of  discord  and  enmity.  The 
reception  of  grace  must  ever  precede  the  enjoyment  of  peace.  The  universal 
mistake  is,  in  first  seeking,  through  many  avenues,  the  happiness  which  peace 

377 


chap.  i.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   COLOSSIAJStS. 


with  God  alone  can  bring,  instead  of  accepting  humbly,  penitently,  believingly, 
the  grace  of  God  in  Christ.  Peace  with  each  other — peace  in  the  Church.  How 
great  a  blessing  is  this !  One  turbulent  spirit  can  ruffle  the  tranquillity  of 
thousands. 

3.  The  source  of  the  blessings  desired. — "  From  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  The  Father's  love  and  the  Son's  work  are  the  sole  source  and 
cause  of  every  blessing  to  humanity,  while  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  agent  of  their 
communication.  The  Trinity  is  ever  harmonious  in  acts  of  beneficence ;  the 
divine  fountain  is  inexhaustible. 

Learn. — 1.  The  broad,  deep  charity  of  the  apostolic  spirit.  2.  The  scope  and 
temper  of  the  prayers  we  should  offer  for  the  race. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  3—5. 

The  Causes  of  Ministerial  Thanksgiving. 

It  is  customary  with  the  apostle  to  begin  his  epistles  with  the  ardent  expression 
of  thanksgiving.  This  showed  the  devout  habit  of  his  mind,  his  constant  and 
emphatic  recognition  of  the  grand  source  of  good,  and  his  deep  interest  in  the 
spiritual  condition  of  those  to  whom  he  wrote. 

I.  Thanksgiving  an  essential  element  in  prayer. — "  We  give  thanks,  .  .  .  pray- 
ing always  for  you  "  (ver.  3).  The  participle  marks  the  thanksgiving  as  part  of  the 
prayer,  and  the  adverb  makes  it  prominent,  indicating  that  when  they  prayed  for 
them  they  always  gave  thanks.  There  is  no  true  prayer  without  thanksgiving. 
Gratitude  intensifies  the  soul's  sensa  of  dependence  on  God,  and  prompts  the  cry 
for  the  needed  help  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  earnest  prayer  naturally  glides 
into  fervent  thankfulness.  As  one  sin  is  interlinked  with  and  produced  by 
another,  so  the  use  of  one  grace  begets  another.  The  more  temporal  things  are 
used,  the  more  they  wear  and  waste ;  but  spiritual  things  are  strengthened 
and  increased  with  exercise.  Every  spiritual  grace  has  in  it  the  seed  of  an  end- 
less reproductiveness.  Underlying  every  thanksgiving  for  others  is  a  spirit  of 
tender,  disinterested  love.  Moved  by  this  passion,  the  apostle,  from  the  midst  of 
imprisonment  and  sorrow,  could  soar  on  the  wings  of  gratitude  and  prayer  to 
heaven.     "  Thanksgiving  will  be  the  bliss  of  eternity." 

II.  The  Being  to  whom  all  thanksgiving  is  due. — "  To  God,  the  Father  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ "  (ver.  3).  God  is  the  Father  of  Jesus  Christ,  not  only  as  God, 
by  an  eternal  generation  and  communication  of  His  whole  essence  unto  Him  in  a 
method  to  us  mysterious  and  ineffable,  but  also  as  man  by  virtue  of  the  personal 
union  of  the  two  natures  in  Christ,  and  in  a  special  sense  exceeding  every  other 
way  in  which  He  is  Father  to  men  or  angels.  Thus  God  and  the  Father  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  are  one ;  the  particle  "  and  "  being  exegetic  of  the  same  thing, 
not  copulative  of  something  different.  All  our  blessings  have  their  source  in  the 
bosom  of  the  divine  Father.  Christ  is  the  only  revealer  of  the  Father,  and  the 
active  agent  in  bestowing  the  paternal  benefits  on  humanity.  The  paternal 
aspect  of  the  divine  character  as  unfolded  by  Jesus  Christ  is  most  fascinating  and 
assuring ;  and  the  loving  heart  delights  to  trace  its  blessings  up  to  the  Parent  of 
all  good,  and  to  render  Him  devout  and  grateful  praise. 

III.  This  thanksgiving  was  grounded  on  the  reputation  of  their  faith  in  the 
Author  of  Christianity. — "  Since  we  heard  of  your  faith  in  Christ "  (ver.  4). 

1.  Christ  is  the  object  and  foundation  of  all  true  faith. — He  is  so  as  the  divinely 
consecrated  Deliverer  of  the  race.  The  grandeur  of  His  redeeming  work  and  the 
dignity  and  glory  of  His  character  are  suggested  by  the  titles  here  given  to  Him. 
Man  must  believe  in  Christ,  not  as  an  abstract  truth,  not  as  a  poetic  conception, 
not  as  a  dim  impersonal  force  acting  in  the  sphere  of  ideality,  but  as  a  divine- 
human  person — the  anointed  Saviour. 

378 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.  chap.  1. 


2.  True  faith  is  the  root  principle  of  the  Christian  life. — Without  it  neither 
love  nor  hope  could  exist.  All  the  graces  that  strengthen  and  beautify  the 
Christian  character  must  grow  out  of  faith. 

3.  True  faith  is  ever  manifest. — "  Since  we  heard."  It  is  seen  in  the  changed 
disposition  and  conduct  of  the  individual  believer.  It  is  marked  by  the  anxious 
Christian  worker,  and  becomes  known  to  a  wide  circle  of  both  friends  and  foes. 
Epaphras  rejoiced  to  bear  tidings  of  the  fact ;  and  the  soul  of  the  apostle,  since 
he  heard,  glowed  with  grateful  praise.  Happy  the  people  whose  highest  reputa- 
tion is  their  faith  in  Jesus  ! 

IV.  This  thanksgiving  was  grounded  on  their  possession  of  an  expansive 
Christian  love. — "  And  of  the  love  which  ye  have  to  all  the  saints  "  (ver.  4).  Love 
to  Christ  is  necessarily  involved,  for  love  to  the  saints  is  really  a  generous,  un- 
selfish affection  for  Christ's  image  in  them.  Love  is  all-embracing.  Peculiari- 
ties, defects,  differences  of  opinion,  distance,  are  no  barriers  to  its  penetrating 
ardour.  It  is  the  unanswerable  evidence  of  moral  transformation  (1  Johniii.  14). 
It  is  the  grandest  triumph  over  the  natural  enmity  of  the  human  heart.  It  is 
the  indissoluble  bond  of  choicest  fellowship. 

"  While  we  walk  with  God  in  light, 
God  our  hearts  doth  still  unite ; 
Dearest  fellowship  we  prove, 
Fellowship  in  Jesu's  love." 

V.  This  thanksgiving  was  further  grounded  on  their  enjoyment  of  a  well- 
sustained  hope. — The  grace  of  hope  naturally  springs  out  of  and  is  properly 
associated  with  the  preceding  two.  Not  one  member  of  the  holy  triad  can  be 
divorced  from  the  other  without  irreparable  damage ;  without,  in  fact,  the  loss 
of  that  which  is  the  resultant  of  the  three — viz.  active  religious  life.  "  Faith 
rests  on  the  past ;  love  works  in  the  present ;  hope  looks  to  the  future.  They 
may  be  regarded  as  the  efficient,  material,  and  final  causes  respectively  of  the 
spiritual  life  "  (Lightfoot). 

1.  The  character  of  this  hope. — "  The  hope  which  is  laid  up  for  you  in  heaven  " 
(ver.  5).  It  is  the  prospect  of  future  heavenly  felicity.  Hope  is  put  for  the 
object  hoped  for — the  hope  of  possessing  a  spiritual  inheritance  whose  wealth 
never  diminishes,  whose  splendours  never  fade ;  the  hope  of  seeing  Christ  in  all 
His  regal  glory ;  of  being  like  Him  ;  of  dwelling  with  Him  for  ever.  A  prospect 
like  this  lifts  the  soul  above  the  meannesses,  disappointments,  and  sufferings  of 
the  present  limited  life. 

2.  The  security  of  this  hope. — "  Laid  up."  This  priceless  inheritance  is  safely 
deposited  as  a  precious  jewel  in  God's  secret  coffer.  There  no  pilfering  hands 
can  touch  it,  no  breath  can  tarnish,  no  rust  corrode,  no  moth  corrupt.  Earthly 
treasures  vanish,  and  sometimes,  to  God's  people,  nothing  but  the  treasure  of 
hope  remains.  The  saint's  enduring  riches  are  in  the  future,  locked  up  in  the 
heavenly  casket.     Where  the  treasure  is  there  the  heart  should  ever  be. 

3.  The  source  and  foundation  of  this  hope. — "  Whereof  ye  heard  before  in  the 
word  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel "  (ver.  5).  The  gospel  is  based  on  unchangeable 
truth,  and  is  therefore  worthy  of  universal  credence.  It  alone  unfolds  the  mysteries 
and  glories  of  the  future.  The  hope  of  heaven  rests,  not  on  the  discoveries  of 
human  philosophy,  but  on  the  revelations  of  the  true  gospel.  In  vain  do  men 
seek  it  elsewhere.  By  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  this  hope  is  made  known  to 
man.     How  dismal  the  outlook  where  hope  is  unknown  ! 

Lessons. — 1.  We  should  thank  God  for  others  more  on  account  of  their  spiritual 
than  temporal  welfare.  2.  Learn  what  are  the  essential  elements  of  the  Christian 
character — faith,  love,  hope.  3.  The  proclamation  of  the  gospel  should  be 
welcomed,  and  its  message  pondered, 

379 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Yers.  3-5.  Good  News  and  its  Good  young  converts.  2.  Established  Chris- 
Effects,  tians   and   especially   ministers    should 

I.  The  good  news,  what  it  was. —  assiwe  young  converts  of  the  gratitude, 
That  certain  at  Colossse  had  not  only  joy,  and  sympathy  they  feel  and  the 
the  gospel,  but  had  known  the  grace  of  prayers  they  present  on  their  behalf. 
God  in  truth,  and  were  now  joined  to  3.  If  our  hearts  are  right,  we  shall 
Christ  by  faith  and  to  His  people  by  rejoice  at  the  success  of  the  gospel. — 
love.  Preacher's  Magazine. 

II.  What     were      the    results. — 

1.  Abundant   thanksgiving   to  the   God  Ver.  5.  Hope  a  Stimulus  to  Chris- 

of    redemption.      2.    Constant  prayer.  tian  Perseverance — 

3.  This  epistle.  I.  In  gaining  the  heavenly  reward. 

III.  Application. — 1.  It  is  well  that  II.  Because  the  heavenly  reward  is 
ministers    should    be    informed   of  the  secure. — "  Laid  np  for  you." 

success  of  the  gospel,  both  for  their  own  III.  Is  based  on  truth  already 
encouragement  and  to  secure  their  known. — "  Whereof  ye  heard  before  in 
sympathy,  prayers,  and  counsel  for  the      the  word  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel." 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  6—8. 

The  True  Gospel  universally  the  Same. 

Wherever  the  gospel  comes  it  carries  with  it  the  ineffaceable  impress  of  its 
divine  origin,  and  of  its  universal  adaptability  to  the  condition  of  humanity. 
There  are  certain  truths  that  are  self-evident  to  the  understanding,  and  are 
not  susceptible  of  proof.  They  are  axiomatic,  and  must  be  admitted  as  such 
before  any  satisfactory  system  can  be  constructed  upon  them.  Of  this  character 
are  the  fundamental  truths  of  the  gospel.  Their  authority  is  supreme,  and  their 
evidential  force  irresistible.  But  a  truth  may  be  universally  self-evident,  and 
not  be  universally  adopted.  It  is  at  this  point  the  guilt  of  the  unbeliever  is 
incurred.  The  gospel  comes  to  mankind  with  ever-accumulating  evidences  of  its 
divine  truthfulness  ;  but  men  resist  it.  This  is  the  condemnation.  "  He  that 
believeth  on  the  Son  is  not  condemned ;  but  he  that  believeth  not  is  condemned 
already"  (John  iii.  18).  The  false  teachers,  against  whom  the  apostle  warns 
the  Colossians,  sought  to  spoil  the  gospel  by  the  intermixture  of  ideas  from  Jew 
and  Gentile. 

I.  The  true  gospel  is  universally  the  same  in  its  adaptation  and  enterprise. 
— "  Which  is  come  unto  you,  as  it  is  in  all  the  world  "  (ver.  6).  The  gospel,  though 
first  proclaimed  to  the  Jews,  was  not  confined  to  them.  It  reached,  penetrated, 
and  changed  the  Colossians.  In  them  all  races  were  represented.  Their  con- 
version was  typical  of  the  possibilities  of  the  gospel  for  all.  The  world's  greatest 
blessings  are  not  indigenous,  are  not  even  sought;  they  are  sent  from  above. 
There  is  not  a  human  being  the  gospel  cannot  benefit ;  it  adapts  itself  to  the 
wants  of  all.  The  gospel  started  from  Judea  with  a  world-wide  mission,  and 
was  eager  to  fulfil  it.  Its  enterprise  was  irresistible.  It  soon  spread  throughout 
Asia,  Europe,  and  Africa — the  regions  embracing  the  Roman  empire,  which  was 
then  virtually  the  whole  world.  Its  marvellous  propagation  proved  its  universal 
adaptability.  The  celebrated  systems  of  philosophy  among  the  Grecians  lived 
only  in  the  soil  that  produced  them.  Heresies  are  at  best  ethnic;  truth  is 
essentially  catholic.  In  less  than  a  quarter  of  a  century  Christianity  was 
diffused  through  the  entire  world.  The  success  of  Mahometanism  was  of  a 
different  character  and  effected  by  different  means.     It  depended  more  on  the 

380 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS.  chap.  i. 


scimitar  than  the  Koran.  Alexander,  Sesostris,  and  others  achieved  similar 
conquests,  and  as  rapidly,  by  the  force  of  arms.  The  victories  of  the  gospel  were 
won  by  moral  weapons.  It  is  the  greatest  privilege  of  any  nation  to  possess  the 
gospel,  and  its  most  solemn  duty  to  make  it  known  to  the  world. 

II.  The  true  gospel  is  universally  the  same  in  its  results. — "  Bringeth  forth 
fruit,  and  increaseth  "  (as  the  most  valuable  MSS.  read)  "  as  it  doth  also  in  you  " 
(ver.  6).  The  effects  produced  on  the  Colossians  by  their  reception  of  the  gospel  were 
a  sample  of  the  results  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  The  fruit-bearing  denotes  its 
inward  and  subjective  influence  on  the  soul  and  life ;  the  increasing  refers  to 
its  outward  and  diffusive  influence  as  it  makes  progress  in  the  world.  The 
metaphor  used  by  the  apostle  suggests  that  the  gospel,  as  a  tree,  not  only  bears 
fruit,  but  grows,  sending  forth  its  roots  more  firmly  and  widely,  and  extending 
its  branches  in  the  air.  Thus  it  bears  fruit  and  makes  advancement  (Spence). 
There  are  some  plants  which  exhaust  themselves  in  bearing  fruit  and  then 
wither.  The  gospel  is  a  plant  whose  seed  is  in  itself,  and  its  external  growth 
keeps  pace  with  its  reproductive  energy.  We  cannot  monopolise  the  benefits  of 
the  gospel  to  ourselves  ;  it  is  intended  for  the  world,  and  wherever  it  comes  it 
brings  forth  fruit.  It  is  intensely  practical,  and  aims  at  results,  corresponding 
with  its  character,  purpose,  and  power. 

III.  The  true  gospel  is  universally  the  same  in  the  manner  of  its  reception. — 
11  Since  the  day  ye  heard  of  it,  and  knew  the  grace  of  God  in  truth  "  (ver.  6).  Faith 
cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  word  of  God.  The  mode  of  receiving 
the  gospel  is  the  same  to  all.  It  is  apprehended  by  the  understanding,  approved 
by  the  judgment,  and  embraced  by  the  affections.  It  is  not  enough  that  it  falls 
on  the  ear  like  the  strain  of  a  seraphic  melody,  not  enough  that  it  enters  the 
understanding  as  a  clearly  conceived,  full-orbed  truth,  not  enough  that  it  ripples 
through  the  sphere  of  the  emotions  as  an  unspeakable  ecstasy,  unless,  aided  by 
the  divine  Spirit,  it  be  cordially  embraced  by  th*e  heart  and  conscience  as  the 
whole  truth — the  only  truth  that  saves  and  regenerates.  It  is  in  the  gospel 
only  that  we  "  hear  of  the  grace  of  God  " — the  good  news  that  He  has  provided 
redemption  and  restoration  for  the  race.  Nature,  with  all  her  revelations  of  beauty, 
wisdom,  and  power,  is  dumb  on  this  subject.  Providence,  with  its  vast  repertory 
of  mingled  mystery  and  bounty,  unfolds  it  not.  It  is  only  by  believing  the 
gospel  that,  like  the  Colossians,  we  can  "  know  the  grace  of  God  in  truth." 

I Y.  The  true  gospel  is  universally  the  same  in  the  method  of  its  propagation. 
— 1.  It  is  propagated  by  preaching.  "  As  ye  also  learned  "  (ver.  7) — more  correctly, 
"  Even  as  ye  wei  e  instructed  in  the  truth  mentioned  in  the  preceding  verse.  It  is 
believed  Epaphras  first  preached  the  gospel  at  Colossae,  and,  under  the  direction 
of  Paul,  he  was  probably  also  evangelist  to  the  neighbouring  cities  of  Hierapolis 
and  Laodicea.  Preaching  is  the  divinely  instituted  means  of  disseminating  the 
gospel.  It  cannot  be  superseded  by  any  other  agency.  Its  success  has  been 
marvellous. 

2.  It  is  propagated  by  men  thoroughly  qualified  for  the  work. — (1)  The  apostle  recog- 
nised Epaphras  as  a  co-labourer  with  himself.  "  Our  dear  fellow-servant "  (ver.  7). 
The  preacher  must  labour  as  belonging  to  Christ,  as  entirely  dependent  on  Him, 
and  as  deeply  attached  to  Him.  He  is  not  a  servant  of  the  Church  ;  he  is  a 
servant  for  the  Church,  in  doctrine,  supplication  to  God,  and  varied  endeavours 
among  men.  With  all  frankness,  affection,  and  modesty,  the  great  apostle 
acknowledges  Epaphras  as  "  a  dear  fellow-labourer."  Envy  and  jealousy  of  the 
gifts  and  reputation  of  others  are  pernicious  and  unjustifiable.  (2)  The  apostle 
recognised  Epaphras  as  a  faithful  minister  of  Christ.  It  was  a  great  honour  to 
be  a  fellow-servant  with  Paul,  but  greater  still  to  be  a  minister  of  Christ,  the 
Lord  of  glory,  the  Head  of  the  Church,  the  Monarch  of  men  and  angels ; 
commissioned  by  Him  to  proclaim  the  most  vital  truths  and  promote  the  -best 

381 


chap.  I.  H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSI ANS. 


interests  of  the  people.  Moreover,  he  is  called  &  faithful  minister  :  the  appellation 
of  minister  he  had  in  common  with  many  others ;  the  praise  of  faithfulness  is 
confined  to  few.  "  The  great  secret  lies  in  these  three  things — Christ,  immortal 
souls,  self-humiliation  "  {Bishop  Wilson).  (3)  The  apostle  recognised  Epaphras 
as  a  man  of  deep  spiritual  insight.  "  Who  also  declared  unto  us  your  love  in  the 
Spirit "  (ver.  8).  Love  is  the  leading  characteristic  of  the  gospel.  It  is  announced 
as  a  message  of  God's  love  to  man,  and  its  object  is  to  produce  love  in  every 
believing  heart.  Epaphras  apprehended  this  prominent  feature  in  the  message 
itself,  discerned  its  origin  in  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  and  rejoiced  in  declaring 
its  exercise  towards  the  apostle,  towards  God,  and  towards  all  men. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  universality  of  the  gospel  a  strong  evidence  of  its  divine 
authorship.  2.  Though  all  the  world  were  to  reject  the  gospel  it  would  still  be 
true.     3.   To  whomsoever  the  gospel  comes  the  imperative  duty  is  to  believe  it. 

GERM-  NOTES   ON  TEE   VERSES. 

Ver.  6.  The  Gospel  manifests  Itself.         as  the  only  truth. — "  Since  the  day  ye 

I.  It  spreads  its  good   news  in  all      heard  of  and  knew." 
possible  places. — "  Which  is  come  unto 

you,  as  it  is  in  all  the  world."  Vers.  7,  8.  A  Successful  Preacher — 

II.  Produces  unmistakable  spiritual  I.  Is  affectionately  recognised  as  a 
results. — "  And  bringeth  forth  fruit,  as     faithful  minister  of  Christ  (ver.  7). 

it  doth  also  in  you."  II.  Attributes   his    success  to  the 

III.  Is  a  revelation  of  divine  grace,      work  of  the  Spirit  (ver.  8). 

— "  The  grace  of  God  in  truth."  III.  Regards  the  exercise  of  love  in 

IV.  To  be  an  evident  blessing  it  his  hearers  as  a  prominent  feature  of 
must  be  heard  and  thoroughly  believed     success  (ver.  8). 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  9—11, 

A  Comprehensive  Apostolic  Prayer. 

1.  It  was  a  prayer  expressive  of  deep  spiritual  interest. — 1.  It  was  suggested 
by  the  report  of  their  active  Christian  virtues.  "  For  this  cause  we  also,  since  the 
day  we  heard  it,  do  not  cease  to  pray  "  (ver.  9).  They  had  believed  in  Christ,  they 
had  shown  a  genuine  love  to  the  brethren,  they  hoped  for  the  glory  of  the  future, 
they  brought  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  AH  this  excites  the  grateful  heart 
of  the  apostle  to  pray  that  they  may  enjoy  yet  higher  spiritual  blessings,  may 
increase  in  knowledge  and  wisdom,  and  rise  to  the  highest  standard  of  moral 
perfection.  We  best  show  our  love  to  others  by  praying  for  them.  Prayer  is 
always  needed,  since  the  most  excellent  Christian  graces  are  imperfect,  liable  to 
decay,  and  may  be  abused. 

2.  It  was  constant  and  fervent. — "  Do  not  cease  to  pray  for  you  and  to  desire  " 
(ver.  9).  The  apostle  had  unbounded  faith  in  the  efficacy  of  prayer.  Many  in  these 
days  limit  the  advantage  of  prayer  to  its  reflex  influence  on  the  individual  who  prays 
— expanding  the  thoughts,  spiritualising  the  mind,  and  sanctifying  the  heart ;  and 
maintain  that  it  is  powerless  to  affect  God,  whose  purposes  must  advance  by  the 
irresistible  operation  of  unchanging  law,  irrespective  of  human  supplication. 
Above  this  partial  philosophy  of  the  modern  scientist  we  have  the  authority 
and  practice  of  an  inspired  apostle.  If  God  did  not  hear  and  answer  prayer — 
answer  it,  not  in  violation  of,  but  in  harmony  with,  the  highest  law — then  the 
frequent  intercessions  of  the  apostle  are  reduced  to  a  solemn  mockery,  are  un- 
justifiable and  inexplicable.  The  apostle  prayed  with  the  utmost  assiduity — - 
night  and  day,  as  opportunity  permitted — and  with  the  utmost  ardency,  desiring 

382 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.  chap.  i. 


that  the  blessings  sought  might  be  liberally  and  at  once  bestowed.  As  Augus- 
tine puts  it,  our  desires  being  prayers,  these  are  continual  when  our  desires  are 
continual. 

II.  It  was  a  prayer  for  amplest  knowledge. — 1.  The  main  subject  of  the  know- 
ledge desired.  "  The  knowledge  of  His  will  "  (ver.  9).  Man  thirsts  for  knowledge. 
He  is  eager  to  become  acquainted  with  himself  and  the  wonders  around  him. 
In  his  unwearied  search  after  knowledge  he  has  conquered  colossal  difficulties ; 
has  penetrated  the  starry  spaces  with  the  telescope  ;  revealed  the  smallest  visual 
atom  with  the  microscope ;  and,  with  the  deep-sea  dredge,  has  made  us  familiar 
with  the  long-hidden  treasures  of  the  ocean.  But  the  highest  knowledge  is  the 
knowledge  of  God — not  simply  of  His  nature,  majesty,  perfections,  works,  but 
the  knowledge  of  His  will.  So  far  as  we  are  concerned,  that  will  comprehends 
all  that  God  wishes  us  to  be,  believe,  and  do.  We  must  know  His  will  in  order 
to  salvation,  and  as  the  supreme  rule  and  guide  of  every  action.  Man  may 
be  ignorant  of  many  things ;  but  he  cannot  be  ignorant  of  God's  will  and  be 
saved.     The  knowledge  of  that  will  is  the  first  great  urgent  duty  of  life. 

2.  The  measure  in  which  the  knowledge  may  be  possessed. — "  Filled  with  know- 
ledge." The  word  "  knowledge  "  is  full  and  emphatic,  indicating  a  living,  compre- 
hensive, complete  knowledge  of  the  divine  will.  They  already  possessed  some 
knowledge  of  that  will ;  and  the  apostle  prays  that  it  may  be  deeper,  clearer,  and 
increasingly  potent  within  them,  that  they  may  be  filled.  The  soul  is  not  only 
to  possess  this  knowledge,  but  it  is  to  possess  the  soul — informing,  animating, 
and  impelling  it  onwards  to  higher  attainments  in  the  things  of  God.  Know- 
ledge is  a  power  for  good  only  as  it  acquaints  with  the  divine  will,  and  as  it 
pervades  and  actuates  the  whole  spiritual  being.  We  may  seek  great  things 
from  God.  He  gives  largely,  according  to  His  infinite  bounty.  There  is  no 
limit  to  our  increase  in  divine  knowledge  but  our  own  capacity,  diligence,  and 
faith. 

3.  The  practical  form  in  which  the  knowledge  should  be  exercised. — "  In  all 
wisdom  and  spiritual  understanding"  (ver.  9).  The  word  "spiritual"  applies  to  both 
wisdom  and  understanding.  The  false  teachers  offered  a  wisdom  which  they  highly 
extolled,  but  it  had  only  a  show  of  wisdom ;  it  was  an  empty  counterfeit,  calling 
itself  philosophy  ;  the  offspring  of  vanity,  nurtured  by  the  flesh  ;  it  was  un- 
spiritual.  The  true  gospel  is  spiritual  in  its  origin,  characteristics,  and  effects. 
The  wisdom  and  understanding  it  imparts  are  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Without  His  presence  and  operation  in  the  soul  both  the  knowledge  of  the 
divine  will  and  advancement  in  it  would  be  impossible.  The  two  terms  are 
similar  in  meaning,  but  there  is  a  distinction.  Wisdom  refers  to  the  God-given 
organ  by  which  truth  is  selected  and  stored  up  ;  understanding  to  the  faculty  by 
which  truth  is  practically  and  prudently  used  :  the  one  is  comprehensive  and 
accumulative,  the  other  discriminative  and  practical.  True  spiritual  insight  is 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  No  amount  of  mental  or  moral  culture,  of  human 
wisdom  and  sagacity,  can  supply  it.  This  was  the  power  lacked  by  the  Galatians 
when  they  were  so  soon  seduced  from  the  gospel ;  and  to  prevent  a  similar 
result  among  the  Colossians  the  apostle  prays  they  may  be  filled  with  the 
knowledge  of  God's  will  in  all  spiritual  wisdom  and  understanding,  that  they 
may  discern  between  the  false  and  the  true,  the  carnal  and  spiritual,  the  human 
and  the  divine. 

III.  It  was  a  prayer  for  the  loftiest  Christian  career. — 1.  The  standard  of 
Christian  conduct.  "  That  ye  might  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord"  (ver.  10).  Life  is 
a  journey ;  death  is  the  common  goal  and  resting-place  where  all  meet.  Our 
conduct  is  the  pathway  on  which  we  travel.  The  walk  therefore  describes  the 
general  course  of  life,  the  actions,  habits,  and  deportment  of  the  man  in  his 
relations  to  God  and  to  the  race.     This  walk  is  to  "  be  worthy  of  the  Lord  " 

383 


chap.  i.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS. 


— worthy  of  His  holy  and  dignified  character ;  worthy  of  His  law,  of  His 
kingdom,  of  His  glory,  of  the  high  destiny  He  has  designed  for  us.  When  a 
certain  prince,  on  being  captured,  was  asked  how  he  should  be  treated,  his 
prompt  reply  was,  "  As  a  king."  We  should  ever  remember  the  high  vocation 
wherewith  we  are  called,  and  the  exalted  pattern  after  which  our  behaviour 
should  be  modelled  (Eph.  iv.  1  ;  1  Thess.  ii.  12).  Our  life  is  to  be  worthy  of  the 
Lord — in  its  spirit,  motive,  active  outgoing,  development,  scope,  and  aim.  For 
this  purpose  we  are  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  His  will.  The  end  of  know- 
ledge is  practice ;  its  value  consists  in  what  it  enables  us  to  do.  He  is  not  an 
architect  who  simply  theorises  about  buildings,  but  he  who  has  the  art  to  erect 
them.  To  speak  eloquently  of  war  does  not  constitute  a  general ;  he  only 
deserves  that  distinction  who  can  skilfully  manage  an  army  in  the  field,  whether 
in  attacking  or  defending. 

2.  The  rule  by  which  that  standard  is  maintained. — "  Unto  all  pleasing  "  (ver.  10). 
We  are  to  please  the  Lord  in  all  things ;  to  attempt  and  sanction  nothing  that  will 
not  be  acceptable  to  Him.  We  are  not  to  please  ourselves — we  are  not  to  please 
others — as  the  ultimate  object  of  life.  If  our  conduct  please  others — our  parents, 
our  friends,  our  country — it  is  well ;  but  though  all  others  are  displeased  and 
estranged,  we  must  strive  in  all  things  to  please  God.  This  is  the  simplest  as 
well  as  the  highest  and  grandest  rule  of  life.  Attention  to  this  will  settle  many 
perplexing  questions  concerning  human  duty.  The  will  of  God  must  be  studied 
as  our  supreme  rule,  and  to  it  all  our  thoughts,  words,  and  actions  must  "be 
conformed.  Thus  the  life  on  earth  becomes  a  preparation  and  discipline  for 
heaven,  and  blends  the  present  with  a  future  of  immortal  blessedness.  It  is  well 
with  us  when  we  obey  the  Lord  (Jer.  xlii.  6). 

3.  The  productiveness  of  Christian  consistency. — "  Being  fruitful  in  every  good 
work  "  (ver.  10).  One  result  of  a  worthy  walk  is  fertility  in  Christian  activity.  In 
order  to  fruitfulness  there  must  be  life.  The  believer's  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God, 
and  the  existence  of  the  hidden  life  is  manifest  in  the  fruits.  Fruitfulness  also 
involves  culture.  Neglect  the  vine,  and  instead  of  the  pendent  clusters  of  glossy, 
luscious  fruit  there  will  be  barrenness  and  decay — withered  branches  fit  only  for 
the  consuming  fire.  God  disciplines  His  people  for  fruitful  and  abundant 
service  by  painful  but  loving  exercises  of  His  providence  (John  xv.  2).  It  is  not 
enough  to  bear  one  kind  of  fruit ;  there  must  be  fertility  "  in  every  good  work." 
The  Christian  is  in  sympathy  with  every  good  enterprise  that  aims  at  the 
physical,  social,  or  moral  welfare  of  man,  and  will  heartily  contribute  his 
influence  and  effort  in  its  promotion. 

4.  Progress  in  divine  knowledge. — "  And  increasing  in  the  knowledge  of  God  " 
(ver.  10).  The  knowledge  of  God  is  the  real  instrument  of  enlargement,  in  soul 
and  life,  of  the  believer  (Alford).  We  can  reach  no  stage  in-Christian  experience 
and  practice  in  which  additional  knowledge  is  unnecessary.  Activity  in  goodness 
sharpens  the  knowing  faculty  and  adds  to  the  stores  of  wisdom.  On  the  other 
hand,  increased  knowledge  reacts  and  stimulates  the  worker  (John  vii.  17; 
Matt.  xxv.  29).  Divine  knowledge  is  the  great  necessity  of  the  soul,  and  the 
real  means  of  fruitfulness  and  growth  in  goodness.  It  appeals  to,  elevates,  and 
expands  the  whole  man. 

IV.  It  was  a  prayer  for  supernatural  strength. — 1.  The  appropriateness  and 
fulness  of  the  blessing  desired.  "  Strengthened  with  all  might "  (ver.  11).  Man  is 
morally  weak.  Sin  has  enfeebled  and  debased  the  soul ;  it  has  tyrannised  over 
humanity  for  ages.  "  When  we  were  yet  without  strength  "  Christ  came  and  intro- 
duced another  force  which  counteracts  sin  and  will  ultimately  effect  its  overthrow. 
All  who  believe  in  Christ  receive  strength  to  struggle  against  and  conquer  sin. 
This  imparted  strength  is  especially  necessary  in  realising  the  blessings  for  which 
the  apostle  prays — complete  knowledge  of  the  divine  will ;  a  life  worthy  of  the 

384 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS.  chap.  i. 


Lord;  spiritual  fertility  and  advancement  in  heavenly  wisdom.  "Strengthened 
with  all  might."  Our  enemies  are  numerous,  violent,  and  obstinate,  and  our 
infirmities  are  many.  We  therefore  need  strength  of  every  kind.  As  it  is 
necessary  to  overcome  all  our  enemies,  so  it  is  necessary  to  be  endued  with  all 
might — might  to  endure  the  most  furious  assault,  might  to  resist  the  most 
bewitching  solicitation  to  evil. 

2.  The  supernatural  source  of  the  blessing. — "  According  to  His  glorious  power  " 
(ver.  11) — or,  more  correctly,  "according  to  the  power  of  His  glory."  Moral  power 
is  not  native  to  the  Christian ;  it  has  its  source  in  God.  He  imparts  it  to  the 
believing  heart.  The  motive  and  measure  of  our  strength  is  in  the  might  of  His 
glory.  Power  is  an  essential  attribute  of  the  divine  glory ;  it  is  manifested  in 
the  splendid  works  of  creation,  in  the  inscrutable  ways  of  providence,  and  pre- 
eminently in  the  marvels  of  human  redemption.  God's  revelation  of  Himself  to 
us,  in  whatever  form,  is  the  one  source  of  our  highest  strength.  The  power  of 
His  glory  reveals  itself  more  and  more  to  him  who  walks  worthy  of  the  Lord. 
Armed  with  this  supernatural  energy,  the  weakest  saint  becomes  invincible. 

3.  The  great  'practical  purpose  contemplated  by  the  blessing. — "  Unto  all  patience 
and  longsuffering  with  joy  fulness"  (ver.  11).  Patience  is  the  temper  which  does 
not  easily  succumb  under  trial ;  longsuffering,  or  longmindedness,  is  the  self- 
restraint  which  does  not  hastily  retaliate  a  wrong.  Patience  respects  the  weight 
of  the  affliction,  longsuffering  its  duration.  The  former  is  exercised  in  relation 
to  God,  in  the  endurance  of  trial,  or  in  waiting  for  promised  blessing  ;  the  latter 
in  relation  to  man,  in  long-continued  forbearance  under  irritating  wrongs.  The 
true  strength  of  the  believer  consists,  not  so  much  in  what  he  can  do,  as  in  what 
he  can  endure  (Isa.  xxx.  15).  The  quiet,  uncomplaining  sufferer  is  greater  than 
the  most  vigorous  athlete.  The  characteristic  of  both  patience  and  long- 
suffering  is  expressed  in  the  phrase  "  with  joyfulness."  To  suffer  with  joyful- 
ness  is  the  great  distinction  and  triumph  of  the  Christian  spirit.  The  endurance 
of  the  Stoic  was  often  the  effect  of  pride  or  insensibility.  But  the  Christian, 
though  keenly  sensitive  to  pain,  is  enabled  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  rejoice  in  the 
assurance  of  God's  presence,  in  the  certain  victory  of  his  cause,  and  in  the 
prospect  of  reward  both  here  and  hereafter. 

Lessons. — 1.  How  sublime  are  the  topics  of  genuine  prayer.  2.  Deep  experi- 
mental acquaintance  with  the  things  of  God  is  essential  to  a  lofty  and  useful  career. 
3.  Knowledge,  wisdom,  spiritual  fertility,  and  strength  are  the  gifts  of  God. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.    9-11.    PauVs   Prayer  for   the  III.  For  strength. — In  order  to  this 

Colossians —  fruitfulness    all    might  is  required  of 

I.  For  knowledge. — Fulness  of  know-  body,  mind,  and  spirit,  but  especially 
ledge  both  extensively  and  intensively  that  of  the  Spirit  within.  The  measure 
is  the  burden  of  his  desire.  "In  all  — "  according  to  His  glorious  power"; 
wisdom  " — as  a  practical  guide,  not  as  so  as  to  suffer  patiently  the  constant 
mere  theory.  "  And  spiritual  under-  trials  of  the  Christian  life,  and  exercise 
standing" — the  spirit  of  the  believer  all  longsuffering  towards  persecutors 
receiving  the  Spirit  of  God  to  lead  him  and  enemies  of  the  truth,  and  this  with 
inwardly  to  understand,  realise,  and  joy  fulness.  It  is  not  what  we  can  do, 
delight  in  the  divine  will.  but  what  He  can   do   in   us,  and  we 

II.  For  fruitfulness.  —  1.    A     life      through  Him. — Preacher's  Magazine, 
worthy  of  the    Christian  as  it  is  well 

pleasing     unto     his     Lord.       2.    Good  Ver.  11.  Divine  Strength — 

works  of  every   kind.      3.   Substantial  I.  Is  spiritual  strength,  the  source 

growth.  and  sustenance  of  all  might. 

cc  385 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS. 


II.  May  be  realised  in  increasing  the  trials  of  life ;  power  to  bear  with 
measure.  the  opposition  and  cruelty  of  others. 

III.  Arms  the  soul  with  invincible  IV.  Enables  the  soul  to  rejoice  in 
power. — Power  to  endure  with  patience  the  midst  of  suffering. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF   VERSE   12. 

Meetness  for  the  Saintly  Inheritance. 

The  epistle  has  been  hitherto  occupied  with  prefatory  observations.  In  this 
verse  the  writer  enters  upon  his  principal  theme  relating  to  the  person  and 
redemption  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  offers  thanks  to  God  the  Father  as  the  primal 
source  of  that  grace  which  constitutes  the  meetness  for  the  saintly  heritage. 
Observe  : — 

1.  The  opulent  inheritance  provided  for  the  good. — 1.  It  is  a  present  and 
prospective  possession.  "  The  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light."  Light  is 
symbolic  of  knowledge,  purity,  and  joy.  The  saints  even  now  are  called  out  of 
darkness  into  God's  kingdom  of  marvellous  light.  "  They  walk  in  the  light  as 
He  is  in  the  light."  They  have  a  measure  of  knowledge,  but  it  is  dimmed  by 
many  earthly  obscurities  ;  of  purity,  but  it  is  surrounded  with  imperfections  ;  of 
joy,  but  it  is  moderated  by  life's  sorrows.  In  the  prospective  heavenly  inherit- 
ance, of  which  the  earthly  portion  is  a  preparation  and  pledge,  knowledge  shall 
be  unclouded  and  complete,  purity  unsullied,  joy  uninterrupted.  "  The  life  for 
eternity  is  already  begun  :  we  are  at  and  from  the  very  hour  of  our  regeneration 
introduced  into  the  spiritual  world — a  world  which,  though  mysterious  and 
invisible,  is  as  real  as  the  world  of  sense  around  us  :  the  Christian's  life  of 
heavenliness  is  the  first  stage  of  heaven  itself  !  There  is  a  power  now  within 
the  believer  in  the  germ,  of  which  his  celestial  immortality  shall  be  the  proper 
fruit.  The  dawn  of  heaven  hath  already  begun  in  all  who  are  yet  to  rejoice  in 
its  noontide  glory"  {Archer  Butler). 

2.  It  is  a  possession  provided  for  the  good. — "  The  saints."  Not  for  the  un- 
holy, the  impenitent,  the  unbelieving,  the  worldly.  It  is  an  inheritance  where 
only  the  pure  in  heart  can  dwell.  There  is  a  world  of  significance  in  that  pithy 
saying  of  an  old  divine:  "Everyone  will  get  to  heaven  who  could  live  there." 
Only  the  saints  who  have  made  the  Lord  their  light  and  their  salvation  can  bear 
the  splendour  of  His  presence. 

3.  It  is  a  possession  freely  given. — The  legal  heir  has  no  need  to  work  for  his 
inheritance;  he  enters  in  possession  by  right  of  succession  or  testatorial  bequest. 
The  saint  enters  upon  his  inheritance  of  righteousness,  not  by  natural  descent 
or  by  any  self-constituted  right,  but  on  the  ground  of  a  free,  divine  gift.  The 
believer  has  a  title  to  the  inheritance  ;  but  it  is  not  earned  by  his  own  efforts  : 
it  is  bestowed  by  Christ  who  won  the  inheritance  by  suffering  and  dying.  Thus 
all  idea  of  merit  is  excluded  j  we  can  do  nothing  to  deserve  such  a  heritage  of 
blessing.  The  word  "inheritance"  really  means  "the  parcel  of  the  lot" — an 
expression  borrowed  from  the  Old  Testament  (Ps.  xvi.  5).  The  promised 
Canaan  suggests  an  analogy  between  it  and  the  higher  hopes  and  wealthier 
possessions  of  the  new  dispensation.  As  each  Israelite,  through  the  grace  of 
God,  obtained  his  allotment,  so  the  Christian  obtains  his  portion  in  the  kingdom 
of  God.  The  present  and  future  possession  of  the  saints  infinitely  surpasses  the 
earthly  inheritance. 

II.  The  special  meetness  necessary  to  a  participation  in  the  inheritance. — 
"  Hath  made  us  meet  to  be  partakers." 

1.  This  meetness  is  absolutely  necessary. — Naturally  we  are  unmeet.  A 
monarch  may  raise  the  basest  slave  to  a  dukedom,  but  he  cannot  give  him  fitness 
to  discharge  the  duties  of  the  exalted  position  ;  he  may  change  his  state,  but  he 

386 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.  chap.  i. 


cannot  change  his  nature.  To  obtain  a  moral  fitness  for  the  saintly  inheritance 
our  nature  must  be  changed.  "  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the 
kingdom  of  God." 

2.  This  meetness  consists  in  the  loving  conformity  of  the  human  will  to  the 
divine. — The  future  life  of  heaven  is  the  object  and  pattern  of  our  present 
heavenly  life  :  "  there  is  the  mighty  model  on  which  we  are  to  reconstruct  our 
nature ;  there  dwells  that  central  form  of  moral  and  spiritual  beauty  of  which 
our  life  is  to  be  the  transcript."  The  celestial  spirits  find  their  highest  glory 
and  blessedness  in  the  complete  submission  of  their  whole  nature  to  God ;  in 
cheerful,  willing,  loving  obedience  to  His  will.  The  heavenly  lifo  is  the  test  and 
standard  of  our  life  on  earth — of  every  motive,  word,  and  deed.  The  Church  of 
Christ  is  a  training-school  for  a  more  exalted  career.  An  ancient  sage  once  said, 
"  Boys  ought  most  to  learn  what  most  they  shall  need  when  they  become  men." 
So  men  ought  to  learn  in  this  life  what  they  shall  need  most  as  glorified  beings 
in  the  future.  Only  as  our  whole  soul  is  conformed  in  loving  obedience  to  the 
will  of  God  are  we  "  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in 
light."  We  are  thus  brought  into  sympathy  with  the  good  in  all  realms,  and 
fitted  to  participate  in  the  most  exalted  fellowships  of  the  future  S 

3.  This  meetness  is  a  divine  work. — It  is  God  "  the  Father  who  hath  made  us 
meet."  He  provides  the  inheritanco  ;  He  gives  the  title  to  it ;  He  confers  the 
moral  fitness  by  which  the  soul  enters  into  its  possession  and  enjoyment.  None 
but  God,  the  fountain  of  holiness,  goodness,  and  power,  could  accomplish  this 
work.  "  He  worketh  in  us  to  will  and  to  do."  In  the  meetening  process  He 
hath  dealt  with  us  as  a  Father,  instructing  our  ignorance,  correcting  and 
chastising  our  faults,  and  comforting  and  strengthening  us  in  trouble. 

III.  The  great  duty  we  owe  to  the  generous  donor  of  tho  inheritance. — 
"  Giving  thanks."  Gratitude  is  the  easiest  and  commonest  duty  of  a  dependent 
creature ;  yet  is  the  duty  most  frequently  and  grossly  neglected.  Our  hearts 
should  ever  glow  with  an  unquenchable  flame  of  grateful  praise  to  the  bountiful 
Author  of  all  our  blessings. 

Lessons. — 1.  We  owe  thanks  to  God  as  the  Provider  of  the  inheritance.  2.  We  owe 
thanks  to  God  as  the  active  Agent  in  producing  the  special  meetness  to  participate  in 
the  enjoyments  of  the  inheritance.  3.  Our  thanks  to  God  should  be  expressed  in 
active  obedience  to  His  uill.  4.  Our  thanks  to  God  should  be  joyful,  fervent,  and 
constant, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSE. 

Ver.  12.  Qualification  for  Heaven.  We   thank   our   fellow-men   for   their 

I.  The   state    contemplated. — It   is  gifts.     We  thank  God  for  His  other 
"  an   inheritance  "  ;    not   a   purchased  gifts.    We  should  thank  Him  for  meet- 
property,  but  the  common  heritage  of  ness    for   heaven.     This   thanksgiving 
the  children  of  God.     "  Of  the  saints,"  prepares  us  for  heaven. — G.  Brooks. 
holy  persons.     "  In  light,"  knowledge, 

holiness,  happiness.  Meetness  for  the  Inheritance  of  the 

II.  The  meetness  required. — Adapta-  Saints  in  Light. — Life  for  eternity  is 
tions  in  the  natural  world.  In  social  already  begun.  The  business  and  the 
arrangement.  In  regard  to  the  heavenly  beatitude  of  heaven  must  consist  in 
state.  A  change  of  heart  is  necessary,  conformity  of  the  will  to  the  will  of 
Without  it  heaven  would  not  be  God  :  this  is  equally  the  law  of  earth, 
heaven  to  us.  It  must  be  sought  and  I.  Faith  is  the  realising  power  of 
obtained  in 'the  present  world.     It  is  this  meetness. 

here  ascribed  to  the  Father.  II.  Hope  is  the  consoling  and  fortify- 

III.  The  thanks  to  be  rendered. —     ing  power. 

387 


chap.  I.  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS. 


III.  Love  is  the  uniting  power,  the         II.  The  meetness  which  is  wrought 

consummation,  and  the  perfection  of  by  God  in  the  hearts  of  all  who  are 

all. — A.  Butler.  raised  to  the  enjoyment  of  this  in- 
heritance.— 1.  The  relative  meetness  is 

The  Inheritance  of  the  Saints.  expressed  by  the  word  inheritance.     It 

I.  An  interesting  view  of  the  future  is  assigned  to  heirs.     2.  The  personal 

world  as  it  is  inherited  by  believers. —  meetness  is  indicated  by  the  term  saints. 
1.  The  saints  are  in  light  in  respect  to  the  Lessons. — 1.  Give  thanks  to  Godfoi' 

place.     2.  As  it  respects  purity.     3.  In  those   who   are    made    meet.       2.    Give 

respect  of  the  permanency  of  their  felicity.  thanks  to  God  if  the  work  be  begun  in 

4.  As  it  respects  knowledge.  yourselves. — R.  Watson. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses   13,    14.    . 

The  Great  Moral  Translation. 

These  words  amplify  the  truth  unfolded  in  the  preceding  verse,  and  describe 
the  great  change  that  must  take  place  in  order  to  obtain  a  meetness  for  the 
saintly  inheritance — the  translation  of  the  soul  from  the  powerful  dominion  of 
darkness  into  the  glorious  kingdom  of  the  Son  of  God. 

I.  This  translation  involves  our  enfranchisement  from  a  state  of  dark  capti- 
vity.— "  Who  hath  delivered  us  from  the  power  of  darkness  "  (ver.  13). 

1.  The  unreneived  are  in  a  realm  of  moral  darkness. — This  was  the  condition 
of  the  Colossians  and  of  the  whole  Gentile  world  before  the  times  of  the  gospel. 
"  Darkness  covered  the  earth,  and  gross  darkness  the  people."  Darkness  denotes 
ignorance,  moral  blindness.  Man  is  in  darkness  about  the  great  mysteries  of 
being,  the  mystery  of  sin  and  suffering,  the  deep  significance  of  life,  the  distressing 
question  of  human  duty,  the  destiny  of  the  universe,  the  character  and  operations 
of  God,  and  His  relation  to  the  race.  It  is  possible  to  know  much  about  religion, 
to  hold  religious  ideas  at  second-hand  as  a  group  of  poetic  conceptions — fancy 
pictures  from  the  book  of  Revelation,  like  the  pictures  of  the  poets  from  the 
book  of  Nature — and  yet  be  totally  in  the  dark  as  to  the  religious  experience 
of  those  ideas.  May  be  intellectually  light,  and  spiritually  dark.  Darkness 
denotes  danger  and  misery.  Like  a  traveller  in  a  strange  country  overtaken 
by  the  night,  stumbling  along  in  uncertainty  and  fear,  until  one  fatal  step — and 
he  lies  helpless  in  the  rocky  abyss,  into  the  bottom  of  which  he  falls. 

2.  In  this  realm  of  moral  darkness  the  unrenewed  are  held  in  captivity. — They 
are  slaves  in  the  land  of  darkness,  tyrannised  over  by  an  arbitrary  and 
capricious  ruler.  Slavery  distorts  and  defaces  the  illustrious  image  in  which 
man  was  originally  created,  darkens  the  understanding,  paralyses  the  intellect, 
and  stunts  the  growth  of  intelligence ;  it  robs  him  of  his  self-respect,  poisons 
his  sense  of  rectitude  and  honour,  blunts  his  sensibilities,  imbrutes  his  entire 
nature,  and  brands  him  with  unutterable  infamy.  The  "power  of  darkness" 
is  that  tyranny  which  sin  exercises  over  its  captives,  filling  their  minds  with 
deadly  errors  or  brutish  ignorance,  their  consciences  with  terror  or  indifference, 
and  dragging  them  onwards  under  its  dismal  yoke  into  all  the  horrors  of  eternal 
darkness.  The  tyrant  of  this  gloomy  realm  is  Satan ;  and  his  domination  is 
founded  and  conducted  on  imposture,  error,  ignorance,  and  cruelty.  He  is  the 
arch-deceiver. 

3.  From  this  realm  of  moral  darkness  God  graciously  liberates. — "  Who  hath 
delivered  us."  For  the  slaves  of  sin  there  is  no  help  but  in  God.  It  is  the 
nature  of  sin  to  incapacitate  its  victim  for  making  efforts  after  self -enfranchise- 
ment. He  is  unwilling  to  be  free.  To  snap  the  fetters  from  a  nation  of  slaves 
yearning  for  liberty  is  a  great  and  noble  act.  Our  deliverance  is  mightier  than 
that.     The  word  "  deliver  "  in  the  text  means  to  snatch  or  rescue  from  danger, 

388 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.  chap.  i. 


even  though  the  person  seized  may  at  first  be  unwilling  to  escape,  as  Lot  from 
Sodom.  God  does  not  force  the  human  will.  The  method  of  deliverance  was 
ds  vised  and  executed  independent  of  our  will ;  its  personal  benefits  cannot  be 
enjoyed  without  our  will. 

II.  This  translation  places  us  in  a  condition  of  highest  moral  freedom  and 
privilege. —  1.  We  are  transferred  to  a  kingdom.  "Hath  translated  us  into  the 
kingdom  "  (ver.  13).  Poiver  detains  captives  ;  a  kingdom  fosters  willing  citizens. 
Tyranny  has  no  law  but  the  capricious  will  of  a  despot ;  a  kingdom  implies  good 
government,  based  on  universally  recognised  and  authoritative  law.  "  The  image 
is  present  d  of  the  wholesale  transportation  of  a  conqupred  people,  of  which  the 
history  of  Oriental  monarchies  furnishes  many  examples  "  ( Josephus,  Ant.,  IX.  xi.). 
They  were  translated  from  a  bad  to  a  better  ruling  power.  So  the  believer  is 
moved  from  the  realm  and  power  of  darkness  and  bondage  to  the  kingdom  of 
light  and  freedom.  The  laws  of  this  kingdom  are  prescribed  by  Christ,  its 
honours  and  privileges  granted  by  Him,  and  its  future  history  and  triumphs 
will  ever  be  identified  with  His  own  transcendent  glory. 

2.  We  are  placed  under  the  rule  of  a  beneficent  and  glorious  King. — "The 
kingdom  of  God's  dear  Son,"  more  accurately  "  the  Son  of  His  love."  As  love 
is  the  essence  of  the  Father,  so  is  it  also  of  the  Son.  The  manifestation  of  the 
Son  to  the  world  is  a  manifestation  by  Him  of  divine  love  (1  John  iv.  9). 
The  kingdom  into  which  believers  are  translated  is  founded  on  love ;  its  entire 
government  is  carried  on  under  the  same  beneficent  principle.  The  acts  of 
suffering  and  death,  by  which  Christ  won  His  kingly  dignity  and  power,  were 
revelations  of  love  in  its  most  heroic  and  self-sacrificing  forms.  When  we  believe 
in  Christ,  we  are  translated  from  the  tyranny  and  darkness  of  sin  into  the 
kingdom  of  which  the  Son  of  God — the  Son  infinitely  beloved  of  the  Father — is 
King.  As  willing  subjects  we  share  with  Him  the  Father's  love,  and  are  being 
prepared  for  more  exalted  service  and  sublimer  experiences  in  the  endless 
kingdom  of  the  future. 

III.  The  divine  method  by  which  the  translation  is  effected. — It  is  effected  by 
redemption. 

1.  The  means  of  redemption. — "Through  His  blood"  (ver.  14).  The  image  of  a 
captive  and  enslaved  people  is  still  continued.  But  the  metaphor  is  changed 
from  the  victor  who  rescues  the  captive  by  force  of  arms  to  the  philanthropist 
who  releases  him  by  the  payment  of  a  ransom  (Lightfoot).  All  men 
are  under  the  condemnation  of  a  violated  law,  and  sink  in  the  bondage  of  sin. 
There  is  no  release  but  by  paying  a  ransom  ;  this  is  involved  in  the  idea  of 
redemption.  The  ransom -price  paid  for  the  enfranchisement  of  enslaved 
humanity  was  "not  corruptible  things,  as  silver  and  gold,  but  the  precious  blood 
of  Christ."  The  mode  of  redemption  is  to  us  a  deep  mystery ;  the  reasons 
influencing  the  divine  Mind  in  its  adoption  we  cannot  fathom.  But  the  fact  is 
plainly  revealed  (1  Pet.  iii.  18,  ii.  24;  Gal.  iii.  13).  This  was  God's  method  of 
translating  from  bondage  to  liberty. 

2.  The  effect  of  redemption. — "Even  the  forgiveness  of  sins"  (ver.  14).  The 
ransom-price  is  paid,  and  the  slave  is  free.  The  first  blessing  of  redemption  is 
pardon.  It  is  this  the  penitent  soul  most  urgently  needs ;  it  does  not  exclude  all  other 
redemptive  ble.- sings,  but  opens  and  prepares  the  soul  for  their  reception.  Sin  is  the 
great  obstacle  between  the  soul  and  God;  the  monsttr  sluice  that  shuts  off  the 
flow  of  divine  blessing.  Redemption  lifts  the  sluice,  and  the  stream  of  divine 
goodness  pours  its  tide  of  benediction  into  the  enraptured  soul.  An  earthly  king 
may  forgive  the  felon,  but  he  cannot  give  him  a  better  disposition.  God  never 
forgives  without  at  the  same  time  giving  a  new  heart.  Pardon  involves  every 
other  blessing — peace,  purity,  glory  ;  it  is  the  pledge  and  foundation  for  the 
bestowal  of  all  we  can  need  in  time  or  in  eternity. 

389 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSI ANS. 


3.  The  Author  of  redemption. — "  In  whom  we  have  redemption  "  (ver.  1 4).  Christ, 
the  Son  of  God's  love,  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself,  accomplished  our  redemption  ;  and 
it  is  only  as  we  are  in  Him  by  faith  that  we  actually  partake  of  the  freedom  He 
purchased  for  us.  His  blood  is  not  merely  the  ransom  paid  for  our  deliverance, 
but  He  is  Himself  the  personal,  living  source  of  redemption.  The  deliverance  of 
humanity  is  not  simply  in  the  work  of  Christ,  through  what  He  did  and  suffered, 
but  in  Himself — "  the  strong  Son  of  God,"  the  crucified,  risen,  and  living  Saviour. 
It  is  not  only  a  rescue  from  condemnation  and  punishment,  but  a  deliverance 
from  the  power  and  bondage  of  evil.  The  words  "  in  whom  we  have  redemption  " 
teach  much  and  imply  more.  They  describe  a  continuous  gift  enjoyed,  a  con- 
tinuous process  realised  by  all  who  have  been  translated  into  the  kingdom  of 
the  Saviour.  In  them  the  power  of  redemption  is  being  carried  on,  so  that 
they  die  unto  sin,  and  live  unto  God,  and  experience  a  growing  meetness  for 
the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light  (Spence).  Christ  only  could  be  the 
Redeemer  of  men  ;  He  combined  in  one  person  the  divine  and  human  natures  : 
He  could  therefore  meet  the  demands  of  God  and  the  necessities  of  man. 

Lessons. — 1.  Sin  is  a  dark,  enslaving  power.  2.  The  kingdom  of  the  Redeemer 
is  one  of  light  and  freedom.  3.  Moral  translation  by  redemption  is  a  divine  work. 
4.  The  forgiveness  of  sin  can  be  obtained  only  by  faith  in  the  Son  of  God. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Ver.  13.  From  Darkness  to  Light.  Yer.  14.  The   Great  Blessing  of  Re 

I.  Man  is  naturally  in  a  state  of     demption — 

darkness,  held    captive    by  sin  and         I.  Is  the  forgiveness  of  sins. 
Satan.  II.  The  blessing  of  forgiveness  is 

II.  A  kingdom  of  freedom  and  light     through  the  agency  of  Christ. 

is  provided  by  the  intervention  of  the         III.  Redemption  is  purchased  at  a 

Son  of  God.  great  cost  and  sacrifice. — "Through 

III.  The  translation  from  darkness  His  blood." 
to  light  is  a  divine  act. 

MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  15—17. 

The  Relation  of  Christ  to  God  and  to  all  Greated  Things. 

Having  spoken  of  our  redemption,  the  apostle,  in  terms  of  the  highest  signifi- 
cance and  grandeur,  dwells  upon  the  dignity  and  absolute  supremacy  of  the 
Redeemer. 

I.  The  relation  of  Christ  to  God. — "  Who  is  the  image  of  the  invisible  God  " 
(ver.  15).  God  is  an  infinite  and  eternal  Spirit,  incomprehensible  and  invisible. 
"  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time ; "  yet  humanity  yearns  for  some  visible 
embodiment  of  Deity.  Christ  reflects  and  reveals  the  Father.  "  He  is  the  bright- 
ness of  His  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  His  person."  It  is  believed  that  the  idea 
of  the  Logos  underlies  the  whole  of  this  passage,  though  the  term  is  not  mentioned. 
The  heretical  teachers  at  Colossse  had  introduced  a  perverted  view  as  to  the 
nature  of  the  mediation  between  God  and  creation,  and  the  apostle  aims  to 
rectify  it.  The  word  Xoyos,  denoting  both  reason  and  speech,  was  a  philoso- 
phical term  adopted  by  Alexandrian  Judaism  to  express  the  manifestation  of  the 
unseen  God — the  absolute  Being — in  the  creation  and  government  of  the  world. 
It  included  all  modes  by  which  God  makes  Himself  known  to  man.  As  His 
reason,  it  denoted  His  purpose  or  design  ;  as  His  speech,  it  implied  His  revelation. 
When  Christian  teachers  adopted  this  term,  they  exalted  and  fixed  its  meaning  by 
attaching  to  it  two  precise  and  definite  ideas — that  the  Word  is  a  divine  person, 

390 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSI ANS.  chap.  I. 


and  that  the  Word  became  incarnate  in  Jesus  Christ  (Lightfoot).  Christ  as  the 
eternal  Word  is  the  perfect  image,  the  visible  representation,  of  the  unseen  God. 
In  addition  to  the  idea  of  similitude,  which  is  capable  of  a  wide  and  general  use, 
the  word  "  image  "  involves  two  others. 

1.  Representation. — It  implies  an  archetype  of  which  the  image  is  a  copy. 
Man  is  said  to  be  in  the  image  of  God ;  but  there  is  a  difference  between  the 
image  of  God  in  man  and  the  image  of  God  in  Christ.  In  Christ  it  is  as 
Caesar's  image  in  his  son ;  in  man  it  is  as  Caesar's  image  on  his  coin.  In  the 
God- man  Christ  Jesus  we  have  a  visible,  living,  perfect,  and  reliable  representa- 
tion of  the  invisible  God. 

2.  Manifestation. — The  general  idea  of  the  Logos  is  the  manifestation  of  the 
hidden.  "  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time  ;  the  only  begotten  Son,  which  is 
in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  He  hath  declared  Him  "  (John  i.  1 8,  compared  with 
xiv.  9,  10,  vi.  46).  The  incarnate  Word,  in  His  nature,  attributes,  and  actions, 
is  the  true  epiphany  of  the  unseen  Deity,  setting  forth,  like  distinct  rays  of  one 
and  the  same  glorious  light,  His  infinite  wisdom,  mercy,  righteousness,  and 
power.  Our  obligations  to  Christ  for  His  wondrous  revelations  are  unspeakably 
great. 

II.  The  relation  of  Christ  to  all  created  things. — 1.  Christ  existed  prior  to  the 
creation.  He  is  "  the  firstborn  of  every  creature  "  (ver.  1 5).  It  is  not  said  He 
was  the  first  formed  or  first  created  of  every  creature,  but  the  firstborn — the 
first  begotten.  It  is  plainly  intimated  that  Christ,  the  Son  of  God's  love,  was 
begotten  before  any  created  thing  existed.  There  is  therefore  no  ground  in 
this  passage  for  the  Arians  and  Socinians  to  build  up  their  theory  of  the 
creatureship  of  Christ.  In  relation  to  all  created  things,  intelligent  or  un- 
intelligent, terrene  or  celestial,  Christ  was  the  firstborn.  In  an  ineffably 
mysterious  sense  He  was  begotten ;  they  were  created.  The  two  ideas  involved 
in  the  phrase  are:  (1)  Priority  to  all  creation — the  absolute  pre-existence 
of  the  Son.  The  term  "  first  begotten "  was  frequently  used  among  the 
Jews  as  a  term  of  precedence  and  dignity.  As  applied  to  the  Son  of  God, 
it  implies  priority  in  rank  in  relation  to  all  created  things.  Time  is  an 
accident  of  the  creature.  Therefore  the  origin  of  the  Son  of  God  precedes  all 
time.  (2)  Sovereignty  over  all  creation.  God's  firstborn  is  the  natural  Ruler, 
the  acknowledged  Head  of  God's  household.  He  is  "  Heir  of  all  things."  He  is 
creation's  supreme  and  absolute  Lord.  He  brought  all  creatures  out  of  nothing, 
and  by  His  own  will  graduated  the  degree  of  being  each  should  possess ;  and  it  is 
fitting  He  should  have  unlimited  empire  over  all.  As  if  to  prevent  the  possi- 
bility of  any  misconception  regarding  the  relation  of  Christ  to  the  universe,  and 
to  show  that  He  could  not  be  a  part  of  creation  however  exalted  in  degree,  but 
was  essentially  distinct  from  it,  the  apostle  sets  forth  the  Son  of  God  as  the  first, 
cause,  the  active  agent,  and  the  grand  end  of  all  created  things. 

2.  Christ  is  Himself  the  Creator  of  all  things. — (1)  The  conception  of  creation 
originated  in  Christ.  "  For  by  Him  [or  in  Him]  were  all  things  created  "  (ver.  16). 
He  was  the  great  first  cause ;  the  being,  forms,  limitations,  energies  of  all  things  to 
be  were  bound  up  in  Him.  It  rested  with  Himself  to  create  or  not  to  create. 
It  is  thought  by  some  the  Platonic  idea  is  here  shadowed  forth ;  that  the  arche- 
types, the  original  patterns  of  all  things,  were  in  Christ  before  they  were 
created  outwardly.  This  is  simply  a  philosophic  speculation,  and  is  readily 
suggested  by  the  universal  method  of  the  mind  first  forming  a  mental  conception 
within  itself  of  any  object  it  desires  to  body-forth  to  the  outward  eye.  It  is  in 
Christ  we  trace  the  great  work  of  creation  in  its  beginning,  progress,  and  end. 
(2)  The  powers  of  creation  were  distributed  by  Christ.  "  All  things  that  are  in 
heaven,  and  that  are  in  earth  "  (ver.  16).  He  created  the  heavens  also ;  but  those 
things  which  are  in  the  heavens  are  rather  named  because  the  inhabitants  are  more 

391 


Chap.  i.  H0MILE1IC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSI 'ANS. 


noble  than  their  dwellings.  "  Visible,"  things  that  are  evident  to  the  outward 
senses ;  and  "  invisible,"  things  that  may  be  conceived  by  the  understanding. 
"  With  a  view  to  meet  some  peculiar  doctrine  of  the  false  teachers  at  Colossae, 
who  seem  to  have  alleged  that  Christ  was  but  one  of  the  heavenly  powers,  St.  Paul 
breaks  up  the  things  invisible,  and  distributes  them  by  the  words  "  thrones," 
"  dominions,"  "  principalities,"  or  "  powers."  It  may  be  difficult,  and  indeed 
impossible,  for  us  now  fully  to  know  what  the  terms  severally  convey  in  connec- 
tion with  the  several  hierarchies  of  heaven  ;  they  seem  to  point  to  gradations  of 
being  and  to  distinctions  of  official  glory.  Yet  all  these  invisible  beings,  so 
illustrious  as  to  be  seated  on  thrones,  so  great  as  to  be  styled  dominions,  so 
elevated  as  to  be  considered  principalities,  so  mighty  as  to  merit  the  designation 
of  powers,  were  created  by  the  Son  of  God;  and  they  all  acknowledge  His 
supremacy  and  glory.  The  highest  position  in  creation  is  infinitely  below  Him, 
and  there  is  neither  majesty  nor  renown  that  equals  His.  All  created  beings 
occupying  the  loftiest  thrones  throughout  the  vastness  of  immensity  and 
amidst  the  mystery  of  life  do  homage  and  service  to  Christ  Jesus  as  the 
firstborn,  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God"  (Spence).  (3)  Christ  is  Himself 
the  great  end  of  creation.  "All  things  were  created  for  Him"  (ver.  16).  As 
all  creation  emanated  from  Him,  so  does  it  all  converge  again  towards  Him. 
"  The  eternal  Word  is  the  goal  of  the  universe,  as  He  was  the  starting- 
point.  It  must  end  in  unity,  as  it  proceeded  from  unity ;  and  the  centre  of  this 
unity  is  Christ."  The  most  elaborate  and  majestic  machinery  of  the  universe 
and  the  most  highly  gifted  intelligence  alike  exist  only  to  serve  the  ultimate 
purpose  of  creation's  Lord.  All  created  things  gather  their  significance,  dignity, 
and  glory  by  their  connection  with  Him.  Christ  must  be  more  than  a  creature, 
as  the  loftiest  creature  could  not  be  the  end  of  all  created  things.  (Jt  is  anarrjQw 
philosophy  that  teaches  that  all  things  weremajie_fQr  man./'  The  granoTend  of 
all  our  endeavours  should  ever  be  the  glory  of  Christ. 

3.  The  unchanging  eternity  of  Christ. — "  He  is  before  all  things  "  (ver.  17).  Not 
only  is  He  before  Moses  and  before  Abraham,  as  Hedeclared  to  the  Jews  (John  viii.), 
but  He  is  before  all  things.  The  words  refer  not  so  much  to  His  eminence  in 
rank  as  to  duration.  The  terms  He  is,  in  the  Greek,  are  most  emphatic,  the 
one  declaring  His  personality,  the  other  that  His  pre-existence  is  absolute  existence. 
Christ  existed  before  any  created  thing — even  before  time  itself ;  therefore,  from 
eternity.  Knowing  the  tendency  of  men  to  entertain  inferior  notions  of  the 
person  of  Christ,  and  of  the  redemption  He  has  provided,  the  apostle  multiplies 
conceptions  to  represent  His  divine  worth  and  excellency.  He  should  be 
preferred  before  all. 

4.  The  continued  existence  of  creation  depends  on  Christ. — "  And  by  [rather  in] 
Him  all  things  consist"  (ver.  17) — hold  together,  cohere.  He  is  the  principle  of 
cohesion  in  the  universe.  He  impresses  upon  creation  that  unity  and  solidarity 
which  makes  it  a  cosmos  instead  of  a  chaos.  Thus,  to  take  one  instance,  the  action 
of  gravitation,  which  keeps  in  their  places  things  fixed  and  regulates  the  motion 
of  things  moving,  is  an  expression  of  His  mind  (Lightfoot).  The  universe  found 
its  completion  in  Him,  and  is  sustained  and  preserved  every  moment  by  the 
continuous  exercise  of  His  almighty  power.  All  things  hang  on  Christ ;  in  Him 
they  live  and  move  and  have  their  being.  If  He  withdrew  His  upholding  hand, 
everything  would  run  into  confusion  and  ruin.  "  Thou  hidest  Thy  face,  they 
are  troubled  :  Thou  takest  away  their  breath,  they  die,  and  return  to  their 
dust."     In  Him  all  things  consist.     He  is  the  centre  of  life,  force,  motion,  and 

k  rest ;  round  Him  all  things  revolve.     He  imposes  their  limits,  gives  to  them 

/  their  law,  strikes  the  keynote  of  their    harmonies,   blends  and  controls  their 

\  diverse  operations.      He  is  the  All-perfect  in  the  midst  of  imperfection,  the 

^Unchanged  in  the  midst  of  change.     He  is  the  Author  of  human  redemption  ; 

392 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS.  chap.  i. 


became  incarnate,  suffered,  died,  and  rose  again,  and  now  reigns  with  the  Father 
in  glory  everlasting.  He  is  worthy  of  our  loftiest  adoration,  our  humblest 
submission,  our  strongest  confidence,  our  most  ardent  love. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  supremacy  of  the  Creator  and  Preserver  of  all  things  is  absolute 
and  universal. — 2.  Human  redemption  is  grounded  on  the  divinity  of  the  Son  of 
God.  3.  Personal  trust  in  the  Redeemer  brings  the  soul  into  direct  personal 
relation  to  the  Father. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.   15.  Christ  a  Revelation  because  Scale   of   being.      Gradations    in    all 

He  is  the  Equal  of  the  Father —  classes. 

I.  In  His  nature. — The  incarnation.  II.  The  end. — 1.  Heaven  was  created 

II.  In  His  attributes.  for  Him.     As  the  place  of  His  special 

III.  In  His  will. — The  character  of  residence   and   as   the   home    of   His 

Christ  and  His  moral  system.  people. 

IV.  In   His   works. — His   miracles,  2.  Angels  were   created  for  Him. — 

His  death  as  a  sacrifice  for   sin,  His  Messengers  of  His  mercy,  executioners 

resurrection.     1.  How  ungrateful  and  of  His  vengeance. 

unbelieving   have   we  been  !     2..  How  3.  Hell  was  created  for  Him. — The 

zealous  and  devoted  should  we  be  ! —  prison  of  His  justice. 
G.  Brooks.  4.  The  earth  was   created  for  Him. 

— The  scene  of    His  incarnation  and 

Ver.  16.   Christ  the  Author  and  the  atoning      death.         His      mediatorial 

End  of  Creation.  kingdom. 

1.  The  Author. — 1.  The  extent.  5.  The  human  race  was  created  for 
11  All  things."  The  universe,  natural  Him.  —  Man  created,  preserved,  re- 
and  moral.  deemed.       (1)  How  exalted  should  be 

2.  The  variety. — "  Visible  and  in-  our  ideas  of  Christ !  (2)  How  care- 
visible."  The  near  and  the  distant,  fully  should  we  learn  to  view  every- 
the  vast  and  the  minute,  the  material  thing  in  connection  with  Christ ! 
and  the  spiritual.  3.  What  ground  for  confidence,  grati- 

3.  The  orders. — "  Whether  they  be."  tude,  and  fear  ! — Ibid. 


MAIN  IIOMILETICS  OF   VERSE   18. 

The  Relation  of  Christ  to  the  Moral  Creation. 

After  showing  that  Christ  holds  the  position  of  absolute  priority  and  sovereignty 
over  the  whole  universe,  the  apostle  now  proceeds  to  point  out  His  relation  to 
the  principal  part  of  that  whole — the  Church,  as  the  symbol  and  embodiment  of 
the  new,  moral  creation.  From  this  verse  we  learn  that  Christ  is  the  supreme 
Head,  and  primal  life-giving  Source  of  the  Church,  and  as  such  is  invested  with 
universal  pre-eminence. 

I.  Christ  is  the  supreme  Head  of  the  Church — the  new  moral  creation. — 
1.  The  Church  is  the  body  of  Christ.  "The  body,  the  Church."  Much  contro- 
versy has  prevailed  as  to  what  constitutes  the  Church ;  and  the  more  worldly  the 
Church  became,  the  more  confused  the  definition,  the  more  bitter  the  contro- 
versy. The  New  Testament  idea  of  the  Church  is  easily  comprehended.  It  is 
the  whole  body  of  the  faithful  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  are  redeemed  and  regenerated 
by  His  grace — the  aggregate  multitude  of  those  in  heaven  and  on  earth  who 
love,  adore,  and  serve  the  Son  of  God  as  their  Redeemer  and  Lord.  The  word 
eKK\r}(T (a  contains  two  leading  ideas :  the  ordained  unity,  and  the  calling  or 
separating  out  from  the  world.     Three  grand  features  ever  distinguish  the  true 

393 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS. 


Church — unbroken  unity,  essential  purity,  and  genuine  catholicity.     (Cf.  Eph.  i. 
22,  23,  iv.  15,  16;  1  Cor.  xii.  12-27). 

2.  Christ  is  the  Head  of  the  Church. — "  And  He  is  the  Head  of  the  body,  the 
Church."  That  the  world  might  not  be  considered  this  body,  the  word  "  Church  " 
is  added ;  and  the  materialistic  conception  of  a  Church  organism  thus  refuted. 
As  the  Head  of  the  Church — (1)  Christ  inspires  it  with  spiritual  life  and  activity. 
(2)  He  impresses  and  moulds  its  character.  (3)  He  prescribes  and  enforces  its 
laws.  (4)  He  governs  and  controls  its  destinies.  (5)  He  is  the  centre  of  its 
unity. 

II.  Christ  is  the  originating,  fontal  Source  of  the  organic  life  of  the  Church. — 
In  respect  to  the  state  of  grace,  He  is  the  beginning ;  in  respect  to  the  state  of 
glory,  He  is  the  firstborn  from  the  dead.  He  gives  to  the  Church  its  entity, 
form,  history,  and  glory ;  except  in  and  through  Him,  the  Church  could  have  no 
existence. 

1.  He  is  the  Author  of  the  moral  creation. — "  The  beginning."  Christ  has  been 
before  described  as  the  Author  of  the  old  material  creation.  Here  He  is 
announced  as  the  beginning  of  the  new  spiritual  creation.  The  moral  creation 
supplies  the  basis  and  constituent  elements  of  the  Church.  In  the  production, 
progress,  and  final  triumph  of  the  new  creation,  He  will  redress  all  the  wreck 
and  ruin  occasioned  by  the  wrong-doing  of  the  old  creation.  Of  this  new  moral 
creation  Christ  is  the  source,  the  principle,  the  beginning ;  the  fountain  of  life, 
purity,  goodness,  and  joy  to  the  souls  of  men. 

2.  He  is  the  Author  of  the  moral  creation  as  the  Conqueror  of  Death. — "The 
firstborn  from  the  dead."  Sin  introduced  death  into  the  old  creation,  and  the 
insatiable  monster  still  revels  and  riots  amid  the  corruptions  he  perpetually 
generates.  The  Son  of  God,  in  fulfilment  of  the  divine  plan  of  redemption, 
became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross.  He  descended  into 
Hades,  and  placed  Himself  among  the  dead.  On  the  third  day  He  rose  again, 
"  the  firstfruits  of  them  that  slept."  He  was  "  the  firstborn  from  the  dead  "  ; 
the  first  who  had  risen  by  His  own  power ;  the  first  who  had  risen  to  die  no 
more.  By  dying  He  conquered  death  for  Himself  and  all  His  followers.  He  can 
therefore  give  life  to  all  that  constitute  that  Church  of  which  He  is  fittingly  the 
Head,  assure  them  of  a  resurrection  from  the  dead,  of  which  His  own  was  a 
pattern  and  pledge,  and  of  transcendent  and  unfading  glory  with  Himself  in  the 
endless  future. 

III.  The  relation  of  Christ  to  the  Church  invests  Him  with  absolute  pre- 
eminence.— "  That  in  all  things  He  might  have  the  pre-eminence." 

1.  He  is  pre-eminent  in  His  relation  to  the  Father. — He  is  "the  image  of  the 
invisible  God " ;  the  Son  of  His  love,  joined  by  a  bond  to  us  mysterious  and 
ineffable,  and  related  in  a  sense  in  which  no  other  can  be.  He  is  the  first  and 
the  last ;  the  only  divine  Son. 

2.  He  is  pre-eminent  in  the  universe  of  created  beings. — He  existed  before  any 
being  was  created,  and  was  Himself  the  omnipotent  Author  of  all  created  things. 
The  whole  hierarchy  of  heaven  obey  and  adore  Him.  He  is  alone  in  His  complex 
nature  as  our  Emmanuel.  Mystery  of  mysteries ;  in  Him  Deity  and  humanity 
unite  ! 

3.  He  is  pre-eminent  in  His  rule  over  the  realm  of  the  dead. — He  entered  the 
gloomy  territory  of  the  grave,  wrestled  with  and  vanquished  the  King  of 
Terrors,  rose  triumphantly  from  the  dismal  battle-field,  and  is  now  Loid  both 
of  the  dead  and  of  the  living.  "  I  am  He  that  liveth  and  was  dead ;  and,  behold, 
I  am  alive  for  evermore ;  and  have  the  keys  of  Hades  and  of  death  "  (Eev.  i.  18). 

4.  He  is  pre-eminent  in  His  relation  to  the  Church. — The  Church  from  begin- 
ning to  end  is  purely  His  own  creation.  He  sketched  its  first  rough  outline, 
projected  its  design,  constructed  its  organism,  informed  it  with  life,  dowered  it 

394 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS. 


CHAP.  I. 


with  spiritual  riches ;  and  He  will  continue  to  watch  over  and  direct  its  future 
until  He  shall  "  present  it  to  Himself  a  glorious  Church,  not  having  spot  or 
wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing  "  ! 

5.  He  is  pre-eminent  in  the  estimation  and  homage  of  a  ransomed  world. — He  is 
the  central  figure  of  all  history ;  around  Him  all  events  group  themselves,  and 
by  Him  are  stamped  with  their  true  character,  significance,  and  worth.  The 
dream  of  the  ages,  the  teaching  of  figures  and  symbols,  the  shadows  and  forecast- 
ings  of  coming  events,  are  all  dismissed  in  the  effulgent  presence  of  Him  to  whom 
they  all  point,  like  so  many  quivering  index- fingers.  Christ  has  to-day  the 
strongest  hold  upon  the  heart  of  humanity.  His  perplexed  enemies  admire  while 
they  reject  Him ;  the  ever-increasing  multitude  of  His  friends  reverence  and 
adore  Him ;  and  the  era  is  rapidly  advancing  when  to  Him  a  universe  of 
worshippers  shall  bow  the  knee  and  acknowledge  that  "in  all  things  He  has  the 
pre-eminence." 

Lessons. — 1.  The  pre-eminence  of  Christ  entitles  Him  to  universal  obedience. 
2.  The  highest  blessedness  is  found  in  union  with  the  Church  of  Christ. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSE. 


Yer.  18.  The  Church  the  Body  of 
Christ. 

I.  As  the  body  of  Christ  the  Church 
is  one  with  Him. — 1.  One  in  covenant 
dealing  with  God.  2.  One  in  respect  of 
the  principle  of  life.  3.  One  in  history. 
4.  How  Christ  may  be  served  or  perse- 
cuted. 

II.  As  the  body  of  Christ  the 
Church  is  one  in  itself. — 1.  Identity  of 
principle.  2.  Substantial  agreement  in 
faith.  3.  A  visible  association  through 
sympathy. 

III.  As  the  body  of  Christ  the 
Church  has  many  co-operating  and 
mutually  dependent  members. — 1.  The 
members  are  as  numerous  as  are  believers 
or  as  are  offices.  2.  Their  mutual  depen- 
dence and  co-operation  illustrated  in  the 
work  of  spreading  the  gospel.  3.  Let 
each  one  know  his  own  place  and 
duties. 

IV.  As  the  body  of  Christ  the 
Church  must  grow  up  to  completeness 
and  maturity. — 1.  Each  believer  is  first 
a  babe  in  Christ,  and  advances  to  the 
measure  of  the  stature  of  a  man  in 
Christ.  2.  As  a  whole  the  Church  is 
gradually  augmented  and  increased — 
from  Abel  onwards.  3.  To  gather  in 
and  perfect  the  elect  is  the  peculiar  work 
of  time. 

V.  As  the  body  of  Christ  the 
Church  must  be  restored  to  perfect 


soundness  and  health. — 1.  Christ  re- 
ceives the  Church — dead.  2.  The  first 
step  towards  perfect  soundness  is  a 
resurrection.  3.  Hence  each  believer  is 
quickened  with  Christ  in  order  to  be 
healed.  4.  The  bodies  of  the  saints  shall 
likewise  be  perfect. — The  Physician. 
5.  In  heaven  no  one  shall  say,  "  /  am 
sick." 

VI.  As  the  body  of  Christ  the 
Church  is  the  object  of  His  unremit- 
ting care. — 1.  To  provide  for  the  wants 
of  his  body  is   man's   unceasing  care. 

2.  Christ  has  made   ample  provision. 

3.  He  now  ministers  to  His  Church 's 
wants — clothing,  food,  defence,  habita- 
tion. 

VII.  As  the  body  of  Christ  the 
Church  is  the  instrument  through 
which  He  accomplishes  His  purposes. — 
1.  The  body  the  instrument  of  the  heart 
or  soul.  2.  The  Church  the  instrument 
of  Christ.  3.  The  Church  but  the 
instrument.  — Stewart. 

Christ  the  Firstborn  from  the  Dead — 

I.  In  the  dignity  of  His  person. 

II.  Because  He  rose  by  His  own 
power. 

III.  Because  He  is  the  only  one  who 
rose  never  to  die  again. 

IV.  Because  He  has  taken  precedence 
of  His  people  who  all  shall  rise  from 
their  graves  to  glory. 

395 


chap.  i.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  19,  20. 

The  Reconciling  Work  of  the  Great  Mediator. 

After  showing  the  grand  pre-eminence  of  Christ  in  both  the  natural  and 
moral  creation,  and  thus  declaring  the  inferior  and  subordinate  position  of  those 
angelic  powers  whose  nature  and  office  the  false  teachers  in  Colossse  unduly 
extolled,  the  apostle  here  proceeds  to  point  out  the  special  fitness  of  the  great 
Mediator  for  that  lofty  relationship.  It  is  grounded  on  the  fact  that  in  Him  all 
fulness  dwells.     Observe  : — 

1.  The  unique  qualification  of  the  great  Mediator. — 1.  In  Him  all  fulness 
dwells.  The  heretical  teachers  would  reduce  Christ  to  the  level  of  an  angelic 
mediator,  a  simple  evolution  from  the  divine  nature,  and  one  of  the  links  that 
bind  the  finite  to  the  infinite.  They  admitted  there  was  the  manifestation  of 
divine  power  and  glory,  but  that  this  was  only  occasional,  and  not  inherent. 
The  apostle,  in  refuting  this,  asserts  that  the  plenitude — the  grand  totality  of 
Deity — resided  in  Christ,  not  as  a  transient  guest,  but  as  a  permanent  and 
abiding  presence.  "All  fulness."  Well  might  the  profound  and  devout  Bengel 
exclaim,  "  Who  can  fathom  the  depth  of  this  subject  ?  "  In  the  marvellous 
person  of  Jesus  there  is  combined  all  the  fulness  of  humanity  as  well  as  the 
fulness  of  divinity — all  the  beauty,  dignity,  and  excellency  that  replenish  heaven 
and  earth,  and  adorn  the  nature  of  God  and  of  men.  It  is  a  fulness  that  stands 
related  to  all  the  interests  of  the  universe,  and  can  supply  the  moral  necessities 
of  all.  There  is  a  fulness  of  wisdom  to  keep  us  from  error,  fulness  of  grace  to 
preserve  from  apostasy,  fulness  of  joy  to  keep  us  from  despair,  and  fulness  of 
power  to  protect  from  all  evil.  It  penetrates  and  fills  the  vast  universe  of 
intelligent  beings,  and  girds  it  with  a  radiant  circle  of  glory  and  felicity. 

2.  It  is  the  good  pleasure  of  the  Father  that  this  fulness  should  reside  in  the  Son. — 
"For  it  pleased  the  Father"  (ver.  19).  It  was  the  will  and  purpose  of  God  the  Father 
that  Christ,  as  the  Mediator,  should,  in  order  to  accomplish  the  great  work  of 
reconciliation,  be  filled  with  the  plenitude  of  all  divine  and  human  excellencies; 
that  He  should  be  the  grand,  living,  unfailing  reservoir  of  blessing  to  the  whole 
intelligent  universe.  The  Father  is  not  only  in  harmony  with  the  reconciling 
work  of  the  Son,  but  the  whole  merciful  arrangement  was  from  the  first 
suggested,  planned,  and  appointed  by  Him.  The  moving  cause  and  foundation 
of  all  saving  grace  through  the  Son  is  the  good  pleasure  of  the  Father.  It  is 
not  His  good  pleasure  that  any  other  than  Christ  should  be  the  Mediator  of  the 
universe.     We  should  never  seek  or  acknowledge  any  other. 

II.  The  reconciling  work  of  the  great  Mediator. — 1.  The  nature  of  the  reconcilia- 
tion. "To  reconcile  unto  Himself"  (ver.  20).  The  word  "reconcile"  imports  to 
restore  one  to  a  state  of  amity  and  friendship,  to  change  the  relations  of  two 
parties  separated  either  by  one  sided  or  mutual  enmity.  Sin  places  man  at 
enmity  with  God,  and  exposes  him  to  the  divine  opposition  and  anger.  The 
cross  of  Christ,  by  removing  the  cause  of  estrangement,  opens  the  way  of 
reconciliation ;  and  the  penitent,  believing  soul  is  thus  restored  to  the  divine 
favour  and  friendship.  But  the  word  "  reconcile  "  does  not  always  presuppose 
the  existence  of  open  enmity ;  and,  from  the  general  drift  of  the  verse,  the  term 
should  be  interpreted  in  the  most  liberal  sense,  yet  with  the  utmost  caution  and 
reverence. 

2.  The  extent  of  the  reconciliation. — "To  reconcile  all  things  unto  Himself, 
whether  they  be  things  in  earth  or  things  in  heaven  "  (ver.  20).  It  was  on  the 
earth  where  the  enmities  first  arose ;  therefore  it  is  put  first.  The  humanity  of 
Christ  bringing  all  creatures  around  it  unites  them  to  God  in  a  b3nd  which  never 
before  existed — a  bond  which  has  its  origin  in  the  mystery  of  redemption.     Thus 

396 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS.  chap.  I. 


all  things  in  heaven  and  earth  feel  the  effect  of  man's  renovation.     In  Christ,  the 
great  Reconciler,  meet  and  merge  the  discordant  elements  which  sin  had  intro- 
duced (see  Bengel  and  Eadie).     The  false  teachers  aimed  at  effecting  a  partial 
reconciliation   between    God    and    man,    through   the   interposition   of   angelic 
mediators.     The  apostle  speaks  of  an  absolute  and  complete  reconciliation   of 
universal  nature  to  God,  effected  through  the  mediation  of  the  incarnate  Word. 
Their  mediators  were  ineffective  because  they  were  neither  human  nor  divine. 
The  true  Mediator  must  be  both  human  and  divine.     The  whole  universe  of 
things  material,  as  well  as  spiritual,  shall  be  restored  to  harmony  with  God. 
How  far  this  restoration  of  universal  nature  may  be  subjective,  as  involved  in 
the  changed  perceptions  of  man  thus  brought  into  harmony  with  God,  and  how 
far  it  may  have  an  objective  and  independent  existence,  it  were  vain  to  speculate 
(Lightfoot).    With  regard  to  this  reconciliation,  we  may  safely  say  it  includes,  with 
much  more  that  is  too  high  for  us  to  understand,  the  following  truths  :  (1)  Sinful 
creatures  on  earth  are  reconciled  to  God  in  Christ.     For  the  degenerate   and 
guilty  children  of  men  there  is  a  Keconciler  and  a  way  of  reconciliation,  so  that 
wrath  is  turned  aside  and  friendship  restored.     (2)  Sinful  and  sinless  or  unf alien 
creatures  are  reconciled  to  each  other,  and  brought  together  again  in  Christ. 
Bengel  says :  "  It  is  certain  that  the  angels,  the  friends  of  God,  were  the  enemies 
of  men  when  they  were  in  a  state  of  hostility  against  God."     The  discord  and 
disunion  introduced  into  the  moral  universe  by  sin  are  overcome  by  the  Lord 
Jesus.     (3)  Sinless  and  unfallen  creatures  are  brought  nearer  to  God  in  Christ, 
and,  through  His  reconciling  work  and  His  infinite  fulness  of  grace,  are  con- 
firmed  for   ever   in    their   loyalty    and    love.     In    Christ,    the   Redeemer    and 
Keconciler,  they  have  views  of  the  divine  nature,  character,  and  glory  they  never 
had  before,  and  which  they  can  nowhere  else  obtain  (Spe?ice).     It  needed  such  a 
Mediator  as  Jesus,  gifted  with  the  highest  divine  and  human  powers,  to  restore 
the  tone  and  harmony  of  a  discordant  universe,  and  tune  every  created  spirit  to 
the  keynote  of  sweetest  celestial  music.     The  true  melody  of  acceptable  praise  is 
learned  only  in  the  ardent,  loving  adoration  of  the  Son  of  God. 

III.  The  means  by  which  the  reconciliation  is  effected. — "And  having  made 
peace  through  the  blood  of  His  cross  "  (ver.  20).  To  make  peace  is  the  same  thing 
as  to  reconcile  ;  and  the  death  of  Christ — the  shedding  of  His  blood  on  the  cross — 
was  the  method  by  which,  in  the  infinite  wisdom  of  God,  the  peace- producing 
reconciliation  is  secured.  It  vas  the  voluntary  self-sacrifice  of  Himself  on  the 
cross  that  constituted  Jesus  the  grand  reconciling  Mediator  of  the  universe.  "  All 
things  are  of  God,  who  hath  reconciled  us  to  Himself  by  Jesus  Christ"  (2  Cor. 
v.  18).  Only  by  suffering  could  suffering  be  assuaged ;  only  by  dying  could  death 
itself  be  conquered.  The  cross  is  therefore  the  symbol  of  peace,  of  power,  of 
triumph.  There  the  law  was  fulfilled  and  magnified,  the  integrity  of  the  divine 
perfections  vindicated,  justice  was  satisfied,  mercy  found  its  most  bounteous 
outlet,  and  love  its  crowning  joy.  The  cross  is  the  source  of  every  blessing  to 
the  fallen ;  the  centre  round  which  a  disordered  universe  again  revolves  in 
beauteous  order  and  rejoicing  harmony ;  the  loadstone  that  draws  the  trembling 
sinner  to  the  needed  and  unutterable  repose. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  great  Mediator  has  every  qualification  for  His  stupendous 
work.  2.  The  reconciliation  of  a  disorganised  universe  is  beyond  the  poiver  of  any 
subordinate  agent.  3.  Rebellious  man  can  be  restored  to  peace  with  God  only  as  he 
yields  himself  up  to  the  great  Mediator. 


397 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSI 'ANS. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

"Ver.  19.  The  Fulness  of  Christ —  Ver.  20.  Christ  the  Reconciler — 

I.  Endowed  with    all    divine  and  I.  Restored  the  friendship  between 
human  excellencies.  God  and  man  broken  by  sin. 

II.  Necessary    to    accomplish    His  II.  Accomplished  His  work  by  the 
reconciling  work.  voluntary  sacrifice  of  His  life. 

III.  Was  required  and  approved  by  III.  Introduces    harmony    into    a 
God  the  Father.  disrupted  universe. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  21,  22. 

The  Personal  Blessings  of  Reconciliation. 

Having  shown  the  relation  of  Christ  to  God,  to  the  whole  creation,  and  to  the 
Church,  and  His  connection  with  all  moral  beings,  the  writer  now  proceeds  to 
point  out  the  relation  of  Christ  to  individual  man  in  delivering  him  from  the 
fetters  of  sin,  and  opening  up  the  way  of  reconciliation  with  an  outraged  but 
loving  Deity.  In  this  passage  we  have  a  description  of  the  attitude  of  sinful  man 
towards  God  and  the  method  of  His  restoration.     We  learn  that : — 

1.  Sin  has  placed  man  in  antagonism  to  God. — 1.  Man  is  estranged  from  God. 
"  And  you  that  were  sometime  alienated  "  (ver.  21).  Sin  severs  the  soul  from  God. 
The  principle  of  cohesion — the  consciousness  of  rectitude  which  God  implanted  in 
man  in  his  sinless  state — is  weakened,  and  the  sinner,  breaking  away  from  the 
centre  of  all  goodness,  drifts  into  an  ever-widening  and  ever-darkening  wilderness 
of  alienation  and  evil.  Sin  places  man  at  an  infinite  distance  from  God,  leads  him 
to  shun  the  divine  presence  and  disregard  the  divine  overtures.  A  state  of 
alienation  is  a  state  of  danger ;  it  is  a  state  of  spiritual  death ;  and  yet  it  is 
painful  to  observe  how  few  in  this  state  are  conscious  of  their  awful  peril. 

2.  Man  is  hostile  to  God. — "Enemies  in  your  mind"  (ver.  21).  The  enmity 
follows  from  the  estrangement,  and  both  have  their  seat  in  the  mind — "in  the 
original  and  inmost  force  of  the  mind  which  draws  after  it  the  other  faculties." 
The  mind  of  man  opposes  the  mind  of  God,  sets  up  a  rival  kingdom,  and  organises 
an  active  rebellion  against  the  divine  Ruler.  "  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against 
God  "  (Rom.  viii.  7).  If  the  hostility  is  not  always  flagrantly  open,  it  is  in  the 
mind  ;  the  fountain  of  all  sin  is  there.  To  be  a  stranger  to  God  is  to  be  an  enemy 
of  God  :  "  He  that  is  not  with  Me  is  against  Me."  The  sinner  is  his  own  greatest 
enemy.  It  is  a  vain  thing  to  fight  against  God ;  terrible  will  be  the  vengeance 
He  will  ere  long  wreak  upon  His  enemies. 

3.  Man's  estrangement  and  hostility  are  evident  in  his  actions. — "  By  wicked 
works  "  (ver.  21).  Man  is  stimulated  by  his  sinful  mind  to  perpetrate  the  most 
outrageous  acts  of  rebellion  against  God,  and  to  indulge  in  the  most  fiendish  cruelty 
towards  his  fellow-man.  But  there  are  "  wicked  works  "  that  may  not  figure  in  the 
criminal  columns  of  the  newspapers,  nor  be  detected  by  the  most  vigilant  watcher. 
To  cherish  envy,  hatred,  malice,  and  all  uncharitableness  is  equally  heinous  in 
the  sight  of  God,  and  an  unmistakable  evidence  of  hostility  towards  Him.  Sin 
conceived  in  the  mind  will,  sooner  or  later,  manifest  itself  in  action. 

II.  Man  is  reconciled  to  God  in  Christ. — 1.  The  distinguished  blessing.  "  Yet 
now  hath  He  reconciled  "  (ver.  21).  To  effect  this  all  that  is  necessary  is  to  persuade 
the  sinner  to  cease  his  rebellion  and  submit  to  God.  In  Christ  God  is  reconciled  to 
the  sinner  ;  there  is  no  need  to  persuade  Him.  He  is  love ;  the  sinner  is  enmity. 
He  is  light ;  the  sinner  is  darkness.  He  is  nigh  unto  the  sinner,  but  the  sinner 
is  afar  off.     The  great  object  is  to  destroy  the  sinner's  enmity,  that  he  may  have 

398 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS.  chap.  i. 


divine  love ;  bring  him  from  darkness  into  divine  light,  bring  him  from  his  evil 
works  nigh  unto  God,  and  reconciliation  is  the  result  (Biblical  Museum).  The 
amity  existing  between  the  soul  and  God,  and  which  sin  had  interrupted,  is  now 
restored.  Dear  as  are  the  friendships  of  earth,  none  can  equal  friendship  with 
God. 

"  He  calls  a  worm  His  friend, 
He  calls  Himself  my  God ; 
And  He  shall  save  me  to  the  end 
Through  Jesu's  blood." 

The  loftiest  communion  of  the  soul  with  God  is  renewed.  In  this  the  soul  finds 
its  strength,  consolation,  life,  rapture.  How  much  does  that  man  lose  whose 
heart  is  not  reconciled  to  God  ? 

2.  The  gracious  medium  of  the  blessing. — "  In  the  body  of  His  flesh  through 
death  "  (ver.  22).  The  apostle  here  refers  in  the  most  explicit  terms  to  the  sufferings 
and  death  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  shows  that  the  great  work  of  reconciliation  was 
effected  in  His  body,  and  through  death,  for  that  body  was  crucified  and  actually 
died.  The  apostle  perhaps  aimed  at  correcting  certain  pseudo-spiritualistic 
notions  regarding  the  person  of  Christ,  busily  propagated  by  the  false  teachers ; 
some  of  whom  held  that  Christ  was  an  angelic  emanation  which  animated  the 
man  Jesus  for  a  time  and  withdrew  from  Him  before  He  suffered.  While  main- 
taining the  proper  deity  and  glory  of  Christ's  nature,  the  apostle  plainly  indicates 
that  the  divine  method  of  reconciliation  was  by  the  incarnation  and  sacrificial 
death  of  Christ.  He  thus  exalts  the  significance  and  value  of  the  death  of  Christ. 
Reconciliation  was  not  accomplished  by  the  faultless  example  of  Christ's  life  or 
the  supernal  wisdom  of  His  teaching,  but  by  His  crucifixion  and  death.  The 
cross,  with  its  unfathomable  mystery,  is  to  them  that  perish  foolishness;  but  to 
them  that  believe  it  is  still  the  power  and  wisdom  of  God. 

III.  The  divine  purpose  in  reconciliation  is  to  promote  man's  highest  blessed- 
ness.— The  magnificence  of  the  believer's  future  career  will  be  in  marked  contrast 
with  the  obscurity  and  imperfection  of  the  present ;  but  even  in  this  lif e  he  is 
lifted  by  the  reconciling  grace  of  God  to  a  high  standard  of  moral  excellence. 
The  terms  here  employed,  while  referring  to  the  same  spiritual  state,  delineate 
its  different  aspects. 

1.  The  highest  blessedness  of  man  consists  in  his  moral  purity — "  To  present  you 
holy  "  (ver.  22).  This  shows  the  condition  of  the  soul  in  relation  to  Gcd  ;  it  is  freely 
offered  to  Him  as  a  living  sacrifice ;  the  inward  consciousness  is  wholly  conse- 
crated to  the  permanent  indwelling  of  the  Holy  One  ;  every  thought,  affection, 
and  aspiration  of  the  soul  is  hallowed ;  the  whole  man  is  enriched,  ennobled,  and 
radiant  with  a  holy  character. 

2.  The  highest  blessedness  of  man  consists  in  his  personal  blamelessness. — "  Un- 
blamable "  (ver.  22).  This  aspect  of  character  has  reference  to  one's 'self  ;  it  is  the 
development  in  the  outward  life  of  the  purity  and  consecration  of  the  heart ;  it 
is  a  sacrificial  term,  and  means  without  blemish.  The  soul  is  inspired  with  a 
sense  of  integrity,  and  of  always  acting  for  the  best.  When  Socrates  was  asked, 
just  before  his  trial,  why  he  did  not  prepare  himself  for  his  defence,  he  calmly 
answered,  "I  have  been  doing  nothing  else  all  my  life."  A  noble,  blameless  life 
is  its  own  defence. 

3.  The  highest  blessedness  of  man  consists  in  his  freedom  from  censure. — "  Un- 
reprovable  in  His  sight "  (ver.  22).  This  feature  of  a  holy  character  has  reference 
to  others.  If  man  thus  purified  and  blessed  can  bear  the  piercing  glance  of  Him 
whose  scrutiny  no  defect  can  escape,  his  character  is  unchallengeable.  To  be 
accepted  and  approved  of  Gojl  places  him  beyond  the  accusations  of  man  or 
demon  ;  the  subtle  insinuations  of  the  Great  Accuser  are  powerless  to  hurt.  "  It 
is  God  that  justifieth  ;  who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  "     To  be  holy,  unblamable, 

399 


CHAP.  I. 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSI ANS. 


and  unreprovable  in  the  sight  of  God  is  to  enjoy  the  highest  honour  and  com- 
pletest  bliss.     This  is  the  ultimate  result  of  reconciliation  in  Christ. 

Lessons. — 1.  Sin  is  the  great  foe  of  God  and  man.  2.  The  death  of  Christ  is  the 
means  of  reconciling  sinful  man  to  God.  3.  The  aim  of  reconciliation  is  to  produce 
an  irreproachable  character. 


GERM  NOTES   ON  THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  21.  Reconciliation  by  Christ. 

I.  Estrangement. — 1.  The  cause — by 
wicked  works.  2.  The  result — not 
merely  that  God  is  angry,  but  we  have 
become  enemies  to  God. 

II.  Keconciliation. — 1.  Christ  has 
reconciled  man  to  God.  2.  He  hath 
reconciled  man  to  man.  3.  He  hath 
reconciled  man  to  himself  4.  He  hath 
reconciled  man  to  duty. — Robertson. 


Ver.  22.  Holiness  the  Supreme  End  of 
Reconciliation. 

I.  Holiness  an  inward  state  and  an 
outward  result. — "  Holy,  unblamable 
and  unreprovable." 

II.  Holiness  alone  can  satisfy  God. 
— "  In  His  sight." 

III.  Holiness  is  the  final  completion 
of  the  soul. — "  To  present  you." 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF   VERSE  23. 

The  Condition  of  Man's  Final  Blessedness. 

The  ripest  fruits  can  only  be  produced  and  gathered  by  careful  and  unremitting 
culture;  so  the  enjoyment  of  the  final  blessings  of  reconciliation  is  conditioned 
upon  continued  allegiance  to  the  gospel  and  the  diligent  practice  of  its  precepts. 
We  are  taught  in  this  verse  that  the  ultimate  presentation  to  God  of  a  perfectly 
holy  and  blameless  character  depends  upon  the  believer  s  firm  and  persevering 
attachment  to  the  gospel.     Observe  : — 

I.  Man's  final  blessedness  depends  upon  his  unswerving  continuance  in  the 
faith. — The  faith  is  a  comprehensive  term  ;  it  is  inclusive  of  all  the  great  saving 
truths  of  the  gospel,  and  of  man's  many-sided  relation  to  them.  There  is 
implied  : 

1.  A  continuance  in  the  doctrines  of  the  faith. — What  a  man  believes  has  a 
powerful  influence  in  moulding  his  character.  The  truths  submitted  to  our 
faith  shed  light  upon  matters  of  transcendent  import  and  worth.  The  baffled 
and  inquiring  mind,  straining  with  painful  eagerness  after  light,  finds  its 
satisfaction  and  rest  amid  the  soothing  radiance  of  revealed  truth.  "  In 
returning  and  rest  shall  ye  be  saved"  (Isa.  xxx.  15).  Unbelief  lures  the  soul 
from  its  restful  confidence,  sets  it  adrift  amidst  the  cross  currents  of  bewilder- 
ment and  doubt,  and  exposes  it  to  moral  shipwreck  and  irrevocable  loss.  The 
soul's  eternal  safety  is  ensured,  not  by  an  infatuated  devotion  to  mere  opinions 
about  certain  dogmas,  but  by  an  intelligent,  firm,  and  constant  faith  in  divine 
verities. 

2.  A  continuance  in  the  profession  of  the  faith. — The  believer  is  a  witness  for 
the  truth ;  and  it  is  an  imperative  duty  to  bear  testimony  for  Christ  before  the 
world  (Rom.  x.  9,  10).  This  is  done  when  we  unite  in  fellowship  and  service 
with  the  external  Church  of  Christ  on  earth.  The  Church,  as  the  representa- 
tive of  Christ,  witnesses  for  Him  in  the  life  and  conduct  of  its  individual  members. 
There  is  nothing  binding  as  to  the  special  form  this  witness-bearing  should  take 
in  each  particular  case ;  nor  is  any  man  compelled,  for  the  sake  of  profession,  to 
wed  himself  to  any  particular  branch  of  the  Church  catholic.  There  may  be 
reasons  that  render  it  justifiable,  and  even  necessary,  for  a  man  to  sever  himself 
from  any  given  religious  community  and  join  another ;  but  on  no  conceivable 

400 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.  chap.  i. 


ground  can  he  be  liberated  from  the  duty  of  an  open  profession  of  his  faith  in 
Christ;  his  future  acceptability  to  God  hinges  on  his  fidelity  in  this  duty 
(Matt.  x.  32). 

3.  A  continuance  in  the  practice  of  the  faith. — Faith  supplies  the  motive  and 
rule  of  all  right  conduct.  The  test  of  all  preceptive  enactment  and  profession  is 
in  the  life.  The  Christian  character  is  developed  and  perfected,  not  by  believing 
or  professing,  but  by  doing  the  will  of  God.  The  rewards  of  the  future  will  be 
distributed  according  to  our  deeds  (Rom.  ii.  6-10). 

4.  Continuance  in  the  faith  must  be  permanent. — "  Grounded  and  settled." 
The  edifice,  to  be  durable,  must  be  well  founded,  that  it  may  settle  into  a  state 
of  firmness  and  solidity ;  so  faith,  in  order  to  survive  the  storms  and  temptations 
of  this  world,  and  participate  in  the  promised  good  of  the  future,  must  be  securely 
grounded  and  settled  in  the  truth.  In  order  to  permanency  in  the  faith,  the 
truth  must  be — (1)  Apprehended  intelligently .  (2)  Embraced  cordially.  (3)  Main- 
tained courageously. 

II.  Man's  final  blessedness  depends  upon  his  unchanging  adherence  to  the 
gospel  hope. — 1.  The  gospel  reveals  a  bright  future.  It  inspires  the  hope  of  the 
resurrection  of  the  body,  and  of  the  glorification  of  it  and  the  soul  together  in 
the  eternal  life  of  the  future.  Faith  and  hope  are  inseparably  linked  together ; 
they  mutually  succour  and  sustain  each  other  ;  they  rise  or  fall  together.  Hope 
is  the  unquestioning  expectation  of  the  fruition  of  those  things  which  we  steadily 
believe.  It  is  compared  to  an  anchor,  which,  cast  within  the  veil,  fastened  and 
grounded  in  heaven,  holds  our  vessel  firm  and  steady  amid  the  agitations  and 
storms  of  life's  tempestuous  sea.  The  gospel  is  the  only  source  of  genuine, 
deathless  hope ;  all  hopes  grounded  elsewhere  wither  and  perish. 

2.  The  gospel  to  be  effectual  must  come  in  contact  with  the  individual  mind. — 
"  Which  ye  have  heard."  Epaphras  had  declared  to  them  the  divine  message. 
It  had  been  brought  to  them ;  they  had  not  sought  it.  Having  heard  and 
received  the  gospel,  to  relinquish  its  blessings  would  be  inexcusable  and  ungrate- 
ful. In  some  way,  either  by  direct  preaching  or  otherwise,  the  gospel  must  come 
to  man.  There  is  no  power  of  moral  reformation  in  the  human  heart  itself ;  the 
germinant  principle  of  a  better  life  must  come  from  without ;  it  is  conveyed  in 
the  gospel  word. 

3.  The  gospel  is  adapted  to  universal  man. — u  Which  was  preached  to  every 
creature  which  is  under  heaven."  Already  it  had  spread  into  every  part  of  the 
then  known  world,  and  its  power  was  felt  in  every  province  of  the  Roman  empire. 
The  fine  prophetic  instinct  of  the  apostle  saw  the  universal  tendency  of  the 
gospel,  and,  in  spirit,  anticipated  the  fulfilment  of  its  generous  mission.  His 
motive  is  to  emphasise  the  universality  of  the  unchangeable  gospel  which  is 
offered  without  reserve  to  all  alike,  and  to  appeal  to  its  publicity  and  progress  as 
the  credential  and  guarantee  of  its  truth.  It  is  adapted  to  all  men ;  it  pro- 
claims its  message  in  all  lands,  and  is  destined  to  win  the  world  to  Christ.  The 
faith  and  hope  of  the  believer  are  based,  not  upon  the  uncertain  declarations  of 
false  teachers,  but  upon  that  gospel,  which  is  unchangeable  in  its  character  and 
universal  in  its  appeal  and  adaptability  to  humanity ;  a  strong  reason  is  thus 
furnished  for  personal  steadfastness. 

4.  The  gospel  invested  the  apostle  with  an  office  of  high  authority. — "  Whereof  I 
Paul  am  made  a  minister."  Paul  participated  in  the  blessings  of  the  gospel; 
he  had  felt  its  transforming  power,  and  from  his  personal  experience  of  its 
preciousness  could,  with  the  greater  assurance  and  force,  exhort  the  Colossians  to 
continue  in  the  faith.  But  in  addition  to  this  the  gospel  was  committed  to  the 
apostle  as  a  sacred  trust  and  for  faithful  ministration  ;  and  while  dwelling  on 
the  broad  charity  of  the  gospel  as  involving  the  offer  of  grace  to  the  Gentiles,  he 
is  impressed  with  the  dignity  and  responsibility  of  his  office  as  he  interjects, 

D  D  401 


chap.  i.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSI 'ANS. 


somewhat  abruptly,  but  with  exquisite  modesty,  the  words,  "  Whereof  I  Paul 
am  made  a  minister."  It  has  been  said  of  man  that  he  is  the  priest  and  inter- 
preter of  nature  ;  that  it  is  his  function  to  observe  and  test  phenomena,  and 
interpret  the  laws  that  govern  the  material  world.  Another  writer  has  said 
that  "  man  is  the  organ  of  revelation  for  the  Godhead."  God  can  find  no 
adequate  form  of  revelation  for  Himself  in  the  impersonal  forces  of  nature ;  only 
through  a  being  in  His  own  image  can  He  unfold  to  the  universe  His  adorable 
character.  But  the  highest  office  to  which  man  can  be  elevated  is  to  be  a 
ministrant  of  gospel  light  and  grace  to  his  fellow-men. 

5.  There  is  an  implied  possibility  of  relinquishing  our  hold  of  the  gospel  hope. 
— "  Be  nob  moved  away  from  the  hope  of  the  gospel."  The  words  do  not 
necessarily  imply  doubt,  but  suggest  the  necessity  for  constant  circumspection, 
vigilance,  and  care.  The  multiplicity  and  fulness  of  our  blessings  may  prove  a 
snare  to  us  ;  prosperity  tempts  us  to  relax  watchfulness,  and  we  are  in  danger  of 
becoming  a  prey  to  the  wiles  of  the  wicked  one.  Our  retention  of  the  gospel 
hope  is  rendered  immovable  by  constant  waiting  upon  God  in  fervent  prayer, 
by  a  growing  acquaintance  with  the  word  of  promise,  by  continually  anticipating 
in  thought  the  bliss  of  the  future. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  gospel  provides  the  surest  "basis  for  faith  and  hope.  2.  Man's 
ultimate  blessedness  depends  on  his  continued  fidelity. 

MAIN  HOMILETIC S   OF   VERSE  24. 

The  Joy  of  Suffering  J or  the  Church. 

A  stolid  indifference  to  suffering  and  a  heroic  endurance  of  the  same  were  not 
unknown  to  the  ancient  pagans  ;  but  it  is  Christianity  alone  that  has  taught  us 
to  rejoice  in  afflictions ;  it  supplies  an  ecstasy  of  emotion  that  renders  us  oblivious 
for  the  time  being  of  encompassing  trials.  The  apostle,  as  he  pondered  over  the 
mighty  work  of  reconciliation,  and  as  he  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  amazing  extent 
of  divine  mercy,  could  not  but  rejoice  even  in  his  sufferings.  In  this  verse  he 
expresses  his  joy  that,  in  suffering  for  the  Church,  he  supplements  that  which  was 
lacking  in  the  afflictions  of  Christ.     Observe  : — 

1.  The  representative  character  of  the  apostle's  sufferings. — 1.  The  apostle 
represented  the  suffering  Saviour.  "The  afflictions  of  Christ."  We  are  not  to 
suppose  that  the  sufferings  of  Christ  were  incomplete  in  themselves  or  in  their 
value  as  constituting  a  sufficient  atonement.  The  passion  of  Christ  was  the  one 
full,  perfect,  and  sufficient  sacrifice,  oblation,  and  satisfaction,  for  the  sins  of  the 
whole  world.  In  this  sense  there  could  be  no  deficiency  in  Christ's  sufferings,  for 
Christ's  sufferings  being  different  in  kind  from  those  of  His  servants,  the  two  are 
incommensurable.  Neither  the  apostle  nor  any  other  could  represent  the 
expiatory  and  sacrificial  aspect  of  the  Redeemer's  sufferings.  But  while  His 
pergonal  sufferings  are  over,  His  afflictions  in  His  people  still  continue.  He  so 
thoroughly  identifies  Himself  with  them  that  their  trials,  sorrows,  persecutions, 
and  afflictions  become  His  own.  The  apostle  represented  the  suffering  Saviour  in 
what  he  endured  for  Christ  and  the  Church.  Thus  he  declared  to  the  Corinth- 
ians, "  The  sufferings  of  Christ  abound  in  us."  The  Church  to-day  is  the 
representative  of  the  suffering  Saviour,  and  so  completely  is  He  identified  with 
His  people  that  He  endures  in  them  the  pangs  of  hunger  and  thirst,  shares  their 
sickness  and  imprisonment,  and  reckons  every  act  of  kindness  done  to  them  as 
done  to  Himself  (Matt.  xxv.). 

2.  The  sufferings  of  the  apostle  supplemented  what  was  lacking  in  the  afflictions 
of  Christ. — "  And  fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ  in  my 
flesh."  In  harmony  with  the  representative  character  of  the  Church,  we  can 
understand  how  the  afflictions  of  every  saint  and  martyr  do  supplement  the 

402 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.  chap.  i. 


afflictions  of  Christ.  Every  age  of  the  Church  has  its  measure  of  suffering.  The 
Church  is  built  up  by  repeated  acts  of  self-denial  in  successive  individuals  and 
successive  generations.  They  continue  the  work  which  Christ  began.  They 
bear  their  part,  and  supplement  what  is  deficient  in  the  sufferings  of  Christ 
(2  Cor.  i.  7;  Phil.  hi.  10).  As  an  apostle,  Paul  was  a  representative  man,  and 
his  share  in  filling  up  what  was  wanting  in  these  afflictions  was  considerable. 
In  his  own  flesh  he  bore  unexampled  hardship,  indignities,  and  distress.  "  In 
labours  more  abundant,  in  stripes  above  measure,  in  prison  more  frequent,  in 
deaths  oft."  The  great  Head  of  the  Church  was  made  perfect  through  suffering ; 
so  must  the  body  be  in  all  its  relations  and  development.  Through  tribulation, 
more  or  less  evident  and  intense,  we  must  enter  the  kingdom.  Suffering  in  itself 
has  no  virtue  to  elevate  moral  character ;  it  is  effective  to  this  end  only  as  it 
tends  to  fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ,  only  as  it  is  borne 
for  Christ,  and  in  .the  Spirit  of  Christ.  The  great  Mediator  suffered  to  effect  our 
salvation;  and  His  people,  on  their  part,  till  up  the  suffering  needed  for  the 
perfection  of  their  spiritual  life  and  for  the  full  display  of  the  divine  glory. 

II.  The  vicarious  character  of  the  apostle's  sufferings. — "  For  His  body's  sake, 
which  is  the  Church."  The  greater  part  of  the  suffering  of  the  believer  in  this 
world  is  vicarious — is  endured  on  behalf  of  others.  It  is  thus  we  most  nearly 
approach  the  spirit  and  example  of  Christ.  St.  Paul,  as  the  pioneer  missionary, 
the  wise  and  edifying  instructor,  the  diligent  and  anxious  overseer,  occupied  a 
prominent  and  important  position  among  the  Churches,  and  his  sufferings  on 
their  behalf  would  benefit  them  in  many  ways. 

1.  The  apostle's  sufferings  for  the  Church  confirmed  the  faith  of  her  converts. — 
Thousands  are  shy  in  embracing  Christianity,  because  they  shrink  from  the 
suffering  it  seems  to  involve  ;  thousands  more  retire  from  the  Christian  profession 
for  the  same  reason.  An  example  like  that  of  Paul's — a  man  profoundly  sincere, 
intensely  earnest,  calm  and  unmoved  by  the  stoutest  opposition,  and  triumphant 
amid  acutest  sufferings — encourages  the  timid  and  strengthens  and  confirms  the 
tempted  and  wavering. 

2.  The  apostle's  sufferings  were  for  the  consolation  of  the  Church. — Writing  to 
the  Corinthians,  he  says :  "  Whether  we  be  afflicted,  it  is  for  your  consolation 
and  salvation."  Suffering  makes  us  more  capable  of  sympathising  with  others. 
"  Great  hearts  can  only  be  made  by  great  troubles.  The  spade  of  trouble  digs 
the  reservoir  of  comfort  deeper,  and  makes  more  room  for  the  water  of  consola- 
tion." The  richest  anointing  of  divine  comfort  is  bestowed  in  the  moment  of 
severest  suffering,  and  the  consolation  of  one  is  the  consolation  of  many.  When 
Mr.  James  Bainham,  who  suffered  under  the  reign  of  Henry  VIIL,  was  in  the 
midst  of  the  flames  which  had  half  consumed  his  arms  and  legs,  he  said  aloud  : 
"  Oh,  ye  Papists,  ye  look  for  miracles,  and  here  now  you  may  see  a  miracle ;  for  in 
this  fire  I  feel  no  more  pain  than  if  I  were  in  a  bed  of  down,  but  it  is  to  me  a 
bed  of  roses  ! " 

3.  The  apostle's  sufferings  for  the  Church  tended  to  promote  her  increase.— -The 
more  the  Egyptians  afflicted  the  Hebrews  the  more  they  multiplied  and  grew. 
The  devil's  way  of  extinguishing  goodness  is  God's  way  of  advancing  it.  The 
apostle  could  testify,  in  the  midst  of  his  sufferings,  that  "the  things  which 
have  happened  to  me  have  fallen  out  rather  unto  the  furtherance  of  the  gospel. * 
Suffering  seals  the  word  spoken  with  a  sacred  and  impressive  significance.  Many 
a  convert  has  been  won  to  the  truth  by  the  irresistible  example  of  a  suffering  life. 

III.  The  high-toned  spirit  of  the  apostle's  sufferings. — "  Who  now  rejoice  in 
my  suffering  for  you."  Nature  shrinks  from  suffering.  It  is  altogether  above 
nature  to  triumph  in  suffering.  It  is  Christianity  alone  that  lifts  the  spirit  into 
the  tranquil  region  of  patient  endurance  and  inspires  us  with  joy  in  tribulation. 
It  is  not  a  love  of  suffering  for  its  own  sake — not  a  mad,  morbid  craving  for  the 

403 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIAN.S. 


ghastly  honours  of  a  self -sought  martyrdom  ;  but  there  is  a  nameless  charm 
about  the  truths  of  Christianity  that  exalts  the  mind,  thrills  the  soul,  and 
transmutes  sorrow  into  joy.  Paul  was  imprisoned  at  Rome,  bound  in  a  chain 
for  the  gospel,  when  he  wrote  this  epistle  ;  but  as  the  thoughts  suggested  by  his 
theme  grew  in  full-orbed  magnificence  before  his  mental  vision — as  he  contem- 
plated the  lavish  wealth  of  God's  mercy  in  the  call  of  the  Gentiles  who  constituted 
the  greater  portion  of  the  world's  population — and  as  he  saw  all  the  glory  of 
being  allowed  to  share,  and  even  to  supplement,  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  he  rose 
above  the  consideration  of  his  own  personal  trials,  and  in  a  sudden  outburst  of 
thanksgiving  could  exclaim,  "  Noiv  I  rejoice  in  my  sufferings  for  you."  Let  us 
not  repine  at  our  affiictions.  Not  only  is  our  own  soul  chastened  and  purified  ; 
but  every  pang,  every  tear,  every  trial  in  our  lot,  is  a  contribution  to  the  filling 
up  of  that  which  is  still  behind  in  the  afflictions  of  Christ.  It  baptises  suffering 
with  a  new  meaning,  and  arrays  it  in  a  new  dignity,  when  it  is  viewed  as  a 
grand  means  of  promoting  the  perfection,  the  purity,  and  unfading  glory  of  the 
whole  Church. 

Lessons. — 1.   It  is  an  unspeakable  honour  to  suffer  for  the  Church  of  Christ. 
2.  The  personal  experience  of  the  grace  of  Christ  renders  suffering  for  Him  a 
joy.     3.  The  glory  of  the  future  will  outweigh  all  we  have  suffered  for  the  Church 
below. 

MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses   25—27. 

The  Pre-eminent  Honour  and  Sublime  Theme  of  the  Christian  Ministry. 

The  highest  dignity  and  most  solemn  responsibility  are  conferred  on  man  when 
he  is  entrusted  with  the  ministration  of  God's  word.  It  is  the  infinite  condescension 
of  God  that  we  have  this  treasure  in  earthen  vessels.  He  who,  in  the  exercise 
of  His  unchallengeable  wisdom,  calls  man  to  this  work,  can  alone  inspire  and 
endow  him  with  the  necessary  intellectual  and  moral  fitness  for  the  awful  charge. 
In  these  verses  we  learn  that  the  apostle  was  appointed  a  minister  of  the  Church — 
a  steward  in  God's  household — charged  to  preach  without  reserve  the  whole 
gospel  of  God,  to  dispense  to  the  Gentiles  the  stores  which  His  bountiful  grace 
provided.     Note  : — 

1.  The  Christian  ministry  is  a  divine  institution. — 1.  The  true  minister  is 
divinely  commissioned.  "  Whereof  I  am  made  a  minister,  according  to  the  dispensa- 
tion of  God  which  is  given  to  me  for  you  n  (ver.  25).  The  word  "  dispensation  " 
involves  the  idea  of  stewardship.  God  governs  His  Church,  not  as  a  tyrant,  who 
rules  what  is  not  his  own,  not  as  a  monarch,  who  knows  not  a  thousandth  part 
of  his  subjects ;  but  as  a  father,  who  knows,  loves,  and  provides  tor  his  own 
children.  The  apostle  was  entrusted  with  a  stewardship  in  God's  household  ;  he 
was  "a  steward  of  the  mysteries  of  God."  He  received  the  office  from  God. 
This  invested  it  with  the  highest  dignity ;  yet  he  was  the  minister  of  the  Church, 
and  it  was  his  joy  to  serve  it,  whatever  might  be  the  labour,  sacrifice,  or  suffering 
entailed.  The  Christian  ministry  is  not  a  lordship,  but  a  stewardship;  the 
minister  is  solemnly  commissioned  of  God  to  maintain,  defend,  and  dispense  the 
truth  that  saves  and  edifies.  There  are  moments  when  the  minister  can  derive 
stimulus  and  courage  for  his  work  only  by  falling  back  upon  the  irrefutable  fact 
of  his  divine  call. 

2.  The  true  minister  is  charged  with  the  most  complete  proclamation  of  the  divine 
word. — "To  fulfil  the  word  of  God"  (ver.  2b) — to  preach  fully,  to  give  its  most 
complete  development  to.  The  apostle  had  declared  the  gospel  in  all  its  depth  and 
breadth  of  meaning,  its  wealth  of  blessing,  and  amplitude  of  revelation.  He 
had  proclaimed  it  in  every  direction,  in  harmony  with  his  insight  into  its  universal 
fitness  and  sufficiency.     Fulfil  implies  the  figure  of  a  measure  to  be  filled.     The 

404 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    C0L0SS1ANS.  chap.  I. 


true  minister  is  empowered  to  preach  the  word  of  God  in  all  the  fulness  of  its 
internal  import,  and  in  accord  with  the  universality  of  its  outward  purpose. 
Whether  palatable  or  unpalatable,  he  must  not  shun  to  declare  everywhere  the 
whole  counsel  of  God.  The  fulness  there  is  in  Christ  and  the  urgent  needs  of 
humanity  alike  demand  this. 

II.  The  Christian  ministry  deals  with  a  theme  of  profound  significance  and 
ineffable  worth. — 1.  It  is  designated  a  mystery.  "Even  the  mystery  which  hath 
been  hid  from  ages  and  from  generations  "  (ver.  26).  Mystery  in  the  Scripture 
sense  does  not  mean  something  actually  incomprehensible,  but  something  concealed 
or  unknown  until  it  please  God  to  reveal  it ;  something  beyond  the  human  mind 
to  discover  for  itself,  and  which  can  only  be  attained  by  divine  aid.  The  mystery 
comprehended  two  leading  features — the  divine  purpose  in  saving  man  through 
a  suffering  and  crucified  Saviour,  and  the  free  admission  of  the  Gentiles  on  equal 
terms  with  the  Jews  to  the  privileges  of  the  covenant.  Unlike  the  heathen 
mysteries,  which  were  confined  to  a  narrow  circle,  the  Christian  mystery  is  freely 
communicated  to  all.  The  mystery  was  concealed  from  the  ages,  which  may  be 
referred  to  the  angels ;  said  from  the  generations,  which  may  be  referred  to  men. 
Though  faintly  shadowed  in  types  and  figures,  the  truth  would  never  have  been 
discovered  by  man.  In  the  revelation  of  the  mystery  the  apostle  applauded  the 
lavish  wealth  of  the  divine  goodness.  The  gospel  is  still  a  mystery  to  the 
unconverted. 

2.  It  is  a  mystery  unveiled  to  those  who  are  morally  fitted  to  understand  it. — 
"  But  now  is  made  manifest  to  His  saints  "  (ver.  26).  God  chose  His  own  time 
for  making  known  the  mystery  of  the  gospel.  Like  all  the  divine  procedures,  the 
development  was  gradual,  increasing  in  clearness  and  completeness  as  the  fulness  of 
time  approached;  that  time  embraced  the  advent  of  the  incarnate  Son  of  G  d, 
His  ascension  and  enthronement  in  heaven,  and  the  descent  of  the  revealing 
Spirit.  It  is  an  axiom  in  optics  that  the  eye  only  sees  what  it  brings  with  it 
the  power  to  see;  and  it  is  equally  true  in  spiritual  things  that  the  soul  compre- 
hends the  revelation  of  God  only  as  it  is  prepared  and  fitted  by  the  good  Spirit. 
The  holier  the  organ  of  divine  revelation,  the  clearer  the  vision.  It  was  not  to 
the  dignitaries  of  imperial  Rome  or  the  ruling  powers  of  Judea,  but  to  humble 
shepherds  that  the  tidings  of  the  Saviour's  advent  were  first  announced ;  not  to 
thevaristocracy  of  Pharisaic  or  Sadducean  intellect,  but  to  the  plain,  unlettered, 
believing  fishermen  of  Galilee  that  the  full  glory  of  salvation  by  Christ  was  dis- 
closed. Augustine  has  said,  "  Illiterate  men  rise  and  seize  heaven,  while  we,  with 
all  our  learning,  are  rolling  in  the  filth  of  sin." 

3.  The  revelation  of  the  mystery  was  an  act  of  the  divine  will. — "  To  whom  God 
would  make  known"  (ver.  27).  There  was  nothing  impelling  Him  to  unfold  this 
mystery  but  His  own  good  pleasure.  It  was  His  sovereign  will  to  disclose  to  the 
humble  and  devout,  rather  than  to  the  proud  and  self-sufficient,  the  wondrous 
grace  and  glory  of  the  gospel.  The  most  sincere  seeker  after  holiness  could  not 
of  himself  discover  the  mystery.  But  though  made  known  in  its  richer  spiritual 
developments  only  to  the  good,  the  good  pleasure  of  God  has  put  the  knowledge 
of  it  within  the  reach  of  all. 

4.  The  revelation  of  the  mystery  endowed  humanity  with  a  vast  inheritance  of 
moral  wealth. — "  What  is  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  this  mystery  "  (ver.  27).  The 
terms  employed  seem  inadequate  to  convey  the  meaning  intended.  It  is  impossible 
fully  to  explain  or  illustrate  the  sublime  truths  they  indicate.  The  gospel  is  a 
mystery  full  of  glory — a  glory  unique,  resplendent,  unsurpassable;  and  this 
glory  is  dowered  with  riches,  abundant,  inexhaustible,  and  divine.  The  riches 
of  the  glory  appear  in  the  manifestation  of  the  nature  and  attributes  of  God 
which  the  mystery  supplies,  and  also  in  the  moral  wealth  that  has  descended 
upon  man.     Here  is  the  most  lavish  provision  for  the  salvation  of  sinful  and 

405 


chap.  I.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY;   COLOSSIANS. 


perishing  humanity — an  inheritance  of  imperishable  bliss.  (1)  This  inheritance 
enriched  the  most  needy.  It  was  exhibited  "  among  the  Gentiles  "  (ver.  27).  The 
Jews  were  the  children  of  promise  and  possessed  every  religious  privilege ;  the 
Gentiles  were  the  children  of  mercy,  and  had  never  dared  to  dream  of  enjoying 
the  blessings  of  the  gospel.  Tn  the  revelation  of  the  mystery  to  them,  the  dis- 
pensation of  grace  achieved  its  greatest  triumphs  and  displayed  its  transcendent 
glory.  Here,  too,  was  its  wealth,  for  it  overflowed  all  barriers  of  caste  or  race. 
Judaism  was  "  beggarly  "  in  comparison,  since  its  treasures  sufficed  only  for  a  few. 
The  glory  of  the  gospel  was  never  so  brilliant  as  in  the  moral  transformations  it 
effected  among  the  degraded  Gentiles.  (2)  This  inheritance  includes  the  hope  inspired 
by  the  indwelling  Christ.  "Which  is  Christ  in  you,  the  hope  of  glory"  (ver.  27). 
The  mystery  of  the  gospel  begins  and  ends  in  Christ,  and  Christ  is  in  every 
believer  the  hope  of  glory.  Only  in  Christ  can  we  hope  for  the  highest  glory, 
and  in  Him  we  infallibly  find  all  the  blessedness  we  can  enjoy  in  this  world  or 
expect  in  the  future.  In  Him  we  have  here  as  seed  what  we  shall  have  in  Him 
there  as  harvest.  "  Even  now  we  sit  there  in  Him,  and  shall  sit  with  Him  in 
the  end." 

Lessons. — 1.  The  Christian  ministry  involves  solemn  responsibilities.  2.  The 
transcendent  theme  of  the  Christian  ministry  is  divinely  revealed.  3.  Personal 
experience  of  the  grace  of  God  endows  man  with  the  clearest  insight  into  its  mystery , 
and  the  most  satisfying  possession  of  its  spiritual  riches. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  25-27.  The  Glory  of  the  Gospel —      experience.  —  1.     Generally  —  Christ 

I.  A  mystery  once  hidden,  but  now  among  you.  2.  Personally — Christ  in 
revealed  (vers.  26,  27).  you. 

II.  Enriches  all  nations  with  moral  II.  What  it  presages. — "  The  hope 
blessings.  of  glory." 

III.  Is  entrusted  to  divinely  author-  1.  Personal  glory — in  the  perfection 
ised  messengers  to  make  known  (vers,  of  being  where  the  servant  is  like  his 
25,  27).                                                         Lord. 

2.  Relative  glory — sharing  the  throne 
Ver.   27.   Christ  in  you  the  Hope  of     with  Jesus,  and  sharing  in  His  triumph 
Glory.  and  glory. — Preacher's  Magazine. 

.1    What    it    implies    of    present 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  28,  29. 

The  Secret  of  Effective  Preaching. 

Much  has  been  written  concerning  the  inefficiency  of  the,  modern  pulpit ;  and 
it  has  been  argued  that  the  press  is  now  the  great  and  successful  rival  of  the 
preacher,  and  must  ere  long  render  his  office  nugatory.  This  prediction  might 
possibly  be  fulfilled  if  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  was  simply  a  human  institution 
and  depended  only  on  man  for  its  permanency.  But  when  we  remember  that 
preaching  is  a  divine  ordinance,  and  is  adapted  to  reach  and  stir  the  heart  as  no 
other  agency  can,  the  preacher's  function  can  never  cease  while  human  nature 
remains  what  it  is,  or  while  God  honours  His  own  institution  with  His  blessing. 
Only  as  the  pulpit  is  faithful  to  its  grand  theme  and  lofty  mission  will  it  be 
effective.  The  deepest  want  of  the  age  is  Christ ;  and  that  preaching  will  be 
irresistibly  potent  that  most  adequately  represents  Him.  These  verses  reveal 
to  us  the  secret  of  effective  preaching. 

I.  In  order  to  effectiveness  in  preaching  Christ  must  be  the  changeless 
theme. — "  Whom  we  preach  "  (ver.  28). 

406 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS.  chap.  i. 


1.  Preach  Christ  as  to  the  special  characteristic  and  unrivalled  excellencies  of  His 
person. — The  greatest  men  who  ever  lived,  however  brilliant  and  capacious  their 
genius  or  stupendous  their  labours,  never  made  so  profound  and  widespread  an 
impression  upon  humanity  as  Christ  has  done  and  is  now  doing.  Their 
influence  operated  for  only  a  limited  period ;  His  pervades  all  time — past, 
present,  and  future  ;  theirs  was  confined  to  a  narrow  locality,  His  is  diffused 
through  the  universe.  The  person  of  Christ  is  unique  in  this — that  it  combines 
two  natures,  the  divine  and  the  human.  It  was  necessary  He  should  be 
both  God  and  man  in  order  to  fully  accomplish  the  work  He  voluntarily  under- 
took. As  God,  He  met  and  satisfied  all  the  requirements  of  Deity ;  and  as 
man — putting  Himself  in  our  place — He  realised  and  reached  the  extremities  of 
our  need,  and  thus  fairly  laying  hold  of  us,  gathering  up  and  grasping  the  roots 
of  our  corrupt  nature,  He  raised  from  sin  to  holiness,  from  earth  to  heaven. 
He  is  Emmanuel — God  with  us. 

2.  Preach  Christ  in  His  mediatorial  character. — As  the  Prophet  who  testified 
of  the  truth  of  God ;  as  the  Priest  who,  by  His  one  offering  of  Himself  on  the 
cross,  has  atoned  for  sin  and  made  reconciliation  possible ;  and  as  the  King  who 
has  vanquished  all  our  spiritual  enemies  and  demands  our  absolute  allegiance  to 
His  rule. 

3.  Preach  Christ  as  the  Saviour  of  every  man,  a.nd  as  the  only  Saviour. —  The 
threefold  repetition  of  the  phrase  "  every  man  "  has  a  special  significance,  and 
emphasises  the  universality  of  the  gospel.  This  great  truth,  a  truth  which  the 
apostle  sacrificed  his  life  in  establishing,  had  been  endangered  by  the  doctrine 
of  a  ceremonial  exclusiveness  taught  by  the  Judaizers  in  several  places,  and  was 
now  endangered  by  the  doctrine  of  an  intellectual  exclusiveness  taught  by  the 
Gnosticizers  at  Colossse.  Christ  must  be  proclaimed  as  the  Saviour  of  men  of 
every  class,  community,  and  country.  He  is  the  only  Saviour,  for  "there  is 
none  other  name  under  heaven  given  among  men  whereby  we  must  be  saved." 
The  preaching  of  Christ  is  no  narrow  theme,  but  stands  essentially  related  to  all 
the  noblest  truths  of  the  universe. 

II.  In  order  to  effectiveness  variety  of  method  must  be  adopted. — The 
declaration  of  the  truth  must  be  : — 

1.  Authoritative. — "  Whom  we  preach  "  (ver.  28).  The  New  Testament  idea 
•of  preaching  involves  three  elements — the  announcement  of  joyful  tidings ;  the 
proclamation  of  truth  as  by  a  herald,  urgently  and  authoritatively ;  and  the 
conviction  and  persuasion  of  men  to  belief  by  means  of  arguments.  The  preacher 
is  the  ambassador  of  God,  and  the  message  must  be  delivered  as  coming  from 
Him,  in  His  name,  and  by  His  authority. 

2.  Admonitory. — "  Warning  every  man."  Sin  has  placed  man  in  imminent 
peril,  and  its  tendency  is  to  deaden  his  sensibilities  and  render  him  oblivious  of  his 
danger.  Hence  he  must  be  roused  to  concern  and  repentance  by  faithful  remon- 
strance, by  earnest  exhortation,  by  solemn  admonition,  by  impassioned  appeal. 

3.  Instructive. — "  Teaching  every  man  "  (ver.  28).  Not  only  must  the  emotions 
be  swayed,  but  the  understanding  enlightened.  It  is  not  enough  to  convince  the 
unbeliever  of  his  error,  not  enough  to  bring  home  to  the  lover  of  sin  the  vileness 
and  enormity  of  his  transgressions,  but  by  clear  and  forcible  exposition  and 
persuasion  the  will  of  the  individual  offender  must  be  seized,  and  with  firm,  yet 
loving  pressure  biassed  to  seek  after  the  light,  truth,  and  purity  that  once  were 
shunned. 

4.  With  shrewd  insight  as  to  its  adaptability. — "  In  all  wisdom  "  (ver.  28).  The 
ancients  spoke  of  a  blind  faith  in  their  mysteries  which  belonged  to  the  many,  and 
of  a  higher  knowledge  that  was  confined  to  the  few.  The  apostle,  while  declaring 
that  in  the  gospel  the  fullest  wisdom  was  offered  to  all  alike,  without  restriction, 
exercised  discretion  as  to  the  method  in  which  he  presented  it  to  the  individual. 

407 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS. 


The  style  of  his  address  at  Athens  would  be  different  from  that  adopted  at 
Jerusalem.  This  involves  a  study  of  character,  and  of  what  goes  to  make  it — 
habits,  customs,  opinions,  sympathies,  and  the  general  circumstances  of  life- 
culture. 

III.  In  order  to  effectiveness  man  must  be  aided  in  realising  the  highest 
ideal  of  the  Christian  character. — "  That  we  may  present  every  man  perfect  in 
Christ  Jesus  "  (ver.  28).  The  gospel  is  a  mirror  in  which  is  glassed  the  portrait  of 
the  character  after  which  each  believer  is  to  model  his  own.  That  character  is 
not  simply  a  development  of  one's  own  natural  manhood,  so  much  as  it  is  something 
added  to  and  thrown  around  that  manhood,  lifting  it  into  dignity  and  trans- 
figuring it  with  a  glorious  beauty.  The  gospel  reveals  the  ideal  of  the  Christian 
character  after  which  the  soul  is  continually  to  aspire.  That  ideal,  in  all  its 
loveliness  and  witchery,  is  projected  before  the  soul's  inmost  vision  in  the  Spirit 
and  life  of  the  man  Christ  Jesus.  He  who  approximates  nearest  to  the  Christly 
character  attains  the  highest  moral  perfection.  It  is  the  sublime  mission  of  the 
preacher  not  to  gratify  the  intellect,  charm  the  imagination,  or  expand  the  mind 
by  propagating  the  ideas  of  a  transcendental  philosophy  ;  but  to  strengthen  the 
soul  in  the  great  contest  with  evil,  to  supply  it  with  holiest  motives,  to  promote 
its  spiritual  progress,  to  present  it  "  perfect  in  Christ  Jesus." 

IV.  In  order  to  effectiveness  there  must  be  self-denying  toil  and  the  vigorous 
forth-putting  of  divinely  inspired  energy. — "  W  hereunto  I  also  labour,  striving 
according  to  His  working  which  worketh  in  me  mightily"  (ver.  29).  All  great 
ideas  have  cost  the  solitary  and  individual  thinker  unspeakable  labour,  and  not  a 
little  suffering  in  the  endeavour  to  elaborate  and  make  them  known  and  set  them 
in  their  due  relation  before  the  world.  The  world  is  ruled  by  ideas ;  but  the 
revolution  they  occasion  is  a  slow  and  painful  process.  The  apostle  was  the 
custodian  of  a  great  idea — that  the  gospel  was  intended  for  all,  and  must  be 
fully  preached  to  all.  The  idea  is  familiar  to  us  ;  but  it  was  new  to  that  age, 
and  revolutionised  the  whole  realm  of  human  thought.  If  the  apostle  had  been 
content  to  preach  an  exclusive  gospel,  he  might  have  saved  himself  more  than 
half  the  troubles  of  his  life.  But  he  saw  the  magnitude  of  the  issues  at  stake  ; 
he  espoused  the  God-given  truth  with  all  the  strength  of  his  great  nature ;  he 
confronted  the  colossal  prejudices  of  the  ages ;  he  trained  himself  in  the  discipline 
of  self-denying  toil ;  he  suffered  as  only  the  true  martyr-soul  can  suffer ;  he  strove 
with  an  agony  of  earnestness  to  make  known  the  whole  truth ;  and,  aided  by  the 
mighty  working  of  the  divine  power  within  him,  he  triumphed  signally.  Preach- 
ing is  always  effective  when  it  is  the  consentaneous  outworking  of  the  divinely 
imparted  energy  within  the  man.  The  preacher  alone,  however  strenuous 
his  efforts,  is  powerless ;  but  inspired  and  strengthened  by  the  divine  Spirit, 
and  acting  in  harmony  with  His  promptness  and  help,  he  is  mighty  to  prevail. 

Lessons. — 1.  Every  sermon  should  be  full  of  Christ.  2.  The  preacher  should  be 
master  of  every  method  that  will  ensure  success.  3.  That  sermon  will  be  most  effective 
that  is  prepared  and  preached  under  the  most  direct  influence  of  the  divine  Spirit. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Ver.  28.  Apostolic  Preaching.  Ver.  29.  The  Christian  Ministry — 

I.  They  preached  Christ  as  the  only  i.  Involves  strenuous  labour  and 
foundation  of  a  sinner's  hope  of  salva-     patient  suffering. 

tlon-  ■  ,  II.     Is  dependent  on  divine  help.    ) 

II     As  the  object  of  supreme  love.  m   Ascribes    all    its    success    to 

III.  As  the  source  of  our  supplies.     a  - 

IV.  As  the  model  of  our  lives.— W.     wm" 
Antliff,  D.D. 

408 


HOHILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.         chap.  ii. 


CHAPTER  II. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  "What  great  conflict. — R.V.  "  how  greatly  I  strive."  It  is  a  repetition  of  the 
thought  of  the  previous  verse  expressed  in  terms  of  the  arena.  Tor  them  at  Laodicea.— 
About  a  dozen  miles  distant  from  Colossae. 

Ver.  2.  The  mystery  of  God,  and  of  the  Father,  and  of  Christ.— The  R.V.  has  greatly  simplified 
this  perplexing  phrase  :  "  The  mystery  of  God,  even  Christ."  Of  the  eleven  various  readings 
extant  (given  by  Lightfoot)  that  of  our  A.V.  is  to  all  appearance  the  latest  and  worst. 

Ver.  3.  In  whom  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge. — When  we  have  "  laid 
our  reasonings  at  His  feet,"  He  does  not  stultify  us.  Neither  pure  reason  nor  nractical 
reason  is  to  "  fust  in  us  unused,"  if  they  seek  their  answers  in  Him. 

Ver.  4.  Should  beguile  you  with  enticing  words. — The  word  for  "  beguile "  is  only 
again  found  in  the  New  Testament  at  Jas.  i.  22.  It  means  to  lead  into  error  by  sophistical 
reasoning.     Enticing  words,  or  persuasive  speech,  plausible  but  false. 

Ver.  5.  The  stedfastness  of  your  faith  in  Christ. — Some  think  "  stedfastness "  (as  well 
as  "  order  "  preceding)  may  have  a  military  significance.  If  so,  it  would  mean  the  compact 
firmness  of  the  phalanx.  Others  say  that  meaning  is  not  inherent,  but  derived  from  its 
context,  which  here  does  not  suggest  it.  The  word  is  used  in  the  LXX.  for  firmament — a 
solid  vault,  as  it  was  thought. 

Ver.  7.  Rooted  and  built  up. — St.  Paul  passes  over  rapidly  from  one  conception  to  another 
of  quite  a  different  kind.  We  cannot  call  it  mixed  metaphor.  We  commonly  speak  of  a  new 
town  planted  or  a  house  planted. 

Ver.  8.  Beware  lest  any  man  spoil  you. — R.V.  "maketh  spoil  of  you."  The  word  for 
"spoil"  means  "to  lead  away  as  booty,"  as  the  Sabeans  swooped  down  on  the  oxen  and  asses 
of  Job  and  carried  them  away  as  their  own  property.  Through  philosophy  and  vain  deceit. 
— We  are  reminded  of  the  saying,  "  It  is  the  privilege  of  a  philosopher  to  depreciate  philo- 
sophy." And  then  men  say,  "How  well  he's  read  to  reason  against  reading  I"  St.  Paul 
speaks  here  of  philosophy  "  falsely  so  called."  The  love  of  wisdom  can  never  be  a  dangerous 
thing  to  men  whose  Master  said,  "  Be  wise  as  serpents  " ;  only  it  must  be  the  "  wisdom  which 
cometh  from  above."  St.  Paul's  alias  for  what  they  call  philosophy  is  "empty  fallacy,"  a 
hollow  pretence ;  or  what  George  Herbert  might  name  "nothing  between  two  dishes."  After 
the  tradition  of  men.—  Something  passed  over  from  one  to  another,  as  the  deep  secrets  of  the 
esoteric  religions  were  whispered  into  the  ears  of  the  perfect.  That  a  matter  has  been 
believed  always,  everywhere,  and  by  all  is  no  guarantee  of  its  truth,  as  Galileo  knew. 

Ver.  9.  In  Him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily. — There  is  no  minimising 
the  significance  of  this  statement.  It  is  either  true  or  it  is  the  wildest  raving  of  blasphemy. 
"  Dwelleth " — has  its  settled  abode.  A  change  of  prefix  would  give  us  the  word  in 
Luke  xxiv.  18.  "  Dost  thou  alone  sojourn  ? "  etc.  Dualism  separates  God  from  matter  as 
far  as  possible;  the  Incarnation  unites  Him  for  ever  with  it.  "Great  is  the  mystery." 
"  Godhead."  though  twice  before  in  our  A.V.  (Acts  xvii.  29  ;  Rom.  i.  23),  the  word  here 
differs  from  both. 

Ver.  10.— And  ye  are  complete  in  Him. — These  minor  powers  of  whom  you  have  heard  are 
all  subordinate  to  Him  in  whom  directly  you  have  all  you  need.  There  is  no  need  to  go  via 
Philip  and  Andrew,  Mary  or  Michael,  when  "  we  would  see  Jesus." 

Ver.  11.  In  whom  also  ye  are  circumcised  ...  by  the  circumcision  of  Christ. — What  to 
the  Jew  was  a  bodily  act,  at  best  symbolical  and  of  no  value  otherwise,  was  to  the  Colossian 
disciple  a  spiritual  renovation,  so  complete  zz  to  render  the  old  symbol  of  it  inadequate. 

Ver.  12.  Buried  .  .  .  risen. — Referring  to  the  definite  acts  when,  as  Christian  converts, 
they  went  beneath  the  baptismal  waters  and  emerged  to  live  the  faith  thus  publicly  confessed. 
Through  the  faith  of  the  operation  of  God. — An  obscure  phrase.  The  R.V.  is  clear  :  "  Through 
faith  in  the  working  of  God." 

Ver.  14.  Blotting  out  tho  handwriting.—"  Wiping  out  the  old  score,"  as  we  might  say.  All 
that  bond  which  was  valid  against  them  Christ  had  for  ever  rendered  nugatory  whilst  they 
confided  in  His  salvation.  Against  us,  which  was  contrary  to  us. — We  have  here  the  author 
of  those  hot  protests  against  work-righteousness.  The  threatening  aspect  of  the  law  is 
expressed  in  this  reiteration.  The  law  not  only  menaces  wrong-doers ;  it  proceeds  against 
them  with  punishment.  Nailing  it  to  His  cross. — The  bond  is  discharged  and  may  be  filed. 
We  are  reminded  of  St.  Peter's  equally  bold  expression :  "  Who  His  own  self  bare  our  sins  in 
His  own  body  \to,  and]  on  the  tree  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  24). 

409 


chap.  II.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS. 


Ver.  15.  Having  spoiled  principalities.— R.V.  "having  put  off  from  Himself."  The 
authorities  are  divided  between  the  A  V.  and  R.V.  The  English  reader  must  not  conclude 
that  he  has  again  the  word  and  idea  of  ver.  8.  The  apostle  says  that  Christ  had  flung  off 
from  Himself  the  powers  of  wickedness.  As  these  Colossians  needed  no  intercessions  of 
good  angels,  so,  on  the  other  hand,  they  need  fear  nothing  from  the  maleficent  powers  of 
darkness,  now  vanquished. 

Ver.  16.  Let  no  man  therefore  judge  you. — They  could  not  well  prevent  an  adverse 
judgment  being  given  on  their  disregard  of  what  the  ritualists  thought  to  be  of  supreme 
moment,  but  they  could  refuse  to  argue  about  such  trifles. 

Ver.  17.  Shadow  .  .  .  body. — The  relationship  is  indicated  here  of  the  old  ceremonial 
worship  to  the  worship  of  the  Spirit.  To  confound  shadow  and  substance,  or  mistake  the 
shadow  for  the  substance,  has  ever  been  the  fatal  error  of  ritualism. 

Ver.  18.  Let  no  man  beguile  yon  of  your  reward. — R.V.  "let  no  man  rob  you  of  your 
prize."  There  seems  to  be  implied  some  such  thought  as  this  :  Do  not  allow  these  heretical 
teachers  to  lay  down  for  you  the  conditions  on  which  the  prize  shall  be  yours  ;  for  when 
they  pronounce  in  your  favour,  "  the  Lord,  the  righteous  Judge,"  pronounces  against  you. 
In  a  voluntary  humility  and  worshipping  of  angels. — In  acts  of  self-imposed  abasement 
in  the  presence  of  invisible  beings.  St.  John  tells  us  of  the  rebuke  administered  by  the 
angel  before  whom  he  prostrated  himself :  "  See  thou  do  it  not :  .  .  .  worship  God."  But 
there  are  men  who  would  say,  "Nay,  my  Lord,"  and  continue  their  forbidden  worship. 
Intruding  into  those  things  which  he  hath  not  seen. — The  change  in  the  R.V.  is  considerable  : 
"dwelling  in  the  things  which  he  hath  seen."  The  apostle  is  apparently  speaking  ironically 
of  the  boasted  manifestations  made  to  the  Gnostic  teachers. 

Ver.  20.  Dead  .  .  .  from  the  rudiments  of  the  world. — Such  as  are  given  in  ver.  21.  Subject 
to  ordinances. — Why  do  you  consent  to  receive  these  "  burdens  grievous  to  be  borne  "  ? 

Ver.  21.  Touch  not;  taste  not;  handle  not. — "These  three  prohibitions  apply  probably 
(1)  to  marriage,  (2)  to  the  use  of  certain  foods,  (3)  to  contact  with  material  objects" 
(Godet).  The  rigour  of  the  prohibitions  is  greatest  in  the  last  of  the  three.  Note  the  change 
in  R.V. :  "  handle  not,  nor  taste,  nor  TOUCH." 

Ver.  23.  Neglecting  of  the  body. — A.V.  margin,  "punishing  or  not  sparing."  R.V.  text, 
"  severity  to  the  body."  No  doubt  the  apostle  felt  that  on  this  subject  he  would  need  to 
tread  cautiously,  for  he  himself  had  beaten  his  body  into  subjection  (1  Cor.  ix.  27).  Not  in 
any  honour  to  the  satisfying  of  the  flesh. — The  R.V.  gives  light  on  the  obscurity  :  "  not  of 
any  value  against  the  indulgence  of  the  flesh."  This  is  the  evidence  .which  for  ever  disqualifies 
asceticism  in  its  many  forms.  We  can  understand  how  a  Lenten  fast  or  a  hair-shirt  may 
make  a  man  irritable.  If  they  are  of  any  value  in  themselves,  monastic  annals  need  revision 
and  expurgation,  and  the  Christian  finds  himself  far  outdone  by  the  dervish. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—4. 

Ministerial  Anxiety. 

The  more  clearly  we  apprehend  truth  in  its  many-sided  aspects  and  in  its 
complex  and  vital  relations,  the  more  grievous  and  calamitous  does  error  appear. 
Error  cannot  come  into  collision  with  truth  without  creating  confusion  of  ideas 
and  much  mental  distraction,  and  as  a  consequence  robbing  the  soul  of  the  peace 
and  solace  it  enjoyed.  The  apostle  saw  the  dangerous  tendency  of  the  doctrines 
advocated  by  the  false  teachers  against  whom  his  epistle  was  directed,  and  he 
was  deeply  concerned  lest  the  pure  and  simple  gospel  embraced  by  the  new 
converts  should  be  contaminated.  As  one  drop  of  ink  pollutes  the  whole  vessel 
of  water,  as  one  stroke  of  the  hammer  diverts  the  rod  from  a  straight  line  and 
spoils  it  throughout  its  whole  length,  so  one  single  error  obscures  and  warps  the 
holiest  truth. 

I.  This  anxiety  was  intense. — "  For  I  would  that  ye  knew  what  great 
conflict  I  have"  (ver.  1).  In  the  closing  words  of  the  preceding  chapter  the  apostle 
referred  to  his  stern  self-discipline  in  training  himself  for  his  arduous  and  self- 
denying  labours  as  an  apostle ;  and  in  this  verse  he  expands  the  same  thought, 
and  would  have  the  converts  know  the  magnitude  of  the  struggle  which  his 
anxiety  for  their  welfare  cost  him.  This  conflict  refers  not  only  to  his  external 
labours  on  behalf  of  the  Churches,  in  journeys,  perils, privations,  persecutions,  and 
imprisonments,  but  more  especially  to  his  fervent  wrestling  with  God  in  prayer, 

410 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.  chap.  n. 


like  Jacob  of  old;  his  importunity,  like  the  widow  with  the  unjust  judge;  his 
inward  soul  struggles  in  earnest  intercession  for  their  stability  in  the  faith.  The 
danger  must  have  been  serious  that  produced  in  such  a  man  so  great  an  agony  of 
anxiety  :  great  souls  are  not  affected  by  trifles.  People  little  know  what  their 
pastors  pass  through  :  when  they  think  them  the  most  at  leisure,  then  are  they 
the  least  so — the  fervent  conflict  of  prayer  is  going  on  in  secret.  A  knowledge 
of  the  minister's  anxiety  is  sometimes  necessary  to  create  a  responsive  sympathy, 
and  to  teach  the  people  the  care  and  anxiety  they  should  feel  for  their  own 
salvation. 

II.  This  anxiety  was  disinterested. — "  For  you,  and  for  them  at  Laodicea,  and 
for  as  many  as  have  not  seen  my  face  in  the  flesh  "  (ver.  1).  The  solicitude  of  the 
apostle  was  not  restricted  to  the  Colossians,  as  though  they  were  more  liable  than 
others  to  defection  from  the  truth,  but  embraced  the  converts  in  the  neighbouring 
city  of  Laodicea.  In  this  populous  and  thriving  city,  celebrated  at  that  time  for 
its  immense  commercial  wealth  and  for  the  high  intellectual  attainments  of  its 
philosophers,  the  heretic  leaven  had  begun  to  work  ;  and  the  subsequent  history 
of  the  Church  there  showed  that  it  spread  only  too  surely  aud  disastrously 
(Rev.  iii.  14-18).  The  apostle  also  extended  his  anxious  regard  to  "as  many  as 
had  not  seen  his  face  in  the  flesh."  The  bulk  of  our  troubles  in  this  life  we 
endure  on  behalf  of  others.  The  Christian  spirit,  in  its  broad,  comprehensive 
charity,  gives  us  a  deep  interest  in  all  who  have  any  connection  with  Christ. 
Fervent  prayer  on  behalf  of  others,  notwithstanding  the  sneers  of  some  modern 
scientists,  is  efficacious,  irrespective  of  locality  or  of  actual  personal  intercourse. 
Prayers  offered  in  private  are  often  answered  in  a  strange,  unlooked-for  manner  in 
public.  God  has  a  sovereign  right  to  select  the  mode  in  which  He  answers  the 
prayers  of  the  faithful.  An  old  divine  has  said  :  "  If  we  would  reap  openly  in 
the  conversion  of  souls  and  their  steady  walk,  we  must  plough  in  secret  with 
prayers  and  tears."  Our  anxiety  about  the  welfare  of  others  is  a  strong 
evidence  of  our  possessing  the  genuine  love  of  the  truth.  It  was  a  trenchant 
aphorism  of  Coleridge  that,  "  He  who  begins  by  loving  Christianity  better  than 
truth,  will  proceed  by  loving  his  own  sect  or  Church  better  than  Christianity,  and 
end  in  loving  himself  better  than  all." 

III.  This  anxiety  had  special  reference  to  the  highest  spiritual  attainments 
of  believers. — 1.  The  apostle  vias  solicitous  for  the  confirmation  of  their  faith. 
"  That  their  hearts  might  be  comforted  "  (ver.  2) — i.e.  encouraged,  confirmed.  The 
apostle  knew  the  subtle  power  of  error  in  disintegrating  the  heart's  confidence, 
producing  trouble,  dejection,  doubt,  and  perplexity.  Hence  he  was  anxious  so 
to  present  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  as  to  restore  and  cheer  the  bewildered  mind 
and  settle  it  on  the  firm  basis  of  an  intelligent  and  cordial  faith.  No  man  can 
reach  the  high  attainments  of  the  Christian  life  whose  heart  is  not  at  rest 
in  God. 

2.  The  apostle  was  solicitous  for  their  union  in  love. — "Being  knit  together  in 
love  "  (ver.  2).  The  heart  can  never  enjoy  solid  comfort  till  it  is  united  in  the  love, 
as  well  as  in  the  faith,  of  the  truth.  Error  divides  as  well  as  distresses;  it  snaps 
the  bond  of  love,  splits  the  Christian  Church  into  parties,  rends  what  ought  to 
be  the  seamless  robe  of  Christ.  Where  there  is  discord  in  the  understanding 
about  fundamental  truths,  there  cannot  be  concord  in  the  will  and  affections. 
The  stability  of  believers  depends  upon  their  being  knit  together  in  a  mutual 
Jove,  as  the  timbers  of  a  building  are  joined  and  compacted  by  a  carpenter — such 
is  the  original  signification  of  the  word — each  part  being  fitted  in  with  the  rest, 
and  all  subserving  the  firmness  and  safety  of  the  whole.  "  He  that  dwelleth  in 
love,  dwelleth  in  God,  and  God  in  him." 

3.  The  apostle  was  solicitous  they  should  be  enriched  with  the  unspeakable  wealth 
of  the  divine  mystery. — (1)   The  divine  mystery  is  explained  in  the  unique  person 

411 


CHAP.  II.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS. 


and  endowments  of  Christ.  "The  mystery  of  God,  and  of  the  Father,  and  of 
Christ,  in  whom  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  "  (vers.  2,  3). 
Christ  embraced  in  His  own  person  the  divine  and  human  natures.  As  God,  He 
is  equal  with  the  Father,  and  possesses  in  Himself  all  the  essentials  of  Deity ;  but 
as  man  He  is  dowered  with  moral  treasures  surpassing  the  endowments  of  the 
highest  angel.  The  mystery  is  not  so  much  Christ,  as  Christ  containing  in  Him- 
self "  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge."  There  is  in  Christ  an  all- 
sufficiency  for  every  possible  want  of  man — copious  and  inexhaustive  riches  of 
eternal  and  saving  wisdom.  These  riches  are  hid  in  Christ  as  treasure  in  a  field — 
concealed  from  the  gaze  of  the  mere  passer-by,  the  careless,  indolent,  and  proud; 
but  revealed  to  and  enjoyed  by  the  humble,  diligent,  and  persevering  seeker. 
"  He  who  is  not  content  with  Christ,  but  goes  out  of  Him  to  philosophy  or 
tradition,  forsakes  the  treasures  for  the  miserable  beggary  of  human  counter- 
feits." It  is  still  a  mystery  to  the  world  how  Christ  can  be  the  grand  depositary 
of  all  wisdom ;  and  the  mystery  is  dispelled  only  as  the  soul  becomes  savingly 
acquainted  with  Him.  (2)  The  believe?'  is  privileged  to  gain  the  full  knowledge  of 
the  divine  mystery. — "To  the  acknowledgment  of  the  mystery"  (ver.  2).  The 
word  implies  that  the  knowledge  of  God  and  of  Christ  is  the  perfection  of 
knowledge.  The  ancient  sage  declared :  "  If  thou«criest  after  knowledge,  then 
shalt  thou  understand  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  find  the  knowledge  of  God." 
And  the  apostle  prayed  for  the  Ephesians  that  "  the  God  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
might  give  unto  them  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  revelation  in  the  knowledge  of 
Him."  This  knowledge  is  to  be  not  a  simple  perception  of  the  truths  contained  in 
the  divine  mystery,  but  a  full,  firm,  and  distinct  knowledge  as  the  result  of  careful 
sifting,  and  the  actual  experience  of  their  soul-transforming  power.  We  know 
nothing  to  purpose  until  it  is  strongly  grasped  by  the  heart  as  well  as  by  the 
understanding.  (3)  A  clear  and  profound  understanding  of  the  divine  mystery 
is  the  true  enrichment  of  the  mind. — "Unto  all  riches  of  the  full  assurance  of 
understanding  "  (ver.  2).  The  vast  store  of  moral  riches  here  indicated  is  opposed 
to  the  poverty  of  the  mind,  which  has  only  a  few  confused,  unconnected  truths 
about  the  gospel  laid  up  in  its  treasury.  By  the  full  assurance  of  understanding  is 
meant  an  unclouded  perception  and  firm  conviction  of  the  truth  revealed  in  the 
gospel.  This  is  obtained  only  by  diligent  study  and  the  inner  illumination 
of  the  Spirit ;  the  understanding  is  cleared  up,  the  judgment  settled,  and  the 
individual  believer  enabled  to  apprehend  each  part  of  the  gospel  in  its  essential 
relation  to  the  grand  whole,  and  thus  to  grasp  with  a  firm  hold  the  salient 
features  of  the  divine  mystery.  In  this  assured  knowledge  of  the  greatest 
truths  the  mind  of  man  finds  it  true  enrichment :  its  abiding  rest  and  felicity. 
"  Wisdom  is  more  precious  than  rubies,  and  all  the  things  thou  canst  desire  are 
not  to  be  compared  unto  her."  Every  other  kind  of  knowledge,  however  rare 
and  extensive,  is  in  itself  poor  and  unsatisfying. 

IV.  This  anxiety  prompted  the  apostle  faithfully  to  warn  the  Church. — 
"  And  this  I  say,  lest  any  man  should  beguile  you  with  enticing  words  "  (ver.  4). 
Error  assumes  the  most  seductive  forms :  it  charms  with  its  eloquence,  bewilders 
with  its  subtle  reasoning,  misleads  with  its  bold,  assured  statements  of  half-truths. 
The  soul  is  fascinated  as  by  the  gaze  of  a  basilisk,  and  morally  poisoned  by  its 
breath.  "  Men  are  easily  persuaded  to  believe  that  which  flatters  their  own 
vanity,  and  dilutes  or  modifies  the  gospel,  so  as  to  accommodate  it  to  their  own 
degenerate  tastes."  It  is  needful  to  maintain  a  vigilant  outlook,  and  be  on  our 
guard  against  every  phase  of  false  teaching.  Some  contend  that  words  have 
little  to  do  with  religion;  that  true  religion  is  a  sentiment  in  the  soul  inde- 
pendent of  words.  The  apostle  thought  differently  when  he  exhorted  to  hold 
fast  "  the  form  of  sound  words "  ;  and  in  this  verse  he  distinctly  avers  that 
enticing  words  may  beguile.     He   solemnly  warns  the   Ephesians,   who  were 

412 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.  chap.  ii. 


assailed  with  a  similar  class  of  errors :  "  Let  no  man  deceive  you  with  vain 
words ;  for  because  of  these  things  cometh  the  wrath  of  God  upon  the  children 
of  disobedience."  The  most  effectual  antidote  to  any  heresy  is  the  faithful, 
simple  proclamation  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  in  whom  are  hid  all  the  treasures 
of  wisdom  and  knowledge.  This  is  the  clue  that  leads  us  out  of  all  the  mazes 
of  error. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  true  minister  is  anxious  to  promote  the  highest  good  of  the 
people.  2.  All  truth  finds  its  explanation  and  all  error  its  refutation  in  Christ, 
the  Source  of  eternal  wisdom.  3.  False  doctrine  should  be  fearlessly  and  faithfully 
exposed. 

MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  VERSE  3. 

The  Hidden  Treasures  of  Wisdom  in  Christ. 

Wisdom  does  not  consist  in  the  possession  of  varied  and  extensive  knowledge. 
The  student  may  be  deeply  read  in  ancient  and  long-forgotten  lore,  be  versed 
in  the  entire  circle  of  the  arts,  sciences,  and  philosophies,  be  intelligibly  familiar 
with  the  best  literature  of  the  day,  be  a  walking  encyclopaedia,  a  literary  fountain 
gushing  in  a  perennial  stream  of  information,  and  yet  be  far  from  being  a  wise 
man.  W  isdom  is  the  practical  application  of  knowledge,  the  attainment  of  the 
highest  moral  results  by  the  use  of  the  best  and  simplest  means.  The  cry  of  the 
human  intellect  in  all  ages  has  been,  "  Where  shall  wisdom  be  found  ?  and  where 
is  the  place  of  understanding  1 "  .  The  greatest  souls  have  toiled  painfully  in 
search  of  the  coveted  treasure,  but  failed  to  discover  it.  Their  mightiest 
endeavours  have  terminated  in  disappointment  and  despair.  True  wisdom  is 
a  divine  revelation.  The  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God;  and  one  of  the 
profoundest  philosophers  of  any  age,  and  who  approached  as  near  the  threshold 
of  the  grand  discovery  as  the  unaided  human  mind  was  perhaps  ever  permitted 
to  do,  had  to  confess  with  a  sigh,  "  If  ever  man  is  destined  to  know  the  good  and 
the  true,  it  must  be  by  a  revelation  of  the  Deity."  That  wisdom  which  all 
need,  and  of  which  all  are  in  quest,  is  found  only  in  Christ.  This  verse  declares 
that  Christ  is  the  unfathomable  depositary  of  the  highest  wisdom.     Observe  : — 

I.  That  Christ  is  the  inexhaustible  Source  of  the  truest  wisdom. — "  In  Him 
are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge."  The  false  teachers  at 
Colossse,  like  certain  pretentious  philosophers  of  modern  times,  boasted  of  the 
vast  range  of  their  wisdom  and  knowledge.  They  discussed  questions,  some  of 
which,  strange  to  say,  are  reproduced  and  advocated  to-day — questions  on  the 
nature  of  the  world,  the  eternity  or  non-eternity  of  matter,  the  chief  good  of 
man,  the  orders  and  ranks  of  the  angelic  hierarchies  and  their  relation  to  the 
mediatorial  work  of  Christ,  the  necessity  of  observing  the  ceremonies  and 
austerities  of  the  law,  and  of  the  beauty  and  grandeur  of  the  theories  of  Plato 
and  Pythagoras,  the  ruling  philosophers  of  the  time.  But  all  this  is  simply 
"  the  wisdom  of  this  world  and  of  the  princes  of  this  world,  which  come  to 
nought."  It  is  only  in  Christ  we  find  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge 
to  furnish  and  enrich  the  mind  and  to  guide  into  the  way  of  salvation.  He  is 
"  to  us  who  are  saved  the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God."  If,  for  the 
sake  of  illustration,  we  classify  the  principal  sources  of  human  knowledge  into 
poetry,  history,  philosophy,  and  theology,  we  may  assert  that  only  in  Christ  does 
each  department  find  its  fullest  explication,  and  from  Him  derive  its  significance 
and  worth. 

1.  Christ  is  the  loftiest  ideal  and  purest  inspiration  of  the  poet. — Poetry 
occupies  an  important  place  in  contributing  to  the  sum  of  human  knowledge, 
and  to  the  culture,  development,  and  happiness  of  man.  It  was  the  language 
of  the  world's  infancy,  as  it  is  of  the  infancy  of  man ;  the  spontaneous  outflow 

413 


chap.  II.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSI  A  NS. 


of  the  soul,  on  its  first  acquaintance  with  the  marvels  of  the  present  life,  expresses 
itself  in  strains  of  poetic  music.  It  is  true  this  great  gift  has  been  abused,  and 
often  made  the  instrument  of  debasing  instead  of  elevating  the  mind.  Hence  Plato, 
in  constructing  his  ideal  republic,  would  exclude  the  poets  because  of  the  evil 
tendency  of  some  of  their  productions,  though  he  accords  them  all  honour  on 
account  of  their  learning  and  genius.  The  genuine  poet  pants  after  the  noblest 
expression  of  the  beautiful  and  the  good.  Christ  is  the  glorious  ideal  and  embodi- 
ment of  the  pure  and  beautiful ;  the  poet  drinks  in  his  most  ravishing  inspiration 
from  Him,  and  exhausts  all  the  resources  of  his  genius  in  attempting  to  portray 
the  exquisite  lineaments  of  His  matchless  character. 

2.  Christ  is  the  grandest  hero  of  the  historian. — History  furnishes  us  with  the 
knowledge  of  man  and  his  doings  in  all  ages — in  his  individual,  social,  and 
national  aspects.  It  traces  the  development  of  the  race  from  the  first  solitary 
man  to  the  peopling  of  the  world  with  the  varied  nationalities  which  now  swarm 
upon  its  surface.  But  the  history  of  the  world  and  man  would  be  a  dark, 
unsolvable  enigma  if  the  name  of  Christ  could  be  struck  out.  The  story  of 
redemption  unites  Christ  with  the  destiny  of  man  in  all  ages — past,  present,  and 
future;  and  "no  history  of  the  world,  political  or  moral,  can  be  either  just  or 
accurate  that  does  not  find  in  Christ  foretold  to  come,  or  in  Christ  come  and 
crucified,  its  centre  and  its  key."  The  world  was  created  by  Christ ;  it  exists  for 
Him ;  and,  without  interfering  with  individual  freedom,  it  may  be  said  that  He 
makes  its  history  :  His  name  and  influence  are  traceable  everywhere,  and  are 
everywhere  potent.  The  devout  historian  njads  in  Him  the  hero  in  whom  all 
excellencies  combine,  and  whose  exploits  he  loves  to  chronicle. 

3.  Christ  is  'prominent  among  the  sublimest  themes  of  the  philosopher. — A 
philosophy  that  does  not  recognise  the  divine  plunges  its  votaries  into  labyrinthine 
darkness ;  its  legitimate  office  is  to  conduct  to  God.  Coleridge  has  well  said : 
"  In  wonder  all  philosophy  began  ;  in  wonder  it  ends  ;  and  admiration  fills  up 
the  interspace.  But  the  first  wonder  is  the  offspring  of  ignorance ;  the  last  is 
the  parent  of  adoration."  In  every  sphere  where  philosophy  penetrates  it  is 
confronted  with  ineffaceable  evidences  of  the  power  and  presence  of  Christ. 
Among  the  splendid  phenomena  of  the  natural  creation— the  forces  that  move, 
and  the  laws  that  control  its  vast  machinery — Christ  is  acknowledged  as  the 
creating  and  ruling  spirit ;  and  only  as  the  material  world  is  regarded  as  the 
theatre  of  redemption,  and  of  moral  conflict  and  discipline,  does  the  philosopher 
reach  its  highest  meaning :  in  the  realm  of  mind,  the  true  dignity,  preciousness, 
and  immortal  endowments  of  the  soul  are  understood  only  as  we  apprehend  that 
the  life  of  the  great  Redeemer  was  sacrificed  to  effect  its  ransom  ;  and,  in  the 
sphere  of  morals,  we  decipher  the  relation  of  man  to  man,  and  to  society  at 
large,  learn  the  duties  and  obligations  we  owe  to  each  other  and  to  God,  discover 
the  standard  of  right  actions,  and  are  aided  in  explaining  and  harmonising  the 
inequalities  that  exist,  when  we  gain  an  insight  into  the  moral  relation  of 
Christ  to  the  whole  race. 

4.  Christ  is  the  all-comprehensive  subject  of  the  theologian. — God  is  inscrutable 
to  the  unchristianised  reason.  "  Canst  thou  by  searching  find  out  God  ?  Canst 
thou  find  out  the  Almighty  unto  perfection  1  It  is  as  high  as  heaven,  what 
canst  thou  do  ?  deeper  than  bell,  what  canst  thou  know  ?  "  Men  have  sought 
God  in  all  ages  with  tears,  sacrifices,  and  sufferings  indescribable ;  but  in  vain. 
Christ  is  the  only  way  to  the  Father  ;  in  Himself  He  reveals  and  illustrates  the 
Godhead.  All  our  saving  and  renewing  knowledge  of  God,  and  of  our  manifold 
relations  to  Him,  we  owe  entirely  to  Christ.  "  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any 
time ;  the  only  begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  He  hath 
declared  Him."  In  the  domain  of  theology  "  Christ  is  all  in  all."  But  for 
Him  the  office  of  the  theologian  would  be  an  impossibility. 

414 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSI  A  NS. 


CHAP.  II. 


II.  That  the  treasures  of  divine  wisdom  are  discoverable  by  the  sincere 
and  earnest  seeker. — They  are  hid ;  but  not  so  hid  as  to  be  beyond  our  reach. 
They  are  intended  for  discovery  and  appropriation.  Their  brilliancy  sparkles 
even  in  their  hiding-place.  They  are  like  a  mine,  whose  riches,  though  faintly 
indicated  on  the  surface,  are  concealed  in  the  depths  of  the  earth.  The  more 
diligently  the  mine  is  worked,  the  more  precious  and  abundant  the  ore  appears. 
So  in  Christ  there  are  treasures  of  wisdom  unseen  by  the  superficial  and  careless 
observer ;  but  to  the  humble  and  believing  student  new  and  deeper  veins  are 
perpetually  opening  up,  until,  still  pursuing  his  search,  he  is  dazzled  by  the 
splendour  and  inexhaustible  fulness  of  wealth,  surpassing  all  finite  comprehension, 
and  filling  him  with  admiration  and  awe. 

Lessons. — 1.  Man  universally  covets  wisdom.  2.  The  highest  wisdom  is 
treasured  up  in  Christ  for  man.     3.  If  man  finds  it  not,  it  is  his  own  fault. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  1-3.   Christian  Unity. 

I.  We  cannot  but  lament  the 
divisions  and  scandals  of  the  professed 
disciples  of  Jesus,  which  have  more 
than  anything  else  prevented  the 
universal  diffusion  of  the  gospel. 

II.  We  should  make  it  b  anifest,  by 
acknowledging  the  truth  in  whomso- 
ever found,  that  we  are  not  bigoted 
sectarians. 

III.  As  regards  those  with  whom 
we  are  united  in  fellowship,  let  us 
prove  by  our  humble,  modest,  and  kind 
disposition  that  we  are  lovers  of  peace 
and  concord. 

IV.  Christian  unity  is  promoted  by 
mutual  efforts  to  edify  one  another  in 
faith  and  love. — W.  France. 


Ver.  3.  Christ  the  Treasury  of  Wisdom 
and  Knowledge. — The  revelation  of 
Christ  not  merely  teaches  us  a  series 
of  truths  of  inexpressible  importance, 
and  without  it  wholly  unattainable,  but 
it  also,  as  a  great  central  discovery, 
harmonises  all  our  beliefs,  sacred  and 
secular,  binds  them  together  as  its  own 
servants,  gives  them  a  new  interest, 
position,  and  colouring,  and  dignifies 
the  pursuit  of  them  as  a  labour  in  the 
very  cause  of  God  Himself,  begun 
and  prosecuted  with  a  view  to  His 
glory — for  to  know  the  beauty  of  the 
temple  is  to  know  the  glory  of  the 
Architect. — Archer  Butler. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF   VERSE   5. 

Apostolic  Praise  of  Order  and  Stability. 

It  is  an  impressive  spectacle  to  see  a  well-armed  body  of  troops  drawn  up  in 
compact  military  order,  resisting  with  calm,  unflinching  courage  the  terrible 
charge  of  the  enemy.  Every  point  of  attack  is  strongly  guarded,  every  vacancy 
occurring  in  the  exposed  front  line  is  instantly  supplied,  and  the  broad,  deep 
phalanx  remains  impenetrable  and  invincible.  The  enforced  companionship  of 
the  apostle  with  the  soldiers  of  the  praetorian  guard,  in  his  imprisonment  in 
Rome,  where  he  would  be  a  daily  witness  of  their  exercises,  might  suggest  some 
such  metaphor  as  this  to  his  mind.  And  as  he  foresaw  the  confusion  and  ruin 
that  would  be  introduced  into  the  Colossian  Church  if  the  fatal  errors  of  the 
false  teachers  were  triumphant,  in  this  verse  he  expresses  his  joyous  satisfaction 
in  being  assured  of  the  orderly  array  and  firmly  set  stability  which  their  faith  in 
Christ  presented  against  the  assaults  of  the  foe.     Note  : — 

I.  The  apostle  commended  the  external  order  of  the  members  of  the  Church. 
— "  Beholding  your  order."  This  is  mentioned  first,  because  it  first  meets  the  eye, 
though  all  external  discipline  and  order  must  necessarily  spring  out  of  and  accom- 
pany a  genuine  faith.     There  is  no  form  of  ecclesiastical  government  that  can 

415 


chap.  ii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS. 


claim  an  exclusively  divine  sanction.  The  New  Testament  lays  down  broad,  general 
principles ;  and  the  Christian  Church  has  been  left  to  shape  itself  according  to 
circumstances  and  in  harmony  with  the  indications  of  divine  Providence.  True 
order  depends,  not  upon  the  form  of  Church  polity  we  adopt — whether  prelacy, 
presbytery,  or  Congregationalism — as  upon  the  consistency,  fidelity,  and  union  of 
the  individual  members  of  the  Church.  Order  that  is  not  based  on  a  vigorous 
Church-life,  and  regulated  by  it,  is  empty  and  powerless ;  it  is  like  the  ice  of  the 
Polar  regions,  which  sometimes  assumes  forms  of  exquisite  and  wondrous  beauty, 
but  is  cold,  heartless,  dead.  The  Scriptural  directions  on  this  subject  are  brief, 
but  pregnant  with  meaning  :  "  Let  all  things  be  done  decently  and  in  order"  ; 
"  God  is  not  the  Author  of  confusion,  but  of  peace,  as  in  all  the  Churches  of  the 
saints  "  ;  "  Let  all  things  be  done  with  charity  "  ;  "  The  rest  will  I  set  in  order 
when  I  come."  While  organisation  that  is  not  instinct  with  a  moving,  pervasive, 
and  aggressive  life  is  cumbersome,  vapid,  and  useless ;  on  the  other  hand, 
Christian  steadfastness  is  imperilled  where  order  is  disregarded. 

II.  The  apostle  commended  their  stability  in  the  faith. — "  And  the  stead- 
fastness of  your  faith  in  Christ."  These  words  describe  the  internal  condition  of 
the  Church  ;  and  the  picture  of  a  firm,  confident  reliance  on  Christ  which  he 
beheld  delighted  the  soul  of  the  anxious  apostle.  Order  is  the  fence  and  guard, 
steadfastness  the  end  in  view,  order  is  the  garb  and  ornament,  steadfastness 
the  substance  of  the  Christian  character.  Faith  girds  and  strengthens  the  soul 
with  its  unchanging  and  invincible  verities ;  the  shafts  of  error  and  profanity 
assail  it  in  vain.  When  the  Roman  proconsul,  from  his  judgment-seat,  urged 
the  holy  Polycarp  to  save  his  life  by  cursing  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  the 
venerable  martyr  calmly  answered  :  "  For  eighty-six  years  I  have  served  him ; 
He  has  never  yet  done  me  harm.  How  can  I  blaspheme  my  King,  who  has 
saved  me  !  "  Man  is  great  and  noble,  not  by  what  he  possesses,  not  by  what  he 
says,  not  by  what  he  gives,  not  by  what  he  does,  but  by  what  he  believes.  The 
most  magnanimous  outward  conduct  may  be,  after  all,  a  very  imperfect  repre- 
sentation of  the  soul's  deepest  faith.  What  a  man  believes  is  not  therefore 
a  matter  of  comparative  indifference,  but  a  question  of  supreme  importance; 
he  must  have  a  clear,  definite  creed.  True  a  creed  is  but  the  visible,  expressive 
mould  of  the  inward  conception  of  the  truth  believed ;  but  as  the  tendency  of  all 
life  is  to  assume  form,  and  can  be  understood  by  us  only  as  it  does  so,  so  faith,  as 
a  vital  and  irresistibly  active  principle,  must  inevitably  shape  itself  into  somo 
outward  expression.  Where  there  is  no  creed,  there  is  no  faith  ;  a  creedless  man 
believes  in  nothing,  and  he  is  himself  that  nothing.  He  has  no  more  cohesion  in 
him  than  the  separate  particles  of  sand  in  the  hour-glass.  All  true  faith  takes 
its  rise  "  in  Christ,"  and  gathers  its  stability  by  continuing  in  Him. 

III.  The  apostle  cherished  a  deep,  personal  interest  in  their  welfare. — 
1.  In  spirit  he  was  present  with  them.  "  For  though  I  be  absent  in  the  flesh, 
yet  am  I  with  you  in  the  spirit."  We  have  no  satisfactory  evidence  that  the 
apostle  had  as  yet  personally  visited  Colossaa.  Epaphras,  the  faithful  and  anxious 
evangelist,  sought  him  out  in  Rome,  perhaps  for  the  purpose  of  laying  before 
him  the  state  of  Colossse  and  of  the  neighbouring  Churches  on  the  banks  of  the 
Lycus.  The  apostle's  interest  in  Colossse  was  further  excited  at  this  time  by 
meeting  with  Onesimus,  a  runaway  slave,  belonging  to  the  household  of 
Philemon,  a  Colossian.  The  apostle  was  the  means  of  bringing  the  runaway 
to  repentance  and  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  liberty  of  the  spiritually  free.  These 
circumstances  deepened  St.  Paul's  concern  in  the  affairs  of  the  Colossian 
Christians  ;  he  grasped  all  the  points  of  the  situation,  was  keenly  alive  to  the 
gravity  of  the  dangers  with  which  they  were  threatened,  and,  as  though  he 
were  personally  present  in  their  midst,  expressed  his  sincere  sympathy  with  them 
in  their  trials,  and  his  profound  satisfaction  on  hearing  of  their  steady  adherence 

416 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.  chap.  n. 


to  the  truth.  It  is  not  necessary  to  be  locally  near  in  order  to  hold  spiritual 
intercourse ;  oceans  may  roll  between  individuals  whose  souls  participate  in  the 
highest  communion.  The  soul  is  where  it  loves :  thither  it  directs  its  affections, 
wishes,  and  hopes. 

2.  He  rejoiced  in  their  fidelity. — "  Joying  and  beholding."  As  though  an 
actual  spectator  of  their  order  and  steadfastness,  his  soul  is  filled  with  joy.  The 
expression  of  his  hearty  interest  in  their  state,  and  his  praise  of  their  fidelity, 
prepared  them  to  give  heed  to  his  cautions  against  the  seductions  of  false 
teachers,  and  to  his  exhortations  to  perseverance.  No  disappointment  is  so 
poignant  as  that  arising  from  the  failure  of  Christian  toil,  and  no  joy  so 
exquisite  as  the  joy  of  success.  The  spectacle  of  a  Christian  Church  poised  in 
beauteous  order,  and  strengthened  with  the  might  of  an  unfalteringly  aggressive 
faith,  is  a  subject  of  unspeakable  joy  to  God,  to  His  angels,  and  to  all  true 
ministers. 

Lessons. — 1.  Attention  must  be  paid  to  the  outward  as  well  as  the  inward  state 
of  the  Church.  2.  While  the  Church  preserves  its  order  and  stability  it  is  invulnerable. 
3.  It  is  cause  of  rejoicing  when  the  Church  faithfully  maintains  the  conquests 
already  won. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  6,  7. 

Suggestive  Features  of  the  Christian  Life. 

The  Christian  life  is  essentially  progressive.  The  law  that  governs  its 
existence  involves  perpetual,  active  increase ;  if  it  did  not  grow,  it  would 
cease  to  live.  Unlike  the  principle  of  growth  in  the  natural  world,  we  cannot 
conceive  a  point  in  the  religious  life  where  it  necessarily  becomes  stationary,  and 
then  begins  to  decline,  on  the  other  hand,  every  provision  is  made  for  its 
unceasing  expansion  in  the  highest  moral  excellencies. 

I.  The  Christian  life  begins  in  a  personal  reception  of  Christ. — "  As  ye  have 
therefore  received  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord  "  (ver.  6).  Religion  is  not  a  self -develop- 
ment of  innate  human  goodness,  as  many  in  the  present  day  believe  and  teach. 
The  soul  of  man  is  infected  with  the  virulent  poison  of  sin  ;  no  part  has  escaped 
the  destructive  moral  taint.  The  utmost  exercise  of  the  unsanctioned  powers  of 
the  soul  can  therefore  tend  only  towards  the  development  of  its  own  inborn 
corruption.  As  the  vinegar  plant  reproduces  itself  with  great  rapidity,  and 
impregnates  every  branch  and  fibre  with  its  own  essential  acid,  so  the  evil 
reigning  in  man  reproduces  itself  with  marvellous  rapidity,  and  permeates  the 
whole  soul  with  its  debasing  poison.  Religion  is  a  receiving — the  receiving  of  a 
gift,  and  that  a  divine  gift.  It  is  the  growth  and  development  of  the  super- 
natural in  man.     "  Christ  in  you  the  hope  of  glory." 

1.  Christ  is  received  as  the  Christ. — The  Colossian  heresy  aimed  at  subverting 
the  true  idea  of  the  Christ,  the  Anointed  One,  commissioned  by  the  Father  to 
effect  the  reconciliation  of  the  world  to  Himself;  it  interposed  a  graduated 
series  of  angelic  mediators,  and  thus  thought  to  discredit  the  sole  and  absolute 
mediatorship  of  Christ.  To  receive  the  Son  of  God  effectually  is  to  receive  Him 
in  all  that  He  claimed  to  be,  and  all  that  He  came  to  do,  as  the  divine,  specially 
anointed  Son,  who  alone  and  fully  manifested  the  Father,  and  who  is  the  only 
mediator  between  sinful  man  and  God.  It  is  of  unspeakable  importance  to 
catch  the  true  idea  of  the  character  and  office  of  Christ  at  the  beginning  of  the 
Christian  life. 

2.  Christ  is  received  as  Jesus  the  Lord. — Jesus  is  the  name  by  which  He  was 
known  among  men,  and  points  out  how  completely  He  has  identified  Himself 
with  humanity  as  the  Saviour.     "  It  behoved  Him  to  be  made  like  unto  His 

EE  417 


chap.  II.  HOMILETIG   COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS. 


brethren,  that  He  might  be  a  merciful  and  faithful  High  Priest,  to  make  recon- 
ciliation for  the  sins  of  the  people."  He  is  also  Lord,  the  supreme  Governor  in 
all  spheres,  in  nature,  providence,  and  grace.  To  receive  Jesus  aright,  He  must 
be  trusted  as  the  Saviour,  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost,  acknowledged  as  the 
Sovereign  and  universal  Ruler,  and  homage  and  obedience  rendered  to  His 
rightful  authority.  Our  reception  of  Christ  does  not  place  us  beyond  the  reach 
of  law,  but  creates  in  us  the  capacity  for  rendering  an  intelligent  and  cheerful 
obedience  to  its  holy  requirements. 

3.  Christ  is  received  by  an  act  of  faith. — To  receive  Christ  is  to  believe  in  Him ; 
and  faith  in  Christ  is  simply  the  reception  of  Christ :  the  only  way  of  receiving 
Him  into  the  soul  is  by  faith.  The  soul  accepts,  not  only  the  testimony  concern- 
ing Christ,  whether  furnished  by  Himself  or  by  His  witnesses,  but  accepts  Christ 
Himself.  The  great,  final  object  of  faith  that  saves  is  Christ,  and  all  testimony 
is  valuable  only  as  it  brings  us  to  Him.  The  sin-tossed  spirit  finds  rest  and 
peace  only  as  it  reposes,  not  in  an  abstract  truth,  but  in  a  person — not  in  love  as 
the  law  of  the  moral  universe,  but  in  a  person  who  is  Himself  love. 

II.  The  Christian  life  is  governed  by  the  law  of  Christ. — "  So  walk  ye  in  Him  " 
(ver.  6).  The  word  "  walk"  expresses  the  general  conduct  of  man  and  the  process 
of  progression  in  the  formation  of  individual  character.  The  will  of  Christ,  as 
indicated  in  His  character,  words,  spirit,  and  example,  is  the  ruling  principle  in 
the  life  of  the  believer. 

1.  To  walk  in  Christ  implies  a  recognition  of  Him  in  all  things. — In  everything 
that  constitutes  our  daily  life — business,  domestic  relations,  social  engagements, 
friendships,  pleasures,  cares,  and  trials — we  may  trace  the  presence  of  Christ 
and  recognise  His  rule.  Everywhere,  on  road,  or  rail,  or  sea — in  all  seasons  of 
distress  or  joy,  of  poverty  or  wealth,  of  disturbance  or  rest — we  may  be  conscious 
of  the  encompassing  and  regulating  presence  of  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord. 

2.  To  walk  in  Christ  implies  a  complete  consecration  to  Him. — He  has  the 
supreme  claim  upon  our  devotion  and  service :  "  We  are  not  our  own ;  we  are 
bought  with  a  price."  Our  life  consists  in  serving  Him  :  "  Whether  we  live,  we 
live  unto  the  Lord."  The  best  of  everything  we  possess  should  be  cheerfully 
offered  to  Him.  Carpeaux,  the  celebrated  French  sculptor,  was  kept  in 
comparative  retirement  for  some  time  before  his  death  by  a  long  and  painful 
illness.  One  Sunday,  as  he  was  being  drawn  to  church,  he  was  accosted  by  a 
certain  prince,  who  exclaimed,  "  Carpeaux,  I  have  good  news  for  you  !  You 
have  been  advanced  in  the  Legion  of  Honour.  Here  is  the  rosette  d'officier." 
The  emaciated  sculptor  smiled  and  replied,  "  Thank  you,  my  dear  friend.  It  is 
the  good  God  who  shall  first  have  the  noble  gift."  Saying  which,  he  approached 
the  altar,  put  the  rosette  in  his  button-hole,  and  reverentially  knelt  down  to  pray. 

3.  To  walk  in  Christ  implies  a  continual  approximation  to  the  highest  life  in 
Him. — The  Christian  can  rise  no  higher  than  to  be  most  like  Christ.  The 
highest  ambition  of  the  apostle  was  to  be  "  found  in  Him."  Life  in  Him  is  a 
perpetual  progress  in  personal  purity  and  ever- deepening  felicity.  Our  interest 
in  the  vast  future  is  intensified  by  the  Christ-inspired  hope  that  we  shall  be 
for  ever  virtually  united  to  Him,  that  we  shall  delight  in  ever-changing  visions 
of  His  matchless  glory,  that  we  shall  be  like  Him,  and  reflect  and  illustrate  the 
splendour  of  His  all-perfect  character.  Every  triumph  over  sin  is  a  substantial 
advance  towards  this  glorious  future  destiny. 

III.  The  Christian  life  is  supported  and  established  by  faith  in  fully 
declared  truth. — 1.  There  is  the  idea  of  stability.  The  believer  is  rooted  in 
Christ,  as  a  tree  planted  in  firm,  immovable  soil ;  he  is  built  up  in  Christ,  as  an 
edifice  on  a  sure  foundation ;  and  in  both  senses,  as  a  tree  and  as  a  building,  he 
must  be  established  in  the  truth  which  has  been  demonstrated  to  him  as  divine 
and   all -authoritative.      It  is  not  enough  to  preserve  the  appearance  of   an 

418 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS.  chap,  h, 


external  walk  in  Christ ;  but  the  roots  of  our  faith  must  be  worked  into  Him, 
and  the  superstructure  of  holiness  rest  on  Him  as  the  only  foundation  laid  in 
Zion.  The  soul  thus  firmly  established  will  survive  the  heaviest  storms  of 
adversity  and  the  most  furious  assaults  of  error. 

2.  There  is  the  idea  of  progress. — Walking  implies  a  continual  advance  to  a 
given  destination ;  a  tree  is  planted  in  order  to  grow ;  the  building,  after  the 
foundation  is  laid,  rises  to  completion.  The  word  "  built "  is  in  the  present  tense, 
and  describes  a  work  in  actual  process.  So  the  believer,  having  become  attached 
to  the  only  foundation  that  is  laid,  which  is  Christ  Jesus,  is  ever  rising  in  con- 
formity with  the  foundation  and  with  the  outlines  of  that  grand  spiritual  edifice 
of  which  Christ  is  the  pattern  and  glory.  Faith  is  the  cement  that  fastens  one 
part  of  the  building  to  the  other;  but  faith  as  a  living,  active  principle  also 
admits  of  increase.  With  respect  to  every  individual  effort  after  a  higher 
spiritual  life,  according  to  our  faith  it  is  done  unto  us. 

IV.  The  Christian  life  has  its  most  appropriate  outflow  in  thanksgiving.— 
"  Abounding  therein  with  thanksgiving  "  (ver.  7).  The  end  of  all  human  conduct 
b  thanksgiving.  It  should  be  expressed  in  every  word,  and  appear  in  every 
action.  Life  should  be  a  ceaseless,  ever-abounding  outflow  of  gratitude.  We 
should  never  forget  the  magnitude  of  the  blessings  we  have  received,  the  wealth 
of  mercies  now  offered  to  us,  and  the  source  whence  they  all  issue.  A  thankful 
remembrance  of  past  benefits  cheers  and  strengthens  the  heart  under  difficulties, 
and  disposes  the  bounteous  Donor  to  confer  further  benefits.  There  is  nothing 
in  which  Christians  are  more  deficient  than  in  a  devout  and  heartily  expressed 
gratitude.  Gratitude  expands  our  sympathies  for  the  race.  What  a  triumph 
of  disinterested  thankfulness  was  that  of  the  invalid  who,  though  confined  to  his 
room,  "thanked  God  for  the  sunshine  for  others  to  enjoy"!  The  spirit  of 
Christian  progress  is  one  of  unceasing  thanksgiving. 

Lessons. —  1.  The  Christian  life  is  divinely  bestowed.  2.  The  Christian  life  is 
divinely  sustained.  3.  The  reality  of  the  Christian  life  is  evidenced  by  effusive  and 
practical  gratitude. 

GERM  NOTES   ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  6,  7.  Retrospection  the  Basis  of  and  gets  the  whole  man.     3.  The  life  of 

Progress.  faith,  as  embodied  in  the  moralities  of 

I.  The  Christian  consciousness  in  its  Christian  living,  is  thus  provided  for 
apprehension  of  Christ. — 1.  There  are  and  follows  this  consecrating  act. 

two  opposing  theories  prevalent   on  the  III.  The  Christian  consciousness  in 

person  of  Christ — the  rationalistic  and  its  subjection  to  Christ. — 1.  The  sphere 

the  revealed.     The  one  rules   out  His  of  the  lordship  of  Christ  is  the  human 

Godhead ;  the  other  is  the  basis  of  the  mind.     2.  The   claim   of  this   lordship 

Christian   faith.       2.   Two   systems   of  is  absolute.     3.  The  mind  is  free  and 

theology ,  widely  distinct  from  each  other ,  unconstrained  in   its   surrender   to   the 

are  dependent  on  these  theories.      The  authority  of  Christ. — John  Burton. 
one   puts   man   at   its   centre,  and    is 

wholly   human ;    the   other  enthrones  Yer.  6.  Moral  Imitation. 
God,  and  is  essentially  divine.   3.  There  I.  The  text  assumes  that  man  pos- 
ts only  one  Christ,  one  faith,  one  salva-  sesses  the  faculty  of  imitation. 
tion.   4.  It  is  within  the  one  or  the  other         II.  He  requires  an  example  to  imi- 
of  these  two  systems  that  we  must  posit  tate,  and  that  example  is  Christ. 
our  decisions.  III.  A  model  must  be  seen  to  be 

II.  The  Christian  consciousness  in  imitated,  so  Christ  has  presented 
its  reception  of  Christ. — 1.  Faith  re-  Himself  to  us  for  that  purpose. — 
ceives  the  whole  Christ.     2.  Christ  asks  W.  Frazer. 

419 


CHAP.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS. 


MAIN  H0MILET1CS  OF   VERSE  8. 

The  Marks  of  a  False  Philosophy. 

Philosophy  plays  an  important  part  in  the  investigation  and  discovery  of 
truth.  The  use  of  the  word  arose  out  of  the  humility  of  Pythagoras,  who 
called  himself  a  lover  of  wisdom.  The  noblest  intellects  of  all  ages  have  been 
devoted  to  the  pursuit  of  the  same  coveted  prize.  Philosophy  represents  the 
highest  effort  of  the  human  intellect  in  its  search  after  knowledge.  It  explores 
and  tests  phenomena  in  the  realm  of  physics  and  of  morals,  and  discovers  the 
subtle  laws  by  which  those  phenomena  are  governed.  It  elevates  man  to  his 
true  rank  in  creation,  and  teaches  that  he  must  be  estimated,  not  by  his  physical 
relation  to  the  outward  world,  but  by  the  sublime  endowments  of  his  mind,  into 
which  it  is  the  special  function  of  philosophy  to  inquire.  The  philosophic  mood 
never  reaches  its  highest  development  till  it  is  Christianised.  The  apostle  does 
not  stigmatise  all  philosophy  as  in  vain ;  he  knew  the  value  of  a  true  philosophy, 
and  in  his  estimation  the  Christian  religion  was  the  embodiment  of  the  highest 
philosophy.  But  he  warned  the  Colossians  against  a  false  philosophy  that  was 
deceptive  in  its  pretentions  and  deadly  in  its  influence. 

I.  A  false  philosophy  is  known  by  its  profitless  speculations. — The  absence 
of  both  preposition  and  article  in  the  second  clause  shows  that  "  vain  deceit " 
describes  and  qualifies  philosophy.  A  celebrated  Roman  sophist  summed  up  his 
deliberate  judgment  on  the  efforts  of  the  learned  in  the  painful  search  after 
wisdom  in  these  words  :  "  The  human  mind  wanders  in  a  diseased  delirium,  and 
it  is  therefore  not  surprising  that  there  is  no  possible  folly  which  philosophers, 
at  one  time  or  another,  have  propounded  as  a  lesson  of  wisdom."  When  the 
most  highly  cultured  intellects  have  been  gravely  occupied  with  tricks  of  magic, 
the  casting  of  nativities,  the  random  guesses  of  soothsaying,  and  the  pretended 
marvels  of  a  mystic  astrology ;  when  the  best  of  life  has  been  spent  in  discussing 
transcendental  questions  as  to  the  eternity  of  matter,  fate,  the  mortality  of  the 
soul,  the  worship  of  angels  and  their  mature  endowments  and  habits,  and  in 
definitional  hair-splitting  as  to  what  constitutes  the  chief  good  of  man ;  when  the 
truest  and  best  discoveries  of  human  reason  are  used  to  disparage  divine  revelation 
and  discredit  the  absolute  authority  of  saving  truth — then  philosophy  falsifies 
its  name,  frustrates  its  lofty  mission,  and  degenerates  into  vain,  empty,  profitless 
speculations.  The  student  of  the  theories  and  contradictions  of  certain  philo- 
sophic schools  may  begin  with  extravagant  expectations,  only  to  end  in  chagrin 
and  despondency.  The  errors  which  assailed  the  Colossian  Church  were  a  mixture 
of  the  Oriental  system  of  Zoroaster  with  Judaism,  and  with  the  crude,  half- 
comprehended  truths  of  Christianity.  It  was  a  mongrel  system  of  philosophy, 
containing  the  germs  of  what  afterwards  developed  into  an  advanced  Gnosticism, 
and  became  the  prolific  source  of  many  forms  of  heresy.  Its  abettors  became 
"  vain  in  their  imaginations,  and  their  foolish  heart  was  darkened ;  professing 
themselves  to  be  wise,  they  became  fools." 

II.  A  false  philosophy  is  known  by  its  purely  human  origin.— "  After  the 
tradition  of  men." 

1.  The  human  mind  is  limited. — The  stream  can  never  rise  higher  than  its 
source ;  so  the  wisdom  that  comes  from  man  is  necessarily  bounded  by  the  range 
of  his  mental  powers.  The  human  mind  cannot  penetrate  far  into  any  subject 
without  discovering  there  is  a  point  beyond  which  all  is  darkness  and  uncertainty. 
It  is  impossible  for  the  circumscribed  and  unaided  mind  of  man  t©  construct 
a  philosophy  that  shall  be  universally  true  and  beneficial.  Tillotson  has  said : 
"  Philosophy  has  given  us  several  plausible  rules  for  attaining  peace  and  tran- 
quillity of  mind,  but  they  fall  very  much  short  in  bringing  men  to  it." 

2.  All  human  knowledge  is  imperfect. — "If  any  man  think  that  he  knoweth 

420 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS.  chap,  il 


anything,  he  knoweth  nothing  yet  as  he  ought  to  know.''  The  traditions  of  men 
are  the  accumulation  of  mere  human  theories  transmitted  from  age  to  age  until 
they  have  assumed  the  pretensions  of  a  philosophy,  imposing  a  number  of  un- 
inspired and  unauthorised  observances  and  austerities.  The  imperfection  of 
human  knowledge  is  not  obliterated  but  aggravated  by  its  antiquity.  A  philo- 
sophy that  builds  solely  on  man  is  baseless  and  full  of  danger. 

III.  A  false  philosophy  is  known  by  its  undue  exaltation  of  elementary 
principles. — "After  the  rudiments  of  the  world."  The  source  of  the  false 
teaching  against  which  the  apostle  warned  was  found  in  human  tradition,  and 
its  subject-matter  was  made  up  of  "  the  rudiments  of  the  world  " — the  most 
elementary  instruction  conveyed  by  external  and  material  objects,  suited  only  to 
man's  infancy  in  the  world.  The  legal  rights  and  ceremonies  instituted  by 
Moses  are  evidently  referred  to  here ;  they  were  the  first  rough  elements  of  an 
introductory  religion  fit  only  for  children — shadows  at  best  of  great  and  deeper 
truths  to  which  they  were  intended  to  lead,  and  yet,  by  the  tendency  of  the  soul 
to  cling  to  the  outward,  gendering  to  bondage.  "Even  so  we,  when  we  were 
children,  were  in  bondage  under  the  elements  [rudiments]  of  the  world.  But 
now,  after  that  ye  have  known  Gcd,  how  turn  ye  again  to  the  weak  and  beggarly 
elements?"  (Gal.  iv.  3-10).  The  apostle  shows  the  Oolossians  that,  in  Christ, 
they  had  been  exalted  into  the  sphere  of  the  Spirit,  and  that  it  would  be  a  sad 
retrogression  to  plunge  again  into  the  midst  of  the  sensuous  and  ceremonial.  A 
true  philosophy,  while  starting  necessarily  with  elementary  principles,  conducts 
its  votaries  into  a  pathway  of  increasing  knowledge  and  of  spiritual  exaltation 
and  liberty.  A  false  philosophy  fetters  the  mind  by  exaggerating  the  importance 
of  first  principles  and  insisting  on  their  eternal  obligation. 

IV.  A  false  philosophy  is  known  by  its  Christlessness. — "  And  not  after 
Christ."  Christ  is  neither  the  author  nor  the  substance  of  its  teaching ;  not  the 
author,  for  its  advocates  rely  on  human  traditions  ;  not  the  substance,  for  they 
ignore  Christ  by  the  substitution  of  external  ceremonies  and  angelic  mediators. 
Such  a  method  of  philosophising  may  be  after  the  Jewish  fanatics,  after  the 
Pythagoreans  or  Platonists,  after  Moses  and  his  abrogated  legalism  ;  but  it  is 
not  after  Christ.  There  is  no  affinity  between  Christ  and  their  inventions ;  the 
substances  cannot  amalgamate.  As  it  is  impossible,  by  any  process,  to  convert  a 
baser  metal  into  gold,  so  is  it  impossible  to  elevate  a  vain  philosophy  into  Chris- 
tianity. All  true  saving  knowledge  must  be  after — i.e.  according  to — Christ. 
It  is  in  Him  alone  the  deepest  wants  of  man's  nature  can  be  met  and  satisfied. 
Any  philosophy,  though  championed  by  the  most  brilliant  intellects,  that  tends 
to  lure  the  soul  from  Christ,  that  puts  anything  in  the  place  of  Him,  or  depreciates 
in  any  way  our  estimate  of  His  glorious  character,  is  false  and  full  of  peril. 

V.  A  false  philosophy  is  known  by  its  destructive  influence. — u  Lest  any 
man  spoil  you."  The  meaning  of  the  word  "  spoil "  is  very  full  and  significant :  it 
is  not  simply  to  despoil — to  strip  off — but  to  carry  away  as  spoil,  just  as  the 
four  kings,  after  the  battle  in  the  vale  of  Siddim,  plundered  the  cities  of  Sodom 
and  Gomorrah,  and  bore  away  as  spoil  the  people  and  all  their  property  and 
victuals  (Gen.  xiv.  12-16).  The  Colossians  had  been  rescued  from  the  bondage 
of  darkness  and  transferred  to  the  kingdom  of  light ;  they  were  settled  there  as 
free  and  happy  citizens  ;  and  now  there  was  danger  lest  they  should  be  tampered 
with  by  some  crafty  marauder,  seized  and  carried  away  as  booty,  and  fall  into  a 
worse  state  than  their  former  slavery.  There  are  worse  losses  than  loss  of 
property,  or  even  of  children  :  man  is  never  so  grievously  spoiled  as  when  his 
soul  is  debased  and  robbed  by  the  errors  of  wicked  seducers.  Men  who  have 
contemptuously  given  up  the  Bible  as  a  book  of  fables,  lost  their  peace  of  mind, 
wrecked  their  moral  character,  and  blasted  their  prospects  for  ever,  began  their 
downward  career  by  embracing  the  apparently  harmless  ideas  of  a  false  philosophy, 

421 


chap.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS. 


"  The  thief  cometh  not,"  saith  Jesus,  "but  to  steal,  to  kill,  and  to  destroy;  I" — 
the  infallible  Teacher,  the  incorruptible  Guardian,  the  inexhaustible  Life-giver 
— "am  come  that  they  might  have  life,  and  that  they  might  have  it  more 
abundantly." 

VI.  Against  a  false  philosophy  the  Church  must  be  faithfully  warned. — 
"  Beware." 

1.  Because  it  is  seductive  in  its  pretensions. — It  seeks  to  refine  and  elevate  the 
plain  gospel  by  a  show  of  lofty  intellectualism;  it  dignifies  some  particular  religious 
rite  into  an  unjustifiable  importance;  it  elaborates  a  ritual  marvellous  for  specta- 
cular display  and  musical  effect ;  it  flatters  the  pride  and  ministers  to  the 
corruption  of  the  human  heart ;  and,  stealing  through  the  avenue  of  the  charmed 
senses,  gains  an  imperious  mastery  over  the  whole  man. 

2.  Because  it  is  baneful  in  its  effect. — It  rot  only  misrepresents  and  distorts  the 
truth,  but  injures  the  faculties  of  the  soul  by  wliich  truth  is  obtained  and  kept. 
It  darkens  the  understanding,  pollutes  the  conscience,  and  weakens  the  will.  It 
robs  man  of  his  dearest  treasure,  and  offers  in  exchange  a  beggarly  system  of 
crude,  unsatisfying  speculations.  The  soul  is  goaded  into  a  restless  search  after 
rest,  and  cursed  with  its  non-attainment. 

Lessons. —  1.  Human  philosophy  is  essentially  defective.  2.  The  true  philosophy 
is  the  highest  knowledge  of  Christ.  3.  All  philosophy  that  weans  the  soul  from 
Christ  is  false,  and  should  be  shunned. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses   9,  10. 

The  Divine  Fulness  of  Christ  a  Pledge  of  the  Believer's  Perfection. 

Christianity  is  the  true  philosophy.  Here  are  its  profoundest  depths,  its  loftiest 
themes,  its  most  substantial  discoveries.  The  philosophy  that  is  not  after  Christ 
is  vain  and  misleading.  It  was  a  false  conception  of  the  Colossian  heresy  that 
the  divine  energy  was  dispersed  among  several  spiritual  agencies.  The  apostle 
boldly  declares  that  in  Christ  dwells  the  whole  TrA^pw/Aa,  the  entire  fulness  of 
the  Deity,  and  that  it  is  in  vain  to  seek  for  spiritual  life  in  communion  with 
inferior  creatures. 

1.  The  divine  fulness  of  Christ. — 1.  In  Christ  is  the  fulness  of  the  Deity. 
"  For  in  Him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  "  (ver.  9).  A  small  text, 
but  a  great  subject.  These  words  contain  the  sublimest  truth  in  the  narrowest 
compass.  Fulness  is  a  term  used  to  signify  all  that  anything  contains.  Hence 
we  read  of  the  fulness  of  the  earth,  the  fulness  of  the  sea,  and  that  the  Church 
is  Christ's  body,  the  fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in  all.  In  Christ  inhere  all 
the  perfections,  attributes,  and  qualities  that  essentially  constitute  the  divine 
nature — power,  wisdom,  eternity,  self-existence,  omnipresence,  truth,  love, 
holiness.  The  deities  of  the  heathen  never  pretended  to  po-s^ss  more  than  a 
few  divine  attributes,  some  portion  of  divinity.  But  Christ  contains  in  Hims&lf 
the  totality  of  divine  powers  and  excellencies. 

2.  The  fulness  of  the  Deity  in  Christ  is  present  and  permanent. — "  Dwelleth." 
The  present  tense  is  used.  It  is  not  as  a  transient  gleam  or  as  a  brilliant 
display  to  serve  a  temporary  purpose,  but  as  an  ever-present  and  unchanging 
reality.  Mystery  of  mysteries !  the  body  that  hungered  and  thirsted,  that 
bled  and  died,  that  rose  and  ascended  on  high,  is  still  the  temple  of  illimitable 
Deity  !  The  manifestations  of  God  through  angels  and  prophets  were  brief  and 
partial.  The  Shekinah,  or  visible  glory,  that  hovered  over  the  ark  of  the 
covenant  was  a  symbol  only  of  a  present  deity,  and  disappeared  as  mysteriously 
as  it  came.  But  in  Christ  the  transcendent  fulness  of  the  Godhead  finds  its 
permanent  home,  never  to  depart,  never  to  vanish. 

422 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.  chap  n. 


3.  The  fulness  of  the  Deity  in  Christ  has  a  visible  embodiment. — "  Bodily."  In 
the  person  of  Christ  every  moral  perfection  of  the  Godhead  was  enshrined,  and 
brought  within  the  range  of  human  vision.  He  presented  and  proved  the  fact 
of  the  divine  existence.  He  embodied  and  declared  the  divine  spirituality.  He 
delineated  the  divine  disposition  and  character  in  the  days  of  His  flesh.  Gleams 
of  the  divine  nature  occasionally  broke  forth.  "  We  beheld  His  glory,  the 
glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God."  And  now,  from  that  subtle, 
glorified  human  form  of  our  exalted  Mediator,  the  splendour  of  the  Deity  rays 
forth,  filling  the  universe  with  light  and  glory  and  joy.  In  Christ  the 
Godhead  is  revealed,  not  as  a  changing,  shadowy  phantasm,  but  as  a  positive, 
substantial  reality. 

II.  The  supreme  authority  of  Christ. — "  Which  is  the  Head  of  all  principality 
and  power"  (ver.  10). 

1.  Angels  are  the  principalities  and  powers  of  the  universe. — They  are  called 
spirits  to  express  their  nature,  and  angels  to  designate  their  office  as  messengers 
sent  by  God.  They  are  called  sons  of  God,  to  indicate  their  lofty  relationship ; 
cherubim,  because  of  their  composite  nature,  and  because  they  are  placed  under 
the  presence  of  Jehovah,  whose  moving  throne  they  appear  to  draw ;  seraphim, 
because  of  their  burning  ardour  in  executing  the  commands  of  God  ;  stars  of  the 
morning,  to  set  forth  their  brightness ;  a  flaming  fire,  because  of  the  fierceness 
and  celerity  with  which  they  carry  out  the  vengeance  of  Heaven  ;  and  they  are 
called  principalities  and  powers  on  account  of  their  exalted  rank  and  superior 
endowments. 

2.  Among  the  principalities  and  powers  of  the  universe  Christ  has  supreme 
authority. — He  is  the  Head  of  all  angelic  hierarchies.  He  called  them  into  being. 
He  endows  them  with  vast  intelligence.  He  designates  their  rank.  He  controls 
their  beneficent  ministries.  He  fills  the  circle  of  their  bliss.  To  worship  angels, 
or  to  seek  their  mediation  in  the  affairs  of  the  soul,  is  not  only  gross  idolatry, 
but  an  insufferable  insult  to  the  fulness  of  the  Deity  in  Christ. 

III.  The  believer's  fulness  in  Christ. — "  And  ye  are  complete  in  Him  "  (ver.  10). 

1.  In  Christ  is  the  inspiration  of  the  believer's  life. — The  soul  finds  its  true  life 
by  believing  on  the  Son  of  God.  "  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life."  In 
ourselves  we  are  like  empty  vessels ;  but  in  Christ  we  are  filled  up  to  the  brim. 
As  there  is  an  original  and  divine  fulness  of  the  Godhead  in  Christ,  so  there  is 
a  derived  fulness  communicated  to  us.  Every  advance  in  Christian  experience, 
every  aspiration  after  a  more  exalted  spiritual  tone,  every  yearning  of  the  soul 
after  clearer  light,  every  struggle  for  victory  over  self  and  sin,  is  prompted  and 
accelerated  by  the  impetuous  inflow  of  the  divine  life. 

2.  In  Christ  is  the  perfect  ideal  of  the  believer's  character. — Christ  has  exalted 
human  nature.  He  took  not  on  Him  the  nature  of  angels,  but  the  seed  of 
Abraham.  He  has  shown  what  human  nature  can  become,  and  what  it  can  do. 
In  Him  we  have  the  illustrious  pattern  after  which  our  souls  are  to  be  fashioned 
and  rounded  off  into  a  full-orbed  completeness.  u  Christ  is  the  mirror  that 
glasses  God's  image  before  us,  and  the  spirit  is  the  plastic  force  within  that 
transfers  and  photographs  that  image  ;  and  so,  beholding  as  in  a  glass  the  glory 
of  the  Lord,  we  are  changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  by 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord." 

3.  In  Christ  is  the  interminable  bliss  of  the  believer's  future. — The  present  life 
is  a  training  for  the  future.  The  more  it  is  in  harmony  with  the  will  of  Christ 
the  happier  will  it  be.  Every  attempt,  amid  the  multiform  relations  of  life,  to 
do  our  duty  in  a  Christly  spirit,  is  bringing  us  into  closer  sympathy  with  Christ, 
and  preparing  us  for  a  joyous  life  with  Him  hereafter.  The  apostle  expressed 
the  condition  of  the  highest  conceivable  bliss  to  the  believer  in  the  words,  "  And 
so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord." 

423 


chap.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS. 


Lessons. — 1.  Christ  is  essentially  divine.  2.  There  is  an  ineffable  fulness  of 
salvation  in  Christ.  3.  All  secondary  mediatws  between  God  and  man  are  super- 
fluous.    4.  The  soul  is  complete  in  Christ  only  as  it  believes  in  Him. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 


Vers.  9,  10.-4  Presentation  of  Two 
Great  Truths. 

I.  That  all  Christianity  centres  in 
Christ. 

II.  That  union  to  Christ  makes  the 
soul  independent  of  others. — Dykes. 

Ver.  9.  The  Fulness  of  Christ. 
I.  Christ  is  full  of  the  power  of  God. 
II.  The  love  of  God. 

III.  The  grace  of  God. 

IV.  The  faithfulness  of  God. 

V.  The  purpose  of  God  to  punish 
sin. — Preacher's  Magazine. 

Ver.  10.  The  Completing  of  the  Soul. 

I.  We  are  made  complete  in  Christ 
by  inspirations. 

II.  We  have  ideas  and  ideals  in 
Christ. 

III.  We  are  set  in  a  various  scheme 
of  relations  that  we  may  have  a 
training  in  virtues  equally  various 
and  be  perfected  in  them  and  by  means 
of  them. — Bushnell. 

The  Believer  Complete  in  Christ. 
I.  Complete  in  Him  with  respect  to 


the  work  which  He  hath  already  per- 
formed.— 1.  His  obedience  and  atone- 
ment were  precisely  what  God  Himself 
had  prescribed.  2.  That  He  obeyed  and 
atoned,  we  have  the  perfect  evidence  of 
observation  and  testimony.  He  Him- 
self declared,  "  I  have  finished  the 
work  which  Thou  gavest  Me  to  do." 
"  It  is  finished."  To  this  the  Father 
and  the  Spirit  have  expressly  borne 
testimony  :  by  signs  and  wonders ;  His 
resurrection ;  His  ascension ;  the  de- 
scent of  the  Spirit ;  conversions ;  the 
glorification  of  His  people.  3.  Into 
His  righteousness  thus  perfect  the  believer 
is  admitted. 

II.  Complete  in  Him  with  respect 
to  the  work  which  He  is  now  performing. 
— 1.  Interceding  in  heaven.  2.  Ruling 
on  earth,  and  thus  giving  grace  and 
affording  protection. 

III.  Complete  in  Him  with  respect 
to  the  work  which  He  is  hereafter  to 
perform. — 1.  As  the  Resurrection.  2.  As 
the  Judge.  3.  As  the  Glorifier.  4.  As 
the  Consummation  and  Communicator 
of  eternal  blessedness. — Stewart. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  11,  12. 

Christian  Circumcision. 

There  were  two  principal  errors  lying  at  the  root  of  the  heresy  that  was  doing 
so  much  damage  at  Colossae.  One  was  the  theological  error  of  substituting 
inferior  and  created  angelic  mediators  for  the  divine  Head  Himself.  The  other 
was  a  practical  error,  in  insisting  upon  ritual  and  ascetic  observances  as  the 
foundation  of  moral  teaching.  Thus  their  theological  speculations  and  ethical 
code  alike  were  at  fault.  Both  errors  flowed  from  a  common  source — the 
false  conception  that  evil  resides  in  matter,  a  fruitful  source  of  many  fatal 
heresies.  Some  contended  the  Colossians  could  not  be  complete  in  Christ  without 
submitting  to  the  Jewish  rite  of  circumcision ;  but  the  apostle  showed  that  they 
were  the  subjects  of  a  superior  circumcision. 

1.  Christian  circumcision  is  inward  and  spiritual. — "  Ye  are  circumcised  with 
the  circumcision  made  without  hands  "  (ver.  11).  The  hand- wrought  circumcision 
of  the  Jews  was  simply  an  outward  and  visible  sign  of  an  inward  and  spiritual 
grace.  This  is  abundantly  clear  in  the  language  of  the  Old  Testament :  "  No 
stranger  uncircumcised  in  heart,  nor  uncircumcised  in  flesh,  shall  enter  into  My 

424 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSI ANS.         chap.  n. 


sanctuary."  "  The  Lord  Thy  God  will  circumcise  thine  heart,  to  love  the  Lord  thy 
God  with  all  thine  heart  and  ail  thy  soul."  The  argument  of  the  apostle  is  that 
the  Colossians  had  secured  all  the  spiritual  results  aimed  at  in  the  ancient  rite, 
and  that  by  a  better  circumcision,  even  that  made  without  hands,  by  the 
spiritual  and  almighty  power  of  Christ,  so  that  it  was  unnecessary  for  them  or 
any  other  Gentiles  to  submit  to  the  abrogated  Hebraic  ordinance.  The  true 
circumcision  is  that  of  the  heart,  in  the  spirit,  and  not  in  the  letter  (Rom.  ii. 
28,  29). 

II.  Christian  circumcision  is  complete. — "  In  putting  off  the  body  of  the  sins 
of  the  flesh"  (ver.  11);  or,  as  Bengel  translates,  putting  off  the  body  of  the  sins — 
that  is  to  say,  the  flesh.  Manual  circumcision,  according  to  the  law  of  Moses,  was 
the  cutting  away  of  only  a  small  part  of  the  flesh.  But  the  true  spiritual  circum- 
cision consists  in  putting  off,  renouncing,  and  casting  away  with  disgust  the 
whole  body  of  our  corrupt  nature — the  entire  fleshly  principle.  The  whole  bulk 
of  sin  is  fitly  compared  to  a  body,  because  of  the  weight  of  guilt  there  is  in  it 
(Rom.  vii.  24),  and  the  soul  is  completely  compassed  by  it,  as  it  is  with  our 
natural  body  (Gen.  vi.  5).  When  the  heart  is  circumcised,  the  total  mass  of  sin 
is  put  off,  as  the  porter  puts  off  his  burden,  the  beggar  his  rags,  the  master  his 
false  servant,  and  the  serpent  its  skin.  Old  things  pass  away ;  all  things 
become  new. 

III.  Christian  circumcision  is  divine. — "  By  the  circumcision  of  Christ"  (ver.  1 1). 
It  is  wrought,  without  hands,  by  the  inward,  invisible  power  of  the  divine  Spirit 
of  Christ.  It  supersedes  the  external  form  of  the  circumcision  of  the  law,  and 
fulfils  all  its  spiritual  designs  in  a  far  more  perfect  manner  than  even  the 
spiritually-minded  Jew  could  adequately  conceive.  What  can  never  be  effected 
by  the  moral  law,  by  external,  ascetic  ceremonies,  or  by  philosophic  speculations, 
is  accomplished  by  the  circumcision  of  Christ.  The  whole  body  of  sin  is  mortified, 
the  soul  is  quickened  and  renewed,  and  brought  into  the  possession  of  the  highest 
moral  perfection. 

IV.  Christian  circumcision  is  realised  by  the  thorough  identification  of  the 
believer  with  Christ  in  His  death  and  resurrection. — "  Buried  with  Him,  wherein 
also  ye  are  risen  with  Him"  (ver.  12).  Burial  implies  previous  death  ;  and  to 
secure  the  true  circumcision  we  must  be  spiritually  identified  with  Christ  in  His 
death,  burial,  and  resurrection.  It  is  the  familiar  teaching  of  the  New  Testament 
that  he  who  believes  in  Christ  is  said  to  die  with  Him,  to  be  buried  with  Him,  and 
to  rise  with  Him  (ver.  13  ;  Rom.  vi.  11 ;  Eph.  ii.  5).  A  circumcised  heart,  a  new 
nature,  cannot  be  obtained  by  mere  human  effort,  by  stern  resolutions,  painful 
processes  of  self-mortification,  or  by  the  most  advanced  and  rigorous  mental 
culture.  It  is  secured  only  by  a  complete,  vital  union  and  incorporation  with 
Christ,  and  a  sympathetic  participation  with  Him  in  all  He  has  done  and 
suffered.  With  Christ  the  believer  enters  the  grave  where  the  vast  body  of  sin 
dies,  and  is  buried ;  and  with  Christ  he  emerges  into  a  new  and  heavenlier  life 
that  transforms  the  soul  into  a  diviner  beauty,  and  fills  it  with  unutterable 
rapture  and  melodious  praise. 

V.  Christian  circumcision  is  wrought  in  the  soul  by  a  spiritual  baptism. — 
"  Buried  with  Him  in  baptism,  wherein  also  ye  are  risen  with  Him  "  (ver.  12). 
Baptism  by  water,  like  legal  circumcision,  is  an  outward  and  visible  sign  of  an 
inward  and  spiritual  grace.  But  it  does  not  appear  that  there  is  any  allusion  here 
to  the  ordinance  of  baptism.  The  leading  ideas  and  figures  used  in  these  two 
verses  refer  to  spiritual  realities  :  the  death,  burial,  and  resurrection,  the  circum- 
cision without  hands,  and  the  putting  off  of  the  body  of  the  flesh,  are  all 
spiritual;  and  the  baptism  is  evidently  of  the  same  character.  It  is  by  the 
baptism  of  the  Spirit — the  quickening  and  renewing  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost — 
that  the  soul  is  so  united  to  and  identified  with  Christ  that  the  believer  may  be 

425 


chap.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS. 


said  to  be  buried  and  to  rise  with  Him.  It  is  possible  to  die  with  Christ  and  to 
rise  with  Him  without  being  baptised  with  water ;  but  it  is  impossible  to  do 
either  without  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Spiritual  baptism  is  the  grave 
of  the  old  man  and  the  birth  of  the  new.  As  he  sinks  beneath  the  baptismal 
waters,  the  believer  buries  there  all  his  corrupt  affections  and  past  sins  ;  as  he 
emerges  thence,  he  rises  regenerate,  quickened  to  new  hopes  and  a  new  life. 

VI.  Christian  circumcision  is  received  by  faith. — "  Through  the  faith  of  the 
operation  of  God,  who  hath  raised  Him  from  the  dead  "  (ver.  12).  Faith  is  not  a 
natural  production  of  the  human  heart.  It  is  a  divine  gift,  ^nd  is  bestowed  on 
man  by  a  divine  operation.  Man  can  believe  because  God  has  given  him  the  power 
to  believe.  No  unbeliever  can  receive  the  baptism  that  effects  the  spiritual  resur- 
rection. The  faith  specially  referred  to  is  to  be  fixed  on  the  power  of  God  as 
exerted  and  displayed  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ  from  the  tomb.  The  same 
power  is  employed  in  that  mysterious  baptismal  process  by  which  the  soul  throws 
off  its  mass  of  moral  vileness  and  rises  into  newness  of  life.  Faith  opens  every 
gateway  of  the  soul,  so  that  it  gratefully  welcomes  and  exults  in  the  trans- 
forming operations  of  the  divine  energy. 

Lessons. — 1.  All  external  ordinances  are  powerless  to  change  the  heart.  2.  The 
true  circumcision  is  accomplished  by  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  3.  To  realise 
the  renewing  power  of  God  faith  is  indispensable. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  11.   The  True  Circumcision —  Ver.  12.  The  True  Baptism — 

I.  Is  not  an  outward  rite,  but  an  I.  Is  spiritual  regeneration, 
inward  change.  II.  Is  being  buried  and  raised  again 

II.  Is  an  excision  of  the  body  of  sin  with  Christ. 

by  our  union  with  Christ,  who  has  III.  Is  secured  by  an  active,  realis- 

conquered  sin.  ing  faith  in  the  power  of  God. 

III.  Is  not  an  external  observance,  IV.  Renders  circumcision  and  all 
but  a  spiritual  experience  and  a  holy  outward  rites  valueless  as  means  of 
life.  salvation. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13,  14. 

The  Transition  from  Death  to  Life. 

In  relation  to  man,  the  physical  order  is  a  descent  from  life  to  death,  the 
spiritual  order  an  ascent  from  death  to  life.  The  soul  of  man  is  held  captive 
in  the  dark  and  dismal  prison-house  of  sin,  and  the  divine  law — at  once  its 
judge  and  gaoler — has  declared  its  condemnation  to  death.  The  great  Mediator 
offers  Himself  a  ransom  for  human  sin.  He  is  accepted.  The  sentence  of 
condemnation  is  cancelled,  and  spiritual  liberty  proclaimed. 

I.  That  the  natural  condition  of  humanity  is  ono  of  moral  and  spiritual 
death. — 1.  Man  is  in  a  condition  of  spiritual  insensibility.  "  You,  being  dead  in 
your  sins  "  (ver.  13).  The  dead  know  not  anything.  They  are  as  unconscious  as 
the  dust  in  the  midst  of  which  they  slumber.  The  sweetest  sounds  or  the  brightest 
scenes  appeal  in  vain  to  the  locked-up  senses.  This  figure  strikingly  depicts  the 
moral  condition  of  man.  The  soul  may  be  keenly  alive  to  the  relations  and 
interests  of  the  outer  world,  and  at  the  same  time  dead  to  the  grandest  spiritual 
realities.  He  is  insensible  to  the  character  and  claims  of  God,  to  the  sublimest 
truths,  to  the  most  ravishing  prospects.  With  faculties  to  appreciate  all  that  is 
lovely  in  nature  and  wonderful  in  art,  he  is  insensible  and  unresponsive  to  the 
highest  moral  beauty. 

426 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.  chap.  II. 


2.  Man  is  in  a  condition  of  moral  corruption. — "  And  the  uncircumcision  of 
your  flesh  "  (ver.  13).  Death  unbinds  the  forces  that  brace  up  the  body  in  life  and 
health,  and  leaves  it  a  prey  to  the  ever-active  power  of  corruption.  The  flesh  is 
the  carnal  principle — the  old  corrupt  nature ;  and  its  uncircumcision  indicates 
that  it  has  not  been  cut  off,  mortified,  or  conquered.  It  is  the  loathsome,  putrid 
fruit  of  a  nature  spiritually  dead — the  outworkings  of  a  wicked,  unrenewed 
heart,  through  all  the  channels  of  unchecked  appetites  and  passions — moral 
putrescence  fattening  on  itself.  No  description  of  sin  can  surpass  the  revolting 
spectacle  of  its  own  self -registered  results. 

3.  Man  is  in  a  condition  of  condemnation. — (1)  The  divine  ordinances  record  an 
indictment  against  the  transgressor.  "The  handwriting  of  ordinances  that  was 
against  us"  (ver.  14).  A  handwriting  imports  what  any  one  writes  with  his  own 
hand,  and  is  usually  applied  to  a  note  of  hand,  a  bond,  or  obligation,  as  having 
the  signature  of  the  debtor  or  contracting  party.  The  primary  reference  in  the 
terms  used  is  to  the  Jews,  who  might  be  said  to  have  signed  the  contract  when 
they  bound  themselves,  by  a  curse,  to  observe  all  the  enactments  of  the  law 
(Deut.  xxvii.  14-26).  Ordinances,  though  referring  primarily  to  the  Mosaic 
ordinances,  include  all  forms  of  positive  decrees  (ordinances)  in  which  moral  or 
social  principles  are  embodied  or  religious  duties  defined.  Man  everywhere  is 
under  law,  written  or  unwritten  ;  and  he  is  morally  obligated  to  obey  it.  That 
law  has  been  universally  violated,  and  its  ordinances  and  sanctions  are  against 
us.  We  are  involved  in  legal  condemnation  ;  we  owe  to  God  what  we  can  never 
pay.  (2)  The  divine  ordinances  are  hostile  towards  the  transgressor.  "  Which 
was  contrary  to  us"  (ver.  14).  We  are  often  painfully  reminded  of  our  broken 
bond,  as  the  debtor  is  often  distressingly  reminded  of  his  undischarged  obligation. 
Our  peace  is  disturbed,  our  conscience  troubled,  our  prospects  darkened.  The 
sense  of  condemnation  pursues  us  in  every  part  of  life,  and  haunts  us  with  visions 
of  terrible  vengeance  to  come. 

II.  That  the  believer  is  raised  into  a  condition  of  spiritual  life. — 1.  Spiritual 
life  begins  in  the  consciousness  of  liberty.  "  Having  forgiven  you  all  trespasses  " 
(ver.  13).  Sin  enthrals  the  soul  in  an  intolerable  bondage,  and  smites  it  wTith  a 
deathly  blow.  There  is  no  return  to  life  until  liberty  is  bestowed.  Forgiveness 
confers  that  liberty.  Pardon  is  the  point  at  which  spiritual  life  begins.  The 
sense  of  liberty  is  the  first  glad  thrill  in  the  soul  of  a  new  and  nobler  life.  The 
pardon  is  ample  ;  it  is  all-comprehensive — having  forgiven  you  all  trespasses. 
Every  legal  barrier  is  removed.  All  guilt  is  cancelled.  Every  stain  is  purged 
away.  Every  vestige  of  corruption  disappears.  The  divine  mercy  triumphs  in 
the  prompt,  generous,  loving,  full  forgiveness  of  sins. 

2.  Spiritual  life  implies  a  freedom  from  all  condemnation. — (1)  The  indictment 
recorded  in  the  divine  ordinances  is  cancelled  and  abolished.  "  Blotting  out  the 
handwriting  of  ordinances  that  was  against  us,  which  was  contrary  to  us,  and 
took  it  out  of  the  way,  nailing  it  to  His  cross  "  (ver.  14).  Every  assurance  is  given 
to  the  trembling  believer  that  his  guilt  is  pardoned  and  his  condemnation  removed. 
The  handwriting  is  blotted  out — as  it  were,  cross-strokes  are  drawn  through  it ; 
and  that  all  suspicion  it  may  again  become  legible,  may  be  allayed,  it  is  added, 
"  and  took  it  out  of  the  way  "  ;  it  is  entirely  removed.  But  lest,  haply,  it  should 
ogain  be  found  and  produced,  it  is  declared — it  is  destroyed,  torn,  nailed  to  the 
cross,  and  so  made  utterly  useless  ever  to  witness  anything  against  the  believer. 
"  Now  we  are  delivered  from  the  law,  that  being  dead  wherein  we  were  held" 
(Rom.  vii.  6).  The  handwriting  against  us  is  removed  and  destroyed  by  the 
sacrificial  death  of  Christ  on  the  cross.  There  we  behold  the  cancelled  sentence 
torn  and  rent  by  the  very  nails  that  pierced  the  sacred  body  of  the  world's 
Redeemer.  (2)  Freedom  from  condemnation  is  effected  by  the  cross.  "  His 
cross."     Much  as  the  doctrine  of  salvation  through  the  vicarious  sufferings  of 

427 


•chap.  ii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS. 


Christ  may  be  misunderstood  and  despised,  it  is  the  only  method  by  which 
pardon  can  be  bestowed,  condemnation  removed,  and  spiritual  life  imparted. 
"  Christ  hath  reedeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a  curse 
for  us." 

III.  That  the  transition  of  the  soul  from  death  to  spiritual  life  is  a  divine 
work. — "  You  hath  He  quickened  together  with  Him  "  (ver.  13).  God  only  can 
raise  the  dead.  He  who  first  fashioned  us  in  His  own  image,  who  raised  from  the 
dead  Jesus,  the  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,  rescues  man  from  the  gloomy  domain 
of  spiritual  death,  and  inspires  him  with  a  new  and  holier  life.  It  is  a  life  of 
blessed  union  with  the  divine.  Its  activities  are  spontaneous  and  Godward  in 
their  tendencies.  It  has  the  power  of  growth  and  endless  development.  Its 
aspirations  are  the  purest  and  noblest.  It  is  intensely  individual.  It  is  the 
movement  of  the  divine  in  the  sphere  of  the  human,  not  defacing  or  destroying 
the  human,  but  exalting  and  perfecting  its  worthiest  traits. 

Lessons. — 1.  All  men  are  dead  in  sin.  2.  Law  condemns  but  cannot  deliver. 
3.  Pardon  of  sin  is  the  gateway  of  spiritual  life.  4.  Pardon  is  obtained  only  by 
looking  to  the  cross. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Ver.  13.  Death  and  Spiritual  Life.  Yer.  14.  The  Handwriting  of  Ordin- 

I.  Man  by  sin  is  spiritually  dead  ances — 

and  disabled  from  exercising  spiritual  I.  Describes  our  condemnation, 

acts.  II.  Must  be  cancelled  in  order  to 

II.  Man  is  quickened  into  spiritual  pardon. 

life  by  virtue  of  the  resurrection  of  III.  Cancelled  by  the  sufferings  on 

Christ.  the  cross. 

III.  Spiritual  life  is  obtainable  only  I Y.  Is  blotted  out  against  us  when 
by  the  pardon  of  sin.  we  accept  the  Crucified. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF   VERSE   15. 

The  Triumph  of  the  Cross. 

The  apostle  has  shown  the  worth lessness  of  the  Jewish  ceremonies  and  the 
galling  tyranny  of  their  yoke.  He  has  exposed  the  emptiness  of  the  philosophy 
that  was  of  human  fabrication,  with  its  illusive  theories  about  angel  mediators, 
its  vast  accretions  of  conflicting  traditions,  and  its  intolerable  impositions.  He 
has  declared  that  they  are  all  transfixed  to  the  cross — torn,  lacerated,  illegible, 
cancelled — and  exhibited  there  as  a  spectacle  for  the  perpetual  consolation  and 
assurance  of  the  believer.  And  now  the  apostle,  rising  with  the  grandeur  of  his 
theme,  compares  the  scene  of  the  cross  to  the  splendid  triumph  of  a  Roman 
general,  in  which  the  captives  taken  in  battle  were  led  in  gorgeous  procession 
through  the  city  as  substantial  trophies  of  the  victor. 

I.  The  triumph  of  the  cross  was  over  the  powers  of  evil. — "  Principalities  and 
Powers." 

1.  The  existence  of  evil  is  a  painful  fact. — We  meet  with  it  everywhere  and  in 
everything.  It  mars  the  beauty  of  external '"creation,  and  loads  it  with  a  burden 
of  unutterable  woe.  It  flings  its  shadow  over  the  brightest  sky,  transforms  the 
music  of  life  into  a  doleful  monotone,  and  translates  the  softest  zephyrs  into 
sighs.  It  impregnates  man's  moral  nature,  deflects  the  purest  principles,  shatters 
the  noblest  powers,  arrests  the  loftiest  aspirations,  and  drags  the  soul  down  to 
the  lowest  hell. 

428 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.  chap.  II. 


2.  Evil  is  embodied  in  invisible  and  potent  personalities. — They  are  here  called 
principalities  because  of  their  excellency,  their  deep  penetration,  vast  knowledge, 
and  exalted  station.  They  are  called  powers  because  of  their  ability,  the  mighty 
influence  they  can  wield,  and  the  terrible  havoc  they  can  work.  Their  dominion 
extends  over  the  whole  realm  of  sin.  They  exist  in  vast  numbers  (2  Pet.  iv.  2  ; 
Jude  6),  but  they  are  inspired  and  guided  by  one  great  master-spirit — the 
prince  of  the  power  of  the  air.  Theyiare  animated  and  bound  together  by  one 
spirit — a  spirit  of  bitter  hatred  and  savage  hostility  towards  God,  and  of  con- 
temptuous scorn  for  His  authority.  They  are  eager  to  obey  the  slightest  behest 
of  their  malignant  leader. 

"  He  spake  :  and  to  confirm  his  words  outflew 
Millions  of  flaming  swords,  drawn  from  the  thighs 
Of  mighty  cherubim  :  the  sudden  blaze 
Far  round  illumined  hell :  highly  they  raged 
Against  the  Highest,  and  fierce  with  grasped  arms 
Clashed  on  their  sounding  shields  the  din  of  war, 
Hurling  defiance  towards  the  vault  of  heaven." 

These  hosts  of  evil  spirits  are  the  great  foes  of  man  with  which  he  has  incessantly 
to  contend  (Eph.  vi.  12).  The  struggle  would  be  hopeless  had  not  Christ 
defeated  them. 

II.  The  triumph  of  the  cross  was  achieved  after  severe  conflict. — "  Having 
spoiled." 

1.  The  conflict  was  continuous. — It  was  fought  from  the  earliest  period  between 
Satan  and  man,  and  the  day  was  lost.  The  woeful  issues  ©f  that  conquest  are 
with  us  to-day.  The  battle  has  been  raging  ever  since.  The  enmity  existing 
between  the  serpent  and  the  seed  of  the  woman  is  still  active.  The  symbols  and 
foreshadowings  of  the  great  strife  appeared  on  many  occasions  during  the  Mosaic 
period.  But  when  Christ  assumed  our  humanity  and  stepped  upon  the  field  as 
the  great  Captain  of  our  salvation,  the  conflict  reached  its  climax. 

2.  The  conflict  was  fierce. — Hosts  of  demons  swarmed  around  the  solitary 
Warrior,  and  with  incredible  fury  sought  to  gain  a  victory  over  the  human 
nature  He  had  assumed.  Again  and  again  they  rushed  to  the  attack  ;  but  each 
fresh  assault  ended  with  a  new  defeat.  In  the  wilderness  He  was  tempted  by 
Satan ;  but  the  arch-tempter  was  compelled  to  retire,  baffled  and  conquered. 
Through  the  voice  of  His  chief  disciple  the  temptation  was  renewed,  and  He  was 
urged  to  decline  His  appointed  sufferings  and  death  (Matt.  xvi.  23).  But  Satan 
was  again  foiled. 

3.  The  conflict  was  deadly. — Then  came  the  final  hour — the  great  crisis  when 
the  power  of  darkness  made  itself  felt,  when  the  prince  of  this  world  threw  his 
last  fatal  shaft  and  asserted  his  tyranny  (Luke  xxii.  53  ;  John  xii.  30).  The 
closing  act  in  the  conflict  began  with  the  agony  of  Gethsemane  ;  it  ended  with 
the  cross  of  Calvary.  The  Son  of  God  expires  on  the  accursed  tree.  But,  lo  ! 
strange  reversal  of  all  human  conflicts — the  moment  of  apparent  defeat  is  the 
moment  of  victory !  By  dying  Christ  has  conquered  death,  and  wrested  from 
the  enemy  his  most  potent  weapon  of  terror.  The  principalities  and  powers  of 
evil,  that  clung  around  the  humanity  of  Christ  like  a  fatal  Nessus  tunic,  were 
spoiled — torn  off  and  cast  aside  for  ever.  Evil  assailed  the  great  Redeemer  from 
without,  but  never  penetrated  Him  as  it  does  humanity.  In  the  act  of  dying 
the  crucified  One  stripped  off  and  flung  to  the  ground  the  great  potentates  of  evil 
never  more  to  be  in  the  ascendant. 

III.  The  triumph  of  the  cross  was  signal  and  complete. — 1.  It  was  signal. 
11  He  made  a  show  of  them  openly."  The  overthrow  of  the  principalities  and 
powers  of  evil  was  boldly  declared  to  the  universe.  They  were  declared  to  be 
liars,  traitors,  deceivers,  usurpers,  and  murderers  !  It  was  not  a  private  but  a 
public  victory,  in  which  the  universe  was  interested,  and  in  which  all  men  may 

429 


chap.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS. 


well  rejoice.  The  victory  of  mankind  is  involved  in  the  victory  of  Christ.  In 
His  cross  we  too  are  divested  of  the  poisonous,  clinging  garments  of  temptation, 
sin,  and  death — we  spoil,  strip  off,  put  away  from  us  the  powers  of  evil,  and  are 
liberated  from  the  dominion  of  the  flesh. 

2.  It  was  complete. — "  Triumphing  over  them  in  it."  Christ  proved  Himself 
on  the  cross  the  Conqueror  of  death  and  hell.  Here  the  paradox  of  the 
Crucifixion  is  placed  in  the  strongest  light — triumph  in  helplessness,  glory  in 
shame,  the  vanquished  become  the  conqueror.  The  gloom  of  the  convict's 
gibbet  is  transformed  into  the  splendour  of  the  victor's  chariot.  In  the  cross  we 
see  the  greatest  triumph  of  our  Immanuel — the  law  fulfilled  ;  God's  moral 
government  vindicated ;  death  robbed  of  its  prey  ;  Satan,  "  the  prince  of  this 
world  "  cast  out ;  principalities  and  powers  dragged  in  procession  as  captives ;  a 
show  of  them  boldly  made ;  the  imprisoned  world  set  free  ;  and  the  final  victory 
over  every  enemy  assured. 

Lessons. — 1.  Christ  has  conquered  the  powers  of  evil.  2.  To  the  believer  ultimate 
victory  is  certain.     3.  Keep  up  a  brave  heart  in  the  fiercest  conflict. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH, -Verses  16,  17. 

The  Ceremonial  and  the  Real  in  Religion. 

After  dealing  with  the  speculative  theories  so  busily  propagated  by  the  false 
teachers  at  Colossse,  the  apostle  descends  from  the  height  of  his  lofty  argument, 
and  with  incomparable  force  sweeps  away  the  whole  group  of  errors  which 
overrated  an  excessive  ritualism  and  insisted  on  a  rigorous  asceticism.  The 
existence  of  the  ceremonial  in  religion  is  a  confession  of  the  imperfection  of  our 
nature ;  and  the  more  rudimentary  the  ceremonial,  the  lower  it  supposes  our 
condition.  The  ceremonial  foreshadows  the  real,  and  is  intended  to  help  in 
attaining  it.  In  the  nature  of  things,  therefore,  the  ceremonial  is  but  temporary. 
When  it  puts  man  in  possession  of  the  real  it  vanishes.  The  shadow  is  absorbed 
in  the  substance.  To  compel  man  to  find  salvation  in  the  ceremonial,  when  he 
already  possesses  the  real,  is  a  retrogression  and  an  injustice.  The  liberty  of 
the  gospel  places  the  believer  above  the  slavery  of  external  ordinances,  and 
furnishes  him  with  a  law — the  law  of  a  christianised  conscience — as  to  their  use 
or  neglect. 

I.  That  the  ceremonial  in  religion  can  form  no  jnst  basis  for  individual  con- 
demnation.— "  Let  no  man,  therefore,  judge  you  in  meat,"  etc.  (ver.  16).  The 
Mosaic  law  enforced  certain  injunctions  concerning  eating  and  drinking.  It 
gave  minute  directions  as  to  the  animals  that  were  to  be  eaten,  making  a  dis- 
tinction between  the  clean  and  the  unclean.  As  to  drinking,  the  priests  were 
strictly  forbidden  the  use  of  wine  on  the  eve  of  solemn  public  duty;  and  the  vow 
of  the  Nazarites  required  entire  abstinence  from  the  fruit  of  the  vine.  The 
tendency  of  the  Jews  was  to  multiply  these  distinctions  and  prohibitions,  and  to 
exalt  them  into  undue  importance.  The  reference  to  special  days  embraces  the 
collective  periodical  feasts  and  sacred  seasons  of  the  Levitical  ritual — the  yearly, 
monthly,  and  weekly  celebrations.  The  term  holy  day  would  include  the  festivals 
of  the  Passover,  Pentecost,  and  Tabernacles  respectively.  The  new  moon  alludes 
to  the  monthly  celebrations  mentioned  (Num.  x.  10,  xxviii.  11).  The  Sabbath  days 
refer  to  the  weekly  solemnities  and  services  of  the  seventh  day.  The  Jews 
assumed  that  the  obligation  of  these  regulations  was  permanent,  and  their 
observance  essential  to  the  salvation  of  the  Christian  believer.  The  gospel 
teaches  that  the  observance  or  non-observance  of  these  ceremonial  rites  is  no 
just  ground  for  judging  each  other.  We  are  not  justified  in  condemning  any 
one  for  neglecting  them,  or  to  think  any  better  of  one  who  reverently  observes 

430 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.  chap.  n. 


them.  The  essence  of  religion  does  not  consist  in  the  outward  form,  but  in  the 
inward  spirit — not  in  the  ceremonial,  but  in  the  real.  "  Which  are  a  shadow  of 
things  to  come  ;  but  the  body  is  of  Christ  "  (ver.  17). 

II.  That  the  ceremonial  in  religion  is  typical  of  the  real. — "  Which  are  a 
shadow  of  things  to  come  "  (ver.  17).  Ceremonies  have  their  place  in  the  culture  of 
mankind,  and  in  their  legitimate  sphere  they  are  important.  They  are  adapted 
to  the  infant  stage  in  the  development  of  the  race.  They  sketch  out  the  bold, 
rough  outlines  of  truths  that  are  in  a  half-formed,  embryotic  state.  They  are 
shadows  projected  across  the  disc  of  our  mental  vision — of  grand  realities  which 
are  ever  advancing  into  clearer  view.  They  are  typical  of  the  existence  and 
certain  manifestation  of  deeper  and  unchangeable  truths.  They  are  predictive 
of  things  to  come.  The  great  yearly  festival  of  the  Passover  typified  the  forgive- 
ness of  sins  by  the  shedding  of  the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  The  Pentecost,  or 
feast  of  the  firstfruits,  sets  forth  the  sustenance  and  ample  provision  God  has 
made  for  tho  soul.  The  feast  of  the  Tabernacles  was  a  significant  reminder  of 
God's  providential  guidance  and  fatherly  care  of  human  life.  The  new  moon,  or 
first  day  of  the  month,  with  its  usual  service,  impressed  on  the  minds  of  the 
people  the  truth  that  Jehovah,  the  Ruler  of  the  seasons,  was  the  God  of 
providence  as  well  as  of  creation.  The  weekly  Sabbath,  with  its  grateful  rest, 
was  expressly  instituted  to  commemorate  the  rest  of  God  after  the  exercise  of 
His  creative  energy.  Then  the  ordinary  sacrifices  were  doubled,  and  the  shew- 
bread  renewed,  to  indicate  that  God  is  the  source  and  sustenance  of  our  life. 
And  so  the  whole  Mosaic  law  was  a  type  and  presage  of  the  gospel.  The 
spiritually  enlightened  look  through  the  outward  and  visible  symbol  to  the  great 
truth  signified.     The  ceremonial  is  valuable  only  as  it  conducts  to  the  real. 

III.  That  the  ceremonial  in  religion  is  abolished  and  rendered  nugatory  by 
the  real. — "  But  the  body  is  of  Christ"  (ver.  17).  When  the  substance  appears, 
the  shadow  is  swallowed  up.  As  the  shadows  are  to  the  body,  so  were  the  types 
and  ceremonies  of  the  law  to  Christ.  They  were  figures  of  evangelical  blessings  ; 
but  the  truth,  the  reality,  and  abiding  substance  of  them  are  found  in  the  person, 
work,  and  salvation  of  Christ.  All  the  grand  truths  prefigured  by  the  ancient 
Mosaic  ritual  are  embodied  in  Christ.  He  gives  the  fullest  personal  representa- 
tion of  Jehovah  as  the  God  of  nature,  providence,  and  redemption,  at  once  the 
Author  and  the  Ruler  of  the  spiritual  life.  In  Christ,  therefore,  as  the  substance 
and  antitype,  all  shadow  and  symbol  disappear.  It  is  a  dangerous  infatuation 
to  snatch  at  the  shadow  and  cling  to  it,  when  we  may  embrace  and  rest  in  the 
sufficiency  of  the  substance.  This  is  to  restore  the  cancelled  handwriting  and 
nullify  the  splendid  triumph  of  the  cross.  In  Christ  the  ceremonial  is  effete, 
powerless,  dead.     He  only  is  the  changeless,  eternal,  all-satisfying  real. 

Lessons. — 1.  Learn  to  exercise  the  spirit  of  Christian  forbearance  in  external 
observances.  2.  Be  careful  not  to  rest  in  the  ceremonial.  3.  Christ  alone  can 
satisfy  the  deepest  craving  of  the  soul. 


GERM  NOTES   ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.    16,   17.    The  Shadow  and  the  II.  The  permanent  substance  which 

Substance  of  the  Sabbath.  cannot  pass. — "  The  body  is  of  Christ  " 

I.  The  transient  shadow  which  has  — the  Spirit  of  Christ  is  the  fulfilment 

passed  away. — The  Sabbath  as  a  sign  of  the  law.    To  have  the  Spirit  of  Christ 

between  God  and  the  Israelites,  mark-  is   to   have   fulfilled   the   law.    Apply 

ing  them   off   from  all  other  nations  this    to   Sabbath   observance. — F.    W. 

by  its  observance — as   a  mere  Jewish  Robertson. 
institution. 

431 


chap.  II.  H0M1LETIG  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  18,  19. 

The  Seductive  Peril  of  a  False  Philosophy. 

The  apostle  had  warned  the  Oolossians  against  the  dangerous  consequences  of 
attaching  too  much  importance  to  the  ceremonial  in  religion,  inasmuch  as  it  was 
the  substitution  of  the  shadow  for  the  substance.  He  now  reveals  the  peril  of 
being  seduced  by  the  theological  error  that  insisted  on  interposition  of  angel 
mediators,  which  was  the  preference  of  an  inferior  member  to  the  Head.  In 
this  verse  the  writer  distinctly  warns  the  Colossian  Christians  against  the  peril 
that  threatened  them,  and  exposes  the  presumptuous  speculations  of  a  false 
philosophy. 

1.  That  the  teachings  of  a  false  philosophy  threaten  to  rob  the  believer  of 
his  most  coveted  reward. — "  Let  no  man  beguile  you  of  your  reward  "  (ver.  18). 
The  Christian's  career  is  a  race ;  the  present  world  is  the  stadium,  or  racecourse  ; 
Christ  is  the  umpire — the  dispenser  of  rewards  ;  eternal  life  is  the  victor's  prize. 
The  Colossians  were  in  a  fair  way  for  winning  the  prize ;  they  had  duly  entered 
the  lists ;  they  were  contending  bravely ;  but  the  false  teachers  unhappily 
crossed  their  path,  sought  to  impede  their  progress,  and  to  rob  them  of  their 
reward.  Error  is  subtle  in  its  influence  and  pernicious  in  its  effects.  Many 
erroneous  opinions  may  possibly  be  held  without  invalidating  the  salvation  of 
the  soul ;  but  any  error  that  in  any  degree  depreciates  our  estimate  of  Christ 
and  interrupts  the  advance  of  our  Christian  life  is  a  robbery.  It  may  be  said 
that  the  dangerous  speculations  of  a  false  philosophy  are  confined  only  to  a  few 
— the  higher  circle  of  thinkers.  That  is  bad  enough.  But  what  is  damaging 
the  higher  order  of  intellects  will  by  and-by  reach  the  lower  and  work  its 
mischief  there.     There  is  need  for  uninterrupted  vigilance. 

II.  That  a  false  philosophy  advocates  the  most  presumptuous  and  perilous 
speculations. — 1.  It  affects  a  spurious  humility.  God  is  unknowable  to  the 
limited  and  uncertain  powers  of  man ;  He  is  too  high  to  be  accessible,  and  too 
much  absorbed  in  loftier  matters  to  concern  Himself  about  individual  man.  He 
can  be  approached  only  through  inferior  beings,  and  their  assistance  should  be 
humbly  sought.  So  it  reasons.  But  this  humility  was  voluntary,  self-induced, 
and  was  in  reality  another  form  of  high  spiritual  pride.  Humility,  when  it 
becomes  self-conscious,  ceases  to  have  any  value. 

2.  It  invents  a  dangerous  system  of  angelolatry. — "  Worshipping  of  angels  " 
(ver.  18).  The  Jews  were  fond  of  philosophising  about  the  dignity,  offices,  and 
ranks  of  the  angelic  powers ;  and  many  held  the  opinion  that  they  were  mes- 
sengers who  presented  our  prayers  to  God.  The  false  teachers  made  the  most  of 
the  authority  they  could  derive  from  Jewish  sources.  They  would  tell  how  the  law 
was  given  by  the  disposition  of  angels — that  angels  conducted  the  Israelites  through 
the  wilderness,  and  on  various  occasions  appeared  to  patriarchs,  prophets,  and 
apostles.  They  would  dwell  on  the  weakness  of  man  and  his  distance  from  God, 
and  insist  that  homage  should  bo  paid  to  these  angelic  messengers  as  necessary 
mediators.  Alas,  how  fatal  has  been  the  influence  through  the  centuries  of  this 
delusive  angelolatry  !  The  apostle  here  condemns  it,  and  thus  sweeps  away  all 
ground  for  the  Christ-dishonouring  practices  of  invocation  of  saints  and  the 
worship  of  the  Virgin. 

3.  It  pretends  to  a  knowledge  of  the  mysterious. — "  Intruding  into  those  things 
which  he  hath  not  seen  "  (ver.  18).  Man  is  everywhere  circled  with  mystery. 
It  is  one  of  the  saddest  moments  of  life  when  he  first  becomes  conscious  of  the 
limitation  of  his  own  powers,  and  of  his  utter  inability  to  fathom  the  mysteries 
which  seem  to  invite  his  inquiry  while  they  baffle  his  attempt.  Locke  somewhere 
says,  a  worm  in  the  drawer  of  a  cabinet,  shut  up  in  its  tiny  enclosure,  might  as  well 
pretend  to  guess  at  the  construction  of  the  vast  universe,  as  mortal  man  venture 

432 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS.         chap.  ii. 


to  speculate  about  the  unseen  world,  except  so  far  as  revealed  for  purposes  of 
salvation.  But  fools  will  rush  in  where  angels  fear  to  tread.  The  boast  of 
possessing  a  profound  knowledge  of  the  mysterious  is  one  of  the  marks  of  a  false 
philosophy. 

4.  It  is  inflated  with  an  excessive  pride. — "Vainly  puffed  up  by  its  fleshly 
mind  "  (ver.  18).  The  carnal  mind,  which  is  enmity  against  God,  rises  to  a  pitch 
of  reckless  daring  in  its  inventions,  and,  revelling  in  its  own  creative  genius,  is 
vainly  puffed  up  with  a  conceit  of  novelty  and  with  a  fancied  superiority  over  the 
humbler  disciple.  There  is  no  state  more  dangerous  than  this  or  more  difficult 
to  change.  It  is  proof  against  every  ordinary  method  of  recovery.  The  proud 
man  lives  "  half-way  down  the  slope  to  hell."  God  only  can  break  the  delusive 
snare,  humble  the  soul,  and  revoke  its  threatened  doom. 

III.  That  a  false  philosophy  ignores  the  divine  source  of  all  spiritual  in- 
crease.— 1.  Christ  is  the  great  Head  of  the  Church.  He  is  the  centre  of  its  unity, 
the  primal  source  of  its  life,  authority,  and  influence.  He  founded  the  Church, 
and  gave  it  shape,  symmetry,  and  durableness.  He  alone  is  supreme — the  Alpha 
and  Omega — the  living  and  only  Head.  To  ignore  Him  is  to  forfeit  the 
substantial  for  the  shadowy — the  rock  for  the  precarious  footing  of  the  crum- 
bling shale. 

2.  The  Church  is  vitally  and  essentially  united  to  Christ. — "  From  which  all  the 
body  by  joints  and  bands  having  nourishment  ministered  and  knit  together  " 
(ver.  19).  As  the  members  of  the  human  frame  are  joined  to  the  head,  and  derive 
life,  motion,  and  sensation  from  it  by  means  of  arteries,  veins,  nerves,  and  other 
attachments,  so  the  spiritual  members  of  Christ  are  knit  to  Him  by  invisible 
joints  and  bands,  and  depend  on  Him  for  sustenance,  character,  and  influence. 

3.  The  vital  union  of  the  Church  with  Christ  is  the  condition  of  spiritual  increase. 
— " Increase th# with  the  increase  of  God"  (ver.  19).  Christ  is  the  divine  source 
of  increase,  and  the  Church  can  grow  only  as  it  receives  nourishment  from  Him. 
The  growth  corresponds  with  its  nature — it  is  divine;  it  increaseth  with  the 
increase  of  God.  There  may  be  a  morbid  increase,  as  there  may  be  an  unnatural 
enlargement  of  some  part  of  the  human  body ;  but  it  is  only  the  excessive 
inflation  of  worldly  splendour  and  ecclesiastical  pretension.  Like  Jonah's  gourd, 
such  a  growth  may  disappear  as  rapidly  as  it  came.  The  true  increase  is  that 
which  comes  from  God,  of  which  He  is  the  source,  and  active,  sustaining  influence, 
and  which  advances  in  harmony  with  His  will  and  purpose.  Such  an  increase 
can  be  secured  only  by  vital  union  with  Christ. 

Lessons. — 1.  A  false  philosophy  distorts  the  grandest  truths.  2.  A  false  philo- 
sophy substitutes  for  truth  the  most  perilous  speculations.  3.  Against  the  teachings 
of  a  false  philosophy  be  ever  on  your  guard. 


GERM  NOTES   ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  18.  Philosophic  Vagaries —  I.  The  source  of  all  the  life  of  the 

I.  Making    pretence    of    superior  body. — Christ  is  the  Head,  therefore 
knowledge.  the  source  from  which  all  parts  of  the 

II.  Affecting  a  spurious  humility  in  body  partake  of  a  common  life.     There 
worship.  are  three  symbols  employed  to  represent 

III.  Inflated  with  pride.  the  union  of  Christ  with  His  Church — 

IV.  Dangerous   to   those   sincerely      the  vine,  the  body,  and  the  marriage 
seeking  the  truth.  bond. 

II.  The    various    and    harmonious 

Ver.  19.  How  a  Church  lives  and     action  of  all  the  parts. — I.  From  Jesus 

grows.  comes  all  nourishment  of  the  divine  lifet 

ff  433 


chap.  ii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS. 


even  when  we  think  that  we  instruct  or  of  all  its  parts,  but  on  their  health  and 

stimulate  each    other.      2.   From   Jesus  vitality.     5.  There  is  an  increase  which 

comes  the  oneness  of  the  body.  is  not  the  increase  of  God. 

III.  The  consequent  increase  of  the  IV.   The    personal  hold    of  Jesus 

whole. — 1.  The  increase  of  life  in  the  Christ  which   is  the  condition  of  all 

Church,  both  as  a  community  and  in  its  life  and  growth. — A  firm,  almost  cles- 

separate  elements,  depends  on  the  har-  perate  clutch  in  which  Love  and  Need, 

monious  activity  of  all  the  paints.      2.  like  two  hands,  clasp  Him  and  will  not 

Is  dependent  on  the  activity  of  all,  and  let  Him  go.     Such  tenacious  grip  im- 

sadly  hampered  when  some  are  idle.     3.  plies  the  adhesive  energy  of  the  whole 

Depends  on  its  vitality  within  and  on  nature — the  mind  laying  hold  on  truth, 

the  concurrent  activity  of  all  its  mem-  the   heart    clinging   to  love,    the   will 

bers.  4.  Depends  not  only  on  the  action  submitting  to  authority. — A.  Maclaren. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  20—23. 

The  Ceremonial  in  Religion  Transitory  and  Unsatisfying , 

The  apostle  returns  again  to  the  question  of  outward  observances.  He  saw 
the  extreme  danger  with  which  the  Colossians  were  threatened  from  that  source, 
and  before  turning  to  other  matters  in  his  epistle  he  lifts  up  a  warning  voice  as 
for  the  last  time. 

1.  That  the  ceremonial  in  religion  is  simply  elementary. — "  The  rudiments  of 
the  world  "  (ver.  20).  The  ceremonial  in  religion  is  the  alphabetical  stage,  suited 
only  to  the  world's  infancy  and  to  the  crudest  condition  in  human  development. 
It  is  the  childish  period  which,  with  all  its  toys  and  pictures  and  gewgaws,  is  put 
away  when  spiritual  manhood  is  attained.  It  is  in  its  nature  transitory  and 
imperfect.  It  conveys  knowledge  but  in  part ;  and  when  that  which  is  perfect 
is  come,  then  that  which  is  in  part  is  done  away. 

II.  The  ceremonial  in  religion  is  unworthy  the  submission  of  the  Christian 
believer. — 1.  The  believer  is  liberated  from  the  slavery  of  the  ceremonial.  He  is 
"  dead  with  Christ "  (ver.  20).  As  Christ  by  His  death  cancelled  the  handwriting 
of  ordinances  that  was  against  us,  and  vanquished  Satan  and  all  his  hosts,  so  the 
believer,  united  with  Christ  in  His  death,  shares  in  the  triumph  of  that  death. 
He  is  free ;  he  rises  into  a  new  life,  not  under  the  tyranny  of  the  old  law,  with 
its  demands  and  penalties,  but  in  allegiance  to  Christ.  He  has  passed  into 
another  sphere  of  existence.  Worldly  ordinances  have  ceased  to  have  any  value 
for  him,  because  his  worldly  life  is  ended.  They  belong  to  the  realm  of  the 
transitory  and  perishable  ;  he  has  been  translated  into  the  realm  of  the  free  and 
the  eternal. 

2.  To  return  to  the  ceremonial  is  to  forfeit  Christian  liberty. — "  Why,  as  though 
living  in  the  world,  are  ye  subject  to  ordinances'?"  (ver.  20).  It  is  to  ignore  all 
progress,  to  impugn  the  reality  of  the  change  wrought  in  the  soul  by  spiritual 
baptism,  to  close  one's  eyes  to  the  altered  state  of  things  into  which  he  has  been 
introduced,  and  to  submit  again  to  the  galling  yoke  of  legal  observances  and 
human  traditions  which  never  had  divine  sanction  and  from  which  he  had  been 
emancipated.  It  is  a  denial  of  his  Christianity  to  subject  himself  again  to  their 
tyranny — to  return  once  more  to  the  dominion  of  the  world.  It  is  giving  up  the 
substance  for  the  shadow.  It  is  a  deliberate  self-degradation  to  the  most  abject 
and  pitiable  slavery.  It  is  supposed  that  many  of  the  ascetic  practices  of  the  false 
teachers  at  Colossse  were  borrowed  from  the  Pythagoreans.  Their  philosophy 
was  all  on  the  side  of  prohibitions,  abstinences,  a  forced  celibacy,  the  unlawful- 
ness of  animal  food,  the  possibility  of  attaining  perfection  by  neglecting  the 
body,  under  the  delusion  that  evil  resided  in  matter. 

434 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.  chap.  ii. 


Til.  The  ceremonial  in  religion,  in  its  main  features,  is  universally  the  same. 

— 1.  It  is  the  same  in  its  dictatorial  prohibitions.  "  Touch  not ;  taste  not ;  handle 
not "  (ver.  21).  Such  is  the  arrogant  language  of  a  narrow,  bigoted,  and  imperious 
superstition.  It  is  an  instruction  to  observe  the  gradual  and  insidious  manner 
in  which  it  obtains  the  mastery  over  the  human  conscience.  Touch  not :  it 
prohibits  even  a  light  partaking  of  some  meat  or  drink.  Taste  not :  the  prohibi- 
tion is  extended,  so  that  it  becomes  a  crime  even  to  taste,  though  refusing  to  eat. 
Handle  not :  to  come  in  contact  with  the  forbidden  object,  even  in  the  handling, 
is  a  dreadful  sacrilege.  So  is  it  ever  with  the  clamorous  demands  of  a  proud, 
assumptions  ritualism.  There  is  no  end  to  the  unauthorised  prohibitions  with 
which  it  seeks  to  bind  the  conscience. 

2.  It  is  the  same  in  its  undue  exaltation  of  the  external  and  the  transitory. — 
"  Which  all  are  to  perish  with  the  using  "  (ver.  22).  The  very  eating  and 
drinking  of  them  destroys  them.  They  are  consumed  in  the  using  ;  and  in  order 
to  nourish  us  they  themselves  perish— a  plain  proof  that  all  the  benefit  we  receive 
from  them  respects  only  our  physical  and  mortal  life.  What  folly  is  it  to  insist 
on  a  scrupulous  avoidance  or  observance  of  externals  in  order  to  salvation  !  You 
claim  an  affinity  with  the  eternal,  and  it  is  unworthy  of  your  glorious  destiny 
to  be  absorbed  with  the  worship  of  the  perishable. 

3.  It  is  the  same  in  its  human  origin. — "After  the  commandments  and 
doctrines  of  men  "  (ver.  22).  A  commandment  is  a  precept ;  a  doctrine  is  the 
principle  or  truth  on  which  it  is  based.  The  one  furnishes  a  direction,  the  other 
the  reason  on  which  the  direction  rests.  The  ceremonial  in  religion  is  an 
accumulation  of  the  commandments  and  doctrines  of  men.  Depending  on 
human  authority,  it  has  no  value  in  itself  ;  and  when  it  is  made  obligatory 
in?order  to  human  salvation,  it  is  an  impious  insult  to  Christ  and  an  intolerable 
servitude  to  man.  The  commandments  of  men,  having  no  solid  doctrines  to  rest 
upon,  are  transitory  and  illusory. 

IV.  The  ceremonial  in  religion  can  never  satisfy  the  many-sided  wants  of 
humanity. — 1,  It  pretends  to  a  wisdom  it  does  not  possess.  (1)  In  self-imposed 
methods  of  worship.  "  Which  things  have,  indeed,  a  show  of  wisdom  in  will- 
worship  "  (ver/23).  It  insists  on  certain  distinctions  of  meats  and  drinks;  on 
abstinence  from  this  or  that  kind  of  food ;  on  certain  ritual  observances  as 
necessary  in  order  to  render  due  homage  to  God.  The  enthusiast  for  the 
ceremonial  argues  that  he  who  only  does  what  God  positively  demands  does 
only  what  is  common  ;  but  he  who  goes  beyond,  and  submits  to  additional 
observances,  reaches  a  higher  degree  of  saintliness.  This  is  will -worship,  which 
has  peculiar  charms  for  the  corrupt  tendencies  of  our  depraved  nature.  The 
works  of  supererogation  it  invents  are  pleasanter  than  the  holy,  humble,  adoring' 
worship  of  God  through  the  blood  of  the  cross.  (2)  In  the  affectation  of  a 
spurious  humility.  "  In  humility "  (ver.  23).  It  is  a  pretence  of  wisdom  to 
renounce  all  worldly  splendour  and  profess  to  live  in  poverty  and  seclusion.  But 
at  the  root  of  this  profession  the  most  pernicious  pride  may  lurk.  A  self-conscious 
and  dramatically  acted  humility  is  the  most  degrading  and  detestable.  (3)  In 
an  unjustifiable  indifference  to  bodily  wants.  "  And  neglecting  of  the  body  " 
(ver.  23).  The  body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  is  to  be  honoured  and 
cherished,  and  all  its  just  wants  satisfied,  in  order  that  its  best  powers  may  be 
employed  in  the  service  of  God.  But  the  abuse  of  the  body  in  starvation,  painful 
macerations,  and  squalid  neglect  is  a  folly  and  a  sin. 

2.  It  is  of  no  value  in  preventing  the  indulgence  of  the  flesh. — "  Not  in  any 
honour  to  the  satisfying  of  the  flesh  "  (ver.  23).  The  radical  error  of  the  ascetic 
lies  in  his  belief  that  evil  resides  in  matter.  Not  the  body,  but  the  soul,  is  the 
source  of  sin :  the  body  is  depraved  because  the  soul  is  depraved.  Sin  exists  as  a 
thought  and  conception  of  the  heart  before  it  exists  as  an  act  of  the  flesh.     No 

435 


CHAP.  III. 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS. 


amount  of  outward  flagellation,  or  of  abstinence  from  needful  food,  will  satisfy  the 
natural  wants  of  the  body,  or  destroy  its  sinful  tendencies.  The  attempt  to  be 
virtuous  by  afflicting  the  body  is  like  battering  the  outwork  while  the  main 
citadel  remains  untouched.  The  outward  can  never  satisfy  the  complicated  needs 
of  man's  nature.  First  bring  the  soul  into  a  right  relation  to  God,  and,  with 
the  aid  of  divine  grace,  it  will  control  all  the  outgoings  of  the  flesh. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  ceremonial  has  its  place  in  religion,  and  therefore  should  not 
be  despised.  2.  The  believer  is  raised  above  the  power  of  the  ceremonial  in  religion, 
and  therefore  should  not  be  subject  to  it. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  20.  Principles  above  Rules;  or, 
Wheat  is  better  than  Bread. — Bread  may 
feed  us  for  the  moment,  but  when  once 
eaten  it  is  gone  for  ever.  Wheat  on 
the  contrary  will  bear  seed,  increase, 
and  multiply.  Every  rule  is  taken  from 
a  principle,  as  a  loaf  of  bread  is  made 
from  wheat.  It  is  right  to  enforce 
the  principle  rather  than  the  action, 
because   a   good   principle   is   sure   of 


producing  good  actions.  Seeming 
goodness  is  not  better  than  religion ; 
precept  is  not  better  than  principle. — 
A.  W.  Hare. 

Vers.  21-23.  Asceticism — 

I.  Multiplies    unnecessary    restric- 
tions. 

II.  Is  a  species  of  self- worship. 

III.  Is  unjust  to  the  body. 


CHAPTER  III. 


CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  Seek  those  things  that  are  above.-  Our  Lord  says  that  as  He  was  "from  above,"  so 
His  disbelieving  hearers  were  "from  beneath,"  which  He  interprets  as  "of  this  world" 
(John  viii.  23,  24).  The  apostle  in  like  manner  in  the  next  verse  opposes  the  "things  above" 
to  "  things  on  earth." 

Ver.  3.  Your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God.— You  are  much  more  likely  to  have  it  kept 
pure  by  having  it  in  Christ  than  by  setting  round  it  a  hedge  o£  "  Thou  shalt "  and  "  Thou 
shalt  not." 

Ver.  5.  Mortify  therefore  your  members  which  are  upon  the  earth.—"  Quite  so !  "  the 
heretic  teacher  might  say;  "this  is  just  what  we  ourselves  advise."  "Yes,"  rejoins  the 
apostle  ;  "  but  let  us  know  what  it  is  we  are  to  slaughter."  It  is  no  hewing  and  hacking  of 
the  body,  but  what  is  as  much  more  difficult  as  it  is  noble — the  excision  or  eradication  of  evil 
thoughts  (Matt.  xv.  19,20).  Inordinate  affection,  evil  concupiscence.— R.V.  "  passion,  evil 
desire."  The  former  of  these  seems  to  indicate  the  corrupt  conditions  from  which  the  latter 
springs.  Covetousness,  which  is  idolatry. — "  Covetousness,"  or  "  having  more."  There  is 
many  a  man,  beside  the  clown  in  Twelfth  Night,  who  says,  "  I  would  not  have  you  to  think 
my  desire  of  having  is  the  sin  of  covetousness."  The  full  drag  can  afford  to  sacrifice 
(Hab.  i.  16). 

Ver.  8.  Anger,  wrath. — The  former  is  the  smouldering  fire,  the  latter  the  fierce  out-leaping 
flame.  Malice,  blasphemy. — The  former  is  the  vicious  disposition,  the  latter  the  manifesta- 
tion of  it  in  speech  that  is  meant  to  inflict  injury.  Filthy  communication. — One  word  in  the 
original ;  R.V.  gives  it  as  "  shameful  speaking."  The  word  does  not  occur  again  in  the  New 
Testament.  It  means  scurrilous  or  obscene  speech.  A  glimpse  of  Eastern  life  helps  us  to 
understand  the  frequent  injunctions  as  to  restraint  of  the  tongue  in  the  New  Testament. 
Dr.  Norman  Macleod  says  :  "  In  vehemence  of  gesticulation,  in  genuine  power  of  lip  and  lung 
to  fill  the  air  with  a  roar  of  incomprehensible  exclamations,  nothing  on  earth,  so  long  as 

436 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS.        chap.  hi. 


the  body  retains  its  present  arrangement  of  muscles  and  nervous  vitality,  can  surpass 
the  Egyptians  and  their  language."  But  the  same  thing  is  witnessed  of  other  Eastern 
tongues. 

Ver.  9.  Lie  not  one  to  another. — "Very  elementary  teaching,"  we  should  be  inclined 
to  say.  Whether  there  was  any  special  tendency  to  this  vice  in  the  Colossian  converts  we 
cannot  know. 

Ver.  12.  Bowels  of  mercies. — R.V.  "a  heart  of  compassion."  A  case  of  concrete  for 
abstract.     The  physical  effect  of  jjity  lies  at  the  bottom  of  the  pbrase. 

Ver.  13.  Forbearing  one  another,  and  forgiving  one  another. — Literally  it  would  be, 
"Bearing  with  one  another,  and  dealing  graciously  with  yourselves  " ;  for  not  only  the  verbs 
but  the  pronouns  also  change  with  a  delicate  shade  of  meaning.  Forbearance,  like  a  peace- 
making angel,  passes  to  and  fro  between  the  incensed  parties.  Even  as  Christ  forgave  you, 
so  also  do  ye. — The  pattern  of  all  graciousness  is  Christ.     See  His  parable  (Matt,  xviii.  33). 

Ver.  14.  Above  all  these  things  put  on  charity. — Reminding  us  of  the  exalted  place  which 
the  queenly  virtue  holds  in  Bt.  Paul's  triad.  As  the  outermost  dress  of  an  Oriental  was 
perhaps  that  which  was  most  serviceable,  so  whatever  else  is  put  on,  "  above  everything  " 
love  must  be  remembered.  Which  is  the  bond  of  perfectness. — "  That  in  which  all  the 
virtues  are  so  bound  together  that  perfection  is  the  result  and  not  one  of  them  is  wanting  to 
that  perfection  "  (  Grimni). 

Ver.  15.  And  let  the  peace  of  God  rule  in  your  hearts. — R.V.  margin,  "arbitrate."  We  met 
the  verb  for  "rule"  in  ii.  18,  but  with  a  prefix  "against."  "Let  the  peace  of  God  be 
umpire,"  says  the  apostle,  in  every  case  of  uncertainty  and  hesitation.  He  who  slept  on 
Galilee's  stormy  waters  had  but  to  say,  "  Peace  !  Be  still  I "  and  there  was  a  great  calm.  He 
said,  "My  peace  I  leave  with  you";  and  reckless  of  consequences  the  men  who  received  it 
amazed  the  authorities  by  the  boldness  of  their  question,  "  Whether  it  be  right  in  the  sigl.t 
of  God  to  hearken  unto  you  more  than  unto  God,  judge  ye  "  (Acts  iv.  19). 

Ver.  16.  Let  the  word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you  richly. — The  word  for  "dwell  in"  is  the 
same  which  assures  the  believer  of  an  indwelling  power  which  shall  quicken  the  mortal  body, 
and  which  describes  the  divine  act  of  grace,  "  I  will  dwell  in  them."  In  psalms  and  hymns 
and  spiritual  songs. — See  on  Eph.  v.  18,  19.  The  same  composition  may  be  either  psalm, 
hymn,  or  spiritual  song.  The  first  may  be  a  technical  word,  as  in  Luke  xxiv.  44.  It 
indicates  a  song  accompanied  by  a  stringed  instrument.  A  hymn  is  a  song  in  praise  of 
some  one,  exalting  the  character  and  attributes.  The  third  term  is  the  most  comprehensive, 
and  to  it,  with  good  reason,  St.  Paul  prefixes  "  spiritual."  Bacchanalian  songs  were  common 
enough  about  Colossae  with  their  noisy,  unhallowed  mirth.  St.  Paul,  like  St.  James,  would 
not  object  to  his  readers  being  merry  if  the  spiritual  joys 

"  From  out  their  hearts  arise 
And  speak  and  sparkle  in  their  eyes 
And  vibrate  on  their  tongues." 

Ver.  18.  As  it  is  fit  in  the  Lord.— See  Eph.  v.  22.  The  feeling  of  propriety  St.  Paul 
emphasises  here,  and  limits  it  "  in  the  Lord." 

Ver.  19.  Be  not  bitter  against  them.  — As  love  in  its  most  degraded  form  might  alternate 
with  paroxysms  of  anger,  St.  Paul  uses  the  nobler  word  for  Christian  love  which  casts  out 
hatred  as  well  as  fear. 

Ver.  20.  For  this  is  well-pleasing. — Eph.  vi.  1 :  "  This  is  right."  What  in  Ephesians  is 
regarded  as  an  equitable  due  from  child  to  parent  is  here  looked  at  in  another  light.  The 
best  commentary  is  Luke  ii.  51,  52.  The  child  Jesus  was  subject  to  his  parents  and  increased 
in  favour  with  God. 

Ver.  21.  Fathers,  provoke  not  your  children. — The  word  for  "provoke  "  is  not  the  same  as  in 
Eph.  vi.  4.  There  the  word  is  "do  not  exasperate."  Here  it  is  "  do  not  irritate."  The  difficulty 
of  discriminating  between  them  may  perhaps  show  how  near  the  original  words  are  iD 
meaning.  "Irritation  is  the  first  consequence  of  being  too  exacting  with  children,  and 
irritation  leads  to  moroseness"  (Lightfoof).  Lest  they  be  discouraged. — Broken-spirited. 
It  is  a  sad  sight  to  see  a  man  for  whom  the  stress  of  life  has  been  too  much,  but  to  see  a 
child  cowed  and  dejected — the  world  has  no  sadder  spectacle. 

Ver.  23.  Whatsoever  ye  do,  do  it  heartily. — Eph.  vi.  7,  "  With  good  will  doing  service." 
R.V.  gives  the  distinction  which  is  obliterated  by  "  do,  do  "  of  A. V.  Whatsoever  ye  do,  work 
heartily  (margin,  from  the  soul). 

Ver.  25.  He  that  doeth  wrong. — The  participle  of  the  original  points  to  the  habitual 
practice  of  wrong-doing.  There  is  no  respect  of  persons.— In  the  Ephesian  letter  this  con- 
sideration is  urged  upon  the  masters  as  it  is  here  upon  the  slaves.  Both  are  amenable  to  the 
same  authority. 


437 


chap.  ill.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  1,  2. 

The  Higher  Aspirations  of  the  Soul. 

You  have  seen  the  clouds  gather  in  the  sky  and  settle  on  the  hills.  The 
thunder  mutters,  the  rain  falls,  and  the  scene  is  one  of  storm,  confusion,  and 
darkness.  Suddenly  the  whole  aspect  of  the  heavens  is  changed.  A  blaze  of 
light  springs  up  among  the  hills  ;  the  storm  ceases ;  the  gloom  is  swept  away ; 
and  the  outlook  is  one  of  tranquillity,  of  triumph,  and  of  splendour.  Similar 
to  this  is  the  striking  change  between  the  close  of  the  last  chapter  of  this 
epistle  and  the  beginning  of  the  present  one.  The  grave  warnings  against  the 
sombre  errors  of  a  false  philosophy,  and  the  supposed  meritorious  torturings  of 
the  body,  which  occupy  a  considerable  part  of  the  second  chapter,  give  place  in 
the  opening  of  the  third  chapter  to  a  luminous  and  inspiring  picture  of  the 
glorious  privileges  and  lofty  destiny  of  the  believing  soul.  These  verses  teach 
that,  being  raised  by  Christ  into  newness  of  life,  the  soul  should  aspire  to  the 
attainment  of  the  highest  blessings. 

I.  The  distinguished  relation  in  which  the  believing  soul  stands  to  Christ. — 
"  Risen  with  Christ  "  (ver.  1). 

1.  This  relation  implies  the  living  union  of  the  soul  with  Christ. — The  apostle 
had  spoken  of  the  soul  as  dying  with  Christ.,  as  buried  with  Him,  as  quickened 
with  Him ;  and  now  he  advances  another  step,  and  declares  that  it  is  also 
raised  with  Him.  The  union  between  the  believer  and  Christ  was  so  complete 
that  he  participates  with  Christ  in  all  He  has  done.  "  Therefore  we  are 
buried  with  Him  by  baptism  into  death ;  that  like  as  Christ  was  raised  up 
from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father,  even  so  we  also  should  walk  in 
newness  of  life  "  (Rom.  vi.  4).  As  the  dead  body  of  the  man  cast  into  the 
sepulchre  of  Elisha  revived  and  stood  up  the  moment  it  touched  the  bones  of 
the  prophet  (2  Kings  xiii.  21),  so  the  soul,  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  is 
quickened  by  believing  contact  with  Christ,  and  rises  into  a  higher  and  more 
glorious  life. 

2.  This  relation  indicates  the  nature  and  tendencies  of  the  soul. — "  Risen  with 
Christ  :  .  .  .  set  your  affections  on  things  above,  not  on  things  on  the  earth." 
(vers.  1,  2).  The  change  involved  in  union  with  Christ  affects  man's  whole 
nature.  It  affects  not  only  his  practical  conduct,  but  also  his  intellectual 
conceptions.  He  is  translated  from  earth  to  heaven  ;  and  with  this  translation 
his  point  of  view  is  altered,  his  standard  of  judgment  wholly  changed.  His 
aspirations  spurn  the  earthly  and  transitory,  and  soar  towards  the  heavenly 
and  eternal.  The  flies  that  sport  upon  the  summer  stream,  while  they  plunge 
their  bodies  in  the  water,  are  careful  not  to  wet  their  wings,  so  that  they  may 
fly  again  into  the  sunny  air.  So,  while  we  are  necessarily  immersed. in  "  things 
on  the  earth,"  we  should  take  heed  that  the  wings  of  our  soul  are  not  so  clogged 
as  to  retard  our  flight  to  heaven. 

II.  The  sublime  objects  of  the  soul's  higher  aspirations. — "  Things  above  " 
(ver.  2). 

1.  Christ  is  above. — "  Where  Christ  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  God  "  (ver.  2). 
This  indicates  that  Christ  is  exalted  to  the  highest  dignity.  He  is  above  all 
angelic  powers,  whatever  their  position  or  rank.  The  right  hand  of  God  also 
indicates  the  right  hand  of  power.  Thence  Christ  wields  all  the  authority  and 
power  of  universal  government.  "  Him  hath  God  exalted  to  be  a  Prince  and 
a  Saviour."  He  reigns  on  high  in  order  to  carry  out  to  a  glorious  consumma- 
tion the  work  He  accomplished  on  the  cross.  To  Him  all  hearts  turn  for  love 
and  blessedness,  as  the  flowers  turn  to  the  sun.  The  rudiments  of  the  world 
have  no  longer  any  power  to  satisfy.     The  soul  ascends  to  heaven,  for  where 

438 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS.        chap,  ill 


the  treasure  is  there  will  be  the  heart  also  ;  and  the  flow  of  time  is  rapidly 

hurrying  us  on  to  the  moment  when  we  shall  be 

"  Caught  up  to  share 
The  triumph  of  our  Lord." 

2.  The  source  of  the  greatest  spiritual  blessings  is  above. — When  Christ  ascended 
into  the  heavens  He  received  gifts  for  men  ;  and  from  His  lofty  throne  He 
delights  to  distribute  those  gifts  to  the  needy  sons  of  men.  Thence  we  receive 
pardon,  the  conscious  favour  of  God,  holiness  of  character,  comfort  in  every  time 
of  distress,  and  hope  to  light  the  pathway  of  the  future.  Of  all  the  blessings 
laid  up  for  us  above,  the  highest  and  the  best  is  that  which  in  itself  includes  all 
others — the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     All,  all  we  want  is  there. 

3.  The  heavenly  home  is  above. — There  is  the  abode  of  peace  and  purity  ;  there 
temptation  has  no  power,  and  suffering  and  sorrow  can  never  enter ;  there  the 
Saviour  reveals  His  glories  and  diffuses  the  joy  of  His  radiant  presence  ;  there 
all  the  members  of  the  Father's  family  assemble  from  every  part  of  the  globe, 
never  more  to  separate.  The  soul,  burdened  with  the  cares  of  life,  and  troubled 
with  multiplied  disappointments,  yearns  for  the  rest  of  the  heavenly  home.  The 
things  on  the  earth  can  never  satisfy  the  wants  of  the  soul ;  they  are  unsuited  to 
it ;  they  are  beneath  it;  and,  liberated  from  their  trammels  by  the  resurrection 
power  of  Christ,  it  seeks  its  true  happiness  above  the  stars. 

III.  The  paramount  duty  of  the  soul  to  aspire  to  the  highest  good. — Seek,  set 
"your  affections  on  things  above"  (ver.  1).  A  similar  expression  repeated  for 
the  emphasis.  You  are  not  only  to  seek  heaven,  but  also  to  think  heaven.  The 
understanding  must  be  engaged  in  duly  estimating  the  value  of  heavenly  things, 
the  will  in  preferring  them  above  all  things  earthly,  the  affections  in  embracing 
them  as  the  objects  to  be  most  evidently  desired  and  loved ;  in  fact,  all  the 
powers  of  the  soul  must  be  constantly  exercised  in  the  search.  The  soul,  raised 
from  the  death  of  sin,  is  ever  responding  to  the  attractive  influence  of  its  risen 
Lord.  "  Being  thus  already  risen,  every  motion  of  grace  is  the  struggle  of  the 
soul  for  the  final  consummation — the  bird  is  caged,  but  the  wings  are  free  to 
flutter  within  their  prison."  The  soul  is  now  willing,  cheerfully  and  faithfully, 
to  follow  the  call  of  duty,  whatever  it  may  entail. 

"  Oft  where  she  leads,  thy  blood  must  mark  thy  footsteps  ; 
Oft  where  she  leads,  thy  head  must  bear  the  storm, 
And  thy  shrunk  form  endure  heat,  cold,  and  hunger; 
But  she  will  guide  thee  up  to  noble  heights, 
Which  he  who  gains  seems  native  of  the  sky  ; 
While  earthly  things  lie  stretched  beneath  his  feet, 
Diminished,  shrunk,  and  valueless." 

Lessons. — 1.  The  soul  is  endowed  with  vast  powers  and  capable  of  the  highest 
destiny.  2.  It  is  sad  to  witness  thousands  whose  souls  rise  no  higher  than  the 
things  on  the  earth.  3.  The  soul  can  realise  its  highest  aspirations  only  as  it  is 
risen  with  Christ, 


GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE   VERSES. 

Ver.  1.  Seeking  the  Things  Above.  II.  The  conduct  enjoined  upon  us. 

I.  Contemplate  the  sublime  object —  — "  Seek  those  things."      1.    Implies 

the  state  of  future  blessedness  of  be-  belief  in  their  existence.     2.  That  atten- 

lievers.     1.   The  perfection  of  character  tion   is    directed   much   towards    them, 

they  exhibit.     2.  The  exercises  in  which  3.  Set  our  attachment  upon  them.    4.  Use 

they  shall  be  engaged.     3.  The  happiness  diligent    and   persevering    exertions   to 

in  which  they  participate.    4.  The  friend-  obtain  them, 

ships  they  share.  III.  Motives    to    this   conduct. — 1. 

439 


chap.  in.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS. 


A  regard  to  consistency.     2.  The  reason-  2.  Love.     3.  Peace.     4.  Truth. — A.  W. 

ableness     of    the     duty.        3.    Present  Hare, 
advantages.      4.  Because   they   are   the 
scene  in  which    are   displayed   Christ's  The  New  Life, 

personal  presence  and  glory.  I.  There,  is  a  great  difference  be- 

tween the  new  life  and  the  old. — 1.  In 

Risen  with  Christ.  our  feelings.     2.  Principles.     3.  Aims. 

I.  Christianity  begins  where  every-  4.  Methods.     5.  Conduct.     6.  Thoughts. 
thing  else  ends :  it  begins  with  death.  7.  Company.     8.  Influence. 

II.  After  dying  to  sin  we  are  to         II.  This  difference  should  lead  us 
begin  to  live  in  good  earnest.  to  think  much  of  heaven  and  to  seek 

in.  The  Christian  toils,  labours,  and  after  heavenly  things. — 1.  To  know  all 

tasks  his  mind  for  the  glory  of  God  we  can  about  heaven.      2.   To  prepare 

and  the  good  of  Others.  all  we  can  for  heaven.     3.  To  take  all 

IV.  The    true   Christian  seeks  the  we  can  with  us  to  heaven. — Preacher's 

thirgs  which  are  above. — 1.  Holiness.  Magazine. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  3,  4. 

The  Present  Condition  and  Future  Glory  of  Life  in  Christ. 

The  Christian  life  has  a  twofold  aspect.  Outwardly  it  is  shorn  of  all  splendours, 
and  to  the  eye  of  the  world  appears  a  life  of  weakness,  ignominy,  and  suffering  ; 
but  inwardly  it  is  radiant  with  divine  light  and  pervaded  with  a  heavenly  peace. 
The  believer  is  often  as  a  monarch  in  the  disguise  of  a  beggar.  The  world  knows 
nothing  of  the  new  life  of  which  he  has  become  possessed,  and  the  new  life  must 
know  nothing  of  the  world.  Its  aspirations  are  directed  towards  higher  things. 
The  relish  for  earthly  things  is  gone. 

I.  That  the  present  condition  of  the  believer's  life  in  Christ  involves  a  new 
relation  to  outward  things. — "  For  ye  are  dead  "  (ver.  3).  There  was  a  time  when 
he  not  only  lived  in  the  world,  but  to  the  world  and  for  the  world.  He  was  wholly 
captivated  and  absorbed  in  the  pursuits  and  enjoyments  of  the  carnal  mind.  But 
now,  while  still  in  the  world,  he  is  dead  to  its  charms  and  to  its  ordinances.  All 
the  mainsprings  of  activity  are  changed.  He  is  risen  with  Christ  and  shares 
the  power  of  His  resurrection  life.  Man  lives  where  He  loves,  and,  having 
experienced  so  complete  a  change,  his  affections  are  now  fixed  on  things  above, 
and  his  life  is  bound  up  in  the  love  and  service  of  Christ,  who  sitteth  on  the 
right  hand  of  God.  He  is  dead  because  he  is  crucified  with  Christ,  and  hath 
put  off  the  old  man — the  old  fleshly  nature — with  his  deeds.  This  death  involves 
a  renunciation  of  all  the  ceremonial  observances  against  which  the  apostle  so 
faithfully  warned  in  the  preceding  chapter — the  Mosaic  ritual,  the  vain 
philosophy,  the  angelolatry,  the  pride  of  the  fleshly  mind,  the  traditions  and 
commandments  of  men,  and  all  the  pernicious  doctrines  of  the  false  teachers. 
He  is  dead  to  the  past,  and  realising  the  beating  of  a  new  life  within  him,  he 
enters  upon  a  brighter  and  loftier  career. 

II.  That  the  present  condition  of  the  believer's  life  in  Christ  is  one  of  conceal- 
ment from  the  outward  world. — 1.  It  is  hid.  "  Your  life  is  hid  "  (ver.  3).  All  life 
is  hid.  Its  origin  is  a  profound  mystery.  The  botanist  fails  to  discover  it  as  he 
picks  his  plant  into  microscopic  atoms.  The  scalpel  of  the  anatomist  has  not 
pierced  its  dark  domain  and  laid  bare  its  hiding-place.  Its  presence  is  known 
only  by  its  effects.  So  is  it  with  the  new  life  of  the  soul.  It  is  hid  from  the 
world.  It  has  a  glory  and  a  power  of  its  own  ;  but  the  world  is  incapable  of 
appreciating  either.  It  is  not  a  life  of  vulgar  display  and  noisy  demonstration. 
It  is  gentle,  quiet,  and  retiring,  sometimes  obscured  by  a  tempest  of  persecution 

440 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS.        chap.  in. 


and  suffering.  It  is  sometimes  partially  hidden  to  the  believer  himself  when 
assailed  by  temptations  and  oppressed  by  the  weight  of  heavy  chastisements. 
Yet  that  hidden  life  is  the  power  that  shall  shake  and  transform  the  world. 

2.  It  is  hid  with  Christ. — "  Your  life  is  hid  with  Christ "  (ver.  3).  Christ  Himself 
was  hidden  when  on  earth.  To  the  undiscerning  He  was  as  a  root  out  of  a  dry 
ground,  possessing  neither  form  nor  comeliness.  Even  now  Christ  is  hidden  to 
the  worldly  mind ;  and  the  believer's  life  is  hidden  with  Him,  as  a  river,  concealed 
for  a  time  in  a  hidden  channel,  flows  on  beneath  and  out  of  sight.  This  hiding 
of  the  believer's  life  with  Christ  indicates  (1)  Dependence.  It  is  not  hid  with 
the  believer  himself.  He  derives  it  from  Christ,  as  the  great  fontal  source  of  all 
life ;  and  on  Him  he  depends  for  its  constant  supply  and  nourishment.  The 
springs  of  this  life  abide  when  every  other  channel  of  supply  is  dry  and  its 
fount  exhausted.  We  must  wait  on  Christ  for  daily  supplies  of  living  water.  It 
indicates  (2)  Security.  Our  life  is  safer  in  Christ's  keeping  than  it  could  be  in 
our  own.  Man  was  once  entrusted  with  the  gift  of  a  glorious  life,  and  he  lost  it. 
But  in  the  hands  of  Christ  our  life  is  out  of  all  danger.  It  is  secure  amid  the  con- 
flicts of  time,  the  subtle  temptations  of  the  world,  and  the  wild  rage  of  demons. 

3.  It  is  hid  in  the  depths  of  the  Godhead. — "  Your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God  " 
(ver.  3).  A  grand  but  unfathomable  truth  !  It  is  not  lost  in  the  abyss  of  Deity, 
as  the  mystic  or  pantheist  would  teach ;  but  it  is  so  hid  as  to  retain  its  own 
conscious  individuality,  while  sharing  in  the  boundless  life  of  God.  It  is  a  gift 
from  God,  bestowed  through  Christ  the  great  Mediator,  created  by  the  power 
and  energy  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  so  that  the  nature,  manner,  and  destiny  of 
the  gift  are  hidden  in  God  through  the  mediation  of  His  Son.  "  God  hath  given 
unto  us  eternal  life,  and  this  life  is  in  His  Son."  The  exercise  of  faith  brings 
the  soul  into  living  union  with  the  glorious  Trinity. 

III.  That  the  believer's  life  in  Christ  will,  in  the  future,  be  manifested  in 
ineffable  glory. — 1.  There  will  be  a  signal  manifestation  of  Christ  in  the  future. 
"  When  Christ,  who  is  our  life,  shall  appear  "  (ver.  4).  Christ  is  now  invisible 
to  His  people  and  to  the  world.  '  He  withdrew  from  the  scene  of  His  suffering 
ministry,  entered  the  serene  heights  of  heaven,  and  there,  all-potent,  is  carrying 
on  His  high  purposes  of  grace  and  salvation.  But  by-and-by — not  at  the  bidding 
of  the  impatient  prophets,  who  dare  to  fix  the  Lord  a  time,  and,  in  their  too 
realistic  interpretation  of  His  word,  consider  His  second  coming  as  the  grand 
and  only  specific  for  the  world's  evils — in  His  own  good  time,  to  the  joy  of  His 
people  and  the  dismay  of  His  foes,  He  will  come  in  overwhelming  glory. 

2.  The  believer  will  share  in  the  ineffable  glory  of  that  manifestation. — "  Then 
shall  ye  also  appear  with  Him  in  glory  "  (ver.  4).  (1)  This  implies  public  recognition. 
The  believer,  obscure  and  despised  on  earth,  is  acknowledged  before  the  universe 
as  related  to  Christ  by  the  dearest  ties  and  as  deriving  his  life  from  Him.  All 
the  ends  of  secrecy  are  answered.  The  hidden  is  revealed.  The  baffled,  perse- 
cuted, unappreciated,  affited  people  of  God  are  for  ever  vindicated.  (2)  This 
also  implies  a  personal  participation  in  the  splendour  of  Christ's  triumph  and  in 
the  bliss  of  His  character.  "  With  Him  in  glory."  Glory  is  a  comprehensive 
term,  and  not  easily  defined.  But  whether  we  regard  it  as  expressive  of  external 
and  visible  splendour,  or  as  describing  a  condition  of  unutterable  and  endless 
felicity,  in  either  sense,  or  both,  the  believer  shares  it  with  his  exultant  Lord. 
Rapture  of  raptures  !  to  see  Jesus,  to  be  with  Him,  and  to  live  in  the  sunshine  of 
His  smile  for  ever  ! 

Lessons. — 1.  The  believers  life  in  Christ  is  a  hidden,  but  a  real  life.  2.  Bear 
patiently  the  trials  of  the  present  life.  3.  The  glory  of  the  believer 's  future  life  will 
more  than  recompense  him  for  the  troubles  of  the  present. 


441 


chap.  in.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  3.  Death  and  Life  with  Christ. 

I.  Ye  are  dead. — 1.  In  your  original 
state  of  unconcern  and  unbelief  ye  are 
dead.  2.  By  the  Holy  Ghost  you  are 
made  to  recognise  this  death  as  real  and 
to  acquiesce  in  it  as  just.  3.  You  con- 
tinue to  be  thus  dead  with  Christ. 

II.  Your  life  is  with  Christ. — 1.  As 
partakers  of  His  right  to  live.  2.  In 
respect  of  the  new  spirit  of  your  life. 
3.  Your  life  being  with  Christ  must  be 
where  He  is.  In  God  as  its  source,  its 
centre,  its  pattern.  4.  This  life  with 
Christ  is  hid.  For  security ;  in  its 
intimacy  ;  as  separated  from  the  world  ; 
is  not  to  be  always  hidden  (ver.  4). — 
R.  S.  Candlish. 

Ver.  4.   Christ  our  Life. 

I.  The  vital  principle  recognised. — 


1.  The  life 
2.     Eternal 


pre 


of 


"  Christ  who  is  our  life." 
is  spiritual  in  its  nature, 
in  its  duration. 

II.  The    splendid    spectacle 
dieted. — "  Christ  shall  appear." 

1.  The   manner. — In    the    glory 
His  Father,  with  His  angels. 

2.  The  purpose. — To  judge  the  quick 
and  the  dead. 

III.  The  glorious  hope  awakened. — 

"Then  shall  ye  appear  with  Him  in 
glory."  1.  The  great  hope  of  the 
Christian  life  is  that  one  day  we  shall 
be  with  Christ.  2.  That  we  shall  par- 
ticipate in  Christ's  glory.  3.  These 
words  are  full  of  comfort  to  those 
drawing  near  to  death. — J.  T.  Wood- 
house. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH, —Verses   5—9. 

Mortification  of  the  Sinful  Principle  in  Man. 

Practice  follows  doctrine.  The  genuineness  of  a  precept  is  tested  by  its 
adaptability  to  the  practical  working  out  of  life's  problem.  The  apostle  has 
laid  down  his  doctrine  clearly  and  emphatically,  and  now  he  proceeds  to 
enforce  the  use  of  the  best  methods  for  securing  the  highest  degree  of  personal 
holiness.  These  methods  are  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  exalted  experience 
into  which  the  believer  is  introduced  when  he  is  risen  with  Christ  and  participates 
in  that  glorious  life  which  is  bid  with  Christ  in  God. 

1.  That  the  sinful  principle  in  man  has  an  active  outward  development. — 1.  It 
is  mundane  in  its  tendencies.  "  Your  members  which  are  upon  the  earth  "  (ver.  5). 
It  is  earthly,  sensual,  depraved.  It  teaches  the  soul  to  grovel  when  it  ought  to 
soar.  It  is  in  sympathy  with  the  whole  mass  of  earthly  things  — riches,  honour, 
pleasure,  fame — which  stand  opposed  to  the  higher  aspirations  of  the  soul,  whose 
affection  is  fixed  on  things  above. 

2.  It  is  manifested  in  acts  of  gross  sensuality. — "  Fornication,  uncleanness,  in- 
ordinate affection,  evil  concupiscence  "  (ver.  5).  A  revolting  catalogue,  a  loathsome 
index  to  the  festering  mass  of  corruption  within  !  A  rake's  progress  has  been 
portrayed  by  the  genius  of  a  Hogarth  ;  but  where  is  the  pencil  that  can  delineate 
the  dark  progress  of  evil  ?  For  there  is  an  order  observed  in  its  abhorrent 
development.  The  mischief  begins  in  evil  concupiscence ;  yielding  to  the  first 
unholy  impulse,  it  goes  on  to  lustful  and  inordinate  affection ;  proceeds  to  un- 
cleanness— pollutions  which  follow  on  the  two  preceding  vices;  and  ends  in 
fornication,  both  in  its  ord'nary  meaning  and  in  that  of  adultery.  Possibly  the 
apostle  had  reference  to  the  rites  of  Bacchus  and  Cybele,  which  were  wont  to  be 
celebrated  with  many  peculiar  impurities  in  Phrygia,  of  which  Colossse,  Laodicea, 
and  Hierapolis  were  cities,  and  which  so  deeply  depraved  the  morals  of  the 
people.  The  outgoings  of  evil  are  not  less  rampant  and  shocking  in  modern 
times.     Evil  is  the  same  in  principle  everywhere. 

3.  It   is   recognised   by   a   debasing   idolatry. — "  And   covetousness,  which  is 

442 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS.        chap.  in. 


idolatry  "  (ver.  5).  Covetousness  is  a  sin  that  comes  the  earliest  into  the  human 
heart,  and  is  the  last  and  most  difficult  to  be  driven  out.  It  is  an  insatiable  lust 
after  material  possessions — the  greed  of  getting  more  for  the  sake  of  more,  till 
often  the  brain  is  turned  and  the  heart  withered.  The  apostle  brands  it  with  the 
significant  term  "  idolatry."  With  the  covetous  man  his  idol  is  his  gold,  which, 
in  his  eyes,  answereth  all  things ;  his  soul  is  the  shrine  where  the  idol  is  set  up ; 
and  the  worship  which  he  owes  to  God  is  transferred  to  mammon.  Avarice  is 
the  seed  of  the  most  hateful  and  outrageous  vices.  The  exhortation  to  mortify 
the  flesh  is  pressed  home  by  reminding  them  of  the  certainty  of  the  divine  wrath 
which  would  overtake  the  contumacious  and  disobedient, 

IT.  That  the  active  outgoings  of  the  sinful  principle  in  man  call  for  the 
infliction  of  divine  vengeance. — The  wrath  of  God  is  not  a  malignant,  un- 
reasoning passion,  like  that  with  which  we  are  familiar  among  men.  Nor  is  it 
a  strong  figure  of  speech,  into  which  the  maudlin  philosophers  of  the  day  would 
fain  resolve  it.  It  is  an  awful  reality.  It  is  not  merely  a  thing  of  the  past,  to 
the  terrible  havoc  of  which  history  bears  faithful  and  suggestive  testimony.  It 
is  the  wrath  to  come,  and  will  be  "  revealed  from  heaven  against  all  ungodliness 
and  unrighteousness  of  men."  It  is  not  inconsistent  with  infinite  love,  but  is 
an  impressive  form  in  which  the  divine  righteousness  expresses  itself  against  all 
disobedient  and  impenitent  workers  of  iniquity. 

III.  That  the  indulgence  of  the  sinful  principle  in  man  is  inconsistent  with 
the  new  life  he  has  in  Christ. — There  was  a  time  when  the  sins  here  enumerated 
formed  the  atmosphere  in  which  the  Colossians  lived,  moved,  a,nd  breathed ; 
they  represented  the  condition  of  their  life  and  the  character  of  their  practice : 
they  lived  and  walked  in  sin.  But  that  time  was  past.  A  great  change  had 
taken  place.  They  were  surrounded  by  a  purer  atmosphere ;  they  lived  in 
another  world  ;  they  aspired  to  a  nobler  destiny.  To  return  to  the  vices  and 
idolatries  of  their  former  life  was  utterly  inconsistent  with  their  exalted 
character ;  it  was  unworthy  the  high  and  holy  vocation  wherewith  they  were 
called.  It  is  salutary  to  be  reminded  now  and  then  of  our  former  life  of  sin. 
It  magnifies  the  grace  of  God  in  the  great  change  He  has  wrought.  It  warns 
against  the  danger  of  being  drawn  into  old  habits  and  associations.  It 
stimulates  the  heavenward  tendencies  of  the  new  life. 

IV.  That  the  sinful  principle  in  man  is  the  source  of  the  most  malignant 
passions. — The  former  classification  embraced  sins  which  related  more  especially 
to  self ;  this  includes  sins  which  have  a  bearing  upon  others. 

1.  There  are  sins  of  the  heart  and  temper. — "Anger,  wrath,  malice"  (ver.  8). 
There  is  an  anger  which  is  a  righteous  indignation  against  wrong,  and  which  is 
so  far  justifiable  and  sinless.  It  is  the  anger  without  cause  or  beyond  cause, 
and  which  degenerates  into  a  bitter  feeling  of  revenge,  that  is  here  condemned. 
Wrath  is  the  fierce  ebullition  of  anger,  expressed  with  ungovernable  passion ; 
and  is  at  all  times  unseemly  and  unlawful.  Malice  is  anger  long  cherished, 
until  it  becomes  a  settled  habit  of  mind.  It  involves  hatred,  secret  envy,  desire 
of  revenge  and  retaliation,  and  universal  ill-will  towards  others.  It  is  altogether 
a  diabolical  passion.  If  anger  exceeds  its  bounds,  it  becomes  wrath;  if  wrath 
lies  brooding  in  the  bosom,  it  degenerates  into  malice. 

2.  There  are  sins  of  the  tongue. — "  Blasphemy,  filthy  communication  out  of  your 
mouth.  Lie  not  one  to  another  "  (vers.  8,  9).  Blasphemy  in  a  lower  sense  includes 
all  calumny,  evil-speaking,  railing,  slandering,  scoffing,  ridiculing — all  vile  in- 
sinuations, whether  against  God  or  man.  Filthy  communication  refers  to  all 
foul-mouthed  abuse,  indelicate  allusions,  details  of  vicious  scenes,  and  whatever 
hurts  the  feelings  and  shocks  the  sense  of  propriety  rather  than  injures  the 
character.  Lying  is  also  here  condemned.  Wherever  this  vice  prevails  society 
is  rotten  to  the  core.     The  almost  total  want  of  truthfulness  is  one  of  the  saddest 

443 


chap.  III.        H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS. 


features  of  the  moral  condition  of  heathendom.  Lying  basely  violates  the  gift 
of  speech,  saps  the  foundation  of  human  intercourse,  and  overturns  the  first 
principles  of  morals.  That  which  is  spoken  in  ignorance,  though  untrue,  is  not 
a  lie ;  but  to  equivocate,  to  speak  so  as  to  lead  another  to  a  false  conclusion,  is 
to  lie  as  really  as  if  the  speaker  deliberately  stated  what  he  knew  was  a  false- 
hood. All  these  sins  are  directly  opposed  to  that  ingenuous  sincerity  which  is 
the  leading  characteristic  of  the  new  life  in  Christ. 

V.  That  the  sinful  principle  in  man,  and  all  its  outgoings,  must  be  wholly 
renounced  and  resolutely  mortified. — "  But  now  ye  also  put  off  all  these " 
(ver.  8).  "  Mortify,  therefore,  your  members  "  (ver.  5).  There  is  much  force 
in  the  word  "  therefore."  Since  ye  are  dead  with  Christ  and  are  risen  with  Him, 
since  ye  possess  a  glorious  life  hid  with  Christ  in  God,  therefore  mortify — put  to 
death  the  members  of  your  earthly  and  corrupt  nature,  and  encourage  the 
expansion  of  that  pure,  beauteous,  and  exalted  life  which  ye  have  received 
through  the  faith  of  the  operation  of  God.  Not  that  we  are  to  kill  or  mutilate 
the  members  of  the  body  that  have  been  the  instruments  of  sin,  but  to  crucify 
the  interior  vices  of  the  mind  and  will.  It  is  wholly  a  moral  process ;  the 
incipient  inclination  to  sin  must  be  restrained,  deadened,  crushed.  In  order  to 
this  there  must  be  the  total  renunciation  of  all  sin.  "  But  now  ye  also  put  off 
all  these."  The  verb  is  imperative  and  the  exhortation  emphatic.  There  must 
be  not  only  an  abstinence  from  open  vice — heathen  morality  insists  on  as  much 
as  this — but  there  must  be  the  putting  away  of  every  secret  evil  passion — 
removing  it  out  of  sight  as  we  would  remove  a  dead  body  to  burial.  As  the  prince 
casts  off  the  coarse  garment  in  which  he  has  been  disguised,  and  stands  forth  in 
an  apparel  befitting  his  rank  and  dignity,  so  the  believer  is  to  divest  himself  of 
the  unsightly  and  filthy  garment  of  the  old  man,  and  allow  the  new  man  to 
appear  adorned  with  heavenly  magnificence  and  bright  with  the  inex- 
tinguishable lustre  of  a  divine  spiritual  life. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  sinful  principle  in  man  is  a  great  power.  2.  The  new 
spiritual  life  in  the  believer  is  in  ceaseless  antagonism  with  the  old.  3.  The  constant 
duty  of  the  believer  is  to  subdue  and  destroy  the  sinful  principle.  4.  In  fulfilling 
this  duty  all  the  powers  of  good  are  on  his  side. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Ver.  5.  Covetousness,  which  is  Idolatry.  endure  the  wrath  to  come. — Preacher's 

I.  In  its  essence. — It  is  putting  the  Magazine. 
creature  in  the  place  of  the  Creator, 

and  giving  it  the  worship  due  to  God  Ver.  6.  The  Wrath  of  God — 

alone.  I.  A  reality  to  be  dreaded. 

II.  In  its  practice. — Body  and  soul  II.  Is  roused  by  the  workings  of 
are     consecrated    to    the     service    of  iniquity. 

mammon.  III.  Will  overtake  the  disobedient. 

III.  In  its  punishment. — Idolatry  is 

a  sin  peculiarly  obnoxious  to  God — is  Vers.  7-9.  The  New  Life — 

not  merely  the  breach  of  His  law,  but  I.  Must  break   thoroughly  away 

treason  against  His  government.     God  from  the  old  life  of  sin. 

deprives  the  covetous  of  his  idol  at  last,  II.  Is  evident  in  temper  and  speech. 

and    sends   him   treasureless   into   the  III.  Is  the  interpretation  of  all  that 

unseen  world,  wrecked  and  ruined,  to  is  pure  and  true. 


444 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.        chap.  m. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  9—11. 

The  New  Spiritual  Nature. 

In  the  primitive  Church  it  was  customary  for  the  new  converts,  after  putting 
aside  their  heathenish  vestments,  to  array  themselves  in  white  garments,  that 
they  might  indicate,  in  the  most  public  manner,  the  great  change  which  had 
taken  place.  It  was  perhaps  in  allusion  to  this  custom  that  the  arostle  bases 
his  exhortation.  A  courtier  would  not  dare  to  insult  his  sovereign  by  appearing 
before  him  in  squalid  and  tattered  garments,  but  would  be  specially  studious  to 
attire  himself  in  a  dress  every  way  suited  to  his  rank  and  character.  So  the 
believer  would  not  dishonour  God  and  disgrace  the  religion  he  has  embraced 
by  exhibiting  the  vices  and  passions  that  characterised  his  former  unrenewed 
state,  but  is  the  more  solicitous  to  magnify  the  grace  of  God  in  a  life  of  out- 
ward consistency  and  purity.  In  the  former  verses  the  writer  has  insisted  on 
sanctification  in  its  negative  aspect — the  mortification  of  sin,  the  putting  off  the 
old  man.  In  these  words  he  deals  with  sanctification  on  its  positive  side,  and 
shows  that  it  is  the  putting  on  the  new  spiritual  nature,  in  which  the  believer  is 
ever  advancing  to  a  higher  knowledge.     Observe  : — 

I.  That  the  possession  of  the  new  spiritual  nature  implies  a  complete  change 
of  the  whole  man. — "  Seeing  that  ye  have  put  off  the  old  man,  with  his  deeds, 
and  have  put  on  the  new  man  "  (vers.  9,  10).  The  believer  has  a  twofold  moral 
personality.  There  is  in  him  the  old  man — the  sinful  principle  ;  and  there  is  in 
him  also  the  new — the  God-like,  spiritual  nature.  Whatever  we  bring  with  us 
from  the  womb  of  our  mother  is  the  old  man ;  whatever  we  receive  by  the  grace 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  new.  In  the  great  spiritual  transformation  experienced 
by  every  believer  there  is  a  twofold  and  coincident  operation — the  putting  off  of 
the  old  and  the  putting  on  of  the  new  ;  there  is  an  act  of  renunciation  and 
unclothing  and  an  act  of  reception  and  investment.  This  change  is  complete  ; 
it  pervades  the  whole  man,  ruling  every  power,  fashioning  the  character, 
and  inspiring  the  entire  life.  This  change  is  divine  in  its  origin  and  outworking. 
Man  has  no  power  of  himself  to  effect  the  renewal  of  his  nature.  It  is  "  not  of 
the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God."  It  is  the  triumph 
of  divine  grace,  and  to  God  only  all  praise  is  due. 

II.  That  the  new  spiritual  nature  is  ever  advancing  to  a  higher  knowledge. — 

"  Which  is  renewed  in  knowledge  "  (ver.  10),  which  is  ever  being  renewed  unto 
perfect  knowledge  (Lightfoot).  The  present  tense  is  used,  and  it  is  indicated 
that  the  new  spiritual  nature  does  not  reach  perfection  at  once,  but  is  in  a  state 
of  growth  and  development.  The  realisation  of  the  new  life  in  man  is  bounded 
by  the  amount  and  character  of  the  knowledge  he  possesses,  and  by  the  clearness 
and  tenacity  with  which  that  knowledge  is  apprehended  and  maintained.  The 
experience  may  be  below  the  actual  knowledge  possessed,  but  cannot  be  beyond 
it.  Whatever  degree  of  holiness  the  soul  attains,  it  is  still  susceptible  of 
advancement.  The  process  of  renewal  is  continually  going  on,  as  the  statue 
grows,  under  the  chisel  of  the  sculptor,  into  a  more  perfect  form  of  beauty. 
The  knowledge  referred  to  is  the  true  knowledge  of  Christ  as  opposed  to  the 
false  knowledge  of  the  heretical  teachers.  The  process  of  renewal  increases  the 
capacity  of  the  believing  soul  to  appreciate  the  knowledge  of  divine  and  heavenly 
realities,  and  the  increase  in  the  knowledge  of  the  highest  things  reacts 
advantageously  on  the  renewed  nature.  The  higher  we  ascend  in  the  knowledge 
of  God,  the  more  like  Him  do  we  become. 

III.  That  the  new  spiritual  nature  is  refashioned  after  the  most  perfect  model. 

— "After  the  image  of  Him  that  created  him"  (ver.  10).     Man  was  originally 

445 


chap.  in.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS. 


created  in  the  image  of  God,  that  image  consisting  in  a  moral  resemblance — "  in 
righteousness  and  true  holiness."  Christ  is  Himself  "the  image  of  the  invisible 
God,"  and  conformity  to  Him  is  the  pattern  of  our  renewal,  the  all-perfect  standard 
towards  which  we  are  continually  to  approximate.  The  moral  image  which  we 
lost  in  the  fall  of  the  first  Adam  is  more  than  regained  in  the  second  Adam. 
Redemption  places  man  on  a  higher  platform  than  he  would  have  occupied  if  he 
had  retained  the  moral  condition  in  which  he  was  originally  created.  It  brings 
him  nearer  to  God,  gives  him  a  broader  and  more  sympathetic  insight  into  the 
divine  character  and  purposes,  .and  makes  him  more  like  God.  In  the  spiritual 
region  into  which  the  believer  in  Christ  is  transferred  all  minor  distinctions 
vanish.  Not  only  do  they  not  exist,  they  cannot  exist.  It  is  a  region  to  which 
th  y  are  utterly  unsuited,  and  cannot  therefore  be  recognised. 

IV.  That  the  new  spiritual  nature  is  superior  to  all  earthly  distinctions. — 
1.  It  is  superior  to  all  national  distinctions.  "  Where  there  is  neither  Greek  nor 
Jew  "  (ver.  11).  To  the  Jew  the  whole  world  was  divided  into  two  classes  :  Jews 
and  Gentiles — the  privileged  and  unprivileged  portions  of  mankind  ;  religious  pre- 
rogative being  taken  as  the  line  of  demarcation.  But  such  a  narrow»distinction 
is  antagonistic  to  the  broad  and  generous  spirit  of  the  gospel.  Let  a  man  be 
but  renewed  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  it  inquires  not  as  to  what  country  he  belongs. 

2.  It  is  superior  to  all  ritualistic  distinctions. — "  Circumcision  nor  uncircum- 
cision"  (ver.  11).  It  matters  not  whether  a  man  is  born  in  a  Christian  country, 
and  brought  up  in  the  midst  of  the  greatest  ecclesiastical  privileges,  or  v\hether  he 
is  cradled  in  the  darkest  paganism ;  in  either  case  a  change  of  heart  is  absolutely 
necessary.  No  branch  of  the  universal  Church  can  claim  the  exclusive  right  of 
admitting  souls  into  heaven ;  and  it  is  intolerable  impertinence  to  insist  upon 
the  necessity  of  ceremonial  observances  in  order  to  salvation — as  was  the  case 
with  the  false  teachers  of  Colossse,  and  as  is  the  case  with  the  pretentious  ritualism 
of  the  day.  "  In  Christ  Jesns  neither  circumcision  availeth  anything,  nor 
uncircumcision,  but  a  new  creature." 

3.  It  is  superior  to  all  political  distinctions. — "  Barbarian,  Scythian"  (ver.  11). 
Like  the  Jews,  the  Greeks  divided  mankind  into  two  classes — Greeks  and 
barbarians — civilisation  and  culture  being  now  the  criterion  of  distinction.  The 
Scythian  was  the  lowest  type  of  barbarian.  Christianity  acknowledges  no  such 
distinction.  Whether  gathered  from  the  most  refined  or  most  barbarous  nation, 
all  are  one  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  gospel  has  broken  down  the  narrow  and  arbitrary 
classification  of  the  race,  maintained  the  right  of  all  nations  of  the  world  to  be 
classed  as  one  genus,  and  replaced  the  barbarian  by  the  more  humane  and  unify- 
ing title  of  brother.  Max  M tiller  writes  :  "  Humanity  is  a  word  which  you  look 
for  in  vain  in  Plato  or  Aristotle  ;  the  idea  of  mankind  as  one  family,  as  the 
children  of  one  God,  is  an  idea  of  Christian  growth ;  and  the  science  of  mankind, 
and  of  the  languages  of  mankind,  is  a  science  which,  without  Christianity,  would 
never  have  sprung  into  life." 

4.  It  is  superior  to  all  social- distinctions. — "Bond  nor  free  "(ver.  11).  The 
diversities  of  condition  which  divide  men  in  the  present  world  are  unknown  in  the 
sphere  of  this  spiritual  renewal.  The  grace  which  changed  the  heart  of  Philemon 
the  master  also  renewed  the  soul  of  Onesimus,  his  slave;  and  often  the  bondman 
is  the  first  to  enter  into  the  liberty  of  the  children  of  God.  Here  the  rich 
and  poor,  the  nobility  and  peasantry,  meet  together,  and  form  one  common 
brotherhood. 

Y.  That  the  new  spiritual  nature  recognises  Christ  as  everything. — "  But 
Christ  is  all,  and  in  all "  (ver.  11).  All  belongs  to  Him  ;  He  originated  and  sustains 
all,  and  He  is  in  all.  He  is  everything  to  the  believer — the  source  and  centre  of  his 
life,  the  ideal  after  which  he  continually  aspires,  the  possession  by  which  He  will 
be  enriched  for  ever.     The  believer  is  a  living,  speaking,  acting  expression  of  the 

446 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS.        chap.  hi. 


Christ  within  him.     Christ,  without  the  exclusion  of  any  nation  or  sect,  unites 
all ;  and  so,  through  His  indwelling  in  all,  is  Himself  all. 

Lessons. — 1.    Christ  is  the  Author,   Pattern,  and  End  of  the  neiv    spiritual 
nature.     2.  To  put  on  the  new  spiritual  nature  it  is  essential  to  believe  in  Christ. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Yers.  9-11.  Religion  a  Change  of  Life. 

I.  Evident  by  putting  off  the  old 
nature  and  its  sins  (ver.  9). 

II.  By  putting  on  a  new  nature 
renewed  after  the  divine  likeness 
(ver.  10). 

III.  Superior  to  all  conventional 
distinctions  (ver.  11). 

IV.  In  which  Christ  is  everything 
(ver.  11). 

Ver.  11.   Christ  All  and  in  All. 

I.  Christ  is  all  and  in  all  in  the 
realm  of  creation. — The  vast  fabric  of 
created  things  sprang  into  being  at  His 
word.  Out  of  nothing  He  created  all 
that  is.  The  distance  between  being 
and  no-being  is  so  great  that  nothing 
short  of  infinite  power  can  cause  that 
to  be  which  never  before  existed.  The 
heavens  are  "  the  firmament  of  His 
power."  He  made  the  stars,  kindled 
their  brilliant  fires,  fixed  their  rank, 
regulated  their  motions,  and  appointed 
their  mission.  He  foimed  the  earth, 
robed  it  in  vestments  of  ever-changing 
beauty,  and  endowed  it  with  unfailing 
productiveness.  He  fashioned  man 
after  the  model  of  His  own  illustrious 
image,  freighted  him  with  facilities  of 
wondrous  compass,  indicated  the  possi- 
bilities of  his  career,  and  the  character 
of  his  destiny.  Christ  is  the  grand 
centre  of  the  magnificent  systems  by 
which  He  is  encircled,  and  which  He 
has  grouped  around  Himself  by  the 
exercise  ©f  His  creative  hand.  On 
Him  their  continued  existence  every 
moment  hangs. 

II.  Christ  is  all  and  in  all  in  the 
sphere  of  providence. — He  sustains 
and  governs  all.  Close  as  population 
follows  on  the  heels  of  production,  food 
never  fails  for  man  and  beast.  Study 
the  sublime  epic  on  the  divine  preser- 
vation furnished  by   Psalm  civ.,  and 


consider  how  the  history  of  human 
experience  in  all  ages  confirms  the 
truth.  Christ  controls  all  the  forces  of 
nature.  The  sweep  of  the  heavenly 
bodies,  the  surge  and  re-surge  of  the 
tide,  the  eccentric  course  and  velocity 
of  the  wind,  the  departure  and  return 
of  the  light,  the  roll  of  the  dreaded 
thunder,  the  recurrent  phases  of  the 
seasons,  all  are  obedient  to  His  nod. 
He  is  predominant  among  the  spiritual 
agencies  of  the  universe.  He  restricts 
the  power  of  the  great  enemy  of  man. 
He  restrains  the  flow  of  evil.  He 
governs  the  complicated  passions  ©f 
human  hearts,  and  makes  even  the 
wrath  of  men  to  praise  Him.  He 
guards,  guides,  and  delivers  His 
Church.  The  greatness  of  His  provi- 
dential power  is  seen  in  His  accom- 
plishing the  mightiest  results  by 
insignificant  instrumentalities.  He  is 
conducting  all  things  to  a  glorious 
consummation. 

III.  Christ  is  all  and  in  all  in  the 
work  of  redemption. — He  suffered  to 
the  death  on  behalf  of  the  sinning  race. 
He  was  a  voluntary  victim.  He  was 
unique  in  His  person — comprising  in 
Himself  the  divine  and  human  natures. 
As  man,  He  met  all  the  necessities  of 
sinful  and  condemned  humanity;  as 
God,  He  answered  all  the  require- 
ments of  the  divine  righteousness. 
While  the  greatest  modern  philosophers 
are  puzzling  their  minds  with  an  end- 
less variety  of  methods  for  recovering 
man  from  his  lapsed  condition,  we 
behold  the  problem  solved  in  the  life, 
sufferings,  and  death  of  Christ.  That 
was  a  method  of  redemption  that 
would  never  have  occurred  to  a  finite 
mind ;  and  it  is  now  beyond  the 
range  of  the  greatest  human  intellect 
to  fathem.  Christ,  and  Christ  al©»e, 
could  redeem.     In  that   sphere  He  is 

447 


CHAP.  in.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIArfS. 


all  in  all,  or  He  is  nothing.  His  work 
of  redemption  is  an  entrancing  ex- 
pression of  the  tenderest,  deepest,  most 
mysterious  love. 

IV.  Christ  is  all  and  in  all  in  the 
kingdom  of  glory. — He  is  the  Head  of 
all  principalities  and  powers  in  the 
heavenly  places.  They  depend  on 
Him  for  life  and  purity,  they  obey  His 
slightest  word,  they  adore  His  infinite 
majesty,  they  delight  in  His  hallowed 
fellowship.  Christ  is  also  Head  over 
all  things  to  the  Church,  which  is  His 
body ;  the  fulness  of  Him  that  filleth 
all  in  all.  He  is  the  central  attraction 
and  source  of  bliss  in  the  realm  of 
glory.  The  redeemed  cast  their  crowns 
before  Him,  and  chant  His  praise  in 
ceaseless  anthems.  If  Christ  were 
absent,  heaveu  would  lose  its  greatest 
charm. 

"  I  love  to  think  of  heaven ;   its  cloudless 

light, 
Its  tearless  joys,  its  recognitions  and  its 

fellowships 
Of  love  and  joy  unending ;  but  when  my 

mind  anticipates 
The  sight  of  God  incarnate,  wearing  on  His 

hands, 
And  feet,  and  side,  marks  of  the  wounds 
Which  He,  for  me,  on  Calvary  endured, 
All  heaven  beside  is  swallowed  up  in  this ; 
And  He  who  was  my  hope  of  heaven  below, 
Becomes  the  glory  of  my  heaven  above." 

V.  Christ  is  all  and  in  all  to  the 
believing   soul. — He   appears    as   the 


great  Emancipator;  He  delivers  from 
the  power  of  darkness,  and  translates 
the  benighted  but  groping  soul  into 
the  kingdom  of  light.  He  gives  rest 
to  the  weary  and  heavy  laden.  He 
comforts  the  mourner.  He  defends 
and  succours  the  tempted.  He  is  the 
refuge  in  every  time  of  distress.  All 
the  wants  of  the  soul  are  anticipated 
and  abundantly  supplied.  He  will 
conduct  safely  through  all  the  change- 
ful scenes  of  this  life ;  and  finally 
invest  the  soul  with  the  imperishable 
splendours  of  an  endless  future. 
Christ  is  the  great  necessity  and  the 
all-satisfying  portion  of  the  soul. 

Lessons. — 1.  Christ  is  supreme  in  all 
spheres.  2.  Christ  is  the  great  need  of 
the  human  soul.  3.  Faith  in  Christ 
briny s  the  soul  into  a  personal  partici- 
pation in  the  divine  fulness. 

Christ  is  A 11  and  in  A 11. 

I.  The  essential  glories  of  Christ. — 
He  possesses  all  things. 

II.  Christ  has  purchased  all  bless- 
ings for  us. — All  temporal  and  all 
spiritual  blessings. 

III.  All  blessings  are  treasured  up 
in  Christ  for  the  eternal  use  of  His 
Church. 

IV.  He  will  keep  His  family  in  the 
possession  of  all  good  for  ever. — 
W.  Howels. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  12,  13. 

Essentials  of  the  Christian  Character. 

In  the  cultivation  of  a  rare  and  valuable  plant  care  must  be  taken  to  rid  it  of 
everything  that  would  retard  its  growth,  and  to  supply  it  with  whatever  aids  it 
in  reaching  the  highest  possibility  of  shapeliness  and  beauty.  Not  only  must  it 
be  severely  pruned  and  divested  of  every  noxious  weed  and  destructive  parasite, 
but  it  must  be  diligently  tended,  and  liberally  provided  with  air,  light,  and 
moisture.  So  is  it  in  the  training  of  the  Christian  character.  It  is  not  enough 
that  the  old  man — the  sinful  principle — is  suppressed,  mortified,  deadened ;  all 
the  graces  of  the  new  man — the  new  spiritual  nature — must  be  assumed  and 
sedulously  cultivated.  Eeligion  is  not  a  dry,  sapless,  dead  negation,  but  a 
grand  positive  reality — an  active,  ever-growing  life,  pushing  its  way  through 
every  channel  of  man's^nature,  and  fashioning  his  character  after  the  loftiest 
pattern  of  moral  loveliness  and  purity.  The  change  the  Colossians  had  ex- 
perienced furnished  the  most  forcible  reason  why  they  should  advance  in  spiritual 
development.  Having  risen  with  Christ,  and  having  put  off  the  old  man,  with 
his  deeds,  there  is  an  unmistakable  emphasis  in  the  exhortation — Put  on, 
therefore,  the  characteristics  of  the  new  man, 

448 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    C0L0SS1ANS.        chap.  hi. 


I.  That  the  Christian  character  is  distinguished  by  a  special  designation. — 

"  The  elect  of  God,  holy  and  beloved  "  (ver.  12). 

1.  Distinguished  as  the  object  of  the  divine  choice. — "  The  elect  of  God" — 
chosen  by  Him,  as  an  act  of  undeserved,  unmerited  mercy,  to  the  knowledge  of 
Himself  and  His  glorious  salvation ;  called  out  of  darkness  and  translated  into 
the  kingdom  of  His  dear  son.  This  election  is  a  condition  of  exalted  privilege  to 
which  all  rise  who  accept  the  message  of  God's  mercy  through  Jesus  Christ. 

2.  Distinguished  by  personal  purity. — "  Holy."  Here  is  the  evidence  and 
practical  result  of  the  divine  election.  "  Chosen  in  Christ  before  the  foundation 
of  the  world,  that  they  should  be  holy  and  without  blame  before  Him  in  love  " 
(Eph.  i.  4).  The  people  of  God  are  called  to  be  holy — consecrated  to  His  service  ; 
set  apart  from  a  common  and  wholly  devoted  to  a  sacred  purpose.  Holiness  is 
the  habitual  condition,  aim,  delight,  and  employment  of  the  Christian's  life. 

3.  Distinguished  by  the  divine  affection. — "  Beloved."  The  believer  is  the 
object  of  God's  special  love,  of  the  favour  which  He  beareth  unto  His  people. 
"  Behold,  what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  on  us  that  we  should 
be  called  the  sons  of  God."  The  epithets  here  used  have  each  the  force  of  a 
motive.  Since  the  believer  is  elect,  holy,  beloved,  let  him  act  in  harmony  with  his 
exalted  character  and  calling.  Lavater  has  said,  "  The  more  honesty  a  man  has, 
the  less  he  affects  the  air  of  a  saint." 

II.  That  the  Christian  character  is  distinguished  by  a  heartfelt  sympathy. — 
1.  This  sympathy  arises  from  a  spirit  of  tender  mercy.  "Bowels  of  mercies" 
(ver.  12) — a  phrase  which  expresses  the  effect  on  the  body  of  strong  emotions 
of  pity.  It  was  said  of  Joseph  that  "  his  bowels  did  yearn  over  his  brethren, 
and  he  sought  where  to  weep."  The  miseries  of  our  fellow-creatures,  especially 
of  those  who  are  in  a  worse  condition  than  ourselves,  call  for  our  compassion 
and  help  ;  and  a  genuine  pity  is  not  only  visible  in  the  countenance  and  uttered 
by  the  lips,  but  felt  in  the  inmost  heart,  and  prompts  to  generous  actions. 

2.  This  sympathy  arises  from  a  spirit  of  kindness. — "  Kindness"  refers  to  the 
temper  we  should  show  towards  those  we  meet  in  the  daily  intercourse  of  life 
who  are  on  an  equality  with  ourselves.  The  Christian  should  be  amiable,  cour- 
teous, kind  in  speech  and  action,  eager  to  relieve  others  according  to  his  means — 
the  farthest  remove  from  a  crabbed,  sullen,  churlish  disposition.  A  hard,  cold, 
selfish,  unfeeling  heart  is  a  characteristic  of  fallen,  unrewed  man ;  bowels  of 
mercies  and  kindness  of  the  renewed  one. 

III.  That  the  Christian  character  is  distinguished  by  a  genuine  humility. — 
"  Humbleness  of  mind  "  (ver.  12).  These  words  describe  the  estimate  that  is  to 
be  formed  of  self.  The  believer  is  taught  not  to  overrate  nor  unduly  to  depreciate 
himself.  He  is  governed  by  the  apostolic  rule,  "  Let  each  esteem  other  better 
than  themselves."  The  more  exalted  his  views  of  God,  and  the  more  he 
remembers  his  own  unworthiness,  weakness,  ignorance,  and  sin,  the  more  softly 
and  lowly  does  he  seek  to  walk.  As  in  the  garden  that  branch  hangs  down  the 
lowest  which  is  most  heavily  laden  with  fruit,  so  in  the  Church  the  ripest  saints 
are  those  who  walk  humbly  with  God.  The  humble  man  is  the  most  susceptible 
to  compassion  and  genuine  in  its  practical  manifestation.  The  proud  man  is  too 
full  of  himself  to  feel  for  others ;  he  is  always  dissatisfied,  always  embroiling 
in  quarrels  the  family,  the  Church,  the  social  circle  where  he  resides.  The 
humblest  man  is  the  bravest  man.  He  endures  with  composure  the  contempt 
and  arrogance  of  others. 

IV.  That  the  Christian  character  is  distinguished  by  a  gentle  and  patient 
spirit. — "  Meekness,  longsuffering  "  (ver.  12). 

1.  The  Christian  spirit  is  gentle. — "Meekness."  This  grace  indicates  what 
should  be  our  conduct  towards  others  in  their  treatment  of  us.  Meekness  is 
evidenced  in  modesty  of  countenance,  gentleness  of  manner,  softness  of  voice, 

gq  449 


chap.  in.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS. 


and  mildness  of  language ;  it  is  opposed  to  rudeness  or  harshness.  We  see  it 
exemplified  in  the  way  in  which  Gideon  pacified  the  irascible  men  of  Ephraim 
(Judg.  viii.  2).     It  is  slow  to  take,  and  scorns  to  give,  offence. 

2.  The  Christian  spirit  is  patient. — "  Longsuffering,"  which  is  meekness  con- 
tinued, though  subjected  to  the  fiercest  provocations.  It  is  opposed  to  resentment, 
revenge,  wrath.  Meekness  exercises  itself  in  matters  of  chagrin,  impertinence, 
folly ;  longsuffering  in  those  of  violent  outrage,  affront,  injury.  Meekness  may 
be  required  by  the  mere  manner  of  others  towards  us ;  longsuffering  is  often 
necessary  by  their  conduct.  There  is  a  difference  between  enduring  long  and 
longsuffering.  The  genuine  grace  is  accompanied,  not  only  with  patience,  but 
with  joyous  activity  and  watchfulness.  It  is  not  like  the  senseless  rock  vvhich 
endures  the  full  force  of  the  storm  unmoved  and  unresponsive,  but  like  the  nimble 
vessel  that,  while  it  bends  to  the  tempest,  is  at  the  same  time  diligently  speeding 
on  its  mission. 

V.  That  the  Christian  character  is  distinguished  by  a  practical  manifestation 
of  a  spirit  of  mutual  forbearance  and  forgiveness. — 1.  Mutual  forbearance  and 
forgiveness  are  to  be  exercised  universally.  "  Forbearing  one  another  and  forgiving 
one  another,  if  any  man  have  a  quarrel  against  any"  (ver.  13).  The  word 
"quarrel"  is  better  rendered  complaint.  It  takes  two  to  make  a  quarrel,  and 
of  these  the  Christian  should  never  be  one.  Whatever  occasion  of  offence  may 
arise,  whatever  cause  of  c6mplaint,  in  any  man,  under  any  circumstances,  and 
however  just  the  complaint  may  appear,  forbearance  is  to  be  exercised  •  and 
even  if  the  forbearance  is  abused  and  injury  be  added,  we  must  forgive.  It 
is  never  on  one  side  only  that  the  fault  exists.  It  is  one  another,  each  in  his 
turn,  that  gives  and  receives  forbearance.  If  this  were  more  frequently  observed, 
how  many  unseemly  discords  and  mischievous  separations  would  be  prevented  ! 

2.  The  exercise  of  forgiveness  is  enforced  by  the  highest  example. — "  Even  as  Christ 
forgave  you,  so  also  do  ye  "  (ver.  13).  These  words  come  as  an  impressive  climax, 
enforcing  the  duty  of  forgiveness  by  the  strongest  motive.  The  more  difficult 
the  duty,  the  more  powerful  should  be  the  arguments  urging  its  performance. 
The  example  of  Christ  is  supreme  in  its  authority.  What  are  the  injuries 
committed  by  others  against  us  compared  with  the  number  and  enormity  of  our 
sins  against  God  ?  Yet  Christ  forgave  us  all,  freely,  fully,  unreservedly,  and  for 
ever.  The  heart  that  is  not  moved  to  forgiveness  by  such  an  example  is  hopelessly 
incorrigible. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  unity  of  Christian  character  is  made  up  of  many  separate 
essential  graces.  2.  The  condition  of  things  in  this  world  ajfwds  ample  scope  for 
the  exercise  of  every  Christian  grace.  3.  To  forgive  is  at  once  the  most  difficult  and 
most  Christ-like. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  12.  Christian  Humility. 

I.  The  nature  of  this  holy  temper. 

— I.  A  humble  apprehension  of  our  own 
knowledge.  The  imperfection  of  our 
faculties,  our  fallibility  of  judgment, 
when  we  compare  our  knowledge  with 
the  attainments  of  others,  and  a  per- 
suasion of  the  small  value  of  the  most 
exalted  knowledge  without  practical 
influence.      2.    Of  our   own   goodness. 

3.  Of   our    independence    and   wants. 

4.  Of  our  own  rank  and  station. 

450 


II.  The  obligations  to  cultivate  a 
humble  temper. — 1.  It  is  mentioned  in 
Scripture  with  peculiar  marks  of  dis- 
tinction and  honour.  The  most  distin- 
guished promises  are  made  to  it.  It  is 
a  necessary  introduction  to  other  graces 
and  duties.  2.  It  is  a  grace  which 
adorns  every  other  virtue  and  recom- 
mends religion  to  every  beholder.  3.  Is 
recommended  to  us  by  the  example  of  the 
Author  and  Finisher  of  our  faith.  4.  Is 
a  grace  that  will  go  with  us  to  heaven. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.        chap.  hi. 


Lessons. — 1.    Those  destitute  of  this  Ver.  13.  Christian  Forgiveness — 

grace  have  the  rudiments  of  Christianity  I.  Is  exercised  where  there  is  mutual 

to  learn.     2.  We  should  look  principally  forbearance. 

to  the  temper  of  our  spirits  to  judge  of  II.  Is  the  noblest  method  of  ending 

our  humility.     3.  By  it  we  judge  of  the  quarrels. 

improving  or  declining  state  of  our  souls.  III.  Is  a  Christ-like  disposition. 
— J.  Evans,  D.D. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF   VERSE   14. 

Love  the  Perfection  of  the  Christian  Character. 

Love  is  the  commonest  and  most  potent  affection  of  the  human  heart.  It 
has  been  the  inexhaustible  theme  of  writers  in  all  ages,  in  poetry  and  prose. 
It  has  been  invested  with  the  bewitching  drapery  of  romance,  and  exhibited 
as  the  instrumental  cause  of  the  darkest  crimes  and  of  the  brightest  virtues. 
The  world  never  tires  of  learning  of  its  adventures,  trials,  and  victories.  While 
it  is  ever  commonplace,  it  is  ever  fresh.  It  is  the  perennial  force  in  human 
life — the  first  to  inspire,  the  longest  to  endure,  the  last  to  perish.  But  Christian 
love — love  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  all  others  for  His  sake — is  not  a  native-born 
affection.  It  does  not  spring  spontaneously  from  the  human  heart.  It  is  a  gift 
from  God.  It  is  the  richest  fruit  of  the  new  spiritual  nature  implanted  in  the 
believer.  It  is  first  to  be  acquired  and  then  diligently  cultivated.  The  apostle 
has  just  described  the  distinctive  garments  with  which  the  believer  is  to  be 
adorned — with  a  heart  of  tender  compassion,  with  humility,  with  a  gentle, 
patient,  and  forgiving  spirit.  But  in  addition  to  all  this,  and  in  order  to 
complete  the  Christian  character,  he  is  to  be  clothed  in  a  robe  which  is  to  cover 
every  other  garment,  and  bind  it  to  its  place — a  robe  whose  purity  and  brightness 
shall  shed  a  lustre  over  all  the  rest. 

I.  That  love  is  the  prime  element  in  every  other  grace  of  the  Christian 
character. — It  is  the  soul  of  every  virtue  and  the  guarantee  of  a  genuine  sincerity. 
Without  love  all  other  graces,  according  to  an  old  writer,  are  but  glittering  sins. 
There  is  a  great  power  of  affectionateness  in  the  human  heart,  but  no  man 
possesses  naturally  the  spiritual  love  of  God  and  love  of  the  race.  It  is  a  fruit 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  comes  through  that  faith  which  works  by  love.  It  is 
possible  to  assume  all  the  essentials  of  the  Christian  character,  enumerated  in 
ver.  12,  and  previously  commented  on  ;  but  without  love  they  would  be  mean- 
ingless, cold,  and  dead.  Mercy  would  degenerate  into  weak  sentimentality; 
kindness  into  foolish  extravagance  ;  humility  into  a  mock  self -depreciation — 
which  is  but  another  form  of  the  proudest  egotism;  and  longsuffering  into  a 
dull,  dogged  stupidity.  Love  is  the  grand  element  in  which  all  other  graces 
move  and  from  which  they  derive  their  vitality  and  value.  It  is  the  grace  which 
alone  redeems  all  other  from  the  curse  of  selfishness,  and  is,  itself,  the  most 
unselfish. 

II.  That  love  occupies  the  most  exalted  place  in  the  Christian  character. — 
11  Above  all  these  things."  Not  simply  in  addition  to,  but  over  and  above  all 
these,  put  on  charity,  as  the  outer  garment  that  covers  and  binds  together  all 
the  rest.  Other  graces  are  local  and  limited  in  their  use  ;  love  is  all-expansive 
and  universal.  A  philosopher,  in  a  vein  of  pungent  satire,  has  dilated  on  the 
philosophy  of  clothes ;  and  experience  testifies  how  mightily  the  world  is  influenced 
and  instructed  by  outward  appearances.  As  the  dress  frequently  indicates  the 
rank  and  importance  of  the  wearer,  so  the  garment  of  love,  worn  without  ostenta- 
tion or  pride,  is  the  badge  by  which  the  Christian  is  known  in.  the  world 
(John  xiii.  35).  Love  is  the  presiding  queen  over  all  Christian  graces,  in- 
spiring and  harmonising  their  exercises,  and  developing  them  into  a  living  and 

451 


chap,  in.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   C0L0SS1ANS. 


beauteous  unity  of  character.  The  apostle  fixes  the  exalted  rank  of  love  in 
1  Cor.  xiii.  13. 

III.  That  love  is  the  pledge  of  permanency  in  the  Christian  character. — 

"  Which  is  the  bond  of  perfectness."  As  a  girdle,  or  cincture,  bound  together 
with  firmness  and  symmetry  the  loose  flowing  robes  generally  worn  by  the 
ancients,  so  love  is  the  power  that  unites  and  holds  together  all  those  graces 
and  virtues  which  together  make  up  perfection.  Love  is  the  preservative  force 
in  the  Christian  character.  Without  it  knowledge  would  lose  its  enterprise, 
mercy  and  kindness  become  languid,  humility  faint,  and  longsuffering  indifferent. 
Love  binds  all  excellencies  together  in  a  bond  which  time  cannot  injure,  the 
enemy  unloose,  or  death  destroy.  No  church,  or  community  of  individuals,  can 
exist  long  without  the  sustaining  power  of  love.  It  is  not  a  similarity  in  taste, 
intellectual  pursuits,  in  knowledge,  or  in  creed,  that  can  permanently  unite 
human  hearts,  but  the  all-potent  sympathy  of  Christian  love.  Charity  never 
faileth. 

IV.  That  the  perfection  of  the  Christian  character  is  seen  in  the  practical 
manifestation  of  love. — "Put  on  charity." 

1.  Love  is  indispensable. — It  is  possible  to  possess  many  beautiful  traits  of 
character — much  that  is  humane  and  amiable — without  being  a  complete  Chris- 
tian :  to  be  very  near  perfection,  and  yet  lack  one  thing.  Without  love  all  other 
graces  are  inconsistent,  heartless,  wayward,  selfish.  They  are  but  as  sounding 
brass  and  a  tinkling  cymbal.  Charity  is  indispensable  to  give  life,  force,  meaning, 
truth,  permanence  to  the  whole.  It  supplies  the  imperfections  and  defects  of 
other  graces  and  virtues. 

2.  Love  is  susceptible  of  individual  cultivation. — It  may  be  "  put  on."  We 
may  have  more  if  we  strive  after  it  and  faithfully  use  what  is  already  possessed. 
It  is  a  pressing,  practical  duty  which  all  Christians  are  bound  to  attend  to.  And 
yet  there  is  no  grace  which  is  more  constantly  suppressed.  What  a  power  the 
Church  would  become,  and  how  marvellously  would  the  character  of  the  world  be 
changed,  if  love  had  a  freer  scope  and  was  universally  exercised.  The  pretentious 
coverings  of  sectarianism  and  bigotry  would  vanish,  and  the  whole  Church  of  the 
redeemed  be  girt  with  the  ample  robe  of  a  seamless  unity.  To  win  the  love  of 
others  we  must  put  it  on  ourselves. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  mere  profession  of  Christianity  is  empty  and  valueless. 
2.  Every  grace  of  the  Christian  character  must  be  diligently  exercised.  3.  Above 
and  through  all  other  graces  love  must  operate. 

MAIN  HOMILETIC 1S  OF   VERSE   15. 

The  Rule  of  Divine  Peace. 

War  in  any  form  is  unfriendly  to  the  growth  of  piety.  The  soul  is  tossed  on 
the  waves  of  disquietude,  and  courage — the  principal  virtue  called  into  exercise 
— is  apt  to  acquire  an  unnatural  and  unhealthy  development  at  the  expense  of 
all  other  graces.  The  whole  structure  of  the  Christian  character  is  dislocated 
and  thrown  off  its  balance.  Peace  restores  the  soul  to  its  true  equipoise,  fixes 
every  power  in  its  just  relation  to  each  other  and  to  the  whole,  and  encourages 
the  harmonious  cultivation  of  that  love  which  is  the  bond  of  perfectness.  Lord 
Bacon  has  said  :  "  It  is  heaven  upon  earth  to  have  a  man's  mind  move  in  charity, 
resfc  in  Providence,  and  turn  upon  the  poles  of  truth."  In  this  verse  we  are 
taught  that  the  one  supreme  umpire  in  the  heart,  by  which  all  differences  are  to  be 
settled,  is  the  peace  of  God — the  destined  end  of  the  Christian  calling,  in  which  is 
realised  the  unity  belonging  to  members  of  one  body  ;  and  that  this  blessing  is  to 
be  sought  in  a  spirit  of  thankfulness.     Observe : — 

I.  That  peace  is  a  divine  blessing. — "  The  peace  of  God,"    Some  of  the  oldest 

452 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.        chap.  in. 


manuscripts  here  read,  "The  peace  of  Christ" — a  reading  adopted  by  the 
ablest  biblical  critics.  The  verbal  difference,  however,  is  of  no  moment.  The 
truth  is  the  same  :  it  is  equally  the  peace  of  God  and  the  peace  of  Christ — a 
divine  tranquillity  filling  the  soul  with  a  calm  that  no  mere  worldly  power  can 
give  or  take  away,  and  that  the  ocean-surges  of  trouble  can  never  diminish  or 
disturb.  Christ  hath  made  peace  through  the  blood  of  His  cross,  and  left  it  as  a 
sacred  legacy  to  all  His  disciples  through  all  time.  In  its  essence  it  is  the  peace 
that  Christ  Himself  enjoys — a  sublime  calmness  similar  to  that  which  pervades 
the  divine  bosom.  It  is  not  like  the  long,  painful,  oppressive  stillness  that  is, 
the  precursor  of  a  storm,  but  a  profound,  pervasive,  heavenly  quiet  that  soothes 
while  it  invigorates  the  soul.  It  proceeds  from  God  through  Christ,  and  is 
maintained  and  nourished  in  the  heart  as  a  positive,  gracious  reality  and  price- 
less blessing. 

II.  That  peace  is  a  ruling  power. — "  Let  the  peace  of  God  rule."  The  word 
"  rule  "  is  borrowed  from  the  practice  of  the  Greeks  at  their  great  national  games, 
and  described  the  duty  of  the  arbiter  or  umpire  presiding,  who  held  the  prize  in 
his  hand  while  the  contest  proceeded  in  the  stadium,  and  conferred  it  on  the 
victor  at  the  close.  Thereby  he  exercised  over  the  athletes  a  peculiar  kind  of 
rule.  Impelled  by  a  sight  of  the  prize,  they  gave  their  whole  being  to  the 
contest.  So,  in  contending  in  the  race  of  life,  the  peace  of  God,  as  containing 
all  desirable  blessings,  is  to  exercise  supreme  authority  and  regulate  all  the 
concerns  of  the  soul. 

1.  As  a  ruling  power  peace  pervades  and  stimulates  every  other  grace. — It  lifts 
the  soul  to  God,  and  enables  it  to  take  hold  of  His  strength.  It  prepares  for 
every  holy  duty,  and  stimulates  to  every  spiritual  enterprise.  The  more  the  soul 
is  permeated  with  divine  peace,  the  more  desire  and  aptitude  will  there  be  for 
higher  attainments  in  piety. 

2.  As  a  ruling  power  peace  is  a  powerful  defence. — It  resists  successfully  the 
attacks  of  evil  from  whatever  source  they  come.  The  shafts  of  infidelity  cannot 
pierce  the  invulnerable  defence  of  a  conscious  peace  with  God  :  right  feeling  is 
superior  to  the  subtlest  logic.  Peace  erects  a  formidable  bulwark  against 
temptation,  and  is  the  surest  safeguard  against  every  form  of  sin. 

3.  As  a  ruling  power  it  concentrates  and  controls  all  the  energies  of  the  soul. — It 
calms  the  intellect,  soothes  the  heart,  tranquillises  the  conscience,  and  centralises 
all  the  powers  of  manhood,  that  they  may  go  forth  and  do  valiant  battle  for 
the  truth.  As  by  an  unerring  instinct  it  decides  upon  what  is  right,  and  shuns 
the  wrong.  The  questions  as  to  whether  it  is  right  to  engage  in  certain  amuse- 
ments, to  visit  certain  places,  or  to  join  this  or  that  company,  will  soon  be 
settled  when  the  peace  of  God  rules  in  the  heart.  It  is  a  regulating  power  in 
moral  difficulties,  and  a  potent  help  in  all  moral  enterprises.  The  peace  of  God 
keeps  the  heart  and  mind  through  Jesus  Christ  (Phil.  iv.  7). 

III.  That  peace  is  a  ruling  power  in  man. — "  In  your  hearts."  The  heart  is 
the  region  where  the  ruling  power  is  exercised  and  takes  effect.  It  embraces 
the  will  and  affections  as  distinguished  from  the  intellect.  It  is  the  choosing 
faculty  as  distinguished  from  the  knowing  faculty.  When  the  heart  is  drawn  in 
one  direction  the  whole  man  follows.  There  the  moral  disease  begins,  and  there 
the  remedy  must  be  applied.  By  sin  the  heart  has  become  deceitful  above  all 
things  ;  in  the  regeneration  the  heart  is  made  new.  The  rush  of  an  evil  heart's 
affections  will  not  always  yield  to  reason.  When  God,  by  His  word  and  Spirit, 
comes  to  save,  He  saves  by  arresting  and  renewing  the  heart.  The  psalmist 
recognised  this  when  he  cried,  "  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  O  God,  and  renew 
a  right  spirit  within  me."  No  man  is  conquered  until  his  heart  is  conquered. 
It  is  in  this  region  the  peace  of  God  has  powerful  sway,  and  where  it  aids  in 
achieving  the  most  brilliant  moral  conquests. 

453 


chap.  ill.        HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSI  ANS. 


IV.  That  peace  is  essential  to  the  unity  of  the  Church. — 1.  The  Church  is 
called  to  the  enjoyment  of  peace.  "  To  the  which  also  ye  are  called."  The  burden 
of  the  gospel  message  is  peace.  Its  mission  is  to  extinguish  wars  and  enmities, 
and  to  pacify  heaven  and  earth.  The  Church  is  called  to  peace  by  the  commands 
of  Christ,  by  the  teachings  of  His  example  when  on  earth,  by  the  reiterated 
precepts  of  God's  word,  and  by  the  necessities  of  the  grand  enterprise  in  which 
she  is  engaged. 

2.  The  enjoyment  of  peace  is  essential  in  preserving  and  promoting  the  unity  of 
the  Church. — "  In  one  body."  As  ye  were  called  as  members  of  one  body,  so  let 
there  be  one  spirit  animating  that  body.  Among  the  stellar  systems,  in  social 
communities  and  states,  as  well  as  in  the  Christian  Church,  a  common  agreement 
is  essential  to  unity.  Divine  peace  preserves  harmony,  nourishes  spiritual 
strength,  and  promotes  union  by  drawing  the  souls,  in  which  it  is  the  ruling 
power,  more  closely  to  God  and  to  each  other.  There  is  to  be  the  constant 
endeavour  "  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace  "  (Eph.  iv.  3). 

V.  That  peace  is  to  be  cultivated  in  the  spirit  of  thankfulness. — "  And  be 
ye  thankful."  These  words  are  not  to  be  restricted  in  their  application.  Not 
only  do  they  imply  that  the  Colossians  were  to  act  towards  each  other  in  a 
thankful  and  amiable  temper,  but  they  teach  in  what  spirit  the  peace  of  God 
should  be  universally  sought  and  exercised.  The  duty  of  thankfulness  was  the 
constant  theme  of  the  apostle :  there  are  upwards  of  thirty  references  to  it  in 
his  epistles.  Here  we  are  exhorted  to  consider  it  in  special  connection  with  the 
enjoyment  of  peace.  Only  he  who  has  been  swung  in  the  dark  whirl  of  unrest 
and  doubt,  who  has  witnessed  the  horrible  riot  of  disunion  and  discord,  can 
appreciate  the  blessing  of  peace  and  the  gratitude  it  inspires.  Cicero  declared 
that  gratitude  was  the  mother  of  all  other  virtues.  Certain  it  is  that  no  man 
sins  without  ingratitude.  Thanksgiving  has  always  been  the  principal  element 
in  all  religion,  whether  instituted  by  divine  command,  prompted  by  natural 
reason,  or  propagated  by  general  tradition.  The  pagan  religion  consists  in  the 
praise  of  their  gods  and  acknowledgments  of  their  benefits ;  the  Jewish,  to  a 
great  extent,  in  eucharistic  oblations  and  solemn  commemorations  of  providential 
favours ;  and  the  ancient  Christians  were  distinguished  by  singing  hymns  to 
Christ,  and  by  mutual  sacraments  obliging  themselves  to  abstain  from  all 
villainy.  Thanksgiving  is  a  joyous  exercise — the  pleasantest  of  duties.  Prayer 
reminds  us  of  our  wants  and  imperfections  ;  confession  enforces  a  painful  remem- 
brance of  our  sins ;  but  gratitude  includes  nothing  but  the  memory  of  exceeding 
goodness.     It  is  a  duty  most  acceptable  to  God  and  most  profitable  to  man. 

Lessons. — 1.  True  peace  is  found  only  in  Christ.  2.  Peace  is  a  mighty  engine 
of  spiritual  power.     3.   Gratitude  should  combine  with  every  blessing. 

GERM  NOTES   ON  THE    VERSE. 

Unity  and  Peace.  from  this  unity. — 1.  It  is  God's  peace. 

I.  The   unity   of   the    Church    of  2.  A  living  peace.     3.  The  peace  which 
Christ. — 1.  Distinguish    the    unity    of  comes  from  an  inward  power.     4.  The 
comprehensiveness  from,  the  unity  of  mere  peace  of  reception. — Robertson, 
singularity.        2.     It    subsists     between 

things  not    similar   or   alike,    but   dis-  The  Peace  of  God  ruling  in  the  Heart, 

similar  or  unlike.      3.   It  is  made  up  of  I.  The  region. — "  In  your  hearts." 

dissimilar  members,  without  which  dis-  When  the  heart  is  drawn  in  one  direc- 

similarity  there  could  be  no  unity.    4.  It  tion,   the   whole  man  follows.     When 

consists  in  submission  to  one  single  in-  God  by  His  word  and  Spirit  comes  to 

fluence  or  spirit.    The  Spirit  of  its  God.  save,  He  saves  by  arresting  the  heart 

II.  The  individual  peace  resulting  and  making  it  new. 

454 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.        chap.  in. 


II.  The  reign. — "  Rule."  Freedom  rule  in  a  human  heart.  2.  It  is  not  the 
from  rule  is  not  competent  to  man ;  the  wrath  but  the  peace  of  God  that  rules  in 
only  choice  he  has  is  a  choice  of  masters.  a  human  heart.     It  is  the  act  of  letting 

III.  The  Ruler. — "  The  peace  of  God."  me  go  free  that  binds  my  whole  soul 
1.  It  is  God  and  no  idol  that  should  for  ever. — W.  Arnot. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF   VERSE  16. 

The  Poetry  of  the  Christian  Life. 

In  the  life  of  the  individual  and  of  nations  the  era  of  poetry  comes  first,  and 
is  followed  by  the  era  of  criticism.  The  impulse  of  a  youthful  and  enthusiastic 
passion  and  the  boundless  play  of  a  prolific  imagination  produce  certain  artistic 
results  ;  and  then  comes  the  cool,  reflective  critic,  with  microscopic  eye  and 
mathematical  rules,  to  measure  and  appraise  the  loved  production.  How  soon 
the  glowing  efflorescence  withers,  and  the  expanding  magnitude  dwindles  to  the 
smallest  practical  limits.  Genuine  poetry  is  superior  to  all  criticism,  outlives 
the  most  violent  opposition,  and  is  imperishable  as  humanity.  Poetry  is  the 
language  of  the  soul  in  its  highest  and  holiest  mood,  when  it  is  fired  with  a 
divinely  kindled  rapture,  when  it  strives  to  grasp  the  invisible  and  pants  to 
express  the  grandest  truths  of  the  universe.  The  Christian  life  has  its  poetry. 
It  is  of  the  loftiest  order,-  its  theme  the  noblest,  and  its  melody  haunts  the 
soul  for  ever  with  strains  of  ravishing  harmony.  In  this  verse  we  learn  that 
the  poetry  of  the  Christian  life  draws  its  inspiration  from  the  divine  word  and 
ministers  to  the  culture  and  enjoyment  of  the  Church.     Observe  : — 

I.  That  the  poetry  of  the  Christian  life  draws  its  deepest  inspiration  from 
the  divine  word. — "  Let  the  word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you  richly." 

1.  That  the  divine  word  is  fitly  called  the  word  of  Christ. — It  contains  the 
record  of  His  personal  teaching — the  revelation  of  new  and  startling  truths,  and 
the  resetting  of  old  truths  in  such  a  light  as  to  connect  the  old  and  new  dispen- 
sations, and  blend  them  in  an  unbroken  homogeneousness.  It  unfolds  the 
mystery  of  that  redemption  He  died  to  accomplish,  and  which  forms  so  prominent 
a  part  of  the  teaching  of  this  epistle.  It  is  inspired  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  and 
gleams  in  every  part  with  brilliant  manifestations  of  His  supernal  glory.  Christ 
is  the  all-pervading  theme  of  the  Scriptures — the  key  of  the  arch — the  corner- 
stone of  the  foundation — the  si*n,  illuminating  with  light  and  salvation  the 
whole  gospel  system  to  its  remotest  circumference. 

2.  The  divine  word  to  create  a  true  poetic  fervour  must  wholly  occupy  the  soul. — 
11  Dwell  in  you  richly."  The  word  of  Christ  is  to  be  embraced  as  a  whole,  and 
due  prominence  given  to  every  part  of  His  character  and  work.  Not  to  exalt 
His  humanity  to  the  denial  of  His  divinity;  not  to  be  so  enamoured  with  the 
moral  beauty  of  His  life  as  to  overlook  the  significance  and  power  of  His  death. 
The  word  is  to  dwell  in  us  so  completely  as  to  possess  and  enrich  every  faculty 
and  power  of  our  nature.  Not  simply  to  give  it  a  place  in  the  region  of  intel- 
lectual opinion 'or  in  judging  of  moral  questions,  but  to  let  it  have  a  mighty 
sway  over  the  affections  of  the  heart — let  it  enter,  saturate,  purify,  and  govern 
the  whole  mental,  moral,  and  spiritual  being.  It  is  to  occupy  the  soul  as  a 
constant  and  permanent  inspiration  ;  to  dwell — not  as  a  stranger  to  stand 
without,  or  be  saluted  at  a  distance,  but  to  enter,  to  abide,  and  be  treated  as  a 
loved  and  intimate  guest.  Let  the  word  of  Christ  be  clearly  apprehended, 
diligently  pondered,  and  firmly  grasped,  and  it  will  fill  the  soul  with  heavenly 
visions  and  inflame  it  with  the  holiest  poetic  ardour. 

II.  That  the  poetry  of  the  Christian  life  has  made  valuable  literary  contri- 
butions to  the  psalmody  of  the  Church. — "  In  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual 
songs."     It  is  not  easy  to   make   arbitrary  distinctions   between   these  poetic 

455 


chap.  m.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS. 


effusions.  The  psalm  was  a  sacred  poem  on  whatever  subject,  and  similar  to  the 
productions  in  the  book  of  Psalms  in  the  Old  Testament ;  the  hymn  specially- 
celebrated  the  praises  of  the  Almighty ;  and  the  spiritual  song,  or  ode,  was  more 
mixed  in  its  matter  and  more  artificial  in  its  arrangement,  and  referred  to 
personal  effusions  of  a  more  general  character.  The  gift  of  poesy  was  among 
the  supernatural  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  early  Church  (1  Cor.  xiv.  26). 
The  first  form  of  literature  in  all  countries  is  for  the  most  part  in  song.  A 
certain  writer  has  said,  that  if  he  were  allowed  to  make  the  songs  of  a  nation,  he 
cared  not  who  made  the  laws.  And  in  the  Christian  Church,  from  the  earliest 
period,  sacred  psalmody  has  been  a  mighty  power  for  edification  and  comfort.  The 
hymnology  of  the  Church  is  becoming  increasingly  rich  in  its  poetic  treasures. 

III.  That  the  poetry  of  the  Christian  life  ministers  to  the  mutual  culture 
and  happiness  of  the  Church. — 1.  It  is  intellectual  in  its  character.  "In  all 
wisdom  teaching  one  another."  A  more  correct  punctuation  connects  the  clause 
"  in  all  wisdom"  with  the  words  that  follow,  not,  as  in  our  version,  with  the  words 
that  precede.  To  teach  in  all  wisdom  demands  the  highest  intellectual  exercise, 
especially  when  poetry  is  the  medium  of  instruction  and  the  word  of  Christ  the 
theme.  Without  wisdom,  poetry  would  sink  into  a  maudlin  sensuousness,  a  mere 
verbal  jingling,  an  intolerable  monotony.  Wisdom  is  necessary  to  compare  and 
balance  the  different  parts  of  Scripture  truth,  to  apply  the  word  on  proper 
occasions  to  its  proper  ends  and  in  harmony  with  its  spirit,  and  to  adopt  the 
best  means  for  attaining  the  highest  results  in  mutual  instruction.  The  pro- 
foundest  feelings  of  our  nature  can  only  be  expressed  in  poetry.  The  orator,  as 
he  reaches  the  loftiest  strains  of  eloquence,  becomes  poetical. 

2.  It  is  moral  in  its  tendency. — "  And  admonishing  one  another."  There  is 
implied  a  deep  concern  for  each  other's  moral  condition  and  safety.  The  poetry 
of  the  early  Christians  was  moral  in  its  exercise  and  tendency.  ISTo  one  can  feel 
an  interest  in  another's  morality  who  is  himself  immoral.  An  eminent  critic  has 
said  :  "  The  element  in  which  poetry  dwells  is  truth,  and  when  imagination 
divorces  itself  from  that  relation,  it  declines  into  the  neighbourhood  of  empty 
fiction  or  the  dreams  of  lunacy."  The  poetry  of  the  Christian  life  is  based  on 
eternal  truth,  and  it  is  to  be  judiciously  used  as  an  instrument  of  admonition  as 
well  as  of  instruction.  There  is  need  for  warning  and  brotherly  counsel  to 
restore  the  wanderer,  to  raise  him  if  he  has  fallen,  to  reprove  him  if  he  is  wrong, 
to  protect  and  admonish  him  if  he  is  in  danger  (Ps.  cxli.  5). 

3.  It  is  joyous  in  its  effects. — "  Singing  with  grace  in  your  hearts  to  the  Lord." 
Music  and  poetry  are  sometimes  prostituted  to  the  basest  purposes,  ministering 
to  the  lowest  passions,  and  inciting  to  the  vilest  actions.  But  the  poetry  of  the 
Christian  life  refines  the  soul,  raises  it  towards  God,  and  fills  it  with  the  music 
of  unspeakable  delight.  The  proper  sphere  of  music  is  the  heavenly  and  the 
spiritual. 

"  Beyond  the  visible  world  she  soars  to  seek, 
For  what  delights  the  sense  is  false  and  weak ; 
Ideal  form,  the  universal  mould." 

As  the  sea-shell  conveys  to  the  ear  the  faint  music  of  the  distant  waves,  so  the 
poetry  of  the  Christian  life  indicates  in  some  degree  the  rapturous  music  that 
awaits  us  on  the  heavenly  shore.  Coleridge  said :  "  Poetry  has  been  to  me  its 
own  exceeding  great  reward.  It  has  soothed  my  affliction,  it  has  endeared 
solitude,  and  it  has  given  me  the  habit  of  wishing  to  discover  the  good  and 
beautiful  in  all  that  surrounds  me."  And  Keats  said  :  "  Let  me  have  music 
dying,  and  I  seek  no  more  delight." 

Lessons. — 1.  The  highest  poetry  is  found  in  the  divine  word.  2.  To  administer 
instruction  and  admonition  through  the  medium  of  song  is  at  once  modest  and 
significant.     3.   The  Christian  life  should  he  one  sweet  harmonious  poem. 

456 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.        chap.  hi. 


GERM  NOTES   ON  THE    VERSE. 


its  Character- 
Booh    and  the 


The  Word  of  Christ : 
istics  as  the  Saviour's 
Sinner's  Booh. 

I.  It  is  simple. 
II.  Significant. 

III.  Saving. 

IV.  Sanctifying. 
V.  Supporting. 

VI.  Suited  to  all. 

Lessons.  —  1.  Let  its  truths  and  reali- 
ties inhabit  your  convictions.  2.  Let  its 
tone  be  infused  into  your  temper.  3.  Let 
the  word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you  richly. — 
James  Hamilton,  D.D. 

The  Indwelling  Word  of  Christ. 

Let  the  word  of  Christ  dwell  in 
you. — 1.  Implies  a  sense  of  the  precious- 
ness  of  Christ  Himself.    2.  Theprecious- 


ness  of  Christ's  words,  as  well  as  of 
Christ  Himself,  is  essential  to  its  dwelling 
in  you.  3.  The  felt  preciousness  of  real 
present  and  living  intercourse  between 
Christ  and  you  will  cause  the  word,  as 
His  word,  to  abide  in  you. 

II.  Dwell  in  you  richly. — 1.  It  may 
refer  to  quantity.  2.  It  may  have  re- 
spect to  quality.  3.  This  rich  indwelling 
of  the  ivord  of  Christ  in  you  may  be  held 
to  correspond  to  the  riches  of  Him  whose 
word  it  is.  4.  It  is  to  dvjell  in  you  not 
only  as  rich  receivers  but  as  rich  dis- 
pensers also. 

Lessons. — 1.  Make  sure  of  the  first 
condition  of  Christ's  word  in  you—  the 
preciousness  of  Christ  Himself  2.  Make 
full  proof  of  all  suitable  helps  for  the 
indwelling  of  the  word  of  Christ  in  you. 
— R.  S.  Candlish. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF   VERSE   17. 

Suggestive  Summary  of  the  Law  of  Christian  Duty. 

Labour,  which  was  originally  imposed  on  man  as  a  curse,  may  minister  very 
largely  to  the  increase  of  human  happiness.  The  effort  necessary  to  contend 
with  and  subdue  the  hostile  forces  of  nature,  and  wrest  from  the  earth  the  food 
essential  to  existence,  strengthens  and  elevates  the  best  powers  of  man.  Ail 
men  are  prompted  to  labour  by  some  distinct  principle  or  ruling  passion  :  the 
savage  by  the  cravings  of  physical  hunger,  the  patriot  by  the  love  of  his  country, 
the  philosopher  by  an  inextinguishable  thirst  for  knowledge  and  delight  in 
intellectual  exercises.  The  ruling  principle  of  action  in  the  believer  is  that  of 
supreme  devotion  to  the  Lord ;  he  is  to  do  everything  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus.  This  exhortation  embraces  everything  previously  mentioned  in  the 
epistle,  and  every  possible  duty  of  the  Christian  life. 

I.  The  guiding  law  of  Christian  duty. — "  Do  all  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus."  The  name  of  Christ  suggests  the  predominating  principle  by  which  the 
whole  course  of  life  is  to  be  regulated,  the  watchword  in  every  enterprise,  the 
battle-cry  in  every  conflict,  the  rallying  centre  in  every  disaster.  In  warfare, 
as  in  other  things,  a  name  is  often  a  powerful  spell  to  conjure  with,  and  vast 
armies  have  been  animated  with  the  enthusiasm  of  action  by  simply  mentioning 
the  name  of  a  Wellington,  a  Napoleon,  a  Garibaldi,  a  Von  Moltke.  But  oh  ! 
how  glorious  and  all-potent  is  the  name  Lord  Jesus !  It  suggests  the  sublime 
dignity  and  redemptive  achievements  of  Christ,  and  that  He  is  the  great  exemplar 
after  which  all  who  believe  in  Him  are  to  be  morally  fashioned. 

1.  In  Christ  is  the  purest  motive  to  duty. — Motive  originates  and  governs 
action,  and  makes  it  good  or  bad.  The  believer  does  everything  for  Christ's  sake, 
out  of  love  for  Him  and  respect  to  His  authority.  The  tendency  in  all  men  is  to 
live  in  themselves,  to  act  in  their  own  name  and  strength,  and  to  carry  out  their 
own  selfish  purposes.  Selfishness  is  one  of  the  mightiest  and  most  general 
motives  to  action.     It  is  only  in  Christ  we  find  the  holiest  and  purest  motive ; 

457 


chap.  in.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS. 


in  Him  love  takes  the  place  of  selfishness.     The  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us 
(2  Cor.  v.  14,  15). 

2.  In  Christ  is  the  noblest  pattern  of  duty. — Not  only  do  we  see  in  His  character 
the  most  perfect  representation  of  moral  excellence,  but  His  whole  career  is  an 
instructive  example  of  devotion  to  duty.  He  fulfilled  the  will  of  His  Father  : 
He  was  obedient  unto  death.  He  has  taught  us  how  to  live  and  how  to  die. 
One  of  the  grandest  pictures  of  moral  heroism  is  seen  in  the  maintenance  of  an 
intelligent  and  faithful  obedience  in  the  midst  of  danger  and  threatened  death. 

3.  In  Christ  is  the  highest  end  of  duty. — All  things  in  the  material  universe 
exist  for  Him,  and  in  the  moral  realm  He  is  the  goal  towards  which  all  actions 
tend.  Everything  should  be  done  with  reference  to  Christ.  We  can  have  no 
worthier  ambition  than  to  seek  in  all  things  His  glory.  Cf.  Mark  ix.  41  ; 
Matt,  xviii.  5 ;  John  xiv.  14 ;  and  note  how  Christ  lays  it  down  as  a  universal 
principle  that  everything  is  to  be  done  in  His  name.  There  is  no  higher  name, 
for  it  "  is  above  every  name "  ;  there  is  no  loftier  end,  for  "  He  is  before  all 
things." 

4.  In  Christ  is  the  final  authmnty  of  Christian  duty. — Many  things  have  been 
done  in  the  name  of  Christ  that  never  had  His  sanction  and  were  contrary  to 
His  authority.  The  most  disastrous  persecutions  and  cruellest  tortures  have 
been  perpetrated  in  the  name  of  Christ.  These  blasphemous  outrages  have  been 
committed  to  strengthen  the  authority  and  hide  the  bloodthirsty  rapacity  of  a 
corrupt  and  domineering  Church.  No  ecclesiastical  hierarchy  has  a  right  to 
compel  the  blind,  unreasoning  submission  of  a  free,  intelligent  agent.  Above  all 
Jesuitical  maxims  and  Papal  decrees  is  the  authority  of  Christ.  His  will  is 
supreme  in  all  spheres,  and  that  will  is  the  guiding  law  of  duty  in  the 
Christian  life. 

II.  The  universal  obligation  of  Christian  duty. — "  Whatsoever  ye  do  in  word 
or  deed." 

1.  There  must  be  a  recognition  of  Christ  in  everything. — In  all  our  employ- 
ments, conversation,  public  acts  of  worship,  in  social  and  private  prayer,  in 
secular  and  domestic  concerns,  in  all  matters  relating  to  the  place  of  our  abode, 
in  changing  residences,  in  the  connections  we  form  for  ourselves  and  our  children. 
There  is  a  comprehensiveness  in  this  obligation  which  is  all-embracing.  Not 
that  we  are  to  parade  our  piety,  to  obtrude  our  religious  notions  upon  everybody 
we  meet,  or  to  be  ever  unctuously  repeating  the  name  of  Christ,  irrespective  of 
time  or  place.  The  merchant  is  not  to  provoke  unseemly  discussions  on  sacred 
subjects  when  he  ought  to  be  attending  to  the  business  of  the  counting-house ; 
the  clerk  should  not  be  reading  his  Bible  when  he  ought  to  be  posting  his 
ledger  ;  the  servant-maid  should  not  be  praying  when  she  ought  to  be  cleaning 
her  kitchen  ;  nor  ought  the  mother  to  be  gadding  about,  or  running  to  endless 
revival  meetings,  while  her  house  is  dirty  and  husband  and  children  neglected. 
It  is  not  so  much  that  everything  is  to  be  done  after  one  special  outward  form 
as  that  every  duty  is  to  be  done  in  a  religious  spirit.  Religion  is  not  a  series  of 
formal  acts,  or  a  string  of  set  phrases  ;  but  it  is  a  life,  pervading  all  our  activities, 
and  making  every  part  of  our  career  sublime.  Recognise  Christ  in  everything, 
and  a  new  meaning  will  be  thrown  on  passing  events  ;  the  commonplaces  of  life 
will  be  exalted  into  dignity,  and  the  future  assume  irresistible  attractions. 

2.  There  must  be  absolute  dependence  on  Christ  at  all  times. — We  cannot  say 
and  do  everything  in  the  name  of  Christ  unless  we  fully  surrender  ourselves  to 
Him.  We  are  helpless  and  full  of  spiritual  infirmities,  but  the  more  conscious 
we  are  of  our  complete  dependence  on  Him  the  stronger  are  we  in  labour  and  in 
hope.  In  our  successes,  lest  we  be  puffed  up  with  vanity — in  our  perplexities, 
lest  we  be  discouraged — in  our  grief,  lest  we  sink  despairing  into  tlie  abyss — and 
in  our  transports  of  joy,  lest  we  be  exalted  above  measure — there  must  ever  be 

458 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.        chap.  Hi. 


a  full,  voluntary,  and  conscious  reliance  on  Jesus.  Thus  resting  on  Him  and 
realising  His  life-giving  power,  we  can  say  with  Paul,  "  I  can  do  all  things 
through  Christ  which  strengthened  me." 

3.  There  must  be  supreme  devotion  to  Christ. — All  we  have  we  owe  to  Him. 
He  gave  His  all  for  us,  and  it  is  but  a  righteous  return  that  we  consecrate  to 
Him  all  that  is  highest  and  best  in  ourselves.  We  must  love  Christ  supremely, 
and  then  every  faculty  and  power  of  our  being  will  render  homage  and  service 
to  Him.  We  shall  be  obedient  to  His  commands,  we  shall  magnify  His  grace, 
we  shall  strive  to  walk  worthy  of  His  great  name,  and  in  all  things  seek  to 
promote  His  glory.  We  pledge  ourselves  to  Him  for  ever,  and  no  consideration 
should  tempt  us  to  relax  our  devotion.  George  III.  was  a  man  of  firm  mind, 
with  whom  one  had  pleasure  in  acting.  He  was  very  slow  in  forming  his 
opinion,  very  diligent  in  procuring  every  information  on  the  subject ;  but  once 
convinced,  he  would  act  with  unflinching  firmness.  His  beautiful  speech  about 
the  Roman  Catholic  question  shows  his  character  :  "I  can  give  up  my  crown 
and  retire  from  power,  I  can  quit  my  palace  and  live  in  a  cottage,  I  can  lay  my 
head  on  a  block  and  lose  my  life,  but  I  can  not  break  my  oath." 

III.  The  unvarying  spirit  in  which  Christian  duty  is  to  be  done. — "  Giving 
thanks  to  God  and  the  Father  by  Him."  They  who  do  all  things  in  Christ's 
name  will  never  want  matter  of  thanksgiving  to  God.  The  apostle  has  frequently 
referred  to  this  duty  of  gratitude,  and  he  evidently  regarded  it  as  a  very  im- 
portant element  of  the  Christian  character.  It  was  Christianity  that  first 
taught  the  duty  of  being  thankful  even  in  trial  and  suffering.  We  are  to  thank 
God  for  the  privilege  of  acting  so  that  we  may  honour  Him.  A  thankful  spirit 
has  a  blessedness  and  a  power  of  blessing  which  those  only  realise  who  cherish  it. 
All  thanksgiving  is  to  be  offered  to  God  the  Father  by  Jesus  Christ,  as  He  is  our 
only  mediator,  and  it  is  through  Him  we  obtain  whatever  good  the  Father 
bestows  upon  us.  The  giving  of  thanks  to  God  is  one  of  the  highest  duties  of 
religious  worship  ;  and  if  this  be  done  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  then  all 
subordinate  duties  must  be  done  in  the  same  manner. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  name  of  Christ  is  the  greatest  power  in  the  universe.  2.  All 
duty  gathers  its  significance  and  blessedness  from  its  relation  to  Christ.  3.  A 
thankful  spirit  is  happy  in  enterprise,  brave  in  difficulties,  and  patient  in  reverses. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSE. 


Ver.  17  (compared  with  1  Cor.  xi.  24). 
The  Lord's  Supper  the  Sample  of  the 
Christian  Life. 

I.  All  the  objects  around  us  are  to 
be  regarded  by  us  as  being  symbols 
and  memorials  of  our  Lord. 

II.  Every  act  of  our  life  is  to  be 
done  from  the  same  motive  as  that 
holy  communion. 

III.  All  life,  like  the  communion 
of  the  Lord's  Supper,  may  be  and  ought 
to  be  a  showing  forth  of  Christ's 
death. 

IV.  This  communion  is  in  itself  one 


of  the  mightiest  means  for  making  the 
whole  of  life  like  itself. — A.  Maclaren. 

Doing  all  in  the  Name  of  Christ. 

I.  Doing  it  as  His  agent. 
II.  We  are  not  our  own,  but  His. 
III.  Whatever  it  is  right  to  do  is 
His  work. — T.  G.  Crippen. 

Christ  in  the  Practical  Life. 
I.  Here  we  find  a  rule  of  life. 
II.  Here  we  find  a  motive. 
III.  Here  we  find  our  life  redeemed. 

— Preacher's  Magazine. 


459 


CSAP.  in.        H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PA RAGR AGE.— Verses  18,  19. 

Duties  of  Husbands  and  Wives. 

After  the  apostle  has  laid  down  the  law  of  duty  for  the  government  of  all 
Christians  in  the  general  conduct  of  life,  he  proceeds  to  show  the  application 
of  the  same  law  to  the  domestic  relationships.  Obedience  to  the  law  in  the 
general  is  an  excellent  preparation  for  observing  it  in  the  particular  :  the  best 
Christian  will  make  the  best  husband  or  wife.  The  morality  of  Christianity  is 
one  of  its  brightest  glories  and  most  beneficent  influences ;  it  provides  for 
the  purity  and  happiness  of  domestic  life,  and  where  it  rules  all  is  peace,  love, 
and  contentment.  Where  polygamy  prevails,  as  in  heathen  and  Mahometan 
countries,  the  most  lamentable  domestic  complications  occur,  and  all  is  dis- 
traction and  misery.  The  family  is  the  source  and  pattern  of  society.  If  the 
family  is  corrupt  and  disorganised,  society  suffers.  A  holy,  well-regulated 
household  is  a  regenerative  force  in  society.  It  is  in  the  home  that  the  social 
principle  finds  its  highest  development.  There  the  tenderest  feelings  are  roused, 
the  deepest  and  most  permanent  impressions  made,  the  foundation  and  first 
rough  outlines  of  what  we  may  become  laid  down  and  indicated,  the  first 
principle  of  good  or  evil  imbibed,  and  the  mightiest  moral  forces  brought  into 
play.  Much,  therefore,  depends  upon  the  understanding  that  exists  between  the 
husband  and  wife,  and  the  way  in  which  they  discharge  their  mutual  duties, 
as  to  what  shall  be  the  character  of  the  household  government.  The  apostle,  in 
enforcing  these  relative  duties,  mentions  the  three  classes  which  divide  the 
domestic  circle — husbands  and  wives,  parents  and  children,  masters  and  servants. 
He  begins  with  the  inferior  relation  in  each  class — wife,  child,  servant — perhaps, 
because  the  difficulty  of  obedience  is  greater,  because  in  disputes  it  is  the  duty 
of  the  humbler  party  to  submit,  and  because  the  discharge  of  duty  by  that 
party  is  the  surest  method  of  securing  it  in  the  other. 

I.  The  duty  of  the  wife  is  submission  to  the  husband. — "  Wives,  submit  your- 
selves to  your  own  husbands  "  (ver.  18). 

1.  This  implies  dependence. — It  is  the  divine  order  that  "  the  husband  is  the 
head  of  the  wife."  In  point  of  nature,  and  of  their  relation  to  God,  they  are 
both  equal ;  but  when  brought  into  the  married  relation  the  husband  has  the 
first  place,  and  the  wife,  as  the  weaker  vessel,  and  under  a  sense  of  dependence, 
is  called  to  submit.  Where  the  order  is  reversed,  and  the  wife  takes  the  lead, 
mischief  is  sure  to  ensue.  Not  that  woman  is  to  be  the  slave  and  drudge  of  her 
husband ;  but  the  relationship  between  the  two  ought  to  be  so  adjusted  by 
the  power  of  religion  that  the  wife  is  never  rudely  reminded  of  her  state  of 
dependence. 

2.  Implies  respect. — It  is  difficult  to  respect  some  men,  and  still  more  difficult 
to  love  where  we  cannot  respect.  But  the  apostolic  injunction  is  emphatic  :  "  Let 
the  wife  see  that  she  reverence  her  husband."  Though  the  husband  be  a 
reckless,  incapable  ne'er-do-well,  the  wife  is  to  respect  the  position  of  her 
husband  and  show  him  deference  as  the  head  of  the  family.  Alas  !  how  many 
a  noble  woman  has  had  her  life  embittered  by  a  worthless  husband,  but  who, 
with  a  heroism,  truly  sublime,  and  a  love  truly  angelical,  has  bravely  done  her 
duty  and  striven  to  screen  the  faults  of  the  man  who  caused  her  misery. 

3.  Implies  obedience  in  all  things  lawful. — St.  Peter  refers  to  "  the  holy  women 
in  the  old  time,  being  in  subjection  unto  their  own  husbands,  even  as  Sara 
obeyed  Abraham,  calling  him  lord  "  (1  Pet.  iii.  5,  6).  A  true  wife  is  wholly 
devoted  to  her  husband.  She  will  care  for  his  person,  property,  health, 
character,  and  reputation,  as  for  her  own.  In  all  things  reasonable  and  lawful 
she  will  rejoice  to  meet  the  requests  of  her  husband  and  follow  his  counsel. 

II.    The  submission  of  the  wife  to  the  husband  is  governed  by  religious 

4G0 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSI 'ANS.        chap.  hi. 


principle. — "  As  it  is  fit  in  the  Lord  "  (ver.  18).  The  wife  is  first  to  submit  herself 
fully  to  Christ,  and,  from  love  to  Him,  to  submit  herself  to  her  own  husband,  and 
to  look  upon  her  subjection  as  service  done  to  Christ.  This  will  be  a  consolation 
and  strength  to  her  in  many  an  unkind  word  from  a  cruel,  apathetic,  and 
unappreciative  husband.  It  would  never  do  for  two  wills  to  be  ruling  a  family. 
There  would  be  endless  clashing  and  confusion.  It  is  the  divine  arrangement 
that  the  husband  is  the  head  of  the  house,  and  "  it  is  fit  in  the  Lord  "  that  the 
wife  should  be  in  subjection.  She  is  not  to  forget  her  responsibility  to  God  in  a 
slavish,  unreasoning,  and  sinful  obedience  to  her  husband.  Governed  by  a  pure 
and  lofty  religious  principle,  she  may  so  fulfil  her  duty  as  to  win,  or  at  least 
disarm,  her  unreasonable  partner.  A  wise  submission  may  sometimes  work 
wonders.  She  stoops  to  conquer.  An  old  writer  has  said  :  "  A  wife  is  ordained 
for  man,  like  a  little  Zoar — a  city  of  refuge  to  fly  to  in  all  his  troubles." 

III.  The  duty  of  the  husband  is  to  show  affection  towards  the  wife. — 1.  This 
affection  is  to  be  genuinely  manifested.  "Husbands,  love  your  wives"  (ver.  19). 
Obligation  is  not  all  on  one  side.  The  husband  is  not  less  bound  to  discharge 
his  duty  to  his  wife  than  the  wife  to  him.  Love  is  the  sum  of  the  husband's 
duty,  and  that  which  will  regulate  every  other.  Where  love  rules,  the  family 
circle  becomes  a  tranquil  and  cherished  haven  of  rest,  peace,  harmony,  arid  joy. 
Nor  is  it  enough  that  this  affection  should  be  recognised  as  a  matter  of  course — 
let  it  be  manifested.  That  woman  is  a  strange,  heartless  shrew  who  is  unaffected 
by  the  gentle  evidences  of  a  devoted  and  manly  love.  The  true  wife  needs, 
craves  for,  and  knows  how  to  appreciate  a  genuine  and  evident  affection.  Let 
the  husband  show  the  same  tender  and  considerate  regard  to  his  wife  as  life 
advances  and  cares  multiply  as  when  he  stood  by  her  side  at  the  altar,  a  lovely 
and  confiding  bride. 

2.  This  affection  is  to  be  free  from  harshness. — "  And  be  not  bitter  against  them  " 
(ver.  19).  It  is  evidently  implied  that  the  love  of  a  Christian  heart  may  be  marred 
by  a  sour  and  morose  temper.  It  is  ungenerous  and  cruel  to  vent  upon  his  wife 
and  family  the  anger  which  the  man  had  not  the  courage  to  display  before  those 
who  roused  it  when  mixing  among  them  in  the  world.  Bitterness  may  be  mani- 
fested as  much  by  a  cold,  repulsive  silence  as  by  the  most  stinging  words  of  sharp 
and  angry  reproof,  or  by  the  irritating  actions  of  a  wilful  and  tantalising 
conduct.  It  is  a  species  of  savage  and  fiendish  brutality  for  a  husband  to  study 
how  he  can  inflict  the  keenest  torture  on  a  loving  and  submissive  nature.  It 
sometimes  requires  the  most  assiduous  art  of  the  tenderest  affection  to  repair  the 
damage  done  by  a  single  word.  Amid  the  perplexities  and  trials  of  married 
life  many  occasions  will  arise  in  which  mutual  patience  and  forbearance  will 
need  to  be  exercised.  Let  love  reign  supreme,  and  banish  the  first  symptoms  of  a 
harsh  and  churlish  disposition. 

Lessons. — 1.  Be   careful   whom  you  marry.     2.    Beware  of  the  first  .quarrel. 

3.  Bear  with  Christian  resignation  the  life-consequences  of  an  unfortunate  choice. 

4.  Connubial  bliss  is  attained  only  by  the  faithful  exercise  of  mutual  duties. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PAR  AGE  A  PH. —Verses  20,  21. 

Duties  of  Parents  and  Children. 

It  is  God  who  hath  set  the  solitary  in  families.  The  domestic  constitution  is 
the  formal  type  of  all  governments.  If  discipline  is  neglected  in  the  home, 
it  is  rarely  that  the  loss  is  made  up  when  the  untaught  becomes  a  citizen 
of  the  world.  Coleridge  has  well  said:  "If  you  bring  up  your  children  in 
a   way   which    puts   them    out   of    sympathy   with   the    religious  feelings    of 

461 


chap.  in.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS. 


the  nation  in  which  they  live,  the  chances  are  that  they  will  ultimately  turn 
out  ruffians  or  fanatics,  and  one  as  likely  as  the  other."  "  A  wise  son  maketh 
a  glad  father;  but  a  foolish  son  is  the  heaviness  of  his  mother"  (Prov.  x.  1). 
Lord  Bacon  observes  that  fathers  have  most  comfort  of  the  good  proof  of  their 
sons,  but  the  mothers  have  most  discomfort  of  their  ill  proof.  It  is  therefore  of 
vital  importance  that  the  reciprocal  duties  of  parents  and  children  should  be 
faithfully  and  diligently  observed.  These  verses  indicate  the  charade?'  of  filial 
duty  and  of  parental  authority.     Observe  :— 

1.  That  the  duty  of  the  child  to  the  parent  is  to  obey. — 1.  This  obedience  is 
universal.  "  Children,  obey  your  parents  in  all  things  "  (ver.  20).  The  Old  Testa- 
ment law  commands,  "  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother  " ;  and  the  most  signal 
way  in  which  a  child  can  honour  his  parents  is  to  obey  them.  Parents  have  learnt 
wisdom  by  experience  ;  they  know  the  dangers  that  threaten  their  children,  and 
are  in  a  position  to  offer  wise  and  judicious  counsel.  Filial  obedience  should  be 
prompt,  cheerful,  self-denying,  uniform;  not  dilatory  and  reluctant.  It  is 
universal  in  its  obligation,  and  is  binding,  not  only  in  those  commands  that  are 
pleasant  to  obey,  but  in  those  that  are  troublesome,  and  that  seem  unreasonable 
and  perverse,  so  long  as  they  do  not  involve  a  violation  of  divine  law.  It  is  a 
painful  spectacle  to  see  a  child  defy  parental  authority,  and  even  exult  in  his 
rebellion  and  in  the  distress  it  causes  his  father  and  mother.  But  filial 
disobedience  rarely  reaches  such  a  pitch  of  cruel  retaliation  without  there  having 
been  some  defect  in  the  early  training.  The  child  who  renders  due  reverence  to 
his  parents  is  sure  to  meet  with  the  rich  rewards  of  heaven  in  the  enjoyment  of 
temporal  and  spiritual  blessing. 

2.  This  obedience  is  qualified  and  limited  by  the  divine  approval.—  "  For  this  is 
well-pleasing  unto  God  "  (ver.  20).  It  is  only  when  the  commands  of  the  parent 
are  in  harmony  with  the  will  of  God  that  the  child  is  bound  to  obey,  and  a  powerful 
motive  to  practise  obedience  is  derived  from  the  fact  that  it  "  is  well-pleasing 
unto  the  Lord."  The  parent  has  no  authority  to  enforce  obedience  beyond  what 
has  been  given  to  him  of  God ;  and  the  exercise  of  that  authority  must  ever  be 
in  subjection  to  the  higher  authority  of  the  divine  law.  Obedience  to  parents 
in  what  is  right  is  obedience  to  the  Lord.  It  is  the  way  of  safety  and  of 
happiness.  A  little  boy,  about  seven  years  old,  was  on  a  visit  to  a  lady  who  was 
very  fond  of  him.  One  day,  at  breakfast,  there  was  some  hot  bread  on  the  table, 
and  it  was  handed  to  him ;  but  he  would  not  take  it.  "  Do  you  not  like  hot 
bread?"  asked  the  lady.  "  Yes,"  said  the  boy ;  "  I  like  it  very  much."  "Then, 
my  dear,  why  do  you  do  not  take  some?  "  "  Because,"  he  said,  "  my  father  does 
not  wish  me  to  eat  hot  bread."  "  But  your  father  is  a  great  way  off,"  said  the 
lady,  "  and  will  not  know  whether  you  eat  it  or  not.  You  may  take  it  for  once ; 
there  will  be  no  harm  in  that."  "No,  ma'am;  I  will  not  disobey  my  father  and 
my  mother.  I  must  do  what  they  have  told  me  to  do,  although  they  are  a  great 
way  off.  I  would  not  touch  it  if  I  was  sure  nobody  would  see  me.  I  myself  should 
know  it,  and  that  would  be  enough  to  make  me  unhappy."  A  reckless  dis- 
obedience of  parental  authority  will  not  go  unpunished.  The  example  of  Christ's 
subjection  to  his  earthly  parents  exalts  filial  duty  into  a  sublime  and  holy 
exercise. 

II.  That  the  duty  of  the  parent  to  the  child  is  to  rule. — 1.  The  parent  is  not 
to  rule  in  a  spirit  of  exasperating  severity.  "  Fathers,  provoke  not  your  children 
to  anger"  (ver.  21).  The  obedience  of  the  child  will  be  very  much  influenced  by 
the  character  of  the  parental  government.  Counsel,  remonstrance,  and  even 
chastisement  will  be  necessary  in  the  successful  training  of  children.  But 
discipline  is  to  be  administered  so  wisely,  lovingly,  and  firmly  as  not  to  irritate 
to  rebellion,  but  to  subdue  and  bend  into  obedience.  An  excessive  severity  is  as 
baneful  as  an  excessive  indulgence. 

462 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    C0L0S8IANS.        chap.  in. 


"  The  voice  of  parents  is  the  voice  of  God, 

For  to  their  children  they  are  heaven's  lieutenants  ; 

Made  fathers,  not  for  common  uses  merely, 

But  to  steer 

The  wanton  freight  of  youth  through  storms  and  dangers, 

Which,  with  full  sails,  they  bear  upon  and  straighten 

The  mortal  line  of  life  they  bend  so  often. 

For  these  are  we  made  fathers,  and  for  these 

May  challenge  duty  on  our  children's  part. 

Obedience  is  the  sacrifice  of  angels, 

Whose  form  you  carry." — Shakespeare. 

2.  To  rule  in  a  spirit  of  exasperating  severity  tends  only  to  dishearten. — "  Lest 
they  be  discouraged"  (ver.  21).  If  the  child  sees  that  all  his  endeavours  to 
please  are  in  vain,  and  that  he  is  repulsed  with  sternness  and  cruel  severity, 
he  loses  heart,  and  becomes  sullen  or  morose,  or  is  stung  into  a  state  of  desperate 
revenge.  To  be  perpetually  fault-finding,  and  to  gratify  your  angry  passions  in 
brutal,  savage  chastisement,  will  crush  the  spirit  of  any  youth,  and  perhaps 
transform  him  into  a  monster  more  terrible  than  yourself.  Children  are  to  be 
led,  not  driven  j  to  be  treated  as  reasonable  beings,  not  forced  like  brute  animals ; 
to  be  encouraged  by  commendation  where  it  is  merited,  and  the  defects  of  their 
obedience  kindly  interpreted.  A  certain  writer  has  significantly  said  :  "What  if 
God  should  place  in  your  hand  a  diamond,  and  tell  you  to  inscribe  on  it  a  sentence 
which  should  be  read  at  the  last  day,  and  shown  there  as  an  index  of  your  own 
thoughts  and  feelings'?  What  care,  what  caution,  would  you  exercise  in  the 
selection  !  Now  this  is  what  God  has  done.  He  has  placed  before  you  the 
immortal  minds  of  your  children,  more  imperishable  than  the  diamond,  on  which 
you  are  about  to  inscribe  every  day  and  every  hour,  by  your  instruction,  by 
your  spirit,  or  by  your  example,  something  that  will  remain  and  be  exhibited  for 
or  against  you  at  the  judgment- day." 

Lessons. — 1.  To  rule  wisely  we  must  first  learn  to  obey.  2.  Disobedience  is  the 
essence  of  all  sin.  3.  That  government  is  the  most  effective  that  tempers  justice  with 
merer. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS    OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  22-25— Ch.  iv.  1. 

Duties  of  Masters  and  Servants. 

The  jealous  conflict  between  capital  and  labour  threatens  the  good  under- 
standing that  was  wont  to  exist  between  employer  and  employed  with  a  serious 
rupture.  Such  a  rupture  would  benefit  neither  side  and  would  inflict  incalculable 
disaster  on  both.  There  are  economic  laws,  which  regulate  the  employment  of 
capital  and  labour,  which  no  number  of  combinations  and  unions  among  masters 
and  servants  can  ever  set  aside.  Though  a  temporary  advantage  may,  in 
extraordinary  times,  be  snatched  by  either  party,  the  law  of  supply  and  demand 
inevitably  tends  to  balance  and  equalise  all  interests.  It  would  be  well,  there- 
fore, for  masters  and  servants  to  ponder  the  teaching  of  the  New  Testament 
regarding  their  reciprocal  duties.  It  was  Christianity  that  rescued  the  servant 
from  a  condition  of  abject  civil  slavery,  and  placed  him  in  his  just  relation  to 
his  fellow-subjects  in  the  commonwealth.  The  farther  men  drift  away  from  the 
Christian  spirit  in  seeking  to  adjust  the  questions  between  capital  and  labour, 
the  more  difficult  and  complicated  they  become.  It  is  only  as  these  questions 
are  settled  on  a  Christian  basis,  in  harmony  with  the  laws  of  a  sound  political 
economy,  that  party  jealousies  will  subside,  and  the  best  understanding  between 
masters  and  servants  be  established.     Observe  : — 

I.  That  the  duty  of  the  servant  is  to  obey  his  master  in  all  things  relating  to 
his  state  of  servitude. — "  Servants,  obey  in  all  things  your  masters  according  to 

463 


chap.  in.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS. 


the  flesh  "  (ver.  22).  There  is  nothing  degrading  in  service.  It  is  the  employ- 
ment of  angels.  "  They  serve  Him  day  and  night."  It  is  ennobled  by  the 
example  of  Christ,  who  "  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister."  To 
obey  in  all  things  is  not  always  pleasant  or  easy ;  but  the  Christian  servant 
will  strive  to  accomplish  the  task.  He  consults  the  master's  will,  not  his  own  ; 
he  does  the  master's  way,  not  his  own ;  he  considers  the  master's  time,  not  his 
own.  His  obedience  is  universally  binding  in  everything  relating  to  his  state  of 
servitude,  but  is  restricted  to  that.  His  employer  is  his  master  only  according 
to  the  flesh,  has  control  over  his  bodily  powers,  and  over  the  time  in  which  he 
has  engaged  to  labour;  but  he  has  not  power  over  the  spirit.  The  master 
cannot  demand  obedience  in  any  matter  forbidden  of  God. 

II.  That  the  duty  of  the  servant  is  to  be  done  in  a  spirit  of  sincerity. — 1.  It  is 
to  be  free  from  duplicity.  "  Not  with  eye-?ervice  as  men-pleasers ;  but  in  single- 
ness of  heart "  (ver.  22).  The  servants  of  whom  the  apostle  writes  were  slaves, 
and  treated  merely  as  chattels.  There  are  supposed  to  have  been  sixty  millions  of 
slaves  in  the  Roman  empire.  From  the  treatment  they  usually  received,  they 
were  greatly  tempted  to  be  merely  eye-servants — diligent  when  their  master  was 
present,  but  indolent  and  reckless  in  his  absence.  Christianity  has  elevated  man 
from  slavery,  and  provided  him  with  the  highest  motives  to  moral  action.  It 
teaches  that  service  is  to  be  rendered,  not  with  a  hypocritical  deference  and  sham 
industriousness,  but  with  a  single,  undivided  heart,  doing  the  best  at  all  times 
for  the  master. 

2.  It  is  to  be  done  in  the  fear  of  God. — "  Fearing  God  " — the  one  Lord  and 
Master,  as  contrasted  with  the  master  according  to  the  flesh.  The  Christian 
servant  has  a  conscience  to  satisfy  and  a  heavenly  Master  to  please.  The  fear 
of  the  Lord  is  the  holiest  motive-power  in  all  acceptable  service.  He  who  serves 
his  earthly  master  as  he  seeks  to  serve  God  will  take  care  that  the  divine  and 
human  interests  do  not  come  into  collision  with  each  other. 

III.  That  the  duty  of  the  servant  is  to  be  discharged  from  the  loftiest 
religious  principle. — 1.  In  every  duty  God  is  to  be  recognised.  "  And  whatsoever 
ye  do,  do  it  as  to  the  Lord,  and  not  unto  men  "  (ver.  23).  The  Christian  servant 
must  look  higher  than  his  earthly  master  ;  that  is  a  service  that  may  be  rendered 
mechanically,  and  by  men  who  make  no  pretence  to  be  Christian.  The  true 
servant  will  give  Christ  the  chief  place  in  his  service — will  so  act  that  his 
obedience  shall  honour  Christ  and  be  acceptable  to  Him.  His  best  efforts  may 
fail  to  satisfy  the  exactions  of  an  unreasonable  master,  and  the  faithful  servant 
will  find  his  consolation  and  recompense  in  the  fact  that  he  aims  to  secure  the 
divine  approval.  This  will  give  a  moral  dignity  to  the  most  menial  employment, 
and  exalt  the  common  drudgery  of  toil  into  a  means  of  religious  refreshment  and 
invigoration. 

2.  In  every  duty  the  best  powers  should  be  exercised. — "  Do  it  heartily  "  (ver.  23). 
If  the  heart  be  engaged,  it  will  put  into  operation  the  best  powers  of  the  whole 
man.  No  work  is  well  done  when  the  heart  is  not  in  it.  Whatever  is  worth  doing 
at  all  is  worth  doing  well ;  and  surely  no  power  can  move  the  springs  of  action  so 
completely  as  the  ever-present  thought  that,  whatever  we  do,  we  "  do  it  as  to 
the  Lord,  and  not  unto  men."  Our  best  efforts  fall  immeasurably  below  the 
lofty  ideal  of  Christian  service  ;  but  it  is  no  small  commendation  when  the 
divine  Master  can  declare  respecting  the  anxious  and  delighted  worker,  "He  hath 
done  what  he  could."  Acting  on  such  a  principle,  the  capacity  for  the  highest 
kind  of  work  is  cultivated,  the  sphere  of  usefulness  widened,  and  the  most  coveted 
honours  and  enjoyments  of  the  faithful  servant  secured. 

IV.  That  faithful  service  will  meet  with  a  glorious  reward. — "  Knowing  that 
of  the  Lord  ye  shall  receive  the  reward  of  the  inheritance,  for  ye  serve  the  Lord 
Christ  "  (ver.  24).     Under  the  sinister  judgment  passed  by  Satan  on  the  devotion 

464 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.        chap.  in. 


of  Job  there  lurks  an  encouraging  truth — man  does  not  serve  God  for  nought. 
Though  there  is  nothing  meritorious  in  the  best  actions  of  the  busiest  life,  yet  it 
has  pleased  God,  in  the  exuberance  of  His  condescending  bounty,  to  provide 
abundant  recompense  for  all  work  done  as  unto  Him.  The  reward  of  the 
inheritance  is  in  generous  disproportion  to  the  service  rendered ;  the  service  is 
marred  and  limited  by  the  numberless  imperfections  of  the  human ;  the  reward 
is  amply  freighted  with  the  overflowing  munificence  and  glittering  splendours  of 
the  divine.  It  is  the  inheritance  of  imperishable  happiness — of  incorruptible 
and  unfading  glory — of  heaven — of  God.      What  an  encouragement  to  work  ! 

V.  That  every  act  of  injustice  will  meet  with  impartial  retribution. — "  But  he 
that  doeth  wrong  shall  receive  for  the  wrong  which  he  hath  done,  and  there  is  no 
respect  of  persons  "  (ver.  25).  Some  regard  the  wrong-doer  referred  to  in  this  verse 
as  the  servant  who  defrauds  the  master  of  his  service  ;  others,  as  the  master  who 
defrauds  the  servant  of  his  just  recompense.  But  the  words  announce  a  general 
principle  which  is  equally  applicable  to  both.  The  philosophers  of  Greece  taught, 
and  the  laws  of  Rome  assumed,  that  the  slave  was  a  chattel,  and  that  as  a 
chattel  he  had  no  rights.  The  New  Testament  places  the  relation  of  master  and 
servant  in  a  wholly  new  light,  and  shows  that  between  both  there  is  a  reciprocity 
of  duties  and  of  penalties.  The  injustice  done  in  the  world,  whether  by  master 
or  by  servant,  shall  be  impartially  redressed,  and  the  injured  one  vindicated  at 
the  day  of  final  retribution. 

VI.  That  the  duty  of  the  master  is  to  deal  righteously  towards  his  servants. 
— 1.  He  is  to  act  towards  his  servants  according  to  the  principles  of  justice  and 
equity.  "  Masters,  give  unto  your  servants  that  which  is  just  and  equal "  (ver.  1). 
If  the  masters  here  addressed  were  exhorted  to  deal  fairly  and  justly  with  those 
who  were  their  slaves,  not  less  fully  is  the  modern  master  bound  to  act  justly 
and  equitably  towards  those  who  serve  him.  The  position  of  the  master  is  one 
of  great  power  and  authority ;  it  is,  at  the  eame  time,  one  of  solemn  responsi- 
bility. Capital  has  not  only  its  cares  and  privileges,  it  has  also  its  duties,  and 
these  cannot  be  abused  with  impunity.  The  communistic  doctrine  of  equality 
has  no  countenance  here.  If  all  were  socially  and  financially  equal  to-day,  the 
inequality  would  be  restored  to-morrow.  The  duty  of  the  master  is  to  give  to 
his  servants  that  which  is  righteous  and  reciprocally  fair.  Treat  them  as  human 
beings,  with  human  rights,  and  as  rational  and  religious  beings,  who,  like  your- 
selves, have  an  endless  future  to  prepare  for.  Give  them  fair  remuneration  for 
work  done.  Be  generous  in  prosperous  times,  and  considerate  when  adversity 
comes.  While  acting  commercially  according  to  the  laws  of  political  economy, 
which  no  sane  business  man  can  'disregard,  yield  in  all  justness  and  fairness  to 
the  impulse  of  the  higher  law  of  Christian  charity  and  kindness.  Interest 
yourselves  in  the«physical,  moral,  and  religious  welfare  of  your  work-people.  Good 
masters  make  good  servants. 

2.  He  is  to  remember  that  he  is  responsible  to  a  higher  Master.  "  Knowing  that 
ye  also  have  a  Master  in  heaven"  (ver.  1).  The  master  is  not  less  bound  than  the 
servant  to  do  his  duty  as  unto  the  Lord.  They  are  both  servants  of  the  one 
great  Lord  and  Master  of  all.  "  One  is  your  Master,  even  Christ,  and  all  ye  are 
brethren."  Do  not  impose  impossible  tasks  upon  your  servants.  Avoid  an 
overbearing  tyranny,  and  "forbear  threatening."  Exercise  your  authority  with 
humanity  and  gentleness.  Use  your  wealth,  reputation,  and  influence  in 
promoting  the  best  interest  of  your  work-people,  and  in  serving  the  Lord  Christ. 
Remember  that  whatever  you  do  to  the  poorest  servant  of  your  heavenly 
Master  is  reckoned  and  recompensed  as  done  to  Himself. 

Lessons. — 1.  Social  distinctions  afford  opportunities  for  personal  discipline. 
2.  Every  rank  in  life  has  its  special  perils.  3.  The  law  of  duty  is  binding  in  all 
ranks.    4.  The  dust  of  both  masters  and  servants  will  soon  mingle  in  a  common  grave. 

PH  465 


chap.  iv.        EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS. 


GERM  NOTES   ON  TEE    VERSES. 

Ver.  23.  Do  all  for  God.  character   of   the   work   vie  do   will  he 

I.  The  Christians  practical  life  com-  decided  by  the  state  of  our  heart.  2.  By 
prises  working,  acting,  and  suffering.  the  predominating  impulse  of  the  heart. 

II.  Abide  with  God  in  your  calling.  3.  The  character  of  our  work  as  a  whole 
■ — Intention  gives  a  moral  character  to  will  be  influenced  by  the  heartiness  we 
actions.  throw  into  every  single  duty.     "  What- 

III.  Motives  to  duty. — 1.  Mechanical  soever  ye  do." 

activity.         2.      Supernatural     motive.  Lessons. — 1.    A  hearty    Christianity 

"  Do    it    heartily   as     to    the    Lord."  is   a  happy    Christianity.       2.    Is   not 

3.     Our  good  intention   should   be  re-  easily   daunted   by  difficulties.      3.    Is 

newed    at    intervals.      4.     Our     lesser  aggressive, 
actions    should   be    brought    under   the 

control  of  Christian  principle. — E.  M.  Vers.  23-25.  Piety  in  the  Household. 

Goulburn.  I.  We  are  serving  the  Lord. — This 

will    dignify    the    most     insignificant 

A  Hearty  Christianity.  duty. 

I.  The  highest  end  of  all  work  is  II.  We  should  seek  to  be  actuated 
work  done  for  God  and  to  God. —  by  the  highest  possible  motive. — Out 
1.  Not  work  done  for  self  2.  Not  of  the  heart,  or  influenced  by  the  affec- 
work  done  for  society.  tions.     The  highest  motive  will  cover 

II.  The   highest  kind   of  work   of  the  lowest. 

which  we  are  capable  is  that  which  III.  The  Lord  Himself  will  give  us 

engages  all  the  powers  of  our  spiritual  the  highest  reward. — With  Him  is  no 

nature. — "Do   it   heartily."      1.    The  respect  of  persons. — Homiletic  Monthly. 


CHAPTER   IV. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  2.  Watch  in  the  same. — "  Being  wakeful."  Here  again  the  apostle  changes  his 
language  from  that  used  in  enjoining  the  same  precepts  in  Ephesians.  Remaining  sleepless 
(Eph.  vi.  18)  is  the  same  thing  as  being  wakeful. 

Ver.  3.  A  door  of  utterance. — R.V.  "a  door  for  the  word."  The  word  of  God  cannot  be 
bound,  though  its  messenger  may ;  but  St.  Paul  can  scarcely  think  its  being  glorified  comes 
so  quickly  as  it  would  if  he  had  liberty  to  preach  it.  "An  open  door"  with  "  many  adver- 
saries "  is  more  to  St.  Paul's  mind  than  the  custodia  libera.     See  Eph.  vi.  19,  20. 

Ver.  5.  Walk  in  wisdom. — Eph.  v.  15.  Walk  circumspectly.  R.V.  "  carefully."  It  would 
appear  from  this  as  if  the  adverb  in  Eph.  v.  15  should  go  with  "  walk  "  rather  than  with  "  look," 
as  in  E.V.  Toward  them  that  are  without. — Who  do  not  participate  in  the  benefits  of  the  new 
kingdom.  Redeeming  the  time. — As  in  Eph.  v.  16.  Seizing  for  yourselves,  like  bargains  in 
the  market,  each  opportunity  (see  R.V.  margin). 

Ver.  6.  Let  your  speech  be  alway  with  grace. — There  is  no  excuse  for  a  Christian's  con- 
versation becoming  rude  and  churlish.  It  may  be  necessary  to  speak  plainly  and  boldly  at 
times — the  way  of  doing  even  that  graciously  ought  to  characterise  Christians.  Seasoned 
with  salt. — The  pungent  flavour  of  wit  and  facetiousness  was  called  salt  by  the  Greeks,  often 
with  a  spice  of  indecency.     "  Salt  "  in  the  New  Testament  is  the  opposite  of  corruption. 

Ver.  11.  A  comfort  to  me. — The  word  for  "  comfort"  is  only  found  in  this  place  in  the  New 
Testament.  It  is  a  medical  term,  and  points  to  relief  given  in  suffering — then,  by  way  of 
ministering  to  a  mind  diseased  or  in  trouble,  is  used  of  the  speech  which  soothes  and  calms. 

Ver.  12.  Always  labouring  fervently  for  you. — R.V.  "always  striving."  Lit.  "agonis- 
ing." Like  the  mighty  wrestler  who  held  the  Angel  till  daybreak,  Epaphras  intercedes  for 
his  Colossian  brethren.    Complete  in  all  the  will  of  God.— R,V.  "  fully  assured,"    "  From  the 

466 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS.         chap.  iv. 


tenor  of  the  letter  it  appears  that  the  Colossians  needed  a  deeper  Christian  insight  and  more 
intelligent  and  well-grounded  convictions  respecting  the  truth  '  as  in  Jesus ' "  (Findlay). 

Ver.  13.  Zeal  ...  for  them  that  are  in  Laodicea. — Here  then  is  one  who  differs  from  the 
Laodicean  spirit  of  St.  John's  time. 

Ver.  17.  And  say  to  Archippus,  Take  heed  to  the  ministry. — He  is  again  closely  connected 
with  Colossae  in  the  epistle  to  Philemon.  A  monition  perhaps  needed  by  Archippus.  In  the 
Lord. — The  element  in  which  every  work  of  the  Christian,  and  especially  the  Christian 
minister,  is  to  be  done. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC 8  'OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  2—4. 

The  Efficacy  of  Prayer. 

Prayer  is  a  supreme  necessity  of  the  soul.  It  is  the  cry  of  conscious  want, 
an  outlet  for  the  pent-up  feelings,  and  a  mighty  engine  of  power  in  all  spiritual 
enterprises.  It  is  the  holiest  exercise  of  the  believer,  his  solace  in  trouble,  his 
support  in  weakness,  the  solver  of  his  doubts  and  perplexities,  his  safety  in 
peril,  his  unfailing  resource  in  adversity,  his  balance  in  prosperity,  his  weapon 
in  every  conflict.  It  is  the  key  which  opens  the  door  of  the  heavenly  treasury, 
and  places  at  his  disposal  the  boundless  wealth  of  the  divine  beneficence.  The 
efficacy  of  prayer  does  not  terminate  in  the  individual  petitioner,  but  extends 
to  others  on  whose  behalf  supplication  is  made.  God  hears  the  cry  of  the 
believing  suppliant,  and  in  some  way,  not  always  explicable  to  us,  but  in 
harmony  with  His  divine  perfections  and  the  fitness  of  things,  answers  and 
blesses.  The  apostle  knew  the  value  and  power  of  prayer  when  earnestly 
and  humbly  exercised,  and,  after  giving  directions  concerning  the  discharge 
of  certain  specific  relative  duties,  he  returns,  in  concluding  this  epistle,  to  some 
general  admonitions  in  which  this  important  duty  holds  a  foremost  place. 
Prayer,  says  Thomas  Aquinas,  should  have  three  qualities :  it  should  be 
assiduous,  watchful,  and  grateful.  The  perseverance  with  which  prayer  uninter- 
ruptedly draws  itself  through  all  events,  internal  and  external,  like  a  thread, 
or  encircles  them  like  a  chain,  is  its  vital  power ;  the  watchfulness,  the  lively 
circumspection,  the  gratitude,  are  the  quiet  tone  or  firm  basis  of  the  same. 

I.  That  prayer  to  be  efficacious  must  be  earnest  and  unceasing. — "  Continue 
in  prayer  "  (ver.  2).  The  heart  must  be  in  the  duty  and  all  the  best  powers  of  the 
man  put  forth.  That  in  which  we  have  no  interest  will  stir  no  feeling,  will 
challenge  no  effort.  To  repeat  a  verbal  formulary  is  not  prayer.  Alas  !  how  many 
thousand  prayers  go  no  farther  than  the  sound  they  make,  and  are  as  useless  ! 
Genuine  prayer  involves  thought,  diligent  inquiry,  passionate  entreaty,  unwearied 
perseverance.  The  highest  blessings  of  the  Christian  life,  the  brightest  visions 
of  God,  the  deepest  insight  into  truth,  the  most  enravishing  ecstasies  of  the  soul, 
are  obtained  only  by  fervent  and  persistent  wrestling.  Prayer  must  be  offered 
with  close-cleaving  constancy,  as  the  word  "  continue  "  implies,  and  with  daily 
frequency.     Let  prayer  be  the  key  of  the  morning  and'  the  bolt  of  the  evening. 

II.  That  prayer  to  be  efficacious  must  be  joined  with  vigilance. — "And 
watch  in  the  same  "  (ver.  2).  Long,  prosy,  spiritless  prayers  lull  the  soul  into  a 
dangerous  slumber ;  and  without  incessant  watchfulness  all  prayers  are  apt  to 
become  long,  prosy,  and  spiritless.  It  is  not  necessary  we  should  rob  ourselves 
of  needful  sleep  in  order  to  spend  so  many  hours  in  formal  devotion.  The 
vigilance  refers  to  the  spirit  and  manner  in  which  all  prayer  is  to  be  offered. 
There  may  be  times  when,  under  the  pressure  of  some  great  solicitude,  the  soul 
is  drawn  out  in  prayer  so  as  to  preclude  sleep  ;  but  at  these  times  the  quality 
of  watchfulness  is  often  in  most  vigorous  operation.  Watch,  as  a  sentinel 
suspecting  the  approach  of  an  enemy  ;  as  a  physician  attending  to  all  the 
symptoms  of  a  disease  ;  as  the  keeper  of  a  prison  watching  an  insidious  and 
treacherous  criminal.     We  have  need  to  watch  against  the  temptations  arising 

467 


chap.  iv.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS. 


from  worldly  associations,  from  the  sinfulness  of  our  own  hearts,  and  from  the 
vile  insinuations  of  the  enemy,  all  which  mar  the  efficacy  of  our  prayers. 
Chrysostom  says,  "  The  devil  knoweth  how  great  a  good  prayer  is."  No  wonder 
he  should  seek  to  distract  the  mind  of  the  earnest  suppliant.  "  Prayer,"  said 
Bernard,  "  is  a  virtue  that  prevaileth  against  all  temptations ;  "  but  this  is  so 
only  when  a  sleepless  vigilance  is  exercised. 

III.  That  prayer  to  be  efficacious*  must  be  mingled  with  gratitude. — "  With 
thanksgiving"  (ver.  2).  The  apostle  has,  throughout  the  epistle,  repeatedly  enforced 
the  duty  of  thankfulness.  He  once  more  recurs  to  it  in  this  place ;  and  we  cannot 
fail  to  note  the  vast  importance  he  attached  to  the  exercise  of  this  grace,  and 
how  it  ought  to  interpenetrate  every  Christian  duty.  We  are  ever  more  ready 
to  grumble  than  to  give  thanks.  Such  is  the  deceitfulness  of  sin,  or  the  vanity 
and  purblindness  of  the  human  heart,  that  the  very  regularity  and  abundance 
of  the  divine  mercies,  instead  of  increasing,  are  apt  to  restrict  our  gratitude. 
We  take,  as  a  matter  of  course,  what  ought  to  be  received  with  humblest 
thankfulness.  An  old  writer  has  well  said,  Need  will  make  us  beggars,  but  grace 
only  thanksgivers.  Gratitude  opens  the  hand  of  God  to  give,  and  the  heart  of 
the  suppliant  to  receive  aright.  Thankfulness  for  past  mercies  is  an  important 
condition  of  success  in  pleading  for  additional  blessings. 

IV.  That  prayer  is  efficacious  in  promoting  an  efficient  declaration  of  the 
gospel. — 1.  Prayer  should  be  offered  on  behalf  of  Christian  ministers.  "Withal 
praying  also  for  us  "  (ver.  3).  The  Oolossians  were  exhorted  to  pray,  not  only  for 
Paul,  his  fellow-labourer  Timothy,  and  their  own  evangelist  Epaphras,  but  for  all 
teachers  of  the  gospel.  The  preacher  is  engaged  in  a  work  of  vast  magnitude, 
environed  with  colossal  difficulties,  and  is  himself  ferociously  assailed  by  great 
and  peculiar  perils.  The  earnest  intercessions  of  a  devout  and  holy  people  are 
to  him  a  safeguard  and  a  tower  of  strength.  A  once  popular  minister  gradually 
lost  his  influence  and  congregation.  The  blame  was  laid  entirely  upon  him. 
Some  of  his  Church  officials  went  to  talk  with  him  on  the  subject.  He  replied  : 
"  I  am  quite  sensible  to  all  you  say,  for  I  feel  it  to  be  true ;  and  the  reason  of  it 
is,  I  have  lost  my  prayer-book."  He  explained  :  "  Once  my  preaching  was 
acceptable,  many  were  edified  by  it,  and  numbers  were  added  to  the  Church, 
which  was  then  in  a  prosperous  state.  But  we  were  then  a  praying  people. 
Prayer  was  restrained,  and  the  present  condition  of  things  followed.  Let  us 
return  to  the  same  means,  and  the  same  results  may  be  expected."  They  acted 
upon  this  suggestion,  and  in  a  short  time  the  minister  was  as  popular  as  he 
had  ever  been,  and  the  Church  was  again  in  a  flourishing  state.  The  great 
apostle  felt  the  necessity  of  co-operative  sympathy  and  prayer  (Bom.  xv.  30 ; 
2  Thess.  iii.  1). 

2.  Prayer  should  be  offered  that  the  most  proininent  features  of  the  gospel  may  be 
declared. — "  To  speak  the  mystery  of  Christ,  for  which  I  am  also  in  bonds  "  (ver.  3). 
It  has  before  been  explained  in  this  epistle  that  the  mystery  of  Christ  is  a  grand 
summary  of  all  the  leading  truths  of  the  gospel  :  the  mystery  of  the  incarnation 
of  Christ,  the  mystery  of  His  sufferings  and  death  as  a  sacrifice  for  sin,  the 
mystery  of  admitting  the  Gentiles  on  equal  terms  with  the  Jews  to  all  the 
privileges  and  blessings  of  the  new  covenant.  It  was  the  apostle's  intrepid 
advocacy  of  the  rights  of  the  despised  Gentile — mangre  the  fierce  bigotry  of  his 
own  countrymen,  the  deep-seated  prejudice  of  the  times,  and  even  the  slavish 
indifference  of  the  Gentiles  themselves — which  led  to  his  imprisonment :  "  for 
which  I  am  also  in  bonds."  The  prayers  of  the  good  give  the  preacher 
courage  to  declare  all  the  counsel  of  God,  whether  it  be  palatable  or  not,  and  to 
give  special  prominence  to  those  truths  which  are  of  priceless  importance  to 
humanity. 

3.  Prayer  should  be  offered,  that  opportunity  maybe  afforded  for  the  free  declara- 

468 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS.         chap.  IV. 


tion  of  the  gospel. — "  That  God  would  open  unto  us  a  door  of  utterance  "  (ver.  3). 
The  door  had  been  closed  and  barred  to  the  apostle  for  four  years  by  his  imprison- 
ment. He  felt  a  holy  impatience  to  be  free,  that  he  might  resume  the  loved 
labour  of  former  years,  when  "  from  Jerusalem  and  round  about  unto  Illyricum 
he  had  fully  preached  the  gospel  of  Christ."  But  he  waited  till  the  door  was 
opened  by  divine  providence ;  and  this  he  knew  was  often  done  in  answer  to 
believing  prayer.  So  there  are  times,  in  all  ages  of  the  Church,  when  the  door 
of  opportunity  for  disseminating  the  gospel  is  shut  by  the  opposition  of  the 
world,  by  the  plottings  of  Satan,  by  the  prevalence  of  a  rabid  infidelity,  or  by 
the  removal  of  eminent  champions  for  the  truth ;  but,  in  response  to  the  earnest 
intercessions  of  God's  people,  a  great  and  effectual  door  is  opened,  and  the  Church 
advances  to  fresh  conquests. 

4.  Prayer  should  be  offered  that  the  gospel  may  be  declared  with  fearless  self- 
evidencing  power. — "That  I  may  make  it  manifest,  as  I  ought  to  speak  "  (ver.  4). 
There  are  some  who  preach  the  gospel  in  a  cold,  lifeless,  perfunctory  manner,  or 
with  unmeaning  feebleness  and  unmanly  timidity.  When  the  preacher  sinks  down 
into  a  condition  so  abject  as  this,  he  has  lost  sight  of  the  true  meaning  of  the  gospel, 
he  becomes  the  most  pitiable  object  under  the  sun,  and  is  exposed  to  the  scathing 
vengeance  of  heaven.  To  preach  the  gospel  with  clearness,  with  intrepidity, 
and  with  irresistible  persuasiveness,  that  he  "  may  make  it  manifest,  as  he  ought 
to  speak,"  demands  the  best  energies  of  the  soul,  and,  above  all,  the  special 
endowments  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  A  minister  is  mightily  aided  in  preaching  by 
the  wrestling  intercessions  of  a  holy  and  sympathetic  people. 

Lessons. — 1.  Prayer  is  an  excellent  training  for  efficiency  in  all  other  duties. 
2.  Prayer  is  a  gigantic  power  in  the  propagation  of  the  gospel.  3.  The  topics  for 
prayer  are  vast  in  range  and  not  far  to  seek.  4.  When  you  can  do  nothing  else 
you  can  pray. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  2.  True  Devotion.  faith,     patience,     and     submissiveness 

I.  Explain  the  meaning  of  the  text,      may  be  expedient.     The  proper  season 

— It  is  : —  may  not  have  come.    God's  sovereignty 

1.  Not  to  be  engaged  without  inter-  musfc  be  owned-  We  ol,ght  to  asslue 
mission  in  outward  and  formal  acts  of  °urs,elve.s  that  we  Pra7  according  to 
devotion. — This  is  inconsistent  with  our      v*od  swill. 

nature,  with  commanded  duties,  with  ,   H.     Enforce     the     exhortation.  — 

the  ends  of  praver  *•    ™ecause  Vou  are  commanded  to   do 

.  so.     2.   Because  Christ  and  the  Spirit 

2.  To  be  frequently  engaged  in  formal  intercede  for  you.     Tnere   is  no  dllty 

acts  of  devotion.— (1)  No  exercise  more  for  which  there  is  more          le  aggigt_ 

hallowing    and    soothing  to   the   soul.  ance     provided.       3<     Because    of    the 

(2)  None  more  profitable  as  procuring  mimber  and  greatness   of  your  wants. 

blessings.      (3)   One   to    which    those  it  is  by  faith  that  we  know  our  wants, 

whose    example    is    recorded    gave    a  Hence  the  necessity.      4.  Because  of  the 

prominent  place— Job,  David,  Daniel,  exhaustless  provision  that  God  has  made 

Paul,    Christ.     (4)   Morning,  evening,  for  y(m%     God  actg  ag  Qod  in  the  pro. 

intervals,  social.  vigion  and  in  the   bestowal<       5    Be_ 

3.  To  be  persevering  and  importunate  cause  of  the  number  of  promises  not  yet 
in  asking  particular  blessings. — God  fulfilled.  To  you  individually,  to  the 
does  not  always  send  sensibly  the  Church,  to  Christ.  6.  Because  the 
answer  at  once.  A  deeper  sense  of  season  for  prayer  is  speedily  hastening 
want  may  be  necessary.     A  trial   of  away. — Stewart. 

469 


chap.  iv.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS. 


Yers.   3,  4.    Praying   and    Preach-  available  opportunity  to  proclaim  the 

ing.  truth  (ver.  3). 

I.  The  sermon  is  powerful  that  is  III.  The  theme  of  the  preacher 
well  prayed  over  (ver.  4).  becomes  more  definite  and  effective  by 

II.  A  praying  preacher  uses  every  prayer  (ver.  3). 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  5,  6. 

The  Wise  Conduct  of  Life. 

The  Christian  lives  a  dual  life  :  one  in  spiritual  communion  with  heaven, 
under  the  eye  of  God ;  the  other  in  daily  contact  with  the  outer  world,  exposed 
to  its  observation  and  criticism.  The  aspects  of  the  life  patent  to  the  world's 
gaze  do  not  always  correspond  with  the  best  impulses  of  the  life  concealed  ;  the 
actual  falls  short  of  the  ideal.  The  world  forms  its  judgment  of  the  Christian 
from  what  it  sees  of  his  outer  life,  and  makes  no  allowance  for  his  unseen 
struggles  after  moral  perfection  and  his  bitter  penitence  over  conscious  failures. 
Nor  can  we  blame  the  world  for  this ;  the  outer  life  of  the  believer  furnishes 
the  only  evidence  on  which  the  world  can  form  its  estimate,  and  it  is  incapable 
of  apprehending  and  taking  into  account  hidden  spiritual  causes.  The  living 
example  of  the  believer  presents  the  only  ideas  of  Christianity  that  great 
numbers  have  any  means  of  possessing  ;  he  is  a  Christ  to  them,  until  they  are 
brought  to  a  clearer  knowledge  of  the  true  and  only  Christ.  With  what  wisdom 
and  circumspection  should  the  believer  walk  toward  them  that  are  without  ! 

1.  That  the  conduct  of  life  is  to  be  regulated  according  to  the  dictates  of  the 
highest  wisdom. — 1.  Religion  is  a  life.  "  Walk."  A  walk  implies  motion,  pro- 
gression, continual  approximation  to  destination.  Our  life  is  a  walk ;  we  are 
perpetually  and  actively  advancing  towards  our  destiny.  Religion  is  not  a 
sentiment,  not  a  round  of  bewitching  ceremonies,  not  a  succession  of  pleasurable 
emotions ;  it  is  a  life.  It  pervades  the  whole  soul,  thrills  every  nerve, 
participates  in  every  joy  and  sorrow,  and  moulds  and  inspires  the  individual 
character. 

2.  Religion  is  a  life  shaped  and  controlled  by  the  highest  ivisdom. — "  Walk  in 
wisdom  "  (ver.  5).  Christian  conduct  is  governed  by  the  spirit  of  that  wisdom  which 
is  from  above,  and  under  the  influence  of  the  knowledge  which  maketh  wise  unto 
salvation  (Jas.  iii.  17).  It  is  ruled,  not  by  an  erratic  sentiment  or  by  the 
wild  impulse  of  a  senseless  fanaticism,  but  by  a  sound  understanding  and  a  wise 
discretion.  Its  experience  and  hopes  rest  upon  a  basis  of  truth  transcending  in 
certainty,  wisdom,  and  majesty  the  most  imposing  speculations  of  the  human 
mind. 

3.  Religion  is  a  life  that  should  be  instructive  to  the  irreligious. — "  Toward 
them  that  are  without "  (ver.  5) — without  the  pale  of  the  Church,  the  unbelievers. 
An  upright,  holy,  consistent  example  is  often  more  eloquent  than  words,  more 
practically  effective  than  the  most  elaborate  code  of  moral  maxims.  The  follies 
and  glaring  inconsistencies  of  professing  Christians  have  often  inflicted  serious 
damage  upon  the  Church  itself,  and  turned  religion  into  ridicule  among  the 
thoughtless  and  irreligious  outsiders.  The  world  is  to  be  largely  trained  into 
correct  views  of  truth  and  a  just  appreciation  of  the  Christian  spirit  by  the 
humble,  saintly  lives  of  those  who  have  experienced  the  transforming  power  of 
the  gospel.     Be  more  anxious  to  live  religiously  than  to  talk  religiously. 

4.  Religion  is  a  life  that  impels  the  soul  to  seize  every  opportunity  for  good  doing. 
— "  Redeeming  the  time "  (ver.  5) — buying  up  the  opportunity  for  yourselves. 
Opportunity  is  the  flower  of  time,  which  blooms  but  for  a  moment  and  is  gone  for 
ever.  Evil  is  prevalent ;  it  affects  the  great  majority,  it  advances  with  ever  accele- 
rating momentum  ;  every  opportunity  for  checking  its  career  and  destroying  its 

470 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS.         cHap.  iv. 


power  should  be  snatched  with  eagerness,  and  used  with  promptitude  and 
discretion.  The  wisdom  that  regulates  the  religious  life  will  be  the  safest  guide 
as  to  the  way  in  which  the  passing  moment  may  be  turned  to  the  best  advantage. 
The  children  of  Issachar  were  commended  as  men  that  had  understanding  of  the 
times,  to  know  what  Israel  ought  to  do  (1  Ohron.  xii.  32).  Ill-timed  and  incon- 
siderate zeal  will  do  more  harm  than  good. 

II.  That  the  conduct  of  life  is  to  be  regulated  by  judicious  speech. — 
1.  Christian  speech  should  be  gracious.  "  Let  your  speech  be  alway  with  grace  " 
(ver.  6).  The  mouth  ought  to  be  a  treasury  of  benediction,  out  of  which  no  corrupt 
communication  should  issue,  but  that  which  is  good  to  the  use  of  edifying,  that  it 
may  minister  grace  unto  the  hearers.  Truth  is  the  soul  of  grace  ;  and  infinite 
pains  should  be  taken  that  every  utterance  of  the  tongue  should  at  least  be  true. 
Idle  gossip,  slander,  falsehood,  should  never  fall  from  lips  circumcised  by  the  grace 
of  God.  Beware  of  the  promiscuous  use  of  the  hackneyed  phrases  of  pious  cant. 
It  is  not  so  much  a  set  religious  phraseology  that  is  wanted,  as  that  all  our  speech 
should  be  baptised  with  the  chrism  of  a  religious  spirit. 

2.  Christian  speech  should  be  piquant.  — "  Seasoned  with  salt "  (ver.  6).  Salt  is  the 
emblem  of  what  is  quickening  and  preservative  ;  and  the  conversation  seasoned 
with  it  will  be  pure,  agreeable,  pointed — free  from  all  taint  and  corrupting 
influence.  The  ancient  teachers  of  rhetoric  used  to  speak  of  "  Attic  salt,"  with 
which  they  advised  their  pupils  to  flavour  their  speeches,  that  they  might  sparkle 
with  jests  and  witticisms.  But  it  is  not  this  kind  of  condiment  the  apostle 
recommends.  Wit  is  a  dangerous  gift  to  most  men  ;  but  where  it  is  joined  with 
a  well-balanced  understanding,  and  sanctified  by  the  grace  of  God,  it  may 
become  a  powerful  weapon  in  the  advocacy  of  truth  and  minister  to  the  good  of 
many.     Speech,  to  be  beneficial,  must  be  thoughtful,  choice,  sharp,  clear,  forceful. 

3.  Christian  speech  should  be  practical. — "  That  ye  may  know  how  ye  ought  to 
answer  every  man  "  (ver.  6).  It  requires  much  practical  wisdom  to  be  able  to  speak 
well  and  wisely  about  religion  to  both  objectors  and  inquirers,  and  only  the  man 
accustomed  to  carefully  weigh  his  words  and  guard  his  utterances  can  become  an 
adept  in  this  work.  Every  Christian  may  cultivate  the  wisdom  which  governs 
the  tongue,  and  is  bound  to  do  so  (1  Pet.  iii.  15).  Silence  is  sometimes  the 
most  conclusive  answer.  It  is  the  triumph  of  wisdom  to  know  when  to  speak 
and  when  to  hold  our  peace. 

Learn. — 1.  The  power  of  a  blameless  life.  2.  The  value  of  a  well-chosen 
word.     3.  The  supreme  control  claimed  by  religion  over  actions  and  speech. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Ver.  5.  The  Worth  of  Time. 

I.  Time  ought  to  be  improved  because 
its  value  is  inexpressible. — 1.  The 
worth  of  time  may  be  argued  from  a 
survey  of  the  great  and  momentous 
business  to  which  it  must  be  appropriated 
— to  get  ready  for  eternity.  2.  From  the 
astonishing  price  at  which  it  has  been 
purchased  for  us.  3.  From  the  careful 
manner  in  which  it  is  allotted  to  man- 
kind. 

II.  Because  of  the  brevity  of  its 
duration. 

III.  Because,  short  as  our  time  is, 
much  of  it  has  already  elapsed. 


IV.  Because  what  remains  to  us  is 
uncertain. 

V.  Because  nothing  can*  ever  com- 
pensate tho  Iocs  of  time. 

VI.  God  has  oado  oternity  to  depend 
on  the  issues  and  results  of  time. — 
Dr.  Robt.  Newton. 

Ver.  6.  Christian  Conversation. — The 
apostle  recommends  a  seasoning 
I.  Of  piety. 
II.  Of  chastity. 

III.  Of  charity. 

IV.  Of  severity. 
V.  Of  solidity. 

471 


chap.  iv.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS. 


Lessons. — 1.    Extravagant     raillery  II.  The  importance  of  special  self- 

p oisons  conversation.      2.  A   spirit  of  examination    in     reference    to     our 

disputing    is  a   vice    of   conversation.  words. 

3.  Indiscreet  questions  are  a  pest  of  III.  Earnest  listening  to  the  divine 

conversation. — Saurin.  voices  the  cure  for  vain  speech  and 

the  source  of  gracious  speech. 

Christ's  Truth  in    Relation  to  our  IV.  Our  words  are  not  to  be  all  about 

Daily  Conversation.  religion,  but  pervaded  by  the  spirit  of 

I.    The  large   space  which  words  religion, 

occupy  in  human  fife. — 1.  On  account  V.    Our    conversation    being    thus 

of  their  number.     2.  On  account  of  their  seasoned,  we  shall  know  how  we  ought 

consequences.  to  answer  every  man. — R.  Abercrombie. 

MAIN  EOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  7—11. 

Side-lights  on  Church-life  in  the  Early  Times. 

A  straw  will  indicate  the  direction  of  a  current ;  a  bit  of  glass  will  reveal 
a  star ;  a  kick  of  the  foot  may  discover  a  treasure  that  will  enrich  successive 
generations ;  a  word,  a  look,  an  involuntary  movement  will  disclose  the  leading 
tendency  of  an  individual  character;  so  on  the  crowded  stage  of  life  it  is  not 
always  the  gigantic  and  public  scenes  that  are  most  suggestive  and  instructive, 
but  rather  the  trivial,  undesigned  incidents  which  are  unnoticed  by  an  ordinary 
observer.  A  reflective  mind  will  pick  up  material  for  thought  from  the  most 
unexpected  and  unpromising  quarters.  The  apostle  has  finished  the  grand 
argument  of  the  epistle,  and  shown  the  importance  of  certain  duties  which 
grow  out  of  the  reception  of  the  truths -enforced.  In  approaching  the  conclusion, 
he  appears  to  be  chiefly  occupied  with  a  mass  of  personal  and  miscellaneous 
matters.  The  few  remaining  verses  contain  little  else  but  a  series  of  names, 
with  the  briefest  qualifying  phrases  attached.  But  here  and  there  light  is 
thrown  on  truths  which,  though  familiar,  are  all  the  more  strongly  impressed 
on  our  minds  because  of  their  evident  antiquity.  In  these  verses  there  are  side- 
lights thrown  on  Church-life  in  the  early  times  with  reference  to  Christian  sympathy, 
commendations,  courtesy,  and  co-operation.     We  learn  : — 

1.  The  value  of  Christian  sympathy. — 1.  As  fostering  mutual  interest  in  tidings 
concerning  the  work  of  God.  "All  my  state  shall  Tychicus  declare  unto  you,  .  .  . 
whom  I  have  sent  unto  you  for  the  same  purpose;  .  .  .  shall  make  known  unto 
you  all  things  which  are  done  here  "  (vers.  7-9).  The  apostle,  though  in  prison 
and  separated  by  a  long  distance  from  the  Colossians,  does  not  abate  anything 
of  his  interest  in  their  welfare.  He  had  received  tidings  of  their  condition  as 
a  Church ;  of  their  steadfastness,  successes,  and  perils ;  and  he  was  sure  that 
intelligence  from  him  would  be  eagerly  welcomed  by  them.  He  therefore 
despatched  Tychicus  and  Onesimus,  who  could  furnish  more  details  concerning 
the  apostle,  the  exemplary  spirit  in  which  he  bore  his  sufferings,  his  profound 
anxiety  on  behalf  of  the  Churches  and  the  progress  of  the  gospel  in  Home,  than 
were  contained  in  the  epistle  they  carried.  A  heart,  touched  with  a  genuine 
Christian  sympathy,  rejoices  in  the  extension  of  the  work  of  God,  in  whatever 
part  of  the  world,  and  by  whatever  Christian  agency.  The  mutual  interchange 
of  intelligence  tends  to  excite  the  interest,  promote  the  union,  and  stimulate  the 
enterprise  of  the  Churches. 

2.  As  a  source  of  encouragement  and  strength  in  the  Christian  life. — "  That  he 
might  know  your  estate  and  comfort  your  heart "  (ver.  8).  Instead  of  "  that 
he  might  know  your  estate,"  another  reading  of  the  original,  adopted  by  Lightfoot 
and  other  eminent  critics,  has  "that  ye  might  know  our  affairs."  "  But,"  as  Bishop 
Wordsworth  remarks,  "  the  very  purpose  for  which  Paul  sent  Tychicus  to  the 

472 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.        chap.  iv. 


Colossians  was  not,  it  would  seem,  in  order  that  they  might  know  how  St.  Paul 
was  faring,  but  that  he  might  know  whether  they  were  standing  steadfast  in 
the  faith  against  the  attempts  of  the  false  teachers."  Whichever  reading  is 
adopted,  the  practical  lesson  is  the  same ;  both  express  the  reality,  strength, 
and  beauty  of  a  mutual  sympathy.  The  presence  of  Tychicus  and  Onesimus,  the 
character  of  the  tidings  they  brought,  and  the  fervour  of  their  exhortations, 
would  encourage  and  reassure  the  Colossians  amid  the  perplexities  and  doubts 
occasioned  by  the  false  teachers.  Mutual  expression  of  sympathy  and  inter- 
community of  intelligence  will  do  much  to  comfort  and  edify  the  Churches. 

II.  The  appropriateness  of  Christian  commendation  (ver.  7). — The  apostle 
speaks  highly  of  his  two  messengers — not  in  terms  of  extravagant  flattery,  but 
in  a  way  calculated  to  ensure  their  favourable  reception  by  the  Colossians  and 
a  respectful  attention  to  their  message.  Tychicus  was  a  native  of  proconsular 
Asia,  perhaps  of  Ephesus.  He  was  well  known  as  an  authorised  delegate  of 
St.  Paul,  and  is  mentioned  in  other  places  as  being  with  the  apostle  (Acts  xx.  42; 
2  Tim.  iv.  12  ;  Tit.  iii.  12).  He  is  spoken  of  in  this  verse  as  "  a  beloved  brother, 
a  faithful  minister,  a  fellow-servant  in  the  Lord."  The  great  apostle,  far  from 
taking  advantage  of  his  exalted  calling  and  inspiration,  humbled  himself  before 
the  least  of  his  brethren,  spoke  in  the  highest  terms  of  their  faithful  labours, 
and  associated  them  with  his  own.  Onesimus,  a  Colossian,  is  commended  as 
"  a  faithful  and  beloved  brother."  It  was  the  more  needful  he  should  be  thus 
commended,  because  if  he  was  known  to  the  Colossians  at  all  it  would  be  as  a 
worthless,  runaway  slave.  Some  time  before,  Onesimus  had  forsaken  his  master 
Philemon,  and  fled  to  Rome — the  common  sink  of  all  nations — probably  as  a 
convenient  hiding-place  where  he  might  escape  detection  among  its  crowds,  and 
make  a  livelihood  as  best  he  could.  In  the  metropolis — perhaps  accidentally, 
perhaps  through  the  intervention  of  Epaphras — he  fell  in  with  the  apostle,  his 
master's  old  friend.  St.  Paul  becomes  interested  in  his  case,  instructs  him  in 
the  gospel,  and  is  the  instrument  of  his  conversion ;  and  now  he  is  commended 
to  the  Colossians,  no  more  as  a  good-for-nothing  slave,  but  as  a  brother  ;  no  more 
dishonest  and  faithless,  but  trustworthy ;  no  more  an  object  of  contempt,  but 
love.  The  apostle  sent  him  back  to  his  master  Philemon,  and  it  is  generally 
thought,  having  been  set  at  liberty  by  his  owner,  he  became  a  faithful  and 
laborious  minister  of  Christ.  Such  is  the  transforming  power  of  divine  grace 
in  changing  and  renewing  the  heart,  in  obliterating  all  former  distinctions  and 
degradations,  and  in  elevating  a  poor  slave  to  the  dignity  of  "  a  faithful  and 
beloved  brother"  of  the  greatest  of  apostles.  Christian  commendations  are 
valuable  according  to  the  character  of  the  persons  from  whom  they  issue,  and  as 
they  are  borne  out  in  the  subsequent  conduct  of  the  persons  commended.  Every 
care  should  be  taken  that  the  testimonial  of  recommendation  is  strictly  true. 
It  is  putting  a  man  in  a  false  position  and  doing  him  an  injury  to  exaggerate 
his  qualifications  by  excessive  eulogy. 

III.  Suggestive  examples  of  Christian  courtesy. — "Aristarchus  my  fellow- 
prisoner  saluteth  you,  and  Marcus,  sister's  son  to  Barnabas,  (touching  whom  ye 
received  commandments :  if  he  come  unto  you,  receive  him  ;)  and  Jesus,  which 
is  called  Justus,  who  are  of  the  circumcision"  (vers.  10,  11).  Aristarchus  was 
a  Jew,  though  a  native  of  Thessalonica.  He  was  with  Paul  during  the  riot  at 
Ephesus,  and  was  hurried  with  Gaius  into  the  theatre  by  Demetrius  and  his 
craftsmen.  He  accompanied  the  apostle  from  Greece  to  Jerusalem  with  the 
collection  for  the  saints.  When  Paul  was  imprisoned  in  Judea,  he  abode  with 
him ;  and  when  he  went  into  Italy,  he  also  went  and  remained  with  him  there 
during  his  confinement,  till  at  length  he  became,  it  may  be,  obnoxious  to  the 
magistrates,  and  was  cast  into  prison  ;  or  perhaps  he  became  a  voluntary 
prisoner,  that  he  might  share  the  apostle's  captivity.     What  a  glimpse  have  we 

473 


chap.  IV.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS. 


here  of  heroic  devotion,  and  of  the  irresistible  charm  there  must  have  been  in 
the  apostle  in  attaching  men  to  himself  !  Marcus  was  the  John  Mark  frequently- 
referred  to  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  He  had  been  the  occasion  of  a  contention 
between  Paul  and  Barnabas,  which  led  to  their  separating  from  each  other  and 
following  different  scenes  of  labour.  Mark  had,  from  cowardice  or  some  other 
motive,  "  departed  from  them  from  Pamphylia,  and  went  not  with  them  out 
to  the  work "  ;  and  when  Barnabas,  probably  influenced  by  his  affection 
as  near  kinsman,  wished  to  take  him  with  them,  Paul  resolutely  refused 
thus  to  distinguish  a  young  and  unstable  disciple.  But  from  the  reference  here 
it  appears  that  Mark  had  repented  of  his  timid  and  selfish  behaviour  and 
returned  to  a  better  spirit.  Perhaps  the  displeasure  of  the  apostle  weighed 
upon  his  mind,  and,  with  Barnabas'  prayers  and  example,  had  brought  him  to  a 
right  view  of  his  misconduct.  He  was  now  restored  to  the  apostle's  confidence, 
and  it  appears  Paul  had  already  given  directions  to  the  Oolossians  concerning 
Mark  to  welcome  him  heartily  if  he  paid  them  a  visit — "  touching  whom  ye 
received  commandments  :  if  he  come  to  you,  receive  him."  The  third  Hebrew 
convert  who  united  in  sending  salutations  was  Jesus,  which  was  also  called 
Justus — a  common  name  or  surname  of  Jows  and  proselytes,  denoting  obedience 
and  devotion  to  the  law.  Nothing  definite  is  known  of  this  person ;  but  the 
apostle  held  him  in  such  esteem  as  to  join  his  salutation  with  the  rest.  These 
three  friends  and  companions  of  Paul  were  Jews — they  were  of  the  circumcision  ; 
and  yet  they  send  their  salutations  to  a  Church  composed  chiefly  of  Gentiles. 
The  Christian  spirit  triumphed  over  their  deep-rooted  prejudices,  and  their 
greeting  would  be  all  the  more  valued  as  an  expression  of  their  personal  esteem, 
their  brotherly  affection,  and  their  oneness  in  Christ.  That  courtesy  is  the  most 
refined,  graceful,  gentle,  and  acceptable  that  springs  from  the  Christian  spirit. 

IV.  The  solace  of  Christian  co-operation. — "  These  only  are  my  fellow-workers 
unto  the  kingdom  of  God,  which  have  been  a  comfort  unto  me  "  (ver.  11).  The 
tendency  of  the  Jewish  convert  was  to  lean  to  the  Mosaic  ritual,  and  insist  on 
its  necessity  in  realising  the  efficacy  of  the  gospel.  They  thus  favoured  the 
false  philosophy  of  the  Jewish  Platonists,  and  fell  into  the  errors  against  which 
the  apostle  so  faithfully  warns  in  this  epistle".  The  action  of  the  Judaizing 
teachers,  and  their  sympathisers  was  often  a  grief  and  hindrance  to  him.  Of  all 
the  Jewish  converts  in  Pome  only  three  were  a  comfort  to  him.  They  thoroughly 
embraced  and  advocated  the  free  and  unconditional  admission  of  the  Gentiles 
into  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  were  devoted  and  zealous  fellow- workers  with 
him  in  extending  the  kingdom  of  God.  It  is  an  evidence  of  the  unpopularity 
among  the  Jows  of  the  gospel  as  intended  equally  for  the  Gentiles,  and  of  the 
formidable  prejudices  and  difficulties  with  which  the  apostle  had  to  contend  in 
that  early  time,  that  there  were  only  three  Hebrew  converts  who  were  a  comfort 
to  him.  And  yet  how  consoling  is  the  sympathy  and  co-operation  of  the  faithful 
few  !  Sometimes  the  noblest  men  are  deserted  by  timid  and  time-serving 
professors,  and  left  to  toil  on  alone  in  peril  and  sadness.  History  records  the 
triumphs  of  those  who  havo  successfully  brayed  the  solitary  struggle  in  some 
great  crisis  ;  but  it  is  silent  about  tho  vanquished  who,  with  broken  hearts  and 
shattered  intellects,  have  sunk  into  unchronicled  oblivion. 

Lessons. — 1.  Christian  experience  is  the  same  in  all  ages.  2.  True  courtesy 
costs  little  and  accomplishes  much.  3.  Genuine  sympathy  is  best  shown  by  an  active 
and  self-denying  co-operation. 


m 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.         chap.  iv. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  12,  13. 

The  Model  Pastor. 

Nothing  is  known  of  Epaphras  beyond  the  few  but  significant  notices 
which  connect  him  with  Colossaa,  of  which  city  he  was  a  native.  Acting 
under  the  direction  of  St.  Paul,  probably  when  the  apostle  was  residing  for  three 
years  at  Ephesus,  Epaphras  was  the  honoured  agent  in  introducing  the  gospel 
into  Colossse  and  the  neighbouring  cities  of  Laodicea  and  Hierapolis  ;  and  it 
is  evident  he  regarded  himself  as  responsible  for  the  spiritual  well-being  of  all 
these  places.  The  dangerous  condition  of  the  Colossian  and  neighbouring 
Churches  at  this  time  filled  the  mind  of  Epaphras  with  a  holy  jealousy  and 
alarm.  A  strange  form  of  heresy  had  appeared  among  them — a  mixture  of 
Jewish  formalism  with  the  speculations  of  an  Oriental  philosophy — and  was 
rapidly  spreading.  The  distress  of  the  faithful  evangelist  was  extreme.  He 
journeyed  to  Ronie  in  order  to  lay  this  state  of  things  before  the  apostle, 
and  to  seek  his  counsel  and  assistance.  The  apostle  bears  testimony  to  his 
profound  anxiety  for  the  spiritual  condition  of  the  newly  founded  Churches  on 
the  banks  of  the  Lycus.  He  had  much  toil  for  them,  and  was  ever  fervently 
wrestling  in  prayer  on  their  behalf,  that  they  might  stand  fast  and  not  lose  the 
simplicity  of  their  earlier  faith,  but  might  advance  to  a  more  perfect  knowledge 
of  the  divine  will.  In  the  verses  now  under  consideration  we  have  Epaphras 
brought  before  us  as  the  model  pastor. 

I.  The  model  pastor  is  distinguished  by  a  suggestive  designation. — "A 
servant  of  Christ"  (ver.  12).  This  title,  which  the  apostle  uses  several  times 
for  himself,  is  not  elsewhere  conferred  on  any  other  individual,  except  once  on 
Timothy  (Phil.  i.  1),  and  probably  points  to  exceptional  services  in  the  cause  of 
the  gospel  on  the  part  of  Epaphras  (Lightfoot).  A  true  pastor  is  not  the  servant 
of  the  Church  to  echo  its  decisions  and  do  its  bidding  ;  but  he  is  the  servant  for 
the  Church  to  influence  its  deliberations  and  decisions,  to  mould  its  character 
and  direct  its  enterprises.  He  is  a  servant  of  Christ,  receiving  his  commission 
from  Him,  ever  anxious  to  ascertain  His  will,  and  ready  to  carry  out  that  will  at 
whatever  sacrifice.  Such  a  service  involves  no  loss  of  self-respect  or  manliness, 
no  degradation,  but  is  free,  honourable,  and  rich  in  blessing. 

II.  The  model  pastor  is  incessant  in  zealous  labour. — "  For  I  bear  him 
record,  that  he  hath  a  great  zeal  for  you,  and  them  that  are  in  Laodicea  and 
them  in  Hierapolis"  (ver.  13).  The  zeal  of  Epaphras  urged  him  to  extend  his 
Christian  labours  beyond  the  limits  of  Colossse  :  he  visited  the  adjoining  cities, 
which  were  much  larger  in  population  and  wealthier  in  commerce.  Laodicea, 
rising  from  obscurity,  had  become,  two^or  three  generations  before  the  apostle 
wrote,  a  populous  and  thriving  city,  and  was  then  the  metropolis  of  the  cities 
on  the  banks  of  the  Lycus.  Hierapolis  was  an  important  and  growing  city,  and, 
in  addition  to  its  trade  in  dyed  wools,  had  a  reputation  as  a  fashionable  watering- 
place,  where  the  seekers  of  pleasure  and  of  health  resorted  to  partake  of  its 
waters  which  possessed  valuable  medicinal  qualities.  The  rare  virtues  of  the 
city  have  been  celebrated  in  song : 

"  Hail,  fairest  soil  in  all  broad  Asia's  realm  ; 
Hail,  golden  city,  nymph  divine,  bedeck'd 
With  flowing  rills,  thy  jewels." 

Into  the  midst  of  these  populations  the  fervent  Epaphras  introduced  the  gospel, 
and  spared  no  pains  in  his  endeavour  to  establish  and  confirm  the  believers.  It 
was  on  their  behalf  he  undertook  the  journey  to  Pome  to  confer  with  St.  Paul 
as  to  their  state  ;  and  the  apostle  .testifies  to  the  unceasing  exercise  of  his  great 
and  holy  zeal  for  his  distant  but  ever-remembered  flock.     When  the  heart  is 

475 


chap.  iv.         EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS. 


interested  and  moved,  labour  is  a  delight ;  and  it  is  the  way  in  which  the  heart 
is  affected  towards  any  work  that  gives  to  it  significance  and  worth.  Canon 
Liddon  writes  :  "  Are  we  not  very  imperfectly  alive  to  the  moral  meaning  of  work 
and  the  moral  fruits  of  work  as  work  1 "  The  true  pastor,  with  a  heart  over- 
flowing with  zeal  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  men,  cheerfully  undertakes 
labour  from  which  the  ordinary  worker  would  timidly  shrink. 

III.  The  model  pastor  is  intensely  exercised  in  prayer  for  the  people  of  God. 
— "  Always  labouring  fervently  [wrestling,  agonising]  for  you  in  prayers " 
(ver.  12).  The  faithful  minister  has  not  only  to  teach  his  flock — a  task  which 
involves  vigilant  observation,  extensive  reading,  and  anxious  study — but  he  has 
also  to  plead  earnestly  at  the  throne  of  grace  on  their  behalf.  In  times  of 
spiritual  dearth,  disappointment,  embarrassment,  and  distress,  prayer  is  the  all- 
efficacious  resource.  There  are  circumstances  in  which  the  minister  can  do 
nothing  but  pray.  Difficulties  that  defied  all  other  means  have  vanished  before 
the  irresistible  power  of  persistent  and  believing  intercession.  Prayer  attains 
what  the  most  conclusive  reasoning,  the  most  eloquent  appeal,  the  most  diligent 
personal  attention,  sometimes  fail  to  accomplish.  It  sets  in  silent  but  stupendous 
operation  the  mightiest  spiritual  agencies  of  the  universe.  It  opens  the  fountain 
of  divine  grace,  and  its  streams  flow  in  full-tide  velocity  through  the  hitherto 
arid  wilderness  o%  human  hearts,  and  life,  freshness,  fertility,  and  beauty  spring 
up  in  its  reviving  course.  It  is  God  only  whoso  help  is  omnipotent,  and  on  this 
help  faithful  prayer  lays  hold  and  uses  it  in  effecting  its  wondrous  transformations. 

IV.  The  model  pastor  is  constantly  solicitous  that  the  people  of  God  should 
be  firmly  established  in  the  highest  good. — "  That  ye  may  stand  perfect  and 
complete  in  all  the  will  of  God  "  (ver.1! 2) — perfectly  instructed  and  fully  convinced 
in  everything  willed  by  God.  The  great  aim  of  all  ministerial  anxiety  is  not 
only  to  instruct  his  people  in  the  full  and  accurate  knowledge  of  the  divine  will, 
but  to  produce  such  a  persuasion  of  the  supreme  majesty  and  authority  of  that 
will  as  to  induce  steadfast  continuance  in  practical  obedience.  The  will  of  God 
and  the  highest  good  of  man  are  always  in  harmony.  Whatever  threatens  to 
disturb  the  stability  of  the  believer,  or  to  retard  his  development  towards  the 
highest  moral  excellence,  whether  it  arises  from  his  personal  unwatchfulness  and 
indifference  or  from  the  subtle  attacks  of  error,  is  always  a  subject  of  keen 
solicitude  to  the  faithful  pastor.  He  knows  that  if  his  converts  fall  away  they 
are  lost  and  the  truth  itself  is  disgraced.  To  be  established  in  an  unswerving 
obedience  it  is  necessary  to  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  God's  will.  This 
blessedness  is  the  grand  scope  and  crowning  glory  of  the  Christian  life. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  office  of  pastor  is  fraught  with  endless  anxieties,  great  responsi- 
bilities, and  rare  opportunities.  2.  The  true  past&r  finds  his  purest  inspirations, 
his  most  potent  spiritual  weapon,  and  his  grandest  successes  in  prayer. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  14—17. 

Christian  Gh%eetings  and  Counsels. 

It  is  sometimes  asked,  with  an  indiscriminate  flippancy,  "  What's  in  a 
name  1 "  There  are  some  names  which  have  no  title  to  a  lasting  remembrance, 
and  with  reference  to  these  the  flippancy  may  be  justified.  But  there  are  names 
whose  reputation  is  imperishable,  and  which  are  written  on  the  world's  history 
in  indelible  characters.  The  name  of  Paul,  the  great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles, 
will  be  venerated  by  the  coming  ages  when  the  titles  of  the  greatest  sages 
and  warriors  shall  have  faded  away  in  the  darkness  of  oblivion ;  and,  just  as 
there  are  lesser  lights  in  the  firmament  that  share  in  the  glory  of  the  great 
luminary  to  which  they  are  essentially  related,  so  there  are  names  of  lesser  note 

476 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS.         chap.  iv. 


grouped  around  that  of  the  great  apostle  that  are  immortalised  by  their 
association  with  him.  Besides,  names  as  they  are  quoted  and  used  by  St.  Paul 
in  this  and  other  epistles  often  furnish  evidence  of  the  authenticity  of  Scripture 
and  undesigned  coincidences  of  the  truth  of  the  sacred  history.  In  these  verses 
there  are  some  names  preserved  to  us  which  were  lifted  into  prominence  by  the 
connection  of  the  persons  they  represented  with  the  apostle,  and  by  their 
own  eminent  piety  and  usefulness.  They  furnish  another  illustration  of  the 
truth  of  the  sacred  saying,  "  The  memory  of  the  just  is  blessed ;  but  the 
name  of  the  wicked  shall  rot."  We  have  here  a  series  of  kindly  Christian 
greetings  and  important  Christian  counsels.     Observe  : — 

I.  The  value  of  a  Christian  greeting  is  estimated  by  the  moral  character  of 
those  from  whom  it  emanates. — "  Luke,  the  beloved  physician,  and  Demas,  greet 
you"  (ver.  14).  Two  persons  are  here  mentioned  whose  individual  histories 
present  a  suggestive  contrast ;  and  it  is  observable,  by  the  way  in  which  their 
names  are  mentioned,  that  the  two  men  stood  very  differently  in  the  apostle's 
estimation. 

1.  Luke  is  the  beloved  physician — the  very  dear  and  attached  friend  of  Paul. 
He  was  his  constant  companion  in  travel,  and  stood  faithfully  by  him  in  his 
greatest  trials.  He  joined  the  apostle  at  Troas  (Acts  xvi.  10),  accompanied  him 
into  Judea,  remained  with  him  during  two  years  of  his  imprisonment  at 
Jerusalem  and  Csesarea,  and  was  no  doubt  present  at  his  trial  before  Festus  and 
Felix ;  he  went  with  him  into  Italy  when  Paul  was  sent  there  as  a  prisoner,  and 
during  his  second  and  final  imprisonment  in  Rome;  while  others  deserted  him, 
Luke  continued  his  staunch  and  faithful  friend.  In  the  last  epistle  probably  the 
apostle  ever  wrote  is  the  simple  but  pathetic  reference,  "  Only  Luke  is  with  me." 
We  can  understand,  therefore,  the  affectionate  tenderness  with  which  Luke  is 
designated  the  beloved  physician.  As  St.  Paul  was  not  a  robust  man,  but  was 
troubled  with  a  "  thorn  in  the  fiesh,"  the  presence  of  a  medical  friend  must  have 
been  of  immense  service  to  him  in  his  laborious  missionary  journeys  and  during 
his  long  imprisonment.  The  physicians  of  ancient  times  had  a  very  questionable 
reputation  for  religiousness  ;  but  in  these  modern  days  there  is  an  increasing 
number  of  medical  men  who  are  no  less  eminent  for  piety  than  for  their 
professional  skill,  and  many  and  important  are  the  opportunities  of  such  for 
doing  good  both  to  body  and  soul.  The  greetings  of  a  man  of  superlative  moral 
excellence  is  gratefully  welcomed  and  respectfully  treasured. 

2.  And  Demas/ — How  suggestive  is  the  laconic  allusion  !  There  is  no  explana- 
tion, no  qualifying  word  of  any  special  regard.  Perhaps  the  apostle  was  already 
beginning  to  suspect  him,  to  mark  the  increasing  worldliness  of  his  spirit,  and  his 
growing  indifference  to  divine  things.  About  three  years  after  this  greeting  was 
despatched  to  the  Colossians,  we  meet  with  the  melancholy  record  :  "  Demas  hath 
forsaken  me,  having  loved  this  present  world  "  (2  Tim.  iv.  10).  Alas  !  how 
seductive  and  how  fatal  are  the  allurements  of  the  world  !  The  highest  and  holiest 
are  not  invulnerable  to  its  charms.  The  most  promising  career  of  usefulness  and 
honour  has  often  been  blighted  by  its  influence.  Bitter  indeed  would  be  the 
disappointment  of  the  apostle's  heart  to  witness  one,  whom  he  had  acknowledged 
and  trusted  as  a  fellow- worker  in  the  gospel,  fall  a  victim  to  worldly  avarice,  and, 
like  Achan,  covet  the  golden  wedge  and  Babylonish  garment  of  secular  things. 
There  is  a  specially  solemn  significance  in  the  warning  of  the  beloved  disciple: 
"  Love  not  the  world,  neither  the  things  that  are  in  the  world  "  (1  John  ii.  15). 

II.  Christian  greeting  recognises  the  universal  brotherhood  of  the  Church. 
— 1.  We  learn  the  early  Christian  Churches  were  composed  of  brethren.  "  Salute 
the  brethren  which  are  in  Laodicea  "  (ver.  15).  This  recognition  of  a  common 
brotherhood  was  a  great  advance  upon  the  eclecticism  and  sharp,  prejudiced 
distinctions  of   the   times.      In  the  circle  of   the  Christian  Church   the   Jew 

477 


chap.  iv.         EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS. 


surrendered  his  Judaism,  and  the  Gentile  his  paganism,  and  became  one  in 
Christ ;  the  slave  and  the  freeman  enjoyed  the  same  spiritual  liberty,  and  the 
barbarian  was  no  longer  dreaded  as  a  monster,  but  hailed  as  a  brother.  The 
test  of  brotherhood  and  union  is  an  individual  faith  in  a  common  Saviour,  the 
sharing  of  one  common  life  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  the  assuiance  of  possessing 
one  common  Father  in  God.  It  is  only  as  we  encourage  the  brotherly  spirit  that 
we  can  ensure  union  and  permanency  in  the  Churches.  About  thirty  years 
after  this  salutation  was  sent  to  the  Laodiceans,  the  Church  in  that  city  had 
degenerated  into  a  state  of  lukewarmness  and  sterility  (Rev.  iii.  15,  16).  There 
is  need  for  united  watchfulness  and  fidelity  in  order  to  continue  "  steadfast, 
immovable,  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord." 

2.  We  learn  further  that  a  separate  assembly  of  the  brethren  constituted  a  Church. 
— "  And  Nymphas,  and  the  Church  which  is  in  his  house  "  (ver.  15).  This  was  not 
the  principal  Church  in  Laodicea,  nor  was  it  simply  a  meeting  together  of  the  family, 
but  an  assembly  of  worshippers.  ISTymphas  was  probably  a  man  of  position  and 
influence  in  the  city,  and  being  also  a  man  of  piety  he  afforded  every  opportunity 
for  the  gathering  together  of  the  brethren  for  Christian  worship  and  communion. 
There  is  little  said  in  the  New  Testament  about  Church  polity,  and  there  is  no 
ecclesiastical  organisation,  whether  Episcopal,  Presbyterian,  or  Congregational, 
that  can  claim  exclusive  divine  authority  and  sanction.  Whether  meeting  in 
large  numbers  in  the  stately  cathedral,  the  modern  tabernacle,  or  a  few  in  the 
private  dwelling-house,  a  company  of  believers  assembled  for  worship  and  mutual 
edification  constitutes  a  Church.  Thus  the  true  brotherhood  of  Christianity  is 
maintained,  irrespective  of  locality,  of  ecclesiastical  structures,  or  of  sacerdotal 
claims  and  pretensions. 

III.  The  reading  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  in  the  Church  an  important  subject 
of  apostolic  counsel. — "  And  when  this  epistle  is  read  among  you,  cause  that  it 
be  read  also  in  the  Church  of  the  Laodiceans,  and  that  ye  likewise  read  the 
epistle  from  Laodicea"  (ver.  16).  The  epistle  from  Laodicea  refers  to  a  letter 
that  St.  Paul  had  sent  to  that  city,  and  which  was  to  be  forwarded  to  Colossse 
for  perusal.  Some  think  this  was  a  letter  specifically  addressed  to  the  Laodiceans, 
and  which  is  now  lost ;  but  the  best  commentators  now  believe  that  the  epistle 
to  the  Ephesians  is  meant,  which  was,  in  fact,  a  circular  letter  addressed  to  the 
principal  Churches  in  proconsular  Asia.  Tychicus  was  obliged  to  pass  through 
Laodicea  on  his  way  to  Colossse,  and  would  leave  a  copy  of  the  Ephesian  epistle 
there  before  the  Colossian  letter  was  delivered.  Here  we  learn  that  one  im- 
portant means  of  edification  was  the  reading  of  the  inspired  letters  of  the  apostle 
in  the  assemblies  of  the  brethren.  The  public  reading  of  the  Scriptures  has 
been  an  invaluable  method  of  instruction  to  the  Church  in  all  ages  and  places, 
and  it  is  a  provision  with  which  the  Church  will  never  be  able  to  dispense.  The 
Church  which  dares  to  prohibit  the  general  perusal  of  the  Scriptures,  or  reads 
only  small  portions,  and  those  mumbled  in  a  language  not  understood  by  the 
people,  has  thrown  off  all  regard  for  apostolic  counsel  and  inflicts  an  unutterable 
injury  upon  humanity.  Shut  up  the  Bible,  and  the  Churches  will  instantly  be 
invaded  by  the  most  enfeebling  superstitions,  the  civilisation  of  the  nations  will 
be  put  centuries  behind,  and  the  widespread  ignorance  and  moral  and  social 
degradation  of  the  dark  ages  will  reappear. 

IV.  An  example  of  apostolic  counsel  concerning  fidelity  in  the  Christian 
ministry. — "  And  say  to  Archippus,  Take  heed  to  the  ministry  which  thou  hast 
received  in  the  Lord,  that  thou  fulfil  it "  (ver.  17).  It  is  probable  that  Archippus 
was  a  youthful  pastor  recently  appointed  to  the  Church  at  Laodicea.  Already 
signs  of  slackened  zeal  began  to  appear,  which  afterwards  culminated  in  the 
state  of  lukewarmness  for  which  this  Church  was  denounced  (Rev.  iii.  19).  The 
condition  of  preacher  and  people  reacts  upon  each  other ;  the  Church  takes  its 

478  '"" 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS.         chap.  iv. 


colour  from  and  communicates  its  colour  to  its  spiritual  pastor.  Hence  the 
apostle,  well  knowing  the  perils  surrounding  the  inexperienced  Archippus,  sends 
to  him  this  timely  warning  to  take  heed  to  his  ministry.     He  is  reminded  of  : — 

1.  The  direct  authority  of  the  ministry. — "The  ministry  which  thou  hast  re- 
ceived in  the  Lord."  The  commission  to  preach  the  gospel  can  come  from  no 
other  than  the  Lord,  and  can  be  properly  received  only  by  one  who  is  himself 
spiritually  in  the  Lord ;  there  must  be  not  only  gifts,  but  also  grace.  The 
minister  must  be  in  direct  and  constant  communication  with  the  Lord,  depend 
on  Him  for  help  in  doing  his  duty,  remember  he  is  accountable  to  Him,  and 
strive  to  seek  His  glory  in  preference  to  all  personal  considerations.  In  times 
of  difficulty  and  trial  it  will  sustain  the  courage  of  the  minister  to  feel  that  his 
commission  is  divine  in  its  source  and  authority. 

2.  The  implied  dangers  of  the  ministry. — "  Take  heed."  The  special  dangers 
that  threatened  the  Colossian  Church  at  that  time  have  been  distinctly  pointed 
out  in  the  epistle.  The  ministry  is  ever  encompassed  with  perils,  arising  from 
the  seductive  forms  of  error,  the  flatteries  and  frowns  of  the  world,  the  subtle 
workings  of  self -approbation,  and  the  deceitfulness  of  sin.  There  is  need  for  the 
exercise  of  a  sleepless  vigilance,  a  tireless  zeal,  and  a  faultless  circumspection. 

3.  The  imperative  personal  demands  of  the  ministry. — "  That  thou  fulfil  it." 
The  whole  truth  must  be  made  known,  and  that  with  the  utmost  clearness, 
faithfulness,  kindness,  and  completeness.  Every  energy  must  be  consecrated  to 
the  sacred  work,  and  the  aid  of  all  the  powers  of  heaven  earnestly  implored. 
No  pains  must  be  spared  in  prayer,  study,  and  self-sacrifice  to  reach  the  highest 
efficiency  and  make  "full  proof"  of  the  ministry.  Failure  here  is  lamentable 
and  irremediable. 

Lessons. — 1.  Salutations  are  valuable  when  imbued  with  the  Christian  spirit. 
2.  The  true  appreciation  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  is  shown  in  their  constant  and 
studious  perusal.  3.  The  Christian  ministry  should  be  sustained  by  practical 
sympathy  and  intelligent  co-operation. 


GERM  NOTES  OJST  THE    VERSES. 

Yer.  14.  "  Luke,  the  beloved  physi-  I.  It  is  in  harmony  with  the  usage 

cian."     Religion  and  the  Medical  Pro-  of  the  ancient  Church. 

fession.  II.  It  is  enforced  by  precept  and 

I.  The  deference  shown  to  medical  example  in  the  Scriptures  themselves, 
science.  III.  It  familiarises  the  mind  with 

II.  Benevolence  of  the  medical  pro-  the  grandest  truths. 

fession.  IV.  It  is  a  mighty  agency  in  ad- 

III.  Religious  drawbacks  in  assaults  vocating  and  moulding  national  char- 
from  materialism. — Mind  is  one  thing,  acter. 

matter  is  another.  V.  It   keeps  alive   the  enthusiasm 

1Y.    Religious    responsibilities.  —  of  the  Church  for  aggressive  enter- 

Yast   power    for    good.     Co-operation  prise. 

with  the  minister.  YI.  It  demands  the  most  laborious 

Y.  The    great    Physician. — Doctor  study    and     practice     to    render   it 

and  patient  need  Him  alike. — Homiletic  effective. 

Monthly. 

Yer.    17.  The   Christian  Ministry  a 

Yer.  16.    The  Public  Reading  of  the  Solemn  and  Responsible  Trust. 

Holy  Scriptures  an  Important  Means  of  L  It   is   divine   in   its  bestowal. — 

Church  Edification.  "  Received  in  the  Lord." 

479 


CHAP.  IV.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    COLOSSIANS. 


II.  It  is  personal  in  its  responsi-  III.  The  declaration  of  the  truth 
bility. — "  Which  thou  hast  received."  must  be  full  and  courageous. 

III.  It  involves  the  communication 

of  good  to  others. — "  Ministry."  "  Take  heed."  The  Christian  Ministry 

IV.  It  has  a  special  aspect  of  im-  is  surrounded  by  Peculiar  Perils. — A 
portance  to  the  individual  minister. —  shrewd  and  ever-wakeful  vigilance  is 
"  The  ministry."  needed— 

I.  Against  the  stealthy   encroach- 

"  That  thou  fulfil  it."     The  Christian  ments  of  error. 

Ministry  demands   Unswerving  Fidelity  II.  Against  the  pernicious  influences 

in  accomplishing  its  Lofty  Mission.  of  the  world. 

I.  Divine  truth  must  be  clearly  ap-  III.  Against  the  subtle  temptations 
prehended  and  profoundly  realised.  to  unfaithfulness. 

II.  The  whole  truth  must  be  declared. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF.  VERSE   18. 

Words  of  Farewell. 

Last  words  have  in  them  a  namel^es  touch  of  pathos.  They  linger  in  the 
memory  as  a  loved  familiar  presence,  they  soothe  life's  sorrows,  and  exert  upon 
the  soul  a  strange  and  irresistible  fascination.  As  the  years  rush  by,  how 
rich  in  meaning  do  the  words  that  have  fallen  from  dying  lips  become,  as 
when  Caesar  said  sadly,  "  And  thou,  Brutus  ! " ;  or  when  John  Quincy  Adams 
said,  "  This  is  the  last  of  earth  " ;  or  Mirabeau's  frantic  cry  for  music,  after  a 
life  of  discord  ;  or  George  Washington's  calm  statement,  "It  is  well " ;  or 
Wesley's  triumphant  utterance,  "  The  best  of  all  is,  God  is  with  us."  And  these 
closing  words  of  the  high-souled  apostle  written  from  his  Roman  prison,  in 
prospect  of  threatened  death,  carry  with  them  a  significance  and  tenderness 
which  will  be  felt  wherever  this  epistle  is  read.  In  these  words  we  have  a 
personally  inscribed  salutation,  a  touching  reminder,  and  a  brief  benediction. 

I.  A  personally  inscribed  salutation. — "  The  salutation  by  the  hand  of  mo 
Paul."  The  rest  of  the  epistle  was  dictated  by  the  apostle  to  an  amanuensis, 
who,  in  this  case,  was  probably  Timothy.  Paul  adds  his  own  personal  saluta- 
tion, not  only  as  an  expression  of  his  anxious  love,  but  also  as  a  mark  of  the 
authenticity  of  the  document,  and  of  his  unqualified  approval  of  its  contents. 
It  would  surely  be  a  scene  worthy  of  the  pencil  of  genius  to  portray  the  noble 
prisoner,  whose  right  hand  was  linked  to  the  left  of  his  military  gaoler,  tracing 
with  tremulous  fingers  the  final  words  to  those  for  whose  sake  he  was  in  bonds ! 
How  would  the  hand-writing  of  such  a  man  be  prized  and  venerated,  and  with 
what  holy  eagerness  would  his  words  be  read  and  pondered  ! 

II.  A  touching  reminder. — "Remember  my  bonds."  The  apostle  was  in 
prison,  not  for  any  offence  against  the  laws  of  God  or  man,  but  for  the  sake  of 
the  gospel  he  loved  to  preach,  and  which  had  wrought  so  marvellous  a  change  in 
the  lives  of  those  to  whom  he  wrote.  His  bonds  bore  irrefragable  testimony 
to  the  truth  he  was  called  to  proclaim,  and  to  his  unalterable  determination 
to  insist  upon  the  rights  and  privileges  of  the  Gentiles,  on  whose  behalf  he 
suffered.  He  wished  to  be  remembered  in  prayer,  that  he  might  be  sustained 
in  his  imprisonment,  and  that  he  might  be  speedily  delivered  from  it,  so  that  he 
might  preach  the  glorious  news  of  spiritual  liberty  to  the  benighted  and  fettered 
sons  of  men.  "  Remember  my  bonds."  These  words  seem  to  indicate  that  the 
illustrious  prisoner  was  more  concerned  to  exhibit  a  spirit  and  deportment 
befitting  the  gospel  than  to  be  released  from  his  incarceration.  The  Church  of 
Christ  in  all  ages  has  had  abundant  reason  to  remember  with  gratitude  and 

480 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    COLOSSIANS.        chap.  iv. 


praise  the  bonds  of  the  great  apostle,  not  only  for  the  stimulating  example  of 
holy  patience  and  dignified  submission  displayed  under  trying  circumstances,  but 
for  the  unspeakably  precious  literary  treasures  they  enabled  him  to  bequeath  to 
the  world.  Bishop  Wordsworth  has  well  said  :  "  The  fact  that  this  epistle  was 
written  by  Paul  in  this  state  of  durance  and  restraint,  and  yet  designed  to 
minister  comfort  to  others,  and  that  it  has  never  ceased  to  cheer  the  Church  of 
Christ,  is  certainly  one  which  is  worthy  of  everlasting  remembrance."  In  the 
prayer  for  "  all  prisoners  and  captives "  special  reference  should  be  made  to 
those  who  are  now  suffering  for  the  truth.  The  offence  of  the  cross  has  not  yet 
ceased.  We  most  practically  remember  the  imprisoned  when  we  supply  their 
wants  and  assuage  their  sufferings. 

III.  A  brief  benediction. — "  Grace  be  with  you.  Amen."  The  epistle  begins 
and  ends  with  blessing ;  and  between  these  two  extremes  lies  a  magnificent  body 
of  truth  which  has  dispensed  blessings  to  thousands  and  is  destined  to  bless 
thousands  more.  The  benediction  is  short,  but  it  is  instinct  with  fervent  life 
and  laden  with  the  unutterable  wealth  of  divine  beneficence.  Grace  is  inclusive 
of  all  the  good  God  can  bestow  or  man  receive.  Grace  is  what  all  need,  what 
none  can  merit,  and  what  God  alone  can  give.  To  possess  the  grace  of  God  is  to 
be  rich  indeed  ;  without  it  "  'Tis  misery  all,  and  woe."  Grace  kindles  the  lamp 
of  hope  amidst  the  darkest  experiences  of  life,  supplies  the  clue  which  unravels 
the  most  tangled  mysteries,  presses  the  nectar  of  consolation  into  the  bitterest 
cup,  implants  in  the  soul  its  holiest  motives  and  opens  up  its  noblest  career, 
strengthens  the  dying  saint  when  he  traverses  the  lonely  borderland  of  the 
unknown,  and  tunes  and  perpetuates  the  celestial  harmonies  of  the  everlasting 
song. 

Lessons. — 1.  Praise  God  for  a  well-authenticated  Bible.  2.  Praise  God  for  the 
teachings  of  a  suffering  life.     3.  Praise  God  for  His  boundless  grace. 


il  431 


THE    FIRST   EPISTLE 

TO    THE    THESSALONIANS. 


INTEODUCTION. 

Thessalonica  and  its  Church. — Most  of  the  Churches  of  the  New  Testament 
belonged  to  cities  which,  if  they  have  not  dropped  out  of  existence  altogether, 
are  scarcely  recognisable  to-day.  Thessalonica  exists  as  a  place  of  considerable 
commercial  importance,  with  a  population  of  70,000,  under  the  shortened 
form  of  "  Saloniki."  It  is  situated  at  the  head  of  the  Thermaic  Gulf,  so 
called  from  the  ancient  name  of  the  town  which  rises  like  an  amphitheatre 
above  its  blue  waters.  Therma  is  the  name  by  which  the  town  comes  into 
history,  the  warm  mineral  springs  of  the  neighbourhood  originating  the 
appropriate  designation.  Cassander,  son-in-law  of  Philip  of  Macedon,  gave  to 
the  city  the  name  of  his  wife,  "  Thessalonica."  Its  position  brought  commerce 
both  by  sea  and  land,  for,  in  addition  to  its  natural  harbour,  the  Via 
Egnatia,  like  a  great  artery,  drove  its  stream  of  traffic  through  the  town. 
Trade  brought  riches,  and  riches  luxurious  living  and  licentiousness.  But  if 
sin  abounded,  so  did  the  grace  which  sent  the  heralds  of  deliverance  from  sin 
in  the  persons  of  St.  Paul  and  Silas,  fresh  from  their  terrible  beating  and  the 
dungeon  of  Philippi,  and  Timothy,,  the  ever-valued  friend  of  St.  Paul.  Jews  were 
in  Thessalonica  in  greater  force  than  in  Philippi;  and  St.  Paul,  perhaps  not 
with  any  great  hope  of  success  amongst  the  adherents  of  the  religion  in  which  he 
had  been  trained,  but  according  to  his  constant  rule,  went  first  to  the  synagogue, 
hoping  that,  as  elsewhere,  devout  souls  not  content  with  the  materialism  and 
atheism  of  their  day  might  be  amongst  those  who  were  drawn  towards  the 
faith  of  Israel.  So  at  least  it  proved,  and  their  acceptance  of  the  message  of 
the  gospel  was  the  signal  for  the  outbreak  of  Jewish  hatred  which  set  on  the 
canaille  of  the  city  with  a  cry  of  revolution  and  high  treason.  Amidst  such 
birth-throes  the  second  Church  in  Europe  came  into  being.  St.  Paul's  con- 
tinuance in  the  city  might  only  have  provoked  murder,  so,  leaving  the  infant 
Church  to  one  who  would  "  naturally  care  for  "  it,  he  made  his  way  to  Beroea. 

483 


introduction.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    THESSALONIANS. 

Occasion  and  design  of  the  epistle. — With  eager  impatience  the  apostle 
would  wait  for  the  messenger  with  tidings  of  the  Macedonian  Churches.  The 
writer  of  the  Proverbs  likened  "  good  news  from  a  far  country "  to  "  cold 
waters  to  a  thirsty  soul  °  ;  so  St.  Paul  says  to  these  Thessalonians  :  "  Now  when 
Timothy  came  from  you  unto  us,  and  brought  us  good  tidings  of  your  faith 
and  charity,  .  .  .  we  were  comforted  over  you  in  all  our  affliction  and  distress 
by  your  faith  :  for  now  we  live,  if  ye  stand  fast  in  the  Lord  "  (1  Thess.  iii.  6-8). 
Timothy  had  brought  word  of  their  fidelity ;  but  he  had  also  to  inform  the 
apostle  of  the  persecutions  they  had  to  endure,  and  also  of  the  troubled  minds  of 
some  of  the  Christian  brotherhood  over  the  condition  of  their  dead,  and  their 
relationship  to  the  Lord  whom  they  daily  expected. 

So  St.  Paul  sends  them  word  by  this  first  letter  of  his  earnest  longing  to  see 
them  again,  and  of  how  he  had  often  purposed  to  do  so,  but  had  been  thwarted. 
Perhaps  there  are  references  in  the  epistle  to  aspersions  on  the  character  of  Paul  • 
and  in  other  ways  the  epistle  is  meant  to  do  what  Paul,  now  that  his  missionary 
field  had  become  so  extended,  could  not  do  in  person. 

Contents  of  the  Epistle. 

i.         1.     Salutation. 
2 — 10.     Thanksgiving  for  reception  and  diffusion  of  the  gospel, 
ii.  1 — 12.     Appeal  to  their  knowledge  of  what  Paul's  ministry  had  been. 
1 3 — 1 6.     Thanksgiving  for  fidelity  under  the  strain  of  Jewish  hostility. 
17 — iii.  13.     Baffled  purposes  resulting  in  the  despatch  of  Timothy,  and  the 

outburst  of  joy  for  the  good  news  with  which  he  returned, 
iv.  1 — 12.     Warning  against  lustful  injustice,  and  exhortation  to  a  further 

development  of  brotherly  love. 
13 — v.  11.     The  Second  Advent  in  its  relation  to  those  who  already  slept. 
12 — 24.     Ethics  of  Church -life  and  personal  life. 
25 — 28.     Conclusion. 


484 


CHAPTER   I. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Paul,  and  Sylvanus,  and  Timotheus. — As  to  Paul,  it  may  be  noted  that  he  does  not 
mention  his  office.  It  was  largely  owing  to  the  aspersions  of  others  that  he  came,  later,  to 
magnify  his  office.  Silvanus  is  the  "  fellow-helper"  and  fellow-sufferer  of  the  apostle,  better 
known  to  New  Testament  readers  by  the  shortened  form  of  his  name — Silas.  That  he  was  a 
Jew  appears  from  Acts  xv.,  but,  like  Paul,  able  to  claim  the  privilege  of  Roman  citizenship 
(Acts  xvi.).  Timotheus  is  the  valuable  and  dear  companion  of  St.  Paul.  Twelve  or  fourteen 
years  later  he  is  said  to  be  still  young  (1  Tim.  iv.  12).  He,  too,  is  only  partly  a  Jew 
(Acts  xvi.  3).  Grace  be  unto  you,  and  peace. — The  men  who  are  by  birth  and  training  divided 
between  Jew  and  Gentile,  salute  both.  It  is  not  less  true  of  the  gospel  than  the  law  that  it 
speaks  the  language  of  the  children  of  men.  All  that  grace  could  mean  to  the  Greek,  or 
peace  to  the  Hebrew,  met  in  Him  whose  title  was  written  above  the  cross  in  Hebrew  and 
Greek  and  Latin. 

Ver.  3.  Work  of  faith,  and  labour  of  love,  and  patience  of  hope. — The  famous  three 
sister-graces  familiar  to  us  from  St.  Paul's  other  letters.  As  Bengel  says,  they  are  Summa 
Christianismi.  St.  James,  one  thinks,  would  have  liked  the  expression,  "work  of  faith" 
(Jas.  ii.  14-26).  But  if  faith  works,  love  cannot  be  outdone  (1  Cor.  xiii.  13),  and  toils  with 
strenuous  endeavour;  whilst  hope — a  faculty  flighty  enough  with  some — here  patiently 
endures,  "  pressing  on  and  bearing  up." 

Ver.  4.  Your  election. — God  is  said  to  pick  out,  not  for  any  inherent  qualities,  certain 
persons  for  purposes  of  His  own.  The  same  idea  is  in  the  word  "  saints,"  as  those  whom  God 
has  separated  from  a  godless  world  and  made  them  dear  to  Himself. 

Ver.  5.  Our  gospel. — The  good  news  which  we  proclaimed ;  so  when  St.  Paul  in  Rom.  ii.  16 
calls  it  "my  gospel."  In  word  ...  in  power. — The  antithesis  is  sometimes  between  the  word 
or  declaration  and  the  reality  ;  here  perhaps  we  have  an  advance  on  that.  Not  only  was  it 
a  word  the  contents  of  which  were  really  true,  but  efficacious  too.  In  much  assurance. — 
R.V.  margin,  "in  much  fulness."  "The  power  is  in  the  gospel  preached,  the  fulfilment  in  the 
hearers,  and  the  Holy  Sp>irit  above  and  within  them  inspires  both  "  (Fi?idlay). 

Ver.  6.  Followers  of  us  and  of  the  Lord. — R.V.  "  imitators."  St.  Paul  begs  his  Corinthian 
readers  to  imitate  him,  even  as  he  imitates  Christ.  The  same  thought  is  implied  here  :  We 
are  walking  after  Christ ;  walk  after  us,  and  you  will  follow  Him.  With  joy  of  the  Holy 
Ghost. — Not  only  was  the  word  preached  "  in  the  Holy  Ghost "  (ver.  5),  but  it  was  eagerly 
welcomed  by  hearts  made  ready  by  the  Holy  Ghost — as  St.  Paul  said  to  the  Corinthians, 
"  So  we  preach,  so  ye  believed/' 

Ver.  7.  So  that  ye  were  ensamples. — R.V.  follows  the  singular.  The  original  word  is 
that  from  which  we  get  our  "type."  The  image  left  on  a  coin  by  stamping  is  a  type. 
Children  are  said  to  be  types  of  their  parents.  So  these  Thessalonians  were  clearly  stamped 
as  children  of  God. 

Ver.  8.  For  from  you  sounded  out  the  word  of  the  Lord. — The  word  did  not  originate 
amongst  the  Thessalonians.  They  had  but  taken  up  the  sound  and  sent  it  ringing  on  to 
others  in  the  regions  farther  removed.  They  had  echoed  out  the  word,  says  St.  Paul.  In 
every  place. — Or  as  we  say,  "  Everybody  is  talking  about  the  matter." 

Ver.  9.  What  manner  of  entering  in. — In  Acts  xvii.  we  have  an  account  of  how  the  Jews 
instigated  men  ever  ready  for  a  brawl  to  bring  a  charge  of  high  treason — the  most  likely  way 
of  giving  the  quietus  to  the  disturbers  of  ancient  traditions,  Paul  and  Silas.  To  serve  the 
living  and  true  God. — The  Thessalonians  had  not  been  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  fear 
that  they  might  lead  lives  irresponsible.     "  Get  a  new  master,"  then  "  be  a  new  man." 

Ver.  10.  And  to  wait  for  His  Son.— The  compound  word  for  wait  is  only  found  here  in  the 
New  Testament.  The  idea  may  be  compared  with,  our  Lord's  figure  of  the  bondservants 
waiting  with  lights  and  ready  for  service  on  their  Lord's  return  (Luke  xii.  35-40).  Jesus, 
which  delivered  us  from  the  wrath  to  come. — R.V.  "delivereth."  The  wrath  to  come 
"revealed  from  heaven  against  all  ungodliness  and  unrighteousness  of  men"  (Rom.  i.  18)  is 
the  penalty  threatened  against  sin  persisted  in. 

485 


chap.  I.     EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I    THESSALONIANS. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF   VERSE   1. 

Phases  of  Apostolic  Greeting. 

There  is  an  interest  about  this  epistle  as  the  first  in  the  magnificent  series 
of  inspired  writings  which  bear  the  name  of  Paul.  This  was  "  the  beginning  of 
his  strength,  the  excellency  of  dignity  and  power."  The  labours  of  the  apostle 
and  his  co-helpers  in  the  enterprising  and  populous  city  of  Thessalonica,  not- 
withstanding the  angriest  opposition,  were  crowned  with  success.  The  stern 
prejudice  of  the  Jew  was  assailed  and  conquered,  the  subtle  philosophising  of 
the  Grecian  tracked  and  exposed.  The  truth  was  eagerly  embraced ;  and  as 
sunbeams  streaming  through  mist  render  it  transparent,  so  did  the  light  of  the 
gospel  bring  out  in  clearness  and  beauty  the  character  of  the  Thessalonian 
citizens,  which  had  been  hitherto  shrouded  in  the  dark  shadows  of  superstition. 

I.  This  greeting  is  harmonious  in  its  outflow. — Paul,  though  the  only  apostle 
of  the  three,  did  not  in  this  instance  assume  the  title  or  display  any  superiority 
either  of  office  or  power.  Silvan  us  and  Timotheus  had  been  owned  of  God, 
equally  with  himself,  in  planting  the  Thessalonian  Church,  and  were  held  in 
high  esteem  among  the  converts.  Each  man  had  his  distinctive  individuality, 
varied  talents,  and  special  mode  of  working ;  but  there  was  an  emphatic  'unity 
of  purpose  in  bringing  about  results.  They  rejoiced  together  in  witnessing  the 
inception,  confirmation,  and  prosperity  of  the  Church,  and  when  absent  united 
in  sending  a  fervent,  harmonious  greeting.  This  harmony  of  feeling  is  traceable 
throughout  both  epistles  in  the  prevalent  use  of  the  first  person  plural.  The 
association  of  Silvanus  and  Timotheus  with  the  apostle  in, this  greeting  also 
indicated  their  perfect  accord  with  him  in  the  divine  character  of  the  doctrines 
he  declared.  As  men  dowered  with  the  miraculous  faculty  of  spiritual  discern- 
ment, they  could  testify  that  everything  contained  in  the  epistle  was  dictated  by 
the  Spirit  of  God  and  worthy  of  universal  evidence.  Not  that  the  personal 
peculiarities  of  any  man  give  additional  value  to  the  doctrine.  Truth  is  vaster 
than  the  individual,  whatever  gifts  he  possesses  or  lacks.  The  water  of  life  is 
as  sweet  and  refreshing  whether  sipped  from  the  rudest  earthen  vessel  or  from 
the  goblet  of  richly  embossed  gold.  What  a  suggestive  lesson  of  confidence  and 
unity  was  taught  the  Thessalonians  by  the  harmonious  example  of  their  teachers  ! 

II.  This  greeting  recognises  the  Church's  sublime  origin. — It  is  addressed 
"  unto  the  Church  which  is  in  God  the  Father  and  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 

1 .  The  Church  is  divinely  founded. — The  preposition  "  in  "  denotes  the  most 
intimate  union  with  God,  and  is  of  similar  significance  as  in  the  comprehensive 
prayer  of  Jesus  :  "  As  Thou,  Father,  art  in  Me,  and  I  in  Thee,  that  they  also  may 
be  one  in  Us."  The  Church  rests,  not  on  any  sacerdotal  authority  or  human 
organisation,  though  many  have  laboured  thus  to  narrow  its  limits  and  define 
its  character ;  it  depends  for  its  origin,  life,  and  perpetuity  on  union  with  the 
Deity.  It  is  based  on  the  divine  love,  fostered  by  the  divine  Spirit,  shielded  by 
Omnipotence,  and  illumined  and  adorned  by  the  divine  glory.  It  exists  for  purely 
spiritual  purposes,  is  the  depositary  of  the  revealed  word,  the  channel  of  divine 
communication  to  man,  the  sanctuary  of  salvation. 

2.  The  Church  is  divinely  sustained. — Founded  in  God,  it  is  every  moment 
sustained  by  Him.  Thus  the  Church  survives  the  mightiest  opposition,  the  fret 
and  wear  of  perpetual  change.  It  is  not  wedded  to  any  locality  under  heaven. 
Places  once  famous  for  the  simplicity  and  power  of  their  Church-life  have  become 
notoriously  vile  or  sunk  into  utter  obscurity.  Bethel,  once  bearing  the  hallowed 
name  House  of  God,  under  the  idolatrous  rule  of  Jeroboam  became  corrupted  into 
Bethhaven,  House  of  Iniquity.  Jerusalem,  the  praise  of  the  whole  earth,  was 
once  the  chosen  habitation  of  Jehovah ;  now  it  is  a  heap  of  ruins,  its  temple  and 

486 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    THESSALONIANS.    chap.  i. 


worship  destroyed,  and  its  people  scattered,  without  king,  prophet,  or  leader. 
The  light  that  shone  so  full  and  clear  from  the  seven  celebrated  Asiatic  Churches 
grew  dim  and  went  out,  and  that  region  is  now  wrapped  in  the  darkness  of 
idolatry.  And  Thessalonica,  renowned  as  a  pattern  of  Christian  purity  and  zeal, 
now  languishes  under  its  modern  name  of  Saloniki,  a  victim  of  Turkish  despotism, 
and  professing  a  spurious  religion  the  first  founders  of  the  Church  there,  could 
they  revisit  the  spot,  would  certainly  repudiate.  But  the  true  Church  lives, 
grows,  and  triumphs. 

III.  This  greeting  supplicates  the  bestowal  of  the  highest  blessings. — 
1.  Grace.  The  source  of  all  temporal  good — life,  health,  sustenance,  prosperity, 
enjoyment ;  and  of  all  spiritual  benefits — pardon  for  the  guilty,  rest  for  the 
troubled  spirit,  guidance  for  the  doubting  and  perplexed,  strength  for  the  feeble, 
deliverance  for  the  tempted,  purity  for  the  polluted,  victory  and  felicity  for  the 
faithful.  The  generosity  of  God  knows  no  stint.  A  certain  monarch  once  threw 
open  his  parks  and  gardens  to  the  public  during  the  summer  months.  The 
royal  gardener,  finding  it  troublesome,  complained  to  his  Majesty  that  the 
visitors  plucked  the  flowers.  "  What,"  said  the  kind-hearted  king,  "  are  my 
people  fond  of  flowers  1  Then  plant  some  more  !  "  So  our  heavenly  King  with 
lavish  hand  scatters  on  our  daily  path  the  flowers  of  blessing,  and  as  fast  as  we 
can  gather  them,  in  spite  of  the  grudging,  churlish  world,  more  are  supplied. 

2.  Peace. — A  blessing  inclusive  of  all  the  happiness  resulting  from  a  participa- 
tion in  the  divine  favour.  Peace  with  God,  with  whom  sin  has  placed  us  in 
antagonism,  and  to  whom  we  are  reconciled  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  hath  "  abolished 
in  His  flesh  the  enmity,  so  making  peace."  Peace  of  conscience,  a  personal  bless- 
ing conferred  on  him  who  believes  in  Jesus.  Peace  one  with  another — peace  in 
the  Church.  In  the  concluding  counsels  of  this  epistle  the  writer  impressively 
insists,  "  Be  at  peace  among  yourselves."  The  value  of  this  blessing  to  any 
Christian  community  cannot  be  exaggerated.  A  single  false  semitone  converts 
the  most  exquisite  music  into  discord. 

3.  The  source  of  all  the  blessings  desired. — "  From  God  our  Father  and  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  The  Jew  in  his  most  generous  greeting  could  only  say, 
"  God  be  gracious  unto  you,  and  remember  His  covenant "  ;  but  the  Christian 
"  honours  the  Son  even  as  he  honours  the  Father."  The  Father's  love  and  the 
Son's  work  are  the  sole  source  and  cause  of  every  Christian  blessing. 

Lessons. — 1.  Lean*n  the  freeness  and  fulness  of  the  gospel.  It  contains  and  offers 
all  the  blessings  that  can  enrich  and  ennoble  man.  It  needs  but  the  willing 
heart  to  make  them  his  own.  He  may  gather  wisdom  from  the  Eastern  proverb, 
and  in  a  higher  sense  than  first  intended,  "  Hold  all  the  skirts  of  thy  mantle 
extended  when  heaven  is  raining  gold." 

2.  Learn  the  spirit  we  should  cultivate  towards  others. — A  spirit  of  genuine 
Christian  benevolence  and  sympathy.  We  can  supplicate  for  others  no  higher 
good  than  grace  and  peace. 


GERM  NOTE  ON  THE   VERSE. 

Apostolic  Introduction  to  the  Epistle.  II.  The  persons  addressed  are  in- 

I.  The  persons  sending   are  men-  troduced  and  described. — 1.  The  epistle 

tioned. — "  Paul,    Silvanus,   and  Timo-  vms    addressed    to    believers.      2.    The 

theus."     1.  Paul  is  not  here  called  an  Church   is  presented  in  an  interesting 

apostle,    because    his     apostleship    was  point   of  view    (John   xvii.    20).     The 

granted.      2.  Silvanus  and    Timotheus  Father  and  the    Mediator  are  one  in 

had  assisted  in  planting  and  watering  redemption  ;  into  this  union  the  Church 

this  Church.  is  received.     1.    The   blessi?igs   desired 

487 


chap.  I.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   THESSALONIANS. 


are  grace  and  peace.     Sovereign  mercy  traced    to    their   proper  source.      The 

and  favour  and  reconciliation.   2.  These  Father — the   Godhead;  the   Son — all 

are  mentioned  in  their  proper  order  of  fulness. — Stewart, 
time,  of  cause  and  effect.     3.  These  are 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  2—4. 

Ministerial  Thanksgiving. 

Gratitude  for  the  healthy,  flourishing  state  of  the  Thessalonian  Church  is  a 
marked  feature  in  both  epistles,  and  is  frequently  expressed.  The  apostle  left 
the  young  converts  in  a  critical  condition,  and  when  he  heard  from  Timothy  a 
favourable  account  of  their  steadfastness  and  growth  in  grace,  like  a  true  minister 
of  Christ  he  gave  God  thanks. 

I.  Ministerial  thanksgiving  is  expansive  in  its  character. — "  We  give  thanks 
always  for  you  all  "  (ver.  2).  It  is  our  duty,  and  acceptable  to  God,  to  be  grateful 
for  personal  benefits ;  but  it  displays  a  broader,  nobler  generosity  when  we  express 
thanksgiving  on  behalf  of  others.  It  is  Christ-like  :  He  thanked  God  the  Father 
for  revealing  the  things  of  His  kingdom  unto  babes.  The  apostle  thanked 
God:— 

1.  Because  of  their  work  of  faith. — "  Remembering  without  ceasing  your  work  of 
faith  "  (ver.  3).  Faith  is  itself  a  work.  It  is  the  eye  and  hand  of  the  soul,  by  which 
the  sinner  sees  and  lays  hold  on  Christ  for  salvation.  Man  meets  with  opposi- 
tion in  its  exercise ;  he  has  to  fight  against  the  faith-stifling  power  of  sin  in  himself 
and  in  the  world.  Faith  is  also  the  cause  of  work.  It  is  the  propelling  and 
sustaining  motive  in  all  Christian  toil.      "  Faith  without  works  is  dead." 

2.  Because  of  their  labour  of  love. — The  strength  of  love  is  tested  by  its  labour ; 
we  show  our  love  to  Christ  by  what  we  do  for  Him.  Love  intensifies  every 
faculty,  moves  to  benevolent  exertion,  and  makes  even  drudgery  an  enjoyment. 
Love  leads  us  to  attempt  work  from  which  we  would  once  have  shrunk  in 
dismay. 

3.  Because  of  their  patient  hope. — Their  hope  of  salvation  in  Christ  was 
severely  tried  by  affliction,  persecutions,  and  numberless  temptations,  but  was 
not  quenched.  It  is  hard  to  hope  on  in  the  midst  of  discouragement.  It  was  so 
with  Joseph  in  prison,  with  David  in  the  mountains  of  Judah,  with  the  Jews  in 
Chaldea.  But  the  grace  of  patience  gives  constancy  and  perseverance  to  our 
hope.  The  apostle  rejoiced  in  the  marked  sincerity  of  their  faith,  love,  and  hope, 
which  he  acknowledged  to  be  "  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  sight  of  God  and 
our  Father."  These  virtues  are  derived  alone  from  Christ,  and  their  exercise 
God  witnesses  and  approves.  Things  are  in  reality  what  they  are  in  God's  sight. 
His  estimate  is  infallible. 

4.  Because  assured  of  their  election. — "  Knowing,  brethren  beloved  of  God,  your 
election  "  (ver.  4).  St.  Paul  here  means  only  to  show  how  he,  from  the  way  in 
which  the  Spirit  operated  in  him  at  a  certain  place,  drew  a  conclusion  as  to  the 
disposition  of  the  persons  there.  Where  it  manifested  itself  powerfully,  argued 
he,  there  must  be  elect ;  where  the  contrary  was  the  case,  he  concluded  the 
contrary  (Olshausen).  Election  is  the  judgment  of  divine  grace,  exempting  in 
Christ  from  the  common  destruction  of  men  those  who  accept  their  calling  by 
faith.  Every  one  who  is  called  is  elected  from  the  first  moment  of  his  faith, 
and  so  long  as  he  continues  in  his  calling  and  faith  he  continues  to  be  elected  ;  if 
at  any  time  he  loses  calling  and  faith  he  ceases  to  be  elected  (Bengel).  Observe 
the  constancy  of  this  thanksgiving  spirit — "  We  give  thanks  always  for  you  all." 
As  they  remembered  without  ceasing  the  genuine  evidences  of  their  conversion, 
so  did  they  assiduously  thank  God.  There  is  always  something  to  thank  God  for 
if  we  will  but  see  it. 

488 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.    THESSALONIANS.     chap.  i. 


II.  Ministerial  thanksgiving  evokes  a  spirit  of  practical  devotion. — "  Making 
mention  of  you  in  our  prayers  "  (ver.  2).  The  interest  in  his  converts  of  the  suc- 
cessful worker  is  keenly  aroused  ;  he  is  anxious  the  work  should  he  permanent, 
and  resorts  to  prayer  as  the  effectual  means.  Prayer  for  others  benefits  the 
suppliant.  When  the  Church  prayed,  not  only  was  Peter  liberated  from  prison, 
but  the  faith  of  the  members  was  emboldened.  Gratitude  is  ever  a  powerful 
incentive  to  prayer.  It  penetrates  the  soul  with  a  conscious  dependence  on  God, 
and  prompts  the  cry  for  necessary  help.  There  is  no  true  prayer  without 
thanksgiving. 

III.  Ministerial  thanksgiving  is  rendered  to  the  great  Giver  of  all  good. — 
«  We  giVe  thanks  to  God  "  (ver.  2).  God  is  the  Author  of  true  success.  In  vain 
we  labour  where  His  blessing  is  withheld.  Paul  was  not  equally  successful  in 
other  places  as  in  Thessalonica.  In  Damascus,  where  he  first  bore  testimony 
for  Christ,  the  governor'  under  King  Aretas  planned  his  capture,  and  he  but 
narrowly  escaped.  At  Lystra  the  apostle  was  violently  stoned  and  dragged  out 
of  the  town  as  one  dead.  But  at  Thessalonica,  notwithstanding  opposition,  the 
gospel  laid  firm  hold  of  the  hearts  of  men,  and  believers  were  multiplied.  The 
highest  kind  of  success  in  spiritual  work  must  ever  come  from  above.  Like  Paul, 
we  should  be  careful  constantly  to  acknowledge  and  thank  God  as  the  active 
source  of  all  prosperity. 

Lessons. — 1.  There  is  much  in  the  work  of  the  minister  to  test  his  patience  and 
faith.  2.  The  true  minister  gratefully  traces  all  success  directly  to  God.  3.  A 
thankful  spirit  prompts  the  minister  to  increased  Christian  enterprise. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Ver.  2.  Thanksgiving  and  Prayer.  work.     2.  Love  is  to  labour.     3.  Hope 

1.  The  apostle  had  the  burden  of     is  to  endure. 

all  the  Churches  and  their  individual  II.  All  active    goodness   must    be 

members.  rooted  in  some  inward  grace. — 1.  The 

II.  The  effect  of  the  remembrance  root  of  work  is  faith.     2.  The  spring 

on  himself. — 1.  He  gives  thanks.     They  of  labour   is   in   love.     3.   We  need  to 

were   the   seals   of    his   ministry,    the  refresh  ourselves  by  a  perpetual  onward 

recipients   of   the   grace    of   God,    the  glance,  a  confident  anticipation  of  the 

earnest  of  a  more  abundant  harvest.  coming     triumph.  —  Local     Preacher's 

2.  He  prays. — They   had   not   fully  Treasury. 
attained.    They  were  in  danger.    None 

trusts  less  to  human  means  than  the  Ver.  4.  Election  of  God. 

most  richly  qualified. — Stewart.  I.  There  is  an  eternal  election. 

II.  Which  comes  out  in  the  election 

Yer.  3.  Grace  and  Good  Works.  made  in  time. 

I.  All  inward  graces  ought  to  bloom  III.  Let  us  rejoice  in  it,  for  apart 
into  active  goodness. — 1.  Faith  is  to     from  it  none  would  be  saved. — Stewart. 

MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF   VERSE  5. 

The  Gospel  in  Word  and  in  Power. 

You  have  passed  through  a  bleak,  barren  moorland,  where  the  soil  seemed 
sown  with  stones  and  disfigured  with  stumps  of  trees,  and  the  only  signs  of 
vegetable  life  were  scattered  patches  of  heather  and  flowerless  lichen.  After  a 
while,  you  have  again  traversed  the  same  region,  and  observed  fields  of  grain 
ripening  for  the  harvest,  and  budding  saplings  giving  promise  of  the  future 
forest.     Whence  this  transformation  ?     The  cultivator  has  been  at  work.     Not 

489 


chap.  I.    EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    THESSALONIANS. 


less  apparent  was  the  change  effected  in  Thessalonica  by  the  diligent  toil  and 
faithful  preaching  of  the  apostles.  We  have  here  two  prominent  features  in  the 
successful  declaration  of  the  gospel. 

I.  The  gospel  in  word. — "  Our  gospel  came  unto  you  in  word."  In  the  history 
of  the  introduction  of  the  gospel  into  Thessalonica  (Acts  xvii.)  we  learn  the 
leading  themes  of  apostolic  preaching.  "  Paul  .  .  .  reasoned  with  them  out  of  the 
Scriptures,  opening  and  alleging,  that  Christ  must  needs  have  suffered,  and  risen 
again  from  the  dead ;  and  that  this  Jesus,  whom  I  preach  unto  you,  is  Christ " 
(vers.  2,  3).  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  the  inspired  apostle  grounded  his  discourse 
on  the  Holy  Scriptures.  Even  he  did  not  feel  himself  free  from  their  sacred 
bonds.     The  apostle's  preaching  embraced  three  leading  topics  : — 

1.  He  demonstrates  that  the  promised  Messiah  was  to  be  a  suffering  Messiah. — 
The  mind  of  the  Jewish  people  was  so  dazed  with  the  splendid  prophecies  of  the 
regal  magnificence  and  dominion  of  Jesus,  that  they  overlooked  the  painful  steps 
by  which  alone  He  was  to  climb  to  this  imperial  greatness :  the  steps  of  suffering 
that  bore  melancholy  evidence  of  the  load  of  anguish  under  which  the  world's 
Redeemer  staggered — steps  crimsoned  with  the  blood  of  the  sacred  victim.  Out 
of  their  Scriptures  he  proved  that  the  only  Messiah  referred  to  there  was  to  be  a 
"  Man  of  sorrows." 

2.  He  demonstrates  that  the  Messiah  who  was  thus  to  suffer  and  die  was  to  rise 
again. — This  declared  the  divine  dignity  of  His  person,  and  was  the  pledge  of  the 
future  success  and  eternal  stability  of  His  redeeming  work. 

3.  He  insisted  that  the  Jesus  who  thus  suffered,  died,  and  rose  again  was  none 
other  than  the  identical  Messiah  promised  in  their  Scriptures. — The  grand  topic  of 
apostolic  preaching  must  be  the  staple  theme  of  the  pulpit  to-day — Jesus  Christ  : 
Christ  suffering,  Christ  crucified,  Christ  risen,  Christ  regnant  and  triumphant}. 
When  John  Huss  was  in  prison  at  Constance  for  the  gospel's  sake,  he  dreamt 
that  his  chapel  at  Prague  was  broken  into  and  all  the  pictures  of  Christ  on  the 
walls  destroyed.  But  immediately  he  beheld  several  painters  in  the  chapel,  who 
drew  a  greater  number  of  pictures,  and  more  exquisitely  beautiful  than  those 
that  had  perished.  While  gazing  on  these  with  rapture,  the  sanctuary  suddenly 
filled  with  his  beloved  congregation,  and  the  painters,  addressing  them,  said, 
"  Now,  let  the  bishops  and  priests  come  and  destroy  these  pictures  ! "  The  people 
shouted  for  joy.  Huss  heartily  joined  them,  and  amid  the  acclamation  awoke. 
So  modern  unbelievers  may  try  to  expunge  the  pictures  of  Christ  familiar  to  the 
mind  for  generations,  and  to  some  extent  they  may  succeed.  But  the  divine 
Artist,  with  graving-tool  of  gospel  word,  will  trace  on  the  tablet  of  the  soul  an 
image  more  beautiful  and  enduring  than  that  which  has  been  destroyed ;  and 
by-and-by  a  universe  of  worshippers  shall  rejoice  with  thundering  acclaim,  while 
recognising  in  each  other  the  reproduction  of  the  image  of  Him  whose  visage  was 
once  marred  more  than  any  man's,  but  whose  face  now  gleams  with  celestial 
beauty  and  is  radiant  with  the  lustre  of  many  crowns. 

II.  The  gospel  in  power. — "  Not  in  word  only,  but  also  in  power." 

1.  In  the  exercise  of  miraculous  power. — The  apostles  were  specially  invested 
with  this  power,  and  used  it  in  substantiating  the  great  facts  of  the  gospel. 

2.  In  the  Holy  Ghost. — Not  only  in  His  miraculous  manifestations  necessary  in 
that  age,  but  in  the  ordinary  exercise  of  His  power,  as  continued  down  to  the 
present  day — enlightening,  convincing,  renewing. 

3.  With  much  assurance. — Literally,  with  full  assurance,  and  much  of  it. 
H\r)pocf>opLa — full  conviction — is  from  a  word  that  means  to  Jill  up,  and  is  used 
to  denote  the  hurrying  a  ship  on  her  career,  with  all  her  sails  spread  and  filled 
with  the  wind.  So  the  soul,  filled  with  the  full  conviction  of  truth,  is  urged  to  a 
course  of  conduct  in  harmony  with  that  conviction. 

4.  An  assurance  enforced  by  high  integrity  of  character. — "  As  ye  know  what 

490 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  THESSALONIANS.    chap.  i. 


manner  of  men  we  were  among  you,  for  your  sake."  Their  earnest  labours  and 
upright  lives  showed  they  were  men  moved  by  profound  conviction — a  blending 
of  evidence  that  is  not  less  potent  in  these  days. 

Lessons. — 1.  To  receive  the  gospel  in  word  only  is  disastrous. — In  a  certain 
mountainous  region  under  the  tropics  the  stillness  of  night  is  sometimes  broken 
by  a  loud,  sharp  report,  like  the  crack  of  a  rifle.  What  causes  this  strange, 
alarming  sound  1  It  is  the  splitting  of  rocks  charged  with  the  intense  heat  of 
the  tropical  sun.  Day  by  day  the  sun  throws  down  its  red-hot  rays  of  fire,  and 
bit  by  bit  the  rock,  as  it  cools,  is  riven  and  crumbles  into  ruin.  So  is  it  with 
the  mere  hearer  of  the  word.  The  gospel  pours  upon  him  its  light  and  heat, 
and  his  heart,  hardened  with  long  and  repeated  resistance,  becomes  damaged  by 
that  which  is  intended  to  better  it. 

2.  The  gospel  must  be  received  in  power. — What  is  wanted  is  strong,  deep, 
faith -compel]  ing  conviction — conviction  of  the  awful  truth  and  saving  power 
of  the  gospel.  To  be  a  mighty  force,  man  must  have  clear,  solid,  all-powerful 
convictions. 

GERM  NOTE   ON  THE    VERSE. 

Ver.  5.  The  Manner  in  which  the  understanding.  2.  Power  over  the  con- 
Gospel  comes  to  the  Believing  Soul.  science.       3.    Power     over     the     heart. 

I.  The     first    is    negative. — "  The      4.  Power  over  the  life. 

gospel  came  not  in  word  only."     This  III.  In  the  Holy  Ghost. — Explains 

description  embraces  various  classes  of  the  former.     1.  The  message  was  that 

persons.     1.  Such   as   hear   the    gospel  of   the   Spirit.     2.  The    apostles    were 

habitually    without    understanding    it.  filled    with    the   Spirit.     3.  Signs   and 

2.  Such    as   partially    understand    the  miraculous  proof s  were  furnished  by  the 

gospel   without  feeling   its   sanctifying  Spirit.      4.  An  entrance  for  the  word 

influence.     3.  Such  as  are  affected  by  it  was  procured  by  the  Spirit, 

only  for  a  limited  time.  IV.  In    much    assurance. — 1.  Ful- 

II.  In  contradistinction  to  such,  the  ness  of  apprehension.  2.  Fulness  of 
gospel  came  to  the  believing  Thessa-  belief— the  result.  3.  Fulness  of  con- 
lonians  in  power. — 1.  Power  over  the  sequent  hope. — Stewart. 

MAIN  H0M1LETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  6—8. 

The  Practical  Result  of  a  True  Reception  of  the  Gospel. 

Christianity  transforms  man,  fills  the  mind  with  pure  and  lofty  thoughts, 
turns  the  current  of  his  feelings  into  the  right  channel,  makes  the  soul  luminous 
with  ever- brightening  hopes,  and  transfigures  his  sin-stricken  nature  into  a 
semblance  of  the  dignity,  beauty,  and  perfection  of  the  divine.  Observe  its 
influence  on  the  mixed  population  of  Thessalonica. 

I.  The  true  reception  of  the  gospel. — "  Having  received  the  word  in  much 
affliction,  with  joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost "  (ver.  6).  The  word  may  fall  on  the  ear  like 
a  sweet  strain  of  music,  and  charm  the  soul  with  temporary  rapture,  may  enter 
the  understanding  as  a  clearly  apprehended  truth,  may  captivate  the  a  flections, 
and  travel  through  the  whole  sphere  of  emotion  on  a  thrill  of  ecstasy ;  but 
unless  it  be  embraced  by  the  heart  and  conscience,  with  the  aid  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  it  is  powerless  in  spiritual  reformation.  Two  opposite,  but  often 
strangely  blended,  emotions — sorrow  and  joy — were  exercised  in  the  reception  of 
the  gospel  by  the  Thessalonians. 

1.  They  received  the  word  in  sorrow. — "  In  much  affliction."  Amid  the  tumult 
and  persecution  of  the  citizens  (Acts  xvii.  5-9).  Principally,  sorrow  on  account  of 
sin,  and  because  of  their  prolonged  rejection  of  Christ  and  obstinate  disobedience. 

491 


chap.  i.    EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I   TBESSALONIANS. 


2.  They  received  the  word  with  joy. — "  With  joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  They 
realised  the  joy  of  conscious  forgiveness  and  acceptance  with  God.  The  sinless 
angels,  placed  beyond  the  necessity  of  pardon,  are  incapable  of  experiencing  this 
joy.  It  belongs  exclusively  to  the  believing  penitent.  The  joy  of  suffering  for 
the  truth.  Cyprian,  who  suffered  for  the  gospel,  used  to  say,  "  It  is  not  the  pain 
but  the  cause  that  makes  the  martyr."  That  cause  is  the  cause  of  truth. 
Suffering  is  limited,  life  itself  is  limited,  but  truth  is  eternal.  To  suffer  for 
that  truth  is  a  privilege  and  a  joy.  The  joy  of  triumph,  over  error,  sin,  Satan, 
persecution.  This  joy  is  the  special  product  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  These  twin 
feelings — sorrow  and  joy — are  typical  of  the  ever-alternating  experience  of  the 
believer  throughout  his  earthly  career. 

II.  The  practical  result  of  the  true  reception  of  the  gospel. — 1.  They  became 
imitators  of  the  highest  patterns  of  excellence.  "  Ye  became  followers  of  us  and 
of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  6).  The  example  of  Christ  is  the  absolute,  all-perfect  standard 
of  moral  excellence.  But  this  does  not  supersede  the  use  of  inferior  models.  The 
planets  have  their  season  to  guide  and  instruct  us,  as  well  as  the  sun,  and  we 
can  better  bear  the  moderated  light  of  their  borrowed  splendour.  The  bravery 
of  the  common  soldier,  as  well  as  the  capacity  and  heroism  of  the  most  gifted 
officer,  may  stimulate  a  regiment  to  deeds  of  valour.  So  the  apostles,  in  their 
patient  endurance  of  suffering,  their  enterprising  zeal  and  blameless  integrity  of 
life,  became  examples  for  their  converts  to  imitate,  while  they  pointed  to  the 
great  infallible  Pattern  after  which  the  noblest  life  must  ever  be  moulded. 

2.  They  became  examples  to  others. — "  So  that  ye  were  ensamples  to  all  that 
believe"  (ver.  7).  In  the  reality  and  power  of  their  faith.  They  eagerly  embraced 
the  word  preached,  believing  it  to  be  not  the  word  of  men  but  of  God.  This  gave 
a  profound  reality  to  their  conceptions  of  the  gospel  and  a  strong  impulse  to  their 
active  religious  life.  In  their  zealous  propagation  of  the  truth.  "  For  from  you 
sounded  out  the  word  of  the  Lord "  (ver.  8).  Wherever  they  travelled  they 
proclaimed  the  gospel.  They  imparted  that  which  had  enriched  themselves,  and 
which,  in  giving,  left  them  still  the  richer.  The  influence  of  their  example  ivas 
extensive  in  its  range.  "  Not  onlyr  in  Macedonia  and  Achaia,  but  also  in  every 
place  your  faith  to  Godward  is  spread  abroad ;  so  that  we  need  not  to  speak 
anything  "  (ver.  8).  Macedonia  and  Achaia  were  two  Roman  provinces  that 
comprised  the  territory  known  as  ancient  Greece.  Thessalonica,  the  metropolis 
of  Macedonia,  was  the  chief  station  on  the  great  Roman  road — the  Via  Egnatia 
— which  connected  Rome  with  the  whole  region  north  of  the  ^Egean  Sea,  and 
was  an  important  centre  both  for  commerce  and  the  spread  of  intelligence. 
Wherever  the  trade  of  the  merchant  city  extended,  there  the  fame  of  the 
newly  founded  Church  penetrated.  Great  was  the  renown  of  their  own 
Alexander,  the  Macedonian  monarch,  and  brilliant  his  victories;  but  the 
reputation  of  the  Thessalonian  Christians  was  of  a  higher  order,  and  their 
achievements  more  enduring. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  gospel  that  brings  sorrow  to  the  heart  brings  also  joy.  2.  A 
genuine  'reception  of  the  truth  changes  the  man  and  creates  unquenchable  aspirations 
after  the  highest  good.  3.  A  living  example  is  more  potent  than  the  most  elaborate 
code  of  precepts. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers.  6,  7.  The  Evidences  and  Effects  Christ-like    spirit.       Multiplication    of 

of  Revival.  Christ -like  men. 

I.  Receivers. — With  faith,  with  joy,  III.  Ensamples. — Centres  of  Chris- 
not  without  trial.  tian  influence. 

II.  Followers.  —  Apostolic      piety.  IV.  Dispensers. — Induced  to  diffuse 

492 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  THESSALONIANS.    chap.  i. 


the  gospel  by  their  gratitude  for  the  mand  of  God,  by  the  hope  of  reward. 

special  grace  which  had  brought  it  to  — G.  Brooks. 

them    with    saving    power,    by    their 

supreme      attachment      to     its     vital  Ver.  8.  The  Power  of  Example — 

truths  and  their    experience   of    the         I.  In  a  faithful  declaration  of  the 

suitableness   of   these  truths  to   their  gospel. 

wants     as     sinners,     by    their     com-  II.  In  its  far-reaching  influence  on 

miseration    for    those   who    were    yet  others. 

in   a   state  of   nature,   by   their   love  III.  Speaks  for  itself,  rendering  ex- 

to  the  Lord  Jesus,  by  the  express  com-  planation  unnecessary. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  9,  10. 

.Conversion  and  its  Evidence. 

A  good  work  cannot  be  hid.  Sooner  or  later  it  will  manifest  itself  and  become 
the  general  topic  of  a  wide  region.  The  successful  worker  meets  with  the  fruit 
of  his  labours  at  times  and  places  unexpected.  Wherever  the  apostles  went, 
the  reputation  of  the  newly  founded  Church  had  preceded  them,  and  the  varied 
features  of  the  great  change  that  had  passed  over  the  Thessalonians  were  eagerly 
discussed.     We  have  here  a  description  of  conversion  and  its  evidence. 

I.  The  conversion  of  the  Thessalonians. — "  For  they  themselves  show  of  us 
what  manner  of  entering  in  we  had  unto  you,  and  how  ye  turned  to  God  from 
idols  "  (ver.  9).  You  have  watched  a  vessel  lying  at  anchor  in  a  tidal  river  with  her 
bowsprit  pointing  seaward.  After  a  brief  interval  you  have  observed  the  force 
of  the  incoming  tide  swing  the  vessel  completely  round,  so  that  her  head  points 
in  an  exactly  opposite  direction.  Not  less  apparent  was  the  change  among  the 
Thessalonians  when  the  flood-tide  of  gospel  blessing  entered  the  city.  Conversion 
is  a  turning  about — a  change  from  sin  to  holiness,  from  unbelief  to  faith,  from 
darkness  to  light,  from  Satan  to  God. 

1.  They  turned  from  idols. — For  generations  the  majority  of  the  members  of 
this  Church,  with  their  forefathers,  had- been  idolaters,  "  walking  as  other 
Gentiles  walked  in  the  vanity  of  their  mind,"  etc.  (Eph.  iv.  17,  18,  ii.  12).  Any 
creature,  real  or  imaginary,  invested  with  divine  properties  is  an  idol.  An  angel, 
a  saint,  wealth,  an  idea,  or  any  object  to  which  we  ascribe  the  omnipotence  that 
belongs  to  God,  becomes  to  us  an  idol — a  false  deity.  An  idol  is  also  the  true  God 
falsely  conceived.      The  Pantheist,  mistaking  the  effect  for  the  cause,  regards  the 

vast  fabric  of  created  things  as  God,  and  Nature,  with  her  grand,  silent  motions, 
is  the  object  of  his  idolatry.  The  sensualist,  reluctant  to  believe  in  punishment 
for  sin,  exalts  the  boundlessness  of  divine  mercy,  and  ignores  the  other  perfections, 
without  which  Ithere  could  be  no  true  God.  Idolatry  is  a  sin  against  which  the 
most  faithful  warnings  have  been  uttered  in  all  ages,  and  on  account  of  which 
the  most  terrible  judgments  have  been  inflicted,  yet  it  is  the  worship  to  which 
man  is  most  prone. 

2.  They  turned  to  God. — The  one  God  whom  Paul  preached  as  "  the  God  that 
made  the  world  and  all  things  therein  "  ;  the  living  God,  having  life  in  Himself, 
and  "  giving  to  all  life  and  breath  and  all  things  "  ;  the  true  God,  having  in 
Himself  the  truth  and  substance  of  essential  deity,  in  extreme  contrast  with  an 
"  idol,  which  is  nothing  in  the  world."  With  shame  and  confusion  of  face  as  they 
thought  of  the  past,  with  penitential  sorrow,  with  confidence  and  hope,  they 
turned  to  God  from  idols. 

II.  The  evidence  of  their  conversion. — Seen:  1.  In  the  object  of  their  service. 
They  "  serve  the  living  and  true  God,"  serve  Him  in  faithful  obedience  to  every 
command,  serve  Him  in  the  face  of  opposition  and  persecution — with  every 
faculty  of  soul,  body,  and  estate — in  life,  in  suffering,  in  death.     This  is  afree% 

493 


chap.  i.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   THESSALONIANS. 


loving  service.  The  idolater  is  enslaved  by  his  own  passions  and  the  iron  bands 
of  custom.  His  worship  is  mechanical,  without  heart  and  without  intelligence. 
The  service  acceptable  to  God  is  the  full,  spontaneous,  pure  outflow  of  a  loving 
and  believing  heart.  It  is  an  ennobling  service.  Man  becomes  like  what  he 
worships;  and  as  the  object  of  his  worship  is  often  the  creation  of  his  own 
depraved  mind,  he  is  debased  to  the  level  of  his  own  gross,  polluted  ideas. 
Idolatry  is  the  corrupt  human  heart  feeding  upon  and  propagating  its  own  ever- 
growing corruptions.  The  service  of  God  lifts  man  to  the  loftiest  moral  pinnacle 
and  transfigures  him  with  the  resplendent  qualities  of  the  Being  he  adores  and 
serves.  It  is  a  rewardable  service.  It  brings  rest  to  the  world-troubled  spirit, 
fills  with  abiding  happiness  in  the  present  life,  and  provides  endless  felicity  in 
the  future — results  idolatry  can  never  produce. 

2.  Seen  in  the  subject  of  their  hope. — "  And  to  wait  for  His  Son"  (ver.   10). 

(1)  Their  hope  was  fixed  on  Christ  as  a  Saviour.  "Even  Jesus,  who  delivereth 
us  from  the  coming  wrath."  Terrible  will  be  the  revelation  of  that  wrath  to 
the  impenitent  and  unbelieving.  As  soon  as  one  wave  of  vengeance  breaks 
another  will  follow,  and  behind  that  another  and  another  interminably,  so  that 
it   will  ever  be  the   wrath   to    come !      From   this    Jesus  delivers    even    now. 

(2)  Their  hope  was  fixed  on  Christ  as  risen.  "  Whom  He  raised  from  the  dead." 
They  waited  for  and  trusted  in  no  dead  Saviour,  but  One  who,  by  His  resur- 
rection from  the  dead,  was  powerfully  declared  to  be  indeed  the  Son  of  God. 

(3)  Their  hope  was  fixed  on  Christ  as  coming  again.  "  To  wait  for  His  Son 
from  heaven."  There  is  a  confusing  variety  of  opinions  as  to  the  character  of 
Christ's  second  advent ;  as  to  the  certainty  of  it  nothing  is  more  plainly 
revealed.  The  exact  period  of  the  second  coming  is  veiled  in  obscurity  and 
uncertainty ;  but  it  is  an  evidence  of  conversion  to  be  ever  waiting  for  and 
preparing  for  that  coming  as  if  there  were  a  perpetual  possibility  of  an  immediate 
manifestation.  The  uncertainty  of  the  time  has  its  use  in  fostering  a  spirit 
of  earnest  and  reverential  inquiry,  of  watchfulness,  of  hope,  of  fidelity. 

Lessons. — 1.  Conversion  is  a  radical  change.  2.  Conversion  is  a  change 
conscious  to  the  individual  and  evident  to  others.  3.  The  gospel  is  the  divinely 
appointed  agency  in  conversion. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Yers.  9,  10.  The  Change  effected  by         IV.  Patiently    waiting    for     it. — 

the  Gospel —  Bradley. 
I.  In  religious  belief. 
II.  In  corresponding  conduct.  The  Wrath  to  come 

TTT   t    4.1.     u         \>    •  \>  a      i    s\r        I.  It  is  divine  wrath. 

III.  In  the  hope  cher  shod.-l.  Of        n    Unmi    led   wrath._ Judgment 

the  sewnd  coming  of  Christ.     %■  Proved  without   merc°,      justice  without   the 

by    His    resurrection    from    the    dead.  ,       .      .   ,  *        j 

o    rm      i- _.     ^  ?t*  7  •       j.  least  mixture  ot  goodness. 

3.  The  object  of  His  second  coming  to  m    Provoked  wrath. 

deliver  from  wrath.     4.  The  spirit  of         ly   Aceumulated  wrath._A  wrath 

earnest  but  patient  waiting  induced.  ^   haye   inflamed   and   increased   by 

TT       1A    m      .,    .,.             ....        r  every  act  of  sin  we  have  committed. 

Ver   10.  The  Christian  waiting  for  y^  Fu ture    wrath.-The   wrath    to 

his  Deliverer—  come  .    lagting  ag  the  holiness  of  the 

I.  Implies  a  firm  belief  in  Christ  s  Being  who  inflicts  and  the  guilt  of  the 
second  coming.  sinners  who  endure  it. 

II.  Habitually  endeavouring  to  be  vi.  Deliverance  from  wrath.— 
prepared  for  His  second  coming.  I.  Undeserved.  2.  Complete.    3. Eternal. 

III.  Earnestly  desiring  it.  — Ibid. 
404 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    THESSALONIANS.  chap.  II. 


CHAPTER   II. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Our  entrance  in  .  .  .  was  not  in  vain. — The  word  for  "  vain  "  here  is  the  same 
as  that  in  the  first  half  of  "  ceno-taph."  The  entrance  into  Thessalonica,  we  might  say 
colloquially,  "  had  something  in  it." 

Ver.  2.  Suffered  before. — Previously,  that  is,  to  our  entrance  to  Thessalonica.  And  were 
shamefully  entreated. — The  acute  sense  of  suffering  in  mind  shows  how  far  St.  Paul  was 
from  Stoicism.  It  is  this  same  exquisite  sensibility  which  makes  possible  the  beautiful 
courtesy  with  which,  in  his  letters,  we  are  so  familiar.  With  much  contention. — All  the 
watchfulness  required  by  one  in  the  arena  and  all  the  danger  incident  to  a  false  movement 
characterised  St.  Paul's  work. 

Ver.  3.  For  our  exhortation. — The  word  reminds  us  of  Christ's  word,  "I  will  send  you 
another  Advocate  " — "  Paraclete."  Our  advocacy  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  was  not  born  of 
error.  Was  not  of  deceit,  nor  uncleanness,  nor  guile. — Perhaps  we  might  paraphrase  thus  : 
We  wee  not  ourselves  mistaken  as  to  the  subject-matter  of  our  preaching,  we  used  no 
"  dirty  tricks  "  in  the  way  of  its  publication,  we  baited  no  hooks  for  unwilling  souls. 

Ver.  4.  As  we  were  allowed  of  God. — The  original  word  means  "to  approve  after  testing" — 
or,  as  God  knows  without  testing,  as  it  is  applied  to  Him  it  simply  means — "  we  were  approved 
of  God."  To  be  put  in  trust— R.V.  "  to  be  intrusted."  "  '  To  be  put  in  trust  with  the 
gospel '  is  the  highest  conceivable  responsibility  ;  the  sense  of  it  is  enough  to  exclude  every 
base  motive  and  deceitful  practice "  {Findlay).  Not  as  pleasing  men. — The  vice  con- 
demned in  slaves  is  equally  reprehensible  if  it  should  appear  in  the  minister  of  the  gospel. 
But  God,  which  trieth  the  hearts. — "  Alloweth  "  and  "  trieth  "  are  different  forms  of  the 
same  verb.  Like  an  assayer  whose  methods  are  perfect,  God  makes  manifest  what  is  in 
man's  heart. 

Ver.  5.  For  neither  at  any  time  used  we  flattering  words. — "  His  friends  well  knew  that 
he  was  not  one  to 

4  Crook  the  pregnant  hinges  of  the  knee 
Where  thrift  may  follow  fawning'  "  {Ibid.). 

Nor  a  cloke  of  covetousness. — The  same  thing  perhaps  as  a  mode  of  flattering  speech. 
Fulsome  flattering  is  either  the  mark  of  a  mind  hopelessly  abject  or  the  craft  of  a  designing 
mind.  Much  fair  speech  and  the  flattering  of  the  lips  still  lead  fools  by  the  nose 
(Prov.  vii.  21)  to  where  "  covetousness"  dwells. 

Ver.  6.  Nor  of  men  sought  we  glory,  neither  of  you,  nor  yet  of  others. — "  The  motive  of 
ambition — 'that  last  infirmity  of  noble  minds  ' — rises  above  the  selfishness  just  disclaimed  ; 
but  it  is  just  as  warmly  repudiated,  for  it  is  equally  inconsistent  with  the  single-mindedness 
of  men  devoted  to  the  glory  of  God.  Gur  Lord  finds  in  superiority  to  human  praise  the 
mark  of  a  sincere  faith  (John  v.  44)  "  {Ibid.).  When  we  might  have  been  burdensome. — 
A.V.  margin,  "  used  authority."  R.V.  margin,  "  claimed  honour  " — literally  in  weight — an 
ambiguous  phrase  whose  sense  is  interpreted  by  ver.  9  {Ibid.). 

Ver.  7.  But  we  were  gentle. — R.V.  margin  says,  "Most  ancient  authorities  read  babes." 
Origen  and  Augustine  interpret  this  to  mean,  "  Like  a  nurse  amongst  her  children,  talking 
in  baby  language  to  the  babes  "  {Ibid.).  As  a  nurse  cherisheth  her  children. — The  A.V.  has 
omitted  a  necessary  word  of  the  original  which  R.V.  supplies — "  her  own  children."  The 
word  for  "  cherisheth  "  is  used  in  Deut.  xxii.  5  (LXX.)  of  the  mother-bird  brooding  over  her 
nestlings  (a  figure  made  memorable  by  our  Lord's  mournful  words  over  Jerusalem).  The 
word  occurs  again  only  in  Eph.  v.  29. 

Ver.  8.  Being  affectionately  desirous. — The  one  Greek  word  corresponding  to  these 
three  "  implies  the  fondness  of  a  mother's  love — yearning  over  you  "  {Ibid.).  We  were 
willing. — R.V.  "  well-pleased."  Like  Him  of  whom  it  is  said,  "  He  gives  liberally,"  without 
stint.  Our  own  souls. — "Our  very  selves,"  for  the  saving  of  which,  says  our  Master,  a  man 
may  well  let  the  world  slip.     The  apostle  keeps  up  the  maternal  figure. 

Ver.  9.  Labour  and  travail. — The  same  words  occur  together  at  2  Cor.  xi.  27.  The  former  is 
used  some  twenty  times,  the  latter  only  three  in  the  New  Testament.  One  marks  the  fatigue 
of  the  work,  "  the  lassitude  or  weariness  which  follows  on  this  straining  of  all  his  powers  to 
the  utmost"  {Trench).  The  other  gives  prominence  to  the  hardship  or  difficulty  of  the  task. 
That  we  might  not  burden  any  of  you  (see  ver.  6). — Any  support  that  could  have  been 
given  would  have  been  a  trifle  indeed  (1  Cor.  ix.  11)  as  compared  with  the  self-sacrifice  of 
the  apostolic  toilers. 

495 


chap.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  THESSALONIANS. 


Ver.  10.  Ye  are  witnesses,  and  God  also. — A  solemn  reiteration  (see  ver.  5).  Holily  and 
justly  and  umblameably. — "  The  holy  man  has  regard  to  the  sanctities,  the  righteous  man  to 
the  duties  of,  life  ;  but  duty  is  sacred  and  piety  is  duty.  They  cover  the  whole  field  of 
conduct  regarded  in  turn  from  the  religious  and  moral  standpoint,  while  unblamably 
affixes  the  seal  of  approval  both  by  God  and  man"  {Findlay). 

Ver.  11.  Exhorted  and  comforted. — As  the  former  points  to  the  stimulation  in  the 
apostolic  addresses,  so  the  latter  to  the  soothing  element.  The  noun  related  to  the  latter 
verb  is  found  in  Phil.  ii.  1,  and  is  translated  by  R.V.  "consolation."  As  a  father  with  his 
own  children. — The  maternal  tenderness  is  united  with  the  discipline  of  a  true  father. 

Ver.  12.  Walk  worthy  of  God.— St.  Paul's  "  Noblesse  oblige." 

Ver.  13.  The  word  of  God  which  ye  heard  of  us. — R.V.  "  the  word  of  the  message,  even  the 
word  of  God."  The  preposition  "from  us  "  is  "  properly  used  in  relation  to  objects  which  come 
from  the  neighbourhood  of  a  person — out  of  his  sphere  "  (  Winer)  ;  but  the  word  originates, 
not  with  Paul,  but  in  God.  Which  effectually  worketh  also. — There  is  no  original  word 
corresponding  to  "  effectually  "  here ;  but  the  word  "  worketh  "  of  itself,  unemphasised,  is 
too  weak.     We  might  almost  say  "  becomes  energetic." 

Ver.  14.  Became  followers. — E.V.  "imitators."  The  usual  meaning  of  imitators  hardly 
seems  to  obtain  in  full  strength  here.  We  cannot  think  the  Thessalonians  consciously 
copied  the  Judean  Christians,  to  do  which  they  would  have  had  the  superfluous  task  of 
raising  up  opposition.  The  words  seem  to  mean  no  more  than,  "  Ye  came  to  resemble."  Of 
your  own  countrymen. — Lit.  "  fellow-tribesmen."     One  is  reminded  of  Shylock's  words — 

"  Sufferance  is  the  badge  of  all  our  tribe." 

Ver.  15.  Who  both  killed. — The  New  Testament  form  of  the  verb  is  always  compound — as 
we  should  say,  "  killed  off."  A  tragic  contrast  to  what  might  have  been  expected  is  set  forth 
in  our  Lord's  parable.  "  It  may  be  they  will  reverence  My  Son."  .  .  .  They  cast  Him  out  and 
killed  Him  off  (Luke  xx.  13-15).  Have  persecuted  us. — A.V.  margin,  "  chased  us  out."  R.V. 
text,  "  drave."  How  deeply  humbling  was  the  thought  to  St.  Paul,  that  he  had  at  one  time 
taken  part  in  this  hounding  1  The  A.V.  margin  gives  us  a  most  vivid  picture.  They  please 
not  God. — This  expression  is  thought  by  some  to  be  a  meiosis,  a  softening  down  of  the  hard 
reality  by  the  negative  form  of  the  language.  Is  not  the  best  comment  found  in  John  xvi.  2, 
"  Whosoever  killeth  you  Shall  think  that  he  offereth  service  unto  God  "  ?  The  sophistry  that 
makes  "  killing  no  murder "  and  sanctions  an  auto  da  fe  is  something  quite  other  than 
pleasing  to  God.  Are  contrary  to  all  men. — "  The  sense  of  God's  displeasure  often  shows 
itself  in  sourness  and  ill  temper  towards  one's  fellows.  Unbelief  and  cynicism  go  together. 
The  rancour  of  the  Jews  against  other  nations  at  this  time  was  notorious.  .  .  .  The  quarrel 
between  Judaism  and  the  world,  alas,  still  continues,  as  the  Judenhasse  of  Germany  and 
Russia  testifies  "  {Findlay). 

Ver.  16.  Forbidding  us  to  speak  to  the  Gentiles. — The  very  spirit  of  the  dog  in  the  manger  ! 
They  would  not  even  have  left  the  "  uncovenanted  mercies  "  to  the  Gentiles.  To  fill  up  their 
sins  alway. — The  phrase  signifies  ripeness  for  judgment,  and  is  used  in  Gen.  xv.  16  of  the 
Amorites  in  Abraham's  time — an  ominous  parallel  {Ibid.).  For  the  wrath. — R.V,  "  but  the 
wrath."  As  though  he  said,  "  But  the  end  comes  at  last ;  they  have  always  been  sowing  this 
harvest ;  now  it  has  to  be  reaped  "  {Ibid.). 

Ver.  17.  Being  taken  from  you. — R.V.  "  bereaved  of  you."  St.  Paul,  absent  from 
Thessalonica,  feels  like  a  parent  who  has  lost  a  child,  and  regards  them  as  children  who  feel 
the  loss  of  a  parent  (see  John  xiv.  18). 

Ver.  18.  But  Satan  hindered  us. — Lit.  "  beat  us  in."  The  figure  is  a  military  one,  and 
indicates  the  obstruction  of  an  enemy's  progress  by  breaking  up  the  road  (destroying 
bridges,  etc.). 

Ver.  19.  Crown  of  rejoicing. — R.V.  "  glorying."  The  victor's  wreath.  St.  Paul  regards 
his  steadfast  converts  as  the  proof  of  his  successful  efforts. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1,  2. 

Essential  Elements  of  Success  in  Preaching.     I.  Boldness. 

Outsiders  testified  of  the  success  of  the  gospel,  and  the  apostles  could 
confidently  appeal  to  the  converts  in  confirmation  of  the  report.  "  For  your- 
selves, brethren,  know  our  entrance  in  unto  you  that  it  was  not  in  vain  "  (ver.  1). 
In  the  first  twelve  verses  of  this  chapter  Paul  is  describing  the  special  features 
of  their  ministry,  the  manner  and  spirit  of  their  preaching ;  and  what  he  denies 
is,  not  so  much  that  their  labours  had  been  vain,  fruitless,  and  without  result, 
as  he  denies  that  those  labours  were  in  themselves  vain,  frivolous,  empty  of  all 

496 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   THESSALONIANS.    chap.  ii. 


human  earnestness,  and  of  divine  truth  and  force.  We  trace  in  their  ministerial 
endeavours  four  essential  elements  that  are  ever  found  in  all  successful  preaching 
— boldness,  sincerity,  gentleness,  moral  consistency.    Consider,  first,  their  boldness. 

I.  This  boldness  manifested  in  the  earnest  declaration  of  the  truth. — "We 
were  bold  in  our  G6d  to  speak  unto  you  the  gospel  of  God  with  much  contention  " 
(ver.  2).  Bold  in  their  conception  of  the  divine  origin  and  vast  scope  of  the 
gospel,  and  its  wondrous  adaptation  to  the  wants  of  universal  man,  they  were 
not  less  bold  in  its  faithful  proclamation.  Their  deep  conviction  of  the  supreme 
authority  of  the  truth  gave  them  unusual  courage.  We  see  the  same  intrepid 
spirit  in  Paul  on  other  occasions,  when  his  fearless  words  roused  the  ire  of 
Festus,  shook  the  conscience  of  the  thoughtless  Felix,  or  swayed  the  heart  of 
Agrippa  towards  a  wise  decision.  We  see  it  in  Elijah  as  he  rebuked  the  sins 
of  the  wicked  Ahab  with  withering  invectives,  or  threw  the  baffled  priests  of 
Baal  into  maddening  hysteria — himself  the  while  unmoved  and  confident.  We 
see  it  conspicuously  in  Him,  who  came  in  the  spirit  and  power  of  Elias,  whose 
burning  words  assailed  every  form  of  wrong,  and  who  did  not  scruple  to  denounce 
the  deluded  leaders  of  a  corrupt  Church  in  the  most  scathing  terms — "  Ye 
serpents !  ye  generation  of  vipers !  How  can  ye  escape  the  damnation  of 
hell  ?  "  "  With  much  contention  " — amid  much  conflict  and  danger.  This  kind 
of  preaching  provoked  opposition  and  involved  them  in  great  inward  struggles. 
The  faithful  messenger  of  God  fears  not  the  most  violent  assault  from  without ; 
but  the  thought  of  the  fatal  issues  to  those  who  obstinately  reject  and  fight 
against  the  gospel  fills  him  with  agonising  concern. 

II.  This  boldness  no  suffering  could  daunt. — "  Even  after  that  we  had  suffered 
before,  and  were  shamefully  entreated,  as  ye  know,  at  Philippi  "  (ver.  2).  They 
had  come  fresh  from  a  city  where  they  had  been  cruelly  outraged.  Though 
Boman  citizens,  they  had  been  publicly  scourged  and,  to  add  to  their  degrada- 
tion, were  thrust  into  the  inner  prison,  and  their  feet  made  fast  in  the  stocks — 
treatment  reserved  for  the  vilest  felons.  But  so  far  from  being  dismayed, 
their  sufferings  only  deepened  their  love  for  the  gospel  and  inflamed  the  passion 
to  make  it  known.  A  German  professor  has  lately  made  experiments  with 
chalcedony  and  other  quartzose  minerals,  and  he  has  demonstrated  that  when 
such  stones  are  ground  on  large  and  rapidly  revolving  wheels  they  exhibit  a 
brilliant  phosphorescent  glow  throughout  their  entire  mass.  So  is  it  with  the 
resolute  worker.  The  more  he  is  ground  under  the  strong  wheel  of  suffering 
and  persecution,  the  more  intensely  will  his  entire  character  glow  with  the 
radiance  of  an  unquenchable  bravery. 

III.  This  boldness  was  divinely  inspired. — "  We  were  bold  in  our  God  "  (ver.  2). 
It  was  not  the  froth  of  a  senseless  presumption,  not  the  wild,  aimless  effort  of 
a  reckless  bravado  ;  but  the  calm,  grand  heroism  of  a  profound  faith  in  the  divine. 
They  fell  back  completely  upon  God,  and  drew  their  deepest  inspiration  and 
mightiest  strength  from  Him.  The  prophet  Jeremiah,  in  a  moment  of  despon- 
dency, decided  to  "  speak  no  more  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  " ;  but  when  he  could 
say,  "  The  Lord  is  with  me  as  a  mighty,  terrible  One,"  his  courage  returned,  and 
he  obeyed  implicitly  the  divine  mandate,  "  Thou  shalt  go  to  all  that  I  shall  send 
thee,  and  whatsoever  I  command  thee  thou  shalt  speak."  Similarly  commissioned, 
Paul  once  exclaimed,  "  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  which  strengtheneth 
me."  Endowed  with  the  like  spirit,  Luther  uttered  his  noble  protest  at  the  Diet 
of  Worms — "  Here  I  stand  :  I  cannot  do  otherwise :  God  help  me  ! 

Lessons. — 1.  Boldness  is  absolutely  indispensable  in  attacking,  not  simply  in  the 
mass,  but  in  detail,  the  crying  evils  of  the  age.  2.  Boldness  is  acquired  only  by 
studious  and  'prayerful  familiarity  with  God's  message  and  with  God. 


jiK  497 


chap.  II.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    TEESSALONIANS. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.    1,    2.    The   Preaching   of  the  He  did  it.     2.  To  gather  in  souls.     He 

Gospel  not  in  Vain.  did  so.    3.  His  reward  was  the  approba- 

I.  It  is  not  in  vain  as  respects  the  tion  of  Christ  and  seals  to  His  ministry. 
end  and  object  of  the  gospel  itself. —  He  had  both. 

1.     Conversion.      2.    Sanctification    or  III.  It  was  not  in  vain  as  respected 

edification.     3.    Condemnation.  the  Thessalonians. — They  were  turned 

II.  It  was  not  in  vain  as  respected  from  idolatry ;  their  hearts  glowed 
the  objects  of  the  apostle. — 1.  His  with  new  feelings;  their  characters 
commission  wets   to  preach    the   gospel.  shone  with  new  graces. — Stewart. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  3—6. 

Essential  Elements  of  Success  in  Preaching.     II.  Sincerity. 

The  devout  Richard  Baxter  once  said  :  "  The  ministerial  work  must  be 
managed  purely  for  God  and  the  salvation  of  the  people,  and  not  for  any  private 
ends  of  our  own.  This  is  our  sincerity  in  it.  A  wrong  end  makes  all  the 
work  bad  from  us,  however  good  in  itself."  In  order  to  success,  it  is  necessary 
not  only  to  display  a  fearless  courage,  but  also  a  spirit  of  unmistakable  in- 
genuousness and  sincerity.  As  the  mountain  tarn  reflects  the  clear,  chaste  light 
of  the  stars  as  they  kindle  in  the  heavens,  so  the  preacher  reflects  in  his  outward 
conduct  the  pure  and  lofty  motives  by  which  he  is  animated  and  sustained.  We 
observe,  in  connection  with  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  at  Thessalonica,  sincerity 
in  motive,  in  speech,  in  aim. 

I.  Sincerity  in  motive. — "  For  our  exhortation  was  not  of  deceit,  nor  of 
uncleanness,  nor  in  guile  "  (ver.  3).  The  apostle  disclaims  the  harbouring  of  evil 
intentions  in  relation  to  God,  himself,  and  others. 

1.  In  relation  to  God. — "  Not  of  deceit  " — not  in  error.  Having  received  the 
truth  from  God  and  about  God,  he  transmits  it  in  all  its  integrity,  without  error 
or  imposture. 

2.  In  relation  to  himself. — "Nor  of  uncleanness."  Pure  in  his  own  affection 
and  purpose,  he  preached  a  gospel  that  was  pure  in  itself,  in  its  tendency,  and  in 
its  experienced  results. 

3.  In  relation  to  others. — "  Not  in  guile."  He  sought  not  to  propagate  the 
gospel  by  any  fraudulent  wiles  or  false  representations.  He  descended  not  to 
hypocrisy  to  catch  men.  "  Hypocrites,"  says  St.  Bernard,  "  desire  to  seem  not 
to  be  good ;  not  to  seem,  but  to  be  evil :  they  care  not  to  follow  or  practise 
virtue,  but  to  colour  vice  by  putting  upon  it  the  painted  complexion  of  virtue." 
The  life  of  the  man  whose  motives  are  thus  sincere  will  be  transparent  as  the 
light.  A  certain  king  of  Castile,  who  had  been  only  too  familiar  with  the 
duplicity  of  mankind,  once  somewhat  arrogantly  said,  "  When  God  made  man 
He  left  one  capital  defect  :  He  ought  to  have  set  a  window  in  his  breast."  The 
sincere  man  opens  a  window  in  his  own  breast  by  the  whole  tenor  of  His  words 
and  actions,  so  that  his  innermost  thoughts  are  apparent. 

II.  Sincerity  in  speech. — 1.  The  preacher  speaks  under  a  solemn  sense  of 
responsibility.  "  But  as  we  were  allowed  of  God  to  be  put  in  trust  with  the 
gospel,  even  so  we  speak  "  (ver.  4).  To  their  charge,  as  men  tested  and  approved 
of  God,  was  committed  the  precious  treasure  of  the  gospel ;  and  keenly  conscious 
of  the  unutterable  riches  with  which  they  were  entrusted,  they  were  deeply 
solicitous  to  distribute  the  same  in  all  faithfulness  and  sincerity.  Every  gift  we 
receive  from  Heaven  has  its  corresponding  responsibility. 

2.  The  preacher  seeks  chiefly  the  divine  approval. — "  Not  as  pleasing  men,  but 
God,  which  trieth  our  hearts  "  (ver.  4).     There  is  much  in  the  gospel  distasteful 

498 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   THESSALONIANS.    chap.  n. 


to  the  natural  man — its  humiliating  exposure  of  our  depravity  and  helplessness, 
its  holiness,  its  mysteries,  the  unbending  severity  of  its  law,  and  the  absolute 
character  of  its  claims.  The  temptation  is  sometimes  great  to  temper  and 
modify  the  truth  to  carnal  prejudice,  and  sacrifice  faithfulness  to  popularity. 
But  the  apostles  risked  everything  so  that  they  secured  the  divine  approval. 
"  As  of  sincerity,  as  of  God,  in  the  sight  of  God  speak  we  in  Christ." 

3.  The  preacher  must  practise  neither  adulation  nor  deception. — "  For  neither  at 
anytime  used  we  flattering  words,  as  ye  know,  nor  a  cloak  of  covetousness,  God  is 
witness  "  (ver.  5).  u  Flattery,"  says  Plutarch,  "  has  been  the  ruin  of  many  states." 
But  alas  !  who  can  tell  the  souls  it  has  for  ever  undone  ?  Truth  is  too  sedate 
and  solid  to  indulge  in  meaningless  flattery.  It  is  only  the  vain  and  self-con- 
ceited who  can  be  deceived  by  adulation. 

III.  Sincerity  in  aim. — "  Nor  of  men  sought  we  glory,  neither  of  you,  nor  yet 
of  others,  when  we  might  have  been  burdensome  as  the  apostles  of  Christ "  (ver.  6). 
The  sincere  aim  of  the  apostles  was  seen  : — 

1.  In  the  generous  suppression  of  the  authority  with  which  they  were  invested. — 
"  When  we  might  have  been  burdensome  as  the  apostles  of  Christ."  Whether 
we  understand  this  authority  as  exercised  in  foregoing  for  the  time  being  their 
legitimate  claim  of  maintenance  by  the  Church,  or  as  restraining  the  exhibition 
of  the  dignity  and  power  of  their  apostleship — which  latter  view  is  generally 
admitted  to  be  the  true  exegesis — it  was  equally  honourable  to  the  pure  and 
disinterested  character  of  their  highest  aim. 

2.  In  the  absence  of  all  selfish  ambition. — "  Nor  of  men  sought  we  glory." 
They  could  conscientiously  aver,  "  We  seek  not  yours,  but  you."  "  I  love  a 
serious  preacher,"  says  Fenelon,  "  who  speaks  for  my  sake  and  not  for  his  own ; 
who  seeks  my  salvation  and  not  his  own  glory."  It  is  said  of  one  of  the  ancient 
fathers  that  he  wept  at  the  applause  frequently  given  to  his  discourses.  "  Would 
to  God,"  said  he,  "  they  had  rather  gone  away  silent  and  thoughtful !  "  It  is  a 
sorry  and  painfully  disappointing  end  to  preach  for  mere  ephemeral  human 
praise.  Such  a  man  may  sink  into  the  grave  with  the  touching  lament  of 
Grotius,  "Alas!  I  have  lost  my  life  in  doing  nothing  with  great  labour!" — 
though  in  his  case  it  was  an  unduly  despondent  estimate  of  his  life-work.  When 
Christ  is  to  be  exalted,  the  preacher  must  be  willing  to  be  unnoticed. 

Lessons.— 1.  Sincerity  in  proclaiming  the  truth  can  be  acquired  only  by  personal 
experience  of  its  power.  2.  Sincerity  is  deepened  by  a  conscious  divine  commission. 
3.  Sincerity  is  unmistakably  evidenced  in  word  and  deed.  4.  Si?  cerity  is  satisfied 
only  in  aiming  at  the  highest  results  in  preaching. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  3-6.    Apostolic  Preaching  char-  insincerity  and  selfishness  (ver.  4). — 

acterised  by  Transparent  Truth.  1.     They    avoided    flattery.     Love     of 

I.  The  doctrine  was  opposed  to  every  favour  (ver.  5).  2.  They  avoided  cove- 
form  of  impurity  (ver.  3). — 1.  It  was  tousness.  Aggrandisement  (ver.  5). 
itself  pure.  2.  It  received  no  tinge  of  3.  They  avoided  vainglory.  Love  of 
impurity  from  the  apostle's  mind.  applause  (ver.  6).  Three  rocks  on 
3.  Its  Jesuits  were  pure.  which     thousands     have     been    ship- 

II.  The   preaching  was  free  from     wrecked. — Stewart. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  7,  8. 

Essential  Elements  of  Success  in  Preaching.     III.  Gentleness. 
There  is  a  power  in  gentleness  to  subdue  the  wildest,  mightiest  opposition, 
and  to  triumph  over  the  most  gigantic  difficulties.      The  gentle   rays  of   the 

499 


chap.  ii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   TRESSALONIANS 


sun  melt  the  ponderous  iceberg  more  speedily  than  the  rolling  billows  of  an 
angry  ocean  ;  the  silent  action  of  the  atmosphere  wastes  the  rock  which  remains 
immovable  under  the  strokes  of  the  heaviest  weapon ;  a  look  from  Moses 
vanquished  the  calf -idolatry  of  the  Israelites  which  the  fluent  eloquence  of  Aaron 
had  been  powerless  to  resist ;  a  calm,  quiet  word  from  Jesus  paralysed  with 
fear  the  band  of  soldiers  who  came  to  arrest  Him  in  Gethsemane.  True 
gentleness  is  never  weak.  It  is  the  tough,  indestructible  material  out  of 
which  is  formed  the  hero  and  the  martyr.  This  quality  was  conspicuous  in 
the  preachers  at  Thessalonica. 

1.  It  was  the  gentleness  of  patient  endurance. — 1.  It  enabled  them  to  bear  the 
insult  and  outrage  of  their  enemies.  Their  preaching  roused  violent  opposition. 
They  retaliated  by  praying  for  their  persecutors.  Against  physical  force  they 
fought  with  moral  weapons;  and  this  attitude  and  policy  had  a  powerful 
influence  on  their  enraged  adversaries.  The  modern  preacher  can  adopt  no 
better  method.  The  offence  of  the  cross  has  not  yet  ceased.  It  stirs  up  all  the 
enmity  of  the  carnal  mind.  "  And  the  servant  of  the  Lord  must  not  strive,  but 
be  gentle  unto  all  men,  apt  to  teach,  patient,  in  meekness  instructing  those  that 
oppose  themselves."  The  power  of  a  man  is  seen,  not  so  much  in  what  he  can 
do,  as  in  what  he  can  endure.  It  is  only  the  Christian  spirit  that  unites  the 
utmost  gentleness  with  the  utmost  strength. 

2.  It  enabled  them  to  bear  with  the  weakness  and  imperfections  of  their  converts. — 
"  As  a  nurse  cherisheth  her  children  "  (ver.  7) — as  a  nursing  mother  cherisheth  her 
own  children.  They  watched  over  them  with  the  tenderest  assiduity,  instructed 
them  with  the  most  disinterested  solicitude,  accommodated  and  assimilated 
themselves  to  their  infant  standpoint  with  all  the  devotion  of  a  fond,  painstaking 
parent.  In  order  to  successful  teaching,  in  spiritual  as  in  secular  subjects,  we 
must  study  the  child-nature — take  into  account  the  influence  of  environment, 
early  prejudices,  differing  capacities  and  temperaments,  and  the  direction  of 
characteristic  tendencies.  See  this  illustrated  in  the  divine  treatment  of  the 
Israelites  under  Moses  and  the  great  Jewish  leaders,  and  in  the  training  of  the 
twelve  by  the  great  Teacher. 

II.  It  was  the  gentleness  of  self-sacrificing  love. — "  So  being  affectionately 
desirous  of  you,  we  were  willing  to  have  imparted  unto  you,  not  the  gospel  of 
God  only,  but  also  our  own  souls,  because  ye  were  dear  unto  us  "  (ver.  8). 

1.  This  gentleness  arose  from  a  genuine  love  of  human  souls. — "  Because  ye 
were  dear  unto  us."  Love  is  the  great  master-power  of  the  preacher.  After 
this  he  strives  and  toils  with  ever-increasing  earnestness  as  the  years  speed  on ; 
and  it  is  the  grace  that  comes  latest  and  slowest  into  the  soul.  No  amount  of 
scholastic  attainment,  of  able  and  profound  exposition,  of  brilliant  and  stirring 
eloquence,  can  atone  for  the  absence  of  a  deep,  impassioned,  sympathetic  love  of 
human  souls.  The  fables  of  the  ancients  tell  us  of  Amphion,  who,  with  the 
music  of  his  lyre,  drew  after  him  the  huge  stones  with  which  to  build  the  walls 
of  Thebes,  and  of  Orpheus,  who,  by  his  skill  on  the  harp,  could  stay  the  course 
of  rivers  and  tame  the  wildest  animals.  These  are  but  exaggerated  examples  of 
the  wondrous  charm  of  the  soul-compelling  music  of  love.  "  I  have  always 
been  afraid,"  said  a  devoted  young  minister,  now  no  more,  "  of  driving  my 
people  away  from  the  Saviour.  I  would  rather  err  on  the  side  of  drawing 
them."  The  seraphic  John  Fletcher  once  said,  a  Love,  continual,  universal, 
ardent  love  is  the  soul  of  all  the  labour  of  a  minister." 

2.  The  intensity  of  their  love  awoke  a  spirit  of  voluntary  self-sacrifice. — "  So, 
being  affectionately  desirous  of  you,  we  were  willing  to  have  imparted  unto  you, 
not  the  gospel  of  God  only,  but  also  our  own  souls."  To  accomplish  the  salvation 
of  their  hearers  they  were  willing  to  surrender  life  itself.  This  was  the  temper 
of  the  divine  Preacher  who  "  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister, 

500 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.   THESSALONIANS.    chap,  it 


and  to  give  His  life."  A  similar  spirit  imbued  the  apostle  when  he  assured  the 
weeping  elders  of  Ephesus  in  that  pathetic'  interview  on  the  lonely  shore — 
"  Neither  count  I  my  life  dear  unto  .myself,  so  that  I  might  finish  my  course 
with  joy  and  the  ministry  which  I  havo  received  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  The  love 
of  science  nerves  the  adventurous  voyager  to  brave  the  appalling  dangers  of  the 
arctic  ice,  amid  which  so  many  have  found  a  crystal  tomb  ;  but  a  nobler  love 
inspires  the  breast  of  the  humble  worker,  "who  cheerfully  sacrifices  all  this  world 
holds  dear  to  rescue  men  from  woe. 

Lessons. — 1.  That  gentleness  is  a  power  not  only  in  patient  endurance,-  but  also 
in  enterprising  action.  2.  That  gerttleness  is  indispensable  to  effectiveness,  either 
in  warning  or  reproof.  It  succeeds  where  a  rigid  austerity  fails.  3.  That 
gentleness  is  fostered  and  regulated  by  a  deep,  self-sacrificing  love. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  7,  8.  Dealing  with  New  Converts.  IT.  Must  be  treated  with  gentleness. 

I.  Divine  principles  have  to  unfold  — 1.  In  the  adaptation  of  teaching  to 

themselves    in   unfavourable  circum-  suit  their  state.     2.  In  the  manner  and 

stances. — 1.  Moral  influence  from  with-  spirit  of  the  instruction  given, 

out.        2.     Jewish     misrepresentation.  III.  Must  be  treated  with  affection- 

3.  Persecution.  ate  self-sacrificingness  (ver.  8). 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  9—12. 

Essential  Elements  of  Success  in  Preaching.     IV.  Moral  Consistency. 

The  writer,  in  dwelling  on  the  manner  and  spirit  of  preaching,  has  shown 
the  necessity  of  boldness,  sincerity,  and  gentleness  as  powerful  instrumentalities 
in  achieving  success.  In  these  verses  he  insists  on  the  moral  consistency  of  the 
individual  life  and  conduct.  As  the  time  indicated  on  the  dial  answers  to 
the  perfect  mechanism  of  the  watch,  so  the  personal  example  of  the  preacher 
must  answer  to  the  words  he  utters.  The  most  accomplished  elocution,  the  most 
impassioned  and  captivating  utterance  will  be  fruitless  unless  backed  with  the 
strength  of  a  complete,  well-rounded,  all-beautiful  spiritual  character.  Paul  and 
his  co-helpers  could  fearlessly  appeal  to  their  hearers,  and  in  all  humility  to  God, 
in  attestation  of  the  moral  consistency  of  their  private  and  public  action. 

I.  Their  moral  consistency  seen  in  the  unselfish  principle  that  governed  them 
in  their  work. — "  For  ye  remember,  brethren,  our  labours  and  travail :  for 
labouring  night  and  day,  because  we  would  not  be  chargeable  to  any  of  you,  we 
preached  unto  you  the  gospel  of  God  "  (ver.  9).  The  apostle  invariably  asserted 
the  obligation  of  ministerial  maintenance  by  the  Church.  In  another  place  he 
emphatically  affirms  that,  not  merely  naked  equity  and  the  spirit  of  the  Mosaic 
law,  but  also  a  positive  ordinance  of  Christ  requires  that  just  as  "  they  which 
ministered  about  holy  things  lived  of  the  things  of  the  temple,  and  they  which 
waited  at  the  altar  were  partakers  with  the  altar,  even  so  they  which  preach 
the  gospel  shall  live  of  the  gospel."  In  the  special  circumstances  and  early  stage 
of  the  work  at  Thessalonica,  the  apostle  waived  this  righteous  claim.  It  might 
be  on  account  of  the  poverty  of  the  majority  of  the  converts,  or  more  probably 
on  account  of  the  charge  of  covetousness  their  enemies  had  diligently  circulated. 
To  crush  all  suspicion  of  interested  motives  and  self-seeking,  those  noble  mission- 
aries refused  "  to  be  chargeable  unto  any  one  of  them,"  depending  for  their 
support  upon  the  occasional  remittances  of  the  liberal  Philippians,  and  on  their 
own  manual  labour.     Thus  did  they  evidence  their  supreme  desire  to  be,  not 

501 


chap.  ii.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   THESSALONIANS. 


mercenary  gain,  but  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel  of  God — an  example  which 
has  its  counterpart  in  the  brave,  devoted,  self-denying  labours  of  many  a 
modern  missionary. 

II.  Their  moral  consistency  seen  in  the  maintenance  of  a  blameless  deportment. 
— "  Ye  are  witnesses,  and  God  aiso,  how  holily  and  justly  and  unblameably  we 
behaved  ourselves  among  you  that  believe  "  (ver.  10).  A  Eoman  prince  of  the 
celebrated  house  of  Colonna,  whose  virtues  had  sustained  him  alike  in  prosperous 
and  adverse  times,  was  once  driven  into  exile,  and  when  reduced  to  extremity 
was  asked,  "  Where  is  now  your  fortress  I "  He  laid  his  hand  upon  his  heart, 
and  answered,  "  Here  !  "  A  conscious  sense  of  integrity  threw  a  strength  and 
majesty  around  him  in  the  midst  of  poverty  and  suffering.  It  was  an  inward 
consciousness  of  purity  that  prompted  these  Christian  workers  to  appeal  to  those 
who  were  best  acquainted  with  their  walk  and  conversation.  They  behaved  holily 
toward  God,  justly  toward  men,  and  unblamably  in  all  things.  "  Among  them 
that  believe."  Believers  could  best  understand  the  secret  of  their  whole  life,  its 
aims  and  motives,  its  tendencies  and  issues,  and  on  them  it  would  have  an  irre- 
sistible impression.  It  is  often  the  fate  of  the  public  teacher,  while  blameless, 
to  be  unmercifully  blamed  by  those  who  are  outside  the  circle  of  his  work. 
The  world  retains  all  its  historic  enmity  to  the  truth,  and  is  as  venomous  as 
ever  in  its  expression. 

No  might,  nor  greatness  in  mortality 

Can  censure  'scape  :  back- wounding  calumny 

The  whitest  virtue  strikes." 

III.  Their  moral  consistency  seen  in  their  persistent  endeavours  to  stimulate 
their  converts  to  the  highest  attainments. — 1.  This  is  evident  in  the  lofty  standard 
set  up.  "  That  ye  walk  worthy  of  God  "  (ver.  12).  How  sublime  and  dignified  the 
Christian  character  may  become — to  walk  worthily  of  God ! — in  harmony  with 
His  nature,  His  law,  with  our  profession  of  attachment  to  Him.  To  the  pro- 
duction of  this  grand  result  all  their  efforts  were  bent.  "  As  a  father  doth  his 
children,"  so  they  "exhorted"  with  all  earnestness,  "comforted"  with  all  loving 
sympathy,  and  "  charged  "  with  all  fidelity  and  authority.  The  preacher  must 
be  master  of  every  art  necessary  to  success. 

2.  This  is  evident  in  the  sublime  motive  that  should  animate  us  in  reaching  the 
standard. — The  divine,  heavenly  calling.  "  Who  hath  called  you  unto  His 
kingdom  and  glory  "  (ver.  1 2) — His  own  glorious  kingdom.  We  are  invited  to  enter 
this  kingdom  on  earth,  and  participate  in  its  blessings  ;  but  the  full  splendours  of 
that  kingdom  are  reserved  for  the  heavenly  world.  How  brief  and  insignificant 
will  the  sufferings  and  sorrows  of  the  present  appear,  contrasted  with  the 
ineffable  bliss  of  the  future  state  !  "  Do  you  want  anything  1 "  eagerly  asked 
the  loved  ones  who  surrounded  the  dying  couch  of  Melancthon.  "  Nothing  but 
heaven,"  was  the  gentle  response,  and  he  went  smiling  on  his  way. 

Lessons. — 1.  In  order  to  success  in  preaching  moral  consistency  of  life  must 
accompany  and  sustain  the  faithful  declaration  of  the  truth.  2.  That  the  greatest 
success  is  achieved  when  the  highest  experience  of  the  Christian  life  is  constantly 
enforced  by  both  precept  and  example. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  9-12.  The  High  Moral  Feeling  III.  In  his  behaviour. — 1.  Towards 

that   should   influence    the  Preacher. —  God.      "  Holily."      2.    Towards  others. 

Illustrated  by  Paul's  work  and  conduct.  "  Justly."      3.    Unblamable.       Prudent 

I.  In  preaching  the  gospel.  and  inoffensive.      He  could  appeal  to 

II.  In  labouring  for  his  own  support,  man  and  God. — Stewart. 

&02 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.    THESSALONIANS.    chap.  ii. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  VERSE  13. 

The  Correct  Estimate  of  Gospel  Truth. 

We  have  before  stated  that  the  population  of  Thessalonica  consisted  of  two 
diverse  classes,  Greek  and  Jew — the  one  representing  the  philosophy  of  paganism, 
the  other  being  the  custodian  of  the  sacred  truths  of  Revelation.  Among  the 
Hebrews  Moses  was  recognised  as  the  central  human  figure  and  head  of  their 
legal  system,  and  his  words  were  profoundly  venerated  ;  and  the  Gentiles  were 
not  less  devout  and  ardent  in  their  admiration  of  Plato  and  his  far-seeing  wisdom. 
The  influence  of  these  two  systems  was  all-potent  with  the  Thessalonians ;  it 
supplied  thought,  moulded  character  and  life,  and  filled  up  the  widest  circle  of 
their  hopes.  The  gospel  impinged  upon  these  ancient  and  revered  institutions, 
and  they  reeled  beneath  the  shock.  The  bigoted  followers  of  Moses  and  Plato 
were  compelled  to  admit  the  higher  authority  of  the  apostolic  message.  They 
formed  a  correct  estimate  of  gospel  truth  when  they  "  received  it,  not  as  the 
word  of  men,  but  as  it  is  in  truth,  the  word  of  God." 

1.  The  gospel  is  superior  to  all  human  wisdom. — It  is  "  not  the  word  of  men." 
1.  Human  wisdom  is  limited  in  its  range.  The  greatest  mind  is  restricted  in 
its  knowledge,  and  imperfect  in  using  what  it  knows.  A  celebrated  Roman 
scholar  once  exclaimed  with  petulance  and  disgust :  "  The  human  mind  wanders 
in  a  diseased  delirium,  and  it  is  therefore  not  surprising  that  there  is  no  possible 
folly  which  philosophers,  at  one  time  or  another,  have  not  propounded  as  a  lesson 
of  wisdom." 

2.  Human  wisdom  is  changeable. — Aristotle,  the  great  father  of  natural 
philosophy,  summed  up  his  impressions  on  this  subject  with  his  usual  hard, 
unyielding  logic  when  he  said  :  "  There  is  no  difference  between  what  men  call 
knowledge  and  mere  opinion ;  therefore,  as  all  opinion  is  uncertain,  there  can  be 
no  certainty  in  human  knowledge." 

3.  Human  wisdom  is  unsatisfying. — It  is  with  a  sigh  of  bitter  disappointment 
that  one  of  the  most  profound  thinkers  of  antiquity  concluded  his  long  and  deep 
inquiry  into  human  affairs,  and  summed  up  the  result  with  these  sad,  melancholy 
words  :  "  Nothing  can  be  known ;  nothing  therefore  can  be  learned  ;  nothing  can 
be  certain  ;  the  senses  are  limited  and  delusive  ;  intellect  is  weak  ;  life  is  short  !  " 

II.  The  gospel  is  essentially  divine. — 1.  It  is  authoritative.  There  is  an  old 
proverb,  "  When  the  lion  roars,  the  beasts  of  the  forest  tremble."  So  when  the 
gospel  speaks,  unbelievers  may  well  be  filled  with  fear.  Milton  thus  describes 
Adam  in  his  innocency  advancing  to  meet  his  celestial  visitor  :  He 

"  walks  forth  without  more  train 
Accompanied  than  with  His  own  complete 
Perfections  :  in  Himself  was  all  His  state." 

In  like  manner  God's  word  comes  to  us  clothed  with  the  majesty  and  authority 
of  its  own  innate  power.  It  bends  the  ear  to  attention,  the  mind  to  faith,  the 
heart  to  reverence,  the  will  and  conscience  to  obedience. 

2.  It  is  immutable. — It  is  "  the  word  of  the  Lord  that  liveth  and  abideth  for 
ever."     (1)  Its  promises  are  sure  ;  (2)  its  threatenings  will  certainly  be  executed. 

3.  It  is  complete. — There  is  nothing  to  add,  nothing  to  subtract.  It  contains 
the  fullest  revelation  of  God,  of  man,  of  eternal  issues — such  as  can  never  be 
found  elsewhere. 

4.  It  is  worthy  of  universal  credence. — "  If  we  receive  the  witness  of  men,  the 
witness  of  God  is  greater."  It  is  to  the  everlasting  commendation  of  the  Thessa- 
lonians, and  of  millions  since  their  day,  that  when  they  heard  the  word  of  God 
they  "  received  it,  not  as  the  word  of  men,  but  as  it  is  in  truth,  the  word  of  God." 

III.  The  gospel  is   efficacious  in   transforming  character. — "  Which  effec- 

503 


chap.  ii.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   THESSALONIANS. 


tually  worketh  also  in  you  that  believe."  As  the  planet  receiving  the  light  of 
the  sun  is  transformed  into  an  imitation  sun,  so  the  believing  soul  receiving  the 
light  of  the  word  is  changed  into  the  image  of  that  word.  Whatever  the 
divine  word  prescribes,  that  it  works  in  us.  Does  it  prescribe  repentance  ? — it 
works  repentance  ;  faith  1 — it  works  faith  ;  obedience  ? — it  works  obedience ; 
knowledge  ? — it  enlightens  to  know.  Its  transforming  power  is  continually 
demonstrated.  It  makes  the  niggardly  generous,  the  profane  holy,  the 
drunkard  sober,  the  profligate  chaste.  Faith  is  the  vital  force  that  connects 
the  soul  with  this  converting  power. 

IV.  The  correct  estimate  of  gospel  truth  is  matter  of  ceaseless  thanksgiving 
to  the  preacher. — "  For  this  cause  also  thank  we  God  without  ceasing."  No 
disappointment  is  keener  to  the  anxious  preacher  than  that  of  unproductive 
labour.  Some  of  the  choicest  ministers  of  God  have  to  mourn  over  comparative 
failure.  Think  of  the  anguish  of  the  sympathetic  Jeremiah  when  the  word  of 
the  Lord  which  he  declared  was  turned  into  daily  reproach  and  derision ;  and 
of  Ezekiel,  when  he  wept  over  rebellious  Israel !  But  the  joy  of  success  is  irre- 
pressible, and  the  full  heart  pours  out  its  thanks  to  God.  "  They  joy  before  Thee 
according  to  the  joy  in  harvest,  and  as  men  rejoice  when  they  divide  the  spoil." 

Lessons. — 1.  The  word  of  man,  while  it  may  charm  the  understanding,  is  power- 
less to  change  the  heart.  2.  The  correct  estimate  of  gospel  truth  is  to  regard  it  as 
the  word  of  God.  3.  The  word  of  God  is  efficacious  to  the  individual  only  as  it 
is  received  believingly. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSE. 

The  Efficacy  of  the  Word  of  God  and         II.    In    what    manner    it     should 

the  Way  of  receiving  it.  be   received. — 1.     With   attention    and 

I.  The    description    given    of    the  reverence.       2.     With     humility    and 

word. — 1.  The  word  not  of  men,  but  of  teachableness.      3.    As    the    instrument 

God.    2.  Known  by  its  effects.     (1)  Pro-  for     conversion     and     edification. — E. 

ducing  conviction  of  sin.     (2)  Binding  Cooper. 
up  the  broken  heart. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF   VERSE   14. 

Suffering :  the  Test  of  Conversion. 

It  often  happens  that  suffering  reveals  new  features  of  individual  character, 
and  awakens  powers  that  were  before  dormant.  It  takes  a  great  deal  to 
thoroughly  rouse  some  people.  We  are  told  that  Agrippa  had  a  dormouse  that 
slumbered  so  profoundly  that  it  would  never  wake  till  cast  into  a  cauldron  of 
boiling  lead.  So  there  are  some  natures  which  put  forth  all  their  powers  only 
when  in  suffering  and  extremity.  The  piety  of  God's  people  has  been  most 
severely  tested  in  the  midst  of  persecution  and  affliction.  The  faith  of  thousands 
has  failed  in  the  hour  of  trial,  while  those  who  have  borne  the  strain  have  gained 
an  accession  of  moral  nerve  and  bravery.  The  Thessalonians  imitated  the 
Churches  in  Judea  in  boldly  facing  the  storm  of  malignant  opposition,  and 
standing  under  it  with  calm,  unconquerable  firmness. 

I.  The  suffering  of  the  Thessalonians  had  a  common  origin. — "  For  ye  also 
have  suffered  like  things  of  your  own  countrymen,  even  as  they  have  of  the 
Jews."  Just  as  the  Jews  who  embraced  Christianity  met  with  the  maddest 
violence  from  their  own  unbelieving  countrymen,  so  the  Gentiles  found  their 
fiercest  foes  among  their  fellow-countrymen,  who  blindly  clung  to  the  worship  of 
the  gods.     It  is  the  unkindest  cut  of  all  that  comes  from  the  sword  of  our  own 

504 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.   THESSALONIANS.    chap.  II. 


people — people  with  whom  we  have  lived  in  amity  and  concord,  but  from  whom 
conscience  compels  us  to  differ.  Who  can  fathom  the  deep  anguish  of  the 
Psalmist  sounding  in  that  sharp,  bitter  cry  of  startled  surprise,  "  For  it  was  not 
an  enemy  that  reproached  me,  then  I  could  have  borne  it.;  but  it  was  thou,  a 
man,  mine  equal,  my  guide  and  mine  acquaintance  "  !  It  was  a  horrible  dis- 
covery of  nature  engaged  in  a  terrible  suicidal  war  with  itself  !  Nature  grown 
monstrously  unnatural  and  savagely  retaliating  on  its  own  :  natural  love  turned 
into  unnatural  enmity  !  What  a  revelation,  too,  is  this  of  the  desperate  nature 
of  all  persecution  !  Its  insensate  malice  rudely  sunders  all  bonds  of  fatherland, 
friendship,  and  kindred.  The  close  affinity  between  Cain  and  Abel  does  not 
arrest  the  murderer's  hand ;  the  tender  ties  between  Saul  and  David,  woven 
with  much  reciprocal  kindness  and  affection,  avail  not  to  curb  the  mad  cruelty 
of  the  infuriate  king.  Ah  !  how  deep  and  changeless  is  the  truth,  "  All  that 
will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  shall  suffer  persecution."  The  suffering  that  tests 
is  still  from  the  same  source,  "A  man's  foes  are  they  of  his  own  household." 

II.  The  suffering  of  the  Thessalonians  was  borne  with  exemplary  Christian 
fortitude. — "  For  ye,  brethren,  became  followers  of  the  Churches  of  God,  which 
in  Judea  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  The  same  thought  is  expressed  in  the  first 
chapter,  where  the  apostle  says,  "  Ye  became  followers  of  us  and  of  the  Lord." 
Tor  at  the  head  of  the  long  line  is  Jesus,  the  Captain  of  salvation ;  and  all 
whom  He  leads  to  glory  walk  in  His  steps,  imitate  His  example,  and  so  become 
followers  one  of  another.  It  is  not,  however,  suffering  in  itself  that  purifies  and 
exalts  Christian  character,  so  much  as  the  spirit  in  which  it  is  borne.  The 
hardest  point  of  obedience  is  to  obey  in  suffering.  It  was  enough  to  cool  the 
fiery  ambition  of  the  aspiring  disciples  when  Jesus  said,  "  Are  ye  able  to  drink 
of  the  cup  that  I  shall  drink  of  ?  "  And  yet  the  following  of  Christ  in  suffering 
is  the  true  test  of  discipleship.  "  He  that  taketh  not  his  cross  and  followeth  Me 
is  not  worthy  of  Me."  It  is  a  grand  proof  of  the  supernatural  efficacy  of  gospel 
truth  that  it  inspires  so  intense  a  love  of  it  as  to  make  us  willing  to  endure  the 
most  exquisite  suffering  for  its  sake.  The  love  of  truth  becomes  supreme.  John 
Huss,  lamenting  the  rupture  of  an  old  and  valued  friendship,  said :  "  Paletz  is 
my  friend  ;  truth  is  my  friend  ;  and  both  being  my  friends,  it  is  my  sacred  duty 
to  give  the  first  honour  to  truth."  The  soul,  penetrated  with  this  sublime 
devotion  to  truth,  will  pass  unscathed  the  fiery  test  of  suffering.  On  the  destruc- 
tion by  fire  of  the  London  Alexandra  Palace  a  few  years  ago,  it  was  found  that, 
while  many  specimens  of  old  English  porcelain  exhibited  there  were  reduced  to 
a  black,  shapeless  mass,  the  true  porcelain  of  Bristol,  though  broken  into  frag- 
ments, still  retained  its  whiteness,  and  even  its  most  delicate  shades  of  colour, 
uninjured  by  the  fire.  So  the  truly  good,  though  wounded  and  maimed,  shall 
survive  the  fiercest  trial,  and  retain  intact  all  that  specially  distinguishes  and 
beautifies  the  Christian  character. 

Lessons. — 1.  Our  love  of  the  gospel  is  tested  by  what  we  suffer  for  it.  2.  The 
similarity  of  experience  in  all  times  and  places  is  a  strong  evidence  of  the  truth  of 
the  Christian  religion.     3.  Suffering  does  not  destroy,  but  builds  up  and  perfects. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  15,  16. 

The  Fury  of  the  Old  Religion  against  the  New. 

It  is  the  natural  order  of  things  that  the  old  must  give  place  to  the  new.  The 
inexorable  operation  of  the  law  of  progress  is  seen  in  a  thousand  different  forms. 
In  the  world  of  vegetation  the  old  life  is  continually  yielding  supremacy  to  the 
new.  The  leaves,  buds,  and  blossoms  of  the  tree,  as  they  force  their  way  to 
the  light,  fling  their  shadows  on  the  grave  where  their  predecessors  lie  decayed 

505 


chap.  ii.    HOMILETIC  C0MMEN1ARY:   I.   THESSALONIANS. 


and  buried — life  blooming  amid  the  ghastly  emblems  of  death.  And,  in  the 
world  of  religious  thought  and  opinion,  while  divine  truth  remains  in  its  essence 
unchangeably  the  same,  old  forms  and  old  definitions  are  ever  giving  place  to 
the  new.  The  transition  from  the  old  to  a  new  order  of  things  in  the  progress 
of  religion  is  not  always  accomplished  without  opposition.  Age  is  naturally 
and  increasingly  tenacious ;  and  the  old  religion  looks  upon  the  new  with 
suspicion,  with  jealousy,  with  fear,  with  anger.  The  Jews  had  resisted  the 
attempts  of  their  own  divinely  commissioned  prophets  to  rouse  the  nation  to  a 
purer  faith  and  more  vigorous  religious  life  ;  but  their  fury  reached  its  climax 
in  their  blind,  unreasonable,  and  fiendish  opposition  to  Christianity.  The  text 
describes  the  fury  of  the  old  religion  against  the  new. 

I.  The  fury  of  the  Jews  is  seen  in  their  inhuman  treatment  of  the  great 
leaders  of  religious  thought. — "  Who  both  killed  the  Lord  Jesus  and  their  own 
prophets,  and  have  persecuted  us  "  (ver.  15). 

1.  They  plotted  against  the  life  of  the  world's  Redeemer  ;  and  in  spite  of  insufficient 
evidence  to  convict,  and  the  endeavours  of  the  Roman  procurator  to  release,  they 
clamoured  for  the  immediate  crucifixion  of  their  innocent  Victim,  exclaiming  in 
the  wild  intoxication  of  malignant  passion,  "His  blood  be  on  us  and  on  our 
children " — a  self-invoked  imprecation  that  fell  on  them  with  terrible  and 
desolating  vengeance. 

2.  The  sin  of  murder  already  darkly  stained  their  race. — The  best  and  noblest 
of  their  prophets  were  unoffending  victims :  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Amos,  Zechariah, 
met  with  violent  deaths.  The  charge  of  the  proto-martyr  Stephen  was  un- 
answerable (Acts  vii.  52). 

3.  The  apostles  were  subjected  to  similar  treatment. — "  And  have  persecuted  us  "  A 
— have  chased  and  driven  us  out.  They  drove  them  out  of  Thessalonica,  after- 
wards out  of  Beroaa,  and  were  at  that  moment  engaged  in  instigating  an 
insurrection  to  drive  the  apostle  out  of  Corinth.  The  spirit  of  persecution  is 
unchanged.  Wherever  the  attempt  is  made  to  raise  the  Church  from  the  grave 
of  spiritual  death  and  reanimate  her  creed  and  ritual  with  intenser  reality  and 
life,  it  is  met  with  a  jealous,  angry  opposition.  What  a  wretched,  short-sighted 
policy  does  persecution  reveal !  It  is  the  idolised  weapon  of  the  tyrant  and  the 
coward,  the  sport  of  the  brutal,  the  sanguinary  carnival  of  demons  ! 

II.  The  fury  of  the  Jews  was  displeasing  to  God. — "  They  please  not  God  " 
(ver.  15).  They  fondly  imagined  they  were  the  favourites  of  heaven,  and  that  all 
others  were  excluded  from  the  divine  complacency.  They  had  the  words  of  the 
law  carefully  committed  to  memory,  and  could  quote  them  with  the  utmost 
facility  to  serve  their  own  purpose.  They  would  support  their  proud  assumption 
of  superiority  and  exclusiveness  by  quoting  Deut.  xiv.  2,  wilfully  shutting  their 
eyes  to  the  vital  difference  between  the  holy  intention  of  Jehovah  and  their 
miserably  defective  realisation  of  that  intention.  In  their  opposition  to 
Christianity  they  thought  they  were  doing  God  service ;  yet  all  the  time  they 
were  displeasing  to  Him.  How  fatally  blinding  is  sin,  goading  the  soul  to  the 
commission  of  the  most  horrible  crimes  under  the  sacred  guise  of  virtue ! 

III.  The  fury  of  the  Jews  was  hostile  to  man. — 1.  Their  hostility  was  directed 
against  the  world  of  mankind.  "  Are  contrary  to  all  men  "  (ver.  15).  The  Jews 
of  that  period  delighted  in  hatching  all  kinds  of  "  sedition,  privy  conspiracy,  and 
rebellion."  They  were  the  adversaries  of  all,  the  despisers  of  all.  Tacitus,  the 
Eoman  historian,  brands  them  as  "  the  enemies  of  all  men " ;  and  Apion,  the 
Egyptian,  according  to  the  admission  of  Josephus,  calls  them  "  atheists  and 
misanthropes — in  fact,  the  most  witless  and  dullest  of  barbarians." 

2.  Their  hostility  was  embittered  by  a  despicable  religious  jealousy. — "  Forbidding 
us  to  speak  to  the  Gentiles,  that  they  might  be  saved"  (ver.  16).  Here  the  fury 
of  the  old  religion  against  the  new  reached  its  climax.     It  is  the  perfection  of 

506 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    t.    THESSALONIANS.    chap.  it. 


bigotry  and  cruelty  to  deny  to  our  fellow-men  the  only  means  of  salvation. 
Into  what  monsters  of  barbarity  will  persecution  turn  men  !  Pharaoh  persisted 
to  such  a  degree  of  unreasonableness  as  to  chastise  the  Hebrews  for  not 
accomplishing  impossibilities  !  Julian,  the  apostate  from  Christianity,  carried 
his  vengeful  spirit  to  his  deathbed,  and  died  cursing  the  Nazarene  ! 

IV.  The  fury  of  the  Jews  hurried  them  into  irretrievable  ruin. — 1.  Their 
wickedness  was  wilfully  persistent.  "To  fill  up  their  sins  alway"  (ver.  16) — at 
all  times,  now  as  much  as  ever.  So  much  so,  the  time  is  now  come  when  the 
cup  of  their  iniquity  is  filled  to  the  brim,  and  nothing  can  prevent  the  consequent 
punishment.  The  desire  to  sin  grows  with  its  commission.  "  Sinners,"  says  St. 
Gregory,  "  would  live  for  ever  that  they  might  sin  for  ever  " — a  powerful  argu- 
ment for  the  endlessness  of  future  punishment.     The  desire  to  sin  is  endless. 

2.  Their  punishment  was  inevitable  and  complete. — "  For  the  v/rath  is  come 
upon  them  to  the  uttermost "  (ver.  16) — is  even  now  upon  them.  The  process 
has  begun ;  their  fury  to  destroy  others  will  accelerate  their  own  destruction. 
Punishment  fell  upon  the  wicked,  unbelieving,  and  resisting  Jews,  and  utter 
destruction  upon  their  national  status  and  religious  supremacy  (vide  Josephus, 
Wars,  Books  v.,  vi.). 

Lessons. — 1.  There  is  a  fearful  possibility  of  sinking  into  a  lifeless  formality, 
and  blind,  infatuate  opposition  to  the  good.  2.  The  rage  of  man  against  the  truth 
defeats  its  own  ends,  and  recoils  in  vengeance  on  himself 

GERM  NOTES   ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  15,  16.  The  Persecuting  Jews —         IV.  Have  themselves  been  perse- 

I.  Often  misled  by  professed  zeal  cuted  by  all  the  nations  among  whom 
for  truth.  they  sojourned. 

II.  Tortured    and    murdered    the 

noblest  men  of  their  own  race.  V.  Furnish  an  unanswerable  argu- 

III.  Opposed  the  gospel  with  violent     ment  for  the  truth  of  Christianity, 
and  unreasoning  severity. 


MAIN  HOMILETIOS  OF   THE   PARAGRAPH— Verses  17—20. 

The  Power  of  Satan,  Great  but  Restricted. 

St.  Paul  had  a  profound,  unhesitating  belief  in  the  reality  and  personal 
activity  of  Satan.  An  examination  of  the  apostle's  own  writings  and  discourses 
places  this  beyond  doubt.  We  need  refer  to  but  a  few  passages.  Satan  is 
11  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,  the  spirit  that  now  worketh  in  the  children 
of  disobedience  "  (Eph.  ii.  2) ;  "  the  god  of  this  world,  blinding  the  minds  of  them 
which  believe  not "  (2  Cor.  iv.  4).  To  convert  to  the  Christian  religion  is  to 
bring  men  "from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God"  (Acts  xxvi.  18).  To  relapse 
is  "  to  turn  aside  after  Satan"  (1  Tim.  v.  15).  To  commit  sin  is  to  "  give  place 
to  the  devil "  (Eph.  iv.  27).  If  Paul  suffered  from  some  grievous  bodily  ailment 
that  checked  him  in  his  evangelical  labours,  it  was  "  the  angel  of  Satan  to  buffet 
him"  (2  Cor.  xii.  17);  and  when  he  was  prevented  from  paying  a  visit  to  the 
struggling  Church  at  Thessalonica,  it  was  "  Satan  that  hindered  him."    Observe  : — 

I.  The  power  of  Satan  forcing  an  unwilling  separation. — "  But  we,  brethren, 
being  taken  from  you  for  a  short  time  in  presence,  not  in  heart  "  (ver.  17). 

1.  The  separation  was  painful,  but  temporary. — "Being  taken  from  you" — 
literally,  being  orphaned  of  you.  This  grief  was  like  that  of  a  father  bereft  of 
his  children,  or  children  of  their  parents.  Their  emotions  were  expressed  by 
Jacob — "  If  I  am  bereaved  of  my  children,  I  am  bereaved."   They  hoped  speedily 

507 


chap.  ii.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.   THESSALONIANS. 


to  return  ;  and,  after  the  lapse  of  five  years,  their  hope  was  realised.     Satan 
acted  by  means  of  wicked  men  (Acts  xvii.  5-8,  13). 

2.  The  separation  did  not  lessen  their  spiritual  attachment. — "  In  presence,  not 
in  heart."  Satan  may  deprive  of  the  opportunity  of  social  intercourse,  but  not 
of  reciprocal  Christian  love.  Augustine,  referring  to  different  kinds  of  friendship, 
shows  the  pre-eminence  of  the  spiritual,  where  the  link  is  grace  and  the  Spirit  of 
God:  "Natural  affection  want  of  presence  diminisheth  ;  mundane  friendship, 
where  profit  makes  the  union,  want  of  profit  unlooseth ;  but  spiritual  amity 
nothing  dissolves,  no,  not  that  which  dissolves  all  others,  lack  of  society." 

II.  The  power  of  Satan  hindering  an  earnestly  desired  visit. — 1.  Opposition 
intensified  their  desire  to  see  their  converts.  "  Endeavoured  the  more  abundantly 
to  see  your  face  with  great  desire  "  (ver.  17).  As  lime  is  inflamed  by  water,  as 
a  stream  grows  more  furious  by  the  obstacles  set  against  it,  so  genuine  affection 
is  increased  in  fervour  by  that  which  opposes  it. 

2.  The  opposition  succeeded  in  baffling  repeated  attempts  to  carry  out  that 
desire. — "  Wherefore,  we  would  have  come  unto  you,  even  I  Paul,  once  and 
again;  but  Satan  hindered  us"  (ver.  18).  The  apostle  halted  at  Beroea  on  his 
way  to  Athens,  and  probably  attempted  then  to  return  to  Thessalonica,  but  was 
thwarted  in  his  design.  Though  no  express  reference  is  made  in  the  history 
to  the  agency  of  Satan,  Paul  had  unmistakable  evidence  of  its  operation  in  many 
ways.  Satan  hindered  us — perhaps  by  imprisonment,  tempests  at  sea,  or  by 
keeping  him  so  fully  occupied  with  incessant  conflicts  and  ever-new  tribulations 
of  his  own,  as  to  leave  him  no  leisure  for  carrying  out  his  plan.  The  verb 
signifies  to  cut  a  trench  in  the  way  of  a  pursuing  enemy,  so  as  to  hinder  his 
progress. 

III.  The  power  of  Satan  unable  to  rob  the  Christian  worker  of  the  joy  and 
reward  of  success. — Great  as  is  the  power  of  Satan,  it  is  not  omnipotent.  The 
Christian  warrior  can  successfully  withstand  it  (Eph.  vi.  11-13);  and  he  is 
assured  that  God  will  bruise  Satan  under  his  feet  (Pom.  xvi.  20). 

1.  Success  in  soul-saving  is  productive  of  unutterable  joy. — "  For  what  is  our 
hope,  or  joy,  or  crown  of  rejoicing?  Are  not  even  ye? "  (ver.  19).  The  merchant 
rejoices  over  his  gains,  the  warrior  over  his  victories,  the  artist  over  the  achieve- 
ments of  genius ;  but  there  is  no  joy  so  sweet,  so  exquisite,  so  abiding,  as  the 
successful  winner  of  souls. 

2.  The  joy  of  success  in  soul-saving  will  be  among  the  highest  rewards  of  the 
future. — "  In  the  presence  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  at  His  coming  %  For  ye  are 
our  glory  and  joy"  (vers.  19,  20).  The  return  of  Christ  to  heaven,  after  the 
judgment,  is  here  compared  to  the  solemnity  of  a  triumph,  in  which  the  apostle 
is  to  appear  crowned  in  token  of  victory  over  the  false  religions  of  the  world, 
attended  by  his  converts ;  and  because  they  are  the  cause  of  his  being  thus 
crowned,  they  are,  by  a  beautiful  figure  of  speech,  called  his  crown  of  rejoicing. 
Special  honour  is  promised  to  the  successful  worker  (Dan.  xii.  3).  (1)  Joy 
enhanced  by  the  recognitions  in  the  future  life.  "  Are  not  even  ye  in  the 
presence  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  at  His  coming  %  "  If  Paul  knows  his  converts 
in  the  heavenly  world,  shall  we  not  know  our  loved  ones  who  have  gone  before  ? 
(2)  By  the  presence  and  approbation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  for  whom  we  have 
laboured.  "  In  Thy  presence  is  fulness  of  joy;  at  Thy  right  hand  there  are 
pleasures  for  evermore." 

Lessons. — 1.  The  power  of  Satan  works  through  many  agencies  ;  therefore  we 
have  need  of  watchfulness.  2.  The  power  of  Satan  is  limited  ;  therefore  we  need 
not  be  discouraged; 


508 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    THESSALONIANS.    chap.  in. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  18.  Satanic  Hindrances — 

I.  Are  veiled  by  subtle  and  specious 
pretexts. 

II.  Work  mischief  in  individuals 
and  in  Churches. 

III.  May  succeed  in  diverting  for 
a  time  the  best  intentions  of  the 
good. 

IV.  Should  be  diligently  and  prayer- 
fully watched. 


V.  Are  frustrated   by  a    superior 
power. 

Yers.  19,  20.  The  Joy  of  a  Minister 
in  his  Converts — 

I.  As  they  are  living  witnesses  of 
the  power  of  the  gospel. 

II.  As  they  are  the  crowning  reward 
of  his  labours. 

III.  As  he  shares  the  joy  of  Christ 
in  their  salvation  and  final  glory. 


CHAPTER  III. 


CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  When  we  could  no  longer  forbear. — This  latter  word  occurs  in  1  Cor.  xiii.  7  to 

describe  the  endurance  of  love. 

Ver.  2.  Fellow-labourer  is  omitted  from  the  R.V.  text,  which  reads,  "  our  brother  and 
God's  minister  in  the  gospel  of  Christ."  To  establish  you.— To  fix  firmly  ;  as  Christ  said  to 
Peter,  "  StaUish  thy  brethren." 

Ver.  3.  That  no  man  should  be  moved. — The  word  seems  to  imply  "  moved  to  softness,"  as 
Professor  Jowett  intimates.  It  is  used  especially  of  the  motion  of  a  dog's  tail  as  it  fawns  on 
its  master.  So  the  word  passes  over  to  the  mental  sphere  (compare  on  St.  James's  figure,  i.  6). 
"  That  no  man  should  amidst  his  calamities  be  allured  by  the  flattering  hope  of  a  more 
pleasant  life  to  abandon  his  duty  "  (Tittmanri). 

Ver.  4.  We  should  suffer  tribulation. — In  the  verse  previous  the  noun  from  the  same 
root  as  the  one  here  translated  "  suffer  tribulation  "  is  given  as  "  afflictions."  "  The  actual 
persecution  of  the  Eoman  government  was  slight,  but  what  may  be  termed  social  persecution 
and  the  illegal  violence  employed  towards  the  first  disciples  unceasing  "  (Jowett). 

Ver.  5.  When  I  could  no  longer  forbear  .  .  .  sent  to  know. — The  whole  verse  shows  the 
tension  of  the  apostle's  mind. 

Ver.  6.  And  brought  us  good  tidings.— R.V.  "  glad  tidings."  "  The  one  word  for  '  brought- 
glad-tidings  '  everywhere  else  in  New  Testament  signifies  the  glad  tidings.  .  .  .  Hence  the 
peculiar  force  of  the  word  here.  ...  It  was  a  gospel  sent  to  him,  in  return  for  his  gospel 
brought  to  them  "  (Findlay).  Ye  have  good  remembrance  of  us.— Kindly  remembrance. 
The  tempter  had  not  been  able  to  turn  to  gall  the  sweet  thoughts  of  grateful  appreciation  of 
the  apostle's  work. 

Ver.  8.  For  now  we  live,  if  ye  stand  fa3t  in  the  Lord. — The  man  who  later  could  say,  "  For 
to  me  to  live  is  Christ,"  prepares  us  for  that  saying  by  this.  Life  to  him  is  desirable  only  as 
others  benefit  by  it. 

Ver.  9.  For  what  thanks  can  we  render  to  God  again. — In  the  R.V.  "  again  "  is  joined  with 
"  render,"  representing  the  one  word  of  St.  Paul.  The  same  verb  is  found  twice  in 
Luke  xiv.  14  as  "  recompense."  The  apostle  feels  what  a  poor  requital  any  thanksgiving 
must  be  for  the  mercy  of  the  good  news  from  Thessalonica  (see  2  Thess.  i.  6). 

Ver.  11.  Direct  our  way  unto  you. — Acts  xvi.  6,  7  should  be  read.  Satan  might  hinder 
(ii.  18) ;  if  God  "  makes  straight "  the  way,  progress  will  be  easy. 

Ver.  12.  The  Lord  make  you  abound  in  love. — The  Lord  may  here  be  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  the 
three  persons  of  the  Trinity  will  be  appealed  to  (cf.  ver.  13,  as  in  2  Thess.  iii.  5).  So  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  called  the  Lord  (2  Cor.  iii.  17).  Love  is  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  (Gal.  v.  22), 
and  His  office  is  to  establish  in  holiness  (ver.  13 ;  1  Pet.  i.  2)  (Faussett). 

£09 


chap.  in.     HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY :    I.    THESSALONIANS. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1,  2. 

A  Difficult  and  Important  Mission. 

Paul  had  been  compelled  to  leave  Tbessalonica  in  consequence  of  the  malignant 
opposition  of  the  Jews.  They  thirsted  for  his  life,  and  it  would  still  be  dangerous 
for  him  to  visit  the  city.  But  Timothy  might  venture  where  it  would  be  perilous 
for  the  apostle  to  appear.  While  the  wrath  of  the  Jews  raged  against  the  gospel 
as  a  whole,  it  culminated  in  its  fury  around  the  head  of  Paul,  the  ringleader  and 
champion  of  the  movement.  Fearing  that  his  absence  might  be  misconstrued, 
and  anxious  to  strengthen  the  faith  of  the  infant  Church  in  the  midst  of  trial, 
the  apostle  determines  to  send  a  trusted  messenger.  It  is  a  significant  testimony 
to  the  sound  judgment  and  prudence  of  Timothy,  that  he  is  selected  for  this 
difficult  and  important  mission. 

I.  This  mission  was  the  suggestion  of  an  uncontrollable  anxiety. — "  Wherefore, 
when  we  could  no  longer  forbear  "  (ver.  1).  This  anxiety  sprang  from  the  intensity 
of  the  apostle's  love.  It  is  a  striking  feature  of  genuine,  Christian  love  that, 
while  it  bears  with  uncomplaining  patience  any  amount  of  external  suffering,  it 
is  restless  with  a  holy  impatience  of  delay  in  doing  good  to  those  it  embraces. 
The  devoted  mother  can  endure  anything  but  restraint  in  her  desire  to  promote 
the  best  welfare  of  her  child.  David  was  indifferent  to  the  exposure  and  dangers 
of  his  wilderness-life ;  but  his  soul  panted  after  God  with  all  the  raging  thirst 
of  the  hart  in  autumn  for  the  cooling  water-brook. 

II.  This  mission  involved  great  personal  inconvenience. — "  We  thought  it  good 
to  be  left  at  Athens  alone  "  (ver.  1).  The  unselfishness  of  true  love  ever  prefers 
another's  good  to  its  own.  Timothy  had  travelled  so  constantly  with  Paul,  and 
had  been  so  great  a  comfort  to  him  in  his  captivities  and  trials,  that  his  absence 
was  a  keenly  felt  loss.  Specially  was  his  sympathy  and  co-operation  needed  when 
the  great  Gentile  missionary  entered  the  region 

"  Where  on  the  iEgean  shore  a  city  stood, 
Built  nobly,  pure  the  air  and  light  the  soil, 
Athens,  the  eye  of  Greece,  mother  of  arts 
And  eloquence." — Milton. 

"At  Athens  alone."  What  a  sublime  historical  picture  is  portrayed  in  these 
words  !  Christianity  embodied  in  a  single,  lonely  man,  standing  in  the  midst  of 
the  populous  metropolis  of  pagan  culture  and  idolatry  !  Yet  the  power  sustained 
in  that  solitary  man  broke  up  and  scattered  the  huge  fabric  of  heathenism. 
u  Solitude  is  one  of  the  highest  enjoyments  of  which  our  nature  is  susceptible. 
Solitude  is  also,  when  too  long  continued,  capable  of  being  made  the  most  severe, 
indescribable,  unendurable,  source  of  anguish  "  (Deloraine). 

III.  This  mission  was  entrusted  to  a  thoroughly  qualified  messenger. — The 
high  character  of  Timothy  and  the  relations  existing  between  the  two  preachers 
are  brought  out  in  the  epithets  applied  to  him.  "  Timothy  our  brother  "  (ver.  2). 
In  other  places  Paul  calls  him  his  "  own  son  in  the  faith,"  his  "  dearly  beloved 
son"  ;  but  in  speaking  of  him  to  the  Churches  he  recognises  him  on  the  equal 
footing  of  a  brother.  He  was  also  a  minister  of  God,  solemnly  set  apart  to  this 
service  by  the  voice  of  prophecy,  and  by  the  consecrating  hands  of  the  presbytery, 
and  of  Paul  himself.  And  finally  he  was  Paul's  fellow -labourer  in  the  gospel  of 
Christ,  not  only  as  all  God's  ministers  are  fellow-labourers,  working  the  work  of 
the  same  Lord,  but  also  on  the  ground  of  that  special  intimacy  of  personal  inter- 
course and  co-operation,  to  which  he  was  from  the  first  admitted  by  the  apostle 
(Lillie).  Thus  Timothy  was  thoroughly  qualified — (1)  to  carry  out  the  apostle's 
wish  concerning  the  Thessalonians,  and  (2)  to  sympathise  with  the  Church's 
peculiar  difficulties  and  trials.  He  was  more  than  a  mere  courier.  He  was 
faithful  to  Paul's  instructions,  and  valuable  to  the  Church  in  himself. 

510 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.   THESSALONIANS.    chap.  hi. 


IV.  This  mission  was  charged  with  a  work  of  high  importance  and  necessity. 

— "  To  establish  you,  and  to  comfort  you,  concerning  your  faith  "  (ver.  2). 

1.  To  establish — to  comfort,  or  set  fast  their  faith  by  a  fresh,  authoritative 
manifestation  of  the  gospel  truth  and  its  divine  evidences ;  and  this  would  be 
done  by  private  conversation  and  public  ministration. 

2.  To  comfort. — The  word  means  also,  and  especially  here,  to  exhoi^t,  though 
doubtless  comfort  would  be  mingled  with  the  exhortation.  The  Thessalonians 
were  exposed  to  the  storm  of  persecution  that  was  everywhere  raging  against  the 
gospel  and  its  adherents,  and  they  were  exhorted  to  steadfastness,  "  that  no  man 
should  be  moved  by  these  afflictions."  Paul  and  Barnabas  had  a  similar  mission 
to  the  Churches  in  Lesser  Asia  (Acts  xiv.  22).  There  are  none  so  strong  in  faith 
but  need  confirmation,  none  so  courageous  but  need  comfort. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  establishment  of  believers  is  ever  a  subject  of  anxiety  to  the  true 
minister.  2.  The  desire  to  promote  the  highest  welfare  of  the  Church  should  ever  be 
paramount. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSE. 

Yer.   1.    "At    Athens    alone"    (cf.  great  soul. — "  His  spirit  was  stirred  in 

Acts  xvii.  16,  17).     The  Solitude  of  a  him." 

Great  City —  III.  Rouses  to  immediate  action  in 

I.  Affords  a  painful  opportunity  to  promoting  the  welfare  of  the  citizens. — 
reflect  on  its  moral  condition. — "He  "  Therefore  disputed  he  in  the  synagogue 
saw  the  city  wholly  given  to  idolatry."  and  in  the  market  daily." 

II.  Awakens  profound  concern  in  a 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  3—5. 

The  Perils  of  Suffering. 

A  storm  among  the  Highlands  of  Scotland  often  effects  great  and  rapid 
changes.  The  huge  mountain  that  slumbers  harmlessly  in  the  sunshine,  with 
such  calm  and  sullen  majesty,  is  transformed  by  the  tempest  into  a  monster 
of  fury.  Its  sides  are  suddenly  sheeted  with  waterfalls,  and  the  ferocious 
torrents  work  devastation  among  the  glens  and  straths  that  lie  in  their 
impetuous  course.  The  trees  and  shrubs  that  are  but  slightly  rooted  are 
swept  away,  and  only  the  firmly  grounded  survive.  So  it  is  when  the  storm 
of  persecution  breaks  upon  the  gospel  and  its  adherents.  The  new  converts,  the 
roots  of  whose  faith  have  not  penetrated  so  deeply  into  the  soil  of  truth,  are  in 
danger  of  being  disturbed  and  carried  away.  Their  peril  is  matter  of  anxiety  to 
the  Christian  worker.  Hence  the  apostle  sends  Timothy,  and  writes  this  epistle 
to  the  Thessalonians,  to  confirm  and  establish  them  in  the  faith.     He  shows : — 

1.  That  suffering  is  the  inevitable  lot  of  God's  people. — 1.  That  suffering  is  a 
divine  ordinance.  "  For  ye  yourselves  know  that  we  are  appointed  thereunto  " 
(ver.  3).  A  strange  way,  one  would  think,  of  reconciling  people  to  affliction,  by 
telling  them  that  they  have  nothing  else  to  expect.  It  is  a  grand  proof  of  the 
triumph  of  the  gospel  over  the  rebellious  human  heart  that  it  prescribes  such  con- 
ditions and  reconciles  men  to  the  acceptance  of  them ;  and  it  does  so  both  by  the 
grace  which  it  imparts  for  the  present  and  by  the  glorious  hope  it  holds  out  for 
the  future.  It  is  laid  down  as  a  law  of  Christian  progress  "  that  we  must,  through 
much  tribulation,  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God."  The  very  purity  of  the 
Church,  imperfect  as  it  is,  coming  into  contact  with  the  sin  and  misery  prevalent 
in  the  world,  produces  suffering.  "  Because  ye  are  not  of  the  world,  but  I  have 
chosen  you  out  of  the  world,  therefore  the  world  hateth  you."     It  is  enough  for 

511 


chap.  in.    EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   Ir   THESSALONIANS. 


us  to  know  that  our  trials  do  not  happen  without  the  knowledge  and  consent 
and  purpose  and  control  of  God,  and  that  their  extent  and  duration  are  regu- 
lated by  His  infinite,  fatherly  wisdom  and  love.  The  divine  appointment  of 
suffering  is  designed  for  our  highest  discipline  and  culture — withdrawing  our 
affections  from  the  temporal  and  centring  them  on  eternal  realities ;  exposing 
our  hypocrisies  and  cleansing  the  moral  corruptions  that  have  entered  into  our 
lives,  like  filth  on  standing  waters,  and  strengthening  us  to  do  the  right,  un- 
dismayed by  the  bitterest  afflictions.  The  greatest  suffering  often  brings  us  into 
the  neighbourhood  of  the  greatest  blessing.  "  Gold  is  cleaner  after  it  has  been 
put  into  the  fire  :  be  thou  gold,  and  the  fiery  persecution  shall  not  hurt  thee." 

2,  That  suffering  was  the  subject  of  frequent  apostolic  warning. — "  For  verily, 
when  we  were  with  you,  we  told  you  before  that  we  should  suffer  tribulation  " 
(ver.  4).  It  is  intimated  here  that  it  was  not  so  much  one  single  statement  on 
some  particular  occasion  as  it  was  the  constant  and  habitual  tenor  of  the  apostle's 
teaching  that  suffering  was  to  be  expected.  Paul  himself  was  an  illustrious 
example  of  heroic  fortitude  in  suffering  for  Christ's  sake.  "  The  Holy  Ghost," 
said  he,  "  witnesseth  in  every  city,  saying  that  bonds  and  affliction  abide  me " 
(Acts  xx.  23).  It  is  both  wise  and  kind  to  forewarn  God's  people  of  coming 
afflictions,  that  they  be  not  overtaken  unexpectedly  and  unprepared.  The  pre- 
dictions of  the  apostle  were  verified  :  "  Even  as  it  came  to  pass,  and  ye  know." 
Their  first  acquaintance  with  the  gospel  was  in  the  midst  of  persecution  and 
trial.  The  violent  opposition  continued,  but  the  warnings  and  exhortations  of 
the  apostle  were  not  in  vain  (2  Thess.  i.  4). 

3.  That  the  suffering  of  God's  people  is  a  cause  of  ministerial  anxiety. — "  For  this 
cause,  when  I  could  no  longer  forbear,  I  sent  to  know  your  faith  "  (ver.  5).  It  has 
been  pithily  said,  "  Calamity  is  man's  true  touchstone."  The  strongest  have 
then  o^nme  a  prey  to  the  malice  and  subtlety  of  Satan.  The  faithful  minister, 
knowing  the  perils  of  suffering  and  the  awful  consequences  of  apostasy,  is 
anxiously  concerned  about  the  faith  of  his  converts.  "  There  are  three  modes  of 
bearing  the  ills  of  life — by  indifference,  which  is  the  most  common  ;  by  philo- 
sophy, which  is  the  most  ostentatious ;  and  by  religion,  which  is  the  most 
effectual "  (Colton). 

II.  That  suffering  exposes  God's  people  to  the  disturbing  forces  of  Satanic 
temptations. — "  Lest  by  some  means  the  tempter  have  tempted  you  "  (ver.  5). 

1.  A  suggestive  designation  of  Satan. — "The  tempter."  What  unspeakable 
vileness,  ruin,  misery,  and  terror  are  suggested  by  that  name  !  All  human  woe 
may  be  traced  directly  up  to  him.  The  greatest  champions  of  Christendom, 
such  as  Paul  and  Luther,  had  the  most  vivid  sense  of  the  personality,  nearness, 
and  unceasing  counter- working  of  this  great  adversary  of  God  and  man.  There 
is  need  of  sleepless  vigilance  and  prayer. 

2.  The  versatility  of  Satanic  temptations. — "  Lest  by  some  means."  He  may 
descend  suddenly,  clothed  with  terror  and  burning  with  wrath,  to  surprise  and 
terrify  into  sin.  More  frequently  he  appears  in  the  seductive  and  more  dangerous 
garb  of  an  angel  of  light,  the  deceptive  phantom  of  what  he  once  was.  Infinite 
are  his  methods  ;  his  aim  is  one — to  suggest  doubts  and  impious  references  as  to 
God's  providential  dealings  of  severity,  and  to  produce  apostasy  from  the  faith. 

III.  That  the  temptations  of  a  suffering  state  imperil  the  work  of  God's 
servants. — "  And  our  labour  be  in  vain  "  (ver.  5).  In  vain  as  regards  the  great  end 
of  their  salvation ;  they  would  lapse  into  their  former  heathenish  state,  and  by 
apostasy  lose  their  heavenly  reward ;  and  in  vain  as  regards  the  joy  which  the 
apostle  anticipated  from  their  ultimate  salvation.  It  is  true  no  work  done  for 
God  is  absolutely  in  vain  j  the  worker  shall  receive  his  just  reward ;  but  it  may 
be  in  vain  with  regard  to  the  object  to  which  his  best  efforts  have  been  directed. 
It  is  bitterly  disappointing  to  see  the  work  that  has  cost   so  much,  utterly 

512 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    THESSALONIANS.    chap.  hi. 


frustrated  by  a  momentary  temptation  of  the  wicked  one.  How  different  might 
have  been  the  moral  history  of  thousands  if  they  had  not  yielded  to  the  first 
fiery  trial  ! 

"  Of  all  the  sad  words  of  tongue  or  pen, 
The  saddest  are  these — it  might  have  been.'" 

IV.  That  God's  people  may  triumph  over  the  greatest  suffering. — "  That  no 
man  should  be  moved  [drawn  away  by  flattery  or  shaken]  by  these  afflictions  " 
(ver.  3).  While  piety  is  tried,  it  is  also  strengthened  by  suffering.  The  watchful 
and  faithful  soul  may  use  his  troubles  as  aids  to  a  richer  experience  and  a  firmer 
consolidation  of  Christian  character.  "  Thus  God  schooleth  and  nurtureth  His 
people,  that  so,  through  many  tribulations,  they  may  enter  into  their  rest. 
Frankincense,  when  it  is  put  into  the  fire,  giveth  the  greater  perfume  ;  spice,  if 
it  be  pounded,  smelleth  the  sweeter  ;  the  earth,  when  it  is  torn  up  by  the  plough, 
becometh  more  fruitful ;  the  seed  in  the  ground,  after  frost  and  snow  and  winter 
storms,  springeth  up  the  ranker ;  the  nigher  the  vine  is  pruned  to  the  stock,  the 
greater  grape  it  yieldeth  ;  the  grape,  when  it  is  most  pressed  and  beaten,  maketh 
the  sweetest  wine  ;  fine  gold  is  the  better  when  it  is  cast  into  the  fire ;  rough 
stones,  with  hewing,  are  squared  and  made  fit  for  the  building ;  cloth  is  rent  and 
cut  that  it  may  make  a  garment ;  linen  that  is  thrown  into  the  tub,  washed, 
and  beaten,  is  the  fairer  "  (Jewell). 

Lessons. — 1.  To  live  a  godly  life  involves  suffering.  2.  A  period  of  suffering  is 
ever  attended  with  powerful  temptations.  3.  The  grace  of  God  is  sufficient  to  sustain 
and  deliver  His  people  amid  the  perils  of  acutest  suffering. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 


Vers.    3-5.    The    Necessity    and    the 
Perils  of  Affliction. 

I.  That  afilictions  are  disturbing  and 
distressing  to  the  children  of  God. 

II.  That  afilictions  are  appointed  by 
God  for  His  people's  good. 

III.  That  Christians  are  forewarned 
to  expect  affliction. 

IV.  That  Satan  uses  affliction  as  a 
means  of  temptation. 


V.  That  the  faithful  minister  must 
labour  and  watch  in  order  to  secure 
the  steadfastness  of  believers  under  his 
care. — Herbert,  the  saintly  poet  of 
the  seventeeth  century,  exhorts  the 
preacher  to  make  the  consolations  of 
the  gospel  his  main  theme  : 

"  Oh,  let  him  speak  of  comfort,  'tis 
Most  wanted  in  this  vale  of  tears." 

— P.  Mearns. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  VERSE  6. 

News  that  gladdens. 

With  what  anxiety  the  father  entrusts  his  son  with  a  commission  to  visit 
an  estate  in  a  distant  land,  and  to  investigate  its  affairs,  which  are  threatened 
tor  the  time  being  with  impending  dangers.  He  is  in  suspense  until  he  receives 
intelligence  of  the  safe  arrival  of  his  loved  messenger,  and  that  there  is  no  reason 
for  apprehension  concerning  the  estate  itself.  But  when  that  son  returns  in 
person  and  assures  him  that  everything  is  prosperous  and  hopeful,  the  father's 
satisfaction  is  complete.  "  As  cold  water  to  a  thirsty  soul,  so  is  good  news  from 
a  far  country."  Such,  in  a  higher  sense,  was  the  experience  of  Paul  when  he 
despatched  Timothy  to  inquire  into  the  condition  of  the  suffering  Thessalonian 
Church,  and  when  he  brought  back  the  cheering  report  as  to  the  fidelity  and 
ailection  of  its  persecuted  members. 


L  L, 


513 


chap.  Hi.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    THESSALONIANS. 


I.  The  apostle    was  gladdened  with  good  tidings  of   faith  maintained. — 

"  Timothy  caine  from  you  to  us,  and  brought  us  good  tidings  of  your  faith." 

1.  Their  faith  in  the  great  truths  of  the  gospel  was  maintained. — The  revelation 
of  divine  truth  is  the  basis  of  faith.  This  truth  as  it  affected  their  salvation  had 
been  clearly,  earnestly,  and  successfully  declared  to  them  by  the  apostle  and  his 
companions.  They  comprehended  its  meaning,  felt  its  force,  embraced  it  in  their 
understanding  and  heart,  and  were  transformed  by  its  agency.  Amid  the  shock 
of  persecution,  and  the  insidious  whisperings  of  false  teachers,  they  held  fast  to 
"the  form  of  sound  words"  they  had  joyfully  received. 

2.  Their  faith  as  a  principle  of  active  spiritual  life  was  maintained. — True  faith 
is  not  simply  a  belief,  but  a  life  ;  not  merely  an  assent  of  the  mind  to  a  grand 
truth  or  a  group  of  correlated  truths,  but  the  impartation  to  the  soul  of  a 
spiritual  force  which  starts  it  on  a  new  career.  It  forms  a  new  era  in  the 
experience  and  history  of  the  soul.  It  unites  us  to  the  living  God,  and  expands  to 
our  view,  however  dimly,  the  vast  outline  of  the  life  of  God  as  the  pattern  of  our 
own.  Their  faith,  as  the  realisation  of  a  life  springing  from  God  and  leading  to 
God,  was  in  sound  and  vigorous  operation. 

II.  The  apostle  was  gladdened  with  good  tidings  of  love  manifested. — 
"  Brought  us  good  tidings  of  your  charity."  Love  is  the  legitimate  fruit  of  a 
genuine  faith,  both  in  its  inward  experience  and  outward  manifestation.  Faith 
and  love  are  indissolubly  combined.  "  And  this  is  His  commandment,  that  we 
should  believe  on  the  name  of  His  Son  Jesus  Christ  and  love  one  another,  as  He 
gave  us  commandment"  (1  John  iii.  23).  The  first  exercise  of  love  is  towards 
God  ;  and  then,  in  ever  widening  and  intensified  outflow,  towards  all  whom  God 
loves.  Such  love  is  impartial  and  universal — manifested  towards  all  in  whom  we 
discern  the  image  of  God,  whatever  their  country,  colour,  rank,  sect,  or  condition. 
Where  faith  and  love  reign  there  is  a  living,  healthy,  and  prosperous  Church. 

III.  The  apostle  was  gladdened  with  good  tidings  of  continued  personal 
regard. — 1.  The  apostle  was  fondly  remembered.  "And  that  ye  have  good 
remembrance  of  us  always."  There  are  some  scenes  of  nature  which,  beheld  but 
for  a  moment,  never  fade  from  the  memory ;  there  are  some  faces  we  can  never 
forget ;  and  there  are  some  individuals,  the  influence  of  whose  character  remains 
with  us  as  a  charm  and  inspiration  through  life.  The  Thessalonians  had  good 
reason  to  remember  Paul.  He  was  the  first  to  proclaim  to  them  the  good  news 
of  salvation  ;  and  how  great  was  their  privilege  to  hear  the  gospel  from  the  lips 
of  such  a  preacher  !  He  counselled  them  in  their  difficulties,  and  sympathised 
with  them  in  their  sufferings.  The  minister  who  first  led  us  to  the  cross  will 
ever  have  the  pre-eminence  in  our  affection  and  the  choicest  spot  in  our  memory. 
A  high  appreciation  of  the  Christian  minister  is  one  of  the  evidences  of  possessing 
genuine  faith  and  love. 

2.  They  were  as  solicitous  as  the  apostle  for  a  renewal  of  Christian  fellowship. — 
"  Desiring  greatly  to  see  us,  as  we  also  to  see  you."  There  is  no  bond  at  once  so 
tender  and  so  strong  as  that  existing  between  the  preacher  and  his  converts. 
He  must  needs  love  the  souls  he  has  been  instrumental  in  saving  and  who  are 
his  glory  and  his  joy.  The  intercourse  between  such  is  of  the  purest  and  highest 
kind.  Never  was  there  a  more  loving  heart  than  that  of  the  apostle  Paul. 
The  Thessalonians  warmly  reciprocated  that  love,  and  longed  to  renew  the 
fellowship  by  which  they  had  so  richly  profited. 

Lessons. — 1.  That  Church  has  the  be  it  reputation  where  faith  is  maintained  and 
love  manifested.  2.  The  Christian  minister  is  cheered  by  the  affection  and  stability 
of  his  converts. 


514 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    1.   THESSALONIANS.     chap.  hi. 


MAIN  H0M1LETIGS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  7—10. 

Steadfastness  of  Believers  a  Source  of  True  Ministerial  Satisfaction. 

The  scholar  finds  his  happiness  in  intellectual  exercises  and  accumulating  stores 
of  knowledge ;  the  politician  in  the  excitement  of  debate  and  the  triumph  of  great 
principles  j  the  scientist  in  testing  and  harmonising  the  laws  of  nature ;  the 
merchant  in  his  gains ;  and  the  minister  of  God's  word  in  the  increase  of  converts 
to  the  truth,  and  in  their  consistency,  fidelity,  and  perseverance  in  the  practice 
of  godliness.  The  truly  Christian  heart  rejoices  in  the  success  of  the  gospel  in 
any  part  of  the  world,  but  more  particularly  in  the  locality  where  personal  labour 
has  been  expended.  The  effect  upon  Paul  of  the  good  tidings  from  Timothy, 
concerning  the  steadfastness  of  the  believers  in  Thessalonica,  is  described  in  these 
verses.     Observe  : — 

1.  Their  steadfastness  was  a  source  of  genuine  comfort. — 1.  The  apostle  was 
comforted  in  the  midst  of  intense  personal  suffering.  "  Therefore,  brethren,  we  were 
comforted  in  all  our  affliction  and  distress  "  (ver.  7).  Paul  was  in  Corinth  when 
he  received  Timothy's  report.  In  that  city  the  customary  opposition  of  the  Jews 
rose  to  an  unwonted  pitch  of  malignity,  and  even  blasphemy,  so  much  so  that  the 
apostle  resolved  to  abandon  them  to  their  fate — "  He  shook  his  raiment,  and  said 
unto  them,  Your  blood  be  upon  your  own  heads  ;  I  am  clean  :  from  henceforth  I 
will  go  unto  the  Gentiles"  (Acts  xviii.  6).  So  great  was  his  anguish  on  behalf  of 
his  own  countrymen,  and  so  manifold  his  cares,  privations,  and  perils,  that  the 
Lord  thought  it  needful  to  encourage  him  with  a  vision,  sajdng,  "  Be  not  afraid : 
I  am  with  thee,  and  no  man  shall  set  on  thee  to  hurt  thee  "  {Ibid.,  9,  10).  The 
bitterness  of  his  afflictions  at  this  time  was  sweetened  by  hearing  of  the  constancy 
of  his  Thessalonian  converts.  It  revived,  refreshed,  and  strengthened  him.  The 
faithlessness  and  disobedience  of  the  people  are  a  grief  to  the  true  minister  now ; 
but  at  last  the  horror  will  be  theirs. 

2.  The  apostle  was  comforted  concerning  their  faith. — "  We  were  comforted  over 
you,  by  your  faith  "  (ver.  7).  Timothy  had  been  commissioned  to  inquire  into 
the  state  of  their  faith,  and  his  report  was  eminently  satisfactory.  He  spoke  not 
only  of  their  faith  as  the  primary  root  of  the  Christian  life,  the  basis  of  all 
stability  and  fruitfulness,  but  of  its  active  outgoings  in  love  to  God  and  in 
affectionate  remembrance  of  the  apostle.  The  Church  is  in  danger  and  a  cause 
of  deep  anxiety  when  its  faith  wavers. 

II.  Their  steadfastness  intensified  the  pleasure  of  living. — "For  now  we  live, 
if  ye  stand  fast  in  the  Lord  "  (ver.  8).  The  apostle  was  perhaps  more  than  usually 
despondent  when  Timothy  arrived.  The  good  news  thrilled  his  soul  with  new  life. 
For  now,  whatever  else  befall — now,  in  the  face  of  the  Jewish  fury  and  Gentile 
scorn — now,  amid  infirmities,  reproaches,  necessities,  persecutions,  distresses,  and 
deaths  oft — now  we  live,  if  ye  standfast  in  the  Lord.  The  relation  of  the  minister 
to  his  people  is  so  close  and  vital  that  they  have  it  in  their  power  to  make  his  life 
happy  or  supremely  miserable.  There  is  a  method  of  destroying  life  without  its 
becoming  utterly  extinct.  Ezekiel  speaks  of  the  false  prophets  whose  lies  made 
the  hearts  of  the  righteous  sad ;  and  we  read  of  Elijah,  under  the  juniper  tree, 
sighing  for  death  because  of  the  idolatry  and  wickedness  of  Judah.  To  lessen 
the  cheerful  flow  of  life,  and  depress  the  spirits  of  the  man  of  God,  is  a  species  of 
murder;  to  starve  him  into  submission  by  studied  neglect  and  privation  is 
diabolical.  The  ministerial  life  and  energy  of  even  an  apostle  depended  on  the 
sympathy,  faith,  and  steadfastness  of  the  brethren  (3  John  v.  4). 

III.  Their  steadfastness  was  productive  of  grateful  joy. — 1.  This  joy  was 
copious  and  sincere. — "  For  the  joy  wherewith  we  joy  before  our  God  "  (ver.  9). 
The  transitions  of  the  emotions  are  rapid.    From  the  midst  of  the  apostle's  grief  a 

515 


chap.  in.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   THESSALONIANS. 


fountain  of  joy  breaks  forth.  This  joy  filled  his  soul  even  in  the  secret  presence 
of  God.  It  was  a  pure,  sincere,  undissembled,  overflowing  joy,  such  as  God  could 
approve. 

2.  This  joy  arose  from  a  disinterested  love. — "  For  your  sakes."  True  love  gives 
us  an  interest  in  the  safety  and  happiness  of  others.  He  who  possesses  this 
never  lacks  joy ;  if  it  flows  not  on  his  own  behalf,  it  does  on  behalf  of  others. 
Bernard  has  said :  "  Of  all  the  motions  and  affections  of  the  soul,  love  is  the  only 
one  we  may  reciprocate  with  God  :  to  re-love  Him  is  our  happiness ;  woe  if  we 
answer  Him  not  in  some  measure  of  re-loving  affection." 

3.  This  joy  was  expressed  in  fervent  thanksgiving. — "  What  thanks  can  we 
render  to  God  again  for  you  1 "  (ver.  9).  His  gratitude  was  so  great  that  he 
knew  not  how  to  give  it  adequate  expression.  The  grateful  heart  prizes  blessings 
that  may  seem  to  others  of  small  value.  He  rendered  thanks  to  God,  the  author 
and  preserver  of  their  faith.  The  heartiest  thanksgiving  seems  cold  and  utterly 
insufficient  when  compared  with  the  mercies  of  God. 

IV.  Their  steadfastness  excited  an  earnest  longing  for  the  opportunity  of 
imparting  additional  good. — 1.  The  apostle  assiduously  prayed  for  the,  opportunity 
of  a  personal  interview.  "  Night  and  day  praying  exceedingly  that  we  might  see 
your  face"  (ver.  10).  The  longer  the  absence,  the  more  eagerly  he  desired  to 
see  them.  The  good  tidings  of  their  constancy  increased  the  desire.-  A  love 
like  his  could  be  satisfied  only  with  personal  spiritual  intercourse.  It  was  not 
enough  simply  to  write.  Voice  and  manner  have  a  pre-eminent  charm  in  the 
interchange  of  mind  with  mind.  Heading,  praying,  and  all  other  endeavours 
will  be  unavailing  if  we  despise  prophesying — the  oral  declaration  of  the  truth. 

2.  The  apostle  sought  this  interview  to  supply  what  was  deficient  in  their  faith. — 
"And  might  perfect  that  which  was  lacking  in  your  faith"  (ver.  10).  None  so 
perfect  in  faith  as  not  to  be  susceptible  of  improvement.  Faith  is  based  on  know- 
ledge ;  and  as  knowledge,  especially  in  the  things  of  God,  is  capable  of  indefinite 
extension,  so  faith  may  be  continually  increased — broadening  and  deepening  its 
foundation  and  consolidating  its  structure.  The  less  distinctly  the  great  subjects 
of  faith  are  understood,  the  more  defective  is  faith ;  the  more  explicit,  the  more 
perfect.  They  most  vaunt  of  faith  who  have  least  experience  in  its  practice. 
"  Empty  vessels  sound  the  loudest."  We  have  all  need  to  cry,  "  Lord,  increase 
our  faith." 

Lessons. — 1.  The  true  minister  cannot  be  indifferent  to  the  spiritual  state  of  his 
people.  2.  The  fidelity  and  perseverance  of  believers  is  an  inspiration  and  unspeak- 
able joy  to  the  anxious  worker.  3.  Faith  and  practice  powerfully  react  upon  each 
other. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  7-10.  Glad  Tidings  of  Christian  Vers.  9,  10.  Religious  Joy — 

Steadfastness—  I.  Is   occasioned   by  the  religious 

I.  Produce  comfort  of  mind  (ver.  7).  progress  of  others. 

II.  Make      life     more     enjoyable  II.  Is    mingled    with     ingenuous 
(ver.  8).  gratitude. 

III.  Are  the  occasion  of  thankful  III.  Is  enjoyed  as  in  the  presence 
joy  before  the  Lord  (ver.  9).  of  God. 

IV.  Excite  to  assiduous  and  earnest  IV.  Is  accompanied  with    fervent 
prayer  (ver.  10).  prayer. 


516 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  THESSALONIANS.    chap.  hi. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  11—13. 

A  Comprehensive  Apostolic  Prayer. 

The  prayers  of  the  apostle  Paul  are  among  his  sublimest  utterances.  The 
frequency  with  which  they  occur  in  his  writings  indicates  the  habitual  devoutness 
of  his  mind.  In  both  the  epistles  to  the  Thessalonians  nearly  every  chapter 
is  distinguished  and  sealed  by  a  fervent  ou threat hing  of  his  soul  to  God. 
In  these  verses  he  expresses,  in  the  most  comprehensive  and  suggestive  terms, 
his  dearest  wishes  for  the  welfare  of  the  Church. 

1.  This  prayer  recognises  the  essential  oneness  of  the  Father  and  the  Son. — 
1.  Christ  is  invoked  equally  with  the  Father.  "  Now  God  Himself  and  our  Father, 
and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  "  (ver.  11).  The  word  "  Himself  "  stands  foremost  in 
the  sentence  and  refers  to  both  persons,  as  if  the  writer  said,  "  May  our  God 
and  Father,  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Himself  direct  our  way  unto  you." 
It  should  be  also  noted  that  the  verb  "  direct,"  belonging  to  both  persons,  is  in 
the  singular  number.  This  fact  was  urged  as  an  important  point  by  Athanasius 
in  the  great  Arian  controversy  in  the  fourth  century.  As  the  Son  partakes 
equally  with  the  Father  in  the  honour  of  invocation,  so  also  in  excellency  of 
nature.  Divine  properties  are  also  ascribed  to  the  Son  in  overruling  by  His 
providence  the  affairs  of  men.  "  What  thirgs  soever  the  Father  doeth,  these 
also  doeth  the  Son  likewise." 

2.  It  is  the  privilege  of  the  believer  to  realise  a  personal  interest  in  the  Father  and 
in  the  Son. — By  an  act  of  appropriating  faith  we  can  say,  God  our  Father  and 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Similiar  phrases  occur  no  less  than  twenty-six  times  in 
these  two  epistles.  Blessed  confidence !  What  a  wealth  of  tenderness,  of 
comfort,  of  satisfying  assurance,  and  of  joyous  triumph  is  involved  in  the  earnest, 
trustful  cry  of  the  soul — My  God  !  my  Saviour  ! 

II.  This  is  a  prayer  for  providential  guidance  in  securing  a  much  desired 
interview. — "Direct  our  way  unto  you"  (ver.  11).  Hitherto  the  way  to 
Thessalonica  had  been  insuperably  blocked  up.  The  brethren  there  were  as 
eager  to  welcome  Paul  as  he  was  to  be  present  with  them;  but  Satan  had 
hindered  by  interposing  many  obstacles.  Nevertheless,  let  God  give  the  signal 
and  all  impediments  from  men  or  devils  would  vanish.  The  road  would  at 
once  become  straight  and  plain.  God  should  be  recognised  in  the  simplest 
affairs  of  life.  "  It  is  not  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his  steps  ;  "  and  only 
those  journeys  are  prosperous  wherein  God  is  pilot.  There  are  crises  in  life 
when  everything  depends  on  being  guided  in  the  right  way — e.g.  in  selecting 
a  school  or  college,  entering  on  the  religious  life,  commencing  business,  con- 
templating marriage,  or  in  change  of  residence.  In  these  and  all  other  matters 
acknowledge  God,  and  He  shall  direct  thy  paths.  Our  prayer  for  guidance 
must  ever  be  in  submission  to  the  divine  will.  The  apostle's  prayer  was  not 
answered  immediately  ;  five  years  elapsed  before  he  again  visited  Macedonia. 
That  path  is  safest  and  best  in  which  God's  finger  points.  Let  His  call  be  our 
loadstar ;  His  hand  the  cloud,  to  move  or  pause  as  He  directs. 

III.  This  is  a  prayer  for  the  bestowal  of  an  increased  measure  of  the  highest 
Christian  affection. — 1.  Christian  love  is  progressive  and  mutual.  "And  the 
Lord  make  you  to  increase  and  abound  in  love  one  toward  another  "  (ver.  12).  The 
apostle  had  before  commended  their  labour  of  love,  and  Timothy  had  brought 
good  tidings  of  their  continued  love.  Now  he  prays  they  may  increase  and  excel 
more  and  more.  Love  is  the  indispensable  badge  of  the  genuine  Christian.  He 
cannot  have  too  much  of  it — the  more  the  better.  It  grows  with  all  other 
graces,  and  causes  them  to  grow.  There  is  no  limit  to  its  expansion  but  our 
finiteness.  But  love  must  be  mutual  in  its  exercise — "  one  toward  another." 
"  For  this  is  the  message,"  says  St.  John,  "  that  ye  heard  from  the  beginning, 

517 


chap.  ill.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    THESSALONIANS. 


that  ye  should  love  one  another  ;  "  and,  "  Seeing  ye  have  purified  your  souls  in 
obeying  the  truth  through  the  Spirit  unto  unfeigned  love  of  the  brethren,  see 
that  ye  love  one  another,"  urges  St.  Peter,  "  with  a  pure  heart  fervently." 

2.  Christian  love  is  unselfish. — "  And  toward  all  men."  The  old  Levitical  law 
declared,  "  Thou  shalt  not  avenge,  nor  bear  any  grudge  against  the  children  of 
thy  people ;  but  thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  And  the  New 
Testament  reiterates  the  truth,  that  charity  out  of  a  pure  heart,  and  of  a  good 
conscience,  and  of  faith  unfeigned  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  royal  law. 

3.  Here  we  have  Christian  love  practically  exemplified. — "  Even  as  we  do  towards 
you."  Paul  and  his  co-labourers  had  given  unmistakable  evidence  of  their 
sincere  love  for  the  Thessalonian  converts  in  their  self-denying  labours,  uncom- 
plaining sufferings,  and  unceasing  anxiety  on  their  behalf  (ii.  8,  9,  13,  iii.  3-5). 
Love  is  the  soul  of  self-sacrifice,  prompts  to  labour,  braves  all  suffering,  and 
persists  in  doing  good  to  others,  even  to  those  who  least  appreciate  and  most 
violently  oppose  the  best  endeavours.  Ministers  should  exemplify  in  their  own 
lives  what  they  prescribe  to  others. 

IV.  This  is  a  prayer  for  confirmation  in  a  state  of  unblamable  personal 
purity. — 1.  There  is  no  stability  in  Christian  graces  apart  from  love.  "  To  the  end 
he  may  establish  your  hearts  "  (ver.  13).  If  it  were  possible  to  possess  every  other 
grace  but  love,  it  would  be  like  a  varied  summer  landscape,  very  beautiful  but 
transient,  having  in  it  no  element  of  permanency.  Above  all  other  graces  we 
are  exhorted  to  "  put  on  charity  which  is  the  bond  of  perfectness  " — a  girdle 
which  adorns  and  binds  together  all  the  rest.  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law, 
the  infallible  test  and  evidence  of  stability. 

2.  Unblamable  holiness  is  the  legitimate  and  necessary  outcome  of  love. — "  To  the 
end  He  may  stablish  your  hearts  in  holiness"  (ver.  13).  The  apostle  prays  for  an 
increase  of  love  in  order  to  the  attainment  of  a  higher  personal  purity.  All 
defects  in  obedience  issue  from  a  defect  in  love.  Our  love  of  God  makes  us 
solicitous  to  know  and  obey  Him  and  fearful  to  offend  Him.  Our  love  of  man 
makes  us  careful  to  preserve  his  honour,  life,  and  possessions,  and  in  no  way  to 
impair  his  happiness.  The  whole  of  the  law  is  love.  There  is  no  duty  to  God 
or  man  but  love  inclines  unto,  and  no  sin  from  which  it  does  not  restrain.  To 
be  unblamable  in  holiness,  store  the  soul  with  love.  When  love  fails,  obedience 
and  all  holy  duties  fail. 

3.  Holiness  serpens  the  soul  from  divine  censure  at  the  second  advent  of  Christ. — 
cl  Unblameable  in  holiness  before  God,  even  our  Father,  at  the  coming  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  with  all  His  saints  "  (ver.  13).  Christ  will  come  in  glorious  pomp 
attended  by  His  holy  ones — saints  and  angels.  He  who  remains  steadfast  in 
holiness  shall  be  held  blameless  then.  Our  outer  life  may  be  censured  by  men ; 
but  if  God,  even  our  Father,  who  stablishes  our  hearts  in  holiness,  absolves  and 
approves,  it  will  be  enough.  That  holiness  alone  is  genuine  which  will  bear  the 
searching  scrutiny  of  Omniscience. 

Lessons. — 1.  Recognise  God  in  every  event  of  life.  2.  To  attain  the  highest 
degree  of  personal  purity  pray  for  an  increase  of  love.  3.  Act  in  all  things  so  as  to 
secure  the  divine  approval. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  12,  13.  A  Prayer  for  Growth  in  Christian  love. — "  Increase  and  abound 

Personal  Piety —  in  love." 

I.  Acknowledges  and  invokes  the  III.  Growth  in  piety  is  the  establish- 
divine  source  of  all  spiritual  good. —  ment  of  the  soul  in  unblamable  holi- 
"  The  Lord  make  you."  ness. — "To  the  end  He  may  stablish 

II.  Growth  in  piety  is  growth  in      your  hearts  unblameable  in  holiness." 

518 


HOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   THESSALONIANS.    chap.  iv. 


x  IV.  Growth  in  piety  is  essential  to  Ver.  13.  The  Coming  of  Christ — 

gain  the  approval  of  God  at  the  second  I.  Will  be  an  imposing  spectacle, 

advent  of  Christ. — "  Before  God,  at  the  II.  Should  be  ardently  longed  for. 

coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  with  III.  Demands  on  our  part  diligent 

all  His  saints."  moral  preparedness. 


CHAPTER  IV. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  And  to  please  God,  so  ye  would  abound  more  and  more. — R.V.  inserts  "even  as  ye 
do  walk  after  God." 

Ver.  2.  What  commandments. — R.V.  "  charge  "  ;  margin,  "  charges."  "  The  Greek  word 
signifies  an  announcement,  then  a  command  or  advice  publicly  delivered  "  (Findlay). 

Ver.  3.  Your  sanctification,  etc. — "The  reception  of  Christianity  never  delkers,  as  with 
the  stroke  of  a  magician,  from  the  wickedness  and  lusts  of  the  heathen  world  which  have 
become  habitual  ;  rather  a  long  and  constant  fight  is  necessary  for  vanquishing  them  " 
(Huther).     The  sanctification  here  is  first  negative — abstinence. 

Ver.  4.  How  to  possess  his  vessel.— R.V.  "to  possess  himself  of  his  own  vessel."  With  the 
long  list  of  names  in  view  of  those  who  interpret  "  vessel "  as  meaning  "  body,"  it  is  almost 
daring  to  hint  at  another  meaning.  The  list,  however,  is  strong  of  those  who  regard  the 
expression  as  a  figurative  designation  for  a  wife,  and  1  Pet.  hi.  7  decides  us. 

Ver.  5.  Not  in  the  lust  of  concupiscence.— R.V.  "  not  in  the  passion  of  lust."  "  The  word 
passion  signifies  not  so  much  a  violent  feeling  as  an  overpowering  feeling,  one  to  which  a 
man  so  yields  himself  that  he  is  borne  along  by  evil  as  if  he  were  its  passive  instrument ;  he 
has  lost  the  dignity  of  self-rule,  and  is  the  slave  of  his  lower  appetites  "  (Findlay). 

Ver.  6.  That  no  man  go  beyond  and  defraud R.V.  "  transgress,   and   wrong."     "  More 

exactly,  that  none  overreach  and  take  advantage  of  his  brother  in  the  matter.  '  The 
matter '  of  the  last  two  verses.  .  .  .  The  apostle  sets  the  wrong  in  the  strongest  light :  it  is 
to  cheat  one's  brother,  and  that  in  what  touches  most  nearly  the  sanctities  of  life " 
{Ibid.).  The  Lord  is  the  avenger.— The  heathen  deities,  so  far  as  they  were  anything,  were 
oftener  patterns  than  avengers  of  such  things,  and  they  who  made  them  were  only  too  like 
them. 

Ver.  8.  He  therefore  that  despiseth.— Margin  and  R.V.  "rejecteth."  He  who  pushes  aside 
sanctification  in  his  preference  for  uncleanness  will  bave  to  reckon  with  God  Himself. 

Ver.  9.  Ye  have  no  need  that  one  write  to  you.— St.  Paul  admits  the  brotherly  love 
amongst  them.  It  was  adroit  on  his  part,  therefore,  to  make  uncleanness  an  offence  against 
brotherly  love.  Taught  of  God. — Is  an  expression  only  found  here  in  the  New  Testament. 
We  are  reminded  of  Isa.  xxviii.  26.  The  mother- wit  of  the  farmer  who  had  no  "  school  of 
agriculture"  is  traced  by  the  prophet  to  God;  he  is  God-taught  to  distinguish  his  methods. 
So  these  Thessalonians  took  to  brotherly  love  naturally,  as  we  say. 

Ver.  10.  We  beseech  you,  brethren,  that  ye  increase  more  and  more.— Brotherly  love  is  a 
good  thing,  of  which  St.  Paul  evidently  thought  too  much  could  not  be  had. 

Ver.  11.  Study  to  be  quiet.— R.V.  margin,  " Go  :  be  ambitious.-  "An  example  of  St.  Paul's 
characteristic  irony:  the  contrast  between  ambition  and  quiet,  giving  a  sharper  point  to  bis 
exhortation,  as  though  he  said,  •  Make  it  your  ambition  to  have  no  ambition  ! '  "  {Ibid.).  To 
do  your  own  business. — To  be  occupied  with  your  own  affairs. 

Ver.  12.  That  ye  may  walk  honestly  —The  adverb  here  is  used  to  match  the  verb— to  walk 
with  a  dignified  and  gentlemanly  bearing.  St.  Paul's  ideas  of  gentlemanliness— "  working 
with  the  hands" — would  not  suit  the  youth  of  gentlemanly  habits  who  wants  to  be  adopted  - 
where  he  will  have  nothing  to  do.  And  may  have  need  of  nothing. — What  a  nobly  inde- 
pendent soul  1  What  a  splendid  text  these  verses  would  make  for  some  plain  words  to 
Christians  who  indulge  in  sharp  practices,  or  waste  until  they  have  to  throw  themselves  on 
any  one  who  will  support  them  ! 

Ver.  13.  Them  which  are  asleep.— The  R.V.  reading  changes  the  perfect  participle  ("them 
who  bave  fallen  asleep  and  continue  to  sleep")  unto  the  present,  "  them  tuat  fall  asleep,"  as 
they  drop  off  one  after  another.  See  on  the  expression  our  Lord's  beautiful  words,  Luke 
viii.  52;  John  xi.  11  f. 

519 


chap.  vi.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    1   THESSALONIANS. 


Ver.  15.  We  which  are  alive  and  remain  unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord. — "  We  must  recognise 
that  Paul  here  includes  himself,  along  with  the  Thessalonians,  among  those  who  will  be  alive 
at  the  advent  of  Christ.  Certainly  this  can  only  have  been  a  hope,  only  a  subjective  expec- 
tation on  the  part  of  the  apostle"  (Huther).  Shall  not  prevent.— The  meaning  of  "prevent "  is 
"  to  go  before."  "But  the  connotation  came  to  have  more  prominence  than  the  meaning,  so  it 
came  to  signify  to  stop  (by  standing  in  the  way).  R.V.  gives,  "  shall  not  precede."  It  is  the 
same  word  as  in  ii.  16  (in  another  tense).  The  apostle  says,  "  We  shall  not  arrive  before 
them.' 

Ver.  16.  "With  a  shout. — Like  the  ring  of  command  heard  over  the  noise  of  battle.  "  We 
must  not  look  for  literal  exactness  where  things  are  depicted  beyond  the  reach  of  sense " 
(ttndlay).  With  the  trump  of  God.— The  trumpet  here,  like  that  in  1  Cor.  xv.  52,  is  the 
military  trumpet. 

Ver.  17.  Shall  be  caught  up. — The  idea  conveyed  by  the  word  is  that  of  sudden  or  violent 
seizure,  as  when  the  fiery  messengers  carried  off  the  prophet  Elijah,  or  as  when  St.  Paul  was 
" caught  up"  to  the  third  heaven. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—3. 

Earnest  Exhortations  to  a  Higher  Sanctity. 

Purity  is  the  perfection  of  the  Christian  character.  It  is  the  brightest  jewel 
in  the  cluster  of  saintly  excellencies,  and  that  which  gives  a  lustre  to  the  whole. 
It  is  not  so  much  the  addition  of  a  separate  and  distinct  grace  as  it  is  the 
beauteous  and  harmonious  development  of  all  the  graces  in  the  most  perfect 
form.  As  Flavel  has  said :  "  What  the  heart  is  to  the  body,  that  the  soul  is  to 
the  man ;  and  what  health  is  to  the  heart,  holiness  is  to  the  soul."  Purity  is 
the  sound,  healthy  condition  of  the  soul  and  its  vigorous  growth  towards  God. 
In  the  concluding  prayer  of  the  preceding  chapter  the  apostle  indicates  that 
God  will,  through  His  Spirit,  fill  the  Thessalonians  with  love — the  great 
distinctive  feature  of  a  genuine  and  higher  sanctity.  He  now  urges  upon  them 
the  necessity  of  earnest  and  persistent  endeavours  after  its  attainment.  Human 
agency  is  not  annihilated,  but  stimulated  by  the  divine.     Observe  : — 

1.  That  a  higher  sanctity  consists  in  living  under  a  sense  of  the  divine 
approval. — 1 .  Religion  is  a  life.  "  How  ye  ought  to  walk  "  (ver.  1 ).  A  walk  implies 
motion,  progression,  continual  approach  to  a  definite  goal.  Religion  is  not  an 
ornament  to  wear,  a  luxury  to  enjoy,  a  ceremony  to  observe,  but  a  life.  It 
penetrates  every  part  of  oar  nature,  throbs  in  every  pulse,  shares  every  joy  and 
sorrow,  and  fashions  every  lineament  of  character.  We  make  sad  mistakes ;  but 
there  is  goodness  hived,  like  wild  honey,  in  strange  nooks  and  corners  of  the 
world. 

2.  Religion  is  a  life  modelled  after  the  worthiest  examples. — "  As  ye  have  received 
of  us  how  ye  ought  to  walk"  (ver.  1).  The  Thessalonians  not  only  received  the 
wisest  counsels  from  their  teachers,  but  they  witnessed  their  holy  and  consistent 
lives ;  and  their  attention  was  constantly  directed  to  the  all-perfect  example — 
Christ  Jesus.  It  is  the  tendency  of  all  life  to  shape  itself  after  the  character 
of  its  strongest  inward  force.  The  love  of  God  is  the  mightiest  power  in  the 
life  of  the  believer ;  and  the  outer  manifestation  of  that  life  is  moulded 
according  to  the  sublime  pattern  of  the  inner  divine  ideal. 

3.  Religion  is  a  life  which  finds  its  chief  joy  hi  the  divine  approval. — "  And  to 
please  God"  (ver.  1).  It  is,  possible,  then,  so  to  live  as  to  please  God.  What  a 
powerful  incentive  to  a  holy  life  is  the  thought,  the  Lord  taketh  pleasure  in 
His  people  !  We  can  rise  no  higher  in  moral  excellence  than  to  be  acceptable 
to  God.  To  enjoy  the  sense  of  His  approval  fills  the  cup  of  happiness  to  the 
brim.  In  vain  the  world  frowns  or  demons  rage,  if  God  smiles.  The  learned 
and  pious  Donne,  when  taking  solemn  farewell  of  his  friends  on  his  deathbed, 
said  :  "I  count  all  that  part  of  my  life  lost  which  I  spent  not  in  communion 
with  God  or  in  doing  good." 

520 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  THESSALONIANS.     chap.  IV. 


4.  Religion  is  a  life  capable  of  vast  expansion. — "  So,  ye  would  abound  more  and 
more  "  (ver.  1).  Life  in  its  healthiest  and  intensest  form  is  happiness.  As  we 
advance  in  the  religious  life  our  happiness  increases.  "  All  the  while,"  says 
Fuller,  "  thou  livest  ill,  thou  hast  the  trouble,  distraction,  and  inconveniences 
of  life,  but  not  the  sweets  and  true  use  of  it."  God  has  made  every  provision 
for  our  increase  in  holiness ;  we  are  exhorted  to  it,  and  most  really  promote  our 
highest  good  and  the  divine  glory  in  attaining  it.  There  is  no  limit  in  our 
elevation  to  a  higher  sanctity  but  our  faith. 

II.  That  the  necessity  of  a  higher  sanctity  is  enforced  by  divine  authority.  — 
"  For  this  is  the  will  of  God,  even  your  sanctification  "  (ver.  3). 

1.  A  higher  sanctity  involves  a  conformity  to  the  divine  nature. — God  is  holy, 
and  the  loftiest  aim  of  the  believer  is  to  be  like  Him.  There  is  to  be  not  only 
an  abstinence  from  all  that  is  impure,  but  a  positive  experience  of  its  opposite 
— purity.  By  faith  we  participate  in  the  divine  nature,  and  possess  qualities 
analogous  to  those  which  constitute  the  divine  perfections — mercy,  truth,  justice, 
holiness.  The  grand  purpose  of  redemption  is  to  bring  man  into  holiest  fellowship 
with  God. 

2.  A  higher  sanctity  is  in  harmony  with  the  divine  will. — "  For  this  the  will  of 
God,  even  your  sanctification. "  Not  only  the  attitude  and  tendency  of  the  soul,  but 
all  its  active  outgoings  must  be  holy.  Such  is  the  will  of  God.  What  he  proscribes 
must  be  carefully  avoided ;  what  He  prescribes  must  be  cheerfully  and  faithfully 
done  in  the  manner  He  prescribes  it.  His  will  is  here  emphatically  expressed  ; 
it  is  supported  by  abundant  promises  of  help ;  and  it  is  declared  that  without 
holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord.  The  will  of  God  is  at  once  the  highest 
reason,  the  strongest  motive,  and  the  final  authority. 

3.  The  divine  will  regarding  a  higher  sanctity  is  enforced  by  duly  authorised 
messengers  and  well-understood  precepts. — "For  ye  know  what  commandments  we 
gave  you  by  the  Lord  Jesus  "  (ver.  2).  The  divine  will  is  expressed  in  definite 
commandments.  The  apostle  did  not  assume  authority  in  any  dictatorial  spirit. 
He  delivered  unto  others,  and  powerfully  enforced  what  he  had  received  "  by  the 
Lord  Jesus."  He  taught  them  to  observe  all  things  whatsoever  the  Lord  had 
commanded — all  those  things,  only  those,  and  no  others.  These  precepts  were 
well  known,  "  For  ye  know  what  commandments  we  gave  you."  Obedience 
should  ever  be  in  proportion  to  knowledge.  Knowledge  and  practice  are 
mutually  helpful  to  each  other-  Knowledge,  the  mother  of  practice;  prac- 
tice, the  nurse  of  knowledge.  To  know  and  not  to  do  is  to  incur  the  heaviest 
condemnation.  A  certain  Stoic,  speaking  of  God,  said :  "  What  God  wills,  I 
will ;  what  God  wills  not,  I  will  not ;  if  He  will  that  I  live,  I  will  live ;  if 
it  be  His  pleasure  that  I  die,  I  will  die."  Ah  !  how  should  the  will  of 
Christians  stoop  and  lie  down  at  the  foot  of  God  s  will  !  "  Not  my  will,  but 
Thine  be  done." 

III.  That  the  possession  of  a  higher  sanctity  is  repeatedly  urged  by  earnest 
exhortations. — "  Furthermore  then,  we  beseech  you,  brethren,  and  exhort  you  " 
(ver.  1).  Doctrine  without  exhortation  makes  men  all  brain,  no  heart ;  exhortation 
without  doctrine  makes  the  heart  full,  leaves  the  brain  empty.  Both  together 
make  a  man.  The  apostle  laboured  in  both,  and  it  is  difficult  to  say  in  which  of 
the  two  he  displayed  most  earnestness.  In  addition  to  all  he  had  urged  before,  he 
beseeches  and  exhorts  the  Thessalonians  to  press  onward  to  higher  attainments ; 
in  which  we  have  a  fine  example  of  the  combination  of  a  tender,  brotherly 
entreaty,  with  the  solemn  authority  of  a  divinely  commissioned  ambassador. 
Some  people,  says  a  certain  writer,  are  as  thorns;  handle  them  roughly  and 
they  pierce  you  ;  others  as  nettles — rough  handling  is  best  for  your  safety.  A 
minister's  task  is  an  endless  one.  Has  he  planted  knowledge  ? — practice  must 
be  urged.      Is  the  practice  satisfactory? — perseverance  must  be  pressed.      Do 

521 


chap.  iv.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I    THESSALONIANS. 


they  continue  in  well-doing  ? — they  must    be  stimulated  to  further  progress. 
The  end  of  one  task  is  the  beginning  of  another. 

Lessons. — The  believer  is  called  to  the  attainment  of  a  higher  sanctity — 1.  By 
the  voice  of  God.  2.  By  the  voice  of  His  faithful  ministers.  3.  And  by  the 
aspirations  of  the  life  divinely  planted  within  him. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  3.  Uncleanness  Inconsistent  with  Why  was  the  Spirit  sent  ?  or,  We  must 

a  Profession  of  the  Gospel.  needs  be  Holy. 

I.  Our  sanctification  is  the  will  of  I.  The  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
God  because  He  is  the  avenger  of  all  to  make  us  new  creatures  by  giving 
such  as  do  things  contrary  to  that  us  the  strength  to  become  so. 

purity  which  He  enjoins.  II.  Since  sanctification  is  declared 

II.  Because  God  has  called  us,  not  to  be  the  special  work  of  the  Holy 
to  uncleanness,  but  to  holiness.  Ghost,  this  clearly  proves  the  difficulty 

III.  Because  God  has  given  unto  us     of  that  work. 

His  Holy  Spirit. — The  Spirit  is  called  III.   The  work  of  sanctification  is 

the  Holy  Spirit  and  the  Spirit  of  Holi-  something  more  than  merely  driving 

ness,  not  only  because  He  is  essentially  out  the  evil  one. 

and    perfectly   holy  in    Himself,   but  IV.  Love  and  devotion  to  God  are 

because  He  is  the  Author  of  holiness  necessary  to  holiness. 

in  believers.     These  considerations  are  V.    Strength — the   strength  of  the 

motives  to  stir   up   and  animate  our  Holy   Spirit — is   necessary  to   defend 

wills  to  obey  and  co-operate  with  the  holiness. — A.  W.  Hare. 

will  of  God. — R.  Mant. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  3—7. 

Distinctive  Features  of  a  True  Sanctification. 

It  is  comparatively  easy  for  some  minds  to  grasp  the  broad  outlines  of  a  grand 
undertaking,  but  they  fail  in  working  out  the  details.  It  is  a  fatal  defect,  and 
involves  the  ruin  of  the  whole  scheme.  The  peculiar  genius  of  minds  like  these 
is  to  deal  with  things  in  the  mass ;  but  they  have  not  the  ability  or  the  patience 
to  master  a  numerous  and  complicated  series  of  minute  particulars.  They  are 
more  theoretical  than  practical ;  they  are  strong  in  the  concrete,  but  feeble  in 
the  abstract  faculty.  So  it  is  possible  to  form  a  bold  conception  of  some  great, 
leading  Christian  virtue,  to  expatiate  on  its  exquisite  beauty,  to  exalt  in  grandiose 
terms  its  supernatural  dignity,  and  to  enforce  with  magisterial  importance  its 
superlative  necessity,  but  all  the  while  to  be  lamentably  deficient  in  practical 
attention  to  the  thousand  and  one  little  details  which,  in  every-day  life,  constitute 
the  essence  of  the  virtue.  Sanctification  is  an  aspect  of  the  Christian  life,  facile 
and  seductive  in  theory,  but  difficult  and  commonplace  in  practice.  It  is  the 
essence  and  perfection  of  the  Christian  life,  and  is  attained,  not  by  some  magical 
feat  of  the  mental  powers,  but  by  patient  plodding,  stern  conflicts,  and  hard -won 
moral  victories.  It  is  the  sublime  but  little  understood  science  of  living  aright, 
in  the  sight  of  God  and  man.  Secretary  Walsingham,  in  writing  to  Lord  Burleigh, 
said  :  "  We  have  lived  long  enough  to  our  country,  to  our  fortunes,  and  to  our 
sovereign ;  it  is  high  time  that  we  began  to  live  for  ourselves  and  for  our  God." 
In  the  above  verses  are  portrayed  the  distinctive  feature  of  a  true  sanctification. 
Observe  : — 

I.  A  true  sanctification  consists  in  the  maintenance  of  a  personal  chastity. — 
1.  This  involves  an  abstinence  from  gross  sensual  indulgence.     "  That  you  should 

522 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I    THESSALONIANS.     chap.  IV. 


abstain  from  fornication  "  (ver.  3).  A  word  that  designates,  not  only  the  actual 
transgression  known  by  that  name,  but  all  the  sinful  lusts  of  the  flesh.  This 
vice  is  a  prolific  source  of  many  other  vices.  It  is  like  the  fabled  Hydra,  or 
many-headed  snake,  of  which  it  is  said  that  when  one  head  was  cut  oft  another 
grew  in  its  place.  Fornication  is  the  root  of  extravagance,  drunkenness,  disease, 
poverty,  profanity,  murder,  and  irreparable  infamy.  It  is  a  sin  the  most 
bewitching,  the  most  prevalent,  the  most  fatal  in  its  tendencies,  and  against 
which  the  most  terrible  vengeance  of  Heaven  has  been  declared.  It  brought  the 
flood  on  the  world  of  the  ungodly,  fire  and  brimstone  upon  Sodom,  pestilence 
upon  the  Israelites,  and  destruction  upon  the  nations  of  antiquity.  Prior  to 
Christianity  it  was  hardly  regarded  as  a  vice.  The  apostolic  teaching  revealed 
its  enormity,  denounced  it  with  righteous  indignation,  and  supplied  the  spiritual 
weapon  by  which  it  is  to  be  slain. 

2.  Involves  a  rigid  maintenance  of  bodily  purity. — "  That  every  one  of  you 
should  know  how  to  possess  his  vessel  in  sanctification  and  honour  "  (ver.  4). 
The  vessel  of  the  body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  whatever  would 
defile  or  disgrace  that  sacred  shrine  must  be  carefully  avoided.  The  apostle 
seems  to  imply  there  is  a  kind  of  art  in  chastity  which  all  should  practise. 
"  That  every  one  of  you  should  know  "• — should  have  skill — the  power  of  self- 
control.  Christianity  is  the  science  of  sciences,  the  art  of  living  well,  and  no 
small  skill  is  necessary  in  regulating  the  exercise  of  the  Christian  virtues.  To 
possess — to  rule  the  body  in  purity,  keep  a  diligent  guard  upon  the  senses  (Job 
xxxi.  1 ;  Prov.  xxiii.  33  ;  Gen.  xxxix.  6,  7),  avoid  the  company  of  the  sensual ; 
be  temperate  ;   be  industrious ;  continue  instant  in  prayer. 

3.  Involves  a  masterly  restraint  upon  the  passionate  outgoings  of  evil  desire. — 
"  Not  in  the  lust  of  concupiscence  ;  not  in  the  passion  of  lust ;  even  as  the  Gentiles 
which  know  not  God  "  (ver.  5).  Ignorance  is  the  origin  of  unchastity  ;  and  the 
apostle  shows  to  what  extent  of  wickedness  man  may  go  who  knows  not  God. 
An  old  writer  says,  "  Ignorance  is  a  master,  a  mother-sin  ;  pull  it,  thou  pullest 
all  sin."  Concupiscence  is  the  rudimentary  stage  of  evil  desire ;  unchecked,  it 
spreads  through  the  soul,  inflames  the  passions,  and  rises  into  an  ungovernable 
tempest  of  lust.  Evil  must  be  restrained  in  its  earliest  manifestation,  banished 
from  the  region  of  thought.  The  longer  it  is  harboured,  the  more  powerful  it 
becomes. 

"  We  are  not  worst  at  once — the  course  of  evil 
Begins  so  slowly  and  from  such  slight  source, 
Ad  infant's  hand  might  stem  its  breach  with  clay ; 
But  let  the  stream  get  deeper,  and  philosophy  shall  strive  in  vain 
To  turn  the  headlong  current." 

II.  A  true  sanctification  consists  in  the  universal  exercise  of  strict  justice. — 
1.  That  no  violation  of  justice  is  allowable.  "  That  no  man  go  beyond  or  defraud 
his  brother  in  any  matter  "  (ver.  6).  The  prohibition  extends  not  only  to  acts  of 
unchastity,  but  to  all  the  transactions  of  life.  The  value  of  a  commodity  is 
governed  by  its  use,  its  relation  to  the  immediate  wants  of  man.  In  nature 
that  which  has  life  and  sense  is  more  excellent  than  an  inanimate  creature ;  in 
this  view  an  insect  is  superior  to  a  diamond.  But  with  regard  to  use,  a  loaf  of 
bread  is  of  more  value  than  a  thousand  insects.  Justice  requires  there  should 
be  a  fair  proportion  between  a  thing  and  its  price.  To  exact  a  price  which  is 
beyond  the  worth  of  the  commodity  sold,  or  to  give  a  sum  which  is  below  its  due 
value,  is  to  overreach  on  the  part  of  either  the  seller  or  the  buyer.  The  com- 
mercial world  of  the  present  day  might  ponder  with  advantage  the  lessons  to  be 
learnt  from  the  practice  of  an  ancient  Christian  simplicity.  The  man  who 
begins  a  course  of  dishonesty  by  defrauding  a  stranger  will  soon  reach  the  point 
of  cheating  his  dearest  brother  and  chuckle  at  his  unjust  success. 

523 


chap.  iv.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   THESSALONIANS. 


2.  That  every  violation  of  justice  will  be  certainly  punished. — "  Because  that  the 
Lord  is  the  avenger  of  all  such,  as  we  also  have  forewarned  you  and  testified  " 
(ver.  6).  The  rogue  will  not  always  triumph  ;  and  his  ill-gotten  gains  may  be 
the  instruments  of  his  curse.  An  all-seeing  Eye  watches  all  his  sinuous 
trickeries,  and  an  unseen  Hand  rests  on  all  his  covetous  accumulations,  and 
by-and-by  the  blow  of  vengeance  will  be  swift  and  terrible.  The  successful 
robber  is  apt  to  lull  himself  into  a  false  security ;  he  has  escaped  disaster  so 
often  and  so  long  that  he  begins  to  fancy  his  villainy  may  be  continued  with 
impunity.  But  their  "  judgment  lingereth  not,  and  their  damnation  slumbereth 
not,"  for  "  the  Lord  is  the  avenger  of  all  such  "  (see  Pro  v.  xxii.  22,  23, 
xxii.  10).  Not  that  we  are  to  act  honestly  from  the  fear  of  punishment;  but 
while  striving  to  act  rightly  from  love  to  God  and  a  lofty  sense  of  duty,  it  is  also 
salutary  to  remember  that  vengeance  belongeth  unto  the  Lord,  and  He  will 
recompense.  Where  human  justice  fails,  the  divine  vengeance  will  supply  the 
deficiency,  that  injustice  may  not  escape  unpunished. 

III.  That  a  true  sanctification  recognises  the  supreme  authority  of  the  divine 
call. — "  For  God  hath  not  called  us  unto  uncleanness,  but  unto  holiness"  (ver.  7). 
A  holy  life  gives  no  licence  to  sin.  Everything  is  in  favour  of  holiness — the  caller 
is  holy  (1  Pet.  i.  15),  the  instrument  holy  (John  xvii.  17),  and  the  Spirit,  the 
immediate  worker,  is  the  fountain  of  all  holiness.  Religion  is  a  holy  calling, 
because  it  leads  to  holiness ;  and  though  it  finds  us  not  holy,  yet  it  makes  us  so. 
They  answer  not  their  calling  who  commit  any  manner  of  sin.  Unmercifulness, 
cruelty,  fornication,  and  uncleanness  are  not  of  God.  In  every  temptation  to 
evil  remember  the  divine  calling. 

Lessons. — A  true  sanctification — 1.  Provides  for  the  chastity  of  the  whole  man. 
2.  Governs  all  the  transactions  of  daily  life.     3.  Responds  to  the  highest  call  of  God. 

GERM  NOTES   ON  THE    VERSES. 

Yer.    6.    Reason  for  Conscientious-  II.  The   origin   of  holiness.— It   is 

ness. — A  man  was  once  asked  why  he  immediately  connected  with  regenera- 

was  so  very  particular   to   give  good  tion.     No  holiness  in  man  previous  to 

measure — over  good — and  he  replied  :  this. 

"  God  has  given  me  but  one  journey  III.  The  progress  of  holiness. — The 

through  this  world,  and  when  I  am  gone  seed,  the  tree.      The  dawn,   the  d&y. 

I  cannot  return  to  correct  mistakes."  The  child,  the  man. 

IV.  The    objects    of   holiness.— In 

Respect   for   Conscientiousness. — Dr.  reference  to  God,  to  the  moral  law,  to 

Arnold,    of     Bugby,    once     remarked  duty,  to  sin. 

respecting  one  of  his  pupils  who  was  in  V.  The     influence     of    holiness. — 

the  habit  of  attending  to  all  his  duties  "  There  is  an  energy  of  moral  suasion 

conscientiously      and      faithfully,    UI  in  a  good  man's  life  passing  the  highest 

could  stand  hat  in  hand  to  that  boy."  efforts   of   the   orator's   genius.       The 

seen    but    silent    beauty    of    holiness 

Yer.  7.   Christian  Holiness.  speaks   more   eloquently   of   God   and 

I.  The    nature    of    holiness. — Con-  duty   than   the   tongues  of   men'  and 

formity  to  the  nature  and  will  of  God.  angels." — G.  Brooks. 
Not  to  be  confounded  with  virtue. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF   VERSE  8. 

A  Word  to  the  Despiser. 

I.  The  Chiistian  minister  is  spiritually  commissioned  to  exhort  men  to 
holiness. — "  Who  hath  also  given  unto  us  His  Holy  Spirit."     The  apostles  were 

524 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    THESSALONIANS.    chap.  iv. 


endowed  for  their  special  ministry  by  the  extraordinary  gifts  of  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  they  were  infallibly  guided  into  all  truth  \  they  wrought  miracles  ;  and 
their  word  was  with  power.  Though  miraculous  gifts  are  no  longer  bestowed, 
Christian  ministers  are  nevertheless  called  and  qualified  by  the  divine  Spirit ; 
they  are  empowered  to  proclaim  the  will  of  God  and  to  urge  men  to  reconciliation 
and  purity  (2  Cor.  v.  20).  The  Rev.  F.  W.  Robertson  was  once  hesitating  in  the 
pulpit  of  a  brother-clergyman  which  of  two  sermons  he  should  preach.  Some- 
thing whispered  to  him,  "  Robertson,  you  are  a  craven  ;  you  dare  not  speak  here 
what  you  believe."  He  selected  a  sermon  that  seemed  almost  personal  in  its 
faithfulness  and  power.     But  it  was  the  message  given  to  him  for  that  hour. 

II.  That  the  most  faithful  exhortations  of  the  Christian  minister  may  be 
despised. — This  is  done  when  men  reject  the  word  spoken,  refuse  to  listen  to  it, 
neglect  to  meditate  upon  it,  and  decline  to  enter  upon  the  course  of  holy  living 
which  it  counsels.     This  conduct  shows  : — 

1 .  The  voluntary  'power  of  man. — He  can  resist  the  truth  or  accept  it.  He  is 
responsible  for  the  exercise  of  all  his  moral  powers,  and  therefore  incurs  guilt 
by  any  abuse  of  those  powers. 

2.  The  blinding  folly  of  sin. — It  darkens  the  understanding,  perverts  the  will, 
petrifies  the  affections,  and  banishes  the  good  that  elevates  and  saves.  Sin  is 
also  a  force — a  stealthy,  remorseless,  destructive  force ;  wherever  it  breathes,  it 
blasts  and  withers  ;  wherever  it  plants  its  sharpened  talons,  it  lacerates  and 
destroys ;  and  the  disorder,  the  moral  anarchy,  the  writhing  agony  of  a  groaning 
world  bear  witness  to  the  terrible  ravages  of  man's  great  enemy.  To  wilfully 
reject  the  overtures  of  righteousness  is  to  relinquish  the  inheritance  of  eternal 
life,  and  to  doom  the  soul  to  the  endless  miseries  of  spiritual  death. 

III.  That  to  despise  the  faithful  exhortations  of  the  Christian  minister  is  to 
despise  God. — "  He  therefore  that  despiseth,  despiseth  not  man,  but  God." 
The  contempt  of  the  true  minister  does  not  terminate  in  his  person  alone, 
but  reaches  the  majesty  of  that  Being  by  whom  he  is.  commissioned.  To 
disregard  the  message  of  an  ambassador  is  to  despise  the  monarch  he  repre- 
sents. The  Saviour  declared,  "  He  that  despiseth  you,  despiseth  Me"  (Luke 
x.  16).  As  the  edicts  proclaimed  by  the  public  herald  are  not  his  own,  but  the 
edicts  of  the  prince  who  gives  them  authority  and  force,  so  the  commands 
published  by  the  divinely  commissioned  minister  are  not  his  own,  but  belong  to 
Him  whose  will  is  the  law  of  the  universe.  It  belongs  to  God  to  reveal  the  law, 
freighted  with  His  sanction  and  authority  ;  it  belongs  to  man  to  declare  it. 
The  exhortation,  whether  uttered  by  a  Moses,  who  was  commended  for  the 
beauty  of  his  personal  appearance,  or  by  a  Simeon  Niger,  who  was  remarkable 
for  his  physical  deformity,  is  equally  the  word  of  God,  to  which  the  most 
reverential  obedience  is  due.  To  despise  the  meanest  of  God's  ministers  is  an 
insult  to  the  majesty  of  Heaven,  and  will  incur  His  terrible  displeasure.  In 
Retzsch's  illustrations  of  Goethe's  Faust  there  is  one  plate  where  angels  are 
represented  as  dropping  roses  upon  the  demons  who  are  contending  for  the  soul 
of  Faust.  Every  rose  falls  like  molten  metal,  burning  and  blistering  where  it 
touches.  So  is  it  that  truth  acts  upon  the  soul  that  has  wilfully  abandoned  its 
teachings.     It  bewilders  when  it  ought  to  guide. 

LessOBS. — 1.  The  divine  commands  concern  man's  highest  good.  2.  Take  heed 
how  ye  hear.  3.  To  despise  the  divine  message  is  to  be  self- consigned  to  endless 
woe. 


525 


chap.  iv.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   THESSALONIANS. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  9,  10. 

Brotherly  Love  the  Proof  of  a  True  Sanctification. 

Love  is  the  bond  of  perfectness,  the  golden  cincture  that  binds  together  and 
beautifies  all  the  other  graces  of  the  Christian  character.  Christianity  has 
rescued  man  from  barbarism  and  slavery.  It  was  the  first  to  advocate  and  insist 
upon  the  common  brotherhood  of  humanity,  and,  by  inspiring  in  the  heart  the 
love  of  Christ,  has  made  it  possible  for  men  to  love  each  other  as  brethren.  This 
was  the  most  striking  feature  of  the  Christian  spirit  in  the  early  times,  and 
to  which  even  the  enemies  of  the  Church  bore  testimony.  In  the  second  century 
the  scoffing  Lucian  declared  :  "  It  is  incredible  to  see  the  ardour  with  which  the 
people  of  that  religion  help  each  other  in  their  wants.  They  spare  nothing. 
Their  first  legislator  has  put  it  into  their  heads  that  they  are  all  brethren."  The 
mutual  exercise  of  love  towards  the  brethren  is  an  indisputable  evidence  of  spiritual 
regeneration  (1  John  iii.  14) ;  and  in  this  chapter  the  apostle  evidently  alludes 
to  it  as  the  proof  of  a  true  sanctification.     Observe  : — 

1.  That  brotherly  love  is  divinely  taught. — "  For  ye  yourselves  are  taught  of 
God  to  love  one  another  "  (ver.  9). 

1.  It  is  commanded  by  Christ. — "  These  things  I  command  you,  that  ye  love 
one  another"  (John  xv.  17).  This  is  a  lesson  the  world  never  taught,  and 
cannot  teach.  The  natural  heart  is  essentially  selfish  and  cruel,  and  delights  in 
fierce  aggression  on  the  rights  of  others,  and  in  angry  retaliation  for  fancied 
wrongs.  Brotherly  love  is  a  fruit  of  Christianity,  and  is  a  powerful  influence  in 
harmonising  the  warring  interests  of  humanity.  If  love  prevail,  other  graces 
will  not  be  absent. 

2.  It  has  the  example  of  Christ. — He  frequently  reminds  His  disciples  of  what 
should  be  the  scope  and  character  of  their  love  towards  each  other — "  As  I  have 
loved  you,  that  ye  also  love  one  another."  The  same  glorious  example  was 
also  the  constant  burden  of  the  apostle's  teaching,  "  Walk  in  love,  as  Christ  also 
hath  loved  us  "  (John  xiii.  34,  xv.  12;  Eph.  v.  2).  Brotherly  love  should  be 
pure,  humble,  self-denying,  fervent,  unchangeable. 

3.  It  is  its  ovm  commendation. — "  But  as  touching  brotherly  love,  ye  need  not 
that  I  write  unto  you."  Love  is  modest  and  ingenuous  in  its  exercise,  making 
itself  felt  without  obtrusiveness,  and  almost  hiding  itself  underneath  the  multitude 
of  benefits  it  creates.  We  should  not  hesitate  to  commend  whatever  good  we 
see  in  others.  The  great  Searcher  of  hearts  does  not  pass  over  any  good  thing 
in  a  Church,  though  otherwise  clouded  with  infirmities,  without  a  laudatory 
notice  (Rev.  ii.  2,  3).  A  word  of  prudent  commendation  will  often  stimulate  the 
soul  in  its  endeavours  after  holiness. 

4.  It  is  a  grace  divinely  wrought. — "  Ye  yourselves  are  taught  of  God."  The 
heart  is  powerfully  inclined  to  the  exercise  of  this  grace  by  the  gracious  working 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  not  independent  of  but  in  conjunction  with  the  outward 
ministry  of  the  word.  The  invariable  method  of  divine  teaching  is  explained 
in  Jer.  xxxi.  33 ;  Acts  xvi.  14.  Those  are  easily  taught  whom  God  doth 
teach. 

II.  That  brotherly  love  must  be  practically  manifested. — "And  indeed  ye  do 
it  toward  all  the  brethren  which  are  in  all  Macedonia  "  (ver.  10).  Love  is  not 
limited  by  locality  or  distance ;  it  is  displayed,  not  only  towards  those  we  know 
and  with  whom  we  have  Christian  communion,  but  towards  those  whose  faces  we 
have  not  seen.  The  foreign  missionary  enterprise  is  a  magnificent  monument 
of  modern  Christian  charity.  Love  should  be  practically  manifested  in  supplying, 
as  far  as  means  and  opportunity  will  allow,  each  other's  need,  in  bearing  one 
another's   burdens,   in    forgiving   one    another,   and,   if   necessary,   in    kindly 

526 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.   THESSALONIANS.    chap.  iv. 


reproving  one  another.  During  the  retreat  of  Alfred  the  Great,  at  Athelney, 
in  Somersetshire,  after  the  defeat  of  his  forces  by  the  Danes,  a  beggar  came  to 
his  little  castle  there  and  requested  alms.  When  his  queen  informed  him  they 
had  only  one  small  loaf  remaining,  which  was  insufficient  for  themselves  and  the 
friends  who  had  gone  abroad  in  quest  of  food  with  little  hope  of  success,  the 
king  replied  :  "  Give  the  poor  Christian  one  half  of  the  loaf.  He  who  could  feed 
five  thousand  men  with  five  loaves  and  two  small  fishes,  can  certainly  make  that 
half  of  the  loaf  suffice  for  more  than  our  necessities."  Accordingly  the  poor  man 
was  relieved,  and  this  noble  act  of  charity  was  soon  recompensed  by  a  provi- 
dential store  of  fresh  provisions  with  which  the  foraging  party  returned. 

III.  That  brotherly  love  is  susceptible  of  continuous  enlargement. — "  But 
we  beseech,  you,  brethren,  that  ye  increase  more  and  more  "  (ver.  10).  Not- 
withstanding the  commendation  of  the  apostle,  he  exhorts  the  Thessalonians  to 
seek  greater  perfection  in  this  grace.  "What  is  the  sun  without  light?  What  is 
fire  without  heat  ?  So  what  is  life  without  love  ?  The  rich  seek  to  increase  their 
store,  the  wicked  add  to  their  iniquities ;  the  saint  should  not  be  less  diligent 
in  increasing  unto  every  good  word  and  work.  "  A  child  that  stayeth  at  one 
stature  and  never  groweth  bigger  is  a  monster.  The  ground  that  prospereth  not 
and  is  not  fruitful  is  cursed.  The  tree  that  is  barren  and  improveth  not  is  cut 
down.  So  must  all  increase  in  the  way  of  godliness  and  go  forward  therein. 
Unless  we  go  forward,  we  slip  back"  (Jewell).  The  growth  of  charity  is 
extensive,  as  it  adds  to  the  number  of  the  objects  loved,  and  intensive  as  to  its 
inward  fervour  and  tenacity.  The  more  we  apprehend  the  love  of  God  to  our- 
selves, the  more  our  hearts  will  enlarge  in  love  to  Him  and  all  saints.  True 
brotherly  love  crushes  all  self-love,  and  is  more  anxious  to  hide  than  pry  into 
the  infirmities  of  others.  Seldom  is  a  charitable  man  curious,  or  a  curious  man 
charitable. 

Lessons. — 1.  That  brotherly  love  is  the  practical  manifestation  of  the  love  of  God 
in  man.  2.  That  brotherly  love  should  be  constantly  cultivated.  3.  That 
brotherly  love  is  a  crowning  feature  of  the  higher  Christian  life. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  9, 10.  Brotherly  Love —  III.   Should    be    constantly    mani- 

I.  An  evidence  of  practical  holiness,     fested. 
II.  An  affection  divinely  taught.  IV.  Grows  by  diligent  cultivation. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  11,  12. 

A  Pacific  Spirit  another  Proof  of  a  True  Sanctif  cation. 

To  pass  from  the  subject  of  brotherly  love  to  the  necessity  of  maintaining  a 
quiet  and  peaceable  disposition  was  for  the  apostle  a  natural  and  suggestive 
transition.  Love  and  peace  are  twin  virtues — "  Two  lovely  berries  moulded 
on  one  stem."  Brotherly  love  can  have  no  place  in  the  heart  from  which  peace 
has  fled  and  where  war  and  discord  reign.  The  quiet  spirit  is  not  a  weak, 
meaningless,  cowardly  condition  of  mind,  but  contains  in  it  all  the  elements  of 
patient  endurance,  unconquerable  bravery,  and  inviolable  moral  power.  It  is  not 
the  quietness  of  the  shallow  lagoon,  on  whose  surface  the  heaviest  storm  can 
raise  but  a  few  powerless  ripples;  it  is  rather  the  profound  calm  of  the  ocean, 
which,  when  roused  by  the  tempest,  is  overwhelmed  in  its  impetuous  onset. 
Christ  is  likened  to  the  lamb — gentle,  harmless,  pacific ;  but  when  His  fury  is 
once  let  loose  upon  the  ungodly,  the  distracted  victims  will  shriek  for  the  rocks 
and  mountains  to  fall  on  them  and  hide  them  from   the   face  of   Him   that 

527 


chap.  iv.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY*:    I.   THESSALONIANS. 


sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  from  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb.  A  pacific  spirit  is 
another  practical  evidence  of  possessing  the  genuine  sanctification  so  earnestly 
commended  by  the  apostle.     Observe :— - 

1.  That  a  pacific  spirit  is  to  be  studiously  cultivated. — "  And  that  ye  study 
to  be  quiet  "  (ver.  11).  The  word  "  study"  signifies  to  seek  after  an  object  with  a 
holy  and  active  ambition,  as  though  it  were  the  highest  honour  to  possess  it.  How 
different  this  is  from  the  restless  spirit  of  the  world  !  There  is  nothing  tome 
people  dread  so  much  as  being  quiet.  They  delight  in  a  row ;  and  if  one  does 
not  happen  as  frequently  as  they  wish,  they  make  one  for  themselves.  The 
political  agitator,  the  avaricious  money-getter,  the  fiery  advocate  of  war,  all  seek 
to  attain  their  selfish  ends  in  the  midst  of  tumult  and  confusion.  Nor  is  the 
sacred  circle  of  the  Christian  Church,  which  should  ever  be  the  abode  of  peace 
and  harmony,  free  from  the  violence  of  the  irrepressible  disturber.  There  are 
some  people  who  never  will  be  still ;  you  cannot  hold  them  still.  They  are  full 
of  endless  suggestions  for  other  people  to  carry  out.  Their  tongue  is  a  perpetual 
clatter.  They  fly  from  one  department  of  work  to  another,  and  create  distraction 
in  each.  They  are  always  on  the  go.  No  sooner  have  they  related  to  one,  with 
such  evident  satisfaction,  the  details  of  the  latest  uproar  they  were  in,  than  they 
are  off*  to  brew  another.  They  try-  one's  temper ;  they  harry  one's  nerves- ;  they 
break  one's  peace  most  cruelly.  To  such  people  it  would  be  the  severest  task 
to  obey  the  apostolic  injunction,  "That  ye  study  to  be  quiet,"  and  yet  no  one 
in  the  world  has  more  need  to  do  so  than  they.  A  pacific  spirit  cannot  be 
secured  without  much  self-denying  effort ;  but  it  is  a  jewel  worth  all  the  trouble 
and  all  the  sacrifice  (Prov.  xx.  3  ;  Col.  iii.  12-15). 

II.  That  a  pacific  spirit  is  attained  by  a  persevering  industry  in  personal 
duties. — 1.  That  personal  duties  have  the  first  claim  upon  our  efforts.  "  Do  your 
own  business  "  (ver.  11).  Attend  first  to  your  personal  concerns — whatever  comes 
within  the  compass  of  your  general  or  particular  calling.  The  man  who  is  in- 
attentive to  his  own  special  duties  cannot  with  any  reason  dictate  as  to  the 
duties  of  others.  To  do  one's  own  business  is  the  best  safeguard  against  idleness 
and  meddling  curiosity.  Solomon  declared,  "  Every  fool  will  be  meddling."  An 
officious  interference  with  the  business  of  others  creates  discords.  All  strifes — 
domestic,  social,  ecclesiastical,  and  political — may  be  traced  to  meddlesomeness. 
The  meddling  man  is  a  fool,  because  he  gratifies  his  own  idle  curiosity  at  the 
expense  of  his  own  well-being  and  the  happiness  of  others.  See  that  the  business 
you  do  is  your  own  business,  and  that  you  let  that  of  your  neighbours  alone. 
"Be  not  eavesdroppers,  hearkening  what  is  said  or  done  in  your  neighbour's  house. 
Wide  ears  and  long  tongues  dwell  together.  They  that  love  to  hear  all  that  may 
be  told  them  do  also  love  to  blab  out  all  they  hear  "  (Jewell). 

2.  That  personal  duties  demand  genuine  hard  work. — "  And  to  work  with  your 
own  hands"  (ver.  11).  The  claims  and  enjoyments  of  religion  do  not  release  us 
from  the  necessity  of  toiling  for  our  daily  bread  and  providing  things  honest  in 
the  sight  of  all  men.  True  religion  rather  consists  in  doing  all  the  work  of  life 
with  consistency,  diligence,  and  perseverance.  Manual  labour  is  not  the  only 
form  of  genuine  industry.  The  industry  of  some  of  our  public  men  is  something 
amazing.  There  is  no  greater  foe  to  piety  than  idleness.  It  is  the  beginning 
of  many  other  evils,  and  has  been  the  origin  of  many  a  career  that  has  ended 
with  the  prison  and  the  gallows.  An  idle  man  is  always  something  worse. 
His  brain  is  the  shop  for  the  devil,  where  he  forges  the  most  debasing  fancies 
and  plots  the  most  pernicious  schemes.  Many  take  more  pains  to  go  to  hell 
than  almost  the  holiest  to  go  to  heaven.  Hierome  used  to  say  that  a  man  who 
labours  disheartens  even  the  devil  himself. 

3.  That  industry  in  personal  duties  is  enforced  by  apostolic  precept. — "  As  we 
commanded  you  "  (ver.  11).    The  apostle  frequently  took  occasion  to  enforce  upon 

528 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.   THESSALONIANS.    chap.  iv. 


his  converts  the  importance  of  diligence  in  one's  daily  business,  and  set  them  an 
example  in  his  own  conduct  (2  Thess.  iii.  7,  8).  Honest  labour  is  not  beneath 
the  dignity  of  any,  and  he  who  works  the  hardest  has  the  greater  influence  in 
enforcing  industry  upon  others. 

III.  That  a  pacific  spirit,  combined  with  diligence,  recommends  Christianity 
to  those  outside  the  Church. — "  That  ye  may  walk  honestly  towards  them  that 
are  without  "  (ver.  12).  Industry  is  no  small  part  of  honesty.  A  lazy  man  can 
never  be  an  honest  one,  though  his  chastity  and  fidelity  were  as  renowned  as 
Joseph's,  if  that  were  possible  to  a  mere  idler.  A  restless,  trifling  busybody  does 
unspeakable  damage  to  religion.  Many,  who  are  Christians  by  profession,  are 
often  more  heathenish  in  practice,  and  the  blindest  among  the  aliens  are  swift 
to  detect  and  pronounce  judgment  on  their  dishonesty.  The  unbelieving  world, 
on  the  other  hand,  is  impressed  and  attracted  by  the  peaceful  and  diligent 
behaviour  of  the  faithful.    Human  nature  is  powerfully  influenced  by  appearances. 

IV.  That  a  pacific  spirit,  combined  with  diligence,  ensures  an  honoured 
independence. — "  And  that  ye  may  have  lack  of  nothing  "  (ver.  12).  It  is  more 
blessed  to  be  able  to  give  than  to  receive.  What  a  mercy  it  is  neither  to  know  the 
power  and  misery  of  those  temptations  which  arise  from  pinching  poverty,  nor 
yet  to  be  necessitated  to  depend  upon  the  cold-hearted,  merciless  charity  of 
others.  The  patient,  quiet  persevering  plodder  in  the  way  of  Christian  duty 
may  not  always  be  rewarded  with  affluence ;  but  he  is  encouraged  to  expect,  at 
least,  a  modest  competency.  And  the  very  spirit  he  has  striven  to  cultivate 
has  enriched  him  with  an  inheritance,  which  few  possibly  attain — contentment 
with  his  lot.  He  whose  is  the  silver  and  the  gold  will  care  for  His  loved  and 
faithful  servants  (Ps.  xxxvii.  25). 

Lessons. — 1.  Quarrelsomeness  and  indolence  cannot  co-exist  with  a  high  degree 
of  sanctity.  2.  To  secure  the  blessings  of  peace  is  worthy  of  the  most  industrious 
study.     3.  The  mightiest  aggressions  of  the  gospel  upon  the  world  are  made  quietly. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSE. 

Ver.  11.  Study  to  be  Quiet.  Mind  your  own  Business. 

I.  Make  it  our  meditation  day  and  L  The  B*ble  contains  little  en- 
night  and  fill  our  minds  with  it.  couragement  for  the  idler. 

xx   _  .  ,..  ,.       .  II.   The  text  enjoins  diligence  not 

II.  Put  our  meditation  into  prac-     onlyin  business,  but  in  one's  own  busi- 

tlce*  ness. 

III.  We  must  unlearn  mauy  things  III.  The  counsel  of  the  apostle  is 
before  we  can  be  taught  this. — 1.  Cast  supported  by  the  best  wisdom  of  the 

out  self-love.     2.  Covetousness.     3.  Pull  world. — "  It    becomes    a    man,"    said 

back  our  ambition.     4.  Bind  our  malice.  Herodotus,    "  to    give   heed    to    those 

5.    Empty   ourselves   of  all   suspicion,  things  only  which  concern  himself." 

surmising,  and  discontent.  IV.  The  apostle  takes  it  for  granted 

IV.  Mind    our  own  business.— 1.  that  ours  is  a  worthy  business. 
Because    it    is   becoming.       2.    Brings  Y'  0nly  by  diligence  in  the  care  of 
advantage.     3.  It  is  necessary.     4.   We  y°ur   own  souls  wiU  y°u  be  able  to 
are  commanded  to  do  so.—Earindon.  do  really  effective  work  for  Christ.— 

A.  F.  Forrest. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  13,  14. 

Sorrow  for  the  Dead. 

The  Thessalonians  who  cherished  a  vivid  expectation  of  the  near  approach  of 
the  second  advent  of  Christ  appear  to  have  fallen  into  a  misconception  as  to  the 

MM  529 


chap.  iv.     HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY:   I.    THESSALONIANS. 


relation  of  their  deceased  friends  to  that  glorious  event.  While  believing  that 
the  pious  dead  would  ultimately  be  raised  again,  they  feared  they  would  not 
be  permitted  to  share  in  the  joy  of  welcoming  Him  back  to  His  inheritance  of 
the  redeemed  earth  and  in  the  triumphant  inauguration  of  His  reign.  "  It  was 
just  as  if,  on  the  very  eve  of  the  day  of  the  expected  return  of  some  long  absent 
father,  a  cruel  fate  should  single  out  one  fond  expectant  child,  and  hurry  him 
to  a  far  distant  and  inhospitable  shore."  But  all  their  fears  and  perplexities 
were  dissipated  by  the  sublime  disclosures  contained  in  this  epistle. 

I.  That  sorrow  is  a  merciful  relief  to  a  soul  bereaved. — Sorrow  is  nowhere 
forbidden.  It  may  be  an  infirmity,  but  it  is  at  the  same  time  a  solace.  The 
soul  oppressed  and  stricken  by  the  weight  of  a  great  calamity  finds  relief  in  tears. 

11 0  ye  tears  !    0  ye  tears  !  till  I  felt  you  on  my  cheek, 
I  was  selfish  in  my  sorrow,  I  was  stubborn,  I  was  weak ; 
Ye  have  given  me  strength  to  conquer,  and  I  stand  erect  and  free, 
And  know  that  I  am  human,  by  the  light  of  sympathy." 

The  religion  of  the  Bible  does  not  destroy  human  passions.  We  do  not  part  with 
our  nature  when  we  receive  the  grace  of  God.  The  mind  that  is  capable  of  a  real 
sorrow  is  capable  of  good.     A  griefless  nature  can  never  be  a  joyous  one. 

II.  That  sorrow  for  the  dead  is  aggravated  by  ignorance  of  their  future 
destiny. — "  I  would  not  have  you  to  be  ignorant  concerning  them  which  are  asleep, 
that  ye  sorrow  not,  even  as  others  which  have  no  hope"  (ver.  13).  The  radius 
of  hope  is  contracted  or  expanded  in  proportion  to  the  character  and  extent  of 
intelligence  possessed.  Ignorant  "  sorrow  is  a  kind  of  rust  to  the  soul,  which 
every  new  idea  contributes  in  its  passage  to  scour  away.  It  is  the  putrefaction 
of  stagnant  life,  and  is  remedied  by  exercise  and  motion."  The  heathen,  who 
have  no  satisfactory  knowledge  of  the  future  life,  give  way  to  an  excessive  and 
hopeless  grief.  Du  Chaillu  describes  a  scene  of  wailing  for  the  dead  among  the 
Africans.  "  The  mother  of  poor  Tonda,"  he  writes,  "  led  me  to  the  house  where 
the  body  was  laid.  The  narrow  space  of  the  room  was  crowded  ;  about  two 
hundred  women  were  sitting  and  standing  around,  singing  mourning  songs  to 
doleful  and  monotonous  airs.  As  I  stood  looking,  filled  with  solemn  thoughts, 
the  mother  of  Tonda  approached.  She  threw  herself  at  the  foot  of  her  dead  son, 
and  begged  him  to  speak  to  her  once  more.  And  then  when  the  corpse  did  not 
answer  she  uttered  a  shriek,  so  long,  so  piercing,  such  a  wail  of  love  and  grief 
that  tears  came  into  my  eyes.  Poor  African  mother  !  She  was  literally  as  one 
sorrowing  without  hope,  for  these  people  count  on  nothing  beyond  the  present 
life."  It  was  the  dictum  of  an  old  Greek  poet — a  man  once  dead  there  is  no 
revival ;  and  those  words  indicated  the  dismal  condition  of  unenlightened  nature 
in  all  lands  and  in  all  ages.  What  an  urgent  argument  is  here  for  increased 
missionary  efforts  among  the  heathen  ! 

III.  That  sorrow  for  the  dead  in  Christ  is  soothed  and  moderated  by  the 
revelation  of  certain  great  truths  concerning  their  present  and  future  blessed- 
ness.— 1.  That  death  is  a  sleep.  "  Them  also  which  sleep  in  Jesus  "  (ver.  14).  The 
only  part  of  man  to  which  the  figure  of  the  text  applies  is  the  body.  As  to  the 
soul,  the  day  of  death  is  the  day  of  our  birth  into  a  progressive  and  eternal  life. 
It  is  called  a  departure,  a  being  with  Christ — absent  from  the  body,  present  with 
the  Lord.  Sleep  is  expressive  of  rest.  When  the  toil  of  life's  long  day  is  ended, 
the  great  and  good  Father  draws  the  dark  curtain  of  night  and  hushes  His 
weary  children  to  rest  "  They  enter  into  rest."  Sleep  is  expressive  of  refresh- 
ment. The  body  is  laid  in  the  grave,  feeble,  emaciated,  worn  out.  Then  a 
wonderful  process  goes  on,  perceptible  only  to  the  eye  of  God,  by  which  the  body 
acquires  new  strength  and  beauty,  and  becomes  a  fit  instrument  and  suitable 
residence  for  the  glorified  soul.  Sleep  implies  the  expectation  of  awaking.  We 
commit  the  bodies  of  the  departed  to  the  earth  in  sure  and  certain  hope  of  a 

630 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    THESSALONIANS.     chap.  iv. 


glorious  resurrection.     They  wait  for  "the  adoption,  to  wit,  the  redemption  of 
the  body." 

2.  That  the  dead  in  Christ  will  be  roused  from  their  holy  slumber  and  share  in 
the  glory  of  His  second  advent. — "  Will  God  bring  with  Him  "  (ver.  14).  The 
resurrection  of  the  dead  is  a  divine  work.  "  I  will  redeem  them  from  the  power 
of  the  grave."  Christ  will  own  His  people  in  their  persons,  their  services,  and 
their  sufferings.  They  shall  receive  His  entire  approval,  be  welcomed  by  Him 
into  His  everlasting  kingdom,  and  crowned  by  Him  with  glory  and  the  affluence 
of  incorruptible  bliss. 

3.  That  the  resurrection  of  Christ  from  the  dead  is  a  pledge  of  the  restoration  and 
future  blessedness  of  all  who  sleep  in  Him. — "  For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus  died 
and  rose  again,  even  so  them  also  which  sleep  in  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  Him  " 
(ver.  14).  Christ  Himself  is  the  resurrection,  not  only  as  revealed  in  His  word 
and  exemplified  in  His  own  person,  but  as  specially  appointed  by  the  Father  to 
effect  it  by  His  own  power  (John  v.  25,  vi.  39).  The  word  of  God  sheds  a  light 
across  the  darkness  of  the  grave,  and  opens  a  vista  radiant  with  hope  and 
immortal  happiness.  "  Let  me  penetrate  into  Thy  heart,  O  God,"  said  an  afflicted 
saint,  "  and  read  the  love  that  is  there.  Let  me  penetrate  into  Thy  mind, 
and  read  the  wisdom  that  is  there ;  then  shall  I  be  satisfied — the  storm  shall 
be  turned  into  calm."  A  vital  knowledge  of  Christ  silences  every  murmur  and 
prepares  for  every  emergency. 

Lessons. —  1.  An  igncyrant  sorrow  is  a  hopeless  one.  2.  To  rise  with  Jesus  we 
must  live  and  die  to  Him.  3.  Divine  revelations  regarding  the  future  life  greatly 
moderate  the  grief  of  the  present. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  13,  14.  The  Sleep  of  the  Faith- 
ful Departed. 

I.  The  dead  are  said  to  be  asleep 
because  we  know  they  shall  wake  up 
again. 

II.  Because  they  whom  men  call 
dead  do  really  live  unto  God. 

III.  Because  they  are  taking  their 
rest. 

IV.  Death  is  changed  to  sleep,  so 
that  it  becomes  a  pledge  of  rest  and  a 
prophecy  of  the  resurrection. 


Lessons. — 1.  We  ought  to  mourn 
rather  for  the  living  than  for  the  dead. 
2.  In  very  truth  it  is  life  rather  than 
death  that  we  ought  to  fear. — H.  E. 
Manning. 

Ver.  14.  The  Resurrection  of  the 
Body. 

I.  The  heart  seeks  it. 

II.  The  Bible  declares  it. 

III.  The  redemption  of  Christ 
secures  it. — A.  F.  Forrest. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  15—18. 

The  Second  Advent  of  Christ. 

Among  the  words  of  consolation  in  the  valedictory  discourse  of  Christ  to  His 
disciples  was  the  promise,  after  His  departure,  He  would  come  again  and  receive 
them  unto  Himself.  Time  has  sped  noiselessly  along ;  events  of  vast  magnitude 
have  rapidly  succeeded  each  other,  and  left  their  lessons  for  the  ages  to  ponder  ; 
nations  have  passed  through  the  throes  of  suffering  and  revolution ;  generation 
after  generation  has  gone  down  to  the  grave;  for  nearly  nineteen  hundred 
years  the  Church  has  been  strained  with  profound,  intense,  and  anxious  ex- 
pectancy :  but  still  the  promise  remains  unfulfilled.  Will  He  come  1  '  Are  the 
hopes  of  the  Church  doomed  to  be  for  ever  unsatisfied?  Must  the  bodies  of 
the  pious  dead  be  for  ever  shut  down  in  the  sepulchres  of  land  and  sea  ?     Will 

531 


chap.  iv.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    THESSALONIANS. 


the  wrongs  of  the  universe  never  be  redressed  ?  If  questions  like  these  flit  for 
a  moment  across  the  mind,  it  is  not  that  the  Church  has  lost  confidence  in  the 
promise.  Faith  in  the  second  advent  of  Christ  is  more  widely  spread  and  more 
firmly  held  to-day  than  ever.  Long  waiting  has  sharpened  the  longing, 
brightened  the  hope,  and  clarified  the  vision.  In  these  words  the  apostle  assures 
the  Thessalonians  of  the  second  coming  of  Christ,  furnishes  some  important 
particulars  of  the  event,  and  points  out  the  bearing  of  the  glorious  doctrine  in 
consoling  the  sorrow  of  the  bereaved. 

1.  That  the  second  advent  of  Christ  is  the  subject  of  divine  revelation. — 
"  For  this  we  say  unto  you  by  the  word  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  15).  In  a  subject  of 
such  vast  moment  the  apostle  was  anxious  to  show  that  he  had  the  highest  and 
most  incontrovertible  authority  for  the  statements  he  uttered.  He  had  a 
special  revelation  from  heaven,  and  spoke  under  the  direct  and  immediate 
inspiration  of  the  divine  Spirit.  The  second  advent  of  Christ  is  emphatically 
taught  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  (cf.  Matt.  xxiv.  3,  xxv.  31;  Mark  viii.  3; 
John  xiv.  3;  Acts  i.  2,  hi.  19,  20;  Rom.  viii.  17;  1  Cor.  i.  8  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  1  ; 
Tit.  ii.  13  ;  1  Pet.  i.  5 ;  2  Pet,  hi.  12 ;  Jude  14). 

II.  That  the  second  advent  of  Christ  will  be  distinguished  by  signal  tokens 
of  terrible  majesty. — 1.  There  will  be  the  triumphant  shout  of  the  divine  Redeemer. 
"For  the  Lord  Himself  shall  descend  from  heaven  with  a  shout"  (ver.  16). 
Just  before  Jesus  expired  on  the  cross  He  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  though 
there  was  the  ring  of  victory  in  that  cry,  it  sounded  more  like  a  conscious  relief 
from  unutterable  suffering.  But  the  shout  of  Jesus  on  his  second  coming  will 
be  like  the  loud,  clear,  joyous  battle-shout  of  a  great  Conqueror.  That  shout 
will  break  the  silence  of  the  ages,  will  startle  the  universe  into  attention,  will 
raise  the  dead,  and  summon  all  people  into  the  presence  of  the  victorious  Messiah. 
Formerly  He  did  "  not  cry,  nor  lift  up,  nor  cause  His  voice  to  be  heard  in  the  street" 
(Isa.  xlii.  2).  But  now  is  the  revelation  of  His  power.  "  Our. God  shall  come, 
and  shall  not  keep  silence  "  (Ps.  1.  3,  4). 

2.  There  will  be  the  voice  of  the  archangel  (ver.  16). — The  angelic  hosts  are 
arranged  in  an  hierarchy  of  various  ranks  and  orders.  The  archangel  is  the 
chief  of  the  heavenly  multitude.  In  response  to  the  majestic  shout  of  the 
descending  Lord,  the  archangel  lifts  up  his  voice,  like  the  loud  cry  of  the  herald 
announcing  the  glorious  advent,  and  the  sound  is  caught  up  and  prolonged  by 
the  vast  hosts  of  celestial  attendants. 

3.  There  will  be  the  trumpet -blast. — "  With  the  trump  of  God,"  with  trumpet 
sounded  by  the  command  of  God — such  a  trumpet,  perhaps,  as  is  used  in  the 
service  of  God  in  heaven.  Besides  the  shout  of  Jesus  and  the  voice  of  the  arch- 
angel, the  sound  of  the  trumpet  will  also  be  heard  in  the  host.  It  is  called  in 
1  Cor.  xv.  52  "the  last  trumpet";  and  in  Matt.  xxiv.  31  we  read,  "  He  shall 
send  His  angels  with  a  great  sound  of  a  trumpet,  and  they  shall  gather  together 
His  elect."  Among  the  Hebrews,  Greeks,  and  ancient  Latins  it  was  the  custom 
to  summon  the  people  with  the  trumpet.  In  this  way  God  is  said  to  gather  His 
people  together  (Isa.  xxvii.  13  ;  Jer.  iv.  5,  vi.  1).  The  whole  passage  is  designed 
to  show  that  the  second  advent  of  King  Messiah  will  be  attended  by  the  most 
imposing  evidences  of  pomp  and  regal  splendour. 

III.  That  the  second  advent  of  Christ  will  be  followed  by  important  con- 
sequences to  the  people  of  God,  living  and  dead. — 1.  The  pious  dead  shall  be  raised. 
"  We  which  are  alive,  and  remain  unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  shall  not  prevent 
them  which  are  asleep.  And  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first"  (vers.  15,  16). 
The  living  at  that  day — who,  it  would  seem,  would  be  spared  the  necessity  of 
dying  and  seeing  corruption — shall,  nevertheless,  have  no  advantage  over  the 
dead.  Before  any  change  takes  place  in  the  living  to  fit  them  for  the  new  con- 
dition of  things,  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first,  and  be  clothed  with  immortality 

532 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.   THESSALONIANS.    chap.  iv. 


and  incorruptible  splendour.  Whatever  disadvantages  may  be  the  lot  of  some 
of  God's  people  over  others,  they  are  ever  recompensed  by  some  special  privilege 
or  prerogative.  The  best  state  for  us  is  that  in  which  God  places  us.  •  And  yet 
every  man  thinks  another's  condition  happier  than  his  own.  Rare  indeed  is  the 
man  who  thinks  his  own  state  and  condition  in  every  respect  best  for  him. 

2.  The  living  and  the  raised  shall  unite  in  a  simultaneous  greeting  of  their 
descending  Lord. — "  Then  we  which  are  alive  and  remain  shall  be  caught  up 
together  with  them  in  the  clouds  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air"  (ver.  17).  The 
living,  after  passing  through  the  wondrous  change  from  mortal  to  immortal, 
shall  not  anticipate  for  a  single  moment  the  newly  raised  bodies  of  the  pious 
dead,  but  together  with  them,  in  one  reunited,  loving,  inseparable  company, 
shall  be  caught  away  in  chariots  of  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air,  and  greet 
Him  in  the  descent.     He  comes  to  fulfil  His  promise  (John  xiv.  3). 

3.  All  believers  in  Christ  shall  be  assured  of  eternal  felicity  with  Him. — "And 
so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord  "  (ver.  17).  Forever  with  the  Lord  in  familiar 
companionship — in  rapturous  communion,  in  impending  glory,  in  ever-enchanting 
revelations.  With  Him,  not  occasionally,  or  for  an  age,  or  a  millennium,  but 
uninterruptedly  for  ever,  without  the  possibility  of  separation.  How  great  the 
contrast  with  the  brightest  experiences  of  this  changeful  life  !  There  are  three 
things  which  eminently  distinguish  the  heavenly  life  of  the  soul — perfection, 
perpetuity,  immutability. 

IV.  That  the  contemplation  of  the  second  advent  of  Christ  is  calculated  to 
minister  consolation  to  the  sorrowing. — "  Therefore  comfort  one  another  with 
these  words "  (ver.  18).  A  community  in  suffering  creates  a  community  in 
sympathy.  "  If  a  thorn  be  in  the  foot,  the  back  bows,  the  eye  is  busy  to  pry 
into  the  hurt,  the  hands  do  their  best  to  pluck  out  the  cause  of  anguish ;  even 
so  we  are  members  one  of  another.  To  him  that  is  afflicted,  pity  should  be 
showed  from  his  friend"  (Job  vi.  14).  The  best  consolation  is  that  which  is 
drawn  from  the  revelations  of  God's  word.  There  are  no  comforts  like  Scripture 
comforts.  The  bereaved  were  sorrowing  for  their  loved  ones  who  had  been 
smitten  down  by  death,  and  were  full  of  anxiety  and  uncertainty  about  the 
future.  Shall  they  meet  again,  or  are  they  parted  for  ever  ?  The  teaching  of 
inspiration  on  the  second  coming  of  Christ  assures  them  that  their  departed 
relatives  shall  be  rescued  from  the  power  of  death,  that  they  shall  meet  again, 
meet  in  glory,  meet  to  part  no  more,  to  be  for  ever  with  each  other  and  with 
the  Lord. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  Church  is  justified  in  looking  for  the  second  advent  of  Christ. 
2.  The  second  advent  of  Christ  will  bring  an  everlasting  recompense  for  the  suffering 
and  sorrow  of  the  present  life.  3.  The  record  that  reveals  the  second  advent  of 
Christ  should  be  fondly  prized  and  constantly  pondered 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  15-18.  The  Second  Coming  of  III.  The  Church,  being  ignorant  of 

Christ  and  Sorrow  for  the  Dead.  the  day  in  which  Christ  should  come 

I.  The  final  period  of  the  world  the  to  judge  the  world,  should  be  always 
apostles  left  undetermined.  ready  for  that  event. 

II.  Though  ignorant  of  the  final  IV.  Sorrow  for  the  dead  is  corn- 
period  of  the  world,  they  were  con-  patible  with  the  hope  of  a  Christian. — 
fident  it  should  not  come  till  the  1.  When  it  proceeds  from  sympathy. 
prophecies  respecting  the  destiny  of  2.  From  the  dictates  of 'nature.  3.  From 
the  Church  were  accomplished.  repentance. — Saurin. 

533 


chap.  v.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.   THESSALONIANS. 


Ver.   18.     The   Duty   of  comforting  1.    In    general   we  must    comfort   one 

One  Another.  another  with  the  word  of  God.     2.   We 

I.  We    must  observe    a    rule    and  must  comfort  one  another  with  the  Scrip - 
method  in  this  duty.  ture  teaching  on  the  coming  of  the"  Lord 

II.  This  method   is   taught  not  in  and    the   resurrection    of   the    dead. — 
the  school  of  nature,  but  of  Christ. —  Farindon. 


CHAPTER  V. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Times  and  seasons. — The  one  is  the  even,  continuous  flow  of  the  river,  the  other 
is  the  cataract.  Seasons  we  may  represent  as  epochs.  Our  Lord  in  the  same  words 
refused  to  gratify  the  curiosity  of  His  followers  (Acts  i.  7). 

Ver.  2.  For  yourselves  know  perfectly. — The  adverb  here  is  the  same  as  in  Eph.  v.  15 
(A.V.  "  circumspectly, "  R.V.  "  carefully  ").  It  is  used  five  times  only  in  the  New  Testament. 
The  translations  are  interesting — Matt.  ii.  8  :  A.V. "  diligently,"  K. V.  "  carefully."  Luke  i.  3  : 
R.V.  "  accurately."  Acts  xviii.  25  (like  Matt.  ii.  8).  Perhaps  the  Thessalonians  had  asked  for 
precise  information.  "  The  apostle  replies,  with  a  touch  of  gentle  irony,  "  You  already  know 
precisely  that  nothing  precise  on  the  subject  can  be  known — that  the  great  day  will  steal 
upon  the  world  like  a  thief  in  the  night "  (Findlay). 

Ver.  3.  For  when  they  shall  say. — R.V.  "when  they  are  saying."  No  matter  at  what  hour 
they  say,  "  Peace  and  security,"  like  the  voice  of  the  watchman  crying,  "  All's  well."  Then 
sudden  destruction. — The  word  for  "sudden"  is  only  found  again  at  Luke  xxi.  34  in  the 
New  Testament.  It  is  really  unforeseen.  As  travail. — In  the  simile  there  is  the  suggestion 
that  the  day  cannot  be  far  off  though  not  exactly  known. 

Ver.  5.  Children  of  light. — Quite  an  Oriental  expression.  The  kings  of  Egypt  called  them- 
selves "  children  of  the  sun."     So  these  of  a  better  sun. 

Ver.  6.  Let  us  watch  and  be  sober. — Ever  on  the  alert  as  men  who  live  in  hourly  ex- 
pectation of  their  Lord's  arrival.  It  is  precisely  they  who  maintain  the  preparedness  of 
spirit  who  are  calm  when  the  midnight  cry  rings  out,  "  The  bridegroom  cometh." 

Ver.  7.  They  that  be  drunken  are  drunken  in  the  night. — The  explanation  is  given 
in  our  Lord's  words — "  because  their  deeds  are  evil " :  as  though  darkness  could  veil  the  loss 
of  self-respect. 

Ver.  9.  For  God  hath  not  appointed  us  to  wrath. — The  inevitable  sequence  of  a  life  of 
sensual  gratification.  The  very  severest  forms  of  expression  for  wrath  fell  from  the 
gentlest  lips  concerning  the  servant  who  falls  to  gluttony  and  drunkenness  because  his  lord 
does  not  appear  at  the  expected  hour  (Luke  xii.  45,  46). 

Ver.  12.  Them  which  labour  among  you  and  are  over  you  in  the  Lord. — "A  clear 
testimony,  from  this  earliest  New  Testament  writing,  to  the  existence  in  the  Church  at  the 
beginning  of  a  ministerial  order — a  clergy  as  distinguished  from  the  laity — charged  with 
specific  duties  and  authority.  But  there  is  nothing  in  grammar  nor  in  the  nature  of  the 
duties  specified  which  would  warrant  us  in  distributing  these  functions  amongst  distinct 
orders  of  Church  office"  {Ibid.). 

Ver.  13.  And  to  esteem  them  very  highly  in  love. — R.V.  "  exceeding  highly  " — the  same 
Greek  adverb  as  in  iii.  10,  the  strongest  intensive  possible  to  the  language.  So  deep  and 
warm  should  be  the  affection  uniting  pastors  and  their  flocks.  Their  appreciation  is  not  to 
be  a  cold  esteem  (Ibid.). 

Ver.  14.  Warn  them  that  are  unruly. — R.V.  "  admonish  the  disorderly."  Every  Church 
knows  these  characters — men  who  will  break  through  all  restraint.  Comfort  the  feeble- 
minded.— R.V.  "encourage  the  faint-hearted."  In  ii.  11  we  have  met  the  verb  before.  The 
feeble-minded  would  have  been  scarcely  worth  the  pity  of  the  philosophers  with  whom  alone 
the  great-souled  man  was  supreme.  The  comfort  in  that  teaching,  for  the  hour  when  the 
strong  shall  be  as  tow,  was  very  scanty  and  inadequate.  Support  the  weak. — So  be  like  the 
Lord  who  " upholdeth  all  that  fall,  and  raiseth  up  all  those  that  be  bowed  down" 
(Ps.  cxlv.  14).  Be  patient  toward  all  men.— R.V.  "  longsuffering."  It  is  the  very  opposite 
of  what  we  mean  by  being  "  short-tempered." 

534 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.   THESSALONIANS.    chap.  v. 


Ver.  15.  Evil  for  evil. — A  quid  pro  quo,  similar  in  kind  and  in  quantity  perhaps,  but 
retaliation  delights  in  interest. 

Ver.  19.  Quench  not  the  Spirit. — When  there  has  been  excess,  and  a  good  has  come  into 
disrepute,  it  is  natural  to  seek  to  stifle  down  further  manifestations  of  it.  The  energy  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  like  Pentecostal  flame,  is  regarded  as  being  capable  of  extinction. 

Ver.  20.  Despise  not  prophesyings. — Do  not  set  down  as  of  no  value,  prophesyings.  The 
word  for  "  despise "  is  used  of  those  who  trusted  in  themselves  that  they  were  righteous 
and  set  at  nought  others  (Luke  xviii.  9),  and  the  contemptuous  bearing  of  him  who  eats 
flesh  with  which  an  idol's  name  has  been  associated,  and  laughs  at  the  shuddering  scruples 
of  the  brother  who  thinks  it  a  dreadful  thing  to  do,  and  sets  him  at  nought  (Rom.  xiv.  3-10). 
The  prophesyings  at  Corinth  were  such  as  might  easily  be  contemned  (1  Cor.  xiv.  23). 

Ver.  21.  Prove  all  things. — Make  trial  of  all.  A  sentence  fatal  to  the  suppression  of 
inquiry  and  to  credulous  faith.  It  forbids  me  to  accept  what  is  given  out  as  prophecy 
even,  unless  it  has  a  self -evidencing  power.  Hold  fast  that  which  is  good. — The  good  here 
is  that  which  is  ethically  beautiful.  In  ver.  15  another  word  points  the  contrast  to  the  evil 
return  of  injury. 

Ver.  22.  Abstain  from  all  appearance  of  evil. — Perhaps  the  best  idea  of  the  word  rendered 
"  abstain"  would  be  gained  by  "  hold  off,"  in  antithesis  to  the  "  hold  fast"  of  ver.  21. 

Ver.  23.  Sanctify  you  wholly. — "  Rather — unto  completeness.  The  apostle  prays  that 
they  may  be  sanctified  to  the  fullest  extent "  (Ibid.).  Your  whole  spirit  ...  be  preserved 
blameless. — R.V.  "  be  preserved  entire,  without  blame."  "  From  the  degree  of  holiness 
desired  we  pass  to  its  range,  from  its  intension  (as  the  logicians  would  say)  to  its 
extension"  (Ibid.'). 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF   THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses   1—11. 

The  A  ttitude  of  the  Church  towards  the  Second  Coming  of  Christ. 

The  book  that  records  the  first  advent  of  the  Redeemer  closes,  anticipating, 
desiring,  beseeching  the  second — "  Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus."  The  revelation 
concerning  that  second  coming  is  distinct  and  emphatic  ;  but  the  exact  period, 
when  the  event  will  happen,  is  wrapped  in  uncertainty.  As  when  we  ascend 
a  winding  river  some  well-known  landmark  appears  to  alter  its  position,  seeming 
now  distant,  now  near — so,  at  different  points  on  the  circuitous  stream  of  life, 
the  familiar  subject  of  the  second  Advent  reveals  itself  as  a  near  or  remote 
event.  "  It  is  plain,"  says  Archer  Butler,  "  that  that  period  which  is  distant  in 
one  scheme  of  things  may  be  near  in  another,  where  events  are  on  a  vaster  scale 
and  move  in  a  mightier  orbit.  That  which  is  a  whole  life  to  the  ephemera  is 
but  a  day  to  the  man ;  that  which  in  the  brief  succession  of  authentic  human 
history  is  counted  as  remote,  is  but  a  single  page  in  the  volume  of  the  heavenly 
records.  The  coming  of  Christ  may  be  distant  as  measured  on  the  scale  of  human 
life,  but  may  be  '  near,'  and  '  at  hand,'  and  '  at  the  door,'  when  the  interval  of  the 
two  advents  is  compared,  not  merely  with  the  four  thousand  years  which  were 
but  its  preparation,  but  with  the  line  of  infinite  ages  which  it  is  itself  preparing." 
The  uncertainty  of  the  time  of  the  second  Advent  and  its  stupendous  issues 
define  the  attitude  of  the  Church. 

I.  It  is  an  attitude  of  expectancy. — 1.  The  time  of  the  second  coming  is  un- 
certain. "But  of  the  times  and  the  seasons,  brethren,  ye  have  no  need  that  I 
write  unto  you"  (ver.  1).  A  gentle  hint  that  all  questions  on  that  subject 
were  unnecessary,  as  there  was  nothing  more  to  be  revealed.  The  untamable 
curiosity  and  reckless  daring  of  man  tempt  him  to  pry  into  secrets  with  which 
he  has  nothing  to  do  and  to  dogmatise  on  subjects  of  which  he  knows  the  least. 
Many  have  been  fanatical  enough  to  fix  the  day  of  the  Lord's  coming.  For  a 
time  there  has  been  a  local  excitement ;  the  day  has  come  and  gone  ;  the  world 
has  moved  on  as  before,  and  the  prophetic  enthusiasts  have  exposed  themselves 
to  scorn  and  ridicule.  "  Of  that  day  and  hour  knoweth  no  man  "  (Mark  xni.  32). 
This  uncertainty  is  a  perpetual  stimulant  to  the  people  of  God  to  exercise  the 
ennobling  virtues  of  hope,  of  watchfulness,  of  fidelity,  of  humility,  of  earnest 
inquiry,  and  of  reverential  awe. 

535 


chap.  v.    EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    1.   T&ESSALONIANS. 


2.  The  second  coming  will  be  sudden. — "  For  yourselves  know  perfectly  that 
the  day  of  the  Lord  so  cometh  as  a  thief  in  the  night.  For  when  they  shall  say, 
Peace  and  safety,  then  sudden  destruction  cometh  upon  them,  as  travail  upon  a 
woman  with  child"  (vers.  2,  3).  The  thief  not  only  gives  no  notice  of  his 
approach,  but  takes  every  possible  care  to  conceal  his  designs.  The  discovery  of 
the  mischief  he  has  wrought  takes  place  when  it  is  too  late.  The  prudent  will 
take  every  precaution  to  avoid  surprise  and  to  baffle  the  subtlety  and  sharpness 
of  the  marauder.  That  which  is  sinful  and  unlawful  in  itself  affords  a  re- 
semblance to  express  an  important  truth  and  to  admonish  to  duty.  There  is 
nothing  more  certain  than  that  the  Lord  will  come ;  nothing  more  uncertain 
when  He  will  come  ;  and  both  the  one  and  the  other  should  keep  His  people  in 
an  attitude  of  prayerful  expectation  and  moral  preparedness.  Faith  breeds  fear; 
the  more  earnestly  we  believe,  the  more  we  tremble  at  the  divine  threatenings. 
Unbelief  lulls  the  soul  into  false  security.  What  a 'dreadful  awakening  will  that 
be,  when  the  thunder  of  God's  wrath  shall  suddenly  burst  from  the  hitherto 
tranquil  heavens  ! 

3.  The  second  coming  will  be  terrible  to  the  wicked. — "  And  they  shall  not 
escape  "  (ver.  3).  Wicked  men  are  never  more  secure  than  when  destruction  is 
nearest,  never  nearer  destruction  than  when  they  are  most  secure.  The  swearer 
may  be  seized  while  the  oath  is  burning  on  his  tongue,  the  drunkard  engulfed 
in  judgment  while  the  cup  is  trembling  between  his  lips.  The  other  day  a 
certain  suspension  bridge  was  crowded  with  pleasure  seekers  ;  the  slender  erection, 
yielding  under  the  unwonted  strain,  broke  in  two,  and  in  a  moment  precipitated 
numbers  into  the  river  rolling  below  and  into  a  watery  grave.  Not  less  fragile 
is  the  confidence  on  which  the  unbelieving  rest ;  and  more  terrible  still  will  be 
the  catastrophe  that  will  suddenly  overtake  them.  The  destruction  of  the  wicked 
— of  all  their  joy,  of  all  they  most  prized  in  this  life — will  be  sudden,  painful, . 
inevitable.  Now  there  is  peace,  for  mercy  reigns  ;  but  when  the  great  day  comes 
there  will  be  nothing  but  indignation  and  wrath,  tribulation,  and  anguish  upon 
every  soul  of  man  that  doeth  evil  (Rom.  ii.  8,  9). 

II.  It  is  an  attitude  of  vigilance. — 1.  This  vigilance  is  enforced  on  the  ground 
of  a  moral  transformation.  "But  ye,  brethren,  are  not  in  darkness,  that  that 
day  should  overtake  you  as  a  thief.  Ye  are  all  the  children  of  light,  and  the 
children  of  the  day  :  we  are  not  of  the  night,  nor  of  darkness  "  (vers.  4,  5). 
Believers  in  Christ  are  delivered  from  the  power  of  darkness,  of  spiritual 
ignorance,  of  godless  profanity,  of  dark  and  dangerous  security,  and  translated 
into  the  kingdom  of  light,  of  truth,  of  purity,  and  felicity.  They  are  children  of 
the  day  when  the  light  shines  the  brightest,  when  privileges  are  more  abundant, 
when  opportunities  multiply,  and  responsibility  is  correspondingly  increased. 
The  light  of  past  ages  was  but  the  dawn  of  the  effulgent  day  which  now  shines 
upon  the  world  from  the  gospel  sun.  Every  inquiring  and  believing  soul  passes 
from  the  dawn  to  the  daylight  of  experimental  truth. 

2.  This  vigilance  must  be  constant. — "  Therefore  let  us  not  sleep,  as  do  others, 
but  let  us  watch  and  be  sober.  For  they  that  sleep  sleep  in  the  night ;  and  they 
that  be  drunken  are  drunken  in  the  night"  (vers.  6,  7).  Let  us  not,  like  the 
drunkards  steeped  in  sottish  slumber,  be  immersed  in  the  deep  sleep  of  sin  and 
unconcern,  neglecting  duty,  and  never  thinking  of  a  judgment ;  but  let  us 
watch,  and,  in  order  to  do  so  effectually,  be  sober.  We  are  day-people,  not 
night-people ;  therefore  our  work  ought  to  be  day-work,  not  night-work ;  our 
conduct  such  as  will  bear  the  eye  of  day,  and  has  no  need  to  hide  itself  under 
the  veil  of  night.     A  strict  sobriety  is  essential  to  a  sleepless  vigilance. 

III.  It  is  an  attitude  of  militant  courage. — "  But  let  us  who  are  of  the  day 
be  sober,  putting  on  the  breastplate  of  faith  and  love ;  and  for  an  helmet  the 
hope  of  salvation"  (ver.  8).     The  Christian  has  to  fight  the  enemy,  as  well  as 

536 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I  TRESSALONIANS.    chap.  V. 


watch  against  him.  He  is  a  soldier,  and  a  soldier  on  sentry.  The  Christian  life 
is  not  one  of  soft,  luxurious  ease;  it  is  a  hard,  fierce  conflict.  The  graces  of 
faith,  love,  and  hope  constitute  the  most  complete  armour  of  the  soul.  The 
breastplate  and  helmet  protect  the  two  most  vital  parts — the  head  and  the 
heart.  With  head  and  heart  right,  the  whole  man  is  right.  Let  us  keep 
the  head  from  error  and  the  heart  from  sinful  lust,  and  we  are  safe.  The  best 
guards  against  error  in  religion  and  viciousness  in  life  are — faith,  hope,  and 
charity ;  these  are  the  virtues  that  inspire  the  most  enterprising  bravery. 
Drunkards  and  sluggards  never  make  good  soldiers. 

IV.  It  is  an  attitude  of  confidence  as  to  the  future  blessedness  of  the  Church. 
— 1.  This  blessedness  is  divinely  provided.  "  For  God  hath  not  appointed  us  to 
wrath,  but  to  obtain  salvation  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  died  for  us " 
(vers.  9,  10).  The  whole  scheme  of  salvation  was  divinely  conceived  and  divinely 
carried  out  in  all  its  essential  details.  And,  without  discussing  other  methods 
by  which  the  salvation  of  the  race  could  be  effected,  it  is  sufficient  for  us  to 
know  that  the  infallible  wisdom  of  God  provided  that  the  death  of  His  Son  was 
the  most  effectual  method.  Our  sins  had  exposed  us  to  the  wrath  of  God,  who 
had  declared  death  to  be  the  penalty  of  sin.  This  death  Christ  underwent  on 
our  behalf,  in  our  stead,  and  so  ^aved  us  from  it.  In  every  extremity,  at  every 
new  challenge  of  the  enemy,  on  each  successive  field  of  effort  and  peril,  this  is 
the  password  and  battle-cry  of  God's  people — Christ  died  for  us. 

2.  This  blessedness  consists  in  a  constant  fellowship  with  Christ. — "  That  whether 

we  wake  or  sleep,  we  should  live  together  with  Him  "  (ver.  10).     The  happiest 

moments  on  earth  are  those  spent  in  the  company  of  the  good,  reciprocating  the 

noblest  ideas  and  emotions.     Christ,  by  dying  for  us,  has  begotten  us  into  a  life 

of  ineffable  and  endless  felicity ;  and  "the  hope  of  salvation"  enables  us  to  look 

forward  to  the  period  when,  released  from  the  sorrows  and  uncertainties  of  this 

changeful  life,  we  shall  enjoy  the  bliss  of  uninterrupted  communion  with  Jesus. 

"  The  soul  to  be  where  Jesus  is 
Must  be  for  ever  blest." 

3.  The  confidence  of  inheriting  this  blessedness  encourages  mutual  edification. — 
"  Wherefore  comfort  yourselves  together,  and  edify  one  another,  even  as  also  ye 
do"  (ver.  11).  "  All  Christians  indiscriminately  are  to  use  these  doctrines  for 
mutual  exhortation  and  mutual  edification.  And  so  the  spirit  of  the  verse  will 
be  this :  Comfort  one  another  as  to  this  matter,  and  then,  free  from  the  dis- 
tracting and  paralysing  influence  of  vain  misgivings,  go  on  edifying  one  another 
in  all  the  relations,  and  by  all  the  means  and  appliances  of  your  Church  fellow- 
ship; even  as  also  ye  do.  Ye  do  it  now,  in  the  midst  of  your  own  secret, 
personal  sorrows  and  depressing  fears.  But  you  will  be  able  to  do  it  more 
effectively,  with  the  clearer  views  I  have  now  given  you  of  what  awaits  us  all — 
those  sleeping  in  Jesus,  and  us  who  are  alive  and  remain  unto  the  coming  of  the 
Lord"  (Lillie). 

Lessons. — 1.  The  great  event  of  the  future  will  be  the  second  coming  of  Christ. 
2.  That  event  should  be  looked  for  in  a  spirit  of  sobriety  and  vigilance.  3.  That 
event  will  bring  unspeakable  felicity  to  the  good  and  dismay  and  misery  to  the 
wicked. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  2.  The  Bay  of  the  Lord —  gestive  of  fear. — "  As  a  thief  in  the 

I.  A  day  which  will  be  in  some     night." 

unique  and  pre-eminent  sense  His  day.         IV.  It  will  come  suddenly. 

II.  It  is  the  day  of  judgment.  V.  Cannot   be    prevented    by   any 

III.  The  coming  of  His  day  is  sug-     efforts  of  our  own. 

537 


CHAP.  v.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    THESSALONIANS. 


VI.  We  may  prepare  for  the  day  of 
judgment  by  judging  ourselves  in  self- 
examination. — H.  P.  Liddon. 

Ver.  6.  The  Pilgrims  on  the  Enchanted 
Ground. 

I.  Hopeful  keeps  awake  by  goodly 
counsel  and  discourse. 

II.  Ignorance  comes  up  again. — 
1 .  Ignorance  explains  the  ground  of  his 
hope.  2.  Christian  explains  what  good 
thoughts  are.  3.  Ignorance  speaks  re- 
proachfully about  things  he  knows  not. 
4.  He  again  falls  behind. 

III.  Christian  and  Hopeful  renew 
their  conversation. — 1.  Reflections  over 
the  conduct  of  Ignorance.  2.  Why 
ignorant  people  stifle  conviction. 
3.  Seasons  why  some  backslide. 

IV.  Some  lessons  from  this  stage. — 
1.  In  times  of  danger  it  is  wise  to  recall 
former  experiences.  2.  Human  philo- 
sophy may  seem  very  wise,  but  the  Bible 
is  an  unfailing  touchstone. — Homiletic 
Monthly. 


Moral  Sleep. 
I.  The  season 


devoted  to  sleep  is 


one  of  darkness. — He  is  in  darkness 
as  to  God,  himself,  and  the  gospel. 

II.  Sleep  is  often  sought  for  and  ob- 
tained by  the  use  of  opiates. — These 
are:  1.  The  falsehoods  of  Satan.  2.  The 
pleasures  of  sense.  3.  The  fellowship  of 
the  world. 

III.  During  sleep  the  mind  is  usually 
occupied  with  dreams. — The  life  of  the 
ungodly  is  one  continued  dream. 

IV.  He  who  is  asleep  is  in  a  great 
measure  insensible,  to  pain. — 1.  The 
sting  of  sin  is  in  man's  nature. 
2.  Through  this  sleep  he  feels  it  not. — 
Stewart. 

Vers.  9,  10.  Salvation  is  of  God. 

I.  The  choice  of  God.— 1.  It  was 
early.  2.  It  was  free.  3.  Efficacious. 
4.  Appropriating. 

II.  The  work  of  Christ.— He  died 
as  our  Substitute.  1.  This  fact  explains 
His  death.  2.  Vindicates  the  justice  of 
God  in  His  death.  3.  Displays  the  love 
of  Christ. 

III.  The  privilege  and  duty  of 
Christians.— 1.  Life  in  Christ.  2.  Life 
with  Christ.  3.  In  Him  and  with  Him 
here  and  hereafter. — G.  Brooks. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  12,  13. 

The  Treatment  due  to  the  Ministerial  Office. 

An  excessive  modesty  prevents  many  ministers  from  calling  attention  to  the 
sacred  office  they  hold,  and  to  the  respect  in  which  it  should  ever  be  regarded 
by  those  over  whom  they  have  the  oversight.  Such  a  modesty  is  inexcusable. 
To  say  nothing  of  the  contempt  with  which  the  world  looks  upon  the  ministerial 
office,  there  are  thousands  within  the  Church  who  are  utterly  ignorant  of  its 
duties  and  awful  responsibilities,  and  who  have  but  vague,  distorted  notions  of 
their  duty  towards  the  men  who  first  led  them  to  Christ,  and  who  have  been 
instructing  them  in  the  truths  for  years.  Let  not  the  minister  hesitate,  even 
at  the  risk  of  being  thought  'egotistical,  to  speak  on  this  subject,  and  enforce 
the  New  Testament  teaching.  The  apostle  was  not  withheld  by  any  false  sense 
of  modesty  from  pointing  out,  with  all  emphasis  and  authority,  the  obligations  of 
the  Church  towards  those  who  minister  in  the  word  and  doctrine.    Observe  : — 

1.  The  distinctive  duties  belonging  to  the  ministerial  office. — 1.  To  labour. 
"  Them  which  labour  among  you"  (ver.  12),  even  unto  weariness,  as  the  verb 
signifies.  The  work  of  the  faithful  minister  is  no  sinecure;  it  taxes  all  the 
powers  of  the  brain  and  muscle.  It  i$  a  work  demanding  prolonged  and  earnest 
study,  intense  feeling,  and  ceaseless  toil. 

2.  To  rule. — "And  are  over  you  in  the  Lord  "  (ver.  12).  The  minister  is  not 
simply  a  sort  of  popular  delegate  or  hired  agent,  bound  to  receive  the  instructions, 
execute  the  wishes,  and  flatter  the  humours  of  his  constituents.  He  is,  indeed, 
the  servant,  in  the  proper  sense  of  that  word,  but  not  the  slave  and  tool  of  the 

538 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    THESSALONIANS.    chap.  v. 


Church.  The  right  to  speak  and  act  in  the  name  of  Christ  carries  with  it  an 
aspect  of  pre-eminence  and  authority,  and  the  same  is  implied  in  the  very  names 
that  designate  the  ministerial  office — as  pastors,  or  shepherds,  teachers,  bishops, 
or  overseers.  On  the  other  hand,  the  impressiveness  of  sacerdotal  assumption 
is  checked  and  limited  by  the  words,  "  In  the  Lord."  The  minister  is  to  rule 
only  in  the  Lord,  recognising  the  joint  union  of  himself  and  his  Church  with 
the  Lord,  and  the  principles  and  polity  by  which  the  Church  of  Christ  is  to 
be  governed. 

3.  To  admonish. — "And  admonish  you"  (ver.  12).  These  words  also  qualify 
the  nature  of  the  rulership.  It  must  not  be  a  despotic  lording  it  over  God's 
heritage,  issuing  commands  with  absolute  and  arbitrary  authority,  and  enforcing 
those  commands,  if  not  instantly  obeyed,  with  terrifying  anathemas.  No ;  he 
is  to  rule  by  the  force  of  moral  suasion — by  instruction,  admonition,  advice, 
warning.  The  verb  means  to  put  in  mind.  To  gain  obedience  to  the  right, 
precept  must  be  repeatedly  enforced  in  all  the  varied  forms  of  reproof,  rebuke, 
and  exhortation. 

II.  The  treatment  due  to  the  ministerial  office. — 1.  An  intelligent  acknow- 
ledgment of  its  character.  Think  of  its  divine  appointment,  its  solemn  responsi- 
bilities, its  important  work,  its  exhausting  anxieties,  its  special  perils.  Whatever 
the  ministers  seem  to  you,  they  are  the  eyes  of  the  Church  and  the  mouth 
of  God.  Acknowledge  them ;  sympathise  with  and  help  them ;  give  credit  to 
their  message  ;  they  watch  and  pray  ;  they  study  and  take  pains  for  your  sake. 

2.  A  superlative,  loving  regard. — "Esteem  them  very  highly  in  love"  (ver.  13). 
The  adverb  is  particularly  forcible,  signifying  super-exceed  in  gly,  more  than  ex- 
ceedingly. There  is  a  hint  here  to  thousands  in  the  Church  at  the  present  day, 
which  it  is  hoped  they  will  have  the  grace  to  act  upon.  The  profound  reverence 
and  esteem  to  be  shown  to  the  ministerial  office  is  to  be  regulated,  not  by  fear, 
but  by  love.  The  hard-working,  devoted,  and  faithful  minister  is  worthy  of  all 
honour  and  affection. 

3.  The  true  ground  of  this  considerate  treatment. — "  For  their  work's  sake  " 
(ver.  13).  Love  them  for  your  own  sake;  you  have  life  and  comfort  by  them. 
Honour  them  for  their  office'  sake ;  they  are  your  fathers ;  they  have  begotten 
you  in  Christ ;  they  are  the  stewards  of  God's  house,  and  the  dispensers  of  His 
mysteries.  Honour  and  love  them  for  God's  sake  ;  He  has  sent  them  and  put  His 
word  in  their  mouth.  To  love  a  minister  is  not  much,  except  his  work  be  that 
which  draws  out  affection.  He  who  can  say,  "I  love  a  minister  because  he 
teacheth  me  to  know  God,  because  he  informs  me  of  duty,  and  reproves  my 
declensions  and  backslidings  " — he  is  the  man  who  has  satisfaction  in  his  love. 

III.  An  important  exhortation. — "  And  be  at  peace  among  yourselves  "  (ver.  13). 
Not  simply  be  at  peace  with  your  pastor,  but  among  yourselves.  You  are  all  the 
children  of  God.  God  is  a  God  of  peace.  Discord,  contention,  and  unquiet- 
ness  are  fit  only  for  the  children  of  the  devil.  Live  in  godly  unity  as  becometh 
the  children  of  peace.  This  is  a  duty  frequently  enjoined  (Heb.  xii.  14; 
Jas.  iii. ;  Ps.  cxli.).  Let  there  be  peace  especially  between  the  minister  and 
his  flock — no  rivalry  between  ministers,  no  disputings  and  contentions  among 
the  people.     There  can  be  no  prosperity  where  peace  is  absent. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  minister  is  accountable  to  God  for  his  fidelity.  2.  The  people 
can  never  profit  under  the  minister  they  have  not  learned  to  respect.  3.  Peace  is  an 
essential  condition  of  success  in  Christian  work. 


539 


chap.  v.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    t   T&ESSALONIANS 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers.  12,  13.  A  Public  Ministry —  Ver.  13.  "  And  be  at  peace  among 

I.  Is  ordained  by  God.—"  Over  you  yourselves £     Church  Concord— 

in  the  Lord."  I.  Possible   only    where    there    is 

TT    TT     '          ,      ,  „     ,    ,  , .  mutual  peace. 

II.  Has   clearly  denned  duties.—  n   It  is  the  duty  of  every  memDer 

1    To  labour.      2.   To  govern.      3.  To  0f  the  Church  to  promote  harmony. 


admonish. 


III.  Peace   with  God  is  the  con- 


III.  Should  be  highly  esteemed. —     dition  of  peace  with  each  other. 
"  Esteem  them  very  highly  in  love  for         IV.  Discord  in  a  Church  mars  the 
their  work's  sake."  usefulness  of  the  best  ministry. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  14,  15. 

A  Group  of  Christian  Precepts. 

The  supernatural  character  of  Christianity  is  not  less  apparent  in  the  purity 
and  loftiness  of  the  morality  it  inculcates,  than  in  the  superiority  of  the  truths 
it  reveals.  It  is  intensely  practical  in  its  teaching  and  aim.  It  is  not  like  a 
glow  of  light  that  irradiates  the  external  character  for  a  time ;  it  is  an  inward 
radiance  that  cannot  help  making  itself  visible  in  the  outer  life.  It  is  not  a 
sentiment ;  it  is  a  principle.  The  moral  precepts  of  Christianity  can  be 
appreciated  and  obeyed  only  by  the  soul  that  has  become  thoroughly  possessed 
by  the  Christian  spirit.  Each  precept  in  these  verses  may  be  fittingly  used  as 
the  homiletical  heading  of  a  distinct  paragraph. 

I.  Warn  them  that  are  unruly. — The  unruly  are  those  who,  like  disorderly 
soldiers,  break  their  ranks,  and  become  idle,  dissolute,  and  worthless  in  their 
lives.  This  disorder liness  was  a  besetting  sin  of  the  primitive  Churches,  not 
excepting  the  Thessalonian.  Many  of  them,  entertaining  false  ideas  about  the 
nearness  of  Christ's  second  coming,  became  indifferent  to  the  ordinary  work  of 
life,  and  sank  into  listlessness  and  apathy,  and  even  worse.  Says  the  proverb, 
"  An  idle  brain  is  the  devil's  workshop,"  and  when  a  man  is  not  diligently 
employed  in  some  healthy  and  vigorous  occupation,  he  is  apt,  notwithstanding 
his  Christian  profession,  to  become  an  instrument  of  evil  and  a  disturber  of  the 
Church,  the  peace  of  which  he  is  pledged  to  maintain.  It  is  difficult  to  pin  some 
people  down  to  do  a  bit  of  fair  and  honest  work.  They  are  full  of  schemes  and 
suggestions  for  other  people  to  carry  out ;  they  lay  down  the  line  of  conduct 
with  the  utmost  precision,  but  never  themselves  illustrate  the  easiness  or 
difficulty  of  keeping  on  the  line ;  they  make  laws  and  regulations  which  they 
never  dream  of  observing  themselves,  and  are  for  ever  finding  fault  that  other 
people  do  not  observe  them.  These  are  the  restless  gipsies  of  the  Church,  the 
pests  of  every  Christian  community  into  which  they  intrude,  the  mischief-makers 
and  busybodies  in  other  people's  matters.  Warn  such.  Admonish  gently  at 
first,  putting  them  in  mind  of  their  duty.  It  is  the  fault  of  many  to  limit 
admonitions  to  gross  and  grievous  sins ;  but  in  these  cases  warning  often  comes 
too  late.  If  admonition  in  the  earlier  stage  is  not  effectual,  then  proceed  to 
sharper  and  more  faithful  reproof.  If  that  is  unavailing,  hesitate  not  to  take 
more  summary  measures — separate  yourselves  from  their  society. 

II.  Comfort  the  feeble-minded. — More  correctly — encourage  the  faint-hearted. 
The  reference  is  not  to  the  intellectually  weak,  but  to  such  as  faint  in  the  day 
of  adversity,  or  are  ready  to  fall  away  before  the  prospect  of  persecution  and 
suffering  (ii.  14),  or  who  are  disheartened  and  desponding  in  consequence  of  the 
loss  of  friends  (iv.   13).     It  may  also  include  those   who   are  perplexed  with 

540 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   THESSALONIANS.    chap.  v. 


constant  doubt  and  apprehension  as  to  their  spiritual  condition,  and  who 
through  fear  are  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage.  There  are  some  people 
so  weighed  down  with  a  sense  of  modesty  as  to  incapacitate  them  from  using 
the  abilities  they  certainly  possess,  though  underneath  all  this  modesty  there 
may  be  the  pride  of  thinking  themselves  better  able  to  judge  of  themselves  and 
their  abilities  than  anybody  else.  Others,  again,  are  so  oppressed  with  the 
inveteracy  of  sin,  that  they  despair  of  gaining  the  victory  over  it,  and  give  up 
all  endeavours.  These  need  encouraging  with  the  promises  of  God,  and  with  the 
lessons  and  examples  furnished  by  experience.  Heart-courage  is  what  the 
faint-hearted  require. 

III.  Support  the  weak. — A  man  may  be  weak  in  judgment  or  weak  in 
practice.  There  may  be  lack  of  information  as  to  certain  great  truths  necessary 
to  be  believed  and  stoutly  maintained,  or  lack  of  capacity  in  clearly  understand- 
ing and  grasping  those  truths.  Such  was  the  condition  of  many  in  the  apostle's 
day,  who,  not  apprehending  the  complete  abrogation  of  the  Mosaic  law,  and 
thinking  they  were  still  conscientiously  bound  to  observe  ordinances,  were  weak 
in  faith.  Some  linger  for  years  in  the  misty  borderland  between  doubt  and 
certainty,  with  all  its  enfeebling  and  poisonous  malaria — ever  learning,  but 
never  coming  to  a  knowledge  of  the  truth.  Defective  faith  implies  defective 
practice.  Support  such  with  the  moral  influence  of  our  sympathy,  our  prayers, 
our  counsel,  our  example.  While  not  countenancing  their  sins,  we  may  bear  or 
prop  them  up  by  judiciously  commending  in  them  that  which  is  good,  by  not  too 
severely  condemning  them  in  the  practice  of  things  indifferent  (1  Cor.  ix.  20), 
and  by  striving  to  rectify  their  errors  with  all  gentleness  and  fidelity. 

IV.  Be  patient  toward  all  men. — Not  only  toward  the  weak,  the  faint- 
hearted, and  the  disorderly,  but  toward  all  men— the  most  wayward  and 
perverse,  the  bitterest  enemies  and  persecutors.  Consider  the  patience  of  God 
towards  ourselves,  while  for  years  we  refused  His  calls  and  despised  His 
admonitions ;  and  let  us  strive  to  imitate  His  longsuffering  and  kindness. 
Lack  of  present  success  is  no  warrant  to  any  to  cease  from  obvious  duties,  and 
leave  things  to  drift  into  hopeless  entanglement  and  ruin.  The  triumphs  of 
genius  in  art,  science,  and  literature  are  triumphs  of  patience. 

V.  See  that  none  renders  evil  for  evil  unto  any  man. — Retaliation  betrays  a 
weak,  ignoble,  and  cruel  disposition.  Pagan  morality  went  so  far  as  to  forbid 
only  the  unprovoked  injuring  of  others,  and  it  is  not  without  noble  examples  of 
the  exercise  of  a  spirit  of  forgiveness. 

"  Exalted  Socrates,  divinely  brave, 
Injured  he  fell,  and  dying,  he  forgave  ; 
Too  noble  for  revenge,  which  still  we  find 
The  weakest  frailty  of  a  feeble  mind." 

The  Jews  prostituted  to  purposes  of  private  revenge  the  laws  which  were  intended 
to  administer  equitable  retributions  between  man  and  man.  It  is  Christianity 
alone  that  teaches  man  to  bear  personal  injuries  without  retaliation.  "  Hath 
any  wronged  thee  ? "  says  Quarles ;  "be  bravely  avenged — slight  it,  and  the 
work  is  begun  ;  forgive  it,  and  it  is  finished.  He  is  below  himself  that  is  not 
above  an  injury."  Public  wrongs  the  public  law  will  avenge  ;  and  the  final 
recompense  for  all  wrong,  private  and  public,  must  be  left  to  the  infallible  Judge 
of  all  (Rom.  xii.  19,  20). 

VI.  But  ever  follow  that  which  is  good,  both  among  yourselves  and  to  all 
men. — The  noblest  retaliation  is  that  of  good  for  evil.  In  the  worst  character 
there  is  some  element  of  goodness,  that  may  call  out  the  desire  to  do  good 
towards  it.  Our  beneficence  should  be  as  large  as  an  enemy's  malice  (Matt.  v. 
44,  45).  That  which  is  good  is  not  always  that  which  is  pleasing  to  the  objects 
of  our  benevolence,  nor  is  it  always  pleasing  to  ourselves.     Goodness  should  be 

541 


chap.  v.     H'OMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I    THESSALONIANS. 


sought  for  its  own  sake,  and  sought  with  increasing  earnestness  and  persever- 
ance, as  the  hunter  seeks  his  prey.  It  is  the  great  aim  and  business  of  life. 
Goodness  is  essentially  diffusive ;  it  delights  in  multiplying  itself  in  others.  It 
is  undeterred  by  provocation  ;  it  conquers  the  most  virulent  opposition. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  'preceptive  morality  of  Christianity  is  a  signal  evidence  of  its 
transcendent  glory.  2.  Practice  is  more  potent  than  precept.  3.  The  Christian 
spirit  is  the  root  of  genuine  goodness. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF   THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  16—18. 

The  Secret  of  a  Happy  Life. 

Happiness  is  not  found  in  anything  external.  It  is  a  certain  state  of  the 
soul  when  it  is  filled  with  the  peace  of  God  and  lit  up  with  the  sunshine  of 
heaven.  It  is  a  mockery  to  talk  about  cultivating  happiness.  It  is  not  a 
potato  to  be  planted  in  mould,  and  tilled  with  manure.  "  Happiness  is  a  glory 
shining  far  down  upon  us  out  of  heaven.  It  is  a  divine  dew  which  the  soul,  on 
certain  of  its  summer  mornings,  feels  dropping  upon  it  from  the  amaranth 
bloom  and  golden  fruitage  of  paradise. n  An  aged  divine  once  gave  this  advice 
to  a  newly  married  pair :  "  Don't  try  to  be  happy.  Happiness  is  a  shy 
nymph,  and  if  you  chase  her,  you  will  never  catch  her ;  but  just  go  quietly  on 
and  do  your  duty,  and  she  will  come  to  you."  In  these  verses  we  have  revealed 
to  us  the  secret  of  a  happy  life. 

1.  The  secret  of  a  happy  life  is  found  in  the  constant  and  faithful  discharge 
of  Christian  duties. — 1.  It  is  our  duty  continually  to  rejoice.  u  Rejoice  ever- 
more "  (ver.  16).  To  rejoice  is  not  only  a  privilege,  but  a  duty;  the  believer  is 
as  much  obliged  to  rejoice  as  he  is  to  believe.  It  seems  a  mockery  to  direct 
people  to  rejoice  in  the  midst  of  a  world  of  sin,  sorrow,  and  death,  and  in  a 
Church  which  is  sorely  tried ;  and  yet  such  was  the  condition  of  things  when 
these  words  were  penned,  and  when  similar  counsel  was  given  to  the  Philippians 
(iv.  4).  Religion  is  never  recommended  by  sour  looks,  sepulchral  tones, 
and  suppressing  every  external  manifestation  of  gladness.  No  wonder  the 
Christian  is  able  to  rejoice  continually,  when  we  remember  the  inexhaustible 
sources  of  joy  he  possesses  in  his  relations  to  Christ,  to  God,  and  to  the  Holy 
Ghost,  in  the  promises  of  the  divine  word,  and  in  a  loving,  beneficent,  and  holy 
life.  By  becoming  religious,  a  man  does  not  lose  his  joys,  but  exchanges  them — 
transitory,  fading,  earthly  joys — for  joy  unspeakable,  glorious,  and  that  fadeth 
not  away. 

2.  It  is  our  duty  to  pray  always. — "  Pray  without  ceasing  "  (ver.  1 7).  As  we 
are  every  moment  in  need,  so  should  we  every  moment  seek  help  in  prayer.  The 
Lord  requires  not  only  frequency  in  prayer,  but  also  unwearied  importunity. 
We  must  guard  against  the  error  of  the  Euchites,  who  flourished  in  the  fourth 
century,  and  who  regarded  all  other  exercises  of  religion  than  inward  prayer  as 
unnecessary  and  vain.  Live  in  the  spirit  of  prayer.  Let  the  whole  work  of  life 
be  as  prayer  offered  to  God.  He  who  prays  the  most  lives  the  best.  Prayer 
surrounds  the  soul  with  a  golden  atmosphere,  through  which  is  sifted  the  sun- 
beams of  heavenly  joy. 

3.  It  is  our  duty  to  be  ever  grateful. — "In  everything  give  thanks"  (ver.  18). 
Prayer  should  ever  be  accompanied  with  thanksgiving.  What  we  may  pray  for, 
for  that  we  must  give  thanks ;  and  whatever  is  unfit  matter  for  prayer  is  unfit 
for  thanksgiving.  The  Christian  can  meet  with  nothing  in  the  way  of  duty 
that  is  not  a  cause  for  thankfulness,  whatever  suffering  may  be  entailed.  When 
we  think  of  the  ceaseless  stream  of  God's  mercies,  we  shall  have  ample  reasons 
for  unintermitted  thanksgiving. 

542 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    THESSALONIANS.    chap.  v. 


II.  The  secret  of  a  happy  life  is  in  harmony  with  the  divine  will. — "  For 

this  is  the  will  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  concerning  you  "  (ver.  18).  It  is  the  will  of 
God  that  His  people  should  be  rejoicing,  praying,  and  grateful ;  and  this  will  is 
revealed  by  Christ,  as  declared  in  His  gospel,  as  received  in  His  Church,  and  as 
observed  by  those  in  communion  with  Him.  What  a  revelation  is  this,  not  of 
an  arbitrary  demand  of  the  impossible  state  of  the  affections  towards  God,  but  a 
beautiful  and  consolatory  discovery  of  the  largeness  of  His  love  and  of  the  blessed 
ends  for  which  He  has  redeemed  us  in  Christ.  The  will  of  God  supplies  constant 
material  for  gratitude  and  praise. 

Lessons. — Learn  the  three  indubitable  marks  of  a  genuine  Christian:  1.  To 
rejoice  in  the  mercy  of  God.  2.  To  be  fervent  in  prayer.  3.  To  give  thanks  to 
God  in  all  things. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Ver.  16.  Rejoice  Evermore.  prayer   is   practised.      3.    Ejaculatory 

I.  In  the  exercise  of  faith. — 1.  In  prayer  helpful  in  striving  after  a  life  of 
the  truths  of  God.     2.  In  the  promises      sanctity. — E.  M.  Goulburn. 

of  God. 

II.  In  the  practice  of  Christian  hope.  Ver.  18.  The  Perpetual  Thanksgiving 

III.  In    performing    the    duty    of     of  a  Christian  Life. 

charity. — Barrow.  I.     Its     difficulty. — 1.     From     our 

fancied  knowledge  of  life.     2.  From  our 

Ver.   17.    On  Selfrecollectedness  and  unbelieving  distrust  of  God. 

Ejaculatory  Prayer.  II.    Its   motive. — God's   will    is    so 

I.  Mental  prayer  consists  in  gather-  revealed  in  Christ,  that,  believing  in 
ing  up  the  mind  from  its  wanderings,  it,  we  can  give  thanks  in  all  things. 
and  placing  it  consciously  in  the  1.  Life  the  perpetual  providence  of  a 
presence  of  God.  Father.     2.  That  perpetual  providence  is 

II.  In  breathing  out  the  mind  to-  a  discipline  of  human  character.  3.  The 
wards  God.  discipline  of  life  is  explained  by  eternity 

III.  Materials      for      ejaculatory     alone. 

prayer. — 1.  Found  in  daily  portions  of  III.  Its  attainment. — It  is  the 
Scripture.  2.  Stated  prayer  cannot  be  gradual  result  of  a  life  of  earnest 
dispensed  with  even  where  ejaculatory      fellowship  with  God. — E.  L.  Hull. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF   THE   PARAGRAPH— Verses  19—22. 

Varied  Aspects  of  Spiritual  Influence. 

In  the  natural  world  the  greater  law  of  distribution  is  manifested  in  the  infinite 
variety  that  appears  in  the  midst  of  an  unchanging  and  inflexible  uniformity. 
And  in  the  Church  of  God  what  varied  gifts,  graces,  and  attainments  are  found 
in  its  members.  No  two  are  precisely  alike.  There  are  diversities  of  gifts, 
but  the  same  Spirit ;  and  the  multiplicity  and  variety  of  endowments  are 
intended  to  be  exercised  for  one  grand  and  definite  purpose  (Eph.  iv.  12,  13). 
By  grouping  together  the  precepts  contained  in  these  verses  we  have  suggested 
to  us  the  varied  aspects  of  spiritual  influence.     Observe : — 

I.  The  fervency  of  spiritual  influence. — 1.  The  influence  of  the  Spirit  is 
represented  under  the  emblem  of  fire.  "Quench  not  the  Spirit"  (ver.  19).  Fire 
purifies  the  gold  of  its  dross,  enlightens  by  its  splendour  the  eyes  of  the  beholder, 
and  raises  the  temperature  of  the  Christian  life.  The  person  inspired  is  borne 
along,  as  it  were,  with  spiritual  ardour  (Acts  xviii.  25;  Rom.  xii.  11).  Timothy 
is  directed  to  rekindle  or  keep  up  the  fire  (2  Tim.  i.  6).     Christian  baptism  is 

543 


chap.  v.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L   THESSALONIANS. 


baptism  "with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire"  (Matt.  iv.  11).  The  descent  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  at  Pentecost  was  in  tongues  of  fire  (Acts  ii.  3).  The  Spirit,  as  fire, 
bestows  both  the  light  of  knowledge  and  the  fervour  of  love. 

2.  The  influence  of  the  Spirit  may  be  quenched  by  denying  the  personality  and 
Godhead  of  the  Spirit,  by  depreciating  the  necessity  of  and  restraining  the  fervour 
of  His  presence  in  Christian  work ;  by  ignoring  special  reference  to  Him  in 
prayer ;  by  stifling  the  voice  of  conscience ;  by  neglect  of  religious  ordinances ; 
by  conformity  to  the  world  ;  by  unsanctified  use  of  past  afflictions.  The  gifts  of 
the  Spirit,  with  all  His  holy  operations,  must  be  fervently  and  diligently 
cherished  within  us. 

II.  The  instructiveness  of  spiritual  influence. — "Despise  not  prophesyings " 
(ver.  20).  The  word  "  prophesying  "  in  the  New  Testament  signifies  not  only  the 
prediction  of  future  events,  but  the  instructions  of  men  inspired  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  teaching  Christian  doctrines,  revealing  or  explaining  mysteries,  exhorting 
to  duties,  consoling  the  sorrowing  and  afflicted.  It  is  what  we  understand  by 
preaching.  It  is  not  so  much  the  prediction  of  events  that  are  future,  as  it  is 
the  proclamation  of  duty  that  is  instant.  However  exalted  the  believer  may  be 
in  spiritual  experience,  however  rich  in  faith  and  charity,  it  is  still  his  duty  to 
attend  to  preaching.  "  Despise  not  prophesying."  Like  many  a  negative  in  the 
Bible,  it  means  a  very  decided  positive  in  the  opposite  direction.  Despite  it  not 
by  exalting  reason  above  revelation.  Despise  it  not  by  identifying  true  religion 
with  the  weakness,  oddities,  and  eccentric  notions  of  good  but  ignorant  men. 
Despise  it  not  by  denying  its  beneficent  teachings,  spurning  its  wise  counsels, 
and  neglecting  its  faithful  warnings.  Where  there  is  no  prophecy  the  people 
perish.  He  that  despiseth  it  shall  be  despised  of  the  Lord ;  he  shall  be  cast  into 
darkness,  because  he  would  not  delight  in  the  light  (Acts  xiii.  41 ;  Prov.  i.  24-31). 

III.  The  possible  abuse  of  spiritual  influence. — "  Prove  all  things ;  hold  fast 
that  which  is  good"  (ver.  21).  Error  is  never  so  dangerous  as  when  it  is  the 
alloy  of  truth.  Pure  error  is  seen  through  at  once  and  rejected ;  but  error  mixed 
with  truth  makes  use  of  the  truth  as  a  pioneer  for  it,  and  gets  introduction  where 
otherwise  it  would  have  none.  Poison  is  all  the  more  dangerous  when  mixed  up 
with  food — error  is  never  so  likely  to  do  mischief  as  when  it  comes  to  us  under 
the  pretensions  and  patronage  of  that  which  is  true.  Hence  the  importance  of 
testing  every  pretender  to  spiritual  illumination — as  the  goldsmith  tests  the  gold 
and  discovers  the  amount  of  alloy  in  it.  "  Beloved,"  says  St.  John,  "  believe  not 
every  spirit,  but  try  the  spirits,  whether  they  are  of  God  ;  because  many  false 
prophets  are  gone  out  into  the  world."  There  are  certain  fundamental  truths 
that  are  beyond  all  necessity  of  testing,  and  which  transcend  the  powers  of  human 
reason  to  fully  comprehend.  The  direction  is  addressed  to  the  Church,  to  those 
who  possess  the  Spirit  by  whose  help  the  test  is  applied.  The  utterances  of  the 
Spirit  may  be  tested  in  their  relation  to  the  glory  of  Jesus,  and  by  the  influence 
of  the  truths  uttered  upon  the  moral  and  spiritual  life  of  the  teacher  and  his 
followers.  Having  proved  the  truth,  hold  fast  that  which  is  good,  as  with  both 
hands  and  against  all  who  would  forcibly  wrest  it  from  you.  Wh'en  you  have 
tried  and  found  out  the  truth,  be  constant  and  settled  in  it.  A  wavering-minded 
man  is  unstable  in  all  his  ways : — 

"  Seize  upon  truth  wherever  'tis  found, 
Among  her  friends,  among  her  foes, 
On  Christian  or  on  heathen  ground, 
The  flower's  divine  where'er  it  grows — 
Refuse  the  prickles  and  assume  the  rose." 

IV.  The  sensitiveness  of  spiritual  influence. — "  Abstain  from  all  appearance 
of  evil  "  (ver.  22).  Nothing  will  sooner  quench  the  fire  of  the  Spirit  in  the  believer 
than  sin.     Therefore  is  he  exhorted  to  abstain,  to  hold  aloof  from  every  species 

544 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   THESSALONIANS.    chap.  V. 


of  evil ;  not  only  from  that  which  is  really  and  in  itself  evil,  but  also  from  that 
which  has  the  shape  or  semblance  of  evil.  Not  what  we  are,  but  what  we  appear, 
determines  the  world's  judgment  of  us.  Our  usefulness  in  the  world  is  very  much 
dependent  on  appearances.  Our  abhorrence  of  evil,  both  in  doctrine  and 
practice,  must  be  so  decided  as  to  avoid  the  very  show  of  it  in  either.  He  makes 
conscience  of  no  sin  that  makes  not  conscience  of  all ;  and  he  is  in  danger  of  the 
greatest  who  allows  himself  in  the  least.  "  By  shunning  evil  things,"  says 
Bernard,  "  we  provide  for  conscience ;  by  avoiding  ill,  shows  we  safeguard  our 
fame."  The  believer  has  need  of  a  sound  judgment,  a  sensitive  conscience,  and 
an  ever-wakeful  vigilance.  To  sanction  evil  in  any  form  is  to  dim  the  lustre 
and  stifle  the  operation  of  spiritual  influence.  "  Know  nought  but  truth,  feel 
nought  but  love,  will  nought  but  bliss,  do  nought  but  righteousness.  All  things 
are  known  in  heaven  ere  aimed  at  on  earth." 

Lessons. — 1.  The  mightiest  influence  in  the  universe  is  spiritual.  2.  Increase 
of  spiritual  influence  is  dependent  on  uprightness  of  life.  3.  The  best  spiritual 
gifts  should  be  eagerly  sought. 


GERM  NOTES   ON   THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  19.  Quench  not  the  Sph'it. 

I.  The  mode  of  the  Spirit's  opera- 
tion is  likened  unto  that  of  fire. — I.Eire 
of  unrest.  When  the  Spirit  convinces 
of  sin.  2.  Fire  of  purification.  When 
the  Spirit  burns  up  evil  within.  3.  Fire 
of  consecration.  When  the  Spirit  dwells 
within  as  a  mighty  impelling  force. 

II.  It  is  in  our  power  to  quench  the 
Holy  Fire. 

III.  The  ways  in  which  men  quench 
the  Spirit. — 1.  By  continuing  in  known 
sin.  2.  By  indulging  in  a  light,  frivolous 
spirit.  3.  By  refusing  to  believe  in  any- 
thing they  cannot  see  or  touch.  4.  By 
allowing  worldly  affairs  to  absorb  the 
affections.  5.  By  neglecting  religious 
duties.  6.  By  not  exercising  the  gifts 
already  bestowed. — Local  Preacher's 
Treasury. 

Ver.  20.  Despise  not  Frophesyings — 

I.  Because  they  are  the  sayings  of 
God. 

II.  They  are  the  grand  appointed 
means  of  our  salvation. 

III.  Because  we  greatly  need  them. 

IV.  We  grieve  the  Spirit  of  God 
thereby. 

V.  It  is  the  sure  way  of  contracting 
a  habit  of  despising  divine  things  in 
general. 

VI.  It  lays  stumbling-blocks  in  the 
way  of  others. 


VII.  Those  who  despise  destroy 
themselves. — E.  Rare. 

Abuse  of  Public  Worship. 

I.  The  offence. — 1.  Habitual  neglect 
of  public  worship.  2.  Attendance  on 
public  worship  in  an  improper  state  of 
mind.  3.  Failure  to  improve  public 
worship  for  the  purposes  for  which  it 
is  intended. 

II.  Its  sin  and  danger. — 1.  It  in- 
volves contempt  of  the  authority  of  God. 
2.  It  involves  contempt  of  an  institution 
with  which  God  has  specially  identified 
Himself  3.  It  involves  contempt  of 
one  of  the  appointed  means  of  grace. 
4.  It  involves  contempt  of  our  own  soul. 
— G.  B7*ooks. 

Ver.  21.  Rationalism. 

I.  Prove  all  things. — 1.    Our  own 

sentiments.     2.  The  sentiments  of  others. 

II.  Hold  fast  that  which  is  good. — 

1.  Against  the  assaults  of  proud  reason. 

2.  Against  the  assaults  of  mad  passions. 

3.  Against  the  assqults  of  a  menacing 
world. — Ibid. 

Prove  all  Things. 

I.  The  course  of  conduct  commanded. 
— "  Prove."  1.  By  an  appeal  to  the 
word  of  God  as  supreme.  2.  Sincerely. 
3.  Thoroughly.     4.  Prayerfully. 

II.  The  extent  to  which  the  course  of 
conduct  is  to  be  carried. — "  All  things." 

NN  545 


CHAP.  V.    HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:    I.    THESSALONIANS. 


1.  Things  taken  for  granted  to  he  right.  II.  Cherish  a  deep  sense  of  responsi- 

2.  Things  wrong.     3.  Things  doubtful,  bility  because  you  have  been  led  to 

III.  Some  hindrances  to  the  adoption  prove  and  to  be  convinced  of  the 
of  this  course. — 1.  Dislike  to  the  trouble  good. 

it  may  cause.     2.  Fear  of  the  demands  III.  Be  assured    that   powerful  in- 

which  the  result  may  make.  fluences  will  be  exerted  that  you  may 

IV.  Blessings  likely  to  result  from  lose  your  hold. 

this  course.— 1.    Activity  of  mind  in  iv.  Do  not  allow  your  convictions 

matters    of   religion.       2.     A    specific  0f  its  goodness  to  be  unsettled. 

acquaintance   with   the   word    of   God.  y    Do  not  take  hold   of  anything 

3.  Legitimate  independence  of  thought.  which  you  cannot  hold  at  the  same 

4.  Increasing    strength    of   Christian  time  that  you  firmly  grasp  this. 

character.       5.     Increase    of    Christian  ^7T    ^««n«+«nuu^u«.A 

a      mi       j      ■         r   ^  VI.  Do  not  let  a  little  oi  it  go. 

sagacity.       o.     The    adorning     oj     the  .  ° 

Christian  doctrine  in  the  eyes  of  men.         *  *•*-•  •"■°1(1  **  mor©  firmly. 

jm  Holmes.  VIII.  Regard  how  others  have  been 

affected  by  the  way  they  have  held. 
Hold  Fast  that  which  is  Good.  IX.  Depend  entirely  on  the  grace 

I.  Be  well  assured  of  the  value  and     of  God  to  enable  you  to  do  this. — 

goodness  of  the  possession.  Ibid. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  23,  24. 

A  Prayer  for  Sanctification. 

Sanctification  is  the  supreme  end  of  the  Christian  life,  and  everything  should 
be  made  to  contribute  to  the  grand  result.  It  is  the  crown  and  ornament  of  all 
other  graces,  the  perfecting  of  every  moral  virtue.  The  fact  that  man  is  capable 
of  so  lofty  a  degree  of  personal  holiness  indicates  that  it  is  the  supreme  end  for 
which  he  ought  to  live.  He  misses  the  glory  that  is  within  his  reach  if  he  does 
not  attain  to  it.  Sanctification  in  its  radical  meaning  is  simply  separation — 
a  separation  from  what  is  evil  to  what  is  good.  It  then  implies  to  make  holy 
that  which  is  unholy.  It  begins  in  a  moral  transformation,  the  regeneration  of 
the  heart,  and  advances  to  perfection.     Observe  : — 

I.  That  sanctification  is  a  complete  work. — "  Sanctify  you  wholly ;  and  I  pray 
God  your  whole  spirit,  and  soul,  and  body  be  preserved  blameless  "  (ver.  23). 

1.  It  affects  the  intellectual  nature  of  man. — '•  Your  spirit."  It  is  this  that 
distinguishes  truth  from  falsehood  and  apprehends  the  mysteries  of  religion.  If 
the  intellect  is  sanctified,  there  is  less  danger  of  falling  into  error  and  heresy. 
Enlightened  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  it  enables  man  to  prove  all  things  and  to  test 
and  judge  every  aspect  of  truth. 

2.  It  affects  the  spiritual  nature  o/  maw.—"  Your  soul" — the  seat  of  the 
affections  and  will,  the  passions  and  appetites.  The  having  the  heart  in  a  right 
or  wrong  condition  makes  the  difference  between  the  moral  and  the  immoral 
character.  When  the  heart  is  sanctified  the  passions  and  appetites  are  kept 
within  due  bounds,  and  the  believer  is  preserved  pure  from  the  sinful  lusts  of 
the  flesh.  The  same  distinction  between  spirit  and  soul  is  made  in  Heb.  iv.  12; 
and  in  Tit.  i.  15  a  distinction  is  made  between  the  intellectual  and  moral  in  the 
terms  mind  and  conscience. 

3.  It  affects  the  physical  nature  of  man. — "  Your  body."  The  body  is  the  temple 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  (1  Cor.  iv.  19),  and  must  be  kept  pure  and  blameless— must 
be  kept  in  temperance,  soberness,  and  chastity ;  to  pollute  it  with  fleshly  lusts  is 
to  pollute  and  destroy  it  (1  Cor.  iii.  17).  The  body,  immortalised  and  glorified, 
will  be  the  companion  of  the  glorified  soul  throughout  eternity  ;  and  the  Thessa- 
lonians  had  already  been  assured  that  the  body  was  to  rise  from  the  grave 

546 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.    THESSALONIANS.     chap.  v. 


(iv.  16).  The  whole  complex  nature  of  man  is  to  be  purified.  Mere 
outward  decency  of  conduct  is  not  enough ;  the  inner  man,  the  intellectual, 
moral,  and  spiritual  faculties  must  be  kept  in  a  state  of  purity  and  holiness. 
He  hath  sanctity  in  no  part  who  is  not  sanctified  in  every  part. 

4.  It  is  a  necessary  fitness  to  meet  Christ  at  His  coming. — "  Be  preserved 
blameless  unto  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  "  (ver.  23).  It  is  the  power 
of  God  only  that  can  keep  man  holy,  though  the  utmost  circumspection  and 
vigilance  are  to  be  exercised  on  his  part.  "  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for 
they  shall  see  God  " — see  Him  now  as  the  inner  eye  of  the  soul  is  clarified,  and 
see  Him  at  His  coming  in  power  and  great  glory. 

II.  That  sanctification  is  a  divine  work. — 1.  The  believer  is  called  to  sanctifica- 
tion  by  the  God  of  unswerving  fidelity.  "  Faithful  is  He  that  calleth  you,  who 
also  will  do  it "  (ver.  24).  God  is  faithful  to  all  His  promises  of  help.  Every 
promise  is  backed  by  the  whole  force  of  His  omnipotence — "  who  also  will  do  it." 
There  is  nothing  greater  in  the  universe  than  the  will  of  God  ;  it  actuates  His 
power  and  ensures  His  faithfulness.  Entire  sanctification  is  therefore  no  impossible 
attainment.     God  calls,  not  to  mock  and  disappoint,  but  to  bless. 

2.  The  believer  is  called  to  sanctification  by  the  God  of  peace. — "  The  very  God  of 
peace  sanctify  you  "  (ver.  23).  Peace  and  sanctification  are  inseparable  ;  without 
holiness  there  can  be  no  peace.  God  is  the  author  and  giver  of  peace,  and 
delights  in  peace.  Mr.  Howels,  of  Long  Acre  chapel,  used  to  say  that  if  he  saw 
two  dogs  at  peace  with  each  other,  he  saw  there  "  the  very  God  of  peace  "  ;  that 
one  atom  of  peace  left  in  a  world  of  war  with  God  is  a  trace  of  the  lingering 
mercy  and  favouring  goodness  of  God.  Peace  is  a  reflection  of  the  divine  presence 
on  earth.  The  Thessalonians  had  been  enjoined  to  cultivate  mutual  peace  and 
harmony  (ver.  13),  and  personal  holiness  had  been  earnestly  recommended 
(iv.  3).  They  are  now  taught  where  peace  and  holiness  are  to  be  found. 
Both  are  gifts  of  God.  We  have  need  of  peace — peace  of  conscience,  peace  from 
the  rage  and  fury  of  the  world,  peace  and  love  among  those  who  are  of  the 
household  of  God. 

III.  That  sanctification  is  obtained  by  prayer. — The  loftiest  duty  is  possible 
with  grace  ;  the  least  is  all  but  impossible  without  it.  All  grace  must  be  sought 
of  God  in  prayer.  The  virtue  and  power  of  all  exhortation  and  teaching  depend 
on  the  divine  blessing.  What  God  encourages  us  to  seek  in  prayer  is  possible  of 
attainment  in  actual  experience.  Prayer  is  the  expression  of  wants  we  feel.  It 
is  the  power  by  which  we  reach  the  highest  spiritual  excellence. 

Lessons. — 1.  Cherish  the  highest  ideal  of  the  Christian  character.  2.  Pray  for 
divine  help  in  its  attainment. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.    23.  The   Sanctification   of   the  consecrate  ourselves.    2.  God  preserves  the 

Complete  Man.  entire  sanctification  by  imparting  peace. 

I.  Its  meaning. — 1.  There  is  a  great  III.  The  motive  for  endeavouring 
trinity  of  powers — body,  soul,  and  to  attain  it. — "  Until  the  coming  of 
spirit — linking  man  with  three  different  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  1.  A  day  of 
worlds.  The  physical,  the  intellectual,  manifestation  when  the  shadows  and 
the  spiritual.  2.  These  three  ranges  of  unrealities  of  time  will  fade  in  the  full 
powers  become  gateways  of  temptation  morning  of  eternity.  2.  A  day  of  ever - 
from  three  different  worlds,  and  unless  lasting  gatherings. — E.  L.  Hull. 

they  are  all  consecrated  we  are  never  free 

from  da,nger.  The  Trinity. 

II.  Its   attainment. — 1.  We  cannot        I.  The  first  power  or  consciousness 

547 


chap.  v.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    THESSALONIANS. 


in  which  God  is  made  known  to  us  Yer.  24.  The  Faith  of  Man  and  the 

is  as  the  Father,  the  author  of  our  Faithfulness  of  God. 

being.  I.  The    highest    object    of    man's 

II.  The  second  way  through  which  existence  is  to  hold  communion  with 
the  personality  and  consciousness  of  his  God. 

God  has  been  revealed  to  us  is  as  the  II.  Rightly  to  believe  in  Christ  is 

Son.  to  know  and  feel  this  communion. 

III.  A  closer  and  a  more  enduring  III.  The  unalterable  faithfulness  of 
relation  in  which  God  stands  to  us  is  God  is  a  fidelity  to  His  own  gracious 
the  relation  of  the  Spirit — It  is  the  engagement. 

graces  of  the  Spirit  which  harmonise  IV.  The    prominent     character    of 

the  man  and  make  him  one  ;  and  that  God  is  unshaken  stability, 

is  the  end,  aim,  and  object  of  all  the  V.  God  is  faithful  to  His  warnings 

gospel. — F.  W.  Robertson.  as  He  is  to  His  promises. — A .  Butler. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  25—28. 

Closing  Words. 

I.  An  important  request. — "Brethren,  pray  for  us"  (ver.  25).  The  most 
gifted  saints  have  need  of  the  prayers  of  God's  people.  The  great  apostle, 
much  as  he  prayed  for  himself,  did  not  himself  feel  independent  of  the  inter- 
cessions of  others.  His  large  experience  of  the  power  of  prayer  made  him 
only  the  more  anxious  to  strengthen  his  personal  interest  at  the  throne  of  grace. 
The  least  gifted  saint  in  other  respects  may  be  mighty  in  prayer.  Believers  are 
so  bound  together  as  to  be  dependent  on  one  another,  and  all  on  the  great  Head 
of  the  Church.  The  richest  inheritance  of  the  anxious  minister  are  the  prayers 
of  his  people.  A  praying  Church  will  never  have  to  complain  of  an  insipid  and 
fruitless  ministry. 

II.  A  Christian  salutation. — "  Greet  all  the  brethren  with  an  holy  kiss " 
(ver.  26).  The  "  kiss  of  charity"  in  those  days  was  a  token  of  friendship  and 
goodwill,  something  equivalent  to  the  shaking  of  hands  in  modern  times.  In  the 
Syrian  Church,  before  communion,  each  takes  his  neighbour's  right  hand,  and 
gives  the  salutation,  "Peace!"  The  greeting  was  "a  holy  kiss" — pure  and 
chaste,  such  as  one  Christian  may  give  to  another,  and  not  sin.  Christianity  is 
the  soul  of  courtesy.  "  Forms  may  change  ;  but  the  same  spirit  of  brotherly 
love  and  cordial  recognition  of  one  another,  under  whatever  diversities  of 
temporal  circumstances,  should  ever  characterise  those  who  know  the  love  of  a 
common  Saviour,  and  have  entered  into  the  communion  of  saints  "  (Lillie).  Let 
the  love  of  the  heart  toward  all  the  brethren  be  practically  manifested  in 
becoming  acts  of  courtesy  and  goodwill. 

III.  A  solemn  direction. — "  I  charge  you  by  the  Lord  that  this  epistle  be  read 
unto  all  the  holy  brethren  "  (ver.  27).  This  first  epistle  to  the  Thessalonians 
is,  in  point  of  time,  the  earliest  of  all  the  canonical  books  of  the  New  Testament ; 
and  here  is  a  solemn  injunction  that  it  be  publicly  read  to  all  the  people.  The 
Bomish  Church,  if  she  does  not  deny,  very  unwillingly  allows  the  reading  of 
Scripture  by  the  laity.  "  What  Borne  forbids  under  an  anathema,"  says  Bengel, 
11  St.  Paul  enjoins  with  an  adjuration."  None  should  be  debarred  from  reading 
or  hearing  the  word  of  God.  "  Women  and  children  are  not  to  be  excluded  " 
(Deut.  xxxi.  12  ;  Josh.  viii.  34,  35).  Lois  and  Eunice  knew  the  Bible,  and 
taught  it  to  the  child  Timothy.  The  Beroeans  had  free  access  to  the  sacred 
volume,  and  searched  it  at  their  pleasure.  The  public  reading  of  the  Holy 
Scriptures  is  an  important  means  of  edifying  the  Church;  it  is  enforced  by 
apostolic  authority ;  it  familiarises  the  mind  with  the  greatest  truths ;  it  keeps 
alive  the  enthusiasm  of  the  Church  for  aggressive  purposes. 

548 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.   THESSALONlANS.    chap.  v. 


IV.  A  gracious  benediction. — "  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with 
you.  Amen "  (ver.  28).  The  epistle  closes,  as  it  began,  with  blessing.  The 
grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  fountain  of  all  the  good  that  has  flowed  in 
upon  and  enriched  the  human  race.  TLe  three  great  features,  of  that  grace — 
pardon,  peace,  holiness — are  clearly  elucidated  in  this  epistle.  The  fountain  is 
inexhaustible.  Its  streams  of  blessing  are  ever  available  for  needy,  perishing 
man. 

Lessons. — 1.  Prayer  is  an  ever-present  duty.  2.  Christianity  hallows  all  the 
true  courtesies  of  life.  3.  The  word  of  God  should  be  constantly  read  and  studied. 
4.   The  best  blessings  issue  from  the  inexhaustible  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  25.  Pray  for  Us. 

I.  We  greatly  need  your  prayers. — 

Our  state,  like  yours,  is  a  state  of  pro- 
bation. We  have  uncommon  wants. 
We  have  a  strict  account  to  give. 

I  J.  We  request  your  prayers. — 
1.  You  can  pray.  2.  God  will  hear 
you. 

III.  We  may  reasonably  expect 
that  you  will  pray  for  us. — 1.  We  pray 
for  you.  2.  We  are  labouring  for  your 
advantage. 

IV.  We  are  warranted  to  expect  it 
from  your  own  professions. — 1.  You 
profess  a  high  degree,  not  only  of  respect, 
but  of  love  to  your  preachers.  2.  Some 
of  you  can  scarcely  give  us  any  other 
proof  of  it. 

V.  It  will  be  to  your  advantage  to 
pray  for  us. — 1.  It  will  prepare  your 
minds  for  hearing  us.  2.  This  will 
make  us  useful  to  you. 

VI.  Your  prayers  will  make  us 
more  useful  to  others. 

Ver.  27.  The  Public  Reading  of  the 
Scriptures. 
I.  To  debar  the  Lord's  people  from 


acquainting  themselves  with  Scripture 
is  a  great  sin. — Scripture  should  be 
translated  into  the  native  tongue  of 
every  nation  where  Christ  has  a  Church, 
that  people  may  read  it,  hear  it,  and 
be  acquainted  with  it.  They  ought 
diligently  to  improve  all  helps  to 
acquaint  them  with  the  mind  of  God 
revealed  in  Scripture,  and  look  upon 
their  doing  so  as  a  duty  of  greatest 
importance  and  weight. 

II.  Ministers  and  Church  guides 
should  see  that  the  people  of  their 
charge  be  acquainted  with  Scripture. 
— Should  invite  them  to  read  it  in 
secret  and  in  their  families,  and  use 
their  influence  that  children  of  both 
sexes  be  trained  up  at  schools  to  read 
the  Lord's  words  distinctly  in  their 
own  native  language. 

III.  Scripture  should  be  publicly 
read  to  God's  people  assembled  to- 
gether for  His  worship. — Even  though 
not  immediately  expounded  and  applied, 
the  reading  of  God's  word  allows  it  to 
speak  for  itself  and  impress  its  own 
divine  authority. — Fergusson. 


549 


THE    SECOND    EPISTLE 

TO    THE    THESSALONIANS. 


INTEODUCTION. 

Occasion  and  design. — Probably  little  more  time  elapsed  between  the  two 
epistles  than  was  necessary  for  the  messenger  of  Paul  to  return  to  him.  This 
appears  likely  from  the  fact  that  Silvanus  and  Timothy  were  still  with  Paul, 
at  Corinth,  as  when  the  first  letter  was  sent.  The  condition  of  the  Church  at 
Thessalonica  had  meanwhile  grown  more  trying,  the  flame  of  persecution  burnt 
more  fiercely,  and  the  conviction  that  this  presaged  the  immediate  appearance  of 
the  Lord  from  heaven  grew  stronger.  "  Religious  effervescence  had  come  to  a 
sort  of  paroxysm ;  an  ever-increasing  number  of  Christians  gave  up  all  their 
worldly  concerns  and  duties  for  the  sake  of  living  a  life  of  contemplation,  inquisi- 
tive idleness,  and  begging.  In  order,  therefore,  to  abate  the  intensity  of  this 
carnal  rather  than  spiritual  flame  the  apostle  is  obliged  to  make  use  of  all  the 
means  at  his  disposal,  and  the  two  principal  of  these  are  instruction  and 
discipline"  {Godet). 

The  design  of  the  epistle  is  heard  in  the  phrase,  "  that  ye  be  not  quickly  shaken 
from  your  mind  nor  yet  be  troubled  ...  as  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  is 
immediately  impending." 

Style  and  character  of  the  epistle. — In  style  these  two  epistles  to  Thessalonica 
are  alike.  We  need  not  expect  the  style  in  which  St.  Paul  writes  to  the  Churches 
which  had  become  faithless — then  his  language  defies  style — nor  of  that  to  tl.ose 
whose  edification  in  the  doctrines  of  the  Christian  faith  is  his  aim.  There  is 
much  in  common  between  these  letters  and  that  to  the  other  Macedonian  Church. 
"  They  are  neither  passionate,  nor  argumentative ;  but  practical,  consolatory, 
prompted  by  affection,  by  memory  and  hope.  Hence  they  represent,  as  it  has 
been  aptly  said,  '  St.  Paul's  normal  style,'  the  way  in  which  he  would  commonly 
write  and  talk  to  his  friends  "  (Findlay). 

In  their  character,  they  are  (1)  the   letters   of  a  missionary,  (2)  singularly 

551 


introduction.    SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   II.   TfiESSALONIANS. 

affectionate  letters,  (3)  especially  cheering  and  consolatory  letters,  and  (4) 
eschatological  letters,  i.e.  they  set  forth  the  last  things  in  Christian  doctrine  * 
(Ibid). 

Outline  of  the  Epistle. 

i.     1,  2.     Greeting. 
3-12 — ii.  13-17.     The  thanksgiving,  with  exhortations  and  prayers, 
ii.     1 — 12.     The  doctrinal  section  :  the  Man  of  Sin. 
iii.    1 — 16.     The   practical   section,   with   messages,   concluded  with 
prayer. 
17,  18.     Autographic  conclusion  and  benediction  (Farrar) 


552 


CHAPTER    I. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  3.  We  are  bound  to  thank  God. — We  owe  a  debt  of  gratitude  to  God.  It  is  not  so 
much  what  is  seemly  that  comes  into  prominence  here,  as  what  is  due.  Even  as  it  is  meet. 
— The  word  for  "  meet "  directs  attention  to  the  value  of  the  increase  of  the  faith  of  the 
Thessalonians.  As  though  the  apostle  said,  "It  is  something  worth  giving  thanks  for." 
Your  faith  groweth  exceedingly. — The  word  for  "  groweth  exceedingly  "  does  not  occur 
again  in  the  New  Testament.  It  means  "  to  increase  beyond  measure."  The  faith  of  the 
Thessalonians  was  like  "  a  fruitful  bough  by  a  fountain  whose  branches  run  over  the  wall," 
though  "  the  archers  have  sorely  grieved  it,  and  shot  at  it  and  persecuted  it  "  (Gen.  xlix. 
22,  23).  The  charity  of  every  one  of  you  toward  each  other  aboundeth. — This  is  high  praise 
indeed — a  plethora  of  love.  Like  a  brimming  fountain  kept  always  full,  so  the  love  of  these 
early  Christians  overflowed.     Cf.  on  1  Thess.  iv.  9. 

Ver.  4.  We  ourselves  glory  in  you. — St.  Paul  had  to  rebuke  the  Corinthians  for  the 
factious  spirit  which  set  off  the  excellencies  of  one  teacher  against  those  of  another.  Here 
he  plays  off  one  Church  against  another,  as  a  schoolmaster  might  seek  to  stir  up  his  pupils 
by  mentioning  the  names  of  those  who  have  taken  scholarships.  But  St.  Paul  well  knew 
that  this  needed  care  (see  Col.  iii.  21 ;  R.V.  or  Greek). 

Ver.  5.  Which  is  a  manifest  token. — u  An  indication.'"  The  steadfast  and  resolute 
continuance  in  the  profession  and  adornment  of  the  Christian  faith,  in  face  of  opposition, 
might  suggest  to  persecutors,  as  to  Gamaliel,  the  possibility  of  the  divine  origin  of  the  faith, 
to  oppose  which  was  to  fight  against  God. 

Ver.  6.  Seeing  it  is  a  righteous  thing. — "  There  is  no  unrighteousness  in  Him."  However 
stern  the  retribution,  none  who  suffers  will  ever  be  able  to  impugn  the  justice.  To 
recompense  tribulation  to  them  that  trouble  you. — The  R.V.  comes  nearer  to  the  original, 
"  affliction  to  them  that  afflict  you."  This  lex  talionis  is  a  sword  that  is  dangerous  to  any 
hand  but  His  who  said,  "  Vengeance  is  Mine  ;  I  will  repay." 

Ver.  7.  And  to  you  who  are  troubled  rest  with  us. — The  idea  suggested  by  the  words  is 
that  of  poor,  hunted  fugitives  with  nerves  tensely  strung  and  a  wild  look  of  fear  in  the  eyes. 
As  the  guardians  of  the  infant  Jesus  were  assured  of  safety  by  the  death  of  him  who 
sought  the  child's  life,  so  the  strain  of  fear  shall  be  relaxed  in  the  case  of  the  persecuted 
Thessalonians. 

Ver.  8.  In  flaming  fire. — Lit.  "  in  a  fire  of  flame."  "  Fire  is  a  symbol  of  divine 
anger  and  majesty  in  Scripture;  and  flame  is  fire  in  motion,  leaping  and  blazing  out" 
{Findlay).  Taking  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not  God. —  St.  Paul  does  not  consider 
ignorance  as  a  valid  excuse  where  knowledge  might  be  had,  any  more  than  a  man  would 
be  looked  on  as  innocent  who  should  plead  that,  being  a  foreigner,  he  did  not  know  that 
the  law  of  any  country  which  he  visits  forbids  murder.  "  This  is  the  condemnation,  that 
light  is  come  into  the  world,  and  men  loved  darkness  rather  than  light,  because  their  deeds 
were  evil  "  (John  iii.  19). 

Ver.  9.  Who  shall  be  punished  with  everlasting  destruction. — R.V.  "  who  shall  suffer 
punishment,  even  eternal  destruction."  It  has  been  repeatedly  shown  that  only  arbitrariness 
can  limit  the  meaning  of  this  terrible  phrase.  Our  comfort  must  be  that  He  with  whom  "  it  is 
a  righteous  thing  to  recompense  affliction  "  will  always  be  self -consistent.  From  the  presence 
of  the  Lord.  The  fulness  of  joy  is  there,  and  they  who,  like  Cain,  go  out  from  it  carry  the 
ache  of  an  irreparable  loss  with  them.  The  Hebraism  in  the  phrase  is  brought  out  by  the 
R.V.  "  from  the  face  of  the  Lord." 

Ver.  10.  To  be  glorified  in  His  saints. — Two  meanings  at  least  suit  this  phrase  : 
(1)  It  may  be  the  apostle  thought  of  the  great  ascription  of  praise  rising  from  the  vast 
assembly  of  saints,  or  (2)  it  may  be  he  is  thinking  of  the  saints  as  the  trophies  of  the 

553 


CHAP.  I.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II    THESSALONIANS 


Redeemer's  love  and  power — the  work  that  speaks  the  Master's  praise.  And  to  be  admired. 
— R. V.  "  marvelled  at."  The  same  work  describes  the  fawning  sycophancy  of  men  of  the 
Balaam  spirit,  or  it  might  describe  the  open-eyed  and  speechless  wonder  of  an  African  chief 
in  a  State  function. 

Ver.  11.  And  fulfil  all  the  good  pleasure— R.V.  "every  desire  of  goodness."  "As 
much  as  to  say,  May  God  mightily  accomplish  in  you  all  that  goodness  would  desire  and 
that  faith  can  effect "  (Eindlay). 

Ver.  12.  That  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  may  be  glorified  in  you. — A  little  mirror 
may  not  increase  the  sum-total  of  sunlight,  but  it  may  cause  some  otherwise  unobservant 
eye  to  note  its  brightness.  So  Christ's  infinite  and  eternal  glory  cannot  be  augmented  but 
only  shared  by  Christians  (John  xvii.  22). 

MAW  EOMILETICS   OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1,  2. 

Phases  of  Apostolic  Greeting. 

Under  this  heading  we  have  already  treated  homiletically  the  apostle's  formula 
of  salutation,  which  is  the  same  here  as  at  the  beginning  of  the  first  epistle. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  3,  4. 

Congratulatory  Features  of  a  Prosperous  Church. 

We  have  here  a  suggestive  example  of  the  apostolic  method  of  dealing  with  a 
Church  in  which  the  incipient  elements  of  error  were  beginning  to  operate.  He 
applauds  first  what  is  really  good,  and  then  faithfully,  almost  fiercely,  warns 
of  the  threatening  evil.  He  who  would  effectually  rebuke  must  first  learn  how 
to  tenderly  sympathise.  These  verses  indicate  what  are  the  congratulatory 
features  of  a  prosperous  Church. 

I.  There  is  a  vital  and  progressive  faith. — "  Your  faith  growTeth  exceedingly  " 
(ver.  3).  Faith  feeds  on  truth  ;  and  all  truth  leads  to  and  unites  with  God,  its 
source.  A  living  faith  can  only  be  sustained  by  a  living  truth ;  and  where 
there  is  life  there  will  be  growth.  We  are  ruled  by  our  beliefs;  if  they  are 
wrong,  our  track  is  wrong,  our  life  a  mistake,  our  energies  wasted.  The 
faith  of  the  Thessalonians  was  so  real,  so  vivid,  so  vitalising,  so  deeply  rooted 
in  the  quickening  soil  of  gospel  truth,  that  it  flourished  with  tropical  luxuriance. 
The  doom  of  a  Church  is  sealed  when  its  faith  is  dead  and  its  creed  inert.  It 
is  like  a  fossil  in  the  grasp  of  a  fossil — a  museum  of  dry,  bony,  musty  remains. 

II.  There  is  a  reciprocal  and  expansive  charity. — "  And  the  charity  of  every 
one  of  you  all  towards  each  other  aboundeth  "  (ver.  3).  Love  is  the  fruit  of  the 
Christian  spirit,  and  the  proof  of  its  genuineness.  It  should  be  manifested  to 
every  believer  in  Christ.  The  love  of  a  common  Saviour  and  the  sharing  in  a 
common  suffering  tend  to  intensify  mutual  esteem  and  affection.  The  prayer 
of  the  apostle  on  behalf  of  the  Thessalonians  was  fulfilled  (1  Thess.  iii.  12) 
— an  encouragement  to  pray  on  behalf  of  others.  Where  charity  abounds 
there  is  mutual  forbearance  with  one  another's  faults  and  frailties,  the  absence 
of  suspicion  and  jealousy,  no  tendency  to  pass  harsh  and  rapid  judgments  on  the 
conduct  of  others,  a  disposition  to  think  the  best  of  each  other,  to  share  each 
other's  trials,  and  bear  each  other's  burdens. 

III.  There  is  a  patient  fidelity  under  suffering. — "  Your  patience  and  faith 
in  all  your  persecutions  and  tribulations  that  ye  endure  "  (ver.  4).  These  trials 
began  with  the  first  planting  of  the  gospel  in  Thessalonica,  and  seemed  to  have 
continued  without  cessation.  The  Jews  were  the  principal  agents  and  instigators 
stirring  up  the  populace  against  the  Christians,  and  rousing  the  suspicions  of  the 
magistrates  who  were  specially  jealous  of  religious  innovations  (Acts  xvii.  5-8). 
Their  faith  made  them  patient  and  uncomplaining  under  the  pressure  of  affliction  ; 
they  believed  the  gospel  was  still  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation,  though  their 

554 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   THESSALONIANS.     chap.  i. 


profession  of  it  brought  on  them  sorrow  and  suffering.  The  former  warnings  and 
teachings  of  the  apostle  were  not  in  vain  ;  their  faith  triumphed  over  persecution. 
Suffering  is  the  opportunity  for  patience  and  the  test  of  faith.  Troubles  come 
not  alone,  but  are  like  chain-shot,  or  like  the  billows  of  the  sea,  linked  one  to 
another,  each  succeeding  blow  being  more  destructive  than  the  other.  Patience 
without  faith  is  simply  dull,  stupid,  stoical  endurance.  It  is  faith  that  renders 
the  soul  invincible  and  triumphant. 

IY.  There  is  ample  ground  for  apostolic  gratitude  and  commendation. — "  We 
are  bound  to  thank  God  always  for  you,  brethren,  as  it  is  meet ;  ...  so  that  we 
ourselves  glory  in  you  in  the  Churches  of  God  "  (vers.  3,  4).  Even  the  enemies  of  the 
Church  are  sometimes  constrained  to  admire  and  applaud  the  spirit  of  harmony, 
the  affection  and  enterprise  which  characterise  its  members.  It  is  also  encouraging 
to  have  the  approbation  and  good  word  of  the  ministers  of  God,  especially  of 
those  who  have  been  instrumental  in  converting  men  to  the  truth  ;  but  no 
Church  could  command  the  respect  of  the  good  if  it  did  not  first  secure  the  smile 
and  blessing  of  God.  The  apostle  thanks  God  as  the  great  Giver  of  all  the 
grace  which  he  rejoices  to  see  has  done  so  much  for  the  Thessalonians.  God 
had  wrought  this  work  of  faith  and  love  and  patience  in  their  hearts,  and  He 
would  make  it  prosper  and  increase.  He  had  put  this  fire  in  them,  and  would 
make  it  burn  ;  He  had  laid  this  leaven  in  the  dough  or  meal  of  their  hearts,  and 
He  would  make  it  heave  and  work  till  the  whole  was  leavened.  The  apostle  felt 
it  at  once  his  duty  and  joy  to  thank  God  on  their  behalf  and  to  boast  of  their 
attainments  to  others.  "  We  are  bound  to  thank  God  always  for  you,  as  it  is 
meet ;  .  .  .  we  ourselves  glory  in  you  in  the  Churches  of  God."  It  is  a  noble, 
Christ-like  spirit  to  sympathise  with  the  sufferings  and  rejoice  in  the  prosperities 
of  the  Church.  A  cheery  word,  a  simple,  hearty  prayer  ,  an  act  of  sympathy  and 
kindness,  will  do  much  to  animate  and  encourage  the  struggling  people  of  God. 
One  lively  Church  is  the  means  of  rousing  the  zeal  and    emulation  of  others. 

Lessons. — 1.  Vigorous  Church-life  is  the  result  of  an  intelligent  and  active  faith 
in  the  truth.  2.  Suffering  is  no  sign  of  the  divine  displeasure,  but  often  a  means 
of  spiritual  prosperity.  3.  Those  who  rejoice  in  the  success  of  the  Church  are  most 
likely  to  share  in  the  blessings  of  that  success. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

"Ver.  3.     Growth  in  Grace.  the  ministry  of  the  word.     3.    Not  to 

I.  Evidences  of  growth. — 1.  Taking  grow,  our  religion  declines  and  becomes 
increasing    pleasure    in     God's    word.      doubtful. — Sketches. 

2.  A  growing  attachment  to  the  doctrines 

of  Christ.     3.  Increasing  acquaintance  Ver.  4.   Christian  Fidelity — 

with  the  mind  of  God.    4.  In  love  one  I.  Is  severely  tested  by  tribulations. 

to  another  for  the  truth's  sake.  II.  Is    a   stimulating     example    to 

II.  Importance      of     growth. —  others. 

1.  Brings  glory  to  God.     2.  Influences       III.  Is  a  theme  of  grateful  boasting. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF   THE   PARAGRAPH— Verses  5—7. 

The  Recompense  of  Suffering  for  the  Truth. 

It  is  not  an  uncommon  spectacle  to  see  vice  prosperous  and  triumphant,  while 
virtue  is  ignored  and  oppressed.  To  a  superficial  observer  it  would  seem  that  all 
the  great  prizes  of  the  world — wealth,  power,  social  status,  gaiety,  display,  pleasure 
— were  thrown  indiscriminately  and  with  lavish  abundance  into  the  lap  of  the 
wicked,  and  that  the  God-fearing  few  are  left  in  obscurity  to  struggle  with 

555 


CHAP.  I.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    It   THESSALONIANS. 


hardships,  penury,  and  affliction.  Nor  is  it  always  an  easy  matter  to  reconcile 
the  sufferings  of  the  good  with  the  goodness  and  justice  of  God.  But  all  things 
come  round  to  the  patient  man.  We  must  look  to  the  future  for  the  faithful 
redress  of  present  grievances.  In  this  chapter  the  apostle  ministers  consolation 
to  the  suffering  Thessalonians  by  assuring  them  of  a  coming  day  in  which  they 
would  be  abundantly  recompensed  for  all  they  had  to  endure,  and  in  which  the 
righteousness  of  God  would  be  publicly  vindicated.     Observe : — 

I.  That  the  maintenance  of  the  truth  often  entails  considerable  suffering. 

"The  kingdom  of  God,  for  which  ye  also  suffer"  (ver.  5).  They  who  will  live 
godly  in  Christ  Jesus  must  suffer  persecution.  The  world  is  violently  opposed  to  the 
Church,  and  that  opposition  is  full  of  malignant  hatred  and  cruelty.  Socrates 
once  said  something  like  this — that  if  goodness  were  to  become  incarnate  in  one 
man,  so  that  that  man  would  be  perfectly  good,  the  world  would  put  him  to  death. 
What  Socrates  said  was  realised  in  Christ.  "If  they  have  persecuted  Me/'  said 
Christ  to  His  followers,  "they  will  also  persecute  you."  It  is  not  the  least  among 
the  trials  of  the  good  that  they  are  obliged  to  come  in  contact  with  evil  in  so 
many  forms,  and  that  they  are  so  savagely  assailed  and  oppressed  with  it. 
Athanasius  regarded  the  suffering  of  persecution  to  be  a  special  note  of  a 
Christian  man,  observing :  "It  is  the  part  of  Christians  to  be  persecuted ;  but 
to  persecute  the  Christians  is  the  very  office  of  Pilate  and  Caiaphas." 

II.  That  suffering  for  the  truth  lias  a  morally  educating  influence. — "  That 
ye  may  be  counted  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  God  "  (ver.  5).  The  believer  has  no 
worthiness  in  himself,  nor  can  he  acquire  any  by  the  merit  of  his  own  works. 
This  worthiness  is  but  another  word  for  .meetness — that  meetness  of  state  and 
character,  as  sinners  justified  and  sanctified,  without  which  no  man  shall  enter 
the  kingdom.  Only  to  such  has  the  kingdom  been  promised.  And  the  suffer- 
ings they  endure  on  behalf  of  the  kingdom,  so  far  from  impairing  their  title, 
serve  rather  to  confirm  and  illustrate  it.  Every  Christian  grace  is  tested, 
developed,  and  trained  by  suffering.  "  The  least  reproach  augments  our  glory. 
Every  tear  is  not  only  noted  and  kept  in  the  bottle,  but  made  as  varnish  to  add 
to  our  brightness  and  glorious  splendour.  No  drop  of  our  blood  but  wins  us  a 
river  of  glory;  effusion  of  it  the  whole  ocean  of  beatitude."  When  Ignatius, 
Bishop  of  Antioch,  was  cast  to  the  lions,  he  exclaimed :  "I  am  God's  wheat,  and 
must  be  ground  by  the  teeth  of  the  wild  beasts  that  I  may  be  found  His  pure 
bread." 

III.  That  suffering  for  the  truth  will  be  divinely  recompensed. — "  Which 
is  a  manifest  token  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God  "  (ver.  5) — i.e.  their  sufferings 
and  the  constancy  with  which  they  endured  them  proved  God's  justice.  A  strange 
assertion  !  The  people  of  God  have  often  been  staggered  by  the  fact  that  the 
wicked  persecute  and  prosper,  and  the  poor  saints  are  plagued  and  oppressed  (Ps. 
lxxiii.  1-14 ;  Jer.  xii.  1-4).  But  from  this  very  fact  the  apostle  derives  consolation. 
It  is  a  proof  to  him  of  a  future  state  in  which  all  this  apparent  inconsistency 
will  be  set  right,  in  which  the  saint  and  the  persecutor  will  each  receive  his  own 
proper  recompense. 

1.  Suffering  will  be  divinely  recompensed  in  the  deliverance  of  the  sufferer. — "  And 
to  you  who  are  troubled  rest  with  us  "  (ver.  7).  The  word  "rest"  really  means  the 
slackening  of  strings  that  had  been  pulled  tight.  To  the  persecuted  and  afflicted 
Thessalonians  the  happiness  of  heaven  is  held  out  under  the  image  of  rest  and 
relief  after  suffering.  It  is,  as  it  were,  the  relaxing  of  tension  after  having 
been  stretched  on  the  rack.  The  keenest  suffering  for  the  truth  is  limited  in  its 
duration ;  and  the  righteousness  of  God  is  pledged  to  sustain  and  deliver  His 
afflicted  ones.  The  sweet  rest  of  heaven  will  be  all  the  more  enjoyable  because 
shared  with  those  who  have  passed  through  a  similar  conflict. 

2.  Suffering  will  be  divinely  recompensed  in  the  punishment  of  the  persecutor. — 

556 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II    THESSALONIANS.    chap.  I. 


"  Seeing  it  is  a  righteous  thing  with  God  to  recompense  tribulation  to  them  that 
trouble  you  "  (ver.  6).  The  punishment  of  the  persecutor  is  as  just  as  the  relief 
of  the  oppressed  ;  and  God  has  both  the  intention  and  the  power  of  accomplishing 
what  He  thinks  just.  The  law  of  retaliation  will  be  rigidly  enforced.  The  very 
measure  the  persecutors  have  dealt  they  are  to  receive  back  again  ;  and  the 
retaliation  will  be  all  the  more  terrible  because  of  its  unanswerable  justice. 
Truth  must  triumph  over  all  its  enemies.  Its  watchword  is  "  no  surrender." 
The  apostate  Julian  spent  his  strength  in  trying  to  destroy  the  true  Church ; 
but  when  he  fell  on  the  battle-field,  as  the  blood  was  gushing  from  his  breast 
and  his  eyes  were  closing  in  death,  he  hissed  between  his  setting  teeth, 
"  Galilean,  Thou  hast  conquered !  "  And  the  Galilean  must  and  will  conquer, 
and  all  His  enemies  shall  receive  their  just  measure  of  punishment. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  sufferings  of  the  good  afford  an  opportunity  for  the  display  of 
divine  justice.  2.  Suffering  is  no  evidence  of  the  divine  displeasure.  3.  The 
glory  of  the  future  will  infinitely  outweigh  the  sufferings  of  the  present  life. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers.  6,   7.    Rest  in  Heaven  for  the  acutest  kind  without  comfort  or  allevia- 

Troubled.  tion. 

I.  Our  Lord's  coming  is    called  a  III.  Look  at  the    portion    of   the 
revealing  of  Him. — Here  He  is  revealed  troubled. — "  Rest."    A -heaven  of  quiet- 
in  the  outer  world  and  in  the  gospel.  ness  and  repose,  and  yet  of  ceaseless 
There  He  will  be   revealed  in   glory,  and  tireless  activity  in  praising  God. 
without  disguise  or  veil.  IV.  The  righteousness  of  the  divine 

II.  Look  at  the  troublers  and  their  conduct. — "  It  is  a  righteous  thing  with 
portion. — "  It  is  a  righteous  thing  with  God."  The  Lord's  second  coming  is  not 
God  to  recompense  tribulation  to  them  on  an  errand  of  mercy  ;  His  main  busi- 
that    trouble    you."      Sorrow    of    the  ness  is  to  dispense  justice. — C.  Bradley. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  7—10. 

The  Day  of  Judgment. 

The  apostle  sought  to  comfort  the  persecuted  and  suffering  Church  at 
Thessalonica  by  assuring  them  of  a  coming  day  of  recompense,  in  which  the 
divine  righteousness  would  be  satisfactorily  cleared,  His  enemies  punished,  and 
His  people  rewarded.  He  now  proceeds  to  depict  the  startling  scenes  of  that 
promised  day — "that  day  for  which  all  other  days  were  made" — and  to  indicate 
the  twofold  aspect  of  severity  and  mercy  which  will  characterise  the  awards 
of  the  great  Judge.  In  dealing  with  a  subject  of  such  overwhelming  import, 
and  which  affords  such  scope  for  the  play  of  the  most  powerful  imagination, 
special  care  should  be  taken  to  keep  within  the  limits  of  the  revealed  word. 
These  verses  suggest : — 

I.  That  the  day  of  judgment  will  be  ushered  in  with  awful  splendour. — 1. 
The  person  of  the  Judge  will  be  clothed  with  dazzling  brightness.  "  The  Lord 
Jesus  shall  be  revealed  from  heaven  in  flaming  fire  "  (vers.  7,  8).  The  career  of 
Christ  on  earth  was  one  of  obscurity,  humiliation,  and  suffering,  relieved  now  and 
then  with  outbursts  of  divine  glory  ;  but  when  He  comes  the  second  time,  He  will 
appear  in  all  the  unveiled  charms  of  His  peerless  majesty,  clad  with  heavenly 
splendour  and  brilliant  as  a  fiery  flame.  The  revelation  of  Jehovah  is  often 
referred  to  in  the  Old  Testament  under  the  emblem  of  fire  (Exod.  xiii.  21;  Num. 
ix.  15;  Deut.  iv.  24  ;  Isa.  x.  16,  17,  etc.).  The  glimpse  caught  by  the  seer  of 
Patmos  of  the  ineffable  beauty  and  glory  of  the  God-man  bowed  him  with 

557 


chap.  I.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.    THESSALONIANS. 


astonishment  and  awe  (Rev.  i.  13- 17).  And  who  shall  stand  before  the  flashing 
splendours  of  the  great  and  holy  Judge  !  Heaven  is  too  narrow  for  the  full 
display  of  the  divine  majesty  ;  it  glances  on  every  globe ;  it  irradiates  the 
universe. 

2.  The  Judge  will  be  attended  by  an  angelic  retinue. — "  With  His  mighty 
angels  "  (ver.  7).  The  pomp  and  state  of  the  earthly  judge,  the  gaily  decked 
chariot,  the  sounding  trumpets,  the  accompanying  officers  of  justice,  are  but  a 
feeble  representation  of  the  pomp  and  state  of  the  heavenly  Judge,  "  who  maketh 
the  clouds  His  chariot,  who  walketh  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind,"  and  whose 
gorgeous  train  is  composed  of  hosts  of  mighty  angels,  who  attend  to  execute  His 
will,  to  punish  the  wicked,  and  to  assist  at  the  final  consummation  (Matt.  xiii. 
41,  42).  These  angels  of  might  are  ministers  of  His  power,  and  by  their  agency 
He  will  make  His  power  felt.  We  have  an  illustration  of  the  colossal  mightiness 
of  these  angelic  messengers  in  the  apparent  ease  with  which  one  angel  in  a  few 
hours  laid  thousands  of  the  Assyrians  low  (2  Kings  xix.  35). 

II.  That  the  day  of  judgment  will  be  a  time  of  punishment  to  the  disobedient. 
— 1.  The  objects  of  punishment.  "Them  that  know  not  God,  and  that  obey  not 
the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  (ver.  8).  Not  that  ample  opportunity  has 
not  been  given  to  all  to  acquire  a  knowledge  of  God.  To  punish  for  not  knowing 
what  we  cannot  know  would  be  an  injustice  and  a  cruelty.  God  has  given  to 
all  the  double  light  of  His  works  and  word.  He  has  also  given  the  eyes  of 
sense  and  reason,  and  the  help  of  His  Holy  Spirit  to  guide  all  to  the  knowledge 
of  Himself  and"  of  "  the  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God."  It  is  not  the 
involuntary  ignorance  of  the  uninstructed  that  is  meant,  but  the  wilful  ignorance 
of  the  determined  adversary,  who  not  only  rejected  the  gospel  himself,  but 
barbarously  persecuted  those  who  received  and  obeyed  it.  Knowledge  of  God 
is  of  little  value  if  it  does  not  lead  to  obedience.  Confused,  indistinct,  inoperative 
knowledge  is  no  knowledge.  To  know  and  not  to  obey  the  gospel  involves  a 
heavier  condemnation. 

2.  The  character  of  the  punishment. — "  Who  shall  be  punished  with  everlasting 
destruction  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  and  from  the  glory  of  His  power"  (ver.  9). 
Awful  words  !  Who  can  fully  explain  what  they  really  involve?  If  destruction 
means  annihilation,  how  can  it  be  everlasting  ?  Besides,  the  notion  of  the  absolute 
extinction  of  anything  God  has  made — the  reduction  to  nothingness  of  either  a 
reasonable  soul  or  a  material  atom — has  as  little  support  from  the  teachings  of 
revelation  as  of  science.  Again,  it  is  urged  that  "everlasting"  does  not  always  in 
Scripture  mean  what  lasts  for  ever,  but  sometimes  what  lasts  only  for  a  long  period. 
But  the  utmost  this  argument  could  prove  would  be  that  the  present  possibly 
may  be,  not  that  it  is,  one  of  these  peculiar  cases.  Were  it  the  only  fact  in  the 
case,  there  would  still  be  the  terrible  uncertainty.  "  But  then  remember,"  says 
Dr.  Lillie,  "that  if  it  had  really  been  intended  to  teach  the  eternity  of  future 
punishment,  no  stronger  words,  phrases,  and  images  could  have  been  found  for 
the  purpose  than  those  actually  employed."  Whatever  the  punishment  may  be 
in  itself,  is  it  not  punishment  enough  to  be  for  ever  excluded  "  from  the  presence 
of  the  Lord,"  driven,  a  moral  wreck,  "  from  the  glory  of  His  power  "  ?  Let  the 
words  of  this  ninth  verse  be  seriously  weighed  in  private  meditation,  and  some 
sense  of  their  awful  signification  cannot  fail  to  be  realised. 

III.  That  the  day  of  judgment  will  be  a  revelation  of  the  glory  and  blessed- 
ness of  the  faithful. — 1.  The  glory  of  Christ  is  bound  up  and  refected  in  His  Church. 
"  When  He  shall  come  to  be  glorified  in  His  saints  and  to  be  admired  in  all 
them  that  believe  in  that  day"  (ver.  10).  The  Church  is  the  creation  of  Christ; 
for  her  He  lived,  suffered,  died,  and  triumphed,  and  into  her  He  poured  the  glory 
of  His  matchless  character.  "  The  glory  which  Thou  gavest  Me  I  have  given 
them."     His   Church,  like  a  mirror,  shall  reflect  to  the  gaze  of  an  admiring 

558 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.    THESSALONTANS.    chap.  I. 


universe  the  unutterable  glory  of  the  great  Redeemer.  "  The  beauty  of  the  Lord 
our  God  shall  be  upon  her,  and  His  glory  shall  be  seen  upon  her."  How  great 
a  change  is  this  from  the  sins,  the  struggles,  the  failures,  the  disappointments, 
and  sufferings  of  earth  ! 

2.  A  life  of  faith  leads  to  a  life  of  glory. — "  Because  our  testimony  among  you 
was  believed"  (ver.  10).  Faith  rests  on  testimony,  and  is  vitally  affected  by  the 
character  of  the  testimony.  Saving  faith  relies  on  the  infallible  testimony  of  the 
word  of  God  concerning  Christ.  The  faith  exercised  in  the  midst  of  discourage- 
ments and  persecution  is  often  tenacious  and  vigorous.  The  gospel  is  backed  by 
evidence  sufficient  to  convince  every  sane  and  reasonable  mind.  All  may  believe 
it,  who  will ;  none  will  be  excluded  from  glory  but  those  who  will  not  believe. 
In  ancient  Athens  were  two  temples — a  temple  of  Virtue  and  a  temple  of 
Honour — and  none  could  enter  the  temple  of  Honour  but  by  passing  through 
the  temple  of  Virtue.  So  none  can  enter  the  temple  of  Glory  who  does  not  first 
pass  through  the  temple  of  Faith. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  day  of  judgment,  though  future,  is  inevitable.  2.  The  pro- 
ceedings of  that  day  will  be  in  harmony  with  the  holiest  principles  of  divine 
justice.  3.  That  day  should  be  solemnly  contemplated  in  its  approach,  in  its 
attendant  circumstances,  and  in  its  final  decisions. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers.  7,  8.  The  Divine  Judge —  the  principles  of  universal  righteous- 

I.  Has  appointed  a  day  of  retribution,  ness. 

II.  Will  be  revealed  on  that  day  in         II.  Means  terrible  punishment  to 
terrible  majesty.  the  wicked. 

III.  Will    take   vengeance    on    the         III.  Will  bring  unspeakable  felicity 
disobedient.  to  the  good. 

IV.  Will  be    recognised  as  fault - 
Vers.  9,  10.  Divine  Retribution —  lessly  just 

I.  Will  be  in  strict  harmony  with  V.  Will  enhance  the  divine  glory. 


MAIN  EOMILETIOS   OF   THE   PARAGRAPH,— Verses  11,  12. 

A  Prayer  for  Completeness  of  Moral  Character. 

To  meet  Christ  at  His  coming,  and  to  dwell  with  Him  in  the  bliss  of  the 
future,  demands  a  moral  preparedness.  To  promote  this  should  be  the  constant, 
unwearied  solicitude  of  both  pastor  and  people.  The  possession  of  any  measure 
of  divine  grace  supplies  the  strongest  motives  for  seeking  the  highest  possible 
degree  of  moral  excellence.     In  this  passage  observe  : — 

I.  That  completeness  of  moral  character  is  really  the  attainment  of  the  divine 
ideal. — "That  our  God  would  count  you  worthy  of  this  calling"  (ver.  11).  The 
tyro  in  religion  pictures  to  himself  a  more  or  less  definite  outline  of  what  he  may 
become  and  what  he  may  do.  The  charm  of  novelty,  the  enthusiasm  of  first  love, 
the  indefiniteness  of  the  untried  and  the  unknown,  throw  a  romantic  glamour 
over  the  Christian  career,  and  the  mind  is  elated  with  the  prospect  of  entering 
upon  grand  enterprises  and  winning  signal  victories.  But  mature  thought  and 
experience  and  a  more  familiar  acquaintance  with  the  divine  mind  lead  us  to 
modify  many  of  our  earlier  views,  and  to  readjust  the  main  features  of  our  own 
ideal  of  the  Christian  character,  so  as  to  be  more  in  harmony  with  the  divine 
ideal.  God  calls  us  to  purity  of  heart  and  life,  and  makes  us  worthy,  and  gives 
us  power  to  attain  it.     We  have  no  worthiness  in  ourselves  or  in  our  works. 

559 


chap.  i.     HQMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II,    THESSALONIANS. 


The  fitness  for  heavenly  glory  is  acquired  by  following  out  the  God-given  inspira- 
tion to  "  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  the  present  world." 

II.  That  completeness  of  moral  character  consists  in  the  delighting  in  good- 
ness.— "And  fulfil  all  the  good  pleasure  of  His  goodness"  (ver.  11).  Some  are 
influenced  to  be  good  because  they  are  afraid  of  the  penalties  attached  to  a  life 
of  sin.  Others  because  of  the  substantial  rewards  and  benefits  found  in  a  life 
of  probity  and  uprightness.  But  the  highest  type  is  to  love  goodness  for  its  own 
sake,  and  to  delight  in  it  as  goodness  ;  to  be  wholly  possessed  with  a  life -absorbing 
passion  to  find  and  to  diffuse  goodness  everywhere.  This  approaches  nearest  to 
the  divine  ideal.  "  He  hath  pleasure  in  uprightness,  and  hath  no  pleasure  in 
wickedness"  (1  Chron.  xxix.  17;  Ps.  v.  4).  There  is  no  pleasure  like  that  we 
find  in  true  goodness.  Severus,  emperor  of  Rome,  confessed  on  his  deathbed,  "  I 
have  been  everything,  and  now  find  that  everything  is  nothing."  Then,  directing 
that  the  urn  should  be  brought  to  him,  he  said,  "  Little  urn,  thou  shalt  contain 
one  for  whom  the  world  was  too  little." 

III.  That  completeness  of  moral  character  is  attained  by  the  exercise  of  a 
divinely  inspired  faith. — "  And  the  work  of  faith  with  power"  (ver.  11).  We 
have  no  innate  righteousness.  It  is  God-given.  It  is  received,  maintained,  and 
extended  in  the  soul  by  faith  in  the  merits  of  the  all-righteous  Saviour.  "  While 
faith  itself  is  the  gift  of  God,  it  is  no  less  an  exercise  of  the  mind  and  heart  of  man. 
And  because,  like  everything  else  about  man,  it  partakes  of  his  great  weakness, 
it  needs  ever,  as  it  walks  in  the  light  of  the  divine  word,  to  stay  itself  on  the 
divine  hand."  Faith  is  the  mighty  instrument  by  which  the  divine  life  is 
propagated  in  the  soul,  and  by  which  its  loftiest  blessings  are  secured. 

IV.  That  completeness  of  moral  character  promotes  the  divine  glory. — "  That 
the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  may  be  glorified  in  you,  and  ye  in  Him  "  (ver.  12). 
It  will  be  seen  at  the  last  that  Christ  has  been  more  abundantly  glorified  by  a 
humble,  holy  life  than  by  wealthy  benefactions  or  by  gigantic  enterprises.  The 
name  now  so  much  despised,  and  for  which  those  who  now  bear  it  suffer  so  much, 
shall  be  magnified  and  exalted  "  above  every  name."  The  followers  of  Christ 
shall  share  in  the  glory  of  their  Lord.  Their  excellencies  redound  to  His  glory ; 
and  His  glory  is  reflected  on  them  in  such  a  way  that  there  is  a  mutual  glorifica- 
tion. "  What  a  glory  it  will  be  to  them  before  all  creatures  that  He  who  sits 
upon  the  throne  once  shared  their  sorrows  and  died  for  them  !  What  a  glory 
that  He  still  wears  their  nature,  and  is  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren  ! 
What  a  glory  to  be  for  ever  clothed  with  His  righteousness  S  What  a  glory  to 
reign  with  Him  and  be  glorified  together  !  "  (Lillie). 

V.  That  completeness  of  moral  character  is  rendered  possible  by  the  pro- 
visions of  divine  grace. — "  According  to  the  grace  of  our  God  and  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ"  (ver.  12).  The  source  of  all  human  goodness,  in  all  its  varying  degrees, 
is  in  the  divine  favour.  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  Christ  is  here  recognised  as  on 
an  equality  with  the  Father,  and  as  being  with  Him  the  fontal  source  of  grace. 
The  glory  which  it  is  possible  for  sanctified  humanity  to  reach  is  "  according  to 
grace."  The  grace  is  "  exceeding  abundant " ;  so  is  the  glory.  There  is  a 
fathomless  mine  of  moral  wealth  provided  for  every  earnest  seeker  after  God. 

VI  That  completeness  of  moral  character  should  be  the  subject  of  constant 
prayer. — "  Wherefore  also  we  pray  always  for  you  "  (ver.  11).  The  Thessalonians 
were  favoured  in  having  the  prayers  of  the  apostles.  It  is  a  beautiful  example  of 
the  unselfishness  of  the  Christian  spirit  when  we  are  so  concerned  for  others  as  to 
pray  for  them.  We  value  that  about  which  we  pray  the  most.  We  have  need 
of  prayer  to  help  us  to  attend  faithfully  to  the  little  things  which  make  up  the 
daily  duties  of  the  Christian  life.  Attention  to  trifles  is  the  way  to  completeness 
of  moral  character.  The  great  Italian  sculptor,  Michael  Angelo,  was  once 
visited  by  an  acquaintance,  who  remarked,  on  entering  his  studio,  "  Why,  you 

560 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   THESSALONIANS.    chap.  ii. 


have  done  nothing  to  that  figure  since  I  was  here  last  V  "  Yes,"  was  the  reply, 
"  I  have  softened  this  expression,  touched  off  that  projection,  and  made  other 
improvements."  "Oh!"  said  the  visitor,  "these  are  mere  trifles."  "True," 
answered  the  sculptor;  "  but  remember  that  trifles  make  perfection,  and  perfec- 
tion is.jio  trifle." 

Lessons. — 1.  It  is  important  to  have  a  lofty  ideal  of  Christian  perfection  constantly 
in  view.  2.  While  humbled  by  failures  we  are  not  to  be  disheartened.  3.  Earnest, 
persevering  prayer  wins  great  moral  victories. 

GERM  NOTES   ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  11,  12.  Genuine  Religion  illus-  glorified  in  you."     2.  The  glory  of  the 

trated.  redeemed.     "  And  ye  in  Him." 

I.  Religion  in  its  nature. — It  is  a  V.  Religion  in  its  measure  or  rule 
worthiness  into  which  we  are  called  of  dispensation. — "  According  to  the 
and  with  which  we  are  invested.  grace  of  our  God  and  the  Lord  Jesus 

II.  Religion  in  its  source. — The  Christ." — Zeta. 
goodness  of  God.  1.  All  present  re- 
ligious views  and  feelings  are  the  effect  Yer.  12.  Christ  glorified  in  His 
of  divine  grace.  2.  Man  has  no  right-  People. — The  bust  of  Luther  was  shut 
ful  claim  to  divine  grace.  3.  Religion  out  from  the  Walhalla,  or  German 
has  its  true  source  in  the  good  pleasure  Westminster  Abbey.  The  people  were 
of  God.  indignant,  but  said,  "  Why  need  we  a 

III.  Religion  in  its  principle. —  bust  when  he  lives  in  our  hearts  ? " 
Faith.  "  The  work  of  faith  with  And  thus  the  Christian  ever  feels  when 
power."  The  producing  and  sustaining  he  beholds  many  around  him  multi- 
principle  of  religion.  plying  pictures  and  statues  of  Christ, 

IV.  Religion  in  its  end. — 1.  The  and  he  can  say,  "  I  need  them  not,  for 
glory  of  the  Redeemer.  "  That  the  He  is  ever  with  me ;  he  lives  perpetu- 
name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  may  be      ally  in  my  heart." 


CHAPTER   II. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Beseech  ...  by  the  coming  of  our  Lord. — The  English  reader  who  consults  the 
similar  phrase  "  to  beseech  by "  in  Roni.  xii.  1  will  be  wholly  astray.  St  Paul  begs  his 
readers  not  to  be  thrown  into  consternation  or  kept  in  a  flutter  of  excitement  over  that 
matter  of  the  Parousia,  or  "  coming." 

Ver.  2.  Not  soon  shaken. — Like  a  house  built  on  sand  when  the  storm  breaks  in  fury, 
or  like  the  mobile  vulgus  in  Thessalonica  who  were  only  too  willing  to  follow  the  lead  of 
Jewish  agitators  (Acts  xvii.  13).  In  mind. — R.V.  "from  your  mind."  "Out  of  your  wits" 
expresses  the  apostle's  meaning  exactly.  They  are  to  behave  like  men  in  whom  reason  is 
supreme — not  like  men  in  a  panic.  Or  be  troubled. — The  same  word  was  used  in  reporting 
our  Lord's  counsels  on  the  same  subject.  "  Be  not  troubled :  .  .  .  the  end  is  not  yet " 
(Matt.  xxiv.  6).  By  epistle  as  from  us. — Either  by  misinterpretation  of  something  St.  Paul 
had  written,  or  by  a  forged  letter  purporting  to  have  come  from  him. 

Ver.  3.  Let  no  man  deceive.— R.V.  "  beguile  or  cheat  you."  A  falling  away. — Lit.  "  the 
apostasy,"  a  desertion  from  the  army  of  God ;  a  recantation  of  faith  in  Christ.  Our  Master 
foretold  that  when  "  iniquity  shall  abound  the  love  of  the  many  shall  be  blown  cool " 
(Matt.  xxiv.  12).  That  man  of  sin. — Another  reading  is  "  lawlessness."  The  man  in  whom 
sin  gathers  itself  up  into  a  head — the  last  product  of  sin.    The   son  of  perdition— par 

oo  501 


CHAP.  II.    EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ;    II.    THESSALONIANS. 


xcellrnce,  sharing  the  title  with  him  whom  Christ  so  named  (John  xvii.  12).    Abaddon 
(Rev.  ix.  11)  may  claim  him  as  his  own  ultimately. 

Ver.  4.  Who  opposeth  and  exalteth  himself. — The  participle  rendered  "  who  opposeth  "  is 
used  twice  by  St.  Luke  in  the  plural  as  "adversaries."  So  in  the  singular  (1  Tim.  v.  14). 
The  compound  word  for  "  exalteth  himself "  occurs  (2  Cor.  xii.  7),  and  is  given  as  "exalted- 
above-measure."  Above  all  that  is  called  God. — The  shudder  of  horror  in  these  words 
reminds  us  how  a  monotheistic  Jew  must  regard  the  impious  act.  We  can  understand  that 
a  Roman  emperor  would  regard  the  God  of  Jew  or  Christian  as  a  tutelary  deity ;  but  the 
acme  of  profanity  is  reached  in  this  act  of  Antichrist.  Or  that  is  worshipped. — R.V.  margin, 
"  Gr.  an  object  of  worship."  "  The  very  name  Sebastos,  the  Greek  rendering  of  the  imperial 
title  Augustus,  to  which  Divus  was  added  at  death  (signifying  '  the  one  to  be  worshipped'), 
was  an  offence  to  the  religious  mind.  .  .  .  Later,  Caesar  or  Christ  was  the  martyr's  alternative  " 
(Findlay).  Showing  Himself  that  He  is  God. — Or,  as  we  should  say,  "  representing  Himself 
to  be  God."     Compare  Herod's  acceptance  of  the  worship  (Acts  xii.  22). 

Ver.  6.  What  withholdeth.— R.V.  "  that  which  restraineth."  "  A  hint  was  sufficient,  verbum 
sap/dntibt/s :  more  ttian  a  hint  would  have  been  dangerous  "  (Ibid.). 

Ver.  7.  He  who  now  letteth.—  R.V.  "there  is  one  that  restraineth."  This  old  word  for 
"obstruct"  is  found  in  Isa.  xliii.  13  :  "  I  will  work,  and  who  shall  let  (i.e.  hinder)  it?"  "  Where 
then  are  we  to  look  .  .  .  for  the  check  and  bridle  of  lawlessness  ?  Where  but  to  law  itself  ? 
The  fabric  of  civil  law  and  the  authority  of  the  magistrate  formed  a  bulwark  and  break- 
water against  the  excesses  both  of  autocratic  tyranny  and  of  popular  violence  "  (Ibid.). 

Ver.  8.  And  then  shall  that  Wicked  be  revealed. — R.V.  "and  then  shall  be  revealed  the 
lawless  one."  Outward  restraint  being  withdrawn,  there  is  no  inward  principle  to  keep  him 
back  :  he  is  "lawless."  And  shall  destroy. — R.V.  "  bring  to  nought."  It  is  the  same  word  as 
that  which  describes  the  effect  of  the  revelation  of  the  gospel  on  "  death"  in  2  Tim.  i.  10— to 
render  absolutely  powrerless.  With  the  brightness  of  His  coming. — R.V.  "  by  the  manifestation 
of  His  coming."     Lit.  "  by  the  epiphany  of  His  presence." 

Ver.  9.  Even  Him,  whose  coming,  etc. — These  words  look  back  to  the  beginning  of  ver.  8. 
"  The  two  comings — the  parousia  of  the  Lord  Jesus  and  that  of  the  Man  of  Lawlessness — are 
set  in  contrast.  The  second  forms  the  dark  background  to  the  glory  of  the  first"  (Ibid.). 
Power  and  signs  and  lying  wonders. — Simulating  the  supernatural  evidences  of  the  gospel  as 
the  magicians  of  Egypt  those  of  Moses. 

Ver.  10.  Deceivableness  of  unrighteousness. — R.V.  "  deceit."  The  deceit  which  is  charac- 
teristic of  unrighteousness,  or  marks  its  methods.  They  received  not  the  love  of  the  truth. 
The  sine  qua  non  for  an  answer  to  Mate's  question  is  this  love  of  the  truth. 

Ver.  11.  God  shall  send  them  strong  delusion. — R.V.  "God  sendeth  them  a  working  of 
error."  "  It  is  a  just,  but  mournful  result,  that  rejecters  of  Christ's  miracles  become  believers 
in  Satan's,  and  that  atheism  should  be  avenged  by  superstition.  So  it  has  been  and  will 
be"  (Ibid.).  One  is  reminded  of  the  old  saying  that  "the  gods  first  drive  mad  those 
whom  they  mean  to  destroy." 

Ver.  12.  Believed  not  the  truth,  but  had  pleasure  in  unrighteousness. — Here  again  we  have 
the  mental  rejection  of  truth  consequent  on  a  liking  for  that  which  truth  condemns.  If  "the 
heart  makes  the  theologian,"  the  want  of  it  makes  the  infidel. 

.  Ver.  13.  We  are  bound  to  give  thanks. — The  same  form  of  expression  as  in  i.  3,  save  that 
here  "  we  "  is  expressed  separately  and  emphatically. 

Ver.  15.  Stand  fast. — Ready  for  any  shock  wdiich  may  come  unexpectedly  through  the 
insidious  methods  of  Antichrist.  Hold  the  traditions. — As  if  the  apostle  said,  keep  a  strong 
hand  on  them.  Tradition  is  that  which  is  handed  over  from  one  to  another.  Compare 
1  Cor.  xi.  23.  "  I  received  of  the  Lord.  .  .  I  delivered  unto  you.  .  .  .  He  was  betrayed." 
Here  the  words  "  delivered "  and  "  betrayed  "  represent  a  doing,  of  which  the  word  for 
"tradition"  is  the  act  completed.  Paul  handed  over  that  which  his  Lord  charged  him  to 
transmit ;  Judas  handed  over  Christ  to  the  Jews. 

Ver.  16.  Everlasting  consolation  and  good  hope. — Consolation,  or  comfort,  is  ministered 
by  the  Paraclete  (John  xiv.  16  ;  Acts  ix.  31),  who  abides  for  ever  with  those  who  are 
Christ's. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—12. 

Antichrist  Portrayed. 

Various  interpretations  of  this  remarkable  paragraph  have  been  attempted. 
Some  modern  German  critics  would  divest  it  of  any  prophetic  significance,  and 
treat  it  as  a  representation  of  the  writer's  own  personal  feelings  and  forebodings. 
Others  would  restrict  its  application  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  the 
Romans,  and  to  persons,  principles,  and  events  that  preceded  that  catastrophe, 

562 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.   THESSALONIANS.    chap.  ii. 


The  commonly  received  Protestant  interpretation  is  to  identify  the  Man  of  Sin 
and  his  doings  with  the  Papacy ;  and  there  are  certainly  many  points  of  that 
interpretation  that  accord  very  remarkably  with  the  prophecy.  But  there  are 
serious  objections  to  all  these  views.  We  believe  the  revelation  of  the  Antichrist 
here  depicted  is  yet  future,  though  the  elements  of.  his  power  are  now  in 
preparation.     From  the  whole  passage  we  gather  the  following  suggestions : — 

I.  That  Antichrist  will  be  embodied  in  some  living  personality. — He  is  called 
"  that  man  of  sin,  the  son  of  perdition  "  :  "that  Wicked" — the  lawless  one  (vers.  3-8). 
The  fathers  of  the  early  Church,  for  at  least  three  centuries  after  the  apostolic 
age,  while  differing  on  some  minor  details,  seemed  unanimous  in  understanding 
by  the  Man  of  Sin,  not  a  system  of  deceit  and  wickedness,  or  a  succession  of 
individuals  at  the  head  of  such  a  system,  but  some  one  man,  the  living  personal 
Antichrist,  the  incarnation  of  Satanic  craft  and  energy,  who  should  put  forth 
his  power  to  weaken  and  destroy  the  Church. 

1.  He  will  arrogantly  assume  divine  prerogatives. — "  Who  opposeth  and  exalteth 
himself  above  all  that  is  called  God,  or  that  is  worshipped ;  so  that  he  as  God 
sitteth  in  the  temple  of  God,  showing  himself  that  he  is  God  "  (ver.  4).  In 
these  words  we  note  Antichrist's  intrusion  into  the  special  dwelling-place  of  God, 
his  usurping  session  there,  and  his  blasphemous  and  ostentatious  assumption  of 
divinity.     The  wildest  excesses  of  pride  and  audacity  cannot  exceed  this. 

2.  His  advent  will  be  accompanied  with  remarkable  displays  of  Satanic  power. — 
"  Whose  coming  is  after  the  working  of  Satan  with  all  power  and  signs  and 
lying  wonders"  (ver.  9).  Antichrist  as  the  masterpiece  of  Satan  will  be  endowed 
with  extraordinary  qualities.  The  devil  will  tax  his  prodigious  abilities  to  the 
utmost  in  making  this  great  adversary  of  the  Church  as  potent  for  mischief  as 
possible.  We  know  how  readily  the  man  of  science  can  impose  upon  the  ignorant 
with  his  experiments.  And  how  easy  it  is  for  Satan,  with  his  vast  knowledge 
and  resources,  to  delude  thousands  with  his  simulations  of  the  miraculous  !  The 
advent  of  Antichrist  is  to  be  a  fiendish  caricature  and  audacious  mockery  of  the 
glorious  coming  of  the  Son  of  God  ! 

II.  That  Antichrist  will  work  deplorable  mischief  in  human  souls. — 1.  He 
seeks  by  secret  methods  to  promote  apostasy  from  the  Church  of  God."  "A  falling 
away  first"  (ver.  3).  "  The  mystery  of  iniquity  doth  already  work  "  (ver.  7).  Here 
we  detect  the  germs  and  preparation  of  the  antichristian  curse  that  is  to  work 
such  havoc.  The  primitive  Church  of  apostolic  times  was  not  such  a  model  of 
perfection  as  we  sometimes  imagine.  The  leaven  of  iniquity,  of  lawlessness,  the 
essence  of  all  sin,  was  already  working.  Observe  the  sorrowing  references  of  the 
apostle  to  the  many  evils  of  the  different  Churches.  Tit.  i.  1 1  ;  1  Tim.  vi.  5 ; 
2  Cor.  xi.  26;  Philem.  9;  2  Tim.  i.  15;  1  John  ii.  18-20;  2  John  7;  3  John,9. 
Passim.  The  most  disastrous  apostasies  have  been  the  result  of  long,  secret 
endeavours. 

2.  He  begets  a  dislike  to  saving  truth. — "  With  all  deceivableness  of  unrighteous- 
ness in  them  that  perish  ;  because  they  received  not  the  love  of  the  truth  that 
they  might  be  saved"  (ver.  10).  The  truth  was  revealed,  its  saving  benefits  were 
offered  ;  they  had  but  to  accept  the  truth  and  they  were  safe.  But  they  rejected 
the  truth  ;  they  loved  it  not.  Their  treatment  of  the  gospel  rendered  them  more 
easy  victims  to  the  deceptions  of  Antichrist ;  fascinated  by  his  unrighteous 
glamour,  they  recede  from  the  truth  and  cherish  a  bitter  hostility  towards  it. 

3.  His  victims  are  abandoned  to  self-delusion  and  condemnation. — "And  for 
this  cause  God  shall  send  them  strong  delusion  that  they  should  believe  a  lie ; 
that  they  all  might  be  damned" — might  he  judged  according  to  their  individual 
character  and  works — "  who  believed  not  the  truth,  but  had  pleasure  in  un- 
righteousness "  (vers.  11,  12).  See  here  the  fearful  consequences  of  a  hatred  to 
and  rejection  of  the  truth  !     The  soul  takes  delight  in  sinning — has  "  pleasure  in 

563 


chap.  II.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.   THESSALONIANS. 


unrighteousness."  It  is,  then,  not  only  abandoned  to  its  iniquity,  but  its  delusions 
are  intensified  so  as  to  embrace  the  most  palpable  falsehoods  as  truth.  It  shall 
then  be  judged  on  its  own  merits,  so  that  God  shall  be  justified  in  His  speaking 
and  clear  in  His  judging.  Terrible  indeed  is  the  fate  of  the  victims  who  fall 
under  the  spell  of  Antichrist. 

III.  That  the  coming  of  Antichrist  is  for  a  time  restrained. — "  And  now  ye 
know  what  withholdeth  that  he  might  be  revealed  in  his  time.  .  .  .  Only  he  who 
now  letteth  will  let,  until  he  be  taken  out  of  the  way  "  (vers.  6,  7).  There  is  an 
external  power  with  an  individual  at  its  head  which  holds  back  the  power  of 
Antichrist  until  the  proper  season  comes.  What  that  power  is  is  not  revealed  ; 
but  God  can  use  any  power  for  this  purpose,  until  the  divinely  appointed  time 
shall  come  for  the  revelation  and  overthrow  of  Antichrist. 

IV.  That  Antichrist  shall  be  summarily  destroyed. — "Whom  the  Lord  shall 
consume  with  the  spirit  of  His  mouth  " — as  insects  wither  on  the  mere  approach 
of  fire — "  and  shall  destroy  with  the  brightness  of  His  coming  "  (ver.  8) — with 
the  appearing  of  His  coming,  as  it  were  the  first  gleaming  dawn  of  His  advent. 
For  a  time  Antichrist  shall  reign  in  pomp  and  splendour  and  delude  many  to 
their  ruin  ;  but  at  the  coming  of  the  true  Lord  of  the  Church  the  great  impostor 
shall  be  dethroned  and  utterly  abolished.  "  It  is  enough,"  says  Chrysostom, 
"  that  He  be  present,  and  all  these  things  perish.  He  will  stay  the  deception 
simply  by  appearing." 

V.  That  the  followers  of  Christ  need  not  be  afraid  of  losing  any  benefits  to 
be  conferred  by  His  second  coming. — "  Now  we  beseech  you,  brethren,  by  the 
coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  by  our  gathering  together  unto  Him,  that 
ye  be  not  soon  shaken  in  mind,  or  be  troubled,  neither  by  spirit,  nor  by  word, 
nor  by  letter  as  from  us,  as  that  the  day  of  Christ  is  at  hand  "  (vers.  1,  2) — on 
hand,  has  already  come.  When  Paul  wrote  the  first  epistle,  the  Thessalonians 
"  were  sorrowing  by  the  graves  of  their  departed  friends,  and  the  grief  of  nature 
was  enhanced  by  the  apprehension  that  their  beloved  ones  might  suffer  loss  at 
the  coming  of  the  Lord.  But  now,  should  they  hear  that  He  had  come  and  had 
not  called  for  them,  a  yet  deeper,  more  agitating  motion  must  seize  them,  lest 
they  themselves  had  forfeited  their  share  in  the  glory  of  the  kingdom."  These 
words  would  allay  their  fears.  Christ  has  yet  to  come,  and  before  that  coming 
Antichrist  is  to  arise  and  reign.  Wait  patiently,  labour  diligently,  and  be  not 
harassed  with  too  great  an  eagerness  to  know  future  events.  All  the  blessings 
of  Christ's  second  coming  shall  be  shared  by  you  and  by  all  who  are  to  be  gathered 
together  unto  Him. 

Lessons. — 1.  There  are  trying  times  ahead.  2.  The  only  safety  for  the  soul  is 
to  holdfast  the  truth.  3.  At  the  darkest  moment  of  the  Church 's  trial  the  glory  of 
God  will  appear. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Vers.     1-6.      A     Warning     against  (2)      Substituting     error     for     truth. 

Imposition.  (3)  Overweening  self -exaltation. 

I.  The  danger. — 1.  Their  faith  was  III.  Hindrances  to  the  spread  of 
imperilled.  2.  Daily  duties  were  inter-  truth  (ver.  6). — 1.  The  civil  powers  of 
fered  with.  that  day.     2.  The  machinations  of  Satan 

II.  Signs  of  the  coming  end. — 1.  By  at  all  times.  3.  The  unfaithfulness  of 
a  great  apostasy.     2.  The  appearance  of  God's  people. 

Antichrist  as  the  man  of  sin  and  son 

of  perdition.      3.  The  proud  pretensions  Vers.  1-3.  A  False  Alarm — 

of  Antichrist.      (1)   Opposing  Christ.         I.  May  arise  from  a  misconception 

564 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   II.   THESSALONIANS.    chap.  it. 


of  an  important  truth. — "  Concerning  II.  Is  propagated  with  great  cunning 

the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  persistency. 

and  our  gathering  together  unto  Him  "  III.  Is  embodied  in  a  powerful  and 

(ver.  1).  wicked  personality  (vers.  7,  8). 

II.  Is  aggravated  by  unwarrantable  IV.  Is  Satanic  in  its  origin  and 
deceptions. — "  Let  no  man  deceive  you  manifestation  (vers.  9,  10). 

by  any  means  "  (ver.  3).     "  Neither  by 

spirit,'  nor  by  word,  nor  by  letter  as  Vers.  10"12-  lhe  Destructive  Subtlety 

from  us,  as  that  the  day  of  Christ  is  °J ^in'A  ,               .  „  ,  „          .    ,       _   , 

come "  (ver.  2).  *-   "  nas  manifold  methods  of  de- 

III.  Is  the  cause  of  much  real  suf-  ception.— "  With  all  deceivableness  of 
fering.— "  Shaken  in  mind— troubled  "  unrighteousness  "  (ver.  10). 

(ver.  2)— like  a  ship  escaped  from  its  -IL  ?*  lncites  tne  soul  to  a  hatred 

moorings,  tossed  in  a  rolling  sea.  ot  savln£  truth.— "That  received  not 

IV.  Is  allayed  by  the  affectionate  the  love  °f  the  truth  that  the7  might 
entreaty  of  competent  teachers. — "We  he  saved"  (ver.  10). 

beseech  you,  brethren  "(ver.  1).  .    }}I.\lt    abandons    its    victims    to 

x          '  judicial    self-deception. — "  God    shall 

send  them  strong   delusion  that   they 
Ver  5    Memory—  should  belieye  a  He  „  (ver>  u) 

I.  Is  freighted  with  treasures  of  IV  It  leads  to  inevitable  condem- 
precious   truth.— « I    told   you   these      nation.— "  That    they    all    might    be 

TnTgS'  a         •  ,  ^  damned"  (ver.  12). 

II.  Associates    the    presence    and         v   It  encourages  sin  for  the  love  of 
character    of  the  teacher   with   the  sin#_«  Who  believed  not  the  truth 
truth  taught.—"  When  I  was  yet  with  but  had  pleasure  in  unrighteousness  " 

y°u'  (ver.  12) 

III.  Is  often  vividly  reminded  of  ' 

the    value    of    its    possession. — "Re-  Vers.  11,  12.  Strong  Delusions. 

member  ye  not."  I.  Believing  a  lie  as  truth. 

II.    Sent   as    a  judgment  for  not 

Vers.  7-10.  The  Mystery  of  Iniquity —      believing  the  truth. 

I.  Is  the  deepest  and  most  subtle  III.  Are  brought  on  by  those  who 
form  of  error.  have  pleasure  in  sin. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13,  14. 

Salvation  a  Divine  Act. 

When  the  air  is  thick  with  antichristian  theories,  sincere  inquirers  after  truth 
are  perplexed,  the  grasp  of  the  hesitating  is  loosened,  and  the  fidelity  of  the 
strongest  severely  tested.  Only  those  who  fully  yield  themselves  up  to  the  teaching 
and  guidance  of  the  divine  Spirit  are  safe.  A  clever  inventor  has  recently 
constructed  a  fireproof  dress,  which  enables  him  to  walk  about  unharmed  in  the 
midst  of  the  fiercest  fire.  Experimental  godliness  is  a  fireproof  dress,  and  the 
soul  clothed  with  this  is  safely  guarded  from  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked, 
and  will  pass  unscathed  through  the  fiercest  fires  of  temptation.  We  never 
know  what  it  is  to  be  really  saved  till  we  personally  experience  the  sanctifying 
power  of  the  truth.     These  verses  teach  that  salvation  is  a  divine  act. 

I.  Salvation  is  an  act  of  the  divine  will. — 1.  The  divine  will  is  actuated 
by  divine  love.  "  Brethren  beloved  of  the  Lord,  God  hath  from  the  beginning 
chosen  you  to  salvation"  (ver.  13).  When  we  examine  the  sources  of  salvation, 
we  find  them  not  in  ourselves,  but  in  some  power  outside  of  ourselves.  We  are 
saved,  not  because  we  are  good,  or  better  than  others,  or  more  favourably 
circumstanced,  but  because  God  has  chosen  us.     And  if  we  ask  still  further  how 

565 


chap.  II.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   H.   TBESSALOtflANS. 


it  is  that  God  should  lavish  the  grace  of  His  salvation  on  sinful  man,  we  are 
reduced,  in  the  final  analysis,  to  this  answer  :  Such  is  the  divine  will — a  will 
swayed  in  all  its  mighty  potentialities  by  infinite  love. 

"  Love,  strong  as  death  ;  nay,  stronger — 

Love  mightier  than  the  grave  ; 
Broad  as  the  earth,  and  longer 

Than  ocean's  widest  wave. 
This  is  the  love  that  sought  us, 
This  is  the  love  that  bought  us, 
This  is  the  love  that  brought  us, 

To  gladdest  day  from  saddest  night, 

From  deepest  shame  to  glory  bright, 

From  depths  of  death  to  life's  fair  height, 

From  darkness  to  the  joy  of  light." 

2.  The  divine  will  provides  the  means  of  salvation. — "  Whereunto  He  called 
you  by  our  gospel"  (ver.  14).  The  gospel  is  God's  method  of  salvation,  and  it 
is  through  this  gospel  He  "  will  have  all  men  to  be  saved,  and  to  come  unto 
the  knowledge  of  the  truth  "  (1  Tim.  iii.  4).  If  the  gospel  were  but  a  human 
expedient,  it  would  fail ;  but,  as  it  was  originated  and  devised  in  the  divine  mind, 
so  it  is  backed  and  made  forceful  by  the  operation  of  the  divine  will. 

II.  Salvation  as  a  divine  act  is  in  harmony  with  individual  freedom. — 
1.  Salvation  implies  personal  holiness.  "Through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit" 
(ver.  13).  The  Spirit  sanctifies  the  individual  soul,  and  the  soul,  in  the  exercise 
of  its  voluntary  power,  co-operates  with  the  Spirit.  The  soul  feels  the  need  of 
being  sanctified,  is  willing  to  be  sanctified,  earnestly  desires  to  be  sanctified,  and 
gives  free,  unrestricted  scope  to  the  Spirit  in  His  sanctifying  work. 

2.  Salvation  implies  personal  faith. — "And  belief  of  the  truth"  (ver.  13). 
This  clause  brings  out  distinctly  that  the  sanctification  of  the  Spirit  is  not 
wrought  on  a  passive  and  unresponsive  agent.  Faith  is  the  gift  of  God,  but  it 
is  the  act  of  man.  It  is  a  self- giving ;  the  surrender  of  his  own  freedom  to 
secure  the  larger  freedom  that  salvation  confers  on  the  soul  that  trusts.  Without 
God's  gift  there  would  be  no  faith,  and  without  man's  exercise  of  that  gift  there 
is  no  salvation.  It  is  not  faith  that  saves,  but  the  Christ  received  by  faith. 
Erskine  puts  it  thus :  "  As  it  is  not  the  laying  on  the  plaster  that  heals  the  sore, 
but  the  plaster  itself  that  is  laid  on,  so  it  is  not  the  faith,  or  receiving  of 
Christ,  but  Christ  received  by  faith  that  saves  us.  It  is  not  our  looking  to  the 
brazen  serpent  mystical,  but  the  mystical  brazen  serpent  looked  unto  by  faith 
— Christ  received  by  faith — that  saves  us." 

III.  Salvation  as  a  divine  act  aims  at  securing  for  the  soul  the  highest 
blessedness. — "  To  the  obtaining  of  the  glory  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ"  (ver.  14). 
The  saved  soul  aspires  after  glory,  but  it  is  glory  of  the  loftiest  type.  It  is  not 
the  changeful  glory  of  worldly  magnificence.  It  is  not  the  glory  of  Paul,  or  of 
the  greatest  human  genius.  It  is  '"  the  glory  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  When  the 
soul  catches  a  glimpse  of  the  splendour  of  this  divine  blessedness,  it  can  be  satisfied 
with  no  lower  aims.  "Paint  and  canvas,"  said  Guthrie,  "cannot  give  the  hues 
of  a  rainbow  or  of  the  beams  of  the  sun.  ISTo  more  can  words  describe  the 
Saviour's  glory.  Nay,  what  is  the  most  glowing  and  ecstatic  view  that  the 
highest  faith  of  a  soul,  hovering  on  the  borders  of  another  world,  ever  obtained 
of  Christ,  compared  with  the  reality  1  It  is  like  the  sun  changed  by  a  frosty  fog- 
bank  into  a  dull,  red  copper  ball — shorn  of  the  splendour  that  no  mortal  eyes 
can  look  upon."  As  it  is  Christ's  glory  that  we  seek,  so  it  is  Christ's  glory  we 
shall  share. 

IV.  Salvation  as  a  divine  act  affords  matter  for  unceasing  gratitude. — "  But 
we  are  bound  to  give  thanks  alway  to  God  for  you"  (ver.  13).     The  mercy  of 

566 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    It    THESSALONIANS.    chap.  II. 


God  in  our  salvation  is  ever  providirg  fruitful  themes  for  gratitude  on  earth  : 
the  glory  of  Christ  as  revealed  in  heaven  will  be  the  song  of  everlasting  thank- 
fulness and  praise.  Every  added  trophy  of  saving  power  augments  the  gi  atitude 
and  joy  of  the  faithful. 

Lessons. —  1.  The  rejection  of  the  truth  is  the  rejection  of salvation.  2.  Salvation 
brings  the  highest  good  to  man  and  the  greatest  glory  to  God.  3.  Salvation  will  be 
the  exhaustless  theme  of  the  heavenly  song, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  13.  The  Holy  Ghost  the  Sanctifier.      mote. — "  W hereunto    He   hath   called 

I.  Connect  the  divine  purpose  and     you  by  our  gospel." 

agency,  that  the    nature  and    effect         II.  Is  a  conscious  personal  posses- 

of  the  latter  may  be  more  apparent. —  sion. — "  To  the  obtaining  of  the  glory." 
To  collect  a  people  out  of  the  wreck  of  III.  Is  a  sharing  of  the  glory  of 

human   life    has   been   God's    purpose  Christ. — "  Of   the   glory   of  our  Lord 

from  the  first.     To  sanctify  them  is  to  Jesus  Christ, 
separate  them  to  God  in  fact  and  in 

effect.     The  Holy    Ghost  is  given   by  What    Saints    should    be.  — In   the 

Christ  to  sever  the  once  dead  in  sins  cathedral    of     St.    Mark,    Venice,    a 

from  the  dead  around  them.  marvellous   building  lustrous  with  an 

II.  The  scope  of  this  agency. — God's  Oriental  splendour  beyond  description, 
work  is  perfect.  It  has  its  stages ;  there  are  pillars  said  to  have  been 
but  the  Holy  Ghost  conducts  it  from  brought  from  Solomon's  temple  ;  these 
first  to  last.  Sanctification  is  pro-  are  of  alabaster,  a  substance  firm  and 
gressive.  The  end  of  sanctification  is  endurable  as  granite,  and  yet  trans- 
salvation,  parent,  so  that  the  light  glows  through 

III.  The  ordinary  means  through  them.  Behold  an  emblem  of  what  all 
which  the  Holy  Ghost  operates. —  true  pillars  of  the  Church  should  be — 
Through  belief  of  the  truth,  the  gospel,  firm  in  their  faith  and  transparent  in 
The  Spirit  sanctifies  through  the  truth,  their  character ;  men  of  simple  mould, 
— H.  T.  Lumsden.  ignorant    of    tortuous   and    deceptive 

ways,  and  yet  men  of  strong  will,  not 
Ver  14.  The  Glory  of  Sainthood —  readily  to  be  led  aside  or  bent  from 
I.  Is  the  object  of  the  gospel  to  pro-      their  uprightness. — Sturgeon. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF   VERSE   15. 

Christian  Steadfastness. 

In  all  ages  the  people  of  God  have  been  assailed  with  the  weapons  of  a  subtle 
and  plausible  philosophy  which  has  sought  to  supplant  the  simple  truth  of  the 
gospel  with  human  opinions.  The  evil  heart  of  man  chafes  under  the  righteous 
restrictions  of  the  truth,  and  in  its  angry  and  delirious  opposition  has  sought  to 
rid  itself  of  God  and  of  all  the  laws  that  bind  it  to  a  life  of  obedience  and  holiness. 
And  when  it  fancies  it  has  succeeded  in  demolishing  the  truths  it  hated  and 
against  which  it  rebelled,  it  is  aghast  at  the  desolation  it  has  wrought  and 
recoils  in  alarm  from  the  dark,  horrible  gulf  to  the  brink  of  which  it  had  forced 
itself.  Stricken  with  bewilderment  and  despair,  man  strives  to  construct  a 
religion  for  himself,  and  he  seeks  to  substitute  his  own  wild  ravings  for  the 
truths  of  divine  revelation.  It  is  the  attempt  of  a  bold,  impious  infidelity  to 
put  error  in  the  place  of  truth,  philosophy  in  the  place  of  religion,  human 
opinion  in  the  place  of  God.     The  exhortation  of  this  verse  is  always  timely. 

I.  Christian  steadfastness  is  an  important  and  ever-present  duty. — 1.  It  is 

567 


chap.  II.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    It   THESSALONIANS. 


necessary  to  growth  and  maturity  in  personal  piety.  Trees  must  grow  or  die. 
So  it  is  with  piety  :  it  must  grow  or  perish.  No  plant  or  tree  can  thrive  that  is 
being  perpetually  plucked  up  and  transplanted ;  nor  can  the  soul  prosper  unless 
it  is  steadfastly  rooted  in  the  soil  of  truth.  Darwin  describes  a  marine  plant — 
the  Macrocystis  pyrifera — that  rises  two  hundred  feet  from  the  depths  of  the 
Western  Ocean  and  floats  for  many  fathoms  on  the  surface,  uninjured  among 
the  waves  and  breakers,  which  no  masses  of  rock,  however  hard,  can  long 
withstand.  It  maintains  its  strength  by  clinging  tenaciously  to  the  rocks  far 
down  below  the  surface  of  the  sea.  So  personal  piety  grows  and  flourishes  by 
maintaining  a  firm  hold  of  the  Rock  of  Ages. 

2.  It  is  necessary  in  bearing  witness  for  Christ. — The  value  of  a  lighthouse  or 
a  landmark  to  the  mariner  is,  that  he  can  rely  on  always  finding  it  in  the  same 
place.  And  the  value  of  Christian  testimony  is  that  it  is  not  erratic  and  change- 
ful, but  stable  and  reliable :  it  hesitates  not  to  witness  for  Christ  in  any  place. 
Fifty  years  ago  at  a  dinner-party  in  the  west  end  of  London,  the  conversation 
was  dishonouring  to  Christ.  One  guest  was  silent,  and  presently  asked  that  the 
bell  might  be  rung.  On  the  appearance  of  the  servant  he  ordered  his  carriage, 
and  with  polished  courtesy  apologised  to  his  host  for  his  enforced  departure, 
saying,  for  I  am  still  a  Christian.  This  gentleman  was  the  late  Sir  Robert 
Peel. 

3.  It  is  a  stimulating  example  to  the  weak  and  faltering. — There  are  timid, 
feeble  followers  of  Christ  who,  until  they  become  well  grounded,  lean  on  others ; 
and  if  their  exemplars  vacillate  and  change,  so  do  they.  Few  have  the  courage 
to  break  away  from  a  pernicious  example.  When  travelling  on  the  Continent, 
Dr.  Duff  made  the  acquaintance  of  Cardinal  Wiseman,  and  for  some  time 
travelled  with  him ;  but  when  at  Antwerp  he  saw  the  cardinal  prostrate 
himself  before  the  Virgin,  he  courteously  but  firmly  bade  him  "  good-bye." 

II.  Christian  steadfastness  is  shown  in  an  unflinching  maintenance  of 
apostolic  doctrine. — "  Hold  the  traditions  which  ye  have  been  taught,  whether 
by  word,  or  our  epistle."  These  traditions  were  the  doctrines  preached  by  the 
apostles.  For  some  years  after  the  ascension  of  Christ,  there  was  no  written 
gospel  or  epistle.  The  truth  was  taught  orally  by  those  who  were  living 
witnesses  of  the  facts  on  which  the  doctrines — or  traditions — were  based. 

1.  Apostolic  doctrine  must  be  clearly  apprehended. — It  must  therefore  be 
diligently  studied,  and  the  truth  sifted  from  the  mass  of  errors  with  which  false 
tsachers  surround  it.  What  is  not  intelligently  comprehended  cannot  be  firmly 
held. 

2.  Apostolic  doctrine  must  be  earnestly  embraced. — Not  simply  discussed,  not 
simply  admired  and  praised,  but  prayerfully  and  cordially  accepted — taken  in 
as  spiritual  food,  and  systematically  fed  upon  to  give  strength  and  stamina  to 
the  soul. 

3.  Apostolic  doctrine  must  be  firmly  held  and  stoutly  defended  against  all  errors. 
— "  Hold  the  traditions."  Believe  them  when  tempted  to  disbelieve  ;  defend  them 
when  assailed  by  the  enemy.  A  brave  Athenian,  who  wrought  deeds  of  valour  in 
the  battle  of  Marathon,  seized  with  his  right  hand  a  stranded  galley  filled  with 
Persians.  When  his  right  hand  was  cut  off,  he  seized  the  boat  with  his  left,  and 
when  that  was  smitten,  he  held  on  with  his  teeth  till  he  died.  The  grasp  of 
truth  by  a  Christian  believer  should  not  be  less  tenacious  than  the  dogged 
heroism  of  a  heathen  warrior. 

III.  Christian  steadfastness  is  emphatically  enforced. — "  Therefore,  brethren, 
stand  fast."  Though  misunderstood  and  misrepresented,  though  savagely 
opposed  by  the  enemies  of  the  truth,  stand  fast.  As  the  wings  of  the  bird  are 
strengthened  by  the  resistance  of  the  atmosphere  in  which  it  floats,  so  your 
graces  will  be  strengthened  by  the  opposition  with  which  you  resolutely  contend. 

568 


JHOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.   THESSALONIANS.    chap.  tt. 


In  order  that  your  own  personal  piety  may  be  matured,  that  your  witnessing 
for  Christ  may  be  unmistakable,  and  that  your  example  may  be  a  stimulating 
encouragement  to  others,  "  stand  fast,  and  hold  the  traditions  which  ye  have 
been  taught." 

Lessons. — 1.  The  unstable  are  the  prey  of  every  passing  temptation.  2.  The 
word  of  God  is  the  unfailing  source  of  moral  strength. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  16,  17. 

Prayer  an  Expression  of  Ministerial  Anxiety. 

The  apostle  had  warned  the  Thessalonians  of  the  errors  that  were  becoming 
rife  among  them.  Indeed,  the  existence  of  these  errors,  and  the  grave  injury 
they  threatened  to  the  faith  of  the  new  converts,  prompted  him  to  write  these 
epistles — the  first  in  a  series  of  magnificent  apostolic  polemics.  The  apostle  knew 
that  if  the  simplicity  of  the  gospel  was  vitiated  at  the  beginning  of  its  world- 
wide mission,  unspeakable  disaster  would  ensue,  as  the  checkered  history  of 
the  Church  in  the  early  centuries  unhappily  proved.  Hence  his  anxiety,  not 
only  to  clearly  state,  but  with  all  his  resources  of  logic  and  persuasion,  resolutely 
to  defend  the  cardinal  principles  of  the  gospel.  He  not  only  argues,  but  prays. 
These  verses  teach  that  prayer  is  the  expression  of  ministerial  anxiety. 

I.  It  recognises  the  need  of  spiritual  consolation. — "Now  our  Lord  .  .  .  comfort 
your  hearts  "  (vers.  16,  17).  You  have  sorrowed  over  the  loss  of  friends,  and 
harassed  yourselves  as  to  their  condition  in  another  world.  I  have  pointed  out  to 
you  that  your  fears  were  groundless  (1  Thess.  iv.  13-18).  Now,  I  commend  you 
God  as  the  Source  and  Giver  of  all  consolation,  and  pray  that  He  may  specially 
comfort  you.  "  It  is  God's  presence,"  says  Burroughs,  "  that  constitutes  the  saint's 
morning.  As  the  stars  may  impart  some  light,  and  yet  the  brightness  of  all 
combined  cannot  form  the  light  of  day,  but  when  the  sun  appears  there  is  day  forth- 
with, so  God  may  make  some  comfort  arise  to  a  soul  from  secondary  and  inferior 
means ;  but  it  is  He  Himself  alone  who,  by  the  shining  of  His  face  and  the 
smiles  of  His  countenance,  causes  morning."  A  comfort  that  is  made  up  of 
our  fancies  is  like  a  spider's  web  that  is  weaved  out  of  its  bowels,  and  is  gone  and 
swept  away  with  the  turn  of  a  besom. 

II.  It  recognises  the  perils  that  beset  the  path  of  obedience. — "  And  establish 
you  in  every  good  word  and  work  "  (ver.  17) — or,  according  to  the  Revised  Version, 
"  every  good  work  and  word."  Work  is  better  than  speech,  deeds  more  eloquent 
than  words,  though  both  are  necessary.  The  best  safeguard  against  temptation 
is  to  be  employed.  "  The  busy  man  is  tempted  by  one  devil,  the  idle  man  by  a 
thousand."  The  force  of  gunpowder  is  not  known  till  some  spark  falls  on  it ;  so 
the  most  placid  natures  do  not  reveal  the  evil  that  is  in  them  till  they  are 
assailed  by  some  fierce  and  sudden  temptation.  Excellence  in  anything  can  only 
be  reached  by  hard  work  ;  so  stability  in  grace  is  attained  only  by  being  diligently 
engaged  in  God's  service.  Steadfastness  is  not  dull  quiescence  :  it  is  self -absorb- 
ing activity.     If  you  would  be  strong,  you  must  work. 

III.  It  recognises  the  divine  source  of  all  spiritual  help. — 1.  That  this  help  is 
the  outcome  of  divine  love.  "Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself  and  God  even  our 
Father,  which  hath  loved  us  "  (ver.  16).  God  helps  because  He  loves.  His  love 
evokes  the  best  and  noblest  in  us,  as  the  master-musician  brings  out  melodies 
from  an  instrument  that  inferior  players  have  failed  to  produce. 

"  Love  is  a  passion 
Which  kindles  honour  into  noblest  acts." 
"  0  let  Thy  love  constrain  us 
To  give  our  hearts  to  Thee  ; 
Let  nothing  henceforth  pain  us 
But  that  which  paineth  Thee. 

569 


chap.  II.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   THESSALONIANS. 


u  Our  joy,  our  one  endeavour, 

Through  suffering,  conflict,  shame, 
To  serve  Thee,  gracious  Saviour, 
And  magnify  Thy  name." 

2.  That  this  help' meets  every  possible  exigency  of  the  Christian  life. — "  And  hath 
given  us  everlasting  consolation  and  good  hope  through  grace"  (ver.  16).  The 
consolation  refers  to  everything  in  the  present,  the  good  hope  to  everything  in 
the  future.  The  consolation  is  constant,  everlasting,  as  flowing  from  inex- 
haustible sources,  and  is  ever  available  in  all  the  changes  and  needs  of  life ; 
and  the  hope  turns  our  fears  into  confidence  and  our  sorrows  into  joy.  When 
the  frail  barques  of  the  Portuguese  went  sailing  south,  they  found  the  sea  so 
stormy  at  the  southern  point  of  Africa  that  they  named  it  the  Cape  of  Storms  ; 
but  after  it  had  been  well  rounded  by  bolder  navigators,  they  named  it  the  Cape 
of  Good  Hope.  So,  by  the  divine  help  afforded  us,  many  a  rough  cape  of  storms 
has  been  transformed  into  a  cape  of  good  hope.  All  spiritual  help  is  given 
"  through  grace  " — the  free,  unmerited  favour  of  God — and  is  therefore  a  fitting 
subject  of  prayer. 

Lessons. — 1.  Every  minister  should  be  emphatically  a  man  of  prayer.  2.  Prayer 
for  others  has  a  reflex  benefit  on  the  suppliant.  3.  An  anxious  spirit  finds  relief 
and  comfort  in  prayer. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  16,  17.  St.  Pauls  Prayer  for 
the  Thessalonians. 

I.  The  objects  the  apostle  addressed. 
— 1.  God,  even  our  Father.  2.  Our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

II.  The  gifts  the  apostle  acknow- 
ledged.— 1.  The  manifestation  of  divine 
love.  2.  The  communication  of  saving 
grace.  3.  The  bestowment  of  Christian 
hope. 

III.  The  blessings  the  apostle  re- 
quested.— 1.  Increasing  felicity  in  the 
Lord.  2.  Persevering  stability  in  the 
truth. — Eta. 

Yer.  16.  A  Good  Hope  through  Grace. 

I.  The  grace  of  hope. — 1.  Refers  to 

the  resurrection   of  the    body.     2.    To 


eternal  life  to  be  enjoyed  by  both  soul 
and  body.  3.  Pre-requisites  of  this 
hope. — Conviction  of  sin.  An  experi- 
mental acquaintance  with  the  gospel. 

II.  The  excellency  of  this  hope. — 
"  A  good  hope."  1.  In  opposition  to 
the  hopes  of  worldly  men.  2.  It  is  a 
lively  hope.  3.  The  object  of  it  is  an 
infinite  and  eternal  good.  4.  It  has  a 
good  foundation.  5.  It  produces  good 
effects. 

III.  The  source  of  this  hope. — 
"  Through  grace."  1.  Man  is  the 
subject  of  infinite  demerit.  2.  Christ 
alone  possesses  infinite  merit.  3.  The 
Scripture  warns  against  all  self 
dependence. — Helps  for  the  Pulpit. 


570 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   II.   THESSALONIANS.    chap.  hi. 


CHAPTER  III. 
CRITICAL  AND   EXPLANATORY  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Have  free  course  and  be  glorified. — Probably  St.  Paul  took  this  image  from  the 
Old  Testament.     In  Ps.  cxlvii.  15  the  word  of  the  Lord  is  said  to  "  run  very  swiftly." 

Ver.  2.  Unreasonable  and  wicked  men. — The  word  for  "unreasonable  "  only  occurs  twice 
beside  in  the  New  Testament :  once,  the  malefactor  on  the  cross  says,  "  This  man  has  done 
nothing  amiss,"  or  out  of  place;  and  again  the  barbarians  "beheld  nothing  amiss  "  come 
to  Paul  when  the  viper  had  fastened  on  his  hand.  The  thief  is  a  good  commentator  here. 
Men  who  by  their  vagaries  hold  even  their  friends  in  painful  suspense,  and  especially  such 
as  are  indifferent  to  morality,  seem  to  be  meant. 

Ver.  3.  And  keep  you  from  evil. — "  Keep "  here  is  a  military  word  reminding  of  the 
psalmist's  name  for  his  God — "Shield."  The  Revisers  add  "one"  after  "  evil,"  as  in  the 
Lord's  Prayer. 

Ver.  5.  Direct  your  hearts. — The  same  word  for  "  direct "  again  occurs  only  in  1  Thess. 
iii.  11  and  Luke  i.  79.  A  similar  phrase  in  the  LXX.  of  1  Chron.  xxix.  18  (R.V. 
"prepare").  Into  the  patient  waiting  for  Christ. — A.V.  margin  and  R.V.  text,  "into  the 
patience  of  Christ."  "  The  Thessalonians  were  eagerly  awaiting  His  return  :  let  them  wait 
for  it  in  His  patient  spirit "  (Mndlay). 

Ver.  6.  Walketh  disorderly. — Falling  out  of  the  ranks  and  desertion  of  the  post  of  duty 
are  grave  faults,  which  if  the  esprit  de  corps  do  not  prevent  it  must  be  punished  by  treat- 
ing the  defaulter  as  one  who  has  discredited  his  comrades  in  arms. 

Ver.  7.  We  behaved  not  ourselves  disorderly  among  you. — "We  never  lived  an  un- 
disciplined life  among  you."  Men  will  bear  the  sharp  rebukes  of  a  martinet,  even  when 
they  observe  that  he  is  as  much  under  discipline  as  he  would  have  the  youngest  recruit,  as 
the  lives  of  men  like  Havelock  and  Gordon  testify. 

Ver.  10.  If  any  would  not  work,  neither  should  he  eat. — "A  stern,  but  necessary  and 
merciful  rule,  the  neglect  of  which  makes  charity  demoralising  "  (Ibid.).  It  is  parasitism 
which  is  condemned. 

Ver.  11.  Working  not  at  all,  but  are  busybodies.— "  Not  working,  but  working  round 
people,"  as  we  might  represent  St.  Paul's  play  on  the  words.  "  Their  only  business  is  to  be 
busybodies." 

Ver.  13.  Be  not  weary  in  well-doing. — Such  bad  behaviour  under  cover  of  the  Christian 
name  is  abhorrent  to  St.  Paul.  "  Tne  loveliness  of  perfect  deeds "  must  be  worthily 
sustained.  Well-doing  here  points  to  that  which  is  admirable  in  conduct  rather  than 
that  which  is  beneficent. 

Ver.  14.  Have  no  company  with  him. — The  difference  between  this  treatment  of  a 
delinquent  and  excommunication  may  be  more  in  idea  than  fact.  He  would  feel  himself 
tabooed  in  either  case.  But  this  agrees  better  with  the  notion  of  Christians  as  being 
separated.  "Come  out  from  among  them."  Cf.  Tit.  ii.  10.  That  he  may  be  ashamed. — 
Not,  of  course,  that  he  may  become  a  laughing-stock,  but  that,  feeling  abashed,  he  may 
quickly  put  himself  right  with  the  community. 

Ver.  15.  Yet  count  him  not  as  an  enemy. — When  Christ  says  the  impenitent  brother  is  to 
be  regarded  as  a  Gentile,  He  gives  no  sanction  to  the  way  in  which  the  Jew  too  often 
regarded  the  Gentile.  Admonish  him  as  a  brother. — Who,  though  in  error,  has  not  sacrificed 
his  claim  to  gentle  treatment  and  consideration. 

Ver.  16.  Now  the  Lord  of  peace  Himself  give  you  peace  always. — The  Church  at 
Thessalonica  had  been  passing  through  stormy  waters.  The  apostle  prays  that  God  may 
give  them  to 

"Feel  His  halcyon  rest  within 
Calming  the  storms  of  dread  and  sin." 

Ver.  17.  The  salutation  .  .  .  the  token. — As  though  he  said,  "  This  that  I  am  about  to 
write  is  my  sign-manual." 

Ver.  18.  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  all. — Whatever  St.  Paul's  hand- 
writing may  have  been,  it  could  not  well  be  more  characteristic  than  this  word  "grace,"  as 
certainly  he  could  not  have  chosen  a  more  beautiful  word  to  engrave  on  his  seal. 


571 


chap.  in.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.   THESSALONIANS. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1,  2. 

Prayer  for  Ministers. 

Prayer  should  not  be  all  on  one  side.  It  is  a  mutual  obligation  and  privilege. 
The  Thessalonians  are  reminded  how  often  they  were  the  subject  of  anxious 
prayer,  and  they  are  now  asked  to  remember  their  own  ministers  at  the  throne 
of  grace.  Mutual  prayer  intensifies  mutual  sympathy  and  affection,  and  deepens 
the  interest  of  both  parties  in  promoting  the  success  of  the  gospel.     Note  : — 

1.  That  prayer  for  ministers  is  apostolically  enjoined. — "  Brethren,  pray  for 
us"  (ver.  1).  True  prayer  is  spontaneous.  It  does  not  wait  to  be  formally 
authorised.  A  loving  heart  loves  to  pray.  Nevertheless,  there  are  laggards  in  this 
duty,  and  they  may  be  prompted  to  the  exercise  by  employing  all  the  weight  of 
apostolic  authority  and  example.  If  apostles  felt  the  need  of  prayer,  how  much 
more  should  we  !  Ministers  are  but  men  ;  but  by  the  use  of  the  word  "  brethren  " 
the  writer  indicates  that  ministers  and  people  have  common  privileges,  common 
wants,  and  common  dangers.  The  ministerial  office  has  also  its  special  responsi- 
bilities and  perils,  and  nothing  helps  more  vitally  the  efficient  discharge  of  its 
duties  than  the  constant  prayers  of  an  appreciative  and  devoted  people. 

II.  That  prayer  for  ministers  should  have  special  reference  to  the  success  of 
the  gospel. — 1.  The  gospel  is  divine.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord"  (ver.  1).  The 
gospel  is  a  message  to  man,  but  it  is  more  than  a  human  message.  It  is  the 
voice  of  God  speaking  to  man  through  man.  If  it  had  been  simply  of  human 
origin,  it  would  have  been  forgotten  and  superseded  by  the  changing  theories  ever 
teeming  from  the  fertile  brain  of  man.  Every  human  institution  is  liable  to  be 
supplanted  by  another.  There  is  nothing  permanent  in  philosophy,  government, 
or  morals  that  is  not  based  on  eternal  truth.  The  gospel  is  abiding,  because 
it  rests  on  unchanging  truth.     It  is  the  "  word  of  the  Lord." 

2.  The  spread  of  the  gospel  is  beset  with  difficulties. — "That  the  word  of  the 
Lord  may  have  free  course"  (ver.  1).  The  pioneers  of  the  gospel  in  Thessalonica 
had  to  contend  with  the  malignant  hatred  of  the  unbelieving  Jews,  with  the 
seductive  theories  of  the  Grecian  philosophy,  and  with  the  jealous  opposition  of  the 
Roman  power.  All  hindrances  to  the  gospel  have  a  common  root  in  the  depravity 
of  the  human  heart — hence  the  difficulties  occasioned  by  the  inconsistencies  of 
half-hearted  professors,  the  paralysing  influence  of  scepticism,  and  the  violence 
of  external  persecution.  The  chief  difficulty  is  spiritual,  and  the  weapon  to  contend 
against  it  must  be  spiritual — the  weapon  of  all-prayer.  Savonarola  once  said, 
"  If  there  be  no  enemy,  no  fight ;  if  no  fight,  no  victory;  if  no  victory,  no  crown." 
We  are  to  pray  that  the  gospel  "  may  have  free  course  " — may  run,  not  simply 
creep,  or  loiter  haltingly  on  the  way,  but  speed  along  as  a  swift-footed  messenger. 
"  Take  courage  from  thy  cause  :  thou  fightest  for  thy  God,  and  against  His 
enemy.  Is  thy  enemy  too  potent  ?  fear  not.  Art  thou  besieged  1  faint  not. 
Art  thou  routed  ?  fly  not.  Call  aid,  and  thou  shalt  be  strengthened ;  petition, 
and  thou  shalt  be  relieved ;  pray,  and  thou  shalt  be  recruited." 

3.  The  glory  of  the  gospel  is  to  change  men's  hearts  and  ennoble  men's  lives. — 
u  And  be  glorified,  even  as  it  is  with  you  "  (ver.  1).  You  Thessalonians,  notwith- 
standing your  imperfect  views  and  defective  conduct,  are  samples  of  what  the 
gospel  can  do  in  changing  the  heart  and  giving  a  lofty  purpose  to  the  life.  Pray 
that  its  triumph  may  be  more  complete  in  you,  and  that  its  uplifting  influence 
may  be  realised  by  others.  "  That  which  Plato  was  unable  to  effect,"  says  Pascal, 
"  even  in  the  case  of  a  few  select  and  learned  persons,  a  secret  power,  by  the  help 
only  of  a  few  words,  is  now  wrought  upon  thousands  of  uneducated  men." 

III.  That  prayer  for  ministers  should  be  offered  that  their  lives  may  be  pre- 
served from  the  violence  of  cruel  and  unbelieving  enemies. — "And  that  ye  may 
be  delivered  from  unreasonable  and  wicked  men  :  for  all  men  have  not  faith  " 

572 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.    THESSALONIANS.    chap.  hi. 


(ver.  2).  Not  all  have  faith,  even  among  those  who  profess  to  have  it,  and  it  is 
certainly  true  of  all  those  who  scout  and  reject  the  gospel.  The  unbelieving  are 
perverse  and  wicked,  and  it  is  from  this  class  that  the  minister  is  met  by  the  most 
unreasonable  and  malicious  opposition.  Perhaps  the  most  dangerous  foes  with 
which  a  minister  has  to  contend  are  those  who  make  some  profession  of  religion, 
but  in  heart  and  practice  deny  it.  "  Men  will  write  for  religion,  fight  for  it,  die  j 
for  it — anything  but  live  for  it."  The  minister,  girdled  with  the  prayers  of  his 
people,  is  screened  from  the  plots  and  attacks  of  the  wicked. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  success  of  the  gospel  is  a  signal  demonstration  of  its  divine 
author  ship.  2.  Ministers  of  the  gospel  have  need  of  sympathy  and  help  in  their 
work.     3.  The  grandest  spiritual  results  are  brought  about  by  prayer. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  1.   The  Ministerial  Request.  people.     2.   On  the  law  of  love.     3.   On 

I.  The  request  presented. — 1.  That  its  advantages  to  yourselves.  4.  On  the 
the  power  of  religion  may  be  eminently  prevalency  of  fervent  prayer.  5.  On  its 
experienced  in  our  own  souls.  2.  That  connection  with  the  salvation  of  souls. — 
we  may  be  preserved  from  the  official  Sketches. 

dangers    to    which     we     are     exposed. 

3.  That  we  may  be  able  ministers  of  the  Ver.  2.    Unbelief — 

New  Testament.     4.  That  prudence  and  I.  Abandons  the  guide  of  reason. 

fidelity  may  distinguish  our  labours.  II.  Leads    to    a    vicious    life    and 

II.  The  grounds  on  which  it  rests,  causes  trouble  to  others. 

— 1.  It  rests  on  the  mutual  connection        III.  We  .should  pray  to  be  delivered 
which   subsists   belv;een    ministers  and      from  its  evil  results. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE   PARAGRAPH— Verses  3,  4. 

The  Faithfidness  of  God. 

From  the  want  of  faith  in  man,  referred  to  in  the  preceding  verse,  the  writer, 
as  if  to  show  the  contrast,  naturally  glides  into  the  subject  of  the  divine  faithful- 
ness. Unbelief  may  abound,  but  God  can  be  relied  on ;  man  may  be  fickle  and 
unreasonable,  but  the  fidelity  of  God  is  inviolate. 

I.  The  faithfulness  of  God  is  a  fact  established  by  abundant  testimonies. — 
"  But  the  Lord  is  faithful "  (ver.  3).  He  is  faithful  to  His  own  nature.  He  cannot 
deny  Himself.  He  is  faithful  to  His  purpose,  to  His  word,  to  every  promise,  and 
every  threatening  too.  The  whole  history  of  God's  dealings  with  the  Jewish 
people  is  a  suggestive  and  impressive  commentary  on  His  inflexible  faithfulness. 
The  fact  that  the  Church  of  God  exists  to-day,  notwithstanding  defection  within 
and  persecution  without,  is  an  unanswerable  testimony  to  His  fidelity.  "  You 
may  be  faint  and  weary,  but  my  God  cannot.  I  may  fluctuate  and  alter  as  to 
my  frames  and  feelings  ;  but  my  Redeemer  is  unchangeably  the  same.  I  might 
utterly  fail  and  come  to  nothing,  if  left  to  myself.  But  I  cannot  be  so  left  to 
myself.  He  is  rich  to  relieve  and  succour  me  in  all  my  wants.  He  is  faithful 
to  perform  and  perfect  all  His  promises  "  [Ambrose  Serle). 

II.  The  faithfulness  of  God  is  practically  manifested  in  establishing  His 
people  in  all  good  and  in  keeping  them  safe  from  all  evil. — "  Who  shall  stablish 
you  and  keep  you  from  evil  "  (ver.  3).  The  people  of  God  do  not  perpetuate 
themselves.  He  perpetuates.  His  faithful  guardianship  gives  persistency  to 
His  people,  so  that  in  every  age  and  in  the  darkest  times  there  has  been  a  bright 
succession  of  living  witnesses  of  His  unchanging  character.  He  preserves  them, 
not  because  of  any  inherent  grace  or  self-deserving,  but  because  He  is  faithful. 

573 


chap.  ill.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.   THESSALONIANS. 


"  Janet,"  said  a  Scottish  minister  to  a  Christian  woman  of  great  fait  b,  whom 
he  was  visiting,  "  suppose,  after  all,  God  were  to  let  you  drop  into  hell ! " 
"  Even  as  He  will,"  was  her  reply  •  "  but  if  He  does,  He  will  lose  mair  than  I'll 
do."     A  single  flaw  in  the  divine  fidelity  would  shatter  the  faith  of  the  universe. 

III.  The  faithfulness  of  God  inspires  confidence  in  the  fidelity  of  the 
obedient. — "  And  we  have  confidence  in  the  Lord  touching  you,  that  ye  both  do, 
and  will  do  the  things  which  we  command  you  "  (ver.  4).  Because  God  is  faith- 
ful, we  know  that  you  can  be  kept  faithful,  if  you  are  willing  and  seeking  to  be 
so  kept.  Moreover,  you  will  assuredly  be  kept  faithful,  while  you  observe  in  the 
future,  as  you  have  done  in  the  past,  "  the  things  which  we  command  you,"  and 
in  commanding  which  we  have  the  divine  authority.  Consider  these  things,  let 
them  sink  into  your  hearts ;  then  act  accordingly.  Let  obedience  follow  con- 
viction, and  we  have  no  fear  about  the  result.  Von  Moltke,  the  great  German 
strategist  and  general,  chose  for  his  motto,  "Erst  wagen,  dann  wagen  " — "First 
weigh,  then  venture  " ;  and  it  was  to  this  he  owed  his  great  victories  and  successes. 
Slow,  cautious,  careful  in  planning,  but  bold,  daring,  even  seemingly  reckless 
in  execution,  the  moment  his  resolve  was  made.  Vows  thus  ripen  into  deeds, 
decision  must  go  on  to  performance.  The  final  perseverance  of  the  saint  depends 
on  the  divine  perseverance ;  his  faithfulness  on  the  divine  faithfulness.  If  we 
had  no  living  Saviour  to  pilot  our  ship,  no  promise  on  which  to  rely,  we  might 
have  cause  to  fear.  The  divine  faithfulness  is  unquestionable ;  our  faithfulness 
is  maintained  only  by  obedience. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  faithfulness  of  God  is  the  guarantee  of  the  believer's  safety. 

2.  The  faithfulness  of  God  should  encourage  the  exercise  of  implicit  faith  in  Him. 

3.  The  faithfulness  of  God  demands  undeviating  obedience  to  His  laws. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE    VERSES. 

Ver.  3.  The  Divine  Faithfulness —  Ver.  4.  Christian  Obedience — 

I.  An  incontrovertible  fact.  J;  .  Js  a    voluntary    and    constant 

n  i      .  v       activity. 

II.  A  guarantee  of  personal  estab-  n  Is  based  0n  well-understood  and 
hshment  in  the  truth.  authoritative  precepts. 

III.  An    invulnerable     protection         III.  Is  the  pathway  of  blessing, 
from  evil  and  all  its  works.  IV.  Inspires  confidence  in  others. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF   VERSE   5. 

Divine  Love  and  Patience. 

Again  the  apostle  is  on  his  knees.  How  beautifully  the  habitual  devoutness 
of  the  apostle's  spirit  comes  out  in  the  side-lights  thrown  from  passages  in  his 
writings  like  this  verse  !  He  lives  and  breathes  in  the  electric  atmosphere  of 
prayer.  All  the  time  he  is  reasoning,  expounding,  warning,  and  persuading  he 
is  also  praying.  Prayer  is  a  powerful  aid  to  the  preacher.  It  keeps  his  soul 
in  sympathy  with  the  realm  of  spiritual  realities,  gives  him  clearer  insight  into 
truth,  and  intensifies  his  experience  of  the  divine.     We  learn  from  this  verse  : — 

I.  That  divine  love  and  patience  are  conspicuous  elements  in  man's 
redemption. — "  The  love  of  God  and  the  patient  waiting  for  Christ " — the  patience 
of  Christ  (R.V.).  The  love  of  God  devised  and  the  patience  of  Christ  carried  out 
the  great  plan  of  human  salvation.  The  gospel  is  a  grand  revelation  of  the 
divine  love  and  patience  in  Christ  Jesus ;  and  the  history  of  the  gospel  in  its 
world-wide  progress  is  a  many-sided  illustration  of  'these  two  conspicuous  virtues 
in  the  divine  character  and  operations.    After  the  last  French  war  the  Roman 

574 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II   THESSALONIANS.    chap.  III. 


Catholic  Archbishop  of  Paris  was  imprisoned.  His  cell  had  a  window  shaped 
like  a  cross,  and  with  a  pencil  he  wrote  upon  the  arms  of  the  cross  that  they 
denoted  the  height,  length,  breadth,  and  depth  of  Gods  love.  That  man  knew 
something  of  the  love  of  God.  The  patience  of  Christ  in  suffering  for  mankind 
was  sustained  and  sublimated  by  the  love  of  God,  and  was  an  object-lesson  to 
the  world,  teaching,  in  a  way  that  appealed  to  the  most  callous,  the  power  and 
universality  of  that  love. 

II.  That  divine  love  and  patience  are  the  distinguished  privilege  of  human 
experience. — "  Direct  your  hearts  into  the  love  of  God  and  patience  of  Christ." 
The  love  we  are  to  enjoy  is  no  mere  human  passion,  fickle  and  evanescent ;  the 
patience,  no  mere  grim  stoical  endurance.  We  are  admitted  into  the  sacred 
adoption  of  the  divine  mysteries ;  we  share  in  their  spiritual  ecstasy  and  unruffled 
calm,  the  very  love  and  patience  of  God !  The  divine  in  us  becomes  more 
glowingly  evident  to  ourselves  and  to  others.  Love  gives  staying-power  to 
and  teaches  us  how  to  suffer  without  murmuring,  to  endure  without  retaliating. 
"  Sire,"  said  Beza  in  his  reply  to  the  king  of  Navarre,  "  it  belongs  to  God's  Church 
rather  to  suffer  blows  than  to  strike  them ;  but  let  it  be  your  pleasure  to 
remember  that  the  Church  is  an  anvil  which  has  worn  out  many  a  hammer." 
With  time  and  patience  the  mulberry  leaf  becomes  satin. 

III.  That  divine  love  and  patience  are  more  fully  enjoyed  by  the  soul  that 
prays. — "And  the  Lord  direct  your  hearts."  The  prayerful  apostle  had  realised 
the  blessedness  of  a  personal  participation  in  the  love  and  patience  of  God.  But 
for  the  love  of  God  he  would  never  have  ventured  upon  his  evangelistic  mission, 
and  but  for  the  patience  of  Christ  he  would  not  have  continued  in  it.  Now  he 
prays  that  the  hearts  of  the  Thessalonians  may  enjoy  the  same  grace,  or  be  set 
in  the  direct  way  of  attaining  it.  It  is  of  vital  consequence  that  the  current  of  the 
heart's  outgoings  should  be  set  in  the  right  direction.  This  brief  petition  shows 
what  we  ought  to  ask  for  ourselves.  The  best  way  to  secure  a  larger  degree  of 
love  and  patience  is  to  ardently  pray  for  them. 

"  What  grace,  O  Lord,  and  beauty  shone 
Around  Thy  steps  below  ! 
What  patient  love  was  seen  in  all 
Thy  life  and  death  of  woe  ! 

"  Oh  !  give  us  hearts  to  love  like  Thee — 
Like  Thee,  O  Lord,  to  grieve 
Far  more  for  others'  sins,  than  all 
The  wrongs  that  we  receive." 

Lessons. — 1.  The  Christian  life  is  a  sublime  participation  in  the  nature  of  God. 
2.  Love  and  patience  reveal  the  God-like  character.  3.  Prayer  is  at  its  best  when 
engaged  with  the  loftiest  themes. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSE. 

Ver.  5.  Waiting  for  the  Second  Advent.  II.  Patient  waiting  another  prepa- 

I.    The  love  of  God  a  preparation  ration  for  the  Redeemer's  coming. — 

for  the   Redeemer's  coming. — 1.    The  1.  The  Christian  attitude  of  soul  is  an 

love   of  God   is   the   love  of   goodness,  attitude  of  expectation. — Every  gift  of 

2.  The  love  of  God  is  the  love  of  man  noble  origin  is  breathed  upon  by  hope's 

expanded    and  purified.     The   love   of  perfect  breath. 

man  expanded  into  the  love  of  Him,  2.    It  is  patient  waiting. — Every  one 

of    whom  all  that    we  have    seen    of  who    has    ardently    longed     for    any 

gentle  and  lovely,  of  true  and  tender,  spiritual  blessing  knows  the  temptation 

of  honourable  and    bright  in  human  to   impatience  in  expecting  it. — F.   W. 

character,  are  but  the  shadows  and  the  Robertson, 
broken,  imperfect  lights, 

575 


chap.  in.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.    THESSALONIANS. 


MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  6,  7. 

Christian  Consistency. 

The  apostle  commended  with  a  warm-hearted  eulogy  whatever  was  good  in 
the  Thessalonians,  but  he  was  not  less  faithful  in  administering  rebuke  when  it 
was  needed.  A  number  of  the  converts,  not  sufficiently  pondering  the  words 
of  the  writer,  were  carried  away  with  the  delusion  that  the  second  advent  of 
Christ  would  take  place  immediately,  and  they  abandoned  all  interest  in  the 
practical  duties  of  life — an  error  that  has  been  often  repeated  since,  with  similar 
results.  Fearing  the  mischief  would  spread,  and  seeing  that  all  previous  warnings 
were  disregarded,  the  apostle  in  these  verses  treats  the  mistaken  enthusiasts  with 
unsparing  condemnation.     Disorder  must  be  crushed  and  consistency  preserved. 

I.  Christian  consistency  is  in  harmony  with  the  highest  teaching. — "After 
the  tradition  which  he  [or  they]  received  of  us"  (ver.  6).  The  rules  of  Christian 
consistency  were  clearly  laid  down  in  the  traditions  or  doctrines  taught  by  the 
apostles,  and  were  enforced  with  all  the  weight  and  sanction  of  divine  authority. 
To  violate  these  rules  is  to  "  walk  disorderly  " — to  break  the  ranks,  to  fall  out 
of  line.  The  value  of  the  individual  soldier  is  the  degree  in  which  he  keeps  in 
order  and  acts  in  perfect  harmony  and  precision  with  the  rest  of  the  regiment. 
A  breach  of  military  rule  creates  disaster.  Let  the  believer  keep  the  divine  law, 
and  the  law  will  keep  him. 

"  The  heavens  themselves,  the  planets  and  this  centre, 
Observe  degree,  priority,  and  place, 
Insisture,  course,  proportion,  season,  form, 
Office  and  custom,  in  all  line  of  order." 

Shakespeare. 

II.  Christian  consistency  is  enforced  by  apostolic  example. — "  For  yourselves 
know  how  ye  ought  to  follow  us :  for  we  behaved  not  ourselves  disorderly  among 
you  "  (ver.  7).  The  apostles  illustrated  what  they  taught,  by  a  rigid  observance 
of  the  rules  they  imposed  on  others.  Precept  was  enforced  by  practice.  While 
the  preachers  laboured  among  the  Thessalonians,  the  influence  of  their  upright 
examples  kept  the  Church  in  order.  Much  depends  upon  the  conduct  of  a  leader 
in  Church  or  State.  It  is  said  of  a  certain  military  commander  on  taking  charge 
of  an  army  that  had  been  somewhat  lax  in  disciplino :  "  The  presence  of  a 
master-mind  was  quickly  visible  in  the  changed  condition  of  the  camp.  Perfect 
order  now  reigned.  He  was  a  rigid  disciplinarian,  and  yet  as  gentle  and  kind 
as  a  woman.  He  was  the  easiest  man  in  our  army  to  get  along  with  pleasantly, 
so  long  as  one  did  his  duty,  but  as  inexorable  as  fate  in  exacting  its  performance. 
He  was  as  courteous  to  the  humblest  private  who  sought  an  interview  for  any 
purpose  as  to  the  highest  officer  under  his  command." 

III.  Christian  consistency  is  to  be  maintained  by  separation  from  the  lawless. 
— "  Now  we  command  you,  brethren,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that 
ye  withdraw  yourselves  from  every  brother  that  walketh  disorderly  "  (ver.  6).  If 
all  efforts  to  recover  the  recalcitrant  fail,  then  the  Church  has  the  highest  authority 
for  separating  completely  from  the  society  and  fellowship  of  such.  Continued 
communion  with  them  would  not  only  seem  to  condone  their  offence,  but  destroy 
discipline,  and  put  an  end  to  all  moral  consistency.  Such  a  separation  from  the 
unruly  would  be  more  marked  in  the  early  Church,  when  there  was  only  one 
Christian  community,  and  when  the  brethren  were  noted  for  their  affectionate 
attachment  to  each  other. 

Lessons. — Christian  consistency — 1.  Is  defined  by  the  highest  law.  2.  Avoids 
association  with  evil.     3.  Is  a  reproof  and  pattern  to  the  unbelieving. 

576 


H0MILE1IC  COMMENTARY:    II.    THESSALONIANS.     chap.  in. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  6,  7.  The  Disorderly  in  Church         III.  Should   be  faithfully    warned 

Life —  and  counselled. 

I.  Violate  the  rules  that  give  com-  IV.  If  incorrigible,  should  be  ex- 
pactness  and  strength  to  all  Church  eluded  from  the  privileges  of  Christian 
organisation.  fellowship. 

II.  Ignore  the  highest  examples  of 
moral  consistency. 

MAIN  IIOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  8,  9. 

Self-denying  Labour. 

Pioneer  work  involves  hard  toil  and  much  patience  and  self-denial.  The 
character  and  surroundings  of  the  people  whose  highest  good  is  sought  must 
be  studied.  The  apostle  took  his  measure  of  the  Thessalonian  converts,  and, 
perhaps  foreseeing  the  extravagances  to  which  they  would  yield,  he  and  his 
co-labourers  determined  to  set  them  an  example  of  unselfish  industry,  even  to 
the  extent  of  surrendering  their  just  rights. 

I.  Here  we  see  self-denying  labour  carried  on  amidst  weariness  and  suffering. 
— "  Neither  did  we  eat  any  man's  bread  for  nought ;  but  wrought  with  labour 
and  travail  night  and  day  "  (ver.  8).  Work  is  a  pleasurable  exercise  to  the  strong 
and  healthy,  but  it  becomes  a  hardship  when  carried  to  excess.  The  devoted 
missionaries  worked  when  they  were  weary — worked  when  they  should  have 
been  resting.  After  a  hard  day's  toil  in  teaching  and  visiting,  they  laboured 
far  on  into  the  night,  so  as  to  maintain  themselves  independent  of  help  from 
their  converts.  Much  as  we  hear  of  the  dignity  of  labour,  the  toiler,  whether 
by  hand  or  brain,  in  the  weariness  and  pain  that  overtake  him,  feels  that  some 
portion  of  the  original  curse  still  clings  to  his  handiwork.  The  best  work  is 
often  accomplished  in  the  midst  of  acute  suffering.  The  unique  histories  of 
England  were  written  by  J.  P.  Green  while  the  shadow  of  death  was  consciously 
hovering  over  his  desk ;  and  the  exquisite  Christian  lyrics  of  H.  F.  Lyte  were 
penned  while  he  felt  that  every  moment  his  heart  was  throbbing  "funeral 
marches  to  the  grave." 

II.  Here  we  see  self-denying  labour  declining  the  maintenance  that  might 
be  legitimately  claimed. — "That  we  might  not  be  chargeable  to  any  of  you  :  not 
because  we  have  not  power  "  (vers.  8,  9) — right,  authority.  While  the  apostle 
forbears  to  urge  their  just  right  to  ministerial  support  by  the  people,  he  gives 
them  clearly  to  understand  it  is  their  right.  Their  self-denial  in  this  instance 
was  for  a  special  purpose,  and  was  only  intended  to  be  temporary,  and  not  to 
establish  a  universal  rule.  In  other  places,  St.  Paul  insists  upon  the  duty  of 
the  Church  to  maintain  its  ministers  (1  Cor.  ix.  4-14;  Gal.  vi  6).  All  honour 
to  the  self-denying  zeal  and  suffering  toil  of  the  unaided  Christian  worker  ;  but 
what  shall  we  say  of  the  parsimony  and  injustice  of  the  people  who  allow 
such  a  state  of  things  to  continue  ? 

III.  Here  we  see  self-denying  labour  set  forth  as  an  example  and  reproof  to 
those  who  are  most  benefited  by  it. — "  To  make  ourselves  an  ensample  unto  you 
to  follow  us  "  (ver.  9).  Here  the  purpose  of  their  disinterested  conduct  is  plainly 
stated — to  set  an  example  of  industry  to  the  idlers.  St.  Paul  acted  in  a  similar 
manner  towards  the  Corinthians,  but  with  a  different  design.  In  the  latter 
case  he  wished  to  manifest  a  better  spirit  than  that  of  the  false  teachers  who 
were  greedy  of  filthy  lucre  (2  Cor.  xi.  8-13).  The  earnest  evangelist  is  ever 
anxious  to  clear  his  work  from  the  taint  of  self-seeking.  Let  the  heart  of  man 
be  changed  and  sanctified,  and  it  will  inspire  and  regulate  the  practical  exercise 

pp  577 


chap.  in.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.   THESSALONIANS. 


of  every  Christian  virtue.  How  little  does  the  world  appreciate  its  greatest 
benefactors  !  And  yet  no  unselfish  act  is  without  its  recompense.  The  actor  is 
not  unblessed.  To  exchange,  as  Christ  did,  the  temple  for  Nazareth,  the 
Father's  house  for  the  carpenter's  shop,  the  joy  of  preaching  for  irksome  toil,  is 
a  great  advance  in  spiritual  obedience  and  nobility  of  character. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  essence  of  the  Christian  spirit  is  unselfishness.  2.  The  earnest 
Christian  pioneer  labours  ungrudgingly  for  the  good  of  others.  3.  The  self-denial 
of  the  preacher  does  not  exonerate  the  people  from  the  duty  of  his  legitimate 
maintenance. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Ver.  8.  Industry  the  Secret  of  Success.  Yer.  9.  Ministerial  Maintenance. 

-When  Sir  Isaac  Newton  was  asked  j    Is   a   claim  baged  Qn  scriptural 

by  what  means  he  had  been  able  to  and  apostolic  authority, 

make  that   successl ul   progress  in  the  .  . 

sciences  which  struck  mankind  with  .  £.  The  temporary  waiving  of  the 

wonder,  he  modestly  replied,  that  it  was  "*«  1S  *  J1™1/  sample  of  self-denial 

not  so   much   owing   to  any  superior  and  unselfish  devotion. 

strength   of  genius  as   to  a  habit  of  III.  No    personal   waiving   of    the 

patient   thinking,  laborious  attention,  right   releases    the    Church   from  its 

and  close  application.  obligation. 

MAIN   HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH. —Verses  10—12. 

Christianity  and  Work. 

Christianity  is  the  gospel  of  work.  Its  clarion-call  thrills  along  the  nerves 
of  human  life  and  summons  the  world  to  labour.  It  gives  to  work  meaning, 
purpose,  dignity,  and  exalts  drudgery  into  a  blessedness.  While  full  of  sympathy 
for  the  feeble  and  maimed,  it  has  no  pity  for  the  indolent.  Its  Founder  and 
first  apostles  were  giants  in  labour,  and  their  example  animates  the  world 
to-day  with  a  spirit  of  noblest  activity.  It  is  not  the  drone,  but  the  worker, 
who  blesses  the  world.  "  Be  no  longer  a  chaos,"  writes  Carlyle,  "  but  a  world, 
or  even  a  worldkin.  Produce  !  produce  !  were  it  but  the  pitif  ullest,  infinitesimal 
fraction  of  a  product,  produce  it,  in  God's  name  !  'Tis  the  utmost  thou  hast  in 
thee ;  out  with  it,  then.  Up,  up  !  whatever  thy  hand  findoth  to  do,  do  it  with 
thy  might." 

I.  Christianity  recognises  the  duty  of  every  man  to  work  for  his  own  support. 
— "  For  even  when  we  were  with  you,  this  we  commanded,  that  if  any  would  not 
work,  neither  should  he  eat "  (ver.  10).  The  necessity  of  food  involves  tiie  necessity 
of  work.  As  every  one  must  eat,  so  every  one  must  work.  The  wife  of  a  certain 
chieftain,  who  had  fallen  upon  idle  habits,  one  day  lifted  the  dish-cover  at  dinner 
and  revealed  a  pair  of  spurs,  a  sign  that  he  must  ride  and  hunt  for  his  next  meal. 
It  is  said  that  in  the  Californian  bee-pastures,  on  the  sun-days  of  summer, 
one  may  readily  infer  the  time  of  day  from  the  comparative  energy  of  bee- 
movements  alone ;  drowsy  and  moderate  in  the  cool  of  the  morning,  increasing 
in  energy  with  the  ascending  sun,  and  at  high  noon  thrilling  and  quivering  in 
wild  ecstasy,  then  gradually  declining  again  to  the  stillness  of  night.  Is  not  this 
a  picture  of  our  life  %  Work  is  necessary  for  sustenance,  for  health,  for  moral 
development ;  and  rest  is  all  the  sweeter  after  genuine  toil. 

II.  Christianity  is  intolerant  of  an  ignoble  indolence. — "  For  we  hear  that 
there  are  some  which  walk  among  you  disorderly,  working  not  at  all,  but  are 
busy  bodies"  (ver.  11).     The  disorderly  are  the  idle  tatlers,  who  make  a  pretence 

578 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   II.   TBESSALONIANS.    chap.  in. 


of  work  by  busying  themselves  with  all  kinds  of  things  but  their  own  duty.  They 
are  triflers,  wasting  their  own  time  and  other  people's ;  and  they  do  serious  mischief. 
In  certain  foreign  parts,  where  insects  abound  in  such  swarms  as  to  be  a  pest  to 
the  people  and  destructive  enemies  to  young  growing  plants,  an  electric  apparatus 
has  been  constructed  to  destroy  the  brood  wholesale.  The  appliance  consists  of 
a  strong  electric  light  attracting  the  moths  and  insects,  a  suction-fan  drawing 
them  into  a  shaft  as  they  approach  the  light,  and  a  small  mill  in  the  shaft  where 
the  victims  are  ground  up  and  mixed  with  flour,  thus  converting  them  into 
poultry -food.  Cannot  some  genius  contrive  a  means  of  putting  an  end — short 
of  grinding  them  into  chicken-food  :  let  us  be  merciful,  even  to  our  enemies  ! — to 
those  social  pests  who  go  buzzing  about  our  homes  and  Churches,  worrying 
with  their  idle  gossip  and  stinging  with  their  spiteful  venom  the  innocent  and 
inoffensive  ?  If  these  busybodies  would  devote,  in  doing  their  duty,  the  energy 
they  waste,  they  would  be  able  to  produce  quite  a  respectable  amount  of  honest 
work.  But  they  find  it  easier  to  sponge  on  the  generosity  and  simplicity  of 
others.  They  are  parasites ;  and  all  parasites  are  the  paupers  of  nature.  Para- 
sitism is  a  crime — a  breach  of  the  law  of  evolution. 

III.  Christianity  enforces  the  necessity  of  a  steady  and  independent  industry. 
— "  We  command  and  exhort  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  that  with  quietness  they 
work,  and  eat  their  own  bread"  (ver.  12).  The  apostle,  having  the  authority  of 
Christ  for  what  he  counsels,  commands;  and  as  a  man  addressing  his  fellow-men,  he 
exhorts  and  persuades.  The  law  of  Christianity  is  both  stern  and  gentle  :  unbend- 
ing in  principle,  and  flexible  only  in  manifold  persuasions  to  translate  the  principle 
into  actual  living  practice.  It  rouses  man  from  yielding  to  a  sinful  listlessness  and 
helps  him  to  develop  a  robust  Christian  manhood.  When  an  Indian  candidate 
for  the  ministry  was  asked  the  question,  "What  is  original  sin?"  he  frankly 
replied,  "  He  did  not  know  what  other  people's  might  be,  but  he  rather  thought 
that  his  was  laziness."  Idleness  is  the  prolific  source  of  many  evils :  work  is  at 
once  a  remedy  and  a  safeguard.  A  clergyman  once  said,  "  A  Christian  should 
never  plead  spirituality  for  being  a  sloven ;  if  he  be  but  a  shoe-cleaner,  he  should 
be  the  best  in  the  parish."  We  are  honouring  Christianity  most  when  we  are 
doing  our  best  to  observe  its  precepts,  "  Working  with  quietness  and  eating  our 
own  bread."  An  American  preacher  once  said,  "  You  sit  here  and  sing  your- 
selves away  to  everlasting  bliss  ;  but  I  tell  you  that  you  are  wanted  a  great  deal 
more  out  in  Illinois  than  you  are  in  heaven." 

Lessons. — 1.  Christianity  encourages  and  honours  honest  toil.  2.  Fearlessly 
denounces  unprincipled  idlers.     3.  Is  an  inspiration  to  the  highest  kind  of  work. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSES. 

er.  10.  Industry  the  True  Charity,  mentions    a    witticism    of    Alcibiades 

— When  the  palace  and  church  build-  when  some  one  was  vaunting  to  him 

ings    of    Caprarolo    were    completed,  about  the  contempt  the  Lacedaemonians 

Borromeo,   the  great    patron   of   idle  had  for  death.      "  It  is  no  wonder," 

almsgiving,  came  to  see  it,  and  com-  said  he,  "since  it  relieves  them  from 

plained  that  so  much  money  had  not  the  heavy  burden  of  an  idle  and  stupid 

been  given  to  the  poor  instead.     "  I  life." 
have   let   them  have   it   all   little   by 

little,"  said  Alexandro  Farnese;  "but  Yer.  12.  The  Way  to  Value  Quietness. 

I  have  made  them  earn  it  by  the  sweat  — "  How  dull  and  quiet  everything  is. 

of  their  brow."  There  isn't    a   leaf    stirring,"   said   a 

young  sparrow  perched  on  the  bough 

Yer.  11.  Idleness  and  Death. — ^Elian  of  a  willow  tree.     "How  delicious  a 

579 


chap.  ill.    EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.    THESSALONIANS. 


puff  of  wind  would  be  ! "     "  We  shall  said  the  sparrow,  as  he  trimmed  his 

have  one  before  long,"  croaked  an  old  wet    feathers.       "  Ah  !  "   croaked    the 

raven ;  "  more  than  you  want,  I  fancy."  raven,  "  you've  altered  your  mind  since 

Before  many  hours  a  tempest   swept  last  night.    Take  my  word  for  it,  there's 

over  the  country,  and  in  the  morning  nothing  like  a  storm  to  teach  you  to 

the  fields  were  strewn  with  its  ravages,  value  a  calm." — G.  Eliot. 
"  What  a  comfort  the  storm  is  over," 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  VERSE  13. 

A  Call  to  do  the  Best  Work. 

The  apostle  has  shown  the  necessity  and  duty  of  work — that  honest  industry 
is  a  law  of  Christianity.  Now  he  inculcates  unwearied  diligence  in  accom- 
plishing the  best  work,  designated  by  the  comprehensive  and  suggestive  phrase 
"  well-doing."  Whatever  is  worth  doing  at  all  is  worth  doing  well.  No  man 
has  done  his  best  till  he  has  done  all  he  can.  A  man's  highest  work  is  the 
outcome  of  his  best  endeavours.     Observe  : — 

I.  Doing  the  best  work  is  well-doing. — "  Be  not  weary  in  well-doing."  We 
may  define  to  ourselves  this  duty  of  well-doing  by  seeking  answers  to  two 
questions  : — 

1.  How  can  I  get  the  most  good?  —The  ancient  philosophers  discussed  the 
question  of  the  supreme  good  with  amazing  subtlety  of  logic ;  but  they  started 
their  investigations  with  the  erroneous  assumption  that  the  supreme  good  must 
be  a  human  product.  The  question  is  not  how  to  get  good,  but  the  most  good — 
the  highest,  the  best.  We  get  the  most  good  by  bringing  the  soul  into  complete 
submission  to  the  highest  law  of  its  being — voluntary  and  full  surrender  to  the 
will  of  God.  Call  it  getting  saved,  getting  converted  ;  call  it  what  you  like,  so 
long  as  you  get  the  thing  itself — the  love  of  God  in  the  soul  through  faith  in  the 
Lord  Jesus. 

2.  How  can  I  do  the  most  good  ? — These  two  questions  are  closely  linked 
together,  and  are  mutually  interpretative  of  each  other — the  one  being  the 
qualification  and  motive  for  the  other.  It  may  be  asserted  we  get  the  most  good 
by  doing  the  most  good.  The  rose  cannot  diffuse  the  fragrance  it  does  not 
possess,  however  much  like  a  rose  it  may  look.  The  question  here,  again,  is  not 
how  I  can  do  good,  but  the  most,  the  highest,  and  best.  We  do  the  most  good 
by  beginning  with  the  duty  that  lies  nearest  to  us,  and  doing  it  at  once.  The 
earnest  worker  never  lacks  opportunity :  there  is  the  home,  the  Church,  the 
perishing  multitude,  ever  within  easy  reach.  "  He  that  winneth  souls  is  wise." 
The  highest  plaudit  of  heaven  is,  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant." 

II.  The  best  work  is  not  done  without  encountering  difficulties. — "  Be  not 
weary."     The  exhortation  implies  there  are  difficulties.     These  arise  : — 

1.  From  vague  and  imperfect  views  of  duty. — We  have  no  sympathy  with  the 
rhapsody  of  the  mystic  who  said,  "  Man  is  never  so  holy  and  exalted  as  when  he 
does  not  know  where  he  is  going."  We  must  know  ck  arly  what  we  would  be  at, 
what  is  within  the  compass  of  our  power  and  opportunity,  where  our  efforts 
must  necessarily  end,  and  room  left  for  the  play  of  other  influences.  We  must 
be  practical  and  methodical.  Clearness  is  power.  Confusion  of  ideas  creates 
difficulties. 

2.  From  unrealised  ideals. — We  have  formed  lofty  conceptions  of  what  is  to  be 
done,  and  what  we  must  do.  We  have  elaborated  extensive  organisations,  and 
worked  them  with  unflagging  zeal.  But  the  result  has  been .  disappointing. 
Because  we  have  not  accomplished  all  we  wished,  we  are  discouraged ;  our 
success  has  not  been  commensurate  with  our  ambition,  and  we  are  tempted  to 

580 


EOMILETIC  C03I3IENTARY :    It   THESSALONIANS.    chap.  HI. 


slacken  our  endeavours.  "  Be  not  weary."  We  are  not  the  best  judges  of  what 
constitutes  success.  If  it  does  not  come  in  the  form  we  expected,  we  must  not 
hastily  conclude  our  work  is  vain. 

3.  From  the  loss  of  spiritual  power. — We  have  neglected  prayer  and  the 
cultivation  of  personal  piety.  We  have  been  so  absorbed  in  the  external  details 
of  our  work  as  to  overlook  the  duty  of  keeping  up  spiritual  communion  with  the 
highest.  We  begin  to  frame  excuses — a  sure  sign  of  moral  decadence.  "  We 
have  no  talents."  Then  we  should  seek  them.  We  have  more  talents  that  we 
suspect,  and  resolute  working  will  develop  them.  "  Our  adversaries  are 
numerous  and  fierce."     If  we  keep  at  our  work,  they  will  not  trouble  us  long. 

III.  The  best  work  demands  incessant  diligence. — "  But  ye,  brethren,  be  not 
weary  in  well-doing."  The  best  state  of  preparedness  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord 
is  to  be  busily  employed  in  the  duty  of  the  hour.  Every  moment  has  its  duty. 
Opportunity  has  hair  in  front ;  behind  she  is  bald.  If  you  seize  her  by  the  fore- 
lock, you  may  hold  her ;  but  if  suffered  to  escape,  not  Jupiter  himself  can  catch 
her  again.  Arnauld,  the  Port  Royalist,  when  hunted  from  place  to  place, 
wished  his  friend  Nicolle  to  assist  him  in  a  new  work,  when  the  latter  observed, 
"  We  are  old  ;  is  it  not  time  to  rest  ?  "  "  Rest  !  "  returned  Arnauld.  °  Have  we 
not  all  eternity  to  rest  in  1 "  A  man's  work  does  not  ennoble  him,  but  he 
ennobles  it. 

Lessons. — The  text  is  a  spiritual  motto  to  he  adopted — 1.  By  ministers  and 
•Sabbath-school  teachers.  2.  By  parents  seeking  the  spiritual  good  of  their  children. 
3.  By  all  discouraged  Christian  workers. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE   VERSE. 

Weary  in  Well-doing.  5.  From  failing  to   lay  hold   on    the 

I.  The  text  by  implication  brings  divine  strength. 
before  us  a  state  of  mind  to  which         II.  The  text  an  exhortation  suited 

believers  are  liable. — "  Weary  in  well-  to  those  in  the  state  referred  to. — "  Be 

doing."  1.  From  a  lamentable  want  of  not  weary."  1.  Because  you  are  en- 
fitness  for  spiritual  duties  and,  employ-  gaged  in  well-doing.  2.  Because  the 
ments.  2.  From  the  opposition  of  the  time  is  short.  3.  Because  your  associates 
world.  3.  From  the  hostile  agency  of  are  glorious.  4.  Because  the  issue  is 
spiritual  wickedness.  4.  From  the  dim-  certain.  5.  Because  sufficient  strength 
ness  of  our  conceptions  of  the  things  is  provided. — Stewart, 
which    should    especially   influence    us. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  14,  15. 

Treatment  of  the  Refractory. 

After  all  the  warnings  of  the  apostle  against  erroneous  views  and  his  ex- 
hortations to  Christian  diligence,  he  foresees  there  may  be  some  refractory 
members  of  the  Church  who  still  persist  in  their  extravagances,  reject  all 
counsel,  and  defy  all  rule  and  order.  In  these  verses  he  gives  explicit  directions 
how  to  deal  with  such.  The  inveterately  lazy  are  often  something  worse  than 
lazy,  and  are  not  easily  reclaimed.  When  disobedience  settles  into  a  habit, 
stringent  measures  are  necessary  to  arouse  the  victim  to  a  sense  of  duty  ;  and 
the  efforts  of  restoration  must  be  both  resolute  and  kind. 

I.  It  should  be  made  evident  that  his  conduct  is  an  obstinate  defiance  of 
authority. — "  And  if  any  man  obey  not  our  word  by  this  epistle,  note  that  man  " 
(ver.  14).    Not  only  note  that  his  disorderly  behaviour  is  a  scandal  to  Christianity 

581 


CHAP.  in.    BOMIIETIC  COMMENTARY :   It   THESSALONIANS. 


and  an  example  to  be  avoided,  but  let  it  be  brought  home  to  him,  by  direct  and 
faithful  dealing,  that  it  is  a  grave  breach  of  the  highest  law.  We  can  make 
nothing  of  a  fool  till  he  is  first  convinced  of  his  folly.  The  first  step  in  the 
process  of  reformation  is  conviction  of  the  need  of  reformation.  It  is  said  of 
Thoreau,  the  author,  that  "  he  was  by  nature  of  the  opposition  ;  there  was  a 
constitutional  *  No '  in  him  that  could  not  be  tortured  into  *  Yes.' "  There 
are  many  like  him,  even  in  the  Christian  Church.  It  may  seem  a  difficult, 
almost  an  impossible  task,  to  convince  the  refractory  of  his  error ;  but  it  is  the 
first  thing  to  be  done,  and  persevered  in.  When  the  hearers  of  Austin  resented 
his  reproofs,  he  used  to  say,  "  Change  your  conduct,  and  I  will  change  my 
conversation." 

II.  With  the  view  of  bringing  him  to  repentance  he  is  to  be  excluded  from 
Christian  fellowship. — "  And  have  no  company  with  him,  that  he  may  be 
ashamed "  (ver.  14).  The  refractory  practically  excludes  himself  from  every 
circle  that  loves  order,  harmony,  and  peace  ;  for  who  can  bear  the  rasping 
chatter  of  an  irresponsible  gossip  who  is  constantly  raking  up  and  turning 
over  everybody's  faults  but  his  own  ?  But  the  Church  must  take  action  unitedly 
in  dealing  with  the  contumacious.  He  must  be  deliberately  and  pointedly 
shunned,  and,  when  compelled  to  be  in  his  company,  the  members  must  show,  by 
the  reserve  of  their  bearing  towards  him,  how  deeply  he  is  grieving  the  hearts 
of  the  brethren  and  sinning  against  God.  In  the  days  when  there  was  only 
one  Church,  and  exclusion  from  it  was  regarded  as  the  greatest  calamity  and 
disgrace,  the  fear  of  utter  excommunication  could  not  fail  to  have  some  effect 
upon  those  thus  threatened  with  it.  Few  people  can  bear  the  test  of  being  left 
severely  alone.    It  gives  them  the  opportunity  for  reflection,  remorse,  and  reform. 

III.  Efforts  should  be  made  in  the  spirit  of  Christian  brotherhood  to  effect  his 
recovery. — "  Yet  count  him  not  as  an  enemy,  but  admonish  him  as  a  brother  " 
(ver.  15).  Though  shunned  and  threatened  with  exclusion  from  Church  fellow- 
ship, he  is  not  to  be  passed  by  with  contemptuous  silence.  He  is  not  a  heretic  or 
a  blasphemer,  nor  is  he  guilty  of  any  monstrous  crime.  He  is  sinning  against 
the  good  order  of  society  and  the  peace  of  the  Church.  He  is  still  a  brother, 
troublesome  and  unreasonable  though  he  be  ;  and  while  there  is  the  least  hope 
of  his  restoration,  he  should  be  faithfully  admonished.  He  is  not  to  be  accused 
and  slandered  to  outsiders ;  this  will  only  aggravate  his  riotousness  and  make 
him  more  defiant.  He  must  be  seen  privately  and  spoken  to  faithfully,  but 
with  the  utmost  tenderness.  The  Christian  spirit  teaches  us  to  be  discreet 
in  all  things,  and  especially  in  administering  reproof.  Virtue  ceases  to  be 
virtuous  when  it  lacks  discretion,  the  queen  of  ethics.  "  To  be  plain,"  writes 
Felltham,  "  argues  honesty  ;  but  to  be  pleasing  argues  discretion.  Sores  are  not 
to  oe  anguished  with  rustic  pressure,  but  gently  stroked  with  a  ladied  hand. 
Physicians  fire  not  their  eyes  at  patients,  but  minister  to  their  diseases.  Let 
reproof  be  so  as  the  offender  may  see  affection,  without  arrogancy." 

Lessons. — 1.  It  is  an  important  part  of  Church  discipline  to  control  the  unruly. 
2.  It  is  in  the  power  of  one  discontented  person  to  work  much  mischief.  3.  Church 
discipline  must  be  administered  with  fidelity  and  Christian  tenderness. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  14,  15.  The  Disobedient —  Ver.  14.  Obedience  should  be  prompt. 

I.  Should  be  specially  noted.  — When  a  large  passenger  steamer  was 

II.  Should  not  be  admitted  to  in-  sinking,  the  question  whether  scores  of 
timate  friendship  without  repentance.       her  passengers  and  crew  would  be  saved 

III.  Should  be  kindly  but  faithfully  or  drowned  was  settled  within  fifteen 
admonished.  minutes.     And  millions  have  decided 

582 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.   THESSALONIANS.    chap.  hi. 


the  momentous  question  of  their  eternal  soul  immediately  within  the  Almighty's 

salvation  or  perdition  in  even  less  time  hold ;  and  when  Jesus  has  His  omni- 

than  that.       It   seems   to   have   been  potent  grasp  of   love   upon    me,  none 

short  work  with    Simon   Peter   when  shall  be  able  to  pluck  me  out  of   His 

Jesus  bade  him  quit  the  nets  and  follow  hands.       Prompt   obedience    saves. — 

Him.     Peter  obeyed  at  once.     Prompt  Cuyler. 
obedience  honours  God.     It   puts  the 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF   THE    PARAGRAPH.— Verses  16—18. 

Apostolic  Courtesy. 

The  epistle  is  coming  to  a  close,  and  the  Christian  courtesy  of  the  apostle 
comes  out  in  the  spirit  in  which  he  expresses  his  farewell.  If  he  has  spoken  out 
plainly  and  even  severely,  it  has  not  been  in  vindictiveness  and  anger.  All 
that  he  has  said  and  written  is  in  the  interests  of  peace.  His  sharpest  reproofs 
and  most  faithful  admonitions  have  been  suffused  with  an  undercurrent  of  loving  - 
kindness  ;  and  his  concluding  words  drop  with  the  gentleness  of  refreshing  dew. 

I.  Apostolic  courtesy  supplicates  the  blessing  of  the  divine  peace  and 
presence. — "  Now  the  Lord  of  peace  Himself  give  you  peace  always  by  all  means. 
The  Lord  be  with  you  all "  (ver.  1 6).  Prayer  was  the  life-breath  of  the  apostle, 
as  we  have  frequently  pointed  out  in  the  study  of  these  epistles.  Considering 
the  dissensions  that  disturbed  the  harmony  of  the  Thessalonian  Church,  this 
epistle  appropriately  closes  with  a  prayer  for  peace.  First,  and  most  important 
of  all,  peace  with  God  and  the  individual  conscience  ;  then  mutual  peace  and 
concord  one  with  another — peace,  such  as  keeps  the  mind  in  an  even  and 
heavenly  frame,  as  a  sentinel  that  guards  a  door,  lest  foes  should  get  in  and 
make  havoc  where  God  hath  commanded  peace.  Where  God's  presence  is 
manifested,  there  is  peace ;  hence  the  apostle  adds,  "  The  Lord  be  with  you  all." 
Peace  is  a  divine  gift,  and  a  divine  experience  in  man ;  it  is  the  peace  of  "  the 
Lord  of  peace  "  that  we  share. 

II.  Apostolic  courtesy  is  expressed  in  an  emphatic  Christian  salutation. — 
"  The  salutation  of  Paul  with  mine  own  hand,  which  is  the  token  in  every 
epistle:  so  I  write"  (ver.  17).  This  epistle  was  written  by  an  amanuensis, 
probably  Silas  or  Timothy,  at  the  dictation  of  Paul ;  and  the  apostle  wrote  his 
own  signature,  adding  the  salutation  and  benediction.  This  act  not  only  stamped 
the  genuineness  of  the  epistle,  but  indicated  in  a  most  unmistakable  manner  the 
anxiety  of  the  apostle  to  thoroughly  identify  himself  with  all  that  was  expressed 
in  the  epistle,  and  to  assure  the  Thessalonians  of  his  personal  interest  in  and 
love  towards  them.  Christianity  is  the  soul  of  courtesy.  Bolingbroke  once  said, 
"  Supposing  Christianity  to  be  a  mere  human  invention,  it  is  the  most  amiable 
and  successful  invention  that  ever  was  imposed  on  mankind."  When  the 
courtiers  of  Henry  IV.  of  France  expressed  their  surprise  that  he  returned  the 
salutation  of  a  poor  man,  who  bowed  down  before  him  at  the  entrance  of  a 
village,  the  king  replied,  "  Would  you  have  your  king  exceeded  in  politeness  by 
one  of  the  lowest  of  his  subjects  ? "  As  he  is  the  best  Christian  who  is  most 
humble,  so  is  he  the  truest  gentleman  that  is  most  courteous. 

III.  Apostolic  courtesy  is  indicated  in  the  solemn  invocation  of  the  abiding 
grace  of  God. — "  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  all.  Amen  " 
(ver.  18).  A  farewell  full  of  pathos,  full  of  solemnity,  full  of  peace,  full  of 
admiration  and  love  for  the  people — all  good  wishes  condensed  into  a  single 
phrase.  Even  an  apostle  can  desire  for  the  Church,  or  any  of  its  members,  no 
richer  benediction  than  that  comprehended  in  "  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ. " 

583 


chap.  in.    H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    II.    THESSALONIANS. 


Lessons. — 1.  Peace  is  a  prime  essential  in  Church  prosperity.  2.  The  Christian 
spirit  is  the  essence  of  true  courtesy.  3.  We  can  invoke  no  higher  blessing  on  others 
than  to  be  kept  in  the  enjoyment  of  divine  grace. 


GERM  NOTES   ON  THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  16.  The  Omnipresent  God — 

I.  In  history. — Shaping  the  course 
and  destiny  of  nations. 

II.  In  providence.  —  1.  Guarding. 
2.  Guiding  His  people. 

III.  In  grace. — 1.  Manifesting  His 
goodness  in  Christ.  2.  Giving  inclina- 
tion and  power  to  do  His  will.  3. 
Demanding  and  bestowing  personal 
holiness.     4.  Ensuring  constant  peace. 

Peace  in  Danger. — During  the  great 
earthquake  in  London,  when  thousands 
were  running  about  and  crying  in 
terror,  when  buildings  were  falling  and 


the  ground  rocking  like  the  ocean  in  a 
storm,  Wesley  gathered  a  few  of  his 
followers  in  one  of  their  little  chapels, 
and  calmly  read  to  them  the  forty- 
sixth  psalm,  "  God  is  our  refuge  and 
strength." 

Vers.  17,  18.  Christian  Courtesy — 

I.  Takes  pains  to  make  itself  evi- 
dent.—" So  I  write." 

II.  Is  a  hearty  expression  of  per- 
sonal regard. — "  The  salutation  of 
Paul  with  mine  own  hand." 

III.  Invokes  the  blessing  of  divine 
grace  on  all  (ver.  18). 


584 


INDEX. 


[H.  =  Homily  ;  N.  =  Note  ;  I.  =  Illustration.  ] 


Abeaham,  all  nations  blessed  in,  N.  Gal.  44 
Abraham's  faith,  imitators  of,  H.  Gal.  44 
Abrahamic  gospel,  H.  Gal.  43,  44 
Abuse  of  Christian  liberty,  H.  Gal.  86 

of  public  worship,  H.  1  Thess.  545 
Access  to  Father,  privilege  of,  H.  Eph.  167 

to  God,  H.  Eph.  187,  188 

revealing  Trinity  in  unity,  H.  Eph.  169 
Active    faith,    righteousness    attained    by, 

N.  Gal.  80 
Adopting  love  of  God,  H.  Eph.  134 
Adoption,  H.  Gal.  64     . 

and  its  claims,  I.  Gal.  64 

of  children  by  Jesus  Christ,  H.  Eph.  134 

of  sons,  Christ's  mission  for,  in  fulness  of 

time,  H.  Gal.  62 

Advent,  second,  of  CL  rist,  H.  1  Thess.  531,  533 

Affection  and  meekness,  power  of,  N.  Gal.  96 

Affections,    religions,    are     attended     with 

change  of  nature,  H.  Eph.  227 
Affliction,  necessity  and  perils  of,  H.  1  Thess. 

513 
Aim  high,  H.  Phil.  348 
Alarm,  false,  H.  2  Thess.  564 
All  and  in  all,  Christ,  H.  Col.  447,  448 

are  one  in  Christ,  H  .Gal.  59 

concluded  under  sin,  N.  Gal.  53 

knowledge  of    Christ    intended   for,   N. 
Eph.  180 

nations  blessed  in  Abraham,  N.  Gal.  44 
Alone,  bearing  our  burdens,  H.  Gal.  105 
Ambassador,  gospel,  H.  Eph.  292 
Angels,  evil,  H.  Eph.  281 
Anger  and  meekness,  H.  Eph.  233 

sinful,  H.  Eph.  233 
Antichrist  portrayed,  H.  2  Thess.  562 
Antidote  to  contention,  humility  an,  N.  Phil. 

325 
Anxiety,  ministerial,  N.  Gal.  68  ;  H.  Col.  410 
prayer  an  expression  of,  H.  2  Thess.  569 
Anxieties  of  ministerial  life,  H.  Phil.  335,  337 
Anxious  care,  H.  Phil.  362 
Apathy  one  of  our  trials,  N.  Gal.  112 
Apostle,  erring,  H.  Gal.  33 

religious  life  of,  H.  Gal.  36 
Apostle's  view  of  his  ministry,  H.  Eph.  182 
Apostleship,  Divine  call -to,  H.  Gal.  21 

practical  proof  of,  H.  Gal.  24 


Apostolic    assurance    of    supernatural  cha- 
racter of  gospel,  N.  Gal.  16 
benediction,  H.  Eph.  297 
courtesy,  H.  2  Thess.  583 
credentials,  H.  Gal.  5 
estimate  of  Christian  character,  H.  Col. 

377 
exposure  of  false  teachers,  H.  Gal.  114 
greeting,  H.  Phil.  306 

phases  of,  H.  1  Thess.  486 ;  2  Thess. 
554 
introduction  to  Epistle,  H.  1  Thess.  487 
praise  of  order  and  stability,  H.  Col.  415 
prayer,  comprehensive,  H.  Col.  382 ;   H. 

1  Thess.  517 
preaching,  H.  Col.  408 

characterised    by    transparent    truth, 

H.  1  Thess.  499 
perversion  of,  H.  Gal.  83 
salutation,  H.  Eph.  128  ;  Col.  376 
Apostolical  care  for  Church,  H.  Eph.  293 
Apprehension  of  spiritual  blessings,  H.  Eph. 

141 
Armour,  Christian's,  N.  Eph.  284 
Ascension  and  its  results,  H.  Eph.  212 
Asceticism,  H.  Col.  436 
Aspirations  of  soul,  higher,  H.  Col.  438 
Association,  H.  Gal.  104 
Assurance  of  Christian  inheritance,  H.  Eph. 

138 
Atheism,  practical,  H.  Eph.  163 
Attainment  of  resurrection,  H.  Phil.  346 

spiritual,  H.  Phil.  312 
Attitude  of  Church  towards  second  coming 

of  Christ,  H.  1  Thess.  535 
Attractiveness  of  worth,  I.  Gal.  42 
Author  and  End  of  creation,  Christ,  H.  Col. 

393 
Authority,  best,  to  be  obeyed,  I.  Gal.  12 

ministerial,     Divine      blessing     highest 

sanction  of,  N.  Gal.  29 
of  messenger  of  God,  H.  Gal.  70 
Awakening,   slumbering  souls  and  their,  H. 
Eph.  253 

Bad  and  good  examples,  H.  Phil.  349 
companions,  I,  Gal.  83 
manners,  reform  of,  H.  Gal.  83 

585 


INDEX. 


Baptism,  H.  Gal.  58 

teachings  of,  H.  Gal.  59 
true,  H.  Col.  426 
Bear  one  another's  burdens,  H.  Gal.  103  ;  N. 

Gal.  104 
Believer  complete  in  Christ,  H.  Col.  424 
crucified  with  Christ,  and  Christ  living  in 

believer,  H.  Gal.  36 
exalted  together  with  Jesus   Christ,   H. 
Eph.  155 
Believer's  life  in  Christ,  features  of,  H.  Phil. 
344 
perfection,     Divine    fulness    of    Christ's 

pledge  of,  H.  Col.  422 
portion  in  both  worlds,  H.  Phil.  318 
salvation,  grounds  of  confidence   in,  H. 
Phil.  308 
Believers,  benefit  conferred  by  Spirit  on,  H. 
Eph.  236 
characteristics  of,  H.  Eph.  174 
children  of  promise,  H.  Gal.  75 
duty  of,  in  evil  day,  H.  Eph.  285 
enemies  of,  H.  Eph.  280 
Paul  as  example  to,  H.  Phil.  365 
steadfastness  of,  a  source  of  true  mini- 
sterial satisfaction,  H.  1  Thess.  515 
Believing    soul,   manner    in    which    gospel 

comes  to,  H.  1  Thess.  491 
Benediction,  apostolic,  H.  Eph.  297 
concluding,  H.  Gal.  121 
suggestive,  H.  EpK  294 
Beneficence,  opportunity  of,  H.  Gal.  113 
Benefit  conferred  by  Spirit  on  believers,  H. 

Eph.  236 
Benevolence,  practical    Christian,   H.   Phil. 

367 
Best  authority  to  be  obeyed,  I.  Gal.  12 

work,  call  to  do,  H.  2  Thess.  580 
Bible  sword  of  Spirit,  H.  Eph.  287 
Biblical  account  of  sin,  N.  Gal.  92 
Blameless  life,  lustre  of,  H.  Phil.  332 
Blessedness,  man's  fiual  condition  of,  H.  Col. 

400 
Blessing,  Divine,  highest  sanction  of  mini- 
sterial authority,  N.  Gal.  29 
of  redemption,  great,  H.  Col.  390 
Blessings  of  reconciliation,  personal,  H.  Col. 
398 
spiritual,  H.  Eph.  133 
Boasting,  empty,  H.  Gal.  115 
Body,  human,  resurrection  of,  H.  Phil.  352 
of  Christ,  Church  the,  H.  Col.  395 

members  of,  H.  Eph.  269 
one,  and  one  Spirit,  H.  Eph.  205 
resurrection  of,  H.  1  Thess.  531 
Boldness  a  duty  in  a  minister,  H.  Eph.  292 

Christian,  H.  Phil.  314 
Bond  of  unity,  peace  the,  H.  Eph.  202 
Bonds,  Paul's,  ministry  of,  H.  Phil.  314 
Bondage  and  liberty,  H.  Gal.  78 
fieedom  from,  N.  Gal.  78 
spiritual,  ignorance  of  God  a,  N.  Gal.  67 
Bondwoman  and  her  son,  cast  out,  N.  Gal.  76 
Book,  names  in,  H.  Phil.  357 
Bravery,  Christian,  exhortation  to,  H.  Phil.  318 
moral,  picture  of,  H.  Eph.  291 

586 


Bread,  wheat  is  better  than,  H.  Col.  436 
Brethren,  false,  and  their  treatment,  H.  Gal. 

27 
Bride,  Christ  and  His,  H.  Eph.  266 
Brotherhood,  Christian,  H.  Gal.  69 
of  man,  Christian,  H.  Eph.  194 
Brotherly  love  in  action,  H.  Eph.  202 

a  proof  of  true  sanctification,  H.  1 
Thess.  526 
reproof,  N.  Gal.  102 
Burden,  every  man  has  his  own,  H.  Gal.  106 

or  a  glory,  cross,  H.  Gal.  118 
Burdens,  bear  one  another's,  H.  Gal.    103  ; 
N.  Gal.  104 
our  twofold,  N.  Gal.  103 
Burden-bearing,  H.  Gal.  104,  105 

mutual  sympathy  in,  H.  Gal.  99 
Business,  mind  your  own,  H.  1  Thess.  529 

Call,  Divine,  to  apostleship,  H.  Gal.  21,  22 
gospel  and,  to  preach  it,  H.  Gal.  16 
of  gospel  to  sinners,  H.  Eph.  254,  255 
to  Christian  fortitude,  H.  Eph.  278 
to  do  best  work,  H.  2  Thess.  580 
Calling  of  Gentiles,  H.  Eph.  179 
Care,  anxious,  H.  Phil.  362 

cure  of,  H.  Pbil.  361 
Causes  of  ministerial  thanksgiving,  H.  Col. 

378 
Censure,  Church,  N.  Gal.  84 
Ceremonial  and  real  in  religion,  H.  Col.  430 
in  religion  transitory  and   unsatisfying, 
H.  Col.  434 
Change  effected  by  gospel,  H.  1  Thess.  494 
great,  effected  in  man  by  gospel,  H.  Eph. 

154 
of  life,  religion,  H.  Col.  447 
of  nature,  religious  affections  are  attended 
with,  H.  Eph.  227 
Character  and  privileges  of  children  of  God, 
H.  Gal.  65 
Christian,  essentials  of,  H.  Col.  448 
Christly,  H.  Gal.  59 
love  perfection  of,  N.  Gal.  95 
Characteristics  of  believers,  H.  Eph.  174 
Charge,  a  father's,  H.  Eph.  274 
Charity,  industry  the  true,  I.  2  Thess.  579 

nature,  properties,  and  acts  of,  H.  Eph.  247 
Children,    adoption    of,    by    Jesus    Christ, 
H.  Eph.  134 
and  parents,  duties  of,  H.  Eph.  271,  273  ; 

Col.  461 
of  darkness  and  of  light,  H.  Eph.  248 
of  God,  H.  Gal.  58,  59 

character  and  privileges  of,  H.  Gal.  65 
of  promise,  believers,  H.Gal.  75 
of  wrath,  H.  Eph.  148 
Christ  a  revelation  because  equal  to  Father, 
H.  Col.  393      , 
all,  and  in  all,  H.  Col.  447,  448 

are  o-ie  in,  H.  Gal.  59 
and  creation,  N.  Eph.  137 
and  F.is  bride,  H.  Eph.  266 
Author  and  End  of  creation,  H.  Col.  39$ 
believer  complete  in,  H.  Col.  424 
believer's  life  in,  features  of,  H.  Phil.  344 


INDEX. 


Christ,  Church  complete  in,  H.  Eph.  143 
the  body  of,  H.  Col.  395 
coming  of,  H.  1  Thess.  519 
contrasted  humiliation  end  exaltation  of, 

H.  Eph.  211,  214 
crucified,  H.  Gal.  117 
death  and  life  with,  H.  Col.  442 
dignity  and  dominion  of,  H.  Eph.  144 
Divine   fulness   of,  pledge   of  believer's 

perfection,  H.  Col.  422,  424 
enthusiasm  for,  H.  Phil.  317 
exaltation  of,  H.  Phil.  328 
excellent  knowledge  of,  H.  Phil.  343,  344 
Firstborn  from  dead,  H.  Col.  395 
fulness  of,  H.  Col.  398 
gift  of,  H.  Gal.  8 

gifts  of,  to  His  Church,  H.  Eph.  207 
glorified  in  His  people,  N.  2  Thess.  561 
glorying    in  cross  of,  H.  Gal.  115,  117, 

118 
God  known  in,  N.  Eph.  180 
great  Peacemaker,  H.  Eph.  164 
growth  into,  in  love  and  truth,  H.  Eph. 

221 
Head  of  Church,  H.  Eph.  145,  146 
heroic  devotion  to,  H.  Phil.  337 
hidden  treasures  of  wisdom  in.  H.  Col. 

413,  415 
humiliation    of,    a    pattern   of   supreme 

unselfishness,  H.  Phil.  325 
in  practical  life,  H.  Col.  459 
in  you  the  hope  of  glory,  H.  Col.  406 
indwelling  Word  of,  H.  Col.  457 
knowledge  of,  intended  for  all,  N.  Eph. 

180 
Law  preparing  for,  H.  Gal.  55 
life    in,    present    condition    and    future 

glory  of,  H.  Col.  440 
of,  only  true   idea  of   self-devotion, 

H.  Phil.  335 
living  in  believer,  and  believer  crucified 

with  Christ,  H.  Gal.  36 
love  of,  H.  Eph.  195,  196 
loving,  in  sincerity,  H.  Eph.  296 
members  of  body  of,  H.  Eph.  269 
name  of,  doing  all  in,  H.  Col.  459 
obedient  to  Law,  H.  Gal.  63 
odium  of  cross  of,  H.  Gal.  115 
our  Life,  H.  Col.  442 
our  Pattern,  H.  Phil.  327 
our  Sacrifice,  H.  Gal.  8 
poor  representative  of,  I.  Gal.  31 
redemption  through,  H.  Eph.  135 
relation  of,  to  God  and  all  created  things, 

H.  Col.  390 
to  moral  creation,  H.  Col.  393 
riches  of,  N.  Eph.  179 
risen  with,  H.  Col.  440 
sacrifice  of,  H.  Eph.  247 
second  advent  of,  H.  1  Thess.  531,  533 
coming  of,  attitude  of  Church  towards, 

H.  1  Thess.  535 
servant  of,  H.  Gal.  14 
the  Christian's  life,  H.  Phil.  317 
the  Inheritance  of  saints,  N.  Eph.  137 
the  only  gain,  H.  Phil.  344 


Christ  the  Reconciler,  H.  Col.  398,  400 

the  Redeemer,  H.  Phil.  327 

true  knowledge  of,  external  religionism 
incomparable  with,  H.  Phil.  342 

unsearchable  riches  of,  N.  Eph.  185 

worthy  of  universal  homage,  H.  Phil.  329 
Christ's  crucifixion,  H.  Phil.  327 

love  for  the  Church,  H.  Eph.  267 

mission  for  adoption  of  sons  in  fulness  of 
time,  H.  Gal.  62 

resurrection,  power  of,  H.  Phil.  346 

sacrifice  of  Himself  explained,  and  man's 
duty  to  offer  spiritual  sacrifice  in- 
ferred and  recommended,  H.  Eph.  245 

sufferings,  fellowship  of,  H.  Phil.  346 

truth  in  relation  to  our  daily  conversa- 
tion, H.  Col.  472 
Christian  benevolence,  practical,  H.  Phil.  367 

boldness,  H.  Phil.  314 

bravery,  exhortation  to,  H.  Phil.  318 

brotherhood,  H.  Gal.  69 
of  men,  H.  Eph.  194 

character,  apostolic  estimate  of,  H.  Col. 
377 
essentials  of,  H.  Col.  448 
love  perfection  of,  H.  Col.  451 
malice  incompatible  with,  H.  Eph.  239 

Church  a  family,  H.  Eph.  191 

circumcision,  H.  Col.  424 

citizenship,  H.  Phil.  351,  352 

conduct,  rule  of,  N.  Eph.  252 

consistency,  H.  Gal.  32;    H.   Phil.  320; 
2  Thess.  576 

contentment,  H.  Phil.  367 

conversation,  H.  Col.  471 

courtesy,  H.  Phil.  370 ;  2  Thess.  584 

dead  to  Law,  H.  Gal.  34 

dutv,  suggestive  summary  of  law  of,  H. 
Col.  457 
to  poor,  N.  Gal.  30 

equity,  H.  Phil.  360 

ethics,  Paul's  doctrine  of,  H.  Eph.  243 
science  of,  H.  Phil.  363 

excellence,  eulogy  of,  H.  Phil.  306 

experience,  highest  type  of,  H.  Phil.  347 

fidelity,  H.  2  Thess.  535 

forgiveness,  H.  Eph.  240 ;  Col.  451 

fortitude,  call  to,  H.  Eph.  278 

generosity,  H.  Gal.  103 ;  Phil.  369 

greeting,  H.  Phil.  304 

greetings  and  counsels,  H.  Col.  476 

holiness,  H.  1  Thess.  524 

humility,  H.  Col.  450 

illustrated   in  character  of  Paul,  H. 
Eph.  183 

inheritance,  assurance  of,  H.  Eph.  138 

joy,  H.  Phil.  358 

law  of  marriage,  H.  Eph.  267 
of  prayer,  H.  Eph.  171 

liberty,  H.  Gal.  77 

love  the  highest  law  of,  H.  Gal.  85 

life  a  Divine  creation,  H.  Eph.  158 
a  race,  H.  Gal.  82 
dignity  of,  H.  Eph.  200 
liberality  a  fruit  of,  H.  Phil.  369 
Lord's  Supper  sample  of,  H.  Col.  459 

587 


INDEX. 


Christian    life,    perpetual   thanksgiving   of, 
H.  1  Thess.  543 
poetry  of,  H.  Col.  455 
suggestive  features  of,  H.  Col.  417 
love,  prayer  for,  H.  Phil.  309,  310 
manhood,  true,  H.  Eph.  215,  217 
maturity,  H.  Eph.  218 
minister,  devoted,  H.  Phil.  336 
ministry,  H.  Col.  408 
efficacy  of,  H.  Gal.  29 
pre-eminent     honour     and     sublime 

theme  of,  H.  Col.  404 
real  and  counterfeit  in,  H.  Phil.  315 
solemn  and  responsible  trust,  H.  Col. 
479 
mirth  versiis  drunken  mirth,  H.  Eph.  260 
mission,  projected,  H.  Phil.  334 
obedience,  H.  2  Thess.  574 
perseverance,  hope  a  stimulus  to,  H.  Col. 

380 
prayer,  witness  of  Christian  citizenship, 

H.  Eph.  173 
precepts,  group  of,  H.  1  Thess.  540 
principles    applied   to   common   life,    H. 
Eph.  229 
tendency  of,  to  produce  true  content- 
ment, H.  Phil.  367 
rectitude,  H.  Phil.  311 
reformation,  H.  Gal.  101 
religion,  truth  and  divinity  of,  H.  Eph. 

138 
salutation,  N.  Gal.  7 
servitude,  N.  Eph.  276 
sobriety  inculcated,  H.  Eph.  250 
spirit  a  new  spirit,  H.  Eph.  227 
steadfastness,  H.  2  Thess.  567 

glad  tidings  of,  H.  1  Thess.  516 
sympathy,  practical,  H.  Gal.  105 
temper,   the  same   mind   which   was   in 

Christ,  H.  Phil.  327 
true  glory  of,  H.  Gal.  117 
truth,  the  girdle  of,  H.  Eph.  287 
unity,  H.  Col.  415 

an  occasion  of  joy,  H.  Phil.  328 
waiting  for  his  Deliverer,  H.  1  Thess.  494 
warfare,  H.  Eph.  276,  278 
warrior  equipped,  H.  Eph.  281 
wisdom,  H.  Eph.  256 
work,  disappointed  hopes  in,  H.  Gal.  10 
zeal,  H.  Gal.  71,  72 
Christian's  armour,  N.  Eph.  284 

estimate  of  living  and  dying,  H.  Phil.  318 
imitation,  duty  and  object  of,  H.  Eph.  245 
life,  Christ  the,  H.  Phil.  317 
power,  source  of,  H.  Phil.  367 
truest  test  and  excellence,  K.  Eph.  296 
Christians,  doubtful,  H.  Gal.  73 
examples  to  world,  H.  Phil.  333 
of  different  denominations,  temper  to  be 
cultivated  by,  toward  each  other,  H. 
Phil.  348 
Christianity  and  persecution,  H.  Gal.  115 
and  poverty,  H.  Gal.  29 
and  work,  H.  2  Thess.  578 
harmony  of,  in  its  personal  influence,  H. 
Eph.  135 

588 


Christianity,  hearty,  H.  Col.  466 
inviolability  of,  H.  Gal.  11 
mercantile  virtues  without,  H.  Phil.  364 
nullified  by  legalism,  H.  Gal.  80 
superior  to  external  rites,  H.  Gal.  79 
Christly  character,  H.  Gal.  59 
Christmas  of  soul,  N.  Gal.  72 
Church  a  Divine  edifice,  H.  Eph.  175 
a  witness,  N.  Gal.  7 
apostolical  care  for,  H.  Eph.  293 
attitude   of,   towards   second   coming  of 

Christ,  H.  1  Thess.  535 
censure,  N.  Gal.  84 
Christ  Head  of,  H.  Eph.  145 
Christ's  love  for  the,  H.  Eph.  267 
Christian,  a  family,  H.  Eph.  191 
complete  in  Christ,  H.  Eph.  143 
concord,  H.  1  Thess.  540 
Divine  ideal  of  the,  H.  Eph.  268 
edification,  public  reading  of  Holy  Scrip- 
tures important  means  of,  H.  Col. 
479 
future  glory  of  the,  H.  Eph.  268 
generous,  H.  Phil.  36 
gifts  of  Christ  to  Hit.    H.  Eph.  207 
growth  of,  H.  Eph.  21 
how  a,  lives  and  grows,    T.  Col.  433 
joy  of  suffering  for,  H.  (    1.  402 
prosperous,  congratulatory  features  of,  H. 

2  Thess.  534 
quarrels,  N.  Gal.  87 
sevenfold  unity  of,  reflected  in  Trinity  of 

Divine  Persons,  H.  Eph.  203 
the  body  of  Christ,  H.  Col.  395 
the  habitation  of  God,  N.  Eph.  175 
the  temple  of  God,  H.  Eph.  171 
troublers  of,  judgment  on,  H.  Gal.  85 
unitv  and  concord  in,  H.  Phil.  325 

of,  H.  Eph.  204 
universal,  Jerusalem  type  of,  H.  Gal.  75 
welfare   of,   ministerial   anxiety  for,    N. 
Phil.  335 
Church-life,  disorderly  in,  H.  2  Thess.  577 
side-lights  on,  in  early  times,  H.  Col.  472 
true,  N.  Eph.  201 
Circumcision,  Christian,  H.  Col.  424 
spiritual,  H.  Phil.  342 
true,  H.  Col.  426 
Citizenship,  Christian,  H.  Phil.  351,  352 
Christian  prayer  witness  of  Christian,  H. 
Eph.  173 
City,  great,  solitude  of,  H.  1  Thess.  511 
Cities,  large,  dissipation  of.  H.  Eph.  251 
Claims,   imperative,   of   Divine  commission, 

H.  Gal.  19 
Clearer  discernment  in  Divine  things  desired, 

H.  Eph.  141 
Closing  words,  H.  1  Thess.  548 
College  life,  H.  Eph.  232 
Colossians,  Epistle  to — 

Colossse  and  its  people,  N.  Col.  371 
outline  of  Epistle,  N.  Col.  372 
style  of  Epistle,  N.  Col.  372 
Colossians,  Paul's  prayer  for,  H.  Col.  385 
Comfort,  religious,  elements  of,  H.  Eph.  295 
Comforting  one  another,  duty  of, H.  1  Thess.  534 


INDEX. 


Coming  of  Christ,  H.  1  Thess.  519 
Commencement  of  gospel  at  PMlippi,  H.  Phil. 

306 
Commission,   Divine,  imperative   claims  of, 

H.  Gal.  19 
exalted  ministerial,  H.  Eph.  180 
Common  life,  Christian  principles  applied  to, 

H.  Eph.  229 
Communion  of  saints,  H.  Eph.  174 
Companions,  bad,  I.  Gal.  83 
Complete  man,  sanctification  of,  H.  1  Thess. 

547 
Completeness  of  moral  character,  prayer  for, 

H.  2  Thess.  559 
Completing  of  soul,  H.  Col.  424 
Comprehensive  and  sublime  prayer,  E.  Eph. 

189 
apostolic  prayer,  H.  Col.  382 ;  1  Thess.  517 
Comprehensiveness  of  gospel,  N.  Eph.  180 
Concluding  benediction,  H.  Gal.  121 
Concord  and  unity  in  Church,  H.  Phil.  325 

Church,  H.  1  Thess.  540 
Condition  of  man's  final  blessedness,  H.  Col. 

400 
Conduct,  Christian,  rule  of,  N.  Eph.  352 

of  life,  wise,  H.  Eph.  258 
Confidence  in  believer's  salvation,  grounds  of, 

H.  Phil.  308 
Confirmatory  proofs  of  Divine  call,  H.  Gal.  26 
Conflict  and  suffering,  H.  Phil.  320 

between  Law  and  faith,  H.  Gal.  45 
Congratulatory  features  of  prosperous  Church, 

H.  2  Thess.  534 
Conscientiousness,  reason  for,  I.  1  Thess.  524 

respect  for,  I.  1  Thess.  524 
Consecrated  life,  development  of  events  in, 

H.  Phil.  314 
Consistency,  Christian,  H.  Gal.  32 ;  Phil.  320 ; 

2  Thess.  576 
Constant  joy,  I.  Gal.  97 
Contention,  humility  an  antidote  to,  N.  Phil. 

325 
Contentment,  Christian,  H.  Phil.  367 

true,  tendency  of  Christian  principles  to 

produce,  H.  Phil.  367 
Conversation,  Christian,  H.  Col.  471 

dailv,  Christ's   truth  in  relation  to  our, 

H.  Col.  472 
Conversion  and  its  evidences,  H.  1  Thess.  493 
and  vocation  of  Paul,  H.  Gal.  20,  21 
condition  of  Ephesians  before,  H.  Eph. 

160 
power  of  God  in,  N.  Eph.  145 
test  of  suffering,  H.  1  Thess.  504 
Converts,  joy  of  minister  in  his,  H.  1  Thess. 

509 
new,  dealing  with,  H.  1  Thess.  501 
Co-operation  of  Divine  and  human  in  man's 

salvation,  H.  Phil.  331 
Correct  estimate  of  gospel  truth,  H.  1  Thess. 

503 
Counsels  and  greetings,  Christian,  H.  Col, 

476 
Couaterfeit  and  real  in  Christian  ministry, 

H.  Phil.  315 
Counterfeits,  godly  zeal  and  its,  H.  Gal.  71 


Courage  under  suffering,  N.  Eph.  189 
Courtesy,  apostolic,  H.  2  Thess.  583,  584 

Christian,  H.  Phil.  370 
Covenant  of  promise,  Divine,  H.  Gal.  47,  48 
Covenants,  Divine  and  human,  H.  Gal.  49 
Covetousness  which  is  idolatry,  H.  Col.  444 
Cowardly  retreat,  I.  Gal.  83 
Created  things,  all,  relation  of  Christ  to  God 

and,  H.  Col.  390 
Creation,  Christ  and,  N.  Eph.  137 

Divine,  Christian  life  a,  H.  Eph.  158 

new  spiritual,  N.  Eph.  159 
Creature,  new,  N.  Gal.  119 
Credentials,  apostolic,  H.  Gal.  5 
Cross  a  burden  or  a  glory,  H.  Gal.  118 

enemies  of,  H.  Phil.  350 

of  Christ,  glorying  in,  H.  Gal.  115,  117, 
118 

odium  of,  H.  Gal.  115 

triumph  of,  H.  Col.  428 
Crucifixion,  Christ's,  H.  Phil.  327 
Crucifying  flesh,  H.  Gal.  97 
Culture,  Divine,  H.  Phil  312 
Cure  of  care,  H.  Phil.  361 

of  vice  of  vain-glory,  H.  Gal.  98 
Curse  and  sentence  of  Law,  N.  Gal.  47 

Daily  conversation,  Christ's  truth  in  rela- 
tion to  our,  H.  Col.  472 
Danger  of  grieving  Him,  office  of  Holy  Spirit 
and,  H.  Eph.  237 

peace  in,  I.  2  Thess.  584 
Darkness,  children  of,  and  of  light,  H.  Eph. 
248 

light  in,  N.  Eph.  252 

to  light,  from,  H.  Col.  390 

works  of,  N.  Eph.  252 
Day,  happy,  and  its  sequel,  H.  Phil.  348 

of  judgment,  H.  2  Thess.  557 

of  Lord,  H.  1  Thess.  537 
Dead,  Christ  Firstborn  from,  H.  Col.  395 

resurrection   of,    an  object    to    aim   at, 
H.  Phil.  346 

sorrow  for,  H.  1  Thess.  529,  533 

to  Law  by  Law,  H.  Gal.  35 
Dealing  with  new  converts,  H.  1  Thess.  501 
Death  a  peacemaker,  N.  Eph.  166 

and  life  with  Christ,  H.  Col.  442 

and  spiritual  life,  H.  Col.  428 

Christian's  life  and,  H.  Phil.  317 

idleness  and,  I.  2  Thess.  579 

state  of  sin  a  state  of,  H.  Eph.  150 

to  life,  transition  from,  H.  Col.  426 
Deceived,  be  not,  H.  Gal.  Ill 

sowers  to  flesh,  H.  Gal.  108 
Deceivers  and  deceived,  case  of,  considered, 

H.  Eph.  219 
Deceptive  glamour  of  error,  H.  Gal.  40 
Defence,    fearless,    of    fundamental    truth, 

H.  Gal.  31 
Defender  of  faith,  astute,  H.  Gal.  32 
Definiteness  in  prayer,  H.  Phil.  311 
Deity,  incarnate,  H.  Phil.  326 
Deliverer,    Christian    waiting    for    his,    H. 

1  Thess.  494 
Delusions. 'strong,  H.  2  Thess.  565 

589 


INDEX. 


Denominations,  temper  to  be  cultivated  by 
Christians  of  different,  towards  each 
other,  H.  Phil.  348 
Departed,  faithful,  sleep  of,  H.  1  Thess.  531 
Dependence,  mutual,  law  of,  H.  Eph.  222 
Despise  not  prophesyings,  H.  1  Thess.  545 
Despiser,  word  to,  H.  1  Thess.  524 
Destiny,  glorious,  of  human  body,  N.  Phil. 

352 
Destructive  subtlety  of  sin,  H.  2  Thess.  565 
Development  of  events  in  consecrated  life, 

H.  Phil.  314 
Devil,  wiles  of,  H.  Eph.  279 
Devoted  Christian  minister,  H.  Phil.  336 
Devotion,  true,  H.  Col.  469 
Devout  doxology,  H.  Eph.  196 
Difference    between    Law    and   gospel,    H. 
Gal.  46 
sowing    to    flesh    and    to    Spirit,  H. 
Gal.  109 
Difficult  and  important  mission,  H.  1  Thess. 

510 
Dignified  and  touching  farewell,  H.  Gal.  119 
Dignity  and  dominion  of  Christ,  H.  Eph.  144 
of  Christian  life,  H.  Eph.  200 
of  sonship  with  God,  H.  Gal.  57 
Dilemma  of  turn-coats,  H.  Gal.  67 
Disagreement,  feminine,  H.  Phil.  357 
Disappointed  hopes  in  Christian  work,  H. 

Gal.  10 
Discernment,     clearer,    in     Divine    things 

desired,  H.  Eph.  141 
Discrimination,  spiritual,  H.  Phil.  311 
Disintegrating  force  of  error,  N.  Gal.  83 
Disobedience,  folly  of,  H.  Gal.  41 
Disobedient,  H.  2  Thess.  582 
Disorderly  in  Church-life,  H.  2  Thess.  577 
Dissipation  of  large  cities,  H.  Eph.  251 
Distinctive  features  of  true  sanctification,  H. 

1  Thess.  522 
Disturber  of  faith,  H.  Gal.  81 
Divine  act,  salvation  a,  H.  2  Thess.  565 
and  human  covenants,  H.  Gal.  49 

co-operation  of,  in  man's  salvation, 
H.  Phil.  331 
blessing  highest  sanction  of  ministerial 

authority,  N.  Gal.  29 
call,  confirmatory  proofs  of,  H.  Gal.  2G 

to  apostleship,  H.  Gal.  21,  22 
commission,    imperative    claims    of,    H. 

Gal.  19 
covenant  of  promise,  H.  Gal.  47 
creation,  Christian  life  a,  H.  Eph.  158 
culture,  H.  Phil.  312 
edifice,  Church  a,  H.  Eph.  175 
faithfulness,  H.  2  Thess.  574 
fulness  of  Christ  pledge  of  believer's  per- 
fection, H.  Col.  422 
grace,  frustrating,  N.  Gal.  38 
glory  of,  H.  Eph.  134 
salvation  an  act  of,  H.  Eph.  153 
ideal  of  the  Church,  H.  Eph.  268 
Judge,  H.  2  Thess.  557 
life,  positiveness  of,  H.  Gal.  87 
love  and  patience,  H.  2  Thess.  574 
peace,  rule  of,  H.  Col.  452 

590 


Divine,  Trinity  of,  sevenfold  unity  of  Church 
reflected  in,  H.  Eph.  203 
promise,  Law  not   contrary  to,  H.  Gal. 

53 
retribution,  H.  2  Thess.  557 
strength,  H.  Col.  385 
things,  clearer  discernment   in,  desired, 
H.  Eph.  141 
Divinity  and  truth  of  Christian  religion,  H. 

Eph.  138 
Doctrine    of    Christian    ethics,    Paul's,    H. 
Eph.  243 
of  predestination,  N.  Eph.  133 
Doing  all  for  God,  H.  Col.  466 

all  in  name  of  Christ,  H.  Col.  459 
good,  on,  H.  Gal.  112,  113 
Dominion  and  dignity  of  Christ,  H.  Eph.  144 
Double  harvest,  H.  Gal.  109 
Doubtful  Christians,  H.  Gal.  73 
Doxology,  devout,  H.  Eph.  196 
Drunken     mirth     versus     Christian    mirth, 

H.  Eph.  260 
Drunkenness,  vice  of,  H.  Epb,  261 
Duty  and  object   of   Christian's   imitation, 
H.  Eph. 245 
Christian,  suggestive  summary  of  law  of, 

H.  Col.  457 
of  believers  in  evil  day,  H.  Eph.  285 
of  comforting  one  another,  H.  1  Thess.  534 
of  thanksgiving,  H.  Eph.  264 
Duties  of  children  and  parents,  H.  Eph.  271, 
273 ;  Col.  461 
of  servants  and  masters,   H.  Eph.  274, 

270 ;  Col.  463 
of    wives  and  husbands,   H.   Eph.   264 ; 
Col.  460 
Dying  and  living,    Christian's  estimate   of, 
H.  Phil.  318 

Early  Christians,  faith  of,  H.  Eph.  139 
Church,  glimpses  of  life  in,  H.  Phil.  356 
times,    side-lights     on    Church-life    in, 
H.  Col.  472 
Earnest   of  inheritance,   Holy    Spirit    and, 

H.  Eph.  139 
Earth,  heaven  and,  family  in,  H.  Eph.  193 
Edification,  Church,  public  reading  of  Holy 
Scriptures  important  means  of,  H.  Col. 
479 
Edifice,  Divine,  Church  a,  H.  Eph.  175 
Effective  preaching,  secret  of,  H.  Col.  406 
Effects,  evidences  and,  of  revival,  H.  1  Thess. 
492 
of    gospel    upon  those  who  receive  it, 
H.  Phil.  320 
Effectual  mediator,  I.  Gal.  51 
Efficacy  of  Christian  ministry,  H.  Gal.  29 
of  prayer,  H.  Col.  467 
of  Word  of  God,  and  way  of  receiving  it, 
H.  1  Thess.  504 
Ejaculatory  prayer,  and  self-recollectedness, 

H.  1  Thess.  543 
Election,  mystery  of,  N.  Eph.  133 

of  God,  H.  1  Thess.  489 
Elements,  essential,  of  success  in  preaching, 
H.  1  Thess.  496,  498,  499,  501 


INDEX. 


Elements  of  religious  comfort,  H.  Eph.  295 

Empty  boasting,  H.  Gal.  115 

Enchanted  ground,  pilgrims  on,  H.  1  Thess. 

538 
End   of   creation,    Christ    Author  and,    H. 

Col.  393 
Enemies  of  believers,  H.  Eph.  280 
of  cross,  H.  Phil.. 350 
of  man,  invisible,  H.  Eph.  280 
Enjoyment,  spiritual,  H.  Eph.  262 
Enlarged  gospe'l,  H.  Eph.  177 
Enlightenment,  spiritual,  N.  Eph.  142 
Enmity  of  heart,  power  of  gospel  to  dissolve, 

N.  Eph. 166 
Enthusiasm  for  Christ,  H.  Phil.  317 
Ephesians  before  conversion,  conditions  of, 

H.  Eph.  160 
Ephesians,  Epistle  to — 

analysis  of  Epistle,  N.  Eph.  124 
genuineness  of  Epistle,  N.  Eph.  125 
practical  design  of  Epistle,  N.  Eph.  125 
to  whom  sent,  N.  Eph.  123 
Ephesians,  Paul's  prayer  for,  H.  Eph.  194 
Equal  to  Father,  Christ  a  revelation  because, 

H.  Col.  393 
Equity,  Christian,  H.  Phil.  360 
Erring  apostle,  H.  Gal.  33 

restoration  of,  H.  Gal.  102 
Error,  deceptive  glamour  of,  H.  Gal.  40 
disintegrating  force  of,  N.  Gal.  83 
safeguards  against,  H.  Phil.  342 
Errors    respecting    forgiveness    of    sin,    H. 

Eph.  239 
Essential  elements  of  success  in  preaching, 

H.  1  Thess.  496,  498,  499,  501 
Essentials  of  Christian  character,  H.  Col.  448 
Estimate  of  gospel  truth,  correct,  H.  1  Thess. 

503 
Eternal  praise  should  be  offered  unto  God, 

H.  Phil.  370 
Ethics,  Christian,  Paul's  doctrine  of,  H.  Eph. 
243 
science  of,  H.  Phil.  363 
Eulogy  of  Christian  excellence,  H.  Phil.  306 
Evangelical  consistency,  H.  Phil.  320 
Every  man  has  his  own  burden,  H.  Gal.  106 
Evidence,  truth  its  own,  H.  Gal.  27 
Evidences  and  effects  of  revival,  H.  1  Thess. 
492 
of  conversion,  H.  1  Thess.  493 
of  sonship,  H.  Gal.  64 
Evil  angels,  H.  Eph,  281 

day,  duty  of  believers  in,  H.  Eph.  285 
Evils,  worst  of,  H.  Eph.  152 
Exaltation,  contrasted  humiliation   and,   of 
Christ,  H.  Eph.  211,214 
of  Christ,  H.  Phil.  328 
of  labour,  Paul's,  H.  Eph.  235 
Exalted  ministerial  commission,  H.  Eph.  180 
Example,  power  of,  N.  Gal.  33 ;   H.  1  Thess. 

493 
Examples,  good  and  bad,  H.  Phil.  348 
Excellence,  Christian,  eulogy  of,  H.  Phil.  386 

Christian's  truest  test  and,  H.  Eph.  296 
Excellency  of  knowledge  of  Christ,  H.  Phil. 
344 


Excellent  knowledge  of  Christ,  H.  Phil.  343 
Excitement,  sensual  and  spiritual,  H.  Eph. 

260 
Exhortations,  earnest,  to  higher  sanctity,  H. 

1  Thess.  520 
Experience,  Christian,  highest   type   of,  H. 

Phil.  347 
Exposure,  apostolic,  of  false  teachers,  H.  Gal. 

114 
External  religionism  incomparable  with  true 

knowledge  of  Christ,  H.  Phil.  342 
rites,  Christianity  superior  to,  H.  Gal.  79 
Extremity,  joy  of  good  man  in,  H.  Phil.  365 

Faith,  active,  righteousness  attained  by,  N. 
Gal.  80 
and  Law,  conflict  between,  H.  Gal.  45 
astute  defender  of,  H.  Gal.  32 
disturber  of,  H.  Gal.  81 
justification  by,  H.  Eph.  156 

not  by  works,  N.  Gal.  33 ;  H.  Gal. 
34  ;  I.  Gal.  46 
life  of,  H.  Gal.  37 
of  early  Christians,  H.  Eph.  139 
of    man    and    faithfulness    of    God,    H. 

1  Thess.  548^ 
reasonableness  of,  H.  Gal.  54 
righteousness  through,  H.  Gal.  44 
salvation  by,  H.  Eph.  156 
working  by  love,  religion  is,  H.  Gal.  80 
Faithful  departed,  sleep  of,  H.  1  Thess.  531 
minister,  N.  Eph.  294 
reproof,  N.  Gal.  41 
Faithfulness  of  God,  H.  2  Thess.  573,  574 

of  God  and  faith  of  man,  H.  1  Thess.  548 
False  alarm,  H.  2  Thess.  564 

and  true  in  religion,  H.  Phil.  340 

zeal,  H.  Gal.  18 
brethren  and  their  treatment,  H.  Gal.  27 
methods  of  salvation,  H.  Gal.  34 
philosophy,  marks  of,  H.  Col.  420 
seductive  peril  of,  H.  Col.  432 
teachers,  apostolic  exposure  of,  H.  Gal.  114 
emphatic  warnings     gainst,  H.  Phil. 
342 
teaching,  perils  of,  H.  Gal.  38 
Falsehood,  sin  of,  H.  Eph.  232 
Family,  Christian  Church  a,  H.  Eph.  191 
in  heaven  and  earth,  H.  Eph.  193 
one,  H.  Eph.  194 
Farewell,  dignified  and   touching,   H.    GaJ. 
119 
words  of,  H.  Col.  480 
Fate  of  unbelievers,  H.  Gal.  76 
Father,  access  to,  privilege  of,  H.  Eph.  167 
Christ  a  revelation  because  equal  to,  H. 

Col.  393 
God  our,  H.  Phil.  306 
the,  H.  Eph.  206 
Father's  charge,  a,  H.  Eph.  274 
Fearless  defence  of  fundamental  truth,  H. 

Gal.  31 
Features,     congratulatory,     of     prosperous 
Church,  H.  2  Thess.  534 
distinctive,    of    true   sanotification,    H. 
1  Thess.  522 

591 


INDEX. 


Features  of  believer's  life  in  Christ,  H.  Phil. 
344 
of  Christian  life,  suggestive,  H.  Col.  417 
Feeling,  past,  N.  Eph.  226 
Fellowship  in  gospel,  H.  Phil.  308 

in  wickedness,  and  its  condemnation,  H. 

Eph.  251 
of  Christ's  sufferings,  H.  Phil.  3'46 
of  mystery,  H.  Epti.  185 
Feminine  disagreement,  H.  Phil.  357 
Fidelity,  Christian,  H.  2  Thess.  535 
in  ministry,  H.  Gal.  14 
to  truth,  N.  Gal.  28 

unswerving,   in   accomplishing   its   lofty 
mission,  Christian  ministry  demands, 
H.  Col.  480 
Final  blessedness,  condition  of  man's,  H.  Col. 

400 
Firstborn  from  dead,  Christ,  H.  Col.  395 
Flesh  and  spirit,  H.  Gal.  88,  89 
crucifying,  H.  Gal.  97 
deceived  sowers  to.  H.  Gal.  108 
works  of,  H.  Gal.  90,  92 
Folly  of  disobedience,  H.  Gal.  41 
Foolish  talking  and  jesting,  against,  H.  Eph. 

250 
Force  of  error,  disintegrating,  N.  Gal.  83 
Forgiveness,  Christian,  H.  Eph.  240;  Col.  451 

of  sin,  errors  respecting,  H.  Eph.  239 
Forlorn  state  of  Gentile  world,  IL  Eph.  159 
Formalism  tested  and  found  wanting,  H.  Phil. 

343 
Fortitude,  Christian,  call  to,  H.  Eph.  278 
Free  grace,  working  out  salvation  harmonises 

with,  H.  Phil.  331 
Freedom  from  bondage,  N.  Gal.  78 
Fruit  of  Christian  life,  liberality,  H.  Phil.  369 

of  Spirit,  H  Gal.  92,94 
Fruits  of  righteousness,  H.  Phil.  312 
Frustrating  Divine  grace,  N.  Gal.  38 
Fulness  of  Christ,  H.  Col.  398,  424 

Divine,  pledge  of  believer's  perfection, 
H.  Col.  422 
of  time,  H.  Gal.  62,  63 
Fundamental  truth,  fearless  defence  of,  H. 

Gal.  31 
Fury  of  old  religion  against  new,  H.  1  Thess. 

505 
Future  glory  of  the  Church,  H.  Eph.  268 

present  condition  and,  of  life  in  Christ, 
H.  Col.  440 
life,  H.  Eph.  145 

Gain,  Christ  the  only,  H.  Phil.  344 

Galatians,  Epistle  to — 

authorship  of  Epistle,  N.  Gal.  2 
character  of  Galatians,  N.  Gal.  1 
purpose  and  analysis,  N.  Gal.  2 
time  of  writing,  N.  Gal.  2 

Generosity,  Christian,  H.  Gal.  103 ;  Phil.  369 

Generous  Church,  H.  Phil.  368 

Gentile  life — a  warning,  H.  Eph.  224 
world,  forlorn  state  of,  H.  Eph.  159 

Gentiles,  calling  of,  H.  Eph.  179 

Gentleness,  grace  of,  H.  Gal.  96 

Genuine  religion  illustrated,  H.  2  Thess.  561 

592 


Germ  of  spurious  ministry,  H.  Phil.  315 

Gift  of  Christ,  H.  Gal.  8 

Gifts  of  Christ  to  His  Church,  H.  Eph.  207 

Girdle  of  truth,  H.  Eph.  286,  287 

Glad  tidings  of  Christian  steadfastness,  H. 

1  Thess.  516 
Glamour  of  error,  deceptive,  H.  Gal.  40 
Glimpses  of  life  in  early  Church,  H.   Phil. 

356 
Glorious  destiny  of  human  body,  N.  Phil.  352 
Glory,  future,  of  the  Church,  H.  Eph.  268 

hope  of,  Christ  in  you  the,  H.  Col.  406 

of  Divine  grace,  H.  Eph.  134 

of  gospel,  H.  Col.  406 

of  sainthood,  H.  2  Thess.  567 

or  a  burden,  cross,  H.  Gal.  118 
Glorying  in  cross  of  Christ,  H  Gal.  115,  117, 

118 
God,  access  to,  H.  Eph.  187,  188 

revealing  Trinity  in  unity,  H.  Eph.  169 

children  of,  H.  Gal.  58,  59 

Church  the  habitation  of,  N.  Eph.  175 

doing  all  for,  H.  Col.  466 

election  of,  H.  1  Thess.  489 

eternal    praise   should   be   offered   unto, 
H.  Phil.  370 

faithfulness  of,  H.  2  Thess.  573 

and  faith  of  man,  H.  1  Thess.  548 

glorified  in  good  men,  N.  Gal.  24 
in  His  servant,  H.  Gal.  22 

ignorance   of,   a    spiritual    bondage,    N. 
Gal.  67 

imitation  of,  N.  Eph.  245 

known  in  Christ,  N.  Eph.  180 

life  of,  H.  Eph.  225 

light  of,  H.  Eph.  253 

likeness  to,  H.  Eph.  246 

man  without,  N.  Eph.  163    . 

manifold  wisdom  of,  H.  Eph.  186,  187 

masters  accountable  to,  N.  Eph.  276 

nearness  to,  H.  Eph  165 

omnipresent,  H.  2  Thess.  584 

our  Father,  H.  Phil.  306 

peace  of,  keeping  heart,  H.  Phil.  363 

relation   of   Christ   to,   and   all   created 
things,  H.  Col.  390 

salvation  is  of,  H.  1  Thess.  538 

singing  in  worship  of,  H.  Eph.  263 

sonship  with,  dignity  of,  H.  Gal.  57 

temple  of,  Church  the,  H.  Eph.  171 

the  Father,  H.  Eph.  206 

true  Israel  of,  H.  Gal.  120 

unity  of,  and  His  purpose  regarding  men, 
H.  Gal.  51 

whole  armour  of,  H.  Eph.  284 

wrath  of,  H.  Col.  444 
G  »d's  infinite  liberality,  H.  Eph.  197 

offspring,  N.  Gal.  65 

riches,    man's    need    supplied    from,   H. 
Phil.  369 

sabbatic  law  antedated  Mosaic  Law,  N. 
Gal.  67 

work  and  man's  care — salvation,  H.  Phil. 
329,  331,  332 
Godless  and  hopeless,  H.  Eph.  161 
Godly  zeal  and  its  counterfeits,  H.  Gal.  71 


INDEX. 


God-made  minister,  N.  Eph.  182 
Good  and  bad  examples,  H.  Phil.  349 

hold  fast  that  which  is,  H.  1  Thess.  546 
hope  through  grace,  H.  2  Thess.  570 
imitation  of,  H.  Phii.  350 
man,  joy  of,  in  extremity,  H.  Phil.  365 
men,  God  glorified  in,  N.  Gal.  24 
news  and  its  good  effects,  H.  Col.  380 
on  doing,  H.  Gal.  112,  113 
works,  grace  and,  H.  1  Thess.  489 
Gospel,  a  Divine  revelation,  H.  Gal.  16 
a  mystery,  H.  Eph.  291 
Abrahamic,  H.  Gal.  43,  44 
according  to  Mark,  H.  Eph.  209 
ambassador,  H.  Eph.  292 
and  call  to  preach  it,  H.  Gal.  16 
and  Law,  difference  between,  H.  Gal.  46 
history   of    Sarah    and    Hagar    alle- 
gorical of,  H.  Gal.  73 
at      Philippi,     commencement     of,     H. 

Phil.  306 
call  of,  to  sinners,  H.  Eph.  254,  255 
change  effected  by,  H.  1  Thess.  494 
comes  to  believing  soul,  manner  in  which, 

H.  1  Thess.  491 
comprehensiveness  of,  N.  Eph.  180 
effects  of,  upon  those  who  receive  it,  H. 

Phil.  320 
enlarged,  H.  Eph.  177 
fellowship  in,  H.  Phil.  308 
glory  of,  H.  Col.  406 
great   change   effected    in  man    by,   H. 

Eph.  154 
in  word  and  in  power,  H.  1  Thess.  489 
inviolable  unity  of,  H.  Gal.  10 
irrepressible,  H.  Phil.  312 
manifests  itself,  H.  Col.  382 
mystery  of,  H.  Eph.  136 
of  grace,  praise  for  work  of  Trinity  in,  H. 

Eph.  130 
of  peace,  H.  Eph.  287 
of  your  salvation,  H.  Eph.  138 
one,  H.  Gal.  8 
power  of,  N.  Gal.  7 

to    dissolve     enmity    of     heart,    N. 

Eph.  166 
practical  result  of  true  reception  of,  H. 

1  Thess.  491 
preaching  of,  not  in  vain,  H.  1  Thess.  498 
profession    of,   uncleanness    inconsistent 

with,  H.  1  Thess.  522 
remonstrance  with  revolters  against,  H. 

Gal.  9 
state  of  men  without,  H.  Eph.  150 
superhuman   origin   of,  H.   Gal.    13  ;   N. 

Gal.  16 
true,   to   be   preached   and  believed,   H. 

Gal.  12 
universally  the  same,  H.  Col.  380 
truth,  correct  estimate  of,  H.  1  Thess.  503 
use  of  Law  under,    H.  Gal.  51 
Government  of  tongue,  H.  Eph.  236 
Grace  and  good  works,  H.  1  Thess.  489 
and  peace,  H.  Gal.  7 
Divine,  glory  of,  H.  Eph.  134 

salvation  an  act  of,  H.  Eph.  153 


Grace,  frustrating  Divine,  N.  Gal.  38 

good  hope  through,  H.  2  Thess.  570 

gospel  of,  praise  for  work  of  Trinity  in, 
H.  Eph.  130 

growth  in,  H.  2  Thess.  536 

of  gentleness,  H.  Gal.  96 

of    God,  justification    by  works    makes 
void  the,  H.  Gal.  39 

of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  H.  Phil.  370 

promise  of,  N.  Gal.  60 

salvation  is  of,  H.  Eph.  157 

sovereign,  pardon  an  act  of,  N.  Eph.  135 

state  by  nature  and  bv,  H.  Eph.  165 
of,  H.  Eph.  155 
Great  blessing  of  redemption,  H.  Col.  390 

city,  solitude  of,  H.  1  Thess.  511 

Mediator,  reconciling  work  of,  H.  Col.  396 

moral  translation,  H.  Col.  388 

prison,  N.  Gal.  53 

truths,  two,  presentation  of,  H.  Col.  424 
Greeting,  Christian,  H.  Phil.  304 
Greetings  and  counsels,  Christian,  H.  Col.  476 
Grieving  the  Holy  Spirit,  H.  Eph.  237 
Ground,  enchanted,  pilgrims  on,  H.  1  Thess. 

538 
Group  of  Christian  precepts,  H.  1  Thess.  540 
Growth,  humility  a,  N.  Eph.  185 

in  grace,  H.  2  Thess.  535 

in  personal  piety,  prayer  for,  H.  1  Thess. 
518 

into  Christ  in  love  and  truth,  H.  Eph.  221 

of  Church,  H.  Eph.  217 
Guidance  of  Spirit,  H.  Gal.  90 


Habitation  of  God,  Church  the,  N.  Eph. 

175 
Hagar  and  Sarah,  history  of,  allegorical  of 

Law  and  gospel,  H.  Gal.  73 
Handwriting  of  ordinances,  H.  Col.  428 
Happy  day  and  its  sequel,  H.  Phil.  348 
life,  secret  of,  H.  1  Thess.  542 
memories,  H.  Phil.  308 
Harmony  of  Christianity  in  its  personal  in- 
fluence, H.  Eph.  135 
Harvest,  double,  H.  Gal.  109 

spiritual,  principle  of,  H.  Gal.  109 
Head  of  Church,  Christ,  H.  Eph.  145 
Headship  of  Christ,  H.  Eph.  146 
Heart,  enmitv  of,  power  of  gospel  to  dissolve, 
N.  Eph.  166 
peace  of  God  keeping,  H.  Phil.  363 
what  is  your,  rilled  with  ?  H.  Eph.  261 
Hearty  Christianity,  H.  Col.  466 
Heaven  and  earth,  family  in,  H.  Eph.  193 
qualification  for,  H.  Col.  387 
rest  in,  for  troubled,  H.  2  Thess.  557 
Heirs  according  to  promise,  H.  Gal.  60 
Heroic  devotion  to  Christ,  H.  Phil.  337 
Hidden  treasures  of  wisdom  in  Christ,   H. 

Col.  413 
High   moral   feeling   that    should   influence 

preacher,  H.  1  Thess.  502 
Higher  aspirations  of  soul,  H.  Col.  438 

sanctitv,    earnest     exhortations     to,    H. 
1  Thess.  520 


QQ 


593 


INDEX. 


Higher  spiritual  knowledge,  prayer  for,  H. 

Eph.  140 
Highest   type  of   Christian   experience,   H. 

Phil.  347 
Hindrances,  Satanic,  H.  1  Thess.  509 
History  of  Hagar  and  Sarah  allegorical  of 

Law  and  gospel,  H.  Gal.  73 
Hold  fast  that  which  is  good,  H.  1  Thess.  546 
Holiness,  Christian,  H.  1  Thess.  524 

supreme  end  of  reconciliation,  H.  Col.  400 
Holy  Ghost  the  Sanctifier,  H.  2  Thess.  567 
Scriptures,  public  reading  of,  important 
means   of   Church  edification,  H. 
Col.  479  ;  1  Thess.  549 
Spirit  and    earnest    of    inheritance,    H. 
Eph.  139 
grieving  the,  H.  Eph.  237 
office  of,  and  danger  of  grieving  Him, 
H.  Eph.  237 
Homage,  Christ  worthy  of  universal,  H.  Phil. 

329 
Home-life,  sanctity  of,  N.  Eph.  269 
Honour,  pre-eminent,  and  sublime  theme  of 

Christian  ministry,  H.  Col.  404 

Hope  a  stimulus  to  Christian  perseverance, 

H.  Col.  380 

good,  through  grace,  H.  2  Thess.  570 

of  glory,  Christ  in  you  the.  H.  Col.  406 

Hopes,  disappointed,  in  Christian  work,  H. 

Gal.  10 
Hopeless  and  godless,  H.  Eph.  161 
Household,  piety  in,  H.  Col.  466 
Human  and  Divine,  co-operation  of,  in  man's 
salvation,  H.  Phil.  331 
covenants,  H.  Gal.  49 
body,  resurrection  of,  H.  Phil.  352 
Humiliation  and  exaltation  of  Christ,  con- 
trasted, H.  Eph.  211,  214 
of  Christ  a  pattern  of  supreme  unselfish- 
ness, H.  Phil.  325 
Humility  a  growth,  N.  Eph.  185 

an  antidote  to  contention,  H.  Phil.  325 
Christian,  H.  Col.  450 

illustrated  in  character  of   Paul,   H. 
Eph.  183 
Paul's,  H.  Eph.  184 
Husbands  and  wives,  duties  of,  H.  Eph.  264, 

266  ;  Col.  460 
Hypocrisy,  profession  without,  N.  Gal.  59 

Ideal,  Divine,  of  the  Church,  H.  Eph.  268 
Idleness  and  death,  I.  2  Thess.  579 
Idolatry,  covetousness  which  is,  H.  Col.  446 
Ignorance   of   God   a  spiritual  bondage,  N. 

Gal.  67 
Imitation,  Christian's,  duty  and  object  of,  H. 

Eph.  245 
moral,  H.  Col.  419 
of  God,  N.  Eph.  245 
of  good,  H.  Phil.  350 
Imitators  of  Abraham's  faith,  H.  Gal.  44 
Imperative  claims  of  Divine  commission,  H. 

Gal.  19 
Important  and  difficult  mission,  H.  1  Thess. 

510 
Imposition,  warning  against,  H.  2  Thess.  564 

594 


Incarnate  Deity,  H.  Phil.  326 
Individual  character,  sowing  and  reaping  in 
their  bearing  on    formation    of,    H. 
Gal.  109 
Industry  secret  of  success,  H.  2  Thess.  578 

the  true  charity,  I.  2  Thess.  599 
Indwelling  Word  of  Christ,  H.  Col.  457 
Inexorability  of  Law,  H.  Gal.  46 
Inferiority  of  Law,  H.  Gal.  49 
Infinite  liberality,  God's,  H.  Eph.  197 
Influence,  moral,  H.  Phil.  314 

spiritual,  varied  aspects  of,  H.  1  Thess.  543 
Inheritance,     Christian,     assurance    of,    H. 
Eph.  138 

of  saints,  Christ,  N.  Eph.  137 

saintly,  meetness  for,  H.  Col.  386,  387,  388 
Iniquity,  mystery  of,  H.  2  Thess.  565 
Interruptions  in  our  work,  and  the  way  to 

deal  with  them,  H.  Eph.  158 
Inviolability  of  Christianity,  H.  Gal.  11 
Inviolable  unity  of  gospel,  H.  Gal.  10 
Invisible  enemies  of  man,  H.  Eph.  280 
Irrepressible,  gospel,  H.  Phil.  312 
Israel  of  God,  true,  H.  Gal.  120 

Jerusalem  above,  H.  Gal.  74 

type  of  universal  Church,  H.  Gal.  75 
Jesting  and    talking,    against    foolish,    H. 

Eph.  250 
Jesus   Christ,  adoption  of  children  by,  H. 
Eph.  134 
believer    exalted    together  with,    H. 
Eph.  155 
name  of,  H.  Phil.  329 
suffering  for,  H.  Gal.  121 
supremacy  of,  H.  Eph.  145 
unselfishness  of,  H.  Gal.  8 
Jews,  persecuting,  H.  1  Thess.  507 
Joy,  Christian,  H.  Phil.  358 

unity  an  occasion  of,  H.  Phil.  323 
constant,  I.  Gal.  97 

of  good  man  in  extremity,  H.  Phil.  365 
of  minister  in  his  converts,  H.  1  Thess.  509 
of  ministerial  success,  H.  Phil.  334 
of  suffering  for  Church,  H.  Col.  402 
pure,  H.  Phil.  308 
religious,  H.  1  Thess.  516 
Judge,  Divine,  H.  2  Thess.  557 
Judgment,  day  of,  H.  2  Thess.  557 

On  troublers  of  Church,  H.  Gal.  85 
Just,  resurrection  of,  H.  Phil.  346 
Justification  by  faith,  H.  Eph.  156 

not  by  works,  N.  Gal.  33 ;  H.  Gal.  34, 
39  ;  I.  Gal.  46 
Justifying  faith,  true,  is  not  of  ourselves, 
N.  Ehp.  157 

Knowledge  and  wisdom,  Christ  the  trea- 
sury of,  N.  Col.  415 
of  Christ,  excellent,  H.  Phil.  343,  344 

intended  for  all,  N.  Eph.  180 
true,  of  Christ,  external  religionism  in- 
comparable with,  H.  Phil.  342 
Known  and  unknown  love  of  Christ,  H.  Eph 
196 


INDEX. 


Labour,  Paul's  exaltation  of,  H.  Eph.  235 

Life,   word  of,   living    ministry  and   living 

self-denying,  H.  2  Thess.  577 

Church,  H.  Phil.  333 

Large  cities,  dissipation  of,  H.  Eph.  251 

Light,  children  of  darkness  and  of,  H.  Eph. 

Last  words,  H.  Phil.  369 

248 

Latitudinarianism,  N.  Gal.  12 

from  darkness  to,  H.  Col.  390 

Law  and  faith,  conflict  between,  H.  Gal.  45 

in  darkness,  N.  Eph.  252 

and  gospel,  difference  between,  H.  Gal.  46 

meetness  for  inheritance  of  saints  in,  H. 

history  of  Hagar  and  Sarah  allegorical 

Col.  387 

of,  H.  Gal.  73 

of  God,  H.  Eph.  253 

and  promise,  N.  Gal.  49 

spiritual,  summons  to,  H.  Eph.  255 

Christ  obedient  to,  H.  Gal.  63 

Likeness  to  God,  H.  Eph.  246 

Christian  dead  to,  H.  Gal.  34 

Living  and  dying,  Christian's  estimate  of,  H. 

curse  and  sentence  of,  N.  Gal.  47 

Phil  318 

fulfilled  in  love  to  others,  H.  Gal.  87 

ministry  and  living  Church. :  Word  of  life, 

inexorability  of,  H.  Gal.  46 

H.  Phil.  333 

inferiority  of,  H.  Gal.  49 

Looking  on  things  of  others,  H.  Phil.  325 

is  for  transgressors,  H.  Gal.  50 

Lord,  day  of,  H.  1  Tbess.  537 

lesson  from  the,  H.  Gal.  74 

Jesus,  marks  of,  H.  Gal.  120 

not  contrary  to  Divine  promise,  H.  Gal.  53 

Christ,  grace  of  our,  H.  Phil.  370 

of  Christian  liberty,    love   the   highest, 

one,  H.  Eph.  205 

H.  Gal.  85 

rejoicing  in,  H.  Phil.  359 

of  marriage,  Christian,  H.  Eph.  267 

Lord's  Supper  sample  of  Christian  life,  H. 

of  mutual  dependence,  H.  Eph.  222 

Col.  459 

of  retribution,  H.  Gal.  Ill 

Love  an  attendant  of  reganeration,  H.  Gal.  95 

our  schoolmaster,  H.  Gal.  54,  56 

and  patience,  Divine,  H.  2  Thess.  574 

preparing  for  Christ,  H.  Gal.  55 

and  truth,  growth  into  Christ  in,  H.  Eph. 

under,  H.  Gal.  64 

221 

use  of,  H.  Gal.  50,  51,  52 

brotherly,  H.  1  Thess.  527 

Leading  of  Spirit,  N.  Gal.  90 

in  action,  H.  Eph.  202 

Legal  bondage  and  spiritual  freedom  con- 

Christ's, for  the  Church,  H.  Eph.  267 

trasted,  H.  Gal.  74 

Christian,  prayer  for,  H.  Phil.  309,  310 

prescriptions,  no  trust  in,  N.  Gal.  51 

faith  working  by,  religion  is,  H.  Gal.  80 

Legalism  a  relapse,  H.  Gal.  66 

for  preacher,  H.  Gal.  70 

Christianity  nullified  by,  H.  Gal.  80 

life  of,  H.  Eph.  2^2 

Lesson  from  the  Law,  H.  Gal.  74 

of  Christ,  H.  Eph.  195,  196 

Liberality  a  fruit  of  Christian  life,  H.  Phil.  369 

of  God,  adopting,  H.  Eph.  134 

God's  infinite,  H.  Eph.  197 

of  Son  of  God  to  men,  H.  Gal.  37 

Liberty,  bondage  and,  H.  Gal.  78 

perfection  of  character,  N.  Gal.  95 

Christian,  H.  Gal.  77 

of  Christian  character,  H.  Col.  451 

abuse  of,  H.  Gal.  86 

powers  of,  H.  Gal.  95 

love  the  highest  law  of,  H.  Gal.  85 

service  of,  H.  Gal.  86 

right  use  of,  H.  Gal.  87 

the  highest  law  of  Christian  liberty,  H. 

Life  and  death,  Christian's,  H.  Phil.  317 

Gal.  85 

and  walk  in  Spirit,  H.  Gal.  97 

to  others,  Law  fulfilled  in,  H.  Gal.  87 

change  of,  religion,  H.  Col.  447 

Loving  Christ  in  sincerity,  H.  Eph.  296 

Christ  our,  H.  Col.  442 

Lustre  of  blameless  life,  H.  Phil.  332 

Christian,  a  Divine  creation,  H.  Eph.  158 

a  race,  H.  Gal.  82 

Maintenance,  ministerial,  N.  Gal.  108 ;   H. 

dignity  of,  H.  Eph.  200 

2  Thess.  578 

Lord's  Supper  sample  of,  H,  Col.  459 

Malice  incompatible  with  Christian  character, 

common,  Christian  principles  applied  to, 

H.  Eph.  239 

H.  Eph.  229 

Man  and  man,  truth  between,  H.  Eph.  231 

death  and,  with  Christ,  H.  Col.  442 

Christian  brotherhood  of,  H.  Eph.  194 

death  to,  transition  from,  H.  Col.  426 

faith   of,   and  faithfulness    of    God,   H. 

future,  H.  Eph.  145 

1  Thess.  548 

in  Christ,  present  condition   and  future 

great  change  effected  in,  by  gospel,  H. 

glory  of,  H.  Col.  440 

Eph.  154 

in  early  Church,  glimpses  of,  H.  Phil.  356 

invisible  enemies  of,  H.  Eph.  280 

misspent,  review  of,  N.  Gal.  18 

justified  by  faith  alone,  I.  Gal.  46 

new,  H.  Col.  440,  444 

mortification  of  sinful  principle  in,  H. 

of  Christ,  only  true  idea  of  self-devotion, 

Col.  442 

H.  Phil.  335 

unity  of  God  and  His  purpose  regarding, 

of  faith,  H.  Gal.  37 

H.  Gal.  51 

of  God,  H.  Eph.  225 

without  God,  N.  Eph.  163 

of  love.  H.  Eph.  242 

Man's  care  and  God's  work — salvation,  H, 

wise  conduct  of,  H.  Eph.  258 ;  Col.  470 

Phil.  329,  331,  332 

595 


INDEX. 


Man's  duty  to  offer  spiritual  sacrifice  inferred 
and  recommended,  Christ's  sacrifice  of 
Himself  explained,  and,  H.  Eph.  245 
final  blessedness,  condition  of,  H.  Col.  400 
need  supplied  from  God's  riches,  H.  Phil. 
369 
Manhood,  true  Christian,  H.  Eph.  215,  217 
Manifold  wisdom  of  God,  H.  Eph.  186,  187 
Manners,  bad,  reform  of,  H.  Gal.  83 
Mark,  Gospel  according  to,  H.  Eph.  209 

pressing  toward,  H.  Phil.  348 
Marks  of  false  philosophy,  H.  Col.  420 

of  Lord  Jesus,  H.  Gal.  120 
Marked  men,  H.  Gal.  121 
Marriage,  Christian  law  of,  H.  Eph.  267 
Masters  accountable  to  God,  N.  Eph.  276 
and  servants,  duties  of,  N.  and  H.  Eph. 
274,  276 ;  H.  Col.  463 
Maturity,  Christian,  H.  Eph.  218 
Mediator,  effectual,  I.  Gal.  51 

great,  reconciling  work  of,  H.  Col.  396 
Medical  profession,  religion  and  the,  H.  Col. 

479 
Meek,  who  are  the  1  I.  Gal.  96 
Meekness  and  affection,  power  of,  N.  Gal.  96 

and  anger,  H.  Eph.  233 
Meetness  for  saintly  inheritance,  H.  Col.  386, 

387,  388 
Members  of  body  of  Christ,  H.  Eph.  269 
Memory,  H.  2  Thess.  565 
Memories,  happy,  H.  Phil.  308 
Men,  love  of  Son  of  God  to,  H.  Gal.  37 
marked,  H  Gal.  121 
state  of,  without  gospel,  H.  Eph.  150 
Mercantile  virtues  without  Christianity,  H. 

Phil.  364 
Messenger,  divinely  commissioned,  self-evi- 
dencing proof  of,  H.  Gal.  24 
of  God,  authority  of,  H.  Gal.  70 
trusted,  H.  Eph.  292 
Mind  which  was  in  Christ,  Christian  temper 
the  same,  H.  Phil.  327 
your  own  business,  H.  1  Thess.  529 
Minister,  boldness  a  duty  in  a,  H.  Eph.  292 
devoted  Christian,  H.  Phil.  336 
faithful,  N.  Eph.  294 
God-made,  N.  Eph.  182 
joy  of,  in  his  converts,  H.  1  Thess.  509 
true,  qualification  of,  H.  Gal.  21 
Ministers,  prayer  for,  H.  2  Thess.  572 
Ministerial  anxiety,  N.  Gal.  68  ;  H.  Col.  410 
for  welfare  of  Church,  N.  Phil.  335 
prayer  an  expression  of,  H.  2  Thess. 
569 
authority,  Divine  blessing  highest  sanc- 
tion of,  N.  Gal.  29 
commission,  exalted,  H.  Eph.  180 
life,  anxieties  of.  H.  Phil.  335,  337 
maintenance,  N.  Gal.  108 ;  H.  2  Thess.  578 
office,  treatment  due  to,  H.  1  Thess.  538 
request,  H.  2  Thess.  573 
satisfaction,  steadfastness  of  believers  a 

source  of  true,  H.  1  Thess.  515 
success,  joy  of,  H.  Phil.  334 
thanksgiving,  H.  1  Thess.  488 
causes  of,  H.  Col.  378 

596 


Ministry,  apostle's  view  of  his,  H.  Eph.  182 
•  Christian,  H.  Col.  408 
efficacy  of,  H.  Gal.  29 
pre-eminent  honour  and  sublime  theme 

of,  H.  Col.  404 
real  and  counterfeit  in,  H.  Phil.  315 
solemn  and  responsible  trust,  H.  Col. 
479 
fidelity  in,  H.  Gal.  14 
of  Paul's  bonds,  H.  Phil.  314 
public,  H.  1  Thess.  540 
spurious,  H.  Phil.  315 
work  of,  H.  Eph.  214 
Miracles,  confirmatory  of  truth,  N.  Gal.  43 
Mirth,  Christian  versus  drunken,  H.  Eph.  260 
Mission,  Christ's,  for  adoption  of  sons  in  ful- 
ness of  time,  H.  Gal.  62 
difficult  and  important,  H.  1  Thess.  510 
projected  Christian,  H.  Phil.  334 
special,  recognition  of,  H.  Gal.  28 
Misspent  life,  review  of,  N.  Gal.  18 
Mistaken  zeal,  H.  Gal.  18 
Model  pastor,  H.  Col.  475 
Moral  bravery,  picture  of,  H.  Eph.  291 

character,   prayer    for  completeness    of, 

H.  2  Thess.  559 
creation,  relation  of  Christ  to,  H.  Col.  393 
feeling,     high,    that     should    influence 

preacher,  H.  1  Thess.  502 
imitation,  H.  Col.  419 
influence,  H.  Phil.  314 
sleep,  H.  1  Thess.  538 
sowing  and  reaping,  H.  Gal.  106 
stupidity,  H.  Eph.  254 
transformation,  thorough,  H.  Eph.  222 
translation,  great,  H.  Col.  388 
Mortification   of    sinful  principle    in    man, 

H.  Col.  442 
Mosaic  Law,  God's  sabbatic  law  antedated, 

N.  Gal.  67 
Mutual  dependence,  law  of,  H.  Eph.  222 
duties  of  children  and  parents,  H.Eph.  273 
submission,  H.  Eph.  264 
sympathy  in  burden-bearing,  H.  Gal.  99 
Mystery,  fellowship  of,  H.  Eph.  185 
gospel  a,  H.  Eph.  291 
of  election,  N.  Eph.  133 
of  gospel,  H.  Eph.  136 
of  iniquity,  H.  2  Thess.  565 


Name  of  Christ,  doing  alf  in,  H.  Col.  459 

of  Jesus,  H.  Phil.  329 
Names  in  book,  H.  Phil.  357 
Nations,  all,  blessed  in  Abraham,  N.  Gal.  44 
Nature  and  by  grace,  state  by,  H.  Eph.  165 
change  of,    religious    affections    are  at- 
tended with,  H.  Eph.  227 
new,  necessity  of,  N.  Gal.  119 

spiritual,  H.  Col.  445 
putting    off    old,  and   putting   on  new, 

^H.  Eph.  226 
source,  and  purpose  of  spiritual  blessings 

H.  Eph.  133 
state  of,  H.  Eph.  151 
Netuneas  to  God,  H.  Eph.  165 


INDEX. 


Necessity  and  perils  of  affliction,  H.  1  Thess. 
513 
of  new  nature,  N.  Gal.  119 
Need,   man's    supplied    from   God's    riches, 
H.  Phil.  369 
our,  and  our  supply,  H.  Phil.  369 
Neighbour's  rights,  regard  for,  I.  Gal.  87 
New  birth  begins  our  true  life,  I.  Gal.  119 
converts,  dealing  with,  H.  1  Thess.  501 
creature,  N.  Gal.  119 

fury  of  old  religion  against,  H.  1  Thess.  505 
life,  H.  Col.  440,  444 
nature,  necessity  of,  N.  Gal.  119 
putting  off  old  nature  and  putting  on, 

H.  Eph.  226 
spirit,  Christian  spirit  a,  H.  Eph.  227 
spiritual  creation,  N.  Eph.  159 
nature,  H.  Col.  445 
News,  good,  and  its  good  effects,  H.  Col.  380 

that  gladdens,  H.  1  Thess.  513 
Noble  attitude  of  sufferer  for  truth,  H.  Phil. 
315 
self-sacrifice,  I.  Eph.  268 
Non-age  of  pre-Christian  world,  H.  Gal.  61 

Obedience,  H.  Eph.  273 

Christian,  H.  2  Thess.  574 

should  be  prompt,  N.  2  Thess.  582 
Object  and  duty   of  Christian's   imitation, 

H.  Eph.  245 
Odium  of  cross  of  Christ,  H.  Gal.  115 
Office  of  Holy  Spirit  and  danger  of  grieving 

Him,  H.  Eph.  237 
Offspring,  God's,  N.  Gal.  65 
Old  nature,  putting  off,  and  putting  on  new, 
H.  Eph.  226 

religion,  fury  of,  against  new,  H.  1  Thess. 
505 
Omnipresent  God,  H.  2  Thess.  584 
One  body  and  one  Spirit,  N.  Eph.  205 

family,  H.  Eph.  194 

gospel,  H.  Gal.  8 

in  Christ,  all  are,  H.  Gal.  59 

Lord,  H.  Eph.  205 

Spirit,  one  body  and,  H.  Eph.  205 
Oneness  of  Church,  H.  Eph.  205 
Opportunity  of  beneficence,  H.  Gal.  113 
Order  and  stability,  apostolic  praise  of,  H. 

Col.  415 
Ordinances,  handwriting  of,  H.  Col.  428 
Origin  of  gospel,  superhuman,  H.  Gal.  13 
Others,  looking  on  things  of,  H.  Phil.  325 

sins  of,  H.  Gal.  101 

Pacific  spirit  proof  of  true  sanctification, 

H.  1  Thess.  527 
Pardon  an  act  of  sovereign  grace,  N.  Eph.  135 
Parents  and  children,  duties  of,  H.  Eph.  271, 

273  ;  Col.  461 
Past  feeling.  N.  Eph.  226 
Pastor,  model,  H.  Col.  475 
Pastors  and  people,  H.  Gal.  107 
Patience  and  love,  Divine,  H.  2  Thess.  574 
Pattern,  Christ  our,  H.  Phil.  327 
Paul  an  example  to  believers,  H.  Phil.  365 


Paul,  Christian  humility  illustrated  in  char- 
acter of,  H.  Eph'.  183 
conversion  and  vocation  of,  H.  Gal.  20,  21 
Paul's  bonds,  ministry  of,  H.  Phil.  314 

doctrine  of  Christian  ethics,  H.  Eph.  243 
exaltation  of  labour,  H.  Eph.  235 
humility,  H.  Eph.  184 
introduction  to  Ephesian  Epistle,  H.  Eph. 

129 
prayer  for  Colossians,  H.  Col.  385 
for  Ephesians,  H.  Eph.  194 
for  Tnessalonians,  H.  2  Thess.  570 
Peace.  Divine,  rule  of,  H.  Col.  452 
'  gospel  of,  H.  Eph.  287 
grace  and,  H.  Gal.  7 
in  danger,  I.  2  Thess.  584 
of  God  keeping  heart,  H.  Phil.  363 
the  bond  of  unity,  H.  Eph.  202 
unity  and,  H.  Col.  454 
Peacemaker,  Christ  great,  H.  Eph.  164 

death  a,  N.  Eph.  166 
People,  pastors  and,  H.  Gal.  107 
Perfection,  believer's,  Divine  fulness  of  Christ 
pledge  of,  H.  Col.  422 
is  attained,  how,  N.  Gal.  82 
of  character,  love,  N.  Gal.  95 
of  Christian  character,  love,  H.  Col.  451 
Perils  and  necessity  of  affliction,  H.  1  Thess. 
513 
of  false  teaching,  H.  Gal.  38 
of  suffering,  H.  1  Thess.  511 
peculiar,  Christian  ministry  is  surrounded 
by,  H.  Col.  480 
Perpetual  thanksgiving  of  Christian  life,  H. 

1  Thess.  544 
Perplexity,  preacher's,  H.  Gal.  72 
Persecuting  Jews,  H.  1  Thess.  507 
Persecution,  Christianity  and,  H.  Gal.  115 

on,  H.  Gal.  75 
Perseverance,  Christian,  hope  a  stimulus  to, 
H.  Col.  380 
of  saints,  H.  Phil.  308 
Personal  blessings  of  reconciliation,  H.  Col. 
398 
influence,  harmony  of  Christianity  in  its, 

H.  Eph. 135 
piety,  prayer  for  growth  in,  H.  1  Thess.  518 
Perversion  of  apostolic  preaching,  H.  Gal.  83 

of  truth,  H.  Gal.  10 
Phases  of  apostolic  greeting,  H.  1  Thess.  486 ; 

2  Thess.  554 

Philippi,  commencement  of  gospel  at,  H.  Phil. 
306 

Philippians,  Epistle  to — 

Philippi  and  the  Philippians,  N.  Phil.  299 
place  and  time  of  writing  Epistle,  N.  300 
occasion  and  contents  of  Epistle,  N.  301 

Philosophic  vagaries,  H.  Col.  433 

Philosophy,  false,  marks  of,  H.  Col.  420 

Picture  of  moral  braverv,  H.  Eph.  291 

Piety  in  household,  H.  Col.  466 

personal,     praver     for     growth     in,    H. 
1  Thess.  518 

Pilgrims  on  enchanted  ground,  H.  1  Thess. 
538 

Plea  for  steadfastness,  H.  Phil,  355 

597 


INDEX. 


Pleadings  of  anxious  teacher  with  his  pupils 

in  peril,  H.  Gal.  68 
Poetry  of  Christian  life,  H.  Col.  455 
Poor,  Christian  duty  to,  N.  Gal.  30 
remember  the,  H.  Gal.  30,  31 
representative  of  Christ,  I.  Gal.  31 
Positiveness  of  Divine  life,  H.  Gal.  87 
Poverty  and  Christianity,  H.  Gal.  29 
Power,  Christian's,  source  of,  H.  Phil.  367 
gospel  in  word  and  in,  H.  1  Thess.  489 
of  Christ's  resurrection,  H.  Phil.  346 
of  example,  N.  Gal.  33 ;  H.  1  Thess.  493 
of  God  in  conversion,  N.  Eph.  145 
of  gospel,  N.  Gal.  7 

to   dissolve   enmity   of  heart,   N. 
Eph.  166 
of  meekness  and  affection,  N.  Gal.  96 
of  Satan  great  but  restricted,  H.  1  Thess. 

507 
of  truth,  H.  Gal.  27 
Powers  of  love,  H.  Gal.  95 
Practical  atheism,  H.  Eph.  163 

Christian  benevolence,  H.  Phil.  367 

sympathy,  H.  Gal.  105 
life,  Christ  in,  H.  Col.  459 
proofs  of  apostleship,  H.  Gal.  24 
result  of  true   reception  of   gospel,   H. 

1  Thess.  491 

Praise,  eternal,  should  be  offered  unto  God, 
H.  Phil.  370 
for  work  of  Trinity  in  gospel  of  grace, 
H.  Eph.  130 
Pray  for  us,  H.  1  Thess.  549 
Prayer,  access  to  God  in,  H.  Eph.  188 

an  expression  of  ministerial  anxiety,  H. 

2  Thess.  569 

and  thanksgiving,  H.  1  Thess.  489 
Christian  law  of,  H.  Eph.  171 

witness  of  Christian  citizenship,  H. 
Eph.  173 
comprehensive    apostolic,    H.   Col.   382 ; 

1  Thess.  517 
definiteness  in,  H.  Phil.  311 
duty  of,  H.  Eph.  290 
efficacy  of,  H.  Col.  467 

for  Christian  love,  H.  Phil.  309,  310 

for  completeness  of  moral  character,  H. 

2  Thess.  559 

for     higher     spiritual    knowledge,     H. 
Eph.  140 

for  ministers,  H.  2  Thess.  572 

for  sanctification,  H.  1  Thess.  546 

Paul's,  for  Colossians,  H.  Col.  385 
for  Ephesians,  H.  Eph.  194 
for  Thessalonians,  H.  2  Thess.  570 

programme  of,  H.  Eph.  287 

subjects  of,  H.  Phil.  362 

sublime  and  comprehensive,  H.  Eph.  189 

true,  H.  Phil.  363 
Praying  and  preaching,  H.  Col.  470 

in  Spirit,  H.  Eph.  290 

with  all  prayer,  H.  Eph.  289 
Preacher,   high  moral   feeling  that   should 
influence,  H.  1  Thess.  502 

love  for,  H.  Gal.  70 

successful,  H.  Col.  382 

598 


Preacher's  perplexity,  H.  Gal.  72 
Preaching  and  praying,  H.  Col.  470 
apostolic,  H.  Col.  408 

characterised   by  transparent    truth, 

H.  1  Thess.  499 
perversion  of,  H.  Gal.  83 
effective,  secret  of,  H.  Col.  406 
essential    elements    of    success    in,    H. 

1  Thess.  496,  498,  499,  501 
of  gospel  not  in  vain,  H.  1  Thess.  498 
Precepts,  Christian,  group  of,  H.  1  Thess.  540 
Pre-Christian  world,  non-age  of,  H.  Gal.  61 
Predestination,  doctrine  of,  N.  Eph.  133 
Prescriptions,  legal,  no  trust  in,  N.  Gal.  51 
Present  condition  and  future  glory  of  life  in 

Christ,  H.  Col.  440 
Presentation  of  two  great  truths,  H.  Col.  424 
Pressing  toward  mark,  H.  Phil.  348 
Principle  of  spiritual  harvest,  H.  Gal.  109 
Principles  above  rules,  N.  Col.  436 

Christian,   applied    to  common  life,   H. 
Eph.  229 
Prison,  great,  N.  Gal.  53 
Privilege  of  access  to  Father,  H.  Eph.  167 
Privileges  and  character  of  children  of  God, 

H.  Gal.  65 
Profession    of    gospel,   uncleanness    incon- 
sistent with,  H.  1  Thess.  522 
without  hypocrisy,  N.  Gal.  59 
Programme  of  prayer,  H.  Eph.  287 
Progress  of  revelation,  H.  Gal.  57 

retrospection  the  basis  of,  H.  Col.  419 
Projected  Christian  mission,  H.  Phil.  334 
Promise  and  Law,  N.  Gal.  49 

believers  children  of,  H.  Gal.  75 
Divine  covenant  of,  H.  Gal.  47,  48 
Law  not  contrary  to,  H.  Gal.  53 
gospel  call  and,  H.  Eph.  255 
heirs  according  to,  H.  Gal.  60 
of  grace,  N.  Gal.  60 
Proof,  confirmatory,  of  Divine  call,  H.  Gal. 
26 
practical,  of  apostleship,  H.  Gal.  24 
Prophesyings,  despise  not,  H.  1  Thess.  545 
Prosperous  Church,  congratulatory  features 

of,  H.  2  Thess.  534 
Prove  all  things,  H.  1  Thess.  545 
Public  ministry,  H.  1  Thess.  540 

reading    of    Holy   Scriptures    important 
means  of  Church  edification,  H.  Col. 
479  ;  1  Thess.  549 
worship,  abuse  of,  H.  1  Thess.  545 
Pupils  in  peril,  pleadings  of  anxious  teacher 
with  his,  H.  Gal.  68 

Pure  joy,  H.  Phil.  308 

t 

Qualification  for  heaven,  H.  Col.  387 

of  true  minister,  H.  Gal.  21 
Quarrels,  Church,  N.  Gal.  87 
Quench  not  Spirit,  H.  1  Thess.  545 
Questions,  searching,  H.  Gal.  42 
Quiet,  study  to  be,  H.  1  Thess.  529 
Quietness,  way  to  value,  I.  2  Thess.  579 

Race,  Christian  life  a.  H.  Gal.  82 
Rationalism,  H.  1  Thest*.  545 


INDEX. 


Reading,    public,   of    Holy    Scriptures    im- 
portant means  of  Church  edification, 
H.  Col.  479 ;  1  Thess.  549 
Ready  to  go,  but  willing  to  wait,  H.  Phil.  318 
Real  and  ceremonial  in  religion,  H.  Col.  430 
counterfeit    in    Christian    ministry, 
H.  Phil.  315 
Reap  if  we  faint  not,  H.  Gal.  112 
Reaping,  moral  sowing  and,  H.  Gal.  106 
sowing  and,  in  their  bearing  on  formation 
of  individual  character,  H.  Gal.  109 
Reason   for   conscientiousness,   I.    1   Thess. 

524 
Reasonableness  of  faith,  H.  Gal.  54 
Reception  of  gospel,  true,  practical  result  of, 

H.  1  Thess.  491 
Recognition  of  special  mission,  H.  Gal.  28 
Recompense  of  suffering  for  truth,  H.  2  Thess. 

535 
Reconciler,  Christ  the,  H.  Col.  398,  400 
Reconciliation,  holiness  supreme  end  of,  H. 
Col.  400 
personal  blessings  of,  H.  Col.  398 
Reconciling  work  of  great  Mediator,  H.  Col. 

396 
Rectitude,  Christian,  H.  Phil.  311 
Redeemer,  Christ  the,  H.  Phil.  327 
Redeeming  the  time,  H.  Eph.  258,  259 
Redemption  and  its  issues,  H.  Gal.  47 
great  blessing  of,  H.  Col.  390 
of  time,  H.  Eph.  258,  259 
through  Christ,  H.  Eph.  135 
Reform  of  bad  manners,  H.  Gal.  83 
Reformation,  Christian,  H.  Gal.  101 
Refractory,  treatment  of,  H.  2  Thess.  581 
Regard  for  neighbour's  rights,  I.  Gal.  87 
Regeneration,  love  an  attendant  of,  H.  Gal.  95 
Rejoice  evermore,  H.  1  Thess.  543 
Rejoicing  in  Lord,  H.  Phil.  359 
Relapse,  legalism  a,  H.  Gal.  66 
Relation  of   Christ  to  God  and  all  created 
things,  H.  Col.  390 
to  moral  creation,  H.  Col.  393 
Religion  a  change  of  life,  H.  Col.  447 

and  the  medical  profession,  H.  Col.  479 
ceremonial  and  real  in,  H.  Col.  430 

in,  transitory  and  unsatisfying,  H.  Col. 
434 
Christian,  truth  and  divinity  of,  H.  Eph. 

138 
false  and  true  in,  H.  Phil.  340 
genuine,  illustrated,  H.  2  Thess.  561 
is  faith  working  by  love,  H.  Gal.  80 
true,  scriptural  view  of,  H.  Gal.  119 
self-revealing,  H.  Eph.  142 
Religionism,  external,  incomparable  with  true 

knowledge  of  Christ,  H.  Phil.  342 
Religious  affections  are  attended  with  change 
of  nature,  H.  Eph.  227 
comfort,  elements  of,  H.  Eph.  295 
joy,  H.  1  Thess.  516 
life  of  apostle,  H.  Gal.  36 
Remedy  for  worldly  care,  H.  Phil.  362 
Remember  the  poor,  H.  Gal.  30,  31 
Remonstrance  with  revolters  against  gospel, 
H.  Gal.  9 


Reproof,  brotherly,  N.  Gal.  102 
faithful,  N.  Gal.  41 

right  mode  of  giving  and  receiving,  H. 
Gal.  70 
Request,  ministerial,  H.  2  Thess.  573 
Respect   for   conscientiousness,  I.   1   Thess. 

524 
Rest  in  heaven  for  troubled,  H.  2  Thess.  557 
Restoration  of  erring,  H.  Gal.  102 
Result,  practical,  of  true  reception  of  gospel, 

H.  1  Thess.  491 
Resurrection,  attainment  of,  H.  Phil.  346 
Christ's,  power  of,  H.  Phil.  346 
of  body,  H.  1  Thess.  531 
of  dead  an  object  to  aim  at,  H.  Phil. 

346 
of  human  body,  H.  Phil.  352 
Retirement  preparation  for  work,  H.  Gal.  22 
Retreat,  cowardly,  I.  Gal.  83 
Retribution,  Divine,  H.  2  Thess.  559 

law  of,  H.  Gal.  Ill 
Retrospection  the  basis  of  progress,  H.  Col. 

419 
Revelation,  Christ  a,  because  equal  to  Father, 
H.  Col.  393 
progress  of,  H.  Gal.  57 
supernatural,  N.  Gal.  12,  16 
Review  of  misspent  life,  N.  Gal.  18 
Revival,  evidences  and  effects  of,  H.  1  Thess. 

492 
Revolters  against  gospel,  remonstrance  with, 

H.  Gal.  9 
Riches,  God's,  man's  "need  supplied  from,  H. 
Phil.  369 
of  Christ,  N.  Eph.  179 
unsearchable,  of  Christ,  N.  Eph.  185 
Right  mode  of  giving  and  receiving  reproof, 
H.  Gal.  70 
use  of  Christian  liberty,  H.  Gal.  87 
Rights,  regard  for  neighbour's,  I.  Gal.  87 
Righteousness  attained  by  active  faith,  N. 
Gal.  80 
fruits  of,  H.  Phil.  312 
through  faith,  H.  Gal.  44 
Risen  with  Christ,  H.  Col.  440 
Rites,  external,  Christianity  superior  to,  H. 

Gal.  79 
Ritualist,  zealous,  H.  Gal.  17 
Rule  of  Christian  conduct,  N.  Eph.  252 

of  Divine  peace,  H.  Col.  452 
Rules,  principles  above,  N.  Col.  436 

Sabbath,  shadow  and  substance  of,  H.  Col. 

431 
Sabbatic  law,  God's,  antedated  Mosaic  Law, 

N.  Gal.  67 
Sacrifice,  Christ  our,  H.  Gal.  8 

Christ's,  of  Himself  explained,  and  man's 
duty  to  offer  spiritual  sacrifice  inferred 
and  recommended,  H.  Eph.  245 
of  Christ,  H.  Eph.  247 
Safeguards  against  error,  H.  Phil.  342 
Saints,  Christ  the  inheritance  of,  N.  Eph.  137 
communion  of,  H.  Eph.  174 
perseverance  of,  H.  Phil.  308 
what,  should  be,  N.  2  Thess.  567 

599 


INDEX. 


Sainthood,  glory  of,  H.  2  Thess.  567 
Saintly   inheritance,   meetness   for,   H.  Col. 

386,  387,  388 
Salutation,  apostolic,  H.  Eph.  128 ;  Col.  376 

Christian,  N.  Gal.  7 
Salvation  a  Divine  act,  H.  2  Thess.  565 
an  act  of  Divine  grace,  H.  Eph.  153 
believer's,  grounds  of  confidence  in,  H. 

Phil.  308 
by  faith,  H.  Eph.  156 
false  methods  of,  H.  Gal.  34 
God's  work  and  man's  care,  H.  Phil.  329, 

331 
gospel  of  vour,  H.  Eph.  138 
is  of  God,*  H.  1  Thess.  538 
is  of  grace,  H.  Eph.  157 
man's,  co-operation  of  Divine  and  human 
in,  H.  Phil.  331 
Same,  true  gospel  universally  the,  H.  Col.  380 
Sa notification  of  complete  man,  H.  1  Thess. 
547 
prayer  for,  H.  1  Thess.  546 
true,  brotherly  love  proof  of,  H.  1  Thess. 
526 
distinctive  features  of,  H.  1  Thess.  522 
pacific    spirit,  another    proof    of,  H. 
1  Thess.  527 
Sanctifier,  Holy  Ghost  the,  H.  2  Thess.  567 
Sanction    of    ministerial    authority,   Divine 

blessing  highest,  N.  Gal.  29 
Sanctity,  higher,  earnest  exhortation  to,  H. 
1  Thess.  520 
of  home-life,  N.  Eph.  269 
Sarah  and  Hagar,  history  of,  allegorical  of 

gospel  and  Law,  H.  Gal.  73 
Satan,   power  of,   great    but  restricted,   H. 

1  Thess.  507 
Satanic  hindrances,  H.  1  Thess.  509 
Schoolmaster,  Law  our,  H.  Gal.  54,  56 
Science  of  Christian  ethics,  H.  Phil.  363 
Scriptural  view  of  true  religion,  H.  Gal.  119 
Sealing  of  Spirit,  N.  Eph.  238 
Searching  questions,  H.  Gal.  42 
Second  advent  of  Christ,  H.  1  Thess.  531 
waiting  for,  H.  2  Thess.  575 
coming  of  Christ,  attitude  of  Church  to- 
wards, H.  1  Thess.  535 
and  sorrow  for  dead,  H.  1  Thess.  533 
Secret  of  effective  preaching,  H.  Col.  406 
of  happy  life,  H.  1  Thess.  542 
of  success,  industry,  H.  2  Thess.  578- 
Seductive  peril  of  false  philosophy,  H.  Col. 

432 
Seeking  things  above,  H.  Col.  439 
Self  abolished  and  replaced,  I.  Gal.  38 
Self-conscious  truth,  H.  Gal.  23 
Self-denying  labour,  H.  2  Thess.  577 
Self-devotion,  life  of  Christ  only  true  idea  of, 

H.  Phil.  335 
Self-evidencing   proof   of    divinely   commis- 
sioned messenger,  H.  Gal.  24 
Self-recollectedness  and   ejaculatory  prayer, 

H.  1  Thess.  543 
Self-sacrifice,  noble,  I.  Eph.  268 
Sensual  and  spiritual  excitement,  H.  Epb.  260 
Sentence  of  Law,  curse  and,  N.  Gal.  47 

600  


Servant,  God  glorified  in  His,  H.  Gal.  22 

of  Christ,  H.  Gal.  14 
Servants  and  masters,  duties  of,  H.  Eph.  274, 

276 ;  Col.  463 
Service  of  love,  H.  Gal.  86 
Servitude,  Christian,  H.  Eph.  276 
Sevenfold  unitv  of  Church  reflected  in  tri- 
nity of  Divine  Persons,  H.  Eph.  203 
Shadow  and  substance  of  sabbath,  H.  Col.  431 
Side-lights  on  Church-life  in  early  times,  H. 

Col.  472 
Sin,  all  included  under,  N.  Gal.  53 
Biblical  account  of,  N.  Gal.  92 
destructive  subtlety  of,  H.  2  Thess.  565 
forgiveness  of,  errors  respecting,  H.  Eph. 

239 
of  falsehood,  H.  Eph.  232 
state  of,  a  state  of  death,  H.  Eph.  150 
of  ungodliness,  H.  Eph.  163 
Sins  of  others,  H.  Gal.  101 
Sincerity  in  youth,  value  of,  H.  Phil.  311 

loving  Christ  in,  H.  Eph.  296 
Sinful  anger,  H.  Eph.  233 

principle  in  man,  mortification  of,  H.  Col. 
442 
Singing  in  worship  of  God,  H.  Eph.  263 
Sinners,  call  of  gospel  to,  H.  Eph.  254 
Sleep,  moral,  H.  1  Thess.  538 

of  faithful  departed,  H.  1  Thess.  531 
Slumbering  souls  and  their  awakening,  H. 

Eph.  253 
Sobriety,  Christian,  inculcated,  H.  Eph.  250 
Solitude  of  great  city,  H.  1  Thess.  511 
Son  of  God,  love  of,  to  men,  H.  Gal.  37 
Sonship,  evidences  of  H  Gal.  64 

with  God,  dignity  of,  H.  Gal.  57 
Sorrow  for  dead,  H.  1  Thess.  529,  533 
Soul,    believing,   manner  in    which    gospel 
comes  to,  H.  1  Thess.  491 
Christmas  of,  N.  Gal.  72 
completing  of,  H.  Col.  424 
higher  aspirations  of,  H.  Col.  438 
Souls,  slumbering,  and  their  awakening,  H. 

Eph.  253 
Source  of  Christian's  power,  H.  Phil.  367 
Sovereign  grace,  pardon  an  act  of,  N.  Eph.  135 
Sowers  to  flesh,  deceived,  H.  Gal.  108 
Sowing    and   reaping    in   their    bearing   on 
formation  of  individual  character, 
H.  Gal.  109 
moral,  H.  Gal.  106 
to  flesh  and  to  spirit,  difference  between, 

H.  Gal.  109 
to  Spirit,  H.  Gal.  Ill 
Special  mission,  recognition  of,  H.  Gal.  28 
Spirit,  being  filled  with,  H.  Eph.  261,  262 
benefit    conferred   by,   on    believers,   H. 

Eph.  236 
Bible  sword  of,  H.  Eph.  287 
Christian,  a  new  spirit,  H.  Eph.  227 
flesh  and,  H.  Gal.  88,  89 
fruit  of,  H.  Gal.  92,  94 
leading  of,  N.  Gal.  90 
one  body  and  one,  H.  Eph.  205 
praying  in,  H.  Eph.  290 
quench  not,  H.  1  Thess.  545 


INDEX. 


Spirit,  sealing  of,  N.  Eph.  238 

sowing  to,  H.  Gal.  Ill 

walking  in,  H.  Gal.  89,  97 
Spiritual  and  sensual  excitement,  H.  Eph.  260 

attainment,  H.  Phil.  312 

blessings,  H.  Eph.  133 

apprehension  of,  H.  Eph.  141 

bondage,  ignorance  of  God  a,  N.  Gal.  67 

building,  Church  of  God  a,  H.  Eph.  172 

circumcision,  H.  Phil.  342 

creation,  new,  N.  Eph.  159 

discrimination,  H.  Phil.  311 

enjoyment,  H.  Eph.  262 

enlightenment,  N.  Eph.  142 

freedom  and   legal  bondage  contrasted, 
H.  Gal.  74 

harvest,  principle  of,  H.  Gal.  109 

influence,  varied  aspects  of,  H.  1  Thess.  543 

knowledge,  higher,  prayer  for,  H.  Eph.  140 

life,  death  and,  H.  Col.  428 

light,  summons  to,  H.  Eph.  255 

nature,  new,  H.  Col.  445 

sacrifice,  man's   duty  to   offer,   inferred 
and    recommended,    and    Christ's 
sacrifice  of  Himself  explained,  H. 
Eph.  245 
Spurious  ministry,  H.  Phil.  315 
Spy,  a,  I.  Gal.  28 
Stability    and    order,    apostolic    praise    of, 

H.  Col.  415 
State  by  nature  and  by  grace,  H.  Eph.  265 

of  grace,  H.  Eph.  155 

of  men  without  gospel,  H.  Eph.  150 

of  nature,  H.  Eph.  151 

of  sin  a  state  of  death,  H.  Eph.  150 
a  state  of  ungodliness,  H.  Eph.  1 63 
Steadfastness,  Christian,  H.  2  Thess.  567 
glad  tidings  of,  H.  1  Thess.  516 

of  believers  a  source  of  true  ministerial  « 
satisfaction,  H.  1  Thess.  515 

plea  for,  H.  Phil.  355 
Stimulus  to  Christian  perseverance,  hope  a, 

H.  Col.  380 
Strength,  Divine,  H.  Col.  385 
Strife  of  flesh  and  spirit,  H.  Gal.  89 
Strong  delusions,  H.  2  Thess.  565 
Study  to  be  quiet,  H.  1  Thess.  529 
Stupidity,  moral,  H.  Eph.  254 
Sublime  and  comprehensive  prayer,  H.  Eph. 

189 
Submission,  mutual,  H.  Eph.  264 
Substance  and  shadow  of  sabbath,  H.  Col.  431 
Subtlety  of  sin,  destructive,  H.  2  Thess.  565 
Success  in  preaching,   essential  elements  of, 
H.  1  Thess.  496,  498,  499,  501 

ministerial,  joy  of,  H.  Phil.  334 

secret  of,  industry,  H.  2  Thess.  578 
Successful  preacher,  H.  Col.  382 
Sufferer  for  truth,  noble  attitude  of,  H.  Phil.  315 
Suffering  and  conflict,  H.  Phil.  320 

courage  under,  N.  Eph.  189 

for  Church,  joy  of,  H.  Col.  402 

for  Jesus,  H.  Gal.  121 

for  truth,  N.  Gal.  42 

recompense  of,  H.  2  Thess.  535 

perils  of,  H.  1  Thess.  511 


Suffering  test  of  conversion,  H.  1  Thess.  504 

uses  of,  N.  Gal.  42 
Sufferings,  Christ's,  fellowship  of,  H.  Phil.  346 
Suggestive  benediction,  H.  Eph.  294 

features  of  Christian  life,  H.  Col.  417 
Summary    of   law   of   Christian   duty,    sug- 
gestive, H.  Col.  457 
Summons  to  spiritual  light,  H.  Eph.  255 
Superhuman  origin  of   gospel,    H.   Gal.  13; 

N.  Gal.  16 
Supernatural  revelation,  N.  Gal.  12,  16 
Supper,    Lord's,    sample    of   Christian   life, 

H.  Col.  459 
Supply,  our  need  and  our,  H.  Phil.  369 
Supremacy  of  Jesus,  H.  Eph.  145 
Sword  of  Spirit,  Bible,  H.  Eph.  287 
Sympathy,   mutual,   in    burden-bearing,    H. 
Gal.  99 
practical  Christian,  H.  Gal.  105 

Talking  and  jesting,   against   foolish,    H. 

Eph.  250 
Teacher,   anxious,   pleadings    of,    with    his 

pupils  in  peril,  H.  Gal.  68 
Teachers,   false,   apostolic   exposure   of,   H. 

Gal.  114 
Teaching,  false,  perils  of,  H.  Gal.  38 
Teachings  of  baptism,  H.  Gal.  59 
Temper,  Christian,  the  same  mind  which  was 
in  Christ,  H.  Phil.  327 
to  be  cultivated  by  Christians  of  different 
denominations  toward  each  other,  H. 
Phil.  348 
Temple  of  God,  Church  the,  H.  Eph.  171 
Test  and  excellence,   Christian's   truest,    H. 
Eph.  296 
of  conversion—  suffering,  H.  1  Thess.  504 
Thanksgiving  and  prayer,  H.  1  Thess.  489 
duty  of,  H.  Eph.  264 
ministerial,  H.  1  Thess.  488 

causes  of,  H.  Col.  378 
perpetual,  of  Christian  life,  II.  1  Thess.  544 
Theft,  warning  against,  H.  Eph.  235 
Thessalonians,  First  Epistle  to — 

contents  of  Epistle,  N.  1  Thess.  484 
occasion  and  design  of  Epistle,  N.  1  Thess. 

484 
Thessalonica  and  its  Church,  N.  1  Thess. 
483 
Thessalonians,  Second  Epistle  to — 

occasion  and  design  of  Epistle,  N.  2  Thess. 

551 
outline  of  Epistle,  N.  2  Thess.  552 
style  and  character  of  Epistle,  N.  2  Thess. 
551 
Thessalonians,  Paul's  prayer  for,  H.  2  Thess. 

570 
Thorough  moral  transformation,  H.  Eph.  222 
Tidings,   glad,    of    Christian    steadfastness, 

H.  1  Thess.  516 
Time,  fulness  of,  H.  Gal.  62,  63 
redeeming  the,  H.  Eph.  258,  259 
worth  of,  H.  Col.  471 
Tongue,  government  of,  H.  Eph.  236 
Touching  and  dignified  farewell,  H.  Gal.  119 
Transcendent  love  of  Christ,  H.  Eph.  196 

601 


INDEX. 


Transformation,  thorough  moral,  H.  Eph.  222 
Transgressors,  Law  is  for,  H.  Gal.  50 
Transition  from  death  to  life,  H.  Col.  426 
Transitory  and   unsatisfying,  ceremonial   in 

religion,  H.  Col.  434 
Translation,  great  moral,  H.  Col.  388 
Treasures   of  wisdom   in  Christ,  hidden,  H. 

Col.  413,  415 
Treasury  of  wisdom  and  knowledge,  Christ 

the,  N.  Col.  415 
Treatment    due    to   ministerial    office,    H. 
1  Thess.  538 
false  brethren  and  their,  H.  Gal.  27 
of  refractory,  H.  2  Thess.  581 
.Trials,  apathy  one  of  our,  N.  Gal.  112 
Trinity  in  unitv,  access  to  God  revealing,  H. 
Eph.  169 
of    Divine   Persons,   sevenfold   unity   of 

Church  reflected  in,  H.  Eph.  203 
praise  for   work  of,  in  gospel  of  grace, 

H.  Eph.  130 
the,  H.  1  Thess.  547 
Triumph  of  cross,  H.  Col.  428 
Troubled,  rest  in  heaven  for,  H.  2  Thess.  557 
Troublers  of  Church,  judgment  on,  H.  Gal.  85 
True  and  false  in  religion,  H.  Phil.  340 
zeal,  H.  Gal.  18 
baptism,  H.  Col.  426 
charity,  industry  the,  I.  2  Thess.  579 
Christian  manhood,  H.  Eph.  215 

zeal,  H.  Gal.  72 
Church-life,  N.  Eph.  201 
circumcision,  H.  Col.  426 
contentment,  tendency  of  Christian  prin- 
ciples to  produce,  H.  Phil.  367 
devotion,  H.  Col.  469 
glory  of  Christian,  H.  Gal.  117 
gospel  to  be  preached  and  believed,  H. 
Gal.  12 
universally  the  same,  H.  Col.  380 
Israel  of  God,  H.  Gal.  120 
life,  new  birth  begins  our,  I.  Gal.  119 
minister,  qualification  of,  H.  Gal.  21 
prayer,  H.  Phil.  363 
religion  self -revealing,  H.  Eph.  142 

scriptural  view  of,  H.  Gal.  119 
use  of  Law,  H.  Gal.  52 
Trust,  Christian  ministry  solemn  and  respon- 
sible, H.  Col.  479 
no,  in  legal  prescriptions,  N.  Gal.  51 
Trusted  messenger,  H.  Eph.  292 
Truth  and  divinity  of  Christian  religion,  H. 
Eph.  138 
and  love,  growth  into  Christ  in,  H.  Eph. 

221 
between  man  and  man,  H.  Eph.  231 
Christ's,  in  relation  to  our  daily  conversa- 
tion, H.  Col.  472 
fidelity  to,  N.  Gal.  28 
fundamental,  fearless  defence  of,  H.  Gal. 

31 
girdle  of,  H.  Eph.  286,  287 
its  own  evidence,  H.  Gal.  27 
miracles  confirmatory  of,  N.  Gal.  43 
not  to  be  yielded,  N.  Gal.  28 
perversion  of,  H.  Gal.  10 

602 


Truth,  power  of,  H.  Gal.  27 

self-conscious,  H.  Gal.  23 

sufferer  for,  noble  attitude  of,  H.  Phil.  315 

suffering  for,  N.  Gal.  42 

recompense  of,  H.  2  Thess.  535 

transparent,  apostolic  preaching  charac- 
terised by,  H.  1  Thess.  499 
Truths  to  live  on,  N.  Gal.  36 

two  great,  presentation  of,  H.  Col.  424 
Turncoats,  dilemma  of,  H.  Gal.  67 
Twofold  burdens,  our,  N.  Gal.  103 


Unbelief,  H.  2  Thess.  573 
Unbelievers,  fate  of,  H.  Gal.  76 
Uncleanness  inconsistent  with  profession  of 

gospel,  H.  1  Thess.  522 
Under  Law,  H.  Gal.  64 
Ungodliness,  state  of  sin  a  state  of,  H.  Eph. 

163 
Unity  and  concord  in  Church,  H.  Phil.  325 
and  peace,  H.  Col.  454 
Christian,  H.  Col.  415 

an  occasion  of  joy,  H.  Phil.  323 
of  Church,  H.  Eph.  204 
of  God  and  His  purpose  regarding  man, 

H.  Gal.  51 
of  gospel,  inviolable,  H.  Gal.  10 
peace  the  bond  of,  H.  Eph.  202 
sevenfold,  of  Church  reflected  in  Trinity 

of  Divine  Persons,  H.  Eph.  203 
Trinitv  in,  access  to  God  revealing,  H. 
"Eph.  169 
Universal   Church,   Jerusalem    type    of,   H. 
Gal.  75 
homage,  Christ  worthy  of,  H.  Phil.  329 
Unknown  and  known  love  of  Christ,  H.  Eph. 

196 
Unsatisfying  and  transitory,  ceremonial  in 

religion,  H.  Col.  434 
Unsearchable  riches  of  Christ,  N.  Eph.  185 
Unselfishness  of  Jesus,  H.  Gal.  8 

supreme,  humiliation  of  Christ  a  pattern 
of,  H.  Phil.  325 
Unswerving    fidelity  in    accomplishing    its 
lofty  mission,  Christian  ministry  de- 
mands, H.  Col.  480 
Us,  pray  for,  H.  1  Thess.  549 
Use,  right,  of  Christian  liberty,  H.  Gal.  87 


Vagaries,  philosophic,  H.  Col.  433 
Vain-gloriousness,  H.  Gal.  97 
Vain-glory,  vice  of,  and  its  cure,  H.  Gal.  98 
Value  of  sincerity  in  youth,  H.  Phil.  311 
Varied  aspects   of    spiritual    influence,    H. 

1  Thess.  543 
Vice  of  drunkenness,  H.  Eph.  261 

of  vain-glory  and  its  cure,  H.  Gal.  98 
Vices   to  be   renounced  and   virtues  to  be 

cherished,  H.  Eph.  238 
Virtues,  mercantile,  without  Christianity,  H. 

Phil.  364 
to  be  cherished  and  vices  to  be  renounced, 

H.  Eph.  238 
Vocation,  conversion  and,  of  Paul,  H.  Gal.  20 


INDEX. 


Waiting  for  second  advent,  H.   2  Thess. 

575 
Walk  in  Spirit,  life  and,  H.  Gal.  97 
Walking  circumspectly,  H.  Eph.  253 

in  Spirit,  H.  Gal.  89,  97 
Warfare,  Christian,  H.  Eph.  276,  278 
Warning,  a— Gentile  life,  H.  Eph.  224 
against  imposition,  H.  2  Thess.  564 
against  theft,  H.  Eph.  235 
Warnings,  emphatic,  against  false  teachers, 

H.  Phil.  342 
Warrior,  Christian,  equipped,  H.  Eph.  281 
Weariness  in   well-doing,   against,   H.    Gal. 

112 
Weary  in  well-doing,  H.  2  Thess.  580 
Welfare  of  Church,  ministerial  anxiety  for, 

N.  Phil.  335 
Well-doing,  H.  Gal.  112 

against  weariness  in,  H.  Gal.  112 
weary  in,  H.  2  Thess.  581 
What   is  your   heart  filled  with  ?    H.   Eph. 

261* 
Wheat  is  better  than  bread,  H.  Col.  436 
Whole  armour  of  God,  H.  Eph.  284 
Wickedness,    fellowship    in,    and    its    con- 
demnation, H.  Eph.  251 
Wiles  of  devil,  H.  Eph.  279 
Willing  to  wait,  but  ready  to  go,  H.  Phil. 

318 
Wisdom,  Christian,  H.  Eph.  256 

hidden   treasures  of,   in  Christ,  H.    Col. 

413,  415 
of  God,  manifold,  H.  Eph.  186,  187 
Wise  conduct  of  life,  H.  Eph.  258  ;  Col.  470 
Witness,  Church  a,  N.  Gal.  7 
Wives  and  husbands,  duties  of,  H.  Eph.  264, 

266  ;  Col.  460 
Word  and  in  power,  gospel  in,  H.  1  Thess. 
489 
closing,  H.  1  Thess.  548 
of  Christ,  indwelling,  H.  Col.  457 
of  God,  efficacy  of,  and  way  of  receiving 
it,  H.  1  Thess.  504 


Word  of    life :    living  ministry   and   living 
Church,  H.  Phil.  333 

to  despiser,  H.  1  Thess.  524 
Words,  last,  H.  Phil.  369 

of  farewell,  H.  Col.  480 
Work  and  Christianity,  H.  2  Thess.  578 

best,  call  to  do,  H.  2  Thess.  580 

Christian,  disappointed  hopes  in,  H.  Gal. 
10 

interruptions  in  our,  and  the  way  to  deal 
with  them,  H.  Eph.  158 

man's  and  God's,  H.  Phil.  332 

of  ministry,  H.  Eph.  214 

retirement  preparation  for,  H.  Gal.  22 
Works,   justification    by   faith    not    by,   >T. 
Gal.  33 ;  H.  Gal.  39 

of  darkness,  N.  Eph.  252 

of  flesh,  H.  Gal.  90,  92 
Working  out  salvation  harmonises  with  free 

grace,  H.  Phil.  331 
World,  Christians  examples  to,  H.  Phil.  333 

pre-Christian,  non-age  of,  H.  Gal.  61 
Worlds,  both,  believer's  portion  in,  H.  Phil. 

318 
Worldly  care,  remedy  for,  H.  Phil.  362 
Worship  of  God,  singing  in,  H.  Eph.  263 

public,  abuse  of,  H.  1  Thess.  545 
Worst  of  evils,  H.  Eph.  152 
Worth,  attractiveness  of,  I.  Gal.  42 

of  time,  H.  Col.  471 
Wrath,  children  of,  H.  Eph.  148 

of  God,  H.  Col.  444 

to  come,  H.  1  Thess.  494 


Youth,  value  of  sincerity  in,  H.  Phil.  311 


Zeal,  H.  Gal  70 

Christian,  H.  Gal.  71,  72 
mistaken,  H.  Gal.  18 
true  and  false,  H.  Gal.  18 

Zealous  ritualist,  H.  Gal.  17 


HOMILIES   FOR   SPECIAL   OCCASIONS. 

Church  Seasons:  Advent,  Eph.  v.  13,  14;  1  Thess.  iii.  13  b\  iv.  15-18;  v.  1-11;  2  Thess.  iii.  5. 

Christmas,  Gal.  iv.  4.     Lent,  Col.  ii.  21-23 ;  iii.  5-9.     Good  Friday,  Gal.  i.  4 ;  vi.  14,  15 

Phil.  ii.  8;   Col.  ii.  15.     St.  Mark's  Day,  Eph.  iv.  7.     Ascension  Dav,  Eph.  iv.  9,  10 

Phil.  iii.   10;   Col.  iii.   1,  2.      Whit  Sunday,  Gal.   v.  22-26;    25;    Eph.   i.   13;    iv.   30 

2  Thess.  ii.  13.     Trinity  Sunday,  Eph.  ii.  18 ;  iv.  4-6. 
Holy  Communion :  Eph.  ii.  19  ;  iii.  15  ;  Col.  iii.  17. 

Missions  to  Heathen:  Eph.  ii.  3;  11,  12;  iii.  1-6.     Bible  Society,  Eph.  vi.  17. 
Evangelistic  Services :  Eph.  i.  7,  8 ;  ii.  1-3 ;  4-9 ;  Col.  i.  13,  14 ;  ii.  13,  14. 
Special :  Ordination,  Gal.  i.  10 ;  15-19  ;  16 ;  vi.  6  ;  Eph.  iii.  7-9 ;  iv.  11,  12 ;  vi.  20 ;  Col.  i.  25-27 ; 

28-29  ;  iv.  12,  13;  1  Thess.  ii.  1-12.     Workers,  Gal.  i.  6;  Eph.  iv.  11,  12;  Phil.  iv.  2,  3; 

2  Thess.  iii.  13.      Baptism,  Gal.  iii.  26-29;    Col.  ii.   12.     Confirmation,  Eph.  ii.  20-24. 

Harvest,  Gal.  vi.  7,  8 ;  9.     Temperance,  Eph.  v.  18.     Friendly  Society,  Gal.  vi.  2.     Death, 

1  Thess.  iv.  13,  14.     Parents,  Eph.  vi.  4;  Col.  iii.  20,  21;  23-25.     Young,  Ep'     vi.  1-4; 

Phil.   i.   10  b.      Worship,   Eph.   v.    19-21;    19.      Almsgiving,    Gal.   ii.    10;    vi.  2;   10; 

Phil.  iv.  15,  16. 


603 


preacher's 

homiletic 

Commentary 


/TV 


GAL.  EPH.  PHIL 
COLI  &  II,  THESS 

BARLOW 


BRIGHAM  YOUNG  UNIVERSITY 


3  1197  21020  8200 


Date  Due 


All  library  items  are  subject  to  recall  3  weeks  from 
the  original  date  stamped. 

MAK  1  t  | 

m 

MAR  1  ?  2C 

J3 

DEC  2  0  n 

1)7 

3fc  i  a  2007 

Brigham  Young  University 

